Ô Cameroun, Berceau de nos Ancêtres (tulkojumā no franču valodas: "O Kamerūna, mūsu senču šūpulis"), saukta arī par Chant de Ralliement ("Manifestācijas dziesma") ir Kamerūnas valsts himna. Neoficiāli tiek lietota kopš 1948. gada, oficiāli apstiprināta 1957. gadā. Mūziku komponējis Renē Džams Afame (René Djam Afame), kurš kopā ar Minkio Bambu (Samuel Minkio Bamba) un Moisi Ņati Nkoo (Moïse Nyatte Nko'o) bija arī dzejas autors. Himnas teksts ticis mainīts 1978. gadā. O Cameroun berceau de nos ancêtres, Va debout et jaloux de ta liberté, Comme un soleil ton drapeau fier doit être, Un symbole ardent de foi et d'unité.   CHORUS: Chère Patrie, Terre chérie, Tu es notre seul et vrai bonheur, Notre joie, notre vie, En toi l'amour et le grand honneur.   Que tous tes enfants du Nord au Sud, De l'Est à l'Ouest soient tout amour, Te servir que ce soit le seul but, Pour remplir leur devoir toujours.   CHORUS: Chère Patrie, Terre chérie, Tu es notre seul et vrai bonheur, Notre joie, notre vie, En toi l'amour et le grand honneur. O Cameroon, Thou Cradle of our Fathers, Holy Shrine where in our midst they now repose, Their tears and blood and sweat thy soil did water, On thy hills and valleys once their tillage rose. Dear Fatherland, thy worth no tongue can tell! How can we ever pay thy due? Thy welfare we will win in toil and love and peace, Will be to thy name ever true!   CHORUS: Land of Promise, land of Glory! Thou, of life and joy, our only store! Thine be honour, thine devotion, And deep endearment, for evermore.   From Shari, from where the Mungo meanders From along the banks of lowly Boumba Stream, Muster thy sons in union close around thee, Mighty as the Buea Mountain be their team; Instil in them the love of gentle ways, Regret for errors of the past; Foster, for Mother Africa, a loyalty That true shall remain to the last.   CHORUS: Land of Promise, land of Glory! Thou, of life and joy, our only store! Thine be honour, thine devotion, And deep endearment, for evermore. Oficiālā vietne (ar skaņas failu) National anthem: Mp3 download, lyrics with the English translation