Keri Lynn Hilson (born December 5, 1982) is an American singer and songwriter. Born and raised in Decatur, Georgia, she began her musical career as a songwriter and backing vocalist for other artists under the wing of record producer Anthony Dent in 2002. At the age of 14, Hilson secured a record deal with the girl group D'Signe, which ultimately disbanded. She attended at Oxford College of Emory University while contributing to material for popular artists, including Britney Spears, Usher, Ciara, The Pussycat Dolls, and Mary J. Blige; she joined the songwriting-production group, the Clutch in 2004. Later that same year, she guest performed on the single "Hey Now (Mean Muggin)" by Xzibit, which marked her first entry on the Billboard Hot 100. Two years later, she signed with producers Polow da Don and Timbaland through their respective labels Zone 4 and Mosley Music Group—both imprints of Interscope Records—to further pursue a recording career. She guest appeared on Timbaland's 2007 single, "The Way I Are," which peaked at number three on the Billboard Hot 100 and peaked atop record charts in eight other countries, becoming her mainstream commercial breakthrough. Her 2008 debut single, "Energy" and its follow-ups "Return the Favor" (featuring Timbaland) and "Turnin Me On" (featuring Lil Wayne) preceded the release of her debut studio album, In a Perfect World... (2009). The album was met with positive critical response, reached number four on the US Billboard 200, and received gold certification by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). It also spawned the single "Knock You Down" (featuring Kanye West and Ne-Yo), which earned a Grammy Award nomination for Best Rap/Sung Collaboration and matched "The Way I Are" as her highest-charting song. Her second studio album, No Boys Allowed (2010) was met with mixed reviews and a commercial decline from its predecessor, although it spawned the platinum-certified single "Pretty Girl Rock" (remixed featuring Kanye West). As of 2024, Hilson has not released any music as a lead artist since 2011. Hilson's musical style is R&B, hip hop, and pop; womanhood, intimacy, romance, and independence is her typical suject matter. She has pursued a side career in acting, making her film debut in the Tim Story romantic comedy film Think Like a Man. Prolific in charitable endeavors, she has contributed in the fight against HIV and AIDS, supported various relief efforts for natural disasters, and has been involved with several educational organizations. Her accolades include two Grammy Award nominations (including Best New Artist), a BET Award, a MOBO Award, a NAACP Image Award, and two Soul Train Music Awards.