Doll Domination is the second and final studio album by American girl group the Pussycat Dolls, released on September 19, 2008, by Interscope Records. The album's release was preceded by the departure of the group's longest-standing member Carmit Bachar. Development began in February 2008 where the group worked with previous collaborators Sean Garrett, Polow da Don and Timbaland and new ones such as Darkchild, J-Roc and Chase N. Cashe. Polow da Don, R. Kelly and Snoop Dogg also make guest performances on the album. Several songs on Doll Domination were originally recorded for the lead singer Nicole Scherzinger's debut solo album, Her Name is Nicole, which was shelved after the under-performance of its preceding singles. The album consists of a mixture of pop and R&B songs that also blend elements of dance, electropop with lyrics that tackle fame, sexuality and relationships. All of the lead and background vocals were sung by Scherzinger with support from Melody Thornton, whilst the remaining group members are only credited for background vocals. Upon release, Doll Domination received mixed reviews from music critics. The album debuted at number four on the US Billboard 200 becoming the group's highest charting album. It experienced similar peaks in international territories, debuting at number three in Canada and number four in Australia and the United Kingdom. Doll Domination was later reissued in multiple versions throughout 2009. The album was supported with a world tour titled Doll Domination Tour in 2009. The album was preceded by the release of the US Billboard Hot 100 top-ten single "When I Grow Up" and the UK top-ten hit "Whatcha Think About That" (featuring Missy Elliott). Other successful singles were "I Hate This Part", "Jai Ho! (You Are My Destiny)", and "Hush Hush; Hush Hush", all of which reached the top ten in numerous countries worldwide. Although "Jai Ho! (You Are My Destiny)" became a number-one hit in Australia, Ireland, Finland, among other countries, the single caused tension within the group as Scherzinger was billed as a featured artist. Despite their commercial success, unhappiness of Scherzinger's spotlight and prominence within the group grew leading to a public outburst by Thornton during the tour. In early 2010, the group disbanded to pursue solo projects, before reforming in 2019 with the promise of new music. In 2019, the R. Kelly collaboration "Out of This Club" was removed from digital retailers and streaming services, following the airing of the Surviving R. Kelly documentary and subsequent abuse allegations against the singer.