In chemistry, colligative properties are those properties of solutions that depend on the ratio of the number of solute particles to the number of solvent particles in a solution, and not on the nature of the chemical species present. The number ratio can be related to the various units for concentration of a solution such as molarity, molality, normality (chemistry), etc. The assumption that solution properties are independent of nature of solute particles is exact only for ideal solutions, which are solutions that exhibit thermodynamic properties analogous to those of an ideal gas, and is approximate for dilute real solutions. In other words, colligative properties are a set of solution properties that can be reasonably approximated by the assumption that the solution is ideal. Only properties which result from the dissolution of a nonvolatile solute in a volatile liquid solvent are considered. They are essentially solvent properties which are changed by the presence of the solute. The solute particles displace some solvent molecules in the liquid phase and thereby reduce the concentration of solvent and increase its entropy, so that the colligative properties are independent of the nature of the solute. The word colligative is derived from the Latin colligatus meaning bound together. This indicates that all colligative properties have a common feature, namely that they are related only to the number of solute molecules relative to the number of solvent molecules and not to the nature of the solute. Colligative properties include: Relative lowering of vapor pressure (Raoult's law) Elevation of boiling point Depression of freezing point Osmotic pressure For a given solute-solvent mass ratio, all colligative properties are inversely proportional to solute molar mass. Measurement of colligative properties for a dilute solution of a non-ionized solute such as urea or glucose in water or another solvent can lead to determinations of relative molar masses, both for small molecules and for polymers which cannot be studied by other means. Alternatively, measurements for ionized solutes can lead to an estimation of the percentage of dissociation taking place. Colligative properties are studied mostly for dilute solutions, whose behavior may be approximated as that of an ideal solution. In fact, all of the properties listed above are colligative only in the dilute limit: at higher concentrations, the freezing point depression, boiling point elevation, vapor pressure elevation or depression, and osmotic pressure are all dependent on the chemical nature of the solvent and the solute.