Sherron Marlon Collins (born March 18, 1987) is an American former professional basketball player who last played for the Kansas City Tornados of the NAPB (NAPB). He formerly played for the Charlotte Bobcats of the National Basketball Association (NBA). He has also played for the Texas Legends and Maine Red Claws of the NBA D-League and Hacettepe Üniversitesi in the Turkish Basketball League. As an All-American member of the Kansas Jayhawks men's basketball team, he earned a national championship in the 2008 NCAA Men's Division I Basketball Tournament, three Big 12 men's basketball tournament championships, and four consecutive Big 12 Conference regular season championships. He was regarded as one of the leaders of the team and was its captain during his senior year. Collins grew up in Chicago where he was a multisport standout athlete at Crane High School. He was regarded as the second best point guard in the nation by Scout.com and was considered one of the two best class of 2006 basketball prospects in the state of Illinois (along with Jon Scheyer). Collins was a well-decorated basketball player at Kansas. He was unanimously selected to the Big 12 All-Freshman Team for the 2006–07 Kansas Jayhawks men's basketball team. After leading the 2008–09 Kansas Jayhawks men's basketball team to the Big 12 Conference regular season title, Collins was named to the 2009 first team All-Big 12 team. That season, he was named a consensus second team 2009 NCAA Men's Basketball All-American. He was also a consensus first team 2010 NCAA Men's Basketball All-American as a senior and earned the Most Outstanding Player award while leading his team to the 2010 Big 12 men's basketball tournament championship. He was included on many of the watchlists for the most prestigious college basketball awards as both a junior and senior. Collins holds the school record for most consecutive free throws. Following his senior season, Collins was eligible for the 2010 NBA draft but went undrafted. Shortly after, he signed a free-agent contract with the Charlotte Bobcats and participated in their summer camp. He represented them in the Orlando Summer League before being signed for the regular season. In October 2012, he signed with the San Antonio Spurs, but he did not make their final roster.