Change management (CM) is a collective term for all approaches to prepare, support, and help individuals, teams, and organizations in making organizational change. It includes methods that redirect or redefine the use of resources, business process, budget allocations, or other modes of operation that significantly change a company or organization. Lack of consideration for changing the environment (Bednar, 2020, p.100) is poor change management, this is a lack of preparation for future change.. An example of this is evolving technologies, new skills may be required (Bessen, 2016) which could impact training protocols. The Human Activity System (Bednar, 2020, p. 100) is a mode of operation that should be flexible to support positive organisational change. Organizational change management (OCM) considers the full organization and what needs to change, while change management may be used solely to refer to how people and teams are affected by such organizational transition. It deals with many different disciplines, from behavioral and social sciences to information technology and business solutions. As change management becomes more necessary in the business cycle of organizations, it is beginning to be taught as its own academic discipline at universities. There are a growing number of universities with research units dedicated to the study of organizational change. One common type of organizational change may be aimed at reducing outgoing costs while maintaining financial performance, in an attempt to secure future profit margins. In a project-management context, the term "change management" may be used as an alternative to change control processes wherein formal or informal changes to a project are formally introduced and approved. Drivers of change may include the ongoing evolution of technology, internal reviews of processes, crisis response, customer demand changes, competitive pressure, modifications in legislation, acquisitions and mergers, and organizational restructuring.