Kara (Korean: 카라; Japanese: カラ; often stylized in all caps) /ˈkɑːrə/ is a South Korean girl group formed by DSP Media in 2007. The group's current lineup is Gyuri, Seungyeon, Nicole, Jiyoung, and Youngji. Kara made their debut in March 2007 with their first studio album, The First Bloooooming, and its title track, "Break It." Originally a quartet composed of Park Gyuri, Han Seungyeon, Nicole Jung, and Kim Sunghee, Kara showcased a strong female image and a mature R&B sound. Expectations for the group were high because they were considered the successors to their senior labelmates, Fin.K.L; however, their debut was a commercial failure. The following year, Sunghee left the group due to parental pressure, and members Goo Hara and Kang Jiyoung were added. After the addition of the new members, Kara's image and musical style changed to a "pretty but natural" concept with the release of their first mini-album, Rock U, in July 2008. Following the change in concept, Kara saw an increase in recognition. In 2009, they achieved their first music show win with "Honey", and after performing their single "Mister," the popularity of its "butt dance" choreography further increased Kara's popularity. Follow-up singles "Lupin" (2010), "Jumping" (2010), "Step" (2011), and "Pandora" (2012), also sold and charted well. After establishing success in Korea, Kara began to promote their music in Japan by signing to Universal Music Japan's subsidiary label, Universal Sigma, in 2010. Following their commercially successful debut, Kara achieved their first number one single in Japan with "Jet Coaster Love" in June 2011, marking the first time a foreign female group topped the singles chart in 30 years. Within their first two years of promoting in Japan, Kara sold over one million physical singles, making them one of the fastest-selling South Korean acts in Japan. In 2014, Nicole and Jiyoung decided not to renew their contracts with DSP Media and left the group. Following their departures, a reality TV show titled Kara Project aired to select a new member to join the group. Seven trainees from DSP Media took part in the program, and the winner, Heo Youngji, became the last member to join Kara. With this four-member lineup, Kara released two more singles in South Korea: "Mamma Mia" (2014) and "Cupid" (2015), receiving one music show win for each. On January 15, 2016, DSP Media announced Kara's disbandment after Gyuri, Seungyeon, and Hara's contracts expired. For Kara's 15th anniversary in 2022, members Gyuri, Seungyeon, Nicole, Jiyoung, and Youngji reunited to release an EP titled Move Again. Its single, "When I Move," earned Kara their first music show win in seven years.