"Jai Ho! (You Are My Destiny)" is a song by Indian composer A. R. Rahman and American girl group The Pussycat Dolls, recorded for the re-release of the group's second studio album Doll Domination (2008) and their EP Doll Domination – The Mini Collection (2009). It was released on February 23, 2009, by Interscope Records as the fourth single from the album and is an English remake of the original Hindi song "Jai Ho" which is taken from the soundtrack to the hit film Slumdog Millionaire (2008). The remake was conceived by record executives Jimmy Iovine and Ron Fair who tasked the Dolls' lead singer Nicole Scherzinger with creating a pop record that did not deviate from the original melody. Iovine and Fair also asked a number of other writers to create interpretations of the song, including Brick & Lace, The Writing Camp and Ester Dean. The final English version of "Jai Ho" was dubbed "Jai Ho! (You Are My Destiny)" and is sometimes also referred to as the "RF Mix" or "Ron Fair" Remix. Upon its release, the song received acclaim from music critics, who applauded it as a great adaptation and praised Scherzinger's vocals. "Jai Ho! (You Are My Destiny)" was also commercially successful, debuting on the US Billboard Hot 100, at 100 before rising to number 15 the following week, registering one of the chart's biggest upward movements since the chart's conception. Additionally, the song topped the charts in several countries, including Australia, Finland, Israel, and Ireland, as well as peaking within the top ten of the charts in countries such as New Zealand and the United Kingdom. It was certified multiple platinum in Australia and platinum in New Zealand and the UK, where it sold over half a million copies. An accompanying music video was shot in Vienna, Austria at the Tram Museum, recreating the last scene from Slumdog Millionaire. In the United Kingdom, the English-language version of the song was sung by various voice actors of British children's shows during the 2009 Children in Need Promotional dance video. It was also sung in The Official BBC Children in Need Medley, which topped the UK Singles Chart for two weeks in late 2009. The Pussycat Dolls have performed "Jai Ho! (You Are My Destiny)" during several live performances, including on Late Night with Jimmy Fallon, an episode of One Life to Live and during their Doll Domination Tour. Scherzinger's billing as a featured artist on the track sparked tension within the group, eventually leading to their disbandment in 2010 before reuniting in 2019.