Hannah Montana 2: Meet Miley Cyrus is a double album by American singer Miley Cyrus, released on June 26, 2007, by Walt Disney Records and Hollywood Records. The first disc is the soundtrack for the second season of the television series Hannah Montana and credited to Cyrus's title character Hannah Montana, and the second disc is Cyrus' debut studio album with all new original recordings. The two halves of the album were re-released as two separate albums on digital platforms on January 22, 2021. Both albums were further promoted with Cyrus' first headlining concert tour, the Best of Both Worlds Tour (2007–08). Most of the Meet Miley Cyrus album was produced by Rock Mafia, with further collaborations with Xandy Barry, Matthew Wilder, Scott Cutler and Wendi Foy Green. Cyrus co-wrote eight out of ten tracks on Meet Miley Cyrus. Hannah Montana 2: Meet Miley Cyrus debuted at number one on the US Billboard 200, with first-week sales of 325,000 copies, and has since become certified quadruple-platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) for exceeding shipments of four million units. Cyrus was also the seventh solo artist to chart at number one on the Billboard 200 under the age of eighteen. The album charted well on national record charts throughout Europe and Oceania, appearing in the top-twenty in several countries. The album received a multi-platinum certification by Music Canada, platinum certifications by the Australian Recording Industry Association (ARIA) in Australia and the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry (IFPI) in Sweden, and gold certifications by the Mexican Association of Phonograph Producers (AMPROFON) in Mexico and the British Phonographic Industry (BPI) in the United Kingdom. "Nobody's Perfect" was released as the lead single from Hannah Montana 2 on May 15, 2007, and peaked at 27 in the US, making it the highest charting Hannah Montana single. Her second single, "Make Some Noise", was released on June 5, 2007, as a digital download. "See You Again" was released as the lead single from Meet Miley Cyrus on December 29, 2007. It peaked at number ten on the Billboard Hot 100, becoming Cyrus' first single to enter the top ten on the chart. "Start All Over" was released only in Australia on March 11, 2008, and peaked at number sixty-eight on the Billboard Hot 100.