Metamorphosis is the second studio album by American actress and singer Hilary Duff. The album was released on August 26, 2003, by Hollywood Records as the follow-up to her debut studio album and first Christmas album, Santa Claus Lane (2002). According to Duff, the album incorporates elements of pop and rock music, and it represents changes that are specific to her life and that everyone experiences. Duff worked with several producers on the album such as The Matrix. Others who collaborated on the album include Chico Bennett, Matthew Gerrard, John Shanks and Kara DioGuardi. The album coincided with other high-profile projects in which she was involved in other media. Metamorphosis received mixed reviews from music critics; some complimented it for being a modern-day bubblegum album, while others considered the album to be a promotional gimmick for Duff, lacking real substance. The album debuted at number two on the US Billboard 200, selling 203,000 copies in its first week, becoming the highest opening week sales figure for a debut album by a female artist in 2003. In the following week, the album rose to number one on the chart. It became the eighth best-selling album of 2003 in the US, according to Nielsen SoundScan, selling 2.6 million copies in a period of five months. By late 2005, the album had sold five million copies worldwide. For Hollywood Records, Metamorphosis was the label's first high-seller in several years and led to the company's further successful cultivation of new artists and brands using the Disney Channel. She was the sixth solo artist to peak at number one on the Billboard 200 under the age of 18. Three singles were released from the album. The lead single, "So Yesterday", was released in July 2003 to mixed reviews. The song failed to make much of an impact in the United States, peaking in the top 50. Internationally, it peaked within the top-ten of the music charts in Australia, Canada, France and the United Kingdom. The second single, "Come Clean", released in early 2004, was more successful in the United States, peaking at number 35 on the US Billboard Hot 100 and becoming her best-selling single in the country. The third and final single from the album, "Little Voice", was only released in Australia. Duff further promoted the album with the Metamorphosis Tour, which began in November 2003 and ended in May 2004.