"The Best of Both Worlds" is a pop-rock song performed by American singer and actress Miley Cyrus for the Disney Channel television series Hannah Montana. Cyrus performs the song as Hannah Montana, who is the alter ego of the series' protagonist Miley Stewart. It was released as the debut and lead single from the Hannah Montana soundtrack album on March 18, 2006. "The Best of Both Worlds" is the theme song of the television series; in the series' third season, the 2009 Movie Mix is used as the theme. A live version is available on Hannah Montana & Miley Cyrus: Best of Both Worlds Concert (2008), a karaoke version is included in the soundtrack's karaoke series (2008), and the 2009 Movie Mix is featured on Hannah Montana: The Movie soundtrack (2009). The song has elements of bubblegum pop and pop rock. Lyrically, it is a showcase of the double life lived by Miley Stewart. "The Best of Both Worlds" is considered to be one of Cyrus' signature songs, introducing her to the music industry. The song received generally positive reviews; critics noted that the song was written well despite its "weird" concept. "The Best of Both Worlds" reached number 92 on the Billboard Hot 100, making the song only one of two television themes of the decade (the other being "Leave It All to Me" by Miranda Cosgrove) to chart on the Hot 100, and achieved some commercial success internationally. The song reached its highest international chart peak position on the Irish Singles Chart, at number seventeen. A promotional music video for the song was taken from a recording of a concert performance. Cyrus promoted the song by performing it at several venues, including her performances as the opening act for The Cheetah Girls' The Party's Just Begun Tour and as the closing number on her own first headlining concert tour of the same name. Cyrus' performances of the song on the Best of Both Worlds Tour were as herself, but when she performed the song on television, she did so in character as Hannah Montana.