The Battle of Stalingrad (17 July 1942 – 2 February 1943) was a major battle on the Eastern Front of World War II where Nazi Germany and its allies unsuccessfully fought the Soviet Union for control of the city of Stalingrad (later renamed Volgograd) in Southern Russia. The battle was characterized by fierce close-quarters combat and direct assaults on civilians in air raids, as the battle epitomized urban warfare, with it also being the single largest and costliest urban battle in the history of warfare. It was the bloodiest and fiercest battle of the entire Second World War, and arguably in all of history, as both sides suffered tremendous casualties and endured ferocious fighting. Today, the Battle of Stalingrad is commonly regarded as the turning point in the European theatre of war, as the Oberkommando der Wehrmacht (German High Command) was forced to withdraw considerable military forces from other areas in occupied Europe to replace German losses on the Eastern Front. For Germany, the battle ended up with the destruction of its 6th Army and an entire corps of its 4th Panzer Army, and the rout of Army Group B. The Soviet victory energized the Red Army and shifted the balance of power in the favour of the Soviets. Stalingrad was of great strategic importance for both sides, as it was the largest industrial center of the Soviet Union and an important transport hub on the Volga River. Whoever controlled Stalingrad would therefore gain access to the oil fields of the Caucasus and would control the Volga. Stalingrad also had significant symbolic importance as it bore the name of Joseph Stalin, the leader of the Soviet Union. Germany was already operating on dwindling fuel supplies, and as a result, focused its efforts on moving deeper into Soviet territory and taking the oil fields at any cost. The German forces first clashed with the Stalingrad Front on the distant approaches to Stalingrad on 17 July. On 23 August, the Germans launched an offensive by using the 6th Army and elements of the 4th Panzer Army. The attack was supported by intense Luftwaffe bombing that reduced much of the city to rubble. The battle degenerated into house-to-house fighting as both sides poured reinforcements into the city. By mid-November, the Germans, at great cost, had pushed the Soviet defenders back into narrow zones along the west bank of the river. Winter conditions became particularly brutal, with temperatures often well below sub-zero. In addition to brutal urban combat, trench warfare was prevalent during the battle. On 19 November, the Red Army launched Operation Uranus, a two-pronged attack targeting the Romanian armies protecting the 6th Army's flanks. The Axis flanks were overrun and the 6th Army was cut off and surrounded in the Stalingrad area. Adolf Hitler was determined to hold the city at all costs and forbade the 6th Army from trying a breakout; instead, attempts were made to supply it by air and to break the encirclement from the outside. The Soviets were successful in preventing the Germans from delivering enough supplies through the air to the trapped Axis forces. Nevertheless, heavy fighting continued for another two months. On 2 February 1943, the German 6th Army, having exhausted their ammunition and food, finally capitulated after several months of fighting, making it the first of Hitler's field armies to surrender in World War II. The Soviet victory is commemorated in Russia as the Day of Military Honour. The battle has also become ingrained in popular culture.