The 1984 Winter Olympics, officially known as the XIV Olympic Winter Games (Serbo-Croatian and Slovene: XIV. Zimske olimpijske igre; Cyrillic: XIV Зимске олимпијске игре; Macedonian: XIV Зимски олимписки игри, romanized: XIV Zimski olimpiski igri) and commonly known as Sarajevo '84 (Cyrillic: Сарајево '84; Macedonian: Сараево '84), were a winter multi-sport event held between 8 and 19 February 1984 in Sarajevo, Yugoslavia. It was the first Winter Olympic Games held in a Slavic language-speaking country, as well as the only Winter Olympics held in a communist country before the 2022 Winter Olympics in Beijing, China. It was the second consecutive Olympic Games held in a communist country, after the 1980 Summer Olympics in Moscow, Russian SFSR, Soviet Union. The Games were held in Sarajevo and at neighbour resorts in the Dinaric Alps located less than 25 kilometers from the city. At the first days of the Games, the sports program was disrupted by extreme weather conditions and the alpine ski events started four days later than planned. The Games brought together 1272 athletes from 49 countries, which represents a significant increase compared to 1980. Athletes participated in six sports and ten disciplines in a total of thirty-nine official events, one more than the Games four years earlier. Seven National Olympic Committees sent athletes for the first time: Egypt, British Virgin Islands, Monaco, Puerto Rico and Senegal participated for the first time in the Olympic Winter Games. Finland's Marja-Liisa Hämäläinen, who won all three individual races in cross-country skiing, won the most medals of the Games. The host country Yugoslavia won the first medal in its history at the Winter Games after skier Jure Franko came second in the giant slalom. Also East Germany, which won all gold and silver medals in women's speed skating and bobsleigh, finished first for the first time on the medal table with twenty-four medals, nine of which were gold. The 1984 Winter Olympics, considered a success, made it possible to develop winter sports in Yugoslavia, but the war in Yugoslavia, which broke out in 1992, heavily damaged the city and the Olympic facilities. Some sites have been renovated after the war but others remain abandoned, the former bobsleigh/luge track being one of the more well-known abandoned sites.