The Ukrainian Premier League (Ukrainian: "Українська Прем'єр-ліга", Ukrainska Premier Liha) or UPL as a sports competition is the highest division of Ukrainian annual football championship. Originally known as the Vyshcha Liha (Ukrainian: Вища ліга, Top League) it was formed in 1991 during the 1992 Ukrainian football championship upon discontinuation of the 1991 Soviet football championship and included the Ukraine-based clubs that competed previously in the Soviet top three tiers competitions as well as better clubs of the Ukrainian republican competitions. The initial season of the league featured six former Soviet Top League clubs among which were Dynamo, Shakhtar, Chornomorets, Dnipro, Metalist, Metalurh as well as four more clubs that previously also competed at the top league. The Ukrainian Premier League is also a public organization of professional clubs. In 1996 along with the other professional football leagues of Ukraine, a council of the Vyshcha Liha (Top League) clubs became a member of the Professional Football League of Ukraine. In 2008 was withdrawn from Professional Football League of Ukraine and reformed into a separate self-governed entity of the Ukrainian Association of Football (previously Football Federation of Ukraine), officially changing its name to the current one. As a leading club of the Soviet Top League, Dynamo Kyiv continues to be the league's "flagship club", while since the mid 2000s the league has been dominated by Shakhtar Donetsk. Three of Ukrainian clubs reached the finals of European club competitions: Dynamo (as Soviet club), Shakhtar and Dnipro. Among Ukrainian fans the most popular Ukrainian clubs are Dynamo Kyiv and Shakhtar Donetsk. Other popular clubs include Karpaty Lviv, Metalist Kharkiv, Chornomorets Odesa and Dnipro. Its rank was 12th highest in Europe as rated by UEFA as of 2021. Since 2014, the operation of the League has been disrupted greatly on account of the Russo-Ukrainian War, worsening with the Russian invasion of Ukraine in 2022. The league has been affected by destruction of its sports infrastructure, many Ukrainian players choosing to join their military, and disruption to match attendances and many other facets of the league's operation.