"Party in the U.S.A." is a song by American singer Miley Cyrus from her debut extended play (EP) The Time of Our Lives (2009). It was released on August 4, 2009, by Hollywood Records as the lead single from the project. The song was written and produced by Dr. Luke, with additional songwriting provided by Jessie J and Claude Kelly. "Party in the U.S.A." was originally intended for Jessie J, but after deciding it was not edgy enough for her, they passed it to Cyrus and adjusted the lyrics to fit her persona. Not completely identifying with "Party in the U.S.A.", Cyrus chose it for The Time of Our Lives partially due to a need for tracks. It is a pop song, with lyrics reflecting her relocating from Nashville, Tennessee, to Hollywood, California. This is one of four collaborations between Cyrus and Dr. Luke, with the EP title track "The Time of Our Lives", will.i.am's "Fall Down" and "Wrecking Ball" following in 2013. "Party in the U.S.A." received acclaim from music critics, many of whom praised its catchiness and Cyrus's vocals. In the United States, the song charted at number two on the Billboard Hot 100. It was the seventh best-selling digital single of 2009 in the United States. The song was certified twelve times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) and quadruple platinum by Music Canada. As of July 2017[update], the song has sold six million in pure sales in the United States. In 2020, during an appearance on Jimmy Kimmel Live!, Cyrus officially received a plaque with an RIAA Diamond certification for "Party in the U.S.A.", making it one of the few songs in history to reach this milestone. The music video for "Party in the U.S.A.", directed by Chris Applebaum, pays tribute to the 1978 film Grease and Cyrus's parents' courting days. It occurs mainly at a drive-in theater and won the MuchMusic Video Award for Best International Artist Video at the 2010 award show. The song was performed live for Cyrus's world tours, the 2009 Wonder World Tour, the 2011 Gypsy Heart Tour, and the 2014 Bangerz Tour. At the 2009 Teen Choice Awards, Cyrus's use of a pole during a performance of "Party in the U.S.A.", which some interpreted to be a dance pole, caused a media uproar. Although co-writer Jessie J originally decided not to record "Party in the U.S.A." after writing it, she did eventually, among various other artists, perform a cover version of the song. "Party in the U.S.A." has also been parodied by "Weird Al" Yankovic. The song premiered on radio on July 28, 2009, before its official release.