Corperryale L'Adorable "Manny" Harris (born September 21, 1989) is an American professional basketball player for Al Riyadi Beirut of the Lebanese Basketball League. He has previously played for the Los Angeles Lakers, Cleveland Cavaliers, and Dallas Mavericks of the National Basketball Association (NBA), and is a former All-Big Ten Conference guard who played three seasons for the Michigan Wolverines. He decided to forgo his final year of collegiate eligibility and declare himself eligible for the 2010 NBA draft, but went undrafted. He signed with the Cavaliers of the National Basketball Association (NBA). He began his second year injured and rehabbed for two months in the NBA D-League with Cavaliers' affiliate, the Canton Charge, before being re-signed by the Cavaliers. He signed with BC Azovmash of Ukraine in September 2012 and spent 2012–13 playing in the Ukrainian Basketball SuperLeague. For the following two seasons he split time in the NBA, NBA D-League and in the Turkish Basketball Super League. He is an NBA D-League All-star and six-time D-League performer of the week. He has set single-game scoring records for the Legends, Charge and D-Fenders franchises. At Michigan, he was a 2008–09 first team All-Big Ten Conference selection, a 2007–08 second team All-Big Ten selection and a 2009–10 third team All-Big Ten selection. Harris also earned Big Ten Academic All-Conference honors as both a sophomore and a junior after the 2008–09 and 2009–10 Big Ten Conference regular seasons. Harris began the 2009–10 NCAA Division I men's basketball season by recording the second triple double in school history. Harris previously attended Redford High School in Detroit, Michigan, where he won the state's Mr. Basketball award as a senior. Harris is one of only five Big Ten Conference basketball players to have finished in the top ten in the conference in scoring, rebounding, and assist average in the same season and prior to Evan Turner's 2009–10 season, Harris' 2008–09 season was the only time a player had finished in the top six of all three categories.