Corey Perry (born May 16, 1985) is a Canadian professional ice hockey right winger for the Edmonton Oilers of the National Hockey League (NHL). He played the first 14 years of his career with the Anaheim Ducks, and has also played for the Dallas Stars, Montreal Canadiens, Tampa Bay Lightning, and Chicago Blackhawks. Perry is known for his goal-scoring ability and an abrasive playing style with an ability to get under his opponent's skin; the former earned him the affectionate nickname "Scorey Perry", the latter the less affectionate "the Worm". He won the Memorial Cup with the Ontario Hockey League (OHL)'s London Knights and a gold medal with Canada at the World Junior Championships during his major junior career. Perry was drafted in the first round, 28th overall, by the Mighty Ducks of Anaheim in the 2003 NHL Entry Draft and won the Stanley Cup with the club in 2007. In 2008, he recorded 29 goals and 25 assists. He improved in 2009 to 72 points and was named to his first NHL All-Star Game. Perry continued his ascent in 2010 as he scored 27 goals and had 49 assists. In 2011, he won the Hart Memorial Trophy as the league's most valuable player for the 2010–11 season. He led the NHL with 50 goals and finished third in points behind Daniel Sedin and Martin St. Louis, with 98. During his two one-year campaigns with the Dallas Stars and Montreal Canadiens respectively, Perry lost consecutive Stanley Cup Finals to the Tampa Bay Lightning; Perry proceed to join the Lightning the very next season after his time with the Canadiens, where he proceeded to lose a third straight Stanley Cup Finals, and in doing so became the first player in NHL history to lose three consecutive Stanley Cup Finals with three different teams. Corey Perry is the last active player to have been a member of the Ducks while it was still called the Mighty Ducks of Anaheim. Internationally, Perry has won gold medals with Canada at the 2010 and 2014 Winter Olympics. He became a member of the Triple Gold Club after captaining Canada to gold at the 2016 IIHF World Championships, in addition to previously winning the Stanley Cup and the Olympic gold medal. Perry is only the second player (joining Scott Niedermayer) to combine Triple Gold membership with gold at the World Junior Championships, a Memorial Cup win, and a World Cup of Hockey win.