The Estonia men's national football team (Estonian: Eesti Jalgpallikoondis) represents Estonia in international football matches and is controlled by the Estonian Football Association, the governing body for football in Estonia. Estonia's home ground is Lilleküla Stadium in the capital city Tallinn. The national team's first ever match was held against Finland in 1920 and resulted in 6–0 defeat. Estonian footballers have participated only once in the Olympic Games, when they played a single match in the 1924 Olympic Games' final tournament in Paris, France, defeated 1–0 by the United States in first round. During World War II, in 1940, Estonia was invaded and occupied by the Soviet Union, and there was no possibility of fielding a national football team again until the country restored full independence in August 1991. After the end of the 1944–1991 Soviet occupation, Estonia's first FIFA-recognised international match was with Slovenia on 3 June 1992, a 1–1 draw at home in Tallinn. Estonia has never qualified for the FIFA World Cup or UEFA European Championship. The team has reached the UEFA Euro 2012 qualifying play-offs, by finishing second in their qualifying group, before being drawn up against Ireland for a play-off tie, making 2011 the "annus mirabilis of Estonian football". They have since repeated this feat by qualifying for the UEFA Euro 2024 qualifying play-offs through being the best group winner in 2022–23 UEFA Nations League D. Estonia has also participated in the local sub-regional Baltic Cup championship, which takes place every two years between the countries of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. Estonia has won the three-nation Baltic Cup tournament four times — most recently in 2020 — which is less than either of the other two teams in the tournament, Latvia and Lithuania. The record for the most international caps by an international is held by Martin Reim with 157, who held the European record in 2009 until November of that year. The record for most goals is held by Andres Oper with 38.