Shaffer Chimere Smith (born October 18, 1979), known professionally as Ne-Yo (/ˈniːjoʊ/ NEE-yoh), is an American singer, songwriter, actor, dancer, and record producer. Regarded as a leading figure of 2000s R&B music, he is the recipient of numerous accolades including three Grammy Awards. He gained recognition for his songwriting abilities following the success of his first major credit, Mario's 2004 single "Let Me Love You". Its release prompted a meeting between Ne-Yo and Def Jam's then-president Jay-Z, resulting in a contract in which he released four successful studio albums and numerous hit songs for the label. Ne-Yo's debut single, "Stay" (featuring Peedi Peedi) was released the following year to lukewarm commercial reception, although its follow-up, "So Sick" became his breakthrough hit as it peaked atop the Billboard Hot 100. Both songs, along with the follow-up singles "When You're Mad" and "Sexy Love," preceded the release of his debut studio album In My Own Words (2006), which peaked atop the Billboard 200 and saw positive critical reception. Furthermore, the album earned a Grammy Award nomination for Best Contemporary R&B Album and received platinum certification by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), in addition to similar certifications in the UK, Japan and Australia. Because of You (2007), Ne-Yo's second studio album, also peaked the Billboard 200 and won Best Contemporary R&B Album at the 50th Annual Grammy Awards. His third studio album, Year of the Gentleman (2008), saw continued success and yielded a nomination for the award, as well as for Album of the Year. Its lead single, "Closer" earned a nomination for Best Male Pop Vocal Performance, while its follow-up, "Miss Independent" won the award, as well as Best R&B Song at the 51st Annual Grammy Awards. Year of the Gentleman received double platinum certification by the RIAA—selling two million copies—as well as triple platinum certification by the British Phonographic Industry (BPI). Libra Scale (2010), Ne-Yo's fourth studio album, was met with mild success on international charts and reached number nine on the US Billboard 200. Seeing an overall decline in commercial reception, he parted ways with Def Jam in favor of its coequal Universal Music Group subsidiary, Motown two years later. His fifth album, R.E.D. (2012) peaked at number four on the chart and was preceded by the single "Let Me Love You (Until You Learn to Love Yourself)", which peaked at number six on the Billboard Hot 100 and peaked atop the UK Singles Chart. His sixth album, Non-Fiction (2015) was met with similar commercial response despite a steep critical decline. It was supported by the Billboard Hot 100-top ten single "Time of Our Lives" (with Pitbull) and the strip club-inspired top 40 single, "She Knows" (featuring Juicy J). His seventh album, Good Man (2018) peaked at number 33 on the Billboard 200, while his eighth and ninth albums, Another Kind of Christmas (2019) and Self Explanatory (2022) scarcely entered the chart. Alongside his recording career, Ne-Yo served as a judge for the reality competition series World of Dance from 2017 to 2020 alongside Jennifer Lopez and Derek Hough. In 2021, Ne-Yo competed as Badger on the second season of The Masked Singer UK, and finished in second place. In 2023, he competed on the tenth season of The Masked Singer, as the Cow and finished in first place. According to Recording Industry Association of America, Ne-Yo has sold 29 million certified albums and singles in the United States. Billboard ranked "Give Me Everything" and "Knock You Down" among the Greatest Songs of the Summer of all time. Ne-Yo has yielded five number one singles on the UK Singles Chart, and spent 315 weeks within the chart's Top 75. Ne-Yo also has four songs listed on Motown's Top 100 songs of the Millennium in the UK—the fifth most entries on the list.