The 2011 Wimbledon Championships was a tennis tournament played on grass courts at the All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club in Wimbledon, London in the United Kingdom. It was the 125th edition of the Wimbledon Championships and were held from 20 June to 3 July 2011. It was the third Grand Slam tennis event of the year and was part of the ATP World Tour, the WTA Tour, the ITF Junior Tour, the NEC Tour and the London Prepares series of test events for the following year's London Olympics. The championships were organised by the All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club and the International Tennis Federation. In the professional tournaments there were two new singles champions for the first time since 2002: Novak Djokovic and Petra Kvitová. By reaching the final Djokovic also claimed the World No. 1 in the ATP rankings from Rafael Nadal, while Kvitová became the first Grand Slam event winner born in the 1990s. In the doubles the Bryan brothers claimed the men's title for a second time, and equalled the overall Grand Slam tournament record of 11 set by the Woodies, Mark Woodforde and Todd Woodbridge. In the women's doubles Katarina Srebotnik won her first ladies major title after making four previous major finals. Srebotnik won alongside Květa Peschke; this was Peschke's first major title. In the mixed doubles Jürgen Melzer won his second major title, and first in the mixed doubles as he partnered Iveta Benešová to her first major title. In total, players from the Czech Republic (Kvitová, Peschke, and Benešová) were champions in three of the five main tour events in the tournament. In the junior tournaments both the boys and girls singles titles were won by Australians. Luke Saville won the boys title while Ashleigh Barty became the first Australian in 31 years to win the girls title. In the doubles there was home success as Brit George Morgan and Croatian Mate Pavić won their maiden junior Grand Slam tournament titles. The girls doubles title was claimed by Canadian Eugenie Bouchard and American Grace Min. In the wheelchair events Esther Vergeer and Sharon Walraven retained their doubles title. This was Vergeer's third successive win at the championships and meant that she was still unbeaten at Wimbledon. In the men's event Maikel Scheffers and Ronald Vink completed a team career Grand Slam, as they won the only title they had previously failed to win as a team. The legends events titles were won by the teams of: Lindsay Davenport and Martina Hingis, the Dutch pair of Jacco Eltingh and Paul Haarhuis, and the Australian pair of Pat Cash and Mark Woodforde.