TV Globo (stylized as tvglobo; Portuguese: [teˈve ˈɡlobu], "Globe TV", or simply Globo and alternatively as Global), formerly known as Rede Globo, is a Brazilian free-to-air television network, launched by media proprietor Roberto Marinho on 26 April 1965. It is owned by media conglomerate Grupo Globo. The TV station is by far the largest of its holdings. Globo is the largest commercial TV network in Latin America and the second-largest commercial TV network in the world behind the American Broadcasting Company and one of the largest producers of telenovelas along with Televisa, TV Azteca, Telemundo, Caracol Televisión, Telefe, RCN Televisión, Venevisión, GMA Network and ABS-CBN. All of this makes Globo renowned as one of the most important television networks in the world and Grupo Globo as one of the largest media groups. Globo is headquartered in the Jardim Botânico neighborhood of Rio de Janeiro, where its news division is based. The network's main production studios are located at a complex dubbed Estúdios Globo, located in Jacarepaguá, in the same city. Globo is composed of 5 owned-and-operated television stations and 122 affiliates throughout Brazil plus its own international networks, TV Globo Internacional and TV Globo Portugal. In 2007, Globo moved its analog operations to high-definition television production for digital broadcasting. According to Brazilian national and international statistical data, Globo is one of the largest media companies in the world, and produces around 2,400 hours of entertainment and 3,000 hours of journalism per year in Brazil. Through its network, the broadcaster covers 98.6% of Brazil's territory. Recognized for its production quality, the company has already been presented with 14 international Emmys. The international operations of Globo include seven pay-per-view television channels and a production and distribution division that distributes Brazilian sports and entertainment content to more than 190 countries around the world. In Brazil, Globo presently reaches 99.5% of potential viewers, practically the entire Brazilian population, with 5 owned-and-operated stations and 131 network affiliates that deliver programming to more than 183 million Brazilians. The network has been responsible for the 20 most-watched TV programs broadcast on Brazilian television, including Avenida Brasil, a 2012 record-breaking telenovela that reached 50 million viewers and was sold to 130 countries. The successful programming structure of TV Globo has not changed since the 1970s: In primetime Monday through Saturday it airs four telenovelas and the newscast Jornal Nacional. The three telenovelas, along with other productions are made in the net's Projac, the largest production center in South America. The four top-rated TV shows in Brazil are Globo's flashy hourlong soap operas, called novelas, at 6 pm, 7 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. nightly, and Globo's national evening news at 8 p.m.—all from the network's own studios. Globo also produces 90% of its programming. TV Globo (as it is known) has had a near monopoly on TV viewership and a symbiotic relationship with successive military and civilian governments. Its political and cultural sway in Brazil is unrivaled. "Globo has a very persuasive influence on diverse aspects of Brazilian society," comments Raul Reis, a former Brazilian journalist. Producing Brazilian-made programming in accordance with international technical standards, the television network grew to become the flagship of multimedia Globo Organization including cellular phone service, cable, television stations in Portugal and Mexico, book and magazine publishing, Internet and film production. Globo's cultural and financial power continues to grow. The company is dramatically expanding its role in Brazilian and Latin American media, transforming itself from an old-style family fiefdom into a twenty-first-century media conglomerate. Most recently, Globo struck a strategic alliance with Microsoft, which paid $126 million in August for an 11.5 percent share in Globo Cabo, the company's cable subsidiary. Now an international economic powerhouse, Globo no longer needs the perks its proximity to local power once offered: It is on the road to becoming Latin America's prime player in the world's mass-media market.