International governments are divided on the issue of recognition of the independence of Kosovo from Serbia, which was declared in 2008. The Government of Serbia does not diplomatically recognise Kosovo as a sovereign state, although the two countries have enjoyed normalised economic relations since 2020 and have agreed not to try to interfere with the other's accession to the European Union. As of 4 September 2020[update], 104 out of 193 (53.9%) United Nations member states, 22 out of 27 (81.5%) European Union member states, 28 out of 32 (87.5%) NATO member states, 4 out of 10 (40%) ASEAN member states, and 34 out of 57 (59.6%) Organisation of Islamic Cooperation member states have recognised Kosovo. In total, Kosovo received 114 diplomatic recognitions by UN member states, however conflicts have arisen regarding the exact number of countries recognizing Kosovo. Among the G20 countries, eleven (including all seven G7 countries) have recognised Kosovo as an independent state: Australia, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Saudi Arabia, South Korea, Turkey, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Eight (including all five founding BRICS countries), however, have not: Argentina, Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, Mexico, Russia, and South Africa. In 2013, the two sides began to normalise relations in accordance with the Brussels Agreement. In September 2020, Serbia and Kosovo agreed to normalise economic ties. Serbia also agreed to suspend its efforts to encourage other states to either not recognise Kosovo or to revoke recognition for one year, while Kosovo agreed to not apply for new membership of international organisations for the same period. In February 2023, Serbia and Kosovo agreed to a proposed normalisation agreement in European Union mediated dialogue and through further negotiations accepted a roadmap and timescale for its implementation the following month. Under the terms of the agreement, Serbia committed to not oppose the membership of Kosovo in international organisations and recognised Kosovo's national symbols and official documents including passports, diplomas, vehicle registration plates, and customs stamps.