Teenage Dream is the third studio album by American singer Katy Perry. It was released on August 24, 2010, through Capitol Records. Primarily a pop record, Teenage Dream also contains elements of disco, electronic, rock, funk, house, Hi-NRG, and hip hop, that revolve around young love, partying, self-empowerment, and personal growth. Perry co-wrote the album, and worked with a number of producers such as Dr. Luke, Max Martin, Benny Blanco, Stargate and Greg Wells. With "California Gurls", "Teenage Dream", "Firework", "E.T.", and "Last Friday Night (T.G.I.F.)", Teenage Dream is the second album in history to have five number-one singles (after Michael Jackson's 1987 album Bad) to top the US Billboard Hot 100, and the first by a woman to achieve this milestone. Its sixth single, "The One That Got Away", peaked at number three on that chart. The album debuted at number one on the US Billboard 200, selling 192,000 copies in its first week. The album was later certified nine times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) for combined album sales, track sales, on-demand audio and video streams equivalent of nine million album-sale units. The album has gone onto sell 3.1 million copies in the United States, and charted within the Top 40 of the Billboard 200 year-end chart three years in a row. The album also sold 1.3 million copies in the United Kingdom, where it was certified five times platinum by the British Phonographic Industry (BPI). Upon its release, Teenage Dream received mixed reviews from music critics, who complimented its themes but were divided over its production and Perry's vocals. However, retrospective reviews have praised the album, ranking it on multiple decade-end best albums lists. Billboard named Teenage Dream "one of the defining LPs from a new golden age in mega-pop" and The A.V. Club called the album "pop perfection". The album and its singles earned Perry seven Grammy Award nominations including Album of the Year, Best Pop Vocal Album, and Record of the Year. It also won International Album of the Year at the Juno Awards of 2011. All six of the aforementioned singles, in addition to two from its 2012 reissue Teenage Dream: The Complete Confection, have sold over two million digital downloads each in the US, setting a record in the digital era for the most multi-Platinum singles from one album, breaking the previous record of Fergie's debut album, The Dutchess (2006), which had five multi-Platinum songs. To promote the album, Perry embarked on the California Dreams Tour from 2011 to 2012. By July 2013, Teenage Dream had sold 6 million copies worldwide.