This is a list of the men's national association football teams in the world. The International Association Football Federation (FIFA) is the world's most important governing body for association football. A majority of national association football teams in the world are members of FIFA or one of its affiliated continental confederations. A majority of them also represent sovereign states with wide international recognition, with 188 of 195 United Nations (UN) member and observer states holding membership of FIFA. A notable exception is the United Kingdom, which is not a member of FIFA in its own right but is represented in the governing body by the teams of its four constituent countries. Other UN members and one observer state have either held membership in a confederation in the past and subsequently lost it, or have never belonged to either FIFA or one of its recognised confederations. Membership of FIFA and its confederations also includes national teams representing a few states with limited international recognition, one associated state with no UN membership, a significant number of dependent territories, and a limited number of autonomous areas. A majority of states with limited recognition, however, have no membership of FIFA or any of its confederations. This list divides national teams into three main groups: Teams that are either members of FIFA (211 teams), or have membership in a FIFA-affiliated continental confederation without being members of FIFA itself (11 teams). Teams that are not members of FIFA or any continental federation, but which represent UN member and observer states. This group includes four United Nations member states and one observer state (5 teams). Teams representing states with limited international recognition and no membership of FIFA or a confederation (6 teams), plus one representing an associated state with no membership of FIFA or a confederation. This list excludes other teams described by their supporters as 'national', which represent specific ethnic groups, cultural/historical regions, separatist or autonomist movements, speakers of specific languages, and micronations. These teams have historically participated in matches and tournaments outside FIFA's recognition, though some of them have sporadically or regularly played in friendly matches and tournaments against FIFA members. Some national teams with FIFA membership have disappeared due to belonging to a sovereign state or dependent territory which split into two or more states or territories (examples include the Soviet Union, Yugoslavia, or the Netherlands Antilles), or by part of the territory becoming independent (such as the Ireland national football team, which ceased to exist as such after reaching a compromise with FIFA and recognising the Republic of Ireland national football team as representative of the independent part of Ireland). Other teams have disappeared by virtue of the states or territories they represented forming a new state by joining another entity or entities (examples include the teams representing Tanganyika and Malaya, which merged with other former colonies to respectively form the Tanzania and Malaysia football teams), or becoming part of an already existing state (as is the case with East Germany, which joined West Germany to form the unified Germany football team). In several cases the football records of dissolved teams are considered by FIFA as belonging to a successor entity (the Russia national team, for example, carries over the records of the Soviet Union national team). Defunct teams are listed on this page for historical purposes. Even if only members of FIFA and its affiliated confederations are taken into account, there are more national association football teams in the world than those of any other sport.