"The Edge of Glory" is a song by American singer Lady Gaga from her second studio album, Born This Way (2011). The song was released on May 9, 2011, as the album's third single. Initially released as one of two promotional singles for Born This Way, it shortly became a single following its success in digital outlets worldwide. The song was written and produced by Gaga and Fernando Garibay, and is a pop, electro-rock, and disco song that speaks of the last moments of life. According to Gaga, lyrical inspiration came from the death of her grandfather, who died in September 2010. Along with a saxophone solo played by Clarence Clemons, the melody of the song resembles much of the musical works of Bruce Springsteen, and contains several qualities similar to that of 1980s adult contemporary musical works. "The Edge of Glory" received critical acclaim, with many reviewers deeming it as an album highlight. Much of the praise went to the song's chorus and the musical production. Reviewers also complimented Gaga's vocals, describing it as "soulful". The song was a commercial success worldwide, charting in the top 10 in several major music markets, including Australia, Belgium, Canada, New Zealand, Norway, Spain and the United Kingdom. In the United States, it peaked at number three on the Billboard Hot 100, becoming Gaga's tenth consecutive top-10 single in the United States. A music video for the song was filmed in late May, co-directed by the singer and her production team, Haus of Gaga. The video is simple in contrast to much of Gaga's past work and portrays her dancing on a fire-escape and walking on a lonely street. Differences include the lack of intricate choreography and backup dancers, as well as using only one outfit designed by Versace. Critics praised the simplicity of the video, while comparing it to the works of Michael Jackson, Janet Jackson and Madonna. Live performances of the song include the tenth season of American Idol, the 2011 MuchMusic Video Awards, Good Morning America's "Summer Concert Series", and many of the singer's concert tours.