"Marry the Night" is a song recorded by American singer and songwriter Lady Gaga for her second studio album, Born This Way (2011). The track was initially released for promotion on FarmVille, six days before the release of Born This Way. It was released as the fifth and initially final single from the album before "Bloody Mary" in 2022 on November 11, 2011, by Interscope Records. The song was written and produced by Gaga and Fernando Garibay, and was recorded on the tour bus during The Monster Ball Tour. Revealed in February 2011, "Marry the Night" was inspired by the energy of Gaga's previous songs like "Dance in the Dark" and her love for her hometown, New York City. "Marry the Night" is a dance-pop and synth-pop song influenced by electro rock and house music. The track features electronic church bells, a driving electro organ sound, techno beats and a funk rock influenced breakdown. The lyrics are a tribute to Gaga's love of the nightlife and partying, while serving as a homage to her hometown. "Marry the Night" received mostly positive reviews from critics, who praised its grand and euphoric dance nature. They furthermore found influences of Italian disco music producer Giorgio Moroder and American rock musician Bruce Springsteen in the song. After the release of Born This Way, "Marry the Night" charted in some nations due to digital sales from the parent album. Gaga directed the music video, which was filmed in New York City. It tells the story of when she was signed by her label Interscope Records after being dropped from her former record label, Def Jam Recordings, with scenes in a clinic, a dance studio, her own New York apartment and on a car's rooftop at a parking lot. She sports outfits by Calvin Klein Collection, Yves Saint Laurent and Stéphane Rolland. Prior to its release, the music video was teased with video stills and previews. Critics wrote positively on the clip, deeming it creative and ambitious, while lauding its narrative theme. Gaga has performed the song at the 2011 MTV Europe Music Awards, The X Factor, and as the final song of her Born This Way Ball tour (2012–2013). She also recorded an acoustic version for her Thanksgiving Day special, A Very Gaga Thanksgiving.