Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 is a 2011 fantasy film directed by David Yates from a screenplay by Steve Kloves. The film is the second of two cinematic parts based on the 2007 novel Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows by J. K. Rowling. It is the sequel to Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 1 (2010) and the eighth and final instalment in the Harry Potter film series. The story concludes Harry Potter's quest to find and destroy Lord Voldemort's Horcruxes in order to stop him once and for all. The film stars an ensemble cast consisting of Daniel Radcliffe as Harry Potter, and Rupert Grint and Emma Watson as Harry's best friends, Ron Weasley and Hermione Granger, alongside Helena Bonham Carter, Robbie Coltrane, Warwick Davis, Ralph Fiennes, Michael Gambon, John Hurt, Jason Isaacs, Gary Oldman, Alan Rickman, Maggie Smith, David Thewlis, and Julie Walters. Principal photography began on 19 February 2009, and was completed on 12 June 2010, with reshoots taking place in December 2010. Part 2 was released in the United Kingdom and the United States on 15 July 2011, by Warner Bros. Pictures, and is the only Harry Potter film to be released in 3D. It was a commercial success and one of the best-reviewed films of 2011, with critics deeming it a satisfying conclusion to the saga while praising its visual effects, cinematography, musical score, action sequences, direction, and cast performances. At the box office, the film claimed the worldwide opening weekend record, earning $483.2 million, as well as setting opening day and opening weekend records in various countries. Part 2 grossed over $1.3 billion worldwide and became the third-highest-grossing film of all time, the highest-grossing film of 2011, and the highest-grossing film released by Warner Bros. until it was overtaken by Barbie in 2023. It is currently the highest-grossing film in the Harry Potter series and well as in the Wizarding World franchise. The National Board of Review named Deathly Hallows – Part 2 one of the top-ten films of 2011. It was nominated for three awards at the 84th Academy Awards, and received numerous other accolades. The DVD and Blu-ray were released on 11 November 2011 in the United States and on 2 December 2011 in the United Kingdom. Part 1 and Part 2 were released as a combo pack on DVD and Blu-ray on 11 November 2011 in Canada. The film was also released in the Harry Potter: Complete 8-Film Collection box set on DVD and Blu-ray, which included all eight films and new special features.