"Give Me All Your Luvin'" is a song by American singer Madonna from her twelfth studio album, MDNA (2012). It features guest vocals by Trinidadian-American rapper Nicki Minaj and English rapper M.I.A. The song was written and produced by Madonna and Martin Solveig, with additional writing by M.I.A., Minaj and Michael Tordjman. After working with Solveig on one song, Madonna continued recording others including "Give Me All Your Luvin'". Madonna chose to work with M.I.A. and Minaj on the track since she felt they were both strong women with unique voices. She also liked their music and what they represented. A demo version of the song, titled "Give Me All Your Love", was leaked on November 8, 2011, resulting in a man from Spain being arrested for copyright violations. The final version of the song was released on February 3, 2012, as the lead single from MDNA. The track was her debut single from her three-album deal with Interscope Records. Backed by bouncing synthesizers, marching drums and a cheer, "Give Me All Your Luvin'" is a dance-pop song, with elements of new wave and disco. Madonna executes the chorus in high-pitched vocals while during its dubstep breakdown, Minaj raps her verse as her alter-ego Roman Zolanski, followed by M.I.A. rapping her verse. "Give Me All Your Luvin'" received mixed reviews from music critics. Its chorus was noted as a highlight by critics, who described it as catchy; however, they felt that the musical composition was inferior to Madonna's previous singles. Commercially, the song attained success, topping the charts in Canada, Finland, Hungary, and Israel while peaking within the top ten in several European countries. In the United States, it became Madonna's 38th top ten hit on the Billboard Hot 100 chart, extending her record as the artist with the most top-ten singles in the chart's history, a record that would be surpassed later by Drake in 2020. The song's accompanying music video featuring both Minaj and M.I.A. was directed by Megaforce. It shows Madonna, Minaj, and M.I.A. along with cheerleaders wearing animegao masks and football players. Madonna first performed the song with Minaj and M.I.A. at the Super Bowl XLVI halftime show. During the performance, M.I.A. extended her middle finger towards the camera while rapping her verse. She was criticized in the media and broadcaster NBC and the National Football League (NFL) issued apologies. They also fined the rapper which was resolved through a confidential agreement. Later that year, Madonna also performed "Give Me All Your Luvin'" on The MDNA Tour, where she wore a majorette outfit.