This article contains Ethiopic text. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Ethiopic characters. Khat or qat, Catha edulis (Amharic: ጫት ch’at; Oromo: Jimaa, Somali: qaad, jaat, khaad or khat, Arabic: القات al-qāt, Swahili: miraa, muguka, jaba or aluta) is a flowering plant native to eastern and southeastern Africa. It is cultivated by farmers and its leaves sold on the market. The world's largest exporters are in Kenya and Ethiopia. Khat contains the alkaloid cathinone, a stimulant which causes greater sociability, excitement, mild loss of appetite and mild euphoria. Among communities from the areas where the plant is native, khat-chewing has historical relevance (as a social custom, especially among men) dating back thousands of years, analogous—but slightly different—to the use of coca leaves in South America's Andes Mountains or the betel nut preparations in South Asia. Since 1980, the World Health Organization (WHO) classifies khat as a “drug of abuse” that can produce psychological dependence, although the WHO does not consider khat addiction to be a serious global problem. The legality of khat varies by region and country; in many territories, khat might pass “under-the-radar” as a botanical species (thus not be a specifically controlled substance), but its recreational use may, nevertheless, be illegal under more general laws. It is strictly a controlled substance in many regions, often at the highest degree, including in Australia, Canada, the European Union, India, Jordan, New Zealand, Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates (UAE) and the United Kingdom (UK). In the United States (US) and Turkey, the botanical specimen (plant) Catha edulis is not outrightly banned, but the consumption and distribution of harvested leaves or possession for recreational use is illegal in some countries. In the UAE, the punishment for possession, use, or distribution of khat can include life imprisonment; by contrast, its production, sale, and consumption are all fully legal—or not mentioned in a legal context at all—in the nations where its use is culturally significant, including Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia, Sudan, Uganda and Yemen. In Israel, which hosts a population of Yemenite Jews, only the consumption of the plant's leaves in its natural state is permitted, “khat extract” are illegal, because they become a street drug in Israel, and caused high abuse in 2000s pop culture.