Fenerbahçe Spor Kulübü (Turkish: [feˈnæɾbahtʃe], Fenerbahçe Sports Club) is a Turkish professional football club based in Kadıköy, Istanbul, Turkey. They represent the men's football department of Fenerbahçe S.K., a prominent multi-sport club. Fenerbahçe, also referred to colloquially as Fener, has never been relegated from the top division of Turkish football and currently competes in the Turkish Super League, the Turkish Cup, the Turkish Super Cup and UEFA Europa Conference League. Fenerbahçe is nicknamed Sarı Kanaryalar (Turkish for "Yellow Canaries") and plays its home games at Şükrü Saracoğlu Stadium, a traditional home ground granted to the club by the mayor of Istanbul in 1994. The stadium is based in Kadıköy, Istanbul. The club's name translates as "Lighthouse in the Garden" and comes from the Fenerbahçe neighbourhood of the Kadıköy district in Istanbul. Fenerbahçe is one of the most successful Turkish clubs having won a record 19 Turkish championship titles. The club also sits at the first place in Süper Lig all-time table. In international club football, Fenerbahçe has won the Balkans Cup in 1968, which is marked as the first ever non-domestic trophy won by a Turkish football club. In UEFA competitions, Fenerbahçe has reached the quarter-finals in the 1963–64 UEFA Cup Winners' Cup and in the 2007–08 UEFA Champions League, and has reached the semi-finals in the 2012–13 UEFA Europa League. Fenerbahçe is a member of the European Club Association. Fenerbahçe is one of the most popular football clubs in Turkey. They boast a large fanbase throughout the country, as well as in Northern Cyprus, Azerbaijan, and in the Turkish diaspora. In their home at the Şükrü Saracoğlu Stadium, Fenerbahçe's average attendances have always been among the highest in Turkey. Fenerbahçe's most intense rivalries is with their major neighbors, Galatasaray and Beşiktaş. Matches between Fenerbahçe and Galatasaray are often referred to as The Intercontinental Derby and are widely regarded as one of the fiercest and most intense derbies globally. Matches against Beşiktaş are also derbys, and the two teams share a longstanding rivalry.