The 2010 Brazilian Grand Prix (officially the Formula 1 Grande Prêmio Petrobras do Brasil 2010) was a Formula One motor race held at the Autódromo José Carlos Pace in the city of São Paulo on 7 November 2010 before 157,582 spectators. It was the 18th round of the 2010 Formula One World Championship and the 38th Brazilian Grand Prix to be held as part of the series. Red Bull driver Sebastian Vettel won the 71-lap race starting from second. His teammate Mark Webber finished second and Ferrari's Fernando Alonso third. Entering the event, there were five drivers in contention to win the World Drivers' Championship while Red Bull led McLaren by 27 points in the World Constructors' Championship. Nico Hülkenberg for the Williams team took the first pole position of his career by recording the fastest lap time in the qualifying session. Vettel and Webber overtook Hülkenberg for the first two positions at the start of the race. Vettel was able to maintain the lead until his first pit stop to switch tyres and Webber led for two laps until he made his own pit stop. Vettel thereafter was able to maintain first position through negotiation of slower traffic for the rest of the race to take his fourth victory of the season and the ninth of his career. Webber was 4.2 seconds behind in second as Alonso drew closer to him in the final ten laps, albeit not close enough to pass and finished third. The race result reduced Alonso's lead in the World Drivers' Championship to eight points over Webber. Vettel's victory moved him from fourth to third, past Lewis Hamilton of McLaren. Jenson Button, the 2009 World Champion, was mathematically eliminated from retaining the championship after finishing fifth. This left Vettel, Alonso, Webber and Hamilton in contention of winning the World Drivers' Championship at the season-ending Abu Dhabi Grand Prix. With their drivers finishing first and second, Red Bull won its first World Constructors' Championship since it purchased Jaguar before 2005 since McLaren could not overtake its points total with one race remaining in the season.