Alizée Lyonnet (née Jacotey; born 21 August 1984), known professionally as Alizée, is a French singer and dancer. She is one of the best-selling French female artists of the 21st century, and the singer with the most exports out of France. Her best-known single is 2000's "Moi... Lolita", which reached number one in several countries. Born and raised in Ajaccio, Corsica, Alizée's first public appearance was her winning performance in the talent show Graines de star in 1999. While collaborating with Mylène Farmer and Laurent Boutonnat, she followed it with a series of albums that attained popularity by pushing the boundaries of lyrical content in mainstream popular music and imagery in her music videos, which became a fixture on NRJ, MTV, Virgin Radio, Europe 1, among others. Throughout her career, many of her songs have been in top 25 hit lists on the record charts, including "Moi... Lolita", "L'Alizé", "J'en ai marre!", "Gourmandises", "Mademoiselle Juliette", her cover version of "La Isla Bonita", "Parler Tout Bas", "Les collines (Never Leave You)" and "À cause de l'automne". Alizée entered the music business in 2000. She has since released six studio albums, the first two of which were composed by Laurent Boutonnat and written by Mylène Farmer. Her first album was Gourmandises, which received a Platinum certification within three months of release. It was a success both in France and abroad, earning Alizée the distinction of being the highest-selling female French singer in 2001. The album featured her most successful single, "Moi... Lolita", which reached number one in several countries in Europe and East Asia. It became a rare example of a foreign-language song to chart highly in the UK Singles Chart, peaking at number 9. It was followed by her second studio album, Mes courants électriques, which was released in 2003, focusing on the East Asian market. Alizée returned home for touring at En concert Tour, performing in 43 concerts throughout France, Belgium and Switzerland in 2003 and 2004. After a three years hiatus, Alizée released her third studio album, Psychédélices, in 2007, which achieved some success in Latin America and Eastern Europe, performing in these regions through 2009 at the same name tour. She collaborated for her fourth album, Une enfant du siècle, with independient Parisian scene, including Para One and Adán Jodorowsky, released in 2010, and performed in concerts through France and Eastern Europe. In the next years, she recorded several collaborations, including Alain Chamfort's "Elle & lui" and Olly Murs's "Dear Darlin'". She released her fifth studio album 5 in 2013, passing through a divorce process and musical maturity on back to basics 60's influences, earning praise for her artistic evolution. She also participated in and won the TV dance contest Danse avec les stars. Her sixth album, Blonde, was released in 2014 collaborating with Pascal Obispo and Zazie with more mainstream pop sounds. It received mixed reviews and was not successful in sales.