Skullgirls is a 2D fighting game developed by Reverge Labs and published by Autumn Games. In Skullgirls, players fight each other with teams of one, two, or three characters, attempting to knock out their opponents or have the most cumulative health when time runs out. The setting of the game revolves around the "Skull Heart", an artifact which grants wishes for women. If a wisher with an impure soul uses the Skull Heart, she is transformed into a monster known as the "Skullgirl". The game was released through the PlayStation Network and Xbox Live Arcade in April 2012, and received generally positive reviews from critics, who praised the animation and gameplay mechanics, while criticizing its initial roster size and online multiplayer features. Development of post-release content faced numerous setbacks. In May 2012, publisher Autumn Games was sued over allegations of fraud regarding an unrelated property, Def Jam Rapstar, cutting off Skullgirls' financial support and forcing developer Reverge Labs to lay off the entire development team. The core team would eventually reform as Lab Zero Games in November 2012, launching a successful crowdfunding campaign to raise funds to continue their work. This allowed Lab Zero Games to develop the Windows version, which was released by Marvelous in August 2013. After Autumn Games severed ties with distributor Konami in December 2013, the latter formally requested to have the game removed from the PlayStation and Xbox storefronts. The game was re-released on both platforms in 2014 as Skullgirls Encore. When the game was ported to PlayStation 4 and PC in 2015, it was renamed to Skullgirls 2nd Encore. This version was released for Japanese arcades in October 2015, for PlayStation Vita in April 2016, for Nintendo Switch in October 2019, and for Xbox One and Xbox Series X/S in July 2023. A spin-off title, Skullgirls Mobile, was developed by Hidden Variable Studios and released for Android and iOS devices in May 2017. Originally published by Line, it is supported by Autumn Games alongside the main game. In August 2020, Autumn Games and Hidden Variable Studios severed ties with Lab Zero Games after sexual harassment allegations were raised against lead designer and programmer Mike Zaimont. Following the dissolution of Lab Zero Games, several former members founded another independent game studio, Future Club, which collaborated with Hidden Variable Studios on future content for 2nd Encore.