Guitar Hero: Aerosmith is a 2008 rhythm game developed by Neversoft and published by Activision. It is the fifth installment in the Guitar Hero series and the first to focus on the career and songs of one rock band, Aerosmith. The game was released for the PlayStation 2, PlayStation 3, Xbox 360, and Wii on June 29, 2008, in North America, on July 27, 2008, in Europe, on August 6, 2008, in Australia, and October 9, 2008, in Japan. Aspyr published the Microsoft Windows and Mac OS X versions of the game, releasing them in October 21, 2008. The game was released . Guitar Hero: Aerosmith sold as both a bundle with a specially designed guitar controller as well as a game-only package. The game is considered an expansion in the Guitar Hero series, extending upon the general features of Guitar Hero III: Legends of Rock. As with other games in the series, the player uses a guitar-shaped controller to simulate the playing of rock music by playing in-time to scrolling notes on-screen. Aerosmith songs comprise approximately 70% of the soundtrack, while the remaining songs are from bands that have been influenced by or opened for Aerosmith. The single player Career mode allows the player to follow the history of the band through several real-world-inspired venues, interspersed with interviews from the band members about their past. Aerosmith re-recorded four songs for this game, and have participated in a motion capture session to create their in-game appearances. Guitar Hero: Aerosmith is the final installment of the series to only feature guitar and bass as possible instrument choices. The next entry (Guitar Hero World Tour) would introduce other roles to create a full band experience. While Guitar Hero: Aerosmith maintains the same gameplay as past Guitar Hero games, it has received criticism for being shorter and easier than the previous Guitar Hero titles and difficult to justify its price point; furthermore, with the game's strong focus on one band, reviewers felt that the game's ultimate enjoyment rested on the player's appreciation and fandom for the music of Aerosmith.