Selected military actions 5000km 3,100miles Saint-Gotthard Novi Trebbia Adda Praga Brest Ismail Rimnik Focsani Özi Kinburn Laba Kozludža Stołowicze Lanckorona Kolberg    Count Alexander Vasilyevich Suvorov-Rymniksky, Prince of Italy (Russian: Князь Италийский граф Александр Васильевич Суворов-Рымникский, romanized: Kni͡az' Italiyskiy graf Aleksandr Vasil'yevič Suvorov-Rymnikskiy; IPA: [ɐlʲɪkˈsandr vɐˈsʲilʲjɪvʲɪtɕ sʊˈvorəf]; 24 November [O.S. 13 November] 1729 or 1730 – 18 May [O.S. 6 May] 1800), was a Russian general and military theorist in service of the Russian Empire and the Habsburg monarchy. He was Count of Rymnik (1789), Graf of the Holy Roman Empire (1789), Feldmarschall of the Holy Roman Empire (1799), Prince of the Kingdom of Sardinia (1799), Grand marshal of the Kingdom of Sardinia (1799), Prince or Knyaz of the Russian Empire (1799), Field marshal (1794) and the last Generalissimo (1799) of the Russian Empire. Suvorov is considered one of the greatest military commanders in Russian history and one of the great generals of the early modern period. He was awarded numerous medals, titles, and honors by Russia, as well as by other countries. Suvorov secured Russia's expanded borders and renewed military prestige and left a legacy of theories on warfare. He was the author of several military manuals, the most famous being The Science of Victory (or The Science of Winning; Russian: Наука побеждать), and was noted for several of his sayings. He never lost a single battle he commanded with the exception of a couple of non-field engagements, and his military record is extensive; Suvorov won in a total of 63 battles without suffering a major defeat. He raised Russian military glory to a unprecedented height. Several military academies, monuments, villages, museums, and orders in Russia are dedicated to him. Born in Moscow, he studied military history as a young boy and joined the Imperial Russian Army at the age of 17. Suvorov was promoted to colonel in 1762 for his numerous successes on the battlefield during the Seven Years' War. When war broke out with the Bar Confederation in 1768, Suvorov, commanding a detachment of Ivan Weymarn's army, captured the Polish capital Kraków, then defeated the Poles of Casimir Pulaski at Orzechowo, routed general Dumouriez near Lanckorona, and subsequently overthrew the Polish forces at Stołowicze. These and other victories marked the start of the partitions of Poland. He was promoted to general and next fought in the Russo-Turkish War of 1768–1774 under Saltykov's supervision, taking Turtukaya twice and winning a decisive victory at the battle of Kozludzha. In 1774 Suvorov interrogated the captured Yemelyan Pugachev and in the same year married into the well-connected Golitsyn family. Four years later, he averted a Russo-Turkish war, then in 1783 suppressed the Nogai uprising. Becoming the General of the Infantry in 1783, he led Russian forces in the Russo-Turkish War of 1787–1792 under the command of Potemkin and participated in the siege of Ochakov, as well as victories at Kinburn and Focșani. Suvorov and the Austro-Bavarian general Josias of Coburg then won one of the most decisive successes of their careers at the battle of Rymnik, and afterwards Suvorov crushingly defeated the Ottomans in the storming of Izmail, which is commemorated as one of the days of Russian military honour and immortalized with the song "Let the Thunder of Victory Rumble!". For Suvorov's accomplishments, he was made a Count of both the Russian Empire and Holy Roman Empire, having been given the glorifying title Rymniksky (a suffix to his surname in honour of the victory at Rymnik). In 1794, while in Repnin's army, he put down the Polish uprising, defeating them at the battle of Brest and others, as well as at the storming of Praga, a faubourg of Warsaw. While a close associate of Empress Catherine the Great, Suvorov often quarreled with her son and heir apparent, Paul. After Catherine died of a stroke in 1796, Paul I was crowned Emperor and dismissed Suvorov for disregarding his orders. However, he was forced to reinstate Suvorov and make him a field marshal at the insistence of the coalition allies for the French Revolutionary Wars. Suvorov was given command of the Austro-Russian army and the Italian campaign of 1799 began. He captured Milan and Turin, thereafter driving the French out of nearly all of Italy through his triumphs at Cassano (the Adda River), the Trebbia River, and Novi. The Italian strongholds of Alessandria and Mantua fell. Suvorov was promoted to a new title: he was made a "Prince of Italy" (or Knyaz Italiysky) for his deeds, and he became known as the Prince of Italy, Count Suvorov-Rymniksky. Afterwards, he was ordered to head the Swiss campaign to assist allied operations. He became cut off by André Masséna and later surrounded in the Swiss Alps by the French after an allied Russo-Austrian army under Alexander Korsakov and Friedrich von Hotze — which he was supposed to reinforce — suffered defeats at Zurich and on the Linth River. Suvorov led the strategic withdrawal of exhausted and ill-supplied Russian troops dealing with French forces three times the size of his own: 27,000 against 77,000 in the theater of operations. He broke through the French trap and battled his way across the central spine of the Alps to the Alpine Rhine, marching thence all the way to Lake Constance; as a result of all this, the army returned from the Helvetic Republic to Russia with minimal casualties. For this exploit, he became the fourth Generalissimo of Russia. He died in 1800 of illness in Saint Petersburg. Suvorov was loved by Russian soldiers throughout his whole military life. He was respected for his truthfulness and honest service. Micheal Clodfelter, in his work "Warfare and Armed Conflicts", described Suvorov as the best general the French First Republic ever fought (with the possible exception of Archduke Charles). Philip Longworth noted that he was never defeated and that he was "one of those rare generals who were consistently successful despite suffering from considerable disadvantages".