Grey's Anatomy is an American medical drama television series focusing on the personal and professional lives of surgical interns, residents, and attendings at the fictional Seattle Grace Hospital, later named the Grey Sloan Memorial Hospital. The series premiered on March 27, 2005, on ABC as a mid-season replacement. The show's title is an allusion to Gray's Anatomy, a classic human anatomy textbook. Writer Shonda Rhimes developed the pilot and served as showrunner, head writer, and executive producer until stepping down in 2015.[better source needed] Set in Seattle, Washington, the series is filmed primarily in Los Angeles, California, and Vancouver, British Columbia. The original cast consisted of nine star-billed actors: Ellen Pompeo, Sandra Oh, Katherine Heigl, Justin Chambers, T. R. Knight, Chandra Wilson, James Pickens Jr., Isaiah Washington, and Patrick Dempsey. For most of its run, the series revolves around Dr. Meredith Grey (Pompeo), chronicling her progression from surgical intern to fully-qualified doctor to the hospital's chief of general surgery. The cast has undergone major changes throughout the series' run, with only three original members remaining by the 19th season – Pompeo, Wilson, and Pickens. Pompeo stepped back from the series in its 19th season, at which point the show shifted to more of an ensemble format. As of February 13, 2023[update], the show has been picked up for a 20th season, which premiered on March 14, 2024. It has not yet been renewed for a 21st season. Grey's Anatomy has two spin-off series: Private Practice (2007–2013) and Station 19 (2018–2024). Other shows which may parallel in plotline and medical dramatics would be programs like ER, which ran from 1994 to 2009, overlapping early seasons of Grey's Anatomy. Grey's Anatomy is the longest-running scripted primetime show currently airing on ABC, and the longest scripted primetime series carried by ABC. Its success catapulted many series regulars including Pompeo, Dempsey, and Oh to worldwide recognition; they were among the top five highest-earning television actors in 2013. Once among the overall top-ten shows in the United States, the show's ratings have fallen, although as of 2017[update] it was still one of the highest-rated shows among the 18–49 demographic. The show also does well on streaming television; as of February 2023[update], Grey's Anatomy was ranked the 10th most popular on-demand program. Grey's Anatomy has been well received by critics throughout much of its run and has been included in various critics' year-end top 10 lists. Since its inception, the show has been described by the media outlets as a television "phenomenon" or a "juggernaut", owing to its longevity and dominant ratings. It is considered to have had a significant effect on popular culture and has received numerous awards, including the Golden Globe Award for Best Television Series – Drama and a total of 38 Primetime Emmy Award nominations, including two for Outstanding Drama Series. The cast members have also received accolades for their individual performances.