NCIS is an American military police procedural television series and the first installment in the NCIS media franchise. The series revolves around a fictional team of special agents from the Naval Criminal Investigative Service, combining elements of the military drama and police procedural genres with comedy. The concept and characters were initially introduced in two episodes of the CBS series JAG (season eight episodes 20 and 21: "Ice Queen" and "Meltdown"). A spin-off from JAG, the series premiered on September 23, 2003, on CBS. To date, it has entered into the 20th full season and has gone into broadcast syndication on the USA Network. Donald P. Bellisario and Don McGill are co-creators and executive producers of the premiere member of the NCIS franchise. As of 2022[update], NCIS is the third-longest-running scripted, live-action U.S. prime-time TV series currently airing, surpassed only by Law & Order: Special Victims Unit (1999–present) and Law & Order (1990–2010; 2022–present); it is the seventh-longest-running scripted U.S. prime-time TV series overall. The series originally had the partly redundant title Navy NCIS: Naval Criminal Investigative Service; this was later shortened to NCIS: Naval Criminal Investigative Service and then to NCIS. In season six, a two-part episode led to a spin-off series, NCIS: Los Angeles. A two-part episode during the 11th season led to a second spin-off series, NCIS: New Orleans. Though initially slow in the ratings barely cracking the top 30 in the first two seasons, the third season showed progress consistently ranking in the top 20, and by its sixth season, it became a top-five hit having remained there since. In 2011, NCIS was voted America's favorite television show in an online Harris Poll. At the end of its 10th season, the series was the most-watched television series in the U.S. during the 2012–13 network television season. NCIS is on its 21st season. NCIS also surpassed Gunsmoke's record for longest running scripted primetime television series to air on CBS. On January 5, 2024, it was announced that the prequel, NCIS: Origins, will be aired during the 2024–25 season as another spin-off series, while a second spin-off following Ziva and DiNozzo was announced on February 28, 2024 as a show exclusive to Paramount+.