Angry Birds (also known as Angry Birds Classic) was a 2009 physics-based casual puzzle video game developed by Finnish video game developer Rovio Entertainment. Inspired primarily by a sketch of stylized wingless birds, the game was first released for iOS and Maemo devices starting in December 2009. By October 2010, 12 million copies of the game had been purchased from the iOS App Store and Ovi, which prompted the developer to design versions for other touchscreen-based smartphones, most notably Android, Symbian, Windows Phone, and BlackBerry 10 devices. The series has since expanded to include titles for dedicated video game consoles and PCs. A sequel, Angry Birds 2, was released in July 2015 for iOS and Android. Around April 2019, the original game was removed from the App Store. A paid recreation of the game's content from 2012 was released as Rovio Classics: Angry Birds on March 31, 2022, but later on, Rovio mentioned that they were removing it from the Google Play Store on February 23, 2023, and retitling it as Red's First Flight on the iOS App Store. The gameplay revolves around players using a slingshot to launch the birds at green pigs stationed in or around various structures, with the intent of destroying all of the pigs on the playing field. As players advance through the game, new types of birds become available (some with special abilities that can be activated by the player mid-flight). Rovio Mobile has supported Angry Birds with numerous free updates that add additional game content, and the company has also released stand-alone holiday and promotional versions of the game. Angry Birds was eventually praised by critics for its success at leveraging a combination of addictive gameplay, comical style, and low price into a viable franchise with long-term potential for profit. The game's popularity has led to the release of Angry Birds games for personal computers and gaming consoles, created a market for merchandise featuring the Angry Birds characters, a 2016 feature-length animated film, a 2019 sequel to said film, and several seasons of television cartoons. The Angry Birds series had a combined tally of over five billion downloads across all platforms, as of April 2022, including special editions. After its release, the original game was called "one of the most mainstream games out in 2010," "one of the great runaway hits of 2010," and "the largest mobile app success the world has seen as of 2011."