Carlo Ancelotti Cavaliere OMRI Ufficiale OSI (born 10 June 1959) is an Italian professional football manager and former player who is the manager of Real Madrid. Nicknamed "Don Carlo", he is regarded as one of the greatest managers of all time. Ancelotti is the most decorated manager in UEFA Champions League history, having won the trophy a record four times as coach (twice with AC Milan and twice with Real Madrid). He is also the first and only one to have managed teams in five Champions League finals. As a player, he won the European Cup twice with AC Milan in 1989 and 1990, making him one of seven people to have won the European Cup or Champions League as both a player and a manager. Ancelotti is also the first and only manager ever to have won league titles in all of Europe's top five leagues. He has won the FIFA Club World Cup three times, and is also the manager with the joint-most UEFA Super Cup triumphs, having won the trophy on four occasions, managing Milan and Real Madrid. Ancelotti played as a midfielder and began his career with Italian club Parma, helping the club to Serie B promotion in 1979. He moved to Roma the following season, where he won a Serie A title and four Coppa Italia titles, and also played for the late 1980s Milan team, with which he won two league titles and two European Cups, among other titles. At international level he played for the Italy national team on 26 occasions, scoring once, and appeared in two FIFA World Cups, finishing in third place in the 1990 edition of the tournament, as well as UEFA Euro 1988, where he helped his nation to reach the semi-finals. As a manager, Ancelotti worked for Reggiana, Parma and Juventus between 1995 and 2001, before rising to prominence with Milan. Appointed as manager in 2001, he went onto win both the 2002–03 Champions League and 2002–03 Coppa Italia. The following season, he won the Scudetto with an Italian record of 82 points from 34 games, and three years later he won his second Champions League with Milan. During his tenure with Milan, Ancelotti was awarded the Serie A Coach of the Year twice. He announced his resignation from Milan after the 2008–09 season, leaving as Milan's longest-serving manager in a single spell. In 2009, he was appointed manager of Chelsea, winning the domestic double of the Premier League and FA Cup in his first season. In 2011, he became the manager of French club Paris Saint-Germain; the following season he won them their first Ligue 1 title in 19 years and was awarded joint Ligue 1 Manager of the Year. Following his success in France, Ancelotti was appointed manager of Real Madrid. In his first season, he led Real Madrid to their long-sought tenth Champions League title, La Décima, and also won the Copa del Rey. Despite collecting further honours with the club and being awarded the Miguel Muñoz Trophy in 2014–15 for the best performing manager in La Liga, Ancelotti was dismissed from Real Madrid in May 2015. He became the manager of Bayern Munich in 2016, where he won the Bundesliga title in his first season, and following stints at Napoli and Everton between 2018 and 2021, he returned to Real Madrid in the summer of 2021, where he went on to win a La Liga–Champions League double.