Sporting Clube de Portugal (Portuguese pronunciation: [ˈspɔɾtĩɡ ˈkluβɨ ðɨ puɾtuˈɣal]), otherwise referred to as Sporting CP or simply Sporting (particularly within Portugal), sometimes incorrectly called Sporting Lisbon in other countries, is a Portuguese sports club based in Lisbon. Having various sports departments and sporting disciplines, it is best known for its men's professional football team playing in the Primeira Liga, the top flight of Portuguese football. Founded on 1 July 1906, Sporting is one of the "Big Three" clubs in Portugal that have never been relegated from Primeira Liga, along with rivals Benfica and Porto. Sporting are nicknamed Leões (Lions), for the symbol used in the middle of the club's crest, and Verde e Brancos (Green and Whites), for the shirt colour that are in (horizontal) stripes. The club's anthem is called "A Marcha do Sporting" ("Sporting's March"), its motto is Esforço, Dedicação, Devoção e Glória (Effort, Dedication, Devotion and Glory), its supporters are called sportinguistas and the club's mascot is called Jubas. Sporting is the second largest sports club by membership in Portugal, with about 150,000 members, which makes it one of the world's largest. It is also among the top three Portuguese sports clubs in number of non-affiliated fans. Their home ground has been the Estádio José Alvalade, built in 2003, which replaced the previous one, built-in 1956. The club's indoor arena is the Pavilhão João Rocha multi-sports pavilion. Its youth academy has helped produce footballers such as Luís Figo and Cristiano Ronaldo. Sporting are the third most decorated Portuguese football team, with 54 major trophies. Domestically, they have won 19 League titles, 17 Taças de Portugal, a joint-record of 4 Campeonato de Portugal, 4 Taças da Liga and 9 Supertaças Cândido de Oliveira. In Europe, they won the 1963–64 European Cup Winners' Cup and were runners-up at the UEFA Cup in 2005. Sporting played in the first European Champions Cup match on 4 September 1955, by invitation, and has participated in the most editions of UEFA Cup/UEFA Europa League (32), a tournament in which they have the second most matches played and won, and where they are ranked first in the all-time club ranking.