Paris Saint-Germain Football Club (French pronunciation: [paʁi sɛ̃ ʒɛʁmɛ̃]), commonly referred to as Paris Saint-Germain, Paris, Paris SG or simply PSG, is a professional football club based in Paris, France. They compete in Ligue 1, the top division of French football. As France's most successful club, they have won over 40 official honours, including eleven league titles and one major European trophy. Their home ground is the Parc des Princes located in the 16th arrondissement of Paris near the commune Boulogne-Billancourt. The Parisians were founded in 1970, following the merger of Paris FC and Stade Saint-Germain. PSG won their first major honour, the French Cup, in 1982 and their first Division 1 title in 1986. The 1990s was among the most successful periods in the club's history; they claimed a second league title, three French Cups, two French League Cups, two French Super Cups and the UEFA Cup Winners' Cup in 1996. After suffering a decline in fortunes during the 2000s, the Red and Blues have enjoyed a revival since 2011 with increased financial backing, achieving unparalleled dominance in domestic competitions, winning multiple league titles and national cups. PSG have also become a regular feature in the UEFA Champions League, reaching their first final in 2020. PSG have the most consecutive seasons playing in France's top flight and are one of two French clubs to have won a major European title. They are the most popular football club in France and one of the most widely supported teams in the world. PSG's home kit colours are red, blue, and white, and their crest features the Eiffel Tower and a fleur-de-lis. Paris have a longstanding rivalry with Marseille; the duo contest French football's most notorious match, Le Classique. Since 2011, Paris Saint-Germain have been majority-owned by Qatari government-backed investment fund Qatar Sports Investments, which currently holds 87.5% of the shares. American investment firm Arctos Partners owns the remaining 12.5%. PSG are the richest club in France and one of the wealthiest in the world. PSG currently have the third-highest revenue in the footballing world with annual earnings of €802m according to Deloitte, and are the world's seventh-most valuable football club, worth $4.21 billion according to Forbes.