The Amazing Spider-Man 2 (internationally titled The Amazing Spider-Man 2: Rise of Electro) is a 2014 American superhero film based on the Marvel Comics character Spider-Man. Produced by Columbia Pictures in association with Marvel Entertainment, Arad Productions, Inc., Matt Tolmach Productions, K/O Paper Products, and Ingenious Film Partners, and distributed by Sony Pictures Releasing, the film was directed by Marc Webb from a screenplay by Alex Kurtzman, Roberto Orci, and Jeff Pinkner, based on a story conceived by the three alongside James Vanderbilt. It is the fifth theatrical Spider-Man film, the sequel to The Amazing Spider-Man (2012), and the final film in The Amazing Spider-Man series. The film stars Andrew Garfield as Peter Parker / Spider-Man, alongside Emma Stone, Jamie Foxx, Dane DeHaan, Campbell Scott, Embeth Davidtz, Colm Feore, Paul Giamatti, and Sally Field. In the film, Peter Parker tries to protect his girlfriend Gwen Stacy as he investigates his parents' death while also dealing with the supervillain Electro and the return of his best friend, Harry Osborn, who is dying from a deadly genetic disease. Development of The Amazing Spider-Man 2 began after the success of The Amazing Spider-Man. DeHaan, Giamatti, Felicity Jones, and Chris Cooper were cast between December 2012 and February 2013. Filming took place in New York City from February to June 2013. The film was released in 2D, 3D, and IMAX 3D on May 2, 2014, in the United States with two international premieres being held between March 31 and April 10 of that year. It received mixed reviews from critics, who praised the chemistry between Stone and Garfield, action sequences, visual effects, and Hans Zimmer's musical score, but criticized the screenplay and overabundance of plotlines. Foxx's portrayal of Electro was met with mixed responses. Critics also deemed it inferior to its predecessor. It grossed $709 million worldwide, making it the ninth-highest-grossing film of 2014. The Amazing Spider-Man series was originally intended to continue with at least two more sequels and several spin-offs, most notably films centered on Venom and the Sinister Six. In February 2015, Sony Pictures and Marvel Studios initiated a deal to share the Spider-Man film rights and reboot the character within the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU), cancelling future projects in The Amazing Spider-Man film series. Tom Holland would succeed Garfield as Peter Parker / Spider-Man beginning with Captain America: Civil War (2016), while a new standalone film titled Spider-Man: Homecoming would release on July 7, 2017, followed by its sequel Spider-Man: Far From Home on July 2, 2019, both as part of Phase Three in the MCU. Both Garfield and Foxx reprised their roles in Spider-Man: No Way Home (2021), linking this film to the MCU using the concept of the multiverse.