Jurassic Park, later also referred to as Jurassic World, is an American science fiction media franchise created by Michael Crichton and centered on a disastrous attempt to create a theme park of cloned dinosaurs. It began in 1990 when Universal Pictures and Amblin Entertainment bought the rights to Crichton's novel Jurassic Park before it was published. The book was successful, as was Steven Spielberg's 1993 film adaptation. The film received a theatrical 3D re-release in 2013, and was selected in 2018 for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant". A 1995 sequel novel, The Lost World, was followed by a film adaptation in 1997. Subsequent films in the series from Jurassic Park III (2001) onward are not based on novels by Crichton. In 2015, a second trilogy of films began with the fourth film in the series, Jurassic World. The film was successful, becoming the first film to gross over $500 million worldwide in its opening weekend, and grossed over $1.6 billion through the course of its theatrical run, making it the third highest-grossing film at the time. It became the second highest-grossing film of 2015, and is currently the eighth highest-grossing film of all time. When adjusted for monetary inflation, Jurassic World is the second highest-grossing film in the franchise after Jurassic Park. A sequel, Jurassic World: Fallen Kingdom (2018) grossed over $1.3 billion worldwide, making it the third Jurassic film to pass the billion-dollar mark. It is the third highest-grossing film of 2018, and currently the 18th highest-grossing film of all time. The final film in the trilogy, Jurassic World Dominion, was released in 2022. It grossed over $1 billion worldwide and became the third highest-grossing film of 2022. Jurassic World Dominion also became the fourth film in the franchise to pass the billion-dollar mark. Numerous video games and comic books based on the franchise have been created since the release of the 1993 film, and several water rides have been opened at various Universal Studios theme parks. Lego has produced several animated projects based on the Jurassic World films, including Lego Jurassic World: Legend of Isla Nublar, a miniseries released in 2019. DreamWorks Animation also produced an animated series, Jurassic World Camp Cretaceous, which ran on Netflix from September 2020 to July 2022. As of 2000, the franchise had generated $5 billion in revenue, making it one of the highest-grossing media franchises of all time. The Jurassic Park franchise is also one of the highest-grossing film series of all time, having earned over $6 billion at the worldwide box office.