Clube de Regatas do Flamengo (Brazilian Portuguese: [ˈklubi dʒi ʁeˈɡataz du flaˈmẽɡu]; English: Rowing Club of Flamengo), more commonly referred to as simply Flamengo, is a Brazilian sports club based in Rio de Janeiro, in the neighborhood of Gávea, best known for their professional football team that plays in Campeonato Brasileiro Série A, as well as Campeonato Carioca. They are one of two clubs to have never been relegated from the top division, the other being São Paulo. The club was first established in 1895 specifically as a rowing club and did not play their first official football match until 1912. Flamengo's traditional uniform features red and black striped shirts with white shorts, and red and black striped socks. Flamengo has typically played their home matches in the Maracanã (which is also Brazil's national stadium) since its completion in 1950, with some exceptions in recent years. Since 1969, the vulture (Portuguese: urubu) has been the most recognized mascot of Flamengo. Flamengo established themselves as one of Brazil's most successful sports clubs in the 20th century during the era of state leagues in Brazil when they captured several Campeonato Carioca (Rio de Janeiro state league) titles prior to the establishment of the first Brazilian national football championship in 1959. Since then, they have remained successful in Brazilian football, having won 7 Campeonato Brasileiro Série A, 4 Copa do Brasil, and a record 37 Campeonato Carioca. In South American and worldwide competitions, the club's highest achievements are their conquests of the 1981, 2019 and 2022 Copa Libertadores, and 1981 Intercontinental Cup against Liverpool, led by the club's most iconic player Zico. Flamengo's fiercest and longest-standing rivalries are with the other "Big Four" of Rio de Janeiro: Fluminense, Botafogo and Vasco da Gama; as well as interstate rivalries with Atletico MG and Palmeiras. Flamengo have also been well represented in the Brazil national football team; At the 1938 FIFA World Cup, forward Leônidas, a Flamengo player at the time, was the Golden Boot winner with 7 goals and won the Golden Ball, thus becoming the first Brazilian player ever to win those two awards. Twelve years later at the 1950 World Cup, Zizinho, who was a midfielder for Flamengo ,also won the Golden Ball after he was voted best player; 4 out of the 10 top scorers for the Brazil National Team have all been Flamengo players at one point in their careers, seven players have won the World Cup whilst playing for Flamengo, and Flamengo player Màrio Zagallo scored Brazil's third goal in the 1958 World Cup final. Flamengo's youth academy is one of the most prolific in Brazil and in the world, and have developed a number of Brazilian internationals such as Zico, Vinícius Júnior, Lucas Paquetá, Júlio César, Adriano, Mário Zagallo, Júnior and Leonardo. Flamengo is the most popular club in Brazil, with over 40.2 million supporters as of 2022. It is also Brazil's richest and most valuable football club with an annual revenue of R$1,2 billion (€ 218 million) and a valuation of over R$3.8 billion (€691 million). Flamengo became the non-European football club with the most followers on social media with 49 million followers across all platforms as of 18 June 2023.