Elena Jane Goulding (/ˈɡoʊldɪŋ/ GOHL-ding; born 30 December 1986) is an English singer and songwriter. In July 2009, she signed a recording contract with Polydor Records, and later that year, she released her debut extended play, An Introduction to Ellie Goulding. Goulding released her debut studio album, Lights, in 2010, which debuted at No. 1 on the UK Albums Chart. In November 2010, the album was reissued as Bright Lights, spawning three successful singles: a cover of Elton John's "Your Song", "Starry Eyed", and "Lights", the latter becoming her highest-charting single to date in the United States. Goulding's second studio album, Halcyon, was released in 2012 and preceded by its lead single "Anything Could Happen". The album debuted at No. 2 on the UK Albums Chart, and topped the chart after 65 weeks. Halcyon Days, a repackaged edition of Halcyon, was released in 2013 and produced the single "Burn", which became her first No. 1 single in the UK. She released her third studio album, Delirium, in 2015, with "On My Mind" as the album's lead single. That year, she received her first Grammy Award nomination for Best Pop Solo Performance for her single "Love Me like You Do". In 2020, Goulding released her fourth studio album, Brightest Blue, which became her third album to top the UK Albums Chart, and her fourth consecutive RIAA–certified album. It spawned several singles, including the hits "Close To Me, "Sixteen" and "Hate Me". In March 2023, Goulding released her third collaboration with DJ Calvin Harris, titled "Miracle", the single spent eight non-consecutive weeks at number 1 on the UK Singles Chart, with the song entry, Goulding made history as the British Female Solo Act with most entries in the UK, surpassing Dame Shirley Bassey, with a total of 35 chart entries. Her fifth studio album, Higher Than Heaven, was released on in April 2023 and debuted at No. 1 in the UK, her fourth chart-topping album, making her the British Female with the most Number 1 Albums in UK history, tying with Adele. Goulding is the recipient of numerous accolades, including three Brit Awards (including the prestigious BRIT Billion Award), a Billboard Music Awards, 17 BMI London Awards, two Glamour Awards, and two Grammy Award nominations. TIME100 honored her with the Impact Award for using her platform to protect the environment and was honored with a 'Doctor of Arts degree' by the University of Kent for her contribution and impact in music. In 2024, Goulding was named the Conservationist of the Year by The Perfect World Foundation Awards, the first musician to receive the honour. She has sold more than 27 million albums and 216 million singles, and amassed 43 billion streams worldwide, making her one of the most successful British female singers of the 21st century.