Darth Vader is a character in the Star Wars franchise. He is the primary antagonist of the original film trilogy and, as Anakin Skywalker, is the protagonist of the prequel trilogy. Star Wars creator George Lucas has collectively referred to the first six episodic films of the franchise as "the tragedy of Darth Vader". He has become one of the most iconic villains in popular culture, and his mask is considered one of the most iconic character costume designs of all time.[citation needed] Originally a slave on the planet Tatooine, Anakin Skywalker becomes a powerful Jedi. He is lured to the dark side of the Force by Chancellor Palpatine and becomes a Sith Lord, assuming the title Darth and the name Vader. As Palpatine's apprentice, Vader helps his master all but destroy the Jedi Order. After a lightsaber battle with his former mentor Obi-Wan Kenobi, during which he is severely injured, Vader is transformed into a cyborg. For over two decades, he serves Palpatine (now the Emperor), hunting down the remaining Jedi as well as members of the Rebel Alliance. Vader eventually kills the Emperor to save his son Luke Skywalker, but is fatally wounded in the process. Vader is also the secret husband of Padmé Amidala, the biological father of Princess Leia, and the maternal grandfather of Kylo Ren (Ben Solo). In the non-canonical Star Wars Legends continuity, he is the grandfather of Luke's son Ben and Leia's children Anakin, Jacen and Jaina, and he is the great-grandfather of Jacen's daughter Allana. Vader has been played by numerous actors. David Prowse physically portrayed him in the original trilogy, while James Earl Jones has voiced him in all of the films and some television shows. Sebastian Shaw portrayed the unmasked Anakin in Return of the Jedi, as well as the character's spirit in the original release of that film. In the prequel trilogy, Jake Lloyd played young Anakin in The Phantom Menace (1999), while Hayden Christensen portrayed him as a young adult in Attack of the Clones (2002) and Revenge of the Sith (2005). Christensen also played the role in post-2004 releases of Return of the Jedi and in the television series Obi-Wan Kenobi and Ahsoka. In addition to the first six Star Wars films, the character appears in the anthology film Rogue One. He also appears in television series (most substantially The Clone Wars) and numerous iterations of the Star Wars Expanded Universe, including video games, novels, and comic books. Various types of Vader-related merchandise have been produced, such as action figures and replicas of his lightsaber.