The 2013 Tour de France was the 100th edition of the Tour de France, one of cycling's Grand Tours. It started on the island of Corsica on 29 June and finished on the Champs-Élysées in Paris on 21 July. The Tour consisted of twenty-one stages and covered a total distance of 3,403.5 km (2,115 mi). The overall general classification was won by Chris Froome of Team Sky. Second and third respectively were Nairo Quintana (Movistar Team) and the Team Katusha rider Joaquim Rodríguez. Marcel Kittel (Argos–Shimano) was the first rider to wear the general classification leader's yellow jersey after winning stage one. He lost the lead the next day to Jan Bakelants of RadioShack–Leopard, who managed to obtain a one-second lead from a late solo attack. Simon Gerrans gained the race lead after his team, Orica–GreenEDGE, won the stage four team time trial. Gerrans passed the lead on to teammate Daryl Impey after the fifth stage. Froome took the lead from Impey after a dominant performance in the eighth stage, the first classified as mountainous. Froome maintained his lead for the remainder of the race by consolidating his lead through solid performances in the individual time trials and another dominant win on Mont Ventoux, while defending his GC lead in the mountains of the final week from his nearest challenger, the white jersey and eventual King of the mountains, Nairo Quintana. Froome became the second consecutive British cyclist to win the Tour de France, after Bradley Wiggins accomplished the feat the year before. In the race's other classifications, Movistar Team rider Quintana took the mountains classification with a summit victory in the final mountain stage edging out Froome, and also finished as the best young rider in the general classification, finishing in second place overall; Peter Sagan of the Cannondale team was the winner of the points classification, with Saxo–Tinkoff finishing as the winners of the team classification. Christophe Riblon (Ag2r–La Mondiale) was given the award for the most combative rider. Kittel won the most stages, with four.