Görlitz ([ˈɡœʁlɪts] ; Polish: Zgorzelec, Upper Sorbian: Zhorjelc [ˈzhɔʁʲɛlts], Czech: Zhořelec, East Lusatian dialects: Gerlz, Gerltz, Gerltsch) is a town in the German state of Saxony. It is on the river Lusatian Neisse and is the largest town in Upper Lusatia as well as the second-largest town in the region of Lusatia after Cottbus. Görlitz is the easternmost town in Germany (the easternmost village being Zentendorf (Šćeńc)) and lies opposite the Polish town of Zgorzelec, which was the eastern part of Görlitz until 1945. The town has approximately 56,000 inhabitants, which make Görlitz the sixth-largest town in Saxony. It is the seat of the district of Görlitz. Together with Zgorzelec it forms the Euro City of Görlitz/Zgorzelec, which has a combined population of around 86,000. Whilst not Lusatiophone itself, the town is situated just east of the Sorbian-speaking parts of Lusatia. The town's recorded history began in the 11th century as a Sorbian settlement. Through its history it has been under German, Czech (Bohemian), Polish and Hungarian rule, the last three by invasion. From 1815 until 1918 Görlitz belonged to the Province of Silesia in the Kingdom of Prussia and later to the Province of Lower Silesia in the Free State of Prussia – it was the Silesian provinces' largest town west of the Oder-Neisse line, and hence Görlitz became part of East Germany from 1949 until German reunification in 1990. Görlitz is culturally diverse. Whilst it is in Saxony, its inhabitants also identify as Upper Lusatian. The East Lusatian dialect (Ostlausitzer Mundart [de]) of the town differs from the Upper Saxon dialects spoken in most parts of Saxony, especially those of Dresden and Leipzig. Because the town had been integrated into the former provinces of Silesia and later Lower Silesia respectively there is also a strong Silesian element in the city's culture, which is reflected by the presence of some Silesian dishes such as Schlesisches Himmelreich [de] and Liegnitzer Bombe [de], a Silesian Museum (Schlesisches Museum zu Görlitz), and the Silesian Christmas Market (Schlesischer Christkindelmarkt [de]). There is also a Sorbian element, since Görlitz was founded and first settled by the Sorbs, a Slavic people. This is evidenced by the name of the town and the etymology of some of its incorporated villages and geographical features being of Slavic origin. Spared from the destruction of World War II, the town also has a rich architectural heritage. Many movie-makers have used the various sites as filming locations.