Bangerz is the fourth studio album by American singer Miley Cyrus, released on September 30, 2013, by RCA Records. It is her first body of original work since leaving Hollywood Records after her third studio album Can't Be Tamed (2010) and signing with RCA in early 2013. Cyrus began working on the album, and decided against prioritizing her acting career as originally stated, in 2012. Bangerz is a pop and R&B record, with lyrical themes that revolve largely around romance. It is a shift from Cyrus' previous work, which she felt "disconnected" from. Pop singer Britney Spears and rappers Big Sean, French Montana, Future, Ludacris, and Nelly appear as guest vocalists. Bangerz received mixed to positive reviews from music critics, who praised its production and originality but were divided on Cyrus' provocative image. It became Cyrus' fifth number-one album on the US Billboard 200, and was the third-highest opening week for a female artist in 2013. The album has since been certified triple-platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). It was also nominated for Best Pop Vocal Album at the 57th Annual Grammy Awards, marking Cyrus' first career Grammy nomination. The album was supported by the singles "We Can't Stop", "Wrecking Ball", and "Adore You". "We Can't Stop" peaked at number two on the US Billboard Hot 100, and "Wrecking Ball" became Cyrus' first number-one single in the United States. Both singles' music videos were once the fastest videos to reach 100 million views on Vevo, and the latter won the award for Video of the Year at the 2014 MTV Video Music Awards. Cyrus further promoted the album with the international Bangerz Tour in 2014. Bangerz and its promotional efforts are lauded as a turning point in Cyrus' career, in which her public image successfully evolved from being a child star who was synonymous with her former television series Hannah Montana, to being a contemporary artist in her own right. Cyrus' controversial and sexually-charged behavior during this time resulted in several defining moments in pop culture, including her polarizing performance at the 2013 MTV Video Music Awards.