Claude Elwood Shannon (April 30, 1916 – February 24, 2001) was an American mathematician, electrical engineer, computer scientist and cryptographer known as the "father of information theory". He was the first to describe the Boolean gates (electronic circuits) that are essential to all digital electronic circuits, and he built the first machine learning device, thus founding the field of artificial intelligence. He is credited alongside George Boole for laying the foundations of the Information Age. As a 21-year-old master's degree student at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), he wrote his thesis demonstrating that electrical applications of Boolean algebra could construct any logical numerical relationship, thereby establishing the theory behind digital computing and digital circuits. In 1987, Howard Gardner called his thesis "possibly the most important, and also the most famous, master's thesis of the century", and Herman Goldstine described it as "surely ... one of the most important master's theses ever written ... It helped to change digital circuit design from an art to a science." Shannon also contributed to the field of cryptanalysis for national defense of the United States during World War II, including his fundamental work on codebreaking and secure telecommunications, writing a paper which is considered one of the foundational pieces of modern cryptography, and whose work "was a turning point, and marked the closure of classical cryptography and the beginning of modern cryptography." His mathematical theory of communication laid the foundations for the field of information theory, with his famous paper being called the "Magna Carta of the Information Age" by Scientific American, along with his work being described as being at "the heart of today's digital information technology". His Theseus machine was the first electrical device to learn by trial and error. It is thus the first example of artificial intelligence. Rodney Brooks declared that Shannon was the 20th century engineer who contributed the most to 21st century technologies. His achievements are said to be on par with those of Albert Einstein and Sir Isaac Newton in their fields.