Myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) is a debilitating long-term medical condition. People with ME/CFS experience delayed worsening of the illness after minor physical or mental activity, which is the hallmark symptom of the illness. Other core symptoms are a greatly reduced ability to do tasks that were previously routine, severe fatigue that does not improve much with rest, and sleep disturbances. Further common symptoms include dizziness or nausea when sitting or standing, along with memory and concentration issues and pain. The root cause(s) of the disease are unknown. ME/CFS often starts after a flu-like infection, for instance, after mononucleosis. In some people, physical trauma or psychological stress may also act as a trigger.: 10  A genetic component is suspected, as ME/CFS can run in families. ME/CFS is associated with changes in the nervous and immune systems, energy metabolism, and hormone production. Diagnosis is based on symptoms because no diagnostic test is available. The severity of the illness can fluctuate significantly over time,: 9  but full recovery is rare. About a quarter of patients are severely affected and unable to leave their bed or home.: 3  ME/CFS negatively impacts people's health and abilities and can cause social isolation. Treatment is aimed at relieving symptoms, as no therapies or medications are approved to treat the condition.: 29  Pacing one's activities to avoid flare-ups may help manage symptoms, and counselling may aid in coping with the illness. Before the COVID-19 pandemic, ME/CFS affected roughly one in every 150 people, although estimates vary widely due to differing definitions used in studies. However, many people with long COVID fit ME/CFS diagnostic criteria. ME/CFS occurs 1.5 to 2 times as often in women as in men. It most commonly affects adults between ages 40 and 60 but can occur at other ages, including childhood. There has been controversy over many aspects of the condition, including the cause and potential treatments, and historical research funding for ME/CFS has been far below that of diseases with comparable impact. People with ME/CFS often face stigma in healthcare settings, and clinicians may be unfamiliar with ME/CFS, as it is often not covered in medical school.