The women's tournament in ice hockey at the 2014 Winter Olympics was held in Sochi, Russia. For the first time, the women's gold medal game was decided in overtime, with Canada defeating the United States 3–2. Switzerland defeated Sweden for their first Olympic ice hockey medal in 66 years, and first medal in the women's tournament. With the win, the Canadian women's national ice hockey team won its fourth consecutive gold medal, a feat only previously accomplished by the Soviet Union men's team in 1964–76, and the Canadian men's team in 1920–32. Canadians Hayley Wickenheiser, Jayna Hefford and Caroline Ouellette became the first hockey players to win four Olympic gold medals. They also joined Soviet biathlete Alexander Tikhonov and German speed skater Claudia Pechstein as the only athletes to win gold medals in four straight Winter Olympics. On 6 December 2017, nearly four years after the tournament was played, six players from the Russian national team (Inna Dyubanok, Yekaterina Lebedeva, Yekaterina Pashkevich, Anna Shibanova, Yekaterina Smolentseva, and Galina Skiba) were subjected to sanctions, and the team was disqualified by the International Olympic Committee (IOC) based on findings from the reanalysis of doping samples collected from Russian athletes at the 2014 Winter Games by the Oswald Commission. Ten days later, Tatiana Burina and Anna Shukina were also sanctioned and the International Ice Hockey Federation (IIHF) was directed to modify results accordingly. All eight of the players were "declared ineligible to be accredited in any capacity for all editions of the Games of the Olympiad and the Olympic Winter Games subsequent to the Olympic Winter Games Sochi 2014" and "disqualified from the events in which they participated" by the IOC. The players registered their appeals with the Court of Arbitration for Sport (CAS) and, in 2018, five of the eight players (Lebedeva, Pashkevich, Smolentseva, Burina, and Shukina) won their appeals, the sanctions against them were annulled and their results were reinstated. The sanctions against Inna Dyubanok, Anna Shibanova, and Galina Skiba were partially upheld, though the life-ban on Olympic competition was lifted, and the disqualification of the team was maintained on account of their violations.