Paul (Greek: Παύλος, romanized: Pav́los; 14 December 1901 – 6 March 1964) was King of Greece, reigning from 1 April 1947 until his death on 6 March 1964. Paul was born in Athens as the third son of Crown Prince Constantine and Crown Princess Sophia of Greece. The year before his father ascended the throne, Paul joined the Royal Hellenic Navy at eleven years old, becoming the youngest cadet at the time, and after a National Schism during World War I, Constantine's abdication was forced and Paul and his family went into exile in Switzerland. Paul's brother, Alexander, became the Greek sovereign in 1917 and his death in 1920 led to Constantine's restoration. In 1922, Paul's other brother, George, became the monarch. However, the 1924 Greek republic referendum two years later saw the abolition of the Greek monarchy. Paul moved to Italy with his family and then to London. In London, Paul had an affair with his first cousin and his first love, Princess Nina Georgievna of Russia, who would eventually reject his marriage proposal. The monarchy and George's position as king were restored after the 1935 Greek monarchy referendum. George was childless, which made Paul the heir presumptive and gave him the responsibility of finding a spouse and having children. At the 1936 Berlin Olympic Games, Paul successfully proposed to Frederica of Hanover, who he had been seeing regularly for the past year. However, Paul's engagement to a German princess received a mixed reaction in Greece, especially since Adolf Hitler attempted to include Nazi swastika flags at their wedding ceremony. Paul fought in World War II and was forced out of Greece with his family when Greece fell to the Axis Powers. Paul moved to Egypt and then South Africa, where he left his wife and three young children and moved to London with his brother for the remainder of the war. After World War II's conclusion and when George died in 1947, Paul became the King of Greece. Paul soon contracted typhoid fever, which restricted his ability to manage the Greek Civil War. The war nonetheless concluded with monarchists defeating communist forces in the country. During his reign, Paul was also increasingly faced with deterioration in Greco-British relations and Greco-Turkish relations as Paul worked to achieve enosis. For his support of the movement, Paul was labelled a terrorist in the British media. Though Paul successfully secured money from the Marshall Plan to fund recovery and infrastructure projects, he was criticised for limiting democracy when the new 1952 Greek constitution gave extensive powers to the monarch. During his reign, Paul was commended for his numerous state visits to multiple countries. He was later diagnosed with stomach cancer and died in 1964. He was succeeded by his only son, who became Constantine II. Paul had three children: Queen Sofía of Spain, Constantine II of Greece and Princess Irene. Paul was also a first cousin of Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh.