Princess Märtha Louise of Norway (born 22 September 1971) is a member of the Norwegian royal family, a businesswoman and a self-described clairvoyant. Märtha Louise is the elder child and only daughter of King Harald V and Queen Sonja. She is fourth in the line of succession to the Norwegian throne, after her younger brother Haakon and his children, but is not a member of the royal house. Like her aunts Ragnhild and Astrid, she had no inheritance rights to the Norwegian throne at the time of her birth due to Norway's agnatic primogeniture succession. This only changed in 1990, when the Norwegian parliament adopted male-preference primogeniture succession for those born before 1990, which made Märtha Louise third in line at the time, after her brother. Märtha Louise is active as a private businesswoman and alternative therapist, and does not carry out official engagements on behalf of the royal house. From 2007 to 2018 she led her own alternative therapy center, commonly known in Norway as the "angel school" (Norwegian: engleskolen), which focused on clairvoyance and communication with angels and communication with the dead. She was married to the late writer and visual artist Ari Behn from 2002 to 2017. In May 2019, she publicly announced her romantic relationship and professional collaboration with Durek Verrett, a conspiracy theorist and self-described shaman who has served time in prison and who has been characterized by Norwegian media and other critics as a conman. As part of her withdrawal into private professional life, Märtha Louise lost the style "Royal Highness" in 2002; the lower style "Highness" is occasionally used informally. She has often faced criticism in Norway for her claims of being clairvoyant and for exploiting her constitutional title as princess commercially; in 2019, the royal court announced that she will no longer use the title princess in her business activities as a clairvoyant. In 2022, she relinquished her remaining royal duties to concentrate on alternative medicine.