The Hunger Games: Mockingjay – Part 2 is a 2015 American dystopian action film directed by Francis Lawrence from a screenplay by Peter Craig and Danny Strong, based on the 2010 novel Mockingjay by Suzanne Collins. The sequel to The Hunger Games: Mockingjay – Part 1 (2014), it is the fourth installment in The Hunger Games film series. It stars Jennifer Lawrence, Josh Hutcherson, Liam Hemsworth, Woody Harrelson, Elizabeth Banks, Julianne Moore, Jeffrey Wright, Stanley Tucci, Donald Sutherland and in his final film, Philip Seymour Hoffman. In the film, Katniss Everdeen (Lawrence) leads a team of rebels to Panem to liberate it from the tyrannical leadership of Coriolanus Snow (Sutherland). This marks Hoffman’s final film appearance prior to his death. Together with its predecessor, principal photography began in September 2013 and lasted until June 2014, taking place back-to-back, with filming locations including Boston, Atlanta, Paris, Berlin, and Los Angeles. Hoffman, who died in February 2014, completed the majority of his scenes, although his death caused others to be rewritten. The Hunger Games: Mockingjay – Part 2 premiered at the Sony Center in Berlin on November 4, 2015, and was released in the United States on November 20, by Lionsgate, in 2D, 3D, and IMAX. The film received generally positive reviews from critics, with praise for its performances (particularly Lawrence, Hutcherson and Sutherland's), screenplay, music, and action sequences; it was deemed a fitting end to the series, although some were divided on the decision to split the novel into two films. It grossed over $653 million, making it the ninth-highest-grossing film of 2015. Among its accolades, the film was nominated for Best Fantasy Film at the 42nd Saturn Awards. It received three nominations at the 21st Empire Awards for Best Sci-Fi/Fantasy, Best Actress (Lawrence) and Best Production Design, while Lawrence was nominated for Best Actress in an Action Movie at the 21st Critics' Choice Awards. A prequel film, The Hunger Games: The Ballad of Songbirds & Snakes, was released on November 17, 2023.