The Spectacular Spider-Man is an American superhero animated television series produced by Sony Pictures Television based on the Marvel Comics character Spider-Man, and developed by Greg Weisman and Victor Cook. In terms of overall tone and style, the series is based primarily on the Stan Lee, Steve Ditko and John Romita Sr. era of The Amazing Spider-Man, with a similar balance of action, drama and comedy as well as a high school setting. However, it also tends to blend material from all eras of the comic's run up to that point in addition to other sources such as the Ultimate Spider-Man comics by Brian Michael Bendis and Mark Bagley, as well as Sam Raimi's Spider-Man film trilogy. The Spectacular Spider-Man was jointly produced by Culver Entertainment, Adelaide Productions and Marvel Entertainment. It premiered on March 8, 2008, during the Kids' WB programming block of The CW. The series aired its second season on Marvel's sister network Disney XD in the United States and ended its run on November 18, 2009. The entire series was broadcast in Canada on Teletoon. Although a total of five seasons consisting of 65 episodes was initially intended in addition to various direct-to-video films connecting each season, the series was canceled before production could begin on the planned third season, due to legal problems between Disney (who had entered an agreement to acquire Marvel during the show's run) and Sony Pictures Television (the series' distributor and parent of Adelaide Productions), who had relinquished the rights to produce television content under 45 minutes using Spider-Man and associated characters ahead of their acquisition, while retaining all production and distribution rights to the series. The series received critical acclaim, with praise for its faithful portrayal of the titular protagonist (along with the supporting characters and villains), the writing, and the unique character designs and art style. The series' iteration of Spider-Man made a return in the 2023 film Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse, with Josh Keaton reprising the role.