The University of Paris (French: Université de Paris), known metonymically as the Sorbonne (French: [sɔʁbɔn]), was the leading university in Paris, France from 1150 to 1970, except for 1793–1806 during the French Revolution. Emerging around 1150 as a corporation associated with the cathedral school of Paris, it was considered the second-oldest university in Europe. Officially chartered in 1200 by King Philip II of France and recognised in 1215 by Pope Innocent III, it was nicknamed after its theological College of Sorbonne, founded by Robert de Sorbon and chartered by King Louis IX around 1257. Highly reputed internationally for its academic performance in the humanities ever since the Middle Ages – particularly in theology and philosophy – it introduced academic standards and traditions that have endured and spread, such as doctoral degrees and student nations. Notable popes, royalty, scientists, and intellectuals were educated at the University of Paris. A few of the colleges of the time are still visible close to the Panthéon and Jardin du Luxembourg: Collège des Bernardins (18 rue de Poissy, 5th arr.), Hôtel de Cluny (6 Place Paul Painlevé, 5th arr.), Collège Sainte-Barbe (4 rue Valette, 5th arr.), Collège d'Harcourt (44 Boulevard Saint-Michel, 6th arr.), and Cordeliers (21 rue École de Médecine, 6th arr.). In 1793, during the French Revolution, the university was closed and, by Item 27 of the Revolutionary Convention, the college endowments and buildings were sold. A new University of France replaced it in 1806 with four independent faculties: the Faculty of Humanities (French: Faculté des Lettres), the Faculty of Law (later including Economics), the Faculty of Science, the Faculty of Medicine and the Faculty of Theology (closed in 1885). In 1896, a new University of Paris was re-founded as a grouping of the Paris faculties of science, literature, law, medicine, Protestant theology and the École supérieure de pharmacie de Paris. It was inaugurated on November 19, 1896 by French President Félix Faure. In 1970, after the civil unrest of May 1968, the university was divided into 13 autonomous universities, which today are the Sorbonne University, Panthéon-Sorbonne University, the Assas University, the Sorbonne Nouvelle University, the Paris Cité University, the PSL University, the Saclay University, the Nanterre University, the Sorbonne Paris North University and the Paris 8 University.