Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Men Tell No Tales (released internationally as Pirates of the Caribbean: Salazar's Revenge) is a 2017 American swashbuckler fantasy film directed by Joachim Rønning and Espen Sandberg. It is written by Jeff Nathanson, from a story by Nathanson and Terry Rossio. Produced by Jerry Bruckheimer and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures, the film is the standalone sequel to On Stranger Tides (2011) and the fifth installment in the Pirates of the Caribbean film series. The film stars Johnny Depp, Javier Bardem, Geoffrey Rush, Brenton Thwaites, Kaya Scodelario, and Kevin McNally. The story follows Captain Jack Sparrow (Depp) as he searches for the Trident of Poseidon to defeat Armando Salazar (Bardem), who is determined to kill every pirate at sea and take revenge on Sparrow for imprisoning him and his crew of ghosts in the Devil's Triangle. Jack is joined by Hector Barbossa (Rush), Will Turner's son Henry (Thwaites), young astronomer Carina Smyth (Scodelario) and Jack's first mate Joshamee Gibbs (McNally) to defeat Salazar's ghostly crew. The filmmakers cited the series' first installment, The Curse of the Black Pearl (2003), as inspiration for the script and tone of the film, with critics describing the film as a "requel". Pre-production for the film started shortly before On Stranger Tides was released in early 2011, with Terry Rossio writing the initial script. In early 2013, Jeff Nathanson was hired to write a new script for the film, with Depp being involved in Nathanson's writing process. Initially planned for a 2015 release, the film was delayed to 2016 and then to 2017, due to script and budget issues. Principal photography started in Australia in February 2015, after the Australian government offered Disney $20 million in tax incentives, and ended in July 2015. Dead Men Tell No Tales premiered in Shanghai on May 11, 2017, and was released in the United States on May 26. The film received generally negative reviews from critics and grossed $796 million worldwide against a production budget of $230–320 million.