PJSC Aeroflot – Russian Airlines (Russian: ПАО "Аэрофло́т — Росси́йские авиали́нии", PAO Aeroflot — Rossiyskiye avialinii), commonly known as Aeroflot (English: /ˈɛəroʊˌflɒt/ or /ˌɛəroʊˈflɒt/ ; Russian: Аэрофлот, transl. "air fleet", pronounced [ɐɛrɐˈfɫot]), is the flag carrier and the largest airline of Russia. Aeroflot is headquartered in the Central Administrative Okrug, Moscow, with its hub being Sheremetyevo International Airport. The Federal Agency for State Property Management, an agency of the Government of Russia, owns 73.77% of the company, with the rest of the shares being public float. The airline was founded in 1923, making Aeroflot one of the oldest active airlines in the world. During the time of the Soviet Union, Aeroflot was one of the largest airlines in the world. In 1992, following the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Aeroflot was divided into approximately 400 regional airlines informally known as Babyflots and was restructured into an open joint-stock company. It shrank its fleet dramatically, switching to Western aircraft and expanding internationally. In 2022, the number of destinations was significantly reduced after many countries banned Russian aircraft as a result of the Russian invasion of Ukraine. It currently operates service to/from Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, China, Cuba, Egypt, India, Iran, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Maldives, Mauritius, Seychelles, Sri Lanka, Turkey, United Arab Emirates, and Uzbekistan. It has a market share in Russia of approximately 37.8%. Including subsidiaries, the company carried 40.7 million passengers in 2022. Aeroflot also owns Rossiya Airlines and Pobeda, a low-cost carrier. The Aeroflot fleet, excluding subsidiaries, includes 178 airplanes: 119 Airbus planes and 59 Boeing planes, including 7 that are blocked outside the Russian Federation. However, as a result of international sanctions during the Russian invasion of Ukraine, the company has ordered over 300 Russian-made jets and plans on making the Yakovlev MC-21 its flagship plane.