Jurassic World is a 2015 American science fiction action film directed by Colin Trevorrow, who co-wrote the screenplay with Rick Jaffa, Amanda Silver, and Derek Connolly from a story by Jaffa and Silver. It is the first installment in the Jurassic World trilogy and the fourth installment overall in the Jurassic Park film series, following Jurassic Park III (2001). The film stars Chris Pratt, Bryce Dallas Howard, Vincent D'Onofrio, Ty Simpkins, Nick Robinson, Omar Sy, BD Wong, and Irrfan Khan. Wong reprised his role from the original Jurassic Park film. Set 22 years after the events of Jurassic Park, Jurassic World takes place on the same fictional island of Isla Nublar, located off the Pacific coast of Costa Rica. A successful theme park of cloned dinosaurs, dubbed Jurassic World, has operated on the island for years, bringing John Hammond's dream to fruition. The park plunges into chaos when a transgenic dinosaur escapes from its enclosure and goes on a rampage, while a conspiracy orchestrated by the park's staff creates more dangers. Universal Pictures intended to begin production of a fourth Jurassic Park film in 2004 for a mid-2005 release but was in development hell while the script underwent several revisions. Following a suggestion from executive producer Steven Spielberg, writers Jaffa and Silver explored the idea of a functional dinosaur park. Once Trevorrow was hired as director in 2013 he followed the same idea while developing a new script with Connolly. Filming lasted from April to August 2014 in Louisiana and Hawaii. The dinosaurs were created by Lucasfilm's Industrial Light & Magic using CGI and by Legacy Effects using life-sized animatronics. Production was completed in May 2015. Jurassic World was theatrically released in the United States on June 12, 2015, by Universal Pictures. It was praised by critics, with many considering it to be the best Jurassic Park sequel. It grossed $1.6 billion worldwide, becoming the second-highest-grossing film of 2015, the eighth highest-grossing film of all time, the highest-grossing in the series and the highest-grossing film released by Universal. Two sequels have released, Jurassic World: Fallen Kingdom (2018) and Jurassic World Dominion (2022).