Cameron Jibril Thomaz (born September 8, 1987), better known by his stage name Wiz Khalifa, is an American rapper, singer and actor from Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. He signed with local independent label Rostrum Records to release his debut studio album, Show and Prove (2006). His contract entered a short-lived joint venture with Warner Bros. Records the following year. His Eurodance-influenced single, "Say Yeah" was released in 2008 and received urban radio airplay; it entered the Rhythmic Top 40 and Hot Rap Songs charts, becoming his first minor hit. Thomaz then parted ways with Warner Bros. and independently released his second album, Deal or No Deal (2009). He released two further mixtapes until signing with Atlantic Records in July 2010. He adopted an urban hip hop-influenced approach for his debut single for label, "Black and Yellow." A tribute to his hometown of Pittsburgh, the song peaked atop the Billboard Hot 100 and received two Grammy Award nominations. "Black and Yellow," along with the top 40-charting singles "Roll Up" and "No Sleep" preceded the release of his third album and major label debut, Rolling Papers (2011). It was met with commercial success and peaked at number two on the Billboard 200, although critical response was mixed. His fourth album, O.N.I.F.C. (2012) was met with similar critical and commercial reception, and supported by the singles "Work Hard, Play Hard" and "Remember You" (featuring the Weeknd). His fifth album, Blacc Hollywood (2014) became his first to debut atop the Billboard 200, and was supported by the lead single "We Dem Boyz." His 2015 single, "See You Again" (featuring Charlie Puth) was released for the soundtrack to the film Furious 7, in tribute to late actor Paul Walker. The song peaked the Billboard Hot 100 for 12 non-consecutive weeks, received diamond (14× platinum) certification by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), earned three Grammy Award nominations, and remains Thomaz's most commercially successful release. His sixth album, Rolling Papers 2 (2018) matched its titular predecessor in chart position, and was supported by the sleeper hit single "Something New" (featuring Ty Dolla Sign). Outside of music, Thomaz has delved into acting with television roles in Dickinson and The Eric Andre Show, the lead role alongside Snoop Dogg in the 2012 stoner comedy film Mac & Devin Go to High School, and voice roles in the animated series American Dad!, Duncanville, and Big City Greens. Thomaz founded the record label Taylor Gang Entertainment in 2008, through which he has signed artists including Juicy J, Ty Dolla Sign, and Berner. Known for his abundant usage of cannabis, Thomaz launched his own cannabis brand, Khalifa Kush, in 2016, which was expanded to release in nationwide dispensaries in 2022.