The 2014 Canadian Grand Prix (officially the Formula 1 Grand Prix du Canada 2014) was a Formula One motor race held at the Circuit Gilles Villeneuve in Montreal, Quebec, on 8 June. It was the seventh race of the 2014 Formula One World Championship and the 45th time the Canadian Grand Prix formed part of the series. Red Bull Racing driver Daniel Ricciardo won the 70-lap race from sixth position. Nico Rosberg finished in second position for Mercedes and Ricciardo's teammate Sebastian Vettel took third. Rosberg took the pole position by setting the fastest lap in qualifying. He held off his teammate Lewis Hamilton to lead the field into the first corner. The race was neutralised with the safety car on the same lap due to a crash between Marussia teammates Max Chilton and Jules Bianchi. Rosberg maintained the lead until his first pit stop on the 18th lap. Rosberg retook it from his teammate Hamilton on lap 19. Kinetic motor–generator unit failures slowed both Rosberg and Hamilton just after halfway through the race. Rosberg made a pit stop at the end of lap 44. Hamilton led that lap and the next before his own pit stop. Williams driver Felipe Massa took the lead for the following two laps and relinquished it back to Rosberg on the 48th lap. Ricciardo overtook Sergio Pérez of Force India for second on lap 66, and Rosberg two laps later. Competitive racing ended with the safety car's deployment on the final lap due to a first turn accident between Massa and Pérez that saw both drivers briefly hospitalised. Ricciardo took the first victory of his career and the first for an Australian driver since 2012. The result increased Rosberg's lead in the Drivers' Championship to 22 points over his teammate Hamilton who retired with overheating rear brakes. Ricciardo's victory advanced him to third, demoted Fernando Alonso of Ferrari to fourth and elevated Vettel to fifth. In the Constructors' Championship, Mercedes maintained its lead over Red Bull in second. Ferrari, Force India and McLaren all maintained third to fifth with twelve races left in the season.