Granada Burgos Córdoba Escorial Prado Altamira Oviedo Ávila Segovia Santiago de Compostela Cáceres Seville Salamanca Poblet Monastery Mérida Guadalupe Doñana Park Cuenca Llotja de la Seda Siega Verde Toledo Serra de Tramuntana Las Médulas Barcelona Monte Perdido San Millán Alcalá de Henares Ibiza Tarraco Atapuerca Vall de Boí Palmeral of Elche Lugo Aranjuez Úbeda Baeza Vizcaya Bridge Tower of Hercules Almadén Antequera Rock art Medina Azahara Talayotics Garajonay National Park San Cristóbal de La Laguna Teide National Park Risco Caído The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) World Heritage Sites are places of importance to cultural or natural heritage as described in the UNESCO World Heritage Convention, established in 1972. Cultural heritage consists of monuments (such as architectural works, monumental sculptures, or inscriptions), groups of buildings, and sites (including archaeological sites). Natural features (consisting of physical and biological formations), geological and physiographical formations (including habitats of threatened species of animals and plants), and natural sites which are important from the point of view of science, conservation or natural beauty, are defined as natural heritage. Spain ratified the convention on May 4, 1982, making its historical sites eligible for inclusion on the list. Sites in Spain were first inscribed on the list at the 8th Session of the World Heritage Committee, held in Buenos Aires, Argentina in 1984. At that session, five sites were added: the Cathedral of Our Lady of the Assumption, Córdoba; The Alhambra and the Generalife, Granada; Burgos Cathedral; Monastery and Site of the Escorial, Madrid; and Park Güell, Palau Güell and Casa Milà, in Barcelona. Five sites were added in 1985, and another four in 1986. Apart from 1984, 1985, and 1986 (Spain's first three years as a member), 2000 saw the most new sites inscribed, with five that year. As of 2021[update], Spain has 49 total sites inscribed on the list, the same number as France, which is the fourth largest number of sites per country, only behind Italy (58), China (56), and Germany (51). Of these 49 sites, 43 are cultural, 4 are natural, and 2 are mixed (meeting both cultural and natural criteria), as determined by the organization's selection criteria. Three sites are located in the Balearic Islands and four are in the Canary Islands. Four sites are transnational. The Pirineos – Monte Perdido World Heritage Site is shared with France, while the Prehistoric Rock-Art Sites in the Côa Valley and Siega Verde site is shared with Portugal. Almadén is inscribed alongside Idrija in Slovenia. The Ancient and Primeval Beech Forests of the Carpathians and Other Regions of Europe are shared with 17 other European countries. Additionally, Spain has established an agreement with UNESCO known as the Spanish Funds-in-Trust. The agreement was signed on April 18, 2002, between Francisco Villar, Spanish Ambassador and Permanent Delegate to UNESCO, and the Director-General of UNESCO, Kōichirō Matsuura. The fund provides €600,000 annually to a chosen program. Programs include helping other member states, particularly in Latin America, with projects such as nominations processes and assessing tentative sites. Spain served as the chair of the World Heritage Committee in 2008 and 2009, and in 2009 hosted the 33rd Session of the Committee in Seville, Andalusia.