Association Sportive Nancy Lorraine (French pronunciation: [asɔsjɑsjɔ̃ spɔʁtiv nɑ̃si lɔʁɛn]), known as AS Nancy Lorraine, and more commonly as Nancy, is a French football club founded in 1967 and based in Nancy, Grand Est. The club plays its home matches at the Stade Marcel Picot located in Tomblaine in the inner suburbs of Nancy, and currently competes in the Championnat National, the third tier of French football. The club was founded in 1910 by Maurice de Vienne under the name of Union sportive Frontière, then was later renamed Association sportive Lorraine in 1928. In 1967, following the collapse of FC Nancy, the club created a professional section and as such changed its name to become Association Sportive Nancy Lorraine. The club currently plays at the Stade Marcel-Picot, a 20,000 seats capacity stadium located in the town of Tomblaine, where its head office is also located. The infrastructures of the training center are located within the forest of Haye business park, in Bois-de-Haye. The club has won 7 titles until this day: the Coupe de France (1978), the Coupe de la Ligue (2006) and five Ligue 2 champion titles (1975, 1990, 1998, 2005 and 2016). The club also has three participations in European competitions to its credit: one participation in the UEFA Cup Winners' Cup in 1979 and two participations in the UEFA Europa League in 2007 and 2008. In December 2020, Chien Lee, PMG, Partners Path Capital and Krishen Sud acquired AS Nancy Lorraine and Chien Lee became the chairman of the board, replacing Jacques Rousselot who had been in charge since 1995. ASNL is renowned as a club with a good training center. One of the club's most notable players is Michel Platini, the former president of UEFA. Platini began his career at the club in 1972, playing eight seasons with Nancy. He scored the only goal in the aforementioned Coupe de France final and won two French Player of the Year awards whilst playing with the club. Platini also established himself as a French international while at the club and went on to achieve numerous team and individual accolades after his departure from Nancy. He is considered to be, arguably, the club's greatest player ever and, upon entering the section of the club's official website showing Nancy's greats, a picture of a young Platini is displayed. Can also be cited great players such as Mustapha Hadji, African Ballon d'Or in 1998, his brother Youssouf Hadji, counting more than 300 matches under the colors of the club, Olivier Rouyer and Tony Vairelles. Other players have emerged or illustrated at the club, such as Tony Cascarino, Jean-Michel Moutier, Roger Lemerre, Aleksandr Zavarov, Bernard Zénier, Clément Lenglet and Michaël Cuisance.