Bring Me the Horizon are a British rock band, formed in Sheffield in 2004. The group currently consists of lead vocalist Oli Sykes, drummer Matt Nicholls, guitarist Lee Malia and bassist Matt Kean. They are signed to RCA Records globally and Columbia Records exclusively in the United States. The band released their debut album Count Your Blessings in 2006. Upon release, the album's deathcore sound polarised listeners, and was largely met with critical disdain. The band began to break away from this sound with their second album Suicide Season (2008), which was considered a creative, critical and commercial turning point for the band. Bring Me the Horizon released their third album, There Is a Hell Believe Me I've Seen It. There Is a Heaven Let's Keep It a Secret., in 2010, propelling them to greater international fame, whilst incorporating influences from classical music, electronica and pop. Their major label debut, Sempiternal, (2013) achieved Gold certification in Australia (35,000) and Silver in the United Kingdom (60,000). That's the Spirit (2015) debuted at number two in the UK Albums Chart and the US Billboard 200. Their sixth studio album Amo (2019) became their first UK chart-topper. The same year, the band also released Music to Listen To... (2019). Post Human: Survival Horror followed in 2020, the first in a planned series of four projects under the Post Human name. The band have also released two extended plays and two live albums. They have received four Kerrang! Awards, including two for Best British Band and one for Best Live Band, and have been nominated for two Grammy Awards. The band has sold over 5 million records worldwide, and have topped the UK Rock & Metal Singles Chart with songs such as "Throne", "Drown", "Mantra", "Parasite Eve", and "Kool-Aid". The style of their early work, including their debut album Count Your Blessings, has been described primarily as deathcore, but over the course of several albums, the band has shifted its style and moved in a more melodically-oriented direction by combining their approach to metalcore with elements of electronica, pop and hip hop.