Nvidia Corporation (/ɛnˈvɪdiə/, en-VID-ee-ə) is an American multinational corporation and technology company headquartered in Santa Clara, California, and incorporated in Delaware. It is a software and fabless company which designs and supplies graphics processing units (GPUs), application programming interfaces (APIs) for data science and high-performance computing as well as system on a chip units (SoCs) for the mobile computing and automotive market. Nvidia is also a dominant supplier of artificial intelligence (AI) hardware and software. Nvidia's professional line of GPUs are used for edge-to-cloud computing and in supercomputers and workstations for applications in such fields as architecture, engineering and construction, media and entertainment, automotive, scientific research, and manufacturing design. Its GeForce line of GPUs are aimed at the consumer market and are used in applications such as video editing, 3D rendering and PC gaming. In the second quarter of 2023, Nvidia had a market share of 80.2% in the discrete desktop GPU market. The company expanded its presence in the gaming industry with the introduction of the Shield Portable (a handheld game console), Shield Tablet (a gaming tablet) and Shield TV (a digital media player), as well as its cloud gaming service GeForce Now. In addition to GPU design and manufacturing, Nvidia provides the CUDA software platform and API that allows the creation of massively parallel programs which utilize GPUs. They are deployed in supercomputing sites around the world. In the late 2000s, Nvidia had moved into the mobile computing market, where it produces Tegra mobile processors for smartphones and tablets as well as vehicle navigation and entertainment systems. Its competitors include AMD, Intel, Qualcomm and AI accelerator companies such as Cerebras and Graphcore. It also makes AI-powered software for audio and video processing, e.g. Nvidia Maxine. Nvidia's offer to acquire Arm from SoftBank in September 2020 failed to materialize following extended regulatory scrutiny, leading to the termination of the deal in February 2022 in what would have been the largest semiconductor acquisition. In 2023, Nvidia became the seventh public U.S. company to be valued at over $1 trillion, and, as of March 2024, it is the third most-valuable publicly traded company based in the United States after Microsoft and Apple, with a market capitalization of $2.3 trillion.