The War of the Spanish Succession was a European great power conflict fought between 1701 and 1714. The immediate cause was the death of the childless Charles II of Spain in November 1700, which led to a struggle for control of the Spanish Empire. His nominated heir was Philip of Anjou, a grandson of Louis XIV of France, whose main backers were France and most of Spain. His rival, Archduke Charles of Austria, was supported by the Grand Alliance, whose primary members included the Holy Roman Empire, the Dutch Republic, and Great Britain. Significant related conflicts include the 1700 to 1721 Great Northern War, and Queen Anne's War in North America. Although by 1701 Spain was no longer the predominant European power, it retained a global presence including the Spanish Netherlands, large parts of Italy, and the Americas. This meant its acquisition by France threatened the European balance of power, and Philip's proclamation as King of Spain on 16 November 1700 led to war. The French held the advantage in the early stages, but were forced onto the defensive after 1706. Despite advancing in northern France, by 1709 some of the Allies questioned the benefit of continuing the war, especially as Bourbon success in Spain had secured Philip's position as king. When Emperor Joseph I died in 1711, Archduke Charles succeeded his brother as Holy Roman Emperor. Since a union of Spain and Austria was as unwelcome as one with France, the new British government argued it was pointless to continue. By now, only British subsidies kept their allies in the war, and their withdrawal led to the Peace of Utrecht in 1713, followed by the treaties of Rastatt and Baden in 1714. Philip was confirmed as King of Spain, but renounced his claim and those of his descendants to the French throne. The Spanish Empire ceded much of its Italian territories to Savoy and Austria, along with the Spanish Netherlands, but remained largely intact elsewhere. Britain retained Gibraltar and Menorca, conquered from Spain during the war, acquired significant trade concessions in the Spanish Americas, and became a major commercial power. For the Dutch, the war is seen as marking the beginning of their decline as a significant European power. Although Louis succeeded in placing his grandson on the Spanish throne, France was left financially exhausted.