The 2017 UCI World Tour was a competition that included thirty-seven road cycling events throughout the 2017 men's cycling season. It was the ninth edition of the ranking system launched by the Union Cycliste Internationale (UCI) in 2009. The competition started with the opening stage of the Tour Down Under on 17 January and concluded with the final stage of the Tour of Guangxi on 24 October. Slovakia's Peter Sagan was the defending champion. The 2017 edition featured ten new events. Sagan was unable to defend his World Tour title, winning just one race overall at the Grand Prix Cycliste de Québec in September, as he finished fourth in the points rankings; he finished one point behind third-placed Tom Dumoulin. The rankings were topped for the first time by Belgian rider Greg Van Avermaet, riding for the BMC Racing Team, who amassed 3,582 points with the newly-enlarged points-scoring system over the course of the season. Van Avermaet led the standings for the majority of the season, winning four races overall; three on home soil at Omloop Het Nieuwsblad, E3 Harelbeke, and Gent–Wevelgem, with a single win in France at Paris–Roubaix. Van Avermaet finished 130 points clear of Great Britain's Chris Froome, riding for Team Sky. Froome won two of the three Grand Tours to be held in 2017, winning his fourth Tour de France, before taking a first Vuelta a España success, the first Tour–Vuelta double in 39 years. The success gave him the World Tour points lead for several hours before Van Avermaet surpassed him with a seventh-place finish at the Grand Prix Cycliste de Montréal. In the concurrent teams' standings, Team Sky prevailed with 12,806 points, as Froome's victories were added to by Michał Kwiatkowski (Strade Bianche, Milan–San Remo and Clásica de San Sebastián), Sergio Henao (Paris–Nice) and Elia Viviani (EuroEyes Cyclassics and Bretagne Classic Ouest–France). 154 points behind in second place were Quick-Step Floors, who took 30 victories on World Tour races (including 16 Grand Tour stages) during the 2017 season, with overall victories for Yves Lampaert (Dwars door Vlaanderen) and Philippe Gilbert (Tour of Flanders and Amstel Gold Race). With 10,961 points, BMC Racing Team finished in third place primarily down to Van Avermaet's performances, with further wins to Richie Porte (Tour Down Under and Tour de Romandie) and Dylan Teuns at the Tour de Pologne.