Euronext N.V. (short for European New Exchange Technology) is a pan-European bourse that provides trading and post-trade services for a range of financial instruments. Traded assets include regulated equities, exchange-traded funds (ETF), warrants and certificates, bonds, derivatives, commodities, foreign exchange as well as indices. In December 2021, it had nearly 2,000 listed issuers worth €6.9 trillion in market capitalisation. Euronext is the largest center for debt and funds listings in the world, and provides technology and managed services to third parties. In addition to its main regulated market, it operates Euronext Growth and Euronext Access, providing access to listing for small and medium-sized enterprises. Euronext's commodity market includes the electric power exchange Nord Pool, as well as Fish Pool. Post-trade services include clearing performed by Euronext's multi-asset clearing house, Euronext Clearing, headquartered in Rome, as well as custody and settlement performed by Euronext's central securities depository (CSD), Euronext Securities. Euronext's registered office and corporate headquarters are situated in Amsterdam and Paris, respectively. Euronext traces its origins back to the world's first bourses, formed in the Low Countries' shifting trade centres, Bruges, Antwerp and Amsterdam in 1285, 1485 and 1602, respectively, as well as to the foundation of the Paris Bourse in 1724. In its present form, Euronext was established in September 2000 through the merger of the bourses in Amsterdam, Brussels and Paris. The goal was to create a single, integrated, and liquid market for securities trading across Europe. Since its inception, Euronext has continued to expand, and now operates stock exchanges in several European countries, including the Netherlands, Belgium, France, Portugal, Ireland, and Norway. Its creation was followed by the introduction of the single currency and harmonisation of financial markets. The present day Euronext was spun off from the Intercontinental Exchange (ICE) in 2014, shortly after ICE's acquisition of NYSE Euronext the year before. On 23 August 2023, the company formed EuroCTP as a joint venture with 13 other bourses, in an effort to provide a consolidated tape for the European Union, as part of the Capital Markets Union proposed by the European Commission.