Itaconic acid (also termed methylidenesuccinic acid and 2-methylidenebutanedioic acid) is a fatty acid containing five carbons (carbon notated as C), two of which are in carboxyl groups (notated as -CO2H) (its chemical formula is C5H6O4, see adjacent figure and dicarboxylic acids). At pH levels below 2, itaconic acid is electrically neutral because both of its carboxy residues are bound to hydrogen (notated as H); at pH levels above 7, it is double negatively charged because both of its carboxy residues are not bound to hydrogen, i.e., CO2−{\displaystyle ^{-}} (its formula is C5H4O42-); and at pH's between 2 and 7 it exists as a mixture with none, one, or both of its carboxy residues being bound to hydrogen. In the cells and most tissue fluids of living animals, which generally have pH levels above 7, itaconic acid exists almost exclusively in its double negatively charged form; this form of itaconic acid is termed itaconate. Animal cells make itaconate by an enzyme-catalyzed reaction from cis-aconitate (see aconitic acid), an intermediate metabolite in the tricarboxylic acid cycle, (i.e., TCA). This cycle operates in the mitochondria of virtually all the cells of animals, plants, fungi, and some microorganisms. The itaconate-producing reaction is stimulated when cells undergo stressful conditions that suppress TCA's operation. The itaconate formed in this reaction acts on its cell of origin and other cells to regulate the inflammation caused by various microorganisms, viruses, autoimmune diseases, oxidative stresses, and other types of tissue injury. It is also a bactericidal agent, i.e., an agent that acts directly on certain types of bacteria to inhibit their viability and/or disease-causing abilities. These regulatory actions are critical for limiting excessive inflammation, healing injured tissues, and combating infections. In 1836, Samuel Baup discovered a previously unknown by-product in a distillate of citric acid; this by-product was later named itaconic acid. In the late 1920s, itaconic acid was isolated from a fungus in the Aspergillus genus of fungi and in the 1930s itaconate was shown to have bactericidal actions. During this time, itaconic acid proved to be useful for synthesizing a wide range of products required by agriculture, textile, and other industries. Since then, the use of itaconic acid for industrial and manufacturing purposes has grown. In 2011, Shin et al. reported that itaconate was produced by two mammalian immortalized cell lines, cultured mouse VM-M3 brain tumor cells and RAW 264.7 mouse macrophages, and by macrophages isolated from mice. This group also showed that stimulation of mouse macrophages with the bacterial toxin, lipopolysaccharide (i.e., LPS, also termed endotoxin), increased their production and secretion of itaconate. In 2013, Michelucci et al. revealed the biosynthesis pathway that produces itaconate in mammals. These two publications were followed by numerous others focused on the biology of itaconate and certain itaconate-like compounds as regulars of a wide range of cellular responses in animals and humans. The following section, titled "Biology of Itaconate," details preclinical studies that analyzed the effects of itaconate and itaconate-like compounds on human cells, animal cells, and animals used as models of specific diseases. These studies sought to a) define itaconate's physiological and pathological functions as well as its mechanisms of action in health and disease; b) define the actions and mechanisms of action of various itaconate-like compounds; and c) determine which actions of itaconate and itaconate-like compounds support conducting further studies to determine if it or they would be useful therapeutic agents in humans. The last section, titled "Commercial production and uses of itaconic acid," reports on the changing methods for making large amounts, and the commercial uses, of itaconic acid.