Formula One, abbreviated to F1, is the highest class of open-wheeled auto racing defined by the Fédération Internationale de l'Automobile (FIA), motorsport's world governing body. The "formula" in the name refers to a set of rules to which all participants and cars must conform. The F1 World Championship season consists of a series of races, known as Grands Prix, held usually on purpose-built circuits, and in a few cases on closed city streets. The World Constructors' Championship is presented by the FIA to the most successful F1 constructor over the course of the season through a points system based on individual Grand Prix results. Constructors' Championship points are calculated by adding points scored in each race by any driver for that constructor. From the inaugural season of the World Constructors' Championship in 1958 up until the 1978 season only the highest-scoring driver in each race for each constructor contributed points towards the World Constructors' Championship (then officially as the International Cup for Formula One Constructors); since the 1979 season points from all cars entered by each constructor have counted towards their championship total. The Constructors' Championship is won when it is no longer mathematically possible for another constructor to overtake another's points total regardless of the outcome of the remaining races, although it is not officially awarded until the FIA Prize Giving Ceremony held in various cities following the conclusion of the season. The Constructors' Championship was first awarded, as the International Cup for Formula One Manufacturers, in 1958 to Vanwall. In 1981 this name was officially changed to the World Constructors' Championship. The makes of both chassis and an engine are included in the constructor name. Out of the 170 chassis constructors that have entered an F1 Grand Prix, a total of 15 have won the Championship in its 63 seasons. Ferrari holds the record for the highest number of World Constructors' Championships victories, having won the title on 16 occasions. Williams is in second position with nine Constructors' Championships and McLaren and Mercedes are in third with eight titles. With 16 titles, Ferrari has amassed the highest number of Constructors' Championships as an engine manufacturer, followed by Renault, Ford, Mercedes and Honda with twelve, ten, ten and six titles, respectively. Mercedes holds the record for the most consecutive constructors' titles with eight between the 2014 and the 2021 seasons. All but 17 titles (16 titles won by Italian-built Ferrari chassis and 1 title won by French-built Matra chassis) have been won by chassis that were designed and constructed in the United Kingdom. On eleven occasions, the World Constructors' Champion team has not contained the World Drivers' Champion for that season. All titles but one (in 1969 Matra cars entered by Ken Tyrrell's privateer team Matra International) have been won by cars that were entered by works teams. Among drivers that have contributed with at least a single point to the constructors' title, Lewis Hamilton has contributed to the most with eight constructors' titles, all of them with Mercedes.