Jolin Tsai (Mandarin: [tsʰaɪ˥˩] ; Chinese: 蔡依林; born September 15, 1980) is a Taiwanese singer, songwriter, and actress. Known as the "Queen of C-Pop", she is one of the most influential pop cultural figures in the Chinese-speaking world. Recognized for her continual reinvention and versatility in musical style and visual image, she is a key figure of popularizing dance-pop as mainstream music in Greater China. She maintains control over every aspects of her career, her works, which incorporate social themes and ideological connotations, have achieved both commercial success and critical acclaim. Tsai was born in Hsinchuang, Taiwan. In 1998, Tsai won a singing competition held by MTV Mandarin. Her debut album 1019 (1999) made her an instant hit, while her girl-next-door image made her a teen idol with a huge teenage fan base. Her album Magic (2003) reflected her first musical transformation, marking the beginning of her dance-oriented musical direction. Her album Dancing Diva (2006) featured dynamic dance music and dazzling dance moves, establishing her status as a representative dance-pop artist in the Chinese music scene. In 2009, Tsai founded her company Eternal, and began to dominate her career. She began demonstrating girl power and concern for minorities with her album Myself (2010), which marked a significant turning point in her musical form. Her album Muse (2012) spans both mainstream and independent music. Her album Play (2014) made the world aware of the high standard of Chinese dance music. Her album Ugly Beauty (2018) explored secular beauty standard and inner psychological polarity, leading the Chinese music industry in terms of production level. Tsai has sold over 25 million records, making her the highest-selling Taiwanese female recording artist since 2000. Beginning with her album Magic (2003), each of her studio albums has been the highest-selling album by a female artist in Taiwan in the year of release, with four of which also being the highest-selling album overall in the country in the years of release. She has won a total of seven Golden Melody Awards, the most of any dance-pop artist in history. Since 2010, she has been ranked top 20 on the Forbes China Celebrity 100 list for six out of ten times, with being ranked top one in terms of Chinese female singer three times. Her net worth exceeded NT$2 billion in 2014, and she has been ranked as the highest-paid Taiwanese female singer 16 times across two decades (2003–2022).