Little Mix are an English girl group, formed on the British version of The X Factor, and the first group and only girl group to win the series. The line up consisted of Leigh-Anne Pinnock, Jade Thirlwall, Perrie Edwards, and originally Jesy Nelson, before her departure from the group in 2020. Regarded as the show's most successful winning act, their success led to a girl band renaissance in the UK. Little Mix's vocals and harmonies have garnered critical acclaim and the band are ranked amongst one of the best vocal girl groups. They were often dubbed by some media as the "biggest girl group in the world", before going on a hiatus in 2022, allowing its members to pursue solo projects. Little Mix rose to prominence with their debut single "Wings" (2012), achieving five number-one singles, and nineteen top ten enteries on the UK Singles Chart. Launched into mainstream recognition after the release of "Black Magic", it became the first song by girl group since 2008 to spend multiple weeks at number one. In 2023, it also became the first music video by a British girl group to surpass one billion streams on YouTube and was ranked by Billboard as one of the "Greatest Girl Group Songs of All Time". The group has broken various records during their career, including becoming the first girl band to spend over a 100 weeks inside the top ten of the UK Singles Charts, the first to accumulate six top five entries on the UK Albums Chart, and holds the record for the highest chart entry for a debut album by a UK girl group on the US Billboard 200. The group achieved moderate success in America and retained a popular following in Europe, South America, Asia and other regions with Forbes, naming them as one of the most influential acts in Europe. Little Mix also made appearances on Debrett's list of the most influential people in the UK, the Forbes "30 Under 30", and the Sunday Times "Young Rich List". Their music has amassed over 15 billion streams worldwide, making them one of the most streamed girl groups on Spotify. Since their debut, their music has been cited as gay anthems, girl power anthems, and feminist anthems, while gaining popularity in South Korea, with Pitchfork describing them as "the girl group who has captured K-pop's spirit better than any other western girl group". Little Mix have sold over 3 million concert tickets worldwide, and performed in over 20 countries across their tours, with the Confetti Tour, being their most critically acclaimed. In 2021, Little Mix became the first girl group in 41 years to win British Group at the Brit Awards. Their other accolades include a Madame Tussauds figure, two Brit Awards, seven MTV Europe Music Awards (the most wins for Best UK & Ireland Act), four Glamour Awards, a iHeartRadio Music Award, two Japanese Gold Disc Awards and three Guinness World Records. They have amassed a huge following of LGBTQ+ fans winning a British LGBT Award, an Attitude Award, and were named as Glamour's "Women of the Year and Game-changers in music". Often named as one of the greatest girl groups of all time, Little Mix have sold over an estimated 60 million records worldwide, becoming the second best-selling British girl group in the UK, one of the best-selling girl groups of all time, and one of Britain's biggest selling acts.