Austin Richard Post (born July 4, 1995), known professionally as Post Malone, is an American rapper, singer, songwriter, record producer, and actor. Malone has gained distinction and acclaim for his blending of various genres including hip hop, pop, R&B, and trap. His stage name was derived from inputting his birth name into a rap name generator. Malone began his musical career in 2011, and gained recognition with his 2015 debut single "White Iverson", which peaked at number 14 on the US Billboard Hot 100. He signed with Republic Records to release his debut studio album Stoney (2016), which peaked at number four on the Billboard 200 and spawned the diamond-certified single "Congratulations" (featuring Quavo). His second album, Beerbongs & Bentleys (2018) debuted atop the Billboard 200 and set numerous streaming records. It contained the Billboard Hot 100 number-one singles "Rockstar" (featuring 21 Savage) and "Psycho" (featuring Ty Dolla Sign), and was nominated for Album of the Year at the 61st Grammy Awards. His third number one single, "Sunflower" (with Swae Lee) was released for the accompanying soundtrack to the 2018 animated film Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse; it became the highest-certified song in RIAA history as the first to receive double diamond (20-times platinum) certification. "Sunflower" was included on Malone's third album Hollywood's Bleeding (2019), which became his second to peak the Billboard 200. It spawned the single "Circles", which was his fourth number-one song on the Billboard Hot 100 and spent 61 weeks on the chart. His fourth album, Twelve Carat Toothache (2022) was supported by the top-ten singles "I Like You (A Happier Song)" (featuring Doja Cat) and "One Right Now" (with the Weeknd). His fifth album, Austin (2023) explored pop rock and reached similar success, supported by the lead single "Chemical". Malone is among the best-selling music artists with over 80 million records sold. His accolades include ten Billboard Music Awards, three American Music Awards, one MTV Video Music Award, and nine Grammy Award nominations. He holds several Billboard chart records: He is the first solo lead artist to top both the Rap Airplay and Adult Contemporary charts, while "Circles" set the record for longest climb to number one (41 weeks) on the Adult Contemporary chart by a solo artist. As of 2024, Malone holds the record for the artist with the most diamond-certified songs, with eight to his name.