Gustav Elijah Åhr (Swedish pronunciation: [ˈoːr]; November 1, 1996 – November 15, 2017), known professionally as Lil Peep, was an American rapper and singer-songwriter. He was a member of the emo rap collective GothBoiClique. Helping pioneer an emo revival-style of rap and rock music, Lil Peep has been credited as a leading figure of the mid–late 2010s emo rap scene and came to be an inspiration to outcasts and youth subcultures. Born in Allentown, Pennsylvania, to an American mother and a Swedish father and raised on Long Island, Åhr started releasing music on SoundCloud in 2013 under the name "Trap Goose", later changing his artist name to Lil Peep because his mother had called him "Peep" since he was a baby. He soon became popular on the platform with the release of his 2015 single "Star Shopping", and his popularity grew further with his release of mixtapes Lil Peep; Part One and Live Forever later that year. In 2016, Lil Peep released his widely acclaimed mixtapes Crybaby and Hellboy, along with many other projects including California Girls and Vertigo. Lil Peep's first live performance was February 12, 2016, in Tucson as member of Schemaposse. Later that year, he toured briefly with Fat Nick, Mikey The Magician, and Smokepurpp. In the spring of 2017, Lil Peep embarked on his first solo tour, performing to packed venues in three Russian cities, making his way across western Europe, and then across the United States. Soon after the tour, Lil Peep moved to London, where he recorded his EP Goth Angel Sinner, and in August he released his debut studio album, Come Over When You're Sober, Pt. 1. While his mixtapes explored emo, trap, lo-fi and alternative rock, his debut album was a transition into pop punk and rap rock. His second album, Come Over When You're Sober, Pt. 2, was released in 2018 and debuted at number four on the Billboard 200. A documentary film about him, Everybody's Everything, was released in 2019. On November 15, 2017, two weeks after his 21st birthday, Lil Peep died on his tour bus before a scheduled performance in Tucson, his second to last scheduled show on a 33-date tour of the United States. The Pima County medical examiner's office, which conducted toxicology tests on Lil Peep, ruled his cause of death an accidental overdose of fentanyl, a powerful opioid, and Xanax, a benzodiazepine sedative. His death was observed as a great loss to 21st-century music. "He could have been his generation's Kurt Cobain", a Rolling Stone profile stated.