Jacques Bermon Webster II (born April 30, 1991), known professionally as Travis Scott (formerly stylized as Travi$ Scott), is an American rapper, singer, songwriter, and record producer. Throughout his career, Scott has achieved four number-one hits on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart, along with a total of over one hundred charting songs. Scott has been nominated for ten Grammy Awards and won a Latin Grammy Award, Billboard Music Award, MTV Video Music Award, and multiple BET Hip Hop Awards. As of 2023, Scott has sold over 49 million certified records in the US alone. Scott's musical style has been described as a "blend between traditional hip-hop and lo-fi" and often characterized as "ambient," with a heavily appraised influence from rappers Kanye West and Kid Cudi. His stage name is derived from the latter's real name, Scott Mescudi, combined with the name of a favorite uncle. In 2012, Scott signed his first major-label recording contract with Epic Records, as well as a publishing deal with Kanye West's GOOD Music as an in-house producer. In April 2013, he entered a joint-venture record deal with Georgia-based rapper T.I.'s Grand Hustle Records. Scott self-released his first full-length project, a mixtape titled Owl Pharaoh in 2013, which was followed by his debut mixtape Days Before Rodeo (2014). His debut studio album, Rodeo (2015) was released to critical praise and commercial success. It was preceded by the singles "3500" (featuring Future and 2 Chainz) and "Antidote," the latter became his first hit song as it peaked at number 16 on the Billboard Hot 100. His second album, Birds in the Trap Sing McKnight (2016), became his first number-one album on the Billboard 200 chart. The following year, Scott formed the duo Huncho Jack with rapper Quavo, with whom he released an eponymous collaborative album (2017). Scott's third studio album, Astroworld (2018) was released to widespread critical acclaim and became his second consecutive number one album on the Billboard 200. Additionally, the album produced his first Billboard Hot 100 number-one single, "Sicko Mode" (featuring Drake). In late 2019, Scott's vanity label imprint, Cactus Jack Records released the compilation album JackBoys, which also topped the Billboard 200. With his 2019 single "Highest in the Room" and his 2020 singles "The Scotts" (with Kid Cudi) and "Franchise" (featuring Young Thug and M.I.A.), Scott became the first artist on the Billboard Hot 100 to have three songs debut at number one in less than a year. Following a series of controversies and five years after the release of his previous solo album, Scott released Utopia (2023), which became his fourth consecutive number one album on the Billboard 200. Over the course of his career, Scott has become a globally recognized artist and pop culture figure. Along with his highly publicized relationship with American media personality Kylie Jenner, Scott has collaborated with organizations including Nike, Dior, and McDonald's. His Cactus Jack record label, founded in 2017, has signed artists including Don Toliver and Sheck Wes. Scott has gained notoriety for controversies and legal issues regarding concert safety. In November 2021, a mass-casualty crowd crush occurred during Scott's hometown performance at his annual Astroworld Festival, causing ten deaths and hundreds of injuries.