Mitrovica (Albanian indefinite form: Mitrovicë; Serbian Cyrillic: Митровица), also referred as Kosovska Mitrovica (Albanian: Mitrovica e Kosovës; Serbian Cyrillic: Косовска Митровица), is a city in northern Kosovo and administrative center of the District of Mitrovica. In 2013, the city was split into two municipalities, South Mitrovica (Albanian: Mitrovica e Jugut; Serbian: Јужна Митровица, romanized: Južna Mitrovica) and North Mitrovica (Albanian: Mitrovica e Veriut; Serbian: Ceвepнa Митровица, romanized: Severna Mitrovica). Settled 10 km from Ujmani/Gazivoda Lake, on the confluence of the rivers Ibar, Sitnica, Lushta, and Trepça, the city is surrounded by the mountains of Kopaonik, Rogozna, Mokna, and Çyçavica. According to the 2011 Census, the two municipalities had 97,686 inhabitants of which 85,360 reside in south and 12,326 in north. The history of Mitrovica is rooted in antiquity, with evidence of early settlements of neolithic and Roman-era artifacts discovered in the region. During the Middle Ages, the area played an important role in the Byzantine and Serbian Empires, while the modern city was founded during the rule of the Ottoman Empire, being first mentioned in the 17th century. Its strategic location along trade routes made it an important center for commerce and cultural exchange during this time. The complex historical context of these foreign influences contributed to the diverse heritage and cultural mosaic of Mitrovica, which continues to be a notable aspect of the city's identity. In the modern era, Mitrovica's history has been marked by various events, including the industrial development of Trepça Mines during the Yugoslav period, the Kosovo War and the ethnic divisions that emerged in its aftermath in 1999. In 2013, following the North Kosovo crisis, the city was divided by the Ibar River into two separate municipalities, South Mitrovica with an ethnic Albanian majority and North Mitrovica with an ethnic Serb majority. Rich in minerals such as lead, zinc ore and other minerals, during Yugoslavian period, Mitrovica was an industrial city with a significant mining industry, as the Trepča Mines, a major mining and metallurgy complex, is located in the region. Following the Kosovo War in 1999 and the city’s ethnic division, Mitrovica suffered economic collapse, turning from the economic center of Kosovo before 1999,to the poorest region in Kosovo after. According to the Kosovo Statistics Agency, of all urban municipalities in Kosovo, Mitrovica has the highest unemployment rate and the highest number of dependents from state transfers. Mitrovica is also an important university center with the University of Mitrovica “Isa Boletini” in the south, the faculties of the parallel institution of University of Pristina in the north and several private universities. The city is known for music and has Mitrovica Rock School. It hosts numerous cultural events, such as Green Fest, Mitrovica Jazz Days Festival, MittrixFest, Mitrovica Guitar Days, ArtFest, Nomad Fest, North Jazz Festival, and others. Mitrovica has the City Museum, the Museum of Crystals, the Cultural Center, City Library, City Theater, ensembles, several galleries, and social/cultural spaces. Additionally, it is home to many sports clubs and venues, including the Adem Jashari Olympic Stadium, Riza Lushta Stadium, Fatime Xhaka Stadium, Minatori Sports Hall and Omni Sports Center. Among the most important historical monuments in the region are the 13th century remains of St. Peter's Catholic Church, the 14th century monasteries of Banjska and Sokolica, and the mosque of Mazhiq, the fortresses of Zveçan and Rashan and Isa Boletini Towers Complex. Ibar bridge has become a symbol of division and the city’s main landmark.