Blackpink (Korean: 블랙핑크; RR: Beullaekpingkeu, stylized in all caps or as BLɅϽKPIИK) is a South Korean girl group formed by YG Entertainment and consisting of members Jisoo, Jennie, Rosé, and Lisa. Cited as the "biggest girl group in the world", they are considered the most successful Korean girl group internationally and a leading force in the Korean Wave. They are stylistically associated with the "girl crush" concept in K-pop—exploring themes of self-confidence and female empowerment. Blackpink debuted in August 2016 with their single album Square One, which featured "Whistle" and "Boombayah", their first number-one entries on South Korea's Gaon Digital Chart and the US Billboard World Digital Songs chart, respectively. It was followed by the single album Square Two in November, whose song "Playing with Fire" was the first by a Korean girl group to enter the Billboard Canadian Hot 100. The group expanded their global reach with "Ddu-Du Ddu-Du" (2018), which was the first song by a Korean female group to enter the UK Singles Chart and receive a certification from the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). Its music video was the first by a Korean group to surpass one and two billion views on YouTube, and remains the most-viewed by a Korean group to date. Their music videos for "Kill This Love" (2019) and "How You Like That" (2020) each set records for the most-viewed music video within the first 24 hours of release, with the latter breaking five Guinness World Records. Blackpink is the highest-charting female Korean act on the US Billboard Hot 100, peaking at number 13 with "Ice Cream" (2020), and on the US Billboard 200, peaking at number one with Born Pink (2022). Blackpink's studio albums The Album (2020) and Born Pink each broke the record for the best-selling female album of all time in South Korea, becoming the first to surpass one million and two million copies sold, respectively. Born Pink was the first album by a girl group to reach number one on the Billboard 200 since Danity Kane in 2008 and set two Guinness World Records as the first album by a Korean girl group to top the Billboard 200 as well as the UK Albums Chart. The album's lead single "Pink Venom" (2022) was the first song by a Korean group to reach number one on Australia's ARIA Singles Chart and the first by a girl group to reach number one on the Billboard Global 200. Blackpink have broken numerous records throughout their career; their Born Pink World Tour (2022–23) became the highest-grossing concert tour by a female group, and they were the first Asian act to headline Coachella. They have the most-subscribed and most-viewed music artist channel on YouTube, and are the most-followed and most-streamed girl group on Spotify. Blackpink's other accolades include several Golden Disc Awards, Billboard Music Awards, People's Choice Awards, and MTV Video Music Awards, among them the first Group of the Year win by a girl group in the 21st century. They were the first girl group to enter Forbes' 30 Under 30 Asia, and were named Time's 2022 Entertainer of the Year. The group has been ranked among the top of the Forbes Korea Power Celebrity list and recognized by former South Korean President Moon Jae-in for spreading K-pop and Korean culture worldwide.