Club Atlético Independiente (Spanish pronunciation: [ˈkluβ aˈtletiko jndepenˈdjente]) is an Argentine professional sports club, which has its headquarters and stadium in Avellaneda, a city of the Buenos Aires Province. The club is best known for its football team, which plays in the Primera División and is considered one of Argentina's Big Five football clubs. Independiente was officially founded on 1 January 1905, although the institution had been formed on 4 August 1904. Originally from Monserrat, a neighbourhood of Buenos Aires, the club moved to Avellaneda in 1907. The football team has won 16 Primera División titles (the last one was the 2002 Apertura) and 9 National cups. In international club football competitions, Independiente has won a total of 20 major titles, with 18 of them organised by CONMEBOL and other associations. Independiente's achievements include a record of seven Copa Libertadores won, being the only club to win four finals in a row, between 1972 and 1975. The club has won the Copa Interamericana three times, the Supercopa Sudamericana twice, the Recopa Sudamericana once, the Intercontinental Cup twice (1973 and 1984), the Copa Sudamericana twice, in 2010 and 2017, and the Copa Aldao twice, in 1938 and 1939. The 2018 Suruga Bank Championship was its most recent achievement. These achievements led the team to adopt the nickname of Rey de Copas (King of Cups) after they conquered its 12th international title, the first team in the world to do so, in reference to the Spanish playing cards' highest number. After winning the 1984 Intercontinental Cup against Liverpool F.C. in Japan, Independiente won the first confrontation involving Argentine and British teams after the Falklands War, a triumph that was celebrated by all Argentines and gave the team the motto of Orgullo Nacional (National Pride). Apart from football, other activities practised at the club are athletics, basketball, boxing, chess, field hockey, futsal, handball, gymnastics, martial arts, Pilates, roller skating, scuba diving, swimming, tennis, volleyball, water polo, and yoga. Also, the club has its own school, with Pre-Kindergarten, Kindergarten, Elementary and Secondary school levels.