Deadpool is a 2016 American superhero film based on the Marvel Comics character of the same name. Distributed by 20th Century Fox, it is a spin-off of the X-Men film series and its eighth installment overall. Directed by Tim Miller and written by Rhett Reese and Paul Wernick, it stars Ryan Reynolds in the title role alongside Morena Baccarin, Ed Skrein, T. J. Miller, Gina Carano, and Brianna Hildebrand. In the film, Wade Wilson hunts the man who gave him mutant abilities and a scarred physical appearance, becoming the antihero Deadpool. Development of a Deadpool film starring Reynolds began in February 2004, before he played the character in X-Men Origins: Wolverine (2009). Reese and Wernick were hired for a spin-off in 2010, and worked with Reynolds to adapt the character more faithfully (including his fourth wall breaking) after the portrayal in Wolverine was criticized. Miller was hired in 2011. An enthusiastic response to leaked test footage he created with Reynolds led to a greenlight from Fox in 2014. Additional casting began in early 2015, and principal photography took place in Vancouver, British Columbia, from March to May of that year. Several vendors provided visual effects for the film, ranging from the addition of blood and gore to the creation of the CGI character Colossus. Deadpool premiered at the Le Grand Rex in Paris on February 8, 2016, and was released in the United States on February 12, after an unconventional marketing campaign. The film achieved both financial and critical success. It earned $782.8 million against a $58 million budget, becoming the ninth-highest grossing film of 2016 and breaking numerous records, including the highest-grossing film in the X-Men series and the highest-grossing R-rated film at the time. Critics praised Reynolds' performance, the film's style, and faithfulness to the comics, along with its action sequences, though some criticized the plot as formulaic and were divided on the film's adult humor. It received many awards and nominations, including two Critics' Choice awards and two Golden Globe nominations. A sequel, Deadpool 2, was released on May 2018 to comparable critical and commercial success. Following the acquisition of 21st Century Fox by Disney, the character's film rights were returned to Marvel Studios alongside the X-Men and the Fantastic Four. Deadpool & Wolverine, a third film starring Reynolds and Hugh Jackman, which will integrate the characters into the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU), is scheduled for release on July 2024, as part of Phase Five of the MCU.