Marvel's Jessica Jones is an American television series created by Melissa Rosenberg for the streaming service Netflix, based on the Marvel Comics character of the same name. It is set in the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU), sharing continuity with the franchise's films, and was the second Marvel Netflix series leading to the crossover miniseries The Defenders. The series was produced by Marvel Television in association with ABC Studios and Tall Girls Productions, with Rosenberg serving as showrunner. Scott Reynolds was co-showrunner for the third season. Krysten Ritter stars as Jessica Jones, an ex-superhero turned private investigator who opens her own detective agency, Alias Investigations. Rachael Taylor, Eka Darville, and Carrie-Anne Moss also star, with Mike Colter, Wil Traval, Erin Moriarty, and David Tennant joining them for the first season, J. R. Ramirez, Terry Chen, Leah Gibson, and Janet McTeer joining the cast for the second season, and Benjamin Walker, Sarita Choudhury, Jeremy Bobb, and Tiffany Mack joining for the third season. A version of the series was developed by Rosenberg for ABC in 2010, but the network passed on it. She was reworking it for Netflix by late 2013 as A.K.A. Jessica Jones, with the title later being simplified. Ritter was cast as Jones in December 2014, and the series took specific influence from the character's creators, Brian Michael Bendis and Michael Gaydos. Filming took place in New York City, in areas that still look like old Hell's Kitchen. The first season was released in its entirety on Netflix on November 20, 2015, followed by the second on March 8, 2018, and the third on June 14, 2019. They were met with positive reviews, and received numerous accolades including a Peabody Award, Hugo Award, and Primetime Creative Arts Emmy Award. Netflix canceled Jessica Jones on February 18, 2019; all of the Marvel Netflix series were removed from Netflix on March 1, 2022, after Disney regained the license for them. They began streaming on Disney+ from March 16.