Hotel Transylvania 3: Summer Vacation (released internationally as Hotel Transylvania 3: A Monster Vacation or simply Hotel Transylvania 3 as marketed on home release) is a 2018 American animated monster comedy film produced by Sony Pictures Animation and distributed by Sony Pictures Releasing. It is the third installment in the Hotel Transylvania franchise and the sequel to Hotel Transylvania 2 (2015), it was directed by Genndy Tartakovsky, written by Tartakovsky and Michael McCullers, and features Adam Sandler, Andy Samberg, Selena Gomez, Kevin James, Fran Drescher, Steve Buscemi, Molly Shannon, Sadie Sandler, David Spade, Keegan-Michael Key, Asher Blinkoff and Mel Brooks reprising their roles, with new additions to the cast including Jim Gaffigan, Kathryn Hahn, Joe Jonas, Chrissy Teigen, Joe Whyte, Tara Strong and Tartakovsky, while Chris Parnell, who voiced The Fly in the first two films, voices Stan. In the film, Dracula finds love with a ship captain named Ericka while he embarks on a vacation on a luxury cruise liner with his family and friends, but Mavis later discovers that Ericka is actually the great-granddaughter of Abraham Van Helsing, Drac's arch-nemesis who secretly plan to destroy them. Discussions for a third Hotel Transylvania film began following its second film release and was announced in November 2015 to be released on September 21, 2018 before being pushed forward for a July 2018 release date. Despite initially leaving the franchise due to his work on Can You Imagine? before eventually being shelved, Tartakovsky confirmed his return in June 2016 after receiving inspiration from a "miserable" family vacation and the Chevy Chase National Lampoon's Vacation movies. McCullers was brought on board to write the film, while the rest of the voice cast, including Sandler, Samberg, and Gomez, reprised their roles. The official title was revealed in November 2017. Hotel Transylvania 3: Summer Vacation premiered at the Annecy International Animated Film Festival on June 13, 2018, and was theatrically released in the United States on July 13. The film received mixed reviews from critics and grossed $528 million worldwide against a budget of $65–80 million, making it the highest-grossing film in the Hotel Transylvania series, and Sony Pictures Animation's highest-grossing fully animated film until it was overtaken by Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse (2023). It was also the final film in the franchise to feature Adam Sandler and Kevin James as Dracula and Frankenstein, respectively, as Brian Hull and Brad Abrell both replaced them for the next and final installment, Hotel Transylvania: Transformania, which was released on January 14, 2022.