The 2020 Tour de France was the 107th edition of the Tour de France, one of cycling's three Grand Tours. Originally scheduled to start on 27 June 2020, it was postponed until 29 August 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic in France. The race began in Nice on 29 August and concluded with its traditional run on the Champs-Élysées on 20 September. A total of 176 riders from 22 teams participated in the race. The overall general classification was won for the first time by a Slovenian, Tadej Pogačar of UAE Team Emirates. His fellow countryman Primož Roglič (Team Jumbo–Visma) finished second, while Australian Richie Porte (Trek–Segafredo) came third. Alexander Kristoff won the bunch sprint on stage 1 to take the first yellow jersey of the tour. Julian Alaphilippe, who led much of the previous year's tour, took the lead of the race after winning stage 2. Alaphilippe received a 20-second penalty for receiving food too close to the finish on stage 5 and lost his lead to Adam Yates. Yates held the lead for four stages before losing significant time in the mountainous stage 9, handing the lead to Roglič. Roglič held the yellow jersey for 11 stages, but was overtaken during the penultimate stage 20 time trial by Pogačar. With only the traditional procession on the Champs-Élysées remaining, Pogačar held his lead on the final stage. The points classification was won by Deceuninck–Quick-Step's Sam Bennett, marking the first time that Peter Sagan had not won the points classification in a Tour he finished. The mountains classification and the young rider classification were both won by Pogačar, making him the first rider to win the yellow, polka dot, and white jerseys in the same year. Pogačar is the first rider to win three distinctive jerseys since Eddy Merckx in 1972, the first rider since Laurent Fignon in 1983 to win the Tour in his debut, and the first rider since Cadel Evans in 2011 to win the yellow jersey on the penultimate stage of the race. Movistar Team won the team classification for the third consecutive year. Marc Hirschi of Team Sunweb was named the overall most combative rider. Pogačar won the most stages, with three.