Orania (Afrikaans pronunciation: [ʊəˈrɑːnia]) is a town established in 1991 along the Orange River in the Karoo region of the Northern Cape province of South Africa. The town is split in two halves by the R369 road, and is 871 kilometres (541 mi) from Cape Town and approximately 680 kilometres (420 mi) from Pretoria. Its climate is semi-arid. The town was founded with the goal of creating a stronghold for the Afrikaner minority group, the Afrikaans language and the Afrikaner culture through the creation of an all-White Afrikaner state known as a Volkstaat. The town is generally described as "Whites-only" and has been accused by outside observers of attempting to revive apartheid, although the community denies this. Living in the town requires application, and acceptance is dependent upon being Afrikaner, demonstrating fluency in Afrikaans, a clean criminal record, and sharing the community's values and goals. Afrikaner Calvinism is an important aspect of local culture. While the South African government has stated that it is opposed to the idea of a Whites-only community, it has generally ignored the town. The town's economy is focused on self-sufficiency and is largely based on agriculture, notably of pecan nuts. Orania prints its own money-like coupons which can be used to purchase in its stores and maintains the last transitional representative council in South Africa, but receives no national funding. The town has pursued energy independence primarily through solar power, constructed its own sewage works, and has experimented with introducing its own cryptocurrency as a replacement for cash. In 2022, Orania's landfill site was the only one in the Northern Cape region to fully comply with government environmental and health regulations. Two South African presidents have visited the town. Nelson Mandela visited in 1995, and Jacob Zuma in 2010. The town has also received visits from tribal leaders from the Xhosa and Tswana people. The town has grown at an annual population growth that was estimated at 10% in 2019. The population increased by 55% to 2,500 from 2018 to mid-2022, and to 2,800 in July 2023. In 2023 the town council wanted the population to grow to 10,000 as soon as possible.