BoJack Horseman is an American adult animated psychological comedy drama television series created by Raphael Bob-Waksberg. It stars the voices of Will Arnett, Amy Sedaris, Alison Brie, Paul F. Tompkins, and Aaron Paul. Set primarily in Hollywood, the series revolves around the anthropomorphic horse BoJack Horseman (Arnett), a washed-up star of a 1990s sitcom who plans a return to relevance with an autobiography to be written by ghostwriter Diane Nguyen (Brie). It also chronicles his contentions with his agent, Princess Carolyn (Sedaris), former rival Mr. Peanutbutter (Tompkins), roommate Todd Chavez (Paul), and his declining mental health. The series is designed by cartoonist Lisa Hanawalt, a longtime friend to Bob-Waksberg who previously collaborated on the webcomic Tip Me Over, Pour Me Out. The series premiered on Netflix on August 22, 2014. On September 20, 2018, Netflix renewed the show for its sixth and final season, and the series ended on January 31, 2020, with a total of 77 episodes. The first five seasons consist of 12 episodes each, while the sixth and final season consists of 16 episodes divided into two parts of eight episodes each. A one-off Christmas special was also released on December 19, 2014. BoJack Horseman received mixed reviews upon release. However, critics were significantly more positive towards the second half of the first season, and the subsequent seasons received widespread critical acclaim. Praise was given to its animation, voice acting, humor, mature themes, character development, emotional weight, and approach to its subject matter. GQ magazine hailed the show as one of the best of the 2010s, and IndieWire ranked BoJack Horseman as one of the greatest animated TV series in history. The show has been lauded for its exploration of depression, trauma, abortion, adoption, addiction, self-destructive behavior, suicide, racism, sexism, teen pregnancy, sexuality, and the human condition. The series received numerous accolades, including four Critics' Choice Television Awards for Best Animated Series, three Annie Awards and two Writers Guild of America Awards. It also received three Primetime Emmy Award nominations, for the 2020 Outstanding Animated Program, 2019 Outstanding Animated Program and 2017 Outstanding Character Voice-Over Performance.