The Good Dinosaur is a 2015 American animated adventure drama film produced by Pixar Animation Studios and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures. The film was directed by Peter Sohn (in his feature directorial debut) and produced by Denise Ream, from a screenplay written by Meg LeFauve, who also wrote the film's story with Sohn, Bob Peterson, Kelsey Mann, and Erik Benson. It stars the voices of Raymond Ochoa, Jack Bright, Steve Zahn, Sam Elliott, Anna Paquin, A. J. Buckley, Jeffrey Wright, and Frances McDormand. The film explores an alternate history where non-avian dinosaurs never became extinct, following a young, timid Apatosaurus named Arlo (Ochoa), who meets an unlikely human friend named Spot (Bright) while traveling through a dangerous and mysterious landscape in order to return home, after being washed downriver. Development of The Good Dinosaur began with Peterson and Sohn working on the film in 2009, when the former came up with the idea of exploring what dinosaurs represent in the present day and how they are represented in stereotypes. The project was officially announced in 2011, with the release date, plot, director and co-director, producer, and other small details being revealed. During its production, the team encountered various problems, which led to multiple story revisions, as well as changing directors and voice cast. To create a realistic background for the film, the team traveled to various American landscapes, which were later incorporated into the film. Arlo is designed to look distinct and relatable, in order to connect with audiences. In addition, the film pays homage to the Western genre in its themes, character representation, and western North American landscapes. Mychael and Jeff Danna composed the film's musical score, marking Pixar's first film to be scored by two composers. The Good Dinosaur premiered on November 10, 2015, in Paris, and was released in the United States on November 25 in the Disney Digital 3D and RealD 3D formats, marking the first time where two Pixar films were released in the same year, following the release of Inside Out earlier that year. The film garnered generally positive reviews from critics for its animation and themes, though its storytelling was not considered to be up to Pixar's standards. Despite this, the film became Pixar’s first box office failure, grossing $332.2 million on a $175–200 million budget, and losing the studio an estimated $85 million. It received a nomination for Best Animated Feature Film at the 73rd Golden Globe Awards.