Count Dooku of Serenno, also known by his Sith name Darth Tyranus, is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise, created by George Lucas. He is an antagonist in the Star Wars prequel trilogy, appearing in both Episode II – Attack of the Clones (2002) and Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (2005), played by Christopher Lee, as well as associated media, such as books, comics, video games, and television series. Actor Corey Burton has voiced Dooku in most of his animated and video game appearances, most notably Star Wars: Clone Wars (2003–2005), Star Wars: The Clone Wars (2008–2014; 2020), and the miniseries Tales of the Jedi (2022). Lee reprised the role in the 2008 animated film that launched The Clone Wars series. In the fictional Star Wars universe, Dooku is a prominent political figure as the Count of his home planet of Serenno, as well as a former Jedi Master, who was trained by Yoda and mentored Obi-Wan Kenobi's master Qui-Gon Jinn. After becoming disillusioned with the corruption within the Galactic Republic's Senate and losing his faith in the Jedi Order, he eventually falls to the dark side of the Force and becomes Darth Sidious' second Sith apprentice, after Darth Maul. Dooku plays a pivotal role in Sidious' rise to power, leading the Confederacy of Independent Systems (made up of numerous planetary systems seeking independence from the Republic) throughout the Clone Wars, all the while engineering the creation of the Republic's clone army. Although Dooku hopes this will allow him to rule the galaxy alongside Sidious, as well as eventually overthrow him, he is ultimately betrayed by his master who arranges his death at the hands of his replacement, Anakin Skywalker, falling to the dark side and becoming Darth Vader. Dooku's character and Christopher Lee's portrayal in the prequel films were met with generally positive reactions from fans and critics. Since the release of the films, Dooku has been highlighted as one of the best Star Wars villains, and a foil for Anakin Skywalker, whose transformation into Darth Vader is foreshadowed through Dooku's own fall to the dark side.