Shayne Gostisbehere (/ɡɑːstɪsbɛər/ gaws-TIHS-bair; born April 20, 1993) is an American professional ice hockey defenseman for the Detroit Red Wings of the National Hockey League (NHL). Gostisbehere was born in Pembroke Pines, Florida, and began playing hockey with the youth affiliate of the Florida Panthers. Halfway through high school, he transferred from Marjory Stoneman Douglas in Florida to South Kent School in South Kent, Connecticut. From there, he moved to Schenectady, New York, where he played three seasons of college ice hockey with the Union Dutchmen of the ECAC Hockey conference, helping to take the team to their first NCAA championship title in 2014. Gostisbehere was named the tournament's Most Outstanding Player, and was a finalist for the 2014 Hobey Baker Award. During this time, he helped take Team USA to a gold medal at the 2013 World Junior Ice Hockey Championships. The Flyers selected Gostisbehere in the third round, 78th overall, of the 2012 NHL Entry Draft, and he signed an entry-level contract with the team in 2014. After only a handful of appearances with the Flyers and their American Hockey League (AHL) affiliate, the Adirondack Phantoms, Gostisbehere suffered an ACL tear that benched him for most of the 2014–15 season. That fall began a record-breaking season for Gostisbehere, whose 15-game point streak was the longest of any rookie defenseman in the NHL. He became the youngest Flyer to receive the Barry Ashbee Trophy for best team defenseman, and was a runner-up for the Calder Memorial Trophy. That summer, he represented Team North America at the 2016 World Cup of Hockey. After a lackluster sophomore season, a successful pairing with fellow two-way defenseman Ivan Provorov for most of the 2017–18 season helped Gostisbehere secure his second Barry Ashbee Trophy in three years. From that point, a recurring knee injury began to impact Gostisbehere's career. He was initially injured in October 2019 during a game against the Colorado Avalanche, and dropped from 65 points the year prior to only 37 points in the 2018–19 season. An acute injury to the knee in January 2020 forced Gostisbehere to undergo arthroscopy, and his performance continued to suffer when he was brought back prematurely from the surgery. Gostisbehere underwent a second arthroscopic surgery during the NHL's COVID-19 shutdown and helped the Flyers advance over the Montreal Canadiens in the 2020 Stanley Cup playoffs. He struggled to find a rhythm the following year, after missing the first six games of the season to COVID-19, and was further limited by a placement on waivers, another knee injury, and a two-game suspension that May. Difficulties managing the salary cap imposed by the NHL for the 2021–22 season forced the Flyers to trade Gostisbehere to Arizona in July 2021.