Fast & Furious 6 (titled on-screen as Furious 6, and in Japan as Wild Speed: Euro Mission) is a 2013 action film directed by Justin Lin and written by Chris Morgan. It is the sequel to Fast Five (2011) and the sixth installment in the Fast & Furious franchise. The film stars Vin Diesel as Dominic Toretto and Paul Walker as Brian O'Conner, alongside Dwayne Johnson, Michelle Rodriguez, Jordana Brewster, Tyrese Gibson, Chris "Ludacris" Bridges, Sung Kang, Luke Evans, Gina Carano, and John Ortiz. In the film, Toretto, O'Conner, and their team are offered pardons for their crimes in exchange for helping DSS agent Luke Hobbs (Johnson) apprehend a mercenary organization led by former British SAS major Owen Shaw (Evans), one member of which is Toretto's former lover Letty Ortiz (Rodriguez). A sixth film was planned as early as February 2010, prior to the production of Fast Five; this was confirmed in April 2011, after Morgan began writing the screenplay, while the returns of Diesel, Lin, and producer Neal H. Moritz were confirmed that June. Discussions arose filming alongside a potential seventh installment; these were abandoned once principal photography began in July 2012, which lasted until that December, with filming locations including Los Angeles, London, Glasgow, and the Canary Islands. Similarly to its predecessor, Fast & Furious 6 featured mostly practical stuntwork, which required designed specialty vehicles in order to be completed. Brian Tyler, the composer of the previous three installments, did not return due to scheduling conflicts and was replaced with Lucas Vidal. Fast & Furious 6 is also the last film in the franchise released in Paul Walker's lifetime, as he died in a single-vehicle accident on November 30, 2013. Fast & Furious 6 premiered at Empire, Leicester Square on May 7, 2013, and was then first released in the United Kingdom on May 17, and in the United States on May 24, by Universal Pictures. The film received generally positive reviews from critics, with praise for Lin's direction, cast performances and action sequences. It grossed $788.7 million, making it the sixth-highest-grossing film of 2013, the then-third highest grossing film distributed by Universal, and the then-highest grossing film in the franchise. It was followed by Furious 7 in 2015.