Regular Show (known as Regular Show in Space during its eighth and final season) is an American animated sitcom created by J. G. Quintel for Cartoon Network. It ran from September 6, 2010, to January 16, 2017, over the course of eight seasons and 245 episodes. The series follows the daily lives of two 23-year old friends, Mordecai (a bluejay) and Rigby (a raccoon), who work at a local park as groundskeepers. Their coworkers are Skips (a yeti), Muscle Man and Hi-Five Ghost. Other characters include: Pops, a lollipop-shaped man and the park's manager, and the duo's boss Benson, a gumball machine. The duo spend their days slacking off and avoiding work to entertain themselves by any means, which leads to surrealistic, extreme and supernatural misconduct. Many of Regular Show's characters were loosely based on those developed for Quintel's student films at California Institute of the Arts: The Naive Man from Lolliland and 2 in the AM PM. The former was one of the winners of the 2005 Nicktoons Film Festival and received international attention after being broadcast on Nicktoons Network. Quintel pitched Regular Show for Cartoon Network's Cartoonstitute project, in which the network allowed young artists to create pilots with no notes, which would possibly be optioned as shows. The series premiered on September 6, 2010, on Cartoon Network. The series has received acclaim from critics and has developed a following of all ages, although it has garnered controversy for its dark humor, sexual innuendos, violence and mature themes. Regular Show was a ratings success for Cartoon Network and was nominated for several awards, including seven Annie Awards, six Primetime Emmy Awards – one of which it won for the episode "Eggscellent" (season 3, episode 17) – and three British Academy Children's Awards. A film based on the series, titled Regular Show: The Movie, premiered in 2015. After eight seasons and 245 episodes, the series concluded on January 16, 2017, with the 33-minute finale "A Regular Epic Final Battle".