The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, adopted by all United Nations members in 2015, created 17 world Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). They were created with the aim of "peace and prosperity for people and the planet..." – while tackling climate change and working to preserve oceans and forests. The SDGs emphasize the interconnected environmental, social and economic aspects of sustainable development by putting sustainability at their center. The short titles of the 17 SDGs are: No poverty (SDG 1), Zero hunger (SDG 2), Good health and well-being (SDG 3), Quality education (SDG 4), Gender equality (SDG 5), Clean water and sanitation (SDG 6), Affordable and clean energy (SDG 7), Decent work and economic growth (SDG 8), Industry, innovation and infrastructure (SDG 9), Reduced inequalities (SDG 10), Sustainable cities and communities (SDG 11), Responsible consumption and production (SDG 12), Climate action (SDG 13), Life below water (SDG 14), Life on land (SDG 15), Peace, justice, and strong institutions (SDG 16), and Partnerships for the goals (SDG 17). Despite the ambitious goals set, reports and outcomes indicate a challenging path. Most, if not all, of the goals are unlikely to be met by 2030, with rising inequalities, climate change, and biodiversity loss among the critical concerns threatening progress. The COVID pandemic exacerbated these challenges. While some regions, such as Asia, have experienced significant setbacks, the global effort towards the SDGs calls for prioritizing environmental sustainability, understanding the indivisible nature of the goals, and seeking synergies across sectors. Political impact assessments of the SDGs suggest they have mainly influenced global and national debates, leading to discursive effects, but have struggled to achieve transformative changes in policy and institutional structures. The pandemic impacted all 17 goals, emphasizing the interconnectedness of global health, economic, social, and environmental challenges. The uneven prioritization of goals, with a tendency to favor socio-economic objectives over environmental ones, reflects longstanding national development policies, complicating the global endeavor towards sustainable development. Funding remains a critical issue, with significant financial resources required across continents to achieve the SDGs. While the UN, other international organizations, and national governments are mobilizing efforts, the role of private investment and need for a shift towards sustainable financing, are increasingly recognized as essential for realizing the SDGs. Amidst these challenges, examples of progress from countries demonstrate the potential for achieving sustainable development through concerted global action.