The Adventures of Tintin (also known as The Adventures of Tintin: The Secret of the Unicorn) is a 2011 animated epic action-adventure film based on Hergé's comic book series of the same name. It was directed by Steven Spielberg, who produced the film with Peter Jackson and Kathleen Kennedy. Steven Moffat, Edgar Wright, and Joe Cornish wrote the screenplay for the film. It stars Jamie Bell as Tintin, Andy Serkis, and Daniel Craig. In the film, Tintin, Snowy and Captain Haddock (Serkis) searches for the treasure of the Unicorn, a ship once captained by Haddock's ancestor Sir Francis Haddock, but they face dangerous pursuit by Ivan Ivanovitch Sakharine (Craig), who is the descendant of Sir Francis's nemesis Red Rackham. Spielberg and Hergé admired each other's work; the director acquired the film rights to The Adventures of Tintin after the author's death in 1983, and re-optioned them in 2002. Filming was due to begin in October 2008 for a 2010 release, but the release was delayed to 2011 after Universal Pictures backed out of producing the film with Paramount Pictures, which had provided $30 million in pre-production; Columbia Pictures replaced Universal as co-financer. The delay resulted in Thomas Brodie-Sangster, who was originally cast as Tintin, departing and being replaced by Bell. The film draws inspiration from the Tintin volumes The Crab with the Golden Claws (1941), The Secret of the Unicorn (1943) and Red Rackham's Treasure (1944). Principal photography began in January 2009 and finished that July, with a combination of voice acting, motion capture and traditional computer animation being used. The Adventures of Tintin premiered in Brussels, Hergé's home region, on 22 October 2011. It was theatrically released in Europe by Sony Pictures Releasing International on 26 October and in the United States by Paramount on 21 December 2011 in Digital 3D and IMAX 3D formats. The film received positive reviews from critics, who praised the stylized motion capture animation (particularly the faithful character designs to Hergé's works), visual effects, action sequences, cast performances and musical score. The film was positively compared to Spielberg's Raiders of the Lost Ark (1981). The Adventures of Tintin was also a commercial success, grossing over $374 million, and received numerous awards and nominations, including being the first motion-captured animated film (and first non-Pixar film) to win the Golden Globe Award for Best Animated Feature Film, while John Williams was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Original Score. A sequel directed by Jackson has been announced, but has since stalled in development hell.