The Orthodox Church of Ukraine (Ukrainian: Православна церква України, romanized: Pravoslavna tserkva Ukrainy; OCU), also called Ukrainian Orthodox Church, is an Eastern Orthodox church in Ukraine. It is one of 16 autocephalous Eastern Orthodox churches, 15th listed in diptych. The Eastern Orthodox Church partially recognizes the Orthodox Church of Ukraine as the only canonical successor of the Metropolitanate of Kyiv, while the Catholic Church recognizes the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church as the only canonical successor. The church was established under the ecclesiastical jurisdiction of the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople by a unification council that convened in Kyiv on 15 December 2018. The Ecumenical Patriarch — Bartholomew I — granted a tomos of autocephaly (decree of ecclesial independence) to the Church on 5 January 2019. The unification council united two Ukrainian Orthodox major jurisdictions: the Ukrainian Orthodox Church – Kyiv Patriarchate (UOC-KP) and the Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox Church (UAOC). Two bishops formerly of the Ukrainian Orthodox Church (Moscow Patriarchate) also joined. The unification council elected the Metropolitan of Pereiaslav-Khmelnytskyi and Bila Tserkva — Epiphanius Dumenko — as its primate and as Metropolitan of Kyiv and All Ukraine. It was also agreed by the council that those "Orthodox Christians of Ukrainian provenance in the Orthodox diaspora" should be subject to the jurisdiction of the diocesan bishops of the Ecumenical Patriarchate (per (Article 4 of the Statute). This provision is also enshrined in the OCU's tomos of autocephaly. In March 2019, Metropolitan Epiphanius said that the transfer of parishes of the dissolved Kyiv Patriarchate to the jurisdiction of the Ecumenical Patriarchate had already begun. The establishment of the OCU and its recognition by other autocephalic Orthodox Churches has been opposed by the Russian Orthodox Church as well as by the Government of Russia. According to different sources, the Orthodox Church of Ukraine or the Ukrainian Orthodox Church (Moscow Patriarchate) is the largest church in Ukraine, both of which have claimed full independence and autonomy.