The Lego Movie 2: The Second Part is a 2019 animated adventure comedy film produced by Warner Animation Group, Lego System A/S, Rideback, Lord Miller Productions, and Vertigo Entertainment, and distributed by Warner Bros. Pictures. It was directed by Mike Mitchell from a screenplay by Phil Lord and Christopher Miller. The film is the sequel to The Lego Movie (2014) and the fourth installment in The Lego Movie franchise, while being the last film of the series produced and distributed by Warner Bros. Pictures. The film stars Chris Pratt, Elizabeth Banks, Will Arnett, Charlie Day, Alison Brie, Nick Offerman, and Will Ferrell reprising their roles from the previous film, while new cast members include Stephanie Beatriz, Tiffany Haddish, and Maya Rudolph. In addition to Pratt reprising his role, he also voiced a new character. A collaboration between production houses from the United States, Australia, and Denmark, the film takes place five years after the events of Taco Tuesday and follows Emmet Brickowski (Pratt), Lucy (Banks) and their friends, who travel into the Systar System to test their skills and creativity, while Emmet deals with a coming cataclysm known as "Armamageddon". Plans for a sequel to The Lego Movie began in February 2014 and were announced to be in the works, four days before the release of the first film. It was announced that the film would be directed by Chris McKay while Phil Lord and Christopher Miller remained as writers and producers in March 2014. The film has since undergone many changes, such as rewrites, directors, and release dates, with Mike Mitchell being later announced as the new director in February 2017. Production for the film began in October 2017, with the majority of the cast members returning to voice the characters in mid-2018, along with the new cast. As with all its previous installments in the franchise, the animation was provided by Animal Logic. To improve on-screen detail and depth-of-field, the production of the film took advantage of the latest update to its trace renderer Glimpse. Mark Mothersbaugh, who composed The Lego Movie and The Lego Ninjago Movie, returned to composed the film's musical score, with artists such as Dillon Francis, Beck, Robyn and The Lonely Island performing new original songs for the film. The Lego Movie 2: The Second Part premiered in Los Angeles on February 2, 2019, and was released in the United States on February 8, 2019. It received generally positive reviews. Despite grossing $199.6 million worldwide against a budget of $99 million, the film became the franchise's second box office disappointment after The Lego Ninjago Movie, which led Warner Bros. to sell the rights of The Lego Movie franchise to Universal Pictures, which was later set for a five-year deal. A new film under this partnership is in development.