Turbo is a 2013 American animated sports comedy film produced by DreamWorks Animation and distributed by 20th Century Fox. The film was directed by David Soren (in his feature directorial debut) from a screenplay he co-wrote with Darren Lemke and Robert Siegel. It stars the voices of Ryan Reynolds, Paul Giamatti, Michael Peña, Snoop Dogg, Maya Rudolph, Michelle Rodriguez, and Samuel L. Jackson. Set in Los Angeles, the film follows an ordinary garden snail Theo/Turbo (Reynolds) who pursues his dream of winning the Indy 500 after a freak accident gives him superspeed. Soren came up with the idea for the film. He conceptualized The Fast & The Furious (2001) with snails, and won the competition. DreamWorks Animation bought the idea, and let it "simmer" for more than five years. After Soren and his family moved into a new home with a backyard infested with snails, he pushed for the idea and "got it back on the fast track." For the racing side of the film, Soren was inspired by his six-year-old son's fascination with race cars. Turbo premiered at the CineEurope on May 20, 2013, and was theatrically released in the United States on July 17, 2013. It was met with moderate positive reviews, with praise for the animation, humor, and voice acting, but criticized for its lack of originality. This was the first film to not use the News Corporation byline since 20th Century Fox was bought by 21st Century Fox in 2013. Despite earning $282.5 million on a $127 million budget, the film underperformed at the box office, prompting the studio to take a $15.6 million write-down on behalf of the film. A television series based on the film, titled Turbo Fast, with only Ken Jeong and Michael Patrick Bell reprising their roles, was put into production a year before the film's release, and it first aired on Netflix on December 24, 2013. The film was dedicated to character effects animator Nicholas Sanger Hoppe, who died from complications relating to his brain cancer positive diagnosis before the film was released.