Winnie the Pooh is a 2011 American animated musical comedy film produced by Walt Disney Animation Studios and released by Walt Disney Pictures. It is based on the book series of the same name written by A. A. Milne and illustrated by E. H. Shepard. The film is a revival of Disney's Winnie the Pooh franchise and the fifth theatrical Winnie the Pooh film released (either animated and overall), and the second in the Disney Animated Canon. It was directed by Stephen Anderson and Don Hall (in his feature directorial debut), and produced by Peter Del Vecho and Clark Spencer, based on a story that Anderson and Hall conceived with Clio Chiang, Don Dougherty, Kendelle Hoyer, Brian Kesinger, Nicole Mitchell, and Jeremy Spears. Jim Cummings reprises his voice roles as Winnie the Pooh and Tigger, and Travis Oates reprises his voice role as Piglet, while newcomers Tom Kenny, Craig Ferguson, Bud Luckey, and Kristen Anderson-Lopez provide the voices of Rabbit, Owl, Eeyore, and Kanga, respectively. In the film, which is narrated by John Cleese, the aforementioned residents of the Hundred Acre Wood embark on a quest to save Christopher Robin from an imaginary culprit while Pooh deals with a hunger for honey. Production began in September 2008 with Disney Animation's chief creative officer John Lasseter announcing that Disney wanted to create a film that would "transcend generations". The film was planned to feature five stories from the A. A. Milne books, before the final cut ended up drawing inspiration from three stories. The film features six songs by Kristen Anderson-Lopez and Robert Lopez and a score composed by Henry Jackman, as well as a rendition of the Sherman Brothers' "Winnie the Pooh" theme song by actress and musician Zooey Deschanel. With a runtime of 63 minutes, it is Disney's shortest theatrical film to date, surpassing the 64 minutes of Dumbo (1941). The film is also the first sequel produced by Walt Disney Animation Studios in twelve years since Fantasia 2000 (1999). Winnie the Pooh premiered at the Roy E. Disney Animation Building on the Walt Disney Studios lot in Burbank, California on July 10, 2011, and was released in the United States on July 15. The film grossed over $50 million on a $30 million budget and received generally positive reviews from critics, who praised its evocations of nostalgia but criticized its short runtime. Though it is Disney Animation's most recent traditionally animated theatrical feature film, producer Peter Del Vecho and Frozen directors Chris Buck and Jennifer Lee confirmed in 2019 that there would be possibilities for hand-drawn feature films in the future.