The Cinema of India, consisting of motion pictures made by the Indian film industry, has had a large effect on world cinema since the late 20th century. Indian cinema is made up of various film industries, including Hindi cinema, which makes motion pictures in the Hindi language and is one of the biggest film industries in the country. In 2021, Telugu cinema became the largest film industry in India in terms of box-office. Major centers of film production across the country include Mumbai, Hyderabad, Chennai, Kolkata, Kochi, Bangalore, Bhubaneswar-Cuttack and Guwahati. For a number of years the Indian film industry has ranked first in the world in terms of annual film output. In 2022, Indian cinema earned ₹15,000 crore at the box-office. Indian cinema is composed of multilingual and multi-ethnic film art. In 2022, Hindi cinema represented 33% of box office revenue, followed by Telugu representing 20%, Tamil representing 16%, Kannada representing 8% and Malayalam representing 6%. Other prominent film industries are that of Bengali, Marathi, Odia, Punjabi, Gujarati and Bhojpuri. As of 2022, the combined revenue of South Indian film industries have surpassed that of the Mumbai-based Hindi-language film industry (Bollywood). As of 2022, Telugu cinema leads Indian cinema's box-office revenue. Indian cinema is a global enterprise and its films have attracted international attention and acclaim throughout South Asia. Since the inception of Indian cinema in 1913, Hindi cinema enjoyed the position of top film industry, but in recent years other industries started giving tough competition to it. Overseas Indians account for 12% of revenue for the industry. Major film production houses in India are Arka Media Works, UV Creations, Aashirvad Cinemas, AGS Entertainment, Ajay Devgn FFilms, AVM Productions, Dharma Productions, Eros International, Geetha Arts, Hombale Films, Lyca Productions, Modern Theatres, Reliance Entertainment, Red Chillies Entertainment, Mythri Movie Makers, Salman Khan Films, Sun Pictures, Suresh Productions, UTV Motion Pictures, Yash Raj Films and Zee Entertainment Enterprises.