A Quiet Place is a 2018 American post-apocalyptic science fiction horror film directed by John Krasinski and written by Scott Beck and Bryan Woods and Krasinski, from a story conceived by Woods and Beck. The plot revolves around a mother (Emily Blunt) and father (Krasinski) who struggle to survive and raise their children (Millicent Simmonds and Noah Jupe) in a post-apocalyptic world inhabited by blind extraterrestrial creatures with an acute sense of hearing. Beck and Woods developed the concept for the story while in college, and began writing the screenplay in January 2016. They told Platinum Dunes producers that they wanted Blunt for the role of the mother. In July 2016, Krasinski read their script for the role of the father. He spoke with Blunt about his ideas for the story, and she suggested he direct the film. Blunt initially did not take the role, but later felt connected to the story after reading the script. The two collaborated on ideas for the film during pre-production. Krasinski was announced as director, co-writer, and co-star with Blunt in March 2017. Filming took place in upstate New York from May to November 2017. A Quiet Place premiered at South by Southwest on March 9, 2018, and was released in the United States on April 6, 2018, by Paramount Pictures. It grossed more than $350 million worldwide and received critical acclaim. The film was chosen by the National Board of Review and American Film Institute as one of the top ten films of 2018. It was nominated for several awards, including the Golden Globe Award for Best Original Score, Academy Award for Best Sound Editing, Writers Guild of America Award for Best Original Screenplay, and Blunt won the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Supporting Role. A sequel, A Quiet Place Part II, premiered in New York City on March 8, 2020 and was released in the United States on May 28, 2021, with Krasinski returning as director and the main cast also returning with the addition of Cillian Murphy and Djimon Hounsou. A spinoff, titled A Quiet Place: Day One, and a second sequel, A Quiet Place Part III, are scheduled to be released on June 28, 2024 and in 2025, respectively, expanding the A Quiet Place universe.