The Angry Birds Movie 2 is a 2019 animated comedy film based on Rovio Entertainment's Angry Birds video game series, produced by Columbia Pictures, Sony Pictures Animation, and Rovio Entertainment, and distributed by Sony Pictures Releasing. The sequel to The Angry Birds Movie (2016), the film was directed by Thurop Van Orman (in his directorial debut) and co-directed by John Rice from a screenplay by Peter Ackerman, Eyal Podell and Jonathon E. Stewart. It is an international co-production between the Finland and the United States. Jason Sudeikis, Josh Gad, Danny McBride, Maya Rudolph, Tony Hale, Anthony Padilla, Bill Hader, and Peter Dinklage reprise their voice roles from the first film, with newcomers Leslie Jones, Rachel Bloom, Awkwafina, Sterling K. Brown, Pete Davidson, Zach Woods, Dove Cameron, Lil Rel Howery, Eugenio Derbez, Tiffany Haddish, JoJo Siwa, and Brooklynn Prince joining the ensemble voice cast. In the film, birds Red (Sudeikis), Chuck (Gad), Bomb (McBride), and Silver (Bloom), are forced to team up with pigs Leonard (Hader), Courtney (Awkwafina), and Garry (Brown) to foil plans by Zeta (Jones) and the rest of the eagles on Eagle Island when an ice ball from Zeta's advanced super-weapon threatens both of their Islands. Production on a sequel to The Angry Birds Movie began in August 2016. New ideas for the film were conceived with the premise being that the birds and pigs work together to save themselves, which very rarely happens in most Angry Birds games. New characters for the film were announced in March 2019 along with new cast members. The animators were tasked with attempting to create more realistic feather systems for the Birds' plumage and designing visual effects for snow, ice, water and lava for the film. Heitor Pereira returned to compose the film's score with artists such as Kesha and Luke Combs contributing tracks for the film. It also features eighteen classical pop songs from the 1960s to 2000s decades from famous artists and different genres from the soundtrack, like the first film. The Angry Birds Movie 2 was theatrically released on August 2, 2019, in the United Kingdom and Ireland, in Finland on August 7, and in the United States on August 14 in RealD 3D formats. While the film was not as successful as its predecessor, grossing $152.8 million on a $65 million budget, it received positive reviews from critics.