Utrecht University (UU; Dutch: Universiteit Utrecht, formerly Rijksuniversiteit Utrecht) is a public research university in Utrecht, Netherlands. Established 26 March 1636 (388 years ago) (1636-03-26), it is one of the oldest universities in the Netherlands. In 2022, it had an enrollment of 37,675 students, and employed 8,584 faculty members and staff. More than 400 PhD degrees were awarded and 8,500 scientific articles were published. The university's 2022 budget was €2.606 billion, consisting of €1.067 billion for the university and €1.539 billion for the University Medical College Utrecht. The university's interdisciplinary research targets life sciences, pathways to sustainability, dynamics of youth, and institutions for open societies. Its teaching and research are strongly connected where equality, diversity, and inclusion are valued. Utrecht University counts a number of distinguished scholars among its alumni and faculty, including 12 Nobel Prize laureates, 1 Pulitzer Prize, 19 Spinoza Prize and 2 NWO Stevin Prize laureates. The university counts several heads of state and government amongst its graduates, including: 4 members of Dutch royal house, 6 Prime Ministers of the Netherlands, An American Founding Father and signatory to the United States Constitution Hugh Williamson, 1 Prime Minister of United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland: William Pitt, 1st Earl of Chatham, an ancestor of both Winston Churchill and Diana, Princess of Wales, First Lord of the Treasury: Charles Spencer, 3rd Earl of Sunderland, 4 foreign heads of state or government, and 35 Ministers of the Cabinet of the Netherlands. An English economist Nicholas Barbon who was one of the first proponents of the free market studied at Utrecht University. A French philosopher, scientist, and mathematician René Descartes who developed the techniques of analytical geometry briefly studied at university. Utrecht University alumni have won a total of 10 gold Olympic medal. Utrecht University is led by the University Board, consisting of Henk Kummeling (Rector Magnificus), Anton Pijpers (chair), Margot van der Starre (Vice Chair) and Anneloes Krul (Student Assessor).Close ties are harboured with other institutions internationally through its membership in the Coimbra Group (CG), the League of European Research Universities (LERU), the Utrecht Network and the European University Association (EUA).