Greensboro (/ˈɡriːnzbʌroʊ/ ; local pronunciation /ˈɡriːnzbʌrəl/) is a city in and the county seat of Guilford County, North Carolina, United States. At the 2020 census, its population was 299,035; it was estimated to be 301,115 in 2022. It is the third-most populous city in North Carolina after Charlotte and Raleigh and the 69th-most populous city in the United States. The population of the Greensboro-High Point, NC Metropolitan Statistical Area was estimated to be 789,842 in 2023. The Piedmont Triad region, of which Greensboro is the most populous city, had an estimated population of 1,736,099 in 2023. In 1808, Greensboro was planned around a central courthouse square to succeed Guilford Court House as the county seat. The county courts were thus placed closer to the county's geographical center, a location more easily reached at the time by the majority of the county's citizens, who traveled by horse or on foot. Three major Interstate Highways (Interstate 40, Interstate 85, and Interstate 73) in the Piedmont region of central North Carolina were built to intersect at this city. Among Greensboro's many notable attractions, some of the most popular are the Greensboro Science Center, the International Civil Rights Museum, The Steven Tanger Center for the Performing Arts, the Weatherspoon Art Museum, the Greensboro Symphony, and the Greensboro Ballet. Annual events in the city include the North Carolina Folk Festival, First Fridays in Downtown Greensboro, Fun Fourth of July Festival, North Carolina Comedy Festival, and Winter Wonderlights. From 2015 to 2017, Greensboro hosted the National Folk Festival. The Greensboro Coliseum Complex hosts a variety of major sporting events, concerts, and other events, including the ACC men's basketball tournament and women's basketball tournament. Local professional teams include the Greensboro Grasshoppers of the South Atlantic Baseball League, the Greensboro Swarm of the NBA G League, and the semi-professional Carolina Dynamo soccer club of USL League Two. Amateur teams include Greensboro Roller Derby and college teams in four NCAA programs. The Sedgefield Country Club is currently host to the annual PGA Tour event Wyndham Golf Championship. Greensboro would serve as the Atlantic Coast Conference headquarters for 70 years, until the league relocated to Charlotte, North Carolina in 2023.