Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd. (Korean: 삼성전자; Hanja: 三星電子; RR: Samseong Jeonja; lit. Tristar Electronics; sometimes shortened to SEC and stylized as SΛMSUNG) is a South Korean multinational major appliance and consumer electronics corporation headquartered in Yeongtong-gu, Suwon, South Korea. It is currently the pinnacle of the Samsung chaebol, accounting for 70% of the group's revenue in 2012. Samsung Electronics has played a key role in the group's corporate governance due to cross ownership. Samsung Electronics has assembly plants and sales networks in 74 countries and employs more than 270,000 people. It is majority-owned by foreign investors. As of 2019,[update] Samsung Electronics is the world's second-largest technology company by revenue, and its market capitalization stood at US$520.65 billion, the 12th largest in the world. Samsung has been the world's largest manufacturer of mobile phones and smartphones since 2011, and is best known for its Samsung Galaxy brand. It has developed 5G-capable smartphones, including the Galaxy S23 and foldable phones, including the Galaxy Z Fold 5. The company is a major vendor of tablet computers, particularly its Android-powered Samsung Galaxy Tab collection, and is regarded for developing the phablet market with the Samsung Galaxy Note family of devices. Samsung has also been the world's largest television manufacturer since 2006. The company is a major manufacturer of electronic components such as lithium-ion batteries, semiconductors, image sensors, camera modules, and displays for clients such as Apple, Sony, HTC, and Nokia. It is also the world's largest semiconductor memory manufacturer and, from 2017 to 2018, had been the largest semiconductor company in the world, briefly dethroning Intel, the decades-long champion. In 2012, Kwon Oh-hyun was appointed the company's CEO. He announced in October 2017 that he would resign in March 2018, citing an "unprecedented crisis". The company had three CEOs (Ki Nam Kim, Hyun Suk Kim, and Dong-Jin Koh) from March 2018 until December 2021, when the business units were reorganized and they were replaced by Kyung Kye-Hyun and Han Jong-hee. It has also had a separate regional CEO, HC Hong, who led the business in Southwest Asia since 2015 and then moved to Latin America in 2020.