Storks is a 2016 American animated buddy slapstick adventure comedy film co-produced by Warner Bros. Pictures Animation, RatPac-Dune Entertainment and Stoller Global Solutions, and distributed by Warner Bros. Pictures. It was directed by Nicholas Stoller and Doug Sweetland (in Sweetland's feature directorial debut), and written by Stoller, who also produced the film with Brad Lewis. The film stars the voices of Andy Samberg, Katie Crown, Kelsey Grammer, Jennifer Aniston, Ty Burrell, Keegan-Michael Key, Jordan Peele and Danny Trejo. The film follows a hotshot package delivering stork Junior (Samberg) and his female human partner Tulip (Crown), working at the distribution center of an enormous online store, Cornerstore.com, situated high in the mountains. After a boy named Nate Gardner (Anton Starkman) sends a letter to the company, the two accidentally create a female baby using the defunct baby factory the storks had formerly used in their original business of making and delivering babies. In order to protect the baby from the company's manager and ensure Junior's promotion to succeed him, the two set off on a journey to deliver the baby to the boy's family. After Warner Animation Group was founded in January 2013, the project was announced, with Sweetland attached to direct the film, while Stoller was hired by the studio to create and write the film. It was announced in April 2015 that Stoller and Sweetland would co-direct the film, and Stoller would produce the film alongside Lewis. The main cast was announced soon after. Mychael and Jeff Danna composed the film's musical score. The animation was provided by Sony Pictures Imageworks. Storks premiered in Los Angeles on September 17, 2016, and was theatrically released in the United States by Warner Bros. Pictures on September 23, in 3D, IMAX, and conventional formats. The film received generally positive reviews from critics, who praised the animation, humor and voice acting, but criticized the story. It was also a box office success, having earned $183 million worldwide against a $70 million budget.