Tom & Jerry (released as Tom & Jerry: The Movie in the United Kingdom) is a 2021 American live-action/animated slapstick comedy film based on the cartoon characters Tom and Jerry created by William Hanna and Joseph Barbera, produced by Warner Animation Group and distributed by Warner Bros. Pictures. It is the second theatrical film based on the characters, following Tom and Jerry: The Movie (1992). The film is directed by Tim Story and written by Kevin Costello. It stars Chloë Grace Moretz, Michael Peña, Colin Jost, Rob Delaney, Pallavi Sharda, Jordan Bolger, Patsy Ferran, and Ken Jeong in live-action roles, with Nicky Jam, Bobby Cannavale, and Lil Rel Howery in voice roles. The titular duo are voiced by William Hanna via archival recordings, with additional vocals from Kaiji Tang and André Sogliuzzo (though the characters are listed as themselves in the credits). Set in a world co-populated by humans and cartoon animals, the film follows Tom enlisted to catch Jerry, whose presence threatens New York City's fanciest hotel and its planned high-profile Indian-themed wedding. Warner Bros. executives wanted the film to "be what Tom and Jerry is", as "the studio understands how much of its history is rooted in these iconic characters". From a live-action film in 2009, to an animated film in 2015, and to a hybrid film combining live-action and animation in 2018, the film was in development hell, as Warner Bros. tried finding a writer "to pen the right take on the characters". The film also draws inspiration from silent comedies, such as Charlie Chaplin films, as reference for the filmmakers to explore a lot of humor and storytelling associated with silent characters. Other cited influences for the film's story include Home Alone 2: Lost in New York and Dunston Checks In. Many elements from the original cartoons were featured in the film, such as their sound effects, Tom being a jazz pianist, Tom's Rube Goldberg mouse trap, Jerry's heartbeat, Jerry's theft of food and items, and some of William Hanna's voice tracks for the titular duo. The film pays homage to many classic Tom and Jerry shorts, including Mouse Trouble (1944), Mouse in Manhattan (1945), and The Cat Concerto (1947). Tom & Jerry was theatrically released by Warner Bros. Pictures in the United States on February 26, 2021, alongside a one-month streaming release on HBO Max. The film had grossed $136.5 million worldwide, on a $50‒79 million production budget. It received generally negative reviews from critics, who criticized the screenplay for its human cast and lack of ambition, while some praised its blend of animation and live-action, performances, score, entertainment value, nostalgic tone, and faithfulness to the source material. The film was later a success on Netflix.