Andrei Antanasovich Kanchelskis (Ukrainian: Андрій Антанасович Канчельскіс; Russian: Андрей Антанасович Канчельскис; born 23 January 1969) is a professional football manager and former player. He currently manages Kyrgyz Premier League side FC Muras United. During his playing career he won two Premier League titles, the FA Cup, the Football League Cup, two FA Charity Shields and the European Super Cup with Manchester United, before going on to win the Scottish Premier League, Scottish Cup and Scottish League Cup twice each with Glasgow Rangers. Kanchelskis began his career with his hometown team Zirka Kropyvnytskyi in 1986, before transferring to Dynamo Kyiv in the Soviet Top League, and later to rivals Shakhtar Donetsk. He then moved abroad, signing for English club Manchester United, where he helped the team win their first league championship in 26 years. He moved to Everton in 1995 where he spent 18 months, before transferring to Italian club Fiorentina for a record fee for a Soviet-born player. Following an injury-marred spell in Italy, Kanchelskis moved to Scottish club Rangers, where he won a domestic treble in his first season. After falling out of favour, his career became nomadic, playing for Manchester City and Southampton in England, and Saudi club Al Hilal, before playing in Russia for the first time for Saturn Ramenskoye and Krylia Sovetov, where he played his last games before retiring in 2007. Kanchelskis is the only player to have scored in each of the Manchester, Merseyside, and Glasgow derbies. After his playing career had finished, Kanchelskis became the general director of Nosta Novotroitsk in 2008, before moving into club management in 2010, managing Torpedo-ZIL Moscow and Ufa in Russia, and then Latvian team Jūrmala in 2014 for three months. In 2016, Kanchelskis returned to management with Solyaris Moscow, and between 2018 and 2020, he had two spells in charge of Navbahor Namangan in Uzbekistan. Internationally, Kanchelskis represented three different teams. He first played for the Soviet Union in 1989, and scored the nations' last ever goal before the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991. During 1992, he played for the CIS, a brief association of former Soviet republics, who he represented at UEFA Euro 1992. Following the tournament, he elected to represent Russia rather than Ukraine, the country of his birth. After boycotting the team for the 1994 FIFA World Cup, he returned and played for Russia during Euro 1996, and won his last cap in 1998. Overall, Kanchelskis was capped 59 times, scoring seven goals. In his youth career for the Soviet Union U21 team, he won the European U21 Championship in 1990.