Divjakë-Karavasta National Park (Albanian: Parku Kombëtar Divjakë-Karavasta) is a national park in western Albania, sprawling across the Myzeqe Plain in the direct proximity to the Adriatic Sea. The park spans a territory of 222.3 square kilometres (22,230 ha) containing remarkable features such as wetlands, salt marshes, coastal meadows, floodplains, woodlands, reed beds, forests and estuaries. Because of the park's important and great availability of bird and plant species, it has been identified as an important Bird and Plant Area of international importance. Among the largest in the Mediterranean Sea, the lagoon of Karavasta has been recognised as a wetland of international importance by designation under the Ramsar Convention. It is separated from the Adriatic Sea by a large strip of sand and was formed by the sediments of which has been discharged by the rivers Shkumbin and Seman. Located near the sea, the park experiences mediterranean climate, with temperatures that ranges between 12 °C (54 °F) in February and 24 °C (75 °F) in August. The particular climate has favored the development of a vast array of floral and faunal species with an immense quality. In terms of biogeography, it falls entirely within the Illyrian deciduous forests terrestrial ecoregion of the Palearctic Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and scrub biome. The wealth of fauna is reflected in the list of many species and subspecies recorded to date, with 228 species of birds, 25 species of mammals, 29 species of reptiles and 29 species of amphibia. The wetlands and swamps are abundant in algaes and dense phanerogam grasses. The forests and woodlands are ascertained by a mixture of varied species of deciduous, coniferous and mixed trees, due to the lower river valleys and sea coast. The forests are important because they provide shelter for a large number of animals, including the red fox, golden jackal and roe deer. The park provides important spawning and nursery habitat for economically valuable fish species that are exploited by a local fisheries cooperative. It is also known for the beauty of its natural landscape, its role in the local economy and its touristic appeal. This park offers a wide range of diverse wildlife to the explorers. However, a new resort complex project inside the park has been proposed by the construction giant Mabetex owned by Kosovo-Albanian businessman Behgjet Pacolli, fiercely opposed by environmentalists and local authorities.