A rapid antigen test (RAT), sometimes called a rapid antigen detection test (RADT), antigen rapid test (ART), or loosely just a rapid test, is a rapid diagnostic test suitable for point-of-care testing that directly detects the presence or absence of an antigen. RATs are a type of lateral flow test detecting antigens, rather than antibodies (antibody tests) or nucleic acid (nucleic acid tests). Rapid tests generally give a result in 5 to 30 minutes, require minimal training or infrastructure, and have significant cost advantages.[citation needed] Rapid antigen tests for the detection of SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, have been commonly used during the COVID-19 pandemic. For many years, an early and major class of RATs—the rapid strep tests for streptococci—were so often the referent when RATs or RADTs were mentioned that the two latter terms were often loosely treated as synonymous with those. Since the COVID-19 pandemic, awareness of RATs is no longer limited to health professionals and COVID-19 has become the expected referent, so more precise usage is required in other circumstances. RATs are based on the principle of antigen-antibody interaction. They detect antigens (generally a protein on the surface of a virus). A linear chromatography substrate (a porous piece of material) bears an indicator line, onto which antibodies directed against the target antigen are fixed. Antibodies are also fixed to a visualisation marker (generally a dye, though sometimes these antibodies are modified to fluoresce), to which the sample is added. Any virus particles present will bind to these markers. This mix then travels through the substrate through capillarity. When it reaches the indicator line, virus particles are immobilised by the antibodies fixed there, along with the visualisation marker, allowing concentration and thus visual detection of significant levels of virus in a sample. A positive result with an antigen test should generally be confirmed by RT-qPCR or some other test with higher sensitivity and specificity.