The 183rd Rifle Division was formed as an infantry division of the Red Army following the Soviet occupation of the Baltic states, based on the shtat (table of organization and equipment) of September 13, 1939 and utilizing the personnel of two divisions of the People's Army of Latvia. At the outbreak of war with Germany it was still in Latvia, part of the 24th Rifle Corps of Northwestern Front's 27th Army. It quickly lost strength, both due to combat losses and to the release of some Latvians who were believed to be politically unreliable. In mid-July to took part in 11th Army's counterstroke at Soltsy, which briefly encircled the 8th Panzer Division and delayed the German advance on Leningrad by a week. Following this, the division fell back to the Staraya Russa area. By October it was back in 27th Army and was partly rebuilt with replacements, some coming from the 181st Rifle Division, another Latvian division, which had been disbanded. Later in the month, as part of the new Kalinin Front, it took part in the successful counterstroke against XXXXI Panzer Corps along the road to Torzhok. It was then transferred to 29th Army, in the same Front, and defended against German 9th Army. During the first Rzhev-Vyasma Offensive in January 1942 the 183rd advanced to the outskirts of Rzhev but failed to take it, before being partly and then fully encircled with its Army in early February and suffering heavy casualties. In breaking out its commanding officer was killed. Through the remainder of its service in the Rzhev area it was on the defense, apart from briefly attacking with 30th Army in July/August. In September it left the fighting front for a much-needed rebuilding. Following an extended stay in the Moscow area it was railed south to join 40th Army in Voronezh Front in January 1943. It took part in the encirclement operation of most of German 2nd Army near Kastornoye during that month before being directed to the southwest, liberating the town of Prokhorovka in early February. It remained in this general area through the spring, and defended it during the Battle of Kursk, as part of 69th Army. It saw heavy fighting south of Prokhorovka during the climax of the battle on July 11-12, and was nearly encircled in the following few days when Army Group South attempted to destroy its 48th Rifle Corps. During the following counteroffensive it was part of Steppe Front, and in late August it was awarded a battle honor for its part in the final retaking of Kharkiv. In September it was again removed to the Reserve of the Supreme High Command for rebuilding, and returned in November as part of 1st Guards Army in 1st Ukrainian Front. It played a minor role in defending against the German offensive to retake Kyiv, and in late December it went over to the counterattack as part of 38th Army, reaching to just north of Vinnytsia. When the offensive recommenced in March 1944 the 183rd was recognized for its part in the battle for that city with the award of the Order of the Red Banner. In April it returned to 1st Guards Army, but just before the Lviv–Sandomierz Offensive it was again assigned to 38th Army, where it remained for the duration of the war. During this offensive several of its subunits would be awarded battle honors or decorations for the capture of Lviv. Following this, it moved into the Carpathian Mountains, and took part in the fighting for the Dukla Pass. In November it was moved, with its Army, to 4th Ukrainian Front, where it would remain for the rest of the war. In January 1945 it began advancing again into southern Poland and Slovakia, winning the Order of Suvorov, 2nd Degree, while several of its subunits were given honors for the capture of Jasło. During March and April the 183rd was involved in difficult fighting through Czechoslovakia, including battles for Opava and Ostrava, before ending the war advancing toward Prague. In the immediate aftermath it became one of the most decorated rifle divisions of the Red Army. Despite this, it was finally disbanded in early 1947.