Raya and the Last Dragon (/ˈraɪ.ə/ RYE-ə) is a 2021 American animated fantasy action-adventure film that was produced by Walt Disney Animation Studios and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures. It was directed by Don Hall and Carlos López Estrada, co-directed by Paul Briggs and John Ripa, and produced by Osnat Shurer and Peter Del Vecho. The screenplay, which is based on story ideas by Bradley Raymond and Helen Kalafatic, was primarily written by Qui Nguyen and Adele Lim with additional contributions from other writers. Raya and the Last Dragon stars the voices of Kelly Marie Tran, Awkwafina, Izaac Wang, and Gemma Chan, and follows the warrior princess Raya as she seeks the fabled last dragon to save her father and the land of Kumandra from evil spirits that are known as Druun. Development of the project began in October 2018, and it was officially announced in August 2019, and the title and voice cast were revealed. During production, Disney replaced several cast and crew members, including the initially announced lead actor Cassie Steele, who was replaced with Tran to conform with changes in character and plot. The film is inspired by traditional Southeast Asian cultures. During design and animation, the filmmakers focused on diverse environments and characters while maintaining authentic cultural representation. James Newton Howard composed the film's score. Raya and the Last Dragon was released in theaters in the United States on March 5, 2021, and simultaneously on the streaming platform Disney+ for customers with Premier Access. The release was twice delayed from its November 2020 date due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The film became the third-most-streamed film of 2021 and grossed $130.4 million worldwide. Critics gave the film positive reviews with praise for it's animation, visuals and voice acting but criticism for the limited Southeast Asian representation. It was nominated for several accolades, including an Academy Award for Best Animated Feature, but lost to Encanto, another Disney film that was released the same year.