The 2021 Vuelta a España was a three-week cycling race which took place in Spain between 14 August and 5 September 2021. It was the 76th edition of the Vuelta a España and the third and final grand tour of the 2021 men's road cycling season. The race departed from Burgos and finished in Santiago de Compostela. The race was won by Primož Roglič of Team Jumbo–Visma, his third consecutive victory in the race. He became only the third rider to win the race in three successive years. He won by 4' 42", the largest margin of victory since Alex Zülle won by 5' 07" in 1997. He first took the red jersey on the first stage time trial before relinquishing the jersey to breakaway riders on two occasions. Roglič proceeded to win three more stages, stage 11 to Valdepeñas de Jaén, stage 17 to Lagos de Covadonga, and the final day's time trial in Santiago de Compostela, on his way to overall victory. In second place was Enric Mas of Movistar Team, who put in a consistent performance in the mountains throughout the race to become Roglič's closest rival. Jack Haig of Team Bahrain Victorious took the final step on the podium, finishing 7' 40" behind Roglič. Haig began the Vuelta as a domestique for Mikel Landa, but after Landa's struggles and eventual abandon, Haig became the team's leader. He moved up to third in the penultimate stage after successfully distancing the previous third-placed rider, Miguel Ángel López, with just over 50 kilometres (31 mi) on the stage. Haig then held on to third in the final day time trial, even extending his gap over fourth-placed Adam Yates (Ineos Grenadiers). In the race's other classifications, Fabio Jakobsen of Deceuninck–Quick-Step took the points classification, winning three sprint stages along the way. Michael Storer of Team DSM won the mountains classification. He won two stages from the breakaway before taking the lead in the competition in the final two mountain stages. The young rider classification was won by Gino Mäder of Team Bahrain Victorious, who performed consistently in the mountains while serving as a domestique for first Landa and then Haig. He took the white jersey after following the decisive split in the GC group on the penultimate stage, allowing him to move up to fifth overall ahead of Egan Bernal (Ineos Grenadiers) in sixth place. Team Bahrain Victorious won the team classification while EF Education–Nippo's Magnus Cort, who won three stages, was given the overall combativity award.