The 79th Golden Globe Awards honored the best in film and American television of 2021, as chosen by the Hollywood Foreign Press Association (HFPA). The ceremony took place privately on January 9, 2022. The nominees were announced on December 13, 2021, by rapper Snoop Dogg and HFPA president Helen Hoehne. For the first time since 2008, there was no traditional, televised ceremony. In support of boycotts of the HFPA by various media companies, actors, and other creatives over its lack of action to increase the membership diversity of the organization, the Golden Globes' regular broadcaster NBC declined to televise the 79th Golden Globe Awards. The HFPA ultimately chose to hold the presentation privately, with attendance limited to the organization's beneficiaries, and results announced via press release and highlighted on the Golden Globe Awards' social media pages. The films Belfast and The Power of the Dog were tied for the most nominations, at seven each. The latter tied with Steven Spielberg's West Side Story and HBO's drama Succession with the most awards of the night, with three each. These included the awards for Best Drama Film, Best Musical or Comedy Film and Best Drama Series, respectively. Michaela Jaé Rodriguez made history as the first transgender person to win an acting award at the Golden Globes, winning Best Actress – Television Series Drama for her role as Blanca Rodriguez-Evangelista in Pose. Rachel Zegler also made history as the first actress of Colombian descent and first Latina to win Best Actress – Motion Picture Comedy or Musical for her performance as María in West Side Story, as well as becoming the youngest winner in that category at 20-years-old. She additionally made history as one of the first people born in the 21st century to win a Golden Globe, alongside Billie Eilish (20-years-old at the time) who won Best Original Song for "No Time to Die", theme song to the film of the same name. For his performance as Oh Il-nam in Netflix's Squid Game, O Yeong-su became the first South Korean actor to win an acting award, winning for Best Supporting Actor – Series, Miniseries or Television Film.