Alireza Firouzja (Persian: علیرضا فیروزجا, pronounced [æliːɾeˈzɒː fiːɾuːzˈdʒɒː]; born 18 June 2003) is an Iranian and French chess grandmaster. Firouzja is the youngest player to have surpassed a FIDE rating of 2800, beating the previous record set by Magnus Carlsen by more than five months. A chess prodigy, Firouzja won the Iranian Chess Championship at age 12 and earned the Grandmaster title at 14. At 16, Firouzja became the second youngest 2700-rated player and won a silver medal at the 2019 World Rapid Chess Championship. In November 2021, at 18, he won the FIDE Grand Swiss tournament and an individual gold medal at the European Team Chess Championship. He won a bronze medal at the 2021 World Blitz Chess Championship. In 2022, Firouzja won the Grand Chess Tour. Firouzja left the Iranian Chess Federation in 2019 because of the country's longstanding policy against competing with Israeli players. Subsequently, the FIDE General Assembly passed a resolution instructing national federations to respect the principles of the Olympic movement and the FIDE Charter and to desist from any such boycotts. Firouzja played under the FIDE flag until mid-2021, when he became a French citizen and began representing France, where he had already been living. After Firouzja revoked his Iranian citizenship, the matter sparked debates in Iran as to why he would switch federations, with officials contesting that Firouzja knew about the policy of not playing against Israelis before he accepted funding and financial support from the Iranian Chess Federation and he left because he already had French citizenship. Iranian officials also stated that Firouzja could have switched federations before the Iranian Chess Federation hired Ivan Sokolov to coach him but the French federation does not invest that much in chess which is why Firouzja stayed and took advantage of Iran's funding of chess. Firouzja was also offered billions of tomans (equal to millions of dollars) not to switch federations.