Māori (Māori: [ˈmaːɔɾi] ), or te reo Māori ('the Māori language'), commonly shortened to te reo, is an Eastern Polynesian language and the indigenous language of the Māori people, the indigenous population of mainland New Zealand. A member of the Austronesian language family, it is closely related to Cook Islands Māori, Tuamotuan, and Tahitian. The Maori Language Act 1987 gave the language recognition as one of New Zealand's official languages along side New Zealand Sign Language which was added as an Official language in New Zealand in 2006. There are several regional dialects of the language, all of which are mutually intelligible. Speakers of the Māori language may be called kaikōrero Māori in both English and Māori. Māori Aotearoa lacked a conventional written language or script outside of tā moko. The Māori language is known for its highly metaphorical poetry and prose, often in the form of karakia, whaikōrero, whakapapa and karanga, and in performing arts such as mōteatea, waiata, and haka. It uses the Latin script, which was adopted and the spelling standardised by high-ranking Northern Māori in collaboration English Protestant clergy in the 19th century. Māori was New Zealand’s lingua franca until the 1870s, when it declined due to the increase of the European population and linguistic discrimination through legislation such as the Native Schools Act, which barred the speaking of Māori in schools. The number of speakers of the language fell sharply after 1945, but a Māori-language revitalisation effort that has begun since the late 20th century has helped to slow the decline. The Māori protest movement and the Māori renaissance of the 1970s caused greater social awareness of and support for the language. The spread of kōhanga reo, or Māori-language kindergartens, has helped increase the number of native speakers. The 2018 New Zealand census reported that about 186,000 people, or 4.0% of the New Zealand population, could hold a conversation in Māori about everyday things. As of 2015[update], 55% of Māori adults reported some knowledge of the language; of these, 64% use Māori at home and around 50,000 people can speak the language "very well" or "well". Ideological support for the Māori language remains high among Māori and relatives so among other New Zealanders in general, with the number of second language students increasing by 76% between 2013 and 2023. In Māori culture, the language is considered to be among the greatest of all taonga, or cultural treasures.