PAW Patrol: The Movie is a 2021 Canadian animated action-adventure comedy film based on the television series PAW Patrol created by Keith Chapman. It is directed by Cal Brunker, who co-wrote the screenplay with Billy Frolick and Bob Barlen from a story by Frolick. Several cast members from the main series reprised their roles, including Kingsley Marshall (voicing Marshall), Keegan Hedley (voicing Rubble), Shayle Simons (voicing Zuma), Lilly Bartlam (voicing Skye), and Ron Pardo (voicing both Cap'n Turbot and Mayor Humdinger). They are joined by Iain Armitage (voicing Chase), Marsai Martin, Yara Shahidi, Kim Kardashian, Randall Park, Dax Shepard, Jimmy Kimmel, Tyler Perry, and introducing Will Brisbin in his film debut as Ryder. In the film, Ryder and the PAW Patrol pups are called to Adventure City in order to stop the recently-elected Mayor Humdinger from wreaking havoc. Ronnen Harary announced that Spin Master Entertainment was "considering whether to extend the PAW Patrol franchise into feature films at some point in the next 12 to 24 months" in November 2017. Development for the feature film based on PAW Patrol television series began in February 2020, with Brunker attached to direct, and Barlen and Frolick attached to write the screenplay. From October 2020 to May 2021, the voice casting call began. Production was done remotely during the COVID-19 pandemic. The film was produced almost entirely in Canada; according to Brunker, "95 percent of everything" happened in Canada, with the exception being some audio recording. PAW Patrol: The Movie premiered at the Vue Leicester Square in London on August 8, 2021, and also premiered in the El Capitan Theatre in Hollywood on August 14, and was theatrically released in both Canada and the United States on August 20, 2021. It was also made available on Paramount+ on the same day in the United States. The film received generally positive reviews from critics for its animation, themes, characterization, soundtrack, and action sequences, but criticized for its writing, pacing, and focusing on the show's merchandising arm, and became a box office success, grossing over $151 million worldwide against a production budget of $26 million. A sequel titled PAW Patrol: The Mighty Movie was released on September 29, 2023, featuring elements from the Mighty Pups sub-theme of the main show; a spin-off of the main series, focusing on Liberty, is schedule to premiere on June 6, 2025, while a third film is scheduled for release on July 31, 2026.