Hotel Transylvania: Transformania (also known as Hotel Transylvania 4) is a 2022 American animated adventure comedy film produced by Columbia Pictures and Sony Pictures Animation and released by Amazon Studios. It is the fourth and final installment in the Hotel Transylvania franchise and the sequel to Hotel Transylvania 3: Summer Vacation (2018), the film was directed by Derek Drymon and Jennifer Kluska (in their respective feature-length directorial debuts) from a screenplay by Amos Vernon, Nunzio Randazzo and Genndy Tartakovsky. It stars the voices of Andy Samberg, Selena Gomez (who also served as an executive producer alongside Tartakovsky and Michelle Murdocca), Kathryn Hahn, Jim Gaffigan, Steve Buscemi, Molly Shannon, David Spade, Keegan-Michael Key, Brian Hull, Fran Drescher, Brad Abrell, Asher Blinkoff, Tyler "Ninja" Blevins and Zoe Berri. In the film, Dracula and Johnny (Hull and Samberg) team up to find a crystal in South America to turn themselves back into their old selves, before their transformations become permanent. Plans for a fourth Hotel Transylvania film begin in February 2019 and was announced to be released on December 22, 2021. Returning and new cast and crew members were announced soon after, and Mark Mothersbaugh, who composed the score for the first three installments, returned to score, in addition to original song performed by Yendry. Production took place remotely during the COVID-19 pandemic. Originally planned to be released theatrically in the United States on October 1, 2021, Sony Pictures Releasing cancelled the film's release plans and sold the film's distribution rights to Amazon Studios for $100 million, due to rising cases of the SARS-CoV-2 Delta variant in the United States. Hotel Transylvania: Transformania was released exclusively on Amazon Prime Video on January 14, 2022, and theatrically in China on April 3. The film received mixed reviews from critics with the Rotten Tomatoes critical consensus calling it "middling family viewing -- relatively painless, but overall rather uninspired".