Fallen angels are angels who were expelled from Heaven. The literal term "fallen angel" does not appear in any Abrahamic religious texts, but is used to describe angels cast out of heaven or angels who sinned. Such angels often tempt humans to sin. The idea of fallen angels is derived from the Book of Enoch, a Jewish pseudepigraphic apocalyptic religious text, or the assumption that the "sons of God" (בני האלוהים‎) mentioned in Genesis 6:1–4 are angels. In the period immediately preceding the composition of the New Testament, some sects of Second Temple Judaism identified these same "sons of God" as fallen angels. During the late Second Temple period the Nephilim were considered the monstrous offspring of fallen angels and human women. In such accounts, God sends the Great Deluge to purge the world of these creatures; their bodies are destroyed, yet their peculiar souls survive, thereafter roaming the earth as demons. Rabbinic Judaism and Christian authorities after the third century rejected the Enochian writings and the notion of an illicit union between angels and women producing hybrids. Christian theology indicates the sins of fallen angels occur before the beginning of human history. Accordingly, fallen angels became identified with those led by Lucifer in rebellion against God, also equated with demons. In Islam, belief in fallen angels is disputed. In early Quranic exegesis (tafsīr) there are two distinct opinions in regards of the obedience of angels, often revolving around the nature of Iblis (Satan in Islam). According to the viewpoint of ibn Abbas (619–687), Iblis was an angel created from fire (nār as-samūm), while according to Hasan of Basra (642–728), he was the progenitor of the jinn. Hasan al-Basri argued that angels are unable to sin. To eliminate the possibilities for fallen angels, he further interpretates Harut and Marut, mentioned in 2:102, as malikayn (kings) instead of malā'ikah (angels). Ibn Abbas, on the other hand, asserts that the verse in Surah 18:50 "except Iblis, he was one of the jinn", means "he was one of the inhabitants of paradise" and generally allows the concept of fallen angels within Islamic tradition. Academic scholars have discussed whether or not the Quranic jinn are identical to the biblical fallen angels. Although the different types of spirits in the Quran are sometimes hard to distinguish, the jinn in Islamic traditions seem to differ in their major characteristics from fallen angels. In classical Islamic traditions, the jinn are often thought of as a race of Pre-Adamites, who dwelt on earth. However, their ethereal bodies, as in the Christian conception of fallen angels, would allow them to ascend to heaven to obtain knowledge, thus passing secret information to soothsayers (a notion also corresponding with the Greek Daimon). The Quran also refers to the idea of jinn trying to climb up to heaven. As Patricia Crone points out, one of the characteristics of fallen angels is that they fall from heaven, not that they try to get back to it.