The 2022 Tour de France was the 109th edition of the Tour de France. It started in Copenhagen, Denmark on 1 July 2022 and ended with the final stage on the Champs-Élysées, Paris on 24 July 2022. Denmark's Jonas Vingegaard (Team Jumbo–Visma) won the general classification for the first time. Two-time defending champion Tadej Pogačar (UAE Team Emirates) finished in second place, and former winner Geraint Thomas (Ineos Grenadiers) finished third. This was the first Tour since 1989 in which each of the three podium finishers had made the podium on a previous occasion. The race began in Copenhagen before returning to France. Wout van Aert of Team Jumbo–Visma controlled the lead for much of the first week until Pogačar seized control of the race and won two consecutive stages. In the Alps, Team Jumbo–Visma attacked Pogačar, and Vingegaard became the first rider to take serious time from Pogačar. Vingegaard defended and increased his lead through the Pyrenees and the final individual time trial to secure the victory. He thereby became the first Dane to win the Tour since Bjarne Riis in 1996. The race was affected by climate-change protests as well as a 40 °C (104 °F) heat wave. The race had the fewest number of finishers since 2000, with 17 riders forced to leave the race because of COVID-19, including stage winners Magnus Cort and Simon Clarke, as well as former Tour winner Chris Froome of Israel–Premier Tech. The points classification was won by Wout van Aert with 480 points, breaking Peter Sagan's modern-day record. Vingegaard also won the mountains classification, marking the first time since 1969 that riders from the same team won the yellow and green jerseys as well as the mountains classification. The young rider classification was won by GC runner-up Pogačar, and the team of Ineos Grenadiers won the team classification. Van Aert was chosen as the most combative rider. The race was followed by the first edition of the Tour de France Femmes, which had its first stage on the final day of the men's Tour.