The men's 5000 m competition in speed skating at the 2022 Winter Olympics was held on 6 February, at the National Speed Skating Oval ("Ice Ribbon") in Beijing. The event was won by Nils van der Poel of Sweden. Patrick Roest of the Netherlands won the silver medal, and Hallgeir Engebråten of Norway the bronze medal. For van der Poel and Engebråten these are the first Olympic medals. Van der Poel's medal was the first Olympic medal in speed skating for Sweden since 1988, when Tomas Gustafson won both 5000 m and 10000 m. The defending champion and the Olympic record holder was Sven Kramer. The silver medalist, Ted-Jan Bloemen, qualified for the Olympics as well. The bronze medalist, Sverre Lunde Pedersen, was not selected to skate at the event. Nils van der Poel is the 2021 World Single Distances champion at the 5000 m distance, with Patrick Roest and Sergey Trofimov being the silver and bronze medalist, respectively. Van der Poel was also the world record holder at the start of the Olympics. He was leading the 2021–22 ISU Speed Skating World Cup at long distances with four races completed before the Olympics, followed by Bloemen and Davide Ghiotto. Van der Poel's world record, 6:01.56 in Salt Lake City on 3 December 2021, was thus the season best time. Sven Kramer was skating in the first pair and set the lead in the event. In pair 3, Hallgeir Engebråten improved Kramer's time by over 7 seconds, 0.12 seconds short of Kramer's Olympic record, and Sergey Trofimov became second. In pair 5, Patrick Roest, skating essentially alone, since his competitor was far behind, took the lead, setting a new Olympic record. This situation remained until the last pair, when Nils van der Poel, skating behind the Roest's scheme most of the distance, caught up at the last kilometer and became the champion with the new Olympic record. In the flower ceremony after the race, the three medalists were handed an olympic mascot to take themselves from a board held by Jan Dijkema, President of the International Skating Union, dressed in face mask due to the ongoing pandemic. The medal ceremony was scheduled for the day after the race.