Bedtime Stories is the sixth studio album by American singer Madonna, released on October 25, 1994, by Maverick and Sire Records. In 1992, Madonna released her fifth studio abum Erotica, the coffee table book Sex, and starred in the erotic thriller Body of Evidence. Due to their sexually explicit nature, all three projects were negatively received by critics and fans alike, who felt the singer had "gone too far" and that her career was over. Madonna decided that she needed to soften her image if she wanted to regain her audience. The first attempt was the ballad "I'll Remember" from the soundtrack to the 1994 film With Honors, which gained positive critics and reached the second spot of the Billboard Hot 100. For her sixth studio album, Madonna decided to incorporate R&B elements, and collaborated with Babyface, Dallas Austin, and Dave Hall. She also chose to explore the British club musical scene, where genres such as dub had been growing in popularity, and hired producer Nellee Hooper. A pop, album with elements of R&B and hip hop, Bedtime Stories explores lyrical themes of love and romance, but with a toned-down, less sexual approach. In the song "Human Nature", Madonna explicitly addresses the backlash and controversy surrounding her previous projects, whereas title track "Bedtime Story" saw her working with Icelandic singer Björk. To promote Bedtime Stories, Madonna performed at the 1995 American Music Awards and Brit Awards. A concert tour was planned, but did not take place due to Madonna acquiring the title role in the 1996 musical film Evita. The album yielded two Hot 100 top-three singles, "Secret" and "Take a Bow"; the latter stayed at number one for seven weeks on the chart. Follow-ups "Bedtime Story" and "Human Nature", were both top-ten hits on the UK Singles Chart. Critics reacted positively towards the album, applauding its romantic nature. Additionally, it was nominated for Best Pop Album at the 38th Grammy Awards. The album debuted and peaked at number three on the US Billboard 200 and was certified triple platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). It reached the first spot in Australia, and charted within the top-five in many other countries, including Canada, France, Germany, and the United Kingdom. Worldwide Bedtime Stories has sold an estimated eight million copies. In retrospective reviews, it has been referred to as one of Madonna's most important yet underrated albums. Bedtime Stories has also been credited as album that started the "second phase" of Madonna's career, which began in the mid-to-late 1990s with Evita and 1998's Ray of Light. Critics have also noted influence of the album on the work of contemporary artists.