The Beast (Koinē Greek: Θηρίον, Thērion) may refer to one of three beasts described in the Book of Revelation. Revelation 12 describes a series of wars. First, the dragon opposes "a woman clothed with the sun," then her male child, then Michael and his angels in heaven, then again the woman, and, lastly, the dragon goes away to make war against her other children. In each of the wars, the dragon is defeated. Revelation 13 begins with the dragon standing on the seashore, apparently waiting for reinforcements. From that vantage point, he is joined by two helpers; the beast from the sea (Rev 13:1-10) and the beast from the earth (Rev 13:11-15). In Revelation 13:1–10, the first beast (interpreted as the Antichrist) rises "out of the sea" and is given authority and power by the dragon. It is the image of this beast that persecutes God's people in the second part of Revelation 13 and it is the name of this beast that is put on the foreheads of his followers (Rev 13:16-17). It is described as having features of a leopard, a lion, and a bear, which are three of the animals in Daniel 7, implying that it is a successor of those animals. In Revelation 13:11–18, the second beast, later known as the false prophet, comes "out of the earth," exercises all the authority of the first beast, forces everyone on earth to worship the first beast, and convinces the people, through signs and wonders, to make an image of the first beast. The beast that is mentioned in Revelation 11:7 as emerging from the abyss, is probably the scarlet beast of Revelation 17, which also "come up out of the abyss" (Rev 17:18). While the first beast (the Sea Beast) is not presented as being inferior to another power, the beast of Revelation 17 is subordinate to the harlot sitting on it. It is, therefore, different from the Sea Beast. Two of these beasts, namely the Sea Beast and the Scarlet Beast each have seven heads and ten horns. The dragon also has seven heads and ten horns, implying that these three creatures are of the same species (have the same origin). Since the animals in Daniel 7 have, in total, seven heads and ten horns, it is argued that these three beasts are related to the animals in Daniel 7. In their fight against God, the Sea Beast and the False Prophet join forces with the Dragon. They persecute the "saints" and those who do not "worship the image of the beast [of the sea]" and influence the kings of the earth through three unclean spirits to gather for the battle of Armageddon. The two beasts are defeated by Christ and are thrown into the lake of fire mentioned in Revelation 19:18–20.