The North American Hockey League (NAHL) is one of the top junior hockey leagues in the United States and is in its 49th season of operation in 2023–24. It is the only Tier II junior league sanctioned by USA Hockey, and acts as an alternative for those who would not or did not make the roster of a team in the Major Junior Canadian Hockey League (CHL) nor Tier I United States Hockey League (USHL). The NAHL is one of the oldest junior hockey leagues in the United States and is headquartered in Addison, Texas. The teams span the United States from Maine in the East to Alaska in the Northwest and to Texas in the South. The teams play a 60-game regular season, usually starting on the 2nd weekend in September and ending near Mid-April(2020-21 season is exception, the season started in late 2020-early 2021 due to the Covid-19 Pandemic). The top teams of the NAHL playoffs meet in a predetermined location to play in the Robertson Cup Championship Tournament. Under USA Hockey Tier II sanctioning, NAHL teams do not charge players to play and also provide players with uniforms, team clothing and select equipment such as sticks, gloves and helmets. Players without local family live with billet families in their area and pay a monthly stipend that covers food and other costs. Unlike the Tier I United States Hockey League, there are no roster restrictions in the NAHL on overage players, which allows for the older players to gain extra NCAA exposure as well as teams to retain a veteran core. Teams are still bound to USA Hockey rules regarding import players, and presently each team is allowed to have four non-American players on their roster. Import players may also apply for an exemption from being counted as an import, but only if they have played hockey in the United States for four years prior. From its beginning in 1975, the NAHL was primarily a 6–12-team league based in the Midwest, known as the Great Lakes Junior Hockey League and changed the name to the North American Hockey League in 1984. The league's all-time leading scorer is Ryan Fultz who tallied 246 points in four seasons. Other notable alumni from the NAHL include Pat LaFontaine, Mike Modano, Doug Weight, Pat Peake, Brian Rolston, Brian Holzinger, Brian Rafalski, Todd Marchant, John Scott, Connor Hellebuyck, and George Parros. In 2003, the league merged with the now defunct America West Hockey League to form a 19-team league.