Lisa Raymond (born August 10, 1973) is an American retired professional tennis player who has achieved notable success in doubles tennis. Raymond has eleven Grand Slam titles to her name: six in women's doubles and five in mixed doubles. On June 12, 2000, she reached the world No. 1 ranking in doubles for the first time, becoming the 13th player to reach the milestone. Raymond was ranked No. 1 on five separate occasions in her career over a combined total of 137 weeks (the fourth-highest mark of all time) and finished as the year-end No. 1 doubles player in both 2001 and 2006. She currently holds the record of most doubles match wins (860) and most doubles matches played (1,206) in WTA history, and earned more than $10 million in prize money in her career. She is one of the few players to win a 'Career Grand Slam' in doubles, which she accomplished after winning the 2006 French Open title. Among her former doubles partners are Lindsay Davenport, Martina Navratilova, Rennae Stubbs, Samantha Stosur, Květa Peschke, Cara Black and Liezel Huber. Raymond is also an Olympic medalist, having won the bronze medal in the mixed-doubles competition at the 2012 Summer Olympics for the US team, partnering with Mike Bryan. She reached a total of 122 WTA doubles finals and won 79 titles (sixth-most in history); Raymond also won a doubles title every single year between 1993 and 2012, a span of 20 years. Despite being best known for her doubles prowess, Raymond also achieved moderate success in singles, winning four titles (finishing runner-up on eight other occasions) and reached a career-high of world No. 15 in October 1997. She reached the second week of a Grand Slam eight times, with her best results being two quarterfinal appearances at the 2000 Wimbledon Championships and the 2004 Australian Open, and six separate fourth round finishes. During her singles career, Raymond recorded wins over former world-number-ones Venus Williams, Arantxa Sánchez Vicario, Monica Seles, Jennifer Capriati and Martina Hingis, as well as other accomplished former top 10 players such as World No.2 Jana Novotna, Amanda Coetzer, Magdalena Maleeva, Brenda Schultz-McCarthy, Lori McNeil, Zina Garrison-Jackson, Nathalie Tauziat, Irina Spîrlea, Natasha Zvereva, Conchita Martínez, Marion Bartoli, Svetlana Kuznetsova, Maria Kirilenko, Elena Dementieva, Daniela Hantuchová, and Dinara Safina. In February 2007 she decided to retire from playing singles, instead choosing to focus on her doubles career.