Dissimulation is the debut studio album by British influencer, boxer, and musician KSI. It was released by RBC Records and BMG on 22 May 2020, and a deluxe edition of the album was released three days later. The album features guest appearances from Offset, Lil Pump, Smokepurpp, Swarmz, Tion Wayne, Jeremih, Trippie Redd, Aiyana-Lee, Rick Ross, Lil Baby and S-X. The deluxe edition of the album features further guest appearances from AJ Tracey, Rich the Kid, Randolph and Crypt. Dissimulation was preceded by four singles. "Down Like That", featuring Rick Ross, Lil Baby and S-X, was released on 8 November 2019 as the album's lead single and it peaked at number 10 on the UK Singles Chart. "Wake Up Call", featuring Trippie Redd, was released on 31 January 2020 as the second single and it debuted at number 11 on the UK Singles Chart. "Poppin", featuring Lil Pump and Smokepurpp, was released on 27 March 2020 as the third single. "Houdini", featuring Swarmz and Tion Wayne, was released on 24 April 2020 as the fourth single from the album and it debuted at number six on the UK Singles Chart. Following the release of Dissimulation, "Killa Killa", featuring Aiyana-Lee, was released as the album's fifth single on 17 July 2020. It had previously peaked at number 27 on the UK Singles Chart. Dissimulation received mostly positive reviews from music critics. Many critics praised KSI's growth from his previous music releases and commended the album's credibility, recognising that KSI had achieved making a genuine rap album. Critics concluded that Dissimulation "marks a serious leap forward for KSI" and remarked that the album has "cemented him his place as a force to be reckoned within the music industry". Dissimulation debuted at number two on the UK Albums Chart and it further entered the albums charts of 16 other countries. Dissimulation was the UK's highest-selling debut album by a British artist and the fourth highest-selling album by a British rap artist in 2020. The album has been certified gold by the British Phonographic Industry (BPI) for exceeding sales of 100,000 units in the UK.