The Naruto manga is written by Masashi Kishimoto and published by Shueisha in Weekly Shōnen Jump. The series focuses on titular hero and protagonist named Naruto Uzumaki, a ninja from the Hidden Leaf Village with supernatural ninjutsu abilities, who is the host of Nine Tailed Fox and dreams to become Hokage in order to receive respect from the villagers and to protect them from any upcoming threats. The series began its serialization in the issue 43 from 1999. Shueisha later collected these chapters in tankōbon bound volumes. The first 244 chapters are known as Part I, and constitute the first part of the Naruto storyline. All subsequent chapters belong to Part II, which continues the storyline from Part I after a two-and-a-half-year ellipsis. Viz Media licenses the Naruto manga for an English adaptation in North America, where it is serialized in the American Shonen Jump and released in volume format. Several adaptations based on Naruto have been made, including two anime series and seven feature films. The first anime series, also titled Naruto, covers the entirety of Part I over 220 episodes. The second, named Naruto: Shippuden (ナルト 疾風伝, Naruto Shippūden, literally, Naruto: Hurricane Chronicles), is based on Part II. Both series are produced by Studio Pierrot and TV Tokyo, and air on TV Tokyo. Shueisha has released 72 tankōbon in Japan, with the first 27 containing Part I, and the remaining 45 belonging to Part II. The first tankōbon was released on March 3, 2000, and the latest volume 72 was released on February 4, 2015. Additionally, from November 7, 2008 through April 10, 2009, Shueisha reprinted the entirety of Part I in a nine-volume sōshūhen set titled Naruto Sōshūhen: Uzumaki Daikan (ＮＡＲＵＴＯ―ナルト―総集編　うずまき大巻, literally, Naruto Complete Collection: Uzumaki Megavolume). Viz Media has released 72 volumes of the English adaptation of the manga, with volume 1 released on August 6, 2003, and volume 72 released on October 6, 2015. In order to compensate for the gap between the Japanese and English adaptations of the manga, Viz announced its "Naruto Nation" campaign, where it would release three volumes each month in the last four months of 2007 in order to close said gap. A similar campaign happened in 2009, entitled "Generation Ninja," with eleven volumes from Part II of the series to be released between February and April of that year in order to catch up to the Japanese serialization. Starting with the release of volume 45 in July 2009, Viz began to release Naruto volumes on a quarterly basis.