Yellowstone is an American neo-Western drama television series created by Taylor Sheridan and John Linson that premiered on June 20, 2018, on Paramount Network. The series stars Kevin Costner, Luke Grimes, Kelly Reilly, Wes Bentley, Cole Hauser, Kelsey Asbille, and Gil Birmingham. The series follows the conflicts along the shared borders of the Yellowstone Ranch, a large cattle ranch, the Broken Rock Indian reservation, Yellowstone National Park and land developers. The fifth season will be its last and is followed by a sequel series titled 2024. The first part of the fifth and final season premiered on November 13, 2022, with the second part scheduled to premiere on November 10, 2024. In 2013, Sheridan began work on the series, having recently grown tired of acting and switched to screenwriting. Having lived in the rural parts of states such as Texas and Wyoming, Sheridan set the series in Montana and set the first scripts in Livingston. Sheridan initially pitched the series to HBO, but the network declined. In May 2017, Paramount Network announced that it had greenlit its first scripted series, Yellowstone. Paramount issued a series order for a first season consisting of ten episodes. The series was set to be written, directed and executive-produced by Sheridan. A prequel series titled 1883 (2021–2022) was announced following a five-year deal signed by Sheridan with ViacomCBS and MTV Entertainment Group. The series focuses on a generation of the Dutton family during the Old West as they undertake the arduous journey across the country before settling the land that would become the Yellowstone Ranch. A second prequel series titled 1923 (2022–present) focuses on an intervening generation of the Dutton family during the time of Western Expansion, Prohibition, and the Great Depression. A third planned spin-off titled 6666 is also in development and is set in the present day on the Four Sixes Ranch in Texas. A further fourth spin-off titled 1944 was confirmed by Paramount in early 2023.