The 2022 FIFA World Cup was an international football tournament held in Qatar from 20 November to 18 December 2022. The 32 national teams involved in the tournament were required to register a squad of up to 26 players, including three goalkeepers. Only players in these squads were eligible to take part in the tournament. A provisional release list of between 35 and 55 players per national team was submitted to FIFA by 21 October 2022, one month prior to the opening match of the tournament. The release lists were not made public by FIFA. From the preliminary squad, the final list of at most 26 and at least 23 players per national team were submitted to FIFA by 14 November, 19:00 AST (UTC+3), six days prior to the opening match of the tournament. FIFA published the final lists with squad numbers on their website on 15 November. The final matchday at club level for players named in the final squads was 13 November 2022, while clubs had to release their players by the following day. In the event that a player on the submitted squad list suffered from an injury or illness prior to his team's first match of the tournament, that player could be replaced at any time up to 24 hours before their first match. The team doctor and the FIFA General Medical Officer had to both confirm that the injury or illness was severe enough to prevent the player from participating in the tournament. Replacement players did not need to be limited to the preliminary list. On 23 June 2022, the Bureau of the FIFA Council approved the increase of the maximum number of players included on the release list (from 35 to 55) and final list (from 23 to 26). This was due to the timing of the tournament in the football calendar and the disruptive effects caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. The position listed for each player is per the official squad list published by FIFA. The age listed for each player is as of 20 November 2022, the first day of the tournament. The numbers of caps and goals listed for each player do not include any matches played after the start of the tournament. The club listed is the club for which the player last played a competitive match prior to the tournament. The nationality for each club reflects the national association (not the league) to which the club is affiliated. A flag is included for coaches who are of a different nationality to their team.