Certified Lover Boy is the sixth studio album by Canadian rapper and singer Drake, released on September 3, 2021, by OVO Sound and Republic Records. Its production was handled by frequent collaborators 40, Nineteen85, PartyNextDoor, OZ, and Vinylz, among others. Lil Baby, Lil Durk, Giveon, Jay-Z, Travis Scott, Future, Young Thug, Yebba, 21 Savage, Project Pat, Tems, Ty Dolla Sign, Lil Wayne, Rick Ross, and Kid Cudi appear as guest artists. It is the first part of what Drake described as a "trilogy" of albums, that also includes the follow-ups Honestly, Nevermind and Her Loss (both 2022). Similar to Drake's previous releases, the album predominantly deals with his views on fame and success, particularly his dominance within the music industry, alongside misplaced loyalty, tainted romances, feuds, and loneliness. Primarily a hip hop record, a hazy atmosphere dominates the album's sound, which includes elements of crunk and trap. Several writers found aspects of the album to be reminiscent of Thank Me Later (2010), Take Care (2011) and Nothing Was the Same (2013). Designed by English artist Damien Hirst, the album's artwork, which features 12 emoji of pregnant women, was the subject of much controversy. Certified Lover Boy was met with mixed reviews from music critics upon release, most of whom felt it was comparable to Drake's other releases and highlighted its structure, but criticized the level of lyrical insight and the production's lack of sonic variety. Nevertheless, it was nominated for Best Rap Album at the 2022 Grammy Awards, until Drake withdrew the album from consideration in December 2021, and won Top Rap Album at the 2022 Billboard Music Awards. The album was a commercial success, debuting at number one on the Billboard 200 with 613,000 album-equivalent units. It became Drake's tenth US number-one album and achieved the largest opening week in the US for an album in 2021 at the time, breaking Apple Music and Spotify records for the biggest opening-day streams on those platforms. It achieved the then-all-time record for the most US top-ten singles from one album (9), with its lead single, "Way 2 Sexy", debuting atop the Billboard Hot 100 as Drake's ninth US number-one hit.