The 2023 FIBA Basketball World Cup was the 19th tournament of the FIBA Basketball World Cup for men's national basketball teams. The tournament was the second to feature 32 teams and was hosted by multiple nations for the first time in its history—the Philippines, Japan, and Indonesia—from 25 August to 10 September 2023. It was the first World Cup to be hosted in Indonesia, and the second to be hosted in both the Philippines and Japan, with both having first hosted the tournament in 1978 and 2006, respectively. The tournament was also the second of three-straight World Cups to be held in Asia after China's hosting of the 2019 edition and Qatar's upcoming hosting of the 2027 tournament, and the first time in tournament history that a host nation has not qualified. It also served as qualification for the 2024 Summer Olympics, in which the top two teams from each of the Americas and Europe, and the top team from each of Africa, Asia and Oceania, qualified alongside the tournament's host France. Germany went undefeated at the tournament to win their first title by defeating Serbia 83–77 in the final. It was the first appearance at the World Cup final for Germany, while for Serbia it would be its second in three tournaments, having appeared in the 2014 final. Canada went on to win the bronze medal, its first medal in World Cup history, after defeating the United States 127–118. The tournament also set a record for the most-attended World Cup game in history, with 38,115 spectators attending the Dominican Republic vs. Philippines game at the Philippine Arena in Bocaue, breaking the previous one of 32,616 set during the 1994 final at the SkyDome in Toronto. Latvia, Georgia, Cape Verde and South Sudan all made their first World Cup appearances, with Latvia placing in the top five. Co-hosts Japan qualified for the Olympics by virtue of being the best-performing Asian team, while co-hosts Philippines qualified for the 2024 FIBA Olympic Qualifying Tournament. Both co-hosts registered wins in the tournament. The defending champions, Spain, lost to Latvia and Canada in the second round and finished only in ninth place. This was the first time Spain missed the quarter-finals since 1994. Olympic champions United States also failed to win a medal for the second consecutive tournament.