Ciudad Guayana (Spanish pronunciation: [sjuˈðað ɣwaˈʝana]) (English: Guayana City) is a city in Bolívar State, Venezuela. It stretches 40 kilometers along the south bank of the Orinoco river, at the point where it is joined by its main tributary, the Caroní river. The Caroní flows through the city from south to north, dividing it into its predominant halves — the old town of San Félix, to the east, and the newer area of Puerto Ordaz (Spanish pronunciation: [ˈpweɾto oɾˈðas]), to the west. Ciudad Guayana was officially founded in 1961 by the unification of two former settlements, but the modern history of San Félix can be traced back to the eighteenth century. Located within the city limits are Cachamay Falls (part of Parque Cachamay) and Llovizna Falls. There are three bridges across the Caroní, and another crossing over the Orinoco, the Orinoquia Bridge, which was inaugurated in 2006. With approximately one million people in the greater metro area, Ciudad Guayana is Venezuela's fastest-growing city with its important iron, steel, aluminum and hydroelectric industries. Additionally, Ciudad Guayana is one of Venezuela's top-five most vital shipping locations (especially for most of the goods produced in Bolívar state), as ships and barges can easily access the port from the Atlantic Ocean via the Orinoco River. Due to its planned nature, the city has a drastically different feel from many other South American cities. The towers of the Alta Vista district recall Barranquilla, and many of the residential neighborhoods have architecture and landscaping that are similar to suburbs in the United States from the 1950s through 1980s, such as subdivisions and 'cookie-cutter' homes, neatly-paved sidewalks, and manicured, patterned lawns. This is partly due to the presence, in the 1960s and early 1970s, of US Steel, an American company with ironworks operations in the region. US Steel built housing for hundreds of its American immigrant workers and their families, who lived in Puerto Ordaz (and other communities) until the nationalization of the Venezuelan steel industry forced the company and its workers to cease operations. Ciudad Guayana is located in a very strategic spot for the country of Venezuela. Many international visitors have traveled there throughout its young history, from Pope John Paul II to many former American presidents, such as G.W. Bush; various musicians, artists, and even filmmakers, like Steven Spielberg, have visited, utilizing the scenic landscaping and city parks for movies. Ciudad Guayana is served by Manuel Carlos Piar International Airport in Puerto Ordaz.