Luca Guadagnino (Italian: [ˈluːka ɡwadaɲˈɲiːno]; born 10 August 1971) is an Italian film director and producer. His films are characterized by their emotional complexity, sensuality, and sumptuous visuals. He is also known for his frequent collaborations with actors Tilda Swinton, Dakota Johnson, Timothée Chalamet and Michael Stuhlbarg, editor Walter Fasano and screenwriter David Kajganich. Born in Palermo, Guadagnino spent part of his childhood in Ethiopia, but moved back to Italy with his family to escape the civil war. He began his career directing short films and documentaries. He made his feature-film debut with The Protagonists (1999), the first of his many collaborations with Swinton. His follow-up Melissa P. (2005), based on the book of Melissa Panarello, was a commercial success in Italy but was met with mixed critical reception. Guadagnino gained further acclaim with his Desire trilogy, which consists of the films I Am Love (2009), A Bigger Splash (2015), and Call Me by Your Name (2017). The latter brought him international recognition and marked the start of his creative partnership with Chalamet. Suspiria (2018) marked his first foray into the horror genre; a remake of the 1977 film, it polarized critics and was deemed a box office failure. The film was followed by We Are Who We Are (2020) a coming-of-age miniseries for HBO, and the romantic horror film Bones and All (2022). Over his career he has received numerous accolades, including a Silver Lion, alongside nominations for an Academy Award and three BAFTA Awards. Guadagnino has directed several documentaries including Bertolucci on Bertolucci (2013) and Salvatore: The Shoemaker of Dreams (2020). Aside from filmmaking, he has also been involved in the world of fashion, having directed advertisements for brands such as Fendi and Salvatore Ferragamo. In 2012, Guadagnino founded the production company Frenesy Film Company. Aside from his recent films, he produced Belluscone: A Sicilian Story (2014), The Truffle Hunters (2020), Salvatore: The Shoemaker of Dreams (2020), Holiday, and Enea (2023)