Wave power is the capture of energy of wind waves to do useful work – for example, electricity generation, water desalination, or pumping water. A machine that exploits wave power is a wave energy converter (WEC). Waves are generated primarily by wind passing over the sea's surface and also by tidal forces, temperature variations, and other factors. As long as the waves propagate slower than the wind speed just above, energy is transferred from the wind to the waves. Air pressure differences between the windward and leeward sides of a wave crest and surface friction from the wind cause shear stress and wave growth. Wave power as a descriptive term is different from tidal power, which seeks to primarily capture the energy of the current caused by the gravitational pull of the Sun and Moon. However, wave power and tidal power are not fundamentally distinct and have significant cross-over in technology and implementation. Other forces can create currents, including breaking waves, wind, the Coriolis effect, cabbeling, and temperature and salinity differences. As of 2023, wave power is not widely employed for commercial applications, after a long series of trial projects. Attempts to use this energy began in 1890 or earlier, mainly due to its high power density. Just below the ocean's water surface the wave energy flow, in time-average, is typically five times denser than the wind energy flow 20 m above the sea surface, and 10 to 30 times denser than the solar energy flow. Eco Wave Power(EWP), a Swedish business based in Israel, claims to have developed and patented a wave power electricity conversion technology. In their September 2023 corporate update, the company cited several advances towards commercial applications for the technology. The station allows for the testing of new systems components and floater designs and materials, with an eye towards continuously improving the EWP wave energy technology and maintaining EWP's leading market position. In 2000 the world's first commercial wave power device, the Islay LIMPET was installed on the coast of Islay in Scotland and connected to the UK national grid. In 2008, the first experimental multi-generator wave farm was opened in Portugal at the Aguçadoura wave park. Both projects have since ended. Wave energy converters can be classified based on their working principle as either: oscillating water columns (with air turbine) oscillating bodies (with hydroelectric motor, hydraulic turbine, linear electrical generator) overtopping devices (with low-head hydraulic turbine)