Racing Club de Avellaneda, officially known as Racing Club or shortened to just Racing, is an Argentine professional sports club based in Avellaneda, a city of the Buenos Aires Province. Founded in 1903, Racing has been historically considered one of the Big Five clubs of Argentine football, and is also known as El Primer Grande ("The First Great"), for becoming the first club in the world to win seven league titles in a row, first Argentine club to win a national cup, and the first world champion (Intercontinental Cup) Argentine club. Racing currently plays in the Primera División, the top division of the Argentine league system, and plays its home games at Estadio Presidente Perón, nicknamed El Cilindro de Avellaneda ("The Cylinder of Avellaneda"). Racing has won the Primera División 18 times, with a record of seven consecutive championships between 1913 and 1919, five of which were won undefeated. Not only does Racing hold the record for the most consecutive titles in Argentine football history, but it is also the only team in South America to achieve such a feat, along with being one of only four clubs (the others are Olympique de Lyon, Bayern Munich, and Juventus) to be a seven-time champion of world-cup winning nations. The club also has 15 National cups to its name, which include five Copa Ibarguren, four Copa de Honor Municipalidad de Buenos Aires, and one Copa Beccar Varela. Due to those achievements the team was nicknamed La Academia ("The Academy"), which still identifies the club and its supporters. On the international stage, the club has won 6 titles, with 3 of them organised by CONMEBOL and other international bodies. Those achievements include one Copa Libertadores, one Intercontinental Cup, and the first edition of the Supercopa Libertadores. The team's home colors are sky blue and white striped, similar to the national team. The shorts and socks have shifted between black, navy blue or white. Apart from football, other sports practised at Racing are artistic gymnastics, basketball, beach soccer, boxing, chess, field hockey, futsal, handball, martial arts, roller skating, tennis, and volleyball.