Carolina Giraldo Navarro (born 14 February 1991), known professionally as Karol G, is a Colombian singer. Considered one of the most influential reggaeton and urban pop artists, she has received awards including a Grammy, five Latin Grammy Awards and four Billboard Music Awards. She was recognized with the Woman of the Year and Rulebreaker Award at the Billboard Women in Music, with the Spirit of Hope Award at the Billboard Latin Music Awards, and has five Guinness World Records. Born and raised in Medellín, Giraldo launched her career as a teenager, appearing on the Colombian spinoff of The X Factor. She moved to New York in 2014 to learn more about the music industry and signed with Universal Music Latino. Her collaboration with Puerto Rican rapper Bad Bunny, "Ahora Me Llama" became her breakthrough hit and was the third single for her debut album Unstoppable, released in 2017. In late 2018, her duet "Secreto" became a hit in Latin America, as she and Puerto Rican artist Anuel AA publicly confirmed their relationship via the music video. In July 2019, she released "China" in collaboration with Anuel AA, Daddy Yankee, Ozuna, and J Balvin, which became her first music video with over one billion views on YouTube. In May 2019, she released the album Ocean, which served as a stylistic departure from Unstoppable, incorporating a more relaxed and less "pop" sound while incorporating reggaetón influences. Popular singles from the album include the title track (later released as a remix with Jessie Reyez). Later that year, her song "Tusa" charted internationally and was certified 28× Latin platinum by the RIAA. In 2020, Giraldo received four nominations at the Latin Grammy Awards. Throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, and into early 2021, she would release successful songs, including some of her most famous ("Ay, Dios Mío!", "Bichota" and "Location"), in the lead-up to her third album, KG0516, which was released in spring of that year, topping the U.S. Latin albums chart. In early 2023, Giraldo released her fourth album, Mañana Será Bonito, in the spring of 2023; the record was immediately recognized as the first-ever Spanish-language album (by a female artist) to debut at No. 1 on the U.S. Billboard 200. She achieved her highest-charting single on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 with the song "TQG", a collaboration with fellow Colombian singer-songwriter Shakira, reaching the No. 7 position. In early 2024, she received her first Grammy Award, at the 66th annual ceremony, for the recently created Música Urbana Album category.