Khosrov Forest State Reserve (Armenian: Խոսրովի անտառ պետական արգելոց, romanized: Khosrovi antarr petakan argelots'), is a nature reserve in Ararat Province of Armenia. The reserve is one of the oldest protected areas in the world having a history of about 1,700 years. It was founded in the 4th century (334–338) by the order of king Khosrov Kotak, who gave it his name. It was founded to improve the natural climatic conditions of adjacent territories of Artashat – the capital city of Armenia of the given period and the newly established city of Dvin to ensure conservation and enrichment of flora and fauna; serve as a ground for royal hunting, military exercises and entertainment. This area was designated as a state reserve in September 1958 and covers around 23,213.5 hectares (57,362 acres) at elevations from 700 to 2,800 m (9,200 ft) above sea level. The Khosrov reserve protects juniper (Juniperus polycarpos) and oak (Quercus macranthera) forests from Tertiary Period, arid associations of semi-desert and phrygana landscapes and other Mediterranean relict plant ecosystems as well as the genetic fund of rare animals and plants adapted to the reserve conditions. It also includes wetlands of international importance. Khosrov Forest State Reserve, thanks to its numerous peculiarities, is unique not only in Armenia but also in the whole Caucasus ecoregion. Since 2002, administrative, scientific, practical and organizational activities in the reserve have been implemented by the Khosrov Forest State Reserve State Non-Commercial Organization (SNCO) of the Bioresources Management Agency under the aegis of the Ministry of Nature Protection of Armenia. According to the reserved charter (RA Governmental decision N 925 from 30 May 2002, Annex 1), the main goals of the reserve establishment are to ensure natural development of water and terrestrial ecosystems of the rivers Azat and Vedi basins, to protect the landscapes and biological diversity including the genetic fund of rare and endangered plants and animals as well as their habitats, to implement scientific research and to create prerequisites for the development of scientific and educational tourism, environmental education and responsibility. The following protected areas are under the subordination of the Khosrov Forest State Reserve: SNCO: Khosrov Forest state reserve, which at present is divided into four districts- Garni (4253ha), Kaqavaberd (4745ha), Khosrov (6860.8ha), and Khachadzor (7354.7ha). Goravan Sands state sanctuary (95.99ha) Khor Virap State Sanctuary (50.28ha) Realizing the importance of the reserve, on 26 August 2013 Khosrov Forest State Reserve SNCO was awarded with European Diploma of Protected Areas. The reserve has wonderful landscapes, rich biological diversity, a huge variety of interesting and important untouched forests that are the result of long-term preservation, proper management plan and structure. The Khosrov Forest is the evidence of the Armenians' caring attitude towards historical monuments. Thanks to their attitude, the virgin forest located near the current capital of Armenia-Yerevan has been preserved for 17 centuries.