Armando Durim Sadiku (born 27 May 1991) is an Albanian professional footballer who plays as a forward for Indian Super League club Mohun Bagan SG and the Albania national team. Sadiku began his senior career with Turbina playing two seasons in Albania's second tier Kategoria e Parë. In 2009 he went to Gramozi in top-flight division Kategoria Superiore where he had a breakthrough year, scoring eight goals, which earned him a move to fellow top-flight side Elbasani. Sadiku played only a half season with Elbasani, as he was banned from Albanian football due to non-sporting behavior. His ban forced him to move abroad going to Switzerland playing at first for Locarno. Sadiku found his form in Switzerland, becoming a reliable goalscorer in second tier Swiss Challenge League, winning top goalscorer award in his first full season 2011–12 Swiss Challenge League. In July 2012 he moved to Lugano gaining another consecutive season as topscorer with 20 goals in the 2012–13 Swiss Challenge League. In November 2013, he joined top flight side Zürich but his time there was marred by lack of playing time and a few injuries most notably in May 2014 which left him sidelined for six months. He returned the next season but failed to make an impact, scoring only three goals, but the club still won the 2013–14 Swiss Cup. Sadiku's form improved in the first half of 2015–16 season, scoring eight goals in 18 appearances. Despite being the top scorer of the team at this time, he was sent on loan to fellow relegation strugglers Vaduz, which was dubbed as an "owngoal" by Swiss media. Sadiku helped Vaduz to retain their top flight status for another season, in addition relegating his parent club. In January 2017, Sadiku was sent on loan again, this time at his former side FC Lugano where he rejoined Paolo Tramezzani. In 2023, following a successful stint with the Spanish club FC Cartagena, he joined Indian Super League side Mohun Bagan Super Giant. An Albanian international, Sadiku with 12 goals scored, is his country's joint active player top goalscorer along Sokol Cikalleshi and 4th in the overall ranking. At youth level, he represented Albania under-19 and under-21 side with whom he scored 6 goals in only 7 appearances, thus being all-time top goalscorer. He made his senior debut in 2012 and was part of UEFA Euro 2016 squad where he scored Albania's first goal at a UEFA European Championship.