Ruby Gillman, Teenage Kraken is a 2023 American animated teen comedy film directed by Kirk DeMicco, co-directed by Faryn Pearl (in her directorial debut), and written by Pam Brady and the writing team of Brian C. Brown and Elliott DiGuiseppi from a story by Brown & DiGuiseppi. Produced by DreamWorks Animation and distributed by Universal Pictures, the film stars the voices of Lana Condor, Toni Collette, Annie Murphy (in her major motion picture debut), Colman Domingo, and Jane Fonda. The film follows a shy kraken girl named Ruby Gillman (Condor) who is desperate to fit in at Oceanside High. When she breaks her mother's (Collette) rule by going into the ocean with any would-be friends, she discovers that she is a direct descendant of battle-hardened krakens who have protected the sea from evil mermaids for generations, and is also destined to inherit the throne from her grandmother (Fonda). The film was first pitched in 2016 by writers Brown and DiGuiseppi. In April 2019, Kelly Cooney Cilella came on board as producer for the film. It was announced in June 2021 as its original title Meet the Gillmans, with casting taking place to play the role and an expected release year of 2022. Paul Tibbitt came on board to direct, with Brady signing on to write with Brown and DiGuiseppi, and production was expected to start in 2022. However, two months later, Tibbitt stepped down from his role as director due to creative differences between him and producer Cooney Cilella, and DeMicco took over shortly after, alongside the addition of first time co-director Pearl. The majority of the voice cast members were announced in March 2023, alongside the film's current title. The film draws inspiration from Easy A (2010), Lady Bird (2017), and Booksmart (2019), as well as several John Hughes films. Stephanie Economou composed the film's musical score, while British singer-songwriters Mimi Webb and Freya Ridings each performed an original song for the film. Ruby Gillman, Teenage Kraken had its world premiere at the Annecy International Animation Film Festival on June 15, 2023, and was released in the United States on June 30. The film received mixed-to-positive reviews from critics, who praised the voice acting, animation and characters but criticized the screenplay and felt that it had failed to live up to its potential. It was a box-office failure, grossing $46 million against a $70 million budget, with projections of an $80 million loss for Universal. Despite this, it was the most watched film on Netflix when it debuted on the streaming service in February 2024.