Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse is a 2023 American animated superhero film featuring the Marvel Comics character Miles Morales / Spider-Man, produced by Columbia Pictures and Sony Pictures Animation in association with Marvel Entertainment, and distributed by Sony Pictures Releasing. It is the sequel to Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse (2018), set in a shared multiverse of alternate universes called the Spider-Verse. The film is directed by Joaquim Dos Santos, Kemp Powers and Justin K. Thompson and written by Phil Lord, Christopher Miller, who both also produce, and David Callaham. Shameik Moore voices Miles, starring alongside Hailee Steinfeld, Brian Tyree Henry, Lauren Vélez, Jake Johnson, Jason Schwartzman, Issa Rae, Karan Soni, Shea Whigham, Greta Lee, Daniel Kaluuya, Mahershala Ali and Oscar Isaac. In the film, Miles goes on an adventure with Gwen Stacy / Spider-Woman across the Multiverse, where he meets a team of Spider-People led by Miguel O'Hara / Spider-Man 2099 known as the Spider-Society, but comes into conflict with them over handling a new threat in the form of the Spot. Sony began developing a sequel to Into the Spider-Verse prior to its 2018 release, with the writing and directing team attached. It was set to focus on the relationship between Moore's Miles and Steinfeld's Gwen. The sequel was officially announced in November 2019 and animation work began in June 2020, with a different visual style for each of the six universes visited by the characters. Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse premiered at the Regency Village Theatre in Los Angeles, California on May 30, 2023, and was theatrically released in the United States on June 2, having been delayed from its original April 2022 theatrical release date due to the COVID-19 pandemic. It was the first film from Sony Pictures Animation to be released in theaters worldwide since The Angry Birds Movie 2 in August 2019. Like to its predecessor, the film was a critical and commercial success. It set several box office records, grossing over $690 million at the worldwide box office, surpassing its predecessor and becoming the third-highest-grossing film of the year domestically in the United States and the sixth-highest-grossing film of 2023. The American Film Institute named Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse one of the top-ten films of 2023. Among its numerous accolades, it won Best Animated Feature at the Critics' Choice Movie Awards, Annie Awards and Producers Guild of America Awards and received nominations for the same category at the Golden Globe Awards, BAFTA Awards, and Academy Awards. The third and final installment in the trilogy, Spider-Man: Beyond the Spider-Verse, and a spin-off film, Spider-Woman, are both in development.