The Ukrainian Insurgent Army (Ukrainian: Українська повстанська армія, УПА, romanized: Ukrayins'ka Povstans'ka Armiia, abbreviated UPA) was a Ukrainian nationalist paramilitary and partisan formation founded by the Organisation of Ukrainian Nationalists on October 14, 1942. During World War II, it was engaged in guerrilla warfare against the Soviet Union, and both the Polish Underground State and Communist Poland. The goal of the Organisation of Ukrainian Nationalists (OUN) was to drive out occupying powers and set up an independent government, it would be achieved by a national revolution led by a leader with dictatorial power; OUN accepted violence as a political tool against enemies of their cause. In order to achieve this goal, a number of partisan units were formed, merged into a single structure in the form of the UPA, which was created on 14 October 1942. From February 1943, the organisation fought against the Germans in Volhynia and Polesia. At the same time, its forces fought an evenly matched war against the Polish resistance, during which the UPA carried out an ethnic cleansing of the Polish population of Volhynia and eastern Galicia, resulting in between 50,000 and 100,000 deaths. Soviet NKVD units fought against the UPA, which led armed resistance against Soviets until 1949. On the territory of communist Poland, the UPA tried to prevent the forced deportation of Ukrainians from western Galicia to the Soviet Union until 1947. Organizationally, the UPA was divided into regions. In Western Ukraine the UPA unit was called UPA West; in the centre-southern regions of Podolia, parts of Kyiv region, parts of Zhytomyr region and Odesa - UPA South; in the northern regions of Volhynia, Rivne, parts of Kiev and Zhytomyr regions UPA North was active; in eastern Ukraine the UPA fled north, as Stalinist dictatorship had executed a number of the UPA's participants. The members of UPA East joined other UPA units in Dnipro and in Chernihiv region. The UPA was a decentralised movement widespread throughout Ukraine with each regions following somewhat different agenda given the circumstances of constant moving front line and a double threat of the Soviet and Nazi powers. The UPA was formally disbanded in early September 1949. However, some of its units continued operations until 1956.[citation needed] In March 2019, surviving UPA members were officially granted the status of veterans by the government of Ukraine.