The Vietnam national football team (Vietnamese: Đội tuyển bóng đá quốc gia Việt Nam) represents Vietnam in men's international senior football and is controlled by the Vietnam Football Federation, the governing body of football in Vietnam. It has been nicknamed the Golden Star Warriors. Football was introduced to Vietnam by the French in the late 19th century during the French colonial period and Vietnam (future South Vietnam) played their first game in 1947. However, because various conflicts occurred in the country throughout the 20th century, Vietnam was split into the Democratic Republic of Vietnam (representing the communist-controlled North) and the State of Vietnam, later the Republic of Vietnam and Republic of South Vietnam (representing the capitalist-controlled South), beginning in 1954. As a result, two national teams (one for the North and one for the South) existed simultaneously and were controlled by separate governing bodies. While South Vietnam became a member of both International Association Football Federation (FIFA) in 1952 and the Asian Football Confederation (AFC) in 1954, North Vietnam never held memberships in either. After North and South were unified into a single country in 1976, the separate governing bodies were combined into the Vietnam Football Federation. However, the current unified Vietnam also inherited South Vietnam's membership in FIFA, therefore Vietnamese team is considered a successor to the South Vietnamese team, while North Vietnamese team is considered a separate team for statistical purposes. For the first years of its history, reunified Vietnam experienced a prolonged international football hiatus and no national team matches were played between unification in 1976 and participation in the Southeast Asian Games football tournament of 1991. This tournament marked the re-integration of Vietnam into international football, with the Vietnam national team subsequently achieving moderate success in Southeast Asia and reaching the final round of the World Cup qualification in 2022. Vietnam also reached the quarter-finals of the AFC Asian Cup twice, in 2007 and in 2019.