Ras (Serbian Cyrillic: Рас; Latin: Arsa), known in modern Serbian historiography as Stari Ras (Serbian Cyrillic: Стари Рас, "Old Ras"), is a medieval fortress and area located in the vicinity of former market-place of Staro Trgovište, some 10–11 kilometers (6.2–6.8 mi) west of modern-day city of Novi Pazar in Serbia. Old Ras was initially part of the First Bulgarian Empire (until 10th century), then Byzantine Empire (mid-10th until mid-12th century), in the end becoming one of the first and main capitals of the Grand Principality and Kingdom of Serbia (since mid-12th until early 14th century). Located in today's region of Raška, its favorable position in the area known as Old Serbia, along the Raška gorge at Pešter plateau, on the crossroads and trading routes between neighbouring regions of Zeta and Bosnia in the west and Kosovo in the south, added to its importance as a city. There exist two fortifications (gradina) around the site, Gradina-Pazarište and Gradina-Postenje, while urban place Staro Trgovište below Gradina-Pazarište developed since the late medieval and influenced foundation of Novi Pazar eastward in the Ottoman period. There are plans for future reconstruction of the site. In the close vicinity is impressive group of medieval monuments, including churches and monasteries. The 9th century Church of Saint Apostles Peter and Paul is one of the oldest early medieval churches in Serbia. The medieval Monastery of Sopoćani near Arsa is a reminder of the contacts between Western world and the Byzantine world. The site of Stari Ras, in combination with the nearby Monastery of Sopoćani, is already a UNESCO World Heritage Site, and Stari Ras monastery (12th century) is being reconstructed and it too may be included on the UNESCO World Heritage List with the site. Stari Ras and Sopoćani World Heritage Site is not far from another UNESCO World Heritage Site of Serbia, the medieval monastery and churches of Studenica. Stari Ras was declared Monument of Culture of Exceptional Importance in 1990, and it is protected by Republic of Serbia.