Software testing is the act of examining the artifacts and the behavior of the software under test by verification and validation. Software testing can also provide an objective, independent view of the software to allow the business to appreciate and understand the risks of software implementation. Test techniques include, but are not limited to: analyzing the product requirements for completeness and correctness in various contexts like industry perspective, business perspective, feasibility and viability of implementation, usability, performance, security, infrastructure considerations, etc. reviewing the product architecture and the overall design of the product working with product developers on improvement in coding techniques, design patterns, tests that can be written as part of code based on various techniques like boundary conditions, etc. executing a program or application with the intent of examining behavior reviewing the deployment infrastructure and associated scripts and automation taking part in production activities by using monitoring and observability techniques Software testing can provide objective, independent information about the quality of software and the risk of its failure to users or sponsors. Software testing can determine the correctness of software under the assumption of some specific hypotheses, but testing cannot identify all the failures within the software. Instead, it furnishes a criticism or comparison that compares the state and behavior of the product against test oracles — principles or mechanisms by which someone might recognize a problem. These oracles may include (but are not limited to) specifications, contracts, comparable products, past versions of the same product, inferences about intended or expected purpose, user or customer expectations, relevant standards, applicable laws, or other criteria. A primary purpose of testing is to detect software failures so that defects may be discovered and corrected. Testing cannot establish that a product functions properly under all conditions, but only that it does not function properly under specific conditions. The scope of software testing may include the examination of code as well as the execution of that code in various environments and conditions as well as examining the aspects of code: does it do what it is supposed to do and do what it needs to do. In the current culture of software development, a testing organization may be separate from the development team. There are various roles for testing team members. Information derived from software testing may be used to correct the process by which software is developed.: 41–43  Every software product caters to a specific audience. For instance, the audience for video game software differs significantly from that of banking software. Therefore, when an organization develops or invests in a software product, it must assess whether the product aligns with the expectations of its end users, target audience, purchasers, and other stakeholders. Software testing plays a critical role in making this assessment.