Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles: Mutant Mayhem is a 2023 American animated superhero film based on the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles characters created by Peter Laird and Kevin Eastman. A reboot of the Turtles film series, it was directed by Jeff Rowe and co-directed by Kyler Spears, from a screenplay and story written by Seth Rogen, Evan Goldberg, and Rowe, with Dan Hernandez and Benji Samit also credited to the former and Brendan O'Brien the latter. The film stars an ensemble voice cast with Micah Abbey, Shamon Brown Jr., Nicolas Cantu, and Brady Noon as the four Turtles—Donatello, Michelangelo, Leonardo, and Raphael—and follows the group as they go on a hunt for a mysterious crime syndicate and face an army of mutants. The story explores themes of family, acceptance, and conformity. Plans for an animated Turtles film with involvement by Rogen began in 2018. In June 2020, the project was officially announced, with Rogen, Goldberg, and James Weaver producing through their company, Point Grey Pictures, Rowe as director, and O'Brien as screenwriter. Spears joined soon after as co-director. Seeking to explore the teenage aspect of the Turtles, the filmmakers drew inspiration from teenage coming-of-age films. The majority of the cast was announced in March 2023. The animation was provided by Mikros Animation in Montreal and Paris and Cinesite in Vancouver and Montreal, and was primarily influenced by school notebook sketches. Trent Reznor and Atticus Ross composed the score. Mutant Mayhem was screened as a work-in-progress at the Annecy International Animation Film Festival on June 12, 2023, and was released by Paramount Pictures in the United States on August 2, 2023. It has grossed $180 million worldwide and received positive reviews for its performances, screenplay, and stylized animation; several critics considered it the best Turtles film. The film received multiple award nominations, including at the Critics' Choice Movie Awards and the Annie Awards. A follow-up television series, Tales of the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles, is set to premiere on Paramount+ in 2024, and a sequel film is set to be released in theaters on October 9, 2026.