Emory Andrew Tate III (born 1 December 1986) is an American-British social media personality, businessman, and former professional kickboxer. His controversial commentary has resulted in his expulsions from various social media platforms and concern that he is encouraging misogynistic views amongst young males. As of December 2023, he had over 8.5 million followers on X (formerly Twitter) and was the third-most "googled" person in 2023, with most British people aware of who he is. As of March 2024, Tate is facing criminal charges in Romania and the United Kingdom. He has also been dubbed the "king of toxic masculinity", and identified as part of the manosphere. Tate first began to kickbox in 2005, winning several kickboxing titles in the late 2000s and early 2010s. In 2016, he appeared on the British reality series Big Brother, but was removed as he was the suspect in an open rape investigation in the United Kingdom. After his kickboxing career, Tate and his brother, Tristan, began operating a webcam model business, followed by selling online courses. With his audience from his courses, he became prominent as an internet celebrity promoting a masculine, luxurious lifestyle. Tate's courses include: Hustler's University, which gained 100,000 subscribers, later rebranded to The Real World; and the secretive War Room group, which has been accused by the BBC of coercing women into sex work, and teaching violence against women. In August 2023, it was estimated that Tate's online ventures generated US$5 million in revenue per month. He has also been described as a right-wing and far-right influencer, and has described himself as "absolutely" misogynistic and sexist. In December 2022, Tate and his brother Tristan were arrested in Romania along with two women. All four were charged in June 2023 with rape, human trafficking, and forming an organised crime group to sexually exploit women. In July 2023, two of the accusers reportedly went into hiding after a campaign of online harassment, and the Tate brothers filed a defamation lawsuit claiming US$5 million in damages against one of the accusers. In March 2024, Bedfordshire Police obtained a European Arrest Warrant for the Tate brothers over allegations of sexual aggression, and a Romanian court authorised their extradition after the conclusion of the Romanian investigation. Tate and his brother have denied all charges.