Iloilo City, officially the City of Iloilo (Hiligaynon: Dakbanwa sang Iloilo ; Filipino: Lungsod ng Iloilo), is a 1st class highly urbanized city in the Western Visayas region of the Philippines, located on the southeastern coast of the island of Panay. It is the capital city of the province of Iloilo, where it is geographically situated and grouped under the Philippine Statistics Authority, but remains politically independent in terms of government and administration. In addition, it is the center of the Iloilo–Guimaras Metropolitan Area, as well as the regional center and primate city of the Western Visayas region. According to the 2020 census, Iloilo City has a population of 457,626 people. For the metropolitan area, the total population is 1,007,945 people. The city is a conglomeration of former towns, now organized as geographical or administrative districts. These districts include Villa de Arevalo, Iloilo City Proper, Jaro (an independent city before), La Paz, Mandurriao, Molo, and Lapuz (declared a separate district in 2008). Iloilo City holds historical significance as one of the earliest Spanish colonial centers in the Philippines, settled in 1566. It was recognized as one of the royal Spanish cities in the country and received the honorific royal title "La Muy Leal y Noble Ciudad" (The Very Loyal and Noble City). Iloilo played a significant role in the Spanish Empire's presence in Asia and the Pacific, serving as its last capital in the region. It was also the capital of the short-lived Federal State of the Visayas. Today, the city remains prominent in the country, exerting influence over its history, culture, politics, and economy. Iloilo City is the first city in the Philippines designated as UNESCO Creative City of Gastronomy. The city also serves as the regional hub for education, culinary arts, religion, healthcare, tourism, culture, industry, governance, and the economy in Western Visayas. Central Philippine University (CPU), a university established by American Protestants, is a prominent academic institution that attracts students from various parts of the Philippines and abroad. The university has been ranked by Quacquarelli Symonds and Times Higher Education, two renowned global university ranking agencies. Iloilo is hailed as the "Asia's City of Love" and the "Heart of the Philippines" because of its central location in the Philippine archipelago and the reputation of the Ilonggo people for their sweetness and gentleness, attributed to the tone of the Hiligaynon language. It is also known as the "Royal City of the South" due to being the second city after Manila to receive a Spanish royal title, the "Bike Capital of the Philippines" in contrast to the cycling culture and infrastructure the metropolis is famous of, and as the "Museum City of the Philippines" and the "City of Mansions" due to the plethora of heritage houses and landmarks found throughout the city. Furthermore, it is considered a "Pilgrim City" and the "Center of Candelaria devotion in the Philippines", as Roman Catholic pilgrims from throughout the country flock to the Jaro Cathedral (National Shrine of Nuestra Señora de la Candelaria) annually for the "Fiesta Candelaria" held on February 2 in honor of Western Visayas's patroness, Nuestra Señora de la Candelaria. This festival is the second-largest Marian festival after Peñafrancia in Naga, Camarines Sur, in the Philippines. The city's urban planning, real estate development, and demand for business process outsourcing (BPO) have contributed to its reputation as one of the most livable cities in the country. It has been identified as a top location for the expansion of outsourcing activity outside Metro Manila and is projected to become the third-largest hub for the IT-BPO industry in the country by 2025, according to CBRE Group.