Sadyr Nurgojo uulu Japarov (also Zhaparov; [sɑ'dɯr nurʁo'd͡ʒo d͡ʒɑ'pɑrof]; Kyrgyz: Садыр Нургожо уулу Жапаров; born 6 December 1968) is a Kyrgyz politician who is currently serving as the president of Kyrgyzstan since 28 January 2021. He had previously served as the acting prime minister of Kyrgyzstan in the 2020 interim government following the resignation of President Sooronbay Jeenbekov. Japarov also became acting president of Kyrgyzstan after Jeenbekov's resignation but resigned himself on 14 November 2020 to run for the 2021 presidential election, where he was elected to succeed the acting president Talant Mamytov. Japarov began his political career as a deputy in 2005 after being elected to the Supreme Council and from 2007 served in the presidential administration under Kurmanbek Bakiyev before his overthrow in the 2010 Kyrgyz Revolution. From there, Japarov returned working as a deputy where he raised concerns regarding the nationalization of Kumtor Gold Mine and held popular rallies to overthrow the Kyrgyz government during the attempts of seizing the Bishkek White House and kidnapping an akim, which led for him to flee Kyrgyzstan for exile in 2013 to avoid prosecution. Japarov returned to Kyrgyzstan to take part in the 2017 presidential election, where he was arrested and imprisoned for 11 years due to his prior illegal political activities. His prison sentence time was cut short after eventually being freed by his supporters during the 2020 Kyrgyz Revolution and leading for his rise to power in Kyrgyzstan. Japarov's presidency is viewed to be autocratic and authoritarian, as he implemented populist policies aimed at combating corruption by reintroducing a presidential system via constitutional and government system referendums which increased his executive powers and reduced the parliament's influence, as well as creating the People's Kurultai which resulted in Kyrgyzstan facing a democratic backsliding. Several opposition politicians and activists were arrested, and new laws aimed at suppressing independent media were introduced. Japarov pursued a multi-vector foreign policy with Kyrgyzstan's international partners and was named as one of main figures in allegedly supporting Russia to evade international sanctions over its invasion of Ukraine. He also faced the 2021 and 2022 Kyrgyzstan–Tajikistan clashes where he expressed his intention to solve a border dispute with Tajikistan.