Argentina, 1985 is a 2022 Argentine historical legal drama film produced and directed by Santiago Mitre. Written by Mitre and Mariano Llinás, it stars Ricardo Darín, Peter Lanzani, Alejandra Flechner and Norman Briski. The film follows the Trial of the Juntas, the 1985 trial of members of the military government that ruled Argentina under the dictatorship of the National Reorganization Process, during which the torture, extrajudicial murder, and forced disappearances of civilians was a systematic occurrence; it focuses on the perspective of the prosecution team, led by Julio César Strassera and Luis Moreno Ocampo, including their investigation before the trial. Work on the screenplay began around five years before the film's release. After reading the first draft of the script, Darín took the main role and became a producer on the film. Production company Amazon Studios joined the project once the script was finished and the casting determined. Filming began in June 2021 and wrapped in September, taking place primarily in Buenos Aires. The film was shot where the depicted events took place, such as the original courtroom at Tribunales. Co-produced by Argentina, the United Kingdom and the United States, Argentina, 1985 premiered in the main competition at the 79th Venice International Film Festival on 3 September 2022, where it won the FIPRESCI Award from the International Federation of Film Critics. Theatrically released in Argentina on 29 September 2022 and in the U.K. and U.S. on 21 October 2022, it was a commercial success, debuting at number one at the Argentine box office and becoming the most-watched Argentine film of 2022. It received critical acclaim, and won, among others, the Golden Globe Award for Best Foreign Language Film, the Goya Award for Best Ibero-American Film, and the National Board of Review Freedom of Expression Award. It was also named one of the top five international films of 2022 by the National Board of Review and received an Academy Award nomination for Best International Feature Film.