N.W.A (an abbreviation for Niggaz Wit Attitudes, eye dialect for Niggas With Attitudes) was an American hip hop group formed in Compton, California. They were among the earliest and most significant popularizers and controversial figures of the gangsta rap subgenre, and the group is widely considered one of the greatest and most influential groups in the history of hip hop music. Active from 1987 to 1991, N.W.A endured controversy owing to their music's explicit lyrics, which many viewed as misogynistic or homophobic, as well as to its glorification of drugs and crime. The group was subsequently banned from many mainstream American radio stations. In spite of this, they have sold over ten million units in the United States alone. Drawing on its members' own experiences of racism and excessive policing, N.W.A made inherently political music. N.W.A's consistent criticisms of institutional racism within the American police significantly contributed to the political awareness and involvement of American youth against racism. The original lineup, formed in early 1987, consisted of Arabian Prince, Dr. Dre, Eazy-E, and Ice Cube, with DJ Yella and MC Ren joining later that year. They released their first compilation album as a group in 1987, called N.W.A. and the Posse, which peaked at No. 39 on Billboard magazine's Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums chart. Arabian Prince left shortly after the release of N.W.A's debut studio album, Straight Outta Compton, in 1988, with Ice Cube following suit in December 1989. Eazy-E, Ice Cube, MC Ren, and Dr. Dre later became Platinum-selling solo artists in their own right in the 1990s. After the death of the group's founder, Eazy-E, from AIDS on March 26, 1995, any attempt to reform the group was destined to fail, despite several attempts that had been made prior to his death. The group's debut album marked the beginning of the new gangsta rap era, as the production and social commentary in their lyrics were revolutionary within the genre. N.W.A's second studio album, Niggaz4Life, was the first hardcore rap album to reach number one on the Billboard 200 sales charts. In general, N.W.A had a lasting impact on generations of hip-hop artists and, in the late '80s, played a crucial role in shaping rap as it evolved in the subsequent generations, both musically and lyrically. Moreover, the group was credited with being the first to open up rap to a white American audience, contributing to the rapid spread of rap within the American population in general, starting from the late 1980s. Rolling Stone ranked N.W.A at number 83 on its list of the "100 Greatest Artists of All Time". In 2016, the group was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, following three previous nominations.