Screen Actors Guild Awards (also known as SAG Awards) are accolades given by the Screen Actors Guild-American Federation of Television and Radio Artists (SAG-AFTRA). The award was founded in 1995 to recognize outstanding performances in movie and prime time television. SAG Awards have been one of the major awards events in the Hollywood film industry since then, along with the Golden Globe Awards and the Oscars. SAG awards focus both on individual performances and on the work of the entire ensemble of a drama series and comedy series, and the cast of a motion picture. Nominations for the awards come from two committees, one for film and one for television, each numbering 2,100 members of the union, randomly selected anew each year, with the full membership (165,000 as of 2012) available to vote for the winners. It is considered an indicator of success at the Academy Awards in acting categories. The awards have been telecast on TNT from 1998 to 2022, and have been simulcast on TBS from 2007 to 2022. In May 2022 it was announced that both TNT and TBS will no longer air the awards. In January 2023, it was announced that Netflix will air the awards live beginning in 2024 as part of a new multi-year partnership, with the 2023 ceremony being announced to be live streamed on Netflix's YouTube channel as Netflix was still working out its live streaming capabilities at the time of the announcement. The inaugural SAG Awards aired live on February 25, 1995, from Universal Studios' Stage 12. The second SAG awards aired live from the Santa Monica Civic Auditorium, while subsequent awards have been held at the Shrine Auditorium. On December 4, 2017, it was announced that the awards show would have its first host in its then twenty-four year history, with actress Kristen Bell presiding over the ceremony. As of 2023, Shakespeare in Love is the only film to receive nominations for all four acting categories and the ensemble award and Everything Everywhere All at Once is the only film to receive four awards, including the ensemble award. The statuette given, a nude male figure holding both a mask of comedy and a mask of tragedy, is called "The Actor". It is 16 inches (41 cm) tall, weighs over 12 pounds (5.4 kg), is cast in solid bronze, and produced by the American Fine Arts Foundry in Burbank, California.