Emotions is the second studio album by American singer-songwriter Mariah Carey. It was released on September 17, 1991, by Columbia Records. The album deviated from the formula of Carey's 1990 self-titled debut album, as she had more creative control over the material she produced and recorded. Additionally, Emotions features influences from a range of different genres, as well as 1950s, 1960s and 1970s balladry infusion. On the record, Carey worked with a variety of producers and writers, including Walter Afanasieff, the only holdover from her previous effort. Additionally, Carey wrote and produced the album's material with Robert Clivillés and David Cole from C+C Music Factory and Carole King, with whom she wrote one song. Upon its release, Emotions polarized the music critics, while some praised the album's production, Carey's vocals, while other found the lyricism standard, and a few criticized Carey for overusing the whistle register. In retrospect, the album has been positively reviewed, with some contemporary music critics citing it amongst Carey's best works. Commercially, the album was a moderate success, failing to top the charts globally including the United States, where it debuted at number four on the Billboard 200, surprising many critics following the success of Carey's debut, which spent eleven weeks atop the chart. In other territories, the album reached the top 10 in eight countries, including Australia, Canada, and the United Kingdom. While selling far less than Mariah Carey, Emotions was eventually certified 4× Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), denoting shipments of four million copies throughout the country, with estimated sales standing at 3,595,000 copies. The album was particularly successful in Japan shipping over one million copies there, and has sold over eight million copies worldwide. Three singles were released to promote the album. The title track, the album's lead single, became Carey's fifth chart topper on the Billboard Hot 100, making her the only artist in history to have their first five singles reach the chart's summit. Additionally, it became Carey's third chart topper in Canada, and reached the top-ten in Greece and New Zealand. "Can't Let Go" was released as the second single from Emotions on October 23, 1991. Due to Columbia's removal of the single from stores in an attempt to boost the album's sales, "Can't Let Go" failed to become her sixth chart topper in the US, peaking at number two. European and worldwide success was very limited, reaching the top 20 in only Canada and the UK. Similarly, "Make It Happen" peaked at number five in the US, and achieved relatively weak international charting, prompting Columbia to halt promotion of the album.