Curaçao (/ˈkjʊərəsoʊ, -saʊ, ˌkjʊərəˈsoʊ, -ˈsaʊ/ KURE-ə-soh, KURE-ə-sow, kure-ə-SOH, or kure-ə-SOW, Dutch: [kyːraːˈsʌu] or [kuːr-], Papiamentu: [ˈkɔrsɔu̯]), officially the Country of Curaçao (Dutch: Land Curaçao; Papiamentu: Pais Kòrsou), is a Lesser Antilles island in the southern Caribbean Sea and Dutch Caribbean region, about 65 km (40 mi) north of Venezuela. It is a constituent country of the Kingdom of the Netherlands. Curaçao includes the main island of Curaçao and much smaller, uninhabited island of Klein Curaçao ("Little Curaçao"). Curaçao has a population of 158,665 (January 2019 est.), with an area of 444 km2 (171 sq mi); its capital is Willemstad. Together with Aruba and Bonaire, Curacao forms the ABC islands. Collectively, Curaçao, Aruba, and other Dutch islands in the Caribbean are often called the Dutch Caribbean. It is the largest of the ABC islands in area and population, and the largest of the Dutch Caribbean. The name "Curaçao" may originate from the indigenous autonym of its people, supported by early Spanish accounts referring to the inhabitants as "Indios Curaçaos". Curaçao's history begins with the Arawak and Caquetio Amerindians, with the island becoming a Spanish colony after Alonso de Ojeda's 1499 expedition. Despite being deemed "the useless island" due to poor agricultural yield and lack of precious metals, it became a strategic cattle ranching area. Dutch colonization in 1634 shifted the island's focus to trade, shipping, and later, a hub for the Atlantic slave trade. The Jewish community, fleeing persecution in Europe, settled here and significantly influenced the economy and culture. The 18th and 19th centuries saw Curaçao under attack by the British but remained predominantly Dutch. Post-abolition of slavery in 1863 led to economic shifts and migrations. Dutch remains the official language, though Papiamentu, English, and Spanish are widely spoken, reflecting the island's diverse cultural influences. Curaçao was formerly part of the Curaçao and Dependencies colony from 1815 to 1954 and later the Netherlands Antilles from 1954 to 2010, as Island Territory of Curaçao. The discovery of oil in the Maracaibo Basin in 1914 transformed Curaçao into a critical refinery location, altering its economic landscape. There were efforts towards becoming a country within the Kingdom of the Netherlands, achieving autonomy in 2010. Despite facing challenges like economic stagnation and COVID, Curaçao continues to navigate its path within the Caribbean and broader world stage.