Indestructible is the fourth studio album by American heavy metal band Disturbed. A self-produced effort, Indestructible is the first Disturbed album that did not feature Johnny K, the producer of Disturbed's previous three albums, The Sickness, Believe, and Ten Thousand Fists. Indestructible was recorded at Groovemaster Studios in Chicago, Illinois. The album features two songs, "Perfect Insanity" and "Divide", that were written by Disturbed prior to their first album, The Sickness, but were never previously released. The album shows Disturbed abandoning the nu metal sound prominent on previous three albums and features significantly darker themes than any of their previous work, according to the band. Some of the lyrical themes involve actual experiences that vocalist David Draiman had endured over the course of the past few years prior to making the album, including "bad relationships", a motorcycle accident that he was involved with, and an incident of suicide. To match the aggressive attitude and nature of said themes, Draiman told the other band members to create darker, more textural music than they have before. Despite these themes, the title track, "Indestructible", is meant to encourage those in the military that are fighting in wars and boost their morale. Indestructible was released on June 3, 2008 in CD format, and also as two different limited edition and special edition digipaks, debuting at number one on the Billboard 200, making it the third consecutive number one debut by Disturbed on that chart, which had only been achieved by five other rock bands prior to the album's release. The album also shipped over 253,000 units in its opening week. Indestructible was met with mixed reviews by critics, earning a score of 57% on review-aggregating website Metacritic, based on six reviews. The album was certified Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America in April 2009 for shipping over 1,000,000 copies in the United States. The single "Inside the Fire" was nominated for a 2009 Grammy Award in the "Best Hard Rock Performance" category.