In celestial mechanics, escape velocity or escape speed is the minimum speed needed for an object to escape from contact with or orbit of a primary body, assuming: Ballistic trajectory - no other forces are acting on the object, including propulsion and friction No other gravity-producing objects exist Although the term escape velocity is common, it is more accurately described as a speed than a velocity because it is independent of direction. Because gravitational force between two objects depends on their combined mass, the escape speed also depends on mass. For artificial satellites and small natural objects the mass of the object makes a negligible contribution to the combined mass, and so is often ignored. Escape speed varies with distance from the center of the primary body, as does the velocity of an object traveling under the gravitational influence of the primary. If an object is in a circular or elliptical orbit, its speed is always less than the escape speed at its current distance. In contrast if it is on a hyperbolic trajectory its speed will always be higher than the escape speed at its current distance. (It will slow down as it gets to greater distance, but do so asymptotically approaching a positive speed.) An object on a parabolic trajectory will always be traveling exactly the escape speed at its current distance. It has precisely balanced positive kinetic energy and negative gravitational potential energy; it will always be slowing down, asymptotically approaching zero speed, but never quite stop. Escape velocity calculations are typically used to determine whether an object will remain in the gravitational sphere of influence of a given body. For example, in solar system exploration it is useful to know whether a probe will continue to orbit the Earth or escape to a heliocentric orbit. It is also useful to know how much a probe will need to slow down in order to be gravitationally captured by its destination body. Rockets do not have to reach escape velocity in a single maneuver, and objects can also use a gravity assist to siphon kinetic energy away from large bodies. Precise trajectory calculations require taking into account small forces like atmospheric drag, radiation pressure, and solar wind. A rocket under continuous or intermittent thrust (or an object climbing a space elevator) can attain escape at any non-zero speed, but the minimum amount of energy required to do so is always the same.