#1's is the first greatest hits album by American girl group Destiny's Child. It was released on October 21, 2005, by Columbia Records, Music World Entertainment and Sony Urban Music. Following a two-year hiatus during which each member released solo albums to varying levels of success, Destiny's Child reunited during the summer of 2004 to record their fifth and final studio album Destiny Fulfilled, which was released that November to widespread commercial success. To further promote the album, the group embarked on the world tour Destiny Fulfilled... and Lovin' It in April 2005. During its Barcelona show on June 11, Kelly Rowland announced the group's disbandment for after the tour's conclusion. However, before formally disbanding, they decided to release #1's, featuring their highest-charting singles alongside three new tracks. Upon its release, #1's received generally positive reviews from music critics, who praised the included material as the highlights of the group's career. However, its title was dismissed by media outlets as numerous of the tracks had not reached the summit of a major record chart; Billboard later acknowledged the title as solely a marketing strategy. A commercial success, the compilation debuted atop the US Billboard 200 with first-week sales of 113,000 units, becoming the group's second number-one album. Briefly after its release, the album was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). #1's produced two singles. "Stand Up for Love" was termed "2005 World Children's Day Anthem" but was a critical and commercial failure, charting solely in South Korea nine years after its release. "Check on It–Beyoncé's collaboration with Slim Thug–peaked atop the US Billboard Hot 100, becoming Beyoncé's third solo number-one single, and within the top ten in 13 additional countries. Following the conclusion of promotional activities for #1's and the release of the video album Live in Atlanta, Destiny's Child formally disbanded in March 2006.