Grant Henry Hill (born October 5, 1972) is an American professional basketball executive and former player who is a co-owner of the Atlanta Hawks of the National Basketball Association (NBA) and a part-owner of Orlando City SC of Major League Soccer (MLS) and Orlando Pride of the National Women's Soccer League (NWSL). Hill also works as a basketball analyst for CBS and Turner Sports. A four-year player at Duke University, Hill was touted as one of the greatest college basketball players ever. In the NBA, he played for the Detroit Pistons, the Orlando Magic, the Phoenix Suns, and the Los Angeles Clippers, mostly at the small forward position. Hill is a seven-time NBA All-Star, a five-time All-NBA selection, and a three-time winner of the NBA Sportsmanship Award. In 2018, he was inducted into the Naismith Basketball Hall of Fame. The 1994 ACC Player of the Year, a two-time NCAA All-American, and a two-time NCAA champion, Hill is generally considered one of the best ever to play for the Duke Blue Devils. After graduating in 1994, Hill was selected by the Pistons with the third overall pick in the NBA draft. He was the co-winner of the 1995 NBA Rookie of the Year Award with Jason Kidd. Early in his NBA career, Hill was widely considered one of the best all-around players in the game, often leading his team in points, rebounds and assists. In his first six seasons in the NBA, Hill averaged 21.6 points, 7.9 rebounds, and 6.3 assists per game and made the Eastern Conference All-Star Team five times. An ankle injury in 2000 changed the trajectory of his career. It plagued him for several years, led to a March 2003 surgery that was followed by life-threatening complications, and forced him to miss the entire 2003–04 season. In 2005, Hill made the Eastern Conference All-Star Team as a member of the Magic. He played in the Western Conference Finals in 2010 with the Phoenix Suns. In the 12 seasons after his ankle injury, Hill averaged 13.1 points, 4.7 rebounds, and 2.6 assists per game. On June 1, 2013, Hill announced his retirement from the NBA. In 2015, Hill and Tony Ressler were part of an ownership group that purchased the Atlanta Hawks. In 2023, Hill and his wife, Tamia became part owners of MLS club Orlando City and NWSL club, Orlando Pride.