Kakashi Hatake (Japanese: はたけ カカシ, Hepburn: Hatake Kakashi) is a fictional character and one of the main protagonists in the Naruto manga and anime series created by Masashi Kishimoto. In the story, Kakashi is the teacher of Team 7, consisting of the series' primary characters, Naruto Uzumaki, Sasuke Uchiha, and Sakura Haruno. Kakashi's past has been extensively explored in the series, resulting in a gaiden being devoted to his past experiences. Kakashi has appeared in several pieces of Naruto media, the featured films in the series, the original video animations, and the video games. Kakashi is depicted in Naruto as an eccentric but highly skilled shinobi for the Hidden Leaf Village. Initially cold and calculated due to the suicide of his father, Sakumo, Kakashi eventually began to warm up in his youth with the help of his teammate Obito Uchiha, while they are under the tutelage of Naruto's father Minato Namikaze. It is through Obito that Kakashi obtains the Uchiha clan's Sharingan, which he uses to copy the abilities of his opponents and make his own, but also drains his energy. Following the deaths of all of his squadmates, unaware of Obito's survival, Kakashi is eventually given charge of Team 7 due to his connections with Minato and the Uchiha, and through them is able to finally have the family he never had. He is initially portrayed as a detached and apathetic figure, but as the series progresses, his loyalty to his friends, students, and the village becomes increasingly apparent. Kakashi was originally created by Kishimoto to be a harsh teacher but the author decided to avoid that. Instead, he made him more generous to calm his students in difficult situations to the point of giving him feminine traits. Kakashi's design gave Kishimoto difficulties as a result of having most of his face covered and as a result it was difficult to show his emotions. For the anime series, he is voiced by Kazuhiko Inoue in Japanese and Dave Wittenberg in the English dub. Numerous anime and manga publications have praised and criticized Kakashi's character. Although he has been noted to be an echo of similar detached shōnen manga characters, the duality of Kakashi's apathetic and serious sides have been praised. Kakashi has been highly popular with the Naruto reader base, placing high in several popularity polls. Merchandise based on Kakashi has also been released, including key chains and plush dolls.