808s & Heartbreak is the fourth studio album by the American rapper Kanye West. It was released by Def Jam Recordings and Roc-A-Fella Records on November 24, 2008, having been recorded earlier that year in September and October at Glenwood Studios in Burbank, California and Avex Recording Studio in Honolulu, Hawaii. Dominating its production, West was assisted by fellow producers No I.D., Plain Pat, Jeff Bhasker, and Mr Hudson, while also utilizing guest vocalists for some tracks, including Kid Cudi, Young Jeezy, and Lil Wayne. Conceived in the wake of West's breakup with his then-fiancée Alexis Phifer and the death of his mother Donda West in 2007, 808s & Heartbreak marked a major artistic departure from his previous rap records. Instead, West performed sung vocals that were processed through an Auto-Tune processor against an electronic production and minimalist sonic palette, including prominent use of minor keys and the Roland TR-808 drum machine. West's lyrics on the album explore themes of loss, alienated fame, and heartache, inspired by the distressing personal events, as well as his struggles with pop stardom. 808s & Heartbreak debuted at number one on the Billboard 200, selling just over 450,000 copies in its first week. Despite varying responses from listeners, the album received positive reviews from most music critics, who generally commended West's experimentation, and was named one of 2008's best records in several year-end lists. Four singles were released in its promotion, including the hit singles "Love Lockdown", which became the highest Billboard Hot 100 debut of West's career, and "Heartless". Despite the positive critical reception, nominations were mostly overlooked for the 52nd Grammy Awards, although the single "Amazing" received a nomination in the category of Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group. Among West's most influential records, 808s & Heartbreak made an immediate impact on hip hop, pop, and R&B music, as a new wave of rappers, singers, and producers adopted its stylistic and thematic elements. Further impact has been noted for pioneering the emo rap and experimental R&B subgenres in particular. Rolling Stone later included the album in its list of "The 40 Most Groundbreaking Albums of All Time" and provided a ranking at number 244 on its revised list of the 500 greatest albums of all time. By 2013, it had sold 1.7 million copies in the United States, where a triple platinum was awarded by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) in 2020.