Adam Mitchel Lambert (born January 29, 1982) is an American singer, songwriter and actor. He has collaborated with rock band Queen as lead vocalist for Queen + Adam Lambert since 2011. Lambert is known for his dynamic vocal performances that combine his theatrical training with modern and classic genres. Lambert rose to fame in 2009 after finishing as runner-up on the eighth season of American Idol. Later that year, he released his debut album For Your Entertainment, which debuted at number three on the U.S. Billboard 200. The album spawned several singles, including "Whataya Want from Me", for which he received a Grammy nomination for "Best Male Pop Vocal Performance". In 2012, Lambert released his second studio album Trespassing. The album premiered at number one on the U.S. Billboard 200, making him the first openly gay artist to top the album charts. In 2015, Lambert released his third album The Original High, which debuted at number three on the U.S. Billboard 200 and produced the single "Ghost Town". Since 2009, he has sold over 3 million albums and 5 million singles worldwide. Alongside his solo career, Lambert has performed with Queen in several worldwide tours from 2012. Their first album, Live Around the World, was released in October 2020, and debuted at number one on the UK Albums Chart. In late 2019, Lambert founded the non-profit Feel Something Foundation, anchoring his ongoing philanthropy, LGBTQ+ and human rights activism. Its particular focus is support for organizations and projects that directly and disproportionately impact the LGBTQ+ community, including education and the arts, mental health, suicide prevention and homelessness. Lambert was born in Indianapolis, Indiana, on January 29, 1982, to mother Leila, a dental hygienist; and father Eber Lambert, a program manager for Novatel Wireless. His father is of partial Norwegian descent and his mother is Jewish, with roots in Romania. Lambert was raised in his mother's religion. He has a younger brother, Neil. Shortly after his birth, his family moved to San Diego, California. Lambert began performing with Metropolitan Educational Theatre network (now MET2) from the age of nine. A few years later, he began more intense acting and vocal coaching, continuing to perform with both MET2 and what was to become the Broadway Bound Youth Theatre Foundation, as he moved through Mesa Verde Middle School and then Mount Carmel High School. There, he became heavily involved with theater and choir, performed vocals with the school's jazz band, and competed in the local Air Bands competitions. He also appeared in local professional productions such as Hello, Dolly!, Camelot, The Music Man, Grease, Chess and Peter Pan, at venues such as The Starlight, The Lyceum and others. After graduating from high school in 2000, he attended California State University, Fullerton. His major was musical theater, but left after five weeks to move to Los Angeles: "I just decided that what I really wanted to do was try to work in the real entertainment world. Life is all about taking risks to get what you want." At 19, Lambert got his first professional job, performing on a cruise ship for ten months with Anita Mann Productions. Afterwards, he performed in light opera in Orange County, California. By 21, he was signed with a manager and cast in a European tour of Hair. In 2004, he appeared in the Theatre Under the Stars (TUTS) production of Brigadoon and a Pasadena Playhouse production of 110 in the Shade, before being cast in the role of Joshua in The Ten Commandments: The Musical at the Kodak Theatre alongside Val Kilmer. He came to the attention of the casting director for Wicked, and was hired as the understudy for the role of Fiyero and an ensemble member in the first national touring production of the musical from 2005, and the Los Angeles production from 2007. He finished performances with the musical in 2008. During this same period, Lambert briefly fronted underground rock band The Citizen Vein with Steve Sidelnyk, Tommy Victor and Monte Pittman. He also worked as a demo singer and a session musician; a compilation of his 2005 recordings was later released in 2009 on the album Take One. In 2009, Lambert auditioned for the eighth season of American Idol in San Francisco, California by singing "Rock with You" and "Bohemian Rhapsody". Advancing to Hollywood Week, he performed "What's Up" and "Believe" solo, and "Some Kind of Wonderful" in the group effort. Simon Cowell voiced some concern about his theatricality, but Randy Jackson found it "current". He advanced easily to the top 36 performing "(I Can't Get No) Satisfaction". In the first week of live shows, his rendition of Michael Jackson's "Black or White" was praised by all four judges. For Country week, he sang a sitar-infused version of "Ring of Fire". His Motown night acoustic version of The Miracles' "The Tracks of My Tears" drew praise from judges and a standing ovation from Smokey Robinson, the week's mentor. Advancing to the top 8, he sang the 2001 Michael Andrews and Gary Jules arrangement of "Mad World". Because the show exceeded its time slot, only Cowell gave a critique, which he did by giving Lambert a standing ovation, the only one he bestowed during his decade-long run as an American Idol judge. After Lambert sang "If I Can't Have You", delivering what DioGuardi called his "most memorable performance", Cowell described his vocals as "immaculate". For the top 3 show, he performed "One" before Cowell declared, "If you are not in the final next week, it will be one of the biggest upsets"; and continued with "Cryin'" before Abdul affirmed, "we'll be seeing you next week and many years after that". In March 2009, photos of Lambert kissing another man while dressed in drag at Burning Man surfaced online. Highlighted as controversial, they were displayed by conservative commentators on The O'Reilly Factor, who called them "embarrassing" and questioned if the images would have an effect on the program. Fox restricted press access to Lambert and to his family following the outing. Despite conservative backlash, outlets such as the New York Times and ABC news speculated that Lambert would be too popular to lose the competition. Upon the announcement of Lambert as runner-up, American Idol pundits, gay bloggers, and LGBT news outlets reassessed these claims, noting that his queerness may have alienated conservative viewers. Lambert performed three solos in the finale, a reprise of "Mad World", followed by the 1960s civil rights anthem "A Change Is Gonna Come", to tremendously positive judge reaction. After his performance of the mandatory winner's single, "No Boundaries" Cowell summed up Lambert's journey: "Over the entire season, you've been one of the best, most original contestants we've ever had on the show. The hope and whole idea of a show like this is to find a worldwide star, and I truly believe we've found that in you". Upon winning the competition, Kris Allen stated: "Adam deserved this", later explaining he thought Lambert deserved to win as much as he did, and that Lambert "was the most consistent person all year. He was seriously one of the most gifted performers that I've ever met". Lambert's version of the winner's single was released alongside Allen's. The Los Angeles Times later ranked Lambert fifth in its list of the top 120 American Idol contestants, selected from the first nine seasons of the show, above Allen. Note Due to the judges using their one save to save Matt Giraud, the Top 7 remained intact for another week. Lambert performed "Mad World" on The Early Show and Live with Regis and Kelly. He began the American Idols LIVE! Tour 2009 in July and that summer was also the recipient of two awards: the Young Hollywood Award for Artist of the Year and the Teen Choice Award for Male Reality/Variety Star. For Your Entertainment, Lambert's first studio album, was released on November 23, 2009. Debuting at number three on the Billboard 200 and selling 198,000 copies in the US its first week, the album saw Lambert in collaboration with producers such as Rob Cavallo, Dr. Luke and Max Martin. Album writers included Matthew Bellamy, Ryan Tedder, Rivers Cuomo, Justin Hawkins, P!nk, Linda Perry and Lady Gaga. At Metacritic, the album received a score of 71, which indicates "generally favorable reviews". Spin said the album is "perhaps the strongest, most flavorful batch of tunes to reach an AI vet, and Lambert's polymorphous vocal skills unite dancefloor strut and hard-rock pomp in a convincing glam package". Rolling Stone, however, gave it a more mixed review: "The songs sound great but feel strangely stuffy—[it] seems like a disc that was overthought. Next time, the hugely talented Lambert should make sure he's going straight for the gut." Its Claude Kelly and Dr. Luke-produced lead single "For Your Entertainment" preceded the album's release but was not as successful as its second single "Whataya Want from Me" which impacted on charts worldwide, became his highest-peaking single (at number 10) on the Billboard Hot 100, and was nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Male Pop Vocal Performance at the 53rd awards ceremony. Another notable single was "Time for Miracles", the ending theme for the disaster movie 2012. As of April 2012[update], For Your Entertainment has sold nearly 2 million copies worldwide and was certified gold in the US in June 2010. On November 22, Lambert performed "For Your Entertainment" at the American Music Awards of 2009. The controversial performance, which was the night's finale, showed Lambert kissing a male bassist and grabbing the crotch of another. In response, the Parents Television Council, a conservative decency group, urged viewers to complain to the FCC and launched a formal complaint—though the performance aired "outside the FCC's usual 6am-10pm time frame prohibiting the broadcast of indecent material". After receiving about 1,500 telephoned complaints, ABC canceled Lambert's November 25 performance on Good Morning America, canceled his upcoming performance on Jimmy Kimmel Live!, and removed him from consideration for Dick Clark's New Year's Rockin' Eve. Discussing the incident in a Rolling Stone interview, Lambert said: "Female performers have been doing this for years—pushing the envelope about sexuality—and the minute a man does it, everybody freaks out. We're in 2009—it's time to take risks, be a little more brave, time to open people's eyes and if it offends them, then maybe I'm not for them. My goal was not to piss people off, it was to promote freedom of expression and artistic freedom." Lambert returned to the AMAs two years later as a presenter and was warmly received. Rejecting claims that the singer was banned from the show in 2009, Executive Producer Larry Klein said that he was anticipating future Lambert performances: "Adam Lambert is a friend of ours, he's talented and I like everything about him". Lambert's performance was included in Billboard's list of "Top Ten American Music Awards Moments" on the eve of its 40th anniversary, in November 2012. In the months leading to his album release, Lambert appeared on the cover of magazines such as Entertainment Weekly in May 2009, Rolling Stone in June 2009 and Details in November 2009. His Rolling Stone cover story became the magazine's best selling issue of the year. He appeared on the cover of Out magazine in their 2009 "Out 100" issue, sparking controversy as Out's publisher issued him an open letter questioning the "gayness" of his image. In April, he became one of People Magazine's Most Beautiful People 2010. He was chosen for Barbara Walters' 10 Most Fascinating People of 2009, and interviewed on the show of December 10. In late 2009, he performed on the Late Show with David Letterman, The Tonight Show with Conan O'Brien, the season finale of So You Think You Can Dance, The Jay Leno Show and The Oprah Winfrey Show. He performed his first official solo concert, which sold-out, at Fantasy Springs Resort Casino in Indio, California. In April 2010, Lambert returned to American Idol as the first former contestant to mentor during an Elvis Presley themed week, where he also performed. In June, he appeared on Canada's MuchMusic Video Awards to receive the UR Fav International Video award for "Whataya Want from Me". In early June 2010, Lambert embarked on his debut headlining Glam Nation Tour, playing in the United States, Europe and Asia for 113 shows, nearly all of them sold out. The Indianapolis show was filmed for Lambert's first video release Glam Nation Live, a 13-track CD with DVD. The concert, which MTV called "out of this world", and his subsequent video release, were well-received, with Entertainment Weekly saying it "sizzles" with the energy that Lambert's vocals bring in a live concert setting. Glam Nation Live debuted at number one on the SoundScan Music Video chart and landed at number 12 on Billboard's 2011 year-end music video sales chart. This followed the release of his first extended play, Acoustic Live!, consisting of acoustic versions of songs recorded live in various countries. The EP garnered excellent reviews and was called "electrifying" by the New York Daily News. In August, he was profiled in an hour-long documentary for VH1's Behind the Music series; and later in the year mentored for a second time on The Hub TV Network's Majors & Minors, coaching singing contestants who were children. In November 2011, Lambert joined Queen as the lead singer at the MTV Europe Music Awards, where the band was honored with the Global Icon Award and they performed a medley of classic hits. Lambert changed management from 19 Entertainment to Direct Management Group in August 2011. The title track of his second studio album, Trespassing, was co-written with Pharrell Williams; while the album's lead single, "Better Than I Know Myself", a collaboration with Dr. Luke and Claude Kelly, was released digitally on December 20, 2011.[citation needed] Trespassing was released on May 15, 2012, to positive reviews. On May 23, the album debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 chart, selling 77,000 copies. and at number three in United Kingdom's midweek chart. His second single "Never Close Our Eyes", written by Bruno Mars and produced by Dr. Luke, was released digitally on April 17, to positive reviews. Lambert returned to American Idol for his third consecutive year on the results show that preceded Idol's final week. The performance of May 17 of "Never Close Our Eyes" was touted for its vibrant energy and dazzle, as well as for the powerhouse vocals that had become his signature. Throughout the spring and summer of 2012, Lambert performed across Europe, North America, Asia and Australia, appearing in festivals, on radio and television, and in concert, including one of several headlining spots at Summer Sonic Festival 2012. In September, he appeared on the finale of The Voice of China, the country's most popular program. Lambert joined Queen for a six concert date collaboration, kicking off with a two-hour extravaganza under the auspices of the UEFA in Kyiv on June 30, the eve of the Euro 2012 Football Championship. Viewed live by hundreds of thousands in Ukraine's main square, the performance was touted for the strength of Lambert's showmanship, vocal excellence and interpretative skill, which confidently balanced old and new. Almost uniformly, reviews noted Lambert's vocals, his "sizzle" and "electrifying" presence; along with the synergy of the collaboration, which Brian May called "organic". Lambert's third single, "Trespassing", was released as part of an eight track EP of remixes that included a radio edit of the original song. Entitled Trespassing Remixes, it became available to radio and digital outlets in October, with hard copies sold from his official website only. "Trespassing" debuted at number one on the Billboard Hot Dance Singles Sales chart, giving Lambert his tenth number one Billboard entry. On October 23, Lambert acted and performed two songs from Trespassing in the Halloween special of the television series Pretty Little Liars. Lambert appeared for the first time in South Africa in November, headlining arena concerts in Cape Town and Johannesburg. South Africa's The Sunday Times called Lambert's Johannesburg performance "epic" and "electrifying", stating: "His voice is stunning and his entertainment factor is through the roof." Later that month he was in Hong Kong delivering a "powerful performance" at the 2012 Mnet Asian Music Awards (2012 MAMA.) The album Trespassing was rewarded in year end lists and polls, among them best album of the year at Rolling Stone, number three at Billboard for "Favorite 200 No.1" albums, and number eight on People magazine's list of "Top Ten Music" in its year end issue. Queen + Adam Lambert was named best live act of 2012 at Gigwise, and one of Classic Rock magazine's top events of the year. Lambert left 19 Recordings when his contract expired, but remained with RCA Records. On February 17, the newly dubbed "We Are Glamily Tour" kicked off in Seoul, with seventeen stops throughout Asia and Europe. His first solo concert in Hong Kong on March 5 was noted for the live debut of two songs, "Time for Miracles" and a cover of "Shout", called "stunning" and vocally impressive. Lambert won the "Favorite International Artist" category at the STAR TV 17th Chinese Music Awards held in Macau in April, also performing two songs from Trespassing. Lambert also appeared as a guest judge during auditions on Chinese Idol. On May 11, Lambert for his album Trespassing along with Frank Ocean for Channel Orange were co-recipients of the award for Outstanding Music Artist at the 24th GLAAD Media Awards. He returned to American Idol on May 16 for the fourth consecutive year, performing a duet with Angie Miller on the twelfth season finale of American Idol, where Miller was a finalist in the top three. The pair tackled the song "Titanium". In a letter sent to The Hollywood Reporter on July 12, Lambert revealed that he would be leaving RCA due to "creative differences" centering most directly on his next release. With RCA "pushing" for a covers album, Lambert stated: "my heart is simply not in doing a covers album ... I am already deep into writing new material with some very talented colleagues for a brand new album, and I can't tell you how excited I am to share this new sound and direction. This music is where my heart is". Lambert unveiled a collaboration with Nile Rodgers and DJ-producer Avicii when the three appeared onstage together for the track's US debut at an August benefit concert on Long Island. The song, entitled "Lay Me Down", released on Avicii's debut album TRUE on September 17 in the US, though it had already begun climbing charts worldwide. It received wide acclaim in previews, and landed at number one on a compilation of Rolling Stone's favorite songs, albums and videos. Lambert and Queen made their first live concert appearance in the United States, closing the night on September 20, at the 2013 iHeartRadio Music Festival at the MGM Grand Arena. Reviews for the performance were stellar, with Rolling Stone stating that they dominated night one, also calling them most anticipated act of the evening, with Lambert "astound[ing] the audience". Billboard was equally laudatory, remarking on the "magnetic power" of the vocals, adding that Lambert "oozed charisma". Lambert made his debut on the fifth season of Glee on November 7, playing the role of Elliot "Starchild" Gilbert in what became a multi-episode arc. His rendition of Lady Gaga's "Marry the Night" was released prior to air date, garnering publicity and positive reviews. Accolades for Lambert's debut spotlighted his powerful vocals and dynamic presence. His remake of "Marry the Night" impacted Billboard the following week, debuting at number 39 on the Pop Digital Songs chart. Lambert was in attendance to receive two awards at China's Huading Music Awards, Best International Male Vocalist and the Fan Choice Award, on December 18 in Shanghai. Lambert tied at number three on Forbes annual list of top earning American Idols, due to his live performances and other endeavors. In February 2014, Lambert returned to American Idol, where he was a guest mentor during Randy Jackson's two-night "Boot Camp" workshop. He was a guest judge on the season 6 premiere of RuPaul's Drag Race the following week. Glee returned on February 25 with the episode "Frenemies" featuring Lambert in a performance of The Darkness's "I Believe in a Thing Called Love". On May 27, 2014, a compilation album The Very Best of Adam Lambert was released by Sony Legacy's Playlist series, featuring recordings from Lambert's two studio albums along with studio recordings from American Idol and Glee. It debuted on the Billboard Top Internet Albums chart at number 14. Lambert started touring with Roger Taylor and Brian May of Queen in June 2014, with 35 dates in North America, Korea, Japan, Australia and New Zealand. It was a critical and commercial success, as reviews highlighted the musical virtuosity of May and Taylor, alongside Lambert's impressive vocal dexterity, charisma and affinity with Queen's repertoire – all augmented by the elaborate spectacle of the production. In 2015, a second leg of eleven countries and 26 dates in Europe and the UK was performed. On November 4, Queen + Adam Lambert was named Band of the Year at the 10th annual Classic Rock Roll of Honour Awards. Following a much reviewed "soaring" performance on the UK's X Factor, Lambert and Queen presented an exclusive New Year's Eve concert in London at Central Hall Westminster, Queen + Adam Lambert Rock Big Ben Live. The praised concert was called "pitch-perfect". In January, Queen + Adam Lambert appeared on the cover of Classic Rock magazine; he was applauded in the cover story by Taylor and May, who called him "a gift from god". In September, Queen and Lambert headlined Rock in Rio's "30 Years Celebration" in Brazil, as part of a six date South American tour. The tour was a critical success; and their Rock in Rio performance was the seven-day festival's most popular, based on ticket sales. On January 15, 2015, Lambert became the first former contestant to appear as a guest judge on American Idol at the fourteenth season's New York City auditions, filling in for Keith Urban. That same day, Lambert revealed in a Billboard interview that he signed to Warner Bros. Records within twenty-four hours after announcing his departure from RCA. He further stated that his upcoming studio release, scheduled for early summer with a single out in April, would be executive produced by the Swedish songwriter-producers Max Martin and Shellback. Promotion for the new album, The Original High, began with a series of magazine cover stories, television appearances and teasers of the lead single, "Ghost Town", prior to its release on April 21, 2015. Also notable was "Ghost Town"'s performance at the 2015 Logo Trailblazer Honors; and its performance in early August on Australia's The Voice. Spin named it one of 2015's best songs so far; and The New York Times stated it "was perhaps his best single to date." "Ghost Town" entered the Billboard Hot 100 at number 73, and charted on the Billboard Adult Top 40. It reached 100 million Spotify streams in early December 2015 and was certified gold in the US on January 15, 2016. The Original High debuted at number three on the Billboard 200 selling 42,000 albums and moving 47,000 total units, including track and streaming equivalent albums. Lambert garnered his first top ten album in the United Kingdom, with a number eight debut on the UK Albums Chart. As with "Ghost Town", reviews were largely positive. The Original High Tour commenced in January 2016 with six dates in Australia and New Zealand and seven dates in Japan. On August 29, Lambert received the award for Best Foreign Artist at the 2015 Eska Music Awards held in Szczecin, Poland. On the 30th, he made his first UK festival appearance, performing a set at Fusion Festival 2015 in Birmingham. In early October, Lambert released "Another Lonely Night". It debuted live as the new single at 538LIVE XXL at the Ziggo Dome in Amsterdam, and a few days later on X Factor Australia. Twenty dates were then added to "The Original High Tour" to include thirteen European countries; "RedFest DXB", a two-day music festival, in Dubai; and two dates in China. The tour commenced at No. Celebrate2016 in The Float at Marina Bay, Singapore on December 31, 2015. In November, an online petition supported by conservative groups was launched to remove Lambert from the Singapore program, citing his controversial performance at the AMA's in 2009, and active support for LGBT rights. He was not removed from the headlining spot, but it was reiterated that his performance would conform to strict broadcast regulations. Throughout the fall, Lambert continued appearances in the US, Europe and Asia. Notable performances included Today, Swedish Idol, The Voice of Poland and BBC One's Strictly Come Dancing, as a musical guest. After participating in a Billboard news conference in Beijing announcing the inclusion of China in its music charts, he was the guest performer at Alibaba's Singles' Day event. On December 2, he performed at the CMT "Artists of the Year" special to honor Little Big Town and their controversial song "Girl Crush" in a duet with Leona Lewis. The performance was nominated for "Performance of the Year" at the 2016 CMT Music Awards. Lambert received several year end accolades, among them a number one in Forbes yearly earnings ranking of American Idol contestants; and the top spot in Rolling Stone's "The Ten Best Albums of 2015" readers' poll, with the publication noting his "vocals are as massive as his performances." In January 2016, twenty-three US dates were added to "The Original High Tour", bringing it to 56 dates worldwide. In mid-January, Lambert partnered with Oreo to launch a diversity focused global ad campaign, "Open Up", featuring his vocals in an animated spot. In February, he featured in the finale tribute to David Bowie at Clive Davis and The Recording Academy's pre-Grammy event. In March, he debuted "Welcome to the Show" in the final fifteenth season of American Idol. The next week, the DJ produced Steve Aoki and Felix Jaehn track "Can't Go Home" debuted, with Lambert as the featured vocalist. In May 2016, Lambert became the new face of Macy's lifestyle brand, I.N.C. International Concepts, and a participant in its "American Icons" summer campaign. Queen + Adam Lambert headlined Rock in Rio Lisbon, Sweden Rock Festival, Isle of Wight Festival, and twelve more European festivals and shows in May and June 2016. In September, they headlined the 2016 Formula 1 Singapore Grand Prix, performed one date in Tel Aviv, three dates in Tokyo, and one each in Bangkok, Hong Kong, Shanghai and Taipei as part of an Asia Tour. In June, Lambert joined the judging panel for the eighth season of The X Factor Australia. Lambert released his first independent, self-produced music video in July to accompany "Welcome to the Show". He performed Faith on the season finale of ABC's Greatest Hits in August. Lambert is featured on the single "Broken", released in August by DJ/producers Tritonal in collaboration with producer Jenaux. In October, Lambert co-starred in the television remake of The Rocky Horror Picture Show. The X Factor Australia wrapped its 2016 season in November, with a member of Lambert's team declared the winner. In December, he performed a duet with finalist Saara Aalto on The X Factor UK finale, and presented the award for British Artist of the Year on the BBC Music Awards 2016 live telecast. Lambert featured on the soundtrack album of DreamWorks Animation's Captain Underpants: The First Epic Movie with "Think", released in June 2017. Queen + Adam Lambert commenced a worldwide arena tour on June 23, 2017, in Glendale, Arizona consisting of dates in North America, Europe, Australia and New Zealand. The group appeared on The Late Late Show with James Corden with Lambert and Corden having a sing-off to be the Queen frontman. Lambert and Queen performed a mini-concert on Jimmy Kimmel Live!, with a four-song set list that included the debut of a new track from Lambert entitled "Two Fux". Early reviews for the shows were strongly positive, highlighting both the synergy of the collaboration, which Billboard stated was perhaps the most "serendipitous fusion of two established recording acts" since Fleetwood Mac; and the emergence of something new, moving the band forward. "Two Fux" was released to digital retailers on June 30, with reviews that were similarly positive: Yahoo! Music called it "a delightfully attitudinal rock 'n' roll waltz" exhibiting a highly confident "almost superhuman" Lambert. Esquire stated the song was "effervescent, and a showcase for the nosebleed-inducing heights his falsetto can scale; it also serves as the conflation of Queen's influence and Lambert's own experiences and perspective". "Two Fux" is included in the Queen + Adam Lambert live show set list. Lambert appeared as guest judge and musical coach on an episode of the third season of RuPaul's Drag Race: All Stars. Due to its success, the Queen + Adam Lambert tour announced a fourth leg to commence June 7 in Lisbon, ending July 8 in Dublin. In March, Billboard reported that Queen + Adam Lambert topped their "Hot Tours" recap, with their Australian shows. In May, Lambert teamed up with Melissa Etheridge to open the 29th GLAAD Media Awards with a "ripping" performance of "I'm the Only One". Days later, he appeared on Live with Kelly and Ryan, announcing a 10-date Las Vegas residency for Queen+Adam Lambert in September 2018, at the Park Theater at Park MGM. The new production, titled "The Crown Jewels", was well received. Lambert changed management to Philymack. Lambert was a guest judge in the "Judges' Houses" segment of The X Factor in October. He performed the duet "As Long As You're Mine" with Ledisi on NBC's A Very Wicked Halloween, commemorating Wicked's fifteen years on Broadway. The performance was lauded for its brilliant harmonies and "impressive vocal riffs", and later released on Wicked: The 15th Anniversary Special Edition album. On December 2, he appeared on the results show of Strictly Come Dancing's Musicals Week, singing "We Are the Champions", from We Will Rock You. On the same date, he performed live at the Kennedy Center Honors in support of honoree Cher, singing "I Got You Babe" with Cyndi Lauper and an orchestral ballad version of "Believe", called an "event high point" by The Washington Post. Following the ceremony's broadcast on December 26, Lambert's performance was widely praised. Lambert appeared with James Corden on The Late Late Show on January 20, 2019, for an NFL themed episode, singing a parody of "Don't Stop Me Now". On February 17, he performed a well-reviewed "rocking" version of "Blue Suede Shoes" on NBC's Elvis All-Star Tribute, a recreation of Elvis Presley's '68 Comeback Special. Lambert voiced the character Emperor Maximus and sung original songs for Playmobil: The Movie, a combination animated live-action film released in 2019. On December 3, Queen and Adam Lambert announced a 23 date arena and stadium tour with a brand new production for North America. The Rhapsody Tour added additional dates in NYC and LA; at 25 dates the tour ran from July 10 through August 23, 2019. Lambert released the song "Feel Something" on February 22, called an "achingly yearning ballad" by Rolling Stone that "showcases [his] acrobatic vocal range". Co-written with Benedict Cork, Josh Cumbee and produced by Cumbee and Afshin Salmani, it was the first track revealed from the singer's then-upcoming fourth studio album, which was released through the independent label Empire. Calling the song "a gift" to fans and the launch of a new era prior to his official first single, Lambert explained via Instagram the process by which he emerged from a dark period of second-guessing, compromise and disillusionment - with "Feel Something" the emotional starting point for his new work. Days later he released a "captivating" live studio performance of "Feel Something", whose beauty and soothing tone capture the song's intent. On February 24, 2019, Lambert and Queen were the first rock band to open the Oscars with an "explosive" performance of two classic Queen songs that earned a standing ovation. The following day, they announced a two-hour documentary, The Show Must Go On: The Queen + Adam Lambert Story, depicting the journey of their ongoing collaboration. The film aired on ABC in April, offering rare behind-the-scenes concert footage and new interviews. Roger Taylor appeared on Good Morning America the same morning, calling the collaboration with Lambert "magical", and an example of "fate unfolding". On April 28, Lambert guest mentored American Idol's top 8 finalists on a Queen-themed night, and was praised for actionable advice that elevated performances. In April 2019, The Rhapsody Tour expanded to include seven stadium dates in Australia and three in New Zealand, slated for February 2020; four shows in Japan and two in South Korea, for January 2020; and 26 shows in Europe including a ten show residency at The O2 Arena in London. On May 15, 2019, Lambert released "New Eyes", the lead single from his fourth studio album Velvet, co-written with Paris Carney and produced by Jamie Sierota. The "effortlessly cool, sleek" song fuses modern and classic rock, while its video reflects the song's lyrics and '70s-inspired aesthetic. Directed by Miles & AJ, the video was the first part of a short film that accompanied the lead-up to the album release. Lambert returned to American Idol for its May 19 season finale to perform "New Eyes" and a duet with a contestant. On May 31, he performed the track on The Ellen DeGeneres Show and again on June 24 on the finals of The Voice Australia. Lambert released The Monarch-produced track "Comin in Hot" on June 26, along with the second video installment of the short film supporting Velvet. The video was called "bewitching" and "mesmerizing", and the song said to extend the '70s rock-driven sound of the album's first single. Lambert revealed that Velvet would be released in two parts, with Side A slated for September 2019. "Comin In Hot" saw its broadcast debut on June 28 when Lambert performed a five-song set and was interviewed on Good Morning America's Summer Concert Series, in celebration of Pride month and WorldPride NYC 2019. On September 4, Lambert released the single and video for "Superpower", appearing on Velvet: Side A, the first half of his fourth studio album. The Tommy English produced song was co-written by Lambert, English and Ilsey Juber, with video direction by Millient Hailes. Its weighty baseline and "smooth falsettos" reflect the '70s rock, funk-heavy core of the multi-genre album, which was released on September 27. Billboard called the 6 track EP his "best work yet", exuding confidence and raw vocal power. His proficiency and artistry across genres was also noted. He performed "Superpower" live on October 2 on Live with Kelly and Ryan, and for Halloween week of BBC One's Strictly Come Dancing. On the 12th, he delivered a "show-stopping" performance of "Superpower" on The Talk. On October 15, a live black-and-white video version of the track "Closer to You" from Velvet: Side A was released, lauded as "a vocal masterclass". Its broadcast debut on The Late Late Show with James Corden was highly praised, characterized as "scaling the song's heights with pop operatic virtuosity." On September 28, Lambert with Queen headlined the 2019 Global Citizen Festival in New York City's Central Park. Dedicated to mobilizing world governments to eradicate extreme poverty and address climate change, the festival posted its best ratings yet: with 60,000 in attendance and nearly 21 million views worldwide, it generated close to $1 billion in pledges. In November, Lambert released a cover of "Please Come Home for Christmas" for the Spotify Singles: Holiday Collection. He was among several performers at the Avicii tribute concert at Friends Arena in Stockholm on December 5, to support suicide prevention and promote mental health awareness. On December 6, Lambert released a cover of Cher's "Believe" based on his 2018 performance at the Kennedy Center Honors. He performed the song as a duet with Katie Kadan on the December 17 finale of the seventeenth season of The Voice. On December 22, he performed on the CBS A Home for the Holidays Christmas special to raise awareness about adoption and the foster care system. Lambert gave four well received solo concerts throughout December to promote Velvet: Side A. In January 2020, Lambert was nominated for a GLAAD Media Award in the Outstanding Music Artist category for Velvet: Side A. Lambert opened the 31st GLAAD Media Awards with a special performance on March 19 in New York City. On February 16 in Sydney, Lambert with Queen performed at the Fire Fight Australia concert to raise funds for relief from Australia's bushfires and replicated Queen's 1985 Live Aid set in its entirety. On February 4, 2020, Lambert released the retro-funk track "Roses" featuring Nile Rodgers. The Velvet Tour begins on August 3 at Manchester Pride, followed by London's SSE Arena Wembley and seven more shows across Europe. The tour was preceded by a mini-residence of five shows at The Venetian Theatre at The Venetian Las Vegas in April. Lambert with Queen united virtually on April 30 to release "You Are the Champions", a reimagining of "We Are the Champions", on streaming and download services, with proceeds going to the World Health Organization's COVID-19 Solidarity Response Fund. In May, Lambert was part of a 3-day livestream event called "Stronger Than You Think", a conversation to address mental health issues affecting teens and young adults, particularly during the COVID-19 pandemic. In June, he appeared on The Late Late Show with James Corden to discuss his support and experience of the Black Lives Matter movement, and gave an acoustic performance of "On the Moon" from Velvet. Lambert participated in the GRAMMY Museum's virtual Programs at Home, with an in-depth interview and acoustic four song set. In July, in support of Joe Biden's presidential bid, he performed "Ready to Run" at Biden's live-streaming fundraiser "Celebration for Change". Queen with Lambert released their first album on October 2, 2020, Queen + Adam Live Around the World. Debuting at number one on the UK's Official Albums Chart, it was followed by a concert film of the same name on January 29, 2021, with tour footage and streaming or purchase access. The group announced that their United Kingdom and European tour would be postponed a second time to 2022 with multiple shows subsequently added. In November, Moonbase 8 debuted, with Lambert in a non-musical guest acting role. Lambert sang "Starman" for the three hour livestream event, "A Bowie Celebration", on what would have been Bowie's 74th birthday. He played the role of "Emile" in Ratatouille the Musical, a first of its kind collaboration between TikTok and the theater community. What emerged was a full Broadway-style musical, streamed on January 1, raising two million dollars for The Actors Fund, and scoring a Drama League Award nomination in an expanded digital category. Lambert sang on the concept recording of Cinderella, "rocking out" in his Prince Charming solo. The album was released in July, and debuted at number one on the UK Official Compilations Chart, later garnering a 2022 Grammy nomination. Lambert, through his Feel Something Foundation in partnership with Pride Live, curated and headlined a three-day festival, the annual June Stonewall Day global celebration, to boost and preserve the legacy of the Stonewall riots and LGBTQ activism. He appeared on The Kelly Clarkson Show on January 26, and discussed the possibility of developing his own beauty brand. In March 2021, Lambert revealed that he was writing a Broadway-style rock and roll stage musical in collaboration with other songwriters. Set in the 1970s, the work will be about a real person; and represents his intent to expand into other creative spaces like acting and producing. Lambert sang "These Are Your Rights", an "anthemic power ballad," for the episode "The Bill of Rights" in We the People released on July fourth. In September, he participated in Global Citizen Live, a worldwide 24-hour broadcast and livestream event to defeat poverty and address the global effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. In May he appeared as a guest judge on the second season of Legendary. Lambert appeared on The Ellen Show in advance of his role as a judge on the reality competition Clash of the Cover Bands, that debuted in October. He voiced the devil in A Tale Dark & Grimm, that also debuted in fall 2021. He returned to Las Vegas for six solo shows at The Venetian Theatre at The Venetian Las Vegas in October. In November, Lambert performed on The Queen Family Singalong. On The Kelly Clarkson Show, he performed the duet he recorded with Darren Criss for Criss' holiday album, "(Everybody's Waitin' for) The Man with the Bag"; a music video of the track was released the following day. Lambert performed two songs to close the 2021 ITV Palooza event; and appeared as a judge on the talent show Starstruck, that debuted on February 12. Lambert performed on the second annual global livestream event, "Rise Up With The Arts", which went live on World Theater Day, March 27. In response to the crisis in Ukraine, funds raised were designated for Save the Children's emergency appeal for Ukraine, as well as to support the theater community and the charity "icandance." Lambert headlined the April 30 show of SunFest music festival in West Palm Beach, Florida; later he announced four more Florida solo shows plus one in Georgia, unofficially dubbing the dates the "Say Gay" tour in response to Florida's recently enacted "Don't Say Gay" bill. Queen and Lambert began the European leg of The Rhapsody Tour on May 27 and concluded on July 25. On June 4, they opened the Platinum Party at the Palace with a three-song set outside Buckingham Palace, in honor of Elizabeth II's Platinum Jubilee. Lambert appeared in Fairyland that debuted at the Sundance Film Festival in January 2023. Lambert received an award from the Creative Coalition's Spotlight Initiative, whose awards ceremony gala took place during Sundance. He returned to Las Vegas in October for the Halloween themed concert series "The Witch Hunt", consisting of three shows at the Encore at Wynn Las Vegas; five California dates were subsequently added to the mini tour that concluded with a livestreamed show at the Hollywood Palladium on October 30. Lambert returned to Warner Music Group with global representation on East West Records. His first single release on the label was a cover of Noël Coward's "Mad About the Boy" that will feature in a documentary about Coward arriving in 2023. Lambert debuted the track with an "amazing" live performance on Strictly Come Dancing. Also in October he performed two duets with Jennifer Hudson, including the aria "Nessun dorma," on The Jennifer Hudson Show. In February Lambert released his fifth studio album, High Drama, a collection of cover songs. It debuted at number five on the UK Albums Chart, marking his first solo entry in the UK Official Charts top ten. Its number seven debut on Billboard's Top Albums Sales chart was his fifth top ten entry in this category. The video and song, "Ordinary World", was released and was called "haunting" in its sound. The song debuted with a performance on the 2022 season finale of The Voice that Lambert dedicated to the victims of the November shootings at the LGBTQ+ Club Q. Lambert was a judge on Britain Get Singing, a televised celebrity singing competition in support of mental health. He debuted High Drama's third single, "a glam-rock makeover" of "Holding Out for a Hero", on The National Lottery's Big Bash end-of-year special held at Ovo Arena Wembley, televised on New Year's Eve. On December 17, he performed on The Jonathan Ross Show's Christmas episode. He performed a "show-stopping" version of "Chandelier" from High Drama on America's Got Talent: All-Stars February 27 finale with the season's winner. Lambert held a one-off album launch show at London's KOKO concert venue on February 27. He began a series of solo concert dates in June, beginning with Royal Albert Hall in London. In early March, he performed on The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon, Good Morning America, The View and Australian Idol; and was interviewed for a Nightline segment. On April 17, he appeared on That's My Jam and performed an "hysterical and impressive" version of "The Muffin Man" as Cher that went viral. Queen + Adam Lambert expanded The Rhapsody Tour, adding 22 dates in North America starting in October in Baltimore and finishing in Los Angeles in November. They headlined the last night of the Formula 1 Lenovo United States Grand Prix in October at Circuit of the Americas in Austin, Texas. In February 2024, they will perform five mega dome concerts in Japan. Lambert returned to American Idol on April 30 to mentor the top twelve on a Rock and Roll Hall of Fame themed night; also performing "I Can't Stand the Rain," praised for its "glam magic". He performed at Capital Summertime Ball in Wembley Stadium on June 11; and at the amfAR Gala on May 25, an annual event to benefit AIDS research, held during the Cannes Film Festival. On June 30, he received the Silver Clef Award for International artist at the Nordoff and Robbins awards ceremony. The latter is a charitable organization that raises money to train music therapists to work with populations with largely mental health disabilities. Noting that Pride seemed "more important now than ever", Lambert had an active Pride season. To kick off Pride Month, on June 1 he hosted a live discussion with military service members and their spouses. He headlined London Pride on July 1, having released the cover single, "You Make Me Feel (Mighty Real)" with Sigala, named the official song of London Pride. In honor of Pride Month, he collaborated with Orly beauty to release a nail polish collection, the "Adam Lambert x Orly: High Drama Collection", with proceeds going to the non-profit "Stand With Trans" in support of trans youth and their families. Lambert's "Feel Something Foundation" collaborated with MusiCares and BMG to host a panel Care/Feel that addressed the intersection of mental health and "queer" identity in the music industry, moderated by Lambert. ITV announced that Lambert will create a documentary focused on queer music history and the experience of LGBTQ+ artists as they navigate the music industry. His own perspective will be explored in the program, Loud: An Adam Lambert Documentary. On December 8, Lambert performed at Princess Catherine's "Together at Christmas" special at Westminster Abbey. The program, airing Christmas Eve, is in support of early child development efforts as part of the Princess's "Shaping Us" awareness campaign. He will be a judge on Britain Get Singing, a Christmas special in support of ITV's mental health campaign Britain Get Talking. In February 2024, it was announced that Lambert would be featured as a coach on the thirteenth season of The Voice Australia, alongside Guy Sebastian, Kate Miller-Heidke, and LeAnn Rimes. Critics, celebrities and colleagues have been outspoken in their praise for Lambert's vocal command. Kathie Bretches-Urban, co-founder of Metropolitan Educational Theatre Network (now MET2) where Lambert performed as a youth, said "He has invested his entire life in music and performing ... He'd just come out onstage, and it popped". Record producer Rob Cavallo once described Lambert as having an unlimited range and able to sing every note on a guitar from the lowest to the highest. In a March 2012 interview, rock artist Meat Loaf rated Lambert's voice in the company of only two others, Whitney Houston and Aretha Franklin, based on "that jet pack quality to their voice that just lets it take off." In 2011, when he took the stage at the MTV Europe Music Awards, honoree Queen guitarist Brian May noted that Lambert's voice has "sensitivity, depth, maturity, and awesome range and power which will make jaws drop"; while Roger Taylor added that Lambert had "the best range I've ever heard" in a BBC interview in 2012. Pharrell Williams, after collaborating with Lambert on his Trespassing album, commented, "This kid has a voice like a siren – there's no guys singing in that Steve Winwood-Peter Cetera range." In October 2012, the Sunday Mirror reported that Lambert insured his voice for $48 million. A source told the tabloid newspaper: "Insurance for stars is a big deal in the US and Adam's voice is his bacon." In a 2019 interview James Michael, lead vocalist for the band Sixx:A.M., praised Lambert's vocal technique, power and the facility of his vocal control - judging him one of the best vocalists in the world. Lambert is best known for his theatrical performance style and meticulous attention to detail in all aspects of his personal presentation. He draws upon extensive stage experience in the ease with which he can refine and define his image through fashion and other imagery, which are essential to how he chooses to inhabit his songs, rivet his audiences and showcase his individuality. While a contestant on American Idol, Lambert's precise yet varied stagings of himself kept audiences and judges glued as much to his presentation as to his vocal talent. His signature flamboyance and glam rock styling was a break-out moment in men's fashion, duly noted by fashion publications and taste-makers, who compared him to Lady Gaga in terms of crossing style boundaries and being unabashedly individual. Lambert made three fashion related TV appearances at the close of 2010. He fused his passion for music and fashion on MTV's "Talk@Playground", appearing in discussion with Skingraft designer Jonny Cota. He was a guest judge on Project Runway in an episode that styled a rock band for their upcoming Rolling Stone cover. He was the subject for whom the young designers of "All on the Line with Joe Zee" created a modern look, which he then critiqued along with the show's hosts. Lambert continued to grace the covers of magazines, moving more specifically into the fashion and culture space. Reflecting the mood and concept behind his album Trespassing, the Fault Magazine fashion shoot exemplified Lambert's commitment to aligning the elements of his artistic vision so that a cohesive narrative emerges. When Lambert appeared on the December 2012 cover of London-based high style magazine Fiasco's "Obsession" issue, he again took the opportunity to manipulate and provoke with his image and style. Sporting a sophisticated, minimalist look that recalled old Hollywood, Lambert played with male stereotypes and representations; and in the interview, emphasized that his fashion and presentation are often disparate from gay as well as straight regimes: "For the general audience, they look at the way I style myself and they go, 'Errrr, that's gay', but you ask a handful of gay guys and they're like, 'I would never wear that!'" In August 2015, he was one of four artists to appear on the cover of Billboard's "Music's Men of Style" issue. He discussed his natural shift towards a cleaner, more classic look; and reiterated that the intersection of music and fashion—the constant motion of trends—is a fascination and part of being a pop musician. Lambert is represented by London-based MiLK Management modeling agency as of July 2016[update]. Lambert was inspired when his father gave him access to his large record collection of 1970s music. He was attracted to theatrical rock from artists like Queen, Led Zeppelin, and Aerosmith. Among his strongest influences are British singers such as Freddie Mercury, David Bowie and Robert Plant: "Those are the people I really gravitate towards". Lambert referred to Michael Jackson and Madonna as "King and Queen" because they creatively merged music with makeup, fashion and cinematic video. In March 2013, Lambert wrote an article for Out magazine's tribute to David Bowie, who was about to release a new album. In it, he explained how Bowie helped inform the expression of his own sexuality and gender in his work: "A light bulb went off—I wasn't into drag, I didn't want to dress like a woman, but I wanted to express my gender and artistic identity differently than the mainstream. Bowie was a key inspiration. It was about the androgyny of mixing it up, and that was what was so incredible about his concepts—he was one of the first rock stars to really push the idea that sexuality was not black and white but an exploration". Lambert's own music has been influenced by numerous genres including classic rock, pop, and electronic music; and his performance style draws heavily from his stage experience. Lambert envisions himself as the type of artist "that creates from the ground up, not only an amazing song, but one with a beat, and a story, and a look, and a theme". For his second album, he used inspiration from classic disco, 1990s electronica, funk and dubstep music. Since his appearance on American Idol, Lambert has lent considerable support and time to charitable causes. As of October 2011[update], financial donations reached the $1,000,000 mark. In January 2010, in lieu of gifts for his 28th birthday, Lambert asked fans to donate to DonorsChoose.org, as 2,435 fans donated $322,700. In June 2010, Lambert teamed with the charity for his "Glam A Classroom" campaign, raising another $208,590, supported by 3,020 fans. In October 2010, he collaborated on a second Signature Collection with The Pennyroyal Studio, which sold out after raising $43,092 for DonorsChoose. Lambert contributed to the MusiCares charity when he and The Pennyroyal Studio collaborated on the design of an Eye of Horus pendant, whose sale raised $32,000 in 7 days. In January 2011, he began a campaign to raise $29,000 for charity: water to commemorate his 29th birthday and the campaign raised $323,803, which helped 16,190 people receive clean water. He continued his efforts for his 30th birthday, in January 2012, this time asking fans to "give up" their birthdays in an ongoing drive that raised $82,000 by May 2012. In June 2013, an accounting by charity:water listed 55 projects thus far completed with funds raised by Lambert. Lambert returned to the American Idol stage for the March 10, 2011, results show, singing an acoustic version of his For Your Entertainment track "Aftermath". After the performance, a dance remix version was made available for purchase, with proceeds benefiting The Trevor Project. Lambert performed at a Royal Albert Hall concert on June 7, 2012, benefiting the Rays Of Sunshine Children's Charity. On June 30, Elton John and Queen + Adam Lambert coordinated with the Olena Pinchuk ANTIAIDS Foundation for a concert to benefit the fight against HIV/AIDS. On September 25, 2012, Lambert headlined a fundraising benefit in Washington, D.C., on behalf of Marylanders for Marriage Equality. On January 31, 2013, he received the Unity Award, which honors artists whose music spreads "peaceful messages", from the We Are Family Foundation at their 2012 Celebration Gala 2.0. Lambert "donated" his 31st birthday to the charity, raising more than $82,000 in just over a week. For his 32nd birthday, he chose the charity again, coordinating with artist Chris Saunders on the creation of limited and open edition prints and posters whose sales benefited the foundation. On May 25, Lambert was a participant in the opening ceremony of 2013 Life Ball in Vienna. Appearing as Ali Baba, he performed the gala's official song, "Love Wins Over Glamour", which he co-wrote with the Vienna-based production team Beat4Feet. On June 23, he sang "The Star-Spangled Banner" to open Broadway Bares to benefit Broadway Cares/Equity Fights AIDS. Lambert was a featured performer at the August 19 Dance Party event in Riverhead, Long Island, benefiting All For The East End (AFTEE). On November 2, he was the musical entertainer for South Florida's Make-A-Wish Foundation Ball. The sold-out 2013 Ball raised a record-breaking 2 million dollars. Lambert was featured in the video launch for UNICEF's #IMAGINE campaign. In collaboration with Queen, he is a participant in Coca-Cola's [RED] campaign to help end mother-to-child HIV transmission. In June 2015, he performed at the Roundhouse for the "One for the Boys" Fashion Ball. Earlier that month, he performed at the "Live Aid Uusi Lastensairaala" concert in Finland. In July 2016, he took part in the charity single "Hands", a tribute to the victims of the Orlando nightclub shooting. In August 2017, Lambert performed a mini-set tribute to George Michael at Project Angel Food's Angel Awards gala, where Michael was the recipient of the Elizabeth Taylor Humanitarian Award, in recognition of his philanthropy. Lambert through his "Feel Something Foundation" again worked with the charity in November 2020 to deliver medically tailored Thanksgiving meals to those most vulnerable during COVID. He performed a duet in October with Cynthia Erivo for the virtual 2020 Carousel of Hope Ball in support of the Children's Diabetes Foundation. In July 2021, he helped raise $1.1 million in funds for Project Angel Food during their KTLA telethon. Lambert has been a contributor to social justice. Lambert stated, "I feel like with celebrity and visibility and fame, there's a responsibility to try to give back and try to use the visibility for the greater good. It's not all about me. It's about trying to raise awareness and getting people to take action." His heavily provocative AMA performance, featuring a gay kiss on live television, served to push societal boundaries by highlighting a double standard of ethics in media regulation as well. Lambert received a GLAAD Media Award nomination for Outstanding Music Artist in 2010. The same year, he lent his voice to a one-and-a-half minute video message on YouTube for the It Gets Better campaign – a project created by columnist Dan Savage in response to school bullying and a rash of suicides among LGBT youth. Lambert was presented the "Equality Idol Award" by Sam Sparro at the Equality California Los Angeles Equality Awards in August 2011 for being an exemplary role model for the LGBT community. He was honored with his mother the following month at the PFLAG National Los Angeles event for his "authentic" voice. The following March, he released a Billboard remix version of his For Your Entertainment song "Aftermath" with a portion of the proceeds going to support The Trevor Project, the leading national organization providing crisis intervention and suicide prevention services to LGBT youth. He raised an additional $43,500 for The Trevor Project after collaborating with The Pennyroyal Studio to make his own Peace pendant. In October 2011, donations on behalf of the Adam Lambert Glambert Fan Army for the MTV Dance Party Marathon raised funds to combat bullying in honor of National Bullying Prevention Month. Lambert was a participant in Spirit Day, a movement begun in 2010 to honor LGBT lives lost to suicide, "going purple" in the push to support LGBT youth in the fight against bullying. In December, he performed at the "Cyndi Lauper & Friends: Home for the Holidays" benefit concert, which raised funds in support of the "True Colors Fund" and the organization's "Forty to None Project", targeting the epidemic of homelessness among LGBT youth. In January 2012, in an exclusive interview with UK music news magazine Pressparty, Lambert noted that despite social progress in the US, there was still a long way to go, particularly in the music industry: "I still long for the LGBT community's diversity to be more broadly represented in the entertainment industry. I think larger strides have been made in film and TV but we still are just at the beginning with mainstream music. I consider myself a post-gay man working in a pre-gay industry." Lambert was the headline performer at the Miami Beach Gay Pride Parade and Festival on April 14, 2013, and was also given the key to the city. Lambert was presented with the prestigious GLAAD Davidson/Valentini Award on May 11 in San Francisco. The honorary award is bestowed yearly to out media professionals who have made a significant difference in promoting equal rights in the LGBT community. On May 30, he was honored with the "Hope of Los Angeles Award" as part of the city's 3rd Annual LGBT Heritage Month. Lambert is featured in "The New F Word" campaign sponsored by the grassroots Friend Movement organization, which has launched a global effort aimed at self-empowerment and raising anti-bullying awareness through positive images in media and the arts. On June 15, declared "Adam Lambert Day" by the City Council, he headlined Pittsburgh's "Pride in the Street" concert. In honor of Pride season, Lambert partnered with AT&T and The Trevor Project for the "Live Proud Campaign", aiming to empower and raise awareness in the LGBTQ community. The $50,000 goal was met and on July 3 a check presentation was made to The Trevor Project during the private finale show given by Lambert. At the October 15 Los Angeles premiere of the movie Bridegroom, Lambert revealed that he donated a song to the score, and felt "humbled" to be connected to the project. The powerful documentary about the intersection of love and the politics of marriage equality won the 2013 Tribeca Film Festival's Audience Award for Best Documentary. Lambert was one of the featured performers at the TrevorLIVE gala on December 8 at the Hollywood Palladium. In February 2014, he performed for the Family Equality Council's 10th Annual Los Angeles Award's dinner. In June 2014, he teamed up with AT&T for its second annual "Live Proud" campaign, again in support of LGBT Pride Month and Pride season. In April 2015 he was the recipient of the "Music Icon" award at the 2015 British LGBT Awards, honoring those whose actions help promote equality. In October, he received the "Music Award/ International Album" at the Attitude Pride Awards in London. In June 2017, Pride month, Lambert was a speaker at the Los Angeles Pride march, delivering a message against hate in all its human rights presentations. A few weeks earlier, he co-hosted BuzzFeed's first "Queer Prom" for LGBTQ high school seniors from across the US. He was featured in Billboard's tribute to Pride month, naming the LGBTQ community his "true inspiration" and "life lines". Released during Pride week, Lambert's newest single, "Two Fux", is a Pride anthem. Lambert performed for Point Foundation Honors Gala in October 2017 in recognition of those who had made a significant impact on the LGBTQ community. Point Foundation is the largest scholarship-granting organization for LGBTQ students of merit in the country. Later in the month, he performed on behalf of GLAAD's kickoff to its annual Spirit Day at the 'Believer' Spirit Day concert event. In May 2018, along with Melissa Etheridge, he performed to open GLAAD's New York City 29th annual Media Awards; and later in the month hosted a talk for teenagers at the Mosaic LGBT Youth Centre in London. Mosaic is an organization that seeks to support, educate and inspire by offering a safe space and variety of programs for LGBTQ+ youth. In January 2020, Lambert launched an LGBTQ+ non-profit advocacy group called the Feel Something Foundation, a name it shares with his first single release from the album Velvet. Its mission is to support "LGBTQ+ organizations that are moving the needle for communities of all ages and backgrounds," and impacting important areas of LGBTQ life. Another specific goal is to "abolish 'coming out' as a term used to define someone simply being themselves." During the COVID-19 pandemic lockdown, the Foundation in partnership with eBay launched two charity auctions of Lambert's stage-wear, with funds raised directed to GLAAD for LGBTQ people in need. The auction in June kicked off a series of events for Pride 2020 in support of GLAAD's youth engagement programs, including a panel with their Campus Ambassadors from around the US. In April 2020, Lambert had participated in GLAAD's Together in Pride: You Are Not Alone livestream event, raising funds for LGBTQ community centers providing critical services during COVID. In early June, he announced a sizable donation from the Foundation to the LGBTQ Freedom Fund, to assist with bail for community members that were arrested during peaceful protests of Black Lives Matter. On June 28, the Pride Music Business Creatives Roundtable was hosted by the Foundation, with Lambert and special guest artists discussing discrimination in the industry, their own coming out stories, and steps forward toward LGBTQ equalty. Other notable Pride performances included "Can't Cancel Pride" to support multiple LGBTQ+ organizations; and Global Pride, a 24-hour live-stream event, at which he also spoke on behalf of Black Lives Matter and people of color in the community. Lambert featured in a speaking segment on Conde Nast's LGBTQ brand them.'s "Out Now Live", a virtual pride celebration to educate, entertain and raise money for the Ali Forney Center targeting LGBTQ youth homelessness. In December he again performed for Cyndi Lauper's annual "Home for the Holidays" benefit concert for True Colors United, which works to combat homelessness in LGBTQ+ youth. He hosted the first of two Stonewall Day Unplugged sessions on February 18 as part of the lead up to the June Stonewall Day celebration that Lambert, through his Feel Something Foundation, will be headlining and curating with Pride Live. The resulting OUTLOUD: Raising Voices event in 2021 featured a "queer for queer" lineup of LGBTQ artists. On March 4, he participated in a celebratory event in support of the Center for Gender-Affirming Care at San Diego's Rady Children's Hospital. Lambert, through his Feel Something Foundation, teamed up with Soundwaves Art Foundation in late March to create art prints, 100% of whose sale's profits would benefit The Trevor Project. He appeared on the Los Angeles LGBT Center's Love in Action telethon on August 14, 2021. In October 2023, Lambert signed the Artists4Ceasefire open letter to Joe Biden, President of the United States, calling for a ceasefire of the Israeli bombardment of Gaza. After being outed on the internet during his bid to win American Idol, Adam Lambert confirmed that he was gay in a Rolling Stone cover interview that was published in June 2009. He was in a relationship with Finnish entertainment reporter and reality TV personality Sauli Koskinen from November 2010 until April 2013, when Lambert announced that the couple had split up amicably. From March to November 2019, Lambert was in a relationship with model Javi Costa Polo. Lambert got his first tattoo at 27, just before the start of American Idol. That tattoo, an Eye of Horus, was placed on his wrist. Since then, he has covered his arms and torso with work by notable tattoo artists Maxime Plescia-Büchi, Daniel Meyer, and Roxx. In November 2023, Lambert, in collaboration with Roger Taylor, Sarina Taylor, Bryan Patrick Franklin, and Michael Solis, opened The Wild bar in West Hollywood, California. For Your Entertainment (2009) Trespassing (2012) The Original High (2015) Velvet (2020) High Drama (2023) With American Idol American Idols Live! Tour 2009 (2009) Solo Glam Nation Tour (2010) We Are Glamily Tour (2013) The Original High Tour (2016) The Velvet Tour (2020) The Witch Hunt (2022) With Queen Queen + Adam Lambert Tour 2012 (2012) Queen + Adam Lambert Tour 2014–2015 (2014–15) Queen + Adam Lambert 2016 Summer Festival Tour (2016) Queen + Adam Lambert Tour 2017–2018 (2017–18) Queen + Adam Lambert The Rhapsody Tour (2019–2024) List of awards and nominations received by Adam Lambert Leahey, Andrew (January 29, 1982). "(Adam Lambert > Overview)". Retrieved March 24, 2010. Bronson, Fred (October 25, 2012). "'American Idol' On The Charts: Scotty McCreery and Adam Lambert Double Up With New No. 1s". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved October 25, 2012. Shapiro, Rachel (May 15, 2012). "Adam Lambert's 'Trespassing': What the critics are saying". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved May 16, 2012. "Adam Lambert". AllMusic. 2021. Retrieved December 1, 2021. "American Idol". Archived from the original on July 19, 2011. Retrieved August 13, 2011. Caulfield, Keith (December 2, 2000). "Susan Boyle Sees 'Dream' Soar To No. 1 On Billboard 200". Archived from the original on April 14, 2013. Retrieved December 28, 2009. "Grammy Awards 2011: Winners and nominees for 53rd Grammy Awards". March 12, 2014. Retrieved September 7, 2019. "Adam Lambert's 'Trespassing' Makes No. 1 Debut, Becomes First Openly Gay Male Artist To Top Charts". Huffpost. May 23, 2012. Retrieved March 5, 2023. "After 45-Year Wait, James Taylor Earns His First No. 1 Album on Billboard 200 Chart". Billboard. Retrieved October 14, 2019. "Milk Management Now Represent Adam Lambert". July 4, 2016. Archived from the original on July 7, 2016. Retrieved July 6, 2016. "The Original High Sizzle Reel". YouTube. Archived from the original on January 27, 2016. Retrieved August 28, 2015. "News". October 9, 2019. Retrieved January 28, 2021. Rude, Mey (January 26, 2021). "Celebrate Stonewall Day With Adam Lambert's Feel Something Foundation". Retrieved March 8, 2021. Leahey, Andrew. "Adam Lambert Biography". AllMusic.com. Archived from the original on March 9, 2014. Retrieved October 26, 2015. Emily H (April 27, 2016). "Adam Lambert drops new music video, reveals surprising secret about his past". Archived from the original on May 29, 2016. Retrieved May 21, 2016. Zimmerman, Gail (October 14, 2009). "Adam Lambert: The Jewish Mother Interview". Archived from the original on May 13, 2013. Retrieved October 1, 2010. Peterson, Karla (May 3, 2009). "'Idol' sensation showed promise on local stage". Retrieved July 27, 2010. Bronson, Fred (August 2009). "Adam Lambert: The ultimate interview, Part One". Archived from the original on July 24, 2013. Retrieved December 23, 2011. Wilkens, John (February 24, 2009). "'Idol' hopeful banks on theatrics to snag a spot". Retrieved December 23, 2011. "Adam Lambert show a mixed bag at Pacific". July 30, 2010. Bronson, Fred (August 5, 2009). "Adam Lambert: The ultimate interview, Part Two". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved December 23, 2011. Williams, Lee (March 25, 2004). "Lost in Translation". Retrieved April 10, 2012. "Culture Monster". Los Angeles Times. April 8, 2009. Bronson, Fred. "Adam Lambert: The ultimate interview, Part Three". Archived from the original on October 3, 2009. Retrieved December 23, 2011. Erlewine, Stephen Thomas. "Take One-Adam Lambert". Allmusic. Retrieved December 23, 2011. Bronson, Fred. "Adam Lambert: The ultimate interview, Part Four". Archived from the original on October 3, 2009. Retrieved December 23, 2011. Kay, Kimberly (March 11, 2009). "Wicked Good: Adam Lambert's American Idol Journey". Retrieved January 24, 2012. ""Idol" runner-up Adam Lambert says he's gay". Reuters. June 10, 2009. Retrieved June 22, 2022. Trebay, Guy (April 10, 2009). "American Idol's Big Tease". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved June 22, 2022. "Adam Lambert: America's First Gay 'Idol'?". ABC News. Retrieved June 22, 2022. "Conservative 'Idol': Gay Icon Adam Lambert Loses to Kris Allen". www.pride.com. May 20, 2009. Retrieved June 22, 2022. "Adam Lambert Loses, Homophobia Wins". HuffPost. June 21, 2009. Retrieved June 22, 2022. Harris, Chris (May 22, 2009). "Kris Allen Still Thinks Adam Lambert Deserved "American Idol" Crown". Rolling Stone. Retrieved November 23, 2011. "The ultimate 'American Idol' power ranking". May 21, 2009. Archived from the original on June 2, 2010. Retrieved March 24, 2010. Santilli, MJ (May 26, 2009). "Adam Lambert-CBS Early Show-Video". MJS Big Blog. Retrieved September 1, 2012. "Adam Lambert Sings On 'Live with Regis and Kelly'". broadwayworld.com. May 30, 2009. Retrieved November 4, 2011. Casablanca, Ted; Bain, Becky (June 8, 2009). "Adam Lambert: I'll "Answer All Those Questions"". Archived from the original on July 16, 2012. Retrieved December 23, 2011. Coppersmith, Scott (August 10, 2009). "Teen Choice Awards 2009: The Winners". Retrieved November 22, 2011. "Adam Lambert For Your Entertainment Review". BBC. May 3, 2010. Retrieved January 24, 2012. "For Your Entertainment". Metacritic.com. Retrieved May 20, 2011. "Global Superstar Adam Lambert Releases Single 'Never Close Our Eyes' New Album, trespassing, set for release, May 15th". Clizbeats. April 12, 2012. Archived from the original on September 30, 2020. Retrieved May 15, 2023. "RIAA's Gold & Platinum Program". Recording Industry Association of America. Retrieved February 27, 2013. Kaufman, Gil (November 23, 2009). "Adam Lambert Says AMA Kiss Was 'In The Moment'". Retrieved November 23, 2009. "Adam Lambert Could Cost ABC Television Up To $500,000". rockstarweekly.com. November 23, 2009. Archived from the original on November 27, 2009. Retrieved November 23, 2009. Fernandez, Maria Elena (December 4, 2009). "Controversy surrounds Adam Lambert's canceled appearances". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved July 2, 2021. Halperin, Shirley (November 19, 2011). "Adam Lambert Returns to 2011 AMA's as Presenter; Producer Says He 'Was Never Banned'". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved November 30, 2011. Lipshutz, Jason (November 16, 2012). "Top 10 American Music Awards Moments: Past AMAs' Video Highlights". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 18, 2013. Retrieved November 16, 2012. Harris, Mark (May 8, 2009). "Adam Lambert: Shaking Up 'Idol'". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved November 5, 2011. "The New Issue of Rolling Stone: The Liberation of Adam Lambert". Rolling Stone. June 9, 2009. Retrieved November 5, 2011. Sales, Nancy Joe (November 1, 2009). "For the Love of Adam Lambert". Retrieved November 5, 2011. Santilli, MJ (August 14, 2009). "Adam Lambert Honored By Rolling Stone for Best Selling Cover Issue". MJS Big Blog. Retrieved May 14, 2011. Hicklin, Aaron (November 10, 2009). "Dear Adam". Archived from the original on November 20, 2009. Retrieved November 5, 2009. Sloame, Joanna (April 14, 2011). "People magazine's 2010 Most Beautiful People list". Daily News. New York. Retrieved November 9, 2011. "Adam Lambert: 'No Regrets' After Tumultuous 2009". ABC News. December 7, 2009. Retrieved November 4, 2011. "Adam Lambert On David Letterman". AdamOfficial.com. November 25, 2009. Archived from the original on November 10, 2013. Retrieved July 30, 2012. "Adam Lambert on Conan O'Brien Tonight". December 14, 2009. Archived from the original on July 24, 2013. Retrieved July 30, 2012. Vena, Jocelyn (December 17, 2009). "Adam Lambert Steals The Show On 'So You Think You Can Dance' Finale". MTV. Retrieved July 30, 2012. Vena, Jocelyn (December 11, 2009). "Adam Lambert Clears Up Rumors On 'The Jay Leno Show'". MTV. Retrieved July 30, 2012. "Adam Lambert's Rise to Fame". oprah.com. January 19, 2010. Retrieved July 31, 2012. Gorgan, Elena (March 2, 2010). "Adam Lambert Puts on 'Historic' Performance at Fantasy Springs". Retrieved November 15, 2011. Kaufman, Gil (April 14, 2010). "Was Adam Lambert A Good 'American Idol' Mentor?". MTV. Retrieved November 21, 2011. Reiher, Andrea (June 20, 2010). "'American Idol": Adam Lambert wins Much Music award, performs 'Whataya Want from Me'". Archived from the original on April 27, 2012. Retrieved November 22, 2011. Porter, Rick (April 27, 2010). "'American Idol': Allison Iraheta, Orianthi join Adam Lambert tour". Zap2It.com. Archived from the original on June 24, 2010. Retrieved June 6, 2010. "Sony/RCA announcement". Adamofficial.com. August 31, 2010. Archived from the original on November 10, 2013. Retrieved December 4, 2013. Stransky, Tanner (March 17, 2011). "Music Review Glam Nation Live (2011)". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on November 5, 2011. Retrieved December 1, 2011. Ryder, Pat (March 30, 2011). "Adam Lambert 'Glam Nation Live' debuts at No. 1". IMDb. Retrieved December 2, 2011. "Year End Charts". 2011. Archived from the original on December 14, 2012. Retrieved December 13, 2011. Savole, Dan (January 2012). "CD Review: Adam Lambert-Acoustic Live!". Archived from the original on October 8, 2011. Retrieved November 23, 2011. Farber, Jim (November 30, 2010). "Justin Bieber's 'My Worlds Acoustic' and Adam Lambert's 'Acoustic Live!' reviews". Daily News. New York. "Behind The Music – Ep. 223 "Adam Lambert"". Archived from the original on September 28, 2011. Retrieved December 1, 2011. Santilli, MJ (November 13, 2011). "Adam Lambert Mentors--Majors & Minors (VIDEO)". MJS Big Blog. Retrieved November 30, 2011. Wong, Curtis (November 7, 2011). "Adam Lambert, Queen Perform At MTV European Music Awards (VIDEO)". Huffington Post. Retrieved November 7, 2011. Halperin, Shirley (August 5, 2011). "Adam Lambert Splits With 'Idol' Manager 19 Entertainment". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved August 13, 2011. "Adam Lambert's 'Trespassing' met with fantastic reception from fans and critics alike". May 8, 2012. Retrieved May 16, 2012. Parker, Lyndsey (May 8, 2012). "Adam Lambert's 'Trespassing': It's That Deep". Retrieved May 16, 2012. London Newsdesk (May 22, 2012). "Adam Lambert tops charts and makes history in the USA with 'Trespassing'". PressParty.com. Retrieved May 24, 2012. "Adam Lambert's New Album Trespassing Secures Top 5 Debut In The UK Midweek Chart". July 14, 2012. Retrieved March 13, 2013. Rosen, Jody (April 26, 2012). "Adam Lambert "Never Close Our Eyes"". Archived from the original on April 30, 2012. Retrieved April 27, 2012. Daw, Robbie (April 13, 2012). "Adam Lambert's "Never Close Our Eyes"; Review Revue". Retrieved April 27, 2012. Williot, Carl (May 18, 2012). "'American Idol':Phillip Phillips And Jessica Sanchez To Face Off In Finale, Adam Lambert Performs". Retrieved May 18, 2012. Barrett, Anne (May 18, 2012). "'American Idol recap: No More Drama". Retrieved May 18, 2012. "Summer Sonic 2012 Lineup Tokyo & Osaka". Archived from the original on September 23, 2020. Retrieved September 22, 2012. "17th China Music Awards to be held in Macau". March 15, 2013. Retrieved April 16, 2013. "Queen+Adam Lambert Perform At Kiev's ANTIAIDS Foundation Charity Concert". July 1, 2012. Archived from the original on July 6, 2012. Retrieved July 10, 2012. Angermiller, Michele Amabile (July 2, 2012). "Adam Lambert and Queen Rock the Ukraine (Video)". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved July 10, 2012. Younie, Chris (July 12, 2012). "News:Adam Lambert And Queen Rock Out Hammersmith Apollo". Archived from the original on July 16, 2012. Retrieved July 17, 2012. "Adam Lambert reveals 'Trespassing' single details". October 1, 2012. Retrieved October 23, 2012. Ng, Philiana (July 12, 2012). "'Pretty Little Liars':Adam Lambert to Appear, Perform Two Songs in Halloween Episode". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved September 22, 2012. "Adam Lambert to play in SA". September 13, 2012. Archived from the original on December 31, 2012. Retrieved November 18, 2012. Aizlewood, John (July 12, 2012). "Queen+Adam Lambert, HMV Hammersmith Apollo-review". Archived from the original on July 15, 2012. Retrieved July 17, 2012. Kim, Erica (November 28, 2012). "[MAMA] '2012 MAMA' to be Aired in 85 Countries Around the World". Archived from the original on May 27, 2013. Retrieved November 30, 2012. "Readers' Poll:The Best Albums of 2012". Rolling Stone. December 20, 2012. Retrieved January 4, 2013. Lipshutz, Jason (December 18, 2012). "Madonna Rules Billboard.com's Readers Poll 2012". Billboard. Retrieved January 4, 2013. "People Magazine's Best and Worst of 2012". December 27, 2012. Archived from the original on December 31, 2012. Retrieved January 5, 2013. Baggs, Michael (December 21, 2012). "Queen and Adam Lambert Named Best Live Act Of 2012". Retrieved January 4, 2013. "Queen + Adam Lambert voted 'Best live act of the year'". January 3, 2013. Retrieved January 4, 2013. Halperin, Shirley (January 11, 2013). "Adam Lambert and 19 Recordings Part Ways". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved January 13, 2012. Snyder, Renee (February 16, 2013). "Adam Lambert to Kick Off the 'We Are Glamily Tour'". Archived from the original on February 18, 2013. Retrieved February 24, 2013. "Adam Lambert covers Tears For Fears during Hong Kong concert". March 5, 2013. Retrieved March 9, 2013. "Adam Lambert wins Chinese Music Award for 'Favourite International Artist'". April 18, 2013. Retrieved April 18, 2013. alidol2011 (May 19, 2013). "Adam Lambert at Chinese Idol audition as a guest judge". YouTube. Archived from the original on October 29, 2021. Retrieved May 20, 2013.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) Harp, Justin (May 13, 2013). "Adam Lambert gets GLAAD Award for contribution to LGBT community". Digital Spy. Retrieved May 13, 2013. Angemiller, Michele Amabile (May 16, 2013). "'American Idol' Season 12 Finale: Adam Lambert Tops 5 Best Moments". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved May 17, 2013. Halperin, Shirley (July 12, 2013). "Adam Lambert Walks Away from RCA (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved July 13, 2013. "VIDEO: Adam Lambert & Nile Rodgers Unveil New Track 'Lay Me Down'". broadwayworld.com. August 20, 2013. Retrieved August 21, 2013. McGarry, Lisa (September 18, 2013). "Avicii & Adam Lambert's new single 'Lay Me Down' climbs the charts!(VIDEO)". Archived from the original on September 21, 2013. Retrieved September 20, 2013. Snyder, Renee (September 7, 2013). "Preview of Avicii and Adam Lambert 'Lay Me Down' Goes Viral". Archived from the original on September 21, 2013. Retrieved September 11, 2013. Baltin, Steve (September 21, 2013). "Queen and Adam Lambert Dominate Night One of iHeartRadio". Rolling Stone. Retrieved September 22, 2013. Lipshutz, Jason (September 21, 2013). "iHeartRadio Music Festival Friday: Katy Perry Roars, But The Old School Soars". Billboard. Retrieved September 22, 2013. Bronson, Fred (November 18, 2013). "'American Idol' on the Charts: Adam Lambert Returns With a Lady Gaga Song". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved November 19, 2013. "Adam Lambert wins twice at China's Huading Music Awards". December 18, 2013. Retrieved December 20, 2013. "Top-Earning American Idols 2013". Forbes. January 14, 2014. Retrieved January 20, 2014. Varga, George (February 13, 2014). "Adam Lambert returning to 'American Idol'". Archived from the original on February 25, 2014. Retrieved February 24, 2014. Schulman, Michael (February 21, 2014). "In Drag, It Turns Out, There Are Second Acts". The New York Times. Retrieved February 24, 2014. Parker, Lyndsey (February 23, 2014). "Music Again:Adam Lambert Revisits the Darkness Catalog for Epic 'Glee' Performance". Retrieved February 24, 2014. Angermiller, Michele Amabile (April 28, 2014). "Sony Music to Release 'The Very Best' of Adam Lambert". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved May 8, 2014. Bronson, Fred (June 6, 2014). "'American Idol' on the Charts: Adam Lambert's 'Very Best' Debuts". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved June 8, 2014. Hyman, Dan (June 20, 2014). "Queen and Adam Lambert's Tour Opener: 5 Things We Learned". Rolling Stone. Retrieved September 16, 2014. "News". queenonline.com. November 13, 2014. Retrieved November 21, 2014. Baltin, Steve (November 5, 2014). "Classic Rock Honors Ceremony Comes to America". Billboard. Retrieved November 6, 2014. "Killer Queen: Brian May, Roger Taylor and Adam Lambert rock out on X Factor". November 30, 2014. Archived from the original on February 22, 2015. Retrieved December 6, 2014. Pocklington, Rebecca (January 1, 2015). "Adam Lambert showered with praise after incredible collaboration with Queen for New Year's Eve celebrations". Daily Mirror. Retrieved January 2, 2015. London Newsdesk (January 6, 2015). "Adam Lambert and Queen cover Classic Rock magazine: 'Lambert is a gift from god'". PressParty.com. Retrieved January 30, 2015. "Queen+Adam Lambert:'Don't Stop Them Now' South American Tour Dates and Ticket Information". May 7, 2015. Retrieved October 5, 2015. "Queen And Adam Lambert-Most Popular Act in Rock in Rio 2015". September 16, 2015. Retrieved October 2, 2015. Angermiller, Michele Amabile (January 15, 2015). "'American Idol': Adam Lambert Shines as Judge as New York Brings the Talent". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved January 16, 2015. Halperin, Shirley; Angermiller, Michele Amabile (January 15, 2015). "Exclusive: Adam Lambert Signs New Major Label Deal, Max Martin to Executive Produce Album". Billboard. United States. Prometheus Global Media. Retrieved January 15, 2015. Avery, Dan (June 11, 2015). "Adam Lambert Will Rock The 2015 Logo Trailblazer Honors". Retrieved July 14, 2015. Carley, Brennan (August 2, 2015). "Adam Lambert Performed One of 2015's Best Songs for "The Voice Australia"". Retrieved August 7, 2015. Caramanica, Jon (June 15, 2015). "Review:Adam Lambert Tones Down Excess On 'The Original High'". The New York Times. Retrieved August 7, 2015. Tewari, Nidhi (June 26, 2015). "Adam Lambert's 'Ghost Town' Cracks Billboard Hot 100; Singer Talks About 'The Original High' Album". International Business Times. Retrieved July 8, 2015. "Adam Lambert Chart History Adult Pop Songs". Billboard. July 11, 2015. Retrieved July 8, 2015. "News". adamofficial.com. December 6, 2015. Archived from the original on February 6, 2016. Retrieved February 18, 2016. "RIAA Gold&Platinum". Recording Industry Association of America. Retrieved January 21, 2016. Cantor, Brian (June 24, 2015). "Adam Lambert's "The Original High" Debits with ~42K Sales". Retrieved July 16, 2015. "Muse are Number 1 album for a second week". OfficialCharts.com. June 21, 2015. Retrieved July 16, 2015. "Events: The Original High Tour". Archived from the original on November 8, 2015. Retrieved November 11, 2015. "Eska Music Awards Szczecin 2015". Archived from the original on July 12, 2021. Retrieved September 1, 2015. "Adam Lambert to play first UK festival @FusionFest". August 16, 2015. Archived from the original on January 27, 2016. Retrieved September 1, 2015. "Adam Lambert unveils new video". October 9, 2015. Retrieved October 16, 2015. "538LIVE XXL: Adam Lambert - Another Lonely Night". YouTube. October 14, 2015. Archived from the original on October 29, 2021. Retrieved October 22, 2015. "Adam Lambert performs his new single live on The X Factor Australia". October 20, 2015. Retrieved October 22, 2015. "Events". adamofficial.com. Archived from the original on November 8, 2015. Retrieved November 11, 2015. "Instagram@adamlambert". November 22, 2015. Retrieved November 23, 2015. Non-loginwalled link at bibliogram.pussthecat.org[permanent dead link] "Petition to get Adam Lambert out of countdown". November 27, 2015. Retrieved December 3, 2015. Wong, Tessa (November 27, 2015). "Adam Lambert concert sparks Singapore culture debate". BBC News. Retrieved December 3, 2015. "Billboard Teams With Local Firm to Declare China's No.1 Song". Wall Street Journal. November 10, 2015. Retrieved December 16, 2015. Harper, Bruce (November 10, 2015). "Alibaba Group Holding Ltd Shifting Its Singles Day Event To Beijing: Here's Why". Retrieved December 16, 2015. "news". adamofficial.com. Retrieved December 16, 2015. Dunham, Nancy (May 9, 2016). "CMT Music Awards 2016: Performance of the Year Nominees Include Carrie Underwood, Adam Lambert and More". Retrieved February 25, 2019. O'Malley Greenburg, Zach (January 6, 2016). "The Top-Earning American Idols of 2015". Forbes. Retrieved January 10, 2016. "Readers'Poll:The 10 Best Albums of 2015". Rolling Stone. December 30, 2015. Retrieved January 10, 2016. "news". AdamOfficial.com. Retrieved January 21, 2016. Beer, Jeff (January 19, 2016). "Adam Lambert Sings For Oreo In New Global Ad Campaign". Retrieved January 21, 2016. Halperin, Shirley (February 19, 2016). "Watch Adam Lambert Talk David Bowie at Clive Davis' Pre-Grammy Party: 'We Were All Inspired By His Ideas'". Billboard. Retrieved February 25, 2016. Spanos, Brittany (March 18, 2016). "Watch Adam Lambert's Soaring 'American Idol' Return". Rolling Stone. Retrieved March 19, 2016. Nelson, Jeff (March 24, 2016). "First Listen: Steve Aoki Teams Up with Adam Lambert and Felix Jaehn on New Track 'Can't Go Home'". People. Retrieved February 25, 2019. "Rock Out This Summer with Macy's Iconic "American Icons" campaign" (Press release). May 3, 2016. Retrieved May 12, 2016. "News". queenonline.com. Retrieved January 21, 2016. "twitter@QueenWillRock". November 13, 2015. Retrieved December 3, 2015. "News". July 28, 2016. Retrieved July 31, 2015. Moran, Jonathon (June 21, 2016). "US singing sensation Adam Lambert joins The X Factor judging panel". Retrieved June 23, 2016. Angermiller, Michele Amabalie (July 6, 2016). "Adam Lambert Shares 'Welcome to The Show' Video to 'Inspire Strength & Pride'". Billboard. Retrieved July 8, 2016. Angermiller, Michele Amabalie (August 4, 2016). "Watch Adam Lambert's Hip-Swiveling Cover of 'Faith' on ABC's 'Greatest Hits'". Billboard. Retrieved August 10, 2016. King, Eric (August 12, 2016). "Adam Lambert Features on New Tritonal Single 'Broken'". Billboard. Retrieved August 17, 2016. Blistein, Jon (August 9, 2016). "Watch Adam Lambert Raise Hell in New 'Rocky Horror' Trailer". Rolling Stone. Retrieved December 28, 2016. "The X Factor Australia: Isaiah Firebrace takes out grand final". November 22, 2016. Retrieved December 14, 2016. Gandolfi, Marco (December 12, 2016). "Interview Adam Lambert". Retrieved December 14, 2016. "Listen to Adam Lambert's 'Think' from 'Captain Underpants: The First Epic Movie'". June 2, 2017. Retrieved June 7, 2017. "New Sydney Date Added to Australasia Tour". June 25, 2017. Retrieved June 25, 2017. "Press Coverage [Queen And Adam Lambert On The Late Late Show]". February 3, 2017. Retrieved February 8, 2017.[permanent dead link] Angermiller, Michele Amabile (June 23, 2017). "Queen and Adam Lambert Dedicate New Song to Freddie Mercury Ahead of U.S. Tour". Retrieved June 26, 2017. Wilker, Deborah (June 27, 2017). "Adam Lambert Continues to Prove He's Queen"s Ideal New Frontman at L.A. Show". Billboard. Retrieved June 30, 2017. Bracelin, Jason (June 25, 2017). "Rock greats Queen hit their stride with Adam Lambert". Retrieved June 30, 2017. Parker, Lyndsey (June 29, 2017). "Adam Lambert Talks New Song, New Sound, and Those Old 'American Idol' Judging Rumors". Retrieved July 14, 2017. Hughes, Hilary (June 30, 2017). "Adam Lambert Isn't Here to Replace Freddie Mercury. He's a Queen Frontman for the 21st Century". Retrieved July 4, 2017. Oliver, Issac (March 2, 2018). "'RuPaul's Drag Race All Stars':A Shocking Elimination". The New York Times. Retrieved March 8, 2018. "European Tour Reviews:"Jaw Dropping"". July 10, 2018. Retrieved November 12, 2018. Allen, Bob (March 7, 2018). "Queen+Adam Lambert Lead Hot Tours Recap With Australian Shows". Billboard. Retrieved March 8, 2018. Lynch, Joe (May 6, 2018). "2018 GLAAD Media Awards:Adam Lambert Duets With Melissa Etheridge, Gloria Carter Delivers Eloquent Speech & More". Billboard. Retrieved June 2, 2018. Bracelin, Jason (September 3, 2018). "In Las Vegas, Queen+Adam Lambert rock Park Theater". Retrieved November 12, 2018. Angermiller, Michele Amabile (May 7, 2018). "Adam Lambert Lands New Management Ahead of Queen Las Vegas Residency". Retrieved June 3, 2018. "X Factor 2018: Leona Lewis and Adam Lambert will be Ayda Field's guest mentors at Judges' Houses". Radio Times. Retrieved February 19, 2021. Lenker, Maureen Lee (October 29, 2018). "The 5 best moments in A Very Wicked Halloween". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved November 14, 2018. Kinane, Ruth (January 25, 2019). "Ariana Grande, Adam Lambert, and more to appear on Wicked 15th anniversary album". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved February 25, 2019. BBC Media Center. "Strictly Come Dancing-The Results". Retrieved December 4, 2018. Marks, Peter (December 2, 2018). "The Kennedy Center Honors felt different, and it was all because of 'Hamilton'". The Washington Post. Retrieved December 5, 2018. Hines, Ree (December 27, 2018). "Adam Lambert's stunning rendition of 'Believe' brought Cher to tears". Retrieved February 25, 2019. Acevedo, Angelica (January 22, 2019). "James Corden Recruits Adam Lambert for Queen NFL Playoffs Parody on 'Late Late Show':Watch". Billboard. Retrieved February 25, 2019. Papadatos, Markos (February 19, 2019). "Review: Adam Lambert slays 'Blue Suede Shoes' in Elvis All-Star Tribute". Retrieved February 25, 2019. Wiseman, Andreas (October 10, 2018). "Anya Taylor-Joy, Meghan Trainor, Adam Lambert, Daniel Radcliffe, Jim Gaffigan & Gabriel Bateman Voice 'Playmobil' Pic". Retrieved December 10, 2018. "News". August 26, 2019. Retrieved September 16, 2019. Preston, Hannah (February 25, 2019). "Adam Lambert, Queen Announce Documentary 'The Show Must Go On' Following Oscars Performance". Newsweek. Retrieved March 2, 2019. Legaspi, Althea (February 22, 2019). "Hear Adam Lambert's Achingly Yearning New Song 'Feel Something'". Rolling Stone. Retrieved March 2, 2019. Halperin Shirley and Michele Amabile Angermiller (February 21, 2019). "Adam Lambert Lands New Record Deal Ahead of Oscars Performance (EXCLUSIVE)". Retrieved March 4, 2019. Alston, Trey (February 27, 2019). "Adam Lambert's Soothing Live performance Of 'Feel Something' Is Beautiful". MTV. Retrieved March 5, 2019. "Queen, Adam Lambert announce 'The Show Must Go On' documentary - National | Globalnews.ca". Global News. Retrieved July 20, 2021. Crowley, Patrick (February 24, 2019). "Queen & Adam Lambert Open 2019 Oscars With Explosive Performance: Watch". Billboard. Retrieved May 1, 2019. "News". queenonline.com. Retrieved August 28, 2020. Runtagh, Jordan (April 29, 2019). "Queen's Roger Taylor Recalls Moving on After Freddie Mercury's Death:'We Thought It Was All Over". Peoplemag. Retrieved May 1, 2019. Angermiller, Michele Amabile (April 29, 2019). "Adam Lambert Returns to 'American Idol' Stage Like a King, for Queen Night". Retrieved May 1, 2019. "News". January 29, 2020. Retrieved February 6, 2020. Daw, Stephen (May 15, 2019). "Adam Lambert Kicks Off His 'Velvet' Album Era With Classic Rock-Tinged 'New Eyes': Watch". Billboard. Retrieved May 20, 2019. Ainsley, Helen (May 14, 2019). "Adam Lambert launches a new era with classic-rock inspired single New Eyes: First listen preview". OfficialCharts.com. Retrieved May 16, 2019. Angermiller, Michele Amabile (May 19, 2019). "Adam Lambert Does Double Performing Duty on 'Idol' as New Winner Is Crowned". Retrieved June 3, 2019. Daw, Stephen (May 31, 2019). "Adam Lambert Gives a Haunting Performance of 'New Eyes' on 'Ellen': Watch". Billboard. Retrieved June 6, 2019. Wilson, Zanda (June 25, 2019). "TV Ratings: Adam Lambert performs on The Voice Australia". The Music Network. Australia: Radio Today Pty, Ltd. Retrieved July 10, 2019. Daw, Stephen (June 26, 2019). "Adam Lambert Gets Funky in the Ballroom With Bewitching 'Comin In Hot' Video:Watch". Billboard. Retrieved June 30, 2019. Miller, Jordan (June 26, 2019). "Adam Lambert's Funky Comin In Hot Video Is Mesmerizing". Archived from the original on July 24, 2020. Retrieved June 30, 2019. McCarthy, Kelly (June 28, 2019). "Adam Lambert encourages everyone to celebrate Pride 'loud and proud'". ABC News. United States. Archived from the original on July 10, 2019. Retrieved July 10, 2019. Daw, Stephen (September 27, 2019). "Adam Lambert's 'Velvet: Side A' Is the Star's Best Work Yet". Billboard. Retrieved October 2, 2019. "Review: Adam Lambert smooth as 'Velvet,' rough as rock on EP". Associated Press. September 26, 2019. Retrieved October 11, 2019 – via ABC News. Cantor, Brian (September 19, 2019). "Adam Lambert Set For Interview, Performance On Oct 2 "Live With Kelly & Ryan". Retrieved November 7, 2019. "Strictly Come Dancing 2019: Music guest performers announced". OfficialCharts.com. November 6, 2019. Retrieved November 7, 2019. Daw, Stephen (November 13, 2019). "Adam Lambert Flexes His 'Superpower,' Opens Up About Touring With Queen On 'The Talk': Watch". Billboard. Retrieved November 22, 2019. Rowley, Glenn (October 15, 2019). "Ugh, Adam Lambert's Vocals in This New Live Video Are Just Perfection". Billboard. Retrieved October 22, 2019. Kaufman, Gil (November 20, 2019). "Watch Adam Lambert Get Gorgeously Mellow with "Closer to You' on 'Late Late Show'". Billboard. Retrieved November 22, 2019. Kaplan, Ilana (September 29, 2019). "Watch Queen+Adam Lambert, Pharrell, Carole King Perform at Global Citizen Fest". Rolling Stone. Retrieved October 11, 2019. Carothers, Cassie (October 10, 2019). "Queen+Adam Lambert, Pharrell, Alicia Keys Help Drive Up Global Citizen Festival Ratings". Retrieved October 11, 2019. Kaufman, Gil (November 25, 2019). "Hear New Holiday Spotify Singles From Adam Lambert, The Lumineers, Tori Kelly and More". Billboard. Retrieved December 18, 2019. Bein, Kat (December 6, 2019). "Watch the Stirring Performances From the Avicii Tribute in Stockholm". Billboard. Retrieved December 15, 2019. Kaufman, Gil (December 6, 2019). "Adam Lambert Finally Released His Spine-Tingling Cover of Cher's 'Believe': Listen". Billboard. Retrieved December 17, 2019. Lasimone, Ashley (December 16, 2019). "Adam Lambert, Little Big Town, Gary Clarke Jr. & Yolanda Adams to Duet With Top 4 on 'The Voice' Finale". Billboard. Retrieved January 8, 2020. Daw, Stephen (November 1, 2019). "Idina Menzel Hosting 'A Home For The Holidays' Christmas Special With Adam Lambert, Ne-Yo & More". Billboard. Retrieved November 7, 2019. Moayeri, Lily (December 22, 2019). "Concert Review: On Holiday From Queen, Adam Lambert Is Still a Killer". Retrieved January 13, 2020. Morin, Alyssa (January 8, 2020). "GLAAD Media AWards 2020: The Complete List of Nominations". Retrieved January 13, 2020. Harvey, Spencer (February 13, 2020). "Adam Lambert to open the 31st Annual GLAAD Media Awards in New York". Retrieved February 18, 2020. "Queen reprise 22-minute Live Aid set at Fire Fight Australia concert". BBC News. February 16, 2020. Retrieved February 18, 2020. Daly, Rhian (February 4, 2020). "Adam Lambert announces new album 'Velvet' and Manchester Pride performance". NME. Retrieved February 9, 2020. Ahmed, Tufayel (February 5, 2020). "Adam Lambert On Turning To Soul And Away From 'Trend-Based' Pop Music, Pete Buttigieg And Freddie Mercury". Newsweek. Retrieved February 9, 2020. "twitter@adamlambert". February 18, 2020. Retrieved February 18, 2020. "Queen, Adam Lambert to Frontline Workers Fighting Coronavirus: 'You Are the Champions' (Watch)". Variety. April 30, 2020. Retrieved July 24, 2020. "Adam Lambert, Yara Shahidi & Others to Join Mental Health Livestream for Teens and Young Adults". ExtraTV. May 19, 2020. Retrieved July 24, 2020. Rowley, Glenn (June 11, 2020). "Adam Lambert Recalls 'Beautiful' Experience of Protesting With Black Lives Matter on 'Corden'". Billboard. Retrieved August 29, 2020. Hertweck, Nate (May 28, 2020). "GRAMMY Museum June Lineup: Adam Lambert, Haim, Lucinda Williams, New Exhibits & More In Never-Before-Released Digital Content". Retrieved August 29, 2020. Sinclair, Joseph (July 26, 2020). "Adam Lambert Inspires With 'Ready to Run'at Joe Biden's 'Celebration for Change'". Billboard. Retrieved August 28, 2020. Turman, Katherine (August 20, 2020). "Queen + Adam Lambert Releasing First-Ever Live Album". Spin. Retrieved August 22, 2020. "News". October 9, 2019. Retrieved March 2, 2021. Lionsdale, John (January 29, 2021). "Queen + Adam Lambert 'Live Around the World' Concert Film Now Streaming Online". Rolling Stone. Retrieved January 31, 2021. "News". May 28, 2021. Retrieved June 2, 2021. Brayson, Johnny (November 8, 2020). "Adam Lambert's Moonbase 8 Character Is Unlike Any Role He's Had Before". Retrieved January 31, 2021. Simpson, Dave (January 10, 2021). "A Bowie Celebration review-a starry tribute concert for a mind-blowing talent". TheGuardian.com. Retrieved January 31, 2021. Romano, Nick (January 12, 2021). "'Ratatouille:The TikTok Musical raises $2 million for The Actors Fund". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved February 2, 2021. Evans, Gregg (March 30, 2021). "'Ratatouille' TikTok Musical Scores Drama Award Nomination As Honors Go Digital And Nationwide-Complete List". Retrieved June 2, 2021. "First Listen: Andrew LLoyd Webber's world premiere 'Cinderella' cast recording". July 9, 2021. Retrieved August 9, 2021. Newsdeck (July 16, 2021). "Andrew Lloyd Webber's Cinderella on top of Compilations Chart ahead of musical's world premiere". Retrieved August 9, 2021. Meyer, Dan (November 23, 2021). "Andrew LLoyd Webber's Cinderella, Girl From the North Country, The Unofficial Bridgerton Musical, More Earn 2022 Grammy Nominations". Retrieved November 27, 2021. Blistein, Jon (May 21, 2021). "Adam Lambert to Headline, Curate Pride Live's Stonewall Day Concert". Rolling Stone. Retrieved July 2, 2021. Dow, Stephen (January 27, 2021). "Adam Lambert Tells Kelly Clarkson He'd 'Love' to Release His Own Makeup Line". Billboard. Retrieved March 2, 2021. Furdyk, Brent (March 21, 2021). "Adam Lambert Is Writing A 'Rock And Roll' Musical". Archived from the original on March 21, 2021. Retrieved April 1, 2021. Ito, Robert (July 1, 2021). "'We the People' Updates the Sound of Schoolhouse Rock With Rap and R&B". The New York Times. Retrieved July 3, 2021. "We The People". YouTube. July 2, 2021. Archived from the original on October 29, 2021. Retrieved July 3, 2021. Shaffer, Claire (July 13, 2021). "BTS, Doja Cat, and More to Perform at Global Citizen Live 2021". Rolling Stone. Retrieved July 13, 2021. Street Mikelle (April 29, 2021). "Watch 'Legendary's Season 2 Trailer, Adam Lambert, Demi Lovato Judge". Retrieved June 2, 2021. "Meghan Trainor, Adam Lambert & More Join as Judges for E!'s 'Clash of the Cover Bands'". Billboard. May 17, 2021. Retrieved June 3, 2021. Cantor, Brian (October 8, 2021). "Early Look: Adam Lambert Chats, Sings Celebrity Tweets On "Ellen DeGeneres Show"". Retrieved November 26, 2021. Del Rosario, Alexandra (June 22, 2021). "Netflix Expands Childrens Animation Slate With 'A Tale Dark & Grimm,' 'Dogs in Space' & 'Super Giant Robot Brothers'". Retrieved July 13, 2021. "A Tale Dark & Grimm (2021-) Full Cast 7 Crew". IMDb. Retrieved November 12, 2021. Dresden, Hilton (November 1, 2022). "Children's & Family Emmys:Netflix Leads Nominations for First Awards Ceremony". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved November 12, 2022. "Adam Lambert adds 6th show to Las Vegas run". August 17, 2021. Retrieved September 5, 2021. Ellwood-Hughes, Pip (September 7, 2021). "Adam Lambert To Live Stream Show From Las Vegas In October". Retrieved November 12, 2021. Spencer, Samuel (November 4, 2021). "'Queen Family Singalong' Lineup: All the Stars and All the Songs in the ABC Special". Newsweek. Retrieved November 12, 2021. Daw, Stephen (December 1, 2021). "Darren Criss&Adam Lambert Jazz Up 'The Kelly Clarkson Show' With Flashy Holiday Cover". Billboard. Retrieved December 2, 2021. "Twitter@itvmedia". November 24, 2021. Retrieved November 27, 2021. Darvill, Josh (February 12, 2022). "Starstruck start date and all about new ITV singing show with Adam Lambert, Sheridan Smith and more". Retrieved February 24, 2022. Wild, Stephi (March 29, 2022). "Rise Up With The Arts Extends Until Sunday 3 April". Retrieved April 1, 2022. O'Rourke, Jill (February 16, 2022). "'Idol' Star Adam Lambert to Headline SunFest Music Festival 2022". Retrieved April 7, 2022. "Instagram@adamlambert". March 31, 2022. Retrieved May 4, 2022. "News". July 6, 2022. Retrieved September 6, 2022. Kreps, Daniel (June 5, 2022). "See Queen+Adam Lambert, Duran Duran, Diana Ross Perform at Platinum Jubilee Concert". Rolling Stone. Retrieved July 2, 2022. Vlessing, Etan (June 6, 2022). "Emilia Jones, Scoot McNairy Star in 'Fairyland' Adaptation for American Zoetrope". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved September 6, 2022. Guy, Zoe (December 7, 2022). "Cat Person Has a Date at Sundance Film Festival 2023". Retrieved December 8, 2022. Paul, Larisha (January 23, 2023). "Adam Lambert Says Early Career Homophobia Inspired Him to 'Be as Gay as I F-cking Can Be'". Rolling Stone. Retrieved March 7, 2023. Paul, Larisha (July 18, 2022). "Adam Lambert Offers Refuge From 'The Witch Hunt' With Las Vegas Halloween Concert Series". Rolling Stone. Retrieved September 8, 2022. "Twitter@adamlambert". July 26, 2022. Retrieved September 8, 2022. Schneider, Marc (October 6, 2022). "Adam Lambert Returns to WMG With EastWest Records Deal". Billboard. Retrieved October 13, 2022. Hudson, David (October 11, 2022). "Adam Lambert turns in amazing, queer performance on British TV show". Retrieved November 12, 2022. Blistein, Jon (October 19, 2022). "Jennifer Hudson and Adam Lambert Bring a Night at the Opera to Daytime TV". Rolling Stone. Retrieved November 16, 2022. "Official Charts". Official Charts. March 9, 2023. Retrieved March 23, 2023. Caulfield, Keith (March 10, 2023). "Adam Lambert Lands Fifth Top 10 on Billboard's Album Sales Chart With 'High Drama'". Billboard. Retrieved March 23, 2023. Daw, Stephen (December 13, 2022). "Adam Lambert Yearns for an 'Ordinary World' With Haunting Duran Duran Cover Off Upcoming Album". Billboard. Retrieved December 16, 2022. "WATCH: Adam Lambert Stuns With Cover Of Duran Duran Hit During 'The Voice' Finale". December 13, 2022. Retrieved December 16, 2022. Archer, Katie (September 27, 2022). "ITV unveils Christmas celebrity singing contest to support mental health with 'Britain Get Singing'". Retrieved November 30, 2022. "The National Lottery's Big Bash". Retrieved November 30, 2022. Ellwood-Hughes, Pip (December 30, 2022). "Listen: Adam Lambert debuts his version of Bonnie Tyler's 'Holding Out For a Hero'". Retrieved January 13, 2023. "The Jonathan Ross Christmas Show". November 28, 2022. Retrieved December 14, 2022. Manno, Jackie (June 8, 2023). "Adam Lambert Just Sang "The Muffin Man" Like Cher Again for a Very Royal Reason". Retrieved August 10, 2023. Aubrey, Elizabeth (January 13, 2023). "Adam Lambert announces one-off intimate London KOKO gig". NME. Retrieved January 13, 2023. "Adam Lambert Tour Dates". Retrieved March 24, 2023. "Adam Lambert to return to Israel this summer". March 18, 2023. Retrieved March 24, 2023. Cantor, Brian (March 2, 2023). "Adam Lambert Performs On "The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon" (1st Look)". Retrieved March 26, 2023. "Twitter@adamlambert". March 1, 2023. Retrieved March 27, 2023. "Twitter@adamlambert". March 1, 2023. Retrieved March 26, 2023. "Twitter@adamlambert". March 7, 2023. Retrieved March 27, 2023. "Twitter@Nightline". March 8, 2023. Retrieved March 27, 2023. Irvin, Irvin, Jack (April 18, 2023). "Adam Lambert Sings Hilarious Version of 'The Muffin Man' While Doing a Spot-On Cher Impression". People. Retrieved April 27, 2023.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Greene, Andy (March 24, 2023). "Queen + Adam Lambert Announce 2023 North American 'Rhapsody' Tour Dates". Rolling Stone. Retrieved March 24, 2023. "News". Retrieved April 27, 2023. "news". August 1, 2023. Retrieved August 10, 2023. Kaufman, Gil (May 1, 2023). "Adam Lambert Soars Back to 'American Idol' With Cover of 'I Can't Stand the Rain'". Billboard. Retrieved May 1, 2023. "CAPITAL'S SUMMERTIME BALL WITH BARCLAYCARD". Retrieved September 29, 2023. Bousfiha, Jihane (May 15, 2023). "5 Things to Know About the 2023 Cannes Film Festival". Retrieved September 18, 2023. "RAYE, Nova Twins, Gregory Porter, Adam Lambert and N-Dubz all Silver Clef Award winners". June 6, 2023. Retrieved September 18, 2023. "Twitter@USONorthwest". May 30, 2023. Retrieved November 30, 2023. Bashforth, Emily and Norris, Lucy (June 14, 2023). "London headliner Adam Lambert insists this year's Pride had 'more important meaning' as LGBTQ+ community fights 'ignorance and hatred'". Retrieved September 29, 2023.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Muhammad, Latifah (June 2, 2023). "Adam Lambert Teams Up With Orly for 'High Drama' Nail Collaboration: Shop the Limited Collection Before It's Gone". Billboard. Retrieved October 6, 2023. Ferber, Kate (June 2, 2023). "Watch Adam Lambert & MusiCares' Care/Feel Panel, A Candid Discussion About Queer Mental Wellness". Retrieved October 11, 2023. Iftikhar, Asyia (August 31, 2023). "Adam Lambert's fascinating new documentary celebrates LGBTQ+ artists who shaped music history". Retrieved November 30, 2023. Moorman, Taijuan (November 20, 2023). "Princess Kate to host 3rd annual holiday caroling special with guests Adam Lambert, Beverly Knight". USA Today. Retrieved December 14, 2023. Pip Ellwood (November 30, 2023). "'Britain Get Singing':ITV reveals the line-up for this year". Retrieved December 14, 2023. "The Voice Australia unveils three new judges". The Canberra Times. February 6, 2024. Retrieved February 19, 2024. "Home: ABOUT THE ORGANIZATION". Retrieved September 11, 2012. Kragan, Pam (June 2, 2009). "Adam Lambert: North County friends, mentors say homegrown 'Idol' worked diligently to reach stardom". Archived from the original on January 29, 2013. Retrieved February 14, 2012. "Producer Rob Cavallo Exclusively Discusses Adam Lambert Album on Reality Rocks". YouTube. October 13, 2009. Archived from the original on October 29, 2021. Retrieved February 14, 2012. Epting, Chris (March 6, 2012). "Meat Loaf Q&A: Rock Legend on Getting Bullied Over His Weight, Turning Down 'Idol" and Why the Country Is Going to 'Hell'". Archived from the original on March 7, 2012. Retrieved March 9, 2012. Reiher, Andrea (August 24, 2009). "Queen's Brian May 'blown away' by Adam Lambert's song for '2012'". Archived from the original on June 18, 2013. Retrieved February 14, 2012. "Roger Taylor-Interview with Chris Evans". February 21, 2012. Retrieved March 21, 2012. Diehl, Matt (November 28, 2011). "Adam Lambert Storms the Dance Floor on New LP". Retrieved February 14, 2012. Rowley, Alison (October 14, 2012). "Adam Lambert insures voice for £30m?". Digital Spy. Retrieved March 19, 2013. "James Michael talking about Adam Lambert vocal skills". YouTube. June 14, 2019. Archived from the original on June 12, 2020. Retrieved May 15, 2023. Alvidrez, Gabrielle (July 5, 2012). "Glitz and Glam: Adam Lambert's Fashion Evolution". Retrieved August 23, 2012. Zeiher, Mary (March 13, 2009). "Adam Lambert Has Qualities Needed to Be Next American Idol". Archived from the original on July 24, 2013. Retrieved March 14, 2012. Odell, Amy (May 21, 2009). "Adam Lambert: Fashion Trailblazer". Retrieved August 21, 2012. Stransky, Tanner (May 26, 2009). "Simon Doonan: Musings on his LOGO show, 'Beautiful People,' and Adam Lambert's 'guts'". Retrieved August 23, 2012. "Jonny+Adam on MTV Playground". September 12, 2011. Archived from the original on May 7, 2012. Retrieved November 29, 2011. Parker, Lyndsey (September 23, 2011). "Adam Lambert Rocks 'Project Runway'". Retrieved November 29, 2011. Kinser, Jeremy (December 9, 2011). "Adam Lambert's Fashion Advice". Archived from the original on February 13, 2012. Retrieved December 12, 2011. Snyder, Renee (March 17, 2012). "Adam Lambert Covers Swedish 'Dorian' Magazine (Video)". Archived from the original on September 21, 2013. Retrieved September 1, 2012. "Adam on Cover of BLIKK magazine". August 2, 2012. Archived from the original on September 21, 2013. Retrieved September 1, 2012. "Adam Lambert's Fault magazine cover shoot and revealing interview". March 2, 2012. Retrieved September 1, 2012. Sciarretto, Amy (December 10, 2012). "Adam Lambert Covers Fiasco Magazine In Black". Retrieved December 11, 2012. Darwin, Liza (December 10, 2012). "Adam Lambert Goes Sleek And Simple For 'Fiasco' Magazine". Archived from the original on December 15, 2012. Retrieved December 11, 2012. Ortved, John (August 20, 2015). "Music's Men of Style: Adam Lambert on Why He's 'Put Down a Lot of the Makeup'". Billboard. Retrieved August 30, 2015. Balls, David (February 19, 2010). "Adam Lambert 'inspired by British acts'". Digital Spy. Retrieved February 24, 2012. "§Adam Lambert Starstruck by Meeting Madonna". June 16, 2009. Retrieved February 25, 2019. Hicklin, Aaron (December 7, 2011). "Adam Revisited". Retrieved February 24, 2012. Lambert, Adam (March 12, 2013). "My Bowie:Adam Lambert". Retrieved March 14, 2013. "The New Issue of Rolling Stone: The Liberation of Adam Lambert". June 9, 2009. Retrieved February 14, 2012. "You Did It! Adam Lambert Raises $1,000,000 Donated for Charity!". October 6, 2011. Archived from the original on October 9, 2011. Retrieved November 3, 2011. "Adam Lambert Supports Education". Retrieved November 3, 2011. "Adam & Glam Nation Support Education". Retrieved November 3, 2011. "Adam Lambert-DonorsChoose.org". Archived from the original on October 19, 2011. Retrieved November 3, 2011. "Adam Lambert-Musicares". Archived from the original on July 24, 2013. Retrieved November 3, 2011. "Adam's 29th Birthday". Archived from the original on October 14, 2013. Retrieved November 3, 2011. "Adam's 30th Birthday". Archived from the original on October 14, 2013. Retrieved May 29, 2012. Snyder, Renee (June 14, 2013). "Adam Lambert's 'Charity Water' Project Is the Gift That Keeps on Giving". Archived from the original on November 10, 2013. Retrieved June 16, 2013. Gilmore, Story (March 10, 2011). "Video:Adam Lambert Performs Stunning Acoustic Version Of "Aftermath" on American Idol Results Show". Retrieved November 30, 2011. Griffin, Matt (June 8, 2012). "The Rays of Sunshine Concert-7 June 2012". Archived from the original on October 15, 2012. Retrieved June 13, 2012. "Press Release: Queen + Adam Lambert and Elton John To Play ANTIAIDS Show in Kiev". June 7, 2012. Retrieved June 8, 2012. Bernard, Bob (September 25, 2012). "Adam Lambert performs at fundraising concert supporting Md. same-sex marriage legalization". Archived from the original on July 20, 2013. Retrieved September 26, 2012. "We Are Family Foundation 2012 Celebration Gala 2.0". Retrieved February 1, 2013. "Adam Lambert and His Fans Help Raise Over $82,000!". Archived from the original on February 5, 2013. Retrieved February 7, 2013. "Happy Birthday, Adam Lambert...You're 32!". Archived from the original on March 1, 2014. Retrieved February 5, 2014. "Life Ball". Archived from the original on August 23, 2013. Retrieved May 10, 2013. Parker, Lyndsey (May 26, 2013). "Adam Lambert Debuts New Song, New Look at Life Ball". Retrieved May 26, 2013. Snyder, Renee (June 24, 2013). "Judith Light, Adam Lambert and More Appear at 'Broadway Bares' to Fight AIDS". Retrieved July 5, 2013. "Adam Lambert talks 'Glee,' new music project, Freddie Mercury". Miami Herald. November 1, 2013. Retrieved November 3, 2013. "A Magic Night". Archived from the original on November 5, 2013. Retrieved November 4, 2013. Reed, Ryan (November 21, 2014). "UNICEF Launches John Lennon-Inspired #IMAGINE Campaign". Rolling Stone. Retrieved November 26, 2014. "Share The Sound Of An AIDS Free Generation". November 4, 2014. Retrieved November 27, 2014. "Adam Lambert joins The One For The Boys Fashion Ball". June 14, 2015. Retrieved June 16, 2015. "Supertähti talkoisiin Suomeen-Adam Lambert tähdittää Live Aid-megakonserttia". May 27, 2015. Retrieved July 1, 2015. Fisher, Luchina (July 6, 2016). "Selena Gomez, Adam Lambert, Britney Spears and More Record Tribute Song for Orlando Victims". ABC News. Retrieved July 7, 2016. Parker, Lyndsey (August 20, 2017). "Adam Lambert honors George Michael at emotional Project Angel Food gala". Retrieved August 20, 2017. Anitos, Rania (November 19, 2020). "Adam Lambert Partners With Project Angel Food to Deliver Thanksgiving Meals & Raise Awareness". Billboard. Retrieved February 5, 2021. "VIDEOS: Cynthia Erivo, Adam Lambert, Andrea Bocelli, and More Perform at the Virtual Carousel of Hope Ball". October 11, 2020. Retrieved February 4, 2021. "Adam Lambert Helps Raise $1.1Million for Project Angel Food". July 19, 2021. Retrieved July 21, 2021. Buettner-Schmidt, Kelly, and Marie, L. Lobo. "Social Justice: A Concept Analysis." Journal of Advanced Nursing 68.4 (2012): 948-958. Retrieved October 15, 2013 Mervis, Scott (June 13, 2013). "Flamboyant star Adam Lambert lends his voice to Pride in the Street". Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. Retrieved October 16, 2013. Matasar-Padilla, Maria."Music Lessons: What Adam Lambert Can Teach Us About Media Self-Regulation."Cardozo Arts & Entertainment Law Journal 29.1(2011):113-142.Retrieved October 15, 2013 Kaufman, Gil (October 28, 2010). "Adam Lambert Encourages Gay Fans in It Gets Better". MTV. Retrieved November 3, 2011. "Adam Lambert, Kathy Griffin to celebrate LGBT victories at Los Angeles Equality Awards". August 10, 2011. Retrieved November 3, 2011. Kinser, Jeremy (September 27, 2011). "Adam Lambert and Mother Both Honored by PFLAG". Archived from the original on December 11, 2011. Retrieved February 25, 2012. "Adam Lambert Supports Gay teen suicide line". Mamba Online. March 9, 2011. Archived from the original on May 15, 2023. Retrieved May 15, 2023. "Adam Lambert-The Trevor Project". Archived from the original on October 28, 2011. Retrieved November 3, 2011. Falconer, Daniel (November 25, 2013). "Glee Stars To Perform With Adam Lambert For Trevor Project". Female First. Archived from the original on January 29, 2014. Retrieved May 15, 2023. "Adam Lambert Glambert Fanarmy". Retrieved November 3, 2011. Bentley, Jean (October 20, 2011). "Spirt Day 2011: Join Ellen DeGeneres, Adam Lambert and more in taking a stand against bullying". Archived from the original on March 25, 2013. Retrieved March 28, 2013. "Adam Lambert, Rosie O'Donnell Join Cyndi Lauper's HOME FOR THE HOLIDAYS Benefit". November 29, 2012. Retrieved December 10, 2012. "Adam Lambert talks to Pressparty". Pressparty. January 6, 2012. Archived from the original on January 9, 2012. Retrieved May 15, 2023. Rothaus, Steve (April 14, 2013). "2013 Miami Beach Gay Pride parade; Adam Lambert greets fans and gets key to the city". Archived from the original on April 18, 2013. Retrieved May 15, 2023. Carter, Ricky (March 28, 2013). "GLAAD to honor Adam Lambert at the #glaadawards in San Francisco". Archived from the original on March 29, 2013. Retrieved March 28, 2013. "Adam Lambert to be honored with 'Hope of Los Angeles Award'". May 25, 2013. Archived from the original on October 14, 2013. Retrieved May 26, 2013. Poulsen, Drew (June 4, 2013). "Adam Lambert, LeAnn Rimes Flick Off Bullies". Billboard. Retrieved June 9, 2013. "City of Pittsburgh Declares June 15 ADAM LAMBERT Day". YouTube. June 18, 2013. Archived from the original on October 29, 2021. Retrieved June 18, 2013. Karlovits, Bob (June 12, 2013). "Lambert to lead latest growth of Pittsburgh Pridefest". Retrieved June 18, 2013. "Show Your LGBTQ Pride: Like, Tweet or Share". April 10, 2013. Archived from the original on April 19, 2013. Retrieved April 20, 2013. Parker, Lyndsey (July 4, 2013). "Adam Lambert Talks "Post-Gay Reality" at Live Proud Event". Retrieved July 7, 2013. Hernandez, Greg (October 16, 2013). "Adam Lambert and Lily Tomlin among stars at emotional LA premiere of Bridegroom". Archived from the original on October 18, 2013. Retrieved October 19, 2013. The Trevor Project. "TREVORLIVE". Retrieved November 22, 2013. Baylen, Ashley (February 10, 2014). "Adam Lambert Helps Raise Over $500,000 For LGBT Families". Archived from the original on March 2, 2014. Retrieved February 10, 2014. Lambert, Adam (May 5, 2014). "Make Your Voice Heard with AT&T's Live Proud Campaign". Archived from the original on June 11, 2014. Retrieved May 11, 2014. ADAM LAMBERT [@adamlambert] (October 14, 2014). "Singin at the AT&T Live Proud Finale at the HighLine Ballroom Thanks for being a great audience New York!" (Tweet) – via Twitter. "British LGBT Awards 2015". April 24, 2015. Archived from the original on September 22, 2016. Retrieved May 8, 2015. "Reggie Yates, Adam Lambert and Lorraine Kelly win at Attitude Pride Awards". Telegraph & Argus. October 15, 2015. Archived from the original on May 16, 2023. Retrieved May 15, 2023. "Adam Lambert: Trump has used 'fear and hate' to divide us". Go Pride. June 13, 2017. Archived from the original on July 17, 2017. Retrieved May 15, 2023. Ragan, Scott (May 15, 2017). "Evan Rachel Wood & Adam Lambert Host 'Queer Prom' for High School Students". Retrieved July 4, 2017. Lambert, Adam (June 1, 2017). "Adam Lambert: Love Letter to the LGBTQ Community". Billboard. Retrieved July 4, 2017. Moran, Justin (June 30, 2017). "Adam Lambert Stands His Ground on Glam-rock Single, 'Two Fux'". Retrieved July 7, 2017. "Adam Lambert Joins Point Foundation Gala Honoring Jill Soloway". September 6, 2017. Retrieved October 15, 2017. Crowley, Patrick (October 20, 2017). "Adam Lambert Performs 4 Non Blondes/Bon Jovi Mash-Up At GLAAD Spirit Day Show:Watch". Billboard. Retrieved October 25, 2017. Webb, Jack (June 1, 2018). "American Idol and Queen singer Adam Lambert shared his journey with an LGBT+ youth club". Archived from the original on October 13, 2020. Retrieved June 13, 2018. Legaspi, Althea (January 22, 2020). "Adam Lambert Launches Non-Profit to Support LGBTQ+ Organizations". Rolling Stone. Retrieved February 6, 2020. Rees, Katrina (June 14, 2020). "Adam Lambert & Feel Something Foundation launch second charity auction in aid of GLAAD". Retrieved July 7, 2020. Gardner, Chris (April 16, 2020). "Adam Lambert, Kesha and More Set For GLAAD Event Highlighting LGBTQ Response to COVID-19 Crisis". Billboard. Retrieved July 7, 2020. Cho, Diane J (June 25, 2020). "How the Stars are Celebrating Pride Month This Year". People. Retrieved July 7, 2020. Daw, Stephen (June 29, 2020). "Adam Lambert, Teddy Geiger & More Get Real About Representation During LGBTQ Roundtable". Billboard. Retrieved July 10, 2020. Kennedy, John R. (June 24, 2020). "Katy Perry, Adam Lambert To Perform On 'Can't Cancel Pride'". Retrieved February 5, 2021. "Black Lives Matter will be centered in Global Pride event on June 27, organisers announce". June 13, 2020. Retrieved February 5, 2021. Darmon, Aynslee (June 26, 2020). "Elton John, Adam Lambert And More Celebrate History Of Pride With Virtual Event 'Out Now Live'". Archived from the original on February 20, 2021. Retrieved February 5, 2021. Rude, Mey (December 7, 2020). "Adam Lambert, Brandi Carlile Join Cyndi Lauper's Blowout Concert". Retrieved February 5, 2021. Stephen Daw (June 3, 2021). "Adam Lambert on Crafting a 'Queer for Queer' Lineup for OUTLOUD: Raising Voices". Archived from the original on July 13, 2021. Retrieved July 13, 2021. "Celebration for the Center for Gender-Affirming Care at Rady Children's". February 17, 2021. Retrieved March 5, 2021. "Twitter@feelsomethingfoundation". March 22, 2021. Retrieved March 29, 2021. Malkin, Marc (July 6, 2021). "Adam Lambert, Jane Fonda and Lily Tomlin Join Los Angeles LGBT Center Telethon on KTLA". Retrieved July 21, 2021. "Artists4Ceasefire". Artists4Ceasefire. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Blas, Lorena (June 15, 2009). "Idol Adam Lambert 'comes out' in print". USA Today. Retrieved December 23, 2011. Parsley, Jason (April 9, 2013). "Adam Lambert Talks Life and Love with SFGN". Archived from the original on April 12, 2013. Retrieved April 12, 2013. "Adam Lambert Is Instagram Official With Boyfriend Javi Costa Polo". Entertainment Tonight. March 27, 2019. Retrieved June 2, 2019. Mastrogiannis, Nicole. "Tattoo Stories with Adam Lambert: Tributes to Queen, His New Album & More". www.iheart.com. "Adam Lambert Shows Off His New Tattoo". Tattoodo. October 5, 2016. Retrieved March 31, 2020. "Adam Lambert Brasil - Adam Lambert revela nova tatuagem!" (in Brazilian Portuguese). Retrieved March 31, 2020. "Adam Lambert on gay pride, touring with Queen and his favourite tattoos". British GQ. July 6, 2018. Retrieved March 31, 2020. Miller, Julius (November 21, 2023). "Adam Lambert and Roger Taylor of Queen Open Wild New Bar in West Hollywood". Retrieved November 30, 2023. "Adam Lambert announces new tour" – via Stereoboard. Falkner, Scott (December 22, 2014). "Lennon or McCartney? New Documentary Asks 550 Celebrities Their Preference — See Their Answers". Inquisitr. Retrieved November 11, 2016. "Adam Lambert to Co-Star in Fox's 'Rocky Horror Picture Show'". Yahoo News. January 14, 2016. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Adam Lambert. Official website Adam Lambert at IMDb