"Throw It on Me" is a song performed by American producer, songwriter and rapper Timbaland featuring Swedish band The Hives from Timbaland's second studio album Shock Value (2007). The song was released as a promotional single on August 4, 2007 only in Australia. It was written by Timbaland, Attitude and Randy Fitzsimmons, while production and instrumentation were helmed by Timbaland. "Throw It on Me" utilizes disco and rock genres while incorporating dance and hip hop flavored beats. Contemporary music critics viewed it as one of the better rock tracks on Shock Value, although they were collectively criticized as falling short of expectations. "Throw It on Me" was written and produced by Timbaland, while additional writing was done by Attitude and Randy Fitzsimmons. The latter is a long-time collaborator for The Hives. Sound engineer Demacio "Demo" Castellon handled the programming and mixing for the song; the latter took place at The Studio at The Palms Las Vegas in Paradise, Nevada. Mark Gray, James Roach and Doug Sadler assisted Castellon in mixing the song. Castellon also recorded Timbaland's vocals for the song at Thomas Crown Studios in Virginia Beach, Virginia and The Hit Factory Criteria in Miami, Florida. The Hives received their own recording engineer, Johan Gustafsson, and had their vocals recorded at Studio Gröndahl in the band's home country Sweden. Howlin' Pelle Almqvist, lead vocalist of The Hives, contributed vocals alongside Timbaland. In addition to co-writing and producing the song, Timbaland also provided every instrument. The guitars, however, were also provided by The Hives's guitarists Vigilante Carlstroem and Nicholaus Arson alongside musician Dan Warner. "Throw It on Me" merges disco and rock music with dance and hip hop beats. The song uses a jagged guitar, techno keyboards, drums and pulsating dance beats. "Throw It on Me" was released on August 4, 2007 as a promotional single single from Shock Value (2007) only in Australia, and was released as a CD single two days later on August 6, 2007. A month later, the song appeared on the Australian Singles Chart at number fifty before falling off the following week. "Throw It on Me" received fairly positive reviews; most found the track to be the better of the rock-oriented tracks on Shock Value, but those tracks received criticism for falling short of expectations. Andrea Park of The Online Gargoyle named "Throw It on Me" one of the album's best highlights, calling it an effortless blend of rock and hip hop. David Hyland of WESH Orlando praised the vocal collaboration between Timbaland and The Hives's Pelle Almqvist and said, "He puffs up his voice like Rob Zombie and his aggressiveness on the mic keeps the cut moving. As Tim raps, Hives singer Pelle Almqvist is his Flavor Flav. He howls, yells and screeches and generally keeps the song's energy level high." Andy Kellman of AllMusic called it a "frisky, careening number that must have taken all of ten minutes to put together". Zharmer Hardimon of The Houston Chronicle claims the Swedish band renders awe on the track and wrote, "The tunes give way to what Shock Value could have been or perhaps tries to be — a genre-bending modern-day version of Quincy Jones's 1980 classic The Dude." Alexis Petridis of The Guardian expressed his disappointment in the rock-oriented tracks on Shock Value. At one point, he wrote, "The Hives must have wondered if it was really worth the journey from Fagersta just to play the guitar riff from the Elastik Band's 60s garage rocker Spazz on Throw It On Me." Evan McGarvey of Stylus Magazine called "Throw It on Me" and "Time" " battlegrounds between two divergent tempos, effects drowning out the instruments we want to hear (post-punk needs a elegant, discernable bassline) and truism after truism (The Hives want to psyche up, She Wants Revenge needs a hug)." In lieu of a copyright lawsuit over "Throw It On Me", Timbaland and David Cortopassi, the composer of "Spazz", which was originally recorded by The Elastik Band and released by ATCO/Atlantic and EMI, reached a settlement agreement in July 2009. Terms of the settlement are undisclosed. The music video directed by Justin Francis was shot on April 19, 2007 at Universal Studios and it featured current and former WWE Divas including Torrie Wilson, Kelly Kelly, the late 2005 WWE Raw Diva Search winner and former Survivor contestant Ashley Massaro, 2006 WWE Diva Search finalist Maryse Ouellet, Brooke Adams, and 2006 WWE Diva Search winner Layla El. The video premiered during Raw on May 21, 2007. The video looks almost like a version of Sin City, where "The Baby Faces" (a reference to the term face in pro wrestling) consisting of Torrie, Maryse and Ashley take on "Extreme Exposé" (Kelly, Brooke and Layla) in a wrestling match. Timbaland and The Hives declare a winner at the end of the video. The winner announced, however, varies. In most markets, it is said to be "The Baby Faces". However, there is a video where "Extreme Exposé" is the winner. The video clip ends with "To be continued...". The video has reached #11 on Top 20 ReVamped. It was also #76 on MTV Asia Credits taken from the liner notes of Shock Value, Mosley Music Group, Blackground Records, Interscope Records. Recording and mixing Timbaland recorded at Thomas Crown Studios in Virginia Beach, Virginia and The Hit Factory Criteria in Miami The Hives recorded at Studio Gröndahl in Sweden Mixed at The Studio at The Palms Las Vegas in Paradise, Nevada Personnel Songwriting – Timothy Mosley, Timothy Clayton, Randy Fitzsimmons Production – Timbaland Recording – Demacio "Demo" Castellon, Johan Gustafsson Programming – Demacio "Demo" Castellon Mixing – Demacio "Demo" Castellon, Mark Gray (assistant), James Roach (assistant), Doug Sadler (assistant) Instruments – Timbaland Guitars – Timbaland, Vigilante Carlstroem, Nicholaus Arson, Dan Warner Vocals – Howlin' Pelle Almqvist Australian CD Single "Throw It On Me" (Album Version) – 2:11 "Throw It On Me" (Video) – 2:30 Shock Value (liner notes). Timbaland. United States: Mosley, Blakcground, Interscope. 2008.{{cite AV media notes}}: CS1 maint: others in cite AV media (notes) (link) Hyland, David (April 11, 2007). "Timbaland's 'Shock Value' Has Shockingly Limited Value". WESH Orlando. Orlando Hearst Television Inc. Retrieved 2 May 2012.[permanent dead link] "Throw It on Me (feat. The Hives) – Single by Timbaland". iTunes Store (US). Apple Inc. Retrieved 4 May 2012. "Timbaland FT Hives – Throw It On Me CD Single". CD Universe. CD Universe. Retrieved 4 May 2012. "australian-charts.com – Timbaland feat. The Hives – Throw It On Me". australian-charts.com. Hung Medien. Retrieved 4 May 2012. Parks, Andrea (April 8, 2007). "CD review: Timbaland, "Shock Value"". The Online Gargoyle. University of Illinois Board of Trustees. Archived from the original on 15 July 2014. Retrieved 2 May 2012. Kellman, Andy. "Timbaland Present Shock Value – Timbaland". AllMusic. Retrieved 2 May 2012. Hardimon, Zharmer (April 8, 2007). "You're a great producer, but please stop rapping". Houston Chronicle. Retrieved 2 May 2012. Petridis, Alexis (March 29, 2007). "Timbaland, Shock Value". The Guardian. Retrieved 2 May 2012. McGarvey, Evan (April 11, 2007). "Timbaland". Stylus Magazine. stylusmagazine.com. Retrieved 2 May 2012. Winslow, Mike (May 24, 2010). "Timbaland Settles 'Spazz' Lawsuit For Undisclosed Amount". AllHipHop News. Fontaine, Smokey (May 24, 2010). "Timbaland Settles 'Spazz' Lawsuit For Undisclosed Amount". The Urban Dailey. Copsey, Robert (May 25, 2010). "Timbaland settles copywright lawsuit". Digital Spy. Medalis, Kara A. (April 22, 2007). "The Sexiest Women in L.A." WWE. World Wrestling Entertainment, Inc. Archived from the original on April 22, 2007. Retrieved 28 August 2013.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) "MTV Top 100 Hits of 2007". MTV Asia. Viacom International, Inc. Archived from the original on December 12, 2007. Retrieved 28 August 2013.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) "Timbaland feat. The Hives – Throw It On Me". ARIA Top 50 Singles. Retrieved 2012-05-03. "Issue 920" ARIA Top 40 Urban Singles. National Library of Australia. Retrieved April 18, 2023.