This is a list of the bird species recorded in Latvia. The avifauna of Latvia include a total of 379 species, of which 3 were introduced by humans. This list's taxonomic treatment (designation and sequence of orders, families and species) and nomenclature (common and scientific names) follow the conventions of The Clements Checklist of Birds of the World, 2022 edition. The family accounts at the beginning of each heading reflect this taxonomy, as do the species counts found in each family account. Introduced and accidental species are included in the total counts for Latvia. The following tags have been used to highlight several categories. The commonly occurring native species do not fall into any of these categories. (A) Accidental - a species that rarely or accidentally occurs in Latvia (I) Introduced - a species introduced to Latvia as a consequence, direct or indirect, of human actions Order: Anseriformes   Family: Anatidae Anatidae includes the ducks and most duck-like waterfowl, such as geese and swans. These birds are adapted to an aquatic existence with webbed feet, flattened bills, and feathers that are excellent at shedding water due to an oily coating. Bar-headed goose, Aensr indicus (I) Snow goose, Anser caerulescens (A) Graylag goose, Aensr anser Greater white-fronted goose, Anser albifrons Lesser white-fronted goose, Anser erythropus Taiga bean-goose, Anser fabalis Tundra bean-goose, Anser serrirostris Pink-footed goose, Anser brachyrhynchus (A) Brant, Branta bernicla Barnacle goose, Branta leucopsis Canada goose, Branta canadensis (I) Red-breasted goose, Branta ruficollis Mute swan, Cygnus olor Tundra swan, Cygnus columbianus Whooper swan, Cygnus cygnus Ruddy shelduck, Tadorna ferruginea (A) Common shelduck, Tadorna tadorna Wood duck, Aix sponsa (I) Garganey, Spatula querquedula Northern shoveler, Spatula clypeata Gadwall, Mareca strepera Eurasian wigeon, Mareca penelope Mallard, Anas platyrhynchos Northern pintail, Anas acuta Green-winged teal, Anas crecca Red-crested pochard, Netta rufina Common pochard, Aythya ferina Ring-necked duck, Aythya collaris (A) Ferruginous duck, Aythya nyroca Tufted duck, Aythya fuligula Greater scaup, Aythya marila Steller's eider, Polysticta stelleri King eider, Somateria spectabilis Common eider, Somateria mollissima Harlequin duck, Histrionicus histrionicus (A) Velvet scoter, Melanitta fusca Stejneger's scoter, Melanitta stejnegeri (A) Common scoter, Melanitta nigra Black scoter, Melanitta americana (A) Long-tailed duck, Clangula hyemalis Common goldeneye, Bucephala clangula Smew, Mergellus albellus Common merganser, Mergus merganser Red-breasted merganser, Mergus serrator White-headed duck, Oxyura leucocephala (A) Order: Galliformes   Family: Phasianidae The Phasianidae are a family of terrestrial birds. In general, they are plump (although they vary in size) and have broad, relatively short wings. Common quail, Coturnix coturnix Ring-necked pheasant, Phasianus colchicus (I) Gray partridge, Perdix perdix Western capercaillie, Tetrao urogallus Black grouse, Lyrurus tetrix Hazel grouse, Tetrastes bonasia Willow ptarmigan, Lagopus lagopus Order: Podicipediformes   Family: Podicipedidae Grebes are small to medium-large freshwater diving birds. They have lobed toes and are excellent swimmers and divers. However, they have their feet placed far back on the body, making them quite ungainly on land. Little grebe, Tachybaptus ruficollis Horned grebe, Podiceps auritus Red-necked grebe, Podiceps grisegena Great crested grebe, Podiceps cristatus Eared grebe, Podiceps nigricollis Order: Columbiformes   Family: Columbidae Pigeons and doves are stout-bodied birds with short necks and short slender bills with a fleshy cere. Rock pigeon, Columba livia Stock dove, Columba oenas Common wood-pigeon, Columba palumbus European turtle-dove, Streptopelia turtur Oriental turtle-dove, Streptopelia orientalis (A) Eurasian collared-dove, Streptopelia decaocto Order: Pterocliformes   Family: Pteroclidae Sandgrouse have small, pigeon like heads and necks, but sturdy compact bodies. They have long pointed wings and sometimes tails and a fast direct flight. Flocks fly to watering holes at dawn and dusk. Their legs are feathered down to the toes. Pallas's sandgrouse, Syrrhaptes paradoxus Order: Otidiformes   Family: Otididae Bustards are large terrestrial birds mainly associated with dry open country and steppes in the Old World. They are omnivorous and nest on the ground. They walk steadily on strong legs and big toes, pecking for food as they go. They have long broad wings with "fingered" wingtips and striking patterns in flight. Many have interesting mating displays. Great bustard, Otis tarda MacQueen's bustard, Chlamydotis macqueenii (A) Little bustard, Tetrax tetrax Order: Cuculiformes   Family: Cuculidae The family Cuculidae includes cuckoos, roadrunners and anis. These birds are of variable size with slender bodies, long tails and strong legs. The Old World cuckoos are brood parasites. Common cuckoo, Cuculus canorus Order: Caprimulgiformes   Family: Caprimulgidae Nightjars are medium-sized nocturnal birds that usually nest on the ground. They have long wings, short legs and very short bills. Most have small feet, of little use for walking, and long pointed wings. Their soft plumage is camouflaged to resemble bark or leaves. Eurasian nightjar, Caprimulgus europaeus Order: Caprimulgiformes   Family: Apodidae Swifts are small birds which spend the majority of their lives flying. These birds have very short legs and never settle voluntarily on the ground, perching instead only on vertical surfaces. Many swifts have long swept-back wings which resemble a crescent or boomerang. Common swift, Apus apus Order: Gruiformes   Family: Rallidae Rallidae is a large family of small to medium-sized birds which includes the rails, crakes, coots and gallinules. Typically they inhabit dense vegetation in damp environments near lakes, swamps or rivers. In general they are shy and secretive birds, making them difficult to observe. Most species have strong legs and long toes which are well adapted to soft uneven surfaces. They tend to have short, rounded wings and to be weak fliers. Water rail, Rallus aquaticus Corn crake, Crex crex Spotted crake, Porzana porzana Eurasian moorhen, Gallinula chloropus Eurasian coot, Fulica atra Little crake, Zapornia parva Baillon's crake, Zapornia pusilla (A) Order: Gruiformes   Family: Gruidae Cranes are large, long-legged and long-necked birds. Unlike the similar-looking but unrelated herons, cranes fly with necks outstretched, not pulled back. Most have elaborate and noisy courting displays or "dances". Common crane, Grus grus Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Recurvirostridae Recurvirostridae is a family of large wading birds, which includes the avocets and stilts. The avocets have long legs and long up-curved bills. The stilts have extremely long legs and long, thin, straight bills. Black-winged stilt, Himantopus himantopus (A) Pied avocet, Recurvirostra avosetta Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Haematopodidae The oystercatchers are large and noisy plover-like birds, with strong bills used for smashing or prising open molluscs. Eurasian oystercatcher, Haematopus ostralegus Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Charadriidae The family Charadriidae includes the plovers, dotterels and lapwings. They are small to medium-sized birds with compact bodies, short, thick necks and long, usually pointed, wings. They are found in open country worldwide, mostly in habitats near water. Black-bellied plover, Pluvialis squatarola European golden-plover, Pluvialis apricaria Pacific golden-plover, Pluvialis fulva (A) Northern lapwing, Vanellus vanellus Greater sand-plover, Charadrius leschenaultii (A) Kentish plover, Charadrius alexandrinus Common ringed plover, Charadrius hiaticula Little ringed plover, Charadrius dubius Eurasian dotterel, Charadrius morinellus Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Scolopacidae Scolopacidae is a large diverse family of small to medium-sized shorebirds including the sandpipers, curlews, godwits, shanks, tattlers, woodcocks, snipes, dowitchers and phalaropes. The majority of these species eat small invertebrates picked out of the mud or soil. Variation in length of legs and bills enables multiple species to feed in the same habitat, particularly on the coast, without direct competition for food. Whimbrel, Numenius phaeopus Eurasian curlew, Numenius arquata Bar-tailed godwit, Limosa lapponica Black-tailed godwit, Limosa limosa Ruddy turnstone, Arenaria interpres Red knot, Calidris canutus Ruff, Calidris pugnax Curlew sandpiper, Calidris ferruginea Broad-billed sandpiper, Calidris falcinellus Temminck's stint, Calidris temminckii Sanderling, Calidris alba Dunlin, Calidris alpina Purple sandpiper, Calidris maritima Little stint, Calidris minuta Pectoral sandpiper, Calidris melanotos (A) Jack snipe, Lymnocryptes minimus Eurasian woodcock, Scolopax rusticola Great snipe, Gallinago media Common snipe, Gallinago gallinago Terek sandpiper, Xenus cinereus Wilson's phalarope, Phalaropus tricolor (A) Red-necked phalarope, Phalaropus lobatus Red phalarope, Phalaropus fulicarius (A) Common sandpiper, Actitis hypoleucos Green sandpiper, Tringa ochropus Spotted redshank, Tringa erythropus Common greenshank, Tringa nebularia Marsh sandpiper, Tringa stagnatilis Wood sandpiper, Tringa glareola Common redshank, Tringa totanus Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Glareolidae Glareolidae is a family of wading birds comprising the pratincoles, which have short legs, long pointed wings and long forked tails, and the coursers, which have long legs, short wings and long, pointed bills which curve downwards. Collared pratincole, Glareola pratincola (A) Black-winged pratincole, Glareola nordmanni Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Stercorariidae The family Stercorariidae are, in general, medium to large birds, typically with grey or brown plumage, often with white markings on the wings. They nest on the ground in temperate and arctic regions and are long-distance migrants. Great skua, Stercorarius skua Pomarine jaeger, Stercorarius pomarinus Parasitic jaeger, Stercorarius parasiticus Long-tailed jaeger, Stercorarius longicaudus Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Alcidae Alcids are superficially similar to penguins due to their black-and-white colours, their upright posture and some of their habits, however they are not related to the penguins and differ in being able to fly. Auks live on the open sea, only deliberately coming ashore to nest. Dovekie, Alle alle Common murre, Uria aalge Razorbill, Alca torda Black guillemot, Cepphus grylle Order: Charadriiformes   Family: Laridae Laridae is a family of medium to large seabirds, the gulls, terns, and skimmers. Gulls are typically grey or white, often with black markings on the head or wings. They have stout, longish bills and webbed feet. Terns are a group of generally medium to large seabirds typically with grey or white plumage, often with black markings on the head. Most terns hunt fish by diving but some pick insects off the surface of fresh water. Terns are generally long-lived birds, with several species known to live in excess of 30 years. Black-legged kittiwake, Rissa tridactyla Sabine's gull, Xema sabini Black-headed gull, Chroicocephalus ridibundus Little gull, Hydrocoloeus minutus Ross's gull, Rhodostethia rosea (A) Laughing gull, Leucophaeus atricilla (A) Mediterranean gull, Ichthyaetus melanocephalus Pallas's gull, Ichthyaetus ichthyaetus Common gull, Larus canus Herring gull, Larus argentatus Yellow-legged gull, Larus michahellis (A) Caspian gull, Larus cachinnans (A) Iceland gull, Larus glaucoides Lesser black-backed gull, Larus fuscus Slaty-backed gull, Larus schistisagus (A) Glaucous gull, Larus hyperboreus Great black-backed gull, Larus marinus Little tern, Sternula albifrons Caspian tern, Hydroprogne caspia Black tern, Chlidonias niger White-winged tern, Chlidonias leucopterus Whiskered tern, Chlidonias hybrida Common tern, Sterna hirundo Arctic tern, Sterna paradisaea Sandwich tern, Thalasseus sandvicensis Order: Gaviiformes   Family: Gaviidae Loons, known as divers in Europe, are a group of aquatic birds found in many parts of North America and northern Europe. They are the size of a large duck or small goose, which they somewhat resemble when swimming, but to which they are completely unrelated. Red-throated loon, Gavia stellata Arctic loon, Gavia arctica Common loon, Gavia immer (A) Yellow-billed loon, Gavia adamsii (A) Order: Procellariiformes   Family: Hydrobatidae The northern storm petrels are relatives of the petrels and are the smallest seabirds. They feed on planktonic crustaceans and small fish picked from the surface, typically while hovering. The flight is fluttering and sometimes bat-like. Leach's storm petrel, Hydrobates leucorhous Order: Procellariiformes   Family: Procellariidae The procellariids are the main group of medium-sized "true petrels", characterised by united nostrils with medium septum and a long outer functional primary. Sooty shearwater, Ardenna griseus Order: Ciconiiformes   Family: Ciconiidae Storks are large, long-legged, long-necked, wading birds with long, stout bills. Storks are mute, but bill-clattering is an important mode of communication at the nest. Their nests can be large and may be reused for many years. Many species are migratory. Black stork, Ciconia nigra White stork, Ciconia ciconia Order: Suliformes   Family: Sulidae The sulids comprise the gannets and boobies. Both groups are medium to large coastal seabirds that plunge-dive for fish. . Northern gannet, Morus bassanus Order: Suliformes   Family: Phalacrocoracidae Phalacrocoracidae is a family of medium to large coastal, fish-eating seabirds that includes cormorants and shags. Plumage colouration varies, with the majority having mainly dark plumage, some species being black-and-white and a few being colourful. Pygmy cormorant, Microcarbo pygmaeus (A) Great cormorant, Phalacrocorax carbo Order: Pelecaniformes   Family: Pelecanidae Pelicans are large water birds with a distinctive pouch under their beak. As with other members of the order Pelecaniformes, they have webbed feet with four toes.. Great white pelican, Pelecanus onocrotalus Dalmatian pelican, Pelecanus crispus Order: Pelecaniformes   Family: Ardeidae The family Ardeidae contains the bitterns, herons and egrets. Herons and egrets are medium to large wading birds with long necks and legs. Bitterns tend to be shorter necked and more wary. Members of Ardeidae fly with their necks retracted, unlike other long-necked birds such as storks, ibises and spoonbills. Great bittern, Botaurus stellaris Little bittern, Ixobrychus minutus Gray heron, Ardea cinerea Great egret, Ardea alba (A) Little egret, Egretta garzetta Cattle egret, Bubulcus ibis (A) Squacco heron, Ardeola ralloides (A) Black-crowned night-heron, Nycticorax nycticorax Order: Pelecaniformes   Family: Threskiornithidae Threskiornithidae is a family of large terrestrial and wading birds which includes the ibises and spoonbills. They have long, broad wings with 11 primary and about 20 secondary feathers. They are strong fliers and despite their size and weight, very capable soarers. Glossy ibis, Plegadis falcinellus Eurasian spoonbill, Platalea leucorodia Order: Accipitriformes   Family: Pandionidae The family Pandionidae contains only one species, the osprey. The osprey is a medium-large raptor which is a specialist fish-eater with a worldwide distribution. Osprey, Pandion haliaetus Order: Accipitriformes   Family: Accipitridae Accipitridae is a family of birds of prey, which includes hawks, eagles, kites, harriers and Old World vultures. These birds have powerful hooked beaks for tearing flesh from their prey, strong legs, powerful talons and keen eyesight. Black-winged kite, Elanus caeruleus (A) European honey-buzzard, Pernis apivorus Cinereous vulture, Aegypius monachus Eurasian griffon, Gyps fulvus Short-toed snake-eagle, Circaetus gallicus Lesser spotted eagle, Clanga pomarina Greater spotted eagle, Clanga clanga Booted eagle, Hieraaetus pennatus (A) Steppe eagle, Aquila nipalensis (A) Imperial eagle, Aquila heliaca (A) Golden eagle, Aquila chrysaetos Eurasian marsh-harrier, Circus aeruginosus Hen harrier, Circus cyaneus Pallid harrier, Circus macrourus Montagu's harrier, Circus pygargus Eurasian sparrowhawk, Accipiter nisus Northern goshawk, Accipiter gentilis Red kite, Milvus milvus Black kite, Milvus migrans White-tailed eagle, Haliaeetus albicilla Rough-legged hawk, Buteo lagopus Common buzzard, Buteo buteo Order: Strigiformes   Family: Tytonidae Barn-owls are medium to large owls with large heads and characteristic heart-shaped faces. They have long strong legs with powerful talons. Barn owl, Tyto alba Order: Strigiformes   Family: Strigidae The typical owls are small to large solitary nocturnal birds of prey. They have large forward-facing eyes and ears, a hawk-like beak and a conspicuous circle of feathers around each eye called a facial disk. Eurasian scops-owl, Otus scops Eurasian eagle-owl, Bubo bubo Snowy owl, Bubo scandiacus Northern hawk owl, Surnia ulula Eurasian pygmy-owl, Glaucidium passerinum Little owl, Athene noctua Tawny owl, Strix aluco Ural owl, Strix uralensis Great gray owl, Strix nebulosa Long-eared owl, Asio otus Short-eared owl, Asio flammeus Boreal owl, Aegolius funereus Order: Bucerotiformes   Family: Upupidae Hoopoes have black, white and orangey-pink colouring with a large erectile crest on their head. Eurasian hoopoe, Upupa epops Order: Coraciiformes   Family: Alcedinidae Kingfishers are medium-sized birds with large heads, long, pointed bills, short legs and stubby tails. Common kingfisher, Alcedo atthis Order: Coraciiformes   Family: Meropidae The bee-eaters are a group of near passerine birds in the family Meropidae. Most species are found in Africa but others occur in southern Europe, Madagascar, Australia and New Guinea. They are characterised by richly coloured plumage, slender bodies and usually elongated central tail feathers. All are colorful and have long downturned bills and pointed wings, which give them a swallow-like appearance when seen from afar. European bee-eater, Merops apiaster Order: Coraciiformes   Family: Coraciidae Rollers resemble crows in size and build, but are more closely related to the kingfishers and bee-eaters. They share the colourful appearance of those groups with blues and browns predominating. The two inner front toes are connected, but the outer toe is not. European roller, Coracias garrulus Order: Piciformes   Family: Picidae Woodpeckers are small to medium-sized birds with chisel-like beaks, short legs, stiff tails and long tongues used for capturing insects. Some species have feet with two toes pointing forward and two backward, while several species have only three toes. Many woodpeckers have the habit of tapping noisily on tree trunks with their beaks. Eurasian wryneck, Jynx torquilla Eurasian three-toed woodpecker, Picoides tridactylus Middle spotted woodpecker, Dendrocoptes medius White-backed woodpecker, Dendrocopos leucotos Great spotted woodpecker, Dendrocopos major Lesser spotted woodpecker, Dryobates minor Gray-headed woodpecker, Picus canus Eurasian green woodpecker, Picus viridis Black woodpecker, Dryocopus martius Order: Falconiformes   Family: Falconidae Falconidae is a family of diurnal birds of prey. They differ from hawks, eagles and kites in that they kill with their beaks instead of their talons. Eurasian kestrel, Falco tinnunculus Red-footed falcon, Falco vespertinus Merlin, Falco columbarius Eurasian hobby, Falco subbuteo Saker falcon, Falco cherrug (A) Gyrfalcon, Falco rusticolus Peregrine falcon, Falco peregrinus Order: Passeriformes   Family: Oriolidae The Old World orioles are colourful passerine birds. They are not related to the New World orioles. Eurasian golden oriole, Oriolus oriolus Order: Passeriformes   Family: Laniidae Shrikes are passerine birds known for their habit of catching other birds and small animals and impaling the uneaten portions of their bodies on thorns. A typical shrike's beak is hooked, like a bird of prey. Red-backed shrike, Lanius collurio Red-tailed shrike, Lanius phoenicuroides (A) Isabelline shrike, Lanius isabellinus (A) Great gray shrike, Lanius excubitor Lesser gray shrike, Lanius minor Order: Passeriformes   Family: Corvidae The family Corvidae includes crows, ravens, jays, choughs, magpies, treepies, nutcrackers and ground jays. Corvids are above average in size among the Passeriformes, and some of the larger species show high levels of intelligence. Siberian jay, Perisoreus infaustus Eurasian jay, Garrulus glandarius Eurasian magpie, Pica pica Eurasian nutcracker, Nucifraga caryocatactes Eurasian jackdaw, Corvus monedula Rook, Corvus frugilegus Carrion crow, Corvus corone (A) Hooded crow, Corvus cornix Common raven, Corvus corax Order: Passeriformes   Family: Paridae The Paridae are mainly small stocky woodland species with short stout bills. Some have crests. They are adaptable birds, with a mixed diet including seeds and insects. Coal tit, Periparus ater Crested tit, Lophophanes cristatus Marsh tit, Poecile palustris Willow tit, Poecile montana Eurasian blue tit, Cyanistes caeruleus Azure tit, Cyanistes cyanus Great tit, Parus major Order: Passeriformes   Family: Remizidae The penduline-tits are a group of small passerine birds related to the true tits. They are insectivores. Eurasian penduline-tit, Remiz pendulinus Order: Passeriformes   Family: Alaudidae Larks are small terrestrial birds with often extravagant songs and display flights. Most larks are fairly dull in appearance. Their food is insects and seeds. T Horned lark, Eremophila alpestris Greater short-toed lark, Calandrella brachydactyla (A) Wood lark, Lullula arborea Eurasian skylark, Alauda arvensis Crested lark, Galerida cristata Order: Passeriformes   Family: Panuridae This species, the only one in its family, is found in reed beds throughout temperate Europe and Asia. Bearded reedling, Panurus biarmicus Order: Passeriformes   Family: Acrocephalidae The members of this family are usually rather large for "warblers". Most are rather plain olivaceous brown above with much yellow to beige below. They are usually found in open woodland, reedbeds, or tall grass. The family occurs mostly in southern to western Eurasia and surroundings, but it also ranges far into the Pacific, with some species in Africa. Booted warbler, Iduna caligata (A) Icterine warbler, Hippolais icterina Aquatic warbler, Acrocephalus paludicola Sedge warbler, Acrocephalus schoenobaenus Paddyfield warbler, Acrocephalus agricola Blyth's reed warbler, Acrocephalus dumetorum Marsh warbler, Acrocephalus palustris Eurasian reed warbler, Acrocephalus scirpaceus Great reed warbler, Acrocephalus arundinaceus Order: Passeriformes   Family: Locustellidae Locustellidae are a family of small insectivorous songbirds found mainly in Eurasia, Africa, and the Australian region. They are smallish birds with tails that are usually long and pointed, and tend to be drab brownish or buffy all over. Pallas's grasshopper warbler, Helopsaltes certhiola Lanceolated warbler, Locustella lanceolata (A) River warbler, Locustella fluviatilis Savi's warbler, Locustella luscinioides Common grasshopper-warbler, Locustella naevia Order: Passeriformes   Family: Hirundinidae The family Hirundinidae is adapted to aerial feeding. They have a slender streamlined body, long pointed wings and a short bill with a wide gape. The feet are adapted to perching rather than walking, and the front toes are partially joined at the base. Bank swallow, Riparia riparia Barn swallow, Hirundo rustica Red-rumped swallow, Cecropis daurica (A) Common house-martin, Delichon urbicum Order: Passeriformes   Family: Phylloscopidae Leaf warblers are a family of small insectivorous birds found mostly in Eurasia and ranging into Wallacea and Africa. The species are of various sizes, often green-plumaged above and yellow below, or more subdued with grayish-green to grayish-brown colors. Wood warbler, Phylloscopus sibilatrix Yellow-browed warbler, Phylloscopus inornatus (A) Hume's warbler, Phylloscopus humei (A) Pallas's leaf warbler, Phylloscopus proregulus Radde's warbler, Phylloscopus schwarzi (A) Dusky warbler, Phylloscopus fuscatus (A) Willow warbler, Phylloscopus trochilus Common chiffchaff, Phylloscopus collybita Greenish warbler, Phylloscopus trochiloides Arctic warbler, Phylloscopus borealis (A) Order: Passeriformes   Family: Aegithalidae Long-tailed tits are a group of small passerine birds with medium to long tails. They make woven bag nests in trees. Most eat a mixed diet which includes insects. Long-tailed tit, Aegithalos caudatus Order: Passeriformes   Family: Sylviidae The family Sylviidae is a group of small insectivorous passerine birds. They mainly occur as breeding species, as the common name implies, in Europe, Asia and, to a lesser extent, Africa. Most are of generally undistinguished appearance, but many have distinctive songs. Eurasian blackcap, Sylvia atricapilla Garden warbler, Sylvia borin Asian desert warbler, Curruca nana (A) Barred warbler, Curruca nisoria Lesser whitethroat, Curruca curruca Greater whitethroat, Curruca communis Order: Passeriformes   Family: Regulidae The kinglets, also called crests, are a small group of birds often included in the Old World warblers, but frequently given family status because they also resemble the titmice. Goldcrest, Regulus regulus Common firecrest, Regulus ignicapillus Order: Passeriformes   Family: Sittidae Nuthatches are small woodland birds. They have the unusual ability to climb down trees head first, unlike other birds which can only go upwards. Nuthatches have big heads, short tails and powerful bills and feet. Eurasian nuthatch, Sitta europaea Order: Passeriformes   Family: Certhiidae Treecreepers are small woodland birds, brown above and white below. They have thin pointed down-curved bills, which they use to extricate insects from bark. They have stiff tail feathers, like woodpeckers, which they use to support themselves on vertical trees. Eurasian treecreeper, Certhia familiaris Short-toed treecreeper, Certhia brachydactyla (A) Order: Passeriformes   Family: Troglodytidae The wrens are mainly small and inconspicuous except for their loud songs. These birds have short wings and thin down-turned bills. Several species often hold their tails upright. All are insectivorous. Eurasian wren, Troglodytes troglodytes Order: Passeriformes   Family: Cinclidae Dippers are a group of perching birds whose habitat includes aquatic environments in the Americas, Europe and Asia. They are named for their bobbing or dipping movements. White-throated dipper, Cinclus cinclus Order: Passeriformes   Family: Sturnidae Starlings are small to medium-sized passerine birds. Their flight is strong and direct and they are very gregarious. Their preferred habitat is fairly open country. They eat insects and fruit. Plumage is typically dark with a metallic sheen. European starling, Sturnus vulgaris Rosy starling, Pastor roseus Order: Passeriformes   Family: Turdidae The thrushes are a group of passerine birds that occur mainly in the Old World. They are plump, soft plumaged, small to medium-sized insectivores or sometimes omnivores, often feeding on the ground. Many have attractive songs. White's thrush, Zoothera aurea (A) Scaly thrush, Zoothera dauma (A) Mistle thrush, Turdus viscivorus Song thrush, Turdus philomelos Redwing, Turdus iliacus Eurasian blackbird, Turdus merula Fieldfare, Turdus pilaris Ring ouzel, Turdus torquatus (A) Black-throated thrush, Turdus atrogularis Order: Passeriformes   Family: Muscicapidae Old World flycatchers are a large group of small passerine birds native to the Old World. They are mainly small arboreal insectivores. The appearance of these birds is highly varied, but they mostly have weak songs and harsh calls. Spotted flycatcher, Muscicapa striata European robin, Erithacus rubecula Thrush nightingale, Luscinia luscinia Common nightingale, Luscinia megarhynchos (A) Bluethroat, Luscinia svecica Siberian rubythroat, Calliope calliope (A) Red-flanked bluetail, Tarsiger cyanurus (A) Red-breasted flycatcher, Ficedula parva European pied flycatcher, Ficedula hypoleuca Collared flycatcher, Ficedula albicollis (A) Common redstart, Phoenicurus phoenicurus Black redstart, Phoenicurus ochruros Whinchat, Saxicola rubetra European stonechat, Saxicola rubicola Siberian stonechat, Saxicola maurus (A) Northern wheatear, Oenanthe oenanthe Isabelline wheatear, Oenanthe isabellina (A) Desert wheatear, Oenanthe deserti (A) Pied wheatear, Oenanthe pleschanka (A) Order: Passeriformes   Family: Bombycillidae The waxwings are a group of birds with soft silky plumage and unique red tips to some of the wing feathers. In the Bohemian and cedar waxwings, these tips look like sealing wax and give the group its name. These are arboreal birds of northern forests. They live on insects in summer and berries in winter. Bohemian waxwing, Bombycilla garrulus Order: Passeriformes   Family: Prunellidae The accentors are in the only bird family, Prunellidae, which is completely endemic to the Palearctic. They are small, fairly drab species superficially similar to sparrows. Siberian accentor, Prunella montanella (A) Dunnock, Prunella modularis Order: Passeriformes   Family: Passeridae Old World sparrows are small passerine birds. In general, sparrows tend to be small, plump, brown or grey birds with short tails and short powerful beaks. Sparrows are seed eaters, but they also consume small insects. House sparrow, Passer domesticus Eurasian tree sparrow, Passer montanus Order: Passeriformes   Family: Motacillidae Motacillidae is a family of small passerine birds with medium to long tails. They include the wagtails, longclaws and pipits. They are slender, ground feeding insectivores of open country. Gray wagtail, Motacilla cinerea (A) Western yellow wagtail, Motacilla flava Citrine wagtail, Motacilla citreola White wagtail, Motacilla alba Richard's pipit, Anthus richardi (A) Tawny pipit, Anthus campestris Meadow pipit, Anthus pratensis Tree pipit, Anthus trivialis Red-throated pipit, Anthus cervinus Rock pipit, Anthus petrosus Water pipit, Anthus spinoletta (A) Order: Passeriformes   Family: Fringillidae Finches are seed-eating passerine birds, that are small to moderately large and have a strong beak, usually conical and in some species very large. All have twelve tail feathers and nine primaries. These birds have a bouncing flight with alternating bouts of flapping and gliding on closed wings, and most sing well. Common chaffinch, Fringilla coelebs Brambling, Fringilla montifringilla Hawfinch, Coccothraustes coccothraustes Common rosefinch, Carpodacus erythrinus Pine grosbeak, Pinicola enucleator Eurasian bullfinch, Pyrrhula pyrrhula European greenfinch, Carduelis chloris Twite, Linaria flavirostris Eurasian linnet, Linaria cannabina Common redpoll, Acanthis flammea Lesser redpoll, Acanthis cabaret (A) Hoary redpoll, Acanthis hornemanni Parrot crossbill, Loxia pytyopsittacus Red crossbill, Loxia curvirostra White-winged crossbill, Loxia leucoptera European goldfinch, Carduelis carduelis European serin, Serinus serinus Eurasian siskin, Spinus spinus Order: Passeriformes   Family: Calcariidae The Calcariidae are a group of passerine birds which had been traditionally grouped with the New World sparrows, but differ in a number of respects and are usually found in open grassy areas. Lapland longspur, Calcarius lapponicus Snow bunting, Plectrophenax nivalis Order: Passeriformes   Family: Emberizidae The emberizids are a large family of passerine birds. They are seed-eating birds with distinctively shaped bills. Many emberizid species have distinctive head patterns. Black-headed bunting, Emberiza melanocephala (A) Corn bunting, Emberiza calandra Yellowhammer, Emberiza citrinella Pine bunting, Emberiza leucocephalos (A) Ortolan bunting, Emberiza hortulana Reed bunting, Emberiza schoeniclus Yellow-breasted bunting, Emberiza aureola Little bunting, Emberiza pusilla Rustic bunting, Emberiza rustica List of birds Lists of birds by region Lepage, Denis. "Checklist of Birds of Latvia". Bird Checklists of the World. Avibase. Retrieved 26 April 2020. Clements, James F. (2000). Birds of the World: A Checklist. Cornell University Press. p. 880. ISBN 0-934797-16-1.