Aarhus (/ˈɔːrhuːs/, US also /ˈɑːr-/, Danish: [ˈɒːˌhuˀs] ; officially spelled Århus from 1948 until 1 January 2011) is the second-largest city in Denmark and the seat of Aarhus Municipality. It is located on the eastern shore of Jutland in the Kattegat sea and approximately 187 kilometres (116 mi) northwest of Copenhagen. Dating back to the late 8th century, Aarhus was founded as a harbour settlement at the mouth of the Aarhus River and quickly became a trade hub. The first Christian church was built here around the year 900 and later in the Viking Age the town was fortified with defensive ramparts. The bishopric of Aarhus grew steadily stronger and more prosperous, building several religious institutions in the town during the early Middle Ages. Trade continued to improve, although it was not until 1441 that Aarhus was granted market town privileges, and the population of Aarhus remained relatively stable until the 19th century. The city began to grow significantly as trade prospered in the mid-18th century, but not until the mid-19th century did the Industrial Revolution bring real growth in population. The first railway line in Jutland was built here in 1862. In 1928, the first university in Jutland was founded in Aarhus and today it is a university city and the largest centre for trade, services, industry, and tourism in Jutland. Aarhus Cathedral is the longest cathedral in Denmark with a total length of 93 m (305 ft). The Church of our Lady (Vor Frue Kirke) was originally built in 1060, making it the oldest stone church in Scandinavia. The City Hall, designed by Arne Jacobsen and Erik Møller, was completed in 1941 in a modern Functionalist style. Aarhus Theatre, the largest provincial theatre in Denmark, opposite the cathedral on Bispetorvet, was built by Hack Kampmann in the Art Nouveau style and completed in 1916. Musikhuset Aarhus (concert hall) and Det Jyske Musikkonservatorium (Royal Academy of Music, Aarhus/Aalborg) are also of note, as are its museums including the open-air museum Den Gamle By, the art museum ARoS Aarhus Kunstmuseum, the Moesgård Museum and the women's museum Kvindemuseet. The city's major cultural institutions include Den Gamle By, ARoS Aarhus Kunstmuseum, the Moesgård Museum, Gender Museum Denmark, Musikhuset Aarhus and Aarhus Theatre. Known as Smilets By (lit. City of Smiles) it is the Danish city with the youngest demographics and home to Scandinavia's largest university, Aarhus University. Commercially, the city is the principal container port in the country, and major Danish companies such as Vestas, Arla Foods, Salling Group, and Jysk have their headquarters there. Aarhus is a compound of the two words ár, genitive of á ("river", Modern Danish å), and oss ("mouth") referencing the city's location at the mouth of Aarhus Å (Aarhus River). In Valdemar's Census Book (1231) the city was called Arus, and in Icelandic it was known as Aros, later written as Aars. The spelling "Aarhus" is first found in 1406 and gradually became the norm in the 17th century. With the Danish spelling reform of 1948, "Aa" was changed to "Å". Some Danish cities resisted the change but Aarhus city council opted to change the name. In 2010, the city council voted to change the name back from Århus to Aarhus again with effect from 1 January 2011. It is still grammatically correct to write geographical names with the letter Å and local councils are allowed to use the Aa spelling as an alternative and most newspapers and public institutions will accept either. Some official authorities such as the Danish Language Committee, publisher of the Danish Orthographic Dictionary, still retain Århus as the main name, providing Aarhus as a second option, in brackets and some institutions are still using Århus explicitly in their official name, such as the local newspaper Århus Stiftstidende and the schools Århus Kunstakademi and Århus Statsgymnasium. "Aa" was used by some major institutions between 1948 and 2011 as well, such as Aarhus University or the largest local sports club, Aarhus Gymnastikforening (AGF), which has never used the "Å" spelling. Certain geographically affiliated names have been updated to reflect the name of the city, such as the Aarhus River, changed from Århus Å to Aarhus Å. Founded in the early Viking Age, Aarhus is one of the oldest cities in Denmark, along with Ribe and Hedeby. The original Aros settlement was situated on the northern shores of a fjord by the mouth of the Aarhus River, right where the city center is today. It quickly became a hub for sea-going trade due to its position on intersecting trade routes in the Danish straits and the fertile countryside. The trade, however, was not nearly as prominent as that in Ribe and Hedeby during the Viking Age, and it was primarily linked to Norway as evidenced by archaeological finds. A shipbuilding yard from the Viking Age was uncovered upriver in 2002 by archaeologists. It was located at a place formerly known as Snekkeeng, or Snekke Meadow in English ('Snekke' is a type of longship), east of the Brabrand Lake close to Viby, and it was in use for more than 400 years from the late 700s till around the mid-1200s. Archaeological evidence indicates that Aarhus was a town as early as the last quarter of the 8th century. Discoveries after a 2003 archaeological dig included half-buried longhouses, firepits, glass pearls and a road dated to the late 700s. Several excavations in the inner city since the 1960s have revealed wells, streets, homes and workshops, and inside the buildings and adjoining archaeological layers, everyday utensils like combs, jewellery and basic multi-purpose tools from approximately the year 900 have been unearthed. The early town was fortified with defensive earthen ramparts in the first part of the 900s, possibly in the year 934 on order from king Gorm the Old. The fortifications were later improved and expanded by his son Harald Bluetooth, encircling the settlement much like the defence structures found at Viking ring fortresses elsewhere. Together with the town's geographical placement, this suggests that Aros became an important military centre in the Viking Age. There are also strong indications of a former royal residence from the same period in Viby, a few kilometres south of the Aarhus city centre. The centre of Aarhus was originally a pagan burial site until Aarhus's first Christian church, Holy Trinity Church, a timber structure, was built upon it during the reign of Frode, King of Jutland, around 900. The bishopric of Aarhus dates back to at least 948 when Adam of Bremen reported that the missionary bishop Reginbrand of Aros attended the synod of Ingelheim in Germany, but the late Viking Age during the Christianization of Scandinavia was a turbulent and violent time with several naval attacks on the town, such as Harald Hardrada's assault around 1050, when the Holy Trinity Church was burned to the ground. Despite the conflicts, Aarhus continued to prosper from the trade and the finding of six runestones in and around Aarhus indicates the city had some significance around the year 1000, as only wealthy nobles traditionally used them. The bishopric diocese was obliterated for almost a hundred years after Reginbrand in 988, but in 1060 a new bishop Christian was ordained and he founded a new church in Aarhus, Sankt Nicolai Domkirke (St. Nicholas Cathedral), this time in stone. It was erected outside the town fortifications, and stood finished in 1070 at the site where Church of Our Lady stands today, but only an underground crypt remains. The growing influence of the Church during the Middle Ages gradually turned Aarhus, with its bishopric, into a prosperous religious centre. Many public and religious buildings were built in and around the town; notably Aarhus Cathedral was initiated in the late 12th century by the influential bishop Peder Vognsen, and around 1200, Aros had a total of four churches. The 13th century also marks a thorough reorganisation, erasing most of the town's original layout with new streets, relocations, dismantling and new constructions. The Church clearly had the upper hand in the Aarhus region during medieval times, and the large bishopric of Aarhus prospered and expanded territory, reaching as far as Viborg in extent. In 1441, Christopher III issued the oldest known charter granting market town status, although similar privileges may have existed as far back as the 12th century. The charter is the first official recognition of the town as a regional power and is by some considered Aarhus's birth certificate. The commercial and religious status spurred town growth, and in 1477 the defensive earthen ramparts, which had ringed the town since the Viking Age, were abandoned to accommodate expansion. Parts of the ramparts still exist today and can be experienced as steep slopes at the riverside, and they have also survived in some place names of the inner city, including the streets of Volden (The Rampart) and Graven (The Moat). Aarhus grew to become one of the largest cities in the country by the early 16th century. In 1657, octroi was imposed in larger Danish cities which changed the layout and face of Aarhus over the following decades. Wooden city walls were erected to prevent smuggling, with gates and toll booths on the major thoroughfares, Mejlgade and Studsgade. The city gates funnelled most traffic through a few streets where merchant quarters were built. In the 17th century, Aarhus entered a period of recession as it suffered blockades and bombardments during the Swedish wars and trade was dampened by the preferential treatment of the capital by the state. Not until the middle of the 18th century did growth return, in large part due to trade with the large agricultural catchment areas around the city; grain, particularly, proved to be a remunerative export. The first factories were established at this time, as the Industrial Revolution reached the country, and in 1810 the harbour was expanded to accommodate growing trade. Aarhus began to prosper in the 1830s as the industrial revolution reached the city and factories with steam-driven machinery became more productive. In 1838, the electoral laws were reformed leading to elections for the 15 seats on the city council. The rules were initially very strict, allowing only the wealthiest citizens to run. In the 1844 elections, only 174 citizens qualified out of a total population of more than 7,000. The first city council, mainly composed of wealthy merchants and industrialists, quickly looked to improve the harbour, situated along the Aarhus River. Larger ships and growing freight volumes made a river harbour increasingly impractical. In 1840, the harbour was moved to the coast, north of the river, where it became the largest industrial harbour outside Copenhagen over the following 15 years. From the outset, the new harbour was controlled by the city council, as it is to this day. During the First Schleswig War, Aarhus was occupied by German troops from 21 June to 24 July 1849. The city was spared any fighting, but in Vejlby north of the city a cavalry skirmish known as Rytterfægtningen took place which stopped the German advance through Jutland. The war and occupation left a notable impact on the city as many streets, particularly on Frederiksbjerg, are named after Danish officers of the time. Fifteen years later, in 1864, the city was occupied again, this time for seven months, during the Second Schleswig War. In spite of wars and occupation, the city continued to expand and develop. In 1851, the octroi was abolished and the city walls were removed to provide easier access for trade. Regular steamship links with Copenhagen had begun with the Jylland in 1825–26 and the Dania (1827–36), and in 1862 Jutland's first railway was established between Aarhus and Randers. In the second half of the 19th century, industrialisation came into full effect and a number of new industries emerged around production and refinement of agricultural products, especially oil and butter. Many companies from this time would come to leave permanent iconic marks on Aarhus. The Ceres Brewery was established in 1856 and served as Aarhus's local brewery for more than 150 years, gradually expanding into an industrial district known as Ceres-grunden (lit.: the Ceres-ground). In 1896, local farmers and businessmen created Korn- og Foderstof Kompagniet (KFK), focused on grain and feedstuffs. KFK established departments all over the country, while its headquarters remained in Aarhus where its large grain silos still stand today. Otto Mønsted created the Danish Preserved Butter Company in 1874, focusing on butter export to England, China and Africa and later founded the Aarhus Butterine Company in 1883, the first Danish margarine factory. His company became an important local employer, with factory employees increasing from 100 in 1896 to 1,000 in 1931, partaking in the effective transformation of the city from a regional trade hub to an industrial centre. Other new factories of note included the dockyard Aarhus Flydedok and the oil mill Århus Oliefabrik. Aarhus became the largest provincial city in the country by the turn of the century and the city marketed itself as the "Capital of Jutland". The population increased from 15,000 in 1870 to 52,000 in 1901 and, in response, the city annexed large land areas to develop new residential quarters such as Trøjborg, Frederiksbjerg and Marselisborg. Many of its cultural institutions were also established at this time such as Aarhus Theatre (1900), the original State Library (1902), Aarhus University (1928) and several hospitals. On 9 April 1940, Nazi Germany invaded Denmark, occupying Aarhus the following day; the occuption lasted for five years. This was a destructive period with major disasters, loss of life and economic depression. The Port of Aarhus became a hub for supplies to the Baltics and Norway, while the surrounding rail network supplied the Atlantic Wall in west Jutland and cargo headed for Germany. Combined, these factors resulted in a strong German presence, especially in 1944–45. Small resistance groups first appeared in 1941–42 but the first to co-ordinate with the Freedom Council was the Samsing Group, responsible for most operations from early 1943. The Samsing group, along with others in and around Aarhus, was dismantled in June 1944 when Grethe "Thora" Bartram turned her family and acquaintances over to German authorities. In response, requests for assistance were sent to contacts in England and in October 1944 the Royal Air Force bombed the Gestapo headquarters successfully destroying archives and obstructing the ongoing investigation. In the summer of 1944 the Copenhagen-based resistance group Holger Danske helped establish the 5 Kolonne group and an SOE agent arrived from England to liaison with the L-groups. Subsequently, resistance operations escalated which was countered with Schalburgtage terror operations by the Peter group. The increasingly destructive occupation was compounded when an ammunition barge exploded in July 1944, destroying much of the harbour area. On 5 May 1945 German forces in Denmark surrendered but during the transitional period fighting broke out resulting in 22 dead. On 8 May the British Royal Dragoons entered the city. In the 1970s and 1980s the city entered a period of rapid economic growth and the service sector overtook trade, industry and crafts as the leading sector of employment for the first time. Workers gradually began commuting to the city from most of east and central Jutland as the region became more interconnected. The student population tripled between 1965 and 1977 turning the city into a Danish centre of research and education. The growing and comparably young population initiated a period of creativity and optimism; Gaffa and the KaosPilot school were founded in 1983 and 1991 respectively, and Aarhus was at the centre of a renaissance in Danish rock and pop music launching bands and musicians such as TV2, Gnags, Thomas Helmig, Bamses Venner, Anne Dorte Michelsen, Mek Pek and Shit & Chanel. Since the turn of the millennium, Aarhus has seen an unprecedented building boom with many new institutions, infrastructure projects, city districts and recreational areas. Several of the construction projects are among the largest in Europe, such as the New University Hospital (DNU) and the harbourfront redevelopment. Both the skyline and land use of the inner city is changing, as former industrial sites are being redeveloped into new city districts and neighbourhoods. Starting in 2008, the former docklands known as De Bynære Havnearealer (The Peri-urban Harbour-areas), and closest to the city seaside, are being converted to new mixed-use districts. It is among the largest harbourfront projects in Europe. The northern part dubbed Aarhus Ø (Aarhus Docklands) is almost finished as of 2018, while the southern district dubbed Sydhavnskvarteret (The South-harbour neighbourhood) is only starting to be developed. The adjacent site of Frederiks Plads at the former DSB repair facilities have been under construction since 2014 as a new business and residential quarter. The main bus terminal close by is planned to be moved to the central railway station and the site will be redeveloped to a new residential neighbourhood. Elsewhere in the inner city, the site of the former Ceres breweries was redeveloped in 2012-2019 as a new mixed use neighbourhood known as CeresByen. Construction of Aarhus Letbane, the first light rail system in the country, commenced in 2013, and the first increment was finished in December 2017. Since then, the lightrail service has been expanded with two intercity sections to the towns of Odder and Grenå, respectively, and also includes a northward leg to the suburb of Lisbjerg. The light rail system is planned to tie many other suburbs closer to central Aarhus in the future, with the next phase including local lines to Brabrand in the east and Hinnerup to the north. Accelerating growth since the early 2000s, brought the inner urban area to roughly 260,000 inhabitants by 2014. The rapid growth is expected to continue until at least 2030 when Aarhus municipality has set an ambitious target for 375,000 inhabitants. Aarhus is located at the Bay of Aarhus facing the Kattegat sea in the east with the peninsulas of Mols and Helgenæs across the bay to the northeast. Mols and Helgenæs are both part of the larger regional peninsula of Djursland. A number of larger cities and towns is within easy reach from Aarhus by road and rail, including Randers (38.5 kilometres (23.9 mi) by road north), Grenå (northeast), Horsens (50 kilometres (31 mi) south) and Silkeborg (44 kilometres (27 mi) east). At Aarhus's location, the Bay of Aarhus provides a natural harbour with a depth of 10 m (33 ft) quite close to the shore. Aarhus was founded at the mouth of a brackish water fjord, but the original fjord no longer exists, as it has gradually narrowed into what is now the Aarhus River and the Brabrand Lake, due to natural sedimentation. The land around Aarhus was once covered by forests, remains of which exist in parts of Marselisborg Forest to the south and Riis Skov to the north. Several lakes extend west from the inner city as the landscape merges with the larger region of Søhøjlandet with heights exceeding 152 metres (499 ft) at Himmelbjerget between Skanderborg and Silkeborg. The highest natural point in Aarhus Municipality is Jelshøj at 128 metres above sea level, in the southern district of Højbjerg. The hilltop is home to a Bronze Age barrow shrouded in local myths and legends. The hilly area around Aarhus consists of a morainal plateau from the last ice age, broken by a complex system of tunnel valleys. The most prominent valleys of this network are the Aarhus Valley in the south, stretching inland east–west with the Aarhus River, Brabrand Lake, Årslev Lake and Tåstrup Lake, and the Egå Valley to the north, with the stream of Egåen, Egå Engsø, the bog of Geding-Kasted Mose and Geding Lake. Most parts of the two valleys have been drained and subsequently farmed, but in the early 2000s some of the drainage was removed and parts of the wetlands were restored for environmental reasons. The valley system also includes the stream of Lyngbygård Å in the west and valleys to the south of the city, following erosion channels from the pre-quaternary. By contrast, the Aarhus River Valley and the Giber River Valley are late glacial meltwater valleys. The coastal cliffs along the Bay of Aarhus consist of shallow tertiary clay from the Eocene and Oligocene (57 to 24 million years ago). Aarhus has a temperate oceanic climate (Köppen: Cfb) and the weather is constantly influenced by major weather systems from all four ordinal directions, resulting in unstable conditions throughout the year. Temperature varies a great deal across the seasons with a mild spring in April and May, warmer summer months from June to August, frequently rainy and windy autumn months in October and September and cooler winter months, often with frost and occasional snow, from December to March. The city centre experiences the same climatic effects as other larger cities with higher wind speeds, more fog, less precipitation and higher temperatures than the surrounding, open land. Western winds from the Atlantic and North Sea are dominant resulting in more precipitation in western Denmark. In addition, Jutland rises sufficiently in the centre to lift air to higher, colder altitudes contributing to increased precipitation in eastern Jutland. Combined, these factors make east and south Jutland comparatively wetter than other parts of the country. Average temperature over the year is 8.43 °C (47.17 °F) with February being the coldest month (0.1 °C or 32.2 °F) and August the warmest (15.9 °C or 60.6 °F). Temperatures in the sea can reach 17–22 °C (63–72 °F) in June to August, but it is not uncommon for beaches to register 25 °C (77 °F) locally. The geography in the area affects the local climate of the city with the Aarhus Bay imposing a temperate effect on the low-lying valley floor where central Aarhus is located. Brabrand Lake to the west further contributes to this effect and as a result, the valley has a comparably mild, temperate climate. The sandy ground on the valley floor dries up quickly after winter and warms faster in the summer than the surrounding hills of moist-retaining boulder clay. These conditions affect crops and plants that often bloom 1–2 weeks earlier in the valley than on the northern and southern hillsides. Because of the northern latitude, the number of daylight hours varies considerably between summer and winter. On the summer solstice, the sun rises at 04:26 and sets at 21:58, providing 17 hours 32 minutes of daylight. On the winter solstice, it rises at 08:37 and sets at 15:39 with 7 hours and 2 minutes of daylight. The difference in length of days and nights between summer and winter solstices is 10 hours and 30 minutes. Aarhus is the seat of Aarhus Municipality, and Aarhus City Council (Aarhus Byråd) is also the municipal government with headquarters in Aarhus City Hall. The Mayor of Aarhus since 2010 is Jacob Bundsgaard of the Social Democrats. Municipal elections are held every fourth year on the third Tuesday of November with the next election in 2021. The city council consists of 31 members elected for four-year terms. When an election has determined the composition of the council, it elects a mayor, two deputy mayors and five aldermen from their ranks. Anyone who is eligible to vote and who resides within the municipality can run for a seat on the city council provided they can secure endorsements and signatures from 50 inhabitants of the municipality. The first publicly elected mayor of Aarhus was appointed in 1919. In the 1970 Danish Municipal Reform the current Aarhus municipality was created by merging 20 municipalities. Aarhus was the seat of Aarhus County until the 2007 Danish municipal reform, which substituted the Danish counties with five regions and replaced Aarhus County with Central Denmark Region (Region Midtjylland), seated in Viborg. Aarhus Municipality has 45 electoral wards and polling stations in four electoral districts for the Folketing (national Parliament). The diocese of Aarhus has four deaneries composed of 60 parishes within Aarhus municipality. Aarhus municipality contains 21 postal districts and some parts of another 9. The urban area of Aarhus and the immediate suburbs are divided into the districts Aarhus C, Aarhus N, Aarhus V, Viby J, Højbjerg and Brabrand. Aarhus has increasingly been investing in environmental planning and, in accordance with national policy, aims to be CO 2-neutral and independent of fossil fuels for heating by 2030. The municipal power plants were adapted for this purpose in the 2010s. In 2015, the municipality took over three private straw-fired heating plants and the year after, a new 77 MW combined heat and power biomass plant at Lisbjerg Power Station was completed while Studstrup Power Station finished a refit to move from coal to wood chips. In conjunction with the development of the Docklands district there are plans for a utility-scale seawater heat pump which will take advantage of fluctuating electricity prices to supply the district heating system. Since 2015, the city has been implementing energy-saving LED technology in street lighting; by January 2019, about half of the municipal street lighting had been changed. Apart from reducing the city's CO2 emissions, it saves 30% on the electricity bill, thereby making it a self-financed project over a 20-year period. The municipality aims for a coherent and holistic administration of the water cycle to protect against, and clean up previous, pollution as well as encourage green growth and self-sufficiency. The main issues are excessive nutrients, adapting to increased (and increasing) levels of precipitation brought on by climate change, and securing the water supply. These goals have manifested in a number of large water treatment projects often in collaboration with private partners. In the 2000s, underground rainwater basins were built across the city while the two lakes Årslev Engsø and Egå Engsø were created in 2003 and 2006 respectively. The number of sewage treatment plants is planned to be reduced from 17 to 2 by 2025, as the treatment plants in Marselisborg and Egå are scheduled for expansion to take over all waste water treatment. They have already been refitted for biogas production to become net producers of electricity and heat. To aid the new treatment plants, and avoid floodings, sewage and stormwater throughout the municipality is planned to be separated into two different drainage systems. Construction began in 2017 in several areas, but it is a long process that is scheduled to be finished by 2085. Afforestation projects have been undertaken to prevent groundwater pollution, secure drinking water, sequester CO 2, increase biodiversity, create an attractive countryside, provide easy access to nature and offer outdoor activities to the public. In 2000, the first project, the New Forests of Aarhus, was completed, which aimed to double the forest cover in the municipality and, in 2009, another phase was announced to double forest cover once more before the year 2030. The afforestation plans were realised as a local project in collaboration with private landowners, under a larger national agenda. Other projects to expand natural habitats include a rewilding effort in Geding-Kasted Bog and continuous monitoring of the four Natura 2000 areas in the municipality. Aarhus has a population of 261,570 on 91 square kilometres (35 sq mi) for a density of 2,874/km2 (7,444/sq mi). Aarhus municipality has a population of 330,639 on 468 km2 with a density of 706/km2 (1,829/sq mi). Less than a fifth of the municipal population resides beyond city limits and almost all live in an urban area. The population of Aarhus is both younger and better-educated than the national average which can be attributed to the high concentration of educational institutions. More than 40% of the population have an academic degree while only some 14% have no secondary education or trade. The largest age group is 20- to 29-year-olds and the average age is 37.5, making it the youngest city in the country and one of its youngest municipalities. Women have slightly outnumbered men for many years. The city is home to 75 different religious groups and denominations, most of which are Christian or Muslim with a smaller number of Buddhist, Hindu, and Jewish communities. Since the 1990s there has been a marked growth in diverse new spiritual groups although the total number of followers remains small. The majority of the population are members of the Protestant state church, Church of Denmark, which is by far the largest religious institution both in the city and the country as a whole. Some 20% of the population are not officially affiliated with any religion, a percentage that has been slowly rising for many years. During the 1990s there was significant immigration from Turkey and in the 2000s, there was a fast growth in the overall immigrant community, from 27,783 people in 1999 to 40,431 in 2008. The majority of immigrants have roots outside Europe and the developed world, comprising some 25,000 people from 130 different nationalities, with the largest groups coming from the Middle East and North Africa. Some 15,000 have come from within Europe, with Poland, Germany, Romania and Norway being the largest contributors. Many immigrants have established themselves in the suburbs of Brabrand, Hasle and Viby, where the percentage of inhabitants with foreign origins has risen by 66% since 2000. This has resulted in a few so-called ghettos, defined as residential areas with more than half of inhabitants from non-Western countries and with relatively high levels of poverty and/or crime. Gellerup is the most notable neighbourhood in that respect. The ghetto-labelling has been criticized as unnecessarily stigmatising and counterproductive for social and economical development of the related areas. The economy of Aarhus is predominantly knowledge- and service-based, strongly influenced by the University of Aarhus and the large healthcare industry. The service sector dominates the economy and is growing as the city transitions away from manufacturing. Trade and transportation remain important sectors, benefiting from the large port and central position on the rail network. Manufacturing has been in slow but steady decline since the 1960s while agriculture has long been a marginal sector within the municipality. The municipality is home to 175,000 jobs with some 100,000 in the private sector and the rest split between state, region and municipality. The region is a major agricultural producer, with many large farms in the outlying districts. People commute to Aarhus from as far away as Randers, Silkeborg and Skanderborg and almost a third of those employed within the Aarhus municipality commute from neighbouring communities. Aarhus is a centre for retail in the Nordic and Baltic countries, with expansive shopping centres, the busiest commercial street in the country and a dense urban core with many speciality shops. The job market is knowledge- and service-based, and the largest employment sectors are healthcare and social services, trade, education, consulting, research, industry and telecommunications. The municipality has more high- and middle-income jobs, and fewer low-income jobs, than the national average. Today, te majority of the largest companies in the municipality are in the sectors of trade, transport and media. The wind power industry has strong roots in Aarhus and the larger region of Central Jutland, and nationally, most of the revenue in the industry is generated by companies in the greater Aarhus area. The wind industry employs about a thousand people within the municipality, making it a central component in the local economy. The biotech industry is well-established in the city, with many small- and medium-sized companies mainly focused on research and development. There are multiple Big Tech companies with offices in the city, including Uber and Google. Several major companies are headquartered in Aarhus, including four of the ten largest in the country. These include Arla Foods, one of the largest dairy groups in Europe, Salling Group, Denmark's largest retailer, Jysk, a worldwide retailer of household goods, Vestas, a global wind turbine manufacturer, Terma A/S, a major defence and aerospace manufacturer, Per Aarsleff, a civil engineering company and several large retail companies. Other large employers of note include Krifa, Systematic A/S,), and Bestseller A/S. Since the early 2000s, the city has experienced an influx of larger companies moving from other parts of the Jutland peninsula. The Port of Aarhus is one of the largest industrial ports in northern Europe with the largest container terminal in Denmark, processing more than 50% of Denmark's container traffic and accommodating the largest container vessels in the world. It is a municipal self-governing port with independent finances. The facilities handle some 9.5 million tonnes of cargo a year (2012). Grain is the principal export, while feedstuffs, stone, cement and coal are among the chief imports. Since 2012 the port has faced increasing competition from the Port of Hamburg and freight volumes have decreased somewhat from the peak in 2008. The ferry terminal presents the only alternative to the Great Belt Link for passenger transport between Jutland and Zealand. It has served different ferry companies since the first steamship route to Copenhagen opened in 1830. Currently, Mols-Linien operates the route and annually transports some two million passengers and a million vehicles. Additional roll-on/roll-off cargo ferries serve Finland and Kalundborg on a weekly basis and smaller outlying Danish ports at irregular intervals. Since the early 2000s the port has increasingly become a destination for cruise lines operating in the Baltic Sea. The ARoS Art Museum, the Old Town Museum and Tivoli Friheden are among Denmark's top tourist attractions. With a combined total of almost 1.4 million visitors they represent the driving force behind tourism but other venues such as Moesgård Museum and Kvindemuseet are also popular. The city's extensive shopping facilities are also said to be a major attraction for tourists, as are festivals, especially NorthSide and SPOT. Many visitors arrive on cruise ships: in 2012, 18 vessels visited the port with over 38,000 passengers. In the 2010s, there was a significant expansion of tourist facilities, culminating in the opening of the 240-room Comwell Hotel in July 2014, which increased the number of hotel rooms in the city by 25%. Some estimates put the number of visitors spending at least one night as high as 750,000 a year, most of them Danes from other regions, with the remainder coming mainly from Norway, Sweden, northern Germany and the United Kingdom. Overall, they spend roughly DKK 3 billion (€402 million) in the city each year. The primary motivation for tourists choosing Aarhus as a destination is experiencing the city and culture, family and couples vacation or as a part of a round trip in Denmark. The average stay is little more than three days on average. There are more than 30 tourist information spots across the city. Some of them are staffed, while others are online, publicly accessible touchscreens. The official tourist information service in Aarhus is organised under VisitAarhus, a corporate foundation initiated in 1994 by Aarhus Municipality and local commercial interest organisations. The largest research park in Aarhus is INCUBA Science Park, focused on IT and biomedical research, It is based on Denmark's first research park, Forskerpark Aarhus (Research Park Aarhus), founded in 1986, which in 2007 merged with another research park to form INCUBA Science Park. The organisation is owned partly by Aarhus University and private investors and aims to foster close relationships between public institutions and startup companies. It is physically divided across 4 locations after a new department was inaugurated in Navitas Park in 2015, which it will share with the Aarhus School of Marine and Technical Engineering and AU Engineering. Another major centre for knowledge is Agro Food Park in Skejby, established to facilitate co-operation between companies and public institutions working within food science and agriculture. In January 2017 Arla Foods will open the global innovation centre Arla Nativa in Agro Food Park and in 2018 Aarhus University is moving the Danish Centre for Food and Agriculture there as well. In 2016, some 1000 people worked at Agro Food Park, spread across 50 companies and institutions and in August 2016 Agro Food Park management published plans to expand facilities from 92,000 m2 to 325,000 square metres (3,500,000 sq ft). In addition, Aarhus is home to the Aarhus School of Architecture, one of two Danish Ministry of Education institutions that provide degree programs in architecture, and some of the largest architecture firms in the Nordic countries such as Schmidt Hammer Lassen Architects, Arkitema Architects and C. F. Møller Architects. Taken together these organisations form a unique concentration of expertise and knowledge in architecture outside Copenhagen, which the Danish Ministry of Business and Growth refers to as arkitekturklyngen (the architecture cluster). To promote the "cluster", the School of Architecture will be given new school buildings centrally in the new Freight Station Neighborhood, planned for development in the 2020s. In the interim, the city council supports a culture, business and education centre in the area, which may continue in the future neighbourhood in some form. The future occupants of the neighbourhood will be businesses and organisations selected for their ability to be involved in the local community, and it is hoped that the area will evolve into a hotspot for creativity and design. Aarhus has developed in stages, from the Viking Age to modern times, all visible in the city today. Many architectural styles are represented in different parts of the city such as Romanesque, Gothic, Renaissance, Baroque, Rococo, National Romantic, Nordic Classicism, Neoclassical, Empire and Functionalism. The city has developed around the main transport hubs – the river, the harbour, and later the railway station – and as a result, the oldest parts are also the most central and busiest today. The streets of Volden (The Rampart) and Graven (The Moat) testify to the defences of the initial Viking town, and Allégaderingen in Midtbyen roughly follows the boundaries of that settlement. The street network in the inner city formed during the Middle Ages with narrow, curved streets and low, dense housing by the river and the coast. Vesterport (Westward Gate) still bears the name of the medieval city gate and the narrow alleyways Posthussmøgen and Telefonsmøgen are remnants of toll stations from that time. The inner city has the oldest preserved buildings, especially the Latin Quarter, with houses dating back to the early 17th century in Mejlgade and Skolegade. Medieval merchants' mansions with courtyards can be seen in Klostergade, Studsgade and Skolegade. By far, the largest part of the present-day city was built during and after the industrialization of the late 1800s, and the most represented architectural styles today are historicism and modernism, especially the subgenre of Danish functionalism of which there are many fine examples. The building boom of the 2000s has imprinted itself on Aarhus with a redeveloped harbourfront, many new neighbourhoods (also in the inner city), and a revitalized public space. It is also beginning to change the skyline with several dominating high-rises. In recent years, Aarhus has experienced a large demand in housing and offices, spurring a construction boom in some parts of the city. The newly built city district of Aarhus Ø, formerly docklands, includes major housing developments, mostly consisting of privately owned apartments, designed by architects such as CEBRA, and JDS Architects. In the second quarter of 2012, the population of the area stood at only 5; however, that number had risen to 3,940 by October 2019. The main public transportation service is bus line 23, as well as Østbanetorvet train station. Plans to service the area by the light rail line Aarhus Letbane have now been shelved. Aarhus Cathedral (Århus Domkirke) in the centre of Aarhus, is the longest and tallest church in Denmark at 93 m (305 ft) and 96 m (315 ft) in length and height respectively. Originally built as a Romanesque basilica in the 13th century, it was rebuilt and enlarged as a Gothic cathedral in the late 15th and early 16th centuries. Even though the cathedral stood finished around 1300, it took more than a century to build; the associated cathedral school of Aarhus Katedralskole was already founded in 1195 and ranks as the 44th oldest school in the world. Another important and historic landmark in the inner city, is the Church of Our Lady (Vor Frue Kirke) also from the 13th century in Romanesque and Gothic style. It is smaller and less impressive, but it was the first cathedral of Aarhus and founded on an even older church constructed in 1060; the oldest stone church in Scandinavia. Langelandsgade Kaserne in National Romantic Style from 1889 is the oldest former military barracks left in the country; home to the university Department of Aesthetics and Communication since 1989. Marselisborg Palace (Marselisborg Slot), designed by Hack Kampmann in Neoclassical and Art Nouveau styles, was donated by the city to Prince Christian and Princess Alexandrine as a wedding present in 1898. The Aarhus Custom House (Toldkammeret) from 1898, is said to be Hack Kampmann's finest work. Tivoli Friheden (Tivoli Freedom) opened in 1903 and has since been the largest amusement park in the city and a tourist attraction. Aarhus Theatre from 1916 in the Art Nouveau style is the largest provincial theatre in Denmark. The early buildings of Aarhus University, especially the main building completed in 1932, designed by Kay Fisker, Povl Stegmann and by C.F. Møller have gained an international reputation for their contribution to functionalist architecture. The City Hall (Aarhus Rådhus) from 1941 with an iconic 60 m (200 ft) tower clad in marble, was designed by Arne Jacobsen and Erik Møller in a modern Functionalist style. Aarhus is home to many annual cultural events and festivals, museums, theatres, and sports events of both national and international importance, and presents some of the largest cultural attractions in Denmark. There is a long tradition of music from all genres, and many Danish bands have emerged from Aarhus. Libraries, cultural centres and educational institutions present free or easy opportunities for the citizens to participate in, engage in, or be creative with cultural events and productions of all kinds. Since 1938, Aarhus has marketed itself as Smilets by (City of smiles) which has become both an informal moniker and official slogan. In 2011, the city council opted to change the slogan to "Aarhus. Danish for Progress" but it was unpopular and abandoned after just a few years. Other slogans that have occasionally been used are Byen ved havet (City by the sea), Mellem bugt og bøgeskov (Between bay and beechwood) and Verdens mindste storby (World's smallest big city). Aarhus is featured in popular songs such as Hjem til Aarhus by På Slaget 12, Lav sol over Aarhus by Gnags, 8000 Aarhus C by Flemming Jørgensen, Pigen ud af Aarhus by Tina Dickow and Slingrer ned ad Vestergade by Gnags. In 1919, the number Sangen til Aarhus (Song to Aarhus) had become a popular hit for a time, but the oldest and perhaps best known "national anthem" for the city is the classical Aarhus Tappenstreg from 1872 by Carl Christian Møller which is occasionally played at official events or at performances by local marching bands and orchestras. Aarhus has a range of museums, including two of the largest in the country, measured by the number of paying guests, Den Gamle By and ARoS Aarhus Kunstmuseum. Den Gamle By (The Old Town), officially Danmarks Købstadmuseum (Denmark's Market Town Museum), presents Danish townscapes from the 16th century to the 1970s with individual areas focused on different time periods. 75 historic buildings collected from different parts of the country have been brought here to create a small town in its own right. ARoS Aarhus Kunstmuseum, the city's main art museum, is one of the largest art museums in Scandinavia with a collection covering Danish art from the 18th century to the present day as well as paintings, installations and sculptures representing international art movements and artists from all over the world. The iconic glass structure on the roof, Your Rainbow Panorama, was designed by Olafur Eliasson and features a promenade offering a colourful panorama of the city. The Moesgård Museum specialises in archaeology and ethnography in collaboration with Aarhus University with exhibits on Denmark's prehistory, including weapon sacrifices from Illerup Ådal and the Grauballe Man. Kvindemuseet, the Women's Museum, from 1984 contains collections of the lives and works of women in Danish cultural history. The Occupation Museum (Besættelsesmuseum) presents exhibits illustrating the German occupation of the city during the Second World War; the University Park on the campus of Aarhus University includes the Natural History Museum with 5,000 species of animals, many in their natural surroundings; and the Steno Museum is a museum of the history of science and medicine with a planetarium. Kunsthal Aarhus (Aarhus Art Hall) hosts exhibitions of contemporary art including painting, sculpture, photography, performance art, film and video. Strictly speaking it is not a museum but an arts centre, one of the oldest in Europe, built and founded in 1917. Public libraries in Denmark are also cultural and community centres. They play an active role in cultural life and host many events, exhibitions, discussion groups, workshops, educational courses and facilitate everyday cultural activities for and by the citizens. In June 2015, the large central library and cultural centre of Dokk1 opened at the harbour front. Dokk1 also includes civil administrations and services, commercial office rentals and a large underground robotic car park and aims to be a landmark for the city and a public meeting place. The building of Dokk1 and the associated squares and streetscape is also collectively known as Urban Mediaspace Aarhus and it is the largest construction project Aarhus municipality has yet undertaken. Apart from this large main library, some neighbourhoods in Aarhus have a local library engaged in similar cultural and educational activities, but on a more local scale. The State Library (Statsbiblioteket) at the university campus has status of a national library. The city is a member of the ICORN organisation (International Cities of Refuge Network) in an effort to provide a safe haven to authors and writers persecuted in their countries of origin. There are several cultural and community centres throughout the city. This includes Folkestedet in the central Åparken, facilitating events for and by non-commercial associations, organisations and clubs, and activities for the elderly, the nearby Godsbanen at the railway yard, with workshops, events and exhibitions, and Globus1 in Brabrand facilitating sports and various cultural activities. The city enjoys strong musical traditions, both classical and alternative, underground and popular, with educational and performance institutions such as the concert halls of Musikhuset, the opera of Den Jyske Opera, Aarhus Symfoniorkester (Aarhus Symphony Orchestra) and Det Jyske Musikkonservatorium (Royal Academy of Music, Aarhus/Aalborg). Musikhuset is the largest concert hall in Scandinavia, with seating for more than 3,600 people. Other major music venues include VoxHall, rebuilt in 1999, and the associated venue of Atlas, Train nightclub at the harbourfront, and Godsbanen, a former rail freight station. The acting scene in Aarhus is diverse, with many groups and venues engaged in a broad span of genres, from animation theatre and children's theatre to classical theatre and improvisational theatre. Aarhus Teater is the oldest and largest venue with mostly professional classical acting performances. Svalegangen, the second largest theatre, is more experimental with its performances and other notable groups and venues includes EntréScenen, Katapult, Gruppe 38, Helsingør Teater, Det Andet Teater and Teater Refleksion as well as dance venues like Bora Bora. The cultural center of Godsbanen includes several scenes and stages and the Concert Halls of Musikhuset also stage theatrical plays regularly and is home to the children's theatre Filuren and a comedy club. The city hosts a biannual international theatre festival, International Living Theatre (ILT), with the next event being scheduled for 2021. Since 2010 the music production centre of PROMUS (Produktionscentret for Rytmisk Musik) has supported the rock scene in the city along with the publicly funded ROSA (Dansk Rock Samråd), which promotes Danish rock music in general. Aarhus is known for its musical history. Fuelled by a relatively young population jazz clubs sprang up in the 1950s which became a tour stop for many iconic American Jazz musicians. By the 1960s, the music scene diversified into rock and other genres and in the 1970s and 1980s, Aarhus became a centre for rock music, fostering iconic bands such as Kliché, TV-2 and Gnags and artists such as Thomas Helmig and Anne Linnet. Acclaimed bands since the 1970s include Under Byen, Michael Learns to Rock, Nephew, Carpark North, Spleen United, VETO, Hatesphere and Illdisposed in addition to individual performers such as Medina and Tina Dico. Aarhus hosts many annual or recurring festivals, concerts and events, with the festival of Aarhus Festuge as the most popular and wide-ranging, along with large sports events. Aarhus Festuge is the largest multicultural festival in Scandinavia, always based on a special theme and takes place every year for ten days between late August and early September, transforming the inner city with festive activities and decorations of all kinds. There are numerous music festivals; the eight-day Aarhus Jazz Festival features jazz in many venues across the city. It was founded in 1988 and usually takes place in July every year, occasionally August or September. There are several annually recurring music festivals for contemporary popular music in Aarhus. NorthSide Festival presents well-known bands every year in mid-June on large outdoor scenes. It is a relatively new event, founded in 2010, but grew from a one-day event to a three-day festival in its first three years, now with 35,000 paying guests in 2015. Spot festival is aiming to showcase up-and-coming Danish and Scandinavian talents at selected venues of the inner city. The outdoor Grøn Koncert music festival takes place every year in many cities across Denmark, including Aarhus. Danmarks grimmeste festival (lit. Denmark's ugliest Festival) is a small summer music festival held in Skjoldhøjkilen, Brabrand. Aarhus also hosts recurring events dedicated to specific art genres. International Living Theatre (ILT) is a bi-annual festival, established in 2009, with performing arts and stage art on a broad scale. The festival has a vision of showing the best plays and stage art experiences of the world, while at the same time attracting thespians and stage art interested people from both Aarhus and Europe at large. LiteratureXchange is a new annual festival from 2018, focused on literature from around the world as well as regional talents. The city actively promotes its gay and lesbian community and celebrates the annual Aarhus Pride gay pride festival while Aarhus Festuge usually includes exhibits, concerts and events designed for the LGBT communities. Notable events of a local scope include the university boat-race, held in the University Park since 1991, which has become a local spectator event attracting some 20,000 people. The boat race pits costumed teams from the university departments against each other in inflatable boats in a challenge to win the Gyldne Bækken (Golden Chamber Pot) trophy. The annual lighting of the Christmas lights on the Salling department store in Søndergade has also become an attraction in recent times, packing the pedestrianised city centre with thousands of revellers. Significant dates such as Saint Lucy's Day, Sankt Hans (Saint John's Eve) and Fastelavn are traditionally celebrated with numerous events across the city. The beech forests of Riis Skov and Marselisborg occupy the hills along the coast to the north and south, and apart from the city centre, sandy beaches form the coastline of the entire municipality. There are two public sea baths, the northern Den Permanente below Riis Skov and close to the harbour area, and the southern Ballehage Beach in the Marselisborg Forests. As in most of Denmark, there are no private beaches in the municipality, but access to Den Permanente requires a membership, except in the summer. The relatively mild, temperate marine climate, allows for outdoor recreation year round, including walking, hiking, cycling, and outdoor team sports. Mountain biking is usually restricted to marked routes. Watersports like sailing, kayaking, motor boating, etc. are also popular, and since the bay rarely freezes up in winter, they can also be practised most of the year. Recreational and transportational pathways for pedestrians and cyclists, radiate from the city centre to the countryside, providing safety from motorised vehicles and a more tranquil experience. This includes the 19 kilometre long pathway of Brabrandstien, encircling the Brabrand Lake. The long-range hiking route Aarhus-Silkeborg, starts off from Brabrandstien. Aarhus has an unusually high number of parks and green spaces, 134 of them, covering a total area of around 550 ha (1,400 acres). The central Botanical Gardens (Botanisk Have) from 1875 are a popular destination, as they include The Old Town open-air museum and host a number of events throughout the year. Originally used to cultivate fruit trees and other useful plants for the local citizens, there are now a significant collection of trees and bushes from different habitats and regions of the world, including a section devoted to native Danish plants. Recently renovated tropical and subtropical greenhouses, exhibit exotic plants from throughout the world. Also in the city centre is the undulating University Park, recognised for its unique landscaped design with large old oak trees. The Memorial Park (Mindeparken) at the coast below Marselisborg Palace, offers a panoramic view across the Bay of Aarhus and is popular with locals for outings, picnics or events. Other notable parks include the small central City Hall Park (Rådhusparken) and Marienlyst Park (Marienlystparken). Marienlyst Park is a relatively new park from 1988, situated in Hasle out of the inner city and is less crowded, but it is the largest park in Aarhus, including woodlands, large open grasslands and soccer fields. Marselisborg Forests and Riis Skov, has a long history of recreational activities of all kinds, including several restaurants, hotels and opportunities for green exercise. There are marked routes here for jogging, running and mountain biking and large events are hosted regularly. This includes running events, cycle racing and orienteering, the annual Classic Race Aarhus with historic racing cars, all attracting thousands of people. Marselisborg Deer Park (Marselisborg Dyrehave) in Marselisborg Forests, comprises 22 ha (54 acres) of fenced woodland pastures with free-roaming sika and roe deer. Below the Moesgård Museum in the southern parts of the Marselisborg Forests, is a large historical landscape of pastures and woodlands, presenting different eras of Denmark's prehistory. Sections of the forest comprise trees and vegetation representing specific climatic epochs from the last Ice Age to the present. Dotted across the landscape are reconstructed Stone Age and Bronze Age graves, buildings from the Iron Age, Viking Age and medieval times, with grazing goats, sheep and horses in between. Aarhus has a large variety of restaurants and eateries offering food from cultures all over the world, especially Mediterranean and Asian, but also international gourmet cuisine, traditional Danish food and New Nordic Cuisine. Among the oldest restaurants are Rådhuscafeen (lit. The City Hall Café), opened in 1924, serving a menu of traditional Danish meals, and Peter Gift from 1906, a tavern with a broad beer selection and a menu of smørrebrød and other Danish dishes. In Aarhus, New Nordic can be experienced at Kähler Villa Dining, Hærværk and Domestic, but local produce can be had at many places, especially at the twice-weekly food markets in Frederiksbjerg. Aarhus and Central Denmark Region was selected as European Region of Gastronomy in 2017. The city (and municipality) is a member of the Délice Network, an international non-profit organization nurturing and facilitating knowledge exchange in gastronomy. Appraised high-end restaurants serving international gourmet cuisine include Frederikshøj, Substans, Gastromé, Det Glade Vanvid, Nordisk Spisehus, Restaurant Varna, Restaurant ET, Gäst, Brasserie Belli, Møf. Restaurants in Aarhus were the first in provincial Denmark to receive Michelin stars since 2015, when Michelin inspectors ventured outside Copenhagen for the first time. Vendors of street food are numerous throughout the centre, often selling from small trailers on permanent locations formally known as Pølsevogne (lit. sausage wagons), traditionally serving a Danish variety of hot dogs, sausages and other fast food. There are increasingly more outlets inspired by other cultural flavours such as sushi, kebab and currywurst. The city centre is packed with cafés, especially along the river and the Latin quarter. Some of them also include an evening restaurant, such as Café Casablanca, Café Carlton, Café Cross and Gyngen. Aarhus Street Food and Aarhus Central Food Market are two indoor food courts from 2016 in the city centre, comprising a variety of street food restaurants, cafés and bars. Aarhus has a robust and diverse nightlife. The action tends to concentrate in the inner city, with the pedestrianised riverside, Frederiksgade, the Latin Quarter, and Jægergårdsgade on Frederiksbjerg as the most active centres at night, but things are stirring elsewhere around the city too. The nightlife scene offers everything from small joints with cheap alcohol and a homely atmosphere to fashionable nightclubs serving champagne and cocktails or small and large music venues with bars, dance floors and lounges. A short selection of well-established places where you can have a drink and socialise, include the fashionable lounge and night club Kupé at the harbourfront, the relaxed Ris Ras Filliongongong offering waterpipes and an award-winning beer selection, Fatter Eskild with a broad selection of Danish bands playing mostly blues and rock, the wine and book café Løve's in Nørregade, Sherlock Holmes, a British-style pub with live music, and the brew pub of Sct. Clemens, with A Hereford Beefstouw restaurant across the cathedral. A few nightlife spots are aimed at gays and lesbians specifically, including Gbar (nightclub) and Café Sappho. The Århus Set (Danish: Århus Sæt) is a set of drinks often ordered together, named for the city and consisting of two beverages, one Ceres Top beer and one shot Arnbitter, both originally from Aarhus. Ordering "a set" suffices in most bars and pubs. Aarhus Bryghus is a local craft brewery with a sizeable production. The brewery is located in the southern district of Viby and a large variety of their craft brews are available there, in most larger well-assorted stores in the city, and in some bars and restaurants as well. They also export. The Aarhus dialect, commonly called Aarhusiansk (Aarhusian in English), is a Jutlandic dialect in the Mid-Eastern Jutland dialect area, traditionally spoken in and around Aarhus. Aarhusian, as with most local dialects in Denmark, has diminished in use through the 20th century and most Danes today speak some version of Standard Danish with slight regional features. Aarhusian, however, still has a strong presence in older segments of the population and in areas with high numbers of immigrants. Some examples of common, traditional and unique Aarhusian words are: træls ('tiresome'), noller ('silly' or 'dumb') and dælme (excl. 'damn me!'). The dialect is notable for single-syllable words ending in "d" being pronounced with stød while the same letter in multiple-syllable words is pronounced as "j", i.e., Odder is pronounced "Ojjer". Like other dialects in East Jutland, it has two grammatical genders, similar to Standard Danish, but different from West Jutlandic dialects, which have only one. In 2009, the University of Aarhus compiled a list of contemporary public figures who best exemplify the dialect, including Jacob Haugaard, Thomas Helmig, Steffen Brandt, Stig Tøfting, Flemming Jørgensen, Tina Dickow and Camilla Martin. In popular culture, the dialect features prominently in Niels Malmros's movie Aarhus by Night and in 90s comedy sketches by Jacob Haugaard and Finn Nørbygaard. Aarhus has three major men's professional sports teams: the Superliga team Aarhus Gymnastikforening (AGF), Danish Handball League's Aarhus GF Håndbold, and Danish Basketball League's Bakken Bears. Notable or historic clubs include Aarhus 1900, Aarhus Fremad, Idrætsklubben Skovbakken and Aarhus Sejlklub. Aarhus Idrætspark has hosted matches in the premiere Danish soccer league since it was formed in 1920 and matches for the national men's soccer team in 2006 and 2007. The five sailing clubs routinely win national and international titles in a range of disciplines and the future national watersports stadium will be located on the Aarhus Docklands in the city centre. The Bakken Bears won the Danish basketball championships in 2011, 2012, 2013 and 2014. The municipality actively supports sports organisations in and around the city, providing public organisations that aim to attract major sporting events and strengthen professional sports. The National Olympic Committee and Sports Confederation of Denmark counts some 380 sports organisations within the municipality and about one third of the population are members of one. Soccer is by far the most popular sport followed by Gymnastics, Handball and Badminton. In recent decades, many free and public sports facilities have sprung up across the city, such as street football, basketball, climbing walls, skateboarding and beach volley. Several natural sites also offer green exercise, with exercise equipment installed along the paths and tracks reserved for mountain biking. The newly reconstructed area of Skjoldhøjkilen is a prime example. Aarhus has hosted many sporting events including the 2010 European Women's Handball Championship, the 2014 European Men's Handball Championship, the 2013 Men's European Volleyball Championships, the 2005 European Table Tennis Championships, the Denmark Open in badminton, the UCI Women's Road Cycling World Cup, the 2006 World Orienteering Championships, the 2006 World Artistic Gymnastics Championships and the GF World Cup (women's handball). On average, Aarhus is hosting one or two international sailing competitions every year. In 2008, the city hosted the ISAF Youth Sailing World Championships and in 2018 it was host to the ISAF Sailing World Championships, the world championship for the 12 Olympic sailing disciplines. Aarhus is an important qualifier for the 2020 Olympics. Aarhus is the principal centre for education in the Jutland region. It draws students from a large area, especially from the western and southern parts of the peninsula. The relatively large influx of young people and students creates a natural base for cultural activities. Aarhus has the greatest concentration of students in Denmark, fully 12% of citizens attending short, medium or long courses of study. In addition to around 25 institutions of higher education, several research forums have evolved to assist in the transfer of expertise from education to business. The city is home to more than 52,000 students.[when?] Since 2012, Aarhus University (AU) has been the largest university in Denmark by number of students enrolled. It is ranked among the top 100 universities in the world by several of the most influential and respected rankings. The university has approximately 41,500 Bachelor and Master students enrolled as well as about 1,500 PhD students. It is possible to engage in higher academic studies in many areas, from the traditional spheres of natural science, humanities and theology to more vocational academic areas like engineering and dentistry. Aarhus Tech is one of the largest technical colleges in Denmark, teaching undergraduate study programmes in English, including vocational education and training (VET), continuing vocational training (CVT), and human resource development. Business Academy Aarhus is among the largest business academies in Denmark and offers undergraduate and some academic degrees, in IT, business and technical fields. The academic level technical aspects are covered in a collaboration with Aarhus Tech, Aarhus School of Marine and Technical Engineering and Aarhus Educational Centre for Agriculture. The Danish School of Media and Journalism (DMJX) is the oldest and largest of the colleges, offering journalism courses since 1946, with approximately 1,700 students as of 2014. DMJX has been an independent institution since 1974, conducting research and teaching at undergraduate level, and in 2004, master's courses in journalism was established in a collaboration with Aarhus University. The latter is offered through the Centre for University studies in journalism, granting degrees through the university. The Royal Academy of Music in Aarhus (Det Jyske Musikkonservatorium) is a conservatoire, established under the auspices of the Danish Ministry of Culture in 1927. In 2010, it merged administratively with the Royal Academy of Music in Aalborg, which was founded in 1930. Under the patronage of His Royal Highness Crown Prince Frederik, it offers graduate level studies in areas such as music teaching, and solo and professional musicianship. VIA University College was established in January 2008 and is one of eight new regional organisations offering bachelor courses of all kinds, throughout the Central Denmark Region. It offers over 50 higher educations, taught in Danish or sometimes in English, with vocational education and it participates in various research and development projects. Aarhus School of Architecture (Arkitektskolen Aarhus) was founded in 1965. Along with the Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts of Copenhagen, it is responsible for the education of architects in Denmark. With an enrolment of approximately 900 students, it teaches in five main departments: architecture and aesthetics, urban and landscape, architectonic heritage, design and architectural design. Aarhus has two ring roads; Ring 1, roughly encircling the central district of Aarhus C, and the outlying Ring 2. Six major intercity motorways radiate from the city centre, connecting with nearby cities Grenå, Randers, Viborg, Silkeborg, Skanderborg and Odder. In the inner city, motorised traffic is highly regulated, larger parts are pedestrianised and in the 2000s, a system of roads prioritised for cyclists have been implemented, connecting to suburban areas. The main railway station in Aarhus is Aarhus Central Station located in the city centre. DSB has connections to destinations throughout Denmark and also services to Flensburg and Hamburg in Germany. Aarhus Letbane is a local electric tram-train system that opened in December 2017, connecting the central station and the inner city with the University Hospital in Skejby and also replaced local railway services to Grenaa and Odder in late 2018. It is the first electric light rail system in Denmark and more routes are planned to open in coming years. Tickets for the light rail are also available in local yellow bus lines. Most city bus lines go through the inner city and pass through either Park Allé or Banegårdspladsen, or both, right at the central station. Regional and Inter-city buses terminate at Aarhus Bus Terminal, just east of the central station. FlixBus provides long-distance buses that travel to other cities in Denmark and Europe. Ferries administered by Danish ferry company Mols-Linien transports passengers and motorvehicles between Aarhus and Sjællands Odde on Zealand. The ferries comprises HSC KatExpress 1 and HSC KatExpress 2, the world's largest diesel-powered catamarans, and HSC Max Mols. Aarhus Airport is located on Djursland, 40 km (25 mi) north-east of Aarhus near Tirstrup, and provides links to both Copenhagen and international destinations. The larger Billund Airport is situated 95 km (59 mi) south-west of Aarhus. There has been much discussion about constructing a new airport closer to the city for many years, but so far no plans have been realised. In August 2014, the city council officially initiated a process to assert the viability of a new international airport. A small seaplane now operates four flights daily between Aarhus harbour and Copenhagen harbour. Aarhus has a free bike sharing system, Aarhus Bycykler (Aarhus City Bikes). The bicycles are available from 1 April to 30 October at 57 stands throughout the city and can be obtained by placing a DKK 20 coin in a release slot, like caddies in a supermarket. The coin can be retrieved when the bike is returned at a random stand. Bicycles can also be hired from many shops. Aarhus is home to Aarhus University Hospital, one of six Danish "Super Hospitals" officially established in 2007 when the regions reformed the Danish healthcare sector. The university hospital is the result of a series of mergers in the 2000s between the local hospitals of Skejby Sygehus, the Municipal Hospital, the County Hospital, Marselisborg Hospital and Risskov Psychiatric Hospital. It is today the largest hospital in Denmark with a combined staff of some 10,000 and 1,150 patient beds, and has been ranked the best hospital in Denmark consecutively since 2008. In 2012, construction of a new large hospital building began, known as Det Nye Universitetshospital (DNU) or 'The New University Hospital' in English, and it is centralising and accommodating all of the former departments, ending in 2019. The new hospital is divided in four clinical centres, a service centre and one administrative unit along with twelve research centres. Private hospitals specialised in different areas from plastic surgery to fertility treatments operate in Aarhus as well. Ciconia Aarhus Private Hospital founded in 1984 is a leading Danish fertility clinic and the first of its kind in Denmark. Ciconia has provided for the birth of 6,000 children by artificial insemination and continually conducts research into the field of fertility. Aagaard Clinic, established in 2004, is another private fertility and gynaecology clinic which since 2004 has undertaken fertility treatments that has resulted in 1550 births. Aarhus Municipality also offers a number of specialised services in the areas of nutrition, exercise, sex, smoking and drinking, activities for the elderly, health courses and lifestyle. The first daily newspaper to appear in Aarhus was Århus Stiftstidende, established in 1794 as Aarhuus Stifts Adresse-Contoirs Tidender, with a moderately conservative approach. Once one of Denmark's largest, it was a leading provincial newspaper for a time, but after the Second World War it increasingly faced competition from Demokraten (1884–1974) and Jyllands-Posten, both published in Aarhus. In 1998, it merged with Randers Amtsavis and is now run by Midtjyske Medier, part of Berlingske Media. The daily newspaper of Jyllands-Posten was established in 1871 in Aarhus, and takes a generally right-wing editorial approach. With a reputation as a serious news publication, the paper has always included news from Jutland in particular, but somewhat less so since its promotion as a national newspaper in the 1960s. Today it is one of the three bestselling serious newspapers in Denmark, the others being Berlingske and Politiken. Jyllands-Posten publishes JP Aarhus, a section dedicated to news in and around Aarhus, and hosted a free cityguide website from 2010 to 2016. The Copenhagen-based media company of Politiken, also publishes several free local papers once a week in parts of Denmark and Sweden. In Aarhus, they publish a total of five local newspapers; Aarhus Midt, Aarhus Nord, Aarhus Vest, Aarhus Syd and Aarhus Onsdag. Aarhus Onsdag (Aarhus Wednesday) is financed completely by advertisements and available in both paperform and online. It was bought from Århus Stiftstidende in June 2017, but has been published for many years previous. Danmarks Radio has a large department in Aarhus with over 200 employees. It runs the DR Østjylland radio programme, provides local contributions to DR P4, and produces local regional television programmes. In 1999, TV 2 moved its Jutland headquarters from Randers to Skejby in northern Aarhus. The station broadcasts regional news and current affairs television and radio programmes. Since 2012, it has run its own TV channel, TV 2 Østjylland. Aarhus has its own local TV channel TVAarhus, transmitting since 1984. After an agreement on 1 July 2014, TVAarhus can be watched by 130,000 households in Aarhus, making it the largest cable-transmitted local TV channel in Denmark. With over 1,700 students, the Danish School of Media and Journalism (Danmarks Medie- og Journalisthøjskole) is the country's largest and oldest school of journalism. The school works closely with Aarhus University, where the first journalism course was established in 1946. In 2004, the two institutions established the Centre for University Studies in Journalism, which offers master's courses. Aarhus is home to 32 consulates:  Austria  Belgium  Burkina Faso  Chile  Croatia  Cyprus  Czech Republic  Estonia  Finland  France  Germany  Greece  Hungary  Iceland  Japan  Lithuania  Malta  Mexico  Netherlands  Norway  Oman  Poland  Romania  Slovakia  Slovenia  South Korea  Spain  Sweden  Turkey  Ukraine  United Kingdom Aarhus practices twinning on the municipal level. For the twin towns, see twin towns of Aarhus Municipality. See § Spelling. "Area by municipality / region" (in Danish). Statistics Denmark. 8 April 2016. Retrieved 8 April 2016. "Population by urban areas, age and sex" (in Danish). Statistics Denmark. 26 June 2016. Retrieved 26 June 2016. "Århus". The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language (5th ed.). HarperCollins. Retrieved 16 April 2019. "Århus". Collins English Dictionary. HarperCollins. Retrieved 16 April 2019. "Aarhus" (US) and "Aarhus". Lexico UK English Dictionary. Oxford University Press. Archived from the original on 24 July 2020. "Århus". Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary. Retrieved 16 April 2019. "Århus eller Aarhus?" (in Danish). Danish Language Committee. 2011. "Statistikbanken". www.statistikbanken.dk. "The Aarhus River" (in Danish). Visit Aarhus. Archived from the original on 9 May 2016. Retrieved 26 June 2016. "History of Aarhus". Visit Aarhus. Archived from the original on 23 April 2016. Retrieved 27 June 2016. "Aarhus" (in Danish). Gyldendal. Retrieved 16 July 2014. "Salmonsens konversationsleksikon / Anden Udgave" (in Danish). Salmonsen. p. 53. Retrieved 16 July 2014. "Det omstridte bolle-å" (in Danish). Aarhus portalen. Archived from the original on 8 August 2014. Retrieved 16 July 2014. "Århus eller Aarhus?". dsn.dk (in Danish). Retrieved 23 January 2023. Anne-Bech Danielsen (20 March 2010). "Borgmesters attentat på bolle-å går verden rundt". Politiken (in Danish). Retrieved 21 October 2017. "Byhistoriske hovedtræk – Byens grundlæggelse" (in Danish). Aarhus Municipality. Archived from the original on 14 September 2013. Retrieved 15 August 2014. Hans Skov (2008). "Det ældste Århus – ca. 770–1200". UBAS Nordisk (in Danish). 5. Bergen University: 215–226. Retrieved 2 April 2021. Grymer, Claus (1 June 2005). "Vikingernes Aros mellem land og hav". Kristeligt Dagblad (in Danish). Retrieved 16 July 2014. "Det Tidligste Århus" [The earliest Århus] (in Danish). The Viking Museum. Archived from the original on 21 April 2017. Retrieved 15 August 2014. "Excavations – Nørrevold" (in Danish). The Viking Museum (Moesgård Museum). Archived from the original on 19 August 2014. Retrieved 15 August 2014. "Excavations" (in Danish). The Viking Museum (Moesgård Museum). Archived from the original on 14 August 2014. Retrieved 15 August 2014. "Tilbage til vikingetiden" [Back to the Viking Age] (in Danish). Vikingemuseet (MOMU). Kaiser, Jens (12 June 2005). "Vikingernes Viby" (in Danish). Jyllands-Posten Aarhus. "Kirkerne i Århus" (PDF) (in Danish). Danmarks Kirker: Nationalmuseet. p. 52. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 16 July 2014. "Aarhus Cathedral". Aarhus University. 2 July 2012. Archived from the original on 25 March 2016. Retrieved 26 June 2016. "By efter by" (in Danish). Gyldendal. 31 March 2014. Retrieved 16 July 2014. "Svend Estridsen, ca. 1019–1074/76" (in Danish). Aarhus University. Retrieved 27 June 2016. "Vikingernes Aros" (in Danish). The Viking Museum (Moesgård Museum). Archived from the original on 11 August 2014. Retrieved 16 July 2014. "Aarhus". Aarhus University. Archived from the original on 24 July 2015. Retrieved 15 August 2014. "Church and Priory of Our Lady" (PDF). danmarkshistorien.dk. Aarhus University. 24 May 2017. Retrieved 27 June 2017. "Stenbroen". AarhusWiki (in Danish). Aarhus Stadsarkiv. Retrieved 26 July 2015. "The Moat" (in Danish). The Viking Museum. Archived from the original on 19 August 2014. Retrieved 15 August 2014. "Historien om Aarhus" (in Danish). Aarhus Stadsarkiv. Retrieved 26 July 2015. "Stenbroen". Aarhus Kommunes digitale korttjenester (in Danish). Aarhus Kommune. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 22 November 2014. Olsen 2000, p. 124. "Århus: Byhistorie" (in Danish). Dansk Center for Byhistorie. Retrieved 16 July 2014. "Danmarks Købstæder: Århus: Byhistorie" (in Danish). Dansk Center for Byhistorie. Retrieved 25 January 2023. Kommune, Aarhus. "Byens raad 1838–1868". Aarhus Kommune (in Danish). Aarhus Municipality. Archived from the original on 29 November 2014. Retrieved 21 November 2014. Andersen, Lasse. "Rapport over udviklingen af den moderne havn i Aarhus fra o. 1840–2006" (PDF). Dansk Center for Byhistorie (in Danish). Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 27 June 2016. "Ugens Aarhushistorie – Rytterfægtningen". Aarhus Stadsarkiv (in Danish). Aarhus Kommune. Archived from the original on 20 June 2017. Retrieved 22 November 2014. Nielsen, Ivan Freund (10 October 2014). "1864 Jylland besat af tyske tropper" (in Danish). Aarhus Stiftstidende. Archived from the original on 8 December 2014. Retrieved 22 November 2014. Petersen, Erik Strange. "Det unge demokrati 1848–1901" (in Danish). Aarhus University. Archived from the original on 19 January 2012. Retrieved 27 June 2016. Munchaus Petersen, Holger (1986). Fælles kræfter. Danske dampskibe indtil 1870, bind III (in Danish). Esbjerg: Fiskerimuseets Forlag. p. 89. ISBN 87-87453-25-8. Ceres. "History" (in Danish). Archived from the original on 28 March 2016. Retrieved 27 June 2016. Ceres (2013). "Ceres Bryggerierne A/S". Hoflev (in Danish). Archived from the original on 7 May 2016. Retrieved 27 June 2016. "Ceres-grunden" (in Danish). Aarhusportalen (Jyllands-Posten). Archived from the original on 14 August 2014. Retrieved 11 August 2014. Gejl 1996, p. 1.... Jansen 1971, p. 1.... "Otto Mønsted (1839–1916)" (in Danish). Aarhus University. 26 May 2015. Retrieved 27 June 2016. Travis 1998, p. 336. The Scandinavian Year Book: A Comprehensive Guide to ... - Page 512. Dawson. 1953. p. 512. Magistratens 2. Afdeling (1979). "Frederiksbjerg Øst – Århus". Kommuneatlas (in Danish). Aarhus Municipality. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 15 August 2014.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) Aarhus County Hospital, 1882, Aarhus Municipal Hospital (1893), Marselisborg Hospital (1913). "Aarhus Besættelse". Aarhus City Archives. Retrieved 8 April 2016. Hansen 1946, p. 13. Alenius 2002, p. 34. Kristensen 2010, p. 52. Zabecki 1999, pp. 1350–1. Trenear-Harvey 2009, p. 2. Hauerbach 1945, p. 8. Hauerbach 1945, p. 22. Knudsen 2009, p. 76. "70 aar siden eksplosionen". Århus Stiftstidende. Retrieved 21 November 2014. "Blodbad på Bispetorvet". Jyllandsposten. 10 April 1948. Retrieved 21 November 2014. "The Royal Dragoons ankomst til Danmark". 5. Maj-Komiteen. Archived from the original on 15 April 2016. Retrieved 8 April 2016. "Aarhus" (in Danish). DanmarksHistoriendk. Retrieved 25 January 2023. "VIGTIGE ÅRSTAL". Aarhus Universitet. Retrieved 23 November 2014. "Aarhus Rocks". Den Gamle By. Archived from the original on 12 November 2014. Retrieved 23 November 2014. "Byen og Musikken 1960–2914". NordeaFonden. Archived from the original on 25 July 2015. Retrieved 23 November 2014. "Aarhus – rytmisk musik". Gyldendal. Retrieved 27 July 2015. "Hospital City on a Human Scale - the New University Hospital in Aarhus". Archello. Retrieved 25 January 2023. "Aarhus Havn" (in Danish). lex: TrapDanmark. November 2019. Retrieved 25 January 2023. "De Bynære Havnearealer". Archived from the original on 22 April 2018. "Business Aarhus, Aarhus Ø". Business Aarhus. Archived from the original on 29 November 2014. Retrieved 20 November 2014. Sydhavnskvarteret Archived 23 April 2018 at the Wayback Machine (in Danish) Official homepage: Frederiks Plads Archived 2 May 2018 at the Wayback Machine (in Danish) "Frederiks Plads". NCC Property Development A/S. Archived from the original on 29 November 2014. Retrieved 20 November 2014. "Frederiks Plads". C. F. Møller. Retrieved 20 November 2014. "Stor ombygning af Aarhus H Fremrykkes". Lokalavisen Aarhus. Archived from the original on 7 February 2016. Retrieved 20 November 2014. "Business Aarhus, Rutebilstation". Business Aarhus. Archived from the original on 29 November 2014. Retrieved 20 November 2014. "CeresByen.dk". CeresByen. Retrieved 20 November 2014. Camilla Wilhardt Boesen (21 December 2017). "Letbanen åbner torsdag med gratis ture" [The light rail opens thursday with free rides]. Århus Stiftstidende. Retrieved 20 November 2014. "Sidste tests: Snart er Odderbanen klar til passagerer" [Last tests: Soon Odderbanen is ready for passengers]. Århus Stiftstidende. 31 July 2018. Archived from the original on 2 August 2019. Retrieved 3 August 2019. "Letbanen åbner for passagerdrift til Grenaa 30. april". Letbanen. 24 April 2019. Retrieved 3 August 2019. "Grønt lys fra politikerne: Etape 2 ruller videre" [Green light from the politicians: Stage 2 rolls on]. Letbanen. 26 June 2018. Retrieved 3 August 2019. "Fremtidens Aarhus". Aarhus Kommune. Archived from the original on 29 November 2014. Retrieved 20 November 2014. Google (18 December 2014). "Aarhus" (Map). Google Maps. Google. Retrieved 18 December 2014. "Riis Skov" (in Danish). Gyldendal. Retrieved 28 July 2014. "Marselisborgskovene". Den Gamle By. Archived from the original on 6 March 2014. Retrieved 27 July 2014. "Vandreruten Aarhus-Silkeborg" (in Danish). Aarhus.dk. Archived from the original on 9 August 2014. Retrieved 1 August 2014. "Jelshøj – en storhøj fra bronzealderen" (in Danish). Danmarks Kulturarvs Forening (DAKUA). Archived from the original on 18 May 2011. Retrieved 15 October 2017. "Aarhus Kommune" (in Danish). Gyldendal. Retrieved 19 July 2014. "Brabrand Dalen" (in Danish). Aarhus County. 13 January 2005. Retrieved 9 April 2016. "Aarhus Ådal" (PDF) (in Danish). Danish Ministry of Education. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 9 April 2016. "Landskab og bebyggelse" (in Danish). Aarhus Municipality. Archived from the original on 14 September 2013. Retrieved 9 April 2016. "Klimanormaler — Østjylland 1961–1990" [Climatological — East Jutland 1961-1990] (in Danish). Danmarks Meteorologiske Institut [ Danish Meteorological Institute ]. Archived from the original on 4 August 2013. Retrieved 15 February 2018. "Climate: Denmark, Aarhus" (in Danish). Climate Data. Archived from the original on 26 October 2016. Retrieved 25 October 2016., Note:The Köppen World Map is rather course-scaled, and not very useful or precise on scales the size of Denmark. Skelbæk, Michael; Hansen, Niels (16 September 2015). "Vejrkorset - efterårsvejrets fire hjørner" [The Weathercross - the four corners of autumn weather] (in Danish). Danish Meteorological Institute. Archived from the original on 15 February 2018. Retrieved 14 February 2018. "Denmark" (in Danish). WeatherOnline. Retrieved 24 November 2014. "The climate in Denmark". DitDanmark. Archived from the original on 5 March 2016. Retrieved 9 January 2015. "Aarhus Kommune" (in Danish). Gyldendal. Retrieved 23 November 2014. "Sol op/ned" (in Danish). Almanak. Retrieved 17 November 2013. "Jacob Bundsgaard fortsætter som borgmester i Aarhus Kommune" [Jacob Bundsgaard continues as Mayor in Aarhus Municipality]. Lokalavisen. 22 November 2017. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 10 June 2018. "Byråd" (in Danish). Aarhus Municipality. 15 July 2003. Archived from the original on 1 August 2014. Retrieved 10 July 2014. "Stillere" (in Danish). Aarhus Municipality. 6 August 2015. Archived from the original on 7 February 2016. Retrieved 6 August 2015. "Aarhus Kommune" (in Danish). Aarhus Universitet. Retrieved 6 August 2014. "Om os" (in Danish). Region Midtjylland. Retrieved 23 July 2014. "Find dit valgsted" (in Danish). Aarhus Kommune. Archived from the original on 21 June 2015. Retrieved 3 August 2015. "Om Aarhus Stift" (in Danish). Aarhus Stift. Archived from the original on 22 October 2016. Retrieved 3 August 2015. "Regionsopdelt Postnummer" (in Danish). Postdanmark. Retrieved 3 August 2015. "9 Postal Codes in Aarhus, Central Denmark Region". Cybo. Retrieved 25 January 2023. "CO2-neutrality by 2030 – an aim for a growing Aarhus". State of Green. Archived from the original on 15 May 2015. Retrieved 10 June 2018. "Climate and the Environment". Aarhus Municipality. 20 March 2012. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 10 June 2018. "Overtagelse af Østjydsk Halmvarmes halmvarmeværker" (PDF) (in Danish). Aarhus Municipality. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 October 2017. Retrieved 22 January 2017. "Nu er varmen grøn" (in Danish). Aarhus Municipality. Archived from the original on 22 January 2017. Retrieved 22 January 2017. "Energianlæg Aarhus Ø" [Energy plant Aarhus Ø] (in Danish). Aarhus Municipality. 25 October 2016. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 10 June 2018. "Aarhus skriver historie med nye gadelamper" [Aarhus writes history with new street lights] (in Danish). Aarhus Municipality. 22 January 2019. Archived from the original on 14 April 2019. Retrieved 14 April 2019. "Vand Vision 2100" (in Danish). Aarhus Municipality. Retrieved 14 April 2019. Karáth, Kata (1 September 2016). "World's first city to power its water needs with sewage energy". New Scientist (in Danish). Retrieved 14 April 2019. "Epokegørende teknologi får strømmen til at flyde" (in Danish). Aarhus Municipality. Archived from the original on 19 April 2016. Retrieved 22 January 2017. "Separatkloakering" (in Danish). Aarhus Municipality. Archived from the original on 14 April 2019. Retrieved 14 April 2019. "Klimatilpasningsplan 2014 - Tilpasning til mere vand" (PDF) (in Danish). Aarhus Municipality. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 October 2017. Retrieved 27 October 2017. "Skovudviklingsplan 2010 -2020" (PDF) (in Danish). Aarhus Municipality. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 14 April 2019. "Nye skove sikrer drikkevand, natur og friluftsliv" (in Danish). Aarhus Municipality. Archived from the original on 7 February 2016. Retrieved 22 January 2017. "Naturkvalitetsplan 2013 - 2030" (PDF) (in Danish). Aarhus Kommune. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 January 2017. Retrieved 25 January 2023. "FOLK1C: FOLKETAL DEN 1. I KVARTALET EFTER OMRÅDE, KØN, ALDER (5-ÅRS INTERVALLER), HERKOMST OG OPRINDELSESLAND". Statistics Denmark. "Statistikbanken - data og tal". "Befolkningsandel i bymæssig bebyggelse" (in Danish). Økonomi og Indenrigsministeriet. Archived from the original on 8 February 2018. Retrieved 8 December 2014. Peter Bro, PhD-studerende, MSc, Aalborg Universitet; Henrik Harder, Lektor, PhD HD.O MAA, Aalborg Universitet (2007). "Fremtidens Byudvikling i Østjylland" (PDF) (in Danish). Retrieved 10 July 2014. "ØIMs Kommunale Nøgletal, Aarhus Kommune, Andel 25-64-årige med videregående uddannelse" (in Danish). Økonomi og Indenrigsministeriet. Archived from the original on 8 February 2018. Retrieved 8 December 2014. "FOLK1: Folketal den 1" (in Danish). Danmarks Statistik. Retrieved 8 December 2014. "GALDER: Gennemsnitsalder 1. januar efter kommune og køn" (in Danish). Danmarks Statistik. Retrieved 8 December 2014. "Danske Købsteder – Århus" (in Danish). Aarhus Universitet. Archived from the original on 10 August 2014. Retrieved 9 December 2014. "Aarhus 2013 religion i forandring" (in Danish). Religion. 10 December 2013. Retrieved 8 December 2014. "Religion_i_Aarhus_2013, s. 475" (PDF) (in Danish). Centre for Samtidsreligion, Aarhus Universitet. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 8 December 2014. Eade & Mele 2011, p. 67. "Færre udsatte boligområder og ghettoområder på de nye lister" [Fewer vulnerable neighbourhoods and ghetto-areas on the new lists] (in Danish). Ministry of Transport and Housing. 1 December 2019. Retrieved 28 January 2020. Nielsen, Regnar M. (1 December 2019). ""Ghettolisten" skrumper - men det går langsomt" [The "Ghetto List" is shrinking - but it goes slowly] (in Danish). BL (Danmarks Almene Boliger). Retrieved 28 January 2020. Theis Lange Olsen (1 December 2018). "Hvorfor bruger vi egentlig begrebet 'ghetto' om boligområder i Danmark?" [Why exactly are we using the term 'ghetto' about neighbourhoods in Denmark?] (in Danish). DR (Danish Broadcasting Corporation). Retrieved 28 January 2020. "Statistikbanken". www.statbank.dk (in Danish). Retrieved 2 July 2023. "Population at the first day of the quarter by region, sex, age (5 years age groups), ancestry and country of origin - StatBank Denmark - data and statistics". www.statbank.dk. Retrieved 2 July 2023. "Danmarks Købsteder: Århus" (in Danish). Den digitale byport. Retrieved 8 December 2014. "Erhvervsstrukturen i Aarhus Kommune 2012" (PDF) (in Danish). Aarhus Kommune. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 April 2017. Retrieved 8 December 2014. "Aarhus: Economy". The Times. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 23 July 2014. "Andel indpendlere" (in Danish). Økonomi og Indenrigsministeriet. Archived from the original on 8 February 2018. Retrieved 8 December 2014. "Interaktion og infrastruktur i Østjylland" (in Danish). Miljøministeriet. Archived from the original on 25 July 2015. Retrieved 8 December 2014. "Shoppere strømmer til byen" (in Danish). Aarhus Stiftidende. 19 January 2011. Retrieved 11 December 2014. "Danmarkshistorien.dk". Gyldendal. Archived from the original on 25 July 2015. Retrieved 9 December 2014. "Strøget". Strøgforeningen. Archived from the original on 15 January 2015. Retrieved 23 November 2014. "De 10 største virksomheder i Aarhus". jyllandsposten.dk (in Danish). Jyllandsposten. 4 March 2014. Retrieved 9 December 2014. "The tightest wind cluster in the world" (in Danish). Windpower.org. Archived from the original on 9 May 2016. Retrieved 20 August 2014. "Biotekselskaber i Danmark ultimo 2007" (PDF). Dansk biotek. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 November 2015. Retrieved 9 December 2014. "Architects of Infrastructure: Meet Uber Aarhus Engineering". 27 December 2017. "Vestas gains impressive lead as top wind-turbine manufacturer". Windpower Engineering & Development. "Find Vestas". Vestas Windsystems. Retrieved 9 December 2014. Ravn, Morten (7 February 2017). "Aarhus-firma scorer milliard kontrakt med USAs forsvar". stiften.dk. "Top Companies in Aarhus". Aarhus Stifstidende. 8 October 2010. Retrieved 9 December 2014. "Aarhus er en magnet for firmaer". Jyllandsposten. 4 November 2013. Retrieved 9 December 2014. "About Port of Aarhus". Aarhus Havn. Archived from the original on 24 July 2014. Retrieved 16 July 2014. Signe Ferslev Pedersen (21 July 2014). "Mærsk-arving vil kapre mere gods til Aarhus". Berlingske Tidende (in Danish). Archived from the original on 24 July 2014. Retrieved 23 July 2014. "Cargo statistics". Aarhus Havn. Archived from the original on 23 June 2014. Retrieved 21 July 2014. "Aarsrapport 2013" (PDF) (in Danish). Aarhus Havn. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 9 December 2014. "Denmark's top attractions". Visit Denmark. Archived from the original on 20 August 2014. Retrieved 29 July 2014. "Festivals energize Aarhus' tourism industry". Jutlandstation.dk. 13 June 2014. Archived from the original on 29 July 2014. Retrieved 29 July 2014. "Aarhus – a city of shopping" (PDF). Business Aarhus. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 July 2014. Retrieved 29 July 2014. "Cruise ships terminal". Aarhus Havn. Archived from the original on 6 August 2014. Retrieved 29 July 2014. "Aarhus som kulturel city destination" (PDF). kulturturisme.dk. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 23 November 2014. "Tourist Information". VisitAarhus. Archived from the original on 18 August 2014. Retrieved 5 August 2014. "Om VisitAarhus" (in Danish). VisitAarhus. Archived from the original on 28 July 2014. Retrieved 5 August 2014. "Vedtægter for VisitAarhus" (PDF) (in Danish). Region Midtjylland. 18 January 2005. Retrieved 5 August 2014.[permanent dead link] "INCUBA Science Park – Historie" (in Danish). INCUBA Science Park. Archived from the original on 15 August 2016. Retrieved 1 October 2016. "Fødevareforskningen får kontor i Agro Food Park" (in Danish). Aarhus University. 4 July 2016. Archived from the original on 3 November 2016. Retrieved 1 October 2016. "Fakta om Agro Food Park" (in Danish). Agro Food Park. Archived from the original on 2 October 2016. Retrieved 20 September 2016. "Arkitekturklyngen i Århus" (PDF) (in Danish). Center for Strategisk Byforskning. Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 December 2016. Retrieved 1 October 2016. "AAØ Anbefaler Arkitektklyngen i Aarhus" (in Danish). Danish Association of Architects. Archived from the original on 17 October 2017. Retrieved 1 October 2016. "Arkitekterhvervets visioner for en ny arkitektskole i Aarhus" (in Danish). Danish Association of Architects. Archived from the original on 17 October 2017. Retrieved 1 October 2016. "Gode muligheder for at bevare Jyllands svar på Christiania". Århus Stiftstidende (in Danish). Archived from the original on 9 October 2016. Retrieved 1 October 2016. "Arkitektur og byggeskik i byen" (in Danish). Aarhus Kommune. Archived from the original on 14 September 2013. Retrieved 14 December 2014. "Kulturhistorisk redegørelse 2013" (in Danish). Aarhus Kommune. Retrieved 14 December 2014. Mikkelhede (8 October 2020). "Arkitektur i Århus – moderne og modernistisk" (in Danish). Kulturhuset. Retrieved 25 January 2023. "The seagulls have taken off, and the architecture is coming into its own". Troldtekt. Archived from the original on 25 January 2023. Retrieved 25 January 2023. "The Iceberg". archello. Retrieved 25 January 2023. "Fejl". ledelsesinformation.aarhuskommune.dk. Archived from the original on 9 November 2020. Retrieved 24 May 2021. "Afgange fra Østbanetorvet (Letbane)" (in Danish). Reiseplanen. Retrieved 25 January 2023. Kristensen, Kathrine Emilie (6 September 2021). "Ingen alternativer til letbanen på Aarhus Ø: 'Det er virkelig skuffende'" (in Danish). B.T. Retrieved 25 January 2021. "Kirkebygningen" (in Danish). Aarhus Domkirke. Retrieved 17 July 2014. "Historien" (in Danish). Aarhus Katedralskole. Archived from the original on 11 October 2014. Retrieved 22 July 2014. "Kryptkirken" (in Danish). Vor Frue Krirke i Aarhus. Retrieved 17 July 2014. "Romansk 1050–1250" (in Danish). Aarhus Kommune. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 28 July 2014. "Vor Frue Kirke og Kloster" (in Danish). Aarhus Universitet. Retrieved 17 July 2014. "Vor Frue Kirke" (in Danish). AarhusWiki. Retrieved 17 July 2014. "Langelandsgades Kaserne (Artillerikasernen), Århus" (in Danish). ArkArk. Archived from the original on 20 December 2014. Retrieved 20 December 2014.. Architectural and historical information with images. "Kasernen" (in Danish). Department of Arts, Aarhus University. 18 December 2014. Retrieved 20 December 2014. P. E. Niemann (1981): Feltartilleriet i Aarhus 1881–1969 Zac, ISBN 87-7348-047-9 (in Danish) "Marselisborg Palace". Kongehuset.dk. Archived from the original on 7 July 2015. Retrieved 18 July 2014. Tarbensen, Kenn. "Marselisborg Slot" (in Danish). historie-online.dk. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 18 July 2014. Egeberg, Kasper. "Toldkammeret (the Custom House)". DAC. Archived from the original on 25 July 2014. Retrieved 18 July 2014. "Aarhus Teater" (in Danish). Gyldendal. 22 November 2012. Retrieved 18 July 2014. "Aarhus Teater får millionstøtte". Berlingske Tidende (in Danish). 12 April 2011. Retrieved 18 July 2014. "Aarhus Universitet" (in Danish). Gyldendal. Retrieved 18 July 2014. Langdon, David (16 January 2019). "AD Classics: Aarhus City Hall / Arne Jacobsen and Erik Møller". ArchDaily. Retrieved 25 January 2023. Ballard, Barclay (28 August 2018). "Aarhus finds success as European Capital of Culture". Business Destination. Retrieved 25 January 2023. "Smilets by" (in Danish). Aarhus City Archives. Archived from the original on 31 December 2016. Retrieved 29 December 2016. "Gammel plakat er en bestseller". Århus Stiftstidende (in Danish). Archived from the original on 31 December 2016. Retrieved 29 December 2016. "Verdens mindste storby: Hjem til Aarhus". Ekstra Bladet (in Danish). 17 December 2016. Retrieved 12 January 2017. "Arhus Tappenstreg" (PDF) (in Danish). Dansens og musikkens rødder. Archived (PDF) from the original on 1 January 2017. Retrieved 29 December 2016. "Vennelystviser sunget af Dorthe Kollo" (in Danish). ROSA. Archived from the original on 1 January 2017. Retrieved 29 December 2016. "Den Gamle By" (in Danish). Gyldendal. Retrieved 19 July 2014. "Nye tider 1927" (in Danish). Den Gamle By. Archived from the original on 11 August 2014. Retrieved 19 July 2014. "ARoS Aarhus Kunstmuseum" (in Danish). Gyldendal. Retrieved 20 July 2014. "About ARoS". ARoS. Archived from the original on 22 June 2014. Retrieved 20 July 2014. "Moesgård Museum" (in Danish). Gyldendal. Retrieved 20 July 2014. "Facts about the Women's Museum". Kvindemuseet. Archived from the original on 28 July 2014. Retrieved 20 July 2014. "The Occupation Museum Aarhus 1940–45". Visit Aarhus. Retrieved 20 July 2014. "National History Museum" (in Danish). Visit Aarhus. Retrieved 20 July 2014. "Steno Museum". Visit Aarhus. Retrieved 20 July 2014. "Kunsthal Aarhus: Om". Kunsthal Aarhus. Retrieved 25 January 2023. "Dokk1". Urban Mediaspace Aarhus. Retrieved 15 October 2015. "Biblioteker" (in Danish). Aarhus Kommunes Biblioteker. Retrieved 15 October 2015. "Mission, vision and strategy". Statsbiblioteket. Archived from the original on 29 July 2014. Retrieved 29 July 2014. "Cities" (in Danish). ICORN. Archived from the original on 6 October 2015. Retrieved 16 December 2014. "Globus1" (in Danish). Aarhus Kommune. Retrieved 15 October 2015. "About Godsbanens". Godsbanen. Retrieved 30 July 2014. "Fonden VoxHall" (in Danish). Fonden VoxHall. Archived from the original on 28 July 2014. Retrieved 26 July 2014. "TRAIN". train.dk. Retrieved 12 October 2015. "Smukt, grimt og brølende relevant". www.svalegangen.dk. "Om teatret" (in Danish). Det Andet Teater. Archived from the original on 27 July 2014. Retrieved 26 July 2014. Theatres in Aarhus Archived 25 July 2014 at the Wayback Machine VisitAarhus (in Danish) Musikhuset Aarhus: Teater "Ungdoms- og børneteater i Aarhus Centrum - Teaterhuset Filuren". filuren.dk. Musikhuset Aarhus: Comedy Zoo Archived 11 January 2018 at the Wayback Machine "ILT Festival". ILT - International Living Theatre. Retrieved 10 January 2018. "Kulturinstitutioner og den skabende kunst" (in Danish). Aarhus 2017. Archived from the original on 8 August 2014. Retrieved 26 July 2014. Kullberg, Erling (October 2016). "1966-76: When Aarhus became the new music metropolis of Denmark". Seismograf. Retrieved 25 January 2023. "Sport events in Aarhus". VisitAarhus. Archived from the original on 9 August 2015. Retrieved 23 August 2015. "Sport Aarhus Events". Sport Aarhus Events. Archived from the original on 14 April 2015. Retrieved 23 August 2015. "Aarhus Festuge". Aarhus Festuge. Retrieved 26 July 2014. "Århus Festuge" (in Danish). Gyldendal. Retrieved 26 July 2014. "Aarhus Jazz Festival". Aarhus Jazz Festival Association. Archived from the original on 8 August 2014. Retrieved 30 July 2014. NorthSide 2014 Official homepage "Nothside 2015" (in Danish). Visit Aarhus. Archived from the original on 29 July 2014. Retrieved 26 July 2014. "SPOT Festival". VisitAarhus. 2023. Retrieved 25 January 2023. "Danmarks Grimmeste Festival – Aarhus". Songkick. 27 May 2022. Retrieved 25 January 2023. "ILT-15". Archived from the original on 2 May 2015. Retrieved 23 August 2015. "LiteratureXchange". Retrieved 11 July 2019. "Aarhus Pride" (in Danish). Aarhus Pride. Retrieved 6 August 2015. "Se billederne fra Aarhus-traditionen". BT (in Danish). Retrieved 20 January 2017. "Salling taendte 500000 julelys". Århus Stiftstidende (in Danish). Retrieved 20 January 2017. "Sankt Hans i Aarhus" (in Danish). VisitAarhus. Retrieved 25 January 2023. "FASTELAVN FOR BÅDE BØRN OG VOKSNE" (in Danish). Aarhus Motion. Retrieved 25 January 2023. "En Tur På Stranden" (in Danish). VisitAarhus. Archived from the original on 13 December 2014. Retrieved 10 December 2014. "DKS bedste MTB ruter sjov nedkørsel ved Aarhus" (in Danish). vorespuls.dk. 6 January 2014. Retrieved 10 December 2014. "Sunbeams Over Århus" (PDF). Natural History Museum, Aarhus Nature and Environment (Municipality of Aarhus), The Outdoor Council. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 23 August 2015. Pamphlet of seven routes ("sunbeams"). "Solstråler over Århus" (in Danish). Natural History Museum, Aarhus. Archived from the original on 11 July 2015. Retrieved 23 August 2015. Weinrich, Mogens (13 November 2000). "Historien om en sti" [The history of a pathway]. Jyllands-Posten (in Danish). Archived from the original on 19 August 2014. Retrieved 2 July 2018. "Map of the lake area" (PDF). Aarhus Municipality. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 2 July 2018. "Vandreruten Århus-Silkeborg" (in Danish). Århus Amt, Natur- og Miljøkontore. 16 March 2009. Retrieved 2 July 2018. "Parker" (in Danish). Aarhus Kommune. Archived from the original on 29 July 2014. Retrieved 20 July 2014. "The Botanical Garden". Visit Aarhus. Retrieved 20 July 2014. "Botanisk Have i Århus får væksthus og vidensformidling i topklasse" (in Danish). Aarhus University. Archived from the original on 12 August 2014. Retrieved 20 July 2014. "The Buildings and the University Park" (in Danish). Aarhus University. Archived from the original on 12 August 2014. Retrieved 23 July 2014. "Marselisborg Mindepark" (in Danish). Visit Aarhus. Retrieved 20 July 2014. "Mindeparken" (in Danish). Aarhus Guide. Archived from the original on 26 July 2014. Retrieved 20 July 2014. "Rådhusparken" (in Danish). Retrieved 26 July 2014. "Marienlystparken" (in Danish). Børn i byen. Retrieved 23 July 2014. Marienlyst Park is between 48 and 83 hectares, depending on how much of the woodlands are included. The woodlands are known as Brendstrup Skov. "What is it about?". Classic Race Aarhus. Archived from the original on 23 September 2015. Retrieved 23 August 2015. "Marselisborg Dyrehave" (in Danish). Aarhus Portalen. Archived from the original on 26 July 2014. Retrieved 20 July 2014. "Marselisborg Skovene" (in Danish). Marselisborg Skovene. Retrieved 25 January 2023. "Fortidens spor i Marselisborg skove" (PDF) (in Danish). Natur og Miliø. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 January 2023. Retrieved 25 January 2023. "Restaurants in Aarhus". Jyllands-Posten (in Danish). Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2014. Reviews and data on 453 restaurants in Aarhus. "AoA Raadhus Cafeen" (in Danish). AoA. Archived from the original on 20 December 2014. Retrieved 20 December 2014. "Peter Gift" (in Danish). Peter Gift. Archived from the original on 18 December 2014. Retrieved 20 December 2014. "Torvet på Ingerslev" (in Danish). Facebook. Retrieved 2 May 2018. European Region of Gastronom: Awarded and Candidate Regions Archived 12 April 2017 at the Wayback Machine "European Region of Gastronomy 2017". European Region of Gastronomy. "Aarhus, Denmark". Délice Network. Archived from the original on 29 October 2018. Retrieved 28 October 2018. "White Guide - Aarhus". White Guide. Archived from the original on 3 May 2018. Retrieved 19 May 2018. "Aarhus Michelin Restaurants". Michelin. Archived from the original on 20 May 2018. Retrieved 19 May 2018. Nielsen, Maria Danmark & Holler, Katrine (28 April 2014). "International mesterklasse på Frederikshøj" [International gourmet class at Frederikshøj]. Spiseguiden.dk (in Danish). Jyllands-Posten. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2014. 22 restaurants in Aarhus were among the best in Denmark, according to White Guide Loumann, Ole. "Restauranter i Aarhus" [Restaurants in Aarhus]. Politiken (in Danish). Archived from the original on 14 July 2014. Retrieved 30 July 2014. Daniel Winther Pedersen (15 January 2015). "Danske restauranter får stjerner i februar" [Danish restaurants receive stars in February]. Spiseguiden.dk (in Danish). Jyllands-Posten. Archived from the original on 18 September 2016. Retrieved 2 June 2016. "Pølsevogne i Aarhus" [Sausage wagons in Aarhus]. Krak.dk (in Danish). Retrieved 20 December 2014. "Takeaway fra Ginza Sushi". Aarhus Update (in Danish). 12 November 2014. Retrieved 20 December 2014. "Byguide" (in Danish). Studenterguiden. Retrieved 20 December 2014. "Aarhus Street Food". Aarhus Street Food. "Welcome to the new food mecca in the heart of Aarhus". Aarhus Central Food Market. Archived from the original on 11 January 2017. Retrieved 10 January 2017. "Omtale" (in Danish). Loeves. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 20 December 2014. "Serving in Aarhus" (in Danish). Danske Ølentusiaster (Aarhus C). Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 28 August 2014. Porter & Prince 2007, p. 372. "Aarhus for LGBTQ+". VisitAarhus. Retrieved 25 January 2023. "Et "Aarhus-sæt" er ikke længere fra Aarhus". Berlingske Tidende (in Danish). 6 January 2015. Archived from the original on 16 April 2016. Retrieved 6 January 2016. "Arnbitter forlader Aarhus" (in Danish). TV2 Østjylland. Archived from the original on 7 March 2016. Retrieved 6 January 2016. "Aarhus Bryghus". Retrieved 1 June 2016. "Jysk" (in Danish). University of Copenhagen. Archived from the original on 13 March 2016. Retrieved 6 January 2016. "Saarn bevarer etniske unge ikkaa". Politiken (in Danish). 25 December 2012. Archived from the original on 26 January 2016. Retrieved 6 January 2016. "Hun fandt den Aarhusianske dialekt i Aarhus V". Århus Stiftstidende (in Danish). Archived from the original on 5 May 2016. Retrieved 6 January 2016. "Vi snakker mindre Aarhusiansk do". Århus Stiftstidende (in Danish). Archived from the original on 1 May 2016. Retrieved 6 January 2016. "Aarhus – engelsk for noller". Dagbladet Information (in Danish). 11 November 2011. Archived from the original on 8 February 2016. Retrieved 6 January 2016. "Træls – dialekt eller standardsprog" (PDF) (in Danish). University of Copenhagen. Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 February 2016. Retrieved 15 January 2016. Borchmann, Simon (2009). "4". Århusiansk – byens sprog før og nu. Aarhus Universitetsforlag. ISBN 978-87-7934-436-5. "Aarhusiansk" (PDF) (in Danish). University of Aarhus. Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 May 2016. Retrieved 6 January 2016. "Historie". Aarhus Gymnastikforening. Archived from the original on 13 December 2014. Retrieved 10 December 2014. In 2001, A.G.F., Aarhus KFUM, VRI and Brabrand IF merged to form Aarhus GF Håndbold. Collectively these clubs have 9 titles. "Håndbold: Århus GF mestre i tilskuere". Aarhus Portalen. Archived from the original on 20 December 2014. Retrieved 10 December 2014. "Tilskuerrekorder". Bakken Bears. Retrieved 10 December 2014. "Landskamp i Aarhus". Dansk Boldspil Union. Archived from the original on 16 July 2015. Retrieved 10 December 2014. "AP Møller Fonden donerer penge til ny sejlsportscenter". Sejlsport.dk. Retrieved 10 December 2014. "Resultater". Sejlsport.Dk. Retrieved 10 December 2014. "Hvem er Bakken Bears?" (in Danish). Bakken Bears. Retrieved 25 January 2023. "Sport og Fritid Aarhus Kommune". Aarhus Kommune. Archived from the original on 15 May 2015. Retrieved 12 April 2014. "Medlemstal". Dansk Idræts Forbund. Retrieved 10 December 2014. "Skjoldhøjkilen et rekreativt område" (PDF) (in Danish). Aarhus Kommune. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 March 2014. Retrieved 31 July 2014. "Aarhus is Denmark's Number One for Sporting Events". Aarhus Kommune. Archived from the original on 9 August 2014. Retrieved 1 August 2014. "Past Events". Sailing Aarhus. Archived from the original on 5 July 2015. Retrieved 21 August 2015. "Future Events". Sailing Aarhus. Archived from the original on 20 July 2015. Retrieved 21 August 2015. "Hempel Sailing World Championships Aarhus 2018". Aarhus 2018 Sailing World Championships. "Aarhus vil have sejler VM i byens nye forhave". Politiken. 2 April 2014. Retrieved 23 November 2014. "Aarhus, Denmark's City of Smiles". ETB News. Archived from the original on 8 August 2014. Retrieved 26 July 2014. "Uddannelse" (in Danish). Aarhus 2017. Archived from the original on 8 August 2014. Retrieved 26 July 2014. Aarhus Kommune: Boliger Archived 25 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine "Aarhus Universitet runder 40.000 studerende: Business Aarhus" (in Danish). Businessaarhus.dk. Archived from the original on 11 October 2014. Retrieved 10 July 2014. "Faculty of Theology". Aarhus University. Archived from the original on 12 August 2014. Retrieved 1 August 2014. "AARHUS TECH International services". Aarhustech.dk. Archived from the original on 8 August 2014. Retrieved 1 August 2014. "About Business Academy Aarhus". Business Academy Aarhus. Retrieved 16 May 2017. "The Danish School of Media and Journalism". Mundusjournalism.com. Archived from the original on 27 July 2014. Retrieved 1 August 2014. "The Royal Academy of Music – Det Jyske Musikkonservatorium". Masterstudies.co.uk. Archived from the original on 8 August 2014. Retrieved 1 August 2014. "About VIA". Viauc.com. Archived from the original on 29 July 2014. Retrieved 1 August 2014. "Arkitektskolen Aarhus" (in Danish). Gyldendal. Retrieved 1 August 2014. "Midtjysk motorvej" (PDF) (in Danish). Vejdirekoratet. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 August 2023. Retrieved 25 January 2023. "Aarhus by bike". VisitAarhus. Retrieved 25 January 2023. "City & traffic". aarhus.com. Archived from the original on 26 July 2014. Retrieved 28 July 2014. "Aarhus tram-train project gets the go-ahead". Railway Gazette International. 10 May 2012. Archived from the original on 1 March 2020. Retrieved 11 May 2012. "Buses in Aarhus and other city buses". Midttraffik. Archived from the original on 26 June 2014. Retrieved 28 July 2014. "Midttrafik Kundecenter". Midttrafik. Archived from the original on 9 November 2017. Retrieved 9 November 2017. "Aarhus Rutebilstation" (in Danish). AarhusWiki. Retrieved 9 November 2017. "Bus Routes Overview". FlixBus. Retrieved 15 February 2020. "KatExpress 1 – en af verdens største hurigfargen" (in Danish). Mols Linien. Archived from the original on 29 July 2014. Retrieved 29 July 2014. "Welcome Aboard – Norman Arrow". Ldlines.co.uk. Archived from the original on 26 March 2012. Retrieved 1 August 2014. "New 115 metre high speed catamaran for Molslinjen – largest ferry to be built by Austal". Austal. 24 October 2019. Retrieved 25 January 2023. "Aarhus Airport (AAR)". Airport Guides. Retrieved 28 July 2014. "Billund Airport" (in Danish). Gyldendal. Retrieved 28 July 2014. Dalhoff, Maria (6 March 2014). "Borgmester Vil Drøfte en ny lufthavn". Jyllands-Posten (in Danish). Retrieved 28 July 2014. "Nu skal ny lufthavnsplacering undersøges" (in Danish). Morgenavisen Jyllands-Posten. 27 August 2014. Retrieved 29 August 2014. "Analyse af en eventuel ny placering af Aarhus Lufthavn". Aarhus Kommune. 17 June 2015. Archived from the original on 7 August 2016. Retrieved 2 June 2016. "Pengemandens millionplan: Vandfly skal i timedrift mellem København og Aarhus". business.dk. 25 May 2016. Retrieved 28 May 2016. "Aarhus City Bikes". Aarhus Kommune. Archived from the original on 9 August 2014. Retrieved 29 July 2014. "Supersygehus" (PDF) (in Danish). Aarhus Municipality. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 June 2016. Retrieved 22 April 2016. "Organisation". Aarhus University Hospital. Archived from the original on 5 November 2020. Retrieved 14 April 2019. "Denmark's best hospital 2018". Aarhus University Hospital. 14 December 2018. Archived from the original on 1 December 2020. Retrieved 14 April 2019. "Forskningsenheder" (in Danish). Aarhus University Hospital. Archived from the original on 28 March 2016. Retrieved 22 April 2016. "Centre" (in Danish). Aarhus University Hospital. Archived from the original on 30 March 2016. Retrieved 22 April 2016. "About". Ciconia Fertility Clinic. Archived from the original on 9 May 2016. Retrieved 22 April 2016. "About the clinic" (in Danish). Aagaard Fertility Clinic. Archived from the original on 27 March 2016. Retrieved 22 April 2016. "Sundhedstilbud" (in Danish). Aarhus Municipality. Archived from the original on 24 April 2016. Retrieved 22 April 2016. Cremo 2010, p. 230. "Århus Stiftstidende". Gyldendal. Retrieved 21 July 2014. Jette Drachmann Søllinge. "Jyllands Posten in The Great Danish". Jyllands-Posten (in Danish). Gyldendal. Retrieved 21 July 2014. "JP Aarhus". Jyllands-Posten. Archived from the original on 2 February 2016. Retrieved 5 February 2016. "Jyllands-Posten øger satsningen i Århus" [Jyllands-Posten increase the bet in Århus]. Jyllands-Posten. 11 March 2010. Retrieved 10 October 2017. "Politikens Lokalaviser" (in Danish). Politikens Lokalaviser A/S. Retrieved 1 July 2018. "E-aviser". Politikens Lokalaviser A/S. Retrieved 1 July 2018. Bruun-Hansen, Kerstin (16 June 2017). "Sikkert godt andre steder – men ikke her" [Probably good elsewhere - but not here] (in Danish). Journalisten. Retrieved 1 July 2018. "Aarhus Onsdag - 26-06-2018". www.e-pages.dk. "Rundvisning i DR Aarhus" (in Danish). DR. 3 September 2013. Retrieved 21 July 2014. "Få overblikket over de første 20 år med TV 2" (in Danish). tv2oj.dk TV 2 | ØSTJYLLAND. Archived from the original on 30 July 2014. Retrieved 21 July 2014. "Om TV3 Øst" (in Danish). TVAarhus. Archived from the original on 8 August 2014. Retrieved 3 August 2014. "Om TVAarhus" (in Danish). Antenneforeningen Aarhus. Retrieved 3 August 2014. "Dobbelt så mange kan nu se TVAarhus" (in Danish). Aarhus Onsdag, Århus Stifstidende. 1 August 2014. Retrieved 3 August 2014. "The Danish School of Media and Journalism". Erasmus Mundus Master's in Journalism, Media and Globalisation. Archived from the original on 27 July 2014. Retrieved 21 July 2014. "Foreign consulates in Denmark" (in Danish). Danmarks-ambassade.com. Retrieved 15 November 2015. Publications Biblioteker, Århus Kommunes (1997). Århus leksikon. Århus Kommunes Biblioteker. Cremo, Michael A. (2010). The Forbidden Archeologist: The Atlantis Rising Magazine Columns of Michael A. Cremo. Torchlight Publishing. ISBN 978-0-89213-337-6. Duffin, C.J.; Moody, R.T.J.; Gardner-Thorpe, C. (10 December 2013). A History of Geology and Medicine. Geological Society of London. ISBN 978-1-86239-356-1. Eade, John; Mele, Christopher (15 July 2011). Understanding the City: Contemporary and Future Perspectives. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-1-4443-9932-5. Hulme, Karen (January 2004). War Torn Environment: Interpreting The Legal Threshold. Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. ISBN 90-04-13848-X. Loumann, Ole (2009). Turen går til Århus & Østjylland. Politiken. ISBN 978-87-567-8977-6. Madsen, Hans Jørgen (1975). Århus of the Vikings. Forhistorisk Museum. Mitcham, Samuel W. (2007). German Order of Battle: 291st–999th Infantry divisions. Stackpole Books. ISBN 978-0-8117-3437-0. Møller, Erik; Vindum, Kjeld (1991). Aarhus City Hall. Danish Architectural Press. ISBN 978-87-7407-110-5. Olsen, Søren (2000). Danmarks købstæder: 144 købstæder og andre gamle byer. Gyldendals Bogklubber. pp. 124–131. ISBN 978-87-00-66364-0. Pedersen, Olaf; Hovesen, Ejnar (1987). Videnskabshistorie i Aarhus: Videnskabshistorisk Museum, Medicinhistorisk Museum. Institut for Videnskabshistorie. Porter, Darwin; Prince, Danforth (5 June 2007). Frommer's Denmark. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-0-470-10058-5. Sevaldsen, Jørgen; Bjørke, Bo; Bjørn, Claus (January 2003). Britain and Denmark: Political, Economic and Cultural Relations in the 19th and 20th Centuries. Museum Tusculanum Press. ISBN 978-87-7289-750-9. Thomsen, C. Walther (1968). Det gamle Aarhus som Kunstnerne saa det. Nellemann & Thomsen, Mejlgade 45. Travis, A. S. (31 October 1998). Determinants in the Evolution of the European Chemical Industry, 1900–1939: New Technologies, Political Frameworks, Markets and Companies. Springer Science & Business Media. ISBN 978-0-7923-4890-0. Trenear-Harvey, Glenmore S. (13 April 2009). Historical Dictionary of Air Intelligence. Scarecrow Press. ISBN 978-0-8108-6294-4. Zabecki, David T. (1999). World War II in Europe: An Encyclopedia. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-0-8240-7029-8. Alenius, Marianne (2002). Ikke noget theselskab: Var vi terrorister?. Museum Tusculanum Press. ISBN 87-7289-736-8. Hauerbach, Sven (1945). 5. Kolonne; Aarhus-sabotørernes modige indsats. 5 Kolonne. Archived from the original on 15 April 2016. Hansen, Salomon (1946). Jydske Sabotører. Willy Samsing-Gruppen. Salomon Hansen. Kristensen, Henrik Skov (2010). Grethe Bartram – fra kommunist til gestapoagent. Nyt Nordisk Forlag. ISBN 978-87-17-04140-0. Knudsen, Peter Øvig (2009). Efter drabet. Gyldendal. ISBN 978-87-02-08327-9. Gejl, Ib (1996). Fra købmandsgård til koncern. Korn- og Foderstof Kompagniet. Danish National Business Archives. ISBN 978-87-89386-17-1. Jansen, Christian R. (1971). Korn, købmænd og kornkompagni. AarhusUniversitetsforlag. ISBN 978-87-504-0252-7. Jensen, Kurt Balle (2006). As time goes by – en jazzkrønike. Pressebureauet Silkeborg. ISBN 87-991273-1-8. Lykke, Palle (1996). By og universitet. Aarhus Universitetsforlag. ISBN 87-7288-683-8. Varberg, Jeanette (2012). Aros og vikingernes verden. Forlaget Moesgård. ISBN 978-87-87334-91-4. Weinrich, Mogens (2014). Kend din by. Saxo Publish. ISBN 978-87-983087-0-6. Weinrich, Mogens (2014). Kend din by II. Saxo Publish. ISBN 978-87-983087-4-4. Dalsgård, Jens (2013). Aarhus-København – en fotografisk spejling. Århus Byhistorisk Fond. ISBN 978-87-91324-45-1. Fode, Henrik; Navntoft, Claus P. (2014). Som kunstnerne så Aarhus. Århus Byhistorisk Fond. ISBN 978-87-91324-47-5. Byrum, Finn (2008). Århus fra oven. Globe. ISBN 978-87-7900-646-1. Bender, Johan (2008). Hurra for Århus. Klematis. ISBN 978-87-641-0296-3. Fode, Henrik (2005). Århus besat. Århus Byhistoriske Fond. ISBN 978-87-91324-11-6. Carlsen, Søren Højlund (2011). Århus i hjertet. Turbine Forlaget. ISBN 978-87-7090-484-1. Elgaard, Søren (2009). Århus Havn. Aarhus Universitetsforlag. ISBN 978-87-7934-457-0. Hansen, Finn Egeland (2010). Verdens navle. Siesta. ISBN 978-87-92539-25-0. Damm, Annette (2005). Vikingernes Aros. Moesgård. ISBN 87-87334-62-3. Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Aarhus (category) Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Aarhus. Aarhus Kommune Official municipal and city portal (in Danish) Visit Aarhus Official tourist site Texts on Wikisource: "Aarhuus" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. I (9th ed.). 1878. p. 3. "Aarhus". The Nuttall Encyclopædia. 1907. "Aarhus". Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. I (11th ed.). 1911. p. 3-4. "Aarhus". Catholic Encyclopedia. 1913. "Aarhuus (city)". Collier's New Encyclopedia. 1921. 56°09′26″N 10°12′39″E﻿ / ﻿56.1572°N 10.2107°E﻿ / 56.1572; 10.2107