"Emergency" is a song by American rock band Paramore. It was released on October 21, 2005, as the second single from their debut studio album, All We Know Is Falling. It was released on 7" vinyl in the United Kingdom on August 26, 2006, and contained the B-side "Oh, Star," and a poster of the band. The song was written by Hayley Williams and Josh Farro. It failed to chart in the United States, however, it was released in Kerrang!s "Class of '06" compilation CD, calling it one of the best rock tracks of that year. An alternative post-hardcore version of the song, providing a heavier sound and screamed vocals, was released on The Summer Tic EP in 2006. The song is about the fact that love is taken for granted, and how most relationships are in emergency status. It is also about Williams' witnessing her parents' argument and failing marriage as a child. During an interview with the February 2008 edition of Alternative Press, Williams said, "I remember actually walking out the door with my mom that night and standing in between my parents and screaming "Shut up! Shut up! Shut up!" [citation needed] There have been several versions of the song released, including the original, a live version in Anaheim (featured on an extended edition of Riot!), and a "Crab Mix", more commonly known as the "Screamo Version" which features screaming vocals introduced in some parts. Ed Masley at The Arizona Republic ranked it as the 11th best Paramore song, stating "this one offsets melancholy jangling with headbanging power chords, the jangling underscoring Williams' bittersweet delivery as she sets the tone with a pout of, "I think we have an emergency."" The beginning of the music video opens with Paramore having minor but bloody injuries, sitting a room looking miserable. They wear dirtied but formal clothing with red roses pinned to them. In between cut scenes are of them performing outside. Then a man (Shane Drake) walks in the room Paramore are in, tosses a rose at Williams, and gestures them to follow him. All of them go outside where there is a stage (being) set up for them to perform. The man is apparently the director and before he mouths the word, "Action!" makeup artists apply more to the bloody injuries on the band members. And as the band performs, there are cut scenes of Williams sitting in a chair from the beginning and singing along to the song. The dress Hayley wears in the video was put on display in the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. The video was directed by Shane Drake. As of November 2023, the music video for "Emergency" has over 50 million views on YouTube. Paramore performed this song live in Anaheim, opening their "All We Know Is Falling" tour. The song was extended to have a piano introduction, which was played by Hayley, whom also did lead vocals. "Emergency" was also played live on "The Final Riot" tour and also given an extended piano introduction. This version of the song is also included in "The Final Riot" album/DVD set. "The 10 Best Paramore Songs". Stereogum. 17 May 2017. "10 EMO SONGS FROM 2005 THAT NEVER LEFT YOUR PLAYLIST". Alternative Press. 14 February 2020. Retrieved March 27, 2023. "// Alternative Press Magazine \\". Alternative Press. Archived from the original on 2011-10-21. Retrieved 2008-05-28. "Playlist: 15 best Paramore songs, 'Twilight' to now". August 7, 2014. Retrieved January 3, 2015. Paramore (August 1, 2006). "Paramore: Emergency [OFFICIAL VIDEO]". YouTube. Retrieved October 17, 2022. Official Paramore website