Diana, Princess of Wales (born Diana Frances Spencer; 1 July 1961 – 31 August 1997), was a member of the British royal family. She was the first wife of Charles III (then Prince of Wales) and mother of Princes William and Harry. Her activism and glamour made her an international icon, and earned her enduring popularity. Diana was born into British nobility, and grew up close to the royal family on their Sandringham estate. In 1981, while working as a nursery teacher's assistant, she became engaged to Charles, the eldest son of Elizabeth II. Their wedding took place at St Paul's Cathedral in July 1981 and made her Princess of Wales, a role in which she was enthusiastically received by the public. The couple had two sons, William and Harry, who were then respectively second and third in the line of succession to the British throne. Diana's marriage to Charles suffered due to their incompatibility and extramarital affairs. They separated in 1992, soon after the breakdown of their relationship became public knowledge. Their marital difficulties were widely publicised, and the couple divorced in 1996. As Princess of Wales, Diana undertook royal duties on behalf of the Queen and represented her at functions across the Commonwealth realms. She was celebrated in the media for her unconventional approach to charity work. Her patronages were initially centred on children and the elderly, but she later became known for her involvement in two particular campaigns: one involved the social attitudes towards and the acceptance of AIDS patients, and the other for the removal of landmines, promoted through the International Red Cross. She also raised awareness and advocated for ways to help people affected by cancer and mental illness. Diana was initially noted for her shyness, but her charisma and friendliness endeared her to the public and helped her reputation survive the public collapse of her marriage. Considered photogenic, she is regarded as a fashion icon of the 1980s and 1990s. In August 1997, Diana died in a car crash in Paris; the incident led to extensive public mourning and global media attention. An inquest returned a verdict of unlawful killing following Operation Paget, an investigation by the Metropolitan Police. Her legacy has had a significant effect on the royal family and British society. Diana Frances Spencer was born on 1 July 1961, the fourth of five children of John Spencer, Viscount Althorp (1924–1992), and Frances Spencer, Viscountess Althorp (née Roche; 1936–2004). She was delivered at Park House, Sandringham, Norfolk. The Spencer family had been closely allied with the British royal family for several generations; her grandmothers, Cynthia Spencer, Countess Spencer, and Ruth Roche, Baroness Fermoy, had served as ladies-in-waiting to Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother. Her parents were hoping for a boy to carry on the family line, and no name was chosen for a week until they settled on Diana Frances after her mother and Lady Diana Spencer, a many-times-great-aunt who was also a prospective Princess of Wales as a potential bride for Frederick, Prince of Wales. Within the family, she was also known informally as "Duch", a reference to her duchess-like attitude in childhood. On 30 August 1961, Diana was baptised at St. Mary Magdalene Church, Sandringham. She grew up with three siblings: Sarah, Jane, and Charles. Her infant brother, John, died shortly after his birth one year before Diana was born. The desire for an heir added strain to her parents' marriage, and Lady Althorp was sent to Harley Street clinics in London to determine the cause of the "problem". The experience was described as "humiliating" by Diana's younger brother, Charles: "It was a dreadful time for my parents and probably the root of their divorce because I don't think they ever got over it". Diana grew up in Park House, situated on the Sandringham estate. The family leased the house from its owner, Queen Elizabeth II, whom Diana called "Aunt Lilibet" since childhood. The royal family frequently holidayed at the neighbouring Sandringham House, and Diana played with Princes Andrew and Edward. Diana was seven years old when her parents divorced. Her mother later began a relationship with Peter Shand Kydd and married him in 1969. Diana lived with her mother in London during her parents' separation in 1967, but during that year's Christmas holidays, Lord Althorp refused to let his daughter return to London with Lady Althorp. Shortly afterwards, he won custody of Diana with support from his former mother-in-law, Lady Fermoy. In 1976, Lord Althorp married Raine, Countess of Dartmouth. Diana's relationship with her stepmother was particularly bad. She resented Raine, whom she called a "bully". On one occasion Diana pushed her down the stairs. She later described her childhood as "very unhappy" and "very unstable, the whole thing". She became known as Lady Diana after her father later inherited the title of Earl Spencer in 1975, at which point her father moved the entire family from Park House to Althorp, the Spencer seat in Northamptonshire. Diana was initially home-schooled under the supervision of her governess, Gertrude Allen. She began her formal education at Silfield Private School in King's Lynn, Norfolk, and moved to Riddlesworth Hall School, an all-girls boarding school near Thetford, when she was nine. She joined her sisters at West Heath Girls' School in Sevenoaks, Kent, in 1973. She did not perform well academically, failing her O-levels twice. Her outstanding community spirit was recognised with an award from West Heath. She left West Heath when she was sixteen. Her brother Charles recalls her as being quite shy up until that time. She demonstrated musical ability as a skilled pianist. She also excelled in swimming and diving, and studied ballet and tap dance. In 1978, Diana worked for three months as a nanny for Philippa and Jeremy Whitaker in Hampshire. After attending Institut Alpin Videmanette (a finishing school in Rougemont, Switzerland) for one term, and leaving after the Easter term of 1978, Diana returned to London, where she shared her mother's flat with two school friends. In London, she took an advanced cooking course and worked at a series of low-paying jobs; she worked as a dance instructor for youth until a skiing accident caused her to miss three months of work. She then found employment as a playgroup pre-school assistant, did some cleaning work for her sister Sarah and several of her friends, and acted as a hostess at parties. She spent time working as a nanny for the Robertsons, an American family living in London, and worked as a nursery teacher's assistant at the Young England School in Pimlico. In July 1979, her mother bought her a flat at Coleherne Court in Earl's Court as an 18th birthday present. She lived there with three flatmates until 25 February 1981. Diana first met Charles, Prince of Wales, the Queen's eldest son and heir apparent, when she was 16 in November 1977. He was then 29 and dating her older sister, Sarah. Charles and Diana were guests at a country weekend during the summer of 1980 and he took a serious interest in her as a potential bride. The relationship progressed when he invited her aboard the royal yacht Britannia for a sailing weekend to Cowes. This was followed by an invitation to Balmoral Castle (the royal family's Scottish residence) to meet his family. She was well received by the Queen, the Queen Mother and the Duke of Edinburgh. Charles subsequently courted Diana in London. He proposed on 6 February 1981 at Windsor Castle, and she accepted, but their engagement was kept secret for two and a half weeks. Their engagement became official on 24 February 1981. Diana selected her own engagement ring. Following the engagement, she left her occupation as a nursery teacher's assistant and temporarily lived at the Queen Mother's residence, Clarence House. She subsequently resided at Buckingham Palace until the wedding, where, according to the biographer Ingrid Seward, her life was "incredibly lonely". Diana was the first Englishwoman to marry the first in line to the throne since Anne Hyde married James, Duke of York and Albany (later James VII and II), over 300 years earlier, and she was also the first royal bride to have a paying job before her engagement. Diana's first public appearance with Charles was at a charity ball held at Goldsmiths' Hall in March 1981, where she was introduced to Princess Grace of Monaco. Diana became Princess of Wales aged 20 when she married Charles, then 32, on 29 July 1981. The wedding was held at St Paul's Cathedral, which offered more seating than Westminster Abbey, a church that was generally used for royal weddings. The service was widely described as a "fairytale wedding" and was watched by a global television audience of 750 million people while 600,000 spectators lined the streets to catch a glimpse of the couple en route to the ceremony. At the altar, Diana inadvertently reversed the order of his first two names, saying "Philip Charles" Arthur George instead. She did not say she would "obey" him; that traditional vow was left out at the couple's request, which caused some comment at the time. Diana wore a dress valued at £9,000 (equivalent to £36,700 in 2021) with a 25-foot (7.62-metre) train. Within a few years of the wedding, the Queen extended Diana visible tokens of membership in the royal family, lending her the Queen Mary's Lover's Knot Tiara and granting her the badge of the Royal Family Order of Elizabeth II. The couple had residences at Kensington Palace and Highgrove House, near Tetbury. On 5 November 1981, Diana's pregnancy was announced. In January 1982—12 weeks into the pregnancy—Diana fell down a staircase at Sandringham, suffering some bruising, and the royal gynaecologist George Pinker was summoned from London; the foetus was uninjured. Diana later confessed that she had intentionally thrown herself down the stairs because she was feeling "so inadequate". On 21 June 1982, she gave birth to the couple's first son, Prince William. She subsequently suffered from postpartum depression after her first pregnancy. Amidst some media criticism, she decided to take William—who was still a baby—on her first major tours of Australia and New Zealand, and the decision was popularly applauded. By her own admission, Diana had not initially intended to take William until Malcolm Fraser, the Australian prime minister, made the suggestion. A second son, Harry, was born on 15 September 1984. Diana said she and Charles were closest during her pregnancy with Harry. She was aware their second child was a boy, but did not share the knowledge with anyone else, including Charles as he was hoping for a girl. Diana gave her sons wider experiences than was usual for royal children. She rarely deferred to Charles or to the royal family, and was often intransigent when it came to the children. She chose their first given names, dismissed a royal family nanny and engaged one of her own choosing, selected their schools and clothing, planned their outings, and took them to school herself as often as her schedule permitted. She also organised her public duties around their timetables. Diana was reported to have described Harry as "naughty, just like me", and William as "my little wise old man" whom she started to rely on as her confidant by his early teens. Five years into the marriage, the couple's incompatibility and age difference became visible and damaging. In 1986 Diana began a relationship with James Hewitt, the family's former riding instructor and in the same year, Charles resumed his relationship with his former girlfriend Camilla Parker Bowles. The media speculated that Hewitt, not Charles, was Harry's father based on the alleged physical similarity between Hewitt and Harry, but Hewitt and others have denied this. Harry was born two years before Hewitt and Diana began their affair. By 1987 cracks in the marriage had become visible and the couple's unhappiness and cold attitude towards one another were being reported by the press, who dubbed them "the Glums" because of their evident discomfort in each other's company. In 1989 Diana was at a birthday party for Parker Bowles's sister, Annabel Elliot, when she confronted Parker Bowles about her and Charles's extramarital affair. These affairs were later exposed in 1992 with the publication of Andrew Morton's book, Diana: Her True Story. The book, which also revealed Diana's allegedly suicidal unhappiness, caused a media storm. In 1991, James Colthurst conducted secret interviews with Diana in which she had talked about her marital issues and difficulties. These recordings were later used as a source for Morton's book. During her lifetime, both Diana and Morton denied her direct involvement in the writing process and maintained that family and friends were the book's main source, however, after her death Morton acknowledged Diana's role in writing the tell-all in the book's updated edition, Diana: Her True Story in Her Own Words. The Queen and Prince Philip hosted a meeting between Charles and Diana and unsuccessfully tried to effect a reconciliation. Philip wrote to Diana and expressed his disappointment at the extramarital affairs of both her and Charles; he asked her to examine their behaviour from the other's point of view. Diana reportedly found the letters difficult, but nevertheless appreciated that he was acting with good intent. It was alleged by some people, including Diana's close friend Simone Simmons, that Diana and Philip had a tense relationship; however, other observers said their letters provided no sign of friction between them. Philip later issued a statement, publicly denying the allegations of him insulting Diana. During 1992 and 1993, leaked tapes of telephone conversations reflected negatively on both Charles and Diana. Tape recordings of Diana and James Gilbey were made public in August 1992, and transcripts were published the same month. The article, "Squidgygate", was followed in November 1992 by the leaked "Camillagate" tapes, intimate exchanges between Charles and Parker Bowles, published in the tabloids. In December 1992, Prime Minister John Major announced the couple's "amicable separation" to the House of Commons. Between 1992 and 1993, Diana hired a voice coach, Peter Settelen, to help her develop her public speaking voice. In a videotape recorded by Settelen in 1992, Diana said that in 1984 through to 1986, she had been "deeply in love with someone who worked in this environment." It is thought she was referring to Barry Mannakee, who was transferred to the Diplomatic Protection Squad in 1986 after his managers had determined that his relationship with Diana had been inappropriate. Diana said in the tape that Mannakee had been "chucked out" from his role as her bodyguard following suspicion that the two were having an affair. Penny Junor suggested in her 1998 book that Diana was in a romantic relationship with Mannakee. Diana's friends dismissed the claim as absurd. In the subsequently released tapes, Diana said she had feelings for that "someone", saying "I was quite happy to give all this up [and] just to go off and live with him". She described him as "the greatest friend [she's] ever had", though she denied any sexual relationship with him. She also spoke bitterly of her husband saying that "[He] made me feel so inadequate in every possible way, that each time I came up for air he pushed me down again." Although she blamed Parker Bowles for her marital troubles, Diana began to believe her husband had been involved in other affairs. In October 1993 Diana wrote to her butler Paul Burrell, telling him that she believed her husband was now in love with his personal assistant Tiggy Legge-Bourke—who was also his sons' former nanny—and was planning to have her killed "to make the path clear for him to marry Tiggy". Legge-Bourke had been hired by Charles as a young companion for his sons while they were in his care, and Diana was resentful of Legge-Bourke and her relationship with the young princes. Charles sought public understanding via a televised interview with Jonathan Dimbleby on 29 June 1994. In the interview, he said he had rekindled his relationship with Parker Bowles in 1986 only after his marriage to Diana had "irretrievably broken down". In the same year, Diana's affair with Hewitt was exposed in detail in the book Princess in Love by Anna Pasternak, with Hewitt acting as the main source. Diana was evidently disturbed and outraged when the book was released, although Pasternak claimed Hewitt had acted with Diana's support to avoid having the affair covered in Andrew Morton's second book. In the same year, the News of the World claimed that Diana had had an affair with the married art dealer Oliver Hoare. According to Hoare's obituary, there was little doubt she had been in a relationship with him. However, Diana denied any romantic relationship with Hoare, whom she described as a friend. She was also linked by the press to the rugby union player Will Carling and private equity investor Theodore J. Forstmann, yet these claims were neither confirmed nor proven. The journalist Martin Bashir interviewed Diana for the BBC current affairs show Panorama. The interview was broadcast on 20 November 1995. Diana discussed her own and her husband's extramarital affairs. Referring to Charles's relationship with Parker Bowles, she said: "Well, there were three of us in this marriage, so it was a bit crowded." She also expressed doubt about her husband's suitability for kingship. The authors Tina Brown, Sally Bedell Smith, and Sarah Bradford support Diana's admission in the interview that she had suffered from depression, bulimia and had engaged numerous times in the act of self-harm; the show's transcript records Diana confirming many of her mental health problems. The combination of illnesses from which Diana herself said she suffered resulted in some of her biographers opining that she had borderline personality disorder. It was later revealed that Bashir had used forged bank statements to win Diana and her brother's trust to secure the interview, falsely indicating people close to her had been paid for spying. Lord Dyson conducted an independent inquiry into the issue and concluded that Bashir had "little difficulty in playing on [Diana's] fears and paranoia", a sentiment that was shared by Diana's son William. The interview proved to be the tipping point. On 20 December, Buckingham Palace announced that the Queen had sent letters to Charles and Diana, advising them to divorce. The Queen's move was backed by Prime Minister John Major and by senior privy counsellors, and, according to the BBC, was decided after two weeks of talks. Charles formally agreed to the divorce in a written statement soon after. In February 1996, Diana announced her agreement after negotiations with Charles and representatives of the Queen, irritating Buckingham Palace by issuing her own announcement of the divorce agreement and its terms. In July 1996, the couple agreed on the terms of their divorce. This followed shortly after Diana's accusation that Charles's personal assistant Tiggy Legge-Bourke had aborted his child, after which Legge-Bourke instructed her solicitor Peter Carter-Ruck to demand an apology. Diana's private secretary Patrick Jephson resigned shortly before the story broke, later writing that Diana had "exulted in accusing Legge-Bourke of having had an abortion". The rumours of Legge-Bourke's alleged abortion were apparently spread by Martin Bashir as a means to gain his Panorama interview with Diana. The decree nisi was granted on 15 July 1996 and the divorce was finalised on 28 August 1996. Diana was represented by Anthony Julius in the case. The couple shared custody of their children. She received a lump sum settlement of £17 million (equivalent to £34 million in 2021) as well as £400,000 per year. The couple signed a confidentiality agreement that prohibited them from discussing the details of the divorce or of their married life. Days before, letters patent were issued with general rules to regulate royal titles after divorce. Diana lost the style "Her Royal Highness" and instead was styled Diana, Princess of Wales. As the mother of the prince expected to one day ascend to the throne, she was still considered to be a member of the royal family and was accorded the same precedence she enjoyed during her marriage. The Queen reportedly wanted to let Diana continue to use the style of Royal Highness after her divorce, but Charles had insisted on removing it. Prince William was reported to have reassured his mother: "Don't worry, Mummy, I will give it back to you one day when I am king". Almost a year before, according to Tina Brown, Philip had warned Diana: "If you don't behave, my girl, we'll take your title away." She is said to have replied: "My title is a lot older than yours, Philip." After her divorce, Diana retained the double apartment on the north side of Kensington Palace that she had shared with Charles since the first year of their marriage; the apartment remained her home until her death the following year. She also moved her offices to Kensington Palace but was permitted "to use the state apartments at St James's Palace". In a book published in 2003, Paul Burrell claimed Diana's private letters had revealed that her brother, Lord Spencer, had refused to allow her to live at Althorp, despite her request. The allegations were proven to be untrue as Spencer received legal apologies from different newspapers, including The Times in 2021, which admitted that "having considered his sister's safety, and in line with police advice, the Earl offered the Princess of Wales a number of properties including Wormleighton Manor, the Spencer family's original ancestral home". However, he could not offer Garden House cottage on the Althorp estate to Diana as the home was intended for a member of staff. Diana was also given an allowance to run her private office, which was responsible for her charity work and royal duties, but from September 1996 onwards she was required to pay her bills and "any expenditure" incurred by her or on her behalf. Furthermore, she continued to have access to the jewellery that she had received during her marriage, and was allowed to use the air transport of the British royal family and government. Diana was also offered security by Metropolitan Police's Royalty Protection Group, which she benefitted from while travelling with her sons, but had refused it in the final years of her life, in an attempt to distance herself from the royal family. After her death, it was revealed that Diana had been in discussion with Major's successor, Tony Blair, about a special role that would provide a government platform for her campaigns and charities to make her capable of endorsing Britain's interests overseas. Diana retained close friendships with several celebrities, including Elton John, Liza Minnelli, George Michael, Michael Jackson, and Gianni Versace, whose funeral she attended in 1997. She dated the British-Pakistani heart surgeon Hasnat Khan, who was called "the love of her life" by many of her closest friends after her death, and she is said to have described him as "Mr. Wonderful". In May 1996, Diana visited Lahore upon invitation of Imran Khan, a relative of Hasnat Khan, and visited the latter's family in secret. Khan was intensely private and the relationship was conducted in secrecy, with Diana lying to members of the press who questioned her about it. Their relationship lasted almost two years with differing accounts of who ended it. She is said to have spoken of her distress when he ended their relationship. However, according to Khan's testimony at the inquest into her death, it was Diana who ended their relationship in the summer of 1997. Burrell also said the relationship was ended by Diana in July 1997. Burrell also claimed that Diana's mother, Frances Shand Kydd, disapproved of her daughter's relationship with a Muslim man. By the time of Diana's death in 1997, she had not spoken to her mother in four months. By contrast, her relationship with her estranged stepmother had reportedly improved. Within a month, Diana began a relationship with Dodi Fayed, the son of her summer host, Mohamed Al-Fayed. That summer, Diana had considered taking her sons on a holiday to the Hamptons on Long Island, New York, but security officials had prevented it. After deciding against a trip to Thailand, she accepted Fayed's invitation to join his family in the south of France, where his compound and large security detail would not cause concern to the Royal Protection squad. Mohamed Al-Fayed bought the Jonikal, a 60-metre multimillion-pound yacht on which to entertain Diana and her sons. Tina Brown later claimed that Diana's romance with Fayed and her four-month relationship with Gulu Lalvani were a ploy "to inflame the true object of her affections, Hasnat Khan". In the years after her death, Burrell, journalist Richard Kay, and voice coach Stewart Pierce have claimed that Diana was also thinking about buying a property in the United States. Following her engagement to Charles, Diana made her first official public appearance in March 1981 in a charity event at Goldsmiths' Hall. She attended the Trooping the Colour for the first time in June 1981, making her appearance on the balcony of Buckingham Palace afterwards. In October 1981, Charles and Diana visited Wales. She attended the State Opening of Parliament for the first time on 4 November 1981. Her first solo engagement was a visit to Regent Street on 18 November 1981 to switch on the Christmas lights. Diana made her inaugural overseas tour in September 1982, to attend the funeral of Princess Grace of Monaco. Also in 1982, Queen Beatrix of the Netherlands created Diana a Grand Cross of the Order of the Crown. In 1983, Diana accompanied Charles and William on a tour of Australia and New Zealand. The tour was a success and the couple drew immense crowds, though the press focused more on Diana rather than Charles, coining the term 'Dianamania' as a reference to people's obsession with her. While sitting in a car with Charles near the Sydney Opera House, Diana burst into tears for a few minutes, which their office stated was due to jet lag and the heat. In New Zealand, the couple met with representatives of the Māori people. Their visit to Canada in June and July 1983 included a trip to Edmonton to open the 1983 Summer Universiade and a stop in Newfoundland to commemorate the 400th anniversary of that island's acquisition by the Crown. In 1983, she was targeted by the Scottish National Liberation Army who tried to deliver a letter bomb to her. In February 1984, Diana was the patron of London City Ballet when she travelled to Norway on her own to attend a performance organised by the company. In April 1985, Charles and Diana visited Italy, and were later joined by their sons. They met with President Alessandro Pertini. Their visit to the Holy See included a private audience with Pope John Paul II. In autumn 1985, they returned to Australia, and their tour was well received by the public and the media, who referred to Diana as "Di-amond Princess" and the "Jewel in the Crown". In November 1985, the couple visited the United States, meeting Ronald and Nancy Reagan at the White House. Diana had a busy year in 1986 as she and Charles toured Japan, Spain, and Canada. In Canada, they visited Expo 86, where Diana fainted in the California Pavilion. In November 1986, she went on a six-day tour to Oman, Qatar, Bahrain and Saudi Arabia, where she met King Fahd of Saudi Arabia and Sultan Qaboos of Oman. In 1988, Charles and Diana visited Thailand and toured Australia for the bicentenary celebrations. In February 1989, she spent a few days in New York as a solo visit, mainly to promote the works of the Welsh National Opera, of which she was a patron. During a tour of Harlem Hospital Center, she spontaneously hugged a seven-year-old child with AIDS. In March 1989, she had her second trip to the Arab states of the Persian Gulf, in which she visited Kuwait and the UAE. In March 1990, Diana and Charles toured Nigeria and Cameroon. The president of Cameroon hosted an official dinner to welcome them in Yaoundé. Highlights of the tour included visits by Diana to hospitals and projects focusing on women's development. In May 1990, they visited Hungary for four days. It was the first visit by members of the royal family to "a former Warsaw Pact country". They attended a dinner hosted by President Árpád Göncz and viewed a fashion display at the Museum of Applied Arts in Budapest. Peto Institute was among the places visited by Diana, and she presented its director with an honorary OBE. In November 1990, she and Charles went to Japan to attend the enthronement of Emperor Akihito. In her desire to play an encouraging role during the Gulf War, Diana visited Germany in December 1990 to meet with the families of soldiers. She subsequently travelled to Germany in January 1991 to visit RAF Bruggen, and later wrote an encouraging letter which was published in Soldier, Navy News and RAF News. In 1991, Charles and Diana visited Queen's University at Kingston, Ontario, where they presented the university with a replica of their royal charter. In September 1991, Diana visited Pakistan on a solo trip, and went to Brazil with Charles. During the Brazilian tour, Diana paid visits to organisations that battled homelessness among street children. Her final trips with Charles were to India and South Korea in 1992. She visited Mother Teresa's hospice in Kolkata, India. The two women met later in the same month in Rome and developed a personal relationship. It was also during the Indian tour that pictures of Diana alone in front of the Taj Mahal made headlines. In May 1992, she went on a solo tour of Egypt, visiting the Giza pyramid complex and attending a meeting with Egyptian president Hosni Mubarak. In November 1992, she went on an official solo trip to France and had an audience with President François Mitterrand. In March 1993, she went on her first solo trip after her separation from Charles, visiting a leprosy hospital in Nepal where she met and came into contact with some patients, marking the first time they had ever been touched by a dignitary who had come to visit. In December 1993, she announced that she would withdraw from public life, but in November 1994 she said she wished to "make a partial return". In her capacity as the vice-president of British Red Cross, she was interested in playing an important role for its 125th anniversary celebrations. Later, the Queen formally invited her to attend the anniversary celebrations of D-Day. In February 1995, Diana visited Japan. She paid a formal visit to Emperor Akihito and Empress Michiko, and visited the National Children's Hospital in Tokyo. In June 1995, Diana went to the Venice Biennale art festival, and also visited Moscow where she received the International Leonardo Prize. In November 1995, Diana undertook a four-day trip to Argentina to attend a charity event. She visited many other countries, including Belgium, Switzerland, and Zimbabwe, alongside numerous others. During her separation from Charles, which lasted for almost four years, Diana participated in major national occasions as a senior member of the royal family, notably including "the commemorations of the 50th anniversaries of Victory in Europe Day and Victory over Japan Day" in 1995. In 1983, Diana confided to the premier of Newfoundland, Brian Peckford, "I am finding it very difficult to cope with the pressures of being Princess of Wales, but I am learning to cope with it". She was expected to make regular public appearances at hospitals, schools, and other facilities, in the 20th-century model of royal patronage. From the mid-1980s, she became increasingly associated with numerous charities. She carried out 191 official engagements in 1988 and 397 in 1991. Diana developed an intense interest in serious illnesses and health-related matters outside the purview of traditional royal involvement, including AIDS and leprosy. In recognition of her effect as a philanthropist, Stephen Lee, director of the UK Institute of Charity Fundraising Managers, said "Her overall effect on charity is probably more significant than any other person's in the 20th century." Diana was the patroness of charities and organisations who worked with the homeless, youth, drug addicts, and the elderly. From 1989, she was president of Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children. She was patron of the Natural History Museum and president of the Royal Academy of Music and the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art. From 1984 to 1996, she was president of Barnardo's, a charity founded by Dr. Thomas John Barnardo in 1866 to care for vulnerable children and young people. In 1988, she became patron of the British Red Cross and supported its organisations in other countries such as Australia and Canada. She made several lengthy visits each week to Royal Brompton Hospital, where she worked to comfort seriously ill or dying patients. From 1991 to 1996, she was a patron of Headway, a brain injury association. In 1992, she became the first patron of Chester Childbirth Appeal, a charity she had supported since 1984. The charity, which is named after one of Diana's royal titles, could raise over £1 million with her help. In 1994, she helped her friend Julia Samuel launch the charity Child Bereavement UK which supports children "of military families, those of suicide victims, [and] terminally-ill parents", and became its patron. Her son William later became the charity's royal patron. In 1987, Diana was awarded the Honorary Freedom of the City of London, the highest honour which is in the power of the City of London to bestow on someone. In June 1995, she travelled to Moscow. She paid a visit to a children's hospital she had previously supported when she provided them with medical equipment. In December 1995, Diana received the United Cerebral Palsy Humanitarian of the Year Award in New York City for her philanthropic efforts. In October 1996, for her works on the elderly, she was awarded a gold medal at a health care conference organised by the Pio Manzù Centre in Rimini, Italy. The day after her divorce, she announced her resignation from over 100 charities and retained patronages of only six: Centrepoint, English National Ballet, Great Ormond Street Hospital, The Leprosy Mission, National AIDS Trust, and the Royal Marsden Hospital. She continued her work with the British Red Cross Anti-Personnel Land Mines Campaign, but was no longer listed as patron. In May 1997, Diana opened the Richard Attenborough Centre for Disability and the Arts in Leicester, after being asked by her friend Richard Attenborough. In June 1997 and at the suggestion of her son William, some of her dresses and suits were sold at Christie's auction houses in London and New York, and the proceeds that were earned from these events were donated to charities. Her final official engagement was a visit to Northwick Park Hospital, London, on 21 July 1997. Her 36th and final birthday celebration was held at Tate Gallery, which was also a commemorative event for the gallery's 100th anniversary. She was scheduled to attend a fundraiser at the Osteopathic Centre for Children on 4 September 1997, upon her return from Paris. Diana began her work with AIDS patients in the 1980s. Contrary to the prevailing stigmatization of AIDS patients, she was not averse to making physical contact with patients, and was the first British royal to do so. In 1987, she held hands with an AIDS patient in one of her early efforts to destigmatise the condition. Diana noted: "HIV does not make people dangerous to know. You can shake their hands and give them a hug. Heaven knows they need it. What's more, you can share their homes, their workplaces, and their playgrounds and toys". To Diana's disappointment, the Queen did not support this type of charity work, suggesting she get involved in "something more pleasant". In July 1989, she opened Landmark Aids Centre in South London. In October 1990, Diana opened Grandma's House, a home for young AIDS patients in Washington, DC. She was also a patron of the National AIDS Trust and regularly visited London Lighthouse, which provided residential care for HIV patients (it has since merged with the Terrence Higgins Trust). In 1991, she hugged one patient during a visit to the AIDS ward of the Middlesex Hospital, which she had opened in 1987 as the first hospital unit dedicated to this cause in the UK. As the patron of Turning Point, a health and social care organisation, Diana visited its project in London for people with HIV/AIDS in 1992. She later established and led fundraising campaigns for AIDS research. In March 1997, Diana visited South Africa, where she met with Nelson Mandela. On 2 November 2002, Mandela announced that the Nelson Mandela Children's Fund would be teaming up with the Diana, Princess of Wales Memorial Fund to help people with AIDS. They had planned the combination of the two charities a few months before her death. Mandela later praised Diana for her efforts surrounding the issue of HIV/AIDS: "When she stroked the limbs of someone with leprosy or sat on the bed of a man with HIV/AIDS and held his hand, she transformed public attitudes and improved the life chances of such people". Diana had used her celebrity status to "fight stigma attached to people living with HIV/AIDS", Mandela said. Diana was patron of the HALO Trust, an organisation that removes debris—particularly landmines—left behind by war. In January 1997, pictures of Diana touring an Angolan minefield in a ballistic helmet and flak jacket were seen worldwide. During her campaign, she was accused of meddling in politics and called a "loose cannon" by Lord Howe, an official in the British Ministry of Defence. Despite the criticism, HALO states that Diana's efforts resulted in raising international awareness about landmines and the subsequent sufferings caused by them. In June 1997, she gave a speech at a landmines conference held at the Royal Geographical Society, and went to Washington, DC to support the American Red Cross's anti-landmine initiative. From 7 to 10 August 1997, just days before her death, she visited Bosnia and Herzegovina with Jerry White and Ken Rutherford of the Landmine Survivors Network. Diana's work on the landmines issue has been described as influential in the signing of the Ottawa Treaty, which created an international ban on the use of anti-personnel landmines. Introducing the Second Reading of the Landmines Bill 1998 to the British House of Commons, the Foreign Secretary, Robin Cook, paid tribute to Diana's work on landmines: All Honourable Members will be aware from their postbags of the immense contribution made by Diana, Princess of Wales to bringing home to many of our constituents the human costs of landmines. The best way in which to record our appreciation of her work, and the work of NGOs that have campaigned against landmines, is to pass the Bill, and to pave the way towards a global ban on landmines. A few months after Diana's death in 1997, the International Campaign to Ban Landmines won the Nobel Peace Prize. For her first solo official trip, Diana visited The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, a cancer treatment hospital in London. She later chose this charity to be among the organisations that benefited from the auction of her clothes in New York. The trust's communications manager said she did "much to remove the stigma and taboo associated with diseases such as cancer, AIDS, HIV and leprosy". Diana became president of the hospital on 27 June 1989. The Wolfson Children's Cancer Unit was opened by Diana on 25 February 1993. In February 1996, Diana, who had been informed about a newly opened cancer hospital built by Imran Khan, travelled to Pakistan to visit its children's cancer wards and attend a fundraising dinner in aid of the charity in Lahore. She later visited the hospital again in May 1997. In June 1996, she travelled to Chicago in her capacity as president of the Royal Marsden Hospital in order to attend a fundraising event at the Field Museum of Natural History and raised more than £1 million for cancer research. She additionally visited patients at the Cook County Hospital and delivered remarks at a conference on breast cancer at the Northwestern University Chicago campus after meeting a group of breast cancer researchers. In September 1996, after being asked by Katharine Graham, Diana went to Washington and appeared at a White House breakfast in respect of the Nina Hyde Center for Breast Cancer Research. She also attended an annual fund-raiser for breast cancer research organised by The Washington Post at the same centre. In 1988, Diana opened Children with Leukaemia (later renamed Children with Cancer UK) in memory of two young cancer victims. In November 1987, a few days after the death of Jean O'Gorman from cancer, Diana met her family. The deaths of Jean and her brother affected her and she assisted their family to establish the charity. It was opened by her on 12 January 1988 at Mill Hill Secondary School, and she supported it until her death in 1997. In November 1989, Diana visited a leprosy hospital in Indonesia. Following her visit, she became patron of the Leprosy Mission, an organisation dedicated to providing medicine, treatment, and other support services to those who are afflicted with the disease. She remained the patron of this charity and visited several of its hospitals around the world, especially in India, Nepal, Zimbabwe and Nigeria until her death in 1997. She touched those affected by the disease when many people believed it could be contracted through casual contact. "It has always been my concern to touch people with leprosy, trying to show in a simple action that they are not reviled, nor are we repulsed", she commented. The Diana Princess of Wales Health Education and Media Centre in Noida, India, was opened in her honour in November 1999, funded by the Diana Princess of Wales Memorial Fund to give social support to the people affected by leprosy and disability. Diana was a long-standing and active supporter of Centrepoint, a charity which provides accommodation and support to homeless people, and became patron in 1992. She supported organisations that battle poverty and homelessness, including the Passage. Diana was a supporter of young homeless people and spoke out on behalf of them by saying that "they deserve a decent start in life". "We, as a part of society, must ensure that young people—who are our future—are given the chance they deserve", she said. Diana used to take young William and Harry for private visits to Centrepoint services and homeless shelters. "The young people at Centrepoint were always really touched by her visits and by her genuine feelings for them", said one of the charity's staff members. William later became the patron of Centrepoint. Diana was a staunch and longtime supporter of charities and organisations that focused on social and mental issues, including Relate and Turning Point. Relate was relaunched in 1987 as a renewed version to its predecessor, the National Marriage Guidance Council. Diana became its patron in 1989. Turning Point, a health and social care organisation, was founded in 1964 to help and support those affected by drug and alcohol misuse and mental health problems. She became the charity's patron in 1987 and visited the charity on a regular basis, meeting the sufferers at its centres or institutions including Rampton and Broadmoor. In 1990 during a speech for Turning Point she said, "It takes professionalism to convince a doubting public that it should accept back into its midst many of those diagnosed as psychotics, neurotics and other sufferers who Victorian communities decided should be kept out of sight in the safety of mental institutions". Despite the protocol problems of travelling to a Muslim country, she made a trip to Pakistan in 1991 in order to visit a rehabilitation centre in Lahore as a sign of "her commitment to working against drug abuse". In November 1980, the Sunday Mirror ran a story claiming that Charles had used the Royal Train twice for secret love rendezvous with Diana, prompting the palace to issue a statement, calling the story "a total fabrication" and demanding an apology. The newspaper editors, however, insisted that the woman boarding the train was Diana and declined to apologise. In February 1982, pictures of a pregnant Diana in bikini while holidaying were published in the media. The Queen subsequently released a statement and called it "the blackest day in the history of British journalism." In 1993, Mirror Group Newspapers (MGN) published photographs of Diana that were taken by gym owner Bryce Taylor. The photos showed her exercising in the gym LA Fitness wearing "a leotard and cycling shorts". Diana's lawyers immediately filed a criminal complaint that sought "a permanent ban on the sale and publication of the photographs" around the world. However, some newspapers outside the UK published the pictures. The courts granted an injunction against Taylor and MGN that prohibited "further publication of the pictures". MGN later issued an apology after facing much criticism from the public and gave Diana £1 million as a payment for her legal costs, while donating £200,000 to her charities. LA Fitness issued its own apology in June 1994, which was followed by Taylor apologising in February 1995 and giving up the £300,000 he had made from the sale of pictures in an out-of-court settlement about a week before the case was set to start. It was alleged that a member of the royal family had helped him financially to settle out of court. In 1994, pictures of Diana sunbathing topless at a Costa del Sol hotel were put up for sale by a Spanish photography agency for a price of £1 million. In 1996, a set of pictures of a topless Diana while sunbathing appeared in the Mirror, which resulted in "a furor about invasion of privacy". In the same year, she was the subject of a hoax call by Victor Lewis-Smith, who pretended to be Stephen Hawking, though the full recorded conversation was never released. Also in 1996, Stuart Higgins of The Sun wrote a front-page story about an intimate video purporting to feature Diana with James Hewitt. The video turned out to be a hoax, forcing Higgins to issue an apology. On 31 August 1997, Diana died in a car crash in the Pont de l'Alma tunnel in Paris while her driver was fleeing the paparazzi. The crash also resulted in the deaths of her companion Dodi Fayed and their driver, Henri Paul, who was also the acting security manager of Hôtel Ritz Paris. Trevor Rees-Jones, who was employed as a bodyguard by Dodi's father, survived the crash, suffering a serious head injury. The televised funeral, on 6 September, was watched by a British television audience that peaked at 32.1 million, which was one of the United Kingdom's highest viewing figures ever. Millions more watched the event around the world. The sudden and unexpected death of an extraordinarily popular royal figure brought statements from senior figures worldwide and many tributes by members of the public. People left flowers, candles, cards, and personal messages outside Kensington Palace for many months. Her coffin, draped with the royal flag, was brought to London from Paris by Charles and Diana's two sisters on 31 August 1997. The coffin was taken to a private mortuary and then placed in the Chapel Royal, St James's Palace. On 5 September, Queen Elizabeth II paid tribute to Diana in a live television broadcast. The funeral took place in Westminster Abbey on 6 September. Her sons walked in the funeral procession behind her coffin, along with the Prince of Wales, the Duke of Edinburgh, Diana's brother Lord Spencer, and representatives of some of her charities. Lord Spencer said of his sister, "She proved in the last year that she needed no royal title to continue to generate her particular brand of magic." Re-written in tribute to Diana, "Candle in the Wind 1997" was performed by Elton John at the funeral service (the only occasion the song has been performed live). Released as a single in 1997, the global proceeds from the song have gone to Diana's charities. The burial took place privately later the same day. Diana's former husband, sons, mother, siblings, a close friend, and a clergyman were present. Diana's body was clothed in a black long-sleeved dress designed by Catherine Walker, which she had chosen some weeks before. A set of rosary beads that she had received from Mother Teresa was placed in her hands. Diana's grave is on an island within the grounds of Althorp Park, the Spencer family home for centuries. The burial party was provided by the 2nd Battalion The Princess of Wales's Royal Regiment, who carried Diana's coffin across to the island and laid her to rest. Diana was the Regiment's Colonel-in-Chief from 1992 to 1996. The original plan was for Diana to be buried in the Spencer family vault at the local church in nearby Great Brington, but Lord Spencer said he was concerned about public safety and security and the onslaught of visitors that might overwhelm Great Brington. He decided Diana would be buried where her grave could be easily cared for and visited in privacy by William, Harry, and other relatives. The initial French judicial investigation concluded that the crash was caused by Paul's intoxication, reckless driving, speeding, and effects of prescription drugs. In February 1998, Mohamed Al-Fayed, father of Dodi Fayed, publicly said the crash, which killed his son, had been planned, and accused MI6 and the Duke of Edinburgh. An inquest, which started in London in 2004 and continued in 2007 and 2008, attributed the crash to grossly negligent driving by Paul and to the pursuing paparazzi, who forced Paul to speed into the tunnel. On 7 April 2008, the jury returned a verdict of "unlawful killing". On the day after the final verdict of the inquest, Al-Fayed announced that he would end his 10-year campaign to establish that the tragedy was murder; he said he did so for the sake of Diana's children. Following her death, Diana left a £21 million estate, "netting £17 million after estate taxes", which were left in the hands of trustees, her mother, and her sister Sarah. The will was signed in June 1993, but Diana had it modified in February 1996 to remove the name of her personal secretary from the list of trustees and have Sarah replace him. After applying personal and inheritance taxes, a net estate of £12.9 million was left to be distributed among the beneficiaries. Her two sons subsequently inherited the majority of her estate. Each of them was left with £6.5 million which was invested and gathered substantial interest, and an estimated £10 million was given to each son upon turning 30 years old in 2012 and 2014 respectively. Many of Diana's possessions were initially left in the care of her brother, who put them on show in Althorp twice a year until they were returned to Diana's sons. They were also put on display in American museums and as of 2011[update] raised two million dollars for charities. Among the objects were her dresses and suits along with numerous family paintings and jewels. Diana's engagement ring and her yellow gold watch were given to William and Harry, respectively. William later passed the ring to his wife, Catherine Middleton. Her wedding dress was also given to her sons. In addition to her will, Diana had also written a letter of wishes in which she had asked for three-quarters of her personal property to be given to her sons, and dividing the remaining quarter (aside from the jewellery) among her 17 godchildren. Despite Diana's wishes, the executors (her mother and sister) "petitioned the probate court for a "variance" of the will", and the letter of wishes was ignored "because it did not contain certain language required by British law". Eventually, one item from Diana's estate was given to each of her godchildren, while they would have received £100,000 each, had a quarter of her estate been divided between them. The variance also prevented the estate from being distributed between her sons at the age of 25 but postponed it until they were 30. Diana also left her butler Paul Burrell around £50,000 in cash. In 1999, after the submission of a Freedom of Information request by the Internet news service apbonline.com, it was revealed that Diana had been placed under surveillance by the National Security Agency until her death, and the organisation kept a top secret file on her containing more than 1,000 pages. The contents of Diana's NSA file cannot be disclosed because of national security concerns. The NSA officials insisted Diana was not a "target of [their] massive, worldwide electronic eavesdropping infrastructure." Despite multiple inquiries for the files to be declassified—with one of the notable ones being filed by Mohamed Al-Fayed—the NSA has refused to release the documents. In 2008, Ken Wharfe, a former bodyguard of Diana, claimed that her scandalous conversations with James Gilbey (commonly referred to as the Squidgygate) were in fact recorded by the GCHQ, which intentionally released them on a "loop". People close to Diana believed the action was intended to defame her. Wharfe said Diana herself believed that members of the royal family were all being monitored, though he also stated that the main reason for it could be the potential threats of the IRA. On the first anniversary of Diana's death, people left flowers and bouquets outside the gates of Kensington Palace and a memorial service was held at Westminster Abbey. The royal family and Tony Blair and his family went to Crathie Kirk for private prayers, while Diana's family held a private memorial service at Althorp. All flags at Buckingham Palace and other royal residences were flown at half-mast on the Queen's orders. The Union Jack was first lowered to half-mast on the day of Diana's funeral and has set a precedent, as based on the previous protocol no flag could ever fly at half-mast over the palace "even on the death of a monarch". Since 1997, however, the Union Flag (but not the Royal Standard) has flown at half-mast upon the deaths of members of the royal family, and other times of national mourning. The Concert for Diana at Wembley Stadium was held on 1 July 2007. The event, organised by Princes William and Harry, celebrated the 46th anniversary of their mother's birth and occurred a few weeks before the 10th anniversary of her death on 31 August. The proceeds from this event were donated to Diana's charities. On 31 August 2007, a service of thanksgiving for Diana took place in the Guards' Chapel. Among the 500 guests were members of the royal family and their relatives, members of the Spencer family, her godparents and godchildren, members of her wedding party, her close friends and aides, representatives from many of her charities, Gordon Brown, Tony Blair and John Major, and friends from the entertainment world such as David Frost, Elton John, and Cliff Richard. In January 2017, a series of letters that Diana and other members of the royal family had written to a Buckingham Palace steward were sold as a part of a collection. The six letters written by Diana raised £15,100. Another collection of 40 letters written by Diana between 1990 and 1997 were sold for £67,900 at an auction in 2021. In 2023, two of Diana's friends put 32 highly personal letters and cards written by her while she was going through her divorce up for auction, announcing that proceeds of the sale would be donated to charities associated with them or Diana. "Diana: Her Fashion Story", an exhibition of gowns and suits worn by Diana, was announced to be opened at Kensington Palace in February 2017 as a tribute to mark her 20th death anniversary, with her favourite dresses created by numerous fashion designers being displayed until the next year. Other tributes planned for the anniversary included exhibitions at Althorp hosted by Diana's brother, Earl Spencer, a series of commemorating events organised by the Diana Award, as well as restyling Kensington Gardens and creating a new section called "The White Garden". Diana remains one of the most popular members of the royal family throughout history, and she continues to influence the younger generations of royals. She was a major presence on the world stage from her engagement to Charles until her death, and was often described as the "world's most photographed woman". She was noted for her compassion, style, charisma, and high-profile charity work, as well as her ill-fated marriage. Biographer Sarah Bradford commented, "The only cure for her suffering would have been the love of the Prince of Wales ... the way in which he consistently denigrated her reduced her to despair." Despite all the marital issues and scandals, Diana continued to enjoy a high level of popularity in the polls while her husband was suffering from low levels of public approval. Diana's former private secretary Patrick Jephson described her as an organised and hardworking person, and pointed out Charles was not able to "reconcile with his wife's extraordinary popularity", a viewpoint supported by the biographer Tina Brown. He also said she was a tough boss who was "equally quick to appreciate hard work" but could also be defiant "if she felt she had been the victim of injustice". Diana's mother also defined her as a "loving" figure who could occasionally be "tempestuous". She was often described as a devoted mother to her children, who are believed to be influenced by her personality and way of life. In the early years, Diana was often noted for her shy nature. Journalist Michael White perceived her as being "smart", "shrewd and funny". Those who communicated with her closely described her as a person who was led by "her heart". In an article for The Guardian, Monica Ali believed that, despite being inexperienced and uneducated, Diana could handle the expectations of the royal family and overcome the difficulties and sufferings of her marital life. Ali also believed that she "had a lasting influence on the public discourse, particularly in matters of mental health" by discussing her eating disorder publicly. According to Tina Brown, in her early years Diana possessed a "passive power", a quality that in her opinion she shared with the Queen Mother and a trait that would enable her to instinctively use her appeal to achieve her goals. Diana was known for her encounters with sick and dying patients, and the poor and unwanted whom she used to comfort, an action that earned her more popularity. Known for her easygoing attitude, she reportedly hated formality in her inner circle, asking "people not to jump up every time she enters the room". Diana is often credited with widening the range of charity works carried out by the royal family in a more modern style. Eugene Robinson of The Washington Post wrote in an article that "Diana imbued her role as royal princess with vitality, activism and, above all, glamour." Alicia Carroll of The New York Times described Diana as "a breath of fresh air" who was the main reason the royal family was known in the United States. In Anthony Holden's opinion, Diana was "visibly reborn" after her separation from Charles, a point in her life that was described by Holden as her "moment of triumph", which put her on an independent path to success. Diana's sudden death brought an unprecedented spasm of grief and mourning, and subsequently a crisis arose in the Royal Household. Andrew Marr said that by her death she "revived the culture of public sentiment". Her son William has stated that the outpouring of public grief after her death "changed the British psyche, for the better", while Alastair Campbell noted that it assisted in diminishing "the stiff upper lip approach". In 1997 Diana was one of the runners-up for Time magazine's Person of the Year, and in 2020 the magazine included Diana's name on its list of 100 Women of the Year. She was chosen as the Woman of the Year 1987 for her efforts in destigmatising the conditions surrounding HIV/AIDS patients. In 2002 Diana ranked third on the BBC's poll of the 100 Greatest Britons, above the Queen and other British monarchs. Despite being regarded as an iconic figure and a popular member of the royal family, Diana was subject to criticism during her life. She was criticised by philosophy professor Anthony O'Hear who in his notes argued that she was unable to fulfill her duties, her reckless behaviour was damaging the monarchy, and she was "self-indulgent" in her philanthropic efforts. Following his remarks, charity organisations that were supported by Diana defended her, and Peter Luff called O'Hear's comments "distasteful and inappropriate". Further criticism surfaced as she was accused of using her public profile to benefit herself, which in return "demeaned her royal office". Diana's unique type of charity work, which sometimes included physical contact with people affected by serious diseases, occasionally had a negative reaction in the media. Diana's relationship with the press and the paparazzi has been described as "ambivalent". On different occasions she would complain about the way she was being treated by the media, mentioning that their constant presence in her proximity had made life impossible for her, whereas at other times she would seek their attention and hand information to reporters herself. Writing for The Guardian, Peter Conrad suggested that it was Diana who let the journalists and paparazzi into her life as she knew they were the source of her power. This view was supported by Christopher Hitchens, who believed that "in pursuit of a personal solution to an unhappy private life, she became an assiduous leaker to the press". Tina Brown argued that Diana was in no way "a vulnerable victim of media manipulation", and she found it "offensive to present the canny, resourceful Diana as a woman of no agency". Former News of the World royal editor Clive Goodman, who later hacked the phones of Diana's sons on several occasions, stated in a court in 2014 that in 1992 Diana sent a confidential directory which contained numbers of senior members of the royal household to their office to get back at Prince Charles. Nevertheless, Diana also used the media's interest in her to shine light on her charitable efforts and patronages. Sally Bedell Smith characterised Diana as unpredictable, egocentric, and possessive. Smith also argued that in her desire to do charity works, Diana was "motivated by personal considerations, rather than by an ambitious urge to take on a societal problem". Eugene Robinson, however, said that "[Diana] was serious about the causes she espoused". According to Sarah Bradford, Diana looked down on the House of Windsor, whom she reportedly viewed "as jumped-up foreign princelings" and called them "the Germans". Tony Blair characterised Diana as a manipulative person and "extraordinarily captivating". In an article written for The Independent in 1998, journalist Yvonne Roberts observed the sudden change in people's opinion of Diana after her death from critical to complimentary, a viewpoint supported by Theodore Dalrymple, who also noticed the "sudden shift". Roberts also added that Diana was neither "a saint" nor "a revolutionary" figure, but "may have encouraged some people" to tackle issues such as landmines, AIDS and leprosy. While analysing the impact of Diana's death and her popularity from a gendered point of view, the British historian Ludmilla Jordanova said "no human being can survive the complex forces that impact upon charismatic women." Jordanova also observed that it is "Better to remember her by trying to decipher how emotions overshadow analysis and why women are the safeguards of humanitarian feelings." The author Anne Applebaum believed that Diana had not had any impact on public opinions posthumously; an idea supported by Jonathan Freedland of The Guardian who believed that Diana's memory and influence started to fade away in the years after her death, while Peter Conrad, another Guardian contributor, argued that even in "a decade after her death, she is still not silent", and Allan Massie of The Telegraph believed that Diana's sentiments "continue to shape our society". Writing for The Guardian, Monica Ali described Diana as "fascinating and flawed. Her legacy might be mixed, but it's not insubstantial. Her life was brief, but she left her mark". Diana was a fashion icon whose style was emulated by women around the world. In 2012, Time included Diana on its All-Time 100 Fashion Icons list. Iain Hollingshead of The Telegraph wrote: "[Diana] had an ability to sell clothes just by looking at them." An early example of the effect occurred during her courtship with Charles in 1980 when sales of Hunter Wellington boots skyrocketed after she was pictured wearing a pair on the Balmoral estate. According to designers and people who worked with Diana, she used fashion and style to endorse her charitable causes, express herself and communicate. Diana remains a prominent figure for her fashion style, impacting recent cultural and style trends. The princess's fashion combined classically royal expectations with contemporary fashion trends in Britain. While on diplomatic trips, her clothes and attire were chosen to match the destination countries' costumes, and while off-duty she used to wear loose jackets and jumpers. "She was always very thoughtful about how her clothes would be interpreted, it was something that really mattered to her", according to Anna Harvey, a former British Vogue editor and Diana's fashion mentor. Her fashion sense originally incorporated decorous and romantic elements, with pastel shades and lush gowns. Elements of her fashion rapidly became trends. She forwent certain traditions, such as wearing gloves during engagements, and sought to create a wardrobe that helped her to connect with the public. According to Donatella Versace who worked closely with Diana alongside her brother, Diana's interest and sense of curiosity about fashion grew significantly after her marital separation. Her style subsequently grew bolder and more businesslike, featuring structured skirt suits, sculptural gowns, and neutral tones designed to reflect attention toward her charity work. Catherine Walker was among Diana's favourite designers with whom she worked to create her "royal uniform". Among her favoured designers were Versace, Armani, Chanel, Dior, Gucci and Clarks. Her famous outfits include the "Black Sheep Sweater", the "Revenge dress", which she wore after Charles's admission of adultery, and the "Travolta dress". Copies of Diana's British Vogue-featured pink chiffon blouse by David and Elizabeth Emanuel, which appeared in the magazine on her engagement announcement day, sold in the millions. She appeared on three British Vogue covers during her lifetime and was featured on its October 1997 issue posthumously. Diana did her own makeup for events, and was accompanied by a hairstylist for public appearances. In the 1990s, she was frequently photographed clutching distinctive handbags manufactured by Gucci and Dior, which became known as the Gucci Diana and Lady Dior. Following the opening of an exhibition of Diana's clothes and dresses at Kensington Palace in 2017, Catherine Bennett of The Guardian said such exhibitions are among the suitable ways to commemorate public figures whose fashion styles were noted due to their achievements. The exhibition suggests to detractors who, like many other princesses, "looking lovely in different clothes was pretty much her life's work" which also brings interest in her clothing. Versace also pointed out that "[she doesn't] think that anyone, before or after her, has done for fashion what Diana did". One of Diana's favourite milliners, John Boyd, said "Diana was our best ambassador for hats, and the entire millinery industry owes her a debt." Boyd's pink tricorn hat Diana wore for her honeymoon was later copied by milliners across the world and credited with rebooting an industry in decline for decades. Permanent memorials to Diana include the Diana, Princess of Wales Memorial Fountain in Hyde Park, London; the Diana, Princess of Wales Memorial Playground in Kensington Gardens; the Diana, Princess of Wales Memorial Walk, a circular path between Kensington Gardens, Green Park, Hyde Park, and St. James's Park; the Diana Memorial Award, established in 1999 and later relaunched in 2007 by Gordon Brown; the Statue of Diana, Princess of Wales, in the Sunken Garden of Kensington Palace; and the Princess Diana Memorial in the garden of Schloss Cobenzl in Vienna, making it the first memorial dedicated to Diana in a German-speaking country. The Flame of Liberty was erected in 1989 on the Place de l'Alma in Paris above the entrance to the tunnel in which the fatal crash later occurred. It became an unofficial memorial to Diana. The Place de l'Alma was renamed Place Diana princesse de Galles in 2019. Following her death, several countries issued postage stamps commemorating Diana, including Armenia, Azerbaijan, Somalia, and Congo. A bronze plaque was unveiled by Earl Spencer at Northampton Guildhall in 2002 as a memorial to his sister. There were two memorials inside Harrods department store, commissioned by Dodi Fayed's father, who owned the store from 1985 to 2010. The first memorial was a pyramid-shaped display containing photos of the princess and al-Fayed's son, a wine glass said to be from their last dinner, and a ring purchased by Dodi the day prior to the crash. The second, Innocent Victims, unveiled in 2005, was a bronze statue of Fayed dancing with Diana on a beach beneath the wings of an albatross. In January 2018, it was announced that the statue would be returned to the al-Fayed family. Diana's granddaughters, Charlotte Elizabeth Diana (born 2015) and Lilibet Diana (born 2021), as well as her niece, Charlotte Diana Spencer (born 2012), are named after her. Before and after her death, Diana has been the subject of films and television series and depicted in contemporary art. The first biopics about Diana and Charles were Charles & Diana: A Royal Love Story and The Royal Romance of Charles and Diana that were broadcast on American TV channels on 17 and 20 September 1981, respectively. In December 1992, ABC aired Charles and Diana: Unhappily Ever After, a TV movie about marital discord between Diana and Charles. Actresses who have portrayed Diana include Serena Scott Thomas (in Diana: Her True Story, 1993), Julie Cox (in Princess in Love, 1996), Amy Seccombe (in Diana: A Tribute to the People's Princess, 1998), Michelle Duncan (in Whatever Love Means, 2005), Genevieve O'Reilly (in Diana: Last Days of a Princess, 2007), Nathalie Brocker (in The Murder of Princess Diana, 2007), Naomi Watts (in Diana, 2013), Jeanna de Waal (in Diana: The Musical, 2019 & 2021), Emma Corrin (2020) and Elizabeth Debicki (2022 & 2023) (in The Crown), and Kristen Stewart (in Spencer, 2021). In 2017, William and Harry commissioned two documentaries to mark the 20th anniversary of her death. The first of the two, Diana, Our Mother: Her Life and Legacy, was broadcast on ITV and HBO on 24 July 2017. This film focuses on Diana's legacy and humanitarian efforts for causes such as AIDS, landmines, homelessness and cancer. The second documentary, Diana, 7 Days, aired on 27 August on BBC and focused on Diana's death and the subsequent outpouring of grief. Diana was born with the style of "The Honourable Diana Frances Spencer". When her father inherited the Earldom of Spencer in 1975, she became entitled to the style of "Lady Diana Spencer". During her marriage, Diana was styled as "Her Royal Highness The Princess of Wales". She additionally bore the titles Duchess of Rothesay, Duchess of Cornwall, Countess of Chester, and Baroness of Renfrew. After her divorce in 1996 and until her death, she was known as "Diana, Princess of Wales", without the style of "Her Royal Highness". Though popularly referred to as "Princess Diana", that style is incorrect and one she never held officially. She is still sometimes referred to in the media as "Lady Diana Spencer" or colloquially as "Lady Di". In a speech after her death, Tony Blair referred to Diana as "the People's Princess". Discussions were also held with the Spencer family and the British royal family as to whether Diana's HRH style needed to be restored posthumously, but Diana's family decided that it would be against her wishes and, thus, no formal offer was made. Orders 1981: Royal Family Order of Queen Elizabeth II Foreign honours 1982: Supreme Class of the Order of the Virtues (or Order of al-Kamal) 18 November 1982: Grand Cross of the Order of the Crown, bestowed by Queen Beatrix of the Netherlands Appointments 1988: Royal Bencher of the Honourable Society of the Middle Temple Fellowships 1988: The Royal College of Surgeons of England, Honorary Fellow in Dental Surgery Freedom of the City 29 October 1981: Cardiff 29 January 1986: Carlisle 1987: London 8 June 1989: Northampton Borough 16 October 1992: Portsmouth As Princess of Wales, Diana held the following military appointments: Australia Colonel-in-Chief of the Royal Australian Survey Corps Canada Colonel-in-Chief of the Princess of Wales' Own Regiment (17 August 1985 to 16 July 1996) Colonel-in-Chief of the West Nova Scotia Regiment United Kingdom Colonel-in-Chief of the Princess of Wales's Royal Regiment Colonel-in-Chief of the Light Dragoons Colonel-in-Chief of the Royal Hampshire Regiment Colonel-in-Chief of the 13th/18th Royal Hussars (Queen Mary's Own) Honorary Air Commodore, RAF Wittering Lady Sponsor of HMS Cornwall (F99) Lady Sponsor of HMS Vanguard (S28) She relinquished these appointments following her divorce. 15 November 1984: Lady Sponsor of Royal Princess Diana was born into the British Spencer family, different branches of which hold the titles of Duke of Marlborough, Earl Spencer, Earl of Sunderland, and Baron Churchill. The Spencers claimed descent from a cadet branch of the powerful medieval Despenser family, but its validity is questioned. Her great-grandmother was Margaret Baring, a member of the German-British Baring family of bankers and the daughter of Edward Baring, 1st Baron Revelstoke. Diana's distant noble ancestors included the first Duke and Duchess of Marlborough. Diana and Charles were distantly related, as they were both descended from the House of Tudor through Henry VII of England. She was also descended from the House of Stuart through Charles II of England by Charles Lennox, 1st Duke of Richmond, and Henry FitzRoy, 1st Duke of Grafton, and his brother James II of England by Henrietta FitzJames. Other noble ancestors include Margaret Kerdeston, granddaughter of Michael de la Pole, 2nd Earl of Suffolk; Robert Devereux, 2nd Earl of Essex, an English nobleman and a favourite of Elizabeth I of England; and Edward Seymour, 1st Duke of Somerset, a descendant of Edward III of England through his son Lionel of Antwerp, 1st Duke of Clarence. Diana's Scottish roots came from her maternal grandmother, Lady Fermoy. Among her Scottish ancestors were Alexander Gordon, 4th Duke of Gordon, and his wife Jane, and Archibald Campbell, 9th Earl of Argyll. Diana's American lineage came from her great-grandmother Frances Ellen Work, daughter of wealthy American stockbroker Franklin H. Work from Ohio, who was married to her great-grandfather James Roche, 3rd Baron Fermoy, an Irish peer. Diana's fourth great-grandmother in her direct maternal line, Eliza Kewark, was matrilineally of Indian descent. She is variously described in contemporary documents as "a dark-skinned native woman" and "an Armenian woman from Bombay". Her patronages also included Landmine Survivors Network, Help the Aged, the National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, the British Lung Foundation, Eureka! (joint patron with Prince Charles), the National Children's Orchestra, British Red Cross Youth, the Guinness Trust, Meningitis Trust, the Malcolm Sargent Cancer Fund for Children, the Royal School for the Blind, Welsh National Opera, the Variety Club of New Zealand, Birthright, the British Deaf Association (for which she learned sign language), All England Lawn Tennis and Croquet Club, Anglo-European College of Chiropractic, Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland, Royal National Orthopaedic Hospital, British Sports Association for the Disabled, British Youth Opera, Faculty of Dental Surgery of the Royal College of Surgeons of England, London City Ballet, London Symphony Orchestra, and Pre-School Playgroups Association. With rare exceptions (such as Princess Alice, Duchess of Gloucester, who was given permission by Queen Elizabeth II), only princesses by birth use the title "Princess" before their given names. "Diana's Legacy: A Reshaped Monarchy, a More Emotional U.K." The New York Times. 30 August 2017. Archived from the original on 31 August 2017. Morton 1997, pp. 70–71. Morton 1997, p. 70. Brown 2007, pp. 32–33. Bradford 2006, p. 2. Morton 1997, p. 71. Barcelona, Ainhoa (3 September 2018). "Princess Diana's sweet childhood nickname revealed in resurfaced letter – see photo". Hello!. Archived from the original on 3 May 2023. Retrieved 17 November 2020. Chua-Eoan, Howard (16 August 2007). "The Saddest Fairy Tale". Time. Archived from the original on 3 February 2017. Retrieved 3 February 2017. she died, suddenly, the day after the 36th anniversary of her christening Brown 2007, pp. 37–38. Brown 2007, p. 37. Brown 2007, p. 41. "The Royal Newlyweds; She Charms with an Easy Grace". The New York Times. 30 July 1981. Archived from the original on 15 July 2023. Retrieved 3 December 2023. Bradford 2006, pp. 2, 20. Brown 2007, p. 42. Bradford 2006, pp. 40, 42. Brown 2007, pp. 40–41. Bradford 2006, p. 34. "Diana 'I thought of running off with lover'". The Telegraph. 7 December 2004. Archived from the original on 23 April 2018. Retrieved 23 April 2018. Morton, Andrew (2017). Diana: Her True Story – In Her Own Words: The Sunday Times Number-One Bestseller. Michael O'Mara Books. ISBN 978-1782436935. Retrieved 25 April 2018. Bradford 2006, p. 29. "International Special Report: Princess Diana, 1961–1997". The Washington Post. 30 January 1999. Archived from the original on 19 August 2000. Retrieved 13 October 2008. Bradford 2006, pp. 21–22. Bradford 2006, p. 23. "The Life of Diana, Princess of Wales: Childhood And Teenage Years". BBC News. Archived from the original on 3 November 2023. Retrieved 16 October 2023. Deedes, W. F. (25 August 2007). "Princess Diana: An injured angel". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 31 July 2017. Retrieved 16 October 2023. "Diana, Princess of Wales". The Royal Family. 21 December 2015. Archived from the original on 24 January 2017. Retrieved 17 February 2017. Bradford 2006, p. 35. Bradford 2006, pp. 40–41. Brown 2007, p. 55. "Major Jeremy Whitaker, eccentric soldier who served as ADC in Nigeria and Malaysia before establishing himself as an in-demand photographer – obituary". The Telegraph. 5 December 2019. Archived from the original on 6 July 2022. Retrieved 6 July 2022. "Childhood and teenage years". The British Monarchy. The Crown. Archived from the original on 2 March 2000. Retrieved 15 July 2019. Bradford 2006, pp. 41, 44. Brown 2007, p. 68. Morton 1997, p. 103. Bradford 2006, p. 45. Bradford 2006, p. 46. Morton 1997, p. 118. Bradford 2006, p. 40. Glass, Robert (24 July 1981). "Descendant of 4 Kings Charms Her Prince". Daily Times. London. Archived from the original on 17 April 2021. Retrieved 24 April 2016. Taylor, Elise (9 November 2022). "A Timeline of Prince Charles and Princess Diana's Tumultuous, Tragic Relationship". Vogue. Archived from the original on 29 December 2022. Retrieved 30 December 2022. "Royal weekend fuels rumours". The Age. London. 17 November 1980. Archived from the original on 17 April 2021. Retrieved 22 July 2013. Dimbleby 1994, p. 279. "It was love at first sight between British people and Lady Diana". The Leader Post. London. AP. 15 July 1981. Archived from the original on 17 April 2021. Retrieved 23 July 2013. Dockterman, Eliana; Haynes, Suyin (15 November 2020). "The True Story Behind The Crown's Prince Charles, Princess Diana and Camilla Parker Bowles Love Triangle". Time. Archived from the original on 3 June 2023. Retrieved 17 November 2020. "1981: Charles and Diana marry". BBC News. 29 July 1981. Archived from the original on 7 March 2008. Retrieved 27 November 2008. Frum, David (2000). How We Got bare: The '70s. New York: Basic Books. p. 98. ISBN 978-0-46-504195-4. Denney, Colleen (2005). Representing Diana, Princess of Wales: cultural memory and fairy tales revisited. Fairleigh Dickinson University Press. p. 57. ISBN 978-0-8386-4023-4. Archived from the original on 25 April 2016. Retrieved 30 April 2011. Field, Leslie (2002). The Queen's Jewels: The Personal Collection of Elizabeth II. London: Harry N. Abrams. pp. 113–115. ISBN 978-0-81-098172-0. Lucy Clarke-Billings (9 December 2015). "Duchess of Cambridge wears Princess Diana's favourite tiara to diplomatic reception at Buckingham Palace". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 25 December 2015. Retrieved 29 December 2015. "Mailbox". The Royal Family. April 2006. p. 3. Archived from the original on 6 August 2007. Vickers, Hugo (1994). Royal Orders. Boxtree. p. 147. ISBN 9781852835101. Brown 2007, p. 195. "Obituary: Sir George Pinker". The Telegraph. London. 1 May 2007. Archived from the original on 13 November 2012. Retrieved 22 December 2012. "US TV airs Princess Diana tapes". BBC News. 5 March 2004. Archived from the original on 11 June 2017. Retrieved 23 April 2018. "1982: Princess Diana gives birth to boy". BBC News. Archived from the original on 25 June 2018. Retrieved 17 May 2018. Petit, Stephanie (18 April 2019). "Princess Diana Revealed Postpartum Depression 'Hit Hard' After William's Birth: 'I Was Troubled'". People. Archived from the original on 10 June 2023. Retrieved 19 November 2020. Morton 1997, pp. 142–143. Morton 1997, p. 147. "Hewitt denies Prince Harry link". BBC News. 21 September 2002. Archived from the original on 15 February 2009. Retrieved 23 April 2016. Petit, Stephanie (17 April 2019). "Princess Diana Recalled Pressure of Giving Birth — and Said Prince Charles Wished Harry Was a Girl". People. Archived from the original on 15 July 2023. Retrieved 21 March 2022. "Prince William Biography". People. Archived from the original on 30 October 2008. Retrieved 15 October 2008. "Prince Harry". People. Archived from the original on 29 October 2008. Retrieved 15 October 2008. Morton 1997, p. 184. Brown, Tina (5 April 2022). "How Princess Diana's Dance With the Media Impacted William and Harry". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on 8 June 2023. Retrieved 6 April 2022. Brown 2007, p. 174. Holder, Margaret (24 August 2011). "Who Does Prince Harry Look Like? James Hewitt Myth Debunked". The Morton Report. Archived from the original on 29 May 2012. Tuohy, William (3 November 1987). "Rumors of Royal Split Trail Charles and Diana to Bonn". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 16 November 2020. Retrieved 17 November 2020. Quest, Richard (3 June 2002). "Royals, part 3: Troubled Times". CNN. Archived from the original on 15 July 2016. Retrieved 17 June 2012. Mercer, David (5 May 2023). "The King: From school bullies to Diana tragedy - the events that shaped Charles". Sky News. Archived from the original on 29 October 2023. Retrieved 24 October 2023. "Diana tells of Camilla encounter". BBC News. 12 March 2004. Archived from the original on 3 August 2018. Retrieved 3 August 2018. "Diana tapes reveal Camilla confrontation". The Telegraph. 12 March 2004. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 3 August 2018. "Interview: Andrew Morton: He couldn't shout: 'Diana was in on this.' 'She trusted me. It would have been a betrayal'". The Independent. 1 December 1997. Archived from the original on 8 January 2017. Retrieved 7 January 2017. "Princess Di breaks down after making appearance". Eugene Register Guard. 12 June 1992. Archived from the original on 20 April 2021. Retrieved 14 August 2013. Sabur, Rozina (10 June 2017). "Princess Diana secretly recorded herself describing despair at the state of her marriage to Prince Charles, biographer reveals". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 16 November 2017. Retrieved 8 March 2018. "The story behind Princess Diana's secret tapes". NBC News. 4 March 2004. Archived from the original on 29 July 2023. Retrieved 19 November 2020. "The Princess and the Press: The Andrew Morton book controversy". PBS. Archived from the original on 19 August 2022. Retrieved 1 September 2022. Brandreth 2004, pp. 348–349. Brandreth 2004, pp. 349–351. Brandreth 2004, pp. 351–353. Rayner, Gordon (16 January 2008). "Diana 'planned secret wedding to Hasnat Khan'". Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 19 June 2008. Retrieved 24 August 2008. Allen, Nick (11 January 2008). "Prince Philip sent 'nasty, cruel' letters to Diana". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 24 May 2008. Retrieved 5 February 2017. "Philip 'sent Diana cruel letters'". BBC News. 10 January 2008. Archived from the original on 6 May 2021. Retrieved 9 December 2020. Alderson, Andrew (14 October 2007). "Diana and Prince Philip: the truth". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 4 February 2017. Retrieved 2 February 2017. "Philip Denies Calling Diana Vulgar Names". The New York Times. 25 November 2002. Archived from the original on 5 May 2023. Retrieved 9 December 2020. "Princess Diana's 'admirer' named by Press". New Straits Times. London. 27 August 1992. Archived from the original on 12 August 2021. Retrieved 14 August 2013. Brown 2007, pp. 304, 309. Brandreth, Gyles (2007). Charles and Camilla: Portrait of a Love Affair. Random House. pp. 257–264. ISBN 978-0-09-949087-6. Dimbleby 1994, p. 489. John Major, Prime Minister (9 December 1992). "Prince And Princess Of Wales". Parliamentary Debates (Hansard). Vol. 215. Parliament of the United Kingdom: House of Commons. col. 845. Archived 18 June 2023 at the Wayback Machine "Diana tapes filmed by voice coach to air on Channel 4 documentary". The Guardian. 24 July 2017. Archived from the original on 29 July 2017. Retrieved 30 July 2017. "Diana 'wanted to live with guard'". BBC News. Archived from the original on 31 July 2017. Retrieved 31 July 2017. Langley, William (12 December 2004). "The Mannakee file". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 31 July 2017. Retrieved 31 July 2017. Lawson, Mark (7 August 2017). "Diana: In Her Own Words – admirers have nothing to fear from the Channel 4 tapes". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 20 September 2017. Retrieved 22 October 2017. Milmo, Cahal (8 December 2004). "Conspiracy theorists feast on inquiry into death of Diana's minder". The Independent. Archived from the original on 1 August 2017. Retrieved 31 July 2017. "New Book Casts Shadow Over Diana". CBS News. 26 October 1998. Archived from the original on 26 March 2023. Retrieved 7 March 2018. Curry, Ann (6 December 2004). "Princess Diana tapes: Part 2". NBC News. Archived from the original on 17 August 2017. Retrieved 7 March 2018. Anderson, Kevin (5 March 2004). "Diana tapes captivate America". BBC News. Archived from the original on 3 August 2018. Retrieved 3 August 2018. Bradford 2006, p. 189. Rosalind Ryan (7 January 2008). "Diana affair over before crash, inquest told". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 3 December 2023. Retrieved 13 October 2008. Rayner, Gordon (20 December 2007). "Princess Diana letter: 'Charles plans to kill me'". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 23 January 2008. Retrieved 19 October 2017. "Tiggy Legge-Bourke". The Guardian. 12 October 1999. Archived from the original on 9 February 2023. Retrieved 7 January 2017. "The Princess and the Press". PBS. Archived from the original on 10 March 2017. Retrieved 7 January 2017. "Timeline: Charles and Camilla's romance". BBC News. 6 April 2005. Archived from the original on 2 February 2017. Retrieved 7 January 2017. Dimbleby 1994, p. 395. Moseley, Ray (24 August 1994). "British Press Advising Princess Di To Get A Life". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on 17 May 2017. Retrieved 13 March 2018. Green, Michelle (5 September 1994). "A Princess in Peril". People. Archived from the original on 12 October 2016. Retrieved 13 March 2018. "Oliver Hoare obituary". The Times. 13 September 2018. Archived from the original on 8 January 2019. Retrieved 20 September 2018. Boggan, Steve (26 November 1995). "Schoolboy with a grudge was Oliver Hoare telephone pest". The Independent. Archived from the original on 19 August 2017. Retrieved 13 March 2018. "Princess Diana's secret life". NBC News. 8 December 2003. Archived from the original on 6 September 2016. Retrieved 13 March 2018. "Sweep It Under the Rugger". People. 25 March 1996. Archived from the original on 15 March 2018. Retrieved 13 March 2018. Leung, Rebecca (20 April 2004). "Diana's Secret Love". CBS News. Archived from the original on 14 February 2018. Retrieved 13 March 2018. Fromson, Brett (4 June 1995). "Dealmaker of the Decade". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 2 May 2018. Retrieved 14 March 2018. Childs, Martin (26 November 2011). "Teddy Forstmann: Pioneer of the leveraged buy-out". The Independent. Archived from the original on 22 October 2020. Retrieved 14 March 2018. Ellam, Dennis (26 September 2014). "Will Carling: My Life as the Cad: I used to be so arrogant. I thought". Sunday Mirror. Archived from the original on 4 May 2006. Retrieved 13 March 2018. Brewerton, David (22 November 2011). "Teddy Forstmann obituary". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 21 July 2016. Retrieved 14 March 2018. "The Panorama Interview with the Princess of Wales". BBC News. 20 November 1995. Archived from the original on 4 March 2011. Retrieved 8 January 2010. "1995: Diana admits adultery in TV interview". BBC News. Archived from the original on 26 January 2021. Retrieved 1 August 2018. Cohen, David (2005). Diana: Death of a Goddess. Random House. p. 18. ISBN 9780099471349. Archived from the original on 4 December 2017. Retrieved 13 June 2016. Jonathan Dimbleby and ... Penny Junor ... said that there were several people who had mentioned Borderline Personality Disorder. Psychiatrists had provided learned opinions that sadly (Diana) had suffered form Borderline Personality Disorder as well as eating disorders Kermode, Frank (22 August 1999). "Shrinking the Princess". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 3 February 2017. Retrieved 5 February 2017. Urwin, Rosamund (1 November 2020). "BBC says sorry to Diana's brother Earl Spencer for interview 'deceit'". The Sunday Times. Archived from the original on 6 May 2021. Retrieved 7 November 2020. Spencer is understood to have told Davie that he has records of all his meetings and conversations with Bashir. These are alleged to show that Bashir told Diana fantastical stories to win her trust and that he used the fake bank statements to garner his first meeting with her.(subscription required) Taylor, Elise (11 November 2022). "The Dark True Story Behind Princess Diana's Explosive BBC Interview". Vogue. Archived from the original on 26 March 2023. Retrieved 31 March 2023. Romo, Vanessa (20 May 2021). "Princes William And Harry Say BBC Interview Led To Princess Diana's Divorce And Death". NPR. Archived from the original on 18 April 2023. Retrieved 31 March 2023. Montalbano, D. (21 December 1995). "Queen Orders Charles, Diana to Divorce". Los Angeles Times. London. Archived from the original on 8 March 2014. Retrieved 23 July 2013. "Charles and Diana to divorce". Associated Press. 21 December 1995. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 23 July 2013. "'Divorce': Queen to Charles and Diana". BBC News. 20 December 1995. Archived from the original on 7 March 2008. Retrieved 2 November 2010. "Princess Diana agrees to divorce". The Gadsden Times. London. AP. 28 February 1996. Archived from the original on 13 August 2021. Retrieved 23 July 2013. Lyall, Sarah (13 July 1996). "Charles and Diana Agree on Divorce Terms". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 7 March 2016. Retrieved 23 April 2016. "Special: Princess Diana, 1961–1997". Time. 12 February 1996. Archived from the original on 6 April 2010. Retrieved 24 April 2016. "Diana 'wept as she read brother's cruel words'". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 3 May 2011. Retrieved 10 April 2015. Jephson, P.D. (2001). Shadows of a Princess: An Intimate Account by Her Private Secretary. HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-38-082046-7. Retrieved 2 November 2010. extract published in The Sunday Times newspaper on 24 September 2000 "Dark side of Diana described by ex-aide". The Guardian. 24 September 2000. Archived from the original on 8 January 2017. Retrieved 7 January 2017. Mendick, Robert (17 September 2021). "BBC to pay Tiggy Legge-Bourke 'significant' damages over Martin Bashir smears". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 18 September 2021. Retrieved 21 October 2021. "Text of Charles and Diana's divorce decree". CNN. 28 August 1996. Archived from the original on 6 March 2005. Retrieved 11 December 2020. "Timeline: Diana, Princess of Wales". BBC News. 5 July 2004. Archived from the original on 8 December 2008. Retrieved 13 October 2008. Grove, Jack (27 March 2013). "Tribunal slams academic for bringing anti-Semitism case". Times Higher Education. Archived from the original on 23 May 2023. Retrieved 16 March 2020. Neville, Sarah (13 July 1996). "Charles and Diana Agree to Terms of Divorce". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 26 March 2023. Retrieved 12 November 2022. Bradford 2006, p. 306. "Divorce: Status And Role of The Princess of Wales" (Press release). Buckingham Palace. 12 July 1996. Archived from the original on 3 June 2012. Retrieved 24 April 2016 – via PR Newswire. Pearson, Allison (23 April 2011). "Royal wedding: Diana's ghost will be everywhere on Prince William's big day". The Telegraph. UK. Archived from the original on 30 June 2012. Brown 2007, p. 392. "Royal Split". The Deseret News. London. AP. 28 February 1996. Archived from the original on 7 May 2021. Retrieved 23 July 2013. "'Deprived Diana of a Home': Princess Diana's brother Charles Spencer's legal victory". The New Zealand Herald. 29 July 2021. Archived from the original on 26 March 2023. Retrieved 8 February 2023. "'Took him to the cleaners': Prince Charles' strict demand in Princess Diana divorce". The New Zealand Herald. 15 July 2020. Archived from the original on 9 July 2021. Retrieved 6 July 2021. Radnofsky, Louise (17 January 2008). "We could have saved Diana, former Met chief tells inquest". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 3 May 2023. Retrieved 4 May 2021. Erlandson, Robert A. (3 September 1997). "Princess' death was avoidable, expert says Diana should have let Scotland Yard guard her, security consultant says". The Baltimore Sun. Archived from the original on 30 March 2020. Retrieved 4 May 2021. "Diana Was Set to Become Blair's Ambassador for Britain". BBC News. Archived from the original on 7 June 2022. Retrieved 27 November 2020. Hallemann, Caroline (22 January 2018). "Here's what Gianni Versace's funeral was really like". Town & Country. Archived from the original on 3 August 2020. Retrieved 28 August 2020. Hills, Megan C. (15 July 2020). "Princess Diana's celebrity friendship circle, from Sir Elton John to Grace Kelly". The Standard. Archived from the original on 6 February 2023. Retrieved 6 February 2023. Ansari, Massoud; Alderson, Andrew (16 January 2008). "Dr Hasnat Khan: Princess Diana and me". Sunday Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 7 September 2008. Retrieved 25 August 2008. Alderson, Andrew (13 August 2000). "Imran Khan: I was Diana's go-between". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 20 June 2017. Retrieved 3 March 2018. Rayner, Gordon (17 December 2007). "Diana: 'I need Dodi marriage like a rash'". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 3 March 2018. "Princess Diana's 'Mr Wonderful' Hasnat Khan Still Haunted by her Death". Sky News. 13 January 2008. Archived from the original on 8 February 2009. Retrieved 25 August 2008. Truscott, Claire (14 January 2008). "Background to Dr Hasnat Khan and Diana, Princess of Wales". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 19 August 2013. Retrieved 5 August 2013. Khoshaba, Christy (31 July 2013). "Princess Diana: Mag details 'secret romance' with Pakistani doctor". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 6 August 2013. Retrieved 5 August 2013. "Princess Diana's ex-lover Hasnat Khan to give evidence". Herald Sun. Victoria, Australia. 9 January 2008. Archived from the original on 8 February 2009. Retrieved 24 August 2008. "Imran and Jemima Khan Welcomed Princess Diana In Pakistan". Huffington Post. 25 May 2011. Archived from the original on 11 October 2014. Retrieved 31 May 2013. "Princess Diana was 'madly in love' with heart surgeon Hasnat Khan". The Telegraph. 31 July 2013. Archived from the original on 18 February 2015. Retrieved 10 April 2015. "The doctor and Diana". The Guardian. 14 January 2008. Archived from the original on 27 December 2014. Retrieved 10 April 2015. "Hasnat Khan Tells Diana Inquest They Enjoyed "Normal" Sex Life, Says She Ended Affair". Huffington Post. 25 May 2011. Archived from the original on 13 February 2012. Retrieved 28 May 2013. Farouky, Jumana (14 January 2008). "Diana's Butler Tells Some Secrets". Time. Archived from the original on 26 August 2013. Retrieved 19 October 2017. Milmo, Cahal (25 October 2002). "Diana did not talk to me in final months, admits her mother". The Independent. Archived from the original on 5 March 2016. Retrieved 24 October 2016. "Diana's 'rift' with mother". BBC News. 24 October 2002. Archived from the original on 21 January 2023. Retrieved 29 May 2018. Davies, Caroline (21 October 2016). "Countess Raine Spencer, stepmother of Princess Diana, dies aged 87". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 24 June 2017. Retrieved 7 March 2018. Jones, Tony (21 October 2016). "Raine Spencer dead: Princess Diana's step-mother dies age 87". The Independent. Archived from the original on 20 October 2017. Retrieved 7 March 2018. "The Life of Diana, Princess of Wales 1961–1997: Separation And Divorce". BBC News. Archived from the original on 2 December 2010. Retrieved 10 May 2015. "Dodi 'ignored' protect Diana advice". Metro (UK). 18 December 2007. Archived from the original on 18 October 2014. Retrieved 11 October 2014. Dominick Dunne (19 May 2010). "Two Ladies, Two Yachts, and a Billionaire". Vanity Fair. New York. Archived from the original on 13 October 2013. Retrieved 11 October 2013. Majendie, Paul (20 December 2007). "Princess Diana planned move abroad, court told". Reuters. Archived from the original on 1 September 2022. Retrieved 1 September 2022. "Butler: Diana Planned Move to Malibu". ABC News. 29 October 2003. Archived from the original on 1 September 2022. Retrieved 1 September 2022. "Princess Diana Dreamed in Living in California Like Harry and Meghan". Marie Claire. 17 June 2021. Archived from the original on 1 September 2022. Retrieved 1 September 2022. "Royal engagement photos through the years as Harry and Meghan's glamorous pictures prove they are Hollywood through and through". The Telegraph. 21 December 2017. Archived from the original on 9 January 2018. Retrieved 8 March 2018. Weaver, Hilary (15 June 2017). "Princess Diana Detailed Her Memorable Meetings with Grace Kelly and Elizabeth Taylor". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on 20 July 2017. "The newlyweds tour of Wales and the moment the nation fell in love with Diana". ITV News. 29 August 2017. Archived from the original on 12 August 2018. Retrieved 12 August 2018. "Statement regarding the State Opening of Parliament in May 2013". The British Monarchy. 1 April 2013. Archived from the original on 18 October 2016. Retrieved 16 October 2016. "The celebrities who have turned on the Christmas lights on Regent Street". The Telegraph. 16 November 2015. Archived from the original on 20 February 2017. Retrieved 20 February 2017. Mosley, Charles, ed. (2003). Burke's Peerage, Baronetage and Knightage. Vol. III (107th ed.). Wilmington, Delaware: Burke's Peerage and Gentry LLC. p. 3696. ISBN 978-0-97-119662-9. Evans, Elinor (15 November 2020). "The Crown S4 E6 real history: Charles and Diana's 1983 royal tour of Australia & the start of 'Dianamania'". BBC History. Archived from the original on 5 May 2023. Retrieved 16 November 2020. Barr, Sabrina (23 January 2020). "Photographer recalls capturing Diana bursting into tears during royal tour: 'It was the first sign something was wrong'". The Independent. Archived from the original on 15 July 2023. Retrieved 1 September 2022. "Royal Tours of Canada". Canadian Crown. Government of Canada. Archived from the original on 5 June 2012. Retrieved 29 January 2016. "Who are the 'tartan terrorists'?". BBC News. 2 March 2002. Archived from the original on 19 October 2021. Retrieved 9 December 2020. "Pope John Paul II in pictures". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 September 2017. Retrieved 9 September 2017. Sullivan, Jane (2 November 1985). "Australia succumbs to Diana mania". The Age. Archived from the original on 14 June 2023. Retrieved 24 November 2020. Paddock, Richard C. (7 May 1986). "Diana Faints at Expo". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 24 April 2018. Retrieved 7 March 2018. Paddock, Richard C. (7 May 1986). "Princess Diana Faints on Visit to California Expo Pavilion". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 2 June 2017. Retrieved 7 March 2018. "The burqa Princess Diana packed for her first tour of the Arabian Gulf". The National. 30 August 2018. Archived from the original on 17 June 2019. Retrieved 17 June 2019. Holden, Anthony; Lamanna, Dean (1 February 1989). "Charles and Diana: portrait of a marriage". Ladies Home Journal. Archived from the original on 16 January 2013. Retrieved 19 December 2012. "The Crown: Inside Princess Diana's Night at the Opera During Her Historic 1989 Visit to N.Y.C." People. 16 November 2020. Archived from the original on 3 May 2023. Retrieved 16 November 2020. "Diana, Princess of Wales". The Telegraph. 31 August 1997. Archived from the original on 25 September 2015. Retrieved 25 February 2016. "Elizabeth Blunt Remembers Diana". BBC News. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 30 January 2016. "Prince Charles, Princess Diana visit Hungary". Associated Press News. Archived from the original on 16 January 2013. Retrieved 27 December 2012. "Distinguished guests from overseas such as State Guests, official guests (1989–1998)". The Imperial Household Agency. Archived from the original on 16 January 2013. Retrieved 19 December 2012. "Royal Visits, Part I". Queen's University Archives. Archived from the original on 24 January 2016. Retrieved 30 January 2016. "Prince Charles, Princess Diana leave Brazil after issue-oriented visit". Deseret News. 28 April 1991. Archived from the original on 17 November 2015. Retrieved 16 October 2016. "Diana, Princess of Wales was a global humanitarian figure who dedicated her life to helping improve the lives of disadvantaged people". The Diana, Princess of Wales Memorial Fund. Archived from the original on 3 February 2016. Retrieved 30 January 2016. "Princess Diana: A photo album (slide 25)". CBS News. 15 March 2015. Archived from the original on 4 August 2017. Retrieved 3 March 2018. Hunt, Peter (16 April 2016). "Diana Taj Mahal photo captured disintegrating marriage". BBC News. Archived from the original on 22 August 2021. Retrieved 9 December 2020. Ross, Ashley (8 April 2016). "The History That Lurks Behind Prince William and Kate Middleton's Taj Mahal Visit". Time. Archived from the original on 27 July 2017. Retrieved 3 March 2018. Rayner, Gordon (16 April 2016). "Duke and Duchess of Cambridge pay loving tribute to Diana on visit to India's Taj Mahal". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 5 February 2017. Retrieved 3 March 2018. "Look back at the Royal family's most stylish summer outfits". The Telegraph. 10 July 2020. Archived from the original on 8 January 2022. Retrieved 8 January 2022. "In photos: Hosni Mubarak". CNN. 25 February 2020. Archived from the original on 9 January 2022. Retrieved 8 January 2022. Holden, Anthony (February 1993). "Diana's Revenge". Vanity Fair. Retrieved 2 December 2020. "Princess Diana Heads Home After Nepal Visit". AP News. 6 March 1993. Archived from the original on 26 March 2023. Retrieved 5 March 2022. Shultz, Cara Lynn; Pearl, Diana (23 June 2011). "Princess Diana and the Causes Close to Her Heart (slide 15)". People. Archived from the original on 5 March 2018. Retrieved 4 March 2018. "Princess Diana visits the British Pavilion". British Council – British Pavilion in Venice. Archived from the original on 17 November 2015. Retrieved 16 October 2016. "Diana, Princess of Wales". British Monarchist Society and Foundation. Archived from the original on 27 August 2017. Retrieved 22 July 2017. "Diana Visits Argentina as 'Ambassador'". Los Angeles Times. 24 November 1995. Archived from the original on 5 February 2013. Retrieved 7 January 2012. MacLeod, Alexander (28 June 1983). "The Princess of Wales: life as a star". The Christian Science Monitor. Archived from the original on 14 April 2015. Retrieved 10 April 2015. "The Royal Watch". Philadelphia Daily News. Archived from the original on 25 October 2014. Retrieved 11 October 2014. "Royal Watch". People. Archived from the original on 17 October 2014. Retrieved 11 October 2014. Ali, Monica (30 March 2011). "Royal rebel: the legacy of Diana". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 3 February 2017. Retrieved 2 February 2017. "Diana's groups of charities". BBC News. Archived from the original on 23 January 2016. Retrieved 17 February 2017. Rayner, Gordon (21 April 2013). "Duchess of Cambridge walks in Diana's footsteps by becoming Patron of Natural History Museum". The Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 23 April 2013. Retrieved 21 April 2013. "Diana memorial service in detail". The Telegraph. 31 August 2007. Archived from the original on 2 October 2015. Retrieved 30 January 2016. Uncut Footage of Princess Diana Visiting RADA (1989). ITN Archive. 17 November 1989. Archived from the original on 28 September 2023. Retrieved 27 September 2023 – via YouTube. "Barnardo's and royalty". Barnardo's. Archived from the original on 7 March 2016. Retrieved 30 January 2016. Furness, Hannah (12 April 2013). "Prince Harry to follow in his mother's footsteps in support of Headway charity". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 26 March 2016. Retrieved 30 January 2016. "About the Chester Childbirth Appeal". Archived from the original on 6 January 2016. Retrieved 25 February 2016. Durand, Carolyn (15 October 2015). "Prince William Gives Moving Tribute Speech About Princess Diana at Charity Event". ABC News. Archived from the original on 27 March 2023. Retrieved 30 May 2018. Kim, Eun Kyung (16 October 2015). "Prince William pays tribute to mother during charity event for grieving families". NBC Today. Archived from the original on 26 March 2023. Retrieved 30 May 2018. "Princess Diana observes 32nd birthday". Star-News. 1 July 1993. Archived from the original on 15 November 2021. Retrieved 24 April 2016. "Diana's Charities". BBC News. Archived from the original on 26 August 2015. Retrieved 24 May 2015. "Our History". Wellbeing of Women. Archived from the original on 26 June 2015. Retrieved 25 June 2015. "NAMES IN THE NEWS : Princess Di Uses Sign Language". Los Angeles Times. 10 August 1990. Archived from the original on 3 December 2023. Retrieved 15 November 2018. "The Honorary Freedom". City of London. Archived from the original on 28 January 2018. Retrieved 27 January 2018. "Spurns Lunch Wine : 'I'm Not an Alcoholic'--Princess Di". Los Angeles Times. 23 July 1987. Archived from the original on 14 April 2015. Retrieved 27 January 2018 – via United Press International. she turned down the vintage wine offered at the luncheon welcoming her as a 'freeman' of the City of London ... the ancient ritual giving Diana the right to drive sheep across London Bridge, to be hanged with a rope made of silk rather than hemp and a guaranteed place in a poorhouse should the need arise. "Harry honours his mother's legacy on the anniversary of her death". Hello!. 31 August 2011. Archived from the original on 26 October 2015. Retrieved 24 April 2016. Clayton, Tim (2001). Diana: Story of a Princess. New York: Simon and Schuster. p. 288. ISBN 978-1-43911-803-0. "Diana receives Humanitarian Award". The Standard. 13 December 1995. Archived from the original on 15 November 2021. Retrieved 24 April 2016. "Diana appeals for the elderly after dropping their charity". The Herald Scotland. 14 October 1996. Archived from the original on 6 March 2016. Retrieved 24 April 2016. Charities devastated after Diana quits as patron Archived 2 September 2017 at the Wayback Machine, The Independent, 17 July 1996. (Retrieved 5 September 2011.) "Diana Memorial Charity Fund Set Up". BBC News. Archived from the original on 14 March 2017. Retrieved 17 February 2017. Pieler, George (Winter 1998). "The philanthropic legacy of Princess Diana". Philanthropy. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 30 January 2016. "Diana, Princess of Wales, to open Richard Attenborough Centre" (PDF). University of Leicester. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 January 2017. Retrieved 24 April 2016. "Toddler Stands In For Diana". BBC News. 4 September 1997. Archived from the original on 17 April 2021. Retrieved 17 April 2021. Allen, Nick; Rayner, Gordon (10 January 2008). "Queen 'was against' Diana's Aids work". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 25 September 2015. Retrieved 30 January 2016. "How Princess Diana changed attitudes to Aids". BBC News. 5 April 2017. Archived from the original on 9 September 2017. Retrieved 9 September 2017. "Diana: The Legacy". Huffington Post. 31 August 2012. Archived from the original on 10 March 2016. Retrieved 23 May 2016. "HIV/Aids: a timeline of the disease and its mutations". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 18 May 2015. Retrieved 24 April 2015. "1989: Diana opens Landmark Aids Centre". BBC News. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 21 May 2016. "Princess Diana's charity work and causes (image 8)". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 25 September 2015. Retrieved 30 January 2016. Green, Ian (31 August 2022). "Princess Diana's secret visits to our centre show just how deeply she cared for people living with HIV". i. Archived from the original on 30 September 2022. Retrieved 30 September 2022. "Prince Harry calls for regular HIV and Aids testing". BBC News. 13 October 2017. Archived from the original on 21 October 2017. Retrieved 21 October 2017. "Princess Diana's charity work and causes (image 13)". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 25 September 2015. Retrieved 24 April 2016. "Diana 'Thrilled' To Meet Mandela In South Africa". Sun-Sentinel. 18 March 1997. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 30 January 2016. Holt, William (18 July 2013). "Prince Harry posts photo of mother and Nelson Mandela". Yahoo. Archived from the original on 5 March 2016. Retrieved 30 January 2016. "Mandela and Diana charities join forces". BBC News. Archived from the original on 17 November 2015. Retrieved 23 May 2016. "Mandela tells world to learn from Diana". The Telegraph. 3 November 2002. Archived from the original on 29 February 2016. Retrieved 23 May 2016. "Prince Harry becomes patron of the HALO Trust's 25th Anniversary Appeal". The HALO Trust. 6 March 2013. Archived from the original on 15 October 2015. Retrieved 30 January 2016. "Prince Harry continues Diana's charitywork in Africa". Today. 12 August 2013. Archived from the original on 24 May 2015. Retrieved 21 May 2015. "Princess Diana sparks landmines row". BBC News. 15 January 1997. Archived from the original on 7 March 2008. Retrieved 13 October 2008. "Diana Meets Landmine Victim in Bosnia". BBC News. Archived from the original on 14 December 2004. Retrieved 10 April 2015. "Diana takes anti-land mine crusade to Bosnia". CNN. 8 August 1997. Archived from the original on 31 January 2011. Retrieved 23 July 2013. "Diana refuels rumours of a Fayed romance". New Straits Times. 9 August 1997. Archived from the original on 16 November 2021. Retrieved 16 October 2016. Maslen, Stuart; Herby, Peter (31 December 1998). "The background to the Ottawa process". International Review of the Red Cross (325): 693–713. doi:10.1017/S0020860400091579. Archived from the original on 13 May 2008. Retrieved 31 January 2016. "House of Commons Hansard Debates for 10 July 1998 (pt 1)". British Parliament. Archived from the original on 30 September 2007. Retrieved 13 October 2008. "The 1997 Nobel Prizes". CNN. Archived from the original on 24 May 2010. Retrieved 12 March 2010. "President of The Royal Marsden". The Royal Marsden Cancer Charity. Archived from the original on 12 January 2016. Retrieved 16 October 2016. "Our President". The Royal Marsden. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 16 October 2016. "Prince William becomes President of the Royal Marsden Hospital". Official website of the Prince of Wales. 4 May 2007. Archived from the original on 16 February 2016. Retrieved 16 October 2016. McGirk, Tim (22 February 1996). "Diana flies in to battle royal in Pakistan". The Independent. Archived from the original on 4 March 2018. Retrieved 3 March 2018. "Princess Diana: A photo album (slide 40)". CBS News. 15 March 2015. Archived from the original on 8 July 2017. Retrieved 3 March 2018. Rowley, Storer (17 May 2018). "Princess Diana's visit to Northwestern remembered on eve of royal wedding". Northwestern Now. Archived from the original on 10 March 2021. Retrieved 4 March 2021. "Diana Photo Gallery (13)". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 18 February 2017. Retrieved 17 February 2017. "Diana Photo Gallery (15)". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 27 March 2016. Retrieved 17 February 2017. "Our history". Children with Cancer UK. Archived from the original on 5 March 2016. Retrieved 16 October 2016. "27 years of saving young lives". Children with Cancer UK. 16 November 2015. Archived from the original on 5 March 2016. Retrieved 16 October 2016. "Diana, Princess of Wales". Children with Cancer UK. Archived from the original on 5 March 2016. Retrieved 16 October 2016. "The Life of Diana, Princess of Wales 1961–1997". BBC News. Archived from the original on 2 December 2010. Retrieved 10 May 2015. "Diana, Princess of Wales (1961–1997)". The Leprosy Mission. Archived from the original on 1 February 2016. Retrieved 30 January 2016. "Our Patron Prince William". Centrepoint. Archived from the original on 20 May 2015. Retrieved 21 May 2015. "William becomes patron of the homeless". The Telegraph. 14 September 2005. Archived from the original on 24 May 2015. Retrieved 21 May 2015. Perry, Simon (30 September 2021). "Prince William Celebrates a Cause Princess Diana Inspired Him and Prince Harry to Support Decades Ago". People. Archived from the original on 30 September 2021. Retrieved 30 September 2021. "People Princess Diana speaks out for homeless young". Sarasota Herald-Tribune. 8 December 1995. Archived from the original on 21 October 2021. Retrieved 31 January 2016. Furness, Hannah (23 January 2018). "Charities must work together or risk confusing donors, Prince William warns". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 24 January 2018. Retrieved 24 January 2018. "Author defends Diana criticism". BBC News. 17 April 1998. Archived from the original on 18 March 2016. Retrieved 2 February 2017. "Press: Royal Pain". Time. 8 December 1980. Archived from the original on 7 May 2021. Retrieved 7 May 2021. "Another round in Prince Charles' matrimonial sweepstakes". United Press International. 22 November 1980. Archived from the original on 7 May 2021. Retrieved 7 May 2021. "Timeline: Diana, Princess of Wales". BBC News. 5 July 2004. Archived from the original on 30 April 2017. Retrieved 29 May 2018. "1993: Diana sues over gym photos". BBC News. Archived from the original on 26 March 2017. Retrieved 5 February 2017. "Gym owner defends Princess pictures: Bryce Taylor says 98 per cent of people would also have tried his 'legal scam' to make money". The Independent. 17 November 1993. Archived from the original on 5 February 2017. Retrieved 5 February 2017. "Topless Princess Di photos up for sale". United Press International. 4 May 1994. Retrieved 17 July 2022. Hall, Alice (11 March 2020). "A history of royal hoaxes – from Harry to Diana and the Queen". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 18 July 2022. Retrieved 17 July 2022. Thorpe, Vanessa; Macdonald, Marianne (8 October 1996). "Gotcha! 'Sun' says Diana tape was a fake". The Independent. Archived from the original on 26 March 2023. Retrieved 27 November 2022. Beckett, Andy (13 October 1996). "Soaking up the Sun". The Independent. Archived from the original on 5 March 2016. Retrieved 27 November 2022. "1997: Princess Diana dies in Paris crash". BBC News. Archived from the original on 24 January 2008. Retrieved 29 May 2018. "The guarded words of Trevor Rees-Jones". Irish Times. 13 March 2000. Archived from the original on 21 September 2022. Retrieved 16 January 2021. "Tracking 30 years of TV's most watched programmes" Archived 18 January 2015 at the Wayback Machine. BBC. Retrieved 21 June 2015 "Diana's funeral watched by millions on television". BBC News. 6 September 1997. Archived from the original on 7 March 2008. Retrieved 13 October 2008. "World Reaction to Diana's Death". BBC News. Archived from the original on 26 November 2004. Retrieved 26 May 2015. "World Remembers Diana". BBC News. Archived from the original on 22 August 2018. Retrieved 25 May 2018. "Your Thoughts". BBC News. Archived from the original on 27 February 2017. Retrieved 2 February 2017. "Princess Diana's body comes home". CNN. 31 August 1997. Archived from the original on 10 January 2015. Retrieved 23 July 2013. "Prince Charles Arrives in Paris to Take Diana's Body Home". The New York Times. 31 August 1997. Archived from the original on 6 December 2013. Retrieved 5 May 2014. Spencer, Earl (4 May 2007). "The most hunted person of the modern age". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 27 December 2013. Retrieved 27 June 2011. Lynch, Joe (11 October 2014). "17 Years Ago, Elton John's 'Candle In the Wind 1997' Started Its 14-Week No. 1 Run". Billboard. Archived from the original on 18 January 2017. Retrieved 24 December 2016. Ibrahim, Youssef M. (9 September 1997). "Millions of Dollars Pouring In To Diana's Favorite Charities". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 4 January 2017. Retrieved 4 January 2017. "Elton John delivers proceeds to Diana charity". CNN. 19 November 1997. Archived from the original on 1 December 2004. Retrieved 4 January 2017. "Diana Returns Home". BBC News. Archived from the original on 2 December 2010. Retrieved 29 June 2015. "No. 52834". The London Gazette (Supplement). 13 February 1992. p. 2581. "Burial site offers princess a privacy elusive in life". Sarasota Herald Tribune. 6 September 1997. Archived from the original on 20 August 2021. Retrieved 29 June 2015. Oborne, Peter (4 September 1999). "Diana crash caused by chauffeur, says report". The Telegraph. No. 1562. London. Archived from the original on 22 May 2008. "Diana crash was a conspiracy – Al Fayed". BBC News. 12 February 1998. Archived from the original on 14 December 2008. Retrieved 13 October 2008. "Point-by-point: Al Fayed's claims". BBC News. 19 February 2008. Archived from the original on 12 January 2009. Retrieved 13 October 2008. "Inquests into the deaths of Diana, Princess of Wales and Mr Dodi Al Fayed". Judicial Communications Office. Archived from the original on 22 March 2009. Retrieved 7 December 2011. "Princess Diana unlawfully killed". BBC News. 7 April 2008. Archived from the original on 11 January 2009. Retrieved 13 October 2008. "Al Fayed abandons Diana campaign". BBC News. 8 April 2008. Archived from the original on 6 March 2012. Retrieved 16 January 2012. Mayoras, Danielle; Mayoras, Andy. "As Remainder Of Princess Diana's Estate Passes To Harry, Troubling Questions Remain". Forbes. Archived from the original on 4 September 2023. Retrieved 3 December 2023. "Diana's will: The full text". CNN. 4 March 1998. Archived from the original on 8 June 2018. Retrieved 2 June 2018. Garber, Julie (31 May 2018). "What Does Princess Diana's Will Say?". The Balance. Archived from the original on 4 May 2018. Retrieved 2 June 2018. "Diana leaves £21m". BBC News. 2 March 1998. Archived from the original on 1 October 2020. Retrieved 9 January 2020. "What will Prince Harry and Prince William inherit from Princess Diana?". The Telegraph. 1 September 2014. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 2 June 2018. Ensor, Josie (8 March 2021). "Princess Diana foresaw Prince Harry's departure from Royal family, Duke claims". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 8 March 2021. Picheta, Rob (27 April 2021). "Princess Diana's wedding dress to go on display after William and Harry agree to loan". CNN. Archived from the original on 27 April 2021. Retrieved 28 April 2021. "A Close Look at the British Royal Family's Engagement Rings". Vogue. 13 March 2017. Archived from the original on 19 August 2020. Retrieved 15 May 2018. Loeb, Vernon (12 December 1998). "NSA Admits to Spying on Princess Diana". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 9 November 2017. Retrieved 29 January 2018. "Top secret US files could hold clues to death of Diana". The Guardian. 11 January 2004. Archived from the original on 8 January 2018. Retrieved 29 January 2018. Allen, Nick (9 January 2008). "Diana's Squidgygate tapes 'leaked by GCHQ'". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 3 September 2017. Retrieved 29 January 2018. "Diana: the people pay tribute". BBC News. 31 August 1998. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 29 May 2018. "Prayers for Diana". BBC News. 30 August 1998. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 29 May 2018. "Princes say thank you". BBC News. 31 August 1998. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 29 May 2018. "Commemorating Diana". BBC News. 30 August 1998. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 29 May 2018. "Flags at half mast for Diana". BBC News. 23 July 1998. Archived from the original on 29 July 2017. Retrieved 17 March 2018. David Pollard, Neil (2007). Constitutional and Administrative Law: Text with Materials. Oxford University Press. p. 22. ISBN 978-0-199-28637-9. "Diana concert a 'perfect tribute'". BBC News. Archived from the original on 25 August 2007. Retrieved 25 August 2012. "Concert for Diana". BBC News. Archived from the original on 30 March 2015. Retrieved 18 May 2015. "What is the Concert for Diana?". BBC News. Archived from the original on 17 October 2015. Retrieved 23 April 2016. "Princes lead Diana memorial service tributes". The Telegraph. 31 August 2007. Archived from the original on 19 May 2015. Retrieved 18 May 2015. "Princes to lead Service of Thanksgiving for Diana, Princess of Wales". The Royal Family. 28 August 2007. Archived from the original on 25 May 2022. Retrieved 11 April 2022. "Handwritten Diana letters sell for £15,100 at auction". BBC News. 5 January 2017. Archived from the original on 7 February 2017. Retrieved 31 January 2017. "Princess Diana's letters about Prince Harry getting into trouble at school sell for five times more than expected". The Telegraph. 6 January 2017. Archived from the original on 13 January 2017. Retrieved 31 January 2017. "Princess Diana's handwritten letters fetch £67,900". BBC News. 18 March 2021. Archived from the original on 22 March 2021. Retrieved 27 March 2021. Gair, Kieran (1 February 2023). "Diana's letters reveal strain of her divorce with Charles". The Times. Archived from the original on 6 February 2023. Retrieved 6 February 2023. "Princess Diana fashion exhibition to feature classic outfits from 80s and 90s". The Guardian. 16 November 2016. Archived from the original on 29 January 2017. Retrieved 31 January 2017. Rayner, Gordon (15 November 2016). "Princess Diana's most iconic dresses being brought back to Kensington Palace to mark 20 years since her death". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 29 January 2017. Retrieved 31 January 2017. "Diana: Her Fashion Story". Historic Royal Palaces. Archived from the original on 6 June 2017. Retrieved 16 May 2017. Smout, Alistair; Addiso, Stephen (22 February 2017). "Princess Diana's dresses go on display in London, 20 years after her death". Reuters. Archived from the original on 12 March 2017. Retrieved 10 March 2017. "Princess Diana: Princes commission statue 20 years after her death". BBC News. 29 January 2017. Archived from the original on 29 January 2017. Retrieved 29 January 2017. "Princes William and Harry plan statue of their mother, Diana". The Guardian. 28 January 2017. Archived from the original on 31 January 2017. Retrieved 31 January 2017. "William and Harry visit Princess Diana memorial". BBC News. 30 August 2017. Archived from the original on 9 September 2017. Retrieved 9 September 2017. "Princess Diana remains UK's most beloved royal". CBS News. 20 August 2012. Archived from the original on 27 April 2021. Retrieved 27 April 2021. Jephson, Patrick (25 June 2011). "We will never forget how Princess Diana made us feel". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 3 February 2017. Retrieved 2 February 2017. White, Michael (31 August 2012). "Princess Diana's influence on the royal family lives on". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 3 February 2017. Retrieved 2 February 2017. Faulkner, Larissa J. (1997). "Shades of Discipline: Princess Diana, The U.S. Media, and Whiteness". Iowa Journal of Cultural Studies. 16 (1): 16–31. doi:10.17077/2168-569X.1224. S2CID 190075942. Archived from the original on 15 November 2022. Retrieved 15 November 2022. Bradford 2006, pp. 307–308. Ciccocioppo, Lucianna (26 September 1997). "The power of Diana's charisma". University of Alberta. Archived from the original on 24 May 2020. Retrieved 24 May 2020. "Patrick Jephson: Prince Charles Was Unable to Reconcile with Princess Diana's Extraordinary Popularity". The Independent. 31 August 2016. Archived from the original on 21 February 2017. Retrieved 2 February 2017. McFadden, Cynthia; Arons, Melinda (29 August 2007). "Princess Diana's Life and Legacy". ABC News. Archived from the original on 4 February 2017. Retrieved 2 February 2017. Wallace, Rob (26 May 2013). "'Rebel Royal Mum': Diana's Legacy as Parent". NBC News. Archived from the original on 4 February 2017. Retrieved 2 February 2017. Regan, Alex (31 August 2017). "Diana's embrace: The legacy she left her sons". BBC News. Archived from the original on 23 February 2018. Retrieved 3 March 2018. Hampson, Chris (28 August 2007). "Why Princess Diana still fascinates us". NBC News. Archived from the original on 4 February 2017. Retrieved 2 February 2017. Brown, Tina (October 1985). "The Mouse That Roared". Vanity Fair. Retrieved 2 December 2020. Gray, Paul (15 September 1997). "Farewell, Diana". Time. Archived from the original on 3 February 2017. Retrieved 2 February 2017. Howell, Georgina (September 1988). "Making the Best of It". Vanity Fair. Retrieved 2 December 2020. Carroll, Alicia (31 May 2012). "America's Obsession With Royalty Started With Princess Diana". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 3 February 2017. Retrieved 2 February 2017. Richard Weight, Patriots: National Identity in Britain 1940–2000 (2002) pp. 659, 681 "Tony Blair: Diana was a manipulator like me". The Telegraph. 31 August 2010. Archived from the original on 3 February 2017. Retrieved 2 February 2017. Alderson, Andrew (26 September 2009). "Criticism of Queen after death of Diana 'hugely upset' Queen Mother". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 2 February 2017. Retrieved 2 February 2017. Hoge, Warren (4 September 1997). "Royal Family, Stung by Critics, Responds to a Grieving Nation". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 3 February 2017. Retrieved 2 February 2017. Campbell, Alastair (29 May 2017). "Prince William on Diana, Princess of Wales". GQ. Retrieved 25 May 2021. "Man of the Year 1997". Time. Archived from the original on 16 February 2017. Retrieved 16 February 2017. "1987: Diana, Princess of Wales". Time. 5 March 2020. Retrieved 6 March 2020. "Great Britons 1–10". BBC via Wayback Machine. Archived from the original on 4 February 2004. Retrieved 22 December 2012. "The Princess and the Press". BBC News. Retrieved 1 December 2020. Cohen, Roger (6 September 1997). "Diana and the Paparazzi: A Morality Tale". The New York Times. Retrieved 2 December 2020. Conrad, Peter (16 June 2007). "Diana: the myth, 10 years on". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 3 February 2017. Retrieved 2 February 2017. Hitchens, Christopher (1 September 1997). "Mother Teresa or Mrs. Simpson: Which Was the Real Diana?". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 18 January 2020. Retrieved 1 December 2020. Holden, Michael (13 March 2014). "Princess Diana leaked royal directories to Murdoch tabloid, court hears". Reuters. Retrieved 26 April 2023. "Princess Diana's death was 'global event' says Blair". BBC News. 1 September 2010. Retrieved 27 November 2020. Dalrymple, Theodore (1997). "The Goddess of Domestic Tribulations". City Journal. Retrieved 5 December 2020. Roberts, Yvonne (29 August 1998). "One Year On: Dry your eyes! She was no saint and her death changed nothing". The Independent. Retrieved 1 December 2020. Freedland, Jonathan (12 August 2007). "A moment of madness?". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 3 February 2017. Retrieved 2 February 2017. Massie, Allan (12 April 2008). "Why Diana is still the spirit of the age". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 3 February 2017. Retrieved 2 February 2017. Lee Adams, William (2 April 2012). "All-Time 100 Fashion Icons: Princess Diana". Time. Archived from the original on 28 November 2016. Retrieved 1 February 2017. "Will Kate kick off a war of the Welles?". The Telegraph. 17 June 2015. Archived from the original on 2 April 2016. "The Woman We Loved". Newsweek. 17 June 2015. Archived from the original on 6 March 2016. "These were the boots that shaped the world". The Telegraph. 17 June 2015. Archived from the original on 17 November 2015. Paton, Elizabeth (22 February 2017). "Why Are We Still Obsessed With Princess Diana's Style?". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 8 November 2017. Retrieved 13 March 2017. Katz, Gregory (22 February 2017). "Dresses that tell a story: Princess Diana fashion exhibit to open at Kensington Palace". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on 3 April 2017. Retrieved 2 April 2017. Holt, Bethan (24 February 2017). "No gloves and high split skirts: How Princess Diana rewrote the rules of royal dressing". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 4 April 2017. Retrieved 3 April 2017. Elbaum, Rachel (30 August 2012). "Forever fashionable: Princess Diana's style legacy lives on". NBC News. Archived from the original on 2 December 2017. Retrieved 1 February 2017. Holt, Bethan (19 November 2016). "Why Princess Diana remains an enduring style icon for all generations". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 29 January 2017. Retrieved 1 February 2017. Ferrier, Morwenna (4 April 2016). "Why Rihanna's obsessed with Princess Diana". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 2 February 2017. Retrieved 1 February 2017. "Diana, Style Icon". CBS News. Archived from the original on 2 December 2017. Retrieved 1 February 2017. Hudson, Mark (22 February 2017). "Diana: Her Fashion Story, review: this riveting show of Diana's dresses shows just how magnificent she was". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 12 March 2017. Retrieved 10 March 2017. Tashjian, Rachel (23 February 2017). "How Princess Diana Became a Fashion Icon". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on 26 February 2017. Retrieved 3 April 2017. Mower, Sarah (1 November 2013). "Princess Diana's Iconic Style: Why We're Still Fascinated by Her Fashion Today". Vogue. Archived from the original on 25 November 2016. Retrieved 1 February 2017. Holt, Bethan (13 October 2016). "The modern way to dress like Princess Diana". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 24 April 2017. Retrieved 1 February 2017. Holmes, Elizabeth (9 November 2020). "Why Princess Diana's Fashion Will Never Go Out of Style". Vanity Fair. Retrieved 25 August 2021. Crimmens, Tamsin (17 November 2016). "Princess Diana's Iconic Fashion Moments". Elle. Archived from the original on 3 July 2017. Retrieved 1 February 2017. "Princess Diana's changing fashion style explored in exhibition". BBC News. 19 February 2017. Archived from the original on 12 March 2017. Retrieved 10 March 2017. Neel, Julia (15 April 2011). "Style File – Diana, Princess Of Wales". Vogue. Archived from the original on 21 November 2016. Retrieved 1 February 2017. Holt, Bethan (16 November 2020). "Revealed: why Princess Diana had to replace her beloved sheep jumper". The Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Retrieved 13 March 2023. "The Second Life of Princess Diana's Most Notorious Sweater". The New Yorker. 20 November 2020. Retrieved 13 March 2023. Adams, Rebecca (1 July 2013). "Princess Diana's Black Dress Was The Best 'Revenge' After Separation". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on 22 February 2017. Retrieved 1 February 2017. "The Inside Story: Diana, Princess of Wales's Vogue Covers". British Vogue. 5 September 2016. Retrieved 21 July 2021. Newbold, Alice (6 July 2021). "Gucci Has Reinvented One of Princess Diana's Favorite Handbags". Vogue. Retrieved 7 July 2021. Bongrand, Caroline; Müller, Florence (April 2011), "Lady Dior", in Éditions de La Martinière (ed.), Inspiration Dior (in French), Irina Antonova (preface), Paris: La Martinière, pp. 220–227, ISBN 978-2732446233, Inspi2011 Bennett, Catherine (25 February 2017). "Diana shook up the royals but they have their poise back now". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 2 April 2017. Retrieved 2 April 2017. "John Boyd, milliner who helped make Princess Diana a fashion icon, dies at 92". The Washington Post. 6 March 2018. "Discreet hatmaker who sparked a craze for British millinery after he designed Princess Diana's pink, ostrich-feathered going-away hat". The Times. 7 March 2018. "Queen unveils new Diana fountain". BBC News. 6 July 2004. Retrieved 16 September 2023. "Royals shun Diana memorial". BBC News. 30 June 2000. Retrieved 16 September 2023. "Diana's walkway unveiled". BBC News. 18 January 2000. Retrieved 2 July 2021. Pierce, Andrew (15 February 2007). "Brown launches Diana Award as charity". The Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 17 May 2011. Shearing, Hazel (1 July 2021). "William and Harry unite to unveil Diana statue at Kensington Palace". BBC News. Archived from the original on 1 July 2021. Retrieved 1 July 2021. "Austrians unveil memorial to Princess Diana". BBC News. 2 September 2013. Archived from the original on 13 January 2017. Retrieved 31 January 2017. Bennhold, Katrin (31 August 2007). "In Paris, 'pilgrims of the flame' remember Diana". International Herald Tribune. Archived from the original on 14 February 2008. Retrieved 23 April 2016. Silverman, Stephen M. (28 August 2002). "Paris Honors Diana with Two Memorials". People. Archived from the original on 7 February 2016. Retrieved 30 January 2016. Chazan, David (30 May 2019). "Paris pays homage to Princess Diana by naming a square after her, 22 years after fatal car crash". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 14 February 2020. "Princess Diana Honored on Postage Stamps: Online Sales from The Collectible Stamps Gallery". The Collectible Stamps Gallery. Archived from the original on 23 January 2016. Retrieved 1 February 2016. "1998 – (140) To the Memory of Princess Diana". HayPost. Archived from the original on 21 January 2014. Retrieved 23 April 2016. "1998, February, 4. Princess Diana". Azermarka. Archived from the original on 11 May 2015. Retrieved 23 August 2013. "Diana memorial unveiled". BBC News. 7 November 2002. Retrieved 29 May 2018. "Harrods unveils Diana, Dodi statue". CNN. 1 September 2005. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 30 January 2016. Johnston, Chris (13 January 2018). "'Tacky' statue of Diana and Dodi Fayed to be removed from Harrods". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 13 January 2018. Retrieved 23 January 2018. "Royal princess named Charlotte Elizabeth Diana". BBC News. London. 4 May 2015. Archived from the original on 7 May 2015. Retrieved 16 May 2015. "Princess Charlotte Elizabeth Diana: why William and Kate made their name choices for royal baby". The Telegraph. London. 4 May 2015. Archived from the original on 6 May 2015. Retrieved 16 May 2015. Foster, Max; Said-Moorhouse, Lauren (6 June 2021). "Meghan and Prince Harry welcome second child". CNN. Retrieved 6 June 2021. "Earl Spencer names baby daughter after Diana, Princess of Wales". The Telegraph. UK. 6 August 2012. Archived from the original on 5 February 2017. Retrieved 5 February 2017. Bastin, Giselle (Summer 2009). "Filming the Ineffable: Biopics of the British Royal Family". Auto/Biography Studies. 24 (1): 34–52. doi:10.1080/08989575.2009.10846787. S2CID 220313542. Archived from the original on 19 November 2015. Retrieved 21 August 2013. Tucker, Ken (11 December 1992). "Charles and Diana: Unhappily Ever After". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on 21 October 2013. Retrieved 14 August 2013. "Serena Scott Thomas". People. 28 March 2005. Archived from the original on 4 February 2017. Retrieved 4 February 2017. "Princess in Love". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on 5 February 2017. Retrieved 4 February 2017. Marks, Kathy (27 January 1998). "Legal fight to safeguard Diana's voice from exploitation by 'soundalike s'". The Independent. Archived from the original on 5 February 2017. Retrieved 4 February 2017. McNulty, Bernadette (19 November 2005). "Affairs to remember". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 25 December 2020. "Banished – Mrs Mary Johnson". BBC Two. Archived from the original on 9 March 2015. Retrieved 4 February 2017. "Diana: Last Days of a Princess TV Show". TV Guide. Archived from the original on 20 January 2013. Retrieved 24 December 2012. "The Murder of Princess Diana". TV Guide. Archived from the original on 4 February 2017. Retrieved 4 February 2017. "Diana film slammed by British press". BBC News. 6 September 2013. Archived from the original on 27 August 2017. Retrieved 4 February 2017. Kumar, Naveen (17 November 2021). "'Diana, The Musical' Review: A Royal Tragedy Turned Vacuous Rom-Com". Variety. Hall, Ellie (9 April 2019). ""The Crown" Just Cast Its Princess Diana". BuzzFeed. Retrieved 10 April 2019. Haring, Bruce (16 August 2020). "'The Crown' Adds Elizabeth Debicki As Princess Diana For Final Two Seasons". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on 16 August 2020. Retrieved 16 August 2020. Katz, David (14 January 2021). "Kristen Stewart joins the British royal family in Spencer". Cineuropa.org. Retrieved 25 August 2021. "About page for the HBO Documentary Film Diana, Our Mother: Her Life and Legacy". HBO. Archived from the original on 23 July 2017. Retrieved 25 July 2017. "Diana, Our Mother: Her Life and Legacy". ITV Press Centre. Retrieved 25 July 2017. "William And Harry To Share Memories Of Mother Diana In Intimate TV Documentary". HuffPost UK. 3 May 2017. Archived from the original on 27 August 2017. Retrieved 25 July 2017. "Diana, Princess of Wales". The Royal Family. Retrieved 21 April 2023. Jack, Ian (11 March 2005). "Lay of the last duchess". The Guardian. Retrieved 29 April 2021. Diana Spencer had also been the Duchess of Rothesay, and of Cornwall, the Baroness Renfrew, etc, as well as the Princess of Wales. de Lucia, Carmella (31 August 2017). "How Chester came to a standstill in the aftermath of Princess Diana's untimely death". Chester Chronicle. Retrieved 29 April 2021. de Lucia, Carmella (19 June 2014). "Help hospital recreate historic day". Chester Chronicle. Retrieved 29 April 2021. This year the hospital is celebrating three decades since Diana, Princess of Wales officially opened the building, and as a result it was named in her honour. "Why Prince Harry's wife will not be called Princess Meghan". BBC News. 30 November 2017. Retrieved 31 March 2023. "Tony coined the 'people's princess'". The Telegraph. London. 9 July 2007. Archived from the original on 22 June 2015. Retrieved 23 June 2015. "Palace and Spencers Agree: No HRH". BBC News. 8 September 1997. Retrieved 17 April 2021. Vickers, Hugo (1994), Royal Orders, Boxtree, p. 147, ISBN 9781852835101 "Royal Insight". The British Monarchy. Archived from the original on 6 August 2007. Retrieved 2 February 2023. "Prince William becomes honorary barrister". The Daily Telegraph. 7 July 2009. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 27 June 2019. The Prince is the sixth member of the Royal Family to be called to the Bench as a Royal Bencher and is following in the footsteps of the Queen Mother, called in 1944, and his mother Diana, Princess of Wales, called in 1988. "RCS: Faculty of Dental Surgery" (PDF). The Royal College of Surgeons. July 2016. Retrieved 16 August 2018. There were records of such diverse events of the endowment of the Nuffield Research Professor in Dental Science, the admission of HRH Diana Princess of Wales as an Honorary Fellow in Dental Surgery and ... "Freedom of Cardiff: List of recipients from 1886". BBC News. 24 February 2012. Retrieved 12 August 2018. "Honorary Freeman of the City and County of Cardiff" (PDF). cardiff.gov.uk. Retrieved 9 January 2020. "Diana Daffodils". Getty Images. February 2005. Retrieved 26 May 2021. Princess Diana in Northampton. YouTube. Archived from the original on 11 December 2021. Retrieved 26 May 2021. "Diana And Her Father Earl Spencer". Getty Images. February 2005. Retrieved 26 May 2021. "Freedom of the city & keys of the city". Portsmouth City Council. 27 November 2013. Retrieved 27 October 2018. C.D. Coulthard-Clark, Australia's Military Mapmakers, Oxford University Press, published 2000, ISBN 978-0-19-551343-1 "Honorary Appointments". Princess of Wales Own Regiment. Retrieved 30 April 2021. "No. 50148". The London Gazette. 10 June 1985. p. 8028. Ilse, Jess (30 June 2021). "What is a royal ship sponsor?". Royal Central. Retrieved 30 June 2021. "HMS VANGUARD NAMING CEREMONY WITH HRH DIANA THE PRINCESS OF WALES, BARROW-IN-FURNESS, 30 APRIL 1992 [Allocated Title]". Imperial War Museums. 30 April 1992. Retrieved 20 May 2022. "HMS VANGUARD COMMISSIONING CEREMONY WITH HRH DIANA, PRINCESS OF WALES, BARROW-IN-FURNESS, 14 AUGUST 1993 [Allocated Title]". Imperial War Museums. 14 August 1993. Retrieved 20 May 2022. Hamilton, Alan (16 November 1984). "Two royal princesses share a day in the limelight". The Times. London. p. 36. "Funeral of Diana, Princess of Wales" (PDF). Westminster Abbey. 6 September 1997. Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 August 2021. Retrieved 17 April 2021. Montague-Smith, Patrick (1968). Debrett's Peerage, Baronetage, Knightage and Companionage. Kelly's Directories. p. 24. "The Coat of Arms of HRH Prince William and HRH Prince Harry of Wales". College of Arms. Archived from the original on 14 November 2014. Retrieved 2 November 2014. Round, J.H. (1901) Studies in Peerage and Family History, A. Constable and Company, London, pp. 292–309 "A Modern Monarchy – The Royal Family appears to have overcome its troubles and the new generation has adapted skilfully to a changing Britain". The Times. 25 July 2013. Leading articles. Prince George of Cambridge, born on Monday, now has in his relatively recent line miners and labourers; something hard to contemplate a generation ago. David White (Somerset Herald) (23 July 2013). "The Windsors & the Middletons – A family tree". The Times. Pull-out supplement. Lowe, Mark Anthony (1860). Patronymica Britannica, A Dictionary of Family Names of the United Kingdom. London: Heritage Books, Inc. p. 325. ISBN 9780788404566. Archived from the original on 4 December 2017. Ziegler, Philip (1988). The Sixth Great Power: Barings 1762–1929. London: Collins. ISBN 978-0-00-217508-1. "A Brief History of Barings". Baring Archive. Archived from the original on 11 February 2013. Retrieved 11 April 2013. Bradford 2006, p. 31. "Charles 'amazed' by Lady Di's yes". 25 February 1981. Archived from the original on 17 November 2015. Retrieved 25 February 2015. Moncreiffe of that Ilk, Sir Iain (1982). Royal Highness. London: Hamish Hamilton. p. 38. Evans, Richard K. (2007). The Ancestry of Diana, Princess of Wales. Boston: New England Historic Genealogical Society. ISBN 9780880822084. Archived from the original on 10 December 2010. Retrieved 12 January 2017. Roberts, Gary Boyd. "The Royal Ancestry of Meghan Markle". New England Historic Genealogical Society. Archived from the original on 1 December 2017. Retrieved 16 December 2017. The Rev. William Skipper's ancestors Sir Philip Wentworth (died 1464) and Mary Clifford are ancestors also, in various lines, of both H.M. the late Queen Mother (and thus H.M. the Queen, the Prince of Wales, and Prince Harry) and of the late Diana, Princess of Wales. Roberts, Gary Boyd (30 November 2017). "The Shared Ancestry of (Rachel) Meghan Markle and Prince Harry" (PDF). American Ancestors. Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 December 2017. Retrieved 7 December 2017. Amos, Owen (27 November 2017). "The other American in Prince Harry's family". BBC News. Retrieved 12 November 2018. "New genetic evidence that Prince William, Duke of Cambridge, is the direct descendant of an Indian woman and that he carries her mitochondrial DNA" (PDF). BritainsDNA. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 July 2014. Retrieved 10 April 2015. "DNA tests reveal Prince William's Indian ancestry". CNN. 14 June 2013. Archived from the original on 10 September 2017. Retrieved 9 September 2017. Brown, David (14 June 2013). "Revealed: the Indian ancestry of William". The Times. p. 1. Sinha, Kounteya (16 June 2013). "Hunt on for Prince William's distant cousins in Surat". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 19 March 2015. Retrieved 11 August 2013. Hern, Alex (14 June 2013). "Are there ethical lapses in the Times' story on William's 'Indian ancestry'?". New Statesman. Archived from the original on 20 August 2013. Retrieved 11 August 2013. Although Eliza Kewark was indeed thought of as Armenian, it's not particularly surprising that she would have had Indian ancestors; the Armenian diaspora had been in India for centuries at the time of her birth, and even the most insular communities tend to experience genetic mixing over in that timescale. Williamson 1981a. Williamson 1981b. Bradford, Sarah (2006). Diana. New York; Toronto; London: Viking. ISBN 978-0-670-03807-7. Brandreth, Gyles (2004). Philip and Elizabeth: Portrait of a Marriage. London: Century. ISBN 978-0-71-266103-4. Brown, Tina (2007). The Diana Chronicles. London; New York: Doubleday. ISBN 978-0-385-51708-9. Dimbleby, Jonathan (1994). The Prince of Wales: A Biography. New York: William Morrow and Company. ISBN 978-0-68-812996-5. Morton, Andrew (1997) [1992]. Diana: Her True Story – In Her Own Words. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-68-485080-1. Smith, Sally Bedell (2000) [1999]. Diana in Search of Herself: Portrait of a Troubled Princess. Signet. ISBN 978-0-451-20108-9. Williamson, D. (1981a). "The Ancestry of Lady Diana Spencer". Genealogist's Magazine. 20 (6): 192–199. Williamson, D. (1981b). "The Ancestry of Lady Diana Spencer". Genealogist's Magazine. 20 (8): 281–282. Anderson, Christopher (2001). Diana's Boys: William and Harry and the Mother they Loved (1st ed.). United States: William Morrow. ISBN 978-0-688-17204-6. Bedell Smith, Sally (1999). Diana in Search of Herself: Portrait of a Troubled Princess. Times Books. ISBN 978-0-81-293030-6. Brennan, Kristine (1998). Diana, Princess of Wales. Philadelphia: Chelsea House. ISBN 978-0-79-104714-9. Burrell, Paul (2003). A Royal Duty. United States: HarperCollins Entertainment. ISBN 978-0-00-725263-3. Burrell, Paul (2007). The Way We Were: Remembering Diana. United States: HarperCollins Entertainment. ISBN 978-0-06-113895-9. Campbell, Lady Colin (1992). Diana in Private: The Princess Nobody Knows. London: St Martins Pr. ISBN 978-0-3120-8180-5. Caradec'h, Jean-Michel (2006). Diana. L'enquête criminelle (in French). Neuilly-sur-Seine: Michel Lafon. ISBN 978-2-7499-0479-5. Corby, Tom (1997). Diana, Princess of Wales: A Tribute. United States: Benford Books. ISBN 978-1-56649-599-8. Coward, Rosalind (2004). Diana: The Portrait. United Kingdom (other publishers worldwide): HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-00-718203-9. Davies, Jude (2001). Diana, A Cultural History: Gender, Race, Nation, and the People's Princess. Houndmills, Hampshire; New York: Palgrave. ISBN 978-0-33-373688-3. OCLC 46565010. Denney, Colleen (2005). Representing Diana, Princess of Wales: Cultural Memory and Fairy Tales Revisited. Madison, New Jersey: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press. ISBN 978-0-83-864023-4. OCLC 56490960. Edwards, Anne (2001). Ever After: Diana and the Life She Led. New York: St. Martin's Press. ISBN 978-0-312-25314-1. OCLC 43867312. Frum, David (2000). How We Got bare: The '70s. New York: Basic Books. ISBN 978-0-46-504195-4. Mattern, Joanne (2006). Princess Diana. DK Biography. New York: DK Publishing. ISBN 978-0-756-61614-4. Morton, Andrew (2004). Diana: In Pursuit of Love. United States: Michael O'Mara Books. ISBN 978-1-84317-084-6. Rees-Jones, Trevor (2000). The Bodyguard's Story: Diana, the Crash, and the Sole Survivor. United States: Little, Brown. ISBN 978-0-316-85508-2. Steinberg, Deborah Lynn (1999). Mourning Diana: Nation, Culture and the Performance of Grief. London: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-41-519393-1. Taylor, John A. (2000). Diana, Self-Interest, and British National Identity. Westport, CN: Praeger. ISBN 978-0-27-596826-7. OCLC 42935749. Thomas, James (2002). Diana's Mourning: A People's History. Cardiff: University of Wales Press. ISBN 978-0-70-831753-2. OCLC 50099981. Turnock, Robert (2000). Interpreting Diana: Television Audiences and the Death of a Princess. London: British Film Institute. ISBN 978-0-85-170788-4. OCLC 43819614. Diana, Princess of Wales at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Textbooks from Wikibooks Data from Wikidata Diana, Princess of Wales at the official website of the Royal Family Portraits of Diana, Princess of Wales at the National Portrait Gallery, London Diana, Princess of Wales at IMDb FBI Records: The Vault – Diana, Princess of Wales at fbi.gov Appearances on C-SPAN Portals:  Monarchy  United Kingdom  England  Wales  Scotland