The striped hog-nosed skunk (Conepatus semistriatus) is a skunk species from Central and South America (from southern Mexico to northern Peru, and in the extreme east of Brazil). This species of skunk is considered a generalist species, because they are able to thrive in, and withstand, disturbed environmental conditions. They can live in a wide range of habitats, including carrasco, arboreal caatinga, mango orchard, and dry forest scrub and occasionally, in rainforest. The striped hog-nosed skunk inhabits mainly the foothills, and partly timbered or brushy, sections of their general range. They usually avoid hot desert areas and heavy stands of timber. The largest populations occur in rocky, sparsely timbered areas. It is a nocturnal solitary animal, feeding mainly on invertebrates, small vertebrates and fruits. When temperature rises during the day, Conepatus semistriatus finds shelter in cool burrows and rests to maintain its body temperature and prevent water loss. Although C. semistriatus are predominantly nocturnal, studies show there is no significant correlation between brightness and activity. Striped skunk skeleton Skunk heart Teeth of a striped skunk Cuarón, A.D.; Helgen, K.; Reid, F. (2016). "Conepatus semistriatus". IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. 2016: e.T41633A45210987. doi:10.2305/IUCN.UK.2016-1.RLTS.T41633A45210987.en. Retrieved 13 November 2021. Boddaert P. 1785. Elenchus Animalium. Dias, Douglas de Matos. "Spatiotemporal ecology of the striped hog-nosed skunk Conepatus semistriatus (Carnivora, Mephitidae) in a seasonally dry forest of northeastern Brazil". Brill Academic Publishers. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help) Gitana Nunes Cavalcanti; Luis Diego Alfaro-Alvarado; Rodrigues Guimaraes; Henrique Flavio. "Home range and activity patterns of Conepatus semistriatus (Carnivora, Mephitidae) in Emas National Park, Brazil". Brill Academic Publishers. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help) Emmons L. H. & Feer F. 1997 Neotropical Rainforest Mammals, A Field Guide. Media related to Conepatus semistriatus at Wikimedia Commons v t e