Flotilla admiral is the lowest flag rank, a rank above captain, in the modern navies of Belgium, Bulgaria, Denmark, Finland, Germany and Sweden. It corresponds to the rank of commodore in the navies of the United Kingdom and certain other countries or rear admiral (lower half) in the navy of the United States. Flottillenadmiral, short FltlAdm in lists FADM, (en: Flotilla admiral) is the lowest flag officer rank in the German Navy, corresponding to command of a US Navy Rear Admiral (lower half) or Commodore (Royal Navy). It is equivalent to Brigadegeneral in the Bundeswehr or to Admiralarzt/Generalarzt, Admiralapotheker/Generalapotheker in the Zentraler Sanitätsdienst der Bundeswehr. Its rank insignia, worn on the sleeves and shoulders, are one five-pointed star above a big gold stripe and a narrow one (without the star when rank loops are worn). It is grade B6 in the pay rules of the Federal Ministry of Defence. The sequence of ranks (top-down approach) in that particular group is as follows: OF-9: Admiral (Germany) / General (Germany) OF-8: Vizeadmiral / Generalleutnant OF-7: Konteradmiral / Generalmajor OF-6: Flottillenadmiral / Brigadegeneral Flottieljeadmiraal (Belgian Navy) Флотилен адмирал Flotilen admiral (Bulgarian Navy) Flotilleadmiral (Royal Danish Navy) Lippueamiraali Flottiljamiral (Finnish Navy) Flottillenadmiral (German Navy) Flotiles admirālis (Latvian Naval Forces) Flotilės admirolas (Lithuanian Naval Force) Flottiljamiral (Royal Swedish Navy) The abbreviation "OF" stands for de: "Offizier / en: officer / fr: officier / ru: офицер" "ЗАКОН ЗА ОТБРАНАТА И ВЪОРЪЖЕНИТЕ СИЛИ НА РЕПУБЛИКА БЪЛГАРИЯ". lex.bg (in Bulgarian). Глава седма. ВОЕННА СЛУЖБА. 12 May 2009. Retrieved 25 May 2021. "Søværnets Gradstegn" (PDF). forsvaret.dk (in Danish). Danish Defence. 2018. Retrieved 26 May 2021. "Sotilasarvot Puolustusvoimissa". puolustusvoimat.fi (in Finnish). Finnish Defence Forces. Retrieved 26 May 2021. "Dienstgradabzeichen Marine". bundeswehr.de (in German). Bundeswehr. Retrieved 30 May 2021. "Pakāpju iedalījums". mil.lv/lv (in Latvian). Latvian National Armed Forces. Retrieved 26 May 2021. "Karių laipsnių ženklai". kariuomene.kam.lt (in Lithuanian). Ministry of National Defence (Lithuania). Retrieved 26 May 2021. "Nya gradbeteckningar införs". Försvarsmakten. 2019-10-01. Retrieved 2019-10-02. v t e