Concordia Research Station, which opened in 2005, is a French–Italian research facility that was built 3,233 m (10,607 ft) above sea level at a location called Dome C on the Antarctic Plateau, Antarctica. It is located 1,100 km (680 mi) inland from the French research station at Dumont D'Urville, 1,100 km (680 mi) inland from Australia's Casey Station and 1,200 km (750 mi) inland from the Italian Zucchelli Station at Terra Nova Bay. Russia's Vostok Station is 560 km (350 mi) away. The Geographic South Pole is 1,670 km (1,040 mi) away. The facility is also located within Australia's claim on Antarctica, the Australian Antarctic Territory. Concordia Station is the third permanent, all-year research station on the Antarctic Plateau besides Vostok Station (Russian) and the Amundsen–Scott South Pole Station (U.S.) at the Geographic South Pole. It is jointly operated by scientists from France and Italy and regularly hosts ESA scientists. In 1992, France built a new station on the Antarctic Plateau. The program was later joined by Italy in 1993. In 1995, Pr. Jean Vernin from University of Nice Sophia-Antipolis and Pr. Giorgio Dall'Oglio from University of Rome performed the first scientific experience towards a site qualification at Dome C. In 1996, a French-Italian team established a summer camp at Dome C. The two main objectives of the camp were the provision of logistical support for the European Project for Ice Coring in Antarctica (EPICA) and the construction of a permanent research station. The new all-year facility, Concordia Station, became operational in 2005. The first winterover began with a staff of 13 (eleven French and 2 Italians) in February 2005. Most of the cargo is moved to Dome C by traverse (called raid) from Dumont d'Urville Station, covering 1,200 kilometres (750 mi) in 7 to 12 days depending on weather conditions. Station personnel and light cargo arrive by air, landing on a Skiway, using the Twin Otters or Basler BT-67 flying from DDU or Zucchelli Station at 1,200 kilometres (750 mi). Dome C is situated on top of the Antarctic Plateau. No animals or plants live at a distance of more than a few tens of kilometers from the Southern Ocean. However, south polar skuas have been spotted overflying the station, 1,200 km away from their nearest food sources. It is believed that these birds have learned to cross the continent instead of circumnavigating it. Concordia Station shares many stressor characteristics similar to that of long-duration deep-space missions, in particular extreme isolation and confinement, and therefore serves as a useful analogue platform for research relevant to space medicine. During the winter, the crew are isolated from the outside world, having no transportation and limited communication for 9 months and live a prolonged period in complete darkness, at an altitude almost equivalent to 4000m at the equator. This creates physiological and psychological strains on the crew. Concordia station is particularly useful for the study of chronic hypobaric hypoxia, stress secondary to confinement and isolation, circadian rhythm and sleep disruption, individual and group psychology, telemedicine, and astrobiology. Concordia station has been proposed as one of the real-life Earth-based analogues for long-duration deep-space missions. In the 1970s, Dome C was the site of ice core drilling by field teams of several nations. In the 1990s, Dome C was chosen for deep ice core drilling by the European Project for Ice Coring in Antarctica (EPICA). Drilling at Dome C began in 1996 and was completed on December 21, 2004, reaching a drilling depth of 3270.2 m, 5 m above bedrock. The age of the oldest recovered ice is estimated to be ca. 900,000 years. Concordia Station has been identified as a suitable location for extremely accurate astronomical observations. The transparency of the Antarctic atmosphere permits the observation of stars even when the sun is at an elevation angle of 38°. Other advantages include the very low infrared sky emission, the high percentage of cloud-free time and the low aerosol and dust content of the atmosphere. The median seeing measured with a DIMM Differential Image Motion Monitor placed on top of an 8.5 m high tower is 1.3 ± 0.8 arcseconds. This is significantly worse than most major observatory sites, but similar to other observatories in Antarctica. However, Lawrence et al. consider other features of the site and conclude that "Dome C is the best ground-based site to develop a new astronomical observatory". Note however that this was written before whole-atmospheric seeing measurements had been made at Dome C. Thanks to the Single Star Scidar SSS, Vernin, Chadid and Aristidi et al. and Giordano, Vernin and Chadid et al. finally demonstrated that most of the optical turbulence is concentrated within the first 30 m atmospheric level at Dome C. The rest of the atmosphere is very quiet with a seeing of about 0.3-0.4 arcseconds, and the overall seeing is somewhat around 1.0 arcseconds. Launched in 2007, PAIX the first robotic multi-color Antarctica Photometer gives a new insight to cope with unresolved stellar enigma and stellar oscillation challenges and offers a great opportunity to benefit from an access to the best astronomical site on Earth –Dome C–. Indeed, Chadid, Vernin, Preston et al. implement, for the first time from the ground, a new way to study the stellar oscillations, pulsations and their evolutionary properties with long uninterrupted and continuous precision observations over 150 days, and without the regular interruptions imposed by the Earth rotation. PAIX achieves astrophysical UBVRI bands time-series measurements of stellar physics fields, challenging photometry from Space. The Antarctic Search for Transiting ExoPlanets (ASTEP) programme is composed of two telescopes: a 10 cm refractor installed in 2008, and a 40 cm telescope installed in 2010 and upgraded in 2022. The climate at Dome C where Concordia Station is located is frigid all year round, being one of the coldest places on Earth. It has a polar ice cap climate (Köppen EF), with maximums ranging from −24.8 °C (−12.6 °F) in December to −62 °C (−80 °F) in May, mean ranging from −30.4 °C (−22.7 °F) in December to −65.3 °C (−85.5 °F) in May and minimums ranging from −36.1 °C (−33.0 °F) in December to −68.7 °C (−91.7 °F) in May. The annual average air temperature is −54.5 °C (−66.1 °F). The station has never recorded a temperature above freezing; the warmest temperature recorded was −5.4 °C (22.3 °F) in January.[year needed] Temperatures can fall below −80 °C (−112 °F) in winter, and the coldest recorded temperature was −84.6 °C (−120.3 °F) in August 2010; one of the coldest temperatures ever recorded on Earth. Humidity is low and it is also very dry, with very little precipitation throughout the year. Dome C does not experience the katabatic winds typical for the coastal regions of Antarctica because of its elevated location and its relative distance from the edges of the Antarctic Plateau. Typical wind speed in winter is 2.8 m/s. While the station has been in use for summer campaigns since December 1997, the first winterover (February to October) was only made in 2005. During this period, the station is inaccessible, requiring total autonomy. The first winter began in mid-February 2005, with thirteen wintering (eleven French people and two Italians): Michel Munoz: station leader, plumber,  France Roberto Dicasilati: physician,  Italy Christophe Mozer: powerhouse chief,  France Pascal Bordais: radio, electronics, computers,  France Emanuele Salvietti: glaciologist,  Italy Claire Le Calvez: technical chief,  France Michel Galland: electrician,  France Jean-Louis Duraffourg: chef,  France Abdelkarim Agabi (Karim Agabi): astronomer,  France Stéphane Beausire: boilermaker, welder,  France Jean Elegoet: vehicle mechanic,  France Jean-François Jurvilliers: multipurpose technician,  France Guillaume Dargaud: climatologist,  France (under contract with the Italian National Antarctic Research Program – PNRA) In September 2005 the highest temperature was −48 °C, with an average in August of −60.2 °C and a record of −78.6 °C on 1 September. At these temperatures, trips outside had to be performed with the utmost care. Those going outside travelled at least in pairs and were equipped with a radio, spare batteries and a full fleece suit, with only the eyes at times visible. Italian Glaciologist Emanuele Salvietti had to take snow samples every day one kilometre from the base. As he had to walk (because no vehicle operates at these temperatures), he built a full face mask, with only a pipe to breathe. The slightest mistake would lead to certain injury, as astronomer Agabi Karim explained: "Burns on the cheeks and eyelashes glued to the lens of the telescope," after exposure to the freezing cold. The second winter was conducted from February to November 2006 with a team of ten wintering (six French, four Italian and 1 American): Minh Ly Pham Minh: station leader, physician,  France Michele Impara: computer science,  Italy Loïc Le Bechec: chef,  France Lucia Agnoletto: seismologist,  Italy Eric Aristidi: astronomer,  France Omar Cerri: glaciologist,  Italy Shaun Deshommes: technical chief,  France Elyseo D'Eramo: mechanic,  Italy José Dos Santos: electrician,  France Miguel Ravoux: plumber,  France Marius Aiyenero: scentist,  America The record temperature for this winter was measured at −80 °C on 5 September 2006 at 2:37 ET was renewed several times. The third winter ran from February to November 2007 with a team of wintering composed of fourteen people (eight French and six Italian): François Jeanneaux: engineer,  France Jean-Pierre Pillisio: plumber,  France Carlos Marsal: chef,  France Maurizio Busetto: climatologist,  Italy Yvan Levy: technical chief,  France Nicolas Le Parc: electrician,  France Christophe Choley: mechanic,  France Federico Miliacca: computer and telecommunications,  Italy Djamel Mékarnia: astronomer,  France Runa Briguglio: astronomer,  Italy Giuseppe Soriani: surgeon,  Italy Pietro di Felice: station leader, engineer,  Italy Benedict Cuisset: technical,  France Alessandro Iacomino: glaciologist,  Italy The average temperature was −65 °C and the minimum temperature recorded was −81.9 °C reached on September 5. The fourth winter took place from 31 January 2008 to 8 November 2008 with a team consisting of thirteen winter-overs (seven French and six Italian): Erick Bondoux: astronomer,  France Laurent Bonnardot: biomedical,  France Zalpha Challita: astronomer,  France Giorgio Deidda: chef,  Italy Sébastien Denamur: mechanic,  France Laurent Fromont: electrician,  France Daniele Frosini: glaciologist,  Italy Patrick LeRoy: technical chief,  France Fabrizio Martinet: plumber,  Italy Roberto Rainis: doctor,  Italy Lucia Sabbatini: astrophysicist,  Italy Riccardo Schioppo: climatologist,  Italy Jean-François Vanacker: station leader, radio,  France The fifth wintering took place from February 2009 to November 2009 with a team of twelve people (eight French, three Italian and one British): Massimiliano Faiella: technical chief,  Italy Domenico Fasano: chef,  Italy William Frinot: plumber,  France Laura Genoni: glaciologist,  Italy Caroline Jullian: atmospheric chemistry,  France Alexander Leluc: mechanic,  France Eric Lotz: station leader, physician,  France Denis Petermann: astronomer,  France Cyprien Pouzenc: astronomer,  France Alex Salam: ESA biomedical research,  United Kingdom Eric Tragin: electrician,  France Jonathan Zaccaria: radio, computer, science support,  France This Wintering took place with a team of thirteen (six French, six Italian and one Czech): Jean-François Vanacker: station leader,  France Ales Rybka: ESA biomedical research,  Czech Republic Karim Agabi: astronomer,  France Alessandro Bambini: electrician,  Italy Arthur Le Forestier: technical chief,  France Boris Padovan: computer, telecommunications,  Italy Christophe Rouy: mechanic,  France Daniele Karlicek: glaciologist,  Italy Giorgio Deidda: chef,  Italy Jean-Marie Moysan: plumber,  France Lorenzo Moggio: atmospheric chemistry,  Italy Rosa Forgittoni: doctor,  Italy Sylvain Lafont: glaciologist,  France The seventh wintering took place with a team of 14 people (seven French, six Italian and one British): Andrea Cesana: station leader, doctor,  Italy Eoin MacDonald: ESA biomedical research,  United Kingdom Djamel Mekarnia: astronomer,  France Eric Aristidi: astronomer,  France Alessandro Giusto: electrician,  Italy Sergeant Frederic: technical chief,  France Paolo Perfetti: computer, telecommunications,  Italy David Colin: mechanic,  France Domenico Romano: astronomer, glaciologist,  Italy Andrea Ballarini: chef,  Italy Vivien Koutcheroff: plumber,  France Ilann Bourgeois: atmospheric chemistry, glaciologist,  France Pascal Robert: technician seismology, magnetism,  France Angelo Galeandro: meteorologist,  Italy The eighth wintering took place with a team of 13 people (seven French, four Italian, one Russian and one British): Erick Bondoux: station leader, electronic technician for science,  France Alexander Kumar: Station physician and ESA biomedical research MD,  United Kingdom Barbara Grolla: nurse anesthetist,  France Guillaume Bouchez: astronomer,  France Alessandro Bambini: electrotechnician,  Italy Stephane Calvo: technical chief,  France Roberto D'Amato: informatician, telecommunications,  Italy Bruno Limouzy: mecanician,  France Mattia Bonazza: glaciologist, atmospheric chemistry,  Italy Giorgio Deidda: chef,  Italy Gérard Guérin: plumber,  France Sebastien Aubin: glaciologist, atmospheric chemistry,  France Igor Petenko: atmospheric science and climate,  Russia. The ninth wintering took place with a team of 15 people (nine French, five Italian and one Greek): Anne-Marie Courant: station leader, physician,  France Evangelos Kaimakamis: ESA biomedical research,  Greece Helene Faradji: astronomer,  France Christophe Leroy Dos Santos: astronomer,  France Yann Reinert: astronomer,  France Jean Gabriel Coll: electrician,  France Yannick Marin: technical chief,  France Bruno Epifania: computer, telecommunications,  Italy Simon Reuze: mechanic,  France Elio Padoan: glaciologist, atmospheric chemistry,  Italy Luigi Vailati: chef,  Italy Olivier Delanoë: Plumber,  France Albane Barbero: glaciologist, atmospheric chemistry, meteorological maintenance,  France Antonio Litterio: electronic technician for science,  Italy Simonetta Montaguti: atmospheric science and climate,  Italy The tenth wintering took place with a team of 13 people (six French, five Italian, one Russian and one Greek): Bruno Limouzy: Electrical motors,  France Giorgio Deidda: Chef,  Italy Tindari Ceraolo: Physician,  Italy Adrianos Golemis: ESA biomedical research,  Greece Pierre Pejoine: Mechanic,  France Paride Legovini: Physicist, Electronic technician for science,  Italy Julien Ribet: Electrotechnician,  France Tommaso Nicosia: Computer, telecommunications,  Italy Daniele Tavagnacco: Astrophysicist,  Italy Olivier Haye: Technical Chief, plumbing and heating,  France Cecile Lenormant: Chemist,  France Igor Petenko: Atmospheric science and climate,  Russia Xavier Joffrin: Astronomy,  France. During the 2014 Antarctic winter Concordia was an active amateur radio station: Paride Legovini operated from there on a weekly basis with call sign IA/IZ3SUS. The HF radio equipment consists in a Rohde & Schwarz XK2100L transceiver with a 150W RF output and a delta loop antenna located a few hundreds of meters away from the station. The analemma (path that the sun follows in the sky if photographed at precisely the same time every week through the course of a year) was imaged for the first time ever in Antarctica by Adrianos Golemis during the 10th winterover mission at Concordia Station (2013–2014). The resulting composite exposure image was selected as NASA Astronomy Picture of the Day (APOD) on 23 September 2015. The eleventh wintering is taking place from February 2015 to November 2015 with a team of 13 people (six French, five Italian, one British and one Swiss): Mario Salza: Station Leader, Information and Communications Technology (ICT),  Italy Yannick Marin: Technical Manager and Electrical motors,  France Antonietta Roveran: Physician,  Italy Roxanne Jacob: Glaciology and Atmospheric Chemistry,  France Luca Ficara: Chef,  Italy Guillaume Poirot: Mechanic,  France Giampietro Casasanta: Glaciology and Atmospheric Remote Sensing,  Italy Benoit Laurent: Electronics for Science,  France Markus Wildi: Astrophysics,   Switzerland Benoit Joncheray: Plumbing and Heating Engineering Technician,  France Lorenzo Moggio: Atmospheric physics,  Italy Beth Healey: ESA Biomedical Research,  United Kingdom Rémi Puaud: Electrical Engineering Technician,  France The twelfth winter began on February 10, 2016, with twelve overwintering (five Italian, six French, one Dutch): Vitale Stanzione: Station Leader, Glaciology,  Italy Elvio Lazzarini: Medical Doctor,  Italy Alessandro Fausto: Information and Communications Technology (ICT),  Italy Luciano Milano: Electronics for Science,  Italy Bertrand Bonnefoy: Chef,  France Floris van den Berg: ESA Biomedical Research MD,  the Netherlands Georges Karakasidis: Electrician,  Belgium Henri van den Hove: Plumbing and Heating Engineering Technician,  France Olivier Leloir: Technical Chief,  France Gaetan Quere: Mechanic,  France Simonetta Montaguti: Atmospheric Science and Climate,  Italy Nicole Hueber: Glaciology and Atmospheric Chemistry,  France The thirteenth winter began on February 9, 2017, with thirteen overwintering (five French, seven Italian, one Belgian Canadian): Simone Chicarella: Electronics for Science, Station Leader,  Italy Andrea Tosti: Information and Communications Technology (ICT).  Italy Didier L'Hôte: Technical Chief,  France Aldo Clemenza: Medical Doctor,  Italy Simone Marcolin: Chef,  Italy Laura Caiazzo: Glaciology and Atmospheric Chemistry,  Italy Sébastien Jullien-Palletier: Electrician,  France Yuri de Prà: Astronomy,  Italy Carole Dangoisse: ESA Biomedical Research MD,  Belgium  Canada Alexis Robin: Plumbing and Heating Engineering Technician,  France Pol Monfort: Mechanic,  France Alfonso Ferrone: Atmospheric Science and Climate,  Italy Paul Serre: Chemistry,  France The fourteenth winter began on February 6, 2018, with thirteen overwintering (five French, seven Italian, one Austrian): Moreno Baricevic: Electronics for Science,  Italy Remi Bras: Electrician,  France Coline Bouchayeur: Glaciology and Atmospheric Chemistry,  France Andre Bourre: Technical Chief,  France Marco Buttu: Astronomy,  Italy Filippo Cali' Quaglia: Atmospheric Science and Climate,  Italy Florentin Camus: Plumbing and Heating Engineering Technician,  France Mario Giorgioni: Information and Communications Technology (ICT),  Italy Carmen Possnig: ESA Biomedical Research MD,  Austria Jacques Rattel: Mechanic,  France Alberto Razeto: Medical Doctor,  Italy Marco Smerilli: Chef,  Italy Cyprien Verseux: Glaciology and Atmospheric Chemistry, Station Leader,  France  Italy The fifteenth winter began on February 13, 2019, with thirteen overwintering (five French, six Italian, one Danish and one Australian): Nadja Albertsen: ESA Biomedical Research MD,  Denmark Damien Beloin: Mechanic,  France Ivan Bruni: Astronomy,  Italy Massimiliano Catricalà: Electronics for Science, Station Leader,  Italy Giuditta Celli: Glaciology and Atmospheric Chemistry,  Italy Meganne Louise Christian: Atmospheric Science and Climate,  Australia  Italy Gianluca Ghiselli: Medical Doctor,  Italy Daniele Giambruno: Chef,  Italy Thibault Gillet: Electrician,  France Bertrand Laine: Technical Chief,  France Julien Le Goff: Plumbing and Heating Engineering Technician,  France Alessandro Mancini: Information and Communications Technology (ICT),  Italy Julien Moyé: Glaciology and Atmospheric Chemistry,  France The sixteenth winter began on February 7, 2020, with twelve overwintering (seven French, four Italian, one Dutch): Camille Bréant: Glaciology and Atmospheric Chemistry,  France Elisa Calmon: Chef,  France Andrea Ceinini: Mechanic,  Italy Loredana Faraldi: Medical Doctor,  Italy Sylvain Guesnier: Chief of the power plant,  France Luca Ianniello: Information and Communications Technology (ICT),  Italy Vivien Koutcheroff: Plumbing and Technical Chief,  France Wenceslas Marie Sainte: Electronics for Science,  France Inès Ollivier: Glaciology and Atmospheric Chemistry,  France Bastien Prat: Electrician,  France Alberto Salvati: Atmospheric Science and Climate, Station Leader,  Italy Stijn Thoolen: ESA Biomedical Research MD,  Netherlands The seventeenth winter began on January 31, 2021, with twelve overwintering (five French, six Italian, one British): Cédric Albert: Electrician,  France Dennis Appere: Glaciology and Atmospheric Chemistry,  France Fabio Borgognoni: Glaciology and Atmospheric Chemistry,  Italy Marco Buttu: Electronics for Science,  Italy Rodolfo Canestrari: Atmospheric Science and Climate, Station Leader,  Italy Giuseppina Canestrelli: Medical Doctor,  Italy Charles Delgrange: Mechanic,  France Simone Marcolin: Chef,  Italy Quentin Perret: Boilermaker, Welder and Multipurpose Technician,  France Jean-François Roques: Technical Chief,  France Nicholas Smith: ESA Biomedical Research MD,  United Kingdom David Tosolini: Information and Communications Technology (ICT),  Italy The eighteenth winter began on 7 February 2022, with thirteen overwintering (six French, six Italian and one Swedish): Massimiliano Catricalà: Station Leader, Electronics for Science,  Italy Fabien Farge: Medical Doctor,  France Angelo Galeandro: Atmospheric Science and Climate,  Italy Thomas Gasparetto: Astronomy,  Italy Nicolas Girard: Electrician,  France Stanislas Grabowski: Boilermaker, Welder and Multipurpose Technician,  France Hannes Hagson: ESA Biomedical Research MD,  Sweden Alessia Nicosia: Glaciology,  Italy Thomas Antonio Massimo Pagano: Information and Communications Technology (ICT),  Italy Frederic Sergent: Technical Chief,  France Marco Smerilli: Chef,  Italy Pierre Supiot: Mechanic,  France Julien Witwicky: Glaciology and Atmospheric Chemistry,  France The nineteenth winter began on 7 February 2023, with twelve overwintering (six French, five Italian and one German): Claude Blanc: Mechanic,  France Rudy Bunel: Technical Chief,  France Davide Carlucci: Station Leader, Electronics for Science,  Italy Stéphane Fraize: Medical Doctor,  France Sascha Freigang: ESA Biomedical Research MD,  Germany Jacopo Lucini Paioni: Chef,  Italy Vincent Morel: Electrotechnician,  France Domenico Mura: Astronomy,  Italy Damien Pessieau: Plumbing and Heating Engineering Technician,  France Luca Rago: Glaciology,  Italy Damien Till: Glaciology and Atmospheric Chemistry,  France Andrea Traverso: Information and Communications Technology (ICT),  Italy The twentieth winter began on 31st January 2024, with thirteen overwintering (seven French, five Italian and one Swiss): Marco Buttu: Electronic of Science,  Italy Gabriele Carugati: Station Leader, Glaciologist, Atmosphere Chemistry  Italy Sergio Cosma: Chef,  Italy Vincent Deloupy: Astronomer,  France Fanny Larcher: Medical Doctor,  France Julien Laurancy: Electrotechnician,  France Mario Lecca: Physics of the Atmosphere,  Italy Quentin Lecoutey: Mechanic and Vehicles,  France Manon Mastin: Glaciologist and Atmospheric Chemist,  France Giovani Rosario: Plumbing and Heating Engineering,  France Frederic Sergent: Technical Chief, Electric Central Mechanic,  France Jessica Studer: ESA Biomedical Research MD,   Swiss Andrea Traverso: Information and Communications Technology (ICT),  Italy List of research stations in Antarctica List of Antarctic field camps List of airports in Antarctica Amundsen–Scott South Pole Station Casey Station Concordia Subglacial Lake Dome A (or Dome Argus) Dome C (also known as Dome Charlie or Dome Circe) Dome F (or Dome Fuji) Dumont d'Urville Station EPICA Ice core Law Dome Neumayer Station III Vostok Station Zucchelli Station List of Mars analogs Antarctic Station Catalogue (PDF) (catalogue). Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs. August 2017. p. 73. ISBN 978-0-473-40409-3. Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 October 2022. Retrieved 16 January 2023. "AT03 Concordia Station". Airport Nav Finder. Retrieved 15 October 2018. "A minimalist photo taken from space reveals the incredible isolation of Antarctic researchers on Earth". Quartz. 11 January 2017. Retrieved 28 February 2023. Akshat, Rathi (14 August 2015). "What life is like in the most remote corner of the world". Quartz. Retrieved 12 November 2018. Salam, Alex (2009). "The coldest job on earth". BMJ: b2453. doi:10.1136/bmj.b2453. S2CID 79621954. "In the Cornucopia of the European Project of Ice Coring in Antarctica: the oldest Antarctic ice core" (Press release). Alfred-Wegener-Institut. 13 January 2005. Archived from the original on 3 January 2006. Abdelkrim Agabi; Eric Aristidi; Max Azouit; Eric Fossat; Francois Martin; Tatiana Sadibekova; Jean Vernin; Aziz Ziad (2006). "First whole atmosphere night-time seeing measurements at Dome C, Antarctica". Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific. 118 (840): 344–348. arXiv:astro-ph/0510418. Bibcode:2006PASP..118..344A. doi:10.1086/498728. S2CID 15833099. Jon S. Lawrence; Michael C. B. Ashley; Andrei Tokovinin; Tony Travouillon (16 September 2004). "Exceptional astronomical seeing conditions above Dome C in Antarctica" (PDF). Nature. 431 (7006): 278–281. Bibcode:2004Natur.431..278L. doi:10.1038/nature02929. PMID 15372024. S2CID 4388419. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 March 2006. → FAQ by the authors Archived 15 February 2006 at the Wayback Machine {Vernin, J., Chadid, M., Aristidi, E., Trinquet, H. and van der Swaelmen, M.}, title = "{First single star scidar measurements at Dome C, Antarctica}", journal = {AP}, keywords = {atmospheric effects, site testing, turbulence, instrumentation: detectors, methods: data analysis, methods: observational}, year = 2009, month = jun, volume = 500, pages = {1271-1276}, doi = {10.1051/0004-6361/200811119}, adsurl = {http://cdsads.u-strasbg.fr/abs/2009A%26A...500.1271V}, adsnote = {Provided by the SAO/NASA Astrophysics Data System} } {Giordano, C., Vernin, J., Chadid, M. and Aristidi, E. and Trinquet, H.}, title = "{Dome C Site Characterization in 2006 with Single-Star SCIDAR}", journal = {PASP}, year = 2012, month = may, volume = 124, pages = {494-506}, doi = {10.1086/665667}, adsurl = {http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2012PASP..124..494G}, adsnote = {Provided by the SAO/NASA Astrophysics Data System} } {Chadid, M., Vernin, Chapellier, E., Trinquet, H. and Bono, G.}, title = "{First Antarctica light curve. PAIX monitoring of the Blazhko RR Lyrae star: S Arae}", journal = {AP}, keywords = {techniques: spectroscopic, methods: data analysis, techniques: photometric, shock waves, stars: variables: RR Lyrae, stars: atmospheres}, year = 2010, month = jun, volume = 516, eid = {L15}, pages = {L15}, doi = {10.1051/0004-6361/201014857}, adsurl = {http://cdsads.u-strasbg.fr/abs/2010A%26A...516L..15C}, adsnote = {Provided by the SAO/NASA Astrophysics Data System} } {Chadid, M., Vernin, J., Preston, G., Zalian, C., Pouzenc, C., Abe, L., A., Aristidi, E., Liu, L.~Y. and Trinquet, H.}, title = "{First Detection of Multi-shocks in RR Lyrae Stars from Antarctica: A Possible Explanation of the Blazhko Effect}", journal = {Astronomical Journal}, keywords = {hydrodynamics, methods: observational, stars: atmospheres, stars: oscillations, stars: variables: general, techniques: photometric}, year = 2014, month = nov, volume = 148, eid = {88}, pages = {88}, doi = {10.1088/0004-6256/148/5/88}, adsurl = {http://cdsads.u-strasbg.fr/abs/2014AJ....148...88C}, adsnote = {Provided by the SAO/NASA Astrophysics Data System} } Crouzet, Nicolas; Guillot, Tristan; Agabi, Karim; Rivet, Jean-Pierre; Bondoux, Erick; et al. (2009). "ASTEP South: An Antarctic Search for Transiting ExoPlanets around the celestial South pole" (PDF). Astronomy & Astrophysics. Daban, Jean-Baptiste; et al. (2010). Stepp, Larry M; Gilmozzi, Roberto; Hall, Helen J (eds.). "ASTEP 400: a telescope designed for exoplanet transit detection from Dome C, Antarctica". Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series. Ground-based and Airborne Telescopes III. 7733 (Ground-based and Airborne Telescopes III): 77334T. Bibcode:2010SPIE.7733E..4TD. doi:10.1117/12.854946. S2CID 122313435. "New year's mission to start new phase of exoplanet research". University of Birmingham. 6 January 2022. Retrieved 28 January 2022. "Le climat à Dome C (en °C et mm, moyennes mensuelles 1971/2000 et records dupuis 1990)". Benfxmth.[permanent dead link] Retrieved on 2014-12-12 "89625: Concordia (Antarctica)". ogimet.com. OGIMET. 18 March 2022. Retrieved 18 March 2022. "89625: Concordia (Antarctica)". ogimet.com. OGIMET. 31 January 2023. Retrieved 1 February 2023. "Vivi con noi la XXIX Spedidione italiana in Antartide". Archived from the original on 15 March 2014. Retrieved 16 March 2014. "Follow MSS13 Adrianos Golemis to the Antarctic Concordia Station". Archived from the original on 15 March 2014. Retrieved 16 March 2014. "Paride Legovini's Website". Archived from the original on 15 March 2014. Retrieved 16 March 2014. "WAPONLINE > News & Information > Archive 2014 > February 2014". Archived from the original on 13 April 2014. Retrieved 12 April 2014. "IZ3SUS - Callsign Lookup by QRZ.COM". Retrieved 12 April 2014. "Vivi con noi la XXX Spedizione italiana in Antartide". Retrieved 2 April 2015. "Concordia: al via la 18a Campagna Invernale". Italiantartide. Retrieved 13 February 2022. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Concordia Station. (in Italian) Official website Concordia Station (in Italian) Official website of the Italian Antarctic Programme (in French) Official website IPEV Institut Polaire Français Paul Emile Victor (in French) IPEV Concordia Station Archived 16 March 2011 at the Wayback Machine (in English) Chronicles from Concordia - winter over ESA blog (in English) Automated Astrophysical Site-Testing International Observatory (AASTINO)[permanent dead link] (in English) 1st Winterover at Concordia Station (2005) blog by Guillaume Dargaud, ISAC (Istituto di Scienze dell'Atmosfera e del Clima) (in French) 2nd Winterover at Concordia Station (2006) blog by Eric Aristidi, LUAN (Laboratoire Universitaire d'Astrophysique de Nice) (in French) 5th Winterover at Concordia Station (2009), blog by Cyprien Pouzenc, Laboratoire Fizeau (Nice, ex-LUAN), Observatoire Sirene COMNAP Antarctic Facilities COMNAP Antarctic Facilities Map Portals:  Earth sciences  Geography  Italy  France