Look up law in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Law is a system of rules that regulate behavior. Law, LAW, laws, or LAWS may also refer to: Law (principle), universal principles that describe the fundamental nature of something Law enforcement, sometimes referred to as "the law" or "lawmen" Statutory law, a written law created by one or more legislators Law, Dundee, an extinct volcanic peak at the centre of the Scottish city of Dundee Law, South Lanarkshire, small town in Scotland Laws, California, United States, an unincorporated community Law (surname) Laws (surname) Luo (surname) (羅), a Chinese surname commonly transliterated Law Law & Order (G.I. Joe), fictional characters from the G.I. Joe: A Real American Hero franchise Law (comics), fictional supervillain Marshall and Forest Law, two characters from the Tekken video game series Trafalgar D. Water Law, a character from the anime and manga One Piece Law (band), a seventies funk / rock band from Ohio "Law", a song by David Bowie from his album Earthling "Law" (Yo Gotti song), by Yo Gotti featuring E-40 from his album The Art of Hustle L.A.W. (comics), a limited series comic book published by DC comics Live Audio Wrestling, a professional wrestling call-in show Law, one axis of the alignment system used in the role-playing game Dungeons & Dragons Law (film), a 2020 Indian Kannada film LAW = Light anti-tank weapon LAW 80, a British light anti-tank weapon M72 LAW, an American light anti-tank weapon NLAW, a Swedish light anti-tank weapon Laser Weapon System or LaWS, a United States navy laser weapon Lethal autonomous weapons system or LAWS, autonomous robots designed for military applications Laredo Law, a defunct 2004 af2 arena football team in Laredo, Texas League of American Bicyclists, formerly known as the League of American Wheelmen League of American Writers Palestinian Society for the Protection of Human Rights (also known as LAW) Laws of science, established principles thought to be universal and invariable Law (stochastic processes), a specific form of law in the stochastic processes subfield of mathematics LAW, IATA airport code and FAA location ID for Lawton–Fort Sill Regional Airport, Comanche County, Oklahoma, United States LAW, station code for Landywood railway station, England USS Laws (DD-558), a destroyer which served in World War II Light Amphibious Warship (LAW) or Landing Ship Medium (LSM) (U.S. Navy) Laws (dialogue), a dialogue by Plato Flight control law, a flight computer mode in a fly-by-wire aircraft. Search for "law" on Wikipedia. Law enforcement agency The Law (disambiguation) All pages with titles beginning with Law All pages with titles containing Law This disambiguation page lists articles associated with the title Law. If an internal link led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended article.