A seniūnija (in English: eldership, elderate, ward, parish, or subdistrict) is the smallest administrative division of Lithuania. An eldership may comprise a very small region consisting of few villages, one single town, or a part of a big city. Elderships vary in size and population depending on their location and nature. A few elderships make up a municipality. Šilainiai, Dainava, Verkiai, Žirmūnai and Pašilaičiai are the most populous elderates, with population counts over 40,000, around twice the population of some entire municipalities. Elderships manage small-scale local matters, such as repairing pavements and dirt roads, and keep records on all families living in the eldership. The premise of the concept is that - unlike in higher administrative divisions - an elder (the leader of the eldership) could have time to talk to every person in the eldership who wants to. Modern Lithuania is divided into 10 counties, 60 municipalities, and 546 elderships. Elderships function as municipal districts. In cities, an elder is elected to each eldership district, along with a mayor for the city. In the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, the term referred to significantly larger administrative units, such as the Eldership of Samogitia, the name of the Duchy of Samogitia during 1422-1441. Lithuania portal Terms Ward Parish Subdistrict Lithuania Administrative divisions of Lithuania Counties (Lithuanian: singular – apskritis, plural – apskritys) Municipalities (Lithuanian: plural – savivaldybės, singular – savivaldybė) Seniūnaitija (sub-eldership) Cities (Lithuanian: plural – miestai, singular – miestas) Towns (Lithuanian: plural – miesteliai, singular – miestelis) "Population by locality". 2011 Population and Housing Census. Statistics Lithuania. Archived from the original (XLS) on 22 September 2013. Retrieved 10 September 2013. Lietuvos Didžiosios Kunigaikštijos administracinio teritorinio suskirstymo raida ("Development of the administrative territorial division of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania"), Visuotinė lietuvių enciklopedija, vol. XII (Lietuva) "2021 m. gyventojų ir būstų surašymas" (PDF), osp.stat.gov.lt