Sopho "Sofia" Nizharadze (Georgian: სოფო ნიჟარაძე, IPA: [sopʰo niʒaɾadze]) is a Georgian singer, actress, and songwriter who represented Georgia in the Eurovision Song Contest 2010 with the song "Shine". Nizharadze was a judge on the TV shows Georgia's Got Talent', 'Only Georgian' and 'The X Factor Georgia. Born in Tbilisi, Georgia, Nizharadze started singing at a very early age. Her mother who was a big push to her in her singing career. She graduated with honors from the Musical Academy under the Tbilisi State Conservatory where she studied piano and vocals. She later continued her studies at the Academy of Theatre and Arts in Russia (GITIS) and graduated with honors from the Gnessin State Musical College in Moscow. Through her singing she has brought international attention to Georgia. Nizharadze's great-grandmother, Dürye, was of Turkish origin who immigrated to Tsarist Russia during the Ottoman Empire. She married the son of a Georgian-born professor and then settled in Georgia. In 2010, Nizharadze was reunited with her Turkish relatives on the Beyaz Show during her Eurovision tour in Turkey. Nizharadze's vocal range is light lyric soprano. At the age of three, Nizharadze started performing as a professional with very positive reception. At the age of seven she was invited by Jansug Kakhidze, a prominent Georgian conductor and author of famous sound tracks for Georgian cinema, to join a children's music studio where she took the lead as a vocalist for various shows and TV projects. At age 11, she performed "Sous le ciel de Paris" at the French Embassy, where she was noticed by journalist Bernard Pivot who invited her to his program on TV5. By the time she turned 17 years old, Nizharadze had won several international young singer's contests, including the "Bravo, Bravissimo!" competition in Mini La Scala (Italy), "Crystal Note" (Moscow, Russia) and "Crystal Fur-tree" (Borjomi, Georgia). She participated in several festivals in Russia, Turkey, Italy, Latvia and Georgia. Later, she took leading parts in the musicals The Wedding of the Jays and Roméo et Juliette, de la Haine à l'Amour. Living in Moscow at that moment she started gaining international recognition as a singer. In 2004, she got a main part in Gerard Presgurvic's musical (Original Russian Version, Operetta Theatre, leading cast). In 2005, she reached the final in the New Wave Festival in Jūrmala, Latvia. In 2008, Nizharadze gave up her career in Russia and returned to Georgia due to the ongoing war between the two countries. She performed "The Star-Spangled Banner" during Vice President Joe Biden's official visit to Georgia. Nizharadze was chosen by GPB to represent Georgia in the Eurovision Song Contest 2010. An open call for songs was launched, and over 100 entries submitted, the broadcasting authorities selected six, that were all performed by her in a national final on 27 February in the Tbilisi Even Hall. "Shine" was voted as the winner. In celebration of her performance at Eurovision, President of Georgia Mikheil Saakashvili suggested that Nizharadze was being considered for appointment as the nation's Minister of Culture. Nizharadze performs at events throughout Europe and Asia. She has sung duets with José Carreras, Andrea Bocelli, Chris de Burgh and Julio Iglesias. In 2013 she recorded a single "When We Danced." She released a new album with this single and also with Eurovision Song Contest hit "Shine" in March 2014. In 2016 she was a judge at the Georgian format of X Factor alongside Nika Gvaramia, Nina Sublatti and Giorgi Gabunia. 1995: "Crystal fir tree", the international festival nominated at the "Best Vocal" category 1996: Special award – "The League", the first Georgian festival; award owner at the festival Mini La Scala 1997: participant of "Crystal note" International Festival in Moscow (850 anniversary of Moscow city) 1999: Diploma of the First category for the best vocal within the frame of the festival "Pushkin weeks"; Diploma of the Tbilisi Mayor's Office for the "Unique vocal features” 1998: 2001- Scholarship of President Eduard Shevardnadze 2000: "Golden Star" for the best vocal granted by Forte Cinematographic Studio and Star Scale Studio 2003–2004: leading part in the musical The Wedding of the Jays 2004–2006: leading part on Roméo et Juliette, de la Haine à l'Amour The Musical 2005: participant, a finalist of the young pop star contest at the New Wave Festival 2005–2007: leading parts in shows and production of RATI; was invited for Esmeralda part to the Musical Notre Dame De Paris 2010: performed a duet with José Carreras, extract from the musical West Side Story 2010: performed with Chris De Burgh 2011: performed with Andrea Bocelli 2012: performed a duet with Julio Iglesias 2012–2013: leading role in Redha Bentifour's musical Melodies of Vera District 2013: recorded single "When We Danced" and a music video with the participation Joaquin Cortes unknown:[when?] main role in the first Georgian musical Keto and Kote[when?] Musical Svadba Soek "The Wedding of the Jays" (Ketevan – main role) Musical Romeo & Juliette – Juliet (Original Russian Main Cast) Musical Hello, Dolly (RATI) Keto and Kote The Musical (Keto – leading role) Melodies of Vera District The Musical by Redha Benteifour (Vardo – leading role) The Wedding of the Jays Original Cast Recording (2003) Musical Romeo & Juliette "Ot Nenavisti Do Lubvi" Original Cast Recording (2005) Where are you... (2008) Track listing: "My Dream" "Every Moment" "Where Are You..." "Leave Me Alone" "I'm Running Away" "Over and Over" "Leave Me Alone (rmx)" "Over and Over (rmx)" We Are All (2014) Track listing: "No Way Out" "Hero" "Why Won't You Love Me" "When We Danced" "We Are All" "Without Your Love" "The Reason I Go On" "Shine" "So in Love" "Call Me" "Without Your Love (Remix)" "Two of a Kind" On December 31, 2021, Mikheil Saakashvili recognized to have an extramarital daughter, Elis-Maria, with Sofia Nizharadze, calling her "my most lovely girl and youngest child". სოფო ნიჟარაძე, Website of Music and Drama Theatre (Tbilisi, Georgia). Archived 31 July 2019 at the Wayback Machine სოფო ნიჟარაძე, Website of National Parliamentary Library of Georgia. Sofia Nizharadze, ruarrijoseph com. Sopho Nizharadze to represent Georgia at 2010 ESC. Georgian Public Broadcaster. 16 January 2010[dead link] "Eurovision sürpriz oldu" [Eurovision was a surprise]. Hürriyet (in Turkish). 3 May 2010. Retrieved 11 August 2021. [translated] Q: The Turk is your grandmother's mother, huh? A: ...she belongs to a Turkish family who emigrated to Tsarist Russia during the Ottoman empire. The family had lived in Moscow for many years. But after communism came, my great-grandmother Düriye's father feared that his children would marry Russians and become Christians as a result of oppression, and he took the whole family to Turkey and placed them in a village in Samsun. "Saakaşvili'nin melekleri" [Saakashvili's angels]. Habertürk (in Turkish). 16 September 2010. Retrieved 26 September 2021. "მიხეილ სააკაშვილი ელის მარია სააკაშვილზე: ჩემი ყველაზე საყვარელი გოგო და უმცროსი შვილი". RFE/RL (in Georgian). Retrieved 1 February 2023. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Sofia Nizharadze. Sofia Nizharadze Official Website Archived 20 February 2014 at the Wayback Machine Official Facebook Page The Sofia Nizharadze official myspace Sofia Nizharadze official Eurovision.Tv page Archived 3 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine www.sofianizharadze.ru Russian/English site Archived 10 August 2015 at the Wayback Machine