The Far East is the geographical region that encompasses the easternmost portion of the Asian continent, including East, North and Southeast Asia. South Asia is sometimes also included in the definition of the term. The term first came into use in European geopolitical discourse in the 15th century, particularly the British, denoting the Far East as the "farthest" of the three "Easts", beyond the Near East and the Middle East. Likewise, during the Qing dynasty of the 19th and early 20th centuries, the term "Tàixī (泰西)" – i.e., anything further west than the Arab world – was used to refer to the Western countries. Since the mid-20th century, the term has mostly gone out of use for the region in international mass media outlets due to its perceived eurocentric connotations. North Asia is sometimes excluded due to cultural and ethnic differences. Among Western Europeans, prior to the colonial era, Far East referred to anything further east than the Middle East. In the 16th century, King John III of Portugal called India a "rich and interesting country in the Far East (Extremo Oriente)." The term was popularized during the period of the British Empire as a blanket term for lands to the east of British India. In pre-World War I European geopolitics, Near East referred to the relatively nearby lands of the Ottoman Empire, Middle East denoted north-western Southern Asian region and Central Asia, and the Far East meant countries along the western Pacific Ocean and eastern Indian Ocean. Many European languages have analogous terms, such as the French (Extrême-Orient), Spanish (Extremo Oriente), Portuguese (Extremo Oriente), Italian (Estremo Oriente), German (Ferner Osten), Polish (Daleki Wschód), Norwegian (Det fjerne Østen) and Dutch (Verre Oosten). Significantly, the term evokes cultural as well as geographic separation; the Far East is not just geographically distant, but also culturally exotic. It never refers, for instance, to the culturally Western nations of Australia and New Zealand, which lie even farther to the east of Europe than East Asia itself. This combination of cultural and geographic subjectivity was well illustrated in 1939 by Robert Menzies, a Prime Minister of Australia. Reflecting on his country's geopolitical situation with the onset of war, Menzies commented that: "The problems of the Pacific are different. What Great Britain calls the Far East is to us the near north." Far East, in its usual sense, is comparable to terms such as the Orient (Latin for "East"), Eastern world, or simply the East, all of which may refer, broadly, to East and South-East Asia in general. Occasionally, albeit more in the past, the Russian Far East and South Asia have been deemed to be part of the Far East. Commenting on such terms, John K. Fairbank and Edwin O. Reischauer (both professors of East Asian Studies at Harvard University) wrote, in East Asia: The Great Tradition: When Europeans traveled far to the east to reach Cathay, Japan and the Indies, they naturally gave those distant regions the general name 'Far East.' Americans who reached China, Japan and Southeast Asia by sail and steam across the Pacific could, with equal logic, have called that area the 'Far West.' For the people who live in that part of the world, however, it is neither 'East' nor 'West' and certainly not 'Far.' A more generally acceptable term for the area is 'East Asia,' which is geographically more precise and does not imply the outdated notion that Europe is the center of the civilized world. Today, the term remains in the names of some longstanding institutions, including the Far Eastern Federal University in Vladivostok, Far Eastern University in Manila, the Far East University in South Korea, and Far East, the periodical magazine of the Missionary Society of St. Columban. Furthermore, the United States and United Kingdom have historically incorporated Far East in the names of several military units and commands in the region, such as the British Royal Navy's Far East Fleet, for instance. Look up far east in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Asia-Pacific East Asia East Asian cultural sphere East–West dichotomy Far West, a term for Europe Four Asian Tigers – Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea and Taiwan Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere, Japanese idea from the 1930s–1940s Inner Asia List of Mongol states North Asia Russian Far East Siberia Ural (region) Northeast Asia Orient Pacific Asia, a region highly coterminous with the Far East South Asia Southeast Asia Tropical Asia Turkic migration Organizations ASEAN+3 Comprehensive Economic Partnership for East Asia East Asian Community Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership Southeast Asian Fisheries Development Center "Oxford Dictionaries – Dictionary, Thesaurus, & Grammar". askoxford.com. Archived from the original on 29 September 2007. "What is the Far East?". WorldAtlas. 1 August 2017. Retrieved 9 June 2022. "Far East, Middle East, Near East". Archived from the original on 15 July 2023. Retrieved 15 July 2023. "Far East Definition". Law Insider. Archived from the original on 15 July 2023. Retrieved 15 July 2023. "Where is the Middle East? The Near East? The Far East?". Dictionary.com. 24 February 2012. Retrieved 19 October 2021. Fields, Larry. "The Eurocentric Worldwiew: Misunderstanding East Asia" (PDF). asj.upd.edu.ph. p. 40. Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 October 2015. Retrieved 9 June 2022. "A menagerie of monikers". The Economist. 7 January 2010. Retrieved 9 July 2011. Reischauer, Edwin and John K Fairbank, East Asia: The Great Tradition, 1960. "East and Southeast Asia". ANDE. Retrieved 19 October 2021. Robert Sewell (1901). A Forgotten Empire: Vijayanagar; A Contribution to the History of India. ISBN 9788120601253. "Historical documents". Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade.   Continental regions as per UN categorisations (map), except 12. Depending on definitions, various territories cited below (notes 6, 11–13, 15, 17–19, 21–23) may be in one or both of Asia and Europe, Africa, or Oceania. Russia is a transcontinental country located in Eastern Europe and North Asia, but is considered European historically, culturally, and ethnically, and the vast majority of its population (78%) lives within its European part. Asian part only. Moscow is located in Europe.   Christmas Island is an External Territory of Australia. English does not have de jure status in Christmas Island and in Australia, but it is the de facto language of communication in government.   The Cocos (Keeling) Islands are an External Territory of Australia. English does not have de jure status in the Cocos (Keeling) Islands and in Australia, but it is the de facto language of communication in government.   The state is commonly known as simply "China", which is subsumed by the eponymous entity and civilisation (China). Figures given are for Mainland China only, and do not include Hong Kong, Macau, and Taiwan. Includes PRC-administered area (Aksai Chin and Trans-Karakoram Tract, both territories claimed by India). Information listed is for Mainland China only. The Special administrative region (i.e. Hong Kong and Macau), the island territories under the control of the Republic of China (which includes the islands of Taiwan, Quemoy, and Matsu) are excluded. "Law of the People's Republic of China on the Standard Spoken and Written Chinese Language (Order of the President No.37)". Chinese Government. 31 October 2000. Archived from the original on 24 July 2013. Retrieved 21 June 2013. For purposes of this Law, the standard spoken and written Chinese language means Putonghua (a common speech with pronunciation based on the Beijing dialect) and the standardized Chinese characters.   Hong Kong is a Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China No specific variety of Chinese is official in the territory. Residents predominantly speak Cantonese, the de facto regional standard. Japan's National Diet have not officially enacted a law stating that the official language is Japanese.   Macau is a Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China. No specific variety of Chinese is official in the territory. Residents predominantly speak Cantonese, the de facto regional standard.   Figures are for the area under the de facto control of the Republic of China (ROC) government, commonly referred to as Taiwan. Claimed in whole by the PRC; see political status of Taiwan. Burghart, Sabine, Denis Park, and Liudmila Zakharova. "The DPRK's economic exchanges with Russia and the EU since 2000: an analysis of institutional effects and the case of the Russian Far East." Asia Europe Journal 18.3 (2020): 281–303. on North Korea Clyde, Paul Hibbert, and Burton F. Beers. The Far East: A History of Western Impacts and Eastern Responses, 1830–1975 (1975). online Crofts, Alfred. A history of the Far East (1958) online Fairbank, John K., Edwin Reischauer, and Albert M. Craig. East Asia: The great tradition and East Asia: The modern transformation (1960) [2 vol 1960] online, famous textbook. Green, Michael. By More Than Providence: Grand Strategy and American Power in the Asia Pacific Since 1783 (2019) excerpt Iriye, Akira. After Imperialism; The Search for a New Order in the Far East 1921–1931. (1965). Keay, John. Empire's End: A History of the Far East from High Colonialism to Hong Kong (Scribner, 1997). online Louis, Wm Roger. "The road to Singapore: British imperialism in the Far East, 1932–42." in The fascist challenge and the policy of appeasement (Routledge, 2021) pp. 352–388. Macnair, Harley F. & Donald Lach. Modern Far Eastern International Relations. (2nd ed 1955) 1950 edition online free, 780pp; focus on 1900–1950. Norman, Henry. The Peoples and Politics of the Far East: Travels and studies in the British, French, Spanish and Portuguese colonies, Siberia, China, Japan, Korea, Siam and Malaya (1904) online Paine, S. C. M. The Wars for Asia, 1911–1949 (2014) excerpt Ring, George C. Religions of the Far East: Their History to the Present Day (Kessinger Publishing, 2006). Solomon, Richard H., and Masataka Kosaka, eds. The Soviet Far East military buildup: nuclear dilemmas and Asian security (Routledge, 2021). Stephan, John J. The Russian Far East (Stanford University Press, 2022). Vinacke, Harold M. A History of the Far East in Modern Times (1964) online free Vogel, Ezra. China and Japan: Facing History (2019) excerpt Woodcock, George. The British in the Far East (1969) online. Portals:  Geography  Asia  China  Indonesia  Japan  Malaysia  North Korea  Philippines  Russia  Singapore  South Korea  Taiwan  Thailand  Vietnam