Parker may refer to: Parker (given name) Parker (surname) Parker, Arizona Parker, Colorado Parker, Florida Parker, Idaho Parker, Kansas Parker, Missouri Parker, North Carolina Parker, Pennsylvania Parker, South Carolina Parker, South Dakota Parker, Texas in Collin County Parker, Johnson County, Texas Parker, Washington Parker City, Indiana Parker County, Texas Parker Dam, at Lake Havasu on the Colorado River between Arizona and California Parker Road (DART station), a light rail terminal on Parker Road in Plano, Texas Parker School, Montana Parker Strip, Arizona Parker Township, Marshall County, Minnesota Parker Township, Morrison County, Minnesota Parker Township, Pennsylvania Parker Center, a former police building in Los Angeles C. W. Parker Carousel, a Burnaby Village Museum exhibit in British Columbia, Canada Mount Parker (Philippines), a Mindanao island volcano of the Philippines Parker Pass, Antarctica Parker Place, an Asian-themed shopping mall in Richmond, British Columbia, Canada Parker Brothers, toy and game manufacturer Parker Bros. (also known as Parker Brothers Gun Company) Parker Guitars Parker Hannifin, manufacturer of motion and control technologies Parker and Lee, public relations firm Parker Manufacturing Company, a manufacturer of machine tools and kitchen cabinets, and an industrial landlord Parker Pen Company, a maker of fine pens and pencils George S. Parker High School, Janesville, Wisconsin, USA Francis W. Parker Charter Essential School, Devens, Massachusetts, USA Parker Academy, Concord, New Hampshire, USA ARA Parker (P-44), an Espora-class corvette serving in the Argentine Navy Fort Parker massacre, at Parker's Fort, Texas Mrs. Parker and the Vicious Circle Parker, a player of park golf Parker (1984 film), a 1984 British crime film Parker (2013 film), a 2013 crime thriller film Parker (Stark novels character), a fictional character and franchise created by Donald E. Westlake Aloysius Parker, a fictional character from the 1960s Thunderbirds British TV series, known mononymously as "Parker" Parker immunity doctrine, a principle in antitrust law in the United States Parker v. Brown, the United States Supreme Court decision that gave rise to the foregoing Parker Morris Committee and the Parker Morris Standards Parker truss, type of bridge design Parker Solar Probe, spacecraft which probed the outer corona of the Sun (launched by NASA in 2018) Parkers (disambiguation) Justice Parker (disambiguation) Parka, a type of hooded anorak This disambiguation page lists articles associated with the title Parker. If an internal link led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended article.