Larisa Semyonovna Latynina (Russian: Лариса Семёновна Латынина, née Diriy, Дирий; born 27 December 1934) is a former Soviet artistic gymnast. Between 1956 and 1964 she won 14 individual Olympic medals and four team medals. She holds the record for the most Olympic gold medals by a gymnast, male or female, with 9. Her total of 18 Olympic medals was a record for 48 years. She held the record for individual event medals, winning 14 over 52 years. She is credited with helping to establish the Soviet Union as a dominant force in gymnastics. She was born as Larisa Semyonovna Diriy in the Ukrainian SSR. Her father, Semyon Andreyevich Diriy, left the family when she was 11 months old, and she was raised by her illiterate mother, who worked as a cleaner during the day, and as a watchman during the night. Her father was killed at the Battle of Stalingrad, where he served as a machine gun operator. She first practiced ballet, but turned to gymnastics after her choreographer moved out of Kherson. She graduated from high school in 1953, and moved to Kyiv. She attended the Lenin Polytechnic Institute, and continued her training at the Burevestnik VSS. At the age of 19, she debuted internationally at the 1954 Rome World Championships, winning the gold medal in the team competition. In 1956, at the age of 21, Latynina made her Olympic debut at the Melbourne Olympic Games. In the all-around event, she fought off stiff competition to win gold. She finished first in the vault, second in the uneven bars hand in the exercise on the floor and fourth in the balancing beam. She also led the Soviet Union in Team Event to victory. After a very successful World Championships in 1958 (winning five out of six titles despite competing whilst four months pregnant and medaling in every event), Latynina was the favorite for the 1960 Summer Olympics in Rome. In the all-around event, she led the Soviet Union to take the first four places, thereby also securing a win in the team competition by a margin of nine points. Latynina defended her floor title, took silver medals in the balance beam and uneven bars events, and bronze in the vault competition. Latynina won all-around titles at the 1962 World Championships, beating Věra Čáslavská of Czechoslovakia. Still the defending World Champion at the 1964 Summer Olympics, she was beaten by Čáslavská in the all-around competition. Latynina added two more gold medals to her tally, winning the team event and the floor event both for the third time in a row. A silver medal and two bronzes in the other apparatus events brought her total of Olympic medals to eighteen—nine gold medals, five silver, and four bronze. She won a medal in every event in which she competed, except for the 1956 balance beam where she came in fourth. Latynina's nine gold medals make her second on the list of most Olympic gold medalists. She held the distinction of having more Olympic medals (either individually or with a team) than anybody, from 1964 until 2012. She is the only woman to have won nine gold medals. She is also the only female athlete who at some point has held the record for most Olympic gold medals. Additionally, within the sport of gymnastics, she is the only woman who has won an all-around medal in more than two Olympiads, the only woman who has won an individual event (floor exercise) in more than two Olympiads, and one of only three women who have won every individual event at either the World Championship or Olympic level. She is the only female gymnast to have twice won team gold, all-around gold, and an event final gold at the same Olympics, having done so in 1956 and four years later, in 1960.[citation needed] She was born to Pelageya Anisimovna Barabamyuk (1902–1975) and Semyon Andreevich Diriy (1906–1943), who died in the Battle of Stalingrad. Larisa was married three times. Her current husband is Yuri Izrailovich Feldman (b. 1938), a member of the Russian Academy of Electrotechnical Sciences and a former competitive cyclist. Her daughter from a former marriage, Tatyana Ivanovna Latynina (b. 1958), is a folk dancer. She was born only five months after her mother won a world all-around title, and seven months after her birth Latynina competed at the national championships. Latynina kept her pregnancy a secret, even from her coach. She also had a son. Latynina retired after the 1966 World Championships and became a coach for the Soviet national gymnastics team, a position she held until 1977. Under her coaching the Soviet women team won gold in the 1968, 1972 and 1976 Olympics. She organized the gymnastics competition at the 1980 Olympic Games in Moscow.[citation needed] She holds Russian citizenship and lives in Moscow. Latynina has received numerous Soviet and Russian state accolades. In 2023, she spoke out against Russian athletes competing under a neutral flag at the Olympics due to the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, calling it "unpatriotic". 1989: Olympic Order (silver), International Olympic Committee 1998: Inducted into the International Gymnastics Hall of Fame Wikimedia Commons has media related to Larisa Latynina. List of multiple Olympic gold medalists List of multiple Olympic gold medalists at a single Games List of multiple Olympic medalists at a single Games List of multiple Summer Olympic medalists List of top Olympic gymnastics medalists List of top medalists at the World Artistic Gymnastics Championships List of Olympic female gymnasts for the Soviet Union List of women who won medals in every event at the World Artistic Gymnastics Championships Evans, Hilary; Gjerde, Arild; Heijmans, Jeroen; Mallon, Bill; et al. "Larisa Latynina". Olympics at Sports-Reference.com. Sports Reference LLC. Archived from the original on 17 April 2020. "Legendary Olympians". CNN. 19 August 2008. Лариса Латынина: «Я ушла от мужа к человеку, о котором не хочу даже вспоминать». 7Days.ru (in Russian). April 2015. Retrieved 9 May 2016. http://edition.cnn.com/2008/SPORT/05/06/larysalatynina/index.html Nick Zaccardi; Gennady Fyodorov (10 July 2012). "With her all-time record set to fall, little-known Latynina looks back". Sports Illustrated. Retrieved 10 July 2012. Wallechinsky, David; Jaime Lucky (2008). The Complete Book of the Olympics: 2008 Edition. Aurum Press. p. 702. ISBN 978-1-84513-330-6. Латынина, Лариса Семёновна. Encyclopedic Dictionary Лариса Латынина – биография. bestpeopleofrussia.ru Справка. Лариса Латынина. Биография. «РИА Новости» // ria.ru (27 декабря 2014 года) "Лариса Латынина не поддержала участие российских спортсменов в нейтральном статусе". championat.com. 1 February 2023. "Larissa Latynina – The International Gymnastics Hall of Fame". International Gymnastics Hall of Fame. Retrieved 1 August 2012. "Gymn Forum: Larissa Latynina Biography". Larisa Latynina (1975). The Balance (in Russian). Moscow: Molodaya gvardiya. Archived from the original on 27 September 2007. Larisa Latynina at the International Gymnastics Federation Larisa Latynina at the International Gymnastics Hall of Fame Larisa Latynina at Olympics.com Larisa Latynina at Olympic.org (archived) Larisa Latynina at the International Olympic Committee at the Wayback Machine (archived 12 December 2010) Larisa Latynina at Olympedia Larisa Latynina at databaseOlympics.com (archived) International Gymnast's profile on Latynina at the Wayback Machine (archived 27 October 2006) Gymn Forum: Complete list of Latynina's competitive results Life Magazine images Larisa Latynina's profile in the Modern Museum of Sports includes photos of her and some of her decorations (in Russian)