The New York Yankees are an American professional baseball team based in the New York City borough of the Bronx. The Yankees compete in Major League Baseball (MLB) as a member club of the American League (AL) East Division. They are one of two major league clubs based in New York City alongside the National League (NL)'s New York Mets. The team was founded in 1903 when Frank Farrell and Bill Devery purchased the franchise rights to the defunct Baltimore Orioles (no relation to the current team of the same name) after it ceased operations and used them to establish the New York Highlanders. The Highlanders were officially renamed the Yankees in 1913. The team is owned by Yankee Global Enterprises, a limited liability company that is controlled by the family of the late George Steinbrenner. Steinbrenner purchased the team from CBS in 1973. Currently, Brian Cashman is the team's general manager, Aaron Boone is the team's field manager, and Aaron Judge is the team captain. The team's home games were played at the original Yankee Stadium in the Bronx from 1923 to 1973 and from 1976 to 2008. In 1974 and 1975, the Yankees shared Shea Stadium with the Mets, in addition to the New York Jets and the New York Giants. In 2009, they moved into a new ballpark of the same name that was constructed adjacent to the previous facility, which was closed and demolished. The team is perennially among the leaders in MLB attendance. Arguably the most successful professional sports franchise in the United States, the Yankees have won 20 American League East Division titles, 40 American League pennants, and 27 World Series championships, all of which are MLB records. The team has won more titles than any other franchise in the four major North American sports leagues, after briefly trailing the NHL's Montreal Canadiens between 1993 and 1999. The Yankees have had 44 players and 11 managers inducted into the National Baseball Hall of Fame, including many of the most iconic figures in the sport's history, such as Babe Ruth, Lou Gehrig, Joe DiMaggio, Mickey Mantle, Yogi Berra, Whitey Ford, Reggie Jackson, and Goose Gossage; more recent inductees include Mariano Rivera and Derek Jeter, who received the two highest vote percentages of all Hall of Fame members. According to Forbes, the Yankees are the second-highest valued sports franchise in the world, after the NFL's Dallas Cowboys, with an estimated value in 2023 of approximately $7.1 billion. The team has garnered enormous popularity and a dedicated fanbase, as well as widespread enmity from fans of other MLB teams. The team's rivalry with the Boston Red Sox is one of the most well-known rivalries in North American sports. The team's logo is internationally known as a fashion item, and as an icon of New York City and the United States. From 1903 through the 2023 season, the Yankees' overall win–loss record is 10,684–8,080–88 (a .569 winning percentage). In 1900, Ban Johnson, the president of a minor league known as the Western League (1894–1899), changed the Western League name to the American League (AL) and asked the National League to classify it as a major league. Johnson held that his league would operate on friendly terms with the National League, but the National League demanded concessions which Johnson did not agree with and declared major league status for the AL in 1901 anyway. Plans to add an AL team in New York City were blocked by the NL's New York Giants. A team was instead placed in Baltimore, Maryland, in 1901 and named the Orioles. The Orioles were managed by John McGraw, who was also a part owner. After many personal clashes with Johnson, during the 1902 season McGraw jumped to become the new manager of the Giants, taking many players with him. The Orioles limped through the remainder of the season under league control, using a roster of players loaned from the rest of the AL clubs. The Orioles were disbanded at the end of the season. In early 1903, the two leagues decided to settle their disputes and try to coexist. At a conference, Johnson requested that an AL team be put in New York, to play alongside the NL's Giants. It was put to a vote, and 15 of the 16 major league owners agreed on it. The franchise was awarded to Frank J. Farrell and William S. Devery. The team's new ballpark, Hilltop Park (formally known as "American League Park"), was constructed in one of Upper Manhattan's highest points—between 165th and 168th Streets in the Washington Heights neighborhood. The team was named the New York Highlanders. Fans believed the name was chosen because of the team's elevated location in Upper Manhattan, or as a nod to team president Joseph Gordon's Scottish-Irish heritage (the Gordon Highlanders were a well known Scottish military unit).: 18  The land was owned by the New York Institute for the Education of the Blind and was leased to the Highlanders for 10 years. Initially, the team was commonly referred to as the New York Americans. The team was also referred to as the "Invaders" in the Evening Journal and The Evening World. New York Press Sports Editor Jim Price coined the unofficial nickname Yankees (or "Yanks") for the club as early as 1904, because it was easier to fit in headlines. The Highlanders finished second in the AL in 1904, 1906, and 1910. In 1904, they lost the deciding game on a wild pitch to the Boston Americans, who later became the Boston Red Sox. That year, Highlander pitcher Jack Chesbro set the single-season wins record at 41. At this time there was no formal World Series agreement wherein the AL and NL winners would play each other. The Polo Grounds, located on the shore of the Harlem River in Washington Heights, was home to the New York Giants of the National League. The Giants were inter-city rivals with the Highlanders, dating back to when Giants manager John McGraw feuded with Ban Johnson after McGraw jumped from the Orioles to the Giants. Polo Grounds III burned down in 1911 and the Highlanders shared Hilltop Park with the Giants during a two-month renovation period. Later, from 1913 to 1922, the Highlanders shared the Polo Grounds with the Giants after their lease with Hilltop Park expired. While playing at the Polo Grounds, the name "Highlanders" fell into disuse among the press. In 1913 the team became officially known as the New York Yankees. In the mid‑1910s, the Yankees finished towards the bottom of the standings.: 66–69  The relationship between Farrell and Devery became strained due to money issues and the team performance. At the start of 1915, the pair sold the team to Colonel Jacob Ruppert, a brewer, and Captain Tillinghast L'Hommedieu Huston, a contractor-engineer. Ruppert and Huston paid $350,000 (equivalent to $9,375,000 in 2021) with both men contributing half of the total price. After the purchase, Ruppert assumed the role of team president with Huston becoming team secretary and treasurer. In the years around 1920, the Yankees, the Red Sox, and the Chicago White Sox had a détente. The trades between the three ball clubs antagonized Ban Johnson and garnered the teams the nickname "The Insurrectos". This détente paid off well for the Yankees as they increased their payroll. Most new players who later contributed to the team's success came from the Red Sox, whose owner, Harry Frazee, was trading them for large sums of money to finance his theatrical productions. Pitcher-turned-outfielder Babe Ruth was the most talented of all the acquisitions from Boston, and the outcome of that trade would haunt the Red Sox for the next 86 years, a span in which the team did not win a single World Series championship. This phenomenon eventually became known as the Curse of the Bambino, which was coined by writer Dan Shaughnessy in the 1990 book of the same name. Ruth's multitude of home runs proved so popular that the Yankees began drawing more people than their National League counterpart, the Giants. In 1921 — the year after acquiring Ruth — the Yankees played in their first World Series. They competed against the Giants, and all eight games of the series were played in the Polo Grounds. After the 1922 season, the Yankees were told to move out of the Polo Grounds. Giants manager John McGraw became upset with the increase of Yankees attendance along with the number of home runs. He was said to have commented that the Yankees should "move to some out-of-the-way place, like Queens", but they instead broke ground for a new ballpark in the Bronx, right across the Harlem River from the Polo Grounds. In 1922, the Yankees returned to the World Series again and were dealt a second defeat at the hands of the Giants. Manager Miller Huggins and general manager Ed Barrow were important newcomers in this period. The hiring of Huggins by Ruppert in 1918 caused a rift between the owners that eventually led to Ruppert buying Huston out in 1923. In 1923, the Yankees moved to their new home, Yankee Stadium, which took 11 months to build and cost $2.5 million (equivalent to $40,000,000 in 2021). The team announced that 99,200 fans showed up on Opening Day and 25,000 were turned away. In the first game at Yankee Stadium, Ruth hit a home run. The stadium was nicknamed "The House That Ruth Built", due mainly to the fact that Ruth had doubled Yankees' attendance, which helped the team pay for the new stadium. At the end of the season, the Yankees faced the Giants in the World Series for the third straight year and won their first championship. In the 1927 season, the Yankees featured a lineup that became known as "Murderers' Row", and some consider this team to be the best in the history of baseball (though similar claims have been made for other Yankee squads, notably those of 1939, 1961 and 1998). The name originated from The Tombs, a jail complex in Lower Manhattan that had specific cell block for murderers. That season, the Yankees became the first team in baseball to occupy first place every day of the season, winning 110 games. The team also swept the Pittsburgh Pirates in the World Series. Ruth's home run total of 60 in 1927 set a single-season home run record that stood until it was broken by Roger Maris in 1961, although Maris had eight additional games in which to break the record. Meanwhile, first baseman Lou Gehrig had his first big season, batting .373 with 47 home runs and 175 runs batted in (RBI), beating Ruth's single-season RBI mark which he had set in 1921. The Yankees won the World Series again in 1928. In 1931, Joe McCarthy, who was previously manager of the Chicago Cubs, was hired as manager and brought the Yankees back to the top of the AL. They swept the Chicago Cubs in the 1932 World Series, and brought the team's streak of consecutive World Series game wins to 12. This series was made famous by Babe Ruth's "Called Shot" in game three of the series at Wrigley Field, in which Ruth pointed to center field before hitting a home run. In 1935, Ruth left the Yankees to join the NL's Boston Braves, and he made his last major league baseball appearance on May 30 of that year. After Ruth left the Yankees following the 1934 season, Gehrig finally had a chance to take center stage, but it was only one year before a new star appeared, Joe DiMaggio. The team won an unprecedented four straight World Series titles from 1936 to 1939. For most of 1939, however, they had to do it without Gehrig, who took himself out of the lineup on May 2 and retired due to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, which was later known as "Lou Gehrig's Disease" in his memory. The Yankees declared July 4, 1939 to be "Lou Gehrig Day", on which they retired his number 4, the first retired number in baseball. Gehrig made a famous speech in which he declared himself to be "the luckiest man on the face of the earth." He died two years later on June 2, 1941. The acclaimed movie The Pride of the Yankees about Gehrig was released in 1942. The 1941 season was often described as the last year of the "Golden Era" before the United States entered World War II and other realities intervened. Numerous achievements were made in the early 1940s including Ted Williams of the Red Sox hitting for the elusive .400 batting average and Joe DiMaggio getting hits in consecutive ballgames. By the end of his hitting streak, DiMaggio hit in 56 consecutive games, the current major league record and one often deemed unbreakable. Two months after the Yankees beat the Brooklyn Dodgers in the 1941 World Series, the first of seven October meetings between the two crosstown rivals before the Dodgers moved to Los Angeles. As a result of the mandatory draft following the attack on Pearl Harbor, more than 90 percent of the players, including DiMaggio, were forced to suspend their playing careers and enter the military. Despite losing many of their players, the Yankees still managed to pull out a win against the St. Louis Cardinals in the 1943 World Series. Following Jacob Ruppert's death in 1939, his heirs assumed control on the team. In 1945 construction and real estate magnate Del Webb along with partners Dan Topping and Larry MacPhail purchased the team from the Ruppert estate for $2.8 million (equivalent to roughly $47.8 million in 2023); MacPhail, who was the team president, treasurer, and general manager, was bought out following the 1947 World Series. After a few slumping seasons, McCarthy left the organization in 1946. A few interim managers later, Bucky Harris took the job, righting the ship and taking the Yankees to a hard-fought series victory against the Dodgers. Despite finishing only three games behind the Cleveland Indians in the 1948 pennant race, Harris was relieved of his duties and replaced by Casey Stengel, who had a reputation of being a clown and managing bad teams. His tenure as Yankees' field manager, however, was marked with success. The "underdog" Yankees came from behind to catch and surprise a powerful Red Sox team on the last two days of the 1949 season, a face-off that fueled the beginning of the modern Yankees–Red Sox rivalry. By this time, however, DiMaggio's career was winding down, and the "Yankee Clipper" retired after the 1951 season after numerous injuries. That year marked the arrival of Mickey Mantle, who was one of several rookies to fill the gap. Bettering the clubs managed by Joe McCarthy, the Yankees won the World Series five consecutive times from 1949 to 1953 under Stengel, which remains an MLB record. Led by players like center fielder Mickey Mantle, pitcher Whitey Ford, and catcher Yogi Berra, Stengel's teams won ten pennants and seven World Series titles in his 12 seasons as the Yankees manager. The 1950 title was the only one of those five championships not to be won against either the New York Giants or Brooklyn Dodgers; it was won in four straight games against the Whiz Kids of the Philadelphia Phillies. In 1954, the Yankees won 103 games, but the Cleveland Indians took the pennant with a then-AL record 111 wins; 1954 was famously referred to as "The Year the Yankees Lost the Pennant". The term was coined by writer Douglass Wallop, who wrote a novel of the same name. The novel was then adapted into a musical called Damn Yankees. In 1955, the Dodgers finally beat the Yankees in the World Series, after five previous Series losses to them. The Yankees came back strong the next year. In Game 5 of the 1956 World Series against the Dodgers, pitcher Don Larsen threw the only perfect game in World Series history, which remains the only perfect game in postseason play and the only postseason no-hitter until 2010. The Yankees lost the 1957 World Series to the Milwaukee Braves when Lew Burdette won three games for the Braves and was awarded World Series MVP. Following the Series, the New York Giants and the Brooklyn Dodgers both left for San Francisco and Los Angeles, respectively. This left the Yankees as New York's only baseball team. In the 1958 World Series, the Yankees got their revenge against the Braves and became the second team to win the Series after being down 3–1. For the decade, the Yankees won six World Series championships (1950, 1951, 1952, 1953, 1956, 1958) and eight American League pennants (those six plus 1955 and 1957). Led by Mantle, Ford, Berra, Elston Howard (the Yankees' first African-American player), and the newly acquired Roger Maris, the Yankees entered the 1960s seeking to replicate their success of the 1950s. Arnold Johnson, owner of the Kansas City Athletics, was a longtime business associate of Yankees co-owners Del Webb and Dan Topping. Because of this "special relationship" with the Yankees, he traded young players to them in exchange for cash and aging veterans. Invariably, these trades ended up being heavily tilted in the Yankees' favor, leading to accusations that the Athletics were little more than a Yankees farm team at the major league level. Kansas City had been home to the Yankees' top farm team, the Kansas City Blues, for almost 20 years before the Athletics moved there from Philadelphia in 1954. In 1960, Charles O. Finley purchased the Athletics and put an end to the trades with the Yankees. At that point, however, the Yankees had already strengthened their supply of future prospects, which included a young outfielder named Roger Maris. In 1960, Maris led the league in slugging percentage, RBI, and extra-base hits. He finished second in home runs (one behind Mickey Mantle) and total bases, and won a Gold Glove, which garnered enough votes for the American League MVP award. The year 1961 was one of the most memorable in Yankees history.: n12  Mantle and Maris hit home runs at a fast pace and became known as the "M&M Boys". Ultimately, a severe hip infection forced Mantle to leave the lineup at the end of the regular season. Maris continued though, and on October 1, the last day of the regular season, he hit home run number 61, surpassing Babe Ruth's single-season home run record of 60. However, MLB Commissioner Ford Frick decreed that since Maris had played in a 162-game season, and Ruth (in 1927) had played in a 154-game season. They were considered two separate records for 30 years, until MLB reversed course and stated Maris held the record alone. His record would be broken by Mark McGwire, who hit 70 home runs in 1998. Maris held the American League record until 2022 when Aaron Judge hit 62. The Yankees won the pennant with a 109–53 record and went on to defeat the Cincinnati Reds in the 1961 World Series. The team finished the year with 240 home runs, which was an MLB record until surpassed by the 1996 Baltimore Orioles team with 257 home runs. In 1962, the sports scene in New York changed when the National League added an expansion team, the New York Mets. The Mets played at the Giants' former home, the Polo Grounds, for two seasons while Shea Stadium was under construction in nearby Flushing, Queens. This restored New York as a city with more than one team, as it had been from the late 1800s until 1957. The Yankees won the 1962 World Series, their tenth in the past sixteen years, defeating the San Francisco Giants 4–3. It was the Yankees' last championship until 1977. The Yankees easily reached the 1963 World Series when they won the pennant by 10.5 games, but they scored only four runs in the series and were swept by the Los Angeles Dodgers and their ace pitcher, Sandy Koufax. The series was the first between the Yankees and the new Los Angeles Dodgers, after their move in 1958. After the season, Yogi Berra, who had just retired from playing, took over managerial duties. The aging Yankees returned the next year for a fifth straight World Series, but were beaten 4–3 by the St. Louis Cardinals. It would be the Yankees' last World Series appearance until 1976. After the 1964 season, broadcasting company CBS purchased 80% of the Yankees from Topping and Webb for $11.2 million (equivalent to $110 million in 2023). With the new ownership, the team began to decline. The 1965 edition of the team posted a record of 77–85 — the Yankees' first losing record in 40 years. In 1966, the Yankees finished in last place in the AL for the first time since 1912. It also marked their first consecutive losing seasons since 1917 and 1918. The 1967 season was not much better; they finished only ahead of the Kansas City Athletics in the American League. While their fortunes improved somewhat in the late 1960s and early 1970s, they finished higher than fourth only once during CBS' ownership, in 1970. The Yankees were not able to replace their aging superstars with promising young talent, as they had consistently done in the previous five decades. As early as the 1961–62 off-season, longtime fans noticed that the pipeline of talent from the minor league affiliates had started to dry up. This was worsened by the introduction of the amateur draft that year, which meant that the Yankees could no longer sign any player they wanted. The Yankees were one of four teams who voted against the establishment of the draft, with the Dodgers, Mets, and Cardinals also objecting. While the Yankees usually drafted fairly early during this period due to their lackluster records, Thurman Munson was the only pick who lived up to his billing. On January 3, 1973, CBS announced they were selling the club to a group of investors, led by Cleveland-based shipbuilder George Steinbrenner (1930–2010), for $10 million (equivalent to $68.6 million in 2023). E. Michael Burke, who assumed the role of team president in 1966, resigned as president in April but stayed with the organization as a consultant to the owner. Within a year, Steinbrenner bought out most of his other partners and became the team's principal owner, although Burke continued to hold a minority share into the 1980s. One of Steinbrenner's major goals was to renovate Yankee Stadium. Both the stadium and the surrounding neighborhood had deteriorated by the late 1960s. CBS initially suggested renovations, but the team needed to play elsewhere, and the Mets refused to open their home, Shea Stadium, to the Yankees. A new stadium in the Meadowlands, across the Hudson River in New Jersey, was suggested (and was eventually built, as Giants Stadium, specifically for football). Finally, in mid-1972, Mayor John Lindsay stepped in. The city bought the stadium and began an extensive two-year renovation period. Since the city also owned Shea Stadium, the Mets were forced to allow the Yankees to play two seasons there. The renovations modernized the look of the stadium, significantly altered the dimensions, and reconfigured some of the seating. In 1973, Steinbrenner instituted a personal appearance policy that included being clean-shaven, with long hair slicked back or trimmed. In an interview with The New York Times, Steinbrenner stated the policy was to " instill a certain sense of order and discipline" in the players. The policy originated from Steinbrenner's service in the United States Air Force, which had a similar appearance policy. This rule is still in effect today, and enforced by his sons after George's passing. The Cincinnati Reds had the same personal appearance policy from 1967 until 1999. After the 1974 season, Steinbrenner made a move that started the modern era of free agency, signing star pitcher Catfish Hunter away from Oakland. Midway through the 1975 season, the team hired former second baseman Billy Martin as manager. With Martin at the helm, the Yankees reached the 1976 World Series, but were swept by the Cincinnati Reds and their famed "Big Red Machine." After the 1976 campaign, Steinbrenner added star Oakland outfielder Reggie Jackson—who had spent 1976 with the Baltimore Orioles—to his roster. During spring training of 1977, Jackson alienated his teammates with controversial remarks about the Yankees captain, catcher Thurman Munson. He had bad blood with manager Billy Martin, who had managed the Detroit Tigers when Jackson's Athletics defeated them in the 1972 playoffs. Jackson, Martin, and Steinbrenner repeatedly feuded with each other throughout Jackson's 5-year contract. Martin was hired and fired by Steinbrenner five times over the next 13 years. This conflict, combined with the extremely rowdy Yankees fans of the late 1970s and the bad conditions of the Bronx, led to the Yankees organization and stadium being referred to as the "Bronx Zoo". Despite the turmoil, Jackson hit four home runs in the 1977 World Series; hit three of those home runs on the first pitch of his at bats in the fourth, fifth and eighth innings of the sixth game of the World Series; earned the Series MVP Award; and got the nickname "Mr. October." Throughout the late 1970s, the race for the pennant was often a close competition between the Yankees and the Red Sox. Despite that, during the 1978 season, the Red Sox were 14+1⁄2 games ahead of the Yankees in July. In late July, Martin suspended Reggie Jackson and fined him $9,000 (equivalent to $42,000 in 2023) for "defiance" after he bunted while Martin had the "swing" signal on. Upon Jackson's return, Martin made a famous statement against both Jackson and owner Steinbrenner: "They deserve each other. One's a born liar; the other's convicted." Martin was forced to resign the next day and was replaced by Bob Lemon. This came while the team was winning five games in a row and Boston was losing five in a row. The Yankees continued to win games, and by the time they met Boston for a pivotal four-game series at Fenway Park in early September, the Yankees were four games behind the Red Sox. The Yankees swept the Red Sox in what became known as the "Boston Massacre", winning the games 15–3, 13–2, 7–0, and 7–4. The third game was a shutout pitched by Ron Guidry, who led the majors with nine shutouts, a 25–3 record, and a 1.74 ERA. On the last day of the season, the two clubs finished in a tie for first place in the AL East, and a tiebreaker game was held at Fenway Park. With Guidry pitching against former Yankee Mike Torrez, the Red Sox took an early 2–0 lead. In the seventh inning, light-hitting Yankee shortstop Bucky Dent drove a three-run home run over the Fenway Park's Green Monster, putting the Yankees up 3–2. Reggie Jackson's solo home run in the following inning sealed the eventual 5–4 win that gave the Yankees their one-hundredth win of the season and their third straight AL East title. Guidry earned his 25th win of the season. After defeating the Kansas City Royals for the third consecutive year in the ALCS, the Yankees faced the Los Angeles Dodgers in the World Series. They lost the first two games in Los Angeles, but won all three games at Yankee Stadium and Game 6 back in Los Angeles, winning their 22nd world championship. Changes occurred during the 1979 season. Former Cy Young Award-winning closer Sparky Lyle was traded to the Texas Rangers for several players, including Dave Righetti. Tommy John was acquired from the Dodgers and Luis Tiant from the Red Sox to bolster the pitching staff. During the season, Bob Lemon was replaced by Billy Martin, who was serving his second stint as Yankees manager. The 1970s ended on a tragic note for the Yankees. On August 2, 1979, catcher Thurman Munson died when his private plane crashed while he was practicing touch-and-go landings. Four days later, the entire team flew out to Canton, Ohio, for the funeral, despite having a game later that day against the Orioles. Bobby Murcer, a close friend of Munson's, along with Lou Piniella, were chosen to give the eulogy at his funeral. In a nationally televised and emotional game, Murcer used Munson's bat (which he gave to Munson's wife after the game), and drove in all five of the team's runs in a dramatic 5–4 walk-off victory. Before the game, Munson's locker sat empty except for his catching gear, a sad reminder for his teammates. His locker, labeled with his number 15, has remained empty in the Yankees clubhouse as a memorial. When the Yankees moved across the street, Munson's locker was torn out and installed in the new stadium's museum. Immediately after Munson's death, the team announced his number 15 would be retired. The 1980 season brought more changes. Billy Martin was fired once again and Dick Howser took his place. Chris Chambliss was traded to the Toronto Blue Jays for catcher Rick Cerone. Reggie Jackson hit .300 for the only time in his career with 41 homers, and finished second in the MVP voting to Kansas City's George Brett. The Yankees won 103 games and the AL East by three games over the Baltimore Orioles, but were swept by the Royals in the ALCS. After the season ended, the Yankees signed Dave Winfield to a 10-year contract. A contract misunderstanding led to a feud between Winfield and Steinbrenner. The team fired Howser and replaced him with Gene Michael. Under Michael, the Yankees led the AL East before a strike hit in June 1981. The Yankees struggled under Bob Lemon, who replaced Michael for the second half of the season. Thanks to the split-season playoff format, the Yankees faced the second-half winner Milwaukee Brewers in the special 1981 American League Division Series. After defeating Milwaukee 3–2, they swept the Oakland Athletics in a three-game ALCS. In the World Series, the Yankees won the first two games against the Los Angeles Dodgers. But the Dodgers fought back to win the next four games to claim the World Series title. This World Series would be the most recent between the Yankees and the Dodgers. Following the team's loss to the Dodgers in the 1981 World Series, the Yankees began their longest absence from the playoffs since 1921. Steinbrenner announced his plan to transform the Yankees from the "Bronx Bombers" into the "Bronx Burners", increasing the Yankees' ability to win games based on speed and defense instead of relying on home runs. As a first step towards this end, the Yankees signed Dave Collins from the Cincinnati Reds during the 1981 off-season. Collins was traded to the Toronto Blue Jays after the 1982 season in a deal that also included future All-Stars Fred McGriff and Mike Morgan. In return the Yankees got Dale Murray and Tom Dodd. The Yankees of the 1980s were led by All-Star first baseman Don Mattingly. In spite of accumulating the most total wins of any major league team, they failed to win a World Series (the 1980s were the first decade since the 1910s in which the Yankees did not win at least two Series) and had only two playoff appearances. They consistently had a powerful offense, with Mattingly and Winfield competing for the best average in the AL for the 1984 season. Despite their offense, the Yankees teams of the 1980s lacked sufficient starting pitching to win a championship in the 1980s. After posting a 22–6 record in 1985, arm problems caught up with Guidry, and his performance declined over the next three years. He retired after the 1988 season. Of the remaining mainstays of the Yankees' rotation, only Dave Righetti stood out, pitching a no-hitter on July 4, 1983, but he was moved to the bullpen the next year where he helped to define the closer role. Despite the Yankees' lack of pitching success during the 1980s, they had three of the premier pitchers of the early 1990s on their roster during these years in Al Leiter, Doug Drabek and José Rijo. All were mismanaged and dealt away before they could reach their full potential, with only Rijo returning much value – he was traded to the Oakland A's in the deal that brought Henderson to New York. The team came close to winning the AL East in 1985 and 1986, finishing second to the Toronto Blue Jays and Boston Red Sox, respectively, but fell to fourth place in 1987 and fifth in 1988, despite having mid-season leads in the AL East both years. By the end of the decade, the Yankees' offense declined. Henderson and third baseman Mike Pagliarulo had departed by the middle of 1989, while back problems hampered both Winfield (who missed the entire 1989 season) and Mattingly (who missed almost the entire second half of 1990). Winfield's tenure with the team ended when he was dealt to the California Angels. From 1989 to 1992, the team had a losing record, spending significant money on free-agents and draft picks who did not live up to expectations. In 1990, the Yankees had the worst record in the American League, and their fourth last-place finish in franchise history. During the 1990 season, Yankee fans started to chant "1918!" to taunt the Red Sox, reminding them of the last time they won a World Series one weekend the Red Sox were there in 1990. Each time the Red Sox were at Yankee Stadium afterward, chants of "1918!" echoed through the stadium. Yankee fans also taunted the Red Sox with signs saying "CURSE OF THE BAMBINO", pictures of Babe Ruth, and wearing "1918!" T-shirts each time they were at the stadium. These fans came to be known as the Bleacher Creatures. The poor showings in the 1980s and early 1990s soon changed. Steinbrenner hired Howard Spira to uncover damaging information on Winfield and was subsequently suspended from day-to-day team operations by Commissioner Fay Vincent for two years when the plot was revealed. This turn of events allowed management to implement a coherent acquisition and development program without owner interference. General Manager Gene Michael, along with manager Buck Showalter, shifted the club's emphasis from high-priced acquisitions to developing talent through the farm system. This new philosophy developed key players such as outfielder Bernie Williams, shortstop Derek Jeter, catcher Jorge Posada, and pitchers Andy Pettitte and Mariano Rivera. The first significant success came in 1994, when the Yankees had the best record in the AL, but the season was cut short by a players' strike. Because the Yankees were last in a postseason in a season cut short by a strike, the news media constantly reminded the Yankees about the parallels between these two Yankees teams, which included both teams having division leads taken away by strike. Throughout October, the media continued to speculate about what might have been if there had not been a strike, making references to the day's games in the postseason would have been played. A year later, the team qualified for the playoffs in the new wild card slot in the strike-shortened 1995 season. In the memorable 1995 American League Division Series against the Seattle Mariners, the Yankees won the first two games at home and lost the next three in Seattle. Although Mattingly batted .417 with a home run and six RBI in the only postseason series of his career, his back problems led him to retire after the 1997 season after sitting out the 1996 season. Joe Torre had a mediocre run as a manager in the National League, and the choice was initially derided ("Clueless Joe" was a headline in the New York Daily News). However, his calm demeanor proved to be a good fit, and his tenure was the longest under George Steinbrenner's ownership. Torre was announced as the new Yankees manager in November 1995. The 1996 season saw the rise of three Yankees who formed the core of the team for years to come: rookie shortstop Derek Jeter, second-year starting pitcher Andy Pettitte, and second-year pitcher Mariano Rivera, who served as setup man in 1996 before becoming closer in 1997. Aided by these young players, the Yankees won their first AL East title in 15 years. They defeated the Texas Rangers in the ALDS, and in ALCS beat the Baltimore Orioles 4–1, which included a notable fan interference by Jeffrey Maier that was called as a home run for the Yankees. In the World Series the team rebounded from an 0–2 series deficit and defeated the defending champion Atlanta Braves, ending an 18-year championship drought. Jeter was named Rookie of the Year. In 1997, the Yankees lost the 1997 ALDS to the Cleveland Indians 3–2. General manager Bob Watson stepped down and was replaced by assistant general manager Brian Cashman. The 1998 Yankees are widely acknowledged to be one of the greatest teams in baseball history, compiling a record of 114–48, a then–AL record for the most wins in a season. On May 17, 1998, David Wells pitched a perfect game against the Minnesota Twins. The Yankees went on to sweep the San Diego Padres in the World Series. Their 125 combined regular and postseason wins remains an MLB single-season record. On July 18, 1999, David Cone pitched a perfect game against the Montreal Expos. The ALCS was the Yankees' first postseason meeting with the rival Red Sox. The 1999 Yankees defeated the Red Sox 4–1 and swept the Braves in the 1999 World Series giving the 1998–99 Yankees a combined 22–3 record in the (including four series sweeps) in the six post-season series those years. In 2000, the Yankees faced the Mets in the first New York City Subway World Series in 44 years. The Yankees won the series in 5 games, but a loss in Game 3 snapped their streak of consecutive games won in World Series contests at 14, surpassing the club's previous record of 12 (in 1927, 1928, and 1932). The Yankees are the last MLB team to repeat as World Series champions and after the 2000 season they joined the Yankees teams of 1936–39 and 1949–53, as well as the 1972–74 Oakland Athletics as the only teams to win at least three consecutive World Series. In aftermath of the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks, the Yankees defeated the Oakland Athletics in the ALDS, and the Seattle Mariners in the ALCS. By winning the pennant for a fourth straight year, the 1998–2001 Yankees joined the 1921–24 New York Giants, and the Yankees teams of 1936–39, 1949–53, 1955–58 and 1960–64 as the only teams to win at least four straight pennants. The Yankees won 11 consecutive postseason series in this 4-year period. In the World Series against the Arizona Diamondbacks, the Yankees lost the series when Rivera uncharacteristically blew a save in the bottom of the ninth inning of Game 7. Also, despite a very poor series overall, batting under .200, Derek Jeter got the nickname, "Mr. November", echoing comparisons to Reggie Jackson's "Mr. October", for his walk-off home run in Game 4, though it began October 31, as the game ended in the first minutes of November 1. In addition, Yankee Stadium played host for a memorial service titled "Prayer for America" for the September 11 victims. A vastly revamped Yankees team finished the 2002 season with an AL-best record of 103–58. The season was highlighted by Alfonso Soriano becoming the first second baseman ever to hit 30 home runs and steal 30 bases in a season. In the ALDS the Yankees lost to the eventual World Series champion Anaheim Angels 3–1. In 2003, the Yankees again had the best league record (101–61), highlighted by Roger Clemens' 300th win and 4000th strikeout. In the ALCS, they defeated the Boston Red Sox in a dramatic seven-game series, which featured a bench-clearing incident in Game 3 and a series-ending walk-off home run by Aaron Boone in the bottom of the 11th inning of Game 7. In the World Series the Yankees lost in 6 games to the Florida Marlins. In 2004, the Yankees traded Alfonso Soriano to the Texas Rangers in exchange for star shortstop Alex Rodriguez, who moved to third base from his usual shortstop position to accommodate Jeter. In the ALCS, the Yankees met the Boston Red Sox again, and became the first team in professional baseball history, and only the third team in North American professional sports history, to lose a best-of-seven series after taking a 3–0 series lead. The Red Sox would go on to defeat the Cardinals in the World Series, their first championship since 1918. In 2005 Alex Rodriguez won the American League MVP award, becoming the first Yankee to win the award since Don Mattingly in 1985. The 2006 season was highlighted by a 5-game series sweep of the Red Sox at Fenway Park (sometimes referred to as the "Second Boston Massacre"), outscoring the Red Sox 49–26. The Yankees' streak of nine straight AL East division titles ended in 2007, but they still reached the playoffs with the AL Wild Card. For the third year in a row, the team lost in the first round of the playoffs, as the Cleveland Indians defeated the Yankees, 3–1, in the 2007 ALDS. After the series, Joe Torre declined a reduced-length and compensation contract offer from the Yankees and returned to the National League as manager of the Los Angeles Dodgers. After Torre's departure, the Yankees signed former catcher Joe Girardi to a three-year contract to manage the club. The 2008 season was the last season played at Yankee Stadium. To celebrate the final year and history of Yankee Stadium, the 2008 Major League Baseball All-Star Game was played there. The final regular-season game at Yankee Stadium was played on September 21, 2008, with the Yankees defeating the Orioles. After the game, Jeter addressed the crowd, thanking them for their support over the years, and urging them to "take the memories of this field, add them to the new memories that will come at the new Yankee Stadium and continue to pass them on from generation to generation." Despite multiple midseason roster moves, the team was hampered by injuries and missed the playoffs for the first time in 14 seasons. During the off-season, the Yankees retooled their roster with several star free agent acquisitions, including CC Sabathia, Mark Teixeira, and A. J. Burnett. At the beginning of the 2009 season, the Yankees opened the new Yankee Stadium, located just a block north on River Avenue from their former home. The Yankees set a major league record by playing error-free ball for 18 consecutive games from May 14 to June 1, 2009. In the ALDS they swept the Minnesota Twins before defeating the Los Angeles Angels in the ALCS, 4–2. They Yankees defeated the Philadelphia Phillies, in the World Series 4–2, their 27th World Series title. During the 2010 All-Star break, public address announcer Bob Sheppard and principal owner George Steinbrenner died. Eight days later, another longtime Yankee icon, former player and manager Ralph Houk, died. In a 22–9 win over the Oakland Athletics on August 25, 2011, the Yankees became the first team in Major League history to hit three grand slams in a single game. They were hit by Robinson Canó, Russell Martin, and Curtis Granderson. In 2012, the Yankees again finished the season with the AL's best record at 95–67. In mid-July, the Yankees traded two prospects to the Seattle Mariners for Ichiro Suzuki. They faced the Orioles in the ALDS. In Game 3, Raúl Ibañez became the oldest player to hit two home runs in a game, the oldest to hit a walk-off home run, the first substitute position player in a postseason game to hit two home runs, and the first to hit two home runs in the 9th inning or later in a postseason game, in the Yankees' 3–2 win. The Yankees defeated the Orioles in five games. However, in the ALCS, the Yankees lost to the Tigers again, this time in a four-game sweep, which was compounded with a struggling offense and a season-ending injury to Derek Jeter. On April 12, 2013, the Yankees made their second triple play ever. It was scored as 4–6–5–6–5–3–4, the first triple play of its kind in baseball history. On September 25, the Yankees lost to the Tampa Bay Rays, which for the second time in the wild-card era, eliminated them from playoff contention. They ended the season 85–77, finishing in 3rd place in the AL East. On September 25, 2014, Jeter – playing his final home game – hit a walk-off single off pitcher Evan Meek to defeat the Baltimore Orioles in front of a sold out stadium. Reliever Dellin Betances finished 3rd in voting for AL Rookie of the Year, while starting pitcher Masahiro Tanaka finished 5th. The Yankees struggled through the 2016 season, ending at 4th place in the AL East. The resurgent 2015 experienced by Rodriguez and Teixeira did not carry over, as they batted .200 and .204 for the season, respectively. At the trade deadline, the Yankees stood at an uninspiring 52–52, and decided to become sellers rather than buyers. The Yankees trades brought a group of players to the team, most notably, Cubs prospect Gleyber Torres. In discussing the midseason trades, Yankees general manager Brian Cashman said that the Yankees recognized the "need to look toward the future." In early August, both Teixeira and Rodriguez revealed their plans to retire by the season's end. Rodriguez played his final game on August 12, 2016, accepting a front office job with the Yankees shortly after. In one of his final games, Teixeira hit a walk-off grand slam against the Boston Red Sox, his 409th and last career home run. The Yankees called up Tyler Austin and outfielder Aaron Judge in August. They made their debuts on August 13, hitting back-to-back home runs in their first career at-bats. Catcher Gary Sánchez hit 20 home runs in 53 games, finishing 2nd in AL Rookie of the Year voting and setting the record at the time as the fastest to reach 20 career home runs. Sanchez, Judge and Austin, as well as the Yankees' prosperous farm system in general, became nicknamed the "Baby Bombers". In 2017, Judge led the American League with 52 home runs, breaking Mark McGwire's major league record for most home runs by a rookie in a single season (McGwire hit 49 in 1987). Judge won the 2017 Home Run Derby, making the Yankees the team with the most players in history to win a Home Run Derby. Judge would end the season by winning Rookie of the Year, and finishing second in the AL MVP voting. In the 2017–18 off-season, the Yankees made a couple moves including hiring Aaron Boone to succeed Girardi as their new manager. and trading for reigning National League Most Valuable Player Giancarlo Stanton. A right fielder who bats right-handed, Stanton hit 59 home runs and drove in 132 runs—both major league highs—in 2017; his contract was the largest player contract in the history of professional sports in North America at the time. In 2019 the Yankees traveled to London in late June to play the Red Sox in the first ever MLB London Series, in addition to the first MLB games played in Europe. The Yankees swept Boston in the two-game series, with the first game lasted 4 hours and 42 minutes, 3 minutes shorter than the longest MLB 9-inning game. The Yankees beat the Twins in a three-game sweep to advance to the ALCS for the second time in three seasons. However, on October 19, the Houston Astros beat the Yankees in the ALCS 4–2. With this loss, the 2010s decade became the first since the 1980s to have the Yankees fail to win a World Series and the first since the 1910s to have the Yankees failing to play in one. During the 2019 offseason, on December 18, 2019, the Yankees signed Gerrit Cole to a nine-year, $324 million contract. On May 19, 2021, former Cy Young Award winner Corey Kluber threw a no-hitter against the Texas Rangers. This was the Yankees 12th no-hitter of all time, and the first since David Cone's perfect game in 1999. The Yankees also recorded a record-tying three triple plays throughout the 2021 season. In 2022, the Yankees clinched their 30th straight winning season. On October 4, Aaron Judge hit his 62nd home run, breaking the American League single-season home run record set in 1961 by Roger Maris. In the offseason, Jose Trevino would become the first Yankee ever to win the Platinum Glove Award. Aaron Judge would also win AL MVP after having an historic season, being the first Yankee to win the award since Alex Rodriguez did in 2007. On December 21, 2022, Aaron Judge was named the 16th captain in Yankees history, after getting resigned to a nine-year, $360 million contract. Judge was named the first captain of the team since Derek Jeter retired in 2014. On June 28, 2023, Domingo Germán threw the 24th perfect game in MLB history, and 4th in Yankees history. After the 2023 season, shortstop Anthony Volpe became the first Yankee rookie to win the Gold Glove Award, and Gerrit Cole won the AL Cy Young Award after posting a league leading 2.63 ERA and 0.981 WHIP. On December 6, 2023, the Yankees made a blockbuster trade for young superstar Juan Soto. The Yankees have won 27 World Series in 40 appearances, the most in Major League Baseball in addition to major North American professional sports leagues. The St. Louis Cardinals are in second place with 11 World Series championships with their last win in 2011. The Dodgers are second in total World Series appearances with 20. The Yankees have lost 13 World Series, the second most in MLB behind the Dodgers, who have 14 losses. The Yankees have faced the Dodgers 11 times, going 8–3. Among North American major sports, the Yankees' success is approached by only the 24 Stanley Cup championships of the Montreal Canadiens of the National Hockey League. The Yankees have played in the World Series against every National League pennant winner except the Houston Astros (who now play in the American League) and the Colorado Rockies. Through 2023, the Yankees have an all-time regular season winning percentage of .569 (a 10,684 – 8,080 record), the best of any team in MLB history. On June 25, 2019, they set a new major league record for homering in 28 consecutive games, breaking the record set by the 2002 Texas Rangers. The streak would reach 31 games, during which they hit 57 home runs. With the walk-off solo home run by DJ LeMahieu to win the game against the Oakland Athletics on August 31, 2019, the Yankees ended the month of August that year now holding a new record of 74 home runs hit in the month alone, a new record for the most home runs hit in a month by a single MLB team. The Yankees have won a record 27 World Series championships. Their most recent one came when the new stadium opened in 2009; they defeated the Philadelphia Phillies in six games under manager Joe Girardi. The team has acquired different nicknames over the years by both baseball personalities and the media. Sportswriter Fred Lieb, in a 1922 story for the Baseball Magazine, said he will call the club "the Yanks" in his articles.: 18  He stated the nickname "will fit into heads better". Their most prominently used nickname is "the Bronx Bombers" or simply "the Bombers", a reference to their home and their prolific hitting. The nickname "Bronx Bombers" was first used by writer Frank Wallace in a July 5, 1928 article in the New York Daily News. By 1935, the name had caught on among sportswriters around the country. A less used nickname is "the Pinstripes" or "Pinstripers", in reference to the iconic feature on their home uniforms. The term "Murderers' Row" has historically been used to refer to both the 1920s Yankees and the team altogether. Critics often refer to the team and the organization as "the Evil Empire", a term applied to the Yankees by Boston Red Sox president Larry Lucchino in a 2002 interview with The New York Times after the Yankees signed pitching prospect José Contreras. Ironically, Yankee fans and supporters refer to their team as the "Evil Empire" as a badge of honor and in fact enjoy having their team play the villain. The team also embraced the label as well, with the stadium playing "The Imperial March" from Star Wars, the song associated with antagonist Darth Vader, at home games. A term from the team's tumultuous late 1970s, "the Bronx Zoo", is sometimes used by detractors, as well as the "Damn Yankees", after the musical of the same name. The Yankees logo and uniform design has changed throughout the team's history. During the inaugural Highlanders season in 1903, the uniform featured a large "N" and a "Y" on each breast.: 288  In 1909, the "N" and "Y" were combined and was added to both the left breast and caps. According to history, the interlocking "NY" letters predates the New York Yankees. The letters appear on the New York City Police Department Medal for Valor, which was established in 1877 and was designed by Tiffany & Co. Three years later, black pinstripes were added to the Highlander uniforms for the first time. The current cap look, a navy blue hat with the white interlocking "NY" letters, was adopted in 1932. Both the home and away uniforms has been relatively unchanged since the 1920s and 1940s, respectively. The away uniform is grey in color with "NEW YORK" across the chest. Cap insignia Jersey logo Print insignia Team logo Merchandise with the Yankees logo, such as baseball caps, is popular worldwide, including in countries where the sport of baseball is not popular. According to a 2023 New York Times report, for instance, Yankees caps (mostly counterfeit) are "viral" in Brazil. Customers there mostly do not know that the logo represents a baseball team, but think of it as "a classic piece of Americana, a status symbol, or a generic—perhaps chic—emblem of the West". With their recurring success since the 1920s, the Yankees have since been one of the most popular teams in the world, with their fan base coming from much further than the New York metropolitan area. The Yankees typically bring an upsurge in attendance at all or most of their various road-trip venues, drawing crowds of their own fans, as well as home-town fans whose interest is heightened when the Yankees come to town. The Yankees have consistently been the most attended MLB games. The first 1 million-fan season was in 1920, when more than 1.2 millions fans attended Yankee games at the Polo Grounds. According to Baseball-Reference.com, the 2008 season saw the most fans per game in Yankees history, with an average of 53,000 per game. In the past seven years, the Yankees have drawn over three million fans each year, with an American League record-setting 4,090,696 in 2005, becoming only the third franchise in sports history to draw over four million in regular-season attendance in their own ballpark. The Yankees were the league leaders in "road attendance" each year from 2001 through 2006. Some Yankees superfans have become notable in their own right. One famous fan was Freddy Schuman, popularly known as "Freddy Sez." For over 50 years, he came to the Yankees' home games with a baseball cap, a Yankees' jersey (which on the back bears his own name), and a cake pan with a shamrock painted on it, which was connected to a sign inscribed with words of encouragement for the home team. Schuman died on October 17, 2010, at the age of 85. The popularity of the Yankees also extended internationally. According to a Major League Baseball executive, the Yankees logo is considered a "sign of quality" despite many people not knowing the team. The "Bleacher Creatures" are a group of fans known for their strict allegiance to the Yankees and are often merciless to opposing fans who sit in the section and cheer for the road team. They occupied Section 39 in the right-field bleachers at the old Yankee Stadium and occupy Section 203 in the new stadium. The Bleacher Creatures are known for their use of chants and songs, with the "roll call" at the beginning of each home game being the most prominent. The "creatures" got their nickname from New York Daily News columnist Filip "Flip" Bondy, who spent the 2004 season sitting in the section for research on his book about the group, Bleeding Pinstripes: A Season with the Bleacher Creatures of Yankee Stadium, published in 2005. Throughout the years both at the old and new stadiums, the Bleacher Creatures have attracted controversy for the use of derogatory and homophobic chants and rowdiness aimed at both opposing fans and players. In 2017, team management ordered the creation of a special cheer section within Section 104 for fans of Yankees outfielder Aaron Judge, called "the Judge's Chambers". They were the second AL team to create a special cheering section, following the Seattle Mariners and the "King's Court" for pitcher Félix Hernández. The Judge's Chambers was added in response to his rise as one of the league's most popular young stars. The section's 18 seats are given to lucky ticketholders and their families, along with black judicial robes with the team logo on the front and Judge's 99 jersey number on the back; prior to the addition of the section, fans were wearing white wigs and judicial robes to games in support of Judge. Occasionally, community organizations, charities and Little League teams are given precedence when selecting participants. The seats, which are close to his position in right field, are surrounded by mahogany wood to emulate the appearance of the city's courthouses. The Yankees baseball club is formally owned by Yankee Global Enterprises, a holding company in turn majorly owned by the Steinbrenner family. Yankee Global Enterprises also has a majority stake in the YES Network, the Yankees main television network. Since purchasing the team from CBS in 1973, George Steinbrenner was involved in daily team operations, including player and manager signings. Steinbrenner retired from day-to-day team operations in 2005, handing over control to Steve Swindal, his then son-in-law. Swindal was bought out in 2007 with George's son Hal Steinbrenner becoming chairman of Yankee Global Enterprises and the team's managing partner. George Steinbrenner, citing declining health, formally handed control of the team to both Hal and brother Hank in October 2007. George Steinbrenner died in 2010 and Hank died ten years later, leaving Hal as the main managing partner. In 2008, the Yankees announced a joint venture with the National Football League's Dallas Cowboys to form the basis for a partnership in running food and beverage, and other catering services to both teams' stadiums. The Yankees has consistently been one of the most valuable sport teams in the world. In 2013, Forbes magazine ranked New York Yankees as the fourth most valuable sports team in the world, behind association football clubs Real Madrid of La Liga, Manchester United of the Premier League and Barcelona of La Liga, a value of $2.3 billion. In 2017, Forbes magazine ranked the Yankees as the second most valuable sports team at $3.7 billion behind the Dallas Cowboys, up 9% from 2016. In 2019, Forbes magazine again ranked the Yankees as the most valuable MLB team at $4.6 billion, up 15% from 2018, behind only the Dallas Cowboys. In 2022, the Yankees were again ranked as the second most valuable team behind the Cowboys, valued at $6 billion. The team's value rose again in 2023, rising 17% from 2022 to $7.1 billion, and keeping the Yankees as the second most valuable sports team in the world behind the Cowboys. With the long-term success of the franchise and a large Yankee fanbase, many fans of other teams have come to dislike the Yankees. When the Yankees are on the road, it is common for the home fans to chant "Yankees Suck". According to the opinion poll and analytics website FiveThirtyEight, the Yankees were MLB's least liked team, with 48% of fans expressing an "unfavorable" view of the team. Much of the animosity toward the team may derive from its high payroll and "buying" champions instead of developing players. Their payroll was around $200 million at the start of the 2008 season, the highest of any American sports team. In 2005, the team's average player salary was $2.6 million with the Yankees having the five highest paid players in MLB. During his tenure as team owner, George Steinbrenner attracted controversy for his public criticism of players and managers and for high personnel turnover. Manager Billy Martin was hired and fired a total of five times under Steinbrenner. Chicago Tribune columnist Mike Royko noted, "Hating the Yankees is as American as pizza pie, unwed mothers, and cheating on your income tax." The official fight song for the Yankees is "Here Come the Yankees", written in 1967 by Bob Bundin and Lou Stallman. The song was used extensively in radio and television broadcast introductions. The song, however, did not catch on with fans and has been rarely used past the 1990s.: 193–197  This is contrasted to other, more popular fight songs such as "Meet the Mets", which is played at every Mets home game. Another song strongly linked to the team is "New York, New York", which is played in the stadium after home games. George Steinbrenner started playing the song during the 1980 season. The Frank Sinatra cover version is traditionally played after victories, and the Liza Minnelli original version after losses. However, due to a complaint from Minnelli, the Frank Sinatra version is played after home games, regardless of the result.: 108  A wide selection of songs are played regularly at the stadium, many of them live on the Stadium's Hammond organ. One of the popular songs is "God Bless America", which has been played during the seventh-inning stretch since September 11. The version typically played for many years since 2001 was an abbreviated version of Kate Smith's rendition. In 2019 the Yankees stopped playing Smith's rendition to allegations of racism in some of her songs. The team switched to a live version by the stadium organist during the stretch in the interim. In 2021, the organ version was replaced by a recording of the Robert Merrill cover of the song. Merrill was the national anthem singer in the old Yankees Stadium for Opening Day and other special events before passing away in 1998. During the 5th inning, the grounds crew, while performing their duties, dance to "Y.M.C.A.". Former Yankees executive Joseph Molloy said that he saw fans dancing to the song during a spring training game in the mid-1990s. Molloy told Steinbrenner, who started to play the song at the stadium. The Yankees Entertainment and Sports (YES) Network was launched in 2002 and serves as the primary home of the New York Yankees. As of 2022, Michael Kay is the play-by-play announcer with David Cone, John Flaherty, and Paul O'Neill working as commentators as part of a three-man, or occasionally two-man, booth. Bob Lorenz hosts both the pre-game and the post-game shows with Jack Curry, and Meredith Marakovits and Nancy Newman are the on-site reporters. Select games are available streaming only on Amazon Prime in the New York metropolitan area, these games formally aired on WPIX and WWOR-TV. Radio broadcasts are on the Yankees Radio Network, the flagship station being WFAN 660 AM, with John Sterling as the play-by-play announcer and Suzyn Waldman providing the commentary. Spanish-language broadcasts are on WADO 1280 AM, with Rickie Ricardo calling the games. Mel Allen was the team's lead announcer from 1948 to 1964. He was known as "The voice of the Yankees." Russ Hodges had a brief stint with Mel Allen before he took over as the lead announcer with the New York Giants. Red Barber called Yankees games for 13 seasons, from 1954 to 1966. Jerry Coleman called Yankees games from 1963 to 1970. Coleman was the Yankees second baseman from 1949 to 1957. Joe Garagiola called Yankees games from 1965 to 1967. Frank Messer, Phil Rizzuto and Bill White teamed together in the 1970s and 1980s. Rizzuto, with 40 years in the broadcast booth, was the longest-serving broadcaster in the history of the club. Messer and White each worked nearly two decades for the Yankees, with White notably moving on to become president of the National League in 1989. Bobby Murcer also called games for over twenty years, and continued with the YES Network until shortly before his death from brain cancer in 2008. The Yankees have retired 22 numbers for 24 individuals, the most in Major League Baseball. The retired numbers were displayed behind the old Yankee Stadium's left-field fence and in front of the opposing team's bullpen, forming a little alley that connects Monument Park to the left-field stands. When the franchise moved across the street to the new stadium, the numbers were incorporated into Monument Park that sits place in center field between both bullpens. The 21 numbers are placed on the wall in chronological order, beginning with Lou Gehrig's number 4. This was retired soon after Gehrig left baseball on July 4, 1939, the same day he gave his famous farewell speech. His was the first number retired in Major League Baseball history. Beneath the numbers are plaques with the names of the players and a descriptive paragraph. The number 42 was retired throughout Major League Baseball in honor of Jackie Robinson on April 15, 1997, the 50th anniversary of his breaking the color barrier. The day was declared Jackie Robinson Day, and was later observed by all of baseball, with select players from every team wearing the number 42. Players who wore No. 42 at the time were allowed to continue to wear it until they left the team with which they played on April 15, 1997; Mariano Rivera was the last active player covered under that grandfather clause. In 1972, the number 8 was retired for two players on the same day, in honor of catcher Bill Dickey and his protege, catcher Yogi Berra. Berra inherited Dickey's number in 1948 after Dickey ended his playing career and became a coach. The numbers 37 and 6, retired for Casey Stengel and Joe Torre respectively, are the only numbers retired by the Yankees for someone who served solely as manager of the team. Stengel managed the Yankees to ten pennants and seven world championships between 1949 and 1960, including a record five consecutive world championships from 1949 through 1953. Joe Torre managed the Yankees from 1996 to 2007, winning six pennants and four World Series championships. On May 14, 2017, the Yankees retired number 2 in honor of Derek Jeter. This leaves 0 as the only single-digit number available for future Yankees, currently worn by pitcher Marcus Stroman. The Yankees have multiple rivalries across the league, most notably The Boston Red Sox. The Yankees have also had historical rivalries with former crosstown National League teams the Los Angeles Dodgers and San Francisco Giants, and current crosstown rivals the New York Mets. The much storied Dodgers-Yankees rivalry goes back to the Dodgers' tenure in Brooklyn. The two teams have met in the World Series 11 times including four matchups since the Dodgers relocated to Los Angeles in 1958. The Yankees also forged an unlikely rivalry with the Cleveland Guardians, built by stark financial contrasts between the two teams, a fatal on-field death in 1920, and heated pennant races and postseason matchups in subsequent years. During the late 1990s, the Yankees built a rivalry with the Seattle Mariners as the two teams met in the postseason three times near the end of the decade. Most recently the team has developed a rivalry with the Houston Astros, fueled in part by the Houston Astros sign stealing scandal, believed by some Yankee fans to have contributed to their team's loss in the 2017 ALCS. The two teams have met in the postseason four times since 2015, and have pursued the same free agents and shared vitriol between both fanbases. The Yankees–Red Sox rivalry is one of the oldest, most famous, and fiercest rivalries in professional sports. The inaugural game between the two teams occurred more than 100 years ago, in 1903, when the Yankees (then known as the Highlanders) hosted the Red Sox (then named the Americans) at Hilltop Park. One of the major aspects of the rivalry is the Curse of the Bambino, where Babe Ruth was traded to the Yankees in 1920. Following the trade, the Red Sox did not win a World Series for 86 years, until 2004. The rivalry is sometimes so polarizing that it is often a heated subject, especially in the Northeastern United States. Since the inception of the wild card team and an added Division Series, the rivals have met in the playoffs five times (with the Yankees winning the 1999 and 2003 American League Championship Series and the Red Sox winning in the 2004 American League Championship Series, 2018 American League Division Series and the 2021 American League Wild Card Game). In addition, the teams have twice met in the last regular-season series of a season to decide the AL pennant, in 1904 (when the Red Sox won) and 1949 (when the Yankees won). Games between the two teams are often broadcast on national television and often yield high television ratings. The teams also finished tied for first in 1978, when the Yankees won a high-profile tie-breaker playoff for the AL East division title. The 1978 division race is memorable for the Red Sox having held a 14-game lead over the Yankees more than halfway through the season. Similarly, the 2004 ALCS is notable for the Yankees leading 3 games to 0 and ultimately losing the next four games and the series. The Red Sox comeback was the only time in MLB history that a team has come back from a 0–3 deficit to win a postseason series. The Subway Series is a series of games played between teams based in New York City. The name originates from the New York City Subway and the accessibility of the each team's stadium within the subway system. Historically, the term "Subway Series" referred to games played between the Yankees and either the New York Giants or the Brooklyn Dodgers. When the Dodgers and Giants moved to California in the late 1950s, the New York Mets were established as an expansion team in 1962. The term's historic usage has been in reference to World Series games played between New York teams. The Yankees have appeared in all Subway Series games as they have been the only American League team in the city, and have compiled an 11–3 record in the 14 championship Subway Series. The most recent World Series between the two New York teams was in 2000, when the Yankees defeated the Mets, in five games. Since 1997, the term Subway Series has also been applied to interleague play during the regular season between the Yankees and National League New York Mets. The New York Yankees farm system consists of six minor league affiliates. List of World Series champions List of New York Yankees managers Although the history of the New York Yankees can be traced back to the 1901–1902 Baltimore Orioles, the Orioles team is considered a separate team by Baseball-Reference.com, official Major League Baseball historian John Thorn, and the official Yankees history. The Polo Grounds were actually four different stadiums, the stadiums mentioned in this article are Polo Grounds III and IV. Hoch, Bryan (February 4, 2021). "NYPD & Tiffany: The story behind Yanks' logo". MLB Advanced Media. Retrieved October 21, 2022. The interlocking "NY" of the Yankees' logo is arguably the most recognizable in all of professional sports, spotted on streets from The Bronx to Beijing, Manhattan to Melbourne. Their navy blue and white caps have transcended baseball, becoming a global cultural touchstone. Hoch, Bryan (April 22, 2021). "Yankees making Stadium greener than ever". Yankees.com. MLB Advanced Media. Retrieved October 22, 2023. The official colors of the Yankees' uniforms are midnight navy and white, but thanks to the sustainability initiatives incorporated by the organization over the past several seasons, Yankee Stadium has become one of the greenest facilities in the Majors. Schoenfield, David (March 28, 2018). "The Evil Empire Strikes Back! Why the Yankees being good is great for baseball". ESPN. Retrieved February 27, 2023. "Yankees Front Office". Yankees.com. MLB Advanced Media. Retrieved October 17, 2022. Kepner, Tyler (September 29, 2007). "Steinbrenner Son Elected Chairman of Yankees". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 5, 2015. Retrieved July 4, 2022. "Yankees Timeline - 1900s". Yankees.com. MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on April 7, 2019. Retrieved July 4, 2022. Lynch, Mike (July 21, 2014). "1901-02 Orioles Removed from Yankees History". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on March 20, 2021. Retrieved July 20, 2022. "Baseball-Reference.com removes 1901-02 Baltimore Orioles from Yankees history". Society for American Baseball Research. Archived from the original on October 30, 2021. Retrieved July 20, 2022. "Yankees Timeline - 1910s". Yankees.com. MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on April 9, 2022. Retrieved July 4, 2022. Wancho, Joseph (April 16, 2009). "Indians throttle Yankees in grand opening of new Yankee Stadium". Society for American Baseball Research. Archived from the original on July 8, 2021. Retrieved July 4, 2022. "New York Yankees Attendance, Stadiums, and Park Factors". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on April 7, 2022. Retrieved July 4, 2022. Acocella, Nick. "History of a dynasty". ESPN. Archived from the original on December 1, 2021. Retrieved July 4, 2022. Robertson, Matthew (June 21, 2022). "The Houston Astros remain the class of the AL West and will provide tough test for both Mets, Yankees". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on June 24, 2022. Retrieved July 4, 2022. "World Series History: 1999". Major League Baseball Advanced Media. Archived from the original on June 10, 2022. Retrieved July 4, 2022. "Major League Teams and Baseball Encyclopedia". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on July 2, 2022. Retrieved July 4, 2022. Stainkamp, Michael (August 17, 2010). "A brief history: Montreal Canadiens". NHL.com. Archived from the original on June 24, 2021. Retrieved July 4, 2022. Casella, Paul (January 21, 2020). "Highest voting percentages in HOF history". MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on June 13, 2022. Retrieved July 4, 2022. "New York Yankees Hall of Fame Register". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on June 10, 2022. Retrieved July 4, 2022. Ozanian, Mike. "The World's 50 Most Valuable Sports Teams 2023". Forbes. Retrieved December 12, 2023. "Team profile: The worldwide phenomenon of the New York Yankees". YouGov. Archived from the original on November 27, 2021. Retrieved July 4, 2022. Enten, Harry (July 20, 2017). "America Has Spoken: The Yankees Are The Worst". FiveThirtyEight. Archived from the original on January 18, 2022. Retrieved July 4, 2022. "Red Sox-Yankees is baseball's ultimate rivalry". USA Today. October 20, 2004. Archived from the original on October 24, 2007. Retrieved July 4, 2022. Borden, Sam (June 25, 2019). "Borden: Why the Yankees hat has become a global fashion sensation". ESPN. Archived from the original on April 17, 2021. Retrieved July 25, 2022. "New York Yankees Team History & Encyclopedia | Baseball-Reference.com". November 15, 2022. Archived from the original on November 15, 2022. Retrieved November 21, 2022. "The National Game, from Coast to Coast: From Minor to Major". Library of Congress. Archived from the original on June 14, 2021. Buege, Bob (2001). "The Birth of the American League". Society for American Baseball Research. Archived from the original on January 15, 2022. Retrieved July 4, 2022. Frommer, Harvey (October 1, 2016). Old Time Baseball: America's Pastime in the Gilded Age. Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 9781630760076. "Change The Name: Old Western Is Now the New American League". Chicago Inter Ocean. October 12, 1899. p. 8. Retrieved July 4, 2022 – via Newspapers.com. Lynch, Mike. "1899-1901 American League Winter Meetings: War on the Horizon". Society for American Baseball Research. Archived from the original on January 16, 2022. Retrieved January 19, 2023. "Origin of each MLB franchise". Fox Sports. October 20, 2016. Archived from the original on October 23, 2017. Retrieved July 4, 2022. Weeks, Jonathan (2016). Baseball's Dynasties and the Players Who Built Them. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 89. ISBN 9781442261570. Tygiel, Jules (2000). Past Time: Baseball as History. Oxford University Press. p. 53. ISBN 9780195089585. Klingaman, Mike (June 16, 2022). "Retro: Although met with great fanfare, the 1902 Orioles season was marked by losses, warring leagues". The Baltimore Sun. Archived from the original on June 17, 2022. Retrieved July 15, 2022. "1903 AL-NL Peace Agreement". Society for American Baseball Research. January 10, 1903. Archived from the original on September 11, 2012. Retrieved July 4, 2022. "New York Yankees (1903–present)". Sports E-cyclopedia. Archived from the original on February 7, 2009. Retrieved March 12, 2009. ""Billy" Burbridge Dead" (PDF). The New York Times. September 17, 1912. Archived from the original (PDF) on April 7, 2022. Retrieved July 4, 2022. Stout, Glenn (2002). Johnson, Richard (ed.). Yankees Century: 100 Years of New York Yankees Baseball. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. pp. 9–14. ISBN 9780618085279. Krisel, Brandon (September 21, 2018). "Plaque Honors Yankees' Original Washington Heights Stadium". Washington Heights-Inwood Patch. Archived from the original on April 7, 2022. Retrieved July 5, 2022. Lamb, Bill. "Hilltop Park (New York)". Society for American Baseball Research. Archived from the original on January 26, 2022. Retrieved July 4, 2022. Calcaterra, Craig (April 10, 2020). "Today in Baseball History: The Yankees become The Yankees". NBC Sports. Archived from the original on December 2, 2020. Retrieved July 5, 2022. Lamb, Bill. "Joseph Gordon". Society for American Baseball Research. Archived from the original on March 19, 2022. Retrieved July 5, 2022. Appel, Marty (2012). Pinstripe Empire: The New York Yankees From Before the Babe to After the Boss. Bloomsbury Publishing. ISBN 9781608194926. "Landlord to the New York Yankees". New York Institute for Special Education. Archived from the original on August 22, 2021. Retrieved January 20, 2023. Krell, David. "April 22, 1903: New York makes its American League debut as Highlanders fall to Washington on Opening Day". Society for American Baseball Research. Archived from the original on March 17, 2022. Retrieved July 5, 2022. Worth, Richard (2013). Baseball Team Names: A Worldwide Dictionary, 1869-2011. McFarland & Company. p. 203. ISBN 9780786491247. "Some Facts About "Live Wire" Baseball". The Evening World. February 16, 1914. p. 12. Retrieved July 5, 2022 – via Library of Congress. Hoch, Bryan (December 1, 2021). "How they came to be called the Yankees". MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on January 25, 2021. Retrieved July 5, 2022. Howell, Brian (2015). New York Yankees. ABDO. p. 15. ISBN 9781629688312. "Jack Chesbro". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on October 6, 2021. Retrieved July 5, 2022. McArdle, Tommy (May 2, 2019). "Why Boston's baseball team is called the Red Sox". Boston.com. Archived from the original on October 13, 2021. Retrieved July 5, 2022. Sandomir, Richard (September 11, 1994). "The Series That Never Was; 90 Years Ago, the Event Was Canceled Because of an Owners' Feud". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on July 1, 2019. Retrieved February 26, 2019. Thornley, Stew. "Polo Grounds (New York)". Society for American Baseball Research. Archived from the original on June 4, 2022. Retrieved July 5, 2022. "The Polo Grounds". Sports Illustrated. September 27, 1954. Archived from the original on April 13, 2021. Retrieved July 5, 2022. Steinberg, Steve; Spatz, Lyle (Fall 2009). "1921: The Yankees, the Giants, and the Battle for Baseball Supremacy in New York". Society for American Baseball Research. Archived from the original on January 14, 2022. Retrieved July 5, 2022. Dufresne, Chris (September 15, 1994). "BASEBALL '94: Going, Going. . .Gone : In a Way, It's 1904 All Over : History: Ninety years ago, the World Series was not played because of a personality feud between the sport's power brokers". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on February 24, 2021. Retrieved July 5, 2022. "Polo Grounds is Historic Diamond". The New York Times. October 2, 1921. Retrieved July 5, 2022 – via Newspapers.com. Fischer, David (April 15, 2018). 100 Things Yankees Fans Should Know & Do Before They Die. Triumph Books. ISBN 9781633199743. Epting, Chris (2009). The Early Polo Grounds. Arcadia Publishing. p. 25. ISBN 9780738562872. Worth, Richard (2013). Baseball Team Names: A Worldwide Dictionary, 1869–2011. McFarland & Company. p. 203. ISBN 9780786491247. Gunderman, Dan (April 1, 2017). "A look at the latter portion of William 'Big Bill' Devery's life, from crooked NYC top cop to becoming part of the Yankees dynasty". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on April 1, 2017. Retrieved July 5, 2022. "The Yankees (Fortune Classics, 1946)". Fortune. Archived from the original on April 2, 2019. Retrieved April 2, 2019. "Sale of the Yanks Is Finally Consummated". The Washington Herald. January 31, 1915. p. 2. Retrieved July 5, 2022 – via Newspapers.com. "Sold At Last! Yes, Yankees Change Hands". Chicago Tribune. January 1, 1915. p. 15 – via Newspapers.com. "Find Franchise Trade History between Boston Red Sox & New York Yankees". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on August 30, 2012. Retrieved July 13, 2012. "Owners Of Yanks To Enjoin Johnson; Colonels Ruppert and Huston Will Carry Fight for Carl Mays Into Court. Refuse To Attend Meeting Big Baseball Battle Precipitated by Ban's Belated Action Against Former Boston Pitcher. Will Enjoin President. Statement of Owners. Parting of the Ways". The New York Times. August 4, 1919. Archived from the original on April 9, 2022. Retrieved July 23, 2018. Stout, Glenn (July 18, 2002). "When the Yankees nearly moved to Boston". ESPN. Archived from the original on January 15, 2016. Retrieved July 5, 2022. Montville, Leigh (2006). The Big Bam: The Life and Times of Babe Ruth. Random House. pp. 101–104. Vecsey, George (September 24, 2004). "A Myth That Should Not Be Perpetuated". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 12, 2020. Retrieved July 5, 2022. Kepner, Tyler (October 28, 2004). "Red Sox Erase 86 Years of Futility in 4 Games". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on May 2, 2019. Retrieved July 5, 2022. Shaughnessy 2005, pp. 7–8. Schumach, Murray (August 17, 1948). "Babe Ruth, Baseball's Great Star and Idol of Children, Had a Career Both Dramatic and Bizarre". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 15, 2018. Retrieved July 5, 2022. "1921 MLB Season History – Major League Baseball". ESPN. Archived from the original on May 2, 2019. Retrieved July 5, 2022. Hanna, William (October 5, 1921). "Teams in Final Drill on Eve of World Series". New York Herald. p. 6. Retrieved July 5, 2022 – via Newspapers.com. "Giants Win Series". The Daily Advance. Associated Press. October 13, 1921. p. 1. Retrieved July 5, 2022 – via Newspapers.com. Spector, Jesse (September 21, 2008). "Touching Base: Yankees had homes before becoming Bronx Bombers". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on May 2, 2019. Retrieved July 5, 2022. Jensen, Don. "John McGraw". Society for American Baseball Research. Archived from the original on October 5, 2022. Retrieved January 20, 2023. Healey, Mark (2021). Gotham Baseball: New York's All-Time Team. Arcadia Publishing. ISBN 9781439669563. "Yankee Stadium on North Bank of Harlem River". New York Herald. February 6, 1921. p. 45. Retrieved July 5, 2022 – via Newspapers.com. "1922 MLB Season History – Major League Baseball – ESPN". ESPN. Archived from the original on May 2, 2019. Retrieved July 5, 2022. "Huggins Still in Dark on Shocker's Return; Says He Has Received No Word From Pitcher". The New York Times. April 10, 1928. p. 24. Archived from the original on February 27, 2018. Retrieved July 6, 2022. Spatz, Lyle (April 2013). Bridging Two Dynasties: The 1947 New York Yankees. University of Nebraska Press. p. 1. ISBN 9780803240940. Durant, John (April 22, 1923). "April 1923: First Day at Yankee Stadium". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on April 18, 2022. Retrieved July 6, 2022. Acocella, Nick (November 19, 2003). "Yankees' Stadium opens in 1923". ESPN. Archived from the original on April 7, 2022. Retrieved July 6, 2022. Allen, Erika (April 18, 2014). "April 18, 1923: Yankee Stadium Opens to Public". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 21, 2014. Retrieved July 6, 2022. "Babe Ruth's first Yankee Stadium home run bat up for auction". ESPN. Associated Press. October 16, 2004. Archived from the original on January 31, 2005. Retrieved July 6, 2022. Smith, Red (April 11, 1976). "The House That Ruth Built—rebuilt". The New York Times. p. 200. Archived from the original on April 7, 2022. Retrieved July 6, 2022. "New York Yankees 27 World Championships". Sports Illustrated. October 15, 2013. Archived from the original on January 27, 2022. Retrieved July 6, 2022. "1927 New York Yankees". Sports Illustrated. August 23, 2017. Archived from the original on July 6, 2022. Retrieved July 6, 2022. Koppett, Leonard. "1927 "Murderers' Row" New York Yankees: No Team Has Ever Been Better". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on April 7, 2007. Retrieved June 4, 2007. Thorn, John (August 26, 2016). "Thorn: Why were the 1927 Yankees called 'Murderers' Row'?". Society for American Baseball Research. Archived from the original on December 3, 2022. Retrieved January 20, 2023. Daniels, Christine (January 27, 2008). "1927 Yankees". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 7, 2022. Retrieved July 6, 2022. Rice, Grantland (October 9, 1927). "Thrilling Plays in Last Game". The Pittsburgh Press. p. 50. Retrieved July 6, 2022 – via Newspapers.com. Donaghy, Jim (April 30, 1989). "Remembering the Day Lou Gehrig Sat Down". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 7, 2022. Retrieved July 6, 2022. "Single-Season Leaders & Records for Runs Batted in". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on June 1, 2022. Retrieved July 6, 2022. "1928 World Series". MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on January 8, 2022. Retrieved July 6, 2022. McMurray, John. "Joe McCarthy". Society of American Baseball Research. Archived from the original on June 4, 2022. Retrieved July 6, 2022. Gallico, Paul (October 3, 1932). "Yankees sweep Cubs to win World Series in 1932". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on July 6, 2022. Retrieved July 6, 2022. Fernandez, Gabriel (October 1, 2020). "Lou Gehrig confirmed Babe Ruth's famous 'called shot' in the 1932 World Series in recently found audio clip". CBS Sports. Archived from the original on October 8, 2020. Retrieved July 6, 2022. Rothman, Lily (June 2, 2015). "The Disappointing Reason Babe Ruth Left Baseball". Time. Archived from the original on April 7, 2022. Retrieved July 6, 2022. Bowman, Mark (February 25, 2022). "The story behind the final stop of Babe Ruth's career". MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on January 21, 2021. Retrieved July 6, 2022. Rosenbaum, Art (May 24, 1995). "DiMaggio: Gehrig 'One of a Kind'". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on January 28, 2022. Retrieved July 6, 2022. Blevins, Dave (2012). The Sports Hall of Fame Encyclopedia. Scarecrow Press. p. 837. ISBN 978-0-8108-6130-5. Sandomir, Richard (September 3, 2009). "Gehrig's Final Hit: A Single on a Cold April Day in the Bronx". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 7, 2022. Retrieved July 6, 2022. "Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) Fact Sheet". National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke. National Institutes of Health. Archived from the original on July 1, 2022. Retrieved July 6, 2022. Donovan, Pete (May 16, 2017). "A number of nuggets about retired numbers around the Major League". The Desert Sun. Archived from the original on April 9, 2022. Retrieved July 6, 2022. "Full text of Lou Gehrig's farewell speech". Sports Illustrated. July 4, 2009. Archived from the original on March 9, 2021. Retrieved July 6, 2022. "Gehrig, 'Iron Man' of Baseball, Dies at the Age of 37". The New York Times. June 3, 1941. Archived from the original on March 10, 2018. Retrieved July 6, 2022. Gutman, Bill (1989). The golden age of baseball, 1941-1963. Gallery Books. pp. 6–7. ISBN 0831739118. Kramer, Daniel (August 15, 2016). "Was Williams or Joe D. the true AL MVP in 1941?". MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on November 11, 2020. Retrieved July 6, 2022. Bowen, Fred (May 12, 2021). "Joe DiMaggio's hitting streak still a record 80 years later". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on July 31, 2021. Retrieved July 6, 2022. Corcoran, Cliff (June 18, 2013). "Fall Classics: The 11 World Series showdowns between the Yankees and Dodgers". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on January 27, 2022. Retrieved July 6, 2022. Bullock, Steve (Spring 2000). "Playing for Their Nation: The American Military and Baseball During World War II". Journal of Sport History. 27 (1). University of Illinois Press: 67–89. eISSN 2155-8450. ISSN 0094-1700. JSTOR 43609950 – via JSTOR. "1943 World Series". MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on January 8, 2022. Retrieved July 6, 2022. Maeder, Jay (March 2, 1999). "Jacob Ruppert The Old Ball Game". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on November 30, 2012. Retrieved July 6, 2022. Shapiro, Michael (July 23, 2010). "The Del Webb Yankees". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on June 16, 2022. Retrieved July 6, 2022. "Builder Del Webb Dead at Age 75". Arizona Daily Star. The New York Times News Service. July 5, 1974. p. 1. Retrieved July 6, 2022 – via Newspapers.com. "Sport: Larry Says Goodbye". Time. October 20, 1947. Archived from the original on July 6, 2022. Retrieved July 6, 2022. P. Dawson, James (May 25, 1946). "M'Carthy Resigns; Dickey Yank Plot; Yankee Catcher Named Manager as McCarthy Resigns". The New York Times. p. 23. Archived from the original on July 6, 2022. Retrieved July 6, 2022. "Joe DiMaggio Biography". biography.com. May 28, 2020. Retrieved March 2, 2021. Contois, John. "Bucky Harris". Society for American Baseball Research. Archived from the original on June 4, 2022. Retrieved July 6, 2022. Creamer, Robert (1996). Stengel: His Life and Times. University of Nebraska Press. pp. 210–211. ISBN 9780803263673. Lucas, Ed (April 6, 2017). "New Casey Stengel biography reveals the man behind the pranks". The Jersey Journal via NJ.com. Archived from the original on January 16, 2021. Retrieved July 6, 2022. Bishop, Bill. "Casey Stengel". Society of American Baseball Research. Archived from the original on March 26, 2022. Retrieved July 6, 2022. Vaccaro, Mike (2007). Emperors and Idiots: The Hundred Year Rivalry Between the Yankees and Red Sox, From the Very Beginning to the End of the Curse. Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. pp. 322–325. ISBN 9780307418951. Young, Dick (December 12, 1951). "Joe DiMaggio ends his legendary Yankees career in 1951 - 'DiMag Quits as Player for TV Post'". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on May 2, 2019. Retrieved July 6, 2022. "Mickey Mantle's Natural Swing is Biggest Asset". The Salisbury Times. April 17, 1951. p. 12. Retrieved July 6, 2022 – via Newspapers.com. Adler, David (November 6, 2021). "Every back-to-back World Series champ". MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on March 27, 2022. Retrieved July 6, 2022. Lawrence, Thomas. "Whitey Ford wins Game 4 of 1950 World Series". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on April 15, 2022. Retrieved July 6, 2022. Fitzpatrick, Frank (November 28, 2020). "In memory of Bob Miller: Curt Simmons and Bob Miller, the last two Phillies Whiz Kids, keep the memories alive". The Philadelphia Inquirer. Archived from the original on July 30, 2021. Retrieved July 6, 2022. Wancho, Joseph. "June 2, 1954: Yankees score seven runs in first inning, but lose to Indians in extras". Society for American Baseball Research. Archived from the original on July 9, 2021. Retrieved July 6, 2022. "The Stuff of Dreams". Hartford Courant. September 5, 1954. p. 80. Retrieved July 6, 2022 – via Newspapers.com. "John Douglass Wallop Dies; Author of Novel on Yankees". The New York Times. April 5, 1985. Archived from the original on November 22, 2021. Retrieved July 7, 2022. "New York Yankees Official Program and Score Card, 1956". National Museum of American History. Archived from the original on July 7, 2022. Retrieved July 7, 2022. Acocella, Nick. "Larsen had one perfect day". ESPN. Archived from the original on March 25, 2022. Retrieved July 7, 2022. Waldstein, David (October 6, 2010). "In New Realm, In Command". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 16, 2021. Retrieved July 7, 2022. Maglie, Sal (October 14, 1957). "Braves' New World". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on May 24, 2022. Retrieved July 7, 2022. "Lew Burdette, 80; pitcher was MVP of 1957 World Series". Los Angeles Times. Associated Press. February 7, 2007. Archived from the original on July 7, 2022. Retrieved July 7, 2022. Landers, Chris (January 25, 2019). "Just why did the Dodgers and Giants move from New York to California?". MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on June 22, 2022. Retrieved July 7, 2022. Haudricourt, Tom (November 2, 2016). "Milwaukee Braves knew pain of blowing 3-1 World Series lead". Milwaukee Journal Sentinel. Archived from the original on July 7, 2022. Retrieved July 7, 2022. Fischer, David (2019). The New York Yankees of the 1950s: Mantle, Stengel, Berra, and a Decade of Dominance. Lyons Press. ISBN 9781493038930. Rosengren, John (April 13, 2015). "Elston Howard became the Yankees' Jackie Robinson 60 years ago". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on June 28, 2022. Retrieved July 7, 2022. Miller, Randy (May 3, 2020). "Yankees' Mount Rushmore: Picking 4 best Bombers of 1960s | Roger Maris makes the cut". NJ.com. Archived from the original on June 16, 2021. Retrieved July 7, 2022. Appel, Marty (2018). Casey Stengel: Baseball's Greatest Character. Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. p. 246. ISBN 9781101911747. Neyer, Rob (2007). Rob Neyer's Big Book of Baseball Blunders: A Complete Guide to the Worst Decisions and Stupidest Moments in Baseball History. Simon & Schuster. pp. 84–85. ISBN 9781416592143. Katz, Jeff (2007). The Kansas City A's & the Wrong Half of the Yankees. University of Michigan Press via Maple Street Press. ISBN 9780977743650. Weiss, Bill; Wright, Marshall. "Top 100 Teams: The Kansas City Blues". Minor League Baseball. Archived from the original on March 13, 2014. Retrieved July 7, 2022. "A Dream Becomes a Nightmare in Kansas City". The New York Times. United Press International. January 12, 1964. pp. Section S, Page 2. Archived from the original on July 7, 2022. Retrieved July 7, 2022. Chesterton, Eric (December 11, 2017). "58 years ago, the Yankees traded for Roger Maris and turned him into a home run king". MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on June 6, 2022. Retrieved July 7, 2022. "Roger Maris". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on June 9, 2022. Retrieved July 7, 2022. Gorman, Robert. "Roger Maris hits his 61st homerun (October 1, 1961)" (PDF). Library of Congress. Archived (PDF) from the original on March 28, 2022. Retrieved July 7, 2022. J. Rebilas, Mark (June 30, 2017). "New York Yankees: A Look Back at the 1961 Lineup". USA Today via Fox Sports. Archived from the original on August 27, 2021. Retrieved July 7, 2022. Houk, Ralph; Creamer, Robert (1988). Season of Glory: The Amazing Saga of the 1961 New York Yankees. Putnam. ISBN 9780399132605. Beschloss, Michael (May 22, 2015). "The M&M Boys: A Profile in Civility". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 24, 2022. Retrieved July 7, 2022. Drebinger, John (September 29, 1961). "Mantle Is Hospitalized, but Yankees Expect Him to Play in World Series". The New York Times. p. 40. Archived from the original on December 13, 2020. Retrieved July 7, 2022. Acocella, Nick. "Maris battled Mantle, media and Babe's legacy". ESPN. Archived from the original on April 7, 2022. Retrieved July 7, 2022. Bingham, Walter. "Assault on the Record". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on April 24, 2021. Retrieved July 7, 2022. Povich, Shirley (September 7, 1991). "Frick's 'Asterisk' Demeaned Maris". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on July 7, 2022. Retrieved July 7, 2022. Justice, Richard (September 8, 1998). "McGwire Surpasses Maris With 62nd Home Run". The Washington Post. pp. C1. Archived from the original on October 16, 2018. Retrieved July 7, 2022. Axisa, Mike (October 1, 2016). "On this date in baseball history: Roger Maris hits record 61st home run in 1961". CBS Sports. Archived from the original on March 19, 2022. Retrieved July 7, 2022. Miller, Mark. "October 9, 1961: Yankees blast Reds to capture 19th World Series championship". Society of American Baseball Research. Archived from the original on February 5, 2022. Retrieved July 7, 2022. Olney, Buster (September 3, 1996). "5 HRs power Orioles past Angels, 12-8 Zeile hits 2; O's climb to 4th all time with 221 homers for season; 15 in 5 games since trade; Tie for wild-card lead as Mussina wins 18th". The Baltimore Sun. Archived from the original on June 24, 2021. Retrieved July 7, 2022. "1962: The Bumbling Beginning". The New York Times. March 27, 2019. Archived from the original on June 22, 2022. Retrieved July 7, 2022. Lardner, Rex (April 26, 1970). "Meet the Mets". The New York Times. p. 5. Archived from the original on July 7, 2022. Retrieved July 7, 2022. Lehman, Bert (February 8, 2019). "From 1947-1957 New York had three Major League Baseball teams". Sports Collectors Digest. Archived from the original on January 22, 2022. Retrieved July 7, 2022. Munder, Craig. "Yankees hold off Giants in Game 7 to Win 1962 World Series". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on December 20, 2021. Retrieved July 7, 2022. Kepner, Tyler (June 24, 2007). "In 1962, Richardson Had Ball, But No Hat". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 7, 2022. Retrieved July 7, 2022. McCue, Andy. "October 6, 1963: Koufax stifles Yankee bats again as Dodgers sweep World Series". Society for American Baseball Research. Archived from the original on July 7, 2022. Retrieved July 7, 2022. Branch, John (June 4, 2014). "New York vs. Los Angeles: Rivalry Revived". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 16, 2022. Retrieved July 7, 2022. "Yogi Gets New Post—Yanks Consider Keane and Dark". The New York Times. October 17, 1964. p. 1. Archived from the original on July 7, 2022. Retrieved July 7, 2022. Leggett, William (October 26, 1964). "Speed Won the World Series". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on May 13, 2021. Retrieved July 7, 2022. Kelly, Matt. "Bob Gibson wills Cardinals to Game 7 Victory in 1964 World Series". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on February 26, 2022. Retrieved July 7, 2022. "C.B.S. Buys 80% of Stock In Yankee Baseball Team". The New York Times. August 14, 1964. p. 1. Archived from the original on January 27, 2022. Retrieved July 7, 2022. Appel, Marty (March 21, 2014). "Yankees Magazine: Yankees in the '70s". Marty Appel. Archived from the original on May 18, 2021. Retrieved July 7, 2022. H. Wolf, Gregory. "Mel Stottlemyre". Society for American Baseball Research. Archived from the original on March 26, 2022. Retrieved July 7, 2022. J. Ryczek, William (2007). The Yankees in the Early 1960s. McFarland & Company. p. 226. ISBN 9780786429967. H. Wolf, Gregory. "April 14, 1967: Red Sox's Billy Rohr misses no-hitter by one out in MLB debut". Society for American Baseball Research. Archived from the original on April 18, 2022. Retrieved July 7, 2022. "1967 Baseball Standings". MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on July 7, 2022. Retrieved July 7, 2022. Gaines, Cork (March 25, 2015). "George Steinbrenner's purchase of the New York Yankees paid off big time for his family". Business Insider. Archived from the original on April 7, 2022. Retrieved July 7, 2022. Mann, Jack (June 21, 1965). "Decline and Fall of a Dynasty". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on September 23, 2020. Retrieved July 7, 2022. LeConte, Walter; Gallagher, Mark (2003). The Yankee Encyclopedia. Sports Publishing. p. 343. ISBN 9781582616834. Manuel, John (Summer 2010). "The History and Future of the Amateur Draft". Society for American Baseball Research. Archived from the original on February 5, 2022. Retrieved July 7, 2022. "Baseball's Minors Follow Pro Football Pattern in Backing Free-Agent Draft". The New York Times. December 3, 1964. p. 64. Archived from the original on July 7, 2022. Retrieved July 7, 2022. Sheehan, Joseph (March 24, 1970). "Munson Bats Way Into Yankee Line-Up". The New York Times. p. 77. Archived from the original on July 7, 2022. Retrieved July 7, 2022. Durso, Joseph (January 4, 1973). "C.B.S. Sells the Yankees for $10-Million". The New York Times. p. 1. Archived from the original on June 15, 2022. Retrieved July 7, 2022. "Yankees Redefine Burke's New Role". The New York Times. May 10, 1973. p. 58. Archived from the original on July 8, 2022. Retrieved July 7, 2022. Chass, Murray (April 30, 1973). "Burke Resigns Active Role With Yanks But Remains an Owner and Consultant". The New York Times. p. 39. Archived from the original on March 15, 2018. Retrieved July 7, 2022. Waldron, Martin (December 1, 1975). "Yanks Get Windfall As City Shifts Plans". The New York Times. p. 1. Archived from the original on July 8, 2022. Retrieved July 7, 2022. Williams, Timothy (May 9, 2006). "A Resurgence in the Bronx Is Finally Putting the Grand Back in the Concourse". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 3, 2022. Retrieved July 7, 2022. Ranzal, Edward (November 10, 1973). "City Seeks to Aid Yankees at Shea". The New York Times. p. 35. Archived from the original on July 8, 2022. Retrieved July 7, 2022. Lucas, Ed (September 2, 2016). "How Yankees almost ended up in the Meadowlands". The Jersey Journal via NJ.com. Archived from the original on September 12, 2021. Retrieved July 7, 2022. "Yankee Stadium Project" (PDF). New York City Department of Parks and Recreation. February 10, 2006. p. 182. Archived (PDF) from the original on February 17, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Hoch, Bryan (December 3, 2020). "If you're a Yankee, you shave' – here's why". MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on May 6, 2022. Retrieved May 5, 2022. Hoch, Bryan (December 18, 2019). "Cole's 1st side effect in pinstripes? Razor burn". MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Goldstein, Richard (July 13, 2010). "George Steinbrenner, Who Built Yankees Into Powerhouse, Dies at 80". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 11, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Garrity, Tanner (July 7, 2020). "Andrew McCutchen Is Right to Question the Yankees' Outdated Grooming Policy". Inside Hook. Archived from the original on January 18, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Buckner, Candace (April 21, 2022). "Baseball is changing its uniforms. The culture needs some updating, too". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on April 22, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Rosecrans, C. Trent (June 12, 2015). "Once banned, Reds now embrace facial hair". The Cincinnati Enquirer. Archived from the original on July 8, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Crass, Murray (January 1, 1975). "Yankees Sign Up Catfish Hunter In Estimated $3.75-Million Deal". The New York Times. p. 1. Archived from the original on May 6, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Durso, Joseph (August 3, 1975). "Martin Starts Job With Yanks; Players Are Divided on Virdon". The New York Times. p. 159. Archived from the original on July 8, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Wancho, Joseph. "October 21, 1976: Big Red Machine sweeps Yankees for second straight World Series championship". Society for American Baseball Research. Archived from the original on March 1, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Chass, Murray (November 30, 1976). "Jackson Signs Yankee Contract For Five Years and $2.9 Million". The New York Times. p. 1. Archived from the original on June 16, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Loumena, Dan (October 5, 2013). "Reggie Jackson tries to set record straight on Thurman Munson quote". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 7, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Acocella, Nick. "Billy battled opponents, himself". ESPN. Archived from the original on June 20, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Keith, Larry (July 31, 1978). "A Bunt That Went Boom!". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on March 17, 2021. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Webley, Kayla (July 13, 2010). "Top 10 George Steinbrenner Moments: Hiring and Firing Billy Martin". Time. Archived from the original on November 17, 2021. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Lucas, Ed (June 22, 2017). "5 things to know about 'Bronx Zoo' 1977 Yankees | Lucas". NJ.com. Archived from the original on January 27, 2022. Retrieved January 25, 2023. McCarron, Anthony (July 14, 2010). "New York Yankees great Bucky Dent: 1970s was 'a great time to be a Yankee' under George Steinbrenner". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on July 8, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2022. "Reggie Jackson". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on March 26, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2022. "'14 Back': The Epic 1978 Red Sox-Yankees Rivalry To Be Featured in Upcoming SI TV Documentary". Sports Illustrated. May 10, 2018. Archived from the original on February 26, 2021. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Crass, Murray (July 19, 1978). "Reggie Jackson Penalized: 5 Days, $9,000". The New York Times. p. 19. Archived from the original on July 8, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Crass, Murray (July 25, 1978). "Martin Resigns". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 26, 2021. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Lupica, Mike (January 16, 2000). "Lemon Will Be Remembered for Yankees Summer of '78". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on December 7, 2020. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Rawlings, Nate (January 31, 2012). "Top 10 NYC-vs.-Boston Showdowns: Yankees vs. Red Sox, 1978". Time. Archived from the original on February 19, 2020. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Boswell, Thomas (September 11, 1978). "Red Sox Keep Falling, 7-4, Into Tie With Yankees". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on July 8, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Feinsand, Mark (June 14, 2018). "The year 'Louisiana Lightning' lit up the Bronx". MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on June 25, 2021. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Muder, Craig. "Legendary Yankees vs. Red Sox Playoff Game Featured Five Future Hall of Famers". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on March 22, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Wancho, Joseph. "October 2, 1978: Bucky Dent's home run spurs Yankees to division title in AL East tiebreaker". Society for American Baseball Research. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2022. "1978 World Series". MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on January 8, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Bogen, Mike (August 2, 2008). "Some baseball deals, like Danny Cater for Sparky Lyle, have ripple effects". MassLive. Archived from the original on May 16, 2020. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Boswell, Thomas (April 1, 1979). "AL Starts With a Team Better Than the Yanks". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on July 8, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Anderson, Dave (October 30, 1979). "'I'm the Same Billy Martin' — Sadly". The New York Times. p. 15. Archived from the original on July 8, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2022. "Munson Dies in Plane Crash". The Washington Post. August 3, 1979. Archived from the original on July 8, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2022. "Hundreds at Funeral Of Yankees' Munson". The New York Times. August 7, 1979. p. 1. Archived from the original on July 8, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Boswell, Thomas (August 7, 1979). "A Hero Buried In Ohio". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on July 8, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Axisa, Mike (August 2, 2013). "Today is the 34th anniversary of Thurman Munson's death". CBS Sports. Archived from the original on July 8, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Sandomir, Richard (August 2, 2007). "Murcer Revisits Emotional Night About Munson". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 16, 2018. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Jones, Chris (December 3, 2008). "The Things We Forget, Part 10: Thurman Munson's old locker in Yankee Stadium". ESPN The Magazine. Archived from the original on July 8, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Bock, Hal (August 4, 1979). "Yankees, O's, Fans In Munson Tribute". Youngstown Vindicator. p. 1. Retrieved July 8, 2022. "Yanks Fire Martin". The Washington Post. October 29, 1979. Archived from the original on January 24, 2020. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Rosenstein, Mike (August 6, 2020). "Ex-Yankees catcher Rick Cerone, Seton Hall star, heads to National College Baseball Hall of Fame". NJ.com. Archived from the original on August 21, 2020. Retrieved July 8, 2022. "Reggie Jackson". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on July 2, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2022. "1980 Awards Voting". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on May 6, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2022. "1980 New York Yankees Statistics". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on June 16, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Murray, Janey. "Winfield signs record-setting deal with Yankees". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on February 13, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Webley, Kayla (July 13, 2010). "Top 10 George Steinbrenner Moments: Banned for Life". Time. Archived from the original on May 15, 2019. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Goldstein, Richard (September 7, 2017). "Gene Michael, Whose Yankee Teams Won 4 World Series, Dies at 79". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 31, 2021. Retrieved July 8, 2022. "Bob Lemon Named Yankees' Manager". The Daily Times. September 4, 1981. Retrieved July 8, 2022 – via Google News. McCalvy, Adam (October 8, 2021). "'We should have won': '81 Crew paved way". MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on October 11, 2021. Retrieved July 8, 2022. "Oakland A's playoff history". NBC Sports Bay Area. Archived from the original on July 26, 2021. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Corcoran, Cliff (June 18, 2013). "Fall Classics: The 11 World Series showdowns between the Yankees and Dodgers". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on January 27, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2022. D. Fetter, Henry (2003). Taking on the Yankees: Winning and Losing in the Business of Baseball, 1903-2003. W. W. Norton & Company. p. 356. ISBN 9780393057195. D’Addona, Dan (Fall 2011). "Baseball's Forgotten Era: The '80s". Society for American Baseball Research. Archived from the original on November 7, 2014. Retrieved August 14, 2014. McCarron, Anthony (June 12, 2010). "Switch-hitting OF Dave Collins' time with New York Yankees short but sweet". New York Daily News. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Kuty, Brendan (December 3, 2016). "Yankees' 7 worst trades of all time". NJ.com. Archived from the original on July 8, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Miller, Randy (May 3, 2020). "Yankees' Mount Rushmore: Picking 4 best Bombers of 1980s". NJ.com. Archived from the original on June 15, 2021. Retrieved July 8, 2022. "Fans voicing displeasure with Yankees' ownership". The Globe and Mail. Associated Press. August 31, 1989. p. A18. Steinbrenner said..."You have to look at the record. We didn't win a World Series this decade, but we had the best record of the 1980s of any team in the major leagues."...This is the first Yankee team since 1910–1919 to go an entire decade without winning a World Series title. "Mattingly Edges Winfield for AL Batting Title". The Washington Post. October 1, 1984. Archived from the original on July 8, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Chass, Murray (May 23, 1990). "Unhappy Yankee Tradition; Pitching Deals of the 1980's Were Disappointing". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 25, 2015. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Chass, Murray (July 11, 1989). "Guidry To Retire As Yanks Spurn Bid". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 4, 2019. Retrieved July 8, 2022. "No Hitter for Yankees' Righetti". Honolulu Star-Bulletin. Associated Press. July 4, 1983. p. 19. Retrieved July 8, 2022 – via Newspapers.com. Martinez, Michael (December 19, 1989). "Righetti Starts Over As Yankee Reliever". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 20, 2017. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Anderson, Dave (May 2, 1989). "Impatience Not a Virtue For Yanks". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 19, 2017. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Chass, Murray (December 6, 1984). "Yankees and A's Complete Deal for Henderson". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 7, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Best, Neil (August 26, 2021). "1985 Yankees getting well-deserved time in spotlight as current team matches 11-game winning streak". Newsday. Archived from the original on July 8, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2022. "1986 Major League Team Statistics". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on November 27, 2021. Retrieved July 8, 2022. "1987 Major League Team Statistics". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on November 21, 2021. Retrieved July 8, 2022. "1988 Major League Team Statistics". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on December 1, 2021. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Axisa, Mike (August 1, 2016). "MLB Trade Deadline: Usually buyers, Yankees show they can be good at selling". CBS Sports. Archived from the original on March 28, 2017. Retrieved July 8, 2022. "Winfield Set For '90 Season". The New York Times. Associated Press. November 9, 1989. Archived from the original on December 20, 2017. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Jaffe, Jay (December 10, 2014). "JAWS and the 2015 Hall of Fame ballot: Don Mattingly". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on May 11, 2021. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Bloom, Earl. "This Date in Angels History, 1990: Dave Winfield refuses to be traded to the Angels". Orange County Register. Archived from the original on July 8, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Pennington, Bill (2019). Chumps to Champs: How the Worst Teams in Yankees History Led to the '90s Dynasty. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. p. 6. ISBN 9781328849854. Delessio, Joe (September 10, 2015). "Despite critics, John Sterling a fixture behind radio microphone for Yankees". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on June 18, 2021. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Maske, Mark (September 25, 1990). "Pennant Chases in East Still Flying High, West All but Flagged". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on July 9, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Shaughnessy 2005, p. 26 Dwyer, Jim (May 14, 1996). "Faithful cowbell finally tolls for Yankee bleacher leader". New York Daily News. p. 186. Retrieved July 8, 2022 – via Newspapers.com. Hudson, Maryann (July 31, 1990). "The Steinbrenner Decision". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on July 9, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Olney, Buster (September 7, 2017). "Olney: Gene 'Stick' Michael's stubbornness was the heart of Yankees' Core Four". ESPN. Archived from the original on October 4, 2018. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Pepe, Phil (2014). Core Four: The Heart and Soul of the Yankees Dynasty. Triumph Books. Chapter: Hello Columbus. ISBN 9781623688707. Curry, Jack (August 26, 2002). "BASEBALL; Lost Games, Lost Dreams". The New York Times. pp. D1. Archived from the original on March 8, 2021. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Curry, Jack (August 7, 1994). "Flashback to '81: Another Lead, Another Strike". The New York Times. p. A1. Archived from the original on November 7, 2016. Retrieved February 11, 2017. Kawakami, Tim (August 10, 1994). "'81, '94 Yankees Both Winners but Worlds Apart in Personality". Los Angeles Times. p. C2. O'Connell, Jack (April 25, 1995). "Finishing What They Started". Hartford Courant. p. G2. Archived from the original on July 9, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Lupica, Mike (February 9, 2022). "When Mattingly recaptured Donnie Baseball in '95: 'I was me again'". MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on February 9, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Curry, Jack (January 23, 1997). "Mattingly Says Farewell, and So Does His Number". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 10, 2021. Retrieved July 8, 2022. "Joe Torre inducted into Baseball Hall of Fame". Sports Illustrated. July 27, 2014. Archived from the original on July 9, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2022. O'Connor, Ian (October 27, 1996). "Joe proves the skeptics were off base". New York Daily News. p. 630. Retrieved July 8, 2022 – via Newspapers.com. Landers, Chris (June 5, 2015). "Joe Torre will be helping American Pharoah's trainer keep calm before the Belmont Stakes". MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on July 9, 2022. Retrieved July 9, 2022. Gavin, Mike (July 13, 2010). "Joe Torre on Steinbrenner". Newsday. Archived from the original on July 9, 2022. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Curry, Jack (November 3, 1995). "Yet Another Era Begins as the Yankees Hire Torre". The New York Times. pp. B11. Archived from the original on June 3, 2020. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Keidel, Jason (June 10, 2016). "Remembering The 1996 Yankees: Core Was Truly A Fantastic 4". CBS News. Archived from the original on February 24, 2022. Retrieved July 9, 2022. Curry, Jack (October 14, 1996). "Yankees in Series After 15 Years in Wilderness". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 26, 2015. Retrieved July 9, 2022. "1996 AL Division Series". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on March 26, 2022. Retrieved July 9, 2022. "Jeffrey Maier opens up about life after robbing the Orioles in the 1996 ALCS". NBC Sports Washington. April 6, 2020. Archived from the original on February 3, 2021. Retrieved July 9, 2022. Hoch, Bryan (January 22, 2022). "For Yankees, 1996 was the birth of a dynasty". MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on May 6, 2022. Retrieved July 9, 2022. Curry, Jack (November 5, 1996). "It's No Contest as Jeter Captures Rookie of the Year". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 7, 2022. Retrieved July 9, 2022. "1997 AL Division Series". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on January 1, 2022. Retrieved July 9, 2022. Acquavella, Katherine (May 15, 2020). "Bob Watson, former Yankees general manager and Astros All-Star, dies at 74". CBS Sports. Archived from the original on July 17, 2020. Retrieved July 9, 2022. Borden, Sam (June 15, 2020). "The Yankees, overshadowed? Why the 'best team ever' never got its due". ESPN. Archived from the original on September 17, 2021. Retrieved July 9, 2022. "1998 New York Yankees". Sports Illustrated. August 23, 2017. Archived from the original on August 17, 2021. Retrieved July 9, 2022. Lacques, Gabe (May 18, 2022). "'There's no stopping this team': How the Yankees cleaned up their act and became baseball's most dominant squad". USA Today. Archived from the original on July 7, 2022. Retrieved July 9, 2022. Jaffe, Jay (May 17, 2013). "15 years ago today: David Wells' perfect game". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on March 1, 2021. Retrieved July 9, 2022. "1998 World Series". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on March 26, 2022. Retrieved July 9, 2022. Paine, Neil (June 24, 2022). "The Yankees Are Partying Like It's 1998". FiveThirtyEight. Archived from the original on July 1, 2022. Retrieved July 9, 2022. Dubow, Josh (July 18, 1999). "Cone Accomplishes Perfection vs. Expos". The Washington Post. Associated Press. Archived from the original on August 8, 2016. Retrieved July 9, 2022. "Yankees vs. Red Sox: An October History". NY1. October 4, 2018. Archived from the original on October 5, 2018. Retrieved July 9, 2022. "1998 New York Yankees Statistics". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on February 7, 2022. Retrieved July 9, 2022. "1999 New York Yankees Statistics". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on April 24, 2022. Retrieved July 9, 2022. Olney, Buster (October 27, 2000). "Baseball: Subway Series; In 5 Games, a Third Straight World Series Trophy". The New York Times. Retrieved February 21, 2022. "2001 Major League Baseball Team Statistics". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on February 20, 2022. Retrieved July 9, 2022. "Yankees in World Series Again". The New York Times. Associated Press. October 22, 2001. Archived from the original on July 9, 2022. Retrieved July 9, 2022. Olney, Buster (November 5, 2001). "In Final Twist, New York Falls in Ninth". The New York Times. p. A1. Archived from the original on February 4, 2022. Retrieved July 9, 2022. Simpson, Jake (July 11, 2011). "Derek Jeter at 3,000: A Fan Favorite, Even as He Starts to Falter". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on October 22, 2020. Retrieved July 9, 2022. D. McFadden, Robert (September 24, 2001). "In a Stadium of Heroes, Prayers for the Fallen and Solace for Those Left Behind". The New York Times. p. B7. Archived from the original on April 5, 2022. Retrieved July 9, 2022. "Soriano Sets Mark, Yankees Roll On". The Washington Post. August 18, 2002. Archived from the original on July 9, 2022. Retrieved July 9, 2022. "2002 New York Yankees season summary". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on June 19, 2022. Retrieved May 6, 2022. Kepner, Tyler (October 17, 2003). "Last Pitch Lands the Yankees in the World Series". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 8, 2022. Retrieved July 9, 2022. Le Batard, Dan (October 27, 2003). "Holding the trophy a thrill to Marlins". Miami Herald. p. 41. Retrieved July 9, 2022 – via Newspapers.com. "Selig gives blessing to mega-merger". ESPN. February 15, 2004. Archived from the original on March 25, 2022. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Kepner, Tyler (October 21, 2004). "Back From Dead, Red Sox Bury Yanks and Go to Series". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 7, 2022. Retrieved July 10, 2022. "2004 New York Yankees season summary". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on June 19, 2022. Retrieved July 10, 2022. West, Jenna (October 20, 2018). "Red Sox Chasing Ninth World Series Title In Franchise History". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on November 10, 2021. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Curry, Jack (November 14, 2005). "Alex Rodriguez Wins M.V.P. Award". The New York Times. Retrieved August 7, 2019. "Yankees finish off five-game sweep". The Boston Globe. Archived from the original on June 18, 2008. Retrieved March 5, 2009. Kepner, Tyler (September 29, 2007). "Yankees Fall to Orioles and Seal Their Fate as Wild Card". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 10, 2021. Retrieved July 10, 2022. "2007 AL Division Series". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on May 28, 2022. Retrieved July 10, 2022. "Torre turns down offer to return as Yanks' skipper". ESPN. Archived from the original on November 17, 2021. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Bumbaca, Chris (October 24, 2019). "Philadelphia Phillies hire former Yankees manager Joe Girardi as skipper". USA Today. Archived from the original on August 5, 2020. Retrieved July 10, 2022. "2008 All-Star Game would be fitting send-off for historic Yankee Stadium". USA Today. June 30, 2006. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Kepner, Tyler (September 21, 2008). "A Long Goodbye to an 85-Year Run". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 25, 2021. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Feinsand, Mark (September 22, 2008). "Yankee Stadium's last word goes to captain Derek Jeter". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on October 9, 2021. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Araton, Harvey (July 21, 2008). "Yanks' Woes of '08 Eerily Similar to '65". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 6, 2022. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Olney, Bustey; Stark, Jayson (December 10, 2008). "Sources: Yanks, Sabathia agree to deal". ESPN. Associated Press. Archived from the original on June 23, 2022. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Olney, Buster (December 23, 2008). "Sources: 'Tex' takes Yanks' 8-year deal". ESPN. Associated Press. Archived from the original on June 23, 2022. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Crasnick, Jerry (December 12, 2008). "Burnett, Yankees agree on 5-year deal". ESPN. Associated Press. Archived from the original on September 10, 2021. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Blum, Ronald (June 2, 2009). "Teixeira slide sparks Yanks in 12-3 win over Texas". Corsicana Daily Sun. Associated Press. Archived from the original on July 10, 2022. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Kepner, Tyler (November 5, 2009). "Back on Top, Yankees Add a 27th Title". New York Times. p. A1. Archived from the original on October 21, 2017. Retrieved November 5, 2009. "Bob Sheppard dies at 99; Yankee Stadium PA announcer". Los Angeles Times. July 12, 2010. Archived from the original on March 11, 2016. Retrieved July 10, 2022. "New York Yankees Owner George Steinbrenner Dies". NPR. Associated Press. July 13, 2010. Archived from the original on October 23, 2019. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Goldstein, Richard (July 21, 2010). "Ralph Houk, Yankees Manager, Dies at 90". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 17, 2022. Retrieved July 10, 2022. "Yankees hit 3 grand slams in a game - a first". CBS News. Associated Press. August 25, 2011. Archived from the original on June 18, 2022. Retrieved July 10, 2022. "Yankees acquire Ichiro for two prospects". MLB Advanced Media. Retrieved July 23, 2012. La Monica, Mark (October 11, 2012). "ALDS Game 3 post-game video: Raul Ibanez". Newsday. Archived from the original on July 11, 2022. Retrieved July 10, 2022. "2012 AL Division Series". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on May 7, 2022. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Matthews, Wallace (October 14, 2012). "Jeter injury caps catastrophic night". ESPN. Archived from the original on June 6, 2022. Retrieved July 10, 2022. "Yankees turn key triple play vs. O's". ESPN. Associated Press. April 2, 2013. Archived from the original on April 13, 2013. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Pouliot, Matthew (September 25, 2013). "Yankees eliminated with Indians' victory". NBC Sports. Archived from the original on November 27, 2013. Retrieved July 10, 2022. "2013 New York Yankees Statistics". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on June 5, 2022. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Angell, Roger (September 26, 2014). "No Game Today". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on October 22, 2021. Retrieved July 10, 2022. "2014 Awards Voting". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on November 16, 2018. Retrieved March 25, 2017. "2016 New York Yankees Statistics". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on June 29, 2022. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Corcoran, Cliff (August 5, 2016). "As Mark Teixeira announces retirement, how valuable was he for Yankees?". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on October 19, 2016. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Berg, Ted (August 12, 2016). "A-Rod doubles, makes encore at 3B in Yankees finale". USA Today. Archived from the original on November 13, 2020. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Hoch, Bryan (November 20, 2018). "Revisiting Yankees' big 2016 Deadline moves". MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on September 20, 2019. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Kuty, Brendan (August 1, 2016). "7 Yankees trade deadline takeaways from Brian Cashman". NJ.com. Archived from the original on March 25, 2022. Retrieved July 11, 2022. Lacques, Gabe (August 7, 2016). "Alex Rodriguez announces retirement, will play final game Friday". USA Today. Archived from the original on October 13, 2017. Retrieved July 11, 2022. Lacques, Gabe (August 5, 2016). "Yankees first baseman Mark Teixeira announces retirement". USA Today. Archived from the original on October 13, 2017. Retrieved July 11, 2022. Waldstin, David (August 7, 2016). "Alex Rodriguez to Retire and Join Yankees as an Adviser". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 21, 2022. Retrieved July 10, 2022. Witz, Billy (September 28, 2016). "Mark Teixeira's Ninth-Inning Grand Slam Lifts Yankees From Brink of Elimination". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 8, 2020. Retrieved July 11, 2022. "Mark Teixeira". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on June 25, 2022. Retrieved July 11, 2022. Mazzeo, Mike (August 13, 2016). "Austin, Judge hit back-to-back HRs in 1st at-bats". ESPN. Archived from the original on December 31, 2016. Retrieved July 11, 2022. Axisa, Mike (September 27, 2016). "Gary Sanchez's 20th home run helps set an MLB record". CBS Sports. Archived from the original on December 21, 2016. Retrieved July 11, 2022. Reiter, Ben (August 19, 2016). "Baby Bombers: Aaron Judge, Gary Sanchez giving Yankees reason for optimism". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on December 1, 2021. Retrieved July 11, 2022. Hoch, Bryan (2018). The Baby Bombers: The Inside Story of the Next Yankees Dynasty. Diversion Books. ISBN 9781635764185. Jaffe, Jay (September 25, 2017). "Yankees' Aaron Judge breaks Mark McGwire's rookie home run record". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on October 13, 2017. Retrieved July 11, 2022. "2017 Home Run Derby: Aaron Judge becomes fourth New York Yankees player to win". MassLive. Associated Press. July 11, 2017. Archived from the original on October 13, 2017. Retrieved July 11, 2022. "Unanimous decision: Judge named AL ROY". MLB.com. Retrieved December 12, 2023. Kepner, Tyler; Waldstein, David (December 1, 2017). "Yankees Choose Aaron Boone to Be Their Next Manager". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 27, 2022. Retrieved July 11, 2022. Chavez, Chris (December 11, 2017). "Giancarlo Stanton puts on his Yankees uniform". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on December 11, 2017. Retrieved July 11, 2022. Ronald, Blum (December 11, 2017). "Giancarlo Stanton joins Aaron Judge as Yankees' Towers of Power". The Denver Post. Associated Press. Archived from the original on April 9, 2022. Retrieved July 11, 2022. Jaffe, Jay (November 17, 2014). "Giancarlo Stanton may actually prove to be worth reported $325M contract". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on July 10, 2021. Retrieved July 11, 2022. "2018 New York Yankees Statistics". Baseball-Reference.com. Retrieved December 18, 2023. Engel, Matthew (July 1, 2019). "London's MLB crowd offers baseball a new land of opportunity". The Guardian. Archived from the original on July 8, 2022. Retrieved July 12, 2022. Miller, Sam (April 4, 2020). "We'll miss MLB's London Series, which gave us the weirdest game of 2019". ESPN. Archived from the original on March 19, 2022. Retrieved July 12, 2022. Hoch, Bryan (October 8, 2019). "Yanks punch ALCS ticket with sweep of Twins". MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on April 9, 2022. Retrieved July 11, 2022. "Astros beat Yankees, look for second world title in 3 seasons". NBC News. October 20, 2019. Retrieved October 20, 2019. Boeck, Scott (October 20, 2019). "Yankees go decade without a World Series trip for first time in 100 years". USA Today. Archived from the original on November 19, 2021. Retrieved July 11, 2022. "2019 New York Yankees Statistics". Baseball-Reference.com. Retrieved December 18, 2023. "Gerrit Cole: 'It was my dream' to pitch for Yankees". ESPN. Associated Press. December 18, 2019. Archived from the original on April 9, 2022. Retrieved July 11, 2022. "2020 New York Yankees Statistics". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on July 4, 2022. Retrieved July 11, 2022. "Kluber tosses Yankees' 12th no-hitter, tops Rangers 2-0". USA Today. Associated Press. May 20, 2021. Archived from the original on June 15, 2022. Retrieved July 11, 2022. "New York Yankees turn game-ending triple play vs. Oakland Athletics, tie MLB record". ESPN. Associated Press. June 20, 2021. Archived from the original on June 28, 2022. Retrieved July 11, 2022. "2022 New York Yankees Statistics". Baseball-Reference.com. Retrieved December 18, 2023. Hoch, Bryan (October 5, 2022). "No. 62! Judge breaks Maris' all-time AL HR record". MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on October 25, 2022. Retrieved January 28, 2023. Hoch, Bryan (November 18, 2022). "All Rise! Judge named AL MVP after historic 62-HR year". MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on December 7, 2022. Retrieved January 28, 2023. "Judge named 16th captain in Yankees history". ESPN.com. December 21, 2022. Retrieved February 9, 2023. "Domingo Germán achieves 24th perfect game in MLB history, giving Yankees most ever with four". CBSSports.com. June 29, 2023. Retrieved December 12, 2023. Hoch, Bryan (November 5, 2023). "Volpe becomes 1st Yankees rookie to win Gold Glove". MLB.com. MLB Advanced Media. Retrieved December 18, 2023. "'One of the absolute best': Cole wins 1st Cy Young in unanimous fashion". MLB.com. Retrieved December 12, 2023. "Juan Soto trade grades: Yankees earn 'A' for blockbuster, Padres get disappointing return as they shed salary". CBSSports.com. December 7, 2023. Retrieved December 12, 2023. "Postseason History: World Series". MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on May 23, 2022. Retrieved July 11, 2022. "Teams with the most World Series titles". MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on July 5, 2022. Retrieved July 11, 2022. "Season-By-Season World Series Results". ESPN. Archived from the original on July 11, 2022. Retrieved July 11, 2022. "World Series History". Baseball Almanac. Archived from the original on May 23, 2007. Retrieved January 26, 2023. "Baseball Teams and Baseball Team Encyclopedias". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on July 9, 2022. Retrieved July 22, 2015. Hoch, Bryan (June 26, 2019). "Yanks HR in 28th straight for all-time MLB mark". MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on June 25, 2019. Retrieved June 25, 2019. Martin, Dan (July 2, 2019). "Yankees' incredible home run streak finally ends". nypost.com. Rivera, Marly. "The second HR of the game for Mike Ford, who has 8 homers and 14 RBI in 95 AB, increases the Yankees August home run total to 64, adding on to the all-time record for most HRs in a single month". ESPN. Archived from the original on April 9, 2022. Retrieved July 11, 2022. Hoch, Bryan (August 26, 2019). "Yanks break HR record, take 'rowdy' LA series". MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on August 26, 2019. Retrieved September 1, 2019. "Postseason Results". MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on July 4, 2022. Retrieved July 10, 2022. "New York Yankees Team History & Encyclopedia". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on January 3, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. Wallace, Frank (July 5, 1928). "Yanks Split Pair With Senators". New York Daily News The gang war moved to the national capital today. Bucky Harris' honky tonk mob mixed with Miller Huggins' Bronx bombers, and honors were even after a day of high class killings. p. 35. Retrieved February 25, 2024 – via Newspapers.com. Carveth, Jack (August 18, 1934). "Rowe Needs Two More Games To Equal Mark". Detroit Free Press The Schoolboy has beaten the Yankees four times and has not been beaten by the Bronx Bombers. p. 11. Retrieved February 25, 2024 – via Newspapers.com. Polakoff, Joe (March 23, 1935). "Polley's Chatter, by Joe Polakoff - Sports Editor". The Scranton Republican It's an old Yankee recipe—this wearing down process—and practiced by the Bronx Bombers for a goodly number of years now. p. 14. Retrieved February 25, 2024 – via Newspapers.com. Lowitt, Bruce (February 16, 1988). "Pinstriper". Tampa Bay Times. p. 19. Retrieved July 11, 2022 – via Newspapers.com. Istorico, Ray (2008). Greatness in Waiting: An Illustrated History of the Early New York Yankees, 1903-1919. McFarland & Company. p. 189. ISBN 9780786432110. Castrovince, Anthony (December 26, 2020). "These are the 25 best team nicknames of all time". MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on May 18, 2021. Retrieved July 12, 2022. "Lucchino fires shot at Yanks after losing out on pitcher". ESPN. Associated Press. December 26, 2002. Archived from the original on January 27, 2022. Retrieved July 12, 2022. Jones, Ashby (February 22, 2013). "New York Yankees: Yes, We're 'Evil'". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on August 15, 2020. Retrieved July 13, 2022. Shapiro, Ben (February 23, 2013). "The New York Yankees are baseball's evil empire, and they're proud of it". MassLive. Archived from the original on April 9, 2022. Retrieved July 12, 2022. Caple, Jim (February 27, 2013). "MLB's legal Evil Empire? The Yanks!". ESPN. Archived from the original on May 17, 2022. Retrieved July 13, 2022. "Why the Washington Nationals Were Once Known as the Senators". United States Senate. Archived from the original on March 18, 2021. Retrieved January 26, 2023. "2022 New York Yankees Media Guide" (PDF). New York Yankees via MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original (PDF) on December 22, 2022. Retrieved January 22, 2023. Dittmeier, Bobbie (April 10, 2012). "100 years ago, Yankees pinstripes are born". MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on January 8, 2018. Retrieved January 22, 2023. Fonseca, Brian (June 27, 2019). "Yankees to wear black uniforms during Players Weekend". NJ.com. Archived from the original on January 22, 2023. Retrieved January 22, 2023. Nicas, Jack (March 29, 2023). "The Yankees Cap Goes Viral in Brazil: 'Is It Basketball?'". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved March 29, 2023. Pumerantz, Zack. "The 50 Most Popular Teams in Sports". The Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on January 16, 2014. Retrieved January 14, 2014. Giratikanon, Tom; Katz, Josh; Leonhardt, David; Quealy, Kevin (April 24, 2014). "Up Close on Baseball's Borders". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 7, 2022. Retrieved July 12, 2022. Roberson, Matthew (June 27, 2021). "Yankees' road games against Blue Jays filled with Bombers' faithful; Mike Ford traded to Rays". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on July 25, 2021. Retrieved July 12, 2022. "Yankees surpass 4 million in home attendance". ESPN. September 24, 2005. Archived from the original on July 12, 2022. Retrieved July 12, 2022. "MLB Attendance Report – 2006". ESPN. Archived from the original on July 12, 2022. Retrieved July 12, 2022. Bultman, Matthew (October 20, 2010). "New York Yankees fans remember the man with a pan -- Freddy 'Sez'". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on July 12, 2022. Retrieved July 12, 2022. Tapper, Craig (May 22, 2020). "When All Else Fails..." MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on April 9, 2022. Retrieved July 12, 2022. Krell, David (2019). The New York Yankees in Popular Culture: Critical Essays. McFarland & Company. pp. 44–45. ISBN 9781476636542. Bondy, Filip (September 22, 2008). "Bleacher Creatures won't curtail actions for ESPN". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on May 14, 2022. Retrieved July 12, 2022. Hoch, Bryan (January 31, 2021). "'Roll call' is a Yankee Stadium exclusive". MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on May 14, 2022. Retrieved July 12, 2022. Bondy, Filip (2005). Bleeding Pinstripes: A Season with the Bleacher Creatures of Yankee Stadium. New York: Sports Publishing. Silva, Drew (October 17, 2010). "Yankee Stadium's Bleacher Creatures agree to put a halt to homophobic chant". NBC Sports. Archived from the original on May 9, 2021. Retrieved July 12, 2022. "New York Yankees increase security in stands; Bleacher Creatures taunt Cleveland Guardians OF Myles Straw". ESPN. Associated Press. April 24, 2022. Archived from the original on June 30, 2022. Retrieved July 12, 2022. Bondy, Filip (September 1, 2017). "The Yankees' Judge's Chambers: A Promotion to Dismiss?". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 12, 2020. Retrieved July 12, 2022. Walker, Ben (May 22, 2017). "All Rise! The Judge's Chambers, in session at Yankee Stadium". The Seattle Times. Associated Press. Archived from the original on September 29, 2017. Retrieved July 12, 2022. Rivera, Marly (August 14, 2020). "New York Yankees slugger Aaron Judge is everything MLB could want in a superstar". ESPN. Archived from the original on July 25, 2021. Retrieved July 12, 2022. "The verdict is in: Aaron Judge's fan club members wore judge costumes to Yankee Stadium". MLB Advanced Media. May 11, 2017. Archived from the original on September 3, 2018. Retrieved September 3, 2018. Clair, Michael; Hoch, Bryan (May 23, 2017). "Aaron Judge now has very own Judge's Chambers section at Yankee Stadium". MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on August 30, 2021. Retrieved July 12, 2022. "Aaron Judge gets 'Judge's Chambers' cheering section at Yankee Stadium". USA Today. Associated Press. May 22, 2017. Archived from the original on May 24, 2017. Retrieved July 12, 2022. Feinsand, Mark (September 29, 2007). "Hal Steinbrenner elected chair of Yankee Global Enterprises". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on July 12, 2022. Retrieved July 12, 2022. Hayes, Dade (August 29, 2019). "YES Network Finalizes $3.5B Sale To New York Yankees, Sinclair And Amazon". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved July 12, 2022. O'Connor, Ian (July 13, 2010). "The Boss' legacy bigger than The Babe's". ESPN. Archived from the original on April 7, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Steve Swindal, Steinbrenner's Once Heir Apparent, Finds New Success". CBS Sports. March 7, 2012. Archived from the original on July 12, 2022. Retrieved July 12, 2022. "Yankees complete buyout of Stephen Swindal". USA Today. Associated Press. September 28, 2007. Archived from the original on July 12, 2022. Retrieved July 12, 2022. "Steinbrenner Relinquishes Control of Yankees". NBC Sports. Archived from the original on April 4, 2012. Retrieved July 12, 2022. Kepner, Tyler (April 14, 2010). "Hank Steinbrenner, an Heir to the Yankees, Is Dead at 63". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 26, 2022. Retrieved July 12, 2022. "Cowboys, Yankees form concessions company". NBC News. October 20, 2008. Archived from the original on November 23, 2020. Retrieved July 13, 2022. Badenhausen, Kurt (July 15, 2013). "Real Madrid Tops The World's Most Valuable Sports Teams". Forbes. Archived from the original on February 24, 2015. Retrieved January 6, 2014. Badenhausen, Kurt (July 12, 2017). "Full List: The World's 50 Most Valuable Sports Teams 2017". Forbes. Archived from the original on July 5, 2022. Retrieved July 13, 2022. Badenhausen, Kurt (July 22, 2019). "The World's 50 Most Valuable Sports Teams 2019". Forbes. Archived from the original on April 14, 2022. Retrieved July 13, 2022. Ozanian, Mike; Teitelbaum, Justin (May 26, 2022). "The World's Most Valuable Soccer Teams 2022: Real Madrid, Worth $5.1 Billion, Is Back On Top". Forbes. Archived from the original on July 2, 2022. Retrieved July 4, 2022. Lee, Joon (March 23, 2023). "Yankees worth $7.1 billion as MLB team values rise amid TV turmoil". ESPN. Archived from the original on March 25, 2023. Retrieved March 25, 2023. "The sports teams everyone loves to hate". The Economist. October 28, 2022. Archived from the original on December 8, 2022. Retrieved January 26, 2023. Waldstein, David (October 29, 2018). "Red Sox Fans, With a Title to Cheer, Choose the Yankees to Jeer". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 25, 2022. Scoenfield, David (December 25, 2017). "Bah, humbug: Why it feels good to hate the Yankees again". ESPN. Archived from the original on March 19, 2022. Retrieved July 13, 2022. Costa, Brian; Diamond, Jared (October 20, 2019). "The Yankees' Decade of Almost: $2 Billion Spent, Zero Titles Won". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on January 25, 2022. Retrieved July 13, 2022. "2006 Salary Database". USA Today. Archived from the original on April 9, 2006. Retrieved May 11, 2007. "Yankees' payroll tops five teams combined". ESPN. Associated Press. April 6, 2005. Archived from the original on January 19, 2022. Retrieved July 13, 2022. "Surprise! George Criticizes His Players". Deseret News. July 13, 1988. Archived from the original on July 14, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "New York Yankee Quotations". Baseball Almanac. Archived from the original on May 13, 2007. Retrieved May 11, 2007. Frommer, Harvey (2017). The Ultimate Yankee Book: From the Beginning to Today: Trivia, Facts and Stats, Oral History, Marker Moments and Legendary Personalities—A History and Reference Book About Baseball's Greatest Franchise. Page Street Publishing. ISBN 9781624144332. Krell, David (Fall 2015). "The New York Mets in Popular Culture". Society for American Baseball Research. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved July 13, 2022. Nocera, Joe (December 11, 2015). "How 'New York, New York' Went to the Top of the Heap". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 27, 2022. Retrieved July 13, 2022. Dodd, Rustin (June 23, 2020). "Steinbrenner and Sinatra: How 'New York, New York' became the Yankees' anthem". The Athletic. Archived from the original on November 28, 2021. Retrieved July 13, 2022. Hoch, Bryan (January 14, 2021). "How Sinatra's classic became Yankees staple". MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on January 27, 2022. Retrieved July 13, 2022. Kreda, Allan (January 29, 2014). "For Organist, the Best of Both Worlds". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 16, 2022. Retrieved July 13, 2022. Gardner, Steve (April 18, 2019). "Yankees drop Kate Smith's 'God Bless America' after being told about her racist songs". USA Today. Archived from the original on May 9, 2022. Retrieved July 13, 2022. Tsioulcas, Anastasia (April 22, 2019). "Kate Smith's 'God Bless America' Dropped By Two Major Sports Teams". NPR. Archived from the original on June 13, 2022. Retrieved July 13, 2022. Abdeldaiem, Alaa (April 18, 2019). "Yankees Move on From Kate Smith's 'God Bless America' After Investigating Racist Lyrics". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on May 30, 2022. Retrieved July 13, 2022. Bondy, Stefan (April 18, 2019). "Yankees dump Kate Smith's 'God Bless America' from rotation over singer's racist songs". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on May 15, 2022. Retrieved July 13, 2022. Euchner, Charles. "Stadium Symphonies". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on February 28, 2021. Retrieved July 13, 2022. Lucas, Ed. "July 2, 2015". NJ.com. Archived from the original on July 13, 2022. Retrieved July 13, 2022. Grant, Sarah (October 27, 2015). "How 'Y.M.C.A.' Became Baseball's Never-Ending Jam". The Village Voice. Archived from the original on February 4, 2017. Retrieved July 13, 2022. Pearlman, Jeff (June 2008). ""Y.M.C.A." (An Oral History)". Spin. pp. 75–78. Retrieved July 13, 2022. Sandomir, Richard (March 19, 2002). "Now on YES, It's Dynasty, For Those Not in the Dark". The New York Times. Archived from the original on February 5, 2018. Retrieved July 13, 2022. "Broadcasters". MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on July 7, 2022. Retrieved July 13, 2022. Best, Neil (March 31, 2022). "Source: 21 Yankees games headed to Amazon Prime Video instead of WPIX Channel 11". Newsday. Archived from the original on April 1, 2022. Retrieved July 13, 2022. Chavkin, Daniel (June 9, 2022). "Minor League Baseball Announcer Makes Pitch to Succeed John Sterling". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on June 14, 2022. Retrieved July 13, 2022. O'Connell, James (June 10, 2019). "WFAN Yankees color analyst Suzyn Waldman nominated for the Radio Hall of Fame". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on June 11, 2019. Retrieved July 13, 2022. Gold, Jon (October 2, 2017). "Rickie Ricardo, Spanish voice of Yankees and Eagles, in league of his own". ESPN. Archived from the original on June 23, 2022. Retrieved July 13, 2022. Sandomir, Richard (June 17, 1996). "Mel Allen Is Dead at 83; Golden Voice of Yankees". The New York Times. p. B9. Archived from the original on September 7, 2020. Retrieved July 14, 2022. Fried, Joseph (April 20, 1971). "Russ Hodges Dies; Voice of Giants, 61". The New York Times. p. 46. Archived from the original on September 20, 2020. Retrieved July 14, 2022. McCarthy, Colman (October 24, 1992). "Remembering Red Barber". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on July 14, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. Brock, Corey. "Oh, Doctor! Coleman synonymous with Padres". MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on March 6, 2016. Retrieved July 14, 2022. Rogers III, C. Paul. "Jerry Coleman". Society for American Baseball Research. Archived from the original on March 26, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. Goldstein, Richard (March 23, 2016). "Joe Garagiola, a Catcher Who Called a Better Game on TV, Is Dead at 90". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 16, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. Madden, Bill (August 15, 2007). "'As good a shortstop as ever played'". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on November 4, 2012. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Frank Messer, 76; Broadcast Yankee, White Sox Games". Los Angeles Times. November 16, 2001. Archived from the original on July 14, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. Amour, Lauren (February 4, 2022). "Former Phillie Bill White's Journey to First Black NL President". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on March 18, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. Graziano, Dan (July 12, 2008). "Bobby Murcer, 62, dies of brain cancer". NJ.com. Archived from the original on May 28, 2020. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Every team's retired numbers". MLB Advanced Media. April 5, 2020. Archived from the original on June 7, 2022. Retrieved July 13, 2022. Hoch, Bryan (December 1, 2021). "Yankees' all-time retired numbers". MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on July 13, 2022. Retrieved July 13, 2022. Newcomb, Tim (June 27, 2014). "Ballpark Quirks: Yankee Stadium's living museum in Monument Park". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on February 27, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. Landers, Chris (July 24, 2018). "The long and winding story behind Yankee Stadium's Monument Park". MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on February 27, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. Erardi, John. "History of retired numbers dates back to Lou Gehrig Day". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on May 6, 2021. Retrieved July 14, 2022. Baker, K.C.; McFarland, Stephen (April 16, 1997). "Jackie Robinson's No. 42 was retired by all MLB teams in 1997". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on July 14, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. Belson, Ken (March 13, 2013). "Rivera Is Taking Robinson's 42 to Its Last Stop". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 17, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. Rothschild, Richard (May 21, 2015). "When it comes to retiring numbers, Yankees, Celtics have a low bar". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on January 15, 2021. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Stengel's No. 37 Joins Retired Yank Uniforms". The New York Times. August 9, 1970. p. 133. Archived from the original on June 19, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. Fordin, Spencer (May 8, 2014). "Yankees to retire Torre's No.6". MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on June 23, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Jeter to have number retired | 12/06/2016". MLB Advanced Media. Archived from the original on March 26, 2017. Retrieved March 25, 2017. "Roger Bresnahan". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on March 26, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Joe Kelley". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Joe McGinnity". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on October 23, 2021. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "John McGraw". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on June 11, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Wilbert Robinson". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on October 30, 2021. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Jack Chesbro". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on July 5, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Clark Griffith". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on March 26, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Willie Keeler". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on April 7, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Branch Rickey". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on April 15, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Home Run Baker". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on March 28, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Ed Barrow". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on June 12, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Yogi Berra". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on April 9, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Wade Boggs". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on March 27, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Frank Chance". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on January 18, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Earle Combs". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on March 26, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Stan Coveleski". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on June 12, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Bobby Cox". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on April 17, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Bill Dickey". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on March 23, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Joe DiMaggio". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on July 5, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Leo Durocher". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on June 12, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Whitey Ford". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on April 15, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Lou Gehrig". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on June 30, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Lefty Gomez". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on March 27, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Joe Gordon". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on June 3, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Goose Gossage". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on April 1, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Burleigh Grimes". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on June 12, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Bucky Harris". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on June 12, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Rickey Henderson". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on July 3, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Waite Hoyt". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on May 31, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Miller Huggins". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on May 31, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Catfish Hunter". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on April 7, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Reggie Jackson". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on May 14, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Derek Jeter". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on April 9, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Randy Johnson". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on March 26, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Jim Kaat". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on July 14, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Tony Lazzeri". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on March 26, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Bob Lemon". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on April 15, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Larry MacPhail". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on February 20, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Lee MacPhail". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on February 20, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Mickey Mantle". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on June 26, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Joe McCarthy". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on February 4, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Johnny Mize". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on June 19, 2022. "Mike Mussina". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on May 23, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Phil Niekro". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on March 26, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Herb Pennock". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on June 12, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Gaylord Perry". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on March 27, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Tim Raines". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on April 22, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Mariano Rivera". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on April 9, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Phil Rizzuto". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on March 9, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Iván Rodríguez". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on May 31, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Red Ruffing". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on May 3, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Jacob Ruppert". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on October 19, 2021. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Babe Ruth". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on April 19, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Joe Sewell". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on March 26, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Enos Slaughter". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on February 6, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Lee Smith". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on June 12, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Casey Stengel". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on April 19, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Joe Torre". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on April 19, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Dazzy Vance". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on June 10, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Paul Waner". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on March 26, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "George Weiss". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on June 17, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Dave Winfield". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on May 18, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "1978 Ford C. Frick Award Winner Mel Allen". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on February 15, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "1978 Ford C. Frick Award Winner Red Barber". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on February 20, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "1985 Ford C. Frick Award Winner Buck Canel". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on August 20, 2021. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "2005 Ford C. Frick Award Winner Jerry Coleman". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on April 27, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "1991 Ford C. Frick Award Winner Joe Garagiola". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on March 26, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "1984 Ford C. Frick Award Winner Curt Gowdy". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on September 18, 2020. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "2019 Ford C. Frick Award winner Al Helfer". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on April 17, 2021. "1980 Ford C. Frick Award Winner Russ Hodges". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on February 18, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "2009 Ford C. Frick Award Winner Tony Kubek". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Archived from the original on March 26, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "Bitter Yankees-Astros rivalry is exactly what MLB needs a lot more of". NY Post. July 12, 2021. Shaughnessy 2005, p. 21. Frommer & Frommer 2004, p. 78. Bodley, Hal (October 21, 2004). "Sport's ultimate rivalry; Yanks-Red Sox epic battles go way back". USA Today. p. 3C. Archived from the original on February 11, 2011. Retrieved January 26, 2011. "Yankees-Red Sox: An Annotated History". Hartford Courant. March 30, 2004. Archived from the original on July 9, 2021. Retrieved July 16, 2022. Reints, Renae (October 26, 2017). "TBT: The Curse of the Bambino Is Broken". Boston. Archived from the original on March 24, 2022. Retrieved July 16, 2022. McCarron, Anthony (October 28, 2004). "Red Sox conquer the Curse of the Bambino, sweeping Cardinals in 2004 for first World Series since 1918". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on August 17, 2017. Retrieved July 16, 2022. Shaughnessy 2005, p. 19. Richinick, Michele (October 4, 2010). "Sox-Yankees rivalry led to attack, police say". The Boston Globe. p. B2. Archived from the original on October 18, 2010. Retrieved January 22, 2011. DiGiovanna, Mike (October 12, 2004). "They Love to Hate Each Other; Red Sox and Yankees carry bitter rivalry into championship series that starts tonight". Los Angeles Times. p. D1. Shaughnessy, Dan (October 21, 2004). "A World Series ticket; Sox complete comeback, oust Yankees for AL title". The Boston Globe. p. A1. Archived from the original on January 12, 2012. Retrieved July 25, 2011. Ortiz, Jorge L. (May 7, 2010). "Yankees vs. Red Sox: Long-running drama". USA Today. p. 1C. Archived from the original on June 28, 2012. Retrieved September 6, 2017. Best, Neil (October 6, 2021). "Yankees vs. Red Sox gives ESPN its largest baseball audience this century". Newsday. Archived from the original on July 14, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. Frommer & Frommer 2004, pp. 177–179. Frommer & Frommer 2004, p. 175. Kepner, Tyler (October 21, 2004). "Back From Dead, Red Sox Bury Yanks and Go to Series". The New York Times. p. A1. Archived from the original on April 7, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. Rieber, Anthony (May 16, 2010). "Bruins' fall brings back memories of 2004". Newsday. p. 68. Archived from the original on July 14, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. Lazar, David (August 22, 2022). "Subway Series returns to New York Monday and Tuesday". NY1. Archived from the original on November 26, 2022. Retrieved January 24, 2023. Corio, Ray (October 21, 2000). "Subway Series; The First 13 Stops". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 27, 2015. Retrieved July 14, 2022. Heaphy, Leslie. "New York Mets team ownership history". Society for American Baseball Research. Archived from the original on January 26, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "World Series and MLB Playoffs". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on July 9, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. Rosenstein, Mike (April 29, 2022). "Another Subway World Series? Yankees, Mets are MLB's best teams". NJ.com. Archived from the original on June 8, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. Nightengale, Bob (September 13, 2021). "Cheating allegations, yelling, a three-home run game: Mets, Yankees fire up emotional rivalry". USA Today. Archived from the original on April 7, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2022. "New York Yankees Minor League Affiliates". Baseball-Reference. Sports Reference. Retrieved October 7, 2023. Weeks, Jonathan (July 18, 2016). Baseball's Dynasties and the Players Who Built Them. Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 9781442261570. Frommer, Harvey; Frommer, Frederic J. (2004). Red Sox vs. Yankees: The Great Rivalry. Sports Publishing, LLC. ISBN 1-58261-767-8. Johnson, Richard A.; Stout, Glenn; Johnson, Dick (2002). Yankees Century: 100 Years of New York Yankees Baseball. Houghton Mifflin Company. ISBN 0-618-08527-0. Prato, Greg (2014). Just Out of Reach: The 1980s New York Yankees. New York: Greg Prato Writer, Corp. ISBN 978-1494931230. Shaughnessy, Dan (2005). Reversing the Curse. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. ISBN 0-618-51748-0. Surdam, David G. (December 2008). "The New York Yankees Cope with the Great Depression". Enterprise and Society. 9 (4): 816–40. doi:10.1093/es/khn081. New York Yankees: Manager and Coaches Archived January 25, 2007, at the Wayback Machine Wikimedia Commons has media related to New York Yankees. New York Yankees official website A Boy and His Job 1969-06-04. Elliott Ashley, bat boy for the New York Yankees, explains his duties in this documentary produced by National Educational Television, preserved in the American Archive of Public Broadcasting. Baseball-Reference.com – year-by-year franchise index Baseball Almanac Sports E-Cyclopedia Portals:  Baseball  New York City  New York (state)