Uttar Pradesh (/ˌʊtər prəˈdɛʃ/; lit. 'North Province' and formerly United Province) is a state in northern India. With over 241 million inhabitants, it is the most populated state in India as well as the most populous country subdivision in the world – more populous than all but four other countries outside of India – and accounting for 16.5 percent of the total population of India. It was established in 1950 after India had become a republic. It is a successor to the United Provinces, established in 1935 by renaming the United Provinces of Agra and Oudh, in turn established in 1902 from the North-Western Provinces and the Oudh Province. Lucknow serves as the state capital, with Prayagraj being the judicial capital. The state is divided into 18 divisions and 75 districts. On 9 November 2000, a new state, Uttaranchal (now Uttarakhand), was created from Uttar Pradesh's western Himalayan hill region. The two major rivers of the state, the Ganges and its tributary Yamuna, meet at the Triveni Sangam in Prayagraj (formerly Allahabad), a Hindu pilgrimage site. Other notable rivers are Gomti and Saryu. The forest cover in the state is 6.1 per cent of the state's geographical area. The cultivable area is 82 per cent of the total geographical area, and the net area sown is 68.5 per cent of the cultivable area. The state is bordered by Rajasthan to the west, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh and Delhi to the northwest, Uttarakhand and an international border with Nepal to the north, Bihar to the east, Madhya Pradesh to the south and also bordered by Chhattisgarh and Jharkhand. It covers 243,286 km2 (93,933 sq mi), equal to 7.3% of the total area of India, and is the fourth-largest Indian state by area. Though long known for sugar production, the state's economy is now dominated by the services industry. The service sector comprises travel and tourism, hotel industry, real estate, insurance and financial consultancies. The economy of Uttar Pradesh is the third-largest state economy in India, with ₹18.63 lakh crore (US$230 billion) in gross domestic product and a per capita GSDP of ₹68,810 (US$860). President's rule has been imposed in Uttar Pradesh ten times since 1968, for different reasons and for a total of 1,700 days. The state, at present, has three international airports – Chaudhary Charan Singh International Airport (Lucknow), Lal Bahadur Shastri Airport (Varanasi) and Kushinagar International Airport (Kushinagar). Prayagraj Junction is the headquarters of the North Central Railway, and Gorakhpur Railway Station serves as the headquarters of the North Eastern Railway. The High Court of the state is located in Prayagraj. The state contributes 80 seats and 31 seats to the lower house Lok Sabha and the upper house Rajya Sabha, respectively. Inhabitants of the state are called Awadhi, Bagheli, Bhojpuriya, Braji, Bundeli, Kannauji or Rohilkhandi depending upon their region of origin. Hinduism is practised by more than three-fourths of the population, with Islam being the next-largest religious group. Hindi is the most widely spoken language and is also the official language of the state, along with Urdu. Uttar Pradesh was home to most of the mainstream political entities that existed in ancient and medieval India including the Maurya Empire, Harsha Empire, Gupta Empire, Pala Empire, Delhi Sultanate and Mughal Empire as well as many other empires. At the time of the Indian independence movement in the early 20th century, there were three major princely states in Uttar Pradesh – Ramgadi, Rampur and Benares. The state houses several holy Hindu temples and pilgrimage centres. Along with several historical, natural and religious tourist destinations, including Agra, Aligarh, Ayodhya, Bareilly, Gorakhpur, Kanpur, Kushinagar, Lucknow, Mathura, Meerut, Prayagraj, Varanasi, and Vrindavan, Uttar Pradesh is also home to three World Heritage sites. Modern human hunter-gatherers have been in Uttar Pradesh since between around 85,000 and 72,000 years ago. There have also been prehistorical finds in the state from the Middle and Upper Paleolithic dated to 21,000–31,000 years old and Mesolithic/Microlithic hunter-gatherer settlement, near Pratapgarh, from around 10550–9550 BCE. Villages with domesticated cattle, sheep, and goats and evidence of agriculture began as early as 6000 BCE, and gradually developed between c. 4000 and 1500 BCE beginning with the Indus Valley Civilisation and Harappa culture to the Vedic period and extending into the Iron Age. Out of the sixteen mahajanapadas (lit. 'great realms') or oligarchic republics that existed in ancient India, seven fell entirely within the present-day boundaries of the state. The kingdom of Kosala, in the Mahajanapada era, was also located within the regional boundaries of modern-day Uttar Pradesh. According to Hinduism, the divine King Rama of the Ramayana epic reigned in Ayodhya, the capital of Kosala. Krishna, another divine king of Hindu legend, who plays a key role in the Mahabharata epic and is revered as the eighth reincarnation (Avatar) of the Hindu god Vishnu, is said to have been born in the city of Mathura. The aftermath of the Kurukshetra War is believed to have taken place in the area between the Upper Doab and Delhi, (in what was Kuru Mahajanapada), during the reign of the Pandava King Yudhishthira. The kingdom of the Kurus corresponds to the Black and Red Ware and Painted Gray Ware culture and the beginning of the Iron Age in northwest India, around 1000 BCE. Control over Gangetic plains region was of vital importance to the power and stability of all of India's major empires, including the Maurya (320–200 BCE), Kushan (100–250 CE), Gupta (350–600), and Gurjara-Pratihara (650–1036) empires. Following the Huns' invasions that broke the Gupta empire, the Ganges-Yamuna Doab saw the rise of Kannauj. During the reign of Harshavardhana (590–647), the Kannauj empire reached its zenith. It spanned from Punjab in the north and Gujarat in the west to Bengal in the east and Odisha in the south. It included parts of central India, north of the Narmada River and it encompassed the entire Indo-Gangetic Plain. Many communities in various parts of India claim descent from the migrants of Kannauj. Soon after Harshavardhana's death, his empire disintegrated into many kingdoms, which were invaded and ruled by the Gurjara-Pratihara empire, which challenged Bengal's Pala Empire for control of the region. Kannauj was several times invaded by the South Indian Rashtrakuta dynasty, from the 8th century to the 10th century. After the fall of the Pala empire, the Chero dynasty ruled from the 12th century to the 18th century. Uttar Pradesh was partially or entirely ruled by the Delhi Sultanate for 320 years (1206–1526). Five dynasties ruled over the Delhi Sultanate sequentially: the Mamluk dynasty (1206–90), the Khalji dynasty (1290–1320), the Tughlaq dynasty (1320–1414), the Sayyid dynasty (1414–51), and the Lodi dynasty (1451–1526). The first Sultan of Delhi, Qutb ud-Din Aibak, conquered some parts of Uttar Pradesh, including Meerut, Aligarh, and Etawah. His successor, Iltutmish, expanded the Sultanate's rule over Uttar Pradesh by defeating the King of Kannauj. During the reign of Sultan Balban, the Mamluk dynasty faced numerous rebellions in the state, but he was able to suppress them and establish his authority. Alauddin Khilji, extended his conquests to various regions in the state, including Varanasi and Prayagraj. Apart from the rulers, the Delhi Sultanate era also saw the growth of Sufism in Uttar Pradesh. Sufi saints, such as Nizamuddin Auliya and Qutbuddin Bakhtiar Kaki, lived during this period and their teachings had a significant impact on the people of the region. Sultanat era in the state also witnessed the construction of mosques and tombs, including the Atala Masjid in Jaunpur, the Jama Masjid in Fatehpur Sikri, and the Ghiyath al-Din Tughluq's Tomb in Tughlaqabad. In the 16th century, Babur, a Timurid descendant of Timur and Genghis Khan from Fergana Valley (modern-day Uzbekistan), swept across the Khyber Pass and founded the Mughal Empire, covering India, along with modern-day Afghanistan, Pakistan and Bangladesh. The Mughals were descended from Persianised Central Asian Turks (with significant Mongol admixture). In the Mughal era, Uttar Pradesh became the heartland of the empire. Mughal emperors Babur and Humayun ruled from Delhi. In 1540 an Afghan, Sher Shah Suri, took over the reins of Uttar Pradesh after defeating the Mughal King Humanyun. Sher Shah and his son Islam Shah ruled Uttar Pradesh from their capital at Gwalior. After the death of Islam Shah Suri, his prime minister Hemu became the de facto ruler of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, and the western parts of Bengal. He was bestowed the title of Hemchandra Vikramaditya (title of Vikramāditya adopted from Vedic period) at his formal coronation took place at Purana Qila in Delhi on 7 October 1556. A month later, Hemu died in the Second Battle of Panipat, and Uttar Pradesh came under Emperor Akbar's rule. Akbar ruled from Agra and Fatehpur Sikri. In the 18th century, after the fall of Mughal authority, the power vacuum was filled by the Maratha Empire, in the mid-18th century, the Maratha army invaded the Uttar Pradesh region, which resulted in Rohillas losing control of Rohilkhand to the Maratha forces led by Raghunath Rao and Malha Rao Holkar. The conflict between Rohillas and Marathas came to an end on 18 December 1788 with the arrest of Ghulam Qadir, the grandson of Najeeb-ud-Daula, who was defeated by the Maratha general Mahadaji Scindia. In 1803–04, following the Second Anglo-Maratha War, when the British East India Company defeated the Maratha Empire, much of the region came under British suzerainty. Starting from Bengal in the second half of the 18th century, a series of battles for north Indian lands finally gave the British East India Company accession over the state's territories. Ajmer and Jaipur kingdoms were also included in this northern territory, which was named the "North-Western Provinces" (of Agra). Although UP later became the fifth-largest state of India, NWPA was one of the smallest states of the British Indian empire. Its capital shifted twice between Agra and Allahabad. Due to dissatisfaction with British rule, a serious rebellion erupted in various parts of North India, which became known as the Indian Rebellion of 1857; Bengal regiment's sepoy stationed at Meerut cantonment, Mangal Pandey, is widely considered as its starting point. After the revolt failed, the British divided the most rebellious regions by reorganising their administrative boundaries, splitting the Delhi region from 'NWFP of Agra' and merging it with Punjab Province, while the Ajmer–Marwar region was merged with Rajputana and Oudh was incorporated into the state. The new state was called the North Western Provinces of Agra and Oudh, which in 1902 was renamed as the United Provinces of Agra and Oudh. It was commonly referred to as the United Provinces or its acronym UP. In 1920, the capital of the province was shifted from Allahabad to Lucknow. The high court continued to be at Allahabad, but a bench was established at Lucknow. Allahabad continues to be an important administrative base of today's Uttar Pradesh and has several administrative headquarters. Uttar Pradesh continued to be central to Indian politics and was especially important in modern Indian history as a hotbed of the Indian independence movement. The state hosted modern educational institutions such as the Aligarh Muslim University, Banaras Hindu University and Darul Uloom Deoband. Nationally known figures such as Ram Prasad Bismil and Chandra Shekhar Azad were among the leaders of the movement in Uttar Pradesh, and Motilal Nehru, Jawaharlal Nehru, Madan Mohan Malaviya and Govind Ballabh Pant were important national leaders of the Indian National Congress. The All India Kisan Sabha was formed at the Lucknow session of the Congress on 11 April 1936, with the famous nationalist Sahajanand Saraswati elected as its first president, to address the longstanding grievances of the peasantry and mobilise them against the zamindari landlords attacks on their occupancy rights, thus sparking the Farmers movements in India. During the Quit India Movement of 1942, Ballia district overthrew the colonial authority and installed an independent administration under Chittu Pandey. Ballia became known as "Baghi Ballia" (Rebel Ballia) for this significant role in India's independence movement. After India's independence, the United Provinces were renamed "Uttar Pradesh" (lit. 'northern province'), preserving UP as the acronym, with the change coming into effect on 24 January 1950. The new state was formed after the merger of several princely states and territories, including the United Provinces of Agra and Oudh, and the Delhi territory. The state has provided nine of India's prime ministers which is more than any other state and is the source of the largest number of seats in the Lok Sabha. Despite its political influence since ancient times, its poor record in economic development and administration, poor governance, organised crime and corruption have kept it among India's backward states. The state has been affected by repeated episodes of caste-related and communal violence. In December 1992 the disputed Babri Mosque located in Ayodhya was demolished by Hindu activists, leading to widespread violence across India. In 2000, northern districts of the state were separated to form the state of Uttarakhand. Uttar Pradesh, with a total area of 240,928 square kilometres (93,023 sq mi), is India's fourth-largest state in terms of land area and is roughly of same size as United Kingdom. It is situated on the northern spout of India and shares an international boundary with Nepal. The Himalayas border the state on the north, but the plains that cover most of the state are distinctly different from those high mountains. The larger Gangetic Plain region is in the north; it includes the Ganges-Yamuna Doab, the Ghaghra plains, the Ganges plains and the Terai. The smaller Vindhya Range and plateau region are in the south. It is characterised by hard rock strata and a varied topography of hills, plains, valleys and plateaus. The Bhabhar tract gives place to the terai area which is covered with tall elephant grass and thick forests interspersed with marshes and swamps. The sluggish rivers of the bhabhar deepen in this area, their course running through a tangled mass of thick undergrowth. The terai runs parallel to the bhabhar in a thin strip. The entire alluvial plain is divided into three sub-regions. The first in the eastern tract consisting of 14 districts which are subject to periodical floods and droughts and have been classified as scarcity areas. These districts have the highest density of population which gives the lowest per capita land. The other two regions, the central and the western, are comparatively better with a well-developed irrigation system. They suffer from waterlogging and large-scale user tracts. In addition, the area is fairly arid. The state has more than 32 large and small rivers; of them, the Ganga, Yamuna, Saraswati, Sarayu, Betwa, and Ghaghara are larger and of religious importance in Hinduism. Cultivation is intensive in the state. Uttar Pradesh falls under three agro-climatic zones viz. Middle Gangetic Plains region (Zone–IV), Upper Gangetic Plains region (Zone–V) and Central Plateau and Hills region (Zone–VIII). The valley areas have fertile and rich soil. There is intensive cultivation on terraced hill slopes, but irrigation facilities are deficient. The Siwalik Range which forms the southern foothills of the Himalayas, slopes down into a boulder bed called 'bhabhar'. The transitional belt running along the entire length of the state is called the terai and bhabhar area. It has rich forests, cutting across it are innumerable streams which swell into raging torrents during the monsoon. Uttar Pradesh has a humid subtropical climate and experiences four seasons. The winter in January and February is followed by summer between March and May and the monsoon season between June and September. Summers are extreme with temperatures fluctuating anywhere between 0–50 °C (32–122 °F) in parts of the state coupled with dry hot winds called the Loo. The Gangetic plain varies from semiarid to sub-humid. The mean annual rainfall ranges from 650 mm (26 inches) in the southwest corner of the state to 1,000 mm (39 inches) in the eastern and south eastern parts of the state. Primarily a summer phenomenon, the Bay of Bengal branch of the Indian monsoon is the major bearer of rain in most parts of state. After summer it is the southwest monsoon which brings most of the rain here, while in winters rain due to the western disturbances and north-east monsoon also contribute small quantities towards the overall precipitation of the state. The rain in Uttar Pradesh can vary from an annual average of 170 cm (67 inches) in hilly areas to 84 cm (33 inches) in Western Uttar Pradesh. Given the concentration of most of this rainfall in the four months of the monsoon, excess rain can lead to floods and shortage to droughts. As such, these two phenomena, floods and droughts, commonly recur in the state. The climate of the Vindhya Range and plateau is subtropical with a mean annual rainfall between 1,000 and 1,200 mm (39 and 47 inches), most of which comes during the monsoon. Typical summer months are from March to June, with maximum temperatures ranging from 30–38 °C (86–100 °F). There is a low relative humidity of around 20% and dust-laden winds blow throughout the season. In summer, hot winds called loo blow all across Uttar Pradesh. Uttar Pradesh has an abundance of natural resources. In 2011 the recorded forest area in the state was 16,583 km2 (6,403 sq mi) which is about 6.9% of the state's geographical area. In spite of rapid deforestation and poaching of wildlife, a diverse flora and fauna continue to exist in the state. Uttar Pradesh is a habitat for 4.2% of all species of Algae recorded in India, 6.4% of Fungi, 6.0% of Lichens, 2.9% of Bryophytes, 3.3% of Pteridophytes, 8.7% of Gymnosperms, 8.1% of Angiosperms. Several species of trees, large and small mammals, reptiles, and insects are found in the belt of temperate upper mountainous forests. Medicinal plants are found in the wild and are also grown in plantations. The Terai–Duar savanna and grasslands support cattle. Moist deciduous trees grow in the upper Gangetic plain, especially along its riverbanks. This plain supports a wide variety of plants and animals. The Ganges and its tributaries are the habitat of large and small reptiles, amphibians, fresh-water fish, and crabs. Scrubland trees such as the Babool (Vachellia nilotica) and animals such as the Chinkara (Gazella bennettii) are found in the arid Vindhyas. Tropical dry deciduous forests are found in all parts of the plains. Since much sunlight reaches the ground, shrubs and grasses are also abundant. Large tracts of these forests have been cleared for cultivation. Tropical thorny forests, consisting of widely scattered thorny trees, mainly babool are mostly found in the southwestern parts of the state. Uttar Pradesh is known for its extensive avifauna. The most common birds which are found in the state are doves, peafowl, junglefowl, black partridges, house sparrows, songbirds, blue jays, parakeets, quails, bulbuls, comb ducks, kingfishers, woodpeckers, snipes, and parrots. Bird sanctuaries in the state include Bakhira Sanctuary, National Chambal Sanctuary, Chandra Prabha Wildlife Sanctuary, Hastinapur Wildlife Sanctuary, Kaimoor Wildlife Sanctuary, and Okhla Sanctuary. Other animals in the state include reptiles such as lizards, cobras, kraits, and gharials. Among the wide variety of fishes, the most common ones are mahaseer and trout. Some animal species have gone extinct in recent years, while others, like the lion from the Gangetic Plain, the rhinoceros from the Terai region, Ganges river dolphin primarily found in the Ganges have become endangered. Many species are vulnerable to poaching despite regulation by the government. Anandabodhi tree in Jetavana Monastery, Sravasti A hybrid nasturtium (Tropaeolum majus) showing nectar spur, found mainly in Hardoi district An endangered Ganges river dolphin (Platanista gangetica) lives in the Ganges river View of the Terai region The threatened Gharial (Gavialis gangeticus) is a large fish-eating crocodilian found in the Ganges River Uttar Pradesh is divided into 75 districts under these 18 divisions: The following is a list of top districts from state of Uttar Pradesh by population, ranked in respect of all India. Each district is governed by a District Magistrate, who is an Indian Administrative Service (IAS) officer appointed Government of Uttar Pradesh and reports to Divisional Commissioner of the division in which his district falls. The Divisional Commissioner is an IAS officer of high seniority. Each district is divided into subdivisions, governed by a Sub-Divisional Magistrate, and again into Blocks. Blocks consists of panchayats (village councils) and town municipalities. These blocks consists of urban units viz. census towns and rural units called gram panchayat. Uttar Pradesh has more metropolitan cities than any other state in India. The absolute urban population of the state is 44.4 million, which constitutes 11.8% of the total urban population of India, the second-highest of any state. According to the 2011 census, there are 15 urban agglomerations with a population greater than 500,000. There are 14 Municipal Corporations, while Noida and Greater Noida in Gautam Budha Nagar district are specially administered by statutory authorities under the Uttar Pradesh Industrial Development Act, 1976. In 2011, state's cabinet ministers headed by the then Chief Minister Mayawati announced the separation of Uttar Pradesh into four different states of Purvanchal, Bundelkhand, Avadh Pradesh and Paschim Pradesh with twenty-eight, seven, twenty-three and seventeen districts, respectively, later the proposal was turned down when the Akhilesh Yadav–lead Samajwadi Party came to power in the 2012 election. Uttar Pradesh has a very large population and a high population growth rate. From 1991 to 2001 its population increased by over 26 per cent. It is the most populous state in India, with 199,581,477 people on 1 March 2011. The state contributes to 16.2 per cent of India's population. As of 2021, the estimated population of the state is around 240 million people. The population density is 828 people per square kilometre, making it one of the most densely populated states in the country. It has the largest scheduled caste population whereas scheduled tribes are less than 1 per cent of the total population. The sex ratio in 2011, at 912 women to 1000 men, was lower than the national figure of 943. The low sex ratio in Uttar Pradesh, is a result of various factors, such as sex-selective abortion, female infanticide, and discrimination against girls and women. The state's 2001–2011 decennial growth rate (including Uttrakhand) was 20.1 per cent, higher than the national rate of 17.64 per cent. It has a large number of people living below the poverty line. As per a World Bank document released in 2016, the pace of poverty reduction in the state has been slower than the rest of the country. Estimates released by the Reserve Bank of India for the year 2011–12 revealed that the state had 59 million (59819,000) people below the poverty line, the most for any state in India. The central and eastern districts in particular have very high levels of poverty. The state is also experiencing widening consumption inequality. As per the report of the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation released in 2020, the state per capita income is below ₹80,000 (US$1,000) per annum. As per 2011 census, Uttar Pradesh, the most populous state in India, is home to the highest numbers of both Hindus and Muslims. The literacy rate of the state at the 2011 census was 67.7 per cent, which was below the national average of 74 per cent. The literacy rate for men is 79 per cent and for women 59 per cent. In 2001 the literacy rate in the state stood at 56 per cent overall, 67 per cent for men and 43 per cent for women. A report based on a National Statistical Office (NSO) survey revealed that Uttar Pradesh's literacy rate is 73 per cent, less than the national average of 77.7 per cent. According to the report, in the rural region, the literacy rate among men is 80.5 per cent and women is 60.4 per cent, while in urban areas, the literacy rate among men is 86.8 per cent and women is 74.9 per cent. Additionally, the report indicates that the state still faces significant challenges in improving literacy rates, particularly among women and girls, and in certain regions with lower levels of development. Hindi is the primary official language and is spoken by the majority of the population. Bhojpuri is the second most spoken language of the state, it is spoken by almost 11 per cent of the population. Most people speak regional languages classified as dialects of Hindi in the census. These include Awadhi spoken in Awadh in central Uttar Pradesh, Bhojpuri spoken in Purvanchal in eastern Uttar Pradesh, and Braj Bhasha spoken in the Braj region in Western Uttar Pradesh. These languages have also been recognised by the state government for official use in their respective regions. Urdu is given the status of a second official language, spoken by 5.4 per cent of the population. English is used as a means of communication for education, commerce, and governance. It is commonly spoken and employed as a language of instruction in educational institutions, as well as for conducting business transactions and managing administrative affairs. Other notable languages spoken in the state include Punjabi (0.3 per cent) and Bengali (0.1 per cent). The state is governed by a parliamentary system of representative democracy. Uttar Pradesh is one of the seven states in India, where the state legislature is bicameral, comprising two houses: the Vidhan Sabha (Legislative Assembly) and the Vidhan Parishad (Legislative Council). The Legislative Assembly consists of 404 members who are elected for five-year terms. The Legislative Council is a permanent body of 100 members with one-third (33 members) retiring every two years. The state sends the largest number of legislators to the national Parliament. The state contributes 80 seats to Lok Sabha, the lower house of the Indian Parliament, and 31 seats to Rajya Sabha, the upper house. The Government of Uttar Pradesh is a democratically elected body in India with the governor as its constitutional head and is appointed by the president of India for a five-year term. The leader of the party or coalition with a majority in the Legislative Assembly is appointed as the chief minister by the governor, and the council of ministers is appointed by the governor on the advice of the chief minister. The governor remains a ceremonial head of the state, while the chief minister and his council are responsible for day-to-day government functions. The Council of Ministers consists of Cabinet Ministers and Ministers of State (MoS). The Secretariat headed by the Chief Secretary assists the council of ministers. The Chief Secretary is also the administrative head of the government. Each government department is headed by a minister, who is assisted by an Additional Chief Secretary or a Principal Secretary, who is usually an officer of Indian Administrative Service (IAS), the Additional Chief Secretary/Principal Secretary serves as the administrative head of the department they are assigned to. Each department also has officers of the rank of Secretary, Special Secretary, Joint Secretary etc. assisting the Minister and the Additional Chief Secretary/Principal Secretary. For administration, the state is divided into 18 divisions and 75 districts. Divisional Commissioner, an IAS officer is the head of administration on the divisional level. The administration in each district is headed by a District Magistrate, who is also an IAS officer, and is assisted by several officers belonging to state services. District Magistrate being the head of the district administration, is responsible for maintaining law and order and providing public services in the district. At the block level, the Block Development Officer (BDO) is responsible for the overall development of the block. The Uttar Pradesh Police is headed by an IPS officer of the rank of Director general of police. A Superintendent of Police, an IPS officer assisted by the officers of the Uttar Pradesh Police Service, is entrusted with the responsibility of maintaining law and order and related issues in each district. The Divisional Forest Officer, an officer belonging to the Indian Forest Service manages the forests, environment, and wildlife of the district, assisted by the officers of Uttar Pradesh Forest Service and Uttar Pradesh Forest Subordinate Service. The judiciary in the state consists of the Allahabad High Court in Prayagraj, the Lucknow Bench of Allahabad High Court, district courts and session courts in each district or Sessions Division, and lower courts at the tehsil level. The president of India appoints the chief justice of the High Court of the Uttar Pradesh judiciary on the advice of the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of India as well as the governor of Uttar Pradesh. Subordinate Judicial Service, categorised into two divisions viz. Uttar Pradesh civil judicial services and Uttar Pradesh higher judicial service are another vital part of the judiciary of Uttar Pradesh. While the Uttar Pradesh civil judicial services comprise the Civil Judges (Junior Division)/Judicial Magistrates and civil judges (Senior Division)/Chief Judicial Magistrate, the Uttar Pradesh higher judicial service comprises civil and sessions judges. The Subordinate judicial service (viz. The district court of Etawah and the district court of Kanpur Dehat) of the judiciary at Uttar Pradesh is controlled by the District Judge. Politics in Uttar Pradesh has been dominated by four political parties – the Samajwadi Party, the Bahujan Samaj Party, the Bharatiya Janata Party, and the Indian National Congress. Uttar Pradesh has provided India with eight Prime Ministers. According to the National Human Rights Commission of India (NHRC), Uttar Pradesh tops the list of states of encounter killings and custodial deaths. In 2014, the state recorded 365 judicial deaths out of a total 1,530 deaths recorded in the country. NHRC further said, of the over 30,000 murders registered in the country in 2016, Uttar Pradesh had 4,889 cases. A data from Minister of Home Affairs (MHA) avers, Bareilly recorded the highest number of custodial death at 25, followed by Agra (21), Allahabad (19) and Varanasi (9). National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) data from 2011 says, the state has the highest number of crimes among any state in India, but due to its high population, the actual per capita crime rate is low. The state also continues to top the list of states with maximum communal violence incidents. An analysis of Ministers of State of Home Affairs states (2014), 23% of all incidents of communal violence in India took place in the state. According to a research assembled by State Bank of India, Uttar Pradesh failed to improve its Human Development Index (HDI) ranking over a period of 27 years (1990–2017). Based on sub-national human development index data for Indian states from 1990 to 2017, the report also stated that the value of human development index has steadily increased over time from 0.39 in 1990 to 0.59 in 2017. The Uttar Pradesh Police, governed by the Department of Home and Confidential, is the largest police force in the world. Uttar Pradesh also reported the highest number of deaths – 23,219 – due to road and rail accidents in 2015, according to NCRB data. This included 8,109 deaths due to careless driving. Between 2006 and 2010, the state has been hit with three terrorist attacks, including explosions in a landmark holy place, a court and a temple. The 2006 Varanasi bombings were a series of bombings that occurred across the Hindu holy city of Varanasi on 7 March 2006. At least 28 people were killed and as many as 101 others were injured. In the afternoon of 23 November 2007, within a span of 25 minutes, six consecutive serial blasts occurred in the Lucknow, Varanasi, and Faizabad courts, in which 28 people were killed. Another blast occurred on 7 December 2010, the blast occurred at Sheetla Ghat in Varanasi in which more than 38 people were killed. In February 2016, a series of bomb blasts occurred at the Jhakarkati Bus Station in Kanpur, killing 2 people and injuring more than 30. In terms of net state domestic product (NSDP), Uttar Pradesh is the second-largest economy in India after Maharashtra, with an estimated gross state domestic product of ₹14.89 lakh crore (US$190 billion), contributing 8.4% of India's gross domestic product. According to the report generated by India Brand Equity Foundation (IBEF), in 2014–15, Uttar Pradesh has accounted for 19% share in the country's total food grain output. About 70% of India's sugar comes from Uttar Pradesh. Sugarcane is the most important cash crop as the state is country's largest producer of sugar. As per the report generated by Indian Sugar Mills Association (ISMA), total sugarcane production in India was estimated to be 28.3 million tonnes in the fiscal ending September 2015 which includes 10.47 million tonnes from Maharashtra and 7.35 million tonnes from Uttar Pradesh. With 359 manufacturing clusters, cement is the top sector of SMEs in Uttar Pradesh. The Uttar Pradesh Financial Corporation (UPFC) was established in 1954 under the SFCs Act of 1951 mainly to develop small- and medium-scale industries in the state. The UPFC also provides working capital to existing units with a soundtrack record and to new units under a single window scheme. In July 2012, due to financial constraints and directions from the state government, lending activities were suspended except for State Government Schemes. The state has reported total private investment worth over Rs. 25,081 crores during the years of 2012 and 2016. According to a recent report of the World Bank on Ease of Doing Business in India, Uttar Pradesh was ranked among the top 10 states and first among Northern states. According to the Uttar Pradesh Budget Documents (2019–20), Uttar Pradesh's debt burden is 29.8 percent of the GSDP. The state's total financial debt stood at ₹2.09 lakh crore (US$26 billion) in 2011. Uttar Pradesh has not been able to witness double-digit economic growth despite consistent attempts over the years. The GSDP is estimated to have grown 7 percent in 2017–18 and 6.5 percent in 2018–19 which is about 10 percent of India's GDP. According to a survey conducted by the Centre for Monitoring Indian Economy (CMIE), Uttar Pradesh's unemployment rate increased 11.4 percentage points, rising to 21.5 percent in April 2020. Uttar Pradesh has the largest number of net migrants migrating out of the state. The 2011 census data on migration shows that nearly 14.4 million (14.7%) people had migrated out of Uttar Pradesh. Marriage was cited as the predominant reason for migration among females. Among males, the most important reason for migration was work and employment. In 2009–10, the tertiary sector of the economy (service industries) was the largest contributor to the gross domestic product of the state, contributing 44.8 percent of the state domestic product compared to 44 percent from the primary sector (agriculture, forestry, and tourism) and 11.2 percent from the secondary sector (industrial and manufacturing). Western Uttar Pradesh dominates the state's economy, contributing 51 percent of revenues to the government. Leading economic centers in this region include Noida, Meerut, Ghaziabad, and Agra. Noida, Meerut, and Agra rank as the top 3 districts with the highest per capita income, whereas Lucknow and Kanpur rank 7th and 9th in per capita income. During the 11th five-year plan (2007–2012), the average gross state domestic product (GSDP) growth rate was 7.3 percent, lower than 15.5 percent, the average for all states of the country. The state's per capita GSDP was ₹29,417 (US$370), lower than the national per capita GSDP of ₹60,972 (US$760). Labor efficiency is higher at an index of 26 than the national average of 25. Textiles and sugar refining, both long-standing industries in Uttar Pradesh, employ a significant proportion of the state's total factory labor. The economy also benefits from the state's tourism industry. The state has attracted foreign direct investment, mostly in the software and electronics fields. Noida, Meerut, Ghaziabad Kanpur and Lucknow have become major hubs for the information technology (IT) industry and house the headquarters of most of the major corporate, media and financial institutions. Sonebhadra, a district in eastern Uttar Pradesh, has large-scale industries. Its southern region is known as the Energy Capital of India. In May 2013 Uttar Pradesh had the largest number of mobile subscribers in the country, a total of 121.60 million mobile phone connections out of 861.66 million in India, according to the telecom regulator, Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI). In November 2015, the Ministry of Urban Development selected sixty-one cities of Uttar Pradesh for a comprehensive development program known as the Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT). A package of ₹260 billion (US$3.3 billion) was declared for the cities to develop service level improvement plan (SLIP), a plan for better functioning of the local urban bodies in the cities. The state has the largest railway network in the country but in relative terms has only sixth-highest railway density despite its plain topography and largest population. As of 2011[update], there were 8,546 km (5,310 mi) of rail in the state. The railway network in the state is controlled by two divisions of the Indian Railways viz. North Central Railway and North Eastern Railway. Allahabad is the headquarters of the North Central Railway and Gorakhpur is the headquarters of the North Eastern Railway. Lucknow and Moradabad serve as divisional Headquarters of the Northern Railway Division. Lucknow Swarna Shatabdi Express, the second fastest Shatabdi Express train, connects the Indian capital of New Delhi to Lucknow while Kanpur Shatabdi Express, connects New Delhi to Kanpur Central. This was the first train in India to get the new German LHB coaches. The railway stations of Prayagraj Junction, Agra Cantonment, Lucknow Charbagh, Gorakhpur Junction, Kanpur Central, Mathura Junction and Varanasi Junction are included in the Indian Railways list of 50 world-class railway stations. The state has a large, multimodal transportation system with the largest road network in the country. It has 42 national highways, with a total length of 4,942 km (3,071 miles) comprising 9.6% of the total NH length in India. The Uttar Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation was established in 1972 to provide transportation in the state with connecting services to adjoining states. All cities are connected to state highways, and all district headquarters are being connected with four lane roads which carry traffic between major centres within the state. One of them is Agra–Lucknow Expressway, which is a 302 km (188 miles) controlled-access highway constructed by UPEIDA. Uttar Pradesh has the highest road density in India – 1,027 km (638 miles) per 1,000 km2 (390 square miles) – and the largest surfaced urban-road network in the country – 50,721 km (31,517 miles). The Lucknow Metro and Kanpur Metro (Orange line) has been operational. By passenger traffic in India, Chaudhary Charan Singh International Airport in Lucknow and Lal Bahadur Shastri Airport in Varanasi, are the major international airports and the main gateway to the state. Uttar Pradesh has six domestic airports located at Agra, Allahabad, Bareilly, Ghaziabad, Gorakhpur and Kanpur. The state has also proposed creating the Noida International Airport at Kurikupa near Hirangaon, Tundla in Firozabad district. Two more international airports have been proposed to be built at Kushinagar and Jewar, Greater Noida. Traditional sports, now played mostly as a pastime, include wrestling, swimming, kabaddi, and track-sports or water-sports played according to local traditional rules and without modern equipment. Some sports are designed to display martial skills such as using a sword or 'Pata' (stick). Due to a lack of organised patronage and requisite facilities, these sports survive mostly as individuals' hobbies or local competitive events. Among modern sports, field hockey is popular and Uttar Pradesh has produced top-level players in India, such as Nitin Kumar. and Lalit Kumar Upadhyay. Recently, cricket has become more popular than field hockey. Uttar Pradesh won its first Ranji Trophy tournament in February 2006, beating Bengal in the final. Shaheed Vijay Singh Pathik Sports Complex is another newly built international cricket stadium with a capacity of around 20,000 spectators. The Buddh International Circuit hosted India's inaugural F1 Grand Prix race on 30 October 2011. Races were only held three times before being cancelled due to falling attendance and lack of government support. The government of Uttar Pradesh considered Formula One to be entertainment and not a sport, and thus imposed taxes on the event and participants. Another cricket stadium is under-construction in the holy city of Varanasi of Uttar Pradesh in India and is expected to be completed by December 2025. The venue will have a seating capacity of 30,000 which can be extended up to 40,000 spectators. Upon completion, it will be the fourth international cricket stadium in Uttar Pradesh after Green Park Stadium in Kanpur, Ekana Cricket Stadium in Lucknow and Saifai International Cricket Stadium in Etawah. Uttar Pradesh has a prolonged tradition of education, although historically it was primarily confined to the elite class and religious schools. Sanskrit-based learning formed the major part of education from the Vedic to the Gupta periods. As cultures travelled through the region they brought their bodies of knowledge with them, adding Pali, Persian and Arabic scholarship to the community. These formed the core of Hindu-Buddhist-Muslim education until the rise of British colonialism. The present schools-to-university system of education owes its inception and development in the state (as in the rest of the country) to foreign Christian missionaries and the British colonial administration. Schools in the state are either managed by the government or by private trusts. Hindi is used as a medium of instruction in most of the schools except those affiliated to the CBSE or the council for ICSE boards. Under the 10+2+3 plan, after completing secondary school, students typically enroll for two years in a junior college, also known as pre-university, or in schools with a higher secondary facility affiliated with the Uttar Pradesh Board of High School and Intermediate Education or a central board. Students choose from one of three streams, namely liberal arts, commerce, or science. Upon completing the required coursework, students may enrol in general or professional degree programs. Some Uttar Pradesh schools, for example Delhi Public School (Noida), La Martinière Girls' College (Lucknow), and Step by Step School (Noida) have been ranked among the best schools in the country. Uttar Pradesh has more than 45 universities, including five central universities, twenty eight state universities, eight deemed universities, two IITs in Varanasi and Kanpur, AIIMS Gorakhpur and AIIMS Rae Bareli, an IIM in Lucknow The Integral University, a state level institution, was established by the Uttar Pradesh Government to provide education in different technical, applied science, and other disciplines. The Central Institute of Higher Tibetan Studies was founded as an autonomous organisation by the national ministry of culture. Jagadguru Rambhadracharya Handicapped University is the only university established exclusively for the disabled in the world. A large number of Indian scholars are educated at different universities in Uttar Pradesh. Notable scholars who were born, worked or studied in the geographic area of the state include Harivansh Rai Bachchan, Motilal Nehru, Harish Chandra and Indira Gandhi. Uttar Pradesh ranks first in domestic tourist arrivals among all states of India. Some 44,000 foreign tourists arrived in the state in 2021, and almost 110 million domestic tourists. The Taj Mahal attracts some 7 million people a year, earning almost ₹78 crore (US$9.8 million) in ticket sales in 2018–19. The state is home to three World Heritage Sites: the Taj Mahal, Agra Fort, and the nearby Fatehpur Sikri. Religious tourism plays a significant role in the state's economy. Varanasi is a major religious hub and one of the seven sacred cities (Sapta Puri) in Hinduism and Jainism. Vrindavan is considered to be a holy place for Vaishnavism. Owing to the belief as to the birthplace of Rama, Ayodhya (Awadh) has been regarded as one of the seven most important pilgrimage sites. Millions gather at Prayagraj to take part in the Magh Mela festival on the banks of the Ganges. This festival is organised on a larger scale every 12th year and is called the Kumbh Mela, where over 10 million Hindu pilgrims congregate in one of the largest gatherings of people in the world. Buddhist attractions in Uttar Pradesh include stupas and monasteries. The historically important towns of Sarnath where Gautama Buddha gave his first sermon after his enlightenment and died at Kushinagar; both of which are important pilgrimage sites for Buddhists. Also at Sarnath are the Pillars of Ashoka and the Lion Capital of Ashoka, both important archaeological artefacts with national significance. At a distance of 80 km (50 miles) from Varanasi, Ghazipur is famous not only for its Ghats on the Ganges but also for the tomb of Lord Cornwallis, the 18th-century Governor of East India Company ruled Bengal Presidency. The tomb is maintained by the Archaeological Survey of India. Jhansi Fort, located in the city of Jhansi, is closely associated with the "First War of Indian Independence", also known as the "Great Rebellion" or the Indian Rebellion of 1857. The fort is constructed in accordance with medieval Indian military architecture, featuring thick walls, bastions, and various structures within its complex. The architecture reflects a blend of Hindu and Islamic styles. Uttar Pradesh has a mix of public as well as private healthcare infrastructure. Public healthcare in Uttar Pradesh is provided through a grid of primary health centers, community health centers, district hospitals, and medical colleges. Although an extensive network of public and private sector healthcare providers has been built, the available health infrastructure is inadequate to meet the demand for health services in the state. In 15 years to 2012–13, the population increased by more than 25 per cent. The public health centres, which are the frontline of the government's health care system, decreased by 8 per cent. Smaller sub-centres, the first point of public contact, increased by no more than 2 per cent over the 25 years to 2015, a period when the population grew by more than 51 per cent. The state is also facing challenges such as a shortage of healthcare professionals, increasing cost of healthcare, a lack of essential medicines and equipment, the mushrooming of private healthcare and a lack of planning. As of 2017[update], the number of government hospital in rural and urban areas of Uttar Pradesh stood at 4,442 with 39,104 beds and 193 with 37,156 beds respectively. A newborn in Uttar Pradesh is expected to live four years fewer than in the neighbouring state of Bihar, five years fewer than in Haryana and seven years fewer than in Himachal Pradesh. The state contributed to the largest share of almost all communicable and noncommunicable disease deaths, including 48 per cent of all typhoid deaths (2014); 17 per cent of cancer deaths and 18 per cent of tuberculosis deaths (2015). Its maternal mortality ratio is higher than the national average at 258 maternal deaths for every 100,000 live births (2017), with 62 per cent of pregnant women unable to access minimum ante-natal care. Around 42 per cent of pregnant women, more than 1.5 million, deliver babies at home. About two-thirds (61 per cent) of childbirths at home in the state are unsafe. It has the highest child mortality indicators, from the neonatal mortality rate to the under-five mortality rate of 64 children who die per 1,000 live births before five years of age, 35 die within a month of birth, and 50 do not complete a year of life. Several texts and hymns of the Vedic literature were composed in Uttar Pradesh. Renowned Indian writers who have resided in Uttar Pradesh were Kabir, Ravidas, and Tulsidas, who wrote much of his Ram Charit Manas in Varanasi. The festival of Guru Purnima is dedicated to Sage Vyasa, and also known as Vyasa Purnima as it is the day which is believed to be his birthday and also the day he divided the Vedas. Hindi became the language of state administration with the Uttar Pradesh Official Language Act of 1951. A 1989 amendment to the act added Urdu, as an additional language of the state. Linguistically, the state spreads across the Central, East-Central, and Eastern zones of the Indo Aryan languages. The major Hindi languages of the state are Awadhi, Bagheli, Bundeli, Braj Bhasha, Kannauji, and Hindustani. Bhojpuri, an Eastern Indo Aryan language, is also spoken in the state. With each district of Uttar Pradesh having its unique music and tradition, traditional folk music in Uttar Pradesh has been categorised in three different ways including music transmitted orally, music with unknown composers and music performed by custom. The popular folk music of Uttar Pradesh includes sohar, which is sung to celebrate the birth of a child, Kajari sung during the rainy season, Ghazal, Thumri and Qawwali which is a form of Sufi poetry is popular in the Awadh region, Rasiya (especially popular in Braj), which celebrate the divine love of Radha and Krishna. Khayal is a form of semi-classical singing which comes from the courts of Awadh. Other forms of music are Biraha, Chaiti, Chowtal, Alha, and Sawani. Kathak, a classical dance form, owes its origin to the state of Uttar Pradesh. Ramlila is one of the oldest dramatic folk dances; it depicts the life of the Hindu deity Rama and is performed during festivals such as Vijayadashami. In the gharana dance form, both the Lucknow and the Benares gharanas are situated in the state. Charkula is popular dance of the Braj region. Chhath Puja is the biggest festival of eastern Uttar Pradesh. The Kumbh Mela, organised in the month of Maagha (February—March), is a major festival held every twelve years in rotation at Prayagraj on the river Ganges. Lathmar Holi is a local celebration of the Hindu festival of Holi. It takes place well before the actual Holi in the town of Barsana near Mathura. Taj Mahotsav, held annually at Agra, is a colourful display of the culture of the Braj area. Ganga Mahotsav, a festival of Kartik Purnima, is celebrated fifteen days after Diwali. Mughlai cuisine is a style of cooking developed in the Indian subcontinent by the imperial kitchens of the Mughal Empire. It represents the cooking styles used in North India, especially Uttar Pradesh, and has been strongly influenced by Central Asian cuisine. Awadhi cuisine from the city of Lucknow consists of both vegetarian and non-vegetarian dishes. It has been greatly influenced by Mughlai cuisine. Bhojpuri cuisine is a style of food preparation common among the Bhojpuri people of Uttar Pradesh. Bhojpuri foods are mostly mild and tend to be less hot in terms of spices used. The cuisine consists of both vegetable and meat dishes.  India portal List of people from Uttar Pradesh Outline of India National Sample Survey from July 2017 to June 2018 provides state-wise details of literacy rates among persons aged seven and above. "United Province, UP was notified in Union gazette on January 24, 1950". The New Indian Express. 2 May 2017. Archived from the original on 8 May 2017. Retrieved 4 May 2017. "Uttar Pradesh District". up.gov.in. Government of Uttar Pradesh. Archived from the original on 15 April 2017. Retrieved 12 April 2017. "List of districts in Uttar Pradesh". archive.india.gov.in. Government of India. Archived from the original on 26 April 2017. Retrieved 12 April 2017. PTI (20 July 2019). "Anandiben Patel made UP governor, Lal ji Tandon to replace her in Madhya Pradesh". India Today. Archived from the original on 20 July 2019. Retrieved 20 July 2019. "The Governor of Uttar Pradesh". uplegisassembly.gov.in. Uttar Pradesh Legislative Assembly. Archived from the original on 3 May 2017. Retrieved 12 April 2017. "Uttar Pradesh | History, Government, Map, & Population | Britannica". Encyclopedia Britannica. Archived from the original on 1 April 2020. Retrieved 24 March 2023. "List of Highest Mountain Peaks State-wise". Wordpandit. 29 July 2017. Archived from the original on 24 March 2023. Retrieved 24 March 2023. "Report of the Commissioner for linguistic minorities: 52nd report (July 2014 to June 2015)" (PDF). Commissioner for Linguistic Minorities, Ministry of Minority Affairs, Government of India. pp. 49–53. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 November 2016. Retrieved 16 February 2016. "Handbook of Statistics of Indian States 2021–22" (PDF). Reserve Bank of India. pp. 37–42. Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 January 2022. Retrieved 11 February 2022. "Sub-national HDI – Area Database". Global Data Lab. Institute for Management Research, Radboud University. Archived from the original on 23 September 2018. Retrieved 25 September 2018. "Census 2011 (Final Data) – Demographic details, Literate Population (Total, Rural & Urban)" (PDF). planningcommission.gov.in. Planning Commission, Government of India. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 January 2018. Retrieved 3 October 2018. "Sex ratio of State and Union Territories of India as per National Health survey (2019-2021)". Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, India. Archived from the original on 8 January 2023. Retrieved 8 January 2023. "Uttar Pradesh". Lexico UK English Dictionary. Oxford University Press. Archived from the original on 26 April 2022. Kopf, Dan; Varathan, Preeti (11 October 2017). "If Uttar Pradesh were a country". Quartz India. Archived from the original on 22 June 2019. Retrieved 20 May 2019. "Agriculture" (PDF). www.niti.gov.in. NITI Aayog. Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 October 2021. Retrieved 19 October 2021. "President's Rule in Uttar Pradesh". uplegisassembly.gov.in. Uttar Pradesh Legislative Assembly. Archived from the original on 9 March 2018. Retrieved 14 March 2018. Virendra N. Misra, Peter Bellwood (1985). Recent Advances in Indo-Pacific Prehistory: proceedings of the international symposium held at Poona. BRILL. p. 69. ISBN 9004075127. Archived from the original on 3 March 2018. Retrieved 23 July 2012. Bridget Allchin, Frank Raymond Allchin (1982). The Rise of Civilization in India and Pakistan. Cambridge University Press. p. 58. ISBN 052128550X. Archived from the original on 25 March 2017. Retrieved 23 July 2012. Hasmukhlal Dhirajlal Sankalia; Shantaram Bhalchandra Deo; Madhukar Keshav Dhavalikar (1985). Studies in Indian Archaeology: Professor H.D. Sankalia Felicitation Volume. Popular Prakashan. p. 96. ISBN 978-0861320882. Archived from the original on 24 March 2017. Confidence limits for the age are 85 (±11) and 72 (±8) thousand years ago. Gibling, Sinha; Sinha, Roy; Roy, Tandon; Tandon, Jain; Jain, M (2008). "Quaternary fluvial and eolian deposits on the Belan river, India: paleoclimatic setting of Paleolithic to Neolithic archeological sites over the past 85,000 years". Quaternary Science Reviews. 27 (3–4): 391. Bibcode:2008QSRv...27..391G. doi:10.1016/j.quascirev.2007.11.001. S2CID 129392697. Kenneth A. R. Kennedy (2000). God-apes and Fossil Men. University of Michigan Press. p. 263. ISBN 0472110136. Archived from the original on 24 March 2017. Retrieved 23 July 2012. Bridget Allchin, Frank Raymond Allchin (1982). The Rise of Civilization in India and Pakistan. Cambridge University Press. p. 119. ISBN 052128550X. Archived from the original on 3 March 2018. Retrieved 23 July 2012. Misra, V N (November 2001). "Prehistoric human colonization of India" (PDF). Journal of Biosciences. 26 (4 Supp). Indian Academy of Sciences: 491–531. doi:10.1007/bf02704749. PMID 11779962. S2CID 26248907. Archived from the original on 7 October 2017. Retrieved 19 September 2017. "Uttar Pradesh – History". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on 1 April 2020. Retrieved 12 January 2020. A systematic history of India and the area of Uttar Pradesh dates to the end of the 7th century BCE, when 16 mahajanapadas (great states) in northern India were contending for supremacy. Of those, seven fell entirely within the present-day boundaries of Uttar Pradesh. Sailendra Nath Sen (1999). Ancient Indian History And Civilization. New Age International. pp. 105–106. ISBN 978-8122411980. Archived from the original on 28 May 2013. Retrieved 1 October 2012. William Buck (2000). Ramayana. Motilal Banarsidass. ISBN 978-8120817203. Archived from the original on 4 June 2013. Retrieved 1 October 2012. Richard White (2010). The Middle Ground: Indians, Empires, and Republics in the Great Lakes Region, 1650–1815. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1107005624. Archived from the original on 28 May 2013. Retrieved 1 October 2012. Marshall Cavendish Corporation (2007). World and Its Peoples: Eastern and Southern Asia. Marshall Cavendish. pp. 331–335. ISBN 978-0761476313. Archived from the original on 5 June 2013. Retrieved 1 October 2012. Pran Nath Chopra (2003). A Comprehensive History of Ancient India. Sterling Publishers Pvt. Ltd. p. 196. ISBN 978-8120725034. Archived from the original on 28 May 2013. Retrieved 1 October 2012. John Stewart Bowman (2000). Columbia Chronologies of Asian History and Culture. Columbia University Press. p. 273. ISBN 978-0231110044. Retrieved 2 August 2012. The History of India by Kenneth Pletcher p. 102 The City in South Asia by James Heitzman p. 37 Singh, Pradyuman (19 January 2021). Bihar General Knowledge Digest. Prabhat Prakashan. ISBN 978-9352667697. * Srivastava, Ashirvadi Lal (1929). The Sultanate of Delhi 711-1526 A D. Shiva Lal Agarwala & Company. Archived from the original on 8 April 2016. Retrieved 29 April 2018. Islam; Bosworth (1998). History of Civilizations of Central Asia. UNESCO. pp. 269–291. ISBN 978-9231034671. Archived from the original on 28 March 2024. Retrieved 21 May 2020. "The Islamic World to 1600: Rise of the Great Islamic Empires (The Mughal Empire)". Archived from the original on 27 September 2011. Annemarie Schimmel (2004). The Empire of the Great Mughals: History, Art and Culture. Reaktion Books. ISBN 978-1861891853. Retrieved 1 October 2012. Babur (Emperor of Hindustan); Dilip Hiro (2006). Babur Nama: Journal of Emperor Babur. Penguin Books India. ISBN 978-0144001491. Archived from the original on 28 May 2013. Retrieved 1 October 2012. Carlos Ramirez-Faria (2007). Concise Encyclopeida of World History. Atlantic Publishers & Dist. p. 171. ISBN 978-8126907755. Archived from the original on 28 May 2013. Retrieved 2 August 2012. Stronge, Susan (2012). Mughal Hindustan is renowned for its opulence. London: The Arts of the Sikh Kingdoms. p. 255. ISBN 9788174366962. Archived from the original on 16 February 2017. Retrieved 23 July 2012. Ashvini Agrawal (1983). Studies in Mughal History. Motilal Banarsidass. pp. 30–46. ISBN 978-8120823266. Archived from the original on 28 May 2013. Retrieved 27 July 2012. Fergus Nicoll, Shah Jahan: The Rise and Fall of the Mughal Emperor (2009) Mayaram, Shail (2003). Against history, against state: counterperspectives from the margins Cultures of history. Columbia University Press. ISBN 978-0231127318. "Uttar Pradesh Day: How the state was born 67 years back". 3 May 2017. Archived from the original on 3 May 2017. Retrieved 3 May 2017. Gyanesh Kudaisya (1994). Region, nation, "heartland": Uttar Pradesh in India's body-politic. LIT Verlag Münster. pp. 126–376. ISBN 978-3825820978. K. Sivaramakrishnan (1999). Modern Forests: Statemaking and Environmental Change in Colonial Eastern India. Stanford University Press. pp. 240–276. ISBN 978-0804745567. Archived from the original on 28 May 2013. Retrieved 26 July 2012. Ashutosh Joshi (2008). Town Planning Regeneration of Cities. New India Publishing. p. 237. ISBN 978-8189422820. Archived from the original on 3 March 2018. Rudrangshu Mukherjee (2005). Mangal Pandey: brave martyr or accidental hero?. Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0143032564. Archived from the original on 5 June 2013. Retrieved 1 October 2012. United Provinces of Agra and Oudh (India); D.L. Drake-Brockman (1934). District Gazetteers of the United Provinces of Agra and Oudh: supp.D.Pilibhit District. Supdt., Government Press, United Provinces. Archived from the original on 28 May 2013. Retrieved 1 October 2012. Dilip K. Chakrabarti (1997). Colonial Indology: sociopolitics of the ancient Indian past. Michigan: Munshiram Manoharlal Publishers Pvt. Ltd. p. 257. ISBN 978-8121507509. Archived from the original on 28 May 2013. Retrieved 26 July 2012. Bernard S. Cohn (1996). Colonialism and Its Forms of Knowledge: The British in India. Princeton University Press. p. 189. ISBN 978-0691000435. Archived from the original on 28 May 2013. Retrieved 26 July 2012. Clare M. Wilkinson-Weber (1999). Embroidering Lives: Women's Work and Skill in the Lucknow Embroidery Industry. SUNY Press. p. 18. ISBN 978-0791440872. Archived from the original on 28 March 2024. Retrieved 24 May 2020. Mathur, Prakash Narain. "A History of the Lucknow Bench Of The Allahabad High Court" (PDF). Allahabad High Court. Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 February 2021. Retrieved 24 May 2020. K. Balasankaran Nair (2004). Law of Contempt of Court in India. Atlantic Publishers & Dist. p. 320. ISBN 978-8126903597. Archived from the original on 28 May 2013. Retrieved 26 July 2012. Śekhara, Bandyopādhyāya (2004). From Plassey to Partition: A History of Modern India. Orient Longman. p. 407. ISBN 978-8125025962. Bandyopādhyāya, Śekhara (2004). From Plassey to Partition: A History of Modern India. Orient Longman. p. 406. ISBN 978-8125025962. Bankim Chandra Chatterji (2006). Anandamath. Orient Paperbacks. p. 168. ISBN 978-8122201307. Archived from the original on 28 May 2013. Retrieved 26 July 2012. "Uttar Pradesh – States and Union Territories". Know India: National Portal of India. Archived from the original on 15 July 2015. Retrieved 14 July 2015. "Uttar Pradesh". What is India. 22 August 2007. Archived from the original on 12 October 2016. Retrieved 8 October 2016. "Communal violence". Business Standard. Ananda Publishers. Kotak Mahindra Bank. 6 August 2014. Archived from the original on 26 August 2014. Retrieved 25 August 2014. communal violence, in uttar pradesh. "Communal conflicts in state". Tehalka. Archived from the original on 12 January 2014. Retrieved 12 January 2014. J. C. Aggarwal; S. P. Agrawal (1995). Uttarakhand: Past, Present, and Future. Concept Publishing Company of India. p. 391. ISBN 978-8170225720. Archived from the original on 24 March 2017. "Most critical factors". Uttar Pradesh climate department. Archived from the original on 15 December 2012. Retrieved 22 July 2012. "Uttar Pradesh Geography". Uttar Pradesh State Profile. Archived from the original on 23 July 2012. Retrieved 22 July 2012. "The larger Gangetic Plain" (PDF). Gecafs. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 December 2013. Retrieved 22 July 2012. "Gangetic Plains and Vindhya Hills and plateau". Zee news. Archived from the original on 6 April 2012. Retrieved 22 July 2012. Anwar, Shakeel (16 August 2018). "List of major canals and dams in Uttar Pradesh". Dainik Jagran. Jagran Prakashan Limited. Archived from the original on 22 June 2020. Retrieved 21 June 2020. "Indo–African Journal for Resource Management" (PDF). Indo–African Journal for Resource Management and Planning. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 April 2022. Retrieved 21 June 2020. Anwar, Shakeel. "The Great Plains of India". Jagran Josh. Dainik Jagran. Jagran Prakashan Private Limited. Archived from the original on 21 November 2017. Retrieved 19 May 2020. Clift, Charles (1977). "Progress of Irrigation in Uttar Pradesh: East-West Differences". Economic and Political Weekly. 12 (39). JSTOR: A83–A90. JSTOR 4365953. Archived from the original on 30 October 2021. Retrieved 19 October 2021. R P Meena. Uttar Pradesh Current Affairs Yearbook 2020. New Era Publication. p. 6. GGKEY:XTXLJ8SQZFE. Archived from the original on 28 March 2024. Retrieved 19 May 2020. "Rivers of Uttar Pradesh". The Economic Times. Archived from the original on 7 May 2013. Retrieved 22 July 2012. "The Glossary of Meteorology". Allen Press Inc. Archived from the original on 5 October 2012. Retrieved 23 July 2012. "Agriculture Mechanization Guide for Uttar Pradesh". Ministry of Agriculture, Government of India. Archived from the original on 16 May 2021. Retrieved 16 May 2021. "Potential Creation and Utilisation". Irrigation department U.P. Archived from the original on 13 February 2012. Retrieved 22 July 2012. "Purports to define every important meteorological term likely to be found in the literature today". Allen Press, Inc. Archived from the original on 12 July 2012. Retrieved 22 July 2012. Vir Singh (1998). Mountain Ecosystems: A Scenario of Unsustainability. Indus Publishing. pp. 102–264. ISBN 978-8173870811. Archived from the original on 28 May 2013. Retrieved 27 July 2012. Upkar Prakashan – Editorial Board (2008). Uttar Pradesh General Knowledge. Upkar Prakashan. pp. 26–. ISBN 978-8174824080. Archived from the original on 5 June 2013. Retrieved 9 March 2011. "Climate change impacts". Uttar Pradesh climate department. Archived from the original on 15 November 2012. Retrieved 22 July 2012. S.V.S. Rana (2007), Essentials of Ecology and Environmental Science, Prentice Hall of India, ISBN 978-81-203-3300-0 Government of Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow, Irrigation Department Uttar Pradesh. "Average rainfall pattern of Uttar Pradesh". Irrigation Department Uttar Pradesh. Archived from the original on 24 August 2012. Retrieved 22 July 2012. Sethi, Nitin (13 February 2007). "Met dept blames it on 'western disturbance'". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 11 August 2011. Retrieved 9 March 2011. "Local Weather Report". Local Weather Report and Forecast Department. 21 May 2012. Archived from the original on 1 May 2012. Retrieved 18 July 2012. "Uttar Pradesh Forest Corporation". Forest department uttar pradesh. Archived from the original on 20 January 2013. Retrieved 23 July 2012.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) "Forest and tree resources in states and union territories: Uttar Pradesh" (PDF). India state of forest report 2009. Forest Survey of India, Ministry of Environment & Forests, Government of India. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 November 2013. Retrieved 4 March 2012. "Floral and Faunal Diversity of Uttar Pradesh". Uttar Pradesh State Biodiversity Board. Archived from the original on 5 July 2019. Retrieved 22 May 2020. "Aegyptica". Bsienvis.nic.in. Archived from the original on 6 May 2009. Retrieved 21 September 2009. "Bird Sanctuary". U.P tourism. Archived from the original on 4 July 2012. Retrieved 23 July 2012. "Sanctuary Park in U.P". U.P tourism. Archived from the original on 18 July 2012. Retrieved 23 July 2012. "Few patches of natural forest". State government of Uttar Pradesh. Archived from the original on 20 May 2012. Retrieved 22 July 2012. The Forests and biodiversity, in UP are important in many ways. "Miscellaneous Statistics". Ministry of Environment and Forests. Archived from the original on 15 November 2012. Retrieved 22 July 2012. "Conservation of the Avifauna" (PDF). Dudhwa National Park. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 July 2012. Retrieved 20 July 2012. "Bakhira Bird Sanctuary". upforest.gov.in. UP Forest and Wildlife Department. Archived from the original on 4 February 2017. Retrieved 4 February 2017. "National Chambal Gharial Wildlife Sanctuary". National Chambal Sanctuary. Archived from the original on 1 January 2017. Retrieved 4 February 2017. "Chandra Prabha Wildlife Sanctuary And Picnic Spots". uptourism.gov.in. Uttar Pradesh Tourism. Archived from the original on 4 February 2017. Retrieved 4 February 2017. "Hastinapur Wild Life Sanctuary". upforest.gov.in. P Forest and Wildlife Department. Archived from the original on 4 February 2017. Retrieved 4 February 2017. "Kaimoor Wild Life Sanctuary". upforest.gov.in. Forest and Wildlife Department Uttar Pradesh. Archived from the original on 4 February 2017. Retrieved 4 February 2017. "Inside Okhla Bird Sanctuary". upforest.gov.in. UP Forest and Wildlife Department. Archived from the original on 4 February 2017. Retrieved 4 February 2017. S. K. Agarwal (1998). Environment Biotechnology. APH Publishing. p. 61. ISBN 978-8131302941. Archived from the original on 23 May 2013. Retrieved 25 July 2012. "Processing of manuscripts of Fauna" (PDF). Indian Government. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 May 2013. Retrieved 22 July 2012. "State Animal, Bird, Tree and Flower". Panna Tiger Reserve. Archived from the original on 13 October 2014. Retrieved 29 August 2014. "Music & Dance". uptourism.gov.in. Uttar Pradesh Tourism. Archived from the original on 23 January 2017. Retrieved 3 March 2017. "State division of Uttar Pradesh". Government of India. Archived from the original on 10 May 2012. Retrieved 22 July 2012. "Indian Districts by population". 2011 Census of India. Archived from the original on 11 June 2011. Retrieved 5 October 2012. "Panchayati Raj Act, 1947" (PDF). Department of Panchayati Raj, Government of Uttar Pradesh. 1947. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 July 2017. Retrieved 16 August 2017. "Panchayati Raj Act, 1947 – Chapter 6 – The Nyaya Panchayat" (PDF). Department of Panchayati Raj, Government of Uttar Pradesh. 1947. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 13 September 2017. "Panels to draft development plans for 13 cities". The Indian Express. 30 August 2010. Retrieved 13 July 2012. "The area and density of metropolitan cities" (PDF). The Ministry of Urban Development. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 October 2012. Retrieved 22 July 2012. "Provisional population totals, Census of India 2011" (PDF). Census of India 2011. p. 19. Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 February 2012. Retrieved 14 March 2012. "Provisional population totals paper 1 of 2011 : Uttar Pradesh". Census of India 2011. Archived from the original on 27 April 2012. Retrieved 23 July 2012. "Uttar Pradesh Municipal Corporation Act, 1959" (PDF). 1959. Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 August 2017. Retrieved 16 August 2017. "Uttar Pradesh Municipal Corporation Act, 1959" (PDF). Uttar Pradesh State Election Commission. 1959. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 March 2012. Retrieved 17 August 2017. "U.P. Industrial Development Act – 1976 (U.P. Act Number 6, of 1976)" (PDF). Noida Authority Online. 1976. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 August 2017. Retrieved 13 August 2017. "U.P. Industrial Development Act – 1976 (U.P. Act Number 6, of 1976)" (PDF). Greater Noida Authority. 1976. Archived (PDF) from the original on 11 May 2015. Retrieved 13 August 2017. Khan, Atiq (16 November 2011). "Maya splits U.P. poll scene wide open". The Hindu. Lucknow. Archived from the original on 12 January 2014. Retrieved 15 June 2013. Number, Religion. "U.P religions by numbers". The Hindu. No. 26 August 2015. N. Ravi. The Hindu Group. Archived from the original on 15 November 2018. Retrieved 29 March 2020. "Table C-16: Language by States and Union Territories – Uttar Pradesh". censusindia.gov.in. Archived from the original on 24 February 2021. Retrieved 24 February 2021. "The density of population in U.P." Environment and Related Issues Department U.P. Archived from the original on 15 December 2012. Retrieved 23 July 2012. "Provisional population totals" (PDF). Census of India 2011. Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 February 2013. Retrieved 23 July 2012. Rampal, Nikhil (16 November 2022). "World population grew by a billion in past 12 yrs & 5% came from just UP & Bihar, data shows". ThePrint. Printline Media Pvt. Ltd. Archived from the original on 1 May 2023. Retrieved 1 May 2023. "All About Demographic Data Of Uttar Pradesh". Unacademy. Archived from the original on 1 May 2023. Retrieved 1 May 2023. "Statistics of Uttar Pradesh". up.gov.in. Government of Uttar Pradesh. Archived from the original on 12 April 2017. Retrieved 12 April 2017. "Scheduled castes and scheduled tribes". Office of the Registrar General & Census Commissioner, India. Archived from the original on 27 April 2020. Retrieved 12 June 2020. Kaul, Sudesh. "Indigenous Peoples Policy Framework" (PDF). World Bank. Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 June 2020. Retrieved 12 June 2020. Ara, Ismat (16 July 2021). "Higher Female Foeticide, Targeted Harassment: UP's Population Control Bill May Be Dangerous". The Wire (India). Foundation for Independent Journalism (FIJ). Archived from the original on 1 May 2023. Retrieved 1 May 2023. Rao, Menaka (16 February 2017). "How one Uttar Pradesh district is using technology to prevent sex-selective abortions". Scroll.in. Scroll Media Incorporation. Archived from the original on 1 May 2023. Retrieved 1 May 2023. "Decennil growth of population by census" (PDF). Census of India (2011). Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 April 2009. Retrieved 5 October 2011. "Decennial growth rate and density for 2011 at a glance for Uttar Pradesh and the districts: provisional population totals paper 1 of 2011". Census of India(2011). Archived from the original on 7 October 2011. Retrieved 5 October 2011. "The state with large no. of peoples living below poverty line". Government of India. Press Information Bureau. Archived from the original on 8 February 2013. Retrieved 5 October 2012. "Uttar Pradesh Poverty, Growth & Inequality" (PDF). World Bank. Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 November 2017. Retrieved 23 May 2020. "Press Note on Poverty Estimates, 2011–12" (PDF). Planning Commission. Government of India. p. 7. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 June 2014. Retrieved 11 August 2014. Singh, Hemant (7 April 2020). "Per Capita Income of Indian States 2019–20". Dainik Jagran. Jagran Josh. Jagran Prakashan Limited. Archived from the original on 26 August 2019. Retrieved 23 May 2020. "Muslim population grew faster: Census". Archived from the original on 27 August 2015. "Uttar Pradesh Profile" (PDF). Census of India 2011. Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 February 2013. Retrieved 16 October 2010. "A comparison of the literacy rates" (PDF). censusmp.gov.in. Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 April 2012. Retrieved 16 October 2010. "Literacy rate in Uttar Pradesh". Census of India 2011. Archived from the original on 30 April 2011. Retrieved 16 October 2010. "UP literacy rate poor than national average: Report". Hindustan Times. HT Media Ltd. 8 September 2020. Archived from the original on 24 June 2021. Retrieved 20 June 2021. Experts, Disha (1 July 2020). Amazing Uttar Pradesh - General Knowledge for UPPSC, UPSSSC & other Competitive Exams. Disha Publications. ISBN 978-93-90486-72-4. Archived from the original on 27 April 2023. Retrieved 11 September 2022. "Language – India, States and Union Territories" (PDF). Census of India 2011. Office of the Registrar General. pp. 13–14. Archived (PDF) from the original on 14 November 2018. Retrieved 21 November 2018. "Uttar Pradesh Vidhan Parishad structure". Legislative Bodies of India. Government of India. Archived from the original on 17 April 2016. Retrieved 19 September 2017. "Uttar Pradesh Vidhan Sabha structure". Legislative Bodies of India. Government of India. Archived from the original on 17 April 2016. Retrieved 19 September 2017. Four other states seen as a barometer of support for the federal government. "Legislative elections in Uttar Pradesh". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 10 February 2012. Retrieved 8 February 2012. Grover, Verinder (1989). Legislative Council in State Legislatures. Deep & Deep Publications. pp. 37–255. ISBN 978-8171001934. Archived from the original on 28 May 2013. Retrieved 27 July 2012. "Composition of Rajya Sabha" (PDF). Rajya Sabha. New Delhi: Rajya Sabha Secretariat. pp. 24–25. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 March 2016. Retrieved 15 February 2012. "Role of The Governor". upgovernor.gov.in. Raj Bhavan Uttar Pradesh. Archived from the original on 7 April 2017. Retrieved 17 March 2017. "Constitutional Setup". Government of Uttar Pradesh. Archived from the original on 31 August 2017. Retrieved 30 August 2017. Laxmikanth, M. (2014). Governance in India (2nd ed.). Noida: McGraw Hill Education. pp. 4.3–4.5. ISBN 978-9339204785. Maheshwari, S.R. (2000). Indian Administration (6th ed.). New Delhi: Orient Blackswan Private Ltd. pp. 563–572. ISBN 978-8125019886. Singh, G.P. (1993). Revenue administration in India: A case study of Bihar. Delhi: Mittal Publications. pp. 26–129. ISBN 978-8170993810. "Contact Details of Commissioners and District Magistrates of U.P." Department of Home and Confidential, Government of Uttar Pradesh. Archived from the original on 16 August 2017. Retrieved 15 August 2017. "Uttar Pradesh judiciary". Maps of India. Archived from the original on 4 September 2012. Retrieved 19 September 2012. "The Uttar Pradesh Judicial Service Rules, 2001" (PDF). Allahabad High Court. Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 October 2019. Retrieved 19 May 2020. Bind, Basini Prasad. "The History and Role of Subordinate Civil Judiciary in Uttar Pradesh" (PDF). Allahabad High Court. Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 May 2013. Retrieved 19 May 2020. "Subordinate Civil Judiciary in Uttar Pradesh" (PDF). Allahabad High Court. Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 May 2013. Retrieved 19 September 2012. "UP: the nerve center of politics". Zee news. Archived from the original on 24 May 2012. Retrieved 22 July 2012. Sarda, Kanu (19 August 2018). "In Custody: Six died daily in four months". The New Indian Express. Express Publications (Madurai) Limited D. Archived from the original on 7 June 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. Sandhu, Kamaljit Kaur (14 May 2018). "More bad news for Yogi Adityanath as data show UP tops crime chart". India Today. Living Media India Limited. Archived from the original on 28 August 2019. Retrieved 20 May 2020. Rao, Phalguni. "NHRC registered 1,782 fake encounter cases between 2000–2017; Uttar Pradesh alone accounts for 44.55%". Firstpost. Network 18. Archived from the original on 7 June 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. Pervez Iqbal Siddiqui (30 October 2011). "UP tops in crime, low on 'criminality'". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 26 December 2013. Retrieved 14 September 2013. "Uttar Pradesh tops the list of communal violence hit states in 2017: Govt". The Economic Times. Bennett, Coleman & Co. Ltd. 14 March 2018. Archived from the original on 25 February 2021. Retrieved 20 May 2020. Sharma, Neeta (14 March 2018). "Communal Violence Goes Up In Country, Uttar Pradesh Still Tops List". NDTV. New Delhi Television Limited. Archived from the original on 12 August 2019. Retrieved 20 May 2020. "Human Development Index Across Indian States: Is the Glass Still Half Empty?" (PDF). State Bank of India. Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 April 2020. Retrieved 20 May 2020. Chauhan, Saurabh. "UP fails to improve human development index ranking in 27 years". Hindustan Times. HT Media Ltd. Archived from the original on 26 January 2020. Retrieved 20 May 2020. "Uttar Pradesh Human Development Report" (PDF). United Nations Development Programme. December 2008. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 July 2017. Retrieved 13 September 2017. "India Human Development Report report raps Gujarat, praises UP and Bihar". The Times of India. 22 October 2011. Archived from the original on 26 December 2013. Retrieved 13 September 2017. Shafi, Alam. "The strength of Armed Police in Uttar Pradesh" (PDF). National Crime Records Bureau. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 November 2011. Retrieved 23 July 2012. "General Information". Uttar Pradesh Police. Archived from the original on 6 September 2017. Retrieved 6 September 2017. "Highlight of criminal statistics" (PDF). Ministry of statistics and program implementation. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 November 2012. Retrieved 22 July 2012. "Accidental Deaths in India" (PDF). National Crime Records Bureau. Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 June 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. Chauhan, Arvind (7 January 2017). "At 23,219, UP reports highest number of road, rail accident". The Times of India. Bennett, Coleman & Co. Ltd. The Times Group. Archived from the original on 18 June 2020. Retrieved 7 June 2020. "An accident reported every two hours in UP: Fatal accidents in the state". Archived from the original on 5 May 2017. "A powerful bomb placed in". Zee news. 20 July 2012. Archived from the original on 29 January 2012. Retrieved 20 July 2012. "Sankat Mochan Hanuman temple blast". 'Rediff.com. Archived from the original on 9 August 2016. Retrieved 14 July 2012. "Varanasi blast". NDTV. 7 December 2010. Archived from the original on 12 December 2012. Retrieved 15 July 2012. Swami, Praveen (25 November 2007). "Uttar Pradesh bombings mark new phase". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 26 January 2012. Retrieved 20 July 2012. Swami, Praveen (26 December 2007). "Wiretap warning on Uttar Pradesh bombings went in vain". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 4 March 2008. Retrieved 20 July 2012. "Massive terror attacks". The Sunday Indian. 25 November 2011. Archived from the original on 6 June 2013. Retrieved 20 July 2012. "Chronology of recent terror attacks". Yahoo. Archived from the original on 17 July 2011. Retrieved 13 July 2011. "Freak blast sets panic alarm ringing". The Times of India. Bennett, Coleman & Co. Ltd. The Times Group. 5 March 2009. Archived from the original on 2 May 2023. Retrieved 2 May 2023. "Gross State Domestic Product by Economic Activity (crore Rs) Uttar Pradesh" (PDF). Directorate of Economics and Statistics, Government of Uttar Pradesh. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 January 2018. Retrieved 11 January 2018. Khullar, Vatsal (20 February 2018). "Uttar Pradesh Budget Analysis 2018–19" (PDF). PRS Legislative Research. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 February 2018. Retrieved 28 March 2018. "Uttar Pradesh: A Rainbow Land" (PDF). ibef.org. India Brand Equity Foundation. 2015. Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 September 2018. Retrieved 13 May 2019. "Indian sugar mills association". indiansugar.com. Archived from the original on 26 August 2016. Retrieved 8 August 2016. IT park, Infrastructure and (4 January 2016). "Noida-Greater Noida's world class infrastructure to be highlighted in UP Pravasi Diwas". The Times of India. Bennett, Coleman & Co. Ltd. Archived from the original on 31 January 2017. Retrieved 2 April 2020. Goyal, Malini (9 June 2013). "SMEs employ close to 40% of India's workforce, but contribute only 17% to GDP". The Economic Times. Archived from the original on 31 December 2016. Retrieved 20 June 2013. "Details of financing & limits of accommodation" (PDF). UPFC India. Archived (PDF) from the original on 30 May 2012. Retrieved 22 July 2012. "A statement of the categories of documents that are held by the Corporation" (PDF). Uttar Pradesh Financial Corporation. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 November 2012. Retrieved 9 July 2012. "The budget allocated to each of its agency" (PDF). UPFC India. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 November 2012. Retrieved 22 July 2012. Rawat, Virendra Singh (27 March 2016). "Private investment under Akhilesh government more than doubles". Business Standard India. Archived from the original on 20 August 2016. Retrieved 8 August 2016. "10. Uttar Pradesh – World Bank Survey: India's top 10 states on the ease of doing business ranking – The Economic Times". Archived from the original on 23 June 2016. Retrieved 8 August 2016. Raghuvanshi, Umesh (23 October 2019). "Finance commission asks Uttar Pradesh to bring down its debt burden". Hindustan Times. HT Media Ltd. Archived from the original on 18 May 2020. Retrieved 24 May 2020. "State slipping into debt burden". The Times of India. 14 June 2011. Archived from the original on 6 May 2013. Retrieved 14 June 2011. "Unemployment in Uttar Pradesh increased 11.4 pct points, rose to 21.5% in Apr 2020: CMIE Survey". Mint. HT Media. 1 May 2020. Archived from the original on 5 June 2020. Retrieved 5 June 2020. Jha, Abhishek; Kawoosa, Vijdan Mohammad (26 July 2019). "What the 2011 census data on migration tells us". Hindustan Times. HT Media. Archived from the original on 14 August 2020. Retrieved 31 July 2020. Edwin, Tina (30 July 2019). "Migrants seem to prefer neighbouring States for livelihood". Business Line. The Hindu Group. Kasturi and Sons Limited. Archived from the original on 25 October 2020. Retrieved 31 July 2020. "Census of India 2001 – Data Highlights" (PDF). Government of India. Archived (PDF) from the original on 1 November 2020. Retrieved 31 July 2020. "Investment climate of a state" (PDF). IBEF organization. Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 May 2013. Retrieved 22 July 2012. "Service sector over the present crisis". The Economic Times. 14 March 2009. Archived from the original on 7 May 2013. Retrieved 14 March 2009. "Statistical Diary of Uttar Pradesh" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 October 2023. Retrieved 2 October 2023. "Only 5 states exceed 11th Plan growth targets: Govt: Ruled by CNBC TV18 News". CNBC TV18-MoneyControl Post. 13 May 2011. Archived from the original on 5 June 2013. "RBI releases Study on State Finances 2009–10". Reserve Bank of India (RBI). Archived from the original on 25 February 2010. Retrieved 22 February 2010. "Ministry of statistics and Program Implementation" (PDF). Ministry of statistics and Program Implementation Govt. Of India. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help) "Small scale industries and other small trades" (PDF). Ministry of Small Scale Industries. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 April 2009. Retrieved 17 January 2008. "Western part of the coalfield". Northern Coalfields Limited. Archived from the original on 26 December 2008. Retrieved 8 July 2008. Report by, TRAI. "Monthly press release" (PDF). Telecom Regulatory Authority of India. TRAI. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 May 2013. Retrieved 23 May 2013. "UP, TN have most cell-phone users in India: TRAI". Business Line. 5 May 2013. Archived from the original on 1 November 2013. Retrieved 13 September 2017. "UP has most cell phone users in India: TRAI". The Indian Express. 6 May 2013. Archived from the original on 28 March 2024. Retrieved 13 September 2017. "Uttar Pradesh top in mobile penetration". The Times of India. 6 May 2013. Archived from the original on 1 November 2013. Retrieved 13 September 2017. "Map of Cities covered under AMRUT". Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, Government of India. Archived from the original on 10 August 2020. Retrieved 31 July 2020. "Uttar Pradesh size – Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT)" (PDF). Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs. Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 March 2021. Retrieved 31 July 2020. "total railway route length uttar pradesh". Northern Railways Lucknow Division. Archived from the original on 14 August 2012. Retrieved 22 July 2012. "North Central Railway-The Allahabad Division". Indian Railways Portal CMS Team. Archived from the original on 18 March 2014. Retrieved 22 February 2011. "the Portal of Indian Railways". Indian Railways. Archived from the original on 11 April 2011. Retrieved 14 April 2011. "Equipment arrives for integrated security system". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 14 May 2013. Retrieved 22 July 2012. "Lucknow New Delhi Shatabdi Express". The Times of India. 2 July 2012. Archived from the original on 26 September 2012. Retrieved 28 July 2012. "Introducing the Railway Budget 2011–12" (PDF). Indian Railways. Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 May 2016. Retrieved 22 July 2012. Investment Promotion & Infrastructure Development Cell. "Road" (PDF). Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 October 2011. Retrieved 7 January 2012. "Road network" (PDF). India Brand Equity Foundation. Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 September 2012. Retrieved 22 July 2012. "Welcome :: U.P. Expressways Industrial Development Authority". upeida.in. Archived from the original on 12 July 2016. Retrieved 26 July 2016. "Pervasive road network of Uttar Pradesh" (PDF). Planning commission, Government of India. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 December 2012. Retrieved 20 September 2012. "contributing to economic growth and prosperity of the nation". Airports Authority of India. Archived from the original on 29 June 2012. Retrieved 22 July 2012. "DFCCIL". dfccil.com. Archived from the original on 1 July 2020. Retrieved 2 October 2023. "UP gets its 8th airport". mint. 9 March 2021. Archived from the original on 24 April 2021. Retrieved 24 April 2021. "UP to seek DGCA nod for Taj airport". Hindustan Times. 21 June 2013. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 29 July 2015. "Hindustan Times e-Paper". Hindustan Times. Archived from the original on 8 June 2014. Retrieved 29 July 2015. "Kushinagar international airport to get ready for take-off". Virendra Singh Rawat. 7 January 2013. Archived from the original on 21 May 2014. Mishra, Mihir (24 June 2017). "Jewar to be second airport in Delhi NCR". The Economic Times. Archived from the original on 11 August 2018. Retrieved 11 August 2018. Rao, Mohan (2005). From Population Control To Reproductive Health: Malthusian Arithmetic. Sage Publications. pp. 244–246. ISBN 978-0761932697. Archived from the original on 4 June 2013. Retrieved 26 July 2012. "Hapless victim of a TV sting, this hockey player is now a rising star". The Indian Express. 19 April 2012. Retrieved 29 June 2012. "Uttar Pradesh: Sports". Jagran Josh. Jagran Prakashan Limited. 29 July 2013. Archived from the original on 29 October 2021. Retrieved 19 October 2021. "Uttar Pradesh win Ranji Trophy". Rediff.com. Archived from the original on 19 October 2012. Retrieved 2 February 2006. "UP to get one more cricket stadium by 2011". First Published:PTI, Friday, 27 November 2009, 21:26. Archived from the original on 24 May 2013. Retrieved 2 February 2006. "The Buddh International Circuit (BIC), which played host to India's first Formula One Grand Prix". CNN-IBN. 18 November 2011. Archived from the original on 22 December 2011. Retrieved 14 July 2012. "Why India's Formula 1 Grand Prix is under threat". BBC News. 24 October 2013. Archived from the original on 27 October 2013. ""Can Seat Over 40,000": PM Modi Lays Foundation Of Varanasi Cricket Stadium". NDTV.com. Retrieved 24 September 2023. Singh, Mansi. "PM Modi to inaugurate international cricket stadium in Varanasi: Key points". Deccan Herald. Retrieved 24 September 2023. "Islamic religious schools". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 3 January 2013. Retrieved 25 April 2003. "British colonial administration system in state education system". State Education Board. Archived from the original on 21 April 2003. Retrieved 25 April 2003. "Uttar Pradesh Facts & Figures". Uttar Pradesh education department. Archived from the original on 3 April 2011. Retrieved 16 October 2010. "India's Best Schools, 2014". Rediff.com. Archived from the original on 22 July 2015. "List of universities". Education info India. Archived from the original on 11 April 2017. Retrieved 13 September 2017. "List of Universities in Uttar Pradesh". Education department of U.P. Archived from the original on 21 June 2012. Retrieved 27 June 2012. "Kanpur schools welcome IIT Council formula". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 22 June 2012. Retrieved 27 June 2012. "Official Website of IIM Lucknow". IIM Lucknow. Archived from the original on 13 April 2012. Retrieved 11 April 2012. "IIM-Lucknow sends country's first team to global agribusiness meet". The Times of India. 28 June 2012. Archived from the original on 7 May 2013. Retrieved 28 June 2012. "IIM Lucknow students shine at International Agri-biz symposium in Shanghai". MBA Universe. Archived from the original on 28 June 2012. Retrieved 28 June 2012. "The Integral University Lucknow state level institution". Government of Uttar Pradesh. Archived from the original on 7 January 2012. Retrieved 28 June 2012. Ragini, Dikshit (10 July 2007). "चित्रकूट: दुनिया का प्रथम विकलांग विश्वविद्यालय" [Chitrakuta: The world's first handicapped university] (in Hindi). Jansatta Express. Upkar Prakashan – Editorial Board (2010). Uttar Pradesh General Knowledge. Upkar Prakashan. pp. 46–287. ISBN 978-8174824080. Archived from the original on 28 May 2013. Retrieved 26 July 2012. Siddiqui, Masood H.; Tripathi, Shalini N. (2011). "Performance of Tourist Centres in Uttar Pradesh: An Evaluation Using Data Envelopment Analysis" (PDF). ASCI Journal of Management. 40 (1). Administrative Staff College of India. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 August 2016. Retrieved 22 March 2019. "Uttar Pradesh". India Brand Equity Foundation. Archived from the original on 22 January 2023. Retrieved 22 January 2023. Taj Mahal, Tourists at. "Tourists up at Taj Mahal". The Economic Times. The Times Group. Bennett, Coleman & Co. Archived from the original on 18 March 2020. Retrieved 29 March 2020. "Taj Mahal". UNESCO.ORG. Archived from the original on 27 August 2016. Retrieved 22 January 2023. "Agra Fort". UNESCO.ORG. Archived from the original on 17 July 2010. Retrieved 22 January 2023. "Taj Mahal". UNESCO.ORG. Archived from the original on 14 May 2011. Retrieved 22 January 2023. Fouberg, Erin H.; Moseley, William G. (2018). Understanding World Geography. New York: John Wiley & Sons. p. 173. ISBN 9781119473169. OCLC 1066742384. Eck, Diana (2013) [1981]. Banaras, the City of Light. Alfred Knopf Inc, [Columbia University Press]. p. 324. Parry, Jonathan P. (2000) [1994]. Death in Banaras. Lewis Henry Morgan Lectures. Cambridge University Press. p. 1. ISBN 9780521466257. Hawley, John Stratton (2020). Krishna's Playground: Vrindavan in the 21st Century. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0190123987. Gopal, Madan (1990). K.S. Gautam (ed.). India through the ages. Publication Division, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of India. p. 176. Paramasivan, Vasudha (2009). "Yah Ayodhya Vah Ayodhya: Earthly and Cosmic Journeys in the Anand-lahari". In Heidi R. M. Pauwels (ed.). Patronage and Popularisation, Pilgrimage and Procession. Otto Harrassowitz Verlag. pp. 101–116. ISBN 978-3-447-05723-3. "District Ayodhya – Government of Uttar Pradesh: City Of Lord Rama: India". Archived from the original on 8 November 2020. Retrieved 10 August 2021. "About District". District Ayodhya – Government of Uttar Pradesh. Archived from the original on 9 November 2019. Retrieved 22 January 2023. MacLean, Kama (2008). Pilgrimage and Power: The Kumbh Mela in Allahabad, 1765–1954. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0195338942. Archived from the original on 27 May 2013. Retrieved 25 July 2012. "Hindus gather for the Kumbh Mela at the Ganges in India and Maha Shivaratri in Allahabad". The Daily Telegraph. London. 12 February 2010. Archived from the original on 27 January 2011. Retrieved 25 January 2011. "Sarnath General Information". Tourism department of Varanasi. Archived from the original on 8 May 2012. Retrieved 8 July 2012. Joon, Sanjeev. Complete Guide for SSC. Tata McGraw-Hill Education. p. 255. ISBN 978-0070706453. Archived from the original on 28 May 2013. Retrieved 25 July 2012. "Jhansi Fort". Government of Uttar Pradesh. Archived from the original on 23 March 2023. Retrieved 29 November 2023. "Ticketed Monuments – Uttar Pradesh jhansi Fort". Archaeological Survey of India. Archived from the original on 5 December 2023. Retrieved 29 November 2023. Anand, Manjaree (1 July 2014). "Health status and health care services in Uttar Pradesh and Bihar: A comparative study". Indian Journal of Public Health. 58 (3): 174–9. doi:10.4103/0019-557X.138624. ISSN 0019-557X. PMID 25116823. "Annual Health Survey 2012–13 Fact Sheet – Uttar Pradesh" (PDF). Office of the Registrar General and Census Commissioner. Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India. 2013. Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 November 2017. Retrieved 13 September 2017. Perappadan, Bindu Shajan (11 May 2019). "India facing critical shortage of healthcare providers: WHO". The Hindu. The Hindu Group. Archived from the original on 17 June 2020. Retrieved 17 June 2020. "Hospitals in the Country". Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. Archived from the original on 13 August 2020. Retrieved 17 August 2020. "Maternal Mortality Ratio (MMR) (Per 100000 Live Births)". NITI Aayog. Archived from the original on 15 January 2020. Retrieved 24 May 2020. Rao, Menaka (8 February 2017). "Uttar Pradesh has a free ambulance service for pregnant women but substandard hospitals". Scroll.in. Scroll Media Inc, US. Archived from the original on 28 September 2020. Retrieved 24 May 2020. "State of Urban Health in Uttar Pradesh – Urban Health Resource Center" (PDF). Urban Health Resource Centre. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India. Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 July 2017. Retrieved 14 August 2017. "Estimates of mortality indicators" (PDF). Census of India. Archived (PDF) from the original on 14 November 2019. Retrieved 24 May 2020. "Rural Health Statistics 2014–15" (PDF). Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India. 2015. Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 August 2017. Retrieved 13 September 2017. Awakening Indians to India. Chinmaya Mission. 2008. p. 167. ISBN 978-8175974340. Archived from the original on 28 May 2013. Retrieved 5 August 2012. "Uttar Pradesh Legislature". U.P assembly. Archived from the original on 19 June 2009. Retrieved 21 September 2009. "The Uttar Pradesh Official Language (Amendment) Act, 1989" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 July 2019. Retrieved 7 May 2020. "Ethnologue report for language code: bfy". Ethnologue. Archived from the original on 16 April 2009. Retrieved 21 September 2009. Frawley, William (May 2003). International Encyclopedia of Linguistics: 4-Volume Set. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-513977-8. Archived from the original on 27 April 2023. Retrieved 11 September 2022. "What are the of Folk Music of Uttar Pradesh". Unacademy. Archived from the original on 2 May 2023. Retrieved 2 May 2023. Walker, Margaret E. (2016). India's Kathak Dance in Historical Perspective. Routledge. pp. 100–102. ISBN 978-1-317-11737-7. Schechner, Richard; Hess, Linda (1977). "The Ramlila of Ramnagar [India]". The Drama Review: TDR. 21 (3). The MIT Press: 51–82. doi:10.2307/1145152. JSTOR 1145152. "Kathak: The cultural gem of Uttar Pradesh". The Statesman. 10 January 2022. Archived from the original on 22 January 2023. Retrieved 22 January 2023. "Charkula Dance". Charkula. Archived from the original on 26 January 2020. Retrieved 27 January 2023. "Chhath puja and the centrality of the Purvanchal community in Delhi politics". Hindustan Times. 18 October 2021. Archived from the original on 1 January 2023. Retrieved 6 September 2022. Maclean, Kama (2003). "Making the Colonial State Work for You: The Modern Beginnings of the Ancient Kumbh Mela in Allahabad". The Journal of Asian Studies. 62 (3): 873–905. doi:10.2307/3591863. JSTOR 3591863. S2CID 162404242. "What is Lathmar Holi? Why is it celebrated?". India Today. 21 March 2016. Archived from the original on 5 November 2017. Retrieved 6 December 2017. "The Braj Holi: Legend in real life". Hindustan Times. 19 March 2011. Archived from the original on 22 March 2011. Retrieved 13 July 2012. "The glorious traditions and mythological legacy". Department of tourism U.P. Archived from the original on 29 June 2012. Retrieved 18 July 2012. "How is Awadhi Cuisine different from Mughlai Cuisine". The Times of India. 16 January 2022. Archived from the original on 22 January 2023. Retrieved 22 January 2023. "All about Bhojpuri Cuisine - Bhojpuri Rasoi - Top Bhojpuri Foods". www.awesomecuisine.com. Archived from the original on 31 October 2023. Retrieved 18 October 2023. Government Official website Official tourism site Archived 27 January 2023 at the Wayback Machine General information Uttar Pradesh web resources provided by GovPubs at the University of Colorado Boulder Libraries Uttar Pradesh at the Encyclopædia Britannica Uttar Pradesh at Curlie Wikimedia Atlas of Uttar Pradesh Geographic data related to Uttar Pradesh at OpenStreetMap Uttar Pradesh at Wikipedia's sister projects: Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Travel guides from Wikivoyage Data from Wikidata