Airborne Forces Day (Russian: День Воздушно-десантных войск) also known as Paratroopers' Day (Russian: День десантника) is a professional military holiday observed in Russia, Belarus and Kazakhstan, celebrated on 2 August annually. It was formerly celebrated in the Soviet Union until its collapse in 1991. It was celebrated in Ukraine as Airmobile Forces Day from 1999 until 2017 (Ukrainian: День високомобільних десантних військ, romanized: Den vysokomobilnykh desantnykh viisk). It is the official holiday of the former Soviet Airborne forces. The birthday of the Airborne Forces is considered to be 2 August 1930. On this day at military exercises of the Moscow Military District, a 12 member paratrooper unit was parachuted for performing a tactical task. Airborne Forces Day is currently celebrated on 2 August, on the basis of the Decree of the President of the Russian Federation dated May 31, 2006 “On the Establishment of Professional Holidays and Memorable Days in the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation". In Ukraine, from 1999 to 2017 Airmobile Forces Day day was celebrated on 2 August. From 2017 Ukraine’s Airmobile Forces were renamed Air Assault Forces, their traditions revised, and a new Air Assault Forces Day [uk] declared 21 November, which is the day of the patron of the paratroopers, Archangel Michael. According to President Petro Poroshenko this move was "Ukrainianization of the historical and political calendar - to replace the Soviet-Russian imposed on us." Airborne Forces Day, which is a professional holiday for active and reserve airborne troops, is traditionally celebrated throughout Russia, Belarus and other countries. During the holiday, many cities traditionally held demonstrations of paratroopers, concerts, charity events, festivals, crafts fairs and souvenirs exhibition and sale. In some Russian cities, it is customary to turn off the fountains on the day of the Airborne Forces and to release all employees responsible for their work on a day off. This is done in order to reduce the damage from the celebration. In Almaty, veterans are found in the Central Park of Culture and Rest named after Gorky. In Donetsk, veterans are found in the Shcherbakov Park and near the monument to the fallen Afghan warriors. In Kyiv, the meeting places of veterans included the National Museum of the History of Ukraine in the Second World War, a monument to soldiers-internationalists, and less often, Maidan Nezalezhnosti. The Ukrainian Air Assault Forces now celebrates its own holiday on 21 November. In Moscow, the traditional places for annual meetings of the Blue Berets are Gorky Central Park of Culture and Leisure and Poklonnaya Gora. The capital's first ever Paratroopers Day parade was held in 2018 on the southern part of Red Square near Saint Basil's Cathedral and the Monument to Minin and Pozharsky marking 88 years of the Airborne Forces. In St. Petersburg, traditional meeting places include Krestovsky Island and Palace Square. In Vitebsk, paratroopers meet on Victory Square. Police and Internal Affairs Servicemen's Day Border Guards Day Navy Day Defender of the Fatherland Day Paratroopers' Day (Tajikistan) Sidorova, Irina (2017-08-02). "On this day: Russia celebrates Airborne Forces Day". www.rbth.com. Retrieved 2020-05-10. "Первый десант". www.vrn-histpage.ru. Официальный интернет-портал правовой информации: Указ Президента Российской Федерации от 31 мая 2006 года № 549 «Об установлении профессиональных праздников и памятных дней в Вооружённых Силах Российской Федерации» (В редакции Указа Президента Российской Федерации от 26.02.2015 г. № 103) (in Ukrainian) Khreshchatyk and Monster dungeons from Maidan. What is hidden under the fountains of Kyiv, Ukrayinska Pravda (14 August 2020) (in Ukrainian) Instead of airborne troops in Ukraine there will be Airborne Assault Troops, BBC Ukrainian (21 November 2017) "Сегодня в России отмечается День Воздушно-десантных войск. Праздничные мероприятия, посвященные Дню ВДВ, пройдут по всей стране". Российская газета. 2006-08-02. Retrieved 2010-08-13. "Десантники и кавказцы не поделили Канавино". nnov.kp.ru. August 4, 2009. "Про День аеромобільних військ". Офіційний вебпортал парламенту України. "Власти Кемерова не дают десантникам искупаться в фонтане". sib.fm. Litovkin, Nikolai (2016-08-04). "Surviving Paratrooper Day in Russia – the dos and the don'ts". www.rbth.com. Retrieved 2020-05-10. "В День ВДВ на Крестовском острове Санкт-Петербурга высадится десант" (in Russian). Regnum. 2007-08-02. Retrieved 2010-08-13. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Category:Airborne Troops Day. Holidays portal