Bryan Guy Adams OC OBC FRPS (born November 5, 1959) is a Canadian musician, singer, songwriter, record producer, and photographer. He is estimated to have sold between 75 million and more than 100 million records and singles worldwide, placing him on the list of best-selling music artists. Adams was the most played artist on Canadian radio in the 2010s and has had 25 top-15 singles in Canada and a dozen or more in the US, UK, and Australia. At age 15, Adams replaced Nick Gilder as lead singer of glam rock band Sweeney Todd and at age 20 his eponymous debut album was released. He rose to fame in North America with the 1983 top ten album Cuts Like a Knife, featuring its title track and the ballad "Straight From the Heart", his first US top ten hit, which he wrote at age 18. His 1984 Canadian and US number one album, Reckless became the first album by a Canadian to be certified diamond in Canada and made him a global star with six charting singles including "Run to You" and "Summer of '69", both top ten hits in the US and Canada, and the power ballad "Heaven", a US number one hit. His 1987 album Into the Fire, with its US and Canadian top ten song, "Heat of the Night", rose to number two in Canada and the top ten in the US and several other countries. In 1991, Adams released "(Everything I Do) I Do It for You", which went to number one in at least 19 countries, including for 16 straight weeks in the UK. It is one of the best-selling singles of all time, having sold more than 15 million copies worldwide. The song was included on Adams' Waking Up the Neighbours (1991), a worldwide number one album that sold 16 million copies, including being certified diamond in Canada. Another major hit off the album was the Canadian number one and US number two hit "Can't Stop This Thing We Started", which also went top ten in several other countries. Beginning in 1993, Adams' hits were mostly ballads, including the worldwide number one or two hits "Please Forgive Me" (1993); "All for Love" (1993); and "Have You Ever Really Loved a Woman?" (1995), the latter two topping the U.S. Billboard Hot 100. Adams' 1993 greatest hits compilation album, So Far So Good, topped the charts in numerous countries selling 13 million copies worldwide, including being certified 6× platinum in Canada, 5× platinum in the US, and 14× platinum in Australia. In 1996, Adams' 18 til I Die was a top five album in many countries, but only reached number 31 in the US. He did duets with Barbra Streisand ("I Finally Found Someone" (1996), his last US top ten hit) and Melanie C ("When You're Gone" (1998), an international top five hit). In the 1990s, Adams had six European Radio Airplay number one songs for 32 weeks, the fourth and third most, respectively; and three number one songs on the Eurochart Hot 100 Singles for 29 weeks total, the most weeks of any artist. Since 1999, Adams released eight albums, three reaching number one in Canada, and the last three reaching the top three in the UK, Germany and elsewhere in Europe. Adams is ranked 48th on the list of all-time top artists on the Billboard Hot 100. Adams has won 20 Juno Awards and a Grammy Award for Best Song Written for Visual Media amongst 16 Grammy nominations, and has been nominated for five Golden Globe Awards and three Academy Awards for his songwriting for films. Adams has been inducted into the Hollywood Walk of Fame, Canada's Walk of Fame, the Canadian Broadcast Hall of Fame, the Canadian Music Hall of Fame and the Canadian Songwriters Hall of Fame. On May 1, 2010, Adams received the Governor General's Awards in Performing Arts - Lifetime Artistic Achievement for his 30 years of contributions to the arts. Bryan Guy Adams was born on November 5, 1959, in Kingston, Ontario, the son of Elizabeth Jane (née Watson) and Conrad J. Adams, an English couple who emigrated to Canada from Plymouth, South West England in the 1950s. One of his grandmothers and his great-grandmother was from Floriana, Malta. His father, an officer from the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst in the British Army, joined the Canadian Army and later worked as a United Nations peacekeeping observer and Canadian foreign service diplomat. Adams travelled with his parents to diplomatic postings in Lisbon, where he attended the Carlucci American International School of Lisbon, and Vienna, where he attended the American International School Vienna, in the 1960s, and to Tel Aviv in the early 1970s. Raised in Ottawa, he attended Colonel By Secondary School in the Beacon Hill neighbourhood of Ottawa. In 1974, Adams, his mother, and younger brother Bruce moved to North Vancouver while his father was posted abroad. While there, he attended Argyle Secondary School and Sutherland Secondary School. Adams bought his first electric guitar at the age of 10 in Reading, an Italian brand from Gherson, based on a Fender Stratocaster. In an interview with music magazine Guitar World, Adams said: "I bought an imitation Les Paul at a Five and Dime store in Ottawa, Canada, in 1971," Adams recalled. "Before that, I had an imitation Strat which I bought in Reading, England in 1970. It felt real at the time to have a Les Paul, even though I'm a massive Ritchie Blackmore fan - still am. I was heavily into Humble Pie's Rockin' the Fillmore album at the time, and both Peter Frampton and Steve Marriott were on Les Pauls. It's rock guitar heaven, that album." He left school to play in a group called "Shock" and used the funds his parents had saved for his college education to buy an Estey grand piano to tinker with. At one point he sold pet food and worked as a dishwasher in a restaurant, which paid the rent. He grew an interest in bands such as CCR and Deep Purple, and attended concerts by Led Zeppelin, T. Rex, Elton John, and Tina Turner. He started working in the Vancouver music scene with bands and as a studio session singer. At the age of 15, he became the vocalist for glam rock band Sweeney Todd, replacing their original vocalist Nick Gilder. With Adams the band re-recorded "Roxy Roller", the Canadian hit single from their first album, which came in at No. 99 on the US charts. The band then recorded their second album If Wishes Were Horses (1977) with Adams billed as "Bryan Guy Adams" on vocals. Adams left the band at age 16. In 1978, at age 18, Adams met Jim Vallance through a mutual friend in a Vancouver Long and McQuade musical instrument store. Vallance was the former drummer and principal songwriter for Vancouver-based rock band Prism, and had recently quit that band to focus on a career as a studio musician and songwriter. They agreed to meet at Vallance's home studio a few days later. This became the beginning of a partnership which was prolific and continuous through the 1980s, together they co-wrote for Adams and a long list of recordings for other artists, including Kiss, Tina Turner, Joe Cocker, Johnny Hallyday, Bonnie Raitt, Rod Stewart, Bonnie Tyler, Loverboy, Carly Simon and Neil Diamond, and while discontinuous, as of 2017[update], is still in existence. Later in 1978, Adams signed to A&M records for one dollar. A&M remixed one of Adams' demos as a disco song "Let Me Take You Dancing", featuring Adams' vocals sped up to meet the 122 BPM dance tempo. The song made the Canadian RPM chart in March 1979 along with its B-side "Don't Turn Me Away". In 1979, he made an agreement with Canadian manager Bruce Allen, who at that time also worked for Bachman–Turner Overdrive and Loverboy. Adams's self-titled debut album, mostly co-written with Jim Vallance, was released in February 1980. With the exception of "Remember" and "Wastin' Time", most of the album was recorded in October and November 1979 at Manta Studios and co-produced by Adams and Vallance. The album was certified gold in Canada in 1986. Singles released from it included "Give Me Your Love", "Remember" and "Hidin' from Love", with the latter having the most success, reaching number 64 on the Canadian RPM Current Hit Radio chart; none reached the US Billboard Hot 100. Adams's second album, You Want It You Got It, was released in 1981 and contained the FM album-oriented rock radio hit, "Lonely Nights", which reached number three on the US Album Rock Tracks chart. The same song was reinterpreted by Uriah Heep for the album Head First, released in 1983. The most successful song off the album in Canada was "Fits Ya Good" which reached the top 30 on the RPM Top 40 Chart; it also reached number 15 on the US Album Rock Tracks chart. From January to May 1982, Adams spent months traveling on his "You Want It You Got It Tour"; within a few months the album had been picked up across the United States and Adams was soon on tour opening for the Kinks and Foreigner. Cuts Like a Knife, which was released in January 1983, was Adams's breakout album. "Straight from the Heart" was the first single released from the album; it reached number 10 on the Billboard Hot 100, number 20 on the Canadian RPM Top 40 chart, and number one on the Canadian Adult Contemporary Chart. In September 1983, Bonnie Tyler released her version for the studio album Faster Than the Speed of Night. The second single, "Cuts Like a Knife", rose to number 15 on the Billboard Hot 100, number six on the US Album Rock Tracks Chart, and number 12 on the Canadian RPM Top 40 Chart. The third single, "This Time", was also a top 30 hit in the US and Canada. Overseas, the latter two singles were both Top 20 hits in New Zealand, but there was little success in any other countries, aside from "Straight From the Heart" and "This Time" reaching the top 50 in the UK. Three other tracks, "Take Me Back", "I'm Ready" and "The Only One", also received substantial airplay on North American rock radio stations, each making the US Album Rock Tracks chart. The album peaked at number eight on both the Billboard 200 album chart and in Canada, achieving three times platinum status in Canada, platinum status in the United States and gold status in Australia. In October, Adams joined Jim Vallance at the Yamaha Music Festival in Japan. The Music Express national popular opinion poll voted him Canada's best male singer for 1982. In 1983, Adams travelled to America, opening for Journey and performing on over 100 dates in five months. On July 30, 1983, he performed at Day on the Green at Oakland Coliseum. Reckless was released in late 1984, and peaked at number one on both the Billboard 200 and the Canadian Album Chart, while reaching number two in Australia and number seven in the UK. The album featured six singles, all of which peaked in the Top 15 of the US Billboard Hot 100, only the third album to achieve this: "Run to You" (number six in the U.S., number 4 in Canada), "Somebody" (number 11 in the U.S.), "Heaven" (number 1 in the U.S., number 11 in Canada), written for the film A Night in Heaven, "Summer of '69" (number 5 in the U.S., number 11 in Canada), which references the 69 sex position and not the year, "One Night Love Affair" (number 7 in the U.S.), and "It's Only Love" (number 14 in the U.S.), a duet with Tina Turner. The album also did well in Europe, Australia, and New Zealand, although "Summer of '69" did not do as well at first in the UK since it was not played often on the radio; however, it achieved success later on in the UK, the Netherlands, and Belgium. "It's Only Love" was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Rock Vocal Performance by a Duo or Group in 1986. In 1986, the song won an MTV award for Best Stage Performance. Reckless also earned Adams a Grammy nomination for Best Male Rock Performance. In December 1984, Adams embarked on a two-year world tour to launch the album. The tour included dates with Tina Turner for her Private Dancer Tour. Adams won Juno Awards for Best Male Vocalist in each year from 1983 to 1987. Reckless eventually went Diamond in sales in Canada, the first album by a Canadian artist to do so, while reaching 5× and 3× Platinum in the US and UK. Reckless has sold over 12 million copies worldwide, and won the Juno Award for Album of the Year in 1985. In February 1985, Adams recorded the charity single "Tears Are Not Enough" as a member of The Northern Lights, an improvised supergroup that also included Anne Murray, Gordon Lightfoot, Burton Cummings, Joni Mitchell and Neil Young, and other Canadian musical artists. Adams wrote the lyrics and the album; the mission was to raise funds to help the 1983-85 famine in Ethiopia. The song was issued as a single by Columbia Records in March of that year, and reached number one on the Canadian Top 40 chart. It also finished number one on the year-end Canadian charts for 1985. The song's video also received extensive airplay on MuchMusic. The single went triple platinum, although independently recorded by the USA for Africa project, it was included in the full-length We Are the World album. In July 1985, Adams performed the song at the Live Aid concert, at the JFK Stadium in Philadelphia, in front of over 100,000 people. In September 1985, Adams co-wrote two tracks for Roger Daltrey's sixth solo album Under a Raging Moon: "Let Me Down Easy", originally written for Stevie Nicks, and "Rebel". The album was a tribute to The Who's drummer Keith Moon, who died in 1978. The track "Let Me Down Easy" was a Top 15 Hit on Billboard's Mainstream Rock Tracks. Nearly 30 years later, Adams released his own version of "Let Me Down Easy" on a 30-year anniversary version of Reckless. In January 1986, Adams provided the ending background vocals to the song "Don't Forget Me (When I'm Gone)" by Canadian rock band Glass Tiger for their debut album The Thin Red Line. It reached number one in Canada and number two in the United States. His follow-up album to Reckless was Into the Fire (1987), dealing with more serious subjects following "Tears Are Not Enough". This album contained the hit songs "Heat of the Night", which went to the top ten in both Canada and the US, and "Hearts on Fire". In December 1987, Adams contributed the song "Run Rudolph Run" to the compilation album A Very Special Christmas, a charity album to benefit the Special Olympics. The album received an RIAA certification of 4x platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America for shipment of four million copies in the United States. It is ranked 19th on the list of best-selling Christmas albums in the United States. In 25 years, it generated $109 million in royalties for the Special Olympics. In May 1988, Tommy Mandel joined the Adams band as new keyboardist. In the summer of 1989, Adams joined artists to provide backing vocals on a re-recording of the Deep Purple hit "Smoke On The Water" in aid of victims of the 1988 Armenian earthquake. In August 1989, he recorded the backup vocals for the Belinda Carlisle song "Whatever It Takes" from the Runaway Horses album. Also during that time, Adams contributed to Mötley Crüe's work on the album Dr. Feelgood, doing the backing vocals of "Sticky Sweet" and Charlie Sexton doing the backing vocals of "Don't Look Back" from the Charlie Sexton album. Adams performed at "A Night for the Environment" to raise funds for environmental organizations. In November 1989, Adams attended Tina Turner's 50th birthday party at the Reform Club in London. On New Year's Eve 1990, Adams performed at the Tokyo Dome. In December 1989, Live! Live! Live!, his first live album, was released. It was recorded live at the Rock Werchter festival on July 3, 1988, in Werchter, Belgium. He returned to London and recorded the backing vocals for "Feels Like Forever", a song written by Adams for Eric Carmen. In 1990, he received the Order Of British Columbia. Adams added vocal tracks on the melody of David Foster's "River Of Love" in his home studio in Vancouver. On July 21, 1990, Adams performed the Pink Floyd tracks "Young Lust" and "Empty Spaces" at Roger Waters's concert production of The Wall - Live In Berlin, to commemorate the fall of the Berlin Wall eight months earlier. In 1990, in a 45-minute songwriting session, Adams, Robert John "Mutt" Lange, and Michael Kamen wrote "(Everything I Do) I Do It For You" for the Robin Hood: Prince Of Thieves soundtrack. It was originally intended to be sung by Kate Bush but she turned it down and it was recorded by Adams in March 1991. "Everything I Do" was released internationally on June 12, days after the premiere of the film, with the initial shipment of 385,000 copies being the largest single shipment in the history of A&M Records. It spent a record 16 consecutive weeks at Number One on the UK Singles Chart and seven weeks on top of the Billboard Hot 100. The song also gave Adams his first Golden Globe Award nomination for Best Song from a Motion Picture. Adams and Vallance wrote "Nature Of The Beast", originally intended for Tina Turner, but recorded by The Law, featuring Adams on vocals and guitar tracks, in 1991. In May 1991, the music video for the song was created in Sheffield, directed by Julien Temple. In June 1991, a video was shot for the first single album "Can't Stop This Thing We Started" 'directed by Kevin Godley at Pinewood Studios in London. On September 24, 1991, the album Waking Up the Neighbours was released. Co-produced by Adams and Robert John "Mutt" Lange, it topped the charts around the world, including in the UK, Canada, Australia and Germany and reached number six on the Billboard 200. It became Adams's second album to be certified Diamond in sales in Canada while being certified 5× platinum in the US. It went on to sell 16 million copies worldwide. Waking up the Neighbors became the first album by a Canadian since Neil Young's 1972 Harvest to reach the top of the album charts in the United Kingdom. The album caused controversy in Canada due to the Canadian content system, as the album was largely recorded in England and co-produced by Robert John "Mutt" Lange, originally from Zambia, making it not Canadian by the rules in effect at the time. Following Adams' complaints, in September of that year, the Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) announced that the Canadian content rules would be expanded. The regulation at that time considered collaborative writing between Canadians and non-Canadians to be "Canadian" only where the lyricist and musical composer worked separately and at least one was Canadian. In protest, Adams briefly threatened to boycott Canada's annual Juno Awards, where his album was eventually almost completely ignored by the awards committee. In 1992, he won the Juno International Achievement Award, Canadian Entertainer of the Year (voted on by the public) and Producer of the Year Award. In September 1991, the regulation was amended to recognize collaborations in which two (or more) contributors each contributed to both lyrics and music, as was the case with Adams and Lange. In addition to "(Everything I Do) I Do It For You", the album included "Can't Stop This Thing We Started" (number two in the US and number one in Canada), the ballad "Do I Have to Say the Words?" (number 11 in the US and in the UK and number one in Canada), "Thought I'd Died and Gone to Heaven" (number 8 in the U.S.), and "There Will Never Be Another Tonight" (number 2 in Canada). The album won many awards including the Grammy Award for Best Song Written for a Motion Picture, Television or Other Visual Media in 1992. In July 1992, Adams performed at Wembley Stadium in front of 80,000 fans, the largest audience on his tour, with Little Angels and Extreme serving as opening acts. In 1993, Adams collaborated with Rod Stewart and Sting for the single "All for Love" co-written by Adams for the soundtrack of the film The Three Musketeers. The single topped the charts worldwide. In June 1993, Adams attended a tribute to Sam Cooke in which he played "Bring It On Home to Me" in a duet with Smokey Robinson. In November 1993, Adams released So Far So Good, a compilation album that was certified 6× Platinum in the US, 3× Platinum in the UK, 6× Platinum in Canada, and 11× Platinum in Australia. It included a new song called "Please Forgive Me", which peaked at number two in the UK, number 7 in the U.S. and was the 10th most popular song in Australia in 1993. In 1994, Adams became the first Western artist to perform in Vietnam since James Brown played there in 1971 at the end of the Vietnam War. In October 1994, Adams sang one of his favorite songs, "Hound Dog", at the Elvis Presley tribute concert in Memphis. In September 1994, at the benefit concert Pavarotti & Friends, Adams sang "Please Forgive Me", and a version of "All for Love" featuring Luciano Pavarotti, Andrea Bocelli, Nancy Gustafson, and Giorgia Todrani. In 1995, Adams released "Have You Ever Really Loved a Woman?". It was a number one in the US, Canada and Australia, as well as a top five hit in the UK and Germany. The single was nominated for the Oscar, Grammy and Golden Globe Award for Best Original Song. In June 1996, the album 18 til I Die was released. It contained the songs: "The Only Thing That Looks Good on Me Is You" (number 1 in Canada), "Let's Make a Night to Remember" (number 1 in Canada), "Have You Ever Really Loved a Woman?" (number 1 in Canada), and "Star", which is included in the soundtrack of the film Jack. The album reached number 22 on the UK charts while also reaching number two in Australia and number four in Canada. The album was less successful in the US only reaching number 31 on the Billboard 200, but was certified platinum in the United States by the RIAA. 18 til I Die was certified three times platinum in Canada and Australia and two times platinum in the UK. In November 1996, "I Finally Found Someone" was released, which was recorded by Bryan Adams and Barbra Streisand as part of the soundtrack of Streisand's self-directed film The Mirror Has Two Faces. The song was nominated for an Academy Awards and Golden Globe Awards. It peaked at number 8 on the Billboard Hot 100. In November 1997, Adams penned new lyrics to the Jean-Jacques Goldman song "Puisque tu pars" also written that month, remade as Let's Talk About Love recorded by Celine Dion. In 1999, a demo version of Adams' translation appeared on the single CD "Cloud Number Nine" in 1999. In December 1997, Adams released MTV Unplugged with three new tracks: "Back to You", "A Little Love" and "When You Love Someone". "Back to You" was the first single, followed by "I'm Ready", an acoustic version of the song from the album Cuts Like A Knife. The album was a top ten success in Germany while both singles reached the top 20 in the UK. On a Day Like Today was released in 1998 and the release coincided with his contract being sold to Interscope Records. On a Day Like Today enjoyed success internationally, entering the top five in Germany and Canada and was certified platinum in the UK. It generated two British top ten singles: "Cloud Number Nine" and "When You're Gone", which featured Melanie C of the Spice Girls and peaked at number 3. The song has sold 830,000 combined equivalent-sales in the UK as of May 2019. To commemorate the millennium, Adams released The Best of Me, his most comprehensive collection of songs at that time, which included two new songs, the title track "The Best of Me" and "Don't Give Up" (number 1 in the UK). The album reached the top ten in Germany and was certified three times platinum in Canada and Platinum in the UK. The single from the album, "The Best of Me" was a successful hit with the exception of the US, where neither the single or the album were released by Interscope Records, the single peaked at 10 on the Canadian Singles Chart on January 24, 2000. Adams sang on the title track and the song "Without You" for Tina Turner's album Twenty Four Seven, released in October 1999. Adams attended Turner's 60th birthday party in London, at which they performed "It's Only Love". It was released on DVD. On New Year's Eve, December 31, 2000, Adams performed with Celine Dion at the Bell Center in Montreal. In October 2000, Adams sang "Sad Songs (Say So Much)" with Elton John at Madison Square Garden for the live album Elton John One Night Only – The Greatest Hits. On August 26, 2000, he performed at the Slane Festival in front of over 70,000 people, with special appearances by Melanie C, Chicane and Davy Spillane. The concert was also released on CD/DVD as Live at Slane Castle, Ireland. On November 27, 2000, Adams performed at The Who & Special Guests: Live at the Royal Albert Hall, a benefit concert organized by The Who, singing a song by the English band, Behind Blue Eyes and See Me, Feel Me with Eddie Vedder. The concert was also released on CD as Live at the Royal Albert Hall. Adams co-wrote and performed the songs for the DreamWorks animated film Spirit: Stallion of the Cimarron in 2002. The songs were included on the film's soundtrack. The most successful single from the soundtrack was "Here I Am", a British top five and German Top 20 hit. Adams received his fourth Golden Globe Award nomination for Best Song from a Motion Picture from the song. In 2004, Adams was ranked 13th on the ARC Weekly chart of top pop artists of the last 25 years, with four number-one singles, ten top five hits and 17 Top-10 hits. Room Service was released in September 2004. It topped the charts in Germany and Switzerland and peaked at number four in the UK, selling 440,000 copies in its first week in Europe and thus debuted at number one on Billboard's European album chart. The single, "Open Road", was the most successful single from the album and peaked at number one in Canada and number twenty-one in the UK. In May 2008, the album was also released in the US, charting at number 134 on the Billboard 200. From June to August 2005, Adams co-headlined a concert tour with Def Leppard that took place at minor league baseball stadiums. In July 2005, Adams performed at Live 8 in Barrie. In 2006, Adams co-wrote and performed the theme music "Never Let Go" which was featured in the closing credits of the film The Guardian. In April 2006, he was inducted into the Canadian Music Hall of Fame. Also in 2006, Adams co-wrote the Grammy Award-winning gospel song "Never Gonna Break My Faith" for Aretha Franklin. It was featured in the film Bobby as a duet by Aretha Franklin and Mary J. Blige with the Boys Choir of Harlem and earned him a Golden Globe Nomination in 2007. On July 31, 2006, together with Billy Joel, he performed in a free concert with an estimated crowd of over 500,000 people in Rome at Via dei Fori Imperiali, with the Colosseum as a background. In May 2007, on the occasion of his 25th concert at the Wembley Arena, he received the "Wembley Square Of Fame", a bronze plaque engraved with his name and handprints at Wembley Park. Also in 2007, Adams co-wrote two songs "A Place for Us" and "Another Layer" for the Disney film Bridge to Terabithia. Adams released his eleventh album, 11, internationally on March 17, 2008. The album was released in the US exclusively at Wal-Mart and Sam's Club retail stores on May 13, 2008. The first single released from the album was "I Thought I'd Seen Everything". In March 2008, Adams played an 11-day, 11-country European acoustic tour to promote the album. The album debuted at number one in Canada, making it his first album to reach that position since Waking Up the Neighbours in 1991, and reached number two in Germany. In the United States, the album charted at number 80. In June and July 2008, he toured the U.S., playing some shows with Foreigner and on others with Rod Stewart. Adams was one of four musicians who were pictured on the second series of the Canadian Recording Artist Series to be issued by Canada Post stamps on July 2, 2009, with estimated one and one-half million Adams stamps printed. On June 26, 2009, he performed some of hits hits on an episode of CMT Crossroads with Jason Aldean. In November 2009, he co-wrote, produced, and performed the song "You've Been a Friend to Me" for the film Old Dogs. In February 2010, Adams released "One World, One Flame". On February 12, 2010, at the 2010 Winter Olympics opening ceremony at BC Place Stadium, Adams performed "Bang the Drum", a duet with Nelly Furtado co-written with Jim Vallance for the event. In May 2010, Adams was one of several Canadian musicians to visit Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper at his official residence. Originally, the visit was meant to be Adams's plea to the Prime Minister to change copyright laws; instead, Harper turned it into an informal jam session. In November 2010, Adams released the acoustic album Bare Bones, a live project consisting of twenty songs, to celebrate thirty years of career. Gary Breit accompanies on piano. Adams then embarked on "The Bare Bones Tour", an acoustic tour, and integrated acoustic concerts into other tours. Adams performed at the opening ceremony of the 2011 Cricket World Cup on February 17, 2011, in Dhaka, Bangladesh. On February 19, 2011, Adams and his band played in Kathmandu, which was organized by ODC Network and made him the first international artist to perform in Nepal. In August 2013, Live at Sydney Opera House was released on CD / DVD set or separately as a CD, DVD or Blu-ray; it was recorded during one of the 3 nights at Sydney Opera House, in August 2011, during "The Bare Bones Tour". In April 2013, Adams and Michael Bublé released "After All", a duet co-written by Adams with Alan Chang, Steven Sater, and Jim Vallance. In 2014, Adams signed a recording contract with Verve Records and in September, he released Tracks of My Years, an album of cover versions celebrating the 30th Anniversary of Reckless. The album reached number one on the Canadian album chart. The album contains cover songs and one original song co-written with Jim Vallance. In July 2014, Adams filmed Bryan Adams in Concert for Great Performances on PBS. It was recorded at the Elgin and Winter Garden Theatres in Toronto and first aired on March 2, 2015. Adams released his first album of all new material in seven years on October 16, 2015. The album, titled Get Up, was co-written with Jim Vallance and produced by Jeff Lynne. Adams performed at the 2015 AFL Grand Final, along with Ellie Goulding and Chris Isaak. On December 31, 2015, he performed at the Central Hall Westminster in London for the BBC's New Year's Eve, which was broadcast live on BBC One. On October 14, 2016, Adams released the Wembley 1996 DVD, the recording of his concert, as part of the 18 Til I die tour, held on July 27, 1996, at London's Wembley Stadium, in front of over 70,000 spectators. The DVD immediately ranked to the top of the British music video charts. In November 2017, Ultimate, a compilation album with two new songs "Please Stay" and the anti-war themed "Ultimate Love", was released. In 2018, Bryan Adams performed "the Ultimate tour", touring Australia, New Zealand, UK, Europe, India, the US, and Canada. Adams first approached Disney in 2009 to discuss writing the music for a possible Broadway theatre adaptation of Pretty Woman. In 2016, when he found out that it was in production, he interviewed for the songwriter position with Jim Vallance and got the job. He worked with producer Paula Wagner and director Jerry Mitchell, spending the next two years writing the music and lyrics, completing the songs in March 2018. Pretty Woman: The Musical made its debut on Broadway in August 2018 and opened in London's West End theatre in February 2020. In August 2018, Adams performed a duet version of "Summer of '69" with Taylor Swift during her Reputation Tour in Toronto, Canada. Adams released his fourteenth album Shine a Light on March 1, 2019. The album features collaborations with Ed Sheeran and Jennifer Lopez. The album debuted at number one on the Canadian Albums Chart, in the first week of its release, with 44,000 copies sold; its previous number one in Canada going back to the Tracks of My Years album released in October 2014. This was his 11th album in the top ten and the fifth album at the top of the Canadian charts. It reached the second position in the UK Albums Chart, and it was his tenth album to enter the UK Top-10 albums chart. It also debuted in second position in Switzerland, which was his 15th album to enter the top ten of the Swiss charts; second position in Austria; second position in the New Zealand charts; and the third position in Germany.Shine a Light was certified gold in Canada, and it won the Juno Award for "Best Adult Contemporary Album" in 2020. On June 19, 2020, on the 155th anniversary of the end of Slavery in the United States, the unreleased solo version of "Never Gonna Break My Faith" by Aretha Franklin was released with the participation of RCA Records, RCA Inspiration and Legacy Recordings, featuring a music video that contained contemporary topics, including films about George Floyd and the Black Lives Matter movement. Adams, while writing this song, did not think it would be performed by Aretha. He conceived something like a hymn and "so that it can express a sense of faith, and that even if you have lost something, there will always be an inner light to guide you." However, then Adams said: "When the song was ready, I told the producers that Aretha was going to sing it – and she did. This solo version had been on my computer for years (about 15 years), and when I heard that the creative director of Sony Music, longtime producer and friend of Aretha's Clive Davis, was making a movie about his life, I sent him this version. The world hadn't heard her full performance yet and it really needed to be heard. I'm so glad it's being released, the world needs this right now." Adams was among hundreds of artists whose material was destroyed in the 2008 Universal fire. Adams told the Times that he had asked Universal for access to the master tapes for Reckless in 2013 while working on a remastered edition of the album, but had been told that the tapes could not be found. Adams eventually located a safety copy of the album to use on the remaster, and was not made aware of the fire until the Times' initial report on June 1. On November 15, 2019, Adams released an EP dedicated to Christmas. The Christmas EP contains five tracks, the new track "Joe and Mary" and three previously released tracks: "Christmas Time", "Reggae Christmas" and "Merry Christmas"; and a new interpretation of "Must Be Santa", a 1960s Christmas song, performed in 2009 by Bob Dylan. At the end of November 2019, the album The Christmas Present by the British singer-songwriter Robbie Williams is released, Adams participates in the duet with Williams in the song Christmas (Baby Please Come Home). On November 13, 2020, Adams was featured on "Stop Crying Your Heart Out" as part of the BBC Radio 2's Allstars' Children in Need charity single. The single debuted at number seven on the Official UK Singles Chart and number one on both the Official UK Singles Sales Chart and the Official UK Singles Download Chart. On December 7, 2020, Adams announced a series of UK concerts following the long hiatus of the "Shine a Light Tour" caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and the cancellation of a sold out 17-date tour with Bon Jovi in US arenas. In July 2021, Adams signed a deal with Bertelsmann Music Group (BMG) to release his next album. On October 11, 2021, Adams released the title track of his 15th studio album, So Happy It Hurts. The album was released in March 2022. Adams also announced dates for a worldwide tour starting in February 2022. The single So Happy It Hurts from this album was nominated in the Best Rock Performance category of the 2023 Grammy Awards. Shows in late 2021 were cancelled due to the COVID-19 pandemic. In 2022, via YouTube, Adams released new versions of the 16 songs of Pretty Woman: The Musical sung by Adams himself. The songs were co-written by Adams and Jim Vallance for the musical in October 2018. On April 1, 2022, Adams released Classic, an album of reworked and reimagined hits. This was followed on July 29, 2022, with Classic Pt II. In December 2023, Adams split with his manager of 44 years, Bruce Allen, instead choosing to self-manage his career. Adams' voice has been described as a "sandpaper tenor that's a cross between Joe Cocker and Bruce Springsteen". Adams has played various styles of rock, from hard rock and arena rock to pop rock and soft rock. During the first few years of his career in the 1970s Adams fronted Canadian glam rock band Sweeney Todd; the band played hard rock as well as glam rock. His early songs were about kids and about the lives of young people, and he is known for his romantic ballads. Adams has discussed political or social issues, such as with songs such as "Native Son" and "Remembrance Day" from the album Into the Fire, "Don't Drop That Bomb on Me" from Waking Up the Neighbours, and "Ultimate Love" from Ultimate. In 1978, after meeting with the drummer and main songwriter Jim Vallance for Canadian rock band Prism under the pseudonym "Rodney Higgs", the initial course was quite difficult. Demos of Adams' early songs were rejected by numerous record companies. In 1978, the Adams–Vallance duo managed to sign their record deal with A&M Records and released the single "Let Me Take You Dancing". It is notable for being Adams' first solo single and his first-ever release as a solo artist, when he was 19. The genre of the single was disco; the melody, a piano riff inspired by Robbie King, was composed by Vallance on his parents' piano during the Christmas holidays in 1977; Adams, meanwhile, helped turn the riff into a song. In 1982, Vallance and Adams received a call from producer Michael James Jackson to contribute some songs for the next Kiss album. Although Vallance and Adams were not fans of heavy metal, it was a golden opportunity for exposure for their songs by a world-class rock group. In collaboration with Gene Simmons, the track "War Machine" and a rewrite "Rock 'n Roll Hell" were recorded by Kiss for the album Creatures of the Night. Adams' first solo albums, Bryan Adams and You Want It You Got It, two clear-cut rock and hard rock albums, respectively, indicated the styles that Adams would become famous for. In 1983, with the release of Cuts Like a Knife, Reckless and Into the Fire, their music was characterized by being hard rock with melodic overtones and powerful ballads (known as power ballads); the production of the first five albums was in cooperation with the American record producer Bob Clearmountain. In the 1990s, with the release of Waking Up the Neighbours in 1991, produced by Robert John "Mutt" Lange, they left the hard rock sound and released an album closer to classic rock and roll, taking inspiration from the sounds of bands like Def Leppard and Foreigner. In 1996, with his album 18 til I Die, Adams and Lange adopted a pop rock sound more in line with the style of the time. Many ballads were included, although it also contained some rock songs such as "18 til I Die" and "The Only Thing That Looks Good on Me Is You".> The album includes the collaboration of Adams with Gretchen Peters. In 1998, On a Day Like Today was released, co-produced by his compatriot Bob Rock, he opted for a sound oriented to pop rock, heavily influenced by contemporary bands. Upon their return in 2000 with the album Room Service, Adams produced the album and co-wrote the songs with various co-writers, the themes of the songs being varied between street life, touring, truth, love and relationships. He again opted for a rock-oriented sound. In 2008, with 11, produced by the same Adams with the collaboration of Mutt lange, he sees the return of his long-time collaborator Jim Vallance after more than 15 years, he has experienced a sound softer, combining songs from soft rock, pop rock and melodic rock. With Get Up produced entirely by Jeff Lynne, they continued in the line of rock, with the strong influence of Lynne's fifty-year experience. In 2019, with Shine a Light, he combined rock with pop rock and R&B. Among his youthful influences, the musician has often mentioned Elvis Presley and Bob Dylan as well as all the pop and rock he heard as a boy on the radio. His main sources of inspiration also include guitarists, besides Blackmore, he was influenced by guitarists such as Jimmy Page, Eric Clapton, Mick Ronson, Jeff Beck, Peter Frampton and Eddie Van Halen. Other influential and favourite artists were Alice Cooper, Black Sabbath, Humble Pie, Bob Marley, Bob Seger, Chuck Berry, David Bowie, Jackie Wilson, Joe Cocker, John Lennon, Led Zeppelin, Leonard Cohen, Ray Charles, Sam Cooke, The Beatles, The Who, The Beach Boys, The Rolling Stones and Van Morrison. With the mainstream success of Reckless in the 1980s, five times multi-platinum "Album of the Year" and in the top 20 in "The Best AOR Albums Of All Time" according to Kerrang! Magazine, the true masterpiece of the Canadian rocker according to the Italian magazine Panorama, and Waking Up The Neighbors in the 1990s, having gained worldwide circulation, Adams' impact still persists today. Being one of the most popular rock artists of the 80s and 90s, the merit of having maintained a pure rock at that time as the world went into Hip hop music and Electronic music. He is known for his powerful rock songs and romantic ballads, and his music has appeared in dozens of films both as a singer and as a songwriter and co-writer since the early 1980s, including Class, A Night in Heaven, Real Genius, Renegades, Pink Cadillac, An Innocent Man, Problem Child 2, Robin Hood: Prince of Thieves, The Cutting Edge, The Three Musketeers, Don Juan DeMarco, The Mirror Has Two Faces, Jack, Red Corner, Hope Floats, Spirit: Stallion of the Cimarron, House of Fools, Devil's Gate, Racing Stripes, Color Me Kubrick, The Guardian, Bobby, Cashback, Bridge to Terabithia, Old Dogs, Jock the Hero Dog and Legends of Oz: Dorothy's Return. Adams and his music are popular in India, where he is a household name for three generations of people, and many people say the first few English phrases mastered by many young Indians are "It was the summer of '69" and "Everything I do, I do it for you." Many music industry executives have said Adams is the most-known foreign music artist in India. He was one of the first foreigners to stage a large-scale concert in India in the early 1990s, and he has returned to tour India several times. Adams was on the cover of the September 2018 issue of Rolling Stone India; an article in the issue stated that Adams is "one rock legend whose concerts have created mass frenzy every single time in every single city he's played" in India. It is also reported that "Summer of '69" has been so popular in India for so long that it is "almost a Hindi song now", often the only "western" song that might be allowed to be played at a traditional Indian wedding. Adams toured India five times between 1994 and 2018 and has called himself an indophile. Most of Adams's philanthropic activity is through The Bryan Adams Foundation, which "aims to improve the quality of people's lives around the world by providing financial grants to support specific projects that are committed to bettering the lives of other people". The foundation is mostly funded by Adams himself. Adams has participated in concerts and other activities to help raise money and awareness for a variety of causes. His first high-profile charity appearance came in 1985 when he opened the US transmission of Live Aid from Philadelphia. In June 1986, Adams participated in the two-week Amnesty International "A Conspiracy of Hope" tour alongside Sting, U2 and Peter Gabriel. In 1986, Adams performed at The Prince's Trust All-Star Rock Concert in Wembley Arena to celebrate first 10 years of the Trust and again in June 1987 at the 5th Annual Prince's Trust Rock Gala along with Elton John, George Harrison, Ringo Starr and others. On June 11, 1988, Adams performed at the Nelson Mandela birthday party concert at Wembley Stadium. In June 1988, Adams and Joe Cocker played in Weißensee in front of a crowd of over 85,000 people. In March 1989, Adams performed on the Greenpeace album Rainbow Warriors, which was also released in the Soviet Union on the Melodiya label. According to Greenpeace, worldwide sales raised more than $8 million for Greenpeace initiatives. In July 1989, Adams committed to work on another charity record: the remake of the Deep Purple classic "Smoke on the Water" for Rock Aid Armenia to obtain funds for the 1988 Armenian earthquake. Adams helped commemorate the fall of the Berlin Wall when, in 1990, he joined many other guests, including his songwriting partner Michael Kamen, for Roger Waters' The Wall – Live in Berlin, in which he performed several Pink Floyd alongside artists including Joni Mitchell, Cyndi Lauper, Van Morrison, and Paul Carrack. On March 2, 1993, Adams performed alongside artists including Tina Turner, James Taylor, George Michael, Tom Jones and Dustin Hoffman at that year's edition of Rock for the Rainforest, a benefit concert at Carnegie Hall hosted by Sting and his wife Trudie Styler to benefit the Rainforest Foundation Fund. It raised $800,000 for indigenous rights. On April 24, 1993, he participated in the benefit concert Farm Aid at the Jack Trice Stadium in Ames. On December 10, 1997, Adams took part in a concert called "A Gift of Song", in celebration of the US Committee for UNICEF 50th Anniversary, held at the Z-100 Jingle Ball Madison Square Garden in New York City. On January 29, 2005, Adams was one of 150 performers at "Canada for Asia", a CBC benefit concert in Toronto for victims of the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake; the concert raised $4 million. In July 2005, Adams played at Live 8 concert, Barrie, Ontario, to raise awareness about poverty. In September 2005, he performed in Qatar to benefit "Reach Out To Asia" benefiting the underpriveled in Asia and those affected by the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake. Adams organized a charity auction of a white Fender Stratocaster guitar signed by himself as well as other prominent guitarists including Mick Jagger, Keith Richards, Eric Clapton, Brian May, Jeff Beck, Pete Townshend, Liam Gallagher, and Noel Gallagher. The guitar raised US$2.8 million, also benefiting "Reach Out To Asia", and thus set a record as the world's costliest guitar. Through the Rock by the River concert, held on May 25, 2005, Adams raised £1.3M with cousin Johnny Armitage, for the Royal Marsden Hospital in London. In June 2008, he offered individuals from the public the chance to bid to sing with him live in concert at three different charity auctions in London. Over £50,000 was raised with money going to the NSPCC, Children in Need, and the University College Hospital. On February 28, 2008, he appeared in One Night Live at the Air Canada Centre in Toronto with Josh Groban, Sarah McLachlan, Jann Arden, and RyanDan in aid of the Sunnybrook Hospital Women and Babies Program. On January 29, 2006, Adams became the first Western artist to perform in Karachi, Pakistan after the September 11th attacks in conjunction with a benefit concert by Shehzad Roy to raise money for underprivileged children to go to school and to support victims of the 2005 Pakistan earthquake. On October 18, 2007, Adams was scheduled to perform in Tel Aviv and Jericho as part of the OneVoice Movement concerts, hoping to aid in solving the Israeli–Palestinian conflict; however, the concerts were cancelled due to security concerns. On January 13, 2010, he received the Allan Waters Humanitarian Award for participating in numerous concerts and charity campaigns. On January 13, 2011, he participated in the Concert for Killing Cancer at the Hammersmith Apollo in London together with the historic rock band The Who, Jeff Beck, Debbie Harry, and Richard Ashcroft. On October 22, 2013, he attended the TJ Martell Foundation's 38th Annual Honors Gala in New York City for Cancer Research. He performed alongside Sting. On September 14, 2014, Adams was the first artist to sing at the Invictus Games organised by Prince Harry in East London. Prince Harry reciprocated by attending Adams's exhibition on Wounded soldiers in London. In May 2015, he received the "Allan Slaight Humanitarian Spirit Award" in recognition of his social activism and support for various humanitarian causes, presented during Canadian Music Week at the Canadian Music Industry & Broadcast Awards Gala. In 2016, Adams canceled an April 14 concert at Mississippi Coast Coliseum in Biloxi. From July 1, the state implemented the law whereby religious groups and private companies can refuse to provide their services to same-sex couples; after the example of Bruce Springsteen, who canceled his show in Greensboro, North Carolina in protest against the law requiring transgenders to use public restrooms reflecting their biological identity at birth, Adams also followed "the Boss". On September 30, 2017, Adams, along with Bruce Springsteen, met on stage at the 2017 Invictus Games. The Paralympic Games for Military Veterans, now in its third edition, saw the two artists perform for the closing ceremony at the Scotiabank Arena in Toronto. They performed some pieces of their repertoire, to close in duet performing "Cuts Like A Knife" and "Badlands". In November 2019, Adams gifted Park Walk Primary School in Chelsea, England, with a new playground through his charity The Bryan Adams Foundation. In previous years, Adams had built a playground for Ashburnham Community School in the Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea in London with his foundation. For his Shine a Light world tour in 2019, Adams teamed up with shipping company DHL for an environmental project to plant a tree for every ticket sold during the course of the tour. In April 2020, he participates in the recording of the song "Lean on Me" together with an ad hoc supergroup of Canadian musicians accredited as ArtistsCAN, both in homage to the recent death of Bill Withers and for raise money for the Canadian Red Cross during the COVID-19 pandemic. In November 2020, Adams participated with other artists in the song "Stop Crying Your Heart Out", proposed in a cover performed for the charitable cause of Children in Need under the supervision of BBC Radio 2. During his tours of 1992–1994, Adams successfully campaigned for the Southern Ocean Whale Sanctuary with Greenpeace Chairman David McTaggart; the sanctuary was created by the International Whaling Commission in 1994. On November 10, 2002, Adams participated in the benefit concert at the Royal Opera House in London for the Dian Fossey Gorilla Fund International. He played "Run to You" and "Crazy Little Thing Called Love" with Brian May. In April 2019, while off the coast of St. Vincent and the Grenadines, Adams physically intervened to protect a whale from being killed when local whalers tried to harpoon it within a conservation zone. Adams is the founder of the St. Vincent and the Grenadines Environment Fund, a non-profit company registered in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to support sustainable initiatives to promote the preservation of the beauty and natural value of the islands. In May 2020, Adams was criticized for a profane social media post blaming the COVID-19 pandemic on "bat eating". Even though Adams did not single out any particular race in his remarks, online response was immediate and "Bryan Adams racist" began trending on social media. Adams later apologized for the comments stating, "To any and all that took offence...No excuse, I just wanted to have a rant about the horrible animal cruelty in these wet-markets being the possible source of the virus, and promote veganism. I have love for all people and my thoughts are with everyone dealing with this pandemic around the world." Adams also works as a photographer. In 2002, Adams was invited, along with other photographers from the Commonwealth, to photograph Queen Elizabeth II during her Golden Jubilee; one of the photographs from this session was used as a Canadian postage stamp in 2004 and again in 2005 (see Queen Elizabeth II domestic rate stamp (Canada)), another portrait of both Queen Elizabeth II and Prince Philip is now in the National Portrait Gallery in London. He won three Lead Awards in Germany for his fashion photography, most recently in October 2015 for his story in Helmut Berger, and previously in June 2012 and again in 2006. He founded the art fashion Zoo Magazine, based in Berlin, for which he shoots regularly. His first retrospective book of photos was released by Steidl in October 2012 titled Exposed. Previous published collaborations include American Women (2005), for Calvin Klein in the United States; proceeds from this book went to Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center in New York City for their breast cancer research programs, and Made in Canada (1999) for Flare Magazine in Canada; proceeds went to the Canadian Breast Cancer Foundation. Both books were dedicated to his friend Donna, who died of the disease. Adams supports the Hear the World initiative as a photographer in its aim to raise global awareness for the topic of hearing and hearing loss. Adams released a photography book entitled Wounded – The Legacy of War (2013) to highlight the human consequences of war. On September 16, 2015, he was given an Honorary Fellowship of the Royal Photographic Society in London for his work in photography. Adams has been published in British Vogue, L'uomo Vogue, American Vanity Fair, Harper's Bazaar, British GQ, Esquire, Interview magazine and i-D, and shot advertising and PR campaigns for Hugo Boss, Guess Jeans, Sand, Converse, Montblanc, John Richmond, Fred Perry, Escada, Gaastra, Zeiss, Joop, Zeiss AG, Schwarzkopf, Ermenegildo Zegna, AGL shoes, Windsor, Jaguar and OPEL cars. In the summer of 2021, he shot the 48th edition of Pirelli Calendar in two working days in June in Los Angeles, where most of the cast met, followed by a day of work at Capri at the end of July. The Pirelli 2022 Calendar shot by Adams is called «On the road», portrays talents from the world of music that Adams has brought together in a journey through very different nationalities, musical genres, ages and professional paths. He photographed Iggy Pop, Rita Ora, Cher, Grimes, Normani, Kali Uchis, Jennifer Hudson, Saweetie, St. Vincent and Bohan Phoenix. Adams has also photographed many of his colleagues in the music business. Other album covers featuring work by Adams include those for: Annie Lennox – The Annie Lennox Collection Amy Winehouse – Lioness: Hidden Treasures Status Quo – Aquostic (Stripped Bare) Diana Krall – Wallflower Anastacia – Ultimate Collection Rammstein – Zeit Other notable people that Adams has photographed include Hillary Clinton, Ben Kingsley, Katie Couric, Jennifer Aniston, Gwyneth Paltrow, Scarlett Johansson, Hilary Swank, Serena Williams, Venus Williams, Lindsay Lohan, L'Wren Scott, Julianne Moore, Jerry Hall, Heather Graham, Sean Penn, Wim Wenders, Danny Trejo, Christie Brinkley, Sarah Jessica Parker, Neve Campbell, Renée Zellweger, Monica Bellucci, Eva Riccobono, Elisabetta Canalis, Caterina Murino, Elle Macpherson, Eartha Kitt, Ray Liotta, Cindy Crawford, Tereza Maxová, Alice Sebold, Amber Valletta, Katie Holmes, Kate Moss, Eve Ensler, Helena Bonham Carter, Daphne Guinness, Aline Weber, Lucy Liu, Laetitia Casta, Tilda Swinton, Lauren Hutton, Muhammad Ali, Dustin Hoffman, Ben Kingsley, Lukas Podolski, Natalia Vodianova, Naomi Campbell, Louise Bourgeois, Nadja Auermann, Michael J. Fox, Mickey Rourke, Judi Dench, Justin Trudeau, Margaret Atwood, Linda Evangelista, Amanda Murphy, Mads Mikkelsen, and many more.[citation needed] Made in Canada (1999) American Women (2005) Exposed (Steidl, 2012) Wounded – The Legacy of War (Steidl, 2013) Untitled (Steidl, 2015) Canadians (Steidl, 2017) Homeless (Steidl, 2019) Royal Ontario Museum, Toronto 1999 McCord Museum, Montréal 2000 Saatchi Gallery, London 2000 Photokina, Cologne 2001 Temple of Hadrian, Rome, July – 2006 Fotografija Galerija, Ljubljana, Slovenia, November 2006 PHotoEspaña, Madrid, Spain, May–July 2007 Nunnington Hall, North Yorkshire, England, May–June 2007 401 projects, New York City, September–November 2007 National Portrait Gallery, London, February–May 2008 Haus Der Kunst, Munich, May 2008 14th Street Gallery, Hear the World Ambassadors Photo Exhibition, New York City, May 2008 Saatchi Gallery, Hear The World Ambassadors, London, July 2009 Calvin Klein American women 2010, New York, September 2010 Multimedia Art Museum, Moscow, July 2012 (Exposed) Goss-Michael Gallery, Dallas, Texas. "Bryan Adams – Exposed" December 2012 February 2013 Oklahoma Contemporary, Oklahoma City. "Bryan Adams – Exposed" February – May 2013 NRW-Forum, Düsseldorf, Germany. "Bryan Adams – Exposed" February – May 2013 Marfa Contemporary, Marfa, Texas. "Bryan Adams – Exposed" May – August 2013 Ostlicht Galerie, Vienna, Austria. "Bryan Adams – Exposed" June – September 2013 Akira Ikeda Gallery, Berlin, Germany. "Bryan Adams – Exposed" September – November 2013 Glenbow Museum, Calgary, Canada. "Bryan Adams – Exposed" February – May 2014 Westlicht Gallery, Vienna, Austria. "Bryan Adams – Exposed" Stadtgalerie, Klagenfurt, Austria. "Bryan Adams – Exposed" July October 3–5, 2014: "Bryan Adams – Exposed" Stadthaus Ulm, Germany. "Bryan Adams – Exposed" June – September 2014 MNBAQ, Quebec City, Canada. "Bryan Adams s'expose" February June 19–14, 2015 Somerset House, London, England. "Bryan Adams – Wounded: The Legacy of War" November 2014 – January 2015 Centro Cultural, Cascais, Portugal. "Bryan Adams – Exposed" October 2014 – February 2015 Young Gallery, Brussels, Belgium. "Bryan Adams – Exposed" September 11, November 28, 2015 Center of Contemporary Art Znaki Czasu,Toruń, Poland. "Bryan Adams – Exposed" November 2015 – January 2016 Fotografiska, Stockholm, Sweden. "Bryan Adams – Exposed" June 18, 2016 – September 25, 2016 Vivacom Art Hall, Sofia, Bulgaria. "Bryan Adams – Exposed" October November 11–12, 2016 Werkhallen, Bonn, Germany. "Bryan Adams – Exposed" February May 19–20, 2017 Royal Ontario Museum, Toronto. "Canadians" 2017 Embassy of Canada, Washington. "Canadians" 2017 Photo Gallery, Halmstad, Sweden. "Bryan Adams – Exposed" January April 20–30, 2018 Camera Work Gallery, Berlin, Germany. "Bryan Adams – Exposed" December 8, 2018 – February 9, 2019 Izzy Gallery, Toronto, Canada. "Bryan Adams – Exposed" July 2–28, 2019 Fotografiska, Tallinn, Estonia. "Bryan Adams – Exposed" March September 6–20, 2020 Gericke + Paffrath Gallery, Düsseldorf, Germany. "Bryan Adams – Exposed" October January 2–31, 2021 Leica Gallery, Munich, Germany. "Bryan Adams – Exposed" October January 29–31, 2021 Atlas Gallery, London, United Kingdom. "Bryan Adams – Homeless" April June 29–12, 2021 IPFO House of Photography, Olten, Switzerland. "Bryan Adams – Exposed" November 18, 2021 - February 6, 2022 Osthaus-Museum Hagen, Hagen, Germany. "Bryan Adams – Exposed" February April 20–10, 2022 Leica Galerie, Milan, Italy. "Bryan Adams – Exposed" April July 21–9, 2022 Atlas Gallery, London, "Bryan Adams In Colour", 22 June - 31 August 2023 Leica Gallery, London, "Bryan Adams Classics", 22 June - 31 August 2023 Galerie Camera Work, Berlin, "Bryan Adams In Colour", 14 October - 18 November 2023 Günter Grass-Haus, Lübeck, "Bryan Adams Exposed/Wounded", 15 October 2023 - 7 January 2024 Sala Magna of Pueblo Español, Palma de Mallorca, "Bryan Adams In Colour", 21 December 2023 - 14 April 2024 War Memorial of Korea, Seoul, "Bryan Adams Exposed/Wounded", 12 January - 14 April 2024 Adams became a vegan in 1989, when he was 28 years old, and said that he has more energy as a result of the decision and says that his motto is "If you love animals, don’t eat them". Adams has never married. In the 1990s, for 12 years, he was in a relationship with Danish model Cecilie Thomsen. Thomsen said that he had an affair with Diana, Princess of Wales; Adams insists they were just friends. Adams and Alicia Grimaldi, his former personal assistant and now trustee and co-founder of his namesake foundation, had their first daughter in April 2011 and their second daughter in February 2013. He maintains homes in London and Paris; the house in Paris was listed on Airbnb. On October 30, 2021, Adams cancelled his participation in a tribute to singer Tina Turner, just before the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame ceremony, after testing positive for COVID-19. On July 20, 2023, Adams was announced as co-founder of Scottish based music start up SongBox, a web application that allows musicians and other audio content creators to securely store and share their files with anyone they choose. Adams's awards and nominations include 20 Juno Awards among 56 nominations and 15 Grammy Award nominations, including a win for Best Song Written Specifically for a Motion Picture or Television in 1992. For his songwriting for films, Adams has been nominated for three times for Academy Awards and five Golden Globe Awards. He was nominated for his fifth Golden Globe in 2007 for songwriting for the film Bobby; the song was performed by Aretha Franklin and Mary J. Blige. In 1990, Adams was awarded the Order of British Columbia. On April 20, 1990, Adams was made a Member of the Order of Canada, and on May 6, 1998, was promoted within the order to the rank of Officer of the Order of Canada. He received these awards for his contributions to popular music and philanthropic work via his foundation, which helps improve education for people around the world. On May 1, 2010, Adams received the Governor General's Performing Arts Award for his 30 years of contributions to the arts. On January 13, 2010, he received the Allan Waters Humanitarian Award for his part in numerous charitable concerts and campaigns during his career. Adams has been inducted into the Hollywood Walk of Fame, Canada's Walk of Fame, the Canadian Broadcast Hall of Fame, and the Canadian Music Hall of Fame. Adams is also a recipient of the Queen's Golden Jubilee Medal (2002) and the Queen's Diamond Jubilee Medal (2012). In 2015, he was awarded an Honorary Fellowship by the Royal Photographic Society (FRPS). In 2023, Adams was nominated for induction into the Songwriters Hall of Fame. Adams' backing band, known as "The Dudes of Leisure" or the "Bryan Adams Band", is composed of guitarist Keith Scott, Gary Breit on piano, Solomon Walker (2017–present) on bass, and drummer Pat Steward. Former members of the band include bassist Dave Taylor, keyboardist Tommy Mandel, U.K. keyboardist John Hanaha (1981–1988), drummers Jimmy Wesley (1981–1983), Frankie LaRocka (1983–1985), Pat Steward (1985–1987) and Danny Cummings (1996–1998), Norm Fisher on bass, Mark Wilson (2016), Richard Jones (2016), and Phil Thornalley. Bryan Adams (1980) You Want It You Got It (1981) Cuts Like a Knife (1983) Reckless (1984) Into the Fire (1987) Waking Up the Neighbours (1991) 18 til I Die (1996) On a Day Like Today (1998) Spirit: Stallion of the Cimarron (2002) Room Service (2004) 11 (2008) Tracks of My Years (2014) Get Up (2015) Shine a Light (2019) So Happy It Hurts (2022) Pretty Woman: The Musical (2022) 1989 – Pink Cadillac, directed by Buddy Van Horn, starring Clint Eastwood and Bernadette Peters, Adams plays a gas station attendant. 1991 – Robin Hood: Prince of Thieves Adams played himself in the full length video for "(Everything I Do) I Do It for You" playing out the end credits to the VHS release of the film. 2002 – House of Fools, directed by Andrei Konchalovsky, Adams plays himself and appears in the scenes in which the protagonist Zhanna (Julia Vysotskaya) dreams of marrying him. 2011 – Jock the Hero Dog, directed by Duncan MacNeillie. Features the voice of Adams as "Jock". 2017 – Juno Awards of 2017 the ceremonies were held at the Canadian Tire Centre in Ottawa and televised on CTV with Adams and Russell Peters as co-hosts. Between 2016 and 2019, Adams presented his favorite songs on several episodes of BBC Rocks on BBC Radio 2. You Want It You Got It Tour (1981–1982) (includes some dates with the Kinks and Loverboy) Cuts Like a Knife Tour (1983–1984) (includes some dates with Journey and the Police) Reckless Tour (1984–1985) (includes some dates with Tina Turner) A Conspiracy of Hope (1986) (includes some dates with U2, Sting, Peter Gabriel, Lou Reed, Joan Baez, and the Neville Brothers) Into the Fire Tour (1987–1988) Waking Up the World Tour (1991–1993) (includes some dates in Europe with ZZ Top for the Recycler Tour) So Far So Good Tour (1993–1994) (includes some dates in the United States with the Rolling Stones for the Voodoo Lounge Tour) 18 Til I Die Tour (1996–1997) Unplugged Tour (1997–1998) White Elephant Tour (1999) (includes some dates in North America with the Rolling Stones for the No Security Tour) The Best of Me Tour (1999–2001) Here I Am Tour (2002–2004) Room Service Tour (2004–2006) (includes 26 dates in the United States with Def Leppard) Anthology Tour (2007–2008) 11 Tour / Acoustic Show (2008–2009) (includes some dates in the United States with Foreigner and Rod Stewart) The Bare Bones Tour (2010–2014) (includes some dates for the Waking Up the Neighbors 20th Anniversary Tour) Reckless 30th Anniversary Tour (2014–2015) Get Up Tour (2016–2018) Ultimate Tour (2018–2019) Shine a Light Tour (2019–2021) (includes some 2019 dates in the United States with Billy Idol) So Happy It Hurts Tour (2022–2024) (includes some 2023 dates in the United States with Soul Asylum and Joan Jett and the Blackhearts; some 2024 dates in the U.S. with Dave Stewart) Music of Canada Rock music of Canada List of animal rights advocates Connolly, Amanda (September 18, 2018). "Here's why Canadian rock star Bryan Adams wants politicians to change copyright laws". Global News. Jones, Chris (March 9, 2018). "An exclusive behind the scenes look at the 'Pretty Woman' musical, coming to Chicago". Chicago Tribune. Krewen, Nick (September 10, 2013). "Brian Chater helped build Canadian music industry". Toronto Star. Krewen, Nick (March 17, 2022). "Bryan Adams On Family Bonding, Writing a Musical and Releasing Upbeat Tunes in Troubled Times". Toronto Star. Mielke, Christine (March 11, 2023). "Most-played artist on Canadian radio in the 2010s Crossword Clue". TryHardGuides. Bagish, Corinne (November 20, 2014). "Bryan Adams' iconic album 'Reckless' turns 30". Mashable. "Official Singles Chart, Bryan Adams (Everything I Do) I Do It for You". Official Charts Company. Marotta, Michael (September 18, 2016). "Remember September: 25 awesome albums turning 25 years old this month". vanyaland.com. Pareles, Jon (March 8, 1994). "Review/Pop; Bryan Adams, More Mr. Nice Guy". The New York Times. "Greatest of All Time Hot 100 Artists". Billboard. "Golden Globe Awards for 'Bryan Adams'". Golden Globe Awards. "Canada's Walk of Fame: Bryan Adams". Canada's Walk of Fame. Archived from the original on August 3, 2008. BRODSKY, RACHEL (March 11, 2022). "We've Got A File On You: Bryan Adams". Stereogum. "Bryan Adams". Canadian Music Hall of Fame. "Bryan Adams". Governor General's Awards. Hart, Courtney (February 1, 2015). "Bryan Adams to Receive Humanitarian Spirit Award at Canadian Music Week". KingstonHerald.com. Archived from the original on September 12, 2015. Jenkins, David (March 30, 2008). "The charmed life of Bryan Adams". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on January 11, 2022. Vella, Charlie (February 7, 2007). "Bryan Adams's Malta roots". Times of Malta. Silva, Marta Martins (January 24, 2016). "A escola portuguesa de Bryan Adams" [The Portuguese School of Bryan Adams]. Correio da Manhã (in Portuguese). Hattenstone, Simon (July 8, 2002). "The life of Bryan". The Guardian. MELOCHE, STEPHANIE (March 2, 2014). "10 Ottawa Born or Raised Celebrities". Her Campus. Lederman, Marsha (June 18, 2012). "Bryan Adams drops his nostalgia bombs in Vancouver show". The Globe and Mail. GILL, ALEXANDRA (May 7, 2005). "Bryan Adams's mom rocks!". The Globe and Mail. Gardner, Josh (March 11, 2022). ""I've had good luck with old guitars, so I stick to them" Bryan Adams on vintage guitars, Gibson hollowbodies and championing positivity". BandLab Technologies. Owen, Matt (January 24, 2022). "Bryan Adams reveals the identity of his "first real six-string"". Guitar World. Earls, John (August 15, 2019). "Interview with Bryan Adams: 'I don't believe in the endings at all. I'd rather go on". classicpopmag.com. Retrieved December 29, 2020. Curtright, Bob (September 20, 2012). "Bryan Adams: 'Sometimes songs they write themselves'". The Wichita Eagle. Heigl, Alex (December 2, 2020). "An Informal Guide to Telling Birthday Twins Bryan Adams and Ryan Adams Apart". People. "Sweeney Todd – Roxy Roller / Rue De Chance". Discogs. "Sweeney Todd If Wishes Were Horses..." Rate Your Music. Vallance, Jim. "Bryan Adams". jimvallance.com. Archived from the original on August 16, 2015. Friend, David (March 9, 2022). "Bryan Adams to be inducted into Canadian Songwriters Hall of Fame". CBC News. Vallance, Jim. "Jim Vallance Recorded Songs 1977–2019". jimvallance.com. Rapp, Allison (February 13, 2021). "51 Songs Bryan Adams Wrote for Other Artists". Townsquare Media. Scheps, Leigh (November 16, 2017). "'Pretty Woman: The Musical' Team Teases a Sexy and True Broadway Adaptation (Exclusive)". Entertainment Tonight. Lifton, Dave (October 30, 2017). "Bryan Adams Writes Score for 'Pretty Woman' Musical". Townsquare Media. Saidman, page 47 "Results: RPM Weekly". Library and Archives Canada. July 17, 2013. Bliss, Karen (October 30, 2015). "Bryan Adams' Manager (of 30 Years) Bruce Allen on the Singer's New Album and Fellow Canadian The Weeknd's Rise". Billboard. "CRIA Certifications". Canadian Recording Industry Association (CRIA). Archived from the original on October 6, 2008. Retrieved June 24, 2008. "Bryan Adams You Want It You Got It". jimvallance.com. Archived from the original on November 2, 2015. Retrieved November 23, 2020. "Uriah Heep – Lonely Nights ("Between 1983 and 2006 Uriah Heep included" Lonely Nights "on at least sixteen albums ...")". jimvallance.com. Archived from the original on August 13, 2014. Retrieved November 28, 2020. "Uriah Heep 1983 hard 'flashback rockin". Metal Odyssey. July 6, 2010. Retrieved November 28, 2020. "Bryan Adams". The Feldman Agency. Retrieved March 5, 2023. "Bryan Adams Cuts Like a Knife (album)". jimvallance.com. Archived from the original on March 6, 2014. Retrieved November 23, 2020. "Bryan Adams with his Hit, "Straight from the Heart"". countrythangdaily.com. October 31, 2018. Retrieved November 26, 2020. "Image : RPM Weekly". Library and Archives Canada. July 30, 1983. Retrieved December 14, 2020. "Bonnie Tyler's "Straight From The Heart": Evokes Country Rock In 1980's". countrythangdaily.com. June 1, 2018. Retrieved November 26, 2020. "Bryan Adams Cuts Like a Knife (single)". jimvallance.com. Archived from the original on April 3, 2015. "Cuts Like A Knife". Music Charts Archive. April 27, 2019. "ARIA Certifications". Australian Recording Industry Association. Archived from the original on May 13, 2011. Retrieved June 24, 2008. "World Popular Song Festival in Tokyo '82" (in Japanese). Yamaha Music Foundation. "Bryan Adams In Concert - 1983". Getty Images. April 2020. "Bryan Adams Reckless". jimvallance.com. Archived from the original on March 6, 2014. "Bryan Adams with Tina Turner It's Only Love". jimvallance.com. Archived from the original on March 4, 2014. Savage, Mark (March 7, 2019). "Bryan Adams explains why Summer of 69 flopped in the UK". BBC News. "It's Only Love (1985)". the-world-of-tina.com. "Chart History: Bryan Adams: Billboard Hot 100". Billboard Hot 100. "Dutch Charts, Zoeken naar: summer of '69" (in Dutch). Dutch Charts. July 21, 1990. "Ultratop.be, Bryan Adams Summer of '69" (in Dutch). Ultratop. "British band, its leader top Grammy nominees". The Register-Guard. January 10, 1986 – via Google News. "Jewels for the Queen: Tina Turner's Lifetime of Grammy Gold". PopMatters. February 9, 2018. Retrieved November 28, 2020. "Concert Map". Setlist.fm. "Bryan Adams". Juno Awards. Healy, Ryan (November 5, 2020). "FEATURES'Reckless': Revisiting Bryan Adams' Stadium-Sized Classic". Universal Music Group. Lacey, Liam (February 11, 1985). "The Northern Lights sparkle for fans and famine victims". The Globe and Mail. jonimitchell.com. Mcintosh, Andrew (February 22, 2016). "Tears Are Not Enough". The Canadian Encyclopedia. "Gold/Platinum, Certification Northern Lights Tears Are Not Enough". Music Canada. May 1, 1985. Kiner, Deb (July 13, 2020). "Live Aid 1985 was literally a life-saving concert for one man 35 years ago". The Patriot-News. "Live Aid (July 13th, 1985): Bryan Adams". liveaid.free.fr. "Roger Daltrey Under a Raging Moon". jimvallance.com. Archived from the original on November 6, 2014. "Roger Daltrey Let Me Down Easy". jimvallance.com. Archived from the original on November 6, 2014. "Roger Daltrey Rebel". jimvallance.com. Archived from the original on November 6, 2014. Starkey, Arun (December 28, 2023). "The Roger Daltrey song written for Stevie Nicks". Far Out. Stevenson, Jane (March 1, 2015). "Bryan Adams brings nostalgia to ACC with Reckless anniversary tour". Toronto Sun. "Glass Tiger Don't Forget Me (When I'm Gone)". jimvallance.com. Retrieved November 23, 2020. Graff, Gary (March 30, 2022). "How Bryan Adams Stretched His Songwriting on 'Into the Fire'". Townsquare Media. "Into the Fire by Bryan Adams". jimvallance.com. Archived from the original on May 7, 2014. McGee, Matt (2008). U2: A Diary. Omnibus Press. p. 111. ISBN 978-1-84772-108-2. "RIAA Searchable Database". Recording Industry Association of America. Archived from the original on August 30, 2014. Retrieved November 30, 2020. "The Gifts That Keep on Giving: Biggest Radio and Album Hits of the Holidays". Billboard. December 1, 2014. "A Very Special Christmas 25th Anniversary – FACT SHEET" (PDF). Special Olympics. Everley, Dave (September 20, 2022). "Rock Aid Armenia: how the ultimate version of Smoke On The Water was recorded". Louder Sound. Future plc. Madlena, Tatiana (January 8, 2015). "Mötley Crüe Dr. Feelgood". rockandmetalinmyblood.com (in Italian). Retrieved December 10, 2020. Greene, Andy (May 5, 2005). ""Dr. Feelgood": Motley Crue's Track By Track Guide to 1989 Classic". Rolling Stone. Retrieved December 10, 2020. "FIVE YEARS LATER, D.O.A. CHANGES AND STAYS THE SAME". The Morning Call. August 17, 1990. "TINA TURNER TURNS 50 IN STYLE". Deseret News. November 28, 1989. "Tokyo Dome Past Concert and Conventions". Tokyo Dome. "Rock Torhout / Werchter 1988". Rock Werchter. "Members of the Order of British Columbia: A–B". Order of British Columbia. Roger Waters - Empty Spaces - W/Bryan Adams – The Wall Live in Berlin 1990 – via YouTube. Roger Waters - Young Lust - W/Bryan Adams – The Wall Live in Berlin 1990 – via YouTube. Eames, Tom (September 18, 2020). "The Story of... 'Everything I Do (I Do it For You)' by Bryan Adams". Smooth Radio (2014). Trust, Gary (August 10, 2015). "This Week in Billboard Chart History: In 1991, Bryan Adams Ruled With the Song of the Summer". Billboard. "Golden Globe Awards for Bryan Adams". Golden Globe Award. "Nature of the Beast". JimVallance.com. "RPM 100 Albums". RPM. November 2, 1991. "Billboard 200™". Billboard 200. "CRTC debate: Bryan Adams not Canadian?". CBC News. January 14, 1992. "PAST NOMINEES + WINNERS". Juno Awards. "Bryan Adams Says Own GRAMMY Win Doesn't Contend With Seeing Whitney". CBS News. February 5, 2013. "Bryan Adams in Concert at Wembley Stadium". Getty Images. April 8, 2016. Warm-up act for Bryan Adams at Wembley Stadium – via YouTube. SNOW, SHAUNA (October 26, 1993). "POP/ROCK Hoping Three's a Hit: Three pop musketeers have...". Los Angeles Times. "American certifications – Adams, B., Rod Stewart & Sting – All for Love". Recording Industry Association of America. "Best-Selling Records of 1994". Billboard. Vol. 107, no. 3. BPI Communications. January 21, 1995. p. 57. ISSN 0006-2510. Pareles, Jon (August 4, 1993). "Reviews/Television; Onstage at the Apollo, Competitive Tribute". The New York Times. HUNT, DENNIS (August 4, 1993). "TV REVIEW : 'Apollo' Tribute: Entertaining but Many Gaps". Los Angeles Times. Bryan Adams and Smokey Robinson - Bring it On Home To Me – via YouTube. "Bryan Adams So Far So Good". jimvallance.com. Archived from the original on April 6, 2012. "PLEASE FORGIVE ME". Official Charts Company. "ARIA Top 50 Singles for 1993". Australian Recording Industry Association. Gerosa, Melina (February 4, 1994). "Bryan Adams performs in Vietnam". Entertainment Weekly. Strauss, Neil (October 10, 1994). "Memphis Has a Tribute to Elvis For a New World of Consumers". The New York Times. Rosenblum, Trudi Miller (May 13, 1995). "Pavarotti Expands Circle Of 'Friends'". Billboard. Vol. 107, no. 19. p. 16. ISSN 0006-2510. Parmeggiani, Luciano (June 20, 2014). "Luciano e Bryan cantano al sole" [Luciano and Bryan sing in the sun]. Famiglia Cristiana (in Italian). "PAVAROTTI & FRIENDS 2". Universal Music Group. "Bryan Adams". Golden Globe Award. "Best-Selling Records of 1995". Billboard. Vol. 108, no. 3. January 20, 1996. p. 56. ISSN 0006-2510. "Top RPM Adult Contemporary: Issue 9218". Library and Archives Canada. July 17, 2013. "Top RPM Singles: Issue 3034". Library and Archives Canada. RPM. July 17, 2013. "Top RPM Singles: Issue 9911". Library and Archives Canada. RPM. July 17, 2013. "Top RPM Singles: Issue 9224". Library and Archives Canada. RPM. July 17, 2013. Eames, Tom (July 27, 2021). "Bryan Adams' 15 best songs ever, ranked". Smooth Radio (2014). "18 TIL I DIE". Official Charts Company. "Australian Charts – Bryan Adams – 18 til I Die". ARIA Charts. "RIAA Certifications". Recording Industry Association of America. Archived from the original on August 8, 2013. Retrieved June 24, 2008. "BPI Certifications". British Phonographic Industry. Archived from the original on April 24, 2008. Retrieved June 24, 2008. "Golden Globe Awards for Bryan Adams". Golden Globe Award. Lau, Melody (January 23, 2024). "Every Canadian who has ever been nominated for best original song at the Oscars". CBC News. Harrington, Richard (November 16, 1997). "DION & STREISAND, TEAMING WITH EMOTION". The Washington Post. "Let's Talk About Love by Bryan Adams". SecondHandSongs. "Official Singles Chart top ten0 (14 December 1997 – 20 December 1997)". Official Charts Company. Retrieved November 23, 2020. "Official Singles Chart top ten0(06 December 1998 – 12 December 1998)". Official Charts Company. Retrieved November 23, 2020. Myers, Justin (May 31, 2019). "10 girl group stars who went it alone". Official Charts Company. "Chicane feat Bryan Adams". Official Charts Company. "Bryan Adams". Universal Music Group. February 12, 2020. Bliss, Karen (May 25, 2023). "It's Only Love… and that's all. A look back on the incredible partnership between Bryan Adams and the late Tina Turner". Canadian Songwriters Hall of Fame. Tina Turner - Celebrate! (Live from London, 1999) [Full Concert] – via YouTube. "New Year's Eve Concerts: Metallica, Red Hot Chili Peppers, Eagles". MTV News. December 11, 1999. "Elton John – One Night Only (The Greatest Hits)". Discogs. "Bryan Adams live at Slane Castle : Ireland 2000". Michigan State University. January 29, 2024. "The Who Live at Royal Albert Hall". The Who. "THE ARC WEEKLY TOP 40 ARCHIVES: TOP POP ARTISTS of the PAST 25 YEARS: 1-50". rockonthenet.com. Sexton, Paul (September 30, 2004). "Adams Finds 'Room' Atop Euro Albums Chart". Billboard. "Room Service". Elpee.jp. "DEF LEPPARD And BRYAN ADAMS To Embark On 26-Date 'Rock 'N Roll Double-Header Tour'". Blabbermouth.net. March 7, 2005. "Barrie wins Canadian Live 8 concert". CBC News. June 21, 2005. Never Let Go (Original Version). March 2, 2021. LEGASPI, ALTHEA (June 19, 2020). "Hear Aretha Franklin's Previously Unreleased Solo Version of 'Never Gonna Break My Faith'". Rolling Stone. "Bobby". Golden Globe Awards. "Joel and Adams in free Rome concert". Irish Examiner. August 1, 2006. "Notte di musica al Colosseo in 500 mila per Adams e Joel" [Night of music at the Colosseum in 500 thousand for Adams and Joel]. la Repubblica (in Italian). Rome. July 31, 2006. "The Square of Fame". Wembley Park. Ali, Alex (May 11, 2007). "Bryan Adams prints the square". hillingdontimes.co.uk. "Various – Music From And Inspired By Bridge To Terabithia". Discogs. Cohen, Jonathan (April 8, 2008). "Wal-Mart secures album exclusive". Billboard.com. "Adams' new album is only at Wal-Mart". Gleaner Company. April 11, 2008. "Bryan Adams To Play 11 Cities In 11 Countries In 11 Days". Uncut. February 19, 2008. "Bryan Adams bringing his hits to DTE show with Rod Stewart". MLive Media Group. August 5, 2008. Houston, Gordon (September 8, 2023). "Bryan Adams has ties to Canadian postage lore". Penticton Herald. "Canadian Recording Artists". Canada Post. July 2, 2009. Bierly, Mandi (June 25, 2009). "Jason Aldean & Bryan Adams on 'CMT Crossroads' = 'Heaven'". Entertainment Weekly. "BRYAN ADAMS, JASON ALDEAN SCHEDULE 'CMT CROSSROADS'". CMT. April 28, 2009. "CMT Crossroads Season 8 Episodes". TV Guide. "Jason & Bryan Adams' CMT Crossroads Set to Air June 26th". Jason Aldean. September 25, 2009. Cantrell, LB (April 28, 2009). "Jason Aldean to Meet Bryan Adams at Crossroads". MusicRow. "The melody maker". CNN. December 1, 2009. Collis, Clark (November 24, 2009). "Bryan Adams pens song for new movie 'Old Dogs': Listen to the exclusive stream here!". Entertainment Weekly. "Nelly Furtado and Bryan Adams - Bang The Drum". International Olympic Committee. Johnson, Brian D. (April 3, 2012). "Bryan Adams still sings straight from the heart". MacLeans Magazine. Quill, Greg (May 19, 2010). "Bryan Adams jams with Stephen Harper". Toronto Star. "Harper jams with Bryan Adams at 24 Sussex". CTV News. May 19, 2010. Murphy, Brien (October 27, 2011). "Q-and-A with Bryan Adams on 'Bare Bones' tour". Observer-Dispatch. Wirt, John (June 10, 2014). "Bryan Adams brings 'Bare Bones' style to New Orleans". The Times-Picayune/The New Orleans Advocate. "Bryan Adams wanted to keep 'Bare Bones' modes". The Canadian Press. November 14, 2010. "Grammy-Winning, Singer-Songwriter Bryan Adams Set to Release New Live CD, Bare Bones Available November 16, 2010 on Decca" (Press release). PR Newswire. September 29, 2010. "Bryan Adams to perform at World Cup opening ceremony". NDTV. February 7, 2011. Karim, Fariha (February 17, 2011). "Bryan Adams a sideshow as Bangladesh goes wild for the World Cup". The Guardian. Rodrigues, Collin (February 8, 2011). "Bryan Adams to open ICC Cricket World Cup". Hindustan Times. "Bryan Adams enthralls fans in Kathmandu". NDTV. Press Trust of India. February 21, 2011. Wachtel, Katya (February 21, 2011). "A Young Banker Got Plucked From The Audience And Stole The Show At A Bryan Adam's Concert This Weekend". Business Insider. "BRYAN ADAMS THE BARE BONES TOUR LIVE AT THE SYDNEY OPERA HOUSE". Australian Classification Board. Hampp, Andrew (April 12, 2013). "Michael Buble Q&A: 'A Lot of Stuff I Did, I Was Just Trying to Do an Impersonation'". Billboard. "Bryan Adams, 'Tracks of My Years': Exclusive Album Premiere". Billboard. September 26, 2014. "Bryan Adams goes way back in new album Tracks of my Years". CBC News. October 1, 2014. "Bryan Adams in Concert ~ Preview – Great Performances". PBS. February 13, 2015. Twomey, Callum (September 7, 2015). "Adams, Goulding, Isaak headline GF show". Australian Football League. "BBC- Bryan Adams to perform at exclusive BBC New Year's Eve concert". BBC News. December 3, 2015. "Official Music Video Chart top 50 (16 October 2016 – 22 October 2016)". Official Charts Company. October 16, 2016. "Get The Ultimate Bryan Adams As The Iconic Singer/Songwriter Releases A Brand-New Best Of Featuring Two New Songs" (Press release). PR Newswire. October 13, 2017. "Rocker Bryan Adams marks new album 'Ultimate' for release Nov. 3". CTV News. The Canadian Press. October 6, 2017. "Rocker Bryan Adams to release new album Nov. 3". CBC News. The Canadian Press. October 7, 2017. "Bryan Adams wraps up India tour with gig in Gurugram, says he's little Indian by nature". Hindustan Times. October 15, 2018. GURBAXANI, AMIT (October 15, 2018). "Inside the Mumbai leg of Bryan Adams' five-city Ultimate Tour". Vogue. Sheldon, Bobbi (December 5, 2017). "Bryan Adams announces June stop at Red Rocks". KUSA. Gooch, Carly (November 4, 2018). "Bryan Adams fan rejoice - he's coming to Nelson". Stuff. Wild, Stephi (March 11, 2018). "Bryan Adams, Jerry Mitchell, and the PRETTY WOMAN Team Talk How the Broadway-Bound Musical Came About". BroadwayWorld. GRAFF, GARY (November 1, 2021). "Songwriters Bryan Adams, Jim Vallance helped take hit film to stage". The Oakland Press. "Taylor Swift Surprises Toronto Crowd With Bryan Adams 'Summer of '69' Duet: Watch". August 5, 2018. Archived from the original on April 30, 2019. Retrieved December 7, 2020. "Taylor Swift: An Iconic Duet with Bryan Adams,"Summer of 69"". countrythangdaily.com. November 5, 2020. Retrieved December 7, 2020. "Bryan Adams enlists Ed Sheeran, Jennifer Lopez for upcoming album". CBC News. January 17, 2020. Retrieved January 17, 2020. Stavropoulos, Laura (February 15, 2019). "Bryan Adams Shares Duet With Jennifer Lopez, 'That's How Strong Our Love Is'". Universal Music Group. Retrieved December 7, 2020. "Bryan Adams Is Back On Top With Shine A Light Debuting At No. 1". FYIMusicNews. March 11, 2019. Retrieved December 1, 2020. "Bryan Adams full Official Chart". Official Charts Company. January 5, 1985. Retrieved December 1, 2020. "Swisscharts.com – Bryan Adams – Shine a Light". Swiss Hitparade. Retrieved December 1, 2020. "Austria Top 40 Alben 15.03.2019". Ö3 Austria Top 40. Retrieved December 1, 2020. "Official New Zealand Music Chart Bryan Adams Shine A Light 11/03/2019". Official New Zealand Music Chart. Retrieved December 1, 2020. "Offizielle Deutsche Charts Bryan Adams Shine a Light". GfK Entertainment charts. Retrieved December 1, 2020. "Canadian album certifications – Bryan Adams – Shine a Light". Music Canada. March 12, 2019. Retrieved December 1, 2020. Warner, Denise (June 29, 2020). "Here Are All the Winners From the 2020 Juno Awards". Billboard. Retrieved December 1, 2020. Legaspi, Althea (June 19, 2020). "Hear Aretha Franklin's Previously Unreleased Solo Version of 'Never Gonna Break My Faith'". Rolling Stone. Retrieved December 9, 2020. Rosen, Jody (June 25, 2019). "Here Are Hundreds More Artists Whose Tapes Were Destroyed in the UMG Fire". The New York Times. Retrieved June 28, 2019. "Bryan Adams Releases Christmas EP, titled 'Christmas EP'". American Songwriter. November 18, 2019. Retrieved December 1, 2020. "Robbie Williams releases his epic duet with Bryan Adams for his new Christmas album". The Breeze. November 14, 2019. Retrieved December 1, 2020. "All-star BBC Children in Need charity single announced". www.officialcharts.com. Retrieved November 13, 2020. "Official Singles Chart top ten0 – 20 November 2020 – 26 November 2020". www.officialcharts.com. Retrieved November 20, 2020. "Official Singles Sales Chart top ten0 – 20 November 2020 – 26 November 2020". www.officialcharts.com. Retrieved November 20, 2020. "Bon Jovi 2020 Tour Announcement". bonjovi.com. January 15, 2020. Retrieved December 7, 2020. Schneider, Marc (July 28, 2021). "Bryan Adams Signs With BMG in First New Label Deal in 40-Plus Years". Billboard. Retrieved July 28, 2021. Krol, Charlotte (October 11, 2021). "Bryan Adams announces 2022 UK tour in support of new album 'So Happy It Hurts'". NME. Retrieved October 12, 2021. "2023 GRAMMY Nominations: See The Complete Nominees List". www.grammy.com. Retrieved February 1, 2023. Ali, Amir (December 17, 2021). "Bryan Adams Vancouver New Year's show cancelled over Omicron concerns". Daily Hive. Wild, Stephi (February 18, 2022). "VIDEOS: Bryan Adams Sings the Songs of PRETTY WOMAN THE MUSICAL". BroadwayWorld. ""Pretty Woman: The Musical" soundtrack, with songs written by Bryan Adams, coming next month". KTLO-FM. August 9, 2018. Bryan Adams Pretty Woman - The Musical – via YouTube. Graff, Gary (March 7, 2022). "Bryan Adams talks missed Rock Hall inductions, lockdown creative spark, new album & more". The Plain Dealer. McCabe, Kathy (March 26, 2022). "Bryan Adams: why the famous Canadian rocker has 'done a Taylor Swift'". The Daily Telegraph. Farrell, David (December 18, 2023). "Bryan Adams Splits with Longtime Manager Bruce Allen". Billboard. Derdeyn, Stuart (December 21, 2023). "Bryan Adams splits from Vancouver manager Bruce Allen after 40 years". Vancouver Sun. Kot, Greg (April 29, 1992). "Bryan Adams Works Hard To Please, Succeeds More Often Than Not". Chicago Tribune. Retrieved December 10, 2020. "History of Prism, Jim Vallance Discography". jimvallance.com. Retrieved December 6, 2020. "Let Me Take You Dancing by Bryan Adams". jimvallance.com. Retrieved December 6, 2020. "War Machine by Kiss". jimvallance.com. Retrieved December 6, 2020. "You Want It You Got It by Bryan Adams". jimvallance.com. Archived from the original on November 2, 2015. "Reckless by Bryan Adams". jimvallance.com. Archived from the original on September 29, 2010. "Work in Progress... (many records not yet listed)". mixthis.com. Retrieved December 7, 2020. "Waking Up the Neighbors by Bryan Adams". jimvallance.com. Archived from the original on June 14, 2020. Li, Victor (February 21, 2020). "Career Killers: "18 'Til I Die" by Bryan Adams". victor-li.com. Retrieved December 6, 2020. "11 by Bryan Adams". jimvallance.com. Retrieved December 6, 2020. Schlüter, Jörn (October 16, 2015). "Bryan Adams Get Up, reviews". Rolling Stone Germany (in German). Peacock, Tim (January 17, 2019). "NEWS Bryan Adams Shares New Song 'Shine A Light' Co-Written With Ed Sheeran". Universal Music Group. Retrieved December 7, 2020. Wheeler, Brad (October 30, 2014). "Tracking Bryan Adams's years of influences in his new album". The Globe and Mail. Wood, James (April 28, 2020). "Bryan Adams: "I realized I had made it when I could pay my rent for more than a month without relying on anyone"". Guitar World. Swash, Rosie (March 11, 2008). "Liked by Bryan". The Guardian. "Kerrang! End Of Year Lists". rocklistmusic.co.uk. Retrieved January 15, 2021. "The Best AOR Albums Of All Time". rocklistmusic.co.uk. October 29, 1988. Retrieved January 15, 2021. Antonucci, Gabriele (March 20, 2020). "L'album del giorno: Bryan Adams, Reckless" (in Italian). Panorama. Retrieved January 15, 2021. Simpson, Dave (November 26, 2014). "Bryan Adams review – clinically dispatched hits still thrill the masses". The Guardian. Retrieved January 15, 2021. "Bryan Adams: Hit Was About Sex, Not 1969". CBS News. September 8, 2008. Retrieved January 15, 2021. "Bryan Adams: How the 'Groover From Vancouver' became famous". Magic (UK radio station). planetradio.co.uk. August 9, 2020. Retrieved January 15, 2021. Childs, Paul (February 12, 2018). "Examining the Many Movie Songs of Bryan Adams". Den of Geek. Retrieved January 15, 2021. Bliss, Karen (September 25, 2022). "David Foster, Bryan Adams, Alanis Morissette & More Inducted Into Canadian Songwriters Hall of Fame". Billboard. Retrieved November 29, 2023. Westhead, Rick (February 11, 2011). "Bryan Adams' star burns brightly in India". Toronto Star. Ghosh, Devarsi (October 12, 2018). "Indians love Bryan Adams because 'Summer of 69' is almost a Hindi song now". Quartz. Singh, Nirmika (September 2018). "Can't Stop This Thing We Started Bryan Adams Is Back In India!". Rolling Stone – via Magzter. Javeri, Lakshmi Govindrajan (March 13, 2022). "As Bryan Adams releases his 15th album, here's a love letter to India's favourite Canadian rocker". Firstpost. "Bryan Adams: It's always an adventure whenever I've been in India". The Indian Express. October 13, 2018. "About Us". The Bryan Adams Foundation. "1985: Was Live Aid the best rock concert ever?". BBC News. July 13, 1985. "Photo of Bryan ADAMS, Bryan Adams performing on stage at the Nelson..." Getty Images. April 21, 2009. Mein Sommer '88 - Wie die Stars die DDR rockten (HQ) (in German). January 13, 2014 – via YouTube. "Der legendäre Rocksommer der DDR" [The legendary rock summer of the GDR]. Die Welt (in German). June 1988. Kemp, Matt (November 7, 2021). "If I can't dance, I don't want your revolution! 50 years of Greenpeace and Music". Greenpeace. Everley, Dave (February 5, 2020). "Rock Aid Armenia: how the ultimate version of Smoke On The Water was recorded". loudersound.com. Beckonert, Matthias (July 20, 2020). "'The Wall' in Berlin: A Symbol of Reunification". Deutsche Welle. "Events in Music History in 1993". On This Day. January 29, 1993. "Past Concerts – Farm Aid (April 24, 1993 Ames, Iowa)". Farm Aid. Archived from the original on May 23, 2011. Retrieved December 2, 2020. "TNT Presents - A Gift of Song - New York - January 1, 1997". Getty Images. October 13, 2010. "Benefit concerts: An abbreviated history". CBC News. January 21, 2010. Singh, Gurmukh (January 8, 2005). "Bryan Adams stars in Canadian tsunami concert". Hindustan Times. "CBC tsunami benefit raises more than $4 million". CBC News. January 14, 2005. "Live 8 Concert in Canada". Getty Images. July 2, 2005. "Bryan Adams in Canadian Live 8". Hindustan Times. Associated Press. June 23, 2005. "BRYAN ADAMS REACHES OUT TO ASIA WITH BOLLYWOOD QUEEN". Asian Pacific Post. September 20, 2005. "Stars sign guitar for tsunami victims". Irish Examiner. November 25, 2005. Stickler, Jon (March 26, 2010). "Bryan Adams Tickets & Tour Dates Confirmed". Stereoboard. Rush, Curtis (February 28, 2008). "Sunnybrook gets $8M gift". Toronto Star. "Bryan Adams performs to Karachi". BBC News. January 29, 2006. "Bryan Adams hails Karachi concert 'eye-opening', 'amazing'". CBC News. February 1, 2006. "Bryan Adams in Pakistan for quake relief gig". The New Zealand Herald. January 29, 2006. "Adams's peace concerts called off". BBC News. October 15, 2007. "Adams' peace concerts cancelled over security". Irish Examiner. October 16, 2007. "Peace concert in Jericho with Bryan Adams cancelled". CBC News. October 12, 2007. "Bryan Adams lands Juno Awards humanitarian honour". CBC.ca. January 13, 2010. Retrieved November 24, 2020. Hart, Courtney (February 2010). "Bryan Adams to Receive Humanitarian Spirit Award At Canadian Music Week". kingstonherald.com. Retrieved November 24, 2020. "Bryan Adams joins KILLING Cancer concert". Music Gear News. Retrieved November 24, 2020. "Sting & Bryan Adams to Honor MTV Co-Founder at Charity Gala". ABC News. October 9, 2013. Retrieved November 24, 2020. "Prince Harry attends Bryan Adams's war veterans photo exhibition". Digital Spy. November 12, 2014. Karen, Bliss (May 8, 2015). "Canadian Music Industry Honors Bryan Adams, Cowboy Junkies, Warner Music Exec Steve Kane". Billboard. Retrieved November 24, 2020. Smith, Nigel M (April 11, 2016). "Bryan Adams cancels Mississippi tour dates in protest over anti-LGBT law". The Guardian. Retrieved December 11, 2020. Kreps, Daniel (October 2017). "See Bruce Springsteen, Bryan Adams Sing 'Cuts Like a Knife' in Toronto". Rolling Stone. Retrieved November 24, 2020. Thomas, Kingsley (December 5, 2019). "Why rockstar Bryan Adams opened a new playground in West London". mylondon.news. Retrieved November 25, 2020. Goolistan, Cooper (November 20, 2015). "Bryan Adams helps Chelsea school build all-weather outdoor area". mylondon.news. Retrieved November 25, 2020. Bliss, Karen (May 6, 2019). "Q&A: DHL Exec Shines A Light on Eco-Partnership With Bryan Adams To Plant Almost A Million Trees". samaritanmag.com. Retrieved May 16, 2019. John R. Kennedy (April 27, 2020). "Canadian Artists Join Voices For 'Lean On Me'". iheartradio.ca. Retrieved October 21, 2021. Claire Shaffer (April 27, 2020). "Justin Bieber, Geddy Lee and More Sing 'Lean on Me' in Bill Withers Tribute. Avril Lavigne, Bryan Adams and more pay tribute to late artist in charity livestream". rollingstone.com. Retrieved October 21, 2021. Sexton, Paul (November 10, 2020). "BBC Radio 2 Allstars To Release Official BBC Children In Need Single". udiscovermusic.com. Retrieved November 20, 2020. Heilbron, Alexandra (January 18, 2010). "Bryan Adams to receive humanitarian award". Tribute. "Pitch perfect". Evening Chronicle. June 2, 2006. "Bryan Adams set to bring highly anticipated tour to the BIC next week". Bournemouth Daily Echo. April 24, 2016. "Brian May live at the Royal Opera House, London, UK (Dian Fossey Gorilla Fund) [10.11.2002]". queenconcerts.com. November 10, 2002. Retrieved November 26, 2020. "Bryan Adams Acts as Human Shield Between a Whale and Its Hunters". Everythingzoomer.com. "NEW CHAIRMAN AND PROJECTS OFFICER/ASSISTANT". St. Vincent and the Grenadines Environment Fund. October 5, 2021. "St. Vincent and the Grenadines: Mother Nature's Paradise" (Press release). Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States. "How did coronavirus start and where did it come from? Was it really Wuhan's animal market?". The Guardian. April 28, 2020. Retrieved November 23, 2020. Aviles, Gwen (May 12, 2020). "Singer Bryan Adams slammed as racist for post blaming 'bat eating' people for coronavirus". NBC News. Retrieved May 12, 2020. "Bryan Adams apologizes for COVID-19 Instagram post condemned as racist, inflammatory". cbc.ca. May 12, 2020. "Bryan Adams attends the official unveiling of the new Queen stamp". Canada Post (Press release). March 20, 2007. Archived from the original on March 13, 2007. Retrieved March 20, 2007. "Singer Bryan Adams smiles during the LEAD Awards 2006 at the..." Getty Images. March 16, 2006. Retrieved January 17, 2020. Drier, Melissa (November 3, 2014). "Bryan Adams Talks Zoo Magazine". WWD. Retrieved January 17, 2020. "CELEBRITIES SUPPORT FROM MORE THAN 100 FAMOUS AMBASSADORS". Hear the World. Blackall, Luke (November 14, 2013). "Bryan Adams' book 'Wounded: The Legacy of War' shows the silent legacy of conflict". The Independent. London. "Bryan Adams". Izzy Gallery. Retrieved January 17, 2020. "Seduced by the Lens: Bryan Adams". Musée Magazine. February 21, 2018. Retrieved January 17, 2020. "Pirelli Calendar makes comeback for 2022 as it goes On The Road with Iggy Pop, Rita Ora, Cher and Grimes". Car Dealer. August 8, 2021. Retrieved August 27, 2021. "Pirelli: Creative Powerhouse Bryan Adams takes on the 48th Pirelli Calendar". Levine, Nick (August 7, 2008). "Annie Lennox to release first hits album". Digital Spy. Retrieved December 4, 2020. "Bryan Adams Shot Amy Winehouse's Album Cover". Spin. November 1, 2011. Retrieved December 4, 2020. Ling, Dave (August 31, 2014). "World Exclusive: Status Quo Stripped Bare". Team Rock. Retrieved December 4, 2020. "Status Quo strip down for album". Independent.ie. September 1, 2014. Retrieved December 4, 2020. Tina Benitez-Eves (March 10, 2022). "Rammstein Reveal New Album 'Zeit,' Single, and Cover Art Photographed by Bryan Adams". American Songwriter. Retrieved March 12, 2022. "Rammstein: Neues Album Zeit kommt am 29.04.2022". Metal Hammer (in German). March 10, 2022. Retrieved March 12, 2022. "Bryan Adams – Fine Art Photography". Photography.ca. Retrieved November 27, 2020. "Bryan Adams -- June 5, 2005". ABC News. January 7, 2006. Retrieved November 27, 2020. "American Women". Publishers Weekly. January 5, 2005. Retrieved November 27, 2020. Hyman, Dan (November 28, 2012). "Inside Bryan Adams' New Photography Book, 'Exposed'". Rolling Stone. Retrieved November 27, 2020. Graff, Gary (February 10, 2012). "Bryan Adams on New Music, Working with a Topless P!nk". Billboard. Retrieved November 27, 2020. "Wounded – The Legacy of War by Bryan Adams". Steidl. Retrieved November 27, 2020. Kombercova, Katerina (November 20, 2014). "An Interview: Bryan Adams! Wounded: The Legacy of War". kaltblut-magazine.com. Retrieved November 27, 2020. "Untitled by Bryan Adams". Steidl. Retrieved November 27, 2020. "Untitled, by Bryan Adams – John Pawson". John Pawson. August 2016. Retrieved November 27, 2020. "Canadians by Bryan Adams". Steidl. Retrieved November 27, 2020. "Bryan Adams Features Notable Canadians in Photography Exhibit and Book". Zoomer. July 15, 2017. Retrieved November 27, 2020. "Homeless by Bryan Adams". Steidl. Retrieved November 27, 2020. "Photography Books – 'Homeless' by Brian Adams". phacemag.com. Retrieved November 27, 2020. "Bryan Adams – with a portrait from his photography exhibition, Made in Canada (paragraph – 13)" (PDF). rom.on.ca. Retrieved November 21, 2020. "Art Gallery President denies infighting". cbc.ca. April 4, 2000. Retrieved November 21, 2020. "Portfolio – Bryan Adams (28/11/2006 do 07/01/2007)". galerijafotografija.si. Retrieved November 21, 2020. Hutchinson, Charles (May 18, 2007). "Bryan Adams, Portfolio, A Major Exhibition of Photographs, Nunnington Hall, near Helmsley, until June 10". The Press. Retrieved November 21, 2020. Meredith, Bryan (September 12, 2007). "Summer of 35 mm! Bryan Adams, Other Rock Stars, Enjoy Photographing…Each Other". observer.com. Retrieved November 21, 2020. "Modern Muses by Bryan Adams". National Portrait Gallery. Retrieved November 21, 2020. Von Ursula, Ernst. "Der Rockstar und die Fußball-Models". augsburger-allgemeine.de. Retrieved November 21, 2020. "Bryan Adams Unveils Hear the World Ambassadors Photo Exhibit". artdaily.com. Retrieved November 21, 2020. "Exhibition ambassador portraits in London". hear-the-world.com. Retrieved November 21, 2020. Casadei, Marta (November 23, 2010). "American Women 2010". Vogue. Retrieved November 21, 2020. "Bryan Adams – Exposed". Exhibitions. Multimedia Art Museum, Moscow. Retrieved February 22, 2013. "The Goss-Michael Foundation presents Bryan Adams 'Exposed' Photography Exhibition". dallas.culturemap.com. December 22, 2012. Retrieved November 21, 2020. "Bryan Adams – Exposed". oklahomacontemporary.org. Retrieved November 21, 2020. McLachlan, Sean (February 5, 2013). "Bryan Adams Opens Photography Exhibition in Düsseldorf". Gadling.com. Retrieved January 24, 2014. "Rocker Bryan Adams Opens with Photography Show at Marfa Contemporary". marfapublicradio.org. Retrieved November 21, 2020. "Bryan Adams OstLicht Galerie fur Fotografie Wien". 1995-2015.undo.net. Retrieved November 21, 2020. "Bryan Adams Exposed – Akira Ikeda Gallery/Berlin". akiraikedagallery.com. Retrieved November 21, 2020. "Glenbow Museum, Bryan Adams "Exposed"". gallerieswest.ca. February 11, 2014. Retrieved November 21, 2020. derStandard.at (June 20, 2013). ""Exposed": Fotos von Bryan Adams: Rund 60 fotografische Arbeiten des kanadischen Rock-Stars sind bis 22. September in der Wiener Galerie Ostlicht zu sehen " Kultur". Derstandard.at. Retrieved December 15, 2013. "events.at". Archived from the original on April 24, 2013. Retrieved September 22, 2014. "Gesichter des Krieges". Stadthaus Ulm. Archived from the original on April 18, 2014. Retrieved July 2, 2014. "Bryan Adams s'expose". Musée national des beaux-arts du Québec. Retrieved November 21, 2020. "Bryan Adams' heartstopping images of wounded British". The Independent. November 3, 2014. Retrieved November 21, 2020. "Bryan Adams expõe fotografia no Centro Cultural de Cascais". cascais.pt. Retrieved November 21, 2020. "Young Gallery, Brussels, Belgium Bryan Adams Exposed". artlimited.net. September 23, 2015. Retrieved November 21, 2020. "Bryan Adams – Exposed". en.csw.torun.pl. November 10, 2015. Retrieved November 21, 2020. Widergren, Michaela (June 20, 2016). "Bryan Adams - EXPOSED". odalisque Magazine. "Bryan Adams, Opening – October 11, 2016, Vivacom Art Hall, Sofia". musizfoundation.com. Retrieved November 21, 2020. "Werkhallen in Oberwinter – Fotografien des Multi-Künstlers Bryan Adams". February 15, 2017. "Bryan Adams' Canadians Returns to the ROM for Canada 150 Festival Weekend". Royal Ontario Museum. June 12, 2017. Retrieved November 21, 2020. "Canadians by Bryan Adams". international.gc.ca. October 13, 2017. Retrieved November 21, 2020. "Bryan Adams — THE PHOTOGALLERY". thephotogallery.se. Retrieved November 21, 2020. "Photography Exhibition Bryan Adams: Exposed". loeildelaphotographie.com. Retrieved November 21, 2020. "Izzy Gallery, Bryan Adams Exposed". Izzy Gallery. Retrieved November 21, 2020. "Bryan Adams-Exposed". Fotografiska. Retrieved September 20, 2020. "Exhibitions Bryan Adams Gericke + Paffrath Gallery". gerickepaffrath.de. Retrieved November 27, 2020. "EXPOSED Bryan Adams". us.leica-camera.com. Retrieved November 21, 2020. "Bryan Adams: Homeless". atlasgallery.com. Retrieved June 9, 2021. Adrian Lobb (June 3, 2021). "Bryan Adams' photography will change how you think about homelessness". bigissue.com. Retrieved June 9, 2021. "BRYAN ADAMS EXPOSED 18.11.21-06.02.22". ipfo.ch. Retrieved December 4, 2021. "House of Photography". myswitzerland.com. Retrieved December 4, 2021. "IPFO House of Photography presents "Exposed" by Bryan Adams". archyworldys.com. November 15, 2021. Retrieved December 4, 2021. "Bryan Adams Exposed". Osthaus-Museum Hagen. Retrieved February 12, 2022. Dirk Schmidt, Lukas Berghammer and Gastautor (February 12, 2022). "Bryan Adams im Osthaus-Museum Hagen – "Exposed" – Aufrichtige Porträts" (in German). ruhr.today. Retrieved February 12, 2022. "Fotos von Bryan Adams in Hagen" (in German). DK-Online.de. February 18, 2022. Retrieved February 18, 2022. "Bryan Adams: dal rock alla fotografia, la mostra gratuita a Milano" (in Italian). Affaritaliani.it. April 8, 2022. Retrieved April 12, 2022. "Bryan Adams In Colour". atlasgallery.com. Retrieved January 18, 2024. Luxury London (June 22, 2023). "Leica Gallery London presents Bryan Adams' most celebrated photographs". luxurylondon.co.uk. Retrieved January 18, 2024. "BRYAN ADAMS In Colour 14.10.2023 bis 18.11.2023 Galerie Camera Work" (in German). visitberlin.de. January 18, 2024. Retrieved January 18, 2024. "Bryan Adams - Günter Grass-Haus - Die Lübecker Museen" (in German). grass-haus.de. Retrieved January 18, 2024. "SEE THROUGH THE LENS OF BRYAN ADAMS". mallorcasunshineradio.com. Retrieved February 15, 2024. "Photo Exhibition BRYAN ADAMS" (in Korean). bryanadams.co.kr. Retrieved January 18, 2024. "Bryan Adams on Animal Rights and Being Vegan". People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals. April 21, 2009. Jacques, Adam (November 9, 2014). "Bryan Adams: The singer-songwriter and photographer on falling asleep at the wheel, his vegan diet and his shots of wounded servicemen". The Independent. "Bryan Adams". Viva!. "Bryan Adams on Animal Rights and Being Vegan". People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals. April 21, 2009. SCHNURR, SAMANTHA (June 26, 2018). "Bryan Adams Insists He Was Just "Great Friends" With Princess Diana". E!. "Bryan Adams still sings straight from the heart". Macleans.ca. April 3, 2012. Retrieved June 18, 2012. DUBEY, TANYA (May 25, 2017). "I Stayed at Bryan Adams' Paris Home Listed on Airbnb & Here's Why it Left an Impression". Business Insider. Graff, Gary (October 30, 2021). "Bryan Adams Exits Tina Turner Rock Hall Tribute After Testing Positive for COVID-19". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved October 31, 2021. Dewar, Caitlyn (July 21, 2023). "Bryan Adams joins innovative music tech start up as co-founder". STV News. Retrieved July 26, 2023. "Bryan Adams joins Scottish music tech start-up Songbox". July 21, 2023. Retrieved December 4, 2023. "Bryan Adams, section Honours". Encyclopedia of Music in Canada. Retrieved August 23, 2019. "1990 Recipient: Bryan Adams – Vancouver". Order of British Columbia. Retrieved June 28, 2014. "Honours Secretariat". Office of the Governor General. Retrieved April 12, 2016. "Bryan Adams to play Ipswich Regent". Ipswich Borough Council. March 24, 2010. Archived from the original on July 3, 2013. Retrieved July 3, 2013. "Bryan Adams tickets to go on sale". Londonderry Sentinel. UK. October 13, 2009. Archived from the original on August 10, 2013. Retrieved February 7, 2011. "Bryan Adams Receives the Allan Waters Humanitarian Award". CARAS. January 13, 2010. Archived from the original on February 23, 2012. Retrieved January 16, 2010. "Honours Secretariat". Office of the Governor General. Retrieved April 12, 2016. "Honours Secretariat". Office of the Governor General. Retrieved April 12, 2016. "Honorary Fellowship". The Royal Photographic Society. Retrieved March 10, 2022. Benitez-Eves, Tina (November 14, 2022). "Bryan Adams, Patti Smith, R.E.M., Ann Wilson, Doobie Brothers Among 2023 Songwriters Hall of Fame Nominees". American Songwriter. Retrieved November 16, 2022. "Bryan Adams". IMDb. "Movie review – house of fools (2002)". rickmcginnis.com. Archived from the original on October 20, 2006. Chestang, Raphael (May 23, 2012). "EXCLUSIVE FIRST LOOK: 'Jock the Hero Dog'". Entertainment Tonight. Retrieved November 28, 2020. Scott, Katie (March 9, 2017). "Bryan Adams, Russell Peters to co-host 2017 Juno Awards". Global News. Retrieved November 28, 2020. "Bryan Adams Rocks!". BBC Radio 2. "Bryan Adams Announces U.S. Dates For Reckless 30th Anniversary Tour" (Press release). PR Newswire. February 24, 2015. "Bryan Adams Announces GET UP TOUR" (Press release). PR Newswire. October 22, 2015. McDermott, Maeve (April 29, 2019). "Bryan Adams and Billy Idol and launch co-headlining U.S. tour". USA Today. Ruggieri, Melissa (June 7, 2023). "Bryan Adams, Joan Jett jolt the pulse of rock 'n' roll at US tour opener". USA Today. "BRYAN ADAMS RETURNS TO THE ROAD WITH SO HAPPY IT HURTS 2023 TOUR" (Press release). Live Nation Entertainment. February 1, 2023. "Bryan Adams announces series of outdoor UK concerts for summer 2024". Smooth Radio (2014). December 11, 2023. Goode, Jay. Bryan Adams. Photographed by Al Purdi & Rick Stern. [s.l.]: Monarch Books, 1986. ISBN 0-921183-01-1 Bryan Adams at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Official website Bryan Adams at IMDb The Bryan Adams Foundation Bryan Adams On A&M Records Vincent and the Grenadines Environment Fund Entry at canadianbands.com Archived March 13, 2022, at the Wayback Machine