Leonardo Wilhelm DiCaprio (/diˈkæprioʊ, dɪ-/; Italian: [diˈkaːprjo]; born November 11, 1974) is an American actor and film producer. Known for his work in biographical and period films, he is the recipient of numerous accolades, including an Academy Award, a British Academy Film Award, and three Golden Globe Awards. As of 2019,[update] his films have grossed over $7.2 billion worldwide, and he has been placed eight times in annual rankings of the world's highest-paid actors. Born in Los Angeles, DiCaprio began his career in the late 1980s by appearing in television commercials. In the early 1990s, he had recurring roles in various television shows, such as the sitcom Parenthood, and had his first major film part as author Tobias Wolff in This Boy's Life (1993). He received critical acclaim and his first Academy Award and Golden Globe Award nominations for his performance as a developmentally disabled boy in What's Eating Gilbert Grape (1993). DiCaprio achieved international stardom with the star-crossed romances Romeo + Juliet (1996) and Titanic (1997). After the latter became the highest-grossing film in the world at the time, he reduced his workload for a few years. In an attempt to shed his image of a romantic hero, DiCaprio sought roles in other genres, including the 2002 crime dramas Catch Me If You Can and Gangs of New York; the latter marked the first of his many successful collaborations with director Martin Scorsese. DiCaprio continued to gain acclaim for his performances in the biopic The Aviator (2004), the political thriller Blood Diamond (2006), the crime drama The Departed (2006) and the romantic drama Revolutionary Road (2008). He later made environmental documentaries and starred in several high-profile directors' successful projects, including the action thriller Inception (2010), the western Django Unchained (2012), the biopic The Wolf of Wall Street (2013), the survival drama The Revenant (2015)—for which he won the Academy Award for Best Actor— the comedy-dramas Once Upon a Time in Hollywood (2019) and Don't Look Up (2021), and the crime drama Killers of the Flower Moon (2023). DiCaprio is the founder of Appian Way Productions—a production company that has made some of his films and the documentary series Greensburg (2008–2010)—and the Leonardo DiCaprio Foundation, a nonprofit organization devoted to promoting environmental awareness. A United Nations Messenger of Peace, he regularly supports charitable causes. In 2005, he was named a Commander of the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres for his contributions to the arts, and in 2016, he appeared in Time magazine's 100 most influential people in the world. DiCaprio was voted one of the 50 greatest actors of all time in a 2022 readers' poll by Empire. Leonardo Wilhelm DiCaprio was born on November 11, 1974, in Los Angeles, California. He is the only child of Irmelin Indenbirken, a legal secretary, and George DiCaprio, an underground comix artist and distributor; they met while attending college and moved to Los Angeles after graduating. His mother is German and his father is of Italian and German descent. His maternal grandfather, Wilhelm Indenbirken, was German, and his maternal grandmother, Helene Indenbirken, was a Russian immigrant living in Germany. DiCaprio was raised Catholic. Sources have falsely claimed his maternal grandmother was born in Odesa, Ukraine; there is no evidence that DiCaprio has any relatives of Ukrainian birth or heritage. DiCaprio's parents named him Leonardo because his pregnant mother first felt him kick while she was looking at a Leonardo da Vinci painting in the Uffizi museum in Florence, Italy. When DiCaprio was one year old, his parents divorced after his father fell in love with another woman and moved out. To raise him together, his parents moved into twin cottages with a shared garden in Echo Park, Los Angeles. DiCaprio's father lived with his girlfriend and her son, Adam Farrar, with whom DiCaprio developed a close bond. DiCaprio and his mother later moved to other neighborhoods, such as Los Feliz. He has described his parents as "bohemian in every sense of the word" and as "the people I trust the most in the world". DiCaprio has stated that he grew up poor in a neighborhood plagued with prostitution, crime and violence. Attending the Los Angeles Center for Enriched Studies for four years and later the Seeds Elementary School, he later enrolled at the John Marshall High School. DiCaprio disliked public school and wanted to audition for acting jobs instead. He dropped out of high school later, eventually earning a general equivalency diploma. As a child, DiCaprio wanted to become either a marine biologist or an actor. He eventually favored the latter; he liked impersonating characters and imitating people, and enjoyed seeing their reactions to his acting. According to DiCaprio, his interest in performing began at the age of two when he went onto the stage at a performance festival and danced spontaneously to a positive response from the crowd. He was also motivated to learn acting when Farrar's appearance in a television commercial earned him $50,000. DiCaprio has said in interviews that his first television appearance was in the children's series Romper Room, and that he was dismissed from the show for being disruptive. The show's host has denied that any children were removed from the show in this way. At 14, he began appearing in several commercials for Matchbox cars, which he calls his first role. DiCaprio later appeared in commercials for Kraft Singles, Bubble Yum and Apple Jacks. In 1989, he played the role of Glen in two episodes of the television show The New Lassie. At the beginning of his career, DiCaprio had difficulty finding an agent. When he found one, the agent suggested DiCaprio change his name to Lenny Williams to appeal to American audiences, which he declined to do. DiCaprio remained jobless for a year and a half, although he had 100 auditions. Following this lack of success, DiCaprio was going to give up acting but his father persuaded him to persevere. Motivated by his father and by the prospect of financial security, he continued to audition. After a talent agent, who knew his mother's friend, recommended him to casting directors, DiCaprio secured roles in about 20 commercials. By the early 1990s, DiCaprio began acting regularly on television, starting with a role in the pilot of The Outsiders (1990) and one episode of the soap opera Santa Barbara (1990), in which he played a teenage alcoholic. DiCaprio's career prospects improved when he was cast in Parenthood, a series based on the 1989 comedy film of the same name. To prepare for the role of Garry Buckman, a troubled teenager, he analyzed Joaquin Phoenix's performance in the original film. His work that year earned him two nominations at the 12th Youth in Film Awards—Best Young Actor in a Daytime Series for Santa Barbara and Best Young Actor Starring in a New Television Series for Parenthood. Around this time, he was a contestant on the children's game show Fun House, on which he performed several stunts, including catching the fish inside a small pool using only his teeth. DiCaprio made his film debut in 1991 as the stepson of an unscrupulous landlord in the low-budget horror sequel Critters 3 – a part he later described as "your average, no-depth, standard kid with blond hair". DiCaprio has stated that he prefers not to remember Critters 3, viewing it as "possibly one of the worst films of all time" and the kind of role he wanted to avoid in the future. Later in 1991, he became a recurring cast member on the sitcom Growing Pains, playing Luke Brower, a homeless boy who is taken in by the show's central family. Co-star Joanna Kerns recalls DiCaprio being "especially intelligent and disarming for his age" but she noted that he was also mischievous and jocular on set, and often made fun of his co-stars. DiCaprio was cast by the producers to appeal to young female audience, but his arrival did not improve the show's ratings and he left before the end of its run. He was nominated for a Young Artist Award for Best Young Actor Co-starring in a Television Series. DiCaprio also had an uncredited role in 1991 in one episode of Roseanne. In 1992, DiCaprio had a brief role in the first installment of the Poison Ivy film series, and was handpicked by Robert De Niro from a shortlist of 400 young actors to co-star with him in This Boy's Life. Adapted from the memoir by Tobias Wolff, the film focuses on the relationship between a rebellious teenager, Toby (DiCaprio), and his mother (Ellen Barkin) and abusive stepfather (De Niro). Director Michael Caton-Jones said that DiCaprio did not know how to behave on set; accordingly, Caton-Jones used a strict mentoring style, after which DiCaprio's behavior began to improve. Bilge Ebiri of Rolling Stone found that the powerful bond between Barkin and DiCaprio elevated the film, praising DiCaprio's portrayal of his character's complex growth from a rebellious teen to an independent young man. This Boy's Life was the first film that gained him recognition. DiCaprio played the developmentally disabled brother of Johnny Depp's character in What's Eating Gilbert Grape (1993), a comedy-drama about a dysfunctional Iowa family. Caton-Jones recommended DiCaprio to director Lasse Hallström, but he was initially skeptical, as he considered DiCaprio too good-looking for the part. Hallström cast DiCaprio after he emerged as "the most observant" auditionee. To ensure authenticity in his portrayal, DiCaprio studied similarly impaired children and their mannerisms, and Hallström allowed him to create the character using his own researched attributes. The film became a critical success. At 19, DiCaprio earned a National Board of Review Award, as well as nominations for a Golden Globe Award and an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor, making him the seventh-youngest Oscar nominee in the category. "The film's real show-stopping turn comes from Mr. DiCaprio," wrote New York Times critic Janet Maslin, "who makes Arnie's many tics so startling and vivid that at first he is difficult to watch. The performance has a sharp, desperate intensity from beginning to end." Caryn James, also writing for The New York Times, said of his performances in This Boy's Life and What's Eating Gilbert Grape: "He made the raw, emotional neediness of those boys completely natural and powerful." DiCaprio's first role of 1995 was in Sam Raimi's Western The Quick and the Dead. When Sony Pictures became dubious over DiCaprio's casting, co-star Sharon Stone paid his salary herself. The film was released to dismal box office performance and mixed reviews from critics. DiCaprio next starred as a teenage Jim Carroll, a drug-addicted high school basketball player and budding writer, in the biopic The Basketball Diaries. He starred in the erotic drama Total Eclipse (1995), driven by the desire to showcase an exceptional performance, which would focus on his acting talent rather than his much-discussed physical appeal. Directed by Agnieszka Holland, it is a fictionalized account of the same-sex relationship between Arthur Rimbaud (DiCaprio) and Paul Verlaine (David Thewlis). DiCaprio was cast when River Phoenix died before filming began. Although the film failed commercially, it has been included in the catalog of the Warner Archive Collection, which releases classic and cult films from Warner Bros.' library on home video. A review in the San Francisco Chronicle called DiCaprio "his generation's great acting promise" but criticized the mismatch between Thewlis's "cultivated" British accent and DiCaprio's "Southern California twang". DiCaprio next starred opposite Claire Danes in Baz Luhrmann's Romeo + Juliet (1996), an abridged modernization of William Shakespeare's romantic tragedy, which retained the original Shakespearean dialogue. DiCaprio was initially unsure about another Romeo and Juliet adaptation, but at his father's suggestion, he agreed to examine Luhrmann's work more closely. DiCaprio and Luhrmann then spent a two-week workshop exchanging ideas, which led to the collaboration. Romeo + Juliet established DiCaprio as a leading Hollywood actor; according to film scholar Murray Pomerance, DiCaprio's newfound popularity helped the film become profitable only days after its release. Reviewing DiCaprio's early works, David Thomson of The Guardian called DiCaprio "a revelation" in What's Eating Gilbert Grape, "very moving" in This Boy's Life, "suitably desperate" in The Basketball Diaries and "a vital spark" in Romeo + Juliet. The latter earned DiCaprio a Silver Bear for Best Actor at the 1997 Berlin International Film Festival. He then portrayed a young man who has been committed to a mental asylum in Marvin's Room (1996), a family drama about two estranged sisters, played by Meryl Streep and Diane Keaton, who are reunited through tragedy. He played Hank, the troubled son of Streep's character. Lisa Schwarzbaum of Entertainment Weekly praised "the deeply gifted DiCaprio" for holding his own against veteran actresses Keaton and Streep, describing the three as "full-bodied and so powerfully affecting that you're carried along on the pleasure of being in the presence of their extraordinary talent". DiCaprio rejected a role in Boogie Nights (1997) to star opposite Kate Winslet in James Cameron's Titanic as members of different social classes who fall in love aboard RMS Titanic during its ill-fated maiden voyage. DiCaprio initially had doubts, but was eventually encouraged by Cameron to pursue the part. With a production budget of more than $200 million, the film was the most expensive in history at the time, and was shot at Rosarito, Baja California where a replica of the ship was created. Titanic became the highest-grossing film at the time, eventually earning more than $2.1 billion in box-office receipts worldwide. The role of Jack Dawson transformed DiCaprio into a superstar, resulting in intense adoration among teenage girls and young women that became known as "Leo-mania". The film won 11 Academy Awards—the most wins for any film – including Best Picture, but DiCaprio's failure to gain a nomination led to a protest against the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences (AMPAS) by more than 200 fans. He was nominated for other high-profile awards, including a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor. DiCaprio stated in 2000: "I have no connection with me during that whole Titanic phenomenon and what my face became around the world [...] I'll never reach that state of popularity again, and I don't expect to [...] It's not something I'm going to try to achieve either." In his 2015 Rolling Stone article, Ebiri called the role DiCaprio's best, writing that he and Winslet "infuse their earnest back-and-forth with so much genuine emotion that it's hard not to get swept up in their doomed love affair." A writer for Vanity Fair in 2008 similarly labeled them "Hollywood's most iconic screen couple" since Humphrey Bogart and Ingrid Bergman. Essaying her first viewing of the film in 2017, Vox contributor Alissa Wilkinson took note of DiCaprio's "boyish charm" and found his performance "natural and unaffected". The success of Titanic intensified DiCaprio's standing as a teen idol and romantic lead, an image from which he sought to dissociate himself. He reduced his workload "to learn to hear [his] own voice in choosing the roles" that he wanted to pursue. DiCaprio had a brief featured role in Woody Allen's 1998 satire of fame, Celebrity. Ebiri labeled DiCaprio "the best thing in the film". That year, he also took on the dual roles of villainous King Louis XIV and his secret, sympathetic twin brother Philippe in Randall Wallace's The Man in the Iron Mask, with common elements from the 1939 film of the same name and a 1929 film with Douglas Fairbanks. It received mixed to negative reviews, but grossed $180 million against a budget of $35 million. Entertainment Weekly critic Owen Gleiberman wrote that DiCaprio did not look old enough to play the part, but praised him as "a fluid and instinctive actor, with the face of a mischievous angel". The Guardian's Alex von Tunzelmann was similarly impressed with the actor's performance but found his talent wasted in the film. DiCaprio won a Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Screen Couple for the dual roles in 1999. Also in 1998, DiCaprio was cast to star in American Psycho (2000) for a reported salary of $20 million; after disagreements with Oliver Stone on the film's direction, DiCaprio left the project, taking the lead role in The Beach instead. Adapted from Alex Garland's 1996 novel, the film saw him play a backpacking American tourist who ends up in a secret island commune in the Gulf of Thailand. Budgeted at $50 million, the film earned almost three times that at the box office, but was negatively reviewed by critics, and earned him a nomination for the Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Actor. Todd McCarthy of Variety thought DiCaprio gave a compelling performance but his character lacked defining qualities. The film received criticism for damaging the filming location in Thailand, after which DiCaprio worked to restore the area. In the mid-1990s, DiCaprio agreed to be in the mostly improvised black-and-white short film Don's Plum as a favor to aspiring director R. D. Robb. When Robb expanded it to a full-length film, DiCaprio and co-star Tobey Maguire had its release blocked in the US and Canada by court order, arguing they never intended to make a feature film. The film premiered at the 2001 Berlin International Film Festival but remains obscure. DiCaprio turned down the role of Anakin Skywalker in Star Wars: Episode II – Attack of the Clones (2002), feeling unprepared to "take that dive" at the time. His first film that year was the biopic Catch Me If You Can, based on the life of Frank Abagnale Jr., who before his 19th birthday committed check fraud to make millions in the 1960s. Directed by Steven Spielberg, the film was shot across 147 different locations in 52 days, making it "the most adventurous, super-charged movie-making" DiCaprio had experienced yet. The film received critical acclaim and grossed $355 million against a budget of $52 million, becoming his second highest-grossing release after Titanic. Roger Ebert praised his departure from dark and troubled characters, and two Entertainment Weekly critics in 2018 called it DiCaprio's best role, labeling him "delightfully persuasive, deceptive, flirtatious, and sometimes tragic—and we dare you to find a better role, if you can". DiCaprio received his third Golden Globe nomination for his performance in the film. Also in 2002, DiCaprio starred in Martin Scorsese's Gangs of New York, a historical drama set in the mid-19th century in the Five Points district of New York City. Scorsese initially struggled selling his idea of realizing the film until DiCaprio became interested in starring in the film, and thus Miramax Films got involved with financing the project. Nonetheless, production on the film was plagued by overshooting of budgets and producer-director disagreements, resulting in an eight-month shoot. With a budget of $103 million, the film was the most expensive Scorsese had ever made. DiCaprio was drawn to playing Amsterdam Vallon, the young leader of an Irish-American street gang, as it marked a shift from "boyish" roles to a mature leading man. Gangs of New York earned $193 million worldwide and received positive critical response. Anne Thompson of The Observer took note of DiCaprio's "low-key, sturdy performance", but felt that co-star Daniel Day-Lewis overshadowed him. In 2004, DiCaprio founded the production company Appian Way Productions, a namesake of the Italian road. He was interested in finding unique source material and preserving its essence during development, citing previous experiences where the involvement of too many people influenced the final product in a negative way. DiCaprio first executive-produced The Assassination of Richard Nixon, which starred Sean Penn as Samuel Byck, and was screened at the 2004 Cannes Film Festival. DiCaprio and Scorsese reunited for a biopic of Howard Hughes, an American film director and aviation pioneer suffering from obsessive–compulsive disorder, in The Aviator (2004), which DiCaprio also co-produced under Appian Way. He initially developed the project with Michael Mann who was eventually replaced by Scorsese. The Aviator became a critical and financial success, grossing $213 million against its budget of $110 million. Simond Braund of Empire thought DiCaprio convincingly played a complex role and highlighted the scenes depicting Hughes's paranoia and obsession. He received his first Golden Globe Award for Best Actor — Motion Picture Drama and nominations for an Academy Award, a BAFTA Award and a Screen Actors Guild Award. In 2006, DiCaprio starred in the crime film The Departed and the political war thriller Blood Diamond. In Scorsese's The Departed, DiCaprio played the role of Billy Costigan, a state trooper working undercover in the Irish Mob in Boston, someone he characterizes as being in a "constant 24-hour panic attack". DiCaprio especially liked the experience of working with co-star Jack Nicholson, describing a scene with him as "one of the most memorable moments" of his life as an actor. In preparation, he visited Boston to interact with people associated with the Irish Mob and gained 15 pounds (6.8 kg) of muscle. Critically acclaimed, the film grossed $291 million against a budget of $90 million, becoming DiCaprio and Scorsese's highest-grossing collaboration to that point. Peter Travers of Rolling Stone praised DiCaprio's and co-star Matt Damon's performances as "explosive, emotionally complex", but felt that Nicholson overshadowed the two. Despite DiCaprio's leading role in The Departed, the film's distributor Warner Bros. Pictures submitted his performance for a Best Supporting Actor nomination at the AMPAS to avoid internal conflict with his part in Blood Diamond. Instead, his co-star Mark Wahlberg was nominated, though DiCaprio earned other accolades for The Departed, including a Satellite Award for Best Supporting Actor and Best Actor nominations at the Golden Globes and BAFTA Awards. In Blood Diamond, DiCaprio starred as a diamond smuggler from Rhodesia who is involved in the Sierra Leone Civil War. While filming, he worked with 24 orphaned children from the SOS Children's Village in Maputo, Mozambique, and said he was touched by his interactions with them. To prepare, he spent six months in Africa, learned about camouflage from people in South African military and interviewed and recorded people in the country to improve his accent. The film received generally favorable reviews, and DiCaprio was noted for his South African accent, which is generally known as difficult to imitate. Claudia Puig of the USA Today approvingly highlighted DiCaprio's transition from a boy to a man on screen, and Ann Hornaday of The Washington Post similarly noted his growth as an actor since The Departed. DiCaprio received nominations for an Academy Award and a Golden Globe for Blood Diamond. In 2007, DiCaprio produced the comedy drama Gardener of Eden, which according to The Hollywood Reporter's Frank Scheck "lack[ed] the necessary dramatic urgency or black humor to connect with audiences". Later that year, he produced, co-wrote and narrated The 11th Hour, a documentary on the state of the natural environment that won the Earthwatch Environmental Film Award in 2008. DiCaprio's Appian Way produced Planet Green's Greensburg (2008–2010), which ran for three seasons. Set in Greensburg, Kansas, it is about rebuilding the town in a sustainable way after being hit by the May 2007 EF5 tornado. Also in 2008, DiCaprio starred in Body of Lies, a spy film based on the novel of the same name. He played one of three agents battling a terrorist organization in the Middle East. Considering the film to be a throwback to political features of the 1970s like The Parallax View (1974) and Three Days of the Condor (1975), DiCaprio dyed his hair brown and wore brown contacts for the role. The film received mixed reviews from critics, and grossed $118 million against a budget of $67.5 million. Later in 2008, DiCaprio collaborated with Kate Winslet for the drama Revolutionary Road, directed by her then-husband Sam Mendes. As both actors had been reluctant to make romantic films similar to Titanic, it was Winslet who suggested that they both work with her on a film adaptation of the 1961 eponymous novel by Richard Yates. She found that the script, by Justin Haythe, had little in common with the 1997 blockbuster. Playing a couple in a failing marriage in the 1950s, DiCaprio and Winslet spent some time together in preparation, and DiCaprio felt claustrophobic on the small set they used. He saw his character as "unheroic", "slightly cowardly" and someone "willing to be just a product of his environment". Peter Travers liked DiCaprio's pairing with Winslet and his multi-layered portrayal of an overwhelmed character, and Marshall Sella of GQ called it the "most mature and memorable performance of his lifetime". DiCaprio earned his seventh Golden Globes nomination for the film. Revolutionary Road grossed $75.9 million against its budget of $35 million. He ended the 2000s by producing director Jaume Collet-Serra's psychological horror thriller film Orphan (2009), starring Vera Farmiga, Peter Sarsgaard and Isabelle Fuhrman. Although the film received mixed reviews, it was a commercial success. DiCaprio continued to collaborate with Scorsese in the 2010 psychological thriller film Shutter Island, based on the 2003 novel of the same name by Dennis Lehane. He played Edward "Teddy" Daniels, a U.S. Marshal investigating a psychiatric facility located on an island, who comes to question his own sanity. DiCaprio and Scorsese became interested in the project in 2007, and the former co-produced the film under Appian Way with Phoenix Pictures. Because of the film's disturbing scenes, DiCaprio had nightmares of mass murder during production and considered relaxing with his friends a form of therapy. The film was released to mixed reviews; Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian praised Scorsese's direction and the acting but criticized its twist ending. Peter Travers called it DiCaprio's "most haunting and emotionally complex performance yet", and particularly liked his cave scene with co-star Patricia Clarkson. The film was a commercial success, grossing $294 million worldwide against a budget of $80 million. DiCaprio's second role in 2010 was in Christopher Nolan's critically acclaimed ensemble science-fiction film Inception. Inspired by the experience of lucid dreaming and dream incubation, the film features Dom Cobb (DiCaprio), an "extractor" who enters the dreams of others to obtain information that is otherwise inaccessible. Cobb is promised a chance to regain his old life in exchange for planting an idea in a corporate target's mind. DiCaprio was fascinated with the idea of a "dream-heist" and the potential for his character to manipulate his dreamworld and impact his real life. Made on a budget of $160 million, the film grossed $836 million worldwide to become DiCaprio's second highest-grossing film. To star in this film, DiCaprio agreed to a pay cut from his $20 million fee and opted for a share in first-dollar gross points, which entitled him to a percentage of the cinema ticket sales. The risk proved fruitful, as DiCaprio earned $50 million from the film, becoming his highest payday yet. DiCaprio starred as J. Edgar Hoover in Clint Eastwood's J. Edgar (2011). A biopic about Hoover, the film focuses on his career as an FBI director, including an examination of his private life as an alleged closeted homosexual. Critics felt that the film lacked coherence overall but commended DiCaprio's performance. Roger Ebert praised DiCaprio's ability to bring depth and nuance to the character, suggesting that his performance conveyed aspects of Hoover's personality that were possibly even unknown to the man himself. Also in 2011, he produced Catherine Hardwicke's romantic horror film Red Riding Hood. Though it was named one of the ten worst films of 2011 by Time magazine, it had moderate box-office returns. Also that year, DiCaprio's Appian Way produced George Clooney's political drama The Ides of March, an adaptation of Beau Willimon's 2008 play Farragut North. In 2012, DiCaprio starred as plantation owner Calvin Candie in Quentin Tarantino's Spaghetti Western, Django Unchained. After reading the script, DiCaprio felt uncomfortable with the extent of racism portrayed in the film, but his co-stars and Tarantino convinced him not to sugarcoat it. While filming, DiCaprio accidentally cut his hand on glass, but continued filming, and Tarantino elected to use the take in the final product. The film received critical acclaim; a writer for Wired magazine commended him for playing a villainous role and found his performance "blood-chilling". The film earned DiCaprio a Golden Globe Award nomination for Best Supporting Actor. Django Unchained grossed $425 million worldwide on a production budget of $100 million. In January 2013, DiCaprio said he would take a long break from acting to "fly around the world doing good for the environment". That year, he had four releases as an actor and a producer. His first was in the role of millionaire Jay Gatsby in Baz Luhrmann's The Great Gatsby, an adaptation of F. Scott Fitzgerald's 1925 novel of the same name, co-starring Carey Mulligan and Tobey Maguire. The film received mixed reviews from critics, but DiCaprio's performance was praised and earned him the AACTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role. Critic Rafer Guzman of Newsday wrote that DiCaprio was not only "tough [...] but also vulnerable, touching, funny, a faker, a human. It's a tremendous, hard-won performance." Matt Zoller Seitz of Roger Ebert's website described his performance as "the movie's greatest and simplest special effect", and "iconic—maybe his career best". The film grossed $353 million worldwide, more than three times its budget. Three films were produced by DiCaprio under Appian Way in 2013—the ensemble crime thriller Runner Runner, which The Guardian's Xan Brooks described as "a lazy, trashy film that barely goes through the motions"; the commercially failed thriller Out of the Furnace; and the black comedy-drama The Wolf of Wall Street. DiCaprio reunited with Scorsese for the fifth time in The Wolf of the Wall Street, a film based on the life of stockbroker Jordan Belfort (played by DiCaprio), who was arrested in the late 1990s for securities fraud and money laundering. DiCaprio wanted to play Belfort ever since he had read his autobiography and won a bidding war with Warner Bros. against Brad Pitt and Paramount Pictures for the rights to Belfort's memoir in 2007. He was fond of Belfort's honest and unapologetic portrayal of his actual experiences in the book, and was inspired by the financial crisis of 2007–2008 to make the film. The Wolf of Wall Street received positive reviews for Scorsese's and DiCaprio's work together. The Hollywood Reporter's Todd McCarthy lauded DiCaprio for fully realizing his character's potential with a carefree performance. Jonathan Romney of Film Comment wrote that DiCaprio displays a great deal of comedic talent, excelling in "rubber-limbed slapstick" humor. The film earned him the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy and nominations for a BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role, as well as Academy Awards for Best Actor and Best Picture. DiCaprio was an executive producer on Virunga, a 2014 British documentary film about four people fighting to protect the world's last mountain gorillas from war and poaching. The film premiered at the Tribeca Film Festival in April 2014, and DiCaprio was nominated for the 2015 Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Documentary or Nonfiction Special. Cowspiracy: The Sustainability Secret was another documentary film that year for which he was an executive producer—he took part in the new cut released exclusively on Netflix that September. It explores the impact of animal agriculture on the environment. In 2015, DiCaprio produced and played fur trapper Hugh Glass in Alejandro G. Iñárritu's survival drama The Revenant. DiCaprio found his role in the film difficult; he had to eat a raw slab of bison's liver and sleep in animal carcasses. He also learned to shoot a musket, build a fire, speak two Native American languages (Pawnee and Arikara) and apply ancient healing techniques. Built on a budget of $135 million, the film earned $533 million worldwide. The film received positive reviews with particular praise for DiCaprio's acting. Mark Kermode of The Guardian wrote that DiCaprio shone with a performance that prioritizes physicality over speech, and Nick De Semlyen of Empire noted that he uplifted the film. The film earned him numerous awards, including the Academy Award, BAFTA, Critics' Choice, Golden Globe and SAG Award for Best Actor. For the next three years, DiCaprio narrated documentaries and served as a producer for films. In 2016, he was an executive producer for The Ivory Game and Catching the Sun; he also produced, hosted and narrated the documentary Before the Flood about climate change. He produced the crime drama Live by Night (2016), which received unenthusiastic reviews and failed to recoup its $65 million production budget. His next production ventures were in 2018—the psychological horror Delirium and the commercially failed action–adventure Robin Hood. After producing and narrating the 2019 global warming documentary Ice on Fire, DiCaprio returned to acting following a four-year break in Quentin Tarantino's comedy-drama Once Upon a Time in Hollywood, which traces the relationship between Rick Dalton (DiCaprio), an aging television actor and his stuntman, Cliff Booth (Brad Pitt). To help the film's financing, DiCaprio and Pitt agreed to take a pay cut, and they each received $10 million. DiCaprio liked working with Pitt, and Tarantino described the pair as the most exciting since Robert Redford and Paul Newman. DiCaprio was fascinated with the film's homage to Hollywood and focus on the friendship between his and Pitt's characters. He drew from real-life experience of witnessing the struggles and rejections of his actor friends in the industry. The film premiered at the 2019 Cannes Film Festival, where critics praised his and Pitt's performances. A writer for Business Insider called it one of the best performances of DiCaprio's career, and Ian Sandwell of Digital Spy particularly liked the duo's chemistry, believing their scenes together to be some of the film's strongest parts. DiCaprio received nominations for an Oscar, a Golden Globe, a BAFTA Award and a Screen Actors Guild Award for Best Actor. The film earned $374 million against a budget of $90 million. In 2020, DiCaprio served as an executive producer for The Right Stuff, a television series adaption of the 1973 namesake book. After being in development at National Geographic, it was released on Disney+. That May, DiCaprio briefly featured in the finale of the miniseries The Last Dance. In 2021, DiCaprio appeared in Adam McKay's satirical comedy Don't Look Up. He spent five months changing the film's script with McKay before agreeing to the part. Starring alongside Jennifer Lawrence as two astronomers attempting to warn humanity about an extinction-level comet, DiCaprio saw this film as an analogy of the world's indifference to the climate crisis. As a frequent supporter of environmentalism, DiCaprio said he has often looked to star in and make films tackling issues related to it, something he found hard due to people's inability to listen. He praised McKay for envisioning a project on how humans would react to a serious issue from a political, social and scientific standpoint. While reviews for the film were mixed, most critics praised DiCaprio's and Lawrence's performances; journalists from Digital Spy and NDTV lauded their pairing. DiCaprio earned nominations for a Golden Globe and a BAFTA Award for the film. It broke the record for the most views (152 million hours) in a single week in Netflix history. DiCaprio next starred in Scorsese's crime drama Killers of the Flower Moon (2023) based on the book of the same name by David Grann, for which he was paid $30 million. Initially signed for the heroic part of FBI agent Thomas Bruce White Sr., DiCaprio insisted on playing the morally complex role of Ernest Burkhart, a nephew of murderer William King Hale, leading to extensive script rewrites. Declaring it the best performance of DiCaprio's career, IndieWire's David Ehrlich wrote that "his nuanced and uncompromising turn as the cretinous Ernest Burkhart mines new wonders from the actor's long-standing lack of vanity". He received another Golden Globe nomination for his performance. DiCaprio will next star in Paul Thomas Anderson's as-yet untitled film, co-starring Sean Penn and Regina Hall. Early in his career, DiCaprio gained a reputation for his reckless behavior and intense partying with a group of male celebrities dubbed "the Pussy Posse" in the 1990s. In an infamous article published by New York Magazine in 1998, journalist Nancy Jo Sales criticized the group as men whose pursuit was to "chase girls, pick fights and not tip the waitress". During an unknown activity, DiCaprio got himself and friend Justin Herwick almost killed when his parachute failed to open, after which his instructor released an emergency core. In response, DiCaprio said he is fond of doing things that scare him. John McCain, who was a United States Senator for Arizona, called him "an androgynous wimp". DiCaprio found people's perception of him exaggerated, adding, "They want you miserable, just like them. They don't want heroes; what they want is to see you fall." Steven Spielberg, who directed him in Catch Me If You Can, defended DiCaprio's reputation as a "party boy", believing it is a common behavior for young people and describing him as a family-oriented person during the film's production. Considering DiCaprio to be conscious of his public reputation, The New York Times' Caryn James credited him as one of the few actors to use his stardom to further social causes. Carole Cadwalladr of The Guardian said DiCaprio is "polite, charming, makes jokes, engages eye contact. And manages [...] to give almost no hint whatsoever of his actual personality." "Life can get pretty monotonous. Acting is like living multiple lives. When you make a movie, you go off to different places, live different cultures, investigate somebody else's reality, and you try to manifest that to the best of your ability. It is incredibly eye-opening. That's why I love acting. There's nothing as transformative as what a film, a documentary, can do to get people to care about something else besides their own lives." —DiCaprio on his love of acting DiCaprio is regarded as one of the finest actors of his generation. In a 2022 readers' poll by Empire, he was voted one of the 50 greatest actors of all time. The magazine praised his willingness to "go to the ends of the earth (often literally) to get under his characters' skin". Colin Covert of The Seattle Times similarly believed DiCaprio "redefines film stardom" through his willingness to take on challenging roles that few of his contemporaries are capable of performing. Since his international stardom with Titanic (1997), he has admitted feeling nervous about starring in big-budget studio films because of their hype and marketing campaigns. As an actor, he views film as a "relevant art form, like a painting or sculpture. A hundred years from now, people will still be watching that movie." He often plays roles based on real-life people and stories told in specific periods. According to Caryn James, DiCaprio is unafraid of working with established directors on unconventional projects; taking such risks has led him to star in failed films like The Beach (2000), but also his successful collaborations with Martin Scorsese. DiCaprio has described his relationship with Scorsese as dreamlike and admires his knowledge of film, crediting the director with having taught him its history and importance. Scorsese has commented on DiCaprio's ability to repeatedly demonstrate emotion on screen. Jesse Hassenger of The A.V. Club considers the duo's collaborations—which earned them the 2013 National Board of Review (Spotlight Award)—to be career-defining moments for both of them and as vital as Scorsese's acclaimed collaborations with Robert De Niro. Author Michael K. Hammond wrote that DiCaprio built his star reputation by demonstrating his acting ability, and praised him for "revealing a character while concealing the actor" and "disappearing into [his] roles". According to Agnieszka Holland, who directed DiCaprio in Total Eclipse (1995), DiCaprio is "one of the most mature actors" she has worked with and is "courageous" in his choice of roles. Holland remarked that he does not rely on method acting but rather on a trick that allows him to truly "become the character". Meryl Streep, who co-starred with DiCaprio in Marvin's Room, said he possesses the kind of unpredictability that makes his career difficult to classify, his life precarious and his work thrilling. Writing for The Observer, film critic Philip French has asserted that many characters portrayed by DiCaprio are in the process of becoming men. He wrote that DiCaprio's inclination toward films about dysfunctional families and characters seeking father figures may allude to his own troubled childhood. DiCaprio often plays characters who themselves are playing roles, which Caryn James says looks simple on screen but requires sophisticated acting. He tends to play antiheroes and characters who lose their mental stability as the narrative progresses. Derek Thompson of The Atlantic argued that DiCaprio gives his best performances when playing "frauds and cheats and double-crossing liars and mercenaries". Several media publications, such as People, Empire and Harper's Bazaar, have included DiCaprio in their listings of the most attractive actors. In 1998, he sued Playgirl magazine over plans to publish a fully nude picture of him. He has said he does not believe in focusing on appearance—as this is only temporary and can negatively affect one's profession in the industry—and looks for career longevity instead. In 2005, DiCaprio was made a commander of the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres by the French Minister of Culture for his contributions to the arts. In 2016, he was named one of the 100 most influential people in the world by Time magazine. He was included on Forbes' annual list of the world's highest-paid actors in 2008 and from 2010 to 2016 with respective earnings of $45 million, $28 million, $77 million, $37 million, $39 million, $39 million, $29 million and $27 million, topping the list in 2011. The magazine has commended DiCaprio's ability to star in risky, R-rated films that become box office successes. The Hollywood Reporter listed him as one of the 100 most powerful people in entertainment from 2016 to 2019. A writer for the same magazine credits DiCaprio as the rare actor to have a successful career "without ever having made a comic book movie, family film or pre-branded franchise. Leo is the franchise." Stacey Wilson Hunt, analyzing his career in New York Magazine in 2016, opined DiCaprio, unlike most of his contemporaries, had not starred in a bad film in the previous ten years. Of his success, DiCaprio says, "My attitude is the same as when I started. I feel very connected to that fifteen-year-old kid who got his first movie." DiCaprio has named Robert De Niro and James Dean as two of his favorite and most influential actors, stating "There were a lot of great actors I really fell in love with, but if I were to pick two, from different generations, it would be De Niro and James Dean". When asked about a performance that stayed with him the most, DiCaprio responded, "I remember being incredibly moved by Jimmy Dean, in East of Eden. There was something so raw and powerful about that performance. His vulnerability [...] his confusion about his entire history, his identity, his desperation to be loved. That performance just broke my heart." "Climate change is real, it is happening right now. It is the most urgent threat facing our entire species, and we need to work collectively together and stop procrastinating. We need to support leaders around the world who do not speak for the big polluters, but who speak for all of humanity, for the indigenous people of the world, for the billions and billions of underprivileged people out there who would be most affected by this. For our children's children, and for those people out there whose voices have been drowned out by the politics of greed." —DiCaprio during his acceptance speech at the 88th Academy Awards, 2016 An active celebrity in the climate change movement, DiCaprio believes global warming is the world's "number-one environmental challenge". Eager to learn about ecology from an early age, he would watch documentaries on rainforest depletion and the loss of species and habitats. In 1998, he established the Leonardo DiCaprio Foundation, a non-profit organization devoted to promoting environmental awareness. It supports organizations and campaigns committed to ensuring a viable future for planet Earth, and produced the short web documentaries Water Planet and Global Warning. The foundation has also funded debt-for-nature swaps. By 2018, the foundation had funded more than 200 projects, providing $100 million in support. He has been an active supporter of numerous environmental organizations and sat on the board of the World Wildlife Fund and International Fund for Animal Welfare. DiCaprio has owned environment-friendly electric-hybrid vehicles. His use of private jets and large yachts have been criticized as hypocritical due to their large carbon footprints. DiCaprio chaired the national Earth Day celebration in 2000 where he interviewed Bill Clinton and they discussed plans to deal with global warming and the environment. He presented at the 2007 American leg of Live Earth. DiCaprio donated $1 million to the Wildlife Conservation Society at Russia's Tiger Summit. DiCaprio's persistence in reaching the event after encountering two plane delays caused then Prime Minister Vladimir Putin to describe him as a "muzhik" or "real man". In 2013, he organized a benefit fine art auction, "11th Hour", which raised nearly $38.8 million for his foundation. In September 2014, United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon designated DiCaprio as a United Nations Messenger of Peace with a focus on climate change. Later that month, he made an opening statement to members of the UN Climate Summit; his speech reached an estimated one billion people worldwide. In 2015, he announced his intention to divest from fossil fuels. He again spoke at the UN in April 2016 prior to the signing of the Paris Climate Change Agreement. At a 2016 meeting with Pope Francis, DiCaprio donated to charity and discussed environmental issues with him. A few days later, possibly influenced by this meeting, the Pope said he would act in a charity film. DiCaprio traveled to Indonesia in early 2016 where he criticized the government's palm oil industry's slash-and-burn forest clearing methods. In July 2016, his foundation donated $15.6 million to help protect wildlife and the rights of Native Americans, along with mitigating climate change. That October, DiCaprio joined Mark Ruffalo in support of the Standing Rock tribe's opposition to the Dakota Access Pipeline. In April 2017, DiCaprio protested against President Donald Trump's inaction on climate change by attending the People's Climate March. In July, a charity auction and celebrity concert arranged by DiCaprio's foundation had raised over $30 million in one night. The DiCaprio foundation donated $100 million in December 2018 to fight climate change. In May 2021, DiCaprio pledged $43 million to enact conservation operations across the Galápagos Islands. DiCaprio endorsed Hillary Clinton for the 2016 presidential election. In March 2020, DiCaprio attended a fundraiser for Joe Biden at the home of Paramount Pictures executive Sherry Lansing. Prior to the 2020 election, DiCaprio narrated a Netflix documentary series about voting rights, stating, "All of us may have been created equal. But we'll never actually be equal until we all vote. So don't wait." On social media, DiCaprio urged voters to make a plan to cast their ballots and to draw attention to voter suppression and restrictive voter ID laws, citing VoteRiders as a source of information and assistance. In 2023, DiCaprio testified during the trial against Prakazrel Michel, who is being accused of participating in a foreign influence campaign that was aimed at the Obama and Trump administrations. In 1998, DiCaprio and his mother donated $35,000 for a "Leonardo DiCaprio Computer Center" at a library in Los Feliz. In May 2009, DiCaprio joined Kate Winslet, director James Cameron and Canadian singer Celine Dion, in a campaign to raise money to financially support the fees of the nursing home where Millvina Dean, a survivor of the RMS Titanic, was residing. DiCaprio and Winslet donated $20,000 to support Dean. In 2010, he donated $1 million to relief efforts in Haiti after the earthquake. In 2011, DiCaprio joined the Animal Legal Defense Fund's campaign to release Tony, a tiger that had spent the last decade at a truck stop in Grosse Tête, Louisiana. DiCaprio donated $61,000 to the gay rights group GLAAD in 2013. In 2016, DiCaprio donated $65,000 to the annual fundraising gala for the Children of Armenia Fund, where he was a special guest of his friend and honorary chair, Tony Shafrazi. Supporting Hurricane Harvey (2017) relief efforts, DiCaprio provided $1 million through his foundation. In 2020, DiCaprio's foundation donated $3 million to Australia bushfire relief efforts. Amidst the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, the media announced DiCaprio donated $10 million to support Ukraine, although the news agency Associated Press suggested this amount was inaccurate. DiCaprio is agnostic but does not identify as an atheist. His personal life is the subject of widespread media attention. He rarely grants interviews and is reluctant to discuss his private life. DiCaprio has been the focus of various reports detailing his involvement with women aged 25 or younger, and has faced criticism for those relationships. In 1999, DiCaprio met Brazilian model Gisele Bündchen, whom he dated until 2005. He was romantically involved with Israeli model Bar Refaeli from 2005 to 2011. He later dated German fashion model Toni Garrn from 2013 to 2014 and later in 2017. DiCaprio was in a relationship with American model and actress Camila Morrone from c. 2017 until 2022. DiCaprio owns houses in Los Angeles and apartments in New York City. In 2009, he bought an island, Blackadore Caye, off mainland Belize—on which he is set to open an environment-friendly resort—and in 2014, he purchased the original Dinah Shore residence designed by architect Donald Wexler in Palm Springs, California. In 2005, DiCaprio's face was severely injured when model Aretha Wilson hit him over the head with a broken bottle at a Hollywood party. As a result, he required seventeen stitches to his face and neck. Wilson pleaded guilty to the assault and was sentenced in 2010 to two years in prison. In 2017, when The Wolf of Wall Street producer Red Granite Pictures was involved in the 1Malaysia Development Berhad scandal, DiCaprio turned over the gifts he received from business associates at the production company, including from fugitive businessman Jho Low, to the US government. These included a Best Actor Oscar trophy won by Marlon Brando, a $3.2 million Pablo Picasso painting and a $9 million Jean-Michel Basquiat collage. According to the online portal Box Office Mojo and the review aggregate site Rotten Tomatoes, DiCaprio's most critically and commercially successful films include What's Eating Gilbert Grape (1993), Romeo + Juliet (1996), Titanic (1997), Catch Me If You Can (2002), Gangs of New York (2002), The Aviator (2004), The Departed (2006), Blood Diamond (2006), Shutter Island (2010), Inception (2010), Django Unchained (2012), The Great Gatsby (2013), The Wolf of Wall Street (2013), The Revenant (2015), Once Upon a Time in Hollywood (2019), Don't Look Up (2021), and Killers of the Flower Moon (2023). His films have grossed $7.2 billion worldwide. DiCaprio has been recognized by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences for the following performances: 66th Academy Awards (1994): Best Supporting Actor, nomination, for What's Eating Gilbert Grape 77th Academy Awards (2005): Best Actor, nomination, for The Aviator 79th Academy Awards (2007): Best Actor, nomination, for Blood Diamond 86th Academy Awards (2014): Best Picture and Best Actor, nominations, for The Wolf of Wall Street 88th Academy Awards (2016): Best Actor, win, for The Revenant 92nd Academy Awards (2020): Best Actor, nomination, for Once Upon a Time in Hollywood DiCaprio has won three Golden Globe Awards: Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama for The Aviator and The Revenant and Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy for The Wolf of Wall Street, as well as a BAFTA Award and a Screen Actors Guild Award for Best Actor for The Revenant. List of oldest and youngest Academy Award winners and nominees – Youngest nominees for Best Actor in a Supporting Role List of actors with Academy Award nominations List of actors with two or more Academy Awards nominations in acting categories List of Golden Globe winners Grouvellinus leonardodicaprioi, a beetle named after DiCaprio Spintharus leonardodicaprioi, a spider named after DiCaprio Titanic grossed $1.84 billion at the time of its release. After a re-release in 3D in 2012, it earned an additional $343.6 million worldwide, totaling up to $2.18 billion. Attributed to multiple references The Pope appeared in the faith-based charity film Beyond the Sun, whose profits were donated to charities in Argentina. DiCaprio donated to humanitarian groups, including CARE, International Rescue Committee, the United Nation's High Commissioner for Refugees and Save the Children. These criticisms include a reference in Taylor Swift's song "The Man", as well as jokes made by hosts of the Golden Globe Awards in 2014, and in 2020 and at the 94th Academy Awards. In 2019, Camila Morrone addressed the criticism as follows: "There's so many relationships in Hollywood – and in the history of the world – where people have large age gaps [...] I just think anyone should be able to date who they want to date". "Happy Birthday, Leonardo DiCaprio: Must-watch Movies of the Oscar-winning Actor". News18. November 11, 2021. Archived from the original on August 2, 2023. Retrieved August 2, 2023. Wight 2012, p. 11. Letran, Vivan (August 19, 2000). "DiCaprio Boosts Artist's Show". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 13, 2015. Retrieved July 29, 2015. Michalski, Jennifer (October 24, 2013). "14 Celebrities Who Speak Multiple Languages". Business Insider. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved January 10, 2022. Wight 2012, pp. 10, 16. Wight 2012, p. 10. Saad, Nardine (January 28, 2016). "Leonardo DiCaprio and Pope Francis Meet to Discuss Climate Change Goals". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on November 8, 2020. Retrieved November 12, 2020. Dale, Daniel (March 12, 2022). "Fact Check: How a False Story About Leonardo DiCaprio Donating $10 Million to Ukraine Spread Around the World". CNN. Archived from the original on August 30, 2022. Retrieved August 30, 2022. DiCaprio [...] does not have a family member from Odessa or anywhere else in Ukraine, a source close to the actor told CNN on Wednesday. Wight 2012, p. 15. Green, Jesse (February 12, 1995). "Fresh Blood; Leonardo DiCaprio". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 9, 2016. Retrieved June 14, 2016. Chilton, Charlotte (November 11, 2019). "50 Photos That Display the Eternal Cool of Leonardo DiCaprio". Esquire. Archived from the original on July 13, 2023. Retrieved July 30, 2023. Wight 2012, p. 13. Wight 2012, pp. 16–17, 29–30. Wight 2012, p. 28. Lindig, Sarah (February 7, 2016). "Leonardo DiCaprio Opens Up About His Very 'Bohemian' Upbringing". Harper's Bazaar. Archived from the original on July 13, 2023. Retrieved July 29, 2023. Molloy, Antonia (February 2, 2014). "Leonardo DiCaprio Reveals His Childhood Surrounded by Drugs as He Defends The Wolf of Wall Street Role". The Independent. Archived from the original on October 11, 2019. Retrieved October 11, 2019. "Los Angeles Center For Enriched Studies: Facts about LACES". Los Angeles Center for Enriched Studies. Archived from the original on January 15, 2014. Retrieved May 15, 2013. Wight 2012, p. 13, 23. Mathieson, Craig (November 11, 2014). "40 for 40: Leonardo DiCaprio Edition". Special Broadcasting Service. Archived from the original on July 30, 2023. Retrieved July 29, 2023. Rader, Dotson (January 8, 2016). "Leonardo DiCaprio: Man of the World". Parade. Archived from the original on September 19, 2016. Retrieved October 12, 2019. Wight 2012, p. 14. Wight 2012, pp. 17–18. O'Neill, Anne-Marie (January 26, 2001). "Riding the Wave". People. Archived from the original on January 9, 2011. Retrieved February 27, 2020. Cronin, Brian (February 19, 2019). "Did Leonardo DiCaprio Get Kicked Off the Set of Romper Room as a Kid?". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on October 11, 2019. Retrieved October 11, 2019. Borge, Jonathan (February 25, 2016). "An Adorable Look Back at 8 of Leonardo DiCaprio's Early TV Commercials". InStyle. Archived from the original on July 23, 2018. Retrieved July 23, 2018. Booth, Jessica (October 30, 2018). "Leonardo DiCaprio's Look Has Evolved Since His Days on Growing Pains". Harper's Bazaar. Yahoo!. Archived from the original on March 2, 2023. Retrieved March 2, 2023. Wight 2012, pp. 28–29. Wight 2012, pp. 21–22. Wight 2012, p. 23. Wight 2012, pp. 23–24. "12th Annual Awards". Young Artist Awards. Archived from the original on July 16, 2015. Retrieved October 11, 2019. Schwartz, Ryan & Wostbrock 1999, p. 80. Boone, John (June 14, 2013). "Flashback Friday: Leonardo DiCaprio Competes on Game Show at 15". E!. Archived from the original on October 11, 2019. Retrieved October 11, 2019. Harmetz, Aljean (December 12, 1993). "The Actor is Boyishly Handsome, and That's a Liability". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 17, 2010. Retrieved August 2, 2010. Wight 2012, p. 26. Wight 2012, p. 24. Yahr, Emily (February 23, 2016). "How Leonardo DiCaprio Went From Being a Dorky Teenage Actor to a Superstar". The Independent. Archived from the original on October 9, 2019. Retrieved October 9, 2019. Wight 2012, pp. 24–25. "13th Annual Awards". Young Artist Awards. Archived from the original on June 13, 2000. Retrieved October 9, 2019. Wight 2012, p. 255. Ebiri, Bilge (November 30, 2015). "Leonardo DiCaprio's Movies, Ranked Worst to Best". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on October 9, 2019. Retrieved October 9, 2019. Ebert, Roger (April 23, 1993). "This Boy's Life Movie Review & Film Summary (1993)". RogerEbert.com. Archived from the original on November 17, 2019. Retrieved November 17, 2019. Wight 2012, p. 38. Pomerance 2012, pp. 104–105. Wight 2012, p. 36. "What's Eating Gilbert Grape (1993)". Rotten Tomatoes. December 25, 1993. Archived from the original on June 3, 2019. Retrieved October 9, 2019. Pomerance 2012, pp. 106–107. Evry, Max (February 9, 2011). "The 25 Youngest Oscar Nominees of All Time". MTV News. Archived from the original on April 20, 2021. Retrieved April 17, 2021. Maslin, Janet (December 17, 1993). "Movie Review: What's Eating Gilbert Grape". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 3, 2014. Retrieved March 2, 2022. James, Caryn (October 29, 2006). "The Baby-Faced Kid Has Developed Quite a Stare". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 12, 2019. Retrieved October 12, 2019. Muir 2004, pp. 171–179. "The Quick and the Dead (1995)". The Numbers. Archived from the original on September 2, 2014. Retrieved August 2, 2010. "The Quick and the Dead (1995)". Rotten Tomatoes. February 10, 1995. Archived from the original on April 21, 2016. Retrieved April 11, 2022. Travers, Peter (April 21, 1995). "The Basketball Diaries". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on August 27, 2015. Retrieved August 26, 2015. Pomerance 2012, pp. 111, 113. Wight 2012, p. 62. "Total Eclipse (1995)". Warner Archive Collection. Archived from the original on November 19, 2019. Retrieved November 19, 2019. Pomerance 2012, p. 115. Wight 2012, pp. 67–68. Wight 2012, p. 67. Pomerance 2012, p. 117. Thomson, David (January 16, 2009). "David Thomson on Leonardo DiCaprio". The Guardian. Archived from the original on October 26, 2019. Retrieved October 26, 2019. Müller 2001, p. 400. Wight 2012, pp. 65–67. Schwarzbaum, Lisa (December 20, 1996). "Marvin's Room (1996)". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 16, 2015. Retrieved August 2, 2010. Wight 2012, p. 8. "Titanic". Entertainment Weekly. November 7, 1997. p. 3. Archived from the original on March 28, 2010. Retrieved January 24, 2010. Block & Wilson 2010, p. 714. Thompson, Eliza (January 2, 2024). "Here's How Leo's 'Titanic' Payday Stacked Up to Kate's". Parade. Retrieved January 8, 2024. Torres, Gaby (May 4, 2012). "The Town That Built the Titanic is Sinking". Vice. Archived from the original on October 9, 2019. Retrieved March 2, 2022. "Titanic (1997)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on October 27, 2019. Retrieved April 11, 2022. Click on the drop-down menu to see the gross at the time of its original release and 3D re-release. Klady, Leonard (March 3, 1998). "Titanic Sails to All-Time Box Office Record". Variety. Archived from the original on February 16, 2016. Retrieved April 11, 2022. Hiscock, John (December 4, 2004). "Leonardo DiCaprio's Magnificent Obsessive". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on December 23, 2010. Retrieved August 3, 2010. Nash & Lahti 1999, pp. 74–83. Davis, Jason (March 24, 1998). "Love Story That Won the Heart of the Academy". BBC News. Archived from the original on March 8, 2008. Retrieved October 8, 2019. Busch, Anita M. (March 6, 1998). "Leonardo DiCaprio: Robbed of a Titanic Nomination?". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 15, 2015. Retrieved November 23, 2013. "Golden Globe Awards: Titanic". Hollywood Foreign Press Association. Archived from the original on December 1, 2020. Retrieved July 30, 2023. "What's Eating Leonardo DiCaprio". Time. February 14, 2000. Archived from the original on January 22, 2014. Retrieved January 13, 2009. Smith, Krista (November 3, 2008). "Isn't she Deneuvely?". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on January 3, 2017. Retrieved August 23, 2021. Wilkinson, Alissa (December 19, 2017). "'Titanic is turning 20, and I just saw it for the first time. It blew my mind.'". Vox. Archived from the original on February 2, 2022. Retrieved February 2, 2022. Rose, Tiffany (January 5, 2003). "Leonardo DiCaprio: The Q Interview". The Independent. Archived from the original on January 8, 2022. Retrieved January 8, 2022. Ebert, Roger (November 20, 1998). "Celebrity Movie Review & Film Summary". RogerEbert.com. Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2019. "The Man in the Iron Mask". The Independent. February 28, 2008. Archived from the original on April 11, 2022. Retrieved April 11, 2022. "The Man in the Iron Mask". Rotten Tomatoes. March 13, 1998. Archived from the original on July 26, 2010. Retrieved May 8, 2010. "The Man in the Iron Mask (1998)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on April 11, 2022. Retrieved April 11, 2022. "The Man in the Iron Mask (1998)". The Numbers. Archived from the original on November 29, 2014. Retrieved July 13, 2010. Gleiberman, Owen (March 12, 1998). "The Man in the Iron Mask (1998)". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on October 3, 2015. Retrieved July 13, 2010. von Tunzelmann, Alex (October 21, 2010). "The Man in the Iron Mask: Uncovered". The Guardian. Archived from the original on February 2, 2022. Retrieved February 2, 2022. "The Man in the Mask (1998) – Leonardo DiCaprio: His Career in Pictures". The Daily Telegraph. February 22, 2016. Archived from the original on April 10, 2015. Retrieved September 4, 2015. Gopalan, Nisha (March 24, 2000). "American Psycho: the Story Behind the Film". The Guardian. Archived from the original on March 27, 2019. Retrieved October 8, 2019. Niven, John (July 2, 2016). "Alex Garland's cult novel The Beach 20 Years On". The Guardian. Archived from the original on April 11, 2022. Retrieved April 11, 2022. "The Beach (2000)". The Numbers. Archived from the original on March 14, 2014. Retrieved August 3, 2010. "The Beach (2000)". Rotten Tomatoes. February 11, 2000. Archived from the original on August 31, 2008. Retrieved August 27, 2008. Wilson, John (February 12, 2001). "Nominations Press Release". Golden Raspberry Awards. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved October 8, 2019. McCarthy, Todd (February 7, 2000). "The Beach Review". Variety. Archived from the original on September 6, 2014. Retrieved August 3, 2010. Erdős 2019, p. 218. Lee, Chris (December 12, 2016). "Leonardo DiCaprio, Tobey Maguire, and the Making and Epic Unmaking of Don's Plum". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on December 15, 2016. Retrieved April 11, 2022. "Leonardo DiCaprio: 'I Turned Down the Chance to Play Anakin Skywalker in Star Wars'". NME. December 30, 2015. Archived from the original on November 8, 2019. Retrieved November 9, 2019. Ebert, Roger (September 25, 2002). "Catch Me If You Can (2002) Review". RogerEbert.com. Archived from the original on August 29, 2014. Retrieved August 3, 2010. "Catch Me If You Can". Extra. December 12, 2002. Archived from the original on December 8, 2008. Retrieved July 3, 2008. "Catch Me If You Can (2002)". The Numbers. Archived from the original on November 22, 2013. Retrieved August 3, 2010. "Leonardo DiCaprio Movie Box Office Results". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on July 12, 2019. Retrieved October 10, 2019. Lawrence, Derek (March 13, 2018). "Every Leonardo DiCaprio Film Performance, Ranked". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on November 15, 2019. Retrieved October 26, 2019. "Chicago Grabs 8 Golden Globe Nominations". CNN. January 18, 2003. Archived from the original on July 10, 2015. Retrieved July 8, 2015. "Scorsese's Gang of Acting Heavyweights". The Age. February 10, 2003. Archived from the original on August 6, 2010. Retrieved August 3, 2010. "Gangs of New York (2002)". The Numbers. Archived from the original on November 25, 2013. Retrieved August 3, 2010. "Gangs of New York (2002)". Rotten Tomatoes. December 20, 2002. Archived from the original on May 17, 2019. Retrieved October 8, 2019. Thompson, Anne (December 22, 2002). "How Do You Like Your Leonardo DiCaprio? Butch Or Boyish? The Choice Is Yours". The Guardian. Archived from the original on November 4, 2013. Retrieved August 3, 2010. Wight 2012, p. 142. Fleming, Mike Jr. (December 30, 2013). "Wolf of Wall Street's Leonardo DiCaprio on Creating Fact-Based Black Comedy Without Glorifying Crooks". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 11, 2019. Retrieved October 6, 2019. "The Assassination of Richard Nixon". Cannes Film Festival. Archived from the original on November 10, 2013. Retrieved December 20, 2015. Fleming, Michael (February 25, 2000). "New Line Spruced up". Variety. Archived from the original on March 6, 2023. Retrieved March 6, 2023. Saney, Daniel (December 8, 2004). "Scorsese Overspends on The Aviator". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on February 10, 2023. Retrieved March 6, 2023. "The Aviator (2004)". Rotten Tomatoes. December 25, 2004. Archived from the original on September 28, 2009. Retrieved November 17, 2009. "The Aviator (2004)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on December 21, 2015. Retrieved April 11, 2022. Braund, Simond. "The Aviator". Empire. Archived from the original on October 8, 2019. Retrieved October 8, 2019. "2004 Golden Globe Awards Nominees". USA Today. December 13, 2004. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved July 8, 2015. "Nominees & Winners for the 77th Academy Awards". Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. Archived from the original on January 1, 2016. Retrieved July 12, 2015. "The Aviator Set to Shine at BAFTAs". The Guardian. January 17, 2005. Archived from the original on March 6, 2023. Retrieved March 6, 2023. "The 11th Annual Screen Actors Guild Awards". Screen Actors Guild Awards. Archived from the original on January 22, 2021. Retrieved March 6, 2023. Neibaur 2016, p. 159. Bell, David (August 6, 2019). "Ranking the Craziest Things Actors Have Done for Famous Roles". Collider. Archived from the original on December 11, 2019. Retrieved December 11, 2019. "The Departed (2006)". Rotten Tomatoes. October 6, 2006. Archived from the original on November 18, 2009. Retrieved October 17, 2009. "The Departed". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on April 10, 2022. Retrieved April 10, 2022. Travers, Peter (September 28, 2006). "The Departed". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 24, 2019. Retrieved October 8, 2019. Tapley, Kristopher (October 4, 2016). "10 Years Later: The Departed, the Oscars, and the Non-Campaign Campaign". Variety. Archived from the original on December 27, 2021. Retrieved January 8, 2022. "The 13th Annual Screen Actors Guild Awards". Screen Actors Guild Awards. Archived from the original on December 4, 2012. Retrieved July 8, 2015. "64th Golden Globe Awards Facts and Figures". Hollywood Foreign Press Association. December 14, 2006. Archived from the original on July 9, 2015. Retrieved July 8, 2015. Cashin, Rory (June 18, 2013). "Opinion: Why Has Leonardo DiCaprio Never Won an Oscar?". Entertainment.ie. Archived from the original on July 7, 2015. Retrieved July 8, 2015. "2006 Winners". International Press Academy. Archived from the original on June 28, 2015. Retrieved August 3, 2015. "Leonardo DiCaprio". SOS Children's Villages – USA. Archived from the original on January 6, 2009. Retrieved January 13, 2009. Ressner, Jeffrey (November 22, 2006). "Q&A with Leonardo DiCaprio". Time. Archived from the original on October 8, 2019. Retrieved October 8, 2019. "Blood Diamond". Metacritic. Archived from the original on August 19, 2010. Retrieved June 29, 2010. Sancton, Julian (December 16, 2009). "Matt Damon vs. Leonardo DiCaprio: Whose South African (and Southie) Accent is Better?". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on July 13, 2015. Retrieved August 11, 2015. Puig, Claudia (December 7, 2006). "Blood Diamond Shines Forth". USA Today. Archived from the original on July 15, 2009. Retrieved October 8, 2019. Hornaday, Ann (December 8, 2006). "The Many Facets of 'Diamond' Gripping Thriller Packs a Wallop Amid a Landscape of Chaos and Civil War". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on March 5, 2022. Retrieved October 8, 2019. Scheck, Frank (April 26, 2007). "The Gardener of Eden". The Hollywood Reporter. Associated Press. Archived from the original on December 22, 2015. Retrieved December 20, 2015. "Earthwatch Film Awards". Earthwatch Institute. Archived from the original on January 28, 2019. Retrieved October 13, 2019. "Greensburg Season 3 to Air on Planet Green". Greensburgks.org. Archived from the original on December 22, 2015. Retrieved October 7, 2019. Carroll, Larry (August 15, 2007). "Leonardo DiCaprio and Russell Crowe Will Be a Good 'Fit' in CIA Flick, Ridley Scott Hopes". MTV News. Archived from the original on March 12, 2009. Retrieved November 30, 2007. "Body of Lies (2008)". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on February 15, 2008. Retrieved February 20, 2008. "Body of Lies (2008)". The Numbers. Archived from the original on December 8, 2013. Retrieved July 20, 2010. Wong, Grace (January 23, 2009). "DiCaprio Reveals Joys of Fighting With Winslet". CNN. Archived from the original on November 5, 2012. Retrieved January 23, 2009. Sella, Marshall (October 31, 2008). "Leading Man: Leonardo DiCaprio". GQ. Archived from the original on March 20, 2018. Retrieved October 15, 2019. Guzmán, Rafer (December 18, 2008). "Leonardo DiCaprio, Kate Winslet in Revolutionary Road". Newsday. Archived from the original on March 6, 2016. Retrieved August 11, 2015. Travers, Peter (December 25, 2008). "Revolutionary Road". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on February 3, 2022. Retrieved February 3, 2022. "Complete List of Nominations for 2009 Golden Globes". E!. December 11, 2008. Archived from the original on July 25, 2015. Retrieved July 8, 2015. "Revolutionary Road". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on September 19, 2020. Retrieved April 4, 2022. Ochoa 2011, p. 75. Fleming, Michael (October 23, 2007). "Scorsese, DiCaprio Team for Island". Variety. Archived from the original on January 1, 2016. Retrieved October 7, 2019. McGarvey, Shannon (February 17, 2010). "DiCaprio: 'Shutter Island Was Traumatic'". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on October 7, 2019. Retrieved October 7, 2019. "Shutter Island (2010)". Rotten Tomatoes. February 19, 2010. Archived from the original on December 20, 2016. Retrieved April 19, 2023. Bradshaw, Peter (March 11, 2010). "Shutter Island". The Guardian. Archived from the original on December 22, 2015. Retrieved December 20, 2015. Travers, Peter (February 19, 2010). "Shutter Island". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on October 7, 2019. Retrieved October 7, 2019. "Shutter Island (2010)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on January 14, 2016. Retrieved March 2, 2022. Child, Ben (July 8, 2010). "Christopher Nolan's Inception: Too Good to be True?". The Guardian. Archived from the original on October 7, 2019. Retrieved October 7, 2019. Sheila, Marikar (July 16, 2010). "Inside Inception: Could Christopher Nolan's Dream World Exist in Real Life? Dream Experts Say Inception's Conception of the Subconscious Isn't Far From Science". ABC News. Archived from the original on July 13, 2015. Retrieved July 31, 2015. Honeycutt, Kirk (October 14, 2010). "Inception – Film Review". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 8, 2015. Retrieved August 11, 2015. "Inception". Empire. No. 253. July 2010. pp. 93–94. "Inception (2010)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on January 24, 2022. Retrieved April 11, 2022. Bacardi, Francesca (January 22, 2014). "Jonah Hill Was Paid $60,000 for Wolf of Wall Street". Variety. Archived from the original on July 11, 2015. Retrieved July 30, 2015. Wight 2012, p. 217. "J. Edgar (2011)". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on November 11, 2011. Retrieved November 10, 2011. Judge, Michael (January 29, 2011). "A Hollywood Icon Lays Down the Law". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on January 25, 2015. Retrieved February 18, 2011. (subscription required) Ebert, Roger (November 8, 2011). "J. Edgar". RogerEbert.com. Archived from the original on May 1, 2013. Retrieved November 9, 2011. Pols, Mary (December 7, 2011). "The Top 10 Everything of 2011 – Red Riding Hood". Time. Archived from the original on December 20, 2011. Retrieved October 7, 2019. "Red Riding Hood". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on December 16, 2015. Retrieved March 2, 2022. Blake, Meredith (February 12, 2013). "Beau Willimon's Political Work is Foundation for House of Cards". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 19, 2023. Retrieved April 19, 2023. Flynn, Fiona (December 18, 2012). "Leonardo DiCaprio Talks Django Unchained: It Was Disturbing". Entertainment.ie. Archived from the original on October 7, 2019. Retrieved October 7, 2019. Appelo, Tim (December 20, 2012). "Quentin Tarantino's Django Unchained: How Panic Attacks and DiCaprio's Real Blood Made a Slavery Epic Better". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 9, 2016. Retrieved February 28, 2016. "Django Unchained (2012)". Rotten Tomatoes. December 25, 2012. Archived from the original on December 30, 2012. Retrieved December 31, 2012. Watercutter, Angela (December 22, 2012). "Review: Django Unchained is a Love Story That Ranks Among Tarantino's Best". Wired. Archived from the original on December 22, 2016. Retrieved October 7, 2019. Reynolds, Simon (December 13, 2012). "Golden Globes nominations 2013: Movies list in full". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Retrieved March 2, 2022. "Django Unchained (2012)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on June 27, 2013. Retrieved March 2, 2022. "Leonardo DiCaprio Plans to Take Break from Acting". CBS News. January 22, 2013. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved August 11, 2015. "The Great Gatsby". Metacritic. Archived from the original on November 22, 2011. Retrieved July 6, 2013. Dibdin, Emma (May 17, 2013). "Leonardo DiCaprio: 5 Best Movie Roles". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on May 14, 2021. Retrieved April 11, 2022. "Australian Academy Announces 3rd AACTA Awards Nominees, renewed partnerships with Destination NSW and The Star, and new partners Foxtel and Audi" (PDF). Australian Academy of Cinema and Television Arts. Archived from the original (PDF) on December 14, 2013. Retrieved October 13, 2019. Guzman, Rafer (May 10, 2013). "The Great Gatsby Review: A Good 'Gatsby,' But a Great Leonardo DiCaprio". Newsday. Archived from the original on July 30, 2013. Retrieved July 6, 2013. Seitz, Matt Zoller (May 8, 2013). "The Great Gatsby Review". RogerEbert.com. Archived from the original on July 23, 2013. Retrieved July 7, 2013. "The Great Gatsby (2013)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on July 3, 2013. Retrieved March 2, 2022. Brooks, Xan (September 26, 2013). "Runner Runner – Review". The Guardian. Archived from the original on December 22, 2015. Retrieved October 6, 2019. Kaufman, Amy (December 8, 2013). "Frozen Tops Catching Fire, But Furnace Generates no Heat". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on May 4, 2014. Retrieved October 6, 2019. "Leonardo DiCaprio". Metacritic. Archived from the original on April 11, 2022. Retrieved April 11, 2022. Fleming, Mike Jr. (April 19, 2012). "TOLDJA! Martin Scorsese, Leonardo DiCaprio Commit to The Wolf of Wall Street". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 30, 2014. Retrieved April 19, 2012. Seitz, Matt Zoller (December 25, 2013). "The Wolf of Wall Street Movie Review (2013)". RogerEbert.com. Archived from the original on April 11, 2022. Retrieved April 11, 2022. Pamela McClintock (March 25, 2007). "Scorsese, DiCaprio Cry 'Wolf'". Variety. Archived from the original on October 26, 2017. Retrieved February 12, 2014. Lee, Ashley (December 17, 2013). "Leonardo DiCaprio Talks 'Flopping Around' in Wolf of Wall Street Sex Scenes (Video)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 6, 2019. Retrieved October 6, 2019. "The Wolf of Wall Street (2013)". Rotten Tomatoes. December 25, 2013. Archived from the original on August 23, 2019. Retrieved October 6, 2019. McCarthy, Todd (December 17, 2013). "The Wolf of Wall Street: Film Review". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 6, 2019. Retrieved October 6, 2019. Romney 2014, p. 26. Murray-Morris, Sophie (January 13, 2014). "Golden Globes 2014: Leonardo DiCaprio wins Best Actor for The Wolf of Wall Street". The Independent. Archived from the original on March 6, 2018. Retrieved March 5, 2018. "The 87th Academy Awards (2015) Nominees and Winners". Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. Archived from the original on March 10, 2015. Retrieved October 6, 2019. Fleming, Mike Jr. (October 17, 2014). "Netflix & Leonardo DiCaprio Team On Virunga Documentary Release". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 27, 2022. Retrieved April 11, 2022. "Virunga | 2014 Tribeca Festival". Tribeca Film Festival. Archived from the original on February 19, 2022. Retrieved February 19, 2022. "Leonardo DiCaprio". Emmy Awards. Archived from the original on June 8, 2021. Retrieved June 8, 2021. "Frequently Asked Questions". Cowspiracy.com. Archived from the original on October 6, 2019. Retrieved October 6, 2019. "Watch Cowspiracy: The Sustainability Secret". Netflix. Archived from the original on November 13, 2020. Retrieved April 10, 2022. Setoodeh, Ramin (December 15, 2015). "Leonardo DiCaprio, Alejandro G. Inarritu Open Up About The Revenant's Brutal Shoot". Variety. Archived from the original on October 5, 2019. Retrieved October 5, 2019. Zakarin, Jordan (October 19, 2015). "Leonardo DiCaprio on Fighting a Bear in The Revenant and Film vs. TV". Yahoo!. Archived from the original on January 6, 2020. Retrieved October 5, 2019. "The Revenant (2015)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 29, 2017. Retrieved March 2, 2022. Trivedi, Hiten J (January 17, 2017). "Watch: Leonardo DiCaprio wins 'Best Actor' Oscar Trophy for The Revenant... Finally!". The Times of India. Archived from the original on April 11, 2022. Retrieved April 11, 2022. Kermode, Mark (January 17, 2016). "The Revenant Review – A Walk on the Wild Side". The Guardian. Archived from the original on October 6, 2019. Retrieved October 6, 2019. De Semlyen, Nick (January 6, 2016). "The Revenant". Empire. Archived from the original on October 6, 2019. Retrieved October 6, 2019. Lee, Benjamin (February 29, 2016). "Leonardo DiCaprio Finally Wins Best Actor Oscar for Iñárritu's The Revenant". The Guardian. Archived from the original on October 11, 2021. Retrieved March 5, 2022. King, Susan (January 31, 2016). "Screen Actors Guild Awards 2016: Leo's March to Oscar Gold in The Revenant". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on May 12, 2021. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Critics' Choice Awards: Spotlight wins Best Film, Leonardo DiCaprio bags Best Actor for The Revenant". The Indian Express. January 18, 2016. Archived from the original on August 19, 2023. Retrieved August 19, 2023. Thorp, Charles (December 4, 2017). "Before the Flood: Leonardo DiCaprio's Toughest Role Yet". Men's Journal. Archived from the original on November 4, 2016. Retrieved October 6, 2019. McClintock, Pamela (January 14, 2017). "Box Office: Why Ben Affleck's Live by Night and Martin Scorsese's Silence Fared So Poorly". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 16, 2017. Retrieved October 6, 2019. "Delirium (2018)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on April 11, 2022. Retrieved April 11, 2022. "Robin Hood (2018)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on October 26, 2021. Retrieved April 11, 2022. Weissberg, Jay (June 11, 2019). "Film Review: Ice on Fire". Variety. Archived from the original on September 13, 2019. Retrieved April 4, 2022. Fleming, Mike Jr. (December 19, 2019). "Leonardo DiCaprio on Once Upon a Time in Hollywood and Looking For Positives in Disruption That Has Turned the Movie Business on Its Ear – the Deadline Q&A". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 21, 2021. Retrieved April 11, 2022. Kroll, Justin (April 30, 2019). "Leonardo DiCaprio, Margot Robbie and More 2019 Star Salaries Revealed". Variety. Archived from the original on May 1, 2019. Retrieved October 6, 2019. "Quentin Tarantino says Brad Pitt-Leo DiCaprio have 'Most Exciting Star Dynamic' Since Robert Redford-Paul Newman". Firstpost. Associated Press. April 24, 2018. Archived from the original on October 6, 2019. Retrieved October 6, 2019. Hainey, Michael (May 21, 2019). "Three Kings: Quentin, Brad, and Leo Take You Inside Once Upon a Time...in Hollywood". Esquire. Archived from the original on October 4, 2019. Retrieved October 6, 2019. Wakeman, Gregory (August 14, 2019). "Once Upon a Time in Hollywood: Could Brad Pitt Finally Win the Elusive Oscar He so Deserves?". The National. Archived from the original on April 11, 2022. Retrieved April 11, 2022. Guerrasio, Jason (July 23, 2019). "Leonardo DiCaprio Gives One of the Best Performances of His Career in Quentin Tarantino's Once Upon a Time in Hollywood". Business Insider. Archived from the original on February 6, 2020. Retrieved October 6, 2019. Sandwell, Ian (August 14, 2019). "Does Once Upon a Time in Hollywood Succeed?". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on October 11, 2019. Retrieved October 6, 2019. "Oscar Nominations 2020: The Complete List". Variety. February 9, 2020. Archived from the original on January 13, 2020. Retrieved January 13, 2020. "Golden Globes 2020: The Complete Nominations List". Variety. December 9, 2019. Archived from the original on December 9, 2019. Retrieved December 9, 2019. "BAFTA Film Awards 2020: The nominations in full". BBC News. February 2, 2020. Archived from the original on January 9, 2020. Retrieved January 8, 2020. "The 26th Annual Screen Actors Guild Awards". Screen Actors Guild Awards. Archived from the original on December 11, 2019. Retrieved June 8, 2021. "Once Upon a Time in Hollywood (2019)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on August 30, 2019. Retrieved March 2, 2022. Dry, Jude (May 5, 2020). "Leonardo DiCaprio-Produced The Right Stuff Series Sets Disney+ Launch Date". IndieWire. Archived from the original on April 11, 2022. Retrieved April 11, 2022. Rosen, Christopher (May 18, 2020). "Leonardo DiCaprio Met Michael Jordan in The Last Dance Finale". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on May 18, 2020. Retrieved May 18, 2020. Guerrasio, Jason (April 23, 2021). "Leonardo DiCaprio Spent 5 Months Tweaking Netflix's Don't Look Up Script Before Signing On". Insider Inc. Archived from the original on April 26, 2021. Retrieved September 29, 2021. "Leonardo DiCaprio on Don't Look Up: Most Important Issue in Civilization History". News18. December 31, 2021. Archived from the original on December 31, 2021. Retrieved January 5, 2022. Guevara, Jorge (December 30, 2021). "Don't Look Up Movie Netflix: Why are Mixed Reviews the Center of Critics About the Movie?". Marca. Archived from the original on December 30, 2021. Retrieved January 5, 2022. Sandwell, Ian (December 24, 2021). "Don't Look Up Review - Is Jennifer Lawrence's Netflix Movie Good?". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on December 30, 2021. Retrieved January 5, 2022. Chatterjee, Saibal (December 25, 2021). "Don't Look Up Review: Leonardo DiCaprio and Jennifer Lawrence's Film Hits the Right Buttons". NDTV. Archived from the original on January 7, 2022. Retrieved January 8, 2022. Lang, Brent; Moreau, Jordan (December 13, 2021). "Golden Globes 2022: The Complete Nominations List". Variety. Archived from the original on December 13, 2021. Retrieved January 8, 2022. Ritman, Alex (February 3, 2022). "BAFTA Awards Nominations: Dune Leads Pack in Diverse List Full of Surprises". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 3, 2022. Retrieved February 3, 2022. Yossman, K. J. (January 6, 2022). "Adam McKay's Don't Look Up Smashes Netflix Viewing Records With Over 150 Million Hours Viewed". Variety. Archived from the original on January 7, 2022. Retrieved January 8, 2022. Kroll, Justin (October 24, 2018). "Leonardo DiCaprio and Martin Scorsese to Reteam on Killers of the Flower Moon". Variety. Archived from the original on October 25, 2018. Retrieved October 25, 2018 – via MSN. Lang, Brent (July 20, 2022). "Inside Movie Stars' Salaries: Joaquin Phoenix Nabs $20M for Joker 2, Tom Cruise Heads to Over $100M and More". Variety. Archived from the original on July 20, 2022. Retrieved July 21, 2022. Sharf, Zack (February 18, 2021). "Jesse Plemons Takes Over DiCaprio's Original Role in Scorsese's 'Flower Moon' After Script Changes". IndieWire. Archived from the original on February 28, 2021. Retrieved February 23, 2021. Fleming, Mike Jr. (May 16, 2023). "Martin Scorsese, Leonardo DiCaprio & Robert De Niro On How They Found The Emotional Handle For Their Cannes Epic 'Killers Of The Flower Moon'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 20, 2023. Retrieved May 21, 2023. Ehrlich, David (May 20, 2023). "'Killers of the Flower Moon' Review: DiCaprio Gives His Best Performance for Scorsese's Bitterest Crime Epic". IndieWire. Archived from the original on May 21, 2023. Retrieved May 21, 2023. Hipes, Patrick (December 11, 2023). "Golden Globe Nominations: 'Barbie', 'Oppenheimer' Top Movie List; 'Succession' Leads Way In TV". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Lang, Brent (January 10, 2024). "Leonardo DiCaprio, Regina Hall, Sean Penn Starring in Paul Thomas Anderson's Next Movie". Variety. Retrieved January 11, 2024. Sales, Nancy Jo (June 22, 1998). "Leo, Prince of the City". New York Magazine. Archived from the original on January 1, 2022. Retrieved January 11, 2022. Lyne, Charlie (January 23, 2016). "Don's Plum: the Film Leonardo DiCaprio Would Rather Forget". The Guardian. Archived from the original on April 30, 2021. Retrieved January 11, 2022. Wight 2012, p. 138. Cadwalladr, Carole (January 28, 2007). "The Interview: Leonardo DiCaprio". The Guardian. Archived from the original on October 12, 2019. Retrieved October 12, 2019. "Leonardo DiCaprio: His Career in Pictures". Marie Claire. January 10, 2013. Archived from the original on October 12, 2019. Retrieved October 12, 2019. Stolworthy, Jacob (May 11, 2021). "Leonardo DiCaprio: 10 Best Films, From Inception to The Wolf of Wall Street". The Independent. Archived from the original on April 25, 2019. Retrieved October 13, 2019. "Leonardo DiCaprio Turned Down a Role in One of the Best Films to Star in One of His Worst Jobs". Marca. November 21, 2022. Archived from the original on February 1, 2023. Retrieved February 1, 2023. Davis, Clayton (May 22, 2023). "Leonardo DiCaprio's 17 Best Film Performances: From Titanic to The Departed". Variety. Archived from the original on February 1, 2023. Retrieved February 1, 2023. Travis, Ben; Butcher, Sophie; De Semlyen, Nick; Dyer, James; Nugent, John; Godfrey, Alex; O'Hara, Helen (December 20, 2022). "Empire's 50 Greatest Actors of All Time List, Revealed". Empire. Archived from the original on December 29, 2022. Retrieved February 1, 2023. Covert, Colin (January 7, 2016). "Q&A: Leonardo DiCaprio Talks About Grueling Revenant Shoot". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on May 30, 2019. Retrieved October 13, 2019. Lozoya, Livia (February 8, 2022). "Every Real Person Leonardo DiCaprio Has Portrayed". Collider. Archived from the original on February 8, 2022. Retrieved April 4, 2022. "Successful Hollywood Duos". Entertainment Weekly. November 30, 2007. Archived from the original on July 3, 2009. Retrieved October 12, 2019. Stolworthy, Jacob (November 18, 2022). "Leonardo DiCaprio Reveals What Martin Scorsese Taught Him as an Actor: 'I Truly Own the Term Artist by Working Alongside Him'". The Independent. Archived from the original on April 25, 2019. Retrieved October 13, 2019. "Leonardo DiCaprio and Hollywood's Biggest Directors - Photo Essays". Time. Archived from the original on May 16, 2017. Retrieved October 12, 2019. "Spotlight Award Archives". National Board of Review. Archived from the original on January 22, 2022. Retrieved February 3, 2022. Hassenger, Jesse (November 23, 2015). "Martin Scorsese's Work with DiCaprio is Just as Vital as His Work with De Niro". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on July 7, 2017. Retrieved October 12, 2019. Hammond 2012, pp. 166–167. Dowd, Vincent (February 27, 2016). "The Enigmatic Mr DiCaprio". BBC News. Archived from the original on May 12, 2018. Retrieved October 12, 2019. Thompson, Derek (February 27, 2010). "Career Advice for Leonardo DiCaprio". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on July 7, 2017. Retrieved October 13, 2019. Katz, Brandon (July 26, 2019). "Leonardo DiCaprio, Revisited: The Secret to His Modern Acclaim". The Observer. Archived from the original on July 27, 2019. Retrieved October 13, 2019. Todd 2014, p. 87. Green, Willow (October 7, 2013). "The 100 Sexiest Movie Stars: The Men". Empire. Archived from the original on May 13, 2018. Retrieved October 13, 2019. Fisher, Lauren Alexis (January 12, 2018). "The 50 Hottest Men of All Time". Harper's Bazaar. Archived from the original on March 9, 2021. Retrieved October 13, 2019. Errico, Marcus (March 26, 1998). "DiCaprio Sues Playgirl Over Nude Spread". E!. Archived from the original on October 12, 2019. Retrieved October 12, 2019. Rauzi, Robin (April 9, 1993). "A Powerfully Complex Boy's Life : This Boy Is Taking His Acting Life Very Seriously". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 13, 2019. Retrieved October 13, 2019. "France honours director Scorsese". BBC News. January 6, 2005. Archived from the original on December 15, 2014. Retrieved December 30, 2014. Schnurr, Samantha (April 21, 2016). "Leonardo DiCaprio, Nicki Minaj and More Stars Honored With Time 100 Covers". E!. Archived from the original on October 9, 2019. Retrieved October 9, 2019. Rose, Lacey (July 22, 2008). "In Pictures: Hollywood's Best-Paid Actors". Forbes. Archived from the original on April 9, 2016. Retrieved October 13, 2019. Pomerantz, Dorothy (September 8, 2010). "Hollywood's Highest-Paid Actors". Forbes. Archived from the original on August 3, 2019. Retrieved October 13, 2019. Pomerantz, Dorothy (August 1, 2011). "Hollywood's Highest-Earning Actors". Forbes. Archived from the original on April 28, 2019. Retrieved October 13, 2019. Pomerantz, Dorothy (July 3, 2012). "Tom Cruise Tops Our List Of Hollywood's Highest-Paid Actors". Forbes. Archived from the original on April 16, 2019. Retrieved October 13, 2019. Pomerantz, Dorothy (July 16, 2013). "Robert Downey Jr. Tops Forbes' List Of Hollywood's Highest-Paid Actors". Forbes. Archived from the original on August 12, 2019. Retrieved October 13, 2019. "Hollywood's Highest Paid Actors 2014". Forbes. Archived from the original on August 11, 2019. Retrieved October 13, 2019. "The World's Highest-Paid Actors 2015". Forbes. Archived from the original on May 8, 2019. Retrieved October 13, 2019. "The World's Highest-Paid Actors 2016". Forbes. Archived from the original on November 21, 2016. Retrieved October 13, 2019. Brower, Alison, ed. (June 22, 2016). "The THR 100: Hollywood Reporter's Most Powerful People in Entertainment". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 23, 2016. Retrieved October 13, 2019. Brower, Alison, ed. (June 21, 2017). "The THR 100: Hollywood Reporter's Most Powerful People in Entertainment". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 21, 2017. Retrieved October 13, 2019. Brower, Alison, ed. (September 20, 2018). "The Hollywood Reporter 100: The Most Powerful People in Entertainment 2018". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 20, 2018. Retrieved October 13, 2019. Brower, Alison, ed. (October 16, 2019). "The Hollywood Reporter 100: The Most Powerful People in Entertainment 2019". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 16, 2019. Retrieved October 16, 2019. Siegel, Tatiana (July 22, 2019). "'His Brand Is Excellence': How Leonardo DiCaprio Became Hollywood's Last Movie Star". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 16, 2019. Retrieved October 13, 2019. Fleming, Mike Jr. (February 10, 2016). "Leonardo DiCaprio On The Hard-Knock Film Education That Led To 'The Revenant': Q&A". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on June 3, 2021. Retrieved August 22, 2021. Bier, Molly (February 29, 2016). "Watch Leonardo DiCaprio's 2016 Oscar Acceptance Speech for Best Actor". Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. Archived from the original on October 11, 2019. Retrieved October 11, 2019. Goldenberg, Suzanne (February 29, 2016). "How Leonardo DiCaprio Became One of the World's Top Climate Change Champions". The Guardian. Archived from the original on April 25, 2017. Retrieved December 12, 2017. Prince, Rosa (September 16, 2014). "Leonardo DiCaprio Named as United Nations Climate Change Envoy". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on December 13, 2019. Retrieved December 13, 2019. Wolf, Jeanne (February 16, 2010). "Leonardo DiCaprio: Fame Can Make You 'a Little Bit Nuts'". Parade. Archived from the original on January 4, 2019. Retrieved October 12, 2019. "Leonardo DiCaprio Foundation". Leonardo DiCaprio Foundation. Archived from the original on April 11, 2016. Retrieved October 13, 2019. "Leonardo DiCaprio, Founder, Leonardo DiCaprio Foundation". World Wide Fund for Nature. Archived from the original on January 28, 2016. "Debt for Nature Swaps". United Nations Development Programme. Archived from the original on January 2, 2018. Retrieved December 1, 2017. Erdős 2019, p. 217. Snead, Elizabeth (October 4, 2011). "Leonardo DiCaprio Named Global Ambassador for International Fund for Animal Welfare". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 10, 2014. Retrieved October 13, 2019. D'Zurilla, Christie (August 18, 2011). "Leonardo DiCaprio Gets the Keys to a $100,000 Car – a Hybrid". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on January 31, 2012. Retrieved March 8, 2012. Revesz, Rachael (May 22, 2016). "Leonardo DiCaprio Flies 8,000 Miles in Private Jet to Accept 'Green Award'". The Independent. Archived from the original on March 5, 2022. Retrieved January 21, 2022. Battershill, Cody (January 20, 2016). "DiCaprio's Hypocritical 'Activism' is His Best Performance Yet". HuffPost. Archived from the original on June 4, 2016. Eilperin, Juliet (October 3, 2016). "It's Been 16 Years Since Leo Interviewed a President on Climate, and Situation is Now Much Worse". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on December 2, 2018. Retrieved October 13, 2019. "London Live Earth Line-up Revealed". NME. July 5, 2007. Archived from the original on September 18, 2021. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Summit Agrees Tiger Recovery Plan". BBC News. November 24, 2010. Archived from the original on September 9, 2015. Retrieved August 11, 2015. Hannamayj (November 25, 2010). "Vladimir Putin: Leonardo DiCaprio is 'A Real Man'". Time. Archived from the original on January 4, 2016. Retrieved August 11, 2015. "'The 11th Hour' Auction" (PDF). Christie's. Archived (PDF) from the original on March 8, 2023. Retrieved March 8, 2023. "Secretary-General Designates Leonardo DiCaprio as United Nations Messenger of Peace". United Nations. September 16, 2014. Archived from the original on August 10, 2022. Retrieved July 31, 2022. "United Nations Messengers of Peace: Leonardo DiCaprio". United Nations. September 16, 2014. Archived from the original on July 31, 2022. Retrieved July 31, 2022. Leonardo DiCaprio (UN Messenger of Peace) at the opening of Climate Summit 2014. United Nations. September 23, 2014. Archived from the original on April 23, 2016. Retrieved July 31, 2022 – via YouTube. Erdős 2019, p. 219. Rowling, Megan (September 22, 2015). "Actor DiCaprio Joins Growing Movement to Divest from Fossil Fuels". Reuters. Archived from the original on October 17, 2019. Retrieved October 17, 2019. Peltier, Elian (December 4, 2015). "Leonardo DiCaprio Warns Mayors That Time to Act Is Limited". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 11, 2019. Retrieved October 13, 2019. Miller, Julia (February 1, 2016). "Days After Meeting Leonardo DiCaprio, Pope Francis Signs on to First Acting Role". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on April 12, 2016. Retrieved October 13, 2019. "Leonardo DiCaprio May Be Blacklisted from Visiting Indonesia Over His Criticism of Palm Oil Plantations". Daily News. April 2, 2016. Archived from the original on April 16, 2016. Retrieved October 13, 2019. Ungerman, Alex (July 13, 2016). "Leonardo DiCaprio's Foundation Commits $15.6 Million to Fight Climate Change and Protect Wildlife". Entertainment Tonight. Archived from the original on July 14, 2016. Retrieved October 13, 2019. Chavez, Danette (December 5, 2016). "Leonardo DiCaprio, Chance the Rapper, and More Celebrate Standing Rock Victory". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on November 12, 2019. Retrieved November 12, 2019. Revesz, Rachael (April 30, 2017). "People's Climate March: Leonardo DiCaprio and Other Stars Join Thousands in Rally Against Donald Trump". The Independent. Archived from the original on April 30, 2017. Miller, Mike (July 27, 2017). "Madonna Delivers Surprise Performance at Leonardo DiCaprio's Charity Auction: $30 million Raised So Far". People. Archived from the original on May 4, 2019. Retrieved October 13, 2019. "DiCaprio's Foundation Donates $100M to Fight Climate Change". Khaleej Times. Indo-Asian News Service. December 22, 2018. Archived from the original on November 13, 2019. Retrieved November 13, 2019. Storer, Rhi (May 18, 2021). "Leonardo DiCaprio Pledges $43m to Restore the Galápagos Islands". The Guardian. Archived from the original on May 18, 2021. Retrieved May 18, 2021. Winfrey, Graham (November 4, 2016). "Hillary Clinton for President: 37 Filmmakers Reveal Why She's the Best Choice". IndieWire. Archived from the original on April 1, 2019. Retrieved April 4, 2022. "The Latest: Biden Fundraiser Draws Bigger Crowd After Wins". AP News. March 4, 2020. Archived from the original on October 26, 2020. Retrieved October 22, 2020. Todisco, Eric (September 27, 2020). "Leonardo DiCaprio Lends His Voice to Increase Voter Participation in New Video". People. Archived from the original on March 8, 2023. Retrieved March 8, 2023. DiCaprio, Leonardo (October 19, 2020). "Leonardo DiCaprio". Archived from the original on October 19, 2020. Retrieved October 22, 2020 – via Twitter. DiCaprio, Leonardo (October 8, 2020). "Leonardo DiCaprio". Archived from the original on October 9, 2020. Retrieved October 22, 2020 – via Twitter. DiCaprio, Leonardo (January 5, 2021). "Instagram". Archived from the original on March 5, 2022. Retrieved July 23, 2021 – via Instagram. Lynch, Sarah (April 4, 2023). "A Rapper Is on Trial over Foreign Influence: Why Is Leo DiCaprio Testifying?". The Age. Archived from the original on April 4, 2023. Retrieved April 4, 2023. "DiCaprio Computer Center Opens". AP News. April 9, 1999. Archived from the original on May 3, 2015. Retrieved November 2, 2014. Hodgson, Claire (September 23, 2014). "Leonardo DiCaprio and Kate Winslet Have Done the Nicest Thing Ever". Cosmopolitan. Archived from the original on December 2, 2021. Retrieved December 2, 2021. Vena, Jocelyn (January 22, 2010). "Leonardo DiCaprio Donates $1 million For Haiti Relief". MTV News. Archived from the original on August 18, 2015. Retrieved July 18, 2015. Franzetta, Lisa (April 29, 2011). "Leonardo Speaks Out For Tony: 'We Need to Act Now'". Animal Legal Defense Fund. Archived from the original on August 7, 2013. Retrieved April 29, 2011. Malkin, Marc (April 23, 2013). "Leonardo DiCaprio Donates $61,000 to Support Gay Rights at Annual GLAAD Media Awards". E!. Archived from the original on September 8, 2015. Retrieved July 29, 2015. "Leonardo DiCaprio Contributes $65,000 to Children of Armenia Fund". Armenian Weekly. December 15, 2016. Archived from the original on March 2, 2019. Retrieved October 13, 2019. Jensen, Eric (August 29, 2017). "Leonardo DiCaprio, The Kardashians, More Celebs Pledge Donations for Hurricane Harvey Relief Efforts". USA Today. Archived from the original on June 27, 2018. Retrieved July 15, 2018. Petski, Denise (January 10, 2020). "Leonardo DiCaprio's Foundation to Donate $3 Million to Australia Wildfire Relief Efforts". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on January 10, 2020. Retrieved January 10, 2020. Coyle, Jake (March 10, 2022). "DiCaprio Donates to Ukraine, but Earlier Reports False". AP News. Archived from the original on March 11, 2022. Retrieved March 11, 2022. "Leonardo DiCaprio Donates $10 Million to His Grandmother's Homeland Ukraine". Hindustan Times. Asian News International. March 8, 2022. Archived from the original on March 8, 2022. Retrieved March 9, 2022. Hiatt, Brian (August 5, 2010). "Leonardo DiCaprio Faces His Demons". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 6, 2023. Retrieved July 29, 2023. I'm not an atheist, I'm agnostic. What I honestly think about is the planet, not my specific spiritual soul floating around. I know that sounds slightly eco-boy, but I think about the idea that there's going to be a mass extinction, and then something else is going to evolve. Mooney 2021, p. 249. James, Caryn (October 29, 2006). "The Baby-Faced Kid Has Developed Quite a Stare". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on October 12, 2019. Retrieved September 11, 2022. Pollard, Alexandra (August 23, 2019). "Taylor Swift, Lover Review: The Sound of an Artist Excited to Be Earnest Again". The Independent. Archived from the original on August 23, 2019. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Hare, Breeanna (January 13, 2014). "Golden Globes: Tina Fey and Amy Poehler's Best Jokes". CNN. Archived from the original on January 14, 2020. Retrieved January 13, 2020. "Leonardo DiCaprio Laughs Off Ricky Gervais' Joke at Golden Globes". Variety. January 6, 2020. Archived from the original on January 14, 2020. Retrieved January 13, 2020. Jones, Allie (June 5, 2019). "Extremely Blonde and Disturbingly Young: The Anatomy of a Leonardo DiCaprio Relationship". Vice. Archived from the original on December 27, 2020. Retrieved January 14, 2020. Stolworthy, Jacob (March 28, 2022). "Oscars 2022: Amy Schumer Joke About Leonardo DiCaprio and His 'Girlfriends' Draws Gasps". The Independent. Archived from the original on March 31, 2022. Retrieved March 30, 2022. "Camila Morrone Doesn't Always Want to Talk About Leonardo DiCaprio. But She Understands Why People Ask". Los Angeles Times. December 3, 2019. Archived from the original on September 5, 2022. Retrieved September 6, 2022. Mahdawi, Arwa (September 3, 2022). "Leonardo DiCaprio, Why Don't You Date Someone Your Own Age?". The Guardian. Archived from the original on September 5, 2022. Retrieved September 6, 2022. Wallace, Francesca (September 27, 2018). "Gisele Bündchen Finally Opened Up About Why She and Leonardo DiCaprio Broke Up in 2005". Vogue Australia. Archived from the original on August 5, 2019. Retrieved August 5, 2019. Torres, Libby (September 11, 2022). "Leonardo DiCaprio Has Been Romantically Linked to Everyone From Blake Lively to Rihanna. Here's a Complete History of His Relationships". Insider Inc. Archived from the original on July 30, 2023. Retrieved March 9, 2023. "Another Breakup for Leonardo DiCaprio, Netizens Say He Doesn't Date Anyone Over 25". The Indian Express. September 2, 2022. Archived from the original on September 2, 2022. Retrieved September 3, 2022. Baker-Whitelaw, Gavia (August 31, 2022). "'Will You Still Love Me When I'm No Longer Young and Beautiful?': Leonardo DiCaprio's '25th Birthday Rule' Strikes Again After Camila Morrone". The Daily Dot. Archived from the original on September 3, 2022. Retrieved September 4, 2022. Halberg, Morgan (December 13, 2021). "Leonardo DiCaprio Paid $9.9 Million for a Remodeled Beverly Hills Home". The New York Observer. Archived from the original on March 2, 2023. Retrieved March 2, 2023. Satow, Julie (April 3, 2015). "Leonardo DiCaprio Builds an Eco-Resort". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 5, 2017. Retrieved October 22, 2016. Bown, Jessica (May 31, 2019). "The Sea-Cooled Eco-Resort That's Nearly Mosquito-Free". BBC News. Archived from the original on October 2, 2019. Retrieved October 29, 2019. Beale, Lauren (March 7, 2014). "Leonardo DiCaprio Buys Dinah Shore's Onetime Desert Home". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on July 6, 2015. Retrieved August 11, 2015. "Leonardo DiCaprio Attacker Gets Two Years in Prison". BBC News. December 8, 2010. Archived from the original on February 8, 2022. Retrieved February 10, 2022. Black, Caroline (December 8, 2010). "Leonardo DiCaprio Attacker Aretha Wilson Sentenced to Two Years in Prison". CBS News. Archived from the original on July 29, 2023. Retrieved July 29, 2023. "Leonardo DiCaprio Turns Over Marlon Brando Oscar, Other Gifts Allegedly Bought with 1MDB Funds". The Straits Times. June 19, 2017. Archived from the original on September 17, 2018. Retrieved September 17, 2018. Ritman, Alex (March 6, 2018). "Red Granite Pictures to Pay $60 Million to U.S. Government in Malaysian Corruption Case". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 9, 2023. Retrieved March 9, 2023. Kinsella, Eileen (June 16, 2017). "Leonardo DiCaprio Surrenders $3.2 Million Picasso and $9 Million Basquiat to US Government". Artnet. Archived from the original on January 16, 2021. Retrieved January 18, 2021. "Leonardo DiCaprio". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on September 15, 2019. Retrieved October 10, 2019. Dove, Steve (January 14, 2016). "Leonardo DiCaprio Gets Best Actor Nomination for 2016 Oscars". Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. Archived from the original on October 10, 2019. Retrieved October 10, 2019. "Leonardo DiCaprio". Hollywood Foreign Press Association. Archived from the original on May 27, 2019. Retrieved October 10, 2019. Lodderhose, Diana (February 14, 2016). "The Revenant, Leonardo DiCaprio Dominate BAFTA Awards". Variety. Archived from the original on February 4, 2021. Retrieved October 10, 2019. Block, Alex Ben; Wilson, Lucy Autrey, eds. (2010). George Lucas's Blockbusting: A Decade-By-Decade Survey of Timeless Movies Including Untold Secrets of Their Financial and Cultural Success. HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-061-77889-6. Erdős, László (2019). "Greening Hollywood – the Activism of Leonardo DiCaprio". Green Heroes. Springer Science+Business Media. pp. 217–221. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-31806-2_43. ISBN 978-3-030-31805-5. S2CID 213723782. Hammond, Michael K. (2012). "Leonardo DiCaprio and Sean Penn: Acting Authentic". In Pomerance, Murray (ed.). Shining in Shadows: Movie Stars of the 2000s. Rutgers University Press. pp. 166–181. ISBN 978-0-81355-216-3. Mooney, William H. (2021). "Citizen Kane (1941) and Baz Luhrmann's the Great Gatsby (2013)". Adaptation and the New Art Film. Palgrave Studies in Adaptation and Visual Culture. Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 237–268. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-62934-2_9. ISBN 978-3-030-62933-5. S2CID 238014709. Muir, John Kenneth (2004). The Unseen Force: The Films of Sam Raimi. Applause: Theatre & Cinema Books. ISBN 978-1-55783-607-6. Müller, Jürgen (2001). Movies of the 90s. Taschen. ISBN 978-3-8228-5878-3. Nash, Melanie; Lahti, Marti (1999). "The Paradoxes of Girls' Fandom". In Sandler, Kevin S.; Studlar, Gaylyn (eds.). Titanic: Anatomy of a Blockbuster. Rutgers University Press. pp. 64–88. ISBN 978-0-8135-2669-0. Neibaur, James L. (2016). The Essential Jack Nicholson. Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-1-4422-6989-7. Ochoa, George (2011). Deformed and Destructive Beings: The Purpose of Horror Films. McFarland & Company. ISBN 978-0-7864-8654-0. Pomerance, Murray (2012). "Leonardo DiCaprio: King of the 'World'". In Everett, Anna (ed.). Pretty People: Movie Stars of the 1990s. Rutgers University Press. pp. 103–122. doi:10.36019/9780813553252-007. ISBN 9780813553252. S2CID 225038492. Romney, Jonathan (2014). "The Man Who Sold the World". Film Comment. 50 (1): 22–27. JSTOR 43459881. Schwartz, David; Ryan, Steve; Wostbrock, Fred (1999). The Encyclopedia of TV Game Shows, 3rd Edition. Checkmark Books. ISBN 978-0-8160-3847-3. Todd, Erica (2014). Passionate Love and Popular Cinema. Palgrave Macmillan. doi:10.1057/9781137295385. ISBN 978-1-349-45183-8. Wight, Douglas (2012). Leonardo DiCaprio – The Biography. John Blake Publishing Ltd. ISBN 978-1-78219-859-8. Leonardo DiCaprio at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Leonardo DiCaprio Foundation Leonardo DiCaprio at IMDb Leonardo DiCaprio at Rotten Tomatoes Leonardo DiCaprio on Instagram