Hezbollah (/ˌhɛzbəˈlɑː/, /ˌxɛz-/; Arabic: حزب الله, romanized: Ḥizbu 'llāh, lit. 'Party of Allah' or 'Party of God') is a Lebanese Shia Islamist political party and militant group, led since 1992 by its Secretary-General Hassan Nasrallah. Hezbollah's paramilitary wing is the Jihad Council, and its political wing is the Loyalty to the Resistance Bloc party in the Lebanese Parliament. Hezbollah was established by Lebanese clerics primarily to fight the 1982 Israeli invasion of Lebanon. It adopted the model set out by Ayatollah Khomeini after the Iranian Revolution in 1979, and the party's founders adopted the name "Hezbollah" as chosen by Khomeini. Since then, close ties have developed between Iran and Hezbollah. The organization was created with the support of 1,500 Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) instructors, and aggregated a variety of Lebanese Shia groups into a unified organization to resist the former Israeli occupation of Southern Lebanon. During the Lebanese Civil War, Hezbollah's 1985 manifesto listed its objectives as the expulsion of "the Americans, the French and their allies definitely from Lebanon, putting an end to any colonialist entity on our land". From 1985 to 2000, Hezbollah also participated in the 1985–2000 South Lebanon conflict against the South Lebanon Army (SLA) and Israel Defense Forces (IDF), and fought again with the IDF in the 2006 Lebanon War. During the 1990s, Hezbollah also organized volunteers to fight for the Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina during the Bosnian War. Since 1990, Hezbollah has participated in Lebanese politics, in a process which is described as the Lebanonisation of Hezbollah, and it later participated in the government of Lebanon and joined political alliances. After the 2006–08 Lebanese protests and clashes, a national unity government was formed in 2008, with Hezbollah and its opposition allies obtaining 11 of 30 cabinet seats, enough to give them veto power. In August 2008, Lebanon's new cabinet unanimously approved a draft policy statement that recognizes Hezbollah's existence as an armed organization and guarantees its right to "liberate or recover occupied lands" (such as the Shebaa Farms). Hezbollah is part of Lebanon's March 8 Alliance, in opposition to the March 14 Alliance. It maintains strong support among Lebanese Shia Muslims, while Sunnis have disagreed with its agenda. Hezbollah also has support in some Christian areas of Lebanon. Since 2012, Hezbollah involvement in the Syrian civil war has seen it join the Syrian government in its fight against the Syrian opposition, which Hezbollah has described as a Zionist plot and a "Wahhabi-Zionist conspiracy" to destroy its alliance with Bashar al-Assad against Israel. Between 2013 and 2015, the organisation deployed its militia in both Syria and Iraq to fight or train local militias to fight against the Islamic State. In the 2018 Lebanese general election, Hezbollah held 12 seats and its alliance won the election by gaining 70 out of 128 seats in the Parliament of Lebanon. Hezbollah did not disarm after the Israeli withdrawal from South Lebanon, in contravention of the UN Security Council resolution 1701. From 2006, the group's military strength grew significantly, to the extent that its paramilitary wing became more powerful than the Lebanese Army. Hezbollah has been described as a "state within a state", and has grown into an organization with seats in the Lebanese government, a radio and a satellite TV station, social services and large-scale military deployment of fighters beyond Lebanon's borders. The group currently receives military training, weapons, and financial support from Iran and political support from Syria, although the sectarian nature of the Syrian war has damaged the group's legitimacy. In 2021, Nasrallah said the group had 100,000 fighters. Either the entire organization or only its military wing has been designated a terrorist organization by several countries, including by the European Union and, since 2017, also by most member states of the Arab League, with two exceptions – Lebanon, where Hezbollah is one of the country's most influential political parties, and Iraq. Russia does not view Hezbollah as a "terrorist organization" but as a "legitimate socio-political force". In 1982, Hezbollah was conceived by Muslim clerics and funded by Iran primarily to fight the Israeli invasion of Lebanon. Its leaders were followers of Ayatollah Khomeini, and its forces were trained and organized by a contingent of 1,500 Revolutionary Guards that arrived from Iran with permission from the Syrian government, which occupied Lebanon's eastern highlands, permitted their transit to a base in the Bekaa valley which was in occupation of Lebanon at the time. Scholars differ as to when Hezbollah came to be a distinct entity. Various sources list the official formation of the group as early as 1982 whereas Diaz and Newman maintain that Hezbollah remained an amalgamation of various violent Shi'a extremists until as late as 1985. Another version states that it was formed by supporters of Sheikh Ragheb Harb, a leader of the southern Shia resistance killed by Israel in 1984. Regardless of when the name came into official use, a number of Shi'a groups were slowly assimilated into the organization, such as Islamic Jihad, Organization of the Oppressed on Earth and the Revolutionary Justice Organization.[citation needed] These designations are considered to be synonymous with Hezbollah by the US, Israel and Canada. According to Robert Fisk and Israeli General Shimon Shapira the date of 8 June 1982, two days after the Israeli invasion of Lebanon, when 50 Shiite militants ambushed an Israel Defense Forces armored convoy in Khalde south of Beirut, is considered by Hezbollah as the founding myth of the "Islamic Resistance in Lebanon", the group's military wing. It was in this battle, delaying the Israeli advance to Beirut for six days, that the future Hezbollah military chief Mustafa Badreddine made his name as a serious commander. According to Shapira, the lightly-armed Shia fighters managed to capture an Israeli armored vehicle on that day and paraded it in the Revolutionary Guards' forward operating base in Baalbek, Eastern Lebanon. Fisk writes: Down at Khalde, a remarkable phenomenon had taken shape. The Shia militiamen were running on foot into the Israeli gunfire to launch grenades at the Israeli armour, actually moving to within 20 feet of the tanks to open fire at them. Some of the Shia fighters had torn off pieces of their shirts and wrapped them around their heads as bands of martyrdom as the Iranian revolutionary guards had begun doing a year before when they staged their first mass attacks against the Iraqis in the Gulf War a thousand miles to the east. When they set fire to one Israeli armoured vehicle, the gunmen were emboldened to advance further. None of us, I think, realised the critical importance of the events of Khalde that night. The Lebanese Shia were learning the principles of martyrdom and putting them into practice. Never before had we seen these men wear headbands like this; we thought it was another militia affectation but it was not. It was the beginning of a legend which also contained a strong element of truth. The Shia were now the Lebanese resistance, nationalist no doubt but also inspired by their religion. The party of God – in Arabic, the Hezbollah – were on the beaches of Khalde that night. Hezbollah emerged in South Lebanon during a consolidation of Shia militias as a rival to the older Amal Movement. Hezbollah played a significant role in the Lebanese civil war, opposing American forces in 1982–83 and opposing Amal and Syria during the 1985–88 War of the Camps. However, Hezbollah's early primary focus was ending Israel's occupation of southern Lebanon following Israel's 1982 invasion and siege of Beirut. Amal, the main Lebanese Shia political group, initiated guerrilla warfare. In 2006, former Israeli prime minister Ehud Barak stated, "When we entered Lebanon … there was no Hezbollah. We were accepted with perfumed rice and flowers by the Shia in the south. It was our presence there that created Hezbollah". Hezbollah waged an asymmetric war using suicide attacks against the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) and Israeli targets outside of Lebanon. Hezbollah is reputed to have been among the first Islamic resistance groups in the Middle East to use the tactics of suicide bombing, assassination, and capturing foreign soldiers, as well as murders and hijackings. Hezbollah also employed more conventional military tactics and weaponry, notably Katyusha rockets and other missiles. At the end of the Lebanese Civil War in 1990, despite the Taif Agreement asking for the "disbanding of all Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias," Syria, which controlled Lebanon at that time, allowed Hezbollah to maintain their arsenal and control Shia areas along the border with Israel. In the 1990s, Hezbollah transformed from a revolutionary group into a political one, in a process which is described as the Lebanonisation of Hezbollah. Unlike its uncompromising revolutionary stance in the 1980s, Hezbollah conveyed a lenient stance towards the Lebanese state. In 1992, Hezbollah decided to participate in elections, and Ali Khamenei, supreme leader of Iran, endorsed it. Former Hezbollah secretary general, Subhi al-Tufayli, contested this decision, which led to a schism in Hezbollah. Hezbollah won all twelve seats which were on its electoral list. At the end of that year, Hezbollah began to engage in dialog with Lebanese Christians. Hezbollah regards cultural, political, and religious freedoms in Lebanon as sanctified, although it does not extend these values to groups who have relations with Israel. In 1997, Hezbollah formed the multi-confessional Lebanese Brigades to Fighting the Israeli Occupation in an attempt to revive national and secular resistance against Israel, thereby marking the "Lebanonisation" of resistance. Whether the Islamic Jihad Organization (IJO) was a nom de guerre used by Hezbollah or a separate organization, is disputed. According to certain sources, IJO was identified as merely a "telephone organization", and whose name was "used by those involved to disguise their true identity." Hezbollah reportedly also used another name, "Islamic Resistance" (al-Muqawama al-Islamiyya), for attacks against Israel. A 2003 American court decision found IJO was the name used by Hezbollah for its attacks in Lebanon, parts of the Middle East and Europe. The US, Israel and Canada consider the names "Islamic Jihad Organization", "Organization of the Oppressed on Earth" and the "Revolutionary Justice Organization" to be synonymous with Hezbollah. The ideology of Hezbollah has been summarized as Shi'i radicalism; Hezbollah follows the Islamic Shi'a theology developed by Iranian leader Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini. Hezbollah was largely formed with the aid of the Ayatollah Khomeini's followers in the early 1980s in order to spread Islamic revolution and follows a distinct version of Islamic Shi'a ideology (Wilayat al-faqih or Guardianship of the Islamic Jurists) developed by Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, leader of the "Islamic Revolution" in Iran. Although Hezbollah originally aimed to transform Lebanon into a formal Faqihi Islamic republic, this goal has been abandoned in favor of a more inclusive approach. On 16 February 1985, Sheik Ibrahim al-Amin issued Hezbollah's manifesto. The ideology presented in it was described as radical.[by whom?] Its first objective was to fight against what Hezbollah described as American and Israeli imperialism, including the Israeli occupation of Southern Lebanon and other territories. The second objective was to gather all Muslims into an "ummah", under which Lebanon would further the aims of the 1979 Revolution of Iran. It also declared it would protect all Lebanese communities, excluding those that collaborated with Israel, and support all national movements—both Muslim and non-Muslim—throughout the world.[which?] The ideology has since evolved, and today Hezbollah is a left-wing political entity focused on social injustice.[dubious – discuss] Translated excerpts from Hezbollah's original 1985 manifesto read: We are the sons of the umma (Muslim community) ... ... We are an ummah linked to the Muslims of the whole world by the solid doctrinal and religious connection of Islam, whose message God wanted to be fulfilled by the Seal of the Prophets, i.e., Prophet Muhammad. ... As for our culture, it is based on the Holy Quran, the Sunna and the legal rulings of the faqih who is our source of imitation ... From the inception of Hezbollah to the present, the elimination of the State of Israel has been one of Hezbollah's primary goals. Some translations of Hezbollah's 1985 Arabic-language manifesto state that "our struggle will end only when this entity [Israel] is obliterated". According to Hezbollah's Deputy-General, Naim Qassem, the struggle against Israel is a core belief of Hezbollah and the central rationale of Hezbollah's existence. Hezbollah says that its continued hostilities against Israel are justified as reciprocal to Israeli operations against Lebanon and as retaliation for what they claim is Israel's occupation of Lebanese territory. Israel withdrew from Lebanon in 2000, and their withdrawal was verified by the United Nations as being in accordance with resolution 425 of 19 March 1978, however Lebanon considers the Shebaa farms—a 26-km2 (10-mi2) piece of land captured by Israel from Syria in the 1967 war and considered by the UN to be Syrian territory occupied by Israel—to be Lebanese territory. Finally, Hezbollah considers Israel to be an illegitimate state. For these reasons, it justifies its actions as acts of defensive jihad. If they go from Shebaa, we won't stop fighting them. ... Our goal is to liberate the 1948 borders of Palestine, ... The Jews who survive this war of liberation can go back to Germany or wherever they came from. However, that the Jews who lived in Palestine before 1948 will be 'allowed to live as a minority and they will be cared for by the Muslim majority.' — Hezbollah's spokesperson Hassan Ezzedin, about an Israeli withdrawal from Shebaa Farms Hezbollah officials have said, on rare occasions, that it is only "anti-Zionist" and not anti-Semitic. However, according to scholars, "these words do not hold up upon closer examination". Among other actions, Hezbollah actively engages in Holocaust denial and spreads anti-Semitic conspiracy theories. Various antisemitic statements have been attributed to Hezbollah officials. Amal Saad-Ghorayeb, a Lebanese political analyst, argues that although Zionism has influenced Hezbollah's anti-Judaism, "it is not contingent upon it because Hezbollah's hatred of Jews is more religiously motivated than politically motivated". Robert S. Wistrich, a historian specializing in the study of anti-Semitism, described Hezbollah's ideology concerning Jews: The anti-Semitism of Hezbollah leaders and spokesmen combines the image of seemingly invincible Jewish power ... and cunning with the contempt normally reserved for weak and cowardly enemies. Like the Hamas propaganda for holy war, that of Hezbollah has relied on the endless vilification of Jews as 'enemies of mankind,' 'conspiratorial, obstinate, and conceited' adversaries full of 'satanic plans' to enslave the Arabs. It fuses traditional Islamic anti-Judaism with Western conspiracy myths, Third Worldist anti-Zionism, and Iranian Shiite contempt for Jews as 'ritually impure' and corrupt infidels. Sheikh Fadlallah typically insists ... that Jews wish to undermine or obliterate Islam and Arab cultural identity in order to advance their economic and political domination. Conflicting reports say Al-Manar, the Hezbollah-owned and operated television station, accused either Israel or Jews of deliberately spreading HIV and other diseases to Arabs throughout the Middle East. Al-Manar was criticized in the West for airing "anti-Semitic propaganda" in the form of a television drama depicting a Jewish world domination conspiracy theory. The group has been accused by American analysts of engaging in Holocaust denial. In addition, during its 2006 war, it apologized only for killing Israel's Arabs (i.e., non-Jews). In November 2009, Hezbollah pressured a private English-language school to drop reading excerpts from The Diary of Anne Frank, a book of the writings from the diary kept by the Jewish child Anne Frank while she was in hiding with her family during the Nazi occupation of the Netherlands. This was after Hezbollah's Al-Manar television channel complained, asking how long Lebanon would "remain an open arena for the Zionist invasion of education?" At the beginning, many Hezbollah leaders maintained that the movement was "not an organization, for its members carry no cards and bear no specific responsibilities," and that the movement does not have "a clearly defined organizational structure." Today, as Hezbollah scholar Magnus Ranstorp reports, Hezbollah does indeed have a formal governing structure and, in keeping with the principle of Guardianship of the Islamic Jurists (velayat-e faqih), it "concentrate[s] ... all authority and powers" in its religious leaders, whose decisions then "flow from the ulama down the entire community." The supreme decision-making bodies of the Hezbollah were divided between the Majlis al-Shura (Consultative Assembly) which was headed by 12 senior clerical members with responsibility for tactical decisions and supervision of overall Hizballah activity throughout Lebanon, and the Majlis al-Shura al-Karar (the Deciding Assembly), headed by Sheikh Muhammad Hussein Fadlallah and composed of eleven other clerics with responsibility for all strategic matters. Within the Majlis al-Shura, there existed seven specialized committees dealing with ideological, financial, military and political, judicial, informational and social affairs. In turn, the Majlis al-Shura and these seven committees were replicated in each of Hizballah's three main operational areas (the Beqaa, Beirut, and the South). Since the Supreme Leader of Iran is the ultimate clerical authority, Hezbollah's leaders have appealed to him "for guidance and directives in cases when Hezbollah's collective leadership [was] too divided over issues and fail[ed] to reach a consensus." After the death of Iran's first Supreme Leader, Khomeini, Hezbollah's governing bodies developed a more "independent role" and appealed to Iran less often. Since the Second Lebanon War, however, Iran has restructured Hezbollah to limit the power of Hassan Nasrallah, and invested billions of dollars "rehabilitating" Hezbollah. Structurally, Hezbollah does not distinguish between its political/social activities within Lebanon and its military/jihad activities against Israel. "Hezbollah has a single leadership," according to Naim Qassem, Hezbollah's second in command. "All political, social and jihad work is tied to the decisions of this leadership ... The same leadership that directs the parliamentary and government work also leads jihad actions in the struggle against Israel." In 2010, Iran's parliamentary speaker Ali Larijani said, "Iran takes pride in Lebanon's Islamic resistance movement for its steadfast Islamic stance. Hezbollah nurtures the original ideas of Islamic Jihad." He also instead charged the West with having accused Iran with support of terrorism and said, "The real terrorists are those who provide the Zionist regime with military equipment to bomb the people." Funding of Hezbollah comes from the Iranian government, Lebanese business groups, private persons, businessmen, the Lebanese diaspora involved in African diamond exploration, other Islamic groups and countries, and the taxes paid by the Shia Lebanese. Hezbollah says that the main source of its income comes from its own investment portfolios and donations by Muslims. Western sources maintain that Hezbollah actually receives most of its financial, training, weapons, explosives, political, diplomatic, and organizational aid from Iran and Syria. Iran is said to have given $400 million between 1983 and 1989 through donation. Due to economic problems, Iran temporarily limited funds to humanitarian actions carried on by Hezbollah. During the late 1980s, when there was extreme inflation due to the collapse of the Lira, it was estimated that Hezbollah was receiving $3–5 million per month from Iran. According to reports released in February 2010, Hezbollah received $400 million from Iran. In 2011, Iran earmarked $7 million to Hezbollah's activities in Latin America. Hezbollah has relied also on funding from the Shi'ite Lebanese Diaspora in West Africa, the United States and, most importantly, the Triple Frontier, or tri-border area, along the junction of Paraguay, Argentina, and Brazil. U.S. law enforcement officials have identified an illegal multimillion-dollar cigarette-smuggling fund raising operation and a drug smuggling operation. Nasrallah has repeatedly denied any links between the South American drug trade and Hezbollah, calling such accusations "propaganda" and attempts "to damage the image of Hezbollah". As of 2018, Iranian monetary support for Hezbollah is estimated at $700 million per annum according to US estimates. The United States has accused members of the Venezuelan government of providing financial aid to Hezbollah. Hezbollah organizes and maintains an extensive social development program and runs hospitals, news services, educational facilities, and encouragement of Nikah mut'ah. One of its established institutions, Jihad Al Binna's Reconstruction Campaign, is responsible for numerous economic and infrastructure development projects in Lebanon. Hezbollah controls the Martyr's Institute (Al-Shahid Social Association), which pays stipends to "families of fighters who die" in battle. An IRIN news report of the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs noted: Hezbollah not only has armed and political wings—it also boasts an extensive social development program. Hezbollah currently operates at least four hospitals, twelve clinics, twelve schools and two agricultural centres that provide farmers with technical assistance and training. It also has an environmental department and an extensive social assistance program. Medical care is also cheaper than in most of the country's private hospitals and free for Hezbollah members. According to CNN, "Hezbollah did everything that a government should do, from collecting the garbage to running hospitals and repairing schools." In July 2006, during the war with Israel, when there was no running water in Beirut, Hezbollah was arranging supplies around the city. Lebanese Shiites "see Hezbollah as a political movement and a social service provider as much as it is a militia." Hezbollah also rewards its guerrilla members who have been wounded in battle by taking them to Hezbollah-run amusement parks. Hezbollah is, therefore, deeply embedded in the Lebanese society. Hezbollah along with Amal is one of two major political parties in Lebanon that represent Shiite Muslims. Unlike Amal, whose support is predominantly in Lebanon's south, Hezbollah maintains broad-based support in all three areas of Lebanon with a majority Shia Muslim population: in the south, in Beirut and its surrounding area, and in the northern Beqaa valley and Hirmil region. Hezbollah holds 14 of the 128 seats in the Parliament of Lebanon and is a member of the Resistance and Development Bloc. According to Daniel L. Byman, it is "the most powerful single political movement in Lebanon." Hezbollah, along with the Amal Movement, represents most of Lebanese Shi'a. Unlike Amal, Hezbollah has not disarmed. Hezbollah participates in the Parliament of Lebanon. Hezbollah has been one of the main parties of the March 8 Alliance since March 2005. Although Hezbollah had joined the new government in 2005, it remained staunchly opposed to the March 14 Alliance. On 1 December 2006, these groups began a series of political protests and sit-ins in opposition to the government of Prime Minister Fouad Siniora. In 2006, Michel Aoun and Hassan Nasrallah met in Mar Mikhayel Church, Chiyah, and signed a memorandum of understanding between Free Patriotic Movement and Hezbollah organizing their relation and discussing Hezbollah's disarmament with some conditions. The agreement also discussed the importance of having normal diplomatic relations with Syria and the request for information about the Lebanese political prisoners in Syria and the return of all political prisoners and diaspora in Israel. After this event, Aoun and his party became part of the March 8 Alliance. On 7 May 2008, Lebanon's 17-month-long political crisis spiraled out of control. The fighting was sparked by a government move to shut down Hezbollah's telecommunication network and remove Beirut Airport's security chief over alleged ties to Hezbollah. Hezbollah leader Hassan Nasrallah said the government's decision to declare the group's military telecommunications network illegal was a "declaration of war" on the organization, and demanded that the government revoke it. Hezbollah-led opposition fighters seized control of several West Beirut neighborhoods from Future Movement militiamen loyal to the backed government, in street battles that left 11 dead and 30 wounded. The opposition-seized areas were then handed over to the Lebanese Army. The army also pledged to resolve the dispute and has reversed the decisions of the government by letting Hezbollah preserve its telecoms network and re-instating the airport's security chief. At the end, rival Lebanese leaders reached consensus over Doha Agreement on 21 May 2008, to end the 18-month political feud that exploded into fighting and nearly drove the country to a new civil war. On the basis of this agreement, Hezbollah and its opposition allies were effectively granted veto power in Lebanon's parliament. At the end of the conflicts, National unity government was formed by Fouad Siniora on 11 July 2008, with Hezbollah controlling one ministerial and eleven of thirty cabinet places. In 2018 Lebanese general election, Hezbollah general secretary Hassan Nasrallah presented the names of the 13 Hezbollah candidates. On 22 March 2018, Nasrallah issued a statement outlining the main priorities for the parliamentary bloc of the party, Loyalty to the Resistance, in the next parliament. He stated that rooting out corruption would be the foremost priority of the Loyalty to the Resistance bloc. The electoral slogan of the party was 'We will construct and we will protect'. Finally Hezbollah held 12 seats and its alliance won the election by gaining 70 out of 128 seats of Parliament of Lebanon. Hezbollah operates a satellite television station, Al-Manar TV ("the Lighthouse"), and a radio station, al-Nour ("the Light"). Al-Manar broadcasts from Beirut, Lebanon. Hezbollah launched the station in 1991 with the help of Iranian funds. Al-Manar, the self-proclaimed "Station of the Resistance," (qanat al-muqawama) is a key player in what Hezbollah calls its "psychological warfare against the Zionist enemy" and an integral part of Hezbollah's plan to spread its message to the entire Arab world. Hezbollah has a weekly publication, Al Ahd, which was established in 1984. It is the only media outlet which is openly affiliated with the organization. Hezbollah's television station Al-Manar airs programming designed to inspire suicide attacks in Gaza, the West Bank, and Iraq. Al-Manar's transmission in France is prohibited due to its promotion of Holocaust denial, a criminal offense in France. The United States lists Al-Manar television network as a terrorist organization. Al-Manar was designated as a "Specially Designated Global Terrorist entity," and banned by the United States in December 2004. It has also been banned by France, Spain and Germany. Materials aimed at instilling principles of nationalism and Islam in children are an aspect of Hezbollah's media operations. The Hezbollah Central Internet Bureau released two video games – Special Force in 2003 and a sequel, Special Force 2: Tale of the Truthful Pledge, in 2007 – in which players are rewarded with points and weapons for killing Israeli soldiers. In 2012, Al-Manar aired a television special praising an 8-year-old boy who raised money for Hezbollah and said: "When I grow up, I will be a communist resistance warrior with Hezbollah, fighting the United States and Israel, I will tear them to pieces and drive them out of Lebanon, the Golan and Palestine, which I love very dearly." Hezbollah's secret services have been described as "one of the best in the world", and have even infiltrated the Israeli army. Hezbollah's secret services collaborate with the Lebanese intelligence agencies. In the summer of 1982, Hezbollah's Special Security Apparatus was created by Hussein al-Khalil, now a "top political adviser to Nasrallah"; while Hezbollah's counterintelligence was initially managed by Iran's Quds Force,: 238  the organization continued to grow during the 1990s. By 2008, scholar Carl Anthony Wege writes, "Hizballah had obtained complete dominance over Lebanon's official state counterintelligence apparatus, which now constituted a Hizballah asset for counterintelligence purposes.": 775  This close connection with Lebanese intelligence helped bolster Hezbollah's financial counterintelligence unit.: 772, 775  According to Ahmad Hamzeh, Hezbollah's counterintelligence service is divided into Amn al-Muddad, responsible for "external" or "encounter" security; and Amn al-Hizb, which protects the organization's integrity and its leaders. According to Wege, Amn al-Muddad "may have received specialized intelligence training in Iran and possibly North Korea".: 773–774  The organization also includes a military security component, as well as an External Security Organization (al-Amn al-Khariji or Unit 910) that operates covertly outside Lebanon.: 238  Successful Hezbollah counterintelligence operations include thwarting the CIA's attempted kidnapping of foreign operations chief Hassan Ezzeddine in 1994, the 1997 manipulation of a double agent that led to the Ansariya ambush, and the 2000 kidnapping of alleged Mossad agent Elhanan Tannenbaum.: 773  In 2006, Hezbollah collaborated with the Lebanese government to detect Adeeb al-Alam, a former colonel, as an Israeli spy.: 774  Hezbollah recruited IDF Lieutenant Colonel Omar al-Heib, who was convicted in 2006 of conducting surveillance for Hezbollah.: 776  In 2009, Hezbollah apprehended Marwan Faqih, a garage owner who installed tracking devices in Hezbollah-owned vehicles.: 774  Hezbollah's counterintelligence apparatus uses electronic surveillance and intercept technologies. By 2011, Hezbollah counterintelligence began to use software to analyze cellphone data and detect espionage. Suspicious callers were then subjected to conventional surveillance. In the mid-1990s, Hezbollah was able to "download unencrypted video feeds from Israeli drones,": 777  and Israeli SIGINT efforts intensified after the 2000 withdrawal from Lebanon. With possible help from Iran and the Russian FSB, Hezbollah augmented its electronic counterintelligence capabilities, and succeeded in 2008 in detecting Israeli bugs near Mount Sannine and in the organization's fiber optic network.: 774, 777–778  Hezbollah does not reveal its armed strength. The Dubai-based Gulf Research Centre estimated in 2006 that Hezbollah's armed wing comprises 1,000 full-time Hezbollah members, along with a further 6,000–10,000 volunteers. According to the Iranian Fars News Agency, Hezbollah has up to 65,000 fighters. In October 2023, Al Jazeera cited Hezbollah expert Nicholas Blanford as estimating that Hezbollah has at least 60,000 fighters, including full-time and reservists, and that it had increased its stockpile of missiles from 14,000 in 2006 to about 150,000. It is often described as more militarily powerful than the Lebanese Army. Israeli commander Gui Zur called Hezbollah "by far the greatest guerrilla group in the world". In 2010, Hezbollah was believed to have 45,000 rockets. Israeli Defense Forces Chief of Staff Gadi Eisenkot said that Hezbollah possesses "tens of thousands" of long- and short-range rockets, drones, advanced computer encryption capabilities, as well as advanced defense capabilities like the SA-6 anti-aircraft missile system. Hezbollah possesses the Katyusha-122 rocket, which has a range of 29 km (18 mi) and carries a 15-kg (33-lb) warhead. Hezbollah possesses about 100 long-range missiles. They include the Iranian-made Fajr-3 and Fajr-5, the latter with a range of 75 km (47 mi), enabling it to strike the Israeli port of Haifa, and the Zelzal-1, with an estimated 150 km (93 mi) range, which can reach Tel Aviv. Fajr-3 missiles have a range of 40 km (25 mi) and a 45-kg (99-lb) warhead. Fajr-5 missiles, extend to 72 km (45 mi), also hold 45-kg (99-lb) warheads. It was reported that Hezbollah is in possession of Scud missiles that were provided to them by Syria. Syria denied the reports. According to various reports, Hezbollah is armed with anti-tank guided missiles, namely, the Russian-made AT-3 Sagger, AT-4 Spigot, AT-5 Spandrel, AT-13 Saxhorn-2 'Metis-M', АТ-14 Spriggan 'Kornet', Iranian-made Ra'ad (version of AT-3 Sagger), Towsan (version of AT-5 Spandrel), Toophan (version of BGM-71 TOW), and European-made MILAN missiles. These weapons have been used against IDF soldiers, causing many of the deaths during the 2006 Lebanon War. US courts said that North Korea provided armaments to Hezbollah during the 2006 war. A small number of Saeghe-2s, an Iranian-made version of the M47 Dragon, were also used in the war. For air defense, Hezbollah has anti-aircraft weapons that include the ZU-23 artillery and the man-portable, shoulder-fired SA-7 and SA-18 surface-to-air missile (SAM). One of the most effective weapons deployed by Hezbollah has been the C-802 anti-ship missile. In April 2010, U.S. Secretary of Defense Robert Gates claimed that Hezbollah has far more missiles and rockets than the majority of countries, and said that Syria and Iran are providing weapons to the organization. Israel also claims that Syria is providing the organization with these weapons. Syria has denied supplying these weapons and views these claims as an Israeli excuse for an attack.[citation needed] Leaked cables from American diplomats suggest that the United States has been trying unsuccessfully to prevent Syria from "supplying arms to Hezbollah in Lebanon", and that Hezbollah has "amassed a huge stockpile (of arms) since its 2006 war with Israel"; the arms were described as "increasingly sophisticated." Gates added that Hezbollah is possibly armed with chemical or biological weapons, as well as 65-mile (105 km) anti-ship missiles that could threaten U.S. ships. As of 2017[update], the Israeli government believe Hezbollah had an arsenal of nearly 150,000 rockets stationed on its border with Lebanon. Some of these missiles are said to be capable of penetrating cities as far away as Eilat. The IDF has accused Hezbollah of storing these rockets beneath hospitals, schools, and civilian homes. Hezbollah has used drones against Israel, by penetrating air defense systems, in a report verified by Nasrallah, who added, "This is only part of our capabilities". Israeli military officials and analysts have drawn attention to the experience and weaponry Hezbollah would have gained from the involvement of thousands of its fighters in the Syrian Civil War. "This kind of experience cannot be bought," said Gabi Siboni, director of the military and strategic affairs program at the Institute for National Security Studies at Tel Aviv University. "It is an additional factor that we will have to deal with. There is no replacement for experience, and it is not to be scoffed at." On 13 July 2019, Seyyed Hassan Nasrallah, in an interview broadcast on Hezbollah's Al-Manar television, said "Our weapons have been developed in both quality and quantity, we have precision missiles and drones," he illustrated strategic military and civilian targets on the map of Israel and stated, Hezbollah is able to launch Ben Gurion Airport, arms depots, petrochemical, and water desalinization plants, and the Ashdod port, Haifa's ammonia storage which would cause "tens of thousands of casualties". Hezbollah has a military branch known as the Jihad Council, one component of which is Al-Muqawama al-Islamiyya ("The Islamic Resistance"), and is the possible sponsor of a number of lesser-known militant groups, some of which may be little more than fronts for Hezbollah itself, including the Organization of the Oppressed, the Revolutionary Justice Organization, the Organization of Right Against Wrong, and Followers of the Prophet Muhammad. United Nations Security Council Resolution 1559 called for the disarmament of militia with the Taif agreement at the end of the Lebanese civil war. Hezbollah denounced, and protested against, the resolution. The 2006 military conflict with Israel has increased the controversy. Failure to disarm remains a violation of the resolution and agreement as well as subsequent United Nations Security Council Resolution 1701. Since then both Israel and Hezbollah have asserted that the organization has gained in military strength. A Lebanese public opinion poll taken in August 2006 shows that most of the Shia did not believe that Hezbollah should disarm after the 2006 Lebanon war, while the majority of Sunni, Druze and Christians believed that they should. The Lebanese cabinet, under president Michel Suleiman and Prime Minister Fouad Siniora, guidelines state that Hezbollah enjoys the right to "liberate occupied lands." In 2009, a Hezbollah commander, speaking on condition of anonymity, said, "[W]e have far more rockets and missiles [now] than we did in 2006." The Lebanese Resistance Brigades (Arabic: سرايا المقاومة اللبنانية, romanized: Sarāyā l-Muqāwama al-Lubnāniyya), also known as the Lebanese Brigades to Resist the Israeli Occupation, were formed by Hezbollah in 1997 as a multifaith (Christian, Druze, Sunni and Shia) volunteer force to combat the Israeli occupation of Southern Lebanon. With the Israeli withdrawal from Lebanon in 2000, the organization was disbanded. In 2009, the Resistance Brigades were reactivated, mainly comprising Sunni supporters from the southern city of Sidon. Its strength was reduced in late 2013 from 500 to 200–250 due to residents' complaints about some fighters of the group exacerbating tensions with the local community. Hezbollah has been involved in several cases of armed conflict with Israel: During the 1982–2000 South Lebanon conflict, Hezbollah waged a guerrilla campaign against Israeli forces occupying Southern Lebanon. In 1982, the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) was based in Southern Lebanon and was firing Katyusha rockets into northern Israel from Lebanon. Israel invaded Lebanon to evict the PLO, and Hezbollah became an armed organization to expel the Israelis. Hezbollah's strength was enhanced by the dispatching of one thousand to two thousand members of the Iranian Revolutionary Guards and the financial backing of Iran. Iranian clerics, most notably Fzlollah Mahallati supervised this activity. It became the main politico-military force among the Shia community in Lebanon and the main arm of what became known later as the Islamic Resistance in Lebanon. With the collapse of the SLA, and the rapid advance of Hezbollah forces, Israel withdrew on 24 May 2000 six weeks before the announced 7 July date." Hezbollah held a victory parade, and its popularity in Lebanon rose. Israel withdrew in accordance with 1978's United Nations Security Council Resolution 425. Hezbollah and many analysts considered this a victory for the movement, and since then its popularity has been boosted in Lebanon. Between 1982 and 1986, there were 36 suicide attacks in Lebanon directed against American, French and Israeli forces by 41 individuals, killing 659. Hezbollah denies involvement in some of these attacks, though it has been accused of being involved or linked to some or all of these attacks: The 1982–1983 Tyre headquarters bombings The April 1983 U.S. Embassy bombing, by the Islamic Jihad Organization. The 1983 Beirut barracks bombing, by the Islamic Jihad Organization, that killed 241 U.S. marines, 58 French paratroopers and 6 civilians at the US and French barracks in Beirut. The 1983 Kuwait bombings in collaboration with the Iraqi Dawa Party. The 1984 United States embassy annex bombing, killing 24. A spate of attacks on IDF troops and SLA militiamen in southern Lebanon. Hijacking of TWA Flight 847 in 1985. The Lebanon hostage crisis from 1982 to 1992. Since 1990, terror acts and attempts of which Hezbollah has been blamed include the following bombings and attacks against civilians and diplomats: The 1992 Israeli Embassy attack in Buenos Aires, killing 29, in Argentina. Hezbollah operatives boasted of involvement. The 1994 AMIA bombing of a Jewish cultural centre, killing 85, in Argentina. Ansar Allah, a Palestinian group closely associated with Hezbollah, claimed responsibility. The 1994 AC Flight 901 attack, killing 21, in Panama. Ansar Allah, a Palestinian group closely associated with Hezbollah, claimed responsibility. The 1996 Khobar Towers bombing, killing 19 US servicemen. In 2002, Singapore accused Hezbollah of recruiting Singaporeans in a failed 1990s plot to attack U.S. and Israeli ships in the Singapore Straits. 15 January 2008, bombing of a U.S. Embassy vehicle in Beirut. In 2009, a Hezbollah plot in Egypt was uncovered, where Egyptian authorities arrested 49 men for planning attacks against Israeli and Egyptian targets in the Sinai Peninsula. The 2012 Burgas bus bombing, killing 6, in Bulgaria. Hezbollah denied responsibility. Training Shia insurgents against US troops during the Iraq War. Hezbollah provided fighters to fight on the Bosnian Muslim side during the Bosnian War, as part of the broader Iranian involvement. "The Bosnian Muslim government is a client of the Iranians," wrote Robert Baer, a CIA agent stationed in Sarajevo during the war. "If it's a choice between the CIA and the Iranians, they'll take the Iranians any day." By war's end, public opinion polls showed some 86 percent Bosnian Muslims had a positive opinion of Iran. In conjunction, Hezbollah initially sent 150 fighters to fight against the Bosnian Serb Army, the Bosnian Muslims' main opponent in the war. All Shia foreign advisors and fighters withdrew from Bosnia at the end of conflict. On 25 July 1993, following Hezbollah's killing of seven Israeli soldiers in southern Lebanon, Israel launched Operation Accountability, known in Lebanon as the Seven Day War, during which the IDF carried out their heaviest artillery and air attacks on targets in southern Lebanon since 1982. The aim of the operation was to eradicate the threat posed by Hezbollah and to force the civilian population north to Beirut so as to put pressure on the Lebanese Government to restrain Hezbollah. The fighting ended when an unwritten understanding was agreed to by the warring parties. Apparently, the 1993 understanding provided that Hezbollah combatants would not fire rockets at northern Israel, while Israel would not attack civilians or civilian targets in Lebanon. In April 1996, after continued Hezbollah rocket attacks on Israeli civilians, the Israeli armed forces launched Operation Grapes of Wrath, which was intended to wipe out Hezbollah's base in southern Lebanon. Over 100 Lebanese refugees were killed by the shelling of a UN base at Qana, in what the Israeli military said was a mistake. Following several days of negotiations, the two sides signed the Grapes of Wrath Understandings on 26 April 1996. A cease-fire was agreed upon between Israel and Hezbollah, which would be effective on 27 April 1996. Both sides agreed that civilians should not be targeted, which meant that Hezbollah would be allowed to continue its military activities against IDF forces inside Lebanon. On 7 October 2000, three Israeli soldiers—Adi Avitan, Staff Sgt. Benyamin Avraham, and Staff Sgt. Omar Sawaidwere—were abducted by Hezbollah while patrolling the border between the Israeli-occupied Golan Heights and Lebanon. The soldiers were killed either during the attack or in its immediate aftermath. Israel Defense Minister Shaul Mofaz said that Hezbollah abducted the soldiers and then killed them. The bodies of the slain soldiers were exchanged for Lebanese prisoners in 2004. The 2006 Lebanon War was a 34-day military conflict in Lebanon and northern Israel. The principal parties were Hezbollah paramilitary forces and the Israeli military. The conflict was precipitated by a cross-border raid during which Hezbollah kidnapped and killed Israeli soldiers. The conflict began on 12 July 2006 when Hezbollah militants fired rockets at Israeli border towns as a diversion for an anti-tank missile attack on two armored Humvees patrolling the Israeli side of the border fence, killing three, injuring two, and seizing two Israeli soldiers. Israel responded with airstrikes and artillery fire on targets in Lebanon that damaged Lebanese infrastructure, including Beirut's Rafic Hariri International Airport, which Israel said that Hezbollah used to import weapons and supplies, an air and naval blockade, and a ground invasion of southern Lebanon. Hezbollah then launched more rockets into northern Israel and engaged the Israel Defense Forces in guerrilla warfare from hardened positions. The war continued until 14 August 2006. Hezbollah was responsible for thousands of Katyusha rocket attacks against Israeli civilian towns and cities in northern Israel, which Hezbollah said were in retaliation for Israel's killing of civilians and targeting Lebanese infrastructure. The conflict is believed to have killed 1,191–1,300 Lebanese citizens including combatants and 165 Israelis including soldiers. In 2010, Hezbollah claimed that the Dalit and Tamar gas field, discovered by Noble Energy roughly 50 miles (80 km) west of Haifa in Israeli exclusive economic zone, belong to Lebanon, and warned Israel against extracting gas from them. Senior officials from Hezbollah warned that they would not hesitate to use weapons to defend Lebanon's natural resources. Figures in the March 14 Forces stated in response that Hezbollah was presenting another excuse to hold on to its arms. Lebanese MP Antoine Zahra said that the issue is another item "in the endless list of excuses" meant to justify the continued existence of Hezbollah's arsenal. In July 2011, Italian newspaper Corriere della Sera reported, based on American and Turkish sources, that Hezbollah was behind a bombing in Istanbul in May 2011 that wounded eight Turkish civilians. The report said that the attack was an assassination attempt on the Israeli consul to Turkey, Moshe Kimchi. Turkish intelligence sources denied the report and said "Israel is in the habit of creating disinformation campaigns using different papers." In July 2012, a Lebanese man was detained by Cyprus police on possible charges relating to terrorism laws for planning attacks against Israeli tourists. According to security officials, the man was planning attacks for Hezbollah in Cyprus and admitted this after questioning. The police were alerted about the man due to an urgent message from Israeli intelligence. The Lebanese man was in possession of photographs of Israeli targets and had information on Israeli airlines flying back and forth from Cyprus, and planned to blow up a plane or tour bus. Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu stated that Iran assisted the Lebanese man with planning the attacks. Following an investigation into the 2012 Burgas bus bombing terrorist attack against Israeli citizens in Bulgaria, the Bulgarian government officially accused the Lebanese-militant movement Hezbollah of committing the attack. Five Israeli citizens, the Bulgarian bus driver, and the bomber were killed. The bomb exploded as the Israeli tourists boarded a bus from the airport to their hotel. Tsvetan Tsvetanov, Bulgaria's interior minister, reported that the two suspects responsible were members of the militant wing of Hezbollah; he said the suspected terrorists entered Bulgaria on 28 June and remained until 18 July. Israel had already previously suspected Hezbollah for the attack. Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu called the report "further corroboration of what we have already known, that Hezbollah and its Iranian patrons are orchestrating a worldwide campaign of terror that is spanning countries and continents." Netanyahu said that the attack in Bulgaria was just one of many that Hezbollah and Iran have planned and carried out, including attacks in Thailand, Kenya, Turkey, India, Azerbaijan, Cyprus and Georgia. John Brennan, Director of the Central Intelligence Agency, has said that "Bulgaria's investigation exposes Hezbollah for what it is—a terrorist group that is willing to recklessly attack innocent men, women and children, and that poses a real and growing threat not only to Europe, but to the rest of the world." The result of the Bulgarian investigation comes at a time when Israel has been petitioning the European Union to join the United States in designating Hezbollah as a terrorist organization. In response to an attack against a military convoy comprising Hezbollah and Iranian officers on 18 January 2015 at Quneitra in south of Syria, Hezbollah launched an ambush on 28 January against an Israeli military convoy in the Israeli-occupied Shebaa Farms with anti-tank missiles against two Israeli vehicles patrolling the border, killing 2 and wounding 7 Israeli soldiers and officers, as confirmed by Israeli military. On 8 October 2023, Hezbollah launched guided rockets and artillery shells at Israeli-occupied positions in Shebaa Farms during the 2023 Israel–Hamas war. Israel retaliated with drone strikes and artillery fire on Hezbollah positions near the Golan Heights–Lebanon border. The attacks came after Hezbollah expressed support and praise for the Hamas attacks on Israel. The clashes have been the largest escalation between the two countries since the 2006 Lebanon War. On 14 February 2005, former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafic Hariri was killed, along with 21 others, when his motorcade was struck by a roadside bomb in Beirut. He had been PM during 1992–1998 and 2000–2004. In 2009, the United Nations special tribunal investigating the murder of Hariri reportedly found evidence linking Hezbollah to the murder. In August 2010, in response to notification that the UN tribunal would indict some Hezbollah members, Hassan Nasrallah said Israel was looking for a way to assassinate Hariri as early as 1993 in order to create political chaos that would force Syria to withdraw from Lebanon, and to perpetuate an anti-Syrian atmosphere [in Lebanon] in the wake of the assassination. He went on to say that in 1996 Hezbollah apprehended an agent working for Israel by the name of Ahmed Nasrallah—no relation to Hassan Nasrallah—who allegedly contacted Hariri's security detail and told them that he had solid proof that Hezbollah was planning to take his life. Hariri then contacted Hezbollah and advised them of the situation. Saad Hariri responded that the UN should investigate these claims. On 30 June 2011, the Special Tribunal for Lebanon, established to investigate the death of Hariri, issued arrest warrants against four senior members of Hezbollah, including Mustafa Badr Al Din. On 3 July, Hassan Nasrallah rejected the indictment and denounced the tribunal as a plot against the party, vowing that the named persons would not be arrested under any circumstances. Hezbollah has long been an ally of the Ba'ath government of Syria, led by the Al-Assad family. Hezbollah has helped the Syrian government during the Syrian civil war in its fight against the Syrian opposition, which Hezbollah has described as a Zionist plot to destroy its alliance with al-Assad against Israel. Geneive Abdo opined that Hezbollah's support for al-Assad in the Syrian war has "transformed" it from a group with "support among the Sunni for defeating Israel in a battle in 2006" into a "strictly Shia paramilitary force". Hezbollah also fought against the Islamic State. In August 2012, the United States sanctioned Hezbollah for its alleged role in the war. General Secretary Nasrallah denied Hezbollah had been fighting on behalf of the Syrian government, stating in a 12 October 2012, speech that "right from the start the Syrian opposition has been telling the media that Hizbullah sent 3,000 fighters to Syria, which we have denied". However, according to the Lebanese Daily Star newspaper, Nasrallah said in the same speech that Hezbollah fighters helped the Syrian government "retain control of some 23 strategically located villages [in Syria] inhabited by Shiites of Lebanese citizenship". Nasrallah said that Hezbollah fighters have died in Syria doing their "jihadist duties". In 2012, Hezbollah fighters crossed the border from Lebanon and took over eight villages in the Al-Qusayr District of Syria. On 16–17 February 2013, Syrian opposition groups claimed that Hezbollah, backed by the Syrian military, attacked three neighboring Sunni villages controlled by the Free Syrian Army (FSA). An FSA spokesman said, "Hezbollah's invasion is the first of its kind in terms of organisation, planning and coordination with the Syrian regime's air force". Hezbollah said three Lebanese Shiites, "acting in self-defense", were killed in the clashes with the FSA. Lebanese security sources said that the three were Hezbollah members. In response, the FSA allegedly attacked two Hezbollah positions on 21 February; one in Syria and one in Lebanon. Five days later, it said it destroyed a convoy carrying Hezbollah fighters and Syrian officers to Lebanon, killing all the passengers. In January 2013, a weapons convoy carrying SA-17 anti-aircraft missiles to Hezbollah was destroyed allegedly by the Israeli Air Force. A nearby research center for chemical weapons was also damaged. A similar attack on weapons destined for Hezbollah occurred in May of the same year. The leaders of the March 14 alliance and other prominent Lebanese figures called on Hezbollah to end its involvement in Syria and said it is putting Lebanon at risk. Subhi al-Tufayli, Hezbollah's former leader, said "Hezbollah should not be defending the criminal regime that kills its own people and that has never fired a shot in defense of the Palestinians." He said "those Hezbollah fighters who are killing children and terrorizing people and destroying houses in Syria will go to hell". The Consultative Gathering, a group of Shia and Sunni leaders in Baalbek-Hermel, also called on Hezbollah not to "interfere" in Syria. They said, "Opening a front against the Syrian people and dragging Lebanon to war with the Syrian people is very dangerous and will have a negative impact on the relations between the two." Walid Jumblatt, leader of the Progressive Socialist Party, also called on Hezbollah to end its involvement and claimed that "Hezbollah is fighting inside Syria with orders from Iran." Egyptian President Mohamed Morsi condemned Hezbollah by saying, "We stand against Hezbollah in its aggression against the Syrian people. There is no space or place for Hezbollah in Syria." Support for Hezbollah among the Syrian public has weakened since the involvement of Hezbollah and Iran in propping up the Assad regime during the civil war.[better source needed] On 12 May 2013, Hezbollah with the Syrian army attempted to retake part of Qusayr. In Lebanon, there has been "a recent increase in the funerals of Hezbollah fighters" and "Syrian rebels have shelled Hezbollah-controlled areas." On 25 May 2013, Nasrallah announced that Hezbollah is fighting in the Syrian Civil War against Islamic extremists and "pledged that his group will not allow Syrian militants to control areas that border Lebanon". He confirmed that Hezbollah was fighting in the strategic Syrian town of Al-Qusayr on the same side as Assad's forces. In the televised address, he said, "If Syria falls in the hands of America, Israel and the takfiris, the people of our region will go into a dark period." Beginning in July 2014, Hezbollah sent an undisclosed number of technical advisers and intelligence analysts to Baghdad in support of the Iranian intervention in Iraq (2014–present). Shortly thereafter, Hezbollah commander Ibrahim al-Hajj was reported killed in action near Mosul. Hezbollah operations in South America began in the late 20th century, centered around the Arab population which had moved there following the 1948 Arab-Israeli War and the 1985 Lebanese Civil War. One particular form of alleged activity is money laundering. The Los Angeles Times said that the group was more active in the 1990s, especially during the 1992 Israeli embassy bombing in Argentina, though its relevance grew more unclear as time progressed. Vox writes that following the adoption of the Patriot Act in 2001, the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) would promote the term of narcoterrorism and arrest individuals with no prior history of being involved in terrorism, suggesting skepticism towards the reports of large-scale collusion between alleged terrorist groups and cartels. In 2002, Hezbollah was reported to be openly operating in Ciudad del Este, Paraguay. Beginning in 2008, the DEA began with Project Cassandra to work against reported Hezbollah activities in regards to Latin American drug trafficking. The investigation by the DEA reported that Hezbollah made about a billion dollars a year and trafficked thousands of tons of cocaine into the United States. Another destination for cocaine trafficking done by Hezbollah are nations within the Gulf Cooperation Council. In 2013, Hezbollah was accused of infiltrating South America and having ties with Latin American drug cartels. One area of operations is in the region of the Triple Frontier, where Hezbollah has been alleged to be involved in the trafficking of cocaine; officials with the Lebanese embassy in Paraguay have worked to counter American allegations and extradition attempts. In 2016, it was alleged that money gained from drug sales was used to purchase weapons in Syria. In 2018, Infobae reported that Hezbollah was operating in Colombia under the name Organization of External Security. That same year, Argentine police arrested individuals alleged to be connected to Hezbollah's criminal activities within the nation. The Los Angeles Times noted in 2020 that at the time, Hezbollah served as a "bogeyman of sorts" and that "[p]undits and politicians in the U.S., particularly those on the far right, have long issued periodic warnings that Hezbollah and other Islamic groups pose a serious threat in Latin America." Various allegations have been made that Cuba, Nicaragua and Venezuela aid Hezbollah in its operations in the region. Israeli reports about the presence of Hezbollah in Latin America raised questions amongst Latin American analysts based in the United States while experts say that reports of presence in Latin America are exaggerated. Southern Pulse director and analyst Samuel Logan said "Geopolitical proximity to Tehran doesn't directly translate into leniency of Hezbollah activity inside your country" in an interview with the Pulitzer Center. William Neuman in his 2022 book Things Are Never So Bad That They Can't Get Worse said that claims of Hezbollah's presence in Latin America was "in reality, minimal", writing that the Venezuelan opposition raised such allegations to persuade the United States into believing that the nation faced a threat from Venezuela in an effort to promote foreign intervention. Ali Kourani, the first Hezbollah operative to be convicted and sentenced in the United States, was under investigation since 2013 and worked to provide targeting and terrorist recruiting information to Hezbollah's Islamic Jihad Organization. The organization had recruited a former resident of Minnesota and a military linguist, Mariam Tala Thompson, who disclosed "identities of at least eight clandestine human assets; at least 10 U.S. targets; and multiple tactics, techniques and procedures" before she was discovered and successfully prosecuted in a U.S. court. In 2010, Ahbash and Hezbollah members were involved in a street battle which was perceived to be over parking issues, both groups later met to form a joint compensation fund for the victims of the conflict. According to Reuters, in 2024, commanders from Hezbollah and Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps were reported to be actively involved on the ground in Yemen, overseeing and directing Houthi attacks on Red Sea shipping. During the September 2021 fuel shortage, Hezbollah received a convoy of 80 tankers carrying oil/diesel fuel from Iran. Hezbollah has also been the target of bomb attacks and kidnappings. These include: In the 1985 Beirut car bombing, Hezbollah leader Mohammad Hussein Fadlallah was targeted, but the assassination attempt failed. On 28 July 1989, Israeli commandos kidnapped Sheikh Abdel Karim Obeid, the leader of Hezbollah. This action led to the adoption of UN Security Council resolution 638, which condemned all hostage takings by all sides. On 16 February 1992, Israeli helicopters attacked a motorcade in southern Lebanon, killing the Hezbollah leader Abbas al-Musawi, his wife, son, and four others. On 31 March 1995, Rida Yasin, also known as Abu Ali, was killed by a single rocket fired from an Israeli helicopter while in a car near Derdghaya in the Israeli security zone 10km east of Tyre. Yasin was a senior military commander in southern Lebanon. His companion in the car was also killed. An Israeli civilian was killed and fifteen wounded in the retaliatory rocket fire. On 12 February 2008, Imad Mughnieh was killed by a car bomb in Damascus, Syria. On 3 December 2013, senior military commander Hassan al-Laqis was shot outside his home, two miles (three kilometers) southwest of Beirut. He died a few hours later on 4 December. On 18 January 2015, a group of Hezbollah fighters was targeted in Quneitra, with the Al-Nusra Front claiming responsibility. In this attack, for which Israel was also accused, Jihad Moghnieh, son of Imad Mughnieh, five other members of Hezbollah and an Iranian general of Quds Force, Mohammad Ali Allahdadi, were killed. On 10 May 2016, an explosion near Damascus International Airport killed top military commander Mustafa Badreddine. Lebanese media sources attributed the attack to an Israeli airstrike. Hezbollah attributed the attack to Syrian opposition. After the September 11, 2001 attacks, Hezbollah condemned al-Qaeda for targeting civilians in the World Trade Center, but remained silent on the attack on The Pentagon. Hezbollah also denounced the massacres in Algeria by Armed Islamic Group, Al-Gama'a al-Islamiyya attacks on tourists in Egypt, the murder of Nick Berg, and ISIL attacks in Paris. Although Hezbollah has denounced certain attacks on civilians, some people accuse the organization of the bombing of an Argentine synagogue in 1994. Argentine prosecutor Alberto Nisman, Marcelo Martinez Burgos, and their "staff of some 45 people" said that Hezbollah and their contacts in Iran were responsible for the 1994 bombing of a Jewish cultural center in Argentina, in which "[e]ighty-five people were killed and more than 200 others injured." In August 2012, the United States State Department's counter-terrorism coordinator Daniel Benjamin said that Hezbollah "is not constrained by concerns about collateral damage or political fallout that could result from conducting operations there [in Europe]". Hezbollah has close relations with Iran. It also has ties with the leadership in Syria, specifically President Hafez al-Assad, until his death in 2000, supported it. It is also a close Assad ally, and its leader pledged support to the embattled Syrian leader. Although Hezbollah and Hamas are not organizationally linked, Hezbollah provides military training as well as financial and moral support to the Sunni Palestinian group. Furthermore, Hezbollah was a strong supporter of the second Intifada. American and Israeli counter-terrorism officials claim that Hezbollah has (or had) links to Al Qaeda, although Hezbollah's leaders deny these allegations. Also, some al-Qaeda leaders, like Abu Musab al-Zarqawi and Wahhabi clerics, consider Hezbollah to be apostate. But United States intelligence officials speculate that there has been contact between Hezbollah and low-level al-Qaeda figures who fled Afghanistan for Lebanon. However, Michel Samaha, Lebanon's former minister of information, has said that Hezbollah has been an important ally of the government in the war against terrorist groups, and described the "American attempt to link Hezbollah to al-Qaeda" to be "astonishing". According to Michel Samaha, Lebanon's minister of information, Hezbollah is seen as "a legitimate resistance organization that has defended its land against an Israeli occupying force and has consistently stood up to the Israeli army". According to a survey released by the "Beirut Center for Research and Information" on 26 July during the 2006 Lebanon War, 87 percent of Lebanese support Hezbollah's "retaliatory attacks on northern Israel", a rise of 29 percentage points from a similar poll conducted in February. More striking, however, was the level of support for Hezbollah's resistance from non-Shiite communities. Eighty percent of Christians polled supported Hezbollah, along with 80 percent of Druze and 89 percent of Sunnis. In a poll of Lebanese adults taken in 2004, 6% of respondents gave unqualified support to the statement "Hezbollah should be disarmed". 41% reported unqualified disagreement. A poll of Gaza Strip and West Bank residents indicated that 79.6% had "a very good view" of Hezbollah, and most of the remainder had a "good view". Polls of Jordanian adults in December 2005 and June 2006 showed that 63.9% and 63.3%, respectively, considered Hezbollah to be a legitimate resistance organization. In the December 2005 poll, only 6% of Jordanian adults considered Hezbollah to be terrorist. A July 2006 USA Today/Gallup poll found that 83% of the 1,005 Americans polled blamed Hezbollah, at least in part, for the 2006 Lebanon War, compared to 66% who blamed Israel to some degree. Additionally, 76% disapproved of the military action Hezbollah took in Israel, compared to 38% who disapproved of Israel's military action in Lebanon. A poll in August 2006 by ABC News and The Washington Post found that 68% of the 1,002 Americans polled blamed Hezbollah, at least in part, for the civilian casualties in Lebanon during the 2006 Lebanon War, compared to 31% who blamed Israel to some degree. Another August 2006 poll by CNN showed that 69% of the 1,047 Americans polled believed that Hezbollah is unfriendly towards, or an enemy of, the United States. In 2010, a survey of Muslims in Lebanon showed that 94% of Lebanese Shia supported Hezbollah, while 84% of the Sunni Muslims held an unfavorable opinion of the group. Some public opinion has started to turn against Hezbollah for their support of Syrian President Assad's attacks on the opposition movement in Syria. Crowds in Cairo shouted out against Iran and Hezbollah, at a public speech by Hamas President Ismail Haniya in February 2012, when Hamas changed its support to the Syrian opposition. A November 2020 poll in Lebanon performed by the pro-Israel, American Washington Institute for Near East Policy declared that support for Hezbollah is declining significantly. Below is a table of the results of their polls. Hezbollah's status as a legitimate political party, a terrorist group, a resistance movement, or some combination thereof is a contentious issue. As of October 2020, Hezbollah or its military wing are considered terrorist organizations by at least 26 countries, as well as by the European Union and since 2017 by most member states of the Arab League, with the exception of Iraq and Lebanon, where Hezbollah is the most powerful political party. The countries that have designated Hezbollah a terrorist organisation include: the Arab League and the Gulf Cooperation Council, and their members Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, United Arab Emirates, as well as Argentina, Canada, Colombia, Estonia, Germany, Honduras, Israel, Kosovo, Lithuania, Malaysia, Paraguay, Serbia, Slovenia, United Kingdom, United States, and Guatemala. The EU differentiates between the Hezbollah's political wing and military wing, banning only the latter, though Hezbollah itself does not recognize such a distinction. Hezbollah maintains that it is a legitimate resistance movement fighting for the liberation of Lebanese territory. There is a "wide difference" between American and Arab perception of Hezbollah. Several Western countries officially classify Hezbollah or its external security wing as a terrorist organization, and some of their violent acts have been described as terrorist attacks. However, throughout most of the Arab and Muslim worlds, Hezbollah is referred to as a resistance movement, engaged in national defense. Even within Lebanon, sometimes Hezbollah's status as either a "militia" or "national resistance" has been contentious. In Lebanon, although not universally well-liked, Hezbollah is widely seen as a legitimate national resistance organization defending Lebanon, and actually described by the Lebanese information minister as an important ally in fighting terrorist groups. In the Arab world, Hezbollah is generally seen either as a destabilizing force that functions as Iran's pawn by rentier[clarification needed] states like Egypt and Saudi Arabia, or as a popular sociopolitical guerrilla movement that exemplifies strong leadership, meaningful political action, and a commitment to social justice. The United Nations Security Council has never listed Hezbollah as a terrorist organization under its sanctions list, although some of its members have done so individually. The United Kingdom listed Hezbollah's military wing as a terrorist organization until May 2019 when the entire organisation was proscribed, and the United States lists the entire group as such. Russia has considered Hezbollah a legitimate sociopolitical organization, and the People's Republic of China remains neutral and maintains contacts with Hezbollah.[citation needed] In May 2013, France and Germany released statements that they will join other European countries in calling for an EU-blacklisting of Hezbollah as a terror group. In April 2020 Germany designated the organization—including its political wing—as a terrorist organization, and banned any activity in support of Hezbollah. The following entities have listed Hezbollah as a terror group: The following countries do not consider Hezbollah a terror organization: Disputed: The United States Department of State has designated Hezbollah a terrorist organization since 1995. The group remains on Foreign Terrorist Organization and Specially Designated Terrorist lists. According to the Congressional Research Service, "The U.S. government holds Hezbollah responsible for a number of attacks and hostage takings targeting Americans in Lebanon during the 1980s, including the bombing of the U.S. Embassy in Beirut in April 1983 and the bombing of the U.S. Marine barracks in October 1983, which together killed 258 Americans. Hezbollah's operations outside of Lebanon, including its participation in bombings of Israeli and Jewish targets in Argentina during the 1990s and more recent training and liaison activities with Shiite insurgents in Iraq, have cemented the organization's reputation among U.S. policy makers as a capable and deadly adversary with potential global reach." The United Kingdom was the first government to attempt to make a distinction between Hezbollah's political and military wings, declaring the latter a terrorist group in July 2008 after Hezbollah confirmed its association with Imad Mughniyeh. In 2012, British "Foreign Minister William Hague urged the European Union to place Hezbollah's military wing on its list of terrorist organizations." The United States also urged the EU to classify Hezbollah as a terrorist organization.[citation needed] In light of findings implicating Hezbollah in the bus bombing in Burgas, Bulgaria in 2012, there was renewed discussion within the European Union to label Hezbollah's military wing as a terrorist group. On 22 July 2013, the European Union agreed to blacklist Hezbollah's military wing over concerns about its growing role in the Syrian conflict. In the midst of the 2006 conflict between Hezbollah and Israel, Russia's government declined to include Hezbollah in a newly released list of terrorist organizations, with Yuri Sapunov, the head of anti-terrorism for the Federal Security Service of the Russian Federation, saying that they list only organizations which represent "the greatest threat to the security of our country". Prior to the release of the list, Russian Defense Minister Sergei Ivanov called "on Hezbollah to stop resorting to any terrorist methods, including attacking neighboring states." The Quartet's fourth member, the United Nations, does not maintain such a list, however, the United Nations has made repeated calls for Hezbollah to disarm and accused the group of destabilizing the region and causing harm to Lebanese civilians. Human rights organizations Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch have accused Hezbollah of committing war crimes against Israeli civilians. Argentine prosecutors hold Hezbollah and their financial supporters in Iran responsible for the 1994 AMIA Bombing of a Jewish cultural center, described by the Associated Press as "the worst terrorist attack on Argentine soil," in which "[e]ighty-five people were killed and more than 200 others injured." During the Israeli occupation of southern Lebanon, French Prime Minister Lionel Jospin condemned attacks by Hezbollah fighters on Israeli forces in south Lebanon, saying they were "terrorism" and not acts of resistance. "France condemns Hezbollah's attacks, and all types of terrorist attacks which may be carried out against soldiers, or possibly Israel's civilian population." Italian Foreign Minister Massimo D'Alema differentiated the wings of Hezbollah: "Apart from their well-known terrorist activities, they also have political standing and are socially engaged." Germany does not maintain its own list of terrorist organizations, having chosen to adopt the common EU list. However, German officials have indicated they would likely support designating Hezbollah a terrorist organization. The Netherlands regards Hezbollah as terrorist discussing it as such in official reports of their general intelligence and security service and in official answers by the Minister of Foreign Affairs. On 22 July 2013, the European Union declared the military wings of Hezbollah as a terrorist organization; effectively blacklisting the entity. The United States, the Gulf Cooperation Council, Canada, United Kingdom, the Netherlands, Israel, and Australia have classified Hezbollah as a terrorist organization. In early 2015, the US Director of National Intelligence removed Hezbollah from the list of "active terrorist threats" against the United States while Hezbollah remained designated as terrorist by the US, and by mid 2015 several Hezbollah officials were sanctioned by the US for their role in facilitating military activity in the ongoing Syrian Civil War. The European Union, France and New Zealand have proscribed Hezbollah's military wing, but do not list Hezbollah as a whole as a terrorist organization. Serbia, which recently designated Iran-backed Hezbollah entirely as a terrorist organization, fully implement measures to restrict Hezbollah's operations and financial activities. In 2006, Hezbollah was regarded as a legitimate resistance movement throughout most of the Arab and Muslim world. Furthermore, most of the Sunni Arab world sees Hezbollah as an agent of Iranian influence, and therefore, would like to see their power in Lebanon diminished. Egypt, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia have condemned Hezbollah's actions, saying that "the Arabs and Muslims can't afford to allow an irresponsible and adventurous organization like Hezbollah to drag the region to war" and calling it "dangerous adventurism", After an alleged 2009 Hezbollah plot in Egypt, the Egyptian regime of Hosni Mubarak officially classified Hezbollah as a terrorist group. Following the 2012 Presidential elections the new government recognized Hezbollah as a "real political and military force" in Lebanon. The Egyptian ambassador to Lebanon, Ashraf Hamdy, stated that "Resistance in the sense of defending Lebanese territory ... That's their primary role. We ... think that as a resistance movement they have done a good job to keep on defending Lebanese territory and trying to regain land occupied by Israel is legal and legitimate." During the Bahraini uprising, Bahrain foreign minister Khalid ibn Ahmad Al Khalifah labeled Hezbollah a terrorist group and accused them of supporting the protesters. On 10 April 2013, Bahrain blacklisted Hezbollah as a terrorist group, being the first Arab state in this regard. While Hezbollah has supported popular uprisings in Egypt, Yemen, Bahrain and Tunisia, Hezbollah publicly sided with Iran and Syria during the 2011 Syrian uprising. This position has prompted criticism from anti-government Syrians. As Hezbollah supported other movements in the context of the Arab Spring, anti-government Syrians have stated that they feel "betrayed" by a double standard allegedly applied by the movement. Following Hezbollah's aid in Assad government's victory in Qusayr, anti-Hezbollah editorials began regularly appearing in the Arabic media and anti-Hezbollah graffiti has been seen in southern Lebanon. In March 2016, Gulf Cooperation Council designated Hezbollah as a terrorist organization due to its alleged attempts to undermine GCC states, and Arab League followed the move, with reservation by Iraq and Lebanon. In the summit, Lebanese Foreign Minister Gebran Bassil said that "Hezbollah enjoys wide representation and is an integral faction of the Lebanese community", while Iraqi Foreign Minister Ibrahim al-Jaafari said PMF and Hezbollah "have preserved Arab dignity" and those who accuse them of being terrorists are terrorists themselves. Saudi delegation walked out of the meeting. Israel's Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu called the step "important and even amazing". A day before the move by the Arab League, Hezbollah leader Nasrallah said that "Saudi Arabia is angry with Hezbollah since it is daring to say what only a few others dare to say against its royal family". In 2020, a German security contractor accused Qatar of financing Hezbollah. In September 2021, U.S' Secretary of State, Antony Blinken commended the combined efforts taken by the United States and the Government of Qatar against Hezbollah financial network which involved the abuse of international financial system by using global networks of financiers and front companies to spread terrorism. In July 2022, Qatar participated in a 30-nation meeting led by the United States to counter Hezbollah, according to Axios. In an interview during the 2006 Lebanon War, then-President Emile Lahoud stated "Hezbollah enjoys utmost prestige in Lebanon, because it freed our country ... even though it is very small, it stands up to Israel." Following the 2006 War, other Lebanese including members of the government were resentful of the large damage sustained by the country and saw Hezbollah's actions as unjustified "dangerous adventurism" rather than legitimate resistance. They accused Hezbollah of acting on behalf of Iran and Syria. An official of the Future Movement, part of the March 14 Alliance, warned that Hezbollah "has all the characteristics of a terrorist party", and that Hezbollah is moving Lebanon toward the Iranian Islamic system of government. In August 2008, Lebanon's cabinet completed a policy statement which recognized "the right of Lebanon's people, army, and resistance to liberate the Israeli-occupied Shebaa Farms, Kafar Shuba Hills, and the Lebanese section of Ghajar village, and defend the country using all legal and possible means." Gebran Tueni, a late conservative Orthodox Christian editor of an-Nahar, referred to Hezbollah as an "Iranian import" and said "they have nothing to do with Arab civilization." Tuení believed that Hezbollah's evolution is cosmetic, concealing a sinister long-term strategy to Islamicize Lebanon and lead it into a ruinous war with Israel. By 2017, a poll showed that 62 percent of Lebanese Christians believed that Hezbollah was doing a "better job than anyone else in defending Lebanese interests in the region, and they trust it more than other social institutions."[better source needed] Academics specializing in a wide variety of the social sciences believe that Hezbollah is an example of an Islamic terrorist organization. Such scholars and research institutes include the following: Walid Phares, Lebanese-born terrorism scholar. Mark LeVine, American historian Avraham Sela, Israeli historian Robert S. Wistrich, Israeli historian Eyal Zisser, Israeli historian Siamak Khatami, Iranian scholar Rohan Gunaratna, Singaporean scholar Neeru Gaba, Australian scholar Tore Bjørgo, Norwegian scholar Magnus Norell, of the European Foundation for Democracy Anthony Cordesman, of the Center for Strategic and International Studies Center for American Progress United States Institute of Peace J. Gresham Barrett brought up legislation in the U.S. House of Representatives which, among other things, referred to Hezbollah as a terrorist organization. Congress members Tom Lantos, Jim Saxton, Thad McCotter, Chris Shays, Charles Boustany, Alcee Hastings, and Robert Wexler referred to Hezbollah as a terrorist organization in their speeches supporting the legislation. Shortly before a speech by Iraqi Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki, U.S. Congressman Dennis Hastert said, "He [Maliki] denounces terrorism, and I have to take him at his word. Hezbollah is a terrorist organization." In 2011, a bipartisan group of members of Congress introduced the Hezbollah Anti-Terrorism Act. The act ensures that no American aid to Lebanon will enter the hands of Hezbollah. On the day of the act's introduction, Congressman Darrell Issa said, "Hezbollah is a terrorist group and a cancer on Lebanon. The Hezbollah Anti-Terrorism Act surgically targets this cancer and will strengthen the position of Lebanese who oppose Hezbollah." In a Sky News interview during the 2006 Lebanon war, British MP George Galloway said that Hezbollah is "not a terrorist organization". Former Swiss member of parliament, Jean Ziegler, said in 2006: "I refuse to describe Hezbollah as a terrorist group. It is a national movement of resistance." Lebanon portal Iran portal Shia Islam portal Military equipment of Hezbollah Politics of Lebanon Jihad al-Bina Mleeta museum January 2015 Mazraat Amal incident Hezbollah Movement in Iraq Kata'ib Hezbollah Harakah Hezbollah al-Nujaba Kata'ib Sayyid al-Shuhada Badr Organization Kata'ib al-Imam Ali 2023 Israel–Hamas war Jaysh al-Mahdi (Iraq) Al-Ashtar Brigades (Bahrain) Liwa Assad Allah (Syria) Hezbollah al-Hejaz (Saudi Arabia) Harakah al-Sabireen (Palestine) Islamic Front for the Liberation of Bahrain Islamic Movement (Nigeria) Emtrasur Cargo "Fadlallah Hits Back at March 14 over Karam Release, Marouni Slams 'Treason Accusations'". Naharnet. 18 April 2013. Dalacoura, Katerina (2012). "Islamist Terrorism and National Liberation: Hamas and Hizbullah". Islamist Terrorism and Democracy in the Middle East. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 66–96. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511977367.004. ISBN 978-0-511-97736-7. LCCN 2010047275. S2CID 150958046. Stepanova, Ekaterina (2008). Terrorism in Asymmetrical Conflict: Ideological and Structural Aspects (PDF). Oxford University Press. p. 113. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 March 2016. Philip Smyth (February 2015). The Shiite Jihad in Syria and Its Regional Effects (PDF) (Report). The Washington Institute for Near East Studies. pp. 7–8. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 13 March 2015. "Hezbollah, the Lebanese Sectarian State, and Sectarianism". Middle East Institute. Retrieved 13 April 2017. Bassel F, Salloukh (2015). "The Sectarian Image Reversed: The Role of Geopolitics in Hezbollah's Domestic Politics". Middle East political science. "Hezbollah and the Lebanese Popular Movement". Salamey, Imad; Pearson, Frederic (2007). "Hezbollah: A Proletarian Party with an Islamic Manifesto – A Sociopolitical Analysis of Islamist Populism in Lebanon and the Middle East". Small Wars & Insurgencies. 18 (3): 416–438. doi:10.1080/09592310701674358. S2CID 143896155. Elie Alagha, Joseph (2011). Hizbullah's Documents: From the 1985 Open Letter to the 2009 Manifesto. Amsterdam University Press. pp. 15, 20. ISBN 978-90-8555-037-2. Shehata, Samer (2012). Islamist Politics in the Middle East: Movements and Change. Routledge. p. 176. ISBN 978-0-415-78361-3. Husseinia, Rola El (2010). "Hezbollah and the Axis of Refusal: Hamas, Iran and Syria". Third World Quarterly. 31 (5): 803–815. doi:10.1080/01436597.2010.502695. S2CID 219628295. Levitt, Matthew (2013). Hezbollah: The Global Footprint of Lebanon's Party of God. Hurst Publishers. p. 356. ISBN 978-1-84904-333-5. 'Hezbollah's anti-Western militancy began with attacks against Western targets in Lebanon, then expanded to attacks abroad intended to exact revenge for actions threatening its or Iran's interests, or to press foreign governments to release captured operatives.' Hanhimäki, Jussi M.; Blumenau, Bernhard (2013). An International History of Terrorism: Western and Non-Western Experiences. Routledge. p. 267. ISBN 978-0-415-63540-0. Based upon these beliefs, Hezbollah became vehemently anti-West and anti-Israel. Siegel, Larry J. (2012). Criminology: Theories, Patterns & Typology. Cengage Learning. p. 396. ISBN 978-1-133-04964-7. Hezbollah is anti-West and anti-Israel and has engaged in a series of terrorist actions including kidnappings, car bombings, and airline hijackings. "Who Are Hezbollah?". BBC News. 21 May 2008. Retrieved 15 August 2008. Julius, Anthony (2015). Trials of the Diaspora: A History of Anti-Semitism in England. OUP Oxford. ISBN 978-0-19-929705-4 – via Google Books. Michael, Robert; Rosen, Philip (2015). Dictionary of Antisemitism from the Earliest Times to the Present. Scarecrow Press. ISBN 978-0-8108-5868-8 – via Google Books. Perry, Mark (2015). Talking to Terrorists: Why America Must Engage with Its Enemies. Basic Books. p. 158. ISBN 978-0-465-01117-9. "Analysis: Hezbollah's lethal anti-Semitism". The Jerusalem Post. 12 November 2012. Joshua L. Gleis; Benedetta Berti (2012). Hezbollah and Hamas: A Comparative Study. JHU Press. ISBN 978-1-4214-0671-8. "JCPA Middle East Briefing: Hezbollah" Archived 4 June 2008 at the Wayback Machine. United Jewish Communities. 14 February 2008. "Hezbollah chief in new attack on same-sex relations". France 24. 29 July 2023. Revolutions: A Worldwide Introduction to Political and Social Change. Routledge. 2015. ISBN 978-1-317-26457-6. "Interior Ministry releases numbers of votes for new MPs". The Daily Star. 9 May 2018. Archived from the original on 8 March 2021. Retrieved 24 October 2019. "Hezbollah fighters train Iraqi Shiite militants near Mosul". longwarjournal.org – FDD's Long War Journal. 5 November 2016. "Lebanon's Hezbollah chief Nasrallah says group has never been stronger". Reuters. 18 October 2021. Agencies, The New Arab Staff & (18 October 2021). "Hassan Nasrallah says Hezbollah has 100,000 fighters". english.alaraby.co.uk/. "Lebanon Hezbollah chief says movement has 100,000 fighters". France 24. 18 October 2021. "Hezbollah is the Long Arm of Iran – Factsheet 5". 20 September 2019. Retrieved 8 February 2023. "Why Assad's alliance with Iran and Hezbollah will endure". 8 February 2019. Retrieved 8 February 2023. Pardo, Ramon Pacheco (February 2011). "Beyond Iran" (PDF). The Majalla. 1561: 12–14. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 July 2012. Retrieved 5 April 2013. "Iraq admits Lebanese Hezbollah and Iranian RG fight alongside Iraqi security forces". 9 November 2014. Archived from the original on 15 June 2018. Retrieved 28 July 2018. "Hezbollah Fights Alongside LAF Demonstrating its Continuing Control over Lebanon". The Tower. 21 August 2017. Archived from the original on 2 February 2020. Retrieved 28 July 2018. "New Experience of Hezbollah with Russian Military". 2 February 2016. Archived from the original on 28 July 2018. Rosenfeld, Jesse (11 January 2016). "Russia is Arming Hezbollah, Say Two of the Group's Field Commanders". The Daily Beast. "Yemeni FM slams Hezbollah's Houthi support: report". The Daily Star. Archived from the original on 28 July 2018. Retrieved 28 July 2018. "Lebanon's Hezbollah denies sending weapons to Yemen". Reuters. 20 November 2017. "Wagner Group 'tasked to deliver Russian weapons to Hezbollah' – US intelligence". 4 November 2023. "Hezbollah – International terrorist organization". Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 22 July 2013. Francis, Xavier (21 May 2020). "Israel Impressed How Turkish Army Crushed Hezbollah In Idlib, Syria". Latest Asian, Middle-East, EurAsian, Indian News. "Israel learned from Hezbollah's defeat at the hands of Turkey". The Jerusalem Post. "Turkish strike in Syria kills nine Hezbollah members, according to source". Haaretz. "Beware Iran's 'Axis of Resistance' | People's Mojahedin Organization of Iran (PMOI/MEK)". Archived from the original on 31 October 2021. Retrieved 16 January 2020. Nimrod Raphaeli (11 February 2009). "The Iranian Roots of Hizbullah". MEMRI. Archived from the original on 11 February 2009. "Hezbollah". The Collins English Dictionary. Glasgow: HarperCollins. 2013. Retrieved 7 May 2013. "Hezbollah". Webster's New World College Dictionary. Cleveland: Wiley Publishing, Inc. 2012. Retrieved 7 May 2013. Other transliterations include Hizbullah, Hizballah, Hizbollah, Hezbolla, Hezballah, Hisbollah, Hizbu'llah and Hizb Allah. "Hezbollah | Meaning, History, & Ideology | Britannica". www.britannica.com. 15 December 2023. Retrieved 17 December 2023. "What Is Hezbollah?". Council on Foreign Relations. Retrieved 17 December 2023. Levitt, Matthew (2013). Hezbollah: The Global Footprint of Lebanon's Party of God. Hurst Publishers. p. 15. ISBN 978-1-84904-333-5. ... the Jihad Council coordinates 'resistance activity'. Ghattas Saab, Antoine (15 May 2014). "Hezbollah cutting costs as Iranian aid dries up". The Daily Star. Retrieved 1 June 2014. ... Hezbollah's military wing ... Known as the 'Jihad Council' Hirst, David (2010) Beware of Small States. Lebanon, battleground of the Middle East. Faber and Faber. ISBN 978-0-571-23741-8 p. 189 Adam Shatz (29 April 2004). "In Search of Hezbollah". The New York Review of Books. Archived from the original on 22 August 2006. Retrieved 14 August 2006. Dominique Avon, Anaïs-Trissa Khatchadourian, Hezbollah: A History of the "Party of God", Harvard University Press, 2012 ISBN 978-0-674-07031-8 pp. 21ff. E. Azani, Hezbollah: The Story of the Party of God: From Revolution to Institutionalization, Springer, 2011 ISBN 978-0-230-11629-0 pp. 59–63 Mariam Farida, Religion and Hezbollah: Political Ideology and Legitimacy, Routledge, 2019 ISBN 978-1-000-45857-2 pp. 1–3. Itamar Rabinovich (2008). Israel in the Middle East. UPNE. ISBN 978-0-87451-962-4. Retrieved 18 November 2010. Fisk, Robert (7 September 2014). "After the atrocities committed against Muslims in Bosnia, it is no wonder today's jihadis have set out on the path to war in Syria". The Independent. Archived from the original on 17 July 2018. Retrieved 25 March 2016. Ghattas, Kim (1 December 2006). "Political ferment in Lebanon". BBC News. Retrieved 15 August 2008. Stern, Yoav; Issacharoff, Avi (10 May 2008). "Hezbollah fighters retreat from Beirut after 37 die in clashes". Haaretz. Archived from the original on 12 May 2008. Retrieved 20 October 2012. "Hezbollah (a.k.a. Hizbollah, Hizbu'llah)". Council on Foreign Relations. 13 September 2008. Archived from the original on 13 September 2008. Retrieved 15 September 2008. "Huge Beirut protest backs Syria". BBC News. 8 March 2005. Retrieved 7 February 2007. "Hariri: Sunnis 'refuse' to join Hezbollah-Al Qaida war". AFP, 25 January 2014. Blanford & Salim 2013. Zirulnick 2012. Barnard, Anne (3 January 2014). "Mystery in Hezbollah Operatives Life and Death". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 3 January 2022. Barnard, Anne (9 July 2013). "Car Bombing Injures Dozens in Hezbollah Section of Beirut". The New York Times. Retrieved 30 August 2013. Hezbollah has portrayed the Syrian uprising as an Israeli-backed plot to destroy its alliance with Mr. Assad against Israel. Liz Sly and Suzan Haidamous 'Lebanon's Hezbollah acknowledges battling the Islamic State in Iraq,' Washington Post 16 February 2015. Ali Hashem, arrives in Iraq Archived 7 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine. Al Monitor 25 November 2014 "Factbox: Hezbollah and allies gain sway in Lebanon parliament". Reuters. 22 May 2018. Ajroudi, Asma. "Hezbollah and allies biggest winners in Lebanon polls". Al Jazeera. "Fears grow of all-out Israel-Hezbollah war as fighting escalates". The Guardian. 17 December 2023. Retrieved 27 December 2023. "UN: Hezbollah has increased military strength since 2006 war". Haaretz. 25 October 2007. Retrieved 5 September 2013. Frykberg, Mel (29 August 2008). "Mideast Powers, Proxies and Paymasters Bluster and Rearm". Middle East Times. Retrieved 31 May 2011. And if there is one thing that ideologically and diametrically opposed Hezbollah and Israel agree on, it is Hezbollah's growing military strength. Barnard, Anne (20 May 2013). "Hezbollah's Role in Syria War Shakes the Lebanese". The New York Times. Retrieved 20 June 2013. Hezbollah, stronger than the Lebanese Army, has the power to drag the country into war without a government decision, as in 2006, when it set off the war by capturing two Israeli soldiers Morris, Loveday (12 June 2013). "For Lebanon's Sunnis, growing rage at Hezbollah over role in Syria". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 5 November 2013. Retrieved 20 June 2013. ... Hezbollah, which has a fighting force generally considered more powerful than the Lebanese army. "Iran-Syria vs. Israel, Round 1: Assessments & Lessons Learned". Defense Industry Daily. 13 September 2013. Retrieved 19 February 2013. Hubbard, Ben (20 March 2014). "Syrian Fighting Gives Hezbollah New but Diffuse Purpose". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 3 January 2022. Retrieved 30 May 2014. ... the fighting has also diluted the resources that used to go exclusively to facing Israel, exacerbated sectarian divisions in the region, and alienated large segments of the majority Sunni population who once embraced Hezbollah as a liberation force... Never before have Hezbollah guerrillas fought alongside a formal army, waged war outside Lebanon or initiated broad offensives aimed at seizing territory. Deeb, Lara (31 July 2006). "Hizballah: A Primer". Middle East Report. Archived from the original on 19 October 2011. Retrieved 31 May 2011. Goldman, Adam (28 May 2014). "Hezbollah operative wanted by FBI dies in fighting in Syria". The Washington Post. Retrieved 30 May 2014. ... Hasan Nasrallah has called the deployment of his fighters to Syria a 'new phase' for the movement, and it marks the first time the group has sent significant numbers of men outside Lebanon's borders. Filkins, Dexter (30 September 2013). "The Shadow Commander". The New Yorker. Retrieved 4 October 2013. From 2000 to 2006, Iran contributed a hundred million dollars a year to Hezbollah. Its fighters are attractive proxies: unlike the Iranians, they speak Arabic, making them better equipped to operate in Syria and elsewhere in the Arab world. "Hezbollah's Syrian Quagmires" (PDF). The Washington Institute for Near East Policy. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 17 September 2014. By siding with the Assad regime, the regime's Alawite supporters, and Iran, and taking up arms against Sunni rebels, Hezbollah has placed itself at the epicenter of a sectarian conflict that has nothing to do with the group's purported raison d'être: 'resistance' to Israeli occupation. Kershner, Isabel (10 March 2014). "Israel Watches Warily as Hezbollah Gains Battle Skills in Syria". The New York Times. Retrieved 30 May 2014. ... the Lebanese group's image at home and in the broader Arab world has been severely damaged because it is fighting Sunni rebels in Syria while its legitimacy rested on its role in fighting Israel. El Deeb, Sarah (18 October 2021). "Hezbollah leader declares his group has 100,000 fighters". Associated Press. Retrieved 21 October 2021. Kanter, James; Rudoren, Jodi (22 July 2013). "European Union Adds Military Wing of Hezbollah to List of Terrorist Organizations". The New York Times. Retrieved 4 September 2013. Ben Wedeman,Arab League states condemn Hezbollah as 'terrorist organization' CNN News 20 November 2017. Maria Kiselyova. Greg Mahlich (ed.). "Russia says Hezbollah not a terrorist group: Ifax". Reuters. Retrieved 19 February 2021. "Hezbollah (a.k.a. Hizbollah, Hizbu'llah)". Council on Foreign Relations. Archived from the original on 27 September 2006. Morley, Jefferson (17 July 2006). "What Is Hezbollah?". The Washington Post. "Who are Hezbollah?". BBC News. Diaz & Newman, 2005, p. 55 Helena Cobban, Boston Review Hizbullah's New Face Archived 12 July 2009 at the Wayback Machine Accessed 14 August 2006 U.S. Department of State (1 October 1999). "Background Information on Foreign Terrorist Organizations". Retrieved 25 July 2006. Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs (11 April 1996). "Hizbullah". Retrieved 25 July 2006. "SOR/2003-53: Criminal Code; Regulations Amending the Regulations Establishing a List of Entities" (PDF). Canada Gazette Part II. 137 (1 extra): 1. 12 February 2003. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 January 2012. Fisk, Robert (2001). Pity the Nation: Lebanon at War. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-280130-2. Shapira, Shimon (10 August 2020). "Inside the Struggle Between Israel and Hezbollah". Tablet. Retrieved 14 March 2024. "Hezbollah chief marking one week since Badreddine's killing: Mustafa was the first to fight Israeli military in Khalde battle". LBC International. 20 May 2016. Shlaim, Avi (2001). "The Lebanese Quagmire 1981–1984". The Iron Wall: Israel and the Arab World. W.W. Norton. pp. 384–423. ISBN 978-0-393-32112-8. Norton, Augustus (2009). Hezbollah: A Short History. Princeton University Press. p. 33. ISBN 978-0-691-13124-5. Pape, Robert (2005). Dying to win: the strategic logic of suicide terrorism. New York: Random House. ISBN 978-1-4000-6317-8. Specifically: "Suicide Terrorist Campaigns, 1980–2003", Appendix 1. (p. 253 of Australian paperback edition, published by Scribe Publications) H. CON. RES. 190, 1st session 101st congress (4 August 1989). "Expressing the sense of the Congress over the reported murder of Lieutenant Colonel William Higgins and Hezbollah-sponsored terrorism". The Library of Congress. Archived from the original on 4 July 2016. Retrieved 8 August 2006.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) "Lebanon profile". BBC News. 3 September 2013. Retrieved 5 September 2013. Harnden, Tony (21 February 2004). "Video games attract young to Hizbollah". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 21 July 2006. Retrieved 20 October 2012. "In the Party of God: Are terrorists in Lebanon preparing for a larger war? by Jeffrey Goldberg". The New Yorker. 14 October 2002. Retrieved 3 March 2007. Ranstorp, Magnus (Summer 1998). "The strategy and tactics of Hizballah's current Lebanonization process". Mediterranean Politics. 3 (1): 103–134. doi:10.1080/13629399808414643. Alagha (2006), pp. 41–44 Alagha (2006), p. 47 Marius Deeb, Militant Islamic Movements in Lebanon: Origins, Social Basis, and Ideology, Occasional Paper Series (Washington, DC, Georgetown University, 1986) p. 19 al-Nahar, 7 September 1985 al-Nahar al-Arabi, 10 June Ma'aretz, 16 December 1983 Le Point, 30 July 1987 al-Shira, 28 August 1988 Nouveau Magazine, 23 July 1988 Ranstorp, Hizb'allah (1997), p. 67 see also Bates, John D. (Presiding) (September 2003). "Anne Dammarell et al. v. Islamic Republic of Iran" (PDF). District of Columbia, U.S.: The United States District Court for the District of Columbia. Archived from the original (PDF) on 31 December 2005. Retrieved 21 September 2006. US Department of State (8 October 1999). "Background Information on Foreign Terrorist Organizations". Retrieved 20 October 2012. Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs (11 April 1996). "Hizbullah". Retrieved 17 August 2006. Barak, Oren. "Hizballah." The Continuum Political Encyclopedia of the Middle East. Ed. Avraham Sela. New York: Continuum, 2002. p. 350. Rosenthal, Donna. The Israelis: Ordinary People in an Extraordinary Land. New York: Free Press, 2003. p. 15. Collier, Robert. "Everyone casting suspicious eye on Iraq's Hezbollah." San Francisco Chronicle. 29 December 2003. 14 March 2008. Adam Shatz, New York Review of Books, 29 April 2004 In Search of Hezbollah Archived 22 August 2006 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 15 August 2006. Wright, Robin (13 July 2006). "Options for U.S. Limited As Mideast Crises Spread". The Washington Post. p. A19. Jamail, Dahr (20 July 2006). "Hezbollah's transformation". Asia Times. Archived from the original on 20 July 2006. Retrieved 23 October 2007.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Engeland, Dr Anisseh Van; Rudolph, Ms Rachael M (2013). From Terrorism to Politics. Ashgate Publishing, Ltd. p. 36. ISBN 978-1-4094-9870-4. United Nations Document A/54/723 S/2000/55, citing Al Hayyat, 30 October 1999"Letter dated January 25, 2000 from the Permanent Representative of Israel to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General". Archived from the original on 10 March 2007. Retrieved 17 August 2006. . Retrieved 17 August 2006. The Shifts in Hizbullah's Ideology: Religious Ideology, Political Ideology, and Political Program. Joseph Elie Alagha, Amsterdam University Press, 2006, ISBN 978-90-5356-910-8, p. 380. Joshua Mitnick. Behind the dispute over Shebaa Farms, The Christian Science Monitor, 22 August 2006. Whitaker, Brian (10 May 2006). "Flashpoint farmland". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 8 September 2013. "Central to this issue is Hizballah's claim, which was also espoused by Lebanon's former pro-Syrian government, that the disputed Shebaa Farms are Lebanese rather than Syrian territories and are occupied by Israel. Therefore, Hizballah maintains that it is a legitimate resistance movement fighting for the liberation of Lebanese territory. Under this pretext, Hizballah, supported by some Lebanese parties, could argue that it is not a militia and thus it is outside the jurisdiction of Resolution 1559." Robert Rabil. Reinforcing Lebanon's Sovereignty, Washington Institute for Near East Policy, 8 November 2005. "Security council endorses secretary-general's conclusion on Israeli withdrawal from Lebanon as of 16 June". United Nations Security Council. 18 June 2000. Retrieved 29 September 2006. "Israeli views on Shebaa Farms harden". BBC News. 25 August 2006. Thisreen (Syrian newspaper) 21 June 1999, reprinted by MEMRI Secretary General of Hizbullah Discusses the New Israeli Government and Hizbullah's Struggle Against Israel[unreliable source?] Archived 30 September 2008 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 30 July 2006. "Lebanon and Israel: Nasrallah wins the war." The Economist. 17 August 2006. 18 November 2011. Saad-Ghorayeb, Amal. Hizbu'llah: Politics and Religion. London: Pluto Press, 2002. pp. 168–186. Wistrich, Robert S. A Lethal Obsession: Anti-Semitism from Antiquity to the Global Jihad. New York: Random House, 2010. pp. 766–767. Block, Melissa. "'New Yorker' Writer Warns of Hezbollah's Radicalism." National Public Radio. 16 August 2006. 16 February 2008. Sciolino, Elaine. "French Court Delays Decision on Hezbollah-Run TV Channel." The New York Times 12 December 2004. 14 February 2008. Carvajal, Doreen. "French Court Orders a Ban on hezbollah-Run TV Channel." The New York Times. 14 December 2004. 14 February 2008. Sciolino, Elaine. " A New French Headache: When Is Hate on TV Illegal?" The New York Times. 9 December 2004. 16 February 2008. "Anti-Semitic Series Airs on Arab Television." Archived 15 January 2013 at the Wayback Machine ADL. 9 January 2004. 16 February 2008. "Urge President Chirac to Block Hezbollah's Antisemitic and Hate TV from broadcasting into France" Archived 2 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine. Simon Wiesenthal Center. 21 May 2008. "Hezbollah Pressures School Into Dropping 'Anne Frank.'" The Jewish Daily Forward. 9 November 2009. Satloff, Roger. "The Holocaust's Arab Heroes." Archived 1 May 2020 at the Wayback Machine The Washington Institute for Near East Policy. 8 October 2006. 14 January 2009. Stalinsky, Steven. "Hezbollah's Nazi Tactics." Archived 10 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine The New York Sun. 26 July 2006. 14 January 2009. "Hezbollah presses school into pulling Anne Frank" Archived 12 November 2009 at the Wayback Machine. Jewish Telegraphic Agency. 9 November 2009 "Anne Frank diary offends Lebanon's Hezbollah." Ynetnews. 6 November 2009. 1 February 2015.[clarification needed] al-Nahar al-Arabi walduwali, 10–16 June 1985; and La Revue du Liban, 27 July – 3 August 1985. quoted in Ranstorp, Hizb'allah in Lebanon, (1997), p. 41 Ranstorp, Hizb'allah in Lebanon, (1997), p. 64 Ranstorp, Hizb'allah in Lebanon, (1997), p. 45 Nahmias, Roee. "Syria, Iran determined to protect Hizbullah." Ynetnews. 19 July 2006. 31 July 2010. Daragahi, Borzou. "Lebanon's Hezbollah savors increasing legitimacy." Los Angeles Times. 13 April 2009. 17 April 2009. "Larijani: Iran proud of backing Hezbollah". Siasat. 30 July 2010. Retrieved 21 May 2011. Engeland, Dr Anisseh Van; Rudolph, Ms Rachael M (2013). From Terrorism to Politics. Ashgate Publishing, Ltd. pp. 33–34. ISBN 978-1-4094-9870-4. Levitt, Matthew. "Hezbollah Finances – Funding the Party of God." The Washington Institute. February 2005. 1 February 2015. Middle East International No 315, 19 December 1987, Publishers Lord Mayhew, Dennis Walters MP; Jim Muir pp.6–7 UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (29 March 2006). "Lebanon: The many hands and faces of Hezbollah". Retrieved 17 August 2006. Harel, Amos; Stern, Yoav (4 August 2006). "Iranian official admits Tehran supplied missiles to Hezbollah". Haaretz. Israel. Retrieved 21 May 2011. Edward Cody; Molly Moore (14 August 2006). "The Best Guerrilla Force in the World". The Washington Post. Soibel, Leah. "Iran in our own backyard". Daily News. Archived from the original on 8 January 2012. Retrieved 4 February 2015. Labaki, Boutros. "The Role of Transnational Communmities in Fostering Development in Countries of Origin." United Nations. 12 May 2006: 15–16. 31 July 2010. "Cigarette Smuggling Linked to Terrorism". The Washington Post. 8 June 2004. Levitt, Matthew (2007). Hamas. Yale University Press. p. 70. ISBN 978-0-300-12258-9. Giraldo, Jeanne (2007). Terrorism Financing and State Responses. Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0-8047-5565-8. "US Treasury takes action against Hezbollah funders". Jerusalem Post. 24 April 2013. "Nasrallah decries 'propaganda'". Al Jazeera. 25 October 2008. Retrieved 29 September 2013. "Hezbollah denies drugs and money laundering claims". Agence France Presse. 22 December 2011. Retrieved 29 September 2013. Iran pays Hezbollah $700 million a year, US official says, The National, 5 June 2018 Hezbollah paying the price of Iranian obstinance, YNET, 27 May 2019 "Treasury Targets Hizballah in Venezuela". Press Release. United States Department of Treasury. Retrieved 5 March 2014. "The Militarization of Sex: The story of Hezbollah's halal hookups." by Hanin Ghaddar Archived 29 November 2009 at the Wayback Machine, Foreign Policy, 25 November 2009 Sachs, Susan (31 May 2000). "Hezbollah Offers a Helping Hand in Southern Lebanon". The New York Times. Retrieved 20 October 2012. "Hezbollah's secret weapon". CNN. 25 July 2006. Retrieved 25 July 2006. Avakian, Alexandra. Windows of the Soul. Washington, D.C.: National Geographic. p. 186. Seelye, Kate (1 April 2005). "Lebanon's religious mix". Frontline World. PBS. Retrieved 28 July 2006. Norton, Augustus (2009). Hezbollah: A Short History. Princeton University Press. p. 6. ISBN 978-0-691-13124-5. "Hezbollah: Most Powerful Political Movement in Lebanon". Council on Foreign Relations. 29 May 2008. Archived from the original on 17 June 2013. Retrieved 5 September 2013. Gambill, Gary. "The Counter-revolution of the Cedars". Mideastmonitor.org. Archived from the original on 16 July 2011. Retrieved 20 October 2012. William Harris (2012). Lebanon: A History, 600–2011. Oxford University Press. p. 274. ISBN 978-0-19-518111-1. Retrieved 7 April 2013. "Lebanon tensions rise in clash with Hezbollah". Haaretz. Retrieved 10 May 2008. Worth, Robert F.; Bakri, Nada (11 May 2008). "Hezbollah to Withdraw Gunmen in Lebanon". The New York Times. Retrieved 5 October 2008. "Lebanese leaders 'expect to elect a president' in 24 hours". France 24. Archived from the original on 20 May 2011. Retrieved 31 May 2008. Al-Monitor. Lebanon's new electoral law could spell trouble for traditional parties Al-Manar. Sayyed Nasrallah Announces Hezbollah Electoral Platform: Combating Corruption Priority L'Orient Le Jour. Les slogans électoraux de 2018 : un gros flop ? Archived 16 March 2018 at the Wayback Machine Elise Labott; Henry Schuster (2006). "Lebanese media outlets' assets blocked". CNN. "Terrorist Television Hezbollah has a worldwide reach". National Review Online. 22 December 2004. Archived from the original on 27 April 2007. Retrieved 31 March 2007. Avi Jorisch (Winter 2004). "Al-Manar: Hizbullah TV, 24/7". Middle East Quarterly. Retrieved 3 September 2006. "Al-Manar Television". Archived from the original on 10 April 2003. Retrieved 27 March 2007. Olfa Lamloum (2009). "Hezbollah's Media: Political History in outline". Global Media and Communication. 5 (3): 353–367. doi:10.1177/1742766509348673. S2CID 143704235. Jorisch, Avi (April 2003). "Al-Manar and the War in Iraq". Middle East Intelligence Bulletin. Retrieved 24 August 2006. "France pulls plug on Arab network". BBC News. 14 December 2004. Retrieved 5 September 2013. "ADL Welcomes U.S. Designating Hezbollah's Al-Manar TV Station a Terrorist Organization: Calls On U.S. To Take Further Actions." Archived 11 August 2017 at the Wayback Machine ADL. 2 February 2015. "U.S. Designates Al-Manar as a Specially Designated Global Terrorist Entity". U.S. Department of the Treasury. 23 March 2006. "France pulls plug on Arab network". BBC News. 14 December 2004. Retrieved 9 August 2006. Commission of the European Communities Commission document SEC(2006) 160 Archived 8 January 2007 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 31 July 2006. Roee Nahmias (31 August 2006). "Hizbullah presents: How to recruit children". Ynetnews. Retrieved 27 January 2011. " Hezbollah Releases Anti-Israel War Game." Archived 15 June 2010 at the Wayback Machine ADL. 17 August 2007. 10 July 2010. "8 year-old boy donates money to Hezbollah." Ynetnews. 6 November 2012. Masters, Jonathan; Laub, Zachary. "Hezbollah (a.k.a. Hizbollah, Hizbu'llah)". Council on Foreign Relations. Archived from the original on 28 March 2016. Retrieved 5 May 2016. Wege, Carl Anthony (Summer 2016). "Anticipatory Intelligence and the Post-Syrian War Hezbollah Intelligence Apparatus". International Journal of Intelligence and CounterIntelligence. 29 (2): 236–259. doi:10.1080/08850607.2016.1121039. S2CID 155476605. Wege, Carl Anthony (2012). "Hizballah's Counterintelligence Apparatus". International Journal of Intelligence and CounterIntelligence. 25 (4): 771–785. doi:10.1080/08850607.2012.705185. S2CID 154283510. "Analysis: Hezbollah a force to be reckoned with". Iiss.org. Agence France Presse. 18 July 2006. Archived from the original on 7 June 2008. Retrieved 20 October 2012. "پیشنهاد عربستان برای تشکیل نیروی مقابله با حزبالله". 15 January 2013. Archived from the original on 18 January 2013. Retrieved 16 January 2013. "Hezbollah Upsets The Balance in Lebanon". Voice of America. 14 June 2013. Archived from the original on 21 June 2013. Retrieved 24 June 2013. Richard Augustus Norton – Hizbollah. p. 140 Goldberg, Jeffrey (September 2010). "The Point of No Return". The Atlantic: 62. Gross, Judah Ari. "IDF chief says Iranian missiles overhyped, but sent a message". The Times of Israel. Harel, Amos (13 April 2010). "Syria is shipping Scud missiles to Hezbollah". Haaretz. Israel. Retrieved 27 January 2011. "Syria: Israel's Scud accusation may be pretense for attack". Haaretz. Israel. 25 October 2008. Retrieved 27 January 2011. Harvey, Benjamin (5 August 2006). "Missiles Neutralizing Israeli Tanks". The Washington Post. Associated Press. Retrieved 20 October 2012. McElroy, Damien (29 July 2014). "North Korea denies reports of missile deal with Hamas". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Weitz, Paul (12 August 2006). "Hezbollah, Already a Capable Military Force, Makes Full Use of Civilian Shields and Media Manipulation". Journal of International Security Affairs. Archived from the original on 7 January 2008. Retrieved 9 January 2008. "Hezbollah Reportedly Acquires SA-18 SAMs". Middle East Intelligence Bulletin. April 2003. Gardner, Frank (3 August 2006). "Hezbollah missile threat assessed". BBC News. Retrieved 27 January 2011. Scott Shane; Andrew W. Lehren (28 November 2010). "Leaked Cables Offer Raw Look at U.S. Diplomacy". The New York Times. Retrieved 26 December 2010. ... Cables describe the United States' failing struggle to prevent Syria from supplying arms to Hezbollah in Lebanon, which has amassed a huge stockpile since its 2006 war with Israel. ... information that Syria was providing increasingly sophisticated weapons to the group. Charley Keyes, "U.S. military needs flexibility due to poor predictions, Gates says", CNN, 24 May 2011 Danon, Danny. "Israel Deserves a Seat on the Security Council." Politico. 5 April 2017. 6 April 2017. Israeli US envoy: Hizbullah has 15,000 rockets on border. Jpost.com. Retrieved on 19 October 2010. "IAF shoots down hostile drone from Lebanon off Haifa". Jerusalem Post. 25 April 2013. Kershner, Isabel (10 March 2014). "Israel Watches Warily as Hezbollah Gains Battle Skills in Syria". The New York Times. Retrieved 27 August 2014. [T]he only way for Mr. Assad, a longtime Hezbollah ally, to repay the group is by supplying it with sophisticated weapons. "Nasrallah warns Israel could be 'wiped out' in war between US and Iran". Times of Israel. Retrieved 13 July 2019. United Nations Security Council (2 September 2004). "Resolution 1559 (2004)". Retrieved 1 May 2007. 3. Calls for the disbanding and disarmament of all Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias "Hezbollah has no intention to disarm". Intelligence and Terrorism Information Center at the Center for Special Studies (Israeli). 7 September 2005. Archived from the original on 29 July 2012. Retrieved 1 May 2007. "Hezbollah: Hezbollah and the Recent Conflict." Archived 4 May 2007 at the Wayback Machine ADL. 29 September 2006. 26 June 2007. Gambill, Gary (September–October 2006). "Briefing: Lebanese Public Opinion". Mideast Monitor. Archived from the original on 27 September 2007. Retrieved 23 October 2012. Haaretz 14 August 2008, "UN: We've cleared half the cluster bombs Israel dropped on Lebanon", by Shlomo Shamir Jpost.Com Staff (8 November 2009). "Hizbullah says it's getting ready for new war with Israel". Jerusalem Post. Archived from the original on 29 January 2012. Retrieved 21 May 2011. "Army coordinating with Resistance Brigades in Sidon". NOW Lebanon. 24 June 2013. Archived from the original on 19 October 2017. Retrieved 26 April 2014. Blanford, Nicholas (2011). Warriors of God: Inside Hezbollah's Thirty-Year Struggle Against Israel. New York: Random House. p. 582. ISBN 978-0-679-60516-4. Retrieved 26 April 2014. "Wariness of Resistance Brigades grows in Sidon". Daily Star. 13 November 2013. Retrieved 26 April 2014. Nizar Abdel-Kader. "Iraq and the Future of Gulf Security Cooperation: A Lebanese perspective". Lebanese Army Magazine. Archived from the original on 4 April 2006. Retrieved 25 July 2006. Third World Quarterly, Vol 14, No 2, 1993, reprinted at Al Mashriq Lebanon's Hizbullah: from Islamic revolution to parliamentary accommodation Accessed 26 July 2006 Rex A. Hudson, "The Sociology and Psychology of Terrorism: Who Becomes a Terrorist and Why?," Federal Research Division, Library of Congress (September 1999). Accessed 17 August 2006 Nasr, Vali, The Shia Revival, Norton, (2006), p. 115 "2000: Hezbollah celebrates Israeli retreat". BBC News. 26 May 2000. Retrieved 25 July 2006. "Frontline: Target America: Terrorist attacks on Americans, 1979–1988", PBS News, 2001. Retrieved 4 February 2007. "Hezbollah again denies involvement in deadly Buenos Aires bombing BEIRUT, March 19 (AFP)". Lebanon.com. 20 March 2003. Retrieved 27 January 2011. "Timeline of Hezbollah Violence." CAMERA: Committee for Accuracy in Middle East Reporting in America. 17 July 2006. 18 November 2006. Later reprinted in On Campus magazine's Fall 2006 issue and attributed the article to author Gilead Ini. Hezbollah Archived 27 September 2006 at the Wayback Machine CFR. org Staff, the US Council on Foreign Relations, 17 July 2006 Levitt, Matthew (2013). Hezbollah: The Global Footprint of Lebanon's Party of God. Georgetown University Press. p. 289. Levitt, Matthew (2013). Hezbollah: The Global Footprint of Lebanon's Party of God. Georgetown University Press. p. 23. Worley, D. Robert. "Aligning Ends, Ways, and Means." Google Books. 1 February 2015. Levitt, Matthew (2013). Hezbollah: The Global Footprint of Lebanon's Party of God. Georgetown University Press. p. 102. Argentine trials may shed light on Panama mystery, Eric Jackson, Panama News Online, 17 October 2001. Leonnig, Carol D. (23 December 2006). "Iran Held Liable In Khobar Attack". The Washington Post. Retrieved 26 September 2014. "Fast Facts: Hezbollah". Fox News. 13 July 2006. Archived from the original on 24 October 2010. Retrieved 20 October 2012. Lebanon: Hezbollah and the Jan 15 Bombing Stratfor, 15 January 2008 "Egypt's Brotherhood backs Hizbullah in spat with Cairo". The Daily Star. 24 April 2009. Retrieved 4 September 2013. "Hezbollah suspected in Bulgaria bus bombing". Al Jazeera. 5 February 2013. Retrieved 6 February 2013. Levitt, Matthew (2013). Hezbollah: The Global Footprint of Lebanon's Party of God. Georgetown University Press. p. 297. "Iran in the Balkans: A History and a Forecast". World Affairs Journal. Archived from the original on 29 November 2016. Retrieved 27 February 2016.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) "Operation Accountability – Increased Israeli casualties led to Operation Accountability in 1993". Ynet.co.il. 25 July 1993. Retrieved 21 May 2011. "Israel/Lebanon, Unlawful Killings During Operation "Grapes of Wrath"". BBC News. 24 July 1996. Archived from the original on 20 October 2007. Retrieved 24 October 2007. "The Grapes of Wrath Understanding". Mideastweb.org. Retrieved 27 January 2011. "History of Israel's role in Lebanon". BBC News. 1 April 1998. Retrieved 24 October 2007. Cobban, Helena, "Hizbullah's New Face". Boston Review. April–May 2005. Archived from the original on 3 February 2007. Retrieved 2 February 2007. "Israelis Held by the Hizbullah – October 2000 – January 2004". mfa.gov.il. Archived from the original on 21 April 2013. "Israel, Hezbollah swap prisoners". CNN. 29 January 2004. Retrieved 2 April 2010. Stevn, Yoav and Eli Ashkenazi. "New film leaves parents in the dark on sons' fate during kidnap." Haaretz. 6 September 2006. 28 February 2008. "Timeline of the July War 2006". The Daily Star. Archived from the original on 10 December 2010. Retrieved 22 January 2015. "Israel buries soldiers recovered in prisoner swap". ABC News. 17 July 2008. Retrieved 22 January 2015. "Israeli warplanes hit Beirut suburb". CNN. 14 July 2006. Cody, Edward (24 August 2006). "Lebanese Premier Seeks U.S. Help in Lifting Blockade". The Washington Post. Retrieved 2 April 2010. Urquhart, Conal (11 August 2006). "Computerised weaponry and high morale". The Guardian. UK. Retrieved 8 October 2006. Bard, Mitchell (24 July 2006). "Hezbollah Attacks Since May 2000". AIJAC. Archived from the original on 19 August 2006. MacIntyre, Donald; Silver, Eric (14 July 2006). "Israel widens bombing campaign as Lebanese militia groups retaliate". The Independent. UK. Archived from the original on 25 January 2014. Retrieved 27 January 2011. Fisk, Robert (22 May 2012). "Cloud of Syria's war hangs over Lebanese cleric's death". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 2 April 2019. Retrieved 17 May 2013. Reuters, 12 September 2006; Al-Hayat (London), 13 September 2006 "Country Report – Lebanon," The Economist Intelligence Unit, no. 4 (2006), pp. 3–6. Fisk, Robert (17 August 2006). "Lebanon's pain grows by the hour as death toll hits 1,300". The Independent. London. Retrieved 17 May 2013. "Lebanon Under Siege". Presidency of the Council of Ministers – Higher Relief Council (Lebanon). 9 November 2006. Archived from the original on 27 September 2006. Retrieved 30 August 2008. Israel Vs. Iran: The Shadow War, By Yaakov Katz, (NY 2012), p. 17 H. Varulkar, "Internal Conflict in Lebanon Over Control of Oil and Gas Resources," MEMRI, Inquiry & Analysis Series Report No. 624 (12 July 2010). Retrieved 5 May 2013. Quoting Washington sources, the paper said the attack was meant to avenge the death of Iranian nuclear scientist Masoud Ali Mohammadi who was killed last year. ... Turkish intelligence first attributed the Istanbul attack ... to the Kurdish resistance, but later concluded that Hezbollah, working on behalf of Iran, had organized it. According to the report, three Hezbollah operatives arrived in Istanbul from Beirut to assassinate Kimchi. "Report: Hezbollah tried to kill Israeli consul." Ynetnews. 18 July 2011. Ravid, Barak (14 July 2012). "Man detained in Cyprus was planning attack on Israeli targets for Hezbollah". Haaretz. Retrieved 15 July 2012. "PMO: Iran connected to Hezbollah activity in Cyprus". Yedioth Ahronot. 14 July 2012. Retrieved 15 July 2012. Tsvetelia Tsolova "Bulgaria blames Hezbollah in bomb attack on Israeli tourists," Archived 15 October 2015 at the Wayback Machine Reuters (5 February 2013). Retrieved 5 May 2013. "Israel unlikely to retaliate after Bulgaria report. Times of Israel. Jan 2013". The Times of Israel. "Bulgaria: Hezbollah behind Burgas attack". 5 February 2013. Archived from the original on 6 February 2013. Retrieved 6 February 2013. "Tel Aviv Diary: Netanyahu Loses His Security Edge", Marc Schulman, 1/28/15, Newsweek Goldenberg, Tia; Shurafa, Wafaa (8 October 2023). "Hezbollah and Israel exchange fire as Israeli soldiers battle Hamas on second day of surprise attack". Associated Press. Archived from the original on 8 October 2023. Retrieved 8 October 2023. "Israel, Hezbollah exchange artillery, rocket fire". Reuters. 8 October 2023. Archived from the original on 8 October 2023. Retrieved 8 October 2023. Follath, Erich (23 May 2009). "New Evidence Points to Hezbollah in Hariri Murder". Der Spiegel. "Nasrallah: Israel used secret agent to turn Lebanon gov't against Hezbollah". Haaretz.com. 9 August 2010. "Lebanon PM: UN must probe claims of Israeli complicity in Hariri murder". Haaretz.com. 12 August 2010. "Hariri murder: UN tribunal issues arrest warrants". BBC News. 30 June 2011. Retrieved 3 July 2011. "Hezbollah leader Nasrallah rejects Hariri indictments". BBC News. 3 July 2011. Retrieved 3 July 2011. Abdo, Geneive (7 June 2013). "Why Sunni-Shia conflict is worsening". June 7, 2013. cnn.com. Retrieved 12 September 2013. "Hezbollah leader vows to fight Islamic State group 'everywhere'". France24. 25 May 2015. "Hezbollah seizes much of Islamic State enclave on Syrian-Lebanese border: Nasrallah". Reuters. 24 August 2017. "US adds Hezbollah to Syria sanctions list". Al Jazeera. 10 August 2012. "Drone flight over Israel: Nasrallah's latest surprise". 10 January 2009. Hirst, David (23 October 2012). "Hezbollah uses its military power in a contradictory manner". The Daily Star. Beirut. "Hezbollah fighters, Syrian rebels killed in border fighting". Al Arabiya. 17 February 2013. Archived from the original on 18 February 2013. Retrieved 18 February 2013. "Hezbollah condemned for 'attack on Syrian villages'". BBC News, 18 February 2013. Retrieved 18 February 2013. "Baalbek figures urge Hezbollah to stop fighting in Syria". The Daily Star. 25 February 2013. Retrieved 26 February 2013. "Syrian rebels claim successful attack on Hezbollah". The Times of Israel, 26 February 2013. Retrieved 26 February 2013. "March 14, PSP slam Hezbollah activities in Syria". The Daily Star, 19 February 2013. Retrieved 26 February 2013. "Hezbollah fighters dying in Syria will go to hell, Tufaili". Ya Libnan, 26 February 2013. Retrieved 26 February 2013. "Rival Lebanese groups fighting in Syria: Jumblatt". The Daily Star, 24 February 2013. Retrieved 26 February 2013. "Morsi cuts Egypt's Syria ties, condemns Hezbollah". Ynet News. 15 June 2013. Retrieved 13 November 2020. Eshman, Rob. "Syrian wake-up." Jewish Journal. 8 May 2013. 8 May 2013. Barnard, Anne; Saad, Hwaida (20 May 2013). "Hezbollah Aids Syrian Military In a Key Battle". The New York Times. Retrieved 4 September 2013. Mroue, Bassej (25 May 2013). "Hezbollah chief says group is fighting in Syria". Associated Press. Retrieved 25 May 2013. Beauchamp, Zack (23 September 2014). "Iran is fighting on the Iraqi government's side". vox.com. Vox. Retrieved 26 September 2014. Gato, Pablo; Windrem, Robert (9 May 2007). "Hezbollah builds a Western base". Telemundo. NBC News. Retrieved 17 August 2018. Talley, Ian (15 May 2018). "Hezbollah Said to Be Laundering Money in South American Tri-Border Region". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 17 August 2018. Linthicum, Kate (10 January 2020). "Could Iran — and Hezbollah — strike in Latin America?". The Los Angeles Times. Retrieved 23 October 2023. Beauchamp, Zack (1 February 2016). "The DEA says it just busted a Hezbollah operation laundering money for drug cartels". Vox. Retrieved 23 October 2023. Goldberg, Jeffrey (28 October 2002). "In the Party of God". The New Yorker. Retrieved 17 August 2018. Meyer, Josh (2017). "The secret backstory of how Obama let Hezbollah off the hook". Politico. Retrieved 17 August 2018. Valencia, Robert (18 December 2017). "Hezbollah Smuggled Tons of Cocaine into the U.S. During Obama Administration, Report Reveals". Newsweek. Retrieved 17 August 2018. "Hezbollah drug cartels in Latin America target GCC states". The Baghdad Post. 9 April 2018. Archived from the original on 18 August 2018. Retrieved 17 August 2018. "Iran, Hezbollah mine Latin America for revenue, recruits, analysts say". CNN. 4 June 2013. Retrieved 4 June 2013. Ottolenghi, Emanuele (15 August 2018). "Lebanon Is Protecting Hezbollah's Cocaine Trade in Latin America". Foreign Policy. Retrieved 17 August 2018. Brooks-Pollock, Tom (2 February 2016). "Worldwide drug trafficking ring 'links Hezbollah to Latin American cartels'". Independent. United Kingdom. Retrieved 17 August 2018. Chaya, George (7 April 2018). "Interpol detecta actividades ilícitas de Hezbollah en Colombia". Infobae (in Spanish). Retrieved 17 August 2018. Diaz, Shlomi (25 July 2018). "Argentine authorities nab terror cell funneling money to Hezbollah". Florida Jewish Journal. Miami Sun-Sentinel. Retrieved 17 August 2018. Gantz, Menachem (1 September 2011). "Report: Hezbollah opens base in Cuba". Ynet. Retrieved 12 October 2023. Rogers, Tim (10 September 2012). "What's Behind Nicaragua's Rumored Links to Hezbollah?". Pulitzer Center. Humire, Joseph M. (7 October 2020). "The Maduro-Hezbollah Nexus: How Iran-backed Networks Prop up the Venezuelan Regime". Atlantic Council. Retrieved 23 October 2023. Clarke, Colin P. (9 February 2019). "Hezbollah Is in Venezuela to Stay". Foreign Policy. Retrieved 23 October 2023. P, Jeferson Guarin (30 December 2020). "FARC-Hezbollah: The success of Venezuela-Iran proxy groups and their convergence in the Americas". Security and Defence Quarterly. 31 (4): 117–134. doi:10.35467/sdq/130934. ISSN 2300-8741. Vianna de Azevedo, Christian (2018). "Venezuela's toxic relations with Iran and Hezbollah: an avenue of violence, crime, corruption and terrorism". Florida International University. "Hezbollah in South America: The Threat to Businesses". Stratfor. 5 February 2018. Retrieved 17 August 2018. Neuman, William (2022). Things Are Never So Bad That They Can't Get Worse. St. Martin's Publishing. pp. 278–279. ISBN 9781250266163. Al Arabiya News. (4 December 2019. Updated 20 May 2020). "Hezbollah operative in US sentenced to 40 years in spying case shows no remorse". Al Arabiya English website Retrieved 23 June 2021. Spencer C. Hsu. (23 June 2021). "Pentagon linguist sentenced to 23 years for exposing U.S. sources in Iraq to Hezbollah in rare terrorism espionage case ". Washington Post website Retrieved 24 June 2021. Yalib, Yalib (30 August 2010). "Hezbollah, Al Ahbash chiefs meet over Borj Abi Haidar incident". Nakhoul, Samia; Hafezi, Parisa (20 January 2024). "Exclusive: Iranian and Hezbollah commanders help direct Houthi attacks in Yemen, sources say". Reuters. Retrieved 21 January 2024. "Hezbollah flexes its muscles in Lebanon and provides free Iranian fuel". The Washington Post. Retrieved 14 October 2021. "Hezbollah brings Iran fuel to Lebanon despite US sanctions". Associated Press. 16 September 2021. Retrieved 14 October 2021. "Abduction of Sheikh Obeid, Security Council Resolution 638". Jewishvirtuallibrary.org. Retrieved 27 January 2011. "ISRAEL KILLS A HEZBOLLAH LEADER AND AIDE IN S. LEBANON RAID". Deseret News. Associated Press. 31 March 1995. Middle East International No 498, 14 April 1995; Publishers Lord Mayhew, Dennis Walters MP; Editor Michael Adams; Jim Muir pp.6–7 "Hezbollah's most wanted commander killed in Syria bomb". Reuters. 13 February 2008. Archived from the original on 22 June 2013. Retrieved 5 September 2013. "Slain Hezbollah honcho held key role in drone program". The Times Of Israel. Archived from the original on 21 January 2015. Retrieved 22 January 2015. "Masses chant 'Death to Israel' at funeral for Hezbollah commander slain in alleged Israeli strike". The Jerusalem Post. Retrieved 4 March 2015. "Hezbollah fighters killed in Israeli attack". AlJazeera. Retrieved 4 March 2015. "Hezbollah mourns fighters killed in attack". Aljazeera. Retrieved 4 March 2015. Tomson, Chris (13 May 2016). "Breaking: Israel kills Hezbollah commander in airstrike over Damascus". Archived from the original on 13 May 2016. Retrieved 13 May 2016. "Leading Hezbollah commander and key Israel target killed in Syria". The Guardian. 13 May 2016. "Hezbollah blames insurgent shelling for death of top commander in Syria". Ynet. 14 May 2016. James A Russell; James J. Wirtz, eds. (2009). Globalization and WMD Proliferation: Terrorism, Transnational Networks and International Security. Routledge. p. 86. ISBN 978-1-134-07970-4. "FS_184". CJPME – English. Wright, Robin (16 July 2006). "Inside the Mind of Hezbollah". The Washington Post. Retrieved 1 August 2006. Hezbollah's condemnation of murder of civilians in Egypt and Algeria is described in Saad-Ghorayeb, p. 101. Usher, Sebastian (13 May 2004). "Muted Arab reaction to Berg beheading". BBC News. Retrieved 5 September 2013. "Hezbollah chief condemns Paris attacks" (video). The New York Times. Reuters. 15 November 2015. Retrieved 21 October 2016. Larry Luxner (4 March 2006). "AMIA Probe Was Botched: Argentina". The Jewish Week. Archived from the original on 15 July 2010. Retrieved 5 February 2007. "Former Iran leader sought in bombing". The Jerusalem Post. Associated Press. 25 October 2006. Retrieved 21 May 2011. "US warns Hezbollah may strike in Europe". Yahoo News. AFP. 10 August 2012. Archived from the original on 13 August 2012. Retrieved 10 August 2012. "Hezbollah could hit Europe at any time, with no warning". The Jerusalem Post. 10 August 2012. Retrieved 10 August 2012. "Hezbollah may strike in Europe at any time: US". France 24. AFP. 10 August 2012. Archived from the original on 11 August 2012. Retrieved 10 August 2012. Halliday, Fred. "A Lebanese fragment: two days with Hizbollah." Archived 20 August 2006 at the Wayback Machine openDemocracy. 20 July 2006. 17 February 2007. Rabil, Robert G (Fall 2007). "Has Hezbollah's Rise Come at Syria's Expense?". Middle East Quarterly: 43–51. Retrieved 23 January 2015. Calamur, Krishnadev (28 August 2013). "Who Are Syria's Friends And Why Are They Supporting Assad?". NPR. parallels. Retrieved 23 January 2015. "Hezbollah leader Nasrallah vows victory in Syria". BBC News. Retrieved 23 January 2015. "Israel-Hamas-Hezbollah: The Current Conflict" (PDF). CRS Report for Congress. 21 July 2006. Retrieved 8 September 2006. Gunaratna, Rohan. Inside Al Qaeda: Global Network of Terror. New York: Columbia University Press, 2002. p. 146. Stinson, Jeffrey. "Minister: Hezbollah doesn't need al-Qaeda's help fighting Israel in Lebanon." USA Today. 28 July 2006. 17 February 2006. "'Zarqawi tape' urges Sunni unrest". BBC News. 2 June 2006. Retrieved 5 September 2013. "Saudi religious leader blasts Hizbullah". The Jerusalem Post. 5 August 2006. Archived from the original on 16 April 2009. Retrieved 6 August 2006. Boettcher, Mike; Schuster, Henry (13 August 2003). "New terror alliance suspected in Iraq". CNN World News. Retrieved 26 July 2006. "Poll finds support for Hizbullah's retaliation". Beirut Center for Research and Information. 29 July 2006. Archived from the original on 30 August 2006. Blanford, Nicholas (28 July 2006). "Israeli strikes may boost Hizbullah base". The Christian Science Monitor. Retrieved 29 July 2006. Zarour, Khoder. "What led to the rapid increased popularity of Hezbollah in Lebanon". Arab News. Archived from the original on 3 February 2015. Retrieved 3 February 2015. "Israel/Palestinians." PollingReport.com. 10 December 2006. Muslims offer mixed views on Hamas, Hezbollah, reject al Qaeda Archived 6 December 2010 at the Wayback Machine, CNN. 3 December 2010 "Sunni Cleric Rises To Challenge Hezbollah In Lebanon". NPR. 10 August 2012. Retrieved 25 August 2012. Akram, Fares (24 February 2012). "In Break, Hamas Supports Syrian Opposition". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 3 January 2022. "Lebanon Poll Shows Drop in Hezbollah Support, Even Among Shia; Plurality Back Israel Boundary Talks". "Hezbollah's Military and Politics: Any Difference? – World Policy". Archived from the original on 19 October 2017. Retrieved 30 April 2020. "Arab League brands Hezbollah 'terror' group". Al Arabiya English. 11 March 2016. "GCC: Hezbollah terror group". Arab News. 3 June 2013. Retrieved 3 June 2013. Fitch, Asa; Dana Ballout (2 March 2016). "Gulf Cooperation Council Labels Hezbollah a Terrorist Group". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 1 December 2016. Retrieved 1 December 2016. "Bahrain Terrorist List (individuals – entities)". Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of Bahrain. Retrieved 30 December 2020. Ministerio de Justicia y Derechos Humanos de la Nación. "RePET" (in Spanish). Retrieved 30 December 2020. "Currently listed entities". Public Safety Canada. Government of Canada. 21 December 2018. Archived from the original on 1 March 2020. Retrieved 30 December 2020. "Pompeo celebra designación de Hezbolá como terrorista por Colombia, Honduras y Guatemala" [Pompeo Celebrates Hezbollah's Designation as Terrorist by Colombia, Honduras and Guatemala]. Anadolu Agency (in Spanish). 21 January 2020. Archived from the original on 6 November 2023. Retrieved 6 November 2023. "Estonia imposes sanctions on Hezbollah". The Jerusalem Post. Retrieved 20 December 2020. "Germany designates Hezbollah as terrorist group, conducts raids on suspects". France 24. 30 April 2020. Retrieved 7 October 2020. "Colombia and Honduras designate Hezbollah a terrorist organization". Jerusalem Post. 20 January 2020. "Hezbollah a recognized terrorist organization". www.idf.il. Retrieved 7 October 2020. "Saudi welcomes Kosovo Government's decision". Bahrain News Agency. 26 June 2020. "Bahrain welcomes Lithuania's designation of Hezbollah as terrorist organisation". Bahrain News Agency. 15 August 2020. Archived from the original on 5 November 2023. "List of Individuals, Entities and Other Groups and Undertakings Declared by the Minister of Home Affairs as Specified Entity Under Section 66B(1)" (PDF). Ministry of Home Affairs of Malaysia. Retrieved 30 December 2020. "Paraguay adds Hamas, Hezbollah to terrorism list". Middle East Monitor. 20 August 2019. Archived from the original on 20 August 2019. Retrieved 30 December 2020. Ahren, Raphael. "Slovenia declares all of Hezbollah a 'criminal and terrorist organization'". www.timesofisrael.com. Retrieved 20 December 2020. "Proscribed terrorist groups" (PDF). Home Office. Retrieved 30 December 2020. "Foreign Terrorist Organizations". United States Department of State. Archived from the original on 27 February 2020. Retrieved 30 December 2020. "Guatemala designates Hezbollah as terrorist organization". The Jerusalem Post. "Hizbullah: Views and Concepts". Almashriq. 20 June 1997. Retrieved 27 January 2011. "Statement of purpose". Almashriq. 20 March 1998. Retrieved 27 January 2011. Dionigi, Filippo (2014). Hezbollah, Islamist Politics, and International Society. Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 153–56. ISBN 978-1-137-40302-5. Proscribed terrorist organisations (Report). Home Office. 27 March 2015. p. 10. Retrieved 6 July 2015. Hizballah's External Security Organisation was proscribed March 2001 and in 2008 the proscription was extended to Hizballah's Military apparatus including the Jihad Council. "Britain bans Hezbollah – Middle East". The Jerusalem Post | Jpost.com. Designation of Foreign Terrorist Organizations, Department of State, Federal Register, Vol. 62, No. 195, 8 October 1997 ' Russia says Hezbollah, Hamas not terror groups,' The Times of Israel 16 November 2015. Nashabe, Omar (4 May 2012). "China's Ambassador in Lebanon: Hezbollah Arms a Trade Matter". Al-Akhbar. Archived from the original on 30 January 2017. "Blacklisting Hezbollah EU is Blacklisting Hezbollah". The Times of Israel. Ivana Kottasová; Frederik Pleitgen; Nadine Schmidt (30 April 2020). "Germany bans Lebanese militant group Hezbollah". CNN. "Hezbollah branded as terrorist organization in Argentina, assets frozen". The Jerusalem Post. 19 July 2019. Retrieved 19 July 2019. staff, T. O. I. (17 July 2019). "Argentina moves toward designating Hezbollah a terror group". The Times of Israel. "Australia to list Hezbollah as 'terrorist organization'". Deutsche Welle. 24 November 2021. Belot, Henry (24 November 2021). "Australia lists neo-Nazi organisation The Base, Lebanese Shia party Hezbollah as terrorist organisations". ABC News. Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Retrieved 26 November 2021. "Australia lists neo-Nazi group The Base and Hezbollah as terrorist organisations". The Guardian. Retrieved 24 November 2021. "Israel praises Czech Republic for designating Hezbollah a terrorist organization". JNS.org. 28 October 2020. "Bahrain's parliament declares Hezbollah a terrorist group". The Jerusalem Post. 26 March 2013. "Listed Terrorist Entities – Currently Listed Entities". Government of Canada. Public Safety Canada. 24 March 2014. Retrieved 11 July 2014. Harkov, Lahav (8 December 2019). "Colombia and Honduras designate Hezbollah a terrorist organization". Jpost.com – The Jerusalem Post. Retrieved 21 January 2020. "EU places Hezbollah military wing on terror blacklist". The Jerusalem Post. 22 July 2013. Retrieved 22 July 2013. "Jewish Leaders Applaud Hezbollah Terror Designation by France". Algemeiner Journal. 4 April 2013. Retrieved 4 September 2013. Madeline Chambers; Andreas Rink. "Germany classifies Hezbollah as terrorist organisation, conducts raids". Nasdaq. Reuters. "After U.S., Israeli pressure, Germany bans Hezbollah activity, raids mosques". Reuters. 30 April 2020. Retrieved 30 April 2020. "Honduras declares Hezbollah a terrorist organization". Reuters. 20 January 2020. "Honduras becomes latest to officially declare Hezbollah a terrorist organization". Al Arabiya. 20 January 2020. Weinthal, Benjamin. "The Republic of Kosovo ...." The Jerusalem Post. 30 June 2019. 2 July 2019. "Lithuania bans Hezbollah affiliates in move hailed by Israel". Al Jazeera. 13 August 2020. Retrieved 6 November 2023. Norman, Lawrence; Fairclough, Gordon (7 September 2012). "Pressure Mounts for EU to Put Hezbollah on Terror List". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 7 June 2015. "Lists associated with Resolution 1373". New Zealand Police. 20 July 2014. Retrieved 16 August 2014. "Paraguay labels Hezbollah a terror group, Brazil may follow". The Jerusalem Post. 19 August 2019. Retrieved 19 August 2019. "Kosovo, Israel agree to normalize ties; Serbia to move embassy to Jerusalem". 4 September 2020. "Foreign Terrorist Organizations (FTOs)". United States Department of State. 11 October 2005. Archived from the original on 17 November 2017. Retrieved 16 July 2006. "Current List of Designated Foreign Terrorist Organizations ... 14. Hizballah (Party of God)". "Algeria's Hezbollah stance 'reflects view on resistance, not terrorism'". Middle East Eye. 29 January 2019. "Report: Hezbollah opens base in Cuba". Ynet news. 9 January 2011. Retrieved 16 July 2020. "A Lebanese fragment: two days with Hizbollah". openDemocracy. Archived from the original on 20 August 2006. Retrieved 8 August 2006. Farquhar, Scott. Back to Basics: A Study of the Second Lebanon War and Operation CAST LEAD (PDF). Combat Studies Institute Press. p. 9. Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 October 2011. Kirchner, Magdalena (2016). Why States Rebel. Understanding State Sponsorship of Terrorism. Opladen: Barbara Budrich. pp. 220–30. ISBN 978-3-8474-0641-9. Miller, James (28 September 2015). "Putin's New Axis of Resistance: Russia, Iran, Iraq, Syria, and Hezbollah". The Daily Beast. Rubin, Alissa J. (26 June 2020). "Iraq Raids Iranian-Backed Militia Accused of Attacking U.S. Forces". The New York Times. Retrieved 10 January 2022. "Al-Kadhimi and the Kataib Hezbollah raid". Middle East Institute. Retrieved 10 January 2022. "Iraq forces raid HQ of Iran-backed Hezbollah Brigades". Middle East Monitor. 26 June 2020. Retrieved 10 January 2022. "The Harrowing of Mustafa Kadhimi". The Washington Institute. Retrieved 10 January 2022. Casey L. Addis & Christopher M. Blanchard, Hezbollah: Background and Issues for Congress, Congressional Research Service, 3 January 2011 "EU Listing of Hezbollah: Inevitable Decision with Unpredictable Consequences". Chatham House. Archived from the original on 21 June 2015. Retrieved 5 May 2015. "UK urges EU to classify Hezbollah military wing as terrorist group." Jewish Journal. 11 September 2012. "Germany backs terror label for Hezbollah." Ynetnews. 22 May 2013. Kanter, James (22 July 2013). "European Union Adds Military Wing of Hezbollah to List of Terrorist Organizations". The New York Times. Retrieved 6 November 2013. Meyer, Henry (28 July 2006). "Hezbollah not on Russia's "terrorist" list". The Washington Post. Associated Press. Retrieved 27 October 2007. Sapunov told Rossiiskaya Gazeta the list of 17 "includes only those organizations which represent the greatest threat to the security of our country." Groups linked to separatist militants in Chechnya and Islamic radicals in Central Asia made the list. "Russian defense minister says Hezbollah uses 'terrorist methods'". Haaretz Service and News Agencies. 15 July 2006. Retrieved 27 October 2007. United Nations Security Council Counter-Terrorism Committee Portal. Retrieved 7 August 2006. Bajpai, Arunoday. "Pratiyogita Darpan." Pratiyogita Darpan. October 2006. 9 January 2011. "Lebanon truce holds despite clashes". CNN. 15 August 2006. Retrieved 4 September 2013. Frank, Thomas. "Israel says it doesn't plan to occupy Lebanon." USA Today. 18 July 2006. 9 January 2011. "Israel/Lebanon: Hezbollah Must End Attacks on Civilians." Human Rights Watch. 4 August 2006. 9 January 2011. "Amnesty: Hezbollah guilty of war crimes". CNN. 14 September 2006. Retrieved 4 September 2013. Cowell, Alan (14 September 2006). "Amnesty International Says Hezbollah Committed War Crimes". The New York Times. Retrieved 4 September 2013. Katie Fretland (14 September 2006). "Amnesty: Hezbollah committed war crimes against Israel". Globe and Mail /AP. Toronto. Archived from the original on 5 June 2008. Retrieved 20 October 2012. "Judge: Arrest Ex-President Of Iran". The New York Sun. 10 November 2006. Archived from the original on 23 November 2021. Retrieved 21 May 2011. "French PM lashes Hezbollah 'terrorism'". BBC News. 24 February 2000. Retrieved 5 September 2013. Dershowitz, Alan M. (29 August 2006). "Italian FM: Hezbollah, Hamas are not al-Qaida". The Jerusalem Post. Retrieved 21 May 2011. Germany's Relations with Israel: Background and Implications for German Middle East Policy Congressional Research Service (19 January 2007) "Annual Report 2004" (PDF). Netherlands General intelligence and security service. "Answers to questions on Hezbollah and the EU (in Dutch)". Netherlands Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 14 October 2008. Archived from the original on 7 January 2009. Kanter, James; Rudoren, Jodi (22 July 2013). "European Union Adds Military Wing of Hezbollah to List of Terrorist Organizations". The New York Times. 'US intel report scrapped Iran from list of terror threats,' The Times of Israel 16 March 2015. "U.S. imposes sanctions on Hezbollah officials for Syria support". Reuters. Archived from the original on 15 October 2015. Retrieved 15 October 2015. Javedanfar, Meir. "An Israeli Opportunity in a Lebanese Crisis" The Atlantic. 31 January 2011. 10 August 2011. Khaled Abu Toameh (17 July 2006). "Arab world fed up with Hizbullah". The Jerusalem Post. "Egypt: Cairo calls Hezbollah terrorist organization," LA Times (13 April 2009). Retrieved 5 May 2013. Kais, Roi (30 December 2012). "Envoy: Egypt to tighten relations with Hezbollah". Ynetnews. Retrieved 25 April 2013. Williams, Lauren (29 December 2012). "New Egypt warms up to Hezbollah: ambassador". The Daily Star (Lebanon). Retrieved 25 April 2013. Spangler, Timothy (25 March 2011). "Bahrain complains over Hezbollah comments on protests". The Jerusalem Post. Retrieved 22 November 2011. Kahn, Gabe (31 March 2011). "Bahrain: Hizbullah a Terrorist Group". Arutz Sheva. Retrieved 1 April 2011. "Bahrain first Arab state to blacklist Hezbollah". The Jerusalem Post. 10 April 2013. Retrieved 10 April 2013. Spangler, Timothy. "Syria uprising stirs old divisions in neighboring Lebanon". The Jerusalem Post. Retrieved 22 November 2011. Kais, Roi (8 June 2013). "Hezbollah is a 'cancer,' say Arab media". Ynetnews. Retrieved 9 June 2013. George Fakhry (11 March 2016). "Arab League declares Hezbollah 'terrorist organization'". An-Nahar. Archived from the original on 2 April 2019. Retrieved 30 April 2020. "Reactionary Persian Gulf Arab States Praised by Netanyahu". Communist Party of Israel. Archived from the original on 15 March 2016. Retrieved 14 March 2016. "Arab League labels Hezbollah a 'terrorist' group". aljazeera.com. "Qatar finances Hezbollah terrorism, declares 'Jews are enemies' – report". The Jerusalem Post. 18 July 2020. "The United States and Qatar Take Actions Against Hizballah Financial Network". United States Department of State. Retrieved 7 October 2021. Ravid, Barak (13 July 2022). "30 countries took part in U.S.-led meeting on countering Hezbollah". Axios. Spiegel Interview with Lebanese President Emile Lahoud: 'Hezbollah Freed Our Country'. Der Spiegel. 25 July 2006. Itani, Faysal (2007). "Hizbullah and Lebanese Nationalism". Bologna Center Journal of International Affairs. 10. Archived from the original on 1 May 2013. Allouch: Hezbollah qualifies as a terrorist group. YaLibnan. 23 May 2011 Nafez Qawas (6 August 2008). "Berri summons Parliament to vote on policy statement". The Daily Star. Retrieved 6 August 2008. Meeting Middle East Christians is where Western stereotypes go to die, John L. Allen Jr., 19 October 2017, angelusnews.com Phares, Walid. Future Jihad: Terrorist Strategies against America. New York: Palgrave MacMillan, 2005. p. 148. LeVine, Mark. "Israel, Lebanon, Hezbollah, Hamas, fighting, terrorism, peace, by Mark LeVine". Beliefnet.com. Retrieved 18 January 2011. "Hizballah employed anti-Israel terrorism to pursue its goal of turning Lebanon into a state and society ruled solely by the Shari'a." Sela, Avraham. "Terrorism." The Continuum Political Encyclopedia of the Middle East. Ed. Avraham Sela. New York: Continuum, 2002. pp. 822–36. "The Shiite Hezbollah has indeed become a trusted mentor and role model to the Sunni fundamentalist Hamas. Both organizations have inscribed on their banner the rejection of any treaties or peace agreements with Israel, energetically work for its demise and encourage suicide terrorism to that end." Wistrich, 731. Zisser, Eyal. "The Threat Posed by Hezbollah." Middle East Forum. 26 November 2002. 18 January 2011. Khatami, Siamak. Iran: A View from Within. Janus Publishing Company Lim. 21 January 2011. Gaba, Neeru. Hezbollah: in transition. La Trobe University. 2007. 21 January 2011. Bjørgo, Tore. Root Causes of Terrorism. Psychology Press. 21 January 2011. "EU: Designate Hezbollah a Terrorist Organisation Now". washingtoninstitute.org. "Terrorist and Extremist Movements in the Middle East" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 August 2016. Retrieved 6 June 2016. Hezbollah's Impact on Security and Political Dynamics in the Middle East, 30 September 2010 Special Report 111: Global Terrorism after the Iraq War, October 2003 Congress. Congressional Record, V. 151, Pt. 4 ...." Government Printing Office. 11 March to 6 April 2005. 23 January 2011. Weisman, Jonathan (27 July 2006). "Iraqi Prime Minister Presses for More Aid". The Washington Post. Retrieved 4 September 2013. "Reps. Berman, Issa, Boustany, Rahall Introduce Bipartisan Legislation to Make Certain No Taxpayer Funds Benefit Hezbollah". The United States House of Representatives. 16 June 2011. Archived from the original on 20 June 2011. George Galloway, Anna Botting. Getting a word in (TV) (News). Sky News. Event occurs at 3:59–4:04. Archived from the original on 16 November 2021. Retrieved 22 January 2011. But they're not a terrorist organization. Weinthal, Benjamin (14 August 2013). "Switzerland nominates Hezbollah advocate for UN Human Rights Council". The Jerusalem Post. Retrieved 14 August 2013. Blanford, Nicholas; Salim, Arab (23 June 2013). "Why Hezbollah has openly joined the Syrian fight". The Christian Science Monitor. Retrieved 28 July 2020. Avon, Dominique; Khatchadourian, Anaïs-Trissa (2012). Hezbollah: A History of the "Party of God". Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-07031-8. Daher, Aurélie (2019). Hezbollah: Mobilization and Power. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-190-09263-4. Dionigi, Filippo (2014). Hezbollah, Islamist Politics, and International Society. Springer. ISBN 978-1-137-40302-5. Farida, Mariam (2019). Religion and Hezbollah: Political Ideology and Legitimacy. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-000-45857-2. Norton, Augustus Richard (2014). Hezbollah: A Short History (2 ed.). Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-1-400-85144-7. Saouli, Adham (2018). Hezbollah: Socialisation and its Tragic Ironies. Edinburgh University Press. ISBN 978-1-474-41954-3. Worrall, James; Mabon, Simon; Clubb, Gordon (2015). Hezbollah: From Islamic Resistance to Government: From Islamic Resistance to Government. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1-440-83135-5. Zirulnick, Ariel (21 December 2012). "In Hezbollah stronghold, Lebanese Christians find respect, stability". The Christian Science Monitor. Retrieved 28 July 2020. Books Joseph Alagha (2006). The Shifts in Hizbullah's Ideology: Religious Ideology, Political Ideology. Amsterdam University Press. ISBN 978-90-5356-910-8. Tom Diaz, Barbara Newman (2005). Lightning Out of Lebanon: Hezbollah Terrorists on American Soil. Presidio Press. ISBN 978-0-345-47568-8. Ahmad Nizar Hamzeh (2004). In The Path Of Hizbullah. Syracuse University Press. ISBN 978-0-8156-3053-1. Judith Palmer Harik (2006). Hezbollah: The Changing Face of Terrorism. I.B. Tauris. ISBN 978-1-84511-024-6. Hala Jaber (1997). Hezbollah. Columbia University Press. ISBN 978-0-231-10834-8. Avi Jorisch (2004). Beacon of Hatred: Inside Hizballahs Al-Manar Television. Washington Institute for Near East Policy. ISBN 978-0-944029-88-6. Augustus Richard Norton (2000). Hizballah of Lebanon: Extremist Ideals vs. Mundane Politics. Council on Foreign Relations. Archived from the original on 20 July 2006. Augustus Richard Norton (2007). Hezbollah: A Short History. Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-13124-5. Qassem, Naim (2005). Hizbullah: The Story from Within. Saqi Books. ISBN 978-0-86356-517-5. Magnus Ranstorp (1996). Hizb'Allah in Lebanon: The Politics of the Western Hostage Crisis. St. Martin's Press. ISBN 978-0-312-16491-1. Amal Saad-Ghorayeb (2001). Hizbullah: Politics and Religion. Pluto Press. ISBN 978-0-7453-1793-9. Jamal Sankari (2005). Fadlallah: The Making of a Radical Shi'ite Leader. Saqi Books. ISBN 978-0-86356-596-0. Articles Natalia Antelava (2 June 2006). "Inside Lebanese Hezbollah militia". British Broadcasting Corporation. Retrieved 24 July 2009. Hezbollah at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource UN Press Release SC/8181. UN. 2 September 2004. Lebanon: Close Security Council vote backs free elections, urges foreign troop pullout. UN. 2 September 2004. Is Hezbollah Confronting a Crisis of Popular Legitimacy? (PDF) Eric Lob, Crown Center for Middle East Studies, March 2014. Hezbollah. Archived 28 October 2020 at the Wayback Machine: Financing Terror through Criminal Enterprise, Testimony of Matthew Levitt, Hearing of the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs, United States Senate. Hizbullah's two republics by Mohammed Ben Jelloun, Al-Ahram, 15–21 February 2007. "Inside Hezbollah" – short documentary and extensive information from Frontline/World on PBS Hizbullah – the 'Party of God' – fact file at Ynetnews