Fernando Martín Espina (March 25, 1962 – December 3, 1989) was a Spanish professional basketball player who was considered to be one of the best Spanish basketball players ever. Martín was 2.06 m (6 ft 9 in) tall, and he played primarily at the center and power forward positions. He was considered a talented all-around athlete. He was a five-time swimming champion in Spain, as well as being a highly ranked athlete in the sports of handball, table tennis and judo. Martín wore the number 10 jersey, which Real Madrid retired after his death. He was named one of FIBA's 50 Greatest Players, in 1991. In 2007, he was enshrined into the FIBA Hall of Fame. Martín was the first Spanish player to play in the National Basketball Association (NBA), in 1986, and was also the second European to play in the league. He played for the Portland Trail Blazers and, earlier, in Spain for Estudiantes and Real Madrid. He played in only 24 games in the 1986–87 NBA season for the Blazers, being injured for two months. At the end of the season, he returned to Spain, to play again for Real Madrid. Martín also played for the senior Spanish national team, and he was a prominent player in the Spanish team that won the silver medal at the 1984 Los Angeles Summer Olympic Games. Martín also represented his country at the 1981 EuroBasket, the 1983 EuroBasket, where he won a silver medal, and the 1985 EuroBasket, where he was selected to the All-Tournament Team. Martín died in a car accident in the M-30 motorway in Madrid, after crashing his car. His death caused an enormous shock in Spanish basketball. His son, Jan Martín, made a start in the top-tier level Spanish pro league, the ACB, with Estudiantes, in the 2002–03 season, and he also played with the Spanish national junior teams. His nephew, Dominick Martín, played college basketball at Yale University, and also played professionally in Spain. His brother, Antonio Martín Espina, was also a professional basketball player. For his first dunk in the 2009 NBA All-Star Slam Dunk Contest, Portland Trail Blazers' player Rudy Fernández, wore a #10 Martín Blazers jersey, in his honor. List of basketball players who died during their careers Duque, Nacho (3 December 2019). "'Fernando Martín: 30 años sin el pionero'". Marca. Retrieved 7 December 2019. Evans, Hilary; Gjerde, Arild; Heijmans, Jeroen; Mallon, Bill; et al. "Fernando Martín". Olympics at Sports-Reference.com. Sports Reference LLC. Archived from the original on 2016-12-03. Full name: Fernando Martín Espina / Related Olympians: Brother of Antonio Martín Career statistics and player information from NBA.com  and Basketball-Reference.com  Fernando Martín at realmadrid.com Fernando Martín at acb.com (in Spanish) Fernando Martín at feb.es (in Spanish) Fernando Martin at FIBA Fernando Martín Espina (and here) at the Comité Olímpico Español (in Spanish) Fernando Martin Espina at Olympics.com Fernando Martin at Olympic.org (archived) Fernando Martín at Olympedia