Turkey, officially the Republic of Türkiye (Turkish: Türkiye Cumhuriyeti), is a country mainly in Anatolia in West Asia, with a smaller part called East Thrace in Southeast Europe. It borders the Black Sea to the north; Georgia, Armenia, Azerbaijan, and Iran to the east; Iraq, Syria, and the Mediterranean Sea (and Cyprus) to the south; and the Aegean Sea, Greece, and Bulgaria to the west. Turkey is home to over 85 million people; most are ethnic Turks, while ethnic Kurds are the largest ethnic minority. Officially a secular state, Turkey has a Muslim-majority population. Ankara is Turkey's capital and second-largest city; Istanbul is its largest city, and its economic and financial center, as well as the largest city in Europe. Other major cities include İzmir, Bursa, Antalya, Konya and Adana. Human habitation began in Late Paleolithic. Home to important Neolithic sites like Göbekli Tepe and some of the earliest farming areas, present-day Turkey was inhabited by various ancient peoples. Hattians were assimilated by the incoming Anatolian peoples. Increasing diversity during Classical Anatolia transitioned into cultural Hellenization following the conquests of Alexander the Great; Hellenization continued during the Roman and Byzantine eras. The Seljuk Turks began migrating into Anatolia in the 11th century, starting the Turkification process. The Seljuk Sultanate of Rum ruled Anatolia until the Mongol invasion in 1243, when it disintegrated into Turkish principalities. Beginning in 1299, the Ottomans united the principalities and expanded; Mehmed II conquered Istanbul in 1453. During the reigns of Selim I and Suleiman the Magnificent, the Ottoman Empire became a global power. From the late 18th century onwards, the empire's power and territory declined; reforms were also made. In the 19th and early 20th centuries, persecution of Muslims during the Ottoman contraction and in the Russian Empire resulted in large-scale loss of life and mass migration into modern-day Turkey from the Balkans, Caucasus, and Crimea. The Second Constitutional Era ended with the 1913 coup d'état. Under the control of Three Pashas, the Ottoman Empire entered World War I in 1914. During the war, the Ottoman government committed genocides against its Armenian, Greek and Assyrian subjects. After its defeat, the Ottoman Empire was partitioned. The Turkish War of Independence resulted in the abolition of the sultanate in 1922 and the signing of the Treaty of Lausanne in 1923. The Republic was proclaimed on 29 October 1923, modelled on the reforms initiated by the country's first president, Mustafa Kemal Atatürk. Turkey is an upper-middle-income and emerging country; its economy is the 17th- or 11th-largest in the world. It is a unitary presidential republic with a multi-party system. Turkey is a founding member of the OECD, G20, and Organization of Turkic States. With a geopolitically significant location, Turkey is a regional power and an early member of NATO. An EU-candidate, Turkey is part of the EU Customs Union, CoE, OIC, and TURKSOY. Turkey has coastal plains, a high central plateau, and various mountain ranges; its climate is temperate with harsher conditions in the interior. Home to three biodiversity hotspots, Turkey is prone to frequent earthquakes and is highly vulnerable to climate change. Turkey has universal healthcare, growing access to education, and increasing innovativeness. It has 21 UNESCO World Heritage sites, 30 UNESCO cultural heritage inscriptions, and a rich and diverse cuisine. Turkey is a leading TV content exporter and is the fourth most visited country in the world. The name Turkey appears in Western sources after the late 11th century, referring to the Seljuk-controlled lands in Anatolia and the Near East. European writers started using Turchia for the Anatolian plateau by the end of the 12th century. The English name Turkey (from Medieval Latin Turchia,Turquia) means "land of the Turks". Middle English usage of Turkye is evidenced in Geoffrey Chaucer's The Book of the Duchess (c. 1369). The modern spelling Turkey dates back to at least 1719. The name Turkey has been used in the texts of numerous international treaties to define the Ottoman Empire. In Byzantine sources, the name Tourkia (Greek: Τουρκία) was used for defining two medieval states: Hungary (Western Tourkia); and Khazaria (Eastern Tourkia). With the Treaty of Alexandropol, the name Türkiye entered international documents for the first time. In the treaty signed with Afghanistan in 1921, the expression Devlet-i Âliyye-i Türkiyye ('Sublime Turkish State') was used, likened to the Ottoman Empire's name. In December 2021, President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan issued a circular, calling for exports to be labeled "Made in Türkiye". The circular also stated that in relation to other governmental communications, the "necessary sensitivity will be shown on the use of the phrase 'Türkiye' instead of phrases such as 'Turkey' (in English)". The reason given was that Türkiye "represents and expresses the culture, civilization, and values of the Turkish nation in the best way". In May 2022, the Turkish government requested the United Nations and other international organizations to use Türkiye officially in English, which the UN immediately agreed to do. The Anatolian peninsula, comprising most of modern Turkey, has been inhabited by modern humans since the late Paleolithic period. The European part of Turkey, called Eastern Thrace, has been inhabited since at least 40,000 years ago and is known to have been in the Neolithic era by about 6000 BC. The spread of agriculture from the Middle East to Europe was strongly correlated with the migration of early farmers from Anatolia about 9,000 years ago and was not just a cultural exchange. Anatolian Neolithic farmers derived a significant portion of their ancestry from the Anatolian hunter-gatherers. Present-day Turkey contains some of the world's oldest Neolithic sites. Göbekli Tepe is the site of the oldest known man-made structure in the world, a temple dating to c. 9600 BC, while Çatalhöyük is a very large Neolithic and Chalcolithic settlement in Anatolia, which existed c. 7500 – c. 5700 BC. It is the largest and best-preserved Neolithic site found to date. The Urfa Man statue is dated c. 9000 BC, to the period of the Pre-Pottery Neolithic, and is defined as "the oldest known naturalistic life-sized sculpture of a human". Troy was first settled in the Neolithic Age, with habitation continuing into the Byzantine period. Troy's Late Bronze Age layers are considered potential historical settings for the later legends of the Trojan War. The earliest recorded inhabitants of Anatolia were the Hattians and Hurrians, non-Indo-European peoples who lived in Anatolia as early as c. 2300 BC. Indo-European Hittites came to Anatolia and gradually absorbed the Hattians and Hurrians c. 2000 – c. 1700 BC. Various other ancient Anatolian populations have also lived in Anatolia, from at least the Neolithic until the Hellenistic period. Many of these peoples spoke the Anatolian languages, a branch of the larger Indo-European language family. Given the antiquity of the Indo-European Hittite and Luwian languages, some scholars have proposed Anatolia as the hypothetical centre from which the Indo-European languages radiated. The first empire in the area was founded by the Hittites, from the 18th through the 13th centuries BC. The Assyrians conquered and settled parts of southeastern Turkey as early as 1950 BC although they have remained a minority in the region. Following the collapse of the Hittite empire c. 1180 BC, the Phrygians, an Indo-European people, achieved ascendancy in Anatolia until their kingdom was destroyed by the Cimmerians in c. 695 BC. The most powerful of Phrygia's successor states were Lydia, Caria and Lycia. Assyrian king Shalmaneser I (1263–1234 BC) recorded a campaign in which he subdued the entire territory of "Uruatri". Urartu re-emerged in Assyrian inscriptions in the 9th century BC. Starting from 714 BC, the Urartu state began to decline and finally dissolved in 590 BC when it was conquered by the Medes. Before 1200 BC, there were four Greek-speaking settlements in Anatolia, including Miletus. Around 1000 BC, Greek migrations to the west coast of Anatolia began; influence of Greek communities were largely limited to these areas until the time of Alexander the Great. These settlements were grouped as Aeolis, Ionia, and Doris, after the specific Greek groups that settled them. Numerous important cities were founded by these colonists, such as Ephesus, Halicarnassus, Pergamon, Aphrodisias, Smyrna (now İzmir) and Byzantium (now Istanbul), the latter founded by Greek colonists from Megara in c. 667 BC. Some of these cities, in particular Miletus, went on to found numerous colonies of their own on the coasts of the Black Sea. Miletus was also home to the Ionian school of philosophy, and many of the most prominent pre-Socratic philosophers lived in Miletus. Thales of Miletus is regarded as the first philosopher in the Greek tradition and is also historically recognized as the first individual known to have engaged in scientific philosophy. Two of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World, the Temple of Artemis in Ephesus, and the Mausoleum of Halicarnassus, were located in Anatolia. The Armenian Orontid dynasty, which included parts of what is now eastern Turkey, began in the 6th century BC. In northwestern Turkey, the most significant tribal group in ancient Thrace was the Odyrisians, founded by Teres I. All of modern-day Turkey was conquered by the Persian Achaemenid Empire during the 6th century BC. The Greco-Persian Wars started when the Greek city-states on the coast of Anatolia rebelled against Persian rule in 499 BC. Queen Artemisia I of Halicarnassus, which was then within the Achaemenid satrapy of Caria, fought as an ally of Xerxes I, King of Persia, against the independent Greek city-states during the second Persian invasion of Greece in 480 BC. Anatolia fell to Alexander the Great in 334 BC, which led to increasing cultural homogeneity and Hellenization in the area, which met resistance in some places. Following Alexander's death in 323 BC, Anatolia was subsequently divided into smaller Hellenistic kingdoms, all of which became part of the Roman Republic by the mid-1st century BC. Hellenization accelerated under Roman rule, and by the early centuries of the Christian Era the local Anatolian languages and cultures had become extinct, being largely replaced by ancient Greek language and culture. From the 1st century BC up to the 3rd century AD, large parts of modern-day Turkey were contested between the Romans and neighboring Parthians through the Roman-Parthian Wars. Galatia was an ancient area in the highlands of central Anatolia inhabited by the Celts. The term "Galatians" came to be used by the Greeks for the three Celtic peoples of Anatolia: the Tectosages, the Trocmii, and the Tolistobogii. By the 1st century BC the Celts had become so Hellenized that some Greek writers called them Hellenogalatai. The Kingdom of Pontus was a Hellenistic kingdom, centered in the historical region of Pontus and ruled by the Mithridatic dynasty of Persian origin, which may have been directly related to Darius the Great. The kingdom was proclaimed by Mithridates I in 281 BC and lasted until its conquest by the Romans in 63 BC. Pontus reached its largest extent under Mithridates VI the Great, who conquered Colchis, Cappadocia, Bithynia, and the Greek colonies of the Tauric Chersonesos. After a long struggle with Rome in the Mithridatic Wars, Pontus was defeated. All ancient regions and territories corresponding to modern Turkey eventually became part of the Roman Empire, and many of them retained their historic names in classical antiquity as Roman provinces. According to the Acts of Apostles, Antioch (now Antakya), a city in southern Turkey, is where the followers of Jesus were first called "Christians". The city quickly became an important center of Christianity. The Apostle Paul of Tarsus traveled to Ephesus and stayed there, probably working as a tentmaker. He is claimed to have performed miracles and organized missionary activity in other regions. Paul left Ephesus after an attack from a local silversmith resulted in a pro-Artemis riot. According to extrabiblical traditions, the Assumption of Mary took place in Ephesus, where Apostle John was also present. Irenaeus writes of "the church of Ephesus, founded by Paul, with John continuing with them until the times of Trajan." While in Ephesus, Apostle John wrote the three epistles attributed to him. The Basilica of St. John near Ephesus, built by Justinian the Great in the 6th century, marks the burial site of Apostle John, while the nearby House of the Virgin Mary is accepted by the Catholic church as the place where Mary, mother of Jesus, lived the final days of her life before her Assumption. Saint Nicholas, born in Patara, lived in nearby Myra (modern Demre) in Lycia. In 123, Roman emperor Hadrian traveled to Anatolia. Numerous monuments were erected for his arrival, and he met his lover Antinous from Bithynia. Hadrian focused on the Greek revival and built several temples and improved the cities. Cyzicus, Pergamon, Smyrna, Ephesus and Sardes were promoted as regional centres for the Imperial cult during this period. After defeating Licinius (the senior co-emperor (augustus) of the East in Nicomedia) at the Battle of Chrysopolis (Üsküdar) in 324 (thus bringing an end to the Tetrarchy system and becoming the sole emperor), Constantine the Great chose the nearby city of Byzantium as the new capital of the Roman Empire and started rebuilding and expanding the city. In 330 he officially proclaimed it as the new Roman capital with the name New Rome (Nova Roma) but soon afterwards renamed it Constantinople (Constantinopolis, modern Istanbul). Under Constantine, Christianity did not become the official religion of the state, but Christianity enjoyed imperial preference since he supported it with generous privileges. Theodosius the Great made Christianity the official state religion of the Roman Empire with the Edict of Thessalonica in 380. Following the death of Theodosius in 395 and the permanent division of the Roman Empire between his two sons, Constantinople became the capital of the Eastern Roman Empire. This empire, which would later be branded by historians as the Byzantine Empire, ruled most of the territory of present-day Turkey until the Late Middle Ages; although the eastern regions remained firmly in Sasanian hands until the 7th century. The frequent Byzantine-Sassanid Wars, a continuation of the centuries-long Roman-Persian Wars, took place between the 4th and 7th centuries. Several ecumenical councils of the early Church were held in cities located in present-day Turkey, including the First Council of Nicaea (Iznik) in 325 (which resulted in the first uniform Christian doctrine, called the Nicene Creed), the First Council of Constantinople in 381, the Council of Ephesus in 431, and the Council of Chalcedon in 451. During most of its existence, the Byzantine Empire was one of the most powerful economic, cultural, and military forces in Europe. Established in the Roman period, the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople is the oldest continuously active institution in Istanbul. According to historians and linguists, the Proto-Turkic language originated in Central-East Asia. Initially, Proto-Turkic speakers were potentially both hunter-gatherers and farmers; they later became nomadic pastoralists. Early and medieval Turkic groups exhibited a wide range of both East Asian and West-Eurasian physical appearances and genetic origins, in part through long-term contact with neighboring peoples such as Iranic, Mongolic, Tocharian, Uralic, and Yeniseian peoples. During the 9th and 10th centuries CE, the Oghuz were a Turkic group that lived in the Caspian and Aral steppes. Partly due to pressure from the Kipchaks, the Oghuz migrated into Iran and Transoxiana. They mixed with Iranic-speaking groups in the area and converted to Islam. Oghuz Turks were also known as Turkoman. The Seljuks originated from the Kınık branch of the Oghuz Turks who resided in the Yabgu Khaganate. In 1040, the Seljuks defeated the Ghaznavids at the Battle of Dandanaqan and established the Seljuk Empire in Greater Khorasan. Baghdad, the Abbasid Caliphate's capital and center of the Islamic world, was taken by Seljuks in 1055. Given the role Khurasani traditions played in art, culture, and political traditions in the empire, the Seljuk period is described as a mixture of "Turkish, Persian and Islamic influences". In the latter half of the 11th century, the Seljuk Turks began penetrating into medieval Armenia and Anatolia. At the time, Anatolia was a diverse and largely Greek-speaking region after previously being Hellenized. The Seljuk Turks defeated the Byzantines at the Battle of Manzikert in 1071, and later established the Seljuk Sultanate of Rum. During this period, there were also Turkish principalities such as Danishmendids. Seljuk arrival started the Turkification process in Anatolia; there were Turkic/Turkish migrations, intermarriages, and conversions into Islam. The shift took several centuries and happened gradually. Members of Islamic mysticism orders, such as Mevlevi Order, played a role in the Islamization of the diverse people of Anatolia. In 13th century, there was a second significant wave of Turkic migration, as people fled Mongol expansion. Seljuk sultanate was defeated by the Mongols at the Battle of Köse Dağ in 1243 and disappeared by the beginning of the 14th century. It was replaced by various Turkish principalities. Based around Söğüt, Ottoman Beylik was founded by Osman I in the early 14th century. According to Ottoman chroniclers, Osman descended from the Kayı tribe of the Oghuz Turks. Ottomans started annexing the nearby Turkish beyliks (principalities) in Anatolia and expanded into the Balkans. Mehmed II completed Ottoman conquest of the Byzantine Empire by capturing its capital, Constantinople, on 29 May 1453. Selim I united Anatolia under Ottoman rule. Turkification continued as Ottomans mixed with various indigenous people in Anatolia and the Balkans. The Ottoman Empire was a global power during the reigns of Selim I and Suleiman the Magnificent. In the 16th and 17th centuries, Sephardic Jews moved into Ottoman Empire following their expulsion from Spain. From the second half of the 18th century onwards, the Ottoman Empire began to decline. The Tanzimat reforms, initiated by Mahmud II in 1839, aimed to modernize the Ottoman state in line with the progress that had been made in Western Europe. The efforts of Midhat Pasha during the late Tanzimat era led the Ottoman constitutional movement of 1876, which introduced the First Constitutional Era, but these efforts proved to be inadequate in most fields, and failed to stop the dissolution of the empire. As the empire gradually shrank in size, military power and wealth; especially after the Ottoman economic crisis and default in 1875 which led to uprisings in the Balkan provinces that culminated in the Russo-Turkish War (1877–1878); many Balkan Muslims migrated to the empire's heartland in Anatolia, along with the Circassians fleeing the Russian conquest of the Caucasus. According to some estimates, 800,000 Muslim Circassians died during the Circassian genocide in the territory of present-day Russia, the survivors of which sought refuge in the Ottoman Empire, mostly settling in the provinces of present-day Turkey. The decline of the Ottoman Empire led to a rise in nationalist sentiment among its various subject peoples, leading to increased ethnic tensions which occasionally burst into violence, such as the Hamidian massacres of Armenians, which claimed up to 300,000 lives. Ottoman territories in Europe (Rumelia) were lost in the First Balkan War (1912–1913). Ottomans managed to recover some territory in Europe, such as Edirne, in the Second Balkan War (1913). In the 19th and early 20th centuries, persecution of Muslims during the Ottoman contraction and in the Russian Empire resulted in estimated 5 million deaths, with more than 3 million in Balkans; the casualties included Turks. Five to seven or seven to nine million refugees migrated into modern-day Turkey from the Balkans, Caucasus, Crimea, and Mediterranean islands, shifting the center of the Ottoman Empire to Anatolia. In addition to a small number of Jews, the refugees were overwhelmingly Muslim; they were both Turkish and non-Turkish people, such as Circassians and Crimean Tatars. Paul Mojzes has called the Balkan Wars an "unrecognized genocide", where multiple sides were both victims and perpetrators. Following the 1913 coup d'état, the Three Pashas took control of the Ottoman government. The Ottoman Empire entered World War I on the side of the Central Powers and was ultimately defeated. During the war, the empire's Armenian subjects were deported to Syria as part of the Armenian genocide. As a result, an estimated 600,000 to more than 1 million, or up to 1.5 million Armenians were killed. The Turkish government has refused to acknowledge the events as genocide and states that Armenians were only "relocated" from the eastern war zone. Genocidal campaigns were also committed against the empire's other minority groups such as the Assyrians and Greeks. Following the Armistice of Mudros in 1918, the victorious Allied Powers sought the partition of the Ottoman Empire through the 1920 Treaty of Sèvres. The occupation of Istanbul (1918) and İzmir (1919) by the Allies in the aftermath of World War I initiated the Turkish National Movement. Under the leadership of Mustafa Kemal Pasha, a military commander who had distinguished himself during the Battle of Gallipoli, the Turkish War of Independence (1919–1923) was waged with the aim of revoking the terms of the Treaty of Sèvres (1920). The Turkish Provisional Government in Ankara, which had declared itself the legitimate government of the country on 23 April 1920, started to formalize the legal transition from the old Ottoman into the new Republican political system. The Ankara Government engaged in armed and diplomatic struggle. In 1921–1923, the Armenian, Greek, French, and British armies had been expelled: The military advance and diplomatic success of the Ankara Government resulted in the signing of the Armistice of Mudanya on 11 October 1922. The handling of the Chanak Crisis (September–October 1922) between the United Kingdom and the Ankara Government caused the collapse of David Lloyd George's Ministry on 19 October 1922 and political autonomy of Canada from the UK. On 1 November 1922, the Turkish Parliament in Ankara formally abolished the Sultanate, thus ending 623 years of monarchical Ottoman rule. The Treaty of Lausanne of 24 July 1923, which superseded the Treaty of Sèvres, led to the international recognition of the sovereignty of the new Turkish state as the successor state of the Ottoman Empire. On 4 October 1923, the Allied occupation of Turkey ended with the withdrawal of the last Allied troops from Istanbul. The Turkish Republic was officially proclaimed on 29 October 1923 in Ankara, the country's new capital. The Lausanne Convention stipulated a population exchange between Greece and Turkey. Mustafa Kemal became the republic's first president and introduced many reforms. The reforms aimed to transform the old religion-based and multi-communal Ottoman monarchy into a Turkish nation state that would be governed as a parliamentary republic under a secular constitution. With the Surname Law of 1934, the Turkish Parliament bestowed upon Kemal the honorific surname "Atatürk" (Father Turk). Atatürk's reforms caused discontent in some Kurdish and Zaza tribes leading to the Sheikh Said rebellion in 1925 and the Dersim rebellion in 1937. İsmet İnönü became the country's second president following Atatürk's death in 1938. In 1939, the Republic of Hatay voted in favor of joining Turkey with a referendum. Turkey remained neutral during most of World War II but entered the war on the side of the Allies on 23 February 1945. Later that year, Turkey became a charter member of the United Nations. In 1950 Turkey became a member of the Council of Europe. After fighting as part of the UN forces in the Korean War, Turkey joined NATO in 1952, becoming a bulwark against Soviet expansion into the Mediterranean. The country's transition to multi-party democracy was interrupted by military coups in 1960 and 1980, as well as by military memorandums in 1971 and 1997. Between 1960 and the end of the 20th century, the prominent leaders in Turkish politics who achieved multiple election victories were Süleyman Demirel, Bülent Ecevit and Turgut Özal. Tansu Çiller became the first female prime minister of Turkey in 1993. Turkey applied for full membership of the EEC in 1987, joined the European Union Customs Union in 1995 and started accession negotiations with the European Union in 2005. In a non-binding vote on 13 March 2019, the European Parliament called on the EU governments to suspend EU accession talks with Turkey, citing violations of human rights and the rule of law; but the negotiations, effectively on hold since 2018, remain active as of 2023. In 2014, prime minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan won Turkey's first direct presidential election. On 15 July 2016, an unsuccessful coup attempt tried to oust the government. With a referendum in 2017, the parliamentary republic was replaced by an executive presidential system. The office of the prime minister was abolished, and its powers and duties were transferred to the president. On the referendum day, while the voting was still underway, the Supreme Electoral Council lifted a rule that required each ballot to have an official stamp. The opposition parties claimed that as many as 2.5 million ballots without a stamp were accepted as valid. Turkey has a unitary structure in terms of public administration, and the provinces are subordinate to the central government in Ankara. In province centers the government is represented by the province governors (vali) and in towns by the governors (kaymakam). Other senior public officials are also appointed by the central government, except for the mayors (belediye başkanı) who are elected by the constituents. Turkish municipalities have local legislative bodies (belediye meclisi) for decision-making on municipal issues. Turkey is subdivided into 81 provinces (il or vilayet) for administrative purposes. Each province is divided into districts (ilçe), for a total of 973 districts. Turkey is also subdivided into 7 regions (bölge) and 21 subregions for geographic, demographic and economic measurements, surveys and classifications; this does not refer to an administrative division. Ankara Kırklareli Edirne Tekirdağ Çanakkale Balıkesir Bursa Yalova Istanbul Kocaeli Sakarya Düzce Zonguldak Bolu Bilecik Eskişehir Kütahya Manisa İzmir Aydın Muğla Denizli Burdur Uşak Afyonkarahisar Isparta Antalya Konya Mersin Karaman Aksaray Kırşehir Kırıkkale Çankırı Karabük Bartın Kastamonu Sinop Çorum Yozgat Nevşehir Niğde Adana Hatay Osmaniye K. Maraş Kayseri Sivas Tokat Amasya Samsun Ordu Giresun Erzincan Malatya Gaziantep Kilis Şanlıurfa Adıyaman Gümüşhane Trabzon Rize Bayburt Erzurum Artvin Ardahan Kars Ağrı Iğdır Tunceli Elazığ Diyarbakır Mardin Batman Siirt Şırnak Bitlis Bingöl Muş Van Hakkâri Turkey is a presidential republic within a multi-party system. The current constitution was approved by referendum in 1982, which determines the government's structure, lays forth the ideals and standards of the state's conduct, and sets out the state's responsibility to its citizens. Furthermore, the constitution specifies the people's rights and obligations, as well as principles for the delegation and exercise of sovereignty that belongs to the people of Turkey. Turkish politics have become increasingly associated with democratic backsliding, being described as a competitive authoritarian system. In the Turkish unitary system, citizens are subject to three levels of government: national, provincial, and local. The local government's duties are commonly split between municipal governments and districts, in which the executive and legislative officials are elected by a plurality vote of citizens by district. The government comprises three branches: Legislative: The unicameral Parliament makes laws, debates and adopts the budget bills, declares war, approves treaties, proclaims amnesty and pardon, and has the power of impeachment, by which it can remove incumbent members of the government. Executive: The president is the commander-in-chief of the military, can veto legislative bills before they become law (subject to parliamentary override), can issue presidential decrees on matters regarding executive power with the exception of fundamental rights, individual rights and certain political rights (parliamentary laws prevail presidential decrees), and appoints the members of the Cabinet and other officers, who administer and enforce national laws and policies. Judicial: The Constitutional Court (for constitutional adjudication and review of individual applications concerning human rights), the Court of Cassation (final decision maker in ordinary judiciary), the Council of State (final decision maker in administrative judiciary) and the Court of Jurisdictional Disputes (for resolving the disputes between courts for constitutional jurisdiction[clarification needed]) are the four organizations that are described by the constitution as supreme courts. The judges of the Constitutional Court are appointed by the president and the parliament. The Parliament has 600 voting members, each representing a constituency for a five-year term. Parliamentary seats are distributed among the provinces by population, conforming with the census apportionment. The president is elected by direct vote and serves a five-year term. The president cannot run for re-election after two terms of five-years, unless the parliament prematurely renews the presidential elections during the second term. Elections for the Parliament and presidential elections are held on the same day. The Constitutional Court is composed of 15 members. A member is elected for a term of 12 years and cannot be re-elected. The members of the Constitutional Court are obliged to retire when they are over the age of 65. Elections in Turkey are held for six functions of government: presidential elections (national), parliamentary elections (national), municipality mayors (local), district mayors (local), provincial or municipal council members (local) and muhtars (local). Apart from elections, referendums are also held occasionally. Every Turkish citizen who has turned 18 has the right to vote and stand as a candidate at elections. Universal suffrage for both sexes has been applied throughout Turkey since 1934 and before most countries. In Turkey, turnout rates of both local and general elections are high compared to many other countries, which usually stands higher than 80%. There are 600 members of parliament who are elected for a five-year term by a party-list proportional representation system from 88 electoral districts. The Constitutional Court can strip the public financing of political parties that it deems anti-secular or having ties to terrorism, or ban their existence altogether. The Interior Ministry can block new parties from elections even if a court rules in favour of the party. The electoral threshold for political parties at national level is seven percent of the votes. Smaller parties can avoid the electoral threshold by forming an alliance with other parties. Independent candidates are not subject to an electoral threshold. After World War II, starting from 1946, Turkey operated under a multi-party system. On the right side of the Turkish political spectrum, parties like the Democrat Party, Justice Party, Motherland Party, and Justice and Development Party became the most popular political parties in Turkey, winning numerous elections. Turkish right-wing parties are more likely to embrace the principles of political ideologies such as conservatism, nationalism or Islamism. On the left side of the spectrum, parties like the Republican People's Party, Social Democratic Populist Party and Democratic Left Party once enjoyed the largest electoral success. Left-wing parties are more likely to embrace the principles of socialism, Kemalism or secularism. President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, winner of the 2023 presidential election, is currently serving as the head of state and head of government. Özgür Özel is the Main Opposition Leader. Numan Kurtulmuş is the Speaker of the Grand National Assembly. The 2023 parliamentary election resulted in the 28th Parliament of Turkey, which had an initial composition of 268 seats for the Justice and Development Party, 169 seats for the Republican People's Party, 61 seats for the Party of Greens and the Left Future, 50 seats for the Nationalist Movement Party, 43 seats for the Good Party, 5 seats for the New Welfare Party and 4 seats for the Workers' Party of Turkey. The next parliamentary election is scheduled to take place in 2028. With the founding of the Republic, Turkey adopted a civil law legal system, replacing Sharia-derived Ottoman law. The Civil Code, adopted in 1926, was based on the Swiss Civil Code of 1907 and the Swiss Code of Obligations of 1911. Although it underwent a number of changes in 2002, it retains much of the basis of the original Code. The Criminal Code, originally based on the Italian Criminal Code, was replaced in 2005 by a Code with principles similar to the German Penal Code and German law generally. Administrative law is based on the French equivalent and procedural law generally shows the influence of the Swiss, German and French legal systems. Islamic principles do not play a part in the legal system. Law enforcement in Turkey is carried out by several agencies under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Internal Affairs. These agencies are the General Directorate of Security, the Gendarmerie General Command and the Coast Guard Command.[citation needed] In the years of government by the Justice and Development Party and Erdoğan, particularly since 2013, the independence and integrity of the Turkish judiciary has increasingly been said to be in doubt by institutions, parliamentarians and journalists both within and outside of Turkey, because of political interference in the promotion of judges and prosecutors and in their pursuit of public duty. In line with its traditional Western orientation, relations with Europe have always been a central part of Turkish foreign policy. Turkey became one of the early members of the Council of Europe in 1950, applied for associate membership of the EEC (predecessor of the European Union) in 1959 and became an associate member in 1963. After decades of political negotiations, Turkey applied for full membership of the EEC in 1987, became an associate member of the Western European Union in 1992, joined the EU Customs Union in 1995 and has been in formal accession negotiations with the European Union since 2005. Turkey's support for Northern Cyprus in the Cyprus dispute and refusal to include the Republic of Cyprus to the EU-Turkey Customs Union agreement complicates its relations with the European Union and remains a major stumbling block to the country's EU accession bid. The other defining aspect of Turkey's foreign policy has been the country's long-standing strategic alliance with the United States. The Truman Doctrine in 1947 enunciated American intentions to guarantee the security of Turkey and Greece during the Cold War, and resulted in large-scale U.S. military and economic support. In 1948 both countries were included in the Marshall Plan and the OEEC for rebuilding European economies. The common threat posed by the Soviet Union during the Cold War led to Turkey's membership of NATO in 1952, ensuring close bilateral relations with the US. Subsequently, Turkey benefited from the United States' political, economic and diplomatic support, including in key issues such as the country's bid to join the European Union. In the post–Cold War environment, Turkey's geostrategic importance shifted towards its proximity to the Middle East, the Caucasus and the Balkans. The independence of the Turkic states of the Soviet Union in 1991, with which Turkey shares a common cultural, historic and linguistic heritage, allowed Turkey to extend its economic and political relations deep into Central Asia. The International Organization of Turkic Culture (TURKSOY) was established in 1993, and the Organization of Turkic States (OTS) was established in 2009. Under the AKP government, Turkey's economy has grown rapidly and the country's influence has grown in the Middle East based on a strategic depth doctrine, also called Neo-Ottomanism. Following the Arab Spring in December 2010, the choices made by the government for supporting certain political opposition groups in the affected countries have led to tensions with some Arab states, such as Turkey's neighbor Syria since the start of the Syrian civil war, and Egypt after the ousting of President Mohamed Morsi. As of 2022[update], Turkey does not have an ambassador in either Syria or Egypt, but relations with both countries have started to improve.[excessive citations] Diplomatic relations with Israel were also severed after the Gaza flotilla raid in 2010 but were normalized following a deal in June 2016. These political rifts have left Turkey with few allies in the East Mediterranean, where large natural gas fields have recently been discovered. There is a dispute over Turkey's maritime boundaries with Greece and Cyprus and drilling rights in the eastern Mediterranean. After the rapprochement with Russia in 2016, Turkey revised its stance regarding the solution of the conflict in Syria. In January 2018, the Turkish military and the Turkish-backed forces, including the Syrian National Army, began an operation in Syria aimed at ousting U.S.-backed YPG (which Turkey considers to be an offshoot of the outlawed PKK) from the enclave of Afrin. Turkey has also conducted airstrikes in Iraqi Kurdistan which have strained Turkey-Iraq relations as the latter has criticised the strikes for violating its sovereignty and killing civilians,. The Turkish Armed Forces consist of the General Staff, the Land Forces, the Naval Forces and the Air Force. The Chief of the General Staff is appointed by the president. The president is responsible to the Parliament for matters of national security and the adequate preparation of the armed forces to defend the country. However, the authority to declare war and to deploy the Turkish Armed Forces to foreign countries or to allow foreign armed forces to be stationed in Turkey rests solely with the Parliament. The Gendarmerie General Command and the Coast Guard Command are under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of the Interior. In wartime, the president can order certain units of the Gendarmerie General Command and the Coast Guard Command to operate under the Land Forces Command and Naval Forces Commands respectively. The remaining parts of the Gendarmerie and the Coast Guard continue to carry out their law enforcement missions under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Interior. Every fit male Turkish citizen otherwise not barred is required to serve in the military for a period ranging from three weeks to a year, dependent on education and job location. Turkey does not recognize conscientious objection and does not offer a civilian alternative to military service. Turkey has the second-largest standing military force in NATO, after the United States, with an estimated strength of 890,700 military personnel as of February 2022. Turkey is one of five NATO member states which are part of the nuclear sharing policy of the alliance, together with Belgium, Germany, Italy, and the Netherlands. A total of 90 B61 nuclear bombs are hosted at the Incirlik Air Base, 40 of which are allocated for use by the Turkish Air Force in case of a nuclear conflict, but their use requires the approval of NATO. The Turkish Armed Forces have a relatively substantial military presence abroad, with military bases in Albania, Iraq, Qatar, and Somalia. The country also maintains a force of 36,000 troops in Northern Cyprus since 1974. Turkey has participated in international missions under the United Nations and NATO since the Korean War, including peacekeeping missions in Somalia, Yugoslavia and the Horn of Africa. It supported coalition forces in the First Gulf War, contributed military personnel to the International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan, and remains active in Kosovo Force, Eurocorps and EU Battlegroups. In recent years, Turkey has assisted Peshmerga forces in northern Iraq and the Somali Armed Forces with security and training. The human rights record of Turkey has been the subject of much controversy and international condemnation. Between 1959 and 2011 the European Court of Human Rights made more than 2,400 judgements against Turkey for human rights violations on issues such as Kurdish rights, women's rights, LGBT rights, and media freedom. Turkey's human rights record continues to be a significant obstacle to the country's membership of the EU. In the latter half of the 1970s, Turkey suffered from political violence between far-left and far-right militant groups, which culminated in the military coup of 1980. The Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK, designated a terrorist organization by Turkey, the United States, and the European Union) was founded in 1978 by a group of Kurdish militants led by Abdullah Öcalan, seeking the foundation of an independent Kurdish state based on Marxist–Leninist ideology. The initial reason given by the PKK for this was the oppression of Kurds in Turkey. A full-scale insurgency began in 1984, when the PKK announced a Kurdish uprising. With time the PKK modified its demands into equal rights for ethnic Kurds and provincial autonomy within Turkey. Since 1980, the Turkish parliament stripped its members of immunity from prosecution, including 44 deputies most of which from the pro-Kurdish parties. In 2013, widespread protests erupted, sparked by a plan to demolish Gezi Park but soon growing into general anti-government dissent. On 20 May 2016, the Turkish parliament stripped almost a quarter of its members of immunity from prosecution, including 101 deputies from the pro-Kurdish HDP and the main opposition CHP party. By 2020, under the pretext of responding to a failed coup attempt in 2016, authorities had arrested or imprisoned more than 90,000 Turkish citizens. According to the Committee to Protect Journalists, the AKP government has waged crackdowns on media freedom. Many journalists have been arrested using charges of "terrorism" and "anti-state activities". In 2020, the CPJ identified 18 jailed journalists in Turkey (including the editorial staff of Cumhuriyet, Turkey's oldest newspaper still in circulation). Homosexual activity has been decriminalized in Turkey since 1858. LGBT people have had the right to seek asylum in Turkey under the Geneva Convention since 1951. However, LGBT people in Turkey face discrimination, harassment and even violence. The Turkish authorities have carried out many discriminatory practices. Despite these, LGBT acceptance in Turkey is growing. In a survey conducted in 2016, 33% of respondents said that LGBT people should have equal rights, which increased to 45% in 2020. Another survey in 2018 found that the proportion of people who would not want a homosexual neighbor decreased from 55% in 2018 to 47% in 2019. A 2015 poll found that 27% of the Turkish public was in favor of legalizing same-sex marriage and 19% supported civil unions instead. When the annual Istanbul Pride was inaugurated in 2003, Turkey became the first Muslim-majority country to hold a gay pride march. Since 2015, parades at Taksim Square and İstiklal Avenue (where the Gezi Park protests took place) have been denied government permission, citing security concerns, but hundreds of people have defied the ban each year. Critics have claimed that the bans were in fact ideological. Turkey bridges Southeastern Europe and Western Asia. Asian Turkey, which includes 97% of the country's territory, is separated from European Turkey by the Bosphorus, the Sea of Marmara, and the Dardanelles. European Turkey comprises 3% of the country's territory. Turkey covers an area of 783,562 square kilometres (302,535 square miles), of which 755,688 square kilometres (291,773 square miles) is in Asia and 23,764 square kilometres (9,175 square miles) is in Europe. The country is encircled by seas on three sides: the Aegean Sea to the west, the Black Sea to the north and the Mediterranean Sea to the south. Turkey also contains the Sea of Marmara in the northwest. The geographical centre of all land surfaces on Earth is at 39°00′N 34°00′E﻿ / ﻿39.000°N 34.000°E﻿ / 39.000; 34.000﻿ (Geographical center of all land surfaces on Earth (Woods 1973)), in Kırşehir Province. Turkey is divided into seven geographical regions: Marmara, Aegean, Black Sea, Central Anatolia, Eastern Anatolia, Southeastern Anatolia and the Mediterranean. The uneven north Anatolian terrain running along the Black Sea resembles a long, narrow belt. This region comprises approximately one-sixth of Turkey's total land area. As a general trend, the inland Anatolian Plateau becomes increasingly rugged as it progresses eastward.Pamukkale terraces are made of travertine, a sedimentary rock deposited by mineral water from hot springs. The area is famous for a carbonate mineral left by the flowing of thermal spring water. It was added as a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1988 along with Hierapolis. East Thrace, the European portion of Turkey, is located at the easternmost edge of the Balkans. It forms the border between Turkey and its neighbors Greece and Bulgaria. The Asian part of the country mostly consists of the peninsula of Anatolia, which consists of a high central plateau with narrow coastal plains, between the Köroğlu and Pontic mountain ranges to the north and the Taurus Mountains to the south. Most of Turkey is vulnerable to earthquakes. The Eastern Anatolia Region mostly corresponds to the western part of the Armenian highlands (the plateau situated between the Anatolian Plateau in the west and the Lesser Caucasus in the north) and contains Mount Ararat, Turkey's highest point at 5,137 metres (16,854 feet), and Lake Van, the largest lake in the country. Eastern Turkey has a mountainous landscape and is home to the sources of rivers such as the Euphrates, Tigris and Aras. The Southeastern Anatolia Region includes the northern plains of Upper Mesopotamia. The Lakes Region contains some of the largest lakes in Turkey, such as Lake Beyşehir, Lake Eğirdir, Lake Burdur, Lake Akşehir, Lake Eber and Lake Işıklı. Lake Tuz, Lake Akdoğan, Lake Nemrut, Lake Çıldır, Lake İznik, Lake Uluabat, Lake Manyas, Lake Sapanca, Lake Salda, Lake Meke and Lake Uzungöl are among other renowned lakes in Turkey. The rocks along the shoreline of Lake Salda were formed over time by microbes; these so-called microbialites provide some of the oldest known fossilized records of life. Studying these microbial fossils from Lake Salda has helped scientists prepare for NASA's Mars 2020 mission. In 2021, NASA reported that its Mars surface-exploring rover Perseverance showed that "the minerals and rock deposits at Lake Salda are the nearest match on Earth to those around the Jezero Crater where the spacecraft landed." Turkey's position at the crossroads of the land, sea and air routes between the three Old World continents and the variety of the habitats across its geographical regions have produced considerable species diversity and a vibrant ecosystem. Anatolia is the homeland of many plants that have been cultivated for food, and the wild ancestors of many plants that now provide staples for humankind still grow in Turkey. The diversity of fauna is even greater than that of its flora. The number of animal species in the whole of Europe is around 60,000, while in Turkey there are over 80,000 animal species. The Northern Anatolian conifer and deciduous forests is an ecoregion which covers most of the Pontic Mountains in northern Turkey, while the Caucasus mixed forests extend across the eastern end of the range. The region is home to Eurasian wildlife such as the Eurasian sparrowhawk, golden eagle, eastern imperial eagle, lesser spotted eagle, Caucasian black grouse, red-fronted serin, and wallcreeper. The narrow coastal strip between the Pontic Mountains and the Black Sea is home to the Euxine-Colchic deciduous forests, which contain some of the world's few temperate rainforests. The Turkish pine (Pinus brutia) is mostly found in Turkey and other east Mediterranean countries. The forests of Turkey are home to the Turkey oak. The most commonly found species of the genus Platanus (plane) is the orientalis. Several wild species of tulip are native to Anatolia, and the flower was first introduced to Western Europe with species taken from the Ottoman Empire in the 16th century. There are 40 national parks, 189 nature parks, 31 nature preserve areas, 80 wildlife protection areas and 109 nature monuments in Turkey such as Gallipoli Peninsula Historical National Park, Mount Nemrut National Park, Ancient Troy National Park, Ölüdeniz Nature Park and Polonezköy Nature Park. In the 21st century, threats to biodiversity include desertification from climate change in Turkey. The Anatolian leopard is still found in very small numbers in the northeastern and southeastern regions of Turkey. The Eurasian lynx, the European wildcat and the caracal are other felid species which are found in the forests of Turkey. The Caspian tiger, now extinct, lived in the easternmost regions of Turkey until the latter half of the 20th century. Renowned domestic animals from Ankara include the Angora cat, Angora rabbit and Angora goat; and from Van Province the Van cat. The national dog breeds are the Kangal (Anatolian Shepherd), Malaklı and Akbaş. The coastal areas of Turkey bordering the Aegean and Mediterranean Seas have a temperate Mediterranean climate, with hot, dry summers and mild to cool, wet winters. The coastal areas bordering the Black Sea have a temperate oceanic climate with warm, wet summers and cool to cold, wet winters. The Turkish Black Sea coast receives the most precipitation and is the only region of Turkey that receives high precipitation throughout the year. The eastern part of the Black Sea coast averages 2,200 millimetres (87 in) annually which is the highest precipitation in the country. The coastal areas bordering the Sea of Marmara, which connects the Aegean Sea and the Black Sea, have a transitional climate between a temperate Mediterranean climate and a temperate oceanic climate with warm to hot, moderately dry summers and cool to cold, wet winters. Snow falls on the coastal areas of the Sea of Marmara and the Black Sea almost every winter but usually melts in no more than a few days. However, snow is rare in the coastal areas of the Aegean Sea and very rare in the coastal areas of the Mediterranean Sea. Winters on the Anatolian plateau are especially severe. Temperatures of −30 to −40 °C (−22 to −40 °F) do occur in northeastern Anatolia, and snow may lie on the ground for at least 120 days of the year, and during the entire year on the summits of the highest mountains. In central Anatolia the temperatures can drop below −20 °C (−4 °F) with the mountains being even colder. Mountains close to the coast prevent Mediterranean influences from extending inland, giving the central Anatolian Plateau a continental climate with sharply contrasting seasons. Because of a combination of socioeconomic, population exposure, and climate factors, Turkey is highly vulnerable to climate change. Turkey is a founding member of the OECD and G20, and is classified among the E7 countries and EAGLEs. It is a newly industrialized country with an upper-middle income economy, which is the 17th-largest in the world by nominal GDP, and the 11th-largest by PPP. According to IMF estimates, Turkey's GDP per capita by PPP is $41,412 in 2023, while its nominal GDP per capita is $11,932. Approximately 11.7% of Turks were at risk of poverty or social exclusion as of 2019. Unemployment in Turkey was 12% in 2021. According to the World Bank, the middle class population in Turkey rose from 18% to 41% of the total population between 1993 and 2010. As of October 2021[update], the foreign currency deposits of the citizens and residents in Turkish banks stood at $234 billion, equivalent to around half of all deposits. As of March 2023[update], the foreign currency reserves of the Turkish Central Bank were $62.6 billion (a 2.3% increase compared to the previous month), its gold reserves were $52.2 billion (a 7.2% increase compared to the previous month), while its official reserve assets stood at $122.4 billion (a 4.3% increase compared to the previous month). The EU–Turkey Customs Union in 1995 led to an extensive liberalization of tariff rates, and forms one of the most important pillars of Turkey's foreign trade policy. Foreign direct investment in Turkey peaked at $22.05 billion in 2007 and dropped to $13.22 billion in 2021. The automotive industry in Turkey is sizeable, and produced 1,352,648 motor vehicles in 2022, ranking as the 13th largest producer in the world. Turkish automotive companies like TEMSA, Otokar and BMC are among the world's largest van, bus and truck manufacturers. Togg, or Turkey's Automobile Joint Venture Group Inc., is the first all-electric vehicle company of Turkey. Turkish shipyards are highly regarded both for the production of chemical and oil tankers up to 10,000 dwt and also for their mega yachts. Turkish brands like Beko and Vestel are among the largest producers of consumer electronics and home appliances in Europe, and invest a substantial amount of funds for research and development in new technologies related to these fields. Other key sectors of the Turkish economy are banking, construction, home appliances, electronics, textiles, oil refining, petrochemical products, food, mining, iron and steel, and machine industry. According to a Turkish Statistical Institute survey in 2021, which used the available data for 2020, it was estimated that 47% of total disposable income was received by the top 20% of income earners, while the lowest 20% received only 6%. Subsidies which are harmful to health in Turkey include those on sugar and coal. Tourism has increased almost every year in the 21st century and is an important part of the economy. The Ministry of Culture and Tourism currently promotes tourism under the project Turkey Home. Turkey is one of the world's top five destination countries, with the highest percentage of foreign visitors arriving from Europe; specially Germany and Russia in recent years. In 2022, Turkey ranked fourth in the world in terms of the number of international tourist arrivals with 50.5 million foreign tourists. Turkey has 21 UNESCO World Heritage Sites and 84 World Heritage Sites in tentative list. Turkey is home to 519 Blue Flag beaches, third most in the world. According to Euromonitor International report, Istanbul is the most visited city in the world, with more than 20.2 million foreign visitors in 2023. Also Antalya has surpassed Paris and New York to become the fourth most visited city in the world, with more than 16.5 million foreign visitors. In 2013 there were 98 airports, including 22 international airports. Istanbul Airport is planned to be the largest airport in the world, with a capacity to serve 150 million passengers per year. Turkish Airlines uses Istanbul Airport, which has a current annual capacity of serving 90 million passengers, as its main hub and several other airlines operate in the country. Turkish Airlines has scheduled services to 315 destinations in 129 countries, making it the largest mainline carrier in the world by number of countries served. The motorway network spans 3,633 kilometres (2,257 mi) as of 2023, with an expected expansion to 9,312 kilometres (5,786 miles) by 2035. Istanbul Metro is the largest metro network in the country with 495 million annual ridership. Opened in 2013, the Marmaray tunnel under the Bosphorus connects the railway and metro lines of Istanbul's European and Asian sides; while the nearby Eurasia Tunnel provides an undersea road connection for motor vehicles. The Bosphorus Bridge, Fatih Sultan Mehmet Bridge, and Yavuz Sultan Selim Bridge (2016) are the three suspension bridges connecting the European and Asian shores of the Bosphorus strait in Istanbul. The Çanakkale 1915 Bridge on the Dardanelles strait, connecting Europe and Asia, is the longest suspension bridge in the world. The Osman Gazi Bridge connects the northern and southern shores of the Gulf of İzmit. Turkish State Railways operates both conventional and high speed trains on 12,532 kilometres rail length. The government-owned national railway company started building high-speed rail lines in 2003. The Ankara-Konya line became operational in 2011, while the Ankara-Istanbul line entered service in 2014. Konya-Karaman line started its operations in 2022 and 406 km (252 mi) long Ankara-Sivas line opened in 2023. Much energy in Turkey comes from Russia. As of 2018[update] Turkey consumes 1,700 terawatt hours of primary energy per year, a little over 20 megawatt hours per person, mostly from imported fossil fuels. Although the energy policy includes reducing fossil-fuel imports, coal in Turkey is the largest single reason why greenhouse gas emissions by Turkey amount to 1% of the global total. Renewable energy in Turkey is being increased and the Akkuyu Nuclear Power Plant is being built on the Mediterranean coast. However, despite the overcapacity in national electricity generation, fossil fuels are still subsidized. In 2019 Turkey had the fourth-highest direct utilization and capacity of geothermal power in the world and produced 43.8% of its electricity from renewable sources. Many natural gas pipelines span the country. Blue Stream, a major trans-Black Sea gas pipeline, delivers natural gas from Russia as does the undersea pipeline TurkStream. The Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan pipeline is the second longest oil pipeline in the world. As of 2022, almost all gas is imported, but production from the Sakarya gas field, a sweet gas field in the Black Sea discovered by TPAO in 2020, began in 2023, with an estimated peak production of 40 bcm in 2026. As of 2022, the total volume of natural gas discovered in the Black Sea amounted to 710 billion cubic metres (bcm). Turkey is among the top 50 most innovative countries in the world, ranking 39th in the Global Innovation Index in 2023; this represents a considerable increase since 2011, where it was ranked 65th. TÜBİTAK is the leading agency for developing science, technology and innovation policies. TÜBA is an autonomous scholarly society acting to promote scientific activities in Turkey. TAEK is the country's official nuclear energy institution, focused on academic research and the development and implementation of peaceful nuclear technology. It is supervising the construction of Turkey's first nuclear facility, Akkuyu Nuclear Power Plant in Mersin, at the cost of $20 billion; the plant became operational in 2023 and is projected to meet around 10% of the country's electricity demand. The government invests heavily in research and development of military technologies, including Turkish Aerospace Industries, Aselsan, HAVELSAN, Roketsan, and MKE. Turkey is a global leader in unmanned aerial vehicles; the Bayraktar TB2, manufactured by private defence company Baykar, has been exported to over a dozen countries and played a decisive role in several conflicts, including the 2020 Nagorno-Karabakh war and the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine. In 2013, Turkey initiated the Turkish Space Launch System to develop an independent satellite launch capability up to an altitude of 550 km (342 mi) with the Roketsan Şimşek-1 rocket by 2027, and the longer range Şimşek-2 by 2028, including the construction of a spaceport, the development of satellite launch vehicles, and the establishment of remote Earth stations. Türksat, the country's sole communications satellite operator, has launched a series of satellites into orbit; likewise, the Turkish Space Systems, Integration and Test Center—a spacecraft production and testing facility owned by the Ministry of National Defence and operated by the TAI—has launched the Göktürk series of Earth observation satellites for reconnaissance; BILSAT-1 and RASAT are the scientific Earth observation satellites operated by the TÜBİTAK Space Technologies Research Institute. Turkish Antarctic Research Station is a planned research station in Antarctica. The plan is to build a permanent base for around 50 people, initially operating only during the summer, and later throughout all the year. In 2015, Aziz Sancar, a Turkish professor at the University of North Carolina, won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for his work on how cells repair damaged DNA; he is one of two Turkish Nobel laureates and the first in the sciences. Other prominent Turkish scientists include physician Hulusi Behçet, who discovered Behçet's disease; mathematician Cahit Arf, who defined the Arf invariant; and immunologists Uğur Şahin and Özlem Türeci, whose German biotechnology company, BioNTech, developed one of the first efficacious vaccines against COVID-19. According to the Address-Based Population Recording System, the country's population was 85,372,377 in 2023, excluding Syrians under temporary protection. 93% lived in province and district centers. In 2023, Turkey had an average population density of 111 people per km2. People within the 15–64 age group constituted 68.3% of the total population; the 0–14 age group corresponded to 21.4%; while senior citizens aged 65 years or older made up 10.2%. Between 1950 and 2020, Turkey's population more than quadrupled from 20.9 million to 83.6 million; however, the population growth rate was 0.1% in 2023. Article 66 of the Turkish Constitution defines a "Turk" as anyone who is a citizen. It is estimated that there are at least 47 ethnic groups represented in Turkey. Reliable data on the ethnic mix of the population is not available because census figures do not include statistics on ethnicity after the 1965 Turkish census. According to the World Factbook, 70-75% of the country's citizens are ethnic Turks. Based on a survey, KONDA's estimation was 76% in 2006, with 78% of adult citizens self-identifying their ethnic background as "Turk". In 2021, 77% of adult citizens identified as such in a survey. Kurds are the largest ethnic minority. Their exact numbers remain disputed, with estimates ranging from 12–20% of the population. According to a 1990 study, Kurds made up around 12% of the population. The Kurds make up a majority in the provinces of Ağrı, Batman, Bingöl, Bitlis, Diyarbakır, Hakkari, Iğdır, Mardin, Muş, Siirt, Şırnak, Tunceli and Van; a near majority in Şanlıurfa (47%); and a large minority in Kars (20%). In addition, internal migration has resulted in Kurdish diaspora communities in all of the major cities in central and western Turkey. In Istanbul, there are an estimated three million Kurds, making it the city with the largest Kurdish population in the world. 19% of adult citizens identified as ethnic Kurds in a survey in 2021. Some people have multiple ethnic identities, such as both Turk and Kurd. In 2006, an estimated 2.7 million ethnic Turks and Kurds were related from interethnic marriages. According to the World Factbook, non-Kurdish ethnic minorities are 7–12% of the population. In 2006, KONDA estimated that non-Kurdish and non-Zaza ethnic minorities constituted 8.2% of the population; these were people that gave general descriptions such as Turkish citizen, people with other Turkic backgrounds, Arabs, and others. In 2021, 4% of adult citizens identified as non-ethnic Turk or non-ethnic Kurd in a survey. According to the Constitutional Court, there are only four officially recognized minorities in Turkey: the three non-Muslim minorities recognized in the Treaty of Lausanne (Armenians, Greeks, and Jews) and the Bulgarians. In 2013, the Ankara 13th Circuit Administrative Court ruled that the minority provisions of the Lausanne Treaty should also apply to Assyrians in Turkey and the Syriac language. Other unrecognized ethnic groups include Albanians, Bosniaks, Circassians, Georgians, Laz, Pomaks, and Roma. Turkey is also home to a Muslim community of Megleno-Romanians. Excluding Syrians under temporary protection, there were 1,570,543 foreign citizens in Turkey in 2023. Millions of Kurds fled across the mountains to Turkey and the Kurdish areas of Iran during the Gulf War in 1991. Turkey's migrant crisis in the 2010s and early 2020s resulted in the influx of millions of refugees and immigrants. Turkey hosts the largest number of refugees in the world as of April 2020. The Disaster and Emergency Management Presidency manages the refugee crisis in Turkey. Before the start of the Syrian civil war in 2011, the estimated number of Arabs in Turkey varied from 1 million to more than 2 million. In November 2020, there were 3.6 million Syrian refugees in Turkey; these included other ethnic groups of Syria, such as Syrian Kurds and Syrian Turkmens. As of August 2023, the number these refugees was estimated to be 3.3 million. The number of Syrians had decreased by about 200,000 people since the beginning of the year. The government has granted citizenship to 238 thousand Syrians by November 2023. As of May 2023, approximately 96,000 Ukrainian refugees of the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine have sought refuge in Turkey. In 2022, nearly 100,000 Russian citizens migrated to Turkey, becoming the first in the list of foreigners who moved to Turkey, meaning an increase of more than 218% from 2021. The official language is Turkish, which is the most widely spoken Turkic language in the world. It is spoken by 85% to 90% of the population as a first language. Kurdish speakers are the largest linguistic minority. A survey estimated 13% of the population speak Kurdish or Zaza as a first language. Other minority languages include Arabic, Caucasian languages, and Gagauz. The linguistic rights of the officially recognized minorities are de jure recognized and protected for Armenian, Bulgarian, Greek, Hebrew, and Syriac. Endangered languages include Abaza, Abkhaz, Adyghe, Cappadocian Greek, Gagauz, Hértevin, Homshetsma, Kabard-Cherkes, Ladino (Judesmo), Laz, Mlahso, Pontic Greek, Romani, Suret, Turoyo, Ubykh, and Western Armenian. Megleno-Romanian is also spoken. Turkey is a secular state with no official state religion; the constitution provides for freedom of religion and conscience. A 2016 survey by Ipsos, interviewing 17,180 adults across 22 countries, found that Islam was the dominant religion in Turkey, adhered to by 82% of the total population; religiously unaffiliated people comprised 13% of the population, while 2% were Christians. The level of religiosity study by Konda found 9.7% of the population who are 'fully devoted', 52% who 'strives to fulfill religious obligations', 34.3% who 'does not fulfill religious obligations' and 3.2% 'Nonbeliever/Irreligious'. Another poll conducted by Gezici Araştırma in 2020 interviewed 1,062 people in 12 provinces and found that 28.5% of the Generation Z identify as irreligious. According to a survey by the pollster KONDA, the percentage of atheists in Turkey has tripled in 10 years and rose from 1% in 2008 to 3% in 2018, the percentage of non-believers or agnostics rose from 1% to 2%, and that 90% of irreligious Turks were under 35 years old. The CIA World Factbook reports that Islam is the religion of 99.8% of the population, with Sunni Muslims as the largest sect, while 0.2% are Christians and Jews. However, there are no official governmental statistics specifying the religious beliefs of the Turkish people, nor is religious data recorded in the country's census. Academics suggest the Alevi population may be from 15 to 20 million, while the Alevi-Bektaşi Federation states that there are around 25 million. According to Aksiyon magazine, the number of Twelver Shias (excluding Alevis) is three million (4.2%). The percentage of Christians in Turkey fell from 17.5% (three million followers) in a population of 16 million to 2.5% in the early 20th century. mainly as a result of the Armenian genocide, the population exchange between Greece and Turkey and the emigration of Christians that began in the late 19th century and gained pace in the first quarter of the 20th century. Today, there are more than 120,000–320,000 people of various Christian denominations, representing less than 0.2% of Turkey's population, including an estimated 80,000 Oriental Orthodox, 35,000 Roman Catholics, 18,000 Antiochian Greeks, 5,000 Greek Orthodox, smaller numbers of Protestants, and 512 Mormons. Currently, there are 398 churches open for worship in Turkey. Turkey has a small Jewish population; with around 26,000 Jews, the vast majority of whom are Sephardi. Turkey has the largest Jewish community among the Muslim-majority countries. In a mid-2010s poll, 2.9% of Turkish respondents identified as atheists. The Association of Atheism, the first official atheist organization in the Balkans and the Middle East, was founded in 2014. Some religious and secular officials have claimed that atheism and deism are growing among Turkish people. The Ministry of National Education is responsible for pre-tertiary education. This is compulsory and lasts twelve years: four years each for primary school, middle school and high school. All 12 years of compulsory education is free of charge in public schools. Basic education is said to lag behind other OECD countries, with significant differences between high and low performers. Access to a high-quality school heavily depends on the performance in the secondary school entrance exams, to the point that some students begin taking private tutoring classes when they are ten years old. There are 209 universities in Turkey. Except for the Open Education Faculties at Anadolu, Istanbul and Atatürk universities, entrance is regulated by the national Student Selection and Placement System (Turkish: Öğrenci Seçme ve Yerleştirme Sistemi, ÖSYS) examination, after which high school graduates are assigned to universities according to their performance. According to the 2012–2013 Times Higher Education World University Rankings, the top university was the Middle East Technical University, followed by Bilkent University, Koç University, Istanbul Technical University and Boğaziçi University. All state and private universities are under the control of the Higher Education Board (Turkish: Yükseköğretim Kurulu, YÖK). Since 2016, the president of Turkey directly appoints all rectors of all state and private universities. Turkey is a member of the Socrates programme, Erasmus Programme and Erasmus+ Programmes. Turkey is also a member of the Erasmus Student Network, a student organization with more than 15,000 volunteers across Europe. Turkey has become a hub for foreign students in recent years, with 795,962 foreign students in 2016. The government has announced a plan to draw around 500,000 foreign students at its universities by offering attractive scholarships. In 2021 Türkiye Scholarships, a government-funded program, received 165,000 applications from prospective students in 178 countries. The Ministry of Health has run a universal public healthcare system since 2003. Known as Universal Health Insurance (Genel Sağlık Sigortası), it is funded by a tax surcharge on employers, currently at 5%. Public-sector funding covers approximately 75.2% of health expenditures. Despite the universal health care, total expenditure on health as a share of GDP in 2018 was the lowest among OECD countries at 6.3% of GDP, compared to the OECD average of 9.3%. The lower health care expenditure is due to lower median age in Turkey which is 32.4, compared to Italy which is 47.3. Aging population is the prime reason for higher healthcare expenditure in the developed world. Average life expectancy is 78.6 years (75.9 for males and 81.3 for females), compared with the EU average of 81 years. Turkey has high rates of obesity, with 29.5% of its adult population having a body mass index (BMI) value of 30 or above. Air pollution is a major cause of early death. There are many private hospitals in the country. Medical tourism generated revenues of more than $1 billion in 2019. Around 60% of the income has been obtained from plastic surgery and a total of 662,087 patients received service in the country within the scope of health tourism in 2019. Turkey has a very diverse culture that is a blend of various elements of the Turkic, Anatolian, Byzantine and Ottoman cultures (the latter was in many aspects a continuation of both the Greco-Roman and Islamic cultures) with Western culture and traditions, a process that started with the Westernization of the Ottoman Empire and still continues today. This mix originally began as a result of the encounter of the Turks and their culture with those of the peoples they came across during their migration from Central Asia to the West. Contemporary Turkish culture during the republican period is a product of efforts to create a "modern" Western society, while maintaining traditional, religious and historical values. The culture has influenced European art and fashion, particularly between the 16th and 18th centuries, during the peak of Ottoman power – a phenomenon that was called Turquerie. Ottoman miniature is linked to the Persian miniature tradition and is likewise influenced by Chinese painting styles and techniques. The words tasvir or nakış were used to define the art of miniature painting in Ottoman Turkish. The studios the artists worked in were called nakkaşhane. The understanding of perspective was different from that of the nearby European Renaissance painting tradition, and the scene depicted often included different time periods and spaces in one picture. They followed closely the context of the book they were included in, more illustrations than standalone works of art. Sixteenth-century artists Nakkaş Osman and Matrakçı Nasuh are among the most prominent artists of this era. Turkish painting, in the Western sense, developed actively starting from the mid 19th century. The first painting lessons were scheduled at what is now the Istanbul Technical University (then the Imperial Military Engineering School) in 1793, mostly for technical purposes. In the late 19th century, human figure in the Western sense was being established in Turkish painting, especially with Osman Hamdi Bey. Impressionism, among the contemporary trends, appeared later on with Halil Pasha. Other important Turkish painters in the 19th century were Ferik İbrahim Paşa, Osman Nuri Paşa, Şeker Ahmet Paşa, and Hoca Ali Riza. Carpet (halı) and tapestry (kilim) weaving is a traditional Turkish art form with roots in pre-Islamic times. During its long history, the art and craft of weaving carpets and tapestries in Turkey has integrated numerous cultural traditions. Apart from the Turkic design patterns that are prevalent, traces of Persian and Byzantine patterns can also be detected. There are also similarities with the patterns used in Armenian, Caucasian and Kurdish carpet designs. The arrival of Islam in Central Asia and the development of Islamic art also influenced Turkic patterns in the medieval period. The history of the designs, motifs and ornaments used in Turkish carpets and tapestries thus reflects the political and ethnic history of the Turks and the cultural diversity of Anatolia. However, scientific attempts were unsuccessful, as yet, to attribute a particular design to a specific ethnic, regional, or even nomadic versus village tradition. The earliest examples of paper marbling, called ebru in Turkish, are said to be a copy of the Hâlnâme by the poet Arifî. The text of this manuscript was rendered in a delicate cut paper découpage calligraphy by Mehmed bin Gazanfer and completed in 1540, and features many marbled and decorative paper borders. One early master by the pseudonym of Şebek is mentioned posthumously in the earliest Ottoman text on the art known as the Tertib-i Risâle-i Ebrî, which is dated based on internal evidence to after 1615. The instructions for several ebru techniques in the text are accredited to this master. Hatip Mehmed Efendi is accredited with developing motifs and perhaps early floral designs, although evidence from India appears to contradict some of these reports. Despite this, marbled motifs are commonly referred to as hatip designs in Turkey today. Interaction between the Ottoman Empire and the Islamic world along with Europe contributed to a blend of Turkic, Islamic and European traditions in modern-day Turkish music and literary arts. Turkish literature was heavily influenced by Persian and Arabic literature during most of the Ottoman era. The Tanzimat reforms of the 19th century introduced previously unknown Western genres, primarily the novel and the short story. Many of the writers in the Tanzimat period wrote in several genres simultaneously: for instance, the poet Namık Kemal also wrote the 1876 novel İntibâh (Awakening), while the journalist Şinasi has written, in 1860, the first modern Turkish play, the one-act comedy "Şair Evlenmesi" (The Poet's Marriage). Most of the roots of modern Turkish literature were formed between 1896 and 1923. The first radical step of innovation in 20th century Turkish poetry was taken by Nâzım Hikmet, who introduced the free verse style. Another revolution in Turkish poetry came about in 1941 with the Garip movement led by Orhan Veli, Oktay Rıfat and Melih Cevdet. The mix of cultural influences in Turkey is dramatized, for example, in the form of the "new symbols of the clash and interlacing of cultures" enacted in the novels of Orhan Pamuk, recipient of the 2006 Nobel Prize in Literature. The origin of Turkish theater dates back to ancient pagan rituals and oral legends. The dances, music and songs performed during the rituals of the inhabitants of Anatolia millennia ago are the elements from which the first shows originated. In time, the ancient rituals, myths, legends and stories evolved into theatrical shows. Starting from the 11th-century, the traditions of the Seljuk Turks blended with those of the indigenous peoples of Anatolia and the interaction between diverse cultures paved the way for new plays. Meddah were storytellers who performed in front of audiences during the Ottoman period. Karagöz and Hacivat are the lead characters of the traditional Turkish shadow play, popularized during the Ottoman period and then spread to most ethnic groups of the Ottoman Empire. After the Tanzimat period, characters in Turkish theatre were modernized and plays were performed on European-style stages, with actors wearing European costumes. Following the restoration of constitutional monarchy with the Young Turk Revolution in 1908, theatrical activities increased and social problems began to be reflected at the theatre as well as in historical plays. A theatrical conservatoire, Darülbedayi-i Osmani (which became the nucleus of the Istanbul City Theatres) was established in 1914. Numerous Turkish playwrights emerged in this era, and the first Turkish musicals were also written. In time, Turkish women began to appear on stage; until then, female roles had only been played by actresses who were members of Turkey's ethnic minorities. Today there are numerous private theatres in the country, together with those which are subsidized by the government, such as the Turkish State Theatres. The roots of traditional music in Turkey span across centuries to a time when the Seljuk Turks migrated to Anatolia and Persia in the 11th century and contains elements of both Turkic and pre-Turkic influences. Much of its modern popular music can trace its roots to the emergence in the early 1930s drive for Westernization. With the assimilation of immigrants from various regions the diversity of musical genres and musical instrumentation also expanded. Turkey has also seen documented folk music and recorded popular music produced in the ethnic styles of Greek, Armenian, Albanian, Polish and Jewish communities, among others. Many Turkish cities and towns have vibrant local music scenes which, in turn, support a number of regional musical styles. Despite this however, western music styles like pop music and kanto lost popularity to arabesque in the late 1970s and 1980s. It became popular again by the beginning of the 1990s, as a result of an opening economy and society. The resurging popularity of pop music gave rise to several international Turkish pop stars such as Ajda Pekkan, Sezen Aksu, Erol Evgin, MFÖ, Tarkan, Sertab Erener, Teoman, Kenan Doğulu, Levent Yüksel and Hande Yener. Internationally acclaimed Turkish jazz and blues musicians and composers include Ahmet Ertegun (founder and president of Atlantic Records), Nükhet Ruacan and Kerem Görsev. The Byzantine era is usually dated from 330 AD at the founding of Constantinople until the fall of the Byzantine Empire in 1453. Its architecture dramatically influenced the later medieval architecture throughout Europe and the Near East and became the primary progenitor of the Renaissance and Ottoman architectural traditions that followed its collapse. When the Roman Empire went Christian (as well as eastwards) with Constantinople as its new capital, its architecture became more sensuous and more ambitious. This new style, which would come to be known as Byzantine architecture, with increasingly exotic domes and ever-richer mosaics, spread west to Ravenna and Venice in Italy and as far north as Moscow in Russia. This influence can be seen particularly in the Venetian Gothic architecture. The architecture of the Seljuk Turks combined the elements and characteristics of the Turkic architecture of Central Asia with those of Persian, Arab, Armenian and Byzantine architecture. The transition from Seljuk architecture to Ottoman architecture is most visible in Bursa, which was the capital of the Ottoman State between 1335 and 1413. Following the Ottoman conquest of Constantinople in 1453, Ottoman architecture was significantly influenced by Byzantine architecture. Topkapı Palace in Istanbul is one of the most famous examples of classical Ottoman architecture and was the primary residence of the Ottoman Sultans for approximately 400 years. Mimar Sinan (c. 1489–1588) was the most important architect of the classical period in Ottoman architecture. He was the chief architect of at least 374 buildings that were constructed in various provinces in the 16th century. Sedefkar Mehmed Ağa, the architect of the Blue Mosque in Istanbul, was an apprentice of Sinan, later becoming his first assistant in charge of the office of chief architect. Since the 18th century, Turkish architecture has been increasingly influenced by European styles, and this can be particularly seen in the Tanzimat era buildings of Istanbul like the Dolmabahçe, Çırağan, Taksim Military Barracks (demolished), Feriye, Beylerbeyi, Küçüksu, Ihlamur and Yıldız palaces, which were all designed by members of the Balyan family of Ottoman Armenian court architects. The Ottoman era waterfront houses (yalı) on the Bosphorus also reflect the fusion between classical Ottoman and European architectural styles. The First National Architectural Movement in the early 20th century sought to create a new architecture which was based on motifs from Seljuk and Ottoman architecture. Turkish cuisine is largely the heritage of Ottoman cuisine, which contains elements of Turkish, Byzantine, Balkan, Armenian, Georgian, Kurdish, Arab and Persian cuisines. It can be described as a fusion and refinement of Mediterranean, Middle Eastern, Central Asian, Balkan and Eastern European cuisines. The country's position between Europe, Asia and the Mediterranean Sea helped the Turks in gaining complete control of the major trade routes, and an ideal landscape and climate allowed plants and animals to flourish. Turkish cuisine was well established by the mid-15th century, which marked the beginning of the classical age of the Ottoman Empire. Yogurt salads; mezes; fish and seafood; grilled, sauteed or steamed meat varieties; vegetables or stuffed and wrapped vegetables cooked with olive oil; and drinks like sherbet, ayran and rakı became Turkish staples. The empire used its land and water routes to import exotic ingredients from all over the world. By the end of the 16th century, the Ottoman court housed over 1,400 live-in cooks and passed laws regulating the freshness of food. Since the establishment of the republic in 1923, foreign food such as French hollandaise sauce and Western fast food have made their way into the modern Turkish diet. The most popular sport is association football. Galatasaray won the UEFA Cup and UEFA Super Cup in 2000. The Turkey national football team won the bronze medal at the 2002 FIFA World Cup, the 2003 FIFA Confederations Cup and UEFA Euro 2008. Other mainstream sports such as basketball and volleyball are also popular. The men's national basketball team and women's national basketball team have been successful. Anadolu Efes S.K. is the most successful Turkish basketball club in international competitions. Fenerbahçe reached the final of the EuroLeague in three consecutive seasons (2016, 2017 and 2018), becoming the European champions in 2017. The final of the 2013–14 EuroLeague Women basketball championship was played between two Turkish teams, Galatasaray and Fenerbahçe, and won by Galatasaray. The women's national volleyball team has won several medals. Women's volleyball clubs, namely VakıfBank S.K., Fenerbahçe and Eczacıbaşı, have won numerous European championship titles and medals. The traditional national sport of Turkey has been yağlı güreş (oil wrestling) since Ottoman times. Edirne Province has hosted the annual Kırkpınar oil wrestling tournament since 1361, making it the oldest continuously held sporting competition in the world. In the 19th and early 20th centuries, oil wrestling champions such as Koca Yusuf, Nurullah Hasan and Kızılcıklı Mahmut acquired international fame in Europe and North America by winning world heavyweight wrestling championship titles. International wrestling styles governed by FILA such as freestyle wrestling and Greco-Roman wrestling are also popular, with many European, World and Olympic championship titles won by Turkish wrestlers both individually and as a national team. Hundreds of television channels, thousands of local and national radio stations, several dozen newspapers, a productive and profitable national cinema and a rapid growth of broadband Internet use constitute a vibrant media industry in Turkey. The majority of the TV audiences are shared among public broadcaster TRT and the network-style channels such as Kanal D, Show TV, ATV and Star TV. The broadcast media have a very high penetration as satellite dishes and cable systems are widely available. The Radio and Television Supreme Council (RTÜK) is the government body overseeing the broadcast media. By circulation, the most popular newspapers are Posta, Hürriyet, Sözcü, Sabah and Habertürk. TRT 2 is the public service channel dedicated to culture and art, and TRT Belgesel is dedicated to documentaries. In the 21st century some reforms have taken place to improve the cultural rights of ethnic minorities in Turkey, such as the establishment of TRT Kurdî, TRT Arabi and TRT Avaz by the TRT. Turkish television dramas are increasingly becoming popular beyond Turkey's borders and are among the country's most vital exports, both in terms of profit and public relations. After sweeping the Middle East's television market over the past decade, Turkish shows have aired in more than a dozen South and Central American countries in 2016. Turkey is today the world's second largest exporter of television series. Yeşilçam is the sobriquet that refers to the Turkish film art and industry. The first movie exhibited in the Ottoman Empire was the Lumiere Brothers' 1895 film, L'Arrivée d'un train en gare de La Ciotat, which was shown in Istanbul in 1896. The first Turkish-made film was a documentary entitled Ayastefanos'taki Rus Abidesinin Yıkılışı (Demolition of the Russian Monument at San Stefano), directed by Fuat Uzkınay and completed in 1914. The first narrative film, Sedat Simavi's The Spy, was released in 1917. Turkey's first sound film was shown in 1931. Turkish directors like Metin Erksan, Nuri Bilge Ceylan, Yılmaz Güney, Zeki Demirkubuz and Ferzan Özpetek won numerous international awards such as the Palme d'Or and Golden Bear. Despite legal provisions, media freedom in Turkey has steadily deteriorated from 2010 onwards, with a precipitous decline following the failed coup attempt on 15 July 2016. As of December 2016, at least 81 journalists were imprisoned in Turkey and more than 100 news outlets were closed. Freedom House lists Turkey's media as not free. The media crackdowns also extend to Internet censorship with Wikipedia getting blocked between 29 April 2017 and 15 January 2020. Turkey portal Outline of Turkey Turkish: Türkiye, Turkish: [ˈtyɾcije] Turkish: [ˈtyɾcije dʒumˈhuːɾijeti] Even though they are not explicitly mentioned in the Treaty of Lausanne. The Bulgarian community in Turkey is now so small that this disposition is de facto not applied. The Turkish government considers that, for the purpose of the Treaty of Lausanne, the language of Turkish Jews is Hebrew, even though the mother tongue of Turkish Jews was not Hebrew but historically Judaeo-Spanish (Ladino) or other Jewish languages. "Türkiye Cumhuriyeti Anayasası" (in Turkish). Grand National Assembly of Turkey. Archived from the original on 2 July 2020. Retrieved 1 July 2020. 3. Madde: Devletin Bütünlüğü, Resmi Dili, Bayrağı, Milli Marşı ve Başkenti: Türkiye Devleti, ülkesi ve milletiyle bölünmez bir bütündür. Dili Türkçedir. Bayrağı, şekli kanununda belirtilen, beyaz ay yıldızlı al bayraktır. Milli marşı "İstiklal Marşı" dır. Başkenti Ankara'dır. "Mevzuat: Anayasa" (in Turkish). Constitutional Court of Turkey. Archived from the original on 21 June 2020. Retrieved 1 July 2020. KONDA 2006, p. 19 Comrie 2018, p. 537 "Turkey". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. Archived from the original on 28 August 2022. Retrieved 13 October 2016. "Turkish Constitution". Anayasa Mahkemesi. Archived from the original on 10 January 2021. Retrieved 12 April 2022. "Surface water and surface water change". Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Archived from the original on 24 March 2021. Retrieved 11 October 2020. "The Results of Address Based Population Registration System, 2023". www.tuik.gov.tr. Turkish Statistical Institute. 6 February 2024. Archived from the original on 6 February 2024. Retrieved 6 February 2024. "World Economic Outlook Database, October 2023 Edition. (Türkiye)". IMF.org. International Monetary Fund. 10 October 2023. Archived from the original on 12 October 2023. Retrieved 10 October 2023. "Gini index (World Bank estimate) – Turkey". World Bank. 2019. Archived from the original on 17 May 2019. Retrieved 15 November 2021. "Human Development Index (HDI)". United Nations Development Programme. Archived from the original on 10 June 2022. Retrieved 18 March 2024. Howard 2016, p. 24 Leonard 2006, p. 1576: "Turkey’s diversity is derived from its central location near the world’s earliest civilizations as well as a history replete with population movements and invasions. The Hattite culture was prominent during the Bronze Age prior to 2000 BCE, but was replaced by the Indo-European Hittites who conquered Anatolia by the second millennium. Meanwhile, Turkish Thrace came to be dominated by another Indo-European group, the Thracians for whom the region is named." Howard 2016, pp. 24–28: "Göbekli Tepe’s close proximity to several very early sites of grain cultivation helped lead Schmidt to the conclusion that it was the need to maintain the ritual center that first encouraged the beginnings of settled agriculture—the Neolithic Revolution" Steadman & McMahon 2011, pp. 3–11, 37 Steadman & McMahon 2011, p. 327 Steadman & McMahon 2011, pp. 233, 713: "By the time of the Old Assyrian Colony period in the early second millennium b.c.e . (see Michel, chapter 13 in this volume) the languages spoken on the plateau included Hattian, an indigenous Anatolian language, Hurrian (spoken in northern Syria), and Indo-European languages known as Luwian, Hittite, and Palaic" ... "The weight of current linguistic evidence supports the traditional view that Indo-European speakers are intrusive to Asia Minor, coming from somewhere in eastern Europe...Recent research argues against the notion of Indo-European “invaders” imposing themselves on a Hattian population in central Anatolia and points rather to a gradual assimilation." Howard 2016, p. 29: "The sudden disappearance of the Persian Empire and the conquest of virtually the entire Middle Eastern world from the Nile to the Indus by Alexander the Great caused tremendous political and cultural upheaval. Working out vague notions of the fundamental commonality of the human spirit, summed up in the ideal of the “brotherhood of man” attributed to Alexander himself, statesmen throughout the conquered regions attempted to implement a policy of Hellenization. For indigenous elites, this amounted to the forced assimilation of native religion and culture to Greek models. It met resistance in Anatolia as elsewhere, especially from priests and others who controlled temple wealth." Leonard 2006, p. 1576: "Subsequently, hellenization of the elites transformed Anatolia into a largely Greek-speaking region" Steadman & McMahon 2011, pp. 5, 16, 617 Davison 1990, pp. 3–4: "So the Seljuk sultanate was a successor state ruling part of the medieval Greek empire, and within it the process of Turkification of a previously Hellenized Anatolian population continued. That population must already have been of very mixed ancestry, deriving from ancient Hittite, Phrygian, Cappadocian, and other civilizations as well as Roman and Greek." Howard 2016, pp. 33–44 Howard 2016, pp. 38–39 Howard 2016, p. 45 Somel 2003, p. xcvii Marushiakova, Elena; Popov, Veselin Zakhariev; Popov, Veselin; Descartes), Centre de recherches tsiganes (2001). Gypsies in the Ottoman Empire: A Contribution to the History of the Balkans. Univ of Hertfordshire Press. ISBN 978-1-902806-02-0. Davison 1990, pp. 115–116 Kaser 2011, p. 336: "The emerging Christian nation states justified the prosecution of their Muslims by arguing that they were their former “suppressors”. The historical balance: between about 1820 and 1920, millions of Muslim casualties and refugees back to the remaining Ottoman Empire had to be registered; estimations speak about 5 million casualties and the same number of displaced persons" Gibney & Hansen 2005, p. 437: ‘Muslims had been the majority in Anatolia, the Crimea, the Balkans, and the Caucasus and a plurality in southern Russia and sections of Romania. Most of these lands were within or contiguous with the Ottoman Empire. By 1923, “only Anatolia, eastern Thrace, and a section of the southeastern Caucasus remained to the Muslim land....Millions of Muslims, most of them Turks, had died; millions more had fled to what is today Turkey. Between 1821 and 1922, more than five million Muslims were driven from their lands. Five and one-half million Muslims died, some of them killed in wars, others perishing as refugees from starvation and disease” (McCarthy 1995, 1). Since people in the Ottoman Empire were classified by religion, Turks, Albanians, Bosnians, and all other Muslim groups were recognized—and recognized themselves—simply as Muslims. Hence, their persecution and forced migration is of central importance to an analysis of “Muslim migration.”’ Karpat 2001, p. 343: "The main migrations started from Crimea in 1856 and were followed by those from the Caucasus and the Balkans in 1862 to 1878 and 1912 to 1916. These have continued to our day. The quantitative indicators cited in various sources show that during this period a total of about 7 million migrants from Crimea, the Caucasus, the Balkans, and the Mediterranean islands settled in Anatolia. These immigrants were overwhelmingly Muslim, except for a number of Jews who left their homes in the Balkans and Russia in order to live in the Ottoman lands. By the end of the century the immigrants and their descendants constituted some 30 to 40 percent of the total population of Anatolia, and in some western areas their percentage was even higher." ... "The immigrants called themselves Muslims rather than Turks, although most of those from Bulgaria, Macedonia, and eastern Serbia descended from the Turkish Anatolian stock who settled in the Balkans in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries." Karpat 2004, pp. 5–6: "Migration was a major force in the social and cultural reconstruction of the Ottoman state in the nineteenth century. While some seven to nine million, mostly Muslim, refugees from lost territories in the Caucasus, Crimea, Balkans and Mediterranean islands migrated to Anatolia and Eastern Thrace, during the last quarter of the nineteenth and the early part of the twentieth centuries..." Pekesen 2012: "The immigration had far-reaching social and political consequences for the Ottoman Empire and Turkey." ... "Between 1821 and 1922, some 5.3 million Muslims migrated to the Empire.50 It is estimated that in 1923, the year the republic of Turkey was founded, about 25 per cent of the population came from immigrant families.51" Biondich 2011, p. 93: "The road from Berlin to Lausanne was littered with millions of casualties. In the period between 1878 and 1912, as many as two million Muslims emigrated voluntarily or involuntarily from the Balkans. When one adds those who were killed or expelled between 1912 and 1923, the number of Muslim casualties from the Balkan far exceeds three million. By 1923 fewer than one million remained in the Balkans" Armour 2012, p. 213: "To top it all, the Empire was host to a steady stream of Muslim refugees. Russia between 1854 and 1876 expelled 1.4 million Crimean Tartars, and in the mid-1860s another 600,000 Circassians from the Caucasus. Their arrival produced further economic dislocation and expense." Tatz, Colin; Higgins, Winton (2016). The Magnitude of Genocide. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1-4408-3161-4. Schaller, Dominik J.; Zimmerer, Jürgen (2008). "Late Ottoman genocides: the dissolution of the Ottoman Empire and Young Turkish population and extermination policies – introduction". Journal of Genocide Research. 10 (1): 7–14. doi:10.1080/14623520801950820. ISSN 1462-3528. S2CID 71515470. Morris, Benny; Ze'evi, Dror (2021). The Thirty-Year Genocide - Turkey's Destruction of Its Christian Minorities, 1894–1924. Harvard University Press. ISBN 9780674251434. Roderic H. Davison; Review "From Paris to Sèvres: The Partition of the Ottoman Empire at the Peace Conference of 1919–1920" by Paul C. Helmreich in Slavic Review, Vol. 34, No. 1 (March 1975), pp. 186–187 "The Political Economy of Regional Power: Turkey" (PDF). giga-hamburg.de. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 February 2014. Retrieved 18 February 2015. "Turkey". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. Archived from the original on 28 August 2022. Retrieved 29 February 2024. Birben, Üstüner (2019). "The Effectiveness of Protected Areas in Biodiversity Conservation: The Case of Turkey". CERNE. 25 (4): 424–438. doi:10.1590/01047760201925042644. Turkey has 3 out of the 36 biodiversity hotspots on Earth: the Mediterranean, Caucasus, and Irano-Anatolian hotspots Leonard 2006, pp. 1575–1576 "Key Highlights: Country Climate and Development Report for Türkiye". 13 June 2022. Archived from the original on 2 February 2024. Retrieved 2 February 2024. OECD (2023). Taking stock of education reforms for access and quality in Türkiye. OECD (Report). OECD Education Policy Perspectives. doi:10.1787/5ea7657e-en. Archived from the original on 2 March 2024. Retrieved 2 March 2024. Over the last 20 years, Türkiye has achieved important progress in the expansion of access to education. This expansion includes greater access to pre-school education, with four times as many pre-school institutions today as there were twenty years ago, or one of the largest increases in educational attainment for 25–34 year-olds at upper secondary non-tertiary or tertiary education between 2011 and 2021 World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) (2023). Global Innovation Index 2023: Innovation in the face of uncertainty. WIPO (Report). Geneva. doi:10.34667/tind.48220. Archived from the original on 22 October 2023. Retrieved 2 March 2024. Indonesia joins China, Türkiye, India, the Islamic Republic of Iran and Viet Nam as most impressive innovation climbers of the last decade "Türkiye". UNESCO. Archived from the original on 2 March 2024. Retrieved 2 March 2024. Yayla, Önder; Aktaş, Semra Günay (2021). "Mise en place for gastronomy geography through food: Flavor regions in Turkey". International Journal of Gastronomy and Food Science. 26. doi:10.1016/j.ijgfs.2021.100384. Archived from the original on 2 March 2024. Retrieved 2 March 2024. Berg, Miriam (2023). Turkish Drama Serials: The Importance and Influence of a Globally Popular Television Phenomenon. University of Exeter Press. pp. 1–2. ISBN 978-1-80413-043-8. Cevdet Küçük (1988–2016). "Türkiye". TDV Encyclopedia of Islam (44+2 vols.) (in Turkish). Istanbul: Turkiye Diyanet Foundation, Centre for Islamic Studies. Howard 2016, p. 31 "Turkey". Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.). Oxford University Press. (Subscription or participating institution membership required.) Hertslet, Edward (1875). "General treaty between Great Britain, Austria, France, Prussia, Russia, Sardinia and Turkey, signed at Paris on 30th March 1856". The Map of Europe by Treaty showing the various political and territorial changes which have taken place since the general peace of 1814, with numerous maps and notes. Vol. 2. Butterworth. pp. 1250–1265. "Protocols of conferences held at Paris relative to the general Treaty of Peace. Presented to both Houses of Parliament by command of Her Majesty, 1856". Harrison. 1856. Retrieved 9 May 2023. Hertslet, Edward (1891), "Treaty between Great Britain, Austria-Hungary, France, Germany, Italy, Russia, and Turkey, for the Settlement of Affairs in the East, Signed at Berlin, 13th July 1878 (Translation)", The Map of Europe by Treaty; which have taken place since the general peace of 1814. With numerous maps and notes, vol. IV (1875–1891) (First ed.), Her Majesty's Stationery Office, pp. 2759–2798, retrieved 9 May 2023 – via Internet Archive "Treaty Between Great Britain, Austria-Hungary, France, Germany, Italy, Russia and Turkey. (Berlin). July 13, 1878". sourcebooks.fordham.edu. Archived from the original on 26 March 2023. Retrieved 9 May 2023. Jenkins, Romilly James Heald (1967). De Administrando Imperio by Constantine VII Porphyrogenitus. Corpus fontium historiae Byzantinae (New, revised ed.). Dumbarton Oaks Center for Byzantine Studies. p. 65. ISBN 978-0-88402-021-9. Archived from the original on 20 January 2023. Retrieved 28 August 2013. According to Constantine Porphyrogenitus, writing in his De Administrando Imperio (c. 950 AD) "Patzinakia, the Pecheneg realm, stretches west as far as the Siret River (or even the Eastern Carpathian Mountains), and is four days distant from Tourkia [i.e. Hungary]." Carter Vaughn Findley (2004). The Turks in World History. Oxford University Press. p. 51. ISBN 978-0-19-517726-8. Cevdet Küçük (2012). "Türkiye". TDV Encyclopedia of Islam, Vol. 41 (Tevekkül – Tüsterî) (in Turkish). Istanbul: Turkiye Diyanet Foundation, Centre for Islamic Studies. p. 567. ISBN 978-975-389-713-6. "Marka Olarak 'Türkiye' İbaresinin Kullanımı (Presidential Circular No. 2021/24 on the Use of the Term "Türkiye" as a Brand)" (PDF). Resmî Gazete (Official Gazette of the Republic of Türkiye). 4 December 2021. Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 May 2022. Retrieved 11 April 2022. "Exports to be labeled 'Made in Türkiye'". Hürriyet Daily News. 6 December 2021. Archived from the original on 7 June 2022. Retrieved 11 April 2022. Soylu, Ragip (17 January 2022). "Turkey to register its new name Türkiye to UN in coming weeks". Middle East Eye. Archived from the original on 6 June 2022. Retrieved 11 April 2022. "UN to use 'Türkiye' instead of 'Turkey' after Ankara's request". TRT World. 2 June 2022. Archived from the original on 2 June 2022. Retrieved 3 June 2022. Wertheimer, Tiffany (2 June 2022). "Turkey changes its name in rebranding bid". BBC News Online. Archived from the original on 2 June 2022. Retrieved 2 June 2022. "The World's First Temple". Archaeology magazine. November–December 2008. p. 23. Archived from the original on 29 March 2012. Retrieved 25 July 2012. Howard 2016, p. 24 Casson, Lionel (1977). "The Thracians" (PDF). The Metropolitan Museum of Art Bulletin. 35 (1): 2–6. doi:10.2307/3258667. JSTOR 3258667. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 May 2019. Retrieved 3 April 2013. Curry, Andrew (August 2019). "The first Europeans weren't who you might think". National Geographic. Archived from the original on 19 March 2021. Krause, Johannes; Jeong, Choongwon; Haak, Wolfgang; Posth, Cosimo; Stockhammer, Philipp W.; Mustafaoğlu, Gökhan; Fairbairn, Andrew; Bianco, Raffaela A.; Julia Gresky (19 March 2019). "Late Pleistocene human genome suggests a local origin for the first farmers of central Anatolia". Nature Communications. 10 (1): 1218. Bibcode:2019NatCo..10.1218F. doi:10.1038/s41467-019-09209-7. ISSN 2041-1723. PMC 6425003. PMID 30890703. "Çatalhöyük added to UNESCO World Heritage List". Global Heritage Fund. 3 July 2012. Archived from the original on 17 January 2013. Retrieved 9 February 2013. Chacon, Richard J.; Mendoza, Rubén G. (2017). Feast, Famine or Fighting?: Multiple Pathways to Social Complexity. Springer. p. 120. ISBN 978-3-319-48402-0. Jablonka, Peter (2011). "Troy in regional and international context". In Steadman, Sharon; McMahon, Gregory (eds.). The Oxford Handbook of Ancient Anatolia. Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/oxfordhb/9780195376142.013.0032. Bryce, T. (2005). The Trojans and their Neighbours. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-0-415-34959-8. Jablonka, Peter (2012). "Troy". In Cline, Eric (ed.). The Oxford Handbook of the Bronze Age Aegean. Oxford University Press. pp. 849–861. doi:10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199873609.013.0063. ISBN 978-0-19-987360-9. "The Position of Anatolian" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 March 2012. Retrieved 4 May 2013. Balter, Michael (27 February 2004). "Search for the Indo-Europeans: Were Kurgan horsemen or Anatolian farmers responsible for creating and spreading the world's most far-flung language family?". Science. 303 (5662): 1323. doi:10.1126/science.303.5662.1323. PMID 14988549. S2CID 28212584. "Ziyaret Tepe – Turkey Archaeological Dig Site". uakron.edu. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 4 September 2010. "Assyrian Identity in Ancient Times And Today'" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 May 2020. Retrieved 4 September 2010. The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York (October 2000). "Anatolia and the Caucasus, 2000–1000 B.C. in 'Timeline of Art History.'". New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art. Archived from the original on 10 September 2006. Retrieved 21 December 2006. Abram Rigg Jr., Horace. "A Note on the Names Armânum and Urartu". Journal of the American Oriental Society, 57/4 (December 1937), pp. 416–418. Zimansky, Paul E. Ancient Ararat: A Handbook of Urartian Studies. Delmar, New York: Caravan Books, 1998, p. 28. ISBN 978-0-88206-091-0. Zimansky, Paul. Urartian Material Culture As State Assemblage: An Anomaly in the Archaeology of Empire. p. 103. Roux, Georges. Ancient Iraq. p. 314. Centre, UNESCO World Heritage. "New Inscribed Properties". UNESCO World Heritage Centre. Archived from the original on 6 July 2022. Retrieved 13 September 2022. Mark Cartwright. "Celsus Library". World History Encyclopedia. Archived from the original on 28 March 2024. Retrieved 2 February 2017. "Anatolia – Greek colonies on the Anatolian coasts, c. 1180–547 bce". Encyclopedia Britannica. Archived from the original on 19 June 2015. Retrieved 2 February 2024. Before the Greek migrations that followed the end of the Bronze Age (c. 1200 BCE), probably the only Greek-speaking communities on the west coast of Anatolia were Mycenaean settlements at Iasus and Müskebi on the Halicarnassus peninsula and walled Mycenaean colonies at Miletus and Colophon. Howard 2016, p. 27 Steadman & McMahon 2011, pp. 500, 753: "Prior to the coming of Alexander, the west coast of Anatolia was home to numerous settlements that can be considered, at least by the end of the Greek Archaic Period (494 b.c.e. ), to be predominantly “Greek.”...However, during the early Iron Age, Greek communities in Anatolia were largely (although not exclusively) limited to the western coastal region. Their cultural influence in the interior was relatively limited, only becoming dominant after Alexander"; "It is impossible to estimate the scale of Greek migrations after the collapse of the Mycenaean kingdoms" Steadman & McMahon 2011, pp. 505, 753 "Istanbul". britannica.com. Encyclopædia Britannica. 9 May 2023. Archived from the original on 1 April 2009. Retrieved 23 May 2021. Aristotle, Metaphysics Alpha, 983b18.  Smith, William, ed. (1870). "Thales". Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology. p. 1016. Michael Fowler, Early Greek Science: Thales to Plato Archived 20 December 2019 at the Wayback Machine, University of Virginia [Retrieved 16 June 2016] Frank N. Magill, The Ancient World: Dictionary of World Biography, Volume 1, Routledge, 2003 ISBN 1135457395 "The Temple of Artemis at Ephesus: The Un-Greek Temple and Wonder". World History Encyclopedia. Archived from the original on 28 March 2024. Retrieved 17 February 2017. D.M. Lewis; John Boardman (1994). The Cambridge Ancient History. Cambridge University Press. p. 444. ISBN 978-0-521-23348-4. Archived from the original on 15 January 2023. Retrieved 7 April 2013. Joseph Roisman, Ian Worthington. "A companion to Ancient Macedonia" Archived 4 April 2023 at the Wayback Machine John Wiley & Sons, 2011. ISBN 978-1-4443-5163-7 pp. 135–138, 343 Herodotus Book 8: Urania, 68 Archived 4 June 2014 at the Wayback Machine "...which have been fought near Euboea and have displayed deeds not inferior to those of others, speak to him thus:..." passages: 7.99, 8.68–69, 8.87–88, 8.93.2, 8.101–103 Hooker, Richard (6 June 1999). "Ancient Greece: The Persian Wars". Washington State University, Washington, United States. Archived from the original on 3 December 2010. Retrieved 22 December 2006. The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York (October 2000). "Anatolia and the Caucasus (Asia Minor), 1000 B.C. – 1 A.D. in Timeline of Art History.". New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art. Archived from the original on 14 December 2006. Retrieved 21 December 2006. Theo van den Hout (2011). The Elements of Hittite. Cambridge University Press. p. 1. ISBN 978-1-139-50178-1. Archived from the original on 15 January 2023. Retrieved 24 March 2013. Strobel, Karl (2013). "Central Anatolia". The Oxford Encyclopedia of the Bible and Archaeology. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-984653-5. Archived from the original on 28 March 2020. Retrieved 15 May 2018. Esler, Philip Francis (1998). Galatians. Routledge. p. 29. ISBN 978-0-415-11037-2. Galatai was the Greek word used for the Celts from beyond the Rhine who invaded regions of Macedonia, Greece, Thrace and Asia Minor in the period 280–275 BCE See Diod.5.32–33; Just.26.2. Cf. Liv.38.17; Strabo 13.4.2. The Foreign Policy of Mithridates VI Eupator, King of Pontus, by B. C. McGing, p. 11 Children of Achilles: The Greeks in Asia Minor Since the Days of Troy, by John Freely, pp. 69–70 Strabo of Amasia: A Greek Man of Letters in Augustan Rome, by Daniela Dueck, p. 3. McGing, Brian (2004). "Pontus". Encyclopaedia Iranica, online edition. Archived from the original on 24 July 2015. Retrieved 14 November 2019. Bosworth, A. B.; Wheatley, P. V. (November 1998). "The origins of the Pontic house". The Journal of Hellenic Studies. 118: 155–164. doi:10.2307/632236. ISSN 2041-4099. JSTOR 632236. S2CID 162855144. "Acts 11:26 and when he found him, he brought him back to Antioch. So for a full year they met together with the church and taught large numbers of people. The disciples were first called Christians at Antioch". biblehub.com. Archived from the original on 16 April 2019. Retrieved 14 July 2021. Encyclopaedia Biblica, Vol. I, p. 186 (p. 125 of 612 in online .pdf file). "Antioch". jewishencyclopedia.com. Archived from the original on 14 July 2021. Retrieved 14 July 2021. Acts 20:34 Cross, Frank L.; Livingstone, Elizabeth A., eds. (2005) [1957]. "Paul, St.". The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church (3rd rev. ed.). Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-280290-3. Archived from the original on 18 July 2023. Retrieved 18 July 2023. Grant, Robert M. (1997). Irenaeus of Lyons. Routledge. p. 2. Mark Golden (2011). "Mark Golden on Caroline Vout, Power and Eroticism" (PDF). The Ancient History Bulletin Online Reviews. 1: 64–66. Archived (PDF) from the original on 31 March 2022. Retrieved 23 March 2022. Anthony Birley, Restless Emperor, pp. 164–167 "Hagia Sophia". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on 29 April 2021. Retrieved 2 February 2017. Daniel C. Waugh (2004). "Constantinople/Istanbul". University of Washington, Seattle, Washington. Archived from the original on 17 September 2006. Retrieved 26 December 2006. Maas, Michael (2015). The Cambridge Companion to the Age of Attila. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-107-02175-4. Archived from the original on 28 March 2024. Retrieved 16 August 2018. Laiou & Morisson 2007, pp. 130–131 "Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople". britannica.com. Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on 5 December 2020. Retrieved 21 February 2023. Uchiyama et al. 2020: "Most linguists and historians agree that Proto-Turkic, the common ancestor of all ancient and contemporary Turkic languages, must have been spoken somewhere in Central-East Asia (e.g. Róna-Tas, Reference Róna-Tas1991, p. 35; Golden, Reference Golden1992, pp. 124–127; Menges, Reference Menges1995, pp. 16–19)." Uchiyama et al. 2020:"To sum up, the palaeolinguistic reconstruction points to a mixed subsistence strategy and complex economy of the Proto-Turkic-speaking community. It is likely that the subsistence of the Early Proto-Turkic speakers was based on a combination of hunting–gathering and agriculture, with a later shift to nomadic pastoralism as an economy basis, partly owing to the interaction of the Late Proto-Turkic groups with the Iranian-speaking herders of the Eastern Steppe." Findley 2005, p. 18: "Moreover, Turks do not all physically look alike. They never did. The Turks of Turkey are famous for their range of physical types. Given the Turks' ancient Inner Asian origins, it is easy to imagine that they once presented a uniform Mongoloid appearance. Such traits seem to be more characteristic in the eastern Turkic world; however, uniformity of type can never have prevailed there either. Archeological evidence indicates that Indo-Europeans, or certainly Europoid physical types, inhabited the oases of the Tarim basin and even parts of Mongolia in ancient times. In the Tarim basin, persistence of these former inhabitants' genes among the modern Uyghurs is both observable and scientifically demonstrable.32 Early Chinese sources describe the Kirghiz as blue-eyed and blond or red-haired. The genesis of Turkic ethnic groups from earliest times occurred in confederations of diverse peoples. As if to prove the point, the earliest surviving texts in Turkic languages are studded with terms from other languages." Golden, Peter B. (25 July 2018). "The Ethnogonic Tales of the Türks". The Medieval History Journal. 21 (2): 291–327. doi:10.1177/0971945818775373. ISSN 0971-9458. S2CID 166026934. Archived from the original on 14 February 2021. Retrieved 12 March 2024."Some DNA tests point to the Iranian connections of the Ashina and Ashide,133 highlighting further that the Turks as a whole 'were made up of heterogeneous and somatically dissimilar populations'.134 Geographically, the accounts cover the regions of Inner Mongolia, Gansu, Xinjiang, the Yenisei zone and the Altay, regions with Turkic, Indo-European (Iranian [Saka] and Tokharian), Yeniseic, Uralic and other populations. Wusun elements, like most steppe polities of an ethno-linguistic mix, may have also played a substratal role." Lee & Kuang 2017: "Both Chinese histories and modern dna studies indicate that the early and medieval Turkic peoples were made up of heterogeneous populations" Lee 2023, p. 84 Wink, Andre (1990). Al Hind: The Making of the Indo Islamic World, Vol. 1, Early Medieval India and the Expansion of Islam, 7th–11th Centuries. Brill Academic Publishers. p. 21. ISBN 978-90-04-09249-5. Lee 2023, p. 91 Howard 2016, p. 34 Peacock 2015, p. 9 Jeffreys, Haldon & Cormack 2008, pp. 778–779: "Thus the majority of traditional 'Greek' lands, including the coastal areas of Asia Minor, remained essentially Greek-speaking, despite the superimposition of Latin and the later Slavic incursions into the Balkans during the sixth and seventh centuries. Even on the Anatolian plateau, where Hellenic culture had come only with Alexander's conquests, both the extremely heterogeneous indigenous populations and immigrant groups (including Celts, Goths, Jews, and Persians) had become heavily Hellenized, as the steady decline in epigraphic evidence for the native languages and the great mass of public and private inscriptions in Greek demonstrate. Though the disappearance of these languages from the written record did not entail their immediate abandonment as spoken languages,..." Howard 2016, pp. 34–36 Howard 2016, p. 36 Leonard 2006, p. 1576 Findley 2005, pp. 71–73, 225 Howard 2016, pp. 36–38 Howard 2016, p. 33 Fierro 2010, p. 303 Davison 1990, p. 4 Howard 2016, pp. 37–39 Howard 2016, p. 38 Fierro 2010, pp. 308–310 Fierro 2010, pp. 309–310 Fierro 2010, pp. 313–314 Lee 2023, p. 94 Howard 2016, pp. 40–41 Howard 2016, p. 43 Agoston & Masters 2009, p. 302 "Ottoman/Turkish Visions of the Nation, 1860–1950". Retrieved 18 February 2015. Niall Ferguson (2 January 2008). "An Ottoman warning for indebted America". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 25 January 2014. Retrieved 5 September 2016. Todorova, Maria (2009). Imagining the Balkans. Oxford University Press. p. 175. ISBN 978-0-19-972838-1. Retrieved 15 June 2013. Mann, Michael (2005). The Dark Side of Democracy: Explaining Ethnic Cleansing. Cambridge University Press. p. 118. ISBN 978-0-521-53854-1. Archived from the original on 28 March 2024. Retrieved 28 February 2013. "Collapse of the Ottoman Empire, 1918–1920". nzhistory.net.nz. Archived from the original on 19 December 2015. Retrieved 9 August 2014. Isa Blumi (2013). Ottoman Refugees, 1878–1939: Migration in a Post-Imperial World. Bloomsbury Academic. ISBN 978-1-4725-1536-0. Archived from the original on 29 December 2020. Retrieved 23 April 2020. Kaser 2011, p. 336 Gibney & Hansen 2005, p. 437 Biondich 2011, p. 93 Pekesen 2012 Kaser 2011, p. 336 Karpat 2001, p. 343 Karpat 2004, pp. 5–6 Howard 2016, p. 70 Karpat 2001, p. 343 Armour 2012, p. 213 Mojzes, Paul (November 2013). "Ethnic cleansing in the Balkans, why did it happen and could it happen again" (PDF). Cicero Foundation. Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 February 2024. Retrieved 23 February 2024. Simons, Marlise (22 August 1993). "Center of Ottoman Power". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 12 July 2018. Retrieved 4 June 2009. "Dolmabahce Palace". dolmabahcepalace.com. Archived from the original on 16 March 2016. Retrieved 4 August 2014. "Armenian Genocide". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on 1 November 2020. Retrieved 4 January 2023. "Fact Sheet: Armenian Genocide". University of Michigan. Archived from the original on 18 August 2010. Retrieved 15 July 2010. Freedman, Jeri (2009). The Armenian genocide (1st ed.). Rosen Pub. Group. ISBN 978-1-4042-1825-3. Archived from the original on 14 January 2023. Retrieved 3 April 2015. Totten, Samuel, Paul Robert Bartrop, Steven L. Jacobs (eds.) Dictionary of Genocide. Greenwood Publishing Group, 2008, p. 19. ISBN 978-0-313-34642-2. "Erdogan: Turkey will 'never accept' genocide charges". Deutsche Welle. Archived from the original on 7 February 2018. Retrieved 7 February 2018. Raziye Akkoç (15 October 2015). "ECHR: Why Turkey won't talk about the Armenian genocide". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 28 May 2016. Donald Bloxham (2005). The Great Game of Genocide: Imperialism, Nationalism, And the Destruction of the Ottoman Armenians. Oxford University Press. p. 150. ISBN 978-0-19-927356-0. Retrieved 9 February 2013. Levene, Mark (Winter 1998). "Creating a Modern 'Zone of Genocide': The Impact of Nation- and State-Formation on Eastern Anatolia, 1878–1923". Holocaust and Genocide Studies. 12 (3): 393–433. doi:10.1093/hgs/12.3.393. Ferguson, Niall (2007). The War of the World: Twentieth-Century Conflict and the Descent of the West. Penguin Group. p. 180. ISBN 978-0-14-311239-6. "The Treaty of Sèvres, 1920". Harold B. Library, Brigham Young University. Archived from the original on 12 November 2017. Retrieved 18 April 2020. Mango, Andrew (2000). Atatürk: The Biography of the Founder of Modern Turkey. Overlook. p. lxxviii. ISBN 978-1-58567-011-6. Robert H. Hewsen. Armenia: A Historical Atlas, p. 237. ISBN 0-226-33228-4 Psomiades, Harry J. (2000). The Eastern Question, the Last Phase: a study in Greek-Turkish diplomacy. Pella. pp. 27–38. ISBN 0-918618-79-7. Macfie, A. L. (1979). "The Chanak affair (September–October 1922)". Balkan Studies. 20 (2): 309–41. Heper, Metin; Criss, Nur Bilge (2009). Historical Dictionary of Turkey. Scarecrow Press. ISBN 978-0-8108-6281-4. Archived from the original on 28 March 2024. Retrieved 13 October 2020. Darwin, J. G. (February 1980). "The Chanak Crisis and the British Cabinet". History. 65 (213): 32–48. doi:10.1111/j.1468-229X.1980.tb02082.x. Dawson, Robert MacGregor (1958). William Lyon Mackenzie King: A Political Biography, 1874-1923. University of Toronto Press. pp. 401–416. Axiarlis, Evangelia (2014). Political Islam and the Secular State in Turkey: Democracy, Reform and the Justice and Development Party. I.B. Tauris. p. 11. Clogg, Richard (2002). A Concise History of Greece. Cambridge University Press. p. 101. ISBN 978-0-521-00479-4. Archived from the original on 28 March 2024. Retrieved 9 February 2013. Gerhard Bowering; Patricia Crone; Wadad Kadi; Devin J. Stewart; Muhammad Qasim Zaman; Mahan Mirza (2012). The Princeton Encyclopedia of Islamic Political Thought. Princeton University Press. p. 49. ISBN 978-1-4008-3855-4. Retrieved 14 August 2013. Following the revolution, Mustafa Kemal became an important figure in the military ranks of the Ottoman Committee of Union and Progress (CUP) as a protégé ... Although the sultanate had already been abolished in November 1922, the republic was founded in October 1923. ... ambitious reform programme aimed at the creation of a modern, secular state and the construction of a new identity for its citizens. Hassan, Mona (10 January 2017). Longing for the Lost Caliphate: A Transregional History. Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-1-4008-8371-4. Archived from the original on 17 January 2023. Retrieved 23 April 2020. Soner Çağaptay (2002). "Reconfiguring the Turkish nation in the 1930s". Nationalism and Ethnic Politics. 8 (2). Yale University: 67–82. doi:10.1080/13537110208428662. S2CID 143855822. "Growth in United Nations membership (1945–2005)". United Nations. 3 July 2006. Archived from the original on 17 January 2016. Retrieved 30 October 2006. Hale, William Mathew (1994). Turkish Politics and the Military. Routledge. pp. 161, 215, 246. ISBN 978-0-415-02455-6. Arsu, Sebsem (12 April 2012). "Turkish Military Leaders Held for Role in '97 Coup". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 1 January 2022. Retrieved 11 August 2014. "Chronology of Turkey-EU relations". Turkish Secretariat of European Union Affairs. Archived from the original on 15 May 2007. Retrieved 30 October 2006. "Interview with European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso on BBC Sunday AM" (PDF). European Commission. 15 October 2006. Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 November 2006. Retrieved 17 December 2006. "European Parliament votes to suspend Turkey's EU membership bid". Deutsche Welle. 13 March 2019. Archived from the original on 10 October 2019. Retrieved 10 October 2019. "Recep Tayyip Erdogan wins Turkish presidential election". BBC News. 10 August 2014. Archived from the original on 25 November 2022. Retrieved 25 November 2022. Cunningham, Erin; Sly, Liz; Karatas, Zeynep (16 July 2016). "Turkey rounds up thousands of suspected participants in coup attempt". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 18 July 2016. Retrieved 17 July 2016. "Here's why Turkish opposition parties are contesting the referendum results". Washington Post. 16 April 2017. Archived from the original on 19 April 2017. Retrieved 17 April 2017. "General Structure of Turkish Public Administration" (PDF). justice.gov.tr/. Ministry of Justice. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 March 2015. Retrieved 14 August 2014. "Ministry of Internal Affairs: Administrative Units in Turkey". Archived from the original on 18 August 2014. Retrieved 17 April 2020. "CIA World Factbook: Turkey". Cia.gov. Archived from the original on 10 January 2021. Retrieved 29 August 2011. "Turkey: Government". globaledge.msu.edu. Archived from the original on 23 May 2022. Retrieved 11 April 2022. Esen, Berk; Gumuscu, Sebnem (11 May 2020). "Why did Turkish democracy collapse? A political economy account of AKP's authoritarianism". Party Politics. 27 (6). SAGE Publications: 1075–1091. doi:10.1177/1354068820923722. hdl:11693/75894. ISSN 1354-0688. S2CID 219458590. Borsuk, Imren; Levin, Paul T. (3 April 2021). "Social coexistence and violence during Turkey's authoritarian transition". Southeast European and Black Sea Studies. 21 (2). Informa UK Limited: 175–187. doi:10.1080/14683857.2021.1909292. ISSN 1468-3857. S2CID 233594832. "Duties and Powers". global.tbmm.gov.tr. The Grand National Assembly of Turkey. Archived from the original on 5 April 2019. Retrieved 12 April 2022. "Duties and Powers". Presidency Of The Republic Of Turkey. Archived from the original on 15 May 2023. Retrieved 11 April 2022. "Law on Constitutional Court". anayasa.gov.tr. Archived from the original on 7 March 2022. Retrieved 12 April 2022. "Turkish women celebrate 85th anniversary of suffrage". Hürriyet Daily News. 5 December 2019. Archived from the original on 12 April 2022. Retrieved 12 April 2022. "Euro court backs Turkey Islamist ban". BBC. 31 July 2001. Archived from the original on 7 July 2018. Retrieved 14 December 2006. "Turkey's Kurd party ban criticized". BBC. 14 March 2003. Archived from the original on 7 July 2018. Retrieved 14 December 2006. ERGİN, Sedat (18 March 2023). "Mahkeme, Yeşiller ile İçişleri Bakanlığı arasındaki kritik davada kimi haklı buldu?" [Who did the court find right in the critical case between the Greens and the Ministry of Interior?]. Hürriyet (in Turkish). Archived from the original on 18 March 2023. Retrieved 18 March 2023. "AK Party, MHP announce draft for Turkey's new election law". Daily Sabah. 14 March 2022. Archived from the original on 21 March 2022. Retrieved 22 March 2022. Yılmaz, Hakan. "Conservatism in Turkey" (PDF). European Stability Initiative. Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 March 2022. Retrieved 12 April 2022. Kate Fleet; Suraiya Faroqhi; Reşat Kasaba (2008). The Cambridge History of Turkey. Cambridge University Press. pp. 357–358. ISBN 978-0-521-62096-3. Archived from the original on 17 January 2023. Retrieved 13 June 2013. "Erdogan wins Turkey's election". CNN. 28 May 2023. Archived from the original on 28 May 2023. Retrieved 28 May 2023. "Erdogan wins five more years as Turkey's president". BBC. 28 May 2023. Archived from the original on 28 May 2023. Retrieved 28 May 2023. "2023 seçimleri: TBMM'de yer alacak 600 milletvekili belli oldu". www.cumhuriyet.com.tr (in Turkish). 15 May 2023. Archived from the original on 30 May 2023. Retrieved 29 May 2023. Tarman, Z. Derya (2012). "Turkey". In Smits, Jan M. (ed.). Elgar Encyclopedia of Comparative Law (2nd ed.). Edward Elgar. p. 940. ISBN 978-1-84980-415-8. Archived from the original on 6 April 2023. Retrieved 20 March 2023. Tarman, Z. Derya (2012). "Turkey". In Smits, Jan M. (ed.). Elgar Encyclopedia of Comparative Law (2nd ed.). Edward Elgar. p. 941. ISBN 978-1-84980-415-8. Archived from the original on 6 April 2023. Retrieved 20 March 2023. "European Commission: Turkey 2015 report" (PDF). European Commission. 10 November 2015. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 August 2016. Retrieved 6 July 2016. "European Parliament resolution of 14 April 2016 on the 2015 report on Turkey". European Parliament. 14 April 2016. Archived from the original on 17 August 2016. Retrieved 6 July 2016. "Turkey's institutions are failing to comply with good governance principles and combat corruption". Transparency International. 7 April 2016. Archived from the original on 3 December 2019. Retrieved 6 July 2016. "As ISIS attacks mount, Turkey steps up its war on free speech". Newsweek. 6 July 2016. Archived from the original on 3 February 2017. Retrieved 6 July 2016. Mardell, Mark (11 December 2006). "Turkey's EU membership bid stalls". BBC. Archived from the original on 22 January 2009. Retrieved 17 December 2006. "U.S. Relations With Turkey". state.gov. U.S. Department of State. 12 August 2021. Archived from the original on 5 January 2023. Retrieved 6 January 2023. "Turkey: Background and U.S. Relations" (PDF). fas.org. 22 December 2022. Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 December 2014. Retrieved 6 January 2023. Huston, James A. (1988). Outposts and Allies: U.S. Army Logistics in the Cold War, 1945–1953. Susquehanna University Press. p. 134. ISBN 978-0-941664-84-4. Archived from the original on 28 March 2024. Retrieved 3 April 2015. Ziya Öniş, ŞuhnazYılmaz. "Turkey-EU-US Triangle in Perspective: Transformation or Continuity?" (PDF). istanbul2004.ku.edu.tr/. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 March 2014. Retrieved 4 August 2014. Mitrovic, Marija (24 March 2014). Turkish Foreign Policy towards the Balkans (PDF). Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Philosophische Fakultät III, Institut für Sozialwissenschaften. doi:10.18452/3090. Archived (PDF) from the original on 14 August 2014. Retrieved 9 August 2014 – via edoc.hu-berlin.de Open access publication server of the Humboldt University. İdris Bal (2004). Turkish Foreign Policy in Post Cold War Era. Universal-Publishers. p. 269. ISBN 978-1-58112-423-1. Retrieved 15 June 2013. Taspinar, Omer (September 2008). "Turkey's Middle East Policies: Between Neo-Ottomanism and Kemalism". Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. Archived from the original on 12 January 2011. Retrieved 5 June 2010. Murinson, Alexander (2009). Turkey's Entente with Israel and Azerbaijan: State Identity and Security in the Middle East and Caucasus (Routledge Studies in Middle Eastern Politics). Routledge. p. 119. ISBN 978-0-415-77892-3. "Syria ratchets up tension with Turkey – warning it of dangers of rebel support". Euronews. 4 October 2013. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 18 October 2013. "Turkey, Egypt recall envoys in wake of violence". Bloomberg. 16 August 2013. Archived from the original on 28 September 2013. Yaşar Yakış (29 September 2014). "On Relations between Turkey and Egypt". Turkish Weekly. Archived from the original on 5 October 2014. Retrieved 19 November 2014. Ragıp Soylu (5 April 2022). "Turkey to appoint ambassador to Egypt, ending nine-year standoff". middleeasteye.net. Archived from the original on 31 December 2022. Retrieved 31 December 2022. Merve Aydoğan (28 November 2022). "Türkiye may appoint ambassador to Egypt in near future". aa.com.tr. Anadolu Agency. Archived from the original on 31 December 2022. Retrieved 31 December 2022. "Erdogan says he may meet Syria's Assad for 'peace' in the region". aljazeera.com. Al Jazeera. 5 January 2023. Archived from the original on 6 January 2023. Retrieved 6 January 2023. "Leaders of Turkey, Syria could meet for peace – Erdogan". reuters.com. Reuters. 6 January 2023. Archived from the original on 6 January 2023. Retrieved 6 January 2023. "Egyptian foreign minister to go to Turkey, Syria for first time in a decade". france24.com. France 24. 26 February 2023. Archived from the original on 27 February 2023. Retrieved 27 February 2023. "Israel and Turkey end rift over Gaza flotilla killings". BBC News. BBC. 27 June 2016. Archived from the original on 5 May 2022. Retrieved 27 June 2016. "Greece, Egypt, Cyprus urge Turkey to quit gas search off island". Reuters. 29 October 2014. Archived from the original on 12 March 2016. Retrieved 19 November 2014. "Egypt, Greece, Cyprus pledge to boost energy cooperation". Reuters. 8 November 2014. Archived from the original on 27 June 2016. Retrieved 19 November 2014. "Cyprus: EU 'appeasement' of Turkey in exploration row will go nowhere". Reuters. 17 August 2020. Archived from the original on 17 August 2020. Retrieved 13 September 2020. "Turkey threatens Greece over disputed Mediterranean territorial claims". Deutsche Welle. 5 September 2020. Archived from the original on 7 April 2022. Retrieved 13 September 2020. "Syria conflict: Turkey and Russia 'agree ceasefire plan'". BBC News. BBC. 28 December 2016. Archived from the original on 15 June 2022. Retrieved 21 June 2018. "Turkey and Russia agree on draft Syria ceasefire, report says". CNN. 28 December 2016. Archived from the original on 10 July 2022. Retrieved 30 December 2016. "How Russia and Turkey brokered peace in Syria – and sidelined the US". CNN. 30 December 2016. Archived from the original on 1 April 2022. Retrieved 30 December 2016. "Turkey starts ground incursion into Kurdish-controlled Afrin in Syria". The Guardian. 21 January 2018. Archived from the original on 6 June 2020. Retrieved 7 January 2023. Aaron Stein; Michelle Foley (26 January 2016). "The YPG-PKK connection". Atlantic Council. Archived from the original on 31 December 2022. Retrieved 31 December 2022. "PKK". mfa.gov.tr. Republic of Türkiye, Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Archived from the original on 25 March 2023. Retrieved 31 December 2022. "Turkey takes full control of Syria's Afrin: military source". reuters.com. Reuters. 24 March 2018. Archived from the original on 7 January 2023. Retrieved 7 January 2023. "The YPG menace: Understanding PKK's Syria offshoot". trtworld.com. TRT World. 25 May 2022. Archived from the original on 7 January 2023. Retrieved 7 January 2023. Iraq accuses Turkey after air raids kill tourists | Al Jazeera Newsfeed, Al Jazeera English, 21 July 2022, archived from the original on 18 March 2024, retrieved 18 March 2024 – via YouTube Dana Taib Menmy (23 June 2020). "Fear and anger greets Turkish air strikes in northern Iraq". Middle East Eye. Archived from the original on 18 March 2024. Retrieved 18 March 2024. "Turkish incursions and air strikes on Iraqi territory have been a constant issue for the Iraqi foreign ministry since 2003, with no resolution in sight," Sajad Jiyad, a political analyst based in Baghdad, told MEE. Gareth Jennings (24 November 2022). "Turkish future fighter comes together ahead of 'victory day' roll-out". janes.com. Archived from the original on 17 February 2023. Retrieved 4 December 2022. "Turkey's Domestic 5th Generation TF-X Fighter Jet Is On The Final Assembly Line". overtdefense.com. 25 November 2022. Archived from the original on 4 December 2022. Retrieved 4 December 2022. Joseph Trevithick (10 January 2023). "Unique Sensor Setup Emerges On Turkey's Stealthy New Fighter". thedrive.com. Archived from the original on 14 March 2023. Retrieved 12 January 2023. Turkish General Staff (2006). "Turkish Armed Forces Defense Organization". Turkish Armed Forces. Archived from the original on 18 February 2009. Retrieved 15 December 2006. United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), Directorate for Movements of Persons, Migration and Consular Affairs – Asylum and Migration Division (July 2001). "Turkey/Military service" (PDF). UNHCR. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 November 2006. Retrieved 27 December 2006. "EBCO: European Bureau for Conscientious Objection". Ebco-beoc.eu. Archived from the original on 10 January 2016. Retrieved 4 September 2010. Emma Helfrich (11 April 2023). "Turkey's 'Drone Carrier' Amphibious Assault Ship Enters Service". thedrive.com. Archived from the original on 28 June 2023. Retrieved 12 April 2023. "TCG Anadolu (L-400) at the Bosporus strait in Istanbul". TRT Haber. 23 April 2023. Archived from the original on 17 May 2023. Retrieved 16 May 2023. "TCG Anadolu (L-400) at the Bosporus strait in Istanbul". Anadolu Agency. 23 April 2023. Archived from the original on 24 April 2023. Retrieved 16 May 2023. "TCG Anadolu (L-400) at the Bosporus strait in Istanbul". haberturk.com. Habertürk. 23 April 2023. Archived from the original on 16 May 2023. Retrieved 16 May 2023. "Baykar's unmanned fighter aircraft completes first flight". baykartech.com. 15 December 2022. Archived from the original on 9 July 2023. Retrieved 17 December 2022. Tayfun Özberk (1 May 2022). "Here Is How UAVs Will Be Recovered Aboard TCG Anadolu". navalnews.com. Naval News. Archived from the original on 23 November 2023. Retrieved 4 December 2022. "Flight of the Baykar MIUS Kızılelma UCAV at Teknofest 2023". Savunma Sanayii. 30 April 2023. Archived from the original on 3 May 2023. Retrieved 3 May 2023. "Baykar MIUS Kızılelma UCAV flies in formation with the Turkish Stars aerobatics team of the Turkish Air Force". Habertürk TV. 7 June 2023. Archived from the original on 6 June 2023. Retrieved 7 June 2023. The International Institute for Strategic Studies (2022). The Military Balance. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-032-27900-8. ISSN 0459-7222. "Der Spiegel: Foreign Minister Wants US Nukes out of Germany (10 April 2009)". Der Spiegel. 30 March 2009. Archived from the original on 14 February 2012. Retrieved 1 November 2010. Hans M. Kristensen. "NRDC: U.S. Nuclear Weapons in Europe" (PDF). Natural Resources Defense Council, 2005. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 January 2011. Retrieved 1 November 2010. "Mapping the Turkish Military's Expanding Footprint". Bloomberg. 7 March 2019. Retrieved 17 March 2022. Larrabee, F. Stephen; Lesser, Ian O. (2003). Turkish foreign policy in an age of uncertainty. Rand Corporation. pp. 94. ISBN 978-0-8330-3404-5. albania. "What is Turkey doing in Iraq?". Hürriyet Daily News. 8 October 2016. Archived from the original on 19 October 2017. Retrieved 5 April 2017. "Seeing shared threats, Turkey sets up military base in Qatar". Reuters. 28 April 2016. Archived from the original on 8 February 2019. Retrieved 2 July 2017. "Turkey to open its largest military base in Somalia". TRT World. 30 September 2017. Archived from the original on 9 September 2022. Retrieved 21 June 2018. Richmond, Oliver P. (1998). Mediating in Cyprus: The Cypriot Communities and the United Nations. Psychology Press. p. 260. ISBN 978-0-7146-4877-4. Retrieved 9 February 2013. "Enter the EU Battle Groups" (PDF). Chaillot Paper no. 97. European Union Institute for Security Studies. February 2007. p. 88. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 18 February 2012. "Contribution of Turkish Armed Forces to Peace Support Operations". tsk.tr. Turkish Armed Forces. Archived from the original on 19 February 2015. Retrieved 3 August 2014. "Turkey finalizes military training base in Somalia". hurriyetdailynews.com. 3 October 2016. Archived from the original on 6 April 2017. Retrieved 5 April 2017. "Turkey trains Kurdish peshmerga forces in fight against Islamic State". Reuters. 22 November 2014. Archived from the original on 23 April 2022. Retrieved 5 April 2017. "European Court of Human Rights: Turkey Ranks First in Violations in between 1959–2011". Bianet – Bagimsiz Iletisim Agi. Archived from the original on 20 January 2016. Retrieved 29 December 2015. The European Court of Human Rights (2015). Annual report, 2014 (PDF) (Report). Registry of the European Court. ISBN 978-92-871-9919-5. Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 September 2020. Retrieved 29 December 2015. "Human rights in Turkey: still a long way to go to meet accession criteria". European Parliament Human Rights committee. 26 October 2010. Archived from the original on 15 June 2011. Retrieved 9 February 2013. Zürcher, Erik J. (2004). Turkey A Modern History, Revised Edition. I.B. Tauris. p. 263. ISBN 978-1-85043-399-6. Archived from the original on 13 January 2023. Retrieved 23 April 2020. "U.S. Department of State – Bureau of Counterterrorism: Foreign Terrorist Organizations". U.S. Department of State. Archived from the original on 16 December 2020. Retrieved 18 April 2020. "Council of the European Union: Council Decision (CFSP) 2019/1341 of 8 August 2019 updating the list of persons, groups and entities subject to Articles 2, 3 and 4 of Common Position 2001/931/CFSP on the application of specific measures to combat terrorism". Official Journal of the European Union. Archived from the original on 18 December 2020. Retrieved 18 April 2020. "Who are Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) rebels?". bbc.com. BBC. 4 November 2016. Archived from the original on 9 December 2020. Retrieved 19 June 2021. Bilgin, Fevzi; Sarihan, Ali, eds. (2013). Understanding Turkey's Kurdish Question. Lexington Books. p. 90. ISBN 978-0-7391-8403-5. Archived from the original on 17 January 2023. Retrieved 31 October 2018. Balci, Ali (2016). The PKK-Kurdistan Workers' Party's Regional Politics: During and After the Cold War. Springer. p. 96. ISBN 978-3-319-42219-0. Archived from the original on 17 January 2023. Retrieved 31 October 2018. White, Paul (2015). The PKK: Coming Down from the Mountains. Zed Books Ltd. ISBN 978-1-78360-040-3. Archived from the original on 17 January 2023. Retrieved 24 July 2017. Stanton, Jessica A. (2016). Violence and Restraint in Civil War: Civilian Targeting in the Shadow of International Law. Cambridge University Press. p. 217. ISBN 978-1-107-06910-7. Archived from the original on 28 March 2024. Retrieved 24 July 2017. "Turkish lecturer to be put on trial for posing exam question on PKK leader". The Guardian. Agence France-Presse. 2 February 2016. Archived from the original on 10 June 2022. Retrieved 24 July 2017. "Ever closer to independence". The Economist. Archived from the original on 19 October 2017. Retrieved 24 July 2017. "İşte TBMM'nin 'dokunulmazlık' tablosu: 1980'den bu yana 44 vekillik düştü". 2000. Archived from the original on 23 October 2022. Retrieved 19 October 2022. Mullen, Jethro; Cullinane, Susannah (4 June 2013). "What's driving unrest and protests in Turkey?". CNN. Archived from the original on 14 October 2017. Retrieved 6 June 2013. "Turkish parliament moves to strip lawmakers' immunity from prosecution Archived 21 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine". Deutsche Welle. 20 May 2016. "Turkey Violated Pro-Kurdish MPs' Rights, European Court Rules". Balkan Insight. 1 February 2022. Archived from the original on 11 November 2022. Retrieved 11 November 2022. "Turkey defends purge of government officials". Deutsche Welle. 12 October 2016. Archived from the original on 11 November 2022. Retrieved 11 November 2022. "Turkey sacks more than 18,000 personnel ahead of expected lifting of emergency rule". Reuters. 8 July 2018. "2020 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices: Turkey". United States Department of State. Archived from the original on 31 October 2022. Retrieved 11 November 2022. Turkey's Press Freedom Crisis. "Turkey's Press Freedom Crisis". Committee to Protect Journalists. Archived from the original on 3 February 2013. Retrieved 9 February 2013. "Turkey's crackdown propels number of journalists in jail worldwide to record high". cpj.org. Retrieved 17 January 2017. "Turkish Journalists Targeted by Prosecutions, Fines, Jail Terms: Report". Balkan Insight. 25 January 2022. Archived from the original on 11 November 2022. Retrieved 11 November 2022. "Turkey jails 16 Kurdish journalists over propaganda charges". Reuters. 16 June 2022. "Russia, China and Turkey top yearly list of music freedom violations". cpj.org. Retrieved 15 October 2022. "17th İstanbul LGBTI+ Pride Parade: Police Attack with Shields, Pepper Gas After Pride Parade Statement Read". Bianet – Bagimsiz Iletisim Agi. Tehmina Kazi (7 October 2011). "The Ottoman empire's secular history undermines sharia claims". The Guardian. Retrieved 23 August 2015. "islam and homosexuality". 11 November 2015. Archived from the original on 25 October 2015. Retrieved 2 November 2015. Birch, Nicholas (19 July 2008). "Was Ahmet Yildiz the victim of Turkey's first gay honour killing?". Independent. Retrieved 8 May 2021. "İstanbul Valiliği: Onur yürüyüşüne izin verilmeyecek". BBC News Türkçe (in Turkish). 17 June 2016. Retrieved 8 May 2021. "Onur Yürüyüşü'nde 20 gözaltı". gazeteduvar.com.tr (in Turkish). 22 June 2019. Retrieved 8 May 2021. "Ankara Valiliği'nden LGBT etkinliklerine yasak". BBC News Türkçe (in Turkish). 19 November 2017. Retrieved 8 May 2021. "Almost half of people in Turkey think that LGBT+ people should have equal rights, nine percent more than last year, according to a survey". Retrieved 11 May 2010. "Perceptions of Gender Equality". Retrieved 11 May 2010. "Of 23 Countries Surveyed, Majority (65%) in 20 Countries Support Legal Recognition of Same-Sex Unions". Ipsos. 29 March 2015. Archived from the original on 3 June 2015. "Turkey's LGBT community draws hope from Harvey Milk". Al Monitor. 17 June 2016. Retrieved 27 January 2022. Metz, Helen Chapin, ed. (1996). "Geography". Turkey: A Country Study. Area handbook series (fifth ed.). US GPO for the Federal Research Division of the Library of Congress. ISBN 978-0-8444-0864-4. LCCN 95049612. "UN Demographic Yearbook" (PDF). Retrieved 1 November 2010. US Library of Congress. "Geography of Turkey". US Library of Congress. Retrieved 13 December 2006. "Geography of Turkey". Turkish Ministry of Tourism. 2005. Retrieved 13 December 2006. Woods, Andrew J. (1973). The Center of the Earth. I.C.R. Technical Monographs. Vol. 3. I.C.R. Scheffel, Richard L.; Wernet, Susan J., eds. (1980). Natural Wonders of the World. Reader's Digest Association, Inc. p. 286. ISBN 978-0-89577-087-5. "Hierapolis-Pamukkale World Heritage Site". UNESCO World Heritage Center. Retrieved 17 January 2022. "Retrofitting and Reconstruction Works" (PDF). Istanbul Seismic Risk Mitigation and Emergency Preparedness Project. p. 10. Taking a retrospective look at the earthquake records, it is observed that a major part of Turkey's territory with high earthquake activity. Therefore, medium (and above) scale earthquakes frequently occur around the country. "Armenian Highland – Historic Region". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 28 November 2018. Armenian Highland, mountainous region of western Asia. It lies mainly in Turkey, occupies all of Armenia, and includes southern Georgia, western Azerbaijan, and northwestern Iran. "Mount Ararat". britannica.com. Retrieved 18 February 2015. "Lake Van". britannica.com. Retrieved 18 February 2015. "Lake Salda Rocks". jpl.nasa.gov. NASA. 27 January 2021. "Searching for Life in NASA's Perseverance Mars Samples". jpl.nasa.gov. NASA. 17 February 2021. Dikmen, Yesim (9 March 2021). "Mars on Earth: Turkish lake may hold clues to ancient life on planet". Reuters. "Biodiversity in Turkey". 6 May 2012. Archived from the original on 7 April 2016. Retrieved 9 August 2014. "Turkey's flora and fauna". allaboutturkey.com. Retrieved 12 June 2014. Couzens, Dominic (2008). Top 100 Birding Sites of the World. University of California Press. pp. 73–75. ISBN 978-0-520-25932-4. "Pontic Mountains and highlands". Archived from the original on 26 February 2014. Retrieved 9 August 2014. Blunt, Wilfrid. Tulipomania. p. 7. E.S. Forster (trans. et ed.), The Turkish Letters of Ogier Ghiselin de Busbecq (Oxford, 1927). "Statistics". milliparklar.gov.tr. Ministry of Forest and Water – General Directorare of Nature Conservation and National Parks. Archived from the original on 17 December 2015. Retrieved 12 June 2014. Kazancı, Nizamettin; Kuzucuoğlu, Catherine (2019), Kuzucuoğlu, Catherine; Çiner, Attila; Kazancı, Nizamettin (eds.), "Threats and Conservation of Landscapes in Turkey", Landscapes and Landforms of Turkey, World Geomorphological Landscapes, Springer International Publishing, pp. 603–632, doi:10.1007/978-3-030-03515-0_36, ISBN 978-3-030-03515-0, S2CID 134498356 Can, O.E. (2004). Status, conservation and management of large carnivores in Turkey. Convention on the Conservation of European Wildlife and Natural Habitats. Standing Committee, 24th meeting, 29 November-3 December 2004, Strasbourg. "Diyarbakır'da öldürülen leopar İran Parsı çıktı". 19 November 2013. Archived from the original on 23 October 2016. Retrieved 21 July 2015. Üstay, A.H. (1990). Hunting in Turkey. BBA, Istanbul. "Specific Animals of Turkey". gateofturkey.com. Archived from the original on 5 March 2016. Retrieved 12 June 2014. "Türkiye'nin Köppen-Geiger iklim tipleri haritası Appendix". ResearchGate. Retrieved 11 November 2023. "Climate of Turkey" (PDF). General Directorate of Meteorology. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 March 2014. Retrieved 24 January 2014. "People at risk of poverty or social exclusion". ec.europa.eu. Eurostat. Retrieved 27 December 2020. "Unemployment, total (% of total labor force) (national estimate) – Turkey | Data". data.worldbank.org. Retrieved 14 April 2021. "New World Bank Report Looks at Turkey's Rise to the Threshold of High-Income Status and the Challenges Remaining". World Bank. 10 December 2014. Retrieved 14 April 2021. "The Fate of Turkey's Battered Lira Hangs With Local Investors". bloomberg.com. Bloomberg. 14 October 2021. "Turkish lira falls out of favour with local investors again". aljazeera.com. Al Jazeera. 14 October 2021. "International Reserves and Foreign Currency Liquidity – March 2023". tcmb.gov.tr. Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey. Retrieved 25 April 2023. "TOGG Official Website". togg.com.tr. Retrieved 3 April 2020. Jay Ramey (30 December 2019). "Turkey Bets on EVs with the Pininfarina-Designed TOGG". autoweek.com. "'A game changer': Türkiye inaugurates its first national car plant". TRT World. 30 October 2022. Dan Mihalascu (4 November 2022). "Turkey's National Carmaker Togg Starts Production Of 2023 C SUV EV". insideevs.com. Bartolomiej Kaminski; Francis Ng (1 May 2006). "Turkey's evolving trade integration into Pan-European markets" (PDF). World Bank. p. 3. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 June 2007. Retrieved 27 December 2006. "Foreign direct investment, net inflows (BoP, current US$) – Turkey". The World Bank. Retrieved 10 August 2021. "2022 Production Statistics". oica.net. OICA. Retrieved 18 April 2023. "The Shipbuilding Industry in Turkey" (PDF). OECD. September 2011. "About Best-Selling Home Appliance Brand Beko UK". Retrieved 9 August 2014. "Beko Avrupa'da üçüncülüğe oynuyor". Retrieved 9 August 2014. "The Unknown TV Giant – Businessweek". Bloomberg.com. 9 June 2006. Archived from the original on 17 July 2012. Retrieved 9 August 2014. "Income and Living Conditions Survey, 2021". Turkish Statistical Institute. 6 May 2022. Retrieved 6 January 2023. "Bakan Yumaklı, şeker pancarı alım fiyatını açıkladı". trthaber.com (in Turkish). 5 October 2023. Retrieved 19 November 2023. "Kömür yardımı ne kadar? Kömür yardımı başvuruları nasıl yapılır? Kömür yardımından kimler yararlanacak?". cumhuriyet.com.tr (in Turkish). 8 December 2023. Retrieved 19 November 2023. "Tourism Statistics" (PDF). Culture and tourism Ministry. Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 April 2019. Retrieved 27 March 2019. "International Tourism – 2023 starts on a strong note with the Middle East recovering 2019 levels in the first quarter" (PDF). UNWTO. Retrieved 25 August 2023. "Blue Flag sites". Blue Flag. "2023's Top 100 City Destinations Ranking: Triumphs and Turmoil Uncovered". Euromonitor International. 11 December 2023. Retrieved 2 January 2024. "CIA World Factbook: Turkey". Archived from the original on 10 January 2021. Retrieved 17 November 2014. "Study in Turkey: International Airports in Turkey". Archived from the original on 25 December 2013. Retrieved 17 November 2014. "It will be the biggest airport of the world". 24 January 2013. Archived from the original on 29 January 2013. Retrieved 24 January 2013. "Istanbul's New Erdoğan-Backed Airport to Be Named After... Erdoğan". Newsweek. 14 August 2014. "Network" (PDF). Investor.turkishairlines.com. Retrieved 26 September 2017. "Turkish Airlines' net profit triples in 9-month". Anadolu Agency. 7 November 2018. Archived from the original on 9 November 2018. Retrieved 9 November 2018. Cebeci, Uğur (21 August 2019). "Yeni uçuşlar yakında". hurriyet.com.tr (in Turkish). Archived from the original on 23 August 2019. Retrieved 23 August 2019. "Bakan Karaismailoğlu: Hedefimiz 2053'e kadar otoyol uzunluğumuzu 8 bin 325 kilometreye ulaştırmak" (in Turkish). aa.com.tr. 6 December 2022. Archived from the original on 9 December 2022. Retrieved 6 February 2023. Infrastrukturprojekte sollen die türkische Bauwirtschaft ankurbeln Archived 10 February 2013 at archive.today, Germany Trade and Invest, 24. November 2009 "Istanbul Metro Passenger Statistics" (PDF). Istanbul Metro (in Turkish). 6 January 2020. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 July 2020. Retrieved 16 January 2020. "Istanbul's $1.3BN Eurasia Tunnel prepares to open". Anadolu Agency. 19 December 2016. "Why Turkey Built the World's Longest Suspension Bridge". The B1M. Retrieved 22 May 2022. "Groundbreaking ceremony for bridge over Dardanelles to take place on March 18". Hürriyet Daily News. 17 March 2017. Retrieved 19 March 2017. "Dünyada Ve Türkıyede Hizli Tren". hizlitren.tcdd.gov.tr. Archived from the original on 5 July 2014. Retrieved 12 August 2014. "Demiryolu yatırımları ne durumda? Bakan Adil Karaismailoğlu anlattı". youtube.com (in Turkish). Archived from the original on 27 April 2023. Cohen, Patricia (9 December 2022). "Turkey Is Strengthening Its Energy Ties With Russia". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 17 March 2023. OECD (2019), section 1. "Energy pricing and non-market flows in Turkey's energy sector • SHURA Enerji Dönüşümü Merkezi". SHURA Enerji Dönüşümü Merkezi. Archived from the original on 6 August 2020. Retrieved 18 May 2020. Richter, Alexander (27 January 2020). "The Top 10 Geothermal Countries 2019 – based on installed generation capacity (MWe)". Think GeoEnergy – Geothermal Energy News. Archived from the original on 26 January 2021. Retrieved 19 February 2021. "Turkey 2021 Energy Policy Review" (PDF). p. 73. Retrieved 2 February 2024. "Serbia receives first gas from TurkStream pipeline". www.aa.com.tr. "BAKÜ-T İ FL İ S-CEYHAN BORUHATTI'NDA SON DURUM" (PDF). emreozgur.com. Retrieved 12 August 2014. Fielder, Jez (21 August 2020). "Turkey's Erdogan announces discovery of large natural gas reserve off its Black Sea coast". Euronews. Archived from the original on 22 August 2020. Retrieved 22 August 2020. "Natural Gas". Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources. Archived from the original on 19 December 2021. Retrieved 19 December 2021. "Erdogan says Turkey will accelerate Black Sea gas production from Sakarya field". Al Arabiya English. 14 June 2022. Retrieved 11 October 2022. "Turkey's natural gas find in Black Sea now comes to 710 bcm – Erdogan". Reuters. 26 December 2022. Sibel Morrow (19 February 2020). "Turkey's largest library to be disabled-friendly". aa.com.tr. Anadolu Agency. Dutta, Soumitra; Lanvin, Bruno; Wunsch-Vincent, Sacha; León, Lorena Rivera; World Intellectual Property Organization. "Global Innovation Index 2023, 15th Edition". WIPO. doi:10.34667/tind.46596. Retrieved 28 October 2023. "Who We Are? The Scientific And Technological Research Council of Turkey". Tubitak.gov. Retrieved 9 August 2014. "Türkiye Bilimler Akademisi". Tuba.gov. Archived from the original on 21 February 2014. Retrieved 9 August 2014. "Turkish Atomic Energy Authority – Mission of TAEK". TAEK. Archived from the original on 8 June 2014. Retrieved 9 August 2014. "Türkiye gains nuclear status with delivery of 1st nuclear fuel to Akkuyu power plant: President Recep Tayyip Erdogan". Türkiye gains nuclear status with delivery of 1st nuclear fuel to Akkuyu power plant: President Recep Tayyip Erdogan. Archived from the original on 23 May 2023. "Cheap but lethal Turkish drones bolster Ukraine's defenses". MSN. Retrieved 17 March 2022. Gatopoulos, Alex. "The Nagorno-Karabakh conflict is ushering in a new age of warfare". aljazeera.com. Retrieved 17 March 2022. "Roketsan Sonda 0.1 rocket successfully delivers payload to low Earth orbit during test launch". Roketsan. 29 October 2020. "MSLS: Micro-Satellite Launching System". roketsan.com.tr. Roketsan. "Roketsan 550 Kilometreye Çıkacak Şimşek İçin Çalışıyor". savunmasanayist.com. SavunmaSanayiST. 23 September 2022. "Space Launch System Project". Undersecretariat for Defence Industries. Archived from the original on 20 December 2013. Retrieved 20 December 2013. Bekdil, Burak Ege (28 July 2013). "Turkey's Sat-Launcher Plans Raise Concerns". Defense News. Archived from the original on 30 August 2013. Retrieved 20 December 2013. Bekdil, Burak Ege (12 December 2013). "Turkey Spends Big on Innovation". Defense News. Archived from the original on 20 December 2013. Retrieved 20 December 2013. "Turkey plans its own Antarctic station". Retrieved 3 May 2022. Agencies, Daily Sabah with (7 October 2015). "Turkish professor, Aziz Sancar, part of the team that wins Nobel Chemistry Prize". Daily Sabah. "The Results of Address Based Population Registration System, 2022". Turkish Statistical Institute. 6 February 2023. Retrieved 22 May 2023. "Population Statistics And Projections". Turkstat.gov.tr. Retrieved 24 July 2023. "Kürt Meselesi̇ni̇ Yeni̇den Düşünmek" (PDF). KONDA. July 2010. pp. 19–20. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 January 2016. Retrieved 11 June 2013. Bayir, Derya (22 April 2016). Minorities and Nationalism in Turkish Law. Routledge. pp. 144–145. ISBN 978-1-317-09579-8. Mutlu, Servet (1996). "Ethnic Kurds in Turkey: A Demographic Study". International Journal of Middle East Studies. 28 (4): 517–541. doi:10.1017/S0020743800063819. S2CID 154212694. Extra, Guus; Gorter, Durk (2001). The other languages of Europe: Demographic, Sociolinguistic and Educational Perspectives. Multilingual Matters. ISBN 978-1-85359-509-7. KONDA 2006, p. 17 "If Turkey Had 100 People". KONDA. Archived from the original on 7 March 2024. Retrieved 7 March 2024. Kirişci & Winrow 1997, pp. 119–121 Migdal, Joel S. (2004). Boundaries and Belonging: States and Societies in the Struggle to Shape Identities and Local Practices. Cambridge University Press. p. 129. ISBN 978-1-139-45236-6. Aktürk, Şener (12 November 2012). Regimes of Ethnicity and Nationhood in Germany, Russia, and Turkey. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-139-85169-5. Watts, Nicole F. (2010). Activists in Office: Kurdish Politics and Protest in Turkey (Studies in Modernity and National Identity). University of Washington Press. p. 167. ISBN 978-0-295-99050-7. Amikam Nachmani (2003). Turkey: Facing a New Millenniium: Coping With Intertwined Conflicts. Manchester University Press. pp. 90–. ISBN 978-0-7190-6370-1. Retrieved 5 May 2013. Kirişci & Winrow 1997, p. 3 Heper 2007, p. 54 KONDA 2006, p. 18 Bayır, Derya (2013). Minorities and nationalism in Turkish law. Cultural Diversity and Law. Ashgate Publishing. pp. 88–90, 203–204. ISBN 978-1-4094-7254-4. Köksal, Yonca (2006). "Minority Policies in Bulgaria and Turkey: The Struggle to Define a Nation". Southeast European and Black Sea Studies. 6 (4): 501–521. doi:10.1080/14683850601016390. ISSN 1468-3857. S2CID 153761516. Özlem, Kader (2019). "An Evaluation on Istanbul's Bulgarians as the "Invisible Minority" of Turkey". Turan-Sam. 11 (43): 387–393. ISSN 1308-8041. Toktaş, Şule; Araş, Bulent (2009). "The EU and Minority Rights in Turkey". Political Science Quarterly. 124 (4): 697–720. doi:10.1002/j.1538-165X.2009.tb00664.x. ISSN 0032-3195. JSTOR 25655744. Yağmur, Kutlay (2001), Extra, G.; Gorter, D. (eds.), "Turkish and other languages in Turkey", The Other Languages of Europe, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters, pp. 407–427, ISBN 978-1-85359-510-3, retrieved 6 October 2023, "Mother tongue" education is mostly limited to Turkish teaching in Turkey. No other language can be taught as a mother tongue other than Armenian, Greek, and Hebrew, as agreed in the Lausanne Treaty [...] Like Jews and Greeks, Armenians enjoy the privilege of an officially recognized minority status. [...] No language other than Turkish can be taught at schools or at cultural centers. Only Armenian, Greek, and Hebrew are exceptions to this constitutional rule. Zetler, Reyhan (2014). "Turkish Jews between 1923 and 1933 – What Did the Turkish Policy between 1923 and 1933 Mean for the Turkish Jews?" (PDF). Bulletin der Schweizerischen Gesellschaft für Judaistische Forschung (23): 26. OCLC 865002828. Ankara 13th Circuit Administrative Court, 18 June 2013 (E. 2012/1746, K. 2013/952). Akbulut, Olgun (19 October 2023). "For Centenary of the Lausanne Treaty: Re-Interpretation and Re-Implementation of Linguistic Minority Rights of Lausanne". International Journal on Minority and Group Rights. -1 (aop): 1–24. doi:10.1163/15718115-bja10134. ISSN 1385-4879. S2CID 264412993. Erdem, Fazıl Hüsnü; Öngüç, Bahar (30 June 2021). "SÜRYANİCE ANADİLİNDE EĞİTİM HAKKI: SORUNLAR VE ÇÖZÜM ÖNERİLERİ". Dicle Üniversitesi Hukuk Fakültesi Dergisi (in Turkish). 26 (44): 3–35. ISSN 1300-2929. Jaipaul L. Roopnarine (2015). Fathers Across Cultures: The Importance, Roles, and Diverse Practices of Dads: The Importance, Roles, and Diverse Practices of Dads. ABC-CLIO. p. 328. ISBN 978-1-4408-3232-1. Kurds are the largest ethnic minority group (about 20%), and Armenians, Greeks, Sephardic Jews,... al-Shamahi, Abubakr (8 June 2015). "Turkey's ethnic make-up: A complex melting pot". alaraby. Archived from the original on 7 November 2017. Retrieved 3 November 2017. "The Ethnic Groups Of Turkey". WorldAtlas. 18 July 2019. Kahl, Thede (2006). "The Islamisation of the Meglen Vlachs (Megleno-Romanians): The Village of Nânti (Nótia) and the "Nântinets" in Present-Day Turkey". Nationalities Papers. 34 (1): 71–90. doi:10.1080/00905990500504871. S2CID 161615853. "Trends in International Migrant Stock: The 2013 Revision". esa.un.org. United Nations. Archived from the original on 10 December 2015. Retrieved 14 August 2014. "Syria Regional Refugee Response: Turkey". unhcr.org. Retrieved 21 April 2020. Luke Coffey (18 February 2016). "Turkey's demographic challenge". www.aljazeera.com. "UNHCR Turkey Operational Update November 2020". UNHCR. 15 December 2020. Retrieved 10 March 2024. "Number of Syrian Kurds fleeing to Turkey nears 140,000; humanitarian needs mount". UNHCR. 23 September 2014. Archived from the original on 27 October 2023. Retrieved 10 March 2024. Pamuk, Humeyra (29 January 2016). "Syrian Turkmens cross to Turkey, fleeing advances of pro-Assad forces". Reuters. Archived from the original on 15 July 2023. Retrieved 10 March 2024. "Number of Syrians in Turkey July 2023 – Refugees Association". multeciler.org.tr. "İçişleri Bakanı Yerlikaya, Türk vatandaşı olan Suriyelilerin sayısının 238 bine yaklaştığını açıkladı". BBC. 9 November 2023. Retrieved 10 March 2024. "Uncertain Futures: Ukrainian Refugees in Turkey, One Year On". pulitzercenter.org. Retrieved 11 May 2023. Airport, Turkish Airlines planes are parked at the new Istanbul (24 July 2023). "Russian migration to Turkey spikes by 218% in aftermath of Ukraine war – Al-Monitor: Independent, trusted coverage of the Middle East". al-monitor.com. Katzner, Kenneth (2002). Languages of the World, Third Edition. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-25004-7. "Turkey Overview". minorityrights.org. 19 June 2015. Archived from the original on 9 September 2015. KONDA 2006, p. 19 "Türkiye'nin yüzde 85'i 'anadilim Türkçe' diyor". Milliyet.com.tr. Retrieved 4 November 2012. Comrie 2018, p. 537 Sabah, Daily (26 August 2019). "Last 17 years a golden era for minority communities, witnessing period of increased rights". Daily Sabah. Retrieved 21 October 2023. "Interactive Atlas of the World's Languages in Danger". UNESCO. Retrieved 9 August 2014. Kiuiper, Kathleen (2009). Islamic Art, Literature, and Culture. Rosen Education Service. pp. 201. ISBN 978-1-61530-019-8. UNESCO World Heritage Centre (27 June 2011). "Six new sites inscribed on UNESCO's World Heritage List". Retrieved 17 August 2021. Axel Tschentscher. "International Constitutional Law: Turkey Constitution". Servat.unibe.ch. Retrieved 1 November 2010. "Turkey: Islam and Laicism Between the Interests of State, Politics, and Society" (PDF). Peace Research Institute Frankfurt. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 October 2008. Retrieved 19 October 2008. "Religion, Ipsos Global Trends". Ipsos. 2017. Archived from the original on 5 September 2017. "KONDA Toplumsal Değişim Raporu: Türkiye'de inançsızlık yükselişte". euronews (in Turkish). 3 January 2019. Retrieved 4 August 2020. "Hayat Tarzı – 10 Yılda Ne Değişti?". interaktif.konda.com.tr. Retrieved 4 August 2020. "Gezici Araştırma Merkezi Başkanı Murat Gezici SÖZCÜ'ye açıkladı: Türkiye'nin kaderi Z kuşağının elinde". sozcu.com.tr. 11 June 2020. "Gezici Araştırma Merkezi Başkanı Murat Gezici: Türkiye'nin kaderi Z kuşağının elinde". gercekgundem.com. 11 June 2020. "KONDA Toplumsal Değişim Raporu: Türkiye'de inançsızlık yükselişte". euronews (in Turkish). 3 January 2019. Retrieved 13 August 2020. "Konda | Araştırma ve Danışmanlık". konda.com.tr. Retrieved 13 August 2020. "WHAT HAS CHANGED IN 10 YEARS?". interaktif.konda.com.tr. Retrieved 14 August 2020. "Middle East :: Turkey". The World Factbook. 26 October 2021. Archived from the original on 10 January 2021. "TURKEY" (PDF). Library of Congress: Federal Research Division. Retrieved 27 March 2019. "Turkey: International Religious Freedom Report 2007". State.gov. 14 September 2007. Retrieved 9 August 2011. "World Directory of Minorities and Indigenous Peoples – Turkey: Alevis". refworld.org. Retrieved 22 April 2015. "Caferi İmamlar" (in Turkish). Aksiyon.com.tr. 11 October 2004. Archived from the original on 17 March 2011. Retrieved 4 September 2010. Heper, Metin (2018). Historical dictionary of Turkey (Fourth ed.). Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. p. 211. ISBN 978-1-5381-0224-4. İçduygu, Ahmet; Toktaş, Şule; Ali Soner, B. (1 February 2008). "The politics of population in a nation-building process: Emigration of non-Muslims from Turkey". Ethnic and Racial Studies. 31 (2): 358–389. doi:10.1080/01419870701491937. S2CID 143541451. Chapter The refugees question in Greece (1821–1930) in "Θέματα Νεοελληνικής Ιστορίας", ΟΕΔΒ ("Topics from Modern Greek History"). 8th edition (PDF), Nikolaos Andriotis, 2008 Quarterly, Middle East (2001). "Editors' Introduction: Why a Special Issue?: Disappearing Christians of the Middle East" (PDF). Middle East Quarterly. Retrieved 11 June 2013. Kamadan, Yusuf. "A forgotten odyssey: The Turkish-Greek population exchange of 1923". A Forgotten Odyssey: The Turkish-Greek Population Exchange of 1923. "Religious Composition by Country, 2010–2050". Pew Research Center. 2 April 2015. Archived from the original on 15 June 2020. Retrieved 13 May 2020. "Religions". Central Intelligence Agency. Archived from the original on 16 March 2017. Retrieved 9 February 2013. "Statistics by Country". catholic-hierarchy.org. Retrieved 18 February 2015. "Christen in der islamischen Welt – Aus Politik und Zeitgeschichte" (PDF). 2008. Retrieved 11 June 2013. "Turkish Protestants still face "long path" to religious freedom". christiancentury.org. Retrieved 3 November 2014. "Statistics and Church Facts | Total Church Membership". newsroom.churchofjesuschrist.org. Retrieved 24 August 2021. "Türkiye'de Hristiyan ve Yahudilere ait 439 ibadethane ve 24 dernek var". Independent Türkçe. "Turkish Jews – Brief History". science.co.il. Retrieved 11 August 2014. "An Overview of the History of the Jews in Turkey" (PDF). American Sephardi Federation. 2006. Archived from the original on 6 October 2013. Retrieved 11 June 2013.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) "Jewish Population of the World". jewishvirtuallibrary.org. Retrieved 22 October 2019. DellaPergola, Sergio (2018). "World Jewish Population, 2018" (PDF). In Dashefsky, Arnold; Sheskin, Ira M. (eds.). The American Jewish Year Book, 2018. Vol. 118. Dordrecht: Springer. pp. 361–452. ISBN 978-3-030-03906-6. Ekin Karaca (3 March 2016). "Being an Atheist in Turkey". human.nl. Archived from the original on 1 July 2016. Retrieved 24 June 2016. "Beyond the Straight Path: Obstacles and Progress for Atheism in Turkey". blogs.lse.ac.uk. 24 November 2015. Retrieved 2 April 2017. "The first Atheist Association in Turkey is founded". turkishatheist.net. 3 May 2014. Retrieved 2 April 2017. Akyol, Mustafa (16 April 2018). "Why so many Turks are losing faith in Islam". Al-Monitor. Retrieved 21 April 2018. "Atheism grows in Turkey as Recep Tayyip Erdogan urges Islam | DW | 09.01.2019". Deutsche Welle. "The number of atheists increasing in Turkey". asianews.it. "The young Turks rejecting Islam". BBC News. 9 May 2018. "History". istanbul.edu.tr. Retrieved 12 June 2014. "World Oldest Universities". Archived from the original on 15 January 2008. "Education in Turkey". World Education Services. Retrieved 12 June 2013. "Turkey's Education Reform Bill Is About Playing Politics With Pedagogy". The New York Times. 23 March 2012. Retrieved 12 June 2013. "Turkey's Education Reform Bill Is About Playing Politics With Pedagogy". Turkish Higher Education System. 23 January 2022. Retrieved 23 January 2013. "Improving The Quality And Equity of Basic Education in Turkey Challenges And Options" (PDF). World Bank. 30 June 2011. p. viii. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 October 2013. Retrieved 12 June 2013. "Cumhurbaşkanı Erdoğan: Eğer samimiysen gel anayasa değişikliğini yapalım". 10 October 2022. Retrieved 10 October 2022. "Guide for Foreign Students planning Education in Turkey". Archived from the original on 12 July 2018. Retrieved 9 August 2014. "World University Rankings 2012–2013". Times Higher Education. Retrieved 16 June 2013. Mustafa Akyol (7 November 2016). "Turkish universities latest domino in Erdogan's path". Al-Monitor. "ErasmusFacts, Figures & Trends" (PDF). 30 January 2022. "Find your ESN section". Erasmus Student Network. "Türkiye'deki yabancı öğrenci sayısı 795 bin 962'ye ulaştı". Retrieved 5 January 2022. "Turkey offers huge opportunities for foreign students". Retrieved 5 January 2022. "TÜRKİYE SCHOLARSHIPS-TÜRKİYE FOR EDUCATION" (PDF). Retrieved 30 August 2013. "Türkiye Scholarships-FAQ". Retrieved 30 August 2013. "Scholarships". Turkey Scholarship. Retrieved 7 January 2019. Atun, Rifat (1 October 2020). "Transforming Turkey's Health System". The New England Journal of Medicine. 373 (14). "Türkiye'nin nüfusu (2020) belli oldu". sozcu.com.tr (in Turkish). 5 February 2020. Retrieved 4 August 2020. Ciccone, John (13 December 2021). "Current Health Care System Cannot Survive Aging Population". Psychiatric Times. Vol 38, Issue 12. Retrieved 1 January 2022. "WHO Mean Body Mass Index (BMI)". World Health Organization. Retrieved 5 February 2019. Akyuz, Ezgi; Samavati, Mehrdad; Kaynak, Burcak (14 August 2020). "Spatial distribution of health risks associated with PM2.5 in Turkey and Iran using satellite and ground observations". Atmospheric Pollution Research. 11 (12): 2350–2360. Bibcode:2020AtmPR..11.2350A. doi:10.1016/j.apr.2020.08.011. ISSN 1309-1042. S2CID 225477420. "Health tourism earns above $1B to Turkey in 2019, under spotlight with COVID-19". Daily Sabah. Daily Sabah. 20 August 2020. Retrieved 8 April 2021. Ibrahim Kaya (2004). Social Theory and Later Modernities: The Turkish Experience. Liverpool University Press. pp. 57–58. ISBN 978-0-85323-898-0. Retrieved 12 June 2013. Erhan Solmaz (2021). "How a Country Turkey? Cultural and Sociological Situation in Turkey". Simit Çay. Retrieved 14 January 2021. Royal Academy of Arts (2005). "Turks – A Journey of a Thousand Years: 600–1600". Royal Academy of Arts. Archived from the original on 18 February 2007. Retrieved 12 December 2006. Barry, Michael (2004). Figurative art in medieval Islam and the riddle of Bihzâd of Herât (1465–1535). Flammarion. p. 27. ISBN 978-2-08-030421-6. Retrieved 11 February 2017. "Turkish Miniatures". turkishculture.org. Retrieved 11 February 2017. Antoinette Harri; Allison Ohta (1999). 10th International Congress of Turkish Art. Fondation Max Van Berchem. ISBN 978-2-05-101763-3. The first military training institutions were the Imperial Army Engineering School (Mühendishane-i Berr-i Hümâyun, 1793) and the Imperial School of Military Sciences (Mekteb-i Ulûm-ı Harbiye-i Şahane, 1834). Both schools taught painting to enable cadets to produce topographic layouts and technical drawings to illustrate landscapes ... Wendy M.K. Shaw (2011). Ottoman Painting: Reflections of Western Art from the Ottoman Empire to the Turkish Republic. Bloomsbury Academic. ISBN 978-1-84885-288-4. Brueggemann, Werner; Boehmer, Harald (1982). Teppiche der Bauern und Nomaden in Anatolien = Carpets of the Peasants and Nomads in Anatolia. Verlag Kunst und Antiquitäten. pp. 34–39. ISBN 978-3-921811-20-7. "The Turkish Art of Marbling (EBRU)". turkishculture.org. Retrieved 11 February 2017. "Ottoman Music". turkishculture.org. Retrieved 18 February 2015. "about Turkey – culture | International Studies". www.ktu.edu.tr. "Turkish literature – New Ottoman, 1839–1918 | Britannica". www.britannica.com. "Pamuk wins Nobel Literature prize". BBC. 12 October 2006. Retrieved 12 December 2006. Çevik, Mehmet (2014). "Cultural Change, Tradition and Turkish Folk Storytelling". Turkish Studies. 9 (12): 113–123. doi:10.7827/TurkishStudies.7482. Halman, Talât Sait; Warner, Jayne L. (2008). İbrahim the Mad and Other Plays. Syracuse University Press. pp. xiii–xiv. ISBN 978-0-8156-0897-4. "Traditional Theatre". turkishculture.org. Retrieved 11 February 2017. Stokes, Martin (2000). Sounds of Anatolia. Penguin Books. ISBN 978-1-85828-636-5., pp. 396–410. "History of music in Turkey". Les Arts Turcs. 1 May 1999. "Seljuk architecture", Illustrated Dictionary of Historic Architecture, ed. Cyril M. Harris, (Dover Publications, 1977), 485. Voyce, Arthur (1957). "National Elements in Russian Architecture". Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians. 16 (2): 6–16. doi:10.2307/987741. ISSN 0037-9808. JSTOR 987741. Simons, Marlise (22 August 1993). "Center of Ottoman Power". The New York Times. Retrieved 4 June 2009. "A list of the buildings designed by Mimar Sinan". Retrieved 9 August 2014. Goodwin, Godfrey (2003). A History of Ottoman Architecture. Thames & Hudson. ISBN 978-0-500-27429-3. "Turkish coffee culture and tradition". UNESCO. 5 December 2013. Retrieved 18 August 2014. Çakır Morin, Arzu (5 December 2013). "Türk kahvesi Unesco korumasında". Hürriyet (in Turkish). Retrieved 18 August 2014. İlkin, Nur; Kaufman, Sheilah (2002). A Taste of Turkish cuisine. Hippocrene Books. ISBN 978-0-7818-0948-1. Retrieved 12 December 2017. Aarssen, Jeroen; Backus, Ad (2000). Colloquial Turkish. Routledge. p. 71. ISBN 978-0-415-15746-9. Retrieved 15 April 2009. Kia, Mehrdad (2017). The Ottoman Empire: A Historical Encyclopedia [2 volumes]. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1-61069-389-9. "Food in Turkey – Turkish Food, Turkish Cuisine". foodbycountry.com. Retrieved 12 August 2014. Burak Sansal (2006). "Sports in Turkey". allaboutturkey.com. Retrieved 13 December 2006. "Galatasaray AŞ". uefa.com. Retrieved 10 August 2014. "Historical Achievements". tff.org. Retrieved 10 August 2014. Ian Whittell. "Basketball Capitals: Cities in Focus – Istanbul". espn.co.uk. ESPN Sports Media Ltd. Retrieved 22 December 2022. "Historic achievements of the Efes Pilsen Basketball Team". Anadolu Efes Spor Kulübü. Archived from the original on 3 May 2008. Retrieved 9 February 2013. "Anadolu Efes S.K.: Our successes". Archived from the original on 24 March 2012. Retrieved 9 August 2014. "Galatasaray Lift EuroLeague Women Title". fibaeurope.com. Retrieved 10 August 2014. "National Team's Activities". tvf.org.tr. Archived from the original on 29 August 2014. Retrieved 10 August 2014. "2023 CEV Women's Champions League Super Final: VakifBank Istanbul – Ezcacibasi Dynavit Istanbul". championsleague.cev.eu. 20 May 2023. Burak Sansal (2006). "Oiled Wrestling". allaboutturkey.com. Retrieved 13 December 2006. "Historical Kırkpınar oil wrestling festival kicks off in northwestern Turkey". Daily Sabah. 13 July 2018. "Kırkpınar Oiled Wrestling Tournament: History". Kirkpinar.com. 21 April 2007. Archived from the original on 1 August 2008. Retrieved 1 November 2010. Gegner, Christiane. "FILA Wrestling Database". Iat.uni-leipzig.de. Archived from the original on 13 March 2009. Retrieved 1 November 2010. "The Political Economy of the Media in Turkey: A Sectoral Analysis" (PDF). tesev.org.tr. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 July 2012. Retrieved 18 February 2015. "Survey on Information and Communication Technology (ICT) Usage in Households and by Individuals, 2022". data.tuik.gov.tr. Turkish Statistical Institute. 26 August 2022. Turkey country profile. Library of Congress Federal Research Division (January 2006). This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain. "About RTÜK". The Radio and Television Supreme Council (RTÜK). Archived from the original on 6 August 2020. Retrieved 18 April 2020. "Gazete Tirajları 02.05.2016 – 08.05.2016". Gazeteciler.com. Archived from the original on 19 December 2015. Retrieved 1 August 2016. Jenna Krajeski (30 March 2012). "Turkey: Soap Operas and Politics". Pulitzer Center. Archived from the original on 17 January 2013. Retrieved 15 January 2013. "Turkish Dramas Sweep Latin America". International Business Times. 9 February 2016. Retrieved 1 October 2016. "Here's why Turkish soaps are a cultural force to reckon with! – The Economic Times". m.economictimes.com. "Turkey world"s second highest TV series exporter after US – Business". Hürriyet Daily News. 27 October 2014. Retrieved 14 October 2017. Betül Alakent (17 October 2022). "Türkiye marches toward $600 million in worldwide TV series sales". dailysabah.com. Fatima Bhutto (13 September 2019). "How Turkish TV is taking over the world". The Guardian. Andreae, Bernard (1977). The Art of Rome. H. N. Abrams. p. 567. ISBN 978-0-8109-0626-6. The Roman theater survives virtually intact... scarcely another surviving theater gives a better impression of just how the Roman theater – a solid single unified structure – differed from the Greek theater, which was made up of separate structures juxtaposed but each isolated and complete in itself. "TURKISH CINEMA". turkishculture.org. Retrieved 11 February 2017. "Berlinale 1964: Prize Winners". berlinale.de. Archived from the original on 19 March 2015. Retrieved 20 February 2010. "CPJ testifies on Turkey's press freedom record after failed coup attempt". Committee to Protect Journalists. 14 September 2016. Retrieved 16 December 2016. "Turkey". freedomhouse.org. Retrieved 29 January 2015. Kingsley, Patrick (30 April 2017). "Turkey Purges 4,000 More Officials, and Blocks Wikipedia". The New York Times. Retrieved 1 May 2017. "Turkey blocks Wikipedia under law designed to protect national security". The Guardian. 29 April 2017. Retrieved 1 May 2017. Agoston, G; Masters, B (2009). Encyclopedia of the Ottoman Empire. Facts On File, Incorporated. ISBN 978-1-4381-1025-7. Armour, Ian D. (2012). A History of Eastern Europe 1740-1918. London New York: Bloomsbury Academic. ISBN 978-1-84966-661-9. Biondich, Mark (2011). The Balkans Revolution, War, and Political Violence Since 1878. The United States: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-929905-8. Comrie, Bernard (2018). Comrie, Bernard (ed.). The World's Major Languages (3rd ed.). Routledge. doi:10.4324/9781315644936. ISBN 978-0-19-506511-4. Davison, Roderic H. (1990). Essays in Ottoman and Turkish History, 1774-1923: The Impact of the West. The University of Texas Press. doi:10.7560/720640. ISBN 978-0-292-75894-0. Fierro, M. (2010). Fierro, Maribel (ed.). The New Cambridge History of Islam: Volume 2, The Western Islamic World, Eleventh to Eighteenth Centuries. Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/chol9780521839570. ISBN 978-1-316-18433-2. Findley, Carter V. (2005). The Turks in World History. Oxford University Press, USA. ISBN 978-0-19-517726-8. Gibney, Matthew J.; Hansen, Randall (2005). Immigration and asylum: from 1900 to the present. Santa Barbara: ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1-57607-796-2. Heper, M. (2007). The State and Kurds in Turkey. Springer. doi:10.1057/9780230593602. ISBN 978-0-230-59360-2. Howard, Douglas A. (2016). The History of Turkey (2nd ed.). Santa Barbara, California: Greenwood. ISBN 978-1-4408-3466-0. Jeffreys, Elizabeth; Haldon, John; Cormack, Robin (2008). The Oxford Handbook of Byzantine Studies. Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199252466.001.0001. ISBN 978-0-19-925246-6. Karpat, K.H. (2001). The Politicization of Islam: Reconstructing Identity, State, Faith, and Community in the Late Ottoman State. Studies in Middle Eastern history. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-513618-0. Karpat, Kemal H. (2004). Studies on Turkish Politics and Society: Selected Articles and Essays. Leiden Boston: BRILL. ISBN 978-9004133228. Kaser, Karl (2011). The Balkans and the Near East: Introduction to a Shared History. Berlin Wien: LIT Verlag Münster. ISBN 978-3-643-50190-5. Kirişci, Kemal; Winrow, Gareth M. (1997). The Kurdish Question and Turkey: An Example of a Trans-state Ethnic Conflict. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-7146-4304-5. Lee, Joo-Yup; Kuang, Shuntu (18 October 2017). "A Comparative Analysis of Chinese Historical Sources and Y-DNA Studies with Regard to the Early and Medieval Turkic Peoples". Inner Asia. 19 (2). Brill: 197–239. doi:10.1163/22105018-12340089. ISSN 2210-5018. Retrieved 20 June 2020. Lee, Joo-Yup (2023). The Turkic Peoples in World History. Routledge. doi:10.4324/9781003256496. ISBN 978-1-000-90421-5. Leonard, Thomas M. (2006). "Turkey". Encyclopedia of the Developing World, Volume 3. Routledge. ISBN 9781579583880. Peacock, A. C. S. (2015). The Great Seljuk Empire. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. ISBN 978-0-7486-3827-7. Pekesen, Berna (7 March 2012). "Expulsion and Emigration of the Muslims from the Balkans". European History Online. Leibniz Institute of European History. Archived from the original on 20 February 2024. Retrieved 20 February 2024. Somel, S.A. (2003). The A to Z of the Ottoman Empire. The A to Z Guide Series. Scarecrow Press. ISBN 978-1-4617-3176-4. Steadman, Sharon R.; McMahon, Gregory (2011). The Oxford Handbook of Ancient Anatolia: (10,000-323 BCE). Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-537614-2. "Toplumsal Yapı Araştırması 2006" (PDF). KONDA Research and Consultancy. 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 February 2017. Retrieved 21 February 2015. Uchiyama, Junzo; et al. (21 May 2020). "Populations dynamics in Northern Eurasian forests: a long-term perspective from Northeast Asia". Evolutionary Human Sciences. 2. Cambridge University Press: e16. doi:10.1017/ehs.2020.11. PMC 10427466. PMID 37588381. Text was copied from this source, which is available under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. Mango, Andrew (2004). The Turks Today. Overlook. ISBN 978-1-58567-615-6. Pope, Hugh; Pope, Nicole (2004). Turkey Unveiled. Overlook. ISBN 978-1-58567-581-4. Reed, Fred A. (1999). Anatolia Junction: a Journey into Hidden Turkey. Burnaby, BC: Talonbooks [sic]. 320 p., ill. with b&w photos. ISBN 978-0-88922-426-1 Revolinski, Kevin (2006). The Yogurt Man Cometh: Tales of an American Teacher in Turkey. Çitlembik. ISBN 978-9944-424-01-1. Roxburgh, David J. (ed.) (2005). Turks: A Journey of a Thousand Years, 600–1600. Royal Academy of Arts. ISBN 978-1-903973-56-1. Laiou, Angeliki E.; Morisson, Cécile (2007). The Byzantine Economy. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-84978-4.. Turkey at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity General turkey.com – topical multilingual website about Turkey (archived 22 May 2015) Turkey from UCB Libraries GovPubs (archived 9 June 2012) Data on Turkey from OECD Turkey at Curlie Geographic data related to Turkey at OpenStreetMap Tourism Wikimedia Atlas of Turkey Go Türkiye – Turkey's official tourism portal Official website of the Ministry of Culture and Tourism Government Official website of the Presidency of the Republic of Turkey Official website of the Grand National Assembly of Turkey Economy Official website of the Ministry of Economy