The Republican Party, also known as the GOP (Grand Old Party), is one of the two major contemporary political parties in the United States. It emerged as the main political rival of the Democratic Party in the mid-1850s. The party was founded in 1854 by anti-slavery activists who opposed the Kansas–Nebraska Act, an act which allowed for the potential expansion of chattel slavery into the western territories of Kansas and Nebraska. It supported classical liberalism and economic reform while opposing the expansion of slavery into the free territories. The party initially had a very limited presence in the South, but was successful in the North. By 1858, it had enlisted most former Whigs and former Free Soilers to form majorities in nearly every northern state. White Southerners became alarmed at the threat to slavery. With the 1860 election of Abraham Lincoln, the first Republican president, the deep Southern states seceded from the United States. Under the leadership of Lincoln and a Republican Congress, the Republican Party led the fight to defeat the Confederate States in the American Civil War, preserving the Union and abolishing slavery. Afterward, the party largely dominated the national political scene until the Great Depression in the 1930s, when it lost its congressional majorities and the Democrats' New Deal programs proved popular. Dwight D. Eisenhower's election was a rare break in between Democratic presidents and he presided over a period of increased economic prosperity after World War II. His former vice president Richard Nixon carried 49 states in 1972 with what he touted as his silent majority. The 1980 election of Ronald Reagan realigned national politics, bringing together advocates of free-market economics, social conservatives, and Cold War foreign policy hawks under the Republican banner. Since 2008, Republicans have faced increased factionalism within the party's ranks. As of 2024, Trumpists are the dominant faction within the GOP. In the 21st century, the party receives its strongest support from rural voters, evangelical Christians, men, senior citizens, veterans, white voters, and those who did not attend college. On social issues, it advocates for restricting the legality of abortion, prohibiting recreational drug use, loosening gun restrictions, overturning the legality of same-sex marriage and opposing the transgender rights movement. On economic issues, the party supports tax cuts and deregulation while opposing labor unions and universal health care. In foreign policy, the party includes both those who promote tough stances against China, Russia, Iran and North Korea and those who promote non-interventionism and isolationism. In 1854, the Republican Party was founded in the Northern United States by forces opposed to the expansion of slavery, ex-Whigs, and ex-Free Soilers. The Republican Party quickly became the principal opposition to the dominant Democratic Party and the briefly popular Know Nothing Party. The party grew out of opposition to the Kansas–Nebraska Act, which repealed the Missouri Compromise and opened the Kansas and Nebraska Territories to slavery and future admission as slave states. They denounced the expansion of slavery as a great evil, but did not call for ending it in the Southern states. While opposition to the expansion of slavery was the most consequential founding principle of the party, like the Whig Party it replaced, Republicans also called for economic and social modernization. At the first public meeting of the anti-Nebraska movement on March 20, 1854, at the Little White Schoolhouse in Ripon, Wisconsin, the name "Republican" was proposed as the name of the party. The name was partly chosen to pay homage to Thomas Jefferson's Democratic-Republican Party. The first official party convention was held on July 6, 1854, in Jackson, Michigan. The party emerged from the great political realignment of the mid-1850s, united in pro-capitalist stances with members often valuing Radicalism. Historian William Gienapp argues that the great realignment of the 1850s began before the Whigs' collapse, and was caused not by politicians but by voters at the local level. The central forces were ethno-cultural, involving tensions between pietistic Protestants versus liturgical Catholics, Lutherans and Episcopalians regarding Catholicism, prohibition and nativism. The Know Nothing Party embodied the social forces at work, but its weak leadership was unable to solidify its organization, and the Republicans picked it apart. Nativism was so powerful that the Republicans could not avoid it, but they did minimize it and turn voter wrath against the threat that slave owners would buy up the good farm lands wherever slavery was allowed. The realignment was powerful because it forced voters to switch parties, as typified by the rise and fall of the Know Nothings, the rise of the Republican Party and the splits in the Democratic Party. At the Republican Party's first National Convention in 1856, held at Musical Fund Hall in Philadelphia, the party adopted a national platform emphasizing opposition to the expansion of slavery into the free territories. While Republican nominee John C. Frémont lost that year's presidential election to Democrat James Buchanan, Buchanan managed to win only four of the fourteen northern states and won his home state of Pennsylvania only narrowly. Republicans fared better in congressional and local elections, but Know Nothing candidates took a significant number of seats, creating an awkward three-party arrangement. Despite the loss of the presidency and the lack of a majority in the U.S. Congress, Republicans were able to orchestrate a Republican speaker of the House of Representatives, which went to Nathaniel P. Banks. Historian James M. McPherson writes regarding Banks' speakership that "if any one moment marked the birth of the Republican party, this was it." The Republicans were eager for the 1860 elections. Former Illinois U.S. representative Abraham Lincoln spent several years building support within the party, campaigning heavily for Frémont in 1856 and making a bid for the Senate in 1858, losing to Democrat Stephen A. Douglas but gaining national attention from the Lincoln–Douglas debates it produced. At the 1860 Republican National Convention, Lincoln consolidated support among opponents of New York U.S. senator William H. Seward, a fierce abolitionist who some Republicans feared would be too radical for crucial states such as Pennsylvania and Indiana, as well as those who disapproved of his support for Irish immigrants. Lincoln won on the third ballot and was ultimately elected president in the general election in a rematch against Douglas. Lincoln had not been on the ballot in a single Southern state, and even if the vote for Democrats had not been split between Douglas, John C. Breckinridge and John Bell, the Republicans would have still won but without the popular vote. This election result helped kickstart the American Civil War, which lasted from 1861 until 1865. The 1864 presidential election united War Democrats with the GOP in support of Lincoln and Tennessee Democratic senator Andrew Johnson, who ran for president and vice president on the National Union Party ticket; Lincoln was re-elected. By June 1865, slavery was dead in the ex-Confederate States but remained legal in some border states. Under Republican congressional leadership, the Thirteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution—which banned slavery, except as punishment for a crime—passed the Senate on April 8, 1864, the House of Representatives on January 31, 1865, and was ratified by the required 27 of the then 36 states on December 6, 1865. Radical Republicans during Lincoln's presidency felt he was too moderate in his efforts to eradicate slavery and opposed his ten percent plan. Radical Republicans passed the Wade–Davis Bill in 1864, which sought to enforce the taking of the Ironclad Oath for all former Confederates. Lincoln vetoed the bill, believing it would jeopardize the peaceful reintegration of the ex-Confederate states. Following the assassination of Lincoln, Johnson ascended to the presidency and was deplored by Radical Republicans. Johnson was vitriolic in his criticisms of the Radical Republicans during a national tour ahead of the 1866 elections. Anti-Johnson Republicans won a two-thirds majority in both chambers of Congress following the elections, which helped lead the way toward his impeachment and near ouster from office in 1868, the same year former Union Army general Ulysses S. Grant was elected as the next Republican president. Grant was a Radical Republican, which created some division within the party. Massachusetts senator Charles Sumner and Illinois senator Lyman Trumbull opposed most of his Reconstructionist policies. Others took issue with the large-scale corruption present in the Grant administration, with the emerging Stalwart faction defending Grant and the spoils system, and the Half-Breeds advocating reform of the civil service. Republicans who opposed Grant branched off to form the Liberal Republican Party, nominating Horace Greeley in the 1872 presidential election. The Democratic Party attempted to capitalize on this divide in the GOP by co-nominating Greeley under their party banner. Greeley's positions proved inconsistent with the Liberal Republican Party that nominated him, with Greeley supporting high tariffs despite the party's opposition. Grant was easily re-elected. The 1876 presidential election saw a contentious conclusion as both parties claimed victory despite three southern states still not officially declaring a winner at the end of election day. Voter suppression had occurred in the South to depress the black and white Republican vote, which gave Republican-controlled returning officers enough of a reason to declare that fraud, intimidation and violence had soiled the states' results. They proceeded to throw out enough Democratic votes for Republican Rutherford B. Hayes to be declared the winner. Still, Democrats refused to accept the results and the Electoral Commission made up of members of Congress was established to decide who would be awarded the states' electors. After the Commission voted along party lines in Hayes' favor, Democrats threatened to delay the counting of electoral votes indefinitely so no president would be inaugurated on March 4. This resulted in the Compromise of 1877 and Hayes finally became president. Hayes doubled down on the gold standard, which had been signed into law by Grant with the Coinage Act of 1873, as a solution to the depressed American economy in the aftermath of that year's panic. He also believed greenbacks posed a threat; greenbacks being money printed during the Civil War that was not backed by specie, which Hayes objected to as a proponent of hard money. Hayes sought to restock the country's gold supply, which by January 1879 succeeded as gold was more frequently exchanged for greenbacks compared to greenbacks being exchanged for gold. Ahead of the 1880 presidential election, Republican James G. Blaine ran for the party nomination, supporting both Hayes' gold standard push and his civil service reforms. After both Blaine and opponent John Sherman failed to win the Republican nomination, each of them backed James A. Garfield for president. Garfield agreed with Hayes' move in favor of the gold standard, but opposed his civil reform efforts. Garfield won the 1880 presidential election, but was assassinated early in his term. His death helped create support for the Pendleton Civil Service Reform Act, which was passed in 1883; the bill was signed into law by Republican president Chester A. Arthur, who succeeded Garfield. In 1884, Blaine once again ran for president. He won the Republican nomination, but lost the general election to Democrat Grover Cleveland. Cleveland was the first Democrat to be elected president since James Buchanan. Dissident Republicans, known as Mugwumps, had defected from Blaine due to the corruption which had plagued his political career. Cleveland stuck to the gold standard policy, but he came into conflict with Republicans regarding budding American imperialism. Republican Benjamin Harrison defeated Cleveland in the 1888 election. During his presidency, Harrison signed the Dependent and Disability Pension Act, which established pensions for all veterans of the Union who had served for more than 90 days and were unable to perform manual labor. Following his loss to Cleveland in the 1892 presidential election, Harrison unsuccessfully attempted to pass a treaty annexing Hawaii before Cleveland could be inaugurated. Most Republicans supported the proposed annexation, but Cleveland opposed it. In the 1896 presidential election, Republican William McKinley's platform supported the gold standard and high tariffs, having been the creator and namesake for the McKinley Tariff of 1890. Though having been divided on the issue prior to that year's National Convention, McKinley decided to heavily favor the gold standard over free silver in his campaign messaging, but promised to continue bimetallism to ward off continued skepticism over the gold standard, which had lingered since the Panic of 1893. Democrat William Jennings Bryan proved to be a devoted adherent to the free silver movement, which cost Bryan the support of Democratic institutions such as Tammany Hall, the New York World and a large majority of the Democratic Party's upper and middle-class support. McKinley defeated Bryan and returned the presidency to Republican control until the 1912 presidential election. The 1896 realignment cemented the Republicans as the party of big businesses while president Theodore Roosevelt added more small business support by his embrace of trust busting. He handpicked his successor William Howard Taft in the 1908 election, but they became enemies as the party split down the middle. Taft defeated Roosevelt for the 1912 nomination so Roosevelt stormed out of the convention and started a new party. Roosevelt ran on the ticket of his new Progressive Party. He called for social reforms, many of which were later championed by New Deal Democrats in the 1930s. He lost and when most of his supporters returned to the GOP, they found they did not agree with the new conservative economic thinking, leading to an ideological shift to the right in the Republican Party. The Republicans returned to the presidency in the 1920s, winning on platforms of normalcy, business-oriented efficiency, and high tariffs. The national party platform avoided mention of prohibition, instead issuing a vague commitment to law and order. The Teapot Dome scandal threatened to hurt the party under Warren G. Harding. He died in 1923 and Calvin Coolidge easily defeated the splintered opposition in 1924. The pro-business policies of the decade produced an unprecedented prosperity until the Wall Street Crash of 1929 heralded the Great Depression. The New Deal coalition forged by Democratic president Franklin D. Roosevelt controlled American politics for most of the next three decades, excluding the presidency of Republican Dwight D. Eisenhower in the 1950s. After Roosevelt took office in 1933, New Deal legislation sailed through Congress and the economy moved sharply upward from its nadir in early 1933. However, long-term unemployment remained a drag until 1940. In the 1934 elections, 10 Republican senators went down to defeat, leaving the GOP with only 25 senators against 71 Democrats. The House likewise had overwhelming Democratic majorities. The Republican Party factionalized into a majority Old Right, based predominantly in the Midwest, and a liberal wing based in the Northeast that supported much of the New Deal. The Old Right sharply attacked the Second New Deal, saying it represented class warfare and socialism. Roosevelt was easily re-elected president in 1936; however, as his second term began, the economy declined, strikes soared, and he failed to take control of the Supreme Court and purge the Southern conservatives from the Democratic Party. Republicans made a major comeback in the 1938 House elections and had new rising stars such as Robert A. Taft of Ohio on the right and Thomas E. Dewey of New York on the left. Southern conservatives joined with most Republicans to form the conservative coalition, which dominated domestic issues in Congress until 1964. By the time of World War II, both parties split on foreign policy issues, with the anti-war isolationists dominant in the Republican Party and the interventionists who wanted to stop German dictator Adolf Hitler dominant in the Democratic Party. Roosevelt won a third term in 1940 and a fourth in 1944. Conservatives abolished most of the New Deal during the war, but they did not attempt to do away with Social Security or the agencies that regulated business. Historian George H. Nash argues: Unlike the "moderate", internationalist, largely eastern bloc of Republicans who accepted (or at least acquiesced in) some of the "Roosevelt Revolution" and the essential premises of President Harry S. Truman's foreign policy, the Republican Right at heart was counterrevolutionary. Anti-collectivist, anti-Communist, anti-New Deal, passionately committed to limited government, free market economics, and congressional (as opposed to executive) prerogatives, the G.O.P. conservatives were obliged from the start to wage a constant two-front war: against liberal Democrats from without and "me-too" Republicans from within. After 1945, the internationalist wing of the GOP cooperated with Truman's Cold War foreign policy, funded the Marshall Plan and supported NATO, despite the continued isolationism of the Old Right. Eisenhower had defeated conservative leader senator Robert A. Taft for the 1952 Republican presidential nomination, but conservatives dominated the domestic policies of the Eisenhower administration. Voters liked Eisenhower much more than they liked the GOP and he proved unable to shift the party to a more moderate position. Historians cite the 1964 presidential election and its respective National Convention as a significant shift, which saw the conservative wing, helmed by Arizona senator Barry Goldwater, battle liberal New York governor Nelson Rockefeller and his eponymous Rockefeller Republican faction for the nomination. With Goldwater poised to win, Rockefeller, urged to mobilize his liberal faction, retorted, "You're looking at it, buddy. I'm all that's left." Following the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and Voting Rights Act of 1965, the southern states became more reliably Republican in presidential politics, while northeastern states became more reliably Democratic. Though Goldwater lost the election in a landslide, Ronald Reagan would make himself known as a prominent supporter of his throughout the campaign, delivering his famous "A Time for Choosing" speech for Goldwater. Reagan would go on to win the California governorship two years later. The GOP would go on to control the White House from 1969 to 1977 under 37th president Richard Nixon, and when he resigned in 1974 due to the Watergate scandal, Gerald Ford became the 38th president, serving until 1977. Ronald Reagan would later go on to defeat incumbent Democratic President Jimmy Carter in the 1980 United States presidential election, becoming the 40th president on January 20, 1981. The Reagan presidency, lasting from 1981 to 1989, constituted what is known as "the Reagan Revolution". It was seen as a fundamental shift from the stagflation of the 1970s preceding it, with the introduction of Reagan's economic policies intended to cut taxes, prioritize government deregulation and shift funding from the domestic sphere into the military to check the Soviet Union by utilizing deterrence theory. During a visit to then-West Berlin in June 1987, he addressed Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev during a speech at the Berlin Wall, demanding that he "Tear down this wall!". The remark was later seen as influential in the fall of the wall in November 1989, and was retroactively seen as a soaring achievement over the years. The Soviet Union was dissolved in 1991. Following Reagan's presidency, Republican presidential candidates frequently claimed to share Reagan's views and aimed to portray themselves and their policies as heirs to his legacy. Reagan's vice president, George H. W. Bush, won the presidency in a landslide in the 1988 presidential election. However, his term was characterized by division within the Republican Party. Bush's vision of economic liberalization and international cooperation with foreign nations saw the negotiation and, during the presidency of Democrat Bill Clinton in the 1990s, the signing of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) and the conceptual beginnings of the World Trade Organization. Independent politician and businessman Ross Perot decried NAFTA and predicted that it would lead to the outsourcing of American jobs to Mexico; however, Clinton agreed with Bush's trade policies. Bush lost his re-election bid in 1992, receiving 37 percent of the popular vote; Clinton garnered a plurality of 43 percent, and Perot took third place with 19 percent. While there is debate about whether Perot's candidacy cost Bush re-election, Charlie Cook asserted that Perot's messaging carried weight with Republican and conservative voters. Perot subsequently formed the Reform Party; future Republican president Donald Trump was a member. In the 1994 elections, the Republican Party, led by House minority whip Newt Gingrich, who campaigned on the "Contract with America", won majorities in both chambers of Congress, gained 12 governorships, and regained control of 20 state legislatures. However, most voters had not heard of the Contract and the Republican victory was attributed to traditional mid-term anti-incumbent voting and Republicans becoming the majority party in Dixie for the first time since Reconstruction. It was the first time the Republican Party had achieved a majority in the House since 1952. Gingrich was made speaker, and within the first 100 days of the Republican majority, every proposition featured in the Contract was passed, with the exception of term limits for members of Congress, which did not pass in the Senate. One key to Gingrich's success in 1994 was nationalizing the election, which in turn led to his becoming a national figure during the 1996 House elections, with many Democratic leaders proclaiming Gingrich was a zealous radical. The Republicans maintained their majority for the first time since 1928 despite Bob Dole losing handily to Clinton in the presidential election. However, Gingrich's national profile proved a detriment to the Republican Congress, which enjoyed majority approval among voters in spite of Gingrich's relative unpopularity. After Gingrich and the Republicans struck a deal with Clinton on the Balanced Budget Act of 1997, which included tax cuts, the Republican House majority had difficulty convening on a new agenda ahead of the 1998 elections. During the ongoing impeachment of Bill Clinton in 1998, Gingrich decided to make Clinton's misconduct the party message heading into the elections, believing it would add to their majority. The strategy proved mistaken and the Republicans lost five seats, though whether it was due to poor messaging or Clinton's popularity providing a coattail effect is debated. Gingrich was ousted from party power due to the performance, ultimately deciding to resign from Congress altogether. For a short time afterward, it appeared Louisiana representative Bob Livingston would become his successor; Livingston, however, stepped down from consideration and resigned from Congress after damaging reports of affairs threatened the Republican House's legislative agenda if he were to serve as speaker. Illinois representative Dennis Hastert was promoted to speaker in Livingston's place, serving in that position until 2007. Republican George W. Bush won the 2000 and 2004 presidential elections. He campaigned as a "compassionate conservative" in 2000, wanting to better appeal to immigrants and minority voters. The goal was to prioritize drug rehabilitation programs and aid for prisoner reentry into society, a move intended to capitalize on President Clinton's tougher crime initiatives such as his administration's 1994 crime bill. The platform failed to gain much traction among members of the party during his presidency. The Republican Party remained fairly cohesive for much of the 2000s, as both strong economic libertarians and social conservatives opposed the Democrats, whom they saw as the party of bloated, secular, and liberal government. This period saw the rise of "pro-government conservatives"—a core part of the Bush's base—a considerable group of the Republicans who advocated for increased government spending and greater regulations covering both the economy and people's personal lives, as well as for an activist and interventionist foreign policy. Survey groups such as the Pew Research Center found that social conservatives and free market advocates remained the other two main groups within the party's coalition of support, with all three being roughly equal in number. However, libertarians and libertarian-leaning conservatives increasingly found fault with what they saw as Republicans' restricting of vital civil liberties while corporate welfare and the national debt hiked considerably under Bush's tenure. In contrast, some social conservatives expressed dissatisfaction with the party's support for economic policies that conflicted with their moral values. The Republican Party lost its Senate majority in 2001 when the Senate became split evenly; nevertheless, the Republicans maintained control of the Senate due to the tie-breaking vote of Bush's vice president, Dick Cheney. Democrats gained control of the Senate on June 6, 2001, when Vermont Republican senator Jim Jeffords switched his party affiliation to Democrat. The Republicans regained the Senate majority in the 2002 elections, helped by Bush's surge in popularity following the September 11 attacks, and Republican majorities in the House and Senate were held until the Democrats regained control of both chambers in the 2006 elections, largely due to increasing opposition to the Iraq War. In the 2008 presidential election, Arizona Republican senator John McCain was defeated by Illinois Democratic senator Barack Obama. The Republicans experienced electoral success in the 2010 elections. The 2010 elections coincided with the ascendancy of the Tea Party movement, an anti-Obama protest movement of fiscal conservatives. Members of the movement called for lower taxes, and for a reduction of the national debt and federal budget deficit through decreased government spending. The Tea Party movement was also described as a popular constitutional movement composed of a mixture of libertarian, right-wing populist, and conservative activism. The Tea Party movement's electoral success began with Scott Brown's upset win in the January Senate special election in Massachusetts; the seat had been held for decades by Democrat Ted Kennedy. In November, Republicans recaptured control of the House, increased their number of seats in the Senate, and gained a majority of governorships. The Tea Party would go on to strongly influence the Republican Party, in part due to the replacement of establishment Republicans with Tea Party-style Republicans. When Obama was re-elected president in 2012, defeating Republican Mitt Romney, the Republican Party lost seven seats in the House, but still retained control of that chamber. However, Republicans were unable to gain control of the Senate, continuing their minority status with a net loss of two seats. In the aftermath of the loss, some prominent Republicans spoke out against their own party. A 2012 election post-mortem by the Republican Party concluded that the party needed to do more on the national level to attract votes from minorities and young voters. In March 2013, Republican National Committee chairman Reince Priebus issued a report on the party's electoral failures in 2012, calling on Republicans to reinvent themselves and officially endorse immigration reform. He proposed 219 reforms, including a $10 million marketing campaign to reach women, minorities, and gay people; the setting of a shorter, more controlled primary season; and the creation of better data collection facilities. Following the 2014 elections, the Republican Party took control of the Senate by gaining nine seats. With 247 seats in the House and 54 seats in the Senate, the Republicans ultimately achieved their largest majority in the Congress since the 71st Congress in 1929. In the 2016 presidential election, Republican nominee Donald Trump defeated Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton. The result was unexpected; polls leading up to the election showed Clinton leading the race. Trump's victory was fueled by narrow victories in three states—Michigan, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin—that had been part of the Democratic blue wall for decades. It was attributed to strong support amongst working-class white voters, who felt dismissed and disrespected by the political establishment. Trump became popular with them by abandoning Republican establishment orthodoxy in favor of a broader nationalist message. After the 2016 elections, Republicans maintained their majority in the Senate, the House, and governorships, and wielded newly acquired executive power with Trump's election. The Republican Party controlled 69 of 99 state legislative chambers in 2017, the most it had held in history. The Party also held 33 governorships, the most it had held since 1922. The party had total control of government in 25 states; it had not held total control of this many states since 1952. The opposing Democratic Party held full control of only five states in 2017. In the 2018 elections, Republicans lost control of the House of Representatives, but strengthened their hold on the Senate. Over the course of his presidency, Trump appointed three justices to the Supreme Court: Neil Gorsuch, Brett Kavanaugh, and Amy Coney Barrett. It was the most Supreme Court appointments for any president in a single term since Richard Nixon. Trump appointed 260 judges in total, creating overall Republican-appointed majorities on every branch of the federal judiciary except for the Court of International Trade by the time he left office, shifting the judiciary to the right. Other notable achievements during his presidency included the passing of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act in 2017; the creation of the U.S. Space Force, the first new independent military service since 1947; and the brokering of the Abraham Accords, a series of normalization agreements between Israel and various Arab states. Trump was impeached by the House of Representatives in 2019 on charges of abuse of power and obstruction of Congress. On February 5, 2020, the Senate voted to acquit him. Trump lost the 2020 presidential election to Democrat Joe Biden. He refused to concede the race, claiming widespread electoral fraud and attempting to overturn the results. On January 6, 2021, the United States Capitol was attacked by Trump supporters following a rally at which Trump spoke. After the attack, the House impeached Trump for a second time on the charge of incitement of insurrection, making him the only federal officeholder to be impeached twice. Trump left office on January 20, 2021. His impeachment trial continued into the early weeks of the Biden presidency, and he was acquitted on February 13, 2021. In 2022 and 2023, Supreme Court justices appointed by Trump proved decisive in landmark decisions on gun rights, abortion, and affirmative action. The party went into the 2022 elections confident and with analysts predicting a red wave, but it ultimately underperformed expectations, with voters in swing states and competitive districts joining Democrats in rejecting candidates who had been endorsed by Trump or who had denied the results of the 2020 election. The party won control of the House with a narrow majority, but lost the Senate and several state legislative majorities and governorships. The results led to many Republicans and conservative thought leaders questioning whether Trump should continue as the party's main figurehead and leader. As of 2024, the GOP holds a majority in the U.S. House of Representatives. It also holds 27 state governorships, 28 state legislatures, and 23 state government trifectas. Six of the nine current U.S. Supreme Court justices were appointed by Republican presidents. Its most recent presidential nominee was Donald Trump, who served as the 45th president of the United States. There have been 19 Republican presidents, the most from any one political party. The Republican Party's founding members chose its name as homage to the values of republicanism promoted by Democratic-Republican Party, which its founder, Thomas Jefferson, called the "Republican Party". The idea for the name came from an editorial by the party's leading publicist, Horace Greeley, who called for "some simple name like 'Republican' [that] would more fitly designate those who had united to restore the Union to its true mission of champion and promulgator of Liberty rather than propagandist of slavery". The name reflects the 1776 republican values of civic virtue and opposition to aristocracy and corruption. "Republican" has a variety of meanings around the world, and the Republican Party has evolved such that the meanings no longer always align. The term "Grand Old Party" is a traditional nickname for the Republican Party, and the abbreviation "GOP" is a commonly used designation. The term originated in 1875 in the Congressional Record, referring to the party associated with the successful military defense of the Union as "this gallant old party". The following year in an article in the Cincinnati Commercial, the term was modified to "grand old party". The first use of the abbreviation is dated 1884. The traditional mascot of the party is the elephant. A political cartoon by Thomas Nast, published in Harper's Weekly on November 7, 1874, is considered the first important use of the symbol. An alternate symbol of the Republican Party in states such as Indiana, New York and Ohio is the bald eagle as opposed to the Democratic rooster or the Democratic five-pointed star. In Kentucky, the log cabin is a symbol of the Republican Party. Traditionally the party had no consistent color identity. After the 2000 presidential election, the color red became associated with Republicans. During and after the election, the major broadcast networks used the same color scheme for the electoral map: states won by Republican nominee George W. Bush were colored red and states won by Democratic nominee Al Gore were colored blue. Due to the weeks-long dispute over the election results, these color associations became firmly ingrained, persisting in subsequent years. Although the assignment of colors to political parties is unofficial and informal, the media has come to represent the respective political parties using these colors. The party and its candidates have also come to embrace the color red. An 1874 cartoon by Thomas Nast, featuring the first notable appearance of the Republican elephant The red, white and blue elephant The GOP banner logo, c. 2013 A GOP banner logo, c. 2017 During the 19th century, Republican factions included the Radical Republicans. They were a major factor of the party from its inception in 1854 until the end of the Reconstruction Era in 1877. They strongly opposed slavery, were hard-line abolitionists, and later advocated equal rights for the freedmen and women. They were heavily influenced by religious ideals and evangelical Christianity; many were Christian reformers who saw slavery as evil and the Civil War as God's punishment for it. Radical Republicans pressed for abolition as a major war aim and they opposed the moderate Reconstruction plans of Abraham Lincoln as both too lenient on the Confederates and not going far enough to help former slaves who had been freed during or after the Civil War by the Emancipation Proclamation and the Thirteenth Amendment. After the war's end and Lincoln's assassination, the Radicals clashed with Andrew Johnson over Reconstruction policy. Radicals led efforts after the war to establish civil rights for former slaves and fully implement emancipation. After unsuccessful measures in 1866 resulted in violence against former slaves in the rebel states, Radicals pushed the Fourteenth Amendment for statutory protections through Congress. They opposed allowing ex-Confederate officers to retake political power in the Southern U.S., and emphasized liberty, equality, and the Fifteenth Amendment which provided voting rights for the freedmen. Many later became Stalwarts, who supported machine politics. Moderate Republicans were known for their loyal support of President Abraham Lincoln's war policies and expressed antipathy towards the more militant stances advocated by the Radical Republicans. According to historian Eric Foner, congressional leaders of the faction were James G. Blaine, John A. Bingham, William P. Fessenden, Lyman Trumbull, and John Sherman. In contrast to Radicals, Moderate Republicans were less enthusiastic on the issue of Black suffrage even while embracing civil equality and the expansive federal authority observed throughout the American Civil War. They were also skeptical of the lenient, conciliatory Reconstruction policies of President Andrew Johnson. Members of the Moderate Republicans comprised in part of previous Radical Republicans who became disenchanted with the alleged corruption of the latter faction. Charles Sumner, a Massachusetts senator who led Radical Republicans in the 1860s, later joined reform-minded moderates as he later opposed the corruption associated with the Grant administration. They generally opposed efforts by Radical Republicans to rebuild the Southern U.S. under an economically mobile, free-market system. The dawn on the 20th century saw the Republican party split into an Old Right and a moderate-liberal faction in the Northeast that eventually became known as Rockefeller Republicans. Opposition to Roosevelt's New Deal saw the formation of the conservative coalition. The 1950s saw fusionism of traditionalist and social conservatism and right-libertarianism, along with the rise of the First New Right to be followed in 1964 with a more populist Second New Right. The rise of the Reagan coalition via the "Reagan Revolution" in the 1980s began what has been called the Reagan era. Regan's rise displaced the liberal-moderate faction of the GOP and established Reagan-style conservatism as the prevailing ideological faction of the Party for the next thirty years. Republicans began the 21st century with the election of George W. Bush in the 2000 United States presidential election and saw the peak of a neoconservative faction that held significant influence over the initial American response to the September 11 attacks through the War on Terror. The election of Barack Obama saw the formation of the Tea Party movement in 2009 that coincided with a global rise in right-wing populist movements from the 2010s to 2020's. Right-wing populism became an increasingly dominant ideological faction within the GOP throughout the 2010s and helped lead to the election of Donald Trump in 2016. The Party has since faced intense factionalism, and has also undergone a major decrease in influence of the traditional establishment conservative faction. Trump's election split both the GOP and larger conservative movement into Trumpist and anti-Trump factions. There are significant divisions within the party on the issues of abortion, same-sex marriage, and free trade. Ronald Reagan's presidential election in 1980 established Reagan-style American conservatism as the dominant ideological faction of the Republican Party until the election of Donald Trump in 2016. Traditional modern conservatives combine support for free-market economic policies with social conservatism and a hawkish approach to foreign policy. Part of the conservative movement is composed of fiscal conservatives and deficit hawks. Conservatives generally support policies that favor limited government, individualism, traditionalism, republicanism, and limited federal governmental power in relation to the states. Long-term shifts in conservative thinking following the election of Trump have been described as a "new fusionism" of traditional conservative ideology and right-wing populist themes. These have resulted in shifts towards greater support for national conservatism, protectionism, cultural conservatism, a more realist foreign policy, a repudiation of neoconservatism, reduced efforts to roll back entitlement programs, and a disdain for traditional checks and balances. Conservative caucuses include the Republican Study Committee and Freedom Caucus. The Republican Party has a small faction of libertarians. This faction of the party tends to prevail in the Midwestern and Western United States. Right-libertarianism emerged from fusionism in the 1950s and 60s. Barry Goldwater had a substantial impact on the conservative-libertarian movement of the 1960s. Libertarians typically favor cutting taxes and regulations, repealing the Affordable Care Act, and protecting gun rights. In foreign policy Libertarians prefer non-interventionism, and isolationism. Compared to other Republicans, they are more likely to favor the legalization of marijuana, LGBT rights such as same-sex marriage, gun rights, oppose mass surveillance, and support reforms to current laws surrounding civil asset forfeiture. Right-wing libertarians are strongly divided on the subject of abortion. Prominent libertarian conservatives within the Republican Party include Rand Paul, a U.S. senator from Kentucky, Kentucky's 4th congressional district congressman Thomas Massie, Utah senator Mike Lee and Wyoming senator Cynthia Lummis. Since the rise of the Christian right in the 1970s, the Republican Party has drawn significant support from traditionalists in the Catholic Church and evangelicals partly due to opposition to abortion after Roe v. Wade. The Christian right faction is characterized by strong support of socially conservative and Christian nationalist policies. Compared to other Republicans, the socially conservative Christian right faction of the party is more likely to oppose LGBT rights, marijuana legalization, and support significantly restricting the legality of abortion. Christian nationalists generally seek to declare the U.S. a Christian nation, enforce Christian values, and overturn the separation of church and state. In October 2023, a member of the Christian right faction, Mike Johnson, was elected the 56th Speaker of the United States House of Representatives. Trumpists are the dominant political faction of the GOP and have been described as consisting of a range of right-wing ideologies including but not limited to right-wing populism, national conservatism, neo-nationalism, and Trumpism. They have been described as the American political variant of the far-right. Despite producing no manifesto, the Trumpist faction generally supports U.S. aid to Israel, cuts to spending, and an isolationist "America First" foreign policy. They generally reject compromise within the party and with the Democrats, and are willing to oust fellow Republican office holders they deem to be too moderate. Compared to other Republicans, the Trumpist faction is more likely to oppose legal immigration, free trade, neoconservatism, and environmental protection laws. The Republican Party's populist and far-right movements emerged in occurrence with a global increase in populist movements in the 2010s and 2020s, coupled with entrenchment and increased partisanship within the party since 2010, fueled by the rise of the Tea Party movement which has also been described as far-right. The election of Trump in 2016 split the party into pro-Trump and anti-Trump factions. The party's Trumpist faction includes members of the Freedom Caucus, as well as Lauren Boebert, Marjorie Taylor Greene and Matt Gaetz, who led the 2023 rebellion against then-Speaker of the House Kevin McCarthy. Joseph Lowndes, a professor of political science at the University of Oregon, argued that while current far-right Republicans support Trump, the faction rose before and will likely exist after Trump. Julia Azari, an associate professor of political science at Marquette University, noted that not all Trumpist Republicans are public supporters of Donald Trump, and that some Republicans endorse Trump policies while distancing themselves from Trump as a person. According to sociologist Joe Feagin, political polarization by racially extremist Republicans as well as their increased attention from conservative media has perpetuated the near extinction of moderate Republicans and created legislative paralysis at numerous government levels in the last few decades. Neoconservatives are a small faction of the GOP that support an interventionist foreign policy and increased military spending. They previously held significant influence in the early 2000s in planning the initial response to the 9/11 attacks through the War on Terror. Since the election of Trump in 2016, neoconservatism has declined and non-interventionism and isolationism has grown among elected federal Republican officeholders. Republican members of the 118th Congress with neoconservative stances include Senators Tom Cotton and Lindsey Graham. The moderate faction in the Republican party predominantly comes from the Northeastern United States, and are typically located in swing states or blue states. Moderate Republican voters are typically highly educated, affluent, socially moderate or liberal and often Never Trump. While they sometimes share the economic views of other Republicans (i.e. lower taxes, deregulation, and welfare reform), moderate Republicans differ in that some are for affirmative action, LGBT rights and same-sex marriage, legal access to and even public funding for abortion, gun control laws, more environmental regulation and action on climate change, fewer restrictions on immigration and a path to citizenship for illegal immigrants. In the 21st century, some former Republican moderates have switched to the Democratic Party. Notable moderate Republicans include Senators Lisa Murkowski of Alaska and Susan Collins of Maine, Nevada governor Joe Lombardo, Vermont governor Phil Scott, former Massachusetts governor Charlie Baker, and former Maryland governor Larry Hogan. Republicans believe that free markets and individual achievement are the primary factors behind economic prosperity. Reduction in income taxes is a core component of Republicans' fiscal agenda. Tax cuts have been at the core of Republican economic policy since 1980. At the national level and state level, Republicans tend to pursue policies of tax cuts and deregulation. Modern Republicans advocate the theory of supply-side economics, which holds that lower tax rates increase economic growth. Many Republicans oppose higher tax rates for higher earners, which they believe are unfairly targeted at those who create jobs and wealth. They believe private spending is more efficient than government spending. Republican lawmakers have also sought to limit funding for tax enforcement and tax collection. As per a 2021 study that measured Republicans' congressional votes, the modern Republican Party's economic policy positions tend to align with business interests and the affluent. Republicans frequently advocate in favor of fiscal conservatism during Democratic administrations; however, the party has a record of increasing federal debt during periods when it controls the government (the implementation of the Bush tax cuts, Medicare Part D and the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 are examples of this record). Republican administrations have, since the late 1960s, sustained or increased previous levels of government spending. Republicans believe individuals should take responsibility for their own circumstances. They also believe the private sector is more effective in helping the poor through charity than the government is through welfare programs and that social assistance programs often cause government dependency. As of November 2022, all 11 states that had not expanded Medicaid had Republican-controlled state legislatures. The Republican Party is generally opposed to labor unions. Republicans believe corporations should be able to establish their own employment practices, including benefits and wages, with the free market deciding the price of work. Since the 1920s, Republicans have generally been opposed by labor union organizations and members. At the national level, Republicans supported the Taft–Hartley Act of 1947, which gives workers the right not to participate in unions. Modern Republicans at the state level generally support various right-to-work laws.[citation needed] Most Republicans also oppose increases in the minimum wage, believing that such increases hurt businesses by forcing them to cut and outsource jobs while passing on costs to consumers. The Republican Party has taken widely varying views on international trade throughout its history. At its inception, the Republican Party supported protective tariffs, with the Morrill Tariff being enacted during the presidency of Abraham Lincoln. In the 1896 presidential election, Republican presidential William McKinley campaigned heavily on high tariffs, having been the creator and namesake for the McKinley Tariff of 1890. In the early 20th century the Republican Party began splitting on tariffs, with the great battle over the high Payne–Aldrich Tariff Act in 1910 splitting the party and causing a realignment. Democratic president Woodrow Wilson cut rates with the 1913 Underwood Tariff and the coming of World War I in 1914 radically revised trade patterns due to reduced trade. Also, the new revenues generated by the federal income tax due to the 16th amendment made tariffs less important in terms of economic impact and political rhetoric. When the Republicans returned to power in 1921 they again imposed a protective tariff. They raised it again with the Smoot–Hawley Tariff Act of 1930 to meet the Great Depression in the United States, but the depression only worsened and Democrat Franklin D. Roosevelt became president from 1932 to 1945. The Reciprocal Tariff Act of 1934 marked a sharp departure from the era of protectionism in the United States. American duties on foreign products declined from an average of 46% in 1934 to 12% by 1962, which included the presidency of Republican president Dwight D. Eisenhower. After World War II, the U.S. promoted the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) established in 1947, to minimize tariffs and other restrictions, and to liberalize trade among all capitalist countries. During the Reagan and George H. W. Bush administrations Republicans abandoned protectionist policies, and came out against quotas and in favor of the GATT and the World Trade Organization policy of minimal economic barriers to global trade. Free trade with Canada came about as a result of the Canada–U.S. Free Trade Agreement of 1987, which led in 1994 to the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) based on Reagan's plan to enlarge the scope of the market for American firms to include Canada and Mexico. President Bill Clinton, with strong Republican support in 1993, pushed NAFTA through Congress over the vehement objection of labor unions. In the 21st century, opinions on trade and protectionism have fluctuated, more recently splitting roughly on partisan lines. In 2017, only 36% of Republicans agreed that free trade agreements are good for the United States, compared to 67% of Democrats. When asked if free trade has helped respondents specifically, the approval numbers for Democrats drop to 54%, however approval ratings among Republicans remain relatively unchanged at 34%. The 2016 election marked the beginning of the trend of returning to protectionism, an ideology incorporated into Republican president Donald Trump's platform. During his presidency, Trump initiated a trade war with China and negotiated the USMCA as a successor to NAFTA. Historically, progressive leaders in the Republican Party supported environmental protection. Republican President Theodore Roosevelt was a prominent conservationist whose policies eventually led to the creation of the National Park Service. While Republican President Richard Nixon was not an environmentalist, he signed legislation to create the Environmental Protection Agency in 1970 and had a comprehensive environmental program. However, this position has changed since the 1980s and the administration of President Ronald Reagan, who labeled environmental regulations a burden on the economy. Since then, Republicans have increasingly taken positions against environmental regulation, with many Republicans rejecting the scientific consensus on climate change. In 2006, then-California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger broke from Republican orthodoxy to sign several bills imposing caps on carbon emissions in California. Then-President George W. Bush opposed mandatory caps at a national level. Bush's decision not to regulate carbon dioxide as a pollutant was challenged in the Supreme Court by 12 states, with the court ruling against the Bush administration in 2007. Bush also publicly opposed ratification of the Kyoto Protocols which sought to limit greenhouse gas emissions and thereby combat climate change; his position was heavily criticized by climate scientists. The Republican Party rejects cap-and-trade policy to limit carbon emissions. In the 2000s, Senator John McCain proposed bills (such as the McCain-Lieberman Climate Stewardship Act) that would have regulated carbon emissions, but his position on climate change was unusual among high-ranking party members. Some Republican candidates have supported the development of alternative fuels in order to achieve energy independence for the United States. Some Republicans support increased oil drilling in protected areas such as the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, a position that has drawn criticism from activists. Many Republicans during the presidency of Barack Obama opposed his administration's new environmental regulations, such as those on carbon emissions from coal. In particular, many Republicans supported building the Keystone Pipeline; this position was supported by businesses, but opposed by indigenous peoples' groups and environmental activists. According to the Center for American Progress, a non-profit liberal advocacy group, more than 55% of congressional Republicans were climate change deniers in 2014. PolitiFact in May 2014 found "relatively few Republican members of Congress ... accept the prevailing scientific conclusion that global warming is both real and man-made." The group found eight members who acknowledged it, although the group acknowledged there could be more and that not all members of Congress have taken a stance on the issue. From 2008 to 2017, the Republican Party went from "debating how to combat human-caused climate change to arguing that it does not exist", according to The New York Times. In January 2015, the Republican-led U.S. Senate voted 98–1 to pass a resolution acknowledging that "climate change is real and is not a hoax"; however, an amendment stating that "human activity significantly contributes to climate change" was supported by only five Republican senators. The party opposes a single-payer health care system, describing it as socialized medicine. It also opposes the Affordable Care Act and expansions of Medicaid. Historically, there have been diverse and overlapping views within both the Republican Party and the Democratic Party on the role of government in health care, but the two parties became highly polarized on the topic during 2008–2009 and onwards. Both Republicans and Democrats made various proposals to establish federally funded aged health insurance prior to the bipartisan effort to establish Medicare and Medicaid in 1965. No Republican member of Congress voted for the Affordable Care Act in 2009, and after it passed, the party made frequent attempts to repeal it. At the state level, the party has tended to adopt a position against Medicaid expansion. According to a 2023 YouGov poll, Republicans are slightly more likely to oppose intersex medical alterations than Democrats. The Republican Party has a persistent history of skepticism and opposition to multilateralism in American foreign policy. Neoconservatism, which supports unilateralism and emphasizes the use of force and hawkishness in American foreign policy, has been a prominent strand of foreign policy thinking in all Republican presidential administration since Ronald Reagan's presidency. Some, including paleoconservatives, call for non-interventionism and an isolationist "America First" foreign policy agenda. This faction gained strength starting in 2016 with the rise of Donald Trump, demanding that the United States reset its previous interventionist foreign policy and encourage allies and partners to take greater responsibility for their own defense. During the 1940s, Republicans predominantly opposed the cause of an independent Jewish state due to the influence of conservatives of the Old Right. In 1948, Democratic President Harry Truman became the first world leader to recognize an independent state of Israel. The rise of neoconservatism saw the Republican Party become predominantly pro-Israel by the 1990s and 2000s, although notable anti-Israel sentiment persisted through paleoconservative figures such as Pat Buchanan. As president, Donald Trump generally supported Israel during most of his term, but became increasingly critical of Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu towards the end of it. After the 7 October 2023 Hamas terrorist attack on Israel, Trump blamed Netanyahu for having failed to prevent the attack. Trump previously criticized the Israeli settlements in the West Bank and expressed doubt about whether Netanyahu truly desired peace with the Palestinians. According to i24NEWS, the 2020s have seen declining support for Israel among nationalist Republicans, led by individuals such as Tucker Carlson. The modern GOP is divided between neoconservatives, who support Israel; and nationalists, who tend to sympathize with Palestine. In the party's 2016 platform, its stance on Taiwan is: "We oppose any unilateral steps by either side to alter the status quo in the Taiwan Straits on the principle that all issues regarding the island's future must be resolved peacefully, through dialogue, and be agreeable to the people of Taiwan." In addition, if "China were to violate those principles, the United States, in accord with the Taiwan Relations Act, will help Taiwan defend itself". Since the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001, Neoconservatist in the party have supported the War on Terror, including the War in Afghanistan and the Iraq War. The George W. Bush administration took the position that the Geneva Conventions do not apply to unlawful combatants, while other prominent Republicans, such as Ted Cruz, strongly oppose the use of enhanced interrogation techniques, which they view as torture. In the 2020s, Trumpist Republicans such as Matt Gaetz supported reducing U.S. military presence abroad and ending intervention in countries such as Somalia. The 2016 Republican platform eliminated references to giving weapons to Ukraine in its fight with Russia and rebel forces; the removal of this language reportedly resulted from intervention from staffers to presumptive Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump. But the Trump administration approves new sale of anti-tank weapons to Ukraine in 2017. Republicans generally question European NATO members' insufficient investment in defense funding, and some are dissatisfied with U.S. aid to Ukraine. Some Republican members of the U.S. Congress supports foreign aid to Israel but not to Ukraine, accused by U.S. media of being pro-Russian. In a 2014 poll, 59% of Republicans favored doing less abroad and focusing on the country's own problems instead. Republicans have frequently advocated for restricting foreign aid as a means of asserting the national security and immigration interests of the United States. A survey by the Chicago Council on Global Affairs shows that "Trump Republicans seem to prefer a US role that is more independent, less cooperative, and more inclined to use military force to deal with the threats they see as the most pressing". The Republican Party is generally associated with social conservative policies, although it does have dissenting centrist and libertarian factions. The social conservatives support laws that uphold their traditional values, such as opposition to same-sex marriage, abortion, and marijuana. The Republican Party's positions on social and cultural issues are in part a reflection of the influential role that the Christian right has had in the party since the 1970s. Most conservative Republicans also oppose gun control, affirmative action, and illegal immigration. The Republican position on abortion has changed significantly over time. During the 1960s and early 1970s, opposition to abortion was concentrated among members of the political left and the Democratic Party; most liberal Catholics — which tended to vote for the Democratic Party — opposed expanding abortion access while most conservative evangelical Protestants supported it. During this period, Republicans generally favored legalized abortion more than Democrats, although significant heterogeneity could be found within both parties. Leading Republican political figures. including Richard Nixon, Gerald Ford, Ronald Reagan, and George H. W. Bush, took pro-choice positions until the early 1980s. However, starting at this point, both George H.W. Bush and Ronald Reagan described themselves as pro-life during their presidencies. In the 21st century, both George W. Bush and Donald Trump described themselves as "pro-life" during their terms. However, Trump stated that he supported the legality and ethics of abortion before his candidacy in 2015. Summarizing the rapid shift in the Republican and Democratic positions on abortion, Sue Halpern writes: ...in the late 1960s and early 1970s, many Republicans were behind efforts to liberalize and even decriminalize abortion; theirs was the party of reproductive choice, while Democrats, with their large Catholic constituency, were the opposition. Republican governor Ronald Reagan signed the California Therapeutic Abortion Act, one of the most liberal abortion laws in the country, in 1967, legalizing abortion for women whose mental or physical health would be impaired by pregnancy, or whose pregnancies were the result of rape or incest. The same year, the Republican strongholds of North Carolina and Colorado made it easier for women to obtain abortions. New York, under Governor Nelson Rockefeller, a Republican, eliminated all restrictions on women seeking to terminate pregnancies up to twenty-four weeks gestation.... Richard Nixon, Barry Goldwater, Gerald Ford, and George H.W. Bush were all pro-choice, and they were not party outliers. In 1972, a Gallup poll found that 68 percent of Republicans believed abortion to be a private matter between a woman and her doctor. The government, they said, should not be involved... Since the 1980s, opposition to abortion has become strongest in the party among traditionalist Catholics and conservative Protestant evangelicals. With the possible exception of the ordeal of the bitter water in Numbers 5:11–31, the Bible does not mention the topic of abortion or explicitly take a position on the practice, although several verses have been interpreted as supporting or opposing the ethics of abortion. Initially, evangelicals were relatively indifferent to the cause of abortion and overwhelmingly viewed it as a concern that was sectarian and Catholic. Historian Randall Balmer notes that Billy Graham's Christianity Today published in 1968 a statement by theologian Bruce Waltke that: "God does not regard the fetus as a soul, no matter how far gestation has progressed. The Law plainly exacts: "If a man kills any human life he will be put to death" (Lev. 24:17). But according to Exodus 21:22-24, the destruction of the fetus is not a capital offense. ... Clearly, then, in contrast to the mother, the fetus is not reckoned as a soul." Typical of the time, Christianity Today "refused to characterize abortion as sinful" and cited "individual health, family welfare, and social responsibility" as "justifications for ending a pregnancy." Similar beliefs were held among conservative figures in the Southern Baptist Convention, including W. A. Criswell, who is partially credited with starting the "conservative resurgence" within the organization, who stated: "I have always felt that it was only after a child was born and had a life separate from its mother that it became an individual person and it has always, therefore, seemed to me that what is best for the mother and for the future should be allowed." Balmer argues that evangelical American Christianity being inherently tied to opposition to abortion is a relatively new occurrence. After the late 1970s, he writes, opinion against abortion among evangelicals rapidly shifted in favor of its prohibition. Today, opinion polls show that Republican voters are heavily divided on the legality of abortion, although vast majority of the party's national and state candidates are anti-abortion and oppose elective abortion on religious or moral grounds. While many advocate exceptions in the case of incest, rape or the mother's life being at risk, in 2012 the party approved a platform advocating banning abortions without exception. There were not highly polarized differences between the Democratic Party and the Republican Party prior to the Roe v. Wade 1973 Supreme Court ruling (which made prohibitions on abortion rights unconstitutional), but after the Supreme Court ruling, opposition to abortion became an increasingly key national platform for the Republican Party. As a result, Evangelicals gravitated towards the Republican Party. Most Republicans oppose government funding for abortion providers, notably Planned Parenthood. This includes support for the Hyde Amendment. Until its dissolution in 2018, Republican Majority for Choice, an abortion rights PAC, advocated for amending the GOP platform to include pro-abortion rights members. The Republican Party has pursued policies at the national and state-level to restrict embryonic stem cell research beyond the original lines because it involves the destruction of human embryos. After the overturning of Roe v. Wade in 2022, a majority of Republican-controlled states passed near-total bans on abortion, rendering it largely illegal throughout much of the United States. Republicans generally oppose affirmative action, often describing it as a "quota system" and believing that it is not meritocratic and is counter-productive socially by only further promoting discrimination. The GOP's official stance supports race-neutral admissions policies in universities, but supports taking into account the socioeconomic status of the student.[citation needed] According to a 2023 ABC poll, a majority of Americans (52%) and 75% of Republicans supported the Supreme Court's decision in Students for Fair Admissions v. Harvard prohibiting race as a factor in college admissions, compared to only 26% of Democrats. The 2012 Republican national platform stated, "We support efforts to help low-income individuals get a fair chance based on their potential and individual merit; but we reject preferences, quotas, and set-asides, as the best or sole methods through which fairness can be achieved, whether in government, education or corporate boardrooms…Merit, ability, aptitude, and results should be the factors that determine advancement in our society." Republicans generally support gun ownership rights and oppose laws regulating guns. Party members and Republican-leaning independents are twice as likely to own a gun as Democrats and Democratic-leaning independents. The National Rifle Association of America, a special interest group in support of gun ownership, has consistently aligned itself with the Republican Party. Following gun control measures under the Clinton administration, such as the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994, the Republicans allied with the NRA during the Republican Revolution in 1994. Since then, the NRA has consistently backed Republican candidates and contributed financial support, such as in the 2013 Colorado recall election which resulted in the ousting of two pro-gun control Democrats for two anti-gun control Republicans. In contrast, George H. W. Bush, formerly a lifelong NRA member, was highly critical of the organization following their response to the Oklahoma City bombing authored by CEO Wayne LaPierre, and publicly resigned in protest. Republican elected officials have historically supported the War on Drugs. They oppose legalization or decriminalization of drugs such as marijuana. Opposition to the legalization of marijuana has softened significantly over time among Republican voters. A 2021 Quinnipiac poll found that 62% of Republicans supported the legalization of recreational marijuana use and that net support for the position was +30 points. The Republican Party has taken widely varying views on immigration throughout its history, including in modern times. In the period 1850–1870, the Republican Party was more opposed to immigration than Democrats, in part because the Republican Party relied on the support of anti-Catholic and anti-immigrant parties, such as the Know-Nothings, at the time. In the decades following the Civil War, the Republican Party grew more supportive of immigration, as it represented manufacturers in the northeast (who wanted additional labor) whereas the Democratic Party came to be seen as the party of labor (which wanted fewer laborers to compete with). Starting in the 1970s, the parties switched places again, as the Democrats grew more supportive of immigration than Republicans. Republicans are divided on how to confront illegal immigration. In 2006, the White House supported and Republican-led Senate passed comprehensive immigration reform that would eventually allow millions of illegal immigrants to become citizens, but the House (also led by Republicans) did not advance the bill. After being defeated in the 2012 presidential election, particularly due to a lack of support among Latinos, several Republicans advocated a friendlier approach to immigrants that allowed for more migrant workers and a path to citizenship for undocumented immigrants. The Border Security, Economic Opportunity, and Immigration Modernization Act of 2013 passed the Senate 68–32, but was not brought up to a vote in the House and died in the 113th Congress. In a 2013 poll, 60% of Republicans supported the pathway concept. In 2016, Donald Trump proposed building a wall along the southern border. Trump enacted several hardline immigration policies during his administration, including a travel ban from multiple Muslim-majority countries, a Remain in Mexico policy for asylum-seekers, a controversial family separation policy, and attempting to end DACA. During Biden's presidency, the Republican Party has continued to take a hardline stance against illegal immigration and largely opposes immigration reform, though there are widely differing views on immigration within the party. Similar to the Democratic Party, the Republican position on LGBT rights has changed significantly over time, with continuously increasing support among both parties on the issue. The Log Cabin Republicans is a group within the Republican Party that represents LGBT conservatives and allies and advocates for LGBT rights and equality. Both Republican and Democratic politicians predominately took hostile positions on LGBT rights before the 2000s.[failed verification] From the early-2000s to the mid-2010s, Republicans opposed same-sex marriage, while being divided on the issue of civil unions and domestic partnerships for same-sex couples. During the 2004 election, George W. Bush campaigned prominently on a constitutional amendment to prohibit same-sex marriage; many believe it helped Bush win re-election. In both 2004 and 2006, President Bush, Senate Majority Leader Bill Frist, and House Majority Leader John Boehner promoted the Federal Marriage Amendment, a proposed constitutional amendment which would legally restrict the definition of marriage to heterosexual couples. In both attempts, the amendment failed to secure enough votes to invoke cloture and thus ultimately was never passed. As more states legalized same-sex marriage in the 2010s, Republicans increasingly supported allowing each state to decide its own marriage policy. As of 2014, most state GOP platforms expressed opposition to same-sex marriage. The 2016 GOP Platform defined marriage as "natural marriage, the union of one man and one woman," and condemned the Supreme Court's ruling legalizing same-sex marriages. The 2020 platform retained the 2016 language against same-sex marriage. Following his election as president in 2016, Donald Trump stated that he had no objection to same-sex marriage or to the Supreme Court decision in Obergefell v. Hodges, but had previously promised to consider appointing a Supreme Court justice to roll back the constitutional right. In office, Trump was the first sitting Republican president to recognize LGBT Pride Month. Conversely, the Trump administration banned transgender individuals from service in the United States military and rolled back other protections for transgender people which had been enacted during the previous Democratic presidency. The Republican Party platform previously opposed the inclusion of gay people in the military and opposed adding sexual orientation to the list of protected classes since 1992. The Republican Party opposed the inclusion of sexual preference in anti-discrimination statutes from 1992 to 2004. The 2008 and 2012 Republican Party platform supported anti-discrimination statutes based on sex, race, age, religion, creed, disability, or national origin, but both platforms were silent on sexual orientation and gender identity. The 2016 platform was opposed to sex discrimination statutes that included the phrase "sexual orientation". The same 2016 platform rejected Obergefell v. Hodges, and was also used for the party's 2020 and 2024 campaigns. In the early 2020s, numerous Republican-led states proposed or passed laws limiting or banning transgender care for minors, public performances of drag shows, and teaching schoolchildren about LGBT topics. On November 6, 2021, RNC Chair Ronna McDaniel announced the creation of the "RNC Pride Coalition", in partnership with the Log Cabin Republicans, to promote outreach to LGBTQ voters. However, after the announcement, McDaniel apologized for not having communicated the announcement in advance and emphasized that the new outreach program does not alter the GOP Platform, last adopted in 2016. As of 2023, a majority of Republican voters support same-sex marriage. According to FiveThirtyEight, as of 2022, Republican voters are consistently more open to same-sex marriage as their representatives. Virtually all restrictions on voting have in recent years been implemented by Republicans. Republicans, mainly at the state level, argue that the restrictions (such as the purging of voter rolls, limiting voting locations, and limiting early and mail-in voting) are vital to prevent voter fraud, saying that voter fraud is an underestimated issue in elections. Polling has found majority support for early voting, automatic voter registration and voter ID laws among the general population. In defending their restrictions to voting rights, Republicans have made false and exaggerated claims about the extent of voter fraud in the United States; all existing research indicates that it is extremely rare, and civil and voting rights organizations often accuse Republicans of enacting restrictions to influence elections in the party's favor. Many laws or regulations restricting voting enacted by Republicans have been successfully challenged in court, with court rulings striking down such regulations and accusing Republicans of establishing them with partisan purpose. After the Supreme Court decision in Shelby County v. Holder rolled back aspects of the Voting Rights Act of 1965, Republicans introduced cuts to early voting, purges of voter rolls and imposition of strict voter ID laws. The 2016 Republican platform advocated proof of citizenship as a prerequisite for registering to vote and photo ID as a prerequisite when voting. After Donald Trump and his Republican allies made false claims of fraud during the 2020 presidential election, Republicans launched a nationwide effort to impose tighter election laws at the state level. Such bills are centered around limiting mail-in voting, strengthening voter ID laws, shortening early voting, eliminating automatic and same-day voter registration, curbing the use of ballot drop boxes, and allowing for increased purging of voter rolls. Republicans in at least eight states have also introduced bills that would give lawmakers greater power over election administration, after they were unsuccessful in their attempts to overturn election results in swing states won by Biden. Supporters of the bills argue they would improve election security and reverse temporary changes enacted during the COVID-19 pandemic; they point to false claims of significant election fraud, as well as the substantial public distrust of the integrity of the 2020 election those claims have fostered, as justification. Political analysts say that the efforts amount to voter suppression, are intended to advantage Republicans by reducing the number of people who vote, and would disproportionately affect minority voters. The Party's 21st-century base consists of groups such as White voters, particularly male, but a majority of White women as well; heterosexual married couples; rural residents; and non-union workers without college degrees. Meanwhile, urban residents, union workers, most ethnic minorities, the unmarried, and sexual minorities tend to vote for the Democratic Party. The suburbs have become a major battleground. Since the 2010s, the party is strongest in the South, most of the Midwestern and Mountain States, and Alaska according to The New York Times. According to a 2015 Gallup poll, 25% of Americans identify as Republican and 16% identify as leaning Republican. In comparison, 30% identify as Democratic and 16% identify as leaning Democratic. The Democratic Party has typically held an overall edge in party identification since Gallup began polling on the issue in 1991. In recent years, the party has made significant gains among the White working class, Hispanics, and Orthodox Jews while losing support among most upper-class and college-educated Whites. As of the 2020s, the party derives its strongest support from rural voters, evangelical Christians, men, senior citizens, and white voters without college degrees. Since 1980, a "gender gap" has seen stronger support for the Republican Party among men than among women. Unmarried and divorced women were far more likely to vote for Democrat John Kerry than for Republican George W. Bush in the 2004 presidential election. In 2006 House races, 43% of women voted Republican while 47% of men did so. In the 2010 midterms, the "gender gap" was reduced, with women supporting Republican and Democratic candidates equally (49%–49%). Exit polls from the 2012 elections revealed a continued weakness among unmarried women for the GOP, a large and growing portion of the electorate. Although women supported Obama over Mitt Romney by a margin of 55–44% in 2012, Romney prevailed amongst married women, 53–46%. Obama won unmarried women 67–31%. However, according to a December 2019 study, "White women are the only group of female voters who support Republican Party candidates for president. They have done so by a majority in all but 2 of the last 18 elections". Until 2016, affluent voters and usually more-educated voters leaned more towards Republicans in presidential elections, but after 2016 the norm reversed. Those without college educations tend to be more socially conservative on a wide array of issues. In the 2020 United States presidential election, Donald Trump won 67% of white voters without a college degree, compared to 48% of white voters with a college degree. In 2012, the Pew Research Center conducted a study of registered voters with a 35–28 Democrat-to-Republican gap. They found that self-described Democrats had an eight-point advantage over Republicans among college graduates and a fourteen-point advantage among all post-graduates polled. Republicans had an eleven-point advantage among White men with college degrees; Democrats had a ten-point advantage among women with degrees. Democrats accounted for 36% of all respondents with an education of high school or less; Republicans accounted for 28%. When isolating just White registered voters polled, Republicans had a six-point advantage overall and a nine-point advantage among those with a high school education or less. Following the 2016 presidential election, exit polls indicated that "Donald Trump attracted a large share of the vote from Whites without a college degree, receiving 72 percent of the White non-college male vote and 62 percent of the White non-college female vote." Overall, 52% of voters with college degrees voted for Hillary Clinton in 2016, while 52% of voters without college degrees voted for Trump. Republicans have been winning under 15% of the African American vote in national elections since 1980. The party abolished chattel slavery under Abraham Lincoln, defeated the Slave Power, and gave Black people the legal right to vote during Reconstruction in the late 1860s. Until the New Deal of the 1930s, Black people supported the Republican Party by large margins. Black delegates were a sizable share of southern delegates to the national Republican convention from Reconstruction until the start of the 20th century when their share began to decline. Black people shifted in large margins to the Democratic Party in the 1930s, when Black politicians such as Arthur Mitchell and William Dawson supported the New Deal because it would better serve the interest of Black Americans. Black voters would become one of the core components of the New Deal coalition. In the South, after the Voting Rights Act to prohibit racial discrimination in elections was passed by a bipartisan coalition in 1965, Black people were able to vote again and ever since have formed a significant portion (20–50%) of the Democratic vote in that region. In the 2010 elections, two African American Republicans, Tim Scott and Allen West, were elected to the House of Representatives. As of January 2023, there are four African-American Republicans in the House of Representatives and one African American Republican in the United States Senate. In recent decades, Republicans have been moderately successful in gaining support from Hispanic and Asian American voters. George W. Bush, who campaigned energetically for Hispanic votes, received 35% of their vote in 2000 and 44% in 2004. The party's strong anti-communist stance has made it popular among some minority groups from current and former Communist states, in particular Cuban Americans, Korean Americans, Chinese Americans and Vietnamese Americans. The 2007 election of Bobby Jindal as Governor of Louisiana was hailed as pathbreaking. Jindal became the first elected minority governor in Louisiana and the first state governor of Indian descent. Republicans have gained support among racial and ethnic minorities, particularly among those who are working class, Hispanic or Latino, or Asian American since the 2010s. According to John Avlon, in 2013, the Republican party was more ethnically diverse at the statewide elected official level than the Democratic Party was; GOP statewide elected officials included Latino Nevada Governor Brian Sandoval and African-American U.S. senator Tim Scott of South Carolina. In the 2008 presidential election, Republican presidential candidate John McCain won 55% of White votes, 35% of Asian votes, 31% of Hispanic votes and 4% of African American votes. In 2012, 88% of Romney voters were White while 56% of Obama voters were White. In the 2022 U.S. House elections, Republicans won 58% of White voters, 40% of Asian voters, 39% of Hispanic voters, and 13% of African American voters. As of 2020, Republican candidates had lost the popular vote in seven out of the last eight presidential elections. Since 1992, the only time they won the popular vote in a presidential election is the 2004 United States presidential election. Demographers have pointed to the steady decline of its core base of older, rural White voters (as a percentage of the eligible voters). However, Donald Trump managed to increase non-White support to 26% of his total votes in the 2020 election — the highest percentage for a GOP presidential candidate since 1960. Religion has always played a major role for both parties, but in the course of a century, the parties' religious compositions have changed. Religion was a major dividing line between the parties before 1960, with Catholics, Jews, and southern Protestants heavily Democratic and northeastern Protestants heavily Republican. Most of the old differences faded away after the realignment of the 1970s and 1980s that undercut the New Deal coalition. Voters who attended church weekly gave 61% of their votes to Bush in 2004; those who attended occasionally gave him only 47%; and those who never attended gave him 36%. Fifty-nine percent of Protestants voted for Bush, along with 52% of Catholics (even though John Kerry was Catholic). Since 1980, a large majority of evangelicals has voted Republican; 70–80% voted for Bush in 2000 and 2004 and 70% for Republican House candidates in 2006. Members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, who reside predominantly in Utah and several neighboring states, voted 75% or more for George W. Bush in 2000. Members of the Mormon faith had a mixed relationship with Donald Trump during his tenure, despite 67% of them voting for him in 2016 and 56% of them supporting his presidency in 2018, disapproving of his personal behavior such as that shown during the Access Hollywood controversy. In the 2020 United States presidential election, Trump underperformed in heavily-Mormon Utah by more than ten percentage points compared to Mitt Romney (who is Mormon) in 2012 and George W. Bush in 2004. Their opinion on Trump had not affected their party affiliation, however, as 76% of Mormons in 2018 expressed preference for generic Republican congressional candidates. Jews continue to vote 70–80% Democratic; however, a slim majority of Orthodox Jews voted for the Republican Party in 2016, following years of growing Orthodox Jewish support for the party due to its social conservatism and increasingly pro-Israel foreign policy stance. Over 70% of Orthodox Jews identify as Republican or Republican leaning as of 2021. An exit poll conducted by the Associated Press for 2020 found 35% of Muslims voted for Donald Trump. The mainline traditional Protestants (Methodists, Lutherans, Presbyterians, Episcopalians and Disciples) have dropped to about 55% Republican (in contrast to 75% before 1968). Democrats have close links with the African American churches, especially the National Baptists, while their historic dominance among Catholic voters has eroded to 54–46 in the 2010 midterms. Although once strongly Democratic, American Catholic voters have been politically divided in the 21st century with 52% of Catholic voters voting for Trump in 2016 and 52% voting for Biden in 2020. While Catholic Republican leaders try to stay in line with the teachings of the Catholic Church on subjects such as abortion, contraception, euthanasia, and embryonic stem cell research, they tend to differ on the death penalty and same-sex marriage. Pope Francis' 2015 encyclical Laudato si' sparked a discussion on the positions of Catholic Republicans in relation to the positions of the Church. The Pope's encyclical on behalf of the Catholic Church officially acknowledges a man-made climate change caused by burning fossil fuels. The Pope says the warming of the planet is rooted in a throwaway culture and the developed world's indifference to the destruction of the planet in pursuit of short-term economic gains. According to The New York Times, Laudato si' put pressure on the Catholic candidates in the 2016 election: Jeb Bush, Bobby Jindal, Marco Rubio and Rick Santorum. With leading Democrats praising the encyclical, James Bretzke, a professor of moral theology at Boston College, has said that both sides were being disingenuous: "I think it shows that both the Republicans and the Democrats ... like to use religious authority and, in this case, the Pope to support positions they have arrived at independently ... There is a certain insincerity, hypocrisy I think, on both sides". While a Pew Research poll indicates Catholics are more likely to believe the Earth is warming than non-Catholics, 51% of Catholic Republicans believe in global warming (less than the general population) and only 24% of Catholic Republicans believe global warming is caused by human activity. The Republican Party has traditionally been a pro-business party. It garners major support from a wide variety of industries from the financial sector to small businesses. Republicans are 24 percent more likely to be business owners than Democrats. Prominent business lobbying groups such as the U.S. Chamber of Commerce and National Association of Manufacturers have traditionally supported Republican candidates and economic policies. Although both major parties support capitalism, the Republican Party is more likely to favor private property rights (including intellectual property rights) than the Democratic Party over competing interests such as protecting the environment or lowering medication costs. A survey cited by The Washington Post in 2012 found that 61 percent of small business owners planned to vote for Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney in the 2012 presidential election. Small business became a major theme of the 2012 Republican National Convention. As of 2021, there have been a total of 19 Republican presidents. History of the Republican Party (United States) History of the Democratic Party (United States) Politics portal Conservatism portal United States portal List of African-American Republicans List of Hispanic and Latino Republicans List of state parties of the Republican Party (United States) Political party strength in U.S. states The Republican Party was formed as a northern party dedicated to antislavery, drawing from the antislavery wing of the Whig Party ("Conscience Whigs") and combining Free Soil, Liberty Party, and antislavery Democratic Party members. Attributed to multiple sources: Right-to-work laws ban union security agreements, which require all workers in a unionized workplace to pay dues or a fair-share fee regardless of whether they are members of the union or not. According to an NPR/PBS NewsHour/Marist poll, while more than 60% of Americans believe the 2020 election was secure, a large majority of Republican voters say they do not trust the results of the 2020 election. According to a poll by Quinnipiac, 77% of Republicans believe there was widespread voter fraud. Died in office. Resigned from office. Comparing seats held immediately preceding and following the general election. Republican Vice President Dick Cheney provided a tie-breaking vote, initially giving Republicans a majority from Inauguration Day until Jim Jeffords left the Republican Party to caucus with the Democrats on June 6, 2001. Democratic Vice President Kamala Harris provided a tie-breaking vote, giving Democrats a majority from Inauguration Day until the end of the 117th Congress. Incumbent vice-president James S. Sherman was re-nominated as Taft's running-mate, but died six days prior to the election. Butler was chosen to receive the Republican vice-presidential votes after the election. Similar to the 2004 map, Republicans dominate in rural areas, making improvements in the Appalachian states, namely Kentucky, where the party won all but two counties; and West Virginia, where every county in the state voted Republican. The party also improved in many rural counties in Iowa, Wisconsin, and other midwestern states. Conversely, the party suffered substantial losses in urbanized areas such as Dallas, Harris, Fort Bend, and Tarrant counties in Texas, and Orange and San Diego counties in California, which it had won in 2004 but lost in 2020 Although Hayes won a majority of votes in the Electoral College, Democrat Samuel J. Tilden won a majority of the popular vote. Although Harrison won a majority of votes in the Electoral College, Democrat Grover Cleveland won a plurality of the popular vote. Taft finished in third place in both the electoral and popular vote, behind Progressive Theodore Roosevelt. Although Bush won a majority of votes in the Electoral College, Democrat Al Gore won a plurality of the popular vote. Although Trump won a majority of votes in the Electoral College, Democrat Hillary Clinton won a plurality of the popular vote. The Origin of the Republican Party by Prof. A. F. Gilman, Ripon College, WI, 1914. Widmer, Ted (March 19, 2011). "A Very Mad-Man". Opinionator. The New York Times. Retrieved March 12, 2017. McPherson, James (2003) [1988]. The Illustrated Battle Cry of Freedom: The Civil War Era. Oxford University Press. p. 129. ISBN 978-0-19-974390-2. James M. McPherson, Ordeal by Fire: Volume I. The Coming of War, second edition (ISBN 0-07045837-5) p. 94. McGovern, George S. (2009). "Abraham Lincoln: The American Presidents Series: The 16th President, 1861–1865". New York, New York: Henry Holt and Company. pp. 38–39. ISBN 978-0-8050-8345-3. Winger, Richard (December 29, 2023). "December 2023 Ballot Access News Print Edition". Ballot Access News. Archived from the original on December 28, 2022. Retrieved January 9, 2024. Smith, Robert C. (2021). "Ronald Reagan, Donald Trump, and the Future of the Republican Party and Conservatism in America". American Political Thought. 10 (2): 283–289. doi:10.1086/713662. S2CID 233401184. Retrieved September 21, 2022. Cohn, Nate (August 17, 2023). "The 6 Kinds of Republican Voters". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on October 12, 2023. Retrieved October 9, 2023. Davis, Susan (August 23, 2019). "Meltdown On Main Street: Inside The Breakdown Of The GOP's Moderate Wing". NPR. Archived from the original on June 17, 2022. Retrieved June 17, 2022. Gannon, Thomas M. (July–September 1981). "The New Christian Right in America as a Social and Political Force". Archives de Sciences Sociales des Religions. 26 (52–1). Paris: Éditions de l'EHESS: 69–83. doi:10.3406/assr.1981.2226. ISSN 0335-5985. JSTOR 30125411. Davis, Susan (April 6, 2022). "The Growing Religious Fervor in the American Right: 'This Is a Jesus Movement'". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 24, 2024. Retrieved March 13, 2024. Rathburn, Brian C. (Summer 2008). "Does One Right Make a Realist? Conservatism, Neoconservatism, and Isolationism in the Foreign Policy Ideology of American Elites". Political Science Quarterly. 123 (2): 271–299. doi:10.1002/j.1538-165X.2008.tb00625.x. ISSN 1538-165X. Biebricher, Thomas (October 25, 2023). "The Crisis of American Conservatism in Historical–Comparative Perspective". Politische Vierteljahresschrift. doi:10.1007/s11615-023-00501-2. ISSN 2075-4698. Arhin, Kofi; Stockemer, Daniel; Normandin, Marie-Soleil (May 29, 2023). "THE REPUBLICAN TRUMP VOTER: A Populist Radical Right Voter Like Any Other?". World Affairs. 186 (3). doi:10.1177/00438200231176818. ISSN 1940-1582. In this article, we first illustrate that the Republican Party, or at least the dominant wing, which supports or tolerates Donald Trump and his Make America Great Again (MAGA) agenda have become a proto-typical populist radical right-wing party (PRRP). Ball, Molly (January 23, 2024). "The GOP Wants Pure, Uncut Trumpism". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on January 24, 2024. Retrieved February 22, 2024. "Members". IDU. Archived from the original on July 16, 2015. Brownstein, Ronald (November 22, 2017). "Where the Republican Party Began". The American Prospect. Archived from the original on December 29, 2021. Fornieri, Joseph R.; Gabbard, Sara Vaughn (2008). Lincoln's America: 1809–1865. SIU Press. p. 19. ISBN 978-0809387137. Archived from the original on July 24, 2019. Retrieved February 4, 2018. Devine, Donald (April 4, 2014). "Reagan's Philosophical Fusionism". The American Conservative. Archived from the original on April 4, 2023. Retrieved January 18, 2023. Broadwater, Luke (October 23, 2023). "'5 Families' and Factions Within Factions: Why the House G.O.P. Can't Unite". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on October 27, 2023. Retrieved October 27, 2023. Ward, Ian (August 26, 2022). "Trump Didn't Kill Reaganism. These Guys Did". Politico. Retrieved February 8, 2024. Desiderio, Andrew; Sherman, Jake; Bresnahan, John (February 7, 2024). "The end of the Old GOP". Punchbowl News. Archived from the original on February 7, 2024. Retrieved February 8, 2024. Kight, Stef W. (February 13, 2023). "GOP's old guard on verge of extinction as Trump allies circle Senate". Axios. Retrieved February 14, 2024. Aratani, Lauren (February 26, 2021). "Republicans unveil two minimum wage bills in response to Democrats' push". The Guardian. Archived from the original on August 14, 2021. Retrieved September 7, 2021. In keeping with the party's deep division between its dominant Trumpist faction and its more traditionalist party elites, the twin responses seem aimed at appealing on one hand to its corporate-friendly allies and on the other hand to its populist rightwing base. Both have an anti-immigrant element. Wren, Adam; Montellaro, Zach; Kashinsky, Lisa; Shepard, Steven; Allison, Natalie; Piper, Jessica (February 25, 2024). "Hidden in Trump's big South Carolina win: A not-so-small problem for him in November". Politico. Archived from the original on February 25, 2024. Retrieved February 25, 2024. From top to bottom, the Republican Party is Trump's party. There are no reliable pockets of dissent. "U.S. Senate: The Kansas-Nebraska Act". www.senate.gov. Archived from the original on March 29, 2019. Retrieved March 28, 2019. "The Wealthy Activist Who Helped Turn "Bleeding Kansas" Free". Smithsonian. Archived from the original on March 27, 2019. Retrieved March 28, 2019. George H. Mayer, The Republican Party, 1854-1964 (1965) pp. 23–30. "The Origin of the Republican Party, A. F. Gilman, Ripon College, 1914". Content.wisconsinhistory.org. Archived from the original on March 22, 2012. Retrieved January 17, 2012. "History of the GOP". GOP. Archived from the original on January 29, 2018. Retrieved May 9, 2017. "Birth of Republicanism". The New York Times. 1879. Archived from the original on May 13, 2022. Retrieved April 25, 2021. Sperber, Jonathan (2013). Karl Marx: A Nineteenth-Century Life. New York: Liveright Publishing Corporation. pp. 214, 258. ISBN 978-0-87140-467-1. William Gienapp, The Origins of the Republican Party, 1852–1856 (Oxford UP, 1987) William Gienapp, "Nativism and the Creation of a Republican Majority in the North before the Civil War." Journal of American History 72.3 (1985): 529–59 online Archived November 24, 2020, at the Wayback Machine "Republican National Political Conventions 1856–2008 (Library of Congress)". www.loc.gov. Archived from the original on February 20, 2019. Retrieved March 12, 2019. "First Republican national convention ends". History. February 9, 2010. Archived from the original on March 22, 2019. Retrieved March 22, 2019. Cooper, William (October 4, 2016). "James Buchanan: Campaigns and Elections". Miller Center of Public Affairs. Archived from the original on May 21, 2021. Retrieved May 31, 2021. McPherson 1988, p. 144. Burlingame, Michael (October 4, 2016). "Abraham Lincoln: Campaigns and Elections". Miller Center of Public Affairs. Archived from the original on April 2, 2017. Retrieved May 31, 2021. Guelzo, Allen C. (2008). Lincoln and Douglas: The Debates that Defined America. New York: Simon and Schuster. p. 285. ISBN 978-0743273206. Kim, Mallie Jane (December 2, 2010). "The Election That Led to the Civil War". U.S. News & World Report. Archived from the original on November 8, 2020. Retrieved May 31, 2021. "Lincoln reelected". History. November 13, 2009. Archived from the original on March 22, 2019. Retrieved March 22, 2019. Klein, Christopher (September 2018). "Congress Passes 13th Amendment, 150 Years Ago". History. Archived from the original on March 30, 2019. Retrieved March 12, 2019. Harris, William C. (1997). With Charity for All: Lincoln and the Restoration of the Union. University Press of Kentucky. pp. 123–170. Varon, Elizabeth R. (October 4, 2016). "Andrew Johnson: Campaigns and Elections". Miller Center of Public Affairs. Archived from the original on September 3, 2020. Retrieved May 31, 2021. McPherson, James M. (October 1965). "Grant or Greeley? The Abolitionist Dilemma in the Election of 1872". The American Historical Review. 71 (1). Oxford University Press: 42–61. doi:10.2307/1863035. JSTOR 1863035. Archived from the original on January 29, 2021. Retrieved May 31, 2021. Matthews, Dylan (July 20, 2016). "Donald Trump and Chris Christie are reportedly planning to purge the civil service". Vox. Archived from the original on March 22, 2019. Retrieved March 22, 2019. Waugh, Joan (October 4, 2016). "Ulysses S. Grant: Campaigns and Elections". Miller Center of Public Affairs. Archived from the original on August 4, 2018. Retrieved May 31, 2021. Frommer, Frederic (October 22, 2022). "Democrats didn't run a presidential candidate 150 years ago. It backfired". Washington Post. "Ulysses S. Grant - Civil War, Facts & Quotes". HISTORY. March 30, 2020. Blackford, Shelia (September 30, 2020). "Disputed Election of 1876". Miller Center of Public Affairs. Archived from the original on April 17, 2021. Retrieved May 31, 2021. Johnston, Robert D. (October 4, 2016). "Rutherford B. Hayes: Campaigns and Elections". Miller Center of Public Affairs. Archived from the original on May 12, 2021. Retrieved May 31, 2021. Johnston, Robert D. (October 4, 2016). "Rutherford B. Hayes: Domestic Affairs". Miller Center of Public Affairs. Archived from the original on May 10, 2021. Retrieved May 31, 2021. Garfield, James A. (February 1876). "The Currency Conflict". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on November 17, 2020. Retrieved May 31, 2021. Peskin, Allan (Spring 1980). "The Election of 1880". The Wilson Quarterly. 4 (2): 172–181. JSTOR 40255831. Andrew Glass (January 16, 2018). "Pendleton Act inaugurates U.S. civil service system, Jan. 16, 1883". Politico. Archived from the original on November 23, 2020. Retrieved February 22, 2021. Butler, Leslie (2009). Critical Americans: Victorian Intellectuals and Transatlantic Liberal Reform. University of North Carolina Press. Blodgett, Geoffrey T. (1962). "The Mind of the Boston Mugwump". The Mississippi Valley Historical Review. 48 (4): 614–634. doi:10.2307/1893145. JSTOR 1893145. Archived from the original on November 8, 2020. Retrieved May 31, 2021. Nevins, Allan (1933). Letters of Grover Cleveland, 1850–1908. p. 269. Bailey, Thomas A. (1937). "Was the Presidential Election of 1900 a Mandate on Imperialism?". The Mississippi Valley Historical Review. 24 (1): 43–52. doi:10.2307/1891336. JSTOR 1891336. Skocpol, Theda (1993). "America's First Social Security System: The Expansion of Benefits for Civil War Veterans". Political Science Quarterly. 108 (1): 85–116. doi:10.2307/2152487. JSTOR 2152487. W. Baker Jr., George (August 1964). "Benjamin Harrison and Hawaiian Annexation: A Reinterpretation". Pacific Historical Review. 33 (3): 295–309. doi:10.2307/3636837. JSTOR 3636837. Archived from the original on August 20, 2020. Retrieved May 31, 2021. Bacon, Harold (Summer 1957). "Anti-Imperialism and the Democrats". Science & Society. 21 (3): 222–239. JSTOR 40400511. Archived from the original on June 1, 2021. Retrieved May 31, 2021. Phillips, Kevin (2003). William McKinley. New York: Times Books. p. 53. ISBN 978-0805069532. Walter Dean Burnham, "Periodization schemes and 'party systems': the 'system of 1896' as a case in point." Social Science History 10.3 (1986): 263–314. Williams, R. Hal (2010). Realigning America: McKinley, Bryan and the Remarkable Election of 1896. Lawrence: University Press of Kansas. pp. 56, 121. ISBN 978-0700617210. "The Contentious 1896 Election That Started the Rural-Urban Voter Divide". HISTORY. August 5, 2020. George H. Mayer, The Republican Party, 1854-1964 (1965) p. 256. "The Ol' Switcheroo. Theodore Roosevelt, 1912". Time. April 29, 2009. Archived from the original on October 5, 2018. Retrieved February 3, 2018. George H. Mayer, The Republican Party, 1854-1964 (1965) pp. 328-427, online David E. Kyvig, Repealing National Prohibition (2000) pp. 63–65. Garland S. Tucker, III, The high tide of American conservatism: Davis, Coolidge, and the 1924 election (2010) online Robert K. Murray, The politics of normalcy: governmental theory and practice in the Harding-Coolidge era (1973) online Lewis Gould, Grand Old Party: A History of the Republicans (2003) pp. 271–308. "The Roots of Modern Conservatism | Michael Bowen". University of North Carolina Press. Archived from the original on May 22, 2017. Retrieved May 20, 2019. Gould, pp. 271–308. Quote on p. 261 Nash, George H.; Reinhard, David W. (1984). "The Republican Right from Taft to Reagan". Reviews in American History. 12 (2): 261–265. doi:10.2307/2702450. JSTOR 2702450. Nash references David W. Reinhard, The Republican Right since 1945, (University Press of Kentucky, 1983). Rothbard, Murray (2007). The Betrayal of the American Right (PDF). Mises Institute. p. 85. Archived (PDF) from the original on February 22, 2021. Retrieved July 21, 2019. Nicol C. Rae, The Decline and Fall of the Liberal Republicans: From 1952 to the Present (1989) Perlstein, Rick (August 2008). "How the 1964 Republican Convention Sparked a Revolution From the Right". Smithsonian Magazine. Archived from the original on February 20, 2021. Retrieved February 15, 2021. F. Will, George (November 21, 2014). "George F. Will: Recalling Rockefeller". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on October 27, 2020. Retrieved February 15, 2021. Hayward, Steven F. (October 23, 2014). "Why Ronald Reagan's 'A Time for Choosing' endures after all this time". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on December 20, 2020. Retrieved February 15, 2021. Troy, Gil (2009). The Reagan Revolution: A Very Short Introduction (1st ed.). Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0195317107. Fisher, Marc (June 2017). "'Tear down this wall': How Reagan's forgotten line became a defining moment". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on November 8, 2022. Retrieved November 7, 2022. "Looking back at the breakup of the Soviet Union 30 years ago". www.wbur.org. December 24, 2021. Archived from the original on November 4, 2023. Retrieved November 4, 2023. Foltynova, Kristyna (October 1, 2021). "The Undoing Of The U.S.S.R.: How It Happened". rferl.org. Archived from the original on April 13, 2022. Retrieved November 4, 2023. "It's 30 years since the collapse of the Soviet Union". euronews. December 24, 2021. Archived from the original on January 9, 2022. Retrieved November 4, 2023. American Culture Transformed: Dialing 9/11. Palgrave Macmillan. 2012. ISBN 978-1137033499. Archived from the original on April 6, 2015. Retrieved June 17, 2015. Erickson, Amanda (December 2, 2018). "How George H.W. Bush pushed the United States to embrace free trade". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on May 16, 2021. Retrieved May 30, 2021. "Opposed from the start, the rocky history of NAFTA". Reuters. August 16, 2017. Archived from the original on January 15, 2021. Retrieved May 30, 2021. Collins, Eliza (July 10, 2019). "Did Perot Spoil 1992 Election for Bush? It's Complicated". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on June 9, 2021. Retrieved May 30, 2021. Helmore, Edward (February 5, 2017). "How Trump's political playbook evolved since he first ran for president in 2000". The Guardian. Archived from the original on February 16, 2021. Retrieved May 30, 2021. Elving, Ron (September 23, 2010). "GOP's 'Pledge' Echoes 'Contract'; But Much Myth Surrounds '94 Plan". NPR. Archived from the original on June 1, 2021. Retrieved May 29, 2021. Kennedy, Lesley (October 9, 2018). "The 1994 Midterms: When Newt Gingrich Helped Republicans Win Big". History. Archived from the original on April 28, 2021. Retrieved May 29, 2021. Glass, Andrew (November 8, 2007). "Congress runs into 'Republican Revolution' Nov. 8, 1994". Politico. Archived from the original on March 9, 2021. Retrieved May 29, 2021. Baer, Susan (November 7, 1996). "Revolutionary Gingrich suddenly is a centrist offering to help Clinton Election showed speaker to be 'slightly more popular than Unabomber'; ELECTION 1996". The Baltimore Sun. Archived from the original on June 1, 2021. Retrieved May 29, 2021. Cogan, John F.; Brady, David (March 1, 1997). "The 1996 House Elections: Reaffirming the Conservative Trend". Hoover Institute. Archived from the original on October 19, 2020. Retrieved May 29, 2021. Mitchell, Alison (November 7, 1998). "The Speaker Steps Down: The Career; the Fall of Gingrich, an Irony in an Odd Year". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 19, 2020. Retrieved October 13, 2019. Kilgore, Ed (June 6, 2019). "Did Impeachment Plans Damage Republicans in 1998?". New York. Archived from the original on March 16, 2021. Retrieved May 29, 2021. Graham, David A.; Murphy, Cullen (December 2018). "The Clinton Impeachment, As Told By The People Who Lived It". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on April 29, 2021. Retrieved May 29, 2021. Rothman, Lily (May 28, 2015). "How a Scandal Made Dennis Hastert the Speaker of the House". Time. Archived from the original on October 25, 2020. Retrieved May 29, 2021. Judis, John (December 20, 2004). "Movement Interruptus". The American Prospect. Archived from the original on February 22, 2021. Retrieved December 8, 2019. Vyse, Graham (March 30, 2018). "'Compassionate Conservatism' Won't Be Back Anytime Soon". New Republic. Archived from the original on January 16, 2021. Retrieved June 15, 2020. Alberta, Tim (June 8, 2020). "Is This the Last Stand of the 'Law and Order' Republicans?". Politico. Archived from the original on February 12, 2021. Retrieved June 13, 2020. Wooldridge, Adrian and John Micklethwait. The Right Nation (2004). Wilentz, Sean (September 4, 2008). "How Bush Destroyed the Republican Party". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on November 1, 2020. Retrieved February 15, 2021. Kazin, Michael, ed. (2013). In Search of Progressive America. University of Pennsylvania Press. p. 97. ISBN 978-0812209099. "Profiles of the Typology Groups". People-press.org. May 10, 2005. Archived from the original on January 11, 2017. Retrieved December 27, 2016. "Righteous Anger: The Conservative Case Against George W. Bush". The American Conservative (Cato Institute Re-printing). December 11, 2003. Archived from the original on July 5, 2015. Retrieved May 2, 2015. "How Huckabee Scares the GOP" Archived September 18, 2008, at the Wayback Machine. By E. J. Dionne. Real Clear Politics. Published December 21, 2007. Retrieved August 22, 2008. "Republican Party | political party, United States [1854–present]". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on May 5, 2017. Retrieved May 9, 2017. Dick, Jason (January 19, 2016). "Today's Senate Roadblock Is Tomorrow's Safeguard". Roll Call. Archived from the original on December 10, 2020. Retrieved December 8, 2019. Winston, David (January 4, 2019). "House Republicans came back from being written off before. They can again". Roll Call. Archived from the original on December 8, 2019. Retrieved December 8, 2019. Niemietz, Brian (August 29, 2018). "Sarah Palin was not invited to John McCain's funeral". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on November 9, 2020. Retrieved December 8, 2019. Kilgore, Ed (November 3, 2010). "How the Republicans Did It". The New Republic. Archived from the original on December 20, 2020. Retrieved October 13, 2019. "US midterm election results herald new political era as Republicans take House". The Guardian. November 3, 2010. Archived from the original on December 14, 2010. Retrieved October 13, 2019. Connolly, Katie (September 16, 2010). "What exactly is the Tea Party?". BBC News. Archived from the original on January 27, 2021. Retrieved October 13, 2019. "Strong in 2010, Where is the Tea Party Now?". NPR.org. Archived from the original on August 6, 2020. Retrieved October 13, 2019. Blum, Rachel M. (2020). How the Tea Party Captured the GOP: Insurgent Factions in American Politics. University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0226687520. Archived from the original on December 15, 2023. Retrieved May 21, 2021. Gallup: Tea Party's top concerns are debt, size of government Archived June 29, 2011, at the Wayback Machine The Hill, July 5, 2010 Somashekhar, Sandhya (September 12, 2010). Tea Party DC March: "Tea party activists march on Capitol Hill" Archived December 14, 2022, at the Wayback Machine. The Washington Post. Retrieved November 5, 2011. Somin, Ilya (May 26, 2011). "The Tea Party Movement and Popular Constitutionalism". Northwestern University Law Review Colloquy. Rochester, NY. SSRN 1853645. Ekins, Emily (September 26, 2011). "Is Half the Tea Party Libertarian?". Reason. Archived from the original on May 11, 2012. Retrieved July 16, 2012.Kirby, David; Ekins, Emily McClintock (August 6, 2012). "Libertarian Roots of the Tea Party". Policy Analysis (705). Cato Institute. Archived from the original on December 4, 2018. Retrieved June 9, 2019. Halloran, Liz (February 5, 2010). "What's Behind The New Populism?". NPR. Archived from the original on July 29, 2018. Retrieved June 9, 2019.Barstow, David (February 16, 2010). "Tea Party Lights Fuse for Rebellion on Right". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 2, 2017. Retrieved June 9, 2019.Fineman, Howard (April 6, 2010). "Party Time". Newsweek. Archived from the original on July 13, 2011. Retrieved June 9, 2019. Arrillaga, Pauline (April 14, 2014). "Tea Party 2012: A Look At The Conservative Movement's Last Three Years". HuffPost. Archived from the original on April 17, 2012. Retrieved June 9, 2019.Boorstein, Michelle (October 5, 2010). "Tea party, religious right often overlap, poll shows". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on April 7, 2019. Retrieved June 9, 2019.Wallsten, Peter; Yadron, Danny (September 29, 2010). "Tea-Party Movement Gathers Strength". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on September 13, 2018. Retrieved June 9, 2019. "Scott Brown: the tea party's first electoral victory". Christian Science Monitor. January 19, 2010. Archived from the original on February 14, 2021. Retrieved December 8, 2019. "Will Redistricting Be a Bloodbath for Democrats?". ABC News. Archived from the original on April 12, 2012. Retrieved April 13, 2012. "It's official: Obama, Biden win second term". Los Angeles Times. January 4, 2013. Archived from the original on January 3, 2021. Retrieved December 8, 2019. "Under Obama, Democrats suffer largest loss in power since Eisenhower". Quorum. Archived from the original on May 26, 2020. Retrieved December 8, 2019. "Democrats Retain Senate Control On Election Night". HuffPost. November 7, 2012. Archived from the original on January 8, 2017. Retrieved December 8, 2019. "Olympia Snowe: Bob Dole is right about GOP" – Kevin Robillard Archived June 5, 2013, at the Wayback Machine. Politico.Com (May 29, 2013). Retrieved on August 17, 2013. Powell: GOP has 'a dark vein of intolerance' Archived May 20, 2013, at the Wayback Machine. Politico.Com. Retrieved on August 17, 2013. "Grand Old Party for a Brand New Generation" (PDF). June 10, 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on June 10, 2013. Franke-Ruta, Garance (March 18, 2013). "What You Need to Read in the RNC Election-Autopsy Report". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on July 7, 2019. Retrieved July 5, 2019. Rachel Weiner, "Reince Priebus gives GOP prescription for future", The Washington Post March 18, 2013 Archived July 23, 2015, at the Wayback Machine "Republicans keep edge in latest Senate midterm estimate". CBS News. Archived from the original on September 7, 2014. Retrieved September 7, 2014. "It's all but official: This will be the most dominant Republican Congress since 1929". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on December 13, 2017. Retrieved December 6, 2017. "12 days that stunned a nation: How Hillary Clinton lost". NBC News. August 23, 2017. Archived from the original on January 28, 2021. Retrieved December 8, 2019. "How Trump won and proved everyone wrong with his populist message". NBC News Specials. December 14, 2016. Archived from the original on November 8, 2020. Retrieved December 8, 2019. Campani, Giovanna; Fabelo Concepción, Sunamis; Rodriguez Soler, Angel; Sánchez Savín, Claudia (December 2022). "The Rise of Donald Trump Right-Wing Populism in the United States: Middle American Radicalism and Anti-Immigration Discourse". Societies. 12 (6): 154. doi:10.3390/soc12060154. ISSN 2075-4698. Cohn, Nate (November 9, 2016). "Why Trump Won: Working-Class Whites". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 9, 2016. Retrieved February 15, 2021. Bosman, Julie; Davey, Monica (November 11, 2016). "Republicans Expand Control in a Deeply Divided Nation". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 19, 2016. Retrieved February 18, 2017. "2017-2018 Governors' Races: Where Power Is Most and Least Likely to Flip". Governing. January 3, 2017. "Republicans Governorships Rise to Highest Mark Since 1922". U.S. News & World Report. Archived from the original on September 15, 2017. Retrieved September 10, 2017. Lieb, David A. (November 6, 2016). "Republican governorships rise to highest mark since 1922". U.S. News & World Report. Associated Press. Phillips, Amber (November 12, 2016). "These 3 maps show just how dominant Republicans are in America after Tuesday". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on November 13, 2016. Retrieved November 14, 2016. Lieb, David A. (December 29, 2016). "GOP-Controlled States Aim to Reshape Laws". Associated Press. Archived from the original on December 31, 2016. Retrieved December 30, 2016. Greenblatt, Alan (November 9, 2016). "Republicans Add to Their Dominance of State Legislatures". Governing. Archived from the original on November 16, 2016. Retrieved November 17, 2016. Graham, David A. (November 7, 2018). "The Democrats Are Back, and Ready to Take On Trump". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on December 9, 2019. Retrieved November 17, 2020. Kumar, Anita (September 26, 2020). "Trump's legacy is now the Supreme Court". Politico. Archived from the original on February 16, 2021. Retrieved November 17, 2020. "Trump signs tax cut bill, first big legislative win". NBC News. December 22, 2017. Archived from the original on February 8, 2021. Retrieved April 1, 2021. Leonard, David (December 21, 2019). "Trump Officially Establishes US Space Force with 2020 Defense Bill Signing". Space.com. Archived from the original on June 3, 2023. Forgey, Quint (September 15, 2020). "'The dawn of a new Middle East': Trump celebrates Abraham Accords with White House signing ceremony". Politico. Archived from the original on February 26, 2021. Retrieved April 1, 2021. Wilkie, Christina; Breuninger, Kevin (February 5, 2020). "Trump acquitted of both charges in Senate impeachment trial". CNBC. Chappell, Bill (January 13, 2021). "House Impeaches Trump A 2nd Time, Citing Insurrection At U.S. Capitol". NPR. Archived from the original on February 20, 2021. Retrieved February 14, 2021. Fandos, Nicholas (January 13, 2021). "Trump Impeached for Inciting Insurrection". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. Retrieved February 14, 2021. Gregorian, Dareh (February 13, 2021). "Trump acquitted in impeachment trial; 7 GOP Senators vote with Democrats to convict". NBC News. Archived from the original on February 13, 2021. Retrieved February 14, 2021. "Supreme Court strikes down century-old New York law, dramatically expanding Second Amendment rights to carry guns outside the home". Business Insider. Archived from the original on June 26, 2022. Retrieved November 21, 2022. "Supreme Court overturns Roe v. Wade, ending 50 years of federal abortion rights". CNBC. June 24, 2022. Archived from the original on June 24, 2022. Retrieved November 21, 2022. "How Election Week 2022 Went Down". FiveThirtyEight. November 8, 2022. Archived from the original on November 16, 2022. Retrieved November 17, 2022. Hounshell, Blake (November 9, 2022). "Five Takeaways From a Red Wave That Didn't Reach the Shore". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on November 18, 2022. Retrieved November 9, 2022. Tumulty, Karen (November 9, 2022). "The expected red wave looks more like a puddle". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on November 12, 2022. Retrieved November 10, 2022. Cowan, Richard (November 17, 2022). "Republicans win U.S. House majority, setting stage for divided government". Reuters. Archived from the original on November 25, 2022. Retrieved November 17, 2022. "State Partisan Composition", May 23, 2023, National Conference of State Legislatures, retrieved July 4, 2023. Archived July 4, 2023, at the Wayback Machine. Cronin, Tom and Bob Loevy: "American federalism: States veer far left or far right", Archived July 4, 2023, at the Wayback Machine, July 1, 2023, updated July 2, 2023, Colorado Springs Gazette, retrieved July 4, 2023 "In the States, Democrats All but Ran the Table", Archived July 4, 2023, at the Wayback Machine November 11, 2022, The New York Times, retrieved July 4, 2023 Bender, Michael C.; Haberman, Maggie (November 10, 2022). "Trump Under Fire From Within G.O.P. After Midterms". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on November 22, 2022. Retrieved November 23, 2022. Gomez, Henry (November 15, 2022). "Battleground Republicans unload on Trump ahead of expected 2024 announcement". NBC News. Archived from the original on November 23, 2022. Retrieved November 23, 2022. Rutland, RA (1996). The Republicans: From Lincoln to Bush. University of Missouri Press. p. 2. ISBN 0826210902. "The Origins of the Republican Party". UShistory.org. July 4, 1995. Archived from the original on September 30, 2012. Retrieved October 25, 2012. Gould, pp. 14–15 Joyner, James. "The Changing Definition of 'Conservative'". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on May 25, 2017. Retrieved May 9, 2017. "Grand Old Party", Oxford English Dictionary. "Cartoon of the Day". HarpWeek.com. Archived from the original on September 21, 2011. Retrieved December 27, 2016. "Ballots of United States: Indiana". University of North Carolina. Archived from the original on May 25, 2017. Retrieved February 6, 2017. Lopez, Tomas (October 23, 2014). "Poor Ballot Design Hurts New York's Minor Parties ... Again". Brennan Center for Justice. Archived from the original on February 7, 2017. Retrieved February 6, 2017. "See Sample Ballots for Today's Primary Elections". West Kentucky Star. May 19, 2015. Archived from the original on February 7, 2017. Retrieved February 6, 2017. Bump, Philip (November 8, 2016). "Red vs. Blue: A history of how we use political colors". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on November 7, 2017. Retrieved October 30, 2017. Drum, Kevin (November 13, 2004). "Red State, Blue State". Washington Monthly. Archived from the original on November 7, 2017. Retrieved October 30, 2017. Drum, Kevin (November 14, 2004). "Red States and Blue States ... Explained!". Washington Monthly. Archived from the original on November 7, 2017. Retrieved October 30, 2017. Bump, Philip. "Red vs. Blue: A history of how we use political colors". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on February 22, 2021. Retrieved November 8, 2018. "The Third-Term Panic". Cartoon of the Day. November 7, 2003. Archived from the original on September 21, 2011. Retrieved September 5, 2011. Howard, Victor B. (2015). Religion and the Radical Republican Movement, 1860–1870. University Press of Kentucky. ISBN 978-0-8131-6144-0. Archived from the original on December 15, 2023. Retrieved March 24, 2023. Foner, Eric (1988). Reconstruction: America's Unfinished Revolution, 1863–1877 (1st ed.). pp. 236–37. Ashbee, Edward; Waddan, Alex (December 13, 2023). "US Republicans and the New Fusionism". The Political Quarterly. doi:10.1111/1467-923X.13341. ISSN 1467-923X. S2CID 266282896. Gottfried, Paul; Fleming, Thomas (1988). The Conservative Movement. Boston: Twayne Publishers. pp. 77–95. ISBN 0805797238. Isaac, Jeffrey (November 2017). "Making America Great Again?". Perspectives on Politics. 15 (3). Cambridge University Press: 625–631. doi:10.1017/S1537592717000871. Aratani, Lauren (February 26, 2021). "Republicans unveil two minimum wage bills in response to Democrats' push". The Guardian. Archived from the original on August 14, 2021. Retrieved February 8, 2024. In keeping with the party's deep division between its dominant Trumpist faction and its more traditionalist party elites, the twin responses seem aimed at appealing on one hand to its corporate-friendly allies and on the other hand to its populist rightwing base. Both have an anti-immigrant element. Johnson, Lauren R.; McCray, Deon; Ragusa, Jordan M. (January 11, 2018). "#NeverTrump: Why Republican members of Congress refused to support their party's nominee in the 2016 presidential election". Research & Politics. 5 (1). doi:10.1177/2053168017749383. Swartz, David L. (May 27, 2022). "Trump divide among American conservative professors". Theory & Society. 52 (5): 739–769. doi:10.1007/s11186-023-09517-4. ISSN 1573-7853. PMC 10224651. PMID 37362148. Doherty, Carroll. "How Republicans view their party and key issues facing the country as the 118th Congress begins". Pew Research Center. Archived from the original on January 21, 2023. Retrieved January 21, 2023. There are fissures in the GOP coalition. The same typology study found fissures in the GOP coalition, including over economic fairness, tax policy, and in views of abortion and same-sex marriage. Coates, David (2012). The Oxford Companion to American Politics. Vol. 2. Oxford University Press. p. 393. ISBN 978-0-19-976431-0. Adams, Ian (2001). Political Ideology Today (reprinted, revised ed.). Manchester: Manchester University Press. pp. 32–33. ISBN 978-0719060205. Archived from the original on January 20, 2023. Retrieved February 2, 2023. Ideologically, all US parties are liberal and always have been. Essentially they espouse classical liberalism, that is a form of democratised Whig constitutionalism plus the free market. The point of difference comes with the influence of social liberalism" and the proper role of government... ...the American right has nothing to do with maintaining the traditional social order, as in Europe. What it believes in is... individualism... The American right has tended towards... classical liberalism... Ashbee, Edward; Waddan, Alex (December 13, 2023). "US Republicans and the New Fusionism". The Political Quarterly. doi:10.1111/1467-923X.13341. ISSN 1467-923X. S2CID 266282896. "The growing peril of national conservatism". The Economist. February 15, 2024. Archived from the original on February 15, 2024. Retrieved February 15, 2024. "The Republican Party no longer believes America is the essential nation". The Economist. October 26, 2023. Archived from the original on February 13, 2024. Retrieved February 14, 2024. "About". Republican Study Committee. December 19, 2013. Archived from the original on January 11, 2024. Retrieved February 14, 2024. Desilver, Drew (January 23, 2023). "Freedom Caucus likely to play a bigger role in new GOP-led House. So who are they?". Pew Research Center. Archived from the original on January 8, 2024. Retrieved February 14, 2024. Dionne Jr., E.J. (1991). Why Americans Hate Politics. New York: Simon & Schuster. p. 161. Poole, Robert (August–September 1998), "In memoriam: Barry Goldwater", Reason (Obituary), archived from the original on June 28, 2009 "A New Guide to the Republican Herd". archive.nytimes.com. August 26, 2012. Barnett, Randy E. (July 17, 2007). "Libertarians and the War". Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on July 29, 2017. Retrieved July 29, 2017. "Toward a Libertarian Foreign Policy". Archived from the original on July 30, 2017. Retrieved July 29, 2017. Doris Gordon (1995, 1999). "Abortion and Rights: Applying Libertarian Principles Correctly". Libertarians for Life. Archived from the original on May 26, 2016. Retrieved March 8, 2023.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) Also see: McElroy, Wendy (2002). Liberty for Women. Chicago: Ivan R. Dee. p. 156. ISBN 978-1566634359. OCLC 260069067. Libertarians for Life declare that abortion is not a right but a 'wrong under justice.' "Who are Mike Lee and Rand Paul, the senators slamming the White House's Iran briefing?". The Courier-Journal. Archived from the original on December 15, 2023. Retrieved May 26, 2023. "Sen. Rand Paul talks CPAC straw poll victory, looks ahead to 2016". Hannity with Sean Hannity (Fox News Network). March 18, 2013. Archived from the original on April 1, 2013. Miller, Joshua (December 22, 2012). "Scientist, Farmer Brings Tea Party Sensibility to House". Roll Call. Archived from the original on September 1, 2020. Retrieved September 1, 2020. Glueck, Katie (July 31, 2013). "Paul, Cruz and Lee in rare form". Politico. Archived from the original on May 26, 2023. Retrieved May 26, 2023. "Where the Republican Party stands after Trump, according to Wyoming's junior senator". Politico. April 26, 2021. Archived from the original on March 8, 2023. Retrieved March 8, 2023. Severns, Maggie (June 1, 2021). "An Evangelical Battle of the Generations: To Embrace Trump or Not?". Politico. Archived from the original on March 8, 2023. Retrieved March 8, 2023. Banwart, Doug (2013). "Jerry Falwell, the Rise of the Moral Majority, and the 1980 Election" (PDF). Western Illinois Historical Review. 5: 133–57. Archived from the original (PDF) on April 30, 2023. Retrieved December 10, 2019. Williams, Daniel K. (May 9, 2022). "This Really Is a Different Pro-Life Movement". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on May 10, 2022. Retrieved February 2, 2023. This was not merely a geographic shift, trading one region for another, but a more fundamental transformation of the anti-abortion movement's political ideology. In 1973 many of the most vocal opponents of abortion were northern Democrats who believed in an expanded social-welfare state and who wanted to reduce abortion rates through prenatal insurance and federally funded day care. In 2022, most anti-abortion politicians are conservative Republicans who are skeptical of such measures. What happened was a seismic religious and political shift in opposition to abortion that has not occurred in any other Western country. Whitehead, Andrew L.; Perry, Samuel L.; Baker, Joseph O. (January 25, 2018). "Make America Christian Again: Christian Nationalism and Voting for Donald Trump in the 2016 Presidential Election". Sociology of Religion. 79 (2): 147–171. doi:10.1093/socrel/srx070. The current study establishes that, independent of these influences, voting for Trump was, at least for many Americans, a symbolic defense of the United States' perceived Christian heritage. Data from a national probability sample of Americans surveyed soon after the 2016 election shows that greater adherence to Christian nationalist ideology was a robust predictor of voting for Trump, even after controlling for economic dissatisfaction, sexism, anti-black prejudice, anti-Muslim refugee attitudes, and anti-immigrant sentiment, as well as measures of religion, sociodemographics, and political identity more generally. Smith, Peter (February 17, 2024). "Many believe the founders wanted a Christian America. Some want the government to declare one now". Associated Press. New York. Archived from the original on February 19, 2024. Retrieved February 22, 2024. Rouse, Stella; Telhami, Shibley (September 21, 2022). "Most Republicans Support Declaring the United States a Christian Nation". Politico. Archived from the original on September 27, 2022. Retrieved February 22, 2024. Smith, Robert B. (2014). "Social Conservatism, Distractors, and Authoritarianism: Axiological versus instrumental rationality". In Dahms, Harry F. (ed.). Mediations of Social Life in the 21st Century. Emerald Group Publishing. p. 101. ISBN 9781784412227. Karni, Annie; Graham, Ruth; Eder, Steve (October 28, 2023). "For Mike Johnson, Religion Is at the Forefront of Politics and Policy". The New York Times. "Christian conservatives cheer one of their own as Mike Johnson assumes Congress' most powerful seat". AP News. October 27, 2023. Retrieved February 8, 2024. Norris, Pippa (November 2020). "Measuring populism worldwide". Party Politics. 26 (6): 697–717. doi:10.1177/1354068820927686. ISSN 1354-0688. S2CID 216298689. Cassidy, John (February 29, 2016). "Donald Trump is Transforming the G.O.P. Into a Populist, Nativist Party". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved July 22, 2016. ""National conservatives" are forging a global front against liberalism". The Economist. London. February 15, 2024. Archived from the original on February 20, 2024. Zhou, Shaoqing (December 8, 2022). "The origins, characteristics and trends of neo-nationalism in the 21st century". International Journal of Anthropology and Ethnology. 6 (1): 18. doi:10.1186/s41257-022-00079-4. PMC 9735003. PMID 36532330. On a practical level, the United Kingdom's withdrawal from the European Union and Trump's election as the United States president are regarded as typical events of neo-nationalism. Katzenstein, Peter J. (March 20, 2019). "Trumpism is US". WZB | Berlin Social Science Center. Retrieved September 11, 2021. DiSalvo, Daniel (Fall 2022). "Party Factions and American Politics". National Affairs. Archived from the original on March 23, 2023. Retrieved April 11, 2023. Lowndes, Joseph (2019). "Populism and race in the United States from George Wallace to Donald Trump". In de la Torre, Carlos (ed.). Routledge Handbook of Global Populism. London & New York: Routledge. "Trumpism" section, pp. 197–200. ISBN 978-1315226446. Trump unabashedly employed the language of white supremacy and misogyny, rage and even violence at Trump rallies was like nothing seen in decades. Bennhold, Katrin (September 7, 2020). "Trump Emerges as Inspiration for Germany's Far Right". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 20, 2020. Retrieved November 20, 2020. Gardner, J.A.; Charles, G.U. (2023). Election Law in the American Political System. Aspen Casebook Series. Aspen Publishing. p. 31. ISBN 978-1-5438-2683-8. Retrieved December 31, 2023. Spiegeleire, Stephan De; Skinner, Clarissa; Sweijs, Tim (2017). The Rise of Populist Sovereignism: What It Is, Where It Comes From, and What It Means for International Security and Defense. The Hague Centre for Strategic Studies. ISBN 978-94-92102-59-1. Falk, Thomas O (November 8, 2023). "Why are US Republicans pushing for aid to Israel but not Ukraine?". Al Jazeera. Retrieved December 31, 2023. Chatelain, Ryan (March 10, 2023). "Freedom Caucus issues demands for raising debt limit". Spectrum News NY1. Retrieved December 31, 2023. Feagin, Joe R. (April 25, 2023). White Minority Nation: Past, Present and Future. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-1-000-86223-2. Lange, Jason (January 17, 2024). "Trump's rise sparks isolationist worries abroad, but voters unfazed". Reuters. Retrieved January 17, 2024. Swan, Jonathan; Savage, Charlie; Haberman, Maggie (December 9, 2023). "Fears of a NATO Withdrawal Rise as Trump Seeks a Return to Power". New York Times. Retrieved December 10, 2023. Baker, Peter (February 11, 2024). "Favoring Foes Over Friends, Trump Threatens to Upend International Order". The New York Times. ISSN 1553-8095. Retrieved February 21, 2024. Collinson, Stephen (October 4, 2023). "McCarthy became the latest victim of Trump's extreme GOP revolution". CNN. Retrieved December 31, 2023. Rocha, Alander (September 7, 2023). "Mike Rogers says of 'far-right wing' of GOP: 'You can't get rid of them'". AL. Retrieved December 31, 2023. Macpherson, James (July 24, 2021). "Far right tugs at North Dakota Republican Party". AP News. Retrieved December 31, 2023. "Fringe activists threaten Georgia GOP's political future". The Times Herald. May 15, 2023. Retrieved December 31, 2023. Baker, Paula; Critchlow, Donald T. (2020). The Oxford Handbook of American Political History. Oxford University Press. p. 387. ISBN 978-0190628697. Archived from the original on December 15, 2023. Retrieved April 23, 2021 – via Google Books. Contemporary debate is fueled on one side by immigration restrictionists, led by President Donald Trump and other elected republicans, whose rhetorical and policy assaults on undocumented Latin American immigrants, Muslim refugees, and family-based immigration energized their conservative base. Jones, Kent (2021). "Populism, Trade, and Trump's Path to Victory". Populism and Trade: The Challenge to the Global Trading System. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0190086350. Smith, Jordan Michael; Logis, Rich; Logis, Rich; Shephard, Alex; Shephard, Alex; Kipnis, Laura; Kipnis, Laura; Haas, Lidija; Haas, Lidija (October 17, 2022). "The Neocons Are Losing. Why Aren't We Happy?". The New Republic. ISSN 0028-6583. Archived from the original on May 5, 2023. Retrieved May 5, 2023. Arias-Maldonado, Manuel (January 2020). "Sustainability in the Anthropocene: Between Extinction and Populism". Sustainability. 12 (6): 2538. doi:10.3390/su12062538. ISSN 2071-1050. Blum, Rachel M. & Cowburn, Mike (2024). "How Local Factions Pressure Parties: Activist Groups and Primary Contests in the Tea Party Era". British Journal of Political Science. 54 (1). Cambridge University Press: 88–109. doi:10.1017/S0007123423000224. Retrieved December 31, 2023.{{cite journal}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) "Far-right Republicans drafted a short-term funding bill with GOP centrists. It's now at risk of collapse". NBC4 Washington. September 19, 2023. Retrieved December 31, 2023. Hulse, Carl (October 25, 2023). "In Mike Johnson, Far-Right Republicans Find a Speaker They Can Embrace". The New York Times. Retrieved December 31, 2023. Mascaro, Lisa; Freking, Kevin; Amiri, Farnoush (October 13, 2023). "Republicans pick Jim Jordan as nominee for House speaker, putting job within the Trump ally's reach". AP News. Retrieved December 31, 2023. "Kevin McCarthy removed as US House speaker in unprecedented vote". Al Jazeera. October 3, 2023. Retrieved December 31, 2023. Vargas, Ramon Antonio (October 9, 2023). "Matt Gaetz says ousting of Kevin McCarthy was worth risk of losing seat". The Guardian. Retrieved December 31, 2023. Lowndes, Joseph (November 8, 2021). "Far-right extremism dominates the GOP. It didn't start — and won't end — with Trump". Washington Post. Retrieved December 31, 2023. Azari, Julia (March 15, 2022). "How Republicans Are Thinking About Trumpism Without Trump". FiveThirtyEight. Retrieved March 8, 2024. Feagin, Joe R. (April 25, 2023). White Minority Nation: Past, Present and Future. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-1-000-86223-2. Rucker, Philip; Costa, Robert (March 21, 2016). "Trump questions need for NATO, outlines noninterventionist foreign policy". The Washington Post. Dodson, Kyle; Brooks, Clem (September 20, 2021). "All by Himself? Trump, Isolationism, and the American Electorate". The Sociological Quarterly. 63 (4): 780–803. doi:10.1080/00380253.2021.1966348. ISSN 0038-0253. S2CID 240577549. Beauchamp, Zack (November 5, 2014). "Meet Tom Cotton: Arkansas's next Senator and Rand Paul's worst nightmare". Vox. Binelli, Mark (January 6, 2020). "How Lindsey Graham Lost His Way". Rolling Stone. Kashinsky, Lisa (July 19, 2023). "Sununu's exit spells the end of a whole breed of Republican governor". POLITICO. Archived from the original on November 8, 2023. Retrieved November 8, 2023. "Losing Its Preference: Affirmative Action Fades as Issue". The Washington Post. 1996. Archived from the original on February 23, 2017. Silverleib, Alan (May 6, 2009). "Analysis: An autopsy of liberal Republicans". cnn.com. Retrieved October 14, 2018. Tatum, Sophie (December 20, 2018). "3 Kansas legislators switch from Republican to Democrat". CNN. Retrieved January 8, 2021. Weiner, Rachel. "Charlie Crist defends party switch". The Washington Post. Retrieved January 8, 2021. Davis, Susan (August 23, 2019). "Meltdown On Main Street: Inside The Breakdown Of The GOP's Moderate Wing". NPR. Archived from the original on June 17, 2022. Retrieved June 17, 2022. Plott, Elaina (October 6, 2018). "Two Moderate Senators, Two Very Different Paths". The Atlantic. Retrieved February 23, 2019. Faludi, Susan (July 5, 2018). "Opinion - Senators Collins and Murkowski, It's Time to Leave the G.O.P." The New York Times. Retrieved February 23, 2019 – via NYTimes.com. Petre, Linda (September 25, 2018). "Kavanaugh's fate rests with Sen. Collins". TheHill. Retrieved February 23, 2019. Connolly, Griffin (October 9, 2018). "Sen. Lisa Murkowski Could Face Reprisal from Alaska GOP". rollcall.com. Archived from the original on October 11, 2018. Retrieved February 23, 2019. Bacon, Perry (March 30, 2018). "How A Massachusetts Republican Became One Of America's Most Popular Politicians". fivethirtyeight.com. FiveThirtyEight. Archived from the original on May 7, 2019. Retrieved February 23, 2019. "Gov. Larry Hogan positions himself as moderate on the national stage at second inauguration". WUSA. January 16, 2019. Archived from the original on February 21, 2019. Retrieved February 23, 2019. Richards, Parker (November 3, 2018). "The Last Liberal Republicans Hang On". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on November 9, 2018. Retrieved February 23, 2019. Mair, Patrick; Rusch, Thomas; Hornik, Kurt (November 27, 2014). "The grand old party – a party of values?". SpringerPlus. 3: 697. doi:10.1186/2193-1801-3-697. PMC 4256162. PMID 25512889. "How Tax Cuts Became Central to the Republican Party". www.russellsage.org. Fox, Justin (January 18, 2019). "Why Republicans Fell in Love With Tax Cuts". www.bloomberg.com. Grumbach, Jacob M.; Hacker, Jacob S.; Pierson, Paul (2021), Hertel-Fernandez, Alexander; Hacker, Jacob S.; Thelen, Kathleen; Pierson, Paul (eds.), "The Political Economies of Red States", The American Political Economy: Politics, Markets, and Power, Cambridge University Press, pp. 209–244, ISBN 978-1316516362, archived from the original on November 23, 2021, retrieved November 10, 2021 "Diving into the rich pool". The Economist. September 24, 2011. Archived from the original on January 12, 2012. Retrieved January 13, 2012. Paul Kiel, Jesse Eisinger (December 11, 2018). "How the IRS Was Gutted". ProPublica. Archived from the original on December 11, 2018. Retrieved December 11, 2018. Grossmann, Matt; Mahmood, Zuhaib; Isaac, William (2021). "Political Parties, Interest Groups, and Unequal Class Influence in American Policy". The Journal of Politics. 83 (4): 1706–1720. doi:10.1086/711900. ISSN 0022-3816. S2CID 224851520. Archived from the original on October 29, 2021. Retrieved January 13, 2022. Bartels, Larry M. (2016). Unequal Democracy: The Political Economy of the New Gilded Age (2nd ed.). Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-1400883363. Archived from the original on November 5, 2021. Retrieved January 13, 2022. Rhodes, Jesse H.; Schaffner, Brian F. (2017). "Testing Models of Unequal Representation: Democratic Populists and Republican Oligarchs?". Quarterly Journal of Political Science. 12 (2): 185–204. doi:10.1561/100.00016077. Archived from the original on October 29, 2021. Retrieved January 13, 2022. Lax, Jeffrey R.; Phillips, Justin H.; Zelizer, Adam (2019). "The Party or the Purse? Unequal Representation in the US Senate". American Political Science Review. 113 (4): 917–940. doi:10.1017/S0003055419000315. ISSN 0003-0554. S2CID 21669533. Archived from the original on October 29, 2021. Retrieved January 13, 2022. Hacker, Jacob S.; Pierson, Paul (2020). Let them Eat Tweets: How the Right Rules in an Age of Extreme Inequality. Liveright Publishing. ISBN 978-1631496851. Appelbaum, Binyamin (December 1, 2017). "Debt Concerns, Once a Core Republican Tenet, Take a Back Seat to Tax Cuts". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on December 2, 2017. Retrieved December 2, 2017. "Why Republicans who once fought budget debt now embrace it". ABC News. Archived from the original on December 2, 2017. Retrieved December 2, 2017. Johnson, Simon (April 5, 2012). "Is There a Fiscal Crisis in the United States?". Economix Blog. Archived from the original on June 21, 2018. Retrieved December 2, 2017. Milkis, Sidney M.; King, Desmond; Jacobs, Nicholas F. (2019). "Building a Conservative State: Partisan Polarization and the Redeployment of Administrative Power". Perspectives on Politics. 17 (2): 453–469. doi:10.1017/S1537592718003511. ISSN 1537-5927. "The Rise in Per Capita Federal Spending". Mercatus Center. November 12, 2014. Archived from the original on December 14, 2021. Retrieved August 30, 2020. Konczal, Mike (March 24, 2014). "The Conservative Myth of a Social Safety Net Built on Charity". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on May 3, 2022. Retrieved December 30, 2021. "Status of State Medicaid Expansion Decisions: Interactive Map". Kaiser Family Foundation. November 9, 2022. Archived from the original on June 24, 2022. Retrieved February 26, 2023. Scroll down for state by state info. "What the GOP candidates have said about strikes and unions". The Independent. January 9, 2024. Greenhouse, Steven (October 25, 2022). "Republicans want working-class voters — without actually supporting workers". The Guardian. "Employer/Union Rights and Obligations". National Labor Relations Board. Archived from the original on July 11, 2017. Retrieved July 7, 2017. Stolberg, Sheryl Gay; Smialek, Jeanna (July 18, 2019). "House Passes Bill to Raise Minimum Wage to $15, a Victory for Liberals". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 18, 2019. Retrieved March 12, 2020. Republican Party National Platform, 1860 Archived August 13, 2023, at the Wayback Machine Reported from the Platform Committee by Judge Jessup of Pennsylvania and adopted unanimously by the Republican National Convention held at Chicago on May 17, 1860. Broadside printing by The Chicago Press & Tribune, May 1860 Coy F. Cross II (2012). Justin Smith Morrill: Father of the Land-Grant Colleges. MSU Press. p. 45. ISBN 9780870139055. Stanley D. Solvick, "William Howard Taft and the Payne-Aldrich Tariff." Mississippi Valley Historical Review 50.3 (1963): 424–442 online Archived March 7, 2021, at the Wayback Machine Broz, J.L. (1999). "Origins of the Federal Reserve System: International Incentives and the Domestic Free-rider Problem". International Organization. 5353 (1): 39–46. doi:10.1162/002081899550805. S2CID 155001158. Anthony O’Brien, "Smoot-Hawley Tariff." EH. Net Encyclopedia (2001) online Archived August 16, 2023, at the Wayback Machine. Bailey, Michael A.; Goldstein, Weingast (April 1997). "The Institutional Roots of American Trade Policy". World Politics. 49 (3): 309–38. doi:10.1353/wp.1997.0007. S2CID 154711958. John H. Barton, Judith L. Goldstein, Timothy E. Josling, and Richard H. Steinberg, The Evolution of the Trade Regime: Politics, Law, and Economics of the GATT and the WTO (2008) McClenahan, William (1991). "The Growth of Voluntary Export Restraints and American Foreign Economic Policy, 1956–1969". Business and Economic History. 20: 180–190. JSTOR 23702815. Karagiannis, Nikolaos; Madjd-Sadjadi, Zagros; Sen, Swapan, eds. (2013). The US Economy and Neoliberalism: Alternative Strategies and Policies. Routledge. p. 58. ISBN 978-1138904910. Archived from the original on August 13, 2021. Retrieved August 14, 2023. Warren, Kenneth F. (2008). Encyclopedia of U.S. Campaigns, Elections, and Electoral Behavior. Sage Publications. p. 358. ISBN 978-1412954891. Archived from the original on December 15, 2023. Retrieved August 14, 2023. Chaison, Gary (2005). Unions in America. Sage. p. 151. ISBN 978-1452239477. Archived from the original on December 15, 2023. Retrieved August 14, 2023. "Support for free trade agreements rebounds modestly, but wide partisan differences remain". Pew Research. Archived from the original on April 11, 2023. Retrieved August 14, 2023. Swedberg, Richard (2018). "Folk economics and its role in Trump's presidential campaign: an exploratory study". Theory and Society. 47: 1–36. doi:10.1007/s11186-018-9308-8. S2CID 149378537. Swanson, Ana (July 5, 2018). "Trump's Trade War With China Is Officially Underway". The New York Times. Retrieved May 26, 2019. Canada, Global Affairs (April 21, 2022). "The Canada-United States-Mexico Agreement". GAC. Retrieved October 13, 2022. ● "54% of Americans view climate change as a major threat, but the partisan divide has grown". Pew Research Center. April 18, 2023. Archived from the original on April 22, 2023. ● Broader discussion by Tyson, Alec; Funk, Cary; Kennedy, Brian (April 18, 2023). "What the data says about Americans' views of climate change". Pew Research Center. Archived from the original on May 12, 2023. Tyson, Alec; Funk, Cary; Kennedy, Brian (March 1, 2022). "Americans Largely Favor U.S. Taking Steps To Become Carbon Neutral by 2050 / Appendix (Detailed charts and tables)". Pew Research. Archived from the original on April 18, 2022. Filler, Daniel. "Theodore Roosevelt: Conservation as the Guardian of Democracy". Archived from the original on August 2, 2003. Retrieved November 9, 2007. Ewert, Sara Dant (July 3, 2003). "Environmental Politics in the Nixon Era". Journal of Policy History. 15 (3): 345–348. doi:10.1353/jph.2003.0019. ISSN 1528-4190. S2CID 153711962. Archived from the original on August 9, 2017. Retrieved June 3, 2017. Dunlap, Riley E.; McCright, Araon M. (August 7, 2010). "A Widening Gap: Republican and Democratic Views on Climate Change". Environment: Science and Policy for Sustainable Development. 50 (5): 26–35. doi:10.3200/ENVT.50.5.26-35. S2CID 154964336. Bergquist, Parrish; Warshaw, Christopher (2020). "Elections and parties in environmental politics". Handbook of U.S. Environmental Policy: 126–141. doi:10.4337/9781788972840.00017. ISBN 978-1788972840. S2CID 219077951. Archived from the original on November 7, 2021. Retrieved November 7, 2021. Fredrickson, Leif; Sellers, Christopher; Dillon, Lindsey; Ohayon, Jennifer Liss; Shapiro, Nicholas; Sullivan, Marianne; Bocking, Stephen; Brown, Phil; de la Rosa, Vanessa; Harrison, Jill; Johns, Sara (April 1, 2018). "History of US Presidential Assaults on Modern Environmental Health Protection". American Journal of Public Health. 108 (S2): S95–S103. doi:10.2105/AJPH.2018.304396. ISSN 0090-0036. PMC 5922215. PMID 29698097. Coley, Jonathan S.; Hess, David J. (2012). "Green energy laws and Republican legislators in the United States". Energy Policy. 48: 576–583. Bibcode:2012EnPol..48..576C. doi:10.1016/j.enpol.2012.05.062. ISSN 0301-4215. Archived from the original on June 18, 2019. Retrieved November 7, 2021. Turner, James Morton; Isenberg, Andrew C. (2018). The Republican Reversal: Conservatives and the Environment from Nixon to Trump. Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0674979970. Archived from the original on January 8, 2019. Ringquist, Evan J.; Neshkova, Milena I.; Aamidor, Joseph (2013). "Campaign Promises, Democratic Governance, and Environmental Policy in the U.S. Congress". The Policy Studies Journal. 41 (2): 365–387. doi:10.1111/psj.12021. Shipan, Charles R.; Lowry, William R. (June 2001). "Environmental Policy and Party Divergence in Congress". Political Research Quarterly. 54 (2): 245–263. doi:10.1177/106591290105400201. JSTOR 449156. S2CID 153575261. "Schwarzenegger takes center stage on warming". NBC News. MSNBC News. September 27, 2006. Archived from the original on July 14, 2014. Retrieved July 3, 2014. Text of Opinion Bush, George W. (March 13, 2001). "Text of a Letter from the President". Archived from the original on July 22, 2009. Retrieved November 9, 2007. Schrope, Mark (April 5, 2001). "Criticism mounts as Bush backs out of Kyoto accord". Nature. 410 (6829): 616. Bibcode:2001Natur.410..616S. doi:10.1038/35070738. PMID 11287908. "Our GOP: The Party of Opportunity". Archived from the original on August 21, 2014. Retrieved December 11, 2014. John Collins Rudolf (December 6, 2010). "On Our Radar: Republicans Urge Opening of Arctic Refuge to Drilling". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 14, 2014. Retrieved December 11, 2014. Davenport, Coral (November 10, 2014). "Republicans Vow to Fight E.P.A. and Approve Keystone Pipeline". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 13, 2016. Retrieved January 25, 2016. Levy, Gabrielle (February 24, 2015). "Obama Vetoes Keystone XL, Republicans Vow to Continue Fight". U.S. News & World Report. Archived from the original on February 1, 2016. Retrieved January 25, 2016. "Keystone XL pipeline: Why is it so disputed?". BBC News. November 6, 2015. Archived from the original on February 9, 2016. Retrieved January 25, 2016. Matthews, Chris (May 12, 2014). "Hardball With Chris Matthews for May 12, 2014". Hardball With Chris Matthews. MSNBC. NBC news. According to a survey by the Center for American Progress' Action Fund, more than 55 percent of congressional Republicans are climate change deniers. And it gets worse from there. They found that 77 percent of Republicans on the House Science Committee say they don't believe it in either. And that number balloons to an astounding 90 percent for all the party's leadership in Congress. "Earth Talk: Still in denial about climate change". The Charleston Gazette. Charleston, West Virginia. December 22, 2014. p. 10. ... a recent survey by the non-profit Center for American Progress found that some 58 percent of Republicans in the U.S. Congress still "refuse to accept climate change. Meanwhile, still others acknowledge the existence of global warming but cling to the scientifically debunked notion that the cause is natural forces, not greenhouse gas pollution by humans. Kliegman, Julie (May 18, 2014). "Jerry Brown says 'virtually no Republican' in Washington accepts climate change science". Tampa Bay Times. PolitiFact. Archived from the original on August 13, 2017. Retrieved September 18, 2017. McCarthy, Tom (November 17, 2014). "Meet the Republicans in Congress who don't believe climate change is real". The Guardian. Archived from the original on September 19, 2017. Retrieved September 18, 2017. Davenport, Coral; Lipton, Eric (June 3, 2017). "How G.O.P. Leaders Came to View Climate Change as Fake Science". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on September 14, 2017. Retrieved September 22, 2017. The Republican Party's fast journey from debating how to combat human-caused climate change to arguing that it does not exist is a story of big political money, Democratic hubris in the Obama years and a partisan chasm that grew over nine years like a crack in the Antarctic shelf, favoring extreme positions and uncompromising rhetoric over cooperation and conciliation. Weaver, Dustin (January 21, 2015). "Senate votes that climate change is real". The Hill. Archived from the original on March 27, 2019. Retrieved March 26, 2019. "Beyond Obamacare: Democrats have plans, GOP is out to destroy them". NBC News. September 11, 2018. Klein, Ezra (June 30, 2012). "The Republican Turn Against Universal Health Insurance". Washington Post. Oberlander, Jonathan (March 1, 2020). "The Ten Years' War: Politics, Partisanship, And The ACA". Health Affairs. 39 (3): 471–478. doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2019.01444. ISSN 0278-2715. PMID 32119603. S2CID 211834684.[permanent dead link] Hertel-Fernandez, Alexander; Skocpol, Theda; Lynch, Daniel (April 2016). "Business Associations, Conservative Networks, and the Ongoing Republican War over Medicaid Expansion". Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law. 41 (2): 239–286. doi:10.1215/03616878-3476141. ISSN 0361-6878. PMID 26732316. Archived from the original on June 2, 2018. Retrieved April 23, 2021. Hacker, Jacob S. (2010). "The Road to Somewhere: Why Health Reform Happened: Or Why Political Scientists Who Write about Public Policy Shouldn't Assume They Know How to Shape It". Perspectives on Politics. 8 (3): 861–876. doi:10.1017/S1537592710002021. ISSN 1541-0986. S2CID 144440604. Archived from the original on February 25, 2021. Retrieved November 10, 2021. Chapin, Christy Ford, ed. (2015), "The Politics of Medicare, 1957–1965", Ensuring America's Health: The Public Creation of the Corporate Health Care System, Cambridge University Press, pp. 194–232, doi:10.1017/CBO9781107045347.008, ISBN 978-1107044883, archived from the original on April 24, 2020, retrieved November 10, 2021 Jacobson, Louis; Kennedy, Patrick (April 15, 2011). "Peter DeFazio says "Medicare passed with virtually no Republican support"". Politifact. Archived from the original on April 19, 2022. Retrieved November 10, 2021. Zeitz, Joshua (June 27, 2017). "How the GOP Turned Against Medicaid". Politico. Archived from the original on February 13, 2021. Retrieved November 10, 2021. Cohn, Jonathan (2021). The Ten Year War: Obamacare and the Unfinished Crusade for Universal Coverage. St. Martin's Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1250270948. Orth, Taylor (February 14, 2023). "Which childhood body modification procedures do Americans think are unacceptable?". YouGov. Archived from the original on March 6, 2023. Retrieved March 6, 2023. "YouGov Survey: Childhood Medical Procedures" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on April 21, 2023. Retrieved April 21, 2023. Fordham, Benjamin O.; Flynn, Michael (2022). "Everything Old Is New Again: The Persistence of Republican Opposition to Multilateralism in American Foreign Policy". Studies in American Political Development. 37: 56–73. doi:10.1017/S0898588X22000165. ISSN 0898-588X. S2CID 252292479. Archived from the original on September 21, 2022. Retrieved September 15, 2022. "neoconservatism". Oxford Reference. Archived from the original on September 22, 2022. Retrieved September 15, 2022. Matthews, Dylan (May 6, 2016). "Paleoconservatism, the movement that explains Donald Trump, explained". Vox. Archived from the original on June 23, 2022. "The Case for a Restrained Republican Foreign Policy". Foreign Affairs. March 22, 2023. Archived from the original on March 24, 2023. Retrieved March 25, 2023. Cavari, Amnon; Freedman, Guy (2020). American Public Opinion Toward Israel: From Consensus to Divide. Taylor & Francis. p. 145. Tenorio, Rich (November 3, 2020). "How a nascent Israel was a key issue in Truman's stunning 1948 election upset". Times of Israel. Archived from the original on November 18, 2023. Retrieved November 1, 2023. Beauchamp, Zack (November 11, 2015). "How Republicans fell in love with Israel". Vox. Archived from the original on November 9, 2023. Retrieved November 9, 2023. Ponnuru, Ramesh (May 15, 2018). "The GOP and the Israeli Exception". National Review. Archived from the original on November 9, 2023. Retrieved November 9, 2023. Collinson, Stephen (October 13, 2023). "Trump's turn against Israel". CNN. Retrieved November 9, 2023. David, Jackson (October 12, 2023). "Trump blames Netanyahu for Hamas attacks, calls Hezbollah leaders 'very smart'". USA TODAY. Choi, Joseph (December 13, 2021). "Trump: Netanyahu 'never wanted peace' with Palestinians". The Hill. Archived from the original on November 9, 2023. Retrieved November 9, 2023. i24NEWS (February 6, 2024). "Hey Israel, don't be so sure about your support among Republicans". I24news. Retrieved February 9, 2024.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) "Republican Platform 2016" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on July 19, 2016. Retrieved July 20, 2016. "Cruz: 'America Does Not Need Torture to Protect Ourselves'". December 3, 2015. Archived from the original on January 1, 2016. Retrieved December 27, 2015. Nick, Turse (April 27, 2023). "REP. MATT GAETZ, PROGRESSIVES JOINTLY CALL FOR U.S. MILITARY TO LEAVE SOMALIA". The Intercept. Retrieved April 27, 2023. Tracy Wilkinson (July 21, 2016). "In a shift, Republican platform doesn't call for arming Ukraine against Russia, spurring outrage". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved July 25, 2016. "Trump admin approves new sale of anti-tank weapons to Ukraine". ABC News. Retrieved October 1, 2019. The Trump administration first approved the sale of Javelins to Ukraine in December 2017 -- a step that former President Barack Obama never took and that Trump allies have pointed to as a sign of Trump's toughness on Russia. Erik, Piccoli. "Republicans are no friends of Europe". ISPI. Retrieved January 31, 2024. "Trump's threat to NATO allies draws little condemnation from GOP, reflecting his grip on the party". AP. February 12, 2024. Retrieved February 12, 2024. Riccardi, Nicholas (February 19, 2024). "Stalled US aid for Ukraine underscores GOP's shift away from confronting Russia". Associated Press. Retrieved February 28, 2024. Lillis, Mike (February 28, 2024). "GOP strained by Trump-influenced shift from Reagan on Russia". The Hill. Retrieved February 28, 2024. Experts say a variety of factors have led to the GOP's more lenient approach to Moscow, some of which preceded Trump's arrival on the political scene ... Trump's popularity has only encouraged other Republicans to adopt a soft-gloves approach to Russia. Ball, Molly (February 23, 2024). "How Trump Turned Conservatives Against Helping Ukraine". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved February 28, 2024. Jonathan, Chait (February 23, 2024). "Russian Dolls Trump has finally remade Republicans into Putin's playthings". Intelligencer. Retrieved February 28, 2024. But during his time in office and after, Trump managed to create, from the grassroots up, a Republican constituency for Russia-friendly policy ... Conservatives vying to be the Trumpiest of them all have realized that supporting Russia translates in the Republican mind as a proxy for supporting Trump. Hence the politicians most willing to defend his offenses against democratic norms — Marjorie Taylor Greene, Jim Jordan, Tommy Tuberville, Mike Lee, J. D. Vance — hold the most anti-Ukraine or pro-Russia views. Conversely, the least-Trumpy Republicans, such as Mitch McConnell and Mitt Romney, have the most hawkish views on Russia. The rapid growth of Trump's once-unique pro-Russia stance is a gravitational function of his personality cult. See "July 3, 2014 – Iraq – Getting In Was Wrong; Getting Out Was Right, U.S. Voters Tell Quinnipiac University National Poll" Quinnipiac University Poll Archived April 2, 2016, at the Wayback Machine item #51 Wasson, Erik (July 18, 2013). "House GOP unveils spending bill with $5.8B cut to foreign aid". The Hill. Archived from the original on December 15, 2014. Retrieved December 11, 2014. Rogers, David (February 1, 2011). "GOP seeks to slash foreign aid". Politico. Archived from the original on February 22, 2015. Retrieved December 11, 2014. Trujillo, Mario (July 1, 2014). "Republicans propose halting foreign aid until border surge stops". The Hill. Archived from the original on December 15, 2014. Retrieved December 11, 2014. Dina Smeltz and Craig Kafura (February 16, 2024). "Majority of Trump Republicans Prefer the United States Stay out of World Affairs". Chicago Council on Global Affairs. Retrieved February 16, 2024. Zelizer, Julian E. (2004). The American Congress: The Building of Democracy. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. pp. 704–705. ISBN 978-0547345505. Retrieved June 17, 2015. Williams, Daniel K. (2012). God's Own Party: The Making of the Christian Right. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0199929061. Archived from the original on December 15, 2023. Retrieved November 13, 2021. Schnabel, Landon Paul (2013). "When Fringe Goes Mainstream: A Sociohistorical Content Analysis of the Christian Coalition's Contract With The American Family and the Republican Party Platform". Politics, Religion & Ideology. 14 (1): 94–113. doi:10.1080/21567689.2012.752361. ISSN 2156-7689. S2CID 144532011. Archived from the original on November 13, 2021. Retrieved November 13, 2021. R. Lewis, Andrew (2019). "The Inclusion-Moderation Thesis: The U.S. Republican Party and the Christian Right". Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Politics. doi:10.1093/acrefore/9780190228637.013.665. ISBN 978-0190228637. Archived from the original on April 18, 2021. Retrieved November 13, 2021. Chapman, Roger (2010). Culture Wars: An Encyclopedia of Issues, Viewpoints, and Voices. M.E. Sharpe. p. passim. ISBN 978-0765622501. Archived from the original on April 7, 2015. Retrieved June 17, 2015. Williams, Daniel K. (June 2015). "The Partisan Trajectory of the American Pro-Life Movement: How a Liberal Catholic Campaign Became a Conservative Evangelical Cause". Religions. 6 (2): 451–475. doi:10.3390/rel6020451. ISSN 2077-1444. Halpern, Sue (November 8, 2018). "How Republicans Became Anti-Choice". The New York Review of Books. ISSN 0028-7504. Archived from the original on February 4, 2023. Retrieved February 4, 2023. Williams, Daniel K. (2011). "The GOP's Abortion Strategy: Why Pro-Choice Republicans Became Pro-Life in the 1970s". Journal of Policy History. 23 (4): 513–539. doi:10.1017/S0898030611000285. ISSN 1528-4190. S2CID 154353515. Archived from the original on July 4, 2023. Retrieved July 4, 2023. Taylor, Justin (May 9, 2018). "How the Christian Right Became Prolife on Abortion and Transformed the Culture Wars". The Gospel Coalition. Archived from the original on February 4, 2023. Retrieved February 4, 2023. Bruni, Frank (January 23, 2000). "Bush Says He Supports the Party's Strong Anti-Abortion Stand". The New York Times. Archived from the original on February 4, 2023. Retrieved February 4, 2023. Smith, David (May 5, 2022). "Trump the hero for anti-abortion movement after bending supreme court his way". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on February 4, 2023. Retrieved February 4, 2023. Abdelfatah, Rund (June 22, 2022). "Evangelicals didn't always play such a big role in the fight to limit abortion access". National Public Radio. Archived from the original on February 24, 2023. Retrieved February 24, 2023. Bergant, Dianne (1992). The Collegeville Bible Commentary: Based on the New American Bible: Old Testament. Liturgical Press. p. 156. ISBN 0814622100. O'Donnell, Paul (October 16, 2020). "What does the Bible really say about abortion?". Religion News Service. Archived from the original on February 24, 2023. Retrieved February 24, 2023. Waltke, Bruce K. (November 8, 1968). "The Old Testament and Birth Control". Christianity Today. Archived from the original on February 24, 2023. Retrieved February 24, 2023. Balmer, Randall (May 10, 2022). "The Religious Right and the Abortion Myth". Politico. Archived from the original on February 24, 2023. Retrieved February 24, 2023. Allen, Bob (November 6, 2012). "Evangelicals and abortion: chicken or egg?". Baptist News Global. Archived from the original on February 24, 2023. Retrieved February 24, 2023. Fram, Alan; Elliot, Philip (August 29, 2012). "GOP OKs platform barring abortions, gay marriage". Finance.yahoo.com. Archived from the original on February 26, 2017. Retrieved December 27, 2016. Layman, Geoffrey (2001). The Great Divide: Religious and Cultural Conflict in American Party Politics. Columbia University Press. pp. 115, 119–120. ISBN 978-0231120586. Archived from the original on June 25, 2015. Retrieved July 15, 2018. "How race and religion have polarized American voters". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on July 16, 2018. Retrieved July 15, 2018. Gould, Eric D.; Klor, Esteban F. (2019). "Party hacks and true believers: The effect of party affiliation on political preferences". Journal of Comparative Economics. 47 (3): 504–524. doi:10.1016/j.jce.2019.03.004. S2CID 241140587. "Bobby Jindal on the Issues". Ontheissues.org. Archived from the original on June 13, 2012. Retrieved May 16, 2010. Kilgore, Ed. "The Near-Extinction of Pro-Choice Republicans in Congress". New York Intelligencer. Archived from the original on September 20, 2018. Retrieved October 10, 2018. Levine, A. D.; Lacy, T. A.; Hearn, J. C. (February 18, 2013). "The origins of human embryonic stem cell research policies in the US states". Science and Public Policy. 40 (4): 544–558. doi:10.1093/scipol/sct005. ISSN 0302-3427. Archived from the original on November 8, 2021. Retrieved November 7, 2021. Blendon, Robert J.; Kim, Minah Kang; Benson, John M. (November 17, 2011). "The Public, Political Parties, and Stem-Cell Research". New England Journal of Medicine. 365 (20): 1853–1856. doi:10.1056/NEJMp1110340. ISSN 0028-4793. PMID 22087677. Archived from the original on November 8, 2021. Retrieved November 7, 2021. Leonhardt, David (April 6, 2023). "The Power and Limits of Abortion Politics". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on April 6, 2023. Retrieved April 7, 2023. After the Supreme Court overturned Roe last June and allowed states to ban abortion, more than a dozen quickly imposed tight restrictions. Today, abortion is largely illegal in most of red America, even though polls suggest many voters in these states support at least some access. Siders, David (April 6, 2023). "No Wisconsin wake-up call: Republicans go full steam ahead on abortion restrictions". Politico. Archived from the original on April 6, 2023. Retrieved April 7, 2023. "Most Americans approve of Supreme Court decision restricting use of race in college admissions". ABC News. Retrieved March 15, 2024. See Republican 2012 Platform "Bush criticizes university 'quota system'". CNN. January 15, 2003. Archived from the original on June 4, 2010. Retrieved May 22, 2010. Eilperin, Juliet (May 12, 1998). "Watts Walks a Tightrope on Affirmative Action". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on May 24, 2010. Retrieved January 22, 2007. Republican National Committee (July 30, 2015). "Republican Views On Affirmative Action". republicanviews.org. Archived from the original on April 19, 2022. "Amid a Series of Mass Shootings in the U.S., Gun Policy Remains Deeply Divisive". PewResearch.org. April 20, 2021. Archived from the original on May 30, 2022. "America's Complex Relationship With Guns". Pew Research Center. June 22, 2017. Archived from the original on June 22, 2017. Nass, Daniel (September 9, 2020). "A Democrat with an 'A' Grade from the NRA? There's One Left". The Trace. Archived from the original on September 9, 2020. Retrieved September 11, 2023. Siegel, Reva B. "Dead or Alive: Originalism as Popular Constitutionalism in Heller." The Second Amendment on Trial: Critical Essays on District of Columbia v. Heller, edited by Saul Cornell and Nathan Kozuskanich, University of Massachusetts Press, 2013, p. 104. Astor, Maggie (September 22, 2022). "For First Time in at Least 25 Years, No Democrat Has Top Grade From N.R.A." The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 22, 2022. Retrieved September 11, 2023. The Democratic break from the National Rifle Association is complete: For the first time in at least 25 years, not a single Democrat running for Congress anywhere in the country received an A in the group's candidate ratings, which were once a powerful influence in U.S. elections. Siddiqui, Sabrina (September 10, 2013). "Colorado Recall Results: Democratic State Senators Defeated In Major Victory For NRA". HuffPost. Archived from the original on September 11, 2013. "Letter of Resignation Sent By Bush to Rifle Association". The New York Times. May 11, 1995. Archived from the original on December 22, 2012. Tesler, Michael (April 20, 2022). "Why Do GOP Lawmakers Still Oppose Legalizing Weed?". FiveThirtyEight. Archived from the original on August 24, 2022. Retrieved August 13, 2022. "Republican Views on Drugs | Republican Views". www.republicanviews.org. Archived from the original on May 2, 2017. Retrieved May 1, 2017. "House votes to decriminalize marijuana as GOP resists national shift". The Washington Post. 2020. Archived from the original on December 21, 2020. Retrieved December 18, 2020. Kneeland, Timothy W. (2016). Today's Social Issues: Democrats and Republicans: Democrats and Republicans. ABC-CLIO. p. 206. ISBN 978-1610698368. Archived from the original on December 15, 2023. Retrieved December 16, 2020. Newburn, Greg (July 18, 2014). "Top GOP Presidential Contenders Support Mandatory Minimum Reform". Families Against Mandatory Minimums. Archived from the original on November 29, 2014. Retrieved December 11, 2014. Peters, Margaret (2017). Trading Barriers. Princeton University Press. pp. 154–155. ISBN 978-0691174471. Archived from the original on March 3, 2018. Blanton, Dana (November 8, 2006). "National Exit Poll: Midterms Come Down to Iraq, Bush". Fox News. Archived from the original on March 6, 2007. Retrieved January 6, 2007. "Immigration reform stalled decade after Gang of 8′s big push". AP News. April 3, 2023. Archived from the original on April 3, 2023. Retrieved April 3, 2023. Frumin, Aliyah (November 25, 2013). "Obama: 'Long past time' for immigration reform". MSNBC. Archived from the original on January 21, 2014. Retrieved January 26, 2014. Hajnal, Zoltan (January 4, 2021). "Immigration & the Origins of White Backlash". Daedalus. 150 (2): 23–39. doi:10.1162/daed_a_01844. ISSN 0011-5266. Hackman, Michelle; Zitner, Aaron (February 2, 2024). "Why Both Parties Have Shifted Right on Immigration—and Still Can't Agree". The Wall Street Journal. Lindberg, Tim (August 2, 2022). "Congress is considering making same-sex marriage federal law – a political scientist explains how this issue became less polarized over time". Kansas Reflector. Archived from the original on August 23, 2022. Retrieved August 14, 2022. Igielnik, Ruth (November 16, 2022). "Backdrop for Vote on Same-Sex Marriage Rights: A Big Shift in Public Opinion". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 16, 2022. Retrieved November 17, 2022. "About Us". Log Cabin Republicans. Archived from the original on February 4, 2021. Retrieved November 29, 2020. Li, Anne (March 9, 2016). "'Religious Liberty' Has Replaced 'Gay Marriage' In GOP Talking Points". FiveThirtyEight. Archived from the original on August 14, 2022. Retrieved August 13, 2022. Lerer, Lisa; Russonello, Giovanni; Paz, Isabella Grullón (June 17, 2020). "On L.G.B.T.Q. Rights, a Gulf Between Trump and Many Republican Voters". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on June 17, 2020. Retrieved June 8, 2021. Dao, James (November 4, 2004). "Same-Sex Marriage Issue Key to Some G.O.P. Races". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on August 12, 2019. Retrieved August 25, 2019. "Bush calls for ban on same-sex marriages". CNN. February 25, 2004. Archived from the original on May 15, 2009. Retrieved February 3, 2016. "Bush urges federal marriage amendment". NBC News. June 6, 2006. Archived from the original on April 8, 2016. Retrieved February 3, 2016. Stout, David (February 24, 2004). "Bush Backs Ban in Constitution on Gay Marriage". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on December 17, 2018. Retrieved December 17, 2018. Murray, Shailagh (June 8, 2006). "Gay Marriage Amendment Fails in Senate". The Washington Post and Times-Herald. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on March 8, 2019. Retrieved December 17, 2018. "Constitutional Amendment on Marriage Fails". Fox News. March 25, 2015. Archived from the original on December 17, 2018. Retrieved December 17, 2018. Jones, Robert P.; Cox, Daniel; Navarro-Rivera, Juhem (February 26, 2014). "A Shifting Landscape" (PDF). Public Religion Research Institute. Archived from the original (PDF) on April 17, 2016. Retrieved December 27, 2016. Terkel, Amanda (May 5, 2014). "Anti-Gay Stance Still Enshrined In Majority Of State GOP Platforms". HuffPost. Archived from the original on August 24, 2019. Retrieved August 24, 2019. Drabold, Will (July 18, 2016). "Read the Republican Platform on Same-Sex Marriage, Guns and Wall Street". Time. Archived from the original on August 4, 2019. Retrieved August 24, 2019. "The 2016 Republican Party Platform". GOP. July 18, 2016. Archived from the original on February 11, 2021. Retrieved February 1, 2020. Orr, Gabby (June 11, 2020). "Republicans across the spectrum slam RNC's decision to keep 2016 platform". Politico. Archived from the original on August 2, 2020. Retrieved June 12, 2020. Kilgore, Ed (June 11, 2020). "Republicans Will Just Recycle Their 2016 Party Platform". New York Intelligencer. Archived from the original on July 30, 2020. Retrieved June 12, 2020. Epstein, Reid J.; Karni, Annie (June 11, 2020). "G.O.P. Platform, Rolled Over From 2016, Condemns the 'Current President'". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on June 11, 2020. Retrieved June 12, 2020. de Vogue, Ariane (November 14, 2016). "Trump: Same-sex marriage is 'settled,' but Roe v Wade can be changed". CNN. Archived from the original on May 11, 2019. Retrieved May 11, 2019. "Trump recognizes LGBTQ pride month in tweets". NBC News. May 31, 2019. Archived from the original on August 3, 2019. Retrieved August 25, 2019. Fadulu, Lola; Flanagan, Annie (December 6, 2019). "Trump's Rollback of Transgender Rights Extends Through Entire Government". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 6, 2019. Retrieved June 9, 2020. Schmalz, Jeffrey (August 20, 1992). "A Delicate Balance: The Gay Vote; Gay Rights and AIDS Emerging As Divisive Issues in Campaign". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on August 24, 2019. Retrieved August 24, 2019. Fisher, Marc (August 28, 2012). "GOP platform through the years shows party's shift from moderate to conservative". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on August 24, 2019. Mellnik, Ted; Alcantara, Chris; Uhrmacher, Kevin (July 15, 2016). "What Republicans and Democrats have disagreed on, from 1856 to today". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on November 14, 2017. "Republican Party Platforms: Republican Party Platform of 1992". Presidency.ucsb.edu. August 17, 1992. Archived from the original on February 4, 2017. Retrieved December 27, 2016. "Layout 1" (PDF). Gop.com. Archived (PDF) from the original on July 30, 2014. Retrieved December 27, 2016. "Republican Party Platforms: 2008 Republican Party Platform". Presidency.ucsb.edu. Archived from the original on January 28, 2017. Retrieved December 27, 2016. "Republican Party Platform". GOP. Archived from the original on November 23, 2019. Retrieved December 29, 2019. "Republican Platform 2016" (PDF). GOP.com. 2016. Archived (PDF) from the original on May 3, 2017. Retrieved December 29, 2019. Zezima, Katie; Weigel, David (July 13, 2016). "While Trump stays out of it, GOP platform tacks to the right on gay rights". Washington Post. Retrieved January 23, 2024. Karson, Kendall; Cunningham, Meg (June 12, 2020). "RNC moves to keep 2016 platform intact through 2024, controversies and all". ABC News. Retrieved January 23, 2024. Astor, Maggie (January 25, 2023). "G.O.P. State Lawmakers Push a Growing Wave of Anti-Transgender Bills". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 15, 2023. Retrieved June 12, 2023. Singman, Brooke (November 8, 2021). "RNC announces 'Pride Coalition,' partnership with Log Cabin Republicans ahead of midterms". Fox News. Archived from the original on November 15, 2021. Retrieved November 18, 2021. "GOP Chairwoman Ronna McDaniel apologizes for poor communication regarding gay outreach". Metro Weekly. November 17, 2021. Archived from the original on November 18, 2021. Retrieved November 18, 2021. Staff (September 28, 2022). "Majority of Americans Believe Abortion and Same-Sex Marriage Should be Guaranteed Rights | Grinnell College". Grinnell College. Archived from the original on March 5, 2023. Retrieved November 17, 2022. Solid majorities across both parties agree that... marrying someone of the same sex...are rights that should be guaranteed to all citizens... Cohn, Nate (August 10, 2023). "It's Not Reagan's Party Anymore". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 2, 2023. Retrieved August 23, 2023. It's not Mr. Reagan's party anymore. Today, a majority of Republicans oppose many of the positions that defined the party as recently as a decade ago, according to a New York Times/Siena College poll released last week. Only around one-third of Republican voters... [oppose]... same-sex marriage... Potts, Monica (August 3, 2022). "What's Behind Senate Republicans' Hesitancy Toward Same-Sex Marriage?". FiveThirtyEight. Archived from the original on August 24, 2022. Retrieved August 24, 2022. Camera, Lauren (July 28, 2022). "The GOP's Same-Sex Marriage Divide". U.S. News & World Report. Archived from the original on August 8, 2022. Retrieved August 24, 2022. "Four in Five Americans Support Voter ID Laws, Early Voting". Gallup.com. August 22, 2016. Archived from the original on April 6, 2021. Retrieved April 7, 2021. Rakich, Nathaniel (April 2, 2021). "Americans Oppose Many Voting Restrictions — But Not Voter ID Laws". FiveThirtyEight. Archived from the original on April 6, 2021. Retrieved April 7, 2021. Vasilogambros, Matt (February 5, 2021). "Republicans Target Ballot Access After Record Turnout". Stateline. Pew Trusts. Archived from the original on April 25, 2021. Retrieved April 25, 2021. Bump, Philip (October 13, 2014). "The disconnect between voter ID laws and voter fraud". The Fix. The Washington Post. Retrieved July 26, 2016. Levitt, Justin (August 6, 2014). "A comprehensive investigation of voter impersonation finds 31 credible incidents out of one billion ballots cast". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on October 28, 2019. Hakim, Danny; Wines, Michael (November 3, 2018). "'They Don't Really Want Us to Vote': How Republicans Made it Harder". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 4, 2018. Retrieved November 4, 2018. "The big conservative lie on 'voter fraud'". The Week. October 23, 2018. Archived from the original on December 28, 2018. Retrieved December 27, 2018. Hakim, Danny; Wines, Michael (November 3, 2018). "'They Don't Really Want Us to Vote': How Republicans Made It Harder". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on November 4, 2018. Retrieved April 7, 2021. Mali, Meghashyam (July 19, 2016). "GOP platform calls for tough voter ID laws". The Hill. Archived from the original on April 18, 2021. Retrieved April 7, 2021. Wines, Michael (February 27, 2021). "In Statehouses, Stolen-Election Myth Fuels a G.O.P. Drive to Rewrite Rules". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. Mena, Kelly (February 2, 2021). "More than 100 bills that would restrict voting are moving through state legislatures". CNN. Archived from the original on February 3, 2021. Retrieved February 3, 2021. Gardner, Amy (March 26, 2021). "After Trump tried to intervene in the 2020 vote, state Republicans are moving to take more control of elections". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on June 14, 2022. Retrieved April 7, 2021. "State Voting Bills Tracker 2021". Brennan Center for Justice. February 24, 2021. Archived from the original on June 11, 2022. Corisaniti, Nick; Epstein, Reid J. (March 23, 2021). "G.O.P. and Allies Draft 'Best Practices' for Restricting Voting". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 11, 2022. Corasaniti, Nick (March 24, 2021). "Republicans Aim to Seize More Power Over How Elections Are Run". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 11, 2022. Gardner, Amy (March 26, 2021). "After Trump tried to intervene in the 2020 vote, state Republicans are moving to take more control of elections". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on June 14, 2022. Kalmbacher, Colin (May 26, 2021). "Arizona GOP Bill Would Allow GOP-Controlled State Legislature to Strip Key Election Powers from Democratic Secretary of State". Law & Crime. Archived from the original on May 31, 2021. Retrieved October 20, 2022. Gardner, Amy (May 29, 2021). "Texas Republicans finalize bill that would enact stiff new voting restrictions and make it easier to overturn election results". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on July 14, 2021. Retrieved October 20, 2022. Montanaro, Domenico (December 9, 2020). "Poll: Just A Quarter Of Republicans Accept Election Outcome". NPR. Archived from the original on June 11, 2022. Retrieved June 14, 2022. "December 10, 2020 – 60% View Joe Biden's 2020 Presidential Victory As Legitimate, Quinnipiac University National Poll Finds; 77% Of Republicans Believe There Was Widespread Voter Fraud". Quinnipiac University. December 10, 2020. Archived from the original on March 21, 2021. Retrieved October 20, 2022. Inskeep, Steve (February 28, 2021). "Why Republicans Are Moving To Fix Elections That Weren't Broken". NPR. Archived from the original on March 28, 2021. Retrieved October 20, 2022. Steinhauser, Paul (February 17, 2021). "Republican Party launching new election integrity committee". Fox News. Archived from the original on March 15, 2021. Retrieved October 20, 2022. Montellaro, Zach (January 24, 2021). "State Republicans push new voting restrictions after Trump's loss". Politico. Archived from the original on March 29, 2021. Retrieved October 20, 2022. Glasberg, Davita; Armaline, William; Purkayastha, Bandana (January 1, 2022). "I Exist, Therefore I Should Vote: Political Human Rights, Voter Suppression and Undermining Democracy in the U.S." Societies Without Borders. 16 (1): 20–47. ISSN 1872-1915. Archived from the original on October 28, 2022. Retrieved October 28, 2022. Hardy, Lydia (May 1, 2020). "Voter Suppression Post-Shelby: Impacts and Issues of Voter Purge and Voter ID Laws". Mercer Law Review. 71 (3). ISSN 0025-987X. Archived from the original on October 28, 2022. Retrieved October 28, 2022. Brewster, Adam; Huey-Burns, Caitlin (February 25, 2021). "Proposals to restrict voting gain traction in Republican states". CBS News. Archived from the original on March 30, 2021. Retrieved October 20, 2022. Skelley, Geoffrey (May 17, 2021). "How The Republican Push To Restrict Voting Could Affect Our Elections". FiveThirtyEight. Archived from the original on October 21, 2023. Retrieved November 28, 2022. Barone, Michael (August 26, 2012). "The Evolution of the Republican Party Voter". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on March 27, 2015. Retrieved April 17, 2013. McGreal, Chris (November 11, 2018). "Can Democrats ever win back white, rural America?". The Guardian. Archived from the original on March 8, 2019. Retrieved March 7, 2019. Drutman, Lee (September 22, 2016). "Opinion – The Divided States of America". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 8, 2019. Retrieved March 7, 2019. Gallup, Inc. (July 2, 2015). "Democrats Regain Edge in Party Affiliation". Gallup.com. Archived from the original on July 4, 2015. Retrieved July 3, 2015. "The great realignment". Axios. July 14, 2022. Archived from the original on July 20, 2022. Retrieved August 2, 2022. "The Democratic electorate's seismic shift". Axios. July 13, 2022. Archived from the original on July 20, 2022. Retrieved August 2, 2022. Ruffini, Patrick (November 4, 2023). "The Emerging Working-Class Republican Majority". POLITICO. Archived from the original on November 14, 2023. Retrieved November 15, 2023. "Rural voters continue to evade Democrats". NBC News. November 5, 2023. Archived from the original on November 15, 2023. Retrieved November 15, 2023. "National Results 2020 President exit polls". CNN. Archived from the original on May 31, 2022. Retrieved November 15, 2023. "Voting patterns in the 2022 elections". Pew Research Center. July 12, 2023. Archived from the original on November 15, 2023. Retrieved November 15, 2023. "Unmarried Women in the 2004 Presidential Election" Archived January 1, 2016, at the Wayback Machine (PDF). Report by Greenberg Quinlan Rosner Research, January 2005. p. 3: "The marriage gap is one of the most important cleavages in electoral politics. Unmarried women voted for Kerry by a 25-point margin (62 to 37 percent), while married women voted for President Bush by an 11-point margin (55 percent to 44 percent). Indeed, the 25-point margin Kerry posted among unmarried women represented one of the high water marks for the Senator among all demographic groups." "Exit Polls". CNN. November 7, 2006. Archived from the original on June 29, 2007. Retrieved November 18, 2006. "Exit Poll Analysis: Vote 2010 Elections Results". ABC News. November 2, 2010. Archived from the original on January 25, 2011. Retrieved January 30, 2011. Weeks, Linton (November 3, 2010). "10 Takeaways From The 2010 Midterms". NPR. Archived from the original on February 3, 2011. Retrieved January 30, 2011. "Republicans should worry that unmarried women shun them". The Economist. December 14, 2013. Archived from the original on January 15, 2018. Retrieved September 18, 2019. McDonnell, Meg T. (December 3, 2012). "The Marriage Gap in the Women's Vote". Crisis Magazine. Archived from the original on October 31, 2014. Retrieved December 11, 2014. Goldenberg, Suzanne (November 9, 2012). "Single women voted overwhelmingly in favour of Obama, researchers find". The Guardian. Archived from the original on December 31, 2014. Retrieved December 11, 2014. Junn, Jane; Masuoka, Natalie (2020). "The Gender Gap Is a Race Gap: Women Voters in US Presidential Elections". Perspectives on Politics. 18 (4): 1135–1145. doi:10.1017/S1537592719003876. ISSN 1537-5927. "White Female Voters Continue to Support the Republican Party". The Atlantic. November 14, 2016. Archived from the original on December 15, 2023. Retrieved January 30, 2021. Hard-core partisans don't switch teams over the personal shortcomings of their champion. "National Results 2020 President exit polls". CNN. Retrieved December 4, 2020. Levitz, Eric (October 19, 2022). "How the Diploma Divide Is Remaking American Politics". New York Intelligencer. Archived from the original on October 20, 2022. Retrieved April 24, 2023. Sosnik, Doug (April 17, 2023). "The 'Diploma Divide' Is the New Fault Line in American Politics". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 24, 2023. Retrieved April 24, 2023. "Detailed Party Identification Tables" (PDF). Pew Research Center for the People & the Press. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 30, 2012. Retrieved October 25, 2012. Hendrickson, William A. Galston and Clara (November 18, 2016). "The educational rift in the 2016 election". Archived from the original on March 8, 2019. Retrieved March 7, 2019. In the South, they were often not allowed to vote, but still received some Federal patronage appointments from the Republicans Heersink, Boris; Jenkins, Jeffery A. (2020). "Whiteness and the Emergence of the Republican Party in the Early Twentieth-Century South". Studies in American Political Development. 34: 71–90. doi:10.1017/S0898588X19000208. ISSN 0898-588X. S2CID 213551748. Archived from the original on February 22, 2021. Retrieved January 11, 2020. "Party Realignment – US House of Representatives: History, Art & Archives". history.house.gov. Archived from the original on December 21, 2020. Retrieved June 24, 2020. Harvard Sitkoff, A New Deal for Blacks (1978). L. A. Holmes (April 7, 2010). "Black Republicans Win First Congress Seats Since 2003". Fox News. Archived from the original on November 4, 2010. Retrieved January 30, 2011. "CNN.com Election 2004". www.cnn.com. Archived from the original on January 4, 2023. Retrieved January 12, 2023. Leal, David (2004). "The Latino Vote in the 2004 Election" (PDF). mattbarreto.com/. Archived (PDF) from the original on January 28, 2017. Retrieved January 12, 2023. "Exit Polls". CNN. November 2, 2004. Archived from the original on April 21, 2006. Retrieved November 18, 2006. "Americas Profile: Bobby Jindal". BBC News. February 25, 2009. Archived from the original on November 2, 2010. Retrieved May 16, 2010. "Bobby Jindal may become first Indian-American to be US prez". Deccan Herald. October 23, 2009. Archived from the original on April 20, 2010. Retrieved May 16, 2010. "Vietnamese Americans and Donald Trump – DW – 11/23/2020". dw.com. Archived from the original on January 14, 2023. Retrieved January 18, 2023. Teixeira, Ruy (November 6, 2022). "Democrats' Long Goodbye to the Working Class". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on January 7, 2023. Retrieved November 8, 2022. As we move into the endgame of the 2022 election, the Democrats face a familiar problem. America's historical party of the working class keeps losing working-class support. And not just among White voters. Not only has the emerging Democratic majority I once predicted failed to materialize, but many of the non-White voters who were supposed to deliver it are instead voting for Republicans... From 2012 to 2020, the Democrats not only saw their support among White working-class voters — those without college degrees — crater, they also saw their advantage among non-White working-class voters fall by 18 points. And between 2016 and 2020 alone, the Democratic advantage among Hispanic voters declined by 16 points, overwhelmingly driven by the defection of working-class voters. In contrast, Democrats' advantage among White college-educated voters improved by 16 points from 2012 to 2020, an edge that delivered Joe Biden the White House. Cohn, Nate (July 13, 2022). "Poll Shows Tight Race for Control of Congress as Class Divide Widens". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on July 20, 2022. Retrieved August 27, 2022. But the cofluence of economic problems and resurgent cultural issues has helped turn the emerging class divide in the Democratic coalition into a chasm, as Republicans appear to be making new inroads among non-White and working class voters... For the first time in a Times/Siena national survey, Democrats had a larger share of support among White college graduates than among non-White voters – a striking indication of the shifting balance of political energy... Zitner, Aaron; Mena, Bryan (October 2, 2022). "Working-Class Latino Voters, Once Solidly Democratic, Are Shifting Toward Republicans". Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on October 8, 2022. Retrieved October 3, 2022. Latinos across America are splitting among economic lines, with a pronounced shift among working-class voters toward the Republican party. Kraushaar, Josh (July 14, 2022). "The Great American Realignment". Axios. Archived from the original on July 20, 2022. Retrieved August 2, 2022. Shifts in the demographics of the two parties' supporters — taking place before our eyes — are arguably the biggest political story of our time. Republicans are becoming more working class and a little more multiracial. Democrats are becoming more elite and a little more White... Kraushaar, Josh (July 13, 2022). "The Democratic electorate's seismic shift". Axios. Archived from the original on July 20, 2022. Retrieved August 2, 2022. Democrats are becoming the party of upscale voters concerned more about issues like gun control and abortion rights. Republicans are quietly building a multiracial coalition of working-class voters, with inflation as an accelerant... In the Times/Siena poll, Ds hold a 20-point advantage over Rs among White college-educated voters — but are statistically tied among Hispanics. Avlon, John (January 18, 2013). "GOP's surprising edge on diversity". CNN. Archived from the original on January 31, 2013. Retrieved January 22, 2013. "Dissecting the 2008 Electorate: Most Diverse in U.S. History" Archived June 18, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. Pew Research Center. April 30, 2009. Tom Scocca, "Eighty-Eight Percent of Romney Voters Were White", Slate November 7, 2012 Archived July 6, 2015, at the Wayback Machine "Exit polls for Midterm Election Results 2022". CNN. November 9, 2022. Archived from the original on November 16, 2022. Retrieved November 17, 2022. "The Republican Party is (Probably) Not Doomed". September 10, 2019. Archived from the original on September 11, 2019. Retrieved September 14, 2019. Bacon, Perry Jr. (April 20, 2018). "Republicans And Democrats Should Be Worried About 2020". FiveThirtyEight. Archived from the original on September 20, 2018. Retrieved September 20, 2018. Nuccitelli, Dana (July 2, 2018). "Republicans try to save their deteriorating party with another push for a carbon tax". The Guardian. Archived from the original on September 20, 2018. Retrieved September 20, 2018. al-Gharbi, Musa (February 28, 2017). "The Democratic Party is facing a demographic crisis". The Conversation. Archived from the original on March 30, 2019. Retrieved March 4, 2019. Brownstein, Ronald (May 31, 2017). "Why Voter Demographics in U.S. Elections Matter Now More Than Ever". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on September 20, 2018. Retrieved September 20, 2018. Hammer, Josh (November 5, 2020). "Despite 'racist' charges, Trump did better with minorities than any GOP candidate in 60 years". Archived from the original on February 13, 2021. Retrieved February 4, 2021. "US election 2020: Why Trump gained support among minorities". BBC News. November 22, 2020. Archived from the original on February 1, 2021. Retrieved February 4, 2021. To some extent the United States Supreme Court decision Roe v. Wade caused American Christians to blur their historical division along the line between Catholics and Protestants and instead to realign as conservatives or liberals, irrespective of the Reformation Era distinction. Norquist, Grover (2008). Leave Us Alone: Getting the Government's Hands Off Our Money, Our Guns, Our Lives. HarperCollins. pp. 146–149. ISBN 978-0061133954. The Democratic Obama administration's support for requiring institutions related to the Catholic Church to cover birth control and abortion in employee health insurance has further moved traditionalist Catholics toward the Republicans. Conroy, J. Oliver (February 15, 2018). "Mormons want to save the Republican party's soul. But is it too late?". The Guardian. Archived from the original on November 9, 2020. Retrieved May 7, 2020. Fingerhut, Hannah; McCombs, Brady (November 29, 2018). "Most Mormons voted Republican in the midterms—but their Trump approval rating continues to decline, study finds". The Salt Lake Tribune. Archived from the original on January 11, 2021. Retrieved May 7, 2020. "'I think it's Israel': How Orthodox Jews became Republicans". Jewish Telegraphic Agency. February 3, 2020. Archived from the original on January 15, 2021. Retrieved June 12, 2020. Hanau, Shira (May 11, 2021). "New Pew study shows 75% of Orthodox Jews identify as Republicans, up from 57% in 2013". Jewish Telegraphic Agency. Archived from the original on November 8, 2022. Retrieved November 23, 2022. NPR Staff (November 3, 2020). "Understanding The 2020 Electorate: AP VoteCast Survey". NPR. Archived from the original on February 19, 2021. Retrieved November 17, 2020. "Religion in the 2010 Elections". Pew Research Center. November 3, 2010. Archived from the original on February 6, 2011. Retrieved January 30, 2011. Lee (June 18, 2015). "Pope hands GOP climate change dilemma". CNN. Archived from the original on July 5, 2015. Retrieved July 3, 2015. Thomas Reese, "A readers' guide to 'Laudato Si'" Archived June 30, 2015, at the Wayback Machine, National Catholic Register, June 26, 2015. Davenport, Caral (June 16, 2015). "Pope's Views on Climate Change Add Pressure to Catholic Candidates". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 19, 2017. Retrieved February 18, 2017. Fraga, Brian (June 26, 2015). "Political Role Reversal: Democrats Praise Encyclical, While GOP Remains Cautious". Ncregister.com. Archived from the original on February 27, 2017. Retrieved December 27, 2016. "Catholics Divided Over Global Warming". Pew Research. June 16, 2015. Archived from the original on July 8, 2015. Retrieved July 6, 2015. "Study: Republicans are 24 percent more likely than Democrats to be business owners". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 12, 2018. McKibben, Bill (March 22, 2011). "The Gang That Couldn't Lobby Straight". HuffPost. Archived from the original on February 26, 2023. Retrieved February 26, 2023. "Chairman Brady Marks Six Months of Tax Reform Wins – Ways and Means". Archived from the original on December 22, 2018. Retrieved August 18, 2018. "House Republicans urge opposition to vaccine patent waiver". The Hill. May 4, 2021. Archived from the original on May 12, 2021. Retrieved June 4, 2021. "House Republicans vote to overturn Biden rule on water protections". NBC News. March 10, 2023. Archived from the original on March 10, 2023. Retrieved March 10, 2023. "Republican Party Platform 2016" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on February 5, 2022. Retrieved October 12, 2018. Harrison, J. D. (August 30, 2012). "Small business a common theme at Republican Convention". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on March 28, 2013. Retrieved April 17, 2013. The Almanac of American Politics 2022 (2022) details on members of Congress, and the governors: their records and election results; also state and district politics; revised every two years since 1975. details Archived January 7, 2022, at the Wayback Machine; see The Almanac of American Politics American National Biography (20 volumes, 1999) covers all politicians no longer alive; online at many academic libraries and at Wikipedia Library Archived October 30, 2020, at the Wayback Machine. Aberbach, Joel D., ed. and Peele, Gillian, ed. Crisis of Conservatism?: The Republican Party, the Conservative Movement, and American Politics after Bush (Oxford UP, 2011). 403pp Aistrup, Joseph A. The Southern Strategy Revisited: Republican Top-Down Advancement in the South (1996). Black, Earl and Merle Black. The Rise of Southern Republicans (2002). Bowen, Michael, The Roots of Modern Conservatism: Dewey, Taft, and the Battle for the Soul of the Republican Party. (U of North Carolina Press, 2011). xii, 254pp. Brennan, Mary C. Turning Right in the Sixties: The Conservative Capture of the GOP (1995). Conger, Kimberly H. The Christian Right in Republican State Politics (2010) 202 pages; focuses on Arizona, Indiana, and Missouri. Crane, Michael. The Political Junkie Handbook: The Definitive Reference Books on Politics (2004) covers all the major issues explaining the parties' positions. Critchlow, Donald T. The Conservative Ascendancy: How the Republican Right Rose to Power in Modern America (2nd ed. 2011). Ehrman, John, The Eighties: America in the Age of Reagan (2005). Fauntroy, Michael K. Republicans and the Black vote (2007). Fried, J (2008). Democrats and Republicans – Rhetoric and Reality. New York: Algora Publishing. Frank, Thomas. What's the Matter with Kansas? How Conservatives Won the Heart of America (2005). Frum, David. What's Right: The New Conservative Majority and the Remaking of America (1996). Gould, Lewis L. The Republicans : A History of the Grand Old Party (2nd ed, 2014); First edition 2003 was entitled: Grand Old Party: A History of the Republicans online 2nd edition' th standard scholarly history Hemmer, Nicole. Partisans: The Conservative Revolutionaries Who Remade American Politics in the 1990s (2022) Jensen, Richard (1983). Grass Roots Politics: Parties, Issues, and Voters, 1854–1983. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. ISBN 083716382X. Archived from the original on May 19, 2020. Retrieved September 10, 2017. Judis, John B. and Ruy Teixeira. The Emerging Democratic Majority (2004), two Democrats project social trends. Kabaservice, Geoffrey. Rule and Ruin: The Downfall of Moderation and the Destruction of the Republican Party, From Eisenhower to the Tea Party (2012) scholarly history ISBN 978-0199768400. Kleppner, Paul, et al. The Evolution of American Electoral Systems (1983), applies party systems model. Kurian, George Thomas ed. The Encyclopedia of the Republican Party (4 vol., 2002). Lamis, Alexander P. ed. Southern Politics in the 1990s (1999). Levendusky, Matthew. The Partisan Sort: How Liberals Became Democrats and Conservatives Became Republicans (2009). Chicago Studies in American Politics. Mason, Robert. The Republican Party and American Politics from Hoover to Reagan (2011). Mason, Robert and Morgan, Iwan (eds.) Seeking a New Majority: The Republican Party and American Politics, 1960–1980. (2013) Nashville, TN. Vanderbilt University Press. 2013. Mayer, George H. The Republican Party, 1854–1966. 2d ed. (1967); a standard scholarly history; online McPherson, James M. (1988). Battle Cry of Freedom: The Civil War Era. Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0195038637. Oakes, James. The Crooked Path to Abolition: Abraham Lincoln and the Antislavery Constitution (W.W. Norton, 2021). Oakes, James. Freedom National: The Destruction of Slavery in the United States, 1861–1865 (W. W. Norton, 2012) Perlstein, Rick. Before the Storm: Barry Goldwater and the Unmaking of the American Consensus (2002), broad account of 1964. Perlstein, Rick. Nixonland: The Rise of a President and the Fracturing of America (2009). Reinhard, David W. The Republican Right since 1945 (1983). Rutland, Robert Allen. The Republicans: From Lincoln to Bush (1996). Sabato, Larry J. Divided States of America: The Slash and Burn Politics of the 2004 Presidential Election (2005). Sabato, Larry J. and Bruce Larson. The Party's Just Begun: Shaping Political Parties for America's Future (2001), textbook. Schlesinger, Arthur Meier Jr. ed. History of American Presidential Elections, 1789–2000 (various multivolume editions, latest is 2001). Essays on the most important election are reprinted in Schlesinger, The Coming to Power: Critical presidential elections in American history (1972). online editions Shafer, Byron E. and Anthony J. Badger, eds. Contesting Democracy: Substance and Structure in American Political History, 1775–2000 (2001), essays by specialists on each time period: includes: "To One or Another of These Parties Every Man Belongs": 1820–1865 by Joel H. Silbey; "Change and Continuity in the Party Period: 1835–1885" by Michael F. Holt; "The Transformation of American Politics: 1865–1910" by Peter H. Argersinger; "Democracy, Republicanism, and Efficiency: 1885–1930" by Richard Jensen; "The Limits of Federal Power and Social Policy: 1910–1955" by Anthony J. Badger; "The Rise of Rights and Rights Consciousness: 1930–1980" by James T. Patterson; and "Economic Growth, Issue Evolution, and Divided Government: 1955–2000" by Byron E. Shafer. Shafer, Byron and Richard Johnston. The End of Southern Exceptionalism (2006), uses statistical election data and polls to argue GOP growth was primarily a response to economic change. Steely, Mel. The Gentleman from Georgia: The Biography of Newt Gingrich Mercer University Press, 2000. ISBN 0865546711. Sundquist, James L. Dynamics of the Party System: Alignment and Realignment of Political Parties in the United States (1983). Wooldridge, Adrian and John Micklethwait. The Right Nation: Conservative Power in America (2004). Republican Party at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Data from Wikidata Official website Republican Party at Curlie.