Julian Paul Assange (/əˈsɑːnʒ/ ə-SAHNZH; né Hawkins; born 3 July 1971) is an Australian editor, publisher and activist who founded WikiLeaks in 2006. He came to wide international attention in 2010 when WikiLeaks published a series of leaks from US Army intelligence analyst Chelsea Manning: footage of a US airstrike in Baghdad, US military logs from the Afghanistan and Iraq wars, and US diplomatic cables. Assange has won multiple awards for publishing and journalism. Assange was raised in several towns in Australia until his family settled in Melbourne in his mid-teens. He became involved in the hacker community and was convicted for hacking in 1996. Following the establishment of WikiLeaks, Assange was its editor when it published the Bank Julius Baer documents, footage of the 2008 Tibetan unrest, and a report on political killings in Kenya with The Sunday Times. In November 2010, Sweden issued a European arrest warrant for Assange, for questioning in a Swedish investigation. After losing his appeal against the warrant, he breached bail and took refuge in the Embassy of Ecuador in London in June 2012. He was granted asylum by Ecuador in August 2012 on the grounds of political persecution and fears he might be extradited to the United States. He stood for the Australian Senate in 2013 and launched the WikiLeaks Party but failed to win a seat. Swedish prosecutors dropped the investigation in 2019. On 11 April 2019, Assange's asylum was withdrawn following a series of disputes with Ecuadorian authorities. The police were invited into the embassy and he was arrested. He was found guilty of breaching the Bail Act and sentenced to 50 weeks in prison. The U.S. government unsealed an indictment charging Assange with conspiracy to commit computer intrusion related to the leaks provided by Manning. In May 2019 and June 2020, the U.S. government unsealed new indictments against Assange, charging him with violating the Espionage Act of 1917 and alleging he had conspired with hackers. Assange has been incarcerated in HM Prison Belmarsh in London since April 2019, as the United States government's extradition effort is contested in the British courts.. In 2024 Assange received the honorary citizenship from Italian major cities such as Rome, Naples, Bari and the political asylum from Perugia. Assange was born Julian Paul Hawkins on 3 July 1971 in Townsville, Queensland, to Christine Ann Hawkins (b. 1951), a visual artist,: 34  and John Shipton, an anti-war activist and builder. The couple separated before their son was born. When Julian was a year old, his mother married Brett Assange, an actor with whom she ran a small theatre company and whom Julian Assange regards as his father (choosing Assange as his surname). Christine and Brett Assange divorced around 1979. Christine then became involved with Leif Meynell, also known as Leif Hamilton, whom Julian Assange later described as "a member of an Australian cult" called The Family. Meynell and Christine Assange separated in 1982. Julian Assange had a nomadic childhood, living in more than 30 Australian towns and cities. He attended many schools, including Goolmangar Primary School in New South Wales (1979–1983) and Townsville State High School in Queensland as well as being schooled at home. In his mid-teens, he settled with his mother and half-brother in Melbourne and moved in with his girlfriend at age 17. Assange studied programming, mathematics, and physics at Central Queensland University (1994) and the University of Melbourne (2003–2006), but did not complete a degree. Assange started the Puzzle Hunt tradition at the University of Melbourne modeled after the MIT Mystery Hunt. Assange was involved in the Melbourne rave scene, assisting in installing an internet kiosk at Ollie Olsen's club night Psychic Harmony where he was nicknamed "Prof". By 1987, aged 16, Assange had become a skilled hacker under the name Mendax, taken from Horace's splendide mendax (from Latin, "nobly untruthful"). Around this time, the police raided his mother's home and confiscated his equipment. According to Assange, "it involved some dodgy character who was alleging that we had stolen five hundred thousand dollars from Citibank". Ultimately, no charges were raised and his equipment was returned, but Assange "decided that it might be wise to be a bit more discreet". In 1988, Assange used social engineering to get the password to Australia's Overseas Telecommunications Commission's mainframes. Assange had a self-imposed set of ethics: he did not damage or crash systems or data he hacked, and he shared information. The Sydney Morning Herald later opined that he had become one of Australia's "most notorious hackers", and The Guardian said that by 1991 he was "probably Australia's most accomplished hacker". Assange's official biography on WikiLeaks called him Australia's "most famous ethical computer hacker", and the earliest version said he "hacked thousands of systems, including the Pentagon" when he was younger. He and two others, known as "Trax" and "Prime Suspect", formed a hacking group called "the International Subversives". According to NPR, David Leigh, and Luke Harding, Assange may have been involved in the WANK hack at NASA in 1989, but this has never been proven.: 42  Assange called it "the origin of hacktivism", and the Swedish television documentary WikiRebels, which was made with Assange's cooperation, also hinted he was involved. The WANK worm was also discussed in the opening chapter of Underground, a book for which Assange was the researcher. In mid-1991, the three hackers began targeting MILNET, a secret data network used by the US military, where Assange found reports he said showed the US military was hacking other parts of itself. Assange found a backdoor and later said they "had control over it for two years." In 2012, Ken Day, the former head of the Australian Federal Police computer crime team, said that there had been no evidence the International Subversives had hacked MILNET. In response to Assange's statements about accessing MILNET, Day said that "Assange may still be liable to prosecution for that act — if it can be proved." Assange wrote a program called Sycophant that allowed the International Subversives to conduct "massive attacks on the US military". The International Subversives regularly hacked into systems belonging to a "who's who of the U.S. military-industrial complex" and the network of Australia National University. At Hack in the Box Security Conference in Malaysia, Assange later said he had been "a famous teenage hacker in Australia, and I’ve been reading generals’ emails since I was 17". Assange has attributed his motivation to this experience with power. The Australian Federal Police (AFP) set up an investigation called Operation Weather targeting The International Subversives. In September 1991, Assange was discovered hacking into the Melbourne master terminal of Nortel, a Canadian multinational telecommunications corporation. Another member of the International Subversives turned himself and the others in, and the AFP tapped Assange's phone line (he was using a modem) and raided his home at the end of October. The earliest detailed reports about Assange are 1990s Australian press reports on him and print and TV news of his trial. He was charged in 1994 with 31 counts of crimes related to hacking, including defrauding Telecom Australia, fraudulent use of a telecommunications network, obtaining access to information, erasing data, and altering data. According to Assange, the only data he inserted or deleted was his program. The prosecution argued that a magazine written by the International Subversives would encourage others to hack, calling it a "hacker's manual" and alleging that Assange and the other hackers posted information online about how to hack into computers they had accessed. His trial date was set in May 1995 and his case was presented to the Supreme Court of Victoria, but the court did not take the case, sending it back to the County Court. Assange fell into a deep depression while waiting for his trial and checked himself into a psychiatric hospital and then checked out and spent six months sleeping in the wilderness around Melbourne. In December 1996, facing a theoretical sentence of 290 years in prison, he struck a plea deal and pleaded guilty to 24 hacking charges including breaches of the Crimes Act, and fraudulent use of a telecommunications network. The judge called the charges "quite serious" and initially thought a jail term would be necessary but ultimately sentenced Assange to a fine of A$2,100 and released him on a A$5,000 good behaviour bond because of his disrupted childhood and the absence of malicious or mercenary intent. After his sentencing, Assange told the judge that he had "been misled by the prosecution in terms of the charges" and "a great misjustice has been done". The judge told Assange "you have pleaded guilty, the proceedings are over" and advised him to be quiet. Assange has described the trial as a formative period and according to The New Republic, "the experience set him on the intellectual path" leading him to found WikiLeaks. In 1993, Assange provided technical advice and support to help the Victoria Police Child Exploitation Unit to prosecute individuals responsible for publishing and distributing child pornography. His lawyers said he was pleased to assist, emphasising that he received no benefit for this and was not an informer. His role in helping the police was discussed during his 1996 sentencing on computer hacking charges. According to his mother, Assange also helped police "remove a book on the Internet about how to build a bomb". In the same year, he took over running one of the first public Internet service providers in Australia, Suburbia Public Access Network, when its original owner, Mark Dorset, moved to Sydney. He joined the cypherpunk mailing list in late 1993 or early 1994. According to Robert Manne, Assange's main political focus at this time seems to have been the information-sharing possibilities created by the internet and its threats. He began programming in 1994, authoring or co-authoring network and encryption programs, such as the Rubberhose deniable encryption system. Assange wrote other programs to make the Internet more accessible and developed cyber warfare systems like the Strobe port scanner which could look for weaknesses in hundreds of thousands of computers at any one time. During this period of time he also moderated the AUCRYPTO forum, ran a website that gave advice on computer security to 5,000 subscribers in 1996,: 45  and contributed research to Suelette Dreyfus's Underground (1997), a book about Australian hackers including the International Subversives. According to Assange, he "deliberately minimized" his role in Underground so it could "pull in the whole community". In 1998, he co-founded the "network intrusion detection technologies" company Earthmen Technology which developed linux kernel hacking with Trax. During this period he also earned a sizeable income working as a consultant for large corporations. In October 1998, Assange decided to visit friends and announced on the cypherpunks mailing list he would be "hopscotching" through Russia, Mongolia, China, Poland and Eastern Europe. According to Assange, in the 1990s, he and Suburbia Public Access Network facilitated leaks for groups like activists and lawyers. Assange told Suelette Dreyfus that he had "acted as a conduit for leaked documents" when fighting local corruption. While awaiting trial and trying to get custody of his son, Assange and his mother formed the activist organisation Parent Inquiry Into Child Protection. An article in the Canadian magazine Maclean's later referred to it as "a low-tech rehearsal for WikiLeaks". The group used the Australian Freedom of Information Act and secretly recorded meetings with Health and Community Services to get information. The group also used flyers to encourage insiders to anonymously come forward, and according to Assange they "had moles who were inside dissidents." An insider leaked a key internal departmental manual about the rules for custody disputes to the group. In November 1996, Assange sent an email to lists he had created and mentioned a "LEAKS" project. Assange stated that he registered the domain "leaks.org" in 1999, but "didn't do anything with it". He publicised a patent granted to the National Security Agency in August 1999, for voice-data harvesting technology saying "This patent should worry people. Everyone's overseas phone calls are or may soon be tapped, transcribed and archived in the bowels of an unaccountable foreign spy agency." Assange and a group of other dissidents, mathematicians and activists established WikiLeaks in 2006.: 145–148  Assange became a member of its advisory board. From 2007 to 2010, Assange travelled continuously on WikiLeaks business, visiting Africa, Asia, Europe, and North America. In December 2006, the month WikiLeaks posted its first leak, Assange published a 5-page essay that outlined the "thought experiment" behind the WikiLeaks strategy: use leaks to force organisations to reduce levels of abuse and dishonesty or pay a 'secrecy tax' to be secret but inefficient. Assange explained: The more secretive or unjust an organization is, the more leaks induce fear and paranoia in the leadership and planning coterie. This must result in minimization of efficient internal communications mechanisms (an increase in cognitive 'secrecy tax') and consequent system-wide cognitive decline resulting in decreased ability to hold onto power as the environment demands adaptation. Assange found key supporters at the Chaos Computer Club conference in Berlin in December 2007, including Daniel Domscheit-Berg and Jacob Appelbaum and the Swedish hosting company PRQ.: 134  During this period, Assange was WikiLeaks' editor-in-chief and one of four permanent staff. The organisation maintained a larger group of volunteers, and Assange relied upon networks of others with expertise.: 97  The organisation published internet censorship lists, leaks, and classified media from anonymous sources. The publications include revelations about drone strikes in Yemen, corruption across the Arab world, extrajudicial executions by Kenyan police, 2008 Tibetan unrest in China, and the "Petrogate" oil scandal in Peru. From its inception, the website had a significant impact on political news in a large number of countries and across a wide range of issues. From its inception, WikiLeaks sought to engage with the established professional media. It had good relations with parts of the German and British press. A collaboration with the Sunday Times journalist Jon Swain on a report on political killings in Kenya led to increased public recognition of the WikiLeaks publication, and this collaboration won Assange the 2009 Amnesty International New Media Award.: 99  Assange said that six men with guns tried to attack the compound that he slept at in Kenya after the report was published, but were scared away when a guard shouted. The Kenya leak led to corruption being a major issue in the election that followed, which was marred by violence. According to Assange, "1,300 people were eventually killed, and 350,000 were displaced. That was a result of our leak. On the other hand, the Kenyan people had a right to that information and 40,000 children a year die of malaria in Kenya. And many more die of money being pulled out of Kenya, and as a result of the Kenyan shilling being debased". Reporters have discussed the moral dilemma involved in reporting the corruption in Kenya. WikiLeaks' international profile increased in 2008 when a Swiss bank, Bank Julius Baer, tried via a Californian court injunction to prevent the site's publication of bank records. Assange commented that financial institutions ordinarily "operate outside the rule of law", and he received extensive legal support from free-speech and civil rights groups. Bank Julius Baer's attempt to prevent the publication via injunction backfired. As a result of the Streisand effect, the publicity drew global attention to WikiLeaks and the bank documents.: 135  By 2009 WikiLeaks had succeeded in Assange's intentions to expose the powerful, publish material beyond the control of states, and attracted media support for its advocacy of freedom of speech. It had not, however, had the impact that Assange hoped for. Assange's idea of crowd-sourcing analysis of the documents to the army of visitors was unsuccessful, and few of the leaks attracted mainstream media attention.: 135  In July 2009 Assange released through Wikileaks the full report of a commission of inquiry, set up by the British Foreign and Commonwealth Office, into corruption in the Turks and Caicos Islands.: 335  The report had been due for publication earlier in the year but an injunction obtained by some of those named had prevented its publication. According to Assange, the Commission released a redacted report and then removed it. WikiLeaks obtained and restored the full text. The report found that foreign property developers had given millions of US dollars in payments and secret loans to senior politicians in the islands, including the TCI's former premier, Michael Misick.: 335  The Cablegate as well as Iraq and Afghan War releases impacted diplomacy and public opinion globally, with responses varying by region. In April 2010, WikiLeaks released video footage of the 12 July 2007, Baghdad airstrike, that have been regarded by several debaters as evidence of war crimes committed by the U.S. military. The news agency Reuters had earlier requested the footage through a US Freedom of Information Act request, but the request was denied. Assange and others worked for a week to break the U.S. military's encryption of the video, which they titled Collateral Murder and which Assange first presented at the U.S. National Press Club. It shows United States soldiers fatally shooting 18 civilians from a helicopter in Iraq, including Reuters journalists Namir Noor-Eldeen and his assistant Saeed Chmagh. WikiLeaks published the Afghan War logs in July 2010. It was described by the New York Times as "a six-year archive of classified military documents [that] offers an unvarnished and grim picture of the Afghan war". In October 2010, WikiLeaks published the Iraq War logs, a collection of 391,832 United States Army field reports from the Iraq War covering from 2004 to 2009. Assange said that he hoped the publication would "correct some of that attack on the truth that occurred before the war, during the war, and which has continued after the war". Regarding his own role within WikiLeaks, he said, "We always expect tremendous criticism. It is my role to be the lightning rod... to attract the attacks against the organization for our work, and that is a difficult role. On the other hand, I get undue credit". Assange travelled often and tried to stay away from Western intelligence agencies by checking into hotels under false names, sleeping on sofas and floors, and using encrypted phones and cash. According to journalists David Leigh, Declan Walsh, and Luke Harding, they had to persuade Assange to redact the names of Afghani informants, expressing their fear that they could be killed if exposed. They said Assange replied "Well, they’re informants, so if they get killed, they’ve got it coming to them. They deserve it." Assange denies making this statement; speaking on PBS Frontline about the accusations he said "It is absolutely right to name names. It is not necessarily right to name every name." In November 2010, WikiLeaks published a quarter of a million U.S. diplomatic cables, known as the "Cablegate" files. WikiLeaks initially worked with established Western media organisations, and later with smaller regional media organisations while also publishing the cables upon which their reporting was based. Assange told a media partner that he owned the information and had a financial interest in how it was released. The files show United States espionage against the United Nations and other world leaders, revealed tensions between the U.S. and its allies, and exposed corruption in countries throughout the world as documented by U.S. diplomats, helping to spark the Arab Spring. In March 2010, a member of WikiLeaks using the handle "Ox", widely believed to be Julian Assange, talked to Chelsea Manning by text chat while she was submitting leaks to WikiLeaks. The US referred to these chat logs in the 2018 indictment of Julian Assange and filed an affidavit which said they were able to identify Assange as the person chatting with Manning using hints he made during the chats and that Manning identified him as Assange to Adrian Lamo. In the chat logs, Manning asks Assange if he was "any good at LM hash cracking", which would decrypt passwords. Assange said he was, and told Manning about rainbow tables that WikiLeaks used to crack hashes and find passwords associated with them. An affidavit by an FBI agent involved in bringing the case against Assange claimed this showed an "illegal agreement" to help crack a password. When Manning told Assange she had nothing else to submit to WikiLeaks, he replied that "curious eyes never run dry in my experience." During her court martial, Manning said she downloaded the detainee assessment briefs (DABs) for Guantanamo Bay after speaking to a member of Wikileaks via a secure online chat log. While discussing files on Guantanamo Bay, Manning asked Assange about detainee assessment briefs. She said that "although he did not believe that they were of political significance, he did believe that they could be used to merge into the general historical account of what occurred at Guantanamo." She added that "after this discussion, I decided to download the data." In 2011, a series of events compromised the security of a WikiLeaks file containing the leaked US diplomatic cables. In August 2010, Assange gave Guardian journalist David Leigh an encryption key and a URL where he could locate the full file. In February 2011 David Leigh and Luke Harding of The Guardian published the encryption key in their book WikiLeaks: Inside Julian Assange's War on Secrecy. Leigh said he believed the key was a temporary one that would expire within days. WikiLeaks supporters disseminated the encrypted files to mirror sites in December 2010 after WikiLeaks experienced cyber-attacks. When WikiLeaks learned what had happened it notified the US State Department. On 25 August 2011, the German magazine Der Freitag published an article giving details which enabled people to piece the information together. On 1 September 2011, WikiLeaks announced they would make the unredacted cables public and searchable. The Guardian wrote that the decision to publish the cables was made by Assange alone, a decision that it and its four previous media partners condemned. Glenn Greenwald wrote that "WikiLeaks decided—quite reasonably—that the best and safest course was to release all the cables in full, so that not only the world's intelligence agencies but everyone had them, so that steps could be taken to protect the sources and so that the information in them was equally available". The U.S. established an Information Review Task Force (IRTF) to investigate the impact of WikiLeaks' publications. It involved as many as 125 people working over ten months. According to IRTF reports, the leaks could cause "serious damage" and put foreign US sources at risk. The head of the IRTF, Brigadier General Robert Carr, testified under questioning at Chelsea Manning's sentencing hearing that the task force had found no examples of anyone who had lost their life due to WikiLeaks' publication of the documents. Ed Pilkington wrote in The Guardian that Carr's testimony significantly undermined the argument that WikiLeaks' publications put lives at risk. At one of Assange's extradition hearings in 2020, a lawyer for the US said that "sources, whose redacted names and other identifying information was contained in classified documents published by WikiLeaks, who subsequently disappeared, although the US can't prove at this point that their disappearance was the result of being outed by WikiLeaks." The US cited the release in the opening of its request for extradition of Assange, saying his actions put lives at risk. John Young, the owner and operator of the website Cryptome, testified at Assange's extradition hearing that the unredacted cables were published by Cryptome on 1 September, the day before WikiLeaks, and they remain on the Cryptome site. Lawyers for Assange gave evidence it said would show that Assange was careful to protect lives. In December 2010, PostFinance said it was closing Assange's Swiss bank account because he "provided false information regarding his place of residence during the account opening process" but that there would be "no criminal consequences" for misleading authorities. WikiLeaks said the account was used to "donate directly to the Julian Assange and other WikiLeaks Staff Defence Fund" and said the closing was part of a banking blockade against WikiLeaks. According to the Associated Press, leaked documents from WikiLeaks include an unsigned letter from Julian Assange authorising Israel Shamir to seek a Russian visa on his behalf in 2010. WikiLeaks said Assange never applied for the visa or wrote the letter. According to the New York Times, in November 2010 "Assange had mused about seeking refuge in Russia", and Russia issued Assange a visa in January 2011. According to Andrew O'Hagan, during the 2011 Egyptian revolution when Mubarak tried to close the mobile phone networks, Assange and others at WikiLeaks "hacked into Nortel and fought against Mubarak’s official hackers to reverse the process". Over the next several years, WikiLeaks published the Guantanamo Bay files leak, the Syria Files, the Kissinger cables, and the Saudi cables. As of July 2015, Assange said WikiLeaks had published more than ten million documents and associated analyses; he described it as "a giant library of the world's most persecuted documents". Beginning in 2010, Assange contested legal proceedings in the United Kingdom concerning the requested extradition of Julian Assange to Sweden for a "preliminary investigation" into accusations of sexual offences made in August 2010, while he was visiting Sweden. Assange left Sweden for UK on 27 September 2010 and was arrested in his absence the same day. He was suspected of rape of a lesser degree, unlawful coercion and multiple cases of sexual molestation. Assange told friends in London he was supposed to return to Stockholm for a police interview on 14 October, but that he had decided to stay away. On 18 October 2010, Assange request for a Swedish residency permit was denied because his application failed to fulfill all the requirements. On 18 November 2010, Marianne Ny ordered the detention of Julian Assange on suspicion of rape, three cases of sexual molestation and unlawful coercion. The Stockholm District Court acceded to the order and issued a European Arrest Warrant to execute it. The warrant was appealed to the Svea Court of Appeal which upheld it, but lowered the charge to suspicion of rape of a lesser degree, unlawful coercion and two cases of sexual molestation rather than three.[failed verification] The warrant was also appealed to the Supreme Court of Sweden, which decided not to hear the case. On 30 November 2010, Interpol posted a Red Notice and put Assange on its most-wanted list. Assange presented himself to and was arrested by officers from the Metropolitan Police Extradition Unit at Scotland Yard on 7 December 2010, and was remanded to London's Wandsworth Prison.[failed verification] When he was arrested, he refused to cooperate with the standard British procedure of collecting photographs, fingerprints and DNA samples from people who are arrested. On 16 December, he was granted bail with conditions of residence at Ellingham Hall, Norfolk, and wearing of an electronic tag. Bail was set at £240,000 surety with a deposit of £200,000 ($312,700). On release on bail, Assange said "I hope to continue my work and continue to protest my innocence in this matter," and told the BBC, "This has been a very successful smear campaign and a very wrong one." He claimed that the Swedish extradition proceedings were "actually an attempt to get me into a jurisdiction which will then make it easier to extradite me to the US." Swedish prosecutors denied that the case had anything to do with WikiLeaks. In June 2012, Assange breached bail and sought refuge at Ecuador's Embassy in London and was granted asylum.[citation needed] On 12 August 2015, Swedish prosecutors announced that the statute of limitations had expired for three of the allegations against Assange while he was in the Ecuadorian embassy. The investigation into the rape allegation was also dropped by Swedish authorities on 19 May 2017 because of Assange's asylum in the Ecuadorian embassy. Assange said in these proceedings that he feared he would ultimately be extradited to the United States if he were sent to Sweden.[citation needed] In May 2019, the Swedish Prosecution Authority reopened the investigation against Assange. The prosecutors expressed the intent to extradite Assange from the United Kingdom after he served his 50-week prison sentence for skipping bail. In June 2019, the Uppsala District Court denied a request to detain Assange, thereby preventing his extradition to Sweden.[citation needed] As of 19 November 2019 the prosecution dropped the case because "the evidence has weakened considerably due to the long period of time that has elapsed" although they were confident in the complainant. After WikiLeaks released the Manning material, United States authorities began investigating WikiLeaks and Assange to prosecute them under the Espionage Act of 1917. In November 2010, US Attorney-General Eric Holder said there was "an active, ongoing criminal investigation" into WikiLeaks. It emerged from legal documents leaked over the ensuing months that WikiLeaks was being investigated by a federal grand jury in Alexandria, Virginia and the administration urged allies to open criminal investigations of Assange. In 2010, the FBI told a lawyer for Assange that he wasn't the subject of an investigation. That year the NSA added Assange to its Manhunting Timeline, an annual account of efforts to capture or kill alleged terrorists and others. In 2011, the NSA discussed categorising WikiLeaks as a "malicious foreign actor" for surveillance purposes. In August 2011, WikiLeaks volunteer Sigurdur Thordarson contacted the FBI and became the first informant to work for the FBI from inside WikiLeaks. He gave the FBI several hard drives he had copied from Assange and core WikiLeaks members. In December 2011, prosecutors in the Chelsea Manning case revealed the existence of chat logs between Manning and someone they claimed was Assange. Assange said that WikiLeaks has no way of knowing the identity of its sources and that chats with sources, including user-names, were anonymous. In January 2011, Assange described the allegation that WikiLeaks had conspired with Manning[clarification needed] as "absolute nonsense". The logs were presented as evidence during Manning's court-martial in June–July 2013. The prosecution argued that they showed WikiLeaks helping Manning reverse-engineer a password. During her trial, Manning said she acted on her own to send documents to WikiLeaks, and no one associated with WikiLeaks pressured her into giving more information. In 2012, diplomatic cables between Australia and the United States were released that showed the US government was investigating Assange and that "a broad range of possible charges are under consideration, including espionage and conspiracy". The diplomats dismissed claims the investigation was politically motivated, and highlighted prosecutors' claims that Manning was "guided by WikiLeaks' list of 'most wanted' leaks". In 2013, US officials said it was unlikely that the Justice Department would indict Assange for publishing classified documents because it would also have to prosecute the news organisations and writers who published classified material. In June 2013, The New York Times said that court and other documents suggested that Assange was being examined by a grand jury and "several government agencies", including by the FBI. Court documents published in May 2014 suggest that WikiLeaks was under "active and ongoing" investigation at that time. Under the Obama Administration, the Department of Justice did not indict Assange because it could not find evidence that his actions differed from those of a journalist. During the Trump Administration, CIA director Mike Pompeo and Attorney General Jeff Sessions stepped up pursuit of Assange. Law enforcement officials wanted to learn about Assange's knowledge of WikiLeaks's interactions with Russian intelligence and other actions. They had considered offering Assange some form of immunity from prosecution in exchange for his testimony and had reached out to Assange's lawyers. The negotiations were ended by the Vault 7 disclosures. In April 2017, US officials were preparing to file formal charges against Assange. Assange's indictment was unsealed in 2019 and expanded on later that year and in 2020. The legal scholar Steve Vladeck said that prosecutors likely accelerated the case in 2019 due to the impending statute of limitations on Assange's largest leaks. In early 2019, the Mueller report wrote the Special Counsel's office considered charging WikiLeaks or Assange "as conspirators in the computer-intrusion conspiracy" and that there were "factual uncertainties" about the role that Assange may have played in the hacks or their distribution that were "the subject of ongoing investigations" by the US Attorney's Office. On 2 September 2011, Australia's attorney general, Robert McClelland released a statement that the US diplomatic cables published by Wikileaks identified at least one ASIO officer, and that it was a crime in Australia to publish information which could identify an intelligence officer. McClelland said that "On occasions before this week, WikiLeaks redacted identifying features where the safety of individuals or national security could be put at risk. It appears this hasn't occurred with documents that have been distributed across the internet this week." According to The Guardian and Al Jazeera, this meant "Julian Assange could face prosecution in Australia." In 2014, WikiLeaks published information about political bribery allegations, violating a gag order in Australia. According to Peter Bartlett, a media lawyer in Australia, WikiLeaks was outside Australia's jurisdiction but "if Assange ever comes back to Australia, you would expect that he would immediately be charged with breaking a suppression order." A letter from Guatemalan human rights lawyer Renata Avila, written in December 2010 said he should "plan to escape and pay the bail money back to his supporters". On 19 June 2012, the Ecuadorian foreign minister, Ricardo Patiño, announced that Assange had applied for political asylum, that the Ecuadorian government was considering his request, and that Assange was at the Ecuadorian embassy in London. An office was converted into a studio apartment and equipped with a bed, telephone, sun lamp, computer, shower, treadmill, and kitchenette. The embassy staff removed the toilet in the women's bathroom at Assange's request so he could sleep in the quiet room. He was limited to roughly three hundred and thirty square feet and ate a combination of take-out food and food prepared by the embassy staff. Assange and his supporters said he was not concerned about any proceedings in Sweden as such but said that the Swedish allegations were designed to discredit him and were a pretext for his extradition from Sweden to the United States. Assange breached his bail conditions by taking up residence in the embassy rather than appearing in court and faced arrest if he left. Assange's supporters, including journalist Jemima Goldsmith, forfeited £200,000 in bail and £40,000 as promised sureties. Goldsmith said she was surprised at his asylum bid and she wanted and expected him to face the Swedish allegations but that he had "a real fear of being extradited to the US". The UK government wrote to Patiño, saying that the police were entitled to enter the embassy and arrest Assange under UK law. Patiño said it was an implied threat, stating that "such actions would be a blatant disregard of the Vienna Convention". Officers of the Metropolitan Police Service were stationed outside the embassy from June 2012 to October 2015 to arrest Assange if he left the embassy and compel him to attend the extradition appeal hearing. The police officers were withdrawn on grounds of cost in October 2015, but the police said they would still deploy "several overt and covert tactics to arrest him". The Metropolitan Police Service said the cost of the policing for the period was £12.6 million. The Australian attorney-general, Nicola Roxon, wrote to Assange's lawyer saying that Australia would not seek to involve itself in any international exchanges about Assange's future. Prime Minister Julia Gillard said the Australian government had no evidence the US intended to charge and extradite Assange at that time, and Roxon suggested that if Assange was imprisoned in the US, he could apply for an international prisoner transfer to Australia. Assange's lawyers described the letter as a "declaration of abandonment". WikiLeaks insiders stated that Assange decided to seek asylum because he felt abandoned by the Australian government. On 16 August 2012, Patiño announced that Ecuador was granting Assange political asylum because of the threat represented by the United States secret investigation against him. In its formal statement, Ecuador said that "as a consequence of Assange's determined defense to freedom of expression and freedom of press... in any given moment, a situation may come where his life, safety or personal integrity will be in danger". Ecuadorian President Rafael Correa confirmed on 18 August that Assange could stay at the embassy indefinitely. Documents released that month showed that Australia had no objection to a potential extradition to the US, and a spokesman for Foreign Minister Bob Carr said that Assange refused an offer for consular assistance. In December, Assange said he felt freer in the Embassy despite being more confined because he was the author of his own confinement. In 2013, Assange and others in WikiLeaks helped whistleblower Edward Snowden flee from US law enforcement. After the United States cancelled Snowden's passport, stranding him in Russia, they considered transporting him to Latin America on the presidential jet of a sympathetic Latin American leader. In order to throw the US off the scent, they spoke about the jet of the Bolivian president Evo Morales, instead of the jet they were considering. In July 2013, Morales's jet was forced to land in Austria after the US pressured Italy, France, and Spain to deny the jet access to their airspace over false rumours Snowden was on board. Assange said the grounding "reveals the true nature of the relationship between Western Europe and the United States" as "a phone call from U.S. intelligence was enough to close the airspace to a booked presidential flight, which has immunity". Assange advised Snowden that he would be safest in Russia which was better able to protect its borders than Venezuela, Brazil or Ecuador. In 2015, Maria Luisa Ramos, the Bolivian ambassador to Russia, accused Assange of putting Morales' life at risk. Assange stated that he regretted what happened but that "[w]e can't predict that other countries engage in some ... unprecedented criminal operation". Assange stood for the Australian Senate in Victoria in the 2013 Australian federal election and launched the WikiLeaks Party after announcing his candidacy but failed to win a seat. Assange said that Prime Minister Julia Gillard's attacks on WikiLeaks contributed to his decision to run for the Senate, and that if he won the seat the US would end the grand jury investigation against him and the British government would follow suit because of "the political costs". Assange's statement was interpreted to indicate that had been one of Assange's major aims in launching his Senate campaign. Assange said he could be described as a libertarian, and that he would use parliamentary privilege to overcome court-imposed gag orders. He also said it was important to protect people and small businesses from large corporations and government, and that there were "strong arguments on all sides" of issues like euthanasia and same-sex marriage. The party experienced internal dissent over its governance and electoral tactics, including a controversial 2013 preference deal. According to leaked emails, Assange was behind the preference deal, and attempted to give himself veto rights and to turn the party's internal National Council into a rubber stamp for decisions taken by individual candidates. He also suggested that he was entitled to make himself the president of the party because he had founded it, although there is no leader or president under the WikiLeaks Party constitution. After the 2013 election, Assange said he thought he would try again for a Senate seat in three or six years, and that the WikiLeaks Party would continue. Assange said he would stand for the 2014 special election in Western Australia, but the Australian Electoral Commission ruled Assange was ineligible. The party was deregistered due to low membership numbers in 2015. According to Assange, Bank of America blocked donations he tried to make to the WikiLeaks Party. Documents provided by Edward Snowden showed that in 2012 and 2013 the New Zealand government worked to establish a secret mass surveillance programme which it called "Operation Speargun". On 15 September 2014 while campaigning for Kim Dotcom, Assange appeared via remote video link on his town hall meeting held in Auckland, which discussed the programme. Assange said the Snowden documents showed that he had been a target of the programme and that "Operation Speargun" represented "an extreme, bizarre, Orwellian future that is being constructed secretly in New Zealand". In 2014, the company hired to monitor Assange warned Ecuador's government that he was "intercepting and gathering information from the embassy and the people who worked there" and that he had compromised the embassy's communications system, which WikiLeaks called "an anonymous libel aligned with the current UK-US government onslaught against Mr Assange". According to El País, a November 2014 UC Global report said that a briefcase with a listening device was found in a room occupied by Assange. The UC Global report said that proved "the suspicion that he is listening in on diplomatic personnel, in this case against the ambassador and the people around him, in an effort to obtain privileged information that could be used to maintain his status in the embassy." Ambassador Falconí said Assange was evasive when asked about the briefcase. On 3 July 2015, Paris newspaper Le Monde published an open letter from Assange to French President François Hollande in which Assange urged the French government to grant him refugee status. In response to this letter, Hollande said: "France cannot act on his request. The situation of Mr Assange does not present an immediate danger." In September 2016 and again on 12 January 2017, WikiLeaks tweeted that if President Obama granted Chelsea Manning clemency, Assange would agree to US extradition. After commuting Manning's sentence on 17 January 2017, Obama stated that Assange's offer had not been a consideration and WikiLeaks tweeted that Assange was "still happy" to agree to extradition if his rights were respected despite Obama's statement. Assange said the decision to grant Manning clemency was an attempt to "make life hard" for Assange and make him look like a liar. One of WikiLeaks' lawyers, Melinda Taylor, said Assange would stand by the offer, and WikiLeaks tweets suggested he was ready for extradition and Assange said "I stand by everything I said including the offer to go to the United States if Chelsea Manning’s sentence was commuted". Assange faced pressure to agree to extradition, but retreated from the offer. WikiLeaks lawyers Melinda Taylor and Barry Pollack said that the clemency didn't meet Assange's conditions and Manning should have been released immediately. On 19 May 2017, Assange emerged on the embassy's balcony and told a crowd that, despite no longer facing a Swedish sex investigation, he would remain inside the embassy to avoid extradition to the United States. During the 2016 U.S. presidential campaign, Assange was critical of both Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton. In February 2016, Assange wrote: "Hillary lacks judgment and will push the United States into endless, stupid wars which spread terrorism. ... she certainly should not become president of the United States". Before the election, WikiLeaks was approached by Cambridge Analytica CEO Alexander Nix about releasing missing Clinton emails. Assange rejected the request and the Daily Beast reported that he replied he preferred to do the work on his own. In an Election Day statement, Assange said that "The Democratic and Republican candidates have both expressed hostility towards whistleblowers". On 22 July 2016, WikiLeaks released emails and documents from the Democratic National Committee (DNC), in which the DNC seemingly presented ways of undercutting Clinton's competitor Bernie Sanders and showed apparent favouritism towards Clinton. The release led to the resignation of DNC chairwoman Debbie Wasserman Schultz and an apology to Sanders from the DNC. The New York Times wrote that Assange had timed the release to coincide with the 2016 Democratic National Convention because he believed Clinton had pushed for his indictment and he regarded her as a "liberal war hawk". On 7 October WikiLeaks began publishing emails from Clinton campaign chairman John Podesta. On 15 October, The Ecuadorian government severed Assange's Internet connection from 15 October until December because of election interference. According to surveillance reports of Assange provided by UC Global, on 19 October, associates of Assange removed boxes covered with blankets and about 100 hard drives from the embassy. In November 2017, WikiLeaks asked Donald Trump Jr. to share a WikiLeaks tweet with the made-up quote "Can't we just drone this guy?" which the website True Pundit claimed that Hillary Clinton had made about Assange. After the election, WikiLeaks and Assange also requested that the president-elect push Australia to appoint Assange as ambassador to the US. Cybersecurity experts attributed the attack on the DNC server to the Russian government and 12 Russian GRU military intelligence agents were later indicted for the attack. The Senate Intelligence Committee reported that "WikiLeaks actively sought, and played, a key role in the Russian intelligence campaign and very likely knew it was assisting a Russian intelligence influence effort." According to the Mueller report, the Russian campaign shared these mails using the pseudonym Guccifer 2.0 with WikiLeaks and other entities. The investigation also unearthed communications between Guccifer 2.0 and WikiLeaks in which they talked about the release of the material. When asked about Guccifer 2.0's leaks, Assange said "These look very much like they're from the Russians. But in some ways, they look very amateur, and almost look too much like the Russians." In interviews, Assange repeatedly said that the Russian government was not the source of the DNC and Podesta emails, and accused the Clinton campaign of "a kind of neo-McCarthy hysteria" about Russian involvement. On the eve of the election, Assange addressed the criticism he had received for publishing Clinton material, saying that WikiLeaks publishes original "material given to us if it is of political, diplomatic, historical or ethical importance" and that it had never received any original information on Trump, Jill Stein, or Gary Johnson's campaign. In a July 2016 interview on Dutch television, Assange hinted that DNC staffer Seth Rich was the source of the DNC emails and that Rich had been killed as a result. Seeking clarification, the interviewer asked Assange whether Rich's killing was "simply a murder," to which Assange answered, "No. There's no finding. So, I'm suggesting that our sources take risks, and they become concerned to see things occurring like that." WikiLeaks offered a $20,000 reward for information about his murder and wrote: "We treat threats toward any suspected source of WikiLeaks with extreme gravity. This should not be taken to imply that Seth Rich was a source to WikiLeaks or to imply that his murder is connected to our publications." Assange's comments set off a spike in attention to the murder. Assange's statements lent credibility and visibility to a conspiracy theory that had up to the point been limited to the fringe parts of the Internet. According to the Mueller investigation, Assange falsely implied that Rich was the source ostensibly to obscure the fact that Russian military intelligence was the source, and Assange received the emails when Rich was already dead and continued to confer with the Russian hackers to coordinate the release of the material. In March 2017, WikiLeaks began releasing the largest leak of CIA documents in history, codenamed Vault 7. The documents included details of the CIA's hacking capabilities and software tools used to break into smartphones, computers and other Internet-connected devices. In April, CIA director Mike Pompeo called WikiLeaks "a non-state hostile intelligence service often abetted by state actors like Russia". According to former intelligence officials, in the wake of the Vault 7 leaks, the CIA talked about kidnapping Assange from Ecuador's London embassy, and some senior officials discussed his potential assassination. Yahoo! News found "no indication that the most extreme measures targeting Assange were ever approved." Some of its sources said that they had alerted House and Senate intelligence committees to the plans that Pompeo and others was suggesting. In October 2021, Assange's lawyers introduced the alleged plot during a hearing of the High Court of Justice in London as it considered the U.S. appeal of a lower court's ruling that Assange could not be extradited to face charges in the U.S. In 2022 the Spanish courts summoned Pompeo as a witness to testify on the alleged plans. On 6 June 2017, Assange supported NSA leaker Reality Winner, who had been arrested three days earlier, by tweeting "Acts of non-elite sources communicating knowledge should be strongly encouraged". On 16 August 2017, US Republican congressman Dana Rohrabacher visited Assange and told him that Trump would pardon him on condition that he would agree to say that Russia was not involved in the 2016 Democratic National Committee email leaks. At his extradition hearings in 2020, Assange's defence team alleged in court that this offer was made "on instructions from the president". Trump and Rohrabacher subsequently said they had never spoken about the offer and Rohrabacher said he had made the offer on his own initiative. In late August 2017, Assange became involved in the Catalonia independence movement. Assange was seen as the independence movement's chief international spokesman and according to an independent analysis confirmed by Fairfax Media, he was responsible for more than 25% of all Twitter traffic under the hashtag #Catalonia before the 2017 Catalan independence referendum. Assange disseminated messages and disinformation supporting the movement and he was forced to delete several fake or misleading images he had shared on Twitter. Some of his statements in tweets and radio interviews on Catalonia confused people with each other or fictional characters, and others made distorted or exaggerated claims. In September, Assange offered a reward for information on the use of Spanish security forces during the referendum. In November 2017, Assange met with two key supporters of the independence movement, Oriol Soler and Arnau Grinyó, which caused backlash from the Spanish government. The Spanish government said that Assange was spreading information that was "at odds with reality" and the Ecuadorian government warned Assange against commenting on other countries’ policies. In December 2017, Spanish Foreign Minister Alfonso Dastis said Assange was "trying to interfere and manipulate" in Catalonia. Assange stated that, while he did not have a position on the outcome of the Catalan independence referendum, he believed that Catalans had the right to self-determination. In the lead up to the referendum, he provided Catalans instructions on how to communicate and organise through secure channels and historical background on the Catalan independence movement. When the Spanish Government disabled voting apps, Assange tweeted instructions on how Catalans could use other apps to find out information about voting. Assange's actions upset the Spanish government, leading to concerns in Ecuador, which soon after cut off Assange's internet and stopped his access to visitors. In January 2020, the Catalan Dignity Commission awarded Assange its 2019 Dignity Prize to "[recognise] his efforts to correct misreporting of events and to provide live video updates to the world of the peaceful Catalan protesters and the brutal crackdown on them by Spanish police". Ecuador granted Assange citizenship in December 2017, and on the 19th approved a "special designation in favor of Mr. Julian Assange so that he can carry out functions at the Ecuadorean Embassy in Russia" with a monthly salary of $2,000. On the 21st, Britain's Foreign Office wrote that it did not recognise Assange as a diplomat, and that he did not have "any type of privileges and immunities under the Vienna Convention." The citizenship was revoked in July 2021 over unpaid fees and problems in the naturalisation papers, which allegedly had multiple inconsistencies, different signatures, and the possible alteration of documents. Assange's lawyer said the decision had been made without due process, but Ecuador's Foreign Ministry said the Pichincha Court for Contentious Administrative Matters had "acted independently and followed due process in a case that took place during the previous government and that was raised by the same previous government." In January 2018, Sean Hannity's Twitter account was temporarily deleted and Assange sent an account impersonating the Fox News host messages offering "news" on Mark Warner, a senior Democrat senator investigating Trump-Russia links. Assange asked the fake Hannity to contact him about it on "other channels". In February 2018, after Sweden had suspended its investigation, Assange brought two legal actions, arguing that Britain should drop its arrest warrant for him as it was "no longer right or proportionate to pursue him" and the arrest warrant for breaching bail had lost its "purpose and its function". In both cases, Senior District Judge Emma Arbuthnot ruled that the arrest warrant should remain in place. In March 2018, Assange used social media to criticise Germany's arrest of Catalonian separatist leader Carles Puigdemont. He also tweeted that Britain was about to conduct a propaganda war against Russia relating to the Poisoning of Sergei and Yulia Skripal. On 28 March 2018, Ecuador responded by cutting Assange's internet connection. Ecuador said he had broken a commitment "not to issue messages that might interfere with other states" and Assange said he was "exercising his right to free speech". In May 2018, The Guardian reported that Ecuador devised plans to help Assange escape should British police forcibly enter the embassy to seize him. In July 2018, President Moreno said that he was talking to the British government about how to end Assange's asylum and guarantee his life would be safe. On 11 October 2018, Ecuador partially restored his communications. On 16 October 2018, members of Congress from the United States House Committee on Foreign Affairs wrote an open letter to President Moreno, which described Assange as a dangerous criminal. It stated that progress between the US and Ecuador in economic cooperation, counter-narcotics assistance, and the return of a USAID mission to Ecuador depended on Assange being handed over to the authorities. On 19 October 2018, Assange sued the government of Ecuador for violating his "fundamental rights and freedoms" by threatening to remove his protection and cut off his access to the outside world, refusing him visits from journalists and human rights organisations and installing signal jammers to prevent phone calls and internet access. An Ecuadorian judge ruled against him, saying that requiring Assange to pay for his Internet use and clean up after his cat did not violate his right to asylum. On 21 December 2018, the UN's Working Group on Arbitrary Detention urged the UK to let Assange leave the embassy freely. In February 2019, the parliament of Geneva passed a motion demanding that the Swiss government extend asylum to Assange. In March 2019, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights rejected a complaint submitted by Assange asking the Ecuadorian government to "ease the conditions that it had imposed on his residence" at the embassy and to protect him from extradition to the US. It also requested US prosecutors unseal criminal charges that had been filed against him. The commission rejected his complaint. After Julian Assange was granted asylum and entered the Ecuadorian embassy in London, new CCTV cameras were installed. The Ecuadorian security service hired UC Global to provide security for the embassy. Without the knowledge of the Ecuadorian security service, employees of UC Global made detailed recordings of Assange's daily activities, interactions with embassy staff, and visits from his legal team and others. New cameras with microphones were installed in December 2017, and the installation of microphones in fire extinguishers and the women's bathroom was ordered. Other microphones were installed in decorations in the embassy. UC Global's director arranged for the United States Central Intelligence Agency to have immediate access to the recordings. The embassy staff had removed the toilet in the women's bathroom in June 2012 at Assange's request so he could sleep in the quiet room, which he also used to meet with his lawyers. Then Ecuadorian ambassador to the UK, Juan Falconí Puig, was unaware of the operation until a bill went to the embassy in May 2015 and then Ecuadorian foreign minister Ricardo Patiño had to explain the situation to the ambassador. According to David Morales, the surveillance was also ordered by the former Ecuadorian ambassador in London, Carlos Abad. On 20 June 2019, El Pais revealed the existence of the surveillance recordings and reports about Assange by UC Global. On 7 August 2019, Spain's High Court opened proceedings inquiring about the surveillance of Assange after he filed a complaint that accused UC Global of violating his privacy and client-attorney privileges as well as committing misappropriation, bribery and money laundering. According to testimony by former employees, the material on Assange was handed over to the CIA by a member of the security service of Sheldon Adelson, the owner of the Las Vegas Sands. According to court papers seen by the Associated Press, it was alleged that Morales had passed the recordings to Zohar Lahav, described by Assange's lawyers as a security officer at Las Vegas Sands. In 2022, four associates of Assange filed a lawsuit against the CIA alleging their civil rights were violated when they were recorded as part of the surveillance of Assange. In a December 2023 ruling allowing the lawsuit to proceed and rejecting a CIA motion to dismiss, the judge trimmed the scope of the suit by rejecting some portions. On 11 April 2019, Ecuador revoked his asylum, he was arrested for failing to appear in court, and carried out of the Embassy by members of the London Metropolitan Police. Following his arrest, the US revealed a previously sealed 2018 US indictment in which Assange was charged with conspiracy to commit computer intrusion related to his involvement with Chelsea Manning and WikiLeaks. On 23 May 2019, a US grand jury added 17 espionage charges also related to his involvement with Chelsea Manning, making a total of 18 federal charges against Assange in the US. On 25 June 2020 a new indictment was filed alleging that since 2009, Assange had attempted to recruit hackers and system administrators at conferences around the world and conspired with hackers including members of LulzSec and Anonymous. The new indictment described Assange's alleged efforts to recruit system administrators, Assange and WikiLeaks' role in helping Snowden flee the US, and their use of Snowden as a recruitment tool, and WikiLeaks' exploiting a vulnerability in the United States Congress' system to access and publish the Congressional Research Service reports. Assange's defenders have responded to U.S. accusations, describing him as a journalist who did nothing more than publish leaked information that embarrassed the U.S. government. On 2 May 2019, the first hearing was held in London into the U.S. request for Assange's extradition. When asked by Judge Snow whether he consented to extradition, Assange replied, "I do not wish to surrender myself for extradition for doing journalism that has won many, many awards and protected many people". On 13 June, British Home Secretary Sajid Javid said he had signed the extradition order. Towards the end of 2019, Judge Emma Arbuthnot, who had presided at several of the extradition hearings, withdrew from the case for what she told Private Eye magazine was a "perception of bias" after reports about her family's connections to the intelligence services and defence industries. Vanessa Baraitser was appointed as the presiding judge. On 21 October 2019, Assange appeared for a case management hearing at the court. When Judge Baraitser asked about his understanding of the proceedings, Assange replied: I don't understand how this is equitable. This superpower had 10 years to prepare for this case and I can't access my writings. It's very difficult where I am to do anything but these people have unlimited resources. They are saying journalists and whistleblowers are enemies of the people. They have unfair advantages dealing with documents. They [know] the interior of my life with my psychologist. In February 2020, the court heard legal arguments. Assange's lawyers contended that he had been charged with political offences and therefore could not be extradited. The hearings were delayed for months due to requests for extra time from the prosecution and the defence and due to the COVID-19 pandemic. In March, the International Bar Association's Human Rights Institute, IBAHRI, condemned the mistreatment of Assange in the extradition trial. Assange appeared in court on 7 September 2020, facing the espionage indictment with 18 counts. Judge Baraitser denied motions by Assange's barristers to dismiss the new charges or to adjourn to better respond. During the hearing, Assange interrupted the US government's lawyer as he spoke during cross-examination of a witness, shouting "this is nonsense". Judge Baraitser warned Assange not to interrupt proceedings and said if he did so again he would be expelled from the courtroom. Some witnesses who testified in September, such as Daniel Ellsberg, did so remotely via video link due to COVID-19 restrictions. Technical problems caused extensive delays. Torture victim Khaled el-Masri, who was originally requested as a defence witness, had his testimony reduced to a written statement. Other witnesses testified that the conditions of imprisonment, which would be likely to worsen upon extradition to the U.S., placed Assange at a high risk of depression and suicide which was exacerbated by his Asperger syndrome. During the court proceedings the defence drew attention to a prison service report stating that a hidden razor blade had been found by a prison officer during a search of Assange's cell. During the proceedings it was also revealed that Assange had contacted the Samaritans phone service on numerous occasions. A forensic psychiatrist for the prosecution said the risk of suicide was managed and that Assange was "self-dramatising or hyperbolic approach in describing (his medical) symptoms". Patrick Eller, a former forensics examiner with the U.S. Army Criminal Investigation Command, testified that Assange did not crack and could not have cracked the password mentioned in the U.S. indictment, as Chelsea Manning had intentionally sent only a portion of the password's hash. Moreover, Eller stated that password cracking was a common topic of discussion among other soldiers stationed at Forward Operating Base Hammer, suggesting that Manning's message was unrelated to the classified documents which were already in her possession. Testimony on 30 September revealed new allegations surrounding the surveillance of the Ecuadorian embassy by UC Global. A former UC Global employee, who spoke anonymously, fearing reprisals, stated that the firm undertook "an increasingly sophisticated operation" after it was put into contact with the Trump administration by Sheldon Adelson. According to the employee, intelligence agents discussed plans to break into the embassy to kidnap or poison Assange and attempted to obtain the DNA of a baby who was believed to be Assange's child. On 4 January 2021, Judge Baraitser ruled that Assange could not be extradited to the United States, citing concerns about his mental health and the risk of suicide in a US prison. She sided with the US on every other point, including whether the charges constituted political offences and whether he was entitled to freedom of speech protections. On 6 January 2021, Assange was denied bail on the grounds that he was a flight risk, pending an appeal by the United States. The US prosecutors appealed against the denial of extradition on 15 January. Following the decision by Judge Baraitser that it would be "oppressive to extradite [Assange] to the United States," in July 2021 the Biden administration assured the Crown Prosecution Services that "Mr Assange will not be subject to SAMs or imprisoned at ADX (unless he were to do something subsequent to the offering of these assurances that meets the tests for the imposition of SAMs or designation to ADX)". The United States also assured that it "will consent to Mr Assange being transferred to Australia to serve any custodial sentence imposed on him." An Amnesty International expert on national security and human rights in Europe said, "Those are not assurances at all. It's not that difficult to look at those assurances and say: these are inherently unreliable, it promises to do something and then reserves the right to break the promise". In June 2021 Icelandic newspaper Stundin published details of an interview with Sigurdur Ingi Thordarson, the witness identified as "Teenager" in the U.S. Justice Department's case against Assange. In the interview Thordarson, who had received a promise of immunity from prosecution in return for co-operating with the FBI, stated he had fabricated allegations used in the U.S. indictment. The Washington Post said Thordarson's testimony was not used as the basis for charges but for information on Assange's contact with Chelsea Manning. A year previously The Washington Post said the superseding indictment broadened the case against Assange to that he was a hacker not a publisher and said evidence for that involved Thordarson. In August 2021 in the High Court, Lord Justice Holroyde ruled that Judge Baraitser may have given too much weight to what Holroyde called "a misleading report" by an expert witness for the defence, psychiatrist Prof Michael Kopelman, and granted permission for the contested risk of suicide to be raised on the appeal. In October 2021, the High Court held a two-day appeal hearing presided over by Ian Burnett, Baron Burnett of Maldon, Lord Chief Justice of England and Wales, and Lord Justice Holroyde. In opening the U.S. as appellant argued that Assange's health issues were less severe than claimed during the initial extradition hearing and that his depression was moderate rather than severe. They also drew attention to binding assurances given by the U.S. concerning his proposed treatment in custody and pointed to the lower rate of suicides in prisons in the U.S. compared to the UK. The lawyer also made four binding assurances concerning his proposed treatment in U.S. custody, including an agreement to send Assange to his home country of Australia to serve the prison sentence and not to incarcerate him in super-maximum security prison or solitary confinement. In response, Edward Fitzgerald QC drew attention to a Yahoo! News report that the CIA had plotted to poison, abduct or assassinate Assange. Fitzgerald argued that "there are great grounds for fearing what will be done to him" if extradited to the U.S. He urged the court "not to trust [the] assurances" of the "same government" alleged to have plotted Assange's killing. According to his partner Stella Moris, Assange had a mini-stroke on 27 October while sitting through the court hearing and was subsequently given anti-stroke medication. On 10 December 2021, the High Court ruled in favour of the United States. The Lord Chief Justice and Lord Justice Holroyde ruled that "if the assurances had been before the judge, she would have answered the relevant question differently" and allowed his extradition. The case was remitted to Westminster Magistrates' Court with the direction that it be sent to the Home Secretary Priti Patel for the final decision on whether to extradite Assange. On 24 January 2022 Assange was granted permission to petition the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom for an appeal hearing, but in March the court refused to allow the appeal, saying that Assange had not raised an arguable point of law. In an auction of non-fungible tokens on 9 February 2022 organised by Pak collaborating with Assange, an NFT artwork called "Clock" by him was bought by a decentralised autonomous organisation ("DAO") of over 10,000 supporters called AssangeDAO and raised 16,593 of the cryptocurrency ether, worth about $52.8m at the time, for Assange's legal defence. "Clock" updates each day to show how long Assange has been imprisoned. On 20 April 2022, Chief Magistrate Paul Goldspring of the Westminster Magistrates Court formally approved the extradition of Assange to the US and referred the decision to the Home Secretary Priti Patel. On 17 June 2022, Patel approved the extradition. On 1 July 2022, Assange lodged an appeal against the extradition in the High Court. On 22 August 2022, Assange's legal team lodged a Perfected Grounds of Appeal before the High Court challenging District Judge Vanessa Baraitser's decision of 4 January 2021 with new evidence. Assange also made a further appeal to the European Court of Human Rights, but on 13 December 2022, this appeal was declared inadmissible. In April 2023, European unions and associations of journalists from Portugal, Armenia, Great Britain and Greece granted Julian Assange honorary membership. The European Federation of Journalists (EFJ) and its affiliates joined the International Federation of Journalists (IFJ) to appeal to US and UK authorities to release Julian Assange and drop all charges. The EFJ was concerned about the impact of Assange's continued detention on media freedom and the rights of all journalists globally and urged European governments to work to secure Assange's release. In May 2023 Assange wrote a letter to King Charles III saying he was a political prisoner and requesting the King visit him in prison. In May 2023, Assange's lawyers said they were open to a plea deal but that "no crime has been committed and the facts involved in the case don't support a crime". In June 2023, The Age reported that the FBI was seeking to gather new evidence in the case, based on a request from the FBI to interview Andrew O'Hagan. O'Hagan refused the request and said to he "would not give a witness statement against a fellow journalist". On 6 June 2023, the High Court in London dismissed Assange's appeal. Justice Jonathan Swift ruled that "none of the four grounds of appeal raises any properly arguable point". In a second ruling, Justice Swift denied Assange permission to challenge a January 2021 ruling by Judge Baraitser. In what was described as a “last-ditch” effort, a two day hearing in the High Court began on 20 February 2024 with Assange too ill to attend. Assange's legal team requested leave to appeal the extradition order signed by Home Secretary Patel in 2022. On 26 March, the judges issued a written judgment that was not a final decision. They sought assurances from the US government that Assange would be able to avail himself of the First Amendment, that he would not be prejudiced by his nationality, and that the death penalty would not be imposed. If these assurances were not forthcoming, Assange would be given leave to appeal. While there was support from some American journalism institutions and from bi-partisan politicians for Assange's arrest and indictment, several non-government organizations for press freedom condemned it and individuals, journalists, and activists have opposed his extradition. In 2019, The New York Times' Editorial Board warned that "The administration has begun well by charging Mr. Assange with an indisputable crime. But there is always a risk with this administration — one that labels the free press as “the enemy of the people” — that the prosecution of Mr. Assange could become an assault on the First Amendment and whistle-blowers." Kenneth Roth, executive director of Human Rights Watch, also warned, "The only thing standing between an Assange prosecution and a major threat to global media freedom is Britain." The same year, Reporters Without Borders said that the United Kingdom should refuse to extradite him because it would "set a dangerous precedent for journalists, whistleblowers, and other journalistic sources that the US may wish to pursue in the future." The incoming Australian Labor government of Anthony Albanese indicated that it opposes the continued prosecution of Assange and intended to pursue quiet diplomacy to prevent it. In July 2023, US Secretary of State Antony Blinken rejected the Australian government's position, saying that Assange faced serious charges. On 14 August 2023, the Sydney Morning Herald reported that the US ambassador to Australia Caroline Kennedy had "flagged" a plea deal for Assange. On 14 February 2024, the Australian House of Representatives passed a motion put forward by independent MP Andrew Wilkie calling for Assange's immediate release and return to Australia, by a vote of 86 to 42. The motion was supported by Albanese, his party, and parliament crossbenchers and only opposed by members of the Liberal-National Coalition. In 2024, The Guardian stated that they opposed the extradition of Assange for "the sake of his freedom – and ours," saying that it was "an iniquitous threat to journalism, with global implications". Simon Crowther, a representative of Amnesty International believes that if Assange is extradited to the U.S., “Journalists the world over are going to have to watch their back." There have been large political rallies in London, Rome, Brussels and Berlin opposing his extradition. German Chancellor Olaf Scholz commented on 4 March, while Assange's appeal was under consideration by the High Court, that "it would be good if the British courts granted him the necessary protection". Assange received the honorary citizenship from major Italian cities such as Rome, Naples, Bari and the political asylum from Perugia. Wikiquote has quotations related to Julian Assange. In his 2012 book Cypherpunks: Freedom and the future of the internet, Assange wrote that his fundamental principle was "the traditional cypherpunk juxtaposition ... privacy for the weak, transparency for the powerful". He is a strong advocate for the use of encryption which he says should be used by individuals to protect themselves against the intrusions of governments, corporations and surveillance agencies and by states to protect themselves against Western imperialism. In 2012 Assange hosted World Tomorrow show, broadcast by Russian network RT. He has written a few short pieces, including "State and terrorist conspiracies" (2006), "Conspiracy as governance" (2006), "The hidden curse of Thomas Paine" (2008), "What's new about WikiLeaks?" (2011), and the foreword to Cypherpunks (2012). He also contributed research to Suelette Dreyfus's Underground (1997), and received a co-writer credit for the Calle 13 song "Multi Viral" (2013). In 2010, Assange said he was a libertarian and that "WikiLeaks is designed to make capitalism more free and ethical" and to expose injustice, not to be neutral. In 2013, Assange said that he is the "number three" hacker in the world. In 2017, Assange said WikiLeaks had a perfect record and that only 2 per cent of mainstream journalists were "credible". In 2010, Assange received a deal for his autobiography worth at least US$1.3 million. In 2011, Canongate Books published Julian Assange, The Unauthorised Autobiography. Assange immediately disavowed it and accused Canongate of breaching their contract by publishing, against his wishes, a draft that Assange considered "a narrative and literary interpretation of a conversation between the writer and me". Assange added that it was "a work in progress" and "entirely uncorrected or fact-checked by me." In 2014, O'Hagan wrote about his experience as Assange's ghostwriter. "The story of his life mortified him and sent him scurrying for excuses," O'Hagan recalled. "He didn't want to do the book. He hadn't from the beginning." Colin Robinson, co-publisher of Assange's 2012 book Cypherpunks, criticised O'Hagan for largely ignoring the bigger issues about which Assange had been warning and noted that O'Hagan's piece "is no part of an organised dirty tricks campaign. But by focusing as it does on Assange's character defects, it ends up serving much the same purpose." Assange's book When Google Met WikiLeaks was published by OR Books in 2014. It recounts when Google CEO Eric Schmidt requested a meeting with Assange, while he was on bail in rural Norfolk, UK. Schmidt was accompanied by Jared Cohen, Scott Malcomson, and Lisa Shields, vice-president of the Council on Foreign Relations. Excerpts were published on the Newsweek website, while Assange participated in a Q&A event on Reddit website. In 2011, an article in Private Eye by its editor, Ian Hislop, recounted a phone call he had received from Assange, who was especially angry about Private Eye's report that Israel Shamir, an Assange associate in Russia, was a Holocaust denier. Assange suggested, Hislop wrote, "that British journalists, including the editor of The Guardian, were engaged in a Jewish-led conspiracy to smear his organization." Assange responded that Hislop had "distorted, invented or misremembered almost every significant claim and phrase." He added, "We treasure our strong Jewish support and staff, just as we treasure the support from pan-Arab democracy activists and others who share our hope for a just world." While still a teenager, Assange married a woman, also in her teens, named Teresa, and in 1989 they had a son named Daniel. The couple separated and disputed custody of Daniel until 1999. According to Assange's mother, his brown hair turned white during the time of the custody dispute. In 2006, Assange created a dating profile on the website OkCupid with the username Harry Harrison. Assange described himself as a "passionate, and often pig headed activist intellectual" who was "directing a consuming, dangerous human rights project" and looking for a "siren for [a] love affair, children and occasional criminal conspiracy". The profile was verified by OkCupid CEO Sam Yagan and last accessed in December 2006. Daniel Domscheit-Berg said in his 2011 memoir Inside WikiLeaks that Assange said he had fathered several children. In an email in January 2007, Assange mentioned having a daughter. In 2015, in an open letter to French President Hollande, Assange revealed he had another child. He said that this child, his youngest, was French, as was the child's mother. He also said his family had faced death threats and harassment because of his work, forcing them to change identities and reduce contact with him. In 2015, Assange began a relationship with Stella Moris, his South African-born lawyer. They were engaged in 2017 and have two sons, born in 2017 and 2019. Moris revealed their relationship in 2020 because she feared for Assange's life. On 7 November 2021, the couple said they were preparing legal action against Deputy UK Prime Minister Dominic Raab and Jenny Louis, governor of Belmarsh Prison. Assange and Moris accused Raab and Louis of denying them and their two children's human rights by blocking and delaying their marriage. On 11 November, the prison service said it had granted permission for the couple to marry in Belmarsh Prison, and on 23 March 2022 the couple married. Assange is the cousin of Australian-British academic and former Iranian hostage Kylie Moore-Gilbert. Views on Julian Assange have been given by a number of public figures, including journalists, well-known whistleblowers, activists and world leaders. They range from laudatory statements to calls for his execution. Various journalists and free speech advocates have praised Assange for his work and dedication to free speech. Some former colleagues have criticised his work habits, editorial decisions and personality. After the 2016 US presidential election, there was debate about his motives and his ties to Russia. After Assange's arrest in 2019, journalists and commenters debated about if Assange was a journalist. Assange has been awarded multiple awards for journalism and publishing. 2008, The Economist New Media Award 2009, Amnesty International UK New Media Award for Kenya: The Cry of Blood—Extra Judicial Killings and Disappearances 2010, Time Person of the Year, Reader's Choice 2010, Sam Adams Award 2010, Le Monde Readers' Choice Award for Person of the Year 2010, "Rockstar of the year" by the Italian edition of Rolling Stone 2010, Honorary member, Media, Entertainment and Arts Alliance 2011, Free Dacia Award 2011, Sydney Peace Foundation Gold Medal 2011, Walkley Award 2011, Martha Gellhorn Prize for Journalism 2011, Voltaire Award for Free Speech 2012, Big Brother Award Italy 2012 "Hero of Privacy" 2013, Global Exchange Human Rights Award, People's Choice 2013, Yoko Ono Lennon Courage Award for the Arts 2013, New York Festivals World's Best TV & Films Silver World Medal 2013 The Brazilian Press Association Human Rights Award 2014, Union of Journalists in Kazakhstan Top Prize 2019, GUE/NGL Galizia prize 2019, Gavin MacFadyen award 2019, Catalan Dignity Prize 2020, Stuttgart Peace Prize 2021, Honorary member, PEN Centre Germany 2023, Konrad Wolf Prize 2023, Political asylum refugee status by Italian city Perugia 2024, Honorary citizen of Rome Underground: Tales of Hacking, Madness and Obsession on the Electronic Frontier (1997). Cypherpunks: Freedom and the Future of the Internet. OR Books, 2012. ISBN 978-1-939293-00-8. When Google Met WikiLeaks. OR Books, 2014. ISBN 978-1-939293-57-2. The WikiLeaks Files: The World According to The US Empire. By WikiLeaks. Verso Books, 2015. ISBN 978-1-78168-874-8 (with an Introduction by Assange). As himself The War You Don't See (2010) The Simpsons (2012) (cameo; episode "At Long Last Leave") Citizenfour (2014) The Yes Men Are Revolting (2014) Terminal F/Chasing Edward Snowden (2015) Asylum (2016) Risk (2016) Architects of Denial (2017) The New Radical (2017) About Assange The Trust Fall (2023) Biography portal Australia portal Internet portal Politics portal Law portal List of people who took refuge in a diplomatic mission List of hackers List of Amnesty International-designated prisoners of conscience Ola Bini, who was arrested in April 2019 in Ecuador apparently due to his association with Assange and WikiLeaks. He was acquitted of all charges in January 2023. Thomas A. Drake, former senior executive of the National Security Agency (NSA), and a whistleblower. Jeremy Hammond, who was summoned to appear before a Virginia federal grand jury which was investigating Assange. He was held in civil contempt of court after refusing to testify. Lauri Love, who in 2018 won an appeal in the High Court of England against extradition to the United States Gary McKinnon, whose extradition to the United States was blocked in 2012 by UK Home Secretary Theresa May Graham Phillips, British journalist sanctioned by UK Government in 2022 Stratfor email leak, leaked emails from geopolitical intelligence company Stratfor in which staff discuss strategies for dealing with Assange McGreal, Chris (5 April 2010). "Wikileaks reveals video showing US air crew shooting down Iraqi civilians". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 26 June 2011. Retrieved 15 December 2010. "WikiLeaks names one-time spokesman as editor-in-chief". Associated Press. Retrieved 26 September 2018. "The Julian Assange Show: Cypherpunks Uncut (p.1)" on YouTube "USA must drop charges against Julian Assange". Amnesty International. Retrieved 21 February 2024. Lagan, Bernard (10 April 2010). "International man of mystery". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 17 March 2014. Leigh, David; Harding, Luke Daniel (30 January 2011). "Julian Assange: the teen hacker who became insurgent in information war". The Guardian. Retrieved 17 March 2014. "Julian Assange: the hacker who created WikiLeaks". Christian Science Monitor. ISSN 0882-7729. Retrieved 13 February 2023. "Wikileaks' Assange faces international arrest warrant". BBC News. 20 November 2010. Bowater, Donna (20 June 2012). "Julian Assange faces re-arrest over breaching his bail condition by seeking asylum in Ecuador". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Neuman, William; Ayala, Maggy (16 August 2012). "Ecuador Grants Asylum to Assange, Defying Britain". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 27 June 2021. Wallace, Arturo (16 August 2012). "Julian Assange: Why Ecuador is offering asylum". BBC. Retrieved 16 May 2019. Dorling, Philip (26 March 2012). "Assange: what I'll do in the Senate". The Age. Retrieved 9 October 2023. "Julian Assange: WikiLeaks party will continue". The Guardian. 8 September 2013. "Julian Assange: Sweden drops rape investigation". BBC. 19 November 2019. Retrieved 11 January 2022. Ma, Alexandra (14 April 2019). "Assange's arrest was designed to make sure he didn't press a mysterious panic button he said would bring dire consequences for Ecuador". Business Insider. Retrieved 14 April 2019. "Police arrest Julian Assange at Ecuadorian Embassy in London". CNN. 11 April 2019. Retrieved 11 April 2019. "Julian Assange jailed over bail breach". BBC News. 1 May 2019. "WikiLeaks Founder Charged in Computer Hacking Conspiracy". www.justice.gov. 11 April 2019. Retrieved 9 January 2023. "WikiLeaks Founder Julian Assange Charged in 18-Count Superseding Indictment". www.justice.gov. 23 May 2019. Retrieved 9 January 2023. "WikiLeaks Founder Charged in Superseding Indictment". www.justice.gov. 24 June 2020. Retrieved 9 January 2023. "WikiLeaks Founder Julian Assange Accused of Conspiring With LulzSec and Anonymous Hackers". Time. 25 June 2020. Retrieved 27 July 2023. Rebaza, Claudia; Fox, Kara (4 January 2021). "UK judge denies US request to extradite Julian Assange". CNN. Retrieved 4 January 2021. "UK judge denies bail for WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange". CNN. 6 January 2021. Retrieved 6 January 2021. Doherty, Ben (9 June 2023). "Julian Assange 'dangerously close' to US extradition after losing latest legal appeal". The Guardian. Retrieved 10 June 2023. Boylan, Patrick (18 October 2023). "Julian Assange made honorary citizen of Rome by the City Council today". Pressenza. Retrieved 30 March 2024. "Londra. «Julian Assange morirà se estradato negli Usa». E Roma gli dà la cittadinanza". www.avvenire.it (in Italian). 15 February 2024. Retrieved 30 March 2024. "Roma, l'Assemblea Capitolina ha detto sì: Assange è cittadino onorario della Capitale". Il Fatto Quotidiano (in Italian). Retrieved 30 March 2024. Kwek, Glenda (8 December 2010). "Magnet for trouble: how Assange went from simple island life to high-tech public enemy number one". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 16 March 2014. "Wikileaks founder Julian Assange a born and bred Queenslander". The Courier-Mail. 29 July 2010. Retrieved 16 March 2014. "Family notices". The Sydney Morning Herald. 10 March 1951. p. 44. Retrieved 17 March 2014. Leigh, David; Harding, Luke (2011). Wikileaks: Inside Julian Assange's War on Secrecy. Guardian Books. ISBN 978-0-85265-239-8. Guilliatt, Richard (15 June 2013). "For John Shipton, the Wikileaks Party isn't just a political cause". The Australian. Retrieved 16 March 2014. Manne, Robert (March 2011). "The cypherpunk revolutionary: Julian Assange". The Monthly. Archived from the original on 11 March 2022. Retrieved 23 March 2022.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) Khatchadourian, Raffi (7 June 2010). "No secrets: Julian Assange's mission for total transparency". The New Yorker. Retrieved 16 March 2014. "The secret life of Julian Assange". CNN. 2 December 2010. Archived from the original on 17 June 2013. Retrieved 16 March 2014. Feain, Dominic (29 July 2010). "WikiLeaks founder's Lismore roots". The Northern Star. Retrieved 16 March 2014. Assange, Julian (23 September 2011). "Julian Assange: 'We just kept moving'". The Independent. Retrieved 24 September 2011. Leif Meynell was a member of an Australian cult called The Family. Calabresi, Massimo (2 December 2010). "WikiLeaks' war on secrecy: truth's consequences". Time. Retrieved 16 March 2014. Obrist, Hans Ulrich (May 2011). "In conversation with Julian Assange, Part I". e-flux. Archived from the original on 7 May 2011. Retrieved 14 March 2014. "Jeremy Geia first Australian to interview Assange". Gilimbaa. 24 October 2012. Archived from the original on 26 January 2014. Retrieved 16 March 2014. Dreyfus, Suelette (1997). Underground: Tales of Hacking, Madness and Obsession on the Electronic Frontier. Mandarin. ISBN 1-86330-595-5. Pearce, Frazer (18 December 2010). "Assange studied at CQU". The Morning Bulletin. Retrieved 16 March 2014. "Meet the Aussie behind Wikileaks". Stuff. 7 August 2008. Retrieved 21 March 2014. Whyte, Sarah (6 December 2010). "Driven to dissent—like father, like son". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 23 March 2022. Harrell, Eben (26 July 2010). "Mystery Hacker: Who Is WikiLeaks Founder Julian Assange?". Time. ISSN 0040-781X. Retrieved 13 February 2023. Greenberg, Andy (2013). This machine kills secrets: Julian Assange, the cypherpunks, and their fight to empower whistleblowers. New York, [New York]: Plume book. ISBN 978-0-14-218049-5. "Julian Assange's very '90s contribution to Melbourne rave". ABC News. 14 September 2018. Retrieved 3 May 2023. "Julian Assange: the whistleblower". The Guardian. 13 July 2010. Retrieved 29 January 2023. "Julian Assange – DW – 12/01/2010". Deutsche Welle. Retrieved 25 February 2023. Greenberg, Andy. "Breaking Down the Hacking Case Against Julian Assange". Wired. ISSN 1059-1028. Retrieved 13 October 2022. "Julian Assange: the teen hacker who became insurgent in information war". The Guardian. 30 January 2011. Retrieved 13 October 2022. Porter, Henry (1 October 2011). "Julian Assange: The Unauthorised Autobiography – review". The Observer. ISSN 0029-7712. Retrieved 25 February 2023. "Julian Assange: From teen hacker to secrets leaker". NBC News. 13 December 2010. Retrieved 14 February 2023. Thomson, Keegan (24 November 2015). "Twelve of Australia's most notorious hackers". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 20 February 2023. "Wikileaks:Advisory Board – Wikileaks". 22 November 2007. Archived from the original on 22 November 2007. Retrieved 13 February 2023. Zetter, Kim. "Video: The Time Julian Assange Hacked the Pentagon". Wired. ISSN 1059-1028. Retrieved 13 October 2022. Kushner, David. "Click and Dagger: Inside WikiLeaks' Leak Factory". Mother Jones. Retrieved 13 February 2023. "The Man Behind Wikileaks: A Julian Assange Cheat Sheet". Vanity Fair. 26 July 2010. Retrieved 13 October 2022. Jenkins, Mark. "'We Steal Secrets': A Sidelong Look At WikiLeaks". NPR. Quinn, Karl (9 October 2012). "Police officer slams TV portrayal of Assange". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 27 August 2023. Savage, Luiza (13 December 2010). "Julian Assange: The man who exposed the world". Maclean's. Toronto: St. Joseph Communications. Wilentz, Sean (19 January 2014). "Would You Feel Differently About Snowden, Greenwald, and Assange If You Knew What They Really Thought?". The New Republic. ISSN 0028-6583. Retrieved 20 February 2023. Assange, Julian (21 September 2011). "Julian Assange: 'I am – like all hackers – a little bit autistic'". The Independent. Retrieved 13 February 2023. "WikiLeaks founder Assange faces new indictment in US". AP News. 24 June 2020. Retrieved 1 November 2023. Ball, James; Rusbridger, Alan; Brooke, Heather; Pilger, John; Stephens, Mark; Loach, Ken; Katz, Ian (24 August 2012). "Who is Julian Assange? By the people who know him best". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 1 November 2023. Rintoul, Stuart; Parnell, Sean (11 December 2010). "Julian Assange, wild child of free speech". The Australian. Archived from the original on 7 May 2018. Retrieved 17 March 2014. Guilliatt, Richard (30 May 2009). "Rudd Government blacklist hacker monitors police". The Australian. Archived from the original on 27 May 2012. Retrieved 17 March 2014. Weinberger, Sharon (22 December 2010). "Besides Julian Assange, Who Is Behind WikiLeaks?". AolNews. Archived from the original on 22 December 2010. Retrieved 2 July 2023. Perhaps the best-documented accounts of Assange come from 1990s Australian press reports, when he was charged for hacking that he did as a teenager in 1990 and 1991. Adams, David (6 May 1995). "Hackers 'Taunted Investigators'". The Age. Melbourne. p. 5. Julian Paul Assange, 23, of Ferntree Gully, is charged with 30 offences, including obtaining access to information, erasing data, altering data and defrauding Telecom. His committal proceedings began yesterday. Fowler, Andrew (2020). The Most Dangerous Man In The World: Julian Assange and WikiLeaks' Fight for Freedom (2nd ed.). Melbourne: Melbourne University Press. ISBN 978-0-522-87685-7. "Trial date set". The Age. 13 May 1995. p. 5. Assange, Julian (2011). Julian Assange: the unauthorised autobiography. Canongate. My case presented itself first to the Supreme Court - almost as a point of order, or as a case study, to help define the terms of the trial - and this allowed us to seek an understanding of what the charges meant. ... The Supreme Court, however, wanted to make a point to the County Courts that they should not send matters to them except in extreme circumstances. Wilson, Lauren (17 January 2011). "Assange's hacking offences laid bare". The Australian. Retrieved 31 March 2014. Lowe, Adrian (15 January 2011). "For lonely teenager Assange, a computer was his only friend". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 31 March 2014. "The most shocking revelations to come from WikiLeaks". au.news.yahoo.com. 3 October 2021. Retrieved 21 February 2023. Butcher, Steve (12 February 2011). "Assange helped our police catch child pornographers". The Age. Retrieved 17 March 2014. Le Grand, Cipe (12 February 2011). "Julian Assange helped crack Victorian kid porn ring". The Australian. Retrieved 3 January 2020. "suburbia public access network". 7 June 2008. Archived from the original on 7 June 2008. Retrieved 25 February 2023. "'Julian Assange ' posts – MARC". Archived from the original on 1 January 2016. Retrieved 4 October 2015. Leigh, David; Harding, Luke (2011). Wikileaks: inside Julian Assange's war on secrecy. New York: Public Affairs. ISBN 978-1-61039-061-3. Assange co-authored several free software programs as part of what would become the open source movement. (They included the Usenet caching software NNTPCache, and Surfraw, a command-line interface for web-based search engines.) Singel, Ryan (3 July 2008). "Immune to critics, secret-spilling WikiLeaks plans to save journalism ... and the world". Wired. Retrieved 17 March 2014. Dreyfus, Suelette (15 November 1999). "Network: This is just between us (and the spies)". The Independent. Retrieved 27 October 2019. Symington, Annabel (1 September 2009). "Exposed: Wikileaks' secrets". Wired. Retrieved 17 March 2014. "WikiLeaks – In Conversation with Julian Assange Part I". wikileaks.org. Retrieved 27 June 2023. Greenberg, Andy. "An Interview With WikiLeaks' Julian Assange". Forbes. Retrieved 2 July 2023. How did you start to approach your leak strategy? " "When we started Suburbia in 1993, I knew that bringing information to the people was very important. We facilitated many groups: We were the electronic printer if you like for many companies and individuals who were using us to publish information. They were bringing us information, and some of them were activist groups, lawyers. And some bringing forth information about companies, like Telstra, the Australian telecommunications giant. We published information on them. That's something I was doing in the 1990s. "WikiLeaks' Advisory Board". WikiLeaks. Retrieved 17 March 2014. Obrist, Hans Ulrich (May 2011). "In conversation with Julian Assange, Part II". e-flux. Retrieved 14 March 2014. Assange, Julian (22 September 2011). "Julian Assange: 'I knew my life would never be the same'". The Independent. Retrieved 18 March 2014. Shenon, Philip (10 June 2010). "Wikileaks founder Julian Assange hunted by Pentagon over massive leak". The Daily Beast. Retrieved 18 March 2014. Greenberg, Andy. "Want to know Julian Assange's endgame? He told you a decade ago". Wired. ISSN 1059-1028. Retrieved 11 June 2023. Assange, Julian. "Conspiracies As Governance" (PDF). IQ. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 January 2007. Merrin, William (2019). "Transparent War: Wikileaks and the War Logs". Digital War: A Critical Introduction. London/New York: Routledge. pp. 126–145. ISBN 978-1-138-89987-2. Chadwick, Andrew (2017). "Power, Interdependence, and Hybridity in the Construction of Political News: Understanding WikiLeaks". The Hybrid Media System: Politics and Power (Second ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp. 103–129. ISBN 978-0-19-069673-3. Karhula, Päivikki (5 October 2012). "What is the effect of WikiLeaks for Freedom of Information?". International Federation of Library Associations and Institutions. Archived from the original on 6 December 2011. Retrieved 11 October 2012. "WikiLeaks Cables Help Uncover What Made Tunisians Revolt". PBS. 25 January 2011. McConnell, Tristan (7 March 2009). "Rights activist Oscar Kamau Kingara shot dead in central Nairobi". The Times. London. Archived from the original on 29 June 2011. Retrieved 2 April 2009. Sweney, Mark (19 March 2008). "Wikileaks defies 'great firewall of China'". The Guardian. "Aparecen 86 nuevos petroaudios de Rómulo León" (in Spanish). Terra Peru. 28 January 2009. Archived from the original on 4 January 2011. Retrieved 8 December 2010. Cadwalladr, Carole (31 July 2010). "Julian Assange, monk of the online age who thrives on intellectual battle". The Guardian. ISSN 0029-7712. "Is Wikileaks putting people at risk?". BBC News. 23 August 2016. Retrieved 22 October 2023. Copeland, Rafiq (13 December 2010). "Life and death under WikiLeaks: what we learnt in Kenya". Crikey. Retrieved 22 October 2023. "Former Swiss Banker Is Arrested in WikiLeaks Case, After a Conviction". The New York Times. 19 January 2011. Retrieved 3 June 2019. Mr. Elmer, who helped bring WikiLeaks to prominence three years ago when he used the Web site to publish secret client details, had admitted sending Julius Baer data to tax authorities. Kiss, Jemima (3 March 2008). "Judge reverses Wikileaks injunction". The Guardian. Retrieved 10 October 2020. Somaiya, Ravi; Werdigier, Julia (17 January 2021). "Ex-Banker Gives Data on Taxes to WikiLeaks". The New York Times. Retrieved 14 April 2021. Smartt, Ursula; Mansfield, Michael (2014). "Freedom of Public Information". Media & Entertainment Law (Second ed.). London: Routledge. pp. 301–337. doi:10.4324/9781315815633. ISBN 978-0-415-66270-3. "Final report on alleged corruption in Turks and Caicos Islands". The National Archives. Kew: Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office. 2 July 2009. Assange, Julian (2009). "Big Trouble in Little Paradise: the Turks and Caicos Islands takeover". WikiLeaks. Archived from the original on 22 July 2009. Brown, David (3 July 2009). "Corruption allegations see Britain near control of Turks & Caicos". The Times. London: News Corp UK & Ireland Ltd. Archived from the original on 22 January 2011. Marmura, Stephen (2018). The WikiLeaks Paradigm: Paradoxes and Revelations. Springer. ISBN 978-3-319-97139-1. Retrieved 13 August 2019. The drama surrounding the leaks reached its peak during 'Cablegate', when Assange decided to release the remaining bulk of nearly 250,000 US diplomatic cables directly on WikiLeaks.org, for fear that the encrypted cache of documents was about to be compromised ... the more WikiLeaks disclosed in 2010, the more public opinion hardened against it. By contrast, the organisation's popularity in the Arab world during roughly the same timeframe was high ... it played a small but arguably important role in the early Arab Spring uprisings of 2011. Vos, Elizabeth (23 April 2019). "New CN Series: The Revelations of WikiLeaks: No. 1—The Video that Put Assange in US Crosshairs". Consortium News. Retrieved 15 September 2020. Daley, Paul (14 June 2020). "Julian Assange indictment fails to mention WikiLeaks video that exposed US 'war crimes' in Iraq". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 21 February 2024. "WikiLeaks acted in public interest, 'Pentagon Papers' leaker tells Assange hearing". Reuters. 16 September 2020. "U.S. asks U.K. court to permit extradition of WikiLeaks' Assange". ny1.com. 27 October 2021. Retrieved 21 February 2024. "DC Belmarsh Tribunal Urges Biden to Drop Assange Charges". www.commondreams.org. 11 December 2023. Retrieved 21 February 2024. "The Man Who Spilled the Secrets". Vanity Fair. 6 January 2011. Retrieved 11 July 2023. "Leaked video shows US military killing of civilians, Reuters staff". France 24. 5 April 2010. Retrieved 12 August 2021. "Q&A: Julian Assange and the law". BBC News. 13 March 2015. Retrieved 5 February 2016. Bumiller, Elisabeth (5 April 2010). "Video Shows U.S. Killing of Reuters Employees". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 8 April 2010. Retrieved 7 April 2010. "View Is Bleaker Than Official Portrayal of War in Afghanistan". The New York Times. 25 July 2010. Retrieved 24 February 2024. "Wikileaks defends Iraq war leaks". BBC. 23 October 2010. Retrieved 12 April 2019. "Wikileaks's leaks mostly confirm earlier Iraq reporting". The Washington Post. 26 October 2010. Retrieved 21 September 2020. Shubert, Atika (25 October 2010). "WikiLeaks editor Julian Assange dismisses reports of internal strife". CNN. Retrieved 15 September 2021. Somaiya, Ravi; Burns, John (23 October 2010). "WikiLeaks Founder on the Run, Trailed by Notoriety". The New York Times. Leigh, David; Harding, Luke (2011). Wikileaks: inside Julian Assange's war on secrecy. London: Guardianbooks. ISBN 978-0-85265-239-8. Harding, Luke; Leigh, David (3 February 2011). "WikiLeaks: How US political invective turned on 'anti-American' Julian Assange". The Guardian. Retrieved 20 February 2024. Cockburn, Andrew (March 2023). "Alternative Facts: How the Media Failed Julian Assange". Harper's Magazine. New York: Harper's Foundation. Office of Communications (10 September 2012). Ofcom Broadcast Bulletin (PDF) (Report). London: Ofcom. pp. 89–107. 213. Smith, Martin (23 May 2011). "WikiSecrets - Behind the Scenes - Assange scolds PBS Frontline's Martin Smith for his coverage of Bradley Manning - The Documentary Network". Documentary Network - Watch free documentaries and films. Leigh, David (28 November 2010). "US embassy cables leak sparks global diplomatic crisis". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 12 April 2019. Lynch, Lisa (2018). "3: The Leak Heard Round the World? Cablegate in the Evolving Global Mediascape". In Brevini, Benedetta; Hintz, Arne; McCurdy, Patrick (eds.). Beyond Wikileaks. Palgrave Macmillan. p. 56. doi:10.1057/9781137275745_4. Jackson, Nicholas (6 January 2011). "Julian Assange: I Own All of the WikiLeaks Documents". The Atlantic. Retrieved 23 October 2023. "WikiLeaks embassy cables: the key points at a glance". The Guardian. 22 December 2010. Retrieved 13 August 2019. Booth, Robert; Borger, Julian (28 November 2010). "US Diplomats Spied on UN Leadership – Diplomats Ordered To Gather Intelligence on Ban Ki-Moon – Secret Directives Sent to More than 30 US Embassies – Call for DNA Data, Computer Passwords and Terrorist Links". The Guardian. Retrieved 11 January 2011. MacAskill, Ewen; Booth, Robert (2 December 2010). "WikiLeaks Cables: CIA Drew Up UN Spying Wishlist for Diplomats — Agency Identified Priorities for Information on UN Leaders — Cables Reveal Further Evidence of Intelligence Gathering". The Guardian. Retrieved 13 December 2010. White, Gregory (14 January 2011). "This Is The Wikileak That Sparked The Tunisian Crisis". Business Insider. Retrieved 13 August 2019. York, Jillian (2018). "13: The Internet and Transparency Beyond WikiLeaks". In Brevini, Benedetta; Hintz, Arne; McCurdy, Patrick (eds.). Beyond Wikileaks. Palgrave Macmillan. p. 229. doi:10.1057/9781137275745_14. Geuss, Megan (6 December 2013). "Army releases 2010 chat log between Manning and Assange". Ars Technica. Retrieved 21 February 2023. Zetter, Kim. "Jolt in WikiLeaks Case: Feds Found Manning-Assange Chat Logs on Laptop". Wired. ISSN 1059-1028. Retrieved 21 February 2023. Pilkington, Ed (11 April 2019). "Inside the webchats the US hopes will get Assange behind bars". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 21 February 2023. Assange, Julian; Manning, Chelsea. "Assange – Manning chat" (PDF). Hern, Alex (6 December 2013). "'All the ships came in' – how Assange and Manning plotted WikiLeaks story". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 21 February 2023. Thomsen, Jacqueline (15 April 2019). "Unsealed docs reveal new details in case against Assange". The Hill. Retrieved 21 February 2023. "Criminal complaint details case against Julian Assange". Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved 21 February 2023. "Feds Say Assange Chat Logs Document Hacking Conspiracy". www.courthousenews.com. Retrieved 21 February 2023. Relph, Azriel James (23 December 2011). "Chat Logs Show Assange-Manning Collaboration, Military Says". Intelligencer. Retrieved 21 February 2023. Poulsen, Kevin. "It's Not a WikiLeak: Assange-Manning Chat Logs Surface on Army Website". Wired. ISSN 1059-1028. Retrieved 21 February 2023. "WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange arrested after 7 years of hiding out; indicted in US". ABC News. Retrieved 21 February 2023. Stuart, Tessa (11 April 2019). "Everything Julian Assange Is Accused of, Explained". Rolling Stone. Retrieved 21 February 2023. Groll, Elias (11 April 2019). "Julian Assange's Legal Trouble, Explained". Foreign Policy. Retrieved 21 February 2023. Stöcker, Christian (1 September 2011). "Leak at WikiLeaks: A Dispatch Disaster in Six Acts". Der Spiegel. Ball, James (1 September 2011). "WikiLeaks prepares to release unredacted US cables Media guardian.co.uk". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 12 February 2013.. Guardian. Retrieved 5 September 2011. Quinn, Ben (24 September 2020). "US has never asked WikiLeaks rival to remove leaked cables, court told". The Guardian. "WikiLeaks publishes full cache of unredacted cables". The Guardian. 2 September 2011. Retrieved 30 January 2023. Greenwald, Glenn (2 September 2011). "Facts and myths in the WikiLeaks/Guardian saga". Salon. Ball, James (2 September 2011). "WikiLeaks publishes full cache of unredacted cables". The Guardian. Cockburn, Andrew (March 2023). "Alternative Facts: How the Media Failed Julian Assange". Harper's Magazine. New York: Harper's Foundation. Leopold, Jason (11 April 2019). "Here Are The Never-Before-Seen US Government Damage Reports Made In The WikiLeaks Aftermath". BuzzFeed News. Retrieved 22 October 2023. Pilkington, Ed (31 July 2013). "Bradley Manning leak did not result in deaths by enemy forces, court hears". The Guardian. Retrieved 1 April 2023. Hooton, Amanda (7 December 2019). "Love him or hate him or simply don't care, Julian Assange's fight for freedom concerns us all". The Sydney Morning Herald. Sydney: Nine Group. Carroll, Lauren (2017). "McCain says Taliban 'murdered' people because of Chelsea Manning and WikiLeaks". PolitiFact. St. Petersburg, FL: Poynter Institute. Maurizi, Stephania (2 March 2020). "Julian Assange is the Defendant, Journalism is Under Trial". Il Fatto Quotidiano. Rome. "Julian Assange 'put lives at risk' by sharing unredacted files". BBC News. 24 February 2020. Retrieved 22 October 2023. Mediapoint, P. A. (24 February 2020). "Julian Assange extradition: Sources 'disappeared' after names exposed by WikiLeaks, court hears". Press Gazette. Retrieved 22 October 2023. Johnson, Jamie (24 February 2020). "Julian Assange 'put lives at risk' by publishing classified documents, court hears". The Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Retrieved 22 October 2023. "Julian Assange 'put lives at risk' by sharing unredacted files". BBC News. 24 February 2020. Quinn, Ben (24 September 2020). "US has never asked WikiLeaks rival to remove leaked cables, court told". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 15 January 2022. Retrieved 29 January 2022. "Wikileaks not 'primary publisher' of unredacted cables as they appeared elsewhere first, Assange trial hears". Press Gazette. Press Association. 21 September 2020. Archived from the original on 16 January 2022. Retrieved 15 January 2022. Goodwyn, Bill. "Julian Assange held back 15,000 documents to prevent harm to US government". ComputerWeekly.com. MacAskill, Andrew (16 September 2020). "WikiLeaks' Assange was careful to protect informants, court hears". Reuters. Jones, Sam (6 December 2010). "Julian Assange's Swiss bank account closed". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 12 November 2023. "WikiLeaks Founder Swiss Account Closed, Bank Says". Bloomberg.com. 6 December 2010. Retrieved 12 November 2023. "AP Exclusive: WikiLeaks files expose group's inner workings". AP NEWS. 20 April 2021. Archived from the original on 13 March 2022. Retrieved 13 March 2022. Becker, Jo; Erlanger, Steven; Schmitt, Eric (31 August 2016). "How Russia Often Benefits When Julian Assange Reveals the West's Secrets". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 15 March 2024. O'Hagan, Andrew (6 March 2014). "Ghosting". London Review of Books. Vol. 36, no. 5. ISSN 0260-9592. O'Hagan, Andrew (2017). The secret life: three true stories of the digital age (First American edition ed.). New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. ISBN 978-0-374-27791-8. "Margaret Atwood and Andrew O'Hagan on Trump, the Internet, and Our Dark Future". Literary Hub. 21 December 2017. Retrieved 1 November 2023. Addley, Esther (21 February 2014). "Julian Assange's ghost writer breaks silence on failed autobiography". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 27 October 2023. "Guantánamo leaks lift lid on world's most controversial prison". The Guardian. 25 April 2011. Retrieved 29 June 2021. Poulsen, Kevin (25 April 2011). "WikiLeaks Releases Guantánamo Bay Prisoner Reports". Wired. ISSN 1059-1028. Retrieved 12 April 2019. "WikiLeaks says starts releasing hacked Syria emails". Reuters. 5 July 2012. "Kissinger Cables: Wikileaks publishes 1.7m US diplomatic documents from 1970s". The Daily Telegraph. 8 April 2013. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 22 March 2014. Markson, Sharri (29 September 2015). "UK deal to back Saudi Arabia for UN Human Rights Council exposed". The Australian. Retrieved 27 October 2019. "Interview with Julian Assange: 'We Are Drowning in Material'". Der Spiegel. 20 July 2015. Retrieved 27 October 2019. Douglas Stanglin (September 2010). "Sweden reopens rape investigation against Wikileaks founder Julian Assange". USA Today. Archived from the original on 1 August 2017. Retrieved 23 June 2014. "Chronology. Events concerning Julian Assange in chronological order". Swedish Prosecution Authority. Archived from the original on 2 May 2019. Retrieved 5 May 2019. "Interpol puts Assange on most-wanted list". CNN. Retrieved 26 February 2023. "Sweden orders arrest of WikiLeaks founder". CNN. Retrieved 26 February 2023. "Sweden rejects WikiLeaks editor's residency request". www.cnn.com. Retrieved 22 October 2023. "Chronology. Events concerning Julian Assange in chronological order". Swedish Prosecution Authority. Archived from the original on 2 May 2019. Retrieved 5 May 2019. "Wikileaks' Assange faces international arrest warrant". BBC News. 20 November 2010. Archived from the original on 19 November 2021. Retrieved 20 June 2018. "Wikileaks' Julian Assange loses extradition appeal". BBC News. 2 November 2011. Archived from the original on 21 September 2018. Retrieved 20 June 2018. "Sweden's supreme court upholds Assange's detention order". AP News. 11 May 2015. Retrieved 12 October 2023. "Julian Assange on Interpol's Most-Wanted List; WikiLeaks Founder Accused of Rape – CBS News". www.cbsnews.com. 1 December 2010. Retrieved 22 July 2023. Reeve, Elspeth (1 December 2010). "Interpol Puts Julian Assange on Most Wanted List for Sex Crimes Charges". The Atlantic. Retrieved 22 July 2023. "WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange arrested by Scotland Yard". www.telegraph.co.uk. 7 December 2010. Archived from the original on 15 April 2023. Retrieved 15 April 2023. "Assange arrested – DW – 12/07/2010". dw.com. Archived from the original on 19 April 2023. Retrieved 15 April 2023. Burns, John F.; Somaiya, Ravi (7 December 2010). "British Court Denies Bail to Assange". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 15 April 2023. Retrieved 15 April 2023. Addley, Esther (17 December 2010). "Q&A: Julian Assange allegations". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 20 September 2013. Retrieved 19 February 2011. Harding, Luke; Jones, Sam (14 December 2010). "Julian Assange offered bail haven at former soldier's Norfolk manor". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 29 October 2018. Retrieved 15 April 2023. Tran, Mark (16 December 2010). "Julian Assange granted bail at high court". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 16 April 2023. Retrieved 15 April 2023. Coles, Isabel; Ormsby, Avril (16 December 2010). "WikiLeaks' Assange walks free on bail in London". Thomson Reuters. Archived from the original on 12 August 2011. Retrieved 16 December 2010. Ormsby, Avril (17 December 2010). "WikiLeaks' Julian Assange says he is victim of smear campaign". The Vancouver Sun. Retrieved 20 February 2011. "Extradition part of 'smear campaign': Assange". The Local. 17 December 2010. Archived from the original on 20 February 2011. Retrieved 20 February 2011. "Julian Assange: Sweden drops rape investigation". BBC News. 19 May 2017. Archived from the original on 19 May 2017. Retrieved 20 May 2017. Addley, Esther; Travis, Alan (19 May 2017). "Swedish prosecutors drop Julian Assange rape investigation". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 19 May 2017. Retrieved 20 May 2017. "Sweden reopens Assange rape inquiry". BBC News. 13 May 2019. Archived from the original on 16 May 2019. Retrieved 6 April 2020. Dorling, Philip (23 June 2012). "Are Assange's fears justified?". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 15 March 2014. Yost, Pete (29 November 2010). "Holder says WikiLeaks under criminal investigation". The Boston Globe. Associated Press. Retrieved 27 July 2019. Shenon, Philip (10 August 2010). "U.S. Urges Allies to Crack Down on WikiLeaks". The Daily Beast. Retrieved 27 October 2019. Greeenwald, Glenn (27 April 2011). "FBI serves grand jury subpoena likely relating to WikiLeaks". Salon. Retrieved 15 March 2014. Zetter, Kim. "Mississippi Lawyer Drawn Into WikiLeaks Intrigue". Wired. ISSN 1059-1028. Retrieved 18 March 2023. Greenwald, Glenn GreenwaldRyan GallagherGlenn; Gallagher, Ryan (18 February 2014). "Snowden Documents Reveal Covert Surveillance and Pressure Tactics Aimed at WikiLeaks and Its Supporters". The Intercept. Retrieved 5 February 2023. Reitman, rainey (19 February 2014). "Surveillance and Pressure Against WikiLeaks and Its Readers". Electronic Frontier Foundation. Retrieved 5 February 2023. Poulsen, Kevin (27 June 2013). "WikiLeaks Volunteer Was a Paid Informant for the FBI". Wired. Retrieved 11 January 2021. "The WikiLeaks Mole". Rolling Stone. Retrieved 14 January 2016. Zetter, Kim (19 December 2011). "Jolt in WikiLeaks case: Feds found Manning-Assange chat logs on laptop". Wired. Retrieved 15 March 2014. Nakashima, Ellen (20 December 2011). "Bradley Manning case: Investigators show evidence of WikiLeaks link, Assange chats". The Washington Post. Retrieved 16 March 2014. Gavett, Gretchen (19 December 2011). "New evidence of Assange-Manning link". PBS. Retrieved 15 March 2014. "Interview Julian Assange". Frontline. PBS. 4 April 2011. Retrieved 16 March 2014. Miklaszewski, Jim (24 January 2011). "The U.S. can't link accused Army private to Assange". NBC News. Retrieved 16 March 2014. Usborne, David (12 June 2013). "Bradley Manning court-martial hears 'evidence of online chats' with Wikileaks founder Julian Assange". The Independent. London. Retrieved 15 March 2014. Klasfield, Adam (12 June 2013). "The only chats recovered between Pfc. Bradley Manning and an online chat buddy". Courthouse News Service. Archived from the original on 17 June 2013. Retrieved 15 March 2014. Weiner, Rachel; Nakashima, Ellen (1 March 2019). "Chelsea Manning subpoenaed to testify before grand jury in Julian Assange investigation". Chicago Tribune. Retrieved 8 March 2019. Dorling, Philip (27 May 2012). "Cables reveal Australia, US focus on Assange". The Age. Retrieved 9 September 2023. Horwitz, Sari (25 November 2013). "Julian Assange unlikely to face U.S. charges over publishing classified documents". The Washington Post. Retrieved 8 September 2019. Carr, David; Somaiya, Ravi (24 June 2013). "Assange, back in news, never left U.S. radar". The New York Times. Retrieved 15 March 2014. Dorling, Philip (20 May 2014). "Assange targeted by FBI probe, US court documents reveal". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 29 August 2014. Greenwald, Glenn; Lee, Micah (12 April 2019). "The U.S. Government's Indictment of Julian Assange Poses Grave Threats to Press Freedoms". The Intercept. Retrieved 12 April 2019. Barnes, Julian E.; Goldman, Adam; Savage, Charlie (16 November 2018). "How the Trump Administration Stepped Up Pursuit of WikiLeaks's Assange". The New York Times. Retrieved 8 September 2019. Perez, Evan; Brown, Pamela; Prokupecz, Shimon; Bradner, Eric (20 April 2017). "Sources: US prepares charges against WikiLeaks' Assange". CNN. Megerian, Chris; Boyle, Christina; Wilber, Del Quentin (11 April 2019). "WikiLeaks' Julian Assange faces U.S. hacking charge after dramatic arrest in London". The Chicago Tribune. Retrieved 11 April 2019. "WikiLeaks Founder Charged in Superseding Indictment". United States Department of Justice. 24 June 2020. Retrieved 29 September 2020. "Chelsea Manning subpoenaed to testify before grand jury in Assange investigation". The Washington Post. Bensinger, Jason Leopold, Ken (3 November 2020). "Mueller Investigated Julian Assange, WikiLeaks, And Roger Stone For DNC Hacks And Election Law Violations". BuzzFeed News. Retrieved 10 February 2023.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Falconer, Rebecca (3 November 2020). "Read: DOJ updated Mueller report with new details on Roger Stone and Julian Assange". Axios. Retrieved 10 February 2023. Polantz, Katelyn (3 November 2020). "Mueller investigated – but didn't charge – Stone, WikiLeaks and Assange for Russian hack of Democrats in 2016, less-redacted report shows | CNN Politics". CNN. Retrieved 10 February 2023. "Julian Assange could face arrest in Australia over unredacted cables". The Guardian. 2 September 2011. Retrieved 21 November 2022. "WikiLeaks criticised over uncensored cables". www.aljazeera.com. Retrieved 5 January 2023. Tolan, Casey; Whiteman, Hilary (30 July 2014). "Watch what you tweet: Caution thrown to wind as WikiLeaks breaks gag order". CNN. Retrieved 27 November 2023. "AP Exclusive: WikiLeaks files expose group's inner workings". AP News. 17 September 2018. Retrieved 1 November 2023. "Renata Avila's Escape Plan". DocumentCloud. Retrieved 1 November 2023. Hough, Andrew (19 June 2012). "Julian Assange: WikiLeaks founder seeks political asylum from Ecuador". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 18 March 2014. Atika Shubert, "Embassy life like 'a space station,' Assange says," CNN, 26 October 2012. Retrieved 18 March 2014. Ben Child, "Oliver Stone meets Julian Assange and criticises new WikiLeaks films," The Guardian, 11 April 2013. Retrieved 18 March 2014. Alexandra Valencia, "Ecuador says UK violating human rights of WikiLeaks' Assange," Reuters, 29 May 2013. Retrieved 18 March 2014. "Julian Assange: A timeline of Wikileaks founder's case". BBC News. 19 November 2019. "Where Julian Assange Lies in Wait—and What He's Planning Next". Vanity Fair. 6 September 2013. Retrieved 15 October 2023. Hollister, Sean (7 September 2013). "Julian Assange's seat of power: a renovated women's bathroom". The Verge. Retrieved 15 October 2023. Khatchadourian, Raffi (14 August 2017). "Julian Assange, a Man Without a Country". The New Yorker. Retrieved 9 September 2021. He spoke of Sweden's 'very, very poor judicial system,' weakened by external political meddling, careerism, and a culture of 'crazed radical feminist ideology.' More important, though, the case was a matter of international politics. 'Sweden is a U.S. satrapy,' he said. Specia, Megan (13 May 2019). "Sweden Reopens Rape Case Against Julian Assange". The New York Times. Retrieved 25 September 2020. Williams, Jennifer (13 June 2019). "UK signs order for WikiLeaks' Julian Assange to be extradited to the US". Vox. Retrieved 25 September 2020. Dorling, Philip (20 June 2012). "Assange felt 'abandoned' by Australian government after letter from Roxon". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 19 November 2018. "Julian Assange: Bail cash decision delayed". BBC News. 3 October 2012. Retrieved 18 March 2014. Batty, David (22 June 2012). "Jemima Khan 'would like to see Julian Assange confront rape allegations'". The Guardian. Khan, Jemima (10 June 2021). "Jemima Khan on Julian Assange: how the Wikileaks founder alienated his allies". New Statesman. Retrieved 6 February 2023. Pearse, Damien (16 August 2012). "Julian Assange can be arrested in Ecuador embassy, the UK warns". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 16 January 2016. "Julian Assange: Police end guard at Wikileaks founder's embassy refuge". BBC News. 12 October 2015. "Declaración del Gobierno de la República del Ecuador sobre la solicitud de asilo de Julian Assange", Comunicado No. 042, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Trade and Integration of Ecuador, 2012. Retrieved 18 March 2014. Lee Ferran and Raisa Bruner, "Ecuador grants WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange political asylum", ABC News, 16 August 2012. Retrieved 18 March 2014. "Julian Assange: Ecuador grants WikiLeaks founder asylum", BBC News, 16 August 2012. Retrieved 18 March 2014. "U.K.: WikiLeaks' Assange won't be allowed to leave", CBS News, 16 August 2012. Retrieved 18 March 2014. "Statement of the Government of the Republic of Ecuador on the asylum request of Julian Assange". Archived from the original on 15 June 2013. Retrieved 8 July 2015. Nathan Gill and Randy Woods, "Correa says Assange may stay in Ecuador embassy indefinitely", Bloomberg Businessweek, 18 August 2012. Retrieved 18 March 2014. "Ricardo Patiño: Ecuador 'acts on principles'," Al Jazeera, 26 August 2012. Retrieved 18 March 2014. "Ecuadorians rally behind Assange asylum bid," Al Jazeera, 21 August 2012. Retrieved 18 March 2014. "Assange refused Australia's offer to assist". ABC News. 18 August 2012. Retrieved 23 October 2023. Aitkenhead, Decca (7 December 2012). "Julian Assange: the fugitive". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 9 February 2024. "Assange on the Untold Story of the Grounding of Evo Morales' Plane During Edward Snowden Manhunt". Democracy Now!. 28 May 2015. Retrieved 10 September 2020. In 2013, Julian Assange of WikiLeaks played a pivotal role in helping National Security Agency whistleblower Edward Snowden leave Hong Kong for Russia. During the U.S. hunt for Snowden, Bolivian President Evo Morales' plane was forced to land in Austria for 14 hours after Spain, France, Portugal and Italy closed their airspace under pressure from the United States over false rumours Snowden was on board. 'And so we just spoke about Bolivia in order to distract from the actual candidate jet,' said Assange. "Bolivia president's jet grounded in Snowden search". BBC. Shoichet, Catherine E. (2 July 2013). "Bolivia: Presidential plane forced to land after false rumors of Snowden onboard". CNN. Archived from the original on 6 July 2013. Retrieved 2 July 2021. Shoichet, Catherine E. (2 July 2013). "Bolivia: Presidential plane forced to land after false rumours of Snowden onboard". CNN. Keane, John (17 February 2013). "Lunch and dinner with Julian Assange, in prison". The Conversation. Retrieved 9 October 2023. "Julian Assange: Senate my ticket to freedom". The Guardian. Associated Press. 18 February 2013. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 9 October 2023. Guilliatt, Richard (15 June 2013). "For John Shipton, the Wikileaks Party isn't just a political cause". "Senator Assange?". The Monthly. 3 June 2013. Retrieved 9 October 2023. "Is the party over for Wikileaks in Australia?". The Independent. 26 August 2013. Retrieved 11 October 2023. Owens, Jared (14 March 2014). "Julian Assange wants full control of WikiLeaks Party, says party figure". The Australian. "Candidate tasking" (PDF). "NC micromanagement of preferences" (PDF). Keane, John (28 October 2013). "Wikileaks: A Few Secrets". The Conversation. Retrieved 9 October 2023. Crook, Andrew (30 August 2013). "Revealed: Assange knee-deep in failed WikiLeaks preference deals". Crikey. Archived from the original on 10 June 2017. Retrieved 9 October 2023. "Julian Assange joins The Drum". www.abc.net.au. 30 August 2013. Archived from the original on 31 August 2013. Retrieved 9 October 2023. "Julian Assange: WikiLeaks party will continue". The Guardian. Australian Associated Press. 8 September 2013. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 11 October 2023. "Assange vows to stand again for fledgling WikiLeaks Party". ABC News. 8 September 2013. Retrieved 20 October 2023. Chirgwin, Richard. "Assange anounces candidacy for possible WA Senate by-election". www.theregister.com. Retrieved 11 October 2023. Sharwood, Simon. "Assange not running in new Australian election". www.theregister.com. Retrieved 11 October 2023. Aston, Heath (12 March 2014). "Schapelle Corby conspiracy theorist to stand for Wikileaks Party in WA Senate byelection". The Sydney Morning Herald. Reilly, Claire (23 July 2015). "WikiLeaks Party deregistered, says AEC review uses 'old' technology". CNET. Samuels, Lennox (17 September 2014). "Greenwald, Assange, and Snowden Join Forces with Kim Dotcom in New Zealand Election". The Daily Beast. Retrieved 17 September 2022. "Greenwald, Dotcom, Snowden and Assange take on 'adolescent' John Key". The Guardian. 15 September 2014. Michael Safi & Hannah Jane Parkinson (15 September 2014). "Kim Dotcom accuses New Zealand government of mass spying – live updates". The Guardian. Collyns, Dan; Kirchgaessner, Stephanie; Harding, Luke (15 May 2018). "Revealed: Ecuador spent millions on spy operation for Julian Assange". The Guardian. Retrieved 15 May 2018. Liñán, José Manuel Abad (14 April 2019). "The life of Julian Assange, according to the Spaniards who watched over him". EL PAÍS English Edition. Retrieved 10 December 2022. Assange, Julian (3 July 2015). "Julian Assange : 'En m'accueillant, la France accomplirait un geste humanitaire'". Le Monde (in French). Retrieved 30 May 2019. Je suis un journaliste poursuivi et menacé de mort par les autorités états-uniennes du fait de mes activités professionnelles. Weaver, Matthew (3 July 2015). "France rejects Julian Assange's asylum request". The Guardian. London. Shen, Lucinda (16 September 2016). "Julian Assange Says He'll Turn Himself in if Obama Pardons Chelsea Manning". Fortune. Retrieved 4 September 2021. Helsel, Phil, and The Associated Press (18 January 2017). "After Extradition Pledge, Assange Lawyers Say Manning Commutation Fell Short". NBC News. Retrieved 4 September 2021.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Toor, Amar (16 September 2016). "Julian Assange says he'll turn himself in if Obama pardons Chelsea Manning". The Verge. Retrieved 4 February 2023. "Obama's Last News Conference: Full Transcript and Video". The New York Times. 18 January 2017. Archived from the original on 19 January 2017. Retrieved 21 July 2017. Albanesius, Chloe (18 January 2017). "Is Assange Coming to America? Unlikely". PCMAG. Retrieved 4 February 2023. Hunt, Elle (25 January 2017). "Julian Assange: Chelsea Manning clemency was bid to make life hard for me". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 4 February 2023. Novak, Matt (24 January 2017). "Julian Assange Says Chelsea Manning Was Granted Clemency to Make Assange Look Like a Liar". Gizmodo. Retrieved 4 February 2023. Weaver, Matthew (18 January 2017). "Julian Assange ready for US extradition, one of his lawyers suggests". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 4 February 2023. "After clemency for Chelsea Manning, all eyes on WikiLeaks' Julian Assange". CBC. The Associated Press. 18 January 2017. "Wikileaks' Julian Assange says "I stand by everything I said"". CBS News. 19 January 2017. Retrieved 1 November 2023. Buncombe, Andrew (17 January 2017). "Julian Assange under pressure to hand himself in for extradition following Manning commutation". The Independent. Retrieved 4 February 2023. Uchill, Joe (19 January 2017). "Assange hedges on extradition to US". The Hill. Retrieved 4 February 2023. Kravets, David (18 January 2017). "Assange weasels out of pledge to surrender if Manning received clemency". Ars Technica. Retrieved 4 February 2023. "WikiLeaks' Julian Assange retreats from extradition pledge". Yahoo. 19 January 2017. Retrieved 4 February 2023. Uchill, Joe (18 January 2017). "Assange lawyer: Manning commutation doesn't meet extradition offer's conditions". The Hill. Retrieved 4 February 2023. "Assange walks back extradition pledge after Manning clemency". CBS News. 18 January 2017. Retrieved 4 February 2023. Rothwell, James; Victoria Ward; Helen Nianias (19 May 2017). "Julian Assange emerges on embassy balcony to say he will not 'forgive or forget' as Swedish rape investigation is dropped". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 21 July 2017. "Why Julian Assange Doesn't Want Hillary Clinton to Be President". The Observer. 24 June 2016. "Why Did a Cambridge Analytica Executive Meet with Julian Assange?". Vanity Fair. 7 June 2018. Retrieved 12 October 2023. Smith, David (26 October 2017). "Julian Assange confirms Cambridge Analytica sought WikiLeaks' help". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 12 October 2023. "WikiLeaks criticizes both Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump, condemns 'McCarthyite' Russia accusations". Salon. 9 November 2018. Schleifer, Theodore; Scott, Eugene (24 July 2016). "DNC treatment of Sanders at issue in emails leaked to Wikileaks". CNN. Retrieved 24 July 2016. Peters, Maquita (23 July 2016). "Leaked Democratic Party Emails Show Members Tried To Undercut Sanders". NPR. Retrieved 24 July 2016. Savage, Charlie (26 July 2016). "Assange, Avowed Foe of Clinton, Timed Email Release for Democratic Convention". The New York Times. After the Democratic chairwoman, Representative Debbie Wasserman Schultz, resigned Monday when Sanders supporters reacted angrily to revelations in the emails that party officials had privately rooted for Mrs. Clinton to win the presidential nomination, Mr. Assange told the news program 'Democracy Now!' that he had timed their release to coincide with the Democratic convention. Bump, Philip (13 July 2018). "Timeline: How Russian agents allegedly hacked the DNC and Clinton's campaign". The Washington Post. Retrieved 14 September 2018. Bennett, Cory (18 October 2016). "Ecuador admits restricting Internet access for WikiLeaks over election meddling". Politico. Retrieved 23 October 2016. "Julian Assange: 'Donald? It's a change anyway'". The Greanville Post. 29 December 2016. Torres, Marshall Cohen, Kay Guerrero, Arturo (15 July 2019). "Exclusive: Security reports reveal how Assange turned an embassy into a command post for election meddling | CNN Politics". CNN. Retrieved 22 March 2023.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Silverman, Craig (27 August 2018). "Revealed: Notorious Pro-Trump Misinformation Site True Pundit Is Run By An Ex-Journalist With A Grudge Against The FBI". BuzzFeed News. Retrieved 1 November 2023. Ioffe, Julia. "The Secret Correspondence Between Donald Trump Jr. and WikiLeaks". The Atlantic. Retrieved 13 November 2017. Singal, Jesse. "Explaining the Viral Rumor That Hillary Clinton Wanted to Drone-Strike Julian Assange". New York Magazine. Retrieved 3 October 2016. "Julian Assange has responded to Trump Jr releasing their private Twitter messages". The Independent. 14 November 2017. Retrieved 26 October 2023. Klasfeld, Adam (16 November 2018). "Feds Say Suspected CIA WikiLeaker Spilled New Files From Prison". Courthouse News Service. Lake, Eli (25 July 2016). "Cyber-Experts Say Russia Hacked the Democratic National Committee". Bloomberg View. Retrieved 23 October 2016. "Counterintelligence Threats and Vulnerabilities" (PDF). senate.gov. Senate Intelligence Committee. Retrieved 12 December 2021. Frum, David (25 November 2021). "It Wasn't a Hoax". The Atlantic. Retrieved 17 December 2021. Hosenball, Mark (18 August 2020). "Senate committee concludes Russia used Manafort, WikiLeaks to boost Trump in 2016". Reuters. Retrieved 17 December 2021. Polantz, Katelyn; Collinson, Stephen (14 July 2018). "12 Russians indicted in Mueller investigation". CNN. Retrieved 14 September 2019. Uchill, Joe (15 December 2016). "Assange: Some leaks may have been Russian". The Hill. Retrieved 27 July 2022. "What the Latest Mueller Indictment Reveals About WikiLeaks' Ties to Russia—and What It Doesn't". The New Yorker. 24 July 2018. Retrieved 27 July 2022. "Julian Assange: Russian government not source of leaked DNC and Podesta emails – WikiLeaks editor contradicts CIA claims in new interview". The Belfast Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Retrieved 12 April 2019. Hains, Tim (15 December 2016). "WikiLeaks' Julian Assange: Russian Government Was Not Source For Podesta, DNC Emails". realclearpolitics.com. Retrieved 12 April 2019. Sciutto, Jim; Gaouette, Nicole; Browne, Ryan (14 October 2016). "US finds growing evidence Russia feeding emails to WikiLeaks". CNN. Retrieved 14 October 2016. Cavanaugh, Darien (27 November 2016). "Julian Assange Interview With John Pilger Becomes Most Viral Video Of The Year For 'RT'". Yahoo! News. Retrieved 19 September 2021. "Assange 'considering' testifying on Russian role in Trump vote". The Sydney Morning Herald. 9 August 2018. "Statement by Julian Assange on U.S. Presidential Election". Newsweek. 8 November 2016. "Julian Assange hints murdered DNC staffer Seth Rich was source of damaging email leaks". news.com.au. 12 August 2021. Retrieved 16 April 2021. "Julian Assange on Seth Rich". Nieuwsuur. Seitz-Wald, Alex (10 August 2016). "WikiLeaks Fuels Conspiracy Theories About DNC Staffer's Death". NBC News. Retrieved 17 December 2018. Network Propaganda: Manipulation, Disinformation, and Radicalization in American Politics. Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press. 15 October 2018. pp. 159–162. ISBN 978-0-19-092363-1. Mueller, Robert. "Report On The Investigation Into Russian Interference In The 2016 Presidential Election". justice.gov. USDOJ. Retrieved 2 April 2022. Mervosh, Sarah (20 April 2019). "Seth Rich Was Not Source of Leaked D.N.C. Emails, Mueller Report Confirms". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 24 April 2019. Knott, Matthew (19 April 2019). "'A monster not a journalist': The Mueller report shows Assange lied about Russian hacking". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 24 April 2019. Dupree, Jamie. "Mueller: Wikileaks used dead DNC worker in bid to cover Russia ties". ajc. Retrieved 24 April 2019. Shane, Scott; Rosenberg, Matthew; Lehren, Andrew W. (7 March 2017). "WikiLeaks Releases Trove of Alleged C.I.A. Hacking Documents". The New York Times. Retrieved 11 September 2020. Strobel, Warren; Hosenball, Mark (13 April 2017). "CIA chief calls WikiLeaks a 'hostile intelligence service'". Reuters. Dorfman, Zach; Naylor, Sean D.; Isikoff, Michael (26 September 2021). "Kidnapping, assassination and a London shoot-out: Inside the CIA's secret war plans against WikiLeaks". Yahoo! News. Retrieved 26 September 2021. Bourke, Latika (27 September 2021). "Trump administration floated kidnapping, killing Julian Assange: report". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 30 September 2021. Grim, Ryan; Sirota, Sara (28 September 2021). "Julian Assange Kidnapping Plot Casts New Light on 2018 Senate Intelligence Maneuver". The Intercept. New York: First Look Media. White, Debbie. "CIA 'discussed kidnapping or assassinating Wikileaks founder Julian Assange'". The Times. London. ISSN 0140-0460. Retrieved 30 September 2021. Goodwin, Bill (28 October 2021). "CIA sought revenge against Julian Assange over hacking tool leaks, court hears". Computer Weekly. Retrieved 28 October 2021. "Assange lawyer dismisses US extradition promise over mental health concerns". ABC News (Australia). 29 October 2021. Retrieved 29 October 2021. Mr Assange's defence team also referred to recent allegations the CIA and US government had considered plans to 'seriously harm' him—including alleged discussions to 'kidnap or poison' him while he was inside the Ecuadorian embassy in London. Specia, Megan (29 October 2021). "British Court Hears Appeal in Julian Assange Extradition Case". The New York Times. Retrieved 29 October 2021. During the two-day hearing this week, Mr. Assange's defense team argued that new accusations—from a Yahoo News investigation published in September—that the C.I.A. plotted to kidnap or kill Mr. Assange during the Trump administration, as well as fears that he would be placed in harsh prison conditions and concerns about his mental state, should be barriers for his extradition to the United States. "Mike Pompeo summoned by court to explain alleged US government plot to assassinate Julian Assange, say Spanish media reports". Business Insider. "Did the US plot to assassinate Julian Assange? A judge wants answers from Mike Pompeo". The Telegraph. Hensch, Mark (6 June 2017). "Julian Assange: Alleged NSA leaker 'must be supported'". The Hill. Retrieved 6 February 2023. Bowcott, Owen and Julian Borger (19 February 2020). "Donald Trump 'offered Julian Assange a pardon if he denied Russia link to hack'". The Guardian. Retrieved 19 February 2020. Mai-Duc, Christine (17 August 2017). "Rohrabacher on meeting with WikiLeaks' Assange: We talked about 'what might be necessary to get him out'". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved 20 February 2020. Isikoff, Michael (20 February 2020). "Rohrabacher confirms he offered Trump pardon to Assange for proof Russia didn't hack DNC email". Yahoo! News. Retrieved 20 February 2020. Abellán, Rafa de Miguel, Lucía (13 November 2017). "Key Catalan ideologue met with Julian Assange in London". EL PAÍS English. Retrieved 13 October 2023.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Bertrand, Natasha. "Julian Assange is rallying behind Catalan separatists ahead of a historic referendum — and Russia has taken notice". Business Insider. Retrieved 13 October 2023. Alandete, David (28 September 2017). "Russian meddling machine sets sights on Catalonia". EL PAÍS English. Retrieved 13 October 2023. "Julian Assange's strange new obsession". 25 September 2017. Retrieved 13 October 2023. Zappone, Chris (26 September 2017). "On Catalan independence, Julian Assange, Edward Snowden emerge as surprise backers". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 13 October 2023. "Spanish minister links Julian Assange meeting to Catalan independence drive". EL PAÍS English. 14 November 2017. Retrieved 13 October 2023. Mackey, Robert (15 November 2017). "Julian Assange's Hatred of Hillary Clinton Was No Secret. His Advice to Donald Trump Was". The Intercept. Retrieved 13 October 2023. Hancock, Jaime Rubio (21 September 2017). "Julian Assange falls for satirical story from Spanish website El Mundo Today". EL PAÍS English. Retrieved 13 October 2023. "The "very serious repression" in Catalonia and seven more of Julian Assange's lies". EL PAÍS English. 28 September 2017. Retrieved 13 October 2023. "Ecuador warns Assange over Catalonia comments". euronews. 23 November 2017. Retrieved 13 October 2023. Kirchgaessner, Stephanie; Jones, Sam; Collyns, Dan (16 May 2018). "Assange 'split' Ecuador and Spain over Catalan independence". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 13 October 2023. "WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange told to keep out of Catalonia crisis". Sky News. Retrieved 13 October 2023. "Assange told not to interfere in Catalonia: Ecuador president". France 24. 17 December 2017. Retrieved 13 October 2023. O'Brien, Natalie (10 January 2020). "Wikileaks founder Julian Assange awarded Dignity Prize from Catalans". News Corp. Archived from the original on 13 February 2020. Retrieved 7 February 2020. "As Catalonia Plans Independence from Spain, Julian Assange Advises Organizers on Secure Messaging". Democracy Now!. 10 October 2017. Noack, Rick (11 April 2019). "How Ecuador soured on Assange". The Washington Post. "Exclusive: Ecuador attempted to give Assange diplomat post in Russia – document". Reuters. 21 September 2018. Retrieved 7 December 2022. "Newly published files confirm plan to move Assange to Russia". AP News. 17 October 2018. Retrieved 5 February 2024. Maria Fleet and Ana María Cañizares (28 July 2021). "Ecuador revokes citizenship of WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange". CNN. "Julian Assange stripped of citizenship by Ecuador". The Guardian. The Associated Press. 27 July 2021. Retrieved 7 December 2022. "A Court In Ecuador Has Stripped Julian Assange Of His Citizenship". NPR. Associated Press. 28 July 2021. Retrieved 7 December 2022. Collins, Ben (30 January 2018). "Julian Assange Offered Hannity Impersonator 'News' About Top Democrat". The Daily Beast. Retrieved 30 January 2023. "Julian Assange offers 'news' on Russia probe to fake Sean Hannity Twitter account". The Independent. 30 January 2018. Retrieved 30 January 2023. Kelly, Tiffany (30 January 2018). "Julian Assange messaged a fake Sean Hannity account on Twitter". The Daily Dot. Retrieved 30 January 2023. Croft, Jane (7 February 2018). "UK judge upholds arrest warrant for Assange". Financial Times. Retrieved 12 October 2020. Croft, Jane (14 February 2018). "Julian Assange loses bid to discharge UK arrest warrant". Retrieved 12 October 2020. London, Domanii Cameron in (27 September 2018). "Julian Assange has stepped down as the editor of WikiLeaks". News.com.au. Retrieved 6 December 2018. Solano, Gonzalo (28 March 2018). "Ecuador cuts WikiLeaks founder Assange's internet at embassy". Associated Press. Retrieved 28 March 2018. "Ecuador wants Assange out of asylum, but safe". Associated Press. 27 July 2018. Retrieved 29 July 2018. "Julian Assange's communications partly restored by Ecuadorian government". ITV News. 14 October 2018. Retrieved 14 October 2018. Greenfield, Patrick (14 October 2018). "Julian Assange to regain internet access at embassy base – reports". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 16 February 2023. Collyns, Dan (15 October 2018). "Ecuador tells Assange to avoid political activity online – and feed the cat". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 16 February 2023. "Embajada Del Ecuador En Gran Bretaña e Irlanda Del Norte" (PDF). 15 October 2018. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 October 2018. Retrieved 16 February 2023. Quinn, Ben; Collyns, Dan (19 October 2018). "Julian Assange launches legal action against Ecuador". The Guardian. Retrieved 17 November 2018. "His Excellency Lenin Moreno" (PDF). Retrieved 17 November 2018. Rebaza, Claudia; Said-Moorhouse, Lauren (20 October 2018). "Julian Assange sues Ecuador for 'violating his rights'". CNN. Retrieved 12 October 2020. "Julian Assange: Wikileaks co-founder takes legal action against Ecuador". BBC News. 19 October 2018. Retrieved 19 October 2018. "Julian Assange: Ecuador court rejects lawsuit over embassy rules". BBC News. 30 October 2018. "UN experts urge the UK to honour rights obligations and let Mr Julian Assange leave Ecuador embassy in London freely". United Nations Human Rights. Office of the High Commissioner. Retrieved 22 December 2018. "Geneva politicians vote to propose Julian Assange asylum". Associated Press. 7 February 2019. Retrieved 13 February 2019. "Human rights agency rejects Assange complaint against Ecuador". Reuters. 15 March 2019. Irujo, José María (29 March 2023). "Spanish company provided CIA with information leading to Julian Assange's arrest". El País]. Madrid: Promotora de Informaciones, S.A. Irujo, José María (26 September 2019). "Spanish security company spied on Julian Assange in London for the United States". El País English Edition. Retrieved 17 December 2022. Irujo, José María (11 February 2020). "Spaniard at center of Julian Assange spying accusations claims ambassador ordered espionage". El País English Edition. Retrieved 17 December 2022. Goodwin, Bill; Ter García (30 July 2020). "Former UC Global staff confirm Embassy surveillance operation against Julian Assange | TechTarget". ComputerWeekly.com. Retrieved 17 December 2022. Irujo, José María (20 June 2019). "Tapes of Spaniards' attempt to extort Julian Assange: "This material is worth €3m"". El País English Edition. Retrieved 15 December 2022. "Spanish court to hear testimony on whether Julian Assange was spied on". Global News. 27 July 2020. Retrieved 27 November 2022. Irujo, José María (5 January 2021). "New leads suggest CIA spied on Assange to secure his extradition to the US". El País English Edition. Retrieved 27 November 2022. "Spanish firm accused of spying on WikiLeaks founder on behalf of US". South China Morning Post. 10 October 2019. Retrieved 6 December 2022. Bourke, Latika (15 August 2022). "Assange lawyers sue CIA for allegedly spying on Wikileaks founder and his visitors in London". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 27 November 2022. "Spain: Court hears testimony on whether Assange was spied on". AP News. 27 July 2020. Retrieved 6 December 2022. "Yanis Varoufakis on his testimony in Spanish case against UC Global". DiEM25. 28 October 2020. Retrieved 27 November 2022. Irujo, José María (21 January 2020). "Three protected witnesses accuse Spanish ex-marine of spying on Julian Assange". El País English Edition. Retrieved 6 December 2022. Gerstein, Josh (19 December 2023). "Judge: Assange visitors can proceed with spying suit against CIA". Politico. Retrieved 21 December 2023. "Julian Assange can be extradited to US to face espionage charges, court rules". TheGuardian.com. 10 December 2021. Megerian, Chris; Boyle, Christina; Wilber, Del Quentin (11 April 2019). "WikiLeaks' Julian Assange faces U.S. hacking charge after dramatic arrest in London". The Chicago Tribune. Retrieved 11 April 2019. Becket, Stefan (23 May 2019). "Julian Assange indictment: Julian Assange hit with 18 federal charges today, related to WikiLeaks' release of Chelsea Manning docs". CBS News. "Julian Assange: US hits WikiLeaks founder with 18 new charges, receiving and publishing classified information". News.com.au. 24 May 2019. Milligan, Ellen (29 June 2020). Julian Assange Lawyers Say New U.S. Indictment Could Derail Extradition. MSN News via Bloomberg News. Archived from the original on 2 July 2020. Retrieved 2 July 2020. "Julian Assange 'conspired with Anonymous-affiliated hackers'". www.aljazeera.com. Retrieved 5 October 2022. "SECOND SUPERSEDING INDICTMENT". 25 June 2020. Tucker, Eric (25 June 2020). "'Hacker not journalist': Assange faces fresh allegations in US". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 5 October 2022. emptywheel (28 June 2020). "The Government Argues that Edward Snowden Is a Recruiting Tool". Emptywheel. Retrieved 5 October 2022. "WikiLeaks Founder Charged in Superseding Indictment". www.justice.gov. 24 June 2020. Retrieved 31 December 2022. "U.S. offers that Assange could serve sentence in Australia in extradition appeal". The Washington Post. Brewster, Thomas. "Here's How The U.S. Claims The Assange-Manning Conspiracy Worked". Forbes. Quinn, Ben (2 May 2019). "US begins extradition case against Julian Assange in London". The Guardian. Retrieved 7 October 2020. "Julian Assange doesn't consent to US extradition, court hears". BBC. 2 May 2019. Retrieved 3 May 2019. Weaver, Matthew (13 June 2019). "Sajid Javid signs US extradition order for Julian Assange". The Guardian. "Julian Assange too ill to appear in court via video link, lawyers say". The Guardian. 30 May 2019. Retrieved 12 October 2020. "Julian Assange to face US extradition hearing in UK next year". The Guardian. 14 June 2019. Retrieved 12 October 2020. Glass, Charles (6 October 2020). "The Unprecedented and Illegal Campaign to Eliminate Julian Assange". The Intercept. Retrieved 16 February 2023. Curtis, Mark; Kennard, Matt (3 September 2020). "Declassified UK: As British judge made rulings against Julian Assange, her husband was involved with right-wing lobby group briefing against WikiLeaks founder". Daily Maverick. Retrieved 12 October 2020. Busby, Mattha (21 October 2019). "Julian Assange extradition judge refuses request for delay". The Guardian. Retrieved 11 May 2021. "Julian Assange appears in dock as extradition hearing resumes". BBC News. 7 September 2020. Retrieved 28 September 2020. Perraudin, Frances (28 February 2020). "Julian Assange's lawyers: US files were leaked for political ends". The Guardian. "Extradition hearing for WikiLeaks' Assange to be split in two parts". Reuters. 23 January 2020. Bourke, Latika (10 September 2020). "Assange's extradition hearing delayed by lawyer's wife's COVID scare". Sydney Morning Herald. "IBAHRI condemns UK treatment of Julian Assange in US extradition trial". IBAHRI. Bourke, Latika (9 September 2020). "'This is nonsense': Julian Assange interjections earn stern warning". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 17 October 2023. Specia, Megan (16 September 2020). "At Assange's Extradition Hearing, Troubled Tech Takes Center Stage". The New York Times. Retrieved 28 September 2020. Dawson, Tim (25 September 2020). "Assange trial hears evidence from Khaled el-Masri". National Union of Journalists. Retrieved 29 September 2020. Goodwin, Bill (23 September 2020). "WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange has Asperger syndrome and depression, court hears". Computer Weekly. Retrieved 10 September 2021. "Julian Assange faces 'torturous' months in parking space-sized cell if extradited to US, court hears". PressGazette. 28 September 2020. Retrieved 5 September 2021. "Julian Assange will not be extradited to US to face charges over WikiLeaks, judge rules". The Independent. 4 January 2021. "Julian Assange dramatising about psychotic thoughts, court told". The Australian. Lee, Micah (30 September 2020). "Crumbling case against Assange shows weakness of 'hacking' charges related to whistleblowing". The Intercept. Retrieved 4 October 2020. Quinn, Ben (30 September 2020). "US intelligence sources discussed poisoning Assange, court told". The Guardian. Retrieved 4 October 2020. "Julian Assange: Wikileaks founder refused extradition to US, judge rules". BBC. 4 January 2021. Retrieved 4 January 2021. Peltier, Elian; Specia, Megan (4 January 2021). "U.K. Judge Blocks Assange's Extradition to U.S., Citing Mental Health Concerns". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 28 December 2021. Retrieved 4 January 2021. "Assange defence mulls cross-appeal of January verdict, partner says". The Duran. 21 February 2021. Retrieved 24 February 2021. "US lawyers lodge appeal against block on Julian Assange's extradition". Express & Star. 19 January 2021. Retrieved 20 January 2021. Savage, Charlie (7 July 2021). "U.S. promises not to imprison Julian Assange under harsh conditions if Britain extradites him". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 28 December 2021. Maurizi, Stefania (24 July 2021). "Julia Hall, Amnesty International expert on National security: 'Assange should be released'". Il Fatto Quotidiano (in Italian). Retrieved 5 August 2021. "Key witness in Assange case admits to lies in indictment". Stundin. Reykjavik: Útgáfufélagið Stundin ehf. 26 June 2021. Quinn, Ben (26 October 2021). "Julian Assange: what to expect from the extradition appeal". The Guardian. Homan, Timothy R. (3 July 2021). "Marianne Williamson calls on Biden to drop efforts to extradite Assange". The Hill. Keßler, Felix (7 July 2021). "Julian Assange: Britisches Gericht lässt Berufung gegen abgelehnte Auslieferung zu" [Assange's extradition process enters the next round]. Der Spiegel (in German). von Hein, Matthias (11 August 2021). "Julian Assange: US still pushing for extradition". Deutsche Welle. Booth, William; Weiner, Rachel (8 July 2021). "U.S. offers that Assange could serve sentence in Australia in extradition appeal". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 8 October 2021. Retrieved 19 August 2021. Booth, William; Weiner, Rachel (8 July 2021). "U.S. offers that Assange could serve sentence in Australia in extradition appeal". The Washington Post. Retrieved 8 July 2021. Nakashima, Ellen; Weiner, Rachel (24 June 2020). "Justice Department broadens case against Julian Assange". Washington Post. Retrieved 26 February 2023. Rawlinson, Kevin (11 August 2021). "Julian Assange loses court battle to stop US expanding extradition appeal". The Guardian. Retrieved 11 August 2021. "US begins legal appeal to get Julian Assange extradited". BBC News. 27 October 2021. Retrieved 27 October 2021. Hussain, Murtaza (28 October 2021). "Julian Assange's Health Is Central to Upcoming Ruling on Extradition to the U.S." The Intercept. Retrieved 28 October 2021. Barry, Eloise (29 October 2021). "What to Know About Julian Assange's Extradition Appeal". Time. Retrieved 6 November 2021. Sabin, Lamiat (12 December 2021). "Julian Assange 'had stroke in prison' due to stress over his future, fiancée says". The Independent. London. "Julian Assange suffers stroke in prison due to 'constant chess game' over his future, claims fiance". The Daily Telegraph. London. 12 December 2021. Chung, Laura (12 December 2021). "Julian Assange suffers stroke during court appeal, his fiancee says". The Sydney Morning Herald. Sydney: Nine Entertainment. Strick, Katie (15 December 2021). "'Blatantly unfair and profoundly wrong' — Stella Moris on why fiancé Julian Assange's extradition ruling is not the end". Yahoo News. Morton, Becky (10 December 2021). "Julian Assange can be extradited to the US, court rules". BBC News. Hawke, Jack (10 December 2021). "US wins appeal against London court's decision not to extradite Julian Assange". ABC News. Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Retrieved 10 December 2021. Specia, Megan (10 December 2021). "U.K. Court Rules Julian Assange Can Be Extradited to U.S." The New York Times. Archived from the original on 28 December 2021. Retrieved 10 December 2021. "Julian Assange wins right to ask Supreme Court to consider US extradition appeal". BBC News. 24 January 2022. Retrieved 24 January 2022. "Julian Assange denied permission to appeal against extradition". BBC News. 14 March 2022. Retrieved 14 March 2022. "'Cypherpunks have rallied to Assange': NFT auction raises $52m for WikiLeaks founder". The Guardian. Reuters. 9 February 2022. Quinn, Ben (20 April 2022). "UK court approves extradition of Julian Assange to US". The Guardian. Grierson, Jamie; Quinn, Ben (17 June 2022). "Julian Assange's extradition from UK to US approved by home secretary". The Guardian. "Assange lodges appeal on US extradition". Canberra Times. 2 July 2022. "WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange files latest appeal in bid to stop extradition to United States". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 27 August 2022. Holden, Michael (3 December 2022). "Julian Assange appeals to European court over U.S. extradition". Reuters. European Court of Human Rights (13 December 2022). Case: Assange v. the United Kingdom. Appeal denied, 13/12/2022 (Court case). Retrieved 18 March 2023. Court's State of Proceedings (SOP) search engine Application number: 34859/22 Application title: Assange v. the United Kingdom Date of Introduction: 14/07/2022 Application requiring a decision: 09/08/2022 Decision to declare a case inadmissible: 13/12/2022 {{cite book}}: |website= ignored (help); Unknown parameter |agency= ignored (help) "Free Julian Assange! Das Ende der Haft fordert die dju in ver.di zusammen mit 18 europäischen Journalist*innen-Gewerkschaften". Deutsche Journalistinnen- und Journalisten-Union. 27 April 2023. Retrieved 27 April 2023. "Free Julian Assange, member of our organisations". European Federation of Journalists. 27 April 2023. Retrieved 27 April 2023. "Athens journalists' union grants honorary membership to Assange". Kathimerini. 27 April 2023. Retrieved 27 April 2023. Cassidy, Caitlin (5 May 2023). "Julian Assange writes letter to King Charles and urges him to visit Belmarsh prison". The Guardian. Retrieved 23 May 2023. Crowe, David (22 May 2023). "'We are considering all options': Assange supporters open to a plea deal with US". The Age. Retrieved 2 June 2023. "Julian Assange's life 'in hands of Australian government', wife Stella says". The Guardian. Australian Associated Press. 22 May 2023. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 2 June 2023. Knott, Matthew (31 May 2023). "FBI restarts Julian Assange probe despite hopes of release". The Age. Retrieved 2 June 2023. Said-Moorhouse, Claudia Rebaza, Lauren (9 June 2023). "Julian Assange loses latest attempt to appeal against extradition to the US". CNN. Retrieved 11 June 2023.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Stuart, Riley (20 February 2024). "Julian Assange too ill to attend as court hears claim of 'breathtaking' plot to poison him". ABC. Casciani, Dominic; Hancock, Sam (20 February 2024). "Julian Assange: Lawyers describe US prosecution as state retaliation". Stuart, Riley (27 April 2024). "Julian Assange handed legal lifeline by London's High Court after delay in appeal ruling". ABC. The Editorial Board (11 April 2019). "Opinion | 'Curious Eyes Never Run Dry'". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. The Editorial Board (11 April 2019). "Opinion | Julian Assange is not a free-press hero. And he is long overdue for personal accountability". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Morgan Chalfant, Olivia Beavers and Jacqueline Thomsen (12 April 2019). "Julian Assange: Five things to know about the legal case against him". The Hill. Bebernes, Mike (27 May 2019). "Julian Assange: Truth teller or criminal?". Yahoo! News. Cassidy, John (12 April 2019). "The indictment of Julian Assange is a threat to journalism". The New Yorker. Retrieved 29 April 2019. Roth, Kenneth (12 April 2019). "The Assange prosecution threatens modern journalism". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 23 February 2024. "Julian Assange: Wikileaks co-founder arrested in London". 11 April 2019. Retrieved 23 February 2024. Hurst, Daniel (20 June 2022). "Julian Assange: what is Australia's position on his extradition, and what options does it have?". The Guardian. "US accuses Julian Assange of 'very serious' crime, pushes back on release". SBS. 3 July 2022. Knott, Matthew (14 August 2023). "'There's a way to resolve it': Caroline Kennedy flags Assange plea deal". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 12 January 2024. Jose, Renju (15 February 2024). "Australia PM backs parliament motion calling for Julian Assange's release". Reuters. Retrieved 17 February 2024. Editorial (18 February 2024). "The Guardian view on Julian Assange: why he should not be extradited". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 21 February 2024. "WikiLeaks founder Assange faces his last legal roll of the dice in Britain to avoid US extradition". AP News. 20 February 2024. Retrieved 21 February 2024. "Germany's Scholz speaks out against Assange extradition". Deutsche Welle. 4 March 2024. Retrieved 11 March 2024. "Le cittadinanze onorarie ad Assange". la Repubblica (in Italian). 15 January 2024. Retrieved 30 March 2024. Boylan, Patrick (18 October 2023). "Julian Assange made honorary citizen of Rome by the City Council today". Pressenza. Retrieved 30 March 2024. Anderson, Patrick D. (1 September 2021). "Privacy for the weak, transparency for the powerful: the cypherpunk ethics of Julian Assange". Ethics and Information Technology. 23 (3): 295–308. doi:10.1007/s10676-020-09571-x. ISSN 1572-8439. Assange, Julian (9 July 2013). "How cryptography is a key weapon in the fight against empire states". The Guardian. Retrieved 18 March 2024. Sakwa, Richard (2021). Deception: Russiagate and the New Cold War. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 35. ISBN 978-1-7936-4496-1. "State and Terrorist Conspiracies," 10 November 2006. Retrieved 12 March 2014. This file contains both 2006 papers; they are also available elsewhere online. "Julian Assange: The Hidden Curse of Thomas Paine". Guernica. 29 April 2008. Assange, Julian (14 April 2011). "What's new about WikiLeaks?". New Statesman. Retrieved 1 November 2023. Assange, Julian; Appelbaum, Jacob; Muller-Maguhn, Andy; Zimmermann, Jérémie (October 2016). Cypherpunks: Freedom and the Future of the Internet. OR Books. ISBN 978-1-944869-08-3. Andy Greenberg, "An interview with WikiLeaks' Julian Assange," Forbes, 29 November 2010. Retrieved 19 March 2014. "Julian Assange blasts 'toxic' press". The Australian. Sonne, Paul (27 December 2010). "Assange memoir sold in U.S., U.K.". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 16 March 2014. Somaiya, Ravi (27 December 2010). "WikiLeaks founder signs book deal". The New York Times. Retrieved 16 March 2014. Dolak, Kevin (26 December 2010). "Julian Assange signs $1.3 million book deal". ABC News. Retrieved 16 March 2014. Addley, Esther (21 September 2011). "Julian Assange publishers to release autobiography without his consent". The Guardian. Retrieved 18 September 2021. "Transparency? Not with my memoirs, Assange insists". The Independent. 22 September 2011. Retrieved 1 November 2023. Robinson, Colin (7 March 2014). "In defence of Julian Assange". The Guardian. Retrieved 18 September 2021. "When Google Met WikiLeaks". OR Books. 18 September 2014. Retrieved 9 December 2014. Wofford, Taylor (16 September 2014). "WikiLeaks Founder Julian Assange Answers Questions About His New Book on Reddit". Newsweek. Retrieved 9 December 2014. Assange, Julian (23 October 2014). "Assange: Google Is Not What It Seems". Newsweek. Retrieved 9 December 2014. Somaiya, Ravi (1 March 2011). "Report Says Assange Cited Jewish Conspiracy". The New York Times. Retrieved 12 September 2021. He was especially angry about a Private Eye report that Israel Shamir, an Assange associate in Russia, was a Holocaust denier. Mr. Assange complained that the article was part of a campaign by Jewish reporters in London to smear WikiLeaks. "Confirmed for the Media: infamous anti-Semite works with Wikileaks". Sveriges Radio. 10 December 2010. Retrieved 12 September 2021. Wikileaks spokesperson Kristinn Hrafnsson confirms Israel Shamir's involvement with Wikileaks. Lee, Micah and Cora Currier (14 February 2018). "In Leaked Chats, WikiLeaks discusses preference for GOP over Clinton, Russia, Trolling, and Feminists They Don't Like". The Intercept. Retrieved 12 September 2021. In 2013, former WikiLeaks volunteer James Ball explained that he left the group over what he said was Assange's close relationship with the Holocaust denier Israel Shamir ... Former WikiLeaks spokesperson Daniel Domscheit-Berg raised similar concerns about Shamir. Johns-Wickberg, Nick (17 September 2010). "Daniel Assange: I never thought WikiLeaks would succeed". Crikey. Retrieved 23 March 2022. "WikiLeaks: Julian Assange's online dating profile: 'I am danger, achtung'". www.telegraph.co.uk. 13 December 2010. Retrieved 14 July 2023. "Loving a leakster: Assange's apparent online dating life". CNN. Retrieved 14 July 2023. Hill, Kashmir. "Leaked: Julian Assange's OkCupid Profile". Forbes. Retrieved 14 July 2023. "Julian Assange denies making asylum request that was refused by France". The Guardian. Australian Associated Press. 4 July 2015. Retrieved 23 March 2022. Morrow, Amanda (19 April 2019). "Julian Assange: France urged to take a stand for the whistleblower nobody wants". RFI. Retrieved 23 March 2022. Back in 2015, Assange wrote an open letter to then-president Francois Hollande, published in Le Monde, warning his life was in danger and asking for help. 'My youngest child and his mother are French.' "Julian Assange fathered two children in the Ecuadorian embassy". 12 April 2020. Quinn, Allison; Montgomery, Blake (11 April 2020). "Wikileaks Founder Julian Assange Reportedly Fathered Two Kids While Holed Up in Embassy Fighting Extradition". The Daily Beast. Retrieved 23 March 2022. Jones, Alan (12 April 2020). "Assange's partner pleas for his release". Australian Associated Press. Archived from the original on 11 April 2020. Retrieved 12 April 2020. Otte, Jedidajah (12 April 2020). "Release Julian Assange, says woman who had two children with him while in embassy". The Guardian. Retrieved 23 March 2022. "Julian Assange's fiancee publicly joins the campaign for his release". SBS. AAP. 12 April 2020. Retrieved 12 April 2020. Keane, Dan (13 April 2020). "Wikileaks founder Julian Assange fathered two children while inside the Ecuadorean embassy". News.com.au. Quinn, Ben (7 November 2021). "Julian Assange and fiancee claim they are being blocked from marrying". The Guardian. Retrieved 7 November 2021. "Wikileaks: Julian Assange given permission to marry partner in prison". BBC News. 11 November 2021. Retrieved 11 November 2021. "Julian Assange: Wikileaks founder gets married in Belmarsh prison". BBC News. 23 March 2022. Retrieved 23 March 2022. "Kylie Moore-Gilbert, Julian Assange are cousins, connections reveal". The Australian. Burns, John F.; Somaiya, Ravi (23 October 2010). "WikiLeaks Founder on the Run, Trailed by Notoriety". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 9 February 2023. Hooton, Amanda (6 December 2019). "Love him or hate him or simply don't care, Julian Assange's fight for freedom concerns us all". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 10 May 2021. The 65-year-old is one of only a handful of Australians to have seen Assange since his imprisonment; she has travelled, at her own expense, on her own time, to see him; and recently she committed herself to giving '100 per cent of my attention and resources' to his defence. She's been a supporter since 2006, long before he was famous. Ball, James; Rusbridger, Alan; Brooke, Heather; Pilger, John; Stephens, Mark; Loach, Ken; Katz, Ian (24 August 2012). "Who is Julian Assange? By the people who know him best". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 17 November 2023. Greenberg, Andy. "Ex-WikiLeaker Claims Defectors Took Control Of Leaks From Assange". Forbes. Retrieved 7 February 2023. Rosenbloom, Joseph. "Blowing the whistle on Assange". Boston.com. Retrieved 7 February 2023. Khan, Jemima (10 June 2021). "Jemima Khan on Julian Assange: how the Wikileaks founder alienated his allies". New Statesman. Retrieved 7 February 2023. Creighton, Adam. "Julian Assange a scoundrel who raped America, says Mike Pompeo in new book Never Give an Inch". The Australian. "When Americans Lost Faith in the News". The New Yorker. 30 January 2023. Retrieved 5 February 2023. Stewart, Emily (12 April 2019). "Is Julian Assange's arrest a threat to freedom of the press? Depends on whom you ask". Vox. Retrieved 30 January 2023. "Opinion | Is Julian Assange a journalist, or is he just an accused thief?". Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved 30 January 2023. "Opinion | 'Curious Eyes Never Run Dry'". The New York Times. 11 April 2019. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 30 January 2023. Savage, Charlie (28 November 2022). "Major News Outlets Urge U.S. to Drop Its Charges Against Assange". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 25 February 2023. "Snowden among statues unveiled in Berlin". The Local. 2 May 2015. Retrieved 6 September 2021. "Index on Censorship Award winners 2008". Index on Censorship. 16 December 2008. Retrieved 12 July 2015. "Amnesty International Media Awards 2009: full list of winners". The Guardian. 3 June 2009. Retrieved 8 July 2015. "Julian Assange: Readers' Choice for TIME's Person of the Year 2010". Time. 13 December 2010. Retrieved 12 July 2015. "Julian Assange". Sam Adams Associates for Integrity in Intelligence. 23 October 2010. Retrieved 8 July 2015. Xiao, Edward (24 December 2010). "Julian Assange 'Man of the Year' according to Le Monde". Digital Journal. Retrieved 31 January 2019. Squires, Nick (14 December 2010). "WikiLeaks: Julian Assange crowned 'Rock Star of the Year' by Italian Rolling Stone". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 19 March 2014. "Journalists' union shows support for Assange". ABC News. 23 December 2010. Retrieved 17 March 2014. "Julian Assange Given Press Freedom Award". CBS News. 1 January 2011. Retrieved 12 July 2015. "Sydney Peace Medal: Julian Assange". Sydney Peace Foundation. Retrieved 8 July 2015. "Statement of the Walkley Foundation Board". Walkley Foundation. 16 April 2019. Retrieved 20 July 2021. "Previous Winners". The Martha Gellhorn Prize for Journalism. Retrieved 8 July 2015. "Liberty Victoria overview 2010–2011". Liberty Victoria. Retrieved 8 July 2015. "Big Brother Award Italia 2012". Big Brother Award. Retrieved 13 April 2019. "Past Honorees". Global Exchange Human Rights Awards. Archived from the original on 27 June 2015. Retrieved 12 July 2015. "Yoko Ono Lennon Presents 2013 Courage Award to Julian Assange". Imagine Peace. 4 February 2013. Retrieved 8 July 2015. "Piece No. 1 – The Julian Assange Show with Hassan Nasrallah". New York Festivals. Archived from the original on 2 January 2018. Retrieved 12 July 2015. "ABI homenageia defensores da liberdade de imprensa e de informação | ABI". www.abi.org.br. "Kazakh Journalists' Union Honors WikiLeaks Founder". Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. 24 June 2014. Retrieved 12 July 2015. Jones, Alan (17 April 2019). "Julian Assange wins EU journalism award". The Canberra Times. Retrieved 23 April 2019. Whitehead, Joanna (28 September 2019). "Julian Assange held in 'sordid' solitary confinement for up to 23 hours a day, says father". iNews. Retrieved 29 September 2019. "This Year, the Stuttgart Peace Prize is Awarded to Julian Assange". Pressenza. 29 July 2020. Retrieved 3 August 2020. "Assange receives honorary membership at German PEN Centre". Deutsche Presse-Agentur. 2 November 2021. Retrieved 3 November 2021. "Konrad-Wolf-Preis 2023 an Julian Assange". www.adk.de (in German). 11 July 2023. Retrieved 12 July 2023. https://www.pressenza.com/2023/10/julian-assange-made-honorary-citizen-of-rome-by-the-city-council-today/ "Julian Assange è cittadino onorario di Roma: solo Italia Viva contraria in Consiglio comunale. Raggi: "Segnale importante"". Il Fatto Quotidiano (in Italian). 15 February 2024. Retrieved 30 March 2024. Assange, Julian (20 September 2016). The WikiLeaks Files: The World According to US Empire. Verso Books. ISBN 978-1-78478-621-2. Archived from the original on 5 May 2016. Retrieved 13 January 2016. Wiseman, Andreas (24 October 2013). "WikiLeaks backs second film". Screen. Retrieved 11 April 2019. Pilger, John (10 December 2010). "Clips from John Pilger's The War You Don't See". The Guardian. Snierson, Dan (30 January 2012). "WikiLeaks' Julian Assange to guest on 'The Simpsons'". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved 30 January 2012. Kohn, Eric (19 May 2016). "Cannes Review: Laura Poitras' Julian Assange Doc 'Risk' is a Prequel to 'Citizenfour'". IndieWire. Retrieved 12 April 2019. Felsenthal, Julia (15 June 2015). "How the Yes Men Found Themselves in a Flourishing Bromance With Julian Assange". Vogue. Retrieved 12 April 2019. "Terminal F/Chasing Edward Snowden". The Film Sufi. Retrieved 11 December 2016. Lee, Benjamin (25 August 2015). "Citizenfour director to preview Assange documentary at New York film festival". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 13 January 2016. Hattenstone, Simon (29 June 2017). "Laura Poitras on her WikiLeaks film Risk: 'I knew Julian Assange was going to be furious'". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 12 April 2019. Haring, Bruce (12 August 2017). "Officials Angry at Billboard Ban For 'Architects of Denial' Film". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved 19 September 2017. Jaworowski, Ken (30 November 2017). "Review: 'The New Radical' Asks, Is It O.K. to Build Your Own Gun?". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 12 April 2019. Pakavakis, Constantine (29 August 2023). "Award Winning New Documentary THE TRUST FALL: JULIAN ASSANGE". PEN Melbourne. Retrieved 8 February 2024. "The TRUST FALL: Julian Assange Documentary The TRUST FALL: Julian Assange Documentary". Amnesty International Australia. Retrieved 8 February 2024. "The Trust Fall: Julian Assange". BBFF. Retrieved 8 February 2024. Nick Cohen, You Can't Read this Book: Censorship in an Age of Freedom (2012). Ali, Tariq; Kunstler, Margaret, eds. (21 November 2019). In Defense of Julian Assange. OR Books. ISBN 978-1-68219-221-4. Juan Branco, Assange, l'antisouverain (Paris, Éditions du Cerf, 2020, ISBN 978-2-204-13307-4) Sharpe, Karen, ed. (16 November 2021). Julian Assange In His Own Words. OR Books. ISBN 978-1-68219-263-4. Melzer, Nils (8 February 2022). The Trial of Julian Assange. Verso Books. ISBN 978-1-83976-622-0. Underground: The Julian Assange Story (2012), Australian TV drama that premiered at the 2012 Toronto International Film Festival. Julian (2012), Australian short film about nine-year-old Julian Assange. The film won several awards and prizes. The Fifth Estate (2013), American thriller that Assange said was a 'serious propaganda attack' on WikiLeaks and its staff. We Steal Secrets: The Story of WikiLeaks (2013), American documentary. Hacking Justice (2017), German documentary. Ithaka (2021), Australian documentary produced by Assange's brother Gabriel Shipton, which deals with his father's worldwide campaign for Julian's release from prison. Julian Assange at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Works by Julian Assange at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Julian Assange at Internet Archive Julian Assange at TED Julian Assange cypherpunks mailing list posts at Mailing List Archives