Singapore, officially the Republic of Singapore, is an island country and city-state in maritime Southeast Asia. It is located about one degree of latitude (137 kilometres or 85 miles) north of the equator, off the southern tip of the Malay Peninsula, bordering the Strait of Malacca to the west, the Singapore Strait to the south along with the Riau Islands in Indonesia, the South China Sea to the east, and the Straits of Johor along with the State of Johor in Malaysia to the north. The country's territory comprises one main island, 63 satellite islands and islets, and one outlying islet; the combined area of these has increased by approximately 25% since the country's independence as a result of extensive land reclamation projects. It has the second highest population density of any country in the world, although there are numerous green and recreational spaces as a result of urban planning. With a multicultural population and in recognition of the cultural identities of the major ethnic groups within the nation, Singapore has four official languages: English, Malay, Mandarin, and Tamil. English is the lingua franca, with its exclusive use in numerous public services. Multi-racialism is enshrined in the constitution and continues to shape national policies in education, housing, and politics. Singapore's history dates back at least eight hundred years, having been a maritime emporium known as Temasek and subsequently a major constituent part of several successive thalassocratic empires. Its contemporary era began in 1819, when Stamford Raffles established Singapore as an entrepôt trading post of the British Empire. In 1867, the colonies in Southeast Asia were reorganised, and Singapore came under the direct control of Britain as part of the Straits Settlements. During World War II, Singapore was occupied by Japan in 1942 and returned to British control as a separate Crown colony following Japan's surrender in 1945. Singapore gained self-governance in 1959 and, in 1963, became part of the new federation of Malaysia, alongside Malaya, North Borneo, and Sarawak. Ideological differences, most notably the perceived encroachment of the egalitarian "Malaysian Malaysia" political ideology led by Lee Kuan Yew into the other constituent entities of Malaysia—at the perceived expense of the bumiputera and the policies of Ketuanan Melayu—eventually led to Singapore's expulsion from the federation two years later; Singapore became an independent sovereign country in 1965. After early years of turbulence and despite lacking natural resources and a hinterland, the nation rapidly developed to become one of the Four Asian Tigers. With its growth based on international trade and economic globalisation, it integrated itself with the world economy through free trade with minimal-to-no trade barriers or tariffs, export-oriented industrialisation, and the large accumulation of received foreign direct investments, foreign exchange reserves, and assets held by sovereign wealth funds. As a highly developed country, it has one of the highest GDP per capita (PPP) in the world. Identified as a tax haven, Singapore is the only country in Asia with a AAA sovereign credit rating from all major rating agencies. It is a major aviation, financial, and maritime shipping hub and has consistently been ranked as one of the most expensive cities to live in for expatriates and foreign workers. Singapore ranks highly in key social indicators: education, healthcare, quality of life, personal safety, infrastructure, and housing, with a home-ownership rate of 88 percent. Singaporeans enjoy one of the longest life expectancies, fastest Internet connection speeds, lowest infant mortality rates, and lowest levels of corruption in the world. Singapore is a unitary parliamentary republic with a Westminster system of unicameral parliamentary government, and its legal system is based on common law. While the country is a multi-party democracy with free elections, the government under the People's Action Party (PAP) wields significant control and dominance over politics and society. The PAP has governed the country continuously since full internal self-government was achieved in 1959, currently holding 79 out of 93 elected seats in Parliament. One of the five founding members of ASEAN, Singapore is also the headquarters of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation Secretariat, the Pacific Economic Cooperation Council Secretariat, and is the host city of many international conferences and events. Singapore is also a member of the United Nations, the World Trade Organization, the East Asia Summit, the Non-Aligned Movement, and the Commonwealth of Nations. The English name of "Singapore" is an anglicisation of the native Malay name for the country, Singapura (pronounced [siŋapura]), which was in turn derived from the Sanskrit word for 'lion city' (Sanskrit: सिंहपुर; romanised: Siṃhapura; Brahmi: 𑀲𑀺𑀁𑀳𑀧𑀼𑀭; literally "lion city"; siṃha means 'lion', pura means 'city' or 'fortress' ). Pulau Ujong was one of the earliest references to Singapore Island, which corresponds to a Chinese account from the third century referred to a place as Pú Luó Zhōng (Chinese: 蒲 羅 中), a transcription of the Malay name for 'island at the end of a peninsula'. Early references to the name Temasek (or Tumasik) are found in the Nagarakretagama, a Javanese eulogy written in 1365, and a Vietnamese source from the same time period. The name possibly means Sea Town, being derived from the Malay tasek, meaning 'sea' or 'lake'. The Chinese traveller Wang Dayuan visited a place around 1330 named Danmaxi (Chinese: 淡馬錫; pinyin: Dànmǎxí; Wade–Giles: Tan Ma Hsi) or Tam ma siak, depending on pronunciation; this may be a transcription of Temasek, alternatively, it may be a combination of the Malay Tanah meaning 'land' and Chinese xi meaning 'tin', which was traded on the island. Variations of the name Siṃhapura were used for a number of cities throughout the region prior to the establishment of the Kingdom of Singapura. In Hindu–Buddhist culture, lions were associated with power and protection, which may explain the attraction of such a name. The name Singapura supplanted Temasek sometime before the 15th century, after the establishment of the Kingdom of Singapura on the island by a fleeing Sumatran Raja (prince) from Palembang. However, the precise time and reason for the name change is unknown. The semi-historical Malay Annals state that Temasek was christened Singapura by Sang Nila Utama, a 13th-century Sumatran Raja from Palembang. The Annals state that Sang Nila Utama encountered a strange beast on the island that he took to be a lion. Seeing this as an omen, he established the town of Singapura where he encountered the beast.: 37, 88–92 : 30–31  The second hypothesis, drawn from Portuguese sources, postulates that this mythical story is based on the real life Parameswara of Palembang. Parameswara declared independence from Majapahit and mounted a Lion Throne. After then being driven into exile by the Javanese, he usurped control over Temasek. It is possible that he rechristened the area as Singapura, recalling the throne he had been driven from. Under Japanese occupation, Singapore was renamed Syonan (Japanese: 昭 南, Hepburn: Shōnan), meaning 'light of the south'. Singapore is sometimes referred to by the nickname the "Garden City", in reference to its parks and tree-lined streets. Another informal name, the "Little Red Dot", was adopted after an article in the Asian Wall Street Journal of 4 August 1998 said that Indonesian President B. J. Habibie referred to Singapore as a red dot on a map. In 1299, according to the Malay Annals, the Kingdom of Singapura was founded on the island by Sang Nila Utama. Although the historicity of the accounts as given in the Malay Annals is the subject of academic debates, it is nevertheless known from various documents that Singapore in the 14th century, then known as Temasek, was a trading port under the influence of both the Majapahit Empire and the Siamese kingdoms, and was a part of the Indosphere. These Indianised kingdoms were characterised by surprising resilience, political integrity and administrative stability. Historical sources also indicate that around the end of the 14th century, its ruler Parameswara was attacked by either the Majapahit or the Siamese, forcing him to move to Malacca where he founded the Sultanate of Malacca. Archaeological evidence suggests that the main settlement on Fort Canning was abandoned around this time, although a small trading settlement continued in Singapore for some time afterwards. In 1613, Portuguese raiders burned down the settlement, and the island faded into obscurity for the next two centuries. By then, Singapore was nominally part of the Johor Sultanate. The wider maritime region and much trade was under Dutch control for the following period after the Dutch conquest of Malacca. The British governor Stamford Raffles arrived in Singapore on 28 January 1819 and soon recognised the island as a natural choice for the new port. The island was then nominally ruled by Tengku Abdul Rahman, the Sultan of Johor, who was controlled by the Dutch and the Bugis. However, the Sultanate was weakened by factional division: Abdul Rahman, the Temenggong of Johor to Tengku Abdul Rahman, as well as his officials, were loyal to the Sultan's elder brother Tengku Long, who was living in exile in Penyengat Island, Riau Islands. With the Temenggong's help, Raffles managed to smuggle Tengku Long back into Singapore. Raffles offered to recognise Tengku Long as the rightful Sultan of Johor, under the title of Sultan Hussein, as well as provide him with a yearly payment of $5000 and another $3000 to the Temenggong; in return, Sultan Hussein would grant the British the right to establish a trading post on Singapore. The Treaty of Singapore was signed on 6 February 1819. In 1824, a further treaty with the Sultan led to the entire island becoming a part of the British Empire. In 1826, Singapore became part of the Straits Settlements, then under the jurisdiction of British India. Singapore became the regional capital in 1836. Prior to Raffles' arrival, there were only about a thousand people living on the island, mostly indigenous Malays along with a handful of Chinese. By 1860 the population had swelled to over 80,000, more than half being Chinese. Many of these early immigrants came to work on the pepper and gambier plantations. In 1867, the Straits Settlements were separated from British India, coming under the direct control of Britain. Later, in the 1890s, when the rubber industry became established in Malaya and Singapore, the island became a global centre for rubber sorting and export. Singapore was not greatly affected by the First World War (1914–18), as the conflict did not spread to Southeast Asia. The only significant event during the war was the 1915 Singapore Mutiny by Muslim sepoys from British India, who were garrisoned in Singapore. After hearing rumours that they were to be sent to fight the Ottoman Empire, a Muslim state, the soldiers rebelled, killing their officers and several British civilians before the mutiny was suppressed by non-Muslim troops arriving from Johore and Burma. After World War I, the British built the large Singapore Naval Base as part of the defensive Singapore strategy. Originally announced in 1921, the construction of the base proceeded at a slow pace until the Japanese invasion of Manchuria in 1931. Costing $60 million and not fully completed in 1938, it was nonetheless the largest dry dock in the world, the third-largest floating dock, and had enough fuel tanks to support the entire British navy for six months. The base was defended by heavy 15-inch (380 mm) naval guns stationed at Fort Siloso, Fort Canning and Labrador, as well as a Royal Air Force airfield at Tengah Air Base. Winston Churchill touted it as the "Gibraltar of the East", and military discussions often referred to the base as simply "East of Suez". However, the British Home Fleet was stationed in Europe, and the British could not afford to build a second fleet to protect their interests in Asia. The plan was for the Home Fleet to sail quickly to Singapore in the event of an emergency. As a consequence, after World War II broke out in 1939, the fleet was fully occupied with defending Britain, leaving Singapore vulnerable to Japanese invasion. During the Pacific War, the Japanese invasion of Malaya culminated in the Battle of Singapore. When the British force of 60,000 troops surrendered on 15 February 1942, British prime minister Winston Churchill called the defeat "the worst disaster and largest capitulation in British history". British and Empire losses during the fighting for Singapore were heavy, with a total of nearly 85,000 personnel captured. About 5,000 were killed or wounded, of which Australians made up the majority. Japanese casualties during the fighting in Singapore amounted to 1,714 killed and 3,378 wounded. The occupation was to become a major turning point in the histories of several nations, including those of Japan, Britain, and Singapore. Japanese newspapers triumphantly declared the victory as deciding the general situation of the war. Between 5,000 and 25,000 ethnic Chinese people were killed in the subsequent Sook Ching massacre. British forces had planned to liberate Singapore in 1945; however, the war ended before these operations could be carried out. After the Japanese surrender to the Allies on 15 August 1945, Singapore fell into a brief state of violence and disorder; looting and revenge-killing were widespread. British, Australian, and Indian troops led by Lord Louis Mountbatten returned to Singapore to receive the formal surrender of Japanese forces in the region from General Seishirō Itagaki on behalf of General Hisaichi Terauchi on 12 September 1945. Meanwhile, Tomoyuki Yamashita was tried by a US military commission for war crimes, but not for crimes committed by his troops in Malaya or Singapore. He was convicted and hanged in the Philippines on 23 February 1946. Much of Singapore's infrastructure had been destroyed during the war, including those needed to supply utilities. A shortage of food led to malnutrition, disease, and rampant crime and violence. A series of strikes in 1947 caused massive stoppages in public transport and other services. However, by late 1947 the economy began to recover, facilitated by a growing international demand for tin and rubber. The failure of Britain to successfully defend its colony against the Japanese changed its image in the eyes of Singaporeans. British Military Administration ended on 1 April 1946, and Singapore became a separate Crown Colony. In July 1947, separate Executive and Legislative Councils were established and the election of six members of the Legislative Council was scheduled for the following year. During the 1950s, Chinese communists, with strong ties to the trade unions and Chinese schools, waged a guerrilla war against the government, leading to the Malayan Emergency. The 1954 National Service riots, Hock Lee bus riots, and Chinese middle schools riots in Singapore were all linked to these events. David Marshall, pro-independence leader of the Labour Front, won Singapore's first general election in 1955. He led a delegation to London, and Britain rejected his demand for complete self-rule. He resigned and was replaced by Lim Yew Hock in 1956, and after further negotiations Britain agreed to grant Singapore full internal self-government for all matters except defence and foreign affairs on 3 June 1959. Days before, in the 30 May 1959 election, the People's Action Party (PAP) won a landslide victory. Governor Sir William Allmond Codrington Goode served as the first Yang di-Pertuan Negara (Head of State). PAP leaders believed that Singapore's future lay with Malaya, due to strong ties between the two. It was thought that reuniting with Malaya would benefit the economy by creating a common market, alleviating ongoing unemployment woes in Singapore. However, a sizeable pro-communist wing of the PAP was strongly opposed to the merger, fearing a loss of influence, and hence formed the Barisan Sosialis, splitting from the PAP. The ruling party of Malaya, United Malays National Organisation (UMNO), was staunchly anti-communist, and it was suspected UMNO would support the non-communist factions of PAP. UMNO, initially sceptical of the idea of a merger due to distrust of the PAP government and concern that the large ethnic Chinese population in Singapore would alter the racial balance in Malaya on which their political power base depended, became supportive of the idea of the merger due to joint fear of a communist takeover. On 27 May 1961, Malaya's prime minister, Tunku Abdul Rahman, made a surprise proposal for a new Federation called Malaysia, which would unite the current and former British possessions in the region: the Federation of Malaya, Singapore, Brunei, North Borneo, and Sarawak. UMNO leaders believed that the additional Malay population in the Bornean territories would balance Singapore's Chinese population. The British government, for its part, believed that the merger would prevent Singapore from becoming a haven for communism. To obtain a mandate for a merger, the PAP held a referendum on the merger. This referendum included a choice of different terms for a merger with Malaysia and had no option for avoiding merger altogether. On 16 September 1963, Singapore joined with Malaya, the North Borneo, and Sarawak to form the new Federation of Malaysia under the terms of the Malaysia Agreement. Under this Agreement, Singapore had a relatively high level of autonomy compared to the other states of Malaysia. Indonesia opposed the formation of Malaysia due to its own claims over Borneo and launched Konfrontasi ("Confrontation" in Indonesian) in response to the formation of Malaysia. On 10 March 1965, a bomb planted by Indonesian saboteurs on a mezzanine floor of MacDonald House exploded, killing three people and injuring 33 others. It was the deadliest of at least 42 bomb incidents which occurred during the confrontation. Two members of the Indonesian Marine Corps, Osman bin Haji Mohamed Ali and Harun bin Said, were eventually convicted and executed for the crime. The explosion caused US$250,000 (equivalent to US$2,417,107 in 2023) in damages to MacDonald House. Even after the merger, the Singaporean government and the Malaysian central government disagreed on many political and economic issues. Despite an agreement to establish a common market, Singapore continued to face restrictions when trading with the rest of Malaysia. In retaliation, Singapore did not extend to Sabah and Sarawak the full extent of the loans agreed to for economic development of the two eastern states. Talks soon broke down, and abusive speeches and writing became rife on both sides. This led to communal strife in Singapore, culminating in the 1964 race riots. On 7 August 1965, Malaysian prime minister Tunku Abdul Rahman, seeing no alternative to avoid further bloodshed (and with the help of secret negotiations by PAP leaders, as revealed in 2015) advised the Parliament of Malaysia that it should vote to expel Singapore from Malaysia. On 9 August 1965, the Malaysian Parliament voted 126 to 0 to move a bill to amend the constitution, expelling Singapore from Malaysia, which left Singapore as a newly independent country. After being expelled from Malaysia, Singapore became independent as the Republic of Singapore on 9 August 1965, with Lee Kuan Yew and Yusof bin Ishak as the first prime minister and president respectively. In 1967, the country co-founded the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). Race riots broke out once more in 1969. Lee Kuan Yew's emphasis on rapid economic growth, support for business entrepreneurship, and limitations on internal democracy shaped Singapore's policies for the next half-century. Economic growth continued throughout the 1980s, with the unemployment rate falling to 3% and real GDP growth averaging at about 8% up until 1999. During the 1980s, Singapore began to shift towards high-tech industries, such as the wafer fabrication sector, in order to remain competitive as neighbouring countries began manufacturing with cheaper labour. Singapore Changi Airport was opened in 1981 and Singapore Airlines was formed. The Port of Singapore became one of the world's busiest ports and the service and tourism industries also grew immensely during this period. The PAP has remained in power since independence. Some activists and opposition politicians see the government's strict regulation of political and media activities as an infringement on political rights. In response, Singapore has seen several significant political changes, such as the introduction of the non-constituency members of parliament in 1984 to allow up to three losing candidates from opposition parties to be appointed as MPs. Group representation constituencies (GRCs) were introduced in 1988 to create multi-seat electoral divisions, intended to ensure minority representation in parliament. Nominated members of parliament were introduced in 1990 to allow non-elected non-partisan MPs. The constitution was amended in 1991 to provide for an elected president who has veto power in the use of past reserves and appointments to certain public offices. In 1990, Goh Chok Tong succeeded Lee and became Singapore's second prime minister. During Goh's tenure, the country went through the 1997 Asian financial crisis and the 2003 SARS outbreak. In 2004, Lee Hsien Loong, the eldest son of Lee Kuan Yew, became the country's third prime minister. Lee Hsien Loong's tenure included the 2008 global financial crisis, the resolution of a dispute over land ownership at Tanjong Pagar railway station between Singapore and Malaysia, and the introduction of the two integrated resorts (IRs), located at the Marina Bay Sands and Resorts World Sentosa. The PAP suffered its worst ever electoral results in 2011, winning just 60% of votes, amidst debate over issues including the influx of foreign workers and the high cost of living. On 23 March 2015, Lee Kuan Yew died, and a one-week period of public mourning was observed nationwide. Subsequently, the PAP regained its dominance in Parliament through the September general election, receiving 69.9% of the popular vote, although this remained lower than the 2001 tally of 75.3% and the 1968 tally of 86.7%. The 2020 election held in July saw the PAP drop to 61% of the vote, while the Workers' Party took 10 of the 93 seats, the highest number ever won by another party. Singapore is a parliamentary republic based on the Westminster system. The Constitution of Singapore is the supreme law of the country, establishing the structure and responsibility of governance. The President is the head of state. The governance of Singapore is separated into three branches: Executive: The executive consists of the cabinet, led by the prime minister, and the Attorney General's Chambers led by the Attorney-General. The cabinet is collectively responsible for all government policies and the day-to-day administration of the affairs of state. It is typically composed of members of the Singapore Parliament. The prime minister is appointed by the President, and the ministers in the cabinet and the attorney-general are appointed by the president, acting on the advice and consent of the prime minister. The prime minister is the effective head of the executive branch of government. Legislature: The Singapore Parliament is unicameral and, together with the president, comprises the legislature. Members of Parliament (MP) consist of elected, non-constituency, and nominated members. The majority of MPs are elected into parliament at a general election. The Singapore Parliament is collectively responsible for enacting the laws governing the state. The president holds limited discretionary powers of oversight over the government. The president's veto powers are further subject to parliamentary overruling. Judiciary: The judiciary's function is to independently administer justice and is headed by the Chief Justice. The judges and judicial commissioners are appointed by the president on the advice of the prime minister. The Supreme Court and State Courts adjudicates in civil disputes between persons, convicts or acquits accused persons in criminal prosecutions, and interprets laws to decide on its constitutionality. Any law or provision of a law found to be unconstitutional can be struck down by the Supreme Court. The president is directly elected by popular vote for a renewable six-year term. Requirements for this position, which were enacted by the PAP government, are extremely stringent, such that only a handful of people qualify for the candidacy. These qualifications include that a candidate needs to be a person at least 45 years of age who is no longer a member of a political party, to either have held public office for at least 3 years in a number of specific public service leadership roles, or to have 3 years experience as chief executive of a fully profitable private sector company with at least S$500 million in shareholders' equity, be a resident in Singapore for at least 10 years, not have a criminal record, and more. Candidates must also "satisfy" the Presidential Elections Committee (PEC) that he or she is a person of integrity, good character and reputation. The Constitution requires that presidential elections be "reserved" for a racial community if no one from that ethnic group has been elected to the presidency in the five most recent terms. Only members of that community may qualify as candidates in a reserved presidential election. In the 2017 presidential election, this combination of stringent requirements and a reserved election that required the candidate to be of the 13% Malay ethnic group led to the PEC approving a single candidate for the presidency; Halimah Yacob, considered part of the Malay community, won in an uncontested election. She also became Singapore's first female president. Members of Parliament (MPs) are elected at least every five years (or sooner with a snap election). The 14th and current Parliament has 103 members; 93 were directly elected from the 31 constituencies, nine are nonpartisan nominated members appointed by the president, and three are non-constituency members from opposition parties who were not elected in the last general election but appointed to the legislature to increase opposition party representation. In group representation constituencies (GRCs), political parties assemble teams of candidates to contest elections. At least one MP in a GRC must be of an ethnic minority background. All elections are held using first-past-the-post voting. MPs host weekly political surgeries, called "Meet-the-People Sessions", where they help constituents resolve personal issues which can be related to housing, financial assistance, and immigration. The People's Action Party occupies a dominant position in Singaporean politics, having won large parliamentary majorities in every election since self-governance was granted in 1959. The PAP, self-described as pragmatic, have a syncretic ideology combining free-market principles, civil nationalism, and welfarism. Despite promulgating restrictions on civil liberties, Singapore under the PAP has seen consistent economic growth and political stability. The most represented and popular opposition party is the Workers' Party. The judicial system is based on English common law, continuing the legal tradition established during British rule and with substantial local differences. Criminal law is based on the Indian Penal Code originally intended for British India, and was at the time as a crown colony also adopted by the British colonial authorities in Singapore and remains the basis of the criminal code in the country with a few exceptions, amendments and repeals since it came into force. Trial by jury was abolished in 1970. Both corporal punishment (caning) and capital punishment (by hanging) are legal penalties. The right to freedom of speech and association is guaranteed by Article 14(1) of the Constitution of Singapore, although there are provisions in the subsequent subsection that regulate them. The government has restricted freedom of speech and freedom of the press as well as some civil and political rights. In 2023, Singapore was ranked 129th out of 180 nations by Reporters Without Borders on the global Press Freedom Index. Freedom House ranks Singapore as "partly free" in its Freedom in the World report, and the Economist Intelligence Unit ranks Singapore as a "flawed democracy", the second freest rank of four, in its "Democracy Index". All public gatherings of five or more people require police permits, and protests may legally be held only at the Speakers' Corner. In the Corruption Perceptions Index, which ranks countries by "perceived levels of public sector corruption", Singapore has consistently ranked as one of the least corrupt countries in the world. Singapore's unique combination of a strong, almost authoritarian, government with an emphasis on meritocracy and good governance is known as the "Singapore model", and is regarded as a key factor behind Singapore's political stability, economic growth, and harmonious social order. In 2021, the World Justice Project's Rule of Law Index ranked Singapore as 17th overall among the world's 193 countries for adherence to the rule of law. Singapore ranked high on the factors of order and security (#3), absence of corruption (#3), regulatory enforcement (#4), civil justice (#8), and criminal justice (#7), and ranked significantly lower on factors of open government (#34), constraints on government powers (#32), and fundamental rights (#38). Singapore's stated foreign policy priority is maintaining security in Southeast Asia and surrounding territories. An underlying principle is political and economic stability in the region. It has diplomatic relations with more than 180 sovereign states. As one of the five founding members of ASEAN, Singapore is a strong supporter of the ASEAN Free Trade Area (AFTA) and the ASEAN Investment Area (AIA); it is also the host of the APEC Secretariat. Singapore is also a founding member of The Forum of Small States (FOSS), a voluntary and informal grouping at the UN. Singapore maintains membership in other regional organisations, such as Asia–Europe Meeting, the Forum for East Asia-Latin American Cooperation, the Indian Ocean Rim Association, and the East Asia Summit. It is also a member of the Non-Aligned Movement, the United Nations and the Commonwealth. While Singapore is not a formal member of the G20, it has been invited to participate in G20 processes in most years since 2010. Singapore is also the location of the Pacific Economic Cooperation Council (PECC) Secretariat. In general, bilateral relations with other ASEAN members are strong; however, disagreements have arisen, and relations with neighbouring Malaysia and Indonesia have sometimes been strained. Malaysia and Singapore have clashed over the delivery of fresh water to Singapore, and access by the Singapore Armed Forces to Malaysian airspace. Border issues exist with Malaysia and Indonesia, and both have banned the sale of marine sand to Singapore over disputes about Singapore's land reclamation. Some previous disputes, such as the Pedra Branca dispute, have been resolved by the International Court of Justice. Piracy in the Strait of Malacca has been a cause of concern for all three countries. Close economic ties exist with Brunei, and the two share a pegged currency value, through a Currency Interchangeability Agreement between the two countries which makes both Brunei dollar and Singapore dollar banknotes and coins legal tender in either country. The first diplomatic contact with China was made in the 1970s, with full diplomatic relations established in the 1990s. China has been Singapore's largest trading partner since 2013, after surpassing Malaysia. Singapore and the United States share a long-standing close relationship, in particular in defence, the economy, health, and education. Singapore has also increased co-operation with ASEAN members and China to strengthen regional security and fight terrorism, and participated in ASEAN's first joint maritime exercise with China in 2018. It has also given support to the US-led coalition to fight terrorism, with bilateral co-operation in counter-terrorism and counter-proliferation initiatives, and joint military exercises. As Singapore has diplomatic relations with both the United States and North Korea, and was one of the few countries that have relationships with both countries, in June 2018, it hosted a historic summit between US President Donald Trump and North Korean leader Kim Jong-un, the first-ever meeting between the sitting leaders of the two nations. It also hosted the Ma–Xi meeting in 2015, the first meeting between the political leaders of the two sides of the Taiwan Strait since the end of the Chinese Civil War in 1950. The Singaporean military, arguably the most technologically advanced in Southeast Asia, consists of the Army, the Navy, the Air Force and the Digital and Intelligence Service. It is seen as the guarantor of the country's independence, translating into Singapore culture, involving all citizens in the country's defence. The government spends 4.9% of the country's GDP on the military—high by regional standards—and one out of every four dollars of government spending is spent on defence. After its independence, Singapore had only two infantry regiments commanded by British officers. Considered too small to provide effective security for the new country, the development of its military forces became a priority. In addition, in October 1971, Britain pulled its military out of Singapore, leaving behind only a small British, Australian and New Zealand force as a token military presence. A great deal of initial support came from Israel, a country unrecognised by Singapore's neighbouring Muslim-majority nations of Malaysia and Indonesia. The Israel Defense Forces (IDF) commanders were tasked by the Singapore Government to create the Singapore Armed Forces (SAF) from scratch, and Israeli instructors were brought in to train Singaporean soldiers. Military courses were conducted according to the IDF's format, and Singapore adopted a system of conscription and reserve service based on the Israeli model. Singapore still maintains strong security ties with Israel and is one of the biggest buyers of Israeli arms and weapons systems, with one recent example being the MATADOR anti-tank weapon. The SAF is being developed to respond to a wide range of issues in both conventional and unconventional warfare. The Defence Science and Technology Agency (DSTA) is responsible for procuring resources for the military. The geographic restrictions of Singapore mean that the SAF must plan to fully repulse an attack, as they cannot fall back and re-group. The small size of the population has also affected the way the SAF has been designed, with a small active force and a large number of reserves. Singapore has conscription for all able-bodied males at age 18, except those with a criminal record or who can prove that their loss would bring hardship to their families. Males who have yet to complete pre-university education, are awarded the Public Service Commission (PSC) scholarship, or are pursuing a local medical degree can opt to defer their draft. Though not required to perform military service, the number of women in the SAF has been increasing: since 1989 they have been allowed to fill military vocations formerly reserved for men. Before induction into a specific branch of the armed forces, recruits undergo at least nine weeks of basic military training. Because of the scarcity of open land on the main island, training involving activities such as live firing and amphibious warfare are often carried out on smaller islands, typically barred to civilian access. However, large-scale drills, considered too dangerous to be performed in the country, have been performed in other countries such as Brunei, Indonesia, Thailand and the United States. In general, military exercises are held with foreign forces once or twice per week. Due to airspace and land constraints, the Republic of Singapore Air Force (RSAF) maintains a number of overseas bases in Australia, the United States, and France. The RSAF's 130 Squadron is based in RAAF Base Pearce, Western Australia, and its 126 Squadron is based in the Oakey Army Aviation Centre, Queensland. The RSAF has one squadron—the 150 Squadron—based in Cazaux Air Base in southern France. The RSAF's overseas detachments in the United States are: Luke Air Force Base in Arizona, Marana in Arizona, Mountain Home Air Force Base in Idaho, and Andersen Air Force Base in Guam. The SAF has sent forces to assist in operations outside the country, in areas such as Iraq, and Afghanistan, in both military and civilian roles. In the region, they have helped to stabilise East Timor and have provided aid to Aceh in Indonesia following the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami.[citation needed] Since 2009, the Republic of Singapore Navy (RSN) has deployed ships to the Gulf of Aden to aid in countering piracy efforts as part of Task Force 151. The SAF also helped in relief efforts during Hurricane Katrina, and Typhoon Haiyan. Singapore is part of the Five Power Defence Arrangements (FPDA), a military alliance with Australia, Malaysia, New Zealand, and the United Kingdom. In 2023, Singapore was ranked the 6th most peaceful country on the Global Peace Index. Capital punishment is a legal and enforced penalty in Singapore. The country is one of four in the developed world to retain the death penalty, along with the United States, Japan and Taiwan. Particularly, its use against drug trafficking has been a source of contention with various non-governmental organisations[who?], regarded by some as a victimless crime.[citation needed] The government has responded that it has "no doubts" that it is the right policy and that there is "clear evidence" of serious deterrence, and that the law should be looked at upon in the wider context of "saving lives", particularly citizens. In 2004, Amnesty International claimed that some legal provisions of the Singapore system for the death penalty conflict with "the right to be presumed innocent until proven guilty". The government has disputed Amnesty's claims, stating that their "position on abolition of the death penalty is by no means uncontested internationally" and that the report contains "grave errors of facts and misrepresentations". From 1938 to 2023, sexual relations between men were technically illegal under Section 377A of the Penal Code, first introduced during British colonial rule. During the last few decades, this law was mostly unenforced and pressure to repeal it increased as homosexuality became more accepted by Singaporean society. Meanwhile, sexual relations between women had always been legal. In 2022, Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong announced that Singapore would repeal 377A, effectively decriminalising homosexual behaviour. Nevertheless, he added that the repeal will not affect the recognition of "traditional familial and societal norms," including how marriage is defined, leaving the legal status of same-sex marriage unchanged for the time, although the possibility of civil unions was not officially ruled out. Lee described this as a compromise between the conservative (and often religious) and progressive elements of Singaporean society to prevent further political fracturing. The law was officially repealed on 3 January 2023. Pink Dot SG, an event held in support of the LGBT community, has drawn thousands of people annually since 2009 with increasing attendance. According to a survey conducted by the Institute of Policy Studies in 2019, Singaporean society has become more liberal on LGBT rights. In the survey, more than 20% of people said that sexual relations between adults of the same sex were not wrong at all or not wrong most of the time, up from 10% in 2013. The survey found that 27% felt the same way about same-sex marriage (an increase from 15% in 2013) and 30% did so about same-sex couples adopting a child (an increase from 24% in 2013). In 2021, six Singaporeans protested for improved trans protections in the educational system outside the Ministry of Education headquarters at Buona Vista. Pimps often traffic women from neighbouring countries such as China, Malaysia and Vietnam at their brothels as well as rented apartments and hostels for higher profit margins when they get a cut from customers. In response, amendments were made to the Women's Charter by the government in 2019 to legislate more serious punishments for traffickers, including imprisonment of up to seven years and a fine of S$100,000. Singapore has a highly developed market economy, based historically on extended entrepôt trade. Along with Hong Kong, South Korea, and Taiwan, Singapore is one of the Four Asian Tigers, and has surpassed its peers in terms of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) per capita. Between 1965 and 1995, growth rates averaged around 6 per cent per annum, transforming the living standards of the population. The Singaporean economy is regarded as free, innovative, dynamic and business-friendly. For several years, Singapore has been one of the few countries with an AAA credit rating from the big three, and the only Asian country to achieve this rating. Singapore attracts a large amount of foreign investment as a result of its location, skilled workforce, low tax rates, advanced infrastructure and zero-tolerance against corruption. It was the world's 4th most competitive economy in 2023, according to the International Institute for Management Development's World Competitiveness Ranking of 64 countries, with the highest GDP (PPP) per capita. Roughly 44 percent of the Singaporean workforce is made up of non-Singaporeans. Despite market freedom, Singapore's government operations have a significant stake in the economy, contributing 22% of the GDP. The city is a popular location for conferences and events. The currency of Singapore is the Singapore dollar (SGD or S$), issued by the Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS). It has been interchangeable with the Brunei dollar at par value since 1967. MAS manages its monetary policy by allowing the Singapore dollar exchange rate to rise or fall within an undisclosed trading band. This is different from most central banks, which use interest rates to manage policy. Singapore has the world's eleventh largest foreign reserves, and one of the highest net international investment position per capita. Singapore has been identified as a tax haven for the wealthy due to its low tax rates on personal income and tax exemptions on foreign-based income and capital gains. Individuals such as Australian millionaire retailer Brett Blundy and multi-billionaire Facebook co-founder Eduardo Saverin are two examples of wealthy individuals who have settled in Singapore. In 2009, Singapore was removed from the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) "liste grise" of tax havens, and ranked fourth on the Tax Justice Network's 2015 Financial Secrecy Index of the world's off-shore financial service providers, banking one-eighth of the world's offshore capital, while "providing numerous tax avoidance and evasion opportunities". In August 2016, The Straits Times reported that Indonesia had decided to create tax havens on two islands near Singapore to bring Indonesian capital back into the tax base. In October 2016, the Monetary Authority of Singapore admonished and fined UBS and DBS and withdrew Falcon Private Bank's banking licence for their alleged role in the Malaysian Sovereign Fund scandal. In 2016, Singapore was rated the world's most expensive city for the third consecutive year by the Economist Intelligence Unit, and this remained true in 2018. The government provides numerous assistance programmes to the homeless and needy through the Ministry of Social and Family Development, so acute poverty is rare. Some of the programmes include providing financial assistance to needy households, providing free medical care at government hospitals, and paying for children's tuition. Other benefits include compensation for gym fees to encourage citizens to exercise, up to S$166,000 as a baby bonus for each citizen, heavily subsidised healthcare, financial aid for the disabled, the provision of reduced-cost laptops for poor students, rebates for costs such as public transport and utility bills, and more. As of 2018 Singapore's ranking in the Human Development Index is 9th in the world, with an HDI value of 0.935. Singapore consists of 63 islands, including the main island, Pulau Ujong. There are two man-made connections to Johor, Malaysia: the Johor–Singapore Causeway in the north and the Tuas Second Link in the west. Jurong Island, Pulau Tekong, Pulau Ubin and Sentosa are the largest of Singapore's smaller islands. The highest natural point is Bukit Timah Hill at 163.63 m (537 ft). Under British rule, Christmas Island and the Cocos Islands were part of Singapore, and both were transferred to Australia in 1957. Pedra Branca is the nation's easternmost point. Land reclamation projects have increased Singapore's land area from 580 km2 (220 sq mi) in the 1960s to 710 km2 (270 sq mi) by 2015, an increase of some 22% (130 km2). The country is projected to reclaim another 56 km2 (20 sq mi). Some projects involve merging smaller islands through land reclamation to form larger, more functional and habitable islands, as has been done with Jurong Island. The type of sand used in reclamation is found in rivers and beaches, rather than deserts, and is in great demand worldwide. In 2010 Singapore imported almost 15 million tons of sand for its projects, the demand being such that Indonesia, Malaysia, and Vietnam have all restricted or barred the export of sand to Singapore in recent years. As a result, in 2016 Singapore switched to using polders for reclamation, in which an area is enclosed and then pumped dry. Singapore's urbanisation means that it has lost 95% of its historical forests, and now over half of the naturally occurring fauna and flora in Singapore is present in nature reserves, such as the Bukit Timah Nature Reserve and the Sungei Buloh Wetland Reserve, which comprise only 0.25% of Singapore's land area. In 1967, to combat this decline in natural space, the government introduced the vision of making Singapore a "garden city", aiming to improve quality of life. Since then, nearly 10% of Singapore's land has been set aside for parks and nature reserves. The government has created plans to preserve the country's remaining wildlife. Singapore's well known gardens include the Singapore Botanic Gardens, a 161-year-old tropical garden and Singapore's first UNESCO World Heritage Site. Singapore has a tropical rainforest climate (Köppen: Af) with no distinctive seasons, uniform temperature and pressure, high humidity, and abundant rainfall. Temperatures usually range from 23 to 32 °C (73 to 90 °F). While temperature does not vary greatly throughout the year, there is a wetter monsoon season from November to February. From July to October, there is often haze caused by bush fires in neighbouring Indonesia, usually from the island of Sumatra. Singapore follows the GMT+8 time zone, one hour ahead of the typical zone for its geographical location. This causes the sun to rise and set particularly late during February, where the sun rises at 7:15 am and sets around 7:20 pm. During July, the sun sets at around 7:15 pm. The earliest the sun rises and sets is in late October and early November when the sun rises at 6:46 am and sets at 6:50 pm. Singapore recognises that climate change and rising sea levels in the decades ahead will have major implications for its low-lying coastline. It estimates that the nation will need to spend $100 billion over the course of the next century to address the issue. In its 2020 budget, the government set aside an initial $5 billion towards a Coastline and Flood Protection Fund. Singapore is the first country in Southeast Asia to levy a carbon tax on its largest carbon-emitting corporations producing more than 25,000 tons of carbon dioxide per year, at $5 per ton. To reduce the country's dependence on fossil fuels, it has ramped up deployment of solar panels on rooftops and vertical surfaces of buildings, and other initiatives like building one of the world's largest floating solar farms at Tengeh Reservoir in Tuas. Singapore considers water a national security issue and the government has sought to emphasise conservation. Water access is universal and of high quality, though the country is projected to face significant water-stress by 2040. To circumvent this, the Public Utilities Board has implemented the "four national taps" strategy – water imported from neighbouring Malaysia, urban rainwater catchments, reclaimed water (NEWater) and seawater desalination. Singapore's approach does not rely only on physical infrastructure; it also emphasises proper legislation and enforcement, water pricing, public education as well as research and development. Singapore has declared that it will be water self-sufficient by the time its 1961 long-term water supply agreement with Malaysia expires in 2061. However, according to official forecasts, water demand in Singapore is expected to double from 380 to 760 million US gallons (1.4 to 2.8 billion litres; 1.4 to 2.8 million cubic meters) per day between 2010 and 2060. The increase is expected to come primarily from non-domestic water use, which accounted for 55% of water demand in 2010 and is expected to account for 70% of demand in 2060. By that time, water demand is expected to be met by reclaimed water at the tune of 50% and by desalination accounting for 30%, compared to only 20% supplied by internal catchments. Singapore is expanding its recycling system and intends to spend $7.4 billion (S$10 billion) in water treatment infrastructure upgrades. The Ulu Pandan wastewater treatment was specially built to test advanced used-water treatment processes before full deployment and won the Water/Wastewater Project of the Year Award at the 2018 Global Water Awards in Paris, France. Operation started in 2017 and was jointly developed by PUB and the Black & Veatch + AECOM Joint Venture. Virtual Singapore is a 3D digital replica of Singapore, which is used by the Government of Singapore, Singapore Land Authority, and many more companies to plan for industrial changes. It is also used for disaster management. Singapore has a road system covering 3,356 kilometres (2,085 mi), which includes 161 kilometres (100 mi) of expressways. The Singapore Area Licensing Scheme, implemented in 1975, became the world's first congestion pricing scheme, and included other complementary measures such as stringent car ownership quotas and improvements in mass transit. Upgraded in 1998 and renamed Electronic Road Pricing (ERP), the system introduced electronic toll collection, electronic detection, and video surveillance technology. A satellite-based system was due to replace the physical gantries by 2020, but has been delayed until 2026 due to global shortages in the supply of semiconductors. As Singapore is a small island with a high population density, the number of private cars on the road is restricted with a pre-set car population quota, to curb pollution and congestion. Car buyers must pay for Additional Registration Fees (ARF) duties of either 100%, 140%, 180% or 220% of the vehicle's Open Market Value (OMV), and bid for a Singaporean Certificate of Entitlement (COE) (that varies twice a month in supply based on the number of car registrations and de-registrations), which allows the car to be driven on the road for maximum period of 10 years. Car prices are generally significantly higher in Singapore than in other English-speaking countries. As with most Commonwealth countries, vehicles on the road and people walking on the streets keep to the left (left-hand traffic). Singapore's public transport network is shaped up with trains (consisting of the MRT and LRT systems), buses and taxis. There are currently six MRT lines (North South MRT line, East West MRT line, North East MRT line, Circle MRT line, Downtown MRT line and Thomson-East Coast MRT line), three LRT lines serving the neighbourhoods of Bukit Panjang and Choa Chu Kang (Bukit Panjang LRT line), Sengkang (Sengkang LRT line) and Punggol (Punggol LRT line), and more than 300 bus routes in operation. Taxis are a popular form of transport as the fares are relatively affordable when compared to many other developed countries, whilst cars in Singapore are the most expensive to own worldwide. The Johor–Singapore Causeway (connecting Singapore with Johor Bahru, Malaysia) is the busiest international land border crossing in the world, whereby approximately 350,000 travellers cross the border checkpoints of both Woodlands Checkpoint and Sultan Iskandar Building daily (with an annual total of 128 million travellers). The Land Transport Authority (LTA) is responsible for all land transport-related infrastructure and operations in Singapore. Singapore is a major international transport hub in Asia, serving some of the busiest sea and air trade routes. Changi Airport is an aviation centre for Southeast Asia and a stopover on Qantas' Kangaroo Route between Sydney and London. There are two civilian airports in Singapore, Singapore Changi Airport and Seletar Airport. Singapore Changi Airport hosts a network of over 100 airlines connecting Singapore to some 300 cities in about 70 countries and territories worldwide. It has been rated one of the best international airports by international travel magazines, including being rated as the world's best airport for the first time in 2006 by Skytrax. Singapore Changi Airport also had the second- and third-busiest international air routes in the world; the Jakarta-Singapore airport pair had 4.8 million passengers carried in 2018, whilst the Singapore-Kuala Lumpur airport pair had 4.5 million passengers carried in 2018, both trailing only behind Hong Kong-Taipei (6.5 million). Singapore Airlines, which is the flag carrier of Singapore, has been regarded as a 5-star airline by Skytrax and been in the world top 10 list of airlines for multiple consecutive years. Changi Airport had also been rated as the world's best airport from 2013 to 2020 before being superseded by Hamad International Airport in Doha; it reclaimed this title in 2023. The Port of Singapore, managed by port operators PSA International and Jurong Port, was the world's second-busiest port in 2019 in terms of shipping tonnage handled, at 2.85 billion gross tons (GT), and in terms of containerised traffic, at 37.2 million twenty-foot equivalent units (TEUs). It is also the world's second-busiest, behind Shanghai, in terms of cargo tonnage with 626 million tons handled. In addition, the port is the world's busiest for transshipment traffic and the world's biggest ship refuelling centre. Singapore is the world's 3rd-largest foreign exchange centre, 6th-largest financial centre, 2nd-largest casino gambling market, 3rd-largest oil-refining and trading centre, largest oil-rig producer and hub for ship repair services, and largest logistics hub. The economy is diversified, with its top contributors being financial services, manufacturing, and oil-refining. Its main exports are refined petroleum, integrated circuits, and computers, which constituted 27% of the country's GDP in 2010. Other significant sectors include electronics, chemicals, mechanical engineering, and biomedical sciences. Singapore was ranked 5th in the Global Innovation Index in 2023 and 7th in 2022. In 2019, there were more than 60 semiconductor companies in Singapore, which together constituted 11% of the global market share. The semiconductor industry alone contributes around 7% of Singapore's GDP. Singapore's largest companies are in the telecommunications, banking, transportation, and manufacturing sectors, many of which started as state-run statutory corporations and have since been publicly listed on the Singapore Exchange. Such companies include Singapore Telecommunications (Singtel), Singapore Technologies Engineering, Keppel Corporation, Oversea-Chinese Banking Corporation (OCBC), Development Bank of Singapore (DBS), and United Overseas Bank (UOB). In 2011, amidst the global financial crisis, OCBC, DBS and UOB were ranked by Bloomberg Businessweek as the world's 1st, 5th, and 6th strongest banks in the world, respectively. It is home to the headquarters of 3 Fortune Global 500 companies, the highest in the region. The nation's best known global companies include Singapore Airlines, Changi Airport, and the Port of Singapore, all of which are among the most-awarded in their respective fields. Singapore Airlines was ranked as Asia's most-admired company, and the world's 19th most-admired company in 2015 by Fortune's annual "50 most admired companies in the world" industry surveys. Other awards it has received include the US-based Travel + Leisure's Best International Airline award, which it has won for 20 consecutive years. Changi Airport connects over 100 airlines to more than 300 cities. The strategic international air hub has more than 480 World's Best Airport awards as of 2015[update], and is known as the most-awarded airport in the world. Over ten free-trade agreements have been signed with other countries and regions. Singapore is the second-largest foreign investor in India. It is the 14th largest exporter and the 15th largest importer in the world. Tourism is a major industry and contributor to the Singaporean economy, attracting 18.5 million international tourists in 2018, more than three times Singapore's total population. Singapore is the 5th most visited city in the world, and 2nd in the Asia-Pacific. In 2019 tourism contributed directly to about 4% of Singapore's GDP, down from 2016, when tourism contributed, directly and indirectly, to around 9.9% of Singapore's GDP. Altogether, the sector generated approximately 8.6% of Singapore's employment in 2016. In 2015, Lonely Planet and The New York Times listed Singapore as their top and 6th-best world destinations to visit, respectively. Well-known landmarks include the Merlion, the Esplanade, Marina Bay Sands, Gardens by the Bay, Jewel Changi Airport, CHIJMES, National Gallery Singapore, the Singapore Flyer, the Orchard Road shopping belt, the resort island of Sentosa, and the Singapore Botanic Gardens, Singapore's first UNESCO World Heritage Site. The Singapore Tourism Board (STB) is the statutory board under the Ministry of Trade and Industry which is tasked with the promotion of the country's tourism industry. In August 2017 the STB and the Economic Development Board (EDB) unveiled a unified brand, Singapore – Passion Made Possible, to market Singapore internationally for tourism and business purposes. The Orchard Road district, which contains multi-storey shopping centres and hotels, can be considered the centre of shopping and tourism in Singapore. Other popular tourist attractions include the Singapore Zoo, River Wonders, Bird Paradise and Night Safari. The Singapore Zoo has embraced the open zoo concept whereby animals are kept in enclosures, separated from visitors by hidden dry or wet moats, instead of caging the animals, and the River Wonders has 300 species of animals, including numerous endangered species. Singapore promotes itself as a medical tourism hub, with about 200,000 foreigners seeking medical care there each year. Singapore medical services aim to serve at least one million foreign patients annually and generate US$3 billion in revenue. As of mid-2023, the estimated population of Singapore was 5,917,600, of whom 3,610,700 (61.6%) were citizens and the remaining 2,306,900 (38.4%) were either permanent residents (522,300) or international students, foreign workers, or dependants (1,644,500). The overall population increased 5% from the prior year, driven largely by foreign workers. According to the country's most recent census in 2020, nearly one in four residents (citizens and permanent residents) was foreign born; including non-residents, roughly 43% of the total population was born abroad. This proportion is largely unchanged from the 2010 census. The 2020 census reported that about 74.3% of residents were of Chinese descent, 13.5% of Malay descent, 9.0% of Indian descent, and 3.2% of other descent (such as Eurasian); this proportion was virtually identical to the 2010 census, with slight increases among Chinese and Malay (0.2% and 0.1% respectively) and minor deceases in Indian and others (0.2% and 0.1%). Prior to 2010, each person could register as a member of only one race, by default that of his or her father; therefore, mixed-race persons were solely grouped under their father's race in government censuses. From 2010 onward, people may register using a multi-racial classification, in which they may choose one primary race and one secondary race, but no more than two. Like other developed countries in Asia, Singapore experienced a rapid decline in its total fertility rate (TFR) beginning in the 1980s. Since 2010, its TFR has largely plateaued at 1.1 children per woman, which is among the lowest in the world and well below the 2.1 needed to replace the population. Consequently, the median age of Singaporean residents is among the highest in the world, at 42.8 in 2022 compared to 39.6 ten years earlier. Starting in 2001, the government introduced a series of programs to increase fertility, including paid maternity leave, childcare subsidies, tax relief and rebates, one-time cash gifts, and grants for companies that implement flexible work arrangements; nevertheless, live births have continued to decline, hitting a record low in 2022. Singapore's immigration policy is designed to alleviate the decline and maintain its working-age population. 91% of resident households (i.e. households headed by a Singapore citizen or permanent resident) own the homes they live in, and the average household size is 3.43 persons (which include dependants who are neither citizens nor permanent residents). However, due to scarcity of land, 78.7% of resident households live in subsidised, high-rise, public housing apartments developed by the Housing and Development Board (HDB). Also, 75.9% of resident households live in properties that are equal to, or larger than, a four-room (i.e. three bedrooms plus one living room) HDB flat or in private housing. Live-in foreign domestic workers are quite common in Singapore, with about 224,500 foreign domestic workers there, as of December 2013. Most major religious denominations are present in Singapore, with the Inter-Religious Organisation, Singapore (IRO) recognising 10 major religions in the city state. A 2014 analysis by the Pew Research Center found Singapore to be the world's most religiously diverse nation, with no single religion claiming a majority. Buddhism is the most widely practised religion, with 31% of residents declaring themselves adherents in the 2020 census. Christianity was the second largest religion at 18.9%, followed by Islam (15.6%), Taoism and Chinese Traditional Beliefs (8.8%) and Hinduism (5.0%). One-fifth of the population had no religious affiliation. The proportion of Christians, Muslims, and the nonreligious slightly increased between 2010 and 2020, while the proportion of Buddhists and Taoists slightly decreased; Hinduism and other faiths remained largely stable in their share of the population. Singapore hosts monasteries and Dharma centres from all three major traditions of Buddhism: Theravada, Mahayana, and Vajrayana. Most Buddhists in Singapore are Chinese and adhere to the Mahayana tradition, owing to decades of missionary activity from China. However, Thailand's Theravada Buddhism has seen growing popularity among the populace (not only the Chinese) during the past decade. Soka Gakkai International, a Japanese Buddhist organisation, is practised by many people in Singapore, and mostly by those of Chinese descent. Tibetan Buddhism has also made slow inroads into the country in recent years. Singapore has four official languages: English, Malay, Mandarin, and Tamil. English is the lingua franca and the main language used in business, government, law and education. The Constitution of Singapore and all government legislation is written in English, and interpreters are required if a language other than English is used in the Singaporean courts. Statutory corporations conduct their businesses in English, while any official documents written in a non-English official language such as Malay, Mandarin, or Tamil are typically translated into English to be accepted for use. Malay was designated as a national language by the Singaporean government after independence from Britain in the 1960s to avoid friction with Singapore's Malay-speaking neighbours of Malaysia and Indonesia. It has a symbolic, rather than functional purpose. It is used in the national anthem Majulah Singapura, in citations of Singaporean orders and decorations and in military commands. Singaporean Malay is officially written in the Latin-based Rumi script, though some Singaporean Malays also learn the Arabic-based Jawi script. Jawi is considered an ethnic script for use on Singaporean identity cards. Singaporeans are mostly bilingual, typically with English as their common language and their mother-tongue as a second language taught in schools, in order to preserve each individual's ethnic identity and values. According to the 2020 census, English was the language most spoken at home, used by 48.3% of the population; Mandarin was next, spoken at home by 29.9%. Nearly half a million speak other ancestral Southern varieties of Chinese, mainly Hokkien, Teochew, and Cantonese, as their home language, although the use of these is declining in favour of Mandarin or just English. Singapore Chinese characters are written using simplified Chinese characters. Singaporean English is largely based on British English, owing to the country's status as a former crown colony. However, forms of English spoken in Singapore range from Standard Singapore English to a colloquial form known as Singlish, which is discouraged by the government as it claims it to be a substandard English creole that handicaps Singaporeans, presenting an obstacle to learning standard English and rendering the speaker incomprehensible to everyone except to another Singlish speaker. Standard Singapore English is fully understandable to all Standard English speakers, while most English-speaking people do not understand Singlish. Nevertheless, Singaporeans have a strong sense of identity and connection to Singlish, whereby the existence of Singlish is recognised as a distinctive cultural marker for many Singaporeans. As such, in recent times, the government has tolerated the diglossia of both Singlish and Standard English (only for those who are fluent in both), whilst continuously reinforcing the importance of Standard English amongst those who speak only Singlish (which is not mutually intelligible with the Standard English of other English-speaking countries). Education for primary, secondary, and tertiary levels is mostly supported by the state. All institutions, public and private, must be registered with the Ministry of Education (MOE). English is the language of instruction in all public schools, and all subjects are taught and examined in English except for the "mother tongue" language paper. While the term "mother tongue" in general refers to the first language internationally, in Singapore's education system, it is used to refer to the second language, as English is the first language. Students who have been abroad for a while, or who struggle with their "Mother Tongue" language, are allowed to take a simpler syllabus or drop the subject. Education takes place in three stages: primary, secondary, and pre-university education, with the primary education being compulsory. Students begin with six years of primary school, which is made up of a four-year foundation course and a two-year orientation stage. The curriculum is focused on the development of English, the mother tongue, mathematics, and science. Secondary school lasts from four to five years, and is divided between Express, Normal (Academic), and Normal (Technical) streams in each school, depending on a student's ability level. The basic coursework breakdown is the same as in the primary level, although classes are much more specialised. Pre-university education takes place at either the 21 Junior Colleges or the Millennia Institute, over a period of two and three years respectively. As alternatives to pre-university education, however, courses are offered in other post-secondary education institutions, including the 5 polytechnics and 3 ITE colleges. Singapore has six public universities, of which the National University of Singapore and Nanyang Technological University are among the top 20 universities in the world. National examinations are standardised across all schools, with a test taken after each stage. After the first six years of education, students take the Primary School Leaving Examination (PSLE), which determines their placement at secondary school. At the end of the secondary stage, O-Level or N-Level exams are taken; at the end of the following pre-university stage, the GCE A-Level exams are taken. Some schools have a degree of freedom in their curriculum and are known as autonomous schools, for secondary education level and above. Singapore is also an education hub, with more than 80,000 international students in 2006. 5,000 Malaysian students cross the Johor–Singapore Causeway daily to attend schools in Singapore. In 2009, 20% of all students in Singaporean universities were international students—the maximum cap allowed, a majority from ASEAN, China and India. Singapore students have excelled in many of the world education benchmarks in maths, science and reading. In 2015, both its primary and secondary students rank first in OECD's global school performance rankings across 76 countries—described as the most comprehensive map of education standards. In 2016, Singapore students topped both the Program International Student Assessment (PISA) and the Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS). In the 2016 EF English Proficiency Index taken in 72 countries, Singapore place 6th and has been the only Asian country in the top ten. Singapore has a generally efficient healthcare system, even though health expenditures are relatively low for developed countries. The World Health Organisation ranks Singapore's healthcare system as 6th overall in the world in its World Health Report. Singapore has had the lowest infant mortality rates in the world for the past two decades. In 2019, Singaporeans had the longest life expectancy of any country at 84.8 years. Women can expect to live an average of 87.6 years with 75.8 years in good health. The averages are lower for men. Singapore is ranked 1st on the Global Food Security Index. As of December 2011 and January 2013, 8,800 foreigners and 5,400 Singaporeans were respectively diagnosed with HIV, but there are fewer than 10 annual deaths from HIV per 100,000 people. Adult obesity is below 10%. There is a high level of immunisation. In 2013, the Economist Intelligence Unit ranked Singapore as having the best quality of life in Asia and sixth overall in the world. The government's healthcare system is based upon the "3M" framework. This has three components: Medifund, which provides a safety net for those not able to otherwise afford healthcare; Medisave, a compulsory national medical savings account system covering about 85% of the population; and Medishield, a government-funded health insurance program. Public hospitals in Singapore have a considerable autonomy in their management decisions, and notionally compete for patients, but remain in government ownership. A subsidy scheme exists for those on low income. In 2008, 32% of healthcare was funded by the government. Healthcare accounts for approximately 3.5% of Singapore's GDP. Despite its small size, Singapore has a diversity of languages, religions, and cultures. Former prime ministers of Singapore, Lee Kuan Yew and Goh Chok Tong, have stated that Singapore does not fit the traditional description of a nation, calling it a society-in-transition, pointing out the fact that Singaporeans do not all speak the same language, share the same religion, or have the same customs. Singaporeans who speak English as their native language would likely lean toward Western culture (along with either Christian culture or secularism), while those who speak Chinese as their native language mostly lean toward Chinese culture, which has linkages with Chinese folk religion, Buddhism, Taoism and Confucianism. Malay-speaking Singaporeans mostly lean toward Malay culture, which itself is closely linked to Islamic culture. Tamil-speaking Singaporeans mostly lean toward Tamil culture, which itself is mostly linked to Hindu culture. Racial and religious harmony is regarded as a crucial part of Singapore's success, and played a part in building a Singaporean identity. When Singapore became independent from the United Kingdom in 1963, most Singaporean citizens were transient migrant labourers who had no intention of staying permanently. There was also a sizeable minority of middle-class, locally born people—known as Peranakans or Baba-Nyonya-descendants of 15th- and 16th-century Chinese immigrants. With the exception of the Peranakans who pledged their loyalties to Singapore, most of the labourers' loyalties lay with their respective homelands of Malaya, China and India. After independence, the government began a deliberate process of crafting a uniquely Singaporean identity and culture. Singapore has a reputation as a nanny state. The government also places a heavy emphasis on meritocracy, where one is judged based on one's ability. The national flower of Singapore is the hybrid orchid, Vanda 'Miss Joaquim', named in memory of a Singapore-born Armenian woman, who crossbred the flower in her garden at Tanjong Pagar in 1893. Singapore is known as the Lion City and many national symbols such as the coat of arms and the lion head symbol make use of a lion. Major religious festivals are public holidays. During the 1990s the National Arts Council was created to spearhead the development of performing arts, along with visual and literary art forms. The National Gallery Singapore is the nation's flagship museum with some 8,000 works from Singaporean and other Southeast Asian artists. The Singapore Art Museum focuses on contemporary art. The Red Dot Design Museum celebrates exceptional art and design of objects for everyday life, hosting more than 1,000 items from 50 countries. The lotus-shaped ArtScience Museum hosts touring exhibitions that combine art with the sciences. Other major museums include the Asian Civilisations Museum, the Peranakan Museum, and The Arts House. The Esplanade is Singapore's largest performing arts centre. In 2016 alone, it was the site of 5,900 free art and culture events. Literature of Singapore, or "SingLit", consists of a collection of literary works by Singaporeans written chiefly in the country's four official languages: English, Malay, Mandarin, and Tamil. Singapore is increasingly regarded as having four sub-literatures instead of one. Many significant works have been translated and showcased in publications such as the literary journal Singa, published in the 1980s and 1990s with editors including Edwin Thumboo and Koh Buck Song, as well as in multilingual anthologies such as Rhythms: A Singaporean Millennial Anthology Of Poetry (2000), in which the poems were all translated three times each. A number of Singaporean writers such as Tan Swie Hian and Kuo Pao Kun have contributed work in more than one language. Singapore has a diverse music culture that ranges from pop and rock, to folk and classical. Western classical music plays a significant role in the cultural life in Singapore, with the Singapore Symphony Orchestra (SSO) instituted in 1979. Other notable western orchestras in Singapore include Singapore National Youth Orchestra and the community-based Braddell Heights Symphony Orchestra. Many orchestras and ensembles are also found in secondary schools and junior colleges. Various communities have their own distinct ethnic musical traditions: Chinese, Malays, Indians, and Eurasians. With their traditional forms of music and various modern musical styles, the fusion of different forms account for the musical diversity in the country. The nation's lively urban musical scene has made it a centre for international performances and festivals in the region. Some of Singapore's best known pop singers include Stefanie Sun, JJ Lin, Liang Wern Fook, Taufik Batisah and Dick Lee, who is famous for composing National Day theme songs, including Home. Singapore's diversity of cuisine is touted as a reason to visit the country, due to its combination of convenience, variety, quality, and price. Local food items generally relate to a particular ethnicity – Chinese, Malay and Indian; but the diversity of cuisine has increased further by the hybridisation of different styles (e.g., the Peranakan cuisine, a mix of Chinese and Malay cuisine). In hawker centres, cultural diffusion is exemplified by traditionally Malay hawker stalls also selling Tamil food. Hainanese chicken rice, based on the Hainanese dish Wenchang chicken, is considered Singapore's national dish. The city-state has a burgeoning food scene ranging from hawker centres (open-air), food courts (air-conditioned), coffee shops (open-air with up to a dozen hawker stalls), cafes, fast food, simple kitchens, casual, celebrity and high-end restaurants. Cloud kitchens and food delivery are also on the rise, with 70% of residents ordering from delivery apps at least once a month. Many international celebrity chef restaurants are located within the integrated resorts. Religious dietary strictures exist (Muslims do not eat pork and Hindus do not eat beef), and there is also a significant group of vegetarians. The Singapore Food Festival which celebrates Singapore's cuisine is held annually in July. Prior to the 1980s, street food was sold mainly by immigrants from China, India, and Malaysia to other immigrants seeking a familiar taste. In Singapore, street food has long been associated with hawker centres with communal seating areas. Typically, these centres have a few dozen to hundreds of food stalls, with each specialising in one or more related dishes. While street food can be found in many countries, the variety and reach of centralised hawker centres that serve heritage street food in Singapore is unique. In 2018, there were 114 hawker centres spread across the city centre and heartland housing estates. They are maintained by the National Environment Agency, which also grades each food stall for hygiene. The largest hawker centre is located on the second floor of Chinatown Complex, and contains over 200 stalls. The complex is also home to the cheapest Michelin-starred meal in the world – a plate of soya-sauce chicken rice or noodles for S$2 (US$1.50). Two street food stalls in the city are the first in the world to be awarded a Michelin star, obtaining a single star each. The development of private sports and recreation clubs began in the 19th century colonial Singapore, with clubs founded during this time including the Cricket Club, the Singapore Recreation Club, the Singapore Swimming Club, and the Hollandse Club. Weightlifter Tan Howe Liang was Singapore's first Olympic medalist, winning a silver at the 1960 Rome Games. Indoor and water sports are some of the most popular sports in Singapore. At the 2016 Rio Olympics, Joseph Schooling won Singapore's first Olympic gold medal, claiming the 100-metre butterfly in a new Olympic record time of 50.39 seconds. Singapore sailors have had success on the international stage, with their Optimist team being considered among the best in the world. Despite its size, the country has dominated swim meets in the Southeast Asia Games. Its men's water polo team won the SEA Games gold medal for the 27th time in 2017, continuing Singapore sport's longest winning streak. Singapore hosted the inaugural 2010 Summer Youth Olympics, in which 3,600 athletes from 204 nations competed in 26 sports. The island is home to ONE Championship, the biggest Mixed Martial Arts promotion in Asia. Singapore's women's table tennis team were silver medalists at the 2008 Beijing Olympics. They became world champions in 2010 when they beat China at the World Team Table Tennis Championships in Russia, breaking China's 19-year winning streak. In 2021, Singapore's Loh Kean Yew achieved a "World Champion" status when he won a badminton gold at the 2021 BWF World Championships men's singles, which is one of the most prestigious badminton tournaments alongside the Summer Olympics badminton tournaments. Singapore's football league, the Singapore Premier League, was launched in 1996 as the S.League and comprises eight clubs, including one foreign team. The Singapore Slingers is one of the inaugural teams in the ASEAN Basketball League, which was founded in October 2009. Kranji Racecourse is run by the Singapore Turf Club and hosts several meetings per week, including international races—notably the Singapore Airlines International Cup. Singapore began hosting a round of the Formula One World Championship, the Singapore Grand Prix at the Marina Bay Street Circuit in 2008. It was the inaugural F1 night race, and the first F1 street race in Asia. It is considered a signature event on the F1 calendar. Companies linked to the government control much of the domestic media in Singapore. MediaCorp operates most free-to-air television channels and free-to-air radio stations in Singapore. There are a total of six free-to-air TV channels offered by MediaCorp. StarHub TV and Singtel TV also offer IPTV with channels from all around the world. SPH Media Trust, a body with close links to the government, controls most of the newspaper industry in Singapore. Singapore's media industry has sometimes been criticised for being overly regulated and lacking in freedom by human rights groups such as Freedom House. Self-censorship among journalists is said to be common. In 2023, Singapore was ranked 129 on the Press Freedom Index published by Reporters Without Borders, up from 139 the previous year. The Media Development Authority regulates Singaporean media, claiming to balance the demand for choice and protection against offensive and harmful material. Private ownership of TV satellite dishes is banned. Internet in Singapore is provided by state-owned Singtel, partially state-owned Starhub and M1 Limited as well as some other business internet service providers (ISPs) that offer residential service plans of speeds up to 2 Gbit/s as of spring 2015. Equinix (332 participants) and the Singapore Internet Exchange (70 participants) are Internet exchange points where Internet service providers and Content delivery networks exchange Internet traffic between their networks (autonomous systems) in various locations in Singapore. In the mid-1980s to 1990s, Singaporeans could also use the locally based videotext service Singapore Teleview to communicate with one another. The phrase Intelligent Island arose in the 1990s in reference to the island nation's early adaptive relationship with the internet. In 2016, there were an estimated 4.7 million internet users in Singapore, representing 82.5% of the population. The Singapore government does not engage in widespread censoring of the internet, but it maintains a list of one hundred websites—mostly pornographic—that it blocks from home internet access as a "symbolic statement of the Singaporean community's stand on harmful and undesirable content on the Internet". Singapore has the world's highest smartphone penetration rates, in surveys by Deloitte and the Google Consumer Barometer—at 89% and 85% of the population respectively in 2014. The overall mobile phone penetration rate is at 148 mobile phone subscribers per 100 people. Singapore portal Cities portal Islands portal Asia portal Index of Singapore-related articles Foreign relations of Singapore Outline of Singapore Singapore has no official distinct capital city as it is a city-state. Proportions of ethnic groups are calculated based only on the resident population, which comprises Singapore Citizens (SC) and Permanent Residents (PR). Proportions of religious denominations are calculated based only on the resident population, which comprises Singapore Citizens (SC) and Permanent Residents (PR). Singapore Citizen (SC) population is 3,610,700, Permanent Resident (PR) population is 538,600, Non-Resident population is 1,768,300. /ˈsɪŋ(ɡ)əpɔːr/ SING-(g)ə-por The breakdown of British Empire losses included 38,496 United Kingdom, 18,490 Australian, 67,340 Indian and 14,382 local volunteer troops. Total Australian casualties included 1,789 killed and 1,306 wounded. "Singapore". Encyclopaedia Britannica. Archived from the original on 28 August 2022. Retrieved 29 August 2019. The city, once a distinct entity, so came to dominate the island that the Republic of Singapore essentially became a city-state. "Singapore Department of Statistics population report for 2022". Singstat. Archived from the original on 24 December 2022. Retrieved 7 June 2023. "Census 2020" (PDF). Singapore Department of Statistics. Archived (PDF) from the original on 11 June 2022. Retrieved 16 June 2021. "Environment - Latest Data". Singapore Department of Statistics. 31 January 2023. Archived from the original on 19 July 2019. Retrieved 15 May 2023. "Population and Population Structure". Department of Statistics Singapore. Archived from the original on 16 November 2023. Retrieved 16 November 2023. "World Economic Outlook Database, October 2023 Edition. (Singapore)". International Monetary Fund. 10 October 2023. Archived from the original on 13 October 2023. Retrieved 12 October 2023. "Distribution of Family Income – GINI Index". Central Intelligence Agency. Archived from the original on 30 November 2018. Retrieved 25 January 2019. "Human Development Report 2023/2024" (PDF). United Nations Development Programme. 13 March 2024. Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 March 2024. Retrieved 13 March 2024. "Singapore". Bartleby. Archived from the original on 11 April 2001. Retrieved 13 May 2020. "Singapore: History, Singapore 1994". Asian Studies @ University of Texas at Austin. Archived from the original on 23 March 2007. Retrieved 13 May 2020. Victor R Savage; Brenda Yeoh (15 June 2013). Singapore Street Names: A Study of Toponymics. Marshall Cavendish. p. 381. ISBN 9789814484749. Archived from the original on 12 April 2023. Retrieved 28 July 2017. John N. Miksic (15 November 2013). Singapore and the Silk Road of the Sea, 1300–1800. NUS Press. pp. 171–182. ISBN 978-9971695743. Archived from the original on 5 March 2024. Retrieved 19 June 2020. Miksic 2013, pp. 151–152. Joshua Lee (6 December 2016). "5 other places in Asia which are also called Singapura". Mothership. Archived from the original on 6 April 2023. Retrieved 13 May 2020. Kheng, Cheah Boon; Ismail, Abdul Rahman Haji, eds. (1998). Sejarah Melayu The Malay Annals MS RAFFLES No. 18 Edisi Rumi Baru/New Romanised Edition. Academic Art & Printing Services Sdn. Bhd. ISBN 967-9948-13-7. Brown, C.C. (October 1952). "The Malay Annals translated from Raffles MS 18". Journal of the Malayan Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society. 25 (2&3): 1–276. Turnbull, C.M. (2009). A History of Modern Singapore, 1819–2005. NUS Press. pp. 21–22. ISBN 978-9971-69-430-2. Archived from the original on 5 March 2024. Retrieved 13 January 2017. Abshire, Jean (2011). The History of Singapore. ABC-CLIO. p. 104. ISBN 978-0-313-37743-3. Archived from the original on 11 February 2024. Retrieved 21 November 2020. Blackburn, Kevin; Hack, Karl (2004). Did Singapore Have to Fall?: Churchill and the Impregnable Fortress. Routledge. p. 132. ISBN 978-0-203-40440-9. Archived from the original on 11 February 2024. Retrieved 21 November 2020. Goetz, Philip W. (1991). "Singapore". The New Encyclopædia Britannica (15th ed.). Chicago. p. 832. Bibcode:1991neb..book.....G. ISBN 978-0-85229-529-8. "Singapore, known variously as the 'Lion City,' or 'Garden City,' the latter for its many parks and tree-lined streets{{cite encyclopedia}}: CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link) Glennie, Charlotte; Ang, Mavis; Rhys, Gillian; Aul, Vidhu; Walton, Nicholas (6 August 2015). "50 reasons Singapore is the best city in the world". CNN. Archived from the original on 7 August 2020. Retrieved 13 May 2020. The Lion City. The Garden City. The Asian Tiger. The 'Fine' City. All venerable nicknames, and the longtime favourite is the 'Little Red Dot' "A little red dot in a sea of green". The Economist. London. 16 July 2015. Archived from the original on 16 October 2017. Retrieved 16 October 2017. ..with a characteristic mixture of pride and paranoia, Singapore adopted 'little red dot' as a motto "Editorial: The mighty red dot". The Jakarta Post. 8 September 2017. Archived from the original on 28 January 2020. Retrieved 13 May 2020. "Habibie truly admired the 'Little Red Dot'". Today. 20 September 2006.. Malay Annals. Translated by Leyden, John. 1821. p. 43. Miksic 2013, p. 154. Miksic 2013, pp. 183–185. Dixon, Robert M.W.; Alexandra, Y. (2004). Adjective Classes: A Cross-linguistic Typology. Oxford University Press. p. 74. ISBN 0-19-920346-6. Matisoff, James (1990), "On Megalocomparison", Language, 66 (1): 106–120, doi:10.2307/415281, JSTOR 415281 Enfield, N.J. (2005), "Areal Linguistics and Mainland Southeast Asia" (PDF), Annual Review of Anthropology, 34: 181–206, doi:10.1146/annurev.anthro.34.081804.120406, hdl:11858/00-001M-0000-0013-167B-C, archived (PDF) from the original on 16 August 2017, retrieved 5 August 2018 Lavy, Paul A. (2003). "As in Heaven, So on Earth: The Politics of Visnu Siva and Harihara Images in Preangkorian Khmer Civilisation". Journal of Southeast Asian Studies. 34 (1). Academia: 21–39. doi:10.1017/S002246340300002X. S2CID 154819912. Archived from the original on 12 August 2021. Retrieved 23 December 2015. "Results of the 1995–1996 Archaeological Field Investigations at Angkor Borei, Cambodia" (PDF). University of Hawai'i-Manoa. Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 September 2015. Retrieved 5 July 2015. Pierre-Yves Manguin, "From Funan to Sriwijaya: Cultural continuities and discontinuities in the Early Historical maritime states of Southeast Asia", in 25 tahun kerjasama Pusat Penelitian Arkeologi dan Ecole française d'Extrême-Orient, Jakarta, Pusat Penelitian Arkeologi / EFEO, 2002, p. 59–82. Miksic 2013, pp. 155–163. Borschberg, P. (2010). The Singapore and Melaka Straits. Violence, Security and Diplomacy in the 17th century. Singapore: NUS Press. pp. 157–158. ISBN 978-9971-69-464-7. "Country Studies: Singapore: History". U.S. Library of Congress. Archived from the original on 23 September 2006. Retrieved 1 May 2007. Leitch Lepoer, Barbara, ed. (1989). Singapore: A Country Study. Country Studies. GPO for tus/singapore/4.htm. Archived from the original on 15 October 2009. Retrieved 18 February 2010. Nicholl, Robert; King, Victor T.; Horton, A. V. H. (1995). "Malay sources for the history of the Sultanate of Brunei in the early nineteenth century: some letters from the reign of Sultan Muhammad Kanzul Alam (Annabel Teh Gallop)". From Buckfast to Borneo: Essays Presented to Father Robert Nicholl on the 85th Anniversary of His Birth, 27 March 1995. Hull, England: University of Hull. p. 219. ISBN 9780859588362. OCLC 35366675. Archived from the original on 11 February 2024. Retrieved 24 April 2022. "Ini kupia surat kepada Raja Barunai" [This is a copy of the letter to the Raja of Brunei]. Farquhar Letterbook (Add MS 12398) (in Malay). 1842. pp. 39–40. Archived from the original on 24 April 2022. Retrieved 24 April 2022. Mun Cheong Yong; V. V. Bhanoji Rao (1995). Singapore-India Relations: A Primer. NUS Press. p. 3. ISBN 978-9971-69-195-0. Archived from the original on 11 February 2024. Retrieved 14 September 2019. Trocki, Carl A. (2009). Singapore: Wealth, Power and the Culture of Control. Routledge. p. 73. ISBN 978-1-134-50243-1. Archived from the original on 11 February 2024. Retrieved 14 September 2019. "Singapore – Founding and Early Years". U.S. Library of Congress. Archived from the original on 17 November 2022. Retrieved 18 July 2006. Ng, Jenny (7 February 1997). "1819 – The February Documents". Ministry of Defence. Archived from the original on 17 July 2017. Retrieved 18 July 2006. "Milestones in Singapore's Legal History". Supreme Court, Singapore. Archived from the original on 27 September 2007. Retrieved 18 July 2006. "Founding of Modern Singapore". Ministry of Information, Communications and the Arts. Archived from the original on 8 May 2009. Retrieved 13 April 2011. "East & South-East Asia Titles: Straits Settlements Annual Reports (Singapore, Penang, Malacca, Labuan) 1855–1941". Cambridge University Press. Archived from the original on 9 June 2012. Retrieved 31 July 2012. "The Malays". National Heritage Board 2011. Archived from the original on 23 February 2011. Retrieved 28 July 2011. Sanderson, Reginald (1907). Wright, Arnold; Cartwright, H.A. (eds.). Twentieth century impressions of British Malaya: its history, people, commerce, industries, and resources. pp. 220–221. "Singapore attains crown colony status – Singapore History". eresources.nlb.gov.sg. Archived from the original on 14 April 2021. Retrieved 3 April 2021. "First Rubber Trees are Planted in Singapore – 1877". History SG. National Library Board Singapore. Archived from the original on 14 June 2018. Retrieved 8 February 2017. The Indian Army in the Two World Wars. Brill Publishers. 14 October 2011. pp. 17–18. ISBN 978-90-04-21145-2. Archived from the original on 11 February 2024. Retrieved 14 September 2019. "1915 Singapore Mutiny". National Library Board. National Library Board Singapore. Archived from the original on 25 February 2021. Retrieved 26 August 2019. Stille, Mark (2016). Malaya and Singapore 1941–42: The fall of Britain's empire in the East. Bloomsbury Publishing. pp. 5–6. ISBN 978-1-4728-1124-0. Archived from the original on 11 February 2024. Retrieved 14 September 2019. Tan, Kevin (2008). Marshall of Singapore: A Biography. Institute of Southeast Asian Studies. pp. 90–. ISBN 978-981-230-878-8. Hobbs, David (2017). The British Pacific Fleet: The Royal Navy's Most Powerful Strike Force. Naval Institute Press. p. 5. ISBN 978-1-61251-917-3. Archived from the original on 11 February 2024. Retrieved 14 September 2019. Lamb, Margaret; Tarling, Nicholas (2001). From Versailles to Pearl Harbor: The Origins of the Second World War in Europe and Asia. Macmillan International Higher Education. p. 39. ISBN 978-1-4039-3772-8. Archived from the original on 18 August 2020. Tan, Kevin (2008). Marshall of Singapore: A Biography. Institute of Southeast Asian Studies. ISBN 978-981-230-878-8. "On This Day – 15 February 1942: Singapore forced to surrender". BBC News. 15 February 1942. Archived from the original on 19 May 2019. Retrieved 1 May 2007. Wigmore 1957, p. 382. "Battle of Singapore". World History Group. Archived from the original on 12 May 2015. Retrieved 8 May 2015. Legg 1965, p. 248. Ooi, Teresa (17 January 1995). "1,000 Aussie victims of WWII join suit against Japan". The Straits Times. Singapore. "South West Pacific War: Australia's Fine Record". The Straits Times. Singapore. 12 September 1946. Archived from the original on 20 December 2019. Retrieved 22 October 2019. Toland 1970, p. 277. Zaccheus, Melody (21 January 2017). "Japanese Occupation newspaper in library portal". The Straits Times. Singapore. Archived from the original on 19 August 2022. Retrieved 22 October 2019. Leitch Lepoer, Barbara (1989). "Singapore, Shonan: Light of the South". Library of Congress Country Studies. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office. Archived from the original on 29 June 2017. Retrieved 29 January 2011. Bose 2010, pp. 18–20. "The real Japanese surrender" (PDF). The Sunday Times. Singapore. 4 September 2005. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 January 2008. Retrieved 22 October 2019. Smith 2006, p. 556–557. "Yamashita Hanged". Malaya Tribune. Singapore. 23 February 1946. Archived from the original on 22 October 2019. Retrieved 22 October 2019. "Singapore – Aftermath of War". U.S. Library of Congress. Archived from the original on 14 May 2011. Retrieved 16 May 2020. "Towards Self-government". Ministry of Information, Communications and the Arts, Singapore. Archived from the original on 13 July 2006. Retrieved 18 June 2006. "Communism". Thinkquest. Archived from the original on 9 April 2000. Retrieved 29 January 2012. Low, James (2004). "Kept in Position: The Labour Front-Alliance Government of Chief Minister David Marshall in Singapore, April 1955 – June 1956". Journal of Southeast Asian Studies. 35 (1): 41–64. doi:10.1017/S0022463404000037. ISSN 0022-4634. JSTOR 20072556. S2CID 154326049. Archived from the original on 19 April 2021. Retrieved 20 February 2021. "Country studies: Singapore: Road to Independence". U.S. Library of Congress. Archived from the original on 4 July 2014. Retrieved 16 May 2020. "Headliners; Retiring, Semi". The New York Times. 2 December 1990. Archived from the original on 18 March 2009. Retrieved 27 December 2008. "The Singapore Legal System". Singapore Academy of Law. Archived from the original on 3 June 2011. Retrieved 26 June 2011. Lee, T. H (1996). The Open United Front: The Communist Struggle in Singapore, 1954–1966. Singapore: South Seas Society. Bloodworth, D (1986). The Tiger and the Trojan Horse. Singapore: Times Books International. "MCA: Wipe out extremists". Singapore Standard. 18 February 1959. "Big 'Unity' Plan – Tengku on closer ties with S'pore, Borneo and Brunei". The Straits Times. Singapore Press Holdings. 28 May 1961. p. 1. Archived from the original on 9 March 2022. Retrieved 9 March 2022. "Appeal To Singapore". The Straits Times. Singapore. 28 March 1962. p. 10. Archived from the original on 19 March 2018. Retrieved 19 August 2017. "Yes – What a win for Premier Lee". The Straits Times. Singapore Press Holdings. 2 September 1962. p. 1. Archived from the original on 9 March 2022. Retrieved 9 March 2022. "Merger "Yes"". The Straits Times. Singapore Press Holdings. 3 September 1962. p. 1. Archived from the original on 9 March 2022. Retrieved 9 March 2022. Abisheganaden, Felix (16 September 1963). "Hail Malaysia!". The Straits Times. Singapore Press Holdings. p. 1. Archived from the original on 9 March 2022. Retrieved 9 March 2022. "Singapore becomes part of Malaysia". HistorySG. Archived from the original on 7 February 2017. Retrieved 6 February 2017. James, Harold; Sheil-Small, Denis (1971). The Undeclared War: The Story of the Indonesian Confrontation 1962–1966. Totowa: Rowman and Littlefield. ISBN 978-0-87471-074-8.Mackie, J.A.C. (1974). Konfrontasi: The Indonesia-Malaysia Dispute 1963–1966. Kuala Lumpur: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-638247-0. "Record of the Wreckers". The Straits Times. Singapore. 16 May 1965. Archived from the original on 19 August 2017. Retrieved 19 August 2017. "Mac Donald House blast: Two for trial". The Straits Times. Singapore. 6 April 1965. Archived from the original on 19 August 2017. Retrieved 19 August 2017. Tan Lay Yuan. "MacDonald House bomb explosion". Singapore Infopedia. National Library Board. Archived from the original on 15 December 2011. "Mac Donald House suffered $250,000 bomb damage". The Straits Times. Singapore. 9 October 1965. Archived from the original on 19 August 2017. Retrieved 19 August 2017. "Road to Independence". AsiaOne. 1998. Archived from the original on 13 October 2013. Lau, A (2000). A moment of anguish: Singapore in Malaysia and the politics of disengagement. Singapore: Times Academic Press. Lim, Edmund (22 December 2015). "Secret documents reveal extent of negotiations for Separation". The Straits Times. Archived from the original on 20 September 2021. Retrieved 15 August 2022. Leitch Lepoer, Barbara (1989). "Singapore as Part of Malaysia". Library of Congress Country Studies. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office. Archived from the original on 29 June 2017. Retrieved 29 January 2011. "A Summary of Malaysia-Singapore History". europe-solidaire. Archived from the original on 29 May 2012. Retrieved 29 January 2012. "Singapore separates from Malaysia and becomes independent – Singapore History". National Library Board. Archived from the original on 11 November 2020. Retrieved 12 May 2017. Negotiations were, however, done in complete secrecy... (Tunku moved) a bill to amend the constitution that would provide for Singapore's departure from the Federation. Razak was also waiting for the fully signed separation agreement from Singapore to allay possible suggestions that Singapore was expelled from Malaysia. "Episode 0: Trailer". Archived from the original on 20 September 2021. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "Road to Independence". Headlines, Lifelines, by AsiaOne. 1998. Archived from the original on 13 October 2013. Abisheganaden, Felix (10 August 1965). "Singapore is out". The Straits Times. Singapore Press Holdings. Archived from the original on 21 February 2022. Retrieved 21 February 2022. "Past and present leaders of Singapore | Infopedia". eresources.nlb.gov.sg. Archived from the original on 5 May 2020. Retrieved 28 May 2020. "Yusof to be the first President". eresources.nlb.gov.sg. Archived from the original on 7 August 2020. Retrieved 28 May 2020. Bangkok Declaration  – via Wikisource. Sandhu, Kernial Singh; Wheatley, Paul (1989). Management of Success: The Moulding of Modern Singapore. Institute of Southeast Asian Studies. p. 107. ISBN 978-981-3035-42-3. Terry McCarthy, "Lee Kuan Yew." Time 154: 7–8 (1999). online "Lee Kuan Yew: Our chief diplomat to the world". The Straits Times. Singapore. 25 March 2015. Archived from the original on 26 October 2015. Retrieved 8 November 2015. "History of Changi Airport". Civil Aviation Authority of Singapore. Archived from the original on 29 June 2006. "Lunch Dialogue on 'Singapore as a Transport Hub'". Lee Kuan Yew School of Public Policy. Archived from the original on 17 November 2018. Retrieved 17 November 2018. Lam, Yin Yin (26 January 2017). "Three factors that have made Singapore a global logistics hub". The World Bank Blogs. Archived from the original on 17 November 2018. Retrieved 17 November 2018. "Singapore elections". BBC News. 5 May 2006. Archived from the original on 15 January 2009. Retrieved 28 July 2017. Parliamentary Elections Act (Cap. 218) Ho Khai Leong (2003). Shared Responsibilities, Unshared Power: The Politics of Policy-Making in Singapore. Eastern Univ Pr. ISBN 978-981-210-218-8 "Presidential Elections". Elections Department Singapore. 18 April 2006. Archived from the original on 27 August 2008. Encyclopedia of Singapore. Singapore: Tailsman Publishing. 2006. p. 82. ISBN 978-981-05-5667-9. Archived from the original on 7 July 2017. Retrieved 19 August 2017. Yeoh, En-Lai (9 April 2003). "Singapore Woman Linked to 100 SARS Cases". Associated Press. "Goh Chok Tong". National Library Board. Archived from the original on 29 July 2023. Retrieved 6 February 2017. "Country profile: Singapore". BBC News. 15 July 2009. Archived from the original on 29 December 2008. Retrieved 22 April 2010. hermesauto (28 August 2015). "GE2015: A look back at the last 5 general elections from 1991 to 2011". The Straits Times. Archived from the original on 7 October 2018. Retrieved 7 October 2018. Lee, U-Wen. "PAP racks up landslide win, takes 83 out of 89 seats". Business Times (Singapore). Archived from the original on 13 September 2015. Retrieved 13 September 2015. Heng, Janice (12 September 2015). "For PAP, the numbers hark back to 2001 polls showing". The Straits Times. Singapore. Archived from the original on 12 September 2015. "History of general elections in Singapore". National Library Board. Archived from the original on 4 February 2020. Retrieved 4 February 2020. "Why so many Singaporeans voted for the opposition". The Economist. 18 July 2020. Archived from the original on 20 July 2020. Retrieved 20 July 2020. "PMO | the Government". 8 July 2023. Archived from the original on 4 August 2023. Retrieved 27 August 2023. Morgan, Grace, ed. (2016). A Guide to the Singapore Constitution. Singapore Management University. pp. 33–36. Archived from the original on 20 December 2019. Retrieved 28 October 2019. "Our Legal System". Archived from the original on 2 September 2023. Retrieved 2 September 2023. "PMO | the Cabinet". 23 December 2022. Archived from the original on 25 April 2006. Retrieved 27 August 2023. "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 27 October 2019. Retrieved 28 October 2019.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) "The President". Singapore Government. 19 December 2010. Archived from the original on 11 June 2011. Retrieved 26 June 2011. Morgan, Grace, ed. (2016). A Guide to the Singapore Constitution. Singapore Management University. p. 27. Archived from the original on 20 December 2019. Retrieved 28 October 2019. "Role and structure of the Supreme Court - structure". Archived from the original on 2 April 2023. Retrieved 2 September 2023. Morgan, Grace, ed. (2016). A Guide to the Singapore Constitution. Singapore Management University. pp. 63–67. Archived from the original on 20 December 2019. Retrieved 28 October 2019. Tan, Kevin Y.L. (2019). "Legislating Dominance: Parliament and the Making of Singapore's Governance Model". In Rahim, Lily Zubaidah; Barr, Michael D. (eds.). The Limits of Authoritarian Governance in Singapore's Developmental State. Palgrave Macmillan. p. 264. doi:10.1007/978-981-13-1556-5. ISBN 978-981-13-1555-8. S2CID 239112493. "What are the Qualifications Required to Run for President in Singapore?". SingaporeLegalAdvice.com. Archived from the original on 11 February 2024. Retrieved 26 April 2022. "Constitution of the Republic of Singapore – article 19". sso.agc.gov.sg. Archived from the original on 28 May 2023. Retrieved 16 June 2021. "Elected Presidency: Higher eligibility criteria accepted, but Govt says no to longer qualifying terms". TODAY. Archived from the original on 26 April 2022. Retrieved 26 April 2022. "Constitution of the Republic of Singapore – article 19B". sso.agc.gov.sg. Archived from the original on 28 May 2023. Retrieved 16 June 2021. "Halimah Yacob named Singapore's first female president". Al Jazeera. 13 September 2017. Archived from the original on 2 May 2019. Retrieved 13 September 2017. "Only one Singaporean is fit to be president". The Economist. 16 September 2017. ISSN 0013-0613. Archived from the original on 6 May 2021. Retrieved 16 June 2021. "Members of Parliament". Parliament of Singapore. Archived from the original on 16 December 2019. Retrieved 9 October 2019. Yong, Ng Tze (20 October 2008). "MP, I want help with..." asiaone. Archived from the original on 27 May 2011. Retrieved 20 October 2008. Tan, Kenneth Paul (2007). "Singapore's National Day Rally speech: A site of ideological negotiation". Journal of Contemporary Asia. 37 (3): 292–308. doi:10.1080/00472330701408635. ISSN 0047-2336. S2CID 145405958. Archived from the original on 22 October 2023. Retrieved 16 May 2023 – via tandfonline. Kuah-Pearce, Khun Eng (2011). Rebuilding the Ancestral Village: Singaporeans in China. Hong Kong University Press. p. 37. ISBN 978-988-8053-66-7. Kerr, Roger (9 December 1999). "Optimism For the New Millennium". nzbr. Archived from the original on 7 March 2006. Retrieved 7 March 2006. "Freedom in the World 2010 – Singapore". Freedom House. Archived from the original on 7 January 2012. Retrieved 12 June 2011. Peers, Douglas M. (2013). Chan, Wing-Cheong; Wright, Barry; Yeo, Stanley (eds.). "Codification, Macaulay and the Indian Penal Code: The Legacies and Modern Challenges of Criminal Law Reform". Victorian Studies. 55 (4): 749–751. doi:10.2979/victorianstudies.55.4.749. S2CID 144820395. "The Singapore Legal System". Singapore Academy of Law. 25 September 2007. Archived from the original on 23 January 2011. Retrieved 10 June 2011. "Judicial caning in Singapore, Malaysia and Brunei". World Corporal Punishment Research. September 2012. Archived from the original on 15 January 2015. Retrieved 12 December 2015. Kuntz, Tom (26 June 1994). "Ideas & Trends; Beyond Singapore: Corporal Punishment, A to Z". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 1 July 2017. Retrieved 18 February 2017. "Singapore country specific information". U.S. Department of State. 19 March 2010. Archived from the original on 30 December 2004. "Constitution of the Republic of Singapore". Singapore Statutes Online. Archived from the original on 28 May 2023. Retrieved 28 May 2020. "The government of Singapore says it welcomes criticism, but its critics still suffer". The Economist. London. 9 March 2017. Archived from the original on 13 October 2017. Retrieved 16 April 2019. "Singapore boasts of being a model of economic development but it is an example of what not to be in regard to freedom of the press, which is almost non-existent". Reporters Without Borders. 16 June 2023. Archived from the original on 11 November 2019. Retrieved 4 October 2023. "Singapore: Freedom in the World 2021 Country Report". Freedom House. Archived from the original on 28 February 2022. Retrieved 17 April 2022. "Singapore". Freedom House. 2013. Archived from the original on 3 May 2014. Retrieved 28 May 2014. "Democracy Index 2018: Me Too?". London: The Economist Intelligence Unit. 8 January 2019. Archived from the original on 2 February 2019. Retrieved 13 January 2019. "Singapore to toughen protest laws ahead of APEC meet". Reuters. 17 January 2009. Archived from the original on 27 November 2020. Retrieved 31 July 2012. "Corruption Perceptions Index 2018". Transparency International. 29 January 2019. Archived from the original on 27 April 2019. Retrieved 27 April 2019. Ortmann, Stephan; Thompson, Mark R (January 2016). "China and the 'Singapore Model'" (PDF). Journal of Democracy. 27 (1): 39–48. doi:10.1353/jod.2016.0004. S2CID 155860923. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 November 2016. Retrieved 24 November 2016. Huff, W G (1995). "What is the Singapore model of economic development?". Cambridge Journal of Economics. 19: 735–759. Archived from the original on 14 February 2011. Retrieved 24 November 2016. Lee Kuan Yew (2012). From third world to first: The Singapore story, 1965–2000. Marshall Cavendish International Asia. "2021 Corruption Perceptions Index – Explore the results". Transparency.org. 25 January 2022. Archived from the original on 19 June 2022. Retrieved 17 February 2022. "Rule of Law Index" (PDF). World Justice Project. 2021. Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 August 2022. Retrieved 28 July 2022. "Singapore country brief". Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade. Archived from the original on 8 March 2020. Retrieved 15 November 2016. "Singapore Missions Overseas". Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Archived from the original on 15 March 2018. Retrieved 27 January 2014. "Overview". ASEAN. 2009. Archived from the original on 9 January 2008. Retrieved 18 February 2011. "APEC is established". National Library Board. Archived from the original on 4 July 2018. Retrieved 4 July 2018. 50 Years of Singapore and the United Nations. World Scientific. 2015. ISBN 978-981-4713-03-0.access-date=7 March 2024 "NAM Member States". The Non-Aligned Movement. 23 January 2002. Archived from the original on 9 December 2010. Retrieved 18 February 2011. "Member States". Commonwealth Secretariat. Archived from the original on 25 December 2018. Retrieved 18 February 2011. "Histories and Milestones". MFA. Archived from the original on 13 August 2021. Retrieved 5 October 2019. "G20". Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Archived from the original on 17 September 2018. Retrieved 26 March 2017. "PECC – PECC :: The Pacific Economic Cooperation Council – International Secretariat". pecc.org. Archived from the original on 17 February 2022. Retrieved 19 September 2018. "Australia – New Zealand Free Trade Agreement (AANZFTA)". New Zealand Government. 4 December 2008. Archived from the original on 2 August 2009. Retrieved 18 February 2011. Gifford, Rob (18 September 1998). "Malaysia and Singapore: A rocky relationship". BBC News. Archived from the original on 12 May 2011. Retrieved 10 April 2011. "World Factbook – Field Listing: International disputes". Central Intelligence Agency. Archived from the original on 14 May 2011. Retrieved 18 February 2011. Lloyd Parry, Richard (17 March 2007). "Singapore accused of land grab as islands disappear by boatload". The Times. London. Archived from the original on 10 May 2011. Retrieved 10 April 2011. "Court awards islet to Singapore". BBC News. 23 May 2008. Archived from the original on 26 May 2008. Retrieved 6 September 2017. Reading Room. "Currency Interchangeability Agreement – Brunei Notes and Coins". Archived from the original on 28 June 2017. Retrieved 14 October 2017. "Brunei Foreign and Trade Relations: ASEAN". New Zealand Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade. 14 January 2009. Archived from the original on 8 September 2009. Retrieved 18 February 2011. "Singapore Business Federation aims for over 100 local firms to take part in first China International Import Expo". The Straits Times. 22 February 2018. Archived from the original on 24 February 2018. Retrieved 24 February 2018. "Singapore, China leaders laud deep, growing ties". Today. Singapore. Archived from the original on 25 February 2018. Retrieved 24 February 2018. "Singapore and China's common interest 'greater than any occasional difference of views': DPM Teo". Singapore: Channel NewsAsia. 24 May 2017. Archived from the original on 25 February 2018. Retrieved 24 February 2018. "Singapore a 'strong supporter' of China's peaceful development". The Straits Times. Singapore. 25 May 2017. Archived from the original on 24 February 2018. Retrieved 24 February 2018. Zhang Xuegang (20 November 2007). "Opening 'window of opportunity' for China-Singapore cooperation". People's Daily. Beijing. Archived from the original on 6 August 2013. Retrieved 31 July 2012. "Asean to step up terror fight, hold naval drill with China". The Straits Times. 7 February 2018. Archived from the original on 24 February 2018. Retrieved 24 February 2018. Lee, Yen Nee (8 June 2018). "White House explains why it chose Singapore to host summit with North Korea". CNBC. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 12 June 2018. "President Trump meets Kim Jong Un: Live updates". CNN. 11 June 2018. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 12 June 2018. "Trump and Kim make history with a handshake". BBC News. 12 June 2018. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 12 June 2018. Yin, Chun-chieh; Lee, Mei-yu (4 November 2015). "Ma, Xi to split dinner bill in Singapore". Central News Agency. Archived from the original on 7 November 2015. Retrieved 7 November 2015. Lee, Shu-hua; Chang, S.C. "President Ma to meet China's Xi in Singapore Saturday (update)". Central News Agency. Archived from the original on 7 November 2015. Retrieved 4 November 2015. Perlez, Jane; Ramzy, Austin (4 November 2015). "China, Taiwan and a Meeting After 66 Years". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 7 November 2017. Retrieved 1 November 2017. Moss, Trefor (18 January 2010). "Buying an advantage". Jane's Defence Review. London. Archived from the original on 23 January 2010. "SAF remains final guarantor of Singapore's independence". Singapore: Channel NewsAsia. 1 July 2007. Archived from the original on 16 May 2011. Retrieved 19 February 2011. "Lunch Talk on "Defending Singapore: Strategies for a Small State" by Minister for Defence Teo Chee Hean" (Press release). Ministry of Defence. 21 April 2005. Archived from the original on 24 October 2007. Retrieved 19 February 2011. "S'pore to boost expenditure, raise defence spending". AsiaOne. Singapore. 13 October 2011. Archived from the original on 11 January 2012. Retrieved 13 October 2011. Barzilai, Amnon (July 2004). "A Deep, Dark, Secret Love Affair". Haaretz. Archived from the original on 3 May 2017. Retrieved 19 February 2011 – via University of Wisconsin. Omar, Marsita; Chan Fook Weng (31 December 2007). "British withdrawal from Singapore". National Library Board. Archived from the original on 21 June 2012. Retrieved 24 August 2012. "Israel alarm at UN force members". BBC News. 18 August 2006. Archived from the original on 10 July 2017. Retrieved 12 October 2011. Rosenberg, Matt. "Diplomatic and Foreign Relations of Israel". About.com. Archived from the original on 15 January 2012. Retrieved 12 October 2011. "Malaysian FA apologises to Benayoun over racist abuse". BBC News. 29 July 2011. Archived from the original on 22 September 2011. Retrieved 12 October 2011. "Jewish Virtual History Tour: Singapore". Jewish Virtual Library. n.d. Archived from the original on 21 October 2011. Retrieved 13 October 2011. "The Israeli Arsenal Deployed Against Gaza During Operation Cast Lead" (PDF). Institute of Palestine Studies. p. 186. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 September 2011. Retrieved 10 July 2012. "Speech by Minister for Manpower and Second Minister for Defence Dr Ng Eng Hen" (Press release). Ministry of Defence. 18 February 2008. Archived from the original on 6 July 2017. Retrieved 19 February 2011. "PSC – FAQs". ifaq.gov.sg. Archived from the original on 11 August 2018. Retrieved 11 August 2018. Deferment of National Service for Medical Studies. Singapore Parliament. 20 October 2011. pp. 341–345. Archived from the original on 12 August 2022. Retrieved 6 July 2022. "Singapore – Recruitment and Training of Personnel". Country-data.com. December 1989. Archived from the original on 30 September 2007. Retrieved 19 February 2011. "RAAF Base Pearce". Royal Australian Air Force. 2011. Archived from the original on 23 June 2012. Retrieved 12 October 2011. "Opening Ceremony of the RSAF Helicopter Detachment in Oakey, Australia" (Press release). Ministry of Defence. 20 August 1999. Archived from the original on 13 March 2006. Retrieved 5 July 2013. "Beyond Limits – Jet Training in France". Ministry of Defence. 2011. Archived from the original on 25 June 2007. Retrieved 12 October 2011. Reif, Jasmine (23 November 2009). "Singapore celebrates Peace Carvin V partnership with U.S. Air Force". U.S. Air Combat Command. Archived from the original on 14 November 2012. Retrieved 5 July 2013. Chua Chin Hon (13 July 2010). "PM gets feel of RSAF's new jet at US base". The Straits Times. Singapore. Archived from the original on 5 July 2013. Retrieved 5 July 2013. Yong, Charissa (7 December 2019). "Singapore and United States sign pact to set up RSAF fighter training detachment in Guam". The Straits Times. Singapore. Archived from the original on 14 February 2021. Retrieved 18 February 2021. "Singapore to send 192 military personnel to Iraq". Singapore Window. Agence France-Presse. 7 October 2003. Archived from the original on 6 September 2008. Retrieved 19 February 2011. "75 SAF soldiers honoured for contributions in fight against ISIS". The Straits Times. Singapore. 9 October 2017. Archived from the original on 6 July 2018. Retrieved 17 August 2018. "SAF to provide medical aid, set up dental clinic in Afghanistan". Singapore: Channel NewsAsia. 16 May 2007. Archived from the original on 8 December 2008. Retrieved 19 February 2011. Chow, Jermyn (17 March 2014). "Singapore sends 151 servicemen to join anti-piracy patrols in Gulf of Aden". The Straits Times. Singapore. Archived from the original on 10 July 2018. Retrieved 5 December 2020. "Katrina Relief Operations". Ministry of Defence. 2011. Archived from the original on 25 October 2005. Retrieved 12 October 2011. "RSAF C-130 arrives in Cebu to assist relief efforts". Today. Singapore. 14 November 2013. Archived from the original on 14 April 2021. Retrieved 5 December 2020. "Global Peace Index 2023" (PDF). Institute for Economics & Peace. Global Peace Index 2023: Measuring Peace in a Complex World, Sydney, June 2023. Sydney, Australia. 30 June 2023. Archived (PDF) from the original on 30 June 2023. Retrieved 30 June 2023. "No doubts that death penalty is the right policy for drug trafficking: Shanmugam". CNA. 30 June 2022. Archived from the original on 30 June 2022. Retrieved 30 June 2022. "Singapore: The death penalty – A hidden toll of executions". Amnesty International. 2003. Archived from the original on 13 January 2012. Retrieved 1 May 2011. "The Singapore Government's Response To Amnesty International's Report 'Singapore – The Death Penalty: A Hidden Toll Of Executions'" (Press release). Ministry of Home Affairs. 30 January 2004. Archived from the original on 14 November 2007. Retrieved 22 April 2010. Wong, Jonathan (2 October 2018). "Government has not curbed public prosecutor's discretion for Section 377A: A-G Lucien Wong". The Straits Times. Singapore. Archived from the original on 4 October 2018. Retrieved 12 July 2021. Lum, Selina (28 February 2022). "Court of Appeal rules Section 377A stays but cannot be used to prosecute men for having gay sex". The Straits Times. Singapore. Archived from the original on 30 June 2022. Retrieved 30 June 2022. Wong, Jonathan (2 October 2018). "Government has not curbed public prosecutor's discretion for Section 377A: A-G Lucien Wong". The Straits Times. Archived from the original on 4 October 2018. Retrieved 16 April 2019. "Singapore to decriminalize gay sex, but will limit change". Associated Press. 21 August 2022. Archived from the original on 21 August 2022. Retrieved 21 August 2022. "377A: Singapore to end ban on gay sex". BBC News. 21 August 2022. Archived from the original on 21 August 2022. Retrieved 21 August 2022. Correspondent, Goh Yan HanPolitical (3 January 2023). "S377A officially repealed after President Halimah gives assent to Bill". The Straits Times. ISSN 0585-3923. Archived from the original on 25 July 2023. Retrieved 27 January 2024. "Views of Homosexuality Around the World". Pew Research Center's Global Attitudes Project. 25 June 2020. Archived from the original on 1 July 2022. Retrieved 12 July 2021. "Greater public acceptance of gay sex and marriage: Survey". The Straits Times. Singapore. 3 May 2019. Archived from the original on 5 June 2019. Retrieved 12 July 2021. Yuen-C, Tham (2 May 2019). "Singapore society still largely conservative but becoming more liberal on gay rights: IPS survey". The Straits Times. Singapore. Archived from the original on 5 June 2019. Retrieved 12 July 2021. Shiying, Wong (30 November 2021). "Six given police warnings for involvement in protest outside MOE headquarters". The Straits Times. Singapore. Archived from the original on 28 June 2022. Retrieved 28 June 2022. "How a 14-year-old girl was trafficked to Singapore and locked up". Asia One. 2017. Archived from the original on 12 April 2020. Retrieved 12 April 2020. "'She had lost all reason to live': Undoing the horrors of being trafficked to Singapore and seeking justice". cna. 15 February 2020. Archived from the original on 12 April 2020. Retrieved 12 April 2020. "Sex trafficking in Singapore: How changes to the law may protect women duped into prostitution". CNA. 10 November 2019. Archived from the original on 12 April 2020. Retrieved 12 April 2020. Baten, Jörg (2016). A History of the Global Economy. From 1500 to the Present. Cambridge University Press. p. 292. ISBN 978-1-107-50718-0. Li, Dickson (1 February 2010). "Singapore is most open economy: Report". Asiaone. Singapore. Archived from the original on 7 February 2010. Retrieved 10 May 2011. "Singapore ranked 7th in the world for innovation". The Straits Times. Singapore. 5 March 2010. Archived from the original on 17 January 2013. Retrieved 23 August 2010. "Singapore jumps to top of Global Dynamism Index". The Straits Times. Singapore. 29 October 2015. Archived from the original on 7 August 2020. Retrieved 25 November 2015. "Singapore top paradise for business: World Bank". AsiaOne. Singapore. Agence France-Presse. 26 September 2007. Archived from the original on 7 July 2009. Retrieved 22 April 2010. For the second year running, Singapore tops the aggregate rankings on the ease of doing business in 2006 to 2007. "The AAA-rated club: which countries still make the grade?". The Guardian. London. 15 October 2014. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 13 December 2016. Ogg, Jon C. (8 August 2011). "Remaining countries with AAA credit ratings". NBC News. Archived from the original on 10 December 2019. Retrieved 12 October 2011. "CPIB Corruption Statistics 2015" (PDF). World Bank. 2 April 2015. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 March 2016. "Singapore drops one place to No. 4 in global competitiveness ranking". Straits Times. 22 June 2023. Archived from the original on 30 June 2023. Retrieved 30 June 2023. "World Competitiveness Booklet". imd.cld.bz. International Institute for Management Development. 2023. Archived from the original on 30 June 2023. Retrieved 1 July 2023. "Report for Selected Countries and Subjects". IMF. Archived from the original on 9 December 2019. Retrieved 7 October 2019. "Report for Selected Countries and Subjects". IMF. Archived from the original on 9 December 2019. Retrieved 7 October 2019. "44 Percent of Workforce Are Non-Citizens" (our estimate)". Your Salary in Singapore. 15 March 2010. Archived from the original on 21 February 2016. Seung-yoon Lee (9 April 2014). "Ha-Joon Chang: Economics Is A Political Argument". HuffPost. Archived from the original on 25 July 2014. Retrieved 18 July 2014. "Singapore remains top Asian city for meetings". The Straits Times. Singapore. 9 September 2015. Archived from the original on 9 August 2018. Retrieved 9 August 2018. Low Siang Kok (2002). "Chapter 6: Singapore Electronic Legal Tender (SELT) – A Proposed Concept" (PDF). The Future of Money. Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. p. 147. ISBN 978-92-64-19672-8. Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 February 2008. Retrieved 28 December 2007. "The Currency History of Singapore" (Press release). Monetary Authority of Singapore. 9 April 2007. Archived from the original on 2 February 2010. Retrieved 22 April 2010. "This Central Bank Doesn't Set Interest Rates". Bloomberg. 13 April 2015. Archived from the original on 19 September 2016. Retrieved 11 March 2017. "Official Foreign Reserves". mas.gov.sg. Archived from the original on 19 November 2020. Retrieved 28 August 2019. "Statistics Singapore -IMF SDDS – Economic and Financial". Singstat.gov.sg. Archived from the original on 9 October 2013. Retrieved 14 October 2013. "Based on USD/SGD rate of 1.221". Xe.com. Archived from the original on 18 February 2013. Retrieved 14 October 2013. Lee, Yen Nee. "Singapore fifth worst tax haven in the world: Oxfam". Archived from the original on 28 August 2019. Retrieved 28 August 2019. Andrew Heathcote (15 April 2013). "Tax havens: Brett Blundy latest to join the Singapore set". Business Review Weekly. Archived from the original on 14 April 2013. Retrieved 18 April 2013. Nooten, Carrie (4 April 2013). "Pourquoi Cahuzac a-t-il placé son argent à Singapour?". Slate (in French). Archived from the original on 14 November 2016. Retrieved 13 November 2016. "Financial Secrecy Index – 2015 Results: Narrative Report on Singapore" (PDF). Tax Justice Network. 2015. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 October 2016. Retrieved 23 November 2016. "Jakarta plans tax haven on two islands near Singapore". The Straits Times. 14 August 2016. Archived from the original on 14 November 2016. Retrieved 13 November 2016. Anshuman Daga; Joshua Franklin (11 October 2016). "Singapore shuts Falcon bank unit, fines DBS and UBS over 1MDB". Reuters. Archived from the original on 14 November 2016. Retrieved 13 November 2016. "UBS et Falcon sanctionnés à Singapour dans le scandale 1MBD". Bilan.ch (in French). 11 October 2016. Archived from the original on 2 May 2018. Retrieved 13 November 2016. Ungku, Fathin; Teo, Hillary (11 March 2017). "Water price hike sparks rare public protest in Singapore". Reuters. Archived from the original on 12 March 2017. Retrieved 11 March 2017. Lee Yen Nee (10 March 2016). "Singapore ranked world's most expensive city for 3rd year running". Today. Singapore. Archived from the original on 24 April 2017. Retrieved 11 March 2017. "Asian and European cities compete for the title of most expensive city". The Economist. London. 15 March 2018. Archived from the original on 1 May 2018. Retrieved 21 April 2018. "Assistance". Ministry of Social and Family Development. 26 October 2014. Archived from the original on 26 October 2014. "The stingy nanny". The Economist. London. 16 October 2009. Archived from the original on 2 February 2012. Retrieved 14 February 2012. "Welfare in Singapore: Singapore government response". The Economist. London. 17 February 2010. Archived from the original on 29 June 2012. Retrieved 14 February 2012. "ActiveSG$100 for Singaporeans to play sport". Today. Singapore. 26 April 2014. Archived from the original on 23 June 2016. Retrieved 13 July 2016. "Baby Bonus". Ministry of Social & Family Development. Archived from the original on 16 October 2015. Retrieved 13 July 2016. "NEU PC Plus Programme". Infocomm Development Authority of Singapore. Archived from the original on 19 January 2016. Retrieved 13 July 2016. "250,000 Public Transport Vouchers to Help Needy Families Cope with Fare Adjustment". Ministry of Transport. 21 January 2015. Archived from the original on 29 May 2016. Retrieved 13 July 2016. "Numbers and profile of homeless persons". Ministry of Social and Family Development. 13 August 2012. Archived from the original on 13 May 2016. Retrieved 13 July 2016. "Singapore Budget 2014 – Measures For Households". Government of Singapore. Archived from the original on 25 June 2016. Retrieved 13 July 2016. "Human Development Report 2019" (PDF). UNDP. 2019. Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 June 2020. Retrieved 20 June 2020. Savage, Victor R.; Yeoh, Brenda S.A. (2004). Toponymics: A Study of Singapore's Street Names. Singapore: Eastern Universities Press. ISBN 978-981-210-364-2. "Bukit Timah Hill". National Heritage Board. Archived from the original on 9 April 2015. Retrieved 11 January 2015. Commonwealth and Colonial Law by Kenneth Roberts-Wray, London, Stevens, 1966. Pgs. 133–134 Department of External Affairs in Australia. (16 May 1957): Report from the Australian High Commission in Singapore to the Department of External Affairs in Australia. Singapore: National Archives of Singapore. (Microfilm: NAB 447) "All set for transfer". The Straits Times. Singapore. 16 May 1958. p. 2. Archived from the original on 6 September 2015. Retrieved 17 February 2019. "Pedra Branca". Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Archived from the original on 20 December 2019. Retrieved 4 February 2020. "Such quantities of sand". The Economist. London. 28 February 2015. Archived from the original on 13 September 2017. Retrieved 11 September 2017. "MND Land Use Report". Ministry of National Development. Archived from the original on 4 February 2013. "Earthshots: Satellite Images of Environmental Change: Singapore". Earthshots. Archived from the original on 21 May 2015. Retrieved 14 April 2015. "New ideas to feed a growing island". The Straits Times. Singapore. 4 February 2018. Archived from the original on 29 May 2019. Retrieved 29 May 2019. Brook, Barry W.; Sodhi, Navjot S.; Ng, Peter K.L. (24 July 2003). "Catastrophic extinctions follow deforestation in Singapore". Nature. 424 (6947): 420–426. Bibcode:2003Natur.424..420B. doi:10.1038/nature01795. ISSN 0028-0836. PMID 12879068. S2CID 4404246. ""Garden City" vision is introduced". History SG. Archived from the original on 30 October 2016. Retrieved 16 November 2016. "Singapore, A City in a Garden" (PDF). National Parks Board. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 March 2014. "Speech by MOS Desmond Lee at the Asia for Animals Conference Gala Dinner". National Development Ministry. Archived from the original on 10 July 2014. Retrieved 17 January 2014. "National Initiatives". National Biodiversity Reference Center. Archived from the original on 5 October 2007. Retrieved 26 September 2009. "Singapore Botanic Gardens declared UNESCO World Heritage Site". Channel NewsAsia. 4 July 2015. Archived from the original on 15 November 2017. Retrieved 15 November 2017. "Climate of Singapore". weather.gov.sg. Archived from the original on 29 May 2020. Retrieved 28 May 2020. McKnight, Tom L. (Tom Lee); Hess, Darrel (2000). Physical geography : a landscape appreciation. Internet Archive. Upper Saddle River, N.J. : Prentice Hall. Retrieved 28 May 2020. "Singapore National Environment Agency Weather Statistics". Archived from the original on 31 October 2016. Retrieved 24 November 2016. Bond, Sam (2 October 2006). "Singapore enveloped by Sumatran smog". Edie newsroom. Archived from the original on 27 September 2011. Retrieved 2 June 2011. Mok Ly Yng (22 September 2010). "Why is Singapore in the 'Wrong' Time Zone?". National University of Singapore. Archived from the original on 28 July 2010. Retrieved 5 May 2020. "Astronomical and Tidal Information | Monthly Data". weather.gov.sg. Archived from the original on 18 May 2020. Retrieved 31 May 2020. Tan, Audrey (18 February 2020). "Singapore Budget 2020: New coastal and flood protection fund to protect Singapore against rising sea levels". The Straits Times. Singapore. Archived from the original on 20 February 2020. Retrieved 20 February 2020. Overland, Indra et al. (2017) Impact of Climate Change on ASEAN International Affairs: Risk and Opportunity Multiplier Archived 28 July 2020 at the Wayback Machine, Norwegian Institute of International Affairs (NUPI) and Myanmar Institute of International and Strategic Studies (MISIS). "Singapore Budget 2018: Carbon tax of $5 per tonne of greenhouse gas emissions to be levied". The Straits Times. Singapore. 19 February 2018. Archived from the original on 19 February 2018. Retrieved 24 March 2020. "One of world's largest floating solar farms coming up in Tuas". The Straits Times. Singapore. 19 August 2020. Archived from the original on 25 November 2020. Retrieved 13 September 2020. "Records of Climate Station Means (Climatological Reference Period: 1991-2020)". National Environment Agency (Singapore). Retrieved 5 August 2021. "Historical Extremes". National Environment Agency (Singapore). Retrieved 5 August 2021. "Singapore/Changi Climate Normals 1991–2020". World Meteorological Organization Climatological Standard Normals (1991–2020). National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Archived from the original on 1 August 2023. Retrieved 1 August 2023. Nur Asyiqin, Mohamad Salleh (1 March 2017). "Parliament: Water an issue of national security and must be priced fully, Masagos says". The Straits Times. Archived from the original on 14 April 2021. Retrieved 6 December 2020. "Water Action Decade – Singapore". Water Action Decade. Archived from the original on 9 December 2020. Retrieved 6 December 2020. "S'pore 'most at risk of facing high water stress'". The Straits Times. 29 August 2015. Archived from the original on 22 January 2021. Retrieved 6 December 2020. "Singapore Water Story". Public Utilities Board. 2018. Archived from the original on 29 March 2022. Retrieved 17 March 2018. Ivy Ong Bee Luan (2010). "Singapore Water Management Policies and Practices". International Journal of Water Resources Development. 26 (1): 65–80. Bibcode:2010IJWRD..26...65L. doi:10.1080/07900620903392190. S2CID 154813810. "Singapore To Meet Water Target Before Deadline: Southeast Asia". Bloomberg News. 30 July 2012. Archived from the original on 5 August 2012. Retrieved 9 August 2012. "Four National Taps Provide Water for All". Archived from the original on 30 July 2012. Retrieved 10 August 2012. "Resource-starved Singapore turns sewage into ultra-clean water". phys.org. Archived from the original on 13 August 2021. Retrieved 13 August 2021. "2018 Water / Wastewater Project of the Year". Global Water Awards. Archived from the original on 13 August 2021. Retrieved 13 August 2021. "PUB, Singapore's National Water Agency". PUB, Singapore's National Water Agency. Retrieved 13 August 2021. "Public transport ridership" (PDF). Land Transport Authority. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 April 2010. Retrieved 2 July 2011. "Tracing our steps". Land Transport Authority. Archived from the original on 5 June 2011. Retrieved 2 July 2011. Small, Kenneth A.; Verhoef, Erik T. (2007). The Economics of Urban Transportation. London: Routledge. p. 148. ISBN 978-0-415-28515-5. Cervero, Robert (1998). The Transit Metropolis. Washington DC: Island Press. p. 169. ISBN 978-1-55963-591-2. Chapter 6/The Master Planned Transit Metropolis: Singapore. "Electronic Road Pricing". Land Transport Authority. Archived from the original on 10 April 2008. Retrieved 16 April 2008. "Satellite-based ERP to be ready by 2020, with S$556m contract awarded". Channel NewsAsia. 25 February 2016. Archived from the original on 17 August 2018. Retrieved 17 August 2018. Aquino, Kristine (17 February 2011). "BMW Costing $260,000 Means Cars Only for Rich in Singapore as Taxes Climb". New York: Bloomberg L.P. Archived from the original on 20 February 2011. Retrieved 2 July 2011. "Once you're here: Basic Road Rules and Regulations". Expat Singapore. 16 August 2009. Archived from the original on 15 December 2014. Retrieved 27 February 2011. "Rail Network". Land Transport Authority. Retrieved 9 December 2022. "Bus". Land Transport Authority. Retrieved 9 December 2022. "Getting A Taxi". Land Transport Authority. Archived from the original on 27 May 2016. Retrieved 13 July 2016. Lim, Yan Liang (13 October 2013). "A look at Woodlands Checkpoint: Singapore's first and last line of defence". The Straits Times. Retrieved 27 April 2022. Marks, Kathy (30 November 2007). "Qantas celebrates 60 years of the 'Kangaroo Route'". The Independent. London. "Malaysia and Singapore resolve airspace issue, Firefly to resume flights to Seletar airport". The Star Online. 6 April 2019. "Malaysian carrier Firefly to resume Singapore flights with twice-daily trips". CNA. Archived from the original on 17 June 2021. Retrieved 28 August 2019. "About Changi Airport". Changiairport.com. Archived from the original on 21 November 2014. Retrieved 13 July 2016. "2006 Airport of the Year result". World Airport Awards. Archived from the original on 31 December 2006. Retrieved 1 June 2006. Yap, Jimmy (30 January 2004). "Turbulence ahead for Singapore flag carrier". Brand Republic. London: Haymarket Business Media. "Singapore Airlines". Skytrax. Retrieved 9 December 2022. "Skytrax World Airline Awards". Skytrax. Retrieved 9 December 2022. McMah, Lauren (10 August 2021). "Singapore is no longer the world's best airport". news.com.au. Archived from the original on 10 August 2021. Retrieved 13 January 2024. "The World's Top 10 Airports of 2023". SKYTRAX. "Singapore's 2019 Maritime Performance". Archived from the original on 3 January 2022. Retrieved 4 February 2020. Pillai, Sharanya (13 January 2020). "Singapore port container throughput hits record high in 2019: MPA". The Business Times. "The Global Financial Centres Index 28" (PDF). Long Finance. September 2020. Retrieved 26 September 2020. Adam, Shamim (10 August 2011). "Singapore Miracle Dimming as Income Gap Widens Squeeze by Rich". Bloomberg. New York. Archived from the original on 16 August 2011. Facts and Figures – Singapore Economic Development Board. Archived 20 July 2012 at the Wayback Machine Burton, John (10 April 2006). "Singapore economy grows 9.1% in first quarter". Financial Times. London. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. "Facts and Figures". Singapore Economic Development Board. 30 January 2012. Archived from the original on 18 April 2012. Retrieved 21 April 2012. Yang Huiwen (7 November 2007). "Singapore ranked No. 1 logistics hub by World Bank". The Straits Times. Singapore. p. 69. "Gross Domestic Product by Industry" (PDF). Singapore Statistics. 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 June 2008. Retrieved 22 April 2010. WIPO (23 October 2023). Global Innovation Index 2023, 15th Edition. World Intellectual Property Organization. doi:10.34667/tind.46596. ISBN 9789280534320. Retrieved 17 October 2023. WIPO (2022). Global Innovation Index 2022, 15th Edition. World Intellectual Property Organization. doi:10.34667/tind.46596. ISBN 9789280534320. Retrieved 16 November 2022. "RTD – Item". ec.europa.eu. Retrieved 2 September 2021. "Global Innovation Index". INSEAD Knowledge. 28 October 2013. Archived from the original on 2 September 2021. Retrieved 2 September 2021. "Heng upbeat about semiconductor industry's prospects". Straits Times. 18 September 2019. "Singapore's OCBC Strongest Bank as Canadians Dominate". Bloomberg Business. New York. 10 May 2011. Archived from the original on 16 October 2015. "Global 500". Fortune. Retrieved 23 October 2020. "SIA tops Asian list among 50 most admired global firms". The Straits Times. Singapore. 26 February 2015. Archived from the original on 22 September 2015. "The world's best airlines". Fortune. New York. 7 July 2015. "Lee Kuan Yew, truly the father of Changi airport". The Business Times. Singapore. 12 September 2015. Ramesh, S. (14 January 2011). "S'pore is India's second-largest foreign investor". Singapore: Channel NewsAsia. Archived from the original on 22 July 2012. "Singapore". Export Britain. Archived from the original on 20 August 2017. Retrieved 7 November 2017. Desker, Barry; Ang, Cheng Guan (22 July 2015). Perspectives on the Security of Singapore: The First 50 Years. World Scientific. p. 128. ISBN 978-981-4689-33-5. "Visitor arrivals to Singapore rise 6.2% to hit new high in 2018: STB". Channel NewsAsia. Singapore. 13 February 2019. Archived from the original on 16 June 2021. Retrieved 27 August 2019. "Singapore is 2nd most visited city in Asia-Pacific, 5th in the world: Mastercard". The Straits Times. Singapore. 26 September 2018. Archived from the original on 1 October 2018. Retrieved 1 October 2018. "STB Overview". Singapore Tourism Board. Retrieved 23 October 2019. "World Travel and Tourism Council 2017 Singapore report" (PDF). World Travel and Tourism Council. Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 October 2019. Retrieved 23 October 2019. "52 Places to Visit in 2015". The New York Times. 1 January 2015. Retrieved 11 December 2015. "Merlion | Infopedia". eresources.nlb.gov.sg. Retrieved 31 May 2020. "Singapore's most iconic landmarks". visitsingapore.com. Retrieved 29 April 2022. "Marina Bay Sands". visitsingapore.com. Retrieved 31 May 2020. "Gardens by the Bay". visitsingapore.com. Retrieved 31 May 2020. "Jewel Changi Airport". visitsingapore.com. Retrieved 31 May 2020. "Orchard Road: A shopping paradise". Singapore Tourism Board. Retrieved 27 August 2019. "Overview". sentosa.gov.sg. Retrieved 28 May 2020. "Singapore Botanic Gardens clinches prestigious Unesco World Heritage site status". The Straits Times. Singapore. 4 July 2015. Retrieved 25 May 2020. "Singapore Tourism Board and Singapore Economic Development Board launch Passion Made Possible Brand for Singapore" (Press release). 24 August 2017. Archived from the original on 14 December 2018. "Singapore Zoo". National Library Board. 22 July 2014. Retrieved 27 August 2019. Dogra, Sapna (16 July 2005). "Medical tourism boom takes Singapore by storm". Express Healthcare Management. Mumbai. Archived from the original on 26 October 2005. Kok, Xinghui. "Singapore's population grows 5% as foreign workers return post-pandemic". Reuters. "Singapore: Asian immigrant stock by country of origin 2020". Statista. Retrieved 22 January 2024. Census of Population 2010 Advance Census Release (PDF) (Report). Singapore Department of Statistics. 2010. pp. 13–16. ISBN 978-981-08-6819-2. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 March 2012. Retrieved 2 July 2011. "Trends in international migrant stock: The 2008 revision", United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division (2009). Singapore Department of Statistics | Census of Population 2020 Statistical Release 1 - Demographic Characteristics, Education, Language and Religion, p. 20. Hoe Yeen Nie (12 January 2010). "Singaporeans of mixed race allowed to 'double barrel' race in IC". Singapore: Channel NewsAsia. Archived from the original on 6 February 2010. Retrieved 18 February 2011. "Lessons from Singapore on Raising Fertility Rates – IMF F&D". IMF. Retrieved 22 January 2024. "World Bank Open Data". World Bank Open Data. Retrieved 22 January 2024. Fertility rate, total (births per woman) - Singapore; ( 1 ) United Nations Population Division. World Population Prospects: 2022 Revision. ( 2 ) Census reports and other statistical publications from national statistical offices, ( 3 ) Eurostat: Demographic Statistics, ( 4 ) United Nations Statistical Division. Population and Vital Statistics Report ( various years ), ( 5 ) U.S. Census Bureau: International Database, and ( 6 ) Secretariat of the Pacific Community: Statistics and Demography Programme. "Singapore: citizen population median age 1970-2022". Statista. Retrieved 22 January 2024. "Lessons from Singapore on Raising Fertility Rates – IMF F&D". IMF. Retrieved 22 January 2024. Jacob, Charmaine (18 September 2023). "Singapore's birth rate is at a record low — but 'throwing money' at the problem won't solve it". CNBC. Retrieved 22 January 2024. Ng, Julia (7 February 2007). "Singapore's birth trend outlook remains dismal". Singapore: Channel NewsAsia. Archived from the original on 5 January 2012. Retrieved 22 April 2010. O'Callaghan, John (31 August 2012). "Tiny Singapore risks economic gloom without big baby boom". Reuters. Retrieved 17 May 2021. Jessica Pan and Walter Theseira, Immigration in Singapore - Background paper to the World Development Report 2023: Migrants, Refugees, and Societies (April 2023) "Statistics Singapore – Latest Data – Households & Housing". Retrieved 27 February 2015. "Statistics Singapore – Latest Data – Households & Housing". Statistics Singapore. 2014. Archived from the original on 29 November 2015. Retrieved 20 April 2015. "Singapore Resident Households by dwellings". Archived from the original on 15 February 2020. Retrieved 15 February 2015. "HDB InfoWEB: HDB Wins the 2010 UN-HABITAT Scroll of Honour Award". Hdb.gov.sg. Archived from the original on 11 December 2011. Retrieved 14 October 2013. "More than 1.3 million foreigners working in Singapore: Tan Chuan-Jin". Singapore: Channel NewsAsia. 5 August 2014. Archived from the original on 14 September 2014. Retrieved 26 October 2014. "Introduction – Inter-Religious Organisation, Singapore". Retrieved 10 July 2022. "Global Religious Diversity". Pew Research Center's Religion & Public Life Project. 4 April 2014. Retrieved 10 July 2022. "Census of population 2010: Statistical Release 1 on Demographic Characteristics, Education, Language and Religion" (PDF) (Press release). Singapore Department of Statistics. 12 January 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 January 2011. Retrieved 16 January 2011. Khun Eng Kuah (2009). State, society, and religious engineering: toward a reformist Buddhism in Singapore. Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies. ISBN 978-981-230-865-8. Retrieved 1 November 2010. "Modernity in south-east Asia". Informaworld. 2 December 1995. Republic of Singapore Independence Act 1965 (No. 9 of 1965, 1985 Rev. Ed.), s7. Gupta, A.F. Fischer, K. (ed.). "Epistemic modalities and the discourse particles of Singapore". Approaches to Discourse Particles. Amsterdam: Elsevier: 244–263. Archived from the original (DOC) on 5 February 2011. Retrieved 2 February 2011. Dixon, L. Quentin. (2005). The Bilingual Education Policy in Singapore: Implications for Second Language Acquisition. In James Cohen, J., McAlister, K. T., Rolstad, K., and MacSwan, J (Eds.), ISB4: Proceedings of the 4th International Symposium on Bilingualism. p. 625–635, Cascadilla Press, Somerville, MA. "Global Literacy: The advantage of speaking good English" (Press release). Ministry of Education. 31 March 2000. Archived from the original on 6 March 2012. Retrieved 27 January 2011. Tan, Sherman, p. 340–341. "The four recognised official languages are English, Mandarin, Tamil, and Malay, but in practice, English is Singapore's default lingua franca." "Education UK Partnership – Country focus". British Council. October 2010. Archived from the original on 2 April 2011. Retrieved 27 February 2011. "Speech by Mr S. Iswaran, Senior Minister of State, Ministry of Trade and Industry and Ministry of Education". Ministry of Education. 19 April 2010. Archived from the original on 19 May 2011. "What do I do if I can't speak English?". Singapore Subordinate Courts. Archived from the original on 9 July 2010. Retrieved 11 October 2011. Constitution of the Republic of Singapore ({{{rep}}} Reprint) "Public Agencies". 6 January 2015. Archived from the original on 6 January 2015. Retrieved 21 September 2018. "31 March 2000". Moe.gov.sg. Archived from the original on 6 March 2012. Retrieved 27 January 2011. Afendras, Evangelos A.; Kuo, Eddie C.Y. (1980). Language and society in Singapore. Singapore University Press. ISBN 978-9971-69-016-8. Retrieved 27 February 2011. Ammon, Ulrich; Dittmar, Norbert; Mattheier, Klaus J. (2006). Sociolinguistics: An international handbook of the science of language and society. Vol. 3. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter. ISBN 978-3-11-018418-1. Retrieved 27 February 2011. Singapore Arms and Flag and National Anthem Act (Cap. 296, 1985 Rev. Ed.) "Literacy and Language" (PDF). Singapore Statistics. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 November 2009. Retrieved 27 February 2011. "General Household Survey 2015" (PDF). 2015. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 December 2017. Retrieved 15 November 2016. Cook, Vivian; Bassetti, Benedetta (2005). Second Language Writing Systems. Multilingual Matters. p. 359. ISBN 978-1-85359-793-0. "Update Change of Name in IC". Immigration and Checkpoints Authority. Archived from the original on 2 February 2017. Retrieved 29 January 2017. Oi, Mariko (5 October 2010). "Singapore's booming appetite to study Mandarin". BBC News. Retrieved 27 February 2011. "General Household Survey 2005, Statistical Release 1: Socio-Demographic and Economic Characteristics" (PDF). Singapore Statistics. 2005. Archived from the original on 26 March 2012. Retrieved 11 November 2010. Fagao Zhou (1986). Papers in Chinese Linguistics and Epigraphy. Chinese University Press. p. 56. ISBN 978-962-201-317-9. Retrieved 31 January 2017. "What are some commonly misspelled English words?|ASK!ASK!". Archived from the original on 3 March 2012. "What are some commonly misspelled English words?". Singapore: National Library Board. 18 April 2008. Archived from the original on 3 March 2012. Retrieved 18 February 2011. Tan Hwee Hwee (22 July 2002). "A war of words is brewing over Singlish". Time. New York. Archived from the original on 29 April 2007. Retrieved 18 February 2011. Harbeck, James (19 September 2016). "The language the government tried to suppress". BBC. Retrieved 1 May 2022. "Private Education in Singapore". Ministry of Education. 2011. Retrieved 2 July 2011. "International Student Admissions: General Information on Studying in Singapore". Ministry of Education. Archived from the original on 4 March 2011. Retrieved 27 February 2011. "ASEAN Scholarships: Frequently Asked Questions". Ministry of Education. Archived from the original on 6 April 2008. Retrieved 27 February 2011. "Speech by Tharman Shanmugaratnam, Senior Minister of State for Trade & Industry and Education at the Seminar on "The Significance of Speaking Skills For Language Development", organised by the Tamil Language and Culture Division of Nie on 15 February 2003" (Press release). Ministry of Education. 2 January 2008. Archived from the original on 15 May 2011. Retrieved 27 February 2011. "Mandarin is important but remains a second language in S'pore MM Lee". Singapore: Channel NewsAsia. 26 June 2010. Archived from the original on 30 June 2017. Retrieved 27 February 2011. "Returning Singaporeans – Mother-Tongue Language Policy". Ministry of Education. Archived from the original on 8 April 2008. Retrieved 27 February 2011. "Refinements to Mother Tongue Language Policy" (Press release). Ministry of Education. Archived from the original on 24 February 2011. Retrieved 27 February 2011. "Primary Education". Ministry of Education. 2011. Retrieved 2 July 2011. "Primary School Curriculum". Ministry of Education. 2011. Archived from the original on 7 April 2008. Retrieved 2 July 2011. "Secondary Education". Ministry of Education. 2011. Retrieved 2 July 2011. "Special/Express Courses Curriculum". Ministry of Education. 2011. Archived from the original on 7 April 2008. Retrieved 2 July 2011. "Pre-University Education". Ministry of Education. 2011. Archived from the original on 5 April 2008. Retrieved 2 July 2011. "How Singapore's six public universities differ". The Straits Times. Singapore. 3 March 2015. Retrieved 23 September 2016. "QS World University Rankings 2015/16". QS. 11 September 2015. Retrieved 15 November 2016. "Secondary". Ministry of Education. Retrieved 2 December 2016. "Singapore's Education System: An Overview". Ministry of Education. Retrieved 6 December 2016. "Developing Asian education hubs". EU-Asia Higher Education Platform. 2011. Archived from the original on 23 October 2011. Retrieved 12 October 2011. "The long, long ride". New Straits Times. Kuala Lumpur. 7 May 2006. Archived from the original on 15 June 2013. Retrieved 12 October 2011. Alt URL "Foreign Students in Singapore". Ministry of Education. 2011. Archived from the original on 9 April 2009. Retrieved 12 October 2011. "Singapore tops OECD's global school ranking, US placed 28th". CNBC. 13 May 2015. "Singapore tops biggest global education rankings published by OECD". The Straits Times. Singapore. 13 May 2015. "Pisa tests: Singapore top in global education rankings". BBC News. 7 December 2016. "PISA: Singapore teens top global education ranking". CNN. 6 December 2016. "Why Singapore's kids are so good at maths". Financial Times. London. 22 July 2016. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. "S'pore students top in science, maths and reading in Pisa test". Today. Singapore. 6 December 2016. "Singapore students top in maths, science and reading in Pisa international benchmarking test". The Straits Times. Singapore. 6 December 2016. "U.S. Teenagers Lose Ground in International Math Exam, Raising Competitiveness Concerns". The Wall Street Journal. New York. 6 December 2016. "UK Schools climb international league table". The Guardian. London. 6 December 2016. Nylander, Johan (14 November 2016). "Singaporeans among top English speakers; Hong Kong slides". Asia Times Online. Hong Kong. Retrieved 16 November 2016. "Dutch Pass Danes to Become World's Best English Speakers". Yahoo News. 15 November 2016. Archived from the original on 8 August 2017. "The Nordics have the highest English proficiency in the world – and it's boosting their tech and innovation". Business Insider. 16 November 2016. Archived from the original on 13 July 2017. Retrieved 6 July 2017. "How Well is English Spoken Worldwide?". Voice of America News. 15 November 2016. Tucci, John (2010). "The Singapore health system – achieving positive health outcomes with low expenditure". Towers Watson. Archived from the original on 10 December 2012. Retrieved 16 March 2011. "World Health Organization Assesses the World's Health Systems" (Press release). World Health Organization. 7 February 2000. Retrieved 13 March 2023. "Latest Data – Births & Deaths". Department of Statistics. 2014. Archived from the original on 29 November 2015. Retrieved 26 April 2015. "Singaporeans have world's longest life expectancy at 84.8 years". The Straits Times. 20 June 2019. "The World's Best Countries For Food Security". worldatlas.com. 18 April 2019. "Data of 14,200 people with HIV leaked online by American fraudster: MOH". Business Times. Singapore. 28 January 2019. "Singapore: Health Profile" (PDF). Geneva: World Health Organization. 13 August 2010. Retrieved 16 March 2011. "At a glance: Singapore". Unicef. Archived from the original on 27 August 2019. Retrieved 27 August 2019. "The lottery of life". The Economist. London. 21 November 2012. Ramesh, M. (2008). "Autonomy and Control in Public Hospital Reforms in Singapore". The American Review of Public Administration. 38 (1): 18. doi:10.1177/0275074007301041. S2CID 154781227. "The World Health Report" (PDF). World Health Organization. 2000. p. 66. Retrieved 16 March 2011. "Core Health Indicators Singapore". World Health Organization. May 2008. Archived from the original on 26 July 2009. Retrieved 16 March 2011. "Speech by Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong on Singapore 21 Debate in Parliament". singapore21. 5 May 1999. Archived from the original on 10 February 2001. Retrieved 27 October 2011. "MM Lee says Singapore needs to do more to achieve nationhood". Singapore: Channel NewsAsia. 5 May 2009. Archived from the original on 30 June 2017. Retrieved 27 October 2011. B. H. Goh, Robbie (2009). "Christian identities in Singapore: religion, race and culture between state controls and transnational flows". Journal of Cultural Geography. 26. routledge: 1–23. doi:10.1080/08873630802617135. S2CID 144728013. Siddique, Sharon (1981). "Some Aspects of Malay-Muslim Ethnicity in Peninsular Malaysia". Contemporary Southeast Asia. 3 (1): 76–87. doi:10.1355/CS3-1E (inactive 31 January 2024). JSTOR 25797648.{{cite journal}}: CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of January 2024 (link) Prystay, Chris. "Bit of Malay Culture Is Now Vanishing Under Muslim Rules". Yale GlobalOnline. Yale University. Retrieved 17 November 2018. "PM Lee on racial and religious issues (National Day Rally 2009)". Singapore United. 16 August 2009. Archived from the original on 20 February 2010. Retrieved 27 February 2011. Prystay, Chris. "Bit of Malay Culture Is Now Vanishing Under Muslim Rules". YaleGlobal Online. Yale Universal. Retrieved 17 November 2018. Singapore, Curriculum Planning & Development Division (2015). Singapore : the making of a nation-state 1300–1975. Secondary Two, [Textbook]. Singapore. ISBN 978-981-4448-45-1. OCLC 903000193.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link) CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) Harding, Andrew (16 August 2004). "Singapore slings a little caution to the wind". BBC News. Retrieved 27 February 2011. Arnold, Wayne (16 August 2004). "The Nanny State Places a Bet". The New York Times. Retrieved 27 February 2011. "Old and new citizens get equal chance, says MM Lee" (Press release). Prime Minister's Office. 5 May 2010. Archived from the original on 12 August 2011. Retrieved 27 October 2011. "National Flower". nhb.gov.sg. National Heritage Board. "Ministry of Manpower issues response on debate over Thaipusam public holiday". The Straits Times. Singapore. 13 February 2015. Retrieved 4 July 2018. "Culture and the Arts in Renaissance Singapore" (PDF). Ministry of Information, Communications and the Arts. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 May 2006. Retrieved 1 May 2006. NN, Soorya Kiran (29 November 2015). "Painting our own canvas". The Straits Times. Retrieved 17 August 2018. Faizah bte Zakaria (7 July 2016). "Esplanade-Theatres on the bay". Retrieved 16 March 2018. Wintle, Angela (5 February 2016). "Singlish, cultural diversity and hawker food essential in forging a national identity, say celebs". Channel NewsAsia. Archived from the original on 21 December 2017. Retrieved 17 August 2018. Toh, Wen Li (5 November 2018). "Singapore Writers Festival: Feature Singapore's unique language in literature, says poet". The Straits Times. Retrieved 27 August 2019. "The dynamics of multilingualism in contemporary Singapore" (PDF). Wiley-Blackwell. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 March 2018. Retrieved 27 August 2019. "Singapore National Youth Orchestra". Ministry of Education. Archived from the original on 9 October 2014. Retrieved 5 October 2014. Ang, Steven. "Music director Adrian Tan ushers in new era for Braddell Heights Symphony Orchestra". Time Out Singapore. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 5 October 2014. Lee Tong Soon (2008). "Singapore". In Terry Miller; Sean Williams (eds.). The Garland Handbook of Southeast Asian Music. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-96075-5. "An A-Z of the nation's iconic talents". The Sunday Times. 17 February 2019. NN, Soorya Kiran (20 August 2017). "Here's why Stefanie Sun's a Singapore icon". AsiaOne. Retrieved 17 August 2018. Wu, David Y.H.; Chee Beng Tan (2001). Changing Chinese foodways in Asia. Hong Kong: Chinese University Press. pp. 161 ff. ISBN 978-962-201-914-0. Retrieved 27 February 2011. Farley, David. "The Dish Worth the 15-Hour Flight". BBC News. Ling, Catherine. "40 Singapore foods we can't live without". CNN. Archived from the original on 19 November 2012. Retrieved 13 January 2019. Michaels, Rowena (20 July 2013). "Singapore's best street food ... just don't order frog porridge". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 21 October 2013. Woo, Jacqueline (8 September 2018). "Food fight! The battle for the food delivery market". The Business Times. "70% of Singapore consumers order from food delivery apps at least once a month – and most are spending more money in recent years". Business Insider Singapore. 21 March 2019. Archived from the original on 23 September 2019. "The top celebrity chef restaurants to visit in Singapore". The Straits Times. Singapore. 23 June 2015. "Singapore Food Festival". Singapore Tourism Board. Retrieved 4 February 2020. Fieldmar, James (19 December 2012). "Singapore's Street Food 101". Fodor's. Archived from the original on 22 October 2013. Retrieved 21 October 2013. Kong, Lily (2007). Singapore Hawker Centres : People, Places, Food. Singapore: SNP. ISBN 978-981-248-149-8. Han, Kirsten (4 August 2016). "Michelin star for Singapore noodle stall where lunch is half the price of a Big Mac". The Guardian. London. "Michael Phelps taught a lesson for once – by Joseph Schooling | Andy Bull". The Guardian. 13 August 2016. Retrieved 17 August 2018. "History of Singapore Sports". Sport Singapore. Archived from the original on 6 July 2018. Retrieved 6 July 2018. "Tan Howe Liang". National Library Board. Retrieved 28 August 2019. "Sailing: S'pore retain world team title". 24 July 2013. Retrieved 28 August 2019. "Singapore sailing needs a trailblazer". 8 May 2017. Retrieved 28 August 2019. Chia, Nicole (20 August 2017). "SEA Games: Singapore capture men's 27th water polo gold to keep country's longest sports winning streak alive". The Straits Times. Retrieved 17 August 2018. "Singapore to host first edition of the Youth Olympic Games in 2010" (Press release). International Olympic Committee. 21 February 2008. Archived from the original on 11 March 2009. Retrieved 16 March 2011. "Mixed martial arts-ONE FC returning to Manila in May". chicagotribune.com. ir. "Olympics: First medal in 48 years for Singapore". Channel NewsAsia. Archived from the original on 22 November 2008. Retrieved 15 August 2008. Chua, Siang Yee (5 March 2016). "Table tennis: End of era for Singapore women paddlers". The Straits Times. Retrieved 28 August 2019. "World champs!: S'pore beat favourites China in World Team Table Tennis C'ships", Today, p. 1, 31 May 2010, archived from the original on 1 June 2010 "Singapore's Loh Kean Yew is badminton world champion". The Straits Times. Retrieved 3 May 2022. "S.League.com – Overview". S.League. 2016. Archived from the original on 22 August 2013. Retrieved 5 January 2016. Football: Goodbye S-League, welcome Singapore Premier League The Straits Times, 21 March 2018 "ASEAN Basketball League takes off". FIBA Asia. 20 January 2009. Archived from the original on 16 August 2009. "Singapore Turf Club". National Library Board. Retrieved 28 August 2019. "Singapore confirms 2008 night race" (Press release). Formula One. 11 May 2007. Archived from the original on 13 June 2007. Retrieved 18 May 2007. "SingTel to sponsor first Singapore Grand Prix" (Press release). Formula One. 16 November 2007. Archived from the original on 18 November 2007. Retrieved 10 December 2007. Oi, Mariko (23 April 2013). "The Big Read: To keep roaring for S'pore, F1 needs to raise its game". TODAYonline. Singapore. "Country Report 2010 Edition". Freedom House. 2010. Archived from the original on 15 December 2010. Retrieved 7 May 2011. "TV Guide". meWATCH. Retrieved 4 February 2022. "Cable Television". XIN MSN. 2011. Archived from the original on 14 July 2010. Retrieved 17 October 2011. "Internet Protocol Television (IPTV)". XIN MSN. 2011. Archived from the original on 14 July 2010. Retrieved 17 October 2011. "Singapore country profile". BBC News. 16 November 2010. Retrieved 27 February 2011. "2023 World Press Freedom Index for Singapore". RSF. 16 June 2023. Retrieved 4 October 2023. "Media: Overview". Ministry of Information, Communications and the Arts. 16 March 2005. Archived from the original on 10 September 2006. Retrieved 27 February 2011. "ViewQwest 2Gbps FAQ". Archived from the original on 21 October 2015. Retrieved 2 November 2015. "Equinix further expands SG2 IBX data center in Singapore". Networks Asia. Archived from the original on 4 July 2018. Retrieved 4 July 2018. "Singapore Internet Exchange". Info-communications Media Development Authority. Archived from the original on 27 February 2018. Retrieved 4 July 2018. Sandfort, Sandy (April 1993). "The Intelligent Island". Wired. Gibson, William (April 1993). "Disneyland with the Death Penalty". Wired. "Internet Users by Country (July 2016 estimate)". Internet Live States. July 2016. Retrieved 23 November 2016. Elaboration of data by International Telecommunication Union (ITU), United Nations Population Division, Internet & Mobile Association of India (IAMAI), World Bank. "Singapore". OpenNet Initiative. Retrieved 7 May 2011. Wong, Tessa (11 January 2011). "Impossible for S'pore to block all undesirable sites". The Straits Times. Singapore: Singapore Press Holdings. Archived from the original on 19 January 2011. Retrieved 17 August 2011. Chua Hian Hou (23 May 2008). "MDA bans two video-sharing porn sites". The Straits Times. Singapore. Archived from the original on 24 May 2008. "Smartphone penetration in Singapore the highest globally: Survey". Today. Singapore. 11 February 2015. "Deloitte Mobile Consumer 2014" (Press release). Deloitte Australia. 25 November 2014. Archived from the original on 5 August 2018. Retrieved 13 January 2016. "6 top things that Singaporeans do when using their smartphones". Asiaone. 6 November 2014. Archived from the original on 26 January 2016. Retrieved 13 January 2016. "Statistics Singapore – Latest Data – Social Indicators". Singapore Department of Statistics. 2014. Archived from the original on 29 November 2015. Retrieved 26 April 2015. Attribution This article incorporates public domain text from the websites of the Singapore Department of Statistics, the United States Department of State, the United States Library of Congress and The World Factbook. Bose, Romen (2010). The End of the War : Singapore's Liberation and the Aftermath of the Second World War. Singapore: Marshall Cavendish. ISBN 978-981-4435-47-5. OCLC 830169524. Legg, Frank (1965). The Gordon Bennett Story: From Gallipoli to Singapore. Sydney, New South Wales: Angus & Robertson. OCLC 3193299. Miksic, John N. (2013). Singapore & the Silk Road of the sea, 1300–1800. Singapore. ISBN 978-9971-69-700-6. OCLC 867742213.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link) Smith, Colin (2006). Singapore Burning. London: Penguin. ISBN 978-0-14-101036-6. Toland, John (1970). The Rising Sun, The Decline and Fall of the Japanese Empire: 1936–1945. New York, NY: Random House. ISBN 978-0-394-44311-9. LCCN 77-117669. Wigmore, Lionel (1957). The Japanese Thrust. Australian War Memorial. Library resources about Singapore Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries By Singapore Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Abshire, Jean. The History of Singapore (ABC-CLIO, 2011). Barr, Michael D. Singapore: A Modern History (2019) Corfield, Justin J. Historical dictionary of Singapore (2011) online Ghesquière, Henri C. Singapore's success: engineering economic growth (2007) Heng, Chye Kiang (2016). 50 Years of Urban Planning in Singapore Hill, Michael (1995). Kwen Fee Lian (ed.). The Politics of Nation Building and Citizenship in Singapore. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-12025-8. Huff, W. G. The Economic Growth of Singapore: Trade and Development in the Twentieth Century (1995) King, Rodney (2008). The Singapore Miracle, Myth and Reality. Insight Press. ISBN 978-0-9775567-0-0. Leifer, Michael. Singapore's foreign policy: Coping with vulnerability (Psychology Press, 2000) online Mauzy, Diane K.; Milne, R. S. (2002). Singapore Politics: Under the People's Action Party. Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-24653-8. Mun, Chia Wai (2008). Singapore and Asia in a Globalized World: Contemporary Economic Issues and Policies Perry, John Curtis. Singapore: Unlikely Power (Oxford University Press, 2017). Singh, Bilveer (2017). Understanding Singapore Politics Tan, Kenneth Paul (2007). Renaissance Singapore? Economy, Culture, and Politics. NUS Press. ISBN 978-9971-69-377-0. Worthington, Ross (2002). Governance in Singapore. Routledge/Curzon. ISBN 978-0-7007-1474-2. Yew, Lee Kuan. From Third World to First: The Singapore Story: 1965–2000. New York: HarperCollins, 2000. ISBN 0-06-019776-5. Singapore at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Travel information from Wikivoyage Data from Wikidata "Singapore Infopedia" from Singapore's National Library Board; numerous well-researched and well-documented essays on key events and important figures, as well as topics regarding culture, architecture, nature, etc. Census of Population 2000 (PDF) (Report). Singapore Department of Statistics. April 2002. ISBN 978-981-04-6158-4. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 November 2007. "Key Facts & Figures". Ministry of Transport, Singapore. Retrieved 11 January 2003. "Nation's History". Singapore Infomap. Archived from the original on 21 April 2009. Retrieved 11 January 2004. Singapore Government Online Portal Singapore from UCB Libraries GovPubs Singapore at Curlie Singapore profile from the BBC News Wikimedia Atlas of Singapore Geographic data related to Singapore at OpenStreetMap WikiSatellite view of Singapore at WikiMapia