Benjamin Stanford (born 11 June 1983), better known by his stage name Dub FX (stylized as Dub Fx or DubFx), is an Australian musician and worldwide street performer. Born in St Kilda, Melbourne, Australia, at the start of his career he was singing in a local alternative rock and rapcore band initially known as Twitch, which would later change its name to N.O.N (Never or Now). In 2004 they released a debut and the only album Exeunt Omnes. Soon after he moved to Italy and began a solo career. His trademark is creating rich live music using only his own performance aided by live looping and effects pedals combined with his voice. He creates intricate hip hop, reggae, and drum and bass rhythms. Dub FX currently resides in Victoria, Australia with his wife, and two kids. Stanford used to travel and perform with his former fiancée, Flower Fairy. Dub FX first met her in Manchester, after which she joined him on his travels around the globe to busk for the public. Flower Fairy would usually be seen selling CDs during Dub FX's performances or on stage alongside Stanford when they perform several tracks together. She is also featured singing on tracks from Everythinks a Ripple, "Wandering Love", "Flow", and "Time Will Tell". To his travels also joined his friend and manager CAde, who is on tracks with Stanford like: "No rest for the wicked" , "Supernova Pilot" , "Easy" , "Fresh" and others... Two songs from Everythinks a Ripple, "Flow", and "Wandering Love", feature a street saxophonist named Mr. Woodnote, who also uses similar looping techniques as Dub FX, using a saxophone. After his first summer traveling through Europe in 2006, he came home to Melbourne where he shared a flat with Melbourne-based producer Sirius. Stanford showed Sirius this new style from the UK called dubstep. and by 2010 together they released the album titled Dub FX and Sirius – A Crossworlds. Dub FX does not beatbox on this album.[citation needed] Dub FX is also part of the dubstep act Kila Mega Giga Tera, the other half being Glade Kettle (Distro)(aka Sirius). To date they have released one song on Aquatic Lab Sessions Volume 1, a CD and limited edition vinyl compilation released in 2009. Kila Mega Giga Tera also released an album, which was released in 2010. This album is called A Crossworlds.[citation needed] Dub FX is completely independent, using only live performance, word of mouth, internet social networking, and a number of easily accessible free samples. Dub FX is also the main founder of the label Convoyunltd, which could be described as a co-op label for Dub FX's own work and that of other artists. To date, artists that have released albums on Convoyunltd are: Flower Fairy, Sirius, Mr. Woodnote, and Dub FX, with additional featured artists on separate songs of each album. Every album released through Convoyunltd has been produced by Dub FX with the exception of Dub FX & Sirius's release, A Crossworlds, a collaboration album released in 2010 which revealed a much darker and instrumental sound.[citation needed] Dub FX's lyrics address both general world events and contemporary angst, while suggesting individual-based revolution through self-determination and engagement. He also addresses issues of social importance, the most notable example being the song Society's Gates, loosely based on the life of the philosopher Socrates. The Music Victoria Awards are an annual awards night celebrating Victorian music. They commenced in 2006. Moses, Allan (2010) "Dubbing into Dub FX", The Hindu, 26 November 2010, retrieved 9 April 2012 "N.O.N". 16 October 2006. "N.O.N on Bandcamp". Archived from the original on 30 January 2019. Wickrematunge, Raisa "Dub FX in Sri Lanka Archived 27 June 2018 at the Wayback Machine", Sunday Leader, retrieved 9 April 2012 "London City Guide | Dub_FX review May 08". Archived from the original on 21 July 2011. Retrieved 2 September 2009. Banerjee, Debesh (2010) "Medley Score", The Indian Express, 25 November 2010, retrieved 9 April 2012 "The Philosopher Street Musician | Kortars". kortars.com. Retrieved 23 August 2016. "Previous Nominess". Music Victoria. Archived from the original on 19 September 2020. Retrieved 13 August 2020. "Previous Winners". Music Victoria. Archived from the original on 31 July 2019. Retrieved 13 August 2020. Official website