Dame Olivia Newton-John AC DBE (26 September 1948 – 8 August 2022) was an English and Australian singer and actress. She was a four-time Grammy Award winner whose music career included fifteen top-ten singles, including five number-one singles on the Billboard Hot 100 and two number-one albums on the Billboard 200: If You Love Me, Let Me Know (1974) and Have You Never Been Mellow (1975). Eleven of her singles (including two Platinum) and fourteen of her albums (including two Platinum and four 2× Platinum) have been certified Gold by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). In 1978, Newton-John starred in the musical film Grease, which was the highest-grossing musical film at the time and whose soundtrack remains one of the world's best-selling albums. It features two major hit duets with co-star John Travolta: "You're the One That I Want"—which is one of the best-selling singles of all time—and "Summer Nights". Her signature solo recordings include the Record of the Year Grammy winner "I Honestly Love You" (1974) and "Physical" (1981)—Billboard's highest-ranking Hot 100 single of the 1980s. Other defining hit singles include "If Not for You" and "Banks of the Ohio" (both 1971), "Let Me Be There" (1973), "If You Love Me (Let Me Know)" (1974), "Have You Never Been Mellow" (1975), "Sam" (1977), "Hopelessly Devoted to You" (1978; also from Grease), "A Little More Love" (1978), "Twist of Fate" (1983) and, from the 1980 film Xanadu, "Magic" and "Xanadu" (with the Electric Light Orchestra). Newton-John is one of the best-selling music artists of all time, as well as one of the highest-selling female Australian artists. Newton-John, who had breast cancer three times, was an advocate and sponsor for breast cancer research. In 2012, the Olivia Newton-John Cancer and Wellness Centre opened in her home town of Melbourne. She also was an activist for environmental and animal rights causes. Olivia Newton-John was born on 26 September 1948 in Cambridge, to Brinley "Bryn" Newton-John (1914–1992) and Irene Helene (née Born; 1914–2003). Her father was born and raised in Wales to a middle-class family. Her mother was born and raised in Germany to a German Jewish academic family who came to the UK in 1933 to escape the Nazi regime. Newton-John's maternal grandfather was German Jewish Nobel Prize–winning physicist Max Born. Her maternal grandmother Hedwig was the daughter of German Jewish jurist Victor Ehrenberg, and of his Lutheran wife, Helene Agatha von Jhering. Through Helene Agatha, Newton-John was a descendant of Protestant theologian Martin Luther. Helene Agatha's own father, Newton-John's great-great-grandfather, was jurist Rudolf von Jhering. Newton-John's uncle was pharmacologist Gustav Victor Rudolf Born. Through her Ehrenberg line, Newton-John was a third cousin of comedian Ben Elton. Newton-John's father was an MI5 officer on the Enigma project at Bletchley Park who took Rudolf Hess into custody during World War II. After the war, he became the headmaster of the Cambridgeshire High School for Boys and was in this post when Newton-John was born. Newton-John was the youngest of three children, following her brother Hugh (1939–2019), a medical doctor, and her sister Rona (1941–2013), an actress who was married to restaurateur Brian Goldsmith and was later married to Newton-John's Grease co-star Jeff Conaway (from 1980 until their divorce in 1985). She also had a half-brother, Toby, and a half-sister, Sarah, both of whom were born of her father's second marriage. In early 1954, when Newton-John was five, her family emigrated to Melbourne, Victoria, on the SS Strathaird. Her father worked as a professor of German and as the master of Ormond College at the University of Melbourne. Her family attended church while her father served as the head of the Presbyterian college. Newton-John attended Christ Church Grammar School in the Melbourne suburb of South Yarra and then the University High School in Parkville. Newton-John went to primary school with Daryl Braithwaite, who also followed a singing career. At age 14, with three classmates, Newton-John formed a short-lived, all-girl group called Sol Four which often performed at a coffee shop owned by her brother-in-law. Newton-John originally wanted to become a veterinarian but then chose to focus on performance after doubting her ability to pass science exams. In 1964, Newton-John's acting talent was first recognised portraying Lady Mary Lasenby in her University High School's production of The Admirable Crichton as she became the Young Sun's Drama Award best schoolgirl actress runner-up. She then became a regular on local Australian television shows, including Time for Terry and HSV-7's The Happy Show, where she performed as "Lovely Livvy". She also appeared on The Go!! Show, where she met her future duet partner, singer Pat Carroll, and her future music producer, John Farrar. (Carroll and Farrar later married.) In 1965, she entered and won a talent contest on the television program Sing, Sing, Sing, hosted by 1960s Australian icon Johnny O'Keefe. She performed the songs "Anyone Who Had a Heart" and "Everything's Coming Up Roses". She was initially reluctant to use her prize, a trip to Great Britain, but travelled there nearly a year later after her mother encouraged her to broaden her horizons. While in Britain, Newton-John missed her then-boyfriend, Ian Turpie, with whom she had co-starred in the 1965 Australian telefilm Funny Things Happen Down Under. She repeatedly booked trips back to Australia that her mother cancelled. In 1966, Newton-John recorded her first single, "Till You Say You'll Be Mine", in Britain for Decca Records. Newton-John's outlook changed when Pat Carroll moved to the UK. The two formed a duo called Pat and Olivia and toured nightclubs in Europe. (In one incident, they were booked at Paul Raymond's Revue in Soho, London, and were unaware that it was a strip club until they began to perform onstage dressed primly in frilly high-collared dresses.) During this period, she and Carroll contributed backup vocals to recordings by a number of other artists, notably the song "Come In, You'll Get Pneumonia" by the Easybeats. After Carroll's visa expired, Carroll was forced to return to Australia but Newton-John remained in Britain to pursue solo work. Newton-John was recruited for the group Toomorrow, formed by American producer Don Kirshner. In 1970, the group starred in the science fiction musical Toomorrow and recorded an accompanying soundtrack album on RCA Records; both the LP and the movie were named after the group. That same year, the group made two single recordings: "You're My Baby Now"/"Goin' Back" and "I Could Never Live Without Your Love"/"Roll Like a River". Neither track became a chart success; the project failed and the group disbanded. Newton-John released her first solo album, If Not for You (US No. 158 Pop), in 1971. (In the UK, the album was known as Olivia Newton-John.) The title track, written by Bob Dylan, was her first international hit (US No. 25 Pop, No. 1 Adult Contemporary/"AC"). Her follow-up single, "Banks of the Ohio", was a top 10 hit in the UK and Australia. She was voted Best British Female Vocalist two years in a row by the magazine Record Mirror. She made frequent appearances on Cliff Richard's weekly show It's Cliff Richard and starred with him in the telefilm The Case. In 1972, Newton-John's second UK album, Olivia, was released but never formally issued in the United States, where her career floundered after If Not for You. Subsequent singles, including "Banks of the Ohio" (No. 94 Pop, No. 34 AC) and remakes of George Harrison's "What Is Life" (No. 34 AC) and John Denver's "Take Me Home, Country Roads" (No. 119 Pop), made minimal impact on the Hot 100. Her fortune changed with the release of "Let Me Be There" in 1973. The song reached the American top 10 on the Pop (No. 6), Country (No. 7), and AC (No. 3) charts and earned her a Grammy for Best Country Female and an Academy of Country Music award for Most Promising Female Vocalist. Her second American album, named Let Me Be There after the hit single, was her third in Britain, where the LP is known as Music Makes My Day. It is also called Let Me Be There in Australia; however, the US and Canadian versions featured an alternate track list that mixed new cuts with selections from Olivia and also recycled six songs from If Not for You, which was going out of print. In 1974, Newton-John represented the United Kingdom in the Eurovision Song Contest with the song "Long Live Love". The song was chosen for Newton-John by the British public out of six possible entries (Newton-John later admitted that she disliked the song). Newton-John finished fourth at the contest, held in Brighton, behind the Swedish winning entry, "Waterloo" by ABBA. All six Eurovision contest song candidates—"Have Love, Will Travel", "Lovin' You Ain't Easy", "Long Live Love", "Someday", "Angel Eyes" and "Hands Across the Sea"—were recorded by Newton-John and included on her Long Live Love album, her first for the EMI Records label. The Long Live Love album was released in the US and Canada as If You Love Me, Let Me Know. All the Eurovision entries were dropped for different and more country-flavoured tunes intended to capitalise on the success of "Let Me Be There"; the North American offering used selections from Long Live Love, Olivia and Music Makes My Day, and only the title cut was new. If You Love Me, Let Me Know's title track was its first single and reached No. 5 Pop, No. 2 Country (her best country position to date) and No. 2 AC. In the UK and Australia, "If You Love Me (Let Me Know)" was featured on compilations titled First Impressions and Great Hits! First Impressions respectively. The next single, "I Honestly Love You", became Newton-John's signature song. Written and composed by Jeff Barry and Peter Allen, the ballad became her first Pop number-one (staying there for two weeks), second AC number-one (for three weeks) and third top 10 Country (No. 6) hit and earned Newton-John two more Grammys for Record of the Year and Best Pop Vocal Performance – Female. In her 2018 autobiography, Don't Stop Believin', Newton-John describes "I Honestly Love You" as a song which is "so simple, with a meaning that was deeper than the ocean". In many of her concert performances, Newton-John closed with this tune, and she further explains: "It's such a special song, and I have some very profound memories of times that I’ve sung it, very intimate times, with special people in my life; and all through my life, it's meant something different to me, and every time I sing it it has a different resonance". The success of the singles "If You Love Me (Let Me Know)" and "I Honestly Love You" helped the album reach No. 1 on both the pop (one week) and country (eight weeks) albums charts.[citation needed] In 1974, George Hamilton IV also presented to her the (BCMA) British Country Music Association Award for "Female Vocalist of the Year" in London, England. In the United States, Newton-John's success in country music sparked a debate among purists, who took issue with a foreigner singing country-flavoured pop music being classed with native Nashville artists. In addition to her Grammy for "Let Me Be There", in 1974 Newton-John was also named the Country Music Association Female Vocalist of the Year, a designation which made her the first British singer to have won the award; and the title also meant she defeated more established Nashville-based nominees Loretta Lynn, Dolly Parton and Tanya Tucker, as well as Canadian artist Anne Murray. This protest by country music participants led to the formation of the short-lived Association of Country Entertainers (ACE). Newton-John was eventually supported by the country music community. Stella Parton, Dolly's sister, recorded "Ode to Olivia" and Newton-John recorded her 1976 album, Don't Stop Believin', in Nashville, Tennessee. Encouraged by expatriate Australian singer Helen Reddy, Newton-John left the UK and moved to the US. Newton-John topped the Pop (one week) and Country (six weeks) albums charts with her next album, Have You Never Been Mellow. For 45 years, Olivia held the Guinness World Record for the shortest gap (154 days) by a female between new Number 1 albums (If You Love Me, Let Me Know > Have You Never Been Mellow) on the US Billboard 200 album charts until Taylor Swift in 2020 (140 days with folklore > evermore). The Have You Never Been Mellow album generated two singles – the John Farrar-penned title track (No. 1 Pop, No. 3 Country, No. 1 AC) and "Please Mr. Please" (No. 3 Pop, No. 5 Country, No. 1 AC). Her pop career cooled with the release of her next album, Clearly Love. Her streak of five consecutive gold top 10 singles on the Billboard Hot 100 ended when the album's first single, "Something Better to Do", stopped at No. 13 (also No. 19 Country and No. 1 AC). Her albums still achieved gold status, and she returned to the top ten of the Hot 100 and Billboard 200 charts again in 1978. Newton-John's singles continued to top the AC chart, where she amassed ten No. 1 singles, including a record seven consecutively: "I Honestly Love You" (1974) – 3 weeks "Have You Never Been Mellow" (1975) – 1 week "Please Mr. Please" (1975) – 3 weeks "Something Better to Do" (1975) – 3 weeks "Let It Shine"/"He Ain't Heavy, He's My Brother" (1976) – 2 weeks "Come on Over" (1976) – 1 week "Don't Stop Believin'" (1976) – 1 week She provided a prominent, but uncredited, vocal on John Denver's "Fly Away" single, which was succeeded by her own single, "Let It Shine"/"He Ain't Heavy, He's My Brother", at No. 1 on the AC chart. ("Fly Away" returned to No. 1 after the two-week reign of "Let It Shine".) Newton-John also continued to reach the Country top 10 where she tallied seven top 10 singles through 1976's "Come on Over" (No. 23 Pop, No. 5 Country, No. 1 AC) (from the same-titled album) and six consecutive (of a career nine total) top 10 albums through 1976's Don't Stop Believin' (No. 30 Pop, No. 7 Country). She headlined her first US television special, A Special Olivia Newton-John, in November 1976. In 1977, the single "Sam", a mid-tempo waltz from Don't Stop Believin', returned her to the No. 1 spot on the AC (No. 40 Country) and also reached No. 20 Pop, her highest chart placement since "Something Better to Do". By mid-1977, Newton-John's pop, AC, and country success all suffered a slight blow. Her Making a Good Thing Better album (No. 34 Pop, No. 13 Country) was not certified gold, and its only single, the title track (No. 87 Pop, No. 20 AC), did not reach the AC top 10 or the Country chart. Later that year, Olivia Newton-John's Greatest Hits (No. 13 Pop, No. 7 Country) became her first platinum album. Newton-John was appointed Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in the 1979 New Year Honours and Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire (DBE) in the 2020 New Year Honours for services to charity, cancer research, and entertainment. In April 1975, Newton-John and MCA entered into an initial two-year, four-album deal in which she was expected to deliver two LPs a year for the record company. MCA also had the option of extending the contract for six more records and three more years; and if the artist did not deliver on time, MCA was allegedly allowed to lengthen the term of the contract. Per her new agreement with MCA, Newton-John's first three albums, beginning with Clearly Love, came out on schedule. Her fourth, Making a Good Thing Better, was late. This delay occurred around the same time she was working on Grease for RSO Records, and the postponement arguably gave MCA—which seemed to want to keep its hold on the performer—the right to exercise its option, extend its contract, and stop her from signing with another enterprise. She also did not deliver a "newly optioned" album. On 31 May 1978, Newton-John and MCA each filed breach-of-contract actions against the other. Newton-John sued for $10 million and claimed that MCA's failure to adequately promote and advertise her product freed her from their agreement. MCA's countersuit requested $1 million in damages and an injunction against Newton-John working with another music firm. Ultimately, Newton-John was forbidden from offering her recording services to another label until the five-year pact had run its course. The original covenant was not automatically extended, though she had not duly supplied the total sum of vinyls indicated in the contract. As a result of the lawsuit, record companies changed their contracts to be based on the number of albums recorded by a musician and not a specific number of years. In 1978, Newton-John's career soared after she starred as Sandy in the film adaptation of the Broadway musical Grease. She was offered the role after meeting producer Allan Carr at a dinner party at Helen Reddy's home. Disillusioned by her Toomorrow experience and concerned that she was too old to play a high school senior (she was 28 during the filming of Grease), Newton-John insisted on a screen test with the film's co-lead, John Travolta. The film accounted for Newton-John's Australian accent by changing her original American character, Sandy Dumbrowski, into Sandy Olsson, an Australian who holidays in the United States and then moves there with her family. Newton-John previewed some of the film's soundtrack during her second American network television special, Olivia, featuring guests ABBA and Andy Gibb. Grease became the biggest box-office hit of 1978. The soundtrack album spent 12 non-consecutive weeks at No. 1 and yielded three Top 5 singles for Newton-John: the platinum "You're the One That I Want" (No. 1 Pop, No. 23 AC) with John Travolta, the gold "Hopelessly Devoted to You" (No. 3 Pop, No. 20 Country, No. 7 AC) and the gold "Summer Nights" (No. 5 Pop, No. 21 AC) with John Travolta and the film's cast. "Summer Nights" was from the original play written by Jim Jacobs and Warren Casey, but the first two songs were written and composed by her long-time music producer, John Farrar, specifically for the film. Newton-John became the second woman (after Linda Ronstadt in 1977) to have two singles—"Hopelessly Devoted to You" and "Summer Nights"—in the Billboard top 5 simultaneously. Newton-John's performance earned her a People's Choice Award for Favourite Film Actress. She was nominated for a Golden Globe as Best Actress in a Musical and performed the Oscar-nominated "Hopelessly Devoted to You" at the 1979 Academy Awards. The film's popularity has endured. It was re-released for its 20th anniversary in 1998 and ranked as the second highest-grossing film behind Titanic in its opening weekend. It was re-shown in April 2018 in over 700 American theatres for two days only. The soundtrack is one of the best-selling soundtracks of all time. Following her death in August 2022, AMC announced that the picture would reappear in some of its cinemas over the weekend and that a portion of the proceeds would go to breast cancer research. Of the film's long-lasting likability, Newton-John contended: "I think the songs are timeless. They're fun and have great energy. The '50s-feel music has always been popular, and it's nostalgic for my generation; and then the young kids are rediscovering it every 10 years or so, it seems. People buying the album was a way for them to remember those feelings of watching the movie and feelings of that time period. I feel very grateful to be a part of this movie that's still loved so much." In June 2006, Newton-John's company ON-J Productions Ltd filed a lawsuit against Universal Music Group (UMG) for $1 million in unpaid royalties from the Grease soundtrack. In 2007, it was announced that she and UMG had reached a "conditional settlement". In November 1978, she released her next studio album, Totally Hot, which became her first solo top 10 (No. 7) album since Have You Never Been Mellow. Dressed on the cover all in leather, Newton-John capitalised on her character's look that was introduced at the end of Grease; moreover, Totally Hot's singles—"A Little More Love" (No. 3 Pop, No. 94 Country, No. 4 AC), "Deeper Than the Night" (No. 11 Pop, No. 87 Country, No. 4 AC), and the title track (No. 52 Pop)—all demonstrated a more aggressive and uptempo sound for Newton-John. Although the album de-emphasised the country sound, the LP still reached No. 4 on the Country Albums chart. Newton-John released the B-side, "Dancin' 'Round and 'Round", of the "Totally Hot" single to Country radio. The entry peaked at No. 29 (as well as No. 82 Pop and No. 25 AC), and it became her last charted solo Country airplay single. Newton-John began 1980 by releasing "I Can't Help It" (No. 12 Pop, No. 8 AC), a duet with Andy Gibb from his After Dark album, and by starring in her third television special, Hollywood Nights. Later that year, she appeared in her first film since Grease when she starred with Gene Kelly and Michael Beck in the musical fantasy Xanadu. Although the film was a critical failure, its soundtrack (No. 4 Pop) was certified double platinum and scored five top 20 singles on the Billboard Hot 100. Newton-John charted with "Magic" (No. 1 Pop, No. 1 AC), "Suddenly" with Cliff Richard (No. 20 Pop, No. 4 AC) and the title song "Xanadu" with the Electric Light Orchestra (No. 8 Pop, No. 2 AC). [ELO also charted with "I'm Alive" (No. 16 Pop, No. 48 AC) and "All Over the World" (No. 13 Pop, No. 46 AC).] "Magic" was Newton-John's biggest pop hit to that point (four weeks at No. 1) and still ranks as the biggest AC hit of her career (five weeks at No. 1). The film has since become a cult classic and the basis for a Broadway show that ran for more than 500 performances beginning in 2007 and was nominated for four Tony Awards including Best Musical. In 1981, Newton-John released her most successful studio album, the double platinum Physical, which strongly reinforced her image change by showcasing risqué, rock-oriented material. Newton-John explained: "I just wasn't in the mood for tender ballads. I wanted peppy stuff because that's how I'm feeling." Of the title cut, Newton-John said: "Roger Davies was my manager at the time; he played it for me and I knew it was a very catchy song." The title track, written by Steve Kipner and Terry Shaddick, spent ten weeks atop the Billboard Hot 100. This matched the record at that time held by Debby Boone's "You Light Up My Life" for most weeks spent at No. 1 on the Hot 100. The single was certified platinum, and it ultimately ranked as the biggest song of the decade. (In 2008, Billboard ranked the song No. 6 among all songs that charted in the 50-year history of the Hot 100.) "Physical" earned Newton-John her only placement ever on the R&B Singles (No. 28) and Albums (No. 32) charts. The Physical album spawned two more singles, "Make a Move on Me" (No. 5 Pop, No. 6 AC) and "Landslide" (No. 52 Pop). The provocative lyrics of the "Physical" title track prompted two Utah radio stations to ban the single from their playlists. (In 2010, Billboard magazine ranked this as the most popular single ever about sex.) To counter its overtly suggestive tone, Newton-John filmed an exercise-themed video that turned the song into an aerobics anthem and made headbands a fashion accessory outside the gym. She helped pioneer the music video industry by recording a video album for Physical, featuring videos of all the album's tracks and three of her older hits. The video album earned her a fourth Grammy and was aired as an ABC prime-time special, Let's Get Physical, becoming a top-10 Nielsen hit. Newton-John asserted: "Like everyone, I've got different sides of my personality. I've my dominant self, my need-to-be-dominated self, the sane Olivia and the crazy Olivia. Playing these different characters gave me a chance to show strange parts people haven't seen much." The success of Physical led to an international tour and the release of her second hits collection, the double-platinum Olivia's Greatest Hits Vol. 2 (No. 16 Pop), which yielded two more top-40 singles: "Heart Attack" (No. 3 Pop) and "Tied Up" (No. 38 Pop). The tour was filmed for her Olivia in Concert television special, which premiered on HBO in January 1983. The special was subsequently released to video, earning Newton-John another Grammy nomination. Newton-John reteamed with Travolta in 1983 for the critically and commercially unsuccessful movie Two of a Kind, redeemed by its platinum soundtrack (No. 26 Pop) featuring "Twist of Fate" (No. 5 Pop), "Livin' in Desperate Times" (No. 31 Pop), and a new duet with Travolta, "Take a Chance" (No. 3 AC). Newton-John released another video package, the Grammy-nominated Twist of Fate, featuring videos of her four songs on the Two of a Kind soundtrack and the two new singles from Olivia's Greatest Hits Vol. 2. That same year Newton-John and Pat Farrar (formerly Pat Carroll) founded Koala Blue. The store, originally for Australian imports, evolved into a chain of women's clothing boutiques. The chain was initially successful, but it eventually declared bankruptcy and closed in 1992. Newton-John and Farrar were the targets of a multimillion-dollar lawsuit when Koala Blue franchise holders alleged breach of contract and unfair competition; agreeing with a motion citing insufficient evidence, a judge dismissed the case on summary judgment in 1993. Newton-John and Farrar later licensed the brand name for a line of Australian wines. Newton-John, a supporter of Australian rules football Carlton, performed the Australian national anthem at the 1986 VFL Grand Final between Carlton and Hawthorn. Newton-John's music career cooled again with the release of her next studio album, the gold Soul Kiss (No. 29 Pop), in 1985. The album's only charted single was the title track (No. 20 Pop, No. 20 AC). The video album for Soul Kiss featured only five of the album's ten tracks (concept videos for the album's singles "Soul Kiss" and "Toughen Up" as well as performance videos of the tracks "Culture Shock", "Emotional Tangle" and "The Right Moment"). After a nearly three-year hiatus following the birth of her daughter Chloe in January 1986, Newton-John resumed her recording career with the 1988 album The Rumour. The album was promoted by an HBO special, Olivia Down Under. Its first single, the title track, was written and produced by Elton John. Both the single (No. 62 Pop, No. 33 AC) and the album (No. 67 Pop) faltered commercially as the nearly 40-year-old Newton-John seemed "old" when compared with the teen queens Debbie Gibson and Tiffany ruling the pop charts at that time. (The album was praised by critics as more mature, with Newton-John addressing topics such as AIDS ("Love and Let Live"), the environment and single-parent households.) The second single, "Can't We Talk It Over in Bed", did not chart, but was released in 1989 by Grayson Hugh, the song's arranger, and became a top-20 pop hit as "Talk It Over". In September 1989, Newton-John released her self-described "self-indulgent" album, Warm and Tender, which reunited her with producer John Farrar, absent from her previous LP, and also marked a return to a more wholesome image. Inspired by her daughter, who appeared on the cover, the album featured lullabies and love songs for parents and their children. This album, the last one produced by Farrar, also failed to revive her recording career, as the disc reached only No. 124 Pop. Newton-John was primed for another comeback in 1992 when she compiled her third hits collection, Back to Basics: The Essential Collection 1971–1992, and planned her first tour since her Physical trek ten years earlier. Shortly after the album's release, Newton-John was diagnosed with breast cancer, forcing her to cancel all publicity for the album, including the tour. She received her diagnosis the same weekend her father died. Newton-John recovered and later became an advocate for breast cancer research and other health issues. She was a product spokesperson for the Liv-Kit, a breast self-examination product. She was also partial owner of Byron Bay's Gaia Retreat and Spa, which was founded in 2005 and sold in 2021 for $30 million to the investment firm of Tattarang. In 2012, the Olivia Newton-John Cancer and Wellness Centre at the Austin Hospital opened in her home town of Melbourne; in 2015, the facility was rechristened the Olivia Newton-John Cancer Wellness and Research Centre following the closure of the Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research at the same location. Newton-John's advocacy for health issues was presaged by her prior involvement with many humanitarian causes. Newton-John cancelled a 1978 concert tour of Japan to protest the slaughter of dolphins caught in tuna fishing nets. She subsequently rescheduled the tour when the Japanese government assured her that the practice was being curbed. Her concern for these "wonderfully evolved creatures" (as she called them in the Warm and Tender liner notes) is also expressed in the 1981 self-penned piece, "The Promise (the Dolphin Song)", described as "one of the most tender, heartfelt vocals of the singer's career." Newton-John said that "The Promise" (from Physical) was inspired by (and even channelled by) dolphins she met at Sea Life Park in Hawaii and attested: "It was strange. The morning after I was in the pools, I woke up and the words and melody were in my head. I think it was a gift from them." She was a performer on the 1979 Music for UNICEF Concert for the UN's International Year of the Child televised worldwide. During the concert, artists performed songs for which they donated their royalties, some in perpetuity, to benefit the cause. She was appointed a Goodwill ambassador to the United Nations Environment Programme. In 1991, she became the National Spokesperson for the Colette Chuda Environmental Fund/CHEC (Children's Health Environmental Coalition) following the death from Wilms' tumour of five-year-old Colette Chuda, daughter of Newton-John's friend Nancy Chuda. Newton-John's cancer diagnosis also affected the type of music she recorded. In 1994, she released Gaia: One Woman's Journey, which chronicled her ordeal. Co-produced by Newton-John for ONJ Productions, Gaia was originally issued by Festival in Australia but also distributed by various independent labels in Japan and Europe. In 2002, there was an American distribution by Hip-O Records, and a subsequent re-release in 2012 by Green Hill featured an alternative cover photo. Gaia was the first album on which Newton-John wrote all the music and lyrics herself, and this endeavour encouraged her to become more active as a songwriter thereafter. The single "No Matter What You Do" entered the Australian top 40, and the second single, the environmentally themed "Don't Cut Me Down", was also used in the film It's My Party. The Latin-fuelled "Not Gonna Give into It" eventually became heavily showcased in concert performance; "The Way of Love" was featured in the telefilm A Christmas Romance, and "Trust Yourself" was incorporated into both the TV-movie The Wilde Girls and the theatrical film Sordid Lives. Newton-John was listed as president of the Isle of Man Basking shark Society between 1998 and 2005. In 2005, she released Stronger Than Before, sold exclusively in the United States by Hallmark. This was her second exclusive album for Hallmark Cards after her successful first Christmas album Tis the Season with Vince Gill five years earlier. Proceeds from the album's sales benefited breast cancer research. The album featured the song "Phenomenal Woman," based on the poem by Maya Angelou, and guest vocals from Diahann Carroll, Beth Nielsen Chapman, Delta Goodrem, Amy Holland, Patti LaBelle and Mindy Smith—all survivors of or affected by cancer. The following year, Newton-John released a healing CD, Grace and Gratitude. The album was sold exclusively by Walgreens, also to benefit various charities including Y-ME National Breast Cancer Organization. The CD was the "heart" of their Body – Heart – Spirit Wellness Collection, which also featured a re-branded Liv-Kit and breast-health dietary supplements. She re-recorded some tracks from Grace and Gratitude in 2010 and re-released the album as Grace and Gratitude Renewed on the Green Hill music label. The Renewed CD includes a new track, "Help Me to Heal", not featured on the original album. In 2008, she raised funds to help build the Olivia Newton-John Cancer and Wellness Centre in Melbourne, Australia. She led a three-week, 228 km walk along the Great Wall of China during April, joined by various celebrities and cancer survivors throughout her trek. The walk symbolised the steps cancer patients must take on their road to recovery. She released a companion CD, A Celebration in Song, the following month in Australia and later worldwide, featuring new and previously recorded duets by "Olivia Newton-John & Friends", including Jann Arden, Jimmy Barnes, John Farrar, Barry Gibb, Delta Goodrem, Sun Ho, Richard Marx, Cliff Richard, Melinda Schneider, Amy Sky, and Keith Urban. Newton-John was featured in UniGlobe Entertainment's breast cancer docu-drama, 1 a Minute, released in October 2010. The documentary was made by actress Namrata Singh Gujral and featured other celebrities who had survived breast cancer or who were affected by the disease. During the same month, Bluewater Productions released a comic book featuring Newton-John to coincide with Breast Cancer Awareness Month. Newton-John continued to record and perform pop-oriented music as well. In 1998, she returned to Nashville to record Back with a Heart (No. 59 Pop). The album returned her to the top 10 (No. 9) on the Country Albums chart. Its first single was a re-recording of "I Honestly Love You" produced by David Foster and featuring Kenneth "Babyface" Edmonds on background vocals that charted on the Pop (No. 67) and AC (No. 18) charts. Country radio dismissed the song, though it did peak at No. 16 on the Country Sales chart. The album track, "Love Is a Gift", won Newton-John a 1999 Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Original Song after being featured on the daytime serial, As the World Turns. During October–December 1998, Newton-John, John Farnham and Anthony Warlow performed in The Main Event Tour. The album Highlights from The Main Event peaked at No. 1 in December, was certified 4× platinum, won an ARIA Award for Highest Selling Australian CD at the 1999 Awards and was also nominated for Best Adult Contemporary Album. For the 2000 Summer Olympics, Newton-John and Farnham re-teamed to perform "Dare to Dream" during the Parade of Nations at the Opening Ceremony. Broadcast of the ceremony was viewed by an estimated 3.5 billion people around the world. In December 1998, following a hiatus of about 16 years, Newton-John also resumed touring by herself and in 2000 released a solo CD, One Woman's Live Journey, her first live album since 1981's Love Performance. Newton-John's subsequent albums were released primarily in Australia. In 2002, she released (2), a duets album featuring mostly Australian artists (Tina Arena, Darren Hayes, Jimmy Little, Johnny O'Keefe, Billy Thorpe and Keith Urban), as well as a "duet" with the deceased Peter Allen. In addition, (2) offered a hidden 12th track, a samba version of "Physical" which Newton-John later performed occasionally in concert instead of the more rock-style original. The album's 2004 Japanese release includes the bonus track "Let It Be Me", a duet with Cliff Richard with whom she had previously been coupled on "Suddenly" and Songs from Heathcliff. In 2002, Newton-John was also inducted into Australia's ARIA Hall of Fame. Produced by Phil Ramone and recorded at the Indigo Recording Studios in Malibu for ONJ Productions, Indigo: Women of Song was released in October 2004 in Australia. The tribute album featured Newton-John covering songs by artists such as Joan Baez, the Carpenters, Doris Day, Nina Simone and Minnie Riperton. She dedicated the album to her mother, who had died the previous year of breast cancer. Indigo was subsequently released in the UK in April 2005 and in Japan in March 2006. A rebranded and resequenced version called Portraits: A Tribute to Great Women of Song was eventually issued in the United States in 2011. Newton-John also released several Christmas albums. In 2000, she teamed with Vince Gill and the London Symphony Orchestra for 'Tis the Season sold exclusively through Hallmark. The following year, she released The Christmas Collection, which compiled seasonal music previously recorded for her Hallmark Christmas album, her appearance on Kenny Loggins' 1999 TNN Christmas special and her contributions to the Mother and Child and Spirit of Christmas multi-artist collections. (Green Hill Records re-released this album with different artwork in 2010.) In 2007, she re-teamed with her Grace and Gratitude producer, Amy Sky, for Christmas Wish (No. 187 Pop) which was sold exclusively by Target in its first year of release. Newton-John acted occasionally since Two of a Kind. She appeared in a supporting role in the 1996 AIDS drama, It's My Party. In 2000, she appeared in a dramatically different role as Bitsy Mae Harling, a bisexual former-convict country singer, in Del Shores' Sordid Lives. Newton-John reprised her role for Sordid Lives: The Series which aired one season on the LOGO television network. The series featured five original songs written and composed by Newton-John specifically for the show. In 2010, Newton-John starred in the film Score: A Hockey Musical, released in Canada. She portrayed Hope Gordon, the mother of a home-schooled hockey prodigy. The film opened the 2010 Toronto International Film Festival. Newton-John's television work included starring in two Christmas films, A Mom for Christmas (1990) and A Christmas Romance (1994) – both top 10 Nielsen hits. Her daughter, Chloe, starred as one of her children in both A Christmas Romance and in the 2001 Showtime film The Wilde Girls. Newton-John guest-starred as herself in the sitcoms Ned and Stacey, Murphy Brown and Bette and also made two appearances as herself on Glee. In 2008, Newton-John took part in the BBC Wales program Coming Home about her Welsh family history. Also, in 2008, Newton-John joined Anne Murray on Murray's last album, titled Duets: Friends & Legends. She sang Gordon Lightfoot's hit "Cotton Jenny" with Murray. For her first Glee appearance, Newton-John recreated her "Physical" video with series regular Jane Lynch. The performance was released as a digital single which peaked at number 89 on the Billboard Hot 100 in May 2010. In Australia, Newton-John hosted the animal and nature series Wild Life and guest-starred as Joanna on two episodes of the Australian series The Man From Snowy River. Newton-John released another concert DVD, Olivia Newton-John and the Sydney Symphony: Live at the Sydney Opera House and a companion CD, her third live album titled Olivia's Live Hits. An edited version of the DVD premiered on PBS station, WLIW (Garden City, New York), in October 2007. In January 2011, Newton-John began filming the comedy A Few Best Men in Australia with director Stephan Elliott, in the role of mother of the bride. The groom is played by Xavier Samuel. Newton-John was actively touring and doing concerts from 2012 to 2017 and also performed a handful of shows in 2018. Her dates for A Summer Night with Olivia Newton-John even included stops in Asia and Canada and culminated in a rare concert appearance in London in 2013. Her March 2013 UK trek also encompassed Bournemouth, Brighton, Birmingham, Manchester and Cardiff, Wales. In November 2012, Newton-John teamed with John Travolta to make the charity album This Christmas, in support of The Olivia Newton-John Cancer & Wellness Centre and the Jett Travolta Foundation. Artists featured on the album include: Barbra Streisand, James Taylor, Chick Corea, Kenny G, Tony Bennett, Cliff Richard and the Count Basie Orchestra. A 2013 residency at the Flamingo Las Vegas was postponed due to the May 2013 death of her elder sister, Rona (aged 72), from a brain tumour. Newton-John resumed performing, doing 45 shows beginning in April 2014. Along with the Vegas shows, Newton-John released a new EP in April 2014 entitled Hotel Sessions, which consisted of seven tracks of unreleased demos that were recorded between 2002 and 2011 with her nephew Brett Goldsmith. The CD contains a cover of "Broken Wings" as well as the popular-with-fans original "Best of My Love", which had leaked on the internet many years prior. Her Vegas stay was eventually extended beyond August 2014, and her Summer Nights residency finished in December 2016 after 175 shows. Her successful three-year run even prompted a fourth live album, Summer Nights: Live in Las Vegas (2015). In 2015, Newton-John also reunited with John Farnham for a joint venture called Two Strong Hearts Live. In 2015, Newton-John was a guest judge on an episode of RuPaul's Drag Race. That same year, she scored her first number-one single on Billboard's Dance Club Songs chart with "You Have to Believe" with daughter Chloe and producer Dave Audé. The song was a re-imagining of her 1980 single "Magic", which she noted was to celebrate both the 35th anniversary of Xanadu and as a dedication to her daughter. About the latter, Newton-John stated: "I met Chloe's dad on the set of Xanadu; so, without that film, Chloe wouldn't be here. She was the real 'magic' that came out of that film!" The song became the first mother-daughter single to reach No. 1 on the Billboard Dance Club Play chart. In 2015, Newton-John was inducted into the Music Victoria Hall of Fame. In 2017, she collaborated with two North American singer-songwriters, Beth Nielsen Chapman and Amy Sky, on a joint concert tour entitled Liv On after co-producing a 2016 CD by the same name. On 7 May 2019, Newton-John's elder brother Hugh, a doctor, died at age 80; his death left Newton-John as the sole surviving sibling from the original family. In recognition for "her work as an entertainer and philanthropist", she was bestowed Australia's highest honour, the Companion of the Order of Australia, in June 2019. In December 2019, Newton-John and Travolta also re-teamed for three live Meet 'n' Grease sing-along events in the Florida cities of Tampa, West Palm Beach and Jacksonville. Subsequently, a sing-along re-broadcast of Grease aired on CBS Television. In February 2020, Newton-John appeared at the Fire Fight Australia charity event. This was her final public performance. In January 2021, Newton-John released her final single, "Window in the Wall", a duet about unity which she recorded with her daughter Chloe Lattanzi. The music video for the song peaked at No. 1 on the iTunes pop music video chart the week of its release. On 2 November 2019, Julien's Auctions auctioned hundreds of memorabilia items from Newton-John's career. The sale raised $2.4 million. Newton-John's Grease outfit garnered $405,700; her pants and jacket were purchased separately by two different billionaires. Sara Blakely, founder of Spanx, bought Newton-John's black skintight pants from Grease for $162,000. The anonymous buyer who acquired her famous Grease leather jacket for $243,200 (£185,000) returned the item to her and said: "It should not sit in a billionaire's closet for country-club bragging rights [...] The odds of beating a recurring cancer using the newest emerging therapies is a thousandfold greater than someone appearing out of the blue, buying your most famous and cherished icon, and returning it to you." All proceeds were donated to her Cancer Wellness and Research Centre in Australia. Newton-John's first boyfriend, Ian Turpie, once said of her early appearances: "In those days she had a small voice, but it was very pure. She could sing prettily in tune....The improvement in her singing since she went to England has been remarkable. She told me Shirley Bassey has been a big influence on her. After hearing Bassey, she worked at developing her head voice to sound like a chest voice, the way Bassey uses hers. The power she's developed is amazing". Michael Dwyer of the Sydney Morning Herald maintains that following Newton-John's career was like watching "our slightly older and braver sister growing up in public" and her passing "feels today like a lost member of the family". Rachel Syme of The New Yorker also suggests that her familial, down-to-earth demeanor and humanity may have even superseded her singing accomplishments: "Her most lasting legacy might be as the rare celebrity who was almost universally well liked, and thought of as an essentially kind and warmhearted person". Her musical abilities on their own merits were also impressive. In her 1982 Olivia in Concert performance of Dolly Parton's "Jolene," Newton-John showcases a down-falling note range covering three octaves. (Much later, Newton-John and Parton recorded a duet of "Jolene," which was not formally released until after Newton-John's death.) In her memoir, Newton-John describes herself as "not a power singer but more of an interpretive one"; and author Lauren O'Neill concurs: "She sang with clarity and precision, her high notes bright and open like a window on a summer morning, but her voice was never clinical – a sultry purr, euphoric cry or breathy gasp seemed always available to her....Her vocal [on "Hopelessly Devoted to You" from Grease] is clean and soaring, but to hear it is to be right down in the dirt with Sandy too; to feel, and perhaps even identify with, her total frustration with herself. As she slides between notes while singing 'I'm out of my head,' she shows us her emotional freefall as well as telling us about it." Long before and after the career summit of Grease, Newton-John proved herself to be a fairly versatile performer, lending her instrument to everything from sentimental ballads and New Age soul searching to lively dance productions and rock & soul fervor. Maura Johnston of Vulture assesses: "Newton-John was a regular chart-topper...throughout the ’70s, her lithe soprano adapting well to the soft pop sound" of the era with "AM Gold staples and tracks from the folk and country world...As it turned out, Newton-John’s voice was pretty well suited to the spiky dance pop that would become popular in the early 1980s" too. However, Stephen Thomas Erlewine of the Los Angeles Times offers a counterpoint on her career decline in the mid-1980s: "Hardness never was Newton-John's comfort zone, though, and the 1980s were a much harder decade than the 1970s. The inherent warmth of 1970s studio sessions gave way to the cold, synthesized gleam of the 1980s, a sterile sound that suited her well only once: the candied faux-new wave of 'Twist of Fate'", produced by David Foster. Johnston further maintains: "Her pop heyday transcended any attempts to musically pigeonhole her"; and by the time she stopped having many new hits, "her musical legacy ... had been pretty well solidified." Newton-John's work has inspired many other female vocalists, including Juliana Hatfield, Lisa Loeb, Kylie Minogue, Delta Goodrem, Natalie Maines and Alanis Morissette. Pink staged a commemorative Newton-John cover during the 2022 American Music Awards. At the 2022 ARIA Music Awards, a special tribute in her honour featured performances by Natalie Imbruglia, Peking Duk and Tones and I. In the mid-1960s, Newton-John dated Australian actor and singer Ian Turpie, her co-star in the 1965 musical film Funny Things Happen Down Under. They met in 1963 when Turpie attended the coffee shop where Newton-John's group Sol Four performed. The relationship continued until she returned to England in 1966. In 1968, Newton-John was engaged to but never married Bruce Welch, one of her early producers and co-writer of her hit "Please Mr. Please". In 1972, Newton-John ended her relationship with Welch, who subsequently attempted suicide. In 1973, while vacationing on the French Riviera, Newton-John met British businessman Lee Kramer, who became both her new boyfriend and manager. Newton-John lived with Kramer on and off and they stayed a couple until 1979; she called their turbulent pairing "one long breakup". Kramer subsequently returned to England and married. He also managed vocalist Krishna Das. Kramer died in 2017. Newton-John married her long-time, live-in partner, actor Matt Lattanzi, in December 1984. The pair had met in 1980 while filming Xanadu. They announced their separation in April 1995, and they divorced in 1996. According to People magazine, people close to the twosome cited the disparity between her spiritual interests and his more earthly ones as a key factor in the dissolution. The couple remained friends. Their daughter, Chloe Rose, was born in January 1986. Newton-John met gaffer/cameraman Patrick McDermott shortly following her divorce from Matt Lattanzi. The couple dated on and off for nine years. McDermott disappeared following a 2005 fishing trip off the Californian coast. Newton-John was in Australia at her Gaia Retreat & Spa at the time of McDermott's disappearance. A United States Coast Guard investigation, based on then-available evidence and released in 2008, "suggest[ed] McDermott was lost at sea", with a friend telling investigators McDermott had appeared sad though not despondent after their breakup. In April 2010, a private investigator, hired by an American television program, claimed that McDermott is alive and had faked his death for a life insurance payout – but did not provide proof beyond their own statement that they were confident. Unsubstantiated claims have been made, particularly in Australian tabloids, that McDermott is living in Mexico. In 1993, Newton-John met John Easterling, founder and president of the Amazon Herb Company, which he started in 1990 and sold to TriVita, Inc., in 2012. Also known as "Amazon John", Easterling is an eco-entrepreneur who initially marketed rainforest botanicals and currently owns and operates Happy Tree Microbes, which offers natural plant performance products. When Newton-John and Easterling first met, they were both married to other people. In 2007, they started dating and married in an Incan spiritual ceremony in Peru on 21 June 2008, followed by a legal ceremony nine days later (30 June 2008) on Jupiter Island, Florida. Although principally raised in Australia, Newton-John remained a British subject throughout her childhood and did not formally become an Australian citizen until 1981 with an application that was expedited by Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser. In 1973, Newton-John purchased a modest one-bedroom flat in northwest London. After relocating from England to the United States in late 1974, Newton-John set up residence in Malibu, California, where for 35 years she owned various real estate, including a horse ranch and several beachfront properties. In June 2009, Newton-John and her second husband, John Easterling, purchased a new $4.1 million home in Jupiter Inlet, Florida. In 2013, while renovations were being done on the property and the couple was not there, a contractor named Christopher Pariseleti committed suicide on the estate, which at the time was up for sale. Following the death on the premises, Newton-John and Easterling bought a nearby condo; their larger home lingered on and off the market for two years but was eventually sold in 2015 to a Swedish advertising executive for $5.1 million. In 2015, the couple purchased a $5.3 million, 12-acre horse ranch in the Santa Ynez Valley outside Santa Barbara. In 2019, Newton-John sold her 187-acre Australian farm, which she had owned for nearly 40 years and is located near Byron Bay in New South Wales. The Dalwood estate sold for $4.6 million; in 1980, Newton-John had paid $622,000 for the property, which had additional land adjoined in both 1983 and in 2002. When asked in 2017 whether she considered herself to be a British, Australian or American citizen, she said, "I am still Australian." In December 2019, upon being given the title of Dame, she expressed her thanks by stating: "As a girl born in Cambridge [England], I am very proud of my British ancestry and so appreciative to be recognised in this way by the United Kingdom." In May 2017, it was announced that Newton-John's breast cancer had returned and metastasised to her lower back. Her back pains had initially been diagnosed as sciatica. She subsequently revealed this was actually her third bout with breast cancer, as she did have a recurrence of the disease in 2013 in addition to her initial 1992 diagnosis. With the 2017 recurrence, the cancer had spread to her bones and progressed to stage IV. Newton-John experienced significant pain from the metastatic bone lesions and had spoken of using cannabis oil to ease her pain. She was an advocate for the use of medical cannabis; her daughter Chloe owns a cannabis farm in Oregon. Newton-John died on August 8, 2022, at the age of 73 at her home in the Santa Ynez Valley of California. Tributes were paid by John Travolta, Barbra Streisand, Australian Prime Minister Anthony Albanese and many other celebrities. As a mark of respect, Melbourne and Sydney lit up many of their landmarks. In September 2022, Newton-John's family held a "small and very private" memorial service in California for the singer, who asked to be cremated and have her ashes scattered in Byron Bay, on her Santa Ynez ranch and "in other places that I love". The State of Victoria offered Newton-John's family a state funeral, which her niece Tottie Goldsmith accepted. Newton-John's Australian memorial service, hosted by David Campbell, was held on 26 February 2023 at Hamer Hall in Melbourne and included eulogies from her widower and daughter; a testimonial to her strength of character, optimism and magnanimity by television personality Richard Wilkins; montages of her career, family life and wellness centre; a medley of her hits performed by Delta Goodrem, and pre-recorded video tributes from Elton John, Mariah Carey, Barry Gibb and Nicole Kidman. If Not for You (1971) Olivia (1972) Let Me Be There (International title) (1973) Music Makes My Day (UK title) (1973) Long Live Love (1974) Have You Never Been Mellow (1975) Clearly Love (1975) Come on Over (1976) Don't Stop Believin' (1976) Making a Good Thing Better (1977) Totally Hot (1978) Physical (1981) Soul Kiss (1985) The Rumour (1988) Warm and Tender (1989) Gaia: One Woman's Journey (1994) Back with a Heart (1998) 'Tis the Season (2000) (with Vince Gill) (2) (2002) Indigo: Women of Song (2004) Stronger Than Before (2005) Grace and Gratitude (2006) Christmas Wish (2007) A Celebration in Song (2008) This Christmas (2012) (with John Travolta) Liv On (2016) Friends for Christmas (2016) (with John Farnham) Headlining If Not for You Tour (1972) Clearly Love Tour (1975) Love Performance Tour (1976) Totally Hot World Tour (1978) Physical Tour (1982–1983) Greatest Hits Tour (1999) One Woman's Live Journey Tour (1999) Millennium Tour (2000) 30 Musical Years Tour (2001) Heartstrings World Tour (2002–2005) 2006 World Tour (2006) Grace and Gratitude Tour (2006) Body Heart & Spirit Tour (2007) An Evening with Olivia Newton-John (2007–2009) 2010 World Tour (2010) 2011 United States Tour (2011) A Summer Night with Olivia Newton-John (2012–2013) Co-headlining The Main Event Tour (with John Farnham and Anthony Warlow) (1998) Two Strong Hearts Tour (with John Farnham) (2015) Liv On In Concert (with Beth Nielsen Chapman and Amy Sky) (2017) Residency show Summer Nights (2014–2016) List of artists who reached number one on the US dance chart List of best-selling music artists List of British Grammy winners and nominees List of Billboard Hot 100 number-ones by Australian artists List of celebrities who own wineries and vineyards Olivia Newton-John: Hopelessly Devoted to You, miniseries Perry v. Louisiana – 1990 United States Supreme Court casePages displaying wikidata descriptions as a fallback "Olivia Newton-John Biography, Songs, & Albums". AllMusic. Sheffield, Rob (9 August 2022). "Farewell, Olivia Newton-John: Why We Honestly Loved Her". Rolling Stone. "Companion of the Order of Australia". Australian Honours. Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet (Australia). 26 January 2019. Retrieved 16 August 2022. Erlewine, Michael (1997). All Music Guide to Country. San Francisco: Miller Freeman Books. p. 334. ISBN 978-0-87930-475-1. Retrieved 13 August 2010. "Olivia Newton-John displays movie memorabilia in Newbridge". RTÉ News and Current Affairs. 25 July 2019. Retrieved 25 July 2019. "News and Events: Modernising Victoria's health complaints arrangements – Department of Health and Human Services". www3.health.vic.gov.au. Retrieved 19 March 2023. Morris, Steven (23 February 2015). "Olivia Newton-John launches Bristol tree-planting project". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 20 March 2023. "I Want Everyone to Remember How Much Olivia Newton-John Cared About Animals". Town & Country. 15 November 2022. Retrieved 20 March 2023. "Olivia Newton-John biography". EuroVisionary. 7 November 2008. Retrieved 5 November 2019. "Olivia Newton-John, 'Grease' star and granddaughter of Jewish Nobel laureate, dies at 73". Jewish Telegraphic Agency. 8 August 2022. Retrieved 10 August 2022. Newton-John, Olivia (12 March 2019). Don't Stop Believin' - Olivia Newton-John - Google Books. Simon and Schuster. ISBN 9781982122263. Retrieved 10 August 2022. G.V.R. Born (2002). "The wide-ranging family history of Max Born" (PDF). Notes and Records of the Royal Society of London. 56 (2). royalsocietypublishing.org: 219–262. doi:10.1098/rsnr.2002.0180. S2CID 72026412. Retrieved 2 March 2012. Multiple sources: "Genealogy of Tiemo Hollmann – Born, Irene Helene". Tiemohollmann.de. 9 January 2012. Archived from the original on 30 November 2012. Retrieved 11 November 2012. Wolf, Emil (1995). "Recollections of Max Born". Astrophysics and Space Science. 227 (1): 277–97. Bibcode:1995Ap&SS.227..277W. doi:10.1007/bf00678085. S2CID 189849885. Born was practising Lutheranism before being officially baptised as a Lutheran in March 1914, before Irene's birth. "Max Born". kehilalinks.jewishgen.org. Conocimiento, Ventana al (5 January 2018). "Max Born, the Quantum Physicist who Believed that "God Plays Dice"". OpenMind. Retrieved 22 March 2023. "Olivia Newton-John's links to notable persons". www.universalcompendium.com. "Excerpts from Olivia's Don't Stop Believin' memoir". 23 May 2019. "Olivia Newton-John Biography". The Biography Channel (UK). AETN-UK. Archived from the original on 9 March 2014. Retrieved 9 March 2014. Ewing, Sarah (21 May 2010). "Fame & Fortune: Olivia Newton-John". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. "Olivia Newton-John on The Biography Channel". Merrymedia.co.uk. 3 February 2007. Archived from the original on 2 February 2009. Retrieved 10 November 2008. Wilde, Gabrielle (29 December 2021). "The Cambs school where Olivia Newton-John's dad was headteacher". CambridgeshireLive. "Family Notices". Australian Jewish Herald. Vol. 24, no. 29. 26 March 1959. p. 9. Retrieved 22 August 2022 – via National Library of Australia. "Digital Item Page Gallery". National Archives of Australia. 25 January 1954. Retrieved 22 August 2022. Note: London to Fremantle, Western Australia. Windeler, Robert (31 July 1978). "Ohh Sandy!". People. Retrieved 10 November 2008. "Olivia Newton-John Attended Catholic Mass, Said 'Favorite Prayer' Daily". NCR. 11 August 2022. Carbone, Suzanne (22 February 2012). "Romantic reunion of a kind on stage for Olivia". Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 5 August 2019. Newton-John, Olivia (2018). Don't Stop Believin'. Camberwell, Australia: Viking Australia. p. 40. ISBN 978-0143788935. Segaert, Anthony (10 August 2022). "'Lively with noteworthy eyes': The untold story of Olivia Newton-John's school years". Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 15 August 2022. "Olivia Newton-John – Hip-O Records". Ilovethatsong.com. 26 October 1987. Archived from the original on 11 January 2009. Retrieved 10 November 2008. "Dame Olivia Newton-John obituary". The Guardian. 8 August 2022. Retrieved 17 August 2022. "Olivia in the Melbourne University High School Play". onlyolivia.com. Retrieved 17 August 2022. Campbell, Amy (5 September 2018). "Olivia Newton-John on Why She Won't Watch The Hopelessly Devoted To You Biopic". GQ. Retrieved 5 August 2019. "Ian Turpie My Love for Olivia!": Murphy, Jim (18 November 1981). "Ian Turpie My love for Olivia!". Australian Women's Weekly. Vol. 49, no. 24. p. 177. Retrieved 9 August 2022 – via National Library of Australia. Murphy, Jim (18 November 1981). "Ian Turpie My love for Olivia!". Australian Women's Weekly. Vol. 49, no. 24. p. 178. Retrieved 9 August 2022 – via National Library of Australia. Pore-Lee-Dunn Productions (26 September 1948). "Olivia Newton-John". Classicbands.com. Retrieved 13 August 2010." Windeler, Robert (24 February 1975). "Pop's Hottest Pipes". People. Retrieved 10 November 2008. "Olivia Newton-John movie Toomorrow". Only Olivia. Retrieved 29 February 2020. "Olivia Newton-John Biography". Olivianewton-john.com. Archived from the original on 27 November 2010. Retrieved 13 August 2010. Bronson, Fred (2003). The Billboard book of number 1 hits. Billboard Books. ISBN 9780823076772. Retrieved 13 August 2010. Whitburn, Joel (2006). The Billboard Book of Top 40 Country Hits. Billboard Books. ISBN 9780823082919. Retrieved 13 August 2010. "Olivia Newton-John – Music Makes My Day". 1974 – via www.discogs.com. O'Connor, John Kennedy. The Eurovision Song Contest – The Official History. Carlton Books, UK. 2007. ISBN 978-1-84442-994-3 "Olivia Newton-John". Radio Swiss Jazz. Retrieved 2 March 2020. Olivia Newton-John – Great Hits!: First Impressions Album Reviews, Songs & More | AllMusic, retrieved 23 March 2023 "charts.org.nz – Olivia Newton-John – First Impressions (Greatest Hits)". charts.nz. Retrieved 23 March 2023. Ehrlich, Ken (2007). At the Grammys!: Behind the Scenes at Music's Biggest Night. Hal Leonard Corporation. ISBN 9781423430735. Retrieved 13 August 2010. Johnston, Maura (10 August 2022). "Olivia Newton-John Was Magic". Vulture. Retrieved 14 September 2022. "Olivia Newton-John's favourite song of all time". faroutmagazine.co.uk. 9 August 2022. Retrieved 20 September 2022. Warner, Jay (2008). Notable Moments of Women in Music. Hal Leonard Corporation. p. 191. ISBN 9781423429517. Retrieved 13 August 2010. "George Hamilton IV Presenting Olivia Newton-John the (BCMA) British Country Music Association Award". Archived from the original on 5 September 2022. Retrieved 5 September 2022. "Olivia Newton-John Conquers Country – October 14, 1974". calendar.songfacts.com. "CMA Awards Past Winners & Nominees". CMA Awards 2022 | Wednesday, 9 Nov at 8/7c on ABC. "Country Music Association Awards". www.infoplease.com. Williams, Bill (23 November 1973). "50 Country Dissidents Organize New Assn., See Threat to CMA". Billboard. pp. 3, 48. Retrieved 1 February 2011. "Shortest gap between new No.1 albums on the US Billboard 200 (female)". Guinness World Records. 26 December 2020. Retrieved 9 August 2022. Erlewine, Michael (1997). All music guide to country: the …. Hal Leonard Corporation. ISBN 9780879304751. Retrieved 13 August 2010. Grein, Paul (10 August 2022). "Forever No. 1: John Travolta & Olivia Newton-John's 'You're the One That I Want'". Billboard. Retrieved 11 August 2022. Cohen, Jonathan (8 August 2022). "Olivia Newton-John, 'Grease' Star and 'Physical' Singer, Dies at 73". Yahoo! News. Retrieved 11 August 2022. "'Our Livvy' remembered: The beautiful life of Olivia Newton-John". 7NEWS. 8 August 2022. Retrieved 11 August 2022. "SUPPLEMENT TO THE LONDON GAZETTE" (PDF). Thegazette.co.uk. 30 December 1978. Retrieved 2 January 2018. "No. 62866". The London Gazette (Supplement). 28 December 2019. p. N8. Stahl, Matt (2013). Unfree Masters: Popular Music and the Politics of Work. Duke University Press. ISBN 9780822353430. "MCA Records, Inc. v. Newton-John (1979)". Justia Law. Retrieved 30 August 2019. Fong-Torres, Ben (27 July 1978). "Olivia Newton-John Battles Back". Rolling Stone. Retrieved 30 August 2019. Knoedelseder, William Jr. (18 August 1985). "'Free' Records Cause Discord With Artists". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved 11 August 2022. "How a Rock Band's Lawsuit Could Upend Record Deals Everywhere". The Hollywood Reporter. 25 August 2017. Retrieved 30 August 2019. "Olivia". The Paley Center for Media. Retrieved 2 March 2020. "IMDb Top Box Office". IMDb. "Grease (Musical) Songs". StageAgent. Retrieved 6 September 2019. "'Grease' at 40: Olivia Newton-John, Frankie Valli & John Farrar Reflect on the Blockbuster Songs". Billboard. 14 April 2018. Retrieved 6 September 2019. "Olivia Newton-John as Sandy Olsson – The Cast of 'Grease,' Then and Now". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved 28 August 2018. Billboard. 30 May 1998. Retrieved 13 August 2010. Box Office Weekend, 27–29 March 1998, Box Office Mojo. Retrieved 6 February 2013. Lenker, Maureen Lee (6 March 2018). "Grease returning to theaters to celebrate its 40th anniversary". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved 19 October 2020. "The 15 best-selling movie soundtracks of all time". Business Insider. Retrieved 5 July 2017. McClintock, Pamela (18 August 2022). "'Grease' Returning to AMC Theatres in Tribute to Olivia Newton-John". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved 19 August 2022. "Newton-John sues over 'Grease' album". USA Today. (5 December 2006). "Olivia Newton-John Reaches Conditional Settlement Over 'Grease' Royalties". The San Diego Union-Tribune. 4 December 2007. Retrieved 23 December 2016. Erlewine, Michael (1997). All Music Guide to Country: The …. Hal Leonard Corporation. ISBN 9780879304751. Retrieved 13 August 2010. Whitburn, Joel (2006). The Billboard Book of Top 40 Country Hits. Billboard Books. ISBN 9780823082919. Retrieved 13 August 2010. "An Olivia Newton-John Retrospective, Part Six: 1978". Country Universe. 12 July 2018. Retrieved 2 March 2020. Bronson, Fred (2003). The Billboard book of number 1 hits. Billboard Books. ISBN 9780823076772. Retrieved 13 August 2010. "An Olivia Newton-John Retrospective, Part Seven: 1979–1980". Country Universe. 19 July 2018. Retrieved 2 March 2020. "Xanadu Moves Up Broadway Closing Date to 9/28". Broadway.com. 23 September 2008. Retrieved 10 November 2008. "Olivia Gets Physical". People. Retrieved 29 August 2019. "What Made Olivia Newton-John 'Horrified' About 'Physical'". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved 6 September 2019. Arrington, Carl (15 February 1982). "Olivia Gets Physical". People. Retrieved 10 November 2008. "Billboard Hot 100 Chat 50th Anniversary – All-Time Top Songs". Billboard. Retrieved 10 November 2008. Bronson, Fred (2003). The Billboard book of number 1 hits. Billboard Books. ISBN 9780823076772. Retrieved 13 August 2010. "Landslide – Chart". Billboard Database. Retrieved 11 August 2022. Cannon, Bob (19 November 1993). "Olivia Gets 'Physical'". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved 13 August 2010. "Olivia Newton-John's "Physical" sexiest song ever". Reuters. 13 February 2010. "Billboard Hot 100 Chart 50th Anniversary – Songs of the Year 1980 to 1989". Billboard. Retrieved 10 November 2008. "26th Annual Grammy Awards 1983, Nominations, Best Video Album, Olivia in Concert (Video)". Recording Academy Grammy Awards. Retrieved 3 March 2020. Arrington, Carl (19 October 1983). "Animal Magnetism". People. Retrieved 10 November 2008. "27th Annual Grammy Awards 1984, Nominations, Best Video, Twist of Fate (Video)". Recording Academy Grammy Awards. Retrieved 3 March 2020. Maier, Anne (19 August 1991). "Losing Their Shirts with Olivia". People. Vol. 36, no. 6. Retrieved 18 July 2017. "Olivia Newton-John: Hopelessly Devoted". Sun-Sentinel. 13 April 1987. Archived from the original on 30 June 2012. Retrieved 31 December 2011. "Olivia, Environmental Heartache - New Idea". www.onlyolivia.com. Retrieved 2 December 2023. "Suit against Newton-John thrown out – UPI Archives". UPI. Retrieved 13 March 2023. "Winemagazine". www.onlyolivia.com. Retrieved 13 March 2023. Beveridge, Riley (29 January 2016). "Your AFL club's most famous supporters, from Barack Obama to Cam Newton". Fox Sports. Retrieved 29 January 2016. "Gold & Platinum – SOUL KISS". RIAA. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "Billboard 200 – Week of 23 November 1985". Billboard. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "Olivia Newton-John – Soul Kiss". AllMusic. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "Olivia Newton-John – Soul Kiss [Video]". AllMusic. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Rosenthal, Elizabeth J. (March 2004). His Song: The Musical Journey of... Watson-Guptill Publications, Incorporated. ISBN 9780823088928. Retrieved 13 August 2010. Eddy, Chuck (1997). The Accidental Evolution Of Rock'n'roll: A Misguided Tour Through Popular Music. Hachette Books. ISBN 978-0-306-80741-1. Mann, Brent (2003). 99 red balloons: and 100 all-time great one-hit wonders. New York City: Citadel Press. p. 60. ISBN 9780806525167. Coyne, Kevin John (28 August 2018). "An Olivia Newton-John Retrospective, Part Ten: 1987-1992". Country Universe. Retrieved 11 August 2022. "Toughing It Out". People. 3 August 1992. Retrieved 10 November 2008. Schindehette, Susan; Schneider, Karen; O'Neill, Anne-Marie (26 October 1998). "Victors Valiant". People. Retrieved 10 November 2008. "About US". Gaiaretreat.com.au. Archived from the original on 23 December 2008. Retrieved 10 November 2008. "Olivia Newton-John's Lesser Known Career — Hotelier! All About the Luxury Resort She Cofounded". Peoplemag. Retrieved 18 March 2023. "Our history". www.onjcancercentre.org. Retrieved 19 March 2023. Silva, Kristian (11 March 2013). "Leading cancer research institute to close branch". The Age. Retrieved 29 March 2023. Tour cancelled over dolphins now reset Billboard, 1 July 1978. "Making Her Move: Olivia Newton-John's 'Physical' Phenomenon Revisited". PopMatters. 22 October 2018. Retrieved 29 August 2019. Biodata Archived 13 April 2016 at the Wayback Machine, Olivianewton-john.com, 22 June 2012. "Olivia Newton-John Dead at 73: The Star and Grease Icon Dies of Breast Cancer". People. Retrieved 11 August 2022. Roan, Shari (20 November 1994). "THE SUNDAY PROFILE : From the Pain, a Passion : James and Nancy Chuda lost their little girl to a rare cancer. Now they are on a mission to protect other children". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved 9 August 2022. "Gaia". onlyolivia.com. Retrieved 20 August 2019. "Gaia – one woman's journey". onlyolivia.com. Retrieved 20 August 2019. Crump, William D. (28 August 2013). The Christmas Encyclopedia, 3d ed. McFarland. ISBN 9781476605739 – via Google Books. "Olivia Newton-John – Trust Yourself". 1997 – via www.discogs.com. "Olivia Newton-John: Sordid Lives". www.onlyolivia.com. Lloyd, John; Mitchinson, John; Harkin, James (2013). 1227 Quite Interesting Facts to Blow Your Socks Off. New York, New York: W. W. Norton & Company. p. 265. ISBN 978-0-393-24103-7. "Newton-John Records Angelou Poem For Breast Cancer". Contactmusic.com. 21 August 2005. Retrieved 10 November 2008. Marquez, Sandra (28 September 2006). "Olivia Newton-John Moves On". People. Retrieved 10 February 2015. Billboard. 28 October 2006. Retrieved 13 August 2010. "Green Hill Music-Grace And Gratitude Renewed". Greenhillmusic.com. Archived from the original on 6 August 2010. Retrieved 13 August 2010. "Great Walk to Beijing". Archived from the original on 7 September 2008. Retrieved 7 September 2008. "Ask Billboard". Billboard. 6 January 2007. Archived from the original on 1 August 2008. Retrieved 10 November 2008. "Olivia and friends release album to better cancer research". Great Walk to Beijing.com. Archived from the original on 16 October 2008. Retrieved 10 November 2008. "Mcg – Indian Star Rallies Celebrity Support For Cancer Movie News". Contactmusic.com. Retrieved 13 August 2010. "Justin Bieber Comic Book to Track His Rise to 'Fame'". Billboard. 14 September 2009. Retrieved 13 August 2010. "Olivia Newton-John – Actor, Executive Producer, Song – Variety Profiles". Variety. Archived from the original on 4 October 2008. Retrieved 10 November 2008. "1998 – Highlights from The Main Event". Internet Archive. 1998. Retrieved 15 August 2022. The Main Event tour was a homecoming of sorts for Olivia Newton-John. Away from the stage for some years, she returned with brothers-in-arms Anthony Warlow and John Farnham to perform a truly spectacular hybrid of the three artists' back catalogue including all their greatest hits. The album was recorded live at the Melbourne Park show and features Age Of Reason (Newton-John, Farnham and Warlow), Hopelessly Devoted To You (Newton-John), You're The One That I Want (Farnham and Newton-John), If Not For You (Newton-John, Farnham and Warlow) and Let Me Be There (Newton-John, Farnham and Warlow). "Whammo Homepage". 29 August 2004. Archived from the original on 29 August 2004. Retrieved 8 August 2019. "australian-charts.com – Discography John Farnham". australian-charts.com. Retrieved 8 August 2019. "ARIA Charts – Accreditations – 1998 Albums". aria.com.au. Retrieved 8 August 2019. "ARIA Awards 2008: History: Winners by Artist". 13 February 2009. Archived from the original on 13 February 2009. Retrieved 8 August 2019. "ARIA and PPCA remember Olivia Newton-John". aria.com.au. Retrieved 13 August 2022. Smolowe, Jill (25 September 2000). "Showing Her Mettle – Olivia Newton-John Cover". People. Retrieved 15 August 2022. "Olympics Sparks Sales in Australia | Retail > Miscellaneous Retail from AllBusiness.com". 27 November 2007. Archived from the original on 27 November 2007. Retrieved 8 August 2019. Olivia Newton-John – One Woman's Live Journey, retrieved 15 August 2022 Olivia Newton-John – Back With A Heart, 21 May 1998, retrieved 15 August 2022 "Olivia Newton-John -> music -> albums -> (2) (Japanese version)". www.onlyolivia.com. Retrieved 15 August 2022. "Olivia Newton-John -> music -> albums -> (2) (Japanese version)". www.onlyolivia.com. Retrieved 15 August 2022. "ARIA and PPCA remember Olivia Newton-John". Australian Recording Industry Association. 8 August 2022. Retrieved 10 August 2022. ""For my beautiful mother Irene 1914–2003" (in CD insert)" (CD). European Article Number (EAN) 4988005422279. Archived from the original on 12 February 2021.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: others (link) theawarenews; theawarenews (1 September 2022). "Olivia Newton-John, singer and actress, dead at 73". The Aware News. Archived from the original on 8 September 2022. Retrieved 8 September 2022. MacDonald, Patrick (22 November 2007). "New sounds for Christmas". The Seattle Times. "Gay channel Logo steps into Sordid realm". Reuters. 9 January 2008. Retrieved 10 November 2008. "Score a Hockey Musical". Score a Hockey Musical. Archived from the original on 24 August 2010. Retrieved 13 August 2010. McKechnie, Brian (14 July 2010). "TIFF 2010 Scores An Opening Night Film". CityNews. Retrieved 28 January 2018. Park, Jeannie (24 December 1990). "Starring as a Mom for Christmas, Olivia Newton-John Returns to Acting in a Role She Plays All Year Round". People. Retrieved 10 November 2008. Semigran, Aly (5 May 2010). "'Glee' Recap: Episode 17, 'Bad Reputation'". MTV News. Retrieved 19 October 2021. "Anne Murray partners with "Friends and Legends"". Reuters. Toronto. 23 November 2007. Retrieved 13 August 2022. Issa, Natalie (9 August 2022). "Olivia Newton-John's most iconic pop culture moments". Deseret News. Retrieved 13 August 2022. Newton-John's film and TV appearances were scarce in the 2000s, but she did a make a rare guest appearance on the hit show "Glee." In Season 1, Episode 17, a video of Sue Sylvester (Jane Lynch) dancing along to "Physical" gets leaked and subsequently ridiculed. The video catches the attention of Newton-John, playing herself, who enlists Sue's help to recreate her iconic "Physical" music video. This guest appearance was a delight to fans, who loved seeing Newton-John recreating "Physical" after over 30 years. Herrera, Monica (5 May 2010). "Olivia Newton-John Gets 'Physical' on 'Glee' with Sue Sylvester". Billboard. Retrieved 13 August 2022. "Physical by Glee Cast and Olivia Newton-John – Music Charts". acharts.co. "Tuned In to Olivia Newton-John". ABC7 Chicago. 17 April 2010. Retrieved 13 August 2022. Olivia's appeal seems to be timeless. With a career spanning more than four decades she is still a vibrant, creative individual that is adored by fans across the world. Throughout her career, the much-loved star, who danced with Gene Kelly in "Xanadu," hosted the popular internationally syndicated "Wild Life" television show, .... "Wild Life (1996) – The Screen Guide". www.screenaustralia.gov.au. Screen Australia. 1996. Retrieved 13 August 2022. "Snowy River: The McGregor Saga: Season 2, Episode 8". Rotten Tomatoes. 1995. Retrieved 13 August 2022. Episode info: Someone tries to prevent Matt (Andrew Clarke) from helping Joanna find her long-lost father. Guest star: Olivia Newton-John. "Snowy River: The McGregor Saga: Season 2, Episode 9". Rotten Tomatoes. 1995. Retrieved 13 August 2022. Episode info: Kathleen (Wendy Hughes) joins Joanna in the search for the half brother she never knew. Guest star: Olivia Newton-John. "Snowy River: The McGregor Saga: episode guide: Series 2". www.australiantelevision.net. Retrieved 13 August 2022. "Olivia Newton-John and the Sydney Symphony – Olivia Newton-John | Release Info". AllMusic. "Olivia Newton-John – Olivia's Hits Live Album Reviews, Songs & More | AllMusic" – via www.allmusic.com. Dufaut, Dominique (7 January 2008). "Eurovision Olivia Newton-John live in Sydney CD & DVD release – ESCToday.com". "Olivia Newton-John's back, with a few good men". Herald Sun. Melbourne, Australia. 14 January 2011. Retrieved 1 February 2011. Tour dates Archived 14 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine at her website "Olivia Newton-John". Bandsintown. Retrieved 7 August 2019. "Olivia Newton-John announces 40th anniversary UK tour". digitalspy.com. 23 October 2012. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "Grease Reunion: John Travolta and Olivia Newton-John Team for Charity Christmas Album". E! Online. 2 October 2012. Retrieved 14 August 2022. Leach, Robin (11 April 2013). "Heart attack! Olivia Newton-John heads to the Flamingo this spring". Las Vegas Sun. Retrieved 8 February 2014. Wilder, Jessica (29 May 2013). "Olivia Newton-John's Sister Dies". ABC News. Archived from the original on 9 January 2014. Retrieved 8 February 2014. "Olivia Newton-John to begin Las Vegas residency". CBS News. 4 February 2014. Retrieved 8 February 2014. Smith, Jay (4 February 2014). "Olivia Newton-John Announces 'Summer Nights' Vegas Residency". Pollstar. Archived from the original on 22 February 2014. Retrieved 8 February 2014. Slovacek, Randy (6 April 2014). "Olivia Newton-John Is Still The One We Want". queerty.com. Retrieved 8 August 2019. "Olivia Newton-John extends run at Flamingo". Las Vegas Magazine. Retrieved 7 August 2019. "Olivia Newton-John To Stay At Flamingo Through 2015". pollstar.com. 10 December 2014. Retrieved 11 August 2019. "Olivia Newton-John Extends Residency at Flamingo Las Vegas Through 2016". olivianewton-john.com. Archived from the original on 11 August 2019. Retrieved 11 August 2019. "Olivia Newton-John's three-year Flamingo run is done". Las Vegas Review-Journal. 6 March 2017. Retrieved 11 August 2019. "Two Strong Hearts: Live In Concert". JB Hi-Fi. 21 August 2015. Retrieved 15 August 2022. Adams, Cameron; Wehner, Cyclone; Cahill, Mikey; Kelton, Sam (25 June 2015). "Album Reviews: John Farnham & Olivia Newton-John, Refused, Thy Art Is Murder, Way of the Eagle & Saskwatch". news.com.au. Retrieved 15 August 2022. "Olivia Newton-John Logs First No. 1 on Dance Club Songs Chart" from Billboard (12 November 2015) "Olivia Newton-John & Daughter Chloe Lattanzi to Release "Window in the Wall" – an Anthem to Unify & Heal – on Greenhill Records Friday, January 22, 2021". GlobeNewswire News Room. 22 January 2021. Archived from the original on 26 January 2021. "Previous Winners". Music Victoria. Archived from the original on 31 July 2019. Retrieved 13 August 2020. "Tour". LIV ON – 2017. Retrieved 15 August 2022. McCarthy, Tyler (24 May 2019). "Olivia Newton-John reveals her brother died earlier this month 'after years of decline'". Fox News. Retrieved 7 August 2019. "Olivia Newton-John receives Australia's highest honour". 7NEWS. 13 June 2019. Retrieved 13 August 2022. Raven, Robin (16 December 2019). "Thousands Of Fans Travel To See John Travolta And Olivia Newton-John Together At 'Grease' Events". Forbes. Archived from the original on 17 December 2019. Retrieved 8 August 2022. Raven, Robin. "Thousands of Fans Travel To See John Travolta And Olivia Newton-John Together At 'Grease' Events". Forbes. Retrieved 16 January 2020. "'Grease' is the word: CBS adds broadcast television premiere of 'Grease Sing-A-Long' to 'Sunday Night Movies' on June 7". Niagara Frontier Publications. Retrieved 19 August 2022. "Watch Olivia Newton-John's jaw-dropping final performance before her death". Smooth. Retrieved 19 August 2022. "Olivia Newton-John and Daughter Chloe Lattanzi Talk New Single". The Hollywood Reporter. 8 February 2021. Retrieved 15 April 2021. "Still the One We Want". OutSmart. 15 March 2021. Retrieved 15 April 2021. Braine, Theresa (5 November 2019). "Secret buyer of Olivia Newton-John's famed 'Grease' pants revealed". Daily News. New York. Retrieved 6 November 2019. "Buyer returns Grease jacket to Olivia Newton-John after auction". BBC News. 11 December 2019. Williams, David (11 December 2019). "A man bought Olivia Newton-John's 'Grease' jacket for $243,200 and gave it back to her". CNN Style. Retrieved 12 December 2019. McKeever, Vicky (11 December 2019). "Mystery billionaire returns auctioned Grease jacket to Olivia Newton-John". CNBC. Retrieved 12 December 2019. Dwyer, Michael (9 August 2022). "How Olivia Newton-John guided us from blissful AM radio to raunchy MTV". Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 28 September 2022. "Olivia Newton-John's Tale of Two Sandys". The New Yorker. 10 August 2022. Retrieved 28 September 2022. "Olivia Newton-John duets album 'Just the Two of Us' coming May 5". 106.9 The Eagle. 17 February 2023. Archived from the original on 21 February 2023. Retrieved 21 February 2023. "Olivia Newton-John's Catalog of Emotion". Oxford American. Retrieved 21 February 2023. Lauren, O'Neill (9 August 2022). "Olivia Newton-John was probably one of the most underrated vocalists in music". inews.co.uk. Retrieved 13 September 2022. "An underappreciated singer, Olivia Newton-John breathed sensuality into the soft rock of the '70s". sports.yahoo.com. 9 August 2022. Retrieved 14 September 2022. "Juliana Hatfield's hopeless devotion to Olivia Newton-John: 'Everything I do is influenced by my love for her'". www.yahoo.com. 8 August 2022. Retrieved 20 September 2022. "Lisa Loeb Biography". musicianguide.com. Retrieved 20 September 2022. "Kylie Minogue pays tribute following heartbreaking death of Olivia Newton-John - details". HELLO!. 9 August 2022. Retrieved 20 September 2022. Leach, Maddison (10 August 2022). "Delta Goodrem breaks into tears on Sunrise as she reveals her final contact with Olivia Newton-John". Now To Love. Retrieved 20 September 2022. Kreps, Daniel (14 August 2022). "See the Chicks Pay Tribute to Olivia Newton-John With 'Hopelessly Devoted to You' Cover". Rolling Stone. Retrieved 20 September 2022. Claire, Marie (13 June 2018). "Alanis Morissette: 'When someone says I'm angry, it's a compliment'". Marie Claire. Retrieved 20 September 2022. "P!nk belts out a powerful tribute to Olivia Newton-John at AMAs". www.geo.tv. Retrieved 23 November 2022. "An Epic Set of Performers Announced for the 2022 ARIA Awards". Australian Recording Industry Association (ARIA). 16 November 2022. Retrieved 22 November 2022. "Episode 64: Olivia Newton-John interview". Enough Rope with Andrew Denton. 18 October 2004. Archived from the original (web.archive.org) on 18 July 2016. Retrieved 13 August 2022. Claire, Marie (6 October 2017). "This is why Olivia Newton-John almost turned down her role in Grease". Marie Claire. Retrieved 7 August 2019. Fong-Torres, Ben (27 July 1978). "Olivia Newton-John Battles Back". Rolling Stone. Retrieved 29 August 2019. Nantwich, Meagan (6 September 2017). "What You Never Knew About Olivia Newton-John". NinjaJournalist. Retrieved 29 August 2019. "In Memory of Lee Kramer: An Inspiration Behind triyoga". triyoga. 21 August 2017. Retrieved 12 July 2022. "To Have and to Hold". People. Retrieved 29 August 2019. People Staff. "Olivia's Breakup". People. Retrieved 28 June 2023. Creswell, Toby; Trenoweth, Samantha (1 January 2006). 1001 Australians You Should Know. Pluto Press Australia. ISBN 9781864033618. Retrieved 13 August 2010. "Newton-John 'frantic'". Sydney Morning Herald. Australian Associated Press. 22 August 2005. Retrieved 1 February 2011. "Tip line for clues on Newton John's ex". Australia: news.com.au. Australian Associated Press. 11 August 2009. Archived from the original on 9 April 2015. Retrieved 1 February 2011. "Coast Guard statement on Patrick McDermott case" (Press release). United States Coast Guard. 10 August 2009. Archived from the original on 17 July 2011. Retrieved 1 February 2011.{{cite press release}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) "Newton-John's boyfriend probably drowned: report". ABC News. Australia. Australian Associated Press. 22 November 2008. Retrieved 1 February 2011. "Found! Olivia Newton-John's Missing Beau Really Did Fake Death". E! Online. 5 April 2010. Retrieved 16 August 2022. Kennedy, Dana (26 November 2017). "Why Olivia Newton-John's 'Missing' Ex—and the Stories About Him—Just Won't Die". The Daily Beast. Retrieved 10 July 2021. "Olivia Newton-John and John Easterling's Relationship: A Look Back". Peoplemag. Retrieved 7 March 2023. "Amazon Herb Company Merges with TriVita, Inc". www.businesswire.com. 14 September 2012. Retrieved 7 March 2023. Blumberg, Dorron (28 September 2019). ""Amazon" John Easterling: Helping Patients Overcome Cancer Related Challenges with Home-Grown Cannabis". Florida Hospital News and Healthcare Report. Retrieved 7 March 2023. Tan, Michelle (10 July 2008). "Olivia Newton-John Marries John Easterling – Twice!". People. Retrieved 10 November 2008. @OzKitsch (27 August 2020). "@PhillipAdams_1 goes into bat for Olivia Newton-John in her quest for Australian citizenship, 1981" (Tweet). Archived from the original on 12 August 2022 – via Twitter. "The humble one-bed flat London Olivia Newton-John called home almost 50 years ago". 10 August 2022. Retrieved 21 March 2023. "Olivia Newton-John's Former House in Malibu Is for Sale for $7.5 Million". Architectural Digest. 8 February 2016. Retrieved 13 December 2021. "Olivia Newton-John Makes Waves With Dirt From Beach Home Work : Coastline: The singer is an honorary ambassador for the environment, but neighbors say debris is muddying the ocean". Los Angeles Times. 9 December 1989. Retrieved 13 December 2021. "Olivia Newton-John and hubby buy home in Jupiter Inlet Colony". TCPalm.com. Archived from the original on 23 June 2009. Retrieved 13 August 2010. Duke, Alan (19 August 2013). "Police: Contractor kills self at Olivia Newton-John's home". CNN. Retrieved 7 August 2019. Cameron, Christopher (12 June 2014). "Olivia Newton-John Jupiter Island | Olivia Newton-John SF". The Real Deal. Retrieved 26 May 2023. "Olivia Newton-John's Waterfront Estate". Lonny. Archived from the original on 11 August 2022. Retrieved 11 August 2022. "Olivia Newton-John offers Santa Ynez horse ranch for $5.4 million". Los Angeles Times. 2 May 2019. Retrieved 7 August 2019. "Olivia Newton-John's horse ranch is the perfect place for summer nights". TODAY.com. 15 May 2019. Retrieved 26 May 2023. Strum, Beckie (28 February 2019). "Olivia Newton-John Selling 187-Acre Australian Farm". Mansion Global. "Olivia Newton-John scores $4.6 million Dalwood sale". propertyobserver.com.au. 28 August 2019. Retrieved 29 August 2019. Fuzek, John (5 April 2017). "Music: Olivia Newton John Interview". Motif. Retrieved 9 August 2022. Mapstone, Lucy (28 December 2019). "Grease star Olivia Newton-John made a dame". The West Australian. Retrieved 6 November 2023. Nolasco, Stephanie (30 May 2017). "Olivia Newton-John postpones concert dates to fight cancer". Fox News. Retrieved 10 August 2019. Rehan, Kelly. "Sciatica Causes Olivia Newton-John to Postpone Performances". SpineUniverse. Retrieved 10 August 2019. "Olivia Newton-John Opens Up About Getting Cancer for a Third Time – Using Radiation and Cannabis Oil For Pain". SurvivorNet. Retrieved 7 August 2019. "Olivia Newton-John Opens Up About Living With Stage 4 Cancer". Yahoo. 6 August 2019. Retrieved 10 August 2019. "'A huge difference': Olivia Newton-John using cannabis to ease pain of her bone cancer". Washington Examiner. 5 August 2019. Retrieved 10 August 2019. Bernstein, Adam (8 August 2022). "Olivia Newton-John, pop singer and 'Grease' star, dies at 73". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on 8 August 2022. Retrieved 8 August 2022. Reynolds, Dolan (8 August 2022). "Olivia Newton-John dies at 73, husband says". FOX8 WGHP. Archived from the original on 8 August 2022. Retrieved 8 August 2022. "Olivia Newton-John Dead: John Travolta, Barbra Streisand and More Stars Pay Tribute | Entertainment Tonight". "'She was a wonderful, generous person': Albanese commemorates Olivia Newton-John". 9 August 2022. "Sydney Opera House lights up pink in memory of Olivia Newton John". 7NEWS. 10 August 2022. Retrieved 11 October 2022. Robinson, Cynthia (26 September 2022). "Olivia Newton-John's Family Held 'Very Private' Memorial Service: Details". Us Weekly. Retrieved 11 October 2022. Evans, Lauren (15 August 2022). "Newton-John revealed where she wanted ashes scattered before death". skynews. Retrieved 11 October 2022. "Olivia Newton-John's FINAL wish: Actress said she wanted her ashes scattered in Byron Bay in unseen interview". meaww.com. 15 August 2022. Retrieved 14 October 2022. "Family of Olivia Newton-John accept Dan Andrews' state funeral offer". noise11.com. 11 August 2022. Archived from the original on 12 August 2022. "New details emerge about Olivia Newton-John's state funeral". MSN. Retrieved 11 October 2022. When and where Olivia Newton-John’s State Memorial Service will be held 3AW 2 February 2023 Boulton, Martin (26 February 2023). "'Supernatural' and 'magic' Olivia Newton-John farewelled at memorial". The Age. Retrieved 26 February 2023. "Olivia Newton-John – If Not For You". Discogs. 11 September 1971. "If Not for You – Olivia Newton-John | Releases | AllMusic" – via www.allmusic.com. "Olivia Newton-John – Olivia". Discogs. 11 September 1972. "Olivia Newton-John – Let Me Be There". Discogs. 11 September 1973. "Long Live Love – Olivia Newton-John | Releases | AllMusic" – via www.allmusic.com. "Olivia Newton-John – Long Live Love". Discogs. 11 September 1974. "Have You Never Been Mellow – Olivia Newton-John | Releases | AllMusic" – via www.allmusic.com. "Olivia Newton-John – Have You Never Been Mellow". Discogs. 25 September 1975. "Clearly Love – Olivia Newton-John | Releases | AllMusic" – via www.allmusic.com. "Olivia Newton-John – Clearly Love". Discogs. 11 September 1975. "Olivia Newton-John – Come on Over Album Reviews, Songs & More | AllMusic" – via www.allmusic.com. "Olivia Newton-John – Come On Over". Discogs. 11 September 1976. "Don't Stop Believin' – Olivia Newton-John | Releases | AllMusic" – via www.allmusic.com. "Olivia Newton-John – Don't Stop Believin'". Discogs. 11 September 1976. "Making a Good Thing Better – Olivia Newton-John | Releases | AllMusic" – via www.allmusic.com. "Olivia Newton-John – Making A Good Thing Better". Discogs. 11 September 1977. "Totally Hot – Olivia Newton-John | Releases | AllMusic" – via www.allmusic.com. "Olivia Newton-John – Totally Hot". Discogs. 11 September 1978. "Physical – Olivia Newton-John | Releases | AllMusic" – via www.allmusic.com. "Olivia – Physical". Discogs. 11 September 1981. "Soul Kiss – Olivia Newton-John | Releases | AllMusic" – via www.allmusic.com. "Olivia – Soul Kiss". Discogs. 11 September 1985. "The Rumour – Olivia Newton-John | Releases | AllMusic" – via www.allmusic.com. "Olivia Newton-John – The Rumour". Discogs. 11 September 1988. "Warm and Tender – Olivia Newton-John | Releases | AllMusic" – via www.allmusic.com. "Olivia Newton-John – Warm And Tender". Discogs. 11 September 1989. "Gaia: One Woman's Journey – Olivia Newton-John | Releases | AllMusic" – via www.allmusic.com. "Olivia Newton-John – Gaia". Discogs. 11 September 1994. "Olivia Newton-John – Back with a Heart Album Reviews, Songs & More | AllMusic" – via www.allmusic.com. "Olivia Newton-John – Back With A Heart". Discogs. 11 September 1998. "Tis the Season – Vince Gill, Olivia Newton-John | Releases | AllMusic" – via www.allmusic.com. "Vince Gill And Olivia Newton-John Featuring The London Symphony Orchestra – 'Tis The Season". Discogs. 11 September 2023. "2 – Olivia Newton-John | Releases | AllMusic" – via www.allmusic.com. "Olivia Newton-John – (2)". Discogs. 11 September 2023. "Indigo: Women of Song – Olivia Newton-John | Releases | AllMusic" – via www.allmusic.com. "Olivia Newton-John – Indigo – Women Of Song". Discogs. 11 September 2023. "Olivia Newton-John – Stronger Than Before Album Reviews, Songs & More | AllMusic" – via www.allmusic.com. "Olivia – Stronger Than Before". Discogs. 11 September 2023. "Grace and Gratitude – Olivia Newton-John | Releases | AllMusic" – via www.allmusic.com. "Olivia – Grace And Gratitude". Discogs. 2006. "Olivia Newton-John – Christmas Wish Album Reviews, Songs & More | AllMusic" – via www.allmusic.com. "Olivia Newton-John – Christmas Wish". Discogs. 2008. "A Celebration in Song – Olivia Newton-John | Releases | AllMusic" – via www.allmusic.com. "Olivia Newton-John – A Celebration In Song". Discogs. 2008. "This Christmas – Olivia Newton-John, John Travolta | Releases | AllMusic" – via www.allmusic.com. "John Travolta & Olivia Newton-John – This Christmas". Discogs. 2012. "Liv On – Amy Sky, Olivia Newton-John, Beth Nielsen Chapman | Releases | AllMusic" – via www.allmusic.com. "Amy Sky | Olivia Newton-John | Beth Nielsen Chapman - Liv On". Discogs. 2016. "John Farnham, Olivia Newton-John – Friends for Christmas Album Reviews, Songs & More | AllMusic" – via www.allmusic.com. "John Farnham & Olivia Newton-John – Friends For Christmas". Discogs. 2016. Baker, Glenn A. (8 August 2022). "'They were her secret ingredient': The Australians who helped Olivia Newton-John conquer the world". Sydney Morning Herald. "Toomorrow". British Film Institute. 12 July 2012. Archived from the original on 12 July 2012. "The Case". British Film Institute. Retrieved 7 December 2023. "Olivia Newton-John". Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved 10 August 2022. "Actor And Singer Olivia Newton-John Dies, Aged 73". Empire. 2022. "It's My Party". Rotten Tomatoes. "Olivia Newton-John was that rare thing: a wonderfully unselfconscious star". The Guardian. 8 August 2022. "The Case (1972)". BFI. Archived from the original on 27 November 2021. "The Case". onlyolivia.com. "Case, The (BBC-1 1972, Cliff Richard, Olivia Newton-John)". 21 December 2018. "Olivia Newton-John – Long Live Love – United Kingdom 🇬🇧 – Grand Final – Eurovision 1974" – via www.youtube.com. "ABBA share tributes to friend Olivia Newton-John". eurovision.tv. 9 August 2022. "A Special Olivia Newton-John". www.onlyolivia.com. "A Special Olivia Newton-John". Television Academy. "1977 – Only Olivia (BBC Special)" – via Internet Archive. "Only Olivia 1977 BBC Special". 70s-tv. "Watch: The moment Olivia Newton-John performed with ABBA". faroutmagazine.co.uk. 9 August 2022. "Relive Andy Gibb, ABBA and Olivia Newton-John's incredible 'jam session' from 1978". Smooth. "ABBA Pay Tribute To Friend And Former Eurovision Competitor Olivia Newton-John". uk.news.yahoo.com. 9 August 2022. "Hollywood Nights Special". www.onlyolivia.com. "When Olivia Newton-John and Elton John gave a breathtaking performance of 'Candle In The Wind'". Smooth. "Olivia-Newton John – Hollywood Nights". Television Academy. Unterberger, Andrew (12 August 2022). "Forever No. 1: Olivia Newton-John's 'Physical'". Billboard. "1982: Olivia Newton-John Gets "Physical" with American TV". Totally 80's. "Olivia Newton-John in Concert 1982, complete and synchronized" – via www.youtube.com. "Olivia Newton-John's 'Physical' Phenomenon Revisited, Page 4". 9 August 2022. Coyne, Kevin John (28 August 2018). "An Olivia Newton-John Retrospective, Part Ten: 1987–1992". Country Universe. "Timeless Tales from Hallmark (1990) | series | videospace". www.videospace.fi. "Timeless Tales from Hallmark (TV Series)". Radio Times. "The Man From Snowy River ser 2 DVD". www.onlyolivia.com. "Hopelessly Devoted To You! A look back at Olivia Newton-John's fantastic life and career". Albany Herald. Archived from the original on 21 August 2022. Retrieved 13 August 2022. "Obituary: Olivia Newton-John". 10 August 2022. "Ned & Stacey". www.onlyolivia.com. "Ned and Stacey: Season 1, Episode 9" – via www.rottentomatoes.com. "Olivia Newton-John Videos on Instagram: "The time when Olivia appeared on "Ned & Stacey" & was so sick of being nice 🤣🤣(1995) ♡ • • • @therealonj #olivianewtonjohn #onj #dameolivianewtonjohn #dameolivia #nedandstacey #debramessing #willandgrace #90s #90sstyle #90smusic #90sfashion #retro #grease #hopelesslydevotedtoyou #youretheonethatiwant #sandyolsson #xanadu #magic #kira #physical #letsgetphysical #twoofakind #twistoffate #aussie #australian #singer #songwriter #actress #oldhollywood #olivianewtonjohnforever"". Instagram. "Olivia Newton-John | Is This Your Life? | Interview | 1995" – via www.youtube.com. "Tracey Takes On..." www.onlyolivia.com. "Olivia Newton-John on Murphy Brown" – via www.youtube.com. Petski, Denise; Tapp, Tom (8 August 2022). "Olivia Newton-John's Career In Photos & Music Videos". "Olivia Newton-John". TVGuide.com. "Olivia Newton-John – Bette | TVmaze". www.tvmaze.com. "Bette S01E14 – The Invisible Mom (3/3) (Special Guests: Olivia Newton John & Chloe Lattanzi)" – via www.youtube.com. "Bette". www.onlyolivia.com. "Night With Olivia". www.onlyolivia.com. "Live in Tokyo, Japan 2003". www.onlyolivia.com. "Olivia Newton-John acts as guest judge on 'Idol'". TODAY.com. 27 September 2006. Wilkinson, Amy (27 June 2008). "'My Life on the D-List' recap: Australia, Meet Kathy Griffin". EW.com. "Olivia Newton-John & Jane Lynch - Physical (Glee)" – via www.youtube.com. "Olivia Newton-John in Glee". www.onlyolivia.com. Rosenzweig, Jed (9 August 2022). "Watch: Olivia Newton John Remade 'Physical' With Glee's Sue Sylvester". primetimer.com. "Olivia Newton-John Gets 'Physical' on Glee". Peoplemag. Freeze, Kellie (20 October 2015). "Recap: Dancing With the Stars "Famous Dances Night" Season 21, Episode 6". Channel Guide Magazine. Kendall, Ellie; Scanlan, Michael (14 August 2022). "When Olivia Newton-John came to Bristol in 1972". BristolLive. "Olivia Newton-John – If Not for You Album Låttexter". LetsSingIt. "Olivia guested on Cliff Richard's 1972 UK tour". www.onlyolivia.com. "1975 US tour". www.onlyolivia.com. "Olivia's 1976 Japan Love Performance tour". www.onlyolivia.com. Pimienta, Edgar. "Olivia Newton-John on tour Totally Hot World Tour". guestpectacular.com. "General News". Billboard. 3 July 1982. "Only Olivia – Greatest Hits Tour". Archived from the original on 27 November 2010. "Olivia's back! And she doesn't miss a beat (archived)". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on 28 November 2010. "Olivia's Concert Tour – 2000". www.onlyolivia.com. "30 Musical Years Tour (archived)". Archived from the original on 12 April 2019. "Olivia Newton-John comes up from Down Under for U.S. tour". 17 September 2004. Archived from the original on 17 September 2004. "Upcoming Tour Info". 9 February 2004. Archived from the original on 9 February 2004. "Olivia Newton-John returns to the states for tour". 26 June 2004. Archived from the original on 26 June 2004. "Heartstrings Tour – Olivia's 2002 US tour book". www.onlyolivia.com. "2003 Heartstrings US Tour". www.onlyolivia.com. "Olivia's Tour dates". olivianewton-john.com. Archived from the original on 6 December 2006. Retrieved 13 August 2022. "Olivia Newton-John Live". www.onlyolivia.com. Pimienta, Edgar. "Olivia Newton-John on tour Grace and Gratitude Tour". guestpectacular.com. "2006 Grace and Gratitude US Tour | Olivia newton john, Childhood memories, Famous people". Pinterest. "British-born Australian singer Olivia Newton-John poses for..." Getty Images. 14 April 2007. British-born Australian singer Olivia Newton-John poses for photographers during a press conference to promote her concert tour... is in the Chinese territory for one-night concert 15 April, as part of her Asian tour dubbed "Body Heart and Spirit Tour" which will take her also to Taiwan, Singapore, and Malaysia. "Newton-John set for maiden Malaysian concert on April 29". The Star. 17 March 2007. Retrieved 13 August 2022. Are you prepared to "get physical" with Olivia Newton-John? The 59-year-old pop star will be performing at Genting's Arena of the Stars on April 29 as part of her Body, Heart and Spirit Tour. Newton-John's tour will kick off in Hong Kong on April 15, followed by Taiwan (April 21 and 22), Shanghai (April 25), Singapore (April 27) and Kuala Lumpur (April 29). "Olivia Newton-John Concert & Tour History | Concert Archives". www.concertarchives.org. "Olivia Newton-John Concert & Tour History | Concert Archives". www.concertarchives.org. "Olivia Newton-John Tour Statistics: 2010 | setlist.fm". www.setlist.fm. "Grace and Gratitude Renewed Tour – Olivia's 2010 Japanese tour book". www.onlyolivia.com. "Olivia Newton-John's 2011 Concert & Tour History | Concert Archives". www.concertarchives.org. "Olivia Newton-John – Special Guests – Adam Hills in Gordon St Tonight – ABC TV". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 24 February 2012. Archived from the original on 24 February 2012. "Pollstar". www.pollstar.com. "Olivia Newton-John's three-year Flamingo run is done". 6 March 2017. Ewbank, Tim (2008). Olivia: The Biography of Olivia Newton-John. London: Piatkus Books. ISBN 978-0-7499-0983-3. OCLC 298705080. Newton-John, Olivia (2018). Don't Stop Believin'. Camberwell, Australia: Viking Australia. ISBN 978-0143788935. Read, Mike (1983). The Story of the Shadows: An Autobiography. London: Elm Tree books. ISBN 9780241108611. OCLC 473318038. Welch, Bruce (1989). Rock 'n' Roll—I Gave You the Best Years of My Life: A Life in the Shadows. London: Penguin Books. ISBN 9780670827053. OCLC 19741528. Wood, Gerry (1998). "Olivia Newton-John". In Kingsbury, Paul (ed.). The Encyclopedia of Country Music: The Ultimate Guide to the Music (First ed.). New York: Oxford University Press. pp. 380–381. ISBN 9780195116717. OCLC 932391260. Wikiquote has quotations related to Olivia Newton-John. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Olivia Newton-John. Olivia Newton-John at AllMusic Olivia Newton-John discography at Discogs Olivia Newton-John at IMDb Olivia Newton-John at Rotten Tomatoes