Peter Gene Hernandez (born October 8, 1985), known professionally as Bruno Mars, is an American singer-songwriter. He is known for his stage performances, retro showmanship, and for performing in a wide range of musical styles, including pop, R&B, funk, soul, reggae, disco, and rock. Mars is accompanied by his band, the Hooligans, who play a variety of instruments, such as electric guitar, bass, piano, keyboards, drums, and horns, and also serve as backup singers and disco dancers. In 2021, he collaborated with Anderson .Paak, as the American musical superduo Silk Sonic. Born and raised in Honolulu, Hawaii, Mars moved to Los Angeles in 2003 to pursue a musical career. Following a brief contract with Motown Records, he first established his name in the music industry as a songwriter. In 2009, he co-founded the production team The Smeezingtons, responsible for various successful singles for Mars himself and other artists. He rose to fame as a solo artist in 2010 buoyed by the success of "Nothin' on You" by B.o.B and "Billionaire" by Travie McCoy, both of which featured his vocals. In the same year, Mars released his debut studio album Doo-Wops & Hooligans, which blended pop with reggae and R&B. It spawned the international number-one singles "Just the Way You Are", "Grenade", and "The Lazy Song". Drawing inspiration from disco, funk, rock, reggae and soul genres, his second studio album, Unorthodox Jukebox (2012), was his first number one on the Billboard 200. It amassed two Billboard Hot 100 number-one songs, "Locked Out of Heaven" and "When I Was Your Man". In 2014, Mars was featured on Mark Ronson's "Uptown Funk", which topped various music charts, spending a total of fourteen and seven weeks atop the Billboard Hot 100 and the UK Singles Chart, respectively. Mars's third studio album, the R&B-focused 24K Magic (2016), received seven Grammy Awards, winning the major categories of Album of the Year, Record of the Year, and Song of the Year. The album also yielded the top-five singles "24K Magic", "That's What I Like" (his seventh Billboard Hot 100 number-one single), and a remix of "Finesse" featuring Cardi B. In 2021, Mars and Anderson .Paak, as Silk Sonic, released the collaborative studio album An Evening with Silk Sonic, which delved into 1970s R&B and soul and was led by the chart-topping single "Leave the Door Open". It received four Grammy Awards, including Record of the Year and Song of the Year. Mars has sold over 130 million records worldwide, making him one of the best-selling music artists of all time. Eight of his songs have reached number one on the Billboard Hot 100 and his concert tours are some of the highest-grossing in history. He has received 15 Grammy Awards (including three Record of the Year wins), four Brit Awards, eleven American Music Awards, 13 Soul Train Awards and holds three Guinness World Records, among other accolades. He featured on Music Week's best songwriters (2011) and Billboard's Greatest of All Time Artists (2019) lists and rankings such as the Time 100 and Forbes Celebrity 100. Mars became the first artist to receive six Diamond-certified songs in the United States and has been regarded as a pop icon due to his influential career. Peter Gene Hernandez was born on October 8, 1985, in Honolulu, Hawaii, to Peter Hernandez and Bernadette San Pedro Bayot growing up in the Waikiki neighborhood of Honolulu. His father has Puerto Rican and Jewish heritage, and is originally from Brooklyn, New York. Mars has stated that his Jewish ancestors were from Hungary and Ukraine. His mother emigrated from the Philippines to Hawaii, and was of Filipino and Spanish ancestry. His parents met while performing in a show in which his mother was a Hula dancer and his father played percussion. At the age of two, he was nicknamed "Bruno" by his father because of his resemblance to professional wrestler Bruno Sammartino. Mars is one of six children and came from a musical family which exposed him to a diverse mix of music genres, including first and foremost Rock and Roll, and later reggae, hip hop, and rhythm and blues. His mother was both a singer and a dancer, and his father performed Little Richard's music, which inspired him as a young child. His uncle was an Elvis Presley impersonator, and also encouraged three-year-old Mars to perform songs on stage by Presley and Michael Jackson. At the age of four, Mars began performing five days a week with his family's band, The Love Notes, and became known in Hawaii for his impersonation of Elvis Presley. When he was five he urinated on himself during a performance of Presley's "Can't Help Falling in Love" (1961), which led his parents to think they could be making a mistake. However, Mars never wavered. In 1990, Mars was featured in the Hawaiian tabloid shopper MidWeek as "Little Elvis" and performed in the halftime show of the 1990 Aloha Bowl. In 1992, he appeared in a cameo role in the film Honeymoon in Vegas and was interviewed by Pauly Shore on MTV. When Mars was six years old, he was featured on The Arsenio Hall Show and throughout grade school, he performed with his family's band, two shows a night, covering Frankie Lymon and Little Anthony. When he was a child he had a small version of a drum set, guitar, piano, and some percussion and learned to play the instruments. When Mars was 12, his parents divorced, ending The Love Notes act. His father's various businesses which ranged from temporary-tattoo parlors to memorabilia shops, failed. As a result, there was no longer a steady source of income. He moved out of his parents' house along with his brother and father. They lived in the "slums of Hawaii", on the back of a car, on rooftops, and in an abandoned bird zoo, Paradise Park, where his father worked before it closed. Mars transferred to another school and was bullied initially, but he became popular in the last days of school. The time Mars spent impersonating Presley had a major impact on his musical evolution and performing techniques. He later began playing guitar after being inspired by American rock guitarist Jimi Hendrix. In 2010, he also acknowledged his Hawaiian roots and musical family as an influence, explaining: "Growing up in Hawaii made me the man I am. I used to do a lot of shows in Hawaii with my father's band. Everybody in my family sings, everyone plays instruments ... I've just been surrounded by it." When he attended President Theodore Roosevelt High School in Honolulu he sang in a group called The School Boys, who did several shows including opening for his father's new band, performing songs by the Isley Brothers and the Temptations. The singer, while in high school, became well known in Hawaiian entertainment, becoming the opening gig for a huge magic show and impersonating Michael Jackson in a celebrity-impersonators show, making $75 per performance. After his sister who lived in Los Angeles played his demo for Mike Lynn (the head of A&R at Dr. Dre's Aftermath Entertainment record label), Lynn summoned Mars to Los Angeles. In 2003, shortly after graduating from high school at the age of 17, Mars moved to Los Angeles to pursue a musical career. At the time, he lived on Mansfield Avenue and was surprised by the poverty and squalor of the neighborhood. He adopted his stage name from the childhood nickname his father gave him, adding "Mars" at the end because: "I felt like I didn't have no pizzazz, and a lot of girls say I'm out of this world, so I was like I guess I'm from Mars." Moreover, the adoption of his stage name was also an effort to "avoid being stereotyped", as the music industry tried to pigeonhole him as another Latin artist. They even tried to convince Mars to sing in Spanish. "I'd always been a working musician in Hawaii and never had problems paying rent. And then it's like, 'Now I'm in L.A. and my phone's getting shut off.' That's when reality hit. I started DJing. I told this person I could DJ because they said they could pay me $75 cash under the table. I didn't know how to DJ. I lost that job pretty quick." —Mars speaking about his experiences of moving to Los Angeles to pursue a musical career. Shortly after moving to Los Angeles, Mars signed a record contract with Motown Records in 2004, but the deal "went nowhere", leading him to have a conversation with will.i.am's management, which also turned out to be fruitless. However, the singer's experience with Motown proved to be beneficial to his career. American songwriter and record producer Philip Lawrence was also signed to the label. After Mars was dropped by the label less than a year after being signed, he stayed in Los Angeles and landed a music publishing deal in 2005 with American record producers Steve Lindsey and Cameron Strang at Westside Independent. "Bruno came to the conclusion that the best way to further his career was writing and producing hit songs." —Strang on developing Mars's career. Lindsey showed Mars and fellow songwriters Brody Brown and Jeff Bhasker (who Mars met through Mike Lynn) the ins and outs of writing pop music and acted as a mentor, helping them to hone their craft. Bhasker explained that Lindsey would "mentor us, and kind of give us lectures as to what a hit pop song is, because you can have talent and music ability, but understanding what makes a hit pop song is a whole other discipline." Lindsey confessed he "held Mars back for five years while they learned an extensive catalog of hit music." In a different interview, Brown corroborated the former story. During this time, Mars played cover songs around Los Angeles in a band called Sex Panther, with Bhasker and Eric Hernandez (the former's brother), who eventually became the drummer of The Hooligans. When Lawrence was first told he should meet Mars he was reluctant to do so since he did not even have money for bus fare. Keith Harris, the drummer for the American musical group The Black Eyed Peas, told Lawrence: "Whatever it costs you to get out here, I'll reimburse you." Lawrence responded: "Just give me five dollars back for the bus." The pair began collaborating, writing songs for Mars, but they received many rejections from record labels. In 2006, Lawrence introduced Mars to his future A&R manager at Atlantic Records, Aaron Bay-Schuck. After hearing him play a couple of songs on the guitar, Bay-Schuck wanted to sign him immediately, but it took roughly three years for Atlantic Records to finally sign Mars to the label, because they felt it was too early and that he still needed to develop as an artist. In 2008, on the verge of giving up, they received a call from Brandon Creed, who was looking for songs for a reunited Menudo. He liked their song "Lost", which was written for Mars. The duo did not want to give the song away, but when they were offered $20,000 for it, they agreed. The sale of this song allowed them to continue working, and Mars and Lawrence decided that they would write and produce songs together for other artists. Eventually Creed became the former's manager for nine years. Before becoming a successful solo artist, Mars was an acknowledged music producer, writing songs for the likes of Alexandra Burke, Adam Levine, Brandy, Sean Kingston, and K'naan. Mars stated that the first "big hit" he and Lawrence wrote was the 2009 single "Right Round" by Flo Rida: "That was our first taste of what could really happen with a hit we hundred-percented". He also co-wrote the Sugababes' hit song "Get Sexy" (2009) and provided backing vocals on their album Sweet 7 (2010). In 2009, he was featured as a singer on Far East Movement's second studio album, Animal, on the track "3D". In the same year, he was also featured on American pastor and hip hop artist Jaeson Ma's debut single "Love" and on American rapper Travie McCoy's "One at a Time", a charity single for MTV's Staying Alive foundation. He reached prominence as a solo artist after being featured on, and composing (as part of the production group the Smeezingtons) American rapper B.o.B's "Nothin' on You" (2009) and McCoy's "Billionaire" (2010); both songs peaked within the top ten of various music charts, with the former charting at number one on both the United States Billboard Hot 100 and the UK Singles Chart. Mars said of these successful singles: "I think those songs weren't meant to be full-sung songs. If I'd sung all of 'Nothin' on You', it might've sounded like some '90s R&B." On May 11, 2010, Mars released his debut extended play (EP), It's Better If You Don't Understand. It peaked at number 99 on the US Billboard 200 and a music video was released for the song "The Other Side" featuring American singer CeeLo Green and B.o.B. Mars, with the Smeezingtons, also composed Green's successful single "Fuck You" (2010). On July 20, 2010, Mars released "Just the Way You Are" as the lead single from his debut studio album, Doo-Wops & Hooligans (2010), an album produced mainly by the Smeezingtons. The song topped the charts in various countries, including Australia, Canada and the U.S. The album, released on October 5, 2010, debuted at number three on the Billboard 200 and number one in the UK. It also charted at number one in the Netherlands and Canada. Doo-Wops & Hooligans has since sold 15.5 million copies worldwide. It spawned two other international singles, "Grenade", which topped the Billboard Hot 100, New Zealand, the UK, as well as multiple other charts, and "The Lazy Song", which peaked at number four on the Billboard Hot 100 and reached the top spot in the UK and Denmark. Other singles include "Talking to the Moon", which was exclusively released in Brazil and topped Billboard Brasil's Hot Pop Songs and Hot 100 Airplay. "Marry You", which was only released to international markets, entering the top ten of various countries, and "Count On Me", which served as the final single in Australia. Mars released the single "It Will Rain" for The Twilight Saga: Breaking Dawn – Part 1 film soundtrack (2011). The song reached number three in the U.S. and at number two in New Zealand. During this period, Mars featured on "Lighters" with American hip hop duo Bad Meets Evil, "Mirror" with American rapper Lil Wayne, and "Young, Wild & Free" with American hip hop artists Wiz Khalifa and Snoop Dogg. The songs peaked at number four, sixteen, and seven in the U.S. and reached the top-20 of various music charts. Mars started to promote his debut album as the opening act for American bands Maroon 5 and OneRepublic on the fall leg of the former act's Palm Trees & Power Lines Tour. Later, on October 18, 2010, the singer began a co-headlined European concert tour with McCoy that lasted until early November. Doo-Wops & Hooligans received further promotion when the singer embarked on his first headlined concert tour, The Doo-Wops & Hooligans Tour, which ran from November 2010 to January 2012. Nevertheless, in February 2011, a joint co-headlining tour between Mars and Janelle Monáe was announced, dubbed Hooligans in Wondaland Tour (2011). The concert tour was performed in North America in May and June 2011. Mars turned down offers to open for notable artists on arena tours, opting instead to play at smaller venues such as theaters and ballrooms. This made the tour less lucrative, but helped him build his fan base. At the 2011 Grammy Awards, Mars won his first Grammy Award for Best Male Pop Vocal Performance for "Just the Way You Are" and received other six nominations for his work: Best Rap Song, Best Rap/Sung Collaboration and Record of the Year for "Nothin' on You"; the latter category along with Song of the Year for "Fuck You" by CeeLo Green, and Producer of the Year, Non-Classical as part of the Smeezingtons. At the 2012 Grammy Awards, Mars lost all the six categories in which he was nominated to British singer Adele. The categories included Album of the Year and Best Pop Vocal Album for Doo-Wops & Hooligans, Best Pop Solo Performance, Record and Song of the Year for "Grenade", while Producer of the Year, Non-Classical as the Smeezingtons was lost to English producer Paul Epworth. During that time, Mars also won his first American Music Award for Favorite Pop/Rock Male Artist, International Male Solo Artist at the Brit Awards and the Echo Award for Best International Male. In March 2012, Mars signed a worldwide publishing deal with BMG Chrysalis US. In September 2012, when interviewed by Billboard magazine, Mars stated that his next album would be more musically varied, adding: "I want to have the freedom and luxury to walk into a studio and say, 'Today I want to do a hip-hop, R&B, soul or rock record'". He announced Unorthodox Jukebox release date, December 11, 2012. The album debuted at number two on the Billboard 200, eventually peaking at number one on the chart. It also charted at number one in Australia, Canada, and in the UK, where it became the third fastest-selling album by a solo artist in 2012. The album has since sold over six million copies worldwide. "Locked out of Heaven" was released on October 1, 2012, and preceded the release of Unorthodox Jukebox, an album produced mainly by the Smeezingtons. The song topped the U.S. and Canada charts, peaking at number two on the UK. It also charted within the top ten in various countries. Other singles released from the album include "When I Was Your Man", "Treasure", "Gorilla" and "Young Girls". Because "When I Was Your Man" reached number one Billboard Hot 100, aside from Elvis Presley, no other male artist has achieved five number-one singles more quickly than Mars. It also peaked at number three in Canada, number two in the UK, and was top-ten in various countries. "Treasure" reached number five on the Billboard Hot 100 and number four in Canada, but had less commercial success in other countries. Mars contributed vocals to Jamaican-American EDM trio Major Lazer's "Bubble Butt", released in May 2013. The single also features American rappers Tyga, 2 Chainz, and American hip-hop singer Mystic. Mars ran his second headlining concert tour, the Moonshine Jungle Tour, from June 2013 to October 2014. He also announced a concert residency titled Bruno Mars at The Chelsea, Las Vegas, Paradise, Nevada. The tour grossed $156.4 million. On September 8, 2013, Mars was disclosed as the headline performer at the Super Bowl XLVIII halftime show, which took place on February 2, 2014, with American rock band Red Hot Chili Peppers as special guests. It was the first Super Bowl halftime headlined by a performer under 30 in a decade. It was the most watched halftime show in the history of the Super Bowl at that time, drawing a rating of 115.3 million viewers. The viewership for the halftime show was higher than that for the game. At the 2014 Grammy Awards, Mars won the award for Best Pop Vocal Album for Unorthodox Jukebox. "Locked Out of Heaven" earned nominations for Record and Song of the Year, while "When I Was Your Man" was nominated for Best Pop Solo Performance. In the same year, the album was recognized with a Juno Award for International Album of the Year. Aside from his music career, Mars cast as Roberto in the movie Rio 2 (2014). He also contributed to the film's soundtrack with the song "Welcome Back". On November 10, 2014, British musician Mark Ronson released "Uptown Funk", featuring Mars. The song was a major commercial success, reaching number one in several countries, including Australia, Canada and New Zealand. "Uptown Funk" spent a total of fourteen and seven weeks atop the Billboard Hot 100 and the UK Singles Chart, respectively. The song became a worldwide phenomenon with a major impact on pop culture. In September 2014, Mars began working on his third studio album, 24K Magic, affirming, "Now it's time to start writing chapter 3". He had not come up with a date for the release, stating: "Until it's done ... It's gotta be just as good if not better". At the 2016 Grammy Awards "Uptown Funk" won Ronson and Mars a Grammy Award for Best Pop Duo/Group Performance and Record of the Year. On February 7, 2016, British band Coldplay headlined the Super Bowl 50 halftime show with Mars and American singer Beyoncé as guest acts, marking their second appearance on the Super Bowl halftime. It became one of the most watched halftime shows in Super Bowl history. In early 2016, Mars was working with bass player Jamareo Artis, musician Brody Brown, singer-songwriter Andrew Wyatt and EDM producer Skrillex. 24K Magic was set to be issued in March but was postponed several months due to Mars's appearance at the Super Bowl halftime show. At that time, seven songs had already been recorded. They were composed mainly by Shampoo Press & Curl, a production team consisting of Mars, Lawrence, and Brown, which replaced the Smeezingtons. In May 2016, the singer split with his manager because Creed sold half his company. Mars took his business affairs under his own management company, Gorilla Management, operated by Aaron Elharar. At the 2017 Grammy Awards, his work (as part of the Smeezingtons) on Adele's "All I Ask", a track from her third studio album, 25 (2015), brought him a Grammy Award for Album of the Year. In 2017, Guinness World Records recognized Mars as the "First Male Artist to achieve three 10-million-selling-singles". In October 2016, "24K Magic" was released as the lead single of 24K Magic. It peaked at number four in the U.S. and reached the top in France and New Zealand. The album, issued on November 18, 2016, debuted at number two in Canada, France, New Zealand, and the U.S. It has since sold over five million copies globally. Four more singles were released throughout 2017 and 2018: "That's What I Like", "Versace on the Floor", "Chunky", exclusively released in Australia, and a remix of "Finesse" featuring American rapper Cardi B. "That's What I Like" was the album's highest-charting single on the Billboard Hot 100, peaking at number one, while "Finesse" reached the top-three. Both singles reached number three in Canada, number four and two in New Zealand, respectively. All appeared on Billboard's Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs, with "That's What I Like" and "Finesse" reaching number one. In late 2016, the singer started his second concert residency titled Bruno Mars at Park MGM. He also announced his third headlining concert tour, 24K Magic World Tour, which began in March 2017 and ended in December 2018. The tour grossed more than $300 million worldwide. On November 29, 2017, CBS aired Mars's first TV concert special, Bruno Mars: 24K Magic Live at the Apollo. He received seven awards at the 2017 American Music Awards, including Artist of the Year, two for "That's What I Like" and other two for 24K Magic. He also won Album/Mixtape of the Year at the 2017 Soul Train Music Awards, in addition to four other awards. At the 2018 Grammy Awards, Mars won in the six categories for which he was nominated: Album of the Year and Best R&B Album for 24K Magic, Record of the Year for the title track and Song of The Year, Best R&B Performance and Best R&B Song for "That's What I Like". 24K Magic also won a Grammy Award for Best Engineered Album, Non-Classical, for the work of the album's engineers. Mars worked on Chic's studio album It's About Time (2018), with the song expected to be featured on Chic's next studio album, according to musician Nile Rodgers. In early 2018, Mars worked with recording engineer Charles Moniz, as well as songwriting and recording production team the Stereotypes. In September 2018, Mars and American rappers Gucci Mane and Kodak Black released "Wake Up in the Sky" for Mane's thirteenth studio album, Evil Genius (2018). It reached number 11 in the US. In February 2019, Cardi B and Mars released a single together, "Please Me". It peaked at number three on the Billboard Hot 100. The single also reached the top-20 of Canada, New Zealand and the UK. Five months later, British singer-songwriter Ed Sheeran, American singer-songwriter Chris Stapleton, and Mars collaborated on, "Blow", for the former's fourth studio album, No.6 Collaborations Project (2019). In October 2019, Mars posted a picture of himself in a recording studio, possibly indicating new music. In February 2020, it was announced a partnership between Mars and Disney for a "music-themed theatrical narrative", in which the singer will both star and produce the movie. A month later, it was confirmed that Mars was working on his next album, possibly with American musician Babyface. While on quarantine, the singer wrote music every day for his upcoming album. In the same year, Mars sold part of his song catalog to Warner Chappell Music, keeping a small share. In exchange for its payment to Mars, Warner Chappell Music, a subsidiary of the Warner Music Group, will collect future income from the songs. Mars's co-publishing contract with BMG was also a part of the deal. In 2021, Mars was reportedly paid $3.2 million to perform at a private show in Cape Cod, Massachusetts. The performance was delivered to Motorola CEO son's wedding. On February 26, 2021, Mars and American rapper Anderson .Paak announced that they have recorded an album together under the band name Silk Sonic. Their debut album, An Evening with Silk Sonic, was released on November 12, 2021, and it features American musician Bootsy Collins as a special guest host. It debuted at number two on the Billboard 200 and entered at the top-five in Australia, Canada, and New Zealand. The songs "Leave the Door Open", "Skate, "Smokin out the Window", a cover version of Con Funk Shun's "Love's Train" and "After Last Night" featuring Thundercat and Bootsy Collins were released as singles. "Leave the Door Open" peaked at number one on the Billboard Hot 100 and in New Zealand. "Smokin out the Window" peaked at number five on the Billboard Hot 100 and number four in New Zealand. All the singles, but "Skate", topped the Billboard Adult R&B Songs, which led the album to become the second with four number-one singles on the aforementioned chart, tying Toni Braxton's record. In early 2022, Silk Sonic started their debut concert residency titled An Evening with Silk Sonic at Park MGM. The duo won Best Group at the BET Awards 2021, International Group of the Year at the 2022 Brit Awards and Outstanding Duo, Group or Collaboration, Traditional at the 53rd NAACP Image Awards. They received three awards at the 2021 Soul Train Music Awards, including Song of the Year for "Leave the Door Open". At the 2022 Grammy Awards, Silk Sonic won Record of the Year, Song of The Year, Best R&B Performance and Best R&B Song for the latter song. At the BET Awards 2022 Silk Sonic won Album of the Year for their debut album and Video of the Year. The same music video also won Video of the Year at the 2022 Soul Train Music Awards. In February 2023, Brody Brown revealed in an interview that Mars was working on his fourth solo studio album, and had called him in to help produce it. Mars was quoted as saying, "Man, I'm working on my fourth album. Let's get it. Let's hurry up and go." In May 2023, a music insider revealed that the album was close to completion after months of production work, with a new sound and an unconfirmed release date. Mars is reportedly also planning to debut a new aesthetic to go with it and is in early talks with Live Nation Entertainment to set up a tour throughout 2024 and 2025, with "large-scale, three-dimensional" performances. The creation of the album is happening alongside a small world tour that will end in early April 2024. and the continuation of his second concert residency Bruno Mars at Park MGM. Mars was raised on his father's 1950s doo-wop collection–"simple four-chord songs that got straight to the point"–and on Little Richard, Frankie Lymon, Little Anthony, and Jerry Lee Lewis. As a child, Mars spent time impersonating Elvis Presley. The playacting had a major impact on his musical evolution; he reflected: I'm a big fan of 1950s Elvis when he would go on stage and scare people because he was a force and girls would go nuts! You can say the same thing for Prince or The Police. It's just guys who know that people are here to see a show, so I watch those guys and I love studying them because I'm a fan. He also impersonated Michael Jackson, another major inspiration. The hip-hop productions by The Neptunes and Timbaland, that were played on the radio, also influenced him. Mars's musical style gravitated initially towards R&B. He was influenced by artists such as Keith Sweat, Jodeci, and R. Kelly. As a child he also took notice of Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis, New Edition, Bobby Brown, Boyz II Men, Teddy Riley, and Babyface. At the same time, he also listened to 1950s rock 'n' roll, doo-wop music, and Motown. In high school, he listened to classic rock groups such as Led Zeppelin, and The Beatles, whose influences can be heard in his work, as well as singers with high voices, like Stevie Wonder and Freddie Mercury. Bob Marley, and local bands in Hawaii, were a major influence and account for his reggae roots. Hip-hop acts like Jay-Z, The Roots, and Cody Chesnutt were among some of his favorites, and have influenced his compositions. Each of these musical genres has influenced the singer's musical style; he observed: "It's not easy to [create] songs with that mixture of rock and soul and hip-hop, and there's only a handful of them." Mars also admires classical music. Other artists Mars has said inspired his work include Janet Jackson, Jimi Hendrix, Amy Winehouse, Sly Stone, Carlos Santana, George Clinton, and Usher. Mars has also stated that he is a fan of Alicia Keys, Jessie J, Jack White, The Saturdays, and Kings of Leon. Mars's music has been noted for displaying a wide variety of styles, musical genres, and influences, including pop, R&B, funk, soul, reggae, and rock. His debut album, Doo-Wops & Hooligans, is predominantly a pop, reggae pop and R&B record. It is influenced by most of the genres mentioned above. Many of his songs on the album, reflect "feel-good", carefree, and optimistic sentiments. However darker subjects are addressed in his songs, detailing failed relationships, pain and loneliness. His subsequent release, Unorthodox Jukebox, as with his debut album, is infused with different influences including disco, funk, rock, reggae and soul, as well as balladry. Lyrically, the album is different from the former, addressing traditional notions of romance, male chauvinism, and sexuality. The explicit content in the song "Gorilla" caused a controversy in Australia. Mars's third album, 24K Magic, was significantly influenced by R&B, funk, pop and new jack swing. Lyrically, the album involves themes of money and sex. An Evening with Silk Sonic is the debut studio album by American musical superduo Silk Sonic, composed of Mars and Anderson .Paak. The album is rooted in R&B, soul, funk, hip hop and pop music. It explores themes of "seduction, romance", reconciliation, materialism, and features explicit lyrics. Mars possesses a three-octave tenor vocal range. Jon Caramanica of The New York Times commented that he is one of the most "versatile and accessible singers in pop, with a light, soul-influenced voice that's an easy fit in a range of styles, a universal donor", while Tim Sendra from AllMusic described the singer's vocals on Doo-Wops & Hooligans as "the kind of smooth instrument that slips into your ear like honey." Jody Rosen from Rolling Stone called Mars a "nimble, soulful vocalist" on Unorthodox Jukebox. Jim Farber of the New York Daily News likened the voice "the purity, cream and range of mid-period Michael Jackson" in a review of a concert promoting Unorthodox Jukebox. On 24K Magic, Consequence of Sound's Karen Gwen afirmed that Mars showed his "pips" and pushed his vocals to the limit. She described his voice as a "clear, unapologetic tenor" being a "blessing" nowadays. Jon Caramanica of The New York Times found 24K Magic to show the singer's vocal ability from tenderness to "the more forceful side of his voice". Mars has explained his writing process: "I don't sit down and think, 'I'm going to write a song'", since "You can't force creativeness" as inspiration comes out of the blue in different places. Ideas occur suddenly to him; and occasionally, he is able to materialize them into lyrics. He has said that he typically writes songs by playing the guitar or piano first. Mars also plays drums, guitar, keyboard, bass, piano, ukulele, and congas. He usually plays the instrumentation or part of it, on his albums and on the songs he composes for other artists. Mars claims that his work with other artists has influenced his musical style: "Nothin' on You had a Motown vibe, Billionaire was a reggae acoustic guitar-driven song, though one of my favorites is the CeeLo Green song. I don't think anyone else could've sung that song. And there's Just the Way You Are. If you know my story, you know I love all different genres of music." Mars feels that growing up in Hawaii influenced his style, giving the songs a reggae sound. He explains: "In Hawaii some of the biggest radio stations are reggae. That music brings people together. It's not urban music or pop music. It's just songs. That's what makes it cross over so well. The song comes first." Philip Lawrence, one of his music partners, stated: "What people don't know is there's a darker underbelly to Bruno Mars." Nevertheless, most of his music is romantic and Mars himself says: "I blame that on me singing to girls back in high school". Brody Brown, who has worked various times with Mars, affirmed that the latter is in charge of both the melody and lyrics of his tracks, "I'll just do the music, but Bruno does both. I chime in on some things with words, but the majority of the content is written by Bruno and Phil (Lawrence)." Mars is known for his retro showmanship, which is widely acclaimed by tour critics and reviewers. Deanna Ramsay of The Jakarta Post described Mars as a "truly global star". Boston Herald's Jim Sullivan compared the showmanship of Mars to Michael Jackson and Elvis Presley. Kevin Johnson of the St. Louis Post-Dispatch called Mars a "consummate performer." The Boston Globe's Sarah Rodman said that Mars shows an "indefatigable ecstatic approach to performing" and "classic showmanship." In the same vein, Jim Farber of the Daily News commented about the halftime show at Super Bowl XLVIII that Mars "brings old-school showmanship to dynamic performance." The singer took its inspiration by playing videotapes of Elvis, James Brown and Michael Jackson when he was younger. Now before shows he watches Brown's T.A.M.I. Show, James Hendrix's Live at Woodstock or Prince performing "Purple Rain" (1984). During The Doo-Wops & Hooligans Tour, Ara Jansan from The West Australian called the performance "one of the most creative and exciting displays of musical artistry" she had witnessed in a long time and noticed the concert attracted a wide-ranging audience of all age groups. The Oregonian's Robert Ham noticed, on the Hooligans in Wondaland Tour, that the singer not only grabbed the spectators' attention throughout the entire concert, but he also sang every note by himself with noticeable guitar skills. During the Moonshine Jungle Tour, Jason Lipshutz of Billboard described the singer's performance as "entertaining ... keeping smiles plastered on the faces of his onlookers, and he does a better job at it than almost anyone working in music right now". Rolling Stone magazine placed Mars at number 35 on its list of 50 Best Live Acts Right Now in 2013; "Anyone from the age of 5 to 95 can walk out of a Bruno Mars concert feeling like the show was designed just for them. Mars walks the old-school walk and talks the sexy talk, but he also nails the hits, leads a super-energetic nine-piece soul band, and rips a mean drum solo". NFL executives Sarah Moll and Tracy Perlman said, "If you go to his concerts, it's 11-year-old girls to 65-year-old women—it's everyone", after seeing The Moonshine Jungle tour several times during the summer of 2013. The 24K Magic World Tour, was praised by critics due to the showmanship, guitar skills and stage production. The tour won two Pollstar awards, two Billboard Music Awards and one TEC Award. Mars's concert residency at Bruno Mars at Park MGM, won Top R&B Tour at the 2022 Billboard Music Awards. Mars's concerts feature The Hooligans, a band that includes a guitarist, bassist, drummer, keyboardist, and a horn section. They also serve as dancers and background singers. Critics noted the difference the backup band and the arrangements made to the sound of the live versions of the songs compared to those on the album. The shows feature all-band choreographed dancing arrangements, including footwork inspired by James Brown and the splits. The shows are influenced by the disco era with a soul revue-inspired set. In addition, long, mellow, and soft interludes that echo the smooth contemporary R&B style which was popular during the 1990s are also part of the show. The set lists blend several genres of music, including pop, doo-wop, funk, R&B, soul, and reggae. His shows usually feature pyrotechnics, strobe and laser lighting, and he typically plays the drums and guitar. In 2021, Pollstar named Mars the hip-hop/R&B touring artist of the 2010s decade. Mars has collaborated with many different directors to produce his music videos, and over time he emerged as a music video director. From 2010 to 2017, Mars co-directed with Cameron Duddy ten music videos from his albums Doo-Wops & Hooligans, Unorthodox Jukebox, and 24K Magic, as well as featured singles. In 2011, not only Mars developed the second concept and treatment for "The Lazy Song", but he also brought in Duddy to co-directed the music video with him. In an interview, Duddy elaborated that he and Mars "can fight like sisters when it comes to doing music videos. The best collaborations are always fueled by opposite perspectives or alternative ideas. We always find a common ground." In 2018, Mars co-directed the music video for "Finesse" with Florent Dechard. He continued to collaborate with Dechard on the music videos for "Please Me", "Blow", "Leave the Door Open" and "Skate". Mars, who choreographed the video for "Treasure", won the award for Best Choreography at the 2013 MTV Video Music Awards. Mars and Duddy work was recognized at several award shows, including two nominations for an MTV Video Music Award for Best Direction on "Uptown Funk" and "24K Magic". Mars's collaborations with Dechard earned them a nomination for Video Director of the Year at the 2019 BET Hip Hop Awards. In 2017, "That's What I Like" directed by Mars and Jonathan Lia led both to a nomination at the BET Awards 2017 for Video Director of the Year. In 2018, Mars and Ben Winston's direction of Bruno Mars: 24K Magic Live at the Apollo (2017) earned them a nomination for a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Music Direction. In 2021, Mars and Dechard directed the video for "Leave the Door Open", for which they won Video Director of the Year at the BET Awards 2021. The aforementioned music video also won Best Editing at the 2021 MTV Video Music Awards. Mars not only wears outfits inspired by previous decades, but he also matches that aesthetic to his music. On his debut studio album, Doo-Wops and Hooligans, the singer wore '60s-inspired suits and presented faded hair. However, on his third studio album, 24K Magic, Mars was channeling the '80s and '90s in its sound and aesthetic. During the recording process of 24K Magic, Mars imposed a dress code in the studio, favoring jewelry and "fine clothes" over sweatpants to create "groovy, smooth and soulful songs". In 2021, he collaborated with Anderson .Paak on their supergroup, Silk Sonic, to release their debut studio album, An Evening with Silk Sonic. Mars wore "wide collars, leisure suits, and funky patterns", as was usual in the '70s, which was also paired with their sound. Tessa Petak writing for InStyle affirmed, "Regardless of the decade he's emulating, Mars's fashion sense and stage presence make him larger-than-life". Current members Bruno Mars – lead vocals, rhythm guitar (2010–present) Philip Lawrence – backing vocals (2010–2018, 2022–present) Jamareo Artis – bass guitar (2010–present) Eric Hernandez – drums (2010–present) Kameron Whalum – trombone (2010–present), backing vocals (2018–present) Dwayne Dugger – saxophone (2010–present) James King – trumpet (2010–present), backing vocals (2018–present) John Fossit – keyboard (2012–present) Mateus Asato – rhythm guitar (2019, 2021), lead guitar (2022–present) Former members Kenji Chan – lead guitar (2010–2012) Phredley Brown – keyboard, rhythm guitar (2010–2012), lead guitar (2012–2022), backing vocals (2010–2022) Timeline In 2011, Mars appeared in two commercials for Bench. He and model Joan Smalls were photographed in 1950s influenced suits in Puerto Rico as part of the clothing line "La Isla Bonita" for Vogue. In 2012, Mars decided to invest in Chromatik, which makes digital versions of sheet music for the web and iPad. Mars said: "I love that Chromatik will bring better music education into schools. [...] And I'm happy to be a part of it." In 2013, Mars tweeted a picture of himself using an electronic cigarette. A press release was published reporting his investment in the NJOY Electronic Cigarette Company, "to quit smoking for his mother", as the singer "believes in the product and the company's mission." Both Chromatik and NJOY have been acquired by TakeLessons and Marlboro, respectively. In 2014, the small rum brand SelvaRey Rum began catering events and parties by Mars. In the following year, the singer was introduced to the brand by co-founder Seth Gold. At that point, Mars decided to invest an undisclosed amount for an equity stake in SelvaRey. In 2020, Mars decided to go global, after he and Gold tried multiple combinations with the bottles and flavors for years, the singer was responsible for the new taste, branding, and design of the packaging, with a 1970s style. The brand was founded and is co-owned by Mars, Seth Gold, Marc Gold, and Robert Herzig. Later, The Hooligans, along with Anderson .Paak, American record producer and songwriter D'Mile, American singer-songwriter James Fauntleroy, and Charles Moniz also became co-owners. On March 5, 2021, Mars, under his designer alter ego, Ricky Regal, released a luxury 1970s-inspired sportswear with Lacoste, entitled Lacoste x Ricky Regal. He worked with Louise Trotter, Lacoste's creative director, to create a clothing line that matched his personality with Lacoste's sportswear. According to Trotter, the singer was involved with every aspect of the collection from concept to fittings. When they started to work, Mars adopted "an alter ego to help him think as a designer." On July 29, 2022, it was reported that Mars is set to open a lounge bar on the Las Vegas Strip, replacing the Lily Bar & Lounge at the Bellagio. It will be named "The Pinky Ring", a reference to a lyric from his song "24K Magic" (2016). On October 28, 2023, The Pinky Ring was announced to be opening in early 2024. It is set to include "moody" lighting, a specialty bar, live music and DJs. The Pinky Ring opened on February 12, 2024. During the first two weeks of the bar's opening, The Hooligans will perform every night. On November 7, 2023, it was announced Mars's partnership with Fender to release the "Bruno Mars Stratocaster", a limited edition Fender Stratocaster in an exclusive color "Mars Mocha Heirloom." The guitar design was inspired by Mars's "retro style and showmanship". It comes with a "'69 neck profile modeled on Mars's own '69 Strat" and includes "custom-voiced Fender Bruno Mars pickups" and "a leopard print strap, which pays homage to two of Mars's favorite guitar players, Jimi Hendrix and Prince". In a statement of designing the guitar, Mars affirmed "I don't think of myself as a guitar player. Every song is like a puzzle you have to solve, and a good guitar can bring something out of you that can help take you to the finish line." Justin Norvell, EVP of Product at FMIC, said "We wanted to fashion a guitar that shows Fender's respect for the artists marking today's musical hall of fame, as well as displays Mars's supernova qualities". In 2014, it was announced that Mars had partnered with the Hawai'i Community Foundation and the Grammy Foundation to establish a Grammy Camp Scholarship Fund for qualified needs-based applicants from Hawaii. On September 27, 2017, he expanded his camp scholarship to include applicants from all over the United States. The singer established the partnership in honor of his mother. In 2014, Mars donated US$100,000 to the orphans of Bantay Bata, who were among the victims of Typhoon Haiyan, raising the morale of those who lost their families and homes. He performed at the Make It Right gala, whose campaign goal is to "help build homes for people in need." He also performed at the Robin Hood Foundation's 2014 annual benefit to "fight poverty in New York City by supporting nonprofit organizations with financial and technical assistance." In 2017, Mars and Live Nation donated a million dollars from the show at the Palace in Auburn Hills, Michigan, to help the victims of the Flint water crisis. The singer participated in the "Somos Una Voz" relief initiative to help survivors of Hurricane Maria in Puerto Rico and Mexico's earthquake. In November 2018, Mars donated 24,000 meals in aid to the Salvation Army Hawaiian & Pacific Islands Division's 48th annual Thanksgiving Dinner. In 2020, he donated $1 million to the MGM Resorts Foundation, to assist MGM employees with financial difficulties due to the COVID-19 pandemic. In the same year, Mars and other artists donated autographed or unique microphones to Reverb.com, a music gear online marketplace, for a charity sale "with all proceeds going to ten youth music education programs" affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. He also created a protest placard with an Angela Davis quote for an online auction called Show Me the Signs to help families of black women killed by police. Until the end of 2021, Mars donated all the profits earned with SelvaRey Rum to the Honolulu Community College's Music & Entertainment Learning Experience program, in Hawaii. In the same year, the singer was part of the "Keep Memory Alive Power of Love" gala. The event's proceeds support services, care, and resources to patients and their caregivers to combat neurocognitive diseases. In 2022, Mars alongside Billie Eilish, Dua Lipa, Shawn Mendes, and Rosalía were named co-chairs for the "Grammy Museum's Campaign for Music Education". The aim is to raise between 3–$5 million for the Grammy's educational programs. This will allow people, who are 18 and under as well as college students, free entrance to the Los Angeles Grammy Museum and access to various "music education programs" in the US. Bruno Mars has been cited as a "pop icon" by media outlets such as The Philippine Star, Courier & Press, The Dickinson Press, and iHeartRadio. The Guardian writer Michael Cragg deemed "the Bruno Mars strategy" the career path of "songwriter turned popstar", as he became known within the music industry by writing and producing hit singles for other artists, and eventually appearing as a featured artist on them—with The New Yorker stating that he overshadowed the lead artists on those songs. Amanda Petrusich of The New Yorker described him as "arguably one of the most instinctive and enthralling showmen of his generation". Fuse TV website has credited Mars for bringing the "funkalicious vibes" of retro pop and R&B back to modern music, while The Independent writer Roisin O'connor has cited him as the "king of retro crooning". In 2013, NPR Music writer Ann Powers defined Mars as "the most valuable pop historian" at the time. In 2016, Damien Scott writing for BET called Mars "the prince of pop music". In 2019, Margaret Farrell from Stereogum affirmed that "Uptown Funk"'s success solidified Mars's "kingly pop stature". Billboard has expressed that no male artist in contemporary pop music during the 2010s has enjoyed a longer success streak than Mars. Similarly, Slate considered him "the most consistent male pop star of the 2010s". In 2021, WBLS stated that Mars "has been a dominant force in popular culture for more than a decade". In 2023, The Times ranked Mars as the thirteenth best vocalist of the 21st century among 20. The New York Times and Toronto Star have described "Uptown Funk" as one of the most recognizable pop songs of the century. Speaking on his Puerto Rican roots and ethnic labels, Remezcla website argued that Mars is "the first proud Latino artist to make it" to the "top of international pop culture" while not following the music industry's "cynical labels game" to be pigeonholed. Singers such as AJ Mitchell, Thomas Rhett, Dua Lipa, Benny Dayal, Rauw Alejandro, KiDi, Lee Brice, Shawn Mendes, Selena Gomez, and Meghan Trainor have cited his music and showmanship as an inspiration. In 2013, Mars was named Artist of the Year by Billboard, while in 2016 he became the recipient of NRJ Artist of Honor "in special recognition for his contribution to music". The singer earned an Innovator Award at the 2017 iHeartRadio Music Awards and a Visionary Award at the 2017 Teen Choice Awards. In 2019, iHeartRadio Canada placed Mars on theirs "Icons of the Decade" of the 2010s, while Insider gave him an honorable mention on their 2010s list. In 2021, Billboard named Mars the third Top Artist of the 2010s and ranked him at number 14 on the list of Top Touring Artists of the 2010s. Mars has earned numerous awards and honors throughout his career, including 15 Grammy Awards, four Brit Awards, four Guinness World Record 11 American and 14 Soul Train Music Awards. In 2011, he made Time magazine's 100 list and his former songwriting and record producing team, the Smeezingtons, earned several accolades. In 2014, Mars topped Forbes magazine's '30 Under 30' list, a tally of the brightest stars in 15 different fields under the age of 30 in the US. At the 2018 Grammys, he became the second artist to win Record and Song of the Year with two different songs from the same album. At the 2022 Grammys, Mars became the second artist to win Record of the Year three times. In 2019, Billboard ranked Mars at number 41 on its list of Greatest of All Time Artists. As a songwriter, Mars has been honored, as part of the Smeezingtons, by Music Week as best songwriters of 2010 and by Billboard as he ranked at number six on their 2013 list of Hot 100 Songwriters. "Just The Way You Are" holds the record as the longest-reigning debut on adult contemporary, spending twenty weeks atop the Adult Contemporary chart in the U.S. "When I Was Your Man" became the second number one song in the U.S. to feature only piano and vocals. He is the first male artist to place two titles as a lead act in the U.S. top 10 simultaneously. He has eight number-one singles in the U.S. In 2018, he matched Beyonce and Mariah Carey as the only artists with three top-five singles in the U.S. from their first three studio albums. In the same year, he became the first solo male artist with nine number ones in the U.S. Mainstream Top 40 chart. Mars, Sheeran and Jewel are the only artists with two songs to spend at least half a year in the U.S. top 10. In 2019, Mars was one of the few artists who have spent at least 241 weeks among all their U.S. Billboard Hot 100 top 10s. "Uptown Funk" and "Grenade" were listed by several publications as being among the best songs of the decade. According to the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry (IFPI), "Just the Way You Are" and "Grenade" are two of the most successful digital singles of all time, with sales of 12.5 million and 10.2 million, respectively. This contributed to Mars becoming the biggest selling artist of 2012. His songs "Just The Way You Are", "Grenade", "Locked Out Of Heaven", and "When I Was Your Man" have each sold over 4 million digital copies, making him the first male artist to do so as a lead singer. Six of his singles are counted among the best-selling singles of all time. Worldwide, Mars has sold 26 million albums as of 2016, and a total of 200 million singles as of 2020. In 2022, he became the first artist to receive six diamond certified songs in the United States. Due to the ticket reselling that occurred during the week after the performance of Mars at the Super Bowl, and to limit that kind of profiteering, Hawaii Senate President Donna Mercado Kim introduced Senate Resolution 12, also known as the Bruno Mars Act. It limits all ticket purchases within 48 hours of the on-sale date to the physical box office so that anyone who comes to the box office to buy tickets for a show should almost be guaranteed a ticket and discourages ticket scalping. The State Senate in Hawaii passed the law. However, the bill died at the conference committee. As of September 2021, Billboard reported that Mars has earned $604.4 million from concerts. He is one of fewer than 30 artists to cross the $600 million threshold in Boxscore history. In 2022, Mars became the fastest-selling artist for his five shows in Japan, selling approximately 210.000 tickets in record time. In 2023, Mars sold 101,000 tickets for two concerts in Seoul, the biggest audience of the Hyundai Card's "Super Concert". Eric Hernandez, Mars's brother, has continuously served as the drummer for his backup band, The Hooligans. Their sisters, Tiara, Tahiti, and Presley, as well as their cousin Jamie, make up the all-girl music group The Lylas. When she was young, Jamie moved in with the siblings due to parental issues. Mars began dating model Jessica Caban in 2011. The two remain a couple as of 2019[update], residing together in a mansion in the Hollywood Hills with a Rottweiler named Geronimo. On May 31, 2013, Mars was returning to Los Angeles from an overseas gig when he learned in the airport that his mother was gravely ill. He immediately got on a plane to Hawaii. The following day, his mother died at Queens Medical Center in Honolulu, aged 55, from complications of a brain aneurysm. On June 7, 2013, the singer wrote about the loss of his mother on Twitter: "So thankful for all the love during the most difficult time in my life. I'll be back on my feet again soon. That's what mom wants, she told me." In 2013, Mars told Rolling Stone that record executives "had trouble categorizing him", and were consequently unsure which radio stations would play his songs, or to which ethnic group (black or white) he would appeal. In the same month, he confessed that "Nothin' on You" was rejected by a "music industry decision-maker" because of his race. That experience made him feel like a "mutant", and he says that was his lowest point. "Even with that song in my back pocket to seal the deal, things like that are coming out of people's mouths. It made me feel like I wasn't even in the room." In 2018, Mars was accused during The Grapevine, a series that explores African-American issues, of cultural appropriation on social media for using his racial ambiguity to profit from black music, and was criticized for mimicking the sound of past artists. Various black celebrities, including Stevie Wonder, Charlie Wilson, 9th Wonder, Marjua Estevez, and Stereo Williams dismissed the accusations. Mars has spoken often about his influences and has given credit to several black artists including Babyface, Teddy Riley, and Jimmy Jam & Terry Lewis. In 2021, during an interview on The Breakfast Club, Mars responded to the criticism, "The only reason why I'm here is because of James Brown, is because of Prince, Michael [Jackson] ... that's it. This music comes from love and if you can't hear that, then I don't know what to tell you." On September 19, 2010, Mars was arrested in Las Vegas at the Hard Rock Casino for possession of cocaine. While talking to a police officer, Mars reportedly declared that what he did was "foolish" and that "he has never used drugs before." Mars pleaded guilty to felony drug possession and in return was told that the charges would be erased from his criminal record as long as he stayed out of trouble for a year. He paid a $2,000 fine, did 200 hours of community service, and completed a drug counseling course. Nevertheless, in a cover story for GQ magazine in 2013, Mars said: "I was young, man! I was in fucking Vegas ... I wasn't thinking". He added: "I was given a number one record and I'm out doing dumb shit." Mars confessed that he lied to the authorities about never having done cocaine before, saying "I don't know where that came from", adding: "I was really intoxicated. I was really drunk. So a lot of that is a big blur, and I try every day to forget." On January 28, 2014, Demetrius Orlandus Proctor filed a lawsuit, claiming he holds the copyright for the McCoy and Mars track "Billionaire". Proctor claimed he owned the copyright to the music and lyrics of the track since March 31, 2011, though the song was released a year before. As evidence, Proctor has submitted a United States Copyright Office registration certificate for "Frisky Vol. 1 to 30 (Tapes)", issued in 2000. Proctor accused McCoy and Mars of "willful and intentional" infringement of copyright, seeking the destruction of all copies of the recording. Proctor claims he has exclusive rights to reproduce and distribute the song. "Uptown Funk" by Ronson and Mars has received various accusations and lawsuits over copyright infringement. In 2015, similarities with "Oops Up Side Your Head" (1979) by The Gap Band led them, along with keyboardist Rudolph Taylor, and producer Lonnie Simmons to be added as co-writers of "Uptown Funk" and receive publishing royalties. In the same year, Serbian artist Viktorija argued that "Uptown Funk" infringed on one of her tracks. She decided not to sue Mars and Ronson. In 2016, electro-funk band Collage sued Ronson and Mars for copying their single, "Young Girls" (1983), while The Sequence, a rap group, claimed it infringed their single "Funk You Up" (1979) and sued a year later. In 2017, Lastrada Entertainment filed a lawsuit due to similarities with "More Bounce to the Ounce" (1980) by Zapp. The company seeks damage, a jury trial and prevent Ronson from profiting with "Uptown Funk". In 2018, the Collage and Zapp lawsuits were dropped; it was not revealed if there had been any financial settlement. "Treasure" was re-registered with new writing credits, which included Thibaut Berland and Christopher Khan, due to the similarities with Breakbot's "Baby I'm Yours". Billboard estimated Mars's earnings at $18,839,681, making him the twelfth-highest-paid musician of 2013. Forbes magazine began reporting his earnings in 2014, calculating that the $60 million earned between June 2013 to June 2014, for his music and tour, made him thirteenth on the list of the Celebrity 100 list. In June 2017, Mars ranked sixth on the Forbes World's Highest Paid Celebrities, earning an estimated $39 million from June 2016 through June 2017. In July 2018, Forbes announced that Mars was America's highest-paid musician of 2017, with an estimated total of $100 million. This, in turn, placed him at number 11 on the Celebrity 100 list as well as being his highest yearly earnings to date. In 2019, he was placed at number 54 on the Forbes Celebrity 100 list, with estimated earnings of $51.5 million between June 1, 2018, and June 1, 2019. In March 2024, it was alleged that Mars is $50 million in debt due to gambling losses, which would explain why Mars has had a 9-year Vegas residency at Park MGM. However, on March 18, 2024, MGM Resorts denied the allegations, with senior vice president of public relations Jenn Michaels asserting that Mars "has no debt with MGM... speculation otherwise is completely false." Studio albums Doo-Wops & Hooligans (2010) Unorthodox Jukebox (2012) 24K Magic (2016) Collaborative albums An Evening with Silk Sonic (with Anderson .Paak, as Silk Sonic) (2021) Honeymoon in Vegas (1992) Rio 2 (2014) List of best-selling singles in the United States List of Billboard Hot 100 chart achievements and milestones List of highest-certified music artists in the United States List of highest-grossing concert tours List of most-followed Twitter accounts Herbert, Emily (2014). Bruno Mars – Emily Herbert. Omnibus Press. ISBN 9781783230501. Alarcon, Jesus Trivino (February 1, 2017). "Mr. Everything". Latina. Archived from the original on January 30, 2017. Retrieved February 1, 2017. Butnick, Stephanie (January 30, 2014). "Super Bowl Halftime Performer Bruno Mars a Quarter Jewish". Tablet Magazine. Archived from the original on December 2, 2020. Retrieved August 16, 2020. Hiatt, Brian (May 10, 2013). "Bruno Mars: The Golden Child". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on December 29, 2019. Retrieved December 29, 2019. Coleman, Miriam (June 2, 2013). "Bruno Mars' Mother Dies of Brain Aneurysm". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 8, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2015. Lewis, Pete. "Bruno Mars: Out of this World!". Blues & Soul. Archived from the original on September 22, 2012. Retrieved September 22, 2010. Moniz, Melissa (April 14, 2010). "Starring Bruno Mars". MidWeek. Honolulu. Archived from the original on January 10, 2015. Retrieved September 15, 2010. Lester, Paul (September 13, 2010). "New band of the day: Bruno Mars (No 865)". The Guardian. Archived from the original on September 21, 2013. Retrieved September 15, 2010. "Bruno Mars and Phillip Lawrence". American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers. March 18, 2010. Archived from the original on October 7, 2012. Retrieved September 15, 2010. "Em miúdo, Bruno Mars já tinha a escola toda". Blitz (in Portuguese). April 1, 2017. Archived from the original on February 15, 2020. Retrieved January 16, 2020. Hope, Clover (October 4, 2010). "Bruno Mars on Songwriting, Singing as a Tot, Working with Ne-Yo". Vibe. Archived from the original on July 17, 2011. Retrieved March 7, 2011. Now, Hawaii News (January 30, 2014). "Little 'Bruno' rocked the Aloha Bowl in 1990". Hawaii News Now. Archived from the original on December 29, 2016. Retrieved December 28, 2016. "The park Bruno Mars used to call home". CBS News. November 17, 2016. Archived from the original on February 4, 2019. Retrieved February 3, 2019. Gentry, Colin (September 22, 2010). "4Music.com meets Bruno Mars". 4Music. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved February 4, 2011. Oldenburg, Ann (March 13, 2012). "Bruno Mars poses on the cover of 'Playboy'". USA Today. Archived from the original on February 15, 2020. Retrieved July 25, 2017. "Greetings From Bruno Mars (YouTube video)". Elektra Records. Archived from the original on October 28, 2021. Greenburg, Zack O'Malley (May 18, 2011). "Mars Attacks!". Forbes. Archived from the original on September 28, 2013. Retrieved July 18, 2013. Artsitas, George (September 15, 2010). "Bruno Mars gravitates toward a stellar solo career". USA Today. Archived from the original on September 18, 2010. Retrieved September 15, 2010. Cline, Georgette. "10 Questions for Bruno Mars". Rap-Up. Archived from the original on August 14, 2012. Retrieved December 23, 2010. Heath, Christ (March 19, 2013). "The Mars Expedition". GQ. pp. 2–3. Archived from the original on April 16, 2016. Retrieved March 14, 2015. Wete, Brad (April 13, 2010). "So who is Bruno Mars? A Q&A with the guy behind B.O.B's smash hit 'Nothin' On You'". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on July 2, 2012. Retrieved September 15, 2010. Jones, Steve (January 25, 2011). "Bruno Mars' musical orbit seems inescapable". USA Today. Archived from the original on February 1, 2011. Retrieved February 3, 2011. Hill, Heather (April 24, 2013). "ASCAP Expo: My Take". ASCAP. Archived from the original on October 1, 2013. Retrieved July 18, 2013. Kimpel, Dan (March 7, 2016). "Songwriter Profile: Body Brown (Bruno Mars, Adele, Mark Ronson)". Music Connection. Archived from the original on November 11, 2018. Retrieved November 11, 2018. LeDonne, Rob (July 10, 2013). "Jeff Bhasker: Music's Go-To Guy". American Songwriter. Archived from the original on February 1, 2014. Retrieved November 17, 2013. Fekadu, Mesfin (January 31, 2013). "Producer Behind Fun. Takes Center Stage at Grammys". Associated Press. Archived from the original on April 8, 2014. Retrieved May 4, 2014. LeDonne, Rob (September 4, 2013). "Philip Lawrence: Bruno Mars' Right Hand Man Goes Solo". American Songwriter. Archived from the original on December 23, 2015. Retrieved December 7, 2015. "Interview with Aaron Bay-Schuck". HitQuarters. December 13, 2010. Archived from the original on May 21, 2019. Retrieved December 14, 2010. Halperin, Shirley (May 10, 2016). "Bruno Mars and Manager Brandon Creed Part Ways". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 11, 2016. Retrieved May 10, 2016. Sweet 7 (CD booklet). Sugababes. Island Records. 2010.{{cite AV media notes}}: CS1 maint: others in cite AV media (notes) (link) "Animal by Far East Movement FM". iTunes Store. Apple Inc. Archived from the original on November 10, 2012. Retrieved September 15, 2010. "Travis McCoy, One at a Time". Billboard. December 4, 2009. Archived from the original on December 30, 2018. Retrieved December 30, 2018. "Jaeson Ma Releases New Single Glory" (Press release). PR Newswire. November 11, 2010. Archived from the original on November 12, 2010. Retrieved November 24, 2010. "Bruno Mars – Chart history: The Hot 100". Billboard. September 12, 2008. Archived from the original on November 18, 2021. Retrieved November 30, 2014. "Bruno Mars Official Chart History". United Kingdom: Official Charts Company. May 29, 2010. Archived from the original on March 13, 2015. Retrieved September 22, 2012. "Discography Bruno Mars". Hung Medien. Archived from the original on December 1, 2015. Retrieved February 1, 2018. Wood, Mikael (August 18, 2010). "Bruno Mars Is Not Soft". The Village Voice. Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Retrieved March 16, 2015. "Bruno Mars Blasts Off into the Top Ten Albums Chart on iTunes With New Digital EP; Acclaimed Singer/Songwriter/Producer Follows B.o.B's No. 1 Blockbuster, "Nothin' On You" With Much-Anticipated Solo Debut; Four-Song EP Features Guest Appearances From B.o.B and the Legendary Cee Lo Green; Major TV Performances Slated Throughout May; "It's Better If You Don't Understand" Arrives at All Digital Retailers Today" (Press release). Marketwire. May 11, 2010. Archived from the original on June 16, 2011. Retrieved September 15, 2010. "Bruno Mars – Chart History: Billboard 200". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 17, 2021. Retrieved December 5, 2020. Rodriguez, Jayson (July 15, 2010). "Bruno Mars Shows His 'Darker' Self On 'The Other Side' Video". MTV News. Archived from the original on November 5, 2012. Retrieved September 15, 2010. The Lady Killer (liner notes). CeeLo Green (standard ed.). Elektra Records, Roadrunner Records. 2010.{{cite AV media notes}}: CS1 maint: others in cite AV media (notes) (link) "Bruno Mars Ready With New Solo Single; "Just The Way You Are" Drops July 20th, Heralding Hugely Anticipated Debut Album; Elektra Recording Artist and Acclaimed Singer/Songwriter/Producer to Join Maroon 5 and One Republic on Tour" (Press release). Marketwire. July 19, 2010. Archived from the original on July 22, 2010. Retrieved September 15, 2010. Doo-Wops & Hooligans (CD booklet). Bruno Mars. Elektra Records. 2010.{{cite AV media notes}}: CS1 maint: others in cite AV media (notes) (link) "Bruno Mars – Chart history: Billboard Canadian Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 18, 2021. Retrieved February 2, 2018. "Bruno Mars Unveils Eagerly Awaited Debut Album "Doo-Wops & Hooligans" Slated to Arrive October 5th; New Single "Just The Way You Are" Shaping Up as Massive Hit, With Top 3 Success on iTunes "Top Singles"; Sold-Out New York City Live Debut Set for Tonight, Followed by US Tour Alongside Maroon 5 in October" (Press release). Marketwire. August 25, 2010. Archived from the original on October 1, 2010. Retrieved August 25, 2010. Caulfield, Keith (October 13, 2010). "Toby Keith's 'Gun' Fires at No. 1 on Billboard 200". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 27, 2016. Retrieved October 13, 2010. "Bruno Mars – Chart History: Canadian Albums". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 18, 2021. Retrieved February 2, 2018. Redacción Entretenimiento (October 5, 2020). "Bruno Mars celebra diez años de "Doo-Wops & Hooligans"". El Espectador (in Spanish). Archived from the original on October 6, 2020. Retrieved October 6, 2020. "Bruno Mars estána trilha de "Insensato Coração"". Warner Music Brasil (in Portuguese). June 21, 2011. Archived from the original on September 30, 2011. Retrieved June 12, 2014. BPP, ed. (2011). "Billboard Brasil Hot 100 Airplay". Billboard Brasil: 78–79. "Billboard Brasil Hot Pop & Popular". Billboard Brasil (26). BPP: 144–145. December 2011 – January 2012. Corner, Lewis (August 1, 2011). "Bruno Mars: 'Marry You'". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on July 3, 2013. Retrieved October 3, 2013. "Bruno Mars – Count On Me". The Music Network (861). Australia. November 7, 2011. Archived from the original on April 3, 2012. Retrieved January 10, 2012. Caulfield, Keith (September 23, 2011). "Exclusive: Bruno Mars Says 'Breaking Dawn' Song Shows 'Darker Side of Love'". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 8, 2016. Retrieved September 15, 2016. "Bruno Mars Soars to #1 on the Billboard Hot 100 Chart With Debut Single "Just The Way You Are"; Single Lands the Top Position on UK Midweek Chart; Elektra Artist Slated for October 9th Performance on Saturday Night Live; Dates Already Sold Out on First-Ever U.S. Headline Tour; "Doo-Wops & Hooligans", Arrives October 5th" (Press release). Marketwire. September 22, 2010. Archived from the original on June 16, 2011. Retrieved September 22, 2010. Toledo, Carolina (January 25, 2012). "Summer Soul Festival 2012 – Bruno Mars, Florence and The Machine, Rox, Dionne Bromfield e Seu Jorge". Omelete (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on July 1, 2018. Retrieved December 7, 2014. Wete, Brad (February 15, 2011). "Bruno Mars and Janelle Monae announce 'Hooligans in Wondaland' tour". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on February 16, 2011. Retrieved February 15, 2011. Lipshutz, Jason (February 15, 2011). "Bruno Mars and Janelle Monae Announce Joint Tour". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 28, 2013. Retrieved February 15, 2011. O'Malley Greenburg, Zack (January 6, 2014). "From Cereal To Super Bowl: The Evolution of Bruno Mars". Forbes. Archived from the original on February 9, 2014. Retrieved March 1, 2014. Peters, Mitchell (September 10, 2013). "WME's John Marx on Bruno Mars' Super Bowl Gig, Sold-Out Arena Tour Strategy, Not Having Presales (Q&A)". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 12, 2013. Retrieved September 10, 2013. "Grammy awards 2011: list of winners". The Guardian. February 14, 2011. Archived from the original on September 21, 2013. Retrieved May 5, 2013. "Final Nominations List: 53rd Grammy Awards" (PDF). Naras. National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences. 2010. Archived (PDF) from the original on December 14, 2010. Retrieved December 2, 2010. "Grammy Awards 2012: Winners and nominees list". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on February 16, 2012. Retrieved June 30, 2013. Spahr, Wolfgang (March 23, 2012). "Adele Wins, Katy Perry Performs at 2012 German ECHO Awards in Berlin". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 11, 2014. Retrieved February 25, 2013. See below on the Achievements section the links for these awards. Williams, Paul (March 22, 2012). "BMG Chrysalis captures Bruno Mars". Music Week. Archived from the original on August 31, 2013. Retrieved March 26, 2012. Billboard Staff (September 28, 2012). "Bruno Mars to Release 'Unorthodox Jukebox' Dec. 11: Exclusive". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 24, 2013. Retrieved September 29, 2012. Trust, Gary (December 27, 2012). "Bruno Mars Debuts at No. 2 as Taylor Swift's 'Red' Still Rules". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 24, 2017. Retrieved January 7, 2012. "Official Albums Chart Analysis: Mars at No.1 with 136k first week sales". Music Week. December 17, 2012. Archived from the original on December 17, 2012. Retrieved December 17, 2012. Marsh, Joanne (March 8, 2016). "Bruno Mars to release third studio album later this year". NME. Archived from the original on February 26, 2017. Retrieved February 25, 2017. Trust, Gary (April 10, 2013). "Bruno Mars Lands Fifth Hot 100 No. 1 With 'When I Was Your Man'". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 13, 2013. Retrieved April 11, 2013. "Bubble Butt (Remix) [feat. Bruno Mars, 2 Chainz, Tyga and Mystic]" (in French). 7digital FR. Archived from the original on December 31, 2013. Retrieved December 28, 2013. Lipshutz, Jason (February 20, 2013). "Bruno Mars Unveils Massive 'Moonshine Jungle' World Tour". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 29, 2013. Retrieved May 10, 2013. Clarke, Norm (February 5, 2014). "Cosmo cheers Bruno Mars' new orbit". Las Vegas Review-Journal. Archived from the original on January 29, 2020. Retrieved January 30, 2020. "2013 Top 20 Worldwide Tours Chart" (PDF). Pollstar. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 24, 2015. Retrieved September 15, 2016. "2014 Top 20 Worldwide Tours Chart" (PDF). Pollstar. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 24, 2015. Retrieved September 15, 2016. Hampp, Andrew (October 14, 2013). "Why The NFL and Pepsi Booked – But Didn't Pay – Bruno Mars For Super Bowl XLVIII (From the Magazine)". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 16, 2013. Retrieved November 3, 2013. Dolan, Jon (February 2, 2014). "Bruno Mars Brings Drum Solos, Chili Peppers, Nostalgia to Super Bowl". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 10, 2014. Retrieved May 3, 2014. M. Watson, Denise (February 1, 2014). "Bruno Mars will have all eyes on the halftime show". The Virginian-Pilot. Archived from the original on February 2, 2014. Retrieved May 3, 2014. Gallo, Phil (February 3, 2014). "Bruno Mars' Super Bowl Halftime Show Attracts Record Audience of 115.3 Million". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 12, 2018. Retrieved January 31, 2018. Gallo, Phil (February 2, 2015). "Katy Perry's Halftime Show the Most-Watched in Super Bowl History". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 4, 2015. Retrieved February 3, 2015. Los Angeles Times Staff (January 26, 2015). "Grammys 2014: The complete list of nominees and winners". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on March 4, 2015. Retrieved December 7, 2015. "2014 Juno Gala Dinner & Awards Winners" (PDF). Juno. March 29, 2014. Archived (PDF) from the original on April 26, 2014. Retrieved March 30, 2014. "Twentieth Century Fox Animation Announces RIO 2 Casting". Business Wire. February 22, 2013. Archived from the original on June 30, 2009. Retrieved February 28, 2013. "'Rio 2': Bruno Mars chante 'Welcome Back' pour la bande originale du film" (in French). Pure Charts. March 27, 2013. Archived from the original on December 4, 2020. Retrieved March 29, 2013. Daw, Robbie (October 30, 2014). "Mark Ronson Announces "Uptown Funk" Single, Featuring Bruno Mars". Idolator. Archived from the original on November 1, 2014. Retrieved November 1, 2014. Gibsone, Harriet (December 9, 2014). "The Uptown Funk phenomenon: Cara, Cowell and the components of its success". The Guardian. Archived from the original on April 6, 2019. Retrieved April 28, 2019. Redfearn, Dominique (October 6, 2016). "What We Know About The New Bruno Mars Album So Far". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 29, 2018. Retrieved September 22, 2017. Guardian Staff (February 16, 2016). "Grammy awards winners: the full list". The Guardian. Archived from the original on February 21, 2016. Retrieved April 20, 2016. Atkinson, Katie (September 8, 2015). "Bruno Mars Wouldn't Be the First Repeat Super Bowl Halftime Performer". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 11, 2015. Retrieved September 10, 2015. McRady, Rachel (December 3, 2015). "Coldplay to Headline Super Bowl 2016 Halftime Show: Details! – Us Weekly". Us Weekly. Archived from the original on January 2, 2016. Retrieved December 31, 2015. O'Connell, Michael (February 8, 2016). "TV Ratings: Super Bowl 50 Falls Shy of Record With 111.9 Million Viewers". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on February 8, 2016. Retrieved February 10, 2016. Earls, John (September 6, 2016). "Bruno Mars will release new album 'sometime this year'". NME. Archived from the original on October 10, 2016. Retrieved September 7, 2016. Medved, Matt (June 9, 2016). "Skrillex Talks Working With Bruno Mars: 'It Sounds Like Nothing Else That's Happened Before' (Exclusive)". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 14, 2016. Retrieved June 14, 2016. Harada, Wayne (February 28, 2016). "Bruno Mars' dad developing family show concept on isle". PressReader. Archived from the original on October 9, 2016. Retrieved March 5, 2016. Roberts, Randall (November 28, 2017). "The mysterious production team Shampoo Press & Curl earns nods for Bruno Mars' 24K Magic". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on February 2, 2018. Retrieved February 1, 2018. O'Malley Greenburg, Zack (July 17, 2018). "$100M Magic: Why Bruno Mars And Other Stars Are Ditching Their Managers". Forbes. Archived from the original on July 17, 2018. Retrieved July 18, 2018. 25 (booklet). Adele. London: XL Records. 2015.{{cite AV media notes}}: CS1 maint: others in cite AV media (notes) (link) "Grammy Award winners 2017: Complete list". The Washington Post. February 12, 2017. Archived from the original on August 21, 2017. Retrieved February 2, 2018. Glenday, Craig (2016). Guinness World Records 2017. Jim Pattison Group. pp. 178–180. ISBN 978-1-910561-34-8. Billboard Staff (October 6, 2016). "Bruno Mars Unveils '24k Magic' Song & Video: Watch". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 7, 2016. Retrieved October 7, 2016. Caulfield, Keith (November 28, 2016). "Metallica Rocks With Sixth No. 1 Album on Billboard 200 Chart". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 23, 2019. Retrieved November 28, 2016. Goncalves, Julien (October 17, 2019). "Bruno Mars de retour en studio : son quatrième album en préparation?" (in French). Pure Charts. Archived from the original on January 15, 2020. Retrieved March 10, 2020. Tuskan, Peter (November 30, 2017). "Most Added: Bruno Mars edges out Promising Newcomer with "Chunky"". The Music Network. Archived from the original on December 4, 2017. Retrieved December 3, 2017. "Bruno Mars – Chart history: Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 28, 2021. Retrieved November 28, 2021. McRady, Rachel (October 10, 2016). "Exclusive: Bruno Mars Partners With MGM Resorts International for the Next Two Years". Entertainment Tonight. Archived from the original on January 29, 2020. Retrieved January 29, 2020. Kaufman, Gil (September 12, 2017). "Bruno Mars Prepping First Primetime Special: 'Bruno Mars: 24K Magic Live at the Apollo'". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 14, 2017. Retrieved September 17, 2017. Billboard Staff (November 19, 2017). "Here Are All the Winners From the 2017 AMAs". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 20, 2019. Retrieved November 20, 2017. Nordyke, Kimberly (November 26, 2017). "BET Soul Train Awards: Bruno Mars Tops With 5 Wins". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 24, 2018. Retrieved April 23, 2018. Atkinson, Katie (January 28, 2018). "Grammys 2018 Winners: The Complete List". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 8, 2018. Retrieved January 29, 2018. Wicks, Amanda; Kim, Michelle (April 22, 2018). "Nile Rodgers Says Haim, Bruno Mars, More Working on New CHIC Album". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on April 22, 2018. Retrieved April 23, 2018. Earls, John (August 5, 2019). "Nile Rodgers reveals Bruno Mars told him how to make their collab a hit". NME. Archived from the original on August 5, 2019. Retrieved August 6, 2019. Friend, David (January 25, 2018). "Grammy-winning Canadian sound engineer on finding gold with Bruno Mars". National Post. Archived from the original on March 5, 2024. Retrieved December 1, 2020. LeGarreta, Raina (February 9, 2018). "Production with finesse". Elk Grove Citizen. Archived from the original on February 10, 2018. Retrieved May 8, 2021. Pierre, Alphonse (September 17, 2018). "The Ones: 5 Best New Rap Songs From 6LACK, Noname, Gucci Mane, Lowkey, and NgeeYL". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on April 7, 2020. Retrieved March 15, 2020. Legaspy, Althea (February 15, 2019). "Hear Cardi B, Bruno Mars' Flirtatious New Song 'Please Me'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on February 15, 2019. Retrieved February 16, 2019. Billboard Staff (July 5, 2019). "Ed Sheeran Drops Bruno Mars-Assisted "Blow" and "Best Part of Me"". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 5, 2019. Retrieved July 5, 2019. Rowley, Glenn (October 16, 2019). "Fans Are Flipping Over This New Pic Of Bruno Mars in the Studio". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 16, 2019. Retrieved October 16, 2019. Aniftos, Rania (February 6, 2020). "Bruno Mars to Star in & Co-Produce Disney Theatrical Film". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 14, 2020. Retrieved February 7, 2020. Katsilometes, John (March 26, 2020). "Bruno Mars cuts $1M check to MGM Resorts assistance fund". Las Vegas Review-Journal. Archived from the original on March 26, 2020. Retrieved March 26, 2020. Radke, Brock (March 6, 2020). "Best Bets: Bruno Mars, Chicago, Tom Segura and more for your Las Vegas weekend". Las Vegas Sun. Archived from the original on November 9, 2020. Retrieved December 1, 2020. Santos, Camille (April 22, 2020). "Bruno Mars promises He's Hard at Work on New Music While on Quarantine". Myx. Archived from the original on October 19, 2020. Retrieved December 6, 2020. Christman, Ed (May 24, 2021). "Bruno Mars Sells Part of Song Catalog to Warner Chappell Music". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 2, 2021. Retrieved September 2, 2021. Washburn, Emily (January 23, 2023). "Beyoncé Reportedly Pocketed At Least $24 Million For Private 'Atlantis The Royal' Performance — Here's Where She Lands In The Top 10 Most Expensive Private Performances". Forbes. Archived from the original on January 27, 2023. Retrieved January 27, 2023. Gallagher, Alex (February 26, 2021). "Bruno Mars and Anderson .Paak form new band Silk Sonic, announce album". NME. Archived from the original on February 26, 2021. Retrieved February 26, 2021. "Bruno Mars and Anderson .Paak Reveal New Silk Sonic Album Release Date". Pitchfork. October 8, 2021. Archived from the original on November 21, 2021. Retrieved November 21, 2021. "Taylor Swift Scores 10th No. 1 Album on Billboard 200 Chart with 'Red (Taylor's Version)'". Billboard. November 21, 2021. Archived from the original on November 23, 2021. Retrieved November 28, 2021. Anderson, Trevor (November 17, 2022). "Silk Sonic Scores Again as 'After Last Night' Hits No. 1 on Adult R&B Airplay". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 18, 2022. Retrieved November 18, 2022. Paul, Larisha (January 19, 2022). "Bruno Mars and Anderson .Paak Hit Vegas for Silk Sonic Residency". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on February 23, 2022. Retrieved February 24, 2022. Clark, Anne Victoria (June 27, 2021). "Megan Thee Stallion Leads the 2021 BET Awards Winners". Vulture. Archived from the original on June 28, 2021. Retrieved July 4, 2021. Grein, Paul (February 2, 2022). "Adele Dominates 2022 Brit Awards: Full List of Winners". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 14, 2022. Retrieved February 12, 2022. Nordyke, Kimberly (February 24, 2022). "NAACP Image Awards: Jazmine Sullivan, Silk Sonic Among Winners From Night 4 of Non-Televised Ceremonies". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 29, 2022. Retrieved February 28, 2022. Imarenezor, Christine (November 28, 2021). "Soul Train Awards 2021: See The Complete Winners List". Vibe. Archived from the original on November 30, 2021. Retrieved November 30, 2021. Atkinson, Katie (April 4, 2022). "Here Are the 2022 Grammy Awards Winners: Full List". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 26, 2022. Retrieved April 4, 2022. Germain, Tabie (June 26, 2022). "BET Awards 2022: Full List of Winners and Honorees (LIVE UPDATE)". BET. Archived from the original on June 27, 2022. Retrieved June 27, 2022. Grein, Paul (November 26, 2021). "Beyoncé Wins Big at 2022 Soul Train Awards: Full Winners List". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 27, 2022. Retrieved November 27, 2021. Kawashima, Dale (February 22, 2023). "7-Time Grammy Winner Brody Brown Talks About Co-Writing Big Hits For Bruno Mars And Silk Sonic, And His Solo Album, The Kick Back". SongwriterUniverse. Archived from the original on February 24, 2023. Retrieved February 24, 2023. Trev (May 22, 2023). "Bruno Mars to release first new solo album in 7 years". WHTQ. Archived from the original on March 5, 2024. Retrieved June 11, 2023. Brooks, Dave (October 9, 2023). "Bruno Mars Evacuated Israel So Quickly Amid Terrorist Attacks, He Left His Band's Gear Behind". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 10, 2023. Retrieved October 10, 2023. Singh, Surej (January 19, 2024). "Bruno Mars adds third and final concert in Singapore this April". NME. Archived from the original on February 2, 2024. Retrieved February 2, 2024. Caramanica, Jon (October 5, 2010). "Bruno Mars in Ascension". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 17, 2022. Retrieved October 7, 2010. Binkert, Lisa (October 21, 2010). "Bruno Mars Live: Billboard Tastemakers". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 27, 2016. Retrieved November 15, 2010. Hope, Clover (October 4, 2010). "Bruno Mars on Damian Marley Track, Hip-Hop Influences, B.o.B." Vibe. Archived from the original on July 9, 2015. Retrieved February 1, 2011. Eells, Josh (November 2, 2016). "Bruno Mars: The Private Anxiety of a Pop Perfectionist". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on November 3, 2016. Retrieved November 2, 2016. Fulton, Rick (November 30, 2012). "Bruno Mars: Every artist should want to be like Michael Jackson". Daily Record. Archived from the original on March 20, 2015. Retrieved March 14, 2015. Farber, Jim (October 3, 2010). "Bruno Mars follows his summer of hits with a big debut album 'Doo-Wops & Hooligans'". Daily News. Archived from the original on October 6, 2010. Retrieved December 26, 2010. Powers, Ann (July 24, 2013). "Bruno Mars Is More Than Your Average Pop Star". NPR. Archived from the original on March 14, 2015. Retrieved March 14, 2015. Bellissimo, Sarina (June 1, 2013). "Sarina Bellissimo interviews Bruno Mars". BBC Radio 1. Archived from the original on October 28, 2021. Retrieved February 21, 2019. "Bruno Mars Reveals Amy Winehouse As Surprise Influence On Unorthodox Jukebox". Contactmusic.com. December 12, 2012. Archived from the original on January 16, 2017. Retrieved January 14, 2017. "Artist Influences for Bruno Mars", MTV, archived from the original on June 17, 2016, retrieved December 13, 2016 Copsey, Robert (January 20, 2011). "Bruno Mars 'in awe' of Alicia Keys". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on January 24, 2011. Retrieved February 6, 2011. Cohen, Sandy (October 4, 2010). "Music Review: Singer-songwriter-producer Bruno Mars shows range and pop flair on debut CD". The News. The Canadian Press. Archived from the original on October 11, 2011. Retrieved February 5, 2011. Mervis, Scott (October 7, 2010). "For the Record: Bruno Mars". Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. Archived from the original on October 11, 2011. Retrieved October 16, 2010. St. Asaph, Katherine (December 2, 2016). "Bruno Mars: 24K Magic Album Review". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on April 20, 2017. Retrieved April 21, 2017. Greenblatt, Leah (September 29, 2010). "Doo-Wops & Hooligans (2010)". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on October 19, 2012. Retrieved September 29, 2010. Fusilli, Jim (November 18, 2016). "'24K Magic' by Bruno Mars Review: A Soundtrack for '80s and '90s Pop Nostalgia". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on December 21, 2019. Retrieved July 18, 2018. Rosen, Jody (October 5, 2010). "Bruno Mars: Doo-Wops & Hooligans". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on October 7, 2010. Retrieved October 5, 2010. Billboard Staff (August 6, 2010). "Bruno Mars, "Just the Way You Are"". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 28, 2013. Retrieved October 16, 2010. Maerz, Melissa (December 7, 2012). "Unorthodox Jukebox – review – Bruno Mars Review". Entertainment Weekly. No. 1237. Archived from the original on January 17, 2013. Retrieved December 7, 2012. Yang, Emily (October 5, 2010). "Album Review: Doo-Wops & Hooligans". The Signal. Archived from the original on April 5, 2015. Retrieved October 15, 2010. Hyman, Dan (December 12, 2012). "Bruno Mars, 'Unorthodox Jukebox'". Spin. Archived from the original on January 17, 2013. Retrieved April 15, 2013. Rosen, Jody (December 11, 2012). "Unorthodox Jukebox". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on July 15, 2013. Retrieved December 11, 2012. Chan, Andrew (December 9, 2012). "Bruno Mars: Unorthodox Jukebox". Slant Magazine. Archived from the original on December 3, 2013. Retrieved December 9, 2012. Freymark, Susanna (September 12, 2013). "Girls education campaigner calls for ban on sexualised Bruno Mars song 'Gorilla'". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on March 30, 2015. Retrieved September 25, 2013. Carroll, Jim (November 15, 2016). "Bruno Mars – 24K Magic album review: Once more around funky planet of sound". Irish Times. Archived from the original on November 16, 2016. Retrieved November 15, 2016. R. Weingarten, Christopher (November 18, 2016). "Review: Bruno Mars' '24k Magic' Is a Lush Nineties Throwback". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on November 20, 2016. Retrieved November 19, 2016. Wroble, Jonathan (November 17, 2016). "Bruno Mars: 24K Magic". Slant Magazine. Archived from the original on November 19, 2016. Retrieved June 29, 2017. Pareles, Jon (November 12, 2021). "Bruno Mars and Anderson .Paak Revisit Vintage Luxury as Silk Sonic". The New York Times. Archived from the original on February 7, 2023. Retrieved November 12, 2021. Deville, Chris (November 15, 2021). "With Silk Sonic, Bruno Mars & Anderson .Paak Set Their Time Machine To '70s Funk & Soul". Stereogum. Archived from the original on October 28, 2022. Retrieved February 16, 2023. Sowing (November 15, 2021). "Silk Sonic An Evening with Silk Sonic". Sputnikmusic. Archived from the original on January 26, 2022. Retrieved November 15, 2021. Sendra, Tim. "AllMusic (((Doo-Wops & Hooligans > Overview)))". AllMusic. Archived from the original on April 4, 2023. Retrieved March 16, 2015. Farber, Jim (June 30, 2013). "Bruno's shining '70s show just Mars-velous during NYC stop". Daily News. Archived from the original on February 15, 2020. Retrieved June 30, 2013. Gwee, Karen (November 22, 2016). "Bruno Mars – 24K Magic". Consequence of Sound. Archived from the original on November 23, 2016. Retrieved November 24, 2016. Caramanica, Jon (November 23, 2016). "Review: Bruno Mars Delivers Decades of Funk in '24K Magic'". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 23, 2016. Retrieved October 23, 2018. Cerini, Marianna (March 24, 2015). "Bruno Mars talks Grammies, songwriting and Elvis ahead of his Shanghai show". that's Shanghai. Archived from the original on December 22, 2015. Retrieved December 6, 2015. Crone, Madeline (March 5, 2021). "Bruno Mars and Anderson .Paak "Leave the Door Open" for Their New Band, Silk Sonic". American Songwriter. Archived from the original on November 17, 2021. Retrieved March 5, 2021. Rogers, Ray (November 10, 2014). "Mark Ronson Says New Single With Bruno Mars 'Uptown Funk' Is a Milestone for Both of Them". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 30, 2019. Retrieved November 23, 2014. Orr, Gillian (December 9, 2012). "Meet the opinionated Bruno Mars". The Independent. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved March 30, 2015. Tingen, Paul (June 2011). "Ari Levine & The Smeezingtons: Producing Bruno Mars". Sound on Sound. SOS Publications Group. Archived from the original on April 29, 2016. Retrieved July 27, 2013. Varga, George (June 9, 2011). "Bruno Mars speaks: Up to the stars". The San Diego Union-Tribune. Archived from the original on May 16, 2018. Retrieved May 15, 2018. Strauss, Matthew (November 12, 2021). "Bruno Mars and Anderson .Paak Release New Album An Evening With Silk Sonic: Listen and Read the Full Credits". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on November 12, 2021. Retrieved November 12, 2021. Instrumentation credits for Bruno Mars: It's Better If You Don't Understand (Digital booklet). Bruno Mars. Atlantic Records, Elektra Records, Fueled by Ramed. 2010.{{cite AV media notes}}: CS1 maint: others in cite AV media (notes) (link) Unorthodox Jukebox (CD liner). Bruno Mars. Atlantic Records. 533064-2.{{cite AV media notes}}: CS1 maint: others in cite AV media (notes) (link) B.o.B Presents: The Adventures of Bobby Ray (CD booklet). B.o.B. Grand Hustle Records, Rebel Rock, Atlantic Records. 2010.{{cite AV media notes}}: CS1 maint: others in cite AV media (notes) (link) The Lady Killer (liner notes). CeeLo Green (standard ed.). Elektra Records, Roadrunner Records. 2010.{{cite AV media notes}}: CS1 maint: others in cite AV media (notes) (link) Sweet 7 (liner notes). Sugababes (standard ed.). Island, Roc Nation. 2010.{{cite AV media notes}}: CS1 maint: others in cite AV media (notes) (link) Lazarus (liner notes). Travie McCoy (standard ed.). Atlantic Records, Decaydance Records, Fueled by Ramen. 2011.{{cite AV media notes}}: CS1 maint: others in cite AV media (notes) (link) Nick & Knight (inlay cover). Nick & Knight. Nick & Knight, Mass Appeal, BMG. 2014.{{cite AV media notes}}: CS1 maint: others in cite AV media (notes) (link) Uptown Special (album liner notes). Mark Ronson. Sony Music Entertainment UK Limited. 2015.{{cite AV media notes}}: CS1 maint: others in cite AV media (notes) (link) No.6 Collaborations Project (CD booklet). Ed Sheeran. Asylum Records, Atlantic Records. 2019.{{cite AV media notes}}: CS1 maint: others in cite AV media (notes) (link) An Evening with Silk Sonic (CD booklet). Silk Sonic. United States: Aftermath, Atlantic. 2021. 2-661922.{{cite AV media notes}}: CS1 maint: others in cite AV media (notes) (link) Johnson, Kevin C. (November 24, 2010). "Bruno Mars learned music biz by collaborating with big acts". STL Daily. Archived from the original on October 13, 2012. Retrieved December 23, 2010. Sullivan, Jim (December 1, 2010). "Mars is out of this world". Boston Herald. Archived from the original on August 25, 2012. Retrieved December 1, 2010.(Subscription required.) Rodman, Sarah (June 27, 2013). "Bruno Mars exudes energy". The Boston Globe. Archived from the original on June 30, 2013. Retrieved June 28, 2013. Farber, Jim (June 30, 2013). "Super Bowl halftime show star Bruno Mars brings old-school showmanship to dynamic performance". Daily News. Archived from the original on February 15, 2020. Retrieved June 30, 2013. Ramsay, Deanna (April 10, 2011). "Bruno Mars: Jakarta can't get enough". The Jakarta Post. Archived from the original on April 10, 2011. Retrieved October 14, 2016. C. Johnson, Kevin (August 9, 2013). "Bruno Mars is consummate showman at Scottrade Center". St. Louis Post-Dispatch. Archived from the original on August 20, 2014. Retrieved March 30, 2015. Jansan, Ara (April 14, 2011). "Music Review: Bruno Mars". The West Australian. Archived from the original on July 7, 2018. Retrieved May 29, 2018. Ham, Robert (June 6, 2011). "Bruno Mars oozes confidence and charm in 'Hooligans' tour (review)". The Oregonian. Archived from the original on July 7, 2018. Retrieved May 29, 2018. Lipshutz, Jason (June 25, 2013). "Bruno Mars Romps Through 'Moonshine Jungle' Tour in Philadelphia: Live Review". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 28, 2013. Retrieved February 22, 2014. "50 Best Live Bands; Best Live Musicians". Rolling Stone. July 31, 2013. Archived from the original on April 3, 2015. Retrieved March 30, 2015. Mitchell, Gail (December 13, 2013). "Bruno Mars: Billboard Artist of the Year Cover Story". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 14, 2013. Retrieved December 13, 2013. Kwan, Tammy (July 17, 2017). "Bruno Mars and his infectious tunes get the crowd dancing all night at sold-out Vancouver gig". The Georgia Straight. Archived from the original on December 7, 2019. Retrieved December 7, 2019. Sendejas, Jesse Jr. (October 25, 2017). "Bruno Mars Plays His Superstar Role to the Hilt at Toyota Center". Houston Press. Archived from the original on April 3, 2018. Retrieved December 1, 2019. McCormick, Neil (April 19, 2017). "Showmanship of the highest order – Bruno Mars, O2, review". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on July 31, 2017. Retrieved August 4, 2017. 24K Magic World Tour awards Borba, Ryan (February 2, 2018). "Pollstar Awards Winners: Tom Petty, Cara Lewis, Gregg Perloff, Bruno Mars". Pollstar. Archived from the original on February 4, 2019. Retrieved May 9, 2018. Billboard Staff (May 10, 2018). "Here Are All the Winners From the 2018 Billboard Music Awards". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 24, 2018. Retrieved May 21, 2018. "The 33rd annual NAMM TEC Awards Winners". TEC Foundation for Excellence in Audio, Inc. NAMM Foundation. Archived from the original on January 30, 2018. Retrieved January 29, 2018. Lynch, Joe (May 1, 2019). "2019 Billboard Music Awards Winners: The Complete List". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 16, 2019. Retrieved May 2, 2019. Wilman, Chris (April 8, 2022). "Billboard Awards Nominations Led by the Weeknd, Doja Cat, Kanye West, Olivia Rodrigo and Justin Bieber". Variety. Archived from the original on April 8, 2022. Retrieved April 9, 2022. Copsey, Robert (October 9, 2013). "Bruno Mars live at London's O2 Arena – Review". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on December 5, 2014. Retrieved April 1, 2015. Herald, NZ (April 19, 2011). "Concert Review: Bruno Mars, Vector Arena". The New Zealand Herald. Archived from the original on July 8, 2018. Retrieved May 29, 2018. Hoby, Hermione (February 3, 2014). "Bruno Mars' Super Bowl halftime show spiced by much-needed Chili Peppers". The Guardian. Archived from the original on May 9, 2015. Retrieved April 1, 2015. Bender, Kelli (February 2, 2014). "What It Looks Like When the Internet Dances Along with Bruno Mars". People. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved April 1, 2015. Willman, Chris (June 16, 2021). "Pollstar Awards Laud Beyonce, Lady Gaga, Garth Brooks and Others as Touring Artists of the Decade". Variety. Michelle Sobrino. Archived from the original on July 5, 2021. Retrieved July 5, 2021. Phull, Hardeep (August 25, 2017). "This guy once lent Bruno Mars a jacket; now, they're a creative dream team". New York Post. Archived from the original on November 12, 2020. Retrieved December 25, 2020. McCandless, Brit (November 21, 2016). "Bruno Mars on songwriting: "It has to sound like me"". 60 Minutes. Archived from the original on December 18, 2016. Retrieved November 24, 2016. Montgomery, James (October 15, 2012). "Bruno Mars Has 'Old-Fashioned Fun' In 'Locked Out Of Heaven' Video". MTV News. Archived from the original on April 8, 2020. Retrieved May 28, 2020. Willman, Chris (August 25, 2017). "How a Country Music Bassist Made 'Magic' With Bruno Mars and Nabbed Four VMA Nominations". Variety. Archived from the original on September 25, 2020. Retrieved December 25, 2020. "Florent Déchard Work". Florent Déchard. Archived from the original on November 1, 2020. Retrieved December 25, 2020. Willis, Kim (August 26, 2013). "MTV VMAs: The winners and nominees". USA Today. Archived from the original on August 26, 2013. Retrieved September 8, 2013. Lipshutz, Jason (August 30, 2015). "MTV Video Music Awards 2015: The Winners Are..." Billboard. Archived from the original on September 13, 2015. Retrieved November 19, 2017. "VMAs 2017: The Complete Winners List". Rolling Stone. August 28, 2017. Archived from the original on August 28, 2017. Retrieved August 28, 2017. Billboard Staff (October 8, 2019). "BET Hip Hop Awards 2019: Complete Winners List". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 9, 2019. Retrieved October 10, 2019. Billboard Staff (June 25, 2017). "Here Is the Complete List of BET Awards 2017 Winners". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 26, 2017. Retrieved June 26, 2017. Sanchez, Omar (September 8, 2018). "Creative Arts Emmys: Complete Winners List". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 9, 2018. Retrieved September 9, 2018. Atkinson, Katie (September 9, 2012). "2021 MTV VMAs Winners: Complete List". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 13, 2021. Retrieved September 15, 2021. Petak, Tessa (July 21, 2022). "Bruno Mars's '70s Style is a Celebration of Short King Summer". InStyle. Archived from the original on July 24, 2022. Retrieved July 24, 2022. "Why Bruno Mars Believes Clothes Make the Album". Billboard. November 17, 2016. Archived from the original on March 28, 2020. Retrieved March 28, 2020. Colurso, Mary (June 12, 2014). "Bruno Mars and the Hooligans provide dizzying fun with 'Moonshine Jungle' concert in Birmingham". The Birmingham News. Archived from the original on August 7, 2016. Retrieved June 24, 2016. McCollum, Brian (April 8, 2015). "Phredley Brown sets solo course amid Bruno Mars success". Detroit Free Press. Archived from the original on October 29, 2020. Retrieved February 5, 2019. Ritschel, Chelsea (January 3, 2019). "Bruno Mars gave each of his bandmates a $55k watch". The Independent. Archived from the original on May 6, 2019. Retrieved December 1, 2019. @DwayneDuggarII (October 15, 2022). "our brother @philsmeeze is back!" (Tweet) – via Twitter. Mateus Asato Bodegon, Kara (July 19, 2019). "Mateus Asato talks touring life, working with pop stars, and how he gets his hair so pretty". Bandwagon. Archived from the original on March 6, 2022. Retrieved March 24, 2022. Brazilian Times Staff (March 9, 2021). "Guitarrista brasileiro fala sobre emoção de tocar para Bruno Mars". Brazilian Times (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on March 6, 2022. Retrieved March 24, 2022. Miranda, Igor (January 11, 2023). "Vídeo mostra Mateus Asato na plateia de Bruno Mars anos antes de tocar com ele". Rolling Stone Brasil (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on September 19, 2023. Retrieved September 13, 2023. Scordilis, Dean (July 15, 2015). "Interview with letlive.: Patience, Character, And Strength". The Aquarian Weekly. Archived from the original on March 20, 2020. Retrieved January 17, 2020. Phredley Brown [@phredley] (January 9, 2022). "First show I've ever played on my birthday! Thanks for the bday love katyperry What a fun show to be a part of! Come see us PLAY in Vegas!" (Tweet) – via Twitter. Sison, Steph (August 29, 2017). "All the Bench International Endorsers in the Last 30 Years". Preview Magazine. Archived from the original on March 30, 2019. Retrieved November 24, 2019. Campion, Freddie (June 2011). "Bruno Mars/Craig McDean". Vogue. Archived from the original on June 3, 2020. Retrieved June 3, 2018. Shontell, Alyson (November 15, 2012). "Hey Look, Bruno Mars Is Investing in Startups". Business Insider. Archived from the original on March 22, 2014. Retrieved March 21, 2014. Moreno, Carolina (June 3, 2013). "Bruno Mars Invests in NJOY Electronic Cigarette Company, Started Using Product For Mom". HuffPost. Archived from the original on February 3, 2014. Retrieved January 30, 2014. Smith, Morgan (August 13, 2023). "Bruno Mars credits his success to this one skill—and it's not musical talent: 'It's become the most important thing for me'". CNBC. Archived from the original on August 14, 2023. Retrieved August 15, 2023. Krader, Kate (November 20, 2020). "Celebrities Are Cashing In on Tequila, But Bruno Mars Bets on Rum". Bloomberg L.P. Archived from the original on November 29, 2020. Retrieved November 21, 2020. Saunders, Tanner (November 20, 2020). "Bruno Mars Wants You to Know His Rum Collection Is 'Vacation in a Glass'". Travel + Leisure. Archived from the original on November 20, 2020. Retrieved November 21, 2020. Imarenezor, Christine (June 3, 2021). "Bruno Mars's SelvaRey Coconut Rum Campaign Is Kicking Off Summer". Vibe. Archived from the original on June 3, 2021. Retrieved June 3, 2021. Simon, Samantha (June 3, 2021). "Bruno Mars Wants to Give People "An Outlet of Joy After Quarantine"". InStyle. Archived from the original on June 7, 2021. Retrieved June 7, 2021. Maoui, Zak (February 27, 2021). "Exclusive: Lacoste's first-ever musical collaboration is with Bruno Mars". GQ. Archived from the original on February 27, 2021. Retrieved February 27, 2021. Allaire, Christian (February 27, 2021). "Bruno Mars's First Clothing Line Channels His Alter Ego". Vogue. Archived from the original on February 27, 2021. Retrieved February 27, 2021. Wright, Johnathan L. (July 29, 2022). "Bruno Mars to open new lounge on the Strip, sources say". Las Vegas Review-Journal. Archived from the original on July 29, 2022. Retrieved July 29, 2022. Wright, Johnathan L. (November 29, 2022). "Bruno Mars announces debut of his jazz bar on the Strip". Las Vegas Review-Journal. Archived from the original on January 1, 2024. Retrieved February 11, 2024. Lilly, Caitlin (July 29, 2022). "Opening date set for Bruno Mars' cocktail lounge on Las Vegas Strip". Las Vegas Review-Journal. Archived from the original on February 7, 2024. Retrieved July 29, 2022. Roberts, Rachel (November 7, 2023). ""We're confident this will be one of our largest signature launches to date": Fender partners with Bruno Mars for his first-ever signature guitar". Guitar.com. Archived from the original on November 7, 2023. Retrieved November 7, 2023. Muhammad, Latifah (November 7, 2023). "Bruno Mars Teams With Fender to Release His Own Signature Guitar: Where to Buy the Limited-Edition Stratocaster". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 8, 2023. Retrieved November 9, 2023. Naras (February 26, 2014). "Grammy Foundation Launches Bruno Mars Scholarship Fund". The Recording Academy. Archived from the original on March 2, 2014. Retrieved February 26, 2014. McPahte, Tim (September 27, 2017). "Bruno Mars Expands Grammy Camp Scholarship Support". The Recording Academy. Archived from the original on February 1, 2018. Retrieved October 7, 2017. Policarpio, Allan (March 23, 2014). "Bruno Mars roars in Manila leg of concert tour". Philippine Daily Inquirer. Archived from the original on October 13, 2016. Retrieved October 12, 2016. Philippines, MYX. "Bruno Mars' "Treasure" For Kids Affected By Typhoon Yolanda". Myx. Archived from the original on June 30, 2017. Retrieved March 21, 2014. Emery, Debbie (April 25, 2014). "Brad Pitt Launches New 'Make It Right' Campaign With Groupon". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 29, 2014. Retrieved April 26, 2014. "2014 Robin Hood Benefit". Robin Hood. May 12, 2014. Archived from the original on April 25, 2016. Retrieved June 8, 2020. Graff, Gary (August 13, 2017). "Bruno Mars Donates $1 Million to Flint Water Crisis Efforts at Michigan Concert". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 13, 2017. Retrieved September 9, 2017. Cantor-Navas, Judy (September 27, 2017). "Marc Anthony and Jennifer Lopez Plan Major Humanitarian Relief Campaign 'Somos Una Voz'". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 29, 2017. Retrieved October 1, 2017. Peters, Mitchell (November 11, 2018). "Bruno Mars to Help Provide Meals for 24K Hawaiians This Thanksgiving". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 18, 2018. Retrieved November 18, 2018. Blistein, Jon (November 25, 2020). "Paul McCartney, the Weeknd, John Legend Donate Microphones for Charity Sale". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on November 27, 2020. Retrieved November 29, 2020. Sayej, Nadja (November 26, 2020). "'Sisterhood of sorrow': an art auction for families of black women killed by police". The Guardian. Archived from the original on November 30, 2020. Retrieved December 1, 2020. Feilden, Eloise (September 17, 2021). "Bruno Mars donates rum profits to Hawaii music education". The Drinks Business. Archived from the original on September 20, 2021. Retrieved September 20, 2021. Katsilometes, John (October 17, 2021). "Bruno Mars brings out 'Babyface' in Power of Love spectacle". Las Vegas Review-Journal. Archived from the original on November 23, 2021. Retrieved November 23, 2021. Grein, Paul (October 12, 2022). "Billie Eilish, Dua Lipa, Bruno Mars & More Co-Chair Grammy Museum's Campaign for Music Education: Exclusive". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 12, 2022. Retrieved October 12, 2022. "Bruno Mars Manila concert extended for another day". The Philippine Star. September 7, 2017. Archived from the original on September 7, 2017. Retrieved March 3, 2022. Evans, Zach (January 29, 2018). "Evansville's own Philip Lawrence earns major Grammy wins with Bruno Mars". Evansville Courier & Press. Archived from the original on September 30, 2020. Retrieved March 3, 2022. Lamb, John (January 28, 2018). "So how well do you know Bruno?". The Dickinson Press. Archived from the original on March 2, 2022. Retrieved March 3, 2022. "Bruno Mars Drops 'Versace on the Floor' Visual Starring Zendaya (Video)". iHeartRadio. August 13, 2017. Archived from the original on March 2, 2022. Retrieved March 3, 2022. Cragg, Michael (October 21, 2010). "Songwriters turned pop stars: the Bruno Mars strategy". The Guardian. Archived from the original on November 26, 2020. Retrieved March 3, 2022. Frere-Jones, Sasha (February 6, 2011). "Mars Attacks!". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on November 28, 2020. Retrieved March 3, 2022. Petrusich, Amanda (December 1, 2017). "Weirdly, We Might Be Overlooking Bruno Mars". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on August 24, 2020. Retrieved March 3, 2022. "Future Asian & Pacific History Month: Bruno Mars' Undeniable Swagger". Fuse TV. 2017. Archived from the original on December 14, 2018. Retrieved March 3, 2022. O'Connor, Roisin (November 19, 2021). "Album reviews: Snoop Dogg – Algorithm, and Silk Sonic – An Evening with Silk Sonic". The Independent. Archived from the original on November 19, 2021. Retrieved November 19, 2021. Scott, Damien (November 19, 2022). "Bruno Mars Just Wants You to Have a Good Time". BET. Archived from the original on November 19, 2016. Retrieved July 17, 2022. "The 200 Best Songs of the 2010s". Stereogum. November 5, 2019. Archived from the original on November 6, 2019. Retrieved June 28, 2022. Unterberger, Andrew (February 27, 2018). "Could Bruno Mars' Big Night at the Grammys End Up Being a Bad Thing for His Career?". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 2, 2022. Retrieved March 3, 2022. Molanphy, Chris (May 5, 2017). "Bruno Mars' New No. 1 Proves He's the Canniest Hit-Maker of the Decade". Slate. Archived from the original on November 14, 2018. Retrieved March 3, 2022. Peters, Jason N. (August 9, 2021). "Is Bruno Mars an R&B Star or Pop Star?". WBLS. Archived from the original on August 9, 2021. Retrieved October 9, 2021. Cairns, Dan; Wollocombe, Luz (January 22, 2013). "Ranked: the best 20 solo singers of this century". The Times. Archived from the original on January 22, 2023. Retrieved January 24, 2023. Coscarelli, Joe (June 13, 2019). "Mark Ronson, a Party Boy No More, Tries on Melancholy After a Parade of Hits". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 13, 2019. Retrieved June 15, 2019. Dekel, Jonathan (July 29, 2021). "How Mark Ronson and Bruno Mars finished writing 'Uptown Funk' at Toronto's Cherry Beach studios". Toronto Star. Archived from the original on July 29, 2021. Retrieved July 29, 2021. Vargas, Andrew S. (February 1, 2017). ""My Father's a Puerto Rican Pimp": Bruno Mars Gets Personal About Boricua Roots in New Interview". Remezcla. Archived from the original on July 22, 2018. Retrieved March 3, 2022. "get to know: aj mitchell". MTV. August 16, 2019. Archived from the original on August 16, 2019. Retrieved March 3, 2022. Hudak, Joseph (March 10, 2015). "Thomas Rhett Talks New Album's Bruno Mars Influence". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on February 10, 2021. Retrieved March 3, 2022. Elvis Duran and the Morning Show (September 26, 2017). "Dua Lipa Learns THIS From Bruno Mars Every Night". iHeartRadio. Archived from the original on September 26, 2017. Retrieved March 3, 2022. "Singer Benny Dayal On How Bruno Mars Inspires His Music". DT Next. December 21, 2020. Archived from the original on January 5, 2021. Retrieved March 3, 2022. Torres, Santiago; Serna, Gustavo (August 27, 2021). "Rauw Alejandro: "Me Siento Bendecido"". Billboard. Argentina. Archived from the original on August 27, 2021. Retrieved March 3, 2022. Sharma, Ekatmata (September 28, 2021). "'Touch It' singer Kidi takes inspiration from Bruno Mars, Chris Brown, Usher (Exclusive)". MENAFN. Archived from the original on October 5, 2022. Retrieved June 16, 2022. Nunez, Mike (March 15, 2015). "Lee Brice: A 'true redneck' who loves performin' & writin'". Florida Today. Archived from the original on March 4, 2021. Retrieved March 3, 2022. McCrea, Brad (November 19, 2017). "Shawn Mendes Wins First American Music Award". iHeartRadio. Archived from the original on September 16, 2019. Retrieved March 3, 2022. DiMartino, Dave (July 23, 2013). "Selena Gomez Gives "It" Up!". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on September 25, 2020. Retrieved March 3, 2022. Sullivan, Caroline (September 1, 2014). "Pop's weighty issue: All About That Bass and other body-positive anthems". The Guardian. Archived from the original on December 13, 2014. Retrieved January 5, 2015. "Warner Music France Triumphs at the NRJ Music Awards". Warner Music Group. November 14, 2016. Archived from the original on November 20, 2016. Retrieved November 19, 2016. Billboard Staff (March 5, 2017). "2017 iHeartRadio Music Awards: Complete Winners List". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 6, 2017. Retrieved March 6, 2017. Rubin, Rebecca; Knapp, JD (August 13, 2017). "Teen Choice Awards 2017: 'Riverdale,' Fifth Harmony Shut Out Competition". Variety. Archived from the original on August 16, 2017. Retrieved August 27, 2017. "Icons of the Decade: Bruno Mars". iHeartRadio. Archived from the original on December 23, 2019. Retrieved January 8, 2020. Ahlgrim, Callie; Larocca, Courteney (December 23, 2019). "The 20 top artists of the decade". Insider. Retrieved March 10, 2020. Trust, Gary (May 11, 2021). "Drake Is Billboard's Artist of the Decade, Will Receive Honor at 2021 Billboard Music Awards". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 12, 2021. Retrieved May 12, 2021. "Top Touring Artists". Billboard. October 31, 2019. Archived from the original on November 16, 2019. Retrieved December 29, 2019. Weatherby, Taylor (April 5, 2022). "Bruno Mars' GRAMMYs Legacy: How His 'Clean Sweep' With Silk Sonic Continued A Remarkable Winning Streak". NARAS. Archived from the original on April 17, 2022. Retrieved April 17, 2022. Brit Awards for Bruno Mars: "The Brits 2012". Brits. British Phonographic Industry's. Archived from the original on January 16, 2012. Retrieved September 26, 2013. "The Brits 2014". Brits. British Phonographic Industry's. Archived from the original on September 7, 2020. Retrieved February 20, 2014. "The Brits 2015". Brits. British Phonographic Industry's. Archived from the original on December 23, 2015. Retrieved December 22, 2015. Glenday, Craig (2015). Guinness World Records 2016. Bantam Books. p. 103. ISBN 978-1-101-88380-8. Stephenson, Kristen (January 26, 2018). "10 Things You Didn't Know about This Year's Grammy Nominees". Guinness World Records. Jim Pattison Group. Archived from the original on January 6, 2019. Retrieved January 6, 2019. American Music Awards for Bruno Mars: Kellogg, Jane (November 20, 2011). "AMAs 2011: Winners and Nominees Complete List". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 1, 2017. Retrieved March 25, 2013. Billboard Staff (November 19, 2017). "Here Are All the Winners From the 2017 AMAs". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 20, 2019. Retrieved November 20, 2017. Nordyke, Kimberly (October 9, 2018). "American Music Awards: Taylor Swift Wins Artist of the Year, Sets New Record". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 10, 2018. Retrieved October 10, 2018. Warner, Denise (November 24, 2019). "Here Are All the Winners From the 2019 American Music Awards". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 25, 2019. Retrieved November 25, 2019. Atkinson, Katie (November 21, 2021). "Here Are All the 2021 American Music Awards Winners". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 5, 2022. Retrieved November 22, 2021. Soul Train Music Awards for Bruno Mars: Osorio, Kim (November 28, 2010). "2010 Soul Train Awards Recap". BET News. Archived from the original on February 10, 2012. Retrieved November 29, 2010. Mitchell, Gail (November 29, 2015). "The Weeknd, 'Uptown Funk' and Jidenna Big Winners at 2015 Soul Train Awards". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 22, 2016. Retrieved February 17, 2016. Nordyke, Kimberly (November 26, 2017). "BET Soul Train Awards: Bruno Mars Tops With 5 Wins". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 24, 2018. Retrieved April 23, 2018. Centero, Tony M. (November 26, 2018). "Drake, Lecrae and Cardi B Win at 2018 Soul Train Music Awards". XXL. Archived from the original on December 1, 2018. Retrieved December 1, 2018. Imarenezor, Christine (November 28, 2021). "Soul Train Awards 2021: See The Complete Winners List". Vibe. Archived from the original on November 30, 2021. Retrieved November 30, 2021. Grein, Paul (November 26, 2021). "Beyoncé Wins Big at 2022 Soul Train Awards: Full Winners List". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 27, 2022. Retrieved November 27, 2021. B.o.B (April 21, 2011). "The 2011 Time 100". Time. Archived from the original on October 5, 2013. Retrieved October 4, 2013. Accolades for The Smeezingtons: Copsey, Robert (January 18, 2011). "Bruno Mars named best songwriter of 2010". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on October 20, 2013. Retrieved October 22, 2013. Stutz, Colin (June 2, 2013). "THR Names Music's 35 Top Hitmakers". The Hoolywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 25, 2016. Retrieved July 5, 2013. Billboard Staff (October 21, 2013). "Sound Selectors: The Top 10 Producers in Music". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 21, 2013. Retrieved October 22, 2013. "Sean "Diddy" Combs, Dr. Dre, Drake, Mary Mary and Other Top Names in Music Attend ASCAP's Rhythm & Soul Music Awards". American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers. June 24, 2011. Archived from the original on September 27, 2013. Retrieved September 25, 2013. Mench, Chris (November 18, 2016). "Who is Bruno Mars' mystery producer Shampoo Press & Curl? and what happened to the Smeezingtons?". Genius. Archived from the original on December 1, 2016. Retrieved November 30, 2016. O'Malley Greenburg, Zack (January 6, 2014). "30 Under 30: Bruno Mars And Music's Brightest Young Stars". Forbes. Archived from the original on January 10, 2014. Retrieved January 10, 2014. Cirisano, Tatiana (January 30, 2018). "How Historic Was Bruno Mars' Big Night at the Grammys?". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 28, 2018. Retrieved April 29, 2018. Grein, Paul (April 4, 2022). "Silk Sonic, Tony Bennett & More 2022 Grammy Record-Setters". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 4, 2022. Retrieved April 4, 2022. "Greatest of All Time Artists". Billboard. November 14, 2019. Archived from the original on November 14, 2019. Retrieved November 15, 2019. Copsey, Robert (January 18, 2011). "Bruno Mars named best songwriter of 2010". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on October 20, 2013. Retrieved October 22, 2013. "Hot 100 Songwriters". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 3, 2020. Retrieved December 31, 2013. Billboard Staff (July 3, 2013). "Born in the U.S.A.: Top 50 Stars of the 50 States". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 24, 2015. Retrieved July 4, 2013. Trust, Gary (May 7, 2014). "John Legend's 'All Of Me' Tops Hot 100, Ariana Grande Debuts at No. 3". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 9, 2014. Retrieved May 8, 2014. Trust, Gary (February 13, 2013). "Macklemore & Ryan Lewis' 'Thrift Shop' No. 1 on Hot 100 for Fourth Week". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 16, 2013. Retrieved February 14, 2013. Trust, Gary (January 18, 2018). "Bruno Mars Matches Mariah Carey & Beyonce as Only Artists With Three Top Five Hot 100 Hits From Each of Their First Three Albums". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 18, 2018. Retrieved January 18, 2018. Trust, Gary (March 26, 2018). "Bruno Mars & Cardi B's 'Finesse' Tops Pop Songs Airplay Chart". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 30, 2018. Retrieved March 27, 2018. Trust, Gary (May 16, 2018). "Ed Sheeran's 'Perfect' Is Just 10th Single to Spend at Least Half a Year in Hot 100's Top 10". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 19, 2018. Retrieved May 21, 2018. Trust, Gary (October 14, 2019). "Justin Bieber Banks 200th Total Week in Hot 100s Top 10 — The Youngest Solo Male to Reach Milestone". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 20, 2021. Retrieved December 20, 2021. "Top 100 Songs of the 2010". Consequence of Sound. November 11, 2019. Retrieved November 17, 2019. Cridlin, Jay (December 26, 2019). "The best pop songs of the 2010s: Taylor Swift, Bruno Mars, Lorde, more". Tampa Bay Times. Retrieved December 28, 2019. Penrose, Nerisha (December 13, 2019). "The 52 Best Songs That Defined the 2010s". Elle. Archived from the original on January 31, 2021. Retrieved January 27, 2020. "Digital music report 2012" (PDF). January 23, 2012. Archived (PDF) from the original on December 5, 2016. Retrieved December 6, 2014. Grein, Paul (November 6, 2013). "Chart Watch: Eminem & The Fab Four". Yahoo! Music. Archived from the original on October 11, 2014. Retrieved November 17, 2013. International Federation of the Phonographic Industry Sales: "Digital Music Report 2012" (PDF). January 23, 2012. Archived (PDF) from the original on December 5, 2016. Retrieved December 6, 2014. "Music subscription revenues help drive growth in most major markets". IFPI. Archived from the original on March 18, 2014. Retrieved March 28, 2014. "IFPI Global Music Report 2016: State of the Industry" (PDF). IFPI. p. 7. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 22, 2020. Retrieved April 13, 2018. "Global Music Report 2018: Annual State of the Industry" (PDF). IFPI. April 25, 2018. p. 9. Archived (PDF) from the original on April 24, 2018. Retrieved April 25, 2018. Fleming, Mike Jr. (February 6, 2020). "Disney Makes Bruno Mars Deal; Platinum-Selling Singer Will Star In, Produce Music-Driven Theatrical Film". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on December 25, 2020. Retrieved February 24, 2020. Inman, DeMicia (October 5, 2022). "Bruno Mars Earns Another Diamond Certification". Vibe. Retrieved October 6, 2022. Lawrence, Jesse (February 12, 2014). "Could "The Bruno Mars Act" Change The Way Tickets Are Bought For High Demand Concerts?". Forbes. Archived from the original on February 22, 2014. Retrieved February 27, 2014. Lawrence, Jesse (April 4, 2014). "Sparse Primary Market Helps Drive Up Price of Bruno Mars Tickets on Secondary Market". Forbes. Archived from the original on April 26, 2014. Retrieved April 26, 2014. "How did so many get shut out of Bruno Mars tickets? Blame it on the bots". Hawaii News Now. June 12, 2018. Archived from the original on December 4, 2019. Retrieved December 4, 2019. Frankenberg, Eric (September 28, 2021). "Boxscore Charts Return After Year-Plus Break: Classic Rock, Country & Vegas Lead the Way". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 1, 2021. Retrieved October 2, 2021. "ブルーノ・マーズの新たな伝説 ドーム5公演が史上最速で完売". Rolling Stone Japan (in Japanese). October 25, 2022. Retrieved October 25, 2022. Dam-young, Hong (June 19, 2023). "Bruno Mars brings magic to sold-out crowd in Seoul with finesse". The Korea Herald. Retrieved June 2, 2023. Roland, Driadonna (April 12, 2013). "Bruno Mars' Sisters Taking Their Turn on the Spotlight Band on 'The Lylas' And Of Course They're Getting A Reality Show". MTV. Archived from the original on December 31, 2016. Retrieved December 30, 2016. Rodriguez, Priscilla (January 9, 2018). "8 things to know about Bruno Mars' girlfriend". Latina. Archived from the original on February 1, 2014. Retrieved March 28, 2015. Mumbi Moody, Nekesa (June 2, 2013). "Bruno Mars' Mother Dead at 55, According To Source". HuffPost. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2015. "Bruno Mars Breaks Silence on His Mother's Death". The Hollywood Reporter. June 7, 2013. Archived from the original on April 8, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2015. Greenblatt, Leah (May 17, 2013). "Bruno Mars is red hot". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on December 29, 2016. Retrieved December 28, 2016. Zaru, Deena (March 13, 2018). "After Bruno Mars is accused of cultural appropriation, black celebrities come to his defense". CNN. Archived from the original on October 22, 2018. Retrieved October 22, 2018. Golding, Shenequa (March 3, 2018). "Stevie Wonder Says It's 'Bulls---' to Call Bruno Mars an Appropriator". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 22, 2018. Retrieved October 22, 2018. Connick, Tom (March 13, 2018). "Bruno Mars accused of cultural appropriation". NME. Archived from the original on October 22, 2018. Retrieved October 22, 2018. Williams, Stereo (March 11, 2018). "Bruno Mars, George Michael and the 'Cultural Appropriation' Tipping Point: Critic's Take". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 23, 2018. Retrieved October 22, 2018. McDuffie, Candace (November 15, 2021). "Silk Sonic Showcase Their Natural Cool on An Evening with Silk Sonic". Paste. Retrieved November 15, 2021. "Bruno Mars Escapes Cocaine Charge". MTV News UK. February 5, 2011. Archived from the original on June 29, 2011. Retrieved February 5, 2011. Martins, Chris (January 29, 2014). "Wanna Be a 'Billionaire': Bruno Mars and Travie McCoy Sued Over Copyright". Spin. Archived from the original on April 6, 2015. Retrieved March 28, 2015. Christman, Ed (May 1, 2015). "'Uptown Funk!' Gains More Writers After Gap Band's Legal Claim". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 2, 2015. Retrieved May 1, 2015. Shepherd, Jack (August 12, 2015). "Mark Ronson and Bruno Mars accused of plagiarising Uptown Funk, again". The Independent. Archived from the original on September 14, 2017. Retrieved August 12, 2015. Minsker, Evan (October 29, 2016). "Mark Ronson and Bruno Mars Sued Over "Uptown Funk"". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on February 13, 2018. Retrieved February 12, 2018. Bowman, Lisa (December 30, 2017). "Mark Ronson and Bruno Mars are being sued again over 'Uptown Funk'". NME. Retrieved April 15, 2022. Minsker, Evan (September 14, 2017). "Mark Ronson Sued Over "Uptown Funk" Zapp Similarities". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on April 23, 2018. Retrieved April 23, 2018. Monroe, Jazz (April 13, 2018). "Bruno Mars and Mark Ronson Settle One of Three "Uptown Funk" Lawsuits: Report". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on April 23, 2018. Retrieved April 23, 2018. Yoo, Noah (July 2, 2018). "Mark Ronson Settles "Uptown Funk" Zapp Copyright Lawsuit". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on April 27, 2019. Retrieved April 27, 2019. Billboard Staff (November 26, 2019). "The 60 Greatest Dance Songs of the Decade: Staff List". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 28, 2019. Retrieved December 4, 2019. Billboard Staff (March 10, 2014). "Music's Top 40 Money Makers 2014: The Rich List". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 15, 2014. Retrieved March 15, 2014. Pomerantz, Dorothy (June 30, 2014). "Matthew McConaughey And Bruno Mars Are Among Newcomers on the Celebrity 100 List". Forbes. Archived from the original on October 7, 2014. Retrieved October 3, 2014. O'Malley Greenburg, Zack (June 12, 2017). "Full List: The World's Highest-Paid Celebrities 2017". Forbes. Archived from the original on December 1, 2017. Retrieved April 23, 2018. Kaufman, Gil (June 10, 2019). "Taylor Swift Tops Forbes' Highest-Paid Celebrity 100 List in 2019 With $185 Million; BTS Earn First Ranking". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 10, 2019. Retrieved June 10, 2019. Harrison, Scoop (March 16, 2024). "Bruno Mars Apparently Owes $50 Million in Gambling Debt". Consequence. Retrieved March 18, 2024. Rigotti, Alex (March 17, 2024). "Bruno Mars is reportedly $50million in debt due to gambling". NME. Retrieved March 18, 2024. Pequeño IV, Antonio (March 18, 2024). "MGM Denies Viral Report Claiming Bruno Mars Has Serious Casino Debt". Forbes. https://www.billboard.com/music/music-news/mgm-grand-denies-bruno-mars-debt-gambling-1235636092/ Media related to Bruno Mars at Wikimedia Commons Official website Bruno Mars discography at Discogs Bruno Mars at IMDb Portals:  Biography  Pop music  R&B and Soul Music  Record production  Hispanic and Latino Americans  Hawaii  United States