Jimmie Kenneth Johnson (born September 17, 1975) is an American professional auto racing driver. He competes part-time in the NASCAR Cup Series, driving the No. 84 Toyota Camry XSE for his team, Legacy Motor Club. Johnson's seven Cup championships, the first five of which are consecutive, are tied with Richard Petty and Dale Earnhardt for the most all-time. From 2021 to 2022, Johnson competed in the IndyCar Series for Chip Ganassi Racing, and has competed occasionally in sports car racing throughout his career. Johnson was born in El Cajon, California, and began racing motorcycles at the age of four. After graduating from Granite Hills High School he competed in off-road series. He raced in Mickey Thompson Entertainment Group (MTEG), Short-course Off-road Drivers Association (SODA), and SCORE International, winning rookie of the year in each series. In 1998, Johnson and his team, Herzog Motorsports, began stock car racing. He moved to the national American Speed Association (ASA) series for late model touring cars, and won another rookie of the year title. In 2000, he switched to the NASCAR Busch Series (now Xfinity Series). His talent was noticed by Hendrick Motorsports driver Jeff Gordon, who convinced owner Rick Hendrick to sign Johnson in the Winston Cup Series full-time for 2002, with Gordon as a part-owner of his car. After finishing fifth in the points in his first full season, he was second in 2003 and 2004 and fifth in 2005. Johnson won his first Cup Series championship in 2006 and with further wins in 2007, 2008, 2009, and 2010, he became the first and only driver in NASCAR history to win five consecutive championships. Johnson finished sixth in the points standings in the 2011 season and third in 2012 before winning his sixth championship in 2013. In 2016, Johnson won his seventh championship, tying Richard Petty and Dale Earnhardt for the most Cup Series championships of all time. Johnson is also a two-time winner of the Daytona 500, winning in 2006 and 2013. Between 2002 and 2017, Johnson recorded seven championships, 83 career race wins, 222 top fives, 341 top tens, and 35 pole positions. Johnson started racing motorcycles in 1980 when he was four. Three years later, he won the 60cc class championship, despite injuring his knee. Afterward, he moved to the Mickey Thompson Entertainment Group (MTEG) Stadium Racing Series where he won several more awards. In 1993, Johnson was given the opportunity to drive for Herb Fishel. He refused the deal and continued racing buggies and trucks in off-road stadium and desert races. He also reported for ESPN in the Short-course Off-road Drivers Association (SODA). Three years later, Johnson drove for Herzog Motorsports in the off-road truck series in 1996. By 1997, Johnson had progressed to SODA's Class 8; Class 8 is short-course off-road racing's class of two-wheel-drive Trophy Trucks which generate about 800 horsepower. He battled Scott Taylor and Brendan Gaughan for the championship. That year, Johnson won both races at Lake Geneva Raceway's first race weekend in May. He also won the season's third event at Antigo before finishing second to Gaughan at Antigo's second race. Johnson returned to Lake Geneva in July, winning the Saturday race and finished second on the following day. Taylor ended up winning the championship with Gaughan second and Johnson third. In SCORE, he won races and had a few memorable finishes, like that in the 1995 Baja 1000, after leading over 900 miles, he fell asleep behind the wheel and woke up to find himself going off course. His Trophy Truck, Butch (the paint scheme of which was used for a throwback for Johnson's 48 car in the 2019 Southern 500, and the car that was used by Larry Ragland in wins such as the 1991 Baja 1000), was wrecked. During his time in the SODA, SCORE, and MTEG series, he accumulated over 25 wins, 100 Top 3 finishes, six championships, and received Rookie of the Year honors in all three leagues. In 1997, he began racing on asphalt ovals when he ran three races in the American Speed Association (ASA), making his debut at Hawkeye Downs Speedway. Driving for Herzog Motorsports' stock car program, he won the ASA Pat Schauer Memorial Rookie title in 1998. One year later, he had two wins and finished third in the standings. Johnson finished second in the two races at Fairgrounds Speedway he participated in over those two years. Johnson made his NASCAR Busch Series (now NASCAR Xfinity Series) debut at the 1998 Indianapolis Raceway Park event, where he finished 25th for ST Motorsports. He continued his limited slate in 1999 with Herzog Motorsports before moving to a full-time schedule in 2000. At Watkins Glen International, he had a spectacularly hard accident on lap 46 when his brakes failed entering the first turn. He had to swerve quickly to the right to avoid the No. 86 of Dennis Demers, but went into the grass on the inside of turn one, then went back across the track, caught some air on the gravel trap before finally crashing head-on into the Styrofoam barriers at the far end of the turn while still more than 150+ MPH. He eventually climbed out of the car unscathed and raised his fists in the air like he had won the race. Johnson noted he was "so happy to be alive and OK. The next couple of days I was really sore." Otherwise, in a rather uneventful season which featured one DNQ at Daytona and six Top 10's, he finished tenth in the point standings. In 2001, he recorded one win at Chicagoland Speedway, and finished eighth in the point standings, his win at Chicagoland was his only throughout his career at the track. During the year, he joined Hendrick Motorsports for a four-race schedule in the Winston Cup Series, making his series debut in the UAW-GM Quality 500 at Lowe's Motor Speedway. The opportunity was made available when he connected with Hendrick driver Jeff Gordon during the 2000 Busch season; with Herzog facing shutdown due to sponsorship issues, Johnson approached Gordon and was informed of the team's intention to field a fourth car for him. Johnson formally moved to Hendrick in 2002, driving the No. 48 Lowe's-sponsored Chevrolet. Johnson began racing full-time in the Winston Cup Series during the 2002 season. He earned his first career pole position for the Daytona 500, becoming the third rookie to do so (the first were Loy Allen Jr. in 1994 and Mike Skinner in 1997). In his 13th career start, Johnson scored his first career win in the NAPA Auto Parts 500 at Auto Club Speedway. Johnson became the first rookie driver to lead the point standings and to win twice at the same track during a season, by sweeping both races at Dover. In the Coca-Cola 600, Johnson led 263 laps before he got a penalty for overshooting his pit box. He earned four pole positions and three wins (tying the rookie record set by Tony Stewart in 1999), as well as six Top 5's and 21 Top 10 finishes. He finished fifth in the final point standings. However, despite the strong season, Ryan Newman won rookie of the year honors over Johnson, partially due to Newman having 22 Top 10's compared to Johnson's 21. In 2003, Johnson finished ninth on the all-time list for consecutive weeks ranked in the Top 10 in points with 69. He won three races (Coca-Cola 600 at Charlotte and both New Hampshire races), two poles (at Kansas Speedway and Pocono Raceway), 14 Top 10's, and 20 Top 10 finishes, including a second-place finish at Rockingham after leading 78 laps. He also was able to win the All-Star race for the first time, as well as finishing second in the final standings, just 90 points Matt Kenseth and 207 ahead of his future teammate Dale Earnhardt Jr. In 2004, Johnson started slowly at Rockingham Speedway and Las Vegas Motor Speedway with results of 41st and 16th, after a Top 10 finish in the Daytona 500. However, he quickly was able to rebound winning the Carolina Dodge Dealers 400 at Darlington Raceway. Subsequent victories in the Coca-Cola 600, the Pocono 500, and the Pennsylvania 500 came in the middle of the season, seeing Johnson sweep the Pocono races. However, finishes of 37th and 32nd at Talladega Superspeedway and Kansas moved him toward the bottom of the point standings. Afterward, he was able to win the UAW-GM Quality 500 at Lowe's Motor Speedway. The second victory of the 2004 Chase for the Nextel Cup, at the Subway 500 at Martinsville on October 24, 2004, was marred by tragedy. Owner Rick Hendrick's son Ricky, twin nieces, brother, and chief engine builder Randy Dorton as well as Joe Turner, Scott Lathram were killed in an airplane crash en route to the race. All eight passengers and both pilots died in the incident, and Johnson was told after completion of the race. Johnson had a total of eight wins, 20 Top 5's and 23 Top 10 finishes. At the end of the season, Johnson finished second in the point standings. In 2005, Johnson won at Las Vegas, Lowe's Motor Speedway, Dover International Speedway, and then again at Lowe's. In total, Johnson had four consecutive wins at his sponsor (Lowe's) sponsored track in Charlotte, North Carolina. He won the Coca-Cola 600 that year, which broke the record for the most yellow flags in a Cup Series race, by beating Bobby Labonte by .027 seconds. Johnson had a chance to win the championship coming into the November 20 season finale at Homestead-Miami Speedway, but finished fifth in points after crashing at the midway point of the event with a tire problem. He scored 13 Top 5's, 22 Top 10 finishes, and one pole position. In 2006, Johnson began the season by winning the Daytona 500. The Daytona 500 also marked his first race with Earl Barban as the spotter, who won five championships with Johnson and the No. 48 team. He finished second in the next race at California Speedway and won the UAW-DaimlerChrysler 400 at Las Vegas by passing Matt Kenseth on the last lap. Johnson won his third race of the season in the Aaron's 499 at Talladega, followed by two more victories at Indianapolis and Martinsville. One highlight of the season was when he saved the car from slamming into the wall when he spun out during qualifications at the first Dover race. Throughout the season, he became the only modern era driver to win at least three races in each of his first five seasons. He started the chase with unfortunate mishaps in the first four races; a DNF at New Hampshire, a pitting mistake at Dover, a penalty at Kansas (he led the most laps in the race), and, while trying to make a pass for first at Talladega, getting clipped and spinning out. He and the team kept their hopes up and rallied with five straight Top 2 finishes including a win at Martinsville to come back from eighth in the points standings to take the championship. At the end of the season, he recorded one pole, 13 Top 5's, 24 Top 10's, and his first championship title (this was also the first in his NASCAR career). In December, Johnson won the 2006 Driver of the Year Award. During the 2007 season, Johnson continued on a streak and recorded 10 wins, four poles, 20 Top 5's, and again 24 Top 10 finishes. Those 10 wins included sweeping both races at Richmond, Atlanta, and Martinsville. He also won at Las Vegas, Auto Club, Texas, and Phoenix. Afterward, he won his second consecutive championship title and was named the 2007 Driver of the Year. Johnson also had the best average finish in the Chase with 5.0. At the end of the season, he had a total of 33 career wins, placing him 18th on the all-time wins list. In December 2007, Johnson commenced a program of exercise sessions and a run schedule supervised by John Sitaras, in order to balance his strength. Sitaras' initial assessment found that half of his body was much tighter, having acclimated to offsetting the g-force load from turning left while driving. In two years, Johnson's body fat percentage dropped from 20% to 8% (visible also in the change of the shape of his face), while his strength and stamina greatly improved. Johnson later became the first racing driver to be named Associated Press Male Athlete of the Year (in 2009). After the 2008 season, Johnson became the second driver to win three consecutive NASCAR Cup Series championships, the first being Cale Yarborough. During the season, he won seven races (including a sweep at Phoenix), a career-high of six poles, 15 Top 5's, and 22 Top 10's. In five of those seven wins, he started from the pole. He became the only driver to record three wins in each of their first seven seasons. In 2008 Jimmie Johnson also raced in his first-ever truck series race, the O'Reilly 200 at Bristol, where he led 28 laps before spinning out on lap 101. That weekend was the first time he had ever sat in a racing truck. In the Chase for the Championship, he recorded 14 wins, eight more than any other driver. One of those included Phoenix in which he won on low fuel and high tire wear after crew chief Chad Knaus decided to stay out late in the race. He also was named the 2008 Driver of the Year and won an ESPY as the Best Driver. After the season, he also moved to third on the active winners' list. In the 2009 season, Johnson recorded his fourth consecutive championship, becoming the only driver to win four back-to-back season titles. Throughout this season, he won seven races (including a third consecutive Checker Auto Parts 500 and both Dover races), four poles, 16 Top 5's, and 24 Top 10 finishes. Johnson now became the only driver to win at least three races in each of his first eight seasons, as well as the only driver to qualify for the Chase for the Championship every year since 2004. During the season, he moved up one spot up to second on the active winners' list and went to 13th on the all-time wins list. After the season concluded, he won an ESPY for the second consecutive year, and won the Driver of the Year award for the third time, tying Jeff Gordon, Mario Andretti, and Darrell Waltrip as the only three-time drivers to win the award. During 2010, Johnson won his fifth consecutive championship, becoming the third driver who made up points to win the title since 1975. During the season, he scored two poles, 17 Top 5's, 23 Top 10's, and six wins. He also remained the only driver to qualify for the Chase every year since its inception in 2004. He became the 12th driver to win 50+ NASCAR races when he won at Bristol in March and went up to 10th on the all-time wins list. His wins in 2010 included Auto Club, Las Vegas, where he passed Jeff Gordon with 16 laps to go for the lead, Bristol, Sonoma, his first and only road course win, New Hampshire, and Dover. At New Hampshire, with eight laps remaining, Kurt Busch, who was running second, bumped Johnson to become the leader, but Johnson returned the favor a couple of laps later to the lead the final two laps. Johnson said, "Kurt knocked me out of the way. At that point, I thought, I don't care if I win or finish. I'm going to run into him one way or the other ... I tried once and moved him. (I thought) I've got to hit him harder. The second time I did and moved him out of the way." Johnson was also named Driver of the Year for the fourth time in his career, joining Gordon as the only drivers to win the award that many times. Johnson had been fighting for the championship with Denny Hamlin all season, but eventually passed him in points in the season finale at Homestead. He also won Tony Stewart's charity race, the Prelude to the Dream, his first victory on a dirt oval. In 2011, Johnson began the season with a fourth-place finish in the Budweiser Shootout, after starting from the 23rd position. One week later in the 2011 Daytona 500, he started 23rd, but finished 27th after being involved in a crash on lap 29. During the Subway Fresh Fit 500, he managed a third-place finish. Following a 16th-place finish after the Kobalt Tools 400 he collected two consecutive Top 5 finishes. Statistically, Johnson's 2011 season was one of his worst performances to date, even though he finished sixth in the points. He only won two races during the season. The first was the Aaron's 499 at Talladega Superspeedway, where Johnson started on the outside pole and tandem-drafted with Dale Earnhardt Jr. for the entire race. On the last lap, with Johnson in front, he and Earnhardt Jr. were in fifth and sixth off of turn 4, behind two other pairs of cars – their Hendrick teammates Jeff Gordon and Mark Martin, and the Richard Childress drafting pair of Clint Bowyer and Kevin Harvick. In the tri-oval, Earnhardt Jr. gave Johnson enough of a push to nip Bowyer at the finish line by 0.002 seconds. This was the closest recorded finish in Talladega history and tied the 2003 Carolina Dodge Dealers 400 for closest margin of victory in NASCAR history. After finishing in the first 15 positions in the next four races, Johnson failed to finish the Coca-Cola 600 after his engine failed. Three weeks later, in the Heluva Good! Sour Cream Dips 400, Johnson spun off turn two, flattening multiple tires, and breaking the sway bar which prompted him to a finish of 27th. During the Toyota/Save Mart 350, Johnson finished seventh after starting 12th on the grid. The finish moved Johnson to third in the Drivers' standings. After returning to Daytona International Speedway for the Coke Zero 400, Johnson and Earnhardt Jr. ran together for most of the race, like at Talladega, until Johnson pitted under a caution flag. Johnson fell down the grid and was involved in a last-lap accident, prompting him to finish 20th. During the next two races, Johnson finished third and fifth in the Quaker State 400 and the Lenox Industrial Tools 301. Two weeks later, Johnson found himself finishing 19th during the Brickyard 400 after coming to pit road with 30 laps remaining in the event. Johnson finished fourth in the Good Sam RV Insurance 500, after bumping Kurt Busch on the final lap. In the next race, Johnson finished tenth. Johnson finished in the Top 5 in the following three races. During the last race of the regular season, the Wonderful Pistachios 400, Johnson finished in the 31st position. While at Chicagoland Speedway for the GEICO 400, Johnson finished 10th. Afterward, Johnson finished 18th in the Sylvania 300, then second in the AAA 400. One week later, Johnson recorded his second victory of the season in the Hollywood Casino 400. During the Bank of America 500, Johnson was involved in a crash and finished 34th. In the following race, Johnson finished second. For the next two races, Johnson finished 14th in each and finished 32nd in the Ford 400 to finish sixth in the Driver's championship standings. The third NASCAR Championship for Tony Stewart marked the first time since 2005 (coincidentally Stewart's second) that someone other than Johnson was the champion. Johnson began the 2012 season with a 14th-place finish in the Budweiser Shootout after crashing on lap 74. During the Daytona 500, Johnson was involved in a crash on lap 2 when he turned into the wall after contact from Elliott Sadler, then was t-boned by David Ragan, also collecting Danica Patrick, Kurt Busch and Trevor Bayne. Damage to the car was severe, prompting him to retire and finish 42nd. Afterward, he finished fourth and second in the Subway Fresh Fit 500 and Kobalt Tools 400. While at Bristol Motor Speedway for the Food City 500, Johnson finished in the ninth position, moving him up to 11th in the Drivers' Standings. Next, Johnson finished tenth in the Auto Club 400, despite having an oil leak, but the rain saved Johnson from a low finish. He went on to finish 12th in the spring event at Martinsville after being involved in a crash on the first green-white-checker attempt. In the following event, the Samsung Mobile 500, Johnson finished second after leading much of the race before he was passed by Greg Biffle. Afterward, he recorded a third-place finish in the STP 400 at Kansas on April 22, 2012, and a sixth-place finish in the Capital City 400 at Richmond one week later. On May 6, 2012, Johnson started 19th in the Aaron's 499 at Talladega, but finished 35th after suffering a broken oil pump belt on lap 62. Johnson won his first race of the season one week later in the Bojangles' Southern 500 at Darlington. The win was also Rick Hendrick's 200th NASCAR Cup Series win. A week later, he matched Gordon and Dale Earnhardt with three wins in the NASCAR Sprint All-Star Race after winning the 2012 NASCAR Sprint All-Star Race. Next, in the Coca-Cola 600, Johnson finished 11th in the race after a penalty on lap 354. After the Coca-Cola 600, Johnson went on to win his second race of the season in the FedEx 400. In the Pocono 400, he recorded a fourth-place finish after starting 24th on the grid. During the next two races, Johnson placed fifth, moving him to fourth in the standings. Afterward, Johnson finished sixth after winning his first pole position of the season in the Quaker State 400. However, in the Coke Zero 400, Johnson finished 36th after retiring from a crash on lap 124. After finishing seventh during the Lenox Industrial Tools 301, Johnson recorded his third victory of the season and his fourth career win at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway, tying Jeff Gordon for what was the record for the most wins in the Brickyard 400. At Michigan, he was leading late in the race with six laps to go when his engine blew up, giving the race to Greg Biffle. After making the NASCAR Chase for the Championship, Johnson secured three straight Top 5 finishes in the GEICO 400, Sylvania 300 and AAA 400. Following a 17th-place finish in Good Sam Roadside Assistance 500, Johnson recorded four top-ten finishes, including two consecutive wins from the pole position at Martinsville and Texas, which was his 60th win in the series, to take a seven-point lead over Brad Keselowski. Johnson was able to hold off Keselowski's hard racing, which even prompted Tony Stewart to say that he was driving with a "death wish". At Phoenix, Johnson blew a right front tire, which caused him to collide into the wall and finish in the 32nd position. He was racing for the win and the championship the following week at Homestead, but his chances of winning the championship were over after he had a pit road penalty and had a gear failure and he finished 36th in that race, and finished third in the Drivers Championship behind Keselowski and Bowyer. In 2013, Johnson began his season with a 14th-place finish in the 2013 Sprint Unlimited when he crashed on lap 14 along with Kyle Busch, Kurt Busch, Mark Martin, Jeff Gordon, and Denny Hamlin. Afterward, he placed fourth in the first Budweiser Duel, resulting in a ninth-place starting position in the 2013 Daytona 500. In the Daytona 500, Johnson started well, assuming the lead from Jeff Gordon on lap 32 and leading a handful of laps before falling back to the middle of the pack. Over the last few laps, Johnson was racing alongside Brad Keselowski for the lead until a caution came out for debris. Johnson took the advantage of leading on the last restart. With five laps to go, Johnson led a lane with Greg Biffle and Danica Patrick. He then held off a last-lap charge from Dale Earnhardt Jr. and Mark Martin to win his second Daytona 500. This was Johnson's first Daytona 500 win with Knaus, as he won the 2006 race with Darian Grubb as Knaus was serving a five-race suspension. It was also the first time since his 2006 win that he finished better than 27th in the Daytona 500, after a streak of six years where he had never finished better than 27th because of crashes and mechanical failures. The following week at Phoenix, Johnson started inside the Top 10 and finished second behind Carl Edwards. He followed this with a sixth-place finish at Las Vegas. At Bristol, he was running on the lead lap until a spin late-race forced him back to a 22nd-place finish. At Fontana, he struggled for most of the race, racing near the back of the pack, but salvaged a 12th-place finish. Johnson won his first pole position of the season at Martinsville and had the dominant car, leading 346 of 500 laps on the way to his eighth Martinsville race win. Johnson also assumed the point lead as well, which he held for the remainder of the regular season. Johnson's consistency was enough that there were points in the summer where he was more than a full two-race wins' worth of points ahead of Carl Edwards or Clint Bowyer. Afterward, Johnson finished sixth at Texas. At Kansas, he led nine laps and finished third behind Matt Kenseth and Kasey Kahne. Johnson finished 12th the following week at Richmond, allowing him to build even further on his point lead. At Talladega, he was the only driver besides Matt Kenseth to lead double-digit laps (16) and finished in fifth place. A fourth-place finish the following week at Darlington allowed Johnson to further solidify his point lead over Edwards. In the 2013 NASCAR Sprint All-Star Race, Johnson won his record fourth All-Star race after a fast pit stop allowed him to start the final 10-lap sprint in second, and later passed Kasey Kahne for the victory. One week later, Johnson finished 22nd after spinning sideways late in the race. At Dover, Johnson led 143 laps but finished 17th when he jumped Juan Pablo Montoya on the last restart causing NASCAR to issue him a penalty. He was able to redeem himself for this mistake the following week at Pocono by earning the pole position, leading the most laps, and winning his third race of the season, which increased his point lead to 51 points over Edwards. This also snapped a nine-year winless streak for Johnson at Pocono since sweeping both of the track's 2004 NASCAR Cup Series races. At the Quicken Loans 400 at Michigan, Johnson closed in on Greg Biffle for the lead with less than 10 laps left, but suffered a flat tire with less than five laps to go. Johnson finished the race in 28th, his worst finish of the season to that point. Johnson then finished ninth at Sonoma. At Kentucky, Johnson started third. He had the dominant car of the race, leading 182 of 267 laps. However, on a restart on lap 246, Johnson was slow to get up to speed and was subsequently touched and spun by Joey Logano, costing Johnson a shot at the win and giving the race to Matt Kenseth. Johnson was able to charge through the field after the caution and restart to salvage a ninth-place finish. Returning to Daytona for the Coke Zero 400, Johnson led 94 laps and held off Tony Stewart and Kevin Harvick on a green-white-checker finish to win his fourth race of the year. In winning the race, Johnson became the first driver since Bobby Allison in 1982 to sweep both Daytona races in a season. This was a significant improvement in Johnson's runs on the restrictor plate tracks, as he had been crashed out of the running at both Daytona races in 2012, had an engine failure early while leading at Talladega in the spring and was part of a crash on the last lap in the fall. Also, he was one of only three drivers to sweep the top ten, the other two drivers being Ryan Newman and Dale Earnhardt Jr. At New Hampshire for the Camping World RV Sales 301, Johnson qualified second, but failed post-qualifying inspection after his car was found to be too low, and started the race in 43rd, the first time in his career he started dead last. In the race, Johnson passed seven cars in the first four laps and reached the Top 20 by lap 50, while reaching the top ten by lap 165; Johnson finished sixth. He almost won the pole position at Indianapolis but was bumped to second by Ryan Newman. Johnson led the most laps and almost won, but a slow final pit stop cost him the race to Newman. The following week at Pocono, Johnson won another pole position, setting another track qualifying record. He led 43 of the first 80 laps before he cut a right-front tire that knocked a spark plug loose and affected the handling of the car. Johnson's pit crew worked hard to repair the car, fixing the plug on the last pit stop, and managing to salvage a 13th-place finish after racing near the back of the pack for most of the race. Returning to Michigan, Johnson qualified third but crashed in happy hour, forcing him to a backup car and a 43rd starting spot. After running up to the lead through pit stop strategy, Johnson lost an engine on lap 55, relegating him to a 40th-place finish. This was followed by a streak of three poor finishes of 36th at Bristol, 28th at Atlanta, and 40th at Richmond due to crashes and mechanical failures. Johnson started the Chase seeded in second place. He started the Chase with a fifth-place finish at Chicago, followed by a fourth-place finish at New Hampshire. At Dover, Johnson led 243 laps and held off Dale Earnhardt Jr. over the last 25 laps to win his eighth race at the track, also redeeming himself for the restart line violation that had cost him a shot at winning the June race. Johnson spent the next several races chasing Matt Kenseth for the points lead, eventually gaining it at Talladega, though losing it when he and Kenseth tied for the points lead at Martinsville. Returning to Texas, Johnson had the dominant car, leading 255 laps to his sixth win of the season. The following weekend at Phoenix, Johnson avoided trouble in tight racing on two separate occasions (a near scrape in turn 4 on the first lap, and later a near spin after contact with Carl Edwards in turn 1) to escape with a third-place finish. He also capitalized on Kenseth suffering from a poor-handling car. With Kenseth finishing 23rd, Johnson took a 28-point lead to the season finale at Homestead-Miami Speedway. In the finale, Johnson raced conservatively to a ninth-place finish to secure his sixth title. He closed out the season with six wins, three poles, 16 Top 5's, and 24 Top 10's, with an average finish of 9.8 and an average start of 10.7. Statistically, 2014 was one of Johnson's worst seasons to date. He started the season on an up-and-down note but went winless through the first 11 races of the 2014 season (his best finish was 2nd at Martinsville). Skepticism began to arise, as he had never gone more than 12 races into a season without a win, and hadn't gone that long since the first few years of his Cup career. However, Johnson won the Coca-Cola 600, his first win in the race since 2005. Afterward, he went on to win at Dover the following week, making it the 13th time he had back-to-back wins. A few weeks later, Johnson recorded his first win at Michigan, after several years of being deprived of a shot at victory as the result of running out of gas or blowing an engine. However, he didn't keep up with the momentum. After finishing in the top ten at Sonoma and Kentucky, Johnson was collected in an early wreck in the Coke Zero 400, finishing 42nd. Johnson's streak of misfortune continued the next several weeks, finishing 42nd for the second week in a row at New Hampshire. This was followed up by an inconsistent run at Indy (14th), and poor showings resulting from accidents at Pocono (39th) and Watkins Glen (28th). Despite the poor finishes, Johnson qualified fourth for the Chase. In the Chase, Johnson finished 12th at Chicagoland, fifth at New Hampshire, and third at Dover to advance to the Contender Round. However, trouble struck when he finished 40th and 17th in the next two races. At Talladega, Johnson started second and led a high of 84 laps. However, a 24th-place finish kept him from advancing to the Eliminator Round. At Martinsville, Johnson started seventh but finished 39th after being involved in a crash early in the race. Returning to Texas, Johnson dominated and held off Brad Keselowski, Kevin Harvick (and Jeff Gordon, who cut a tire on contact with Brad Keselowski late in the race which led to a post-race brawl) to score his third straight win in the fall Texas race, and also ended an 18-race-winless-streak. At Phoenix, he struggled for most of the day and finished 38th after blowing a tire and crashing out. At the season finale at Homestead, Johnson finished ninth and closed out finishing 11th in points. This marks the first time in Johnson's NASCAR Cup career that he has finished outside of the Top 10 in the final points. Johnson began his season with a win in the Budweiser Duel. He started the season by finishing fifth in the Daytona 500 for the second year in a row. The following week, he won the Folds of Honor QuikTrip 500 at Atlanta. At Las Vegas, Johnson crashed twice into the outside wall, leaving him with a 41st-place finish. He rebounded with an 11th-place finish in Phoenix and a ninth-place finish at California, his first Top 10 there in two years. At Martinsville, he struggled to a 35th-place finish. However, his momentum returned at Texas when he held off Kevin Harvick and Dale Earnhardt Jr. to win. At Bristol, he avoided tight trouble early in the race and came home second to polesitter Matt Kenseth. At Richmond, he finished third. These finishes moved him back up to fourth in the standings. At Talladega, Johnson started fifth and led 50 laps, only to finish second to Earnhardt Jr. At Kansas, Johnson gambled by staying out on the last round of pit stops and held off Harvick and Earnhardt again to win his third race at Kansas and of the season. In winning, he established a Cup record of 23 wins on 1.5-mile tracks, taking what was both his 200th Top 5 and his 300th Top 10 finish. At Charlotte, he spun out on two occasions. The first time was early in the race while running 16th coming out of turn 4 but he was lucky to avoid hitting anything. He wasn't so lucky on the second spin late in the race; while running fifth, he spun out again at the same place, and hit the wall in pit road, causing some nose damage. Those spin-outs left him with a 40th-place finish. He rebounded the following week with a win at Dover, and also became one of four drivers to have won 10 or more races at one track. This gave him a total of 74 career wins, two fewer than Dale Earnhardt's 76. At Pocono, Johnson cut a tire on lap 88 but did not take major damage. He was able to work his way through the field to finish in third place. He finished 19th at Michigan after the race was called for rain on lap 138. At Sonoma, Johnson led the most laps at 45 laps, but a late-race caution caused by Casey Mears' broken wheel axle cost him, and he was passed by Kyle Busch with five laps to go and slipped back to sixth place. Returning to Daytona, Johnson started 12th and led 35 laps before finishing second to Dale Earnhardt Jr., in a repeat of the Talladega race. At Kentucky, Johnson started sixth and ran inside the Top 10 for most of the night, finishing ninth. At the second stop in Pocono, Johnson, along with two of his Hendrick teammates, Jeff Gordon, and Dale Earnhardt, Jr, took advantage of several cars running out of fuel to finish in the Top 6 (Gordon finished third, Dale Jr. took fourth, Johnson grabbed sixth). At Watkins Glen, despite suffering two penalties (lap 3: Overshooting the entrance to the inner loop, and caution No. 1 (lap 26–28): Speeding through pit road) Johnson rallied to finish 10th. He wasn't so lucky at Michigan, late in the race, he got loose and spun in turn 3, and damaged the splitter on his car, resulting in a 39th-place finish (10 laps down). He rebounded at Bristol by finishing 4th but had bad luck once more at Darlington. He spun out on lap 134 in turn 4, bringing out the seventh caution, and was never a real threat. He ended up 19th. He was able to recover a bit for a ninth-place finish at Richmond and started 1st in the Chase in a three-way tie between him, Kyle Busch, and Matt Kenseth. Johnson opened up the Chase in a rough way. At Chicagoland, he blew a left front tire early in the race but was able to charge through the field to salvage an 11th-place finish. He also was the subject of controversy when he made contact with Kevin Harvick on a three-wide pass that led to Harvick cutting a left rear tire, leaving Harvick with a 42nd-place finish. At Loudon, Johnson finished sixth after blowing a tire in the third position. At Dover, his Chase hopes came to an end when his car broke a driveline, leading him to finish 36 laps down in 41st place. At the fall race at Texas Johnson won, passing Brad Keselowski with 4 laps to go. This marked his fourth consecutive win in the fall race, and third consecutive win on that track, having also won the spring race. That victory also marked the 75th of his NASCAR Cup Series career, putting him one race win short of tying Dale Earnhardt's career wins. Also in the process, he snapped a 20-race-winless-streak. Johnson finished fifth at Phoenix, and for the third year in a row, he finished ninth at Homestead. Also in the process, he edged out Ryan Newman by one point to finish 10th in the final standings. With the retirement of his teammate and mentor, Jeff Gordon, Johnson assumed the active wins record with 75. Johnson began the 2016 season with a 16th-place finish at the Daytona 500. In the next race at Atlanta Motor Speedway, he won his first race of the season and the 76th of his career, tying Dale Earnhardt for seventh on the all-time wins list. Johnson finished third and eleventh in the next two events of the season at Las Vegas and Phoenix. His second victory of the season came in the fifth race, the Auto Club 400, where Johnson passed Harvick in an overtime finish. It was also the first time since 2011 that he finished in the Top 5 at the Auto Club Speedway. In the STP 500 at Martinsville Speedway, Johnson recorded a ninth-place finish after moving through the field after qualifying 24th. One week later, Johnson finished fourth in the Duck Commander 500 at Texas Motor Speedway despite suffering minor damage during a 13-car accident that occurred within 50 laps of the finish. In the Food City 500 at Bristol, Johnson finished 23rd after making an unscheduled pit stop due to a loose lug nut on lap 300. At Richmond, he led 44 laps early in the race and finished third. At Talladega, Johnson was spun by Paul Menard and got involved in a multi-car accident with 28 laps to go, finishing 22nd. Johnson's streak of misfortune continued through the next several months, crashing out at Dover, Pocono, Daytona, Kentucky and at Watkins Glen, where he finished last for the first time in his career. His Top 10 finishes during the period came only in the Coca-Cola 600 and Brickyard 400, where he finished third in both races. Johnson finished seventh and sixth at Bristol and Michigan the following two weeks but finished 33rd at Darlington after he spun out of turn 4. Johnson then finished 11th at Richmond. He qualified eighth for the Chase. Johnson began the Chase for the Championship by leading a race-high 118 laps at Chicagoland, but received a speeding penalty during a green flag pit stop late in the race, ultimately finished 12th. Johnson finished eighth the following week at Loudon. At Dover, Johnson led 90 laps but once again received a pit road penalty with 105 laps to go, costing him a win. He charged through the field and finished seventh (1st car a lap down) and moved to the "Round of 12" of the Chase. At Charlotte, Johnson led a race-high 155 laps and won the Bank of America 500, claiming his eighth win at the track and the third win of the season, also snapping his 24-race winless streak. This marked Johnson's first appearance in the "Round of 8" under the current Chase system. He then finished 4th at Kansas and 23rd at Talladega. At Martinsville, Denny Hamlin aggressively made contact with Johnson on lap 198 and had a tire rub to cause a caution but was able to stay on the lead lap. Later during a caution on lap 362, he lost fuel pressure but was able to get the car refired and stayed on the lead lap again. After the restart, he took the lead from Hamlin and led the final 92 laps to win the Goody's Fast Relief 500. This locked him into the Championship 4 for the final race at Homestead. Johnson finished 11th in the rain-shortened race at Texas, and 38th at Phoenix after being penalized a lap for passing the pace car coming down to pit road and involved in a wreck on a restart. Wikinews has related news: Jimmie Johnson wins seventh NASCAR Cup Series championship Johnson claimed his seventh championship by winning at Homestead on November 20. After losing his starting spot due to a pre-race inspection fault, Johnson started at the rear of the field. He progressed through the field, cracking the Top 10 quickly, but remained stagnant around fifth-place for a majority of the race. On a restart with 10 laps to go, Carl Edwards came across the nose of Joey Logano, hit the inside wall, and triggered a massive wreck, ending Edwards' championship hopes. Johnson avoided the accident and was put into the position to win the title. On the final restart, he passed Kyle Larson, winning the race and his seventh championship, tying Richard Petty and Dale Earnhardt for the most all-time of championships. Johnson came into 2017 as the defending NASCAR Cup Series champion. The start of the season didn't go as smoothly as the end of last season, however. Through the first six races of the season, Johnson only scored one Top 10 finish. He then rebounded with back-to-back wins at the 2017 O'Reilly Auto Parts 500 in Texas (started from the rear of the field) and the 2017 Food City 500 at Bristol, his first win at The Last Great Coliseum since 2010. This would be the 14th and final time he won back-to-back races in his career. The following week, Johnson would finish just outside the Top 10 at Richmond, after colliding with teammate Dale Earnhardt Jr late in the event, leading to an eventual flat tire and spin for the driver of the No. 88. Johnson scored his third win of the season at Dover in June after passing Kyle Larson on an overtime restart, which ended under caution with a multicar incident behind the two leaders. This was Johnson's record-holding 11th win at Dover and 83rd career victory, tying him with NASCAR Hall of Famer, Cale Yarborough. This would eventually be Johnson's final NASCAR Cup Series win. The rest of the season didn't go smoothly for Johnson. In the week following his Dover triumph, during the Axalta presents the Pocono 400, Johnson's brakes failed into turn 1 at a speed of over 200 MPH, resulting in a tremendous impact with the outside SAFER barrier. Similarly, directly behind Johnson, fellow competitor Jamie McMurray also experienced a brake failure, and impacted the wall hard, igniting a large vehicle fire. Both Johnson and McMurray were uninjured in the accident. Johnson suffered a big slump during the summer part of the season, failing to earn a Top 5 finish, and only netting three Top 10 finishes. During that stretch, in the 2017 Brickyard 400 on a late race restart, Johnson's Lowe's-sponsored Chevrolet started billowing smoke while running in third-place. Heading into turn 3, the two race leaders Brad Keselowski and Kasey Kahne battled one another, allowing Johnson to close in and make a three-wide move to the inside. Without much space into the corner, and with the obvious mechanical failure, the car broke sideways and impacted the outside retaining wall hard. The following week, Johnson had another run-in with teammate Kasey Kahne, resulting in a second consecutive DNF; his third in the last four races. Regardless, Johnson (from his wins earlier in the season) was able to qualify for the playoffs. Entering the 2017 NASCAR Cup Series Playoffs, the defending champion was still one of the favorites to win the title, despite his results over the summer stretch. After earning his first Top 5 finish (third) since his Dover victory, fittingly in the fall Dover event, he advanced through the opening round and into the Round of 12. Johnson scored a seventh-place finish at Charlotte to open the second round, but the following week was involved in "The Big One" at Talladega. He was scored with a 24th-place result, after his car was disqualified for violating the NASCAR Damaged Vehicle Policy in which his crew worked on the car during the red flag. In the elimination race at Kansas Speedway, Johnson entered with a seven-point advantage. After having two separate spins, he drove his way through a large multicar accident off turn 2, involving Playoff drivers Matt Kenseth and Jamie McMurray, and rebounded with an 11th-place finish. Assisted by fellow Playoff contenders finding trouble, Johnson qualified into the Round of 8, by just nine points. Unfortunately, Johnson's performance slipped in the third round. He finished 12th at Martinsville, but was followed by a disappointing 27th-place result at Texas. Entering the final race in the round at Phoenix, Johnson was 51 points behind the Playoff cutoff, and in a near must-win situation. However, on lap 148, Johnson's hopes at an eighth championship ended when he blew a tire in turn 3, and hit the outside wall hard, ending his day and eliminating him from the Playoffs. Johnson finished 10th in the final standings, his 15th and final Top 10 finish in the points standings. Johnson's Speedweeks did not go smoothly, wrecking in each of his three races. At the Advance Auto Parts Clash, he was wrecked on the last lap by Kyle Larson; this was the seventh year in a row he failed to finish the Clash. Johnson qualified third for the 2018 Daytona 500 but had to go to a backup car after wrecking in his Duel. On lap 59 of the Daytona 500, he got caught up in a wreck started by Ryan Blaney, and Ricky Stenhouse Jr., which also involved his teammate William Byron, Erik Jones, Daniel Suárez, Trevor Bayne, and Ty Dillon and ended up 38th. Since then, Johnson struggled throughout the 2018 season with only two Top 5s and eight Top 10 finishes by the time he barely made the Playoffs for the 15th season in a row. Johnson's only great run of the season came at the Charlotte Roval race where he ran in the Top 10 for most of the day and battled Martin Truex Jr. for the win on the final lap, but he locked his brakes on turn 17 and spun out of control, taking Truex out with him in the process while Blaney passed them to win the race. Johnson finished eighth, and as a result of a three-way tie with 0 points, he was eliminated in the Round of 16. Johnson scored only one more top-ten finish afterward and wound up a then career-worst 14th in the final point standings since running full-time in 2002, winless for the first time in his career along with equaling a career-low 11 Top 10 finishes for the second season in a row. Johnson notably gave teammate and friend Chase Elliott a push to the front stretch when his car ran out of fuel when being congratulated by the rest of the drivers after recording his first career win, at Watkins Glen. On March 14, 2018, Lowe's announced they would no longer sponsor the No. 48 car after the 2018 season; Ally Financial assumed primary sponsorship of the team in 2019 on a two-year deal. Johnson and his long-time crew chief Knaus parted ways at the end of the season, ending a 17-year partnership, the longest in NASCAR history. Johnson was paired with JR Motorsports crew chief Kevin Meendering in the 2019 season. The 2019 season started on a positive note for Johnson, as he won the 2019 Advance Auto Parts Clash after contact between him and Paul Menard sent Menard spinning while battling for the lead and triggering "The Big One" on lap 55 right before the rain arrived. It was also the first race with new sponsor Ally Financial and crew chief Meendering. He followed it up by finishing eighth in the first duel race. In the Daytona 500, Johnson ran up front most of the race, but when he came to pit road with around 40 to go, B. J. McLeod and Cody Ware's cars spun behind him and hit him in the left rear. The contact ripped off the left rear quarter-panel. He recovered to finish ninth after being two laps down. In the next race at Atlanta Motor Speedway, Jimmie finished 24th, two laps down. He followed up by finishing 19th. He followed up that performance with a ninth-place finish. On March 29 in O'Reilly Auto Parts 500 qualifying at Texas, Johnson got his first pole since 2016 at Texas and scored his first Top 5 finish since the 2018 Coca-Cola 600 two days later. At the Coca-Cola 600, Johnson ran well and ended up finishing eighth. At Chicagoland Speedway, Johnson started fourth and took the lead on lap 7 from Austin Dillon. He went on to finish fourth followed by a third-place finish at the rain-shortened Coke Zero Sugar 400 a week later, his best finishes of the season. On July 29, 2019, following a string of disappointing finishes during the season, Hendrick Motorsports announced that race engineer Cliff Daniels would replace Meendering as the crew chief of the No. 48. At Watkins Glen, Johnson finished 19th after being spun out by Ryan Blaney, leading to an argument between the two after the race. The animosity between them lasted until Michigan a week later. In September 2019, Johnson missed the playoffs cut for the first time in his NASCAR career after finishing 35th in the Brickyard 400 due to contact with Kurt Busch and William Byron that sent his car crashing hard into the wall. Johnson scored four more Top 10 finishes in the playoffs and wound up finishing a career-worst 18th place in the final standings, going winless for the second straight season. Many crashes throughout the season brought down his otherwise promising year. On October 4, 2019, Ally extended its sponsorship of the No. 48 for three more years through the 2023 season. On November 20, 2019, Johnson announced that the 2020 Cup season would be his last full-time season of racing, although he did not rule out a part-time schedule after that. The 2020 season started with the Daytona 500 qualifying, he finished fourth for a second year in a row. Later that day, he entered the 2020 Busch Clash as the defending champion. He started 16th and finished 11th after a tire spun on the first restart in overtime. Next race was the 2020 Bluegreen Vacations Duels. He started and finished second behind team-mate William Byron in Duel 2. In his last Daytona 500, he started sixth and finished 35th after Kyle Busch and Brad Keselowski triggered "The Big One". Next week in Las Vegas, he finished first in the final practice. He started 18th and finished fifth in the race. At his home track Auto Club, he qualified second, losing the pole position to Clint Bowyer by 0.007 seconds. In the race, his wife and children waved the green flag at the start of the race. There was a four wide salute before the race to honor him. For most of the event, he was in the Top 10 and led 10 laps; he finished seventh. In The Real Heroes 400 at Darlington, the first race back after the delay forced by the COVID-19 pandemic, Johnson was leading in the final lap of the first stage when he lost control of his car and crashed after contact with Chris Buescher who was a lap down at the time. It marked his 100th race in a row without a win. A few days later in the Toyota 500 at the same track, Johnson bounced back with an eighth-place finish in the same track. At the Coca-Cola 600, he qualified second, losing the pole position to Kurt Busch by 0.009 seconds. Johnson finished second in the 600 but was disqualified after his car failed post-race technical inspection. He bounced back with an 11th-place run in Charlotte's next race Alsco Uniforms 500. He enjoyed a pair of top-ten finishes at Bristol and Atlanta. At Martinsville, he overcame a start at 21st and finished third in the first stage, and scored his first stage win of the year and the third of his career in the second segment, but dropped back in the third stage and finished tenth. He fell back early due to car issues at Homestead but ended with a strong run to make his way to the Top 20 and finish 16th. The following week at Talladega, Johnson spearheaded a pre-race ceremony in support of Bubba Wallace after it was falsely reported a noose was in his garage; before the race, Johnson texted his peers that he intended to stand with Wallace during the national anthem, with the drivers also pushing his car to the front of pit road. In the race, Johnson was on the verge of taking the lead with three laps remaining before being spun by Harvick. On July 3, 2020, two days before the Brickyard 400 at Indianapolis, Johnson announced he had tested positive for the coronavirus, forcing him to miss the race and Justin Allgaier to take over the No. 48. This snapped a 663-race streak in which Johnson started a Cup event. Johnson was cleared to return to racing on July 8, 2020, after testing negative twice, and he received a waiver that allowed him to remain playoff eligible should he qualify. His first race back was the Quaker State 400 at Kentucky, a track at which he had never won before. With 23 laps to go, he was coming off of the fastest three laps of the race and a strong run from ninth to third before taking the inside on a restart and being nipped by Brad Keselowski in the left rear, spinning out. He finished the race in 18th. The next week at Texas, Johnson was again one of the fastest cars, putting up a Top 10 lap before getting loose and hitting the wall in stage 2. On top of that, his crew committed a penalty for too many crew members over the wall. He finished 26th and only two points above the playoff cutoff in the standings. Johnson's misfortunes continued at Kansas when he was collected in a third-stage crash while running in the top ten, followed by a first-stage spin at New Hampshire while fighting for a top-five spot. Prior to the Go Bowling 235 at the Daytona road course, the No. 48 team changed the Ally paint scheme from black to white, which Johnson branded as a "rAlly" livery in an effort to "reset" his luck. Johnson, who had experience at the road course via the 24 Hours of Daytona, finished fourth in a run that he described as "what we needed". The final three races of the regular season saw Johnson battling with Byron and Matt DiBenedetto for the final playoff spots. Entering the doubleheader at Johnson's strongest track Dover, Johnson was 25 points behind his teammate. He finished seventh and third in the two races while Byron was 28th and fourth, which placed Johnson below Byron by four points with one race before the playoffs, and nine points behind DiBenedetto. The final race, the Coke Zero Sugar 400 at Daytona, began with a strong first stage for Johnson as he finished fifth, ahead of Byron and DiBenedetto. The second stage saw him pit early to avoid having to save fuel, and he took advantage of the drivers pitting later in the stage, for another fifth-place finish. Although the three bubble drivers avoided a late wreck in the final stage, Johnson was collected in "The Big One" with two laps remaining. Although his team was able to salvage the car to meet the minimum speed and finish 17th, DiBenedetto beat him for the last playoff seed by six points. In his post-race interview, Johnson lamented his misfortunes during the year including the Coca-Cola 600 disqualification and the positive COVID-19 test; he drew praise from fans for his humility when he congratulated Knaus, who moved to Byron's team, and expressed his gratitude to Hendrick Motorsports for his career. In the first playoff race, the Cook Out Southern 500 at Darlington, despite being out of the playoffs, Johnson ran in the top five for most of the night in a throwback scheme that combined those of Dale Earnhardt and Richard Petty, to honor the two other seven-time champions. His teammates at Hendrick Motorsports also drove in throwback schemes to honor him in his last year. During the fall Texas race, Johnson would gain publicity by running a special scheme created by designer Noah Sweet, otherwise known as Lefty or Lefty Designs. Sweet, four months earlier in June, had created a mock Jimmie Johnson scheme adorned with pride flag colors, which had led to an excess of harassment towards Sweet and led him to take a temporary break from social media. During his break, encouragement came from most in the NASCAR community (with the hashtag #WeLoveLefty created and spread), including Johnson himself. In a few weeks, Ally president Andreas Brimmer and Jimmie Johnson would tell Sweet on a video call that he would have his chance to get his design on Johnson's car. Sweet, whose favorite driver throughout his life had been Johnson, said "I'm going to remember it for the rest of my life. I am." The car eventually ran in the 2020 Autotrader EchoPark Automotive 500, finishing 36th due to engine issues. Johnson's only Top 10 of the playoffs came in his final start with a fifth-place finish in the Season Finale 500 at Phoenix; he was the highest-finishing driver of those not in the Championship Round. After the race, he congratulated teammate Elliott on his maiden championship and performed a Polish victory lap. He ended his final season with 10 Top 10 finishes, the lowest of his career. On November 4, 2022, Johnson purchased an ownership stake in Petty GMS Motorsports. In addition, he announced his return to the Cup Series on a part-time basis in 2023, starting with an attempt to make the 2023 Daytona 500. On January 11, 2023, the team was rebranded under the name Legacy Motor Club, with Johnson announced to be running the No. 84. On February 14, 2023, Johnson made the Daytona 500 entry field by scoring the fastest lap among the non-chartered teams. Johnson finished 31st after being involved in an overtime crash. Johnson would then make a start at the COTA race in March, where he finished 38th after wrecking out on Lap 1. Johnson's next start would come at the 2023 Coca-Cola 600 in May. He finished 37th after spinning out twice and only completing 115 laps. On June 26, 2023, Johnson’s in-laws were involved in a possible murder-suicide at their house in Muskogee, Oklahoma. Johnson was on the original entry list for the Chicago street course race, yet on June 27, 2023, Legacy Motor Club announced they would withdraw his entry from the race due to the tragedy. In 2020, Johnson participated in a test with IndyCar Series team Chip Ganassi Racing. He initially had a test scheduled in March with Arrow McLaren SP at Barber Motorsports Park before it was canceled due to the COVID-19 pandemic, a second attempt with Chip Ganassi Racing on the Indianapolis road course in July was postponed when he tested positive for the virus. The CGR test finally took place on July 28, 2020, it was overseen by CGR owner Chip Ganassi and five-time IndyCar champion Scott Dixon (who is, along with Johnson, considered to be one of the best in their respective series) to discuss the car. Johnson said that driving an IndyCar was a "childhood dream" of his. On September 9, 2020, Johnson announced that he would join Chip Ganassi Racing on a part-time basis in 2021 and 2022 to drive the road and street courses on the IndyCar circuit. The deal left open the possibility of running select NASCAR Cup Series events in conjunction, as Ganassi fielded two cars in NASCAR and could've added a part-time car for Johnson, staying under the four-car maximum for Cup teams. However, in 2021, Ganassi's NASCAR operations were sold to Justin Marks and absorbed into the Trackhouse Racing Team the following year. Johnson refused to run the ovals due to safety concerns of racing open-wheel cars on them but after both driving the cars and watching teammate Tony Kanaan run on ovals, he ultimately agreed to run an oval test at Texas to prep himself for the Indianapolis 500. Throughout the year Johnson largely struggled in IndyCar, frequently running at the back of the field and struggling with spins and accidents. On December 15, 2021, Johnson announced that he would contest the full 2022 IndyCar schedule driving the No. 48 car for Chip Ganassi Racing. During his first oval race in the series, the XPEL 375 at Texas, Johnson finished a then career-best sixth. Johnson made his Indianapolis 500 debut later in the year. Johnson led two laps and, despite a late race crash, was elected Rookie of the Year for the race. Johnson proceeded to collect his first career IndyCar top 5 in his first ever trip to Iowa Speedway at the Hy-Vee Salute to Farmers 300 presented by Google on July 24, 2022. On September 26, 2022, Johnson announced that he would be stepping back from racing full-time. Johnson first raced in the Race of Champions in Europe in 2002. He was eliminated in the first runoff by then world rally champion Marcus Grönholm of Finland but he and Jeff Gordon and Colin Edwards racing as Team USA won the teams' championship. He returned to the event two years later but lost the quarter finals 0–2 to Mattias Ekström of Sweden who was DTM German Touring Car champion that year. Johnson entered the 2006 Race of Champions but did not start due to injury received just days before the race. He still attended the event to cheer for teammate Travis Pastrana. In the 2007 event, Johnson was eliminated before the quarter-finals by Formula One driver Sébastien Bourdais of France. In 2004, he started racing in Grand-Am with the 24 Hours of Daytona, where he finished eighth. He also entered the event one year later, which his team, Howard-Boss Motorsports, finished second. Two years later, he entered two events, which were both held at Daytona International Speedway. During the races, his team finished 9th and 19th. In 2008, Johnson moved to Bob Stallings Racing with Alex Gurney and Jon Fogarty to race in the 2008 Rolex 24 at Daytona, where the team finished second. One year later, he returned with GAINSCO/Bob Stallings Racing for his fifth Rolex 24 appearance. During the race, his team finished seventh. He returned to the team in 2010, to race in the Rolex 24 and Sahlen's Six Hours of the Glen. During the Rolex 24 at Daytona his team finished 21st, while at Watkins Glen the team finished sixth. He returned to the Rolex 24, in 2011 where his team finished 15th. He returned to the race in 2021, driving an Ally Financial-sponsored No. 48 Cadillac DPi-V.R for Action Express Racing alongside Simon Pagenaud, Kamui Kobayashi, and Mike Rockenfeller. He finished second for a third time in his career. Alongside Pagenaud and Kobayashi, he will participate in all IMSA Michelin Endurance Cup races for 2021 which include Sebring, Watkins Glen and Road Atlanta. At Sebring, his team finished third but they were moved to the rear of DPi classification for violating drive time rules after Pagenaud was found to have driven more than the maximum 4 hours within a 6-hour time period. The team finished 28th in overall ranking. On November 26, 2018, Johnson participated in a motorsports cultural exchange with two-time F1 champion Fernando Alonso at Bahrain International Circuit, where both drivers compared their respective race cars. Johnson was born on September 17, 1975 in El Cajon, California, the son of Catherine Ellen "Cathy" (née Dunnill) and Gary Ernest Johnson. He has two younger brothers, Jarit and Jessie. Both have made professional off-road racing starts in the TORC: The Off-Road Championship. Johnson attended Granite Hills High School, while he raced motorcycles during the weekends. He was a varsity water polo player, diver, and swimmer, and graduated in 1993. The number 48 is retired from all sports teams uniforms at his school and Johnson was inducted into the school's Athletic Hall of Fame. Johnson lives in Charlotte, North Carolina like many other NASCAR drivers. He is married to Chandra Janway, the two having known each other since 2002. They have two daughters. Johnson is a triathlete, regularly participating in triathlons and long-distance running; the Jimmie Johnson Foundation's Wellness Challenge also hosts triathlons. In 2019, he competed in the Boston Marathon, finishing with a time of 3:09:07 and 4,155th overall (3,746th among males and 641st in the Male 40–44 class). Johnson was close friends with NASCAR competitor Blaise Alexander. Following Alexander's death during a racing incident, Johnson's car has had a flame decal with Alexander's initials inside of it on every car. In 2004, following the plane crash that killed the son of Rick Hendrick, Ricky, along with nine others, the tail number of the Hendrick plane that crashed was added alongside Alexander's initials. The Jimmie Johnson Foundation was launched by Johnson and his wife, Chandra, in 2006. The foundation helps children, families, and communities in need. In 2007, Johnson opened Jimmie Johnson's Victory Lanes in Randleman, North Carolina, which is a four-lane bowling alley for campers at Pattie and Kyle Petty's Victory Junction Gang Camp. The foundation supports several charities, including Habitat for Humanity, Hendrick Marrow Program, Make-A-Wish Foundation, and Victory Junction. Every year, it holds a golf tournament in San Diego, which raises money for K-12 public education. Since the beginning, the tournament has raised a total of $8 million to help fund several projects. During 2009 and 2010, the foundation awarded $1.5 million for the Education Champions Grants program. The money is given to public schools in California, Oklahoma, and North Carolina. It helps fund basic needs, such as technology, outdoor classrooms, playground construction, and reading programs. The foundation has also assisted the American Red Cross with disaster relief efforts. In 2014, Johnson joined the Ban Bossy campaign, as a spokesperson advocating leadership in young girls. For his successes, Johnson is often regarded as one of the greatest drivers in NASCAR history. Other drivers and teammates have also lauded Johnson for his leadership and helpfulness, including younger drivers Corey LaJoie (for whom Johnson advocated to get a seat in a Cup car), Chase Elliott, William Byron, Bubba Wallace, Alex Bowman, and Ryan Blaney as well as veterans including Brad Keselowski, Kevin Harvick, Jeff Gordon, and more. In 2000, People recognized Johnson as one of their "Men in the Fast Lane". Johnson has won the Driver of the Year Award five times (2006, 2007, 2009, 2010, 2013). In 2009, he became the first racing driver to win the Associated Press Male Athlete of the Year Award in the United States. Johnson was ranked No. 1 on Forbes.com's list of "Most Influential Athletes" for two consecutive years (2011, 2012). In 2018, Johnson received the fourth-annual Byrnsie Award, named after the late Fox NASCAR broadcaster Steve Byrnes, during FS1's RaceDay prior to the running of the Toyota/Save Mart 350 at Sonoma Raceway. At the time of his retirement, Johnson's 83 career points-paying victories made him the winningest active NASCAR driver, in sixth place among the all-time Cup Series winners; he is also ranked third among those who have competed during the sport's modern era (1972–present). He is tied in first with Dale Earnhardt Sr. and Richard Petty for most NASCAR Cup Series championships, with 7. He also has the most consecutive NASCAR Cup Series championships with 5. Johnson is the all-time winningest Cup Series driver at the following tracks: Auto Club Speedway (6) Charlotte Motor Speedway (8) Dover International Speedway (11) Las Vegas Motor Speedway (4) Texas Motor Speedway (7) Johnson won a Cup Series race at every track on the 2020 schedule except at Chicagoland Speedway (where he won his first NASCAR race, in the Busch Series), Kentucky Speedway, Watkins Glen International, The Roval at Charlotte Motor Speedway and the Daytona International Speedway Road Course. Up until 2019, Johnson was the only driver to have qualified for the NASCAR Cup Series playoffs every single year since its inception in 2004. He also holds the record for the most consecutive and total playoffs appearances, with 15. On January 11, 2022, Johnson announced Charlotte FC's first ever MLS draft pick, and the first overall draft pick of the 2022 MLS SuperDraft, when Charlotte drafted Ben Bender out of the University of Maryland, College Park. Johnson appeared as a moonshine runner along with Ryan Newman in the opening scene of the 2004 NASCAR 3D: The IMAX Experience. Johnson made an appearance as himself in the 2005 film Herbie: Fully Loaded, commenting on Herbie's sunroof as unusual for a stock car to have, and his car is also briefly seen from Herbie's POV. Johnson starred in an episode of the television series Las Vegas in 2005. Johnson starred in an episode of the HBO reality television series 24/7, titled "Jimmie Johnson: Race to Daytona". Cameras followed him from January 2010 to the 52nd Daytona 500 held on February 14, 2010. In 2012, Johnson was featured in a NASCAR segment of Top Gear along with NASCAR drivers Jeff Gordon, Juan Pablo Montoya, and Kyle Petty. Johnson appeared on The Ellen DeGeneres Show during its tenth season in 2013. Fresh off his second Daytona 500 victory, Johnson challenged host Ellen DeGeneres to a go-kart race. On November 19, 2013, Johnson became the first professional athlete to co-host ESPN's flagship news show, SportsCenter. In 2015, Johnson appeared on the series Repeat After Me and voiced a lobster named Jimmie on the animated kids show Bubble Guppies. In 2016, Johnson appeared in Blaze and the Monster Machines with fellow NASCAR drivers Chase Elliott, Kasey Kahne and Danica Patrick. Johnson has appeared on the cover of several magazines, including NASCAR Illustrated; Sports Illustrated; Men's Fitness, and Success. Johnson makes a cameo appearance as a pilot in the music video for The Avett Brothers' "Ain't No Man", the lead single from the album True Sadness (2016). Johnson's Cup ride, the No. 48 Lowe's Chevrolet, is featured on the covers of NASCAR Racing 2003 Season alongside Kevin Harvick and NASCAR The Game: 2011. Johnson and Hendrick Motorsports teammate Jeff Gordon are featured on the cover of NASCAR 06: Total Team Control, highlighting Team Control, the main addition of the game. Johnson is also one of the six cover drivers of NASCAR Kart Racing. Johnson's No. 48 Chevrolet Impala is one of the twelve playable NASCAR Sprint Cup Series stock cars in the 2010 racing video game Gran Turismo 5. His 2011 car was later added to the game in the Spec II update of the game, with his 2013 car also being featured in the 2013 sequel Gran Turismo 6. Johnson is featured in the 2011 racing video game Jimmie Johnson's Anything with an Engine. Johnson's No. 48 is also playable in Forza Motorsport 6, via the NASCAR expansion pack. The expansion features twenty-four paint schemes from the 2016 Sprint Cup Series season, including Johnson's No. 48 Lowe's SS. Johnson, along with Chase Elliott and Kyle Busch, provide commentary in the expansion as the "voices of motorsport". Johnson and Elliott also had roles in developing the expansion. Johnson, along with teammates Chase Elliott, Alex Bowman, and William Byron, were featured on the cover of NASCAR Heat 3. Johnson was also featured in Ally Racer, a mobile game created to honor his final season by Ally Financial. List of Daytona 500 pole position winners List of Daytona 500 winners Portals:  Biography  California  Sports "10 Greatest Race Car Drivers of All Time - Page 6 of 10". May 7, 2015. Archived from the original on April 9, 2017. Retrieved April 8, 2017. "Jimmie Johnson grabs rare Bristol win after Larson mishap". MSN. Archived from the original on April 25, 2017. Retrieved April 24, 2017. "Official Site of Hendrick Motorsports NASCAR Racing & Team Store". Hendrickmotorsports.com. September 17, 1975. Archived from the original on February 24, 2011. Retrieved February 6, 2011. "CORR: Scott Taylor wins Governor's Cup at Crandon". Motorsport.com. Archived from the original on November 5, 2013. Retrieved January 12, 2013. "FANS CHEER LAKE GENEVA SODA SEASON OPENER". Archived from the original on December 8, 2013. Retrieved July 27, 2013. "Antigo 1997". Off-road.com. Archived from the original on December 8, 2013. Retrieved July 27, 2013. "Douglas Scores Double Win at Lake Geneva Race". Off-road.com. Archived from the original on December 8, 2013. Retrieved July 27, 2013. "Class 8 points standings". Off-road.com. Archived from the original on December 8, 2013. Retrieved July 27, 2013. "Jimmie Johnson salutes a long, strange trip through the desert". sports.yahoo.com. Retrieved July 31, 2020.[permanent dead link] "Jimmie JohnsonBiography, Pictures, Videos, & Quotes". Jimmie Johnson .org. Archived from the original on July 26, 2011. Retrieved February 6, 2011. Dahn, Jeff (September 20, 1998). "Tragedy hits Petty hard". The Gazette. Archived from the original on March 23, 2021. Retrieved June 12, 2020 – via Newspapers.com. Jim, Tretow. "Howie Lettow Remembered". Speed 51. Archived from the original on July 16, 2011. Retrieved August 21, 2010. "1998 Kroger 200 Presented by the Fifth Third Bank". Racing-Reference. NASCAR Media Group, LLC. Archived from the original on February 19, 2021. Retrieved June 12, 2020. Dahn, Jeff (July 10, 1999). "Johnson's days in ASA winding down". The Gazette. Archived from the original on March 23, 2021. Retrieved June 12, 2020 – via Newspapers.com. Humphrey, Matt (July 2, 2000). "Johnson has eyes forward after crash". St. Joseph News-Press. Retrieved June 12, 2020 – via Newspapers.com. "Jimmie Johnson to race for Hendrick". Statesman Journal. September 23, 2000. Retrieved June 12, 2020 – via Newspapers.com. Pearce, Al (February 12, 2015). "Jimmie Johnson recalls how NASCAR champion Jeff Gordon helped kick-start his career ahead of Daytona 500". Autoweek. Archived from the original on June 13, 2020. Retrieved June 12, 2020. "Team Lowe's Racing – Jimmie Johnson". Lowesracing.com. September 17, 1975. Archived from the original on December 17, 2010. Retrieved February 6, 2011. "NASCAR.COM – Before Hendrick, there was Herzog Motorsports". December 7, 2006. Nascar.com. Archived from the original on October 10, 2012. Retrieved February 6, 2011. Caraviello, David (January 20, 2014). "TOP TEN ROOKIE CAMPAIGNS AT NASCAR'S HIGHEST LEVEL". NASCAR. Archived from the original on August 11, 2017. Retrieved January 20, 2014. "NASCAR Cup Rookie of the Year Records". Jayski's NASCAR Silly Season Site. Archived from the original on November 16, 2019. Retrieved November 25, 2019. "2003 Standings". NASCAR.com. Archived from the original on October 12, 2012. Retrieved November 22, 2010. "Johnson's First Martinsville Win Came With a Price". Bleacher Report. March 23, 2010. Archived from the original on October 8, 2012. Retrieved February 6, 2011. "2004 Jimmie Johnson Season Stats | Racing Season Stats and Results | NASCAR Sprint Cup". FOX Sports on MSN. Archived from the original on April 19, 2010. Retrieved February 6, 2011. "2005 Jimmie Johnson Season Stats | Racing Season Stats and Results | NASCAR Sprint Cup". FOX Sports on MSN. Archived from the original on April 19, 2010. Retrieved February 6, 2011. Pearce, Al (March 10, 2020). "Earl Barban is 7-time NASCAR champion Jimmie Johnson's eyes in the sky". Autoweek. Archived from the original on July 4, 2020. Retrieved July 4, 2020. "Earl Barban Archives". NASCAR Talk | NBC Sports. Archived from the original on June 18, 2020. Retrieved July 4, 2020. "Impossible save: Jimmie Jimmie's 2006 qualifying spin at Dover | NASCAR". Official Site Of NASCAR. Retrieved October 21, 2020. "Frontstretch Breakdown: 2006 Sylvania 300 at Loudon". Frontstretch. September 18, 2006. Archived from the original on December 3, 2020. Retrieved October 21, 2020. "Jimmie Johnson's Chase Diary: Kansas | Hendrick Motorsports". hendrickmotorsports.com. Archived from the original on January 22, 2018. Retrieved October 21, 2020. "Gamble Earns Stewart a Victory (Published 2006)". The New York Times. Associated Press. October 2, 2006. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved October 21, 2020. "NASCAR.COM - Lap-by-Lap: 'Dega - Oct 8, 2006". April 30, 2011. Archived from the original on April 30, 2011. Retrieved October 21, 2020. "Jimmie Johnson's Chase Diary: Talladega | Hendrick Motorsports". hendrickmotorsports.com. Archived from the original on January 23, 2018. Retrieved October 21, 2020. "Best of 7: Jimmie Johnson's Greatest Championship". YouTube. Archived from the original on December 29, 2020. Retrieved October 21, 2020. "Bowles-Eye View: Jimmie Johnson's Miracle Comeback". Frontstretch. November 5, 2006. Archived from the original on December 8, 2020. Retrieved October 21, 2020. "2006 Jimmie Johnson Season Stats | Racing Season Stats and Results | NASCAR Sprint Cup |". FOX Sports on MSN. Archived from the original on April 19, 2010. Retrieved February 6, 2011. "2007 Jimmie Johnson Season Stats | Racing Season Stats and Results | NASCAR Sprint Cup". FOX Sports on MSN. Archived from the original on April 19, 2010. Retrieved February 6, 2011. Marty Smith (February 13, 2010). "Workout wiz JJ strengthens his grip on Cup reign". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on September 15, 2016. Retrieved March 5, 2012. David Caraviello (October 23, 2010). "For some, running means a different kind of race". NASCAR.com. Archived from the original on October 19, 2011. Retrieved March 5, 2012. "John Sitaras and Jimmie Johnsonon ESPN". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on September 26, 2013. Retrieved March 5, 2012. David Caraviello (July 18, 2011). "Setting the golden standard". NASCAR.com. Archived from the original on October 19, 2011. Retrieved March 5, 2012. Fryer, Jenna (December 21, 2009). "NASCAR's Johnson wins male athlete of the year". Boston Globe. Archived from the original on July 25, 2012. Retrieved February 6, 2011. "2008 Jimmie Johnson Season Stats | Racing Season Stats and Results | NASCAR Sprint Cup | FOX Sports on MSN". Msn.foxsports.com. Archived from the original on April 19, 2010. Retrieved February 6, 2011. "With Late Bump, Johnson Wins Lenox Industrial Tools 301". The New York Times. Associated Press. June 27, 2010. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on June 29, 2018. Retrieved September 10, 2020. "NASCAR's Jimmie Johnson wins Driver of the Year". USA Today. December 15, 2010. Archived from the original on January 13, 2012. Retrieved February 6, 2011. "Johnson captures 5th straight NASCAR title – Motor sports- NBC Sports". Nbcsports.msnbc.com. November 21, 2010. Archived from the original on July 21, 2012. Retrieved February 6, 2011. "Johnson wins fifth straight title; Edwards wins race". Sporting News. November 21, 2010. Archived from the original on November 23, 2010. Retrieved November 28, 2009. "Johnson wins Prelude to the Dream at Eldora". Autoweek.com. Archived from the original on December 1, 2010. Retrieved November 22, 2010. "Jimmie Johnson – 2011 NASCAR Sprint Cup Series Results". Racing-Reference. USA Today Sports Media Group. Retrieved October 26, 2014. "Bayne becomes youngest Daytona 500 winner". Sporting News Wire Service. NASCAR.com. February 11, 2011. Archived from the original on June 16, 2013. Retrieved June 20, 2013. "Johnson nips Bowyer at the line, wins at Talladega". Sporting New Wire Service. NASCAR.com. Archived from the original on October 23, 2013. Retrieved June 5, 2011. Aumann, Mark (June 20, 2011). "Spins, scrapes, and struggles ... Oh my!". NASCAR.com. Archived from the original on October 23, 2013. Retrieved June 20, 2013. "Gordon, Johnson finish in top ten at Sonoma". Hendrick Motorsports. June 26, 2011. Archived from the original on June 30, 2011. Retrieved August 8, 2011. "Earnhardt, Johnson: no hard feelings after Daytona". ESPN. July 8, 2011. Archived from the original on December 1, 2017. Retrieved August 8, 2011. "Gordon finishes second, teammates in top 19 at Indianapolis Motor Speedway". Hendrick Motorsports. July 31, 2011. Archived from the original on September 28, 2011. Retrieved August 8, 2011. "Busch stands his ground and grabs third at Pocono". NASCAR.com. August 8, 2011. Archived from the original on November 5, 2013. Retrieved August 8, 2011. "Johnson Finishes 14th in Shootout". Press Release. Catchfence.com. February 19, 2012. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved February 27, 2012. "Jimmie Johnson, Danica Patrick crash". ESPN. Associated Press. February 28, 2012. Archived from the original on July 28, 2018. Retrieved March 18, 2012. "Jimmie Johnson – 2012 NASCAR Sprint Cup Series Results". Racing-Reference. USA Today Sports Media Group. Retrieved October 26, 2014. "2012 Official Driver Standings: Food City 500". NASCAR.com. Archived from the original on September 8, 2012. Retrieved March 21, 2012. "Johnson ninth, Earnhardt 15th at Bristol". Hendrick Motorsports. March 18, 2012. Archived from the original on March 27, 2012. Retrieved March 18, 2012. Pockrass, Bob (March 25, 2012). "Jimmie Johnson gets big break with California rain". Sporting News. Archived from the original on March 27, 2012. Retrieved March 25, 2012. "Newman wins at Martinsville after leaders crash". NASCAR Wire Service. NASCAR.com. April 2, 2012. Archived from the original on November 3, 2013. Retrieved May 11, 2012. Jensen, Tom (April 14, 2012). "CUP: Biffle Makes Late Charge To Victory". Speed TV. Archived from the original on April 17, 2012. Retrieved May 11, 2012. "Lap-by-Lap: Talladega". NASCAR.com. May 6, 2012. Archived from the original on November 3, 2013. Retrieved May 11, 2012. "At long last! Johnson wins 200th for Hendrick". NASCAR Wire Service. NASCAR.com. May 13, 2012. Archived from the original on April 5, 2013. Retrieved May 13, 2012. "Jimmie Johnson wins All-Star race". ESPN Dallas/Fort Worth. Associated Press. May 20, 2012. Archived from the original on September 15, 2016. Retrieved May 26, 2012. "Kahne wins at Charlotte, teammates in top 11". Hendrick Motorsports. May 27, 2012. Archived from the original on May 30, 2012. Retrieved June 2, 2012. "Johnson wins FedEx 400 at Dover". Fox Sports at MSN. Associated Press. June 4, 2012. Archived from the original on August 12, 2014. Retrieved June 4, 2012. Jensen, Tom (June 10, 2012). "CUP: Johnson Rallies For Fourth". Speed TV. Archived from the original on August 16, 2012. Retrieved July 23, 2012. "Top Five Finish at Sonoma". Team Lowe's Racing. June 24, 2012. Archived from the original on November 17, 2012. Retrieved July 23, 2012. "Brad Keselowski wins third of 2012". ESPN. Associated Press. July 2, 2012. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved July 23, 2012. "Stewart emerges from wild finish for Daytona win". NASCAR.com. July 9, 2012. Archived from the original on November 5, 2013. Retrieved July 23, 2012. Ryan, Nate (July 29, 2012). "Fourth Brickyard win stamps Jimmie Johnson as Chase favorite". USA Today. Archived from the original on July 30, 2012. Retrieved July 29, 2012. "Jimmie Johnson extends Chase lead". ESPN. November 5, 2012. Archived from the original on July 28, 2018. Retrieved January 31, 2013. Sports, Nate Ryan, USA TODAY. "Keselowski is no longer 'Bad Brad' — he's just better". USA TODAY. Archived from the original on November 29, 2020. Retrieved August 1, 2020.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Long, Dustin (November 12, 2012). "Blown tire all but ends Jimmie Johnson's title hopes". USA Today. Archived from the original on January 8, 2013. Retrieved January 31, 2013. Olsen, Jeff (November 18, 2012). "Gears and lug nuts doom Jimmie Johnson's title hopes". USA Today. Archived from the original on January 10, 2013. Retrieved January 31, 2013. "Jimmie Johnson – 2013 NASCAR Sprint Cup Series Results". Racing-Reference. USA Today Sports Media Group. Retrieved October 26, 2014. Nate Ryan and Heather Tucker (February 24, 2013). "Jimmie Johnson wins Daytona 500; Danica Patrick eighth". USA Today. Archived from the original on February 25, 2013. Retrieved February 24, 2013. Fryer, Jenna (May 18, 2013). "Jimmie Johnson races to record 4th All-Star win". Yahoo! Sports. Archived from the original on June 8, 2013. Retrieved May 18, 2013. Bruce, Kenny (June 16, 2013). "Trouble snares Hendrick quartet at Michigan". NASCAR.com. Archived from the original on June 20, 2013. Retrieved June 16, 2013. Fryer, Jenna (July 6, 2013). "Johnson 1st driver to sweep Daytona since 1982". Yahoo! Sports. Archived from the original on July 10, 2013. Retrieved July 6, 2013. Bruce, Kenny (July 12, 2013). "Johnson's time disallowed, will start at rear". Yahoo! Sports. Archived from the original on July 15, 2013. Retrieved July 14, 2013. Cain, Holly (July 14, 2013). "Jimmie Johnson caps major rally at New Hampshire". NASCAR. Archived from the original on July 18, 2013. Retrieved July 14, 2013. "Jimmie Johnson wins record eighth victory at Dover". Hendrick Motorsports. September 29, 2013. Archived from the original on September 29, 2013. Retrieved September 30, 2013. "Jimmie Johnson wins Coca-Cola 600". ESPN. May 26, 2014. Archived from the original on June 4, 2020. Retrieved June 4, 2020. "Jimmie Johnson makes it nine wins at Dover". USA Today. June 1, 2014. Archived from the original on June 2, 2014. Retrieved June 1, 2014. "Jimmie Johnson falls from No. 2 in NASCAR Cup Series points standings". Archived from the original on July 14, 2014. Retrieved July 7, 2014. "Johnson survives for soggy Atlanta win". Archived from the original on March 4, 2015. Retrieved March 12, 2015. Bonkowski, Jerry (May 10, 2015). "Jimmie Johnson leads Hendrick onslaught, holds off Kevin Harvick to win at Kansas". NASCAR Talk. NBC Sports. Archived from the original on May 11, 2015. Retrieved May 10, 2015. Dutton, Monte (February 29, 2016). "Johnson Ties Earnhardt Victory Mark as NASCAR Returns to Normal". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on April 1, 2016. Retrieved March 25, 2016. "Jimmie Johnson gets past Kevin Harvick in OT to win at Fontana". ESPN. March 20, 2016. Archived from the original on December 1, 2017. Retrieved March 25, 2016. Caldwell, Gray (April 3, 2016). "Race Recap: Johnson battles for top-10 finish at Martinsville". Hendrick Motorsports. Archived from the original on July 22, 2016. Retrieved July 11, 2016. Spencer, Reid (April 10, 2016). "Kyle Busch extends streak; corrals Texas win". NASCAR.com. NASCAR Media Group, LLC. Archived from the original on July 17, 2016. Retrieved July 11, 2016. "Jimmie Johnson wins second race in a row, captures Food City 500 at Bristol". April 24, 2017. "Dale Jr., Jimmie Johnson collide". April 30, 2017. Wackerlin, Jeff (June 4, 2017). "Monster Milestone Win for Johnson". MRN.com. Motor Racing Network. Archived from the original on June 7, 2017. Retrieved June 4, 2017. "Pocono wreck: Jimmie Johnson, Jamie McMurray take hard hits". June 11, 2017. "Add Jimmie Johnson to those who wreck out of Brickyard 400". July 24, 2017. "WATCH: Jimmie Johnson crashes out of NASCAR race at Pocono". July 30, 2017. "NASCAR Playoffs: 2017 Monster Energy Series field set". September 10, 2017. "NASCAR Playoffs: Who advanced to Round of 12? | NASCAR.com". October 2017. "Jimmie Johnson advances to Round of 8 | NASCAR.com". October 23, 2017. "NASCAR Playoffs: Jimmie Johnson fades at Texas | NASCAR.com". November 5, 2017. "Jimmie Johnson in 'must-win' situation at Phoenix | NASCAR.com". November 10, 2017. "Jimmie Johnson crashes at Phoenix, ending his chase for record eighth NASCAR title". USA Today. "Iconic moment as Johnson pushes Elliott to Victory Lane | Hendrick Motorsports". hendrickmotorsports.com. Archived from the original on July 19, 2020. Retrieved July 19, 2020. "Chase Elliott on Jimmie Johnson's 'awesome' sportsmanship after first win". For The Win. August 8, 2018. Archived from the original on July 19, 2020. Retrieved July 19, 2020. Utter, Jim (October 29, 2018). "Jimmie Johnson finds new sponsor in Ally Financial for 2019 season". Motorsport.com. Archived from the original on October 28, 2018. Retrieved October 29, 2018. "Jimmie Johnson wins rain-shortened Advance Auto Parts Clash". NASCAR.com. NASCAR Digital Media, LLC. February 10, 2019. Archived from the original on February 12, 2019. Retrieved February 11, 2019. Spencer, Reid (July 29, 2019). "Hendrick Motorsports names Cliff Daniels as No. 48 crew chief". NASCAR.com. NASCAR Digital Media, LLC. Archived from the original on July 30, 2019. Retrieved July 30, 2019. Wilhelm, Chase (July 29, 2019). "Jimmie Johnson on crew chief change: 'We have to act now'". NASCAR.com. NASCAR Digital Media, LLC. Archived from the original on July 30, 2019. Retrieved July 30, 2019. Page, Scott (July 29, 2019). "Cliff Daniels named crew chief for Jimmie Johnson". Jayski's Silly Season Site. NASCAR Digital Media, LLC. Archived from the original on July 30, 2019. Retrieved July 30, 2019. Albert, Zack (August 4, 2019). "Johnson's anger with Blaney boils over: 'Everybody stay tuned'". NASCAR.com. NASCAR Digital Media, LLC. Archived from the original on August 12, 2019. Retrieved August 12, 2019. "Report: Blaney, Johnson make peace over beers at Michigan". NASCAR.com. NASCAR Digital Media, LLC. August 10, 2019. Archived from the original on August 12, 2019. Retrieved August 12, 2019. Page, Scott (September 8, 2019). "Jimmie Johnson comments on Indianapolis accident, missing playoffs". Jayski's Silly Season Site. NASCAR Digital Media, LLC. Archived from the original on March 23, 2021. Retrieved September 9, 2019. "Ally Financial extends full-season primary sponsorship of Hendrick Motorsports". Hendrick Motorsports. October 4, 2019. Archived from the original on March 23, 2021. Retrieved October 5, 2019. "Ally signs three-year, full-season sponsorship extension with Hendrick". NASCAR.com. NASCAR Digital Media, LLC. October 4, 2019. Retrieved October 5, 2019. Long, Dustin (November 20, 2019). "Jimmie Johnson announces that 2020 will be his final full-time Cup season". NBC Sports. NBC. Archived from the original on November 21, 2019. Retrieved November 20, 2019. "Jimmie Johnson, seven-time NASCAR champion, to retire after 2020 season". NASCAR.com. NASCAR Digital Media, LLC. November 20, 2019. Archived from the original on November 20, 2019. Retrieved November 20, 2019. "311 - Jimmie Johnson: 7x3=Perfection". Player.fm. Dirty Mo Media. August 18, 2020. Archived from the original on September 18, 2020. Retrieved October 19, 2020. Spencer, Reid (March 1, 2020). "NASCAR NOTES: Jimmie Johnson runs well in final Auto Club Speedway race". Gwinnett Daily Post. Archived from the original on July 11, 2020. Retrieved July 8, 2020. DeGroot, Nick (May 17, 2020). "Johnson crashes from lead moments away from Stage 1 win". Motorsport.com. Motorsport Network. Archived from the original on May 25, 2020. Retrieved May 17, 2020. "No. 48 fails post-race inspection; Jimmie Johnson disqualified at Charlotte". NASCAR. May 25, 2020. Archived from the original on June 3, 2020. Retrieved May 25, 2020. "Starting lineup for Martinsville Cup race | NASCAR". Official Site Of NASCAR. June 8, 2020. Archived from the original on July 7, 2020. Retrieved July 4, 2020. "Stage results for Martinsville NASCAR Cup Series race | NASCAR". Official Site Of NASCAR. June 11, 2020. Archived from the original on June 11, 2020. Retrieved July 4, 2020. "Jimmie Johnson, Joey Logano split stage wins at Martinsville". NASCAR. June 10, 2020. Archived from the original on June 11, 2020. Retrieved July 3, 2020. "How Jimmie Johnson and other NASCAR drivers came together in solidarity with Bubba Wallace at Talladega". For The Win. June 23, 2020. Archived from the original on June 24, 2020. Retrieved June 23, 2020. Andrejev, Alex (June 22, 2020). "NASCAR at Talladega results: Ryan Blaney took the checkered flag, but Bubba Wallace won". The Charlotte Observer. Archived from the original on July 7, 2020. Retrieved July 3, 2020. "Johnson to miss Brickyard 400 due to COVID-19". ESPN.com. July 3, 2020. Archived from the original on July 4, 2020. Retrieved July 3, 2020. Fryer, Jenna (July 8, 2020). "NASCAR's Jimmie Johnson can race again after he tests negative twice for COVID-19: 'It's been an emotional journey'". The Baltimore Sun. AP. Archived from the original on July 10, 2020. Retrieved July 8, 2020. "Quaker State 400 Presented by Walmart". Official Site Of NASCAR. Archived from the original on July 13, 2020. Retrieved July 12, 2020. Weaver, Matt (July 13, 2020). "Brad Keselowski Says Jimmie Johnson Spin was Unavoidable". Autoweek. Archived from the original on August 15, 2020. Retrieved August 24, 2020. "Brad Keselowski spins Jimmie Johnson on late Kentucky restart | NASCAR". Official Site Of NASCAR. Archived from the original on July 12, 2020. Retrieved July 12, 2020. "O'Reilly Auto Parts 500". Official Site Of NASCAR. Archived from the original on July 19, 2020. Retrieved July 21, 2020. "Some Jimmie Johnson fans are wondering if the NASCAR driver is jinxed this season". For The Win. July 19, 2020. Archived from the original on July 21, 2020. Retrieved July 21, 2020. "Jimmie Johnson, others caught in multi-car crash at Kansas | NASCAR". Official Site Of NASCAR. July 24, 2020. Archived from the original on July 24, 2020. Retrieved July 24, 2020. Handy, Sarah (August 3, 2020). "Jimmie Johnson with up and down day in final Loudon race". Kickin' the Tires. Archived from the original on September 21, 2020. Retrieved August 24, 2020. Taranto, Steven (August 13, 2020). "Jimmie Johnson gets paint scheme "reset" for rest of 2020 season". 247Sports.com. Retrieved August 24, 2020. Long, Dustin (August 16, 2020). "What drivers said after Daytona road course race". NBC Sports. Archived from the original on August 21, 2020. Retrieved August 24, 2020. Andrejev, Alex (August 24, 2020). "Final NASCAR playoff spot will likely come down to Jimmie Johnson vs. William Byron". The Charlotte Observer. Archived from the original on November 17, 2020. Retrieved August 24, 2020. McFadin, Daniel (August 23, 2020). "William Byron has narrow lead over Jimmie Johnson for final playoff spot". NBC Sports. Archived from the original on September 19, 2020. Retrieved August 16, 2020. Kelly, Godwin (August 29, 2020). "William Byron wins at Daytona as teammate Jimmie Johnson misses playoffs in final season". USA Today. Archived from the original on August 30, 2020. Retrieved August 30, 2020. "Chance at eighth championship escapes Jimmie Johnson | NASCAR". Official Site Of NASCAR. August 30, 2020. Archived from the original on August 30, 2020. Retrieved August 30, 2020. "Jimmie Johnson dressed like Dale Earnhardt, Richard Petty before Southern 500 throwback race". For The Win. September 6, 2020. Archived from the original on September 7, 2020. Retrieved September 7, 2020. "Hendrick Darlington throwbacks to honor Jimmie Johnson | NASCAR". Official Site Of NASCAR. August 20, 2020. Archived from the original on October 31, 2020. Retrieved September 7, 2020. "Lefty's dream: Jimmie Johnson's bond with young designer creates special No. 48 for final Texas ride". sports.yahoo.com. Archived from the original on May 19, 2021. Retrieved May 19, 2021. Waack, Terrin (November 8, 2020). "Jimmie Johnson's final ride comes to a close in Phoenix finale". NASCAR. Archived from the original on November 29, 2020. Retrieved November 30, 2020. Eggert, Seth (November 8, 2020). "Johnson caps off full-time Cup Series career with Phoenix top-five". Kickin' The Tires. Archived from the original on December 5, 2020. Retrieved November 30, 2020. "Petty GMS and Seven-Time NASCAR Cup Series Champion Jimmie Johnson Enter Ownership Agreement". Petty GMS Motorsports. November 4, 2022. Archived from the original on November 4, 2022. Retrieved November 5, 2022. "Jimmie Johnson joins Petty GMS in part-owner role, plans return to select Cup races in 2023". NASCAR.com. NASCAR Digital Media, LLC. November 4, 2022. Retrieved November 5, 2022. Srigley, Joseph (January 11, 2023). "Petty GMS Rebranding to LEGACY Motor Club, Jimmie Johnson Driving No. 84 Part-Time in 2023". TobyChristie.com. Retrieved January 11, 2023. Albert, Zack (February 15, 2023). "Jimmie Johnson, Travis Pastrana seal Daytona 500 berths". NASCAR. Retrieved February 16, 2023. NASCAR [@NASCAR] (February 19, 2023). "It's @StenhouseJr to the lead, but trouble strikes behind him!" (Tweet). Retrieved August 11, 2023 – via Twitter. "Daytona 500 results: The finishing order of the 2023 NASCAR Cup opener". us.motorsport.com. February 20, 2023. Retrieved June 27, 2023. Christie, Toby (May 29, 2023). "Video: Jimmie Johnson Done for Day After Two Crashes in Coca-Cola 600". TobyChristie.com. Retrieved June 27, 2023. "NASCAR driver's in-laws, nephew dead after possible murder-suicide in Muskogee". Fox23 News. June 27, 2023. Retrieved June 27, 2023. "Jimmie Johnson withdraws from Chicago race after family tragedy". www.motorsport.com. June 27, 2023. Retrieved June 27, 2023. Dasrath, Diana; Romero, Dennis (June 27, 2023). "NASCAR driver Jimmie Johnson's in-laws and their grandson are dead in an apparent murder-suicide". NBC News. Retrieved June 28, 2023. Ryan, Nate (July 10, 2020). "Arrow McLaren SP still interested in Jimmie Johnson despite Ganassi test". NBC Sports. Archived from the original on September 13, 2020. Retrieved August 24, 2020. "Jimmie Johnson is first NASCAR driver to test positive for coronavirus". Associated Press. July 3, 2020. Archived from the original on July 4, 2020. Retrieved July 4, 2020. George, Dhruv (June 30, 2020). "NASCAR Champion Jimmie Johnson to Drive an IndyCar at Indianapolis Motor Speedway". EssentiallySports. Archived from the original on July 4, 2020. Retrieved July 4, 2020. "NASCAR champ Johnson enamored with IndyCar after test". AP NEWS. July 28, 2020. Archived from the original on July 29, 2020. Retrieved July 29, 2020. "NASCAR Legend Johnson Exceeds All Expectations – Including His Own – in First INDYCAR Test at IMS". IndyCar.com. Archived from the original on August 1, 2020. Retrieved July 29, 2020. "Jimmie Johnson says he wants to do IndyCar 'more than ever' after test". sports.yahoo.com. Archived from the original on August 2, 2020. Retrieved July 29, 2020. "Jimmie Johnson's IndyCar run impresses Ganassi, Scott Dixon". motorsport.com. July 29, 2020. Archived from the original on October 31, 2020. Retrieved July 29, 2020. "Seven-time NASCAR Cup Series champion Jimmie Johnson will race in IndyCar in 2021 and 2022". September 9, 2020. Archived from the original on September 22, 2020. Retrieved September 9, 2020. "Chip Ganassi sells entire NASCAR team to Trackhouse Racing". USA Today. Charlotte, N.C.: Associated Press. June 30, 2021. Archived from the original on July 25, 2022. Retrieved July 25, 2022. Andrejev, Alex. "Jimmie Johnson returning to NASCAR? What he told us about the idea and racing Indy 500". Charlotte Observer. Retrieved August 11, 2021. "Jimmie Johnson to run Indy 500, full IndyCar schedule in 2022". ESPN.com. December 15, 2021. Retrieved December 15, 2021. "Indy 500 purse soars to record heights". IndyCar.com. Brickyard Trademarks, LLC. May 30, 2022. Retrieved May 30, 2022. Malsher-Lopez, David (July 24, 2022). "Jimmie Johnson hails "special day" after IndyCar career-best finish". Motorsport.com. Archived from the original on July 25, 2022. Retrieved July 25, 2022. Pruett, Marshall (September 26, 2022). "Johnson steps back from full-time racing". RACER. Retrieved September 26, 2022. "News Story – Nascar champ Johnson and X-games hero Pastrana challenge worlds best at The". Race of Champions. Archived from the original on July 28, 2011. Retrieved February 6, 2011. "News Story – NASCAR champion Jimmie Johnson goes head-to-head with Michael Schumacher at the". Race of Champions. Archived from the original on July 28, 2011. Retrieved February 6, 2011. "Jimmie Johnson". Race of Champions. Archived from the original on January 10, 2011. Retrieved February 6, 2011. JOHN KEKIS, AP Sports Writer. "Johnson takes on Watkins Glen in 6-hour Rolex race". SignOnSanDiego.com. Retrieved February 6, 2011. "Rolex 24 at Daytona Results (2010)". Grand-am.com. Archived from the original on February 4, 2010. Retrieved February 6, 2011. "Sahlen's Six Hours of The Glen Results (2010)". Grand-am.com. Archived from the original on April 2, 2012. Retrieved February 6, 2011. "Rolex 24 at Daytona Results (2011)". Grand-am.com. Archived from the original on February 1, 2012. Retrieved February 6, 2011. "Jimmie Johnson". Grand-am.com. September 17, 1975. Archived from the original on March 2, 2012. Retrieved February 6, 2011. Malsher-Lopez, David (December 4, 2020). "Jimmie Johnson to race for Action Express in Rolex 24". Motorsport.com. Motorsport Network. Retrieved December 6, 2020. "Championship swap: Jimmie Johnson, Fernando Alonso turn laps together". NASCAR.com. NASCAR Digital Media LLC. November 26, 2018. Archived from the original on November 28, 2018. Retrieved November 28, 2018. "Alonso swaps seats with NASCAR racer Jimmie Johnson". FormulaOne.com. Formula One World Championship Limited/Tata Communications. November 26, 2018. Archived from the original on December 26, 2019. Retrieved November 28, 2018. "Bio". Jimmie Johnson official website. Archived from the original on August 30, 2016. Retrieved September 5, 2013. Mcubbin, Ashley (December 4, 2008). "Jimmie Johnson: Just a California Kid". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on January 16, 2014. Retrieved July 3, 2013. "jimmie johnson". Archived from the original on May 27, 2013. Retrieved November 20, 2012. "2015 TORC drivers standings". TORC: The Off-Road Championship. October 31, 2015. Archived from the original on September 8, 2016. Retrieved October 31, 2015. "About Us". The Jimmie Johnson Foundation. July 7, 2010. Archived from the original on July 19, 2009. Retrieved February 6, 2011. Ken Stone (December 16, 2010). "Jimmie Johnson Foundation Helping Rev Up Grossmont Performing Arts – La Mesa, CA Patch". Lamesa.patch.com. Archived from the original on January 12, 2012. Retrieved February 6, 2011. "Jimmie Johnson's Road to American Hero". AOL News. November 17, 2009. Archived from the original on October 8, 2012. Retrieved August 26, 2011. "chandra johnson". PlayerWives.com. July 16, 1978. Archived from the original on January 6, 2011. Retrieved February 6, 2011. "Jimmie Johnson's Loyalty Shows with New Baby's Name". Bleacher Report. July 11, 2010. Archived from the original on December 13, 2010. Retrieved November 12, 2010. Estrada, Chris (September 6, 2013). "Jimmie Johnson, wife Chandra welcome baby girl; Regan Smith to fill in today". NBC Sports. Archived from the original on September 11, 2013. Retrieved September 6, 2013. Martinelli, Michelle R. (July 7, 2017). "Jimmie Johnson is obsessed with finishing a 140.6-mile IRONMAN triathlo". USA Today. For The Win. Archived from the original on December 30, 2018. Retrieved April 15, 2019. "Jimmie Johnson finishes first Boston Marathon: 'It's been an amazing experience'". NASCAR. April 15, 2019. Archived from the original on April 15, 2019. Retrieved April 15, 2019. "Annual Golf Tournament". The Jimmie Johnson Foundation. Archived from the original on July 20, 2009. Retrieved February 6, 2011. "Celebrities Join the American Red Cross in 2008. In December 2010, Johnson visited Collinswood Language Academy. He donated $17,000 to build a new playground". The Jimmie Johnson Foundation. February 27, 2008. Archived from the original on September 22, 2010. Retrieved February 6, 2011. Sandberg, Sheryl; Chávez, Anna Maria (March 8, 2014). "Sheryl Sandberg and Anna Maria Chávez on 'Bossy,' the Other B-word". The Wall Street Journal. The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on June 5, 2014. Retrieved June 13, 2014. Jolie Lee (May 10, 2014). "Beyonce, Jennifer Garner, Jane Lynch join 'Ban Bossy" campaign. USA Today 10 March 2014 | Retrieved 8 Aug 2014". USAToday.com. Archived from the original on July 28, 2018. Retrieved August 8, 2014. "Facebook COO Sandberg's ludicrous crusade against bossy". New York Post. March 17, 2014. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved March 20, 2014. "Beyoncé, Jennifer Garner, Jane Lynch join prominent women in #BanBossy campaign". New York Daily News. March 10, 2014. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved August 8, 2014. "Corey LaJoie keeps chasing NASCAR dream". NASCAR Talk | NBC Sports. February 15, 2020. Archived from the original on April 6, 2020. Retrieved June 15, 2020. "NASCAR: Jimmie Johnson's big influence on younger drivers - NBC Sports". NASCAR Talk | NBC Sports. February 16, 2020. Archived from the original on March 13, 2020. Retrieved June 15, 2020. "Brad Keselowski: Jimmie Johnson did what Dale Jr. Wouldn't". YouTube. Archived from the original on November 8, 2020. Retrieved August 1, 2020. "Kevin Harvick: Jimmie Johnson one of 'most disrespected' | NASCAR.com". Official Site Of NASCAR. Archived from the original on April 8, 2019. Retrieved August 1, 2020. "Gordon on Johnson: "I've never raced with anybody better"". RACER. November 22, 2019. Archived from the original on November 8, 2020. Retrieved August 1, 2020. "Men in the Fast Lane". People. November 13, 2000. Archived from the original on April 1, 2018. Retrieved April 1, 2018. "FOX NASCAR bestows 'The Byrnsie Award' on Jimmie Johnson". Jayski's Silly Season Site. June 24, 2018. Archived from the original on June 25, 2018. Retrieved June 24, 2018. "NASCAR Legend Jimmie Johnson announces Ben Bender as Charlotte FC No. 1 pick in '22 MLS SuperDraft". MLSSoccer.com. Retrieved January 13, 2022. "Las Vegas Episode Guide 2006 Season 3 – Urban Legends, Episode 15". TV Guide. Archived from the original on February 26, 2014. Retrieved April 24, 2014. 1 December 2010 24/7. "HBO's 24/7 Jimmie Johnson: Race to Daytona to Debut January 26". Darlington Raceway. Archived from the original on August 20, 2010. Retrieved January 30, 2011.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) staff. "Top Gear Thursday: Richard Hammond Says NASCAR Driving is 'Like Climbing into the Belly of a Dragon'". BBC America. Archived from the original on September 3, 2019. Retrieved September 3, 2019. "Ellen Races Jimmie Johnson". July 15, 2013. Archived from the original on December 9, 2014. Retrieved December 5, 2014. Scott, Nate (November 19, 2013). "Jimmie Johnson becomes first athlete co-host for SportsCenter". USA Today. McLean, VA. Archived from the original on November 22, 2013. Retrieved November 19, 2013. "Jimmie Johnson visits a massage therapist on 'Repeat After Me', hijinx ensue". For The Win. April 16, 2015. Archived from the original on September 3, 2019. Retrieved September 3, 2019. Eddy, Art (June 2, 2015). "NASCAR Champ Jimmie Johnson Gets Animated For Bubble Guppies". old.lifeofdad.com. Retrieved September 3, 2019.[permanent dead link] Schwartz, Peter (May 25, 2016). "Schwartz: NASCAR Drivers Lend Their Voices To Nickelodeon Show". CBS New York. Archived from the original on July 1, 2020. Retrieved June 29, 2020. "January 2014". NASCAR Illustrated. Archived from the original on February 11, 2016. Retrieved February 9, 2016. "Jimmie Johnson To Be on Cover of Sports Illustrated". SB Nation. November 18, 2008. Archived from the original on February 11, 2016. Retrieved February 9, 2016. "Jimmie Johnson on SI cover". Charlotte, NC: ESPN. October 11, 2011. Archived from the original on February 17, 2017. Retrieved February 9, 2016. "Video! NASCAR Superstar Jimmie Johnson's Workout Secrets". Extra. April 22, 2013. Archived from the original on February 16, 2016. Retrieved February 9, 2016. Caldwell, Gray (February 9, 2016). "Johnson graces 'SUCCESS Magazine' cover". Concord, NC: Hendrick Motorsports. Archived from the original on February 11, 2016. Retrieved February 9, 2016. Hilton, Robin (May 13, 2016). "First Watch: The Avett Brothers, 'Ain't No Man'". NPR Music. Archived from the original on May 16, 2016. Retrieved May 17, 2016. Berardini, César (August 22, 2005). "NASCAR 06: Total Team Control Cover Athletes Announced". TeamXbox. Archived from the original on November 28, 2005. Retrieved July 19, 2013. "NASCAR® Comes to Gran Turismo 5". gran-turismo.com. Archived from the original on September 3, 2019. Retrieved September 3, 2019. "Forza Motorsport 6 NASCAR Expansion". Forza Motorsport. May 17, 2016. Archived from the original on May 19, 2016. Retrieved May 17, 2016. "Forza Motorsport 6 NASCAR Expansion released on Xbox One". NASCAR. May 17, 2016. Archived from the original on May 20, 2016. Retrieved May 17, 2016. "'NASCAR Heat 3' cover revealed | Hendrick Motorsports". hendrickmotorsports.com. Archived from the original on August 13, 2018. Retrieved August 29, 2019. "Gamers, start your engines: Ally Racing creates nostalgic video game for NASCAR fans". PR Newswire. Ally Financial. August 10, 2020. Archived from the original on December 10, 2020. Retrieved December 10, 2020. Johnson, Jimmie; Chandra Johnson (2012). On the Road. Self-published. ISBN 978-0-615-65800-1. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Jimmie Johnson. Official website The Jimmie Johnson Foundation Jimmie Johnson driver statistics at Racing-Reference Jimmie Johnson career summary at DriverDB.com