Alexander Boris de Pfeffel Johnson (born 19 June 1964) is a British politician and writer who was Prime Minister of the United Kingdom and Leader of the Conservative Party from 2019 to 2022. He was previously Foreign Secretary from 2016 to 2018 and Mayor of London from 2008 to 2016. He was Member of Parliament (MP) for Henley from 2001 to 2008 and Uxbridge and South Ruislip from 2015 to 2023. Johnson attended Eton College and Balliol College, Oxford in his youth; and he was elected president of the Oxford Union in 1986. In 1989, he began writing for The Daily Telegraph, and from 1999 to 2005 he was the editor of The Spectator. He became a member of the shadow cabinet of Michael Howard in 2001 before being sacked in 2004 for lying about his private life. After Howard resigned, he became a member of David Cameron's shadow cabinet. He was elected Mayor of London in 2008 and resigned from the House of Commons to focus his attention on the mayoralty. He was re-elected mayor in 2012, but did not run for re-election in 2016. At the 2015 general election he was elected MP for Uxbridge and South Ruislip. Johnson was a prominent figure in the Brexit campaign in the 2016 European Union membership referendum. After the referendum, Prime Minister Theresa May appointed him foreign secretary. He resigned from the position in 2018 in protest at both the Chequers Agreement and May's approach to Brexit. Johnson succeeded May as prime minister. He re-opened Brexit negotiations with the European Union and in early September he prorogued Parliament; the Supreme Court later ruled the action to have been unlawful. After agreeing to a revised Brexit withdrawal agreement but failing to win parliamentary support, Johnson called a snap general election to be held in December 2019, which the Conservative Party won. During Johnson's premiership, the government responded to the COVID-19 pandemic by introducing various emergency powers to mitigate its impact and approved a nationwide vaccination programme. He also responded to the Russian invasion of Ukraine by imposing sanctions on Russia and authorising foreign aid and weapons shipments to Ukraine. In the Partygate scandal it was found that numerous parties had been held at 10 Downing Street during national COVID-19 lockdowns, and COVID-19 social distancing laws were breached by 83 individuals, including Johnson, who in April 2022 was issued with a fixed penalty notice. The publishing of the Sue Gray report in May 2022 and a widespread sense of dissatisfaction led in June 2022 to a vote of confidence in his leadership amongst Conservative MPs, which he won. In July 2022, revelations over his appointment of Chris Pincher as deputy chief whip of the party while knowing of allegations of sexual misconduct against him led to a mass resignation of members of his government and to Johnson announcing his resignation as prime minister. He was succeeded as Prime Minister by Liz Truss. He remained in the House of Commons as a backbencher until 9 June 2023, when he received the draft of the Commons Privileges Committee investigation into his conduct that unanimously found that he had lied to the Commons on numerous occasions. Johnson resigned his position as MP the same day. Johnson is seen by many as a controversial figure in British politics. His supporters have praised him for being humorous, witty, and entertaining, with an appeal reaching beyond traditional Conservative Party voters, making him, in their view, an electoral asset to the party. Conversely, his critics have accused him of lying, elitism, cronyism and bigotry. As prime minister, his supporters praised him for "getting Brexit done", overseeing the UK's COVID-19 vaccination programme, which was amongst the fastest in the world, and being one of the first world leaders to offer humanitarian support to Ukraine following the Russian invasion of the country. His tenure also saw several controversies and scandals, and is viewed as the most scandalous premiership of modern times by historians and biographers alike. Johnson has commonly been described as a one-nation conservative, and political commentators have characterised his political style as opportunistic, populist and pragmatic. Alexander Boris de Pfeffel Johnson was born on 19 June 1964 in the Upper East Side of Manhattan, New York City, to Stanley Johnson, then studying economics at Columbia University, and Charlotte Fawcett, an artist. Johnson is one of only two British prime ministers to have been an American citizen . Johnson's parents returned to the UK in September 1964 so Charlotte could study at the University of Oxford. She lived with her son in Summertown, Oxford, and in September 1965 she gave birth to a daughter, Rachel. In July 1965, the family moved to Crouch End in North London, and in February 1966 they relocated to Washington, DC, where Stanley worked with the World Bank. Stanley then took a job with a policy panel on population control, and moved the family to Norwalk, Connecticut, in June. A third child, Leo, was born in September 1967. The family returned to the UK in 1969, and they settled into West Nethercote Farm, Somerset, Stanley's family home in Exmoor. His father was regularly absent, leaving Johnson to be raised largely by his mother, assisted by au pairs. As a child, Johnson was quiet, studious, and deaf, resulting in several operations to insert grommets into his ears. He and his siblings were encouraged to engage in intellectual activities from a young age. Johnson's earliest recorded ambition was to be "world king". Having no other friends, the siblings became very close. In late 1969, the family moved to Maida Vale in West London, while Stanley began post-graduate research at the London School of Economics. In 1970, Charlotte and the children briefly returned to Nethercote, where Johnson attended Winsford Village School, before returning to London to settle in Primrose Hill, where they were educated at Primrose Hill Primary School. A fourth child, Joseph, was born in late 1971. After Stanley secured employment at the European Commission in April 1973, he moved his family to Uccle, Brussels, where Johnson attended the European School, Brussels I and learnt to speak French. Charlotte had a nervous breakdown and was hospitalised with depression, after which Johnson and his siblings were sent back to the UK in 1975 to attend Ashdown House, a preparatory boarding school in East Sussex. There, he developed interests in rugby, Ancient Greek, and Latin. In December 1978 his parents' relationship broke down; they divorced in 1980, and Charlotte moved to Notting Hill, London, where her children joined her for much of their time. As a kid I was extremely spotty, extremely nerdy and horribly swotty. My idea of a really good time was to travel across London on the tube to visit the British Museum. — Boris Johnson Johnson gained a King's Scholarship to study at Eton College, a boarding school near Windsor, Berkshire. Arriving in the autumn term of 1977, he began going by his middle name Boris, and developed "the eccentric English persona" for which he became famous. He denounced Catholicism and joined the Church of England. School reports complained about his idleness, complacency, and lateness, but he was popular at Eton. Johnson's friends were largely from the wealthy upper classes; his best friends were Darius Guppy and Charles Spencer. Both would go on to accompany him at the University of Oxford and remained his friends into adulthood. Johnson excelled in English and the Classics, winning prizes in both, and became secretary of the school debating society and editor of the school newspaper. In late 1981, he became a member of Pop, a small, self-selecting elite group of school prefects. After leaving Eton, Johnson went on a gap year to Australia, where he taught English and Latin at Timbertop, an Outward Bound-inspired campus of Geelong Grammar, an independent boarding school. Johnson won a scholarship to study Literae Humaniores at Balliol College, Oxford, a four-year course in Classics, ancient languages, literature, history, and philosophy. Matriculating in late 1983, he was one of a generation of Oxford undergraduates who dominated British politics and media in the early 21st century, including Cameron, William Hague, Michael Gove, Jeremy Hunt and Nick Boles. While at Oxford, Johnson joined the college's rugby union team as a tighthead prop. To his later regret, he joined the Bullingdon Club, an exclusive drinking society notorious for vandalism. Many years later, a group photograph including himself and Cameron in Bullingdon Club formal dress led to much negative press coverage. While at Oxford, he began a relationship with Allegra Mostyn-Owen, cover girl for Tatler magazine and daughter of Christie's Education chairman William Mostyn-Owen. They became engaged. Johnson was popular and well known at Oxford. Alongside Guppy, he edited the university's satirical magazine Tributary. In 1984, Johnson was elected secretary of the Oxford Union, and campaigned unsuccessfully for the position of Union President. In 1986, Johnson ran successfully for President, but his term was not distinguished or memorable, and questions were raised regarding his competence and seriousness. At graduation, Johnson was awarded an upper second-class degree, and was deeply unhappy he did not receive a first. In September 1987, Johnson and Mostyn-Owen married. They settled in West Kensington, London. In late 1987, through family connections, he began work as a graduate trainee at The Times. Scandal erupted when Johnson wrote an article for the newspaper on the archaeological discovery of Edward II's palace, having invented a quote which he falsely attributed to the historian Colin Lucas, his godfather. After the paper's editor, Charles Wilson, learnt of the matter, he dismissed Johnson. Johnson secured employment on the lead-writing desk of The Daily Telegraph, having met its editor, Max Hastings, while at university. His articles appealed to the newspaper's Conservative-voting "Middle England" readership, and he was known for his distinctive literary style, replete with old-fashioned phrasing and for regularly referring to the readership as "my friends". In early 1989, Johnson was appointed to the newspaper's Brussels bureau to report on the European Commission, remaining in the post until 1994. A strong critic of the integrationist Commission president Jacques Delors, he established himself as one of the city's few Eurosceptic journalists. He wrote articles about euromyths: that Brussels had recruited sniffer dogs to ensure that all manure smelt the same, they were about to dictate the acceptable curve of British bananas, limit the power of their vacuum cleaners and order women to return their old sex toys. He wrote that euro notes made people impotent and that a plan to blow up the Berlaymont building was in place because asbestos cladding made the building too dangerous to inhabit. Many of his fellow journalists were critical of his articles, saying they often contained lies designed to discredit the commission. The Europhile Conservative politician Chris Patten later said that Johnson was "one of the greatest exponents of fake journalism". Johnson opposed banning handguns after the Dunblane school massacre, writing in his column "Nanny is confiscating their toys. It is like one of those vast Indian programmes of compulsory vasectomy." According to one of his biographers, Sonia Purnell, – who was Johnson's Brussels deputy – he helped make Euroscepticism "an attractive and emotionally resonant cause for the Right", whereas it had been associated previously with the Left. Johnson's articles exacerbated tensions between the Conservative Party's Eurosceptic and Europhile factions. As a result, he earned the mistrust of many party members. His writings were also a key influence on the emergence of the eurosceptic UK Independence Party (UKIP) in the early 1990s. Conrad Black, then proprietor of The Daily Telegraph, said Johnson "was such an effective correspondent for us in Brussels that he greatly influenced British opinion on this country's relations with Europe". In February 1990, Johnson's wife Allegra broke up with him; after several attempts at reconciliation, their marriage ended in April 1993. He began a relationship with childhood friend Marina Wheeler, who had moved to Brussels in 1990. They were married in May 1993. Soon after, Marina gave birth to a daughter. Johnson and his new wife settled in Islington, North London, an area known for its association with the left-liberal intelligentsia. Under the influence of this milieu and of his wife, Johnson moved in a more liberal direction on issues such as climate change, LGBT rights and race relations. While in Islington, the couple had three more children, all given the surname Johnson-Wheeler. They were sent to the local Canonbury Primary School and then to private secondary schools. Devoting much time to his children, Johnson wrote a book of verse, The Perils of the Pushy Parents: A Cautionary Tale, which was published to largely poor reviews. Back in London, Hastings turned down Johnson's request to become a war reporter, instead promoting him to assistant editor and chief political columnist. Johnson's column received praise for being ideologically eclectic and distinctively written, and earned him Commentator of the Year Award at the What the Papers Say awards. Some critics condemned his writing style as bigotry; in columns he used the words "piccaninnies" and "watermelon smiles" when referring to Africans, championed European colonialism in Uganda and referred to gay men as "tank-topped bumboys". In 1993, Johnson outlined his desire to run as a Conservative in the 1994 European Parliament elections. Andrew Mitchell convinced Major not to veto Johnson's candidacy, but Johnson could not find a constituency. He turned his attention to obtaining a seat in the House of Commons instead. After being rejected as Conservative candidate for Holborn and St. Pancras, he was selected the Conservative candidate for Clwyd South in north Wales, then a Labour Party safe seat. Spending six weeks campaigning, he attained 9,091 votes (23 per cent) in the 1997 general election, losing to Labour candidate Martyn Jones. Scandal erupted in June 1995 when a recording of a 1990 telephone conversation between Johnson and his friend Darius Guppy was made public. In it, Guppy said that his criminal activities involving insurance fraud were being investigated by News of the World journalist Stuart Collier, and he asked Johnson to provide him with Collier's private address, seeking to have the latter beaten. Johnson agreed, although he expressed concern that he would be associated with the attack. When the phone conversation was published, Johnson stated that ultimately he had not obliged Guppy's request. Hastings reprimanded Johnson but did not dismiss him. Johnson was given a regular column in The Spectator, sister publication to The Daily Telegraph, which attracted mixed reviews and was often thought rushed. In 1999, he was also given a column reviewing new cars in the American men's monthly magazine GQ. The large number of parking fines that Johnson acquired while testing cars frustrated staff. At The Daily Telegraph and The Spectator, he was consistently late delivering copy, forcing staff to stay late to accommodate him; some related that if they published without his work, he would shout at them with expletives. Johnson's April 1998 appearance on the BBC's satirical current affairs show Have I Got News for You brought him national fame. He was invited back on to later episodes, including as a guest presenter; for his 2003 appearance, Johnson was nominated for the BAFTA Television Award for Best Entertainment Performance. After these appearances, he came to be recognised on the street, and was invited to appear on other shows, such as Top Gear, Parkinson, Breakfast with Frost, and Question Time. In July 1999, Conrad Black offered Johnson the editorship of The Spectator on the condition he abandon his parliamentary aspirations; Johnson agreed. While retaining The Spectator's traditional right-wing bent, Johnson welcomed contributions from leftist writers and cartoonists. Under Johnson's editorship, the magazine's circulation grew by 10% to 62,000 and it became profitable. His editorship also drew criticism; some opined that under him The Spectator avoided serious issues, while colleagues became annoyed that he was regularly absent from the office, meetings, and events. He gained a reputation as a poor political pundit because of incorrect political predictions. His father-in-law Charles Wheeler and others strongly criticised him for allowing Spectator columnist Taki Theodoracopulos to publish racist and antisemitic language. Journalist Charlotte Edwardes wrote in The Times in 2019 that Johnson had squeezed her thigh at a private lunch at the Spectator in 1999 and that another woman had told her he had done the same to her. A spokesman denied the allegation. In 2004, Johnson published an editorial in The Spectator after the murder of Ken Bigley suggesting that Liverpudlians were wallowing in their victim status and "hooked on grief" over the Hillsborough disaster, which Johnson partly blamed on "drunken fans". In an appendix added to a later edition of his 2005 book The Dream of Rome, Tell MAMA and the Muslim Council of Britain criticised Johnson for arguing Islam has caused the Muslim world to be "literally centuries behind" the West. The selection of Boris Johnson ... confirms the Tory Party's increasing weakness for celebrity personalities over the dreary exigencies of politics. Johnson, for all his gifts, is unlikely to grace any future Tory cabinet. Indeed, he is not known for his excessive interest in serious policy matters, and it is hard to see him grubbing away at administrative detail as an obscure, hardworking junior minister for social security. To maintain his funny man reputation he will no doubt find himself refining his Bertie Wooster interpretation to the point where the impersonation becomes the man. –Max Hastings, London Evening Standard, Following Michael Heseltine's retirement, Johnson decided to stand as Conservative candidate for Henley, a Conservative safe seat in Oxfordshire. The local Conservative branch selected him although it was split over Johnson's candidacy. Some thought him amusing and charming while others disliked his flippant attitude and perceived lack of knowledge of the local area. Assisted by his television fame, Johnson won the seat in the 2001 general election. Alongside his Islington home, Johnson bought a farmhouse outside Thame in his new constituency. He regularly attended Henley social events and occasionally wrote for the Henley Standard. His constituency surgeries proved popular, and he joined local campaigns to stop the closure of Townlands Hospital and the local air ambulance. In Parliament, Johnson was appointed to a standing committee assessing the Proceeds of Crime Bill, but missed many of its meetings. Despite his credentials as a public speaker, his speeches in the House of Commons were widely deemed lacklustre. He attended around half of Commons votes, usually supporting the Conservative party line. In free votes, he demonstrated a more socially liberal attitude, supporting the Gender Recognition Act 2004 and the repeal of Section 28. However, in 2001, Johnson had spoken out against plans to repeal Section 28, saying it was "Labour's appalling agenda, encouraging the teaching of homosexuality in schools". After initially stating he would not, he supported the government's plans to join the United States in the 2003 invasion of Iraq, and in April 2003 visited occupied Baghdad. In August 2004, he backed unsuccessful impeachment procedures against Prime Minister Tony Blair for "high crimes and misdemeanours" regarding the war, and in December 2006 described the invasion as "a colossal mistake and misadventure". Although labelling Johnson "ineffably duplicitous" for breaking his promise not to become an MP, Black decided not to dismiss him because he "helped promote the magazine and raise its circulation". Johnson remained editor of The Spectator, while also writing columns for The Daily Telegraph and GQ, and making television appearances. His 2001 book, Friends, Voters, Countrymen: Jottings on the Stump, recounted that year's election campaign, while 2003's Lend Me Your Ears collected previously published columns and articles. In 2004, HarperCollins published his first novel: Seventy-Two Virgins: A Comedy of Errors revolved around the life of a Conservative MP and contained autobiographical elements. Responding to criticism that he was juggling too many jobs, he cited Winston Churchill and Benjamin Disraeli as exemplars who combined political and literary careers. To manage stress, he took up jogging and cycling, and became so well known for the latter that Gimson suggested he was "perhaps the most famous cyclist in Britain". Following William Hague's resignation as Conservative leader, the party elected Iain Duncan Smith. Johnson had a strained relationship with Duncan Smith, and The Spectator became critical of his party leadership. Duncan Smith was succeeded by Michael Howard in November 2003; Howard deemed Johnson to be the most popular Conservative politician with the electorate and appointed him vice-chairman of the party, responsible for overseeing its electoral campaign. In his Shadow Cabinet reshuffle of May 2004, Howard appointed Johnson as shadow arts minister. In October, Howard ordered Johnson to apologise publicly in Liverpool for publishing a Spectator article – anonymously written by Simon Heffer – which said the crowds at the Hillsborough disaster had contributed to the incident and that Liverpudlians had a predilection for reliance on the welfare state. In November 2004, the tabloids revealed that since 2000 Johnson had been having an affair with Spectator columnist Petronella Wyatt, resulting in two abortions. Johnson denied the allegations but they were subsequently proven to be true, and Howard dismissed him as vice-chairman and shadow arts minister when he refused to resign. At the 2005 general election, Johnson was re-elected MP for Henley. Labour won the election and Howard stood down as Conservative leader; Johnson backed David Cameron as his successor. After Cameron was elected, he appointed Johnson as the shadow higher education minister. Interested in streamlining university funding, Johnson supported Labour's proposed top-up fees. He campaigned in 2006 to become the Rector of the University of Edinburgh, but his support for top-up fees damaged his campaign, and he came third. In April 2006, the News of the World alleged that Johnson was having an affair with journalist Anna Fazackerley; the pair did not comment, and shortly afterwards Johnson began employing Fazackerley. In September 2006, Papua New Guinea's High Commission protested after he compared the Conservatives' frequently changing leadership to cannibalism in the country. In 2005, The Spectator's new chief executive, Andrew Neil, dismissed Johnson as editor. To make up for this loss of income, Johnson negotiated with The Daily Telegraph to raise his salary from £200,000 to £250,000, averaging £5,000 per column. He presented a popular history television show, The Dream of Rome, which was broadcast in January 2006; a book followed in February. A sequel, After Rome, focused on early Islamic history. In 2007, he earned £540,000, making him the third-highest-earning MP that year. In September, Johnson was selected as the Conservative candidate for Mayor of London after a public London-wide primary. Johnson's campaign focused on reducing youth crime, making public transport safer, and replacing the articulated buses with an updated version of the AEC Routemaster. Targeting the Conservative-leaning suburbs of outer London, it capitalised on perceptions that the Labour Mayoralty had neglected them in favour of inner London. His campaign emphasised his popularity, even among those who opposed his policies, with opponents complaining a common attitude among voters was: "I'm voting for Boris because he is a laugh." The campaign of Labour incumbent Ken Livingstone portrayed Johnson as an out-of-touch toff and bigot. In the election, Johnson received 43% and Livingstone 37% of first-preference votes; when second-preference votes were added, Johnson was victorious with 53% to Livingstone's 47%. Johnson subsequently announced his intention to stand down as MP for Henley. After Johnson became mayor, those in City Hall deemed too closely allied to Livingstone's administration had their employment terminated. Johnson appointed Tim Parker as his deputy mayor, but after Parker began taking increasing control at City Hall, Johnson dismissed him. Many in the Conservative Party initially distanced themselves from Johnson's administration, fearing it would be damaging for the 2010 general election. During the campaign, Johnson had confided to Brian Paddick he was unsure how he would maintain his lifestyle on the mayoral salary of £140,000 a year. He agreed to continue his Daily Telegraph column, thus earning a further £250,000 a year. His team believed this would cause controversy and made him promise to donate 20% of his Daily Telegraph salary to a charitable cause. Johnson resented this, and ultimately did not pay the full 20%. Controversy erupted when on the BBC's HARDtalk he referred to the £250,000 salary as "chicken feed"; this was at the time approximately 10 times the average yearly wage for a British worker. During his first administration, Johnson was embroiled in several personal scandals. After moving to a new house in Islington, he built a shed without obtaining planning permission; after neighbours complained, he dismantled it. The press also accused him of having an affair with Helen Macintyre and of fathering her child, allegations that he did not deny. Johnson was accused of warning Damian Green that police were planning to arrest him; Johnson denied the claims. He was accused of cronyism, in particular for appointing Veronica Wadley as the chair of London's Arts Council. In the parliamentary expenses scandal, he was accused of excessive expenses claims for taxis. Johnson remained a popular figure in London with a strong celebrity status in the city. Johnson made no major changes to the mayoral system of the previous administration. However, he did reverse several other measures implemented by Livingstone: ending the city's oil deal with Venezuela, abolishing The Londoner newsletter, and scrapping the half-yearly inspections of black cabs, which was reinstated three years later. Abolishing the western wing of the congestion charging zone, he cancelled plans to increase the congestion charge for four-wheel-drive vehicles. He was subsequently accused of failing to publish an independent report on air pollution commissioned by the Greater London Authority, which revealed the city breached legal limits on nitrogen dioxide levels. Johnson retained Livingstone projects such as Crossrail and the 2012 Olympic Games, but was accused of trying to take credit for them. He introduced a public bicycle scheme that had been mooted by Livingstone's administration; colloquially known as "Boris Bikes", the part privately financed system was a significant financial loss but proved popular. Despite Johnson's support of cycling, and his much-publicised identity as a cyclist, some cycling groups argued he had failed to make the city's roads safer for cyclists. As per his election pledge, he commissioned the development of the New Routemaster buses for central London. He also ordered the construction of a cable car system that crossed the River Thames between the Greenwich Peninsula and the Royal Docks. Johnson's first policy initiative was a ban on drinking alcohol on public transport. He announced plans to extend pay-as-you-go Oyster cards to national rail services in London. A pledge in Johnson's manifesto was to retain Tube ticket offices, in opposition to Livingstone's proposal to close up to 40. On 2 July 2008, the Mayor's office announced the closure plan was to be abandoned. On 21 November 2013, Transport for London announced that all London Underground ticket offices would close by 2015. In financing these projects, Johnson's administration borrowed £100 million, while public transport fares were increased by 50%. During his first term, Johnson was perceived as having moved leftward on certain issues, supporting the London Living Wage and endorsing an amnesty for illegal migrants. He tried placating critics who had deemed him a bigot by appearing at London's gay pride parade and praising ethnic minority newspapers. Johnson broke from the traditional protocol of those in public office not publicly commenting on other nations' elections by endorsing Barack Obama for the 2008 United States presidential election. Johnson appointed himself chair of the Metropolitan Police Authority (MPA), and in October 2008 successfully pushed for the resignation of Metropolitan Police Commissioner Ian Blair, after Blair was criticised for allegedly handing contracts to friends and for his handling of the death of Jean Charles de Menezes. This earned Johnson respect among Conservatives, who interpreted it as his first act of strength. Johnson resigned as chairman of the MPA in January 2010, but throughout his mayoralty was highly supportive of the Metropolitan Police, particularly during the controversy surrounding the death of Ian Tomlinson. Overall crime in London fell during his administration, but his claim that serious youth crime had decreased proved to be false, and he acknowledged the error. He was criticised for his response to the 2011 London riots. Johnson championed London's financial sector and denounced what he saw as "banker bashing" following the financial crisis of 2007–08, condemning the anti-capitalist Occupy London movement that appeared in 2011. He collected donations from the city's wealthy for a charitable enterprise, the Mayor's Fund, which he had established to aid disadvantaged youths. It initially announced the fund would raise £100 million, but by 2010 it had only earnt £1.5 million. He also maintained extensive personal contacts throughout the British media, which resulted in widespread favourable press coverage of his administration. In turn he remained largely supportive of his friends in the media, including Rupert Murdoch, during the News International phone hacking scandal. The formation of the Forensic Audit Panel was announced on 8 May 2008. The panel was tasked with monitoring and investigating financial management at the London Development Agency and the Greater London Authority. Johnson's announcement was criticised by Labour for the perceived politicisation of this nominally independent panel. The head of the panel, Patience Wheatcroft, was married to a Conservative councillor and three of the four remaining panel members also had close links to the Conservatives. Up for re-election in 2012, Johnson again hired Crosby to orchestrate his campaign. Before the election, Johnson published Johnson's Life of London, a work of popular history that historian A. N. Wilson characterised as a "coded plea" for votes. Polls suggested that while Livingstone's approach to transport was preferred, voters in London placed greater trust in Johnson on crime and the economy. Johnson's campaign emphasised the accusation that Livingstone was guilty of tax evasion, for which Livingstone called Johnson a "bare-faced liar". Political scientist Andrew Crines believed that Livingstone's campaign focused on criticising Johnson rather than presenting an alternate and progressive vision of London's future. Johnson was re-elected. After a successful bid under Livingstone in 2005, London hosted the 2012 Summer Olympics, with Johnson as board co-chair. He improved transportation around London by making more tickets available and adding buses around the capital when thousands of spectators were temporary visitors. Johnson was accused of covering up pollution ahead of the games by deploying dust suppressants to remove air particulates near monitoring stations. In November 2013, Johnson announced major changes to the operation of the London Underground, including the extension of operating hours. All staffed ticket offices were replaced with automated ticketing systems. Johnson was close friends with American entrepreneur and model Jennifer Arcuri, with The Sunday Times describing him as a regular visitor to her flat, and implying they were in a sexual relationship. Arcuri and her company, Innotech, were awarded substantial government grants, and Johnson intervened to allow her onto three trade mission trips. The Sunday Times said in September 2019 that Johnson failed to declare his personal relationship as a conflict of interest. The Greater London Authority referred the matter to the Independent Office for Police Conduct (IOPC) "so it can assess whether or not it is necessary to investigate the former mayor of London for the criminal offence of misconduct in public office", as the Mayor is also London's police and crime commissioner. On 9 November 2019 it was revealed that the IOPC had decided to publish its report after the general election on 12 December. The IOPC eventually issued its report in May 2020, concluding that, although there was no basis for any criminal charge, there was evidence that the close relationship between Johnson and Arcuri had influenced decisions, that Johnson should have declared an interest, and that his failure to do this could have breached the London Assembly's code of conduct. In 2015, Johnson criticised then-presidential candidate Donald Trump's false comments that there were no-go zones in London inaccessible for non-Muslims. Johnson said Trump was "betraying a quite stupefying ignorance that makes him frankly unfit to hold the office of President of the United States", becoming the first senior politician in the UK to declare Trump unfit for office, but rejecting calls for him to be banned from the country. In 2016, he said he was "genuinely worried that [Trump] could become president", telling ITV's Tom Bradby that being mistaken for Trump in New York was "one of the worst moments" of his life. Johnson did not run for a third mayoral and stepped down on 5 May 2016 following the election. A YouGov poll commissioned at the end of Johnson's term revealed that 52% of Londoners believed he did a "good job" while 29% believed he did a "bad job". Johnson initially said that he would not return to the House of Commons while mayor. After much media speculation, in August 2014 he sought selection as the Conservative candidate for the safe seat of Uxbridge and South Ruislip at the 2015 general election. In the 2015 general election, Johnson was elected. There was speculation that he had returned to Parliament because he wanted to replace Cameron as Conservative leader and prime minister. In February 2016, Johnson endorsed Vote Leave in the "Out" campaign for the 2016 European Union membership referendum. Following this announcement, which was interpreted by financial markets as making Brexit more probable, the pound sterling slumped by nearly 2% against the US dollar, reaching its lowest level since March 2009. In April 2016, in response to a comment by President Barack Obama that Britain should remain in the European Union, Johnson wrote an "ancestral dislike" of Britain owing to his "part-Kenyan" background may have shaped Obama's views. Several politicians condemned his comments as racist and unacceptable. Conversely, former Conservative Party leader Iain Duncan Smith and UK Independence Party (UKIP) leader Nigel Farage defended them. Johnson supported Vote Leave's statement that the government was committed to Turkish accession to the EU. Vote Leave was accused of implying that 80 million Turks would come to the UK if it stayed in the EU. When interviewed in January 2019, he said he had not mentioned Turkey during the campaign. On 22 June 2016, Johnson declared 23 June could be "Britain's independence day" in a televised debate. Following the victory of the "Leave" campaign, Cameron resigned. Johnson was widely regarded as the front-runner to succeed him. Johnson announced he would not stand in the Conservative leadership election. Shortly before this, Michael Gove, hitherto a Johnson ally, concluded that Johnson "cannot provide the leadership or build the team for the task ahead". The Daily Telegraph called Gove's comments "the most spectacular political assassination in a generation". Johnson endorsed Andrea Leadsom's candidature, but she dropped out, leaving Theresa May to be elected uncontested. May appointed Johnson foreign secretary in July 2016. Analysts saw the appointment as a tactic to weaken Johnson politically: the new positions of "Brexit secretary" and international trade secretary left the foreign secretary as a figurehead. Johnson's appointment ensured he would often be out of the country and unable to mobilise backbenchers against her, while forcing him to take responsibility for problems caused by withdrawing from the EU. Some journalists and foreign politicians criticised Johnson's appointment because of his controversial statements about other countries. His tenure attracted criticism from diplomats and foreign policy experts. A number of diplomats, FCO staff and foreign ministers who worked with Johnson compared his leadership unfavourably to previous foreign secretaries for his perceived lack of conviction or substantive positions on foreign policy issues. A senior official in Obama's government suggested Johnson's appointment would push the US further towards Germany at the expense of the Special Relationship with the UK. On one occasion Egyptian president Abdel Fattah el-Sisi walked out of a meeting with Johnson after a meeting did not "get beyond the pleasantries". Johnson's visit to Turkey in September 2016 was somewhat tense because he had won Douglas Murray's offensive poetry competition about the President of Turkey, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, four months earlier. When questioned by a journalist whether he would apologise for the poem, Johnson dismissed the matter as "trivia". Johnson pledged to help Turkey join the EU and expressed support for Erdogan's government. Johnson described the Gülen movement as a "cult" and supported Turkey's post-coup purges. Johnson supported the Saudi Arabian–led intervention in Yemen and refused to block UK arms sales to Saudi Arabia. In September 2016, human rights groups accused him of blocking the UN inquiry into Saudi war crimes in Yemen. Given the UK-Saudi alliance, in December 2016, he attracted attention for commenting the Saudis were akin to the Iranians in "puppeteering and playing proxy wars". In November 2017, Johnson told the Foreign Affairs Select Committee that Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe – a British-Iranian citizen imprisoned in Iran after being arrested for training citizen journalists and bloggers in a BBC World Service Trust project – had been "simply teaching people journalism". Facing criticism, Johnson stated he had been misquoted and that nothing he said had justified Zaghari-Ratcliffe's sentence. In May 2018, Johnson backed the Iran nuclear deal framework, despite Donald Trump's withdrawal. In April 2017, Johnson said that Gibraltar's sovereignty was "not going to change" after Brexit. Johnson promised while in Northern Ireland that Brexit would leave the Irish border "absolutely unchanged". Johnson visited Anguilla and Tortola in September 2017 to confirm the United Kingdom's commitment to helping restore British territories devastated by Hurricane Irma. In September 2017, he was criticised for reciting lines from Rudyard Kipling's poem Mandalay while visiting a Myanmar temple; the British ambassador, who was with him, suggested it was "not appropriate". In October 2017, he faced criticism for stating the Libyan city of Sirte could become an economic success like Dubai: "all they have to do is clear the dead bodies away". Initially favouring a less hostile approach to Russia, Johnson soon backed a more aggressive policy. Following the March 2018 poisoning of Sergei and Yulia Skripal in Salisbury, an act which the UK government blamed on Russia, Johnson compared Vladimir Putin's hosting of the World Cup in Russia to Adolf Hitler's hosting of the Olympic Games in Berlin in 1936. Russia's Foreign Ministry denounced Johnson's "unacceptable and unworthy" parallel towards Russia, a "nation that lost millions of lives in fighting Nazism". Johnson described the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline from Russia to Germany as "divisive" and a "threat" that left Europe dependent on a "malign Russia" for its energy supplies. Johnson condemned the persecution of Rohingya Muslims in Myanmar, comparing the situation with the displacement of Palestinians in 1948. Johnson supported the Turkish invasion of northern Syria aimed at ousting the Syrian Kurds from Afrin. In June 2018, Johnson accused the UNHRC of focusing disproportionately on the Israeli–Palestinian conflict and Israel's occupation of the Palestinian territories. In a September 2017 op-ed, Johnson reiterated the UK would regain control of £350m a week after Brexit, suggesting it go to the National Health Service (NHS). Cabinet colleagues subsequently criticised him for reviving the assertion. Following the 2017 general election, Johnson denied media reports he intended to challenge May's leadership. In a February 2018 letter to May, Johnson suggested that Northern Ireland may have to accept border controls after Brexit and that it would not seriously affect trade, having initially said a hard border would be unthinkable. In June, he was reported as having said "fuck business" when asked about corporate concerns regarding a 'hard' Brexit. Secret recordings obtained by BuzzFeed News in June 2018 revealed Johnson's dissatisfaction with Prime Minister Theresa May's negotiating style, accusing her of being too collaborative with the European Union in Brexit negotiations. Comparing May's approach to that of the US president Donald Trump – who at the time was engaged in a combative trade war with the EU because it raised tariffs on metal – Johnson said: "Imagine Trump doing Brexit. He'd go in bloody hard ... There'd be all sorts of breakdowns, all sorts of chaos. Everyone would think he'd gone mad. But actually you might get somewhere." He accused individuals of scaremongering over a Brexit "meltdown", saying "No panic. Pro bono publico, no bloody panic. It's going to be all right in the end." In April 2018, Johnson travelled to Italy to attend a party at the Palazzo Terranova, owned by the former KGB agent Alexander Lebedev and hosted by his son Evgeny. He travelled without security protection or other officials, and did not document the trip, which led to accusations of Johnson having misled parliament. In June 2023, it was revealed that Lord Simon McDonald, the most senior civil servant of his department, was not aware of the trip. Johnson stated that "no government business was discussed" at the event as far as he was aware. Lebedev's villa was monitored by the Italian secret service at the time, who, according to a Channel 4 documentary, suspected it to be used for espionage activities. Johnson granted a peerage to Evgeny in 2020, against the advice of the MI6, and met with criticism over potential security concerns. In July 2018, three days after the cabinet had its meeting to agree on a Brexit strategy, Johnson, along with Brexit secretary David Davis, resigned his post. Johnson returned to the role of a backbench MP. In July, he delivered a resignation speech, stating "it is not too late to save Brexit". In January 2019, Johnson came under criticism for remarks he had made during the 2016 Leave campaign regarding the prospect of Turkish accession to the European Union; he denied making such remarks. In March 2019, he was criticized for saying that expenditure on investigating historic allegations of child abuse was money "spaffed up the wall". In July 2018, Johnson signed a 12‑month contract to write articles for the Telegraph Media Group. The Advisory Committee on Business Appointments (ACOBA) reported that this was a breach of the Ministerial Code. Johnson was ordered to apologise for failing to declare £50,000 of earnings. The Parliamentary Commissioner for Standards found the errors were not inadvertent, and that Johnson had failed on nine occasions to make declarations within the rules. In September 2018, Johnson wrote: "We have opened ourselves to perpetual political blackmail. We have wrapped a suicide vest around the British constitution – and handed the detonator to Michel Barnier." Senior Tories heavily criticised him, with Alan Duncan of the Foreign Office vowing to ensure the comments marked "the political end of Boris Johnson". In April 2019, the Independent Press Standards Organisation ruled that a claim in a 6 January 2019 article in The Daily Telegraph, "The British people won't be scared into backing a woeful Brexit deal nobody voted for", authored by Johnson, that a no-deal Brexit was "by some margin preferred by the British public" was false, and "represented a failure to take care over the accuracy of the article in breach of Clause 1 (i)" of its guidelines, and required that a correction be published. On 12 June 2019, Johnson launched his campaign for the Conservative Party leadership election, saying, "we must leave the EU on 31 October." On the campaign trail, Johnson warned of "catastrophic consequences for voter trust in politics" if the government pushed the EU for further delays. He advocated removing the backstop from any Brexit deal. On 25 and 26 August, he announced plans to retain £7 or £9 billion of the £39 billion divorce payment the UK is due to transfer to the EU upon withdrawal. Johnson initially pledged to cut income tax for earners of more than £50,000 but backed away from this plan in June 2019 after coming under criticism in a televised BBC debate. Johnson was elected leader with 92,153 votes (66%) to Hunt's 46,656 (34%). Wikisource has original text related to this article: Boris Johnson: First Speech as Prime Minister On 24 July 2019, the day following Johnson's election as Conservative Party leader, Queen Elizabeth II accepted Theresa May's resignation and appointed Johnson as prime minister. This made Johnson the first prime minister to be born outside British territories. Johnson appointed Dominic Cummings as his senior advisor. In his first speech as PM, Johnson said that the United Kingdom would leave the European Union on 31 October 2019 with or without a deal, and promised to remove the Irish backstop from the withdrawal agreement. Johnson declared his intention to re-open negotiations, but talks did not immediately resume as the EU refused to accept Johnson's condition that the backstop be removed. On 28 August 2019, UK and EU negotiators agreed to resume regular meetings. Also on 28 August 2019, Johnson declared he had asked the Queen to prorogue Parliament from 10 September, reducing the time in which Parliament could block a no-deal Brexit and causing a political controversy. The Queen at Privy Council approved prorogation later the same day, and it began on 10 September, scheduled to last until 14 October. Some suggested that this prorogation amounted to a self-coup, and on 31 August 2019, protests occurred throughout the United Kingdom. As of 2 September 2019, three separate court cases challenging Johnson's action were in progress or scheduled to take place, and on 11 September, three Scottish judges ruled the prorogation of the UK Parliament to be unlawful. On 12 September, Johnson denied lying to the Queen over suspension of the Parliament, while a Belfast Court rejected claims that his Brexit plans will have a negative impact on Northern Ireland's peace policy. On 24 September, the Supreme Court ruled unanimously that Johnson's advice to prorogue Parliament was unlawful, and therefore the prorogation was rendered null. When Parliament resumed on 3 September 2019, Johnson indicated he would call a general election under the Fixed-term Parliaments Act after opposition and rebel Conservative MPs successfully voted against the government to take control of the order of business to prevent a no-deal exit. Despite government opposition, the Benn Act, a bill to block a no-deal exit, passed the Commons on 4 September 2019, causing Johnson to propose a general election on 15 October. His motion was unsuccessful as it failed to command the support of two-thirds of the House. In October 2019, following bilateral talks between Johnson and Taoiseach Leo Varadkar, the UK and EU agreed to a revised deal, which replaced the backstop with a new Northern Ireland Protocol. Johnson appointed his Cabinet on 24 July 2019, dismissing 11 senior ministers and accepting the resignation of six others. The mass dismissal was the most extensive postwar Cabinet reorganisation without a change in the ruling party. Among other appointments, Johnson made Dominic Raab the First Secretary of State and foreign secretary and appointed Sajid Javid and Priti Patel as the Chancellor of the Exchequer and Home Secretary, respectively. On 3 September 2019, Phillip Lee crossed the floor to the Liberal Democrats following a disagreement with Johnson's Brexit policy. This left the government without a working majority in the House of Commons. Later that day, 21 Conservative MPs had the party whip withdrawn for defying party orders and supporting an opposition motion. (The whip was restored to 10 former Conservative ministers on 29 October.) On 5 September 2019, Johnson's brother Jo Johnson resigned from the government and announced that he would step down as MP, describing his position as "torn between family and national interest". Two days later, Amber Rudd resigned as Secretary of State for Work and Pensions and from the Conservative Party, describing the withdrawal of the party whip as an "assault on decency and democracy". In October 2019, Parliament was dissolved, and an election called for 12 December. The election resulted in the Conservative Party winning 43.6% of the vote and a parliamentary landslide majority of 80 seats – its biggest since 1987 under Margaret Thatcher. A key slogan used in the Conservative campaign was their promise to "Get Brexit Done". Johnson reshuffled his cabinet in February 2020. Five Cabinet ministers were sacked, including the Northern Ireland secretary Julian Smith, a decision that was criticised by several politicians and commentators following his success in restoring the Northern Ireland Executive devolved government. Chancellor of the Exchequer Sajid Javid resigned from the Cabinet and was replaced by Rishi Sunak; Javid later returned to Johnson's Cabinet as Secretary of State for Health and Social Care in June 2021 following the resignation of Matt Hancock. Johnson reshuffled his cabinet again in September 2021. Changes included the dismissal of Education Secretary Gavin Williamson who had received significant criticism for his handling of disruption to education during the COVID-19 pandemic. Dominic Raab was moved from foreign secretary to deputy prime minister and justice secretary. Raab was replaced as foreign secretary by Liz Truss. The COVID-19 pandemic emerged as a serious crisis within the first few months of Johnson's second term. Johnson's non-attendance of five COBR briefings during the early months and the failure of the UK government to prepare for and control the outbreak has been criticised. The UK was among the last major[clarification needed] European states to close schools, ban public events and order a lockdown. This response is thought by some scientists to have contributed to the UK's high death toll from COVID-19, which as of January 2021[update] was among the highest in the world.[needs update] Reuters reported that scientists were critical of Johnson both for acting too slowly to stop the spread of COVID-19 and for mishandling the government's response; Politico quoted Chief Medical Officer Chris Whitty as saying that an earlier initial lockdown would have significantly lowered the death toll. The BMJ published several editorials critical of the policies adopted during the country's public health response. Johnson's public communication over the virus and the UK's test and trace system were also criticised. On 3 March 2020, Johnson claimed to have shaken hands with COVID-19 patients in hospital on the same day that SAGE had advised the government to warn the public not to shake hands and minimise physical contact, though it was unclear whether the hospital he visited actually contained any coronavirus patients. He continued to shake hands publicly in the following days. On 23 March, a COVID-19 lockdown was imposed throughout the UK, except for a few limited purposes, backed up by new legal powers. On 27 March, it was announced that Johnson had tested positive for COVID-19. On 5 April, he was admitted to a hospital. The next day, he was moved to the hospital's intensive care unit. Johnson left intensive care on 9 April, and left hospital three days later to recuperate at Chequers. After a fortnight at Chequers, he returned to Downing Street on 26 April. Johnson later said that he had been given emergency oxygen while in intensive care, and that doctors had made preparations in case he died. A scandal in May 2020 involved Johnson's chief political advisor Dominic Cummings, who made a trip with his family to Durham during the March 2020 lockdown while experiencing COVID-19 symptoms. Both Cummings and Johnson rejected widespread calls that Cummings resign. Johnson's defence of Cummings and his refusal to sack him caused a widespread backlash. This resulted in a loss of confidence in the government and specifically its response to the pandemic, referred to as 'the Cummings effect' in The Lancet. Concerns were raised in the study that this could affect the public's compliance with pandemic restrictions. The Johnson ministry was accused of cronyism in their assignment of contracts related to the pandemic response. Procurement of government contracts for key COVID-19 supplies became less transparent as a result of emergency measures bypassing the usual competitive tendering process. In October 2020, Johnson conceded that the UK's test and trace system and its specially developed contact tracing app, which had been criticised for their cost and operational issues, had caused "frustrations". Johnson reportedly resisted calls from SAGE and within the government to enact a second lockdown throughout September as COVID-19 infections rose. In April 2021, Johnson denied allegations he had said he would rather "let the bodies pile high in their thousands" on 30 October 2020. The government enacted a second national lockdown on 31 October. Throughout December 2020, COVID-19 cases across the UK rose significantly, straining emergency services and hospitals. In response, the government enacted further restrictions to large parts of southern and eastern England and on 21 December shortened a planned household mixing period over Christmas. Britain began its COVID-19 vaccination programme in December 2020. Half of UK adults had received at least their first vaccine dose by 20 March 2021. A third lockdown for the whole of England was introduced on 6 January 2021. Record numbers of infections and daily deaths were recorded in the UK throughout January, and the government began exploring quarantine procedures on arrival. Johnson said he was "deeply sorry" and "take[s] full responsibility" as the UK passed 100,000 deaths from COVID-19, the first European country to do so, on 26 January. In July 2021, Johnson announced that most generalised public health restrictions in England would be lifted and replaced by recommendations. This took place despite an increase in cases driven by the Delta variant. In September 2021, Johnson was pictured in a cabinet meeting, with "at least 30 people crammed shoulder-to-shoulder", without anyone wearing masks and with all windows apparently closed, contradicting government advice. Johnson was also photographed without a face mask during a visit to a hospital in November. In December 2021, more stringent "Plan B" restrictions for England were put forward, a partial renewal of previous measures due to the increased incidence of the SARS-CoV-2 Omicron variant. These proposals included face coverings to be required in more public settings, guidance to work from home wherever possible, and requirements of COVID-19 passports to enter certain venues. The government experienced the largest rebellion of Conservative MPs during Johnson's premiership, in opposition to these measures. At the State Opening of Parliament on 11 May 2021, a range of proposed laws were announced, including the Dissolution and Calling of Parliament Bill, which would restore the royal prerogative to dissolve Parliament; a Higher Education (Freedom of Speech) Bill to combat deplatforming at universities; an Online Safety Bill that would impose a statutory duty of care on online companies and empower Ofcom to block particular websites; and an Animal Welfare (Sentience) Bill that would legally recognise animal sentience. Further laws would introduce mandatory voter identification at general elections, reform the national immigration system, and implement a levelling up policy to reduce imbalances between areas. In April 2021, Cummings alleged that Johnson had arranged for donors to "secretly pay" for renovations on the private residence at 11 Downing Street. On 27 April Johnson asked the Cabinet Secretary, Simon Case, to hold a review about the refurbishment. On 28 April, the Electoral Commission announced it had opened a formal investigation. On the same day Johnson said that he had not broken any laws over the refurbishment and had met the requirements he was obliged to meet. During Prime Minister's Questions, the leader of the opposition, Keir Starmer, asked: "Who initially paid for the redecoration of his Downing Street flat?"; Johnson responded: "I paid for Downing Street's refurbishment personally." On 28 May Lord Geidt published a report on the allegations which concluded that Johnson did not breach the Ministerial Code and that no conflict, or reasonably perceived conflict, of interest arose. However, Lord Geidt expressed that it was "unwise" for Johnson to have proceeded without "more rigorous regard for how this would be funded". The Electoral Commission reported on 9 December that it found that the Conservative Party had failed to follow the law in not accurately reporting donations to the party from Lord Brownlow and imposed a £17,800 fine on the party. The Herald said the commission's report outlined how, in March, all the money paid by Brownlow and his company had been reimbursed, as had the payments made by the Conservative Party and Cabinet Office. Downing Street had said at the time that the full cost of the works had been met personally by the prime minister. In November 2021, Johnson backed a motion to block the suspension of Owen Paterson, a Conservative MP found to have abused his position by the independent standards commissioner after undertaking paid lobbying. The motion called for the creation of a new Conservative-majority committee to examine reforms of the standards investigation process. Many Conservative MPs refused to support the motion, and 13 defied a three-line whip to vote against it. Following the announcement by opposition parties that they would boycott the new committee, and faced with a backlash in the media and from MPs of all parties, the government announced that a new vote would take place on whether Paterson should be suspended. Paterson announced his resignation as an MP the same day. A by-election in Paterson's former constituency of North Shropshire saw the Liberal Democrat candidate, Helen Morgan, overturn a Conservative majority of nearly 23,000, the seventh largest swing in United Kingdom by-election history. In December 2021, reports emerged that social gatherings of government and Conservative Party staff in Downing Street had taken place ahead of Christmas 2020 against COVID-19 regulations. Johnson denied these allegations. Following a leaked video showing Downing Street staff joking about a "fictional party", at a press conference rehearsal recorded days after one alleged party took place, Johnson apologised for the contents of the video and suggested he had been misled but had now ordered an inquiry. On 10 January 2022, ITV News reported that a planned party had taken place on 20 May 2020, during the first lockdown. ITV had obtained an email sent by principal private secretary Martin Reynolds to staff inviting them to "socially distanced drinks" in the garden of No. 10. At the time, people outdoors were not allowed to meet more than one person from outside their household. Two eyewitnesses later alleged that Johnson and Symonds attended, contradicting Johnson's insistence in December 2021 that there were "no parties". On 12 January 2022, Johnson apologised to MPs in the Commons for "attending an event in the Downing Street garden during the first lockdown", stating he believed it was "a work event". He said that MPs should await the outcome of the independent inquiry, led by senior civil servant Sue Gray, which he said "will report as soon as possible". There were calls across the House for Johnson to resign. On 19 January, Bury South MP Christian Wakeford defected from the Conservative Party to the Labour Party. Conservative former minister David Davis called for Johnson to resign, quoting Leo Amery calling on Neville Chamberlain to resign during the Norway Debate in 1940, and saying: "You have sat there too long for all the good you have done. In the name of God, go." On 25 January, the Metropolitan Police's chief commander, Cressida Dick, announced that they were commencing investigations into the Downing Street Parties. An abbreviated version of the Sue Gray report into the controversy was released on 31 January, where Gray concluded there was a "failure of leadership" over the events that she had examined. The release of the full report was delayed pending the Metropolitan Police's investigation. In April 2022, Johnson was issued a fixed penalty notice as police determined that he committed a criminal offence by breaching the COVID-19 lockdown regulations. Johnson therefore became the first prime minister in British history to have been sanctioned for breaking the law while in office. According to Downing Street insiders, Johnson was involved in instigating a party on the occasion of Lee Cain leaving Number 10. What had begun as press office drinks became a party after Johnson arrived, gave a speech and poured drinks for staff. Labour's deputy leader, Angela Rayner said, "If the latest reports are true, it would mean that not only did the prime minister attend parties, but he had a hand in instigating at least one of them. He has deliberately misled the British people at every turn. The prime minister has demeaned his office." On 21 April, MPs voted to refer Johnson to the Parliamentary Privileges Committee to investigate whether he knowingly misled Parliament. Steve Baker said Johnson's "marvellous contrition... only lasted as long as it took to get out of the headmaster's study". Following the May 2022 local elections, many leading Conservatives in areas where the Conservatives had done badly blamed Johnson and calling on Johnson to resign. On 6 June, Graham Brady announced that the threshold for a vote on Johnson's leadership had been passed; the vote was scheduled for later that same day. On 3 March 2023, an interim report from the Commons Select Committee of Privileges said there was evidence that "strongly suggests" breaches of coronavirus regulations would have been "obvious" to Johnson. The report also said "There is evidence that those who were advising Mr Johnson about what to say to the press and in the House were themselves struggling to contend that some gatherings were within the rules". Johnson said none of the evidence showed he "knowingly" misled Parliament. The report stated that the Commons may have been misled on multiple occasions and Johnson "did not correct the statements [at the] earliest opportunity". The committee also stated that Johnson had "personal knowledge" over lockdown gatherings in No 10, which he could have disclosed. While speaking in the House of Commons on 31 January 2022, Johnson falsely blamed Starmer for the non-prosecution of serial sex offender Jimmy Savile when Starmer was Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) in the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS). Starmer was DPP in the years immediately prior to Savile's death but there is no evidence he was involved in the decision to not have him prosecuted. The claim linking the failure of the CPS to prosecute Savile to Starmer originated in 2018 on the right-wing Guido Fawkes blog. Johnson received criticism for the comment and his policy adviser, Munira Mirza, resigned three days later, saying that Johnson had made "a scurrilous accusation". Julian Smith, the former chief whip, and Simon Hoare were among Conservatives who called for Johnson to apologise. On 3 February, during an interview with Sky News, Johnson defended his comments, stating that in 2013, Starmer apologised because the CPS had not investigated Savile; however, Johnson then said: "I totally understand that he [Starmer] had nothing to do personally with those decisions". In the week prior to and throughout the Platinum Jubilee of Elizabeth II in June 2022, it had been speculated that a vote of confidence in Johnson's leadership of the Conservative Party might soon occur. On 6 June 2022, the Conservative Party announced that Johnson would face a vote of confidence in his leadership of the party, after at least 54 Conservative MPs wrote no-confidence letters to Sir Graham Brady, the chairman of the 1922 Committee. Johnson won the vote, with 211 in favour and 148 against. The number of rebel MPs was larger than had been expected. The result was described by Keir Starmer as the "beginning of the end" for Johnson's premiership. Following heavy Conservative defeats in the 23 June 2022 by-elections in Wakefield and Tiverton and Honiton, former party leader Michael Howard called for Johnson to resign, saying: "[Mr Johnson's] biggest asset has always been his ability to win votes but I'm afraid yesterday's results make it clear that he no longer has that ability." Oliver Dowden, the Co-Chairman of the Conservative Party, resigned saying: "somebody must take responsibility". Johnson announced that he had no intention of changing or resigning; senior Conservatives accused him of increasingly "delusional" behaviour. On 26 June 2022 Johnson said: "At the moment I'm thinking actively about the third term and what could happen then, but I will review that when I get to it." He also claimed that he intended to stay as prime minister until the mid-2030s, although Number 10 later said that he had been joking. Government Deputy Chief Whip Chris Pincher resigned on 30 June 2022, saying he had "drunk far too much" the night before at the Carlton Club in St James's, London, and having "embarrassed myself and other people". It was later alleged that he sexually assaulted two men, and he was suspended as an MP. On 3 July 2022 six new allegations against Pincher emerged, involving behaviour over a decade. Johnson allegedly referred to Pincher as "handsy" and Cummings said Johnson joked about him being "Pincher by name, pincher by nature" in 2020, leading to calls for Johnson to explain how much he knew about Pincher's behaviour. Ministers initially said that Johnson was unaware of any specific complaints against Pincher when he was appointed as deputy chief whip. The BBC then reported, however, that an official complaint and subsequent investigation into Pincher, while he was at the Foreign Office (July 2019 to February 2020), had confirmed his misconduct, and that Johnson had been made aware at that time. Sir Simon McDonald, former Permanent Under-Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, later said that the prime minister had been briefed "in person" about Pincher. On 5 July 2022, Sunak and Javid resigned within minutes of each other, followed over the next 24 hours by 11 other ministers, as well as Conservative MPs from parliamentary private secretary and other Government positions; other backbenchers also withdrew their support for Johnson. Many of the MPs stated that the Pincher affair had led them to change their minds on the suitability of Johnson to be prime minister. It was reported on 6 July that Johnson could face another confidence vote, with members of the 1922 Committee considering changing the rules as soon as that evening to allow this to happen. By 6 July, there had been a total of 31 resignations. As of May 2022, the government comprised 122 ministers. By the morning of 7 July, the newly installed Chancellor of the Exchequer, Nadhim Zahawi, publicly stated his belief that Johnson should resign. Within hours, the BBC and other media reported Johnson's intention to resign. Johnson announced his resignation at 12.30 pm. Upon reports of his resignation, the pound sterling temporarily strengthened in value, and UK stocks rose. He remained as prime minister until September, while the Conservative Party chose a new leader. On 5 September 2022, it was announced that Liz Truss had won the Conservative leadership election. She became prime minister the next day. During his farewell speech outside 10 Downing Street on 6 September 2022 Johnson referred to the Roman statesman Cincinnatus. Some commentators noted that, while, as Johnson said, Cincinnatus returned to his plough, he was also later recalled to power. In November 2020, Johnson announced a 10-point plan for a "green industrial revolution", to include ending the sale of petrol and diesel cars and vans by 2030, quadrupling the amount of offshore wind power capacity within a decade, funding emissions-cutting proposals, and spurning a proposed green post-COVID-19 recovery. In 2021, the Johnson government announced plans to cut carbon emissions by 78% by 2035. Johnson announced that the UK would join the Global Methane Pledge to cut methane emissions by 30% by 2030 at the COP26 summit, which the UK hosted. Before the summit, representatives of Greenpeace and Friends of the Earth criticised Johnson's comments on plans to introduce "enforceable limits" on carbon emissions for other countries, which they accused of being unsubstantive, and his government faced criticism from environmental groups for cutting taxes on domestic air travel, given the environmental impact of aviation. In April 2022, Johnson announced that eight more nuclear reactors would be built on existing nuclear power plant sites and called for an expansion in wind energy. Under these plans, up to 95% of the UK's electricity could come from low-carbon power sources by 2030. Johnson supported the European Union–Mercosur Free Trade Agreement, which would form one of the world's largest free trade areas. Johnson's government placed importance on the "Special Relationship" with the United States. In 2022, his government introduced an asylum deal whereby people entering the UK illegally would be sent to Rwanda. Johnson said in July 2019 that his government would be very "pro-China" in an interview with the Hong Kong broadcaster Phoenix TV. He voiced support for Chinese president Xi Jinping's infrastructure investment effort, the Belt and Road Initiative, and promised to keep the United Kingdom "the most open economy in Europe" for Chinese investment. In June 2020, Johnson announced that if China were to continue pursuing the Hong Kong national security law, the UK would offer 350,000 Hong Kong residents who are British National (Overseas) passport holders, and 2.6 million other eligible individuals, the chance to move to the UK. China accused the UK of interfering in its internal affairs. Johnson declined to describe the Chinese government's treatment of the Uyghur people as "genocide", despite use of the term by the United States. Johnson's government argued that genocide should be decided by the International Criminal Court. Nevertheless, he called what is happening to the Uyghurs in Xinjiang as "utterly abhorrent". The UK joined the AUKUS defence pact with the United States and Australia in September 2021. The pact was denounced by China and caused a French backlash, as it usurped existing plans for Australia to procure French submarines. On 8 July 2021, the day after saying he was "apprehensive" about the future of Afghanistan following what was then the impending withdrawal of US troops, while announcing the near completion of British troop withdrawal from Afghanistan, Johnson expressed the view that there was "no military path to victory for the Taliban". Following the fall of Kabul to the Taliban, he blamed the United States for the crisis, saying that NATO alliance members "could not continue this US-led mission, a mission conceived and executed in support of America, without American logistics, without US air power and without American might". Following the formal withdrawal from the European Union in January 2020, Johnson's government entered trade negotiations with the EU. Fisheries was a major topic of the negotiations. On 16 October 2020 Johnson said that the UK "must get ready" for no trade deal with the EU. It was announced on 24 December 2020 that the EU–UK Trade and Cooperation Agreement had been reached; it came into force formally on 1 May. A fisheries dispute between the UK and France occurred shortly afterwards. Introduction of new UK border checks were delayed until 2022 to minimise the disruption caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. In May 2022, Johnson readied a draft that would unilaterally change parts of the Northern Ireland Protocol, citing issues with medical supplies and cuts in VAT. One of the thornier points of contention involves safety regulations for food and plants, where the British government is opposed to a closer alignment with existing EU regulations. The EU rebuffed the idea of changing the text of the treaty to accommodate the British. A unilateral override by the UK would be tantamount to a breach of the agreement. As Johnson sought a more conciliatory tone, sources within the government began to stress that the draft is designed to be an "insurance policy" and would take years to become law. In November 2021, Johnson warned that the European Union faces "a choice" between "sticking up for Ukraine" and approving the Nord Stream 2 natural gas pipeline from Russia to Europe. During the 2021–2022 Russo-Ukrainian crisis, Johnson's government warned the Russian Government not to invade Donbas. Johnson and Vladimir Putin agreed in a phone call to work towards a "peaceful resolution". On 1 February 2022, Johnson arrived in Kyiv on a diplomatic visit. He called the presence of the Russian Armed Forces near the Russia–Ukraine border "the biggest security crisis that Europe has faced for decades". The Kremlin denied that it wanted to attack Ukraine. On 20 February 2022, Johnson warned that Russia is planning the "biggest war in Europe since 1945" as Putin intends to invade and encircle Kyiv. On 21 February 2022, Johnson condemned Russia's diplomatic recognition of two self-proclaimed republics in Donbas. Johnson condemned the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, and ensured the UK joined in international sanctions on Russian banks and oligarchs. He later announced the UK would phase out Russian oil by the end of 2022. On 9 April 2022, Johnson travelled to Kyiv and met the President of Ukraine, Volodymyr Zelenskyy. On 16 April 2022, Russia's Ministry for Foreign Affairs banned Johnson and a number of senior British politicians from visiting Russia, saying that Britain aimed to isolate Russia politically and supply "the Kyiv regime with lethal weapons and coordinating similar efforts on the part of NATO". Within Ukraine, Johnson is praised by many as a supporter of anti-Russian sanctions and military aid for Ukraine. On 3 May, Johnson virtually addressed the Ukrainian Parliament, becoming the first world leader to speak in Ukraine since the invasion. He pledged an extra £300m in military aid to Ukraine, praised Ukraine's resistance to Russia as its "finest hour" and said that the West had been "too slow to grasp what was actually happening" prior to Russia's invasion. In July 2022, Johnson warned that it would be a mistake to cease fire and freeze the conflict. In August 2022, Johnson blamed Vladimir Putin for the emerging global energy crisis. After stepping down, Johnson reverted to being a backbench MP. Following the death of Queen Elizabeth II, Johnson took part in Charles III's Accession Council. After Liz Truss announced her resignation as Conservative Party leader on 20 October 2022, Johnson received more than the 100 MPs' nominations required to stand in the leadership election, but soon announced that he would not stand. In May 2023, Johnson was referred to the police by the Cabinet Office regarding previously unknown potential breaches of COVID regulations between June 2020 and May 2021. to which Johnson's office issued a statement criticising the "unfounded suggestions" which "has all the hallmarks of yet another politically motivated stitch-up". On 9 June 2023, the publication of his 2022 Prime Minister's Resignation Honours led to a public feud with Rishi Sunak. Johnson supporter Nadine Dorries announced that she was resigning as an MP due to not being included as a peer on the honours list. The same day, after receiving a confidential report from a committee of the House of Commons that was looking into whether he had lied to Parliament over lockdown-breaking parties, Johnson announced his resignation as MP. His resignation statement said he is "not alone in thinking that there is a witch-hunt under way, to take revenge for Brexit and ultimately to reverse the 2016 referendum result". On 15 June, the Commons Privileges Committee published their report, which concluded that Johnson lied to and deliberately misled the House of Commons over Partygate, misled the Committee themselves during the hearing, and acted in contempt of the Committee itself through a "campaign of abuse and intimidation". The report noted that had Johnson still been an MP, the Committee would have recommended he be suspended from Parliament for 90 days. The contents of the report represented a recommendation to the House of Commons, which accepted the report by 354 votes to seven. On 16 June, Johnson was unveiled as a new columnist for the Daily Mail. The news website Politico Europe reported that Johnson would be paid a "very-high six-figure sum". Johnson reportedly informed the Advisory Committee on Business Appointments half an hour before the columnist assignment was publicly announced. The committee ruled that Johnson committed a "clear breach" of the rules since he had not sought its advice on the matter within an appropriate timeframe. In October 2023, Johnson announced he would join the television channel GB News as a commentator and programme maker for the upcoming General Election and US Presidential Election. Johnson condemned Hamas' attack on Israel and expressed support for Israel's right to self-defence, saying "there can be no moral equivalence between the terrorism of Hamas and the actions of the Israeli Defense Forces". He rejected calls for a ceasefire in the 2023 Israel–Hamas war. Johnson criticised pro-Palestinian protests in the UK, saying participants "are giving moral support and comfort to the terrorists". On 5 November 2023, Johnson visited Israel to express solidarity. In February 2024, Johnson had a private meeting with the president of Venezuela, Nicolás Maduro. In March 2024, The Times reported that Johnson is expected to campaign for the Conservatives in the next General Election. [I am] free-market, tolerant, broadly libertarian (though perhaps not ultra-libertarian), inclined to see the merit of traditions, anti-regulation, pro-immigrant, pro-standing on your own two feet, pro-alcohol, pro-hunting, pro-motorist and ready to defend to the death the right of Glenn Hoddle to believe in reincarnation. — Boris Johnson, 2011 Ideologically, Johnson has been described as a "One-Nation Tory". Political scientists have described Johnson's political positions as ambiguous and contradictory, encompassing nativist, authoritarian and free market tendencies on the one hand, and one-nation liberal conservatism on the other. Some scholars have questioned Johnson's commitment to one-nation conservativism, instead characterising his ideology as flexible and populist. Purnell stated that Johnson regularly changed his opinion on political issues, commenting on what she perceived to be "an ideological emptiness beneath the staunch Tory exterior". During his tenure as mayor, Johnson gained a reputation as "a liberal, centre-ground politician", according to Business Insider. In 2012, the political scientist Tony Travers described Johnson as "a fairly classic—that is, small-state—mildly eurosceptic Conservative" who also embraced "modern social liberalism". The Guardian stated that while mayor, Johnson blended economic and social liberalism, with The Economist saying that in doing so Johnson "transcends his Tory identity" and adopts a more libertarian perspective. According to political scientist Richard Hayton, Johnson's premiership was about Brexit, which served as a "national cause". Johnson evoked the discourse of popular sovereignty and anti-establishment populism to portray Parliament as seeking to "sabotage" Brexit, and in doing so, presented himself "as the true representative of 'the people'". Scholars of comparative politics have drawn comparisons between Johnson and other populist leaders such as Donald Trump and Viktor Orban. Some commentators have likened Johnson's political style to Trumpism, although others have argued that Johnson's stance on matters such as social policy, immigration and free trade is liberal. Johnson biographer Gimson wrote that Johnson is economically and socially "a genuine liberal", although he retains a "Tory element" through his "love of existing institutions, and a recognition of the inevitability of hierarchy". In 2019, reacting to reports in The Sun, that Johnson had told cabinet colleagues he was "basically a Brexity Hezza", former deputy leader of the Conservative Party Michael Heseltine wrote: "I fear that any traces of liberal conservatism that still exist within the prime minister have long since been captured by the rightwing, foreigner-bashing, inward-looking view of the world that has come to characterise his fellow Brexiters." Johnson expressed climate sceptical views in several columns, conflating the distinction between weather and climate and highlighting a factually incorrect claim by weather forecaster and conspiracy theorist Piers Corbyn that reduced solar activity could lead to a "mini-Ice Age". Bloomberg News suggested that Johnson's interest in climate change increased after becoming prime minister, and suggested this could have been influenced by his wife Carrie Symonds and father Stanley Johnson, who are both environmental campaigners. In 2019 and 2020, Johnson expressed support for the UK to have "net-zero" greenhouse gas emissions by 2050 and spoke about increasing ambition for mitigating climate change through carbon capture and storage and a renewable energy transition. During the 2021 United Nations Climate Change Conference, Johnson called for greater efforts towards climate change mitigation, and welcomed the prospect of coal phase-out. It was reported in 2022 that Johnson was convinced of the scientific consensus on climate change following a briefing by the chief scientist of the Met Office in January 2020, and subsequently made the issue a priority for his government. According to TheyWorkForYou as of 2022[update], Johnson has "generally voted against" what it described as "key measures to prevent climate change"[clarification needed] while an MP, and other sources confirm this.[needs update] Purnell believed it was the influence of Johnson's maternal family that led to him developing "a genuine abhorrence of racial discrimination". In 2003, Johnson said, "I am not by any means an ultra-Eurosceptic. In some ways, I am a bit of a fan of the European Union. If we did not have one, we would invent something like it." As mayor, Johnson was known as a supporter of immigration. From 2009, he advocated a referendum on Britain's EU membership. In 2018, during Brexit negotiations, Johnson called for Britain to leave the Single Market and advocated a more liberal approach to immigration than that of Prime Minister May. He stated many people believed that Britain's EU membership had led to the suppression of British wages and said the EU was intent on creating a "superstate" that would seek to rob Britain of its sovereignty. In 2019, Johnson said he would take Britain out of the EU on 31 October whether there was a trade deal in place or not. Johnson also stated his opposition to a referendum on the Brexit withdrawal agreement. On 19 August 2019, Johnson wrote a letter to the EU asking for the removal of the "backstop" accord. The president of the European Council, Donald Tusk, rejected the proposal. On 26 August 2019, Johnson said that Britain would not pay £39 billion for the withdrawal agreement were the UK to leave without a deal. The European Parliament Brexit coordinator Guy Verhofstadt said there would be no further negotiation unless the UK agreed to pay the entire sum.[needs update] Johnson described himself as a "fervent and passionate unionist". He proposed building an Irish Sea Bridge, but he later scrapped this initiative. The devolved administrations have criticised the Internal Market Bill for its re-centralisation of control over commerce. Johnson has said that "humour is a utensil that you can use to sugar the pill and to get important points across". He is said to have a genuine desire to be liked. Johnson has been described as having a light-hearted and charming persona; many biographers and commentators suggest he has put significant effort into developing this version of himself. He has also been described as heavily focused on his own interests, with an often vitriolic or irresponsible way of conducting himself in private. Johnson has been described as a divisive, controversial figure in British politics. Supporters have praised him as witty and entertaining. Johnson has been accused of lying or making misleading statements throughout his career, and has been compared to former US president Donald Trump. He has been considered a figure with broad appeal outside of the usual Conservative support base. Johnson's premiership has been described by historians as the most controversial and scandal-affected since that of David Lloyd George about a century earlier. Since Johnson was born in New York City to British parents, he held British-American dual citizenship. In 2015, he agreed to pay capital gains tax to the US tax authorities on a property that he inherited in the UK. He renounced his US citizenship the following year. Johnson has knowledge of French, Italian, German, Spanish, Latin and Ancient Greek, frequently alluding to classical references in his newspaper columns and his speeches. Sonia Purnell wrote in 2011 that Johnson was a "highly evasive figure" when it came to his personal life, who remained detached from others and who had few intimate friends. Among friends and family, Johnson is more commonly known as Al (short for his forename Alexander), rather than Boris. In 2007, Johnson said he had smoked cannabis before he went to university. He has also said he had used cocaine. Johnson partakes in cycling, tennis and pilates, and returned to road running in 2023. He was considered obese in 2018 and overweight in 2020, and has spoken of making efforts to lose weight. Johnson previously owned a £1.3 million buy-to-let townhouse in Camberwell, South London. According to HM Land Registry documents, he bought the four-bedroom property with his then-girlfriend Carrie Symonds in July 2019. The register of MPs' interests states that Johnson had a rental income of at least £10,000 a year. In 2023, Johnson and Symonds bought Brightwell Manor, a £3.8 million moated mansion in Brightwell-cum-Sotwell, Oxfordshire. Johnson was baptised Catholic and later confirmed in the Church of England, but has said that his faith "comes and goes" and that he is not a serious practising Christian. In 2020, his son Wilfred was baptised Catholic. Johnson and Symonds married in a Catholic ceremony at Westminster Cathedral on 29 May 2021. Since he was baptised Catholic, but his previous weddings were not conferred by the Catholic Church, they are considered putatively invalid. Johnson holds ancient Greek statesman Pericles as a personal hero. According to Johnson's biographer, Andrew Gimson, regarding ancient Greek and Roman polytheism: "it is clear that [Johnson] is inspired by the Romans, and even more by the Greeks, and repelled by the early Christians". Johnson views secular humanism positively and sees it as owing more to the classical world than to Christian thinking. However, in 2021, Johnson was asked if he held pre-Christian beliefs, which he denied, saying, "Christianity is a superb ethical system and I would count myself as a kind of very, very bad Christian... Christianity makes a lot of sense to me." In 1987, Johnson married Allegra Mostyn-Owen, daughter of the art historian William Mostyn-Owen and Italian writer Gaia Servadio. The couple's marriage ended in divorce or annulment in 1993 and 12 days later Johnson married Marina Wheeler, a barrister, daughter of journalist Charles Wheeler. Five weeks later, their first child was born. They have four children: Lara Lettice, Milo Arthur, Cassia Peaches and Theodore Apollo. Between 2000 and 2004, Johnson had an affair with Spectator columnist Petronella Wyatt when he was its editor, resulting in a terminated pregnancy and a miscarriage. In April 2006, the News of the World alleged that Johnson was having an affair with Guardian journalist Anna Fazackerley. The pair did not comment; shortly afterward, Johnson employed Fazackerley. In 2009, Johnson fathered a daughter with Helen Macintyre, an arts consultant. In September 2021, Johnson stated that he had (then) six children, thereby denying the existence of further illegitimate children. In September 2018, Johnson and Wheeler issued a statement confirming that they had separated months earlier; they divorced in 2020. Jennifer Arcuri said that she had an affair with Johnson from 2012 to 2016. In 2019, Johnson was living with Carrie Symonds, the daughter of Matthew Symonds, co-founder of The Independent newspaper. Johnson and Symonds became engaged in late 2019 and their son, Wilfred Lawrie Nicholas Johnson, was born in April 2020. On 29 May 2021, Johnson married Symonds at Westminster Cathedral. Their daughter, Romy Iris Charlotte Johnson, was born in December 2021. Their third child, a son named Frank Alfred Odysseus Johnson, was born in July 2023. Johnson is the eldest of the four children of Stanley Johnson, a former Conservative member of the European Parliament, and the painter Charlotte Johnson Wahl (née Fawcett), the daughter of Sir James Fawcett, president of the European Commission of Human Rights. His younger siblings are Rachel Johnson, a writer and journalist, Leo Johnson, a broadcaster, and Jo Johnson, ex-minister of state and former Conservative MP for Orpington, who resigned from his brother's government in September 2019 and is now a member of the House of Lords. Johnson's stepmother, Jenny, the second wife of his father Stanley, is the stepdaughter of Teddy Sieff, the former chairman of Marks & Spencer. Having been a member of the Conservatives between 2008 and 2011, Rachel Johnson joined the Liberal Democrats in 2017. She stood as a candidate for Change UK in the 2019 European Elections. Johnson also has two half-siblings, Julia and Maximilian, through his father's later marriage to Jennifer Kidd. Johnson's paternal grandfather, Wilfred Johnson, was an RAF pilot in Coastal Command during the Second World War. Wilfred Johnson's father was the Ottoman Interior Minister and journalist Ali Kemal. Ali Kemal's father was a Turk while his mother was a Circassian reputedly of slave origin. His other paternal ancestry includes English, German and French; one of his German ancestors was said to be the illegitimate daughter of Prince Paul of Württemberg and thus a descendant of George II of Great Britain, which was later confirmed on an episode of Who Do You Think You Are? Johnson's mother is the granddaughter of Elias Avery Lowe, a palaeographer and a Russian Jewish immigrant to the US, and Pennsylvania-born Helen Tracy Lowe-Porter, a translator of Thomas Mann. Referring to his varied ancestry, Johnson has described himself as a "one-man melting pot". Johnson was given the middle name "Boris" after a White Russian émigré named Boris Litwin, who was a friend of his parents. Honorary degree of Doctor of Laws (LLD) from Brunel University London, 2007 Honorary Fellowship of the Royal Institute of British Architects (Hon FRIBA), 2011 Honorary Australian of the Year in the UK, 26 January 2014 Sworn in as a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council on 15 July 2016, upon his appointment as foreign secretary. This gave him the honorific title "The Right Honourable" for life. Medical Education Ig Nobel Prize, 2020. Honorary Citizen of Odesa, 2 July 2022 Member of the Order of Liberty (Ukraine), 24 August 2022 Honorary Citizen of Kyiv, 19 January 2023 Honorary Doctorate from Ivan Franko National University, Lviv Friends, Voters, Countrymen (HarperCollins, 2001) ISBN 978-0-00-711913-4 Johnson's Column (Continuum International – Academi, 2003) ISBN 978-0-8264-6855-0 Lend Me Your Ears (HarperCollins, 2003) ISBN 978-0-00-717224-5 Seventy-Two Virgins (HarperCollins, 2004) ISBN 978-0-00-719590-9 Aspire Ever Higher / University Policy for the 21st century (Politeia, 2006) The Dream of Rome (HarperCollins, 2006) ISBN 978-0-00-722441-8 Have I Got Views For You (HarperPerennial, 2006) ISBN 978-0-00-724220-7 Life in the Fast Lane: The Johnson Guide to Cars (HarperPerennial, 2007) ISBN 978-0-00-726020-1 The Perils of the Pushy Parents: A Cautionary Tale (HarperPress 2007) ISBN 978-0-00-726339-4 Johnson's Life of London (HarperPress 2011) ISBN 978-0-00-741893-0 The Churchill Factor (Hodder & Stoughton 2014) ISBN 978-1-44-478302-5 Raab deputised for Johnson as First Secretary of State from July 2019 to September 2021, then as Deputy Prime Minister from September 2021 until September 2022. Commission Regulation (EC) No. 2257/94 introduced the requirement for bananas to be "free from malformation or abnormal curvature"; different standards applied to different classes of banana. The EU introduced limits on the power of vacuum cleaners in 2014. This was a reduction on the 2035 target set in February that year, which brought forward the previous deadline of 2040. Sources differ on whether the marriage ended in divorce or with an annulment. Croucher, Shane (23 July 2019). "Britain's new prime minister was a U.S. citizen for decades—until the IRS caught up with him". Newsweek. Archived from the original on 25 September 2020. Retrieved 25 September 2020. "UK Gives £1 Billion to Ukraine to Help Fund Offensive Operations". Bloomberg.com. 29 June 2022. Retrieved 7 July 2022. Davies, Guy (23 July 2019). "Meet Boris Johnson: The UK's controversial new prime minister". ABC News. Archived from the original on 30 April 2021. Retrieved 8 May 2021. Blitz, James (23 July 2019). "Why is Boris Johnson such a divisive figure?". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 24 July 2019. Retrieved 5 May 2021. Gimson 2012, p. 20. Kirkup, James (7 January 2015). "Boris Johnson goes looking for Conservative friends in the north". The Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 5 May 2021. Purnell 2011, p. 327. Edwards & Isaby 2008, p. 110. Conn, David; Pegg, David; Evans, Rob; Garside, Juliette; Lawrence, Felicity (15 November 2020). "'Chumocracy': how Covid revealed the new shape of the Tory establishment". The Observer. Retrieved 15 November 2020. Purnell 2011, p. 365. "'Get Brexit Done.' The Slogan That Won Britain's Election". Time. 13 December 2019. Archived from the original on 30 January 2020. Retrieved 15 May 2023. Editorial (1 February 2021). "The Guardian view on the vaccine rollout: the state we're in". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 15 May 2023. Retrieved 15 May 2023. "Boris Johnson's support for Ukraine was special, President Zelensky says". BBC News. 7 July 2022. Archived from the original on 15 May 2023. Retrieved 15 May 2023. "The most controversial PM since Lloyd George: historians on Boris Johnson". The Observer. 4 September 2022. Archived from the original on 4 September 2022. Retrieved 4 September 2022. Purnell 2011, p. 121. Staunton, Denis (23 June 2019). "Boris Johnson: The UK's deeply polarising next prime minister". The Irish Times. Archived from the original on 29 July 2021. Retrieved 8 May 2021. Berend, T. Iván (2020). A century of populist demagogues: Eighteen European portraits, 1918–2018. Budapest: Central European University Press. p. 239. ISBN 978-963-386-334-3. JSTOR 10.7829/j.ctv16f6cn2.1. Lawless, Jill (23 July 2019). "Boris Johnson's Chaotic Path to Power Finally Pays Off". Associated Press. Archived from the original on 31 July 2019. Retrieved 31 July 2019. Purnell 2011, p. 10; Gimson 2012, p. 1. Purnell 2011, p. 11; Gimson 2012, p. 2. Llewellyn Smith, Julia (18 May 2008). "Boris Johnson, by his mother Charlotte Johnson Wahl". The Sunday Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 23 January 2011. Retrieved 16 April 2020. Frost, Amanda. "Everyone born in the United States is a U.S. citizen. Here's why". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 2 June 2023. Retrieved 3 November 2023. "Citizen of the United States, 1963". National Churchill Museum. Archived from the original on 3 November 2023. Retrieved 3 November 2023. Edwards & Isaby 2008, p. 44; Purnell 2011, pp. 12–13; Gimson 2012, p. 11. Purnell 2011, p. 13. Purnell 2011, p. 14. Edwards & Isaby 2008, p. 44; Purnell 2011, p. 16; Gimson 2012, p. 14. Purnell 2011, p. 16. Purnell 2011, p. 15; Gimson 2012, p. 14. Edwards & Isaby 2008, p. 44; Purnell 2011, p. 17; Gimson 2012, p. 17, 20–22. Purnell 2011, p. 18; Gimson 2012, p. 25. Purnell 2011, p. 13; Gimson 2012, p. 11. Purnell 2011, p. 26; Gimson 2012, p. 18. Edwards & Isaby 2008, p. 45; Purnell 2011, p. 28; Gimson 2012, pp. 17–18. Purnell 2011, pp. 28–29. Purnell 2011, p. 29. Purnell 2011, p. 30. Edwards & Isaby 2008, p. 44; Purnell 2011, p. 30; Gimson 2012, p. 26. Purnell 2011, p. 31. Edwards & Isaby 2008, p. 44; Purnell 2011, pp. 31–32; Gimson 2012, p. 26. Johnson, Stanley (18 June 2016). "Stanley Johnson: Why I remain a fan of Brussels". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 1 July 2016. Retrieved 5 May 2021. Edwards & Isaby 2008, p. 44; Purnell 2011, pp. 33–35; Gimson 2012, pp. 27–29. Purnell 2011, p. 42; Gimson 2012, pp. 30–31. Purnell 2011, pp. 36, 42. Edwards & Isaby 2008, pp. 44–45; Purnell 2011, pp. 38–39; Gimson 2012, p. 35. Purnell 2011, p. 49. Edwards & Isaby 2008, p. 44; Purnell 2011, p. 42. Purnell 2011, p. 45. Sonia, Purnell (21 July 2019). "The 10 ages of Boris Johnson: a guide to his road to power". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 11 July 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022. Purnell 2011, pp. 47–48. Purnell 2011, p. 48. Edwards & Isaby 2008, p. 44; Purnell 2011, pp. 50–51; Gimson 2012, pp. 41–44. Purnell 2011, p. 53. Purnell 2011, pp. 49–50. Purnell 2011, p. 55. Purnell 2011, pp. 49, 53. Purnell 2011, pp. 54–55; Gimson 2012, pp. 51–52. Purnell 2011, pp. 58–59. Bunbury, Stephanie (17 August 2013). "Boris Johnson and the right to write". The Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on 13 January 2018. Retrieved 12 January 2018. Johnston, Chris (15 July 2016). "When Boris was just another Timbertop Rent-A-Pom". The Border Mail. Archived from the original on 13 January 2018. Retrieved 12 January 2018. Edwards & Isaby 2008, p. 45; Purnell 2011, p. 57; Gimson 2012, p. 83. Gimson 2012, p. 56. Purnell 2011, p. 62. Johnson, Boris (2001). Friends, Voters, Countrymen: Jottings on the Stump. London: HarperCollins. p. 151. ISBN 0007119135. Purnell 2011, pp. 63–65; Gimson 2012, pp. 63–66. "David Dimbleby Slams 'Disgraceful' Boris Johnson For Ruining Bullingdon Club". HuffPost. 28 May 2013. Archived from the original on 11 December 2018. Retrieved 29 May 2014. Kingsley, Patrick (10 August 2011). "UK riots: how do Boris Johnson's Bullingdon antics compare?". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 29 May 2014. Purnell 2011, pp. 72, 74–78; Gimson 2012, pp. 76–83. Purnell 2011, p. 70; Gimson 2012, p. 60. Purnell 2011, p. 68; Gimson 2012, p. 74. Purnell 2011, pp. 70–71. Purnell 2011, pp. 71–73. Purnell 2011, pp. 80–81. Purnell 2011, p. 84. Purnell 2011, p. 87. Purnell 2011, pp. 89–90; Gimson 2012, p. 84. Barber, Lyn (5 October 2003). "Charmed, I'm Sure". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 8 April 2020. Purnell 2011, p. 92. Purnell 2011, pp. 92–94; Gimson 2012, pp. 85–86. Purnell 2011, p. 94. Purnell 2011, pp. 95–99; Gimson 2012, pp. 88–90. Purnell 2011, pp. 100–102; Gimson 2012, pp. 90–96. Purnell 2011, pp. 102–103; Gimson 2012, p. 97. Purnell 2011, p. 108. Purnell 2011, pp. 106–107. Purnell 2011, p. 109. Fletcher, Martin (4 November 2017). "The joke's over – how Boris Johnson is damaging Britain's global stature". New Statesman. Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 7 November 2017. Purnell 2011, pp. 115–116. Bower 2021, pp. 68, 627. Henley, Jon (11 May 2016). "Is the EU really dictating the shape of your bananas?". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 18 May 2022. Retrieved 28 November 2021. Henley, Jon (11 May 2016). "Is the EU really dictating the shape of your bananas?". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 18 May 2022. Retrieved 8 November 2021. Smithers, Rebecca (21 August 2014). "EU ban on powerful vacuum cleaners prompts anger and legal challenge". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 28 November 2021. Retrieved 28 November 2021. Dallison, Paul (23 February 2016). "Boris Johnson's 11 best Europe moments". Politico Europe. Archived from the original on 28 November 2021. Retrieved 28 November 2021. Purnell 2011, pp. 121, 126; Gimson 2012, pp. 98–99, 100–101. "Boris Johnson handgun quote is real". Full Fact. 25 March 2021. Archived from the original on 8 June 2022. Retrieved 10 October 2021. Purnell 2011, p. 115. Purnell 2011, p. 124. Black, Conrad (29 June 2019). "Max Hastings vs Boris Johnson: I know who I'd trust more". The Spectator. Archived from the original on 31 March 2022. Retrieved 9 April 2020. Purnell 2011, pp. 129–130, 134; Gimson 2012, pp. 107–111, 113–114. Press Association (18 February 2020). "Boris Johnson agrees divorce settlement with Marina Wheeler". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 29 May 2021. Retrieved 29 May 2021. Purnell 2011, pp. 130–133; Gimson 2012, pp. 111–114. Purnell 2011, p. 134; Gimson 2012, pp. 114–115. Purnell 2011, p. 135; Gimson 2012, p. 115. Purnell 2011, p. 142. Purnell 2011, pp. 144, 148. Purnell 2011, p. 143; Gimson 2012, p. 125. Purnell 2011, pp. 146–147. Purnell 2011, p. 153. Purnell 2011, pp. 139–140. Purnell 2011, p. 161; Gimson 2012, p. 124. Purnell 2011, p. 168; Gimson 2012, p. 125. Purnell 2011, p. 169. Johnson, Boris (10 January 2002). "If Blair's so good at running the Congo, let him stay there". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 8 November 2020. Retrieved 5 May 2021. Johnson, Boris (1 September 2005). "Getting our knickers in a twist over China". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 5 March 2020. Retrieved 5 May 2021. Purnell 2011, p. 171. Purnell 2011, pp. 162–165. Edwards & Isaby 2008, p. 46; Purnell 2011, pp. 185–186; Gimson 2012, p. 125. Purnell 2011, pp. 173–176; Gimson 2012, pp. 117–123. Purnell 2011, p. 168. Purnell 2011, p. 171; Gimson 2012, pp. 177–178. Purnell 2011, pp. 179–181; Gimson 2012, p. 177. Marshall, Alex (29 October 2019). "A Show That Laughs at Boris Johnson, and May Have Aided His Rise". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 29 October 2019. Retrieved 10 June 2021. Purnell 2011, pp. 176–178; Gimson 2012, pp. 127–129. "Television in 2004 – BAFTA Awards". BAFTA. 18 April 2020. Archived from the original on 14 August 2017. Retrieved 3 May 2020. Purnell 2011, p. 178; Gimson 2012, p. 130. Purnell 2011, p. 188; Gimson 2012, p. 131. Purnell 2011, pp. 198–199. Purnell 2011, p. 191. Purnell 2011, p. 204. Purnell 2011, pp. 192, 194. Purnell 2011, p. 193. "Boris says sorry over 'blacks have lower IQs' article in the Spectator". Evening Standard. 2 April 2008. Archived from the original on 31 August 2018. Retrieved 30 August 2018. "No 10 denies Boris Johnson 'thigh squeeze' claim". BBC News. 29 September 2019. Archived from the original on 29 September 2019. Retrieved 29 September 2019. Edwardes, Charlotte (29 September 2019). "Charlotte Edwardes on Boris Johnson's wandering hands". The Times. Archived from the original on 7 August 2021. Retrieved 7 August 2021. Pidd, Helen (11 August 2019). "PM should apologise for Hillsborough remarks, says Liverpool mayor". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 17 July 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022. "Boris sorry for Scouse stereotype". BBC News. 19 October 2004. Archived from the original on 22 May 2006. Retrieved 27 June 2020. Perraudin, Frances (15 July 2019). "Boris Johnson claimed Islam put Muslim world 'centuries behind'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 27 July 2019. Retrieved 27 July 2019. Purnell 2011, p. 219. Purnell 2011, pp. 209–210; Gimson 2012, p. 141. Purnell 2011, pp. 211–212. Purnell 2011, pp. 220–221. Purnell 2011, p. 240. Purnell 2011, p. 238. Purnell 2011, p. 239. Purnell 2011, p. 225. Purnell 2011, pp. 232–233. Purnell 2011, p. 230. Purnell 2011, p. 231. "Section 28 compromise avoids a crisis". BBC News. 16 January 2003. Archived from the original on 27 May 2006. Retrieved 30 July 2022. Cowley, Philip; Stuart, Mark (19 November 2004). "Mapping Conservative Divisions Under Michael Howard" (PDF). Revolts.co.uk. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 June 2011. Retrieved 3 February 2010. Johnson, Boris (15 April 2000). "Another voice". The Spectator. p. 8. Archived from the original on 19 May 2021. Retrieved 6 June 2021. Cooper, Alex (26 July 2019). "Boris Johnson gets mixed reviews from U.K.'s LGBTQ community". NBC News. Archived from the original on 6 June 2021. Retrieved 6 June 2021. Purnell 2011, p. 149. "Programmes = BBC Parliament – Impeachment in practice". BBC. 2 September 2004. Archived from the original on 16 November 2020. Retrieved 18 December 2016. Gimson 2012, p. 265. Purnell 2011, pp. 189, 190. Purnell 2011, p. 226. Purnell 2011, p. 230; Gimson 2012, pp. 145–146. Gimson 2012, pp. 176–177. Purnell 2011, pp. 249–251; Gimson 2012, pp. 189–192. Purnell 2011, p. 227; Gimson 2012, p. 143. Purnell 2011, p. 228. Gimson 2012, p. 182. Purnell 2011, pp. 223–224; Gimson 2012, p. 150. Purnell 2011, p. 234; Gimson 2012, p. 150. Edwards & Isaby 2008, pp. 46–47; Purnell 2011, pp. 242–243; Gimson 2012, p. 178. Purnell 2011, p. 243; Gimson 2012, p. 179. Edwards & Isaby 2008, p. 47; Purnell 2011, pp. 251–252; Gimson 2012, pp. 193–207. "Boris sorry for Scouse stereotype". BBC News. 19 October 2004. Archived from the original on 9 April 2020. Retrieved 9 April 2020. Edwards & Isaby 2008, p. 47; Purnell 2011, pp. 257–263; Gimson 2012, pp. 162–173, 209–218. Edwards & Isaby 2008, p. 47; Purnell 2011, pp. 265–267; Gimson 2012, pp. 222–223. McSmith, Andy (14 November 2004). "On your bike, Boris: Howard sacks Johnson over private life". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 13 December 2004. Retrieved 12 September 2013. Stubley, Peter (25 May 2019). "Boris Johnson: The most infamous lies and untruths by the Conservative leadership candidate". The Independent. Retrieved 29 March 2024. Purnell 2011, p. 277; Gimson 2012, p. 232. Purnell 2011, pp. 283–284; Gimson 2012, pp. 235–236. Edwards & Isaby 2008, p. 47; Purnell 2011, p. 289; Gimson 2012, p. 243. Purnell 2011, p. 302. Purnell 2011, p. 291. Purnell 2011, pp. 291–292; Gimson 2012, p. 248. Fazackerley, Anna (24 February 2006). "Blond has more fun but fails to thwart anti top-up fee vote". Times Higher Education Supplement. London. Archived from the original on 14 May 2012. Purnell 2011, pp. 296–300; Gimson 2012, pp. 255–257. Barber, Lynn (19 October 2008). "No more Mr Nice Guy". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 30 July 2022. Gimson 2012, p. 266. Purnell 2011, pp. 289–290; Gimson 2012, pp. 244–245. Purnell 2011, pp. 294–295. Brook, Stephen (15 May 2008). "Boris to return to Telegraph column". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 7 July 2010. Purnell 2011, pp. 292–293; Gimson 2012, pp. 250–253. Purnell 2011, p. 294. Purnell 2011, p. 295. Edwards & Isaby 2008, p. 53; Gimson 2012, p. 279. "Johnson is Tory mayor candidate". BBC News. 27 September 2007. Archived from the original on 13 April 2008. Retrieved 2 January 2010. Purnell 2011, p. 327; Gimson 2012, p. 285. Purnell 2011, pp. 326–327. Hosken 2008, pp. 426–427; Edwards & Isaby 2008, pp. 67–69, 133; Purnell 2011, pp. 90, 315. Edwards & Isaby 2008, pp. 200–201; Purnell 2011, p. 348. "Johnson wins London mayoral race". BBC News. 3 May 2008. Archived from the original on 9 August 2017. Retrieved 3 May 2008. Purnell 2011, p. 351. Watt, Nicholas (3 May 2008). "Johnson snatches Tories' biggest prize". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 1 April 2010. Purnell 2011, p. 366. Purnell 2011, pp. 368–271. Purnell 2011, p. 368. Purnell 2011, p. 360. Purnell 2011, p. 361. Purnell 2011, p. 362. Purnell 2011, p. 363. "Mayor's £250,000 'chicken feed'". BBC News. 14 July 2009. Archived from the original on 13 January 2022. Retrieved 2 January 2010. Mulholland, Hélène (14 July 2009). "Johnson condemned for describing £250,000 deal as 'chicken feed'". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 1 April 2010. Purnell 2011, pp. 396–397; Gimson 2012, p. 308. Purnell 2011, pp. 407–410; Gimson 2012, pp. 330–331. Mulholland, Helene (15 December 2010). "No censure for Boris Johnson over relationship with unpaid City Hall adviser". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 2 December 2020. Retrieved 30 July 2022. Mulholland, Hélène (20 July 2010). "Boris Johnson pressed for full details of the appointment of his alleged lover". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 30 July 2022. "Public has right to know about Boris Johnson's secret lovechild, court rules". The Daily Telegraph. London. 21 May 2013. Archived from the original on 16 June 2013. Retrieved 5 May 2021. Purnell 2011, pp. 380–385; Gimson 2012, pp. 305–308. Purnell 2011, p. 407. Purnell 2011, pp. 401–402. Mulholland, Hélène (9 October 2009). "Ken Livingstone claims Boris Johnson tried to 'pay off' former Evening Standard editor". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 30 July 2022. Coates, Sam (8 October 2009). "Boris Johnson 'broke rules' by proposing ally for top London arts job". The Times. London. Archived from the original on 1 August 2020. Retrieved 16 April 2020. Purnell 2011, pp. 392–395. Purnell 2011, p. 446. Purnell 2011, p. 373. Edwards & Isaby 2008, p. 211; Purnell 2011, p. 373. Purnell 2011, p. 443. Purnell 2011, p. 391. "Boris Johnson accused of hiding study linking air pollution and deprived schools". The Daily Telegraph. 17 May 2016. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 5 May 2021. Mortimer, Caroline (16 May 2016). "Boris Johnson accused of burying report on the number of schools in London's most polluted areas". The Independent. Archived from the original on 12 May 2022. Retrieved 24 August 2017. Purnell 2011, p. 390. Hoscik, Martin (19 December 2012). "Exclusive: TfL reveals how much Barclays has paid for Cycle Hire scheme". MayorWatch. Archived from the original on 20 July 2019. Retrieved 20 May 2015. Purnell 2011, pp. 414–416; Gimson 2012, p. 307. Purnell 2011, pp. 442–443. Purnell 2011, p. 417; Gimson 2012, p. 307. Purnell 2011, pp. 417–418. Purnell 2011, p. 265; Gimson 2012, p. 288. "Mayor unveils plan to ban alcohol on the transport network" (Press release). Greater London Authority. 6 May 2008. Archived from the original on 13 May 2008. Retrieved 7 May 2008. Waugh, Paul (12 May 2008). "Boris plans to 'Oysterise' overground rail services by next May". Evening Standard. Archived from the original on 21 February 2014. Retrieved 21 November 2013. Johnson, Boris. "Saying No To Ticket Office Closures" (PDF). Getting Londoners Moving (Transport Manifesto for the 2008 Mayoral election). Back Boris campaign. p. 38. Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 April 2010. Retrieved 21 November 2013. Murray, Dick (2 July 2008). "Mayor scraps Ken plan to axe 40 Tube ticket offices". Evening Standard. Archived from the original on 21 February 2014. Retrieved 21 November 2013. "London Underground in 24-hour plans as ticket offices shut". BBC News. 21 November 2013. Archived from the original on 21 February 2015. Retrieved 17 February 2015. Purnell 2011, p. 437. Purnell 2011, p. 416. Purnell 2011, p. 388. Purnell 2011, pp. 374–375. Mulholland, Hélène (1 August 2008). "Barack Obama gets backing from Boris Johnson". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 20 July 2019. Retrieved 1 April 2010. Prince, Rosa (1 August 2008). "Boris Johnson backs Barack Obama as US President". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 12 September 2012. Retrieved 5 May 2021. Purnell 2011, pp. 377–278; Gimson 2012, p. 304. "Britain's top policeman resigns". BBC News. 2 October 2008. Archived from the original on 23 April 2020. Retrieved 1 April 2010. O'Neill, Sean; Fresco, Adam; Coates, Sam (3 October 2008). "Boris Johnson forces Sir Ian Blair to quit as police chief". The Times. London. Archived from the original on 31 July 2020. Retrieved 16 April 2020. Purnell 2011, p. 379. Purnell 2011, pp. 387–388. Purnell 2011, p. 436. Donovan, Tim (16 November 2011). "London mayor admits 'caveats' in youth crime statistics". BBC News. Archived from the original on 6 June 2022. Retrieved 21 June 2018. Purnell 2011, pp. 429–432; Gimson 2012, pp. 333–335. Purnell 2011, p. 400; Gimson 2012, p. 324. Purnell 2011, pp. 439–440. Purnell 2011, p. 414. Purnell 2011, p. 389. Purnell 2011, pp. 424–425. "Mayor of London announces new Forensic Audit Panel to investigate GLA and LDA" (Press release). Greater London Authority. 8 May 2008. Archived from the original on 18 May 2008. Retrieved 7 May 2008. "Labour accuse Mayor of 'Tory witch hunt'". MayorWatch. 9 May 2008. Archived from the original on 13 May 2008. Retrieved 12 September 2013. "The Media Guardian 100 – 87 Patience Wheatcroft". The Guardian. London. 17 July 2006. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 8 June 2019. Retrieved 11 December 2016. "Stephen Greenhalgh – Conservative Home". Archived from the original on 22 June 2019. Retrieved 25 June 2016. Barney, Katharine (15 July 2008). "Ken Livingstone refuses to appear before LDA audit panel". Evening Standard. Archived from the original on 30 July 2022. Retrieved 25 June 2016. Gimson 2012, p. 338. Purnell 2011, pp. 447–448. Purnell 2011, p. 440. Crines 2013, p. 3. Crines 2013, p. 2. "London mayor: Boris Johnson wins second term by tight margin 5 May 2012 Last updated at 01:35". BBC News. 5 May 2012. Archived from the original on 17 June 2012. Retrieved 5 May 2012. "The Mayor of London – 2012 Olympics". London 2012. Archived from the original on 29 July 2012. Retrieved 11 December 2012. "Boris Johnson on London 2012 Olympics tickets and transport". The Guardian (video). 30 July 2012. Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 11 December 2012. "London 2012: Boris Johnson says capital is prepared". BBC News. 22 July 2012. Archived from the original on 31 October 2012. Retrieved 11 December 2012. "Every Tube ticket office to close". BBC News. 21 November 2013. Archived from the original on 21 February 2015. Retrieved 21 November 2013. Beard, Matthew (21 November 2013). "950 London Underground staff to lose their jobs in Tube ticket office shake-up". Evening Standard. Archived from the original on 27 November 2013. Retrieved 21 November 2013. "PM Defends Actions over Conflict of Interest Claims". BBC News. 23 September 2019. Archived from the original on 7 July 2022. Retrieved 23 September 2019. Bulman, May (22 September 2019). "Boris Johnson facing questions over relationship with ex-model Jennifer Arcuri". The Independent. Archived from the original on 12 May 2022. Retrieved 26 September 2019. Coates, Sam (25 September 2019). "Boris Johnson breaks silence on relationship with entrepreneur Jennifer Arcuri". Sky News. Archived from the original on 31 March 2022. Retrieved 23 September 2019. "Boris Johnson Facing Questions over Giving Public Money to American Woman". HuffPost. 22 September 2019. Archived from the original on 31 March 2022. Retrieved 22 September 2019. Weaver, Matthew (22 September 2019). "Boris Johnson urged to justify 'awarding public funds to close friend'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 26 September 2019. Retrieved 26 September 2019. "PM's links to Arcuri referred to police watchdog". BBC News. 27 September 2019. Archived from the original on 17 May 2022. Retrieved 13 October 2019. Townsend, Mark (10 November 2019). "Fury as decision on police inquiry into PM shelved until after election". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 10 November 2019. Retrieved 11 November 2019. Weaver, Matthew (21 May 2020). "Boris Johnson will not face criminal inquiry over Jennifer Arcuri". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 21 May 2020. Retrieved 22 May 2020. Waugh, Paul (9 December 2015). "Boris slams Trump: he's 'out of his mind'". HuffPost. Archived from the original on 9 September 2017. Retrieved 25 August 2019. Dathan, Matt (9 December 2015). "Boris Johnson says Donald Trump 'betrays a stupefying ignorance that makes him unfit to be US President'". The Independent. Archived from the original on 12 May 2022. Retrieved 25 August 2019. McCann, Kate (21 March 2016). "Boris Johnson: 'I was mistaken for Donald Trump'". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 2 July 2016. Retrieved 5 May 2021. Dahlgreen, Will. "Mayor Boris: the public verdict". YouGov. Archived from the original on 18 July 2018. Retrieved 17 July 2018. de Peyer, Robin (26 August 2014). "Boris Johnson declares he will stand in Uxbridge and South Ruislip". Evening Standard. Archived from the original on 26 August 2014. Retrieved 26 August 2014. Johnston, Chris (12 September 2014). "Boris Johnson selected to stand for Tories in Uxbridge and South Ruislip". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 30 March 2015. Swinford, Steven; Holehouse, Matthew (12 September 2014). "Boris Johnson selected to stand for Tories in Uxbridge and South Ruislip". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 4 April 2015. Retrieved 5 May 2021. Bennett, Asa (17 September 2012). "Boris Johnson lacks the skills to be prime minister, says Tory chairman". LondonlovesBusiness.com. Archived from the original on 7 October 2012. Retrieved 8 October 2012. "Boris Johnson says UK is better off outside the EU". BBC News. 21 February 2016. Archived from the original on 21 February 2016. Retrieved 21 February 2016. Wearden, Graeme (22 February 2016). "Pound hits seven-year low after Boris Johnson's Brexit decision". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 22 February 2016. "Boris Johnson's most controversial foreign insults". BBC Newsbeat. 14 July 2016. Archived from the original on 24 November 2020. Retrieved 18 April 2018. "Obama hits back at Boris Johnson's alleged smears". BBC News. 22 April 2016. Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 23 April 2016. Lawless, Jill (22 April 2016). "London mayor under fire for 'loaded' criticism of 'part-Kenyan' Obama". The Times of Israel. Jerusalem. Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 23 April 2016. "Obama hits back at Boris Johnson's alleged smears". BBC News. 22 April 2016. Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 18 April 2018. Stone, Jon (25 April 2016). "Boris Johnson was not racist about Barack Obama, Iain Duncan Smith insists". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 26 April 2016. Retrieved 26 April 2016. "Brexit: Did Boris Johnson talk Turkey during referendum campaign?". BBC News. 18 January 2019. Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 24 January 2019. "Letter to the Prime Minister and Foreign Secretary – Getting the facts clear on Turkey". VoteLeave. 16 June 2016. Archived from the original on 20 September 2018. Retrieved 24 January 2019. Wilkinson, Michael (21 June 2016). "EU debate: Boris Johnson says Brexit will be 'Britain's independence day' as Ruth Davidson attacks 'lies' of Leave campaign in front of 6,000-strong Wembley audience". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 22 June 2016. Retrieved 5 May 2021. "Boris Johnson Favourite to replace David Cameron as PM after Brexit". The Guardian. London. 24 June 2016. Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 30 June 2016. Cowburn, Ashley (30 June 2016). "Michael Gove's statement on running for Tory leadership against Boris Johnson". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 12 May 2022. Retrieved 30 June 2016. "Boris Johnson rules himself out of Conservative leader race". BBC News. 30 June 2016. Archived from the original on 1 July 2016. Retrieved 30 June 2016. Witte, Griff (30 June 2016). "Stung by a betrayal, former London mayor Boris Johnson ends bid to lead Britain". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 30 June 2016. Hughes, Laura (30 June 2016). "Conservative MPs in uproar as Boris Johnson 'rips party apart' by withdrawing from leadership contest after ambush by Michael Gove". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 1 July 2016. Retrieved 5 May 2021. Swinford, Steven; Hope, Christopher; Dominiczak, Peter (1 July 2016). "Boris Johnson's allies accuse Michael Gove of 'systematic and calculated plot' to destroy his leadership hopes". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 19 August 2016. Retrieved 16 April 2020 – via MSN News. Asthana, Anushka; Mason, Rowena (4 July 2016). "Boris Johnson endorses Andrea Leadsom in Tory leadership bid". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 5 July 2016. Retrieved 5 July 2016. Hutton, Robert. "Boris Johnson Appointed U.K. Foreign Secretary in May Government". Bloomberg L.P. Archived from the original on 13 July 2016. Retrieved 13 July 2016. Bush, Stephen (14 July 2016). "Sending Boris Johnson to the Foreign Office is bad for Britain, good for Theresa May". New Statesman. Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 14 July 2016. Hüetlin, Thomas (14 July 2016). "Boris Johnson als Außenminister: Der Prügelknabe" [Boris Johnson as Foreign Secretary: The whipping boy]. Der Spiegel (in German). Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 14 July 2016. Cassidy, John (13 July 2016). "The Huge Challenge Facing Theresa May". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on 15 July 2016. Retrieved 14 July 2016. Wintour, Patrick (13 July 2016). "Boris Johnson and diplomacy are not synonymous". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 14 July 2016. Retrieved 14 July 2016. "Boris Johnson is foreign secretary: The world reacts". BBC News. 14 July 2016. Archived from the original on 14 July 2016. Retrieved 14 July 2016. Malkin, Bonnie; Oltermann, Philip; Phillips, Tom (14 July 2016). "'Maybe the Brits are just having us on': the world reacts to Boris Johnson as foreign minister". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 14 July 2016. Retrieved 14 July 2016. "Boris Johnson: What did he achieve as foreign secretary?". BBC News. 9 July 2018. Archived from the original on 12 January 2021. Retrieved 10 January 2021. Hopkins, Nick (18 July 2019). "What diplomats really think about Boris Johnson". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 12 January 2021. Retrieved 10 January 2021. Moore, Robert (14 July 2016). "Boris Johnson's appointment as Foreign Secretary has not gone down well in the United States". ITV News. Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 14 July 2016. Murray, Douglas (18 May 2016). "Boris Johnson wins The Spectator's President Erdogan Offensive Poetry competition". The Spectator. Archived from the original on 22 July 2019. Retrieved 31 March 2017. Steerpike (27 September 2016). "Boris Johnson refuses to apologise for his President Erdogan poem". The Spectator. Archived from the original on 9 December 2019. Retrieved 31 March 2017. "Boris Johnson: UK will help Turkey join the EU". Politico. 28 September 2016. Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 1 October 2016. "Boris Johnson says he will help Turkey hunt for Gulenists in the UK". Business Insider. 28 September 2016. Archived from the original on 8 June 2022. Retrieved 26 July 2019. "Boris Johnson urged to back probe into international law violations in Yemen". The Independent. 21 September 2016. Archived from the original on 16 May 2022. Retrieved 24 August 2017. "Boris Johnson defends UK arms sales to Saudi Arabia". The Guardian. 5 September 2016. Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 26 September 2016. "Boris Johnson criticised by human rights groups after blocking inquiry into war crimes in Yemen". The Independent. 27 September 2016. Archived from the original on 11 July 2022. Retrieved 24 August 2017. "Boris Johnson accuses Saudi Arabia of 'playing proxy wars'". BBC News. 8 December 2016. Archived from the original on 9 June 2017. Retrieved 4 May 2017. Tovey, Alan (8 March 2015). "Charted: the world's biggest arms importers". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 5 May 2021. Dominiczak, Peter (8 December 2016). "Row over Saudi Arabia comments blows open rift between Theresa May and Boris Johnson". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 5 May 2021. "Fears for Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe after Boris Johnson remark". BBC News. 6 November 2017. Archived from the original on 7 November 2017. Retrieved 7 November 2017. Rawlinson, Kevin (7 November 2017). "Boris Johnson to call Iran in wake of comments about jailed Briton". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 7 November 2017. Retrieved 7 November 2017. "Boris Johnson defends Iran nuclear deal after Israeli claims". 1 May 2018. Archived from the original on 10 June 2019. Retrieved 16 May 2018. Wintour, Patrick (9 May 2018). "UK will not follow Trump in ditching Iran deal, Boris Johnson vows". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 21 July 2018. "Trump pulls US out of Iran deal: Here's what to know". PolitiFact. Archived from the original on 20 June 2019. Retrieved 12 July 2019. "Brexit and Gibraltar: May laughs off Spain 'war' talk". BBC News. 3 April 2017. Archived from the original on 16 May 2022. Retrieved 22 July 2019. "How would Boris Johnson solve the Irish border problem?". New Statesman. 12 June 2019. Archived from the original on 6 April 2020. Retrieved 22 July 2019. "French, British officials view Irma's damage, vow island aid". Archived from the original on 14 September 2017. Retrieved 13 September 2017. "Ambassador stops Boris Johnson 'reciting colonial poem' in Burmese temple". ITV. 30 September 2017. Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 4 November 2017. Grafton-Green, Patrick (30 September 2017). "Boris Johnson 'caught on camera quoting Kipling poem in Burmese temple'". Evening Standard. Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 30 September 2017. Booth, Robert (30 September 2017). "Boris Johnson caught on camera reciting Kipling in Myanmar temple". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 3 October 2017. Retrieved 4 October 2017. "Boris Johnson Libya 'dead bodies' comment provokes anger". BBC News. 4 October 2017. Archived from the original on 3 October 2017. Retrieved 4 October 2017. "Is Boris Johnson really unsackable?". The Economist. 5 October 2017. Archived from the original on 30 April 2021. Retrieved 5 May 2021. Webber, Esther (14 February 2018). "I was a fool to think we could reset relations with Russia, says Johnson". The Times. Archived from the original on 2 May 2022. Retrieved 2 May 2022. "The Kremlin conundrum facing Boris Johnson". The Times. 23 July 2019. Archived from the original on 6 April 2020. Retrieved 16 April 2020. "What has Boris Johnson said about other countries and their leaders?". BBC News. 24 July 2019. Archived from the original on 1 July 2020. Retrieved 26 July 2019. "PM under pressure over Russian spy case". BBC News. 12 March 2018. Archived from the original on 25 March 2018. Retrieved 28 March 2018. "Boris Johnson accused of making misleading Russia Novichok claim in DW interview". Deutsche Welle. 4 April 2018. Archived from the original on 1 February 2022. Retrieved 24 July 2019. Wintour, Patrick (21 March 2018). "Boris Johnson compares Russian World Cup to Hitler's 1936 Olympics". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 22 March 2018. Retrieved 28 March 2018. Osborne, Samuel (21 March 2018). "Sergei Skripal: Chemical weapons inspectors arrive in Salisbury to investigate nerve agent attack". The Independent. Archived from the original on 19 June 2018. "Boris Johnson joins US in criticising Russia to Germany gas pipeline". The Guardian. 22 May 2018. Archived from the original on 26 July 2019. Retrieved 26 July 2019. "Direct Cargo Flights from Dhaka: UK to lift ban shortly". The Daily Star. 10 February 2018. Archived from the original on 23 July 2019. Retrieved 22 July 2019. "Boris Johnson for quick repatriation of Rohingyas". Dhaka Tribune. 9 February 2018. Archived from the original on 22 July 2019. Retrieved 22 July 2019. "UK: Turkey has legitimate interest in border security". Anadolu Agency. 22 January 2018. Archived from the original on 22 July 2019. Retrieved 22 July 2019. "Britain condemns 'anti-Israel bias' at UN Human Rights Council". The Times of Israel. 18 June 2018. Archived from the original on 16 May 2022. Retrieved 23 July 2019. Johnson, Boris (15 September 2017). "My vision for a bold, thriving Britain enabled by Brexit". The Daily Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Archived from the original on 15 September 2017. Retrieved 5 May 2021. Asthana, Anushka (17 September 2017). "Boris Johnson left isolated as row grows over £350m post-Brexit claim". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 17 September 2017. Retrieved 18 September 2017. "Brexit: Boris Johnson and stats chief in row over £350m figure". BBC News. Archived from the original on 31 March 2022. Retrieved 21 June 2018. "Boris Johnson denies plot to topple UK PM Theresa May". Archived from the original on 11 June 2017. Retrieved 11 June 2017. Maidment, Jack (28 February 2018). "Boris Johnson accuses Remainers of trying to use Irish border issue to stop the UK leaving the EU". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 5 May 2021. Crisp, James; Foster, Peter; Rayner, Gordon (23 June 2018). "EU diplomats shocked by Boris's 'four-letter reply' to business concerns about Brexit". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 23 June 2018. Retrieved 5 May 2021. "Enough already: in the national interest, we must stop a hard Brexit". The Guardian. 24 June 2018. Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 24 June 2018. "EU diplomats reveal Boris Johnson said 'f**k business' over Brexit fears". The National. 23 June 2018. Archived from the original on 28 August 2018. Retrieved 24 June 2018. "Johnson challenged over 'Brexit expletive'". BBC News. 26 June 2018. Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 27 June 2018. Pitas, Costas (8 June 2018). "Brace for a possible 'Brexit meltdown' but don't panic, Johnson says -BuzzFeed". Reuters. Archived from the original on 25 August 2019. Retrieved 25 August 2019. Culbertson, Alix (26 July 2022). "Boris Johnson fails to provide further details of meeting with ex-KGB agent Alexander Lebedev". Sky News. Archived from the original on 28 June 2023. Retrieved 28 June 2023. Maidment, Jack (7 July 2022). "Boris Johnson accused of misleading Parliament over meeting with Alexander Lebedev". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 28 June 2023. Retrieved 28 June 2023. "UK's Boris Johnson defends meeting ex-KGB agent at party". The Independent. 26 July 2022. Archived from the original on 28 June 2023. Retrieved 28 June 2023. "Boris Johnson faces fresh questions over 2018 party at Lebedev villa". Financial Times. 27 June 2023. Archived from the original on 28 June 2023. Retrieved 28 June 2023. Crerar, Pippa (26 June 2023). "Italy 'was monitoring Lebedev villa at time of Boris Johnson visit'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 27 June 2023. Retrieved 28 June 2023. Freeman, Colin (21 May 2022). "Boris Johnson faces fresh pressure over Lord Lebedev's peerage after oligarch father sanctioned". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 28 June 2023. Retrieved 28 June 2023. "Boris Johnson met Russian oligarch Lebedev without aides". BBC News. 6 July 2022. Archived from the original on 28 June 2023. Retrieved 28 June 2023. "Evgeny Lebedev: MI6 warned Boris Johnson about peerage for Russian oligarch two years ago". The Telegraph. 13 March 2022. Archived from the original on 28 June 2023. Retrieved 28 June 2023. "At-a-glance: The new UK Brexit plan agreed at Chequers". BBC News. 7 July 2018. Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 9 July 2018. Stewart, Heather (9 July 2018). "Brexit secretary David Davis resigns plunging government into crisis". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 31 July 2018. Retrieved 9 July 2018. Stewart, Heather; Crerar, Pippa; Sabbagh, Dan (9 July 2018). "May's plan 'sticks in the throat', says Boris Johnson as he resigns over Brexit". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 31 August 2018. Retrieved 9 July 2018. "Johnson: It is not too late to save Brexit". BBC News. 18 July 2018. Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 18 July 2018. "Boris Johnson under attack over Turkey claim". ITV News. 18 January 2019. Archived from the original on 21 January 2019. Retrieved 21 January 2019. "Boris Johnson hits out at police spending on historic child abuse probes". The Belfast Telegraph. Archived from the original on 28 March 2019. Retrieved 13 March 2019. "Boris Johnson historical child sex abuse comments 'horrific'". BBC News. 13 March 2019. Archived from the original on 14 March 2019. Retrieved 13 March 2019. "ACOBA Letter to Johnson" (PDF). 8 August 2018. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 August 2018. Retrieved 9 August 2018. "Johnson's Telegraph contract broke rules". BBC News. 9 August 2018. Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 9 August 2018. Bienkov, Adam (6 December 2018). "Boris Johnson ordered to apologise to Parliament for failing to declare earnings". Business Insider. Archived from the original on 9 June 2019. Retrieved 8 December 2018. Walker, Peter (9 September 2018). "Tories condemn Boris Johnson for Brexit 'suicide vest' remarks". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 9 September 2018. "Open warfare between top Tories over Boris Johnson 'suicide vest' jibe at May". The Independent. Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 9 September 2018. Johnson, Boris (6 January 2019). "The British people won't be scared into backing a woeful Brexit deal nobody voted for". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 7 January 2019. Retrieved 5 May 2021. "00154-19 Stirling v The Daily Telegraph". Independent Press Standards Organisation. Archived from the original on 17 July 2019. Retrieved 12 April 2019. "Full text: Boris Johnson launches his Tory leadership campaign". The Spectator. 12 June 2019. Archived from the original on 23 July 2019. Retrieved 12 June 2019. Shipman, Tim; Wheeler, Caroline; Urwin, Rosamund (25 August 2019). "Boris Johnson threatens EU over Brexit divorce bill and raises general election stakes". The Times. Archived from the original on 8 January 2020. Retrieved 14 April 2020. Heffer, Greg (26 August 2019). "Boris Johnson: 'Chances of Brexit deal improving now my messages have landed'". Sky News. Archived from the original on 4 June 2020. Retrieved 14 April 2020. "Boris Johnson backs down on key campaign promises during Tory leadership debate". The Independent. 18 June 2019. Archived from the original on 19 July 2019. Retrieved 21 June 2019. Stewart, Heather (23 July 2019). "Boris Johnson elected new Tory leader". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 15 April 2020. Retrieved 23 July 2019. "Boris Johnson Becomes First US born Prime Minister of Britain". The American. United Kingdom. 23 July 2019. Archived from the original on 31 March 2022. Retrieved 23 December 2019. "Who are Boris Johnson's key advisers?". BBC News. 30 July 2019. Archived from the original on 20 July 2022. Retrieved 10 August 2019. Sparrow, Andrew (24 July 2019). "Boris Johnson cabinet: Sajid Javid, Priti Patel and Dominic Raab given top jobs – live news". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 4 January 2021. Retrieved 24 July 2019. Westlake, M. (2020). Outside the EU: Options for Britain. Agenda Publishing. pp. 168–169. ISBN 978-1-78821-312-7. JSTOR j.ctv16qjx9d.20. Woodcock, Andrews (29 July 2019). "Boris Johnson set for Brexit deadlock after admitting no progress made with EU withdrawal agreement". The Independent. Archived from the original on 30 July 2021. Retrieved 30 July 2021. Heather Stewart, Severin Carrell and Jennifer Rankin (29 August 2019). "Time to step up tempo of Brexit talks, says bullish Boris Johnson". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 29 August 2019. Retrieved 30 August 2019. Elgot, Jessica; Stewart, Heather (28 August 2019). "Boris Johnson asks Queen to suspend parliament". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 14 September 2019. Retrieved 28 August 2019. "Brexit: Queen consents to suspension of parliament for five weeks – live news". The Guardian. 28 August 2019. Archived from the original on 28 August 2019. Retrieved 28 August 2019. Taylor, Simon; Graham, Chris (29 August 2019). "'A very British coup': How Europe reacted to Boris Johnson suspending parliament in Brexit push". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 5 May 2021. "Parliament suspension: Thousands protest across the UK". BBC. 31 August 2019. Archived from the original on 2 September 2019. Retrieved 2 September 2019. Ferguson, Donna; Murphy, Simon; Townsend, Mark; Wall, Tom (31 August 2019). "From Bodmin to Berlin, crowds vent their fury at Boris Johnson's 'coup'". The Observer. Archived from the original on 4 June 2020. Retrieved 2 September 2019. MacAskill, Andrew; James, William (30 August 2019). "Factbox: UK government ensnared in court battles over suspending parliament". Reuters. Archived from the original on 1 September 2019. Retrieved 2 September 2019. Carrell, Severin (11 September 2019). "Scottish judges rule Boris Johnson's prorogation unlawful". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 4 April 2020. Retrieved 11 September 2019. "Brexit: Scottish judges rule Parliament suspension is unlawful". BBC News. 11 September 2019. Archived from the original on 11 September 2019. Retrieved 11 September 2019. "Johnson denies lying to queen; court rejects Brexit case". 6News. 12 September 2019. Archived from the original on 6 April 2020. Retrieved 12 September 2019. Bowcott, Owen (24 September 2019). "Boris Johnson's suspension of parliament unlawful, supreme court rules". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 26 September 2019. Retrieved 24 September 2019. "Supreme Court: Suspending Parliament was unlawful, judges rule". BBC News. London. 24 September 2019. Archived from the original on 24 September 2019. Retrieved 24 September 2019. Rayner, Gordon; Sheridan, Danielle (3 September 2019). "Brexit vote result: Boris Johnson demands general election after rebel MPs seize control of Commons agenda". The Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 5 May 2021. "MPs back bill aimed at blocking no-deal Brexit". 4 September 2019. Archived from the original on 4 September 2019. Retrieved 5 September 2019. "Johnson's call for general election rejected by MPs". 4 September 2019. Archived from the original on 29 November 2019. Retrieved 5 September 2019. "Brexit: Boris Johnson and Leo Varadkar 'can see pathway to a deal'". BBC News. 10 October 2019. Archived from the original on 30 October 2019. Retrieved 23 December 2019. "Brexit: What is in Boris Johnson's new deal with the EU?". BBC News. 21 October 2019. Archived from the original on 22 December 2019. Retrieved 23 December 2019. "Boris Johnson: Does his cabinet reflect 'modern Britain'?". BBC News. 25 July 2019. Archived from the original on 25 July 2019. Retrieved 25 July 2019. Swinford, Steven; Chorley, Matt (25 July 2019). "Boris Johnson the Godfather takes his retribution in massacre of cabinet ministers". The Times. Archived from the original on 27 July 2019. Retrieved 27 July 2019. Syal, Rajeev (24 July 2019). "'Summer's day massacre' may spell backbench trouble for Boris Johnson". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 24 July 2019. Retrieved 27 July 2019. Woodcock, Andrew (25 July 2019). "Boris Johnson dismantles cabinet in reshuffle, building government around people who delivered Brexit vote". Independent. Archived from the original on 25 July 2019. Retrieved 27 July 2019. Lyons, Kate (25 July 2019). "'Cabinet massacre': what the papers say about Boris Johnson's arrival in No 10". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 27 July 2019. Retrieved 27 July 2019. "Boris Johnson loses majority after Tory MP defects during speech". The Independent. 3 September 2019. Archived from the original on 2 December 2019. Retrieved 3 September 2019. "Twenty-one Tory rebels lose party whip after backing bid to block no-deal Brexit". PoliticsHome.com. 4 September 2019. Archived from the original on 15 January 2020. Retrieved 5 September 2019. "Restoration of Conservative Whip". BBC News. 29 October 2019. Archived from the original on 12 June 2022. Retrieved 4 December 2019. "PM's brother quits as Tory MP and minister". BBC News. 5 September 2019. Archived from the original on 5 September 2019. Retrieved 5 September 2019. Shipman, Tim (7 September 2019). "Exclusive: Amber Rudd resigns from cabinet and quits Tories". The Sunday Times. ISSN 0140-0460. Archived from the original on 9 September 2019. Retrieved 5 May 2021. "General Election 2019: What's behind the Conservative victory?". BBC News. Archived from the original on 7 June 2022. Retrieved 13 December 2019. Perrigo, Billy (13 December 2019). "'Get Brexit Done.' The Slogan That Won Britain's Election". Time. Archived from the original on 30 January 2020. Retrieved 11 December 2021. "Sajid Javid resigns as chancellor". BBC News. 13 February 2020. Archived from the original on 13 February 2020. Retrieved 13 February 2020. Walker, Peter (13 February 2020). "Smith, Leadsom and McVey out as Johnson reshuffles cabinet". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 30 November 2020. Retrieved 18 July 2021. "Cabinet reshuffle: Sajid Javid resigns as chancellor". BBC News. 13 February 2020. Archived from the original on 13 February 2020. Retrieved 18 July 2021. "Cabinet reshuffle: Raab moved from foreign secretary to deputy PM". BBC News. 15 September 2021. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. Heffer, Greg (15 September 2021). "Cabinet reshuffle: Gavin Williamson sacked and Dominic Raab moved from foreign secretary". Sky News. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. Stewart, Heather; Walker, Peter (20 March 2020). "Boris Johnson announces closure of all UK pubs and restaurants". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 23 December 2021. Retrieved 20 March 2020. Calvert, Jonathan; Arbuthnot, George; Leake, Jonathan. "Coronavirus: 38 days when Britain sleepwalked into disaster". The Times. ISSN 0140-0460. Archived from the original on 11 October 2020. Retrieved 1 January 2021. Walker, Peter (19 April 2020). "Boris Johnson missed five coronavirus Cobra meetings, Michael Gove says". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 21 April 2020. Retrieved 1 January 2021. Helm, Toby; Graham-Harrison, Emma; McKie, Robin (19 April 2020). "How did Britain get its coronavirus response so wrong?". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 5 January 2021. Retrieved 1 January 2021. "Coronavirus: What are the lockdown measures across Europe?". Deutsche Welle. 1 April 2020. Archived from the original on 6 April 2020. Retrieved 13 April 2020. Flaxman, S.; et al. (30 March 2020). Estimating the number of infections and the impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions on COVID-19 in 11 European countries (PDF). Department of Infectious Disease Epidemiology (Report). Imperial College London. p. 5. doi:10.25561/77731. Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 April 2020. Retrieved 13 April 2020. Sandle, Andrew MacAskill, Paul (25 January 2021). "Anger and grief as United Kingdom's COVID-19 death toll nears 100,000". Reuters. Archived from the original on 25 January 2021. Retrieved 25 January 2021.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) "50,000 COVID-19 deaths and rising. How the UK keeps failing". Reuters. 24 November 2020. Archived from the original on 23 January 2021. Retrieved 1 January 2021. "Scientists turn on Boris Johnson over UK's coronavirus response". Politico. 10 June 2020. Archived from the original on 18 December 2020. Retrieved 1 January 2021. Scally, Gabriel; Jacobson, Bobbie; Abbasi, Kamran (15 May 2020). "The UK's public health response to covid-19". BMJ. pp. m1932. doi:10.1136/bmj.m1932. Archived from the original on 4 February 2022. Retrieved 20 February 2022. Ham, Chris (1 February 2021). "The UK's poor record on covid-19 is a failure of policy learning". BMJ. pp. n284. doi:10.1136/bmj.n284. Archived from the original on 16 February 2022. Retrieved 20 February 2022. Yong, Ed (16 March 2020). "The U.K.'s Coronavirus 'Herd Immunity' Debacle". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on 11 July 2021. Retrieved 25 January 2021. Macaskill, Andrew; Grey, Stephen; McNeill, Ryan; Stecklow, Steve; Wilkes, Tommy; Marshall, Andrew R. C. (24 November 2020). "50,000 COVID-19 deaths and rising. How the UK keeps failing". Reuters. Archived from the original on 23 January 2021. Retrieved 20 February 2022. Mason, Rowena (5 May 2020). "Boris Johnson boasted of shaking hands on day Sage warned not to". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 2 January 2021. Retrieved 1 January 2021. "Coronavirus: Boris Johnson was shaking hands as some scientists were calling for it to stop". Sky News. 5 May 2020. Archived from the original on 22 December 2020. Retrieved 1 January 2021. Wildman, Sam (4 March 2020). "Silence over Boris Johnson coronavirus claim following KGH visit". Northamptonshire Telegraph. Archived from the original on 3 February 2022. Retrieved 3 February 2022. Payne, Sebastian; Cookson, Clive (5 May 2020). "Boris Johnson shook hands 'continuously' despite science panel warnings". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 17 December 2021. Retrieved 2 February 2022. Picheta, Rob (24 March 2020). "Boris Johnson issues stay-at-home order, sending UK into lockdown to fight coronavirus pandemic". CNN. Archived from the original on 15 April 2020. Retrieved 16 April 2020. "PM Boris Johnson tests positive for coronavirus". BBC News. 27 March 2020. Archived from the original on 23 April 2020. Retrieved 27 March 2020. "PM admitted to hospital over virus symptoms". BBC News. 5 April 2020. Archived from the original on 15 April 2020. Retrieved 5 April 2020. "UK PM Boris Johnson taken to intensive care". BBC News. 6 April 2020. Archived from the original on 23 April 2020. Retrieved 6 April 2020. Rawlinson, Kevin (6 April 2020). "Coronavirus: Boris Johnson taken into intensive care – live updates". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 6 April 2020. "UK PM Johnson leaves intensive care, remains under observation". Reuters. 9 April 2020. Archived from the original on 9 April 2020. Retrieved 9 April 2020. "Boris Johnson discharged from hospital". BBC News. 12 April 2020. Archived from the original on 21 April 2020. Retrieved 12 April 2020. "Coronavirus: Boris Johnson's return to work 'a boost for the country'". BBC News. 26 April 2020. Archived from the original on 27 April 2020. Retrieved 27 April 2020. "U.K.'s Boris Johnson says doctors prepared to announce his death as he fought COVID-19". NBC News. 3 May 2020. Archived from the original on 9 November 2021. Retrieved 9 November 2021. "A site for sore eyes? How Dominic Cummings put Barnard Castle on the map". The Guardian. 26 May 2020. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 28 May 2020. Retrieved 27 May 2020. "No 10 'chaos' as 'defiant' PM defends Cummings". BBC News. 25 May 2020. Retrieved 27 May 2020. Keating, Joshua (26 May 2020). "Why Is the U.K. in an Uproar Over a Boris Johnson Adviser's COVID Road Trip?". Slate. Retrieved 27 May 2020. Sebastian Payne (24 May 2020). "Boris Johnson backs Dominic Cummings over lockdown breach". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 24 May 2020. Retrieved 10 July 2021. Fancourt, Daisy; Steptoe, Andrew; Wright, Liam (15 August 2020). "The Cummings effect: politics, trust, and behaviours during the COVID-19 pandemic". The Lancet. 396 (10249): 464–465. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(20)31690-1. ISSN 0140-6736. PMC 7613216. PMID 32771083. Knapton, Sarah (6 August 2020). "'Dominic Cummings effect' has led to major loss of confidence in Government, study reveals". The Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Archived from the original on 7 August 2020. Retrieved 5 May 2021. Pogrund, Gabriel; Calver, Tom (15 November 2020). "Chumocracy first in line as ministers splash Covid cash". The Sunday Times. Retrieved 5 May 2021. "'Utter shambles': GPs and medics decry NHS test-and-trace system". The Guardian. 14 September 2020. Retrieved 17 January 2021. "Covid: NHS Test and Trace needs to improve, PM concedes". BBC News. 22 October 2020. Retrieved 17 January 2021. "Ministers frustrated with PM's 'mistakes' ahead of Covid second wave". BBC News. 15 March 2021. Archived from the original on 18 March 2021. Retrieved 20 March 2021. Ray, Siladitya. "Report: Boris Johnson Said U.K. Should 'Ignore' Covid-19 At The Start Of The Pandemic". Forbes. Retrieved 20 March 2021. Rayner, Gordon (26 April 2021). "'Let the bodies pile high': What really happened on night Boris Johnson was accused of outburst". The Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 27 May 2021. "Covid: Boris Johnson's 'bodies pile high' comments prompt criticism". BBC News. 26 April 2021. Archived from the original on 26 April 2021. Retrieved 27 May 2021. Peston, Robert (26 April 2021). "Johnson 'did make bodies pile high in their thousands' comment, writes Peston". ITV News. Archived from the original on 27 April 2021. Retrieved 27 May 2021. Syal, Rajeev (20 December 2020). "Boris Johnson's Covid flip-flops: the pledges upended by reality". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 5 January 2021. "U.K. Bets 2 Million Vaccine Shots a Week Will End Lockdown". Bloomberg L.P. 4 January 2021. Retrieved 5 January 2021. "Pressure on hospitals 'at a really dangerous point'". BBC News. 18 December 2020. Retrieved 5 January 2021. Woodyatt, Amy; Isaac, Lindsay (20 December 2020). "Boris Johnson backtracks on relaxing Christmas rules after scientists warn new Covid-19 variant is spreading faster". CNN. Retrieved 31 December 2020. Baraniuk, Chris (18 February 2021). "Covid-19: How the UK vaccine rollout delivered success, so far". BMJ (Clinical Research Ed.). 372: n421. doi:10.1136/bmj.n421. PMID 33602672. S2CID 231946710. Retrieved 16 January 2021. "Covid-19: Record day for UK with 711,156 vaccinations given". BBC News. 20 March 2021. Retrieved 20 March 2021. "Covid: England's third national lockdown legally comes into force". BBC News. 6 January 2022. Retrieved 17 January 2022. "UK Covid deaths: Why the 100,000 toll is so bad". BBC News. 26 January 2021. Retrieved 26 January 2021. "Covid deaths: UK passes milestone of 100,000". BBC News. 26 January 2021. Retrieved 26 January 2021. "Johnson: England to lift last virus restrictions on July 19". AP News. 12 July 2021. Retrieved 9 November 2021. Ellyatt, Holly (19 July 2021). "England takes leap into the unknown, lifting Covid rules as cases surge". CNBC. Retrieved 9 November 2021. Peter Walker (17 September 2021). "Johnson's revamped cabinet cram into office – with no masks". The Guardian. Retrieved 21 September 2021. "Dominic Raab defends Boris Johnson after PM is pictured not wearing mask on hospital visit". Sky News. Retrieved 9 November 2021. Gillett, Francesca; Lee, Dulcie (8 December 2021). "Covid: New Plan B rules on working from home and masks announced for England". BBC News. Swinford, Steven; Zeffman, Henry (14 December 2021). "Johnson suffers biggest rebellion of premiership". The Times. Penna, Dominic; Fisher, Lucy; Nanu, Maighna (14 December 2021). "Politics latest news: Boris Johnson suffers huge rebellion as MPs vote in favour of Covid passports". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Brown, Faye (11 May 2021). "All the new laws unveiled in the Queen's Speech today". Metro. Archived from the original on 2 June 2021. Retrieved 1 June 2021. Wakefield, Jane (12 May 2021). "Government lays out plans to protect users online". BBC News. Archived from the original on 12 May 2021. Retrieved 12 May 2021. "Downing Street refurbishment: What is the row over Boris Johnson's flat?". BBC News. 28 April 2021. Archived from the original on 29 April 2021. Retrieved 29 April 2021. "Boris Johnson's flat: Top official to review funding of revamp". BBC News. 27 April 2021. Archived from the original on 29 April 2021. Retrieved 29 April 2021. "Electoral Commission to investigate Boris Johnson's Downing Street flat renovations". BBC News. 28 April 2021. Archived from the original on 28 April 2021. Retrieved 29 April 2021. Allegretti, Aubrey; Elgot, Jessica (28 April 2021). "Electoral Commission launches inquiry into Boris Johnson flat refurb". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 29 April 2021. Retrieved 29 April 2021. Wright, Oliver; Swinford, Steven; Zeffman, Henry (29 April 2021). "Downing St concern at 'paper trail' over Boris Johnson's flat redecoration". The Times. Archived from the original on 28 April 2021. Retrieved 29 April 2021. "Commons Chamber 28th April 2021". UK Parliament. Archived from the original on 30 April 2021. Retrieved 30 April 2021. Walker, Peter; Allegretti, Aubrey (28 May 2021). "Boris Johnson acted unwisely over flat refurbishment, report finds". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 28 May 2021. Retrieved 29 May 2021. "Downing Street flat: PM cleared of misconduct but acted unwisely, says watchdog". BBC News. 29 May 2021. Archived from the original on 28 May 2021. Retrieved 29 May 2021. Quinn, Ben (9 December 2021). "Downing Street refurb: the money trail, inquiries and questions still to answer". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 31 March 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022. Rodger, Hannah (9 December 2021). "Tories fined over £52,000 undeclared donation for Boris Johnson's luxury Downing Street flat refurb". The Herald. Archived from the original on 11 December 2021. Retrieved 11 December 2021. Maclellan, Kylie (3 November 2021). "UK PM's party slammed for backing overhaul of system that polices lawmakers". Reuters. Archived from the original on 30 July 2022. Retrieved 4 November 2021. "Owen Paterson: Anger as Tory MP avoids suspension in rule shake-up". BBC News. 3 November 2021. Archived from the original on 4 November 2021. Retrieved 4 November 2021. Woodcock, Andrew (3 November 2021). "Tories vote to tear up sleaze rules after MP found guilty of paid lobbying". The Independent. Archived from the original on 4 November 2021. Retrieved 4 November 2021. "Owen Paterson row: Government U-turn over MPs' conduct plan". BBC News. BBC. 4 November 2021. Archived from the original on 4 November 2021. Retrieved 4 November 2021. "Tory MP Owen Paterson resigns amid standards row". BBC News. 4 November 2021. Archived from the original on 4 November 2021. Retrieved 4 November 2021. "Tories lose North Shropshire seat they held for nearly 200 years". BBC News. Archived from the original on 17 December 2021. McGuinness, Alan (17 December 2021). "North Shropshire: Liberal Democrats pull off shock win as Tory by-election defeat piles further pressure on Boris Johnson". Sky News. Archived from the original on 17 December 2021. Retrieved 17 December 2021. "Partygate: UK PM and chancellor apologise for breaking law in lockdown – BBC News". Archived from the original on 22 July 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022 – via YouTube. Stone, Jon (7 December 2021). "Boris Johnson says 'rules were followed' at No 10 party as Sunak denies attending". The Independent. Archived from the original on 25 May 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022. "Cheese and wine? UK PM's staff joked about alleged lockdown party". Reuters. 7 December 2021. Archived from the original on 31 May 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022. Walker, Peter; Allegretti, Aubrey; Grierson, Jamie (7 December 2021). "PM accused of lying after No 10 officials caught joking about Christmas party". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 9 December 2021. Retrieved 9 December 2021. "PMQs: Boris Johnson sorry for offence caused by aides joking about lockdown party". BBC News. 8 December 2021. Archived from the original on 8 December 2021. Retrieved 8 December 2021. Brand, Paul (10 January 2022). "Email proves Downing Street staff held drinks party at height of lockdown". ITV News. Archived from the original on 20 January 2022. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Keay, Lara (12 January 2022). "What were the rules on 20 May 2020, what happened in Downing Street, and was Boris Johnson at the party?". Sky News. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 12 January 2022. "'Is this for real?' No escape for No 10 from party claims". BBC News. 10 January 2022. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 12 January 2022. "Downing Street party: PM to face MPs following revelations". BBC News. 12 January 2022. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Walker, Peter; Stewart, Heather (12 January 2022). "Boris Johnson admits attending Downing Street party during lockdown". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Retrieved 12 January 2022. "Boris Johnson admits he attended lockdown-breaking party but claims he thought it was work event". ITV News. 12 January 2022. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Retrieved 12 January 2022. "Boris Johnson faces calls to quit after lockdown party apology". BBC News. 12 January 2022. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Retrieved 12 January 2022. "Boris Johnson: Senior Tories urge PM to quit after party apology". BBC News. 13 January 2022. Archived from the original on 27 July 2022. "Bury South MP Christian Wakeford resigns from Conservative to join Labour". Bury Times. 19 January 2022. Archived from the original on 19 January 2022. Retrieved 19 January 2022. Merrick, Rob (19 January 2022). "'In the name of God, go': Tory MP David Davis tells Boris Johnson to quit". The Independent. Archived from the original on 25 May 2022. Retrieved 19 January 2022. "Boris Johnson: Tory MP defects as ex-minister tells Johnson to go". BBC News. 19 January 2022. Archived from the original on 19 January 2022. Retrieved 19 January 2022. "The story behind David Davis's 'In the name of God, go' quote". i. 19 January 2022. Archived from the original on 19 April 2022. Retrieved 19 April 2022. "Police to investigate No 10 lockdown parties". 25 January 2022. Archived from the original on 25 January 2022. Retrieved 25 January 2022. "Sue Gray: No 10 pledges updated report after police inquiry finishes". BBC News. BBC. 31 January 2022. Archived from the original on 3 February 2022. Retrieved 3 February 2022. Payne, Sebastian; Wright, Robert; Pickard, Jim; Cameron-Chileshe, Jasmine (12 April 2022). "Boris Johnson, wife Carrie and Rishi Sunak fined over Covid lockdown breaches". Financial Times. London: The Financial Times Ltd. Mason, Rowena; Allegretti, Aubrey (12 April 2022). "Boris Johnson defies calls to quit after he and Rishi Sunak fined". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 9 July 2022. Retrieved 13 April 2022. Scott, Jennifer (12 April 2022). "Boris Johnson and Rishi Sunak to be fined over lockdown parties". BBC News. Archived from the original on 12 April 2022. Retrieved 12 April 2022. Wheeler, Caroline; Yorke, Harry (16 April 2022). "Boris Johnson has cleared so many hurdles, but he may yet come a cropper". The Sunday Times. London: News UK. Archived from the original on 28 May 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022. Cameron-Chileshe, Jasmine (17 April 2022). "Johnson accused of demeaning his office after new partygate claims". Financial Times. London: Financial Times Ltd. Archived from the original on 22 April 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022. Wells, Ione (18 April 2022). "Partygate: No easy return for Boris Johnson after Easter break". BBC News. London: BBC. Archived from the original on 6 June 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022. Sparrow, Andrew (17 April 2022). "Report of Boris Johnson pouring drinks 'implies he started lockdown party'". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 20 July 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022. "Boris Johnson: PM's response to party fine a joke, Starmer tells MPs". BBC News. 19 April 2022. Archived from the original on 19 June 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022. Ford Rojas, John-Paul (21 April 2022). "'The gig's up': Senior Tory backbencher Steve Baker says PM should be 'long gone'". Sky News. Archived from the original on 16 July 2022. Retrieved 10 July 2022. Mason, Rowena; Stewart, Heather; Allegretti, Aubrey (6 May 2022). "Tory council leaders point finger at Johnson after election losses blamed on Partygate". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 27 June 2022. Retrieved 10 July 2022. Walker, Peter (6 June 2022). "Boris Johnson to face no-confidence vote today as scores of Tory MPs call on him to go". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 6 June 2022. Retrieved 6 June 2022. Johnson may have misled Parliament over parties, say MPs BBC "No evidence for Boris Johnson's claim about Keir Starmer and Jimmy Savile". BBC News. 3 February 2022. Archived from the original on 8 February 2022. Retrieved 8 February 2022. Urwin, Rosamund (6 February 2022). "How fake news infected Britain". The Sunday Times. Archived from the original on 20 February 2022. Retrieved 20 February 2022. The origin of the claim against Starmer is believed to be a 2018 article on the right-wing political website, Guido Fawkes ... According to research by the campaign group Hope Not Hate, searches for "Starmer" and "Savile" peaked in April 2020 when the far-right fake news website Politicalite published a piece with the headline, "New leader new danger: Keir Starmer 'helped paedophile Jimmy Saville [sic] evade justice'". ... [Marianna] Spring says that the Savile claims have melded with the theories of QAnon, an outlandish US conspiracy cult about devil-worshipping paedophiles "Boris Johnson's policy chief Munira Mirza resigns over PM's Savile remarks". BBC News. 3 February 2022. Archived from the original on 3 February 2022. Retrieved 9 February 2022. "Boris Johnson tries to 'clarify' Jimmy Savile 'slur' against Sir Keir Starmer after days of criticism". Sky News. 3 February 2022. Archived from the original on 7 February 2022. Retrieved 9 February 2022. Macaskill, Andrew (31 May 2022). "UK's Boris Johnson faces new threat of confidence vote over lockdown parties". Reuters. Archived from the original on 3 June 2022. Retrieved 6 June 2022. Horton, Harry (5 June 2022). "Vote of no confidence in Boris Johnson could be announced 'as soon as Monday' as MP letters pile up". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 6 June 2022. Retrieved 6 June 2022. "Tory MPs to vote on Boris Johnson's leadership". BBC News. 6 June 2022. Archived from the original on 6 June 2022. Retrieved 6 June 2022. Mason, Rowena (6 June 2022). "Boris Johnson wins no-confidence vote despite unexpectedly large rebellion". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 6 June 2022. Retrieved 6 June 2022. "Confidence vote marks 'beginning of the end' for Boris Johnson, Keir Starmer says". The Independent. 6 June 2022. Archived from the original on 7 June 2022. Retrieved 7 June 2022. "By-election defeats: Ex-leader Michael Howard calls for Boris Johnson to go". BBC News. 24 June 2022. Archived from the original on 6 July 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022. "Former Tory leader Michael Howard says Johnson should resign after by-election defeat". The Independent. 24 June 2022. Archived from the original on 27 June 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022. Forrest, Adam; Woodcock, Andrew (24 June 2022). "Tory party chairman Oliver Dowden resigns after double by-election loss". The Independent. Archived from the original on 24 June 2022. Retrieved 24 June 2022. "Boris Johnson's aspiration to serve for a third term 'delusional'". The Guardian. 25 June 2022. Archived from the original on 19 July 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022. "Boris Johnson's aspiration to serve for a third term 'delusional'". The Observer. London. Archived from the original on 19 July 2022. Boris Johnson 'actively thinking about' third term as PM Archived 20 July 2022 at the Wayback Machine BBC News. 26 June 2022. "Chris Pincher suspended as Tory MP after groping allegation". BBC News. 1 July 2022. Archived from the original on 1 July 2022. Retrieved 1 July 2022. "Tory MP Chris Pincher suspended by party over 'drunken groping' claims". Sky News. 2 July 2022. Archived from the original on 7 July 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022. "Chris Pincher suspended as Tory MP after groping allegation". BBC News. 1 July 2022. Archived from the original on 8 July 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022. Snowdon, Kathryn; Seddon, Paul (3 July 2022). "Chris Pincher: New claims emerge against former Tory MP". BBC News. Archived from the original on 7 July 2022. Retrieved 3 July 2022. Blewett, Sam; Baynes, Chris (2 July 2022). "Boris Johnson accused of turning blind eye to Chris Pincher allegations". The Independent. Archived from the original on 3 July 2022. Retrieved 3 July 2022. "Boris Johnson was made aware of formal Chris Pincher complaint". BBC News. 5 July 2022. Archived from the original on 28 July 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022. Davidson, Peter (5 July 2022). "Boris Johnson was told about Pincher inquiry as top official suggests No10 lied". Daily Record. Archived from the original on 16 July 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022. Dimsdale, Connie (5 July 2022). "Simon McDonald letter in full: Peer claims Boris Johnson was briefed in person about Chris Pincher allegations". i. Archived from the original on 25 July 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022. "Chris Pincher: PM 'bitterly regrets' appointing MP after complaint". BBC News. 5 July 2022. Archived from the original on 21 July 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022. "Government resignations: Who has gone, who is staying?". BBC News. 6 July 2022. Archived from the original on 5 July 2022. Retrieved 6 July 2022. Walker, Peter; Mason, Rowena (6 July 2022). "Johnson hit by further resignations as Zahawi seeks to prop up PM". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 6 July 2022. Retrieved 6 July 2022. Elgot, Jessica (6 July 2022). "Boris Johnson could face new confidence vote within days". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 6 July 2022. Retrieved 6 July 2022. Mason, Rowena (6 July 2022). "The Tory MPs who have quit Boris Johnson's government – listed". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 28 July 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022. 21 names as of 15:00, 6 July 2022 Britchfield, Colm; Devine, Dan; Durrant, Tim (21 May 2019). "Government ministers". Institute for Government. Archived from the original on 8 December 2019. Retrieved 6 July 2022. Amos, Owen (7 July 2022). "Boris Johnson resigns: Five things that led to the PM's downfall". BBC News. Archived from the original on 7 July 2022. Retrieved 7 July 2022. Meredith, Sam (7 July 2022). "UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson resigns". CNBC. Archived from the original on 7 July 2022. Retrieved 7 July 2022. "Live: Boris Johnson expected to make statement on his leadership". ABC News. 7 July 2022. Archived from the original on 7 July 2022. Retrieved 7 July 2022. "Pound Rallies as Johnson's Exit Plan Spells Relief for Traders". Bloomberg.com. 7 July 2022. Archived from the original on 16 July 2022. Retrieved 7 July 2022. "Boris Johnson resigns: Johnson will stay on but only as caretaker PM, new cabinet agrees". BBC News. 7 July 2022. Archived from the original on 15 July 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022. "Truss wins Tory leadership race and faces daunting challenge as PM". The Independent. 5 September 2022. "Liz Truss confirmed as prime minister after meeting Queen at Balmoral – UK politics live". The Guardian. 6 September 2022. Retrieved 6 September 2022. Grierson, Jamie (6 September 2022). "Boris Johnson likens himself to Roman who returned as dictator". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 6 September 2022. Pickard, Jim; Campbell, Peter (15 November 2020). "UK set to ban sale of new petrol and diesel cars from 2030". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 14 November 2020. Retrieved 5 May 2021. "The key areas of Boris Johnson's 'green industrial revolution'". The Guardian. 17 November 2020. Archived from the original on 24 November 2020. Retrieved 25 November 2020. "Boris Johnson: Climate change about jobs not 'bunny hugging'". BBC News. 22 April 2021. Archived from the original on 1 June 2021. Retrieved 31 May 2021. Harvey, Fiona (17 September 2021). "US and EU pledge 30% cut in methane emissions to limit global heating". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 17 November 2021. Retrieved 18 November 2021. Mason, Jeff; Alper, Alexandra (18 September 2021). "Biden asks world leaders to cut methane in climate fight". Reuters. Archived from the original on 8 October 2021. Retrieved 8 October 2021. "Boris Johnson accused of making impossible pledge for climate crisis summit". The Independent. 19 January 2020. Archived from the original on 30 November 2020. Retrieved 19 January 2021. "Rishi Sunak cuts taxes on domestic flights days before Cop26 climate summit". The Independent. 27 October 2021. Archived from the original on 18 November 2021. Retrieved 18 November 2021. "UK to build 8 nuclear reactors amid new energy strategy". Associated Press. London. 7 April 2022. Archived from the original on 7 April 2022. Retrieved 7 April 2022. "Energy strategy: UK plans eight new nuclear reactors to boost production". BBC News. 7 April 2022. Archived from the original on 6 April 2022. Retrieved 7 April 2022. "Britain joins Germany in criticizing Macron's Mercosur threat". Reuters. 24 August 2019. Archived from the original on 31 March 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022. "Amazon fires spark European rift at G7 over Mercosur trade deal". Deutsche Welle. 24 August 2019. Archived from the original on 28 October 2019. Retrieved 30 July 2022. McGee, Luke (17 October 2020). "UK's 'special relationship' with the US is more fragile than ever. Just when Boris Johnson is banking on it". CNN. Archived from the original on 31 March 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022. "Biden presidency could bring difficulties for US-UK special relationship". Press Association. 7 November 2020. Archived from the original on 26 January 2021. Retrieved 30 July 2022. "UK to send asylum seekers to Rwanda under controversial new deal". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 4 July 2022. Retrieved 20 June 2022. "'Pro-China' Boris Johnson 'enthusiastic' about belt and road plan". Yahoo! News. 24 July 2019. Archived from the original on 6 April 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022. "Hong Kong: UK makes citizenship offer to residents". BBC News. 1 July 2020. Archived from the original on 1 July 2020. Retrieved 30 July 2022. "China warns UK 'interfering' in Hong Kong affairs will 'backfire'". Al Jazeera. 3 June 2020. Archived from the original on 8 June 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022. "Boris Johnson refuses to back Trump and Biden teams in calling Uighur situation 'genocide'". The Independent. 20 January 2021. "Johnson Wins U.K. Vote on Genocide Rulings After China Sanctions". Bloomberg L.P. 22 March 2021. "Aukus: China denounces US-UK-Australia pact as irresponsible". BBC News. 17 September 2021. Archived from the original on 16 September 2021. Retrieved 17 February 2022. "'Donnez-moi un break': Johnson deepens rift with France over defence deal". The Guardian. 22 September 2021. Archived from the original on 30 July 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022. "Most of the remaining British troops have left Afghanistan, says Boris Johnson". Mint. Agence France-Presse. 8 July 2021. Archived from the original on 30 July 2022. Retrieved 19 August 2021. "Boris Johnson urges international unity over Taliban as he recalls parliament". The Guardian. 15 August 2021. Archived from the original on 30 July 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022. "Afghanistan crisis: Johnson took holiday as Kabul was about to fall". The Guardian. 16 August 2021. Archived from the original on 26 June 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022. "Blame on Biden? UK PM Johnson says US decision to pull out of Afghanistan 'accelerated' events". The Week. 16 August 2021. Archived from the original on 16 August 2021. Retrieved 30 July 2022. "British government details plan to settle 20,000 Afghan refugees in heated emergency debate". CBC News. 18 August 2021. Archived from the original on 30 July 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022. Mueller, Benjamin; Robins, Peter (8 November 2021). "What Is Brexit? And How Is It Going?". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 29 December 2020. Retrieved 4 February 2022. "'Boris the betrayer' has swindled us over Brexit, England's fishermen say". Reuters. 30 December 2020. Archived from the original on 4 February 2022. Retrieved 4 February 2022. Sparrow, Andrew (16 October 2020). "Boris Johnson: UK must prepare for no-deal Brexit and 'Australia-style' trade – UK politics live". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 16 October 2020. Retrieved 16 October 2020. Boffey, Daniel; O'Carroll, Lisa (24 December 2020). "UK and EU agree Brexit trade deal". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 29 December 2020. Retrieved 3 January 2021. Smyth, Chris; Waterfield, Bruno; Charter, David (16 May 2022). "Boris Johnson defies warnings over Northern Ireland protocol". Archived from the original on 5 July 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022. "Boris Johnson warns EU to choose between Ukraine and Nord Stream 2". Financial Times. 15 November 2021. Archived from the original on 22 July 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022. "Boris Johnson visits Ukraine for talks as Russian invasion fears rise". BBC News. 1 February 2022. Archived from the original on 31 January 2022. Retrieved 1 February 2022. Sheridan, Danielle (31 January 2022). "Boris Johnson puts Vladimir Putin on hold, allowing France to seize diplomatic initiative". The Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Archived from the original on 31 January 2022. Retrieved 1 February 2022. "Ukraine crisis: What's at stake for the UK?". BBC News. 30 January 2022. Archived from the original on 1 February 2022. Retrieved 1 February 2022. "UK, Russian leaders discuss Ukraine crisis in phone call". Al Jazeera. 2 February 2022. Archived from the original on 6 June 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022. "Johnson-Putin call rescheduled as PM's diplomacy drive falters". The Guardian. 1 February 2022. Archived from the original on 1 February 2022. Retrieved 1 February 2022. "British PM Says Europe In Most Serious Security Crisis In Decades Over Ukraine". Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. 10 February 2022. Archived from the original on 30 July 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022. "Ukraine: Russia plans biggest war in Europe since 1945 – Boris Johnson". BBC News. 20 February 2022. Archived from the original on 23 February 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022. "Britain prepares Russia sanctions, says Ukraine invasion could be imminent". Reuters. 21 February 2021. Archived from the original on 22 February 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022. "Ukraine conflict: UK sanctions target Russian banks and oligarchs". BBC News. 24 February 2022. Archived from the original on 6 April 2022. Retrieved 6 April 2022. Boris Johnson outlines plan to phase out Russian oil and gas by end of 2022, 9 March 2022, archived from the original on 6 April 2022, retrieved 6 April 2022 "Boris Johnson meets Volodymyr Zelenskiy in unannounced visit to Kyiv". The Guardian. 9 April 2022. Archived from the original on 4 May 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022. "Ukraine war: Russia bans Boris Johnson from country over Ukraine war". BBC News. 16 April 2022. Archived from the original on 18 April 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022. Spencer, Richard (24 April 2022). "Ukrainians rename Odesa road as Boris Johnson Street". The Times. Archived from the original on 4 May 2022. Retrieved 2 May 2022. Morris, Sophie (2 May 2022). "Ukraine war: UK sends £300m more in military aid as PM set to praise country's 'finest hour'". Sky News. Archived from the original on 2 May 2022. Retrieved 2 May 2022. "Ukraine war: West too slow to grasp Russian threat to Ukraine, says PM". BBC News. 3 May 2022. Archived from the original on 3 May 2022. Retrieved 3 May 2022. "'It could take years': NATO secretary-general warns of a possible lengthy war in Ukraine". Euronews. 19 June 2022. "Liz Truss under renewed pressure to outline cost of living support". Financial Times. 28 August 2022. "Boris Johnson to continue as member of parliament after resigning as UK prime minister". SBS. 22 July 2022. Retrieved 30 September 2022. Juneau, Jan (12 September 2022). "Boris Johnson Says Queen Elizabeth Was 'Bright and Focused' in Last Meeting 2 Days Before Her Death". People. Retrieved 30 September 2022. Ferguson, Emma (8 September 2022). "Boris Johnson statement: Former PM pays emotional tribute to the Queen after her death". i. Retrieved 30 September 2022. Mason, Rowena (19 September 2022). "All six living former prime ministers among Queen's funeral congregation". The Guardian. Retrieved 30 September 2022. Gallardo, Cristina (10 September 2022). "Boris, meet Tony: Every living ex-UK prime minister gathers as Charles is proclaimed king". Politico. Retrieved 30 September 2022. Francis, Same (21 October 2022). "Could Boris Johnson really make a comeback?". BBC News Online. Retrieved 21 October 2022. "Boris Johnson had backing to challenge Rishi Sunak, Sir Graham Brady confirms". BBC News Online. 4 November 2022. Enokido-Lineham, Olive (23 October 2022). "Boris Johnson pulls out of Conservative leadership race". Sky News. Retrieved 23 October 2022. Mason, Rowena (23 October 2022). "Boris Johnson says he will not stand in Tory leadership contest". The Guardian. Retrieved 23 October 2022. "Boris Johnson referred to police over potential Covid rule breaches". BBC News Online. 23 May 2023. Retrieved 25 May 2023. "Chris Mason: The ghost of Boris Johnson haunts Rishi Sunak". BBC News Online. 10 June 2023. Retrieved 12 June 2023. "Boris Johnson and Rishi Sunak trade barbs in row over honours list". BBC News Online. 12 June 2023. Retrieved 12 June 2023. Rogers, Alexandra (13 June 2023). "Nadine Dorries claims 'sinister forces' were behind House of Lords snub". Sky News. "Boris Johnson re-selected to run in Uxbridge at next general election after suggestions of safer seat". Sky News. Retrieved 10 June 2023. "'It is sad to be leaving … for now': Boris Johnson's resignation statement in full". The Guardian. 9 June 2023. Crerar, Pippa; Allegretti, Aubrey (15 June 2023). "Johnson deliberately misled Parliament over Partygate, damning report finds". The Guardian. Retrieved 15 June 2023. "Boris Johnson would be facing 90-day suspension if still an MP". BBC News Online. 15 June 2023. Retrieved 15 June 2023. "Matter referred on 21 April 2022 (conduct of Rt Hon Boris Johnson): Final Report". Parliament of the United Kingdom. Baker, Tim (16 June 2023). "Rishi Sunak facing potentially acrimonious vote on Boris Johnson partygate report". Sky News. Retrieved 17 June 2023. Forrest, Adam; Dearden, Lizzie (20 June 2023). "Humiliation for Boris Johnson as MPs back ban over Partygate lies". The Independent. Retrieved 15 July 2023. "Boris Johnson: MPs back Partygate report as just seven vote against". BBC News. 19 June 2023. Retrieved 15 July 2023. McDonald, Andrew (16 June 2023). "Boris Johnson lands 'six-figure' Daily Mail column. Good luck getting him to file on time". Politico. Retrieved 21 June 2023. Sarkar, Alisha Rahaman; Mathers, Matt; Gregory, Andy (20 June 2023). "Boris Johnson – latest: MPs back scathing Partygate report and sanctions in humiliation for ex-PM". The Independent. Retrieved 21 June 2023. Brown, Faye (16 June 2023). "Boris Johnson in 'clear breach' of rules after Daily Mail job announced, says MP watchdog". Sky News. Sky. Retrieved 21 June 2023. Scott, Jennifer (27 June 2023). "Boris Johnson committed 'clear and unambiguous' rule breach by taking columnist job, says watchdog". Sky News. Retrieved 27 June 2023. "Former Prime Minister Boris Johnson joins GB News". BBC News. 27 October 2023. Retrieved 28 October 2023. Mason, Rowena (27 October 2023). "Boris Johnson to join GB News as presenter". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 28 October 2023. "Ex-UK PM Johnson: Marchers for 'Free Palestine' give moral support to Hamas terrorists". The Times of Israel. 5 November 2023. "Boris Johnson jets to Israel to 'express solidarity' after Hamas attacks". The Independent. 5 November 2023. Wells, Ione (10 March 2024). "Boris Johnson flew to Venezuela for unofficial talks". BBC News. BBC. Swinford, Steven (12 March 2024). "Boris Johnson to make a general election comeback for the Tories". The Times. Ferguson, Niall (15 December 2019). "It's One Nation under Boris Johnson's populist groove". The Times. Archived from the original on 28 October 2020. Retrieved 4 January 2021. Parker, George (21 December 2014). "Boris Johnson aims to win back voters as 'One Nation Tory'". Financial Times. London. Archived from the original on 14 December 2016. Retrieved 5 May 2021. Hayton, Richard (July 2021). "Conservative Party Statecraft and the Johnson Government". The Political Quarterly. 92 (3): 412–419. doi:10.1111/1467-923X.13006. S2CID 236571324. Mornington, Alicia-Dorothy (29 June 2020). "Was Boris Johnson's One-Nation Post-Electoral Pledge Sincere?". French Journal of British Studies. 25 (3). doi:10.4000/rfcb.5693. S2CID 225755384. Williams, Ben (11 February 2022). "Boris Johnson – one nation Conservative or populist?". Politics Home. Retrieved 9 August 2022. Purnell 2011, p. 2. Payne, Adam; Bienkov, Adam (23 May 2019). "Conservative moderates plan to take back control of Boris Johnson as prime minister". Business Insider. Archived from the original on 6 April 2020. Retrieved 26 May 2019. "Boris Johnson: Classic Tory or Political Maverick?". Channel 4 News. 9 October 2012. Archived from the original on 18 March 2015. Retrieved 26 May 2019. Hill, Dave (4 December 2008). "Mayor Boris, the liberal". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 11 November 2018. Retrieved 11 December 2016. "Generation Boris". The Economist. London. 1 June 2013. Archived from the original on 3 January 2015. Retrieved 5 May 2021. Alexandre-Collier, Agnès (13 April 2022). "David Cameron, Boris Johnson and the 'populist hypothesis' in the British Conservative Party". Comparative European Politics. 20 (5): 527–543. doi:10.1057/s41295-022-00294-5. S2CID 248154829. Chadwick, Vince (24 May 2016). "Donald Trump and Boris Johnson kiss and make Out". Politico. Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 30 July 2022. Greenslade, Roy (29 June 2016). "New York Post compares Boris Johnson to Donald Trump". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 30 July 2022. McTague, Tom (4 October 2021). "Is Boris Johnson a Liar?". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on 19 October 2021. Retrieved 18 October 2021. Bourne, Ryan (23 July 2019). "Don't lump Boris Johnson together with Donald Trump". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 23 July 2019. Retrieved 5 May 2021. Gimson 2012, p. 342. Heseltine, Michael (12 September 2019). "Boris Johnson has no right to call himself a one-nation Conservative". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 31 March 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022. "Climate change: The science briefing that convinced Boris Johnson". BBC News. 2 February 2022. Archived from the original on 2 February 2022. Retrieved 2 February 2022. "What is Boris Johnson's record on climate change?". The Week UK. 4 February 2020. Archived from the original on 18 November 2021. Retrieved 18 November 2021. Ward, Bob (10 June 2021). "Boris Johnson's climate change "scepticism" is an embarrassment to London's scientists". New Statesman. Archived from the original on 5 January 2020. Retrieved 18 November 2021. Aron, Jacob (4 June 2019). "New prime minister Boris Johnson's climate change record". New Scientist. Archived from the original on 24 November 2020. Retrieved 1 January 2021. "What Does Boris Johnson Really Think About Climate Change?". Bloomberg L.P. 5 February 2020. Archived from the original on 22 January 2021. Retrieved 1 January 2021. Vaughan, Adam (11 June 2019). "UK commits to reduce greenhouse gas emissions to net zero by 2050". New Scientist. Archived from the original on 26 November 2020. Retrieved 25 November 2020. Gatten, Emma (24 September 2020). "Boris Johnson warns against 'napping' on climate change". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 20 January 2021. Retrieved 5 May 2021. "Could Scotland ever be 'the Saudi Arabia of renewables'?". BBC News. 2 November 2020. Archived from the original on 24 November 2020. Retrieved 25 November 2020. "COP26: World at one minute to midnight over climate change – Boris Johnson". BBC News. 1 November 2021. Archived from the original on 18 November 2021. Retrieved 18 November 2021. "COP26: Climate deal sounds the death knell for coal power – PM". BBC News. 14 November 2021. Archived from the original on 17 November 2021. Retrieved 18 November 2021. "Boris Johnson MP, Uxbridge and South Ruislip". TheyWorkForYou. 18 May 2022. Retrieved 20 May 2023. Purnell 2011, p. 25. Bienkov, Adam (14 February 2018). "All the times Boris Johnson has contradicted his own arguments for Brexit". Business Insider. Archived from the original on 26 May 2019. Retrieved 26 May 2019. Worthy, Ben; Bennister, Mark; Stafford, Max W. (1 March 2019). "Rebels Leading London: the mayoralties of Ken Livingstone and Boris Johnson compared" (PDF). British Politics. 14 (1): 23–43. doi:10.1057/s41293-017-0069-1. ISSN 1746-9198. S2CID 158055383. Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 April 2019. Retrieved 30 July 2022. "A secret pro-EU article Boris Johnson wrote before the referendum has been revealed". The Independent. 15 October 2016. Archived from the original on 18 October 2016. Retrieved 26 May 2019. Ross, Tim (23 May 2018). "Boris Johnson reopens post-Brexit immigration debate". Bloomberg L.P. Archived from the original on 5 November 2021. Retrieved 5 May 2021. Mason, Rowena (26 May 2019). "Brexit: top Tories would bring down any PM who backs no deal". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 26 May 2019. Retrieved 26 May 2019. @borisjohnson (25 June 2019). "If I become PM, we will leave the EU on 31 October, deal or no deal. Today I have asked @Jeremy_Hunt whether he will also commit to this date, no matter what. We must keep our promises to the British people and deliver Brexit – no ifs, no buts, and no second referendum" (Tweet) – via Twitter. "Britain's Boris Johnson Appeals To EU To Drop 'Irish Backstop' Demand". kcbx.org. 20 August 2019. Archived from the original on 10 February 2020. Retrieved 20 August 2019. "Johnson says Britain will not pay Brussels for no-deal Brexit". New Europe. 27 August 2019. Archived from the original on 28 August 2019. Retrieved 27 August 2019. "Boris Johnson declares unionist views on trip to Northern Ireland". BBC News. 7 November 2019. Archived from the original on 29 November 2020. Retrieved 24 November 2020. "Northern Ireland to Scotland bridge plans 'put to bed'". 15 September 2021. Archived from the original on 20 November 2021. Retrieved 23 November 2021. Sheppard, Tommy (10 September 2020). "Don't fall for Boris Johnson's big lie about the Internal Market Bill and its effect on devolution". The Scotsman. Archived from the original on 14 September 2020. Retrieved 12 September 2020. Purnell 2011, p. 3. Gimson 2012, p. 258. Purnell 2011, p. 103. Crines 2013, p. 1. Hill 2016, p. 31. Gimson 2012, p. x. Purnell 2011, p. 91. Edwards & Isaby 2008, p. 74. Edwards & Isaby 2008, p. 74; Purnell 2011, p. 1; Gimson 2012, p. 301. Purnell 2011, p. 183. Gimson 2012, p. 108. Gimson 2012, p. 17. Purnell 2011, pp. 6–7. Gimson 2012, p. 301. Purnell 2011, p. 37. "Who is Boris Johnson, the man poised to be the next British leader?". NBC News. 26 May 2019. Davies, Guy (23 July 2019). "Meet Boris Johnson: The UK's controversial new prime minister". ABC News. Retrieved 8 May 2021. Blitz, James (23 July 2019). "Why is Boris Johnson such a divisive figure?". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 24 July 2019. Retrieved 5 May 2021. Grierson, Jamie (10 December 2021). "Lies, damned lies: the full list of accusations against Boris Johnson". The Guardian. Retrieved 19 December 2021. Chadwick, Vince (24 May 2016). "Donald Trump and Boris Johnson kiss and make Out". Politico. Greenslade, Roy (29 June 2016). "New York Post compares Boris Johnson to Donald Trump". The Guardian. London. "London mayor Boris Johnson eyes Trump-style insurgency in EU battle". Newsweek. Reuters. 23 March 2016. McTague, Tom (4 October 2021). "Is Boris Johnson a Liar?". The Atlantic. Retrieved 18 October 2021. Edwards & Isaby 2008, p. 47. "The most controversial PM since Lloyd George: historians on Boris Johnson". The Observer. 4 September 2022. Retrieved 4 September 2022. Watt, Holly (20 November 2014). "Boris Johnson could be hit with six-figure tax bill". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 21 November 2014. Retrieved 5 May 2021. Siddique, Haroon (20 November 2014). "New York-born London mayor Boris Johnson refuses to pay US tax bill". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 21 November 2014. "London Mayor Boris Johnson agrees to pay US tax bill". BBC News. 22 January 2015. Archived from the original on 16 February 2015. Retrieved 15 February 2015. Shipman, Tim (15 February 2015). "Crikey! Boris gives up White House to bid for No 10". The Times. ISSN 0140-0460. Archived from the original on 10 October 2021. Retrieved 10 October 2021. Wintour, Patrick (9 February 2017). "Boris Johnson among record number to renounce American citizenship in 2016". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 22 July 2019. Retrieved 10 September 2018. "Reading into the problem of illiteracy where 'Street' is often king". The Irish Times. 22 July 2010. Archived from the original on 29 February 2020. Retrieved 26 July 2019. Purnell 2011, p. 1. Purnell 2011, p. 15. Edwards & Isaby 2008, p. 43; Purnell 2011, p. 1; Gimson 2012, p. xiii. "Boris: I took cocaine and cannabis". Oxford Mail. 4 June 2007. Archived from the original on 11 December 2018. Retrieved 8 October 2012. Edwards & Isaby 2008, pp. 144–145. "'Never interview here!' Boris Johnson's edict as he runs in the country". Sky News. Retrieved 28 October 2023. "Hospital admission puts new focus on Boris Johnson's health". The Guardian. 6 April 2020. Archived from the original on 12 April 2022. Retrieved 12 April 2022. "Coronavirus: Boris Johnson says he was 'too fat' as he launches obesity crackdown". Sky News. Archived from the original on 12 April 2022. Retrieved 12 April 2022. "Car crashes into garden of Boris Johnson's £1.3m south London townhouse". The Independent. 10 May 2022. Archived from the original on 21 June 2022. Retrieved 20 July 2022. "Boris and Carrie Johnson move into new £3.8m moated mansion in Oxfordshire – see inside". House & Garden. 17 May 2023. Retrieved 21 May 2023. Sanderson, Terry (26 April 2008). "Who would Jesus vote for?". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 23 July 2019. Retrieved 24 July 2019. Swinford, Steven (29 January 2015). "Boris Johnson: I am not a serious practicing Christian". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 5 May 2021. Pepinster, Catherine (26 September 2020). "As Boris Johnson's godmother, I'm so pleased he has returned to Catholicism". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 26 September 2020. Retrieved 5 May 2021. Shearing, Hazel; Snowdon, Kathryn (30 May 2021). "Boris Johnson marries Carrie Symonds at Westminster Cathedral". BBC News. Archived from the original on 30 May 2021. Retrieved 30 May 2021. Southworth, Phoebe; Malnick, Edward; Stanley, Tim (29 May 2021). "Boris Johnson wedding: How did Prime Minister marry Carrie Symonds in a Catholic church?". The Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 30 May 2021. Gledhill, Ruth. "Boris weds Carrie at Westminster Cathedral". The Tablet. Archived from the original on 30 May 2021. Retrieved 30 May 2021. Kidd, Patrick (23 July 2019). "Boris Johnson could prove more of a Chancer than his hero Pericles". The Times. Archived from the original on 31 March 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022. "Boris Johnson's magniloquent tongue reaps political gold, linguists". Reuters. 23 July 2019. Archived from the original on 31 March 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022. "Boris Johnson's confusing and contradictory religious history". The Economist. 27 July 2019. Archived from the original on 28 July 2019. Retrieved 5 May 2021. Hobson, Theo (4 August 2019). "What I learned talking to Boris Johnson about religion". The Spectator. Archived from the original on 28 November 2019. Retrieved 30 July 2022. McTague, Tom (7 June 2021). "Boris Johnson Knows Exactly What He's Doing". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on 7 June 2021. Retrieved 7 June 2021. "Boris Johnson's secret family: Prime Minister's 3 marriages and 7 children revealed". HELLO!. 13 December 2021. Archived from the original on 8 July 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022. "What Do We Know About Boris Johnson's Seven Children?". Evoke.ie. 9 December 2021. Archived from the original on 31 March 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2022. "Boris and Carrie Johnson announce birth of son". BBC News. Retrieved 11 July 2023. Helyer-Donaldson, Rachel. "Boris Johnson's first wife marries again". The Week. London. Archived from the original on 17 May 2016. Retrieved 4 May 2017. Sampson, Annabel (11 November 2019). "Who is Boris Johnson's first wife, former Tatler cover girl Allegra Mostyn-Owen?". Tatler. Archived from the original on 14 April 2021. Retrieved 29 May 2021. McDonaugh, Melanie (29 May 2012). "'He's a better ex than he was a husband', says Boris Johnson's ex wife". Evening Standard. Archived from the original on 27 May 2021. Retrieved 29 May 2021. Malnick, Edward; Stanley, Tim; Southworth, Phoebe (30 May 2021). "Boris Johnson and Carrie Symonds married in secret wedding ceremony at Westminster Cathedral". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 30 May 2021. Doward, Jamie (29 August 2004). "No dumb blond". The Observer. London. Archived from the original on 8 January 2014. Retrieved 7 July 2010. McSmith, Andy (13 February 2016). "Marina Wheeler, profile: The brains behind Boris Johnson". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 31 July 2020. Retrieved 7 September 2018. "Boris celebrates Vaisakhi in Southall". BackBoris.com. 6 April 2008. Archived from the original on 13 April 2008. Retrieved 3 May 2008. Wheeler, Brian (4 May 2008). "The Boris Johnson story". BBC News. Archived from the original on 6 May 2008. Retrieved 1 August 2021. Halliday, Josh (21 May 2013). "Public has right to know Boris Johnson fathered child during affair, court rules". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 21 September 2021. Pitel, Laura (22 May 2013). "'Boris lovechild' can be public knowledge, appeal court rules". The Times. London. Archived from the original on 7 February 2017. Retrieved 7 May 2016. Stewart, Helen (21 September 2021). "Boris Johnson admits he has six children". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 21 September 2021. Retrieved 22 September 2021. "Boris Johnson and wife to divorce". BBC News. 7 September 2018. Archived from the original on 17 January 2021. Retrieved 10 September 2018. "UK PM Johnson's divorce with Indian-origin wife finalised". The Times of India. 8 May 2020. Retrieved 9 October 2023. McKelvie, Geraldine (28 March 2021). "Jennifer Arcuri: Why I've decided to speak my truth about Boris Johnson". Sunday Mirror. Archived from the original on 28 March 2021. Retrieved 28 March 2021. Sommerlad, Joe (28 March 2021). "Jennifer Arcuri tells of 'four-year affair' with Boris Johnson and calls him 'cowardly'". The Independent. Archived from the original on 28 March 2021. Retrieved 28 March 2021. "Carrie Symonds: Who is Boris Johnson's partner?". itv.com. 22 June 2019. Archived from the original on 29 July 2019. Retrieved 24 June 2019. "PM Johnson and Symonds engaged and expecting baby". BBC News. 29 February 2020. Archived from the original on 5 May 2020. Retrieved 29 February 2020. Braddick, Imogen (2 May 2020). "Boris Johnson and Carrie Symonds name baby boy Wilfred Lawrie Nicholas Johnson after doctors who saved PM's life". Evening Standard. London. Archived from the original on 2 August 2020. Retrieved 2 May 2020. Proctor, Kate (29 April 2020). "Boris Johnson and Carrie Symonds announce birth of baby boy". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 31 July 2021. Retrieved 21 September 2021. "Boris Johnson and Carrie Symonds announce birth of son". BBC News. 29 April 2020. Archived from the original on 1 May 2020. Retrieved 29 April 2020. Beech, Samantha (30 May 2021). "Boris Johnson marries Carrie Symonds in secret wedding". CNN. Archived from the original on 31 May 2021. Retrieved 1 June 2021. "Boris and Carrie Johnson announce name of new daughter". BBC News. London. 16 December 2021. Archived from the original on 16 December 2021. Retrieved 16 December 2021. "Boris Johnson's wife Carrie gives birth to second child". Sky News. 9 December 2021. Archived from the original on 9 December 2021. Retrieved 11 December 2021. "Boris and Carrie Johnson announce birth of son". BBC News. 11 July 2023. Retrieved 11 July 2023. Clapham, Andrew (1993). "Human Rights in the Private Sphere". OUP. p. 186. "Has Leo Johnson, Boris' younger brother, found the key to happiness?". The Telegraph. 15 July 2018. Retrieved 15 June 2023. Bates, Stephen (14 May 2008). "People". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 30 July 2022. Martinson, Jane (27 April 2017). "Rachel Johnson joins Lib Dems in protest against Tory backing for Brexit". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 27 April 2017. Retrieved 27 April 2017. "Rachel Johnson and Gavin Esler to stand for Change UK". 23 April 2019. Archived from the original on 23 April 2019. Retrieved 23 April 2019./ Walden, Celia (11 April 2008). "Stanley Johnson: The man who made Boris". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 5 July 2016. Killen, Mary (March 2015). "Boris Johnson's mother on her brilliant brood". Tatler. Archived from the original on 19 January 2018. Retrieved 19 January 2018. Bird, Steve (2 May 2020). "The story of Wilfred Johnson, the decorated WW2 pilot who has given his name to the Prime Minister's son". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 24 July 2020. Retrieved 5 May 2021. Edwards & Isaby 2008, p. 44; Purnell 2011, pp. 19–20; Gimson 2012, pp. 5–7, 1957. Acar, Özgen (20 June 2008). "Bir Baba Ocağı Ziyareti" [A Visit to Family Home]. Hürriyet Daily News (in Turkish). Istanbul. Archived from the original on 10 May 2016. Retrieved 19 July 2016. Gökçe, Deniz (25 April 2016). "Obama ile Boris Johnson Kapıştı" [Obama versus Boris Johnson]. Akşam (in Turkish). Istanbul. Archived from the original on 1 May 2016. Retrieved 19 July 2016. Purnell 2011, p. 21; Gimson 2012, p. 10. Boris Finds Out He's Related To King George II | Who Do You Think You Are. BBC. 4 October 2018 – via YouTube. Peled, Daniella (2008). "Interview: Boris Johnson – my Jewish credentials". The Jewish Chronicle (April). Archived from the original on 17 September 2016. Retrieved 19 May 2015. "Boris Johnson's Sister Reveals His Little-known Past as a Volunteer on an Israeli Kibbutz". Haaretz. 8 August 2016. Archived from the original on 30 June 2019. Retrieved 30 June 2019. Woodward, Will (17 July 2007). "Phooey! One-man melting pot ready to take on King Newt". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 15 July 2019. Retrieved 30 July 2022. "Honorary Graduates". Brunel University London. Archived from the original on 20 November 2018. Retrieved 6 October 2019. "RIBA Honorary Fellowships 2018 announced". Architecture.com. Archived from the original on 2 July 2018. Retrieved 11 November 2019. The lifetime honour allows recipients to use the initials Hon FRIBA after their name. Fulcher, Merlin (6 December 2011). "Boris Johnson scoops RIBA honorary fellowship". Architects Journal. London. Archived from the original on 6 December 2019. Retrieved 6 October 2019. "London mayor Boris Johnson named honorary Australian of the Year". The Guardian. London. Associated Press. 26 January 2014. Archived from the original on 30 September 2019. Retrieved 6 October 2019. Magnay, Jacquelin (26 January 2014). "Boris Johnson admits to being a bit baffled by honorary Aussie award". The Australian. Retrieved 26 August 2020. Tilbrook, Richard (15 July 2016). "Business Transacted and Orders Approved at the Privy Council Held by the Queen at Buckingham Palace on 15th July 2016" (PDF). The Government of the United Kingdom. Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 January 2017. Retrieved 2 February 2022. Tanne, Janice Hopkins (18 September 2020). "Donald Trump, Boris Johnson, and other leaders win Ig Nobel awards for teaching people about life and death". BMJ. 370: m3675. doi:10.1136/bmj.m3675. ISSN 1756-1833. PMID 32948527. S2CID 221766743. Archived from the original on 29 September 2020. Retrieved 30 July 2022. "Boris Johnson becomes honorary citizen of Odesa – Trukhanov". Interfax-Ukraine. Archived from the original on 10 July 2022. Retrieved 10 July 2022. Kilner, James (2 July 2022). "Boris Johnson named honorary citizen of Odesa for helping Ukraine". The Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Archived from the original on 12 July 2022. Retrieved 10 July 2022. "Zelensky presents Johnson with Order of Liberty in Kyiv". Ukrinform. 24 August 2022. Retrieved 24 August 2022. Findon, Mary-Kate (19 January 2023). "Boris Johnson awarded honorary 'citizen of Kyiv' medal in Davos". The Independent. Retrieved 21 January 2023. "Boris Johnson: Former PM and 'great friend of Ukraine' awarded honorary degree in Lviv". Sky News. Retrieved 16 September 2023. Bower, Tom (2021). Boris Johnson: The Gambler. Random House. ISBN 978-0753554920. Crines, Andrew S. (2013). "Why did Boris Johnson win the 2012 mayoral election?". Public Policy and Administration Research. 3 (9): 1–7. Edwards, Giles; Isaby, Jonathan (2008). Boris v. Ken: How Boris Johnson Won London. London: Politico's. ISBN 978-1-84275-225-8. Gimson, Andrew (2012). Boris: The Rise of Boris Johnson (2nd ed.). Simon & Schuster. Hill, Dave (2016). Zac Versus Sadiq: The Fight to Become London Mayor. Double Q. ISBN 978-1-911079-20-0. Retrieved 30 July 2022. Hosken, Andrew (2008). Ken: The Ups and Downs of Ken Livingstone. Arcadia Books. ISBN 978-1-905147-72-4. Retrieved 30 July 2022. Purnell, Sonia (2011). Just Boris: Boris Johnson: The Irresistible Rise of a Political Celebrity. London: Aurum Press Ltd. ISBN 978-1-84513-665-9. Dale, Iain. The Little Book of Boris. (Harriman House Ltd., 2007) ISBN 978-1-905641-64-2 Gimson, Andrew. Boris: The Adventures of Boris Johnson (Simon & Schuster, 2012). Heppell, Timothy; McMeeking, Thomas (2021). "The Conservative Party Leadership Transition from Theresa May to Boris Johnson: Party Popularity and Leadership Satisfaction". Representation. 57 (1): 59–73. doi:10.1080/00344893.2020.1778512. S2CID 225753305. Johnson, Stanley (2009). Stanley I Presume. London: Fourth Estate. ISBN 978-0-00-729673-6. Retrieved 30 July 2022. Anthony Seldon and Raymond Newell. Johnson at 10 (Atlantic, 2023) O'Toole, Fintan, "The King of Little England", The New York Review of Books, vol. LXVIII, no. 10 (10 June 2021), pp. 44–46. Vasudevan, A. The Thinking Man's Idiot: The Wit and Wisdom of Boris Johnson (New Holland Publishers (UK) Ltd., 2008) ISBN 978-1-84773-359-7 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Boris Johnson. Official website Profile at Parliament of the United Kingdom Contributions in Parliament at Hansard Appearances on C-SPAN Boris Johnson at IMDb Boris Johnson, columnist — The Daily Telegraph Boris Johnson on the Muck Rack journalist listing site Portraits of Boris Johnson at the National Portrait Gallery, London