The 2005 European Women Basketball Championship, commonly called Eurobasket 2005 Women, was held in Turkey between 2 September and 11 September 2005. Czech Republic won the gold medal and Russia the silver medal while Spain won the bronze. Maria Stepanova from Russia was named the tournament MVP. The FIBA European Women’s Basketball Championship is a bi-annual women’s basketball competition between national teams organised by FIBA Europe, the sport's governing body in Europe. This was the first time that the championship was hosted by Turkey. Ankara Bursa İzmir Ankara, the capital of Turkey and the country’s second largest city, was the final stage of the Eurobasket 2005 Women action. The Ankara Atatürk Sport Hall with a capacity of 4,500 people hosted 16 games of the competition following the preliminary round. Turkey’s fourth most populous city Bursa was home to Group A during the tournament, and also had a total of 15 games played in the 3,500 person capacity Bursa Atatürk Sport Hall. İzmir is the third largest city of Turkey. İzmir Atatürk Sport Hall with a capacity of 3,000 persons hosted Group B, where 15 games were played. For details on qualification, see Eurobasket 2005 Women qualification. 5th to 8th place 9th to 12th place MVP: Maria Stepanova ( Russia) Best Center: Maria Stepanova ( Russia) Best Forward: Amaya Valdemoro ( Spain) Best Guard: Hana Machová ( Czech Republic) Maria Stepanova ( Russia) Tatiana Shchegoleva ( Russia) Amaya Valdemoro ( Spain) Hana Machová ( Czech Republic) Eva Vítečková ( Czech Republic) Anna Montañana ( Spain) Agnieszka Bibrzycka ( Poland) Sandra Valužytė ( Lithuania) Anete Jekabsone ( Latvia) Audrey Sauret-Gillespie ( France) Michaela Pavlíčková ( Czech Republic) Eva Němcová ( Czech Republic) Ilona Korstin ( Russia) Marta Fernández ( Spain) Iveta Marcauskaite ( Lithuania) Sandra Le Dréan ( France) Nevriye Yılmaz ( Turkey) Ivana Matović ( Serbia and Montenegro) Biljana Stanković ( Serbia and Montenegro) Evanthia Maltsi ( Greece) Linda Fröhlich ( Germany) Eurobasket 2005 Women official website Eurobasket 2005 Women at Eurobasket official website FIBA Europe official website FIBA official website