Ādaži ([ˈaː.da.ʒi]) (formerly German: Neuermühlen) is a town in Pierīga, on the left bank of the Gauja river. The town is the administrative center of the Ādaži Municipality. It is located by the highway A1, 21.6 km from the center of Riga. Ādaži has administrative offices, schools (Ādaži Elementary School, Ādaži Secondary School, and Ādaži Free Waldorf School), Kindergarten Strautins, several shops (Maxima, Rimi, Elvi) and service companies. Latvia's longest river, the Gauja, flows along the Ādaži River, and its tributary Vējupe divides the town into two parts. Ādaži also has an eponymous wakeboarding club on the Gauja. The town is mostly known due to the nearby Latfood factory producing Ādažu Čipsi, the best known potato chip brand in Latvia. The castle of Neuermühlen has been documented since at least 1204. Here, the Battle of Neuermühlen took place in 1492. After the battle the Bishop of Riga has to recognize the Teutonic Order as Overlord of Livonia. The modern village of Ādaži is formed around the center of the former Gauja Manor ( Aahof ) or the Gauja-Plava Manor, but the newest part of the village Vejupe on the right bank — around the center of the Remberg manor (Ringenberg). Gauja Manor was located in the ancient Bukultu and Baltezers areas. In the 19th century, it was called Ādaži-Carnikava Parish. According to the provisions of the 2021 Latvian administrative reform, Ādaži gained city rights (town status) on 1 July 2022. There is also a training camp of the Latvian Army in Ādaži. In September 2016, Latvia's Defense Minister Raimonds Bergmanis said that infrastructure at the base was "being constructed and modernized at a fast pace" in preparation for a Canadian-led 1,500 strong multinational NATO battalion expected to deploy to Latvia in the spring of 2017. Ādaži's location on the A1 road (Latvia), which is part of Via Baltica's international highway, favors transit and transport industries. Ādaži Protected Landscape Ādaži, adazi.lv History of Neuermühlen, its castle, parish and church Bienenstamm, H. von. Geographischer Arbiss der Dreideutschen Ostsee-Provinzen Russlands; oder oder, der Gouvernemens Ehst-, Liv- und Kurland . Riga: bei Deubner, 1826. S.227. "Three more Latvian settlements become official 'cities'". eng.Lsm.lv. 2022-07-07. Retrieved 2022-09-03. Ādaži camp official site "NATO reinforcements to arrive early 2017". LSM Latvian Public Broadcasting. 8 September 2016. Retrieved 8 September 2016. "Multinational NATO battalion to arrive in Latvia in the spring - ambassador". LETA Latvian Information Agency. 9 June 2016. Retrieved 8 September 2016. Ādaži official site v t e