The 2010s (pronounced "twenty-tens" or "two thousand (and) tens"), variously nicknamed "the '10s" ("the Tens"), "the Tenties", or more rarely "the Teens") was a decade that began on January 1, 2010, and ended on December 31, 2019. The decade began with an economic recovery from the late 2000s financial crisis. Inflation and interest rates stayed low and steady throughout the decade, gross world product grew from 2010 to 2019. Global economic recovery accelerated during the latter half of the decade, fueled by strong economic growth in many countries, robust consumer spending, increased investment in infrastructure, and the emergence of new technologies. However, the recovery developed unevenly. Socioeconomic crises in some countries—particularly in the Arab world—triggered political revolutions in Tunisia, Egypt, and Bahrain as well as civil wars in Libya, Syria, and Yemen in a regional phenomenon that was commonly referred to as the Arab Spring. Meanwhile, Europe had to grapple with a debt crises that was pronounced early in the decade. Shifting social attitudes saw LGBT rights make substantial progress throughout the decade, particularly in developed countries. The decade saw the musical and cultural dominance of dance-pop, electronic dance music, hipster culture and electropop. Globalization and an increased demand for variety and personalisation in the face of music streaming services such as Spotify, SoundCloud and Apple Music created many musical subgenres. As the decade progressed, diversity was also seen with the mainstream success of K-pop, Latin music and trap. Superhero films became box office leaders, with Avengers: Endgame becoming the highest-grossing film of all time. Cable providers saw a decline in subscribers as cord cutters switched to lower cost online streaming services such as Netflix, Amazon Prime, Hulu and Disney+. The video game industry continued to be dominated by Nintendo, Sony, and Microsoft; while indie games became more popular, with Minecraft becoming the best-selling game of all time. Handheld console gaming revenue was overtaken by mobile gaming revenue in 2011. The best-selling book of this decade was Fifty Shades of Grey. Drake was named the top music artist of the decade in the US by Billboard. The United States continued to retain its superpower status while China sought to expand its influence in the South China Sea and in Africa through its economic initiatives and military reforms. It solidified its position as an emerging superpower, despite causing a series of conflicts around its frontiers. Within its border, China enhanced its suppression and control of Hong Kong, Xinjiang, and Tibet. These developments led the United States to implement a containment policy and initiate a trade war against China. Elsewhere in Asia, the Koreas improved their relations after a prolonged crisis between the two countries, and the War on Terror continued as a part of the U.S.'s continued military involvement in many parts of the world. The rise of the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant extremist organization in 2014 erased the Syria-Iraq border, resulting in a multinational intervention against it. In Africa, South Sudan broke away from Sudan, and mass protests and various coups d'état saw longtime strongmen deposed. In the U.S., celebrity businessman Donald Trump was elected president amid an international wave of populism and neo-nationalism. The European Union experienced a migrant crisis in the middle of the decade and withdrawal of the United Kingdom as a member state following the historic United Kingdom EU membership referendum. Russia attempted to assert itself in international affairs, annexing Crimea in 2014. Information technology progressed, with smartphones becoming widespread. Internet coverage grew from 29% to 54% of the world population, and also saw advancements in wireless networking devices, mobile telephony, and cloud computing. Advancements in data processing and the rollout of 4G broadband allowed data, metadata, and information to be collected and dispersed among domains at paces never before seen while online resources such as social media facilitated phenomena such as the Me Too movement, the rise of slacktivism, and online cancel culture. WikiLeaks gained international attention for publishing classified information on topics related to Guantánamo Bay, Syria, the Afghan and Iraq wars, and United States diplomacy. Edward Snowden blew the whistle on global surveillance, raising awareness on the role governments and private entities play in global surveillance and information privacy. Baidu (4th), Twitter (6th) and Instagram (8th) emerged to become among the top 10 most visited websites, while Wikipedia went from the 9th to the 5th most popular website, almost sextupling its monthly visits. Yahoo significantly declined in popularity, descending from being the 1st to the 9th most popular site, with monthly visits declining by two-thirds. Google, Facebook, YouTube and Yandex maintained relatively consistent popularity and remained within the top 10 throughout the decade. Global warming became increasingly noticeable through new record temperatures in different occurrences and extreme weather events on all continents. The CO2 concentration rose from 390 to 410 PPM over the decade. At the same time, combating pollution and climate change continued to be areas of major concern, as protests, initiatives, and legislation garnered substantial media attention. The Paris Agreement was adopted in 2015, and the global climate youth movement was formed. Major natural disasters included the 2010 Haiti earthquake, the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami, the Nepal earthquake of 2015, the 2018 Sulawesi earthquake and tsunami, the devastating tropical cyclones Bopha (Pablo), Haiyan (Yolanda), and Maria, as well as the 2019 European heat waves. During the decade, the world population grew from 6.9 to 7.7 billion people. There were approximately 1.4 billion births during the decade (140 million per year), and about 560 million deaths (56 million per year). The decade has been variously termed "the '10s" ("The Tens"), occasionally "The Teens",[citation needed] and (especially in the UK) "the Tenties". The prominent wars of the decade include: Successful revolutions and otherwise major protests of the decade include, but are not limited to: The Arab Spring was a series of anti-government protests, uprisings, and armed rebellions that spread across much of the Islamic world in the early 2010s. It began in response to oppressive regimes and a low standard of living, starting with protests in Tunisia. In the news, social media has been heralded as the driving force behind the swift spread of revolution throughout the world, as new protests appear in response to success stories shared from those taking place in other countries. In many countries, the governments have also recognised the importance of social media for organising and have shut down certain sites or blocked Internet service entirely, especially in the times preceding a major rally. Governments have also scrutinised or suppressed discussion in those forums through accusing content creators of unrelated crimes or shutting down communication on specific sites or groups, such as through Facebook. On 8 April 2010, the United States and Russia signed a treaty in Prague, Czech Republic agreed to reduce the stockpiles of their nuclear weapons by half. It is meant to replace the Strategic Offensive Reductions Treaty (SORT), which was set to expire. The treaty went into force on 5 February 2011 after it was ratified by both nations. In 2015, Iran and other world powers agreed to trade sanctions relief for explicit constraints on Iran's contentious nuclear program, including allowing the inspections of nuclear facilities by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). On 16 January 2016 the IAEA confirmed that Iran had complied with the agreement (the JCPOA), allowing the United Nations to lift sanctions immediately. However, on 8 May 2018, United States President Donald Trump announced the United States was withdrawing from the deal. On 7 July 2017, the United Nations passed the Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons, the first legally binding international agreement to comprehensively prohibit nuclear weapons, with the goal of leading towards their total elimination. It has been signed by 58 nations. Throughout the decade, North Korea expanded its nuclear capabilities, performing alleged nuclear tests in 2013 and 2016, which governments responded by placing international sanctions on the country. In response North Korea has threatened the United States, South Korea and Japan with pre-emptive nuclear strikes. However, in 2018, North Korea suggested that they may disarm their nuclear arsenal after negotiations with the United States. On 1 February 2019, The US formally suspended the Russo-American Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty (INF), and Russia did the same on the following day in response. The US formally withdrew from the treaty on 2 August 2019. The United States initiated a renovation of its nuclear weapon arsenal. The most prominent terrorist attacks committed against civilian populations during the decade include, but are not limited to: China was increasingly called a superpower in the early 2010s, including at the 2011 meeting between President Hu Jintao and United States President Barack Obama. By the end of the decade, China overtook the U.S. as the world's largest trading nation and the country filing the most patents, dramatically expanded its military and landed its lunar rover Yutu on the moon, ending a four-decade hiatus of lunar exploration. In 2018, global military spending reached its highest level since 1988, late Cold War levels, largely fuelled by increased defence spending by the United States (4.6% increase to $649 billion) and China (5% increase to $250 billion). Together, their budgets accounted for half of the world's total military spending. In 2019, the Lowy Institute Asia Power Index, which measures the projections of power across eight indexes in the Indo-Pacific, ranked the United States at #1 with a score of 84.5 and China #2 with a score of 75.9. Along with the United States and China, Russia under President Vladimir Putin steadily increased its defence spending and continued to modernise its military throughout the decade. This included the development of the T-14 Armata main battle tank and the fifth-generation Sukhoi Su-57 jet fighter. Russia also exercised its power projection capabilities in its 2014 annexation of Crimea and interventions in eastern Ukraine and the Syrian Civil War. Russia also waged information warfare campaigns against its geopolitical foes, interfering in the 2016 U.S. elections via hacking and leaking emails of U.S. political party leadership and by spreading disinformation via the Internet Research Agency. Other alleged Russian intelligence operations included the Skripal poisonings and the Montenegrin coup plot, both of which were attributed by some to the GRU's Unit 29155. Collectively, these activities—and the Western-led efforts to combat them—have been referred to as marking the beginning of the Second Cold War. The European Union went through several crises. The European debt crisis caused severe economic problems to several eurozone member states, most notably Greece. The 2015 migration crisis led to several million people entering the EU illegally in a short period of time. There was a significant rise in the vote shares of several eurosceptic parties, including the League in Italy, Alternative for Germany, and the Finns Party in Finland. As a result of a referendum, the United Kingdom became the first member state in the EU's history to leave the Union. Socio-political polarisation increased as conservatives and social liberals clashed over the role and size of government and other social, economic and environmental issues in the West. In the United States, polls showed a divided electorate regarding healthcare reform, immigration, gun rights, taxation, job creation, and debt reduction. In Europe, movements protesting increasing numbers of refugees and migrants from Islamic countries developed, such as the English Defence League and Pegida. The trend of polarisation in the West was partially influenced by the prevalence of identity politics, both left-wing and right-wing, among activist movements. Beginning around 2011, far-left and progressive concepts such as combating social inequality and economic inequality, often via progressive stack tactics, proliferated in the Western world and elsewhere. Around the middle of the decade, phenomenon such as white nationalism, identitarianism and emboldened feelings of nativism saw a marked reemergence in the West due to drastically increased migration and corresponding crime and amongst both the right and left general dissatisfaction with Western government and Media responses to certain issues. There were also increased calls for egalitarianism, including between the sexes, and some scholars assert that a fourth wave of feminism began around 2012, with a primary focus on intersectionality. Populism in politics saw a widespread surge throughout the decade, with many politicians and various political movements expressing populist sentiments and utilising populist rhetoric. This included conservative wave phenomenon in Latin America and neo-nationalist fervor in Europe and North America. The 2019 European Parliament election saw the highest voter turnout in two decades and saw relatively moderate centre-right and centre-left parties suffer significant losses to less moderate far-right, environmentalist, and both pro-EU and eurosceptic parties, who made gains. Examples of 2010s populist movements included the Tea Party movement, Occupy Wall Street, Brexit, Black Lives Matter, and the alt-right. Examples of populist country leaders were just as extensive, with Donald Trump, Narendra Modi, Andrés Manuel López Obrador, Hugo Chávez, Matteo Salvini, Jair Bolsonaro, Rodrigo Duterte, and Boris Johnson, left and right-wing, described as such. Related to the rise of populism and protests movements was the decline of traditional political parties. In Europe, pasokification described the loss of vote share experienced by traditional centre-left or social democratic parties. In France, specifically, Emmanuel Macron's La République En Marche! party won a majority in its first election in 2017. Centre-left, neoliberal and traditional social democratic parties often lost their vote share to more socialist or democratic socialist alternatives, especially in Europe. This happened most completely in Greece, where PASOK was replaced by Syriza as the main left-wing party. Other far-left parties which rose in prominence included Podemos in Spain and La France Insoumise in France. In the two-party systems of the English-speaking world, these challenges mainly came from within the established parties of the left, with Bernie Sanders in the Democratic Party and Jeremy Corbyn in the Labour Party pushing for more left-wing policies. The political establishment was also challenged in many countries by protest movements, often organised through new social media platforms. These included the various Arab Spring protests, the Occupy movement, and the yellow vests movement. Countries which democratised fully or partially during the decade included Angola, which reformed under João Lourenço; Armenia, which went through a revolution; Ecuador, which reformed under Lenín Moreno; Ethiopia; and Malaysia, where the ruling party lost the first election since independence. Long-term dictators ousted from power included Muammar Gaddafi of Libya (after 42 years), Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe (37 years), Ali Abdullah Saleh of Yemen (33 years), Omar al-Bashir of Sudan (30 years), Hosni Mubarak of Egypt (29 years), and Ben Ali of Tunisia (23 years). Democratic backsliding occurred in countries such as Hungary, Venezuela, and Turkey. The Arab Winter refers to the resurgence of authoritarianism, absolute monarchies and Islamic extremism evolving in the aftermath of the Arab Spring protests in Arab countries. The term "Arab Winter" refers to the events across Arab League countries in the Mid-East and North Africa, including the Syrian Civil War, the Iraqi insurgency and the following civil war, the Egyptian Crisis, the Libyan Crisis and the Crisis in Yemen. Events referred to as the Arab Winter include those in Egypt that led to the removal of Mohamed Morsi and the seizure of power by General Abdel Fattah el-Sisi in an anti-Muslim Brotherhood campaign. In 2018, China's National People's Congress approved a constitutional change that removed term limits for its leaders, granting Xi Jinping the status of "leader for life". Xi is the General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party (de facto leader). Sitting world leaders such as Hugo Chávez of Venezuela, Muammar Gaddafi of Libya, Kim Jong-il of North Korea, Abdullah of Saudi Arabia, Lech Kaczyński of Poland, Zillur Rahman of Bangladesh, Islam Karimov of Uzbekistan and Beji Caid Essebsi of Tunisia, all died in office, as did former leaders Fidel Castro, Lee Kuan Yew, Nelson Mandela, Margaret Thatcher, Robert Mugabe, Giulio Andreotti, Francesco Cossiga, Oscar Luigi Scalfaro, Carlo Azeglio Ciampi, Jacques Chirac, Helmut Schmidt, Helmut Kohl, Hussain Mohammad Ershad, Mohamed Morsi, Ariel Sharon, Shimon Peres, Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani, Zine El Abidine Ben Ali, Václav Havel, Malcolm Fraser, Bob Hawke, B. J. Habibie, Yasuhiro Nakasone, Alan García, Jorge Rafael Videla, Néstor Kirchner, Fernando de la Rúa, Patricio Aylwin, Itamar Franco, A. P. J. Abdul Kalam, Atal Bihari Vajpayee and George H. W. Bush. Coups d'état against ruling governments during the decade include: The following tables of events is listed by the region and by chronological order. The prominent political events include, but are not limited to: 2010 – 2011 – 2012 – 2013 – 2014 – 2015 – 2016 – 2017 – 2018 – 2019 Prominent assassinations, targeted killings, and assassination attempts include: On 10 April 2010 a Tupolev Tu-154 aircraft of the Polish Air Force crashed in Russia with the Polish President Lech Kaczynski and 95 other passengers including many senior officials For over 15 months it was unclear what exactly happened to Malaysia Airlines Flight 370 until at the end of July 2015 a few remnants of the plane swept to the shores of the island of Réunion View of Notre-Dame Cathedral on fire as seen from Quai de Montebello in Paris The global economy during the 2010s was generally strong. It saw steady growth, low unemployment, and increasing consumer confidence recovering from the great recession. The decade ended with a strong finish, with 2019 seeing record highs in many areas. A sovereign-debt crisis in Europe began in early 2010, and the Greek government admitted that it was having difficulties servicing its large sovereign debt. In the summer and fall of 2011, bond yields for Italy and Spain spiked above 6 percent. By 2015 bond rates had returned to normal ranges across Europe, save for Greece, which accepted another, even more stringent bailout package. The size of the European Financial Stability Facility was increased from €440 billion to €2 trillion. Despite the Eurozone debt crisis, the American Dow Jones Industrial Average had its longest stretch of gains since the late 1990s tech boom. However, economic issues, including inflation and an increase in commodity prices, sparked unrest in many lower-income countries. In some countries, particularly those in the Arab world, political unrest evolved into socioeconomic crises, resulting in the Arab Spring leading to political instability and civil wars. As a result of the global recession, many central banks instituted a zero interest-rate policy, or close to it. Another form of monetary stimulus was that of quantitative easing. The resulting flood of market liquidity caused a rise in asset prices. As a result, for example, United States stock prices reached record highs. Another consequence has been the rise in housing prices in many major world cities. Some of the cities which recorded the most dramatic rises included Sydney, San Francisco, Vancouver, and Auckland. In 2010, China became the second largest global economy, surpassing Japan. Japan also saw a rating downgrade the following year due to debt burden. In August 2011, the S&P downgraded the United States' credit rating from triple AAA to AA-plus following a debt ceiling crisis. Also in 2011, a Gallup poll found that more than half of Americans believed the country was still in a recession. In June 2015, the Shanghai Stock Exchange lost a third of the value of A-shares within one month, an event known as the 2015–16 Chinese stock market turbulence. India became the fastest growing major economy of the world in 2015, surpassing China. In 2018, as the U.S. Federal Reserve raised interest rates, fears of a yield curve inversion preceding a potential U.S. recession sent inflation higher in several emerging markets, including Argentina, where interest rates hit 40% and an International Monetary Fund bail out was issued. In 2019, Singapore supplanted the United States as the world's most competitive economy, with the U.S. dropping to third, behind Hong Kong. Global oil production in 2014 reached a historic peak, reaching 93 million barrels/day. In 2018, partially due to a shale boom, the United States overcame Russia and Saudi Arabia in becoming the world's largest crude oil producer, the first time since 1973. Around the year 2017 is a period seen by some economists as being the new peak of a "goldilocks economy". The International Monetary Fund's April 2019 World Economic Outlook stated, "After peaking at close to 4 percent in 2017, global [economic] growth remained strong, at 3.8 percent in the first half of 2018, but dropped to 3.2 percent in the second half of the year." In 2018, United States President Donald Trump announced he would put into place new tariffs on some Chinese products, starting the 'US-China Trade War', an economic conflict involving the world's two largest economies. Trump said the reasoning for the trade war is to punish China for 'unfair' trade practices, such as the appropriation of jobs and the theft of American intellectual property. China responded with tariffs of its own, and a cycle began, escalating the conflict to the situation faced today. As part of his 'America First' policy, Trump also announced new tariffs were being placed on countries around the world for various products such as steel and aluminium, which has drawn some economic retaliation. By the end of the decade, in North American and some Western European domestic economies, consumer-level purchasing habits had shifted significantly, a partial consequence of the Great Recession's impact on discretionary incomes and a shifting breadwinner model. The so-called "retail apocalypse" had commenced as consumers increasingly resorted to online shopping and e-commerce, accelerating the decline of brick-and-mortar retail and the continued decline of indoor shopping malls. The transitioning retail industry and popularity of online shopping facilitated economic phenomena such as bricks and clicks business models, pop-up and non-store retailing, drone delivery services, ghost restaurants, and a quickly maturing online food ordering and delivery service sector. This was only further perpetuated by the rise in cryptocurrency throughout the decade, such as Bitcoin. By May 2018, over 1,800 cryptocurrency specifications existed. In the same vein as cryptocurrency, the trend towards a cashless society continued as non-cash transactions and digital currency saw an increase in favourability in the 2010s. By 2016, only about 2 percent of the value transacted in Sweden was by cash, and only about 20 percent of retail transactions were in cash. Fewer than half of bank branches in the country conducted cash transactions. A report published in 2019 suggested that the percentage of payments conducted in cash in the United Kingdom had fallen to 34% from 63% from 2009. The 2016 United States User Consumer Survey Study claimed that 75 percent of respondents preferred a credit card or debit card as their payment method while only 11 percent of respondents preferred cash. Two of the most prominent deaths in the scientific community during the decade were Neil Armstrong in 2012 and Stephen Hawking in 2018. Below are the most significant scientific developments of each year, based on the annual Breakthrough of the Year award of the American Association for the Advancement of Science journal Science. 2010: The first quantum machine 2011: HIV treatment as prevention (HPTN 052) 2012: Discovery of the Higgs boson 2013: Cancer immunotherapy 2014: Rosetta comet mission 2015: CRISPR genome-editing method 2016: The Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory makes the first observation of gravitational waves, fulfilling Einstein's prediction 2017: Cosmic convergence: Neutron star merger (GW170817) 2018: Development cell by cell 2019: First black hole image released The late 2000s saw the rise of two prominent mobile operating systems, the Android developed by Google and the iOS developed by Apple. Robotics, particularly drones like quadcopters, experienced a wide use and application in the 2010s. Autonomous and electric car technology and sales showed considerable growth as well. In addition, sustainable space launch technologies were spearheaded by entrepreneurs like Elon Musk. In 2016, the number of people globally using mobile devices to access the internet overtook those using desktop computers for the first time, having been preceded by the U.S. two years prior in 2014. 3D printers also emerged in the 2010s and were referenced or used in pop culture during the decade. In 2018, during the Falcon Heavy test flight, the first production car was launched into space. The car was attached to the Falcon Heavy rocket, the most powerful rocket in operation at the time. The 2010s saw the release of smaller and earlier iPhone iterations, as during the 2010s newer smartphones began to replace Clamshell designed phones. Phones of the 2010s mostly saw the usage of 3G and 4G technologies. Many earlier iPhones would be released bundled with wired earbuds. DVDs continued to be used throughout the 2010s decade, as new DVD rental pop-ups like Redbox appeared. Here are Nintendo DS and 3DS cartridges as would be used to play handheld video games during the decade, before the later release of the hybrid Nintendo Switch system. Cyber security incidents, such as hacking, leaks or theft of sensitive information, gained increased attention of governments, corporations and individuals. AIDS, a pandemic responsible for killing over 30 million people since its discovery in the early 1980s, especially in sub-Saharan Africa, became a treatable condition, though by the end of the decade only two cases had been cured. With good treatment patients can generally expect normal lives and lifespans. However, as of 2011[update] only some 5 million of the 12 million affected people had access to such treatment. During the 2010s, social changes included increases in life expectancy and falling birth rates leading to larger proportions of the population being elderly. This put pressure on pensions and other social security programs in developed nations. The environment became a topic of greater public concern around the world. Many parts of the world moved towards greater acceptance of LGBT people often including the legalisation of same-sex marriage. The internet took an ever greater role in entertainment, communication, politics and commerce, especially for younger people and those living in wealthier countries. In 2011, the world population reached seven billion people. Netflix, one of the first streaming services to release, which for a fee gave users access to a portfolio of films and television. Netflix rose to prominence from around the middle part of the 2010s onwards. Silly Bandz, a piece of pop culture and fashion wear in the early 2010s. They were often traded and worn by school children. Disney, Pixar, and Illumination led CGI films during the decade, making some of the highest-grossing movies of all time like Toy Story 3, Frozen, Incredibles 2 and Despicable Me. Other studios released CGI films like The Lego Movie and Spider-Man: Into The Spider-Verse. The Big Bang Theory, which was popular in the 2010s, became the top sitcom throughout its airing on CBS. The show featured numerous pop-culture figures from science and tech, including Bill Gates, Buzz Aldrin, and Elon Musk. A young child spinning a fidget spinner, one of the most popular toys of the decade from spring and summer of 2017, joining novelty toys of the 2010s such as the fidget cube. The Nintendo 3DS, a portable 3D gaming device that contained glasses-free 3D and was released during the height of the 3D fad in the 2010s. Its flagship title was Super Mario 3D Land. Smartphones and tablets started to replace flip-phones and become mainstream. They could be used to play games, make telephone calls, download music, and check the Internet. The iPad was first introduced in 2010 by Steve Jobs, who later died in 2011. The Wii (Wii Mini c. 2013 pictured) was a popular gaming console in the 2010s which influenced the Microsoft Kinect and PlayStation Move. One of the most critically acclaimed games of the decade, Super Mario Galaxy 2, released on the Wii. A cultural shift was that social media heavily took over. For really the first time in history, US presidents like Barack Obama and Donald Trump could communicate directly to citizens via applications like Facebook, Twitter and Instagram. A self-balancing scooter. These devices (also named hoverboards at the time) attracted much attention and curiosity around 2015 on the Internet from appearing on shows such as Jimmy Fallon and Conan. Fedora hats were popular at the beginning of the 2010s, worn here by Bruno Mars in 2011, singer of "Uptown Funk" (the Billboard Hot 100's #1 song of the 2010s). A public stop or "Pokéstop" for the game Pokémon Go. The game made use of AR, or augmented reality, and became huge in the summer of 2016. Two men using cell phones placed inside VR headsets in 2018. The same year Steven Spielberg's Ready Player One released, which featured Vive Virtual Reality headsets and helped advance motion capture. The eighth generation of video game consoles like PlayStation 4 (pictured), Xbox One, and Nintendo Switch were released in 2013 and 2017. These systems popularized games like The Last of Us, The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild, Super Mario Odyssey, Mario Kart 8, Minecraft and Grand Theft Auto V. A cosplayer dressed as the character Ramona Flowers from the 2010 movie Scott Pilgrim vs. the World, which helped popularize the e-girl aesthetic seen in the late 2010s. In the late 2010s, vaping became popular. Fruit-flavored vape cartridges could be purchased as well, and became highly controversial. Vaporwave was a 2010s music genre that attracted attention. Lofi hip hop was also new and grew a following. Floral Shoppe and Lofi Girl helped define these genres of the 2010s. A group of teens dabbing, a popular fad and gesture of the youth around 2015–2016. Dabbing was the most prominent dance trend of the 2010s, which joined such dances as Flossing and the Harlem Shake. A group of emojis. The 2010s saw the first usage of modern emoticons or "emojis" which were often on the operating systems of phones and computers. With the infancy of mobile gaming stores in the early 2010s, apps like Doodle Jump, Angry Birds and Cut the Rope became hits, with the success of apps like Smash Hit and Pokémon Go coming later on. The EDM scene obtained commercial success as seen with songs like "Party Rock Anthem" by LMFAO. The early 2010s had a unique party culture that was inspired by EDM. In the 2010s indie artists gained much wider traction online. A few popular indie artists of the decade included talents such as Mitski (pictured), Gotye, Mac DeMarco, Tame Impala, and Foster the People. Five Olympic Games were held in the 2010s: Vancouver in 2010, London in 2012, Sochi in 2014, Rio de Janeiro in 2016 and Pyeongchang in 2018. From the mid-to-late 2000s to the early 2010s the aesthetic known as Frutiger Aero was popular. The aesthetic was seen in the releases of iOS 4, iOS 5, and iOS 6. Above is a computer desktop screen circa March 2011. Fashion of the 2010s became slimmer-fit and slightly more formal compared to previous decades. In addition, people's handheld devices such as cellphones (and their colorful cases), selfie sticks (for a brief period during the middle of the decade), tech-like Beats headphones, smart watches, wired and by the end of the decade wireless ear buds, as well as handheld gaming systems became more prevalent personal items. The decade was also defined by new hipster fashion (hipster styles were marked by the wearing of knit beanies, checkered shirts, and clothes from thrift stores; as well as hobbies like horticulture, photography, and specialty coffee) athleisure, and a revival of austerity-era and other nostalgic alternative fashion trends (such as 1980s-style neon streetwear in the first part of the decade, and unisex 1990s-style elements influenced by grunge). In 2018, a subculture of "e-kids" came into existence, whom took their style from Japanese street fashion, cosplay, skater aesthetic, and other pieces of pop culture. In contrast to the colorful subculture of "e-kids" later in the decade, the early 2010s saw the Emo revival. Political fashion became a genre of fashion starting around 2016, as people wore hats like MAGA hats (popularized by political outsider, prior TV-star and businessman President Donald Trump), as well as the Pussyhat. These two pieces of fashion wear would be popularized in the 2010s in popular culture on television and further, but would become controversial in their own right. The decade sparked many smaller fashion movements, notable examples including Cottagecore and Normcore (a notable icon of Normcore in the 2010s was Steve Jobs, whom represented the decade's casual clothing). Fad toys and accessories like the Fidget spinner, Silly Bandz, and Shutter shades each had waves of popularity among youth throughout the decade. Funko Pops were a collectible fad during the 2010s. Internet users grew from covering 29% to 54% of the world population. Over the course of the 2010s, Baidu, Twitter and Instagram emerged to become among the top 10 most visited websites (becoming the 4th, 6th and 8th most popular websites by the end of the decade), while Wikipedia went the 9th to 5th most popular website, almost sextupling its monthly visits (from 1 to 5.7 billion). Meanwhile, Yahoo significantly declined in popularity, descending from being the 1st to 9th most popular site, with monthly visits declining by two-thirds (going from 11.6 to 3.9 billion). Google, Facebook, YouTube and Yandex maintained relatively consistent popularity and remained within the top 10 throughout the decade. In January 2010, James Cameron's Avatar surpassed $1 billion in sales, becoming the first movie of the decade to do so, and surpassed $2 billion in sales by February 2010. The following year, Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 became one of the fastest grossing films of all time, and became the highest-grossing film of 2011. 2019's Joker became the first R rated movie to gross over $1 billion and cemented itself in popular culture by making the "Joker Stairs" a famous tourist destination in New York City at the end of the decade. Motion capture grew in terms of its realism and reach, and was seen in movies like Steven Spielberg's Ready Player One, Pirates of the Caribbean, The Avengers, and The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey. Superhero films became box office leaders, especially with the start of The Infinity Saga of the Marvel Cinematic Universe in 2008 with movies such as the Avengers franchise. Avengers: Infinity War was the first superhero film to gross over $2 billion internationally, broke numerous box office records, became the highest-grossing film of 2018, and the 4th-highest-grossing film of all time. Avengers: Endgame grossed over $2.7 billion worldwide, surpassed Infinity War's entire theatrical run in just eleven days, broke numerous box office records, and became the highest-grossing film of all time. Marvel's main competitor, DC Extended Universe also began to produce superhero films starting in 2013, with films such as Shazam! releasing in 2019. Non-shared universe superhero films have also been successful with the release of The Dark Knight Rises in addition to animated films such as Incredibles 2, Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse, The Lego Batman Movie, The SpongeBob Movie: Sponge Out of Water, and many others. The epic space-opera franchise Star Wars saw a resurgence throughout its decade with the third trilogy aka the sequel trilogy of the franchise and the final act of the "Skywalker Saga". These films include Star Wars: The Force Awakens, Star Wars: The Last Jedi, and Star Wars: The Rise of Skywalker with all of them raking in over $4 billion with the first movie became the 3rd highest-grossing film of all time at its release. The science fiction Universal franchise Jurassic Park also saw a resurgence and popularity with the release of Jurassic World and Jurassic World: Fallen Kingdom. Both of these films each garnered over $1 billion in revenue with the first film became the 3rd highest-grossing film of all time and the second film became the 12th highest-grossing film of all time. Critical reception of the first movie was positive while the second movie had mixed reviews from critics and negative reviews from fans. The action racing heist spy franchise The Fast and the Furious continued on from the 2000s and became commercially successful in the 2010s becoming one of Universal's biggest franchises besides Jurassic Park and was the eighth highest-grossing film series. Films include Fast Five, Fast & Furious 6, Furious 7, and The Fate of the Furious. The horror film It, which was based on the novel of the same name by Stephen King, became the highest-grossing horror film of all time. 2018 saw the acclaimed Halloween sequel, Halloween (2018), the 11th installment of the Halloween franchise and sequel to the first film, Halloween (1978). Disney, Pixar, DreamWorks, Illumination, and Sony Pictures Animation have dominated the animated films market and have also gained popularity in this decade. The highest-grossing and critically successful franchises included Toy Story, Frozen, Wreck-It-Ralph, Hotel Transylvania, The Lego Movie, and Despicable Me being the highest grossing animated franchise of all time. The 2010s saw the release of many Disney live-action remakes based on Disney animated movies: Alice in Wonderland, Alice Through the Looking Glass, The Sorcerer's Apprentice, Maleficent, Maleficent: Mistress of Evil, Lady and the Tramp, Christopher Robin, Dumbo, The Jungle Book, Cinderella, Beauty and the Beast, Aladdin, and The Lion King. Many of these movies were met with mixed reviews from critics and audiences but were financially successful at the box office, especially The Lion King which grossed over $1.6 billion and became the 7th-highest-grossing film of all time as well as the 2nd-highest-grossing film of 2019. The decade also saw many popular and critically acclaimed theatrical releases of varying genres, such as The Social Network, Her, 12 Years a Slave, Boyhood, Me and Earl and the Dying Girl, The Edge of Seventeen, The Fault in Our Stars, The Wolf of Wall Street, The Perks of Being a Wallflower, The Grand Budapest Hotel, Easy A, 21 Jump Street, Eighth Grade, Steve Jobs, Lady Bird, Green Book, Get Out, Parasite, Love, Simon, Once Upon a Time in Hollywood, and Uncut Gems. While Jimmy Kimmel was hosting the Oscars in 2017, a live error was made in which the Best Picture winner was incorrectly stated as La La Land. It was later found out that the wrong envelope was handed to the presenters, and the Best Picture was Moonlight. This came after Steve Harvey's live error during the 2015 Miss Universe Pageant, in which the wrong contestant was accidentally deemed Miss Universe (in 2015 then presidential candidate Donald Trump sold his ownership of Miss Universe). The critically acclaimed movies of the 2010s mentioned above set new precedents. Movies like Boyhood (2014) were filmed over the span of a decade in real time to show the growth and childhood of a young boy, and Uncut Gems (2019) brought Adam Sandler back to a wide screen release and was critically acclaimed, while teenage movies like The Edge of Seventeen (2016), Me and Earl and the Dying Girl (2015), The Fault in Our Stars (2014), and The Perks of Being a Wallflower (2012) gained large popularity. Her (2013) became Spike Jonze's highest grossing and most critically acclaimed movie, noted for its filming locations and art direction, Parasite (2019) became the first foreign film to win best picture, and movies like Ready Player One (2018) helped advance motion capture technologies (winning two Outstanding Achievement Awards from the Visuals Effects Society and a Saturn Award for Best Science Fiction Film), in addition to becoming one of Spielberg's highest-grossing films. The 2010s decade is often said to be a part of the Golden Age of Television, due to the widespread quality of multiple shows, as well as advancements in technology leading to streaming, cable television, and online outlets bringing this quality and quantity of programming. Cable providers saw a decline in subscriber numbers as cord-cutting viewers switched to lower-cost online streaming services such as Netflix, Amazon Prime, and Hulu. On cable television, as well as streaming services, a variety of shows gained popularity. The comedy sitcom The Big Bang Theory ran for the entirety of the decade, and was the number-one television sitcom for all of its airing prior to its finale in 2019. Other sitcoms like Curb Your Enthusiasm, Will & Grace, The Office, Scrubs: Med School, and Netflix's Trailer Park Boys and its Out Of The Park: USA and Out Of The Park: Europe specials were popular in the 2010s. How I Met Your Mother (narrated by Bob Saget) gained controversy for its 2014 finale, "Last Forever", which sparked an alternate finale to be created for the show, a television-first. Cult shows like the dark comedy sitcom It's Always Sunny in Philadelphia carried its popularity from the 2000s and lasted through the entirety of the 2010s. CBS's Two Broke Girls began its run in 2011 (ending in 2017), its pilot being the highest watched on the network in a decade. In 2011, Charlie Sheen was fired from Two and a Half Men, who made his last appearance in the show in Season 8 during February 2011. Sheen's 2011 outbursts and firing from the show were highly publicized. Indian sitcom Taarak Mehta Ka Ooltah Chashmah became the world's longest-running sitcom, with over 2,500 episodes, Dramas like Breaking Bad (2008–2013), The Walking Dead (2010–2022), Game of Thrones (2011–2019) and the Breaking Bad spin-off Better Call Saul (2015–2022) became some of the most popular American television series of all time. Stranger Things gained a massive following during the decade among teen and youth, and 2019's Stranger Things 3 gained even more recognition for the character of Robin Buckley, who was popularized online. Science fiction television gained a renewed sense of interest, thanks in part to Seth MacFarlane's The Orville and its second season which aired on Fox between 2017 and 2019, inspired by and parading the Star Trek franchise. Black Mirror was popularized on Netflix after being broadcast on British television. Science nonfiction such as Cosmos: A Spacetime Odyssey joined the lineup on Fox. A new era of family television and tween television existed in the 2010s, sitcoms of which were mainly spearheaded by Disney and Nickelodeon, but also appeared on cable channels such as ABC (The Middle on ABC for example) and on streaming services like Netflix. Shows such as Nickelodeon's iCarly and Victorious, and Disney's Girl Meets World were notable examples of popular shows among tween and youth throughout the 2010s. The short-lived 2018 revival of Roseanne (a family sitcom on ABC) gained attention for the firing of its main star Roseanne Barr and her outbursts. Reality television grew an increased following during the decade. Kitchen Nightmares, Hell's Kitchen (UK), and Hotel Hell gained popularity on cable television, as well as getting millions of views on YouTube, making Gordon Ramsay a prominent celebrity chef. America's Got Talent drew in viewers when radio personality Howard Stern announced his joining of the show in late 2011, staying as host until 2015. Meanwhile, popular reality programming on ABC included What Would You Do?, Shark Tank and The Bachelor. Corinne Olympios also gained recognition on the 2017 season of The Bachelor for her behavior on set. American Idol remained popular into the beginning of the decade, as did The Voice. Impractical Jokers flourished throughout the 2010s, gaining exposure on YouTube and elsewhere. TMZ became a popular television show and news source in the 2010s on cable television and YouTube respectively. A genre of pawn shows emerged like Pawn Stars and Hardcore Pawn. The Apprentice was a reality television show that starred media personality and businessman Donald Trump as host until 2015, at which time resigning as host. Trump would use the success he gained on The Apprentice to run for President of the United States; which he was elected to in 2016. Additionally, programs such as The Celebrity Apprentice, Comedy Central's The Roast Of Donald Trump, and Donald Trump's November 2015 hosting of Saturday Night Live, would send the reality TV star and businessman into the spotlight to help win the U.S. presidency. Governor in the early 2010s and movie star Arnold Schwarzenegger took Trump's place on The Celebrity Apprentice. Popular cartoons were dominated by Nickelodeon, Cartoon Network, and Disney Channel during the decade. Popular cartoons of the 2010s included the likes of SpongeBob SquarePants, Adventure Time, The Loud House, Arthur, Regular Show, Steven Universe, Phineas and Ferb, Gravity Falls, The Amazing World of Gumball, and My Little Pony: Friendship Is Magic (which, under its G4 status, became a pop culture phenomenon in its own right, thanks to its controversial, but loyal cult following known as "Bronies" who peaked in 2012–2015). SpongeBob SquarePants also made headlines for the petition and attempts to get "Sweet Victory" played at the 2019 Super Bowl after the passing of its series creator Stephen Hillenburg. Nickelodeon brought back three classic Nicktoons; Hey Arnold!, Rocko's Modern Life (which was themed around late 2010s culture), and Invader Zim near the end of the decade, turning them into reboot films. Anime broadened its appeal worldwide with shows such as Attack on Titan, Madoka Magica, Mob Psycho 100, Fairy Tail, KonoSuba, Food Wars!, Haikyu!!, Sailor Moon Crystal, One Piece, Bleach, Hunter × Hunter, One Punch Man, Little Witch Academia, Devilman Crybaby, My Hero Academia, JoJo's Bizzarre Adventure, and Steins;Gate, separately Japanese reality shows like Terrace House: Boys & Girls in the City reached new and international audiences because of the use of the internet and streaming services (it was Netflix's first international release and one of their earliest international releases). As a result of anime's international popularity it has inspired many creators outside of Japan to create their own shows incorporating anime characteristics. Anime elements can be seen in shows like The Boondocks. Anime was also viewed on services of the era like Crunchyroll. Newer adult animation grew rapidly throughout the decade with shows such as Rick and Morty, F Is for Family, BoJack Horseman, Superjail! (continuing from the 2000s), Bob's Burgers, among many others; while adult animation like Family Guy, Futurama, South Park, The Simpsons, Robot Chicken, and 2011's Beavis and Butt-Head have remained popular. The video streaming website YouTube became popular, especially among younger people, as memes shifted the meaning of entertainment. Memes like Nyan Cat, Dat Boi, "We Are Number One", Trollface, Pepe the Frog, Bottle flipping, Condescending Wonka (Gene Wilder died in 2016), Creepypastas and others emerged on YouTube; the use of YouTube and the internet also lead to new and popular vernacular like: poggers, bae, Netflix and chill, and "on fleek". Initially (early in the decade) channels like Fred Figglehorn (FRED), The Annoying Orange, Ray William Johnson, CollegeHumor, Smosh, PewDiePie and the Angry Video Game Nerd attracted millions of views, channels and videos becoming viral on the site. The popularity of YouTubers even ended up spawning films based on popular YouTubers, including Angry Video Game Nerd: The Movie (2014), Smosh: The Movie (2015), and the Fred Trilogy (2010–2012) starting with Fred: The Movie. These YouTubers became well known through comedic skits, video game reviews, and "Let's Play" videos, as Angry Video Game Nerd reviewed games like Sonic The Hedgehog for the Xbox 360, and Life of Black Tiger for the PlayStation 4, which AVGN reviewed in a video featuring Gilbert Gottfried, Smosh would upload skits like "FOOD BATTLE" and Pewdiepie would play games such as Five Nights at Freddy's. Other YouTubers that constantly received views within the millions or went viral during the decade included the likes of bill wurtz for his "history of japan" and "history of the entire world i guess" videos (and music like "and the day goes on"), Swoozie, Etika (and his fanbase the "JOYCONBOYZ"), REACT, WatchMojo, The Joe Rogan Experience, The Nostalgia Critic, Studio C, Babish Culinary Universe, Good Mythical Morning, Penguinz0, Vsauce, CGP Gray, Kurzgesagt, Matpat, MrBeast, Scott the Woz, TheOdd1sOut, Domics, and Jaiden Animations among many others. YouTube itself would even end up banning controversial content creators like ImJayStation and LeafyIsHere during the decade. YouTube would make an annual video series called YouTube Rewind where it would be a recap of each year's YouTubers, viral videos, trends, events, music and memes starting from 2010 to 2019. The 2018 and 2019 installments was heavily criticized by YouTubers, critics, and viewers alike, receiving millions of dislikes. Rewind did not return for 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and YouTube announced the following year that the series would be discontinued leading to other YouTubers to make their own YouTube Rewind videos. Globalism and an increased demand for variety and personalisation in the face of music streaming services such as Spotify and Apple Music created many new subgenres. US digital music sales topped CD sales in 2012. Dance, hip-hop, and pop music surged in the 2010s, with hip-hop and R&B surpassing rock as the biggest US music genre in 2018. Electronic dance music (EDM) achieved mass commercial success in the middle of the decade but fell somewhat into decline by the end. The mass global appeal of EDM music (and subgenres such as dubstep, electro house and trap) from the early-to-mid part of the decade spawned the rise in fame of DJs and digital music producers, such as Skrillex, Tiësto, Avicii, Steve Aoki, Deadmau5, Calvin Harris, Baauer and Diplo. Country music also saw a resurgence throughout the 2010s in the United States, with artists like Luke Bryan, Jason Aldean, Blake Shelton, Carrie Underwood, Eric Church, Kacey Musgraves, Chris Stapleton and Florida Georgia Line topping the charts and garnering many music industry awards. With the rise of the internet in the 2010s, independent music (or "indie music") gained a large international cult following, with successful indie bands being Foster the People, Dr. Dog, Tally Hall, Florence and The Machine, Beach House, alt-J, Of Monsters and Men, The National, Two Door Cinema Club, and M83; as well as successful indie solo artists being Tame Impala, Neil Cicierega, St. Vincent, Father John Misty, Ellie Goulding, Feist, Sufjan Stevens, Lana Del Rey, Justin Vernon and Lorde. Music artists like Taylor Swift, Lady Gaga, Justin Bieber, Katy Perry, Bruno Mars, Rihanna and Nicki Minaj (with their albums such as 1989, The Fame Monster, My World 2.0, Teenage Dream, Doo-Wops & Hooligans, Loud and Pink Friday respectively) increased the global commercial appeal of pop music in the 2010s, with each of them selling over 100 million records in the 2010s and becoming some of the best-selling musicians of all time. Billboard named Drake the top artist of the decade in the US. Other popular musical solo artists of the 2010s included Adele, Ed Sheeran, Beyoncé, Kanye West, Kendrick Lamar, J. Cole, The Weeknd, Frank Ocean, Ariana Grande, Miley Cyrus, Khalid, Sam Smith, Travis Scott, Cardi B, Future, Shawn Mendes, Post Malone, Kesha, Selena Gomez and Fetty Wap. Popular musical groups of the decade included One Direction, BTS, Imagine Dragons, Mumford & Sons, Arcade Fire, Twenty One Pilots, Migos, Swedish House Mafia, Bon Iver, Zac Brown Band, Maroon 5, Alabama Shakes, The Chainsmokers, OneRepublic, Vampire Weekend, The Lumineers, Lady A, Fun, 5 Seconds of Summer and Anthem Lights. Successful duos included The Black Keys, Run the Jewels, Matt and Kim, Rae Sremmurd, Love and Theft, LMFAO, Garfunkel and Oates and Dan + Shay. Several prominent musicians from past decades died in the 2010s, including Ronnie James Dio in 2010, Gil Scott-Heron and Amy Winehouse in 2011, Whitney Houston and Adam Yauch in 2012, Lou Reed in 2013, Joe Cocker in 2014, Ben E. King, B.B. King and Lemmy Kilmister in 2015, David Bowie, Glenn Frey, Phife Dawg, Merle Haggard, Prince, Pete Burns, Leonard Cohen and George Michael all in 2016, Chuck Berry, Chris Cornell, Prodigy and Tom Petty in 2017, Aretha Franklin in 2018, and Keith Flint in 2019. There were also several deaths of newer hip hop artists who had started or first became successful in the 2010s, including Capital Steez, Lil Peep, XXXTentacion, Mac Miller, Nipsey Hussle, Juice WRLD and others. The video game industry continued to be dominated by Nintendo, Sony, and Microsoft; Minecraft became the best-selling game of all time in 2019. Sony's PlayStation 4 and Microsoft's Xbox One were released in 2013, and in the United States the PlayStation 4 became the highest-selling console of the decade, surpassing Nintendo, releasing games such as Marvel's Spider-Man, God of War, Uncharted 4, The Last of Us, and Bloodborne. The Nintendo Switch launched in 2017 and was responsible for bringing Nintendo's success back, the success of the console initially spawned by the strong sales of both The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild and Super Mario Odyssey, as well as Wii U ports/sequels with Super Mario Maker (Wii U) and Super Mario Maker 2 (Nintendo Switch), Splatoon (Wii U) and Splatoon 2 (Nintendo Switch), and updated "Deluxe" versions of Mario Kart 8 and New Super Mario Bros. U, among many others. Micro-consoles also emerged during the decade, a notable example being the Ouya, a system which was a commercial and critical failure that received attention online. Handheld gaming console revenue was overtaken by mobile gaming revenue in 2011, due to the rise of smartphones and freemium apps. The use of iPods, tablets, and cell phones became one of the most popular forms of gaming as the decade progressed with the rise of mobile games, expanding the industry's appeal among less traditional markets such as women and older adults. Gaming apps such as Angry Birds, Cut the Rope, Plants vs. Zombies, Fruit Ninja, Candy Crush, Flappy Bird, Clash of Clans, Temple Run, Smash Hit, Doodle Jump, Geometry Dash, Subway Surfers, and Pokémon Go became huge hits. The popularity of video games increased across the world, as the Nintendo Wii influenced gaming in the early part of the decade, and the Nintendo 3DS provided 3D gaming through autostereoscopy. The successful Wii was followed by the Wii U in 2012, a commercial failure. Ports and sequels to Wii U games on the Nintendo Switch would sell considerably better than their Wii U counterparts, and even though well-received games like Super Mario 3D World and Nintendo Land released on Wii U, the console still ultimately failed due to poor marketing and public confusion. The Nintendo Wii would be responsible for the most critically acclaimed game of the 2010s decade, Super Mario Galaxy 2 (which is also often considered one of the greatest video games of all time by game critics). The Wii (and later to a lesser extent the Wii U) would singlehandedly cause the increased use of motion controls in gaming with its Wii line up of games such as Wii Play: Motion, Wii Fit U, Wii Sports Club, Wii Party and Wii Party U, all released in the 2010s. Motion controls would carry over to Nintendo Switch's Joy-Con in 2017, and would form the foundation of 2010's motion-based PlayStation Move and Xbox Kinect, counterparts and competitors to the Wii. In addition to Super Mario Galaxy 2, it is notable in mentioning that Nintendo Wii released a large group of critically acclaimed games in the early 2010s with popular titles such as Kirby's Epic Yarn, Donkey Kong Country Returns (both games later in the decade released on 3DS), The Legend of Zelda: Skyward Sword, and Sonic Colors; as well Portal 2 was a critical success on Xbox and PlayStation early in the decade. The 2010s marked the growth, release, and large expansion of the "Toys To Life" category. Brands such as Nintendo's Amiibo became massively popular, and allowed figurines to be bought which were scanned into games to level up, train your figurine, or receive goods for your figurine. The Amiibo skyrocketed in success due to the roster of figurines available for Super Smash Bros. for Nintendo 3DS and Wii U, with many posting videos of them online going "amiibo hunting" mostly around late 2014 and 2015. Skylanders and Disney Infinity also remained popular at the time, as fads. The Nintendo Labo released in 2018, was also a part of the "Toys To Life" brand of video games, using cardboard to create objects such as a fishing pole, a crank, and a race-car wheel to be played with games. By the early 2010s online gaming had become a mainstay of console platforms such as Xbox and PlayStation. During the 2010s, as the number of Internet users increased, two new video game genres rapidly gained worldwide popularity – battle royales and multiplayer online battle arenas (MOBA). Both designed exclusively for multiplayer gameplay over on the Internet. First-person shooters genre were also popular genre before and during the decade. These genres are commonly played in Esports. Professional gaming, also known as Esports, although was well known in the 2000s, it became tremendously big incurring a large increase in both viewership and prize money. By the late 2010s, it was estimated that the total audience of esports would grow to 454 million viewers, with revenue increasing to more than US$1 billion, with China accounting for 35% of the global esports revenue in 2020. The increasing availability of online streaming media platforms, particularly YouTube and Twitch, have become central to the growth and promotion of esports competitions. Since the 2010s, a common trend among online games has been operating them as games as a service, using monetization schemes such as loot boxes and battle passes as purchasable items atop freely-offered games. Unlike purchased retail games, online games have the problem of not being permanently playable, as they require special servers in order to function. YouTube and Twitch became a platform for "Let's Players" to upload videos of themselves playing certain games, which led to the popularity of existing games and newer indie games like Cuphead, Undertale, Terraria, Octodad/Octodad: Dadliest Catch, Shovel Knight, Stardew Valley, and Five Nights at Freddy's (indie games like Cuphead were lauded for its rubber hose animation style, while Undertale's soundtrack like "Megalovania" came to light and Five Nights At Freddy's became well known for its lore). "Let's Players" were even referenced in greater pop culture such as the 2014 episode Rehash on South Park, where Pewdiepie would be featured onto the show. Jimmy Kimmel would make a sketch parody on his YouTube channel where he would ridicule the "let's plays" culture which led to backlash from the gaming community. In the 2010s movies based on video game franchises became popular, grossing more and being talked about in the media and among fans more than ever before. Movies like Detective Pikachu starring Ryan Reynolds (which starred additional actors like Kathryn Newton as Lucy Stevens and Bill Nighy as Howard Clifford) broke box office records for movies based on game series at the time, while movies like Jim Carrey's debut in Sonic The Hedgehog created buzz in the media and on shows like Conan (where the film and its fans were satirized) in 2019 for the movie's depiction of a more realistic looking hedgehog character, which by demand of the fans, was changed into a more cartoon version of the titular character to much like and approval upon the November 2019 trailer and movie's release. In early 2018 Nintendo and Illumination jointly announced (after the 2015 reveal of Nintendo's planned Universal theme parks) that they were working on a Super Mario Bros. movie. The announcement by Nintendo and Illumination was met with internet speculation; the new Illumination Super Mario film replaced the Sony-Nintendo Super Mario film that was leaked during the 2014 Sony Pictures hack. Video game themed movies became popular as well, with films such as Ready Player One, Pixels, Scott Pilgrim vs. the World, Wreck-It Ralph, Jumanji: Welcome to the Jungle and Jumanji: The Next Level. The best-selling games of every year throughout this decade were as follows: 2010: Call of Duty: Black Ops 2011: Call of Duty: Modern Warfare 3 2012: Call of Duty: Black Ops II 2013: Grand Theft Auto V 2014: Call of Duty: Advanced Warfare 2015: Call of Duty: Black Ops III 2016: Call of Duty: Infinite Warfare 2017: Call of Duty: WWII 2018: Red Dead Redemption 2 2019: Call of Duty: Modern Warfare The best-selling book of the decade was Fifty Shades of Grey, having sold 15.2 million copies in the United States. The following is a list of the 10 best-selling books of the decade. Note that global data is unavailable and this is limited to the United States: Fifty Shades of Grey – 15.2 million sales Fifty Shades Darker – 10.4 million sales Fifty Shades Freed – 9.3 million sales The Hunger Games – 8.7 million sales The Help – 8.7 million sales The Girl on The Train – 8.2 million sales Gone Girl – 8.1 million sales The Fault in Our Stars – 8 million sales The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo – 7.9 million sales Divergent – 6.6 million sales The Diary of a Wimpy Kid series also became one of the best-selling book series of all time throughout the 2010s, with installments such as Cabin Fever and The Long Haul winning awards at the Nickelodeon Kids' Choice Awards. Popular athletes of the decade included Cristiano Ronaldo, Lionel Messi, Megan Rapinoe, LeBron James, Kevin Durant, Stephen Curry, Tiger Woods, Tom Brady, Aaron Rodgers, Floyd Mayweather, Manny Pacquiao, Canelo Álvarez, Serena Williams, Novak Djokovic, Kyle Busch, Conor McGregor, Ronda Rousey, Mike Trout, Michael Phelps, Usain Bolt, Shaun White, Kelly Slater, Simone Biles, Sidney Crosby and many more. At the 2010 Wimbledon Championships, tennis players John Isner and Nicolas Mahut competed in the longest professional tennis match in history, requiring five sets and 183 games for Isner to ultimately defeat Mahut in a match which lasted 11 hours and 5 minutes, and was played over the course of three days. A doping scandal and investigation that was concluded in 2012 led to former professional road racing cyclist Lance Armstrong being stripped of all seven of his Tour de France titles. On 14 October 2012, skydiver Felix Baumgartner completed a jump from the stratosphere and set world records for the highest skydive (39 km or 24 mi), fastest freefall speed (1,357.64 km/h or 843.6 mph, or Mach 1.25), and became the first person in history to break the sound barrier without vehicular power. In 2015, after Thoroughbred racehorse American Pharoah won the American Triple Crown and the Breeders' Cup Classic, he became 12th Triple Crown winner in history and the first in more than 30 years, and in winning all four races, became the first horse ever to win the Grand Slam of Thoroughbred racing. In November 2016, the Chicago Cubs won the World Series for the first time since 1908, over the then-Cleveland Indians. Their win, along with Game 7 and the entire 2016 Series, was heavily noted in the sports and baseball community. It is often considered one of the best World Series ever played, due to the underdog nature of both teams, how close the games were and especially the final game, and how it ultimately ended the over 100-year drought of the Cubs not winning a series. In June 2017, rock climber Alex Honnold became the first person in history to free solo climb El Capitan in Yosemite National Park, an accomplishment that one commentator described as "one of the great athletic feats of any kind, ever." In January 2018, the final play of an NFL playoffs game between the Minnesota Vikings and the New Orleans Saints, dubbed the "Minneapolis Miracle", became the first time in NFL playoffs history where a game ended in a touchdown as time expired, and prompted a change to the NFL's rules as they pertain to extra-point conversion attempts. As the decade drew to a close, some commentators looked back on it as a politically unstable period. An article in the New York Times stated: "With the rise of nationalist movements and a backlash against globalisation on both sides of the Atlantic, the liberal post-World War II order – based on economic integration and international institutions – began to unravel." It heavily discussed the US presidency of Donald Trump (a reality TV Star and businessman with no political experience at the time of taking office, succeeding Barack Obama) whilst also commenting, "Echoes of Mr. Trump's nationalist populism can be found in Prime Minister Boris Johnson of Britain's recent electoral victory and the Brexit referendum of 2016, and in the ascent of the far-right President Jair Bolsonaro of Brazil and Prime Minister Narendra Modi of India. Democracy is under threat in Hungary and Poland. Once fringe right-wing parties with openly racist agendas are rebranding themselves in Sweden and Belgium. And far-right groups in Germany and Spain are now the third-largest parties in those nations' parliaments." A December 2019 piece in The Guardian argued that the 2010s would be remembered "as a time of crises", elaborating "there have been crises of democracy and the economy; of the climate and poverty; of international relations and national identity; of privacy and technology". The article also noted that, in Britain, "politics since 2010 has often been manic. Parties have hastily changed their leaders and policies; sometimes their entire guiding philosophies. Last week's general election was the fourth of the decade; the 1980s, 1990s and 2000s had two apiece." Similar trends of political unrest were felt beyond the Western world, as suggested in The Asian Review, which described the 2010s as a "tumultuous time for Asia, sometimes tragic, sometimes triumphant and never dull". 2010s portal Modern history portal List of decades Millennials (when the majority of that generation had reached maturity). The following articles contain brief timelines which list the most prominent events of the decade: 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 Avatar (2009) later surpassed Avengers: Endgame as the highest-grossing film of all time following a 2021 re-release in China. Billboard awards are based on album and digital songs sales, radio airplay, streaming, touring and social engagement. Tartaglione, Nancy (13 March 2021). "'Avatar' Overtakes 'Avengers: Endgame' As All-Time Highest-Grossing Film Worldwide; Rises To $2.8B Amid China Reissue – Update". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved 13 March 2021. "About". Billboard Music Awards. Retrieved 21 February 2022. "World Population Growth Rate 1950-2022". Wills, Dixe (19 December 2009). "The decade camping became cool". The Guardian. Retrieved 15 December 2023. "2010s: Into the Tenties". YouTube. Retrieved 15 December 2023. "that's what most want to call the coming decade". The Times of India. 1 January 2010. Retrieved 15 December 2023. "A History of Conflict". BBC News. Retrieved 26 June 2016. "Israeli settlement plan denounced". BBC News. 18 November 2009. Retrieved 26 June 2016. Bear, Shalom (8 July 2014). "IDF's Operation "Protective Edge" Begins Against Gaza". The Jewish Press. Retrieved 26 June 2016. Kucera, Joshua (30 May 2018). "Azerbaijani military advances on tense Nakhchivan-Armenia border | Eurasianet". Eurasianet. Retrieved 24 December 2020. "Azerbaijan makes territorial gains in Nakhchivan as fighting with Armenia flares". bne IntelliNews. 20 June 2018. Retrieved 24 December 2020. "Azerbaijan makes territorial gains in Nakhchivan as fighting with Armenia flares". www.intellinews.com. intellinews.com. 20 June 2018. Archived from the original on 21 June 2018. Retrieved 20 June 2018. "President Bush Releases National Strategy for Combating Terrorism". 14 February 2003. Retrieved 10 October 2018. "Updated: Obama speech balances Afghanistan troop buildup with exit pledge". Associated Press. 1 December 2009. Retrieved 26 June 2016. "Pilger claims White House knew Saddam was no threat". The Sydney Morning Herald. 23 September 2003. Retrieved 26 June 2016. "Online NewsHour Update: Coalition Says Iraqi Regime Has Lost Control of Baghdad – April 9, 2003". 1 December 2010. Archived from the original on 1 December 2010. Retrieved 26 June 2016. Allawi, Ali A. (2007). The Occupation of Iraq: Winning the War, Losing the Peace. Yale University Press. Gall, Carlotta (13 November 2004). "World Briefing | Asia: Afghanistan: Taliban Leader Vows Return". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 26 June 2016. "Putin signs laws on reunification of Republic of Crimea and Sevastopol with Russia". ITAR TASS. 21 March 2014. Archived from the original on 20 March 2015. Retrieved 21 March 2014. Chulov, Martin (10 June 2014). "Isis insurgents seize control of Iraqi city of Mosul". The Guardian. Retrieved 26 June 2016. "ISIS announces formation of Caliphate, rebrands as 'Islamic State'". The Long War Journal. 29 June 2014. Retrieved 26 June 2016. Nicks, Denver. "U.S. Forms Anti-ISIS Coalition at NATO Summit". Time. Retrieved 26 June 2016. Payne, Ed; Abdelaziz, Salma. "34 Islamic nations form coalition to fight terrorism". CNN. Retrieved 26 June 2016. McKay, Hollie (5 December 2017). "Trump, Mattis turn military loose on ISIS, leaving terror caliphate in tatters". Fox News. Retrieved 24 December 2020. Najjar, Farah (23 March 2019). "ISIL 'caliphate' totally eliminated: SDF". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 24 December 2020. "Turkish military operation east Euphrates kills more than 70 civilians so far and forces nearly 300 thousand people to displace from their areas". Syrian Observatory for Human Rights. 16 October 2019. Retrieved 24 December 2020. "Teröristlerin saldırılarında 20 sivil şehit oldu, 170 kişi yaralandı". Bursada Begün (in Turkish). 16 October 2019. Retrieved 24 December 2020. "Kurdish politician among nine civilians executed by Turkish-backed fighters in Syria". Haaretz. 13 October 2019. Retrieved 24 December 2020. "About 10 citizens were killed or injured due to rocket shelling carried out by the forces of "Jarabulus Military Council" on the city of Jarabulus north-east of Aleppo". Syrian Observatory for Human Rights. 10 October 2019. Retrieved 24 December 2020. "Damning evidence of war crimes by Turkish forces and allies in Syria". Amnesty International. 18 October 2019. Retrieved 24 December 2020. "India slams Turkey for its 'unilateral military offensive' in northeast Syria". The Times of India. 10 October 2019. Retrieved 24 December 2020. "Turkey-Syria offensive: US sanctions Turkish ministries". BBC News. 15 October 2019. Retrieved 24 December 2020. Cockburn, Patrick (15 November 2019). "Erdogan's ethnic cleansing of the Kurds is still happening now – and we have Trump to thank". The Independent. Archived from the original on 1 May 2022. Retrieved 24 December 2020. Candar, Cengiz (30 September 2019). "Erdogan's Syria plan: Resettling the Syrian refugees or ousting Kurds from their land?". Al-Monitor. Retrieved 24 December 2020. Evans, Dominic (8 October 2019). "Turkey's plan to settle refugees in northeast Syria alarms allies". Reuters. Retrieved 24 December 2020. Safi, Michael; Farooq, Azhar (15 February 2019), "Dozens of Indian paramilitaries killed in Kashmir car bombing", The Guardian, archived from the original on 4 April 2019, retrieved 4 April 2019 Quote: "'We will give a befitting reply, our neighbour will not be allowed to de-stabilise us,' Modi said ..." Slater, Joanna; Constable, Pamela (27 February 2019), "Pakistan captures Indian pilot after shooting down aircraft, escalating hostilities", The Washington Post, archived from the original on 15 March 2019, retrieved 30 March 2019 Quote: The two days of tit-for-tat airstrikes ... the first since 1971, were triggered by a 14 Feb terrorist bombing in Indian-controlled Kashmir that killed 40 Indian security personnel." Heyden, Tom (23 March 2011). "Neo-paramilitaries do not deserve political status: Govt". Colombia Reports. Retrieved 26 June 2016. Brodzinsky, Sibylla; Watts, Jonathan (23 June 2016). "Colombia and Farc rebels sign historic ceasefire deal to end 50-year conflict". The Guardian. Retrieved 26 June 2016. Idler, Annette (3 October 2016). "Colombia just voted no on its plebiscite for peace. Here's why and what it means". The Washington Post. Retrieved 24 December 2020. "Colombia signs new peace deal with Farc". BBC News. 24 November 2016. Retrieved 24 December 2020. Miroff, Nick; Partlow, Joshua (30 November 2016). "Colombia's congress approves historic peace deal with FARC rebels". The Washington Post. Retrieved 24 December 2020. "Musharraf warns against failure of Wana operation". Dawn. 3 December 2013. Archived from the original on 3 December 2013. Retrieved 26 June 2016. Crawford, Neta C. "Update on the Human Costs of War for Afghanistan and Pakistan, 2001 to mid-2016" (PDF). Brown University. Watson Institute for International and Public Affairs. Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 September 2017. Retrieved 20 September 2017. The war in Pakistan, which began as Al Qaeda and the Taliban fled from Afghanistan into the northwest region of Pakistan in 2001, has caused almost 62,000 deaths and an additional 67,000 injuries. "As Death Toll Rises, Pashtun Lawmaker Calls For Waziristan Protest". Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. 27 May 2019. Retrieved 24 December 2020. Wahab, Ali (11 July 2010). "The real cost of Pakistan's war on terror". The Express Tribune. Pakistan. Archived from the original on 14 May 2014. Retrieved 16 June 2013. From the Newspapers (20 June 2011). "War on terror cost Pakistan $67.9 billion". Dawn News, Economic Survey. Archived from the original on 24 May 2013. Retrieved 16 June 2013. "A Small Measure of Progress". Foreign Policy. 22 December 2014. Retrieved 26 June 2016. Boone, John; MacAskill, Ewen (16 December 2014). "More than 100 children killed in Taliban attack on Pakistan school". The Guardian. Retrieved 14 November 2015. Aguilera, Freddy (19 March 2008). ""Ejército Paraguayo del Pueblo ya incursiona militarmente"". Última Hora (in European Spanish). Archived from the original on 25 January 2021. Retrieved 24 December 2020. Yagoub, Mimi (10 July 2014). "Attacks Sign of Growing EPP Strength in Paraguay Despite Security Crackdown". InSight Crime. Retrieved 24 December 2020. "Mexico's drug war is getting even worse". Retrieved 26 June 2016. "Counting Mexico's drug victims is a murky business". National Catholic Reporter. March 2014. Archived from the original on 28 May 2016. Retrieved 26 June 2016. Villegas, Paulina (6 January 2020). "A New Toll in Mexico's Drug War: More Than 61,000 Vanished". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 24 December 2020. Agren, David (22 September 2020). "Mexico's drug war leaves 39,000 unidentified bodies in its morgues". The Guardian. Retrieved 24 December 2020. Cook, Colleen W. (16 October 2007). "Mexico's Drug Cartels" (PDF). Congressional Research Service. p. 7. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 24 December 2020. Fantz, Ashley (20 January 2012). "The Mexico drug war: Bodies for billions". CNN. Retrieved 24 December 2020. Carl, Traci (10 March 2009). "Progress in Mexico drug war is drenched in blood". Associated Press. Archived from the original on 15 March 2009. Retrieved 1 April 2009. "High U.S. cocaine cost shows drug war working: Mexico". Reuters. 14 September 2007. Retrieved 1 April 2009. Sullivan, Mark P., ed. (18 December 2008). "Mexico – U.S. Relations: Issues for Congress" (PDF). CRS Report for Congress: Mexico and the 112th Congress. Congressional Research Service. pp. 2, 13, 14. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Marosi, Richard (23 April 2008). "Mexican general makes explosive accusations". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved 24 December 2020. "UPDATE 3-Somali government declares Islamist rebellion defeated". Reuters. 6 August 2011. Archived from the original on 19 October 2011. Retrieved 26 June 2016. "Somalia: 'Al-Shabab' militants forced out of Jowhar". BBC News. 9 December 2012. Retrieved 26 June 2016. "SOMALIA: President says Godane is dead, now is the chance for the members of al-Shabaab to embrace peace | RBC Radio". www.raxanreeb.com. Archived from the original on 6 September 2014. Retrieved 26 June 2016. "Propaganda is effective weapon as al-Shabab makes resurgence". PBS NewsHour. 22 April 2016. Retrieved 24 December 2020. Germanos, Andrea (14 April 2017). "Trump Further Entrenches US Military Involvement in Somalia". Common Dreams. Retrieved 25 December 2020. Harsch, Michael F.; Meduna, Maximilian M.; Krug, Teresa (18 July 2017). "As the U.S. gets more involved in Somalia, beware these three fallacies". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved 24 December 2020. White, Matthew (February 2012). "Twentieth Century Atlas – Death Tolls and Casualty Statistics for Wars, Dictatorships and Genocides". Necrometrics. Retrieved 24 December 2020. "The resurgence of al-Shabaab in Somalia and implications for the humanitarian sector – Somalia". ReliefWeb. 23 March 2016. Retrieved 24 December 2020. Nossiter, Adama (27 July 2009). "Scores Die as Fighters Battle Nigerian Police". The New York Times. Retrieved 29 December 2014. "Nigeria's Boko Haram pledges allegiance to Islamic State". BBC News. Retrieved 20 June 2016. Pisa, Katie; Hume, Tim (19 November 2015). "Boko Haram overtakes ISIS as world's deadliest terror group, report says". CNN. Retrieved 23 March 2016. "Global Terrorism Index 2015" (PDF). Institute for Economics and Peace. November 2015. p. 41. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 February 2019. Retrieved 23 March 2016. "Boko Haram's Deadly Impact". Council on Foreign Relations. Retrieved 25 December 2020. "Sambisa Forest: An Ideal Hiding Place for Boko Haram | Voice of America – English". www.voanews.com. Retrieved 25 December 2020. Withnall, Adam (8 September 2016). "Boko Haram descends into in-fighting as reports emerge of deadly clashes between rival Islamist factions". The Independent. Archived from the original on 1 May 2022. Retrieved 25 December 2020. "Nigeria: Deaths of hundreds of Boko Haram suspects in custody requires investigation". Amnesty International. 15 October 2013. Retrieved 25 December 2020. "Another brutal attack by Boko Haram highlights the weakness of Nigeria's military". The Economist. 5 February 2016. ISSN 0013-0613. Retrieved 25 December 2020. "Nigeria's Boko Haram 'uses child soldiers'". Al Jazeera. 29 November 2013. Retrieved 25 December 2020. "Boko Haram kidnaps 330 boys: 'No child should have to choose between their education and their life'". USA Today. Associated Press. 16 December 2020. Retrieved 25 December 2020. Daniel, Serge (4 April 2012). "Mali junta denounces 'rights violations' by rebels". AFP. Archived from the original on 1 February 2013. Retrieved 26 June 2016. "Tuaregs claim 'independence' from Mali". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 26 June 2016. Flood, Zoe. "Trouble in Timbuktu as Islamists extend control". Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 26 June 2016. "Yoweri Museveni: Uganda troops fighting South Sudan rebels". BBC News. 16 January 2014. "South Sudan country profile". BBC News. 6 August 2018. "Who Else, Besides Americans, Are Flying Fighter Jets in Iraq?". Slate. Archived from the original on 12 November 2014. Retrieved 14 November 2014. "Iran 'sent soldiers to fight in Iraq'". Al Jazeera America. 23 August 2014. Archived from the original on 20 September 2014. Retrieved 11 September 2014. Mostafa, Nehal (9 December 2017). "Iraq announces end of war against IS, liberation of borders with Syria: Abadi". Iraqi News. Retrieved 13 January 2019. Aboulenein, Ahmed (10 December 2017). "Iraq holds victory parade after defeating Islamic State". Reuters. Retrieved 13 January 2019. "Libyan Civil War: Two warring factions sign 'permanent' ceasefire". The Daily Star. 24 October 2020. "Libyan factions sign countrywide U.N.-brokered cease-fire". Los Angeles Times. 23 October 2020. "Yemen's ousted president Hadi calls for Houthis to quit capital". The Star Online. Retrieved 26 June 2016. Orkaby, Asher (25 March 2015). "Houthi Who?". Foreign Affairs. Archived from the original on 27 March 2015. Retrieved 25 March 2015. Yap, Clarissa Batino Cecilia (3 August 2016). "Duterte to Push Ahead With Name-Shame in Drug War as Deaths Rise". Bloomberg.com – via Bloomberg. "Drug war killings increased during COVID-19 pandemic, says HRW". www.msn.com. "Kyrgyz opposition seizes control". BBC News. 8 April 2010. Retrieved 20 June 2016. "Hundreds of protesters descend to 'Occupy Wall Street'". money.cnn.com. 17 September 2011. Retrieved 17 September 2011. Higgins, Andrew; Kramer, Andrew E. (22 February 2014). "Archrival Is Freed as Ukraine Leader Flees". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 20 June 2016. "Abkhazia: the post-Soviet revolution the world blinked and missed". The Guardian. Eurasianet. "Mais de 1 milhão de pessoas protestam contra Dilma pelo país | EXAME". exame.abril.com.br (in Brazilian Portuguese). Archived from the original on 26 June 2018. Retrieved 25 June 2018. Sullivan, Katherine; Bugesera, in (19 May 2015). "Burundi refugees say there is no turning back as fears grow of reprisals at home". The Guardian. Retrieved 20 June 2016. "Report of the independent international commission of inquiry on the protests in the Occupied Palestinian Territory" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Hairenik (23 April 2018). "Breaking: Serge Sarkisian Resigns as Prime Minister". The Armenian Weekly. Retrieved 26 April 2018. Roth, Andrew (8 May 2018). "'He's not a populist, he's popular': Nikol Pashinyan becomes Armenian PM". The Guardian. Retrieved 8 May 2018. "Bangladesh approves new road safety law to placate protesters". Arab News. 6 August 2018. "Bangladesh: Students Started an Enduring Movement Even as Street Protests End". 10 August 2018. "Yellow vest protests 'economic catastrophe' for France". BBC News. 9 December 2018. Retrieved 9 December 2018. "Algerian president Abdelaziz Bouteflika resigns after 20 years". The Guardian. 2 April 2019. Retrieved 2 April 2019. "Why Hong Kong has become a city of protests". The Washington Post. 1 July 2019. Retrieved 22 July 2019. "Hong Kong Tempts China's Ire as Protests Take More Violent Turn". Bloomberg. 22 July 2019. "Ecuador declares state of emergency as fuel protests block roads". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 9 October 2019. "Chile protests: Chileans demand new constitution amid unrest". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 4 November 2019. Nugent, Ciara. "Bolivian President Evo Morales Has Resigned After Nearly 14 Years in Power. Here's What to Know". Time. "Clashes Rock Bolivia as its New Interim Leader is Challenged". Time. Archived from the original on 14 November 2019. Retrieved 19 November 2019. "Peddler's martyrdom launched Tunisia's revolution". Reuters. 19 January 2011. "Uprisings in the region and ignored indicators". Payvand. Archived from the original on 25 April 2013. Retrieved 19 December 2019. "Egypt protests: Internet service disrupted before large rally". The Telegraph. 28 January 2011.[dead link] Skinner, Julia (10 December 2011). "Social Media and Revolution: The Arab Spring and the Occupy Movement as Seen through Three Information Studies Paradigms". Association for Information Systems AIS Electronic Library (AISeL): 3. "Tunisia: President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali forced out". BBC News. Retrieved 20 June 2016. "Two killed in Bahrain violence despite martial law". BBC News. Retrieved 20 June 2016. Shadid, Anthony (18 February 2011). "Clashes in Libya Worsen as Army Crushes Dissent". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 26 June 2016. Meo, Nick (20 February 2011). "Libya protests: 140 'massacred' as Gaddafi sends in snipers to crush dissent". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 26 June 2016. Gillis, Clare Morgana. "In Eastern Libya, Defectors and Volunteers Build Rebel Army". Retrieved 26 June 2016. Kirkpatrick, David D. (23 August 2011). "Qaddafi Defiant After Rebel Takeover". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 26 June 2016. "Gaddafi killed as Libya's revolt claims hometown". Reuters. 20 October 2011. Archived from the original on 22 October 2011. Retrieved 26 June 2016. "Police Kill 6 Protesters in Syria". The New York Times. 18 March 2011. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 26 June 2016. "Mid-East unrest: Syrian protests in Damascus and Aleppo". BBC News. Retrieved 26 June 2016. Landis, Joshua (29 July 2011). "Free Syrian Army Founded by Seven Officers to Fight the Syrian Army". The Jakarta Post. Archived from the original on 5 January 2017. Retrieved 26 June 2016. "US and Russia hail nuclear treaty". BBC News. 8 April 2010. Retrieved 22 June 2016. "U.S.-Russia nuclear arms treaty finalised". USA Today. Retrieved 20 June 2016. "Iran nuclear talks: 'Framework' deal agreed". BBC News. Retrieved 22 June 2016. "Iran Says International Sanctions To Be Lifted Saturday". The Huffington Post. 16 January 2016. Retrieved 22 June 2016. "Iran Sanctions Lifted After Watchdog Verifies Nuclear Compliance". NBC News. Retrieved 22 June 2016. Trump, Iran and the end of the deal, The Spectator. Gladstone, Rick (7 July 2017). "A Treaty Is Reached to Ban Nuclear Arms. Now Comes the Hard Part". The New York Times. Retrieved 9 August 2017. "Treaty banning nuclear weapons approved at UN: Supporters hail step towards nuclear free world as treaty is backed by 122 countries". The Guardian. 7 July 2017. Retrieved 9 August 2017. "Chapter XXVI: Disarmament – No. 9 Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons". United Nations Treaty Collection. 20 September 2017. Retrieved 21 September 2017.[permanent dead link] "North Korea Says it Has Conducted a Nuclear Test". ABC News. 12 February 2013. Retrieved 22 June 2016. McCurry, Justin; Safi, Michael (6 January 2016). "North Korea claims successful hydrogen bomb test in 'self-defence against US'". The Guardian. Retrieved 22 June 2016. "UN toughens North Korea sanctions". BBC News. 12 June 2009. Retrieved 22 June 2016. Roth, Richard; Yan, Holly; Ellis, Ralph. "North Korea hit with tough sanctions by U.N." CNN. Retrieved 22 June 2016. Chambrot, Krysten; Ingber, Hanna; Keller, Josh; Mainl, Lexi; Murphy, Heather; Pecanha, Sergio; S; Stevenson, Ra; Suppes, Mark. "In Focus: North Korea's Nuclear Threats". Retrieved 22 June 2016. "Pompeo announces suspension of nuclear arms treaty". CNN. Retrieved 1 February 2019. "INF nuclear treaty: US pulls out of Cold War-era pact with Russia". BBC News. 2 August 2019. Retrieved 2 August 2019. "Pakistan government under pressure after deadly attack". Reuters. 2 January 2010. Retrieved 2 June 2019. "Russian police release subway bomb suspects' photos". CNN. Retrieved 26 June 2016. "Mumbai blasts: Death toll rises to 26". Archived from the original on 5 September 2012. Retrieved 20 June 2018. "Norway police chief quits over Breivik report". BBC News. Retrieved 26 June 2016. "Murder in Mogadishu". Voanews.com. 13 October 2011. Retrieved 10 November 2011. "Police narrow in on two suspects in Boston Marathon bombings". Daily News. 18 April 2013. Retrieved 26 June 2016. "Rebels lose ground in southern Philippines". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 26 June 2016. Straziuso, Jason (13 December 2013). "NYPD report on Kenya attack isn't US gov't view". Associated Press. Archived from the original on 26 July 2018. Retrieved 26 June 2016. "احصائية رسمية: 1997 العدد الكلي لمفقودي مجزرتي سبايكر وبادوش". www.rudaw.net. Retrieved 8 June 2019. Ensor, Josie; Pearlman, Jonathan (15 December 2014). "Victims of Sydney siege hailed as heroes after they die protecting hostages". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 17 December 2014. "132 children killed in Peshawar school attack – The Express Tribune". 16 December 2014. Retrieved 26 June 2016. Onishi, Norimitsu (21 September 2015). "More than 100 Killed by Boko Haram Bombings in Nigeria". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 2 June 2019. "France: A timeline of terror". Sky News. 13 May 2018. Retrieved 18 May 2019. and agencies (21 March 2015). "Yemen mosque bombings 'could only be done by the enemies of life' – president". The Guardian. Retrieved 26 June 2016. "Kenya al-Shabab attack: Security questions as dead mourned". BBC News. Retrieved 26 June 2016. Walt, Vivienne. "Terrorist Attacks Suggest a Change in ISIS Tactics". Time. Retrieved 26 June 2016. "Does Turkey have to learn to live with terror?". Hürriyet Daily News. 16 March 2016. Retrieved 26 June 2016. "Egypt Concedes That Terrorists Caused Sinai Plane Crash". Time. 25 February 2016. "ISIS claims responsibility for Beirut southern suburb attack". The Daily Star. 12 November 2015. Archived from the original on 7 April 2019. Retrieved 26 June 2016. Boutry, Timothée (15 June 2019). "Suicide d'un rescapé du Bataclan : Guillaume, 131e victime du 13 Novembere". Le Parisien (in French). Retrieved 12 October 2019.[permanent dead link] Rosenfeld, Everette. "Upwards of 14 people dead in San Bernardino mass shooting: Police department chief". CNBC. Retrieved 2 December 2015. "Hunt is on for Brussels bombings suspect; Islamic State warns of more, worse attacks". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved 20 June 2016. Ellis, Ralph; Fantz, Ashley; Karimi, Faith; McLaughlin, Eliott C. "49 killed in Florida nightclub terror attack". CNN. Retrieved 26 June 2016. "Istanbul airport attack toll rises to 45 as child dies". The Straits Times. Agence France-Presse. 2 July 2016. Retrieved 5 July 2016. McCurry, Justin (22 April 2019). "Sri Lanka terrorist attacks among world's worst since 9/11". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 3 June 2019. "Why France Has Become the Number One Target of ISIS". Time. 15 July 2016. Retrieved 15 July 2016. "Anschlag in Berlin: Zahl der Verletzten liegt nun offiziell bei 56". Berliner Zeitung (in German). 6 March 2017. Retrieved 6 March 2017.[permanent dead link] "Istanbul: Victims of Reina nightclub attack identified". Al Jazeera. "London terror: Death toll rises to five people – including attacker – as eight arrested on suspicion of preparation of terrorist acts". Irish Independent. 23 March 2017. "St. Petersburg Bomber Said to Be Man From Kyrgyzstan; Death Toll Rises". The New York Times. 4 April 2017. Retrieved 6 June 2020. "Uzbek suspect in Swedish attack sympathized with Islamic State: police". Reuters. 10 April 2017. Retrieved 23 November 2019.[dead link] Mashal, Mujib; Rahim, Najim (21 April 2017). "'A Shortage of Coffins' After Taliban Slaughter Unarmed Soldiers". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 29 January 2018. Retrieved 4 February 2019. "At least 22 dead, 50 injured, in suicide bomb attack at Manchester Arena". The Guardian. 22 May 2017. Retrieved 23 May 2017. Evans, Martin (10 June 2017). "London Bridge terrorists were thwarted in attempt to hire a 7.5 tonne truck on day of atrocity". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 4 February 2019. "Spain attack: What do we know about the victims?". BBC News. 27 August 2017. Retrieved 16 May 2018. "Committee: 587 dead in Oct 14 terror attack". www.hiiraan.com. Retrieved 8 June 2019. "How the New York City truck attack unfolded". CNN. 1 November 2017. Retrieved 3 November 2017. Specia, Megan (24 November 2017). "Who Are Sufi Muslims and Why Do Some Extremists Hate Them?". The New York Times. Retrieved 26 November 2017. "Strasbourg Shooting: What we know". BBC News. 16 December 2018. Retrieved 24 November 2019. kurt.bayer@nzherald.co.nz @KurtBayerNZME, Kurt Bayer NZ Herald reporter based in Christchurch (27 May 2020). "Covid 19 coronavirus: Christchurch mosque gunman's sentencing delayed". The New Zealand Herald. ISSN 1170-0777. Retrieved 23 June 2020. "Key Accused in Pulwama Terror Attack, Thought to be Killed in an Encounter in July, is Alive: Report". News 18. 25 August 2021. Retrieved 11 September 2021. "Sri Lanka marks Easter Sunday attack anniversary". BBC News. 21 April 2020. Retrieved 23 June 2020. "22 Dead, 24 Injured in El Paso Shooting: Texas Officials". WRC-TV. 3 August 2019. Archived from the original on 24 October 2019. Retrieved 24 November 2019. "Somalia Bombing Kills Nearly 80, Raising Fears of Resurgent Militancy". The New York Times. 28 December 2019. Retrieved 29 December 2019. "Global military spending at new post-Cold War high, fuelled by US, China – think-tank". Reuters. 29 April 2019. Archived from the original on 30 April 2019. Retrieved 29 April 2019. "Asia Power Index | Countries". power.lowyinstitute.org. "Generic Congressional Ballot – Rasmussen Reports". Rasmussenreports.com. Retrieved 10 November 2011. Jamrisko, Michelle. "Political polarisation affects economic views" Salon. Associated Press, 2013. Web. 7 January 2015. Miller, Zeke (10 August 2011). "Americans Want Higher Taxes on Wealthy, No Entitlement Reform In 'Super Committee' Deal". Businessinsider.com. Retrieved 10 November 2011. "Herman Cain: Obama "Just Doesn't Have A Clue" On Economic Issues". RealClearPolitics. 5 September 2011. Retrieved 10 November 2011. "Democracy Corps/Women's Voices. Women Vote Action Fund Frequency Questionnaire" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 July 2012. Retrieved 12 May 2013. "Congressional Favourability Ratings – Rasmussen Reports". Rasmussenreports.com. 27 October 2011. Retrieved 10 November 2011. Jan Douwe Keulen. "Who is a German?". Retrieved 13 March 2015. "Why online Islamophobia is difficult to stop". 2 November 2014. Retrieved 13 March 2015. "How Everything Became the Culture War". Politico. November 2018. Retrieved 24 April 2019. "Why Identity Politics Could Be Good Politics For Democrats In 2020". 2 April 2019. Retrieved 24 April 2019. "What's Intersectionality? Let These Scholars Explain the Theory and Its History". Time. 29 March 2019. Retrieved 21 October 2020. Stiglitz, Joseph (May 2011). "Of the 1%, by the 1%, for the 1%". Vanity Fair. Greven, Thomas (May 2016). "The Rise of Right-wing Populism in Europe and the United States" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. England, Paula. "The gender revolution uneven and stalled" Gender & society 24.2 (2010): 149–166. Rivers, Nicola (2017). Postfeminism(s) and the Arrival of the Fourth Wave. Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 4, 8. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-59812-3. ISBN 978-3-319-59812-3. Cochrane, Kira (10 December 2013). "The Fourth Wave of Feminism: Meet the Rebel Women". The Guardian. Brooks, David (25 January 2010). "The Populist Addiction". The New York Times. Retrieved 29 September 2017. Surowiecki, James (15 February 2010). "The Populist Problem". The New Yorker. Retrieved 29 September 2017. Smith, Alexander (27 May 2019). "European Parliament elections: 5 takeaways from the results". NBC News. Retrieved 27 May 2019. Fraser, Steve (3 May 2010). "The strange history of Tea Party populism". Salon. Retrieved 17 May 2018. Thompson, Derek (4 October 2011). "'Occupy Wall Street': What Should a Populist Movement Ask of Washington?". The Atlantic. Barkin, Noah (9 November 2016). "After Trump and Brexit, populist tsunami threatens European mainstream". Reuters. Roberts, Frank L. "Black Lives Matter: Race, Resistance, and Populist Protest Archived 6 November 2020 at the Wayback Machine". New York University. Fall 2015. Retrieved 17 January 2018. Wallace-Wells, Benjamin (5 May 2016). "Is the Alt-Right for real?". The New Yorker. Wilson, Jason (23 August 2016). "'A sense that white identity is under attack': making sense of the alt-right". The Guardian. Retrieved 7 September 2016. Kazin, Michael (22 March 2016). "How Can Donald Trump and Bernie Sanders Both Be 'Populist'?". The New York Times. Taylor, Adam (23 May 2019). "India's Modi has been a bellwether for global populism". The Washington Post. Retrieved 20 November 2019. "Mexico's populist Amlo capitalises on economic woes". Financial Times. 1 January 2017. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Fisher, Max; Taub, Amanda (1 April 2017). "How Does Populism Turn Authoritarian? Venezuela Is a Case in Point". The New York Times. Stille, Alexander (9 August 2018). "How Matteo Salvini Pulled Italy to the Far Right". The Guardian. Retrieved 11 August 2018. "Right-Wing Populist Jair Bolsonaro Sworn in As President of Brazil". NPR. Retrieved 26 January 2019. "Rodrigo Duterte and the populist playbook". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 26 January 2019. "Freedom in the World 2019". Freedom House. "Three countries where democracy actually staged a comeback in 2018". The Washington Post. "Did an election just cause Malaysian democratisation?". The Lowy Institute. "The Death of Gaddafi". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 20 November 2019. Retrieved 20 November 2019. "Zimbabwe's army mounts a coup against Robert Mugabe". The Economist. 15 November 2017. "Yemen president Saleh steps down". 27 February 2012. Retrieved 20 November 2019. "Profile: Omar al-Bashir, Sudan's longtime ruler". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 20 November 2019. "Profile: Hosni Mubarak". BBC News. 24 March 2017. "Ben Ali: Tunisia's ousted ex-president dies in exile aged 83". BBC News. 19 September 2019. Kingsley, Patrick (10 February 2018). "As West Fears the Rise of Autocrats, Hungary Shows What's Possible". The New York Times. Sabatini, Christopher (14 August 2019). "The Final Blow to Venezuela's Democracy". Foreign Affairs. Tansel, Cemal Burak (2018). "Authoritarian Neoliberalism and Democratic Backsliding in Turkey: Beyond the Narratives of Progress". South European Society and Politics. 23 (2): 197–217. doi:10.1080/13608746.2018.1479945. Yun Ru Phua (31 March 2015). "After Every Winter Comes Spring: Tunisia's Democratic Flowering – Berkeley Political Review". Bpr.berkeley.edu. Retrieved 11 February 2017. Ahmed H Adam and Ashley D Robinson. Will the Arab Winter spring again in Sudan?. Al-Jazeera. 11 June 2016. [1] "The Arab Spring that swept across the Middle East and succeeded in overthrowing three dictatorships in Tunisia, Egypt and Libya in 2011 was a pivotal point in the history of nations. Despite the subsequent descent into the 'Arab Winter', the peaceful protests of young people were heroic..." Karber, Phil (18 June 2012). Fear and Faith in Paradise. Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. ISBN 978-1-4422-1479-8. Retrieved 23 October 2014. "Arab Winter". America Staging. 28 December 2012. Retrieved 23 October 2014. "Analysis: Arab Winter is coming to Baghdad". The Jerusalem Post. Retrieved 23 October 2014. "Egypt and Tunisia's new 'Arab winter'". Euro news. 8 February 2013. Retrieved 23 October 2014. "Yemen's Arab winter". Middle East Eye. Retrieved 23 October 2014. "Egypt & Tunisia's new Arab winter", Euro news, 8 February 2013 "Niger's junta takeover condemned". BBC News. 19 February 2010. Retrieved 26 June 2016. Nossiter, Adam (22 March 2012). "Soldiers Overthrow Mali Government in Setback for Democracy in Africa". The New York Times. Nossiter, Adam (13 April 2012). "Guinea-Bissau Premier, Election Front-Runner, Is Deposed in a Coup". The New York Times. Kirkpatrick, David D. (4 July 2013). "Army Ousts Egypt's President; Morsi Is Taken into Military Custody". The New York Times. Fuller, Thomas (22 May 2014). "Thailand's Military Stages Coup, Thwarting Populist Movement". The New York Times. Saif Saleh Al-Oliby (1 February 2015). "Houthis Start Three Day Conference in Capital". Yemen Observer. Archived from the original on 16 February 2015. Retrieved 15 February 2015. Hubbard, Ben; Argano, Tim; Yeginsu, Ceylan (22 July 2016). "Failed Turkish Coup Accelerated a Purge Years in the Making". The New York Times. Retrieved 30 August 2017. "Zimbabwe's President Mugabe resigns". BBC News. 21 November 2017. Retrieved 23 January 2019. Herbert, Tom (7 January 2019). "Gabon coup d'etat explained: Why is President Ali Bongo facing military opposition?". Retrieved 19 February 2019. "Sudan military coup topples Bashir". BBC News. 11 April 2019. "Ethiopia army chief shot dead in 'coup bid' attacks". BBC World News. 23 June 2019. Retrieved 23 June 2019. Gen Asaminew openly advised the Amhara people this month to arm themselves, in a video spread on Facebook and seen by a Reuters reporter. "Over 99 pct in Southern Sudan vote for secession". USA Today. Retrieved 20 June 2016. "South Africa's Nelson Mandela dies in Johannesburg". BBC News. Retrieved 20 June 2016. Parker, Claire; Fahim, Kareem (25 July 2019). "Tunisian President Beji Caid Essebsi dies at 92". The Washington Post. Retrieved 25 July 2019. Freeman, Colin (31 March 2015). "Muhammadu Buhari claims victory in Nigeria's presidential elections". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 20 June 2016. Graham-Harrison, Ruth Maclean Emma (2 December 2016). "The Gambia's President Jammeh to concede defeat in election". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 2 December 2016. "Zuma bows to party pressure and quits". BBC News. 15 February 2018. Retrieved 13 July 2018. Khadder, Kareem; Hollingsworth, Julia. "Sudan death roll rises to 100 as bodies found in Nile, say doctors". CNN. Retrieved 6 June 2019. "African Union suspends Sudan, demands civilian administration". Reuters. 6 June 2019. Archived from the original on 6 June 2019. Retrieved 6 June 2019. "Tunisia election: 'Robocop' Kais Saied wins presidential runoff". The Guardian. 14 October 2019. Retrieved 16 October 2019. Stolberg, Sheryl Gay; Pear, Robert (23 March 2010). "Obama Signs Health Care Overhaul into Law". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 20 June 2016. "Brazil elects Dilma Rousseff as first female president". BBC News. Retrieved 20 June 2016. "Impact of the Tea Party movement on the 2010 election". 6 July 2011. "Canada's Conservatives in crushing election victory". The Guardian. Retrieved 3 May 2011. "Argentine president wins landslide re-election". NBC News. Desantis, Daniela. "Paraguay's Lugo says only miracle can reinstate him". Reuters. Retrieved 26 June 2018. Ellingwood, Ken; Wilkinson, Tracy (2 July 2012). "Enrique Peña Nieto wins Mexico's presidency, early results show". Los Angeles Times. ISSN 0458-3035. Retrieved 20 June 2016. "Obama reelected as president". The Washington Post. Retrieved 20 June 2016. Romero, Simon (6 March 2014). "Hugo Chávez, 1954–2013: A Polarising Figure Who Led a Movement". The New York Times. Liptak, Adam (26 June 2015). "Supreme Court Ruling Makes Same-Sex Marriage a Right Nationwide". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 20 June 2016. "Canadian election 2015 hands Justin Trudeau and the Liberals a majority government". National Post. 20 October 2015. Retrieved 20 June 2016. Dreier, Hannah (7 December 2015). "Venezuela's Opposition Wins Control of National Assembly". ABC News. Retrieved 7 December 2015. "Brazil's Dilma Rousseff to face impeachment trial". BBC News. Retrieved 12 May 2016. "Donald Trump Wins the 2016 Election". Time. Retrieved 9 November 2016. Collinson, Stephen. "Trump becomes 45th President of the United States". CNN. Retrieved 16 December 2018. "Cuba's Fidel Castro, former president, dies aged 90". BBC News. "As Venezuela unrest spreads, Maduro presses on with plans to rewrite charter". Reuters. 24 May 2017. Retrieved 24 May 2017. "Peru's president dissolves Congress to push through anti-corruption reforms". The Guardian. 1 October 2019. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 1 October 2019. "Jair Bolsonaro é eleito presidente e interrompe série de vitórias do PT". Eleições 2018 (in Brazilian Portuguese). 28 October 2018. Retrieved 29 November 2019. "Canada elections: Trudeau wins narrow victory to form minority government". The Guardian. Retrieved 5 November 2019. "Bolivian President Evo Morales resigns amid election protests". BBC News. Fandos, Nicholas; Shear, Michael D. (18 December 2019). "Trump Impeached for Abuse of Power and Obstruction of Congress – Voting nearly along party lines, the House approved two articles of impeachment against President Trump, making him the third president in history to face removal by the Senate". The New York Times. Retrieved 18 December 2019. "Burma ex-Prime Minister Thein Sein named new president". BBC News. Retrieved 20 June 2016. "North Korean leader Kim Jong-il dead". ABC News. 19 December 2011. Retrieved 20 June 2016. Fackler, Martin (26 December 2012). "Shinzo Abe Selected as Japan's Prime Minister". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 20 June 2016. "North Korean leader threatens strike on South island". AFP News. 11 March 2013. Archived from the original on 29 January 2014. "Modi wave conquers all: What exit polls show in Haryana, Maharashtra". Firstpost. 16 October 2014. Retrieved 20 June 2016. Cochrane, Joe (22 July 2014). "A Child of the Slum Rises as President of Indonesia". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 20 June 2016. "Luneta Mass is largest Papal event in history". ABS-CBN News. "King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia dies". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 20 June 2016. "Remembering Lee Kuan Yew: The Straits Times' full print coverage". www.straitstimes.com. January 2016. Retrieved 20 June 2018. "Say goodbye to the weirdest border dispute in the world". The Washington Post. Retrieved 20 June 2016. "Taiwan gets first female President as DPP sweeps election". Channel NewsAsia. Archived from the original on 16 January 2016. Retrieved 20 June 2016. Gonzales, Yuji Vincent (30 May 2016). "Duterte, Robredo proclaimed new President, VP; Rody a no-show". Philippine Daily Inquirer. Retrieved 31 May 2016. "Thailand's King Bhumibol Adulyadej, world's longest-reigning monarch, dies". The Hindu. Reuters. 13 October 2016. "South Korean court throws president out of office, 2 dead in protest". Reuters. 10 March 2017. Retrieved 10 March 2017. "South Korea elects Moon Jae-in, who backs talks with North, as President". The New York Times. 9 May 2017. Retrieved 9 May 2017. Ar, Zurairi (10 May 2018). "Pakatan takes Putrajaya, buoyed by 'Malay tsunami'". The Malay Mail. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 10 May 2018. Chan, Tara (16 May 2018). "Malaysia's jailed leader-in-waiting has been released from custody and given a full royal pardon". Business Insider. Archived from the original on 11 June 2019. Retrieved 18 May 2018. "Trump-Kim Summit". straitstimes.com. Retrieved 20 June 2018. "Remarks by President Trump and Chairman Kim Jong Un in a 1:1 Conversation". U.S. Embassy & Consulate in Vietnam. 27 February 2019. Archived from the original on 2 March 2019. Retrieved 28 February 2019. PRESIDENT TRUMP: Thank you very much. That's really nice. Well, I want to just say it's an honour to be with 'Chairman Kim'. "Malaysia king: Sultan Muhammad V abdicates in historic first". BBC News. 6 January 2019. Retrieved 8 January 2019. "Vladimir Putin and Kim Jong-un hold Vladivostok summit". BBC News. 24 April 2019. "Japan's emperor prays for peace in first abdication in 200 years". Reuters. 30 April 2019. Retrieved 1 May 2019. "UK joins US in mission to protect oil tankers in Gulf". The Guardian. 5 August 2019. "Italy crisis: Silvio Berlusconi resigns as PM". BBC News. 12 November 2011. Archived from the original on 28 November 2013. Retrieved 13 November 2011. "Valituksi tuleminen – Vaalit". Vaalit.fi. Archived from the original on 28 January 2012. Retrieved 7 February 2012. "Presidentinvaali 5.2.2012" [Second round results]. tulospalvelu.vaalit.fi. Ministry of Justice (Finland). 8 February 2012. Archived from the original on 29 April 2017. Retrieved 28 March 2019. "Queen celebrates Jubilee at St Paul's (+images) – St Paul's Cathedral". www.stpauls.co.uk. Retrieved 22 June 2016. "Hollande wins French presidency". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 20 June 2016. Messia, Hada; Pearson, Michael. "Too tired to go on, Pope Benedict resigns". CNN. Retrieved 20 June 2016. "A New Pope, and Maybe a New Era". PBS NewsHour. Retrieved 22 June 2016. "Margaret Thatcher: final moments in hotel without her family by her bedside". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 20 June 2016. "Giorgio Napolitano, Italy's reluctant president". Reuters. 20 April 2013. Retrieved 20 June 2016. "Ukraine crisis: Putin signs Russia-Crimea treaty". BBC News. Retrieved 20 June 2016. "Scottish election: Salmond victorious after party's win". BBC News. Retrieved 20 June 2016. "Scottish referendum: Scotland votes 'No' to independence". BBC News. Retrieved 20 June 2016. "King Juan Carlos of Spain abdicates". BBC News. Retrieved 20 June 2016. "Ireland says Yes to same-sex marriage". RTE.ie. Retrieved 20 June 2016. "'Historic' Paris climate deal adopted". CBC News. 12 December 2015. Retrieved 16 May 2018. Stewart, Heather; Mason, Rowena; Syal, Rajeev (24 June 2016). "David Cameron resigns after UK votes to leave European Union". The Guardian. Retrieved 24 June 2016. "May to take over as UK PM by Wednesday". Financial Times. 11 July 2016. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Oltermann, Philip (4 December 2016). "Far-right candidate concedes defeat in Austrian election". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 4 December 2016. Rubin, Alissa J. (7 May 2017). "Macron Decisively Defeats Le Pen in French Presidential Race". The New York Times. Whitney, Craig R.; Cowell, Alan (16 June 2017). "Helmut Kohl, Chancellor Who Reunited Germany, Dies at 87". The New York Times. "Catalans declare independence as Madrid imposes direct rule". BBC News. 27 October 2017. Retrieved 27 October 2017. Soares, Isa; Cotovio, Vasco; Clarke, Hilary (2 October 2017). "Catalonia referendum result plunges Spain into political crisis". CNN. "Elezioni politiche: vincono M5s e Lega. Crollo del Partito democratico. Centrodestra prima coalizione. Il Carroccio sorpassa Forza Italia". 4 March 2018. Sala, Alessandro. "Elezioni 2018: M5S primo partito, nel centrodestra la Lega supera FI". "Сведения о проводящихся выборах и референдумах". www.vybory.izbirkom.ru. Retrieved 18 April 2018. "European Parliament elections five key takeaways". The New York Times. 27 May 2019. "Boris Johnson elected new Tory leader". The Guardian. 23 July 2019. "Results of the 2019 General Election". BBC News. Retrieved 4 September 2020. "Arizona Congresswoman Giffords shot; doctors 'optimistic' about recovery chances". www.azcentral.com. Archived from the original on 15 February 2022. Retrieved 20 June 2016. "Osama bin Laden buried at sea after being killed by U.S. forces in Pakistan". The Washington Post. Retrieved 20 June 2016. Griffin, Jennifer (7 April 2010). "Two U.S.-Born Terrorists Killed in CIA-Led Drone Strike". Fox News. Archived from the original on 30 September 2011. Retrieved 30 September 2011. Jawad, Rana (20 October 2011). "Libya's Col Muammar Kaddafi killed, says NTC". BBC News. Retrieved 10 November 2011. "Suspect in Quebec shooting identified as Mont-Tremblant businessman". The Globe and Mail. 5 September 2012. Archived from the original on 7 September 2012. Retrieved 30 November 2012. Zain, Asma Ali. "Malala will soon undergo reconstructive surgery – Khaleej Times". www.khaleejtimes.com. Archived from the original on 5 March 2016. Retrieved 20 June 2016. "Russia opposition politician Boris Nemtsov shot dead". BBC News. Retrieved 21 June 2016. J. Wilkie (23 November 2016). "Sentencing remarks of Mr Justice Wilkie: R -v- Mair (Jo Cox murder)" (PDF). Judiciary. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 24 November 2016. There is no doubt that this murder was done for the purpose of advancing a political, racial and ideological cause namely that of violent white supremacism and exclusive nationalism most associated with Nazism and its modern forms. "Jo Cox MP dead after shooting attack". BBC News. Retrieved 21 June 2016. "Russian ambassador to Turkey Andrei Karlov shot dead in Ankara". BBC News. 19 December 2016. Retrieved 22 January 2017. "Malaysia says VX nerve agent used in killing North Korean leaders half brother". Fox News. 24 February 2017. Retrieved 24 February 2017. "Who Is James T. Hodgkinson?". The Atlantic. 14 June 2017. Retrieved 17 October 2017. Dodd, Vikram; Harding, Luke; MacAskill, Ewen (8 March 2018). "Sergei Skripal: former Russian spy poisoned with nerve agent, say police". The Guardian. Retrieved 28 May 2018. Amoroso, Ed; Ozaeta, Arnell (3 July 2018). "'Walk of shame' mayor shot dead". The Philippine Star. Retrieved 19 July 2018. "'Tell Your Boss': Recording Is Seen to Link Saudi Crown Prince More Strongly to Khashoggi Killing". The New York Times. 12 November 2018. "Jamal Khashoggi: An unauthorised Turkey source says journalist was murdered in Saudi consulate". BBC News. 7 October 2018. Retrieved 7 January 2019. "U.S. Says Saudi crown prince approved Khashoggi killing, imposes visa restrictions on 76 Saudis". CNBC. 26 February 2021. "Liberal mayor of Poland's Gdansk dies after stabbing". Reuters. 14 January 2019. "Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi: IS leader 'dead after US raid' in Syria". BBC News. 28 October 2019. Retrieved 29 October 2019. "Ethiopian jet crashes off Beirut". BBC News. 25 January 2010. Retrieved 21 June 2016. "'Black boxes' of Lech Kaczynski's plane found". NewsComAu. Archived from the original on 13 April 2010. Retrieved 21 June 2016. "Briton among Libya air crash dead". BBC News. 13 May 2010. "Plane crashes in India, 158 feared dead, 8 alive". Associated Press. 22 May 2010. Retrieved 22 May 2010. "Pakistan mourns victims of its worst-ever air crash". BBC News. 29 July 2010. Retrieved 21 June 2016. "Official: 153 on plane, at least 10 on ground dead after Nigeria crash". CNN. Retrieved 21 June 2016. Chelsea J. Carter and Mike M. Ahlers (7 July 2013). "Pilot in deadly plane crash had no experience landing 777 in San Francisco". CNN. Retrieved 13 March 2015. "New missing Malaysian plane MH370 search area announced". BBC News. Retrieved 21 June 2016. Safi, Michael; Holmes, Oliver (30 July 2015). "MH370 search: what is the 'flaperon' debris found in Réunion?". The Guardian. Retrieved 21 June 2016. "Russia vetoes bid to set up tribunal for downed flight MH17". Reuters. 29 July 2015. Retrieved 21 June 2016. "Air Algerie AH5017: 'No survivors' from crash in Mali". BBC News. Retrieved 21 June 2016. "Bodies, wreckage from missing AirAsia flight found". Archived from the original on 1 January 2015. Retrieved 13 March 2015. "Germanwings plane 4U 9525 crashes in French Alps – no survivors". BBC News. 24 March 2015. Retrieved 24 March 2015. Kurniawati, Dewi; Ramzy, Austin (30 June 2015). "Death Toll Rises to 142 After Indonesian Military Plane Crashes into City". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 21 June 2016. "Egyptian plane crash: Isis claims militants downed Metrojet flight but officials find no evidence of attack". The Independent. 31 October 2015. Archived from the original on 1 May 2022. "Brazil's Chapecoense football team in Colombia plane crash". BBC News. Retrieved 29 November 2016. "Russian military plane crashes in Black Sea, 'killing 92'". BBC News. 25 December 2016. Retrieved 11 December 2020. "Aseman Airlines plane crash kills 65 in central Iran". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 13 July 2018. Gladstone, Rick; Robles, Frances (18 May 2018). "More Than 100 Die as Ageing Cuban Airliner Crashes". The New York Times. Retrieved 15 July 2018. "Lion Air crash: Boeing 737 plane crashes in sea off Jakarta". BBC News. 29 October 2018. Retrieved 29 October 2018. "Ethiopian Airlines crash: 'No Survivors' on flight with 157 on board, plane similar to jet in Lion Air crash". The Straits Times. 10 March 2019. Retrieved 10 March 2019. "Aeroflot plane crash: 41 killed on Russian jet". BBC News. 6 May 2019. Retrieved 6 May 2019. "All 33 Chile miners freed in flawless rescue". NBC News. 13 October 2010. Retrieved 14 October 2010. Butler, Sarah (22 June 2013). "Bangladeshi factory deaths spark action among high-street clothing chains". The Guardian. Retrieved 21 June 2016. "Tianjin explosion: China sets final death toll at 173, ending search for survivors". The Guardian. 12 September 2015. Retrieved 27 November 2015. "Pilgrims traumatised, asking how Mecca crane could collapse". Associated Press. 14 September 2015. Archived from the original on 8 December 2015. "Iran holds funeral for diplomat killed in Saudi hajj crush". Associated Press. 27 November 2015. Archived from the original on 8 December 2015. Willis, Andrew; Stringer, David (7 November 2015). "Dam Owned by Iron-Ore Giants Bursts, Flooding Brazil Valley". Bloomberg. Retrieved 7 November 2015. "Brazil dam collapse death toll rises to 17, BHP says". BBC News. 22 December 2015. Retrieved 24 December 2015. "Boechat: Mariana é a maior tragédia ambiental do Brasil". TV UOL (in Portuguese). 9 November 2015. Retrieved 30 November 2015. "Thailand cave rescue: all 12 boys and coach successfully rescued – live". The Guardian. 10 July 2018. Retrieved 10 July 2018. "Cave rescue: All 13 out after 17-day ordeal in Thailand". BBC News. 10 July 2018. Retrieved 10 July 2018. "Italy bridge: 38 dead as rescuers search for survivors". Al Jazeera. 15 August 2018. Retrieved 15 August 2018. Giuffrida, Angela (15 August 2018). "Italy bridge collapse: 35 dead as minister calls for resignations". The Guardian. Retrieved 15 August 2018. Esposito, Anthony (20 January 2019). "Death toll raised to 79 in Mexico pipeline blast; new focus on fuel theft". Reuters. "China chemical blast: Survivor found but toll rises again". BBC News. 23 March 2019. Retrieved 25 March 2019. "Comayagua prison fire killed 355 – Honduras officials". BBC News. 16 February 2012. Retrieved 24 April 2019. Castillo, Mariano; Sandoval, Elvin (16 February 2012). "More than 300 killed in Honduras prison fire". CNN. Retrieved 24 April 2019. "Deadly smoke, lone blocked exit: 230 die in Brazil". Associated Press. 28 January 2013. Archived from the original on 27 January 2013. Retrieved 21 June 2016. "Visual guide to the Grenfell Tower fire". BBC News. 4 August 2017. "German towerblock evacuated after cladding fears in wake of Grenfell tragedy". The Telegraph. 27 June 2017. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022 – via www.telegraph.co.uk. "Russia fire: Children killed in Kemerovo shopping centre blaze". BBC News. 26 March 2018. Retrieved 26 March 2018. Herenandez, Juan (29 March 2018). "At least 78 dead in Venezuela jail fire". CNET. Archived from the original on 2 April 2018. Retrieved 29 March 2018. Londoño, Ernesto; Darlington, Shasta (2 September 2018). "Fire Engulfs a Brazilian Museum, Threatening Hundreds of Years of History". The New York Times. Retrieved 3 September 2018. "Fire engulfs 200-year-old Brazil museum". BBC News. 2 September 2018. Archived from the original on 3 September 2018. Retrieved 2 September 2018. "Bangladesh fire: Blaze kills dozens in Dhaka historic district". BBC News. 21 February 2019. Retrieved 22 February 2019. "Notre Dame fire was probably caused by electrical short circuit, police official says". Los Angeles Times. 18 April 2019. Retrieved 18 May 2019. "Costa Concordia captain Francesco Schettino facing new charge". Agence France-Presse. 23 February 2012. Archived from the original on 28 February 2012. "Four crew members of sunken South Korea ship charged with murder – Asia Bulletin". www.asiabulletin.com. Retrieved 21 June 2016. Watson, Ivan; Park, Madison; Botelho, Greg. "Hundreds of bodies recovered from Chinese cruise ship". CNN. Retrieved 21 June 2016. "Death toll reaches 100 in Tanzania ferry disaster, hundreds feared missing". Reuters. 20 September 2018. Retrieved 21 September 2018. "BP Will Pay For Gulf Oil Spill Disaster, CEO Says". NPR. 3 May 2010. Archived from the original on 4 May 2010. Retrieved 3 May 2010. "Full text of President Obama's BP Oil Spill speech". Reuters. 15 June 2010. Archived from the original on 16 June 2010. Retrieved 16 June 2010. "Magnitude 9.0 – Near The East Coast of Honshu, Japan". United States Geological Survey (USGS). Archived from the original on 7 April 2011. Retrieved 13 March 2011. "Japanese nuclear plant operator admits playing down risk". CNN. Retrieved 21 June 2016. "City switch to Flint River water slated to happen Friday". MLive.com. Retrieved 21 June 2016. "Accused water plant operator takes plea deal in Flint water crisis". MLive.com. Retrieved 21 June 2016. Sutton, Jane; Boadle, Anthony; Fletcher, Pascal (15 January 2010). "Haiti quake death toll may hit 200,000-minister". Reuters. Archived from the original on 19 January 2010. Retrieved 15 January 2010 – via Alertnet. "Red Cross: 3M Haitians Affected by Quake". CBS News. 13 January 2010. Retrieved 25 June 2016. "Gobierno entregó lista de 497 fallecidos en el terremoto". Cooperativa.cl. Retrieved 21 June 2010. Newitz, Annalee (3 March 2010). "Why the Chile earthquake deformed the earth and shortened our days". io9. Retrieved 4 January 2016. Than K. (2 March 2010). "Chile earthquake altered Earth axis, shortened day". National Geographic News. Archived from the original on 4 March 2010. Retrieved 20 March 2010. Wright, David; Murray, Michael (5 April 2010). "Baja California Earthquake: Recovering from Easter Sunday 7.2 Quake". ABC News. Retrieved 15 July 2018. "China Earthquake: 589 Killed in Qinghai Province's Yushu Region After 6.9 Magnitude Tremor | World News | Sky News". News.sky.com. Archived from the original on 28 May 2010. Retrieved 21 June 2010. "Hundreds die in west China quake". BBC News. 14 April 2010. Archived from the original on 17 April 2010. Retrieved 23 April 2010. "February earthquake toll hits 185". Stuff.co.nz. 9 February 2012. Retrieved 21 June 2016. "Damage Situation and Police Countermeasures associated with 2011 Tohoku district – off the Pacific Ocean Earthquake October 10, 2015" (PDF). National Police Agency of Japan. 10 December 2015. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 February 2012. Retrieved 5 January 2016. "2011 Japan Earthquake – Tsunami Fast Facts". 22 October 2015. Retrieved 5 January 2016. "Japan quake – hundreds dead in Sendai". www.newshub.co.nz. Retrieved 21 June 2016. Arm; Vervaeck; Daniell, Dr James (23 October 2011). "Earthquake Van – Ercis, Turkey – 604 Dead, Large Aftershock 5.6 hits Van". Earthquake-Report.com. Archived from the original on 22 November 2020. Retrieved 21 June 2016. "Nepal earthquake death toll rises to 8,413 – The Times of India". The Times of India. Retrieved 21 June 2016. "The Latest on Nepal: In Ravaged Hamlets, Lives Were Spared". U.S. News & World Report. Retrieved 21 June 2016. "Nepal earthquake: Eerie reminder of 1934 tragedy". Daily News & Analysis. 25 April 2015. Retrieved 26 June 2016. Shrestha, Manesh. "Death toll from latest Nepal earthquake rises above 125". CNN. Retrieved 21 June 2016. "Death toll from Ecuador earthquake surpasses 650". Reuters. 24 April 2016. Retrieved 21 June 2016. Zampano, Giada; Mesco, Manuela; Legorano, Giovanni (24 August 2016). "Italy Earthquake Kills at Least 159, Leaves Dozens Missing". The Wall Street Journal. "Death toll rises to 360 in Mexico earthquake". The Denver Post. 1 January 2018. Retrieved 15 July 2018. "Indonesia earthquake: Hundreds dead in Palu quake and tsunami". BBC News. 29 September 2018. Retrieved 29 September 2018. "Indonesia tsunami kills hundreds after Krakatau eruption". BBC News. 23 December 2018. Retrieved 23 December 2018. "Peru earthquake leaves one dead and several injured". CNN. 26 May 2019. Retrieved 16 June 2019. "Albania earthquake: at least 21 dead and hundreds injured". The Guardian. 27 November 2019. Retrieved 27 November 2019. "Super Typhoon Megi hits northern Philippines". BBC News. 18 October 2010. Retrieved 14 October 2011. "Hundreds die as tropical storm Washi sweeps across Philippines". The Daily Telegraph. 17 December 2011. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Diakakis, Michalis; Deligiannakis, Georgios; Katsetsiadou, Katerina; Lekkas, Efthymios (2015). "Hurricane Sandy mortality in the Caribbean and continental North America". Disaster Prevention and Management. 24 (1): 132–148. Bibcode:2015DisPM..24..132D. doi:10.1108/DPM-05-2014-0082. "Hurricane Sandy Grows To Largest Atlantic Tropical Storm Ever". 28 October 2012. Retrieved 21 June 2016. "Typhoon-hit Philippines appeals for help". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 21 June 2016. "Death toll from Typhoon Haiyan in Philippines passes 6,000 mark". Global News. Retrieved 21 June 2016. "Tropical Cyclone Report, Hurricane Joaquin" (PDF). National Hurricane Center. 12 January 2016. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 15 August 2019. "Typhoon Nona makes landfall in Northern Samar". Rappler. 13 December 2015. Retrieved 20 December 2015. "PAGASA: Typhoon Nona makes landfall over Batag Island, Northern Samar". CNN Philippines. 14 December 2015. Archived from the original on 22 December 2015. Retrieved 20 December 2015. "$2.98 billion damage caused by TC Winston". Newswire. Archived from the original on 17 June 2016. Retrieved 21 June 2016. "Tropical Cyclone Report, Hurricane Matthew" (PDF). National Hurricane Center. 7 April 2017. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 15 August 2019. Isidore, Chris (30 August 2017). "Harvey certain to be one of the most expensive natural disasters ever". CNNMoney. Retrieved 30 August 2017. Costliest U.S. tropical cyclones tables update (PDF) (Report). United States National Hurricane Center. 12 January 2018. Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 January 2018. Retrieved 12 January 2018. Weaver, Matthew; Phipps, Claire; Levin, Sam; Lartey, Jamiles (7 September 2017). "Caribbean islands suffer huge damage after Irma – as it happened". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 11 September 2017. "Hurricane Irma causes devastation in the Caribbean". BBC News. 7 September 2017. Retrieved 11 September 2017. Kassam, Ashifa (4 October 2017). "Dominica in tatters weeks after Maria: 'We saw everything totally destroyed'". The Guardian. Retrieved 15 July 2018. "Puerto Rico: Nearly half of residents without power three months after Hurricane Maria". USA Today. Deutsche Welle. 1 January 2018. Retrieved 15 July 2018. "At least 95 dead due to Typhoon Ompong". Rappler. 21 September 2018. Retrieved 21 September 2018. "Recovered bodies from Itogon landslide now 23". GMA News. 20 September 2018. Retrieved 20 September 2018. "Tropical Cyclone Report, Hurricane Michael" (PDF). National Hurricane Center. 17 May 2019. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 15 August 2019. "Hurricane Dorian Ravaged the Bahamas and Struck the Southeastern U.S. Coast Before Heading to Atlantic Canada (RECAP)". The Weather Channel. 8 September 2019. Retrieved 1 January 2020. "South mourns victims of deadly tornadoes". CBS News. Retrieved 21 June 2016. "Annual U.S. Killer Tornado Statistics". Storm Prediction Center. "Bara-Parsa Tornado Destroyed Property Worth Loss Over Rs. 90 Million: Nepal Govt. Report". Nepal 24 Hours. 15 April 2019. Archived from the original on 19 August 2020. Retrieved 23 April 2019. Bodeen, Christopher (8 August 2010). "Asia flooding plunges millions into misery". Associated Press. Archived from the original on 4 September 2010. Retrieved 8 August 2010. Khan, Ismail (30 July 2010). "400 Killed in Flooding in Pakistan, Officials Say". The New York Times. Retrieved 30 July 2010. "Deaths From Pakistan Floods May Reach 3,000, Rescue Service Official Says". Bloomberg. Retrieved 12 May 2013. "Death toll from Brazil floods hits 600". The Irish Times. Retrieved 21 June 2016. "Número de mortos na Região Serrana já passa de 900 após chuvas de janeiro". O Globo (in Brazilian Portuguese). 16 February 2011. Retrieved 21 June 2016. "Alberta flooding claims at least 3 lives". CBC News. Retrieved 21 June 2016. Delhi, Zibair Babakarkhail in Kabul and Dean Nelson in New (2 March 2015). "Avalanches kill more than 300 in Afghanistan". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 21 June 2016. Narasimhan, T.E. (11 December 2015). "Chennai floods are world's 8th most expensive natural disaster in 2015". Business Standard. Retrieved 12 December 2015. "Qantas cancels flights for a third day". The Sydney Morning Herald. 18 April 2010. Archived from the original on 5 June 2011. Retrieved 18 April 2010. "Another person dies of injuries from Whakaari /White Island eruption, bringing death toll to 20". TVNZ. Retrieved 13 January 2020. Ghose, Tia (8 April 2015). "What Record-Breaking Drought Means for California's Future". Live Science. Retrieved 24 February 2018. Meteorologist, Chris Burton -. "Indian monsoon arrives – deadly heatwave ends". The Weather Network. Archived from the original on 30 January 2016. Retrieved 21 June 2016. Parsons, Paige (3 May 2016). "Thousands flee from Fort McMurray wildfire in the largest fire evacuation in Alberta's history". Edmonton Journal. Archived from the original on 10 May 2016. Retrieved 3 May 2016. "Fort McMurray fire could cost insurers $9B, BMO predicts". CBC News. 5 May 2016. Archived from the original on 10 May 2016. Retrieved 5 May 2016. Baldassari, Erin (11 November 2018). "Camp Fire death toll grows to 29, matching 1933 blaze as state's deadliest". East Bay Times. Retrieved 12 November 2018. Masters, Jeff. "America's Deadliest Wildfire in 100 Years: 56 Dead in Paradise, California". Weather Underground. Retrieved 30 November 2018. "Situação atual – Programa Queimadas – INPE". queimadas.dgi.inpe.br. Archived from the original on 20 June 2022. Retrieved 1 September 2019. "Brazil's Bolsonaro says he will accept aid to fight Amazon fires". CBS News. 27 August 2019. Retrieved 30 August 2019. "Update on Northern NSW bush fires". www.rfs.nsw.gov.au. "Australian bushfires reach Sydney's suburbs". BBC News. 12 November 2019. Retrieved 21 November 2019. Tolhurst, Kevin (10 June 2020). "It's 12 months since the last bushfire season began, but don't expect the same this year". The Conversation. Retrieved 3 September 2021. "Beaches and pools closed, races cancelled as Melbourne chokes on bushfire smoke". www.abc.net.au. 13 January 2020. Retrieved 3 September 2021. "Bond market developments are deep concern, says Barroso". BBC News. 3 August 2011. "Does debt deal solve euro woes?". CNN. 27 October 2011. "When were the most prolific bull and bear market periods in the United States?" Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, 2001. Web. 6 January 2015. Tan, Weizhen. "'Addiction' to cheap money will do 'tremendous damage' to the global economy". CNBC. Enda, Curran. "Central Bankers Are Playing a Dangerous Game With Asset Prices". Bloomberg. Bartash, Jeffrey. "It's great the stock market is setting records, but it's not because the economy is great". MarketWatch. Evans, Judith. "Real estate: post-crisis boom draws to a close". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. "Our cities house-price index suggests the property market is slowing". The Economist. 11 August 2018. Hosaka, Tomoko A. "Japan confirms China surpassed its economy in 2010". Yahoo!. Archived from the original on 20 February 2011. Fujioka, Toru (24 August 2011). "Japan Unveils Billion to Fight Surging Yen as Moody's Lowers Rating". Bloomberg. Retrieved 10 November 2011. "United States loses prized AAA credit rating from S&P". Reuters. 6 August 2011. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 30 June 2017. "More Than Half Still Say U.S. Is in Recession or Depression". Gallup. 28 April 2011. Retrieved 10 November 2011. "India clocks 7.5% growth in January–March quarter, becomes world's fastest growing economy". Daily News & Analysis. 29 May 2015. Retrieved 6 March 2016. "Argentina hikes interest rates to 40% amid inflation crisis". 4 May 2018. Archived from the original on 1 May 2022. "The US is no longer the world's most competitive economy". Fox Business. 30 May 2019. Retrieved 31 May 2019. "International Energy Statistics – EIA". www.eia.gov. Retrieved 19 January 2016. "America is now the world's largest oil producer". CNNBusiness. 12 September 2018. Retrieved 31 May 2019. "Economic optimism drives stockmarket highs". The Economist. 17 October 2017. "World Economic Outlook, April 2019: Growth Slowdown, Precarious Recovery". April 2019. Thompson, Derek (10 April 2017). "What in the World Is Causing the Retail Meltdown of 2017?". The Atlantic. Retrieved 10 April 2017. Mark James, Retail Apocalypse Online competition drives store closings Archived 9 February 2019 at the Wayback Machine [2] Archived 9 February 2019 at the Wayback Machine , 16 July 2018 Badkar, Mamta (14 May 2018). "Fed's Bullard: Cryptocurrencies creating 'non-uniform' currency in US". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 14 May 2018. Henley, Jon (4 June 2016). "Sweden leads the race to become cashless society". The Observer – via www.theguardian.com. "Access to Cash Review Final Report" (PDF). www.accesstocash.org.uk. March 2019. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. "2016 User Consumer Study" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 August 2019. Retrieved 31 May 2019. Cho, Adrian (2010). "BREAKTHROUGH OF THE YEAR. The First Quantum Machine". Science. 330 (6011): 1604. Bibcode:2010Sci...330.1604C. doi:10.1126/science.330.6011.1604. PMID 21163978. Cohen, Jon (2011). "Breakthrough of the Year: HIV Treatment as Prevention". Science. 334 (6063): 1628. Bibcode:2011Sci...334.1628C. doi:10.1126/science.334.6063.1628. PMID 22194547. "Breakthrough of the Year, 2012". Science. Couzin-Franken, Jenifer (20 December 2013). "Cancer Immunotherapy". Science. 342 (6165): 1432–1433. doi:10.1126/science.342.6165.1432. PMID 24357284. Archived from the original on 22 December 2013. Retrieved 22 December 2013. Hand, Eric (19 December 2014). "Comet rendezvous". Science. 346 (6216): 1442–1443. doi:10.1126/science.346.6216.1442. PMID 25525223. Travis, John (18 December 2015). "Making the cut". Science Magazine. 350 (6267): 1456–1457. doi:10.1126/science.350.6267.1456. PMID 26680172. "Ripples in spacetime: Science's 2016 Breakthrough of the Year". Adiran Cho. AAAS. 22 December 2016. Retrieved 23 December 2016. "Breakthrough of the year 2017". Science. AAAS. 22 December 2017. Retrieved 9 September 2018. "Choose your 2018 Breakthrough of the Year!". Science. AAAS. Retrieved 28 November 2018. Phelan, Meagan; Beckwith, Walter (19 December 2019). "Science's 2019 Breakthrough: First Image of Supermassive Black Hole". American Association for the Advancement of Science. Retrieved 20 December 2019. American Association for the Advancement of Science (19 December 2019). "Science's 2019 breakthrough of the year: The first image of a black hole". EurekAlert!. Retrieved 20 December 2019. O'Toole, James (28 February 2014). "Mobile apps overtake monthly Internet usage on PCs for the first time". CNNMoney. Etherington, Darrell (1 November 2016). "Mobile internet use passes desktop for the first time, study finds". "Pivotal moments in 2014: when mobile overtook desktop". www.phocuswire.com. "Mobile Now Exceeds PC: The Biggest Shift Since the Internet Began". Search Engine Watch. 8 July 2014. "Mobile and tablet internet usage exceeds desktop for first time worldwide". StatCounter Global Stats. Davies, Nick; Leigh, David (25 July 2010). "Afghanistan war logs: Massive leak of secret files exposes truth of occupation". The Guardian. Retrieved 25 June 2016. Nakashima, Ellen (2 June 2012). "Stuxnet was work of U.S. and Israeli experts, officials say". The Washington Post. Davies, Nick; Steele, Jonathan; Leigh, David (22 October 2010). "Iraq war logs: secret files show how US ignored torture". The Guardian. Retrieved 25 June 2016. "Secret Files Expose Offshore's Global Impact". ICIJ. Archived from the original on 5 April 2013. Retrieved 4 April 2013. Greenwald, Glenn (6 June 2013). "NSA collecting phone records of millions of Verizon customers daily". The Guardian. Retrieved 22 June 2016. "Millions more Americans hit by government personnel data hack". Reuters. 9 July 2015. Retrieved 22 June 2016. Sanger, David E.; Davis, Julie Hirschfeld (4 June 2015). "Hacking Linked to China Exposes Millions of U.S. Workers". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 22 June 2016. "Sri Lankan in Bangladesh cyber heist says she was set up by friend". Reuters. 31 March 2016. Retrieved 22 June 2016. "How a spelling mistake stopped hackers stealing $1bn in a bank heist". The Independent. 11 March 2016. Archived from the original on 1 May 2022. Retrieved 22 June 2016. "Giant Leak of Offshore Financial Records Exposes Global Array of Crime and Corruption". The International Consortium of Investigative Journalists. 3 April 2016. Archived from the original on 3 April 2016. "Yahoo Says 'State-Sponsored Actor' Hacked 500M Accounts". NBC News. 22 September 2016. Retrieved 22 September 2016. "Massive web attacks briefly knock out top sites". BBC News. 21 October 2016. Retrieved 21 October 2016. "Cyber-attack: Europol says it was unprecedented in scale". BBC News. 13 May 2017. Retrieved 13 May 2017. Garside, Juliette (5 November 2017). "Paradise Papers leak reveals secrets of the world elite's hidden wealth". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 11 November 2017. Retrieved 11 November 2017. "H.I.V. Is Reported Cured in a Second Patient, a Milestone in the Global AIDS Epidemic". The New York Times. 4 March 2019. "30 Years Later: An End to AIDS?". Fox News. 2 June 2011. "Global Concern about Climate Change, Broad Support for Limiting Emissions". Pew Research Centre's Global Attitudes Project. 5 November 2015. Retrieved 29 June 2020. "Population seven billion: UN sets out challenges". BBC News. 26 October 2011. Retrieved 30 October 2011. "Share of the population using the Internet". Our World in Data. Retrieved 9 January 2023. Eagle, James (9 September 2022). "Animation: The Most Popular Websites by Web Traffic (1993-2022)". Visual Capitalist. Retrieved 9 January 2023. Parisi, Paula (21 February 2019). "'Ready Player One' Juxtaposes Real, Virtual Via VFX From Three Shops". Variety. Retrieved 8 December 2020. "Pixar's Brave to debut new Dolby Atmos sound system". BBC News. 25 April 2012. Retrieved 8 December 2020. Spangler, Todd (19 February 2020). "Traditional Pay-TV Operators Lost Record 6 Million Subscribers in 2019 as Cord-Cutting Picks Up Speed". Variety. Retrieved 8 December 2020. Fitzgerald, Toni (17 May 2019). "How Do 'The Big Bang Theory' Series Finale Ratings Rank All Time?". Forbes. Retrieved 8 December 2020. "Longest-running sitcom (by episode count)". Guinness World Records. 2 July 2022. "Taarak Mehta Ka Ooltah Chashmah set to clock 3000 'happysodes';making it 'world's longest running daily family comedy show'". Mumbai Mirror. Dredge, Stuart (3 February 2016). "Why are YouTube stars so popular?". The Guardian. Retrieved 8 December 2020. Gilbert, Ben. "YouTube now has over 1.8 billion users every month, within spitting distance of Facebook's 2 billion". Business Insider. Retrieved 8 December 2020. Halliday, Josh (6 January 2012). "Digital downloads overtake physical music sales in the US for first time". The Guardian. Retrieved 8 December 2020. Leight, Elias (3 January 2019). "Hip-Hop Continued to Dominate the Music Business in 2018". Rolling Stone. Retrieved 8 December 2020. "Hip hop and R&B surpass rock as biggest U.S. music genre". Reuters. 4 January 2018 – via www.reuters.com. Alvarado, Abel (30 October 2015). "It's a $6.2B industry but, how did EDM get so popular?". CNN. Retrieved 8 December 2020. Smirke, Richard (23 May 2019). "Is The Party Over? EDM's Share of US Record Market Falls As DJ Earnings Slip to Five-Year Low". Billboard. Retrieved 8 December 2020. "Top Artists". Billboard. 31 October 2019. Macgregor, Jody (19 May 2019). "Minecraft has sold 176 million copies, may be the best-selling game ever". PC Gamer. Retrieved 9 December 2020. "PlayStation 4 v Xbox One: Experts on next-gen battle". BBC News. 15 November 2013. Retrieved 9 December 2020. "PlayStation 4 was the best-selling hardware of the decade". VentureBeat. 16 January 2020. Retrieved 9 December 2020. "iOS games spending overtakes dedicated games". sg.news.yahoo.com. 16 May 2013. Retrieved 8 January 2023. "Feature: 2010–2019 – Nintendo's Decade In Review". Nintendo Life. 30 December 2019. Retrieved 9 December 2020. "Nintendo 3DS discontinued after almost a decade". BBC News. 17 September 2020. Retrieved 9 December 2020. Stuart, Keith (3 February 2017). "RIP Wii U: Nintendo's glorious, quirky failure". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 17 October 2023. "Mobile games sparked 60% of 2019 global game revenue, study finds". Marketing Dive. Retrieved 9 December 2020. "Myth busting: Mobile Gaming demographics". MMA. Retrieved 9 December 2020. Webb, Kevin (12 September 2019). "The best-selling video game of every year, from 1995 to 2018". Business Insider. Retrieved 29 June 2021. Kain, Erik (17 January 2020). "The 20 Best-Selling Video Games Of 2019". Forbes. Retrieved 29 June 2021. "These are the 10 best-selling books of the decade". Literary Hub. 20 December 2019. Retrieved 18 July 2020. Kakutani, Michiko (27 December 2019). "Opinion | The 2010s Were the End of Normal". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 26 September 2020. Beckett, Andy (17 December 2019). "The age of perpetual crisis: how the 2010s disrupted everything but resolved nothing". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 26 September 2020. "The 2010s in review: A decade of political and economic shocks". Nikkei Asian Review. 27 December 2019. Retrieved 26 September 2020. Strong, Jason. The 2010s: Looking Back at a Dramatic decade (2019) Media related to 2010s at Wikimedia Commons