Demetria Devonne "Demi" Lovato (/ˈdɛmi ləˈvɑːtoʊ/ DEM-ee lə-VAH-toh; born August 20, 1992) is an American singer, songwriter, and actress. After appearing on the children's television series Barney & Friends (2002–2004), she rose to prominence for playing Mitchie Torres in the musical television film Camp Rock (2008) and its sequel Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam (2010). The former film's soundtrack contained "This Is Me", her debut single and duet, which peaked at number nine on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100. After signing with Hollywood Records, Lovato released her pop rock debut album, Don't Forget (2008), which debuted at number two on the U.S. Billboard 200. Its follow-up, Here We Go Again (2009), debuted at number one in the U.S., while its title track reached number 15 on the Hot 100. Her third studio album, Unbroken (2011), experimented with pop and R&B and spawned the U.S. platinum-certified single "Skyscraper". She released her self titled fourth album in 2013, which debuted at number three on the Billboard 200, and contained the top-ten international song "Heart Attack". Lovato's fifth and sixth albums, Confident (2015) and Tell Me You Love Me (2017), infused soul and mature themes. She earned a Grammy Award nomination for Confident, while "Sorry Not Sorry", the lead single from Tell Me You Love Me, became her highest-charting single in the U.S., reaching number six. After a hiatus, she released her seventh and eighth albums Dancing with the Devil... the Art of Starting Over (2021) and Holy Fvck (2022), which reached number two and number seven in the U.S., respectively. On television, Lovato has starred as the titular character on the sitcom Sonny with a Chance (2009–2011), served as a judge on the music competition series The X Factor USA for its second and third seasons, and appeared as a recurring character on the musical comedy Glee (2013–2014) and the sitcom Will & Grace (2020). She also starred in the television drama film Princess Protection Program (2009), the animated comedy film Smurfs: The Lost Village (2017), and the musical comedy Eurovision Song Contest: The Story of Fire Saga (2020). Lovato has sold over 24 million records in the United States and has also received numerous accolades, including an MTV Video Music Award, 14 Teen Choice Awards, five People's Choice Awards, two Latin American Music Awards, a Guinness World Record, and was included on the Time 100 annual list in 2017. An activist for various social causes, Lovato's struggles with an eating disorder and substance abuse have received considerable media attention, in response to which she published the self-help memoir Staying Strong: 365 Days a Year (2013) and released the documentaries Demi Lovato: Simply Complicated (2017) and Demi Lovato: Dancing with the Devil (2021). Demetria Devonne Lovato was born on August 20, 1992, in Albuquerque, New Mexico, to former Dallas Cowboys cheerleader Dianna De La Garza (née Lee Smith) and engineer and musician Patrick Martin Lovato. Lovato has an older full sister named Dallas, a younger maternal half-sister, actress Madison De La Garza, and an older paternal half-sister, Amber, whom Lovato first spoke to at age 20. In mid-1994, shortly after Lovato's second birthday, her parents divorced. Her father was of Nuevomexicano descent, with mostly Spanish and Native American ancestors, and came from a family that had been living in New Mexico for generations; he also had distant Portuguese and Jewish ancestry. He was a descendant of Civil War Union veteran Francisco Perea and Santa Fe de Nuevo México governor Francisco Xavier Chávez. Lovato had no interest in forging a relationship with Patrick after her parents divorced. Her mother is of Irish descent. She has been vocal about her strained relationship with her father, calling him abusive and once stated, "He was mean, but he wanted to be a good person. And he wanted to have his family, and when my mom married my stepdad, he still had this huge heart where he said, 'I'm so glad that [he's] taking care of you and doing the job that I wish I could do.'" After Patrick died of cancer on June 22, 2013, Lovato said that he had been mentally ill, and she created the Lovato Treatment Scholarship Program in his honor. Lovato was brought up in Dallas, Texas. She began playing the piano at age seven and guitar at ten, when she began dancing and acting classes. In 2002, Lovato began her acting career on the children's television series Barney & Friends, portraying the role of Angela. She appeared on Prison Break in 2006 and on Just Jordan the following year. Due to her acting career, Lovato was bullied and consequently requested homeschooling, through which she eventually received her high-school diploma. From 2007 to 2008, Lovato played Charlotte Adams on the Disney Channel short series As the Bell Rings. Lovato auditioned for the channel's television film Camp Rock and series Sonny with a Chance during 2007 and got both roles. Lovato played the lead character, aspiring singer Mitchie Torres, in Camp Rock. The film premiered on June 20, 2008, to 8.9 million viewers. Gillian Flynn of Entertainment Weekly wrote that Lovato's acting skills were underwhelming and that she has "the knee-jerk smile of someone who is often told she has a great smile". The film's soundtrack was released three days earlier; however, the music was considered less current than that of High School Musical. It debuted at number three on the US Billboard 200, with 188,000 units sold in its first week of release. Lovato sang four songs on the soundtrack, including "We Rock" and "This Is Me". The latter, Lovato's debut single, debuted at number 11 on the US Billboard Hot 100 and later peaked at number nine, marking her first entry on the chart. That summer, Lovato signed with Hollywood Records and began her Demi Live! Warm Up Tour before the release of her debut studio album, and appeared on the Jonas Brothers' Burnin' Up Tour. Lovato's debut studio album, Don't Forget, released on September 23, 2008, was met with generally positive reviews from critics. Michael Slezak of Entertainment Weekly said, "Demi Lovato might satisfy her 'tween fans but she won't be winning any rockers over with Don't Forget". The album debuted at number two in the US, with first-week sales of 89,000 copies. Ten of its songs were co-written with the Jonas Brothers. Don't Forget was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) for US sales of over 500,000 copies. Its lead single, "Get Back", was praised for its pop rock style and peaked at number 43 on the Billboard Hot 100, also selling over 560,000 copies in the United States. The album's second single, "La La Land", was cited for its strong rock elements and peaked at number 52 in the US, and cracked the top 40 in Ireland and the United Kingdom. The music video for the song was directed by Brendan Malloy and Tim Wheeler.[full citation needed] The third single and title track, "Don't Forget", peaked at number 41 in the US. Lovato's Disney Channel sitcom Sonny with a Chance, in which she played Sonny Munroe, the newest cast member of the show-within-a-show So Random!, premiered on February 8. Robert Lloyd of the Los Angeles Times described Lovato's acting ability as "very good", comparing her favorably to Hannah Montana star Miley Cyrus. That June, Lovato starred as Rosie Gonzalez / Princess Rosalinda in the Disney Channel film Princess Protection Program, alongside Selena Gomez. The film, the fourth highest-rated Disney Channel original movie, premiered to 8.5 million viewers. For the film's soundtrack, the pair recorded the song "One and the Same", which was later released as a promotional single. Lovato's second studio album, Here We Go Again, was released on July 21, 2009; she described its acoustic style as similar to that of John Mayer. The album received favorable reviews from critics who appreciated its enjoyable pop-rock elements, echoing reviews of Don't Forget. Lovato's first number-one album, it debuted atop the Billboard 200 with first-week sales of 108,000 copies, and was later certified Gold. The album's lead single and title track, "Here We Go Again", debuted at number 59 on the Billboard Hot 100, and managed to peak at number 15, becoming Lovato's highest-charting solo single to that point. The song also peaked at number 68 on the Canadian Hot 100 and number 38 in New Zealand. "Here We Go Again" was additionally certified Platinum in the US. The album's second and final single, "Remember December" failed to match the success of its predecessor, but peaked at number 80 on the UK Singles Chart. Lovato made her first 40-city national concert tour, Live in Concert, in support of Here We Go Again. The tour, from June 21 to August 21, 2009, had David Archuleta, KSM, and Jordan Pruitt as opening acts. Lovato and Archuleta received the Choice Music Tour award at the 2009 Teen Choice Awards. Lovato was featured alongside the Jonas Brothers, Miley Cyrus, and Selena Gomez on the song "Send It On", a charity single and the theme song for Disney's Friends for Change. All proceeds from the song were donated to environmental charities supported by the Disney Worldwide Conservation Fund. Lovato recorded "Gift of a Friend" as a soundtrack for the Disney movie Tinker Bell and the Lost Treasure. The movie was released in October 2009. In 2010, Lovato and Joe Jonas recorded "Make a Wave" as the second charity single for Disney's Friends for Change. That May, Lovato guest-starred as Hayley May, a teenager with schizophrenia, in the sixth-season Grey's Anatomy episode, "Shiny Happy People". Although critics praised her versatility, they were underwhelmed by her acting and felt that her appearance was designed primarily to attract viewers. Later that year, she headlined her first international tour, Demi Lovato: Live in Concert, and joined the Jonas Brothers: Live in Concert tour as a guest. Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam, with Lovato reprising her role as Mitchie Torres, premiered on September 3, 2010. Critics were ambivalent about the film's plot, and it has a 40-percent approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes. However, Lovato's performance was called "dependably appealing" by Jennifer Armstrong of Entertainment Weekly. The film premiered to eight million viewers, the number-one cable television movie of the year by the number of viewers. Its accompanying soundtrack was released on August 10 with Lovato singing nine songs, including "Can't Back Down" and "Wouldn't Change a Thing". The soundtrack debuted at number three on the Billboard 200, with first-week sales of 41,000 copies. Jonas Brothers: Live in Concert was reworked to incorporate Lovato and the rest of the film's cast; it began on August 7, two weeks later than planned. The Sonny with a Chance soundtrack was released on October 5; Lovato sang on four tracks, including "Me, Myself and Time". It debuted (and peaked) at number 163 on the Billboard 200, her lowest-selling soundtrack. In November 2010, Lovato announced her departure from Sonny with a Chance, putting her acting career on hiatus and ending the series; she later said that she would return to acting when she felt confident doing so. Her departure led to the actual spin-off series So Random! with the Sonny cast, featuring sketches from the former show-within-a-show. The series was canceled after one season. Lovato released her third studio album, Unbroken, on September 20, 2011. Begun in July 2010, the album experimented with R&B and featured less pop rock than her first two albums. Lyrically, Unbroken encompassed more mature themes as opposed to Lovato's previous works, with some songs focusing on her personal struggles. The album and its stylistic change received mixed reviews from critics, who praised Lovato's vocals and saw a growth in her musicianship due to the songs focusing on her struggles, but criticized the album's "party songs" and found the music to be more generic than her previous efforts. Unbroken debuted at number four in the US, selling 97,000 copies in its first week of release; it was later certified Gold. "Skyscraper", the lead single from Unbroken, was released on July 12, and was noted for its messages of self-worth and confidence. It debuted at number ten in the US, selling 176,000 downloads during the first week of release, becoming Lovato's highest first week sales at the time. The song also became Lovato's highest-charting single since "This Is Me" peaking at number nine in July 2008, and it also debuted at number two on the Hot Digital Songs chart. "Skyscraper" received the Best Video With a Message award at the September 2012 MTV Video Music Awards, and the track was also certified Platinum by the RIAA and Silver by the BPI. The album's second and final single, "Give Your Heart a Break", was released on January 23, 2012, and later peaked on the Billboard Hot 100 at number 16, making Lovato's fourth highest-charting song to that point. It peaked at number 12 on the US Adult Top 40 chart and number one on the US Pop Songs chart. It also became the longest climb by a female artist to reach No. 1 in the Pop Songs chart history until 2019, when Halsey's feature on "Eastside" broke the record. The song was certified triple Platinum in the US; as of October 2014[update], "Give Your Heart a Break" has sold 2.1 million digital copies. Billboard has ranked the song as Lovato's best, calling it "timeless". In May, Lovato became a judge and mentor for the second season of the U.S. version of The X Factor, with a reported salary of one million dollars. Joining Britney Spears, Simon Cowell, and L.A. Reid, it was speculated that she was chosen to attract a younger audience. Mentoring the Young Adults category, her final act (CeCe Frey) finished sixth. At the Minnesota State Fair in August, Lovato announced that after a pre-show performance at the 2012 MTV Video Music Awards she would release a single by December. On December 24, she released a video on her YouTube account of herself singing "Angels Among Us" dedicated to the victims of the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting. In March, she was confirmed as returning for The X Factor's third season, with her salary reportedly doubling. Lovato's fourth studio album, Demi, was released on May 14, 2013. The album features influences of synthpop and bubblegum pop and was met with generally positive reviews from music critics. Although Jon Carmichael of The New York Times found Lovato's transition fun, according to Entertainment Weekly it signified a less mature image. The album debuted at number three in the US, with first-week sales of 110,000 copies, the best-selling debut week of Lovato's discography. It was also successful internationally, charting in the top ten in New Zealand, Spain and the UK. The album has been certified Gold in the US. The lead single from Demi, "Heart Attack", was released on February 25, and debuted at number 12 in the US, with first-week sales of 215,000 copies, the highest first week sales of Lovato's discography. The song peaked at number ten (Lovato's third top ten entry in the US), and was also successful in the UK, Australia, and Europe. The second single, "Made in the USA" peaked at number 80 in the US. The third and fourth singles from Demi, "Neon Lights" and "Really Don't Care", both peaked in the top forty of the US, and at number one in the country's Dance Club Songs chart. She was also certified Platinum in the US. Lovato later released a deluxe version of Demi, which included seven new tracks, consisting of four live performances and three studio recordings. One of these songs was "Up", a collaboration with Olly Murs for his fourth studio album Never Been Better. Lovato contributed to The Mortal Instruments: City of Bones soundtrack album with "Heart by Heart". On June 11, Lovato released an e-book, Demi, on iBooks. She planned to appear in at least six episodes of the fifth season of Glee, but only appeared in four. She played Dani, a struggling New York-based artist who befriends Rachel Berry (Lea Michele) and Santana Lopez (Naya Rivera) and interacts with fellow newcomer Adam Lambert's character. Lovato debuted in the season's second episode, which aired on October 3, and made her final appearance in March 2014. On November 19, she released a book, Staying Strong: 365 Days a Year, which topped The New York Times bestseller list. She then agreed to write a memoir, which has yet to be released. While on The X Factor, her final act (Rion Paige) finished fifth. Lovato announced her Neon Lights Tour (including a Canadian leg) on September 29, 2013; it began on February 9, 2014, and ended on May 17. On October 21, she released her cover of "Let It Go" for the Disney film Frozen, which was released in theaters on November 27. Lovato's cover was described as more "radio friendly" and "pop" as compared to the original by Idina Menzel. Lovato's cover appears in the film's credits, and the song was promoted as the single for the film's soundtrack. The song peaked at number 38 on the Billboard Hot 100, spending 20 weeks on the chart. It was certified double Platinum by the RIAA. On May 18, 2014, "Somebody to You" featuring Lovato was released as the fourth single from the Vamps' debut album, Meet the Vamps. On May 29, Lovato announced the Demi World Tour, which marked her fourth concert tour (and first world tour, covering 25 cities) and second in support of her album Demi. In November 2014, she opened the UK shows on Enrique Iglesias' Sex and Love Tour and worked with longtime friend Nick Jonas on the song "Avalanche" from his self-titled album. On December 24, Lovato released a music video for the song "Nightingale". In May 2015, Billboard revealed that Lovato was in the process of starting an "artist-centric" new record label, Safehouse Records, of which she would be co-founder and co-owner. The label would be a partnership between Lovato, Nick Jonas, and her then-manager Phil McIntyre, and will form part of a new collaborative arrangement with record label Island. Her fifth studio album, Confident, was released through the new venture deal. This would be Lovato's second multi-label venture of her career; she was formerly part of Jonas Records, a UMG/Hollywood/Jonas Brothers partnership, which is now defunct. Lovato released "Cool for the Summer" as the lead single from her fifth studio album, in July 1, 2015. The song attracted attention for its bi-curious theme, and was a commercial success, peaking at number eleven on the Billboard Hot 100, and reached the top ten in the United Kingdom and New Zealand, and was certified 3× Platinum by the RIAA. On September 18, 2015, the title track "Confident" was released as the album's second single and peaked at number 21 on the Hot 100. Lovato performed as the musical guest on an episode of the NBC late-night sketch comedy Saturday Night Live in October 2015. Lovato was also featured on the re-release of "Irresistible", the fourth single from Fall Out Boy's sixth studio album American Beauty/American Psycho. Lovato's fifth album, Confident, was released on October 16, 2015, and was nominated for Best Pop Vocal Album at the 59th Annual Grammy Awards. The album debuted at number two on the U.S. Billboard 200 with first-week sales of 98,000 album units, and was certified Platinum by the RIAA. The album received mixed to positive reviews from critics. Annie Zaleski from The A.V. Club stated that "Confident is an impressive album by a pop star who knows what she wants—and also knows exactly how to get there." During the album's production, Lovato commented: "I've already started recording for my new album, and I have plans to record during the tour. The sound just evolves into everything that I've been and everything that I want to become." She further stated, "I've never been so sure of myself as an artist when it comes down to confidence, but not only personal things, but exactly what I want my sound to be and what I know I'm capable of and this album will give me the opportunity to show people what I can really do." On October, she signed with the major modeling agency, Wilhelmina Models. Lovato released the music video for her R&B-infused song "Waitin for You" featuring rapper Sirah on October 22, 2015. On October 26, 2015, Lovato and Nick Jonas announced that they would be touring together on the Future Now Tour, to further promote Confident, with shows in North America and Europe. Lovato was honored with the first-ever Rulebreaker Award at the 2015 Billboard Women in Music event. On March 21, 2016, "Stone Cold" was released as the third and final single from Confident. On July 1, 2016, Lovato released a new single titled "Body Say" to promote her tour. In 2016, Lovato was honored with the GLAAD Vanguard Award at the 27th GLAAD Media Awards, for her support of the rights of the LGBT community. Lovato was also named to Forbes' 30 Under 30 list in the music category. In February 2017, Lovato executive-produced a documentary, Beyond Silence, which follows three individuals and their experiences with mental illnesses including bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, depression, and anxiety. Lovato featured in Cheat Codes' song "No Promises", released in March 2017, and Jax Jones's "Instruction" along with Stefflon Don, released in June 2017. In 2017, Lovato was included in Time magazine's annual list of the 100 most influential people in the world. On May 8, 2017, she announced a collaboration with sportswear line Fabletics to support the United Nations' initiative, Girl Up. In July 2017, Lovato released "Sorry Not Sorry" as the lead single from her sixth studio album, which became her highest-charting song in New Zealand and the United States at number six as well as Australia at number eight. It also became her best-selling single in the US for its 5× Platinum certification by RIAA. The album, titled Tell Me You Love Me, was released on September 29 and debuted at number three on the US Billboard 200 with first-week sales of 78,000 copies. It received positive reviews from music critics and became Lovato's first album to be certified Platinum in the US. On October 17, Lovato released Demi Lovato: Simply Complicated on YouTube, a documentary focusing on her career and personal struggles. It was nominated for "Best Music Documentary" at the 2018 MTV Movie & TV Awards. In October 2017, Lovato announced the tour dates for the North American leg of her Tell Me You Love Me World Tour, with special guests DJ Khaled and Kehlani. She confirmed European and South American legs of the tour in the following months, and the tour commenced in February 2018. In November 2017, Lovato released the single "Échame la Culpa" with Puerto Rican singer Luis Fonsi. Lovato performed at the March for Our Lives anti-gun violence rally in Washington, D.C. on March 24, 2018. In May, Lovato was featured on Christina Aguilera's "Fall in Line" and Clean Bandit's "Solo". The latter became Lovato's first number-one song in the United Kingdom. On June 21, Lovato released a new single, titled "Sober", which she referred to as "my truth"; it discusses struggles with addiction and sobriety. The Tell Me You Love Me World Tour concluded the following month, having originally been scheduled to end in November 2018. On May 11, 2019, Lovato revealed she had signed with a new manager, Scooter Braun. She shared that she "couldn't be happier, inspired and excited to begin this next chapter". In August 2019, it was revealed that Lovato would appear in Eurovision Song Contest: The Story of Fire Saga, a Netflix original film, directed by David Dobkin, based on the song competition of the same name. The film was ultimately released on June 26, 2020, and starred Will Ferrell and Rachel McAdams. This marked Lovato's first acting appearance since her guest role on Glee in 2013 and her first film role since Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam (2010). Later in the month, after teasing that she had been working on a new project, Lovato revealed her return to television with a recurring guest role in the final season of the NBC sitcom Will & Grace, where she played Will's surrogate. In January 2020, Lovato made her first musical appearance since her hiatus with a performance of single "Anyone" at the 62nd Annual Grammy Awards. The song, which was recorded four days prior to her 2018 drug overdose, was released on iTunes immediately after. On February 2, 2020, Lovato performed "The Star-Spangled Banner" at Super Bowl LIV. On March 6, Lovato released a new single titled "I Love Me". The release was supplemented by both a guest appearance and guest-host role on The Ellen DeGeneres Show. On April 16, she released a collaboration with Sam Smith titled "I'm Ready". Rolling Stone ranked this song at number 32 on its list of The 50 Most Inspirational LGBTQ Songs of All Time. A remix of "Lonely Hearts" by JoJo featuring Lovato was released on August 28, 2020. At the 2020 MTV Video Music Awards, Lovato received two nominations for her song "I Love Me", becoming the first artist in VMA history to receive a nomination every year for eight consecutive years. On September 10, Lovato released a collaboration with American DJ Marshmello, titled "OK Not to Be OK", in partnership with the Hope For The Day suicide prevention movement. On September 30, 2020, Lovato released "Still Have Me" via Twitter; the song was later released on digital platforms. On October 14, she released a political ballad titled "Commander in Chief", ahead of the 2020 presidential election. She hosted the 46th People's Choice Awards on November 15, 2020. On November 20, she featured on American rapper Jeezy's song "My Reputation" from his album The Recession 2. On December 4, Lovato featured on a remix of the song "Monsters" by rock band All Time Low, alongside Blackbear. Lovato was chosen to perform during Celebrating America, the primetime television special marking the inauguration of Joe Biden. Lovato sang "Lovely Day" by Bill Withers, with appearances from President Joe Biden with his grandson. A four-part documentary series following Lovato's life premiered on YouTube in March 2021. The series, titled Demi Lovato: Dancing with the Devil, was directed by Michael D. Ratner and showcased her personal and musical journey over the past three years. It was later announced that Lovato's seventh studio album, titled Dancing with the Devil... the Art of Starting Over, would be released on April 2, 2021. Lovato defined it "the non-official soundtrack to the documentary". The album features collaborations with Ariana Grande, Noah Cyrus and Saweetie, as well as the previously released "What Other People Say", a collaboration between Lovato and Australian singer-songwriter Sam Fischer, initially released on February 4, 2021. Dancing with the Devil... the Art of Starting Over debuted at number two on the Billboard 200 with first-week sales of 74,000 album-equivalent units in the US. Prior to the release of the album, Lovato released one of the two title tracks "Dancing with the Devil" on March 26, and "Met Him Last Night" on April 1, 2021. The Dave Audé remix of the song was nominated for Best Remixed Recording at the 64th Annual Grammy Awards. On August 20, 2021, Lovato released the "Melon Cake" music video. Lovato launched a podcast series titled 4D with Demi Lovato on May 19, 2021, with new episodes releasing every Wednesday. Confirmed guests for the podcast include Chelsea Handler, Jane Fonda, Jameela Jamil, Alok Vaid-Menon, and Glennon Doyle. On July 30, 2021, a talk show hosted by Lovato titled The Demi Lovato Show was released on The Roku Channel. Consisting of ten-minute episodes, it features candid, unfiltered conversations between Lovato and both expert and celebrity guests, exploring topics such as activism, body positivity, gender identity, sex, relationships, social media, and wellness. The show had initially been announced in February 2020 to air on Quibi under the title Pillow Talk with Demi Lovato before Quibi sold its contents to Roku. On September 17, 2021, American rapper G-Eazy released "Breakdown" featuring Lovato as the second single from his album These Things Happen Too. On September 30, Lovato launched a four-episode series titled Unidentified with Demi Lovato on Peacock. The show follows Lovato as she searches for signs of extraterrestrial life with her sister Dallas and friend Matthew Montgomery. In early 2022, Lovato began teasing her eighth studio album, and described it as "more rock than anything". She stated that the record is reminiscent of her debut studio album, Don't Forget (2008), and would explore "heaviness" in its sound. Lovato further called the album her "absolute best yet" and "so representative of [her]". In February, the singer appeared on "FIIMY (Fuck It, I Miss You)", a collaboration with Winnetka Bowling League; its live rendition followed later that month. "Skin of My Teeth", the lead single from Lovato's forthcoming album, was released on June 10, 2022. She premiered the song a day earlier on The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon. On June 6, the title of the album was officially announced as Holy Fvck, along with its cover art and a trailer; it was released on August 19, 2022. Holy Fvck was preceded by two other singles: "Substance" and "29", in July and August. The album debuted at number seven on the US Billboard 200 with 33,000 units, becoming Lovato's eighth consecutive top-ten entry on the chart. It also topped the Billboard Top Rock Albums and Top Alternative Albums charts. In support of the album, she embarked on the Holy Fvck Tour, which commenced in Springfield, Illinois on August 13, 2022, and ended in Rosemont, Illinois on November 10. In August 2022, a poster advertising the album and featuring Lovato in a bondage-style outfit lying on a cushioned crucifix was banned in the UK by the Advertising Standards Authority for being "likely to cause serious offence to Christians". On March 3, 2023, Lovato released "Still Alive", a standalone promotional single for the slasher film Scream VI. The song received a nomination for the MTV Movie & TV Award for Best Song. After performing a rock version of her 2013 song "Heart Attack" on tour, Lovato officially released it with re-recorded vocals on March 24. In the following months, she continued to release rock versions of her previous top 20 hits, "Cool for the Summer" and "Sorry Not Sorry" (the latter featuring guitarist Slash), with a "darker sound backed by electric guitars and grittier lyric delivery from Lovato." Forbes said that re-recording her hits as "rock anthems" is a "brilliant business move," and stated that it "showcases her artistic versatility and demonstrates her willingness to evolve as an artist." In May, Lovato guest-starred as herself in "Met Gala", the eighth episode of the third season of comedy series Dave. On June 22, she surprise-released the song "Swine" as a protest song two days before the one-year anniversary of the Supreme Court's decision to overturn Roe v. Wade. A charity single, Lovato's net profits from the song will be donated to the Demi Lovato Foundation's Reproductive Justice Fund for a year, which will use the proceeds to support the nonprofits: NARAL Pro-Choice America, Plan C, and the National Network of Abortion Funds. On July 14, 2023, accompanying the release of the rock version of "Sorry Not Sorry", she announced her first remix album titled Revamped, which features ten re-recordings of previous songs in rock format; it was released on September 15, 2023. In a press release, she said: "breathing new life into the songs that played such a huge role in my career has allowed me to feel so much closer to my music than ever before." The rock version of "Confident" was released as the fourth and final single in August. Revamped received positive reviews from critics, who praised Lovato's vocals, the record's rock production, and new iteration of the songs. On August 4, the fourth remix of the song "Eve, Psyche & the Bluebeard's Wife" by South Korean girl group Le Sserafim was released, which featured Lovato. A week after, Lovato released a cover of the song "Let Me Down Easy" from the series Daisy Jones & the Six. On August 29, Brazilian singer-songwriter Luísa Sonza released her third studio album Escândalo Íntimo, which contains the Portuguese-language song "Penhasco2", a collaboration between Sonza and Lovato. Also in August, it was revealed that Lovato was no longer represented by Scooter Braun and SB Projects, having left his management that July. She signed with Brandon Creed and his Good World Management in September. On September 10, 2023, Lovato did a special performance in the "Kickoff Show" for the tenth season of The Masked Singer as "Anonymouse". She performed a medley at the 2023 MTV Video Music Awards two days later, and was chosen by Billboard and USA Today as one of the best performances of the show. Lovato executive produced and hosted A Very Demi Holiday Special, which premiered on December 8 on Roku. The special featured JoJo, Hailey Bieber, Paris Hilton, Trixie Mattel, and Tiffany Haddish as guests. Also in December, she made a guest appearance in the television special Dynamo Is Dead. Lovato held a one-off New Year's Eve concert on December 31, 2023, at the Cosmopolitan of Las Vegas in Paradise, Nevada. She will appear on a blues cover of "Papa Was a Rollin' Stone" with Slash, from his second solo album Orgy of the Damned, set for release in May 2024. Lovato will star alongside Rose Byrne and Dominic Sessa in the Stephanie Laing-directed Tow. The singerto is expected to make her directorial debut for Child Star, a documentary film she will co-direct with Nicola Marsh and executive produce under her own DLG, alongside OBB Pictures and SB Projects. The film will "deconstruct the highs and lows of growing up in the spotlight through the lens of some of the world's most famous former child stars, including Lovato" and comprise "intimate conversations [led by Lovato], verité footage, and archival material from all subjects involved". Former child actors including Drew Barrymore and Raven-Symoné are also expected to appear. It is slated to be released on Hulu in 2024. Lovato has frequently cited "power vocalists" such as Christina Aguilera, Kelly Clarkson, Whitney Houston, and Aretha Franklin as major musical and vocal influences. Lovato says, "I had a lot of respect for Whitney Houston, and Christina Aguilera." About her admiration for Clarkson, Lovato says, "I just thought she was a great role model. I feel like she set a really great example and she was extremely talented." Lovato also said that she was "obsessed with Kelly Clarkson" as a child, and she even had an AOL username, "Little Kelly", inspired by the singer. Her other influences or inspirations include Britney Spears, Rihanna, JoJo, Keri Hilson, Jennifer Lopez, Gladys Knight, Alexz Johnson, Billie Holiday, the Spice Girls, and Billy Gilman. About Gilman she said, "We had the same voice range when I was young. I would practice to his songs all the time." In her teens, Lovato listened to heavy metal music, including bands such as the Devil Wears Prada, Job for a Cowboy, Maylene and the Sons of Disaster, and Bring Me the Horizon. She has said that John Mayer's songwriting has in particular been a "huge influence" on hers and that he taught her to write songs by starting with the titles. Following the release of Unbroken, her musical style shifted towards hip hop and R&B. Upon the release of the song "Without a Fight" by country music singer Brad Paisley featuring Lovato, she cited the country genre as a lifelong strong musical influence of hers, as she "grew up listening to country" and her mother "was a country singer". Lovato's Neon Lights Tour was "inspired by Beyoncé" and specifically her 2013 self-titled visual album in regard to the visuals shown onscreen. Moreover, Lovato revealed that her sixth studio album, Tell Me You Love Me, was inspired by Aguilera. Lovato said "I grew up listening to Christina Aguilera. She was one of my idols growing up. She still is. Her voice is incredible, and in Stripped you really got to hear that. I think it was her breakout album that really transformed her into the icon that she is today. So that inspired me … she really inspired this album. I was even inspired by the black and white artwork!" Throughout her career, Lovato has received acclaim from critics for her singing abilities and mezzo-soprano voice. Regarding her vocals on Don't Forget, Nick Levine of Digital Spy stated, "she's certainly a stronger singer than the Jonases. In fact, her full-bodied vocal performances are consistently impressive." Becky Brain of Idolator remarked that Lovato has a "killer voice and the A-list material to put it to good use". According to Sophie Schillaci of The Hollywood Reporter, Lovato "has a voice that can silence even the harshest of critics." In his review of Lovato's second studio album Here We Go Again, Jeff Miers from The Buffalo News stated, "Unlike so many of her Disney-fied peers, Lovato can really sing," and he found it "refreshing" that she "doesn't need the help of Auto-Tune ... to mask any lack of natural ability." Commenting on working with Lovato on her third studio album Unbroken, Ryan Tedder stated that Lovato "blew me out of the water vocally! I had no idea how good her voice is. She's one of the best singers I've ever worked with. Literally, that good ... I mean, she's a Kelly Clarkson-level vocalist. And Kelly has a set of pipes." He also commented on their work together on the song "Neon Lights" from her fourth studio album, saying that Lovato "has one of the biggest ranges, possibly the highest full voice singer I've ever worked with." Tamsyn Wilce from Alter the Press commented on her vocals on Demi, stating "it shows just how strong her vocal chords [sic] are and the variation of styles that she can completely work to make her own." In a review of the Neon Lights Tour, Mike Wass from Idolator remarked "you don't need shiny distractions when you can belt out songs like Demi and connect with the crowd on such an emotional level". In a review of the Demi World Tour, Marielle Wakim from Los Angeles magazine praised Lovato's vocals, commenting, "For those who haven't bothered to follow Lovato's career, let's get something out of the way: [Lovato] can sing.... At 22 years old, her vocal range is astounding." Wakim also described Lovato's vocals as "spectacular". Lovato was lauded for her performance of "The Star-Spangled Banner" at Super Bowl LIV in 2020. Patrick Ryan of USA Today commended her for delivering a "flawless performance" and described Lovato as "one of the best vocalists in the industry today". He remarked that Lovato "hit all the high notes with ease" and ultimately "even added some of her own riffs" which he says resulted in "a rendition that was uniquely and phenomenally" her own. On August 20, 2010, her 18th birthday, Lovato purchased a Mediterranean-style house in Los Angeles for her family; however, Lovato decided to live in a "sober house" in Los Angeles after leaving rehab in January 2011. In September 2016, Lovato also purchased a Laurel Canyon home in Los Angeles for $8.3 million, which she sold in June 2020 for $8.25 million. In September 2020, Lovato purchased a Studio City home in Los Angeles for $7 million. Lovato started training in Brazilian jiu-jitsu in 2016. She was promoted to purple belt in the sport on February 4, 2023. For a few months, Lovato dated singer Trace Cyrus in 2009. Lovato briefly dated her Camp Rock co-star Joe Jonas in 2010. Lovato then had an on-again, off-again relationship with actor Wilmer Valderrama; they first began dating in August 2010 when Valderrama was 29 and Lovato was 18. They ended their relationship in June 2016. Her 2022 single "29" was widely believed to be about Valderrama and the significant age gap in their relationship, although Lovato did not directly confirm this. Lovato later dated UFC athlete Guilherme "Bomba" Vasconcelos from January to July 2017. In late 2018, Lovato briefly dated designer Henry Levy until March 2019. She dated model Austin Wilson for a few months until late 2019. On July 23, 2020, Lovato announced her engagement to actor Max Ehrich. The two had begun dating four months prior, but eventually called off the engagement that September. In early August 2022, People reported that Lovato was in a "happy and healthy relationship" with a male musician. On August 20, Canadian musician Jutes announced the relationship in an Instagram post marking Lovato's 30th birthday. On December 16, 2023, it was announced Lovato and Jutes were engaged. Lovato describes her sexuality as fluid, and has said she is open to finding love with someone of any gender. In July 2020, she labeled herself queer in a social media statement mourning the death of her Glee co-star Naya Rivera. In March 2021, Lovato came out as pansexual and sexually fluid, stating "I've always known I was hella queer, but I have fully embraced it." In the same interview, she called herself "just too queer" to date men at the time. She also expressed feeling proud of belonging to the "alphabet mafia", referring to the LGBT community. On May 19, 2021, Lovato publicly came out as non-binary and announced the decision to change her gender pronouns to they/them, stating that "this has come after a lot of healing and self-reflective work. I'm still learning and coming into myself; I don't claim to be an expert or a spokesperson. Sharing this with you now opens another level of vulnerability for me." She had previously come out as non-binary to her family and friends towards the end of 2020. Lovato later changed her pronouns to include she/her in April 2022, and described herself the following August as a "fluid person" who had "adopted the pronouns of she/her again" after starting to feel "more feminine". That September, she reiterated that she "still feel[s] very comfortable with they/them". Lovato had suffered from bulimia nervosa, self-harm, and being bullied before her first stint in rehab at age 18. On November 1, 2010, Lovato withdrew from the Jonas Brothers: Live in Concert tour, entering a treatment facility for "physical and emotional issues". It was reported that she decided to enter treatment after punching backup dancer Alex Welch; her family and management team convinced her that she needed help. Lovato said she took "100 percent, full responsibility" for the incident. On January 28, 2011, she completed in-patient treatment at Timberline Knolls and returned home. Lovato acknowledged that she had bulimia, had cut herself, and had been "self-medicating" with drugs and alcohol "like a lot of teens do to numb their pain". She added that she "basically had a nervous breakdown" and had been diagnosed with bipolar disorder during her treatment. She later commented that she used to use cocaine several times a day and smuggled cocaine onto airplanes. In a 2022 interview on the podcast Call Her Daddy, Lovato added that she began using opiates at the age of 13 after a car accident and "was already drinking" by that time. She said that this eventually led her to use cocaine at the age of 17. In April 2011, Lovato became a contributing editor for Seventeen magazine, penning an article that described her struggles. In March 2012, MTV aired a documentary, Demi Lovato: Stay Strong, about her rehab and recovery. She began work on her fourth studio album the following month. In January 2013, it was reported that Lovato had been living in a sober-living facility in Los Angeles for over a year because she felt it was the best way to avoid returning to her addiction and eating disorder. Lovato celebrated the five-year anniversary of her sobriety on March 15, 2017. In her 2017 YouTube documentary Demi Lovato: Simply Complicated, Lovato revealed that her treatment at Timberline Knolls had not been entirely successful, stating that she still struggled with alcoholism and a cocaine addiction in the year following her stint in the treatment center and further admitting that she was in fact under the influence of cocaine while being interviewed about her sobriety for Demi Lovato: Stay Strong. She stated, "I wasn't working my program. I wasn't ready to get sober. I was sneaking it on planes, sneaking it in bathrooms, sneaking it throughout the night. Nobody knew." Lovato also stated that her drug and alcohol addiction not only caused her to nearly overdose several times, but later began to impact her ability to perform live and promote her Unbroken album, referencing a 2012 performance on American Idol where she was severely hungover. After her management team had expressed their intentions to leave her, Lovato agreed to resume treatment and counseling for her addiction, leading to her move to a sober-living facility in Los Angeles with roommates and responsibilities to help her overcome her drug and alcohol problems. Although she had previously stated that she was entirely done with hard drugs such as heroin, Lovato revealed in March 2021 that she was not completely sober; she drank alcohol and smoked marijuana in moderation at that point, a choice that many of her friends openly disagreed with. She decided on moderation as she felt she was setting herself up for failure if she told herself she was never going to drink or smoke again. Lovato said it was because it had been drilled into her that "one drink was equivalent to a crack pipe." This changed the following December when she abandoned her "California sober ways" and declared herself "sober sober". In 2021, Lovato said she had initially accepted her bipolar diagnosis and shared this in 2011 because it explained her erratic behavior, but later came to believe it was inaccurate: "I was acting out when I was 18 for many reasons, but I know now from multiple different doctors that it was not because I was bipolar. I had to grow the fuck up." Lovato also stated that the diagnosis has been revised to attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). On June 21, 2018, Lovato released the single "Sober" in which she revealed she had relapsed after six years of sobriety. On July 24, 2018, she was rushed to the Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles after emergency services were called to her home due to an opioid overdose. Lovato recalled, "The doctors told me that I had five to 10 minutes, like, if no one had found me, then I wouldn't be here." The singer was reported to be stable and recovering later in the day. She reportedly overdosed on oxycodone laced with fentanyl and was revived with naloxone. Lovato also had multiple health complications stemming from the overdose, including multiple strokes, a heart attack, and brain damage, the latter of which caused lasting vision problems. She was hospitalized for two weeks and subsequently entered an in-patient rehab facility. Lovato's drug overdose received widespread media coverage, leading to her becoming the most googled person of 2018, ahead of other figures who had received extensive coverage throughout the year, due largely to the public interest surrounding the overdose. CBS News ranked the overdose the 29th biggest story of 2018. In December 2018, Lovato took to Twitter to dismiss rumors regarding her overdose and went on to thank fans, writing, "If I feel like the world needs to know something, I will tell them MYSELF. All my fans need to know is I'm working hard on myself, I'm happy and clean and I'm SO grateful for their support." She added that some day she would "tell the world what exactly happened, why it happened and what my life is like today .. but until I'm ready to share that with people please stop prying and making up shit that you know nothing about. I still need space and time to heal." Lovato addressed the matter during a 2020 appearance on The Ellen DeGeneres Show, elaborating on how her worsened struggles with bulimia in 2018 contributed to her eventual drug overdose as she relapsed three months prior to the incident due to being extremely unhappy. The singer attributed these struggles to the extreme measures that her then-manager, Phil McIntyre, took to control the food she ingested. Lovato further explained that, along with the controlling nature of her management team, they did not provide her with the help she needed: "People checking what my orders at Starbucks were on my bank statements ... just little things like that ... it led me to being really unhappy and my bulimia got really bad and I asked for help and I didn't receive the help that I needed." Moreover, she recounted that her thought process the night she relapsed after six years of sobriety was as follows, "I'm six years sober and I'm miserable. I'm even more miserable than I was when I was drinking. Why am I sober?" When Lovato confronted her management about these thoughts, the latter responded with, "You're being very selfish, this would ruin things for not just you but for us as well." This made Lovato feel "completely abandoned" due to triggering her underlying abandonment issues with her birth father, and so she "drank ... that night". In 2021, Lovato said she was raped at age 15 when she was an actor on the Disney Channel, and that the rapist was a co-star whom she had to continue seeing thereafter. The incident contributed to her bulimia and self-harm. She told someone about the incident, but the assaulter "never got in trouble for it. They never got taken out of the movie they were in." Lovato stated she did not acknowledge the act as rape at the time, because sexual activity was not normalized to her, and she was part of the Disney crowd who wore purity rings and were waiting until marriage. However, she decided to share her experience because she believed that everyone should "speak their voice if they can and feel comfortable doing so". Lovato also stated she was raped during her 2018 drug overdose, realizing a month after the incident that she was not in a place to consent at that point. Lovato's work as an LGBT rights activist has been recognized by GLAAD, which awarded her the Vanguard Award in 2016. When the Defense of Marriage Act was appealed in June 2013, Lovato celebrated the occasion on social media. Lovato has previously affirmed her support for the LGBT community: "I believe in gay marriage, I believe in equality. I think there's a lot of hypocrisy with religion. But I just found that you can have your own relationship with God, and I still have a lot of faith." In May 2014, Lovato was named lead performer for NYC Pride Week and Grand Marshal of the LA Pride Parade, where she later filmed the music video for "Really Don't Care". Lovato became the face of Human Rights Campaign's America's for Marriage Equality in 2015. In June 2016, Lovato participated in a video released by the Human Rights Campaign honoring the victims of the Orlando nightclub shooting. Lovato has also raised awareness for health and mental health issues. For her efforts to fight mental health stigma, she was honored with the Artistic Award of Courage by The Jane and Terry Semel Institute. In May 2009, Lovato was named an Honorary Ambassador of Education by the American Partnership For Eosinophilic Disorders. In December 2011, Lovato condemned the Disney Channel for airing episodes of Shake It Up and So Random! in which characters joked about eating disorders. The network subsequently issued an apology and removed the episodes from their broadcast and video-on-demand services. In May 2013, she was cited for her dedication to mentoring teens and young adults with mental health problems at a National Children's Mental Health Awareness Day hosted by the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration in Washington. Lovato has paid treatment costs for mentally ill patients through the Lovato Treatment Scholarship Program, named for her late father, since 2013. Her speech at the 2016 Democratic National Convention focused on raising awareness for mental health. In September 2017, Lovato was named a Global Citizen ambassador for championing the mental health of thousands of children displaced within Iraq and other communities" and helped "fund the expansion of a Save the Children pilot program, Healing, and Education through the Arts, to violence-scarred young people living around Kirkuk and Saladin Governorate, Iraq". In April 2020, Lovato joined a mental health campaign in support of Irish charity SpunOut.i.e. to launch The Mental Health Fund which is raising money for mental health support. Lovato identifies as a feminist. In a 2017 interview with Dolly magazine, she explained that "Feminism ... doesn't have to mean burning bras and hating men" but instead "standing up for gender equality and trying to empower our youth. And showing women that you can embrace your sexuality and you deserve to have confidence and you don't need to conform to society's views on what women should be or how you should dress. So, I think it is just about supporting other women and empowering other women." In May 2017, Lovato partnered with Fabletics to create a limited edition activewear collection for the United Nations Foundation's Girl Up campaign to fund programs for "the world's most marginalized adolescent girls". Lovato is a vocal anti-bullying advocate. In October 2010, she served as spokesperson for the anti-bullying organization PACER and appeared on America's Next Top Model to speak out against bullying. Lovato participated in the "A Day Made Better" school advocacy campaign and has supported DonateMyDress.org, Kids Wish Network, Love Our Children USA, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital and City of Hope. In April 2012, she became a contributing editor of Seventeen magazine, describing her personal struggles to its female teenage readers. In September 2012, Lovato was named the ambassador of Mean Stinks, a campaign focused on eliminating bullying by girls. Lovato is politically active, often speaking out against gun violence and racial injustice. In January 2010, she was featured in a public-service announcement for Voto Latino to promote the organization's "Be Counted" campaign ahead of the 2010 United States Census. In June 2016, Lovato signed an open letter from Billboard urging gun reform and performed at the March for Our Lives anti-gun violence rally in Washington, D.C. in March 2018. In May 2020, Lovato condemned police brutality and the officers responsible for the murder of George Floyd and the shooting of Breonna Taylor. She shared resources to support the Black Lives Matter movement and black-owned businesses and denounced white privilege. Throughout her career, Lovato has donated to and partnered with various charities. In 2009, she recorded the theme song "Send It On" with the Jonas Brothers, Miley Cyrus, and Selena Gomez for Disney's Friends for Change program. The song debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 at number 20, and its proceeds were directed to environmental charities through the Disney Worldwide Conservation Fund. Lovato and Joe Jonas recorded the song "Make a Wave" for the charity in March 2010. In August 2013, she traveled to Kenya for her 21st birthday to participate in a program of the international charity organization Free the Children. She returned to Kenya in January 2017 with We Movement to work with women and children. In March 2017, as a celebration of her five-year anniversary of sobriety, Lovato donated money to Los Angeles-based charities specializing in animal, LGBT, and adoption rights. In August 2017, Lovato donated $50000 to Hurricane Harvey relief and started fund with Nick Jonas, DNCE, and her then-manager Phil McIntyre. Lovato's second limited edition activewear collection with Fabletics, released in June 2020, pledged up to $125,000 in proceeds to COVID-19 pandemic relief efforts. As spokesperson for the Join the Surge Campaign, DoSomething.Org, and Joining the Surge by Clean & Clear, she has encouraged fans to take action in their own communities. In September 2021, Lovato performed at the Greek Theatre in Los Angeles to raise awareness of the different crises that the world is going through and promote global unity, as part of the Global Citizen Live organization. In December 2023, Lovato voiced her support for United Nations Human Rights' climate change campaign, urging leaders to work towards climate justice, in tandem with the COP28 conference. From 2014 to 2016, Lovato was the face of the Skechers footwear brand. She partnered with Shazam on the Demi World Tour in 2014. Lovato launched her skincare line Devonne by Demi in December of the same year. In addition, she became the first-ever brand ambassador of the makeup brand N.Y.C. New York Color in 2015. That year, Lovato promoted The Radiant Collection for Tampax for "empowering females of all ages to stay fearless and wear what they want anytime of the month." In June 2016, Lovato partnered with streaming service Tidal to livestream the first date of her Future Now Tour with Nick Jonas. Since 2017, Lovato has released activewear collections with the women's athleisure brand Fabletics to raise money for organizations such as United Nations Foundation's Girl Up campaign and COVID-19 relief efforts. Also in 2017, she performed at a dinner hosted by the jewelry company Bulgari to celebrate the opening of the brand's Fifth Avenue flagship store in New York City. Lovato became a brand ambassador for the JBL audio company in 2017 and for the mug company Ember in 2018. That year, she starred in CORE Hydration's "Finding Balance" campaign; she had become an initial investor of CORE Hydration after first discovering the brand in 2015. Jaguar, JBL, Lyft, Ferrari, TikTok and Samsung products have been featured in Lovato's music videos. She also appeared in commercials for Skechers, Acuvue, Apple, and Fabletics. In 2019, Dior used Lovato's song "Only Forever" from the album Tell Me You Love Me in a series of commercials and social media posts to promote the brand's "Dior Forever" makeup collection; the brand later used Lovato's song "Confident" in March 2021 to promote a new "Dior Forever" foundation in a series of social media campaigns. Since September 2020, Lovato has served as a Mental Health Spokesperson for the online and mobile therapy company Talkspace. In November 2021, Lovato announced the launch of her own vibrator, named Demi Wand, in partnership with Bellesa. The same month, she became Gaia, Inc.'s first celebrity ambassador; this endorsement attracted criticism from fans and the media due to the contents of the platform, which are widely described as promoting conspiracy theories. In 2024, Lovato became a brand ambassador for and celebrity partner of Xeomin, a neurotoxic injectable filler by Merz Aesthetics. Lovato has won an MTV Video Music Award, a Guinness World Record, an iHeartRadio Much Music Video Award, two Latin American Music Awards, and five People's Choice Awards. For her work in music, she was nominated for two Grammy Awards, an American Music Award, four Billboard Music Awards, and three Brit Awards. With 14 wins, Lovato is the eighth-most-awarded solo artist at the Teen Choice Awards. She was named the #1 The New York Times Best Seller Author of 2013. In 2015, Lovato was honored with the Rulebreaker Award at the Billboard Women in Music event. In 2016, for her activism in the LGBT rights movement, she was awarded a GLAAD Vanguard Award at the 27th GLAAD Media Awards. That year, she was named to Forbes' 30 Under 30 list in the music category. Time included Lovato on its annual list of the 100 most influential people in 2017. Billboard ranked her as one of the most successful artists of the 2010s decade in 2019. In 2009, when Lovato was 16, her album Here We Go Again debuted atop the Billboard 200, making her one of the eleven artists of all time who topped the chart before turning 18. Lovato has released eight studio albums, all of which debuted in the top-ten of the Billboard 200, (four platinum, two gold), and four which boast over one billion streams on Spotify. She has four top-ten songs on the Billboard Hot 100. Two of Lovato's songs and music videos have reached more than one billion streams and views on Spotify and YouTube. In 2012, she became the youngest X Factor judge in the show's history. Lovato is the eleventh most-followed musician on Instagram with over 157 million followers on this platform, and the tenth most-followed musician on Twitter with over 53 million followers on this platform. Camp Rock (2008) Jonas Brothers: The 3D Concert Experience (2009) Princess Protection Program (2009) Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam (2010) Demi Lovato: Stay Strong (2012) Smurfs: The Lost Village (2017) Louder Together (2017) Demi Lovato: Simply Complicated (2017) Charming (2018) Eurovision Song Contest: The Story of Fire Saga (2020) Demi Lovato: Dancing with the Devil (2021) Don't Forget (2008) Here We Go Again (2009) Unbroken (2011) Demi (2013) Confident (2015) Tell Me You Love Me (2017) Dancing with the Devil... the Art of Starting Over (2021) Holy Fvck (2022) Staying Strong: 365 Days a Year, Feiwel & Friends (November 19, 2013), ISBN 978-1-250-05144-8 Staying Strong: A Journal, Feiwel & Friends (October 7, 2014), ISBN 978-1-250-06352-6 Lovato, Demi (September 1, 2020). "Demi Lovato's Deeply Personal Letter on the Pandemic, Mental Health and Black Lives Matter". Vogue. Retrieved January 11, 2021. Lovato, Demi (October 23, 2020). "A Conversation Between Senator Anne Ranch and Demi Lovato (and Danny DeVito)". Interview. Retrieved December 4, 2023. History of Mexican Americans in Dallas–Fort Worth Honorific nicknames in popular music List of American Grammy Award winners and nominees List of artists who reached number one on the Billboard Mainstream Top 40 chart List of artists who reached number one on the U.S. Dance Club Songs chart List of wax figures displayed at Madame Tussauds museums The Bigg Chill Lovato uses both she/her and they/them pronouns. This article uses she/her pronouns for consistency. Lovato identified as female at that time. Adapted from List of awards and nominations received by Demi Lovato. Bitette, Nicole (October 4, 2016). "Demi Lovato is taking a break from music and the spotlight". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on April 10, 2019. Retrieved December 8, 2016. "Demi Lovato reviews, music, news". sputnikmusic. May 14, 2013. Archived from the original on March 5, 2024. Retrieved June 29, 2019. "Demi Lovato Anaheim Tickets". Excite.com. Archived from the original on January 5, 2021. Retrieved June 29, 2019. Harper's BAZAAR (July 14, 2023). "Demi Lovato Talks Favorite Dishes, Poot, and the Rock Version of "Sorry Not Sorry"". Event occurs at 0:05. Archived from the original on December 22, 2023 – via YouTube. "Ask Billboard: Demi Lovato's Career Album & Song Sales". Billboard. October 15, 2017. Archived from the original on April 26, 2022. Retrieved July 10, 2020. "Demi Lovato". Biography. June 14, 2021. Archived from the original on April 15, 2019. Retrieved March 4, 2022. "Sue Emmons and Donald Smith". Family Tree Maker. Archived from the original on October 15, 2014. Retrieved February 17, 2014. Payne, Chris. "Demi Lovato's Father Dies". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 4, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2022. "Happy 24th Birthday Dallas Lovato February 4, 2012". Disney Dreaming. Archived from the original on February 8, 2012. Retrieved February 4, 2012. Yao, Laura (June 21, 2008). "Disney Demi-Goddess". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on June 29, 2011. Retrieved March 11, 2013. "Demi Lovato Reveals Secret Half-Sister". People. March 6, 2013. Archived from the original on April 4, 2017. Retrieved April 3, 2017. Jensen Shaffer, Jody (2013). Demi Lovato: Taking Another Chance. Minneapolis, Minnesota: Lerner Publications. p. 7. ISBN 978-1467715515. KISS FM UK (September 22, 2015). "Demi Lovato finds out she's Jewish!?". Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved March 10, 2017 – via YouTube. "The Young Hispanic Hollywood Class of 2013". The Hollywood Reporter. November 22, 2013. Archived from the original on March 14, 2014. Retrieved March 4, 2022. In honor of her Mexican-American father, "Somos Primos". Diario El Carabobeño. Archived from the original on September 15, 2018. Retrieved October 5, 2013. Hoyle, Antonia (April 22, 2012). "The fame, the drugs, the self-harm". Fabulous. Archived from the original on November 1, 2012. Retrieved March 16, 2013. Murphy, Nicola (March 15, 2014). "How Irish ancestry links Demi Lovato, Megan Fox and Olivia Wilde". Irish Central. Archived from the original on April 15, 2019. Retrieved August 26, 2015. Lovato, Demi [@ddlovato] (November 12, 2012). "actually - I found out that I am Irish, Hispanic, Native American, Portuguese and Jewish!!!" (Tweet). Retrieved March 4, 2022 – via Twitter. Bueno, Antoinette (October 20, 2015). "Demi Lovato Opens Up About Her 'Abusive' Father: 'I Was Very Conflicted When He Passed'". Entertainment Tonight. Archived from the original on March 17, 2023. Retrieved February 27, 2017. "Demi Lovato talks about her relationship with her father". Fox News. October 22, 2015. Archived from the original on March 4, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2022. "Demi Lovato speaks on dad's death". CNN. June 27, 2013. Archived from the original on March 12, 2021. Retrieved June 28, 2013. Lovece, Frank (June 27, 2013). "Demi Lovato discusses father's death on 'Good Morning America'". Newsday. Archived from the original on March 12, 2021. Retrieved June 28, 2013. Biography Today. Detroit, Michigan: Omnigraphics. 2009. p. 103. ISBN 978-0-7808-1052-5. Caramanica, Jon (July 15, 2009). "Tween Princess, Tweaked". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 21, 2009. Retrieved November 4, 2009. "Biography Today", p.105. "Demi Lovato and B.o.B." MTV. MTV. December 18, 2012. Archived from the original on November 15, 2014. Retrieved March 7, 2013. Bryson, Carey. "Demi Lovato The Disney Star Machine Does It Again". Dotdash. Archived from the original on May 26, 2016. Retrieved March 11, 2013. Culbertson, Caroline (November 2, 2010). "Demi Lovato in rehab: Dad blames Hollywood, acting for her issues". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on April 15, 2019. Retrieved March 4, 2022. "Demi Lovato Graduates High School". Disney Dreaming. April 23, 2009. Archived from the original on April 7, 2010. Retrieved July 27, 2011. "About Demi Lovato". demilovatotour.com. Archived from the original on November 4, 2013. Retrieved September 13, 2013. Moser, John J. (June 22, 2009). "Disney singing sensation Demi Lovato ready for new album, first tour as headliner". The Victoria Advocate. Victoria Advocate Publishing Co. Archived from the original on August 18, 2013. Retrieved March 11, 2013. Bryson, Carey. "Camp Rock (2008) – Movie Review for Parents". About.com. New York City: IAC. Archived from the original on April 21, 2013. Retrieved March 11, 2013. "High ratings for 'Camp Rock,' the Disney Channel's Jonas Brothers movie". Los Angeles Times. June 21, 2008. Archived from the original on May 21, 2022. Retrieved March 11, 2013. Flynn, Gillian (June 20, 2008). "Camp Rock (2008)". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on November 26, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2022. Hinkley, David (June 18, 2008). "'Camp Rock' is a rock-steady Disney hit". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on December 1, 2022. Retrieved June 1, 2013. Hasty, Katey (June 25, 2008). "Coldplay Cruises To No. 1 On The Billboard 200". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 4, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2022. "Camp Rock: Original Television Soundtrack: Music". Amazon. Archived from the original on January 10, 2016. Retrieved March 11, 2013. "Top 100 Songs | Billboard Hot 100 Chart". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 27, 2021. Retrieved May 11, 2019. "Demi Live! Warm Up Tour Video". OVGuide. Archived from the original on October 22, 2013. Retrieved March 11, 2013. "Jonas Brothers: The Burning Up Tour with special guest Demi Lovato". Zvents. Archived from the original on November 3, 2013. Retrieved March 11, 2013. "Demi Lovato – Don't Forget". AbsolutePunk.net. Archived from the original on July 16, 2012. Retrieved August 26, 2015. Levine, Nick (April 20, 2009). "Demi Lovato: 'Don't Forget'". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on August 3, 2021. Retrieved March 4, 2022. Erlewine, Stephen Thomas. "Here We Go Again – Demi Lovato". AllMusic. San Carlos, California: Rovi Corporation. Archived from the original on March 5, 2024. Retrieved October 9, 2011. Slezak, Michael (September 17, 2008). "Don't Forget". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on March 5, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2022. Kreps, Daniel (October 1, 2008). "On the Charts: Demi Lovato & Kings of Leon Debut High, Metallica Rule". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on October 4, 2008. Retrieved March 4, 2022. Donahue, Amy (June 25, 2008). "Jonas Brothers thrilling tweens". Reuters. London, England: Thomson Reuters. Archived from the original on December 21, 2015. Retrieved July 7, 2011. "Don't Forget". Recording Industry Association of America. Archived from the original on May 27, 2023. Retrieved March 18, 2017. "Ask Billboard: Songs Two Good Not To Be No. 1". Billboard. November 17, 2012. Archived from the original on March 4, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2022. "At sweet 16, Lovato's ready for her close-up". The Boston Globe. Boston, Massachusetts: Boston Globe Media Partners, L.P. September 23, 2008. Archived from the original on March 4, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2022. "Demi Lovato – Chart History". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 21, 2021. Retrieved March 11, 2013. McAlpine, Fraser (May 31, 2009). "Demi Lovato – 'La La Land'". BBC Music. BBC. Archived from the original on July 2, 2014. Retrieved June 1, 2013. "Chart Track". Irish Singles Chart. Archived from the original on May 16, 2012. Retrieved July 26, 2011. "Demi Lovato – La La Land". Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on June 11, 2015. Retrieved July 26, 2011. Demi Lovato, Brendan Malloy, Tim Wheeler. Making the Video: La La Land (DVD). Don't Forget (Deluxe Edition). Sources concerning the single release of "Don't Forget": "Billboard". Billboard. April 25, 2009. Archived from the original on March 5, 2024. Retrieved April 11, 2021. Burlingame, Jeff (September 1, 2013). Demi!: Latina Star Demi Lovato (Sizzling Celebrities). Enslow Publishing. p. 25. Don't Forget's songs included popular singles 'Get Back,' and 'Don't Forget'. "Demi Lovato Chart History". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 9, 2021. Retrieved June 1, 2019. "Sonny With a Chance, Season 1". iTunes Store (US). Apple Inc. February 7, 2009. Archived from the original on July 12, 2018. Retrieved March 11, 2013. Lloyd, Robert (February 6, 2009). "'Sonny' tests the tween climate". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on November 29, 2020. Retrieved March 4, 2022. Lauer-Williams, Kathy (July 1, 2009). "Jon & Kate divorce episode/ BET Jackson tribute draw record audiences". The Morning Call. Allentown, Pennsylvania: Tribune Company. Archived from the original on August 3, 2021. Retrieved March 4, 2022. "Selena Gomez and Demi Lovato's 18 year-long friendship". Yaay. September 16, 2020. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. Retrieved October 22, 2020. Chelsea (January 28, 2009). "Demi Lovato on second album". Sugar Slam. Archived from the original on June 4, 2009. Retrieved June 13, 2009. "Here We Go Again (2009): Reviews". Metacritic. Chicago, Illinois: CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on October 23, 2012. Retrieved July 27, 2011. Caulfield, Keith (July 29, 2009). "Demi Lovato Debuts At No. 1 On Billboard 200, But Michael Jackson Still Reigns". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 4, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2022. "Gold & Platinum: Demi Lovato". Recording Industry Association of America. Archived from the original on May 29, 2016. Retrieved January 19, 2023. "Demi Lovato Album & Song Chart History – Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 21, 2021. Retrieved October 9, 2011. "Demi Lovato Album & Song Chart History – Canadian Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 21, 2021. Retrieved October 9, 2011. Erlewine, Stephen Thomas (July 21, 2009). "Here We Go Again – Demi Lovato". AllMusic. San Carlos, California: Rovi Corporation. Archived from the original on April 24, 2022. Retrieved June 2, 2013. "Demi Lovato Announces "Summer Tour 2009" North American Headline Tour". AEG Live. Archived from the original on April 16, 2014. Retrieved January 1, 2009. "Demi Lovato Lines Up Lengthy Summer Tour". ArtistDirect. April 16, 2009. Archived from the original on October 25, 2012. Retrieved October 5, 2013. Vena, Jocelyn (April 15, 2009). "Demi Lovato To Tour With David Archuleta This Summer". MTV News. New York City: Viacom. Archived from the original on December 6, 2014. Retrieved October 5, 2013. "Announcing the Winners of the 2009 Teen Choice Awards!". Buzz Sugar. August 9, 2009. Archived from the original on June 30, 2015. Retrieved October 5, 2013. ""Send It On", an anthem by the world's biggest teen stars, Miley Cyrus, Jonas Brothers, Selena Gomez and Demi Lovato, for Disney's "Friends For Change: Project Green", will debut on Radio Disney, Disney Channel, disney.com and iTunes" (Press release). The Walt Disney Company. August 6, 2009. Archived from the original on July 12, 2015. Retrieved October 2, 2015. "Send It On (feat. Demi Lovato, Jonas Brothers, Miley Cyrus & Selena Gomez) – Single". Apple Music. August 11, 2009. Archived from the original on July 22, 2013. Retrieved March 4, 2022. "Make a Wave (feat. Joe Jonas & Demi Lovato) – EP". Apple Music. March 15, 2010. Archived from the original on March 4, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2022. "Demi Lovato stars in Grey's Anatomy". MetroLyrics. May 14, 2010. Archived from the original on May 22, 2010. Retrieved March 14, 2013. Sanders, Helen (May 14, 2010). "Demi Lovato Stars In Grey's Anatomy – Pictures". Entertainment Wise. Archived from the original on November 6, 2013. Retrieved June 2, 2013. "Demi Lovato Announces South American Tour 2010". Disney Dreaming. Burbank, California: Walt Disney Company. March 21, 2010. Archived from the original on October 6, 2013. Retrieved October 5, 2013. "Demi's coming to South America!!". Myspace. Beverly Hills, California: Specific Media LLC. March 30, 2010. Archived from the original on March 27, 2012. Retrieved March 13, 2013. "Summer tour announcement". Myspace. Beverly Hills, California: Specific Media LLC. April 27, 2010. Archived from the original on March 27, 2012. Retrieved March 13, 2013. Vena, Jocelyn (April 27, 2010). "'Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam' Premieres September 3 On Disney Channel". MTV News. New York City: Viacom. Archived from the original on June 13, 2021. Retrieved May 14, 2010. Peel, Sarah (September 7, 2010). "Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam Premier Had 8 Million Viewers". BSC Kids. Archived from the original on August 27, 2011. Retrieved March 14, 2010. "Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam (2010)". Rotten Tomatoes. Los Angeles, California: Fandango Media. September 7, 2010. Archived from the original on November 28, 2012. Retrieved March 13, 2013. Armstrong, Jennifer (August 25, 2010). "Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on March 4, 2022. Retrieved March 2, 2022. Fitzgerald, Toni (September 7, 2010). "'Camp Rock 2' becomes year's top movie". Media Life Magazine. Portland, Oregon: Media Life Co. Archived from the original on July 25, 2022. Retrieved April 9, 2013. "Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam (Soundtrack from the Motion Picture)". Apple Music. August 10, 2010. Archived from the original on March 4, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2022. "Camp Rock 2 Soundtrack 41,863 Sold". OceanUp. Los Angeles, California: As If Productions. Archived from the original on September 15, 2018. Retrieved April 9, 2013. "Jonas Brothers 2010 World Tour Camp Rock 2 Tour 20 of the show have been cancelled or moved". Disney Dreaming. Burbank, California: The Walt Disney Company. April 27, 2010. Archived from the original on August 16, 2013. Retrieved March 13, 2013. "Jonas Brothers Cancel Camp Rock 2 Tour Dates, Add Others". Disney Dreaming. Burbank, California: The Walt Disney Company. July 3, 2010. Archived from the original on August 29, 2012. Retrieved March 13, 2013. "Sonny With a Chance (Soundtrack from the TV Series)". Apple Music. October 5, 2010. Archived from the original on March 4, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2022. "Sonny with a Chance – Original TV Soundtrack: Awards". AllMusic. San Carlos, California: Rovi Corporation. Archived from the original on January 17, 2014. Retrieved March 14, 2013. Grossberg, Josh (April 19, 2011). "Demi Lovato Quitting Sonny With a Chance". E!. New York City: NBCUniversal. Archived from the original on July 16, 2023. Retrieved March 11, 2013. "Demi Lovato – Koko Pop UK". YouTube. April 7, 2012. Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved March 14, 2013. "Demi Lovato Exits Disney Series: 'I Don't Think It Would Be Healthy for My Recovery'". TVLine. Los Angeles, California. April 19, 2011. Archived from the original on March 10, 2013. Retrieved March 14, 2013. James Dinh (July 22, 2011). "Demi Lovato To Release New Album September 20". MTV News. Archived from the original on August 3, 2021. Retrieved March 15, 2013. Vena, Jocelyn (July 21, 2010). "Demi Lovato Wants To Embrace Her 'Inner Soul' Diva On Next Album". MTV News. Archived from the original on August 5, 2021. Retrieved March 15, 2013. Vena, Jocelyn. "Demi Lovato's Unbroken: Putting It Back Together". MTV News. Archived from the original on November 23, 2017. Retrieved June 24, 2019. "Critic Reviews for Unbroken". Metacritic. Archived from the original on March 22, 2014. Retrieved March 15, 2013. Caulfield, Tony (September 28, 2011). "Tony Bennett, 85, Achieves First No. 1 Album on Billboard 200". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 4, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2022. Lamb, Bill. "Demi Lovato – "Skyscraper"". Dotdash Meredith. Archived from the original on May 5, 2013. Retrieved June 2, 2013. Trust, Gary (July 20, 2011). "LMFAO Still Atop Hot 100, Demi Lovato Debuts In Top 10". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 4, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2022. Caulfield, Kevin (July 20, 2011). "Blake Shelton's 'River' Runs to No. 1 on Billboard 200". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 4, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2022. "Demi Lovato nominated for Best Video With A Message at the 2012 VMA's". MTV News. Viacom. July 31, 2012. Archived from the original on May 4, 2013. Retrieved March 15, 2013. "Hot 100 Songs & New Music: 1 – 10 Songs". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 21, 2021. Retrieved December 6, 2012. "Benny Blanco, Halsey & Khalid Complete Record Rise to No. 1 on Pop Songs Chart With 'Eastside'". Billboard. February 25, 2019. Archived from the original on March 4, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2022. "Ask Billboard: Baseball Hits, Gwen Stefani's Delay & Demi Lovato's Best-Selling Songs". Billboard. October 12, 2014. Archived from the original on March 4, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2022. "Demi Lovato's 10 Best Songs: Critic's Picks". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 2, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2022. "Demi Lovato's 'X Factor' salary can't compare to Britney Spears'". Zap2It. May 30, 2012. Archived from the original on November 29, 2014. Retrieved March 7, 2013. Bricker, Tierney (May 13, 2012). "It's Official! Demi Lovato Joins X Factor as Fourth Judge". E! Online. Archived from the original on April 29, 2023. Retrieved May 13, 2012. Gil Kaufman (May 2, 2012). "Demi Lovato, Miley Cyrus Rumored For 'X Factor' Judge Spot". MTV News. Viacom. Archived from the original on June 10, 2022. Retrieved May 16, 2012. Chris Kim (December 7, 2012). "CeCe Frey 'Knew' She Wasn't Going To Win 'X Factor'". MTV News. Archived from the original on June 14, 2022. Retrieved March 15, 2013. Test, Irene (September 1, 2012). "Demi Lovato Reveals She is Recording Fourth Album Soon". Kovideo. Glam Entertainment. Archived from the original on April 2, 2013. Retrieved March 16, 2013. Ashley E. (August 31, 2012). "Demi Lovato To Release New Single By December". Bsckids. Archived from the original on September 5, 2012. Retrieved March 16, 2013. "Demi Lovato – Angels Among Us". YouTube. December 24, 2012. Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. "Demi Lovato Returning for Third Season of 'X Factor'". Billboard. March 28, 2013. Archived from the original on March 5, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2022. "Demi Lovato Making More Money Than Paulina Rubio, Kelly Rowland In 'The X Factor'". Fox News. May 22, 2013. Archived from the original on June 15, 2013. Retrieved March 4, 2022. Andrea Dresdale (April 1, 2013). "Demi Lovato Releasing New Album "Demi" on May 14". ABC News Radio. Archived from the original on August 3, 2021. Retrieved March 24, 2020. "Demi Reviews". Metacritic. Chicago, Illinois: CBS Corporation. Archived from the original on June 7, 2013. Retrieved May 15, 2013. Carmichael, Jon (May 13, 2013). "New Albums by Demi Lovato and Talib Kweli". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 3, 2021. Retrieved June 1, 2013. "Demi Lovato's new album 'Demi' now streaming online". Entertainment Weekly. May 7, 2013. Archived from the original on August 3, 2021. Retrieved March 4, 2022. Keith Caulfield (May 22, 2013). "Vampire Weekend Debuts at No. 1 on Billboard 200 Chart". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 5, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2022. "Demi Lovato – Demi". Ultratop. Hung Medien. Archived from the original on July 16, 2023. Retrieved June 1, 2013. "American album certifications – Demi Lovato – Demi". RIAA. July 11, 2016. Archived from the original on May 27, 2023. Retrieved March 18, 2017. Gary Trust (March 6, 2013). "Baauer's 'Harlem Shake' Still Atop Hot 100, Although Lead Shrinks". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 5, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2022. Gary Trust (April 3, 2013). "Macklemore & Ryan Lewis Top Hot 100; Imagine Dragons, Ariana Grande Hit Top 10". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 31, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2022. "Demi Lovato – Heart Attack". Ultratop. Hung Medien. Archived from the original on July 16, 2023. Retrieved June 1, 2013. "It's Demi Lovato's #Demiversary: New Single, New Lyric Video And Performances". MTV. New York City: Viacom. Archived from the original on May 19, 2022. Retrieved August 3, 2014. "Hot Dance Club Songs". Billboard. September 6, 2014. Archived from the original on September 29, 2014. Retrieved August 28, 2014. "Gold & Platinum". RIAA. Archived from the original on November 10, 2020. Retrieved June 1, 2019. "Demi Lovato announces Demi – Deluxe". November 6, 2014. Archived from the original on November 7, 2014. Katy, Finbow (November 24, 2014). "Listen to Olly Murs and Demi Lovato's new single 'Up'". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on August 3, 2021. Retrieved March 4, 2022. Guidry, Ken (July 2, 2013). "'The Mortal Instruments: City Of Bones' Soundtrack Features Jessie J, Demi Lovato, Owl City & More". IndieWire. Archived from the original on August 13, 2013. Retrieved March 4, 2022. Legaspi, Althea (May 23, 2013). "Buzz Bites (5/23/13): Demi Lovato Is Releasing An E-Book!". MTV News. Viacom. Archived from the original on March 5, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2022. Strecker, Erin (August 22, 2013). "Demi Lovato headed to 'Glee'". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on August 3, 2021. Retrieved March 4, 2022. "Demi Lovato becomes a New York Times bestseller with book Staying Strong: 365 Days A Year". Sugarscape. September 15, 2011. Archived from the original on November 18, 2016. Retrieved December 24, 2013. Deutsch, Lindsay (September 9, 2013). "Demi Lovato is writing an inspirational book". USA Today. Mclean, Virginia. Archived from the original on September 13, 2013. Retrieved September 9, 2013. Lipshutz, Jason (September 30, 2013). "Demi Lovato Announces 2014 Tour with Little Mix, Cher Lloyd, Fifth Harmony". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 24, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2022. Lovato, Demi. "Neon Lights Tour". Facebook. Archived from the original on January 21, 2016. Retrieved September 29, 2013. Lovato, Demi (October 14, 2013). "The Neon Lights Tour comes to Brazil and Mexico". demilovato.com. Archived from the original on October 19, 2013. "Disney Sued Over Alleged "Let It Go" Song Theft, Millions Of YouTube Covers Could Be Affected". Tubefilter. December 4, 2017. Archived from the original on August 3, 2021. Retrieved June 1, 2019. Rubin, Julia Lynn (October 21, 2013). "Demi Lovato Releases New Song 'Let It Go' From Disney's 'Frozen' Soundtrack". HNGN. Archived from the original on December 29, 2021. Retrieved October 24, 2013. "Somebody to You (feat. Demi Lovato) by The Vamps". Apple Music. Archived from the original on March 4, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2022. Johnson, Zach (May 29, 2014). "Demi Lovato Announces First World Tour Dates!". E!. New York City: NBCUniversal. Archived from the original on January 17, 2023. Retrieved May 29, 2014. "Enrique Iglesias announces UK tour with Demi Lovato – Music News". Digital Spy. June 6, 2014. Archived from the original on August 11, 2014. Retrieved August 3, 2014. "Nick Jonas And Demi Lovato's "Avalanche": Listen To Their Gorgeous Duet". Idolator. November 6, 2014. Archived from the original on March 5, 2024. Retrieved November 7, 2014. De Wilde, Karen (December 25, 2014). "Demi Lovato releases 'Nightingale' video showing Wilmer Valderrama". AXS. Archived from the original on April 6, 2015. Retrieved April 5, 2015. "Demi Lovato on Island Records Website". Island. Archived from the original on September 29, 2016. Retrieved December 5, 2014. Halperin, Shirley (May 26, 2015). "Demi Lovato, Nick Jonas, Manager Phil McIntyre Launch Joint Venture with Island Records (Exclusive)". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 28, 2015. Retrieved March 4, 2022. Garibaldi, Christina (June 25, 2015). "YES! Demi Lovato Just Announced Her New Single 'Cool For The Summer'". MTV News. New York City: Paramount. Archived from the original on August 2, 2021. Retrieved June 25, 2015. Kornhaber, Spencer (July 14, 2015). "Demi Lovato's 'Cool for the Summer': The Next Great Gay Anthem?". The Atlantic. Boston, Massachusetts. Archived from the original on August 3, 2021. Retrieved May 11, 2019. Murray, Gordon (September 1, 2015). "Demi Lovato's 'Cool for the Summer' Is Fastest No. 1 on Dance Club Songs in Two Years". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 5, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2022. Chart positions: "Demi Lovato". Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on July 14, 2023. Retrieved May 1, 2023. "Discography Demi Lovato". New Zealand Charts Portal. Hung Medien. Archived from the original on February 15, 2018. Retrieved May 1, 2023. Maslow, Nick (September 18, 2015). "Demi Lovato Takes Control in Her New Song 'Confident': 'You Can't Make Me Behave'". People. Archived from the original on August 3, 2021. Retrieved September 20, 2015. Lewittes, Michael (October 18, 2015). "Demi Lovato Performs "Cool For The Summer" And "Confident" Medley On 'SNL' – WATCH VIDEO". Gossip Cop. Archived from the original on April 5, 2017. Retrieved October 18, 2015. Kreps, Daniel (October 18, 2015). "See Demi Lovato's Confident 'SNL' Performances". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on March 5, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2022. Fall Out Boy (October 12, 2015). "Fall Out Boy are smack in the middle of leaving the hoth system in empire strikes back…". Medium. New York City: A Medium Corporation. Archived from the original on August 2, 2021. Retrieved October 14, 2015. Butler, Karen (August 26, 2015). "Demi Lovato's fifth studio album 'Confident' due out Oct. 16". United Press International. Archived from the original on March 17, 2021. Retrieved August 27, 2015. "Grammys 2017: The Complete Winners List". The Hollywood Reporter. February 12, 2017. Archived from the original on March 10, 2017. Retrieved March 5, 2017. Caulfield, Keith (October 26, 2015). "Pentatonix Scores First No. 1 Album on Billboard 200 Chart". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 5, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2022. Johnston, Maura. "Demi Lovato Lays It All Bare on 'Confident': Album Review". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 18, 2015. Retrieved October 16, 2015. Ryan, Patrick. "Album of the week: Demi Lovato". USA Today. Archived from the original on October 17, 2015. Retrieved October 16, 2015. Erlewine, Stephen Thomas. "Confident – Demi Lovato". AllMusic. Archived from the original on October 18, 2015. Retrieved October 17, 2015. "Reviews for Confident by Demi Lovato". Metacritic. Archived from the original on October 18, 2015. Retrieved October 16, 2015. Zaleski, Annie. "Demi Lovato comes into her own on Confident". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on October 18, 2015. Retrieved October 16, 2015. Lewis, Hillary; Willis, Cortney (December 19, 2013). "Demi Lovato Leaving 'X Factor'". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 29, 2021. Retrieved December 19, 2013. Legaspi, Althea (February 10, 2014). "Buzz Bites: Demi Lovato Has Begun Recording Her Fifth Studio Album". MTV. Archived from the original on January 21, 2016. Retrieved April 5, 2014. Williott, Carl (February 10, 2014). "Demi Lovato Is Already Working On Album #5". Idolator. San Francisco, California. Archived from the original on March 5, 2024. Retrieved April 5, 2014. Lewis, Casey (October 16, 2015). "Demi Lovato Just Signed With a Major Modeling Agency". Teen Vogue. New York City. Archived from the original on July 16, 2023. Retrieved October 16, 2015. Stutz, Colin (October 23, 2015). "Demi Lovato Gets Tough in 'Waitin for You' Video: Watch". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 5, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2022. Strecker, Eric (October 26, 2015). "Nick Jonas & Demi Lovato Announce Joint Future Now Tour". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 5, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2022. "Demi Lovato to Receive Billboard's Inaugural 'Rulebreaker' Award; Will Perform at Women in Music". Billboard. November 2, 2015. Archived from the original on March 5, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2022. Sources regarding the contemporary hit radio release of "Stone Cold": Trust, Gary [@gthot20] (March 16, 2016). ".@ddlovato's 'Stone Cold' goes to mainstream & adult top 40 radio Monday (March 21) ..." (Tweet). Archived from the original on April 6, 2016. Retrieved April 6, 2016 – via Twitter. "Demi Lovato "Stone Cold"". Republic Playbook. Republic Records. Archived from the original on March 22, 2016. Retrieved March 22, 2016. Iasimone, Ashley (July 2, 2016). "Demi Lovato Releases Steamy New Song 'Body Say'". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 5, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2022. The Hollywood Reporter (April 4, 2016). "Demi Lovato, Caitlyn Jenner Receive 2016 GLAAD Media Awards". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 4, 2016. Retrieved April 5, 2016. "Demi Lovato - Musician". Forbes. Archived from the original on December 11, 2022. Retrieved November 3, 2022. Ahern, Sarah (February 22, 2017). "Demi Lovato on Her New Documentary: Mental Health Is 'Just as Important as Physical Health'". Variety. Archived from the original on March 1, 2017. Retrieved March 1, 2017. Malone, Dolph (March 30, 2017). "Cheat Codes & Demi Lovato's "No Promises" Heading To Pop Radio". Headline Planet. Archived from the original on November 6, 2018. Retrieved March 31, 2017. "Jax Jones Has Released A Snippet Of His Demi Lovato Collab & It Has Mad Carnival Vibes". Capital. June 14, 2017. Archived from the original on June 25, 2018. Retrieved June 14, 2016. Gajanan, Mahita. "Time 100: John Legend and Demi Lovato to Perform at Gala". Time. Archived from the original on July 27, 2017. Retrieved April 20, 2017. Gibbs, Nancy (April 20, 2017). "Time 100: How the 2017 List of Influential People Was Chosen". Time. Archived from the original on October 19, 2018. Retrieved April 20, 2017. Saunders, Nicole (May 8, 2017). "Demi Lovato Teams Up With Kate Hudson's Fabletics Line to Support Girl Up". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 5, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2022. Lakshmin, Deepa (July 11, 2017). "Demi Lovato to Release New Single 'Sorry Not Sorry' July 11". MTV News. Archived from the original on October 5, 2018. Retrieved September 22, 2017. "Discography Demi Lovato". New Zealand Charts. Archived from the original on February 15, 2018. Retrieved October 30, 2017. Trust, Gary (October 30, 2017). "Post Malone & 21 Savage Lead Hot 100, Camila Cabello & Ed Sheeran Hit Top 10". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 5, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2022. "Taylor Swift holds #1 for second week". Australian Recording Industry Association. September 9, 2017. Archived from the original on September 17, 2017. Retrieved October 7, 2017. Demi Lovato Charts [@chartdlovato] (January 22, 2020). "Demi's new certifieds in the United States: Sorry Not Sorry — 5× Platinum Confident — 2× Platinum Tell Me You Love Me — 2× Platinum Stone Cold — Platinum Confident (Album) — Platinum pic.twitter.com/Xr1jFZYpYC" (Tweet). Retrieved January 23, 2020 – via Twitter. "Demi Lovato Announces New Album 'Tell Me You Love Me'". Rolling Stone. August 24, 2017. Archived from the original on June 12, 2018. Retrieved March 4, 2022. Caulfield, Keith (October 8, 2017). "Shania Twain's 'Now' Debuts at No. 1 on Billboard 200 Albums Chart". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 4, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2022. "Demi Lovato – Tell Me You Love Me". Metacritic. September 29, 2017. Archived from the original on October 3, 2017. Retrieved October 2, 2017. "Demi Lovato goes platinum with Tell Me You Love Me". CelebMix. April 8, 2018. Archived from the original on August 3, 2021. Retrieved May 11, 2019. Tenreyro, Tatiana (September 26, 2017). "Demi Lovato Announces 'Simply Complicated' Documentary Release Date". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 4, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2022. Fernandez, Alexia (May 4, 2017). "Demi Lovato to Star in YouTube Documentary I Am: Demi Lovato". People. Archived from the original on December 28, 2017. Retrieved May 5, 2017. Ramos, Dino-Ray (May 3, 2018). "MTV Movie & TV Awards: 'Black Panther', 'Stranger Things' Lead Pack In Nominations". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 25, 2020. Retrieved May 11, 2019. Blistein, Jon (October 26, 2017). "Demi Lovato Plots 2018 Tour With DJ Khaled". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 21, 2018. Retrieved October 26, 2017. "Demi Lovato's 'Tell Me You Love Me' Tour: Photos + Set List". PopCrush. February 27, 2018. Archived from the original on February 2, 2023. Retrieved February 27, 2018. "Demi Lovato and Luis Fonsi Drop the Fiery Music Video For Their Spanish Song 'Echame La Culpa' – Watch!". Entertainment Tonight Online. Chicago, Illinois: CBS Corporation. November 16, 2017. Archived from the original on November 17, 2017. Retrieved November 17, 2017. McGrath, Mary Kate (March 25, 2018). "Demi Lovato's performance of "Skyscraper" at March for Our Lives will send actual chills through your body". Yahoo!. Archived from the original on August 3, 2021. Retrieved May 7, 2018. White, Jack (May 16, 2018). "Christina Aguilera and Demi Lovato release their much-anticipated collaboration Fall In Line". Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on May 18, 2018. Retrieved May 19, 2018. Wass, Mike (May 10, 2018). "Demi Lovato Lends Her Voice To Clean Bandit's Next Single, "Solo"". Idolator. San Francisco, California: SpinMedia. Archived from the original on May 27, 2020. Retrieved May 18, 2018. Myers, Justin (June 22, 2018). "Clean Bandit and Demi Lovato take Solo to Number 1: "We can't believe it!"". Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on September 29, 2018. Retrieved June 22, 2018. "Demi Lovato sings about addiction struggles on 'Sober'". The News Tribune. June 21, 2018. Archived from the original on June 23, 2018. Retrieved June 23, 2018. Halperin, Shirley (July 24, 2018). "Demi Lovato Concert Canceled Following Hospitalization for Suspected Overdose". Variety. Archived from the original on March 5, 2024. Retrieved November 15, 2021. Murphy, Desiree (August 10, 2018). "Demi Lovato Temporarily Leaves Rehab for Further Treatment in Another Facility". Entertainment Tonight. Archived from the original on March 5, 2024. Retrieved November 15, 2021. "Demi Lovato Signs With Scooter Braun for Management". Variety. May 12, 2019. Archived from the original on May 12, 2019. Retrieved May 13, 2019. Iasimone, Ashley (August 20, 2019). "Will Ferrell Welcomes Demi Lovato to 'Eurovision' Cast". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 5, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2022. Harnick, Chris (August 27, 2019). "Demi Lovato Joins Will and Grace's Final Season". E! News. NBCUniversal. Archived from the original on March 5, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2022. Bruner, Raisa (January 27, 2020). "Demi Lovato Brought the Audience to Its Feet In Her Grammys Return". Time. Archived from the original on January 27, 2020. Retrieved January 27, 2020. Swinton, Elizabeth (February 2, 2020). "Watch: Demi Lovato Sings National Anthem at Super Bowl LIV". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on May 13, 2021. Retrieved February 2, 2020. Melas, Chloe (March 6, 2020). "Demi Lovato drops new single and music video for 'I Love Me'". CNN. Archived from the original on March 7, 2020. Retrieved March 11, 2020. "Sam Smith and Demi Lovato announce new single". Pressparty. Archived from the original on May 15, 2020. Retrieved April 14, 2020. "The 50 Most Inspirational LGBTQ Songs of All Time". Rolling Stone. June 28, 2023. Archived from the original on June 29, 2023. Retrieved June 29, 2023. Aniftos, Rania (August 5, 2020). "JoJo Calls to Call on Demi Lovato for Upcoming 'Lonely Hearts' Remix". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 5, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2022. Ginsberg, Gab (July 30, 2020). "Ariana Grande & Lady Gaga Lead 2020 MTV VMA Nominations: See Full List". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 19, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2022. @mikeadamonair (August 1, 2020). "#DemiLovato is now the first artist in #VMAs history to receive a nomination every year for EIGHT consecutive years, since her first nom in 2012. "I Love Me" is nominated in the 'Video for Good' category this year. pic.twitter.com/YMjpNkeAvt" (Tweet). Retrieved August 11, 2020 – via Twitter. "Demi Lovato & Marshmello Announce "OK Not To Be OK"". Idolator. September 8, 2020. Archived from the original on March 5, 2024. Retrieved September 9, 2020. Rowley, Glenn (September 30, 2020). "Demi Lovato Unveils Somber Ballad 'Still Have Me' Following Max Ehrich Breakup: Listen". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 5, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2022. Melas, Chloe (October 14, 2020). "Demi Lovato has a few words for President Trump". CNN. Archived from the original on November 10, 2021. Retrieved October 14, 2020. "Demi Lovato to Host the 2020 E! People's Choice Awards". E! Online. October 27, 2020. Archived from the original on December 19, 2021. Retrieved October 28, 2020. "Are All Time Low Teasing A Collaboration With Demi Lovato?". Kerrang!. December 3, 2020. Archived from the original on May 17, 2021. Retrieved December 3, 2020. "Demi Lovato to Revisit 'Darkest Point' of Her Life for 'Dancing With the Devil' Docuseries". Billboard. January 13, 2021. Archived from the original on April 26, 2023. Retrieved March 4, 2022. Haylock, Zoe (June 25, 2020). "A New Demi Lovato Docuseries Is Coming to YouTube to Break Us". Vulture. Archived from the original on April 26, 2023. Retrieved August 2, 2020. White, Peter (June 25, 2020). "YouTube Gets Back With Demi Lovato With Four-Part Documentary Series". Deadline. Archived from the original on November 13, 2020. Retrieved August 2, 2020. Kennedy, John R. (March 16, 2021). "Demi Lovato Shares New Album Details". iHeartRadio. Archived from the original on August 3, 2021. Retrieved March 16, 2021. Blakemore, Peyton (February 5, 2021). "Demi Lovato Teams Up With Sam Fischer For New Song 'What Other People Say'". iHeartRadio. Archived from the original on April 26, 2023. Retrieved March 16, 2021. Caulfield, Keith. "Justin Bieber's 'Justice' Returns to No. 1 on Billboard 200 Albums Chart". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 22, 2023. Retrieved March 4, 2022. Minsker, Evan (March 26, 2021). "Demi Lovato Releases New Song "Dancing With the Devil": Listen". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on March 27, 2021. Retrieved March 26, 2021. "Demi Lovato Talks Collaborating With Ariana Grande on 'Met Him Last Night'". Rolling Stone. April 2, 2021. Archived from the original on October 29, 2021. Retrieved April 6, 2021. "2022 GRAMMYs Awards Show: Complete Nominations List". Grammy.com. November 23, 2021. Archived from the original on January 24, 2022. Retrieved December 22, 2021. Alter, Rebecca (August 21, 2021). "Demi Lovato's New Single Is a Break-Up Song for Melons". Vulture. Archived from the original on April 26, 2023. Retrieved August 22, 2021. "Demi Lovato launching her own podcast". Yardbarker. March 30, 2021. Archived from the original on October 29, 2021. Retrieved April 25, 2021. "Demi Lovato is launching her own podcast, kicking off new TikTok series 'Headstream'". ABC News Radio. Archived from the original on April 25, 2021. Retrieved April 25, 2021. Blistein, Jon (May 12, 2021). "Demi Lovato to Launch New Podcast '4D'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on August 23, 2023. Retrieved May 19, 2021. Witter, Brad (July 21, 2021). "Watch An Exclusive First Look & See The Guest List For Demi Lovato's New Talk Show". Bustle. Archived from the original on August 2, 2021. Retrieved August 2, 2021. Pedersen, Erik (February 6, 2020). "Demi Lovato Talk Show Gets Quibi Greenlight". Deadline. Archived from the original on April 26, 2023. Retrieved January 26, 2021. "Quibi Sets Demi Lovato Talk Show 'Pillow Talk With Demi Lovato'". TheWrap. February 6, 2020. Archived from the original on April 26, 2023. Retrieved March 11, 2020. Spangler, Todd (January 8, 2021). "Roku Acquires Global Rights to 75-Plus Quibi Shows, Will Stream Them for Free". Variety. Archived from the original on January 8, 2021. Retrieved January 26, 2021. Mamo, Heran (September 17, 2021). "G-Eazy & Demi Lovato Confront Their Most Harrowing Headlines in 'Breakdown' Video". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 27, 2023. Retrieved March 4, 2022. Aniftos, Rania (September 29, 2021). "How to Watch 'Unidentified With Demi Lovato' Online". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 5, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2022. Kinane, Ruth (September 27, 2021). "Demi Lovato dishes on alien abductions and making contact on UFO docuseries Unidentified". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on September 21, 2023. Retrieved October 29, 2021. Rubin, Julia Lynn (May 9, 2022). "Living for the Moment". Inked. Archived from the original on June 8, 2022. Retrieved June 8, 2022. Gelhoren, Giovana (April 22, 2022). "Demi Lovato Says They Are 'So Proud' of Forthcoming Album: 'It's My Absolute Best Yet'". People. Archived from the original on June 7, 2022. Retrieved May 17, 2022. Dailey, Hannah (April 22, 2022). "Demi Lovato Teases New Album: It's 'So Representative of Me'". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 5, 2022. Retrieved May 14, 2022. * Mier, Tomás (February 17, 2022). "Demi Lovato Is 'Good' with Being Alone. But Their New Winnetka Bowling League Collab Deals With Past Heartbreak". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 8, 2022. Retrieved March 24, 2023. Ferguson, Piper (February 4, 2022). "How Demi Lovato teamed up with Winnekta Bowling League for new duet "fiimy (f**k it i miss you)"". WRMF. Archived from the original on May 15, 2023. Retrieved March 24, 2023. * Dailey, Hannah (June 10, 2022). "Demi Lovato Drops 'Holy Fvck' Lead Single 'Skin of My Teeth': Stream It Now". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 4, 2023. Retrieved August 4, 2023. Mendez, Michele (May 27, 2022). "Demi's Pop-Punk Era Is Here by the "Skin of My Teeth"". Elite Daily. Archived from the original on June 5, 2023. Retrieved May 27, 2022. Bowenbank, Starr (June 10, 2022). "Demi Lovato Made New Album While 'Clean & Sober': 'I'm Really, Really Proud'". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 10, 2022. Retrieved June 11, 2022. Aniftos, Rania (June 6, 2022). "Demi Lovato Announces New Album 'Holy Fvck' & Release Date". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 6, 2022. Retrieved June 6, 2022. Strauss, Matthew (June 6, 2022). "Demi Lovato Announces New Album Holy Fvck". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on June 9, 2022. Retrieved June 6, 2022. Lane, Kwase (June 6, 2022). "Demi Lovato drops 'Holy Fvck' announcement video—watch". AltPress. Archived from the original on June 6, 2022. Retrieved August 4, 2023. Zemler, Emily (July 15, 2022). "Demi Lovato Evokes Old School Pop-Punk in 'Substance' Music Video". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on July 15, 2022. Retrieved August 4, 2023. Mier, Tomás (August 17, 2022). "Demi Lovato Alludes to 12-Year Age Gap with Ex Wilmer Valderrama on Scathing New Track '29'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on August 17, 2022. Retrieved August 4, 2023. Caulfield, Keith (August 28, 2022). "Bad Bunny Ties 'Encanto' for Most Weeks at No. 1 on Billboard 200 in 2022". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 28, 2022. Retrieved August 4, 2023. Rutherford, Kevin (August 29, 2022). "Demi Lovato & Five Finger Death Punch Crown Billboard's Rock Album Charts". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 16, 2023. Retrieved August 4, 2023. Kaufman, Gil (June 7, 2022). "Demi Lovato Announces Dates for Holy Fvck Fall 2022 Tour". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 7, 2022. Retrieved June 7, 2022. * Meierhans, Jennifer (January 11, 2023). "Demi Lovato poster banned for being offensive to Christians". BBC UK. Archived from the original on January 11, 2023. Retrieved January 11, 2023. Kolirin, Lianne (January 11, 2023). "Demi Lovato poster banned by advertising regulator for being offensive to Christians". CNN. Archived from the original on May 22, 2023. Retrieved January 11, 2023. ASA (January 11, 2023). "Universal Music Operations Ltd". Advertising Standards Authority. Archived from the original on January 17, 2023. Retrieved January 11, 2023. Brandle, Lars (March 3, 2023). "Demi Lovato Unleashes 'Scream VI' Cut 'Still Alive': Stream It Now". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 1, 2023. Retrieved August 4, 2023. Iasimone, Ashley (May 7, 2023). "Here Are the 2023 MTV Movie & TV Awards Winners: Full List". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 8, 2023. Retrieved May 8, 2023. Mier, Tomás (March 24, 2023). "Demi Lovato Reimagines 'Heart Attack' as a Rock Anthem for Song's 10th Anniversary". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on August 21, 2023. Retrieved April 1, 2023. Bowenbank, Starr. "Demi Lovato Updates 'Cool For the Summer' With New Rock Version: Listen". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 19, 2023. Retrieved July 10, 2023. "Demi Lovato Shares 'Sorry Not Sorry (Rock Version)' Featuring Slash, Announces New Album 'Revamped'". People. July 14, 2023. Archived from the original on July 18, 2023. Retrieved August 4, 2023. McIntyre, Hugh (July 7, 2023). "Demi Lovato Is Re-Recording Her Hits As Rock Anthems, Which Is A Brilliant Business Move". Forbes. Archived from the original on July 10, 2023. Retrieved July 10, 2023. Sepinwall, Alan (May 31, 2023). "How 'Dave' Landed Drake and Brad Pitt in Wild Season Three Finale". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on December 24, 2023. Retrieved November 28, 2023. Paul, Larisha (June 22, 2023). "Demi Lovato Wages War to Protect Reproductive Rights on Protest Single 'Swine'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on July 6, 2023. Retrieved July 10, 2023. Denis, Kyle (June 22, 2023). "Demi Lovato Drops New Song 'Swine' Inspired by 1-Year Anniversary of Roe v. Wade Reversal". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 14, 2023. Retrieved October 13, 2023. Mier, Tomás (July 14, 2023). "Demi Lovato Will 'Reenvision' Their Pop Hits as Rock Bangers on Upcoming Album 'Revamped'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on July 19, 2023. Retrieved July 14, 2023. Garcia, Thania (July 14, 2023). "Demi Lovato's New 'Revamped' Album Will Consist of Rock Versions of Her Biggest Hits". Variety. Archived from the original on September 20, 2023. Retrieved July 14, 2023. Paul, Larisha (August 18, 2023). "Demi Lovato Is Feeling Unstoppable on 'Confident (Rock Version)'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on September 20, 2023. Retrieved August 20, 2023. * Taylor, Ims (September 15, 2023). "Demi Lovato – Revamped". Clash. Archived from the original on October 2, 2023. Retrieved October 13, 2023. McClain Merrill, Allison (September 19, 2023). "Demi Lovato Gives Their Hits the Rock Treatment on Revamped". Paste. Archived from the original on October 2, 2023. Retrieved October 13, 2023. "Demi Lovato Refashions Herself On 'Revamped'". PopMatters. Archived from the original on October 2, 2023. Retrieved September 20, 2023. Daw, Stephen (September 15, 2023). "Queer Jams of the Week: New Music From Demi Lovato, K.Flay, Vagabon & More". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 2, 2023. Retrieved October 13, 2023. "Le Sserafim Teams Up With Demi Lovato for 'Eve, Psyche & The Bluebeard's Wife' Remix: Stream It Now". Billboard. August 4, 2023. Archived from the original on August 6, 2023. Retrieved August 4, 2023. Aniftos, Rania (August 11, 2023). "Demi Lovato Reimagines Daisy Jones & The Six's 'Let Me Down Easy'". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 13, 2023. Retrieved August 11, 2023. "Compositora que ajudou Demi Lovato a cantar em português em 'Penhasco 2' é autora de músicas da 'Rensga Hits!'". Globo (in Portuguese). August 31, 2023. Archived from the original on September 22, 2023. Retrieved August 31, 2023. Havens, Lyndsey (August 21, 2023). "Demi Lovato Splits With Manager Scooter Braun". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 8, 2024. Retrieved January 4, 2024. Aswad, Jem (September 8, 2023). "Demi Lovato Signs With Brandon Creed for Management". Variety. Archived from the original on January 4, 2024. Retrieved January 4, 2024. "The Masked Singer season 10 premiere kickoff reveals special all-star unmasking". Entertainment Weekly. September 11, 2023. Archived from the original on October 20, 2023. Retrieved September 15, 2023. Lynch, Joe (September 13, 2023). "2023 VMAs Performances Ranked From Worst to Best". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 14, 2023. Retrieved September 14, 2023. Ruggieri, Melissa (September 12, 2023). "Brutally honest reviews of every VMAs performance, including Shakira, Maneskin and Demi Lovato". USA Today. Archived from the original on September 21, 2023. Retrieved September 14, 2023. Bell, Sadie (October 3, 2023). "Demi Lovato Announces A Very Demi Holiday Special for the Roku Channel". People. Archived from the original on October 20, 2023. Retrieved October 5, 2023. Kaplan, Ilana (December 8, 2023). "Demi Lovato on Her Holiday Special, Directing Documentary 'Child Star' and New Music in 2024 (Exclusive)". People. Archived from the original on December 9, 2023. Retrieved December 9, 2023. Krol, Charlotte (November 15, 2023). "Magician Dynamo to be 'killed' live on TV". NME. Archived from the original on January 18, 2024. Retrieved November 28, 2023. Johnston, Rylee (October 12, 2023). "You Can Still Ring in 2024 With Demi Lovato: Here's Where to Buy Tickets to Her NYE Concert". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 1, 2024. Retrieved January 1, 2024. Rigotti, Alex (March 9, 2024). "Slash announces new star-studded blues album 'Orgy of the Damned'". NME. Archived from the original on March 10, 2024. Retrieved March 10, 2024. Wiseman, Andreas (March 8, 2024). "Demi Lovato Joins Rose Byrne & 'The Holdovers' Breakout Dominic Sessa In Movie 'Tow' About Homeless Woman Caught In Tow-Company Hell". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 10, 2024. Retrieved March 11, 2024. Shafer, Ellise (March 16, 2023). "Demi Lovato to Make Directorial Debut With Child Stardom Doc for Hulu". Variety. Archived from the original on July 12, 2023. Retrieved October 13, 2023. Siegel, Tatiana; Wagmeister, Elizabeth (September 13, 2023). "Scooter Braun's Role in Demi Lovato's Directorial Debut in Question Amid Client Exodus. What About His Other TV and Film Projects?". Variety. Archived from the original on October 19, 2023. Retrieved October 13, 2023. The letter highlights some talent already on board, like Drew Barrymore and Raven-Symoné [...] "Demi Talks About Her Influences". Tiger Beat. September 8, 2011. Archived from the original on September 21, 2013. Retrieved March 16, 2013. "Demi Lovato dishes on her current pop faves, from Harry Styles to Dua Lipa – Music News – ABC News Radio". ABC News Radio. Archived from the original on April 19, 2020. Retrieved August 11, 2020. "Demi Lovato Q&A: On 'Demi,' Her 'X Factor' Return and Being Sick of Party Songs". Billboard. May 13, 2013. Archived from the original on April 26, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2022. Nguyen, Vi-An (March 25, 2013). "Demi Lovato: I Want to 'Settle Down' in the Next Few Years". Parade. Archived from the original on April 27, 2023. Retrieved April 17, 2014. "Demi Lovato Says Her AOL Screen Name Was Inspired by Kelly Clarkson". Billboard. March 22, 2018. Archived from the original on March 4, 2022. Retrieved March 4, 2022. Boyce, Shannon (September 1, 2011). "SHE DID IT AGAIN: BRITNEY SPEARS LANDS BACK ON TOP". Young Hollywood. Los Angeles, California: Fremantle Media. Archived from the original on October 20, 2012. Retrieved January 7, 2012. Minaya, Marcell (August 7, 2010). "Lovato 'inspired by Rihanna R&B sound'". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on May 2, 2013. Retrieved June 15, 2013. "Demi Lovato inspired by Jennifer Lopez". The Indian Express. January 29, 2017. Archived from the original on July 16, 2023. Retrieved September 21, 2015. "Demi Lovato talks about Alexz Johnson". YouTube. October 16, 2012. Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved January 18, 2017. Karen Jane Ng (September 30, 2017). "Look: Demi Lovato reveals her first love was The Spice Girls!". Myx. Archived from the original on August 21, 2019. Retrieved August 21, 2019. Joey Guerra (June 19, 2008). "Demi Lovato: Texas' own 'tween star". Houston Chronicle. Archived from the original on October 21, 2012. Retrieved March 31, 2013. Chris Harris (August 29, 2008). "Demi Lovato metalhead?". MTV News. Viacom. Archived from the original on August 15, 2021. Retrieved March 16, 2013. Smith-Engelhardt, Joe (August 23, 2019). "10 metal-loving mainstream musicians who might surprise you". Alternative Press. Archived from the original on August 3, 2021. Retrieved August 11, 2020. McClellan, Laura (July 18, 2016). "Demi Lovato Wants to Cut More Country Music". Taste of Country. Archived from the original on August 3, 2021. Retrieved August 11, 2020. Garibaldi, Christina. "Demi Lovato Will Make Like Queen Bey On Neon Lights Tour". MTV. Archived from the original on August 3, 2021. Retrieved February 7, 2014. "Demi Lovato Reveals Christina Aguilera Album Inspiration". PEOPLE.com. Archived from the original on August 15, 2021. Retrieved August 11, 2020. Lansky, Sam (May 14, 2014). "Demi Lovato's 'Demi': Album Review". Idolator. Archived from the original on March 5, 2024. Retrieved October 11, 2023. Smith, Andy (February 19, 2014). "This Weekend in Charlotte (2/19/14): Rock of Ages, Charlotte Symphony, Demi Lovato, & HousingFest". Charlotte Magazine. Archived from the original on June 29, 2019. Retrieved October 11, 2023. Spata, Christopher (February 26, 2014). "Review: Demi Lovato gives fans what they want in Tampa". The Tampa Tribune. Archived from the original on June 21, 2018. Retrieved October 11, 2023. Nick Levine (April 26, 2009). "Demi Lovato: 'Don't Forget'". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on August 3, 2021. Retrieved March 4, 2022. Brain, Becky (September 7, 2011). "Demi Lovato 'Unbroken': Fall Preview". Idolator. Buzz Media. Archived from the original on March 5, 2024. Retrieved September 16, 2011. Sophie Schillaci (July 19, 2012). "Demi Lovato at The Greek: Concert Review". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved March 31, 2013. Miers, Jeff (July 31, 2009). "Demi Lovato shows her talents on new disc". The Buffalo News. Berkshire Hathaway. Archived from the original on June 30, 2012. Retrieved October 9, 2011. "OneRepublic's Ryan Tedder Hails Demi Lovato's Voice And "Incredible" Range – Video". Capital. October 12, 2013. Retrieved November 3, 2014. "Alter The Press!: ATP! Album Review: Demi Lovato – Demi". Retrieved November 3, 2014. "Demi Lovato's 'Neon Lights' Tour Shines Bright In Vancouver, Canada: Live Review". Idolator. February 10, 2014. Retrieved March 4, 2022. "If You're Not Listening to Demi Lovato, You're Doing Music Wrong". Los Angeles. October 2014. Retrieved March 4, 2022. Ryan, Patrick. "Demi Lovato wows with flawless, confident national anthem at Super Bowl". USA TODAY. Retrieved March 16, 2020. "Demi Lovato Likes To Be Sober And Not Move Into Addiction Again, Makes Sober House Her Home". Mstarz. January 11, 2013. Archived from the original on March 6, 2016. Retrieved March 1, 2014. McClain, James (June 13, 2020). "Demi Lovato Sells Notorious Sunset Strip Villa to Real Estate Scion". Variety. Retrieved June 26, 2020. McClain, James (September 8, 2020). "Demi Lovato Buys All-New Modern Farmhouse". Variety. Retrieved September 8, 2020. Demi Lovato (October 10, 2017). Demi Lovato Does Jiu Jitsu. Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved October 11, 2017. Burne, Kathrine (February 5, 2023). "Demi Lovato Promoted To Purple Belt In BJJ". JitsMagazine. Retrieved February 5, 2023. Garcia, Jennifer. "Demi Lovato and Trace Cyrus Split". People. Michaels, Wendy (October 11, 2017). "Did Demi Lovato & Joe Jonas Date? 'Tell Me You Love Me' Singer Opens Up About Their Past". Elite Daily. Walsh, Savannah. "Demi Lovato's Complete Dating History, From Wilmer Valderrama to Joe Jonas". Elle. Retrieved July 14, 2020. Ahlgrim, Callie. "Demi Lovato is teasing a song that seems to slam ex-boyfriend Wilmer Valderrama for dating her as a teen". Insider Inc. Retrieved August 22, 2022. De Loera, Carlos (August 18, 2022). "Demi Lovato's '29' has become a TikTok anthem exposing older men dating teenage girls". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved August 31, 2022. Chiu, Melody. "Demi Lovato Splits from MMA Fighter Guilherme 'Bomba' Vasconcelos". People. Retrieved November 30, 2020. Mizoguchi, Karen. "Demi Lovato and Designer Henry Levy Break Up: Source". People. Retrieved November 30, 2020. Chiu, Melody. "Demi Lovato and Austin Wilson Split After Months of Dating: 'She's Concentrating on Herself'". People. Retrieved November 30, 2020. Aiello, McKenna (July 23, 2020). "Demi Lovato Is Engaged to Max Ehrich". E!. Retrieved March 4, 2022. Kinane, Ruth (September 30, 2020). "Demi Lovato drops breakup ballad 'Still Have Me' after split from fiancé". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved September 30, 2020. Irvin, Jack; Chiu, Melody (August 8, 2022). "Demi Lovato Is in a 'Happy and Healthy Relationship' with New Musician Boyfriend: Source". People. Retrieved August 21, 2022. Lee, Tionah (August 21, 2022). "Demi Lovato's Boyfriend Jute$ Celebrates Her 30th Birthday With Romantic Post". Entertainment Tonight. Retrieved August 21, 2022. Gibson, Kelsie (August 31, 2022). "Who Is Demi Lovato's Boyfriend? All About Jutes". People. Retrieved September 26, 2022. Chiu, Melody (December 17, 2023). "Demi Lovato and Jordan 'Jutes' Lutes Are Engaged! Inside the 'Personal and Intimate' Proposal (Exclusive)". People. United States: Dotdash Meredith. ISSN 0093-7673. OCLC 794712888. Archived from the original on December 17, 2023. Retrieved December 17, 2023. Johnson, Zach (March 7, 2018). "Demi Lovato Is Happily Single—and Ready to Slide Into Your DMs". E!. Retrieved January 31, 2020. Aiello, McKenna (January 30, 2020). "Demi Lovato Reveals the "Really Beautiful" Moment She Came Out to Her Parents". E!. Retrieved January 31, 2020. Dodgson, Lindsay. "Demi Lovato said she would forever cherish the opportunity to play Naya Rivera's girlfriend on 'Glee,' because 'she helped queer girls like me'". Insider.com. Insider Inc. Retrieved July 14, 2020. Vivinetto, Gina (March 29, 2021). "Demi Lovato says she's pansexual: 'I'm so fluid now'". Today. Retrieved March 29, 2021. Byrne, Suzy (March 29, 2021). "Demi Lovato comes out as pansexual". Yahoo! News. Retrieved March 29, 2021. Gajewski, Ryan (May 19, 2021). "Demi Lovato Comes Out as Non-Binary and Changes Pronouns to They/Them". E!. Retrieved March 4, 2022. "Demi Lovato is non-binary and is changing pronouns to they/them, singer announces". BBC News. May 19, 2021. Retrieved May 19, 2021. Lovato, Demi (June 25, 2021). "Demi Lovato performs their greatest hits this Pride season | YouTube Pride 2021". Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved July 14, 2021 – via YouTube. Henry, Ben (June 28, 2021). "Demi Lovato Opened Up About The "Reality" Of Coming Out As Nonbinary". BuzzFeed News. Retrieved July 14, 2021. Jokic, Natasha (August 20, 2021). "Demi Lovato Called Their Breakup With Max Ehrich The "Best Thing That's Happened" To Them". BuzzFeed News. Retrieved August 26, 2021. Sim, Bernardo (April 29, 2022). "Demi Lovato Just Quietly Updated Their Pronouns on Instagram". Out. Retrieved April 30, 2022. Irvin, Jack (August 2, 2022). "Demi Lovato Explains Why She Started Using She/Her Pronouns Again in Addition to They/Them". People. Retrieved August 3, 2022. Kingsberry, Janay (August 3, 2022). "Demi Lovato's pronouns can help normalize gender fluidity, advocates say". The Washington Post. Retrieved August 4, 2022. Cardenas, Cat (September 21, 2022). "Demi Lovato Has Risen". Spin. Retrieved September 26, 2022. Johnston, Janice (April 19, 2011). "Demi Lovato Interview: Teen Star Opens Up on Bulimia, Cutting Issues". ABC News. Archived from the original on May 21, 2011. Retrieved March 14, 2013. Gicas, Peter (June 28, 2013). "Demi Lovato Still Has "Nightmares" About the Childhood Bullying She Endured". E! News. Retrieved December 27, 2015. Finn, Natalie (November 1, 2010). "Demi Lovato Enters Treatment Center for 'Issues'". E! News. Retrieved March 14, 2010. Atkinson, Katie; Caulfield, Keith (July 5, 2016). "Pop Shop Podcast: Hozier Talks 'Better Love' & What's Next, Plus Burning Questions About Britney, Demi & More". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 6, 2016. Retrieved March 4, 2022. Collis, Ellen. "Demi Lovato Exclusive Interview". Seventeen. Retrieved March 14, 2013. "Disney Star Demi Lovato: I'm Bipolar". Fox News. April 20, 2011. Retrieved March 4, 2022. Spero, Jesse (December 10, 2013). "Demi Lovato Reveals: I Would 'Smuggle' Cocaine On Airplanes (Exclusive)". Access Hollywood. Retrieved August 1, 2021. Raiken, Amber (August 25, 2022). "Demi Lovato reveals she used opiates for first time at 13". The Independent. Retrieved August 25, 2022. Wenger, Stephanie (August 23, 2022). "Demi Lovato Recalls Starting to Use Opiates at 13 After a Car Accident: 'Looking for an Escape'". People. Retrieved August 25, 2022. "The Pressure to Be Perfect". Seventeen. April 14, 2011. Archived from the original on April 17, 2011. Retrieved March 4, 2022. Alexander, X. (March 7, 2012). "Demi Lovato's 'Stay Strong' Documentary: Watch". Idolator. Retrieved May 31, 2013. "Demi Lovato Starts Work on Her Fourth Album". Sawfnews. WordPress. April 5, 2012. Archived from the original on April 7, 2012. Retrieved November 1, 2012. "Demi Lovato: The Sober Living House Is My Home!". TMZ. January 11, 2013. Retrieved January 24, 2013. Aniftos, Rania (March 16, 2017). "Demi Lovato Celebrates 5-Year Anniversary of Her Sobriety". Billboard. Retrieved March 4, 2022. "Demi Lovato: Simply Complicated – Official Documentary". YouTube. Archived from the original on December 21, 2021. Retrieved October 21, 2017. Armstrong, Megan (October 18, 2017). "The 10 Most Honest Confessions From Demi Lovato's 'Simply Complicated' YouTube Documentary". Billboard. Retrieved October 22, 2017. "Demi Lovato Talks About Casual Sex and Cocaine Addiction in Her Revealing 'Simply Complicated'". Maxim. October 22, 2017. Retrieved October 22, 2017. Fowler, Brandi (October 17, 2017). "Demi Lovato's Childhood Bullies Were So Intense They Petitioned for Her Suicide". InStyle. Archived from the original on October 21, 2017. Retrieved October 22, 2017. McRady, Rachel (March 16, 2021). "Demi Lovato on Deciding to Drink Alcohol and Smoke Weed After Overdose". Entertainment Tonight. Retrieved March 18, 2021. Mamo, Heran (December 2, 2021). "Demi Lovato Is No Longer 'California Sober': 'Sober Sober Is the Only Way to Be'". Billboard. Retrieved December 5, 2021. Grimes, Gary (December 5, 2021). "Demi Lovato declares they're no longer 'California sober': 'Sober sober is the only way to be'". PinkNews. Retrieved December 5, 2021. "Demi Lovato Said She Was Misdiagnosed With Bipolar Disorder". InStyle. March 16, 2021. Archived from the original on March 17, 2021. Retrieved June 3, 2022. Ganz, Caryn (March 16, 2021). "How Honest Can Demi Lovato Be?". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. Retrieved March 17, 2021. Romano, Nick (June 21, 2018). "Demi Lovato confesses 'I'm not sober anymore' in new song". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved July 28, 2018. Gonzalez, Sandra; Melas, Chloe; Respers France, Lisa (July 24, 2018). "Demi Lovato stable and recovering after apparent overdose". CNN. Retrieved July 27, 2018. "Demi Lovato addresses addiction battle". BBC News. August 6, 2018. Retrieved August 9, 2018. "Demi Lovato on life after surviving overdose: I had to "essentially die to wake up"". CBS News. March 21, 2021. Retrieved March 21, 2021. Ross, Martha (August 14, 2018). "Demi Lovato's overdose likely caused by drug laced with fentanyl, report says". San Jose Mercury News. Retrieved October 18, 2018. Ryan, Lisa (August 14, 2018). "Demi Lovato Will Reportedly Be in Rehab for Several Months". The Cut. Retrieved October 18, 2018. Gonzalez, Sandra (February 17, 2021). "Demi Lovato reveals she had multiple strokes, brain damage after overdose". CNN. Retrieved February 17, 2021. "Demi Lovato Released From Hospital, Enters In-Patient Facility: Report". Billboard. August 6, 2018. Retrieved March 4, 2022. "Google's Most-Searched Person of 2018 is Demi Lovato". Elle. December 18, 2018. Retrieved April 18, 2021. "Biggest stories of 2018, ranked". CBS News. November 30, 2018. Retrieved April 18, 2021. Steirnberg, Bonnie (December 22, 2018). "Demi Lovato Responds to Rumors About Her Recovery". Billboard. Retrieved March 4, 2022. Ganz, Jami (March 5, 2020). "Demi Lovato reveals what led to her 2018 overdose". New York Daily News. Retrieved March 11, 2020. "Demi Lovato says her old manager used to "control" what she ate". PopBuzz. Retrieved March 16, 2020. Maltceva, Margarita (March 17, 2021). "'I lost my virginity in a rape': Demi Lovato reveals she was raped as a teenager when she was acting on Disney Channel". National Post. Retrieved March 18, 2021. Horton, Adrian (March 17, 2021). "Demi Lovato says she was raped as a teenager by someone she knew". The Guardian. Retrieved March 18, 2021. "This is why Demi Lovato is an LGBT icon". PinkNews. July 25, 2018. Retrieved March 16, 2020. Blake, Emily. "Lady Gaga, Demi Lovato Proclaim '#LoveIsLove' After Gay-Marriage Ruling". MTV. Retrieved June 26, 2013. Tang, Vivian (November 22, 2013). "Demi's New Image? "[Neon Lights] Was My Grown-Up Sexy Video"". Cambio. Retrieved November 24, 2013. "MULTI-PLATINUM SELLING RECORDING ARTIST, DEMI LOVATO GOES BICOASTAL FOR PRIDE" (PDF). NYC Pride (Press release). May 5, 2014. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 6, 2014. Retrieved May 6, 2014. "Demi Lovato & Cher Lloyd's 'Really Don't Care' Video: Demi Invade L.A. Pride". Billboard. June 26, 2014. Retrieved March 4, 2022. "Demi Lovato Face of Human Rights Campaign's Americans for Marriage Equality – Fuse". Fuse. Retrieved August 26, 2015. "49 Celebrities Honor 49 Victims of Orlando Tragedy | Human Rights Campaign". Hrc.org. Archived from the original on August 23, 2016. Retrieved June 30, 2016. Rothaus, Steve (June 12, 2016). "Pulse Orlando shooting scene a popular LGBT club where employees, patrons 'like family'". The Miami Herald. Retrieved June 15, 2016. Washington, Arlene (March 3, 2017). "Demi Lovato to be Honored for Mental Health Advocacy". Billboard. Retrieved March 4, 2022. "Demi Lovato Accepts Eosinophilic Honorary Ambassador Award". Crushable. May 12, 2009. Archived from the original on May 31, 2012. Retrieved March 16, 2013. Derschowitz, Jessica (December 26, 2011). "Demi Lovato slams Disney Channel over eating disorder joke". CBS News. Retrieved December 26, 2011. Harris, Nadia-Elysse (May 8, 2013). "Demi Lovato Honored At National Children's Mental Health Awareness Day Event". Medicaldaily.com. Retrieved August 22, 2013. Johnson, Ted (July 25, 2016). "Demi Lovato Performs AT DNC, Talks Mental Health Care". Variety. Retrieved September 30, 2016. "Demi Lovato to help war-scarred children in Iraq". nydailynews. Associated Press. September 23, 2017. Archived from the original on September 26, 2017. Retrieved September 26, 2017. Hillyer, Hannah (April 20, 2020). "Demi Lovato includes Irish charity in urgent mental health appeal". VIP. Retrieved November 24, 2020. Simone, Chima (August 8, 2014). "Demi Lovato Gets Feminism Right, See the Celebs That Have Gotten It All Wrong!". E! Online. Retrieved May 31, 2015. Galea, Matt. "Demi Lovato talks about feminism and cyber-bullying". Dolly. Archived from the original on August 3, 2021. Retrieved March 16, 2020. Kim Duong (May 8, 2017). "Demi Lovato Is Launching an Activewear Collection with Fabletics". InStyle. Dominique Astorino (May 12, 2017). "Brace Your Wallets: Fabletics Is Launching a Collaboration With Demi Lovato". PopSugar. Faith Brar (May 8, 2017). "Demi Lovato Teams Up with Fabletics to Empower Young Girls". Shape.com. Archived from the original on November 18, 2018. Retrieved July 10, 2017. "Demi Lovato America's Next Top Model". Ocean Up. As If Productions. Archived from the original on April 15, 2019. Retrieved July 27, 2011. "Demi Lovato, PACER and Facebook® Team Up to Stop Cyberbullying During National Bullying Prevention Month" (Press release). National Bullying Prevention Center. October 1, 2010. Archived from the original on June 13, 2013. Retrieved March 16, 2013. Peel, Sarah (October 7, 2010). "Demi Lovato Does 'A Day Made Better' School Advocacy Campaign". BSCKids. Archived from the original on November 14, 2012. Retrieved March 16, 2013. "Demi Lovato's Charity Work, Events and Causes". Look to the Stars: The World of Celebrity Giving. Retrieved March 10, 2013. Cory Midgarden (September 24, 2012). "Demi Lovato Tackling Girl-To-Girl Bullying, One 'Mean' Girl At A Time". MTV News. Viacom. Retrieved March 16, 2013. "Voto Latino campaign, January 10, 2010". Demi Lovato Daily. Archived from the original on January 10, 2016. Retrieved March 16, 2013. "An Open Letter to Congress from the Music Industry". Billboard. Retrieved June 26, 2016. "Demi Lovato Performs At March For Our Lives In Washington, D.C.". CBS Miami. (March 24, 2018). Maria Pasquini. "Demi Lovato and Miley Cyrus Reunite at March for Our Lives: 'Happy to Stand with You'". People Music (May 2, 2017). Benjamin Vanhoose (May 27, 2020). "Kim Kardashian, Chance the Rapper and More Celebs React to George Floyd Killing: 'This Is Not Okay'". People. Retrieved June 17, 2020. Patrick Hosken (June 3, 2020). "Demi Lovato Memorialized Breonna Taylor And Speaks Out Against White Privilege". MTV News. Retrieved June 17, 2020. "'Send It On,' an anthem by the world's biggest teen stars, Miley Cyrus, Jonas Brothers, Selena Gomez and Demi Lovato, for Disney's 'Friends for Change: Project Green,' will debut on Radio Disney, Disney Channel, Disney.com and iTunes". Disney Channel Media Net (Press release). Burbank, California: The Walt Disney Company. August 6, 2009. Archived from the original (DOC) on May 11, 2011. Retrieved August 20, 2009. Nesbitt, Cherylann. "Demi Lovato Celebrates 21st Birthday In Kenya During Me to We Volunteer Trip". MTV Canada. Archived from the original on May 21, 2016. Retrieved April 5, 2017. Baila, Morgan (January 13, 2017). "Demi Lovato Kenya Travel Pics We Movement Charity". Refinery29. Retrieved January 20, 2017. Aiello, McKenna (March 19, 2017). "Demi Lovato Celebrates Five Years of Sobriety by Hand Delivering Donations to Charities". Eonline.com. Retrieved March 21, 2017. de la Cretaz, Britni (March 19, 2017). "Demi Lovato Celebrated Five Years Sober With A Selfless Act Of Kindness". Refinery29. Retrieved March 21, 2017. Kara Nesvig (April 1, 2020). "Demi Lovato Launches New Fabletics Line, Announces Part of the Profits Will Go to COVID-19 Relief". Teen Vogue. Retrieved June 17, 2020. "CLEAN & CLEAR® Skincare, Demi Lovato and DoSomething.org Join Forces to Start a Massive Movement Encouraging Teens to Give Back" (Press release). PR Newswire. June 15, 2010. Retrieved December 27, 2015. Lee Lenker, Maureen (September 25, 2021). "Watch Global Citizen Live featuring performances from Lizzo, Elton John, Demi Lovato, and more". Yahoo! News. Retrieved September 26, 2021. Bain, Katie (December 1, 2023). "Demi Lovato, Cyndi Lauper & More Artists Join Climate Change Human Rights Campaign". Billboard. Retrieved December 9, 2023. "Get a Sneak Peek at Demi Lovato's Skechers Campaign!". Latina. September 10, 2014. Archived from the original on November 30, 2020. Retrieved June 22, 2020. Flanagan, Andrew (April 28, 2014). "Demi Lovato, Shazam Announce Deal to Let Fans Plan New Tour". Billboard. Retrieved May 11, 2014. Calderone, Ana. "Demi Lovato on Her New Skincare Line: 'If You Use Products That Work, You'll Find Inner Confidence'". People. Archived from the original on September 4, 2014. Retrieved September 3, 2014. "Demi Lovato Just Scored a Big-Deal New Gig That's 100% Perfect for Her". Teen Vogue. September 26, 2014. Retrieved June 22, 2020. "Demi Lovato Steps into the Spotlight as the Face of The Radiant Collection". Business Wire. February 12, 2015. Retrieved May 20, 2021. Kaufman, Gil (June 28, 2016). "Tidal To Livestream Nick Jonas & Demi Lovato Tour Date". Billboard. Retrieved June 30, 2016. Saunders, Nicole (May 17, 2017). "Demi Lovato on Her New Fabletics Collection: 'It's All About Being the Best Version of Yourself'". Billboard. Retrieved June 22, 2020. McCarthy, Lauren (October 21, 2017). "Lily Aldridge Takes Us Inside Bulgari's Extravagant, Top Secret Party with Bella Hadid, Sofia Richie, and Demi Lovato". W. Retrieved December 8, 2020. Shewchuk, Darrin (November 21, 2016). "Demi Lovato Named JBL® Brand Ambassador". Harman. Retrieved June 22, 2020. "Demi Lovato turned this humiliating meme about her into an ad deal and honestly, I'm inspired". Babe. March 12, 2018. Retrieved June 22, 2020. "Core Hydration Water Demi Lovato Commercial". All TV Spots. June 18, 2018. Retrieved June 24, 2020. "Demi Lovato Product Placement Photos". Product Placement Blog. Retrieved June 22, 2020. "Demi Lovato TV Commercials Ads". i-Spot. Retrieved September 14, 2020. Lehmann, Carolin (September 9, 2020). "Demi Lovato Is Talkspace's New Mental Health Spokesperson!". E!. Retrieved September 14, 2020. Tannenbaum, Emily (November 9, 2021). "Demi Lovato Just Released Their Own Sex Toy". Glamour. Condé Nast. Retrieved November 9, 2021. McNab, Kaitlyn (November 18, 2021). "Demi Lovato Joined Gaia — Here's Why It Matters". Teen Vogue. Condé Nast. Retrieved December 15, 2021. Strunck, Clara (November 17, 2021). "Demi Lovato Joins Conspiracy Site Gaia - Here's What You Need To Know". Elle. UK. Retrieved December 15, 2021. Paper Magazine (November 9, 2021). "Demi Lovato Is Out Here Promoting a Site for Conspiracy Theorists". Paper. Retrieved December 15, 2021. Rude, Mey (November 9, 2021). "What You Need to Know About Demi Lovato Joining Conspiracy Site Gaia". Out. Retrieved December 15, 2021. "Merz Aesthetics® Continues Multi-Year 'Beauty on Your Terms' Campaign for XEOMIN® (incobotulinumtoxinA) with Announcement of Demi Lovato as New Brand Partner". Business Wire. March 6, 2024. Retrieved March 10, 2024. Carballo, Charlie (March 6, 2024). "Demi Lovato Lends Her Voice to Empowerment Through Self Care and Maintaining a 'Natural Look' With Anti-wrinkle Injectable Xeomin". Women's Wear Daily. Retrieved March 10, 2024. "Teen Choice Awards: Most Wins". Gold Derby. July 26, 2018. Retrieved July 26, 2018. "The New York Times Best Sellers". The New York Times. December 8, 2013. Archived from the original on July 29, 2019. Retrieved August 3, 2023. Mancuso, Christina (December 2, 2013). "Demi Lovato Becomes #1 The New York Times Best-Selling Author". BroadwayWorld. Archived from the original on December 7, 2013. Retrieved August 3, 2023. "Demi Lovato: The 100 Most Influential People of 2017". Time. Retrieved April 20, 2017. "Top Artists - 2010s". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 26, 2023. Retrieved November 3, 2022. Lynch, Joe (April 29, 2015). "These 11 Solo Artists Scored a No. 1 Album Before Turning 18". Billboard. Retrieved June 7, 2020. "Demi Lovato – Chart History: Billboard 200". Billboard. Retrieved July 11, 2016. "Most streamed albums on Spotify". Chart Masters. Retrieved August 4, 2023. "BILLIONS CLUB". Spotify. Retrieved May 6, 2022. "Échame la Culpa". YouTube. November 7, 2017. Retrieved August 4, 2023. Clean Bandit - Solo (feat. Demi Lovato) [Official Video]. YouTube. May 31, 2018. Retrieved November 30, 2023. "Youngest X Factor judge". Guinness World Records. May 24, 2012. Retrieved July 16, 2020. "Demi Lovato". Retrieved August 3, 2023 – via Instagram. "Demi Lovato". Retrieved August 3, 2023 – via Twitter. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Demi Lovato. Wikiquote has quotations related to Demi Lovato. Official website Demi Lovato at IMDb Demi Lovato discography at Discogs Demi Lovato at MusicBrainz Portals:  Biography  Pop music  Television  Film  Hispanic and Latino Americans  LGBT  United States