Waldorf education, also known as Steiner education, is based on the educational philosophy of Rudolf Steiner, the founder of anthroposophy. Its educational style is holistic, intended to develop pupils' intellectual, artistic, and practical skills, with a focus on imagination and creativity. Individual teachers have a great deal of autonomy in curriculum content, teaching methods, and governance. Qualitative assessments of student work are integrated into the daily life of the classroom, with standardized testing limited to what is required to enter post-secondary education. The first Waldorf school opened in 1919 in Stuttgart, Germany. A century later, it has become the largest independent school movement in the world, with more than 1,200 independent schools and nearly 2,000 kindergartens in 75 countries, as well as more than 500 centers for special education in more than 40 countries. There are also numerous Waldorf-based public schools, charter schools, and academies, as well as a homeschooling movement. Germany, the United States, and the Netherlands have the most Waldorf schools. Many Waldorf schools have faced controversy due to Steiner's connections to racist ideology and magical thinking.[discuss] Others have faced regulatory audits and closure due to concerns over substandard treatment of special needs children.[citation needed] Critics of Waldorf education point out the mystical nature of anthroposophy and the incorporation of Steiner's esoteric ideas into the curriculum. Waldorf schools have also been linked to the outbreak of infectious diseases due to the vaccine hesitancy of many Waldorf parents. The first school based upon the ideas of Rudolf Steiner was opened in 1919 in response to a request from Emil Molt, owner and managing director of the Waldorf-Astoria Cigarette Company in Stuttgart, Germany. This is the source of the name Waldorf, which is now trademarked in the United States when used in connection with the educational method. Molt's proposed school would educate the children of employees of the factory.: 381  Molt was a follower of anthroposophy, an esoteric spiritual movement based on the notion that an objectively comprehensible spiritual realm exists and can be observed by humans, and of Rudolf Steiner, the movement's founder and spiritual leader. Many of Steiner's ideas influenced the pedagogy of the original Waldorf school and still play a central role in modern Waldorf classrooms: reincarnation, karma, the existence of spiritual beings, the idea that children are themselves spiritual beings, and eurythmy. As the co-educational school also served children from outside the factory, it included children from a diverse social spectrum. It was also the first comprehensive school in Germany, serving children of all genders, abilities, and social classes. At Steiner's behest, the early Waldorf schools were "open to all students, regardless of income. If the parents were unable to pay the full tuition, the remaining amount would be subsidized." Waldorf education became more widely known in 1922 through lectures Steiner gave at a conference at Oxford University. Two years later, on his final trip to Britain at Torquay in 1924, Steiner delivered a Waldorf teacher training course. The first school in England (Michael Hall) was founded in 1925; the first in the United States (the Rudolf Steiner School in New York City) in 1928. By the 1930s, numerous schools inspired by Steiner's pedagogical principles had opened in Germany, Switzerland, the Netherlands, Norway, Austria, Hungary, the United States, and England. From 1933 to 1945, political interference from the Nazi regime limited and ultimately closed most Waldorf schools in Europe, with the exception of some British, Swiss, and Dutch schools (UK and Switzerland did not get occupied by Nazi Germany). Rudolf Hess, the adjunct Führer, was a patron of Waldorf schools. Nazis did not like private schools, especially after Hess flew to England. According to Karen Priestman, "Although the Anthroposophy Society was prohibited in November 1935 and Reich Education Minister Bernhard Rust forbade all private schools from accepting new students in March 1936, the last Waldorf school was not closed until 1941." The affected schools reopened after the Second World War ended. A few schools elsewhere in Europe (e.g. in Norway) survived by going underground. Some schools in East Germany were re-closed a few years later by the Communist government. In North America in 1967, there were nine schools in the United States and one in Canada. As of 2021, that number had increased to more than 200 in the United States and over 20 in Canada. There are currently 29 Steiner schools in the United Kingdom and three in the Republic of Ireland. After the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Waldorf schools again began to proliferate in Central and Eastern Europe. More recently, many have opened in Asia, especially China. There are currently over 1,200 independent Waldorf schools worldwide. The structure of Waldorf education follows a theory of childhood development devised by Rudolf Steiner, utilizing distinct learning strategies for each of three developmental stages or "epochs": early childhood, elementary, and secondary education. Steiner believed each stage lasted approximately seven years. Aside from their spiritual underpinnings, Steiner's seven-year stages are broadly similar to those later described by Jean Piaget and also theories described earlier by Comenius and Pestalozzi.: 402  The stated purpose of this approach is to awaken the "physical, behavioral, emotional, cognitive, social, and spiritual" aspects of each pupil. In Waldorf pedagogy, young children learn best through immersion in un-selfconscious imitation of practical activities. The early childhood curriculum focuses on experiential education and imaginative play. The overall goal of the curriculum is to "imbue the child with a sense that the world is good". Waldorf preschools employ a regular daily routine that includes free play, artistic work (e.g. drawing, painting or modeling), circle time (songs, games, and stories), outdoor recess,: 125  and practical tasks (e.g. cooking, cleaning, and gardening), with rhythmic variations. Rhythm and repetitive patterns are considered important in anthroposophy and are believed to hold spiritual significance. The classroom is intended to resemble a home, with tools and toys usually sourced from simple, natural materials that lend themselves to imaginative play. The use of natural materials has been praised as fulfilling children's aesthetic needs and reinforcing connections to nature, though some scholars have questioned whether the preference for natural, non-manufactured materials is truly a "reasoned assessment of twenty-first century children's needs", rather than "a reaction against the dehumanizing aspects of nineteenth-century industrialization". Pre-school and kindergarten programs generally include seasonal festivals drawn from a variety of traditions, with attention placed on traditions brought forth from the surrounding community. Waldorf schools in the Western Hemisphere have traditionally celebrated Christian festivals, though one source states that some North American Waldorf schools also include Jewish holidays. Waldorf kindergarten and lower grades generally discourage pupils' use of electronic media such as television and computers. There are a variety of reasons for this: Waldorf educators believe that use of these conflicts with young children's developmental needs, media users may be physically inactive, and media may be seen to contain inappropriate or undesirable content and to hamper the imagination. Waldorf pedagogues consider that readiness for learning to read depends upon increased independence of character, temperament, habits, and memory, one of the markers of which is the loss of the baby teeth.: 389  Formal instruction in reading, writing, and other academic disciplines are therefore not introduced until students enter the elementary school, when pupils are around seven years of age. Steiner believed that engaging young children in abstract intellectual activity too early would adversely affect their growth and development.: 389  Waldorf elementary schools (ages 7–14) emphasize cultivating children's emotional life and imagination. In order that students can connect more deeply with the subject matter, academic instruction is presented through artistic work that includes story-telling, visual arts, drama, movement, music, and crafts. The core curriculum includes language arts, mythology, history, geography, geology, algebra, geometry, mineralogy, biology, astronomy, physics, chemistry, and nutrition. The school day generally begins with a one-and-a-half to two-hour, cognitively oriented academic lesson, or "Main lesson", that focuses on a single theme over one month's time.: 145  This typically begins with introductory activities that may include singing, instrumental music, and recitations of poetry, generally including a verse written by Rudolf Steiner for the start of a school day. There is little reliance on standardized textbooks. Waldorf elementary education allows for individual variations in the pace of learning, based upon the expectation that a child will grasp a concept or achieve a skill when he or she is ready. Cooperation takes priority over competition. This approach also extends to physical education; competitive team sports are not introduced until upper grades. Each class remains together as a cohort throughout all elementary, developing as a quasi-familial social group. In elementary years, a core teacher teaches primary academic subjects. A central role of this teacher is to provide a supportive role model both through personal example and through stories drawn from a variety of cultures, educating by exercising "creative, loving authority". Class teachers are normally expected to teach a cohort for several years, a practice known as looping. Starting in first grade, specialized teachers teach many subjects, including music, crafts, movement, and two foreign languages from complementary language families (in English-speaking countries these are typically German and either Spanish or French). While class teachers serve a valuable role as personal mentors, establishing "lasting relationships with pupils", Ullrich documented problems when the same teacher continues into middle school. Noting that there is a danger of any authority figure limiting students enthusiasm for inquiry and autonomy, he cited a number of schools where the class teacher accompanies the class for six years only, after which specialist teachers play a greater role.: 222  Steiner considered children's cognitive, emotional, and behavioral development to be interlinked. When students in a Waldorf school are grouped, it is generally not by a focus on academic abilities.: 89  Instead, Steiner adapted the pseudoscientific proto-psychological concept of the classic four temperaments – melancholic, sanguine, phlegmatic, and choleric. Steiner indicated that teaching should be differentiated to accommodate the different needs that these "types" represent. For example, Anthroposophists believe "cholerics are risk takers, phlegmatics take things calmly, melancholics are sensitive or introverted, and sanguines take things lightly".: 18  Steiner also believed that teachers must consider their own temperament and be prepared to work with it positively in the classroom, that temperament is emergent in children, and that most people express a combination of temperaments rather than a pure single type. No evidence exists for such "personality types" to be consistent in an individual across time or context, nor that such "types" are useful in providing more effective education. Today, Waldorf teachers may work with these pseudoscientific "temperaments" to design instruction for each student. Seating arrangements and class activities may take into account the supposed temperaments of students but this is often not described to parents, students, or observers. In most Waldorf schools, pupils enter secondary education when they are fourteen years old. Secondary education is provided by specialist teachers for each subject. The curriculum is purported to foster pupils' intellectual understanding, independent judgment, and ethics. In the third developmental stage (14 years old and up), children are supposed to learn through their own thinking and judgment. Students are asked to understand abstract material and expected to have sufficient foundation and maturity to form conclusions using their own judgment.: 391  The overarching goals are to provide young people the basis on which to develop into free, morally responsible, and creative beings. No independent studies have been published as to whether or not Waldorf education achieves these aims more than any other approach. The philosophical foundation of the Waldorf approach, anthroposophy, underpins its primary pedagogical goals: to provide an education that enables children to become free human beings, and to help children to incarnate their "unfolding spiritual identity", carried from the preceding spiritual existence, as beings of body, soul, and spirit in this lifetime. Educational researcher Martin Ashley suggests that the latter role would be problematic for secular teachers and parents in state schools, and the commitment to a spiritual background both of the child and the education has been problematic for some committed to a secular perspective. While anthroposophy underpins the curriculum design, pedagogical approach, and organizational structure, it is explicitly not taught within the school curriculum and studies have shown that Waldorf pupils have little awareness of it.: 6  Tensions may arise within the Waldorf community between the commitment to Steiner's original intentions and openness to new directions in education, such as the incorporation of new technologies or modern methods of accountability and assessment. Waldorf schools frequently have striking architecture, employing walls meeting at varied angles (not only perpendicularly). The walls are often painted in subtle colors, often with a lazure technique, and include textured surfaces. The schools primarily assess students through reports on individual academic progress and personal development. The emphasis is on characterization through qualitative description. Pupils' progress is evaluated through portfolio work in academic blocks and discussion of pupils in teacher conferences. Standardized tests are rare, with the exception of examinations necessary for college entry taken during secondary school years.: 150, 186  Letter grades are generally not given until students enter high school. Pupils are not typically asked to repeat years of elementary or secondary education. Though Waldorf schools are autonomous institutions not required to follow a prescribed curriculum (beyond what is required by local governments) there are widely agreed upon guidelines for the Waldorf curriculum. Main academic subjects are introduced through two-hour morning lesson blocks that last for several weeks.: 18  These blocks are horizontally integrated at each grade level in that the topic of the block will be infused into many classroom activities and vertically integrated in that each subject will be revisited with increasing complexity as students develop their skills, reasoning capacities and individual sense of self. This has been described as a spiral curriculum. Many subjects and skills not considered core parts of mainstream schools, such as art, music, gardening, and mythology, are central to Waldorf education. Students learn a variety of fine and practical arts. Elementary students paint, draw, sculpt, knit, weave, and crochet. Older students build on these experiences and learn new skills such as pattern-making and sewing, wood and stone carving, metal work, book-binding, and doll or puppet making. Music instruction begins with singing in early childhood and continuing through high school. Pupils also usually learn to play pentatonic flutes, recorders and/or lyres in early elementary grades. Around age 9, diatonic recorders and orchestral instruments are introduced. Certain subjects are largely unique to the Waldorf schools. Foremost among these is eurythmy, a movement art usually accompanying spoken texts or music which includes elements of drama and dance. Although found in other educational contexts, cooking, farming, and environmental and outdoor education are centrally incorporated into Waldorf curriculum. Other differences include: non-competitive games and free play in younger years as opposed to athletics instruction; instruction in two foreign languages from the beginning of elementary school; and an experiential-phenomenological approach to science. In this method, students observe and depict scientific concepts in their own words and drawings rather than encountering the ideas first through a textbook. The scientific methodology of modern Waldorf schools utilizes a so-called "phenomenological approach" to science education employing a methodology of inquiry-based learning aiming to "strengthen the interest and ability to observe" in pupils.: 111  Experts have called into question the quality of this phenomenological approach if it fails to educate Waldorf students on basic tenets of scientific fact. The Waldorf approach is said to cultivate students with "high motivation" but "average achievement" in the sciences. One study conducted by California State University at Sacramento researchers outlined numerous theories and ideas prevalent throughout Waldorf curricula that were patently pseudoscientific and steeped in magical thinking. These included the idea that animals evolved from humans, that human spirits are physically incarnated into "soul qualities that manifested themselves into various animal forms", that the current geological formations on Earth have evolved through so-called "Lemurian" and "Atlantean" epochs, and that the four kingdoms of nature are "mineral, plant, animal, and man". All of these are directly contradicted by mainstream scientific knowledge and have no basis in any form of conventional scientific study. Contradictory notions found in Waldorf textbooks are distinct from factual inaccuracies occasionally found in modern public school textbooks, as the inaccuracies in the latter are of a specific and minute nature that results from the progress of science. The inaccuracies present in Waldorf textbooks, however, are the result of a mode of thinking that has no valid basis in reason or logic. This unscientific foundation has been blamed for the scarcity of systematic empirical research on Waldorf education as academic researchers hesitate in getting involved in studies of Waldorf schools lest it hamper their future career. Waldorf schools teach the Old Testament as if were historically accurate. One study of science curriculum compared a group of American Waldorf school students to American public school students on three different test variables. Two tests measured verbal and non-verbal logical reasoning and the third was an international TIMSS test. The TIMSS test covered scientific understanding of magnetism. The researchers found that Waldorf school students scored higher than both the public school students and the national average on the TIMSS test while scoring the same as public school students on the logical reasoning tests. However, when the logical reasoning tests measured students' understanding of part-to-whole relations, the Waldorf students also outperformed the public school students. The authors of the study noted the Waldorf students' enthusiasm for science, but viewed the science curriculum as "somewhat old-fashioned and out of date, as well as including some doubtful scientific material". In 2008, Stockholm University terminated its Waldorf teacher training courses. In a statement, the university said "the courses did not encompass sufficient subject theory and a large part of the subject theory that is included is not founded on any scientific base". The dean, Stefan Nordlund, stated "the syllabus contains literature which conveys scientific inaccuracies that are worse than woolly; they are downright dangerous". Because they view human interaction as the essential basis for younger children's learning and growth,: 212  Waldorf schools view computers as being first useful to children in the early teen years, after they have mastered "fundamental, time-honoured ways of discovering information and learning, such as practical experiments and books". In the United Kingdom, Waldorf schools are granted an exemption by the Department for Education (DfE) from the requirement to teach ICT as part of Foundation Stage education (ages 3–5). Waldorf schools have been popular with some parents working in the technology sector in the United States, including those from some of the most advanced technology firms. A number of technologically oriented parents from one school expressed their conviction that younger students do not need the exposure to computers and technology, but benefit from creative aspects of the education; one Google executive was quoted as saying "I fundamentally reject the notion you need technology aids in grammar school." Waldorf education aims to educate children about a wide range of religious traditions without favoring any single tradition. One of Steiner's primary aims was to establish a spiritual yet nondenominational setting for children from all backgrounds: 79  that recognized the value of role models drawn from a wide range of literary and historical traditions in developing children's fantasy and moral imaginations.: 78  For Steiner, education was an activity which fosters the human being's connection to the divine and is thus inherently religious.: 1422, 1430  Waldorf schools were historically "Christian based and theistically oriented", as they expand into different cultural settings they are adapting to "a truly pluralistic spirituality".: 146  Waldorf theories and practices are often modified from their European and Christian roots to meet the historical and cultural traditions of the local community. Examples include Waldorf schools in Israel and Japan, which celebrate festivals drawn from these cultures, and classes in the Milwaukee Urban Waldorf school, which have adopted African American and Native American traditions. Religion classes are typically absent from United States Waldorf schools, but are mandatory in some German federal states, which require teachers who identify with each offered religion to teach such classes in addition to a nondenominational offering. In the United Kingdom, public Waldorf schools are not categorized as "Faith schools". Waldorf teacher education programs offer courses in child development, the methodology of Waldorf teaching, academic subjects appropriate to the future teachers' chosen specialty, and the study of pedagogical texts and other works by Steiner. For early childhood and elementary school teachers, the training includes considerable artistic work in storytelling, movement, painting, music, and handwork. Waldorf teacher education includes social–emotional development as "an integral and central element", which is unusual for teacher trainings. A 2010 study found that students in advanced years of Waldorf teacher training courses scored significantly higher than students in non-Waldorf teacher trainings on three measures of empathy: perspective taking, empathic concern, and fantasy. One of Waldorf education's central premises is that all educational and cultural institutions should be self-governing and should grant teachers a high degree of creative autonomy within the school;: 143  this is based upon the conviction that a holistic approach to education aiming at the development of free individuals can only be successful when based on a school form that expresses these same principles. Most Waldorf schools are not directed by a principal or head teacher, but rather by a number of groups, including: The college of teachers, who decide on pedagogical issues, normally on the basis of consensus. This group is usually open to full-time teachers who have been with the school for a prescribed period of time. Each school is accordingly unique in its approach, as it may act solely on the basis of the decisions of the college of teachers to set policy or other actions pertaining to the school and its students. The board of trustees, who decide on governance issues, especially those relating to school finances and legal issues, including formulating strategic plans and central policies. There are coordinating bodies for Waldorf education at both the national (e.g. the Association of Waldorf Schools of North America and the Steiner Waldorf Schools Fellowship in the UK and Ireland) and international level (e.g. International Association for Waldorf Education and The European Council for Steiner Waldorf Education (ECSWE)). These organizations certify the use of the registered names "Waldorf" and "Steiner school" and offer accreditations, often in conjunction with regional independent school associations. Independent schools receive complete or partial funding in much of Europe, particularly in Northern and Eastern Europe. Sweden, Finland, Holland, and Slovakia provide over 90% of independent schools' funding, while Slovenia, Germany, Belgium, Luxembourg, Ireland, Hungary, Estonia, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Spain, and Portugal provide the majority of independent schools' funding. In countries outside of this region, funding for independent schools varies widely. Waldorf-inspired home schools typically obtain their program information through informal parent groups, online, or by purchasing a curriculum. Waldorf homeschooling groups are not affiliated with the Association of Waldorf Schools of North America (AWSNA), which represents independent schools and it is unknown how many home schools use a Waldorf-inspired curriculum. Educationalist Sandra Chistolini suggests that parents offer their children Waldorf-inspired homeschooling because "the frustration and boredom some children feel in school are eliminated and replaced with constant attention to the needs of childhood [and] connections between content and the real world". Some Waldorf schools in English-speaking countries have met opposition due to vaccine hesitancy among parents. In a 2011 article, Waldorf schools were identified as a risk factor for noncompliance of Measles vaccination. Other controversies have centered on Waldorf schools' educational standards and the mystical and antiquated nature of some of Steiner's theories. The first US Waldorf-inspired public school, the Yuba River Charter School in California, opened in 1994. The Waldorf public school movement is currently expanding rapidly; while in 2010, there were twelve Waldorf-inspired public schools in the United States, by 2018 there were 53 such schools. Most Waldorf-inspired schools in the United States are elementary schools established as either magnet or charter schools. The first Waldorf-inspired high school was launched in 2008 with assistance from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. While these schools follow a similar developmental approach as the independent schools, Waldorf-inspired schools must demonstrate achievement on standardized tests in order to continue receiving public funding. Studies of standardized test scores suggest that students at Waldorf-inspired schools tend to score below their peers in the earliest grades and catch up or surpass their peers by middle school. One study found that students at Waldorf-inspired schools watch less television and spend more time engaging in creative activities or spending time with friends. Public Waldorf schools' need to demonstrate achievement through standardized test scores has encouraged increased use of textbooks and expanded instructional time for academic subjects. A legal challenge alleging that California school districts' Waldorf-inspired schools violated the First and Fourteenth Amendments of the United States Constitution and Article IX of the California Constitution was dismissed on its merits in 2005 and on appeal in 2007 and 2012. The first state-funded Steiner-Waldorf school, the Steiner Academy Hereford opened in 2008. Since then, Steiner academies have opened in Frome, Exeter, and Bristol as part of the government-funded free schools programme. In December 2018, The Office for Standards in Education (Ofsted) judged the Steiner Academy Exeter as inadequate and ordered it to be transferred to a multi-academy trust; it was temporarily closed in October 2018 because of concerns, including significant lapses in safeguarding of students' wellbeing, mistreatment of children with special educational needs and disabilities, and misspending of funds. In July 2018, two 6-year-old children were found by police having walked out of the Exeter school unnoticed. Their parents were not informed until the end of the day. Subsequently, the Steiner Academies in Bristol and Frome have also been judged inadequate by Ofsted, because of concerns over safeguarding and bullying. A number of private Steiner schools have additionally been judged inadequate in the ensuing investigation. Overall, several Waldorf schools in the UK have closed in the last decade due to their administrations' failure to adhere to state-mandated standards of education (e.g. required levels of literacy, safety standards for child welfare, and mistreatment of special needs children). In November 2012, BBC News broadcast a segment about accusations that the establishment of a state-funded Waldorf School in Frome was a misguided use of public money. The broadcast reported that concerns were being raised about Rudolf Steiner's beliefs, stating he "believed in reincarnation and said it was related to race, with black (schwarz) people being the least spiritually developed, and white (weiß) people the most". In 2007, the European Council for Steiner Waldorf Education (ECSWE) issued a statement, "Waldorf schools against discrimination", which said in part, "Waldorf schools do not select, stratify or discriminate amongst their pupils, but consider all human beings to be free and equal in dignity and rights, independent of ethnicity, national or social origin, gender, language, religion, and political or other convictions. Anthroposophy, upon which Waldorf education is founded, stands firmly against all forms of racism and nationalism." The British Humanist Association criticized a reference book used to train teachers in Steiner academies for suggesting that the heart is sensitive to emotions and also promoting homeopathy, while claiming that Darwinism is "rooted in reductionist thinking and Victorian ethics". Edzard Ernst, emeritus professor of complementary medicine at the University of Exeter, said that Waldorf schools "seem to have an anti-science agenda". A United Kingdom Department for Education spokeswoman said "no state school is allowed to teach homeopathy as scientific fact" and that free schools "must demonstrate that they will provide a broad and balanced curriculum". Australia has "Steiner streams" incorporated into a small number of existing government schools in some states; in addition, independent Steiner-Waldorf schools receive partial government funding. The majority of Steiner-Waldorf schools in New Zealand are Integrated Private Schools under The Private Schools Integration Act 1975, thus receiving full state funding. In the Canadian provinces of British Columbia, Quebec and Alberta, all private schools receive partial state funding. The first Steiner school in Russia was established in 1992 in Moscow. That school is now an award-winning government-funded school with over 650 students offering classes for kindergarten and years 1 to 11 (the Russian education system is an eleven-year system). There are 18 Waldorf schools in Russia and 30 kindergartens. Some are government funded (with no fees) and some are privately funded (with fees for students). As well as five Waldorf schools in Moscow, there are also Waldorf schools in Saint Petersburg, Irkutsk, Jaroslawl, Kaluga, Samara, Zhukovskiy, Smolensk, Tomsk, Ufa, Vladimir, Voronezh, and Zelenograd. The Association of Russian Waldorf Schools was founded in 1995 and now has 21 members. Steiner's belief that all people are imbued with a spiritual core has fueled Waldorf schools' social mission. The schools have always been coeducational and open to children of all social classes. They were designed from the beginning to be comprehensive, 12-year schools under the direction of their own teachers, rather than the state or other external authorities, all radical principles when Steiner first articulated them. Social renewal and transformation remain primary goals for Waldorf schools, which seek to cultivate pupils' sense of social responsibility. Studies suggest that this is successful;: 190 : 4  Waldorf pupils have been found to be more interested in and engaged with social and moral questions and to have more positive attitudes than students from mainstream schools, demonstrating activism and self-confidence and feeling empowered to forge their own futures. Waldorf schools build close learning communities, founded on the shared values of its members,: 17  in ways that can lead to transformative learning experiences that allow all participants, including parents, to become more aware of their own individual path,: 5, 17, 32, 40 : 238  but which at times also risk becoming exclusive.: 167, 207  Reports from small-scale studies suggest that there are lower levels of harassment and bullying in Waldorf schools: 29  and that European Waldorf students have much lower rates of xenophobia and gender stereotypes than students in any other type of schools. Betty Reardon, a professor and peace researcher, gives Waldorf schools as an example of schools that follow a philosophy based on peace and tolerance. Many private Waldorf schools experience a tension between these social goals and the way tuition fees act as a barrier to access to the education by less well-off families. Schools have attempted to improve access for a wider range of income groups by charging lower fees than comparable independent schools, by offering a sliding scale of fees, and/or by seeking state support. Waldorf schools have linked polarized communities in a variety of settings. Under the apartheid regime in South Africa, the Waldorf school was one of the few schools in which children of all apartheid racial classifications attended the same classes. A Waldorf training college in Cape Town, the Novalis Institute, was referenced during UNESCO's Year of Tolerance for being an organization that was working towards reconciliation in South Africa. The first Waldorf school in West Africa was founded in Sierra Leone to educate boys and girls orphaned by the country's civil war. The school building is a passive solar building built by the local community, including the students. In Israel, the Harduf Kibbutz Waldorf school includes both Jewish and Arab faculty and students and has extensive contact with the surrounding Arab communities. It also runs an Arab-language Waldorf teacher training. A joint Arab-Jewish Waldorf kindergarten (Ein Bustan) was founded in Hilf (near Haifa) in 2005. An Arabic language multi-cultural Druze/Christian/Muslim Waldorf school has operated in Shefa-'Amr since 2003. In Lod, a teacher training program brings together Israeli Arabs and Jews on an equal basis, with the goals of improving Arab education in Israel and offering new career paths to Arab women. In Brazil, a Waldorf teacher, Ute Craemer, founded Associação Comunitária Monte Azul, a community service organization providing childcare, vocational training and work, social services including health care, and Waldorf education to more than 1,000 residents of poverty-stricken areas (Favelas) of São Paulo. In Nepal, the Tashi Waldorf School in the outskirts of Kathmandu teaches mainly disadvantaged children from a wide variety of cultural backgrounds. It was founded in 1999 and is run by Nepalese staff. In addition, in the southwest Kathmandu Valley a foundation provides underprivileged, disabled and poor adults with work on a biodynamic farm and provides a Waldorf school for their children. The T.E. Mathews Community School in Yuba County, California, serves high-risk juvenile offenders, many of whom have learning disabilities. The school switched to Waldorf methods in the 1990s. A 1999 study of the school found that students had "improved attitudes toward learning, better social interaction and excellent academic progress". This study identified the integration of the arts "into every curriculum unit and almost every classroom activity" as the most effective tool to help students overcome patterns of failure. The study also found significant improvements in reading and math scores, student participation, focus, openness and enthusiasm, as well as emotional stability, civility of interaction and tenacity. In 2008, 24 Waldorf schools in 15 countries were members of the UNESCO Associated Schools Project Network. The Friends of Waldorf Education is an organization whose purpose is to support, finance and advise the Waldorf movement worldwide, particularly in disadvantaged settings. Although studies about Waldorf education tend to be small-scale and vary in national context, a 2005 independent comprehensive review of the literature concluded there was evidence that Waldorf education encourages academic achievement as well as "creative, social and other capabilities important to the holistic growth of a person".: 39  In comparison to state school pupils, European Waldorf students are significantly more enthusiastic about learning, report having more fun and being less bored in school, view their school environments as pleasant and supportive places where they are able to discover their personal academic strengths, and have more positive views of the future. Twice as many European Waldorf students as state school pupils report having good relationships with teachers; they also report significantly fewer ailments such as headaches, stomach aches, and disrupted sleep. A 2007 German study found that an above-average number of Waldorf students become teachers, doctors, engineers, scholars of the humanities, and scientists. Studies of Waldorf students' artistic capacities found that they averaged higher scores on the Torrance Test of Creative Thinking Ability, drew more accurate, detailed, and imaginative drawings, and were able to develop richer images than comparison groups. Some observers have noted that Waldorf educators tend to be more concerned to address the needs of weaker students who need support than they are to meet the needs of talented students who could benefit from advanced work. Professor of educational psychology Clifford Mayes said "Waldorf students learn in sequences and paces that are developmentally appropriate, aesthetically stimulating, emotionally supportive, and ecologically sensitive." Professors of education Timothy Leonard and Peter Willis stated that Waldorf education "cultivates the imagination of the young to provide them a firm emotional foundation upon which to build a sound intellectual life". Professor of education Bruce Uhrmacher considers Steiner's view on education worthy of investigation for those seeking to improve public schooling, saying the approach serves as a reminder that "holistic education is rooted in a cosmology that posits a fundamental unity to the universe and as such ought to take into account interconnections among the purpose of schooling, the nature of the growing child, and the relationships between the human being and the universe at large", and that a curriculum need not be technocratic, but may equally well be arts-based.: 382, 401  Thomas Nielsen, assistant professor at the University of Canberra's education department, said that imaginative teaching approaches used in Waldorf education (drama, exploration, storytelling, routine, arts, discussion and empathy) are effective stimulators of spiritual-aesthetic, intellectual and physical development, expanding "the concept of holistic and imaginative education" and recommends these to mainstream educators. Andreas Schleicher, international coordinator of the PISA studies, commented on what he saw as the "high degree of congruence between what the world demands of people, and what Waldorf schools develop in their pupils", placing a high value on creatively and productively applying knowledge to new realms. This enables "deep learning" that goes beyond studying for the next test. Deborah Meier, principal of Mission Hill School and MacArthur grant recipient, while having some "quibbles" about the Waldorf schools, stated: "The adults I know who have come out of Waldorf schools are extraordinary people. That education leaves a strong mark of thoroughness, carefulness, and thoughtfulness." Robert Peterkin, director of the Urban Superintendents Program at Harvard's Graduate School of Education and former Superintendent of Milwaukee Public Schools during a period when Milwaukee funded a public Waldorf school, considers Waldorf education a "healing education" whose underlying principles are appropriate for educating all children. Waldorf education has also been studied as an example of educational neuroscience ideas in practice. In 2000, educational scholar Heiner Ullrich wrote that intensive study of Steiner's pedagogy had been in progress in educational circles in Germany since about 1990 and that positions were "highly controversial: they range from enthusiastic support to destructive criticism". In 2008, the same scholar wrote that Waldorf schools have "not stirred comparable discussion or controversy... those interested in the Waldorf School today... generally tend to view this school form first and foremost as a representative of internationally recognized models of applied classic reform pedagogy": 140–141  and that critics tend to focus on what they see as Steiner's "occult neo-mythology of education" and to fear the risks of indoctrination in a worldview school, but lose an "unprejudiced view of the varied practice of the Steiner schools". Ullrich himself considers that the schools successfully foster dedication, openness, and a love for other human beings, for nature, and for the inanimate world.: 179  Professor of Comparative Education Hermann Röhrs describes Waldorf education as embodying original pedagogical ideas and presenting exemplary organizational capabilities. A UK Department for Education and Skills report suggested that Waldorf and state schools could learn from each other's strengths: in particular, that state schools could benefit from Waldorf education's early introduction and approach to modern foreign languages; combination of block (class) and subject teaching for younger children; development of speaking and listening through an emphasis on oral work; good pacing of lessons through an emphasis on rhythm; emphasis on child development guiding the curriculum and examinations; approach to art and creativity; attention given to teachers' reflective activity and heightened awareness (in collective child study for example); and collegial structure of leadership and management, including collegial study. Aspects of mainstream practice which could inform good practice in Waldorf schools included: management skills and ways of improving organizational and administrative efficiency; classroom management; work with secondary-school age children; and assessment and record keeping. American state and private schools are drawing on Waldorf education – "less in whole than in part" – in expanding numbers. Professor of Education Elliot Eisner sees Waldorf education exemplifying embodied learning and fostering a more balanced educational approach than American public schools achieve. Ernest Boyer, former president of the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching commended the significant role the arts play throughout Waldorf education as a model for other schools to follow. Waldorf schools have been described as establishing "genuine community" and contrasted to mainstream schools, which have been described as "residential areas partitioned by bureaucratic authorities for educational purposes". Many elements of Waldorf pedagogy have been used in all Finnish schools for many years. Ashley described seven principal ways Waldorf education differed from mainstream approaches: its method of working from the whole to the parts, its attentiveness to child development, its goal of freedom, the deep relationships of teachers to students, the emphasis on experiencing oral traditions, the role of ritual and routine (e.g. welcoming students with a handshake, the use of opening and closing verses, and yearly festivals), the role arts and creativity play, and the Goetheanistic approach to science. In US states where nonmedical vaccine exemption is legal, 2015 reports showed Waldorf schools as having a high rate of vaccine exemption within their student populations, however, recent research has shown that in US state schools, child immunization rates often fall below the 95-percent threshold that the Centers for Disease Control say is necessary to provide herd immunity for a community. A 2010 report by the UK Government said that Steiner schools should be considered "high risk populations" and "unvaccinated communities" with respect to children's risks of catching measles and contributing to outbreaks. On 19 November 2018, the BBC reported there was an outbreak of chickenpox affecting 36 students at the Asheville Waldorf School located in North Carolina. Out of 152 students at the school, 110 had not received the Varicella vaccine that protects against chickenpox. The United States Advisory Committee on Immunization, the Centers for Disease Control, and the North Carolina Department of Health and Human Services all recommend that all healthy children 12 months of age and older get vaccinated against Varicella. The Guardian reported that several Waldorf schools in California had some of the lowest vaccination rates among kindergarten pupils in the 2017–18 school year, with only 7% of pupils having been vaccinated in one school. In the same article, however, The Guardian also reported that, in a 2019 statement, the International Center for Anthroposophic Medicine and the International Federation of Anthroposophic Medical Associations stressed that anthroposophic medicine, the form of medicine Steiner founded, "fully appreciates the contributions of vaccines to global health and firmly supports vaccinations as an important measure to prevent life threatening diseases". Rudolf Steiner founded the first Waldorf school several years before vaccinations for tetanus, diphtheria, and whooping cough were invented. After such vaccinations became widespread in Europe, Steiner opposed their use in several contexts, writing that vaccination could "impede spiritual development" and lead to a loss of "any urge for a spiritual life". Steiner also thought that these effects would carry over into subsequent reincarnations of the vaccinated person. The Association of Waldorf Schools of North America released the following in a statement in 2019: The Association of Waldorf Schools of North America wishes to state unequivocally that our educational objectives do not include avoidance of, or resistance to, childhood immunization. The health, safety, and wellbeing of children are our forefront concerns. All members of our association are schools or institutions that are free to make independent school policy decisions in accordance with AWSNA's membership and accreditation criteria. Our membership and accreditation criteria require schools to be compliant with national, state, provincial, and local laws. While policy decisions regarding immunizations may vary from school to school, such decisions are made in accordance with legal requirements set by local, state, provincial or federal government. The Association encourages parents to consider their civic responsibility in regards to the decision of whether or not to immunize against any communicable disease, but ultimately, the decision to immunize or not is one made by parents in consultation with their family physician. In 2021, Waldorf schools in Germany were associated with outbreaks of COVID-19 during a pandemic of the disease, as well as reticence to incorporate public health measures relating to disease outbreak. The Association of Waldorf Schools of North America (AWSNA) and European Council for Steiner Waldorf Education have put out statements stating that "racist or discriminatory tendencies are not tolerated in Waldorf schools or Waldorf teacher training institutes. The Waldorf school movement explicitly rejects any attempt to misappropriate Waldorf pedagogy or Rudolf Steiner's work for racist or nationalistic purposes." Similar statements were put out by the Waldorf school association in Britain ("Our schools do not tolerate racism. Racist views do not accord with Steiner's longer term vision of a society in which such distinctions would be entirely irrelevant & modern Steiner Waldorf schools deplore all forms of intolerance, aiming to educate in a spirit of respect & to encourage open-hearted regard for others among the children they educate") and Germany. These statements are the necessary response to Rudolf Steiner's contradictory beliefs about race: he emphasized the core spiritual unity of all the world's peoples, sharply criticized racial prejudice, and articulated beliefs that the individual nature of any person stands higher than any racial, ethnic, national or religious affiliation, yet he asserted a hierarchy of races, with the white race at the top, and associated intelligence with having blonde hair and blue eyes. In 2019 a school in Christchurch, New Zealand began considering removing "Rudolf Steiner" from the name of the school "so that the our best ideals are not burdened by historical, philosophical untruths." In 2014, after an investigation by the NZ Ministry of Education, a small school on the Kāpiti Coast of New Zealand was cleared of teaching racist theories. An independent investigation concluded that while there were no racist elements in the curriculum, the school needed to make changes in the "areas of governance, management and teaching to ensure parents' complaints were dealt with appropriately in the future...[and that]...the school must continue regular communication with the school community regarding the ongoing work being undertaken to address the issues raised and noted that the board has proactively sought support to do this." Racist attitudes and behaviour have been reported in particular Waldorf schools, and some teachers have reportedly expressed Steiner's view that individuals reincarnate through various races, however, Kevin Avison, senior advisor for the Steiner Waldorf Schools Fellowship in the UK and Ireland, calls the claim of belief in reincarnation through the races "a complete and utter misunderstanding" of Steiner's teachings. "Steiner's collected works, moreover, totalling more than 350 volumes, contain pervasive internal contradictions and inconsistencies on racial and national questions." Italian Fascism exploited "his racial and anti-democratic dogma." "It was a meeting of old acquaintances: Nazi leaders such as Rudolf Hess and Heinrich Himmler already recognized a kindred spirit in Rudolf Steiner, with his theories about racial purity, esoteric medicine and biodynamic agriculture." For people who do not believe in reincarnation Steiner is a racist, but for people who do, he is not so. Edmunds, Francis (2004). An Introduction to Steiner Education: The Waldorf School. Forest Row: Sophia Books. p. 86. ISBN 9781855841727. Zdrazil, Tomas (2018). "Theorie-Praxis Verhältnis in der Waldorfpädagogik". In Kern, Holger; Zdrazil, Tomas; Götte, Wenzel Michael (eds.). Lehrerbildung in der Waldorfschule. Weinheim, DE: Juventa. p. 34. ISBN 9783779938293. "Statistics for Waldorf schools worldwide" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 December 2019. Retrieved 2 May 2013. "Freunde der Erziehungskunst Rudolf Steiners". Archived from the original on 10 February 2021. Retrieved 10 February 2021. J. Vasagard, "A different class: the expansion of Steiner schools" Archived 2 February 2017 at the Wayback Machine, Guardian 25 May 2012 M. L. Stevens, "The Normalisation of Homeschooling in the USA", Evaluation & Research in Education Volume 17, Issue 2–3, 2003, pp. 90–100 Cook, Chris (4 August 2014). "Why are Steiner schools so controversial?". BBC News. Archived from the original on 4 August 2018. Retrieved 20 June 2018. Special to the Capital-Star (16 August 2020). "Concerned parents speak up about racism, discrimination at Waldorf School of Philadelphia • Pennsylvania Capital-Star". Pennsylvania Capital-Star. Retrieved 12 March 2024. Staufenberg, Jess (23 June 2020). "Steiner schools chief: what my time in prisons taught me about the UK's education mistakes". the Guardian. Retrieved 12 March 2024. Rawlings, Roger (14 February 2007). "My Experience As a Waldorf Student". Retrieved 9 August 2022. Beckner, Chrisianne (7 July 2005). "SN&R". Sacramento News & Review. Retrieved 9 August 2022. de Freytas-Tamura, Kimiko (13 June 2019). "Bastion of Anti-Vaccine Fervor: Progressive Waldorf Schools". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 28 January 2022. Francisco, Carol Pogash in San (28 May 2019). "As anti-vaxx dispute rages, attention turns to California's Waldorf schools". The Guardian. Retrieved 28 January 2022. Ernst, Edzard (March 2011). "Anthroposophy: A Risk Factor for Noncompliance With Measles Immunization". The Pediatric Infectious Disease Journal. 30 (3): 187–189. doi:10.1097/INF.0b013e3182024274. ISSN 0891-3668. PMID 21102363. "Waldorf Education Trademarks". waldorfeducation.org. Association of Waldorf Schools of North America. Archived from the original on 10 November 2017. Retrieved 1 February 2016. Uhrmacher, P. Bruce (Winter 1995). "Uncommon Schooling: A Historical Look at Rudolf Steiner, Anthroposophy, and Waldorf Education". Curriculum Inquiry. 25 (4): 381–406. doi:10.2307/1180016. JSTOR 1180016. Paull, John. "'From Waldorf Tobacco to Waldorf Education' Emil Molt meets Rudolf Steiner". Anthroposophical Society in Australia. Archived from the original on 31 March 2019. Retrieved 26 December 2018. Lewis, Andy (19 March 2013). "Bill Roache, Karma, Reincarnation and Steiner Schools". The Quackometer Blog. Archived from the original on 3 February 2019. Retrieved 26 December 2018. Cook, Chris (4 August 2014). "Why are Steiner schools so controversial?". BBC News. Archived from the original on 7 February 2019. Retrieved 26 December 2018. "Second Year". Bay Area Center for Waldorf Teacher Training. Archived from the original on 16 December 2018. Retrieved 26 December 2018. Brown, Candy Gunther (2019). Debating Yoga and Mindfulness in Public Schools: Reforming Secular Education Or Reestablishing Religion?. University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 9781469648491. Berlatsky, Noah (1 April 2013). "My Waldorf-Student Son Believes in Gnomes—and That's Fine With Me". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on 26 December 2018. Retrieved 25 December 2018. Woods, Glenys; O'Neill, Maggie; Woods, Philip A. (December 1997). "Spiritual Values in Education: Lessons from Steiner?". International Journal of Children's Spirituality. 2 (2): 25–40. doi:10.1080/1364436970020204. Goldshmidt, Gilad (14 February 2017). "Waldorf Education as Spiritual Education". Religion & Education. 44 (3): 346–363. doi:10.1080/15507394.2017.1294400. S2CID 151518278. Hemleben, Johannes (1975). Rudolf Steiner : a documentary biography. East Grinstead: Henry Goulden Ltd. pp. 121–126. ISBN 0-904822-02-8. Heiner Ullrich (2002). Inge Hansen-Schaberg, Bruno Schonig (ed.). Basiswissen Pädagogik. Reformpädagogische Schulkonzepte Band 6: Waldorf-Pädagogik. Baltmannsweiler: Schneider Verlag Hohengehren. ISBN 978-3-89676503-1. Barnes, Henry (1980). "An Introduction to Waldorf Education". Teachers College Record. 81 (3): 323–336. doi:10.1177/016146818008100301. S2CID 246490715. Reinsmith, William A. (31 March 1990). "The Whole in Every Part: Steiner and Waldorf Schooling". The Educational Forum. 54 (1): 79–91. doi:10.1080/00131728909335521. Priestman, Karen (2009). Illusion of Coexistence: The Waldorf Schools in the Third Reich, 1933–1941 (PhD dissertation). Wilfrid Laurier University. ISBN 978-0-494-54260-6. Retrieved 16 March 2023. Paull, John (2016). "The Anthroposophic Art of Ernesto Genoni, Goetheanum, 1924" (PDF). Journal of Organics. 3 (2): 1–24. Retrieved 1 March 2023. Paull, John (15 March 2018). "Torquay: In the footsteps of Rudolf Steiner". Journal of Biodynamics Tasmania. 125: 26–31. Retrieved 22 August 2022. "Waldorf Schools' Expansion". Friends of Waldorf education. Archived from the original on 14 August 2021. Douglas-Hamilton, James (2012). "1 Turmoil at the Dictator's Court: 11 May 1941". The Truth About Rudolf Hess. Mainstream Publishing. p. unpaginated. ISBN 978-1-78057-791-3. Retrieved 2 October 2022. Organisations which Hess had supported, such as the Rudolf Steiner schools, were closed down. Rieppel, Olivier (2016). Phylogenetic Systematics: Haeckel to Hennig. CRC Press. p. 246. ISBN 978-1-4987-5489-7. Retrieved 3 October 2022. Although in his reply, Himmler pretended to share Astel's assessment of anthroposophy as a dangerous movement, he admitted to be unable to do anything about the school of Rudolf Steiner because Rudolf Hess supported and protected it. Staudenmaier 2014, p. 111. Uhrmacher, P. Bruce (1995). "Uncommon Schooling: A Historical Look at Rudolf Steiner, Anthroposophy, and Waldorf Education". Curriculum Inquiry. 25 (4): 381–406. doi:10.2307/1180016. JSTOR 1180016. "History of the Norwegian schools". Freunde Waldorf. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. E.g. Waldorf schools in East Germany were closed by the DDR educational authorities, who justified this as follows: the pedagogy was based on the needs of children, rather than on the needs of society, was too pacifistic, and had failed to structure itself according to pure Marxist-Leninist principles."Die Geschichte der Dresdner Waldorfschule" Archived 16 November 2017 at the Wayback Machine The schools founded by 1967 were: Detroit Waldorf School, Green Meadow Waldorf School, High Mowing School, Highland Hall Waldorf School, Honolulu Waldorf School, Kimberton Waldorf School, Rudolf Steiner School of New York City, Sacramento Waldorf School, Waldorf School of Garden City.AWSNA list of schools with dates of founding Archived 21 March 2013 at the Wayback Machine Founded in 1968, Toronto Waldorf School was the first Waldorf school in Canada.History of the Toronto Waldorf School Archived 15 October 2014 at the Wayback Machine "Find a School – Alliance for Public Waldorf Education". www.allianceforpublicwaldorfeducation.org. Archived from the original on 3 March 2017. Retrieved 27 August 2014. "Different teaching method attracts parents" Archived 15 March 2017 at the Wayback Machine, The New York Times Waldorf Schools in Canada | Waldorf ca Archived 4 January 2014 at the Wayback Machine Steiner Waldorf Schools Foundation, List of Steiner schools Archived 4 January 2014 at the Wayback Machine Connor, Neil (12 March 2012). "China Starts to Question Strict Schooling Methods". Agence France Press – AFP. Archived from the original on 7 June 2014. Retrieved 1 May 2013. In recent years, China has seen a major expansion of alternative teaching establishments such as those that operate under the educational principles of Austrian philosopher Rudolf Steiner. Lin Qi and Guo Shuhan (23 June 2011). "Educating the Whole Child". China Daily. Archived from the original on 4 January 2014. Retrieved 1 May 2013. Steiner, Rudolf. "HUMAN VALUES IN EDUCATION GA 310 IV. Three Epochs of Childhood". Rudolf Steiner Archive. Steiner Online Library. Retrieved 21 August 2022. Wilkinson, Roy (2001). Rudolf Steiner : an introduction to his spiritual world-view : anthroposophy. Forest Row: Temple Lodge. ISBN 9781902636283. Thomas Armstrong, PhD (1 December 2006). The Best Schools: How Human Development Research Should Inform Educational Practice. ASCD. p. 53. ISBN 978-1-4166-0457-0. Archived from the original on 17 January 2016. Retrieved 29 November 2012. Steiner, Rudolf (2016). "Between Death and Rebirth: Lecture Seven". wn.rsarchive.org. Rudolf Steiner Archive. Retrieved 27 February 2019. Steiner, Rudolf (1973). "Karmic Relationships: Esoteric Studies – Volume VII (Lecture Two)". Rudolf Steiner Archive. Retrieved 28 February 2019. Steiner, Rudolf (1996). The Education of the Child. SteinerBooks. ISBN 9780880109130. Retrieved 27 February 2019. Bowles, Adam (26 March 2000). "Different Teaching Method Attracts Parents". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 3 February 2019. Retrieved 27 February 2019. Ahern, Geoffrey (2009). Sun at midnight : the Rudolf Steiner movement and gnosis in the West (Rev. and expanded ed.). James Clarke & Co. pp. 20–21. ISBN 978-0227172933. Ullrich, Heiner (1994). "Rudolf Steiner". Prospects: The Quarterly Review of Comparative Education. 24 (3–4): 555–572. doi:10.1007/BF02195288. S2CID 189874700. Iona H. Ginsburg, "Jean Piaget and Rudolf Steiner: Stages of Child Development and Implications for Pedagogy", Teachers College Record Volume 84 Number 2, 1982, pp. 327–337. Woods, Philip; Martin Ashley; Glenys Woods (2005). Steiner Schools in England (PDF). UK Department for Education and Skills. ISBN 1-84478-495-9. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 April 2013. Uhrmacher, P. Bruce (Winter 1993). "Making Contact: An Exploration of Focused Attention between Teacher and Students". Curriculum Inquiry. 23 (4): 433–444. doi:10.2307/1180068. JSTOR 1180068. Ginsburg and Opper, Piaget's Theory of Intellectual Development, ISBN 0-13-675140-7, pp. 39–40. Todd Oppenheimer, Schooling the Imagination Archived 14 May 2008 at the Wayback Machine, Atlantic Monthly, September 1999. Sue Waite; Sarah Rees (2011). Rod Parker-Rees (ed.). Meeting the Child in Steiner Kindergartens: An Exploration of the beliefs, values and practices. Routledge. p. 57. ISBN 978-0-415-60392-8. The first epoch (0–7 years), when the child is intensely sensitive to people and surroundings, is seen by Steiner educators as the empathic stage - where empathy means embracing the unconscious of another with one's own unconscious, to live into the experience of another. The kindergarten teacher purposefully employs her own empathic ability as she strives to be a role model worthy of imitation by the children, but she also creates a space and ethos conducive to imaginative play that actively develops children's capacity for empathy. Ullrich, Heiner (2008). Rudolf Steiner. London: Continuum International Pub. Group. p. 77. ISBN 9780826484192. Taplin, Jill Tina (2010). "Steiner Waldorf Early Childhood Education: Offering a Curriculum for the 21st Century". In Linda Miller, Linda Pound (ed.). Theories and Approaches to Learning in the Early Years. SAGE Publications. p. 92. ISBN 9781849205788. Archived from the original on 14 August 2021. Retrieved 29 April 2013. "Eighteen year rhythm – Anthroposophy". anthroposophy.eu. Retrieved 20 August 2022. Edwards, Carolyn Pope (Spring 2002). "Three Approaches from Europe: Waldorf, Montessori, and Reggio Emilia". Early Childhood Research & Practice. 4 (1). Archived from the original on 24 March 2007. Retrieved 19 January 2007. Hutchison, David C. (2004). A Natural History of Place in Education. New York, NY: Teachers College Press. p. 92. ISBN 978-0807744703. Nicol, Janni; Taplin, Jill (2012). Understanding the Steiner Waldorf Approach: Early Years Education in Practice. Routledge. p. 49. ISBN 9780415597166. Ann Gordon and Kathryn Browne, Beginnings & Beyond: Foundations in Early Childhood Education. John Siraj-Blatchford; David Whitebread (1 October 2003). Supporting ICT in the Early Years. McGraw-Hill International. p. 16. ISBN 978-0-335-20942-2. Archived from the original on 3 January 2014. Retrieved 28 November 2012. Henk van Oort (2011), "Religious education", Anthroposophy A-Z: A Glossary of Terms Relating to Rudolf Steiner's spiritual philosophy ISBN 9781855842649. p. 99. Ida Oberman, "Waldorf History: Case Study of Institutional Memory" Archived 14 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine, Paper presented to Annual Meeting of the American Education Research Association, 24–28 March 1997, published US Department of Education – Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC). Willis, Peter; Neville, Bernie (1996). Qualitative Research Practice in Adult Education. University of South Australia, Centre for Research in Education Equity and Work. pp. 103, 362. ISBN 1-86355-056-9. Retrieved 29 October 2021. Woods, Philip A.; Glenys J. Woods (2006). "In Harmony with the Child: the Steiner teacher as a co-leader in a pedagogical community". FORUM. 48 (3): 319. doi:10.2304/forum.2006.48.3.317. R. Murray Thomas, "Levels in education practice", In Encyclopedia of Education and Human Development, Farenga and Ness (eds.). M. E. Sharpe 2005 ISBN 9780765621085. p. 624. Gesell, Arnold; Ilg, Frances; Ames, Louise Bates; Bullis, Glenna (1946). The child from five to ten. NY: Harper & Bros. p. 12. "Different teaching method attracts parents" Archived 15 March 2017 at the Wayback Machine, The New York Times, 26 March 2000. Thomas William Nielsen, "Rudolf Steiner's Pedagogy of Imagination: A Phenomenological Case Study", Peter Lang Publisher 2004. Carolyn P. Edwards, "Three Approaches from Europe: Waldorf, Montessori and Reggio Emilia", Early Childhood and Practice, Spring 2002, pp. 7–8. Easton, F. (1997). "Educating the whole child, "head, heart, and hands": Learning from the Waldorf experience". Theory into Practice. 36 (2): 87–94. doi:10.1080/00405849709543751. S2CID 55665652. McDermott, R.; Henry, M. E.; Dillard, C.; Byers, P.; Easton, F.; Oberman, I.; Uhrmacher, B. (1996). "Waldorf education in an inner-city public school". The Urban Review. 28 (2): 119. doi:10.1007/BF02354381. S2CID 143544078. Martin Ashley (2009). Philip A. Woods; Glenys J. Woods (eds.). Chapter 11: Alternative Education for the 21st Century: Philosophies, Approaches, Visions. Palgrave Macmillan. p. 214. ISBN 978-0-230-61836-7. Archived from the original on 17 January 2016. Retrieved 13 December 2015. Vivienne Walkup, Exploring Education Studies. Taylor and Francis 2011 ISBN 9781408218778. p. 68. Helen H. Frink, "Germany", in World Educational Encyclopedia, Rebecca Marlow-Ferguson (ed.), v. 1. Gale 2002 ISBN 0-7876-5578-3. pp. 488–489. Ginsberg, Iona H. (1982). "Jean Piaget and Rudolf Steiner:stages of child development and implications for pedagogy". Teachers College Record. 84 (2): 327–337. doi:10.1177/016146818208400204. S2CID 142616063. Grant, M. (1999). "Steiner and the Humours: The Survival of Ancient Greek Science". British Journal of Educational Studies. 47: 60. doi:10.1111/1467-8527.00103. In individuals the temperaments are mixed in the most diverse ways, so that it is possible only to say that one temperament or another predominates in certain traits. Temperament inclines toward the individual, thus making people different, and on the other hand joins individuals together in a group so proving that it has something to do both with the innermost essence of the human being and with universal human nature. Ullrich, Heiner (2008). Rudolf Steiner. London: Continuum. Stehlik, Tom (2008). Thinking, Feeling, and Willing: How Waldorf Schools Provide a Creative Pedagogy That Nurtures and Develops Imagination. In Leonard, Timothy and Willis, Peter, Pedagogies of the Imagination: Mythopoetic Curriculum in Educational Practice. Springer. p. 232. ISBN 978-1-4020-8350-1. Archived from the original on 17 January 2016. Retrieved 10 January 2013. Lilienfeld, Scott O.; Lynn, Steven Jay; Lohr, Jeffrey M. (2015). Science and pseudoscience in clinical psychology (Second ed.). New York: The Guilford Press. pp. 205–239. ISBN 978-1462517893. Feerick, Jack (16 December 2020). "Humoural [sic] Theory: Inside the Strange Pseudoscience That Dominated Western Medicine for 2,000 Years". Discover Magazine. Retrieved 20 August 2022. Coltheart, M; McArthur, G (5 April 2012). "12 Neuroscience, education and educational efficacy research". In Della Sala, Sergio; Anderson, Mike (eds.). Neuroscience in Education: The good, the bad, and the ugly. pp. 215–221. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199600496.001.0001. ISBN 978-0-19-960049-6. Retrieved 20 August 2022. Coffield, Frank; Moseley, David; Hall, Elaine; Ecclestone, Kathryn (2004). "Learning styles and pedagogy in post-16 learning: A systematic and critical review". Learning and Skills Research Council (Report). Retrieved 22 August 2022. Bailey, Richard P.; Madigan, Daniel J.; Cope, Ed; Nicholls, Adam R. (2018). "The Prevalence of Pseudoscientific Ideas and Neuromyths Among Sports Coaches". Frontiers in Psychology. 9: 641. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2018.00641. ISSN 1664-1078. PMC 5941987. PMID 29770115. Sarah W. Whedon (2007). Hands, Hearts, and Heads: Childhood and Esotericism in American Waldorf Education. University of California, Santa Barbara. ISBN 978-0-549-26917-5. Archived from the original on 11 October 2013. Retrieved 6 December 2012. Woods, Philip A.; Martin Ashley; Glenys Woods (2005). Steiner Schools in England. UK Department for Education and Skills (DfES). pp. 89–90. For example, melancholic children like sitting together because they are unlikely to be annoyed or disturbed by their neighbors. Livelier temperaments such as sanguine or choleric are said to be likely to rub their liveliness off on each other and calm down of their own accord. Little evidence of this aspect of practice was immediately apparent to outside observers, and teachers did not readily volunteer to talk about it. Oberski, Iddo (2006). "Learning to Think in Steiner-Waldorf Schools" (PDF). Journal of Cognitive Education and Psychology. 5 (3): 336–349. doi:10.1891/194589506787382431. S2CID 144940637. Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 May 2017. Retrieved 29 April 2013. *"The overarching goal is to help children build a moral impulse within so they can choose in freedom what it means to live morally."—Armon, Joan, "The Waldorf Curriculum as a Framework for Moral Education: One Dimension of a Fourfold System" Archived 14 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine, (Abstract Archived 28 February 2008 at the Wayback Machine), Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association (Chicago, IL, 24–28 March 1997), p. 1. Carnie, Fiona (2003). Alternative approaches to education : a guide for parents and teachers. London: RoutledgeFalmer. p. 47. ISBN 978-0-415-24817-4. Miller, Ron (1995). "Freedom in a holistic context". Holistic Education Review. 8 (3): 4–11. "Religion or philosophy" Archived 11 March 2015 at the Wayback Machine SFGate 30 October 2000. Suzanne L. Krogh, "Models of Early Childhood Education", In Encyclopedia of Education and Human Development, Farenga and Ness (eds.). M. E. Sharpe 2005. ISBN 9780765621085 p. 484. OECD (2005). Formative Assessment Improving Learning in Secondary Classrooms: Improving Assessment in Secondary Classrooms. p. 267. Schwartz, Eugene (2000). Waldorf Education: Schools for the Twenty-First Century. Xlibris Corporation. p. 68. ISBN 0738821632. Nicholson, David W. (2000). "Layers of experience: Forms of representation in a Waldorf school classroom". Journal of Curriculum Studies. 32 (4): 575–587. doi:10.1080/00220270050033637. S2CID 143537628. Waldorf Answers Archived 24 February 2017 at the Wayback Machine. Little, William (3 February 2009). "Steiner schools: learning – it is a wonder". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 3 June 2013. Retrieved 20 May 2013. Ogeltree, Earl J. (1979). Introduction to Waldorf Education: Curriculum and Methods. University Press of America. Leone, Stacie (26 April 2013). "Ithaca Waldorf School: An education based in music, movement and neuroscience". The Ithaca Times. Archived from the original on 10 May 2013. Retrieved 29 April 2013. Weiner, Irving B.; William Reynolds; Gloria Miller (2012). Handbook of Psychology Vol. 7 Educational Psychology. John Wiley & Sons. p. 241. Sumner, Jennifer; Heather Mair; Erin Nelson (2010). "Putting the culture back into agriculture: civic engagement and the celebration of local food". International Journal of Agricultural Sustainability. 1–2 (8): 54–61. doi:10.3763/ijas.2009.0454. S2CID 154772882. Leyden, Liz (29 November 2009). "For Forest Kindergarteners, Class is Back to Nature, Rain or Shine". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 8 May 2013. Retrieved 30 April 2013. Østergaard, Edvin; Dahlin, Bo; Hugo, Aksel (1 September 2008). "Doing phenomenology in science education: a research review" (PDF). Studies in Science Education. 44 (2): 93–121. Bibcode:2008SScEd..44...93O. doi:10.1080/03057260802264081. S2CID 59056009. Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 October 2013. Retrieved 27 October 2013. Zubrowski, Bernard (2009). Exploration and Meaning Making in the Learning of Science (Vol. 18 ed.). Springer. p. 231. ISBN 978-90-481-2496-1. [Pictoral representation] is also a way of focusing attention and closely observing what is happening. However, there are problems when it comes to having students draw. Some are inhibited because they feel they have to have very realistic representations. This can be overcome if throughout the grades drawing is approached both as a way of self-expression and a way of capturing the external world. In Waldorf education, there is an ongoing practice of having students draw. Others would do well to find ways of adapting this approach in public school practice so that drawing is second nature to the students and they are not inhibited in attempting it. Østergaard, Edvin; Dahlin, Bo; Hugo, Aksel (1 September 2008). "Doing phenomenology in science education: a research review". Studies in Science Education. 44 (2): 93–121. Bibcode:2008SScEd..44...93O. doi:10.1080/03057260802264081. S2CID 59056009. Scott, Eugenie C. (Winter 1994). "Waldorf Schools Teach Odd Science, Odd Evolution". National Center for Science Education Reports. 14 (4): 20. Archived from the original on 31 October 2018. Retrieved 30 November 2018. Salchegger, Silvia; Wallner-Paschon, Christina; Bertsch, Christian (December 2021). "Explaining Waldorf students' high motivation but moderate achievement in science: is inquiry-based science education the key?". Large-Scale Assessments in Education. 9 (1): 14. doi:10.1186/s40536-021-00107-3. PMC 8220126. PMID 34178572. Jelinek, David; Sun, Li-Ling. "Does Waldorf Offer a Viable Form of Science Education? A Research Monograph" (PDF). California State University College of Education. California State University Press. Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 December 2019. Retrieved 29 November 2018. Dahlin, Bo (2017). Rudolf Steiner: The Relevance of Waldorf Education. Cham, Switzerland: Springer. p. 5. ISBN 9783319589060. Frisk, Liselotte (2012). "The Anthroposophical movement and the Waldorf educational system". In Cusack, Carole M.; Norman, Alex (eds.). Handbook of New Religions and Cultural Production. Brill Handbooks on Contemporary Religion. Brill. p. 204 fn. 10, 208. ISBN 978-90-04-22187-1. Retrieved 1 January 2024. Thus my conclusion is that it is quite uncontroversial to see Anthroposophy as a whole as a religious movement, in the conventional use of the term, although it is not an emic term used by Anthroposophists themselves. Peter Vinthagen Simpson (29 August 2008). "Stockholm University ends Steiner teacher training". The Local. Archived from the original on 17 January 2016. Retrieved 1 September 2015. Stockholm University has decided to wind up its Steiner-Waldorf teacher training. Steiner science literature is 'too much myth and too little fact', the university's teacher education committee has ruled. "Reading is a habit that we can't afford to lose" Archived 2 July 2013 at the Wayback Machine, The Herald, 2 December 2007. NBC News, "The Waldorf Way: Silicon Valley school eschews technology" Archived 1 September 2014 at the Wayback Machine, 30 November 2011. Huffington Post, "Waldorf School Of The Peninsula In California Succeeds With No- And Low-Tech Education" Archived 10 April 2017 at the Wayback Machine, 8 July 2014. Bart Jones, Newsday, "Garden City's Waldorf School takes 'no-tech' approach in lower grades" Archived 14 July 2014 at the Wayback Machine, 22 March 2014. CBS News, "Silicon Valley school bucks high-tech trend" Archived 14 July 2014 at the Wayback Machine. Matt Richtel, "A Silicon Valley School That Doesn't Compute" Archived 16 March 2017 at the Wayback Machine, The New York Times, 22 October 2011. Oberski, Iddo (February 2011). "Rudolf Steiner's philosophy of freedom as a basis for spiritual education?". International Journal of Children's Spirituality. 16 (1): 14. doi:10.1080/1364436x.2010.540751. S2CID 145444483. Zander, Helmut (2007). Anthroposophie in Deutschland. Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht. Easton, Freda (1 March 1997). "Educating the whole child, "head, heart, and hands": Learning from the Waldorf experience". Theory into Practice. 36 (2): 87–94. doi:10.1080/00405849709543751. S2CID 55665652. Mark Riccio, Rudolf Steiner's Impulse in Education, dissertation, Columbia University Teachers College, 2000, p. 87. Woods, Philip A.; Woods, Glenys J. (2002). "Policy on School Diversity: Taking an Existential Turn in the Pursuit of Valued Learning?". British Journal of Educational Studies. 50 (2): 254–278. doi:10.1111/1467-8527.00201. JSTOR 3122313. S2CID 144581447. Haynes, Dion (20 September 1999). "Waldorf School Critics Wary of Religious Aspect". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on 10 July 2013. Retrieved 9 July 2013. Oberski, Iddo; Alistair Pugh; Astrid MacLean; Peter Cope (February 2007). "Validating a Steiner-Waldorf teacher education programme". Teaching in Higher Education. 12 (1): 135–139. doi:10.1080/13562510601102388. S2CID 143719683. Eric Gidseg, "Waldorf education", In Moncrieff Cochran and Rebecca S. New (eds.), Early Childhood Education An International Encyclopedia, v. 4. Praeger (2008), ISBN 0-313-34143-5. pp. 833–835 Philipp Martzog, Simon Kuttner & Guido Pollak (2016): "A comparison of Waldorf and non-Waldorf student-teachers' social-emotional competencies: can arts engagement explain differences?", Journal of Education for Teaching, doi:10.1080/02607476.2015.1131365 Ullrich, Heiner (2008). Rudolf Steiner. London: Continuum International Pub. Group. pp. 152–154. ISBN 9780826484192. Carlo Willmann, Waldorfpädogogik, Kölner Veröffentlichungen zur Religionsgeschichte, v. 27. Böhlau Verlag, ISBN 3-412-16700-2. See "Ganzheitliche Erziehung", 2.3.3" "ASWSNA effective practices". Archived from the original on 10 May 2015. Retrieved 10 February 2013. "WASC Accrediting commission for schools". Archived from the original on 24 December 2006. Retrieved 8 January 2007. Regulating Publicly Funded Private Schools: A Literature Review on Equity and Effectiveness, OECD Education Working Papers No. 147, 11 Nov 2016, [1] Archived 14 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine Chistolini, Sandra (2009). "Apart from the Steiner School and Montessori Method, Homeschooling is the answer for families to the social crisis of schools". New Jersey Journal of Supervision and Curriculum Development. 53. "Vaccine deniers: inside the dumb, dangerous new fad". The Verge. Archived from the original on 3 December 2018. Retrieved 3 December 2018. Ernst, Edzard (March 2011). "Anthroposophy: A Risk Factor for Noncompliance With Measles Immunization". Pediatric Infectious Disease Journal. 30 (3): 187–189. doi:10.1097/INF.0b013e3182024274. ISSN 0891-3668. PMID 21102363. Morgan, Richard E. (1973). "The Establishment Clause and Sectarian Schools: A Final Installment?". The Supreme Court Review. 1973: 57–97. doi:10.1086/scr.1973.3108801. JSTOR 3108801. S2CID 147590904. Cook, Chris (4 August 2014). "Why are Steiner schools so controversial?". BBC News. Archived from the original on 4 August 2018. Retrieved 20 June 2018. "Steiner schools have some questionable lessons for today's children". The Independent. 17 May 2019. Archived from the original on 13 August 2018. Retrieved 31 August 2018. Chertoff, Emily (30 November 2012). "Is This Grade School a 'Cult'? (And Do Parents Care?)". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on 22 June 2019. Retrieved 21 May 2019. Pappano, Laura (November–December 2011). "Waldorf Education in Public Schools: Educators adopt – and adapt – this developmental, arts-rich approach". Harvard Education Letter. 27 (6). The original trial ended in 30 minutes with the case being dismissed after the plaintiff failed to present an offer of proof (proffer) of evidence. See "Transcript of Court Trial" held 9/12/05 before Judge Frank C. Damrell, Jr., PLANS, Inc v Sacramento City Unified School District and Twin Ridges Elementary School District, filed U.S. District Court Eastern District of California No. Civ. S 98–266. Transcript notes trial commenced at 1:30 p.m. and concluded 2:01 pm. Damrell, Frank C., Minute Order, 27 November 2007. Text of order Archived 11 April 2008 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 17 December 2007. "'Inadequate' Steiner school to be taken over by academy chain". 6 December 2018. Archived from the original on 6 December 2018. Retrieved 7 December 2018. "Ofsted reveals why it had to close down Exeter Steiner Academy". 12 October 2018. Archived from the original on 9 December 2018. Retrieved 7 December 2018. "Ofsted inspections find three Steiner schools to be inadequate". 17 January 2019. Archived from the original on 17 January 2019. Retrieved 17 January 2019. Cunningham, Anna. "Steiner schools should adopt modern reading methods". The Conversation. Archived from the original on 3 December 2018. Retrieved 3 December 2018. Williams, Lee (14 December 2018). "Steiner schools have some questionable lessons for today's children". The Independent. Archived from the original on 29 March 2019. Retrieved 14 December 2018. Turner, Camilla (2 September 2017). "Exclusive: Top Steiner school ordered to close by Government over child safety fears". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 16 December 2018. Retrieved 30 November 2018. "Frome Steiner school causes controversy". BBC News. 19 November 2012. Archived from the original on 28 November 2012. Retrieved 28 November 2012. European Council for Steiner Waldorf Education (October 2007). "Waldorf schools against discrimination" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 May 2013. Retrieved 29 November 2012. Barker, Irena (17 September 2012). "Homeopathy? Sorry, we're just not swallowing it". TES. Archived from the original on 7 December 2018. Retrieved 6 December 2018. Friends of Waldorf Education, Canada Archived 17 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine Paull, John (December 2017). "The First Waldorf School in Russia: A Postcard from Moscow". Journal of Biodynamics Tasmania (124): 14–17. Archived from the original on 14 August 2021. "Steiner Waldorf" in Encyclopedia of Primary Education, Denis Hayes (ed.) ISBN 9780203864609. pp. 403–404 "Waldorf schools", Encyclopedia of American Education, Harlow G. Unger (ed.). ISBN 9780816068876. p. 1196. "Waldorf schools", Encyclopedia of American Education (Harlow G. Unger (ed.) Facts on File (2007). ISBN 9780816068876. pp. 1196–7 D. C. Phillips, "Waldorf education: Rudolf Steiner", in Encyclopedia of Educational Theory and Philosophy, SAGE 2014, p. 847-8 Spies, Werner E. (1985), "Gleichrichtung und Kontrast – Schulprogramme und Gesellschaftsprogramme", in Edding, Friedrich et al. (eds), Praktisches Lernen in der Hibernia-Pädagogik: eine Rudolf Steiner-Schule entwickelt eine neue Allgemeinbildung. Stuttgart: Klett, pp. 203, ff. Nicholson, David W. (1 July 2000). "Layers of experience: Forms of representation in a Waldorf school classroom". Journal of Curriculum Studies. 32 (4): 575–587. doi:10.1080/00220270050033637. S2CID 143537628. Christensen, Leah M (2007). "Going Back to Kindergarten: Applying the Principles of Waldorf Education to Create Ethical Attorneys" (PDF). Suffolk University Law Review. 40 (2).[permanent dead link][2] Archived 14 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine Gidley, Jennifer (2010). "Comparing beliefs and values related to civic and moral issues among students in Swedish mainstream and Steiner Waldorf schools". Journal of Beliefs & Values: Studies in Religion & Education. 31 (2). Gidley, J. (1998). "Prospective Youth Visions through Imaginative Education", Futures 30(5), pp395–408 "Liebe Waldorfschüler" Archived 2 April 2015 at the Wayback Machine, Süddeutsche Zeitung, 17 May 2010; see "Study of racist attitudes among Waldorf school pupils" Archived 18 August 2016 at the Wayback Machine for a summary of the study's results in English Tolerance: The Threshold of Peace., UNESCO, 1994. Chen, Grace (1 August 2012). "Waldorf Education: Four Successes and Four Failures". Education.com. Public School Review. Retrieved 22 August 2022. "Education as an Opportunity to Break Out of the Poverty Trap" Archived 16 June 2015 at the Wayback Machine, Freunde der Erziehungskunst Rudolf Steiners Mulderrig, Arnie (26 May 2010). "Teacher from Rudolf Steiner School to help disadvantaged students from Sierra Leone". The Watford Observer. Archived from the original on 27 March 2014. Retrieved 14 May 2013. Flynn, Liina (15 March 2012). "Earthships taking off". Northern Rivers Echo. Archived from the original on 19 August 2013. Retrieved 14 May 2013. "Salaam Shalom Educational Foundation : Community Development". 28 September 2007.[dead link] "Salaam Shalom Educational Foundation : Arabic Waldorf Teaching Training". 28 September 2007.[dead link] Frucht, Leora Eren (28 May 2006). "When Ahmed met Avshalom". Israel21c. Archived from the original on 9 November 2013. Retrieved 10 May 2013. Cohen, Ma'ayan (3 December 2009). "Peace in the Middle East? Educational group brings tolerance and conflict resolution to Arab and Jewish kids' classrooms". Jewish Journal. Archived from the original on 17 January 2016. "Waldorf Worldwide: Learning for peace". Freunde der Erziehungskunst Rudolf Steiners. Archived from the original on 14 August 2021. Retrieved 10 May 2013. Abigail Klein Leichman, Israeli Arabs and Jews work together to boost Arab education Archived 7 February 2020 at the Wayback Machine, Israel 21c 16 February 2020 Tashi Waldorf School Archived 8 April 2010 at the Wayback Machine [3] Archived 6 December 2017 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 28 March 2010. "風俗といえば今の時代はデリヘルがよく利用されています". krmecofoundation.org. Archived from the original on 6 December 2017. Retrieved 10 February 2013. Arline Monks, "Breaking Down the Barriers to Learning: The Power of the Arts", Journal of Court, Community and Alternative Schools Archived 1 October 2005 at the Wayback Machine Babineaux, R., Evaluation report: Thomas E. Mathews Community School, Stanford University 1999, cited in Monks, op. cit. "Friends of Waldorf Education". UNESCO. Archived from the original on 12 April 2013. Retrieved 8 January 2013. Fanny Jiminez, "Namen tanzen, fit in Mathe – Waldorf im Vorteil" Archived 14 December 2013 at the Wayback Machine. Die Welt 26 September 2012, citing Barz, et al., Bildungserfahrungen an Waldorfschulen: Empirische Studie zu Schulqualität und Lernerfahrungen, 2012 Gidley, Jennifer M.; Hampson, Gary P. (2005). "The evolution of futures in school education". Futures. 37 (4): 255. doi:10.1016/j.futures.2004.07.005. S2CID 43307667. Archived from the original on 15 June 2019. Retrieved 5 January 2019. Fanny Jiménez, "Wissenschaftler loben Waldorfschulen", Die Welt, 27 September 2012. Earl J. Ogletree, The Comparative Status of the Creative Thinking Ability of Waldorf Education Students Archived 28 February 2008 at the Wayback Machine, also reported in Woods, p. 152 Cox, Maureen V.; Rowlands, Anna (2000). "The effect of three different educational approaches on children's drawing ability: Steiner, Montessori and traditional". British Journal of Educational Psychology. 70 (4): 485–503. doi:10.1348/000709900158263. PMID 11191183. S2CID 10142097. Rocha, Doralice Lange DeSouza (2003). Schools Where Children Matter: Exploring Educational Alternatives. Brandon, VT: Foundation for Educational Renewal. p. 131. ISBN 978-1885580146. Clifford Mayes, Seven Curricular Landscapes: An Approach to the Holistic Curriculum, University Press of America; ISBN 076182720X, pg. 136. Timothy Leonard and Peter Willis, Pedagogies of the Imagination: Mythopoetic Curriculum in Educational Practice, pg. 8. Thomas W. Nielsen, "Rudolf Steiner's Pedagogy of Imagination: A Phenomenological Case Study" A paper to complement a presentation given at the first International Conference on Imagination in Education, 16–19 July, Vancouver, Canada, pg. 1. Edgar Allen Beem, The Waldorf Way, Boston Globe, 16 April 2001 Archived 26 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine Robert S. Peterkin, Director of Urban Superintendents Program, Harvard Graduate School of Education and former Superintendent of Milwaukee Public Schools, in Boston Public Schools As Arts-Integrated Learning Organizations: Developing a High Standard of Culture for All Archived 3 February 2012 at the Wayback Machine: "Waldorf is healing education. ... It is with a sense of adventure that the staff of Milwaukee Public Schools embraces the Waldorf concept in an urban multicultural setting. It is clear that Waldorf principles are in concert with our goals for educating all children." Larrison, Abigail (2013). Mind, Brain, and Education as a Framework for Curricular Reform (PDF). Dissertation. University of California, San Diego. Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 January 2016. Retrieved 26 March 2013. Röhrs, Hermann (1998). Reformpädagogik und innere Billdungsreform. Weinheim: Beltz. pp. 90–91. ISBN 978-3892718253. Pamela Bolotin Joseph; et al. (6 December 2012). Cultures of Curriculum. Routledge. pp. 118–. ISBN 978-1-136-79219-9. Archived from the original on 17 January 2016. Retrieved 1 February 2013. Eisner, Elliot W. (1994). Cognition and curriculum reconsidered (2nd ed.). New York: Teachers College Press. p. 83. ISBN 978-0807733103. Ernest Boyer, cited in Eric Oddleifson, Boston Public Schools As Arts-Integrated Learning Organizations: Developing a High Standard of Culture for All Archived 30 May 2014 at the Wayback Machine, Address of 18 May 1995: "One of the strengths of the Waldorf curriculum is its emphasis on the arts and the rich use of the spoken word through poetry and storytelling. The way the lessons integrate traditional subject matter is, to my knowledge, unparalleled. Those in the public school reform movement have some important things to learn from what Waldorf educators have been doing for many years. It is an enormously impressive effort toward quality education." Holmes, M. (2000). "How Should Educational Policymakers Address Conflicting Interests within a Diverse Society?". Curriculum Inquiry. 30: 129. doi:10.1111/0362-6784.00157. S2CID 145338432. Seither, Ranee (2019). "Vaccination Coverage with Selected Vaccines and Exemption Rates Among Children in Kindergarten — United States, 2018–19 School Year". MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report. 68 (41): 905–912. doi:10.15585/mmwr.mm6841e1. ISSN 0149-2195. PMC 6802678. PMID 31622283. S2CID 204774899. Archived from the original on 23 October 2020. Retrieved 21 October 2020. "State releases 'startling' data on unvaccinated children". The CT Mirror. 3 May 2019. Archived from the original on 23 October 2020. Retrieved 21 October 2020. Smith, Morgan (5 February 2015). "See Vaccination Exemptions in Texas by School District". Texas Tribune. Archived from the original on 29 December 2016. Retrieved 5 February 2015. Dover, Haley (5 February 2015). "Vermont schools report low vaccination rates". Burlington Free Press. Archived from the original on 6 February 2015. Retrieved 5 February 2015. Yee, Greg (24 January 2015). "Waldorf school in Belmont Heights reports low vaccination rate". Long Beach Press-Telegram. Archived from the original on 6 February 2015. Retrieved 5 February 2015. "Vaccine exemptions exceed 10% at dozens of Seattle-area schools". The Seattle Times. 4 February 2015. Archived from the original on 6 February 2015. Retrieved 5 February 2015. HPA (Health Protection Agency) National Measles Guidelines Local & Regional Services (PDF) (Report). 28 October 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 July 2015. Retrieved 27 May 2015. "'Anti-vaxxers' in US chickenpox outbreak". BBC News. 19 November 2018. Archived from the original on 20 November 2018. Retrieved 20 November 2018. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, (CDC). (19 July 2013). "Updated recommendations for use of VariZIG—United States, 2013". MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report. 62 (28): 574–6. PMC 4604813. PMID 23863705. Archived from the original on 12 January 2019. Retrieved 22 December 2018. "NC DPH, WCH: Immunization: Family: Vaccines: Varicella (Chickenpox)". www.immunize.nc.gov. North Carolina DPH. Archived from the original on 29 October 2018. Retrieved 22 December 2018. "Chickenpox (Varicella) Vaccination – CDC". www.cdc.gov. 7 July 2017. Archived from the original on 12 December 2018. Retrieved 22 December 2018. Pogash, Carol (28 May 2019). "As anti-vaxx dispute rages, attention turns to California's Waldorf schools". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 28 May 2019. Retrieved 21 October 2020. "CDC – Diphtheria PinkBook" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 September 2007. Retrieved 14 June 2019. "History of Vaccines – Timeline". Archived from the original on 15 June 2020. Retrieved 14 June 2019. Miller, Lisa (29 May 2019). "Measles for the One Percent". The Cut. Archived from the original on 11 June 2019. Retrieved 14 June 2019. "USA Today Network". lohud.com. 12 March 2019. Archived from the original on 3 June 2019. Retrieved 20 August 2019. DW Politics [@dw_politics] (21 November 2021). "What does Rudolf Steiner have to do with vaccination scepticism?" (Tweet). Retrieved 3 February 2022 – via Twitter. AWSNA Statement of Equality Archived 1 September 2018 at the Wayback Machine. The statement quoted here is from AWSNA's statement, which is an adapted translation of the "Stuttgart Manifesto" put out by the European Council "Steiner/Waldorf Schools Fellowship Press Release". Archived from the original on 4 August 2017. Retrieved 1 September 2018. "Stuttgarter Erklärung" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 September 2018. Retrieved 28 September 2018. Christoph Lindenberg, Rudolf Steiner, Rowohlt 1992, ISBN 3-499-50500-2, p. 55 Robert McDermott, The Essential Steiner, ISBN 0-06-065345-0, pp. 3–11, 392–5 "Anthroposophy" Archived 14 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine, Encyclopædia Britannica online, accessed 10/09/07 Chris Cook (4 August 2014). "Why are Steiner schools so controversial?". BBC Newsnight. Archived from the original on 14 September 2018. Retrieved 31 August 2018. Lee Williams (8 November 2016). "Steiner schools have some questionable lessons for today's children". The Independent. Archived from the original on 13 August 2018. Retrieved 31 August 2018. Kenny, Lee (21 September 2019). "Rudolf Steiner school's name change dilemma". Stuff. Archived from the original on 1 October 2020. Retrieved 23 September 2020. Moir, Jo (25 July 2014). "Steiner school cleared of racist teachings". Stuff. Archived from the original on 1 October 2020. Retrieved 23 September 2020. Peter Staudenmaier, "Rudolf Steiner and the Jewish Question" Archived 2017-09-16 at the Wayback Machine, Leo Baeck Institute Yearbook, Vol. 50, No. 1 (2005): 127-147. Hill, Chris (2023). "'Gustavo Who?' — Notes Towards the Life and Times of Gustavo Rol; Putative Mage and Cosmic 'Drainpipe'". In Pilkington, Mark; Sutcliffe, Jamie (eds.). Strange Attractor Journal Five. MIT Press. p. 194. ISBN 978-1-907222-52-8. Retrieved 1 November 2023. Wieringa, Tommy (8 May 2021). "Groene vingers". NRC (in Dutch). Archived from the original on 7 May 2021. Retrieved 7 February 2023. Het was een ontmoeting van oude bekenden: nazi-kopstukken als Rudolf Hess en Heinrich Himmler herkenden in Rudolf Steiner al een geestverwant, met zijn theorieën over raszuiverheid, esoterische geneeskunst en biologisch-dynamische landbouw. — It was a meeting of old acquaintances: Nazi leaders such as Rudolf Hess and Heinrich Himmler already recognized a kindred spirit in Rudolf Steiner, with his theories about racial purity, esoteric medicine and biodynamic agriculture.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Munoz, Joaquin (23 March 2016). "CHAPTER 5: CONCLUSION AND IMPLICATIONS: THE CHALLENGE OF WALDORF EDUCATION FOR ALL YOUTH. Waldorf Education and Racism". The Circle of Mind and Heart: Integrating Waldorf Education, Indigenous Epistemologies, and Critical Pedagogy (PDF) (PhD thesis). The University of Arizona. pp. 189–190. Retrieved 8 February 2024. Staudenmaier, Peter (2014). Between Occultism and Nazism: Anthroposophy and the Politics of Race in the Fascist Era. Aries Book Series. Brill. p. 214. ISBN 978-90-04-27015-2. Retrieved 3 February 2022. Steiner, Rudolf. "The Education of the Child, and early Lectures on Education" in Foundations of Waldorf Education, Anthroposophic Press, 1996 (includes Steiner's first descriptions of child development, originally published as a small booklet). Steiner, Rudolf. The Foundations of Human Experience (also known as The Study of Man). Anthroposophic Press, 1996 (these fundamental lectures on education were given to the teachers just before the opening of the first Waldorf school in Stuttgart in 1919). Wikimedia Commons has media related to Waldorf pedagogy. Wikiquote has quotations related to Waldorf education. Online Waldorf Library Education Section at the Rudolf Steiner Archive, An Online Library Interactive map of Waldorf kindergartens, schools and teacher training colleges worldwide Association of Waldorf Schools of North America Steiner Waldorf Schools Fellowship (UK) Steiner Education Australia