Stephen William Hawking (8 January 1942 – 14 March 2018) was an English theoretical physicist, cosmologist, and author who was director of research at the Centre for Theoretical Cosmology at the University of Cambridge. Between 1979 and 2009, he was the Lucasian Professor of Mathematics at Cambridge, widely viewed as one of the most prestigious academic posts in the world. Hawking was born in Oxford into a family of physicians. In October 1959, at the age of 17, he began his university education at University College, Oxford, where he received a first-class BA degree in physics. In October 1962, he began his graduate work at Trinity Hall, Cambridge, where, in March 1966, he obtained his PhD degree in applied mathematics and theoretical physics, specialising in general relativity and cosmology. In 1963, at age 21, Hawking was diagnosed with an early-onset slow-progressing form of motor neurone disease that gradually, over decades, paralysed him. After the loss of his speech, he communicated through a speech-generating device initially through use of a handheld switch, and eventually by using a single cheek muscle. Hawking's scientific works included a collaboration with Roger Penrose on gravitational singularity theorems in the framework of general relativity, and the theoretical prediction that black holes emit radiation, often called Hawking radiation. Initially, Hawking radiation was controversial. By the late 1970s and following the publication of further research, the discovery was widely accepted as a major breakthrough in theoretical physics. Hawking was the first to set out a theory of cosmology explained by a union of the general theory of relativity and quantum mechanics. He was a vigorous supporter of the many-worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics. Hawking achieved commercial success with several works of popular science in which he discussed his theories and cosmology in general. His book A Brief History of Time appeared on the Sunday Times bestseller list for a record-breaking 237 weeks. Hawking was a Fellow of the Royal Society, a lifetime member of the Pontifical Academy of Sciences, and a recipient of the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the highest civilian award in the United States. In 2002, Hawking was ranked number 25 in the BBC's poll of the 100 Greatest Britons. He died in 2018 at the age of 76, having lived more than 50 years following his diagnosis of motor neurone disease. Hawking was born on 8 January 1942 in Oxford to Frank and Isobel Eileen Hawking (née Walker). Hawking's mother was born into a family of doctors in Glasgow, Scotland. His wealthy paternal great-grandfather, from Yorkshire, over-extended himself buying farm land and then went bankrupt in the great agricultural depression during the early 20th century. His paternal great-grandmother saved the family from financial ruin by opening a school in their home. Despite their families' financial constraints, both parents attended the University of Oxford, where Frank read medicine and Isobel read Philosophy, Politics and Economics. Isobel worked as a secretary for a medical research institute, and Frank was a medical researcher. Hawking had two younger sisters, Philippa and Mary, and an adopted brother, Edward Frank David (1955–2003). In 1950, when Hawking's father became head of the division of parasitology at the National Institute for Medical Research, the family moved to St Albans, Hertfordshire. In St Albans, the family was considered highly intelligent and somewhat eccentric; meals were often spent with each person silently reading a book. They lived a frugal existence in a large, cluttered, and poorly maintained house and travelled in a converted London taxicab. During one of Hawking's father's frequent absences working in Africa, the rest of the family spent four months in Mallorca visiting his mother's friend Beryl and her husband, the poet Robert Graves. Hawking began his schooling at the Byron House School in Highgate, London. He later blamed its "progressive methods" for his failure to learn to read while at the school. In St Albans, the eight-year-old Hawking attended St Albans High School for Girls for a few months. At that time, younger boys could attend one of the houses. Hawking attended two private (i.e. fee-paying) schools, first Radlett School and from September 1952, St Albans School, Hertfordshire, after passing the eleven-plus a year early. The family placed a high value on education. Hawking's father wanted his son to attend Westminster School, but the 13-year-old Hawking was ill on the day of the scholarship examination. His family could not afford the school fees without the financial aid of a scholarship, so Hawking remained at St Albans. A positive consequence was that Hawking remained close to a group of friends with whom he enjoyed board games, the manufacture of fireworks, model aeroplanes and boats, and long discussions about Christianity and extrasensory perception. From 1958 on, with the help of the mathematics teacher Dikran Tahta, they built a computer from clock parts, an old telephone switchboard and other recycled components. Although known at school as "Einstein", Hawking was not initially successful academically. With time, he began to show considerable aptitude for scientific subjects and, inspired by Tahta, decided to read mathematics at university. Hawking's father advised him to study medicine, concerned that there were few jobs for mathematics graduates. He also wanted his son to attend University College, Oxford, his own alma mater. As it was not possible to read mathematics there at the time, Hawking decided to study physics and chemistry. Despite his headmaster's advice to wait until the next year, Hawking was awarded a scholarship after taking the examinations in March 1959. Hawking began his university education at University College, Oxford, in October 1959 at the age of 17. For the first eighteen months, he was bored and lonely – he found the academic work "ridiculously easy". His physics tutor, Robert Berman, later said, "It was only necessary for him to know that something could be done, and he could do it without looking to see how other people did it." A change occurred during his second and third years when, according to Berman, Hawking made more of an effort "to be one of the boys". He developed into a popular, lively and witty college-member, interested in classical music and science fiction. Part of the transformation resulted from his decision to join the college boat-club, the University College Boat Club, where he coxed a rowing-crew. The rowing-coach at the time noted that Hawking cultivated a daredevil image, steering his crew on risky courses that led to damaged boats. Hawking estimated that he studied about 1,000 hours during his three years at Oxford. These unimpressive study habits made sitting his finals a challenge, and he decided to answer only theoretical physics questions rather than those requiring factual knowledge. A first-class degree was a condition of acceptance for his planned graduate study in cosmology at the University of Cambridge. Anxious, he slept poorly the night before the examinations, and the result was on the borderline between first- and second-class honours, making a viva (oral examination) with the Oxford examiners necessary. Hawking was concerned that he was viewed as a lazy and difficult student. So, when asked at the viva to describe his plans, he said, "If you award me a First, I will go to Cambridge. If I receive a Second, I shall stay in Oxford, so I expect you will give me a First." He was held in higher regard than he believed; as Berman commented, the examiners "were intelligent enough to realise they were talking to someone far cleverer than most of themselves". After receiving a first-class BA degree in physics and completing a trip to Iran with a friend, he began his graduate work at Trinity Hall, Cambridge, in October 1962. Hawking's first year as a doctoral student was difficult. He was initially disappointed to find that he had been assigned Dennis William Sciama, one of the founders of modern cosmology, as a supervisor rather than the noted astronomer Fred Hoyle, and he found his training in mathematics inadequate for work in general relativity and cosmology. After being diagnosed with motor neurone disease, Hawking fell into a depression – though his doctors advised that he continue with his studies, he felt there was little point. His disease progressed more slowly than doctors had predicted. Although Hawking had difficulty walking unsupported, and his speech was almost unintelligible, an initial diagnosis that he had only two years to live proved unfounded. With Sciama's encouragement, he returned to his work. Hawking started developing a reputation for brilliance and brashness when he publicly challenged the work of Hoyle and his student Jayant Narlikar at a lecture in June 1964. When Hawking began his doctoral studies, there was much debate in the physics community about the prevailing theories of the creation of the universe: the Big Bang and Steady State theories. Inspired by Roger Penrose's theorem of a spacetime singularity in the centre of black holes, Hawking applied the same thinking to the entire universe; and, during 1965, he wrote his thesis on this topic. Hawking's thesis was approved in 1966. There were other positive developments: Hawking received a research fellowship at Gonville and Caius College at Cambridge; he obtained his PhD degree in applied mathematics and theoretical physics, specialising in general relativity and cosmology, in March 1966; and his essay "Singularities and the Geometry of Space–Time" shared top honours with one by Penrose to win that year's prestigious Adams Prize. In his work, and in collaboration with Penrose, Hawking extended the singularity theorem concepts first explored in his doctoral thesis. This included not only the existence of singularities but also the theory that the universe might have started as a singularity. Their joint essay was the runner-up in the 1968 Gravity Research Foundation competition. In 1970, they published a proof that if the universe obeys the general theory of relativity and fits any of the models of physical cosmology developed by Alexander Friedmann, then it must have begun as a singularity. In 1969, Hawking accepted a specially created Fellowship for Distinction in Science to remain at Caius. In 1970, Hawking postulated what became known as the second law of black hole dynamics, that the event horizon of a black hole can never get smaller. With James M. Bardeen and Brandon Carter, he proposed the four laws of black hole mechanics, drawing an analogy with thermodynamics. To Hawking's irritation, Jacob Bekenstein, a graduate student of John Wheeler, went further—and ultimately correctly—to apply thermodynamic concepts literally. In the early 1970s, Hawking's work with Carter, Werner Israel, and David C. Robinson strongly supported Wheeler's no-hair theorem, one that states that no matter what the original material from which a black hole is created, it can be completely described by the properties of mass, electrical charge and rotation. His essay titled "Black Holes" won the Gravity Research Foundation Award in January 1971. Hawking's first book, The Large Scale Structure of Space-Time, written with George Ellis, was published in 1973. Beginning in 1973, Hawking moved into the study of quantum gravity and quantum mechanics. His work in this area was spurred by a visit to Moscow and discussions with Yakov Borisovich Zel'dovich and Alexei Starobinsky, whose work showed that according to the uncertainty principle, rotating black holes emit particles. To Hawking's annoyance, his much-checked calculations produced findings that contradicted his second law, which claimed black holes could never get smaller, and supported Bekenstein's reasoning about their entropy. His results, which Hawking presented from 1974, showed that black holes emit radiation, known today as Hawking radiation, which may continue until they exhaust their energy and evaporate. Initially, Hawking radiation was controversial. By the late 1970s and following the publication of further research, the discovery was widely accepted as a significant breakthrough in theoretical physics. Hawking was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society (FRS) in 1974, a few weeks after the announcement of Hawking radiation. At the time, he was one of the youngest scientists to become a Fellow. Hawking was appointed to the Sherman Fairchild Distinguished Visiting Professorship at the California Institute of Technology (Caltech) in 1974. He worked with a friend on the faculty, Kip Thorne, and engaged him in a scientific wager about whether the X-ray source Cygnus X-1 was a black hole. The wager was an "insurance policy" against the proposition that black holes did not exist. Hawking acknowledged that he had lost the bet in 1990, a bet that was the first of several he was to make with Thorne and others. Hawking had maintained ties to Caltech, spending a month there almost every year since this first visit. Hawking returned to Cambridge in 1975 to a more academically senior post, as reader in gravitational physics. The mid-to-late 1970s were a period of growing public interest in black holes and the physicists who were studying them. Hawking was regularly interviewed for print and television. He also received increasing academic recognition of his work. In 1975, he was awarded both the Eddington Medal and the Pius XI Gold Medal, and in 1976 the Dannie Heineman Prize, the Maxwell Medal and Prize and the Hughes Medal. He was appointed a professor with a chair in gravitational physics in 1977. The following year he received the Albert Einstein Medal and an honorary doctorate from the University of Oxford. In 1979, Hawking was elected Lucasian Professor of Mathematics at the University of Cambridge. His inaugural lecture in this role was titled: "Is the End in Sight for Theoretical Physics?" and proposed N = 8 supergravity as the leading theory to solve many of the outstanding problems physicists were studying. His promotion coincided with a health-crisis which led to his accepting, albeit reluctantly, some nursing services at home. At the same time, he was also making a transition in his approach to physics, becoming more intuitive and speculative rather than insisting on mathematical proofs. "I would rather be right than rigorous", he told Kip Thorne. In 1981, he proposed that information in a black hole is irretrievably lost when a black hole evaporates. This information paradox violates the fundamental tenet of quantum mechanics, and led to years of debate, including "the Black Hole War" with Leonard Susskind and Gerard 't Hooft. Cosmological inflation – a theory proposing that following the Big Bang, the universe initially expanded incredibly rapidly before settling down to a slower expansion – was proposed by Alan Guth and also developed by Andrei Linde. Following a conference in Moscow in October 1981, Hawking and Gary Gibbons organised a three-week Nuffield Workshop in the summer of 1982 on "The Very Early Universe" at Cambridge University, a workshop that focused mainly on inflation theory. Hawking also began a new line of quantum-theory research into the origin of the universe. In 1981 at a Vatican conference, he presented work suggesting that there might be no boundary – or beginning or ending – to the universe. Hawking subsequently developed the research in collaboration with Jim Hartle, and in 1983 they published a model, known as the Hartle–Hawking state. It proposed that prior to the Planck epoch, the universe had no boundary in space-time; before the Big Bang, time did not exist and the concept of the beginning of the universe is meaningless. The initial singularity of the classical Big Bang models was replaced with a region akin to the North Pole. One cannot travel north of the North Pole, but there is no boundary there – it is simply the point where all north-running lines meet and end. Initially, the no-boundary proposal predicted a closed universe, which had implications about the existence of God. As Hawking explained, "If the universe has no boundaries but is self-contained... then God would not have had any freedom to choose how the universe began." Hawking did not rule out the existence of a Creator, asking in A Brief History of Time "Is the unified theory so compelling that it brings about its own existence?", also stating "If we discover a complete theory, it would be the ultimate triumph of human reason – for then we should know the mind of God"; in his early work, Hawking spoke of God in a metaphorical sense. In the same book he suggested that the existence of God was not necessary to explain the origin of the universe. Later discussions with Neil Turok led to the realisation that the existence of God was also compatible with an open universe. Further work by Hawking in the area of arrows of time led to the 1985 publication of a paper theorising that if the no-boundary proposition were correct, then when the universe stopped expanding and eventually collapsed, time would run backwards. A paper by Don Page and independent calculations by Raymond Laflamme led Hawking to withdraw this concept. Honours continued to be awarded: in 1981 he was awarded the American Franklin Medal, and in the 1982 New Year Honours appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE). These awards did not significantly change Hawking's financial status, and motivated by the need to finance his children's education and home-expenses, he decided in 1982 to write a popular book about the universe that would be accessible to the general public. Instead of publishing with an academic press, he signed a contract with Bantam Books, a mass-market publisher, and received a large advance for his book. A first draft of the book, called A Brief History of Time, was completed in 1984. One of the first messages Hawking produced with his speech-generating device was a request for his assistant to help him finish writing A Brief History of Time. Peter Guzzardi, his editor at Bantam, pushed him to explain his ideas clearly in non-technical language, a process that required many revisions from an increasingly irritated Hawking. The book was published in April 1988 in the US and in June in the UK, and it proved to be an extraordinary success, rising quickly to the top of best-seller lists in both countries and remaining there for months. The book was translated into many languages, and as of 2009, has sold an estimated 9 million copies. Media attention was intense, and a Newsweek magazine-cover and a television special both described him as "Master of the Universe". Success led to significant financial rewards, but also the challenges of celebrity status. Hawking travelled extensively to promote his work, and enjoyed partying and dancing into the small hours. A difficulty refusing the invitations and visitors left him limited time for work and his students. Some colleagues were resentful of the attention Hawking received, feeling it was due to his disability. He received further academic recognition, including five more honorary degrees, the Gold Medal of the Royal Astronomical Society (1985), the Paul Dirac Medal (1987) and, jointly with Penrose, the prestigious Wolf Prize (1988). In the 1989 Birthday Honours, he was appointed a Member of the Order of the Companions of Honour (CH). He reportedly declined a knighthood in the late 1990s in objection to the UK's science funding policy. Hawking pursued his work in physics: in 1993 he co-edited a book on Euclidean quantum gravity with Gary Gibbons and published a collected edition of his own articles on black holes and the Big Bang. In 1994, at Cambridge's Newton Institute, Hawking and Penrose delivered a series of six lectures that were published in 1996 as "The Nature of Space and Time". In 1997, he conceded a 1991 public scientific wager made with Kip Thorne and John Preskill of Caltech. Hawking had bet that Penrose's proposal of a "cosmic censorship conjecture" – that there could be no "naked singularities" unclothed within a horizon – was correct. After discovering his concession might have been premature, a new and more refined wager was made. This one specified that such singularities would occur without extra conditions. The same year, Thorne, Hawking and Preskill made another bet, this time concerning the black hole information paradox. Thorne and Hawking argued that since general relativity made it impossible for black holes to radiate and lose information, the mass-energy and information carried by Hawking radiation must be "new", and not from inside the black hole event horizon. Since this contradicted the quantum mechanics of microcausality, quantum mechanics theory would need to be rewritten. Preskill argued the opposite, that since quantum mechanics suggests that the information emitted by a black hole relates to information that fell in at an earlier time, the concept of black holes given by general relativity must be modified in some way. Hawking also maintained his public profile, including bringing science to a wider audience. A film version of A Brief History of Time, directed by Errol Morris and produced by Steven Spielberg, premiered in 1992. Hawking had wanted the film to be scientific rather than biographical, but he was persuaded otherwise. The film, while a critical success, was not widely released. A popular-level collection of essays, interviews, and talks titled Black Holes and Baby Universes and Other Essays was published in 1993, and a six-part television series Stephen Hawking's Universe and a companion book appeared in 1997. As Hawking insisted, this time the focus was entirely on science. Hawking continued his writings for a popular audience, publishing The Universe in a Nutshell in 2001, and A Briefer History of Time, which he wrote in 2005 with Leonard Mlodinow to update his earlier works with the aim of making them accessible to a wider audience, and God Created the Integers, which appeared in 2006. Along with Thomas Hertog at CERN and Jim Hartle, from 2006 on Hawking developed a theory of top-down cosmology, which says that the universe had not one unique initial state but many different ones, and therefore that it is inappropriate to formulate a theory that predicts the universe's current configuration from one particular initial state. Top-down cosmology posits that the present "selects" the past from a superposition of many possible histories. In doing so, the theory suggests a possible resolution of the fine-tuning question. Hawking continued to travel widely, including trips to Chile, Easter Island, South Africa, Spain (to receive the Fonseca Prize in 2008), Canada, and numerous trips to the United States. For practical reasons related to his disability, Hawking increasingly travelled by private jet, and by 2011 that had become his only mode of international travel. By 2003, consensus among physicists was growing that Hawking was wrong about the loss of information in a black hole. In a 2004 lecture in Dublin, he conceded his 1997 bet with Preskill, but described his own, somewhat controversial solution to the information paradox problem, involving the possibility that black holes have more than one topology. In the 2005 paper he published on the subject, he argued that the information paradox was explained by examining all the alternative histories of universes, with the information loss in those with black holes being cancelled out by those without such loss. In January 2014, he called the alleged loss of information in black holes his "biggest blunder". As part of another longstanding scientific dispute, Hawking had emphatically argued, and bet, that the Higgs boson would never be found. The particle was proposed to exist as part of the Higgs field theory by Peter Higgs in 1964. Hawking and Higgs engaged in a heated and public debate over the matter in 2002 and again in 2008, with Higgs criticising Hawking's work and complaining that Hawking's "celebrity status gives him instant credibility that others do not have." The particle was discovered in July 2012 at CERN following construction of the Large Hadron Collider. Hawking quickly conceded that he had lost his bet and said that Higgs should win the Nobel Prize for Physics, which he did in 2013. In 2007, Hawking and his daughter Lucy published George's Secret Key to the Universe, a children's book designed to explain theoretical physics in an accessible fashion and featuring characters similar to those in the Hawking family. The book was followed by sequels in 2009, 2011, 2014 and 2016. In 2002, following a UK-wide vote, the BBC included Hawking in their list of the 100 Greatest Britons. He was awarded the Copley Medal from the Royal Society (2006), the Presidential Medal of Freedom, which is America's highest civilian honour (2009), and the Russian Special Fundamental Physics Prize (2013). Several buildings have been named after him, including the Stephen W. Hawking Science Museum in San Salvador, El Salvador, the Stephen Hawking Building in Cambridge, and the Stephen Hawking Centre at the Perimeter Institute in Canada. Appropriately, given Hawking's association with time, he unveiled the mechanical "Chronophage" (or time-eating) Corpus Clock at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge in September 2008. During his career, Hawking supervised 39 successful PhD students. One doctoral student did not successfully complete the PhD.[better source needed] As required by Cambridge University policy, Hawking retired as Lucasian Professor of Mathematics in 2009. Despite suggestions that he might leave the United Kingdom as a protest against public funding cuts to basic scientific research, Hawking worked as director of research at the Cambridge University Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics. On 28 June 2009, as a tongue-in-cheek test of his 1992 conjecture that travel into the past is effectively impossible, Hawking held a party open to all, complete with hors d'oeuvres and iced champagne, but publicised the party only after it was over so that only time-travellers would know to attend; as expected, nobody showed up to the party. On 20 July 2015, Hawking helped launch Breakthrough Initiatives, an effort to search for extraterrestrial life. Hawking created Stephen Hawking: Expedition New Earth, a documentary on space colonisation, as a 2017 episode of Tomorrow's World. In August 2015, Hawking said that not all information is lost when something enters a black hole and there might be a possibility to retrieve information from a black hole according to his theory. In July 2017, Hawking was awarded an Honorary Doctorate from Imperial College London. Hawking's final paper – A smooth exit from eternal inflation? – was posthumously published in the Journal of High Energy Physics on 27 April 2018. Hawking met his future wife, Jane Wilde, at a party in 1962. The following year, Hawking was diagnosed with motor neurone disease. In October 1964, the couple became engaged to marry, aware of the potential challenges that lay ahead due to Hawking's shortened life expectancy and physical limitations. Hawking later said that the engagement gave him "something to live for". The two were married on 14 July 1965 in their shared hometown of St Albans. The couple resided in Cambridge, within Hawking's walking distance to the Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics (DAMTP). During their first years of marriage, Jane lived in London during the week as she completed her degree at Westfield College. They travelled to the United States several times for conferences and physics-related visits. Jane began a PhD programme through Westfield College in medieval Spanish poetry (completed in 1981). The couple had three children: Robert, born May 1967, Lucy, born November 1970, and Timothy, born April 1979. Hawking rarely discussed his illness and physical challenges—even, in a precedent set during their courtship, with Jane. His disabilities meant that the responsibilities of home and family rested firmly on his wife's increasingly overwhelmed shoulders, leaving him more time to think about physics. Upon his appointment in 1974 to a year-long position at the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena, California, Jane proposed that a graduate or post-doctoral student live with them and help with his care. Hawking accepted, and Bernard Carr travelled with them as the first of many students who fulfilled this role. The family spent a generally happy and stimulating year in Pasadena. Hawking returned to Cambridge in 1975 to a new home and a new job, as reader. Don Page, with whom Hawking had begun a close friendship at Caltech, arrived to work as the live-in graduate student assistant. With Page's help and that of a secretary, Jane's responsibilities were reduced so she could return to her doctoral thesis and her new interest in singing. Around December 1977, Jane met organist Jonathan Hellyer Jones when singing in a church choir. Hellyer Jones became close to the Hawking family and, by the mid-1980s, he and Jane had developed romantic feelings for each other. According to Jane, her husband was accepting of the situation, stating "he would not object so long as I continued to love him". Jane and Hellyer Jones were determined not to break up the family, and their relationship remained platonic for a long period. By the 1980s, Hawking's marriage had been strained for many years. Jane felt overwhelmed by the intrusion into their family life of the required nurses and assistants. The impact of his celebrity status was challenging for colleagues and family members, while the prospect of living up to a worldwide fairytale image was daunting for the couple. Hawking's views of religion also contrasted with her strong Christian faith and resulted in tension. After a tracheotomy in 1985, Hawking required a full-time nurse and nursing care was split across three shifts daily. In the late 1980s, Hawking grew close to one of his nurses, Elaine Mason, to the dismay of some colleagues, caregivers, and family members, who were disturbed by her strength of personality and protectiveness. In February 1990, Hawking told Jane that he was leaving her for Mason and departed the family home. After his divorce from Jane in 1995, Hawking married Mason in September, declaring, "It's wonderful – I have married the woman I love." In 1999, Jane Hawking published a memoir, Music to Move the Stars, describing her marriage to Hawking and its breakdown. Its revelations caused a sensation in the media but, as was his usual practice regarding his personal life, Hawking made no public comment except to say that he did not read biographies about himself. After his second marriage, Hawking's family felt excluded and marginalised from his life. For a period of about five years in the early 2000s, his family and staff became increasingly worried that he was being physically abused. Police investigations took place, but were closed as Hawking refused to make a complaint. In 2006, Hawking and Mason quietly divorced, and Hawking resumed closer relationships with Jane, his children, and his grandchildren. Reflecting on this happier period, a revised version of Jane's book, re-titled Travelling to Infinity: My Life with Stephen, appeared in 2007, and was made into a film, The Theory of Everything, in 2014. Hawking had a rare early-onset, slow-progressing form of motor neurone disease (MND; also known as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) or Lou Gehrig's disease), a fatal neurodegenerative disease that affects the motor neurones in the brain and spinal cord, which gradually paralysed him over decades. Hawking had experienced increasing clumsiness during his final year at Oxford, including a fall on some stairs and difficulties when rowing. The problems worsened, and his speech became slightly slurred. His family noticed the changes when he returned home for Christmas, and medical investigations were begun. The MND diagnosis came when Hawking was 21, in 1963. At the time, doctors gave him a life expectancy of two years. In the late 1960s, Hawking's physical abilities declined: he began to use crutches and could no longer give lectures regularly. As he slowly lost the ability to write, he developed compensatory visual methods, including seeing equations in terms of geometry. The physicist Werner Israel later compared the achievements to Mozart composing an entire symphony in his head. Hawking was fiercely independent and unwilling to accept help or make concessions for his disabilities. He preferred to be regarded as "a scientist first, popular science writer second, and, in all the ways that matter, a normal human being with the same desires, drives, dreams, and ambitions as the next person." His wife Jane later noted: "Some people would call it determination, some obstinacy. I've called it both at one time or another." He required much persuasion to accept the use of a wheelchair at the end of the 1960s, but ultimately became notorious for the wildness of his wheelchair driving. Hawking was a popular and witty colleague, but his illness, as well as his reputation for brashness, distanced him from some. When Hawking first began using a wheelchair he was using standard motorised models. The earliest surviving example of these chairs was made by BEC Mobility and sold by Christie's in November 2018 for £296,750. Hawking continued to use this type of chair until the early 1990s, at which time his ability to use his hands to drive a wheelchair deteriorated. Hawking used a variety of different chairs from that time, including a DragonMobility Dragon elevating powerchair from 2007, as shown in the April 2008 photo of Hawking attending NASA's 50th anniversary; a Permobil C350 from 2014; and then a Permobil F3 from 2016. Hawking's speech deteriorated, and by the late 1970s he could be understood by only his family and closest friends. To communicate with others, someone who knew him well would interpret his speech into intelligible speech. Spurred by a dispute with the university over who would pay for the ramp needed for him to enter his workplace, Hawking and his wife campaigned for improved access and support for those with disabilities in Cambridge, including adapted student housing at the university. In general, Hawking had ambivalent feelings about his role as a disability rights champion: while wanting to help others, he also sought to detach himself from his illness and its challenges. His lack of engagement in this area led to some criticism. During a visit to CERN on the border of France and Switzerland in mid-1985, Hawking contracted pneumonia, which in his condition was life-threatening; he was so ill that Jane was asked if life support should be terminated. She refused, but the consequence was a tracheotomy, which required round-the-clock nursing care and caused the loss of what remained of his speech. The National Health Service was ready to pay for a nursing home, but Jane was determined that he would live at home. The cost of the care was funded by an American foundation. Nurses were hired for the three shifts required to provide the round-the-clock support he required. One of those employed was Elaine Mason, who was to become Hawking's second wife. For his communication, Hawking initially raised his eyebrows to choose letters on a spelling card, but in 1986 he received a computer program called the "Equalizer" from Walter Woltosz, CEO of Words Plus, who had developed an earlier version of the software to help his mother-in-law, who also had ALS and had lost her ability to speak and write. In a method he used for the rest of his life, Hawking could now simply press a switch to select phrases, words or letters from a bank of about 2,500–3,000 that were scanned. The program was originally run on a desktop computer. Elaine Mason's husband, David, a computer engineer, adapted a small computer and attached it to his wheelchair. Released from the need to use somebody to interpret his speech, Hawking commented that "I can communicate better now than before I lost my voice." The voice he used had an American accent and is no longer produced. Despite the later availability of other voices, Hawking retained this original voice, saying that he preferred it and identified with it. Originally, Hawking activated a switch using his hand and could produce up to 15 words per minute. Lectures were prepared in advance and were sent to the speech synthesiser in short sections to be delivered. Hawking gradually lost the use of his hand, and in 2005 he began to control his communication device with movements of his cheek muscles, with a rate of about one word per minute. With this decline there was a risk of him developing locked-in syndrome, so Hawking collaborated with Intel Corporation researchers on systems that could translate his brain patterns or facial expressions into switch activations. After several prototypes that did not perform as planned, they settled on an adaptive word predictor made by the London-based startup SwiftKey, which used a system similar to his original technology. Hawking had an easier time adapting to the new system, which was further developed after inputting large amounts of Hawking's papers and other written materials and uses predictive software similar to other smartphone keyboards. By 2009, he could no longer drive his wheelchair independently, but the same people who created his new typing mechanics were working on a method to drive his chair using movements made by his chin. This proved difficult, since Hawking could not move his neck, and trials showed that while he could indeed drive the chair, the movement was sporadic and jumpy. Near the end of his life, Hawking experienced increased breathing difficulties, often resulting in his requiring the usage of a ventilator, and being regularly hospitalised. Starting in the 1990s, Hawking accepted the mantle of role model for disabled people, lecturing and participating in fundraising activities. At the turn of the century, he and eleven other humanitarians signed the Charter for the Third Millennium on Disability, which called on governments to prevent disability and protect the rights of disabled people. In 1999, Hawking was awarded the Julius Edgar Lilienfeld Prize of the American Physical Society. In August 2012, Hawking narrated the "Enlightenment" segment of the 2012 Summer Paralympics opening ceremony in London. In 2013, the biographical documentary film Hawking, in which Hawking himself is featured, was released. In September 2013, he expressed support for the legalisation of assisted suicide for the terminally ill. In August 2014, Hawking accepted the Ice Bucket Challenge to promote ALS/MND awareness and raise contributions for research. As he had pneumonia in 2013, he was advised not to have ice poured over him, but his children volunteered to accept the challenge on his behalf. In late 2006, Hawking revealed in a BBC interview that one of his greatest unfulfilled desires was to travel to space; on hearing this, Richard Branson offered a free flight into space with Virgin Galactic, which Hawking immediately accepted. Besides personal ambition, he was motivated by the desire to increase public interest in spaceflight and to show the potential of people with disabilities. On 26 April 2007, Hawking flew aboard a specially-modified Boeing 727–200 jet operated by Zero-G Corp off the coast of Florida to experience weightlessness. Fears that the manoeuvres would cause him undue discomfort proved incorrect, and the flight was extended to eight parabolic arcs. It was described as a successful test to see if he could withstand the g-forces involved in space flight. At the time, the date of Hawking's trip to space was projected to be as early as 2009, but commercial flights to space did not commence before his death. Hawking died at his home in Cambridge on 14 March 2018, at the age of 76. His family stated that he "died peacefully". He was eulogised by figures in science, entertainment, politics, and other areas. The Gonville and Caius College flag flew at half-mast and a book of condolences was signed by students and visitors. A tribute was made to Hawking in the closing speech by IPC President Andrew Parsons at the closing ceremony of the 2018 Paralympic Winter Games in Pyeongchang, South Korea. His private funeral took place on 31 March 2018, at Great St Mary's Church, Cambridge. Guests at the funeral included The Theory of Everything actors Eddie Redmayne and Felicity Jones, Queen guitarist and astrophysicist Brian May, and model Lily Cole. In addition, actor Benedict Cumberbatch, who played Stephen Hawking in Hawking, astronaut Tim Peake, Astronomer Royal Martin Rees and physicist Kip Thorne provided readings at the service. Although Hawking was an atheist, the funeral took place with a traditional Anglican service. Following the cremation, a service of thanksgiving was held at Westminster Abbey on 15 June 2018, after which his ashes were interred in the Abbey's nave, between the graves of Sir Isaac Newton and Charles Darwin. Inscribed on his memorial stone are the words "Here lies what was mortal of Stephen Hawking 1942–2018" and his most famed equation. He directed, at least fifteen years before his death, that the Bekenstein–Hawking entropy equation be his epitaph. In June 2018, it was announced that Hawking's words, set to music by Greek composer Vangelis, would be beamed into space from a European space agency satellite dish in Spain with the aim of reaching the nearest black hole, 1A 0620-00. Hawking's final broadcast interview, about the detection of gravitational waves resulting from the collision of two neutron stars, occurred in October 2017. His final words to the world appeared posthumously, in April 2018, in the form of a Smithsonian TV Channel documentary entitled, Leaving Earth: Or How to Colonize a Planet. One of his final research studies, entitled A smooth exit from eternal inflation?, about the origin of the universe, was published in the Journal of High Energy Physics in May 2018. Later, in October 2018, another of his final research studies, entitled Black Hole Entropy and Soft Hair, was published, and dealt with the "mystery of what happens to the information held by objects once they disappear into a black hole". Also in October 2018, Hawking's last book, Brief Answers to the Big Questions, a popular science book presenting his final comments on the most important questions facing humankind, was published. On 8 November 2018, an auction of 22 personal possessions of Stephen Hawking, including his doctoral thesis ("Properties of Expanding Universes", PhD thesis, Cambridge University, 1965) and wheelchair, took place, and fetched about £1.8 m. Proceeds from the auction sale of the wheelchair went to two charities, the Motor Neurone Disease Association and the Stephen Hawking Foundation; proceeds from Hawking's other items went to his estate. In March 2019, it was announced that the Royal Mint would issue a commemorative 50p coin, only available as a commemorative edition, in honour of Hawking. The same month, Hawking's nurse, Patricia Dowdy, was struck off the nursing register for "failures over his care and financial misconduct." In May 2021 it was announced that an Acceptance-in-Lieu agreement between HMRC, the Department for Culture, Media and Sport, Cambridge University Library, Science Museum Group, and the Hawking Estate, would see around 10,000 pages of Hawking's scientific and other papers remain in Cambridge, while objects including his wheelchairs, speech synthesisers, and personal memorabilia from his former Cambridge office would be housed at the Science Museum. In February 2022 the "Stephen Hawking at Work" display opened at the Science Museum, London as the start of a two-year nationwide tour. At Google's Zeitgeist Conference in 2011, Stephen Hawking said that "philosophy is dead". He believed that philosophers "have not kept up with modern developments in science", "have not taken science sufficiently seriously and so Philosophy is no longer relevant to knowledge claims", "their art is dead" and that scientists "have become the bearers of the torch of discovery in our quest for knowledge". He said that philosophical problems can be answered by science, particularly new scientific theories which "lead us to a new and very different picture of the universe and our place in it". His view was both praised and criticized. In 2006, Hawking posed an open question on the Internet: "In a world that is in chaos politically, socially and environmentally, how can the human race sustain another 100 years?", later clarifying: "I don't know the answer. That is why I asked the question, to get people to think about it, and to be aware of the dangers we now face." Hawking expressed concern that life on Earth is at risk from a sudden nuclear war, a genetically engineered virus, global warming, or other dangers humans have not yet thought of. Hawking stated: "I regard it as almost inevitable that either a nuclear confrontation or environmental catastrophe will cripple the Earth at some point in the next 1,000 years", and considered an "asteroid collision" to be the biggest threat to the planet. Such a planet-wide disaster need not result in human extinction if the human race were to be able to colonise additional planets before the disaster. Hawking viewed spaceflight and the colonisation of space as necessary for the future of humanity. Hawking stated that, given the vastness of the universe, aliens likely exist, but that contact with them should be avoided. He warned that aliens might pillage Earth for resources. In 2010 he said, "If aliens visit us, the outcome would be much as when Columbus landed in America, which didn't turn out well for the Native Americans." Hawking warned that superintelligent artificial intelligence could be pivotal in steering humanity's fate, stating that "the potential benefits are huge... Success in creating AI would be the biggest event in human history. It might also be the last, unless we learn how to avoid the risks." He feared that "an extremely intelligent future AI will probably develop a drive to survive and acquire more resources as a step toward accomplishing whatever goal it has", and that "The real risk with AI isn't malice but competence. A super-intelligent AI will be extremely good at accomplishing its goals, and if those goals aren't aligned with ours, we're in trouble". He also considered that the enormous wealth generated by machines needs to be redistributed to prevent exacerbated economic inequality. Hawking was concerned about the future emergence of a race of "superhumans" that would be able to design their own evolution and, as well, argued that computer viruses in today's world should be considered a new form of life, stating that "maybe it says something about human nature, that the only form of life we have created so far is purely destructive. Talk about creating life in our own image." Hawking was an atheist. In an interview published in The Guardian, Hawking regarded "the brain as a computer which will stop working when its components fail", and the concept of an afterlife as a "fairy story for people afraid of the dark". In 2011, narrating the first episode of the American television series Curiosity on the Discovery Channel, Hawking declared: We are each free to believe what we want and it is my view that the simplest explanation is there is no God. No one created the universe and no one directs our fate. This leads me to a profound realisation. There is probably no heaven, and no afterlife either. We have this one life to appreciate the grand design of the universe, and for that, I am extremely grateful. Hawking's association with atheism and freethinking was in evidence from his university years onwards, when he had been a member of Oxford University's humanist group. He was later scheduled to appear as the keynote speaker at a 2017 Humanists UK conference. In an interview with El Mundo, he said: Before we understand science, it is natural to believe that God created the universe. But now science offers a more convincing explanation. What I meant by 'we would know the mind of God' is, we would know everything that God would know, if there were a God, which there isn't. I'm an atheist. In addition, Hawking stated: If you like, you can call the laws of science 'God', but it wouldn't be a personal God that you would meet and put questions to. Hawking was a longstanding Labour Party supporter. He recorded a tribute for the 2000 Democratic presidential candidate Al Gore, called the 2003 invasion of Iraq a "war crime", campaigned for nuclear disarmament, and supported stem cell research, universal health care, and action to prevent climate change. In August 2014, Hawking was one of 200 public figures who were signatories to a letter to The Guardian expressing their hope that Scotland would vote to remain part of the United Kingdom in September's referendum on that issue. Hawking believed a United Kingdom withdrawal from the European Union (Brexit) would damage the UK's contribution to science as modern research needs international collaboration, and that free movement of people in Europe encourages the spread of ideas. Hawking said to Theresa May, "I deal with tough mathematical questions every day, but please don't ask me to help with Brexit." Hawking was disappointed by Brexit and warned against envy and isolationism. Hawking was greatly concerned over health care, and maintained that without the UK National Health Service, he could not have survived into his 70s. Hawking especially feared privatisation. He stated, "The more profit is extracted from the system, the more private monopolies grow and the more expensive healthcare becomes. The NHS must be preserved from commercial interests and protected from those who want to privatise it." Hawking blamed the Conservatives for cutting funding to the NHS, weakening it by privatisation, lowering staff morale through holding pay back and reducing social care. Hawking accused Jeremy Hunt of cherry picking evidence which Hawking maintained debased science. Hawking also stated, "There is overwhelming evidence that NHS funding and the numbers of doctors and nurses are inadequate, and it is getting worse." In June 2017, Hawking endorsed the Labour Party in the 2017 UK general election, citing the Conservatives' proposed cuts to the NHS. But he was also critical of Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn, expressing scepticism over whether the party could win a general election under him. Hawking feared Donald Trump's policies on global warming could endanger the planet and make global warming irreversible. He said, "Climate change is one of the great dangers we face, and it's one we can prevent if we act now. By denying the evidence for climate change, and pulling out of the Paris Agreement, Donald Trump will cause avoidable environmental damage to our beautiful planet, endangering the natural world, for us and our children." Hawking further stated that this could lead Earth "to become like Venus, with a temperature of two hundred and fifty degrees, and raining sulphuric acid". Hawking was also a supporter of a universal basic income. He was critical of the Israeli government's position on the Israeli–Palestinian conflict, stating that their policy "is likely to lead to disaster." In 1988, Hawking, Arthur C. Clarke and Carl Sagan were interviewed in God, the Universe and Everything Else. They discussed the Big Bang theory, God and the possibility of extraterrestrial life. At the release party for the home video version of the A Brief History of Time, Leonard Nimoy, who had played Spock on Star Trek, learned that Hawking was interested in appearing on the show. Nimoy made the necessary contact, and Hawking played a holographic simulation of himself in an episode of Star Trek: The Next Generation in 1993. The same year, his synthesiser voice was recorded for the Pink Floyd song "Keep Talking", and in 1999 for an appearance on The Simpsons. Hawking appeared in documentaries titled The Real Stephen Hawking (2001), Stephen Hawking: Profile (2002) and Hawking (2013), and the documentary series Stephen Hawking, Master of the Universe (2008). Hawking also guest-starred in Futurama and had a recurring role in The Big Bang Theory. Hawking allowed the use of his copyrighted voice in the biographical 2014 film The Theory of Everything, in which he was portrayed by Eddie Redmayne in an Academy Award-winning role. Hawking was featured at the Monty Python Live (Mostly) show in 2014. He was shown to sing an extended version of the "Galaxy Song", after running down Brian Cox with his wheelchair, in a pre-recorded video. Hawking used his fame to advertise products, including a wheelchair, National Savings, British Telecom, Specsavers, Egg Banking, and Go Compare. In 2015, he applied to trademark his name. Broadcast in March 2018 just a week or two before his death, Hawking was the voice of The Book Mark II on The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy radio series, and he was the guest of Neil deGrasse Tyson on StarTalk. The 2021 animated sitcom The Freak Brothers features a recurring character, Mayor Pimco, who is apparently modeled after Stephen Hawking. On 8 January 2022, Google featured Hawking in a Google Doodle on the occasion of his 80th birthday. Hawking received numerous awards and honours. Already early in the list, in 1974 he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society (FRS). At that time, his nomination read: Hawking has made major contributions to the field of general relativity. These derive from a deep understanding of what is relevant to physics and astronomy, and especially from a mastery of wholly new mathematical techniques. Following the pioneering work of Penrose he established, partly alone and partly in collaboration with Penrose, a series of successively stronger theorems establishing the fundamental result that all realistic cosmological models must possess singularities. Using similar techniques, Hawking has proved the basic theorems on the laws governing black holes: that stationary solutions of Einstein's equations with smooth event horizons must necessarily be axisymmetric; and that in the evolution and interaction of black holes, the total surface area of the event horizons must increase. In collaboration with G. Ellis, Hawking is the author of an impressive and original treatise on "Space-time in the Large". The citation continues, "Other important work by Hawking relates to the interpretation of cosmological observations and to the design of gravitational wave detectors." Hawking was also a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences (1984), the American Philosophical Society (1984), and the United States National Academy of Sciences (1992). Hawking received the 2015 BBVA Foundation Frontiers of Knowledge Award in Basic Sciences shared with Viatcheslav Mukhanov for discovering that the galaxies were formed from quantum fluctuations in the early Universe. At the 2016 Pride of Britain Awards, Hawking received the lifetime achievement award "for his contribution to science and British culture". After receiving the award from Prime Minister Theresa May, Hawking humorously requested that she not seek his help with Brexit. In 2017, the Cambridge Union Society, in conjunction with Hawking, established the Professor Stephen Hawking Fellowship. The fellowship is awarded annually to an individual who has made an exceptional contribution to the STEM fields and social discourse, with a particular focus on impacts affecting the younger generations. Each fellow delivers a lecture on a topic of their choosing, known as the ‘Hawking Lecture’. Hawking himself accepted the inaugural fellowship, and he delivered the first Hawking Lecture in his last public appearance before his passing. Hawking was a member of the advisory board of the Starmus Festival, and had a major role in acknowledging and promoting science communication. The Stephen Hawking Medal for Science Communication is an annual award initiated in 2016 to honour members of the arts community for contributions that help build awareness of science. Recipients receive a medal bearing a portrait of Hawking by Alexei Leonov, and the other side represents an image of Leonov himself performing the first spacewalk along with an image of the "Red Special", the guitar of Queen musician and astrophysicist Brian May (with music being another major component of the Starmus Festival). The Starmus III Festival in 2016 was a tribute to Stephen Hawking and the book of all Starmus III lectures, "Beyond the Horizon", was also dedicated to him. The first recipients of the medals, which were awarded at the festival, were chosen by Hawking himself. They were composer Hans Zimmer, physicist Jim Al-Khalili, and the science documentary Particle Fever. A Brief History of Time (1988) Black Holes and Baby Universes and Other Essays (1993) The Universe in a Nutshell (2001) On the Shoulders of Giants (2002) God Created the Integers: The Mathematical Breakthroughs That Changed History (2005) The Dreams That Stuff Is Made of: The Most Astounding Papers of Quantum Physics and How They Shook the Scientific World (2011) My Brief History (2013) Hawking's memoir. Brief Answers to the Big Questions (2018) The Nature of Space and Time (with Roger Penrose) (1996) The Large, the Small and the Human Mind (with Roger Penrose, Abner Shimony and Nancy Cartwright) (1997) The Future of Spacetime (with Kip Thorne, Igor Novikov, Timothy Ferris and introduction by Alan Lightman, Richard H. Price) (2002) A Briefer History of Time (with Leonard Mlodinow) (2005) The Grand Design (with Leonard Mlodinow) (2010) Black Holes & Time Warps: Einstein's Outrageous Legacy (Kip Thorne, and introduction by Frederick Seitz) (1994) The Physics of Star Trek (Lawrence Krauss) (1995) Co-written with his daughter Lucy. George's Secret Key to the Universe (2007) George's Cosmic Treasure Hunt (2009) George and the Big Bang (2011) George and the Unbreakable Code (2014) George and the Blue Moon (2016) A Brief History of Time (1992) Stephen Hawking's Universe (1997) Hawking – BBC television film (2004) starring Benedict Cumberbatch Horizon: The Hawking Paradox (2005) Masters of Science Fiction (2007) Stephen Hawking and the Theory of Everything (2007) Stephen Hawking: Master of the Universe (2008) Into the Universe with Stephen Hawking (2010) Brave New World with Stephen Hawking (2011) Stephen Hawking's Grand Design (2012) The Big Bang Theory (2012, 2014–2015, 2017) Stephen Hawking: A Brief History of Mine (2013) The Theory of Everything – Feature film (2014) starring Eddie Redmayne Genius by Stephen Hawking (2016) S. W. Hawking; R. Penrose (27 January 1970). "The Singularities of Gravitational Collapse and Cosmology". Proceedings of the Royal Society A. 314 (1519): 529–548. Bibcode:1970RSPSA.314..529H. doi:10.1098/RSPA.1970.0021. ISSN 1364-5021. S2CID 120208756. Zbl 0954.83012. Wikidata Q55872061. S. W. Hawking (May 1971). "Gravitational Radiation from Colliding Black Holes". Physical Review Letters. 26 (21): 1344–1346. Bibcode:1971PhRvL..26.1344H. doi:10.1103/PHYSREVLETT.26.1344. ISSN 0031-9007. Wikidata Q21706376. Stephen Hawking (June 1972). "Black holes in general relativity". Communications in Mathematical Physics. 25 (2): 152–166. Bibcode:1972CMaPh..25..152H. doi:10.1007/BF01877517. ISSN 0010-3616. S2CID 121527613. Wikidata Q56453197. Stephen Hawking (March 1974). "Black hole explosions?". Nature. 248 (5443): 30–31. Bibcode:1974Natur.248...30H. doi:10.1038/248030A0. ISSN 1476-4687. S2CID 4290107. Zbl 1370.83053. Wikidata Q54017915. Stephen Hawking (September 1982). "The development of irregularities in a single bubble inflationary universe". Physics Letters B. 115 (4): 295–297. Bibcode:1982PhLB..115..295H. doi:10.1016/0370-2693(82)90373-2. ISSN 0370-2693. Wikidata Q29398982. J. B. Hartle; S. W. Hawking (December 1983). "Wave function of the Universe". Physical Review D. 28 (12): 2960–2975. Bibcode:1983PhRvD..28.2960H. doi:10.1103/PHYSREVD.28.2960. ISSN 1550-7998. Zbl 1370.83118. Wikidata Q21707690. Stephen Hawking; C J Hunter (1 October 1996). "The gravitational Hamiltonian in the presence of non-orthogonal boundaries". Classical and Quantum Gravity. 13 (10): 2735–2752. arXiv:gr-qc/9603050. Bibcode:1996CQGra..13.2735H. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.339.8756. doi:10.1088/0264-9381/13/10/012. ISSN 0264-9381. S2CID 10715740. Zbl 0859.58038. Wikidata Q56551504. S. W. Hawking (October 2005). "Information loss in black holes". Physical Review D. 72 (8). arXiv:hep-th/0507171. Bibcode:2005PhRvD..72h4013H. doi:10.1103/PHYSREVD.72.084013. ISSN 1550-7998. S2CID 118893360. Wikidata Q21651473. Stephen Hawking; Thomas Hertog (April 2018). "A smooth exit from eternal inflation?". Journal of High Energy Physics. 2018 (4). arXiv:1707.07702. Bibcode:2018JHEP...04..147H. doi:10.1007/JHEP04(2018)147. ISSN 1126-6708. S2CID 13745992. Zbl 1390.83455. Wikidata Q55878494. By considering the effect of a black hole's event horizon on virtual particle production, Hawking found in 1974, much to his surprise, that black holes emit black-body radiation associated with a temperature that can be expressed (in the nonspinning case) as: T=ℏc38πGMk,{\displaystyle T={\frac {\hbar c^{3}}{8\pi GMk}},} where T{\displaystyle T} is black hole temperature, ℏ{\displaystyle \hbar } is the reduced Planck constant, c{\displaystyle c} is the speed of light, G{\displaystyle G} is the Newtonian constant of gravitation, M{\displaystyle M} is the mass of the black hole, and k{\displaystyle k} is the Boltzmann constant. This relationship between concepts from the disparate fields of general relativity, quantum mechanics and thermodynamics implies the existence of deep connections between them and may presage their unification. It is inscribed on Hawking's memorial stone. The equation's most fundamental implication can be obtained as follows. According to thermodynamics, this temperature is associated with an entropy, S{\displaystyle S}, such that T=Mc2/2S,{\displaystyle T=Mc^{2}/2S,} where Mc2{\displaystyle Mc^{2}} is the energy of a (nonspinning) black hole as expressed with Einstein's formula. Combining equations then gives: S=4πGM2kℏc.{\displaystyle S={\frac {4\pi GM^{2}k}{\hbar c}}.} Now, the radius of a nonspinning black hole is given by r=2GMc2,{\displaystyle r={\frac {2GM}{c^{2}}},} and since its surface area is just A=4πr2,{\displaystyle A=4\pi r^{2},} S{\displaystyle S} can be expressed in terms of surface area as: SBH=kc34ℏGA,{\displaystyle S_{\text{BH}}={\frac {kc^{3}}{4\hbar G}}A,} where the subscript BH stands for either "black hole" or "Bekenstein–Hawking". This can be expressed more simply as a proportionality between two dimensionless ratios: SBHk=14AlP2,{\displaystyle {\frac {S_{\text{BH}}}{k}}={\frac {1}{4}}{\frac {A}{l_{\text{P}}^{2}}},} where lP=ℏG/c3{\displaystyle l_{\text{P}}={\sqrt {\hbar G/c^{3}}}} is the Planck length. Jacob Bekenstein had conjectured the proportionality; Hawking confirmed it and established the constant of proportionality at 1/4{\displaystyle 1/4}. Calculations based on string theory, first carried out in 1995, have been found to yield the same result. This relationship is conjectured to be valid not just for black holes, but also (since entropy is proportional to information) as an upper bound on the amount of information that can be contained in any volume of space, which has in turn spawned deeper reflections on the possible nature of reality. List of things named after Stephen Hawking On the Origin of Time, a book of Thomas Hertog Stephen Hawking at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Ferguson 2011, p. 29. Allen, Bruce (1983). Vacuum energy and general relativity (PhD thesis). University of Cambridge. Archived from the original on 25 January 2016. Retrieved 5 February 2014. Bousso, Raphael (1997). Pair creation of black holes in cosmology (PhD thesis). University of Cambridge. Archived from the original on 25 January 2016. Retrieved 5 February 2014. Carr, Bernard John (1976). Primordial black holes (PhD thesis). University of Cambridge. Archived from the original on 25 January 2016. Retrieved 5 February 2014. Bernard Carr; George F. R. Ellis; Gary Gibbons; James Hartle; Thomas Hertog; Roger Penrose; Malcolm Perry; Kip S. Thorne (July 2019). "Stephen William Hawking CH CBE. 8 January 1942—14 March 2018". Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the Royal Society. 66: 267–308. arXiv:2002.03185. doi:10.1098/RSBM.2019.0001. ISSN 0080-4606. S2CID 131986323. Wikidata Q63347107. Dowker, Helen Fay (1991). Space-time wormholes (PhD thesis). University of Cambridge. Archived from the original on 25 January 2016. Retrieved 5 February 2014. Galfard, Christophe Georges Gunnar Sven (2006). Black hole information & branes (PhD thesis). University of Cambridge. Archived from the original on 25 January 2016. Retrieved 5 February 2014. Gibbons, Gary William (1973). Some aspects of gravitational radiation and gravitational collapse (PhD thesis). University of Cambridge. Archived from the original on 25 January 2016. Retrieved 5 February 2014. Hertog, Thomas (2002). The origin of inflation (PhD thesis). University of Cambridge. Archived from the original on 25 January 2016. Retrieved 5 February 2014. Laflamme, Raymond (1988). Time and quantum cosmology (PhD thesis). University of Cambridge. Archived from the original on 25 January 2016. Retrieved 5 February 2014. Page, Don Nelson (1976). Accretion into and emission from black holes (PhD thesis). California Institute of Technology. Archived from the original on 21 February 2014. Retrieved 6 February 2014. Perry, Malcolm John (1978). Black holes and quantum mechanics (PhD thesis). University of Cambridge. Archived from the original on 25 January 2016. Retrieved 6 February 2014. Taylor-Robinson, Marika Maxine (1998). Problems in M theory. lib.cam.ac.uk (PhD thesis). University of Cambridge. OCLC 894603647. EThOS uk.bl.ethos.625075. Archived from the original on 1 May 2018. Retrieved 1 May 2018. Wu, Zhongchao (1984). Cosmological models and the inflationary universe (PhD thesis). University of Cambridge. Archived from the original on 25 January 2016. Retrieved 7 February 2014. Shirbon, Estelle (20 March 2018). "Stephen Hawking to Join Newton, Darwin in Final Resting Place". London: Reuters. Archived from the original on 21 March 2018. Retrieved 21 March 2018. "Centre for Theoretical Cosmology: Outreach Stephen Hawking". University of Cambridge. Archived from the original on 30 August 2015. Retrieved 23 June 2013. "About Stephen". Stephen Hawking Official Website. Archived from the original on 30 August 2015. Retrieved 23 June 2013. "Michael Green to become Lucasian Professor of Mathematics". The Daily Telegraph. Retrieved 11 December 2012. "Mind over matter: How Stephen Hawking defied Motor Neurone Disease for 50 years". The Independent. 26 November 2015. Archived from the original on 23 August 2017. Retrieved 15 September 2017. "How Has Stephen Hawking Lived to 70 with ALS?". Scientific American. 7 January 2012. Archived from the original on 30 August 2015. Retrieved 23 December 2014. Q: How frequent are these cases of very slow-progressing forms of ALS? A: I would say probably less than a few percent. Stephen Hawking: An inspirational story of willpower and strength. Swagatham Canada https://www.swagathamcanada.com/inspirational/stephen-hawking-an-inspirational-story-of-willpower-and-strength/ Archived 6 November 2021 at the Wayback Machine 26 October 2021 Gardner, Martin (September/October 2001). "Multiverses and Blackberries" Archived 28 July 2016 at the Wayback Machine. "Notes of a Fringe-Watcher". Skeptical Inquirer. Volume 25, No. 5. Price, Michael Clive (February 1995). "THE EVERETT FAQ" Archived 20 April 2016 at the Wayback Machine. Department of Physics, Washington University in St. Louis. Retrieved 17 December 2014. "UPI Almanac for Monday, 8 Jan 2018". United Press International. 8 January 2018. Archived from the original on 8 January 2018. Retrieved 21 September 2019. …British physicist and author Stephen Hawking 1942 (age 76) Anon (2015). "Hawking, Prof. Stephen William". Who's Who (online Oxford University Press ed.). A & C Black. doi:10.1093/ww/9780199540884.013.19510. (Subscription or UK public library membership required.) Larsen 2005, pp. xiii, 2. Ferguson 2011, p. 21. "Mind over matter Stephen Hawking". The Herald. Glasgow. Archived from the original on 30 May 2016. Retrieved 14 March 2018. Ferguson, Kitty (6 January 2012). "Stephen Hawking, "Equal to Anything!" [Excerpt]". Scientific American. Archived from the original on 22 March 2018. Retrieved 21 March 2018. White & Gribbin 2002, p. 6. Larsen 2005, pp. 2, 5. Ferguson 2011, p. 22. Larsen 2005, p. xiii. White & Gribbin 2002, p. 12. Ferguson 2011, pp. 22–23. White & Gribbin 2002, pp. 11–12. White & Gribbin 2002, p. 13. Larsen 2005, p. 3. Hawking, Stephen (7 December 2013). "Stephen Hawking: "I'm happy if I have added something to our understanding of the universe"". Radio Times. Archived from the original on 7 January 2017. Retrieved 6 January 2017. Ferguson 2011, p. 24. White & Gribbin 2002, p. 8. Hawking, Stephen (2013). My Brief History. Bantam. ISBN 978-0-345-53528-3. Retrieved 9 September 2013. White & Gribbin 2002, pp. 7–8. Larsen 2005, p. 4. Ferguson 2011, pp. 25–26. White & Gribbin 2002, pp. 14–16. Ferguson 2011, p. 26. White & Gribbin 2002, pp. 19–20. Ferguson 2011, p. 25. White & Gribbin 2002, pp. 17–18. Ferguson 2011, p. 27. Hoare, Geoffrey; Love, Eric (5 January 2007). "Dick Tahta". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 8 January 2014. Retrieved 5 March 2012. White & Gribbin 2002, p. 41. Ferguson 2011, pp. 27–28. White & Gribbin 2002, pp. 42–43. Ferguson 2011, p. 28. Ferguson 2011, pp. 28–29. White & Gribbin 2002, pp. 46–47, 51. Ferguson 2011, pp. 30–31. Hawking 1992, p. 44. White & Gribbin 2002, p. 50. White & Gribbin 2002, p. 53. Ferguson 2011, p. 31. White & Gribbin 2002, p. 54. White & Gribbin 2002, pp. 54–55. White & Gribbin 2002, p. 56. Ferguson 2011, pp. 31–32. Ferguson 2011, p. 33. White & Gribbin 2002, p. 58. Ferguson 2011, pp. 33–34. White & Gribbin 2002, pp. 61–63. Ferguson 2011, p. 36. White & Gribbin 2002, pp. 69–70. Ferguson 2011, p. 42. White & Gribbin 2002, pp. 68–69. Ferguson 2011, p. 34. "Stephen Hawking's PhD thesis, explained simply". 30 October 2017. Archived from the original on 13 December 2017. Retrieved 27 November 2017. White & Gribbin 2002, pp. 71–72. Stephen Hawking (1966), Properties of expanding universes, doi:10.17863/CAM.11283, OCLC 62793673, Wikidata Q42307084 Ferguson 2011, pp. 43–44. Ferguson 2011, p. 47. Larsen 2005, p. xix. White & Gribbin 2002, p. 101. Ferguson 2011, pp. 61, 64. Ferguson 2011, pp. 64–65. White & Gribbin 2002, pp. 115–16. S. W. Hawking; R. Penrose (27 January 1970). "The Singularities of Gravitational Collapse and Cosmology". Proceedings of the Royal Society A. 314 (1519): 529–548. Bibcode:1970RSPSA.314..529H. doi:10.1098/RSPA.1970.0021. ISSN 1364-5021. S2CID 120208756. Zbl 0954.83012. Wikidata Q55872061. Ferguson 2011, p. 49. Ferguson 2011, pp. 65–67. Larsen 2005, p. 38. Ferguson 2011, pp. 67–68. White & Gribbin 2002, pp. 123–24. Larsen 2005, p. 33. R.D. Blandford (30 March 1989). "Astrophysical Black Holes". In Hawking, S.W.; Israel, W. (eds.). Three Hundred Years of Gravitation. Cambridge University Press. p. 278. ISBN 978-0-521-37976-2. Larsen 2005, p. 35. Ferguson 2011, p. 68. Larsen 2005, p. 39. White & Gribbin 2002, p. 146. Ferguson 2011, p. 70. Larsen 2005, p. 41. Stephen Hawking (March 1974). "Black hole explosions?". Nature. 248 (5443): 30–31. Bibcode:1974Natur.248...30H. doi:10.1038/248030A0. ISSN 1476-4687. S2CID 4290107. Zbl 1370.83053. Wikidata Q54017915. Stephen Hawking (August 1975). "Particle creation by black holes". Communications in Mathematical Physics. 43 (3): 199–220. Bibcode:1975CMaPh..43..199H. doi:10.1007/BF02345020. ISSN 0010-3616. S2CID 55539246. Zbl 1378.83040. Wikidata Q55869076. Ferguson 2011, pp. 69–73. Ferguson 2011, pp. 70–74. Larsen 2005, pp. 42–43. White & Gribbin 2002, pp. 150–51. Larsen 2005, p. 44. White & Gribbin 2002, p. 133. Ferguson 2011, pp. 82, 86. Ferguson 2011, pp. 86–88. Ferguson 2011, pp. 150, 189, 219. Ferguson 2011, p. 95. Ferguson 2011, p. 90. White & Gribbin 2002, pp. 132–33. Ferguson 2011, p. 92. White & Gribbin 2002, p. 162. Larsen 2005, p. xv. Ferguson 2011, p. 91. Larsen 2005, p. xiv. "Stephen Hawking to retire as Cambridge's Professor of Mathematics". The Daily Telegraph. 23 October 2008. Archived from the original on 16 March 2018. Retrieved 15 March 2018. Ferguson 2011, pp. 93–94. Ferguson 2011, pp. 92–93. Ferguson 2011, p. 96. Ferguson 2011, pp. 96–101. Susskind, Leonard (7 July 2008). The Black Hole War: My Battle with Stephen Hawking to Make the World Safe for Quantum Mechanics. Hachette Digital, Inc. pp. 9, 18. ISBN 978-0-316-01640-7. Archived from the original on 18 January 2017. Retrieved 23 February 2016. Ferguson 2011, pp. 108–11. Ferguson 2011, pp. 111–14. See Guth (1997) for a popular description of the workshop, or The Very Early Universe, ISBN 0-521-31677-4 eds Gibbons, Hawking & Siklos for a detailed report. Stephen Hawking (September 1982). "The development of irregularities in a single bubble inflationary universe". Physics Letters B. 115 (4): 295–297. Bibcode:1982PhLB..115..295H. doi:10.1016/0370-2693(82)90373-2. ISSN 0370-2693. Wikidata Q29398982. Ferguson 2011, pp. 102–103. White & Gribbin 2002, p. 180. J. B. Hartle; S. W. Hawking (December 1983). "Wave function of the Universe". Physical Review D. 28 (12): 2960–2975. Bibcode:1983PhRvD..28.2960H. doi:10.1103/PHYSREVD.28.2960. ISSN 1550-7998. Zbl 1370.83118. Wikidata Q21707690. Baird 2007, p. 234. White & Gribbin 2002, pp. 180–83. Ferguson 2011, p. 129. Ferguson 2011, p. 130. Sample, Ian (15 May 2011). "Stephen Hawking: 'There is no heaven; it's a fairy story'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 20 September 2013. Retrieved 17 May 2011. Yulsman 2003, pp. 174–176. Ferguson 2011, pp. 180–182. Ferguson 2011, p. 182. White & Gribbin 2002, p. 274. Larsen 2005, pp. x–xix. Ferguson 2011, p. 114. "No. 48837". The London Gazette (Supplement). 30 December 1981. p. 8. Ferguson 2011, pp. 134–35. White & Gribbin 2002, pp. 205, 220–21. Ferguson 2011, p. 134. White & Gribbin 2002, pp. 220–27. Ferguson 2011, p. 135. Ferguson 2011, p. 175. Ferguson 2011, pp. 140–42. Ferguson 2011, p. 143. White & Gribbin 2002, pp. 243–45. Radford, Tim (31 July 2009). "How God propelled Stephen Hawking into the bestsellers lists". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 16 December 2013. Retrieved 5 March 2012. Ferguson 2011, pp. 143–44. Ferguson 2011, p. 146. Ferguson 2011, pp. 145–46. Ferguson 2011, p. 149. Ferguson 2011, pp. 147–48. White & Gribbin 2002, pp. 230–31. Larsen 2005, p. xvi. White & Gribbin 2002, p. 279. "No. 48837". The London Gazette (Supplement). 16 June 1989. p. 18. Peterkin, Tom (15 June 2008). "Stephen Hawking Warns Government over 'Disastrous' Science Funding Cuts". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 2 April 2018. Retrieved 2 April 2018. Guyoncourt, Sally (14 March 2018). "Why Professor Stephen Hawking Never Had a Knighthood". I News. Archived from the original on 16 June 2018. Retrieved 15 June 2018. Ferguson 2011, p. 180. Ferguson 2011, p. 188. Ferguson 2011, pp. 189–90. Ferguson 2011, p. 190. Hawking, S.W.; Thorne, K.S.; Preskill (6 February 1997). "Black hole information bet". Pasadena, California. Archived from the original on 11 May 2013. Retrieved 20 April 2013. S. W. Hawking (October 2005). "Information loss in black holes". Physical Review D. 72 (8). arXiv:hep-th/0507171. Bibcode:2005PhRvD..72h4013H. doi:10.1103/PHYSREVD.72.084013. ISSN 1550-7998. S2CID 118893360. Wikidata Q21651473. Preskill, John. "John Preskill's comments about Stephen Hawking's concession". Archived from the original on 26 February 2012. Retrieved 29 February 2012. Ferguson 2011, pp. 168–70. Ferguson 2011, p. 178. Ferguson 2011, p. 189. Larsen 2005, p. 97. Ferguson 2011, pp. 199–200. Ferguson 2011, pp. 222–23. Highfield, Roger (26 June 2008). "Stephen Hawking's explosive new theory". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 5 February 2015. Retrieved 9 April 2012. Highfield, Roger (3 January 2012). "Stephen Hawking: driven by a cosmic force of will". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 9 January 2015. Retrieved 7 December 2012. Stephen Hawking; Thomas Hertog (23 June 2006). "Populating the landscape: A top-down approach". Physical Review D. 73 (12). arXiv:hep-th/0602091. Bibcode:2006PhRvD..73l3527H. doi:10.1103/PHYSREVD.73.123527. ISSN 1550-7998. S2CID 9856127. Wikidata Q27442267. Ferguson 2011, p. 233. "Fonseca Prize 2008". University of Santiago de Compostela. Archived from the original on 5 June 2009. Retrieved 7 August 2009. Ferguson 2011, p. 239. Ferguson 2011, p. 269. Ferguson 2011, pp. 197, 269. Ferguson 2011, pp. 216–17. Ferguson 2011, pp. 217–20. Ferguson 2011, pp. 223–24. Kwong, Matt (28 January 2014). "Stephen Hawking's black holes 'blunder' stirs debate". CBC News. Archived from the original on 17 March 2018. Retrieved 14 March 2018. Ferguson 2011, pp. 95, 236. Ferguson 2011, pp. 94–95, 236. Wright, Robert (17 July 2012). "Why Some Physicists Bet Against the Higgs Boson". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on 7 April 2013. Retrieved 1 April 2013. "Stephen Hawking loses Higgs boson particle bet – Video". The Guardian. London. 5 July 2012. Archived from the original on 20 September 2013. Retrieved 1 April 2013. "Higgs boson breakthrough should earn physicist behind search Nobel Prize: Stephen Hawking". National Post. Agence France-Presse. 4 July 2012. Retrieved 1 April 2013. Amos, Jonathan (8 October 2013). "Higgs: Five decades of noble endeavour". BBC News. Archived from the original on 11 June 2016. Retrieved 10 May 2016. Ferguson 2011, pp. 230–231. "Books". Stephen Hawking Official Website. Archived from the original on 13 March 2012. Retrieved 28 February 2012. "100 great British heroes". BBC News. 21 August 2002. Archived from the original on 4 November 2010. Retrieved 10 May 2016. "Oldest, space-travelled, science prize awarded to Hawking". The Royal Society. 24 August 2006. Archived from the original on 22 January 2015. Retrieved 29 August 2008. MacAskill, Ewen (13 August 2009). "Obama presents presidential medal of freedom to 16 recipients". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 7 September 2013. Retrieved 5 March 2012. "2013 Fundamental Physics Prize Awarded to Alexander Polyakov". Fundamental Physics Prize. Archived from the original on 19 January 2015. Retrieved 11 December 2012. Komar, Oliver; Buechner, Linda (October 2000). "The Stephen W. Hawking Science Museum in San Salvador Central America Honours the Fortitude of a Great Living Scientist". Journal of College Science Teaching. XXX (2). Archived from the original on 30 July 2009. Retrieved 28 September 2008. "The Stephen Hawking Building". BBC News. 18 April 2007. Archived from the original on 23 March 2012. Retrieved 24 February 2012. "Grand Opening of the Stephen Hawking Centre at Perimeter Institute" (Press release). Perimeter Institute. Archived from the original on 29 December 2012. Retrieved 6 June 2012. Ferguson 2011, pp. 237–38. "Time to unveil Corpus Clock". Cambridgenetwork.co.uk. 22 September 2008. Archived from the original on 25 January 2016. Retrieved 10 September 2015. "Hawking gives up academic title". BBC News. 30 September 2009. Archived from the original on 3 October 2009. Retrieved 1 October 2009. Ferguson 2011, pp. 238–39. "Professor Stephen Hawking to stay at Cambridge University beyond 2012". The Daily Telegraph. London. 26 March 2010. Archived from the original on 9 January 2014. Retrieved 9 February 2013. Billings, Lee (2 September 2014). "Time Travel Simulation Resolves 'Grandfather Paradox'". Scientific American. Archived from the original on 4 September 2016. Retrieved 2 September 2016. Katz, Gregory (20 July 2015). "Searching for ET: Hawking to look for extraterrestrial life". Associated Press. Archived from the original on 22 July 2015. Retrieved 20 July 2015. "Tomorrow's World returns to BBC with startling warning from Stephen Hawking – we must leave Earth". The Telegraph. 2 May 2017. Archived from the original on 5 May 2017. Retrieved 5 May 2017. "Stephen Hawking will test his theory that humans must leave Earth. Let's hope he's wrong". USA Today. 4 May 2017. Archived from the original on 4 May 2017. Retrieved 5 May 2017. "Stephen Hawking says he has a way to escape from a black hole". New Scientist. Archived from the original on 8 January 2017. Retrieved 31 May 2017. "Stephen Hawking awarded Imperial College London's highest honour". Imperial College London. 17 July 2017. Archived from the original on 14 March 2018. Retrieved 19 July 2017. Stephen Hawking; Thomas Hertog (April 2018). "A smooth exit from eternal inflation?". Journal of High Energy Physics. 2018 (4). arXiv:1707.07702. Bibcode:2018JHEP...04..147H. doi:10.1007/JHEP04(2018)147. ISSN 1126-6708. S2CID 13745992. Zbl 1390.83455. Wikidata Q55878494. "Hawking's last paper co-authored with ERC grantee posits new cosmology". EurekAlert!. 2 May 2018. Archived from the original on 2 May 2018. Retrieved 3 May 2018. Ferguson 2011, pp. 37–40. Ferguson 2011, p. 40. Ferguson 2011, pp. 45–47. White & Gribbin 2002, pp. 92–98. Ferguson 2011, p. 65. Ferguson 2011, pp. 37–39, 77. Ferguson 2011, p. 78. Ferguson 2011, pp. 82–83. Hawking, Stephen (1994). Black Holes and Baby Universes and Other Essays. Random House. p. 20. ISBN 978-0-553-37411-7. Archived from the original on 18 January 2017. Retrieved 23 February 2016. Ferguson 2011, pp. 83–88. Ferguson 2011, pp. 89–90. Larsen 2005, pp. xiv, 79. Hawking 2007, pp. 279–80. Larsen 2005, p. 79. Hawking 2007, p. 285. Ferguson 2011, pp. 91–92. Ferguson 2011, pp. 164–65. Ferguson 2011, p. 185. Ferguson 2011, pp. 80–81. Adams, Tim (4 April 2004). "Brief History of a first wife". The Observer. London. Archived from the original on 29 December 2016. Retrieved 12 February 2013. Ferguson 2011, p. 145. Ferguson 2011, p. 165. Ferguson 2011, pp. 186–87. Ferguson 2011, p. 187. Ferguson 2011, pp. 187, 192. Ferguson 2011, p. 197. "Welcome back to the family, Stephen". The Times. 6 May 2007. Archived from the original on 3 December 2008. Retrieved 6 May 2007. Sapsted, David (20 October 2006). "Hawking and second wife agree to divorce". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 18 September 2008. Retrieved 18 March 2007. Ferguson 2011, p. 225. "Eddie Redmayne wins first Oscar for 'Theory of Everything'". Reuters. 10 May 2016. Archived from the original on 1 December 2017. Retrieved 7 March 2015. Ferguson 2011, p. 32. Donaldson, Gregg J. (May 1999). "The Man Behind the Scientist". Tapping Technology. Archived from the original on 11 May 2005. Retrieved 23 December 2012. White & Gribbin 2002, p. 59. Ferguson 2011, pp. 34–35. Larsen 2005, pp. 18–19. White & Gribbin 2002, pp. 59–61. Ferguson 2011, pp. 48–49. Ferguson 2011, pp. 76–77. White & Gribbin 2002, pp. 124–25. Ridpath, Ian (4 May 1978). "Black hole explorer". New Scientist. Archived from the original on 18 January 2017. Retrieved 9 January 2013. White & Gribbin 2002, p. 124. White & Gribbin 2002, p. viii. Ferguson 2011, p. 48. White & Gribbin 2002, p. 117. Ferguson 2011, p. 162. "A motorised wheelchair". November 2018. Retrieved 18 June 2019. "NASA Lecture Series – Dr. Stephen Hawking". 21 April 2008. Retrieved 18 June 2019. "Stephen Hawking's powerchair provider Permobil pays tribute to physics titan". 15 March 2018. Archived from the original on 18 June 2019. Retrieved 18 June 2019. Ferguson 2011, pp. 81–82. Mialet 2003, pp. 450–51. Ferguson 2011, pp. 79, 149. White & Gribbin 2002, pp. 273–74. White & Gribbin 2002, pp. 193–94. White & Gribbin 2002, p. 194. Ferguson 2011, pp. 135–36. White & Gribbin 2002, pp. 232–36. Ferguson 2011, pp. 136–37. White & Gribbin 2002, pp. 235–36. Ferguson 2011, p. 139. Ferguson 2011, p. 136. Medeiros, Joao (13 January 2015). "How Intel Gave Stephen Hawking a Voice". Wired. Archived from the original on 14 March 2018. Retrieved 14 March 2018. Ferguson 2011, pp. 137–38. White & Gribbin 2002, pp. 236–37. Ferguson 2011, p. 140. Ferguson 2011, pp. 140–41. Ferguson 2011, p. 138. Greenemeier, Larry (10 August 2009). "Getting Back the Gift of Gab: Next-Gen Handheld Computers Allow the Mute to Converse". Scientific American. Archived from the original on 12 May 2014. Retrieved 11 September 2012. "Stephen Hawking says pope told him not to study beginning of universe". USA Today. 15 June 2006. Archived from the original on 30 August 2015. Retrieved 12 December 2012. Ferguson 2011, p. 224. de Lange, Catherine (30 December 2011). "The man who saves Stephen Hawking's voice". New Scientist. Archived from the original on 30 August 2015. Retrieved 18 June 2012. Boyle, Alan (25 June 2012). "How researchers hacked into Stephen Hawking's brain". NBC News. Archived from the original on 30 August 2015. Retrieved 29 September 2012. "Start-up attempts to convert Prof Hawking's brainwaves into speech". BBC. 7 July 2012. Archived from the original on 3 November 2012. Retrieved 29 September 2012. Ferguson 2011, p. 240. Ferguson 2011, pp. 164, 178. "Call for global disability campaign". London: BBC. 8 September 1999. Archived from the original on 12 December 2012. Retrieved 12 February 2013. Ferguson 2011, p. 196. "Julius Edgar Lilienfeld Prize". American Physical Society. Archived from the original on 26 October 2011. Retrieved 29 August 2008. "Paralympics: Games opening promises 'journey of discovery'". BBC. 29 August 2012. Archived from the original on 29 August 2012. Retrieved 29 August 2012. DeWitt, David (13 September 2013). "The Brilliance of His Universe". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 12 May 2014. Retrieved 13 September 2013. Duffin, Claire (17 September 2013). "We don't let animals suffer, says Prof Stephen Hawking, as he backs assisted suicide". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 14 March 2018. Retrieved 14 March 2018. Culzac, Natasha (29 August 2014). "Stephen Hawking, MND sufferer, does ice bucket challenge with a twist". The Independent. Archived from the original on 29 August 2014. Retrieved 29 August 2014. "Hawking takes zero-gravity flight". BBC News. 27 April 2007. Archived from the original on 8 September 2012. Retrieved 17 June 2012. Overbye, Dennis (1 March 2007). "Stephen Hawking Plans Prelude to the Ride of His Life". The New York Times. New York. Archived from the original on 10 May 2013. Retrieved 9 February 2013. Ferguson 2011, pp. 232–33. Leonard, T.; Osborne, A. (27 April 2007). "Branson to help Hawking live space dream". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 16 March 2018. Retrieved 15 March 2018. Dean, James (14 March 2018). "Stephen Hawking felt freedom of weightlessness during KSC visit". USA Today. Archived from the original on 15 March 2018. Retrieved 15 March 2018. Martin Rees (1 March 2018). "Stephen Hawking (1942-2018)". Nature. 555 (7697): 444. Bibcode:2018Natur.555..444R. doi:10.1038/D41586-018-02839-9. ISSN 1476-4687. PMID 32034344. S2CID 4375879. Wikidata Q56551506. Overbye, Dennis (14 March 2018). "Stephen Hawking Dies at 76; His Mind Roamed the Cosmos". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 14 March 2018. Retrieved 14 March 2018. Penrose, Roger (14 March 2018). "'Mind over matter': Stephen Hawking". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 14 March 2018. Retrieved 14 March 2018. Allen, Karma (14 March 2018). "Stephen Hawking, author of 'A Brief History of Time,' dies at 76". ABC News. Archived from the original on 14 March 2018. Retrieved 14 March 2018. Barr, Robert. "Physicist Stephen Hawking dies after living with ALS for 50-plus years". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on 14 March 2018. Retrieved 14 March 2018. Overbye, Dennis (14 March 2018). "Stephen Hawking's Beautiful Mind". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 14 March 2018. Retrieved 15 March 2018. Mlodinow, Leonard (14 March 2018). "Stephen Hawking, Force of Nature". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 15 March 2018. Retrieved 14 March 2018. Brown, Benjamin. "'We lost a great one today': World reacts to Stephen Hawking's death on social media". Fox News Channel. Archived from the original on 14 March 2018. Retrieved 14 March 2018. "Stephen Hawking: Tributes pour in for 'inspirational' physicist". BBC News. 14 March 2018. Archived from the original on 14 March 2018. Retrieved 14 March 2018. Marsh, Sarah (14 March 2018). "Cambridge colleagues pay tribute to 'inspirational' Hawking". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 14 March 2018. Retrieved 14 March 2018. "Queue of people sign book of condolence at Stephen Hawking's former college". BT News. Press Association. 14 March 2018. Archived from the original on 15 March 2018. Retrieved 14 March 2018. Overbye, Dennis (15 March 2018). "Stephen Hawking Taught Us a Lot About How to Live". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 14 March 2018. Retrieved 15 March 2018. "IPC to Pay Tribute to Stephen Hawking During PyeongChang Paralympics Closing Ceremony". Archived from the original on 20 March 2018. Retrieved 20 March 2018. Elliott, Chris (31 March 2018). "The day Cambridge said goodbye to Stephen Hawking – one of our city's greatest ever academics". Cambridge News. Archived from the original on 31 March 2018. Retrieved 31 March 2018. The Associated Press (31 March 2018). "At Stephen Hawking Funeral, Eddie Redmayne and Astronomer Royal Give Readings". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 31 March 2018. Retrieved 31 March 2018. Prof Stephen Hawking funeral: Legacy 'will live forever' Archived 18 June 2018 at the Wayback Machine. BBC News. Published 31 March 2018. Retrieved 31 March 2018. "Famous guests attend Prof Stephen Hawking's funeral". BBC News. 31 March 2018. Archived from the original on 28 February 2019. Retrieved 28 February 2019. "Benedict Cumberbatch to take lead role in Stephen Hawking memorial service". The Sunday Times. 10 June 2018. Archived from the original on 28 February 2019. Retrieved 28 February 2019. "Stephen Hawking funeral: His city stops to salute genius who unlocked secrets of the universe". Archived from the original on 26 October 2019. Retrieved 26 October 2019. "Stephen Hawking Mourned by Hundreds at Cambridge Funeral". Space.com. 3 April 2018. Archived from the original on 5 April 2019. Retrieved 5 April 2019. pixeltocode.uk, PixelToCode. "Professor Stephen Hawking to be honoured at the Abbey – Westminster Abbey". Archived from the original on 29 March 2018. Retrieved 20 March 2018. Castle, Stephen (15 June 2018). "Stephen Hawking Enters 'Britain's Valhalla,' Where Space Is Tight". The New York Times. Retrieved 21 July 2019. when Stephen Hawking's ashes were interred there on Friday, they were placed between the remains of Isaac Newton and Charles Darwin "Stephen Hawking's Ashes Buried in Westminster Abbey". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on 16 June 2018. Retrieved 16 June 2018. Roger Highfield (20 February 2002), "A simple formula that will make a fitting epitaph", Telegraph Media Group, archived from the original on 18 March 2018, retrieved 16 March 2018 Clark, Stuart (2016), The Unknown Universe, Pegasus, p. 281, ISBN 978-1-68177-153-3 Bever, Lindsey (15 June 2018). "Stephen Hawking's farewell: As his ashes were buried, his voice was beamed into space". Washington Post. Archived from the original on 31 July 2018. Retrieved 31 July 2018. Walecka, John Dirk (2007). Introduction to General Relativity. World Scientific. p. 305. ISBN 978-981-270-584-6. Griffin, Andrew (14 March 2018). "Stephen Hawking death: The equation the professor asked to be put on his tombstone". The Independent. Archived from the original on 17 March 2018. Retrieved 17 March 2018. Andrew Strominger; Cumrun Vafa (June 1996). "Microscopic origin of the Bekenstein-Hawking entropy". Physics Letters B. 379 (1–4): 99–104. arXiv:hep-th/9601029. Bibcode:1996PhLB..379...99S. doi:10.1016/0370-2693(96)00345-0. ISSN 0370-2693. S2CID 1041890. Zbl 1376.83026. Wikidata Q29013523. "Stephen Hawking's words will be beamed into space". BBC. Archived from the original on 22 October 2018. Retrieved 20 October 2018. Ghosh, Pallab (26 March 2018). "Stephen Hawking's final interview: A beautiful Universe". BBC News. Archived from the original on 26 March 2018. Retrieved 26 March 2018. Taylor, Dan (24 March 2018). "Stephen Hawking's incredible last words will stun you". MorningTicker.com. Archived from the original on 25 March 2018. Retrieved 24 March 2018. Tasoff, Harrison (13 March 2018). "4 Smithsonian Space Documentaries You Don't Want to Miss". Space.com. Archived from the original on 25 March 2018. Retrieved 24 March 2018. Staff (University of Cambridge) (2 May 2018). "Taming the multiverse—Stephen Hawking's final theory about the big bang". Phys.org. Archived from the original on 2 May 2018. Retrieved 2 May 2018. Starr, Michelle (22 December 2018). "Stephen Hawking's Final Theory About Our Universe Will Melt Your Brain". ScienceAlert.com. Archived from the original on 22 December 2018. Retrieved 22 December 2018. Haco, Sasha; Hawking, Stephen W.; Perry, Malcolm J.; Strominger, Andrew (2018). "Black Hole Entropy and Soft Hair". Journal of High Energy Physics. 2018 (12). Springer Science and Business Media LLC: 98. arXiv:1810.01847v2. Bibcode:2018JHEP...12..098H. doi:10.1007/jhep12(2018)098. ISSN 1029-8479. Nield, David (12 October 2018). "The Very Last Paper Stephen Hawking Worked on Has Just Been Published Online – He continued the quest to understand black holes until the end". ScienceAlert.com. Archived from the original on 12 October 2018. Retrieved 12 October 2018. Overbye, Dennis (23 October 2018). "Stephen Hawking's Final Paper: How to Escape From a Black Hole – In a study from beyond the grave, the theoretical physicist sings (mathematically) of memory, loss and the possibility of data redemption". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 24 October 2018. Retrieved 23 October 2018. Stanley-Becker, Isaac (15 October 2018). "Stephen Hawking feared race of 'superhumans' able to manipulate their own DNA". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 15 October 2018. Retrieved 15 October 2018. AP News (15 October 2018). "In Posthumous Message, Hawking Says Science Under Threat". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 16 October 2018. Retrieved 15 October 2018. Staff (2018). "Brief Answers to the Big Questions – Hardcover – 16 October 2018 by Stephen Hawking". Amazon. Retrieved 15 October 2018. Staff (8 November 2018). "Stephen Hawking personal effects fetch £1.8 m at auction". BBC News. Archived from the original on 8 November 2018. Retrieved 8 November 2018. Fortin, Jacey (8 November 2018). "Stephen Hawking's Wheelchair and Thesis Fetch More Than $1 Million at Auction". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 9 November 2018. Retrieved 8 November 2018. Lawless, Jill (22 October 2018). "Stephen Hawking's wheelchair, thesis for sale". Phys.org. Archived from the original on 22 October 2018. Retrieved 22 October 2018. "Celebrating the Life of Stephen Hawking 2019 UK 50p Brilliant Uncirculated Coin." The Royal Mint. Retrieved 3 December 2022. McRae, Mike (13 March 2019). "UK Put a Black Hole on a 50p Coin to Honour Stephen Hawking, And It Looks Stunning". ScienceAlert.com. Archived from the original on 30 March 2019. Retrieved 13 March 2019. "Hawking's nurse struck off over his care". BBC News. 12 March 2019. Archived from the original on 12 March 2019. Retrieved 12 March 2019. Roberts, Stuart (27 May 2021). "Hawking Archive saved for the nation". University of Cambridge. Retrieved 7 June 2022. "Explore incredible objects from Stephen Hawking's office at the Science Museum". Science Museum. 8 January 2022. Retrieved 7 June 2022. "Stephen Hawking tells Google 'philosophy is dead'". www.telegraph.co.uk. 17 May 2011. Retrieved 17 April 2022. Scott, Callum D. (2012). "The death of Philosophy: a response to Stephen Hawking". South African Journal of Philosophy. 31 (2): 384–404. doi:10.1080/02580136.2012.10751783. S2CID 144498480. Sample, Ian (2 August 2006). "The great man's answer to the question of human survival: Er, I don't know". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 14 March 2018. Retrieved 14 March 2018. "Prof Stephen Hawking: disaster on planet Earth is a near certainty". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 2 April 2018. Retrieved 2 April 2018. Highfield, Roger (16 October 2001). "Colonies in space may be only hope, says Hawking". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 26 April 2009. Retrieved 5 August 2007. Hickman, Leo (25 April 2010). "Stephen Hawking takes a hard line on aliens". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 1 January 2018. Retrieved 24 February 2012. "Stephen Hawking warns over making contact with aliens". BBC News. 25 April 2010. Archived from the original on 12 May 2010. Retrieved 24 May 2010. Hawking, Stephen; Tegmark, Mark; Wilczek, Frank (1 May 2014). "Stephen Hawking: 'Transcendence looks at the implications of artificial intelligence – but are we taking AI seriously enough?'". The Independent. Archived from the original on 2 October 2015. Retrieved 3 December 2014. "Stephen Hawking warns artificial intelligence could end mankind". BBC News. 2 December 2014. Archived from the original on 30 October 2015. Retrieved 3 December 2014. stevenson, matt (8 October 2015). "Answers to Stephen Hawking's AMA are Here!". Wired. ISSN 1059-1028. Retrieved 28 April 2023. Ferguson 2011, p. 179. Boyle, Alan (23 September 2014). "'I'm an Atheist': Stephen Hawking on God and Space Travel". NBC News. Archived from the original on 25 January 2017. Retrieved 12 January 2017. "Stephen Hawking's Thoughts on Atheism, God and Death". Time. Retrieved 15 May 2021. "Stephen Hawking – There is no God. There is no Fate". YouTube. Archived from the original on 16 August 2013. Retrieved 4 July 2013. Lowry, Brian (4 August 2011). "Curiosity: Did God Create the Universe?". Variety. Archived from the original on 14 March 2018. Retrieved 14 March 2018. "Humanists UK mourns death of Stephen Hawking". Humanists UK. 14 March 2019. Retrieved 18 March 2019. White & Gribbin 2002, p. 195. Ferguson 2011, p. 223. Ferguson 2011, p. 195. "Scientist Stephen Hawking decries Iraq war". USA Today. 3 November 2004. Archived from the original on 14 October 2013. Retrieved 18 February 2013. Andalo, Debbie (24 July 2006). "Hawking urges EU not to stop stem cell funding". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 30 August 2013. Retrieved 18 February 2013. Ferguson 2011, p. 242. Lean, Geoffrey (21 January 2007). "Prophet of Doomsday: Stephen Hawking, eco-warrior – Climate Change – Environment". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 10 April 2014. Retrieved 18 February 2013. "Celebrities' open letter to Scotland – full text and list of signatories". The Guardian. London. 7 August 2014. Archived from the original on 17 August 2014. Retrieved 26 August 2014. Radford, Tim (31 May 2016). "Trump's popularity inexplicable and Brexit spells disaster, says Stephen Hawking". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 31 May 2016. Retrieved 31 May 2016. Stephen Hawking's political views Archived 14 March 2018 at the Wayback Machine BBC "Stephen Hawking's political views". BBC News. 14 March 2018. Archived from the original on 17 March 2018. Retrieved 19 March 2018. "Hawking v Hunt: What happened?". BBC News. 20 August 2017. Archived from the original on 14 March 2018. Retrieved 14 March 2018. Triggle, Nick (19 August 2017). "Stephen Hawking: I'm worried about the future of the NHS". BBC News. Archived from the original on 15 March 2018. Retrieved 14 March 2018. Campbell, Denis (18 August 2017). "Stephen Hawking blames Tory politicians for damaging NHS". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 15 March 2018. Retrieved 14 March 2018. Kennedy, Maev (27 August 2017). "Jeremy Hunt continues war of words with Stephen Hawking over NHS". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 15 March 2018. Retrieved 14 March 2018. Griffin, Andrew (6 June 2017). "Stephen Hawking announces he is voting Labour: 'The Tories would be a disaster'". The Independent. Archived from the original on 5 June 2017. Retrieved 6 June 2017. Ghosh, Pallab (2 July 2017). "Hawking says Trump's climate stance could damage Earth". BBC News. Archived from the original on 14 March 2018. Retrieved 14 March 2018. Eleftheriou-Smith, Loulla-Mae (3 July 2017). "Stephen Hawking says Donald Trump could turn Earth into Venus-like planet with 250C and sulphuric acid rain". The Independent. Archived from the original on 19 March 2018. Retrieved 14 March 2018. Brooks, Libby (25 December 2017). "Scotland united in curiosity as councils trial universal basic income". The Guardian. Retrieved 4 October 2020. Universal basic income is, according to its many and various supporters, an idea whose time has come. The deceptively simple notion of offering every citizen a regular payment without means testing or requiring them to work for it has backers as disparate as Mark Zuckerberg, Stephen Hawking, Caroline Lucas and Richard Branson. Sherwood, Harriet; Kalman, Matthew; Jones, Sam (9 May 2013). "Stephen Hawking: Furore deepens over Israel boycott". The Guardian. Retrieved 16 May 2022. "Watch this: 'God, the Universe and Everything Else' with Carl Sagan, Stephen Hawking and Arthur C. Clarke". The Verge. Retrieved 19 August 2019. Ferguson 2011, pp. 177–78. Larsen 2005, pp. 93–94. Larsen 2005, pp. xiii, 94. Ferguson 2011, p. 192. Ferguson 2011, p. 221. Wollaston, Sam (4 March 2008). "Last night's TV: Stephen Hawking: Master of the Universe". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 14 December 2013. Retrieved 10 February 2013. "Professor Stephen Hawking films Big Bang Theory cameo". BBC News. 12 March 2012. Archived from the original on 14 March 2012. Retrieved 12 March 2012. Mialet, Hélène (28 June 2012). Hawking Incorporated: Stephen Hawking and the Anthropology of the Knowing Subject. Chicago, Illinois: University of Chicago Press. p. 211. ISBN 978-0-226-52226-5. Edgar, James (30 May 2014). "'Have you still got that American voice?' Queen asks Stephen Hawking". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 6 August 2015. Retrieved 12 July 2015. Setoodeh, Ramin (28 October 2014). "How Eddie Redmayne Became Stephen Hawking in 'The Theory of Everything'". Variety. Archived from the original on 26 February 2015. Retrieved 24 February 2015. McAfee, Melonyce (14 April 2015). "Stephen Hawking sings Monty Python's 'Galaxy Song'". CNN. Archived from the original on 13 January 2017. Retrieved 12 January 2017. Grow, Korry (14 April 2015). "Hear Stephen Hawking Sing Monty Python's 'Galaxy Song'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 13 January 2017. Retrieved 12 January 2017. Haurant, Sandra (3 June 2008). "Savings: Heavyweight celebrities endorse National Savings". Archived from the original on 2 September 2013. Retrieved 25 February 2013. "Could Hawking's parody be sincerest form of flattery?". Telegraph Media Group Limited. 13 June 2000. Archived from the original on 10 January 2014. Retrieved 19 February 2013. Usborne, Simon (1 January 2013). "Stephen Hawking, Go Compare and a brief history of selling out". The Independent. Archived from the original on 25 February 2013. Retrieved 19 February 2013. Buchanan, Rose Troup (20 March 2015). "Professor Stephen Hawking to trademark name". The Independent. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 2 April 2015. Tufnell, Nicholas (9 March 2018). "The Hitchhikers Guide to the Galaxy' is back with the original cast". CNET. Archived from the original on 15 March 2018. Retrieved 14 March 2018. and "StarTalk Season 4, Episode 20: Stephen Hawking". National Geographic Partners, LLC. 4 March 2018. Archived from the original on 15 March 2018. Retrieved 14 March 2018. |url=https://thefreakbrothers.com/ }} Stephen Hawking's 80th Birthday, retrieved 7 January 2022 "Certificate of election: Hawking, Stephen, EC/1974/12". London: The Royal Society. Archived from the original on 4 February 2014. "Stephen William Hawking". American Academy of Arts & Sciences. Retrieved 19 May 2022. "APS Member History". search.amphilsoc.org. Retrieved 19 May 2022. "Stephen Hawking". www.nasonline.org. Retrieved 19 May 2022. Corkery, Claire (1 November 2016). "Pride of Britain 2016: Stephen Hawking makes Brexit joke at PM Theresa May's expense". Express. Archived from the original on 15 March 2018. Retrieved 14 March 2018. "2018 Hawking Fellowship". Varsity. "Jony Ive Hawking Fellowship". Forbes. "Stephen Hawking's Biography". Hawking.org.uk. "Hawking in Pictures". Hawking.org.uk. "Stephen Hawking Medals For Science Communication". STARMUS. Archived from the original on 7 October 2016. Retrieved 16 May 2017. "Stephen Hawking medal" Archived 5 November 2019 at the Wayback Machine. Starmus. Retrieved 19 August 2019 Davis, Nicola (16 June 2016). "Winners of inaugural Stephen Hawking medal announced". The Guardian. Retrieved 19 August 2019. "Black Holes and Baby Universes". Kirkus Reviews. 20 March 2010. Archived from the original on 4 August 2012. Retrieved 18 June 2012. "How Physics got Weird". The Wall Street Journal. 5 December 2016. Archived from the original on 20 December 2016. Retrieved 11 March 2017. Griffin, Andrew (16 May 2018). "Stephen Hawking's final work will try to answer some of the biggest questions in the universe – Book will collect the late professor's most profound and celebrated writings". The Independent. Archived from the original on 16 October 2018. Retrieved 15 October 2018. "A Brief History of Time: Synopsis". Errol Morris. Archived from the original on 29 June 2012. Retrieved 18 June 2012. "Stephen Hawking's Universe". PBS. Archived from the original on 6 May 2016. Retrieved 26 June 2012. "The Hawking Paradox". BBC. Archived from the original on 9 March 2012. Retrieved 9 February 2012. Richmond, Ray (3 August 2007). ""Masters of Science Fiction" too artistic for ABC". Reuters. Archived from the original on 14 March 2018. Retrieved 7 December 2012. Walton, James (4 March 2008). "Last night on television: Stephen Hawking: Master of the Universe (Channel 4) – The Palace (ITV1)". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 14 March 2018. Retrieved 14 March 2018. "Into the Universe with Stephen Hawking". Discovery Channel. Archived from the original on 25 March 2011. Retrieved 25 April 2010. Moulds, Josephine (17 October 2011). "Brave New World with Stephen Hawking, episode one, Channel 4, review". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 14 March 2018. Retrieved 14 March 2018. "Stephen Hawking's Grand Design". Discovery Channel UK. Archived from the original on 27 April 2013. Retrieved 25 October 2012. Wollaston, Sam (9 December 2013). "Stephen Hawking: A Brief History of Mine – TV review". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 14 March 2018. Retrieved 14 March 2018. Labrecque, Jeff (6 August 2014). "Eddie Redmayne plays Stephen Hawking in 'Theory of Everything' trailer". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on 9 August 2015. Retrieved 6 August 2014. Baird, Eric (2007). Relativity in Curved Spacetime: Life Without Special Relativity. Chocolate Tree Books. ISBN 978-0-9557068-0-6. Ferguson, Kitty (2011). Stephen Hawking: His Life and Work. Transworld. ISBN 978-1-4481-1047-6. Hawking, Jane (2007). Travelling to Infinity: My Life With Stephen. Alma. ISBN 978-1-84688-115-2. Hawking, Stephen W. (1992). Stephen Hawking's A brief history of time: a reader's companion. Bantam Books. Bibcode:1992bhtr.book.....H. ISBN 978-0-553-07772-8. Larsen, Kristine (2005). Stephen Hawking: a biography. Greenwood Publishing. ISBN 978-0-313-32392-8. Mialet, Hélène (2003). "Is the end in sight for the Lucasian chair? Stephen Hawking as Millennium Professor". In Knox, Kevin C.; Noakes, Richard (eds.). From Newton to Hawking: A History of Cambridge University's Lucasian Professors of Mathematics. Cambridge University Press. pp. 425–460. ISBN 978-0-521-66310-6. White, Michael; Gribbin, John (2002). Stephen Hawking: A Life in Science (2nd ed.). National Academies Press. ISBN 978-0-309-08410-9. Yulsman, Tom (2003). Origins: the quest for our cosmic roots. CRC Press. ISBN 978-0-7503-0765-9. Stephen Hawking at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Textbooks from Wikibooks Scholia has a profile for Stephen Hawking (Q17714). Library resources about Stephen Hawking Resources in your library Resources in other libraries By Stephen Hawking Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Official website Professor Stephen Hawking Collection on In Our Time at the BBC "Archival material relating to Stephen Hawking". UK National Archives. Stephen Hawking publications indexed by Google Scholar Stephen Hawking collected news and commentary at The New York Times Stephen Hawking's publications indexed by the Scopus bibliographic database. (subscription required) O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "Stephen Hawking", MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive, University of St Andrews Stephen Hawking collected news and commentary at The Guardian Stephen Hawking discography at Discogs Stephen Hawking at IMDb Lecture at the Hebrew University, Jerusalem - 2006 Portals:  Physics  Astronomy  Spaceflight  Outer space  Stars  Books  Film  Schools  Science