The Organisation internationale de la Francophonie (OIF; sometimes shortened to the Francophonie, French: La Francophonie [la fʁɑ̃kɔfɔni], sometimes also called International Organisation of La Francophonie in English) is an international organization representing countries and regions where French is a lingua franca or customary language, where a significant proportion of the population are francophones (French speakers), or where there is a notable affiliation with French culture. The organization comprises 88 member states and governments; of these, 54 states and governments are full members, 7 are associate members and 27 are observers. The term francophonie (with a lowercase "f"), or francosphere (often capitalized in English), also refers to the global community of French-speaking peoples, comprising a network of private and public organizations promoting equal ties among countries where French or Belgian people or France or Belgium played a significant historical role, culturally, militarily, or politically. The modern organisation was created in 1970. Its motto is égalité, complémentarité, solidarité ("equality, complementarity, and solidarity"), a deliberate allusion to France's motto liberté, égalité, fraternité. Starting as a small group of French-speaking countries, the Francophonie has since evolved into a global organization whose numerous branches cooperate with its member states in the fields of culture, science, economy, justice, and peace. The convention which created the Agency for Cultural and Technical Co-operation (Agence de Coopération Culturelle et Technique) was signed on 20 March 1970 by the representatives of the 21 states and governments under the influence of African Heads of State, Léopold Sédar Senghor of Senegal, Habib Bourguiba of Tunisia, Hamani Diori of Niger and Prince Norodom Sihanouk of Cambodia. Based on the sharing of the French language, the missions of this new intergovernmental organization are the promotion of the cultures of its members and the intensification of the cultural and technical cooperation between them, as well as the solidarity and the connection between them through dialogue. The Francophonie project ceaselessly evolved since the creation of the Agency for Cultural and Technical Co-operation, it became the intergovernmental Agency of the Francophonie (Agence intergouvernementale de la Francophonie) in 1998 to remind its intergovernmental status. Finally in 2005, the adoption of a new Charter of the Francophonie (la Charte de la Francophonie) gives the name to the Agency of international Organisation of the Francophonie (Organisation internationale de la Francophonie). The position of Secretary-General was created in 1997 at the seventh leaders' summit held in Hanoi. Canadian Jean-Louis Roy was secretary of the Agence de coopération culturelle et technique from 1989 until the formal creation of the Agence intergouvernementale de la Francophonie in 1997 with former Secretary-General of the United Nations Boutros Boutros-Ghali as the first secretary-general of La Francophonie. Abdou Diouf, the former president of the Republic of Senegal, became Secretary General on January 1, 2003. He was reelected on 29 September 2006, for a second mandate during the Summit of the Francophonie of Bucharest, and elected again in 2010 at the Summit of the Francophonie of Montreux for another mandate which ran until 31 December 2014. At the 2014 summit in Dakar, former Governor General of Canada Michaëlle Jean was chosen to lead the organization starting in January 2015. The Secretary General of the Francophonie is elected during the Summit, and serves as the spokesperson and the official representative internationally of the political actions of the Francophonie. The Secretary General is responsible for proposing priority areas for multilateral Francophonie actions. Their job is to facilitate Francophone multilateral cooperation and to ensure that programs and activities of all operating agencies work in harmony. The Secretary General carries out their four-year mandate under the authority of the three main institutions of the Francophonie: the Summits, the Ministerial Conference and the Permanent Council. The Summit, the highest authority in the Francophonie, is held every two years and gathers the heads of states and governments of all member states of the OIF around certain themes of discussion. It is chaired by the head of state or government of the host country and this person assumes that responsibility until the next summit. By enabling the heads of state and government to hold a dialogue on all international issues of the day, the summit serves to develop strategies and goals of the Francophonie so as to ensure the organisation's influence on the world scene. The Ministerial Conference of the Francophonie gathers the foreign or francophone affairs ministers of member states and governments every year to ensure the political continuity of the Summit. This conference ensures that the decisions made during the previous Summits are carried out and to plan the next Summit. It also recommends new members and observers to the Summit. The Permanent Council of the Francophonie gathers the Ambassadors of the member countries, chaired by the General Secretary of the Francophonie and under the authority of the Ministerial Conference, its main task is to plan Summits. This conference also supervises the execution of the Summit decisions made by the ministerial conferences on a day-to-day basis, about the examination of the propositions of the budget distribution. The objectives of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Francophonie (APF) are to represent to the French-speaking authorities, the interests of the French-speaking communities, to promote the democracy, the rule of law and the respect of human rights. Furthermore, it follows the execution by the operators of the Francophonie of action plans elaborated by the Conference of the members using French as a common language It also favours the cooperation and strengthens the solidarity within the French-speaking communities, mainly towards the parliaments of the South. The Parliamentary Assembly of the Francophonie is constituted by member sections representing 77 parliaments or interparliamentary organizations. The Secretary General is the French senator Jacques Legendre. The Agency of the Francophonie is the main operator of the cultural, scientific, technical, economic and legal cooperation programs decided at the Summits. It is also the legal seat of the Secretary General and is used by him as an administrative support. The agency also contributes to the development of the French language and to the promotion of the diverse languages and cultures of its members, while encouraging mutual understanding between them and the Francophonie. For this reason, it is a place of exchange and dialogue and its simultaneous in Francophone countries. The Agency's headquarters are in Paris and it has three regional branches in Libreville, Gabon; Lomé, Togo; and Hanoi, Vietnam. Mauritania's membership was suspended on 26 August 2008, pending democratic elections, after a military coup d'état. Madagascar's membership was suspended in April 2009 due to an unconstitutional transfer of power on 17 March 2009. Mali's membership was also suspended in March 2012 due to a coup d'état, and then the Central African Republic was suspended for instances of la Francophonie at the 88th session of the CPF[clarification needed] (March 2012), as well as Guinea-Bissau on 18 April 2012 for the same reason. Thailand, an observer nation, was suspended in 2014 following the 2013–14 political crisis. In 2018, Louisiana became the first US state to join, as an observer. In 2021, the government of Nova Scotia announced its intention to apply for observer status. Although Algeria has one of the largest French-speaking communities in the world, it is not a member of the organisation. The International Organization of the Francophonie relies on five operating agencies to carry out its mandate: l’Agence Universitaire de la Francophonie (AUF); TV5Monde; l’Association Internationale des Maires Francophones (AIMF); l'Association des Fonctionnaires Francophones des Organisations Internationales (AFFOI); and l’Université Senghor d’Alexandrie. Established in 1961 in Montreal, the Association of Francophone Universities gathers institutions of higher education and research among the Francophone countries of Africa, the Arab world, Southeast Asia, Central and Eastern Europe, and the Caribbean. Its mission is to contribute to the construction and consolidation of a scientific space in French. It supports the French language, cultural and linguistic diversity, law and democracy, and the environment and sustainable development. It also provides an important mobility program for the students, the researchers and the professors. Its mission is to support the French language and the linguistic diversity within International Organisations. Every year the association coordinates the day of French language within International Organisations. It also organizes seminaries to increase awareness about the importance of linguistic, cultural and conceptual diversity. The president is the French international civil servant Dominique Hoppe. TV5Monde is the first international French language television network, available in many countries. On television and online the audience of TV5Monde has grown rapidly. TV5 is one of the three largest television networks in the world (along with the BBC and CNN), and is considered one of the greatest achievements of the Francophonie. It provides wide access to original television programmes in French, and contributes to the development of the language and French-speaking cultures. It broadcasts the different forms of the French language spoken around the world, with all their accents. It reaches beyond native speakers of French; the majority of those who can receive it and part of its audience comprise viewers for whom French is not the mother tongue. Thanks to subtitles in various languages, it provides access to the Francophonie to non-French speakers - it is translated into 12 languages. The International Association of French-speaking Mayors was created in Quebec City in 1979 Jean Pelletier and Jacques Chirac, then the respective mayors of Quebec City and Paris with an initial group of 20 founder-cities. It is an operating agency for urban development gathering 48 countries or governments. The goal is to establish close cooperation in all areas of municipal activities. Its missions are to strengthen local democracy, building municipal capacities, and to support the populations. The association pursues its actions in the domains of health, culture, youth and education, urban development, training, and municipal infrastructures. The association is presided by Anne Hidalgo (Paris' mayor) since 2009, with Pierre Baillet as permanent secretary. The project of creating a French-speaking university in the service of African development was presented and adopted following the Dakar Summit in 1989. The Senghor University in Alexandria, Egypt is a private postgraduate institution that trains managers and high-level trainers in areas that are a priority for development in Francophone Africa. It directs the capacities of the managers and trainers to the action and the exercise of responsibilities in certain domains for the development: the project management, the financial institutions, the environment, the nutrition-health and of the cultural heritage. The Senghor University regularly organizes seminaries to help its students and of the public specialized in the domains of its action, by collaborating with the other operators and the institutions of the Francophonie. The International Organization of the Francophonie leads political actions and multilateral cooperation according to the missions drawn by the Summits of the Francophonie. The Summits gather the Heads of states and governments of the member countries of the International Organization of the Francophonie where they discuss international politics, world economy, French-speaking cooperation, human rights, education, culture and democracy. Actions of the International Organization of the Francophonie are scheduled over a period of four years and funded by contributions from its members. The Charte de la Francophonie defines the role and missions of the organization. The current charter was adopted in Antananarivo, on 23 November 2005. The summit held in Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso on 26–27 November 2004 saw the adoption of a strategic framework for the period 2004–2014. The four missions drawn by the Summit of the Francophonie are: Promoting French language and cultural and linguistic diversity. Promoting peace, democracy and human rights. Supporting education, training, higher education and scientific research. Expand cooperation for sustainable development. The primary mission of the organization is the promotion of the French language as an international language and the promotion of worldwide cultural and linguistic diversity in the era of economic globalization. In this regard, countries that are members of the Francophonie have contributed largely to the adoption by the UNESCO of the Convention on the Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions (20 October 2005). At the national level, there is the problem of promoting the French language within the context of its co-existence with other partner or international languages in most member countries, especially in Africa. Maintaining the relative importance of the status of French is an imperative that requires solidarity and the pooling of means and resources among countries committed to the French language within their respective societies. The Francophonie has been a pioneer in terms of the recognition of cultural diversity and dialogue of cultures. It must find ways of confronting the trend towards uniformity that accompanies globalization and fostering the preservation and development of cultural diversity. Similar to the Commonwealth of Nations, the Francophonie has as its stated aims the promotion of democracy and human rights. Following the 3 November 2000 Déclaration de Bamako, the Francophonie has given itself the financial means to attain a number of set objectives in that regard. The Francophonie intends to contribute significantly to promoting peace, democracy and support for the rule of law and human rights by focusing on prevention. Political stability and full rights for all, the subject of the Bamako declaration, are considered key to sustainable development. The Francophonie has chosen to provide its member countries with access to the expertise of its extensive intergovernmental, institutional, academic and non-governmental network with a view to building national capacities, resolving conflict and providing support for ending crises. In recent years, some participating governments, notably the governments of Canada and Quebec, pushed for the adoption of a Charter in order for the organization to sanction member States that are known to have poor records when it comes to the protection of human rights and the practice of democracy. Such a measure was debated at least twice but was never approved. The International Organization of the Francophonie aims at connecting the various peoples using French as a common language through their knowledge. Education, like access to autonomy and information for all, begins with all children having access to a full primary education free of any inequality. It involves an integrated approach of teaching and training from primary to secondary school that will lead to employment. Education policies must also give French an integral place alongside the partner languages. Last, the research potential of French-language academic streams must be promoted. The Francophonie is committed to working towards sustainable development by supporting the improvement of economic governance, capacity building, cooperation and the search for common positions in major international negotiations. It's necessary to manage durably the natural resources, particularly the energy and the water, and politics are established to make sure of the conservation of these resources with effective anti-poverty campaigns. In 2013, the United Nations Volunteers programme received a financial contribution from the Federal Public Service (FPS) Foreign Affairs, Foreign Trade and Development Cooperation of the Kingdom of Belgium for the years 2013 and 2014 to support the outreach to the francophone world and the promotion of volunteerism via its Online Volunteering service. The membership of the OIF has climbed from 21 in 1970 to 88 member states and territories in 2018. This sharp increase in the number of member states, many of whom have little to no connection with the French language and culture, has been a matter of growing concern. In their 1996 study on the Francophone space, linguists Daniel Baggioni and Roland Breton pointed out, alluding to the applications of Bulgaria and Angola to join the OIF, that only politico-diplomatic criteria could explain these odd extensions of the OIF. Xavier Deniau, founder of the Association des parlementaires de langue française (now the Parliamentary assembly) and author of La Francophonie, expressed concern that the enlargement of the OIF to countries where French is practically nonexistent risks diluting the effectiveness of the organisation. Despite calls for a moratorium on the admission of new members, each new Sommet de la Francophonie has witnessed the admission of batches of new members that have little, if anything, to do with the French language: Bosnia-Herzegovina, the Dominican Republic, the United Arab Emirates, Estonia and Montenegro in 2010; Qatar and Uruguay in 2012; Mexico, Costa Rica and Kosovo in 2014. On that occasion, the Montreal daily Le Devoir, which reports extensively on the OIF and its summits, remarked that several members of this "merry madhouse" that the OIF had become did not even recognise Kosovo as a country. The “endless enlargement” of the Organisation accelerated following the arrival at the head of the OIF of former UN Secretary General Boutros-Ghali who declared early in his term in 1998 that French being in his opinion the language of solidarity, tolerance, respect for the individual, cultural diversity, universality and openness, the OIF needed to open itself to non francophones. The motivation of small and mid-size countries in joining the organisation appears to be a desire to increase their international visibility. In October 2018, the Irish Minister of State for European Affairs explained that Ireland's accession to the OIF with observer status was one of the steps set out in 'Global Ireland', the Government's initiative to double the scope and impact of Ireland's global footprint in the period to 2025. Following the arrival of Boutros-Ghali, the OIF had also seen a steady increase in the number of its missions and priority action areas — peace and conflict prevention, human rights, democracy, international cooperation, sustainable development, cultural and linguistic diversity, education and training, youth, gender equality, civil society — bringing a fundamental shift from the cultural to the political sphere. Jacques Legendre, the French senate's rapporteur on the Francophonie, expressed his concern that the OIF was becoming "a second-rate duplicate of the General Assembly of the UN". Many actors of the francophone sphere interested in the future of the organisation, including Former French ministers or secretaries of state for the Francophonie such as Pierre-André Wiltzer and Jean-Baptiste Lemoyne, have been calling on the OIF to refocus on its fundamentals: language and culture. Human rights and fundamental freedoms, despite having been declared "categorical imperatives" by Secretary General Boutros-Ghali in 1998, are routinely abused by many members states of the OIF. The deplorable track record of many OIF member states regarding human rights came to the fore during the 1999 Francophonie Summit in Moncton, Canada, when Canadian dailies loudly denounced the organisation's silence regarding widespread human rights abuses by member states ruled by "tyrants". It was pointed out that no less than 35 member states of the OIF had been accused of human rights violations by Amnesty International, while 15 member states were among the countries listed by Reporters Without Borders as systematically violating freedom of the press. Prime Minister Chrétien and President Chirac felt compelled to declare at the close of the summit that a human rights observatory would be established to tackle the problem. Given that during his 12-year tenure, President Chirac, dubbed Papa Afrique or Chirac l'Africain, had confided more than once that Africa was not ready for multipartism (l'Afrique n'est pas mûre pour le multipartisme) and was known for his close relationship with many entrenched African strongmen, calling Omar Bongo of Gabon, Gnassingbé Eyadéma of Togo, Denis Sassou Nguesso of the Republic of the Congo and Blaise Compaoré of Burkina Faso "personal friends", nothing came out of this declaration. The French daily Le Monde noted at the time that if respect for fundamental freedoms was to become a criterion for membership in the OIF, the organisation would simply cease to exist. French President Macron's surprise announcement in May 2018 that France officially backed the nomination of Louise Mushikiwabo, Rwanda's longtime foreign minister, as the next secretary general of the OIF was seen by many as a setback for the defense and promotion of human rights. An open letter signed by four former French ministers for international cooperation condemned this move, on one hand because it was taken unilaterally by the French president without consultation with the other member states of the organisation and on the other because it disregarded President Kagame's lamentable track record on human rights. "How will the Francophonie be able to promote freedom of the press, as part of its mission of advocating for human rights, if it's headed by one of the key leaders of a country that's trampled on media freedom and repressed journalists for 18 years?" asked Christophe Deloire, secretary general of Reporters Without Borders. Agence de coopération culturelle et technique Minister responsible for La Francophonie (Canada) Jeux de la Francophonie International Francophonie Day (Journée internationale de la Francophonie) Conseil international de la langue française French immersion Alliance française Espace Francophone pour la Recherche, le Développement et l'Innovation Journée internationale de la Francophonie (March 20) Francophone French colonial empire Geographical distribution of French speakers French in Africa French in India French in the United States Franco-Canadian relations French America Vietnamese French Lao French Cambodian French List of countries where French is an official language List of international organisations which have French as an official language List of French possessions and colonies Three Linguistic Spaces Francophonie is the name of the "French-speaking world". Brochure: L'Institut de l’énergie et de l'environnement de la Francophonie. Archived 6 August 2020 at the Wayback Machine. (IEPF Archived 3 August 2020 at the Wayback Machine). Accessed 22 January 2009. "88 États et gouvernements – Organisation internationale de la Francophonie". 1 November 2018. Archived from the original on 1 November 2018. "Atlas of Canada: The Francophonie". Archived from the original on 26 February 2014. "Welcome to the International Organisation of La Francophonie's website". Archived from the original on 1 April 2014. Retrieved 24 July 2015. FRANCOPHONIE 18 March 2006. Archived 6 January 2007 at the Wayback Machine. Radio France International. "Journée mondiale de la Francophonie". France Inter. Archived from the original on 15 July 2012. Retrieved 5 May 2011. "Former governor general Michaëlle Jean to lead la Francophonie". National Post. Retrieved 28 December 2014. "Canada's Michaelle Jean chosen to lead organisation of Francophone states". Toronto Sun. Archived from the original on 27 December 2014. Retrieved 28 December 2014. Structure and institutions of La Francophonie. Accessed 5 May 2011 La Francophonie: History, Structure, Organisation, and Philosophical Underpinnings Archived 7 October 2011 at the Wayback Machine. Accessed on 5 May 2011 "Summits of La Francophonie". International.gc.ca. 18 January 2013. Archived from the original on 21 July 2017. Retrieved 18 June 2016. Staff Writer (27 November 2016). "Francophonie Summit Welcomes COP22 Outcome". Morocco World News. Rabat. Archived from the original on 16 October 2021. Retrieved 3 July 2019. Crawford, Alison (25 November 2016). "Trudeau visits Madagascar for la Francophonie summit of French-speaking nations". www.cbc.ca. Archived from the original on 16 October 2021. Retrieved 22 January 2020. "Trudeau to discuss LGBTQ rights at la Francophonie summit in Madagascar | The Star". The Toronto Star. 22 November 2016. Archived from the original on 16 October 2021. Retrieved 3 July 2019. "La Francophonie grants observer status to Ontario". www.cbc.ca. 26 November 2016. Archived from the original on 5 November 2021. Retrieved 22 January 2020. "Remarks by Edward Nalbandian at the meeting of the Political Committee of the Parliamentary Assembly of la Francophonie - Speeches - Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Armenia". Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 10 June 2018. "Louise Mushikiwabo n’a pas sa place à la tête de la Francophonie" Archived 27 December 2021 at the Wayback Machine Le Monde, 13 September 2018. "Saudi Arabia withdraws bid to join Francophonie group". France 24. 11 October 2018. Archived from the original on 16 October 2021. Retrieved 3 July 2019. "Ghana joins La Francophonie". www.graphic.com.gh. Archived from the original on 21 October 2021. Retrieved 3 July 2019. Hasselle, Della (13 October 2018). "Louisiana joins international organization of French-speaking governments". NOLA.com. Archived from the original on 26 July 2020. Retrieved 26 August 2020. "La Francophonie summit closes in Yerevan - Xinhua | English.news.cn". www.xinhuanet.com. Archived from the original on 13 October 2018. Retrieved 3 July 2019. "La Francophonie confirme le report de son sommet à novembre 2022". La Presse (in French). 28 October 2021. Archived from the original on 28 January 2022. Retrieved 28 January 2022. "Djerba Summit: defining new ambitions for the Francophonie". Campus France. Retrieved 25 April 2023. ""Une ambition pour la langue française et le plurilinguisme" - Bilan après 4 ans d'action". elysee.fr (in French). 18 November 2022. Retrieved 25 April 2023. "Portail de l'Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie (OIF)". Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie (in French). Retrieved 25 April 2023. Organisation internationale de la Francophonie Archived 6 March 2016 at the Wayback MachineAccessed 05 May 2011. "L’OIF suspend la Mauritanie" Archived 28 August 2008 at the Wayback Machine, Radio France Internationale, 27 August 2008 "Madagascar". francophonie.org. Archived from the original on 5 March 2019. Retrieved 27 December 2014. "Mali". francophonie.org. Archived from the original on 21 December 2010. Retrieved 27 December 2014. Organisation internationale de la Francophonie Archived 3 April 2015 at the Wayback Machine. Francophonie.org. Retrieved on 2013-07-12. "L'Organisation internationale de la Francophonie (OIF) suspend la Thaïlande et réintègre la Guinée-Bissau dans ses instances" (PDF). Organisation internationale de la Francophonie. 27 June 2014. Archived (PDF) from the original on 30 June 2015. Retrieved 29 September 2015. Hasselle, Della (13 October 2018). "Louisiana joins international organization of French-speaking governments". NOLA.com. Archived from the original on 26 July 2020. Retrieved 26 August 2020. Murat, Philippe (28 April 2021). "La Nouvelle-Écosse demandera le statut d'observateur à l'OIF". ONFR. Archived from the original on 3 May 2021. Retrieved 3 May 2021. Valantin, Christian (2007). La Francophonie dans le Monde 2006-2007 (PDF). Nathan. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 June 2007. Valantin, Christian (2007). La Francophonie dans le Monde 2006-2007 (PDF). Nathan. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 June 2007., accessed 5 May 2011. "1e Journée du français dans les Organisations internationales". francophonie.org. Archived from the original on 27 December 2014. Retrieved 28 December 2014. "Accueil". TV5MONDE. Archived from the original on 30 April 2013. Retrieved 28 December 2014. La Francophonie dans le Monde... Larousse. 2005. "Accueil". AIMF. Archived from the original on 13 October 2008. Retrieved 28 December 2014. "Operating agencies". Government of Canada. Archived from the original on 2 August 2012. Retrieved 5 May 2011. "Page d'accueil". Senghor University of Alexandria. Archived from the original on 16 April 2018. Retrieved 28 December 2014. "Senghor University". Archived from the original on 22 July 2011. Retrieved 5 May 2011. "La voix de la diversité". Archived from the original on 23 February 2011. Retrieved 5 May 2011., accessed on 5 May 2011. "Organisation internationale de la Francophonie". Archived from the original on 6 March 2016. Retrieved 5 May 2011. "Déclaration de Bamako". Archived from the original on 27 September 2007. Retrieved 30 September 2006. "Programming of the International Organization of la Francophonie". Archived from the original on 7 March 2012., accessed on 5 May 2011. "La voix de la diversité". Archived from the original on 16 May 2013. Retrieved 5 May 2011., accessed 5 May 2011. "UNV Online Volunteering service, Partners". Archived from the original on 28 October 2014. Retrieved 19 December 2014. Cited in La "francophonie" : définitions et usages Archived 27 December 2021 at the Wayback Machine, Quaderni, 2006, volume 62, no. 1, p. 97. Christian Rioux, "Franco... quoi?", Le Devoir, Montreal, 4 September 1999. For example at the Beyrouth Summit (2002), when Louise Beaudoin, Minister of international relations of Quebec called for tightening the admission criteria to the OIF. Christian Rioux, Beyrouth: la démocratie écope, Le Devoir, Montreal, 17 October 2002. There had been a consensus at the Kinshasa Summit (2012), that the enlargement of the OIF should be restricted and several members even called for a total stop but they were ignored. Christian Rioux, "Faut-il encore élargir la Francophonie?", Le Devoir, Montreal, 26 November 2016. Stéphane Baillargeon, Francophonie ou Francofunny?, Le Devoir, Montreal, 1 December 2014. Marie Verdier, "La francophonie en pleine errance", La Croix, Paris, 11 October 2018. "Cette langue porte les plus beaux mots du monde : la solidarité, la tolérance, le respect de la personne humaine, l’attachement à la diversité des cultures. En étant francophones nous sommes par là même universels et cette universalité nous appelle à beaucoup d’exigence car la francophonie est d’abord une école. L’école de la diversité. J’ai toujours voulu penser le français comme une langue non alignée, comme une langue d’ouverture, comme une langue qui nous donne accès au grand large. C’est pourquoi nous devons aussi nous ouvrir aux non francophones." "October - Ireland granted Observer Status at the Organisation Internationale de la Francophonie - Department of Foreign Affairs". www.dfa.ie. Archived from the original on 10 October 2021. Retrieved 2 September 2019. "un doublon médiocre de l'Assemblée Générale des Nations-Unies", http://www.senat.fr/rap/r16-436/r16-4366.html#toc46 Archived 9 September 2021 at the Wayback Machine Vif, Le (9 October 2018). "La Francophonie au bord de la cacophonie ?". Site-LeVif-FR. Archived from the original on 22 October 2020. Retrieved 2 September 2019. La presse canadienne fait assaut de critiques sur la Francophonie Archived 27 December 2021 at the Wayback Machine Agence France-Presse, 1 September 1999. Christian Rioux, "La Franco... quoi?", Le Devoir, 4 September 1999. "Mort de Jacques Chirac, "l'Africain"". TV5MONDE. 21 September 2016. Archived from the original on 16 October 2021. Retrieved 26 September 2019. Raverdy, Quentin (26 September 2019). "Chirac, l'Africain". Le Point. Archived from the original on 16 October 2021. Retrieved 26 September 2019. "Si on faisait du respect des libertés fondamentales un critère d'appartenance à l'Organisation de la francophonie, cette dernière cesserait tout simplement d'exister.", S.A., "Francophonie et Libertés", Le Monde, 5–6 September 1999, p. 11. "France backs controversial Rwandan candidate to head Francophonie". France 24. 10 October 2018. Archived from the original on 4 September 2019. Retrieved 25 September 2019. Glasze, Georg (2007): "The Discursive Constitution of a World-spanning Region and the Role of Empty Signifiers: the Case of Francophonia." In: Geopolitics (12)4: 656–679. (pdf: Wayback Machine) Milhaud, Olivier (2006): "Post-Francophonie?". EspacesTemps.net. Post-Francophonie? Organisation internationale de la Francophonie at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity (in French) Official website (in French) Organisation internationale de la Francophonie at Curlie (in French and English) MaVieFrancaise.org, a social network for Francophiles, Francophones and those learning French (features articles and interviews). L'Assemblée des Francophones Fonctionnaires des Organisations Internationales (AFFOI) is the assembly of French speaking international civil servants. Portal:  Politics 48°51′36″N 2°18′12″E﻿ / ﻿48.86000°N 2.30333°E﻿ / 48.86000; 2.30333