Love Is Dead is the debut studio album by Estonian recording artist Kerli. It was released in the United States on 8 July 2008 by Island Records. Love Is Dead is a pop, rock, alternative and electronica record that incorporates gothic influences. Its sound has been noted to contain influences from the music of artists such as Natasha Bedingfield and Björk, while it has been described as both uplifting and dark. The album received overall mixed reviews, nonetheless reviewers lauded its uniqueness and composition, while praising Kerli's vocals. The album peaked at number 2 on the US Heatseekers Albums chart, which measures the popularity of albums by new artists. It also reached number 126 on the Billboard 200 in the United States. Kerli began writing for her debut album at the age of 14 but after two failed recording contracts with Universal Republic Records and Stolen Transmission, she spent two years in Sweden writing music with other writers at the request of a Swedish publisher who took an interest in her music. She later caught the attention of Island Records and landed an audition with L.A. Reid who signed her. During the audition, which was Kerli's first visit to the United States, she later remarked she was "so out of it" which came off as rude, saying "I guess he liked that I wasn't kissing his ass". In a 2008 interview, Kerli said she was grateful she was not in a position to release an album after gaining her first contract because, saying "I wasn't ready as a person. I didn't stand behind my vision the way I do now, and everything was much more about my ego and need for attention. It's about people now. It's about delivering something magical." She described the process of creating the album as a "10-year struggle". Kerli cites her upbringing in an abusive household as one of the main influences on Love Is Dead, saying "This is the place that I created for myself to escape to, and I want to share it with people now". A lot of the songs I wrote when I was really depressed, and then the later songs I wrote after coming out from my depression, so the theme of the album pretty much is overcoming obstacles and overcoming the darkness. I’m really grateful for all these experiences because I believe that until you are absorbed by darkness you can't overcome it and face the light. — Kerli The lyrics of the songs on Love Is Dead focus around Kerli's depression at the time as well as her life in Estonia. She noted a feeling of oppression and hostility still present in Estonia after the Soviet occupation ended, saying "I felt like everybody was always trying to break my spirit. I felt very lonely because I was always very passionate and very over the top. I was not scared to be different. I had to create my own world. I had to work hard and dream hard to get out of that environment." While citing "Walking on Air" and "Love Is Dead" as her favorite tracks from the album, she cites "Butterfly Cry" as the most meaningful song for her as it was the first song she wrote after coming out of her depression. It was written when she was 17 with Krister Linder, who she says was her "spiritual mentor". "Walking on Air" and "Creepshow" discuss Kerli's childhood. Kerli has noted autobiographical connections to specific lyrics from "Walking on Air" such as "She has a little creepy cat" and "little rocking chair and an old blue hat" by recalling a feral cat she rescued as well as frequently wearing old hats as a child. "Creepshow" concerns Estonia specifically where Kerli says "being different is not really accepted" and that "it felt like even more of a creepshow than this little town environment that I wanted to get out of." Originally due to be released in April 2008, the album was pushed back to July 29 and then pushed up to July 8. It eventually gained a wider European release in 2009 with a release in Italy in February, in Germany in April, and in Austria and Ireland in summer 2009. "Bulletproof" was part of Punisher: War Zone Original Motion Picture Soundtrack too. "Love Is Dead" was released as the lead single on November 21, 2007 with "Walking on Air" being released on 8 April 2008 as the second single and was a moderate success. "Creepshow" was released as the third single in late 2008, "The Creationist" was released as the album's fourth and final commercial single exclusively in Italy in December 2009. This version also had new vocals from singer Cesare Cremonini. Love Is Dead received positive reviews from music critics. Rick Florino of Artistdirect raved that the album is "more than just 'alternative music;' it's alternative art. Kerli's vision extends far beyond the notes recorded on her CD, and that's instantly apparent from her twisted fairytale aesthetic." Heather Phares of AllMusic concluded that "despite its faults, it is one of the most unique albums released by a major label in 2008." About.com's Ben Norman agreed, stating that it is "one of the best and most unique major label offerings of 2008, and hardly something to miss. With Kerli's emergence into the dance scene, I predict that this is the album to watch." Slant Magazine reviewer Sal Cinquemani complimented the album's first three tracks, "Love Is Dead", "Walking on Air", and "The Creationist", commenting that "they display enough diversity and musical savvy, if not actual talent, to warrant an endorsement", but criticized songs like "Creepshow" ("over-the-top") and "Butterfly Cry" ("plodding"). He also added that "[t]he formulas employed throughout Love Is Dead are often trite but the undeniable excitement and awe with which she approaches them is just as frequently refreshing." Christy Grosz from the Los Angeles Times wrote that "[a]lthough her songs occasionally feature the alto piano of Apple or the otherworldly trilling of Morissette or Björk, her voice can sound thin and inconsistent, giving the whole thing a somewhat derivative feel" and that "a little more creepiness would give Kerli the edge that her appearance advertises." In his review for Blender, Andrew Harrison noted that "Love Is Dead's gothic gray walls of riff and throbbing drum machines are convincing enough, and Kerli has clearly lived a tough old life so far. Unfortunately, it translates into kohl-eyed pantomime, rather than cathartic music, with lyrics so hopelessly trite they sound like a feel-good tract for preschoolers." Vail Daily's Charlie Owen felt that the album "reveals Kerli's talent but sounds more like she's trying to find a direction than blazing a trail." The album debuted at number 126 on the Billboard 200 in the United States, selling 5,500 copies in its first week.[citation needed] It also entered at number three on the Top Heatseekers chart (peaking at number two, two weeks later) and peaked at number 141 on the Top Digital Albums chart.[citation needed] With this, Kerli is the first Estonian artist to chart on the Billboard 200, where the album spent four weeks before dropping off.[citation needed] Despite having four single releases, the only song that made any impact on the charts was "Walking on Air".[citation needed] Note "Love Is Dead" contains samples of "Love Don't Live Here Anymore" by Rose Royce (written by Miles Gregory). Credits adapted from Love Is Dead liner notes. Production Guy Chambers – producer John Deley – string arranger T.J. Doherty – engineer Jason Epperson – producer John Ewing, Jr. – engineer Ill Factor – drum programmer Richard Flack – additional programmer, mixer Matty Green – assistant mixer Mike Green – engineer, mixer, assistant mixer Keith Gretlein – assistant engineer Benji Madden – producer Joel Madden – producer Lasse Mårtén – engineering, recording Mathias Mårtén – engineering, recording Tony Maserati – mixer David Maurice – drum programmer, engineer, mixer, producer Lester Mendez – producer, arranger Christian Olsson – programmer Neal Pogue – mixer Mark Roule – Pro Tools engineer, assistant mixer Natalie Shau – label art Paul Stanborough – acoustic guitar, programmer, recorder Oliver Strauss – string engineer Charles Wilson, Jr. – assistant mix engineer Mathias Wollo – arranger, producer, recorder Joe Wohlmuth – engineer Musicians Peter Ågren – composer Mio Alt – violins Gregg E. August – double bass Vanessa Bley – backing vocals, composer Karl Brazil – drums, percussion Inbal Brener – cello Guy Chambers – ace tone rhythm ace, acoustic guitar, backing vocals, bass guitar, composer, fuzz guitar, synths, upright piano John Deley – keyboards Fil Eisler – guitars, bass guitar Per Eklund – drums, percussion Tony Falanga – double bass Fleshquartet – strings Richard Fortus – guitar Josh Freese – drums Tanesha Gary – backing vocals Josh Garza – drums Mike Green – bass Miles Gregory – composer ("Love Don't Live Here Anymore" sample) Mattias Hellden – cello Örjan Högberg – viola Jennifer Karr – backing vocals Kerli Kõiv – vocals, composer Yoon Kwon – violins Anders Lennartsson – composer Andreas Lavander – bass, organ Krister Linder – composer Jonas Lindgren – violin Benji Madden – composer, guitars Joel Madden – composer Audrey Martells – backing vocals David Maurice – bass guitar, composer, guitars, keyboards Lester Mendez – composer Emily Ondrovek – violins Joel W. Noyes – cello Sebastian Oberg – cello Inbal Segev – cello Sonus Quartet – strings Philip Spetzer – violins Jonathan Vinocour – viola Skoota Warner – drums Thomas Who – composer Mathias Wollo – guitars, kalimba, organ Alison Zlotow – violins "Love Is Dead - Kerli". Rockol (in Italian). 31 March 2009. Retrieved 25 March 2019. un incontro tra elettronica, pop, rock ed atmosfere gotiche Avina, Christina. "Kerli - An artist in every sense of the word". Rock on Request. Archived from the original on 29 March 2012. Retrieved 21 September 2012. Triana, Mark (August 2008). "Interview with Kerli Kõiv". Chicago Music Guide. Archived from the original on 13 March 2012. Retrieved 22 September 2012. Perry, Clayton (31 May 2008). "Interview: Kerli - Singer and Songwriter". Blogcritics. Retrieved 21 September 2012. Wood, Eric Emin (8 July 2008). "Record Deal Means Kerli Can Ditch the Rice-Only Diet". andPOP. Archived from the original on 22 July 2012. Retrieved 21 May 2010. "Exclusive Interview: Kerli, New Pop Act Breaking Boundaries". AceShowbiz. Retrieved 21 September 2012. "Interview with Estonian Pop Princess Kerli". Pop Culture Madness. 1 July 2008. Retrieved 22 September 2012. "MTV Premieres 'Walking on Air' Video! Album set to release July 29!". ThinkTank Marketing. 21 May 2008. Archived from the original on 6 March 2012. Retrieved 21 May 2010. "Kerli's Debut Album, Love Is Dead, Gets Pushed Up to July 8 Release Date!". ThinkTank Marketing. 6 June 2008. Archived from the original on 6 March 2012. Retrieved 21 May 2010. Kerli - The Creationist (feat. Cesare Cremonini) - Italy iTunes Store "Reviews for Love is Dead by Kerli". Metacritic. Retrieved 19 March 2016. Norman, Ben. "Kerli – 'Love Is Dead'". About.com. Retrieved 22 May 2010. Phares, Heather. "Love Is Dead. Overview". AllMusic. Retrieved 21 May 2010. Florino, Rick (7 July 2008). "Love Is Dead by Kerli". Artistdirect. Retrieved 21 May 2010. Grosz, Christy (8 July 2008). "New CDs: Beck, Kerli and Greg Laswell". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved 21 May 2010. Cinquemani, Sal (2 July 2008). "Kerli: Love Is Dead". Slant Magazine. Retrieved 21 May 2010. Owen, Charlie (9 June 2008). "'Love Is Dead' newest CD from Estonian pop star Kerli". Vail Daily. Retrieved 21 May 2010. Harrison, Andrew. "Kerli – Love Is Dead". Blender. Retrieved 21 May 2010.[permanent dead link] "Kerli Chart History (Billboard 200)". Billboard. Retrieved October 25, 2021. Kerli (2008). Love Is Dead. Island Records. "Ultratop.be – Kerli – Love Is Dead" (in Dutch). Hung Medien. Retrieved October 25, 2021. "Ultratop.be – Kerli – Love Is Dead" (in French). Hung Medien. Retrieved October 25, 2021. "Pedro.ee - CD top100, nädal 36 - 2008". Archived from the original on 26 December 2008. "Italiancharts.com – Kerli – Love Is Dead". Hung Medien. Retrieved October 25, 2021. "Swisscharts.com – Kerli – Love Is Dead". Hung Medien. Retrieved October 25, 2021. "Kerli Chart History (Heatseekers Albums)". Billboard. Retrieved October 25, 2021.