Avatar (marketed as James Cameron's Avatar) is a 2009 epic science fiction film directed, written, co-produced, and co-edited by James Cameron. The cast includes Sam Worthington, Zoe Saldana, Sigourney Weaver, Michelle Rodriguez, Stephen Lang, Joel David Moore, Giovanni Ribisi, CCH Pounder, Dileep Rao, Matt Gerald, Laz Alonso, and Wes Studi It is the first installment in the Avatar franchise. It is set in the mid-22nd century, when humans are colonizing Pandora, a lush habitable moon of a gas giant in the Alpha Centauri star system, in order to mine the valuable mineral unobtanium. The expansion of the mining colony threatens the continued existence of a local tribe of Na'vi, a humanoid species indigenous to Pandora. The title of the film refers to a genetically engineered Na'vi body operated from the brain of a remotely located human that is used to interact with the natives of Pandora. Development of Avatar began in 1994, when James Cameron wrote an 80-page treatment for the film. Filming was supposed to take place after the completion of Cameron's 1997 film Titanic, for a planned release in 1999; however, according to Cameron, the necessary technology was not yet available to achieve his vision of the film. Work on the language of the Na'vi began in 2005, and Cameron began developing the screenplay and fictional universe in early 2006. Avatar was officially budgeted at $237 million, due to the groundbreaking array of new visual effects Cameron achieved in cooperation with Weta Digital in Wellington. Other estimates put the cost at between $280 million and $310 million for production and at $150 million for promotion. The film made extensive use of new motion capture filming techniques and was released for traditional viewing, 3D viewing (using the RealD 3D, Dolby 3D, XpanD 3D, and IMAX 3D formats), and "4D" experiences in selected South Korean theaters. Avatar premiered on December 10, 2009, in London and was released in the United States on December 18, 2009, to positive reviews. Critics highly praised its groundbreaking visual effects, though the story received some criticism for being derivative. During its theatrical run, the film broke several box office records, including becoming the highest-grossing film of all time. In July 2019, this position was overtaken by Avengers: Endgame, but with subsequent re-releases, beginning with China in March 2021, it returned to becoming the highest-grossing film since then. Adjusted for inflation, Avatar is the second-highest-grossing movie of all time, only behind Gone with the Wind, with a total of a little more than $3.5 billion. It also became the first film to gross more than $2 billion and the best-selling video title of 2010 in the United States. Avatar was nominated for nine awards at the 82nd Academy Awards, winning three, and received numerous other accolades. The success of the film also led to electronics manufacturers releasing 3D televisions and caused 3D films to increase in popularity. Its success led to the Avatar franchise, which includes the sequels Avatar: The Way of Water (2022), Avatar 3 (2025), Avatar 4 (2029), and Avatar 5 (2031). In 2154, Earth suffers from resource exhaustion and ecological collapse. The Resources Development Administration (RDA) mines the valuable mineral unobtanium on Pandora, a moon in the Alpha Centauri star system. Pandora, whose atmosphere is inhospitable to humans, is inhabited by the Na'vi, 10-foot-tall (3.0 m), blue-skinned, sapient humanoids that live in harmony with nature. To explore Pandora, genetically matched human scientists control Na'vi-human hybrids called "avatars". Paraplegic Marine Jake Sully is sent to Pandora to replace his deceased identical twin, who had signed up to be an operator. Avatar Program head Dr. Grace Augustine considers Sully inadequate but accepts him as a bodyguard. While escorting the avatars of Grace and Dr. Norm Spellman, Jake's avatar is attacked by Pandoran wildlife, and he flees into the forest, where he is rescued by Na'vi princess Neytiri. Suspicious of Jake, she takes him to her clan. Neytiri's mother, Mo'at, the clan's spiritual leader, orders her daughter to initiate Jake into their society. Colonel Miles Quaritch, head of RDA's security force, promises Jake that the company will restore the use of his legs if he provides information about the Na'vi and their gathering place, the giant Hometree, under which is a rich deposit of unobtanium. Learning of this, Grace transfers herself, Jake, and Norm to an outpost. Jake and Neytiri fall in love as Jake is initiated into the tribe, and they choose each other as mates. When Jake attempts to disable a bulldozer threatening a sacred Na'vi site, Administrator Parker Selfridge orders Hometree destroyed. Despite Grace's argument that destroying Hometree would damage the biological neural network that encompasses all Pandoran life, Selfridge gives Jake and Grace one hour to convince the Na'vi to evacuate. Jake confesses that he was a spy and the Na'vi take him and Grace captive. Quaritch's soldiers destroy Hometree, killing many, including Neytiri's father named Eytukan, the clan chief. Mo'at frees Jake and Grace, but they are detached from their avatars and imprisoned by Quaritch's forces. Pilot Trudy Chacón, disgusted by Quaritch's brutality, airlifts Jake, Grace, and Norm to Grace's outpost, but during the escape Grace is shot and fatally wounded. Jake regains the Na'vi's trust by connecting his mind to that of Toruk, a dragon-like creature feared and revered by the Na'vi. Supported by new chief Tsu'tey, Jake unites the clan, telling them to gather all the clans to battle the RDA. Quaritch organizes a strike against the Tree of Souls to demoralize the Na'vi. Before the battle, Jake prays to the Na'vi deity Eywa via a neural connection with the Tree of Souls. Tsu'tey and Trudy are among the battle's heavy casualties. The Na'vi are rescued when Pandoran wildlife unexpectedly join the attack and overwhelm the humans, which Neytiri interprets as Eywa answering Jake's prayer. Quaritch, in a Amplified Mobility Platform suit (AMP), escapes his crashed aircraft and breaks open the avatar link unit containing Jake's human body, exposing it to Pandora's poisonous atmosphere. As Quaritch prepares to slit Jake's avatar's throat, he is killed by Neytiri, who saves Jake from suffocation, seeing his human form for the first time. The RDA is expelled from Pandora, and Jake is permanently transferred into his avatar with the aid of the Tree of Souls. Sam Worthington as Corporal Jake Sully, a disabled former Marine who becomes part of the Avatar Program after his twin brother is killed. His military background helps the Na'vi warriors relate to him. Cameron cast the Australian actor after a worldwide search for promising young actors, preferring relative unknowns to keep the budget down. Worthington, who was living in his car at the time, auditioned twice early in development,[failed verification] and he has signed on for possible sequels. Cameron felt that because Worthington had not done a major film, he would give the character "a quality that is really real". Cameron said he "has that quality of being a guy you'd want to have a beer with, and he ultimately becomes a leader who transforms the world".[failed verification] Cameron offered the role to Matt Damon, with a 10% stake in the film's profits, but Damon turned the film down because of his commitment to the Bourne film series. Worthington also briefly appears as Jake's deceased identical twin, Tommy. Zoe Saldaña as Neytiri te Tskaha Mo'at'ite, the Na'vi princess, daughter of the leaders of the Omaticaya (the Na'vi clan central to the story). She is attracted to Jake because of his bravery, though frustrated with him for what she sees as his naiveté and stupidity. She serves as Jake's love interest. The character, like all the Na'vi, was created using performance capture, and its visual aspect is entirely computer generated. Saldaña signed on for potential sequels. Stephen Lang as Colonel Miles Quaritch, the head of the mining operation's security detail. Fiercely consistent in his disregard for any life not recognized as human, he has a profound disregard for Pandora's inhabitants that is evident in both his actions and his language. Lang had unsuccessfully auditioned for a role in Cameron's Aliens (1986), but the director remembered Lang and sought him for Avatar. Michael Biehn, who had worked with Cameron in Aliens, The Terminator and Terminator 2: Judgment Day, was briefly considered for the role. He read the script and watched some of the 3-D footage with Cameron but was ultimately not cast. Michelle Rodriguez as Trudy Chacón, a combat pilot assigned to support the Avatar Program who is sympathetic to the Na'vi. Cameron had wanted to work with Rodriguez since seeing her in Girlfight. Giovanni Ribisi as Parker Selfridge, the corporate administrator for the RDA mining operation. While he is at first willing to destroy the Na'vi civilization to preserve the company's bottom line, he is reluctant to authorize the attacks on the Na'vi and taint his image, doing so only after Quaritch persuades him that it is necessary and that the attacks will be humane. When the attacks are broadcast to the base, Selfridge displays discomfort at the violence. Joel David Moore as Dr. Norm Spellman, a xenoanthropologist who studies plant and animal life as part of the Avatar Program. He arrives on Pandora at the same time as Jake and operates an avatar. Although he is expected to lead the diplomatic contact with the Na'vi, it turns out that Jake has the personality better suited to win the natives' respect. Moore also portrays Spellman's Na'vi avatar. CCH Pounder as Mo'at, the Omaticaya's spiritual leader, Neytiri's mother, and consort to clan leader Eytukan. Wes Studi as Eytukan te Tskaha Kamun'itan, the Omaticaya's clan leader, Neytiri's father, and Mo'at's mate. Laz Alonso as Tsu'tey te Rongola Atey'itan, the finest warrior of the Omaticaya. He is heir to the chieftainship of the tribe. At the beginning of the film's story, he is betrothed to Neytiri. Sigourney Weaver as Dr. Grace Augustine, an exobiologist and head of the Avatar Program. She is also Sully's mentor and an advocate of peaceful relations with the Na'vi, having set up a school to teach them English. Weaver also portrays Grace's Na'vi avatar. Dileep Rao as Dr. Max Patel, a scientist who works in the Avatar Program and comes to support Jake's rebellion against the RDA Matt Gerald as Corporal Lyle Wainfleet, a human mercenary who works for the RDA as Quaritch's right-hand man. Additionally, Alicia Vela-Bailey appears, uncredited, as Ikeyni, the leader of the Tayrangi clan, Saeyla, one of the young Na'vi hunters who accompany Jake during his Iknimaya and a harassed blonde woman in a bar that Jake defends. Vela-Bailey served as the stunt double for Zoe Saldana and would later portray Zdinarsk in Avatar: The Way of Water. Terry Notary, who performed stunts as well, plays the Banshees via motion capture. In 1994, director James Cameron wrote an 80-page treatment for Avatar, drawing inspiration from "every single science fiction book" he had read in his childhood as well as from adventure novels by Edgar Rice Burroughs and H. Rider Haggard. Parts of the movie also came to him in a dream when he was 19 years old. He dreamed about a bioluminescent forest with fiber-optic trees, fan lizards, a river with bioluminescent particles and a purple moss that would lit up when someone stepped on it. When he woke up he made a drawing of the scene and later used it in the movie. In August 1996, Cameron announced that after completing Titanic, he would film Avatar, which would make use of synthetic, or computer-generated, actors. The project would cost $100 million and involve at least six actors in leading roles "who appear to be real but do not exist in the physical world". Visual effects house Digital Domain, with whom Cameron has a partnership, joined the project, which was supposed to begin production in mid-1997 for a 1999 release. However, Cameron felt that the technology had not caught up with the story and vision that he intended to tell. He decided to concentrate on making documentaries and refining the technology for the next few years. It was revealed in a Bloomberg BusinessWeek cover story that 20th Century Fox had fronted $10 million to Cameron to film a proof-of-concept clip for Avatar, which he showed to Fox executives in October 2005. In February 2006, Cameron revealed that his film Project 880 was "a retooled version of Avatar", a film that he had tried to make years earlier, citing the technological advances in the creation of the computer-generated characters Gollum, King Kong, and Davy Jones. Cameron had chosen Avatar over his project Battle Angel after completing a five-day camera test in the previous year. From January to April 2006, Cameron worked on the script and developed a culture for the film's aliens, the Na'vi. Their language was created by Paul Frommer, a linguist at USC. The Na'vi language has a lexicon of about 1000 words, with some 30 added by Cameron. The tongue's phonemes include ejective consonants (such as the "kx" in "skxawng") that are found in Amharic, and the initial "ng" that Cameron may have taken from Te Reo Māori. Actress Sigourney Weaver and the film's set designers met with Jodie S. Holt, professor of plant physiology at University of California, Riverside, to learn about the methods used by botanists to study and sample plants, and to discuss ways to explain the communication between Pandora's organisms depicted in the film. From 2005 to 2007, Cameron worked with a handful of designers, including famed fantasy illustrator Wayne Barlowe and renowned concept artist Jordu Schell, to shape the design of the Na'vi with paintings and physical sculptures when Cameron felt that 3-D brush renderings were not capturing his vision, often working together in the kitchen of Cameron's Malibu home. In July 2006, Cameron announced that he would film Avatar for a mid-2008 release and planned to begin principal photography with an established cast by February 2007. The following August, the visual effects studio Weta Digital signed on to help Cameron produce Avatar. Stan Winston, who had collaborated with Cameron in the past, joined Avatar to help with the film's designs. Production design for the film took several years. The film had two different production designers, and two separate art departments, one of which focused on the flora and fauna of Pandora, and another that created human machines and human factors. In September 2006, Cameron was announced to be using his own Reality Camera System to film in 3-D. The system would use two high-definition cameras in a single camera body to create depth perception. While these preparations were underway, Fox kept wavering in its commitment to Avatar because of its painful experience with cost overruns and delays on Cameron's previous picture, Titanic. During the production of Titanic, Cameron rewrote the script to streamline the plot by combining several characters' roles and offered to cut his fee if the film were a commercial disappointment. Cameron installed a traffic light with the amber signal lit outside of co-producer Jon Landau's office to represent the film's uncertain future. In mid-2006, Fox told Cameron "in no uncertain terms that they were passing on this film," so he began shopping it around to other studios and approached Walt Disney Studios, showing his proof of concept to then chairman Dick Cook. However, when Disney attempted to take over, Fox exercised its right of first refusal. In October 2006, Fox finally agreed to commit to making Avatar after Ingenious Media agreed to back the film, which reduced Fox's financial exposure to less than half of the film's official $237 million budget. After Fox accepted Avatar, one skeptical Fox executive shook his head and told Cameron and Landau, "I don't know if we're crazier for letting you do this, or if you're crazier for thinking you can do this ..." In December 2006, Cameron described Avatar as "a futuristic tale set on a planet 200 years hence ... an old-fashioned jungle adventure with an environmental conscience [that] aspires to a mythic level of storytelling". The January 2007 press release described the film as "an emotional journey of redemption and revolution" and said the story is of "a wounded former Marine, thrust unwillingly into an effort to settle and exploit an exotic planet rich in biodiversity, who eventually crosses over to lead the indigenous race in a battle for survival". The story would be of an entire world complete with an ecosystem of phantasmagorical plants and creatures, and native people with a rich culture and language. Estimates put the cost of the film at about $280–310 million to produce and an estimated $150 million for marketing, noting that about $30 million in tax credits would lessen the financial impact on the studio and its financiers. A studio spokesperson said that the budget was "$237 million, with $150 million for promotion, end of story." Principal photography for Avatar began in April 2007 in Los Angeles and Wellington. Cameron described the film as a hybrid with a full live-action shoot in combination with computer-generated characters and live environments. "Ideally at the end of the day the audience has no idea which they're looking at," Cameron said. The director indicated that he had already worked four months on nonprincipal scenes for the film. The live action was shot with a modified version of the proprietary digital 3-D Fusion Camera System, developed by Cameron and Vince Pace. In January 2007, Fox had announced that 3-D filming for Avatar would be done at 24 frames per second despite Cameron's strong opinion that a 3-D film requires higher frame rate to make strobing less noticeable. According to Cameron, the film is composed of 60% computer-generated elements and 40% live action, as well as traditional miniatures. Motion-capture photography lasted 31 days at the Hughes Aircraft stage in Playa Vista in Los Angeles. Live action photography began in October 2007 at Stone Street Studios in Wellington and was scheduled to last 31 days. More than a thousand people worked on the production. In preparation of the filming sequences, all of the actors underwent professional training specific to their characters such as archery, horseback riding, firearm use, and hand-to-hand combat. They received language and dialect training in the Na'vi language created for the film. Before shooting the film, Cameron also sent the cast to the Hawaiian tropical rainforests to get a feel for a rainforest setting before shooting on the soundstage. During filming, Cameron made use of his virtual camera system, a new way of directing motion-capture filmmaking. The system shows the actors' virtual counterparts in their digital surroundings in real time, allowing the director to adjust and direct scenes just as if shooting live action. According to Cameron, "It's like a big, powerful game engine. If I want to fly through space, or change my perspective, I can. I can turn the whole scene into a living miniature and go through it on a 50 to 1 scale." Using conventional techniques, the complete virtual world cannot be seen until the motion-capture of the actors is complete. Cameron said this process does not diminish the value or importance of acting. On the contrary, because there is no need for repeated camera and lighting setups, costume fittings and make-up touch-ups, scenes do not need to be interrupted repeatedly. Cameron described the system as a "form of pure creation where if you want to move a tree or a mountain or the sky or change the time of day, you have complete control over the elements". Cameron gave fellow directors Steven Spielberg and Peter Jackson a chance to test the new technology. Spielberg said, "I like to think of it as digital makeup, not augmented animation ... Motion capture brings the director back to a kind of intimacy that actors and directors only know when they're working in live theater." Spielberg and George Lucas were also able to visit the set to watch Cameron direct with the equipment. To film the shots where CGI interacts with live action, a unique camera referred to as a "simulcam" was used, a merger of the 3-D fusion camera and the virtual camera systems. While filming live action in real time with the simulcam, the CGI images captured with the virtual camera or designed from scratch, are superimposed over the live action images as in augmented reality and shown on a small monitor, making it possible for the director to instruct the actors how to relate to the virtual material in the scene. Due to Cameron's personal convictions about climate change, he allowed only plant-based (vegan) food to be served on set. A number of innovative visual effects techniques were used during production. According to Cameron, work on the film had been delayed since the 1990s to allow the techniques to reach the necessary degree of advancement to adequately portray his vision of the film. The director planned to make use of photorealistic computer-generated characters, created using new motion capture animation technologies he had been developing in the 14 months leading up to December 2006. Innovations include a new system for lighting massive areas like Pandora's jungle, a motion-capture stage or "volume" six times larger than any previously used, and an improved method of capturing facial expressions, enabling full performance capture. To achieve the face capturing, actors wore individually made skull caps fitted with a tiny camera positioned in front of the actors' faces; the information collected about their facial expressions and eyes is then transmitted to computers. According to Cameron, the method allows the filmmakers to transfer 100% of the actors' physical performances to their digital counterparts. Besides the performance capture data which were transferred directly to the computers, numerous reference cameras gave the digital artists multiple angles of each performance. A technically challenging scene was near the end of the film when the computer-generated Neytiri held the live action Jake in human form, and attention was given to the details of the shadows and reflected light between them. The lead visual effects company was Weta Digital in Wellington, at one point employing 900 people to work on the film. Because of the huge amount of data which needed to be stored, cataloged and available for everybody involved, even on the other side of the world, a new cloud computing and Digital Asset Management (DAM) system named Gaia was created by Microsoft especially for Avatar, which allowed the crews to keep track of and coordinate all stages in the digital processing. To render Avatar, Weta used a 930 m2 (10,000 sq ft) server farm making use of 4,000 Hewlett-Packard servers with 35,000 processor cores with 104 terabytes of RAM and three petabytes of network area storage running Ubuntu Linux, Grid Engine cluster manager, and 2 of the animation software and managers, Pixar's RenderMan and Pixar's Alfred queue management system. The render farm occupies the 193rd to 197th spots in the TOP500 list of the world's most powerful supercomputers. A new texturing and paint software system, called Mari, was developed by The Foundry in cooperation with Weta. Creating the Na'vi characters and the virtual world of Pandora required over a petabyte of digital storage, and each minute of the final footage for Avatar occupies 17.28 gigabytes of storage. It would often take the computer several hours to render a single frame of the film. To help finish preparing the special effects sequences on time, a number of other companies were brought on board, including Industrial Light & Magic, which worked alongside Weta Digital to create the battle sequences. ILM was responsible for the visual effects for many of the film's specialized vehicles and devised a new way to make CGI explosions. Joe Letteri was the film's visual effects general supervisor. James Horner – "Jake Enters His Avatar World" listen to a clip from the score of the 2009 film Avatar. Problems playing this file? See media help. Composer James Horner scored the film, his third collaboration with Cameron after Aliens and Titanic. Horner recorded parts of the score with a small chorus singing in the alien language Na'vi in March 2008. He also worked with Wanda Bryant, an ethnomusicologist, to create a music culture for the alien race. The first scoring sessions were planned to take place in early 2009. During production, Horner promised Cameron that he would not work on any other project except for Avatar and reportedly worked on the score from four in the morning until ten at night throughout the process. He stated in an interview, "Avatar has been the most difficult film I have worked on and the biggest job I have undertaken." Horner composed the score as two different scores merged into one. He first created a score that reflected the Na'vi way of sound and then combined it with a separate "traditional" score to drive the film. British singer Leona Lewis was chosen to sing the theme song for the film, called "I See You". An accompanying music video, directed by Jake Nava, premiered December 15, 2009, on MySpace. Avatar is primarily an action-adventure journey of self-discovery, in the context of imperialism, and deep ecology. Cameron said his inspiration was "every single science fiction book I read as a kid" and that he wanted to update the style of Edgar Rice Burroughs' John Carter series. He acknowledged that Avatar shares themes with the films At Play in the Fields of the Lord, The Emerald Forest, and Princess Mononoke, which feature clashes between cultures and civilizations, and with Dances with Wolves, where a battered soldier finds himself drawn to the culture he was initially fighting against. He also cited Hayao Miyazaki's anime films such as Princess Mononoke as an influence on the ecosystem of Pandora. In 2012, Cameron filed a 45-page legal declaration that intended to "describe in great detail the genesis of the ideas, themes, storylines, and images that came to be Avatar." In addition to historical events (such as European colonization of the Americas), his life experiences and several of his unproduced projects, Cameron drew connections between Avatar and his previous films. He cited his script and concept art for Xenogenesis, partially produced as a short film, as being the basis for many of the ideas and visual designs in Avatar. He stated that Avatar's "concepts of a world mind, intelligence within nature, the idea of projecting force or consciousness using an avatar, colonization of alien planets, greedy corporate interests backed up by military force, the story of a seemingly weaker group prevailing over a technologically superior force, and the good scientist were all established and recurrent themes" from his earlier films including Aliens, The Abyss, Rambo: First Blood Part II, The Terminator and Terminator 2: Judgment Day. He specifically mentioned the "water tentacle" in The Abyss as an example of an "avatar" that "takes on the appearance of...an alien life form...in order to bridge the cultural gap and build trust." Cameron also cited a number of works by other creators as "reference points and sources of inspiration" for Avatar. These include two of his "favorite" films, 2001: A Space Odyssey, where mankind experiences an evolution after meeting alien life, and Lawrence of Arabia, where "an outsider...encounters and immerses into a foreign culture and then ultimately joins that group to fight other outsiders." Cameron said he became familiar with the concept of a human operating a "synthetic avatar" inside another world from George Henry Smith's short story "In the Imagicon" and Arthur C. Clarke's novel The City and the Stars. He said he learned of the term "avatar" by reading the cyberpunk novels Neuromancer by William Gibson and Islands in the Net by Bruce Sterling. The idea of a "world mind" originated in the novel Solaris by Stanislaw Lem. Cameron mentioned several other films about people interacting with "indigenous cultures" as inspiring him, including Dances with Wolves, The Man Who Would Be King, The Mission, The Emerald Forest, Medicine Man, The Jungle Book and FernGully. He also cited as inspiration the John Carter and Tarzan stories by Edgar Rice Burroughs and other adventure stories by Rudyard Kipling and H. Rider Haggard. In a 2007 interview with Time magazine, Cameron was asked about the meaning of the term Avatar, to which he replied, "It's an incarnation of one of the Hindu gods taking a flesh form. In this film what that means is that the human technology in the future is capable of injecting a human's intelligence into a remotely located body, a biological body." Cameron also cited the Japanese cyberpunk manga and anime Ghost in the Shell, in terms of how humans can remotely control, and transfer their personalities into, alien bodies. The look of the Na'vi – the humanoids indigenous to Pandora – was inspired by a dream that Cameron's mother had, long before he started work on Avatar. In her dream, she saw a blue-skinned woman 12 feet (4 m) tall, which he thought was "kind of a cool image". Also he said, "I just like blue. It's a good color ... plus, there's a connection to the Hindu deities, which I like conceptually." He included similar creatures in his first screenplay (written in 1976 or 1977), which featured a planet with a native population of "gorgeous" tall blue aliens. The Na'vi were based on them. For the love story between characters Jake and Neytiri, Cameron applied a star-crossed love theme, which he said was in the tradition of Romeo and Juliet. He acknowledged its similarity to the pairing of Jack and Rose from his film Titanic. An interviewer stated: "Both couples come from radically different cultures that are contemptuous of their relationship and are forced to choose sides between the competing communities." Cameron described Neytiri as his "Pocahontas", saying that his plotline followed the historical story of a "white outsider [who] falls in love with the chief's daughter, who becomes his guide to the tribe and to their special bond with nature." Cameron felt that whether or not the Jake and Neytiri love story would be perceived as believable partially hinged on the physical attractiveness of Neytiri's alien appearance, which was developed by considering her appeal to the all-male crew of artists. Although Cameron felt Jake and Neytiri do not fall in love right away, their portrayers (Worthington and Saldana) felt the characters did. Cameron said the two actors "had a great chemistry" during filming. For the film's floating "Hallelujah Mountains", the designers drew inspiration from "many different types of mountains, but mainly the karst limestone formations in China." According to production designer Dylan Cole, the fictional floating rocks were inspired by Huangshan (also known as Yellow Mountain), Guilin, Zhangjiajie, among others around the world. Cameron had noted the influence of the Chinese peaks on the design of the floating mountains. To create the interiors of the human mining colony on Pandora, production designers visited the Noble Clyde Boudreaux oil platform in the Gulf of Mexico during June 2007. They photographed, measured and filmed every aspect of the platform, which was later replicated on-screen with photorealistic CGI during post-production. Cameron said that he wanted to make "something that has this spoonful of sugar of all the action and the adventure and all that" but also have a conscience "that maybe in the enjoying of it makes you think a little bit about the way you interact with nature and your fellow man". He added that "the Na'vi represent something that is our higher selves, or our aspirational selves, what we would like to think we are" and that even though there are good humans within the film, the humans "represent what we know to be the parts of ourselves that are trashing our world and maybe condemning ourselves to a grim future". Cameron acknowledges that Avatar implicitly criticizes the United States' role in the Iraq War and the impersonal nature of mechanized warfare in general. In reference to the use of the term "shock and awe" in the film, Cameron said: "We know what it feels like to launch the missiles. We don't know what it feels like for them to land on our home soil, not in America." He said in later interviews, "... I think it's very patriotic to question a system that needs to be corralled ..." and, "The film is definitely not anti-American." A scene in the film portrays the violent destruction of the towering Na'vi Hometree, which collapses in flames after a missile attack, coating the landscape with ash and floating embers. Asked about the scene's resemblance to the September 11 attacks on the World Trade Center, Cameron said he had been "surprised at how much it did look like September 11". The first photo of the film was released on August 14, 2009, and Empire released exclusive images from the film in its October issue. Cameron, producer Jon Landau, Zoe Saldana, Stephen Lang, and Sigourney Weaver appeared at a panel, moderated by Tom Rothman, at the 2009 San Diego Comic-Con on July 23. Twenty-five minutes of footage was screened in Dolby 3D. Weaver and Cameron appeared at additional panels to promote the film, speaking on the 23rd and 24th respectively. James Cameron announced at the Comic-Con Avatar Panel that August 21 will be 'Avatar Day'. On this day, the trailer was released in all theatrical formats. The official game trailer and toy line of the film were also unveiled on this day. The 129-second trailer was released online on August 20, 2009. The new 210-second trailer was premiered in theaters on October 23, 2009, then soon after premiered online on Yahoo! on October 29, 2009, to positive reviews. An extended version in IMAX 3D received overwhelmingly positive reviews. The Hollywood Reporter said that audience expectations were colored by "the [same] establishment skepticism that preceded Titanic" and suggested the showing reflected the desire for original storytelling. The teaser has been among the most viewed trailers in the history of film marketing, reaching the first place of all trailers viewed on Apple.com with 4 million views. On October 30, to celebrate the opening of the first 3-D cinema in Vietnam, Fox allowed Megastar Cinema to screen exclusive 16 minutes of Avatar to a number of press. The three-and-a-half-minute trailer of the film premiered live on November 1, 2009, during a Dallas Cowboys football game at Cowboys Stadium in Arlington, Texas, on the Diamond Vision screen, one of the world's largest video displays, and to TV audiences viewing the game on Fox. It is said to be the largest live motion picture trailer viewing in history. The Coca-Cola Company collaborated with Fox to launch a worldwide marketing campaign to promote the film. The highlight of the campaign was the website AVTR.com. Specially marked bottles and cans of Coca-Cola Zero, when held in front of a webcam, enabled users to interact with the website's 3-D features using augmented reality (AR) technology. The film was heavily promoted in an episode of the Fox series Bones in the episode "The Gamer In The Grease" (Season 5, Episode 9). Avatar star Joel David Moore has a recurring role on the program, and is seen in the episode anxiously awaiting the release of the film. A week prior to the American release, Zoe Saldana promoted the film on Adult Swim, when she was interviewed by an animated Space Ghost. McDonald's had a promotion mentioned in television commercials in Europe called "Avatarize yourself", which encouraged people to go to the website set up by Oddcast, and use a photograph of themselves to change into a Na'vi. Avatar: A Confidential Report on the Biological and Social History of Pandora, a 224-page book in the form of a field guide to the film's fictional setting of the planet of Pandora, was released by Harper Entertainment on November 24, 2009. It is presented as a compilation of data collected by the humans about Pandora and the life on it, written by Maria Wilhelm and Dirk Mathison. HarperFestival also released Wilhelm's 48-page James Cameron's Avatar: The Reusable Scrapbook for children. The Art of Avatar was released on November 30, 2009, by Abrams Books. The book features detailed production artwork from the film, including production sketches, illustrations by Lisa Fitzpatrick, and film stills. Producer Jon Landau wrote the foreword, Cameron wrote the epilogue, and director Peter Jackson wrote the preface. In October 2010, Abrams Books also released The Making of Avatar, a 272-page book that detailed the film's production process and contains over 500 color photographs and illustrations. In a 2009 interview, Cameron said that he planned to write a novel version of Avatar after the film was released. In February 2010, producer Jon Landau stated that Cameron plans a prequel novel for Avatar that will "lead up to telling the story of the movie, but it would go into much more depth about all the stories that we didn't have time to deal with", saying that "Jim wants to write a novel that is a big, epic story that fills in a lot of things". In August 2013, it was announced that Cameron hired Steven Gould to pen four standalone novels to expand the Avatar universe. Cameron chose Ubisoft Montreal to create an Avatar game for the film in 2007. The filmmakers and game developers collaborated heavily, and Cameron decided to include some of Ubisoft's vehicle and creature designs in the film. Avatar: The Game was released on December 1, 2009, for most home video game consoles (PlayStation 3, Xbox 360, Wii, Nintendo DS, iPhone) and Microsoft Windows, and December 8 for PlayStation Portable. A second game, Avatar: Frontiers of Pandora, was released on December 7, 2023. Mattel Toys announced in December 2009 that it would be introducing a line of Avatar action figures. Each action figure will be made with a 3-D web tag, called an i-TAG, that consumers can scan using a web cam, revealing unique on-screen content that is exclusive to each specific action figure. A series of toys representing six different characters from the film were also distributed globally in McDonald's Happy Meals. In December 2009, France Post released a special limited edition stamp based on Avatar, coinciding with the film's worldwide release. Avatar premiered in London on December 10, 2009, and was released theatrically worldwide from December 16 to 18. The film was originally set for release on May 22, 2009, during filming but was pushed back to allow more post-production time (the last shots were delivered in November) and give more time for theaters worldwide to install 3D projectors. Cameron stated that the film's aspect ratio would be 1.78:1 for 3D screenings and that a 2.39:1 image would be extracted for 2D screenings. However, a 3D 2.39:1 extract was approved for use with constant-image-height screens (i.e., screens that increase in width to display 2.39:1 films). During a 3D preview showing in Germany on December 16, the movie's DRM "protection" system malfunctioned, and some copies delivered weren't watched at all in the theaters. The problems were fixed in time for the public premiere. Avatar was released in a total of 3,457 theaters in the US, of which 2,032 theaters showed it in 3D. In total, 90% of all advance ticket sales for Avatar were for 3D screenings. Internationally, Avatar opened on a total of 14,604 screens in 106 territories, of which 3,671 were showing the film in 3D (producing 56% of the first weekend gross). The film was simultaneously presented in IMAX 3D format, opening in 178 theaters in the United States on December 18. The international IMAX release included 58 theaters beginning on December 16, and 25 more theaters were to be added in the coming weeks. The IMAX release was the company's widest to date, a total of 261 theaters worldwide. The previous IMAX record opening was Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince, which opened in 161 IMAX theaters in the US, and about 70 international. 20th Century Fox Korea adapted and later released Avatar in 4D version, which included "moving seats, smells of explosives, sprinkling water, laser lights and wind". In July 2010, Cameron confirmed that there would be an extended theatrical rerelease of the film on August 27, 2010, exclusively in 3D theaters and IMAX 3D. Avatar: Special Edition includes an additional nine minutes of footage, all of which is CG, including an extension of the sex scene and various other scenes that were cut from the original theatrical film. This extended re-release resulted in the film's run time approaching the then-current IMAX platter maximum of 170 minutes, thereby leaving less time for the end credits. Cameron stated that the nine minutes of added scenes cost more than $1 million a minute to produce and finish. During its 12-week re-release, Avatar: Special Edition grossed an additional $10.74 million in North America and $22.46 million overseas for a worldwide total of $33.2 million. The film was later re-released in China in March 2021, allowing it to surpass Avengers: Endgame to become the highest-grossing film of all time. Avatar was rereleased in theaters on September 23, 2022, by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures for a limited two-week engagement, with the film being remastered in 4K high-dynamic range, with select scenes at a high frame rate of 48 fps. The reissue was prior to the December 2022 premiere of its sequel, Avatar: The Way of Water. Prior to this, Cameron previously teased a re-release of the film back in 2017 when promoting the Dolby Cinema re-release of Titanic, stating that there were plans in the works to remaster the film with Dolby Vision and re-release it in Dolby Cinema. 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment released the film on DVD and Blu-ray in the United States on April 22, 2010, and in the United Kingdom on April 26. The United States release was not on a Tuesday as is the norm, but was done to coincide with Earth Day. The first DVD and Blu-ray release does not contain any supplemental features other than the theatrical film and the disc menu in favor of and to make space for optimal picture and sound. The release also preserves the film's 1.78:1 (16:9) format over the 2.39:1 (21:9) scope version as Cameron felt that was the best format to watch the film. The Blu-ray disc contains DRM (BD+ 5) which some Blu-ray players might not support without a firmware update. Avatar set a first-day launch record in the United States for Blu-ray sales at 1.5 million units sold, breaking the record previously held by The Dark Knight (600,000 units sold). First-day DVD and Blu-ray sales combined were over four million units sold. In its first four days of release, sales of Avatar on Blu-ray reached 2.7 million in the United States and Canada – overtaking The Dark Knight to become the best ever selling Blu-ray release in the region. The release later broke the Blu-ray sales record in the United Kingdom the following week. In its first three weeks of release, the film sold a total of 19.7 million DVD and Blu-ray discs combined, a new record for sales in that period. As of July 18, 2012, DVD sales (not including Blu-ray) totaled over 10.5 million units sold with $190,806,055 in revenue. Avatar retained its record as the top-selling Blu-ray in the US market until January 2015, when it was surpassed by Disney's Frozen. The Avatar three-disc Extended Collector's Edition on DVD and Blu-ray was released on November 16, 2010. Three different versions of the film are present on the discs: the original theatrical cut (162 minutes), the special edition cut (170 minutes), and a collector's extended cut (178 minutes). The DVD set spreads the film across two discs, while the Blu-ray set presents it on a single disc. The collector's extended cut contains eight more minutes of footage, thus making it 16 minutes longer than the original theatrical cut. Cameron mentioned, "you can sit down, and in a continuous screening of the film, watch it with the Earth opening". He stated the "Earth opening" is an additional 4+1⁄2 minutes of scenes that were in the film for much of its production but were ultimately cut before the film's theatrical release. The release also includes an additional 45 minutes of deleted scenes and other extras. Cameron initially stated that Avatar would be released in 3D around November 2010, but the studio issued a correction: "3-D is in the conceptual stage and Avatar will not be out on 3D Blu-ray in November." In May 2010, Fox stated that the 3D version would be released some time in 2011. It was later revealed that Fox had given Panasonic an exclusive license for the 3D Blu-ray version and only with the purchase of a Panasonic 3DTV. The length of Panasonic's exclusivity period is stated to last until February 2012. On October 2010, Cameron stated that the standalone 3D Blu-ray would be the final version of the film's home release and that it was "maybe one, two years out". On Christmas Eve 2010, Avatar had its 3D television world premiere on Sky. On August 13, 2012, Cameron announced on Facebook that Avatar would be released globally on Blu-ray 3D. The Blu-ray 3D version was finally released on October 16, 2012. On February 2, 2024, the film became available to stream in variable high frame rate in 3D 4K Dolby Vision on the Disney+ app for the Apple Vision Pro. On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, 82% of 337 reviews are positive, and the average rating is 7.5/10. The site's consensus reads: "It might be more impressive on a technical level than as a piece of storytelling, but Avatar reaffirms James Cameron's singular gift for imaginative, absorbing filmmaking." On Metacritic—which assigns a weighted mean score—the film has a score of 83 out of 100 based on 38 critics, indicating "universal acclaim". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A" on an A+ to F scale. Every demographic surveyed was reported to give this rating. These polls also indicated that the main draw of the film was its use of 3D. Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times called the film "extraordinary", and gave it four stars out of four. "Watching Avatar, I felt sort of the same as when I saw Star Wars in 1977," he said, adding that like Star Wars and The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring, the film "employs a new generation of special effects" and it "is not simply a sensational entertainment, although it is that. It's a technical breakthrough. It has a flat-out Green and anti-war message".A. O. Scott of At The Movies also compared his viewing of the film to the first time he viewed Star Wars and he said "although the script is a little bit ... obvious," it was "part of what made it work". Todd McCarthy of Variety praised the film, saying: "The King of the World sets his sights on creating another world entirely in Avatar, and it's very much a place worth visiting." Kirk Honeycutt of The Hollywood Reporter gave the film a positive review. "The screen is alive with more action and the soundtrack pops with more robust music than any dozen sci-fi shoot-'em-ups you care to mention," he stated. Peter Travers of Rolling Stone awarded Avatar a three-and-a-half out of four star rating, and wrote in his print review: "It extends the possibilities of what movies can do. Cameron's talent may just be as big as his dreams." Richard Corliss of Time thought that the film was "the most vivid and convincing creation of a fantasy world ever seen in the history of moving pictures." Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times thought the film has "powerful" visual accomplishments but "flat dialogue" and "obvious characterization". James Berardinelli of ReelViews praised the film and its story, giving it four out of four stars. He wrote: "In 3-D, it's immersive – but the traditional film elements – story, character, editing, theme, emotional resonance, etc. – are presented with sufficient expertise to make even the 2-D version an engrossing 2+1⁄2-hour experience." Avatar's underlying social and political themes attracted attention. Armond White of the New York Press wrote that Cameron used "villainous American characters" to "misrepresent facets of militarism, capitalism, and imperialism". Russell D. Moore of The Christian Post concluded that "propaganda exists in the film" and stated "If you can get a theater full of people in Kentucky to stand and applaud the defeat of their country in war, then you've got some amazing special effects." Adam Cohen of The New York Times was more positive about the film, calling its anti-imperialist message "a 22nd-century version of the American colonists vs. the British, India vs. the Raj, or Latin America vs. United Fruit". Ross Douthat of The New York Times opined that the film is "Cameron's long apologia for pantheism [...] Hollywood's religion of choice for a generation now", while Saritha Prabhu of The Tennessean called the film a "misportrayal of pantheism and Eastern spirituality in general", and Maxim Osipov of The Hindustan Times, on the contrary, commended the film's message for its overall consistency with the teachings of Hinduism in the Bhagavad Gita. Annalee Newitz of io9 concluded that Avatar is another film that has the recurring "fantasy about race" whereby "some white guy" becomes the "most awesome" member of a non-white culture. Michael Phillips of the Chicago Tribune called Avatar "the season's ideological Rorschach blot", while Miranda Devine of The Sydney Morning Herald thought that "It [was] impossible to watch Avatar without being banged over the head with the director's ideological hammer." Nidesh Lawtoo believed that an essential, yet less visible social theme that contributed to Avatar's success concerns contemporary fascinations with virtual avatars and "the transition from the world of reality to that of virtual reality". Critics and audiences have cited similarities with other films, literature or media, describing the perceived connections in ways ranging from simple "borrowing" to outright plagiarism. Ty Burr of The Boston Globe called it "the same movie" as Dances with Wolves. Like Dances with Wolves, Avatar has been characterized as being a "white savior" movie, in which a "backwards" native people is impotent without the leadership of a member of the invading white culture. Parallels to the concept and use of an avatar are in Poul Anderson's 1957 novelette "Call Me Joe", in which a paralyzed man uses his mind from orbit to control an artificial body on Jupiter. Cinema audiences in Russia have noted that Avatar has elements in common with the 1960s Noon Universe novels by Arkady and Boris Strugatsky, which are set in the 22nd century on a forested world called Pandora with a sentient indigenous species called the Nave. Various reviews have compared Avatar to the films FernGully: The Last Rainforest, Pocahontas and The Last Samurai. NPR's Morning Edition has compared the film to a montage of tropes, with one commentator stating that Avatar was made by "mixing a bunch of film scripts in a blender". Gary Westfahl wrote that "the science fiction story that most closely resembles Avatar has to be Ursula Le Guin's novella The Word for World Is Forest (1972), another epic about a benevolent race of alien beings who happily inhabit dense forests while living in harmony with nature until they are attacked and slaughtered by invading human soldiers who believe that the only good gook is a dead gook". The science fiction writer and editor Gardner Dozois said that along with the Anderson and Le Guin stories, the "mash-up" included Alan Dean Foster's 1975 novel, Midworld. Some sources saw similarities to the artwork of Roger Dean, which features fantastic images of dragons and floating rock formations. In 2013, Dean sued Cameron and Fox, claiming that Pandora was inspired by 14 of his images. Dean sought damages of $50m. Dean's case was dismissed in 2014, and The Hollywood Reporter noted that Cameron had won multiple Avatar idea theft cases. Avatar received compliments from filmmakers, with Steven Spielberg praising it as "the most evocative and amazing science-fiction movie since Star Wars" and others calling it "audacious and awe inspiring", "master class", and "brilliant". Noted art director-turned-filmmaker Roger Christian is also a noted fan of the film. On the other hand, Duncan Jones said: "It's not in my top three James Cameron films. ... [A]t what point in the film did you have any doubt what was going to happen next?". For French filmmaker Luc Besson, Avatar opened the doors for him to now create an adaptation of the graphic novel series Valérian and Laureline that technologically supports the scope of its source material, with Besson even throwing his original script in the trash and redoing it after seeing the film. TIME ranked Avatar number 3 in their list of "The 10 Greatest Movies of the Millennium (Thus Far)" also earning it a spot on the magazine's All-Time 100 list, and IGN listed Avatar as number 22 on their list of the top 25 Sci-Fi movies of all time. Avatar was released internationally on more than 14,000 screens. It grossed $3,537,000 from midnight screenings in the United States and Canada, with the initial 3D release limited to 2,200 screens. The film grossed $26,752,099 on its opening day, and $77,025,481 over its opening weekend, making it the second-largest December opening ever behind I Am Legend, the largest domestic opening weekend for a film not based on a franchise (topping The Incredibles), the highest opening weekend for a film entirely in 3D (breaking Up's record), the highest opening weekend for an environmentalist film (breaking The Day After Tomorrow's record), and the 40th-largest opening weekend in North America, despite a blizzard that blanketed the East Coast of the United States and reportedly hurt its opening weekend results. The film also set an IMAX opening weekend record, with 178 theaters generating approximately $9.5 million, 12% of the film's $77 million (at the time) North American gross on less than 3% of the screens. International markets generating opening weekend tallies of at least $10 million were for Russia ($19.7 million), France ($17.4 million), the UK ($13.8 million), Germany ($13.3 million), South Korea ($11.7 million), Australia ($11.5 million), and Spain ($11.0 million). Avatar's worldwide gross was US$241.6 million after five days, the ninth largest opening-weekend gross of all time, and the largest for a non-franchise, non-sequel and original film. 58 international IMAX screens generated an estimated $4.1 million during the opening weekend. Revenues in the film's second weekend decreased by only 1.8% in domestic markets, marking a rare occurrence, grossing $75,617,183, to remain in first place at the box office and recording what was then the biggest second weekend of all time. The film experienced another marginal decrease in revenue in its third weekend, dropping 9.4% to $68,490,688 domestically, remaining in first place at the box office, to set a third-weekend record. Avatar crossed the $1 billion mark on the 19th day of its international release, making it the first film to reach this mark in only 19 days. It became the fifth film grossing more than $1 billion worldwide, and the only film of 2009 to do so. In its fourth weekend, Avatar continued to lead the box office domestically, setting a new all-time fourth-weekend record of $50,306,217, and becoming the highest-grossing 2009 release in the United States, beating Transformers: Revenge of the Fallen. In the film's fifth weekend, it set the Martin Luther King Day weekend record, grossing $54,401,446, and set a fifth-weekend record with a take of $42,785,612. It held the top spot to set the sixth and seventh weekend records grossing $34,944,081 and $31,280,029 respectively. It was the fastest film to gross $600 million domestically, on its 47th day in theaters. On January 31, it became the first film to gross over $2 billion worldwide, and it became the first film to gross over $700 million in the U.S. and Canada, on February 27, after 72 days of release. It remained at number one at the domestic box office for seven consecutive weeks – the most consecutive No. 1 weekends since Titanic spent 15 weekends at No.1 in 1997 and 1998 – and also spent 11 consecutive weekends at the top of the box office outside the United States and Canada, breaking the record of nine consecutive weekends set by Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest. By the end of its first theatrical release Avatar had grossed $749,766,139 in the U.S. and Canada, and $1,999,298,189 in other territories, for a worldwide total of $2,749,064,328. Including the revenue from a re-release of Avatar featuring extended footage, Avatar grossed $785,221,649 in the U.S. and Canada, and $2,137,696,265 in other countries for a worldwide total of $2,922,917,914. Avatar has set a number of box office records during its release: on January 25, 2010, it surpassed Titanic's worldwide gross to become the highest-grossing film of all time worldwide 41 days after its international release, just two days after taking the foreign box office record. On February 2, 47 days after its domestic release, Avatar surpassed Titanic to become the highest-grossing film of all time in Canada and the United States. It became the highest-grossing film of all time in at least 30 other countries and is the first film to gross over $2 billion in foreign box office receipts. IMAX ticket sales account for $243.3 million of its worldwide gross, more than double the previous record. By 2022, this figure rose to $268.6 million. Box Office Mojo estimates that after adjusting for the rise in average ticket prices, Avatar would be the 14th-highest-grossing film of all time in North America. Box Office Mojo also observes that the higher ticket prices for 3D and IMAX screenings have had a significant impact on Avatar's gross; it estimated, on April 21, 2010, that Avatar had sold approximately 75 million tickets in North American theaters, more than any other film since 1999's Star Wars: Episode I – The Phantom Menace. On a worldwide basis, when Avatar's gross stood at $2 billion just 35 days into its run, The Daily Telegraph estimated its gross was surpassed by only Gone with the Wind ($3.0 billion), Titanic ($2.9 billion), and Star Wars ($2.2 billion) after adjusting for inflation to 2010 prices, with Avatar ultimately winding up with $2.92 billion after subsequent re-releases. Reuters even placed it ahead of Titanic after adjusting the global total for inflation. The 2015 edition of Guinness World Records lists Avatar only behind Gone with the Wind in terms of adjusted grosses worldwide. Before its release, various film critics and fan communities predicted the film would be a significant disappointment at the box office, in line with predictions made for Cameron's previous blockbuster Titanic. This criticism ranged from Avatar's film budget, to its concept and use of 3-D "blue cat people". Slate magazine's Daniel Engber complimented the 3D effects but criticized them for reminding him of certain CGI characters from the Star Wars prequel films and for having the "uncanny valley" effect. The New York Times noted that 20th Century Fox executives had decided to release Alvin and the Chipmunks: The Squeakquel alongside Avatar, calling it a "secret weapon" to cover any unforeseeable losses at the box office. I think if everybody was embracing the film before the fact, the film could never live up to that expectation ... Have them go with some sense of wanting to find the answer. James Cameron on criticism of Avatar before its release. Box office analysts, on the other hand, estimated that the film would be a box office success. "The holy grail of 3-D has finally arrived," said an analyst for Exhibitor Relations. "This is why all these 3-D venues were built: for Avatar. This is the one. The behemoth." The "cautionary estimate" was that Avatar would bring in around $60 million in its opening weekend. Others guessed higher. There were also analysts who believed that the film's three-dimensionality would help its box office performance, given that recent 3D films had been successful. Cameron said he felt the pressure of the predictions, but that pressure is good for film-makers. "It makes us think about our audiences and what the audience wants," he stated. "We owe them a good time. We owe them a piece of good entertainment." Although he felt Avatar would appeal to everyone and that the film could not afford to have a target demographic, he especially wanted hard-core science-fiction fans to see it: "If I can just get 'em in the damn theater, the film will act on them in the way it's supposed to, in terms of taking them on an amazing journey and giving them this rich emotional experience." Cameron was aware of the sentiment that Avatar would need significant "repeat business" just to make up for its budget and achieve box office success, and believed Avatar could inspire the same "sharing" reaction as Titanic. He said that film worked because, "When people have an experience that's very powerful in the movie theatre, they want to go share it. They want to grab their friend and bring them, so that they can enjoy it. They want to be the person to bring them the news that this is something worth having in their life." After the film's release and unusually strong box office performance over its first two weeks, it was debated as the one film capable of surpassing Titanic's worldwide gross, and its continued strength perplexed box office analysts. Other films in recent years had been cited as contenders for surpassing Titanic, such as 2008's The Dark Knight, but Avatar was considered the first film with a genuine chance to do so, and its numbers being aided by higher ticket prices for 3D screenings did not fully explain its success to box office analysts. "Most films are considered to be healthy if they manage anything less than a 50% drop from their first weekend to their second. Dipping just 11% from the first to the third is unheard of," said Paul Dergarabedian, president of box-office analysis for Hollywood.com. "This is just unprecedented. I had to do a double take. I thought it was a miscalculation." Analysts predicted second place for the film's worldwide gross, but most were uncertain about it surpassing Titanic because "Today's films flame out much faster than they did when Titanic was released." Brandon Gray, president of Box Office Mojo, believed in the film's chances of becoming the highest-grossing film of all time, though he also believed it was too early to surmise because it had only played during the holidays. He said, "While Avatar may beat Titanic's record, it will be tough, and the film is unlikely to surpass Titanic in attendance. Ticket prices were about $3 cheaper in the late 1990s." Cameron said he did not think it was realistic to "try to topple Titanic off its perch" because it "just struck some kind of chord" and there had been other good films in recent years. He changed his prediction by mid-January. "It's gonna happen. It's just a matter of time," he said. You've got to compete head on with these other epic works of fantasy and fiction, the Tolkiens and the Star Wars and the Star Treks. People want a persistent alternate reality to invest themselves in and they want the detail that makes it rich and worth their time. They want to live somewhere else. Like Pandora. James Cameron on the success of Avatar Although analysts have been unable to agree that Avatar's success is attributable to one primary factor, several explanations have been advanced. First, January is historically "the dumping ground for the year's weakest films", and this also applied to 2010. Cameron himself said he decided to open the film in December so that it would have less competition from then to January. Titanic capitalized on the same January predictability, and earned most of its gross in 1998. Additionally, Avatar established itself as a "must-see" event. Gray said, "At this point, people who are going to see Avatar are going to see Avatar and would even if the slate was strong." Marketing the film as a "novelty factor" also helped. Fox positioned the film as a cinematic event that should be seen in the theaters. "It's really hard to sell the idea that you can have the same experience at home," stated David Mumpower, an analyst at BoxOfficeProphets.com. The "Oscar buzz" surrounding the film and international viewings helped. "Two-thirds of Titanic's haul was earned overseas, and Avatar [tracked] similarly ...Avatar opened in 106 markets globally and was No. 1 in all of them", and the markets "such as Russia, where Titanic saw modest receipts in 1997 and 1998, are white-hot today" with "more screens and moviegoers" than before. According to Variety, films in 3D accumulated $1.3 billion in 2009, "a threefold increase over 2008 and more than 10% of the total 2009 box-office gross". The increased ticket price – an average of $2 to $3 per ticket in most markets – helped the film. Likewise, Entertainment Weekly attributed the film's success to 3D glasses but also to its "astronomic word-of-mouth". Not only do some theaters charge up to $18.50 for IMAX tickets, but "the buzz" created by the new technology was the possible cause for sold-out screenings. Gray said Avatar having no basis in previously established material makes its performance remarkable and even more impressive. "The movie might be derivative of many movies in its story and themes," he said, "but it had no direct antecedent like the other top-grossing films: Titanic (historical events), the Star Wars movies (an established film franchise), or The Lord of the Rings (literature). It was a tougher sell ..." The Hollywood Reporter estimated that after a combined production and promotion cost of between $387 million and $437 million, the film turned a net profit of $1.2 billion. Avatar won the 82nd Academy Awards for Best Art Direction, Best Cinematography, and Best Visual Effects, and was nominated for a total of nine, including Best Picture and Best Director. Avatar also won the 67th Golden Globe Awards for Best Motion Picture – Drama and Best Director, and was nominated for two others. At the 36th Saturn Awards, Avatar won all ten awards it was nominated for: Best Science Fiction Film, Best Actor, Best Actress, Best Supporting Actor, Best Supporting Actress, Best Director, Best Writing, Best Music, Best Production Design and Best Special Effects. The New York Film Critics Online honored the film with its Best Picture award. The film also won the Critics' Choice Awards of the Broadcast Film Critics Association for Best Action Film and several technical categories, out of nine nominations. It won two of the St. Louis Film Critics awards: Best Visual Effects and Most Original, Innovative or Creative Film. The film also won the British Academy of Film and Television Arts (BAFTA) award for Production Design and Special Visual Effects, and was nominated for six others, including Best Film and Director. The film has received numerous other major awards, nominations and honors. Despite the film's financial and critical success, some journalists have questioned Avatar's cultural impact. In 2014, Scott Mendelson of Forbes said the film had been "all but forgotten", citing the lack of merchandising, a fandom for the film, or any long-enduring media franchise, and further stated that he believed most general audiences could not remember any of the film's details, such as the names of its characters or actors in the cast. Mendelson argued Avatar's only achievement of note to be its popularization of 3D cinema. Despite this, he still felt it was a quality film, saying, "A great blockbuster movie can just be a great blockbuster movie without capturing the lunchbox market." He further reflected and reversed his stance in 2022 after the box office success of the re-release, saying, "The very things that made Avatar sometimes feel like a 'forgotten blockbuster' have inspired a skewed renewed nostalgia for its singular existence. It was just a movie, an original auteur-specific movie that prioritized top-shelf filmmaking and clockwork plotting over quotable dialogue and memes." Some have questioned if there is an audience for the film's planned sequels, believing there to be a lack of interest in the face of the multiple delays of their release dates. Writing for The Escapist, Darren Mooney acknowledged that the film had not been broadly remembered in the pop cultural subconscious and had not found a fandom in the same sense as many other popular media, but argued that this was not a negative point, saying, "its defining legacy is the insistence that it lacks a legacy." In 2022, in response to the trailer for Avatar's upcoming sequel and the film's re-release, journalists again questioned the cultural relevance of the film, particularly Patrick Ryan of USA Today, who said the film had "curiously left almost no pop-culture footprint". In contrast, Bilge Ebiri of Vulture called others' opinions that the film had left no cultural impact "narrow-minded" and said that the film still held up well. A detailed overview of the Avatar franchise was reported in The New York Times in December of that year. Avatar's success led to two sequels; this number was subsequently expanded to four. Avatar: The Way of Water (2022) grossed over $2.3 billion, becoming the highest-grossing film of 2022, and received a similarly positive critical and audience response. It will be followed by Avatar 3 (2025). Fourth and fifth Avatar films, titled Avatar 4 and Avatar 5, respectively, are scheduled to be released in 2029 and 2031. Toruk – The First Flight is an original stage production by the Montreal-based Cirque du Soleil which ran between December 2015 and June 2019. Inspired by Avatar, the story is set in Pandora's past, involving a prophecy concerning a threat to the Tree of Souls and a quest for totems from different tribes. Audience members could download an app in order to participate in show effects. On January 18, 2016, it was announced via the Toruk Facebook page that filming for a DVD release had been completed and was undergoing editing. In 2011, Cameron, Lightstorm, and Fox entered an exclusive licensing agreement with the Walt Disney Company to feature Avatar-themed attractions at Walt Disney Parks and Resorts worldwide, including a themed land for Disney's Animal Kingdom in Lake Buena Vista, Florida. The area, known as Pandora – The World of Avatar, opened on May 27, 2017. Following the release of Avatar, Cameron planned to write a novel based on the film, "telling the story of the movie, but [going] into much more depth about all the stories that we didn't have time to deal with." In 2013, this plan was superseded by the announcement of four novels set within the "Avatar expanded universe", to be written by Steven Gould. The books were due to be published by Penguin Random House, although since 2017, there has been no update on the planned book series. Film portal United States portal science fiction portal List of films featuring extraterrestrials List of films featuring powered exoskeletons Red Scorpion Run of the Arrow Attributed to multiple sources: Attributed to multiple sources: LaFraniere, Sharon (January 29, 2010). "China's Zeal for 'Avatar' Crowds Out 'Confucius'". The New York Times. Retrieved January 18, 2020. "Avatar (2009)". AFI Catalog of Feature Films. Archived from the original on July 7, 2018. Retrieved July 6, 2018. "AVATAR [2D] version". British Board of Film Classification. December 8, 2009. Archived from the original on August 27, 2016. Retrieved August 19, 2014. Patten, Dominic (December 3, 2009). "Avatar's True Cost – and Consequences". TheWrap. Archived from the original on July 2, 2015. Retrieved April 27, 2022. "Avatar". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved October 2, 2022. Lefroy, Emily (June 30, 2022). "Kate Winslet stuns as fierce 'warrior' in first-look 'Avatar 2' photo". Choi, Charles Q. (December 28, 2009). "Moons like Avatar's Pandora could be found". NBC News. Retrieved February 27, 2010. Horwitz, Jane (December 24, 2009). "Family Filmgoer". Boston.com. The Washington Post. Retrieved April 27, 2022. This property of Unobtanium is stated in movie guides, rather than in the film. Wilhelm, Maria; Mathison, Dirk (November 2009). James Cameron's Avatar: A Confidential Report on the Biological and Social History of Pandora. HarperCollins. p. 4. ISBN 978-0-06-189675-0. Keegan, Rebecca Winters (January 11, 2007). "Q&A with James Cameron". Time. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Jensen, Jeff (January 10, 2007). "James Cameron talks Avatar". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on August 17, 2019. Retrieved January 28, 2007. Marquardt, Alexander (January 14, 2010). "Did Avatar Borrow from Soviet Sci-Fi Novels?". ABC News. Retrieved March 8, 2012. "Synthetic actors to star in "Avatar"". Tampa Bay Times. August 12, 1996. Archived from the original on January 21, 2021. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Hevrdejs, Judy; Conklin, Mike (August 9, 1996). "Channel 2 has Monday morning team in place". Chicago Tribune. Retrieved February 1, 2010. "Crafting an Alien Language, Hollywood-Style: Professor's Work to Hit the Big Screen in Upcoming Blockbuster Avatar". USC Marshall School of Business. December 7, 2009. Archived from the original on May 26, 2011. Retrieved May 31, 2011. "Avatar Language". Nine to Noon. Radio New Zealand. December 15, 2009. Retrieved September 9, 2021. Barnes, Brooks (December 20, 2009). "'Avatar' Is No. 1 but Without a Record". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 13, 2011. Retrieved December 20, 2009. Fritz, Ben (December 20, 2009). "Could 'Avatar' hit $1 billion?". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on December 22, 2009. Retrieved December 20, 2009. Keegan, Rebecca (December 22, 2009). "How Much Did Avatar Really Cost?". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on January 14, 2010. Retrieved December 23, 2009. Sunhee, Han (February 5, 2010). "'Avatar' goes 4D in Korea". Variety. Archived from the original on February 10, 2010. Retrieved April 28, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony (December 19, 2009). "'Avatar' takes $27 million in its first day". Variety. Retrieved January 11, 2010. Douglas, Edward (December 21, 2009). "Avatar Soars Despite Heavy Snowstorms". ComingSoon.net. Archived from the original on December 23, 2009. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Dean Goodman (December 20, 2009). ""Avatar" leads box office, despite blizzard". Reuters. Archived from the original on January 19, 2010. Retrieved December 20, 2009. Tartaglione, Nancy (March 13, 2021). "'Avatar' Overtakes 'Avengers: Endgame' As All-Time Highest-Grossing Film Worldwide; Rises To $2.8B Amid China Reissue – Update". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved March 13, 2021. Coyle, Jake (January 31, 2010). "'Avatar' Wins Box Office, Nears Domestic Record". ABC News. Archived from the original on February 3, 2010. Retrieved February 2, 2010. Goss, Patrick (April 15, 2016). "Why Avatar's big screen success couldn't save 3D TV". TechRadar. Archived from the original on July 20, 2016. Retrieved May 11, 2020. Goldberg, Matt (April 6, 2018). "3D Is Dead (Again)". Collider. Retrieved April 7, 2018. Conan O'Brien (December 18, 2009). The Tonight Show with Conan O'Brien. Season 1. Episode 128. NBC. I was cheap Williamson, Kevin. "Paraplegic role helps Worthington find his feet". The London Free Press. Archived from the original on January 30, 2010. Retrieved January 1, 2010. "This week's cover: James Cameron reveals plans for an 'Avatar' sequel". Entertainment Weekly. January 14, 2010. Archived from the original on January 23, 2010. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Horn, John. "Faces to watch 2009: film, TV, music and Web – Sam Worthington". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on December 31, 2008. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Grater, Tom (July 9, 2021). "Matt Damon Talks Turning Down 'Avatar', Almost Directing 'Manchester By The Sea' & Diversity In His Films At Engaging Cannes Masterclass". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved July 9, 2021. Brennan, David (February 11, 2007). "Avatar Scriptment: Summary, Review, and Analysis". James Cameron's Movies & Creations. Archived from the original on December 19, 2009. Retrieved April 29, 2010. Thompson, Anne (January 9, 2007). ""Titanic" director sets sci-fi epic for '09". Reuters. Archived from the original on January 22, 2010. Retrieved December 26, 2009. "Cameron's Avatar Starts Filming in April". ComingSoon.net. January 9, 2007. Archived from the original on August 22, 2008. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Thompson, Anne (August 2, 2007). "Lang, Rodriguez armed for 'Avatar'". Variety. Retrieved August 3, 2007. Barnes, Jessica (March 26, 2007). "Michael Biehn Talks 'Avatar' – Cameron Not Using Cameras?". Cinematical. Archived from the original on January 12, 2010. Simmons, Leslie (September 21, 2007). "'Avatar' has new player with Ribisi". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 27, 2022. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Kaye, Don (April 21, 2021). "How The Saving Private Ryan Cast Launched A New Generation Of Stars". Den of Geek. Archived from the original on May 27, 2022. Retrieved January 20, 2023. Harp, Justin (October 13, 2017). "James Cameron's Avatar is bringing back Giovanni Ribisi as Parker Selfridge for All the sequels". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on July 17, 2019. Retrieved January 20, 2023. Cameron, James (2007). "Avatar" (PDF). Fox Screenings. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 25, 2010. Retrieved May 6, 2010. Lux, Rachel (December 14, 2009). "Close-Up: Joel David Moore". Alternative Press. Archived from the original on January 2, 2010. Retrieved May 6, 2010. "Pounder Talks Avatar". IGN. April 30, 2007. Archived from the original on November 5, 2012. Retrieved December 25, 2009. Morris, Clint (August 2, 2007). "Sigouney Weaver talks Avatar". Moviehole.net. Archived from the original on September 29, 2007. Retrieved August 2, 2007. Bazley, Lewis (May 25, 2009). "Drag Me to Hell Review". inthenews.co.uk. Archived from the original on June 11, 2009. Retrieved June 2, 2009. The Return of James Cameron, Box Office King - GQ ""Avatar": James Cameron's New SciFi Thriller -The Official Trailer (VIDEO)". The Daily Galaxy --Great Discoveries Channel. Archived from the original on October 14, 2017. Retrieved October 14, 2017. Grover, Ronald; Lowry, Tom; White, Michael (January 21, 2010). "King of the World (Again)". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on January 25, 2010. Retrieved April 26, 2022. Knowles, Harry (February 28, 2006). "Harry talks to James Cameron, Cracks PROJECT 880, the BATTLE ANGEL trilogy & Cameron's live shoot on Mars!!!". Ain't It Cool News. Archived from the original on October 13, 2006. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Horn, John (January 8, 2007). "Director Cameron to shoot again". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved January 9, 2007. Kozlowski, Lori (January 2, 2010). "'Avatar' team brought in UC Riverside professor to dig in the dirt of Pandora". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on January 4, 2010. Retrieved January 3, 2010. Davis, Lauren (August 9, 2009). "Avatar Concept Designer Reveals the Secrets of the Na'vi". Gizmodo. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Kendricks, Neil (March 7, 2010). "Cameron, the Science Geek Who Became a Movie Titan for the Ages". The San Diego Union-Tribune. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Crabtree, Sheigh (July 7, 2006). "Cameron comes back with CG extravaganza". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 14, 2006. Retrieved October 18, 2006. Smith, Lynn (August 4, 2006). "Special-effects giants sign on to 'Avatar'". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Duncan, Jody; Cameron, James (October 2006). The Winston Effect: The Art and History of Stan Winston Studio. Titan Books. ISBN 1-84576-150-2. Anders, Charlie Jane (December 10, 2009). "Avatar Started As A Four-Month, Late-Night Jam Session At James Cameron's House". Gizmodo. Retrieved April 27, 2022. "Technology adds more in-depth feeling to the movie experience". The Washington Times. September 27, 2006. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Duncan, Jody; Fitzpatrick, Lisa (2010). The Making of Avatar. United States: Abrams Books. p. 52. ISBN 978-0-8109-9706-6. "Written By homepage". Archived from the original on November 30, 2010. Retrieved November 20, 2010. Rampton, James (December 19, 2006). "James Cameron: King of all he surveys". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on January 8, 2007. Retrieved December 20, 2006. Waxman, Sharon (January 8, 2007). "'Titanic' Director Joins Fox on $200 Million Film". The New York Times. Retrieved January 8, 2007. Thompson, Anne (January 2010). "How James Cameron's Innovative New 3D Tech Created Avatar". Popular Mechanics. Archived from the original on December 14, 2009. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Cohen, David S. (April 10, 2008). "James Cameron supercharges 3-D". Variety. Archived from the original on March 31, 2022. Retrieved December 26, 2009. Thompson, Anne (January 9, 2007). "Cameron sets live-action, CG epic for 2009". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 4, 2021. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Quittner, Josh (March 19, 2009). "The Next Dimension". Time. Archived from the original on March 22, 2009. Retrieved March 19, 2009. "$200m Avatar starts filming in Wellington". Stuff. October 17, 2007. Archived from the original on June 14, 2011. Retrieved April 27, 2022. James Cameron and production team (January 19, 2010). 'Avatar' Creating the World of Pandora (Video). Yahoo! Video. Archived from the original on January 25, 2010. "James Cameron's Jungle Expedition For 'Avatar' Stars". Starpulse.com. November 9, 2009. Archived from the original on February 11, 2010. Retrieved January 2, 2010. Waxman, Sharon (January 9, 2007). "Computers Join Actors in Hybrids On Screen". The New York Times. Retrieved August 22, 2007. Abramowitz, Rachel (February 19, 2009). "Do the 'Avatar' actors deserve recognition?". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on March 1, 2010. Retrieved February 24, 2010. Warren, Jane (December 11, 2009). "Avatar: Director James Cameron's crowning glory". Daily Express. UK. Retrieved January 24, 2010. Chang, Aldric (August 20, 2009). "Reading Between the Lines: First Image of James Cameron's Avatar". media-freaks.com. Archived from the original on August 30, 2009. Retrieved February 5, 2015. Cameron, James; Cameron, Suzy Amis (December 4, 2017). "Animal agriculture is choking the Earth and making us sick. We must act now". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved December 6, 2017. Duncan, Jody (January 2010). "Avatar". Cinefex. Riverside, CA: 86. Terdiman, Daniel (February 1, 2010). "'Avatar' Oscars could make Weta household name". CNET. Archived from the original on February 27, 2015. Retrieved July 21, 2014. McConnon, Aili (April 2, 2007). "James Cameron on the Cutting Edge". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on October 30, 2009. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Kaufman, Amy (July 25, 2009). "Jackson, Cameron Saddened by State of Film Industry (Video)". Archived from the original on January 22, 2010. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Williams, Phillip (January 19, 2010). "James Cameron Mixes It Up With Avatar". MovieMaker. Archived from the original on September 10, 2012. Retrieved July 21, 2014. Gelten, Larry (January 31, 2010). "2nd look: 'Avatar'". New York Post. Archived from the original on September 12, 2017. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Wakefield, Philip (December 19–25, 2009). "Close encounters of the 3D kind". The Listener. Vol. 3632. Archived from the original on May 22, 2010. Retrieved February 4, 2010. Siegel, Jake (February 5, 2010). "Cameron Says Microsoft's Role in 'Avatar' Was Key". Microsoft. Archived from the original on January 6, 2012. Retrieved December 21, 2010. Ericson, Jim (January 2, 2010). "Overheard: AVATAR's Data Center". SourceMedia. Information Management: 26. Archived from the original on March 27, 2020. Retrieved March 27, 2020. Ericson, Jim (December 21, 2009). "Processing AVATAR". SourceMedia. Information Management. Archived from the original on December 25, 2009. Retrieved February 2, 2010. Paul, Ryan (March 26, 2010). "Cloudy with a chance of Linux: Canonical aims to cash in". Ars Technica. Archived from the original on March 29, 2010. Retrieved April 28, 2022. Rowe, Robin (March 1, 2009). "The Day the Earth Stood Still". Linux Journal. Archived from the original on April 30, 2010. Retrieved March 28, 2010. Hellard, Paul (May 25, 2010). "Jack Greasley, developer and Product Manager at The Foundry, takes CGSociety for a look around Mari, the new texture application". CG Society. Archived from the original on November 10, 2011. Retrieved December 21, 2010. Seymour, Mike (March 29, 2010). "Exclusive: Foundry NAB Preview". FX Guide. Retrieved December 21, 2010. Masters, Tim (December 16, 2009). "Will Avatar crown James Cameron 'King of the Universe'?". BBC News. Archived from the original on January 14, 2010. Retrieved January 12, 2010. Rath, John (December 22, 2009). "The Data-Crunching Powerhouse Behind 'Avatar'". Datacenterknowledge.com. Archived from the original on January 22, 2010. Retrieved January 21, 2010. Osborne, Doug (December 24, 2009). "The computing power that created Avatar". Geek.com. Archived from the original on April 14, 2013. Retrieved July 21, 2014. Terdiman, Daniel (December 19, 2009). "ILM steps in to help finish 'Avatar' visual effects". CNET. Archived from the original on April 28, 2014. Retrieved April 28, 2014. Giardina, Carolyn (October 12, 2017). "'Avatar' VFX Supervisor Joe Letteri Will be Feted by Visual Effects Society". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved October 12, 2017. "Fox confirms Horner on Cameron's 'Avatar'" (PDF). FilmMusic Weekly. June 19, 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 29, 2007. Retrieved January 25, 2010. Dorey, Jim (April 2, 2008). "Na'vi Alien Language Incorporated In "Avatar" Music Soundtrack". MarketSaw Blog. Archived from the original on December 21, 2009. Retrieved April 21, 2008. Lucas, Ann (Fall 2007). "Alumni News" (PDF). UCLA Department of Ethnomusicology. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 6, 2016. Retrieved July 24, 2008. Carlsson, Mikael (January 3, 2009). "Top-10 Most Anticipated Scores of 2009". Upcoming Film Scores. Archived from the original on January 17, 2009. Retrieved January 7, 2009. Vaughan, Owen (November 30, 2009). "James Horner: 'Scoring Avatar has been the most difficult job I've done'". The Times. London. Retrieved February 8, 2010.(Subscription required.) Fukushima, Glenn (November 16, 2009). "Atlantic Unveils "AVATAR: MUSIC FROM THE MOTION PICTURE"; Official Companion Album to James Cameron's Upcoming Epic Adventure Features Music Composed & Conducted by Oscar-Winner James Horner, Plus "I See You (Theme From Avatar)," Performed by Leona Lewis". Marketwired. Archived from the original on December 21, 2009. Retrieved November 22, 2009. Ordoña, Michael (December 13, 2009). "Eye-popping 'Avatar' pioneers new technology". San Francisco Chronicle. Hearst Communications Inc. Archived from the original on August 13, 2012. Retrieved April 27, 2022. "James Cameron: Yes, 'Avatar' is 'Dances with Wolves' in space ... sorta". Los Angeles Times. August 14, 2009. Archived from the original on July 1, 2013. Retrieved December 21, 2009. Ito, Tokuhiro (December 25, 2009). "新作「アバター」宮崎アニメにオマージュ Ｊ・キャメロン監督 (New Film Avatar Homage to Miyazaki's Animated Film: J. Cameron)". Sankei Shimbun (in Japanese). Archived from the original on December 28, 2009. Retrieved March 10, 2010. Acuna, Kirsten (December 13, 2012). "James Cameron Swears He Didn't Rip Off The Idea For 'Avatar'". Business Insider. Archived from the original on December 15, 2012. Retrieved April 23, 2021. Gardner, Eriq (December 10, 2012). "Read James Cameron's Sworn Declaration on How He Created 'Avatar' (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 12, 2012. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Schrodt, Paul (April 1, 2017). "How the original 'Ghost in the Shell' changed sci-fi and the way we think about the future". Business Insider. Retrieved June 14, 2019. Rose, Steve (October 19, 2009). "Hollywood is haunted by Ghost in the Shell". TheGuardian.com. Archived from the original on March 8, 2013. Retrieved July 27, 2011. In Hinduism, the human manifestations of several deities, including Vishnu, Krishna, and Rama, have blue-colored skin. See Blue:Religion. Wadhwani, Sita (December 24, 2009). "The religious backdrop to James Cameron's 'Avatar'". CNNgo. CNN. Archived from the original on January 17, 2010. Retrieved January 18, 2010. Svetkey, Benjamin (January 15, 2010). "'Avatar:' 11 Burning Questions". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on January 17, 2010. Retrieved January 16, 2010. Eric Ditzian, with reporting by Josh Horowitz (January 7, 2010). "James Cameron Compares His 'Avatar' And 'Titanic' Couples. The director notes the similarities between Sully and Neytiri, and Jack and Rose". MTV. Archived from the original on February 6, 2010. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Woerner, Meredith (July 24, 2009). "James Cameron Fought the Studio to Keep His Aliens Weird in "Avatar"". Gizmodo. Archived from the original on February 12, 2010. Retrieved April 27, 2022. "James Cameron en Chine pour faire la publicité de son film Avatar". peopledaily (in French). December 24, 2009. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Anders, Charlie Jane (January 14, 2010). "Avatar's Designers Speak: Floating Mountains, AMP Suits And The Dragon". Gizmodo. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Kontis, Nick (December 17, 2019). "Zhangjiajie, China: Get hyped for 'Avatar 2' by visiting the place that inspired the film". USA Today. Retrieved September 10, 2020. "Noble Clyde Boudreaux – Rig Specifications". Noble Corporation. Archived from the original on January 30, 2012. Retrieved January 31, 2010. Pbadmin (January 12, 2008). "Avatar Designs Based on Drilling Rig". Comingsoon.net - Movie Trailers, Tv & Streaming News, and More. ComingSoon.net. Archived from the original on June 5, 2008. Retrieved April 27, 2022. "'Avatar Friday': fans will be shown preview of James Cameron's 3-D film". The Daily Telegraph. London. Associated Press. August 18, 2009. Archived from the original on March 26, 2010. Retrieved February 20, 2010. Hoyle, Ben (December 11, 2009). "War on Terror backdrop to James Cameron's Avatar". The Australian. Archived from the original on January 17, 2018. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Anderson, John (December 10, 2009). "Alternate World, Alternate Technology". The New York Times. Retrieved December 11, 2009. Murphy, Mekado (December 21, 2009). "A Few Questions for James Cameron". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 25, 2009. Retrieved January 9, 2010. Raup, Jordan (August 14, 2009). "First Official Photo For James Cameron's 'Avatar'". Thefilmstage.com. Archived from the original on November 1, 2009. Retrieved September 19, 2009. "New Empire Avatar Cover!". Empire. August 25, 2009. Archived from the original on January 6, 2010. Retrieved April 28, 2022. Rettig, Kristina (July 23, 2009). "James Cameron previews 'Avatar'". Variety. Retrieved July 26, 2009. Gershman, Joshua (July 23, 2009). "Dolby 3D is the Official 3D Provider for Comic-Con International 2009". Business Wire. Dolby. Archived from the original on July 10, 2011. Retrieved July 26, 2009. Finke, Nikki (July 23, 2009). "2009 Comic-Con: Jim Cameron's 'Avatar'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 24, 2020. Retrieved July 24, 2009. Cohen, Sandy (July 24, 2009). "James Cameron wows Comic Con with 3-D 'Avatar'". The San Diego Union-Tribune. Retrieved April 28, 2022. Balchak, Brian (July 24, 2009). "SDCC 2009: Watch the James Cameron's Avatar Comic-Con Panel!". MovieWeb. Archived from the original on October 27, 2020. Retrieved July 25, 2009. Darren (July 23, 2009). "Official 'Avatar Day' Press Release". SciFiScoop.com. Archived from the original on January 2, 2010. Retrieved July 23, 2009. Clark, Cindy (August 23, 2009). "'Avatar' preview dazzles audiences". USA Today. Archived from the original on December 10, 2012. Retrieved December 6, 2009. Michael Bodey (August 27, 2009). "Titanic director James Cameron grabs film's holy grail in new film Avatar". The Australian. Retrieved December 6, 2009. Pomerantz, Dorothy (October 3, 2009). "Stars gear up for a risky season in Hollywood". CTV Television Network. Retrieved December 6, 2009. Kilday, Gregg (August 24, 2009). "A chip off the ol' iceberg?". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 28, 2022. Retrieved April 28, 2022. Paur, Joey (August 24, 2009). "AVATAR Movie Teaser is the Most Viewed Trailer Ever on Apple.com". GeekTyrant. Archived from the original on July 21, 2012. Retrieved December 6, 2009. Nga, Pham Thu; Kha, Trong (November 13, 2009). "Through a glass starkly". Thanh Nien News. Archived from the original on January 5, 2010. Retrieved January 5, 2010. "AVATAR Trailer Gets World's Largest Live Trailer Viewing on November 1". Reuters. October 29, 2009. Archived from the original on November 2, 2009. Retrieved December 6, 2009. "Coca-Cola Zero Immerses in the World of 'Avatar'". Progressive Grocer. November 24, 2009. Archived from the original on September 27, 2011. Retrieved January 19, 2010. Kung, Michelle (December 3, 2009). ""Avatar" Advertising Invades "Bones" Episode "The Gamer in the Grease"". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on March 24, 2020. Retrieved April 28, 2022. Kapko, Matt (December 7, 2009). "Adult Swim's Space Ghost to Interview Avatar's Zoë Saldana". Adult Swim. Animation World Network. Archived from the original on February 24, 2014. Retrieved February 18, 2010. Elliott, Stuart (February 8, 2010). "This Campaign Is Wet (and Wild)". The New York Times. Archived from the original on February 11, 2010. Retrieved February 1, 2012. Avatar: A Confidential Report on the Biological and Social History of Pandora. ISBN 978-0-06-189675-0 James Cameron's Avatar: The Movie Scrapbook. ISBN 978-0-06-180124-2 The Art of Avatar: James Cameron's Epic Adventure. ISBN 978-0-8109-8286-4 The Making of Avatar. ISBN 0-8109-9706-1 Germain, David (December 21, 2009). "Avatar creator Cameron shares alien shop talk". San Diego Union-Tribune. Associated Press. Archived from the original on February 25, 2010. Retrieved April 28, 2022. Carroll, Larry (February 12, 2010). "James Cameron Writing 'Avatar' Prequel – But Not For The Big Screen". MTV. Archived from the original on March 25, 2010. Retrieved April 28, 2022. Lewis, Andy (August 22, 2013). "James Cameron Spins Off 'Avatar' Book Series". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved April 28, 2022. Woerner, Meredith (June 2, 2009). "James Cameron's Na'vi Banshees Take Flight In The Avatar Video Game". Gizmodo. Archived from the original on June 5, 2009. Retrieved April 28, 2022. "'Avatar' in four different formats". The Independent. London. December 12, 2009. Archived from the original on December 15, 2009. Retrieved April 28, 2022. Roberts, Katie (December 11, 2009). "Fox Licensing unveils Avatar licensing programme". Licensing.biz. Archived from the original on September 30, 2013. Retrieved December 12, 2009. "Mattel is Master Toy Licensee for Cameron's Avatar". ComingSoon.net. February 13, 2009. Archived from the original on February 14, 2009. Retrieved April 28, 2022. "McDonald's Brings Customers to Another Planet in Partnership With James Cameron's Movie Masterpiece 'AVATAR'". McDonald's Press Release via PR Newswire. December 10, 2009. Archived from the original on December 13, 2009. Retrieved August 23, 2015. Sharma, Garima (February 17, 2010). "Stamp-ed!". The Times of India. India. Archived from the original on August 11, 2011. Retrieved February 17, 2010. "Avatar International Release Dates". Fox International. Archived from the original on October 5, 2009. Retrieved October 31, 2009. McNary, Dave (July 13, 2007). "Hollywood films' dating game". Variety. Retrieved July 17, 2007. McClintock, Pamela; Fleming, Michael (December 11, 2007). "Fox shifts Avatar, Museum". Variety. Archived from the original on January 15, 2016. Retrieved April 27, 2022. "James Cameron Q & A Podcast from Aliens / The Abyss Event!". MarketSaw. May 29, 2009. Archived from the original on June 12, 2009. Retrieved June 2, 2009. "James Cameron Q & A at Aero Theatre 05–29–09 (Audio)". MarketSaw. May 30, 2009. Retrieved June 2, 2009. Connelly, Brendon (May 31, 2009). "3D Avatar Vs. 2D Avatar, And The Importance Of Aspect Ratios". /Film. Retrieved April 27, 2022. "DRM chaos prevents 3D preview of Avatar". heise.de. December 17, 2009. Archived from the original on December 20, 2009. Retrieved February 5, 2015. Gwin, Scott (December 17, 2009). "Over 350 Avatar Screenings Already Sold Out". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on December 20, 2009. Retrieved December 20, 2009. Segers, Frank (December 20, 2009). "'Avatar' dominates int'l boxoffice". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 14, 2010. Retrieved April 28, 2022. Kay, Jeremy (December 21, 2009). "Avatar is king of the world with $165.2m overseas launch". ScreenDaily. Archived from the original on November 20, 2017. Retrieved December 20, 2009. "James Cameron's Avatar Posts Record Opening Weekend Box Office Results in IMAX(R) Theatres". Yahoo!. December 21, 2009. Archived from the original on January 17, 2010. Retrieved October 13, 2010. "ScreenCrave: Avatar Breaks IMAX's Wide Release Record". Bigmoviezone.com. December 14, 2009. Archived from the original on March 15, 2012. Retrieved December 14, 2009. Kilday, Greg; DiOrio, Carl (July 8, 2010). "'Avatar: Special Edition' 3D coming to theaters". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 11, 2010. Retrieved July 8, 2010. Dorey, Jim (August 7, 2010). "EXCLUSIVE: James Cameron Interview! Talks AVATAR Re-release, Sequels, 3D Conversions & Working With Del Toro!". marketsaw.blogspot.com. MarketSaw. Archived from the original on August 15, 2010. Retrieved August 14, 2010. Warner, Kara (August 11, 2010). "'Avatar' Director James Cameron Talks 'Alien Kink Scene'". MTV. Archived from the original on August 14, 2010. Retrieved August 14, 2010. Wigney, James (August 15, 2010). "Avatar director slams bandwagon jumpers". Herald Sun. Australia. Archived from the original on June 15, 2011. Retrieved August 16, 2010. Giardina, Carolyn (September 29, 2022). "How James Cameron and Jon Landau Remastered 'Avatar' for Its Rerelease". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved September 23, 2022. Giardina, Carolyn (April 27, 2022). "'Avatar 2' Footage Astonishes Audience at CinemaCon". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Keegan, Rebecca (November 26, 2017). "James Cameron on Titanic's Legacy, the Avatar Sequels' Progress, and the Impact of a Fox Studio Sale". Vanity Fair. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Obviously the [new] Avatar films will be [in Dolby Vision] as well, and in fact, we're also going to do a conversion of Avatar to HDR. We'll re-release that at some point down the line; I want to try to help this rollout of the Dolby cinemas, because I think it's fantastic what they're doing. Weintraub, Steve (March 16, 2010). "Avatar DVD/Blu-ray Arrives April 22 – Cover Art and Info Here". British Academy of Film and Television Arts. Archived from the original on November 26, 2013. Retrieved September 17, 2014. "James Cameron's Avatar: Combi Pack (Blu-ray & DVD) (2009) (Blu-ray)". Play.com. Archived from the original on March 22, 2010. Retrieved May 25, 2010. "Avatar Earth Day RELEASE: James Cameron Film Comes Out On DVD, Inspires 'Home Tree' Earth Day 2010". The Huffington Post. April 21, 2010. Archived from the original on April 27, 2010. Retrieved May 25, 2010. Calonge, Juan (March 25, 2010). "Makers of Avatar Unveil Blu-ray Launch (Update)". Blu-ray.com. Archived from the original on April 14, 2010. Retrieved March 25, 2010. Ryan, Mike (April 30, 2010). "Some 'Avatar' Fans Struggle With Blu-Ray". Yahoo! Movies. Archived from the original on May 3, 2010. Retrieved April 30, 2010. Biggs, John (April 23, 2010). "This is why early adopting sucks: Avatar doesn't play on some Samsung BR players". CrunchGear. Archived from the original on April 26, 2010. Retrieved April 30, 2010. Boucher, Geoff; Johnson, Reed (April 23, 2010). "'Avatar' shatters sales records – and inspires an armed heist in Mexico City". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 25, 2010. Retrieved April 23, 2010. Fritz, Ben (April 25, 2010). "'Avatar' is already the bestselling Blu-ray ever". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on June 8, 2010. Retrieved May 25, 2010. Ryan, Mike (April 26, 2010). "Movie Talk: James Cameron, King of DVD sales". Yahoo! Movies. Archived from the original on May 5, 2010. Retrieved May 25, 2010. "Avatar breaks UK Blu-ray sales record". BBC News. April 28, 2010. Archived from the original on May 1, 2010. Retrieved May 2, 2010. Dobuzinskis, Alex (May 11, 2010). ""Avatar" fastest selling DVD after three weeks". Reuters. Retrieved May 25, 2010. "Avatar (2009)". The Numbers. Nash Information Services. Retrieved February 15, 2021. "All-Time Best-Selling Blu-ray Titles in the United States". The Numbers. Nash Information Services. Retrieved January 25, 2015. Fleming, Ryan (October 7, 2010). "Avatar three-disc extended collectors set due in November". Digital Trends. Archived from the original on March 14, 2012. Retrieved October 11, 2010. Russell, Mike (August 26, 2010). "Interview with James Cameron on 'Avatar' re-release, BP oil spill – and much more". The Oregonian. Archived from the original on August 29, 2010. Retrieved April 28, 2022. "Update: Cameron Talks Avatar Blu-ray/DVD Releases and Sequel". Comingsoon.net. February 19, 2010. Archived from the original on February 22, 2010. Retrieved May 25, 2010. Trenholm, Rich (November 1, 2010). "Avatar gets 3D Blu-ray release, comes with free Panasonic 3DTV". CNET UK. Archived from the original on November 4, 2010. Retrieved November 12, 2010. Calonge, Juan (October 21, 2010). "Cameron: Avatar CE Blu-ray Is Last Version – Save for 3D". Blu-ray.com. Archived from the original on October 26, 2010. Retrieved November 11, 2010. Laughlin, Andrew (December 1, 2010). "Sky to give 'Avatar' 3D world premiere". Digital Spy. Retrieved December 21, 2010. Lamkin, Paul (December 1, 2010). "Avatar 3DTV world premiere on Sky 3D". Pocket-lint.com. Archived from the original on December 31, 2010. Retrieved December 21, 2010. Jani, David (December 1, 2010). "Sky Secures Avatar 3D TV World Premier". Itproportal.com. IT Pro Portal. Retrieved December 21, 2010. "Avatar on Blu-ray 3D". YouTube. August 15, 2012. Archived from the original on November 15, 2021. Retrieved November 8, 2012. "Avatar 3D Blu-ray: Limited 3D Edition". Blu-ray.com. Archived from the original on March 16, 2017. Retrieved November 8, 2012. "Disney+ on Apple Vision Pro Ushers in a New Era of Storytelling Innovation and Immersive Entertainment". Disney Plus Press. Retrieved February 8, 2024. "Avatar". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Archived from the original on December 31, 2010. Retrieved March 14, 2024. "Avatar". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Archived from the original on January 17, 2010. Retrieved February 15, 2021. Miller, Neil (December 21, 2009). "Avatar Opens to Big Returns, But Staying Power is the Key". FilmSchoolRejects.com. CraveOnline. Archived from the original on February 9, 2010. Retrieved January 29, 2010. Ebert, Roger (December 11, 2009). "Avatar". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on December 13, 2009. Retrieved December 17, 2009. "Avatar – Movie Reviews". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. December 21, 2009. Retrieved December 22, 2009. Aravind, Ajay (July 24, 2021). "10 Movies That Are All Style & No Substance". Comic Book Resources. Retrieved July 25, 2021. McCarthy, Todd (December 10, 2009). "Avatar". Variety. Archived from the original on April 16, 2015. Retrieved March 17, 2023. Honeycutt, Kirk (December 10, 2009). "Avatar- Film Review". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 13, 2009. Retrieved December 13, 2009. Travers, Peter (December 14, 2009). "Avatar: review". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on March 23, 2010. Retrieved January 3, 2010. Corliss, Richard (December 14, 2009). "Corliss Appraises Avatar: A World of Wonder". Time. Archived from the original on December 17, 2009. Retrieved January 3, 2010. Turan, Kenneth (December 17, 2009). "Movie Review: 'Avatar'". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on December 20, 2009. Retrieved December 30, 2009. Berardinelli, James (December 17, 2009). "Avatar". Reelviews.net. Retrieved January 3, 2010. White, Armond (December 15, 2009). "Blue in the Face". New York Press. Archived from the original on December 17, 2009. Retrieved December 15, 2009. See also last paragraph of the above section Avatar Themes and inspirations. Moore, Russell D. (December 21, 2009). "Avatar: Rambo in Reverse". The Christian Post. Retrieved December 21, 2009. Cohen, Adam (December 25, 2009). "Next-Generation 3-D Medium of 'Avatar' Underscores Its Message". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 25, 2015. Retrieved December 26, 2009. Douthat, Ross (December 21, 2009). "Heaven and Nature". The New York Times. Retrieved December 21, 2009. Prabhu, Saritha (January 22, 2010). "Movie storyline echoes historical record". The Tennessean. Internet Archive. Retrieved February 7, 2010.[dead link] Alt URL Osipov, Maxim (December 27, 2009). "What on Pandora does culture or civilisation stand for?". Hindustan Times. India. Archived from the original on December 3, 2011. Retrieved February 25, 2011. Newitz, Annalee (December 18, 2009). "When Will White People Stop Making Movies Like "Avatar"?". io9. Gizmodo. Archived from the original on December 30, 2009. Retrieved December 27, 2009. Phillips, Michael (January 7, 2010). "Why is 'Avatar' a film of 'Titanic' proportions?". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on January 9, 2010. Retrieved January 10, 2010. Devine, Miranda (January 2, 2010). "Hit by the leftie sledgehammer". The Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on April 9, 2010. Retrieved April 7, 2010. Lawtoo, Nidesh (March 2015). "Avatar Simulation in 3Ts: Techne, Trance, Transformation". Science Fiction Studies. 42 (1): 132–150. doi:10.5621/sciefictstud.42.1.0132. JSTOR 10.5621/sciefictstud.42.1.0132. Burr, Ty (December 17, 2009). "Avatar". Boston.com. Retrieved December 23, 2009. Barnard, Linda (January 11, 2010). "Is Avatar weighted down by white man's burden?". Toronto Star. Archived from the original on October 20, 2013. Retrieved October 21, 2013. Sirota, David (February 21, 2013). "Oscar loves a white savior". Salon. Retrieved July 4, 2013. Davis, Lauren (October 26, 2009). "Did James Cameron Rip Off Poul Anderson's Novella?". io9. Gizmodo. Retrieved October 26, 2009. Westfahl, Gary (December 20, 2009). "All Energy Is Borrowed: A Review of Avatar". Locus Online. Locus Publications. Archived from the original on January 7, 2010. Retrieved December 29, 2009. Harding, Luke (January 13, 2010). "James Cameron rejects claims Avatar epic borrows from Russians' sci-fi novels". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on January 16, 2010. Retrieved February 25, 2010. Schwartzberg, Joel (December 29, 2009). "What Did 'Avatar' Borrow from 'FernGully'?". IVillage. Archived from the original on February 24, 2012. Retrieved January 17, 2011. Quinn, Karl (December 17, 2009). "Don't just watch Avatar, see it". The Age. Australia. Archived from the original on January 16, 2014. Retrieved January 17, 2011. Bill (June 8, 2009). "Avatar to Follow a Pocahontas Narrative". Reelz. Archived from the original on December 12, 2009. Retrieved December 21, 2009. Heaven, Will (December 24, 2009). "Avatar: James Cameron deserves the Worst Lefty Award 2009". The Daily Telegraph. UK. Archived from the original (Blog) on December 26, 2009. Ulaby, Neda; Chace, Zoe (January 6, 2010). "'Avatar' And Ke$ha: A Denominator In Common?". NPR Morning Edition. Archived from the original on January 14, 2010. Retrieved January 6, 2010. Dozois, Gardner (2010). "Summation: 2009". The Year's Best Science Fiction: Twenty-Seventh Annual Collection. St. Martin's Griffin. p. xxxv. ISBN 978-0-312-60898-9. Retrieved January 18, 2013. Anders, Charlie Jane (December 14, 2009). "Did Prog Rock's Greatest Artist Inspire Avatar? All Signs Point To Yes". io9. Gizmodo. Retrieved December 14, 2009. Handy, Bruce (October 30, 2009). "Avatar's Unexpected Influences: Psychedelic Cover Art, Disney, and... Furries?". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on January 14, 2012. "James Cameron sued by artist Roger Dean over Avatar". BBC News. June 30, 2013. Archived from the original on April 6, 2015. Retrieved June 30, 2013. Couch, Aaron (September 17, 2014). "James Cameron Wins 'Avatar' Idea Theft Lawsuit Against Artist". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved September 17, 2014. Anderson, Martin (March 21, 2012). "Roger Christian talks zombies, Prometheus & Battlefield Earth". Shadowlocked.com. Archived from the original on July 14, 2014. Retrieved July 21, 2014. Sciretta, Peter (December 21, 2009). "The Buzz: Filmmakers react to Avatar". /Film. Archived from the original on January 25, 2010. Retrieved December 30, 2009. Fleming, Mike Jr. (July 17, 2017). "Luc Besson Lays It On The Line For Passion Pic 'Valerian'". Deadline Hollywood. Penske Business Media, LLC. Archived from the original on July 20, 2017. Retrieved June 22, 2017. I thought the script was kind of good a few years ago, and I was ready to start the financing. Then, Avatar arrived. The good news was that, technically, I could see that we can do everything now. The film proved that imagination is the only limit. The bad news is, I threw my script in the garbage, literally, when I came back from the screening. Corliss, Richard (May 17, 2012). "The 10 Greatest Movies of the Millennium (Thus Far)". Time. Archived from the original on May 17, 2012. Retrieved May 21, 2012. Corliss, Richard (May 17, 2012). "Rethinking the Movie Masterpieces: Richard Corliss Expands TIME's List of Cinematic Greats". Time. Archived from the original on May 25, 2012. Retrieved May 21, 2012. Pirrello, Phil; Collura, Scott; Schedeen, Jesse (September 14, 2010). "Top 25 Sci-Fi Movies of All Time". IGN. Archived from the original on December 4, 2010. Retrieved November 28, 2010. "Bollywood film-makers vie for larger screen pie". The Economic Times. India. September 25, 2011. Retrieved April 28, 2022. "Avatar Scores $3.5 Million at Midnight Screenings, Big Opening Day in Australia". The Numbers. December 18, 2009. Retrieved April 28, 2022. "3D Movies Opening Weekends". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on July 13, 2014. Retrieved July 21, 2014. "Environmentalist Movies Opening Weekends". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on December 28, 2009. Retrieved March 4, 2012. "Opening Weekends". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on June 23, 2011. Retrieved April 28, 2022. Cheng, Andria (January 10, 2010). "Avatar becomes top-grossing U.S. film released in 2009". MarketWatch. Retrieved January 10, 2010. "Weekend Box Office Results for December 25–27, 2009". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on January 1, 2010. Retrieved April 28, 2022. "Top Grossing Movies in Their 2nd Weekend at the Box Office". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on December 2, 2009. Retrieved April 28, 2022. "Weekend Box Office Results for January 1–3, 2010". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on January 18, 2010. Retrieved January 3, 2010. "Top Grossing Movies in Their 3rd Weekend at the Box Office". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on January 8, 2010. Retrieved January 11, 2010. "Avatar fastest film to break $1 billion mark". Hindustan Times. India. January 5, 2010. Archived from the original on June 5, 2011. Retrieved April 28, 2022. "2009 Worldwide Grosses". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on January 2, 2010. Retrieved January 3, 2010. "Top Grossing Movies in Their 4th Weekend at the Box Office". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on January 9, 2010. Retrieved January 12, 2010. "Top Grossing Movies for Martin Lurther King Holiday Weekends". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on January 21, 2010. Retrieved January 19, 2010. "Top Grossing Movies in Their 5th Weekend at the Box Office". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on January 18, 2010. Retrieved January 19, 2010. "Top Grossing Movies in Their 6th Weekend at the Box Office". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on February 3, 2010. Retrieved February 1, 2010. "Top Grossing Movies in Their 7th Weekend at the Box Office". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on February 3, 2010. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Subers, Ray (June 26, 2012). "'The Avengers' Hits $600 Million". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved June 27, 2012. Deprez, Esme E. (January 31, 2010). "'Avatar' Tops Box Office, Passes $2 Billion Worldwide (Update1)". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on April 12, 2010. Retrieved April 27, 2022. "Avatar (2009) – Daily Box Office Results". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on August 15, 2010. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Gray, Brandon (January 19, 2010). "Weekend Report: 'Avatar' Reigns with Record MLK Gross". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on January 21, 2010. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Gray, Brandon (March 1, 2010). "Weekend Report: 'Shutter Island' Hangs On, 'Cop Out,' 'Crazies' Debut Decently". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on April 10, 2010. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Cieply, Michael (January 26, 2010). "He Doth Surpass Himself: 'Avatar' Outperforms 'Titanic'". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 28, 2010. Retrieved January 27, 2010. Segers, Frank (January 25, 2010). "'Avatar' breaks 'Titanic' worldwide record". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved December 4, 2010. "All Time Worldwide Box Office Grosses". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on January 2, 2010. Retrieved January 3, 2010. Gray, Brandon (February 3, 2010). "'Avatar' Claims Highest Gross of All Time". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on February 7, 2010. Retrieved April 28, 2022. "'Avatar' passes 'Titanic' in domestic earnings". Today.com. Associated Press. February 4, 2010. Retrieved March 2, 2010. Gray, Brandon (January 26, 2010). "'Avatar' Is New King of the World". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on January 30, 2010. Retrieved April 28, 2022. Gray, Brandon (February 8, 2010). "Weekend Report: 'Dear John' Delivers, 'Avatar' Flies High Again". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 1, 2020. Retrieved April 28, 2022. Gray, Brandon (February 21, 2010). "Weekend Report: 'Shutter Island' Lights Up". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on February 24, 2010. Retrieved April 28, 2022. Foley, Jack. "Avatar beats Mamma Mia's UK box office record". Indie London. Archived from the original on May 5, 2012. Retrieved April 29, 2012. Hutton, Michelle (February 28, 2010). "AVATAR Becomes Biggest Blockbuster Ever in Korea". altfg.com. Alt Film Guide. Archived from the original on March 2, 2010. Retrieved February 28, 2010. "'Avatar' Sinks 'Titanic' To Take Irish Box Office Crown". Irish Film and Television Network. March 2, 2010. Retrieved March 8, 2010. "Top Lifetime Grosses". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on January 28, 2010. Retrieved January 27, 2010. Lang, Brent (January 3, 2016). "'Star Wars: The Force Awakens' Shattering Imax Records". Variety. Retrieved January 4, 2016. Corliss, Richard (January 11, 2010). "Another Avatar Weekend: Pandorans Defeat Vampires". Time. Archived from the original on January 12, 2010. Retrieved January 10, 2010. Tartaglione, Nancy (October 2, 2022). "'Smile' Giddy With $37M Global Bow, China Returns At $60M Local 'Home Coming'; Keep A Bag Packed For 'Ticket To Paradise' – International Box Office". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved October 3, 2022. "All Time Box Office Adjusted for Ticket Price Inflation". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Archived from the original on May 16, 2010. Retrieved May 2, 2010. Adjusted to the estimated 2010 average ticket price of $7.95. Subers, Ray (April 21, 2010). "'Avatar' Strikes DVD". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Archived from the original on April 25, 2010. Retrieved April 21, 2010. Shone, Tom (February 3, 2010). "Oscars 2010: How James Cameron took on the world". The Daily Telegraph. UK. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved October 20, 2010. Segers, Frank (February 22, 2010). ""Avatar" top film overseas for 10th weekend". Reuters. Archived from the original on January 19, 2012. Retrieved February 25, 2010. Records, Guinness World (2014). Guinness World Records. Vol. 60 (2015 ed.). Guinness World Records. pp. 160–161. ISBN 978-1-908843-70-8. Glenday, Craig, ed. (2011). Гиннесс. Мировые рекорды [Guinness World Records] (in Russian). Translated by Andrianov, P.I.; Palova, I.V. (2012 ed.). Moscow: Astrel. p. 211. ISBN 978-5-271-36423-5. Levin, Josh (December 10, 2009). "Here Come the Cats With Human Boobs. Is Avatar destined to flop?". Slate. Archived from the original on December 17, 2009. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Carroll, Jason (November 23, 2009). "'King of the world' James Cameron returns with 'Avatar'". CNN. Archived from the original on September 26, 2020. Retrieved December 20, 2009. Gwin, Scott (December 21, 2009). "Why Avatar's Headed For Blockbuster Mediocrity". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on December 22, 2009. Retrieved March 30, 2012. Engber, Daniel (August 22, 2009). "Avatar = "Apocalypto" + George Lucas". Slate. Archived from the original on December 30, 2009. Retrieved December 22, 2009. Cieply, Michael (November 8, 2009). "A Movie's Budget Pops From the Screen". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 11, 2011. Retrieved November 24, 2010. Rosenberg, Adam (December 17, 2009). "How Will 'Avatar' Fare At The Box Office? Experts Weigh In". MTV. Archived from the original on June 5, 2011. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Wells, Jeffery (December 9, 2009). "Avatar Adjustments". hollywood-elsewhere.com. Hollywood Elsewhere. Archived from the original on January 6, 2010. Retrieved December 22, 2009. Blair, Iain (December 8, 2009). "Avatar's Cameron shrugs off buzz – and promises a sequel". Sci-Fi Wire. Syfy. Archived from the original on January 2, 2010. Retrieved June 9, 2020. "'Avatar' Hits $1 Billion Mark, Eyes 'Titanic' Record". omg!. Yahoo! News. January 3, 2010. Archived from the original on January 6, 2010. Retrieved January 4, 2010. Tramontana, Stephen (January 5, 2010). "Why Avatar will not beat Titanic". Manolith.com. Archived from the original on January 8, 2010. Retrieved January 6, 2010. Britt, Russ (January 4, 2010). "Can Cameron break his own box-office record? 'Avatar' unprecedented in staying power, international sales". MarketWatch. Archived from the original on January 6, 2010. Retrieved January 4, 2010. Ditzian, Eric (January 4, 2010). "Will 'Avatar' Top James Cameron's 'Titanic' Box-Office Record?". MTV. Archived from the original on January 9, 2010. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Jacks, Brian (January 16, 2010). "EXCLUSIVE: James Cameron Says 'Avatar' Will Beat 'Titanic' To Become Biggest Of All Time". MTV. Archived from the original on January 17, 2010. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Boucher, Geoff (August 25, 2010). "James Cameron: I want to compete with 'Star Wars' and Tolkien". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on November 6, 2010. Retrieved October 26, 2010. Ball, Sarah (January 6, 2010). "How 'Avatar' Can Beat 'Titanic". Newsweek. Archived from the original on January 9, 2010. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Vary, Adam B. (January 3, 2010). "Box Office Report: 'Avatar' is No. 1 again, soars past $1 billion worldwide". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 16, 2010. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Galloway, Stephen (January 18, 2020). "What Is the Most Profitable Movie Ever?". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved April 27, 2022. "The 82nd Academy Award Winners and Nominees". NPR. March 7, 2010. Archived from the original on May 6, 2021. Retrieved April 13, 2023. "Golden Globe Winners List 2010". Moviefone. January 17, 2010. Archived from the original on January 15, 2010. Retrieved January 17, 2010. Davis, Don (December 14, 2009). "N.Y. Online Critics like 'Avatar'". Variety. Archived from the original on June 10, 2015. Retrieved December 15, 2009. Child, Ben (December 15, 2009). "Tarantino's Inglourious Basterds dominates Critics' Choice awards". The Guardian. UK. Retrieved December 15, 2009. Robinson, Anna (December 21, 2009). "St. Louis Film Critics Awards 2009". altfg.com. Alt Film Guide. Archived from the original on December 22, 2009. Retrieved September 17, 2014. "Film Awards Winners". British Academy of Film and Television Arts. January 21, 2010. Archived from the original on April 1, 2010. Retrieved September 17, 2014. Mendelson, Scott. "Five Years Ago, 'Avatar' Grossed $2.7 Billion But Left No Pop Culture Footprint". Forbes. Retrieved September 25, 2022. "Avatar returns to theaters, but has its magic faded?". Digital Trends. September 24, 2022. Retrieved September 25, 2022. Bunch, Sonny (May 18, 2022). "Does the world really want an 'Avatar' sequel?". The Washington Post. Retrieved September 24, 2022. Placido, Dani Di. "Why 'Avatar' Never Really Managed To Take Root In Pop Culture". Forbes. Retrieved September 25, 2022. Power, Ed (July 24, 2020). "Avatar amnesia: how the world forgot about the biggest film of all time". The Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Retrieved September 25, 2022. Blichert, Frederick (November 13, 2019). "10 Years Later, 'Avatar' Is the Most Popular Movie No One Remembers". www.vice.com. Retrieved September 25, 2022. Mendelson, Scott. "Box Office: Last Weekend Proved That Audiences Still Care About 'Avatar'". Forbes. Retrieved November 4, 2022. Child, Ben (June 6, 2017). "Avatar: why no one cares about a sequel to the world's most successful movie". The Guardian. Retrieved September 25, 2022. Mooney, Darren (January 13, 2020). "Avatar's Lack of a Cultural Footprint Might Be Its Best Feature". The Escapist. Retrieved September 25, 2022. Ryan, Patrick. "Do moviegoers still care about 'Avatar'? James Cameron is about to find out". USA Today. Retrieved September 25, 2022. Serrels, Mark (May 9, 2022). "'Avatar': The Blockbuster Movie That History Forgot". CNET. Retrieved September 25, 2022. Ebiri, Bilge (September 23, 2022). "Sorry, But Avatar Still Rules". Vulture. Retrieved September 25, 2022. Keiles, Jamie Lauren (December 1, 2022). "'Avatar' and the Mystery of the Vanishing Blockbuster – It was the highest-grossing film in history, but foryears it was remembered mainly for having been forgotten. Why?". The New York Times. Retrieved December 3, 2022. Harris, Hunter (January 2, 2023). "An Exhaustive Timeline of All the Avatar Sequel Announcements". Vulture. Archived from the original on January 3, 2023. Retrieved April 2, 2023. "Top 2022 Movies at the Worldwide Box Office". The Numbers. Archived from the original on March 19, 2023. Retrieved April 2, 2023. "Avatar: The Way of Water". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved April 2, 2023. McClintock, Pamela; Couch, Aaron (June 13, 2023). "Avatar 3 Pushed a Year to 2025, Two Star Wars Movies Head for 2026 and Avengers Films Delayed". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 13, 2023. Retrieved June 14, 2023. "That's a wrap! Filming for the upcoming #TORUK DVD is complete! Next stop, the editing room..." TORUK – The First Flight via Facebook. January 17, 2016. Retrieved January 18, 2016. Cody, Anthony (September 22, 2011). "Disney to build Avatar attractions at its theme parks". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved September 23, 2011. Levy, Dani (February 7, 2017). "Disney's 'Avatar'-Themed Land Opening Date Revealed, Star Wars Land Coming in 2019". Variety. Retrieved February 8, 2017. Flood, Alison (February 18, 2010). "James Cameron to write novel based on Avatar". The Guardian. Archived from the original on January 8, 2014. Retrieved March 8, 2021. Maher, John (December 7, 2017). "PRH Inks Multi-Book 'Avatar' Deal". Publishers Weekly. Retrieved March 8, 2021. Armstrong, Jeffrey (2010). Spiritual Teachings of the Avatar: Ancient Wisdom for a New World. New York: Atria Books. ISBN 978-1-58270-281-0. A detailed analysis of the film's parallels with the teachings of the Vedas. Duncan, Jody; Fitzpatrick, Lisa (2010). The Making of Avatar. New York: Harry N. Abrams. ISBN 978-0-8109-9706-6. OCLC 555654027. Mahoney, Kevin Patrick (2010). The Ultimate Fan's Guide to Avatar, James Cameron's Epic Movie (Unauthorized). London: Punked Books. ISBN 978-0-9533172-5-7. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Avatar (2009 film). Wikiquote has quotations related to Avatar (2009 film). Official website Official shooting script Avatar at IMDb