Toy Story is a 1995 American animated comedy film produced by Pixar Animation Studios for Walt Disney Pictures. The first installment in the franchise of the same name, it was the first entirely computer-animated feature film, as well as the first feature film from Pixar. It was directed by John Lasseter (in his feature directorial debut) and produced by Bonnie Arnold and Ralph Guggenheim, from a screenplay written by Joss Whedon, Andrew Stanton, Joel Cohen, and Alec Sokolow and a story by Lasseter, Stanton, Pete Docter, and Joe Ranft. The film features music by Randy Newman, and was executive-produced by Steve Jobs and Edwin Catmull. The film features the voices of Tom Hanks, Tim Allen, Don Rickles, Jim Varney, Wallace Shawn, John Ratzenberger, Annie Potts, R. Lee Ermey, John Morris, Laurie Metcalf, and Erik von Detten. Taking place in a world where toys come to life when humans are not present, the plot of Toy Story focuses on the relationship between an old-fashioned pullstring cowboy doll named Woody and a modern space cadet action figure, Buzz Lightyear, as Woody develops jealousy towards Buzz when he becomes their owner Andy's favorite toy. Following the success of Tin Toy, a short film that was released in 1988, Pixar was approached by Disney to produce a computer-animated feature film that was told from a small toy's perspective. Lasseter, Stanton, and Docter wrote early story treatments, which were rejected by Disney, who wanted the film's tone to be "edgier". After several disastrous story reels, production was halted and the script was rewritten to better reflect the tone and theme Pixar desired: "toys deeply want children to play with them, and ... this desire drives their hopes, fears, and actions". The studio, then consisting of a relatively small number of employees, produced Toy Story under minor financial constraints. Toy Story premiered at the El Capitan Theatre in Los Angeles on November 19, 1995, and was released in theaters in North America on November 22 of that year. It was the highest-grossing film during its opening weekend, eventually grossing over $373 million worldwide, making it the second highest-grossing film of 1995. The film received critical acclaim and holds a 100% approval rating on film aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes. It was praised for the technical innovation of the 3D animation, script, Newman's score, appeal to all age groups, and voice performances (particularly Hanks and Allen); it is frequently lauded as one of the best animated films ever made and, due to its status as the first computer-animated film, one of the most important films in medium's history and film at large. The film received three Academy Award nominations—Best Original Screenplay (the first animated film to be nominated for the award), Best Original Song for "You've Got a Friend in Me", and Best Original Score—in addition to being honored with a non-competitive Special Achievement Academy Award. In 2005, Toy Story was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant", one of nine films designated in its first year of eligibility. The success of Toy Story launched a multimedia franchise. It spawned three sequels beginning with Toy Story 2 (1999), a spin-off film Lightyear (2022), numerous short films, and a planned fourth sequel. The film also had a theatrical 3D re-release in 2009 as part of a double feature with the second film. Sentient when humans are not around, a group of toys are preparing to move into a new house with their owner, child Andy Davis, his younger sister Molly and their single mother Mrs. Davis. Sheriff Woody, Andy's favorite toy and their de facto leader, sends Sarge and his green army men to spy on Andy's birthday party with a baby monitor, as the toys are nervous about him receiving new toys that could replace them. The other toys include Mr. Potato Head, Slinky Dog, Rex the tyrannosaur, Hamm the piggy bank, and Bo Peep the porcelain doll. Andy receives a Buzz Lightyear action figure who believes he is an actual Space Ranger and does not know he is a toy. Buzz impresses the others with his high-tech features and becomes Andy's new favorite toy, making Woody jealous. Two days before the move, Andy's family plans for a dinner at Pizza Planet. To ensure Andy brings him along and not Buzz, Woody tries using the radio-controlled car RC to knock Buzz behind the desk, but accidentally knocks him out the bedroom window instead. The other toys (except for Bo and Slinky) believe Woody deliberately tried to kill Buzz. Andy takes Woody and a furious Buzz confronts him in the car. The two fight, fall out of the car, and are left behind. After a further quarrel, they hitch a ride to the restaurant on a Pizza Planet delivery truck. Buzz mistakenly believes a claw crane full of Little Green Men to be a true rocket. Andy's sadistic next-door neighbor Sid, who destroys toys for fun, captures the two from the crane and takes them to his house, where they encounter his Bull Terrier Scud and his abused "mutant" toys made from parts of other toys he has destroyed. Buzz is shocked by a TV commercial that reveals he is indeed a toy. He attempts to fly but falls, breaks his arm, and has a mental breakdown. After Sid's toys fix Buzz, Sid tapes Buzz to a rocket, planning to blow him up the next morning. Overnight, Woody helps Buzz realize that his purpose is to make Andy happy, restoring Buzz's resolve. Sid takes Buzz out to blow him up while Woody rallies the mutant toys to terrify Sid into never harming toys again. Now freed, Buzz and Woody pursue Andy's moving truck, but Scud gives chase. Woody climbs into the truck and pushes RC out to rescue Buzz. The other toys, still thinking Woody has killed Buzz, toss him back out. Buzz and Woody pursue the truck on RC, and the other toys see them and realize their error. RC's batteries run out, forcing Woody to ignite the rocket strapped to Buzz. Buzz opens his wings to sever the tape just before the rocket explodes; he and Woody fall through the sunroof of Andy's car, landing safely inside. At the Christmas gift-opening in the new house, Mr. Potato Head is delighted when Molly gets a Mrs. Potato Head. Woody and Buzz jokingly ponder what gift could be "worse" than Buzz, only to nervously smile at each other when Andy gets a dachshund puppy. Tom Hanks as Woody, a pullstring cowboy doll who is Andy's favorite toy. Tim Allen as Buzz Lightyear, a Space Ranger action figure, Andy's second favorite toy, and Woody's rival, who later becomes his best friend. Don Rickles as Mr. Potato Head, a cynical potato-shaped doll with put-together pieces on his body. Jim Varney as Slinky Dog, a dachshund slinky toy. Wallace Shawn as Rex, a nervous green Tyrannosaurus figurine. John Ratzenberger as Hamm, a smart-talking piggy bank. Annie Potts as Bo Peep, a porcelain shepherdess doll and Woody's love interest. John Morris as Andy Davis, the toys' owner. Erik von Detten as Sid Phillips, Andy's next-door neighbor and bully, who destroys toys for fun. Laurie Metcalf as Mrs. Davis, Andy and Molly's single mother. R. Lee Ermey as Sergeant, the leader of a large troop of plastic green army men. Jeff Pidgeon as Aliens, crane game toys at Pizza Planet. Sarah Freeman as Hannah Phillips, Sid's friendly younger sister. Penn Jillette as the Buzz Lightyear TV commercial announcer. Mickie McGowan as Mrs. Phillips, the unseen mother of Sid and Hannah. John Lasseter's first experience with computer animation was during his work as an animator at Walt Disney Feature Animation, when two of his friends showed him the light-cycle scene from Tron. It was an eye-opening experience that awakened Lasseter to the possibilities offered by the new medium of computer-generated animation. Lasseter tried to pitch The Brave Little Toaster as a fully computer-animated film to Disney, but the idea was rejected and Lasseter was fired. He then went on to work at Lucasfilm and in 1986, he became a founding member of Pixar. In 1986, Pixar was purchased by entrepreneur and Apple Inc. co-founder Steve Jobs. At Pixar, Lasseter created short, computer-animated films to show off the Pixar Image Computer's capabilities. In 1988, Lasseter produced the short film Tin Toy, which was told from the perspective of a toy, referencing Lasseter's love of classic toys. Tin Toy won the 1989 Academy Award for Best Animated Short Film, the first computer-generated film to do so. Tin Toy gained Disney's attention, and the new team at The Walt Disney Company, CEO Michael Eisner and chairman Jeffrey Katzenberg in the film division, sought to get Lasseter to come back. Lasseter, grateful for Jobs' faith in him, felt compelled to stay with Pixar, telling co-founder Ed Catmull, "I can go to Disney and be a director, or I can stay here and make history." Katzenberg realized he could not lure Lasseter back to Disney and therefore set plans into motion to ink a production deal with Pixar to produce a film. Disney had always made all their movies in-house and refused to change this. But when Tim Burton, who used to work at Disney, wanted to buy back the rights to The Nightmare Before Christmas, Disney struck a deal allowing him to make it as a Disney film outside the studio. This allowed Pixar to make their movies outside Disney. Both sides were willing. Catmull and fellow Pixar co-founder Alvy Ray Smith had long wanted to produce a computer-animated feature, but only by the early 1990s were the computers cheap and powerful enough to make this possible. In addition, Disney had licensed Pixar's Computer Animation Production System (CAPS), and that made it the largest customer for Pixar's computers. Jobs made it apparent to Katzenberg that although Disney was happy with Pixar, it was not the other way around: "We want to do a film with you," said Jobs. "That would make us happy." Catmull, Smith, and head of animation Ralph Guggenheim met with Walt Disney Feature Animation president Peter Schneider in the summer of 1990 to discuss making a feature film, but they found the atmosphere to be puzzling and contentious. They later learned that while Katzenberg was pushing the idea of working with Pixar, Schneider did not want to bring in a non-Disney animation studio. Katzenberg arranged to meet directly with the Pixar contingent, this time including Lasseter and Jobs. The Pixar team proposed a Christmas television special, A Tin Toy Christmas, as a first step, but Katzenberg countered that as long as they were gearing up to transition from 30-second commercials to a half-hour special, they might as well go all the way and make a feature-length film. Katzenberg also made it clear that he was only working with Pixar to get access to Lasseter's talents, and that the Pixar team would be signing up to work with a self-described "tyrant" and micro-manager. However, he invited them to talk with Disney's animators and get their opinions on working under him and Lasseter was impressed with what he heard. The two companies began negotiations, although they disagreed on key points including whether Disney would get the rights to Pixar's animation technology or whether Pixar would retain partial ownership of the films, characters, and home video and sequel rights. As Pixar was nearing bankruptcy and desperate for funds, they settled on a deal that would allow Disney to have complete ownership and control of the films and characters, including the rights to make sequels without Pixar's involvement, while Pixar would get approximately 12.5% of ticket sales. These early negotiations became a point of contention between Jobs and Eisner for many years. An agreement to produce a feature film based on Tin Toy with a working title of Toy Story was finalized, and production began soon thereafter. Originally, Toy Story was going to feature "Tinny", the wind-up one-man band toy from the Tin Toy short film, along with "the dummy", a ventriloquist's dummy. While the film's premise was still about toys' desire to be played with by children, the rest of the film's script, which involved Tinny being left behind at a gas station, meeting up with the dummy, and having a series of adventures before finding their way into a kindergarten classroom where they can be played with every day, was quite different. Katzenberg was unhappy with the treatment drafted by Lasseter, Andrew Stanton, and Pete Docter, as the two character's motivations were too similar. Instead, he encouraged them to write it as a buddy film, giving the two main characters contrasting personalities, and having them only become friends after being forced to work together. Lasseter, Stanton, and Docter delivered a revised treatment in September 1991 that more closely resembles the final version of the film: Tinny replaces the ventriloquist dummy as a child's favorite toy, their bickering causes them to be left behind at a gas station, they almost catch up to the family at a pizza restaurant, they have to escape a kid that mutilates toys, and the movie ends with a chase scene as the two toys try to catch up to the family's moving van. The script went through many changes before the final version of it. Lasseter decided Tinny was "too antiquated"; the character was first changed to a military action figure in the likes of G.I. Joe and was then given a space theme. Tinny's name changed to Lunar Larry, then Tempus from Morph, and eventually Buzz Lightyear (after astronaut Buzz Aldrin). Lightyear's design was modeled on the suits worn by Apollo astronauts as well as the aforementioned G.I. Joe action figures. Also, the green and purple color scheme on Lightyear's suit was inspired by Lasseter and his wife, Nancy, whose favorite colors are green and purple, respectively. Woody was inspired by a Casper the Friendly Ghost doll that Lasseter had when he was a child; he was a ventriloquist's dummy with a pull-string (hence the name "Woody"). This was until character designer Bud Luckey suggested that Woody could be changed to a cowboy ventriloquist dummy. Lasseter liked the contrast between the Western and the science fiction genres and the character immediately changed. Eventually, all of the ventriloquist dummy aspects of the character were deleted as the dummy looked "sneaky and mean". However they kept the name "Woody" to pay homage to the Western actor Woody Strode. The story department drew inspiration from films such as Midnight Run and The Odd Couple, and Lasseter screened Hayao Miyazaki's Castle in the Sky for further influence. Since Toy Story's script writers had little experience with feature films, they attended a seminar given by screenwriter Robert McKee. They were inspired by his guidance, based on Aristotle's Poetics, that the main character in a story should be defined by how they react to the obstacles they face, and that it is those obstacles that make characters interesting. Disney also appointed the duo Joel Cohen and Alec Sokolow and, later, Joss Whedon to help develop the script. Whedon thought that while the script did not work, it had "a great structure". He added the character of Rex and sought a pivotal role for a Barbie doll; the latter transformed into Bo Peep as Mattel would not license the character. Whedon also re-visioned Buzz Lightyear from being a dim-witted but cheerful and self-aware character to an action figure who isn't aware that he's a toy—an epiphany that transformed the film. A brainstorming session with members of Disney Animation's creative team resulted in the addition of the three-eyed squeaky toy aliens. Katzenberg approved the script on January 19, 1993, at which point voice casting began. Paul Newman, who subsequently accepted the role of Doc Hudson in the 2006 Pixar film Cars, was considered for the role of Woody. Robin Williams and Clint Eastwood were also considered for Woody, but Lasseter always wanted Tom Hanks to play the role. Lasseter claimed that Hanks "has the ability to take emotions and make them appealing. Even if the character, like the one in A League of Their Own, is down-and-out and despicable." To gauge how an actor's voice might fit with a character, Lasseter borrowed a common Disney technique: animate a vocal monologue from a well-established actor to meld the actor's voice with the appearance or actions of the animated character. This early test footage, using Hanks' voice from Turner & Hooch, convinced Hanks to sign on to the film. Billy Crystal was approached to play Buzz, and was given his own monologue, utilizing dialogue from When Harry Met Sally. However, he turned down the role, believing the film would be unsuccessful due to its animation. Crystal regretted this upon seeing the film; he subsequently accepted the role of Mike Wazowski in the 2001 Pixar film Monsters, Inc.. In addition to Crystal, Bill Murray, Chevy Chase and Jim Carrey, along with a number of other actors, including Jason Alexander, Dan Aykroyd, Matthew Broderick, Kevin Costner, Michael J. Fox, Richard Gere, David Hasselhoff, Michael Keaton, Wayne Knight, Bill Paxton, Dennis Quaid, Kurt Russell, Adam Sandler and John Travolta, were also considered for the role of Buzz. Lasseter took the role to Tim Allen, who was appearing in Disney's Home Improvement, and he accepted. Crystal later stated in an interview that he would not have been right as Buzz, and that Allen was "fantastic" in the role. Before Wallace Shawn and Jim Varney were cast as Rex and Slinky Dog, Rick Moranis and John Cleese were originally considered for the roles. To cast Andy, Pixar held an open call for young male actors to bring a toy with them. John Morris (who voices Andy in the film) brought multiple toys, specifically 45 X-Men figures, contrary to the instructions of bringing just one, and Pixar reacted to his dumping of the toys with laughter. Toy Story was both Hanks' and Allen's first animated film, and they recorded their lines together to make their characters' chemistry and interactions realistic. Every couple of weeks, Lasseter and his team showed Disney their latest storyboards or footage. Disney was impressed by Pixar's technical innovation, but less so of the plot. Katzenberg discarded most of Pixar's script ideas, giving his own extensive notes. Katzenberg primarily wanted to add "more edginess" to the two main characters, as Disney wanted Toy Story to appeal to both children and adults, and they asked for adult references to be added to the film. The characters ended up being stripped of their charm, with Hanks, while recording Woody's dialogue for the story reels, pointed out that the Woody character had been made into a "real jerk". Pixar screened the first half of the film for Disney executives on November 19, 1993—an event they later dubbed the "Black Friday Incident". The results were disastrous, and Disney's head of feature animation, Peter Schneider, halted production. Katzenberg asked colleague Thomas Schumacher why the reels were bad, to which Schumacher answered, "Because it's not their movie anymore; it's completely not the movie that John set out to make." Lasseter was embarrassed by the current state of the film, later recalling, "It was a story filled with the most unhappy, mean characters that I've ever seen." Katzenberg allowed him to take the script back to Pixar for rewrites, and the production crew shifted to television commercials while the head writers worked out a new script, being funded personally by Jobs until Disney resumed production. Although Lasseter attempted to keep morale high by remaining outwardly buoyant, the production shutdown was "a very scary time" according to story department manager BZ Petroff. Schneider appealed directly to Eisner to cancel the project altogether. Stanton and the other story artists worked to quickly produce new script pages, with help from consultants such as Whedon, and the first revisions were completed in two weeks as promised. Pixar's script rewrites took three months, and saw Woody transformed from a tyrant to a wise leader. It also included a more adult-oriented staff meeting amongst the toys rather than the juvenile group discussion that had existed in earlier drafts. Buzz Lightyear's character was also changed "to make it more clear to the audience that he genuinely doesn't know he's a toy". Katzenberg and Schneider resumed production with the new script by February 1994, and the voice actors returned one month later to record their new lines. The crew grew from 24 people to 110, and now included 27 animators and 22 technical directors. In comparison, The Lion King, released in 1994, required a staff of 800. In the early budgeting process, Jobs was eager to produce the film as efficiently as possible, impressing Katzenberg with his focus on cost-cutting. However, the $17 million production budget was no longer going to be sufficient, and Jobs requested more funds from Disney to compensate them for the time lost in rewrites based on Katzenberg's notes. Catmull was able to reach a compromise on a new budget, but the incident led Jobs to rethink their deal with Disney. We couldn't have made this movie in traditional animation. This is a story that can only really be told with three-dimensional toy characters. ... Some of the shots in this film are so beautiful. —Tom Schumacher, Vice President of Walt Disney Feature Animation Recruiting animators for Toy Story was brisk; the magnet for talent was not mediocre pay but the allure of taking part in the first computer-animated feature. Lasseter said of the challenges of computer animation, "We had to make things look more organic. Every leaf and blade of grass had to be created. We had to give the world a sense of history. So the doors are banged up, the floors have scuffs." The film began with animated storyboards to guide the animators in developing the characters. 27 animators worked on the film, using 400 computer models to animate the characters. Each character was first either created out of clay or modeled from a computer-drawn diagram before reaching the computer-animated design. Once the animators had a model, its articulation and motion controls were coded; this allowed each character to move in a variety of ways, such as talking, walking, or jumping. Out of all of the characters, Woody was the most complex, as he required 723 motion controls, including 212 for his face and 58 for his mouth. The first piece of animation, a 30-second test, was delivered to Disney in June 1992, when the company requested a sample of what the film would look like. Lasseter wanted to impress Disney with several things in the test that could not be done in traditional, hand-drawn animation, such as Woody's yellow plaid shirt with red stripes, the reflections in Buzz's helmet and the decals on his spacesuit, or Venetian blind shadows falling across Andy's room. There were eight teams that were responsible for different aspects of all of the shots. The art department was responsible for determining the overall color and lighting scheme. The layout department was responsible for determining the position of all elements of the shot, as well as programming the virtual camera's position and movements. The animation department created the movements of the characters, generally with one animator being assigned to animate an entire shot, but occasionally with each character having its own animator. The shading team used Pixar's RenderMan software to assign surface textures and reflectivity properties to objects. The lighting team placed global, spot, and flood lighting within the scenes. The "Render Farm" used Sun Microsystems computers, running around the clock, to produce the final frames of the film. The camera team recorded the finished frames, which had been rendered at a resolution of 1536 by 922, onto film stock. Finally, Skywalker Sound mixed sound effects, the musical score, and the dialogue to create the audio for the film. In order to make the film feel as realistic as possible, the layout department, led by Craig Good, avoided the sweeping camera shots popular in computer animation at the time, and instead focused on emulating what would have been possible had the film been shot in live-action with real film cameras. The animation department, led by Rich Quade and Ash Brannon, used Pixar's Menv software to hand pose the characters at key frames based on videotape of the actors recording their lines, and let the software do the inbetweening. To sync the characters' mouths and facial expressions to the actors' recorded voices, animators spent a week per eight seconds of animation, as Lasseter felt that automatic lip syncing would not properly convey a character's emotions. The shading team, led by Tom Porter, used scans of real objects, as well as textures drawn by artists and created with procedural generation algorithms, to "dress" the objects in the film. The film required 800,000 machine hours and 114,240 frames of animation in total, divided between 1,561 shots that totaled over 77 minutes. Pixar was able to render less than 30 seconds of the film per day. Lasseter did not want to make Toy Story into a musical, as he felt that it would make the film feel less genuine. Whedon later agreed, saying "It would have been a really bad musical because it's a buddy movie. It's about people who won't admit what they want, much less sing about it. ... Buddy movies are about sublimating, punching an arm, 'I hate you.' It's not about open emotion." However, Disney preferred to make it a musical, as they had had much success with incorporating Broadway-style musical numbers into their animated films, and encouraged Pixar to do the same. As a compromise, although the characters would not sing, the movie would feature non-diegetic songs as background music. Despite this not happening, the first musical number is seen at the end of Toy Story 2 (1999), and Toy Story: The Musical (2012) is the first version of the original to actually feature the cast of characters singing. Randy Newman was hired, and composed three original songs for the film. The film's signature song "You've Got a Friend in Me", was written in one day. The song "Hakuna Matata" from The Lion King is heard briefly during the climax when Woody and Buzz are trying to get into the truck while riding RC. On Newman, Lasseter said, "His songs are touching, witty, and satirical, and he would deliver the emotional underpinning for every scene." The soundtrack for Toy Story was produced by Walt Disney Records and was released on November 22, 1995, the week of the film's release. Editors, including Lee Unkrich, worked on Toy Story up until the September 1995 deadline to deliver a final cut for scoring and sound design. According to Unkrich, a scene removed from the original final edit featured Sid torturing Buzz and Woody violently at his house; Unkrich decided to cut right into the scene where Sid is interrogating Woody because the film's creators thought the audience would love Buzz and Woody by that point. Another scene, in which Woody tried to get Buzz's attention when he was stuck in the box crate, was shortened because the creators felt it would lose the energy of the film. A test screening in July 1995 received encouraging responses from the audience, but the film was not rated as highly as had been hoped, leading to another last-minute round of edits. Eisner, who attended the screening, suggested that the final shot of the film should be of both Woody and Buzz, leading to the film's final shot of the two worried about the arrival of Andy's new puppy. Crew members had difficulty analysing the film's quality due to footage being in scattered pieces. Some animators felt the film would be a significant disappointment commercially but felt animators and animation fans would find it interesting. Schneider had grown optimistic about the film as it neared completion, and he announced a United States release date of November, coinciding with Thanksgiving weekend and the start of the winter holiday season. Sources indicate that Jobs lacked confidence in the film during its production, and had been exploring the possibility of selling Pixar to companies such as Hallmark Cards and Microsoft. However, as the film progressed, Jobs, like Schneider, became increasingly passionate about the film and the transformative nature of what Pixar might be able to accomplish. Eager for Pixar to have the funds necessary to negotiate with Disney as an equal partner, and optimistic about the impact the finished film would have, Jobs decided that he would schedule an initial public offering (IPO) of Pixar just a week after the film's November release. Both Disney and Pixar held separate premiers for Toy Story, with Disney holding theirs at their flagship El Capitan Theatre in Los Angeles on November 19, 1995, and Pixar holding theirs the following night at the Regency Center in San Francisco. According to David Price's 2008 book The Pixar Touch, the film deeply resonated with audiences, with even the adults being noticeably moved by the film. In some international territories, the theatrical release of the film was preceded by a re-release of the Roger Rabbit short Roller Coaster Rabbit. In addition to showing at the El Capitan, where tickets included admission to the Totally Toy Story funhouse that Disney had built in the Hollywood Masonic Temple next door, the film opened on 2,281 screens on the 22nd and later expanded to 2,574. The film was also shown at the Berlin International Film Festival out of competition from February 15 to 26, 1996. Elsewhere, the film opened in March 1996. Marketing for Toy Story included $20 million spent by Disney for advertising as well as advertisers such as Burger King, PepsiCo, Coca-Cola, and Payless ShoeSource paying $125 million in promotions for the film. Marketing consultant Al Ries reflected on the promotion: "This will be a killer deal. How can a kid, sitting through a one-and-a-half-hour movie with an army of recognizable toy characters, not want to own one?" Despite this, Disney Consumer Products was slow to see the potential of Toy Story. When the Thanksgiving release date was announced in January 1995, many toy companies were accustomed to having eighteen months to two years of lead time and passed on the project. Disney shopped the film at the Toy Fair trade show in February 1995, where only the small Canadian company Thinkway Toys, was interested in licensing the toy rights for the Toy Story characters. Disney promoted the film by inserting its trailer into the home-video re-release of Cinderella, showing a behind-the-scenes documentary on the Disney Channel, and incorporating the characters into a parade at the Disney-MGM Studios theme park in Florida. It was screenwriter Joss Whedon's idea to incorporate Barbie as a character who could rescue Woody and Buzz in Toy Story's final act. The idea was dropped after Mattel objected and refused to license the toy. Producer Ralph Guggenheim claimed that Mattel did not allow the use of the toy as "They [Mattel] philosophically felt girls who play with Barbie dolls are projecting their personalities onto the doll. If you give the doll a voice and animate it, you're creating a persona for it that might not be every little girl's dream and desire." Hasbro likewise refused to license G.I. Joe (mainly because Sid was going to blow one up, prompting the filmmakers to instead use a fictional toy, Combat Carl), but they did license Mr. Potato Head. The only toy in the film that was not in production was Slinky Dog, which had been discontinued since the 1970s. When designs for Slinky were sent to Betty James (Slinky inventor Richard James's wife) she said that Pixar had improved the toy and that it was "cuter" than the original. On October 2, 2009, Toy Story was re-released in Disney Digital 3-D. The film was also released with Toy Story 2 as a double feature for a two-week run which was extended due to its success. In addition, the film's second sequel, Toy Story 3, was also released in the 3-D format. Lasseter commented on the new 3-D re-release: The Toy Story films and characters will always hold a very special place in our hearts and we're so excited to be bringing this landmark film back for audiences to enjoy in a whole new way thanks to the latest in 3-D technology. With Toy Story 3 shaping up to be another great adventure for Buzz, Woody, and the gang from Andy's room, we thought it would be great to let audiences experience the first two films all over again and in a brand new way. Translating the film into 3-D involved revisiting the original computer data and virtually placing a second camera into each scene, creating left eye and right eye views needed to achieve the perception of depth. Unique to computer animation, Lasseter referred to this process as "digital archaeology". The process took four months, as well as an additional six months for the two films to add the 3-D. The lead stereographer Bob Whitehill oversaw this process and sought to achieve an effect that affected the emotional storytelling of the film: When I would look at the films as a whole, I would search for story reasons to use 3-D in different ways. In Toy Story, for instance, when the toys were alone in their world, I wanted it to feel consistent with a safer world. And when they went out to the human world, that's when I really blew out the 3-D to make it feel dangerous and deep and overwhelming. Unlike other countries, the United Kingdom received the films in 3-D as separate releases. Toy Story was released on October 2, 2009. Toy Story 2 was instead released January 22, 2010. The re-release performed well at the box office, opening with $12,500,000 in its opening weekend, placing at the third position after Zombieland and Cloudy with a Chance of Meatballs. The double feature grossed $30.7 million in its five-week release. As part of Disney's 100th anniversary, Toy Story was re-released in selected CINEMARK theaters from July 21 to August 3, 2023, as well as UK cinemas from September 29 to October 5, and Latin American theaters from October 12 to 18 alongside Cinderella. Toy Story was released by Walt Disney Home Video on VHS and LaserDisc in the United States and Canada on October 29, 1996, with no bonus material. Within the first few weeks of this release, VHS rentals and sales totaled $5.1 million, ranking Toy Story as the No. 1 video, beating out Twister. Over 21.5 million VHS copies were sold during the first year. A deluxe edition widescreen LaserDisc 4-disc box set was released on December 18, 1996. This THX certified LaserDisc release features bonus material, such as the history and development of characters, storyboards and story reels, abandoned concepts and characters, outtakes, deleted animation and trailers. On January 11, 2000, the film was re-released on VHS, but this time as the first video to be part of the Walt Disney Gold Classic Collection with the bonus short film Tin Toy. This release sold two million copies. Toy Story was released for the first time on DVD on October 17, 2000, in a two-pack with its first sequel Toy Story 2. The same day, a 3-disc "Ultimate Toy Box" set was released, featuring Toy Story, Toy Story 2, and the third disc of bonus materials. The twin-pack release was later released individually on March 20, 2001. The DVD two-pack, the Ultimate Toy Box set, the Gold Classic Collection VHS and DVD, and the original DVD were all put in the Disney Vault on May 1, 2003. On September 6, 2005, a 2-disc "10th Anniversary Edition" was released featuring much of the bonus material from the "Ultimate Toy Box", including a retrospective special with John Lasseter and a brand new DTS sound mix. This DVD went back in the Disney Vault on January 31, 2009, along with Toy Story 2. The 10th Anniversary release was the last version of Toy Story to be released before being taken out of the Disney Vault lineup along with Toy Story 2. Also on September 6, 2005, a UMD of Toy Story featuring some deleted scenes, a filmmakers' reflect, and a new "Legacy of Toy Story" was released for the Sony PlayStation Portable. Toy Story was available for the first time on Blu-ray in a Special Edition Combo Pack that included two discs, the Blu-ray, and the DVD versions of the film. This combo-edition was released by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment on March 23, 2010, along with its sequel. There was a DVD-only re-release on May 11, 2010. Another "Ultimate Toy Box", packaging the Combo Pack with those of both sequels, became available on November 2, 2010. On November 1, 2011, the first three Toy Story films were re-released all together, each as a DVD/Blu-ray/Blu-ray 3D/Digital Copy combo pack (four discs each for the first two films, and five for the third film). They were also released on Blu-ray 3D in a complete trilogy box set. The film had a re-release on 4K Ultra HD Blu-ray on June 4, 2019. Yes, we worry about what the critics say. Yes, we worry about what the opening box office is going to be. Yes, we worry about what the final box office is going to be. But really, the whole point of why we do what we do is to entertain our audiences. The greatest joy I get as a filmmaker is to slip into an audience for one of our movies anonymously and watch people watch our film. Because people are 100 percent honest when they're watching a movie. And to see the joy on people's faces, to see people really get into our films... to me is the greatest reward I could get. —John Lasseter, reflecting on the impact of the film Before the film's release, executive producer and Apple Inc. co-founder Steve Jobs stated "If Toy Story is a modest hit—say $75 million at the box office, we'll [Pixar and Disney] both break even. If it gets $100 million, we'll both make money. But if it's a real blockbuster and earns $200 million or so at the box office, we'll make good money, and Disney will make a lot of money." Upon its release on November 22, 1995, Toy Story managed to gross more than $350 million worldwide. Disney chairman Michael Eisner stated "I don't think either side thought Toy Story would turn out as well as it has. The technology is brilliant, the casting is inspired, and I think the story will touch a nerve. Believe me, when we first agreed to work together, we never thought their first movie would be our 1995 holiday feature, or that they could go public on the strength of it." The film's first five days of domestic release (on Thanksgiving weekend) earned it $39.1 million. Moreover, Toy Story earned a total of $158.6 million from ticket sales combined with the five-day Wednesday opening. It would go on to hold this record until Independence Day took it the next year. The film placed first in the weekend's box office with $29.1 million and maintained the number-one position at the domestic box office for the next two weekends. It was displaced by Jumanji in its fourth weekend, but still remained ahead of Heat with $10.9 million. Toy Story went on to become the highest-grossing domestic film of 1995, beating Batman Forever, Apollo 13 (also starring Tom Hanks), Pocahontas, Casper, Waterworld, GoldenEye, and other films. At the time of its release, it was the third-highest-grossing animated film of all time, after The Lion King (1994) and Aladdin (1992). Toy Story became the second-highest-grossing film of 1995, just $3 million behind Die Hard with a Vengeance. When not considering inflation, Toy Story is number 96 on the list of the highest-grossing domestic films of all time. The film had gross receipts of $192.5 million in the U.S. and Canada and $181.8 million in international markets from its original 1995 release and two re-releases for a total of $374.4 million worldwide. At the time of its release, the film ranked as the 17th-highest-grossing film (unadjusted) domestically and the 21st-highest-grossing film worldwide. Toy Story has an approval rating of 100% based on 97 professional reviews on the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, with an average rating of 9/10. Its critical consensus reads, "Entertaining as it is innovative, Toy Story reinvigorated animation while heralding the arrival of Pixar as a family-friendly force to be reckoned with." Metacritic (which uses a weighted average) assigned Toy Story a score of 96 out of 100 based on 26 critics, indicating "universal acclaim". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A" on an A+ to F scale. Particular praise was offered for the film's 3D animation. Leonard Klady of Variety commended its "razzle-dazzle technique and unusual look" and said that "the camera loops and zooms in a dizzying fashion that fairly takes one's breath away." Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times compared the animation to Disney's Who Framed Roger Rabbit, saying that "both movies take apart the universe of cinematic visuals and put it back together again, allowing us to see in a new way." Due to the film's creative animation, Richard Corliss of TIME claimed that it was "the year's most inventive comedy". The voice cast was also praised by various critics. Susan Wloszczyna of USA Today approved of the selection of Tom Hanks and Tim Allen for the lead roles. Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times stated that "Starting with Tom Hanks, who brings an invaluable heft and believability to Woody, Toy Story is one of the best voiced animated features in memory, with all the actors ... making their presences strongly felt." Several critics also recognized the film's ability to appeal to various age groups. Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly wrote "It has the purity, the ecstatic freedom of imagination, that's the hallmark of the greatest children's films. It also has the kind of spring-loaded allusive prankishness that, at times, will tickle adults even more than it does kids." In 1995, Toy Story was ranked eighth in TIME's list of the "Best 10 films of 1995". In 2011, TIME named it one of the "25 All-TIME Best Animated Films". It also ranks at number 99 in Empire magazine's list of the "500 Greatest Films of All Time" and as the "highest-ranked animated movie". In 2003, the Online Film Critics Society ranked the film as the greatest animated film of all time. In 2007, the Visual Effects Society named the film 22nd in its list of the "Top 50 Most Influential Visual Effects Films of All Time". The film is ranked 99th on the AFI's list of the "100 greatest American Films of All-Time". It was one of the only two animated films on that list, the other being Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs (1937). It was also the sixth best in the animation genre on AFI's 10 Top 10. In more recent years, director Terry Gilliam has praised the film as "a work of genius. It got people to understand what toys are about. They're true to their own character. And that's just brilliant. It's got a shot that's always stuck with me when Buzz Lightyear discovers he's a toy. He's sitting on this landing at the top of the staircase and the camera pulls back and he's this tiny little figure. He was this guy with a massive ego two seconds before... and it's stunning. I'd put that as one of my top ten films, period." The film won and was nominated for various other awards including a Kids' Choice Award, MTV Movie Award, and a British Academy Film Award, among others. John Lasseter received a Special Achievement Academy Award in 1996 "for the development and inspired application of techniques that have made possible the first feature-length computer-animated film". Additionally, the film was nominated for three Academy Awards, two to Randy Newman for Best Music—Original Song, for "You've Got a Friend in Me", and Best Music—Original Musical or Comedy Score. It was also nominated for Best Original Screenplay for the work by Joel Cohen, Pete Docter, John Lasseter, Joe Ranft, Alec Sokolow, Andrew Stanton and Joss Whedon, making it the first animated film to be nominated for an Academy Award writing category. Toy Story won eight Annie Awards, including Best Animated Feature. Animator Pete Docter, director John Lasseter, musician Randy Newman, producers Bonnie Arnold and Ralph Guggenheim, production designer Ralph Eggleston, and writers Joel Cohen, Alec Sokolow, Andrew Stanton, and Joss Whedon all won awards for Best Individual Achievement in their respective fields for their work on the film. The film also won Best Individual Achievement in technical achievement. Toy Story was nominated for two Golden Globe Awards, one for Best Motion Picture—Comedy or Musical, and one for Best Original Song—Motion Picture for Newman's "You've Got a Friend in Me". At both the Los Angeles Film Critics Association Awards and the Kansas City Film Critics Circle Awards, the film won "Best Animated Film". Toy Story is also among the top ten in the BFI list of the 50 films you should see by the age of 14, and the highest-placed (at No. 99) animated film in Empire magazine's list of "500 Greatest Movies of All Time". In 2005, Toy Story, along with Toy Story 2 was voted the fourth greatest cartoon in Channel 4's 100 Greatest Cartoons poll, behind The Simpsons, Tom and Jerry, and South Park. Toy Story had a large effect on the film industry with its innovative computer animation. After the film's debut, various industries were interested in the technology used for the film. Graphics chip makers desired to compute imagery similar to the film's animation for personal computers, game developers wanted to learn how to replicate the animation for video games, and robotics researchers were interested in building artificial intelligence into their machines that compared to the film's lifelike characters. Various authors have also compared the film to an interpretation of Don Quixote as well as humanism. In addition, Toy Story left an impact with its catchphrase "To Infinity and Beyond", sequels, and software, among others. In 2005, Toy Story was selected by the United States Library of Congress to be preserved in the National Film Registry for being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant". Buzz Lightyear's line "To Infinity and Beyond!" has been used not only on themed merchandise, but among philosophers and mathematical theorists as well. In 2008, during STS-124, astronauts took an action figure of Buzz Lightyear into space on Space Shuttle Discovery as part of an educational experience for students while stressing the catchphrase. The action figure was used for experiments in zero-g. It was reported in 2008 that a father and son had continually repeated the phrase to help them keep track of each other while treading water for 15 hours in the Atlantic Ocean. The phrase occurs in the lyrics of Beyoncé's 2008 song "Single Ladies (Put a Ring on It)", during the bridge. In 2012, the late Capital STEEZ released a song titled "Infinity and Beyond" in reference to the phrase as part of his AmeriKKKan Korruption mixtape. Disney has also recycled the phrase in homage to Toy Story at least twice. In the "blooper reel" shown during the credits of A Bug's Life, Dave Foley says the line while in character as Flik, and Tim Allen himself repeated his famous line in The Shaggy Dog, in a scene when the titular character jumps off a bridge onto a moving vehicle. Toy Story's cast of characters forms the basis for the naming of the releases of the Debian computer operating system, from Debian 1.1 Buzz, the first release with a codename, in 1996, to Debian 14 Forky, the most-recently announced future release. In 2013, Pixar designed a "Gromit Lightyear" sculpture based on the Aardman Animations character Gromit for Gromit Unleashed which sold for £65,000. The sequel, titled Toy Story 2, was released on November 24, 1999. In the film, Woody is stolen by a toy collector, leading Buzz and his friends to launch a rescue mission. Initially, Toy Story 2 was going to be a direct-to-video release, with development beginning in 1996. However, after the cast from Toy Story returned and the story was considered to be better than that of a direct-to-video release, it was announced in 1998 that the sequel would see a theatrical release. Toy Story 3 was released on June 18, 2010. In the film, Andy's toys are accidentally donated to a day-care center as he prepares to leave for college. Toy Story 4 was released on June 21, 2019, with most of the main cast returning for the film. In the film, Woody, Buzz, and the rest of the gang get used to living with Bonnie, who creates a new toy named Forky, from recycled materials from school. As they go on a road trip with Bonnie, Woody is also reunited with Bo Peep, and must decide where his loyalties lie. A spin-off film, Lightyear, was released on June 17, 2022, with Chris Evans portraying the original Buzz Lightyear, upon whom the toy given to Andy in the first film was based. On February 8, 2023, Disney announced that a fifth Toy Story film is in development. List of films with a 100% rating on Rotten Tomatoes, a film review aggregator website List of animated films considered the best The Brave Little Toaster How the Toys Saved Christmas Live Action Toy Story "Toy Story". British Board of Film Classification. Archived from the original on September 21, 2013. Retrieved August 2, 2013. "Toy Story". The Numbers. Nash Information Services, LLC. Archived from the original on December 5, 2014. Retrieved January 18, 2022. "Toy Story". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Archived from the original on January 18, 2022. Retrieved January 18, 2022. Sources that refer to Toy Story is referred to as one of the best-animated films of all time include: "Top 25 Animated Movies of All-Time – Movies Feature at IGN". Movies.ign.com. June 18, 2011. Archived from the original on July 11, 2018. Retrieved July 8, 2011. "Best Animated Movies (5–1) – The Moviefone Blog". Blog.moviefone.com. June 2, 2008. Archived from the original on July 8, 2012. Retrieved July 8, 2011. "Best Animated Films – Toy Story". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on October 17, 2011. Retrieved July 8, 2011. "10 Top 10". AFI. Archived from the original on May 18, 2010. Retrieved July 8, 2011. "Time Out's Top 50 Animated Movies of All Time Curated by Terry Gilliam | /Film". Slashfilm.com. October 7, 2009. Archived from the original on November 7, 2018. Retrieved July 8, 2011. "The Movie Blog's 10 Best Animated Films of All Time". The Movie Blog. October 4, 2008. Archived from the original on November 6, 2018. Retrieved July 8, 2011. Corliss, Richard (June 23, 2011). "Toy Story, 1995 – The 25 All-TIME Best Animated Films". Time. Archived from the original on September 13, 2012. Retrieved July 8, 2011. King, Susan (September 30, 2015). "How 'Toy Story' changed the face of animation, taking off 'like an explosion'". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 2, 2015. Retrieved September 30, 2015. Paik 2007, p. 38. "Waterman Gives 'Brave Little Toaster' a New Lease of Life (Exclusive)". The Wrap. September 12, 2012. Archived from the original on June 13, 2018. Retrieved July 9, 2017. Paik 2007, p. 41. Isaacson 2011, p. 181. "How Pixar became the world's greatest animation company". The Telegraph. November 21, 2015. Archived from the original on June 25, 2018. Retrieved July 8, 2017. Price 2008, p. 117. ""Droidmaker" takes an entertaining & informative look back at the development of computer animation". May 15, 2007. Archived from the original on June 23, 2018. Retrieved June 22, 2018. Isaacson 2011, p. 206. Price 2008, p. 119. Price 2008, p. 120. Kanfer 2000, p. 229. Burrows, Peter; Grover, Ronald (November 23, 1998). "Steve Jobs, Movie Mogul". Bloomberg BusinessWeek. Archived from the original on June 13, 2011. Retrieved March 11, 2009. Schlender, Brent (May 17, 2006). "Pixar's magic man". CNNMoney.com. Archived from the original on July 15, 2012. Retrieved March 11, 2009. Price 2008, p. 121. Price 2008, p. 124. Isaacson 2011, p. 207. Price 2008, p. 125. "Disney's Buzz Lightyear and Wall-E explore space for NASA". Space.com. June 24, 2008. Archived from the original on July 24, 2012. Retrieved March 13, 2009. Paik 2007, p. 103. Price 2008, p. 126. Charlie Rose (December 2, 2011). "Charlie Rose Interview of John Lasseter". Archived from the original on December 8, 2011. Retrieved November 21, 2016. Price 2008, p. 127. Price 2008, p. 128. Kirsten Acuna (September 23, 2014). "'Toy Story' Had An Unwatchable Script Until Joss Whedon Saved It". Business Insider. Archived from the original on July 2, 2019. Retrieved July 2, 2019. Price 2008, p. 137. "Toy' Wonder". Entertainment Weekly. December 8, 1995. Archived from the original on December 5, 2012. Retrieved March 11, 2009. Evans, Bradford (March 17, 2011). "The Lost Roles of Jim Carrey". Splitsider. Archived from the original on August 8, 2015. Retrieved March 28, 2016. Early in Toy Story's development, producers wanted Paul Newman as Woody and Jim Carrey as Buzz Lightyear, with the two actors representing Old Hollywood and New Hollywood, respectively. Sherlock, Ben (January 7, 2020). "Toy Story: 10 Actors Who Almost Voiced Iconic Roles". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on October 28, 2021. Retrieved October 28, 2021. Toy Story (10th Anniversary Edition) – (Making Toy Story) (DVD). Walt Disney Home Entertainment. September 6, 2005. Event occurs at 6:43. Evans, Bradford (February 17, 2011). "The Lost Roles of Bill Murray". Archived from the original on May 20, 2015. Retrieved May 25, 2015. Farr, John (September 19, 2014). "Bill Murray and the Roles That Got Away". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on January 11, 2016. Retrieved May 25, 2015. Locke, Greg W. (August 26, 2011). "The Top 25 Roles Bill Murray Didn't Take". Archived from the original on November 25, 2011. Retrieved May 25, 2015. "THE FACES & FACTS BEHIND DISNEY CHARACTERS". E!. Archived from the original on March 14, 2016. Retrieved April 3, 2016. Kozak, Jim (August 2005). "Serenity Now!". In Focus. National Association of Theatre Owners. Archived from the original on August 3, 2005. Retrieved August 10, 2015. Ironically, Disney put the kibosh on the person they wanted for Buzz Lightyear because he wasn't famous enough, so we couldn't use Jim Carrey. But they had Tom Hanks in place. Evans, Bradford. "The Lost Roles of Chevy Chase". Splitsider. Archived from the original on February 2, 2013. Retrieved November 21, 2016. Sherlock, Ben (December 28, 2019). "To Infinity And Beyond: 10 Behind-The-Scenes Facts About The Toy Story Movies". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on October 30, 2021. Retrieved October 28, 2021. Price 2008, p. 129. Fischer, Paul. "Billy Crystal – Cranky Critic StarTalk". Archived from the original on December 18, 2001. Retrieved March 11, 2009. Pearlman, Cindy (October 28, 2001). "Crystal clear on 'Monsters'" (Fee required). Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on January 13, 2012. Retrieved March 16, 2009. Bierly, Mandi (June 18, 2010). "'Toy Story 3': Q&A with the voice of Andy, John Morris". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on December 8, 2020. Retrieved April 15, 2021. Michael, Dennis (November 25, 1995). "'Toy Story' stars say being animated is hard work". CNN. Archived from the original on December 10, 2012. Retrieved March 12, 2009. Isaacson 2011, p. 208. Price 2008, p. 130. Price 2008, p. 131. Toy Story (10th Anniversary Edition) – (Filmmakers Reflect) (DVD). Walt Disney Home Entertainment. September 6, 2005. "'Toy Story': The Inside Buzz". Entertainment Weekly. December 8, 1995. Archived from the original on January 12, 2012. Retrieved July 8, 2011. Price 2008, p. 133. Hicks, Chris (October 13, 1995). "Animation: Disney is Still King". Deseret News. Archived from the original on January 21, 2013. Retrieved October 17, 2012. Snider, Burr (December 1995). "The Toy Story Story". Wired. pp. 1–6. Archived from the original on October 17, 2013. Retrieved March 13, 2009. Henne, Mark; Hickel, Hal; Johnson, Ewan; Konishi, Sonoks (February 25–28, 1996). "The making of Toy Story [computer animation]" (PDF). COMPCON '96. Technologies for the Information Superhighway Digest of Papers. Santa Clara, CA. pp. 463–468. doi:10.1109/CMPCON.1996.501812. ISBN 0-8186-7414-8. S2CID 1203344. Archived from the original (PDF) on June 26, 2010. Retrieved March 13, 2009.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link) Price 2008, p. 134. Price 2008, p. 136. Price 2008, p. 135. Schlender, Brent (September 18, 1995). "Steve Jobs' Amazing Movie Adventure Disney Is Betting on Computerdom's Ex-Boy Wonder To Deliver This Year's Animated Christmas Blockbuster. Can He Do For Hollywood What He Did For Silicon Valley?". CNN. Archived from the original on June 4, 2012. Retrieved March 12, 2009. Price 2008, p. 138. Price 2008, p. 149. Lasseter, John (2005). Toy Story Deleted Scenes (Toy Story 10th Anniversary Edition) (Media notes). Walt Disney Home Entertainment. Price 2008, pp. 139–142. Price 2008, p. 151. Kronke, David (November 21, 1995). "After 'Toy Story' Credits Roll, the Fun Comes Alive". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on May 20, 2016. Retrieved September 7, 2015. "Programme 1996". Berlinale. Archived from the original on October 7, 2014. Retrieved December 6, 2014. "1996 Yearbook". Berlinale. Archived from the original on December 5, 2014. Retrieved December 6, 2014. Elliott, Stuart (November 22, 1995). "The Media Business: Advertising; Coca-Cola, Pepsico and Burger King sign on with Disney for a happy ending with 'Toy Story' tie-ins". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 13, 2012. Retrieved March 12, 2009. Reyes, Sonia (November 23, 1995). "It's A Toy Story Told at the Cash Register". Daily News. New York. Archived from the original on September 6, 2018. Retrieved October 17, 2012. Price 2008, p. 143. tnarwani (July 21, 2008). "The Lost Joss Whedon/Pixar Connection". Archived from the original on September 6, 2018. Retrieved March 11, 2009. Witchel, Alex (February 21, 1996). "Talking Toys with Betty James; Persevering for Family and Slinky". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 26, 2015. Retrieved November 17, 2021. Richards, Olly (January 24, 2008). "Toy Story Movies Going 3D". Empire. Archived from the original on November 7, 2018. Retrieved March 11, 2009. Germain, David (March 31, 2009). "Disney does 3-D with Toy Story, Beast reissues". USA Today. Archived from the original on February 5, 2013. Retrieved October 17, 2012. David Chen (October 12, 2009). "Lee Unkrich Announces Kristen Schaal and Blake Clark Cast in Toy Story 3; Toy Story 3D Double Feature To Stay in Theaters". Archived from the original on September 10, 2012. Retrieved October 12, 2009. "Toy Story Franchise Going 3-D". VFXWorld.com. January 24, 2008. Retrieved March 12, 2009. Murphy, Mekado (October 1, 2009). "Buzz and Woody Add a Dimension". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 29, 2014. Retrieved February 18, 2010. "Toy Story in 3D: MSN Review". Archived from the original on October 2, 2009. Retrieved October 3, 2009. "Toy Story/Toy Story 2 (3D)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on July 31, 2012. Retrieved February 18, 2010. Woodroof, Cory (June 29, 2023). "8 Disney classics (Toy Story!) re-releasing in movie theaters for its 100th anniversary". For the Win. USA Today. Archived from the original on June 29, 2023. Retrieved July 5, 2023. "DISNEY100 'CELEBRATING TIMELESS STORIES' SCREENING PROGRAMME LAUNCHES IN THE UK TOMORROW, FRIDAY 4TH AUGUST, 2023". UK Press. Archived from the original on October 17, 2023. Retrieved October 13, 2023. Pike (September 25, 2023). "Disney 100 se verá en las salas de cine de Colombia". Minuto30 (in Spanish). Archived from the original on October 16, 2023. Retrieved October 13, 2023. King, Susan (August 16, 1996). "'Letterbox' Brings Wide Screen Home". Times Staff Writer. Los Angeles Times. p. 96. Archived from the original on March 11, 2023. Retrieved March 11, 2023 – via Newspapers.com. "The top 10 videocassette rentals, based on Billboard's survey..." United Press International. November 14, 1996. Archived from the original on February 26, 2022. Retrieved February 26, 2022. Snow, Shauna (November 8, 1996). "Arts and entertainment reports from The Times, national and international news services and the nation's press". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on February 6, 2014. Retrieved March 12, 2009. Hettrick, Scott (June 21, 2000). "Disney packages Toy Story and sequel together for DVD". VideoBusiness.com. Archived from the original on October 19, 2006. Retrieved March 12, 2009. "Dazzling releases show laserdisc is still tops". Sfgate. December 28, 1996. Archived from the original on March 31, 2022. Retrieved March 31, 2022. "Time is Running Out! Disney/Pixar's Toy Story & Toy Story 2 Disappearing Campaign; On May 1st, The Toys Are going Back In The Vault" (Press release). Business Wire. March 31, 2003. p. 5268. Retrieved May 1, 2022 – via Gale General OneFile. Otto, Jeff (September 2, 2005). "Double Dip Digest: Toy Story". IGN. Archived from the original on July 7, 2012. Retrieved March 12, 2009. Munoz, Marin (September 7, 2008). "Get 'em now! Toy Story & Toy Story 2 in the Vault Jan. 31st". Pixar Planet. Archived from the original on April 4, 2023. Retrieved May 1, 2022. "Amazon.com – Toy Story (Two-Disc Special Edition Blu-rayDVD Combo w/ Blu-ray Packaging)". Amazon.com. February 10, 2010. ASIN B0030IIYWA. "Amazon.com – Toy Story (Special Edition)". Amazon. Archived from the original on March 2, 2016. Retrieved May 3, 2010. Toy Story 4K Blu-ray, archived from the original on May 13, 2019, retrieved May 13, 2019 Paik 2007, p. 104. "Toy Story Daily Box Office". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on January 30, 2012. Retrieved March 11, 2009. "'Toy Story' fuels $158M record weekend". Daily Record. November 28, 1995. p. 13. Archived from the original on March 28, 2022. Retrieved March 28, 2022 – via Newspapers.com. "Independence Day blows away box-office records". The Ottawa Citizen. July 10, 1996. p. 38. Archived from the original on March 28, 2022. Retrieved March 28, 2022 – via Newspapers.com. "'Toy Story,' 'Jumanji' duel for box office lead". The Sheboygan Press. December 19, 1995. p. 19. Archived from the original on April 4, 2023. Retrieved April 4, 2023 – via Newspapers.com. "1995 Domestic Grosses". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 10, 2012. Retrieved March 11, 2009. "A Look Back at the Year 1995 in Film History". November 25, 2020. Archived from the original on February 3, 2022. Retrieved February 3, 2022. "Domestic Grosses #1–100". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on August 3, 2018. Retrieved March 11, 2009. "Toy Story". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Archived from the original on July 7, 2019. Retrieved July 8, 2022. "Toy Story". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Archived from the original on May 22, 2012. Retrieved January 18, 2022. "Find Cinemascore". CinemaScore. Archived from the original on January 2, 2018. Retrieved October 20, 2016. Klady, Leonard (November 20, 1995). "Toy Story". Variety. Archived from the original on August 14, 2018. Retrieved March 11, 2009. Ebert, Roger (November 22, 1995). "Toy Story". RogerEbert.com. Archived from the original on October 17, 2013. Retrieved March 11, 2009. Corliss, Richard (November 27, 1995). "They're Alive!". Time. Archived from the original on December 11, 2012. Retrieved March 11, 2009. Wloszczyna, Susan. "Toy Story". USA Today. Archived from the original on May 28, 2009. Retrieved March 11, 2009. Turan, Kenneth (November 22, 1995). "MOVIE REVIEWS : The Secret Life of Toys: A 'Story' for All Ages : The animated film's visual dazzle will delight kids, while adults will appreciate the wised-up jokes". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on January 27, 2013. Retrieved October 17, 2012. Ansen, David (November 27, 1995). "Toy Story". Newsweek. Archived from the original on December 14, 2020. Retrieved March 11, 2009. Gleiberman, Owen (November 27, 1995). "Toy Story". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on December 20, 2007. Retrieved March 11, 2009. "The Best of 1995". Time. December 25, 1995. Archived from the original on December 8, 2012. Retrieved March 12, 2009. Corliss, Richard (June 23, 2011). "The 25 All-TIME Best Animated Films – Toy Story". Time. Archived from the original on September 13, 2012. Retrieved August 19, 2011. "The 500 Greatest Movies of All Time". Empire. Archived from the original on August 14, 2011. Ball, Ryan (March 4, 2003). "Toy Story Tops Online Film Critics' Top 100". Animation Magazine. Archived from the original on February 21, 2013. Retrieved October 17, 2012. "Star Wars Leads VES' Top 50 Most Influential VFX List". VFXWorld.com. May 11, 2007. Archived from the original on December 14, 2020. Retrieved March 11, 2009. "Citizen Kane stands the test of time" (PDF). American Film Institute. June 20, 2007. p. 4. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 10, 2016. Retrieved March 11, 2009. American Film Institute (June 17, 2008). "AFI Crowns Top 10 Films in 10 Classic Genres". ComingSoon.net. Archived from the original on June 19, 2008. Retrieved March 11, 2009. "Top Ten Animation". American Film Institute. Archived from the original on June 19, 2008. Retrieved March 11, 2009. "Time Out's 50 Greatest Animated Films: Part 5". Time Out London. Archived from the original on October 8, 2009. Retrieved April 8, 2011. "1995 Academy Awards". infoplease. Archived from the original on January 3, 2013. Retrieved January 31, 2009. "Three Pixar execs get special Oscars". San Francisco Chronicle. February 1, 1996. Archived from the original on June 29, 2012. Retrieved March 12, 2009. "Toy Story (1995)". Movies & TV Dept. The New York Times. 2011. Archived from the original on May 11, 2011. Retrieved March 12, 2009. "Legacy: 24th Annual Annie Award Nominees and Winners (1996)". Annie Awards. Archived from the original on May 12, 2008. Retrieved March 12, 2009. Horn, John (December 21, 1995). "'Sense And Sensibility' Tops Nominations For Golden Globe Awards". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on June 29, 2012. Retrieved March 12, 2009. Emerson, Jim. "The Los Angeles Film Critics Association". Los Angeles Film Critics Association Awards. Archived from the original on December 3, 1998. Retrieved March 12, 2009. "KCFCC Award Winners". Kansas City Film Critics Circle. Archived from the original on June 29, 2012. Retrieved March 12, 2009. "The 500 Greatest Movies of All Time (100–96)". Emprire. Archived from the original on August 14, 2011. Retrieved April 1, 2010. "Channel 4's 100 Greatest Cartoons". List Challenges. Archived from the original on September 9, 2018. Retrieved February 24, 2019. Porter, Tom; Susman, Galyn (January 1, 2000). "Creating Lifelike Characters in Pixar Movies". Communications of the ACM. Archived from the original on September 9, 2018. Retrieved March 13, 2009. Burningham, Bruce (2000). "Walt Disney's Toy Story as Postmodern Don Quixote" (PDF). Cervantes. 20 (1). Cervantes Society of America: 157–174. Archived (PDF) from the original on July 6, 2008. Retrieved March 13, 2009. Hall, Lucia K.B. (March 1, 2000). "Toy Stories for Humanists?". The Humanist. Archived from the original on December 6, 2014. Retrieved March 13, 2009. "Library of Congress Adds 25 Films to Registry List". NPR. January 1, 2006. Archived from the original on January 18, 2022. Retrieved January 18, 2022. "Films Selected to the National Film Registry, Library of Congress – 2005". National Film Registry. December 27, 2005. Archived from the original on February 8, 2014. Retrieved March 11, 2009. Dusek, Val (2006). Philosophy of Technology: An Introduction. Blackwell Publishing. p. 59. ISBN 1-4051-1163-1. "Introducing student-friendly technology". The Jakarta Post. April 10, 2004. Archived from the original on July 16, 2012. Retrieved March 13, 2009. Matson, John (July 19, 2007). "Strange but True: Infinity Comes in Different Sizes". Scientific American. Archived from the original on September 18, 2012. Retrieved March 13, 2009. Pearlman, Robert Z. (May 29, 2008). "Buzz Lightyear Becomes Real Space Ranger". Space.com. Archived from the original on September 11, 2012. Retrieved March 12, 2009. "'Toy Story' Line Helped Father, Son Survive in Water for 15 Hours". Fox News Channel. Associated Press. September 10, 2008. Archived from the original on July 30, 2012. Retrieved March 13, 2009. "Beyonce Knowles – Single Ladies (Put A Ring On It) Lyrics | AZLyrics.com". www.azlyrics.com. Archived from the original on February 2, 2019. Retrieved February 1, 2019. "Capital STEEZ — AmeriKKKan Korruption Lyrics and Tracklist". Genius.com. Archived from the original on April 27, 2019. Retrieved April 27, 2019. "Shaggy Dog, The Easter Egg". eeggs.com. June 11, 2007. Archived from the original on April 26, 2021. Retrieved April 26, 2021. "The Debian GNU/Linux FAQ – The Debian FTP archives". Debian. April 25, 2015. Archived from the original on October 11, 2011. Retrieved April 26, 2015. "bits from the release team: are you ready to skate yet?". Debian. October 13, 2022. Archived from the original on October 13, 2022. Retrieved March 1, 2023. "GROMIT UNLEASHED 2013: Cracking! Auction of Gromits in Bristol tops the £2m mark". Bristol Post. Archived from the original on October 27, 2014. Thompson, Anne (January 26, 1996). "Could a Toy Story sequel be released straight-to-video – Woody and Buzz might be coming to a living room near you". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on December 8, 2012. Retrieved March 12, 2009. Cohen, Karl (December 1, 1999). "Toy Story 2 Is Not Your Typical Hollywood Sequel". Animation World Network. Retrieved March 12, 2009. McClintock, Pamela (October 26, 2016). "'The Incredibles 2' Moves Up to Summer 2018; 'Toy Story 4' Pushed to 2019". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 29, 2019. Retrieved October 27, 2016. "Toy Story 4: Release Date, Trailer, Cast, Plot, and News". May 24, 2019. Archived from the original on April 3, 2019. Retrieved June 15, 2021. D'Alessandro, Anthony (February 8, 2023). "Frozen, Toy Story & Zootopia Sequels In The Works". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on February 8, 2023. Retrieved February 8, 2023. Isaacson, Walter (2011). Steve Jobs. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-1-4516-4853-9. Kanfer, Stefan (2000) [1997]. Serious Business: The Art and Commerce of Animation in America from Betty Boop to Toy Story. New York: Da Capo Press. ISBN 978-0-306-80918-7. Paik, Karen (2007). To Infinity and Beyond!: The Story of Pixar Animation Studios. San Francisco: Chronicle Books. ISBN 978-0-8118-5012-4. Price, David (2008). The Pixar Touch: The Making of a Company. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 978-0-307-26575-3. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Toy Story. Wikiquote has quotations related to Toy Story. Official Disney website Official Pixar website Toy Story at IMDb Toy Story at the TCM Movie Database Toy Story at AllMovie Toy Story at Disney A to Z Portals:  Disney  Cartoon  Comedy  Film  United States  Animation  1990s  Toys