Zagreb (/ˈzɑːɡrɛb/ ZAH-greb Croatian: [zǎːɡreb] ) is the capital and largest city of Croatia. It is in the north of the country, along the Sava river, at the southern slopes of the Medvednica mountain. Zagreb stands near the international border between Croatia and Slovenia at an elevation of approximately 158 m (518 ft) above sea level. At the 2021 census, the city itself had a population of 767,131, while the population of Zagreb urban agglomeration is slightly above one million people. Zagreb is a city with a rich history dating from Roman times. The oldest settlement in the vicinity of the city was the Roman Andautonia, in today's Ščitarjevo. The historical record of the name "Zagreb" dates from 1134, in reference to the foundation of the settlement at Kaptol in 1094. Zagreb became a free royal city in 1242. In 1851, Janko Kamauf became Zagreb's first mayor. Zagreb has special status as a Croatian administrative division—it comprises a consolidated city-county (but separate from Zagreb County), and is administratively subdivided into 17 city districts. Most of the city districts lie at a low elevation along the valley of the river Sava, but northern and northeastern city districts, such as Podsljeme and Sesvete districts are situated in the foothills of the Medvednica mountain, making the city's geographical image quite diverse. The city extends over 30 km (19 mi) east-west and around 20 km (12 mi) north-south. Zagreb ranks as a global city, with a 'Beta-' rating from the Globalization and World Cities Research Network. The transport connections, the concentration of industry, scientific, and research institutions and industrial tradition underlie its leading economic position in Croatia. Zagreb is the seat of the central government, administrative bodies, and almost all government ministries. Almost all of the largest Croatian companies, media, and scientific institutions have their headquarters in the city. Zagreb is the most important transport hub in Croatia: here Central Europe, the Mediterranean and Southeast Europe meet, making the Zagreb area the centre of the road, rail and air networks of Croatia. It is a city known for its diverse economy, high quality of living, museums, sporting, and entertainment events. Major branches of Zagreb's economy include high-tech industries and the service sector. The etymology of the name Zagreb is unclear. It was used for the united city only from 1852, but it had been in use as the name of the Zagreb Diocese since the 12th century and was increasingly used for the city in the 17th century. The name is first recorded in a charter by the archbishop of Esztergom Felician, dated 1134, mentioned as Zagrabiensem episcopatum. The older form of the name is Zagrab. The modern Croatian form Zagreb is first recorded in a 1689 map by Nicolas Sanson. An even older form is reflected in Hungarian Zabrag (recorded from c. 1200 and in use until the 18th century). For this, Hungarian linguist Gyula Décsy proposes the etymology of Chabrag, a well-attested hypocorism of the name Cyprian. The same form is reflected in several Hungarian toponyms, such as Csepreg. The name might be derived from Proto-Slavic word *grębъ which means hill, uplift. (However, note Croatian brȇg < Proto-Slavic *bergъ, which also means '(smaller) hill', and za brȇg 'to or toward the hill' for the seemingly metathesized variant in Hungarian, Zabrag – possibly modified from assumed *Zabreg because of Hungarian vowel harmony.) An Old Croatian reconstructed name *Zagrębъ is manifested through the German name of the city Agram. The name Agram was used in German in the Habsburg period; this name has been classified as "probably of Roman origin" but according to Décsy (1990) it could be an Austrian German reanalysis of *Zugram. In Middle Latin and Modern Latin, Zagreb is known as Agranum (the name of an unrelated Arabian city in Strabo), Zagrabia or Mons Graecensis (also Mons Crecensis, in reference to Grič (Gradec)). In Croatian folk etymology, the name of the city has been derived from either the verb za-grab-, meaning "to scoop" or "to dig". One folk legend illustrating this derivation ties the name to a drought of the early 14th century, during which Augustin Kažotić (c. 1260–1323) is said to have dug a well which miraculously produced water. In another legend, a city governor is thirsty and orders a girl named Manda to "scoop" water from the Manduševac well (nowadays a fountain in Ban Jelačić Square), using the imperative: Zagrabi, Mando! ("Scoop, Manda!"). The oldest known settlement located near present-day Zagreb, the Roman town of Andautonia, now Ščitarjevo, existed between the 1st and the 5th centuries AD. The first recorded appearance of the name "Zagreb" dates from 1094, at which time the city existed as two different city centers: the smaller, eastern Kaptol, inhabited mainly by clergy and housing Zagreb Cathedral, and the larger, western Gradec, inhabited mainly by craftsmen and merchants. In 1851 the Ban of Croatia, Josip Jelačić, united Gradec and Kaptol; the name of the main city square, Ban Jelačić Square honors him. While Croatia formed part of Yugoslavia (1918 to 1991), Zagreb remained an important economic centre of that country, and was the second largest city. After Croatia declared independence from Yugoslavia in 1991, the Parliament of the Republic of Croatia (Croatian: Sabor Republike Hrvatske) proclaimed Zagreb as the capital of the Republic of Croatia. The history of Zagreb dates as far back as 1094 A.D. when the Hungarian King Ladislaus, returning from his campaign against the Kingdom of Croatia, founded a diocese. Alongside the bishop's see, the canonical settlement Kaptol developed north of Zagreb Cathedral, as did the fortified settlement Gradec on the neighbouring hill, with the border between the two formed by the Medveščak stream. Today the latter is Zagreb's Upper Town (Gornji Grad) and is one of the best-preserved urban nuclei in Croatia. Both settlements came under Tatar attack in 1242. As a sign of gratitude for offering him a safe haven from the Tatars, the Croatian and Hungarian King Béla IV granted Gradec the Golden Bull of 1242, which gave its citizens exemption from county rule and autonomy, as well as their own judicial system. The development of Kaptol began in 1094 after the foundation of the diocese, while the growth of Gradec began after the Golden Bull was issued in 1242. In the history of the city of Zagreb, there have been numerous conflicts between Gradec and Kaptol, mainly due to disputed issues of rent collection and due to disputed properties. The first known conflicts took place in the middle of the 13th century and continued with interruptions until 1667. Because of the conflict, it was recorded that the Bishop of Kaptol excommunicated the residents of Gradec twice. In the conflicts between Gradec and Kaptol, there were several massacres of the citizens, destruction of houses and looting of citizens. In 1850, Gradec and Kaptol, with surrounding settlements, were united into a single settlement, today's city of Zagreb. There were numerous connections between the Kaptol diocese and the free sovereign town of Gradec for both economic and political reasons, but they were not known as an integrated city, even as Zagreb became the political center, and the regional Sabor (Latin: Congregatio Regnorum Croatiae, Dalmatiae et Slavoniae) representing Croatia, Slavonia and Dalmatia, first convened at Gradec. Zagreb became the Croatian capital in 1557, with city also being chosen as the seat of the Ban of Croatia in 1621 under ban Nikola IX Frankopan. At the invitation of the Croatian Parliament, the Jesuits came to Zagreb and built the first grammar school, the St. Catherine's Church (built 1620-1632) and monastery. In 1669, they founded an academy where philosophy, theology, and law were taught, the forerunner of today's University of Zagreb. During the 17th and 18th centuries, Zagreb was badly devastated by fire and by the plague. In 1776, the royal council (government) moved from Varaždin to Zagreb and during the reign of the Emperor Joseph II Zagreb became the headquarters of the Varaždin and Karlovac general command. Modern Zagreb's town core emerged from the Upper Town medieval settlements of Gradec and Kaptol. Picture from 1689 Ban Jelačić Square in Zagreb under the Habsburgs, before the 1880 Zagreb earthquake The Zagreb Cathedral renovated according to designs of Hermann Bollé, between 1902 and 1906 Zagreb 1930s Starčević square, first half of the 20th century In the 19th century, Zagreb was the center of the Croatian National Revival and saw the foundation of important cultural and historic institutions. In 1850, the town was united under its first mayor – Janko Kamauf. The first railway line to connect Zagreb with Zidani Most and Sisak opened in 1862 and in 1863 Zagreb received a gasworks. The Zagreb waterworks opened in 1878. After the 1880 Zagreb earthquake, up to the 1914 outbreak of World War I, development flourished and the town received the characteristic layout which it has today. The first horse-drawn tram dated from 1891. The construction of railway lines enabled the old suburbs to merge gradually into Donji Grad, characterized by a regular block pattern that prevails in Central European cities. This bustling core includes many imposing buildings, monuments, and parks as well as a multitude of museums, theatres, and cinemas. An electric-power plant was built in 1907. Since 1 January 1877, the Grič cannon fires daily from the Lotrščak Tower on Grič to mark midday. The first half of the 20th century saw a considerable expansion of Zagreb. Before World War I, the city expanded and neighborhoods like Stara Peščenica in the east and Črnomerec in the west grew up. The Rokov perivoj neighbourhood, noted for its Art Nouveau features, was established at the start of the century. After the war, working-class districts such as Trnje emerged between the railway and the Sava, whereas the construction of residential districts on the hills of the southern slopes of Medvednica was completed between the two World Wars. In the 1920s, the population of Zagreb increased by 70 percent – the largest demographic boom in the history of the town. In 1926, the first radio station in the region began broadcasting from Zagreb, and in 1947 the Zagreb Fair opened. During World War II, Zagreb became the capital of the Independent State of Croatia (1941–1945), which was backed by Nazi Germany and by the Italians. The history of Zagreb in World War II became rife with incidents of régime terror and resistance sabotage - the Ustaša régime had thousands of people executed during the war in and near the city. Partisans took the city at the end of the war. From 1945 until 1990, Zagreb functioned as the capital of the Socialist Republic of Croatia, one of the six constituent socialist republics of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. The area between the railway and the Sava river witnessed a new construction-boom after World War II. After the mid-1950s, construction of new residential areas south of the Sava river began, resulting in Novi Zagreb (Croatian for New Zagreb), originally called "Južni Zagreb" (Southern Zagreb). From 1999 Novi Zagreb has comprised two city districts: Novi Zagreb – zapad (New Zagreb – West) and Novi Zagreb – istok (New Zagreb – East) The city also expanded westward and eastward, incorporating Dubrava, Podsused, Jarun, Blato, and other settlements. The cargo railway hub and the international airport (Pleso) were built south of the Sava river. The largest industrial zone (Žitnjak) in the south-eastern part of the city, represents an extension of the industrial zones on the eastern outskirts of the city, between the Sava and the Prigorje region. Zagreb hosted the Summer Universiade in 1987. This event initiated the creation of pedestrian-only zones in the city centre and extensive new sport infrastructure, lacking until then, all around the city.[citation needed] During the 1991–1995 Croatian War of Independence, the city saw some sporadic fighting around its JNA army barracks, but escaped major damage. In May 1995, it was targeted by Serb rocket artillery in two rocket attacks which killed seven civilians and wounded many. An urbanized area connects Zagreb with the surrounding towns of Zaprešić, Samobor, Dugo Selo, and Velika Gorica. Sesvete was the first and the closest area to become a part of the agglomeration and is already included in the City of Zagreb for administrative purposes and now forms the easternmost city district. In 2020 the city experienced a 5.5 magnitude earthquake, which damaged various buildings in the historic downtown area. The city's iconic cathedral lost the cross off of one of its towers. This earthquake was the strongest one to affect the city since the destructive 1880 Zagreb earthquake. The climate of Zagreb is classified as an oceanic climate (Köppen: Cfb), very closely bordering on a humid continental climate (Dfb). Zagreb has four separate seasons. Summers are generally warm, sometimes hot. In late May it gets significantly warmer, temperatures start rising and it often becomes very warm or even hot with occasional afternoon and evening thunderstorms. Heatwaves can occur but are short-lived. Temperatures rise above 30 °C (86 °F) on average 14.6 days each summer. During summertime, rainfall is abundant and it mainly falls during thunderstorms. With 840 mm of precipitation per year, Zagreb is Europe's ninth wettest capital, receiving less precipitation than Luxembourg but more than Brussels, Paris or London. Compared to these cities, however, Zagreb has fewer rainy days, but the annual rainfall is higher due to heavier showers occurring mainly in late spring and summer. Autumn in its early stage often brings pleasant and sunny weather with occasional episodes of rain later in the season. Late autumn is characterized by a mild increase in the number of rainy days and a gradual decrease in daily temperature averages. Morning fog is common from mid-October to January, with northern city districts at the foothills of the Medvednica mountain as well as south-central districts along the Sava river being more prone to longer fog accumulation. Winters are relatively cold, bringing overcast skies and a precipitation decrease pattern. February is the driest month, averaging 39 mm of precipitation. On average there are 29 days with snowfall, with the first snow usually falling in early December. However, in recent years, the number of days with snowfall in wintertime has decreased considerably. Spring is characterized by often pleasant but changeable weather. As the season progresses, sunny days become more frequent, bringing higher temperatures. Sometimes cold spells can occur as well, mostly in the season's early stages. The average daily mean temperature in the winter is around 1 °C (34 °F) (from December to February) and the average temperature in the summer is 20 °C (68.0 °F). The highest recorded temperature at the Maksimir weather station was 40.4 °C (104.7 °F) in July 1950, and lowest was −27.3 °C (−17.1 °F) in February 1956. A temperature of −30.5 °C (−22.9 °F) was recorded on the since defunct Borongaj Airfield in February 1940. The most important historical high-rise constructions are Neboder (1958) on Ban Jelačić Square, Cibona Tower (1987), and Zagrepčanka (1976) on Savska Street, Mamutica in Travno (Novi Zagreb – istok district, built in 1974) and Zagreb TV Tower on Sljeme (built in 1973). In the 2000s, the City Assembly approved a new plan that allowed for the many recent high-rise buildings in Zagreb, such as the Almeria Tower, Eurotower, HOTO Tower, Zagrebtower and one of the tallest skyscrapers Sky Office Tower. In Novi Zagreb, the neighbourhoods of Blato and Lanište expanded significantly, including the Zagreb Arena and the adjoining business centre. Due to a long-standing restriction that forbade the construction of 10-story or higher buildings, most of Zagreb's high-rise buildings date from the 1970s and 1980s and new apartment buildings on the outskirts of the city are usually 4–8 floors tall. Exceptions to the restriction have been made in recent years, such as permitting the construction of high-rise buildings in Lanište or Kajzerica. The wider Zagreb area has been continuously inhabited since the prehistoric period, as witnessed by archaeological findings in the Veternica cave from the Paleolithic and excavation of the remains of the Roman Andautonia near the present village of Šćitarjevo. Picturesque former villages on the slopes of Medvednica, Šestine, Gračani, and Remete, maintain their rich traditions, including folk costumes, Šestine umbrellas, and gingerbread products. To the north is the Medvednica Mountain (Croatian: Zagrebačka gora), with its highest peak Sljeme(1,035 m), where one of the tallest structures in Croatia, Zagreb TV Tower is located. The Sava and the Kupa valleys are to the south of Zagreb, and the region of Hrvatsko Zagorje is located on the other (northern) side of the Medvednica hill. In mid-January 2005, Sljeme held its first World Ski Championship tournament. From the summit, weather permitting, the vista reaches as far as Velebit Range along Croatia's rocky northern coast, as well as the snow-capped peaks of the towering Julian Alps in neighboring Slovenia. There are several lodging villages, offering accommodation and restaurants for hikers. Skiers visit Sljeme, which has four ski-runs, three ski-lifts, and a chairlift. The old Medvedgrad, a recently restored medieval burg was built in the 13th century on Medvednica hill. It overlooks the western part of the city and also hosts the Shrine of the Homeland, a memorial with an eternal flame, where Croatia pays reverence to all its heroes fallen for homeland in its history, customarily on national holidays. The ruined medieval fortress Susedgrad is located on the far-western side of Medvednica hill. It has been abandoned since the early 17th century, but it is visited during the year. Zagreb occasionally experiences earthquakes, due to the proximity of Žumberak-Medvednica fault zone. It's classified as an area of high seismic activity. The area around Medvednica was the epicentre of the 1880 Zagreb earthquake (magnitude 6.3), and the area is known for occasional landslide threatening houses in the area. The proximity of strong seismic sources presents a real danger of strong earthquakes. Croatian Chief of Office of Emergency Management Pavle Kalinić stated Zagreb experiences around 400 earthquakes a year, most of them being imperceptible. However, in case of a strong earthquake, it's expected that 3,000 people would die and up to 15,000 would be wounded. Zagreb is by far the largest city in Croatia in terms of population, which was 767,131 in 2021. Zagreb metropolitan area population is slightly above 1.0 million inhabitants, as it includes the Zagreb County. Zagreb metropolitan area makes approximately a quarter of a total population of Croatia. In 1997, the City of Zagreb itself was given special County status, separating it from Zagreb County, although it remains the administrative centre of both. The majority of its citizens are Croats making up 93.53% of the city's population (2021 census). The same census records around 49,605 residents belonging to ethnic minorities: 12,035 Serbs (1.57%), 6,566 Bosniaks (0.86%), 3,475 Albanians (0.45%), 2,167 Romani (0.28%), 1,312 Slovenes (0.17%), 1,036 Macedonians (0.15%), 865 Montenegrins (0.11%), and a number of other smaller communities. After the easing of COVID-19 pandemic restrictions, thousands of foreign workers immigrated to Zagreb due to the shortage of labor force in Croatia. These workers primarily come from countries such as Nepal, the Philippines, India, and Bangladesh, as well as some European countries including Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia, Kosovo and North Macedonia. City of Zagreb: Population trends 1857–2021 Sources: Croatian Bureau of Statistics publications v Since 14 December 1999 City of Zagreb is divided into 17 city districts (gradska četvrt, pl. gradske četvrti): City districts are subdivided in 218 local committees as primary units of local self-government. The city itself is not the only standalone settlement in the City of Zagreb administrative area – there are a number of larger urban settlements like Sesvete and Lučko and a number of smaller villages attached to it whose population is tracked separately. There are 70 settlements in the City of Zagreb administrative area: Adamovec, population 975 Belovar, population 378 Blaguša, population 594 Botinec, population 9 Brebernica, population 49 Brezovica, population 594 Budenec, population 323 Buzin, population 1,055 Cerje, population 398 Demerje, population 721 Desprim, population 377 Dobrodol, population 1,203 Donji Čehi, population 232 Donji Dragonožec, population 577 Donji Trpuci, population 428 Drenčec, population 131 Drežnik Brezovički, population 656 Dumovec, population 903 Đurđekovec, population 778 Gajec, population 311 Glavnica Donja, population 544 Glavnica Gornja, population 226 Glavničica, population 229 Goli Breg, population 406 Goranec, population 449 Gornji Čehi, population 363 Gornji Dragonožec, population 295 Gornji Trpuci, population 87 Grančari, population 221 Havidić Selo, population 53 Horvati, population 1,490 Hrašće Turopoljsko, population 1,202 Hrvatski Leskovac, population 2,687 Hudi Bitek, population 441 Ivanja Reka, population 1,800 Jesenovec, population 460 Ježdovec, population 1,728 Kašina, population 1,548 Kašinska Sopnica, population 245 Kučilovina, population 219 Kućanec, population 228 Kupinečki Kraljevec, population 1,957 Lipnica, population 207 Lučko, population 3,010 Lužan, population 719 Mala Mlaka, population 636 Markovo Polje, population 425 Moravče, population 663 Odra, population 1,866 Odranski Obrež, population 1,578 Paruževina, population 632 Planina Donja, population 554 Planina Gornja, population 247 Popovec, population 937 Prekvršje, population 809 Prepuštovec, population 332 Sesvete, population 54,085 Soblinec, population 978 Starjak, population 227 Strmec, population 645 Šašinovec, population 678 Šimunčevec, population 271 Veliko Polje, population 1,668 Vuger Selo, population 273 Vugrovec Donji, population 442 Vugrovec Gornji, population 357 Vurnovec, population 201 Zadvorsko, population 1,288 Zagreb, population 688,163 Žerjavinec, population 556 Zagreb is the capital of the Republic of Croatia, its political center and the center of various state institutions. On the St. Mark's Square are the seats of the Government of the Republic of Croatia in the Banski Dvori complex, the Croatian Parliament (Sabor), as well as the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Croatia. Various ministries and state agencies are located in the wider area of the City of Zagreb. The current mayor of Zagreb is Tomislav Tomašević ('We can!'), elected in the 2021 Zagreb local elections, the second round of which was held on 30 May 2021. There are two deputy mayors elected from the same list, Danijela Dolenec and Luka Korlaet. The Zagreb Assembly is composed of 51 representatives, elected in the 2021 Zagreb local elections. The political groups represented in the Assembly (as of June 2021): The Zagreb Assembly is composed of 51 representatives, elected in the 2021 Zagreb local elections. According to the Constitution, the city of Zagreb, as the capital of Croatia, has a special status. As such, Zagreb performs self-governing public affairs of both city and county. It is also the seat of the Zagreb County which encircles Zagreb. The city administration bodies are the Zagreb City Assembly (Gradska skupština Grada Zagreba) as the representative body and the mayor of Zagreb (Gradonačelnik Grada Zagreba) who is the executive head of the city. The City Assembly is the representative body of the citizens of the City of Zagreb elected for a four-year term on the basis of universal suffrage in direct elections by secret ballot using proportional system with d'Hondt method in a manner specified by law. There are 51 representatives in the City Assembly, among them the president and vice-presidents of the assembly are elected by the representatives. Before 2009, the mayor was elected by the City Assembly. It was changed to direct elections by majoritarian vote (two-round system) in 2009. The mayor is the head of the city administration and has two deputies (directly elected together with him/her). The term of office of the mayor (and his/her deputies) is four years. The mayor (with the deputies) may be recalled by a referendum according to the law (not less than 20% of all electors in the City of Zagreb or not less than two-thirds of the Zagreb Assembly city deputies have the right to initiate a city referendum regarding recalling of the mayor; when a majority of voters taking part in the referendum vote in favor of the recall, provided that majority includes not less than one-third of all persons entitled to vote in the City of Zagreb, i.e. 1⁄3 of persons in the City of Zagreb electoral register, the mayor's mandate shall be deemed revoked and special mayoral by-elections shall be held). In the City of Zagreb, the mayor is also responsible for the state administration (due to the special status of Zagreb as a "city with county rights", there isn't a State Administration Office which in all counties performs tasks of the central government). City administration offices, institutions and services (18 city offices, 1 public institute or bureau and 2 city services) have been founded for performing activities within the self-administrative sphere and activities entrusted by the state administration. The city administrative bodies are managed by the principals (appointed by the mayor for a four-year term of office, may be appointed again to the same duty). The City Assembly Professional Service is managed by the secretary of the City Assembly (appointed by the Assembly). Local government is organised in 17 city districts represented by City District Councils. Residents of districts elect members of councils. Directly elected minority councils and representatives are tasked with consulting tasks for the local or regional authorities in which they are advocating for minority rights and interests, integration into public life and participation in the management of local affairs. At the 2023 Croatian national minorities councils and representatives elections Albanians, Bosniaks, Czechs, Hungarians, Macedonians, Montenegrins, Roma, Slovenes and Serbs of Croatia each fulfilled legal requirements to elect 25 members minority councils of the City of Zagreb while Bulgarians, Poles, Pannonian Rusyns, Russians, Slovaks, Italians, Turks, Ukrainians and Jews of Croatia elected individual representatives with representative of the Germans of Croatia remaining unelected due to the lack of candidates. Zagreb is twinned with the following towns and cities: Bologna, Italy (since 1963) Mainz, Germany (since 1967) Saint Petersburg, Russia (since 1968) Tromsø, Norway (since 1971) Buenos Aires, Argentina (since 1972) Kyoto, Japan (since 1972) Lisbon, Portugal (since 1977) Pittsburgh, United States (since 1980) Shanghai, China (since 1980) Budapest, Hungary (since 1994) La Paz, Bolivia (since 2000) Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina (since 2001) Ljubljana, Slovenia (since 2001) Podgorica, Montenegro (since 2006) Tabriz, Iran (since 2006) Ankara, Turkey (since 2008) London, United Kingdom (since 2009) Skopje, Macedonia (since 2011) Warsaw, Poland (since 2011) Pristina, Kosovo (since 2012) Astana, Kazakhstan (since 2014) Rome, Italy (since 2014) Vienna, Austria (since 2014) Petrinja, Croatia (since 2015) Vukovar, Croatia (since 2016) Xiangyang, China (since 2017) The city has partnership arrangements with: Zagreb is an important tourist center, not only in terms of passengers traveling from the rest of Europe to the Adriatic Sea but also as a travel destination itself. Since the end of the war, it has attracted close to a million visitors annually, mainly from Austria, Germany, and Italy, and in recent years many tourists from far east (South Korea, Japan, China, and last two years, from India). It has become an important tourist destination, not only in Croatia, but considering the whole region of southeastern Europe. There are many interesting sights and happenings for tourists to attend in Zagreb, for example, the two statues of Saint George, one at the Republic of Croatia Square, the other at the Stone Gate, where the image of Virgin Mary is said to be the only thing that did not burn in the 17th-century fire. Also, there is an art installation starting in the Bogovićeva Street, called Nine Views. Zagreb is also famous for its award-winning Christmas market that had been named the one in Europe for three years in a row (2015, 2016, 2017) by European Best Destinations. The capital is also known for its top Restaurants in Zagreb that offer more than traditional Croatian food and classic dishes. The historical part of the city to the north of Ban Jelačić Square is composed of the Gornji Grad and Kaptol, a medieval urban complex of churches, palaces, museums, galleries and government buildings that are popular with tourists on sightseeing tours. The historic district can be reached on foot, starting from the Ban Jelačić Square, the center of Zagreb, or by a funicular on nearby Tomićeva Street. Each Saturday, (from April until the end of September), on St. Mark's Square in the Upper town, tourists can meet members of the Order of The Silver Dragon (Red Srebrnog Zmaja), who reenact famous historical conflicts between Gradec and Kaptol. In 2010 more than 600,000 tourists visited the city, with a 10% increase seen in 2011. In 2012 a total of 675 707 tourists visited the city. A record number of tourists visited Zagreb in 2017. – 1.286.087, up 16% compared to the year before, which generated 2.263.758 overnight stays, up 14,8%. Numerous shops, boutiques, store houses and shopping centers offer a variety of quality clothing. There are about fourteen big shopping centers in Zagreb. Zagreb's offerings include crystal, china and ceramics, wicker or straw baskets, and top-quality Croatian wines and gastronomic products. Notable Zagreb souvenirs are the tie or cravat, an accessory named after Croats who wore characteristic scarves around their necks in the Thirty Years' War in the 17th century and the ball-point pen, a tool developed from the inventions by Slavoljub Eduard Penkala, an inventor and a citizen of Zagreb. Many Zagreb restaurants offer various specialties of national and international cuisine. Domestic products which deserve to be tasted include turkey, duck or goose with mlinci (a kind of pasta), štrukli (cottage cheese strudel), sir i vrhnje (cottage cheese with cream), kremšnite (custard slices in flaky pastry), and orehnjača (traditional walnut roll). Zagreb's museums reflect the history, art, and culture not only of Zagreb and Croatia, but also of Europe and the world. Around thirty collections in museums and galleries comprise more than 3.6 million various exhibits, excluding church and private collections. The Archaeological Museum collections, today consisting of nearly 450,000 varied archaeological artefacts and monuments, have been gathered over the years from many different sources. These holdings include evidence of Croatian presence in the area. The most famous are the Egyptian collection, the Zagreb mummy and bandages with the oldest Etruscan inscription in the world (Liber Linteus Zagrabiensis), as well as the numismatic collection. Modern Gallery (Croatian: Moderna galerija) holds the most important and comprehensive collection of paintings, sculptures and drawings by 19th- and 20th-century Croatian artists. The collection numbers more than 10,000 works of art, housed since 1934 in the historic Vranyczany Palace in the center of Zagreb, overlooking the Zrinjevac Park. A secondary gallery is the Josip Račić Studio. Croatian Natural History Museum holds one of the world's most important collections of Neanderthal remains found at one site. These are the remains, stone weapons, and tools of prehistoric Krapina man. The holdings of the Croatian Natural History Museum comprise more than 250,000 specimens distributed among various collections. Technical Museum was founded in 1954 and it maintains the oldest preserved machine in the area, dating from 1830, which is still operational. The museum exhibits numerous historic aircraft, cars, machinery and equipment. There are some distinct sections in the museum: the Planetarium, the Apisarium, the Mine (model of mines for coal, iron and non-ferrous metals, about 300 m (980 ft) long), and the Nikola Tesla study. Museum of the City of Zagreb was established in 1907 by the Association of the Braća Hrvatskog Zmaja. It is located in a restored monumental complex (Popov toranj, the Observatory, Zakmardi Granary) of the former Convent of the Poor Clares, of 1650. The Museum deals with topics from the cultural, artistic, economic and political history of the city spanning from Roman finds to the modern period. The holdings comprise over 80,000 items arranged systematically into collections of artistic and mundane objects characteristic of the city and its history. Arts and Crafts Museum was founded in 1880 with the intention of preserving the works of art and craft against the new predominance of industrial products. With its 160,000 exhibits, the Arts and Crafts Museum is a national-level museum for artistic production and the history of material culture in Croatia. Ethnographic Museum was founded in 1919. It lies in the fine Secession building of the one-time Trades Hall of 1903. The ample holdings of about 80,000 items cover the ethnographic heritage of Croatia, classified in three cultural zones: the Pannonian, Dinaric and Adriatic.Mimara Museum was founded with a donation from Ante "Mimara" Topić and opened to the public in 1987. It is located in a late 19th-century neo-Renaissance palace. The holdings comprise 3,750 works of art of various techniques and materials, and different cultures and civilizations. Croatian Museum of Naïve Art is one of the first museums of naïve art in the world. The museum holds works of Croatian naïve expression of the 20th century. It is located in the 18th-century Raffay Palace in the Gornji Grad. The museum holdings consist of almost 2000 works of art – paintings, sculptures, drawings, and prints, mainly by Croatians but also by other well-known world artists. From time to time, the museum organizes topics and retrospective exhibitions by naïve artists, expert meetings and educational workshops and playrooms. The Museum of Contemporary Art was founded in 1954. Its new building hosts a rich collection of Croatian and international contemporary visual art which has been collected throughout the decades from the nineteen-fifties until today. The museum is located in the center of Novi Zagreb, opened in 2009. The old location is now part of the Kulmer Palace in the Gornji Grad. The Institute for Contemporary Art (Institut za suvremenu umjetnost), successor to the Soros Center for Contemporary Art – Zagreb (SCCA – Zagreb), was founded in 1993, and registered as an independent nonprofit organization in 1998. It was founded and run by art historians, curators, artists, photographers, designers, publishers, academics, and journalists, and initially located at the Museum of Contemporary Art. After moving a number of times, the institute has a gallery at the Academia Moderna. Its aims are to promote contemporary Croatian artists and the visual and other creative arts; to start documenting contemporary artists; and to build a body of contemporary art. It established the Radoslav Putar Award in 2002. The Strossmayer Gallery of Old Masters offers permanent holdings presenting European paintings from the 14th to 19th centuries, and the Ivan Meštrović Studio, with sculptures, drawings, lithography portfolios and other items, was a donation of this great artist to his homeland The Museum and Gallery Center introduces on various occasions the Croatian and foreign cultural and artistic heritage. The Art Pavilion by Viennese architects Hellmer and Fellmer who were the most famous designers of theatres in Central Europe is a neo-classical exhibition complex and one of the landmarks of the downtown. The exhibitions are also held in the Meštrović building on the Square of the Victims of Fascism – the Home of Croatian Fine Artists. The World Center "Wonder of Croatian Naïve Art" exhibits masterpieces of Croatian naïve art as well as the works of a new generation of artists. The Modern Gallery comprises all relevant fine artists of the 19th and 20th centuries. The Museum of Broken Relationships at 2 Ćirilometodska holds people's mementos of past relationships. It is the first private museum in the country. Lauba House (23a Baruna Filipovića) presents works from Filip Trade Collection, a large private collection of modern and contemporary Croatian art and current artistic production. Other museums and galleries are also found in the Croatian School Museum, the Croatian Hunting Museum, the Croatian Sports Museum, the Croatian Post and Telecommunications Museum, the HAZU (Croatian Academy of Sciences and Arts) Glyptotheque (collection of monuments), and the HAZU Graphics Cabinet. There are five castles in Zagreb: Dvorac Brezovica, Kašina (Castrum antiquum Paganorum), Medvedgrad, Susedgrad and Kulmerovi dvori. Zagreb has been, and is, hosting some of the most popular mainstream artists, in the past few years their concerts held the Rolling Stones, U2, Eric Clapton, Deep Purple, Bob Dylan, David Bowie, Roger Waters, Depeche Mode, Prodigy, Beyoncé, Nick Cave, Jamiroquai, Manu Chao, Massive Attack, Metallica, Snoop Dogg, Lady Gaga, Duran Duran as well as some of world most recognised underground artists such as Dimmu Borgir, Sepultura, Melvins, Mastodon and many more. Zagreb is also the home of the INmusic festival, one of the biggest open-air festivals in Croatia which is held every year, usually at the end of June. There is also the Zagreb Jazz Festival which has featured popular jazz artists like Pat Metheny or Sonny Rollins. Many others festivals occur in Zagreb like Žedno uho featuring indie, rock, metal and electronica artists such as Animal Collective, Melvins, Butthole Surfers, Crippled Black Phoenix, NoMeansNo, The National, Mark Lanegan, Swans, Mudhoney around the clubs and concert halls of Zagreb. There are about 20 permanent or seasonal theatres and stages. The Croatian National Theater in Zagreb was built in 1895 and opened by emperor Franz Joseph I of Austria. The most renowned concert hall named "Vatroslav Lisinski", after the composer of the first Croatian opera, was built in 1973. The World Theatre Festival and International Puppet Festival both take place in Zagreb in September and October. Animafest, the World Festival of Animated Films, takes place every even-numbered year, and the Music Biennale, the international festival of avant-garde music, every odd-numbered year. It also hosts the annual ZagrebDox documentary film festival. The Festival of the Zagreb Philharmonic and the flowers exhibition Floraart (end of May or beginning of June), the Old-timer Rally annual events. In the summer, theatre performances and concerts, mostly in the Upper Town, are organized either indoors or outdoors. The stage on Opatovina hosts the Zagreb Histrionic Summer theatre events. Zagreb is also the host of Zagrebfest, the oldest Croatian pop-music festival, as well as of several traditional international sports events and tournaments. The Day of the City of Zagreb on 16 November is celebrated every year with special festivities, especially on the Jarun lake in the southwestern part of the city. Zagreb is home to numerous sports and recreational centers. Recreational Sports Center Jarun, situated on Jarun Lake in the southwest of the city, has fine shingle beaches, a world-class regatta course, a jogging lane around the lake, several restaurants, many night clubs and a discothèque. Its sports and recreation opportunities include swimming, sunbathing, waterskiing, angling, and other water sports, but also beach volleyball, football, basketball, handball, table tennis, and mini-golf. Dom Sportova, a sport centre in northern Trešnjevka features six halls. The largest two have seating capacity of 5,000 and 3,100 people, respectively. This centre is used for basketball, handball, volleyball, hockey, gymnastics, tennis, etc. It also hosts music events. Arena Zagreb was finished in 2008. The 16,500-seat arena hosted the 2009 World Men's Handball Championship. The Dražen Petrović Basketball Hall seats 5,400 people. Alongside the hall is the 94 m (308 ft) high glass Cibona Tower. Sports Park Mladost, situated on the embankment of the Sava river, has an Olympic-size swimming pool, smaller indoor and outdoor swimming pools, a sunbathing terrace, 16 tennis courts as well as basketball, volleyball, handball, football and field hockey courts. A volleyball sports hall is within the park. Sports and Recreational Center Šalata, located in Šalata, only a couple hundred meters from the Jelačić Square, is most attractive for tennis players. It comprises a big tennis court and eight smaller ones, two of which are covered by the so-called "balloon", and another two equipped with lights. The center also has swimming pools, basketball courts, football fields, a gym, and fitness center, and a four-lane bowling alley. Outdoor ice skating is a popular winter recreation. There are also several fine restaurants within and near the center. Maksimir Tennis Center, located in Ravnice east of downtown, consists of two sports blocks. The first comprises a tennis center situated in a large tennis hall with four courts. There are 22 outdoor tennis courts with lights. The other block offers multipurpose sports facilities: apart from tennis courts, there are handball, basketball and indoor football grounds, as well as track and field facilities, a bocci ball alley and table tennis opportunities. Recreational swimmers can enjoy a smaller-size indoor swimming pool in Daničićeva Street, and a newly opened indoor Olympic-size pool at Utrine sports center in Novi Zagreb. Skaters can skate in the skating rink on Trg Sportova (Sports Square) and on the lake Jarun Skaters' park. Hippodrome Zagreb offers recreational horseback riding opportunities, while horse races are held every weekend during the warmer part of the year. The 38,923-seat Maksimir Stadium, last 10 years under renovation, is located in Maksimir in the northeastern part of the city. The stadium is part of the immense Svetice recreational and sports complex (ŠRC Svetice), south of the Maksimir Park. The complex covers an area of 276,440 m2 (68 acres). It is part of a significant green zone, which passes from Medvednica in the north toward the south. ŠRC Svetice, together with Maksimir Park, creates an ideal connection of areas which are assigned to sport, recreation, and leisure. The latest larger recreational facility is Bundek, a group of two small lakes near the Sava in Novi Zagreb, surrounded by a partly forested park. The location had been used prior to the 1970s, but then went to neglect until 2006 when it was renovated. In year 2021 Zagreb was the host city of Croatia Rally, round three of 2021 World Rally Championship. The Rally was won by Sébastien Ogier and Julien Ingrassia, Toyota Gazoo Racing WRT crew. Service parc, Overnight parc ferme and Shakedown Medvedgrad took place in Zagreb placing him as a lone capital in the championship. 2021 Croatia Rally became third tightest WRC event up to date, with only 0,6 seconds dividing the winning crew and second placed Elfyn Evans and Scott Martin (co-driver) in Toyota Yaris WRC. The Croatian round of WRC was praised by becoming the part of 2022 World Rally Championship. Some of the most notable sport clubs in Zagreb are: GNK Dinamo Zagreb, KHL Medveščak Zagreb, RK Zagreb, KK Cibona, KK Zagreb, KK Cedevita, NK Zagreb, HAVK Mladost and others. The city hosted the 2016 Davis Cup World Group final between Croatia and Argentina. The Archdiocese of Zagreb is a metropolitan see of the Catholic Church in Croatia, serving as its religious center. The Archbishop is Dražen Kutleša. The Catholic Church is the largest religious organisation in Zagreb, Catholicism being the predominant religion of Croatia, with over 1.1 million adherents. Zagreb is also the Episcopal see of the Metropolitanate of Zagreb and Ljubljana of the Serbian Orthodox Church. Islamic religious organization of Croatia has the see in Zagreb. President is Mufti Aziz Hasanović. There used to be a mosque in the Meštrović Pavilion during World War II at the Square of the Victims of Fascism, but it was relocated to the neighborhood of Borovje in Peščenica. Mainstream Protestant churches have also been present in Zagreb – Evangelical (Lutheran) Church and Reformed Christian (Calvinist) Church. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) is also present in the Zagreb neighborhood of Jarun whereas Jehovah's Witnesses have their headquarters in Central Zagreb. In total there are around 40 non-Catholic religious organizations and denominations in Zagreb with their headquarters and places of worship across the city making it a large and diverse multicultural community. There is also significant Jewish history through the Holocaust. Important branches of industry are: production of electrical machines and devices, chemical, pharmaceutical, textile, food and drink processing. Zagreb is an international trade and business centre, as well as an essential transport hub placed at the crossroads of Central Europe, the Mediterranean and the Southeast Europe. Almost all of the largest Croatian as well as Central European companies and conglomerates such as Agrokor, INA, Hrvatski Telekom have their headquarters in the city. The only Croatian stock exchange is the Zagreb Stock Exchange (Croatian: Zagrebačka burza), which is located in Eurotower, one of the tallest Croatian skyscrapers. According to 2008 data, the city of Zagreb has the highest PPP and nominal gross domestic product per capita in Croatia at $32,185 and $27,271 respectively, compared to the Croatian averages of US$18,686 and $15,758. As of May 2015, the average monthly net salary in Zagreb was 6,669 kuna, about €870 (Croatian average is 5,679 kuna, about €740). At the end of 2012, the average unemployment rate in Zagreb was around 9.5%. 34% of companies in Croatia have headquarters in Zagreb, and 38.4% of the Croatian workforce works in Zagreb, including almost all banks, utility and public transport companies. Companies in Zagreb create 52% of the total turnover and 60% of the total profit of Croatia in 2006 as well as 35% of Croatian export and 57% of Croatian import. The following table includes some of the main economic indicators for the period 2011–2019, based on the data by the Croatian Bureau of Statistics. A linear interpolation was used for the population data between 2011 and 2021. While data on the yearly averaged conversion rates between HRK, EUR and USD is provided by the Croatian National Bank. Zagreb is the hub of five major Croatian highways. The highway A6 was upgraded in October 2008 and leads from Zagreb to Rijeka, and forming a part of the Pan-European Corridor Vb. The upgrade coincided with the opening of the bridge over the Mura river on the A4 and the completion of the Hungarian M7, which marked the opening of the first freeway corridor between Rijeka and Budapest. The A1 starts at the Lučko interchange and concurs with the A6 up to the Bosiljevo 2 interchange, connecting Zagreb and Split (As of October 2008[update] Vrgorac). A further extension of the A1 up to Dubrovnik is under construction[needs update]. Both highways are tolled by the Croatian highway authorities Hrvatske autoceste and Autocesta Rijeka - Zagreb.[citation needed] Highway A3 (formerly named Bratstvo i jedinstvo) was the showpiece of Croatia in the SFRY. It is the oldest Croatian highway. A3 forms a part of the Pan-European Corridor X. The highway starts at the Bregana border crossing, bypasses Zagreb forming the southern arch of the Zagreb bypass, and ends at Lipovac near the Bajakovo border crossing. It continues in Southeast Europe in the direction of Near East. This highway is tolled except for the stretch between Bobovica and Ivanja Reka interchanges. Highway A2 is a part of the Corridor Xa. It connects Zagreb and the frequently congested Macelj border crossing, forming a near-continuous motorway-level link between Zagreb and Western Europe. Forming a part of the Corridor Vb, highway A4 starts in Zagreb forming the northeastern wing of the Zagreb bypass and leads to Hungary until the Goričan border crossing. It is often used highway around Zagreb. The railway and the highway A3 along the Sava river that extend to Slavonia (towards Slavonski Brod, Vinkovci, Osijek and Vukovar) are some of the busiest traffic corridors in the country. The railway running along the Sutla river and the A2 highway (Zagreb-Macelj) running through Zagorje, as well as traffic connections with the Pannonian region and Hungary (the Zagorje railroad, the roads and railway to Varaždin – Čakovec and Koprivnica) are linked with truck routes. The southern railway connection to Split operates on a high-speed tilting trains line via the Lika region (renovated in 2004 to allow for a five-hour journey); a faster line along the Una river valley is in use only up to the border between Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. The city has an extensive avenue network with numerous main arteries up to ten lanes wide and Zagreb bypass, a congested four-lane highway encircling most of the city. Finding a parking space is supposed to be made somewhat easier by the construction of new underground multi-story parking lots (Importanne Center, Importanne Gallery, Lang Square, Tuškanac, Kvaternik Square, Klaić Street, etc.). The busiest roads are the main east–west arteries, former Highway "Brotherhood and Unity", consisting of Ljubljanska Avenue, Zagrebačka Avenue and Slavonska Avenue; and the Vukovarska Avenue, the closest bypass of the city center. The avenues were supposed to alleviate the traffic problem, but most of them are nowadays gridlocked during rush hour and others, like Branimirova Avenue and Dubrovnik Avenue which are gridlocked for the whole day. European routes E59, E65 and E70 serve Zagreb. Zagreb has seven road traffic bridges across the river Sava, and they all span both the river and the levees, making them all by and large longer than 200 m (660 ft). In downstream order, these are: There are also two rail traffic bridges across the Sava, one near the Sava bridge and one near Mičevec, as well as two bridges that are part of the Zagreb bypass, one near Zaprešić (west), and the other near Ivanja Reka (east). Two additional bridges across the river Sava are proposed: Jarun Bridge and Bundek Bridge. Public transportation in the city is organized in several layers: the inner parts of the city are mostly covered by trams, the outer city areas, and closer suburbs are linked with buses and rapid transit commuter rail. The public transportation company ZET (Zagrebački električni tramvaj, Zagreb Electric Tram) operates trams, all inner bus lines, and most of the suburban bus lines, and it is subsidized by the city council. The national rail operator Croatian Railways (Hrvatske željeznice, HŽ) runs a network of urban and suburban train lines in the metropolitan Zagreb area and is a government-owned corporation. The funicular (uspinjača) in the historic part of the city is a tourist attraction. Taxi market has been liberalized in early 2018 and numerous transport companies have been allowed to enter the market; consequently, the prices significantly dropped whereas the service was immensely improved so the popularity of taxis in Zagreb has been increasing from then onwards. Zagreb has an extensive tram network with 15 day and 4 night lines covering much of the inner- and middle-suburbs of the city. The first tram line was opened on 5 September 1891 and trams have been serving as a vital component of Zagreb mass transit ever since. Trams usually travel at speeds of 30–50 km/h (19–31 mph), but slow considerably during rush hour. The network operates at the curb whereas on larger avenues its tracks are situated inside the green belts. An ambitious program, which entailed replacing old trams with the new and modern ones built mostly in Zagreb by companies Končar elektroindustrija and, to a lesser extent, by TŽV Gredelj, has recently been finished. The new "TMK 2200", trams by the end of 2012 made around 95% of the fleet. The commuter rail network in Zagreb has existed since 1992. In 2005, suburban rail services were increased to a 15-minute frequency serving the middle and outer suburbs of Zagreb, primarily in the east–west direction and to the southern districts. This has enhanced the commuting opportunities across the city. A new link to the nearby town of Samobor has been announced and is due to start construction in 2014. This link will be standard-gauge and tie in with normal Croatian Railways operations. The previous narrow-gauge line to Samobor called Samoborček was closed in the 1970s. Zagreb Airport (IATA: ZAG, ICAO: LDZA) is the main Croatian international airport, a 17 km (11 mi) drive southeast of Zagreb in the city of Velika Gorica. The airport is also the main Croatian airbase featuring a fighter squadron, helicopters, as well as military and freight transport aircraft. The airport had 3.45 million passengers in 2019 with a new passenger terminal being opened in late March 2017 that can accommodate up to 5.5 million passengers. Zagreb also has a second, smaller airport, Lučko (ICAO: LDZL). It is home to sports aeroplanes and a Croatian special police unit, as well as being a military helicopter airbase. Lučko used to be the main airport of Zagreb from 1947 to 1959. A third, small grass airfield, Buševec, is located just outside Velika Gorica. It is primarily used for sports purposes. Zagreb has 136 primary schools and 100 secondary schools including 30 gymnasia. There are 5 public higher education institution and 9 private professional higher education schools. In Zagreb you will also find 4 International Schools: American International School of Zagreb (AISZ) The Learning Tree International Kindergarten (TLT) French School in Zagreb The German School in Zagreb. Founded in 1669, the University of Zagreb is the oldest continuously operating university in Croatia and one of the largest and oldest universities in the Southeastern Europe. Ever since its foundation, the university has been continually growing and developing and now consists of 29 faculties, three art academies and the Croatian Studies Centre. More than 200,000 students have attained the Bachelor's degree at the university, which has also assigned 18,000 Master's and 8,000 Doctor's degrees. As of 2011[update], the University of Zagreb is ranked among 500 Best Universities of the world by the Shanghai Academic Ranking of World Universities. Zagreb is also the seat of two private universities: the Catholic University of Croatia and the Libertas International University; as well as numerous public and private polytechnics, colleges, and higher professional schools.[which?] Artists Kristina Krepela (born 1979), actress Sanja Iveković (born 1949), photographer, performer, sculptor and installation artist Jagoda Kaloper (1947–2016), painter and actress Igor Kordej (born 1957), comic book artist Darko Macan (born 1966), writer and illustrator Ivan Meštrović (1983–1962), sculptor, architect, and writer Velimir Neidhardt (born 1942), architect Vera Nikolić Podrinska (1886–1972), painter and baroness Srećko Puntarić (born 1952), cartoonist Josip Račić (1885–1908), painter Esad Ribić (born 1972), comic book artist Goran Sudžuka (born 1969), comic book artist Marino Tartaglia (1894–1984), painter Vladimir Varlaj (1895–1962), artist Zdravko Zupan (1950–2015), comic book creator and historian Footballers Milan Badelj (born 1989), football player Josip Brekalo (born 1998), football player Marcelo Brozović (born 1992), football player Tomislav Butina (born 1974), football player Ivan Čunčić (born 1985), football player Joško Gvardiol (born 2002), football player Tin Jedvaj (born 1995), football player Josip Juranović (born 1995), football player Andrej Kramarić (born 1991), football player Niko Kranjčar (born 1984), football player Jerko Leko (born 1980), football player Lovro Majer (born 1998), football player Jasmin Mujdža (born 1974), football player Mensur Mujdža (born 1984), football player Mislav Oršić (born 1992), football player Dubravko Pavličić (1967–2012), football player Josip Pivarić (born 1989), football player Marko Pjaca (born 1995), football player Dario Šimić (born 1975), football player Zvonimir Soldo (born 1967), football player Bernard Vukas (1927–1983), football player Military Haim Bar-Lev (1924–1994), Israeli general and politician Music Zlatko Baloković, violinist Miljenko Matijević, singer and songwriter; the lead vocalist of rock band Steelheart Zinka Milanov, operatic spinto soprano Other sportspeople Vasilije Calasan (born 1981), French racing driver Marin Čolak (born 1984), racing driver Borna Ćorić (born 1996), tennis player Krešimir Ćosić (1948–1995), basketball player Danko Cvjetićanin (born 1963), basketball player Josip Glasnović (born 1983), sports shooter, Olympic gold medal winner Zlatko Horvat (born 1984), handball player Filip Hrgović (born 1992), professional boxer Ivo Karlović (born 1979), tennis player Nenad Kljaić (born 1966), handball player Vjekoslav Kobešćak (born 1974), water polo player and coach Ivica Kostelić (born 1979), alpine ski racer Janica Kostelić (born 1982), alpine ski racer, four-time Olympic gold medalist Luka Lončar (born 1987), water polo player Iva Majoli (born 1977), tennis player Nikola Mektić (born 1988), tennis player, Olympic gold medal winner Mirko Novosel (born 1938), basketball player Tomislav Paškvalin (born 1961), water polo player Sandra Perković (born 1990), discus thrower, won two gold medals at the Summer Olympics Dubravko Šimenc (born 1966), water polo player Martin Sinković (born 1989), rower, Olympic gold medal winner Valent Sinković (born 1988), rower, Olympic gold medal winner Tin Srbić (born 1996), artistic gymnast Manuel Štrlek (born 1988), handball player Igor Vori (born 1980), handball player Vedran Zrnić (born 1979), handball player Religion Mihalj Šilobod Bolšić (1724–1787) - Roman Catholic priest, mathematician, writer, and musical theorist primarily known for writing the first Croatian arithmetic textbook Arithmatika Horvatzka (published in Zagreb, 1758) Josip Juraj Strossmayer (1815–1905), politician, Roman Catholic bishop, and benefactor Science and humanities Ivan Đikić (born 1966), molecular biologist, director of the Institute of Biochemistry II at Goethe University Frankfurt Mario Jurić (born 1979), astronomer Vesna Girardi-Jurkić (1944–2012), archeologist and museologist Dragutin Gorjanović-Kramberger (1856–1936), geologist, paleontologist, and archeologist Milan Kangrga (1923–2008), philosopher Radoslav Katičić (1930–2019), linguist, classical philologist Nada Klaić (1920–1988), historian Ivo Kolin (1924–2007), inventor Zdravko Lorković (1900–1998), biologist, entomologist and geneticist Ranko Matasović (born 1968), linguist Ivo Pilar (1874–1933), historian, politician, publicist and lawyer Martin Previšić (born 1984), historian Vesna Pusić (born 1953), sociologist and politician Marin Soljačić (born 1974), physicist and electrical engineer Rudi Supek (1913–1993), sociologist and philosopher Goran Švob (1947–2013), philosopher and logician Josip Torbar (1824–1900), natural scientist Hrvoje Turković (born 1943), film theorist Ljudevit Vukotinović (1813–1893), politician, writer and naturalist Milena Žic-Fuchs (born 1954), linguist Writers Tituš Brezovački (1757–1805), playwright, satirist and poet August Cesarec (1893–1941), writer Bora Ćosić (born 1932), writer Dimitrija Demeter (1811–1872), writer Daša Drndić (1946–2018), writer Zoran Ferić (born 1961), writer Branko Gavella (1885–1962), theater director and essayist Miroslav Krleža (1893–1981), writer, considered the greatest Croatian writer of the 20th century Antun Mihanović (1796–1861), poet and lyricist, wrote the national anthem of Croatia August Šenoa (1838–1881), novelist Sunčana Škrinjarić (1931–2004), writer, poet and journalist Davor Slamnig (born 1956), writer and musician Slobodan Šnajder (born 1948), writer and publicist From the household census Population census without clergy and nobility Kajkavian pronunciation: [ˈzaɡrep] Register of spatial units of the State Geodetic Administration of the Republic of Croatia. Wikidata Q119585703. "Statistički ljetopis Grada Zagreba 2007" (PDF). Statistički Ljetopis Zagreba (in Croatian and English). 2013. ISSN 1330-3678. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 December 2008. Retrieved 12 November 2008. "Population by Age and Sex, by Settlements, 2021 Census". Census of Population, Households and Dwellings in 2021. Zagreb: Croatian Bureau of Statistics. 2022. "Zagreb Urban Agglomeration Development Strategy for the period up to 2020" (PDF). www.zagreb.hr. April 2018. Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 October 2020. Retrieved 28 December 2019. "EU regions by GDP, Eurostat". Retrieved 18 September 2023. "Sub-national HDI - Subnational HDI - Global Data Lab". globaldatalab.org. Wells, John C. (2008). Longman Pronunciation Dictionary (3rd ed.). Longman. ISBN 978-1-4058-8118-0.; Roach, Peter (2011). Cambridge English Pronouncing Dictionary (18th ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-15253-2. International Review of Slavic Linguistics. Linguistic Research. 1982. ISBN 9780887830464. "Hrvatski jezični portal". Archived from the original on 27 August 2015. Retrieved 23 March 2015. "Grad Zagreb službene stranice". Archived from the original on 20 June 2017. Retrieved 20 June 2017. "OSNOVNI PODACI O GRADU ZAGREBU". Archived from the original on 7 June 2017. Retrieved 20 June 2017.; "Zagreb, Zagreb... – ZPR – FER". Archived from the original on 30 July 2007. Retrieved 20 June 2017. "Arheološki park ANDAUTONIJA". Archived from the original on 1 January 2012. Retrieved 20 June 2017.; "Arheološki park ANDAUTONIJA u Ščitarjevu – Arheološki muzej u Zagrebu". Archived from the original on 29 July 2017. Retrieved 20 June 2017.; "Povijest – Andautonija". Archived from the original on 26 July 2012. Retrieved 20 June 2017.; "Andautonija – Turistička zajednica Zagrebačke županije". Archived from the original on 29 July 2017. Retrieved 20 June 2017. "Muzej grada Zagreba – 5. Slobodni kraljevski grad na Gradecu". Archived from the original on 5 July 2017. Retrieved 20 June 2017.; "Kralj Bela IV Gradecu izdao Zlatnu bulu kojom je postao slobodni kraljevski grad". 16 November 2014. Archived from the original on 29 July 2017. Retrieved 20 June 2017.; "slobodni kraljevski gradovi i trgovišta | Hrvatska enciklopedija". Archived from the original on 30 July 2017. Retrieved 20 June 2017.; "slobodni kraljevski gradec – Grad Zagreb službene stranice". Archived from the original on 29 July 2017. Retrieved 20 June 2017.; "Zlatna bula Bele IV. – Hrvatska enciklopedija". Archived from the original on 28 July 2017. Retrieved 20 June 2017. "Zagrebački gradonačelnici – Grad Zagreb službene stranice". Archived from the original on 12 June 2017. Retrieved 20 June 2017.; "Popis gradonačelnika grada Zagreba / ZGportal Zagreb". Archived from the original on 10 July 2017. Retrieved 20 June 2017.; "Izabran prvi zagrebački gradonačelnik u povijesti – 1851". 14 May 2014. Archived from the original on 29 July 2017. Retrieved 20 June 2017.; "15. svibnja 1851. – tko je bio prvi gradonačelnik Zagreba?". narod.hr. 15 May 2017. Archived from the original on 29 July 2017. Retrieved 20 June 2017. "Kakav je status Grada Zagreba? – Ministarstvo uprave". Archived from the original on 29 July 2017. Retrieved 20 June 2017.; "Popis županija, gradova i općina". Archived from the original on 29 July 2017. Retrieved 20 June 2017.; "Sustav lokalne i područne (regionalne) samouprave". Archived from the original on 29 July 2017. Retrieved 20 June 2017.; "Zakon o Gradu Zagrebu – Zakon.hr". Archived from the original on 29 July 2017. Retrieved 20 June 2017. "Gradske četvrti – Grad Zagreb službene stranice". Archived from the original on 18 June 2017. Retrieved 20 June 2017.; "Gradske četvrti grada Zagreba / ZGportal Zagreb". Archived from the original on 19 June 2017. Retrieved 21 June 2017.; "Doznajte kako su glasale pojedine gradske četvrti Zagreba – Dnevnik.hr". Archived from the original on 27 June 2017. Retrieved 20 June 2017. "Gradska četvrt Podsljeme – Grad Zagreb službene stranice". Archived from the original on 29 May 2017. Retrieved 20 June 2017.; "Karta Podsljeme – Zagreb – Karta Zagreba". Archived from the original on 5 July 2017. Retrieved 20 June 2017.; "Gradska četvrt Podsljeme / ZGportal Zagreb". Archived from the original on 29 July 2017. Retrieved 20 June 2017. "Udaljenost Sesvete - Zagreb - Udaljenosti.com". Archived from the original on 27 June 2017. Retrieved 20 June 2017.; "Karta Sesvete – Zagreb – Karta Zagreba". Archived from the original on 5 July 2017. Retrieved 20 June 2017.; "Sesvete – Karta Zagreba". Archived from the original on 28 June 2017. Retrieved 20 June 2017. "Medvednica / Simboli grada Zagreba / ZGportal Zagreb". Archived from the original on 29 July 2017. Retrieved 20 June 2017. "Zagreb – Google Karte". Archived from the original on 22 November 2018. Retrieved 20 June 2017. "Karta Zagreba". Archived from the original on 8 April 2022. Retrieved 20 June 2017. "The World According to GaWC 2020". GaWC - Research Network. Globalization and World Cities. Archived from the original on 12 June 2022. Retrieved 31 August 2020. "Zagreb – naša metropola". Archived from the original on 16 July 2017. Retrieved 20 June 2017. "Zagreb – moderna metropola bogate povijesti – HUP Zagreb". Retrieved 20 June 2017.[permanent dead link] "Grad Zagreb – Velegrad zelenog srca – Jutarnji List". 21 August 2010. Archived from the original on 29 July 2017. Retrieved 21 June 2017. "Republika Grad Zagreb – STav". Archived from the original on 8 April 2022. Retrieved 20 June 2017. "Unitarna i centralizirana Hrvatska zrela za redizajn – Glas Slavonije". Archived from the original on 29 July 2017. Retrieved 20 June 2017. "Sindikati traže izdvajanje Grada Zagreba iz statističke podjele RH". Archived from the original on 29 July 2017. Retrieved 20 June 2017. Zagrabia in Giovanni Giacomo de Rossi's Mercurio Geografico (Dalmatia Istria Bosnia Servia Croatia parte di Schiavonia [...], Rome, c. 1692; swaen.com Archived 29 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine). Cod. Dipl. II 42: rex diuina gratia inspirante ... Zagrabiensem constituit episcopatum videlicet ut quos error idolatrie a dei cultura extraneos fecerat, episcopalis cuira ad viam veritatis reduceret. Mladen ANČIĆ, "Dva teksta iz sredine 14. stoljeća. Prilog poznavanju „društvenog znanja“ u Hrvatskom Kraljevstvu Archived 22 February 2017 at the Wayback Machine ("Two works from the middle of the 14th century: Contribution to the understanding of "social knowledge" in the Croatian Kingdom") Starohrvatska prosvjeta III.40 (2013). Décsy, Gyula in: Jean-Claude Boulanger (ed.) Actes du XVIe Congrès international des sciences onomastiques: Québec, Université Laval, 16–22 août 1987 : le nom propre au carrefour des études humaines et des sciences sociales, Presses Université Laval (1990), ISBN 978-2-7637-7213-4. p. 202 Archived 10 April 2023 at the Wayback Machine. Gluhak, Alemko (14 November 1999). "Neke praslavenske riječi u hrvatskome". Hrvatski Dijalektološki Zbornik (11): 11–20. Archived from the original on 13 October 2017. Retrieved 10 July 2017 – via Hrčak. Frank Moore Colby, Talcott Williams Dodd, The New International Encyclopaedia, Volume 1, 1918, p. 239. Nikola Štambak, Zagreb (2004), p. 77 Archived 5 April 2023 at the Wayback Machine. "'BILA JEDNOM MANDA BAJNA, GRABILA JE IZ BUNARA' Legenda o Manduševcu i nastanku imena Zagreb". Archived from the original on 23 June 2017. Retrieved 20 June 2017. "LEGENDA O ZELENOM KURCU: Što se krije iza priče o Mandi i žednom junaku?". 28 December 2016. Archived from the original on 8 June 2017. Retrieved 20 June 2017. "Poznate i nepoznate legende o Zagrebu i okolici! - Narodni.NET". 17 January 2012. Archived from the original on 28 June 2017. Retrieved 20 June 2017. "Manduševac, fontana po kojoj je Zagreb dobio ime". Archived from the original on 29 June 2017. Retrieved 20 June 2017. "Zagreb nije oduvijek bio Zagreb. Znate li kako se zvao? – Večernji.hr". Archived from the original on 29 July 2017. Retrieved 20 June 2017. "Legend about Zagreb". Croatian National Tourist Board. Retrieved on 12 November 2008. "The Roman town of Andautonia". Andautonia Archaeological Park. Archived from the original on 7 December 2008. Retrieved 8 November 2008. "Ban Josip Jelačić". hrt.hr (in Croatian). Croatian Radiotelevision. Archived from the original on 5 March 2016. Retrieved 30 October 2016. Sluzbeni List. "Deklaraciju o proglašenju suverene i samostalne Republike Hrvatske" [Declaration on the Sovereignty and Independence of the Croatian Republic]. narodne-novine.nn.hr (in Croatian). Archived from the original on 4 May 2015. Retrieved 27 May 2013. Hawkesworth, Celia (2007). Zagreb: A Cultural and Literary History. Signal Books. ISBN 978-1-904955-30-6. Archived from the original on 10 April 2023. Retrieved 3 October 2020. Oliver, Jeanne (26 February 2015). Croatia Traveller's Zagreb and Beyond: A practical guide to visiting Zagreb, Croatia. Croatia Traveller. ISBN 978-1-311-66016-9. Archived from the original on 10 April 2023. Retrieved 3 October 2020. Stone, Zofia (1 March 2017). Genghis Khan: A Biography. Vij Books India Pvt Ltd. ISBN 978-93-86367-11-2. Archived from the original on 10 April 2023. Retrieved 3 October 2020. Zagreb: turistički vodič (in Croatian). Masmedia d.o.o. 1970. ISBN 978-953-157-464-8. Archived from the original on 10 April 2023. Retrieved 3 October 2020. "Na Badnjak, Kaptol je počeo bombardirati Gradec koji je uzvratio opsadom…Zaboravljeni opisi otkrivaju kako je izgledao rat Gradeca i Kaptola". Blaga & misterije (in Croatian). 18 November 2018. Retrieved 24 December 2023. Lumen (16 May 2023). "Od veterničkog neandertalca do potresa 1699". Zagreb moj grad (in Croatian). Retrieved 24 December 2023. Željko (5 January 2023). "Krvavi most". Hrvatski vojnik (in Croatian). Retrieved 24 December 2023. Džalo, Marijana (2 August 2021). "Krvavi most: Deset (ne)poznatih tajni mračne zagrebačke ulice". Beli Zagreb Grad (in Croatian). Retrieved 24 December 2023. "Gdje je sve počelo? Početak dugogodišnjih nasilnih sukoba između građana Kaptola i Gradeca | Lice Grada" (in Croatian). 19 July 2020. Retrieved 24 December 2023. "History of Zagreb". Archived from the original on 23 April 2021. Retrieved 20 March 2021. [...] in 1621 the city was picked to become the seat of the Croatian viceroys. Varga, Szabolcs (2010). "Ethnic Groups, Denominations and Migration in South Danubia and Slavonia". In Bendel, Rainer; Spannenberger, Norbert (eds.). Kirchen als Integrationsfaktor für die Migranten im Südosten der Habsburgermonarchie im 18. Jahrhundert. Kirche und Gesellschaft im Karpaten-Donauraum - volume 1. Münster: LIT Verlag. p. 18. ISBN 9783643100450. Retrieved 3 October 2023. The first Jesuit college opened in Zagreb in 1606 [...]. Letcher, Piers; McKelvie, Robin; McKelvie, Jenny (May 2007) [2003]. "Zagreb". Croatia: The Bradt Travel Guide. Bradt Guides (3 ed.). Chalfont St Peter, Buckinghamshire: Bradt Travel Guides. p. 103. ISBN 9781841621920. Retrieved 3 October 2023. The Jesuits were also responsible for [St Catherine's Square (Katarina Trg)'s] main attraction, and Zagreb's finest baroque church, St Catherine's. Built between 1620 and 1632, it features some highly superior 18th-century stucco work and an amazing trompe l'oeil altarpiece [...] an extraordinary work from 1762 [...]. "The city of Zagreb". hrt.hr. Croatian Radiotelevision. Archived from the original on 17 January 2007. Retrieved 2 July 2006. Paris Aéroport, Paris Vous Aime Magazine, No 13, avril-may-juin 2023, p. 139 Maretić, Mirko (10 January 2008). "O imaginarnim kartama Južnog ≈ Novog Zagreba". Zarez (in Croatian) (222). Archived from the original on 15 May 2009. Retrieved 25 February 2009. "SAS Output". Dzs.hr. Archived from the original on 12 June 2011. Retrieved 15 September 2011. "Zagreb Climate Normals" (PDF). Croatian Meteorological and Hydrological Service. Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 December 2015. Retrieved 2 December 2015. "Monthly values and extremes:Values for Zagreb Maksimir in 1949-2019 period". Croatian Meteorological and Hydrological Service. Archived from the original on 6 June 2021. Retrieved 28 May 2021. Marković, Đurđica (21 December 2011). "Najledeniji dani u našoj zemlji". Meteo-info.hr (in Croatian). Archived from the original on 22 August 2018. Retrieved 22 August 2018. "Zagreb, Croatia – Climate data". Weather Atlas. Archived from the original on 12 March 2017. Retrieved 9 March 2017. "Zagreb hoteli – putovanje u Zagreb". Blogger (in Croatian). 19 December 2014. Archived from the original on 14 January 2017. Retrieved 27 August 2015. "Sky Office – Zagreb". Sky Office (in Croatian). Archived from the original on 17 August 2015. Retrieved 27 August 2015. "Sky Office Tower, Zagreb". Empoirs. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 27 August 2015. "Blato i Lanište postaju najsuvremeniji dio Zagreba?". novi-zagreb.hr (in Croatian). 28 March 2008. Archived from the original on 21 July 2011. Retrieved 27 July 2008. "Na Laništu gradnja iznad 9 katova". Javno.hr (in Croatian). 21 June 2007. Archived from the original on 15 January 2009. Retrieved 21 September 2009. SEISMOGENIC ZONES OF NORTHWESTERN CROATIA Archived 6 February 2016 at the Wayback Machine GNGTS 2008 "Earthquake – Zagreb, Croatia – Embassy of the United States". usembassy.gov. Archived from the original on 6 February 2016. dpuljic. "Potresi na zagrebačkom području". hgi-cgs.hr. Archived from the original on 6 February 2016. Retrieved 5 February 2016. "STIŽU UPUTE KAKO SE PONAŠATI: "Potresi se stalno događaju. Zagreb ih ima 400 godišnje"". net.hr. 14 January 2016. Archived from the original on 6 February 2016. Retrieved 5 February 2016. City Mayors & Tann vom Hove (2010). "City Mayors: Largest cities and their mayors in 2011 (Countries A-D)". citymayors.com. Archived from the original on 27 August 2011. Retrieved 29 June 2011. City Mayors & Tann vom Hove Sić, Miroslav (2007). "Spatial and functional changes in recent urban development of Zagreb" (PDF). Delo. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 December 2008. Retrieved 6 November 2008. Narodne novine 62/01, 125/08 "Population by Towns/Municipalities, 2021 Census". Census of Population, Households and Dwellings in 2021. Zagreb: Croatian Bureau of Statistics. 2022. "Jutarnji list - U Hrvatskoj je više od 115.000 stranih radnika, dovode ih 424 agencije za posredovanje". www.jutarnji.hr (in Croatian). 9 January 2023. Archived from the original on 31 March 2023. Retrieved 31 March 2023. "City of Zagreb – Population by districts". Census 2001. Croatian Bureau of Statistics. Archived from the original on 20 November 2010. Retrieved 20 January 2011. "Population by age and sex, by districts of City of Zagreb" (HTML). Census of Population, Households and Dwellings 2011. Zagreb: Croatian Bureau of Statistics. December 2012. Retrieved 31 August 2014. "zagreb.hr – Local self-government" Archived 17 August 2016 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 28 September 2016. "Statistički ljetopis Grada Zagreba 2007. – 2. Stanovništvo" (PDF). Statistički Ljetopis Zagreba (in Croatian and English). 2007. ISSN 1330-3678. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 October 2008. Retrieved 12 November 2008. "Population by Age and Sex, by Settlements, 2011 Census: City of Zagreb". Census of Population, Households and Dwellings 2011. Zagreb: Croatian Bureau of Statistics. December 2012. Retrieved 31 August 2014. "Tomislav Tomašević, Mayor of Zagreb". www.zagreb.hr (in Croatian). Retrieved 28 December 2023. "Klubovi". www.skupstina.zagreb.hr. Gradska skupština Grada Zagreba. Retrieved 4 March 2021. "XXI. Grad Zagreb" (PDF). Informacija o izborima članova predstavničkih tijela jedinica lokalne i područne (regionalne) samouprave i općinskih načelnika, gradonačelnika i župana te njihovih zamjenika-2021. State Election Committee of the Republic of Croatia. Retrieved 27 June 2021. "Klubovi" [Clubs]. Zagreb City Assembly. Retrieved 23 June 2021. "zagreb.hr – Zagreb in brief (City administration)" Archived 9 September 2008 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 29 September 2016. "Manjinski izbori prve nedjelje u svibnju, kreću i edukacije". T-portal. 13 March 2023. Retrieved 2 May 2023. "Informacija o konačnim rezultatima izbora članova vijeća i izbora predstavnika nacionalnih manjina 2023. XXI. GRAD ZAGREB" (PDF) (in Croatian). Državno izborno povjerenstvo Republike Hrvatske. 2023. pp. 3–10. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 June 2023. Retrieved 3 June 2023. "Intercity and International Cooperation of the City of Zagreb". 2006–2009 City of Zagreb. Archived from the original on 7 July 2017. Retrieved 23 June 2009. "Gradovi prijatelji grada Zagreba". Archived from the original on 2 July 2017. Retrieved 20 June 2017. "Na Bundekfestu prvi put i gradovi prijatelji-Rim, Beč, Budimpešta i Ljubljana". 16 September 2014. Archived from the original on 29 July 2017. Retrieved 20 June 2017. "Saint Petersburg in figures – International and Interregional Ties". Saint Petersburg City Government. Archived from the original on 24 February 2009. Retrieved 23 March 2008. "Sister Cities of Kyoto City". City of Kyoto. Archived from the original on 21 January 2014. Retrieved 21 January 2014. "Lisboa – Geminações de Cidades e Vilas" [Lisbon – Twinning of Cities and Towns]. Associação Nacional de Municípios Portugueses [National Association of Portuguese Municipalities] (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 20 May 2020. Retrieved 23 August 2013. "Acordos de Geminação, de Cooperação e/ou Amizade da Cidade de Lisboa" [Lisbon – Twinning Agreements, Cooperation and Friendship]. Camara Municipal de Lisboa (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 31 October 2013. Retrieved 23 August 2013. "Budapest – Testvérvárosok" [Budapest – Twin Cities]. Budapest Főváros Önkormányzatának hivatalos oldala [Official site of the Municipality of Budapest] (in Hungarian). Archived from the original on 9 August 2013. Retrieved 14 August 2013. "Fraternity cities on Sarajevo Official Web Site". City of Sarajevo 2001–2008. Archived from the original on 1 December 2008. Retrieved 9 November 2008. "Medmestno in mednarodno sodelovanje". Mestna občina Ljubljana (Ljubljana City) (in Slovenian). Archived from the original on 26 June 2013. Retrieved 27 July 2013. "سفير كرواسي در تهران: "زاگرب" با تبريز خواهر خوانده مي‌شود". Farsnews.ir. 10 October 2006. Archived from the original on 10 April 2023. Retrieved 23 December 2015. "Sister Cities of Ankara". ankara.bel.tr. Archived from the original on 24 December 2018. Retrieved 11 August 2016. "Gradovi prijatelji grada Zagreba". ZGportal Zagreb. Archived from the original on 17 August 2015. Retrieved 25 August 2015. "Declaration of intent signed by Akim of Astana and Mayor of Croatias capital". Akimat of Astana. 4 July 2014. Archived from the original on 15 October 2014. Retrieved 9 October 2014. "Zagreb i Petrinja postaju gradovi prijatelji". 9 July 2015. Archived from the original on 29 July 2017. Retrieved 20 June 2017. "Vukovar i Zagreb gradovi prijatelji: Povelju o prijateljstvu potpisali Bandić i Penava". Archived from the original on 29 July 2017. Retrieved 20 June 2017. "Koji su to sve gradovi prijatelji našem Zagrebu?". 6 November 2018. Archived from the original on 21 July 2021. Retrieved 21 July 2021. "Kraków otwarty na świat". krakow.pl. Archived from the original on 13 August 2016. Retrieved 19 July 2009. "Twinning Cities: International Relations" (PDF). Municipality of Tirana. tirana.gov.al. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 October 2011. Retrieved 23 June 2009. Twinning Cities: International Relations. Municipality of Tirana. www.tirana.gov.al. Retrieved on 25 January 2008. "Twin cities of Pécs". PécsEconomy. Archived from the original on 20 February 2022. Retrieved 20 February 2022. "Zagreb Christmas Market 2021 - Dates, hotels, things to do,..." Europe's Best Destinations. Archived from the original on 30 September 2021. Retrieved 30 September 2021. "I treću godinu zaredom: Zagreb ima najbolji Advent u Europi!". 24sata (in Croatian). 11 December 2017. Archived from the original on 30 September 2021. Retrieved 30 September 2021. "Welcome Center Croatia - The Art Of Travelling". www.welcome-center-croatia.com. Archived from the original on 12 June 2022. Retrieved 16 June 2022. "Broj turistickih dolazaka". poslovni.hr. Archived from the original on 16 January 2011. Retrieved 12 January 2012. "Broj turista najvise porastao u Zagrebu". kigo.hr. Archived from the original on 1 March 2013. Retrieved 12 January 2012. "U Zagrebu više turista i noćenja". Ministry of Tourism. Archived from the original on 24 August 2015. Retrieved 27 September 2013. "The History and Activities of the Archeological Museum". Archived from the original on 18 May 2006. Retrieved 2 July 2006. "Modern Gallery". Moderna Galerija. Archived from the original on 11 October 2012. Retrieved 8 October 2010. "Croatian Natural History Museum". Archived from the original on 16 February 2007. Retrieved 2 July 2006. "Technical Museum". Archived from the original on 16 February 2007. Retrieved 2 July 2006. "Tehnički muzej". Official web site (in Croatian). Zagreb, Croatia: Technical Museum. Archived from the original on 20 August 2019. Retrieved 28 July 2021. "Museum of the City of Zagreb". Archived from the original on 8 March 2021. Retrieved 2 July 2006. "Arts and Crafts Museum". Archived from the original on 13 February 2007. Retrieved 2 July 2006. "Ethnographic Museum". The Zagreb Tourist Board. Archived from the original on 9 October 2012. Retrieved 6 December 2012. "Mimara Museum". Archived from the original on 16 February 2007. Retrieved 2 July 2006. "Croatian Naïve Art Museum". Archived from the original on 16 February 2007. Retrieved 2 July 2006. "The Museum of Contemporary Art Zagreb". Archived from the original on 28 May 2019. Retrieved 20 January 2010. "About". Institut za suvremenu umjetnost. Archived from the original on 24 December 2022. Retrieved 28 January 2023. "About Strossmayer's Old Masters Gallery". Archived from the original on 27 September 2007. Retrieved 2 July 2006. "Museum of Broken Relationships". New.brokenships.com. Archived from the original on 20 November 2011. Retrieved 5 May 2014. "Museum of Broken Relationships: BBC video". Bbc.co.uk. 13 December 2010. Archived from the original on 8 December 2013. Retrieved 5 May 2014. "A Poignant Trail of Broken Hearts, All on Display". The New York Times. 15 February 2010. Archived from the original on 14 January 2017. Retrieved 28 February 2017. "The Museum of Broken Relationships". En.wikinoticia.com. 25 November 2010. Archived from the original on 18 July 2011. Retrieved 3 June 2011. "People and Art House Lauba". Lauba.hr. Archived from the original on 8 May 2014. Retrieved 5 May 2014. "Lauba-The Youngest Centenarian in Town". pogledaj.to. 25 April 2011. Archived from the original on 12 June 2011. Retrieved 18 July 2011. "Zagreb ranks 7th among Europe's cities with the most castles". croatiaweek.com. Croatia Week. 28 August 2023. Retrieved 29 August 2023. "Festivals and Annual Events in Zagreb, Croatia". Zagreb.com. Archived from the original on 14 December 2021. Retrieved 14 December 2021. www.globaldizajn.hr, Globaldizajn. "Ustanova Upravljanje sportskim objektima – Dvorane Doma sportova". sportskiobjekti.hr. Archived from the original on 22 October 2020. Retrieved 24 August 2016. Arena Zagreb[circular reference] Stadion Maksimir[circular reference] "Zagreb(Archdiocese)-Statistics". Zagreb(Archdiocese). Archived from the original on 12 May 2012. Retrieved 3 May 2012. Meštrović Pavilion "Crkva Isusa Krista Svetaca Poslijednih Dana". crkvaisusakrista.hr. Archived from the original on 30 August 2012. Retrieved 2 September 2012. "About Zagreb Economy". Archived from the original on 14 June 2006. Retrieved 2 July 2006. "Zagreb – City Office for Economy, Labour and Entrepreneurship". Archived from the original on 20 July 2013. Retrieved 25 April 2012. "Prosječna plaća u Zagrebu 990 kuna viša od hrvatskog prosjeka". Index.hr. Archived from the original on 24 June 2020. Retrieved 31 January 2016. Foto: Marijan Sušenj/PIXSELL. "Znate li koliko iznosi prosječna plaća u Hrvatskoj? – Vijesti – hrvatska – Večernji list". Vecernji.hr. Archived from the original on 27 September 2013. Retrieved 5 May 2014. "Službene stranice Grada Zagreba – Zaposlenost i nezaposlenost". Zagreb.hr. 5 October 2013. Archived from the original on 29 April 2017. Retrieved 5 May 2014. "CENTRALIZIRANA HRVATSKA Analiza Jutarnjeg – zaposleni Zagrepčani primaju 50 posto veće plaće od Varaždinaca!". 3 August 2015. Archived from the original on 2 April 2019. Retrieved 20 June 2017. "Centralizacija: Zagreb troši triput više od Rijeke, Splita i Osijeka zajedno". Archived from the original on 22 June 2020. Retrieved 20 June 2017. "Grabar Kitarović: Demografska slika Hrvatske je ogroman problem". Archived from the original on 26 June 2020. Retrieved 20 June 2017. "Gospodarstvo Grada Zagreba i Zagrebačke županije" (PDF). Croatian Chamber of Economy (in Croatian). 11 December 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 December 2008. Retrieved 11 November 2008. "Economic Profile of Zagreb Chamber of Commerce" (in Croatian). Croatian Chamber of Commerce, Zagreb Chamber of Commerce. Archived from the original on 15 January 2008. Retrieved 25 January 2008. "BRUTO DOMAĆI PROIZVOD ZA REPUBLIKU HRVATSKU, HR_NUTS 2021. – HR NUTS 2 I ŽUPANIJE U 2019". DZS. Državni zavod za statistiku. Archived from the original on 5 July 2022. Retrieved 29 April 2022. "BRUTO DOMAĆI PROIZVOD ZA REPUBLIKU HRVATSKU, HR_NUTS 2021. – HR NUTS 2 I ŽUPANIJE U 2021". Državni zavod za statistiku. Croatian Bureau of Statistics. Retrieved 28 February 2024. "Glavni makroekonomski indikatori" [Main macroeconomic indicators]. HNB. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 6 April 2022. "From Zagreb to Rijeka in an hour". Product of Croatia. 22 October 2008. Archived from the original on 15 July 2011. Retrieved 11 November 2008. "PRAZNOVANJE ROJSTNEGA DNE ZA OTROKE – NASVETI!" [Brotherhood and Unity Motorway] (in Slovenian). Zbirka.si. Archived from the original on 11 March 2016. Retrieved 27 August 2015. "Vremeplov" [Time machine] (in Serbian). Radio Television of Serbia. 1 April 2010. Archived from the original on 10 August 2016. Retrieved 17 August 2015. "Autocesta A3 – Bregana–Zagreb–Lipovac" [Motorway A3 – Bregana–Zagreb–Lipovac] (PDF). Hrvatske autoceste. 3 July 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 February 2011. Retrieved 21 June 2017. "South East Europe Core Regional Transport Network Development Plan". South-East Europe Transport Observatory. May 2006. Archived from the original on 5 October 2011. Retrieved 13 November 2008. "Project appraisal document on a proposed loan to the Republic of Croatia" (PDF). The World Bank. 27 September 2000. Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 December 2008. Retrieved 13 November 2008. "Autocesta koja koči Hrvatsku". Archived from the original on 29 July 2017. Retrieved 20 June 2017. "Zagreb Transportation". Archived from the original on 28 September 2007. Retrieved 2 July 2006. "Izvješće o mreži". Croatian Railways (in Croatian). 2009. p. 67. Archived from the original on 10 April 2023. Retrieved 13 November 2008. Pupačić, Tomislav (20 September 2004). "Nagibni vlakovi više nisu nagibni". Vjesnik (in Croatian). Archived from the original on 8 January 2009. Retrieved 13 November 2008. "PROMETNI KOLAPS Gužve zbog asfaltiranja Avenije Dubrovnik trajat će do kraja kolovoza". 22 August 2016. Archived from the original on 29 July 2017. Retrieved 20 June 2017. "Zbog radova velike gužve u Novom Zagrebu, Avenija Dubrovnik djelomično zatvorena do srijede". Archived from the original on 29 July 2017. Retrieved 20 June 2017. "10 projekata koji bi riješili gradske gužve u Zagrebu – na čekanju". Archived from the original on 29 July 2017. Retrieved 20 June 2017. Neven Crnobrnja (2006). "Bridges across the Sava River in Zagreb". Građevinar (in Croatian). Vol. 57, no. 12. Zagreb, Croatia: Hrvatski savez građevinskih inženjera. Archived from the original on 5 August 2012. Retrieved 20 January 2011 – via Hrčak. "Ministar Butković: Novim Zakonom o prijevozu u cestovnom prometu jeftiniji i dostupniji taksi za sve građane". Government of the Republic of Croatia. Archived from the original on 20 November 2018. Retrieved 20 November 2018. "Predstavljen 71. niskopodni tramvaj" (in Croatian). Zagrebački električni tramvaj (ZET). 27 December 2007. Archived from the original on 31 December 2007. Retrieved 8 January 2008. Vojković, Ana Marija (1 August 2008). "Zagreb kupuje 18 vlakova za brži prigradski promet". 24 sata (in Croatian). Archived from the original on 28 September 2011. Retrieved 8 December 2008. "Uskoro Samoborček i novi prigradski vlakovi" (PDF). Zagrebački Komunalni Vjesnik (in Croatian) (362): 11. 28 November 2007. ISSN 1845-4968. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 September 2008. Retrieved 31 July 2008. "Franjo Tuđman Airport terminal". Archived from the original on 28 September 2007. Retrieved 2 July 2006. "Zagreb Airport – History" (in Croatian). Archived from the original on 1 August 2008. Retrieved 2 October 2008. Kosović, Vedran (10 October 1999). "Usprkos teškoćama leti se dalje". Vjesnik (in Croatian). Archived from the original on 8 January 2009. Retrieved 31 July 2008. "Primary schools". Republic of Croatia, Ministry of science, education and sports. Archived from the original on 11 July 2007. Retrieved 27 September 2007. "Secondary schools". Republic of Croatia, Ministry of science, education and sports. Archived from the original on 23 October 2007. Retrieved 27 September 2007. "Higher education institutions". Republic of Croatia, Ministry of science, education and sports. Archived from the original on 9 June 2007. Retrieved 3 September 2007. "International Schools in Croatia - All you need to know". www.welcome-center-croatia.com. Archived from the original on 4 October 2022. Retrieved 4 October 2022. "International Schools in Croatia - All you need to know". www.welcome-center-croatia.com. Archived from the original on 11 July 2022. Retrieved 11 July 2022. "About University". Archived from the original on 7 March 2021. Retrieved 23 July 2017. "Croatia: University of Zagreb – KTH". Archived from the original on 29 July 2017. Retrieved 23 July 2017. "University of Zagreb – CENTER FOR EUROPEAN EDUCATION". Archived from the original on 29 July 2017. Retrieved 23 July 2017. "University of Zagreb, Croatia – Europe Engage". Archived from the original on 29 July 2017. Retrieved 23 July 2017. "University of Zagreb – Top Universities". Archived from the original on 29 July 2017. Retrieved 23 July 2017. "4th Ensec Conference-Zagreb-Croatia". Archived from the original on 5 July 2016. Retrieved 23 July 2017. "Zagreb in brief". City of Zagreb. Archived from the original on 9 September 2008. Retrieved 11 November 2008. Cresswell, Peterjon; Atkins, Ismay; Dunn, Lily (10 July 2006). Time Out Croatia (First ed.). London, Berkeley & Toronto: Time Out Group Ltd & Ebury Publishing, Random House Ltd. 20 Vauxhall Bridge Road, London SV1V 2SA. ISBN 978-1-904978-70-1. Zagreb at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Travel information from Wikivoyage Zagreb – Official website Archived 25 July 2016 at the Wayback Machine Zagreb Tourist Board Zagreb Fair Portals:  Geography  Europe  Croatia