The Continental Cup (Russian: Кубок Континента, Kubok Kontinenta), also known as the Kontinental Cup, is the trophy presented to the winner of the regular season of the Kontinental Hockey League, i.e. the team with the most points at the end of the regular season. The name and trophy were introduced during the second season of the competition. In the first season it was simply named the regular season winner. During the history of KHL, the winner of Continental Cup had never won Gagarin Cup in the same season before 2018–19, when CSKA Moscow became the first team to win both trophies.    Team won the Gagarin Cup.    Team lost in the Gagarin Cup Finals.    Team lost in the first round of the playoffs. Bold Team with the most points ever accumulated in a season during the trophy's existence. Gagarin Cup, awarded to the winner of the KHL play-offs Presidents' Trophy, an NHL trophy having the same function as the Continental Cup The 2021–22 regular season was ended prematurely at the Olympic break due to complications from the COVID-19 pandemic; as a result, teams finished with an uneven total of games played, and the final standings were instead determined by points percentage. At the time of the suspension, Metallurg Magnitogorsk led the league with 71 points in 48 games. The original season schedule called for 56 games per team; however, COVID-19-related postponements and the aforementioned premature conclusion of the season resulted in teams finishing with as few as 45 or as many as 50 games played. "Ufa's first trophy". khl.ru. Archived from the original on 11 March 2010. Retrieved 5 March 2010. "Новые трофеи Лиги". khl.ru. Retrieved 5 March 2010. "Kontinental champion!". Kontinental Hockey League. 26 February 2012. Archived from the original on 14 July 2014. Retrieved 1 March 2012. ""Кубок Континента" – награда победителю регулярного чемпионата". khl.ru. Retrieved 5 March 2010. [1], an article on the official website of Traktor Chelyabinsk with a picture of Mikhail Yurevich receiving the trophy from Alexander Medvedev