American Pie Presents: The Naked Mile is a 2006 American sex comedy film released by Universal Pictures. It is the second installment in the American Pie Presents film series, a spin-off of the American Pie franchise. John White stars as Erik Stifler, a high school senior given a hall pass from his girlfriend (Jessy Schram) who visits his cousin (Steve Talley) to run a mile naked. Christopher McDonald co-stars as Erik's father and Eugene Levy plays family friend Noah Levenstein. The Naked Mile was released direct-to-DVD internationally on December 12, 2006, and in the United States on December 19, 2006. The film was a financial success, generating US$27.46 million in United States sales. It received generally negative reviews from film critics. It was followed by Beta House (2007). Erik Stifler, Steve and Matt Stifler's cousin, fails to live up to the family name as he is about to graduate from high school as a virgin. As the film opens, Erik feigns an illness so that he can stay home and masturbate. His parents and grandmother unexpectedly walk in and are hit with Erik's semen, causing his grandmother to die of a heart attack. Erik's girlfriend of two years, Tracy, loves him but is not ready for sex. She suddenly decides she's now ready, inviting Erik to her house later to have sex for the first time. They are interrupted when her father comes downstairs for a nightcap. Before Tracy's father can catch him, a naked Erik flees from the dryer, in which he defecated while hiding there. Erik's friends Cooze and Ryan plan a road trip to visit Erik's cousin Dwight Stifler at the University of Michigan for an event known as the Naked Mile. Tracy sees this as an opportunity to give Erik a sex pass, hoping that he can quench his lustful desires. As soon as Erik and his friends arrive on campus, they witness a drinking contest where Dwight is crowned champion. Later, they lose a rough game of football against a bitter rival fraternity composed almost entirely of midgets. Later at a bar, Erik meets a college girl named Brandi who has a fetish for virgins, prompting Ryan and Cooze to make a bet regarding whether or not Erik will sleep with her. The following morning, Dwight gets attacked by the midget fraternity while walking down the street, landing him in the hospital. However, he manages to make it to the Naked Mile where he joins up with Erik, Ryan, and Cooze. At first they are reluctant to run, but when Brandi, Jill, and Alexis strip down stark naked, they are finally prompted to strip down as well. Finally as Erik and Brandi reach the finish line, they share a kiss which is caught on camera for a TV news report. Watching the report about the Naked Mile at home, Tracy is upset and feels guilty that she allowed Erik the pass. Her friends persuade her also to lose her virginity before he gets back. Later that evening, Erik realizes that he loves Tracy, so confesses to Brandi that he cannot sleep with her, and rushes back to see his girlfriend. When he gets to her house, Tracy's dad says she is at a party. Erik rides her horse to the party, pounds on the closed bedroom door and proclaims his love for her. However, Tracy is not in the room because she had decided that she could not go through with her plans. They reconcile and have sex. When Erik returns to the Beta house to pick up his friends the next morning, each guy shares stories of his sexual experiences from the night before. The guys then ask him if he "sealed the deal" with Brandi that night, and when Erik tells them no, Ryan pays up on the bet to Cooze. Erik tells them about his adventure back home to make up with Tracy and finally lose his virginity. The guys are proud of him for officially living up to the Stifler family name, and the three friends go home. During the post-Naked Mile party, Dwight spots Vicky, the girlfriend of the leader of the midget fraternity, Rock. She heads up to Dwight's room to have sex. Later, as the film closes, Dwight sends a DVD to Rock that reads, "Payback's a bitch." It reveals Dwight and Vicky having sex to Rock's dismay. John White as Erik Stifler Steve Talley as Dwight Stifler Jessy Schram as Tracy Sterling Eugene Levy as Noah Levenstein Ross Thomas as Ryan Grimm Jake Siegel as Mike "Cooze" Coozeman Christopher McDonald as Harry Stifler Jordan Prentice as Rock Maria Ricossa as Mrs. Stifler Candace Kroslak as Brandy Mika Winkler as Vicky Dan Petronijevic as Bull Jaclyn A. Smith as Jill Angelique Lewis as Alexis Jordan Madley as Brooke Melanie Merkosky as Natalie Jon Cor as Trent Alyssa Nicole Pallett as Porn Chick Jessica Booker as Grandma Stifler Stuart Clow as Mr. Sterling Joe Bostwick as Mr. Williams Daniel Morgret as Frankie "The Naked Mile" of the title refers to a real event that was carried out annually by students of the University of Michigan that ran in earnest beginning in 1985 and ending in 2000 although smaller groups ran through 2004. The participants, mostly senior students, would run or bike a pre-designed course through campus while partially or entirely naked to celebrate the last day of class. The city began the "Naked Mile" crackdown in 2000 after the University began issuing threats to students who ran and arresting some for indecent exposure. Participation in the event was also affected as a result of it attracting amateur videographers who sold videos of the event online. Parts were filmed at McMaster University in Hamilton, Ontario, and at the St. George campus of the University of Toronto in Toronto, Ontario. The Naked Mile itself was filmed at Victoria College, a federated college within the University of Toronto. Other parts were filmed at Port Credit Secondary School in Mississauga, Ontario.[citation needed] The DVD was released on December 19, 2006 in the USA. In the opening weekend, 478,336 units were sold, generating revenue of $9,561,937. As of April 2010, over 3,000,000 have been sold translating to estimate amount of $30,000,000 in revenue. The Region 2 DVD was released in the UK on December 4, 2006 in PAL Widescreen and has been certified 15 by the BBFC with the following viewer guidance; Contains strong language, moderate sex and sex references. The movie was passed without any cuts.[citation needed] The Region 1 DVD was released December 19, 2006 in Fullscreen R-Rated, Fullscreen Unrated, and Widescreen Unrated versions. All feature Dolby Digital 5.1 audio in English, French, and Spanish. Extras include deleted and extended scenes, outtakes, and a full-length feature commentary featuring the director, writer and cast members. The unrated DVD also contains two bonus features. After the commercial success of the direct-to-DVD production American Pie Presents: Band Camp, Universal Studios Home Entertainment decided to produce another sequel to the American Pie film. American Pie Presents: The Naked Mile was released direct-to-video on December 19, 2006. The film was a financial success, generating US$27.41 million in DVD sales domestically. The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported a 0% approval rating based on 5 reviews, and an average rating of 3.2/10. Tanner Stransky of Entertainment Weekly graded the film with a "C" and wrote "although predictable, the opening stays on par with Jason Biggs’ original jaw-dropper. The rest is pretty deadly." Film critic Christopher Null wrote "I never thought I'd believe that the characters in American Pie were rich and nuanced, but compared to the disjointed, half-written affair here, they may as well be from Shakespeare." IGN's Chris Carle gave the film 3/10, writing that it's "a smorgasbord of gross-out humor, shallow laughs and bigotry." Steve Weintraub of Collider wrote "there is something to be said about comedic timing and pacing to even the most basic form of cinematic genres, neither of which this [film] grasps at all." Common Sense Media's Heather Boerner gave the film 2/5, writing that it's "another raunchy race toward the first time." Writing in DVD Talk, Scott Weinberg criticised the acting, directing and screenplay, declaring that "The Naked Mile is one of the lamest, laziest and most shockingly amateurish comedies I've ever seen". Sloan Freer of The Radio Times gave the film 2/5, writing that "even fans of teen sex comedies will find the verbal gags repetitive, predictable and often plain unfunny, while the visual jokes are dragged out to tedious levels." DVD Verdict's Eric Profancik, in his positive review, found the film was "filled with a firm, rowdy, and lascivious wit that made you smirk with its aggressive antics", in particular praising the opening scene as "stunning". Peter Hammond of Maxim describes The Naked Mile as "hilarious, sexy fun... goes where no American Pie has gone before," writing that it "goes the extra mile for laughs and gets them". Film portal United States portal Human sexuality portal Comedy portal Culture of Ann Arbor, Michigan "American Pie Presents: The Naked Mile – DVD Sales". The Numbers. Archived from the original on 2 April 2012. Retrieved 16 April 2018. Randall, Laura (2004-08-01). "Things You Do Only in College". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 2013-06-18. Retrieved 2017-02-18. "Construction, police hinder Naked Mile". 9 April 2001. Archived from the original on 8 March 2009. Retrieved 20 December 2011. "Police say nude runners could end up on Internet". The Item. Ann Arbour: Osteen Publishing. Associated Press. 21 April 1998. Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 19 December 2011. "Naked Mile may run on Internet". The Robesonian. Ann Arbour. Associated Press. 21 April 1998. Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 19 December 2011. Dave Foster, The Digital Fix. "American Pie Presents: The Naked Mile (R1) in December". DVD Times. Archived from the original on 2009-08-12. Retrieved 2011-12-20. "American Pie Presents: The Naked Mile (2006)". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on 9 April 2019. Retrieved 21 December 2018. Stransky, Tanner (15 December 2006). "American Pie Presents: The Naked Mile". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on 12 June 2021. Retrieved 8 September 2018. Null, Christopher (14 December 2006). "American Pie Presents the Naked Mile". Archived from the original on 25 September 2009. Retrieved 8 September 2018. Carle, Chris (19 December 2006). "American Pie Presents: The Naked Mile DVD Review". IGN. Retrieved 8 September 2018. Weintraub, Steve (21 December 2006). "DVD Review – 'American Pie Presents – The Naked Mile'". Collider. Archived from the original on 12 September 2018. Retrieved 8 September 2018. Boerner, Heather (18 December 2010). "American Pie Presents: The Naked Mile movie review by Heather Boerner". Common Sense Media. Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 8 September 2018. Weinberg, Scott (19 December 2006). "American Pie Presents: The Naked Mile". DVD Talk. Archived from the original on 24 March 2018. Retrieved 8 September 2018. Freer, Sloan. "American Pie Presents the Naked Mile - review". The Radio Times. Retrieved 8 September 2018. Profancik, Eric (8 January 2007). "DVD Verdict Review - American Pie Presents The Naked Mile". DVD Verdict. Archived from the original on 5 April 2016. Retrieved 8 September 2018. American Pie Presents: The Naked Mile (DVD) (Unrated ed.). Universal Pictures. 12 December 2006. Wikiquote has quotations related to American Pie Presents: The Naked Mile. American Pie Presents: The Naked Mile at IMDb American Pie Presents: The Naked Mile at AllMovie American Pie Presents: The Naked Mile at Rotten Tomatoes