Lagos (/ˈleɪɡɒs/ LAY-goss; also US: /ˈlɑːɡoʊs/ LAH-gohss; Yoruba: Èkó) or Lagos City is the most populous city in Nigeria, with an estimated population of 21 million in 2015. Lagos is the most populous urban area in Africa. Lagos was the national capital of Nigeria until December 1991 following the government's decision to move their capital to Abuja in the centre of the country. Lagos is a major African financial centre and is the economic hub of Lagos State and Nigeria at large. The city has a significant influence on commerce, entertainment, technology, education, politics, tourism, art, and fashion in Africa. Lagos is also among the top ten of the world's fastest-growing cities and urban areas. The megacity has the fourth-highest GDP in Africa and houses one of the largest and busiest seaports on the continent. Due to the large urban population and port traffic volumes, Lagos is classified as a Medium-Port Megacity. Lagos emerged as a home to the Awori subgroup of the Yoruba of West Africa islands, which are contained in the present day Local Government Areas (LGAs) of Lagos Island, Eti-Osa, Amuwo-Odofin and Apapa. The islands are separated by creeks, fringing the southwest mouth of Lagos Lagoon, while being protected from the Atlantic Ocean by barrier islands and long sand spits such as Bar Beach, which stretch up to 100 km (62 mi) east and west of the mouth. Due to rapid urbanisation, the city expanded to the west of the lagoon to include areas in the present day Lagos Mainland, Ajeromi-Ifelodun, and Surulere. This led to the classification of Lagos into two main areas: the Island, which was the original city of Lagos, and the Mainland, which it has since expanded into. This city area was governed directly by the Federal Government through the Lagos City Council, until the creation of Lagos State in 1967, which led to the splitting of Lagos city into the present-day seven Local Government Areas (LGAs), and an addition of other towns (which now make up 13 LGAs) from the then Western Region to form the state. However, the state capital was later moved to Ikeja in 1976, and the federal capital moved to Abuja in 1991. Even though Lagos is still widely referred to as a city, the present-day Lagos, also known as "Metropolitan Lagos", and officially as "Lagos Metropolitan Area" is an urban agglomeration or conurbation, consisting of 16 LGAs including Ikeja, the state capital of Lagos State. This conurbation makes up 37% of Lagos State total land area, but houses about 85% of the state's total population. The population of Metropolitan Lagos is disputed. In the 2006 federal census data, the conurbation had a population of about 8 million people. However, the figure was disputed by the Lagos State Government, which later released its own population data, putting the population of Lagos Metropolitan Area at approximately 16 million. Daily, the Lagos area is growing by some 3,000 people or around 1.1 million annually, so the true population figure of the greater Lagos area in 2022 is roughly 28 million (up from some 23.5 million in 2018). Lagos may therefore have overtaken Kinshasa as Africa's most populous city. As of 2015, unofficial figures put the population of "Greater Metropolitan Lagos", which includes Lagos and its surrounding metro area, extending as far as into Ogun State, at approximately 21 million. The Lagos conurbation is part of an emerging transnational megalopolis on the coast of West Africa that includes areas in five sovereign states, the Abidjan–Lagos Corridor. The University of Lagos is one of the first generation universities of Nigeria. The business district of Lagos is home to Tinubu Square, named after the aristocratic slave trader Efunroye Tinubu. Lagos contains Murtala Muhammed International Airport, named after Nigerian president Murtala Muhammad, and is one of the busiest African airports. Lagos National Stadium has hosted various international sports events such as the 1980 African Cup of Nations. Lagos is derived from the Portuguese word for "lakes". The pronunciation /ˈleɪɡɒs/ (LAY-goss) is typically standard in British and Nigerian English. Speakers of American English often use the pronunciation /ˈlɑːɡoʊs/ (LAH-gohss), which sounds more similar to the original Portuguese pronunciation. The native Yoruba name Èkó is also used by Yoruba people. Lagos was formerly the capital city of Nigeria, but it has since been replaced by Abuja. Abuja officially became the capital of Nigeria on 12 December 1991, although the decision to move the federal capital had been made in now Act no. 6 of 1976. Lagos is also home to the High Court of the Lagos State Judiciary, housed in an old colonial building on Lagos Island. In terms of administration, Lagos is not a single municipality and therefore has no overall city administration. The geographical city limits of Metropolitan Lagos comprise 16 of the 20 Local Government Areas of Lagos State. The latter entity provides overall government for the metropolitan region. The former Municipality of Lagos, which covered Lagos Island, Ikoyi, and Victoria Island as well as some mainland territory, was managed by the Lagos City Council (LCC), but it was disbanded in 1976 and divided into several Local Government Areas (most notably Lagos Island LGA, Lagos Mainland LGA and Eti-Osa LGA). The mainland beyond the Municipality of Lagos, on the other hand, included several separate towns and settlements such as Mushin, Ikeja and Agege. In the wake of the 1970s Nigerian oil boom, Lagos experienced a population explosion, untamed economic growth, and unmitigated rural migration. This caused the outlying towns and settlements to develop rapidly, thus forming the present-day "Lagos Metropolitan Area", also known as "Metropolitan Lagos". The history of Lagos is still evidenced in the layout of the LGAs that display the unique identities of the cultures that created them.[citation needed] By 2006, the metro area around Lagos had extended beyond Lagos State's boundaries and attained a megacity status. This much larger area is referred to as "Greater Metropolitan Lagos" or "Lagos Megacity Region", which is a continuously built-up land area of an additional 1,535.4 square kilometres (592.8 square miles), in LGAs situated next to Lagos's eastern and western city limits in Lagos State, and also beyond its northern limits, spilling into some LGAs in adjoining Ogun State. Ogun State LGAs that have become part of Greater Metropolitan Lagos include Obafemi Owode, Sagamu, Ifo, Ado-Odo/Ota and part of Ewekoro. Today, the word Lagos most often refers to the urban area, called "Metropolitan Lagos" in Nigeria, which includes both the islands of the former municipality of Lagos and the mainland suburbs. Lagos State government is responsible for some of the utilities including roads and transportation, power, water, health, and education. Metropolitan Lagos extends over 16 of the 20 LGAs of Lagos State and contains about 85% of the population of Lagos State, including some semi-rural areas. Lagos has a considerable number of high-rise buildings that dominate its skyline. Most of the tall buildings are located in the downtown Central Business District.[citation needed] Although the 2006 National Population Census of Nigeria credited the metropolitan area with a population figure of 7,937,932, the figure is at variance with some projections by the United Nations and other population agencies and groups worldwide. The population figure of Lagos State given by the Lagos State Government is 17,553,924. That figure was based on claimed conducted enumeration for social planning by the Lagos State Government's "parallel census" and it believes that since the inhabitants of the metropolitan area of Lagos constitute 88% of the Lagos State population, the population of metropolitan Lagos is about 15.5 million. A rejoinder to Lagos State Government views concluded that Lagos State concealed the fact that the population projection, for Lagos Urban Agglomeration by the UN agencies, had been revised downwards substantially as early as 2003. It failed to interpret the two most important and fairly representative and reliable secondary data sets already in the public domain, the National Identity Card Scheme and the 2003 Voters Registration figures from INEC. The figures for 2007 Voters Registration by INEC were an act subsequent to the release of the provisional census results and comprehensively corroborate, vindicate and validate the population figures. According to the official results of the 2006 census, there were 8,048,430 inhabitants in Metropolitan Lagos. This figure was lower than anticipated and has created controversy in Nigeria. Lagos Island, the central Local Government Area and historic center of Metropolitan Lagos, had a population of 212,700 at the 2006 Census. Authorities of Lagos State have disputed the results of the 2006 census, accusing the Nigerian National Population Commission of undercounting the population of the state. This accusation is denied by the National Population Commission. A study found that research carried out by Africapolis (the African subsidiary of e-Geopolis backed by the Agence française de développement), in addition to the cross-referencing of official figures with more scientific independent research concluded that the 2006 census figures for Lagos State of about 9 million were valid and that the state's own assessments are inflated. Lagos is, by most estimates, one of the fastest-growing cities in the world. Lagos is experiencing a population increase of about 275,000 persons per annum. In 1999, the United Nations predicted that the city's metropolitan area, which had only about 290,000 inhabitants in 1950, would exceed 20 million by 2010 and thus become one of the ten most populated cities in the world.[citation needed] Lagos is loosely classified into two main geographical areas—the "Island" and the "Mainland".[citation needed] The city of Lagos has the tallest skyline in Nigeria. The architectural styles in Lagos are diverse and range from tropical and vernacular to colonial European and ultramodern buildings or a mixture. Brazilian style architecture brought by the creoles is evident in buildings such as Water House and Shitta Bey Mosque. Skyscrapers and most high rise buildings are centered on the islands, while the mainland has some high rise buildings. In recent years, the Lagos State government has renovated existing parks and green areas, with a long-term goal of expansion. Many good quality buildings are interspersed across the city. The Island is a loose geographical term that is used to define the area of Lagos that is separated from the "Mainland" by the main channel draining the lagoon into the Atlantic Ocean, which forms Lagos Harbour. The Island is mainly a collection of islands that are separated from each other by creeks and are connected by bridges. The smaller sections of some creeks have been dredged and built over. This part of Lagos is the area where most business activities and entertainment events take place, as well as where most of the upscale residential areas are concentrated. The Local Government Areas (LGAs) that are considered to be on the Island include Lagos Island and Eti-Osa. The major upscale Island neighborhoods within these LGAs include Ikoyi and Victoria Island. Three major bridges join the Island to the Mainland. They are the Carter Bridge, which starts from Iddo; the Eko Bridge (formerly called the Second Mainland Bridge); and the Third Mainland Bridge, which passes through densely populated mainland suburbs to the Lagos Lagoon. The Ikoyi link bridge links Ikoyi and Lekki Phase 1, both of which are part of the Island. Construction on the Fourth Mainland Bridge will commence in 2022, according to Lagos State Governor, Babajide Sanwo-Olu. Lagos Island contains a central business district. This district is characterized by high-rise buildings. The Island also contains many of the city's largest wholesale marketplaces (such as the popular Idumota and Balogun Markets). It also has the National Museum of Nigeria, the Central Mosque, the Glover Memorial Hall, Christ's Church Cathedral (CMS) and the Oba's Palace (Iga Idunganran). Another major part of Lagos Island is Marina. It borders the idumota and Balogun markets and houses major Banking institutions. Though formerly in a derelict condition, Lagos Island's Tinubu Square is a site of historical importance; it was here that the Amalgamation Ceremony that unified the North and South protectorate to form Nigeria took place in 1914.[citation needed] Ikoyi is situated on the eastern half of Lagos Island and joined to it by a landfill. Ikoyi is also connected to Victoria Island by Falomo bridge, which carries the main road over Five Cowrie creek. Falomo garden, a green public space which was developed by the state government in conjunction with Fidelity Bank in 2017, is located under the bridge. Ikoyi housed the headquarters of the federal government of Nigeria and other buildings owned by the government, including the old federal secretariat complex. The complex today is on reestablishment. In Ikoyi there are military and police barracks, a top-security prison, and a federal high court of Nigeria. Ikoyi also has hotels, nightclubs, a recreational park, and one of Africa's largest golf courses. Originally a middle class neighborhood, in recent years it has become a fashionable residential enclave for the upper middle class to the upper class. There are also commercial activities in Ikoyi, which are spotted in an increasing number of offices, banks, and shopping complexes. The commercial section is concentrated in the South-West.[citation needed] Victoria Island with its annex is situated to the south of Lagos Island and known with a zip code of 101241 as assigned by NIPOST. It has expensive real estate properties and for that reason, many new luxury condos and apartments are blooming up everywhere. Along with Ikoyi, Victoria Island occupies a major area in Lagos that boasts several shopping districts. On its seashore along the Atlantic front, there is an environmentally reconstructed Bar Beach. Ajah/Lekki The Lekki Peninsula shares some prestige with its Ikoyi and Victoria Island neighbors. Development has stretched the piece of land further such that the Ibeju axis, though closer to Epe (which is on the outskirts of Lagos) is almost always described as part of Lekki. The expanse of land starts from the Lekki toll gate, which was the focal stage of the famous #EndSars protest in October 2020, and ends in Ibeju-Lekki and boasts of communities slowly inching their way to suburb status such as Ajah, Awoyaya, Sangotedo, Abijo, and Eputu. There is quite a bit of places to see – the Lekki Conservation Centre; The Novare Mall; The Lekki Free Trade Zone – Dangote, Africa's richest man is building his refinery in this FTZ; Lagos Business School; Eleko Beach; Elegushi Beach; La Camaigne Tropicana – a beach/tourist getaway, Pan-Atlantic University. The area has a Catholic monastery. Across the main channel of the lagoon from Lagos Island, there is a smaller settlement called Iddo. Iddo is also a railroad terminus and it is now situated in the Lagos Mainland Local Government Area after it was connected to the Mainland like a peninsula. A huge population of Lagosians also live on the Lagos Mainland, and most industries are located there. The Mainland is known for its music and nightlife, which used to be located in areas around Yaba, Ikeja, and Surulere. However, in recent years more nightclubs have sprung up on the Island, making the Island (particularly Victoria Island, Ikate, and Lekki Phase 1) the main nightlife attraction. Mainland LGAs include Surulere, Apapa, and Lagos Mainland. Metropolitan Lagos suburban LGAs include: Agege, Amuwo Odofin, Mushin, Oshodi-Isolo and Ikeja (site of Murtala Muhammed International Airport and the capital of Lagos State). Major areas on the Mainland include Ebute Metta, Yaba and Ejigbo. Some rivers, like Badagry Creek, flow parallel to the coast for some distance before exiting through the sand bars to the sea.[citation needed] Lagos experiences a tropical savanna climate (Aw) according to the Köppen climate classification, as there are three months under 60 mm or 2.4 in of rain, and annual rainfall is not nearly high enough for tropical monsoon classification. The wet season starts in March and ends in October, while the dry season starts in November and ends in February. The wettest month is June with precipitation total 315.5 mm or 12.42 in, while the driest month is January with precipitation total 13.2 mm or 0.52 in.[citation needed] Located near the equator, Lagos has only a slight seasonal temperature variation, with mean high temperatures ranging from 28.3 to 32.9 °C (82.9 to 91.2 °F). Lagos shares the seasons of the Southern Hemisphere, with the highest temperatures in March with a daily range from 32.9 to 24.1 °C (91.2 to 75.4 °F), and least hot temperatures in August ranging from 28.3 to 21.8 °C (82.9 to 71.2 °F). A 2019 paper published in PLOS One estimated that under Representative Concentration Pathway 4.5, a "moderate" scenario of climate change where global warming reaches ~2.5–3 °C (4.5–5.4 °F) by 2100, the climate of Lagos in the year 2050 would most closely resemble the current climate of Panama City. The annual temperature would increase by 1.6 °C (2.9 °F) and the temperature of the warmest month by 1.5 °C (2.7 °F), while the temperature of the coldest month would be 2.9 °C (5.2 °F) higher. According to Climate Action Tracker, the current warming trajectory appears consistent with 2.7 °C (4.9 °F), which closely matches RCP 4.5. Moreover, according to the 2022 IPCC Sixth Assessment Report, Lagos is one of 12 major African cities (Abidjan, Alexandria, Algiers, Cape Town, Casablanca, Dakar, Dar es Salaam, Durban, Lagos, Lomé, Luanda and Maputo) that would be the most severely affected by sea level rise. It estimates that they would collectively sustain cumulative damage of US$65 billion under RCP 4.5 and US$86.5 billion in the high-emission scenario RCP 8.5 by the year 2050. Additionally RCP 8.5 combined with the hypothetical impact from marine ice sheet instability at high levels of warming would involve up to US$137.5 billion in damage, while the additional accounting for the "low-probability, high-damage events" may increase aggregate risks to US$187 billion for the "moderate" RCP4.5, US$206 billion for RCP8.5 and US$397 billion under the high-end ice sheet instability scenario. Since sea level rise would continue for about 10,000 years under every scenario of climate change, future costs of sea level rise would only increase, especially without adaptation measures. The city of Lagos is a major economic focal point in Nigeria, generating around 10% of the country's GDP. Most commercial and financial business is carried out in the central business district situated on the island. This is also where most of the country's commercial banks, financial institutions, and major corporations are headquartered. Lagos is also the major information communications and telecommunications (ICT) hub of West Africa. Lagos is developing a 24-hour economy. The globalisation of Lagos' economy is rated "beta minus" by the GaWC. This is equivalent to Manchester or Edinburgh in the UK . Lagos is thus the most "globalised" city in West and Central Africa. 5 out of 7 African tech "unicorns" operate out of Lagos (see below). Lagos is home to more tech centres than any other city in Africa. Lagos is a major financial and banking centre. The four largest banks in West and Central Africa are headquartered in Lagos, and another nine banks in Lagos are among the 20 largest banks in the region. Zenith Bank, Access Bank, Guaranty Trust Bank and First Bank have capital of more than US$2 billion each. Banking headquarters are located on Victoria Island and Lagos Island. The insurance industry in Nigeria is comparatively modestly developed, with an industry turnover of around US$1 billion per year. As with the banks, the headquarters of the insurance companies are predominantly located in Lagos. The Port of Lagos, formally known as the Lagos-Elbert Mathews Memorial Port, is Nigeria's leading port and one of the largest and busiest in Africa. Due to the large urban population, Lagos is categorized as a medium-port megacity using the Southampton System for port-city classification. It is administered by the Nigerian Ports Authority. The Port of Lagos / Apapa is the oldest and largest port in the country, both in terms of land area and cargo volume handled. More than half of Nigeria's maritime trade is handled here, and the port also acts as a transshipment point for landlocked countries such as Chad and Niger. Around 1,000 ships with 5,700,000 tonnes of cargo call at the Lagos port complex annually. Tin Can Island Port is located west of Apapa near the Lagos Port Complex. It was established in 1975. In early 2023, the deep sea port of Lekki was commissioned 50 km east of Lagos. This thus does not belong to the urban area of Lagos, but to the state of the same name. Lagos is the center of the West African film, music, and TV industries. The film industry in the Surulere locality ranks second or third in the world, ahead of or behind Hollywood, depending on the survey. PricewaterhouseCoopers Int. forecasts that the Nigerian entertainment industry will grow 85% to $15 billion. Since the success of the Nigerian thriller "The Figurine", Nigerian film has increasingly turned to high-quality productions that are also commercially successful. This, in turn, has led to consistently new box office revenue records in Nigeria (2009's "The Figurine," 2013's "Half of a Yellow Sun," 2016's "The Wedding Party", 2023's "Battle on Buka Street"). In Nigeria, newspapers are available in digital format and are predominantly produced in Lagos. The most widely read newspaper in Lagos, by its own account, is Punch. The Vanguard newspaper is one of the few dailies that is not only available online but also in print. Other publications include The Guardian, The Nation, The Sun and the Nigerian Tribune. The latter was founded in colonial times, in 1949. The most watched television station in Lagos (and in Nigeria) is the 24-hour news channel Channels TV, based in Lagos. Some of its presenters use an overly correct standard British English that compatriots like to mock. The same can be said of Arise TV and the state broadcaster NTA. The private African Independent Television focuses on entertainment and infotainment. Programmes in pidgin English or in Yoruba have moved to digital streaming services and offer action films, comedies and heartbreak productions. There are seven tech start-ups in Africa that are said to have "unicorn" status (worth over 1 billion euros). Five of them are based in Lagos: Flutterwave is in the virtual bank card business. Opay and Interswitch are platforms for online bookings. Andela trains software engineers and places them in the Nigerian labour market. Jumia is an online retail company that offers a wide range of products such as electronic devices and fashion. Lagos is home to more tech hubs than any other city in Africa. With more than 90 million internet users, Lagos is attracting investors who want to capitalise on this expanding technology hotspot. Startupgrind.com refers to Lagos as "Africa's Silicon Valley". Bloomberg highlights "Nigeria's Chaotic Rise as the Tech Heart of Africa" and means Lagos, specifically the Yaba district. Lagos is the only African city to have both a Google and a Microsoft office. MTN maintains the first and still predominant 4G network in Nigeria. Airtel is another 4G provider. 9Mobile and Dataflex are Internet providers. Paystack is used by Nigerians who regularly receive payments from abroad. ULesson maintains a platform on which secondary school learning content is presented. Hotels.ng and allows hotel bookings to be made throughout Africa. For decades, there was no oil processing industry in Nigeria, apart from illegal refineries in the Niger Delta (which are very polluting due to the lack of cracking). Nigeria therefore had to have the end products of domestic crude oil such as fuels, bitumen, paraffin, motor oil, polypropylene etc. produced in US or European refineries, with transport costs over thousands of nautical miles and margins for middlemen. The oil refinery in Lekki went into operation in December 2023 and is expected to process 650,000 barrels of oil per day when fully operational, making it the seventh largest oil refinery in the world. By comparison, the largest refinery in the United Kingdom in Fawley processes 270,000 barrels a day, while the biggest US refinery in Port Arthur, Texas, processes 607,000 barrels a day. 57,000 people have been hired. Since 2022, a new fertiliser production plant has been producing 3 million tonnes of fertiliser a year (roughly equivalent to Germany's fertiliser consumption). With no more Russian fertiliser coming onto the world market in 2022 due to the Ukraine war, Nigeria is stepping into a gap in the market. "The fertiliser market is a seller's market," company owner Dangote raves. "People are begging for us to sell and we are choosy about who we sell to." Nigeria hosts about 60 percent of the pharmaceutical production capacity in Africa (status 2022). The larger pharmaceutical companies in Nigeria are located in the North of Lagos. Emzor Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd appears to be the pharmaceutical producer with the most employees. Next in line are Fidson Healthcare Plc, May & Baker Nig. Plc and Swiss Pharma Nigeria. "Nord Automobiles Ltd" has two assembly plants in Lagos: in Sangotedo and in Epe. The company manufactures its own plastic parts and plans to take on steel pressing in the future. The company offers eight different models. However, company founder and CEO Oluwatobi Ajayi is struggling with insufficient demand and the increase in the price of imported components due to the devaluation of the local currency, the naira, in 2023. He is looking for solutions with a German partner. The Lekki Free Trade Zone is a free trade zone in the eastern part of Lekki, covering a total area of about 155 square kilometres. It has an area of 30 square kilometres and is to be developed into a multifunctional district integrating industry, trade and commerce, real estate development, warehousing and logistics, tourism and entertainment. Lagos has two major congress halls, the Eko Convention Center and the Landmark Centre. The Eko Convention Center has 5,151 m2 and 13 meeting rooms. It hosts for example the Lagos Fashion Fair. The Landmark Centre has 1,004 m2 and 8 meeting rooms. The Landmark Centre hosts annual meetings like "Medic/Medlab West Africa", "Beauty West Africa" or "agrofood". Nigeria's largest brewery, fancily named Nigerian Breweries and a Heineken subsidiary, is located in the Lagos-Surulere district. The Guinness brewery produces its famous strong beer in the Ikeja district. Apparently, the average Nigerian drinks larger quantities of this beverage than the average Irishman. Both breweries also produce non-alcoholic (Guinness also halal) malt beer, which is part of the "Lagos' way of life". In Ketu-Ereyun, between Epe and Ikorodu, Lagos State builds a "Food Logistics Park" - the biggest logistics hub for food in Sub-Saharan Africa. The site is 1.2 million square meters big and the construction is expected to be finished in 2024. Until now, Nigeria paradoxically exported unhusked rice but had to import husked rice, the country's staple food. - The hulling mill in Imota, just outside Lagos, processes the rice domestically. When fully operational, the plant, the largest south of the Sahara, is expected to employ 250,000 people and produce 2.5 million 50-kg bags of rice annually. The Apapa sugar refinery, part of the Dangote Group, increased its turnover to 288.3 billion naira (€590 million) in the third quarter of 2022 - a 47% increase from the third quarter of 2021. The sugar refinery has a capacity of 1.44 million metric tonnes per annum and supplies end users as well as bulk buyers such as Nestlé Nigeria Plc, Cadbury Nigeria Plc, Seven-Up Bottling Company Plc and the Nigerian Bottling Company. Lagos State Governor Babajide Sanwo-Olu opened the new Ikosi International Fruits Market in the Ketu district on 25 May 2023. The new fruit market comprises 1,004 shop units. It has its own water and electricity supply, canteen and parking facilities. The facility is monitored by security personnel. On December 18, 2023, Sanwo-Olu opened a similar "Fresh Food Hub" in Idi-Oro, Mushin. Both hubs are aiming to increase the speed of food supply and reduce the percentage of food going to waste before it reaches the customer. The Lagos sawmill moved from its old but bursting-at-the-seams location in Oko Baba to Timberville, just outside Lagos, in 2022, where modern facilities are available. Following the remodernization project achieved by the previous administration of Governor Raji Babatunde Fashola, Lagos is gradually becoming a major tourist destination, being one of the largest cities in Africa and in the world. Diasporan Africans and others, especially from East and Southern Africa, are increasingly visiting Lagos mostly to understand and experience the Nigeria that has been presented to them by Nollywood. Lagos has sandy beaches by the Atlantic Ocean, including Elegushi Beach and Alpha Beach. Lagos also has a number of private beach resorts, including the Landmark Beach and the Inagbe Grand Beach Resort. On Wole Olateju Crescent, in the immediate vicinity of Lekki Bridge, there are several companies that offer boat tours and rent kayaks or jet skis. Nightclubs are mainly found on Victoria Island, where the well-to-do and foreign guests hang out, and around Adeniran Ogunsanya Street in Surulere. Rooftop restaurants on the Atlantic beach or on the lagoon offer not only culinary delights and a view, but also a welcome breeze from the sea for the heat-stricken visitor. Even before the devaluation of the local currency, the naira, in June 2023, Lagos was a place where US$10 (9.10 euros) could keep you full for a day and buy souvenirs to boot. The stress-resistant and experienced bargain-hunter buys brand-name clothes for a knockdown price at the ecomarket and the adjoining Martin Street. The Lekki Arts and Crafts Market (known to Lagosians as Oba Elegushi Market) is a large market that displays a wide variety of African arts and crafts. It is considered the largest art market in Nigeria. Freedom Park is a memorial and recreational park in the middle of Lagos city centre on Lagos Island, Nigeria, which used to be Her Majesty's Broad Street Prison. It was designed by architect Theo Lawson. The park was built to preserve the history and cultural heritage of Nigerians. The monuments in the park commemorate the colonial heritage of Lagos and the history of Her Majesty's Broad Street Prison. It was erected to mark the 50th Independence Anniversary celebrations in October 2010. The park is a national memorial, a historical landmark, a cultural site and an arts and recreation centre. Now a tranquil place for individuals, visitors and collective contemplation, the park is open to the public daily. Today, Freedom Park has become a gathering place for various social events and recreational entertainment. Tinubu Square (formerly Independence Square) is an open space on Broad Street, Lagos Island, Lagos State, Nigeria, named after slave trader, merchant and aristocrat Efunroye Tinubu. It used to be called Ita Tinubu before it was renamed Independence Square and later Tinubu Square by the leaders of the First Nigerian Republic after Nigerian independence. Tinubu Square is the most popular square in Nigeria. Tafawa Balewa Square is a 50,000-capacity stadium that was a racecourse under the British and where independence was proclaimed in 1960. At the entrance to the square are sculptures of four white horses and seven red eagles. After Abuja replaced Lagos as the capital, the "TBS" fell into disrepair. Attempts by Governor Babajide Sanwo-Olu to renovate the stadium have not yielded results (as of 2023). Ndubuisi Kanu Park is a public green space much loved by all for relaxation. The Lekki Conservation Centre is essentially the Lagos Zoo. It consists of a fenced-off strip of vegetation that attempts to replicate rainforest, mangroves and savannah. There are monkeys, numerous birds, snakes and crocodiles. There is a small museum with stuffed animals. On Sundays however it is used for lengthy religious service. According to a tourism website, the LCC is the second-most popular site in Lagos to see (after the Nike Gallery, see chapter "Art"). Lufasi Nature Park is the Lekki Urban Forestry and Animal Shelter Initiative. It preserves nature and protects wildlife and endangered species. Nollywood film crews often use this park as a set. National Theatre, Iganmu (see chapter "Monumental buildings"). Lekki-Ikoyi Link Bridge, the first cable-stayed bridge built in Nigeria. The Oba's (Kings) Palace at Iga Idunganran - This is an ancestral palace for the Oba of Lagos - the custodian on the traditions and customs of the people of Eko. Cathedral Church of Christ, Lagos Herbert Macaulay memorial statue, Welcome to Lagos statue showing three Lagos white cap chiefs. In local parlance, they are noted as warning you not to "suegbe, didinrin nor ya mugun" while in Lagos, Takwa Bay - A popular bay from where you can observe shipping traffic in and out of the Lagos port as well as enjoy some water sports. If you have a personal yacht this is where to go. Festac town. Despite its active nightlife and prevailing joie de vivre, Lagos, like all cities in Nigeria, is "not LGBT-friendly". Nigeria's 2014 legislation in this regard is among the most draconian systems of repression against queer people in the world. Homosexuals, but also their "supporters" such as people who have attended a same-sex wedding in another country, or hotel staff who have provided a room for a queer couple, theoretically can be sentenced to up to 15 years in prison. In Lagos, however, internet searches reveal only one case of persons being prosecuted under the 2014 laws (as of 2023). The 47 men were arrested in December 2019 after a raid on a bar frequented by local men. The Federal High Court in Lagos acquitted all the accused in October the next year. The case was considered a "test case" for the application of anti-LGBT laws in Nigeria, but was dismissed because prosecutors failed to appear at trial and no incriminating witnesses could be found. No other arrests or convictions are known from Lagos. However, three men were convicted and subsequently stoned to death by an Islamic court in Kano, northern Nigeria. Tourists should definitely take the legal situation in Nigeria very seriously. Lagos is a cultural centre of Nigeria. As a port city and the starting point of British colonisation, the Western influence is stronger here than in probably any other Nigerian city. All Nigerian ethnic groups can be found in the melting pot of this metropolis, with the Yoruba predominating. The music and film industries in the city are dynamic centres of the country with international acclaim. A very striking building in Lagos is the National Arts Theatre with its oval base. The renovation of the National Arts Theatre was completed in March 2023. With the new "blue line" of the Lagos light rail, the National Theatre is recently easily accessible - the station "National theatre" is at a stone's throw distance from the theatre building. Another frequently photographed structure in Lagos is the Lekki-Ikoyi Link Bridge - or more simply: Lekki bridge. The Cathedral Church of Christ is at the centre of the oldest part of Lagos. The Anglican church was built between 1867 and 1869, shortly after the establishment of British colonial rule. The Synagogue Church of all Nations was built in 2004. The Nike Art Gallery is an art gallery in Lagos owned by Nike Davies-Okundaye. The gallery is probably the largest of its kind in West Africa. It is housed in a five-storey building and has a collection of about 8,000 different works of art by various Nigerian artists such as Chief Josephine Oboh Macleod. Red Door Gallery specializes in African contemporary art. The Ovuomaroro Studio and Gallery is one of the oldest art galleries in Lagos. The Alexis Galleries, owned by Patty Chidiac-Mastrogiannis, are located on Victoria Island. Since its foundation in 2011, Alexis Galleries have been engaged in the presentation and dissemination of Nigerian contemporary styles including; painting, drawing, mixed media, and sculpture. It aims to strengthen and support the Nigerian Art Circle. In 2002, Lagos was one of the African platform cities for the art exhibition Documenta 11. The National Museum in Onikan on Lagos Island houses archaeological and ethnographic collections as well as traditional art. There is an opportunity to purchase Nigerian arts and crafts at the adjoining craft centre. Haggling is allowed at the island's Jankara market. Spices, printed cotton and hand-woven fabrics as well as leather articles are offered here. The John K. Randle Centre houses an exhibition on Yoruba culture inaugurated in 2023. The curators actively work with artists, writers, craftspeople, historians and storytellers to share the rich Yoruba culture. The John K. Randle Centre is a new, partly interactive kind of museum. It adapts modern Western museum practices to present new forms of storytelling inspired by Yoruba traditions. It celebrates tangible and intangible culture by preserving, enhancing and promoting the cultural heritage of the Yoruba people. The centre actively collects a wide range of items that distinguish it from a traditional museum. The John K. Randle Centre plays a leading role in the repatriation of Yoruba artefacts from European institutions. The Kalakuta Republic is a museum honouring late musician Fela Kuti. Furthermore, the Mindscape Childrens Museum deserves mentioning. Since 2015 it is notable as Nigeria's premiere Children's museum. It aims at social interaction and improve their natural curiosity. The MUSON Centre (Musical Society of Nigeria) is a theatre / performance hall. MUSON regularly organizes concerts of both Nigerian and Western genres. Its choir performs since 1995, the symphony orchestra, Nigeria's only professional symphony orchestra at the time, since 2005. Both perform regularly at the annual MUSON Festival and during the Society's concert season. In Lagos, festivals take place in different months. These are the Lagos Carnival in January, the Eko International Film Festival in March, the Lagos Black Heritage Carnival in April, the Lagos Photo Festival in November, the Book & Art Festival in November and the Lagos Food Festival in December. The Lagos Jazz Festival features music of all genres with a focus on jazz. The Experience is a decibel-rich gospel concert hosted by the evangelical House of the Rock Church in packed Talewa Balewa Square on the first Friday in December. Ear protection and a certain tolerance for overly dedicated worshippers are recommended. The Eyo Carnival is an irregular festival that originated in Iperu Remo, Ogun State. Some of the famous dishes in Lagos include indigenous delicacies such as eba and egusi; amala and ewedu; jollof (the go-to party dish); ofada rice; plantains (locally called dodo); beans; suya (spicy shish kebab or spiced roasted beef), which is consumed in local clubs and bars with a bottle of cold beer; and eba, made from cassava and eaten with soups prepared with vegetables and mixture of spices and herbs. Other dishes range from local ones like Iyan (pounded yam) made from yam flour, amala; asaro, which is usually eaten with various kinds of vegetables; and Egusi (melon soup) to European, Middle-Eastern, and Asian cuisine. Lagos is famous throughout Africa for its music scene. Lagos has a vibrant nightlife and has given birth to a variety of styles such as Sakara music, Nigerian hip hop, highlife, juju, fuji and Afrobeats. James Brown performed in Lagos in 1970. With his band Wings, Paul McCartney recorded his fifth post-Beatles album, Band on the Run, in an EMI studio in Lagos in August and September 1973. Other foreign musicians who have also performed in the city include Sean Paul, Snoop Dogg, 50 Cent, Akon, Jarule, Ashanti, Usher, Shaggy, R Kelly, Cardi B, Migos especially during the Star Mega Jam; Shakira, John Legend, Ludacris, Busta Rhymes, Boyz II Men, T-Pain, Brian McKnight, JayZ, Mary J. Blige, Beyoncé, Brandy, Ciara, Keri Hilson and Lauryn Hill. The Surulere district is the centre of the Nigerian film industry, commonly referred to as Nollywood. Lagos itself is the location and setting for many films. The city is featured in domestic and foreign feature film productions. Many films are shot in the Festac area of Lagos, which also hosted the World Festival of Black Arts. The 2016 film "Captain America: Civil War" contains a scene set in Lagos. The Spanish police series "La unidad" (2020 - 2023), the British drama "The last tree" (2019) and the US-Spanish drama "The Way, Chapter 2" with Martin Sheen (2023 still in development) also use Lagos as a filming location. The film "93 days" with Danny Glover is a somewhat melodramatic but fact-based account of the Ebola outbreak in Lagos in 2014 and was filmed at original locations. Since the success of the Nigerian thriller "The Figurine", Nigerian film has increasingly focused on high-quality productions that are also commercially successful. This in turn has led to ever new records in box office takings in Nigeria (2009: "The Figurine", 2013: "Half of a Yellow Sun", 2016: "The Wedding Party"). . Association football is Lagos's most popular sport. Prominent Lagos football clubs include Bridge Boys F.C., MFM F.C., and First Bank: both play in Nigeria National League, the second tier of Nigerian football. The Nigeria national football team, also known as the Super Eagles, used to play almost all of their home games in Lagos at the National Stadium in Surulere; much later, games were played at the then New Abuja National Stadium in Abuja for sometime; however, games are now mostly played at the newer Godswill Akpabio International Stadium in Uyo, which is the default home of the Super Eagles. Lagos also hosted the 2nd All-African games in 1973. In a 2018 ranking of cities by quality of life, Lagos ranked 212th among 231 cities surveyed worldwide. In 2023, Lagos ranked second only to Manila in a global survey by the Statista Research Department of cities with the lowest quality of life. The quality of life index value determined is made up of eight sub-indices. By way of qualification, it must be made clear that index lists of countries or cities are usually not based on verifiable or locally collected data, but often on subjective assessments by Europeans or North Americans. The CPI of Transparency International, for example, is, according to its own definition, "based on the perceived assessment of lay people and experts and is not reduced to actual experience and its analysis". There is criticism that the indices determined simply reflect the prejudices of Western countries numerically. There is a huge spectrum of wealth distribution among the people that reside in Lagos. It ranges from the very wealthy to the very poor. Lagos has attracted many young people and families seeking a better life from all other parts of Nigeria and beyond. In some parts of Lagos, residents have one of the highest standards of living in Nigeria and in Africa. Reliable data on unemployment, income below the subsistence level, etc. are hardly available for Lagos - as for the whole region - and must be taken with scepticism where they are provided, e.g. in other articles (see also the previous chapter). The reason for this is the widespread "informal economy" (not to be confused with "shadow economy") in West Africa. Insufficient jobs in traditional wage labour force people to look for work elsewhere. This benefits the informal sector of the economy, where there is no minimum wage and workers pay no taxes, have no holiday or labour rights and often work in unsafe conditions. According to the International Monetary Fund, about 5.5 million people are employed in the informal economy in Lagos State alone - about three quarters of Lagos' workforce. Throughout Lagos, one can observe street vendors, artisans, sellers, small and micro enterprises, shared taxis, tricycles and motorbikes (okada drivers), domestic workers, market traders and others engaged in the informal sector. Activities in the informal economy are not included in economic statistics. As a result, the wealth of the population, but also e.g. unemployment, is significantly underestimated if the massive informal economy is not taken into account. The Council on Foreign Relations' Nigeria Security Tracker continuously records homicides (murder, manslaughter, etc.) by criminals, religious zealots (such as Boko Haram) and police attacks in Nigeria for each state. Strikingly, according to the NST, Nigeria's two largest cities, Lagos and Kano, are significantly safer than rural areas when it comes to homicides. For Lagos State, the NST shows 135 such violent deaths in the past 24 months (as of July 2023), or 5.6 annually for every million inhabitants (for comparison, the United Kingdoms' crime statistics in 2022 counted 10 homicides per million inhabitants or Turkey's 24). For Nigeria as a whole, this figure is 93, with 62% of these cases attributable to police violence (mainly vigilante justice). Boko Haram plays a negligible role (as of 2023) in Lagos. The Lagos State Government operates state schools. The education system is the 6-3-3-4 system, which is practiced throughout the country (as well as by many other members of the Economic Community of West African States). The levels are Primary, Junior Secondary School (JSS), Senior Secondary School (SSS), and university. All children are offered basic education, with a special focus now on the first nine years. Many of the schools in Nigeria are federally funded and usually are boarding schools. A few examples are the Federal government college Odogbolu (FGCOdogbolu), the Federal government girls' college Sagamu (FGGCSagamu), and the Federal government college Kano (FGCKano). The state of Lagos has its own federally funded high schools namely Federal government college Ijanikin also known as FGC Lagos, King's College Lagos, and Queen's College Lagos. Lagos is home to postsecondary schools, universities, and other vocational institutions that are either operated by the government or private entities. Institute for Industrial Technology (IIT) : founded in 2000, IIT is a technical vocational school for male youth from families with limited resources. Its educational model is based on the Dual Training System. Yaba College of Technology (YABATECH): founded in 1934, the college is Nigeria's first higher educational institution and the third in Africa. The college is a center of culture and heritage. It has student enrolments of over 16,000. Lagos State Polytechnic is a polytechnic comprising more than six schools including private polytechnics and was founded 25 years ago. Its main campus resides at Ikorodu, along Shagamu road. Lagos City Polytechnic, located at 6/8, Bashiru Oweh Street, Off Simbiat Abiola Road (formerly Medical Road), Ikeja – This is the first private Polytechnic in Nigeria. It was established in 1990 by Engr. Babatunde Odufuwa. Engr. Odufuwa hails from Oke-Aye in Ijebu North East Local Government Area (I.N.E.L.G) of Ogun State. Grace Polytechnic Wolex Polytechnic Federal College of Fisheries and Marine Technology is a monotechnic that offers courses in fisheries technology, general science, marine engineering and nautical science. Federal College of Education (tech) Akoka Ronik Polytechnic The University of Lagos (UNILAG) Akoka, is a large institution dating from 1962, with over 55,000 students. It comprises 13 faculties, run by over 4,000 staff. Lagos State University (LASU) is a multi-campus university established in the year 1983 and owned by the Lagos State government. The main campus is located at Ojo, along the Lagos-Badagry Expressway. Pan-Atlantic University formerly known as Pan-African University has a business school (LBS), a school of Media and Communication (SMC), and an entrepreneurial development center (EDC), specialized in providing short courses for SMEs. The School of Media and Communication is also known for its pragmatic communication courses in the field of journalism, media, and marketing. SMC awards BSc., MSc., and Ph.D. in social science courses. Founded in 1996 and awarded university status in 2002. The university also places some emphasis on the study of art, running the Virtual Museum of Modern Nigerian Art. National Open University of Nigeria is the first Open university in Nigeria; it is located on Ahmadu Bello Way, Victoria Island, Lagos. Caleb University is a private university located at Imota, Lagos. Lagos State College of Health Technology (LASCOHET) is an institution that runs health courses such as Health Information Management, Pharmacist Tech, Medical Laboratory Tech, Community Health Extension, and Environmental Health Technology; it is located in Yaba. Lagos State University College of Medicine (LASUCOM), Ikeja College of Medicine, University of Lagos (CMUL) Lagos has many hospitals and medical facilities. The oldest Nigerian hospital is located in the city as well as West Africa's first air-operated emergency medical service, which commenced in the city. The Lagos healthcare system is divided into public and private sectors that provide medical services at the primary, secondary, and tertiary levels. Lagos has one of the largest and most extensive road networks in West Africa. It also has suburban trains and some ferry services. Highways are usually congested in peak hours owing to the geography of the city and to its explosive population growth. Lagos is also linked by many highways and bridges. The Lagos–Ibadan Expressway and the Lagos–Abeokuta Expressway are the major controlled-access highways in the north of the city and serve as inter-state highways to Oyo State and Ogun State respectively. To the west the congested Lagos–Badagry Expressway serves outlying towns such as Festival Town, which was the location for the 1977 Festival of Black Arts and Culture 77. Lagos's importance as a commercial center and port and its strategic location have led to it being the end-point of three Trans-African Highway routes using Nigeria's national roads. The Trans–West African Coastal Highway leaves the city as the Badagry Expressway to Benin and beyond as far as Dakar and Nouakchott; the Trans-Sahara Highway to Algiers, which is close to completion, leaves the city as the Lagos-Ibadan Expressway. The Lagos Metropolitan Area Transport Authority (LAMATA) is responsible for public transport.[citation needed] Since 2021 using a bus or the light rail system is paid for with a public transport card without cash. This card can be used equally on BRT and LBSL buses. One can purchase a public transportation card at any of the ticketing booths at the bus terminals scattered across Lagos State.[citation needed] There are two city bus companies in Lagos: BRT (Lagos Bus Rapid Transit System) and LBSL (Lagos Bus Services). The city buses are air-conditioned. (However, during the Covid epidemic, the AC had to be switched off at all times.) BRT was inaugurated in 2008. BRT offers e-payment with bank cards. On two arterial roads (Ikorodu Road and Funsho Williams Avenue), a dedicated bus lane has been established for BRT buses. BRT uses diverse brands of buses, like Ashok Leyland and Yutong. Primero Transport Services (PTS) Ltd. is the sole operator of the BRT buses. LBSL was inaugurated in 2019. LBSL uses Brazilian-built Marcopolo buses. The central hub for city buses and long-distance buses is the Oshodi Bus Terminal, which is visible from afar. It is the largest bus station in West Africa and commenced operation in 2019. The Lagos Transportation department, LAMATA, introduced electric busses in Lagos in May 2023. The first section, or phase, of the rapid transit system, the Lagos Light Rail, has been operational since February 2023. The "Blue Line" runs between Mile 2 and Marina (East–west axis). The extension towards Okokomaiko and the "Red Line" are under construction, The red line will run between Agbado and Marina (North–south axis). There are plans for more light rail lines:[citation needed] The green line (Marina to Lekki), the yellow line (Otta/airport to Iddo), the purple line (Redeem to Ojo), The brown line (Mile 12 to Marina) and the orange line (Redeem to Marina). At the beginning of 2024, it was announced that the Lagos suburban railway had transported 583,000 passengers in its first four months. This would make it the largest inner-city rail service provider in Africa. On 14 February 2024, Governor Sanwo-Olu announced that the Red Line between Agbado and Oyingbo would be inaugurated on 29 February 2024 in the presence of Nigerian President Tinubu. As of June 2021, Lagos has a double-track standard gauge line to Ibadan and a modern main station, Mobolaji Johnson. The Lagos-Ibadan train service runs three trips every Friday and Saturday with the point of departure at the Mobaji Johnson train station. Passengers can travel to Ibadan on Friday at the train station by 8 pm, 12 pm, and 4 pm, while on Saturday, the train movement will depart at 8 am, 1 pm and 6 pm. The Lagos-Ibadan train schedule for Monday to Thursday, and Sunday, remains 8 am and 4 pm. Ticket sales are over the counter and cash only (as of 2023), but e-ticketing will be introduced "soon". The operator is the Nigerian Railway Corporation. A popular means of transportation are yellow minibuses called danfo. The yellow buses, most of the VW T3 or LT type, characterize the appearance of the city. They run on fixed routes but without a timetable, according to the principle of shared cabs. According to residents, getting to work by car in Lagos can take six times longer than by ferry. About two million passengers were recorded by the Ferry Authority per month in 2021. Five Cowries Terminal is the central terminal for ferry operations in Lagos. The terminal is located on the lagoon between Lagos Island and Victoria Island and was commissioned on 30 August 2018. Five Cowries also serves as the headquarters of the Lagos State Waterways Authority (LASWA). It has a jetty, restaurant, bar, administrative offices, ticket offices, waiting area, toilets, lift, conference room, and ATMs. Boats from private individuals and from other operators also dock at the pier. The terminal also has a multi-storey car park with space for over 800 vehicles. The multi-storey car park is located behind the terminal (as seen from the lagoon) and is directly connected to the terminal. The terminal was built without thresholds and there is a toilet for wheelchair users. Five Cowries is open seven days a week, from 8.00 am to 5.00 pm. The terminal is located next to the Falomo Bridge. The destinations of LASWA ferries are Marina, Ikoyi, Victoria Island, Lekki, Apapa, Ikorodu and Badagry. Lagos is served by Murtala Muhammed International Airport, one of the largest and busiest airports in Africa. The MMIA is Nigeria's premier international air gateway. The airport's history dates back to colonial times, around the time of the Second World War. The international airport terminal was built and commissioned over 40 years ago, in 1978. The terminal opened officially on 15 March 1979. The airport had been known simply as the Lagos International Airport. It was, however, renamed for the late Nigerian Head of State, General Murtala Muhammed, who died in 1976. The airport terminal has been renovated several times since the 1970s but its most radical makeover began in 2013, following the launch of the Federal government's multi-billion naira Remodelling/ Rehabilitation Programme for its airports nationwide. Under the re-modeling work there, by late in 2014, the MMA lounge area had been expanded to four times its previous size and new passenger handling conveyor systems were installed which can handle over 1,000 passengers per hour.[citation needed] A second airport, Lekki-Epe International Airport has been approved by the Federal Government in April 2023. In Lagos, only 40 percent of waste is collected and only 13 percent is recycled. 13,000 tonnes of waste are generated daily in the metropolis. Some residents burn their own waste, which does not improve air pollution. Tap water in Lagos is not suitable for drinking, but can be used for other purposes such as cooking and showering. The water in the distribution network is often contaminated. Since the raw water in the lagoon is too polluted, the city draws its water from the Ogun and Owo rivers. There has been debate about the poor water quality in Lagos for years. At the same time, a sizable proportion of the residents live in slums without access to piped water and sanitation. An efficient sewage system is lacking. Sewage is flushed into the open sewerage system by rainwater. This water then carries pollutants into rivers and the lagoon. Sewage also enters groundwater through leaking septic tanks and latrines. The contaminants can then contaminate the water in wells and boreholes. Water sold by street vendors can also be affected, as it comes from the same sources. Lagos is twinned with: Atlanta, United States Gary, Indiana, United States Belo Horizonte, Brazil Bucharest, Romania Port of Spain, Trinidad and Tobago List of largest cities List of governors of Lagos State Benin City Portals:  Nigeria  Africa  Geography  Cities Metropolitan Lagos consists of 16 of Lagos State's 20 LGAs, which excludes Badagry, Epe, Ibeju-Lekki and Ikorodu. "Metro Lagos (Nigeria): Local Government Areas". City Population. 21 March 2015. Archived from the original on 7 May 2016. Retrieved 26 October 2015. "Lagos and Its Potentials for Economic Growth". 2 July 2015. Archived from the original on 9 October 2015. Retrieved 26 October 2015. "18th National Sports Festival: Lagos unveils Logo, mascot and website". Premium Times. Abuja, Nigeria. 18 June 2012. Archived from the original on 27 October 2012. Retrieved 2 October 2012. "Eko 2012: Building Branding through Sports, Articles". ThisDay. Lagos, Nigeria. 22 August 2012. Archived from the original on 24 December 2013. Retrieved 2 October 2012. Hutchison, Ray (2009). Encyclopedia of Urban Studies. SAGE. p. 427. ISBN 978-1-412-9143-21. Lagos Bureau of Statistics. "2019 Abstract of Local Government Statistics" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 August 2021. Retrieved 1 January 2021. Demographia (January 2015). Demographia World Urban Areas (PDF) (11th ed.). Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 August 2011. Retrieved 2 March 2015. Okeowo, Gabriel; Fatoba, Iyanuoluwa, eds. (13 October 2022). "State of States 2022 Edition" (PDF). Budgit.org. BudgIT. Retrieved 7 March 2023. Williams, Lizzie (2008). Bradt Travel Guides (3rd ed.). Paperback. p. 87. ISBN 978-1-8416-2397-9. Retrieved 26 July 2014. Jones, Daniel (2011). Roach, Peter; Setter, Jane; Esling, John (eds.). Cambridge English Pronouncing Dictionary (18th ed.). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-15255-6. "Lagos". merriam-webster.com. Wells, John C.; Davidson, Lhinton (2014). Sounds interesting: observations on English and general phonetics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 21. ISBN 978-1-107-07470-5. "Lagos now wears a new look". Renewal. 30 March 2016. Archived from the original on 19 December 2022. Retrieved 19 April 2023. "As world population tops 8 billion, Africa's most populated city keeps growing". NBC News. Retrieved 21 January 2024. Ogunbiyi, Tayo (5 January 2023). "Lagos and the 2023 Census". Vanguard. Retrieved 22 January 2024. Bearak, Max; Moriarty, Dylan; Ledur, Júlia. "Africa's rising cities". Washington Post. Archived from the original on 16 April 2023. Retrieved 19 April 2023. "Abuja at 46: The Dreams, Strides, Challenges". www.premiumtimesng.com. Retrieved 21 January 2024. Nigeria, Guardian (12 December 2021). "ABUJA: Capital relocation from Lagos 30 years ago". The Guardian Nigeria News - Nigeria and World News. Retrieved 21 January 2024. Mohamed, Hamza. "Nigeria: Clearing the locals to make Abuja the capital". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 21 January 2024. African Cities Driving the NEPAD Initiative. United Nations Human Settlements Programme. 2006. p. 202. ISBN 978-9-211318159. Hartley, John; Potts, Jason; Flew, Terry; Cunningham, Stuart; Keane, Michael; Banks, John (2012). Key Concepts in Creative Industries. SAGE. p. 47. ISBN 978-1-446-2028-90. Helmut K Anheier; Yudhishthir Raj Isar (2012). Cultures and Globalization: Cities, Cultural Policy and Governance. SAGE. p. 118. ISBN 978-1-446-2585-07. Cunningham, Stuart (2013). Hidden Innovation: Policy, Industry and the Creative Sector (Creative Economy and Innovation Culture Se Series). Univ. of Queensland Press. p. 163. ISBN 978-0-702-2509-89. Benton-Short, Lisa; John Rennie Short (2013). Cities and Nature. Routledge Critical Introductions to Urbanism and the City. p. 7. ISBN 978-1-134252749. Pinther, Kerstin; Förster, Larissa; Hanussek, Christian (2012). Afropolis: City Media Art. Jacana Media. p. 18. ISBN 978-1-431-4032-57. Diop, Salif; Barusseau, Jean-Paul; Descamps, Cyr (2014). The Land/Ocean Interactions in the Coastal Zone of West and Central Africa Estuaries of the World. Springer. p. 66. ISBN 978-3-319-0638-81. Sources: "The Most Populated Cities of the World. World Megacities - Nations Online Project". nationsonline.org. Archived from the original on 5 October 2021. Retrieved 23 September 2021. "These cities are the hubs of Africa's economic boom". Big Think. 4 October 2018. Archived from the original on 23 April 2019. Retrieved 23 April 2019. "Africa's biggest shipping ports". Businesstech. 8 March 2015. Archived from the original on 5 November 2015. Retrieved 26 October 2015. Rajewski, Brian (1998). Africa, Volume 1 of Cities of the World: a compilation of current information on cultural, geographical, and political conditions in the countries and cities of six continents, based on the Department of State's "post reports". Gale Research International, Limited. ISBN 978-0-810-3769-22. Lees, Loretta; Hyun Bang Shin; Ernesto López Morales (2015). Global Gentrifications: Uneven Development and Displacement. Policy Press. p. 315. ISBN 978-1-447-3134-89. Roberts, Toby; Williams, Ian; Preston, John (10 August 2020). "The Southampton system: a new universal standard approach for port-city classification". Maritime Policy & Management. 48 (4). London: Taylor & Francis Group: 530–542. doi:10.1080/03088839.2020.1802785. S2CID 225502755. "CASE STUDY OF LAGOS" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 27 November 2015. "Lagos State Information". National Bureau of Statistics. Archived from the original on 9 November 2015. Retrieved 25 October 2015. "History Of Lagos". One Lagos Fiesta. 10 July 2016. Archived from the original on 7 April 2022. Retrieved 12 March 2022. "A Flood-Free Lagos: The Regional Imperative". Archived from the original on 24 April 2022. Retrieved 27 November 2015. Olukoju, Ayodeji (1996). "The Travails of Migrant and Wage Labour in the Lagos Metropolitan Area in the Inter-War Years". Labour History Review. 61. Liverpool University Press: 49–70. doi:10.3828/lhr.61.1.49. Retrieved 27 November 2015. "Lagos Metropolitan Area: Scope and scale of the shelter problem". Archived from the original on 8 December 2015. Retrieved 27 November 2015. Caprio, Charles (6 March 2012). "Lagos is wonderful and charming conurbation of Nigeria to visit". Go Articles. Archived from the original on 24 February 2014. Retrieved 27 November 2015. "Administrative Levels - Lagos State". Nigeria Congress. Archived from the original on 25 December 2005. Retrieved 27 November 2015. "Population - Lagos State". Lagos State Government. Archived from the original on 18 October 2015. Retrieved 27 November 2015. "2022 World Population by Country". worldpopulationreview.com. Archived from the original on 21 September 2021. Retrieved 12 March 2022. The sixteen LGAs making up Metropolitan Lagos (Agege, Ajeromi-Ifelodun, Alimosho, Amuwo-Odofin, Apapa, Eti-Osa, Ifako-Ijaiye, Ikeja, Kosofe, Lagos Island, Lagos Mainland, Mushin, Ojo, Oshodi-Isolo, Shomolu, Surulere) as per "2006 Population Census" (PDF). National Bureau of Statistics of Nigeria. May 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 June 2011. Retrieved 14 September 2010. "Population". Lagos State Government. 2011. Archived from the original on 18 October 2015. Retrieved 3 November 2012. Pacetti, M.; Passerini, G.; Brebbia, C.A.; Latini, G. (2012). The Sustainable City VII: Urban Regeneration and Sustainability. WIT Press. ISBN 978-1-84564-578-6. French, Howard W. (27 October 2022). "Megalopolis: how coastal west Africa will shape the coming century". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 6 March 2024. Choplin, Armelle; Hertzog, Alice (4 September 2020), "The West African corridor from Abidjan to Lagos: a megacity-region under construction", Handbook of Megacities and Megacity-Regions, Edward Elgar Publishing, pp. 206–222, ISBN 978-1-78897-270-3, retrieved 6 March 2024 "Listen To An EXPERT Would Say Lagos? Find Out TODAY. Lagos Pronunciation". "Lagos State Judiciary". Nigeria Law Online. Archived from the original on 21 May 2013. Retrieved 4 April 2012. "Cities & Citizens Series:Urban Iniquities in three Cities" (PDF). Unhabit Online. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 October 2013. Retrieved 4 April 2012. Dr. Dele Olowu (1992). Public Admin. Dev. Urban local government finance in Nigeria: The case of Lagos municipal area. p. 12: 19–38. doi:10.1002/pad.4230120103. "Managing Metropolitan Lagos" (PDF). R.Rasaki. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 May 2012. Retrieved 4 April 2012. "Metro Lagos". Archived from the original on 7 May 2016. Retrieved 28 November 2015. "Nigeria: Administrative Division (States and Local Government Areas) - Population Statistics, Charts, and Map". www.citypopulation.de. Retrieved 17 January 2024. "Document". Nigerian Muse Online. 7 February 2007. Archived from the original on 8 February 2010. Retrieved 4 April 2012. "NATIONAL POPULATION COMMISSION – MISUNDERSTANDING, MISPERCEPTION AND MISREPRESENTATION OF CENSUS 2006 A REJOINDER TO THE PUBLICATION – "The Falsification of Lagos Census Figure" by Lagos State Government". Economicconfidential.com. Archived from the original on 29 May 2010. Retrieved 2 June 2010. "Legal Notice on Publication of the Details of the Breakdown of the National and State Official Totals 2006 Census" (PDF). Federal Republic of Nigeria Official Gazette. 96 (2). 2 February 2009. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 July 2007. Retrieved 29 June 2007. Obasola, Kemi (5 February 2007). "Lagos rejects population commission's figures". The Punch. Punch Nigeria Limited, via Biafra Nigeria World News. Archived from the original on 31 December 2007. Retrieved 11 December 2007. Government of Nigeria, National Population Commission (8 February 2007). "Lagos State Claim on the Provisional Result of the 2006 Census is Unfounded" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 June 2007. Retrieved 29 June 2007. "FACTSHEET: Nigeria's population figures". Africa Check. Archived from the original on 21 June 2016. Retrieved 2 June 2016. Lawal, Leonard; Egbejule, Eromo; Norbrook, Nicholas (5 April 2016). "Nigeria: Lagos, Maximum City". The Africa Report. Archived from the original on 15 April 2016. Retrieved 18 April 2016. "World Urbanization Prospects - Population Division - United Nations". Population.un.org. Archived from the original on 19 January 2020. Retrieved 31 January 2022. Herskovits, Melville J. (5 November 2013). The Human Factor in Changing Africa. Routledge, 2013. p. 118. ISBN 978-1-136-5296-10. Brook, James (6 September 1987). "Brazilian Houses In Nigeria Are A Legacy Of Thousands Of Freed Slaves". Chicago Tribune. New York. Archived from the original on 16 August 2017. Retrieved 30 May 2017. "Five Architectural Wonders of Lagos". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 21 May 2017. Retrieved 30 May 2017. Bakare, Tonye (15 May 2016). "Open House Lagos opens a new vista in Lagos architecture". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 27 August 2017. Retrieved 27 August 2017. de Blij, Harm; Muller, Peter O. (24 March 1998). Geography, Update: Realms, Regions, and Concepts. Wiley, 1998. p. 349. ISBN 978-0-471-29112-1. Immerwahr, Daniel. The Politics of Architecture and Urbanism in Postcolonial Lagos, 1960-1986. Journal of African Cultural Studies (Thesis). Vol. 19. Taylor & Francis, Ltd. p. 165-186. JSTOR 25473387.[dead link] "A cursory look at the colonial roots of Lagos, Nigeria". Google Arts and culture (The Centenary Project). 1 March 2014. Retrieved 30 May 2017. "THE RISE OF FUTURE CITIES IN SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA". Cityscape. Archived from the original on 16 August 2017. Retrieved 30 May 2017. Akin George (29 November 2016). "Rising Residential Towers In Lagos: Changing The Megacity Skyline". Independent. Archived from the original on 16 August 2017. Retrieved 30 May 2017. "Lekki-Ikoyi Link Bridge in Lagos, Nigeria". Julius Berger International. Archived from the original on 11 September 2022. Retrieved 27 January 2022. "Sanwo-Olu says Opebi-Mende link bridge, 4th mainland bridge projects to commence 2022 - Naira metrics". 3 January 2022. Archived from the original on 15 January 2022. Retrieved 15 January 2022. "Lagos to begin construction of 4th Mainland Bridge 2022 - Sanwo-Olu - P.M. News". Archived from the original on 15 January 2022. Retrieved 15 January 2022. "The lagos pressure group on the environment". Limge Online. Archived from the original on 10 May 2013. Retrieved 4 April 2012. 2008 All Africa Media Research Conference. Nigeria Tribune. 26 April 2007. p. 34. "Simply Lagos". The Transmitter. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 4 April 2012. Oni, A. O (2008). "Journal of the Nigerian Institution of Estate Surveyors and Valuers: An empirical study of the Lagos state rent edict of 1997". Archived from the original on 2 October 2009. Retrieved 4 April 2012. "Lagos | City, Population, & History | Britannica". www.britannica.com. Archived from the original on 5 June 2019. Retrieved 12 March 2022. Branch of the Nigerian Institution of estate surveyors & Valuers. Lagos state. 30 August 2006. "'We spent between N40m and N200m to construct a park'". Business day NG. 12 October 2014. Archived from the original on 4 September 2022. Retrieved 21 July 2022. Awa, Omiko (3 November 2019). "Ikoyi Federal secretariat … Disused monument rotting away". The Guardian (Nigeria). Archived from the original on 14 August 2021. Retrieved 26 December 2021. "Victoria Island Postal Code / Zip Code – Lagos City | Lagos State | Nigerian Postal Code | NairaPostCode". 10 May 2022. Archived from the original on 11 May 2022. Retrieved 11 May 2022. "2008 All Africa Media Research Conference" (PPT). Pan African Media Research Organisation. p. 8. Retrieved 4 April 2012.[permanent dead link] Best Lagos (16 September 2023). "Best Beaches in Victoria Island". BestLagos.ng. Retrieved 20 September 2023. Best Lagos (3 September 2023). "Fun Places in Lekki". BestLagos.ng. Retrieved 15 September 2023. "Giant Cities of Tiny Islands" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 April 2012. Retrieved 4 April 2012. Best Lagos (16 September 2023). "Best Clubs in Lagos". BestLagos.ng. Retrieved 19 September 2023. "Ikeja Climate Normals 1991–2020". World Meteorological Organization Climatological Standard Normals (1991–2020). National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Archived from the original on 26 August 2023. Retrieved 26 August 2023. "Lagos Climate Normals 1961–1990". National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Retrieved 7 July 2016. "Station Murtala" (in French). Meteo Climat. Archived from the original on 25 February 2021. Retrieved 7 July 2016. "Climate & Weather Averages in Lagos, Nigeria". Time and Date. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 10 January 2022. "Monthly weather forecast and climate in Lagos, Nigeria". Weather Atlas. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 10 January 2022. Bastin, Jean-Francois; Clark, Emily; Elliott, Thomas; Hart, Simon; van den Hoogen, Johan; Hordijk, Iris; Ma, Haozhi; Majumder, Sabiha; Manoli, Gabriele; Maschler, Julia; Mo, Lidong; Routh, Devin; Yu, Kailiang; Zohner, Constantin M.; Thomas W., Crowther (10 July 2019). "Understanding climate change from a global analysis of city analogues". PLOS ONE. 14 (7). S2 Table. Summary statistics of the global analysis of city analogues. Bibcode:2019PLoSO..1417592B. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0217592. PMC 6619606. PMID 31291249. "Cities of the future: visualizing climate change to inspire action". Current vs. future cities. Archived from the original on 8 January 2023. Retrieved 8 January 2023. "The CAT Thermometer". Archived from the original on 14 April 2019. Retrieved 8 January 2023. Trisos, C.H., I.O. Adelekan, E. Totin, A. Ayanlade, J. Efitre, A. Gemeda, K. Kalaba, C. Lennard, C. Masao, Y. Mgaya, G. Ngaruiya, D. Olago, N.P. Simpson, and S. Zakieldeen 2022: Chapter 9: Africa Archived 6 December 2022 at the Wayback Machine. In Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability Archived 28 February 2022 at the Wayback Machine [H.-O. Pörtner, D.C. Roberts, M. Tignor, E.S. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegría, M. Craig, S. Langsdorf, S. Löschke,V. Möller, A. Okem, B. Rama (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, pp. 2043–2121 Technical Summary. In: Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (PDF). IPCC. August 2021. p. TS14. Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 August 2021. Retrieved 12 November 2021. Douglas Zhihua Zeng (2008). Knowledge, Technology, and Cluster-based Growth in Africa (WBI development studies). World Bank Publications. p. 66. ISBN 978-0-8213-7307-1. "ICT Development: Nigeria Seeks Increased Regional Collaboration among West African States". www.ncc.gov.ng. Archived from the original on 7 July 2022. Retrieved 12 March 2022. "Ambode, Security And Lagos Quest For 24/7 Economy". PM News. 27 August 2015. Archived from the original on 27 January 2022. Retrieved 1 October 2016. Busari, Stephanie (1 April 2009). "24 hours in Lagos: The city that never sleeps". CNN. Archived from the original on 9 April 2022. Retrieved 1 October 2016. Globalization and World Cities Research Network "The World According to GaWC 2020". GaWC - Research Network. Globalization and World Cities. Archived from the original on 24 August 2020. Retrieved 31 August 2020. Eleanya, Frank (9 February 2023). "Nigerian government targets three new tech unicorns in 2023 -". Businessday NG. Retrieved 3 January 2024. admin (8 December 2019). "Africa's Top 10 Digital Hubs". Africancube. Retrieved 3 January 2024. Ford, Neil (28 September 2022). "West Africa's Top Banks in 2022". African Business. Retrieved 18 August 2023. "Insurance companies in Nigeria: ranking 2022". www.atlas-mag.net. Retrieved 18 August 2023. Roberts, Toby; Williams, Ian; Preston, John (2021). "The Southampton system: A new universal standard approach for port-city classification". Maritime Policy & Management. 48 (4): 530–542. doi:10.1080/03088839.2020.1802785. S2CID 225502755. Bhattacharjee, Shilavadra (30 May 2022). "6 Major Ports in Nigeria". Marine Insight. Retrieved 2 July 2023. Liston, Enjoli (10 April 2014). "Hello Nollywood: how Nigeria became Africa's biggest economy overnight". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 12 April 2014. Retrieved 12 April 2014. "Nigeria: Media and Entertainment to hit $15bn by 2025". Theafricareport.com. October 2021. Archived from the original on 27 May 2022. Retrieved 27 December 2021. Akande, Victor (14 September 2014). "Toronto: Nigerians disagree over new Nollywood". The Nation Newspaper. The Nation Online. Archived from the original on 22 September 2013. Retrieved 24 March 2015. "Why Lagos (in Nigeria) is Africa's Silicon Valley". Startup Grind. Retrieved 3 January 2024. Nigeria's Chaotic Rise as the Tech Heart of Africa | Hello World with Ashlee Vance, retrieved 3 January 2024 "Best Computer Software Solution in Lagos, Nigeria - List of Computer Software Solution Companies Nigeria". Businesslist.com.ng. Archived from the original on 5 May 2022. Retrieved 31 January 2022. "Top 10 Software Companies in Lagos". Mitrobe.com. 7 August 2021. Archived from the original on 6 April 2022. Retrieved 27 December 2021. AriseNews (28 December 2023). "Dangote Refinery Receives Third Crude Shipment Of 1 Million Barrels, To Start Diesel and Aviation Fuel Production Mid-January 2024". Arise News. Retrieved 3 January 2024. "oilandgasclub". www.oilandgasclub.com. Retrieved 3 January 2024. Villanueva, Laurie (4 January 2022). "4 of Nation's 10 Largest Oil Refineries Located Along Texas Gulf Coast". Zehl & Associates. Retrieved 3 January 2024. Adenuga, Adepeju (6 September 2021). "Dangote refinery to increase workforce to 57,000". Punch Newspapers. Retrieved 3 January 2024. Sanni, Seun (22 March 2022). "Nigerian billionaire Dangote launches $2.5 billion fertilizer plant as prices soar". Reuters. Retrieved 18 August 2023. Mbachu, Dulue (5 May 2022). "Dangote's timely fertiliser plant pays off as prices soar". African Business. Retrieved 18 August 2023. Onyesi, Chika (6 October 2021). "'Nigeria's pharmaceutical sector dwindling despite 60 percent production capacity'". Daily Post Nigeria. Archived from the original on 5 June 2022. Retrieved 5 June 2022. Yahaya, Abdulwali (19 September 2019). "Top 10 Best Pharmaceutical Companies in Nigeria & Their Products". Nigerian Infopedia. Archived from the original on 17 May 2022. Retrieved 2 June 2022. "About Emzor Pharmaceutical Industries Limited". Emzor. Archived from the original on 1 August 2022. Retrieved 2 June 2022. Fidson. "Our Company". Archived from the original on 26 June 2022. Retrieved 15 June 2022. "May and Baker Plc. – Supporting your Health for Life". Archived from the original on 25 June 2022. Retrieved 2 June 2022. "Welcome to swiss pharma Nigeria limited". www.swiphanigeria.com. Archived from the original on 4 July 2022. Retrieved 2 June 2022. Clark, Jeanette (7 March 2021). "How this entrepreneur started a Nigerian car brand". How we made it in Africa. Retrieved 18 August 2023. Precious, Amaefule (16 June 2023). "Nigerian Automobile Industry: " We Produce Fewer Cars in Nigeria Because Demand Isn't Encouraging," Nord CEO Reveals". Car blog. Retrieved 18 August 2023. "Landmark Africa | Business.Leisure.Lifestyle". www.landmarkafrica.com. Retrieved 30 June 2023. "Lagos Fashion Fair Exhibition – International Ready-to-Wear Fashion Exhibition". Retrieved 30 June 2023. "Landmark Centre". 10times. Retrieved 30 June 2023. "Trade Fairs in Lagos (2023 -2024), Exhibitions, Expos, Trade Shows, Events in Lagos". www.tradeindia.com. Retrieved 30 June 2023. "Which African Nation Consumes more Guinness than Ireland? - livingireland.com". livingireland.com. 30 November 2022. Retrieved 18 August 2023. Adoga, Stephen (6 March 2023). "Most Popular Malt Brands And Their Manufacturers In Nigeria". Nyscinfo. Retrieved 18 August 2023. "How Construction of Biggest Logistics Hub Will Affect Lagosians -". The NEWS. 25 August 2022. Retrieved 30 June 2023. "Lagos begins work at Africa's Largest Food and Logistics Hub". Radio Nigeria Lagos. Retrieved 30 June 2023. "Lagos today: Like Tinubu like Sanwo-Olu". TheCable. 4 May 2022. Retrieved 18 August 2023. "Dangote Sugar Refinery Plc (DSR) - AGE (African Growing Enterprises) File". Institute of Developing Economies. Retrieved 18 August 2023. Adesanya, Adedapo (26 May 2023). "Lagos Targets Economic Growth with New Ikosi-Ketu Markets". Business Post Nigeria. Retrieved 27 June 2023. The New Ikosi (Babajide Sanwoolu) International Model Market Phase 3 In Ikosi-Isheri LCDA, Lagos, retrieved 27 June 2023 "Sanwo-Olu Inaugurates Fresh Food Hub, To Mitigate 50% Produce Loss". News Agency of Nigeria. 18 December 2023. Retrieved 21 December 2023. The New Ultra Model Fresh Food Market In Lagos ||The Newly Commissioned Middle Level Food Agro Hub. Iamgbolahan. Retrieved 21 December 2023 – via YouTube. My Day and Night Experience at Elegushi Beach, Lagos, retrieved 19 August 2023 LANDMARK BEACH IN LAGOS, NIGERIA | A QUICK TOUR OF MY FAVORITE BEACH IN NIGERIA, retrieved 19 August 2023 What Can $100 Get in LAGOS, NIGERIA? (Africa's Craziest City), retrieved 19 August 2023, starting at 7:40 "Lekki-Ikoyi Link Bridge - Julius Berger International". Julius Berger International (in German). Retrieved 19 August 2023. I Tried Every Rooftop Restaurant In Lagos So You Don't Have To!, retrieved 19 August 2023 What Can $100 Get in LAGOS, NIGERIA? (Africa's Craziest City), retrieved 19 August 2023 What Can $10 Get in LAGOS, NIGERIA? (Craziest City), retrieved 19 August 2023 Lagos, Nigeria is CRAZY 🇳🇬 (25 million people, Largest English Speaking City), retrieved 19 August 2023 Community, Craftsvillage (8 June 2022). "A Visit To The Lekki Arts and Crafts Market". CraftsVillage™ MarketHUB. Retrieved 19 August 2023. "Top 10 Fascinating Facts about Freedom Park, Lagos". Discover Walks Blog. 26 August 2022. Retrieved 1 July 2023. admin (5 February 2017). "New face of Tinubu Square: A boost to tourism in Lagos mega city". EnviroNews Nigeria. Retrieved 1 July 2023. "Tinubu Square: A befitting memorial to an Amazon". Retrieved 1 July 2023. Whiteman, Kaye (2013). Lagos: A Cultural and Literary History (Landscapes of the Imagination) (5th ed.). Luton, UK: Andrews UK Limited. ISBN 978-1-908493-89-7. Ogundeji, Josephine (22 March 2023). "Tafawa Balewa Square: Years after concession, world-class tourist site dream fades". Punch Newspapers. Retrieved 21 August 2023. "DIE 10 BESTEN Sehenswürdigkeiten in Lagos 2023 (mit fotos)". Tripadvisor (in German). Retrieved 1 July 2023. travelwaka (1 June 2021). "Lufasi Nature Park - A Nature Reserve in Lagos". TravelWaka. Retrieved 1 July 2023. nevada (27 February 2021). "10 Best and Unique Tourist Attractions in Lagos Nigeria". Nevada Hotels and Suites. Archived from the original on 29 June 2023. Retrieved 29 June 2023. Isaack, Wendy (20 October 2016). ""Tell Me Where I Can Be Safe"". Human Rights Watch. Burke, Jason (11 December 2019). "First men go on trial under Nigeria's anti-homosexuality laws". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 2 July 2023. "Over 40 Men Have Been Arrested in Nigeria for Homosexual Acts". Global Citizen (in French). 2017. Retrieved 2 July 2023. "Nigerian judge throws out homosexuality case against 47 men". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 2 July 2023. "Nigerian judge throws out case against 47 men facing homosexuality charge". Reuters. 27 October 2020. Retrieved 2 July 2023. Moses-Ashike, Hope (14 November 2022). "First phase of National Theatre rehabilitation project completed". Businessday NG. Retrieved 27 June 2023. "Lagos' Best Kept Secret". Pulse Nigeria. 15 October 2014. Retrieved 27 June 2023. "Chief Josephine Oboh-Macleod: Art creator, connoisseur, politician, activist". Vanguard newspapers. 30 May 2021. Retrieved 27 June 2023. "Ovuomaroro Studio and Gallery". BusinessList.com.ng. Retrieved 1 July 2023. "About us – Alexis Galleries". Retrieved 1 July 2023. Obinna, Emelike (29 January 2023). "John Randle Centre for Yoruba Culture & History: A global spotlight on Lagos". Businessday NG. Retrieved 27 June 2023. "A Bold New Complex Celebrates Yoruba Culture". Architectural Digest. 21 April 2023. Retrieved 27 June 2023. Lagos Reconstructs it's [sic] cultural mystery Center., archived from the original on 30 June 2023, retrieved 27 June 2023 "Kalakuta Museum". Fela Kuti. Retrieved 1 July 2023. "Mindscapes Children's Museum, Lagos - Photos & Reviews". Hotels.ng Places. Retrieved 1 July 2023. Duro, Oni (2010). Stage Lighting Design: The Nigerian Perspective. Indiana, USA: Society of Nigerian Theatre Artistes, Indiana University. ISBN 978-978-8065-01-2. AfricaNews (2 January 2023). "Nigerians kick off the year with the Fanti Carnival celebrations in Lagos". Africanews. Retrieved 21 August 2023. "EKOIFF – An international film festival site". 30 April 2023. Retrieved 21 August 2023. Eko Brass Band at the Freedom Park Lagos at 2015 Lagos Black Heritage Festival opening parade, retrieved 21 August 2023 "LagosPhoto | International art festival of photography in Nigeria". www.lagosphotofestival.com. Retrieved 21 August 2023. "Lagos Book & Art Festival | LABAF | .....Dubbed Africa' Largest Culture Picnic". Retrieved 21 August 2023. "Festival". Eat.Drink.Lagos. Retrieved 21 August 2023. "Lagos International Jazz Festival Returns - THISDAYLIVE". www.thisdaylive.com. Retrieved 21 August 2023. The Experience 2022, retrieved 21 August 2023 Hotels.ng. "Eyo Festival: 10 Things You Should Know". Hotels.ng Guides. Retrieved 21 August 2023. The University of Michigan (1992). Post Report. United States Department of State. p. 16. Whiteman, Kaye (2013). Lagos: A Cultural and Literary History Volume 5 of Landscapes of the Imagination. Andrews UK Limited. ISBN 978-1-908493-89-7. Awa, Omiko (21 June 2015). "A Peep into The Glamour, Glitz of Lagos Nightlife". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 9 April 2016. Retrieved 26 March 2016. Ganiu, Ayodele (2011). "The contribution of the Creative Economy to African Cities: A Case Study of Lagos Creative Sector & Its Potential" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 May 2013. Retrieved 4 April 2012. "James Brown tours Africa for U.S. State Department Company". Jet. Vol. 38, no. 26. 1 October 1970. p. 57. ISSN 0021-5996. Lewisohn, Mark (2001). "Band on the Run: Paul McCartney and Wings". Archived from the original on 28 March 2008. Retrieved 8 April 2012. Williams, Lizzie; Shenley, Mark (2012). Nigeria. Bradt Travel Guides. p. 51. ISBN 978-1-841-6239-79. "Nigeria: The Shaggy Thriller in Lagos". All Africa. 2 January 2002. Archived from the original on 31 January 2002. Retrieved 25 April 2017. "R Kelly storms Nigeria". The Vanguard. 11 November 2010. Archived from the original on 26 April 2017. Retrieved 25 April 2017. "Nigeria: Shakira, Legend, UB40 to Star at Thisday Festival". All Africa. Archived from the original on 27 August 2007. Retrieved 25 April 2017. Ogunjimi, Opeoluwa. "Jay-Z coming to Nigeria". The Vanguard. Archived from the original on 26 April 2017. Retrieved 25 April 2017. Egole, Anozie (5 October 2013). "How Mary J. Blige rocked Lagos". The Vanguard. Archived from the original on 18 April 2014. Retrieved 25 April 2017. "How 7 US celebs have visited Nigeria in six months". Nigerian Entertainment Today. 15 June 2016. Archived from the original on 26 April 2017. Retrieved 25 April 2017. "Nigeria: Usher Raymond is Star of the Mega Jam". All Africa. Archived from the original on 22 December 2002. Retrieved 25 April 2017. "Yoruba Travelling Theatre & Video Film" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 May 2012. Retrieved 4 April 2012. Du, Katherine (5 May 2016). "'Captain America' Is Trending In Nigeria, But You Might Be Surprised Why". NPR. Archived from the original on 26 December 2022. Retrieved 26 December 2022. Ademola, Bisi (20 June 2023). "Nollywood: Blockbusters To Streaming Success | African Folder". Retrieved 28 June 2023. Best Lagos (28 September 2023). "7 Best Football Clubs in Lagos, Nigeria". BestLagos.ng. Retrieved 29 September 2023. "Nigeria". World Stadiums. Archived from the original on 18 April 2016. Retrieved 2 June 2010. Onwumechili, Chuka (3 July 2008). "Nigeria International Matches 1955–2007". Rec.Sport.Soccer Statistics Foundation Online. Archived from the original on 22 August 2022. Retrieved 2 June 2010. "OnlineNigeria.com". Onlinenigeria.com. 29 January 2022. Archived from the original on 31 January 2022. Retrieved 31 January 2022. "Mercer's 2018 Quality of Living Rankings". Mobilityexchange.mercer.com. Archived from the original on 4 April 2019. Retrieved 30 July 2018. Höchel, Sarah (7 June 2023). "Die 10 Städte mit der niedrigsten Lebensqualität weltweit". SÜDKURIER Online (in German). Retrieved 19 August 2023. "Städte mit schlechtester Lebensqualität 2023". Statista (in German). Retrieved 19 August 2023. Bernoff, Josh (7 December 2020). "My big problem with Statista". Josh Bernoff. Retrieved 19 August 2023. "Thilo Mischke: Womit haben die Menschen in Nigeria diesen Hass verdient?". Berliner Zeitung (in German). 10 June 2023. Retrieved 19 August 2023. Søreide, Tina (2006). Is it wrong to rank? A critical assessment of corruption indices. Bergen, Norway: Chr. Michelsen Institute. ISBN 82-8062-134-2. Budsaratragoon, Pornanong (2019). "A critique on the Corruption Perceptions Index". Socio-Economic Planning Sciences. 70. Elsevier. Draper, Robert; Hammond, Robin (1 January 2015). "Lagos Nigeria: Africa's First city". National Geographic. Archived from the original on 23 December 2014. Retrieved 18 April 2016. Okuneye P. A.; Adebayo, K.; Opeolu B.T.; Baddru F.I. ANALYSIS OF THE INTERPLAY OF MIGRATION AND URBAN EXPANSION, ON HEALTH AND THE ENVIRONMENT: THE CASE OF LAGOS, NIGERIA (PDF) (Thesis). Committee for International Cooperation in National Research in Demography (CICRED). Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 August 2016. Retrieved 11 July 2016. Ogunlesi, Tolu (4 May 2014). "Commercial hub status of Lagos sparks a chain reaction". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 17 March 2016. "Luxury living in Lagos". CNBC Africa. 21 October 2013. Archived from the original on 19 March 2016. Retrieved 16 March 2016. Onigbinde, Oluseun. "LAGOS' INFORMAL SECTOR Taxation & Contribution to the Economy" (PDF). Heinrich Böll Foundation (Nigeria). Retrieved 1 February 2017. "THE INFORMAL ECONOMY IN NIGERIA - THISDAYLIVE". www.thisdaylive.com. Retrieved 19 August 2023. "Nigeria Security Tracker". Council on Foreign Relations. Retrieved 19 August 2023. Hernando Gómez Buendía (13 July 2007). Urban crime: global trends and policies. United Nations University, 1989 (University of Michigan). p. 141. ISBN 978-9-280-8067-93. "UK homicide rate 2022". Statista. Retrieved 19 August 2023. "Türkei - Mordrate". Statista (in German). Retrieved 19 August 2023. "Education". Archived from the original on 14 July 2007. Retrieved 4 April 2012. Best Lagos (2 October 2023). "Best State Schools in Lagos (Ranked)". BestLagos.ng. Retrieved 2 October 2023. "Issue And Problems in Higher Education" (PDF). National Open University, Nigeria. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 May 2013. Retrieved 4 April 2012. "Technology for Self Reliance – Official Website". Ronik Polytechnic Ejigbo. Archived from the original on 19 May 2022. Retrieved 24 September 2021. "Homepage". University of Lagos official website. Archived from the original on 6 April 2012. Retrieved 4 April 2012. Dekker, Marleen; van Dijk, Rijk (2010). Markets of Well-being: Navigating Health and Healing in Africa. Vol. 9. BRILL, African Dynamics. p. 31. ISBN 978-90-04-20110-1. "Digest of Statistics 2010" (PDF). Lagos State. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 August 2021. Retrieved 4 April 2012. "BRT-Lite-Final Report" (PDF). Nigerianewsworld. Retrieved 14 September 2020.[permanent dead link] "The Socio-economic Costs of Traffic Congestion in Lagos" (PDF). Economic Intelligence Unit (Working paper series No.2). 2 July 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 June 2016. Retrieved 18 April 2016. Best Lagos (1 October 2023). "Best Bridges in Lagos, Nigeria". BestLagos.ng. Retrieved 2 October 2023. "Ogun, Oyo move to deploy CCTV, drones to tackle insecurity on highways, borderlines". Businessday NG. 3 February 2022. Archived from the original on 12 March 2022. Retrieved 12 March 2022. Strategic Plan. University of Lagos, Lagos. 2003–2008. African Development Bank/United Nations Economic Commission For Africa: "Review of the Implementation Status of the Trans African Highways and the Missing Links (PDF). Vol. 2 Description of Corridors. African Development Bank. 14 August 2003. Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 November 2019. Retrieved 14 July 2007. Madamombe, Itai (October 2006). "Highways link 15 West African countries". Africa Renewal. 20 (3). Itai Madamombe : "NEPAD promotes better transport networks": 14. doi:10.18356/4def088a-en. Archived from the original on 25 February 2007. Retrieved 4 April 2012. "How to Get and Use the Lagos BRT Bus Cowry Card; All You Need to Know; FAQs". Bank Naija. 2 August 2021. Archived from the original on 18 December 2021. Retrieved 18 December 2021. Olisah, Chike (23 March 2021). Nairametrics (ed.). "Lagos Bus Services commence deployment of a contactless payment card to commuters". Nairametrics. Archived from the original on 25 October 2021. Retrieved 18 December 2021. "Cowry's 'tap to ride' contactless payment is making transit easier for Lagosians to commute during the pandemic". The Guardian Nigeria. 1 October 2021. Archived from the original on 19 May 2022. Retrieved 18 December 2021. "Home". 18 December 2021. Archived from the original on 18 December 2021. Retrieved 21 December 2021. "Lagos Bus Services: New face of Smart City Transportation in Nigeria". Businessday NG. 28 May 2019. Archived from the original on 12 March 2022. Retrieved 12 March 2022. "Coronavirus: Sanwo-Olu reduces bus capacity to 60%, stops use of AC in BRT". Daily Trust. 1 May 2020. Retrieved 30 June 2023. Olowolagba, Fikayo (4 May 2020). "Lagos residents fear COVID-19 escalation as buses flout transportation guidelines [PHOTOS]". Daily Post Nigeria. Retrieved 30 June 2023. Blue BRT Bus, Lagos [@PrimeroTSL] (17 March 2021). "Dear valued customers" (Tweet). Retrieved 26 December 2021 – via Twitter. "Lagos' Bus Rapid Transit System: Decongesting and Depolluting Mega-Cities". blogs.worldbank.org. 8 December 2015. Retrieved 30 June 2023. "The Difference Between Lagos BRT And LBSL Buses". Autojosh.com. 23 October 2019. Archived from the original on 19 January 2022. Retrieved 31 January 2022. Transportday (10 November 2022). "Lagos BRT, LBSL Buses and LAGBUS: Check out their differences". Transport Day Newspaper. Retrieved 30 June 2023. "Oshodi Transport Interchange – Planet Projects". Retrieved 30 June 2023. travelwaka (31 March 2021). "Oshodi Transport Interchange, A World Class Terminal In Lagos". TravelWaka. Retrieved 30 June 2023. Izuaka, Mary (24 May 2023). "Oando, LAMATA launch electric mass transit buses in Lagos". Premium Times Nigeria. Retrieved 30 June 2023. Lagos Inaugurates Electric Buses For Public Transport, retrieved 30 June 2023 WATCH: Exclusive Clips From The Lagos Blue Rail Line 😍, retrieved 30 June 2023 Train Trip On The New Lagos Metro || My Blue Line Rail Experience || Test-Ride On The Lagos Metro, retrieved 30 June 2023 Oyingbo Train Station & Overpass Construction Progress || Lagos Redline Rail Project, retrieved 30 June 2023 The $400m Lagos Rail Mass Transit Green Line | All Info About The Upcoming Project, retrieved 30 June 2023 "Lagos & Ogun State Rail Lines (Update & Map)". Blackborderbuild.weebly.com. Retrieved 31 January 2022. "Iamgbolahan - YouTube". www.youtube.com. Retrieved 20 January 2024. Rohde, Michael. "World Metro Database - metrobits.org". mic-ro.com. Retrieved 20 January 2024. Akoni, Olasunkanmi (14 February 2024). "Lagos: Tinubu to inaugurate Red Line Rail project Feb 29". Vanguard. Retrieved 15 February 2024. "MOBOLAJI JOHNSON TRAIN STATION, EBUTE META, LAGOS". Virtual Tour. Retrieved 30 June 2023. "NRC increases frequency of Lagos-Ibadan train service". TheCable. 12 January 2022. Retrieved 30 June 2023. Nigeria, Guardian (16 June 2023). "NRC to begin e-ticketing system for Lagos-Ibadan, Warri-Itakpe train routes". The Guardian Nigeria News - Nigeria and World News. Retrieved 30 June 2023. "Mobolaji Johnson railway station – Channels Television". Archived from the original on 7 April 2022. Retrieved 16 December 2021. "Buhari inaugurates Lagos-Ibadan Railway project". 10 June 2021. Archived from the original on 11 July 2021. Retrieved 16 December 2021. New Ultra Modern Train Ride, Lagos to Abeokuta, Nigeria. #LagosTube on YouTube "Mobolaji Johnson Train Station in the city Lagos". Archived from the original on 7 April 2022. Retrieved 16 December 2021. "Danfo: Yellow of Lagos". 13 September 2018. Archived from the original on 21 December 2021. Retrieved 18 September 2021. Hoffmann, Heiner; Akinleye (Fotos), Akintunde (12 September 2021). "Lagos in Nigeria: Eine Woche in der chaotischsten Stadt der Welt". Der Spiegel (in German). ISSN 2195-1349. Retrieved 22 July 2023. travelwaka (2 September 2019). "Five Cowries Terminal - An Ultra Modern Boat Terminal In Lagos, Nigeria". TravelWaka. Retrieved 22 July 2023. "Ambode commissions 'ultra-modern' ferry terminal in Lagos". Premium Times. 30 August 2018. Archived from the original on 22 July 2023. Retrieved 22 July 2023. Hanafi, Afeez (22 October 2021). "Badagry: Underused waterways offer escape from deplorable highway to Nigeria's multi-billion naira tourism hub". Punch Newspapers. Retrieved 22 July 2023. "Tariff Booklet". view.officeapps.live.com. Retrieved 22 July 2023. "Murtala Ramat Mohammed | head of state of Nigeria | Britannica". www.britannica.com. Archived from the original on 12 March 2022. Retrieved 12 March 2022. "FG approves the Lekki-Epe International Airport. Here is what to expect along the Lekki-Epe Corridor". www.linkedin.com. Retrieved 19 August 2023. "Lagos, Nigeria - Copenhagenize". copenhagenizeindex.eu. Retrieved 19 August 2023. "The current state of waste management in Nigeria and the challenges of transitioning to a circular economy". www.linkedin.com. Retrieved 19 August 2023. Winfield, Scott (14 July 2022). "Nigeria Tap Water Quality Report: Is It Drinkable?". Water Defense. Retrieved 19 August 2023. Ngoni, Simon (9 November 2020). "Can I drink the tap water in Nigeria (incl Lagos and Abuja)? - EN". Retrieved 19 August 2023. "Urban Challenges in Lagos - clean water, sanitation and energy". Internet Geography. Retrieved 19 August 2023. Price, Roland K.; Zoran Vojinovi? (2011). Urban Hydroinformatics: Data, Models, and Decision Support for Integrated Urban Water Management. IWA Publishing. p. 492. ISBN 978-1-843-3927-43. "Water Supply and Sanitation in Nigeria" (PDF). WorldBank. Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 December 2018. Retrieved 30 November 2016. "Lagos, the mega-city of slums". The New Humanitarian. 5 September 2006. Archived from the original on 31 January 2022. Retrieved 31 January 2022. In 1995, the World Bank stated that "70 percent of Lagos' population lived in squatted settlements in extremely poor environmental surroundings. Knee-deep floods sweeping raw sewage and refuse inside densely packed homes were frequent in neighborhoods where overcrowding was the norm. While the average residential density for Lagos was about 260 people per hectare, the population density in slums was between 790 and 1240 people per hectare." Nigeria - Lagos Metropolitan Development and Governance Project Archived 10 May 2017 at the Wayback Machine, report of World Bank, 2006 (lookup on 2016-11-23) "Lagos Water Supply and Pollution". Internet Geography. Retrieved 19 August 2023. "List of Atlanta's 17 Sister Cities". atlantaga.gov. City of Atlanta. Archived from the original on 13 August 2021. Retrieved 22 October 2020. "Cidades Irmãs de Belo Horizonte". portalbelohorizonte.com.br (in Portuguese). Belo Horizonte. Archived from the original on 15 August 2021. Retrieved 12 October 2020. "Care-i cel mai… înfrățit oraș din România? Care-i cu americanii, care-i cu rușii? Și care-i înfrățit cu Timișoara…". banatulazi.ro (in Romanian). Banatul Azi. 6 August 2016. Archived from the original on 21 December 2020. Retrieved 22 October 2020. "Listing of Twinning Cities". cityofportofspain.gov.tt. City of Port of Spain. Archived from the original on 22 October 2017. Retrieved 22 October 2020. Leithead, Alastair (21 August 2017). "The city that won't stop growing: How can Lagos cope with its spiralling population?". BBC News. Lagos at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Travel information from Wikivoyage Official website State Judiciary of Lagos