Historical affiliations Archbishop of Salzburg (1112–1555)  Habsburg Monarchy (1555–1804)  Austrian Empire (1804–1809) Illyrian Provinces (1809–1814; capital)  Austrian Empire (1814–1867)  Austria-Hungary (1867–1918)  State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs (1918)  Kingdom of Yugoslavia (1918–1941)  Kingdom of Italy (1941–1945; annexed) Nazi Germany (1943–1945; de facto)  SFR Yugoslavia (1945–1991)  Slovenia (1991–present; capital) Ljubljana (also known by other historical names) is the capital and largest city of Slovenia, located along a trade route between the northern Adriatic Sea and the Danube region, north of the country's largest marsh, inhabited since prehistoric times. It is the country's cultural, educational, economic, political and administrative center. During antiquity, a Roman city called Emona stood in the area. The city was first mentioned in the first half of the 12th century. It was the historical capital of Carniola, one of the Slovene-inhabited parts of the Habsburg monarchy. It was under Habsburg rule from the Middle Ages until the dissolution of the Austro-Hungarian Empire in 1918. After World War II, Ljubljana became the capital of the Socialist Republic of Slovenia, part of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. The city retained this status until Slovenia became independent in 1991 and Ljubljana became the capital of the newly formed state. The exact origin of the name Ljubljana is unclear. In medieval times, both the river and the town were also called Laibach (German: [ˈlaɪ̯bax] ) in German. This name was used within the region until 1918 and continues to be used in German. In Italian, the city is referred to as Lubiana, and in Latin, it is known as Labacum. The German name was first documented in 1144, and the Slovenian form appeared in records as early as 1146. The 10th-century work "Life of Gregentios" provides the Greek variant Λυπλιανές (Lyplianes) and situates it among the Avars in the 6th century. This account is influenced by an earlier northern Italian source written shortly after the conquest of 774. The connection between the Slovene and German names has posed a puzzle for scholars. In 2007, linguist Tijmen Pronk, an authority in comparative Indo-European linguistics and Slovene dialectology from the University of Leiden, provided strong support for the theory that the Slavic ljub- meaning "to love, like" was the most likely origin. He argued that the river's name likely stemmed from the settlement's name. Silvo Torkar, a linguist with expertise in Slovene names, put forth the idea that Ljubljana's name has its roots in "Ljubija," the original name of the Ljubljanica River. This can be traced back to the Old Slavic male name "Ljubovid," which translates to "the one with a lovely appearance." Torkar also asserted that the name "Laibach" is a combination of German and Slovene, sharing its origins with the same personal name. The city's symbol is the Ljubljana Dragon. It is depicted on the top of the tower of Ljubljana Castle in the Ljubljana coat of arms and on the Ljubljanica-crossing Dragon Bridge (Zmajski most). It represents power, courage, and greatness. Several explanations describe the origin of the Ljubljana Dragon. According to a Slavic myth, the slaying of a dragon releases the waters and ensures the fertility of the earth, and it is thought that the myth is tied to the Ljubljana Marsh, the expansive marshy area that periodically threatens Ljubljana with flooding. According to Greek legend, the Argonauts on their return home after having taken the Golden Fleece found a large lake surrounded by a marsh between the present-day towns of Vrhnika and Ljubljana. There Jason struck down a monster. This monster evolved into the dragon that today is present in the city coat of arms and flag. It is historically more believable that the dragon was adopted from Saint George, the patron of the Ljubljana Castle chapel built in the 15th century. In the legend of Saint George, the dragon represents the old ancestral paganism overcome by Christianity. According to another explanation, related to the second, the dragon was at first only a decoration above the city coat of arms. In the Baroque, it became part of the coat of arms, and in the 19th and especially the 20th century, it outstripped the tower and other elements in importance. Around 2000 BC, the Ljubljana Marsh was settled by people living in pile dwellings. Prehistoric pile dwellings and the oldest wooden wheel in the world are among the most notable archeological findings from the marshland. These lake-dwelling people survived through hunting, fishing and primitive agriculture. To get around the marshes, they used dugout canoes made by cutting out the inside of tree trunks. Their archaeological remains, nowadays in the Municipality of Ig, have been designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site since June 2011, in the common nomination of six Alpine states. Later, the area remained a transit point, for groups including the Illyrians, followed by a mixed nation of the Celts and the Illyrians called the Iapydes, and then in the 3rd century BC a Celtic tribe, the Taurisci. Around 50 BC, the Romans built a military encampment that later became a permanent settlement called Iulia Aemona. This entrenched fort was occupied by the Legio XV Apollinaris. In 452, it was destroyed by the Huns under Attila's orders, and later by the Ostrogoths and the Lombards. Emona housed 5,000 to 6,000 inhabitants and played an important role during battles. Its plastered brick houses, painted in different colours, were connected to a drainage system. In the 6th century, the ancestors of the Slovenes moved in. In the 9th century, they fell under Frankish domination, while experiencing frequent Magyar raids. Not much is known about the area during the settlement of Slavs in the period between the downfall of Emona and the Early Middle Ages. The parchment sheet Nomina defunctorum ("Names of the Dead"), most probably written in the second half of 1161, mentions the nobleman Rudolf of Tarcento, a lawyer of the Patriarchate of Aquileia, who had bestowed a canon with 20 farmsteads beside the castle of Ljubljana (castrum Leibach) to the Patriarchate. According to the historian Peter Štih's deduction, this happened between 1112 and 1125, the earliest mention of Ljubljana. The property changed hands repeatedly until the first half of the 12th century. The territory south of the Sava where Ljubljana developed, gradually became property of the Carinthian Dukes of the House of Sponheim. Urban settlement started in the second half of the 12th century. At around 1200, market rights were granted to Old Square (Stari trg), which at the time was one of Ljubljana's three original districts. The other two districts were an area called "Town" (Mesto), built around the predecessor of the present-day Ljubljana Cathedral at one side of the Ljubljanica River, and New Square (Novi trg) at the other side. The Franciscan Bridge, a predecessor of the present-day Triple Bridge, and the Butchers' Bridge connected the walled areas with wooden buildings. Ljubljana acquired the town privileges at some time between 1220 and 1243. Seven fires erupted during the Middle Ages. Artisans organised themselves into guilds. The Teutonic Knights, the Conventual Franciscans, and the Franciscans settled there. In 1256, when the Carinthian duke Ulrich III of Spanheim became lord of Carniola, the provincial capital was moved from Kamnik to Ljubljana. In the late 1270s, Ljubljana was conquered by King Ottokar II of Bohemia. In 1278, after Ottokar's defeat, it became—together with the rest of Carniola—property of Rudolph of Habsburg. It was administered by the Counts of Gorizia from 1279 until 1335, when it became the capital town of Carniola. Renamed Laibach, it was owned by the House of Habsburg until 1797. In 1327, the Ljubljana's "Jewish Quarter"—now only "Jewish Street" (Židovska ulica) remains—was established with a synagogue, and lasted until Emperor Maximilian I in 1515 and expelled the Jews from Ljubljana at the request of its citizens, for which he demanded a certain payment from the town. In 1382, in front of St. Bartholomew's Church in Šiška, at the time a nearby village, now part of Ljubljana, a peace treaty was signed between the Republic of Venice and Leopold III of Habsburg. In the 15th century, Ljubljana became recognised for its art, particularly painting and sculpture. The Latin Catholic Archdiocese of Ljubljana was established in 1461 and the Church of St. Nicholas became the diocesan cathedral. After the 1511 Idrija earthquake, the city was rebuilt in the Renaissance style and a new wall was built around it. Wooden buildings were forbidden after a large fire at New Square in 1524. In the 16th century, the population of Ljubljana numbered 5,000, 70% of whom spoke Slovene as their first language, with most of the rest using German. The first secondary school, public library and printing house opened in Ljubljana. Ljubljana became an important educational centre. From 1529, Ljubljana had an active Slovene Protestant community. They were expelled in 1598, marking the beginning of the Counter-Reformation. Catholic Bishop Thomas Chrön ordered the public burning of eight cartloads of Protestant books. In 1597, the Jesuits arrived, followed in 1606 by the Capuchins, seeking to eradicate Protestantism. Only 5% of all the residents of Ljubljana at the time were Catholic, but eventually they re-Catholicized the town. The Jesuits staged the first theatre productions, fostered the development of Baroque music, and established Catholic schools. In the middle and the second half of the 17th century, foreign architects built and renovated monasteries, churches, and palaces and introduced Baroque architecture. In 1702, the Ursulines settled in the town, and the following year they opened the first public school for girls in the Slovene Lands. Some years later, the construction of the Ursuline Church of the Holy Trinity started. In 1779, St. Christopher's Cemetery replaced the cemetery at St. Peter's Church as Ljubljana's main cemetery. From 1809 to 1813, during the "Napoleonic interlude", Ljubljana (as Laybach) was the capital of the Illyrian Provinces. In 1813, the city returned to Austria and from 1815 to 1849 was the administrative centre of the Kingdom of Illyria in the Austrian Empire. In 1821, it hosted the Congress of Laibach, which fixed European political borders for that period. The first train arrived in 1849 from Vienna and in 1857 the line extended to Trieste. In 1895 Ljubljana, then a city of 31,000, suffered a serious earthquake measuring 6.1 Richter and 8–9 degrees MCS. Some 10% of its 1,400 buildings were destroyed, although casualties were light. During the subsequent reconstruction, some districts were rebuilt in the Vienna Secession style. Public electric lighting arrived in 1898. The rebuilding period between 1896 and 1910 is referred to as the "revival of Ljubljana" because of architectural changes that defined the city and for reform of urban administration, health, education and tourism. The rebuilding and quick modernisation of the city were led by the mayor Ivan Hribar. In 1918, following the dissolution of Austria-Hungary, the region joined the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes. In 1929, Ljubljana became the capital of the Drava Banovina, a Yugoslav province. In 1941, during World War II, Fascist Italy occupied the city, and then on 3 May 1941 made Lubiana the capital of Italy's Province of Ljubljana with former Yugoslav general Leon Rupnik as mayor. After the Italian capitulation, Nazi Germany with SS-general Erwin Rösener and Friedrich Rainer took control in 1943, but formally the city remained the capital of an Italian province until 9 May 1945. In Ljubljana, the Axis forces established strongholds and command centres of Quisling organisations, the Anti-Communist Volunteer Militia under Italy and the Home Guard under German control. Starting in February 1942, the city was surrounded by barbed wire, later fortified by bunkers, to prevent co-operation between the resistance movements that operated inside and outside the fence. Since 1985, the commemorative trail has ringed the city where this iron fence once stood. Postwar reprisals filled mass graves. After World War II, Ljubljana became the capital of the Socialist Republic of Slovenia, part of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. It retained this status until Slovene independence in 1991. Ljubljana is the capital of independent Slovenia, which joined the European Union in 2004. The city covers 163.8 km2 (63.2 sq mi). It is situated in the Ljubljana Basin in Central Slovenia, between the Alps and the Karst. Ljubljana is located some 320 km (200 mi) south of Munich, 477 km (296 mi) east of Zürich, 250 km (160 mi) east of Venice, 350 km (220 mi) southwest of Vienna, 124 km (77 mi) west of Zagreb and 400 km (250 mi) southwest of Budapest. Ljubljana has grown considerably since the 1970s, mainly by merging with nearby settlements. The city stretches out on an alluvial plain dating to the Quaternary era. The mountainous regions nearby are older, dating from the Mesozoic (Triassic) or Paleozoic. Earthquakes have repeatedly devastated Ljubljana, notably in 1511 and 1895. Ljubljana has an elevation of 295 m (968 ft). The city centre, located along the river, sits at 298 m (978 ft). Ljubljana Castle, which sits atop Castle Hill (Grajski grič) south of the city centre, has an elevation of 366 m (1,201 ft). The highest point of the city, called Grmada, reaches 676 m (2,218 ft), 3 m (9.8 ft) more than the nearby Mount Saint Mary (Šmarna gora) peak, a popular hiking destination. These are located in the northern part of the city. The main watercourses in Ljubljana are the Ljubljanica, the Sava, the Gradaščica, the Mali Graben, the Iška and the Iščica rivers. From the Trnovo District to the Moste District, around Castle Hill, the Ljubljanica partly flows through the Gruber Canal, built according to plans by Gabriel Gruber from 1772 until 1780. Next to the eastern border, the rivers Ljubljanica, Sava, and Kamnik Bistrica flow together. The confluence is the lowest point of Ljubljana, with an elevation of 261 m (856 ft). Through its history, Ljubljana has been struck by floods. The latest was in 2010. Southern and western parts of the city are more flood-endangered than northern parts. The Gruber Canal has partly diminished the danger of floods in the Ljubljana Marsh, the largest marsh in Slovenia, south of the city. The two major ponds in Ljubljana are Koseze Pond in the Šiška District and Tivoli Pond in the southern part of Tivoli City Park. Koseze Pond has rare plant and animal species and is a place of meeting and recreation. Tivoli Pond is a shallow pond with a small volume that was originally used for boating and ice skating, but is now used for fishing. Ljubljana's climate is oceanic (Köppen climate classification: Cfb), bordering on a humid subtropical climate (Köppen climate classification: Cfa), with continental characteristics such as warm summers and moderately cold winters. July and August are the warmest months with daily high temperatures generally between 25 and 30 °C (77 and 86 °F), and January is the coldest month with temperatures mostly around 0 °C (32 °F). The city experiences 90 days of frost per year, and 11 days with temperatures above 30 °C (86 °F). Precipitation is relatively evenly distributed throughout the seasons, although winter and spring tend to be somewhat drier than summer and autumn. Yearly precipitation is about 1,400 mm (55 in), making Ljubljana one of the wettest European capitals. Thunderstorms are common from May to September and can occasionally be heavy. Snow is common from December to February; on average, snow cover is recorded for 48 days a year. The city is known for its fog, appearing on average on 64 days per year, mostly in autumn and winter, and can be particularly persistent in conditions of temperature inversion. The city's architecture is a mix of styles. Large buildings have appeared around the city's edges, while Ljubljana's historic centre remains intact. Some of the oldest architecture dates to the Roman period, while Ljubljana's downtown got its outline in the Middle Ages. After the 1511 earthquake, it was rebuilt in the Baroque style following Italian, particularly Venetian, models. After the earthquake in 1895, it was again rebuilt, this time in the Vienna Secession style, which is juxtaposed against the earlier Baroque style buildings that remain. Large sectors built in the inter-war period often include a personal touch by the architects Jože Plečnik and Ivan Vurnik. In the second half of the 20th century, parts of Ljubljana were redesigned by Edvard Ravnikar. The central square in Ljubljana is Prešeren Square (Prešernov trg) home to the Franciscan Church of the Annunciation (Frančiškanska cerkev). Built between 1646 and 1660 (the bell towers followed), it replaced an older Gothic church. It offers an early-Baroque basilica with one nave and two rows of lateral chapels. The Baroque main altar was executed by sculptor Italian Francesco Robba. Much of the original frescos were ruined by ceiling cracks caused by the Ljubljana earthquake in 1895. The new frescos were painted by the Slovene impressionist painter Matej Sternen. Ljubljana Castle (Ljubljanski grad) is a medieval castle with Romanesque, Gothic, and Renaissance architectural elements, located on the summit of Castle Hill, which dominates the city centre. The area surrounding the castle has been continuously inhabited since 1200 BC. The castle was built in the 12th century and was a residence of the Margraves, later the Dukes of Carniola. Its Viewing Tower dates to 1848; it was manned by a guard whose duty it was to fire cannons announcing fire or important visitors or events, a function the castle still holds. Cultural events and weddings also take place there. In 2006, a funicular linked the city centre to the castle. Town Hall (Mestna hiša, Magistrat), located at Town Square, is the seat of city government. The original, Gothic building was completed in 1484. Between 1717 and 1719, the building underwent a Baroque renovation with a Venetian inspiration by architect Gregor Maček Sr. Near Town Hall, at Town Square, stands a replica of the Baroque Robba Fountain. The original was moved into the National Gallery in 2006. The fountain is decorated with an obelisk; at the foot are three figures in white marble symbolising the three chief rivers of Carniola. It is work of Francesco Robba, who designed other Baroque statues there. Ljubljana Cathedral (ljubljanska stolnica), or St. Nicholas's Cathedral (stolnica sv. Nikolaja), serves the Archdiocese of Ljubljana. Easily identifiable due to its green dome and twin towers, it is located at Cyril and Methodius Square (Ciril-Metodov trg, named for Saints Cyril and Methodius). The Diocese was set up in 1461. Between 1701 and 1706, Jesuit architect Andrea Pozzo designed the Baroque church with two side chapels shaped in the form of a Latin cross. The dome was built in the centre in 1841. The interior is decorated with Baroque frescos painted by Giulio Quaglio between 1703–1706 and 1721–1723. Nebotičnik (pronounced [nɛbɔtiːtʃniːk], "Skyscraper") is a thirteen-story building that rises to a height of 70.35 m (231 ft). It combines elements of Neoclassical and Art-Deco architecture. Predominantly a place of business, Nebotičnik is home to shops on the ground floor and first story, and offices are located on floors two to five. The sixth to ninth floors are private residences. The top three floors host a café, bar and observation deck. It was designed by Slovenian architect Vladimir Šubic. The building opened on 21 February 1933. It was once the tallest residential building in Europe. Prešeren Square in downtown Ljubljana Ljubljanica River, downtown Ljubljana Town Hall Robba Fountain at Town Square Urbanc House at Prešeren Square Slovenian Philharmonic Building Nebotičnik Kazina Palace Visitation of Mary Church Tivoli City Park (Mestni park Tivoli) is the largest park. It was designed in 1813 by French engineer Jean Blanchard and now covers approximately 5 km2 (1.9 sq mi). The park was laid out during the French imperial administration of Ljubljana in 1813 and named after the Parisian Jardins de Tivoli. Between 1921 and 1939, it was renovated by Slovene architect Jože Plečnik, who unveiled his statue of Napoleon in 1929 in Republic Square and designed a broad central promenade, called the Jakopič Promenade (Jakopičevo sprehajališče) after the leading Slovene impressionist painter Rihard Jakopič. Within the park, there are trees, flower gardens, several statues, and fountains. Several notable buildings stand in the park, among them Tivoli Castle, the National Museum of Contemporary History and the Tivoli Sports Hall. Tivoli–Rožnik Hill–Šiška Hill Landscape Park is located in the western part of the city. The Ljubljana Botanical Garden (Ljubljanski botanični vrt) covers 2.40 ha (5.9 acres) next to the junction of the Gruber Canal and the Ljubljanica, south of the Old Town. It is the central Slovenian botanical garden and the oldest cultural, scientific, and educational organisation in the country. It started operating under the leadership of Franc Hladnik in 1810. Of over 4,500 plant species and subspecies, roughly a third is endemic to Slovenia, whereas the rest originate from other European places and other continents. The institution is a member of the international network Botanic Gardens Conservation International and cooperates with more than 270 botanical gardens all across the world. In 2014, Ljubljana won the European Green Capital Award for 2016 for their environmental achievements. Ljubljana's best-known bridges, listed from northern to southern ones, include the Dragon Bridge (Zmajski most), the Butchers' Bridge (Mesarski most), the Triple Bridge (Tromostovje), the Fish Footbridge (Slovene: Ribja brv), the Cobblers' Bridge (Slovene: Šuštarski most), the Hradecky Bridge (Slovene: Hradeckega most), and the Trnovo Bridge (Trnovski most). The last mentioned crosses the Gradaščica, whereas all other bridges cross the Ljubljanica River. The 1901 Dragon Bridge, decorated with dragon statues on pedestals at four corners of the bridge has become a symbol of the city and is regarded as one of the most beautiful examples of a bridge made in Vienna Secession style. It has a span of 33.34 m (109 ft 5 in) and its arch was at the time the third largest in Europe. It is protected as a technical monument. Decorated with mythological bronze sculptures, created by Jakov Brdar, from Ancient Greek mythology and Biblical stories, the Butchers' Bridge connects the Ljubljana Open Market area and the restaurants-filled Petkovšek Embankment (Petkovškovo nabrežje). It is also known as the love padlocks-decorated bridge in Ljubljana. The Triple Bridge is decorated with stone balusters and stone lamps on all of the three bridges and leads to the terraces looking on the river and poplar trees. It occupies a central point on the east–west axis, connecting the Tivoli City Park with Rožnik Hill, on one side, and the Ljubljana Castle on the other, and the north–south axis through the city, represented by the river. It was enlarged in order to prevent the historically single bridge from being a bottleneck by adding two side pedestrian bridges to the middle one. The Fish Footbridge offers a view of the neighbouring Triple Bridge to the north and the Cobbler's Bridge to the South. It is a transparent glass-made bridge, illuminated at night by in-built LEDs. From 1991 to 2014 the bridge was a wooden one and decorated with flowers, while since its reconstruction in 2014, it is made of glass. It was planned already in 1895 by Max Fabiani to build a bridge on the location, in 1913 Alfred Keller planned a staircase, later Jože Plečnik incorporated both into his own plans which, however, were not realised. The 1930 'Cobblers' Bridge' (Šuštarski, from German Schuster – Shoemaker) is another Plečnik's creation, connecting two major areas of medieval Ljubljana. It is decorated by two kinds of pillars, the Corinthian pillars which delineate the shape of the bridge itself and the Ionic pillars as lamp-bearers. The Trnovo Bridge is the most prominent object of Plečnik's renovation of the banks of the Gradaščica. It is located in the front of the Trnovo Church to the south of the city centre. It connects the neighbourhoods of Krakovo and Trnovo, the oldest Ljubljana suburbs, known for their market gardens and cultural events. It was built between 1929 and 1932. It is distinguished by its width and two rows of birches that it bears, because it was meant to serve as a public space in front of the church. Each corner of the bridge is capped with a small pyramid, a signature motif of Plečnik's, whereas the mid-span features a pair of Art-Deco male sculptures. There is also a statue of Saint John the Baptist on the bridge, the patron of the Trnovo Church. It was designed by Nikolaj Pirnat. The Hradecky Bridge is one of the first hinged bridges in the world, the first and the only preserved cast iron bridge in Slovenia, and one of its most highly valued technical achievements. It has been situated on an extension of Hren Street (Hrenova ulica), between the Krakovo Embankment (Krakovski nasip) and the Gruden Embankment (Grudnovo nabrežje), connecting the Trnovo District and the Prule neighbourhood in the Center District. The Hradecky Bridge was manufactured according to the plans of the senior engineer Johann Hermann from Vienna in the Auersperg iron foundry in Dvor near Žužemberk, and installed in Ljubljana in 1867, at the location of today's Cobblers' Bridge. Having already existed in the 18th century, Ljubljana's central square, Prešeren Square's modern appearance has developed since the end of the 19th century. After the 1895 earthquake, Max Fabiani designed the square as the hub of four streets and four banks, and in the 1980s Edvard Ravnikar proposed the circular design and the granite block pavement. A statue of the Slovene national poet France Prešeren with a muse stands in the middle of the square. The Prešeren Monument was created by Ivan Zajec in 1905, whereas the pedestal was designed by Max Fabiani. The square and surroundings have been closed to traffic since 1 September 2007. Only a tourist train leaves Prešeren Square every day, transporting tourists to Ljubljana Castle. Republic Square, originally named Revolution Square, is the largest square in Ljubljana. It was designed in the second half of the 20th century by Edvard Ravnikar. On 26 June 1991, the independence of Slovenia was declared here. The National Assembly Building stands at its northern side, and Cankar Hall, the largest Slovenian cultural and congress centre, at the southern side. At its eastern side stands the two-storey building of Maximarket, also the work of Ravnikar. It houses one of the oldest department stores in Ljubljana and a cafe, which is a popular meeting place and a place for political talks and negotiations. Congress Square (Kongresni trg) is one of the important centres of the city. It was built in 1821 for ceremonial purposes such as Congress of Ljubljana after which it was named. Since then it has been a centre for political ceremonies, demonstrations, and protests, such as the ceremony for the creation of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia, ceremony of the liberation of Belgrade, and protests against Yugoslav authority in 1988. The square also houses several important buildings, such as the University of Ljubljana Palace, Philharmonic Hall, Ursuline Church of the Holy Trinity, and the Slovene Society Building. Star Park (Park Zvezda) is located in the centre of the square. In 2010 and 2011, the square was renovated and is now mostly closed to road traffic on ground area, however, there are five floors for commercial purposes and a parking lot located underground. Čop Street (Čopova ulica) is a major thoroughfare in the centre of Ljubljana. The street is named after Matija Čop, an early 19th-century literary figure and close friend of the Slovene Romantic poet France Prešeren. It leads from the Main Post Office (Glavna pošta) at Slovene Street (Slovenska cesta) downward to Prešeren Square and is lined with bars and stores, including the oldest McDonald's restaurant in Slovenia. It is a pedestrian zone and regarded as the capital's central promenade. The Ljubljana accent and/or dialect (Slovene: ljubljanščina [luːblɑːŋʃnɑː] ) is considered a border dialect, since Ljubljana is situated where the Upper dialect and Lower Carniolan dialect group meet. Historically, the Ljubljana dialect in the past displayed features more similar with the Lower Carniolan dialect group, but it gradually grew closer to the Upper dialect group, as a direct consequence of mass migration from Upper Carniola into Ljubljana in the 19th and 20th century. Ljubljana as a city grew mostly to the north, and gradually incorporated many villages that were historically part of Upper Carniola and so its dialect shifted away and closer to the Upper dialects. The Ljubljana dialect has also been used as a literary means in novels, such as in the novel Nekdo drug by Branko Gradišnik, or in poems, such as Pika Nogavička (Slovene for Pippi Longstocking) by Andrej Rozman - Roza. The central position of Ljubljana and its dialect had crucial impact on the development of the Slovenian language. It was the speech of 16th century Ljubljana that Primož Trubar a Slovenian Protestant Reformer took as a foundation of what later became standard Slovenian language, with a small addition of his native speech, the Lower Carniolan dialect. While in Ljubljana, he lived in a house, on today's Ribji trg, in the oldest part of the city. Living in Ljubljana had a profound impact on his work; he considered Ljubljana the capital of all Slovenes, not only because of its central position in the heart of the Slovene lands, but also because it always had an essentially Slovene character. Most of its inhabitants spoke Slovene as their mother tongue, unlike other cites in today's Slovenia. It is estimated that in Trubar's time around 70% of Ljubljana's 4000 inhabitants attended mass in Slovene. Trubar considered Ljubljana's speech most suitable, since it sounded much more noble, than his own simple dialect of his hometown Rašica. Trubar's choice was later adopted also by other Protestant writers in the 16th century, and ultimately led to a formation of a more standard language. Ljubljana appears in the 2005 The Historian, written by Elisabeth Kostova, and is called by its Roman name (Emona). Ljubljana is also the setting of Paulo Coelho's 1998 novel Veronika Decides to Die. During 2010, Ljubljana was designated as the World Book Capital by UNESCO. Each year, over 10,000 cultural events take place in the city, including ten international theatre, music, and art festivals. The Ljubljana Festival is one of the two oldest festivals in former Yugoslavia (the Dubrovnik Summer Festival was established in 1950, and the Ljubljana Festival one in 1953). Guests have included Dubravka Tomšič, Marjana Lipovšek, Tomaž Pandur, Katia Ricciarelli, Grace Bumbry, Yehudi Menuhin, Mstislav Rostropovich, José Carreras, Slide Hampton, Zubin Mehta, Vadim Repin, Valery Gergiev, Sir Andrew Davis, Danjulo Ishizaka, Midori (violinist), Yuri Bashmet, Ennio Morricone, and Manhattan Transfer. Orchestras have included the New York Philharmonic, Israel Philharmonic, Royal Philharmonic Orchestra, Orchestras of the Bolshoi Theatre from Moscow, La Scala from Milan, and Mariinsky Theatre from Saint Petersburg. In recent years there have been 80 kinds of events and some 80,000 visitors from Slovenia and abroad.[citation needed] Other cultural venues include Križanke, Cankar Hall and the Exhibition and Convention Centre. During Book Week, starting each year on World Book Day, events and book sales take place at Congress Square. A flea market is held every Sunday in the old city. On the evening of International Workers' Day, a celebration with a bonfire takes place on Rožnik Hill. Ljubljana has numerous art galleries and museums. The first purpose-built art gallery in Ljubljana was the Jakopič Pavilion, which was in the first half of the 20th century the central exhibition venue of Slovene artists. In the early 1960s, it was succeeded by Ljubljana City Art Gallery, which has presented a number of modern Slovene and foreign artists. In 2010, there were 14 museums and 56 art galleries in Ljubljana. There is for example an architecture museum, a railway museum, a school museum, a sports museum, a museum of modern art, a museum of contemporary art, a brewery museum, the Slovenian Museum of Natural History and the Slovene Ethnographic Museum. The National Gallery (Narodna galerija), founded in 1918, and the Museum of Modern Art (Moderna galerija) exhibit the most influential Slovenian artists. In 2006, the museums received 264,470 visitors, the galleries 403,890 and the theatres 396,440. The Metelkova Museum of Contemporary Art (Muzej sodobne umetnosti Metelkova), opened in 2011, hosts simultaneous exhibitions, a research library, archives, and a bookshop. Cankar Hall is the largest Slovenian cultural and congress center with multiple halls and a large foyer in which art film festivals, artistic performances, book fairs, and other cultural events are held. The cinema in Ljubljana appeared for the first time at the turn of the 20th century, and quickly gained popularity among the residents. After World War II, the Cinema Company Ljubljana, later named Ljubljana Cinematographers, was established and managed a number of already functioning movie theatres in Ljubljana, including the only Yugoslav children's theatre. Cinema festivals took place in the 1960s, and a cinematheque opened its doors in 1963. With the advent of television, video, and recently the Internet, most cinema theatres in Ljubljana closed, and the cinema mainly moved to Kolosej, a multiplex in the BTC City. It features twelve screens, including an IMAX 3D screen. The remaining theatres are Kino Komuna, Kinodvor, where art movies are accompanied by events, and the Slovenian Cinematheque. The Slovenian Cinematheque hosts the international Ljubljana LGBT Film Festival which showcases LGBT-themed films. Founded in 1984, it is the oldest film festival of its sort in Europe (with oldest ex SFRY LGBT+ march in Ljubljana Pride). The Slovenian Philharmonics is the central music institution in Ljubljana and Slovenia. It holds classical music concerts of domestic and foreign performers as well as educates youth. It was established in 1701 as part of Academia operosorum Labacensis and is among the oldest such institutions in Europe. The Slovene National Opera and Ballet Theatre also resides in Ljubljana, presenting a wide variety of domestic and foreign, modern and classic, opera, ballet and concert works. It serves as the national opera and ballet house. Music festivals are held in Ljubljana, chiefly in European classical music and jazz, for instance the Ljubljana Summer Festival (Ljubljanski poletni festival), and Trnfest. In addition to the main houses, with the SNT Drama Ljubljana as the most important among them, a number of small producers are active in Ljubljana, involved primarily in physical theatre (e.g. Betontanc), street theatre (e.g. Ana Monró Theatre), theatresports championship Impro League, and improvisational theatre (e.g. IGLU Theatre). A popular form is puppetry, mainly performed in the Ljubljana Puppet Theatre. Theatre has a rich tradition in Ljubljana, starting with the 1867 first ever Slovene-language drama performance. The modern dance was presented in Ljubljana for the first time at the end of the 19th century and developed rapidly since the end of the 1920s. Since the 1930s when in Ljubljana was founded a Mary Wigman dance school, the first one for modern dance in Slovenia, the field has been intimately linked to the development in Europe and the United States. Ljubljana Dance Theatre is today the only venue in Ljubljana dedicated to contemporary dance. Despite this, there's a vivid happening in the field. Several folk dance groups are active in Ljubljana. In July 2015, the 56th Ljubljana Jazz Festival was held. A participant event in the European Jazz Network, the festival took place over four days and included 19 concerts with artists from 19 countries, including a celebration of the 75th birthday of James "Blood" Ulmer. In the 1980s with the emergence of subcultures in Ljubljana, an alternative culture began to develop in Ljubljana organised around two student organisations. This caused an influx of young people to the city centre, caused political and social changes, and led to the establishment of alternative art centres. Metelkova and Rog A Ljubljana equivalent of Copenhagen's Freetown Christiania, a self-proclaimed autonomous Metelkova neighbourhood, was set up in a former Austro-Hungarian barracks that was built in 1882. In 1993, the seven buildings and 12,500 square metres (135,000 sq ft) of space were turned into art galleries, artist studios, and seven nightclubs, including two LGBTQ+ venues, playing host to music from hardcore to jazz to dub to techno. Celica Hostel is adjacent to Metelkova with rooms artistically decorated by Metelkova artists. A new part of the Museum of Modern Art is the nearby Museum of Contemporary Art. Another alternative culture centre is located in the former Rog factory. Both Metelkova and the Rog factory complex are near the city centre. Šiška Cultural Quarter Šiška Cultural Quarter hosts art groups and cultural organisations dedicated to contemporary and avant-garde arts. Kino Šiška Centre for Urban Culture is there, a venue offering concerts of indie, punk, and rock bands as well as exhibitions take place. The Museum of Transitory Art (MoTA) is a museum without a permanent collection or a fixed space. Its programs are realised in temporary physical and virtual spaces dedicated to advancing the research, production and presentation of transitory, experimental, and live art forms. Yearly MoTA organises the Sonica Festival. Ljudmila (since 1994), which strives to connect research practices, technologies, science, and art. Tension between German and Slovene residents dominated the development of sport in Ljubljana in the 19th century. The first sports club in Ljubljana was the South Sokol Gymnastic Club (Gimnastično društvo Južni Sokol), established in 1863 and succeeded in 1868 by the Ljubljana Sokol (Ljubljanski Sokol). It was the parent club of all Slovene Sokol clubs as well as an encouragement for the establishment of the Croatian Sokol club in Zagreb. Members were also active in culture and politics, striving for greater integration of the Slovenes from different Crown lands of Austria-Hungary and for their cultural, political, and economic independence. In 1885, German residents established the first sports club in the territory of nowadays Slovenia, Der Laibacher Byciklistischer Club (Ljubljana Cycling Club). In 1887, Slovene cyclists established the Slovene Cyclists Club (Slovenski biciklistični klub). In 1893 followed the first Slovene Alpine club, named Slovene Alpine Club (Slovensko planinsko društvo), later succeeded by the Alpine Association of Slovenia (Planinska zveza Slovenije). Several of its branches operate in Ljubljana, the largest of them being the Ljubljana Matica Alpine Club (Planinsko društvo Ljubljana-Matica). In 1900, the sports club Laibacher Sportverein (English: Ljubljana Sports Club) was established by the city's German residents and functioned until 1909. In 1906, Slovenes organised themselves in its Slovene counterpart, the Ljubljana Sports Club (Ljubljanski športni klub). Its members were primarily interested in rowing, but also swimming and football. In 1911, the first Slovenian football club, Ilirija, started operating in the city. Winter sports already started to develop in the area of the nowadays Ljubljana before World War II. In 1929, the first ice hockey club in Slovenia (then Yugoslavia), SK Ilirija, was established. Nowadays, the city's football teams which play in the Slovenian PrvaLiga are NK Olimpija Ljubljana and NK Bravo. ND Ilirija 1911 currently competes in Slovenian Second League. Ljubljana's ice hockey clubs are HK Slavija and HK Olimpija. They both compete in the Slovenian Hockey League. The basketball teams are KD Slovan, KD Ilirija and KK Cedevita Olimpija. The latter, which has a green dragon as its mascot, hosts its matches at the 12,480-seat Arena Stožice. Ježica is women's basketball that competes in Slovenian League. Handball is popular in the female section. RK Krim is one of the best women's handball teams in Europe. They won the EHF Champions League twice, in 2001 and 2003. RD Slovan is male handball club from Ljubljana that currently competes in Slovenian First League. AMTK Ljubljana is the most successful speedway club in Slovenia. The Ljubljana Sports Club has been succeeded by the Livada Canoe and Kayak Club. Each year since 1957, on 8–10 May, the recreational Walk Along the Wire has taken place to mark the liberation of Ljubljana on 9 May 1945. At the same occasion, a triples competition is run on the trail, and a few days later, a student-run from Prešeren Square to Ljubljana Castle is held. The last Sunday in October, the Ljubljana Marathon and a few minor competition runs take place on the city streets. The event attracts several thousand runners each year. The Stožice Stadium, opened in August 2010 and located in Stožice Sports Park in the Bežigrad District, is the biggest football stadium in the country and the home of the NK Olimpija Ljubljana. It is one of the two main venues of the Slovenia national football team. The park also has an indoor arena, used for indoor sports such as basketball, handball and volleyball and is the home venue of KK Olimpija, RK Krim and ACH Volley Bled among others. Besides football, the stadium is designed to host cultural events as well. Another stadium in the Bežigrad district, Bežigrad Stadium, is closed since 2008 and is deteriorating. It was built according to the plans of Jože Plečnik and was the home of the NK Olimpija Ljubljana, dissolved in 2004. Joc Pečečnik, a Slovenian multimillionaire, plans to renovate it. Šiška Sports Park is located in Spodnja Šiška, part of the Šiška District. It has a football stadium with five courts, an athletic hall, outdoor athletic areas, tennis courts, a Boules court, and a sand volleyball court. The majority of competitions are in athletics. Another sports park in Spodnja Šiška is Ilirija Sports Park, known primarily for its stadium with a speedway track. At the northern end of Tivoli Park stands the Ilirija Swimming Pool Complex, which was built as part of a swimming and athletics venue following plans by Bloudek in the 1930s and has been nearly abandoned since then, but there are plans to renovate it. A number of sport venues are located in Tivoli Park. An outdoor swimming pool in Tivoli, constructed by Bloudek in 1929, was the first Olympic-size swimming pool in Yugoslavia. The Tivoli Recreational Centre in Tivoli is Ljubljana's largest recreational centre and has three swimming pools, saunas, a Boules court, a health club, and other facilities. There are two skating rinks, a basketball court, a winter ice rink, and ten tennis courts in its outdoor area. The Tivoli Hall consists of two halls. The smaller one accepts 4,050 spectators and is used for basketball matches. The larger one can accommodate 6,000 spectators and is primarily used for hockey, but also for basketball matches. The halls are also used for concerts and other cultural events. The Slovenian Olympic Committee has its office in the building. The Tacen Whitewater Course, located on a course on the Sava, 8 km (5 mi) northwest of the city centre, hosts a major international canoe/kayak slalom competition almost every year, examples being the ICF Canoe Slalom World Championships in 1955, 1991, and 2010. Since the 1940s, a ski slope has been in use in Gunclje, in the northwestern part of the city. It is 600 m (2,000 ft) long and has two ski lifts, its maximum incline is 60° and the difference in height from the top to the bottom is 155 m (509 ft). Five ski jumping hills stand near the ski slope. Several Slovenian Olympic and World Cup medalists trained and competed there. In addition, the Arena Triglav complex of six jumping hills is located in the Šiška District. A ski jumping hill, built in 1954 to plans by Stanko Bloudek, was located in Šiška near Vodnik Street (Vodnikova cesta) until 1976. International competitions for the Kongsberg Cup were held there, attended by thousands of spectators. The ice rinks in Ljubljana include Koseze Pond and Tivoli Hall. In addition, in the 19th century and the early 20th century, Tivoli Pond and a marshy meadow in Trnovo, named Kern, were used for ice skating. Industry is the most important employer, notably in the pharmaceuticals, petrochemicals and food processing. Other fields include banking, finance, transport, construction, skilled trades and services and tourism. The public sector provides jobs in education, culture, health care and local administration. The Ljubljana Stock Exchange (Ljubljanska borza), purchased in 2008 by the Vienna Stock Exchange and later by the Zagreb Stock Exchange, deals with large Slovenian companies. Some of these have their headquarters in the capital: for example, the retail chain Mercator, the oil company Petrol d.d. and the telecommunications concern Telekom Slovenije. Over 15,000 enterprises operate in the city, most of them in the tertiary sector. Numerous companies and over 450 shops are located in the BTC City, the largest business, shopping, recreational, entertainment and cultural centre in Slovenia. It is visited each year by 21 million people. It occupies an area of 475,000 m2 (5,110,000 sq ft) in the Moste District in the eastern part of Ljubljana. About 74% of Ljubljana households use district heating from the Ljubljana Power Station. The city of Ljubljana is governed by the City Municipality of Ljubljana (Slovene: Mestna občina Ljubljana; MOL), which is led by the city council. The president of the city council is called the mayor. Members of the city council and the mayor are elected in the local election, held every four years. Among other roles, the city council drafts the municipal budget, and is assisted by various boards active in the fields of health, sports, finances, education, environmental protection and tourism. The municipality is subdivided into 17 districts represented by district councils. They work with the municipality council to make known residents' suggestions and prepare activities in their territories. Between 2002 and 2006, Danica Simšič was mayor of the municipality. Since the municipal elections of 22 October 2006 until his confirmation as a deputy in the National Assembly of Slovenian in December 2011, Zoran Janković, previously the managing director of the Mercator retail chain, was the mayor of Ljubljana. In 2006, he won 62.99% of the popular vote. On 10 October 2010, Janković was re-elected for another four-year term with 64.79% of the vote. From 2006 until October 2010, the majority on the city council (the Zoran Janković List) held 23 of 45 seats. On 10 October 2010, Janković's list won 25 out of 45 seats in the city council. From December 2011 onwards, when Janković's list won the early parliamentary election, the deputy mayor Aleš Čerin was decided by him to lead the municipality. Čerin did not hold the post of mayor. After Janković had failed to be elected as the Prime Minister in the National Assembly, he participated at the mayoral by-election on 25 March 2012 and was elected for the third time with 61% of the vote. He retook the leadership of the city council on 11 April 2012. Public order in Ljubljana is enforced by the Ljubljana Police Directorate (Policijska uprava Ljubljana). There are five areal police stations and four sectoral police stations in Ljubljana. Public order and municipal traffic regulations are also supervised by the city traffic wardens (Mestno redarstvo). Ljubljana has a quiet and secure reputation. In 1869, Ljubljana had about 22,600 inhabitants, a figure that grew to almost 60,000 by 1931. As of the 2022 census, Ljubljana had a population of 293,218 in the city proper. At the 2002 census, 39% of Ljubljana inhabitants were Catholic; 30% had no religion, an unknown religion or did not reply; 19% atheist; 6% Eastern Orthodox; 5% Muslim; and the remaining 0.7% Protestant or another religion. Approximately 91% of the population speaks Slovene as their primary native language. The second most-spoken language is Bosnian, with Serbo-Croatian being the third most-spoken language. In Ljubljana today there are over 50 public elementary schools with over 20,000 pupils. This also includes an international elementary school for foreign pupils. There are two private elementary schools: a Waldorf elementary school and a Catholic elementary school. In addition, there are several elementary music schools. Historically the first school in Ljubljana belonged to Teutonic Knights and was established in the 13th century. It originally accepted only boys; girls were accepted from the beginning of the 16th century. Parochial schools are attested in the 13th century, at St. Peter's Church and at Saint Nicholas's Church, the later Ljubljana Cathedral. Since 1291, there were also trade-oriented private schools in Ljubljana. At the beginning of the 17th century, there were six schools in Ljubljana and later three. A girls' school was established by Poor Clares, followed in 1703 by the Ursulines. Their school was for about 170 years the only public girls' school in Carniola. These schools were mainly private or established by the city. In 1775, the Austrian Empress Maria Theresa proclaimed elementary education obligatory and Ljubljana got its normal school, intended as a learning place for teachers. In 1805, the first state music school was established in Ljubljana. In the time of Illyrian Provinces, "école primaire", a unified four-year elementary school program with a greater emphasis on Slovene, was introduced. The first public schools, unrelated to religious education, appeared in 1868. In Ljubljana, there are ten public and three private grammar schools. The public schools are divided into general gymnasiums and classical gymnasiums, the latter offering Latin and Greek as foreign languages. Some general schools offer internationally oriented European departments, and some offer sports departments, allowing students to more easily adjust their sport and school obligations. All state schools are free, but the number of students they can accept is limited. The private secondary schools include a Catholic grammar school and a Waldorf grammar school. There are also professional grammar schools in Ljubljana, offering economical, technical, or artistic subjects (visual arts, music). All grammar schools last four years and conclude with the matura exam. Historically, upon a proposal by Primož Trubar, the Carniolan Estates' School (1563–1598) was established in 1563 in the period of Slovene Reformation. Its teaching languages were mainly Latin and Greek, but also German and Slovene, and it was open for both sexes and all social strata. In 1597, Jesuits established the Jesuit College (1597–1773), intended to transmit general education. In 1773, secondary education came under the control of the state. A number of reforms were implemented in the 19th century; there was more emphasis on general knowledge and religious education was removed from state secondary schools. In 1910, there were 29 secondary schools in Ljubljana, among them classical and real gymnasiums and Realschules (technical secondary schools). In 2011, the University had 23 faculties and three academies, located around Ljubljana. They offer Slovene-language courses in medicine, applied sciences, arts, law, administration, natural sciences, and other subjects. The university has more than 63,000 students and some 4,000 teaching faculty. Students make up one-seventh of Ljubljana's population, giving the city a youthful character. Historically, higher schools offering the study of general medicine, surgery, architecture, law and theology, started to operate in Ljubljana under the French annexation of Slovene territory, in 1810–1811. The Austro-Hungarian Empire never allowed Slovenes to establish their own university in Ljubljana, and the University of Ljubljana, Slovenia's most important university, was founded in 1919 after Slovenes joined the first Yugoslavia. When it was founded, the university comprised five faculties: law, philosophy, technology, theology and medicine. From the beginning, the seat of the university has been at Congress Square in a building that served as the State Mansion of Carniola from 1902 to 1918. National and University Library of Slovenia The National and University Library of Slovenia is the Slovene national and university library. In 2011, it held about 1,307,000 books, 8,700 manuscripts, and numerous other textual, visual and multimedia resources, altogether 2,657,000 volumes. Central Technological Library The second largest university library in Ljubljana is the Central Technological Library, the national library and information hub for natural sciences and technology. Municipal Library and other libraries The Municipal City Library of Ljubljana, established in 2008, is the central regional library and the largest Slovenian general public library. In 2011, it held 1,657,000 volumes, among these 1,432,000 books and a multitude of other resources in 36 branches. Altogether, there are 5 general public libraries and over 140 specialised libraries in Ljubljana. Besides the two largest university libraries there are libraries at individual faculties, departments and institutes of the University of Ljubljana. The largest among them are the Central Humanist Library in the field of humanities, the Central Social Sciences Library, the Central Economic Library in the field of economics, the Central Medical Library in the field of medical sciences, and the Libraries of the Biotechnical Faculty in the field of biology and biotechnology. History The first libraries in Ljubljana were located in monasteries. The first public library was the Carniolan Estates' Library, established in 1569 by Primož Trubar. In the 17th century, the Jesuit Library collected numerous works, particularly about mathematics. In 1707, the Seminary Library was established; it is the first and oldest public scientific library in Slovenia. Around 1774, after the dissolution of the Jesuits, the Lyceum Library was formed from the remains of the Jesuit Library as well as several monastery libraries. The first society of the leading scientists and public workers in Carniola was the Dismas Fraternity (Latin: Societas Unitorum), formed in Ljubljana in 1688. In 1693, the Academia Operosorum Labacensium was founded and lasted with an interruption until the end of the 18th century. The next academy in Ljubljana, the Slovenian Academy of Sciences and Arts, was not established until 1938. Ljubljana Jože Pučnik Airport (ICAO code LJLJ; IATA code LJU), located 26 km (16 mi) northwest of the city, has flights to numerous European destinations. Among the companies that fly from there are Air France, Air Serbia, Brussels Airlines, easyJet, Finnair, Lufthansa, Swiss, Wizz Air, Transavia and Turkish Airlines. The destinations are mainly European. This airport has superseded the original Ljubljana airport, in operation from 1933 until 1963. It was located in the Municipality of Polje (nowadays the Moste District), on a plain between Ljubljanica and Sava next to the railroad in Moste. There was a military airport in Šiška from 1918 until 1929. In the Ljubljana Rail Hub, the Pan-European railway corridors V (the fastest link between the North Adriatic, and Central and Eastern Europe) and X (linking Central Europe with the Balkans) and the main European lines (E 65, E 69, E 70) intersect. All international transit trains in Slovenia drive through the Ljubljana hub, and all international passenger trains stop there. The area of Ljubljana has six passenger stations and nine stops. For passengers, the Slovenian Railways company offers the possibility to buy a daily or monthly city pass that can be used to travel between them. The Ljubljana railway station is the central station of the hub. The Ljubljana Moste Railway Station is the largest Slovenian railway dispatch. The Ljubljana Zalog Railway Station is the central Slovenian rail yard. There are a number of industrial rails in Ljubljana. At the end of 2006, the Ljubljana Castle funicular started to operate. The rail goes from Krek Square (Krekov trg) near the Ljubljana Central Market to Ljubljana Castle. It is especially popular among tourists. The full trip lasts 60 seconds. Ljubljana is located where Slovenia's two main freeways intersect, connecting the freeway route from east to west, in line with Pan-European Corridor V, and the freeway in the north–south direction, in line with Pan-European Corridor X. The city is linked to the southwest by A1-E70 to the Italian cities of Trieste and Venice and the Croatian port of Rijeka. To the north, A1-E57 leads to Maribor, Graz and Vienna. To the east, A2-E70 links it with the Croatian capital Zagreb, from where one can go to Hungary or important cities of the former Yugoslavia, such as Belgrade. To the northwest, A2-E61 goes to the Austrian towns of Klagenfurt and Salzburg, making it an important entry point for northern European tourists. A toll sticker system has been in use on the Ljubljana Ring Road since 1 July 2008. The centre of the city is more difficult to access especially in the peak hours due to long arteries with traffic lights and a large number of daily commuters. The core city centre has been closed for motor traffic since September 2007 (except for residents with permissions), creating a pedestrian zone around Prešeren Square. The historical Ljubljana tram system was completed in 1901 and was replaced by buses in 1928, which were in turn abolished and replaced by trams in 1931 with its final length of 18.5 km (11.5 mi) in 1940. In 1959, it was abolished in favor of automobiles; the tracks were dismantled and tram cars were transferred to Osijek and Subotica. Reintroduction of an actual tram system to Ljubljana has been proposed repeatedly in the 2000s. There are numerous taxi companies in the city. The Ljubljana Bus Station, the Ljubljana central bus hub, is located next to the Ljubljana railway station. The city bus network, run by the Ljubljana Passenger Transport (LPP) company, is Ljubljana's most widely used means of public transport. The fleet is relatively modern. The number of dedicated bus lanes is limited, which can cause problems in peak hours when traffic becomes congested. Bus rides may be paid with the Urbana payment card (also used for the funicular) or with a mobile phone. Sometimes the buses are called trole (referring to trolley poles), harking back to the 1951–1971 days when Ljubljana had trolleybus (trolejbus) service. There were five trolleybus lines in Ljubljana, until 1958 alongside the tram. Another means of public road transport in the city centre is the Cavalier (Kavalir), an electric shuttle bus vehicle operated by LPP since May 2009. There are three such vehicles in Ljubljana. The ride is free and there are no stations because it can be stopped anywhere. It can carry up to five passengers; most of them are elderly people and tourists. The Cavalier drives in the car-free zone in the Ljubljana downtown. The first line links Čop Street, Wolf Street and the Hribar Embankment, whereas the second links Town Square, Upper Square, and Old Square. There is also a trackless train (tractor with wagons decorated to look like a train) for tourists in Ljubljana, linking Cyril and Methodius Square in the city centre with Ljubljana Castle. There is a considerable amount of bicycle traffic in Ljubljana, especially in the warmer months of the year. It is also possible to rent a bike. Since May 2011, the BicikeLJ, a self-service bicycle rental system offers the residents and visitors of Ljubljana 600 bicycles and more than 600 parking spots at 60 stations in the wider city centre area. The daily number of rentals is around 2,500. There was an option to rent a bike even before the establishment of BicikeLJ. There are still some conditions for cyclists in Ljubljana that have been criticised, including cycle lanes in poor condition and constructed in a way that motorised traffic is privileged. There are also many one-way streets which therefore cannot be used as alternate routes so it is difficult to legally travel by bicycle through the city centre. Through years, some prohibitions have been partially abolished by marking cycle lanes on the pavement. Nevertheless, the situation has been steadily improving; in 2015, Ljubljana placed 13th in a ranking of the world's most bicycle-friendly cities. In 2016, Ljubljana was 8th on the Copenhagenize list. The river transport on the Ljubljanica and the Sava was the main means of cargo transport to and from the city until the mid-19th century, when railroads were built. Today, the Ljubljanica is used by a number of tourist boats, with wharves under the Butchers' Bridge, at Fish Square, at Court Square, at Breg, at the Poljane Embankment, and elsewhere. Ljubljana has a rich history of discoveries in medicine and innovations in medical technology. The majority of secondary and tertiary care in Slovenia takes place in Ljubljana. The Ljubljana University Medical Centre is the largest hospital centre in Slovenia. The Faculty of Medicine (University of Ljubljana) and the Ljubljana Institute of Oncology are the other two central medical institutions in Slovenia. The Ljubljana Community Health Centre is the largest health centre in Slovenia. It has seven units at 11 locations. Since 1986, Ljubljana is part of the WHO European Healthy Cities Network. Ljubljana is twinned with: List of people from Ljubljana Pronunciation: UK: /ˌljuːbˈljɑːnə, ˌlʊbliˈɑːnə/ lewb-LYAH-nə, LUUB-lee-AH-nə, US: /ˌljuːbliˈɑːnə, liˌuː-/ LEW-blee-AH-nə, lee-OO-; Slovene: [ljuˈbljàːna] , locally also [luˈblàːna]. "Osebna izkaznica – RRA LUR". rralur.si. Archived from the original on 27 March 2019. Retrieved 14 October 2016. "Nadmorska višina naselij, kjer so sedeži občin" [Height above sea level of seats of municipalities] (in Slovenian and English). Statistical Office of the Republic of Slovenia. 2002. Archived from the original on 24 May 2013. "Ljubljana, Ljubljana". Place Names. Statistical Office of the Republic of Slovenia. Archived from the original on 16 December 2020. Retrieved 28 August 2020. Zip Codes in Slovenia from 1000 to 1434 (in Slovene) Archived 14 April 2019 at the Wayback Machine Acquired on 28 April 2015. Known as: Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes (1918–1929) Known as: Federal People's Republic of Yugoslavia (1945–1963); Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (1963–1992) "Ljubljana". Lexico UK English Dictionary. Oxford University Press. Archived from the original on 9 April 2022. "Ljubljana". Collins English Dictionary. HarperCollins. Archived from the original on 21 July 2019. Retrieved 21 July 2019. "Ljubljana". Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English. Longman. Archived from the original on 4 September 2019. Retrieved 4 September 2019. "Ljubljana". The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language (5th ed.). HarperCollins. Retrieved 21 July 2019. Wells, John C. (2008). Longman Pronunciation Dictionary (3rd ed.). Longman. ISBN 978-1-4058-8118-0. Jones, Daniel (2011). Roach, Peter; Setter, Jane; Esling, John (eds.). Cambridge English Pronouncing Dictionary (18th ed.). Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-15255-6. "Slovenski pravopis 2001 - Inštitut za slovenski jezik Frana Ramovša ZRC SAZU in Slovenska akademija znanosti in umetnosti - izid poizvedbe". bos.zrc-sazu.si. Archived from the original on 24 December 2014. Retrieved 22 December 2014. Vuk Dirnberk, Vojka; Tomaž Valantič. "Statistični portret Slovenije v EU 2010" [Statistical Portrait of Slovenia in the EU 2010] (PDF). Statistični Portret Slovenije V Eu ...=Statistical Portrait of Slovenia in the Eu (in Slovenian and English). Statistical Office of the Republic of Slovenia. ISSN 1854-5734. Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 October 2011. Retrieved 2 February 2011. Zavodnik Lamovšek, Alma; Drobne, Samo; Žaucer, Tadej (2008). "Small and Medium-Size Towns as the Basis of Polycentric Urban Development" (PDF). Geodetski Vestnik. Vol. 52, no. 2. Association of Surveyors of Slovenia. p. 303. ISSN 0351-0271. Archived (PDF) from the original on 14 October 2017. Retrieved 30 January 2012. Mehle Mihovec, Barbka (19 March 2008). "Kje so naše meje?" [Where are our borders?]. Gorenjski glas (in Slovenian). Archived from the original on 31 May 2008. Retrieved 7 August 2009. "Emona, Legacy of a Roman City – Culture of Slovenia". www.culture.si. Archived from the original on 17 July 2019. Retrieved 13 April 2016. Mehle Mihovec, Barbka (19 March 2008). "Kje so naše meje?" [Where are our borders?]. Gorenjski glas (in Slovenian). Archived from the original on 31 May 2008. Retrieved 7 August 2009. "Volitve" [Elections]. Statistični letopis 2011 [Statistical Yearbook 2011]. Vol. 15. Statistical Office of the Republic of Slovenia. 2011. p. 108. ISSN 1318-5403. Archived from the original on 26 August 2013. Retrieved 3 February 2016. Libri Antichi Libri Rari. "Città di stampa dei LIBRI ANTICHI dei LIBRI VECCHI dei LIBRI RARI". Osservatoriolibri.com. Archived from the original on 2 December 2011. Retrieved 10 December 2011. Albrecht Berger, ed. (2006), Life and Works of Saint Gregentios, Archbishop of Taphar: Introduction, Critical Edition and Translation, De Gruyter, pp. 14–17 and 190. "Dr T.C. (Tijmen) Pronk". Leiden University Centre for Linguistics, University of Leiden. 2009. Archived from the original on 17 August 2012. Retrieved 24 April 2012. Pronk, Tijmen (2007). "The Etymology of Ljubljana – Laibach". Folia onomastica Croatica. 16: 185–191. ISSN 1330-0695. "Dr. Silvo Torkar" (in Slovenian). Fran Ramovš Institute of the Slovenian Language. 6 May 2011. Archived from the original on 1 January 2013. Retrieved 24 April 2012. Pronk, Tijmen. "O neprepoznanih ali napačno prepoznanih slovanskih antroponimih v slovenskih zemljepisnih imenih: Čadrg, Litija, Trebija, Ljubija, Ljubljana, Biljana" [On the unrecognized or incorrectly recognized Slavic anthroponyms in Slovenian toponyms: Čadrg, Litija, Trebija, Ljubija, Ljubljana, Biljana] (PDF). The Etymology of Ljubljana – Laibach (in Slovenian): 257–273. ISSN 1330-0695. Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 August 2011. C Abdunur (2001). ARCH'01: Troisième conferénce internationale sur les ponts en arc. Presses des Ponts. p. 124. ISBN 978-2-85978-347-1. Exhibition catalogue Emona: myth and reality Archived 5 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine; Museum and Galleries of Ljubljana 2010 "The dragon – city emblem". Archived from the original on 7 September 2015. Retrieved 2 August 2015. novisplet.com. "Najstarejše kolo z osjo na svetu – 5150 let". ljubljanskobarje.si. Archived from the original on 13 January 2016. Retrieved 10 February 2016. "Prehistoric Pile Dwellings Listed as UNESCO World Heritage". Slovenia News. Government Communication Office. 28 June 2011. Archived from the original on 27 April 2014. Retrieved 28 June 2011. Maša Štiftar de Arzu, ed. (14 October 2011). "Pile-dwellings in the Ljubljansko Barje on UNESCO List" (PDF). Embassy Newsletter. Embassy of Slovenia in Washington. Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 January 2017. Retrieved 10 February 2016. "First settlers". Archived from the original on 18 March 2010. Retrieved 31 October 2009. Bernarda Županek (2010) "Emona, Legacy of a Roman City" Archived 17 July 2019 at the Wayback Machine, Museum and Galleries of Ljubljana, Ljubljana. "The Times of Roman Emona". Archived from the original on 15 March 2010. Retrieved 31 October 2009. "Roman Emona". Culture.si. Ministry of culture of the republic of Slovenia. Archived from the original on 4 October 2012. Retrieved 15 October 2012. "Emona, Legacy of a Roman City". Culture.si. Ministry of culture of the republic of Slovenia. Archived from the original on 17 July 2019. Retrieved 15 October 2012. (in French) Hildegard Temporini and Wolfgang Haase, Aufstieg und Niedergang der römischen Welt. de Gruyter, 1988. ISBN 3-11-011893-9. Google Books, p.343 Archived 3 May 2016 at the Wayback Machine Daniel Mallinus, La Yougoslavie, Éd. Artis-Historia, Brussels, 1988, D/1988/0832/27, p. 37-39. "Ljubljana in the Middle Ages". Archived from the original on 18 March 2010. Retrieved 31 October 2009. Peter Štih (2010). Castrum Leibach: the first recorded mention of Ljubljana and the city's early history: facsimile with commentary and a history introduction (PDF). City Municipality of Ljubljana. ISBN 978-961-6449-36-6. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 12 May 2015. COBISS 252833024 Darinka Kladnik (October 2006). "Ljubljana Town Hall" (PDF). Ljubljana Tourist Board. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 September 2011. "Srednjeveška Ljubljana – Luwigana" [Ljubljana of the Middle Ages – Luwigana]. Arhitekturni vodnik [Architectural Guide]. Archived from the original on 27 March 2019. Retrieved 15 May 2012.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Nered, Andrej (2009). "Kranjski deželni stanovi do leta 1518: Mesta" [Carniolan Provincial Estates Until 1518: Towns]. Dežela – knez – stanovi: oblikovanje kranjskih deželnih stanov in zborov do leta 1518 [The Land – the Prince – the Estates: the Formation of Carniolan Provincial Estates and Assemblies Until 1518] (in Slovenian). Založba ZRC. p. 170. ISBN 978-961-254-130-9. Archived from the original on 21 February 2022. Retrieved 3 October 2020. Kušar, Domen (2003). "Vpliv požarov na razvoj in podobo srednjeveških mest" [The Influence of Fires on the Development and Image of Towns in the Middle Ages]. Urbani izziv [Urban Challenge] (in Slovenian). 14 (2). Archived from the original on 21 September 2018. Mlinarič, Jože. "Frančiškanski samostan od ustanovitve okoli leta 1240 do preselitve 1784" [The Franciscan Monastery from Its Establishment around 1240 until Its Relocation in 1784]. Župnija Marijino oznanenje: Ljubljana – Frančiškani [The Parish of the Annunciation – Franciscans] (in Slovenian). Archived from the original on 20 November 2012. Retrieved 15 May 2012. "History of Ljubljana". Municipality of Ljubljana. Archived from the original on 8 September 2015. Retrieved 1 November 2015. (includes timeline) Marija Verbič (1967). "700 let Novega trga v mestu Ljunbljani". Kronika: časopis Za Slovensko Krajevno Zgodovino. 15 (2). Archived from the original on 19 June 2013. Retrieved 29 November 2010. Phillips 1911. Bavec, Milos; Car, Marjeta; Stopar, Robert; Jamsek, Petra; Gosar, Andrej (2012). "Geophysical evidence of recent activity of the Idrija fault, Kanomlja, NW Slovenia". Materials and Geoenvironment. 59. Lipold, Marc Vincenc (1857). "Bericht über die geologischen Aufnamen in Ober-Krein im Jahre 1856". Jahrbuch der K. K. Geol. Reichsanstalt. Fitzko, F.; Suhadolc, P.; Aoudia, A.; Panza, G.F. (2005). "Constraints on the location and mechanism of the 1511 Western-Slovenia earthquake from active tectonics and modeling of macroseismic data". Tectonophysics. 404 (1–2): 77–90. Bibcode:2005Tectp.404...77F. doi:10.1016/j.tecto.2005.05.003. Cunningham, Dickson; Gosar, Andrej; Kastelic, Vanja; Grebby, Stephen; Tansey, Kevin (2007). "Multi-disciplinary investigations of active faults in the Julian Alps, Slovenia" (PDF). Acta Geodyn. Geomater. 4. Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 August 2014. Retrieved 10 August 2014. "Renaissance and Baroque". Archived from the original on 18 March 2010. Retrieved 31 October 2009. Mihelič, Breda (1990). Ljubljana City Guide. State Publishing House of Slovenia. p. 30. COBISS 18846464. Archived from the original on 4 October 2022. Retrieved 3 October 2020. Rajhman, Jože, & Emilijan Cevc. 1990. Tomaž Hren. Enciklopedija Slovenije, vol. 4, pp. 50–51. Ljubljana: Mladinska knjiga. Lutar Ivanc, Aleksandra. 2006. Album slovenskih književnikov. Ljubljana: Mladinska knjiga, p 14. "1980: Ljubljana – Cerkev sv. Trojice" [1980: Ljubljana – Holy Trinity Church]. Register nepremične kulturne dediščine [Registry of Immovable Cultural Heritage] (in Slovenian). Ministry of Culture, Republic of Slovenia. Archived from the original on 16 February 2016. Retrieved 29 October 2012. "Ljubljana.info – Ursuline Church Ljubljana". ljubljana.info. Archived from the original on 24 July 2008. Retrieved 10 February 2016. Kladnik, Darinka (1996). Mestna hiša v Ljubljani: pomembni dogodki v zgodovini mesta [The Ljubljana Town Hall: Significant Events in the Town History] (in Slovenian). Viharnik. p. 58. ISBN 978-961-6057-05-9. Tršan, Lojze (2020). "V glavni vlogi nastopa Lilian ..." [Starring Lilian ...] (PDF). Arhivi: Glasilo arhivskega društva in arhivov Slovenije (in Slovenian). 43 (2). Arhivsko društvo Slovenije: 461. ISSN 0351-2835. Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 November 2022. Retrieved 8 November 2023. Tršan, Lojz. "Arhivalija meseca (april 2012): Ljubljana 1909" [Archivalia of the Month (April 2012): Ljubljana 1909] (in Slovenian). Arhiv republike Slovenije [Archives of the Republic of Slovena]. "Ljubljana in the 18th and 19th Centuries". Archived from the original on 18 March 2010. Retrieved 31 October 2009. Vidic, Marko, ed. (2000). "Ilirsko kraljestvo" [Kingdom of Illyria]. Ilustrirana zgodovina Slovencev [The Illustrated History of the Slovenes]. Mladinska knjiga. p. 213. ISBN 978-86-11-15664-4. "Introducing Ljubljana". Archived from the original on 19 October 2009. Retrieved 31 October 2009. Jarrett, Mark (2013). The Congress of Vienna and its Legacy: War and Great Power Diplomacy after Napoleon. London: I. B. Tauris & Company, Limited. ISBN 978-1-78076-116-9. "Potresna aktivnost v Sloveniji: Močni potresi v preteklosti" [Seismic Activity in Slovenia: Strong Earthquakes in the Past] (PDF). Potresna aktivnost v Sloveniji [Seismic Activity in Slovenia] (in Slovenian). Environmental Agency of the Republic of Slovenia. Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 July 2013. Retrieved 15 May 2012. Verdinek, Alenka (2005). "Ljubljanski potres v slovenskih literarnih delih" [Ljubljana Earthquake in Slovene Literary Works] (PDF). Slavistična revija [Journal of Slavic Linguistics] (in Slovenian). 53 (4). ISSN 0350-6894. Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 10 February 2016. Dobnik, Jože (2006). "Planinski dom 2. grupe odredov na Jančah". Pot kurirjev in vezistov NOV Slovenije [Path of Couriers and Operators of the National Liberation War of Slovenia] [Mountain Hut of the 2nd Group of Detachments at Janče] (in Slovenian). Društvo Domicilnega odbora kurirjev in vezistov NOV Slovenije. ISBN 978-961-238-581-1. Archived from the original on 18 August 2012. Retrieved 15 May 2012. Orožen Adamič, Milan (1995). "Earthquake Threat in Ljubljana". Geografski Zbornik. 35: 45–112. ISSN 0373-4498. Archived from the original on 23 November 2020. Retrieved 15 May 2012. "The Turbulent 20th Century". Archived from the original on 15 March 2010. Retrieved 31 October 2009. Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1922). "Yugoslavia" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 32 (12th ed.). London & New York: The Encyclopædia Britannica Company. p. 1116. "Dans la Yougoslavie des Karageorgévitch" (in French). Archived from the original on 12 April 2008. Retrieved 30 July 2008. Davide Rodogno (2006). Fascism's European empire: Italian occupation during the Second World War. Cambridge University Press. p. 82. ISBN 978-0-521-84515-1. Vurnik, Blaž (22 April 2016). "Kabinet čudes: Ljubljana v žičnem obroču" [Cabinet of Curiosities: Ljubljana in the Barbed Wire Ring]. Delo.si (in Slovenian). Archived from the original on 23 April 2016. Retrieved 22 April 2016. Hudolin, Gašper; Kerševan, Ana Nuša (2016). "Ljubljanske zgodbe: 60. obletnica Pohodov ob žici" [Ljubljana Stories: The 60th Anniversary of the Marches Along the Wire] (in Slovenian). Ljubljana Municipal Library. Archived from the original on 8 May 2016. Retrieved 22 April 2016. (in Slovene and English) "The Trail of Remembrance and Comradeship" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 September 2007. Retrieved 30 July 2008. Booker, Christopher. 1997. A Looking-Glass Tragedy. The Controversy over the Repatriations From Austria In 1945. London: Gerald Duckworth & Co Ltd., p. 214. Vuletić, Dominik. 2007. "Kaznenopravni i povijesni aspekti bleiburškog zločina." Pravnik 41(85): 125–150. "Grahek Ravančić, Martina. 2009. "Izručenja i sudbine zarobljenika smještenih u savezničkim logorima u svibnju 1945. Journal of Contemporary History 41(2): 391–416". Archived from the original on 15 May 2021. Retrieved 10 February 2016. Ferenc, Tone. 1999. "Šentvid." Enciklopedija Slovenije, vol. 13 (Š–T). Ljubljana: Mladinska knjiga, p. 28. Approximate road distances calculated through Google Earth. "Največja naselja po številu prebivalcev: Ljubljana" [Largest settlements by the number of residents: Ljubljana] (in Slovenian). Statistical Office of the Republic of Slovenia. 1 January 2010. Archived from the original on 7 June 2011. Retrieved 5 February 2011. "Geological Map of Slovenia". Archived from the original on 11 August 2008. Retrieved 30 July 2008. "Nadmorska višina naselij, kjer so sedeži občin" [Height above sea level of seats of municipalities] (in Slovenian and English). Statistical Office of the Republic of Slovenia. 2002. Archived from the original on 24 May 2013. "Ljubljana, glavno mesto" [Ljubljana, the Capital] (PDF). Statistics and Analysis Service, Information Center, City Administration, City Municipality of Ljubljana. June 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 March 2013. Retrieved 7 February 2011. "Settlements: Ljubljana". Geopedia.si. Archived from the original on 6 February 2021. Retrieved 30 January 2012. Burger, Boštjan. "Šmarna gora". Slovenia-Landmarks. Archived from the original on 29 September 2018. Retrieved 30 January 2012. "Settlements: Ljubljana". Geopedia.si. Archived from the original on 9 August 2011. Retrieved 5 February 2011. "Površinske vode" [Surface Waters] (in Slovenian). Municipality of Ljubljana. Archived from the original on 8 July 2011. Retrieved 5 February 2011. "Vodna ujma minuli konec tedna ohromila dobršen del Slovenije" [Large part of Slovenia brought to a halt by a flash flood] (in Slovenian). Ljubljanske novice. Archived from the original on 3 October 2011. Retrieved 20 September 2010. Dobravc, Mina (2007). "Ocena ogroženosti mestne občine Ljubljana zaradi poplav" [Flood hazard assessment of the City Municipality of Ljubljana] (PDF) (in Slovenian). p. 7. Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 August 2011. Retrieved 20 September 2010. "Tivolski ribnik" [Tivoli Pond]. Kamnaizlet.si (in Slovenian). PVA, d. o. o. Archived from the original on 20 July 2011. Retrieved 8 February 2012. Zgonik, Alenka (5 May 2011). "Dobimo se na Koseškem bajerju" [Let's Meet at Koseze Pond]. Delo.si (in Slovenian). ISSN 1854-6544. Archived from the original on 27 June 2015. Retrieved 9 February 2012. Krelj, Živa (2007). Ekološki status ribnika Tivoli [The Ecological Status of Tivoli Pond] (PDF) (in Slovenian and English). Department of Biology, Faculty of Natural Sciences and Engineering, University of Ljubljana. Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 October 2020. Retrieved 9 February 2012. "Ljubljana, Slovenia Köppen Climate Classification (Weatherbase)". Weatherbase. Archived from the original on 24 February 2019. Retrieved 23 February 2019. "MODERN CLIMATE CHANGE IN SLOVENIA". ResearchGate. Retrieved 23 February 2019. "ARSO". Archived from the original on 22 July 2013. Retrieved 10 September 2009. "Ljubljana Bežigrad Podnebne statistike 1950-2020" (in Slovenian). Slovenian Environmental Agency. Archived from the original on 25 August 2023. Retrieved 25 August 2023. "Ljubljana Bežigrad Climate Normals 1981-2010" (PDF). Slovenian Environmental Agency. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 May 2021. Retrieved 25 August 2023. "Extreme values of measured yearly, monthly and daily values of chosen meteorological parameters in 1948–2019". ARSO. Archived from the original on 26 December 2018. Retrieved 2 December 2014. "Ljubljana Bežigrad Climate Normals 1991–2020". World Meteorological Organization Climatological Standard Normals (1991–2020). National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Archived from the original on 25 August 2023. Retrieved 25 August 2023. "14015: Ljubljana / Bezigrad (Slovenia)". OGIMET. 27 February 2021. Archived from the original on 23 February 2022. Retrieved 27 February 2021. "14015: Ljubljana / Bezigrad (Slovenia)". ogimet.com. OGIMET. 23 July 2022. Archived from the original on 24 July 2022. Retrieved 24 July 2022. Suhadolnik, Jože (1994). "Stavbni razvoj v Ljubljani (1144–1895) in arhivsko gradivo Zgodovinskega arhiva Ljubljana" [Architectural Development of Ljubljana (1144–1895) and the Archives of the Historical Archives of Ljubljana]. Kronika: časopis za slovensko krajevno zgodovino [The Chronicle: the Newspaper for the Slovenian History of Places] (in Slovenian). 42. ISSN 0023-4923. Archived from the original on 19 February 2014. Retrieved 15 May 2012. "Kamniti dokumenti ljubljanske zgodovine" [Stone Documents of the History of Ljubljana]. MMC RTV Slovenija (in Slovenian). RTV Slovenija. 31 May 2006. Archived from the original on 1 June 2015. Retrieved 15 May 2012. Stopar, Ivan; Prelovšek, Damjan (1992). Walks in old Ljubljana: a guide to its culture and history. Marketing 013 ZTP. COBISS 31777280. Archived from the original on 22 February 2022. Retrieved 3 October 2020. Balantič, Polona (23 June 2008). "Eden zadnjih univerzalnih arhitektov pri nas" [One of the Last Universal Architects at Our Place]. MMC RTV Slovenija (in Slovenian). RTV Slovenija. Archived from the original on 19 June 2013. Retrieved 23 May 2012. Jakič, Ivan (1997). Vsi slovenski gradovi: leksikon slovenske grajske zapuščine [All Slovenian Castles: The Lexicon of the Slovenian Castle Heritage] (in Slovenian). Državna založba Slovenije [National Publishing House]. p. 192. ISBN 978-86-341-1771-4. Archived from the original on 22 February 2022. Retrieved 3 October 2020. "Ljubljanski grad / Ljubljana Castle". Archived from the original on 2 May 2008. Retrieved 30 July 2008. "ljubljana-calling.com". ljubljana-calling.com. Archived from the original on 2 February 2014. "Festival Ljubljana". Archived from the original on 5 November 2013. Retrieved 30 July 2008. "5 Years of the Funicular Railway to the Castle". City Municipality of Ljubljana. 28 December 2011. Archived from the original on 13 March 2012. Suhadolnik, Jože (1994). "Stavbni razvoj v Ljubljani (1144–1895) in arhivsko gradivo Zgodovinskega arhiva Ljubljana" [Architectural Development of Ljubljana (1144–1895) and the Archives of the Historical Archives of Ljubljana]. Kronika: časopis za slovensko krajevno zgodovino [The Chronicle: The Newspaper for the Slovenian History of Places] (in Slovenian). 42 (2). ISSN 0023-4923. Archived from the original on 19 February 2014. Retrieved 15 May 2012. Žvanut, Katja (1999). "Meščani Ljubljane in njihova mestna hiša". Kronika: časopis za slovensko krajevno zgodovino [The Chronicle: The Newspaper for the Slovenian History of Places] (in Slovenian, English, and German). 47 (1/2). ISSN 0023-4923. Archived from the original on 19 February 2014. Retrieved 15 May 2012. "Baroque Ljubljana". Archived from the original on 27 June 2008. Retrieved 30 July 2008. "Stolnica (Cerkev sv. Nikolaja) / The Cathedral (Church of St. Nicholas)". Archived from the original on 12 April 2008. Retrieved 30 July 2008. Ljubljana.si – Skyscraper. Retrieved 3 December 2007. Archived 6 June 2008 at the Wayback Machine Government Communication Office – Ljubljana's Neboticnik Is 70 Years Old. Retrieved 3 December 2007. Archived 5 March 2008 at the Wayback Machine Slovenia.Info (2011). "Ljubljana, Park Tivoli, Rožnik and Šišenski hill – Cultural and Historical Heritage – Slovenia – Official Travel Guide –". slovenia.info. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 5 July 2011. LjubljanaLife.com (2011). "Tivoli Park Ljubljana | Slovenia – Ljubljana Life". ljubljana-life.com. Archived from the original on 7 September 2012. Retrieved 5 July 2011. Lešnik, Aleksandra (23 September 2003). Poročilo: Inventarizacija dvoživk (Amphibia) v Krajinskem parku Tivoli, Rožnik in Šišenski hrib [A Report: The Inventarisation of Amphibians (Amphibia) in Tivoli–Rožnik–Šiška Hill Landscape Park] (PDF) (in Slovenian). Center for Cartography of Fauna and Flora. pp. 8–9. Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 August 2012. Retrieved 9 February 2012. Bavcon, Jože (2010). "Botanični vrt Univerze v Ljubljani – 200 let" [University Botanic Gardens Ljubljana – 200 Years] (PDF). Acta Biologica Slovenica (in Slovenian and English). 53 (1): 3–33. doi:10.14720/abs.53.1.15370. ISSN 1408-3671. S2CID 260524382. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 October 2013. "Environment: Ljubljana European Green Capital 2016" (PDF). European Commission. 24 June 2014. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 January 2016. Retrieved 24 June 2014. "Med mostovi slovenske prestolnice" [Among the Bridges of the Slovenian Capital]. MMC RTV Slovenia (in Slovenian). RTV Slovenia. 28 March 2008. Archived from the original on 30 June 2020. Retrieved 15 May 2012. Dragon Bridge Archived 3 October 2011 at the Wayback Machine Eccenet.org McKelvie, Robin; McKelvie, Jenny (2008). "What To See". Slovenia: The Bradt Travel Guide. Bradt Travel Guides. p. 75. ISBN 978-1-84162-119-7. "Ljubljana - Dragon bridge - Zmajski most / Dragon Bridge". www.ljubljana.si. Archived from the original on 11 December 2008. Fallon, Steve (2004). Slovenia. Lonely Planet. p. 65. ISBN 978-1-74104-161-3. Ljubljana – A lively city, safe under the wings of a dragon Archived 10 April 2008 at the Wayback Machine International Associations of Business Communicators (IABC) Humar, Gorazd (September 2001). "World Famous Arch Bridges in Slovenia: The Dragon Bridge in Ljubljana (1901)". In Charles Abdunur (ed.). Arch'01: troisième Conférence internationale sur les ponts en arc Paris. Paris: Presses des Ponts. pp. 124–125. ISBN 2-85978-347-4. Archived from the original on 29 April 2021. Retrieved 29 October 2015. Tekst: Irena Brejc (15 September 2012). "Iz gline naredi dober kruh in ga razdeli med ljudi | Dnevnik". Dnevnik.si. Archived from the original on 13 October 2012. Retrieved 19 September 2012. "Triple Bridge". visitljubljana.com. Ljubljana Tourism. Archived from the original on 20 June 2012. Retrieved 15 May 2012. Ribja brv Girder Bridge Archived 27 March 2018 at the Wayback Machine, www.fleetwoodurban.com.au, Ribja brv v novi 'preobleki' Archived 16 August 2018 at the Wayback Machine, MMC RTV Slovenia, 27 September 2014 "Cobblers' Bridge (Čevljarski most)". 30 May 2017. Archived from the original on 25 January 2018. Retrieved 25 January 2018. "The Suburbs of Krakovo and Trnovo". Ljubljana Tourist Guide. Ljubljana Tourism. February 2012. p. 30. Humar, Gorazd (September 2001). "World Famous Arch Bridges in Slovenia: 6. Cast Iron Single-Hinged Arch Bridge in Ljubljana (1867)". In Charles Abdunur (ed.). Arch'01: troisième Conférence internationale sur les ponts en arc Paris. Paris: Presses des Ponts. p. 126. ISBN 2-85978-347-4. Archived from the original on 10 February 2017. Retrieved 29 October 2015. Slivnik, Lara (2010). Juvanec, Borut (ed.). "Zgradbe z železno oziroma jekleno konstrukcijo v Sloveniji" [Buildings with iron and steel structures in Slovenia] (PDF). AR: Arhitektura, raziskave [Architecture, Research] (in Slovenian and English) (1): 38–39. ISSN 1581-6974. Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 July 2013. "Točke Poljanskega predmestja" [The Points of the Poljane Suburb]. Geopedia.si (in Slovenian). Synergise, d. o. o. Hradeckega most [Hradecky Bridge].[permanent dead link] "Hradecki Bridge". Ljubljana.si. Municipality of Ljubljana. 12 May 2011. Archived from the original on 19 March 2013. Trbižan, Milan (12 May 2011). "Tretje življenje mostu Hradeckega čez Ljubljanico" [The Third Life of the Hradecky Bridge over the Ljubljanica]. Delo.si (in Slovenian). ISSN 1854-6544. COBISS 256579584. Archived from the original on 17 May 2011. Retrieved 15 May 2012. "365: Ljubljana – Hradeckega most" [365: Ljubljana – The Hradecky Bridge]. Registry of the Immovable Cultural Heritage (in Slovenian). Ministry of Culture, Slovenia. Archived from the original on 19 March 2013. Retrieved 13 March 2012. Habič, Marko (1997). "Prestolnica Ljubljana nekoč in danes: Čevljarski most". Geopedia.si [A pictorial chronicle of a capital city: Shoemaker's Bridge]. National Publishing House of Slovenia. Sinergise, d. o. o. ISBN 978-86-341-2007-3. Archived from the original on 3 December 2013. Retrieved 15 May 2012. "Ljubljana, Tromostovje". slovenia.info. Slovenian Tourist Board. Archived from the original on 23 October 2012. Retrieved 15 May 2012. Mihelič, Breda (1999). "Prešernov trg v Ljubljani" [Prešeren Square in Ljubljana]. Zbornik za umetnostno zgodovino [Collection of Art History Papers] (in Slovenian and English). 35: 94–131. Archived from the original on 13 August 2020. Retrieved 15 May 2012. Nina Caf (2008). Turizem kot del revitalizacije mestnega jedra Ljubljana (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 12 December 2011.[permanent dead link] Bartulovič, Alenka. "Trg republike" [Republic Square]. In Šmid Hribar, Mateja; Golež, Gregor; Podjed, Dan; Kladnik, Drago; Erhartič, Bojan; Pavlin, Primož; Ines, Jerele (eds.). Enciklopedija naravne in kulturne dediščine na Slovenskem – DEDI [Encyclopedia of Natural and Cultural Heritage in Slovenia] (in Slovenian). Archived from the original on 23 July 2012. Retrieved 23 May 2012. Bartulovič, Alenka. "Veleblagovnica Maximarket" [Maximarket Department Store]. In Šmid Hribar, Mateja; Golež, Gregor; Podjed, Dan; Kladnik, Drago; Erhartič, Bojan; Pavlin, Primož; Ines, Jerele (eds.). Enciklopedija naravne in kulturne dediščine na Slovenskem – DEDI [Encyclopedia of Natural and Cultural Heritage in Slovenia] (in Slovenian). Archived from the original on 23 July 2012. Retrieved 23 May 2012. "Zgodbe, ki so se dogajale na Kongresnem trgu" [News from Congress Square] (in Slovenian). Radiotelevizija Slovenija. Archived from the original on 7 September 2015. Retrieved 9 October 2011. Rigler, Jakob (1965). "Osnove Trubarjevega jezika". Jezik in slovstvo. 10 (6–7). "Velemir Gjurin: Beseda avtorju. In: Nekdo drug". Archived from the original on 1 June 2015. Retrieved 25 July 2012. "Ljubljanščina in druga stilna sredstva v besedilih Andreja Rozmana Roze na primeru Pike Nogavičke. In: Slovenska narečja med sistemom in rabo". Znanstvena založba Filozofske fakultete. Archived from the original on 1 June 2015. Retrieved 25 July 2012. Rigler, Jakob (1965). "Nekdanja ljubljanščina kot osnova Trubarjevega jezika". Začetki Slovenskega Knjižnega Jezika: 100–110. Rigler, Jakob (1968). "Začetki slovenskega knjižnega jezika. The Origins of the Slovene Literary Language, Ljubljana: Slovenska akademija znanosti in umetnosti". Razred Za Filoloske in Literarne Vede. 22. The Historian, excerpt from the novel, p.3-4 "Ljubljana chosen by UN cultural agency as 2010 World Book Capital". UN News. 18 June 2008. Archived from the original on 19 April 2022. Retrieved 19 April 2022. "Museums". Archived from the original on 31 December 2007. Retrieved 31 July 2008. "Ljubljana in Figures". City Municipality of Ljubljana. Archived from the original on 19 April 2012. Retrieved 23 April 2012. Ginanne Brownell (2 December 2011), New Museum Opens for the Avant-Garde Archived 31 March 2024 at the Wayback Machine, New York Times "About". 36. lgbt film festival. Društvo ŠKUC. Archived from the original on 12 May 2021. Retrieved 3 March 2021. "Ljubljana Jazz Festival – July 2015 – Europe Jazz Network". europejazz.net. Archived from the original on 6 September 2015. Retrieved 23 October 2015. Gržinić, Marina; B. Lengel, Laura (2000). "Video as Civic Discourse in Slovenia and the Former Yugoslavia: Strategies of Visualization and the Aesthetics of Video in the New Europe: Ljubljana's Alternative or Subculture(e/al) Movement". Culture and Technology in the New Europe: Civic Discourse in Transformation. Greenwood Publishing Group. pp. 198–202. ISBN 978-1-56750-466-8. Archived from the original on 22 February 2022. Retrieved 3 October 2020. Dawisha, Karen; Parrot, Bruce (2008). "Democratization in Slovenia–The Second Stage". In P. Ramet, Sabrina (ed.). Serbia, Croatia and Slovenia at Peace and at War: Selected Writings, 1983–2007. LIT Verlag Münster. p. 227. ISBN 978-3-03735-912-9. Archived from the original on 22 February 2022. Retrieved 3 October 2020. "Metelkova". ljubljana-life.com. Archived from the original on 19 July 2012. Retrieved 7 August 2012. "Metelkova mesto". culture.si. Archived from the original on 23 September 2018. Retrieved 23 September 2018. "Celica Hostel". Archived from the original on 31 March 2024. Retrieved 7 August 2012. "Lovely Ljubljana; Its name is hard to pronounce, but the city's easy to love and explore". The Calgary Herald. 21 July 2012. Retrieved 7 August 2012.[dead link] "Zgodovina" [History]. Sports Club Dolomiti. 13 October 2011. Archived from the original on 7 May 2013. Retrieved 5 January 2012. "S Tisljem ponoviti leto 2001 in 2003" (in Slovenian). Siol. 28 July 2011. Archived from the original on 25 February 2021. Retrieved 20 March 2021. Habič, Marko (1997). "Ljubljanica se leno vije proti mestu" [The Ljubljanica River, as It Winds Lazily Towards the Town]. Prestolnica Ljubljana nekoč in danes [A Pictorial Chronicle of a Capital City]. National Publishing House of Slovenia. ISBN 978-86-341-2007-3. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 26 May 2012. "Thousands Join Ljubljana Hike". Slovenian Press Agency [STA]. 10 May 2008. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 16 October 2015. "13th Ljubljana marathon – record participation!". Archived from the original on 26 October 2008. Retrieved 1 November 2008. "Plečnika prerašča plevel, z velodromom se grejejo Romi" [Plečnik Overgrown by Weed, Velodrome Used by Romas to Warm Themselves]. Slovenske novice (in Slovenian). 6 May 2012. Archived from the original on 11 May 2012. Retrieved 14 May 2012. "Tivoli Sports Park". visitljubljana.com. Ljubljana Tourism. Archived from the original on 23 October 2012. Retrieved 14 May 2012. "Park Tivoli: O Parku Tivoli" [Tivoli Park: About Tivoli Park]. sport-ljubljana.si. 2011. Archived from the original on 22 April 2012. Retrieved 14 May 2012. "Hala Tivoli – športna dvorana" [Tivoli Hall – Sports Hall] (in Slovenian). Archived from the original on 28 January 2010. Retrieved 14 May 2012. "Tacen White Water Slalom Course". Archived from the original on 6 October 2011. Retrieved 21 February 2009. "Osnovni podatki smučišča" [Basic Data About the Ski Slope]. Alpski poligon Gunclje (in Slovenian). Archived from the original on 10 May 2013. Retrieved 5 February 2012. "Smučišče" [Ski Slope]. Alpski poligon Gunclje (in Slovenian). Archived from the original on 26 January 2013. Retrieved 5 February 2012. "Primož Peterka – prvi Slovenec, ki je preskočil magično mejo" [Primož Peterka – the First Slovene Who Jumper Over the Magic Limit]. Ventilator besed – revija za kulturo in izobraževanje (in Slovenian). 14 October 2011. Archived from the original on 5 June 2012. Retrieved 5 February 2012. "Revija smučarskih skokov v Mostecu" [A Ski Jumping Show in Mostec] (in Slovenian). Sports Society of Ljubljana. 9 June 2011. Archived from the original on 13 May 2015. Retrieved 5 February 2012. "Vabilo na prireditve ob dnevu Četrtne skupnosti Šiška in evropske dnevu sosedov" [The Invitation to the Events on the Day of the District Community of Šiška and the European Day of Neighbours] (PDF) (in Slovenian). District Community of Šiška. 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 July 2012. Retrieved 6 February 2012. "Neverjetno: Orli nad Šiško" [Incredible: Eagles Above Šiška] (in Slovenian). Dnevnik.si. 25 February 2012. Archived from the original on 19 April 2012. Retrieved 14 May 2012. Sič, Albert (1939). "Kern – Trnovsko drsališče". Kronika Slovenskih Mest. 6 (4). OCLC 300063354. Archived from the original on 4 December 2013. Retrieved 3 July 2012. "Austrians Buy Ljubljana Stock Exchange". Archived from the original on 11 January 2009. Retrieved 31 July 2008. "Ljubljanska borza d.d." Archived from the original on 18 April 2009. Retrieved 31 July 2008. "Ljubljana: economic center of Slovenia". Archived from the original on 8 June 2008. Retrieved 31 July 2008. "BTC City, Ljubljana". Ljubljana.info. Archived from the original on 21 July 2011. Retrieved 22 December 2010. "Ljubljana Life: BTC City". Lifeboat Limited. Archived from the original on 14 June 2010. Retrieved 22 December 2010. "20 let od otvoritve prve trgovine na območju BTC CITY Ljubljana" [20 Years Since the Opening of the First Shop in the BTC CITY Ljubljana Area]. Kapital (in Slovenian). Kapital Publishing Company. 4 October 2010. Archived from the original on 3 February 2019. Retrieved 22 December 2010. Martinek, Tomaž (2007). Zgodovina nakupovalnih centrov [A History of Shopping Centers] (in Slovenian). Faculty of Social Sciences, University of Ljubljana. Šulin, Anja (2007). Preobrazba industrijskih območij v Mestni občini Ljubljana [The Transformation of Industrial Areas in the City Municipality of Ljubljana] (PDF) (in Slovenian). Faculty of Arts, University of Ljubljana. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 March 2014. Retrieved 22 December 2010. "District heating systems". 19 June 2015. Archived from the original on 1 October 2017. Retrieved 30 September 2017. "Boards of the City Council". Archived from the original on 10 January 2008. Retrieved 31 July 2008. "District authorities". Archived from the original on 12 April 2008. Retrieved 31 July 2008. "Spremembe in dopolnitve statuta Mestne občine Ljubljana" [Amendments and Completions of the Statute of the City Municipality of Ljubljana]. Official Gazette (in Slovenian). Archived from the original on 28 October 2012. Retrieved 30 January 2012. "Danica Simšič 2002". City Municipality of Ljubljana. Archived from the original on 6 November 2011. Retrieved 30 January 2012. "The Mayor of the City of Ljubljana". Archived from the original on 18 September 2008. Retrieved 31 July 2008. "Čerin ljubljansko občino trenutno vodi v neskladju s statutom" [Čerin is Currently Leading the Ljubljana Municipality in Discrepancy with its Statute]. Dnevnik.si (in Slovenian). 1 February 2012. Archived from the original on 1 February 2012. Retrieved 1 February 2012. "Janković Sworn in as Ljubljana Mayor Again". English Service: News. Slovenian Press Agency. 11 April 2012. Archived from the original on 30 September 2013. Retrieved 24 April 2012. "Police directorate Ljubljana". Archived from the original on 20 June 2008. Retrieved 1 February 2012. "Varnostne razmere na območju Mestne občine Ljubljana v obdobju 2005 – 2010" [Safety Situation in the Area of the City Municipality of Ljubljana in the 2005–2010 Period] (PDF) (in Slovenian). Police Directorate of Ljubljana, Ministry of the Interior, Republic of Slovenia. March 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 March 2013. "City traffic wardens". City Municipality of Ljubljana. Archived from the original on 18 March 2010. Retrieved 14 September 2010. "Precautions to take" (in French). Archived from the original on 18 November 2008. Retrieved 31 July 2008. Pipp, Lojze (1935). "Razvoj števila prebivalstva Ljubljane in bivše vojvodine Kranjske" [The Development of the Number of Population of Ljubljana and the Former Duchy of Carniola]. Kronika Slovenskih Mest (in Slovenian). 2 (1). Archived from the original on 11 May 2019. Retrieved 1 February 2012. "Population by settlements, detailed data, 1 January 2022". Statistični Urad. Archived from the original on 17 December 2023. Retrieved 17 December 2023. "Population, municipalities, settlements, Slovenia, 1 January 2022". Statistični Urad. Archived from the original on 17 December 2023. Retrieved 18 January 2024. "Population by religion, municipalities, Slovenia, Census 2002". Archived from the original on 7 June 2011. Retrieved 5 August 2008. "Population by language usually spoken in the household (family), municipalities, Slovenia, 2002 Census – Statistični urad RS". Archived from the original on 24 October 2020. Retrieved 13 April 2020. Bohnec Kogoj, Maja (2011). Raba tal in spreminjanje meje Mestne občine Ljubljana [The Use of Soil and Changes of the Borders of the City Municipality of Ljubljana] (PDF) (in Slovenian). Department of Geography, Faculty of Arts, University of Ljubljana. Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 July 2013. Šorn, Mojca (2007). Življenje Ljubljančanov med drugo svetovno vojno [The life of the Ljubljana Inhabitants During World War II] (in Slovenian). Institute of Modern History. ISBN 978-961-6386-12-8. Archived from the original on 16 March 2022. Mestna naselja v Republiki Sloveniji [Urban Settlement in the Republic of Slovenia, 2003] (PDF) (in Slovenian and English). Statistical Office of the Republic of Slovenia. 2004. p. 53. Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 February 2012. Retrieved 1 February 2012. "Population by age and gender, municipalities, Slovenia, half-yearly". Statistical Office of Slovenia. 15 June 2020. Archived from the original on 14 May 2020. Retrieved 15 June 2020. University of Ljubljana (2011). "University of Ljubljana". uni-lj.si. Archived from the original on 23 September 2011. Retrieved 5 July 2011. Rudolf, Dostal (1939). "Ljubljansko ljudsko šolstvo v terezijanski in jožefinski dobi" [Ljubljana People's Schools in the Era of Theresian and Josef's Era]. Kronika slovenskih mest [The Chronicle of Slovenian Cities] (in Slovenian). Vol. 6. City Municipality of Ljubljana. pp. 21–28, 33–41. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 9 May 2012. "Statutes of UL". Archived from the original on 23 February 2009. Retrieved 31 July 2008. "UL history". Archived from the original on 23 February 2009. Retrieved 31 July 2008. Poslovno poročilo 2011 [Business Report 2011] (in Slovenian). National and University Library of Slovenia. 28 February 2012. p. 23. Archived from the original on 24 May 2012. "Statistics". City Municipality of Ljubljana. Archived from the original on 30 April 2012. Retrieved 14 May 2012. "The Organisation and Activities of the UL Libraries". Archived from the original on 24 April 2012. Retrieved 13 May 2012. "Lavric AHAS 6 | Umetnostnozgodovinski inštitut Franceta Steleta". Umzg.zrc-sazu.si. Archived from the original on 31 August 2011. Retrieved 1 June 2011. "Aerodrom Ljubljana, d.d." Archived from the original on 16 September 2008. Retrieved 31 July 2008. "7622: Ljubljana – Staro letališče" [Ljubljana: The Old Airport]. Register of the Cultural Heritage of Slovenia (in Slovenian). Ministry of Culture, Slovenia. Archived from the original on 6 July 2012. Retrieved 16 January 2011. "Staro Ljubljansko letališče: Zgodovina" [The Old Ljubljana Airport: History] (in Slovenian). Archived from the original on 12 April 2014. Retrieved 16 January 2012. Zajec, Anja (May 2010). Sprejem in odprava potnikov na Letališču Jožeta Pučnika Ljubljana (PDF). B&B education and training. pp. 8–9. Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 March 2014. Retrieved 16 January 2012. "Slovenia, a Country at the Crossroads of Transport Links". Government Communication Office, Republic of Slovenia. November 2000. Archived from the original on 8 July 2012. Siarov, Veselin; Ahmed, Moustafa (February 1999). "Corridor X – Case Study" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 May 2013. Retrieved 7 February 2012. Pšenica, Peter; Pangerc, Jože (December 2007). "Extent of PRI". Network Statement of the Republic of Slovenia 2009. p. 25. Archived from the original on 8 February 2012. LUZ, d. d. (March 2010). Državni prostorski načrt za Ljubljansko železniško vozlišče [The National Space Plan for the Ljubljana Rail Hub: Draft] (PDF) (in Slovenian). Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 July 2012. Brkić, Tanja (7 August 2008). "SŽ: Železniška postajališča niso zadovoljivo opremljena" [SŽ: The Railway Stops are Not Adequately Fitted]. Dnevnik.si (in Slovenian). Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 7 February 2012. "City pass". Slovenian Railways. Archived from the original on 8 February 2012. "0800.03: Imenik železniških postaj, daljinar in kažipot za prevoz blaga po progah SŽ" [0800.03: The Directory of Railway Stations, Fare Scales and a Signpost for the Transport of Goods on the Rails of the Slovenian Railways] (PDF) (in Slovenian). Holding Slovenske železnice. 16 April 2004. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 August 2012. Urban Rail (30 January 2007). "Ljubljana's funicular tram". Archived from the original on 8 July 2011. Retrieved 13 September 2009. Andrej, Černe (2004). "Pomen prometa za ljubljansko mestno aglomeracijo" [The Significance of Transport for the Ljubljana Urban Agglomeration] (PDF). Dela (in Slovenian and English) (22): 78. ISSN 0354-0596. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 March 2007. Oplotnik, Žan; Križanič, France (November 2004). "National motorway construction program (NMCP) in Slovenia (financing, impact on national economy and realisation)" (PDF). Highways: cost and regulation in Europe. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 November 2012. Michelin, Slovénie, Croatie, Bosnie-Herzégovine, Serbie, Monténégro, Macédoine, Cartes et guides n°736, Michelin, Zellik, Belgium, 2007, ISBN 978-2-06-712627-5 "Travel Report: Slovenia". Foreign Affairs and International Trade Canada. 17 January 2012. Archived from the original on 5 January 2012. Retrieved 6 February 2012. "Slovenian Vignettes (Toll Stickers)". Tourist Association Portorož. Archived from the original on 20 July 2012. Retrieved 6 February 2012. Kozina, Jani (2010). Prometna dostopnost v Sloveniji [Transport Accessibility in Slovenia] (in Slovenian). ZRC Publishing House. pp. 69–71. ISBN 978-961-254-235-1. d'Antonio, Simone (29 January 2016). "How Ljubljana turned itself into Europe's 'green capital' – Citiscope". citiscope.org. Archived from the original on 1 October 2017. Retrieved 30 September 2017. "110 let mestnega potniškega prometa" [110 Years of the City Passenger Traffic] (in Slovenian). Municipality of Ljubljana. 6 September 2011. Archived from the original on 26 September 2011. Retrieved 16 January 2012. "Kronika: časopis za slovensko krajevno zgodovino" [The Chronicle: The Newspaper for the Slovene Place History] (in Slovenian). Vol. 8–9. Zgodovinsko društvo za Slovenijo (Historical Association of Slovenia). 1959. p. 64. Archived from the original on 7 April 2022. Retrieved 3 October 2020. Nebec, Damjan (March 2010). Analiza plačilnega sistema v LPP [An Analysis of the Payment System in the LPP] (PDF) (in Slovenian and German). B&B education and training. pp. 10–11. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 August 2012. "Potencijalni gradonačelnici obećali tramvaj, stadion i džamiju". Business.hr. Archived from the original on 3 August 2012. "Tramvaj ponovno v Ljubljani? Zares želi, da odločitev o tirnem prometu pade že zdaj". STA. dnevnik.si. Archived from the original on 1 June 2015. Retrieved 30 December 2011. "Vozilo, ki bi zanimanje vzbujalo še danes". MMC. rtvslo.si. Archived from the original on 1 March 2014. Retrieved 30 December 2011. "Situation per mode of transport" (PDF). Study on Strategic Evaluation on Transport Investment Priorities under Structural and Cohesion funds for the Programming Period 2007–2013. ECORYS Nederland BV. August 2006. Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 May 2012. Retrieved 7 February 2012. Pataky, Nenad (17 November 2010). "Izgubljena Ljubljana" [Lost Ljubljana]. Dnevnik (in Slovenian). Archived from the original on 14 September 2016. Retrieved 16 January 2012. "'The Cavalier' on the Streets of Ljubljana". Ljubljana.si. City Municipality of Ljubljana. 30 March 2011. Archived from the original on 10 September 2011. Retrieved 24 April 2012. "Naj vas zapelje Kavalir" [Let the Cavalier Drive You]. Ljubljana.si (in Slovenian). City Municipality of Ljubljana. 13 May 2009. Archived from the original on 27 April 2012. Retrieved 24 April 2012. "Turistični vlakec na Ljubljanski grad" [A Tourist Train to Ljubljana Castle]. Slovenia.info (in Slovenian). Archived from the original on 13 January 2014. Retrieved 24 April 2012. "Ljubljana Rent-a-Bike Network Gaining in Popularity". STA. 24 July 2011. Archived from the original on 12 January 2012. Retrieved 25 July 2011. "Ljubljana Launches Public Bike Project". STA. 14 May 2011. Archived from the original on 12 January 2012. Retrieved 25 July 2011. "Ljubljana Bike". Archived from the original on 9 October 2007. Retrieved 31 July 2008. Mateja Gruden (25 March 2012). "Delo (17. julij 2000): Razvajati kolesarje, ne avtomobiliste". delo.si. Archived from the original on 28 March 2012. Retrieved 24 August 2012. Ljubljanska kolesarska mreža (12 June 2012). "Peticija za Fabianijev most". kolesarji.org. Archived from the original on 24 August 2012. Retrieved 24 August 2012. "Mladina (17. julij 2000): Kolesarski zmaji". 9 January 2008. Archived from the original on 4 May 2001. Retrieved 10 December 2011. "Ljubljanska kolesarska mreža (okt. 2010): Pobude za izboljšave v Ljubljanski kolesarski infrastrukturi, str. 2" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 August 2011. Retrieved 10 December 2011. "Survey Ranks Ljubljana World's 13th Most Bicycle-Friendly City". Slovenia Times. 30 June 2015. Archived from the original on 3 July 2015. Retrieved 30 June 2015. "copenhagenizeindex". copenhagenizeindex.eu. 21 June 2018. Archived from the original on 16 July 2018. Retrieved 21 June 2018. "Organizacijske enote v sestavi: Odsek za zdravje" [Organisational Units of the Department of Health and Social Protection] (in Slovenian). City Municipality of Ljubljana. 2009. Archived from the original on 6 December 2011. Retrieved 8 December 2011. "Ljubljana's twin cities". Mestna občina Ljubljana (Ljubljana City). Archived from the original on 11 June 2016. Retrieved 27 July 2013. Jarrett, Mark (2013). The Congress of Vienna and its Legacy: War and Great Power Diplomacy after Napoleon. London: I. B. Tauris & Company, Limited. ISBN 978-1-78076-116-9. Phillips, Walter Alison (1911). "Laibach" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 16 (11th ed.). pp. 82–83. Jörg Stabenow (2009). "Ljubljana". In Emily Gunzburger Makas; Tanja Damljanovic Conley (eds.). Capital Cities in the Aftermath of Empires: Planning in Central and Southeastern Europe. Routledge. pp. 223–240. ISBN 978-1-135-16725-7. Velušček, Anton (ed.) (2009). Stare Gmajne Pile-Dwelling Settlement and its Era (bilingual English and Slovenian edition). Založba ZRC. ISBN 978-961-254-155-2. Ljubljana at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Travel information from Wikivoyage Ljubljana on Geopedia City of Ljubljana official site Official Ljubljana tourism site Ljubljana: locations with surround photography at Burger.si (in Slovene) Ljubljana on Google Maps