Kate Elizabeth Winslet CBE (/ˈwɪnzlət/; born 5 October 1975) is an English actress. Known for her roles as headstrong and complicated women in independent films, particularly period dramas, she has received numerous accolades, including an Academy Award, a Grammy Award, two Primetime Emmy Awards, five BAFTA Awards and five Golden Globe Awards. Time magazine named Winslet one of the 100 most influential people in the world in 2009 and 2021. She was appointed Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in 2012. Winslet studied drama at the Redroofs Theatre School. Her first screen appearance, at age 15, was in the British television series Dark Season (1991). She made her film debut playing a teenage murderess in Heavenly Creatures (1994), and went on to win a BAFTA Award for playing Marianne Dashwood in Sense and Sensibility (1995). Global stardom followed with her leading role in James Cameron's epic romance Titanic (1997), which was the highest-grossing film at the time. Winslet then eschewed parts in blockbusters in favour of critically acclaimed period pieces, including Quills (2000) and Iris (2001). The science fiction romance Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind (2004), in which Winslet was cast against type in a contemporary setting, proved to be a turning point in her career, and she gained further recognition for her performances in Finding Neverland (2004), Little Children (2006), Revolutionary Road (2008), and The Reader (2008). For playing a former Nazi camp guard in the latter, she won the BAFTA Award and the Academy Award for Best Actress. Winslet's portrayal of Joanna Hoffman in the biopic Steve Jobs (2015) won her another BAFTA Award, and she received two Primetime Emmy Awards for her performances in the HBO miniseries Mildred Pierce (2011) and Mare of Easttown (2021). In 2022, she produced and starred in the single drama "I Am Ruth", winning two BAFTA TV Awards, and played a supporting role through motion capture in Cameron's top-grossing science fiction film Avatar: The Way of Water. For her narration of a short story in the audiobook Listen to the Storyteller (1999), Winslet won a Grammy Award. She performed the song "What If" for the soundtrack of her film, Christmas Carol: The Movie (2001). A co-founder of the charity Golden Hat Foundation, which aims to create autism awareness, Winslet has also written a book on the topic. Divorced from film directors Jim Threapleton and Sam Mendes, Winslet has been married to businessman Edward Abel Smith since 2012. She has a child from each marriage, including actress Mia Threapleton. Kate Elizabeth Winslet was born on 5 October 1975, in Reading, Berkshire to Sally Ann (née Bridges) and Roger John Winslet. She is primarily of British descent, but also has Irish ancestry on her father's side and Swedish ancestry on her mother's side. Her mother worked as a nanny and waitress, and her father, a struggling actor, took labouring jobs to support the family. Her maternal grandparents were both actors and ran the Reading Repertory Theatre Company. Winslet has two sisters, Anna and Beth, both of whom are actresses, and a younger brother, Joss. The family had limited financial means; they lived on free meal benefits and were supported by a charity named the Actors' Charitable Trust. When Winslet was ten, her father severely injured his foot in a boating accident and found it harder to work, leading to more financial hardships for the family. Winslet has said her parents always made them feel cared for and that they were a supportive family. Winslet attended St Mary and All Saints' Church of England primary school. Living in a family of actors inspired her to pursue acting from a young age. She and her sisters participated in amateur stage shows at school and at a local youth theatre, named Foundations. When she was five, Winslet made her first stage appearance as Mary in her school's production of the Nativity play. She describes herself as an overweight child, and was called "blubber" by her schoolmates and was bullied for her appearance. She said she did not let this stop her. At eleven, Winslet was accepted into the Redroofs Theatre School in Maidenhead. The school also functioned as an agency and took students to London to audition for acting jobs. She appeared in a Sugar Puffs commercial and dubbed for foreign films. At school, she was made head girl, took part in productions of Alice's Adventures in Wonderland and The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe, and played the lead role of Wendy Darling in Peter Pan. She worked simultaneously with the Starmaker Theatre Company in Reading. She participated in over twenty of their stage productions, but was rarely selected as the lead due to her weight. Nonetheless, she played key roles as Miss Agatha Hannigan in Annie, the Mother Wolf in The Jungle Book, and Lena Marelli in Bugsy Malone. In 1991, within two weeks of finishing her GCSE examinations, Winslet made her screen debut as one of the main cast members of the BBC science fiction television series Dark Season written by Russell T Davies. Her part was that of Reet, a schoolgirl who helps her classmates fight against a sinister man distributing free computers to her school. She did not earn much from the job and, at age sixteen, lack of funds forced Winslet to leave Redroofs. To support herself, she worked at a delicatessen. In 1992, she had a small part in the television film Anglo-Saxon Attitudes, an adaptation of Angus Wilson's satirical novel. Winslet, who weighed 13 stone 3 pounds (84 kg; 185 lb) at the time, played the daughter of an obese woman. During filming, after hearing an off-hand comment from the director Diarmuid Lawrence about the likeness between her and the actress who played her mother, Winslet became motivated to lose weight. She next took on the role of the young daughter of a bankrupt self-made man (played by Ray Winstone) in the television sitcom Get Back (1992–1993). She also had a guest role in a 1993 episode of the medical drama series Casualty. Winslet was among 175 women to audition for Peter Jackson's psychological drama Heavenly Creatures (1994), and was cast after impressing Jackson with the intensity she brought to her part. The New Zealand-based production is based on the Parker–Hulme murder case of 1954, in which Winslet played Juliet Hulme, a teenager who assists her friend, Pauline Parker (played by Melanie Lynskey), in the murder of Pauline's mother. She prepared for the part by reading the transcripts of the girls' murder trial, their letters and diaries, and interacted with their acquaintances. She has said she learnt tremendously from the job. Jackson filmed in the real murder locations, and the experience left Winslet traumatised. She found it difficult to detach herself from her character, and said that after returning home, she often cried. The film was a critical breakthrough for Winslet; Desson Thomson, a reviewer for The Washington Post, called her "a bright-eyed ball of fire, lighting up every scene she's in". Winslet recorded "Juliet's Aria" for the film's soundtrack. Also that year, she appeared as Geraldine Barclay, a prospective secretary, in the Royal Exchange Theatre production of Joe Orton's farce What the Butler Saw. While promoting Heavenly Creatures in Los Angeles, Winslet auditioned for the minor part of Lucy Steele for a 1995 film adaptation of Jane Austen's novel Sense and Sensibility, written by and starring Emma Thompson. Impressed by her reading, Thompson cast her in the much larger part of the recklessly romantic teenager Marianne Dashwood. The director Ang Lee wanted Winslet to play the part with grace and restraint—aspects that he felt were missing from her performance in Heavenly Creatures—and thus asked her to practise tai chi, read gothic literature, and learn to play the piano. David Parkinson of Radio Times considered Winslet to be a standout among the cast, and Mick LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle took note of how well she had portrayed her character's growth and maturity. The film grossed over $134 million worldwide. She won the Screen Actors Guild and British Academy Film Award for Best Supporting Actress, and received nominations for the Academy Award and Golden Globe Award in the same category. Also in 1995, Winslet featured in the poorly received Disney film A Kid in King Arthur's Court. Winslet had roles in two period dramas of 1996—Jude and Hamlet. As with Heavenly Creatures, her roles in these films were those of women with a "mad edge". In Michael Winterbottom's Jude, based on the novel Jude the Obscure by Thomas Hardy, she played Sue Bridehead, a young woman with suffragette leanings who falls in love with her cousin, Jude (played by Christopher Eccleston). The critic Roger Ebert believed the part allowed Winslet to display her acting range, and praised her for the defiance she brought to the role. After unsuccessfully auditioning for Kenneth Branagh's 1994 film Mary Shelley's Frankenstein, she was cast for the part of Ophelia, the doomed lover of the title character, in Branagh's adaptation of William Shakespeare's tragedy Hamlet. Winslet, aged 20, was intimidated by the experience of performing Shakespeare with such established actors as Branagh and Julie Christie, saying the job required a level of intellect that she thought she did not possess. Mike Jeffries of Empire believed that she had played the part "well beyond her years". Despite the acclaim, Jude and Hamlet earned little at the box office. Winslet was keen on playing Rose DeWitt Bukater, a socialite aboard the ill-fated RMS Titanic, in James Cameron's epic romance Titanic (1997). Cameron was initially reluctant to cast her, preferring the likes of Claire Danes and Gwyneth Paltrow, but she pleaded with him, "You don't understand! I am Rose! I don't know why you're even seeing anyone else!" Her persistence led him to give her the part. Leonardo DiCaprio featured as her love interest, Jack. Titanic had a production budget of $200 million, and its arduous principal photography was held at Baja Studios where a replica of the ship was created. Filming proved taxing for Winslet; she almost drowned, caught influenza, suffered from hypothermia, and had bruises on her arms and knees. The workload allowed her only four hours of sleep per day and she felt drained by the experience. Writing for Newsweek, David Ansen commended Winslet for capturing her character's zeal with delicacy, and Mike Clark of USA Today considered her to be the film's prime asset. Against expectations, Titanic went on to become the highest-grossing film to that point, earning over $2 billion in box office receipts worldwide, and established Winslet as a global star. The film won eleven Academy Awards—tied for most for a single film—including Best Picture, and earned the 22-year-old Winslet a nomination for Best Actress. She also received Golden Globe and SAG nominations for Best Actress. Winslet did not view Titanic as a platform for larger salaries. She avoided parts in blockbuster films in favour of independent productions that were not widely seen, believing that she "still had a lot to learn" and was unprepared to be a star. She later said her decision ensured career longevity. Hideous Kinky, a low-budget drama shot before the release of Titanic, was Winslet's sole film release of 1998. She turned down offers to star in Shakespeare in Love (1998) and Anna and the King (1999) to do the film. Based on the semi-autobiographical novel by Esther Freud, Hideous Kinky tells the story of a single British mother yearning for a new life in 1970s Morocco. Janet Maslin of The New York Times praised Winslet's decision to follow-up Titanic with such an offbeat project, and took note of how well she had captured her character's "obliviousness and optimism". Jane Campion's psychological drama Holy Smoke! (1999) featured Winslet as an Australian woman who joins an Indian religious cult. She found the script brave and was challenged by the idea of playing an unlikeable, manipulative woman. She learnt to speak with an Australian accent and worked closely with Campion to justify her character's vileness. The film required her to perform explicit sex scenes with co-star Harvey Keitel, and featured a scene in which her character appears naked and urinates on herself. David Rooney of Variety wrote, "Showing the kind of courage few young thesps would be capable of and an extraordinary range [...] from animal cunning to unhinged desperation, [Winslet] holds nothing back." That same year, she voiced a fairy for the animated film Faeries, and won the Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album for Children for narrating the short story "The Face in the Lake" for the children's audiobook Listen to the Storyteller. In Quills (2000), a biopic of the erratic Marquis de Sade, starring Geoffrey Rush and Joaquin Phoenix, Winslet played the supporting role of a sexually repressed laundress working in a mental asylum. Hailing her as the "most daring actress working today", James Greenberg of Los Angeles magazine praised Winslet for "continuing to explore the bounds of sexual liberation". She received a SAG Award nomination for Best Supporting Actress. The following year, she played a fictitious mathematician involved in the cracking of the Enigma ciphers in Michael Apted's espionage thriller Enigma. Winslet's character was vastly expanded from a subsidiary love-interest in the novel it was based on to a prominent code-breaker in the film. She was pregnant while filming, and to prevent this from showing, she wore corsets under her costume. The biopic Iris (2001) featured Winslet and Judi Dench as the novelist Iris Murdoch at different ages. The director Richard Eyre cast the two actresses after finding a "correspondence of spirit between them". Winslet was drawn to the idea of playing an intellectual and zesty female lead, and in research, she read Murdoch's novels, studied her husband's memoir Elegy for Iris, and watched televised interviews of Murdoch. The project was filmed over four weeks and allowed Winslet to bring her daughter, who was six months old at the time, on set. Writing for The Guardian, Martin Amis remarked that "the seriousness and steadiness of [Winslet's] gaze effectively suggest the dawning amplitude of the Murdoch imagination". She received her third Oscar nomination for Iris, in addition to BAFTA and Golden Globe nominations for Best Supporting Actress. Winslet's third film release of 2001 was the animated film Christmas Carol: The Movie, based on Charles Dickens' novel. For the film's soundtrack she recorded "What If", which proved to be a commercial hit. After a year-long absence from the screen, Winslet starred as a headstrong journalist interviewing a professor on death row in the thriller The Life of David Gale (2003). She agreed to the project to work with the director Alan Parker, whom she admired, and believed the film raised pertinent questions about capital punishment. Mick LaSalle thought the film had muddled the subject and disliked both the film and Winslet's performance. To avoid typecasting in historical dramas, Winslet actively sought roles in contemporary-set films. She found it in the science fiction romance Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind (2004) in which she played Clementine, a neurotic and impetuous woman who decides to erase memories of her ex-boyfriend (played by Jim Carrey). Unlike her previous assignments, the role allowed her to display the quirky side to her personality. Gondry encouraged Winslet and Carrey to improvise on set, and to keep herself agile she practised kickboxing. Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind proved to be a modest financial success and several critics have regarded it as one of the best films of the 21st century. Peter Travers of Rolling Stone described it as a "uniquely funny, unpredictably tender and unapologetically twisted romance" and found Winslet to be "electrifying and bruisingly vulnerable" in it. A journalist for Premiere magazine commended her for abandoning her "corseted English rose persona", and ranked it as the 81st greatest film performance of all-time. Winslet considers it to be a favourite among her roles, and she received Best Actress nominations at the Oscar and BAFTA award ceremonies. She has said the film marked a turning point in her career and prompted directors to offer her a wide variety of parts. Winslet was paid £6 million to star in her next release of the year, the drama Finding Neverland. It is about the relationship between J. M. Barrie (played by Johnny Depp) and the Llewelyn Davies boys, which inspired Barrie to write Peter Pan; she played the boys' mother, Sylvia. Despite her reluctance to star in another period piece, Winslet agreed to the project after empathising with her character's love for the children. Ella Taylor of LA Weekly found her to be "radiant and earthy as ever", and CNN's Paul Clinton thought she was "exceptional in a delicate and finely tuned performance". She received a second Best Actress nomination at that year's BAFTA Award ceremony. With a box office gross of $116 million, Finding Neverland became her most widely seen film since Titanic. In 2005, Winslet took on a guest role in an episode of the British comedy sitcom Extras, starring Ricky Gervais and Stephen Merchant. She played a satirical version of herself in it—an actress, who in an effort to win an Oscar, takes the role of a nun in a Holocaust film. She received a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Comedy Series nomination. Within three months of giving birth to her second child, Winslet returned to work on Romance & Cigarettes, a musical romantic comedy directed by John Turturro, in which she played Tula, a promiscuous and foulmouthed woman. The part required her to sing and dance, and it helped her lose weight gained during the pregnancy. She twisted her ankle while filming one of the dance sequences. Derek Elley of Variety wrote that despite her limited screen time, Winslet had "the showiest role and filthiest one-liners". She turned down an offer from Woody Allen to star in Match Point (2005) to spend more time with her children. Winslet had four film releases in 2006. She first appeared in All the King's Men, a political thriller set in 1940s Louisiana, featuring Sean Penn and Jude Law. She played the supporting part of the love interest to Law's character. The film received negative reviews for its lack of political insight and narrative cohesiveness, and failed to recoup its $55 million investment. Her next release, the drama Little Children, was better received. Based on the novel of the same name, the film tells the story of Sarah Pierce, an unhappy housewife who has an affair with a married neighbour (played by Patrick Wilson). Winslet was challenged by the role of an uncaring mother, as she did neither understand nor respect her character's actions. Scenes requiring her to be hostile towards the child actress who played her daughter proved upsetting for her. Having given birth to two children, she was nervous about the sex scenes in which she had to be nude; she took on the challenge to present a positive image for women with, in her words, "imperfect bodies". A. O. Scott of The New York Times wrote that Winslet had successfully "register[ed] every flicker of Sarah's pride, self-doubt and desire, inspiring a mixture of recognition, pity and concern". Once again, she received BAFTA Award and Academy Award nominations for Best Actress; the latter making her, at 31, the youngest performer to accrue five Oscar nominations. After Little Children, Winslet played a part she found more sympathetic in Nancy Meyers's romantic comedy The Holiday. She played Iris, a Briton who temporarily exchanges homes with an American (played by Cameron Diaz) during the Christmas holiday season. It became her biggest commercial success in nine years, grossing over $205 million worldwide. Critic Justin Chang found the film formulaic yet pleasing, and took note of Winslet's radiance and charm. In her final release of the year, she voiced Rita, a scavenging sewer rat, in the animated film Flushed Away. Her sole project of 2007 was as the narrator for the English version of the French children's film The Fox and the Child. Winslet had two critically acclaimed roles in 2008. After reading Justin Haythe's script for Revolutionary Road, an adaptation of Richard Yates's debut novel, Winslet recommended the project to her then-husband, director Sam Mendes, and her Titanic co-star Leonardo DiCaprio. The film traces the tribulations of a young married couple in 1950s suburban America. Winslet was drawn to the idea of playing a woman whose aspirations had not been met, and she read The Feminine Mystique to understand the psychology of unhappy housewives from the era. Mendes encouraged DiCaprio and Winslet to spend time together, and she believed the small set they used helped them to develop their characters' strained relationship. Hailing Winslet as "the best English-speaking film actress of her generation", David Edelstein of New York magazine wrote that "there isn't a banal moment in Winslet's performance—not a gesture, not a word". To avoid a scheduling conflict with Revolutionary Road, Winslet turned down an offer to star in The Reader. After her replacement Nicole Kidman left the project due to her pregnancy, Winslet was signed to it. Directed by Stephen Daldry, The Reader is based on Bernhard Schlink's novel Der Vorleser and is about Hanna Schmitz, an illiterate Nazi concentration camp guard (Winslet), who has an affair with a teenage boy. Winslet researched the Holocaust and the SS guards. To educate herself on the stigma of illiteracy, she spent time with students at the Literacy Partners, an organisation that teaches adults to read and write. She was unable to sympathise with Schmitz and struggled to play the part honestly without humanising the character's actions. Despite this, some historians criticised the film for making Schmitz an object of the audience's sympathy and accused the filmmakers of Holocaust revisionism. Todd McCarthy commended Winslet for supplying "a haunting shell to this internally decimated woman", and writing for The Daily Telegraph, Sukhdev Sandhu considered her to be "absolutely fearless here, not just in her willingness to expose herself physically, but her refusal to expose her character psychologically". Winslet received significant awards attention for her performances in Revolutionary Road and The Reader. She won a Golden Globe Award for each of these films, and for the latter, she was awarded the Academy Award and BAFTA Award for Best Actress. At age 33, she surpassed her own record as the youngest performer to accrue six Oscar nominations. She also became the third actress in history to win two Golden Globe Awards at the same ceremony. Exhausted by the media attention during this period, Winslet took two years off work until she was ready to creatively engage again. Winslet returned to acting with the five-part HBO miniseries Mildred Pierce (2011), an adaptation of James M. Cain's novel from the director Todd Haynes. It is about the titular heroine (Winslet), a divorcée during the Great Depression struggling to establish a restaurant business while yearning for the respect of her narcissistic daughter (played by Evan Rachel Wood). Winslet, who had recently divorced Mendes, believed certain aspects of her character's life mirrored her own. She was intimidated by the scope of the production, as she featured in every scene of the 280-page script. She was disturbed and upset by the story, and was particularly fascinated by the complex relationship between the mother-daughter pair. She collaborated closely with the production and costume designers, and learnt to bake pies and prepare chickens. The broadcast received a limited audience but gained positive reviews. Matt Zoller Seitz of Salon called the series a "quiet, heartbreaking masterpiece" and described Winslet's performance as "terrific—intelligent, focused and seemingly devoid of ego". She received the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress, in addition to Golden Globe and SAG Award wins. The ensemble thriller Contagion from Steven Soderbergh was Winslet's first film release of 2011. She was cast as a disease detective for the CDC, and she modelled her role on Anne Schuchat, the director of the NCIRD. Contagion was a commercial success, and David Denby of The New Yorker credited Winslet for capturing the essence of an exasperated woman. Her next project was the Roman Polanski-directed Carnage, adapted from the play God of Carnage by Yasmina Reza. Set entirely inside an apartment, the black comedy follows two sets of parents feuding over their respective children. Jodie Foster, John C. Reilly, and Christoph Waltz co-starred. The cast rehearsed the script like a play for two weeks, and Winslet brought her children with her to Paris for the eight weeks of filming. Critics found the adaptation to be less compelling than the play, but praised the performances of Winslet and Foster. They both received Golden Globe nominations for it. Winslet said her workload in 2011 helped her overcome heartbreak from her divorce, and after completing work on Carnage she took a break from acting to focus on her children. A short part that she had filmed four years prior for the anthology film Movie 43 was her sole screen appearance of 2012, and it yielded the worst reviews of her career. Winslet also performed an audiobook recording of Émile Zola's novel Thérèse Raquin. She was reluctant to accept Jason Reitman's offer to star in his 2013 film adaptation of Joyce Maynard's novel Labor Day, but agreed after Reitman postponed the production for a year to accommodate Winslet's commitment to her children. Set over a Labor Day weekend, it tells the story of Adele (Winslet), an agoraphobic single mother, who falls in love with an escaped convict. Describing Adele's characterisation as having "more vulnerability than strength", Winslet found her a departure from the strong-willed women she typically played. A scene in the film required her to make a pie, for which she drew on her baking experience from Mildred Pierce. Reviews of the film were negative; Chris Nashawaty of Entertainment Weekly dismissed it as "mawkish and melodramatic" but credited Winslet for adding layers to her passive role. She received her tenth Golden Globe nomination. The novelty of playing a villain drew Winslet to the part of Jeanine Matthews in the science fiction film Divergent (2014). Set in a dystopian future, the adaptation of Veronica Roth's young adult novel stars Shailene Woodley as a heroine fighting an oppressive regime headed by Winslet's character. She was pregnant with her third child during production, and her tight-fitting costumes had to be altered to accommodate the pregnancy. To maintain her character's intimidating persona, she remained aloof from her co-stars for much of the filming. Richard Lawson of Vanity Fair compared the film unfavourably to the Hunger Games series, and found Winslet to be underutilised in it. The film grossed $288 million worldwide. A Little Chaos marked her return to the period film genre. Directed by Alan Rickman, it is about a rivalry among gardeners commissioned to create a fountain at the Palace of Versailles. Winslet's role was that of fictional architect Sabine de Barra, a character she believed had overcome extreme grief and hardship like herself. Catherine Shoard of The Guardian took note of the "emotional honesty" Winslet brought to her part, but criticised the implausibility of her role. Also that year, she read audiobooks of Roald Dahl's children's novels Matilda and The Magic Finger. In 2015, Winslet reprised the role of Jeanine Matthews in the second instalment of the Divergent series, subtitled Insurgent, which despite negative reviews grossed $297 million worldwide. Her next film, an adaptation of the Australian gothic novel The Dressmaker, was described by the director Jocelyn Moorhouse as being reminiscent of the western Unforgiven (1992). Winslet starred as the femme fatale Tilly Dunnage, a seamstress who returns to her hometown years after she was accused of murder. She learnt to sew for the part and designed some of her own costumes. The project was filmed in the Australian desert and she found it difficult to wear couture dresses in the harsh weather. Despite disliking the film, Robert Abele of the Los Angeles Times credited Winslet for underplaying her over-the-top part. The film emerged as one of the highest-grossing Australian films of all time, but earned little elsewhere. Winslet won the AACTA Award for Best Actress. While filming The Dressmaker, Winslet became aware of a forthcoming Steve Jobs biopic written by Aaron Sorkin and directed by Danny Boyle. Keen on playing Jobs's marketing chief and confidante Joanna Hoffman, she sent a picture of herself dressed as Hoffman to the film's producer. Steve Jobs, starring Michael Fassbender in the title role, is told in three acts, each depicting a key milestone in Jobs's career. In preparation, Winslet spent time with Hoffman, and worked with a dialect coach to speak in Hoffman's accent, a mixture of Armenian and Polish, which she considered to be the most difficult of her career. The cast rehearsed each act like a play and filmed it in sequence. Winslet collaborated closely with Fassbender, and their off-screen relationship mirrored the collegial dynamic between Jobs and Hoffman. The film earned her some of the best reviews of her career, though it was a box-office flop. Peter Howell of the Toronto Star commended Winslet for finding "strength and grace" in her part, and Gregory Ellwood of HitFix thought she had improved on Hoffman's characterisation. She won the Golden Globe and BAFTA Awards for Best Supporting Actress, and received her seventh Oscar nomination. John Hillcoat's ensemble crime-thriller Triple 9 (2016) featured Winslet as Irina Vlaslov, a ruthless Russian-Israeli gangster. The critic Ann Hornaday of The Washington Post felt Winslet had failed to effectively portray her. Her next release of the year, Collateral Beauty, about a man (played by Will Smith) struggling with the death of his daughter, was panned by critics. Writing for New York magazine, Emily Yoshida dismissed the film as a vacuous remake of A Christmas Carol and added that Winslet had "never looked more painted and tired". It was a modest earner at the box office. Winslet agreed to the romantic disaster film The Mountain Between Us (2017) to take on the challenge of a role requiring physical exertion. It featured Idris Elba and her as two strangers who crash land on an icy and isolated mountain range. They filmed in the mountains of Western Canada at 10,000 feet (3,000 metres) above sea level where the temperature was well below freezing. Winslet performed her own stunts and described it as the most physically gruelling experience of her career. Moira Macdonald of The Seattle Times opined that the duo's charisma and chemistry had enhanced a mediocre film. Woody Allen's Wonder Wheel, a drama set in 1950s Coney Island, was Winslet's final release of 2017. She played Ginny, a temperamental housewife having an affair with a lifeguard (played by Justin Timberlake). She described her character as permanently dissatisfied and uneasy; playing the part proved difficult for Winslet, who suffered from anxiety. Manohla Dargis of The New York Times disliked Allen's writing but credited Winslet for filling her "shabby character with feverish life". When asked during the film's promotion about her decision to work with Allen despite an allegation of child molestation against him, Winslet chose not to comment on the filmmaker's personal life but stated she was pleased with the collaboration. She would later go on to express regret over working with both Allen and Roman Polanski. In 2019, Winslet provided her voice to Moominvalley, an animated television series about the Moomins, and took on a leading role alongside Susan Sarandon and Mia Wasikowska in Blackbird, a remake of the Danish film Silent Heart (2014). Benjamin Lee of The Guardian dismissed it as "less of a film and more of an actors' workshop" and found Winslet miscast. Winslet portrayed palaeontologist Mary Anning in Ammonite (2020), a period drama about a romance between Anning and Charlotte Murchison (played by Saoirse Ronan) set in 1840s England. She dropped out of Wes Anderson's The French Dispatch to have more preparation time for the project. She collaborated closely with Ronan, and they choreographed their own sex scenes. For much of the filming, she lived in isolation in a rented cottage in Dorset, where the film was shot, to get into her character's headspace. Caryn James of the BBC credited Winslet for portraying Anning as "stern and brittle but immensely sympathetic" and considered her "contained, potent performance" to be one of the best of her career, and Manuel Betancourt of New York magazine welcomed it as a "return to form". She next voiced the titular horse in a film adaptation of the novel Black Beauty, which was released on Disney+. In 2021, Winslet executive produced and starred in Mare of Easttown, an HBO miniseries about a troubled police detective solving a murder case. Set in Delaware County, Winslet insisted on using the "Delco accent", a version of Philadelphia English used in the county; she considered it to be one of the hardest accents she has had to learn. To play Mare, a woman who has lost a child to suicide, she created a backstory for her character and collaborated closely with a grief counsellor. The series and Winslet's performance received critical acclaim; Richard Roeper wrote that she "adds to a long list of magnificent, disappear-into-the-character performances" and Lucy Mangan of The Guardian opined, "If you can have a defining performance this late in a career, this is surely Winslet's." Mare of Easttown proved to be a ratings hit for HBO, and Winslet once again won the Primetime Emmy, Golden Globe, and SAG Awards for Best Actress in a miniseries. Following Mare of Easttown, Winslet took a year off work to spend time with her family. She narrated the documentary Eleven Days in May (2022), about the 2021 bombing of Gaza by Israel. She starred with her daughter Mia Threapleton in an improvised feature-length episode of the Channel 4 anthology series I Am..., titled "I Am Ruth", about the negative effects of social media. She won two BAFTA TV Awards for Best Actress and Best Single Drama (as producer). In her acceptance speech, she urged lawmakers to criminalise harmful digital content. In 2017 and 2018, Winslet concurrently filmed two sequels to James Cameron's science fiction film Avatar (2009) using motion capture technology. She learnt freediving for her role and was able to hold her breath underwater for seven minutes, setting a new record for any film scene shot underwater. Released in 2022, Avatar: The Way of Water earned over $2 billion to rank as the third highest-grossing film of all time and Winslet's second film after Titanic to cross the $2 billion mark. After being attached to a biopic of model and war photographer Lee Miller for eight years, Winslet produced and starred in Lee (2023). She hired cinematographer Ellen Kuras (who had filmed her in Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind) to make her feature directorial debut with the project. Winslet slipped and fell while filming, leading to three haematomas on her spine; she continued working despite the pain. Reviewers for The Hollywood Reporter and The Daily Beast noted how much Winslet's performance helped elevate a conventional biopic. Winslet next executive produced and starred in the HBO miniseries The Regime (2024), a satire about a fictional authoritarian country. To play a megalomaniac dictator, she consulted a neuroscientist and a psychotherapist to create a backstory for her character. Critics deemed her performance superior to the series. Winslet will next reprise her role in the sequel Avatar 3. Journalists consider Winslet to be among the finest actresses of her generation. Despite achieving stardom early in her career with the blockbuster Titanic, she has rarely acted in commerce-driven films. A journalist for Elle believes that her choices reflect the "soul and attitude of a jobbing actress, trapped in the body of a movie star". In a 2022 readers' poll by Empire magazine, Winslet was voted one of the 50 greatest actors of all time. The magazine termed her "a dramatic force, turning her hand to all kinds of periods and genres with an inimitable sense of dignity and strength". Winslet belongs to a group of esteemed British actresses who are typically showing "restraint, rendering emotions through intellect rather than feelings, and a sense of irony, which demonstrates the heroine's superior understanding". Tom Perrotta, the author of Little Children, has said that Winslet "gravitates toward troubling roles in smaller films", typically those of "thorny, potentially unsympathetic" women. The journalist Mark Harris writes that she specialises in "unsentimentalized, restless, troubled, discontented, disconcerted, difficult women" and John Hiscock of The Daily Telegraph has identified a theme of characters who are free-spirited with a sexual edge to them. Anthony Lane of The New Yorker associates Winslet with stubbornness, writing that "the set of her jaw and the blaze of her glance suggest a self-freeing spirit who knows the path ahead and is determined to take it". Stephen Whitty of NJ.com associates Winslet with "serious, almost despairing material", although he finds it hard to pigeonhole her as an actress. Josephine Livingstone of The New Republic, however, finds Winslet unconvincing in roles where she has "no real emotional vulnerability", believing she is most compelling when she has "the opportunity to get hysterical".  "I can't just learn my lines and do [my job], but perhaps that's because I don't want to act, I want to be. And I do think there's a difference." —Winslet on acting Leonardo DiCaprio, her co-star in Titanic and Revolutionary Road, considers Winslet to be "the most prepared and well-researched actor on set", and Jude Law, her co-star in The Holiday, believes that despite her seriousness she remains "very calm and good-natured". Her Steve Jobs director Danny Boyle has identified a willingness in Winslet to avoid typecasting and said that she takes an effort "to reposition directors' and producers' perspective on her" to allow herself to be challenged as an artist. Winslet has said she is interested in playing "angst-ridden women" with strong dispositions masking flaws and insecurities, and that she connects with "women who are either finding their way out of a situation, looking for love, having some struggle within love, or questioning the big things in life". Drawn to parts that are in tandem with her personal struggles at certain points in her life, she finds it difficult to detach herself from her roles, saying that "you have to confront your true feelings every single day. And that's pretty exhausting. Then you have to go home and make dinner". Even so, she finds it therapeutic to perform. Winslet is known for her willingness to perform nude scenes, having done so in over a dozen of her films, although she considers its contribution to the narrative before agreeing to it. She believes that such scenes promote a positive body image among women. While filming Dark Season, fifteen-year-old Winslet began a romantic relationship with actor-writer Stephen Tredre, who was twelve years her senior. She considered him a major influence in her life and they lived together in London from 1991. They broke up in 1995, but remained close until Tredre died of bone cancer two years later. Winslet decided not to attend the premiere of Titanic to attend his funeral. In 2008, she said that she had not overcome his death. A year after Tredre's death, Winslet met Jim Threapleton on the set of Hideous Kinky, on which he served as an assistant director. They married in November 1998 at her primary school in Reading, and their daughter, Mia Threapleton, was born in 2000. Describing her marriage to Threapleton as a "mess", Winslet later said she had lost control of her instincts during this period. They divorced in 2001. Soon after separating from Threapleton, she met director Sam Mendes when he offered her a part in a play; she turned down the offer but began dating him. Dismayed at how the British tabloids portrayed her personal life, Winslet relocated to New York City. She married Mendes in May 2003 on the island of Anguilla, and their son, Joe, was born later that year. The family divided their time in New York with frequent visits to their estate in the Cotswolds, England. Amid intense media speculation of an affair between Mendes and actress Rebecca Hall, he and Winslet announced their separation in 2010 and were divorced a year later. She reported being heartbroken by the split, but affirmed her determination to look after her children in spite of her marital breakups. While holidaying at Richard Branson's estate on Necker Island in 2011, Winslet met his nephew Edward Abel Smith (legally known as Ned Rocknroll from 2008 to 2019) during a house fire. They married in December 2012 in New York, and their son, Bear, was born the following year. After moving back to her native England, Winslet purchased a property worth £3.25 million by the sea in West Wittering, Sussex, where she lives with Smith and her children as of 2015[update]. In a 2015 interview, she commented on how much she enjoyed living in the countryside. Winslet has stated that despite three marriages and a family structure that might be perceived by some as "unconventional", she does not consider it to be any "less of a family". She turns down offers of work that otherwise would take her away from her children for too long, and likes to schedule her filming commitments around their school holidays. Discussing her parenting style, she said she enjoys packing lunches and doing the school run. Winslet has lent her support to several charities and causes, along with financial donations and items for auctions. In 2006, she became a patron of a Gloucester-based charity, the Family Haven, which provides counselling services to vulnerable families. The same year, hand-made envelopes designed by Winslet were auctioned for the "Pushing the Envelope" campaign created by the National Literacy Trust. Winslet was one of the celebrities to participate in a 2007 auction to raise funds for the Afghanistan Relief Organization. In 2009, she contributed to the Butterfly Book, a compilation of doodles made by several celebrities, to raise money for leukaemia research. Also in 2009, Winslet participated in a joint effort with Titanic co-star Leonardo DiCaprio, James Cameron, and Celine Dion, financially to help Millvina Dean, the then last-living survivor of the sinking of the Titanic. The donation amounted to $30,000 which was used to pay the fees of the nursing home in the United Kingdom where Dean was living. In 2009, Winslet narrated the English version of an Icelandic documentary named A Mother's Courage: Talking Back to Autism, about Margret Ericsdottir, whose child Keli Thorsteinsson has non-verbal autism. Inspired by the story, she teamed with Ericsdottir in 2010 to form an NGO named the Golden Hat Foundation. The organisation aims to create autism awareness and was named after a poem written by Thorsteinsson. As the ambassador for the luxury brands Lancôme and Longines, Winslet partnered with these companies to raise awareness and funds for the foundation. She created a make-up collection for Lancôme in 2011 and, in 2017, she designed a new watch for Longines. In 2012, Winslet wrote a book about autism, entitled The Golden Hat: Talking Back to Autism, which was published by Simon & Schuster. It contains correspondence between Winslet and Ericsdottir, personal statements from various celebrities, and contributions from Thorsteinsson. A reviewer for Publishers Weekly praised the book for its "warmth and sincerity". The United Nations featured the book during a ceremony on the World Autism Awareness Day of 2012. For her work with the Golden Hat Foundation, Winslet received Spain's Yo Dona award for Best Humanitarian Work. Winslet narrated a video for PETA in 2010 that showed animal cruelty in the production of foie gras. She encouraged chefs to remove the item from their menu and urged consumers to boycott it. In 2015, she lent her support to the UNICEF campaign World's Largest Lesson, which creates awareness among children about sustainable development and global citizenship. Teased as a child for her weight, Winslet takes a stand against body-shaming and bullying. She narrated an Australian animated short film named Daisy Chain (2015), about a victim of cyberbullying. In 2017, Winslet teamed with Leonardo DiCaprio's environmental foundation for a fundraiser on global warming. Also that year, she and DiCaprio auctioned a private dinner with themselves to raise money for a British woman's cancer treatment. Winslet teamed with Lancôme and the National Literacy Trust in 2018 to launch a programme that aims to educate underprivileged women in the UK. In 2020, Winslet read a bedtime story as part of Save with Stories to raise funds for Save the Children's Emergency Coronavirus Appeal. In 2021, Winslet commented on homophobia in Hollywood, saying that she knew actors "who are terrified their sexuality will be revealed and that it will stand in the way of their being cast in straight roles". In a 2015 article for Elle, Sally Holmes described Winslet's ability to establish rapport with her manner. Jo Ellison of Vogue writes that she has an "authoritative, almost ambassadorial aura", and Kira Cochrane of The Guardian considers her to be "articulate, sophisticated, [with] a definite hint of grandeur". Describing Winslet as plain-spoken, Krista Smith of Vanity Fair believes that despite her stardom she is unpretentious. Winslet's weight fluctuations over the years have been well-documented by the media. She has been outspoken in her refusal to allow Hollywood to dictate her weight. In 2003, the British edition of GQ magazine published photographs of Winslet which had been digitally altered to make her look thinner and taller. She said the alterations were made without her consent, and GQ subsequently issued an apology. In 2007, Winslet won a libel case against Grazia magazine after it claimed she had visited a dietitian. She claimed £10,000 in damages, and donated the amount to an eating disorder charity. She won another case in 2009 against the British tabloid Daily Mail after it claimed she had lied about her exercise regimen. She received an apology and a payout of £25,000. Winslet was included on People magazine's "Most Beautiful People" listing in 2005. Her beauty and sex appeal have been picked up by several other publications, including Harper's Bazaar, Who, and Empire magazines. She has said she does not subscribe to the beauty ideal of Hollywood, and uses her celebrity to empower women to accept their appearance with pride. She has spoken against Botox and plastic surgery. In an effort to encourage natural ageing, she formed the British Anti-Cosmetic Surgery League, alongside fellow actresses Emma Thompson and Rachel Weisz. She instructs magazines and brands not to digitally smooth her wrinkles in photographs. Winslet is reluctant to discuss the gender pay gap in the film industry, as she dislikes speaking publicly about her salary. She has expressed an aversion to elaborate press junkets and red carpet events, terming them a waste of money. In 2009, Forbes reported her annual salary to be $2 million, a majority of that stemming from her endorsement deals. Also that year, the UK Film Council calculated that she had earned £20 million from her acting roles since 1995. She was named one of the 100 most influential people in the world by Time magazine in 2009 and 2021. Madame Tussauds in London unveiled a wax statue of Winslet in 2011. The following year, she received the Honorary César award, and in 2014, she received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. Winslet was appointed Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in the 2012 Birthday Honours for her services to drama. Prolific in film since 1994, Winslet's most acclaimed and highest-grossing films, according to the online portal Box Office Mojo and the review aggregate site Rotten Tomatoes, include Heavenly Creatures (1994), Sense and Sensibility (1995), Hamlet (1996), Titanic (1997), Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind (2004), Finding Neverland (2004), The Holiday (2006), Contagion (2011), Divergent (2014), Insurgent (2015), Steve Jobs (2015), and Avatar: The Way of Water (2022). Her television projects include the miniseries Mildred Pierce (2011) and Mare of Easttown (2021). Winslet has been recognised by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences for the following performances: 68th Academy Awards: Best Supporting Actress, nomination, for Sense and Sensibility (1995) 70th Academy Awards: Best Actress, nomination, for Titanic (1997) 74th Academy Awards: Best Supporting Actress, nomination, for Iris (2001) 77th Academy Awards: Best Actress, nomination, for Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind (2004) 79th Academy Awards: Best Actress, nomination, for Little Children (2006) 81st Academy Awards: Best Actress, win, for The Reader (2008) 88th Academy Awards: Best Supporting Actress, nomination, for Steve Jobs (2015) Winslet has won five BAFTA Awards: Best Actress in a Leading Role for The Reader (2008); Best Actress in a Supporting Role for Sense and Sensibility (1995) and Steve Jobs (2016); Best Leading Actress and Best Single Drama for I Am Ruth. She has also won two Primetime Emmy Awards for Outstanding Actress in a Leading Role in a Limited or Anthology Series or Movie for Mildred Pierce (2011), and Mare of Easttown (2021) as well as the Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album for Children for narrating the children's audiobook Listen to the Storyteller (1999). Winslet is the recipient of five Golden Globe Awards from the Hollywood Foreign Press Association, winning Best Supporting Actress – Motion Picture for The Reader and Steve Jobs, Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Drama for Revolutionary Road, and Best Actress in a Miniseries or Motion Picture – Television for Mildred Pierce and Mare of Easttown. She is among the few actresses to have won three of the four major American entertainment awards. Agra katewinsletae List of youngest Academy Award nominees List of EGOT winners – People who have won Emmy, Grammy and Academy Awards Smith was legally known as Ned Rocknroll from 2008 to 2019. Kurp, Josh (15 January 2021). "Kate Winslet Explains Why Husband Is No Longer Named 'Ned Rocknroll'". Uproxx. Archived from the original on 9 April 2021. Retrieved 23 May 2021. As pronounced by Winslet in the following: "A Slate Show" with Stephen Colbert, Feat. Megan Thee Stallion, Tom Hanks and More. The Late Show with Stephen Colbert. YouTube. 13 March 2021. Event occurs at 3:20. Archived from the original on 14 November 2021. Retrieved 14 March 2021. Lusher, Adam (7 December 2015). "Kate Winslet claims that being English is a one-way ticket to a Hollywood acting career". The Independent. Archived from the original on 29 September 2021. Retrieved 26 September 2021. When you are an English actor and you go into another country," she said, "They automatically assume you are fully trained … Which I've played on, believe me. "Kate Winslet Biography: Film Actress, Television Actress (1975–)". Biography.com (FYI/A&E Networks). Archived from the original on 17 July 2016. Retrieved 7 July 2016. Barratt, Nick (5 December 2005). "Family detective: Kate Winslet". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 3 March 2008. Retrieved 16 October 2021. "Kate Winslet discovers her Irish roots". Irish Central. 6 August 2019. Archived from the original on 7 August 2019. Retrieved 12 August 2019. Kate Winslet can trace her roots back to Dublin. She learns about this link, courtesy of her paternal great-great-great-grandmother Eliza O'Brien... her roots are primarily British, Irish, and Swedish... The actress had long had a hunch her maternal ancestors were from Sweden but sadly was unable to confirm this before her mother, Sally, died Fox, Chloe (3 January 2013). "Kate Winslet: 'I don't do theatre because I'm not prepared to miss my children's bedtime'". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 28 July 2017. Retrieved 29 October 2017. Benson, Richard (12 December 2008). "Kate Winslet: girl interrupted". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 4 March 2011. Retrieved 14 April 2011. Feinberg, Scott (11 November 2013). "'Labor Day' Star Kate Winslet on Defying Expectations, Onscreen and Off (Q&A)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on 24 March 2016. Retrieved 30 October 2017. "Titanic star in low-key wedding". BBC News. 22 November 1998. Archived from the original on 27 September 2015. Retrieved 1 November 2017. Hiscock, John (18 September 2013). "Kate Winslet: 'I still absolutely believe in true love'". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 9 June 2016. Retrieved 1 November 2017. Real, Evan (3 January 2016). "Kate Winslet Opens Up About Being Bullied as a Kid: "I Was Teased for How I Looked"". Marie Claire. Archived from the original on 30 September 2016. Retrieved 30 October 2017. Berrington, Katie (23 September 2016). "Kate Winslet's "Sweet" Revenge". Vogue. Archived from the original on 25 June 2017. Retrieved 30 October 2017. "Kate Winslet, who is from Reading, took part in the WE Day arena tour". The Reading Chronicle. 23 March 2017. Archived from the original on 23 March 2017. Retrieved 30 October 2017. Millea, Holly (November 1999). "The New Passions of Kate Winslet". Premiere: 127–140. ASIN B000A7IUZA. Foster, Patrick; Ward, Victoria (15 February 2016). "Kate Winslet's school denies claims that teacher told her to settle for 'fat girl parts'". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 2 February 2017. Retrieved 30 October 2017. "Kate Winslet passed over for being too fat". The Daily Telegraph. 21 February 2011. Archived from the original on 3 April 2015. Retrieved 13 March 2015. Midgley, Emma (24 February 2011). "Reading charity celebrates birthday with Winslet film". BBC News. Archived from the original on 3 April 2015. Retrieved 13 March 2015. Vallely, Paul (17 January 2009). "Kate Winslet: The golden girl". The Independent. Archived from the original on 22 March 2010. Retrieved 3 December 2009. "Profile: Kate Winslet". BBC News. 23 February 2009. Archived from the original on 30 September 2009. Retrieved 3 December 2009. Cornell, Paul; Day, Martin; Topping, Keith (30 July 2015). The Classic British Telefantasy Guide. Orion. p. 28. ISBN 978-0-575-13352-5. Archived from the original on 30 October 2017. Docherty, Mark J.; McGown, Alistair D. (26 April 2003). The Hill and Beyond: Children's Television Drama – An Encyclopedia. British Film Institute. pp. 237–238. ISBN 978-0-85170-878-2. Roberts, Jerry (5 June 2009). Encyclopedia of Television Film Directors. Scarecrow Press. p. 327. ISBN 978-0-8108-6378-1. Archived from the original on 30 October 2017. Wiegand, David (13 July 2008). "DVD review: 'Anglo-Saxon Attitudes'". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on 27 October 2017. Retrieved 26 October 2017. Lipsky, David (5 March 1998). "The Unsinkable Kate Winslet". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 26 October 2017. Retrieved 26 October 2017. Leith, William (20 September 1992). "It's a funny business". The Independent. Archived from the original on 9 November 2012. Retrieved 25 September 2010. Chagollan, Steve (17 March 2014). "Walk of Fame Honoree Kate Winslet Keeps Raising the Bar". Variety. Archived from the original on 27 October 2017. Retrieved 26 October 2017. "Casualty's Oscar links". BBC News. 26 February 2009. Archived from the original on 11 November 2012. Retrieved 26 October 2017. Sibley, Brian (2006). Peter Jackson: A Film-maker's Journey. HarperCollins Entertainment. p. 243. ISBN 978-0-00-717558-1. Archived from the original on 30 October 2017. Dening, Penelope (9 March 1996). "Winslet ways". Irish Times. Archived from the original on 1 November 2017. Retrieved 26 October 2017. "Heavenly Creatures". Rotten Tomatoes. 16 November 1994. Archived from the original on 29 October 2014. Retrieved 6 October 2014. Masters, Tim (3 April 2014). "Kate Winslet: 'I wish I'd had help dealing with fame'". BBC News. Archived from the original on 27 October 2017. Retrieved 26 October 2017. Howe, Desson (25 November 1994). "Heavenly Creatures". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 19 March 2012. Retrieved 2 February 2008. "Heavenly Creatures (Original Soundtrack)". BMG Rights Management. 1 January 1994. Archived from the original on 6 November 2017. Retrieved 6 November 2017. "Venice Preserved". Plays and Players: 32. 1994. Archived from the original on 30 October 2017. Elias, Justine (7 December 1995). "Kate Winslet: No 'Period Babe'". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 11 November 2012. Retrieved 2 February 2008. Parkinson, David. "Sense and Sensibility". Radio Times. Archived from the original on 29 August 2012. Retrieved 1 September 2012. LaSalle, Mick (13 December 1995). "A fine 'Sensibility', Emma Thompson adapts Jane Austen's classic story". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on 26 October 2012. Retrieved 31 August 2012. "Sense and Sensibility (1995)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on 25 July 2012. Retrieved 23 August 2012. "The 2nd Annual Screen Actors Guild Awards". Screen Actors Guild. Archived from the original on 18 January 2014. Retrieved 13 August 2011. Macdonald, Marianne (22 April 1996). "Emma Thompson adds Bafta to Oscar trophies". The Independent. UK. Archived from the original on 26 January 2012. Retrieved 13 August 2011. "Nominees & Winners for the 68th Academy Awards". Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. Archived from the original on 1 February 2014. Retrieved 13 August 2011. "HFPA – Awards Search". Hollywood Foreign Press Association. Archived from the original on 11 August 2011. Retrieved 13 August 2011. Nashawaty, Chris (2 December 2011). "24 Stars' Worst Movies". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on 17 February 2018. Retrieved 16 February 2018. Ebert, Roger (1 November 1996). "Jude Movie Review". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on 26 October 2017. Retrieved 26 October 2017. Jeffries, Mike (1 January 1996). "Hamlet Review". Empire. Archived from the original on 26 October 2017. Retrieved 26 October 2017. "Kate Winslet Movie Box Office Results". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on 27 October 2017. Retrieved 26 October 2017. "Kate Winslet". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on 30 August 2017. Retrieved 26 October 2017. Smith, Krista (3 November 2008). "Isn't she Deneuvely?". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on 3 January 2017. Retrieved 28 October 2017. "Titanic". Entertainment Weekly. 7 November 1997. pp. 1–7. Archived from the original on 10 October 2008. Retrieved 24 January 2010. Gritten, David (11 May 1997). "Back From the Abyss". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 4 February 2017. Retrieved 27 October 2016. Perez, Lexy (1 December 2017). "Kate Winslet, Stephen Colbert Reenact 'Titanic' Ending". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on 23 June 2019. Retrieved 23 June 2019. Ansen, David (14 December 1997). "Rough Waters". Newsweek. Archived from the original on 13 October 2016. Retrieved 27 October 2016. Clark, Mike. "Flashback: Read our original review of 'Titanic'". USA Today. Archived from the original on 16 May 2017. Retrieved 27 October 2016. "Worldwide Grosses". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on 16 July 2001. Retrieved 18 April 2015. Riding, Alan (12 September 1999). "For Kate Winslet, Being a Movie Star iIs 'a Bit Daft'". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 3 January 2017. Retrieved 27 October 2016. Davis, Jason (24 March 1998). "Love story that won the heart of the Academy: The love story that stole the world's hearts". BBC News. Archived from the original on 8 March 2008. Retrieved 11 September 2007. "Titanic - Golden Globes". Golden Globes. Archived from the original on 1 December 2020. Retrieved 13 October 2021. "The 4th Annual Screen Actors Guild Awards". Screen Actors Guild Awards. Archived from the original on 1 May 2021. Retrieved 13 October 2021. Mackenzie, Suzie (10 April 2004). "Perfecting the illusion". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 27 October 2017. Retrieved 27 October 2017. Maslin, Janet (16 April 1999). "Life With Mother Can Be Erratic, to Say the Least". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 22 February 2012. Retrieved 4 February 2008. Wloszczyna, Susan (23 December 2008). "A Revolutionary Road for Titanic friends DiCaprio, Winslet". USA Today. Archived from the original on 28 December 2008. Retrieved 4 February 2008. Gerrard, Nicci (12 March 2000). "Kate gets real". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 27 October 2017. Retrieved 27 October 2017. Brook, Tom (5 November 1999). "Holy Smoke: Winslet's back". BBC News. Archived from the original on 27 October 2017. Retrieved 27 October 2017. Rooney, David (7 September 1999). "Holy Smoke". Variety. Archived from the original on 27 October 2017. Retrieved 27 October 2017. "Festive TV treat for Winslet fans". BBC News. 18 November 1999. Archived from the original on 8 March 2008. Retrieved 5 February 2008. "Listen to the Storyteller – A Trio of Musical Tales from Around the World". Sony Classical Records. 17 August 1999. Archived from the original on 28 October 2017. Retrieved 27 October 2017. "Grammy Award Results for Kate Winslet". The Recording Academy. Archived from the original on 30 October 2017. Retrieved 27 October 2017. Allen, Jamie (15 December 2000). "'Quills' scribe channels sadistic Sade". CNN. Archived from the original on 24 June 2007. Retrieved 31 March 2007. Thomas, Rebecca (28 December 2000). "Quills Ruffling Feathers". BBC News. Archived from the original on 1 February 2008. Retrieved 27 March 2007. Greenberg, James (November 2000). "Say Anything". Los Angeles: 54–55. ISSN 1522-9149. Archived from the original on 30 October 2017. "The 7th Annual Screen Actors Guild Awards". Screen Actors Guild Award. 2001. Archived from the original on 17 March 2016. Retrieved 22 January 2014. Mottram, James (20 August 2001). "Interview – Kate Winslet". BBC News. Archived from the original on 5 April 2007. Retrieved 27 October 2017. "Winslet Hid Pregnancy Under Corsets". ABC News. 20 August 2001. Archived from the original on 27 October 2017. Retrieved 27 October 2017. Turan, Kenneth (14 December 2001). "Connecting with the Poignant 'Iris'". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 17 October 2015. Retrieved 27 October 2017. Youngs, Ian (24 February 2002). "The importance of being Iris". BBC News. Archived from the original on 27 October 2017. Retrieved 27 October 2017. Amis, Martin (21 December 2001). "Age will win". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 27 October 2017. Retrieved 27 October 2017. Irvine, Chris (23 January 2009). "Oscar nomination 2009: Kate Winslet will join list of great Oscar losers if she is defeated". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 26 March 2010. Retrieved 27 October 2017. "Kate Winslet tunes up for a singing career". The Guardian. 25 June 2001. Archived from the original on 25 December 2013. Retrieved 3 December 2009. "Winslet launches festive chart bid". BBC News. 26 November 2001. Archived from the original on 26 January 2017. Retrieved 4 November 2017. Lee, Alana (10 March 2003). "Kate Winslet: The Life of David Gale". BBC News. Archived from the original on 27 June 2006. Retrieved 27 October 2017. LaSalle, Mick (21 February 2003). "Lack of mystery undermines 'David Gale' / Muddled treatise on death penalty". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on 27 October 2017. Retrieved 27 October 2017. Bunbury, Stephanie (2 January 2005). "Mother Superior". The Age. Archived from the original on 18 February 2009. Retrieved 7 February 2009. Rosen, Christopher (19 March 2014). "Kate Winslet Remembers How 'Eternal Sunshine Of The Spotless Mind' Helped Change Her Career". HuffPost. Archived from the original on 27 October 2017. Retrieved 28 February 2020. Oei, Lily (2 January 2005). "Kate Winslet: Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind". Variety. Archived from the original on 14 March 2005. Retrieved 28 February 2020. Holmes, A.M. "Kate Winslet, 2004". Index Magazine. Archived from the original on 28 May 2017. Retrieved 27 October 2017. "Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on 10 May 2013. Retrieved 27 October 2017. "The 21st Century's 100 Greatest Films". BBC News. 23 August 2016. Archived from the original on 31 January 2017. Retrieved 16 August 2017. Dargis, Manohla; Scott, A.O. (9 June 2017). "The 25 Best Films of the 21st Century...So Far". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 8 July 2017. Retrieved 8 July 2017. Travers, Peter (10 March 2004). "Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 22 June 2008. Retrieved 28 February 2020. "The 100 Greatest Performances of All Time: 100–75". Premiere. Archived from the original on 31 March 2009. Retrieved 30 January 2009. Richards, Olly (November 2006). "In Conversation with Kate Winslet". Empire: 159–164. "Nominees & Winners for the 74th Academy Awards". Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. 2005. Archived from the original on 2 May 2017. Retrieved 22 April 2015. "BAFTA gives Winslet two best actress nods". Today. 19 January 2005. Archived from the original on 27 October 2017. Retrieved 27 October 2017. Irvine, Chris (8 November 2009). "Kate Winslet 'worth £60 million' to British economy". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 11 November 2009. Retrieved 27 October 2017. Hohenadel, Kristen (7 November 2004). "Behind the Writer Behind Peter Pan". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 27 October 2017. Retrieved 27 October 2017. Taykor, Ella (11 November 2004). "The Other Dr. Strangelove". LA Weekly. Archived from the original on 27 October 2017. Retrieved 27 October 2017. Clinton, Paul (19 November 2004). "Review: 'Finding Neverland' a joy to see". CNN. Archived from the original on 12 May 2016. Retrieved 27 October 2017. "Finding Neverland". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on 5 April 2017. Retrieved 27 October 2017. Ryan, Amy (26 September 2005). "Snap Judgment: 'Extras'". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on 27 October 2017. Retrieved 27 October 2017. "Kate Winslet: Awards and nominations". Academy of Television Arts & Sciences. Archived from the original on 27 October 2017. Retrieved 27 October 2017. Schaefer, Stephen (27 November 2007). "Winslet swears by role". Boston Herald. p. 27. Holden, Stephen (7 September 2007). "Blue Collar Guy Loses His Heart and Ruins His Lungs". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 17 April 2009. Retrieved 3 December 2009. Elley, Derek (5 September 2007). "Romance & Cigarettes". Variety. Archived from the original on 4 November 2015. Retrieved 7 February 2009. "All The King's Men (2006)". Rotten Tomatoes. 22 September 2006. Archived from the original on 30 August 2017. Retrieved 27 October 2017. "All the King's Men". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on 27 October 2017. Retrieved 27 October 2017. Chang, Justin (12 December 2006). "Kate Winslet, 'Little Children'". Variety. Archived from the original on 28 October 2017. Retrieved 27 October 2017. Hiscock, John (27 October 2006). "Why Winslet bared body and soul". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 31 August 2015. Retrieved 27 October 2017. Scott, A.O. (29 September 2006). "Playground Rules: No Hitting, No Sex". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 13 November 2007. Retrieved 29 September 2006. "Baftas 2007: The winners". BBC News. 11 February 2007. Archived from the original on 5 March 2016. Retrieved 30 October 2017. "In profile: Best actress nominees". BBC News. 23 January 2007. Archived from the original on 28 October 2017. Retrieved 27 October 2017. Weintraub, Steve (8 December 2006). "Collider Interviews Kate Winslet and Nancy Meyers – 'The Holiday'". Collider. Archived from the original on 28 October 2017. Retrieved 27 October 2017. "The Holiday". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on 29 January 2009. Retrieved 7 February 2009. Chang, Justin (30 November 2006). "The Holiday". Variety. Archived from the original on 28 October 2017. Retrieved 28 October 2017. Stuart, Jen (3 November 2006). "A puppet's life goes down the toilet". Newsday. Archived from the original on 26 November 2006. Retrieved 8 June 2015. Quinn, Anthony (8 August 2008). "The Fox and the Child (U)". The Independent. Archived from the original on 7 April 2014. Retrieved 2 April 2014. Harris, Mark (19 February 2009). "Best Actress: Kate Winslet's Moment". Time. Archived from the original on 30 October 2017. Retrieved 28 October 2017. Cochraine, Kira (19 December 2008). "'I did have moments where I'd say, Oh my God ...'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 29 October 2017. Retrieved 28 October 2017. Edelstein, David (12 December 2008). "'Tis the Season ..." New York. Archived from the original on 31 January 2009. Retrieved 10 January 2009. Meza, Ed; Fleming, Michael (8 January 2008). "Winslet replaces Kidman in 'Reader'". Variety. Archived from the original on 4 November 2015. Retrieved 10 January 2008. Balfour, Brad (23 January 2009). "Actress Kate Winslet Struggles With Making The Reader, The Nazi Era and Oscar Buzz". HuffPost. Archived from the original on 28 September 2016. Retrieved 28 February 2020. Shipman, Tim (15 February 2009). "Kate Winslet's Oscar chances hit by The Reader Nazi accusation". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 14 August 2016. Retrieved 8 November 2017. Todd, McCarthy (30 November 2008). "The Reader". Variety. Archived from the original on 28 October 2017. Retrieved 28 October 2017. Sandhu, Sukhdev (29 December 2008). "The Reader – review". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 28 November 2015. Retrieved 28 October 2017. Graham, Mark (23 January 2009). "Getting to the Bottom of Kate Winslet's Unprecedented Oscar Snubs". New York. Archived from the original on 27 January 2009. Retrieved 30 January 2009. "Trivia". Hollywood Foreign Press Association. Archived from the original on 28 October 2017. Retrieved 28 October 2017. Ellison, Jo (April 2011). "Solo Act". Vogue: 218–225. "Interview: Kate Winslet on Mildred Pierce". Radio Times. 24 June 2011. Archived from the original on 29 October 2017. Retrieved 28 October 2017. Raddish, Christina (2 February 2011). "Kate Winslet and Director Todd Haynes Interview: Mildred Pierce". Collider. Archived from the original on 29 October 2017. Retrieved 28 October 2017. Collins, Scott (29 March 2011). "HBO's 'Mildred Pierce' With Kate Winslet Opens To Disappointing Ratings". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 5 April 2011. Retrieved 21 May 2011. "Mildred Pierce". Metacritic. Archived from the original on 30 August 2011. Retrieved 21 May 2011. Seitz, Matt Zoller (24 March 2011). "Mildred Pierce Is A Quiet, Heartbreaking Masterpiece". Salon. Archived from the original on 4 June 2011. Retrieved 21 May 2011. Wicks, Kevin (September 2011). "Emmys: 'Downton' Nearly Sweeps, Kate Winslet Edges Toward EGOT". BBC America. Archived from the original on 23 October 2013. Retrieved 28 October 2017. "Mildred Pierce". Hollywood Foreign Press Association. Archived from the original on 20 January 2012. Retrieved 16 January 2012. "The 18th Annual Screen Actors Guild Awards". Screen Actors Guild. Archived from the original on 19 June 2012. Retrieved 30 January 2012. Barclay, Eliza (14 September 2011). "'Contagion': CDC Basks In Hollywood's Admiring Take On Disease Detectives". National Public Radio. Archived from the original on 16 September 2011. Retrieved 16 September 2011. "Contagion (2011)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on 24 October 2011. Retrieved 28 October 2011. Denby, David (19 September 2011). "Call the Doctor". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on 8 April 2015. Retrieved 28 October 2011. Ellen, Gamerman (9 December 2011). "On Playing One of Four 'Caged Animals'". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 30 May 2015. Retrieved 28 October 2011. Chris, Michaud (16 December 2011). "Kate Winslet finds delight in "Carnage"". Reuters. Archived from the original on 29 October 2017. Retrieved 28 October 2011. "Carnage (2011)". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on 30 August 2017. Retrieved 28 October 2017. "Carnage". Hollywood Foreign Press Association. Archived from the original on 29 October 2017. Retrieved 29 October 2017. Sherwell, Phillip (29 October 2017). "Movie 43: How Kate Winslet and Hugh Jackman lured all-star cast to 'the worst film ever'". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 3 February 2013. Retrieved 2 February 2013. Roeper, Richard (25 January 2013). "There's awful and then there's 'Movie 43'". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on 14 February 2014. Retrieved 26 January 2013. Gelt, Jessica (14 March 2012). "Audiobooks are going Hollywood". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 14 March 2012. Retrieved 14 March 2012. "Audiobook Review: Thérèse Raquin". AudioFile. 5 May 2012. Archived from the original on 30 October 2012. Retrieved 5 May 2012. Hammond, Pete (22 December 2013). "Oscars Q&A: Kate Winslet On 'Labor Day'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on 21 June 2017. Retrieved 29 October 2017. "Labor Day (2014)". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on 8 February 2014. Retrieved 8 February 2014. Nashwaty, Chris (11 February 2014). "Labor Day Movie". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on 29 October 2017. Retrieved 29 October 2017. "Making Sense of This Morning's Golden Globe Nominations and Snubs (Analysis)". The Hollywood Reporter. 12 December 2013. Archived from the original on 16 December 2013. Retrieved 1 January 2014. Alexander, Bryan (6 July 2013). "On set of 'Divergent', Kate Winslet is pregnant and mean". USA Today. Archived from the original on 18 February 2014. Retrieved 17 March 2014. Feeney, Nolan (17 March 2015). "Kate Winslet on Insurgent: I Wanted More Fight Scenes With Shailene Woodley". Time. Archived from the original on 24 July 2016. Retrieved 29 October 2017. Lawson, Richard (20 March 2014). "The Generic Dystopia of Divergent". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on 13 April 2016. Retrieved 29 October 2017. "Divergent (2014)". Box Office Mojo. 21 March 2014. Archived from the original on 1 October 2014. Retrieved 2 October 2014. Kilcooley-O'Halloran, Scarlett (15 April 2015). "Kate's Occasional Chaos". Vogue. Archived from the original on 25 June 2017. Retrieved 29 October 2017. Shoard, Catherine (10 September 2014). "A Little Chaos review – Louis XIV gardening romp borders on ridiculous". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 11 September 2014. Retrieved 10 September 2014. Matilda by Roald Dahl. Penguin Random House. 11 September 2014. Archived from the original on 30 October 2017. Retrieved 29 October 2017. "The Magic Finger by Roald Dahl". Penguin Random House. 11 September 2014. Archived from the original on 14 November 2017. Retrieved 14 November 2017. "Insurgent". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on 17 March 2015. Retrieved 20 March 2015. "Insurgent (2015)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on 19 April 2015. Retrieved 19 April 2015. Yuan, Jada (15 September 2015). "Kate Winslet Discusses the Many Reasons The Dressmaker Will Make You Jealous of Her". New York. Archived from the original on 30 June 2017. Retrieved 29 October 2017. Schonfield, Zach (3 October 2016). "Kate Winslet: The Newsweek Interview". Newsweek. Archived from the original on 19 August 2017. Retrieved 29 October 2017. Abele, Robert (21 September 2016). "Review: Australian drama 'The Dressmaker' has hearty energy but quickly wears out its welcome". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 24 October 2017. Retrieved 29 October 2017. Bodey, Michael (23 December 2015). "The Dressmaker set to enter top 10 at box office". The Australian. Retrieved 29 October 2017. "The Dressmaker (2016)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on 29 October 2017. Retrieved 29 October 2017. Frater, Patrick (9 December 2015). "'Mad Max,' 'Dressmaker' Split Australian Academy Awards". Variety. Archived from the original on 11 December 2015. Retrieved 28 October 2015. Lipsky-Karasz, Elisa (30 September 2015). "Director's Darling: Kate Winslet Stars in the Highly Anticipated Film 'Steve Jobs'". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 9 September 2017. Retrieved 29 October 2017. Lang, Brent (25 October 2015). "'Steve Jobs' Bombs: What Went Wrong With the Apple Drama". Variety. Archived from the original on 14 June 2017. Retrieved 29 October 2017. Brzeski, Patrick (14 May 2016). "Wanda's Legendary Lost $500 Million in 2015, Chinese Filing Reveals". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on 10 November 2017. Retrieved 9 November 2017. Howell, Peter (29 October 2017). "Steve Jobs a man as imperfect and 'insanely great' as his machines: review". Toronto Star. Archived from the original on 18 October 2015. Retrieved 16 October 2015. "Review: Aaron Sorkin dominates the ambitious three-act drama that is 'Steve Jobs'". HitFix. 6 September 2015. Archived from the original on 8 September 2015. Retrieved 6 September 2015. Ellis-Petersen, Hannah; Lee, Benjamin (14 February 2016). "Kate Winslet: I was told to 'settle for the fat girl parts'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 7 October 2017. Retrieved 29 October 2017. Konerman, Jennifer (10 January 2016). "Golden Globes: Kate Winslet Wins Best Supporting Actress in a Motion Picture". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on 11 May 2016. Retrieved 29 October 2017. Piccalo, Gina (21 January 2016). "The Envelope: Oscars 2016: How a wig helped Kate Winslet snag her nominated 'Steve Jobs' role". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 24 October 2017. Retrieved 29 October 2017. Rubenstein, Holly (17 February 2016). "Kate Winslet says playing a Brit "would be ultimate challenge"". Reuters. Archived from the original on 30 October 2017. Retrieved 29 October 2017. Hornady, Ann (25 February 2016). "An appealing Casey Affleck plays one of Atlanta's finest in 'Triple 9'". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 8 November 2017. Retrieved 29 October 2017. Jackson, Danielle (13 December 2016). "Collateral Beauty reviews: Will Smith movie slammed by critics". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on 1 January 2017. Retrieved 31 December 2016. Yoshida, Emily (16 December 2016). "Collateral Beauty Is a Cold and Crass Christmas Carol Remake That's Exactly As Bad As You've Heard". New York. Archived from the original on 16 December 2016. Retrieved 17 December 2016. "Collateral Beauty (2016)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on 5 August 2017. Retrieved 29 October 2017. Zemler, Emily (19 June 2017). "Kate Winslet Says Titanic Prepared Her for The Mountain Between Us". Elle. Archived from the original on 30 October 2017. Retrieved 29 October 2017. Ryzik, Melena (6 September 2017). "Kate Winslet Relives Two Haunting Film Experiences". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 10 September 2017. Retrieved 29 October 2017. Whitaker, Helen (27 September 2017). "Kate Winslet: "Me and Leo? We quote the odd Titanic line to each other."". Glamour. Archived from the original on 30 October 2017. Retrieved 29 October 2017. Macdonald, Moira (3 October 2017). "'The Mountain Between Us' review: Idris Elba, Kate Winslet keep film aloft". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on 6 October 2017. Retrieved 29 October 2017. Setoodeh, Ramin (October 2017). "Kate Winslet on Woody Allen, 'Wonder Wheel' and the 20th Anniversary of 'Titanic'". Variety. Archived from the original on 24 October 2017. Retrieved 29 October 2017. Dargis, Manohla (30 November 2017). "Review: 'Wonder Wheel,' Woody Allen's Coney Island Memory Palace". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 8 December 2017. Retrieved 8 December 2017. Miller, Julie (10 September 2020). "Kate Winslet, Unfiltered: 'Because Life Is F–king Short'". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on 1 October 2020. Retrieved 11 September 2020. Golby, Joel (13 April 2019). "Why are Rosamund Pike and Kate Winslet stuck in the CGI Moominvalley?". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 16 April 2019. Retrieved 16 April 2019. Lee, Benjamin (7 September 2019). "Blackbird review – Sarandon and Winslet's lifeless death drama". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 8 September 2019. Retrieved 10 September 2019. Wiseman, Andreas (14 December 2018). "Kate Winslet & Saoirse Ronan To Star In Romance 'Ammonite' For 'The King's Speech' & 'Lady Macbeth' Producers". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on 14 December 2018. Retrieved 15 December 2018. Siegel, Tatiana (26 August 2020). ""Oh F***, I've Forgotten How to Act": Kate Winslet, Back in the Awards Race With Same-Sex Romance 'Ammonite,' on Getting Back to Work". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on 27 August 2020. Retrieved 27 August 2020. James, Caryn (12 September 2020). "Film review: Five stars for the 'exquisite' Ammonite". BBC. Archived from the original on 12 September 2020. Retrieved 12 September 2020. Betancourt, Manuel (27 May 2021). "12 Essential Kate Winslet Performances". New York. Archived from the original on 27 May 2021. Retrieved 27 May 2021. McNary, Dave (7 May 2019). "Mackenzie Foy, Kate Winslet to Star in 'Black Beauty'". Variety. Archived from the original on 7 May 2019. Retrieved 8 May 2019. Porter, Rick (23 January 2019). "Kate Winslet Returns to HBO for Limited Series". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on 23 January 2019. Retrieved 23 January 2019. Adams, Sam (16 April 2021). "Why Most Actors Won't Even Attempt a Philadelphia Accent". Slate. Archived from the original on 17 May 2021. Retrieved 18 April 2021. Travers, Ben (10 February 2021). "'Mare of Easttown': Kate Winslet's HBO Limited Series Sets Release Date, First Details". IndieWire. Archived from the original on 8 May 2021. Retrieved 18 April 2021. Hill, Libby (6 June 2021). "Kate Winslet Details the Tragic Backstory She Constructed for 'Mare of Easttown'". IndieWire. Archived from the original on 9 December 2022. Retrieved 9 December 2022. "Mare of Easttown: Miniseries (2021)". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on 27 April 2021. Retrieved 1 December 2021. Mangan, Lucy (19 April 2021). "Mare of Easttown review – Kate Winslet triumphs in a moreish murder mystery". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 8 June 2021. Retrieved 3 May 2021. Roeper, Richard (16 April 2021). "'Mare of Easttown': Kate Winslet plays a troubled detective with authority, authenticity". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on 20 April 2021. Retrieved 3 July 2022. Porter, Rick (1 June 2021). "'Mare of Easttown' Finale Reaches Series Highs on HBO, HBO Max". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on 9 June 2021. Retrieved 8 June 2021. Perez, Lexy (19 September 2021). "Emmys: Kate Winslet Wins Best Limited Series Actress for Playing "Imperfect, Flawed Mother" in 'Mare of Easttown'". The Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 20 September 2021. Retrieved 19 September 2021. Hipes, Patrick (9 January 2022). "Golden Globes: The Complete Winners List". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 10 January 2022. Respers France, Lisa (28 February 2022). "SAG Awards 2022: The winners list". CNN. Archived from the original on 1 March 2022. Retrieved 1 March 2022. Longeretta, Emily (8 March 2022). "Kate Winslet Can't Wait to Throw Herself Back Into Work After Yearlong Break: 'I Am Craving' It". Variety. Archived from the original on 9 March 2022. Retrieved 10 March 2022. Bradshaw, Peter (4 May 2022). "Eleven Days in May review – heart-wrenching documentary on the grimness of life in Gaza". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 10 May 2022. Retrieved 11 May 2022. Weatherall, Greg (4 December 2022). "Kate Winslet Was 'Impressed' by Daughter Mia Threapleton's Performance in Drama 'I Am Ruth'". Variety. Archived from the original on 7 December 2022. Retrieved 7 December 2022. Yossman, K.J. (14 May 2023). "Kate Winslet, Netflix's 'Dahmer' Among the Winners at BAFTA TV Awards 2023". Variety. Archived from the original on 14 May 2023. Retrieved 14 May 2023. Milmo, Dan (15 May 2023). "Campaigners welcome Kate Winslet plea about online safety and children". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 17 May 2023. Retrieved 18 May 2023. Brookins, Laurie (30 April 2018). "Kate Winslet Talks Timepieces, 'Avatar 2' and a Treasured Gift From Eli Wallach". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on 5 May 2018. Retrieved 5 May 2018. Guttman, Graeme (19 January 2021). "Avatar 2 Or 3? Kate Winslet Couldn't Tell Them Apart When Filming". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on 31 December 2022. Retrieved 2 January 2023. Stolworthy, Jacob (14 June 2018). "Avatar director James Cameron required Kate Winslet to hold breath underwater for seven minutes in watery sequels". The Independent. Archived from the original on 27 June 2018. Retrieved 27 June 2018. Rawden, Jessica (1 November 2020). "Kate Winslet Beats Tom Cruise's Underwater Record In Avatar 2". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on 1 November 2020. Retrieved 4 April 2022. Klein, Brennan (22 January 2023). "Avatar: Way of Water Makes Box Office History By Crossing $2 Billion". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on 22 January 2023. Retrieved 23 January 2023. Canfield, David (6 September 2023). "Kate Winslet Embodies an Unsung American Icon in Lee". Vanity Fair. Retrieved 10 September 2023. Davis, Clayton (9 September 2023). "Kate Winslet Bares It All for Another Trip to the Oscars With Her Passion Project 'Lee' Following Its TIFF Premiere". Variety. Archived from the original on 10 September 2023. Retrieved 10 September 2023. Sharf, Zack (11 September 2022). "Kate Winslet Had to Be 'F—ing Brave' for 'Lee' Nude Scenes, Calls Out Male Investors Who Asked: 'Why Am I Supposed to Like This Woman?'". Variety. Retrieved 26 September 2022. Gyarkye, Lovia (10 September 2023). "'Lee' Review: Kate Winslet Energizes a Glossy Biopic of Vogue Photographer". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on 10 September 2023. Retrieved 11 September 2023. Schager, Nick (10 September 2023). "Kate Winslet Shoots for Her Next Oscar in 'Lee'". The Daily Beast. Archived from the original on 11 September 2023. Retrieved 11 September 2023. "Kate Winslet to Lead HBO Limited Series 'The Palace,' Stephen Frears to Direct". Variety. 26 July 2022. Archived from the original on 27 July 2022. Retrieved 27 July 2022. Foreman, Alison (2 March 2024). "Kate Winslet Cried, Consulted a Neuroscientist, and Rehearsed Constantly to Prepare for 'The Regime'". IndieWire. Retrieved 8 March 2024. "The Regime". Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved 7 March 2024. Clarke, Cath (30 September 2013). "Kate Winslet interview: 'I never felt that I was in any way entitled to be an arsehole'". Time Out. Archived from the original on 24 June 2017. Retrieved 4 November 2017. Whitty, Stephen (26 January 2014). "Kate Winslet on 'Labor Day,' pregnancy, acting and that 'Titanic' breakthrough". NJ.com. Archived from the original on 19 March 2015. Retrieved 4 November 2017. "Falling in Love Again". Elle: 131–136. November 2004. Travis, Ben; Butcher, Sophie; De Semlyen, Nick; Dyer, James; Nugent, John; Godfrey, Alex; O'Hara, Helen (20 December 2022). "Empire's 50 Greatest Actors of All Time List, Revealed". Empire. Archived from the original on 29 December 2022. Retrieved 4 February 2023. Hollinger, Karen (2006). The Actress: Hollywood Acting and the Female Star. Taylor & Francis. p. 62. ISBN 978-0-415-97792-0. Archived from the original on 14 October 2022. Retrieved 17 December 2021. Perrotta, Tom (4 February 2009). "Kate Winslet". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 2 October 2015. Retrieved 4 November 2017. Lane, Anthony (6 November 2020). "Discoveries and Awakenings in 'Ammonite'". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on 1 March 2021. Retrieved 14 June 2021. Livingstone, Josephine (12 October 2017). "The Mountain Between Us is a Lesson in Bad Casting". The New Republic. Archived from the original on 24 June 2021. Retrieved 17 June 2021. Bilmes, Alex (January 2007). "Out of the Ordinary". Vogue: 122–126. Dwyer, Michael (3 January 2009). "What Kate did next". The Irish Times. Archived from the original on 4 November 2017. Retrieved 4 November 2017. Michelle, Manelis (10 April 2012). "Kate Winslet and the naked truth". Vogue. Archived from the original on 7 November 2017. Retrieved 1 November 2017. Reid, Vickie (15 January 1999). "Waving, not drowning". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 2 October 2013. Retrieved 30 November 2009. Clark, John (17 April 1999). "Winslet Sets a New Course". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 14 November 2017. Retrieved 3 November 2017. Moreton, Cole (12 September 1999). "Film world acclaims writer's final act". The Independent. Archived from the original on 23 January 2012. Retrieved 14 April 2011. "Kate Winslet: Queen of the World". Parade. 5 November 2006. Archived from the original on 7 February 2009. Retrieved 14 April 2011. "Winslet Gives Birth To Daughter Mia In England". Chicago Tribune. 16 October 2000. Archived from the original on 7 October 2015. Retrieved 10 August 2015. "Winslet's divorce finalized". BBC News. 12 December 2001. Archived from the original on 9 August 2010. Retrieved 14 April 2011. Yazel, Leslie (February 2002). "Kate Our Hero". Glamour: 179–180. Hiscok, John (23 January 2009). "Kate Winslet and Sam Mendes: Hollywood's golden couple". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 17 June 2013. Retrieved 31 October 2017. Midgeley, Neil; Leonord, Tom (16 March 2010). "Kate Winslet and Sam Mendes: Hollywood couple split after seven year marriage". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 16 September 2011. Retrieved 31 October 2017. "Kate Winslet and Sam Mendes split". BBC News. 15 March 2010. Archived from the original on 16 March 2010. Retrieved 15 March 2010. Picardie, Justine (November 2011). "Forever Chic". Harper's Bazaar. pp. 188–192. there's no way I'm going to allow my children to be fucked up because my marriages haven't worked out Ho, Erica (30 October 2017). "Kate Winslet Weds Ned RocknRoll, Richard Branson's Nephew". Time. Archived from the original on 30 December 2012. Retrieved 27 December 2012. "Kate Winslet marries Ned RocknRoll in private New York ceremony". BBC News. Archived from the original on 27 December 2012. Retrieved 27 December 2012. Saad, Nardine (18 March 2014). "Kate Winslet explains her son's name, Bear Blaze, on 'Ellen'". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 9 November 2017. Retrieved 8 November 2017. Pells, Rachel (2 April 2015). "Kate Winslet in Titanic battle over plan to build 600ft seawall to protect her home". The Independent. Archived from the original on 15 December 2015. Retrieved 30 October 2017. "Kate Winslet is Bazaar's March cover star". Harper's Bazaar. 8 February 2015. Archived from the original on 17 March 2015. Retrieved 23 March 2015. Smith, Liz (3 November 2017). "Kate Winslet: What Matters Most". Good Housekeeping. Archived from the original on 11 April 2015. Retrieved 14 February 2007. Burleigh, James (10 March 2007). "I'm no hypocrite, says diet libel winner Kate". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 30 August 2011. Retrieved 31 October 2017. "Star turn for house". The Daily Telegraph. 19 May 2004. Archived from the original on 1 March 2016. Retrieved 31 October 2017. "Star to be family charity patron". BBC News. 25 March 2006. Archived from the original on 15 June 2012. Retrieved 31 October 2017. "Bloc Party and Lily Allen auction artwork for charity". NME. 7 October 2006. Archived from the original on 1 November 2017. Retrieved 31 October 2017. "Celebs take part in 'Kite Runner' auction". United Press International. 4 December 2007. Archived from the original on 15 June 2012. Retrieved 31 October 2017. "Tony Blair and Kate Winslet contribute to butterfly book". The Daily Telegraph. 29 April 2009. Archived from the original on 23 June 2016. Retrieved 31 October 2017. Metrowebukmetro (11 May 2009). "Kate and Leo help Titanic survivor". Metro. Archived from the original on 2 December 2021. Retrieved 3 December 2021. de Klerk, Amy (13 June 2017). "Kate Winslet on feeling her most confident self in her forties". Harper's Bazaar. Archived from the original on 1 November 2017. Retrieved 31 October 2017. Clark, Cindy (26 March 2012). "Kate Winslet wears a new hat: Charity coordinator". USA Today. Archived from the original on 7 April 2014. Retrieved 12 August 2013. "Film moves Winslet to start charity". The Belfast Telegraph. 22 September 2010. Archived from the original on 7 April 2014. Retrieved 12 August 2013. "Kate Winslet launches makeup range with Lancôme". The Independent. 18 August 2011. Archived from the original on 22 January 2014. Retrieved 12 August 2013. Clott Kanter, Sharon (19 October 2011). "Kate Winslet's Lancôme Collection for Charity". InStyle. Archived from the original on 7 October 2016. Retrieved 6 November 2017. "The Golden Hat: Talking Back to Autism". Barnes & Noble. Archived from the original on 13 July 2015. Retrieved 18 March 2015. "Review: The Golden Hat: Talking Back to Autism". Publishers Weekly. Archived from the original on 12 May 2012. Retrieved 12 August 2013. "World Autism Awareness Day: 2 April". United Nations. Archived from the original on 1 November 2017. Retrieved 31 October 2017. "Kate Winslet contra el autismo". En Mundo (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 25 June 2011. Retrieved 23 June 2011. "Actress Winslet speaks out against foie gras in video". The Independent. 16 April 2010. Archived from the original on 4 November 2017. Retrieved 31 October 2017. Bumpus, Jessica (14 April 2010). "Winslet's Feathered Friends". Vogue. Archived from the original on 6 August 2012. Retrieved 31 October 2017. "Neymar, Serena Williams, Kate Winslet and Jamie Oliver join UNICEF and the Global Goals campaign to launch the World's Largest Lesson". UNICEF. Archived from the original on 4 November 2017. Retrieved 31 October 2017. Walsh, Lara (23 March 2017). "Kate Winslet's Inspiring Speech on Overcoming Bullies, Being Fat Shamed". InStyle. Archived from the original on 17 May 2017. Retrieved 31 October 2017. Meade, Amanda (16 October 2015). "Kate Winslet and the little Australian anti-bullying film that took on the world". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 20 September 2017. Retrieved 3 October 2017. Seemayer, Zach (26 July 2017). "Kate Winslet and Leonardo DiCaprio Reunite With 'Titanic' Co-Star Billy Zane: 'Now We're Saving Icebergs'". Entertainment Tonight. Archived from the original on 5 September 2017. Retrieved 31 October 2017. Willis, Jackie (25 July 2017). "Leonardo DiCaprio and Kate Winslet Will Reunite to Auction Off a Dinner With Themselves for Charity". Entertainment Tonight. Archived from the original on 5 October 2017. Retrieved 31 October 2017. Davis, Jessica (10 September 2018). "Kate Winslet and Lancôme launch UK literacy programme". Harper's Bazaar. Archived from the original on 12 September 2018. Retrieved 12 September 2018. "HRH the Princess Royal Reads 'Thomas and the Royal Engine' on Instagram for Save the Children's Coronavirus Appeal". Save the Children. 2 July 2020. Archived from the original on 19 January 2021. Retrieved 2 April 2021. Lattanzio, Ryan (5 April 2021). "Kate Winslet Says She Knows 'At Least Four' Gay Actors Terrified of Coming Out in Hollywood". IndieWire. Archived from the original on 26 June 2023. Retrieved 5 April 2021. Holmes, Sally (26 June 2015). "Why Kate Winslet's Boobs Were Her Biggest Obstacle in 'A Little Chaos'". Elle. Archived from the original on 24 December 2016. Retrieved 1 November 2017. She has the kind of personality that puts an entire room at ease, dropping F-bombs and self-deprecating remarks intermittently, while charming everyone with that buttery English accent Pomerance, Murray (19 October 2011). Shining in Shadows: Movie Stars of the 2000s. Rutgers University Press. p. 184. ISBN 978-0-8135-5216-3. Archived from the original on 1 November 2017. Smith, Goldwin; Gilman, Sander L. (23 January 2008). Diets and Dieting: A Cultural Encyclopedia. Routledge. p. 44. ISBN 978-1-135-87068-3. "In brief: Winslet says fuss about figure is 'my own fault'". The Guardian. 18 February 2003. Archived from the original on 18 March 2016. Retrieved 1 November 2017. "Magazine admits airbrushing Winslet". BBC News. 9 January 2003. Archived from the original on 1 March 2017. Retrieved 1 November 2017. Grossberg, John (9 March 2007). "Kate Winslet Gets Big, Fat Apology". E! News. Archived from the original on 29 December 2014. Retrieved 30 July 2014. "Kate Winslet accepts £25,000 libel damages from Daily Mail". The Guardian. 3 November 2009. Archived from the original on 21 September 2016. Retrieved 1 November 2017. "Most Beautiful People 2005". People. 9 May 2005. Archived from the original on 6 November 2017. Retrieved 1 November 2017. Campbell-Johnston, Rachel (1 June 2005). "The most beautiful women?". The Sunday Times. Archived from the original on 1 June 2010. Retrieved 15 January 2015. "Angelina Jolie 'Sexiest Movie Star Ever'". Empire. 5 December 2007. Archived from the original on 8 October 2014. Retrieved 15 January 2015. "Who Is the Most Beautiful?". Yahoo!. 9 April 2009. Archived from the original on 6 September 2014. Retrieved 17 January 2015. Eden, Richard (14 August 2011). "Kate Winslet: Cosmetic surgery goes against my morals". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 18 October 2017. Retrieved 1 November 2017. Sowray, Bibby (16 August 2011). "Winslet Won't". Vogue. Archived from the original on 1 November 2017. Retrieved 1 November 2017. Mychaskiw, Marianne (2 October 2015). "Kate Winslet Tells Lancôme Not to Photoshop Out Her Wrinkles in Campaign Images". InStyle. Archived from the original on 27 January 2016. Retrieved 1 November 2017. "Kate Winslet's new contract bans retouching of her photos". Hello!. 23 October 2015. Archived from the original on 24 October 2015. Retrieved 1 November 2017. Jamieson, Natalie (10 November 2015). "Kate Winslet on gender pay chat: It's a bit vulgar". Newsbeat. Archived from the original on 26 March 2021. Retrieved 11 November 2015. Pomerantz, Dorothy (1 July 2009). "Hollywood's Top-Earning Actresses". Forbes. Archived from the original on 21 October 2017. Retrieved 1 November 2017. Brooks, Xan (9 November 2009). "Kate Winslet 'worth £60m' to UK economy". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 6 November 2017. Retrieved 4 November 2017. Jackson, Peter (30 April 2009). "Kate Winslet – The 2009 Time 100". Time. Archived from the original on 21 October 2016. Retrieved 1 November 2017. Branagh, Kenneth (15 September 2021). "Kate Winslet". Time. Archived from the original on 28 October 2021. Retrieved 28 October 2021. Warr, Philippa (11 October 2011). "Copy-Kate: Madame Tussauds Unveil Their Kate Winslet Waxwork". HuffPost. Archived from the original on 6 November 2017. Retrieved 1 November 2017. "Kate Winslet Receives Star On Hollywood Walk Of Fame In First Post-Baby Appearance". HuffPost. 14 August 2014. Archived from the original on 6 November 2017. Retrieved 1 November 2017. "Kate Winslet to receive honorary Cesar award". BBC News. 27 January 2012. Archived from the original on 8 November 2017. Retrieved 1 November 2017. "Kate Winslet and Gary Barlow receive royal honours". BBC News. 21 November 2012. Archived from the original on 8 April 2014. Retrieved 1 November 2017. Mueller, Matt (20 November 2015). "We need to talk about Kate: Kate Winslet on 'Steve Jobs'". Screen International. Archived from the original on 26 November 2015. Retrieved 4 November 2017. "Person: Kate Winslet". Hollywood Foreign Press Association. Archived from the original on 22 December 2021. Retrieved 23 December 2021. Christianson, Emily (21 February 2013). "EGOTs on deck: Who will win an Emmy, Grammy, Oscar and Tony award next". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 24 April 2014. Retrieved 13 March 2014. Buckley, Cat (25 February 2017). "The Top 11 EGOT Contenders: Who Will Be Next to Win All Four Major Awards?". Billboard. Archived from the original on 13 September 2017. Retrieved 4 November 2017. Kate Winslet at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Kate Winslet at IMDb Kate Winslet at BAFTA Kate Winslet at the TCM Movie Database Portals:  Biography  Film  Theatre  Television