Around the World in 80 Days is a 2004 American action adventure comedy film based on Jules Verne's 1873 novel of the same name and remake of the movie of the same name of 1956. It stars Jackie Chan, Steve Coogan and Cécile de France. The film is set in the nineteenth century and centers on Phileas Fogg (Coogan), here reimagined as an eccentric inventor, and his efforts to circumnavigate the globe in 80 days. During the trip, he is accompanied by his Chinese valet, Passepartout (Chan). For comedic reasons, the film intentionally deviated wildly from the novel and included a number of anachronistic elements. With production costs of about $110 million and estimated marketing costs of $30 million, it earned $24 million at the U.S. box office and $48 million worldwide, making it a box office failure. It also received generally unfavorable reviews from critics, mainly for lacking similarities to the original book. Chinese thief Lau Xing robs the Bank of England and hides in Phileas Fogg's house, giving his name as "Passepartout"; Fogg hires him as his valet. He helps Fogg test his latest invention which breaks the 50-mile-per-hour (80 km/h) speed barrier. At the Royal Academy of Science, Fogg is insulted by Lord Kelvin, head of the academy, who believes ambition and innovation to be an insult. Following a debate on the whereabouts of the thief, Kelvin makes a bet that Fogg cannot travel around the world in 80 days. If Fogg succeeds, he will replace Kelvin as Minister of Science. If not, he will be ruined. Fogg and Passepartout take a carriage out of London after a confrontation with corrupt Inspector Fix, hired by Kelvin. Passepartout and Fogg journey to Paris, where Passepartout must evade General Fang's warriors. Fang wants the jade Buddha previously given to Lord Kelvin but stolen by Passepartout. Pretending to take Fogg to see Thomas Edison, Passepartout leads him to impressionist painting student Monique La Roche. Passepartout fights the warriors while his boss discusses impressionism. The two men and Monique depart in a hot-air balloon, chased by Fang's warriors. The trio continue their journey by train. However, in Istanbul, they are forced to become guests of Prince Hapi's banquet. Whilst initially hospitable, he soon orders the men to leave while Monique must become his seventh wife. The men convince Hapi to release Monique or they will damage his personal statue of "The Thinker", which is accidentally smashed. With Hapi in pursuit, the three travelers then escape. Kelvin learns about the bank robbery. He orders the British-colonial authorities in India to arrest both men. Passepartout sees notice of the price on his head and warns his companions. Disguised as women they are attacked by Fang's warriors. Using Inspector Fix and a sextant as weapons, Fogg and Passepartout defeat their assailants and flee to China. In a Chinese village where Lau Xing had come from, Lanzhou, they are welcomed by Lau's family members. However, they are captured by the Black Scorpions. Recognized, Lau Xing challenges the leader of the group to a fight. At first, he fights alone and is defeated; moments later, he is joined by his fellow "Ten Tigers of Canton" to defeat the Black Scorpions. The jade Buddha is returned to the village temple. Fogg desires to continue alone, disappointed and feeling used by his companions after finding out that through a picture of Lau and his family members in the village. He travels to San Francisco and is tricked out of his money. He is found destitute by Lau Xing and Monique who have followed him. In the Western desert, they find the Wright brothers who discuss their prototype flying machine. Fogg suggests a few changes, which are eagerly taken. In New York City, a jubilant crowd prevents them from their ship. A policeman leads them to an ambush in a workshop. The three friends fight Fang and her warriors and win. Though Fogg could have gotten to the boat, he misses it to help Lau Xing. Fogg feels that he has lost, but the other two say that they may still make it if they catch the next ship. They board an old ship and Fogg builds a plane out of the ship's old wood, promising a new ship to the captain. The ship's crew builds a catapult to launch it. The three fly to London and crash-land at the Royal Academy. Kelvin sends police to hinder them, and the clock strikes noon, ending the wager. Kelvin proclaims himself the victor, but Monique, Fix and other ministers attest to his unfair methods. Kelvin insults Queen Victoria who overhears him and learns of his actions, which leads to his arrest. She then reveals that she has bet money on Fogg winning and congratulates him for making it back a day early. Although the trio are confused at first, Fogg realizes that they forgot to take the International Date Line into account: because they traveled east, they forgot to subtract a day in their calculations when they crossed the International Date Line. Therefore, only 79 days have passed in London. Fogg ascends the stairs of the academy and kisses Monique, victorious in his bet. Jackie Chan as Passepartout / Lau Xing / Tiger #1 Steve Coogan as Phileas Fogg Cécile de France as Monique Laroche Jim Broadbent as Lord Kelvin Ewen Bremner as Inspector Fix Kathy Bates as Queen Victoria Arnold Schwarzenegger as Prince Hapi Ian McNeice as Colonel Kitchener Karen Mok (credited as Karen Joy Morris) as General Fang Roger Hammond as Lord Rhodes David Ryall as Lord Salisbury Mark Addy as Steamer Captain Richard Branson as Balloon Man John Cleese as Grizzled sergeant Will Forte as Young French Policeman Bobby Macy Gray as Sleeping French Woman Sammo Hung as Wong Fei Hung / Tiger #2 Rob Schneider as San Francisco Hobo Luke Wilson as Orville Wright Owen Wilson as Wilbur Wright Daniel Wu as Bak Mei Robert Fyfe as Jean Michel Adam Godley as Mr. Sutton Maggie M. Quigley as Female Agent Phil Meheux as London Hobo Michael Youn as Art Gallery Manager Frank Coraci as Angry Dapper Pedestrian Don Tai as Ho / Tiger #9 Warner Bros., who owned the rights to the 1956 adaptation, planned their own remake with Stephen Sommers directing and Brendan Fraser starring, after the success of The Mummy. Stan Chervin wrote the script for this utilization of the film. Around the same time, 20th Century Fox and Good Machine were developing their own version with Mark Rosenthal and Lawrence Konner writing the screenplay. Ang Lee and Stephen Herek were considered to direct. When Frank Coraci got involved, he went back to read the original novel and watch the 1956 film, where he realized that the story didn't really have a driving lead character. So he decided to rework the plot considerably, which involved giving Phileas Fogg an arc. Coraci's first choice for Fogg was Johnny Depp, but studio executives at the time didn't think Depp in a family movie would ever work. Jackie Chan was announced to play Passepartout in June 2002. He was paid about $18 million for the role. After Chan was cast, the filmmakers settled on lesser known character actor Steve Coogan for Fogg. Walden Media was in charge of investing the film while Summit Entertainment handled foreign sales. Paramount Pictures acquired domestic distribution rights, and set a release date for November 21, 2003. However, the studio stepped out at the start of the year, with concerns over the high budget and bankability of the cast. Principal photography began on March 13, 2003, in Thailand, followed by a 3-month shoot at Babelsberg Studio in Berlin. Before Disney had picked the film up for distribution, it was one of the highest-budget films produced without a distributor attached. "It's Slinky!" – Written by Homer Fesperman and Charles Weasley "Sehnaz Pesrev "The Mystery Continues" – Composed by Suma Ograda "Everybody, All over the World (Join the Celebration)" – Performed by David A. Stewart and Sylvia Young Stage School "River of Dreams" (Instrumental) – Written by David A. Stewart and Aidan Love "It's a Small World" – Written by the Sherman Brothers, and performed by Baha Men Around the World in 80 Days premiered at the El Capitan Theatre in Hollywood, California on June 13, 2004, and was released in theaters on June 16, 2004, by Walt Disney Pictures. Around the World in 80 Days was met with mixed reviews. Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a 32% approval rating, based on 128 reviews, with an average score of 4.79/10, with the site's consensus stating: "Hit-and-miss family fare that bears only the slightest resemblance to Verne's novel." Metacritic gives the film a weighted score of 49 out of 100, based on reviews from 33 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "B+" on an A+ to F scale. The Guardian critic Rob Mackie, criticized it for having little to no resemblance to the novel it is based on. Roger Ebert praised it for its visual style and for being "goofy fun". Todd McCarthy of Variety wrote: "Takes plenty of liberties with the material and never generates much genuine excitement, but provides an agreeable ride without overloading it with contemporary filmmaking mannerisms." In 2014, the Los Angeles Times listed the film as one of the most expensive box office flops of all time. The film was nominated for two Razzie Awards - Worst Remake or Sequel and Worst Supporting Actor (Arnold Schwarzenegger). It was released on DVD and VHS on November 2, 2004, by Walt Disney Home Entertainment. List of American films of 2004 Around the World in 80 Days (1956 film) Around the World in Eighty Days (book) Jackie Chan filmography Arnold Schwarzenegger filmography Around the World in 80 Days (2004) Goodridge, Mike (18 June 2004). "Around the World in 80 Days". Screen International. Retrieved 14 September 2021. "Around the World in 80 Days (2004)". Box Office Mojo. IMDB. Retrieved 29 October 2011. Fleming, Michael (28 June 1999). "'Mummy' team to tour 'World'". Variety. Retrieved 23 April 2022. Lyons, Charles; Petrikin, Chris (9 September 1999). "Herek around 'World' journey". Variety. Retrieved 23 April 2022. "History of: Around the World in 80 Days". YouTube. Lyons, Charles; Dunkley, Cathy (20 June 2002). "Chan's the man for 'Eighty Days'". Variety. Harris, Dana; Brodesser, Claude (26 June 2003). "Jackie Chan". Variety. Retrieved 21 April 2022. Lyons, Charles; Dunkley, Cathy (9 July 2002). "Par boards Chan's 'World' trip". Variety. Retrieved 21 April 2022. Harris, Dana (12 January 2003). "Inside Move: On Walden bond". Variety. Retrieved 21 April 2022. Dunkley, Cathy (30 March 2003). "Bates a Queen for '80 Days'". Variety. Retrieved 21 April 2022. Dunkley, Cathy (10 July 2003). "Branson full of hot air in 'Around the World' cameo". Variety. Retrieved 21 April 2022. Dunkley, Cathy; Fleming, Michael (17 November 2003). "Disney deals for '80 Days'". Variety. Retrieved 21 April 2022. "Around the World in 80 Days". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved 10 October 2020. "Around the World in 80 Days Reviews". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Retrieved 13 February 2020. "CinemaScore". cinemascore.com. "Around the World in 80 Days | DVD and video reviews". The Guardian. 19 November 2004. Retrieved 28 October 2019. Roger Ebert (16 June 2004). "Around the World in 80 Days". Chicago Sun-Times. Retrieved 20 July 2014. McCarthy, Todd (16 June 2004). "Around the World in 80 Days". Variety. "Eller, Claudia,"The costliest box office flops of all time", Los Angeles Times (January 15, 2014)". Los Angeles Times. 6 August 2012. Retrieved 4 October 2014. "For Immediate Release". Razzies.com. Retrieved 13 February 2014. "Around the World in 80 Days (2004) - Financial Information". The Numbers. Retrieved 22 July 2023. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Around the World in 80 Days (2004). Wikiquote has quotations related to Around the World in 80 Days (2004 film). Official website Around the World in 80 Days at IMDb Around the World in 80 Days at AllMovie Around the World in 80 Days at the TCM Movie Database Around the World in 80 Days at the American Film Institute Catalog