The Orlando Magic are an American professional basketball team based in Orlando, Florida. The Magic compete in the National Basketball Association (NBA) as a member of the Southeast Division of the Eastern Conference. The franchise was established in 1989 as an expansion franchise, and such notable NBA stars as Shaquille O'Neal, Penny Hardaway, Grant Hill, Tracy McGrady, Dwight Howard, Jameer Nelson, Rashard Lewis, Hedo Turkoglu and Nikola Vučević have played for the club throughout its history. As of 2021[update], the franchise has played in the NBA playoffs 16 times in 32 seasons, and twice went to the NBA Finals, in 1995 and 2009, losing to the Houston Rockets and the Los Angeles Lakers, respectively. Orlando has been the second most successful of the four expansion teams brought into the league in 1988 and 1989 in terms of winning percentage and playoff success, after the Miami Heat. In September 1985, Orlando businessman Jim L. Hewitt approached Philadelphia 76ers general manager Pat Williams as they met in Texas on his idea of bringing an NBA team to Orlando. Intrigued by the potential of an Orlando-based NBA team, Williams became the front man of the investment group one year later, after he left the 76ers. On June 19, 1986, the two held a news conference to announce their intention of seeking an NBA franchise. At the same time, Hewitt and Williams decided to hold a contest in the Orlando Sentinel newspaper to get names for their new franchise. Out of a total of 4,296 submitted entries, the names were subsequently narrowed to four, "Heat", "Tropics", "Juice", and "Magic". The last one, which had been submitted by 11 people, was picked after Williams brought his seven-year-old daughter Karyn to visit in Orlando. On July 27, 1986, it was announced that the committee chose the Magic to be the new name of the Orlando franchise in the NBA. The name "Magic" alludes to the area's biggest tourist attraction and economic engine Walt Disney World, along with its Magic Kingdom, highlighting its corporate theme of magic. Hewitt added that "You look at all the aspects of Central Florida, and you find it really is an exciting place, a magical place." Many, including Williams himself at first, thought that Miami or Tampa were better locations in Florida for a franchise. At the time, Orlando was a small city without a major airport or a suitable arena. Hewitt brought investors such as real estate developer William DuPont, Orlando Renegades owner Don Dizney, and Southern Fruit Citrus owners Jim and Steve Caruso, and talked the Orlando city officials into approving an arena project. Meanwhile, Williams gave presentations to NBA commissioner David Stern and the owners of the other teams of the league that the town was viable. In April, the franchise committee recommended expanding by three teams, with two of the slots going to Charlotte and Minneapolis-St. Paul. The recommendation put the Orlando bid in doubt, since it advised that the state of Florida should only be allocated one team as part of the three-team expansion. This feedback put the planned Orlando franchise up against the Miami-based team, originally known as the Florida Heat and eventually named the Miami Heat. When both Miami and Orlando ownership groups made successful pitches, the expansion committee decided to expand by four teams, allowing both to have a franchise. The Magic became the first-ever major-league professional sports franchise in the Orlando area, following an expansion fee of reportedly $32.5 million. They were one of the four new expansion franchises awarded by the NBA in 1987 along with the Charlotte Hornets, Miami Heat and Minnesota Timberwolves. The Magic hired Matt Guokas as the team's first coach, who helped the Magic select 12 players in the NBA Expansion Draft on June 15, 1989. On June 27, 1989, the Magic chose Nick Anderson with the 11th pick in the first round, who became the first draft pick of the franchise. The Magic, in their debut year, went on to select Nick Anderson (Illinois), who had just won both the Mr. Basketball and College Player of the Year awards, in the first round of the 1989 NBA Draft. As the 11th pick, he was the team's first franchise player and leading scorer for a decade. The Magic's very first game played was an exhibition game on October 13, 1989, against the then-reigning champion Detroit Pistons, which the Magic won. Anderson was quoted as saying the atmosphere and the people watching the game was "like Game 7 of the NBA Finals". On November 4, 1989, the Magic played their first season game at the Orlando Arena (O-Rena) against the visiting New Jersey Nets, who won 111–106 in a hard-fought game. The Magic's first victory came two days later, as the Magic defeated the New York Knicks 118–110. The inaugural team compiled a record of 18–64 with players including the franchise star player Nick Anderson, Reggie Theus, Scott Skiles, Terry Catledge, Sam Vincent, Otis Smith, and Jerry Reynolds. In the 1990 NBA draft, the Orlando Magic selected Dennis Scott with the fourth overall pick. On December 30, 1990, Scott Skiles racked up 30 assists in the 155–116 victory over the Denver Nuggets, breaking Kevin Porter's NBA single-game assists record (29). Skiles was named the NBA's Most Improved Player at the end of the season, as the Magic heralded the NBA's most improved record that season. Forward Dennis Scott set a team mark with 125 three-point field goals for the season, the best long-distance production by a rookie in NBA history. He was named to the NBA All-Rookie First Team. On September 19, 1991, the DeVos family, founders of Amway, purchased the franchise for $85 million. Family patriarch Richard DeVos became the owner of the franchise. The 1991–92 season was disappointing for the Magic as various players missed games with injuries. Dennis Scott played only 18 games, Nick Anderson missed 22 games, Stanley Roberts, Jerry Reynolds, Brian Williams, Sam Vincent and Otis Smith all missed at least 27 games each. With a shortage of healthy players, the team struggled through a 17-game losing streak and finished with a 21–61 record. The Magic still managed to have all 41 home games sold out. The Magic history was changed on May 17, 1992, when the franchise won the first pick in the 1992 NBA draft Lottery. The Magic selected big-man Shaquille O'Neal from Louisiana State University, the biggest prize in the draft since the Knicks won Patrick Ewing. O'Neal, a 7 ft 1 in (2.16 m) center, made an immediate impact on the Magic, leading the team to a 41–41 record. The Magic again became the NBA's most improved franchise, as they improved by 20 games. O'Neal was the first rookie to be voted an All-Star starter since Michael Jordan in 1985. He also became the 1992–93 NBA Rookie of the Year. Despite O'Neal's presence, the Magic missed the 1993 NBA playoffs because they were tied with the Indiana Pacers for the eighth and final playoff spot in the Eastern Conference with the Pacers holding the tiebreaker. Despite barely missing the playoffs and receiving the least chance of gaining the top draft pick with only one ball in the lottery, the Magic again won the first pick in the 1993 NBA draft Lottery. Prior to the draft, Guokas stepped down as head coach, and Brian Hill was promoted to become the Magic's second head coach. In the draft, the Magic selected Chris Webber, but traded him to the Golden State Warriors for the number three pick, guard Anfernee "Penny" Hardaway and three future first-round draft picks. With the combination of O'Neal and Hardaway, the Magic became a dominant team in the NBA, compiling the first 50 win season in franchise history with a 50–32 record. The Magic were in the playoffs for the first time, ranked the fourth seed in the Eastern Conference; however, the Pacers swept the Magic 3–0 in the first round, thus ending the Magic's season. In the 1994–95 season, the Magic's sixth season, All-Star forward Horace Grant was acquired as a free agent from the Chicago Bulls. The Orlando Magic compiled a 57–25 record, best in the East and winning the Atlantic Division title, becoming the second-fastest team (behind the Milwaukee Bucks in 1971, who were in their third season) to advance to the NBA Finals in league history. In the playoffs, the Magic defeated the Boston Celtics, Bulls, and the Indiana Pacers, advancing to the NBA Finals where O'Neal, Hardaway and the young Magic bowed to a more playoff-experienced Hakeem Olajuwon and the Houston Rockets, winning their second consecutive championship in a 4–0 sweep of Orlando. In the 1995–96 season, the Magic again were near the top of the Eastern Conference and the Atlantic Division with a 60–22 record, led by O'Neal and Hardaway; however, the Magic were seeded number two, behind the NBA's second-best all-time 72–10 record of the Chicago Bulls. In the meantime, general manager Pat Williams was promoted to senior executive vice president and replaced by the vice president of Basketball Operations John Gabriel on April 29, 1996. In the playoffs, after the Magic defeated the Detroit Pistons and the Atlanta Hawks, Orlando met the Bulls in the Eastern Conference Finals. The combination of Jordan, Scottie Pippen and rebounder Dennis Rodman was too much for the Magic, and Orlando was swept 4–0. In the off-season, O'Neal left as a free agent to the Los Angeles Lakers, dealing a huge blow to the Magic franchise. In the middle of the season, urged by player discontent, management fired coach Brian Hill and named Richie Adubato as interim coach for the rest of the season. Under Adubato, the Magic went 21–12 to compile a 45–37 record, led by Penny Hardaway. In the playoffs, the Magic quickly fell 0–2 to the heavily favored Miami Heat in the first round, but Hardaway battled back with consecutive 40-point games to assure a game five (the first player to do so), which the Magic ultimately lost. The Magic then hired Chuck Daly to be head coach for the 1997–98 season. In addition, Hall of Famer Julius Erving joined the Magic's front office, giving Orlando hope for a successful season. The season was hampered by an injury to Hardaway who sat out the majority of the season. Anderson, combined with newly acquired free agent Bo Outlaw, led the team to a 41–41 record, just out of reach of the NBA playoffs. In addition, Seikaly was traded during the season to the New Jersey Nets for three role players and a future draft pick. In 1998–99, with the drafting of Michael Doleac and Matt Harpring with the 12th and 15th picks in the 1998 draft, and a healthy Penny Hardaway and Nick Anderson, the Magic tied for the Eastern Conference's best record with the Miami Heat in the lockout-shortened season, 33–17. At the heart of the team was veteran and future Orlando Magic Hall of Famer Darrell Armstrong, leading from the vanguard (a constant that Orlando fans would enjoy for a decade) and picking up the NBA's Sixth-Man and Most Improved Player awards along the way. Orlando also acquired NBA great Dominique Wilkins, along with brother Gerald, who were past their primes but were both still serviceable NBA players. In the playoffs the Penny Hardaway-led Magic were seeded number 3 because of tiebreakers and faced the Philadelphia 76ers. The 76ers, led by Allen Iverson, upset the Magic 3–1 in the first round. The team also changed their uniforms for the first time ever, changing from pinstripes to stars. In 1999, the Magic, under general manager John Gabriel, who was later named Executive of the Year, hired rookie-coach Doc Rivers. Gabriel dismantled the previous team trading their only remaining superstar Penny Hardaway to the Phoenix Suns for Danny Manning (who never donned a Magic uniform), Pat Garrity, and two future draft picks. The Magic were then a team composed of virtually all no name players and little experience, which included team captain Armstrong, Bo Outlaw and a young Ben Wallace, along with Coach Rivers, who led the Magic to a 41–41 record, barely missing out on the playoffs. At the end of the season Rivers was named Coach of the Year. That year was characterized by the slogan "Heart and Hustle", as the team was known for its hard-working style. The following off-season, Gabriel, with millions of cleared salary cap space, attempted to lure three of the NBA's most prized free agents: Tim Duncan, Grant Hill, and Tracy McGrady. While Duncan opted to remain with the San Antonio Spurs, the Magic acquired Hill, a perennial All-Star, and McGrady. With McGrady and Hill together, the Magic were expected to be a force in the East. However, Hill was limited to 4 games because of an ankle injury. McGrady blossomed into a star during the season, becoming one of the NBA's top scorers. With the addition of Mike Miller from the draft, the Magic compiled a 43–39 record, which included a nine-game winning streak, and once again made the playoffs. McGrady made the All-Star Team and All-NBA Second Team. Miller won the Rookie of the Year. In the playoffs, they faced the Milwaukee Bucks in the first round. The Bucks won the series 3–1. In 2001–02, McGrady led the Magic to a winning record of 44–38. Hill was still severely limited by his ankle injury, and did not play for the vast majority of the season. McGrady, combined with Armstrong, Miller, and 3-point sharpshooter Pat Garrity, formed the core of the team. McGrady made the All-NBA for the first time and made his second consecutive All-Star Team. However, the Magic were defeated 3–1 in the first round of the playoffs by the Charlotte Hornets led by Baron Davis. In 2002–03, with the acquisitions of Gordan Giricek and Drew Gooden from the Memphis Grizzlies in exchange for Mike Miller, McGrady once again led the Magic to a 42–40 record. McGrady led the league in scoring with 32.1 points per game, made his second All-NBA First Team, and Third All-Star Team. Despite still not having Hill due to injury, the Magic entered the playoffs for the third straight year. However, after taking a 3–1 lead in the best-of-seven first-round series, the Magic fell to the Detroit Pistons 4–3 in the now infamous heartbreaker. McGrady was quoted as saying, "It feels good to get in the second round" after still needing one more win to advance. The Magic's 15th season in 2003–04 proved to be one of its toughest ever. Even with the acquisition of veteran free agents Tyronn Lue and Juwan Howard, the Magic struggled early. After winning its first game, the Magic lost 19 consecutive games, setting a franchise record. They never recovered, and finished an NBA worst 21–61. Despite this, McGrady led the league in scoring with 28.0 points per game, made the All-NBA Second Team and his fourth consecutive All-Star Team. In the middle of the 19-game losing streak, coach Doc Rivers was fired, and assistant Johnny Davis was promoted to head coach. General manager Gabriel was replaced by John Weisbrod. In the off-season, Weisbrod completely dismantled the team. Though he kept Davis as coach, he shook up the player roster, only keeping a few players from last season. The most significant trade was Tracy McGrady. McGrady, discontent with the Magic, wished to move on; Weisbrod accused McGrady of "slacking off" and not attending practices (McGrady later admitted that he did not give 100 percent during the 2003–04 season and wanted the team to bring him some help, but never wanted to leave Orlando). The Magic traded McGrady along with Reece Gaines, Tyronn Lue, and Juwan Howard to the Houston Rockets for Steve Francis, Kelvin Cato, and Cuttino Mobley. In addition, the Magic acquired center Tony Battie and two second-round draft picks from the Cleveland Cavaliers in exchange for Drew Gooden, Steven Hunter, and the draft rights to Anderson Varejão. The Magic then signed free agent Hedo Türkoğlu. With the number one draft pick, the Magic selected high-school phenomenon and future All-Star and franchise cornerstone Dwight Howard, and a draft-day trade with the Denver Nuggets got them point guard Jameer Nelson. After a promising 13–6 start, the Magic began to fall apart. First, Weisbrod traded Mobley for Doug Christie from the Sacramento Kings. Christie, because of his emotional ties to the Kings, at first refused to play for the Magic. Later on, Christie claimed he had bone spurs and was placed on the injured list after playing only a few games for the Magic. Near the end of the season, with a playoff-push faltering, Weisbrod fired Davis after leading Davis to believe he was going to be the team's head coach for the entire 2004–05 NBA season. He then promoted Chris Jent to interim head coach. Throughout the season, bolstered by Hill's return, the Magic played spectacularly, defeating top NBA teams. However, led by the erratic play of Francis, the Magic also lost to league teams with losing records. Howard showed great promise, becoming one of the few players to average a double-double. Howard was a consistent rebounder and scorer, becoming the first rookie to start and play all 82 games in a season. In addition, Nelson, after a slow start, developed into a talented player, taking over the starting point guard position. Hill also returned and averaged 19.7 points a game. Hill was chosen an All-Star starter by NBA fans for the 2005 All-Star Game, and Dwight Howard and Jameer Nelson were named to the All-Rookie first and second teams, respectively. Howard was a unanimous selection. The Magic finished the season 36–46. Their playoff push was hampered by injuries in the last quarter of the season: a season-ending broken wrist for sixth man Hedo Türkoğlu, a shin injury to Grant Hill, a rib cage injury to Nelson, and a three-game suspension to Francis for kicking a photographer. The Magic ended a few games out of the playoffs. On May 23, 2005, the Magic's plans were disrupted by the abrupt resignation of general manager and Chief Operating Officer John Weisbrod. In addition, the Magic announced the following day that Brian Hill, the coach who led the Magic to the NBA Finals under O'Neal and Hardaway, would return as head coach. The Magic drafted Spanish Fran Vázquez with the 11th pick in the 2005 NBA draft. On July 28, 2005, Vazquez stunned the team after announcing that he would remain in Spain to play for Akasvayu Girona, getting ridiculed by media after he was quoted that the decision to stay was made by his girlfriend. Owner Rich DeVos announced on October 21 that he was transferring ownership to his children, with the official owner role moving to son-in-law and team president Bob Vander Weide. The transfer was supposed to be complete by the end of the year. The 2005–06 season opened with high hopes for the Magic despite not being able to add first-round draft pick Vasquez. Grant Hill was supposedly finally healed from his multiple ankle surgeries. Dwight Howard and Jameer Nelson showed excellent progress during summer-league play. Second-round draft pick Travis Diener showed excellent shooting and decision-making during the summer. And the free-agent signing of Keyon Dooling showed that the club was going to continue making progress. Then trouble began. Hill, despite his ankle apparently being healed, suffered a painful sports hernia injury that would hamper his play throughout the entire season. After playing in three preseason games, he underwent surgery to correct the hernia and would not appear during the regular season until mid-December, to which he lasted a month before attempting to make another comeback in February and early March, however, he only played sporadically. Then a foot injury to Nelson forced him to sit out for over a month. On February 15, 2006, the Magic announced that they had acquired Darko Miličić and Carlos Arroyo from the Detroit Pistons in exchange for Kelvin Cato and a 2007 top-five protected first-round draft pick. One week later, on February 22, the Magic announced that they had traded Steve Francis to the New York Knicks in exchange for Penny Hardaway (whom they waived two days later) and Trevor Ariza. With a set starting rotation of Battie, Howard, Türkoğlu, DeShawn Stevenson, and Nelson, the Magic mounted a surprising run at the eighth playoff spot in the Eastern Conference, including an 8-game winning streak and 12 consecutive home wins. The streak included wins against NBA powerhouses Detroit, San Antonio, Dallas and Miami, as well as a game against the Philadelphia 76ers in which Howard recorded 28 points and a career-high 26 rebounds. Despite their efforts they did not make the playoffs. With the 11th overall pick in the 2006 NBA draft, the Magic took former Duke star JJ Redick. Even with the fan support to get him playing time he averaged just over 11 minutes a game. After beginning the season strong with a 13–4 record, the Orlando Magic began to suffer in the standings as the result of multiple losses, due in large part to the injuries of Tony Battie, Keyon Dooling, and Grant Hill. The Magic were also hampered with the sporadic play of many of their young stars, who on multiple occasions showed their propensity for streaky shooting and the team's lack of a solid scoring two-guard. Despite the team's poor play, Dwight Howard continued to develop and blossom in his third year in the league, culminating in his first selection to the Eastern Conference All-Star team. The final few weeks of the season saw the Magic build momentum and confidence with an impressive late push towards the Playoffs. On April 15, 2007, with an 88–86 victory over the Boston Celtics, the Magic secured its first berth in the NBA playoffs since 2003 by locking up the eighth seed in the Eastern Conference. This marked the first time that the team had made the playoffs while posting a losing record. Nevertheless, their Playoff run ended on April 28, 2007, after they were swept in the first round by first seeded Detroit Pistons whose experience, veteran leadership and ability to consistently make the clutch basket proved far too much for the undermanned and overwhelmed Magic to overcome. It was announced on May 23, 2007, that Brian Hill had been fired as head coach of the Magic. On June 1, 2007, the Magic signed Billy Donovan to be their head coach for five years. The next day, Donovan wished to be released from the contract and the Magic agreed several days later. On June 6, 2007, the Magic signed a 4-year contract with Stan Van Gundy. In the free agent market, the Magic signed Rashard Lewis of the Seattle SuperSonics to a six-year league-maximum contract believed to be worth over $110 million. At the NBA China Games, the Magic swept the three games in China, twice against the Cleveland Cavaliers and once against the Chinese national team in games held in Shanghai and in Macau. On November 15, 2007, Bob Vander Weide, the son-in-law of Richard DeVos, officially took over as owner of the team, although ownership is still split evenly amongst Richard DeVos' other children as well. The Magic started the 2007–08 NBA season with an impressive 16–4 record in their first 20 games, which included wins over the Boston Celtics and Cleveland Cavaliers. Through the next few months, the Magic were not so successful, splitting their next 36 games with 18 wins and 18 losses. At the start of March, the Magic seemed to pick up speed again, finishing the month with 10 wins, the first time since November that they won 10 or more in a month. The Magic clinched the Southeast Division title when the Washington Wizards were routed at Utah 129–87 on March 31, 2008. It was the Magic's third division title, but only their first since 1995–96 season, as well as their first since the Southeast Division was formed. They also earned their 50th win of the season against the Chicago Bulls on April 13, which had not happened since the 1995–96 season. The Magic finished the regular season 52–30, their best season since 1995–96. With the third seed in the Eastern Conference, they were matched up in their first-round playoff series against the Toronto Raptors. The Magic had home-court advantage for the first time since the 1998–99 season. On April 28, 2008, at Amway Arena, the Magic eliminated the Raptors with a 4–1 series victory in the first round. It was the first playoff series victory for the Magic in 12 years after 6 straight first-round exits. The run of success did not last long as they fell 4–1 to the experienced Detroit Pistons in the second round. With the Magic already down in the series, controversy erupted after the Pistons' Game 2 victory. At the conclusion of the third quarter, Chauncey Billups of the Pistons made a three-point shot giving the Pistons a three-point lead. However, the clock had stopped just as the play began. NBA rules prohibit officials from using instant replay or any timing device to determine how much time has elapsed when a clock malfunctions, nor is a replay allowed to be viewed from the time of the malfunction to when the play ends, when the game clock has not expired. Because of the rule, the officials then estimated that the play took 4.6 seconds, and because there were 5.1 seconds remaining when play began, the field goal was allowed to be counted. The NBA later admitted that the play actually took 5.7 seconds and the basket in question should not have counted. The Pistons went on to win Game 2. The Magic were able to win Game 3, with the Pistons' Chauncey Billups out for most of the game with an injury but were unable to take advantage of his absence and defeat the Pistons in Games 4 and 5, which ended the Magic's playoff run in 2008. The first half of the 2008–09 season went very well for the Magic. After 41 games, the Magic were 33–8, leading the Southeast Division, as well as having one of the top four records in the league. At the start of February, Jameer Nelson, their all-star starting point guard, went down with a shoulder injury. He was expected to miss the remainder of the season. After trading for Rafer Alston, the Magic finished the regular season with a 59–23 record, it was the most games the team had won in a season since the 1995–96 season in which they had 60 wins. In the playoffs, the Magic beat the Philadelphia 76ers in the first round of the playoffs and then the defending champions, the Boston Celtics, in the Eastern Conference semifinals, behind assistant coach Patrick Ewing's guarantee that they would win Game 7 of that series. In their first conference finals since 1996, the Magic beat the Cleveland Cavaliers, which were led by the season's MVP, LeBron James. After dropping the first two games in the Finals against the Los Angeles Lakers, the Magic finally won their first-ever game in the Finals in Game 3. Despite Nelson's return to the team for the Finals, the Lakers won the series and the championship by beating the Magic in five games. In the 2009 off-season, Orlando traded Rafer Alston, Tony Battie, and Courtney Lee to the New Jersey Nets in exchange for eight-time All-Star Vince Carter and Ryan Anderson. Hedo Türkoğlu, as part of a sign-and-trade, was sent to the Toronto Raptors. They then made several free agent signings. On July 10, former Dallas Mavericks power forward Brandon Bass was given a 4-year deal. On July 21, the Magic signed former Phoenix Suns forward Matt Barnes. On August 19, they signed former Miami Heat point guard Jason Williams, who decided to come back after a year in retirement. On September 28, 2009, Orlando extended the contract of head coach Stan Van Gundy by exercising his option for the 2010–11 season. They did the same for general manager Otis Smith, which would keep him in that position through the 2011–12 season. The Magic were without Rashard Lewis for the first 10 games of the 2009–10 season. Lewis tested positive for an elevated testosterone level that was caused by an over-the-counter supplement containing a substance banned by the league. To make matters worse, Vince Carter suffered a left ankle injury in just the second game of the season. Carter's injury turned out to be not too serious, but caused him to miss the next five games. Another setback came in mid-November, when Jameer Nelson injured his left knee, which required arthroscopic surgery to repair. Nelson would be out for five weeks. Despite all of this, the Magic had a 23–8 record at the end of December. Orlando lost seven of their first ten games in January but recovered well enough to post a winning record for the month by winning six of their next seven. Following the All-Star break, the Magic went on a roll, winning 23 of their 28 remaining games, clinching their fourth consecutive playoff berth and winning their third consecutive division championship in the process. The Magic finished the regular season with a 59–23 record, matching their record from the 2008–09 season, and finishing with not only the second-best record in the Eastern Conference, but the second-best record in the entire league. The team became one of the only teams in NBA history to beat all of the other 29 teams at least once during the regular season. The Magic swept the Charlotte Bobcats and the Atlanta Hawks in the first two rounds of the playoffs, respectively. They then faced the Boston Celtics in the conference finals. After losing the first three games of the series, Orlando managed to win the next two games, but lost on the road in Game 6, ending their season. In anticipation of the team's move to Amway Center, the Magic updated its logo. They retained the streaking ball logo, but changed the wordmark taken from their current uniforms. The Magic hosted the NBA All-Star Game in 2012. The Magic also unveiled black alternate uniforms. In the summer of 2010, the Orlando Magic signed Chris Duhon, formerly of the New York Knicks, and Quentin Richardson, formerly of the Miami Heat. On December 18, 2010, having lost five of their last six games, the Magic made a blockbuster trade deal with the Phoenix Suns and the Washington Wizards. They traded Vince Carter, Marcin Gortat and Mickaël Piétrus to Phoenix for Hedo Türkoğlu (who led them into the 2009 NBA Finals when they lost 4–1 against the Los Angeles Lakers), Jason Richardson and Earl Clark. Rashard Lewis was traded to Washington for 3-time All-Star Gilbert Arenas. The Magic finished the season with 52 victories, good for second in the Southeast Division. But they were ousted in six games by the Atlanta Hawks in the first round of the 2011 NBA playoffs, the first time head coach Stan Van Gundy was eliminated early in the playoffs. In a lockout-shortened 2011–12 season, the Magic started the off-season on a rocky note, with their All-Star center, Dwight Howard, requesting a trade to either the New Jersey Nets, Los Angeles Lakers, or Dallas Mavericks. Overlooking the trade request the Magic did a sign and trade with the Boston Celtics for Glen Davis and Von Wafer in exchange for Brandon Bass. The Magic also amnestied Gilbert Arenas and signed Larry Hughes, Justin Harper, and DeAndre Liggins. The Magic started the season on Christmas Day in Oklahoma City against the Thunder. They lost the season opener 97–89. During the month of February, the Magic waived Hughes and signed Ish Smith. On February 26, Orlando hosted the 2012 All-Star Game. The Magic struggled to win games consistently, with concerns about the uncertainty of Dwight Howard's future with the franchise. However, after Dwight rescinded his trade demand and signed a one-year deal in March, the Magic seemed to find their footing again. But then in early April, shortly after it became public that Howard requested coach Van Gundy to be replaced, the center was diagnosed with a herniated disk and forced to have back surgery, thus ending his season. The Magic clinched the sixth seed in the east with a 37–29 record. The Magic were faced with the third-seeded Pacers in the first round. Despite winning the first game of the series the Magic were defeated 4–1. On May 21, 2012, it was reported that general manager Otis Smith and head coach Stan Van Gundy would part ways with the organization. Stan Van Gundy finished with a 259–135 regular season record with the team which included making the playoffs in those five years and a conference championship. CEO Alex Martins announced former Oklahoma City assistant general manager Rob Hennigan as the new general manager for the Orlando Magic on June 20, 2012. Once hired, he became the youngest general manager in the league. In the 2012 NBA draft, the Magic selected Andrew Nicholson and Kyle O'Quinn. On June 25, 2012, Dwight Howard had face-to-face meetings with general manager Rob Hennigan in Los Angeles and demanded a trade to the Brooklyn Nets. On July 9, 2012, the Magic completed a sign-and-trade deal with the New Orleans Hornets, that sent forward Ryan Anderson to the Hornets. In return the Magic received center Gustavo Ayon. On July 28, 2012, Jacque Vaughn was named the new head coach. He had been the assistant coach for the San Antonio Spurs for the last two seasons. On August 9, 2012, ESPN reported that a four-team trade would send Dwight Howard to the Los Angeles Lakers. Marc Stein of ESPN.com was told the Lakers were to acquire Howard, Chris Duhon and Earl Clark, the Denver Nuggets were to acquire Andre Iguodala, the Philadelphia 76ers were to acquire Andrew Bynum and Jason Richardson, and the Magic were to acquire Arron Afflalo, Al Harrington, Nikola Vučević, Maurice Harkless, Josh McRoberts, Christian Eyenga, and five total protected future (three first-round, two second-round) picks from each of the other three teams. The deal was officially confirmed and completed on August 10. Howard left the Magic as their all-time leading scorer, shot blocker, and rebounder. Following the trade of Dwight Howard, the Magic entered into a state of rebuilding with Maurice Harkless and Nikola Vučević. On August 29, the Magic signed free agent guard E'Twaun Moore. On December 2, 2012, Howard's first game against his former team, the Magic defeated the Lakers 113–103. On February 21, 2013, the Magic traded JJ Redick, Ish Smith and Gustavo Ayón to the Milwaukee Bucks. In return, the Magic received Beno Udrih, Tobias Harris and rookie Doron Lamb. The Magic also traded Josh McRoberts to the Charlotte Bobcats for Hakim Warrick who was waived 2 days later. The Magic finish the 2012–13 season 20–62 as the worst record in the NBA, missing the playoffs for the first time since 2006. On June 27, 2013, the Orlando Magic had the second pick in the first round of the 2013 NBA draft. The Magic used their lottery pick to draft Big Ten Defensive Player of the Year, shooting guard Victor Oladipo from Indiana University. The Magic also had the 51st pick in the second round of the NBA draft. They used this pick to draft forward Romero Osby from the University of Oklahoma. Osby averaged 16 points, seven rebounds, and 1.3 assists during his senior NCAA season at Oklahoma but was cut by the Magic before the season opener. The Magic finished the 2013–14 season with a 23–59 record, third worst in the NBA. The draft lottery gave them the fourth pick in the 2014 NBA draft. In the draft, they selected Aaron Gordon with the fourth pick and Dario Šarić with the 12th pick. Saric was then swapped for the 10th pick, Elfrid Payton in exchange for a 2017 first round pick and a future second round pick. Roy Devyn Marble was selected with the 56th pick in the second round. On February 5, 2015, Jacque Vaughn was relieved of his head coaching duties after coaching 2+1⁄2 seasons for the Magic. His overall record was 58–158. He was replaced by interim head coach James Borrego. On May 29, 2015, the Magic hired their former point guard Scott Skiles as the franchise's 12th head coach. On June 25, 2015, in the 2015 NBA draft, Orlando selected Mario Hezonja with the fifth overall pick and Tyler Harvey with the 51st overall pick. On February 16, 2016, the Magic traded Tobias Harris to the Detroit Pistons in exchange for Ersan İlyasova and Brandon Jennings. On May 12, 2016, Skiles stepped down as head coach of the Orlando Magic. On May 19, the Orlando Magic agreed to a deal with former Indiana Pacers coach Frank Vogel to become the next head coach of the team. With Vogel as their new coach, the Magic made many changes to their roster during the off-season. On June 23, 2016, in the 2016 NBA draft the Magic selected Domantas Sabonis 11th overall, but then traded Sabonis and shooting guard Victor Oladipo for defensive power forward Serge Ibaka of the Oklahoma City Thunder. During free agency the Magic re-signed Evan Fournier to a five-year, $85 million contract and also signed Bismack Biyombo, Jeff Green, and D. J. Augustin. On July 15, C. J. Wilcox was acquired, along with cash considerations, from the Clippers in exchange for Devyn Marble and a future second round draft pick. On February 14, 2017, Ibaka was traded to the Toronto Raptors in exchange for Terrence Ross and a future first-round draft pick. The Magic finished the 2016–17 season with the third worst record in their conference, finishing 29–53. In the summer of 2017, the Magic made various changes, the first being the firing of general manager Rob Hennigan on April 13. On May 23, the Magic named Jeff Weltman, the former general manager of the Toronto Raptors, as president of basketball operations and named John Hammond, the former general manager for the Milwaukee Bucks, as the new general manager. With the sixth overall pick in the 2017 NBA draft, Orlando drafted Florida State forward, Jonathan Isaac. During free agency the Magic signed Jonathon Simmons, Arron Afflalo, Shelvin Mack, Marreese Speights, Khem Birch and Adreian Payne. On October 6, 2017, the Magic announced that former superstar Tracy McGrady, had rejoined the team as assistant to the CEO. On February 8, 2018, the Magic traded starting point guard Elfrid Payton to the Phoenix Suns in exchange for a 2018 second-round pick. On April 12, 2018, head coach Frank Vogel was fired by the Magic after the conclusion of the 2017–18 regular season. On May 30, the Magic named Steve Clifford as their new head coach. On June 21, 2018, the Magic drafted center Mohamed Bamba with the sixth overall pick. and Melvin Frazier in the second round. Other player acquisitions included trading for Timofey Mozgov and Jerian Grant in a three-team trade for Bismack Biyombo, Jarell Martin in a trade from the Memphis Grizzlies, and free agent Isaiah Briscoe. On September 6, 2018, team owner Richard DeVos died aged 92 from complications from an infection. During the 2018–19 season, the Magic won their sixth division title and finished in seventh place in the Eastern Conference to clinch a playoff berth for the first time since the 2011–12 season. Mohamed Bamba was diagnosed with stress fracture on February 5, 2019, and eventually missed the remainder of the season. At the NBA trade deadline, the Magic traded Jonathon Simmons and two draft picks to the Philadelphia 76ers for Markelle Fultz. Nikola Vučević was selected as a reserve for the 2019 Eastern Conference All Star Team, being the first Orlando Magic All Star player since Dwight Howard in 2012. In March 2019, the Magic signed former NBA Rookie of the Year Michael Carter-Williams to two ten-day contracts before signing him to a one-year deal. The Magic were matched up against the Toronto Raptors in the first round of the 2019 NBA playoffs. While the Magic won their first playoff game in seven years, the Toronto Raptors won the series 4–1. In the 2019 NBA draft the Magic selected Chuma Okeke with the 16th overall pick, and traded its second-round pick to the Los Angeles Lakers in exchange for $2.2 million and a future draft pick. With the prospect of limited playing time due to injury, the Magic and Okeke agree to sign a one-year deal with the Magic's G League affiliate in Lakeland and sign Okeke's rookie contract in the summer of 2020. During the 2019 free agency, the Magic re-signed with Vučević, Terrence Ross, Michael Carter-Williams, and Birch, signed free agent Al-Farouq Aminu, and waived Mozgov. The Magic compiled a 30–35 record before the league suspended its season on March 11, 2020, due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Following the suspension of the season, the Magic were one of the 22 teams invited to the NBA Bubble to participate in the final eight seeding games of the regular season. Season ending injuries to Jonathan Isaac and Mo Bamba, along with significant injuries to Terrence Ross and Evan Fournier hampered their performance and they went 3–5 in the seeding games, but the team earned the eighth playoff spot in the Eastern Conference to face the Milwaukee Bucks. While the Magic won the opening game, Milwaukee won the next four ending the Magic's season in round one for the second year in a row. In the 2020 NBA draft the Magic selected Cole Anthony with the 15th overall pick. The shortened free agency period followed where the Magic signed their 2019 draft pick Chuma Okeke, re-signed James Ennis, Michael Carter-Williams, and Gary Clark, while adding Dwayne Bacon. The injury Jonathan Isaac suffered during the previous season was significant enough that he was ruled out for the entire 2020–21 season. In the eighth game of the 2020–21 season, starting point guard, Markelle Fultz went down with an ACL tear in a game against the Cleveland Cavaliers. After the season-ending injury, rookie point guard, Cole Anthony would fill the starting point guard role. On January 20, 2021, Fultz underwent surgery. At the 2021 NBA trade deadline the Magic traded away Nikola Vučević, Aaron Gordon, and Evan Fournier, each to different teams, in what has been viewed as the beginning of another rebuilding period. At the end of the season, the team and Clifford mutually agreed to part ways. On July 11, 2021, Jamahl Mosley was named head coach after spending the previous season as an assistant coach with the Dallas Mavericks. On July 29, 2021, the Magic selected Jalen Suggs with the fifth pick and Franz Wagner with the eighth pick (Acquired via the Chicago Bulls in the Nikola Vučević trade) in the 2021 NBA draft. The Magic also selected Orlando native Jason Preston in the second round and promptly traded him on draft night to the Los Angeles Clippers. On June 23, 2022, the Magic selected Paolo Banchero from Duke University with the first pick and Caleb Houstan from the University of Michigan with the 32nd pick in the 2022 NBA draft. Banchero helped the Magic improve their record from 22 wins to 34, averaging 20 points per game and ultimately being chosen as Rookie of the Year. In May 2023, the Magic donated $50,000 to a super PAC supporting Florida governor Ron DeSantis's 2024 presidential campaign, in what the New York Times called "the first known instance in which an NBA team directly donated to a group allied with a presidential candidate." On June 22, 2023, the Magic selected Anthony Black from the University of Arkansas with the sixth overall pick and Jett Howard from the University of Michigan with the 11th pick. On July 5, 2023, the Magic promoted Anthony Parker to general manager (GM) and Pete D'Alessandro to executive vice president (EVP), while Jeff Weltman was promoted to President of Basketball Operations. On July 17, 2023, the Magic traded picks with the Phoenix Suns. The Suns received a 2023 second-round pick via the Denver Nuggets, a 2026 second-round pick via the Los Angeles Clippers, and a 2028 second-round pick via the Orlando Magic (protected No. 31-45). In this deal, the Orlando Magic receive unprotected swap rights to the 2026 first-round pick of the Phoenix Suns or Washington Wizards (the Phoenix Suns owe the top of these two picks or theirs already, therefore allowing the Orlando Magic to receive the best of the left-over pick selection spots or keep their own). The 2023-24 Season saw the young Orlando Magic rise as a playoff team. Paolo Banchero made his first All-Star team as a reserve for the Eastern Conference, becoming the first Magic All-Star since Nikola Vucevic in 2021. The team's current home arena, the Kia Center (formerly Amway Center), officially opened on October 1, 2010. The Orlando Magic hosted their first preseason game at Amway Center on October 10 against the New Orleans Hornets. The 2010–11 regular season home opener was on October 28 against the Washington Wizards, and the Magic won both games. In 2012, the Amway Center hosted the All-Star Weekend. At the time it opened, the new Amway Center was home to the largest Jumbotron in the NBA. The arena also features approximately 2,100 feet (640 m) of digital ribbon boards, and outside the building a 46 feet (14 m) by 53 feet (16 m) video display is visible to motorists traveling on Interstate 4. On December 20, 2023, Amway Center was formally renamed the Kia Center in partnership with Kia America. The Kia Center is also the home of the minor league hockey team, Orlando Solar Bears and the Orlando Predators of the National Arena League (NAL). Amway Arena opened in 1989 and served as home to the Orlando Magic since their inception until the 2009–10 season. It was originally known as the Orlando Arena, or the "O-Rena", during its first 10 years. In 1999, TD Waterhouse purchased the naming rights and named the venue the TD Waterhouse Centre. In December 2006, the naming rights were purchased by Amway for four years. It is also home of the Arena Football League's Orlando Predators, the Orlando Sharks of the Major Indoor Soccer League, and various sporting and entertainment events. Amway Arena was one of "The Orlando Venues" owned and operated by the City of Orlando. The other facilities include the Bob Carr Performing Arts Centre, Tinker Field, Camping World Stadium, Harry P. Leu Gardens, and Mennello Museum. Orlando advertising agency The Advertising Works, led by its president Doug Minear was responsible for the original Magic uniforms. The logo, featuring a basketball crowded by stars and the wordmark "Magic" with a star replacing the A, was created following meetings with Walt Disney World artists and over 5000 suggestions sent from around the country. Stars would remain a primary feature of the logo once it was redesigned in 2000 to feature a comet-like basketball. Pat Williams first suggested the colors black and gold of his alma mater Wake Forest, but this was eschewed for various factors, including the local college UCF using the same scheme. Black would still be the primary color in the scheme used by Minear, a trait shared by 16 other NBA teams. Other colors were an electric blue specially made by sporting goods manufacturer MacGregor, and silver. The home uniforms were white with black pinstripes, featuring black numbers with blue trim, and the road jerseys reversed the scheme while featuring "Orlando" instead of the Magic wordmark. Given the standard mesh nylon worn across the NBA did not allow for pinstripes, the jerseys were made out of durene, a material with cotton on the underside and polyester bonded on the outside. The road uniform was changed to blue with white pinstripes in 1994–95, although the black uniforms remained in use as alternates. For the Magic's 10th anniversary in 1998–99, a new look designed by fashion designer Jhane Barnes was unveiled. The pinstripes were relegated to the sides and the uniforms now featured stars as the background. Both jerseys, made out of the dazzle that was used in the Women's National Basketball Association uniforms, had the Magic wordmark, with the home jersey in white and the away in blue. For its first two seasons, the original "streaking ball with stars" logo was placed on the waistline, but after the Magic changed its logo in the 2000–01 season, the new "shooting ball with stars" logo was placed on the left leg. The Magic's 15th anniversary in 2003–04 inspired another uniform revamp, opting for a cleaner look without stripes or stars. The home jerseys were white and featured "Magic" in blue block letters with silver and black trim. The away jersey reverted to the city name in white block letters with silver and black trim and was blue. The logo was placed on either side with thin white and black stripes, and a silver star was placed beneath the collar. During this time, the team's original pinstriped jerseys were worn several times per year as alternates: black in 2003–04 and 2006–07, blue in 2004–05, and white in 2005–06. For the 2008–09 season, the Magic have once again introduced new uniforms. The Magic returned to the pinstriped uniforms to commemorate the team's 20th anniversary. The current design combines the elements of the previous three uniform designs the Magic used in its 20-year history. The home jerseys are white with silver pinstripes, while the away jerseys are blue with white pinstripes. The font used for the number and player/team name has also been updated to a more modern look. Magic alternate logos are on the shorts and the back of the jersey. This is the fourth model in franchise history. As the Magic moved to the Amway Center in 2010, they unveiled a new logo that for the first time fully spelled "Magic", without the star instead of the A. They also unveiled a black alternate uniform, with silver pinstripes, mirroring the regular blue road uniform. They were usually worn as throwback uniforms as part of the NBA Hardwood Classics program. A variation of the uniform is also used for Noche Latina every March, with 'Orlando' substituted for 'El Magic', with 'El' in black and silver trim and 'Magic' in blue and silver trim. This was unveiled in the 2011–12 season. In 2014, Magic unveiled a silver uniform for the first time in their history. It was sleeved, and featuring white pinstripes along with blue, black and white trim for the letters and numbers. Unlike the three other uniforms, a different striping pattern will be used on the sides. In 2016, The Magic unveiled a third alternate uniform, featuring carbon as the primary color and without pinstripes. Named “Stars”, it featured the team's secondary logo and a blue, white and blue tricolor stripe in front, along with white lettering. The Magic made only a few slight tweaks to their uniforms when Nike became the league's uniform provider in 2017. From 2017 to 2019, the Magic wore white "Association" uniforms, blue "Icon" uniforms and black "Statement" uniforms. With the exception of the black uniforms eliminating the blue side stripes and changing pinstripe colors from silver to blue, the set remained almost identical to the previous Adidas set. Beginning with the 2019–20 season, the black uniform became the "Icon" uniform while a new blue uniform served as the "Statement" uniform. The uniform was inspired from the different sets the Magic wore through the years, such as the silver star and black stripes with white pinstripes from the 1989–98 set, and the cleaner look of the 2003–08 set. This uniform was then tweaked prior to the 2022–23 season, adding black pinstripes (a nod to the 1989–98 uniforms) and black stripes with subtle star patterns (a nod to the 1998–2003 uniforms). Starting in 2020–21, the "Statement" uniforms would feature Jordan Brand's jumpman logo. Their jersey's sponsor is Disney. An annual "City" edition is also utilized by Nike to honor either local culture or team tradition. The Magic's 2017–18 "City" uniform featured a printed pattern of stars in the sky along with the team's alternate logo in front. For the 2018–19 season, the Magic only made slight changes to their "City" uniform, with the printed pattern of stars relegated to the sides and a predominantly black base. The 2019–20 City uniforms featured an "anthracite" (grey) base with orange lettering. The orange color pays homage to Florida's orange-growing industry. The Magic kept the orange theme for their 2020–21 "City" uniform, this time with a white base and orange letters and numerals with anthracite trim. The uniform also paid homage to the original uniforms worn from 1989 to 1998, featuring "Orl" beside an anthracite star in its original typeface along with orange pinstripes. When the jersey's colors are inverted it shows the exact color scheme used in Orlando's original uniforms. In the 2021–22 season, the Magic again reprised the orange theme for its "City" uniform, this time featuring a few elements from previous uniforms. For their 2022–23 "City" uniform, the Magic went with a black base, dark gray pinstripes, and gothic-inspired white letters with blue trim to represent the team and the city as a kingdom on the rise. Orlando's "City" uniform for the 2023–24 season featured a Gothic-themed design, attributing to Orlando's pride and resiliency and the Magic's determination to protect its kingdom. The midnight-based jersey incorporated silver stripes meant to evoke a steel cage, along with Gothic script lettering. Having qualified for the 2020 NBA playoffs the previous year, the Magic were also given an "Earned" uniform. The design, which has a white base, featured the alternate logo in front (an homage to the 2016–17 "Stars" alternate and 2017–19 "City" uniform) and blue numbers with black and silver trim. Side panels featured the stars pattern as an homage to the 1998–2003 blue uniforms. The Magic are one of seven teams to wear "Classic" uniforms for the 2018–19 season. As part of their 30th anniversary, the team unveiled the blue pinstriped uniform similar to those worn from 1994 to 1998. To commemorate not only its 35th anniversary season, but also the 25th anniversary of the 1999–2000 "Heart and Hustle" team in 2023–24, the Magic donned the blue "sublimated stars" uniform worn from 1999 to 2003. Stuff the Magic Dragon has been the Magic's mascot since 1989. A dragon designed by Wade Harrison and Bonnie Erickson of Acme Mascots, Inc, his name is a pun on Puff the Magic Dragon, and how a slam dunk is also known as "stuffing". The Magic hold the draft rights to the following unsigned draft picks who have been playing outside the NBA. A drafted player, either an international draftee or a college draftee who is not signed by the team that drafted him, is allowed to sign with any non-NBA teams. In this case, the team retains the player's draft rights in the NBA until one year after the player's contract with the non-NBA team ends. This list includes draft rights that were acquired from trades with other teams. Notes: 1 The number was unretired in the 2001–02 season for Patrick Ewing. The NBA retired Bill Russell's No. 6 for all its member teams on August 11, 2022. Notes: 1 In total, Ewing was inducted into the Hall of Fame twice – as player and as a member of the 1992 Olympic team. Also served as assistant coach in 2007–2012. 2 In total, Daly was inducted into the Hall of Fame twice – as coach and as a member of the 1992 Olympic team Notes: 1 In total, Daly was inducted into the FIBA Hall of Fame twice – as coach and as a member of the 1992 Olympic team. In 2014, the Orlando Magic launched the team's Hall of Fame, which honors players, coaches and executives who have had a major impact for the team and in the community. List of the last five seasons completed by the Magic. For the full season-by-season history, see List of Orlando Magic seasons. Note: GP = Games played, W = Wins, L = Losses, W–L% = Winning percentage The Orlando Magic and the Miami Heat had a rivalry because both teams are located in Florida, thus the rivalry was known as the Sunshine State rivalry. Another ingredient to the rivalry was the high-caliber players on both teams such as Orlando's Shaquille O'Neal and Penny Hardaway to Miami's Alonzo Mourning and Tim Hardaway. The two had met each other in the NBA playoffs for the first time in 1997, with Miami beating Orlando 3–2, they have not met in the playoffs since. The rivalry intensified during the 2000s and early 2010s with the rising stardom of Miami's and Orlando's Dwyane Wade and Dwight Howard, respectively, along with Miami's acquiring high caliber stars such LeBron James from the Cleveland Cavaliers and Chris Bosh from the Toronto Raptors and in 2010, resulting in fierce competition between the two. When Dwight Howard departed from the Magic to the Los Angeles Lakers in August 2012, the rivalry softened. The Orlando Magic have been going through a process of rebuilding ever since then. The Atlanta Hawks and the Orlando Magic had an intense rivalry, mostly stemming from playoff competitions and the rising stardom of Dwight Howard and Josh Smith, both from the 2004 NBA draft and who were both raised in Georgia. The two teams faced each other three times in the 1996, 2010, and 2011 NBA playoffs. The Magic defeated the Hawks in the second round of the 1996 playoffs 4–1, and swept the second-round series 4–0 in the 2010 playoffs, while the Hawks eliminated the Magic 4–2 in the first round of the corresponding 2011 playoffs. The current television announcing team for the Orlando Magic is play-by-play announcer David Steele and color analyst Jeff Turner. Turner played for the Magic from its inaugural 1989 season to 1996. Paul Kennedy and Dante Marchetelli serve as courtside reporters, while Marchetelli, former coach Brian Hill, and former Magic player Nick Anderson host the pre-game, halftime and post-game shows. Television broadcasts were split in 2007–08 between Fox Sports Florida and Sun Sports (later Fox Sports Sun, currently Bally Sports Sun). In the 18 years before then, broadcasts were split between Sun Sports (formerly known as the Sunshine Network) and local television stations, originally WKCF and, later, WRBW. There was a controversy with moving broadcasts to Fox Sports Florida since Orlando's largest cable TV provider, Bright House Networks, did not carry the network. Pressure increased for the cable provider to pick up FS Florida in time for the 2007–08 NBA season but this did not happen. The Magic persisted with airing games on FS Florida into the 2008–09 season despite Bright House's refusal to pick up the channel in all of its affiliates. Bright House and FS Florida came to an agreement on January 1, 2009, and began airing the channel as part of its standard cable package. However, Bright House airs the channel using a digital signal that only allows customers who own the Digital cable box to receive the channel. The customers do not have to pay any additional costs to get the channel with their Digital cable box. As of the 2020–21 season, all Magic games are now on Bally Sports Florida. After the end of the 2019–20 season, the Orlando Magic decided to not to renew its contract with play-by-play announcer Dennis Neumann and color analyst Richie Adubato, another former Magic head coach. Games are produced by Magic Radio Network flagship AM 580 WDBO in Orlando, and also broadcast on AM 1380 WELE in Daytona Beach, 99.5 FM WGMW "The Star" in Gainesville and Ocala, AM 1290 WPCF in Panama City, AM 1590 WPSL in Port St. Lucie and AM 1450 WSTU in Stuart. The affiliate in Tallahassee is AM 1270 "My 94.3" WTLY. The immediate Tampa Bay area has no affiliate although AM 1340 in Clearwater WTAN is listed on the team's website. The Magic will continue to have a radio presence using the audio from its television broadcasts. The flagship broadcast was simulcast on WDBO-FM during the 2011–12 NBA season while that station moved from AM to FM. When WDBO re-formatted from talk radio to sports radio, it retained the flagship status. However, WOEX (the former WDBO-FM) still simulcasts Magic games in Central Florida. The official Orlando Magic website features a collection of podcasts available on iTunes, including "Magic Overtime with Dante and Galante". Bold denotes still active with team. Italic denotes still active but not with team. Points scored (regular season) (as of the 2022–23 NBA season) Dwight Howard (11,435) Nick Anderson (10,650) Nikola Vucevic (10,423) Tracy McGrady (8,298) Jameer Nelson (8,184) Shaquille O'Neal (8,019) Hedo Turkoglu (7,216) Evan Fournier (7,049) Penny Hardaway (7,018) Dennis Scott (6,603) Darrell Armstrong (5,898) Aaron Gordon (5,507) Scott Skiles (4,966) Horace Grant (4,638) Terrance Ross (4,427) Rashard Lewis (4,194) Pat Garrity (3,800) JJ Redick (3,662) Victor Oladipo (3,551) Terry Catledge (3,433) Other statistics (regular season) (as of the 2022–23 NBA season) Most points in one game with 62 (Tracy McGrady on March 10, 2004, vs. Washington Wizards) Most points in one half with 37 in the first half (Tracy McGrady on March 9, 2003, vs. Denver Nuggets) Most points in one quarter with 25 in the second quarter (Tracy McGrady on March 9, 2003, vs. Denver Nuggets) Most free throws made in one game with 21 (Dwight Howard on January 12, 2012, vs. Golden State Warriors Most free throws attempted in one game with 39 (Dwight Howard on January 12, 2012, vs. Golden State Warriors) ***NBA Record Most points in a playoff game with 46 (Dwight Howard in Game 1 of 2011 Eastern Conference playoffs, First round vs. Atlanta Hawks and Tracy McGrady in Game 2 of the 2003 Eastern Conference playoffs, First round vs. Detroit Pistons) Most assists made in one game with 30 (Scott Skiles on December 30, 1990, vs. Denver Nuggets) ***NBA Record Most rebounds in one game with 29 (Nikola Vučević on December 31, 2012, vs. Miami Heat) NBA Defensive Player of the Year Dwight Howard – 2009, 2010, 2011 NBA Rookie of the Year Shaquille O'Neal – 1993 Mike Miller – 2001 Paolo Banchero – 2023 NBA Sixth Man of the Year Darrell Armstrong – 1999 NBA Sportsmanship Award Grant Hill – 2005 NBA Most Improved Player of the Year Scott Skiles – 1991 Darrell Armstrong – 1999 Tracy McGrady – 2001 Hedo Türkoğlu – 2008 Ryan Anderson – 2012 NBA Coach of the Year Doc Rivers – 2000 NBA Executive of the Year John Gabriel – 2000 NBA scoring champion Shaquille O'Neal – 1995 Tracy McGrady – 2003, 2004 All-NBA First Team Penny Hardaway – 1995, 1996 Tracy McGrady – 2002, 2003 Dwight Howard – 2008–2012 All-NBA Second Team Shaquille O'Neal – 1995 Tracy McGrady – 2001, 2004 All-NBA Third Team Shaquille O'Neal – 1994, 1996 Penny Hardaway – 1997 Dwight Howard – 2007 NBA All-Defensive First Team Dwight Howard – 2009–2012 NBA All-Defensive Second Team Horace Grant – 1995, 1996 Dwight Howard – 2008 NBA All-Rookie First Team Dennis Scott – 1991 Shaquille O'Neal – 1993 Penny Hardaway – 1994 Matt Harpring – 1999 Mike Miller – 2001 Drew Gooden – 2003 Dwight Howard – 2005 Victor Oladipo – 2014 Elfrid Payton – 2015 Franz Wagner – 2022 Paolo Banchero – 2023 NBA All-Rookie Second Team Stanley Roberts – 1992 Michael Doleac – 1999 Chucky Atkins – 2000 Gordan Giriček – 2003 Jameer Nelson – 2005 NBA All-Star Team Shaquille O'Neal – 1993–1996 Penny Hardaway – 1995–1998 Tracy McGrady – 2001–2004 Grant Hill – 2001, 2005 Dwight Howard – 2007–2012 Rashard Lewis – 2009 Jameer Nelson – 2009 Nikola Vučević – 2019, 2021 Paolo Banchero – 2024 NBA All-Star head coaches Brian Hill – 1995 Stan Van Gundy – 2010 "NBA.com/Stats–Orlando Magic seasons". Stats.NBA.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. Archived from the original on December 2, 2022. Retrieved December 2, 2022. "History: Team by Team" (PDF). 2018–19 Official NBA Guide (PDF). NBA Properties, Inc. October 8, 2018. Archived from the original (PDF) on April 11, 2019. Retrieved February 28, 2019. "Orlando Magic Unveil New Logo". OrlandoMagic.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. June 15, 2010. Archived from the original on April 16, 2023. Retrieved May 20, 2016. The new logo incorporates the Magic's current jersey wordmark giving a more integrated look. It also continues the team's colors with the Magic blue, Magic black and Magic silver. "Orlando Magic Reproduction and Usage Guideline Sheet". NBA Properties, Inc. Archived from the original on July 29, 2023. Retrieved December 22, 2017. "Disney Believes in Magic". OrlandoMagic.com (Press release). NBA Media Ventures. June 20, 2017. Archived from the original on April 16, 2023. Retrieved December 17, 2017. Denton, John (May 23, 2017). "Magic Name Jeff Weltman President of Basketball Operations". OrlandoMagic.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. Archived from the original on April 16, 2023. Retrieved May 24, 2017. "Franchise History - Stats - NBA.com". NBA.com. Archived from the original on June 28, 2021. Retrieved April 21, 2021. "Hewitt: Banking on a Circle of Friends". Biz Journals. Archived from the original on March 8, 2021. Retrieved April 23, 2019. Lombardo, John. "Magic Man". Sports Business Daily. Archived from the original on December 15, 2018. Retrieved April 23, 2019. Galarza, Carlos (July 6, 2006). "Magic moments: 20 years since NBA idea was born". Orlando Business Journal. Archived from the original on April 6, 2014. Retrieved December 26, 2013. Lombardo, John (February 11, 2013). "Magic Man". Sports Business Journal. Archived from the original on October 21, 2013. Retrieved December 26, 2013. "MAGIC: Behind the Name: the Orlando Magic". NBA.com/magic. Archived from the original on December 1, 2010. Retrieved March 9, 2008. "MAGIC: 20 Years Ago Today – The Magic Begins". NBA.com/magic. Archived from the original on February 2, 2008. Retrieved March 9, 2008. "History of team names in the NBA". Archived from the original on June 29, 2015. Retrieved June 30, 2015. Cooper, Barry (July 27, 1986). "Abracadabra! It's Magic Orlando's Prospective Nba Team Now Has A Name". Orlando Sentinel. Archived from the original on December 20, 2016. Retrieved June 30, 2015. "The Origins of All 30 NBA Team Names". October 14, 2016. Archived from the original on August 9, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2015. Lombardo, John (February 11, 2013). "Stern: Pat 'refused to take no for an answer'". Sports Business Journal. Archived from the original on October 21, 2013. Retrieved December 26, 2013. Blumenstyk, Goldie (December 9, 1986). "Gung-ho City Council Okays Early Construction Of Arena". Archived from the original on June 12, 2012. Retrieved December 26, 2013. "The Heat is On, Miami awarded NBA franchise". Sun Sentinel. Archived from the original on December 3, 2022. Retrieved February 10, 2024. Goldaper, Sam (April 23, 1987). "The National Basketball Association decided yesterday in a surprise move to expand by four franchises rather than the three originally planned". The New York Times. Archived from the original on February 10, 2024. Retrieved March 10, 2008. "NBA '89–90; Turnovers, 2 More Teams And Questions". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 23, 2019. Retrieved April 23, 2019. Dunlap, Evan (November 1, 2013). "Orlando Magic 25th anniversary: Team to honor Nick Anderson on November 8th". Orlando Pinstriped Post. Archived from the original on December 30, 2013. Retrieved December 26, 2013. Schmitz, Brian (October 29, 2011). "Dave Corzine has Magic flashback". Orlando Sentinel. Archived from the original on December 31, 2013. Retrieved December 26, 2013. Denton, John. "Denton: 25 Years of Magic History". NBA.com/magic. Archived from the original on January 9, 2017. Retrieved March 10, 2016. "1989–90 Standings". NBA.com/history. Archived from the original on January 1, 2011. Retrieved March 10, 2008. "NBA Expansion Drafts: Results". NBA.com/history. Archived from the original on March 29, 2010. Retrieved March 10, 2008. Dunlap, Evan (December 9, 2013). "Orlando Magic 25th anniversary: Team to honor Dennis Scott on December 13th". Orlando Pinstriped Post. Archived from the original on December 30, 2013. Retrieved December 26, 2013. "Scott Skiles: The Game I'll Never Forget". OrlandoMagic.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. December 30, 2005. Archived from the original on December 1, 2010. Retrieved November 27, 2006. "N.B.A. Orlando Team Sold". The New York Times. September 20, 1991. Archived from the original on October 4, 2013. Retrieved March 10, 2008. Moran, Malcolm (May 18, 1992). "The Top Pick Is Going to Disney World". The New York Times. Archived from the original on February 10, 2024. Retrieved March 10, 2008. "1992–93 Standings". NBA.com/history. Archived from the original on December 17, 2007. Retrieved March 10, 2008. Abrams, Jonathan (April 6, 2015). "Blue Chips: An oral history of Shaq, Penny, and the Orlando Magic's lost NBA dynasty". Grantland. ESPN. Archived from the original on November 26, 2016. Retrieved December 7, 2016. "Hill Is Named Coach of Magic". The New York Times. July 1, 1993. Retrieved March 11, 2008. Thompson II, Marcus; Geoff Lepper (January 26, 2008). "Warriors in talks with Webber". San Jose Mercury News. Archived from the original on January 14, 2012. Retrieved March 11, 2008. "1993–94 Standings". NBA.com/history. Archived from the original on December 15, 2018. Retrieved March 12, 2008. "1994 Playoff Results". NBA.com/history. Archived from the original on April 9, 2008. Retrieved March 12, 2008. "1994–95 Standings". NBA.com/history. Archived from the original on July 27, 2010. Retrieved March 12, 2008. "Orlando Magic: Did You Know?". NBA.com/magic. Archived from the original on May 2, 2010. Retrieved March 12, 2008. "1995 Playoff Results". NBA.com/history. Archived from the original on June 9, 2012. Retrieved March 12, 2008. "1995–96 Standings". NBA.com/history. Archived from the original on November 16, 2017. Retrieved March 12, 2008. "MAGIC: All-Time Transactions". NBA.com/magic. Archived from the original on February 3, 2012. Retrieved March 12, 2008. "1996 Playoff Results". NBA.com/history. Archived from the original on June 9, 2012. Retrieved March 12, 2008. Smallwood, John (May 28, 1996). "Bull Rush Jordan, Chicago Sweep Past Magic Into Finals Jordan Is The Magic". Philadelphia Daily News. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved December 26, 2013. Heisler, Mark (July 19, 1996). "Lakers Hit The Shaqpot". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on December 30, 2013. Retrieved December 26, 2013. "Daly reconsiders, takes Magic job Former Pistons coach gets 3-year, $15 million deal". The Baltimore Sun. June 2, 1997. Archived from the original on December 31, 2013. Retrieved December 26, 2013. Povtak, Tim (February 20, 1998). "Seikaly Bounces To Nets, And It Looks As If He'll Go". Orlando Sentinel. Archived from the original on December 30, 2013. Retrieved December 26, 2013. Povtak, Tim (May 16, 1999). "76ers 101, Magic 91". Orlando Sentinel. Archived from the original on December 30, 2013. Retrieved December 26, 2013. Smith, Stephen A. (June 8, 1999). "Oakley Shows Interest In Sixers; Magic Hire Rivers As Head Coach". Philadelphia Daily News. Archived from the original on March 2, 2016. Retrieved December 26, 2013. "Suns Sign Penny For 7 Years". CBS News. August 4, 1999. Archived from the original on December 30, 2013. Retrieved December 26, 2013. "Rivers edges Jackson for Honor". ESPN. Archived from the original on April 22, 2019. Retrieved April 22, 2019. "Mike Miller wins rookie of the year". NBA. Archived from the original on April 22, 2019. Retrieved April 22, 2019. "Hornets make Magic disappear". Philadelphia Daily News. May 1, 2002. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved December 26, 2013. "We Reminisce: When Tracy McGrady Almost Made The Second Round Of The NBA Playoffs 10 Years Ago". April 29, 2013. Archived from the original on October 1, 2015. Retrieved September 29, 2015. Schmitz, Brian (November 18, 2003). "Magic Fire Coach Doc Rivers". Orlando Sentinel. Archived from the original on December 31, 2013. Retrieved December 26, 2013. "Gabriel blamed for Grant Hill fiasco". ESPN.com. March 12, 2004. Archived from the original on December 31, 2013. Retrieved December 26, 2013. Schmitz, Brian (June 30, 2004). "Exit T-mac, Enter Steve Francis . . .the 7-player Trade With Houston Is Final. Tracy Mcgrady Didn't Want To Leave Here". Orlando Sentinel. Archived from the original on December 31, 2013. Retrieved December 26, 2013. "Magic Acquire Tony Battie, Picks from Cleveland". OrlandoMagic.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. July 23, 2004. Archived from the original on November 2, 2012. Retrieved December 26, 2013. "2004–05 Season". OrlandoMagic.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. Archived from the original on December 31, 2013. Retrieved December 28, 2013. "Magic will waive Christie". Archived from the original on December 20, 2016. Retrieved December 7, 2016. "Magic fire Davis following sixth straight loss". ESPN.com. March 17, 2005. Archived from the original on December 20, 2016. Retrieved December 7, 2016. "Magic GM & COO John Weisbrod Resigns; Is Move To NHL Next?". Sports Business Daily. May 23, 2005. Archived from the original on December 30, 2013. Retrieved December 28, 2013. "Brian Hill named Orlando Magic coach". UPI. May 24, 2005. Archived from the original on December 30, 2013. Retrieved December 28, 2013. "Fran Vazquez — the ghost of Magic past — retires | Commentary". Orlando Sentinel. May 9, 2020. Retrieved February 26, 2024. "Archived copy". Archived from the original on January 4, 2006. Retrieved October 22, 2005.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) "Sonics, Magic complete sign-and-trade for Rashard Lewis". ESPN. July 11, 2007. Archived from the original on March 2, 2012. Retrieved June 30, 2015. "Magic's Vander Weide officially takes over reins from owner Rich DeVos". tribunedigital-orlandosentinel. Archived from the original on November 17, 2007. Retrieved June 30, 2015. "After review, NBA says Billups' 3-pointer should not have counted". ESPN. May 6, 2008. Archived from the original on August 7, 2012. Retrieved June 30, 2015. Golen, Jimmy (May 18, 2009). "Magic Moment: Orlando beats Boston to advance". Yahoo. Associated Press. "New Jersey Nets ship Vince Carter to Orlando Magic for Rafer Alston, rookie Courtney Lee". ESPN. June 25, 2009. Archived from the original on October 25, 2011. Retrieved June 30, 2015. "Magic Sign Free Agent Brandon Bass". OrlandoMagic.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. Archived from the original on July 14, 2009. Retrieved February 28, 2019. "Orlando Magic agree to two-year contract with free-agent forward Matt Barnes". ESPN. July 21, 2009. Archived from the original on November 10, 2011. Retrieved June 30, 2015. "Magic Sign Free Agent Jason Williams". OrlandoMagic.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. Archived from the original on December 1, 2010. Retrieved June 30, 2015. "Van Gundy, Smith reap the rewards of success". tribunedigital-orlandosentinel. Archived from the original on October 1, 2009. Retrieved June 30, 2015. "Lewis suspended 10 games by NBA". ESPN. August 7, 2009. Archived from the original on September 5, 2011. Retrieved April 13, 2010. "Magic sign Chris Duhon". InsideHoops. Archived from the original on March 7, 2012. Retrieved January 27, 2013. "Sources: Magic trade for Gilbert Arenas". ESPN. December 18, 2010. Archived from the original on January 10, 2012. Retrieved December 18, 2010. "Orlando Magic GM Rob Hennigan –". Usatoday.com. June 20, 2012. Archived from the original on June 23, 2012. Retrieved January 27, 2013. "Dwight Howard Demands Nets Trade". CBS New York. June 30, 2012. Archived from the original on June 25, 2013. Retrieved July 1, 2012. "Jacque Vaughn named as Magic head coach". WFTV Channel 9 Orlando. Archived from the original on July 30, 2012. Retrieved July 28, 2012. "Dwight Howard to Lakers". ESPN. August 10, 2012. Archived from the original on May 9, 2013. Retrieved August 10, 2012. "It's official: Howard dealt to Lakers in four-team trade". NBA. August 10, 2012. Archived from the original on August 11, 2012. Retrieved August 10, 2012. "Big Ten Announces 2013 Men's Basketball Postseason Honors". www.bigten.org. March 11, 2013. Archived from the original on March 14, 2013. Retrieved June 28, 2013. Hightower, Kyle (May 29, 2015). "Magic tab Skiles as 12th coach in franchise history". National Basketball Association. Archived from the original on June 2, 2015. Retrieved August 15, 2015. "Magic hire Scott Skiles as coach". ESPN. May 29, 2015. Archived from the original on August 22, 2015. Retrieved August 15, 2015. Denton, John (June 25, 2015). "Magic Select Mario Hezonja with Fifth Overall Pick". OrlandoMagic.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. Archived from the original on June 28, 2015. Retrieved June 26, 2015. "Detroit Pistons Acquire Forward Tobias Harris". NBA.com. Turner Sports Interactive, Inc. February 16, 2016. Archived from the original on February 16, 2016. Retrieved February 16, 2016. Robbins, Josh (May 12, 2016). "Scott Skiles resigns as head coach of Orlando Magic". Orlando Sentinel. Archived from the original on May 13, 2016. Retrieved May 12, 2016. "Source: Magic agree to deal with Vogel as coach". ESPN.com. May 19, 2016. Archived from the original on July 9, 2021. Retrieved July 3, 2021. Denton, John (July 7, 2016). "Orlando Magic Re-Sign Evan Fournier". OrlandoMagic.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. Archived from the original on March 8, 2021. Retrieved May 18, 2020. Robbins, Josh (July 7, 2016). "Orlando Magic re-sign Evan Fournier". Orlando Sentinel. Archived from the original on July 8, 2016. Retrieved July 12, 2016. "Magic Acquire C.J. Wilcox From Clippers". OrlandoMagic.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. July 15, 2016. Archived from the original on July 18, 2016. Retrieved July 15, 2016. "Raptors Acquire Serge Ibaka From Magic". Raptors.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. February 14, 2017. Archived from the original on February 15, 2017. Retrieved February 14, 2017. Wojnarowski, Adrian (February 8, 2018). "Suns acquire former first-round pick Elfrid Payton from Magic". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on May 14, 2019. Retrieved May 15, 2019. Denton, John (April 12, 2018). "Orlando Magic Dismiss Frank Vogel as Head Coach". OrlandoMagic.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. Archived from the original on November 9, 2020. Retrieved April 12, 2018. Denton, John (May 30, 2018). "Orlando Magic Name Steve Clifford Head Coach". OrlandoMagic.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. Archived from the original on September 28, 2020. Retrieved May 18, 2020. "Mo Bamba, known for wingspan, joins Magic as sixth overall pick". ESPN.com. June 21, 2018. Archived from the original on June 25, 2018. Retrieved June 26, 2018. "Richard M. DeVos, Co-Founder of Amway, Dies". OrlandoMagic.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. September 6, 2018. Archived from the original on May 16, 2020. Retrieved May 18, 2020. Denton, John (April 7, 2019). "Magic Clinch Playoff Berth With Win Over Celtics". OrlandoMagic.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. Archived from the original on August 6, 2020. Retrieved May 18, 2020. Parry, Roy (February 5, 2019). "Magic rookie Mohamed Bamba diagnosed with stress fracture in left leg". orlandosentinel.com. Archived from the original on May 15, 2019. Retrieved May 15, 2019. Parry, Roy (February 9, 2019). "Magic, 76ers trade complete as Markelle Fultz, Jonathon Simmons pass physicals". orlandosentinel.com. Archived from the original on February 10, 2019. Retrieved May 15, 2019. Parry, Roy (April 4, 2019). "Magic officially sign Michael Carter-Williams for rest of season, waive Isaiah Briscoe". orlandosentinel.com. Archived from the original on May 15, 2019. Retrieved May 15, 2019. Parry, Roy (June 20, 2019). "Magic excited about versatility top pick Chuma Okeke brings to team". orlandosentinel.com. Archived from the original on June 25, 2019. Retrieved June 28, 2019. Parry, Roy. "Magic trade second-round pick to Lakers for 2020 pick, cash considerations". orlandosentinel.com. Archived from the original on July 10, 2019. Retrieved November 29, 2019. Dennis, David (June 21, 2019). "Orlando Sentinel". Archived from the original on July 10, 2019. Retrieved June 21, 2019. "Sources: Chuma Okeke Won't Sign Rookie Deal Until 2020". www.basketballinsiders.com. September 24, 2019. Archived from the original on October 25, 2019. Retrieved September 24, 2019. Parry, Roy (July 1, 2019). "Magic reportedly agree to sign Michael Carter-Williams to 1-year deal". orlandosentinel.com. Archived from the original on July 3, 2019. Retrieved November 29, 2019. Meagher, Sean (June 30, 2019). "NBA free agency 2019: Al-Farouq Aminu signs 3-year deal with Orlando Magic". oregonlive. Archived from the original on July 2, 2019. Retrieved November 29, 2019. Parry, Roy (November 28, 2019). "Magic receive cap relief as NBA clears remaining salary of Timofey Mozgov". orlandosentinel.com. Archived from the original on November 29, 2019. Retrieved November 29, 2019. "NBA Board of Governors approves competitive format to restart 2019-20 season with 22 teams returning to play". www.nba.com. Archived from the original on October 22, 2021. Retrieved July 3, 2021. Jankowski, Jon (November 18, 2020). "Orlando Magic draft Cole Anthony". WKMG. Archived from the original on November 19, 2020. Retrieved November 18, 2020. Rossman-Reich, Philip (November 21, 2020). "Orlando Magic put free agent focus on shoring up team's depth". Orlando Magic Daily. Archived from the original on November 21, 2020. Retrieved November 21, 2020. Kaskey-Blomain, Michael (August 31, 2020). "Jonathan Isaac to miss entire 2020–21 season after suffering knee injury in bubble, per Magic president". CBS Sports. Archived from the original on October 28, 2020. Retrieved August 31, 2020. Smith, Keith (March 25, 2021). "NBA trade deadline winners and losers: Nuggets make playoff push by adding Aaron Gordon; Terrence Ross tweets through emotions". Yahoo Sports. Archived from the original on March 25, 2021. Retrieved March 25, 2021. Wojnarowski, Adrian (June 5, 2021). "Steve Clifford won't return as coach of Orlando Magic, sources say". ESPN. Archived from the original on June 5, 2021. Retrieved June 5, 2021. "Orlando Magic Name Jamahl Mosley Head Coach". NBA.com. July 11, 2021. Archived from the original on July 11, 2021. Retrieved July 11, 2021. "2022 NBA Draft results: Picks 1-58". NBA.com. Archived from the original on June 14, 2022. Retrieved November 14, 2023. Reynolds, Tim (April 26, 2023). "Paolo Banchero named 2022–23 Kia NBA Rookie of the Year". NBA.com. Archived from the original on April 26, 2023. Retrieved May 8, 2023. Deb, Sopan (August 3, 2023). "Orlando Magic's Political Donation Is 'Alarming,' Players' Union Says". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 5, 2023. Retrieved August 5, 2023. "2023 NBA Draft Results: Picks 1-58". NBA.com. Archived from the original on June 4, 2023. Retrieved November 14, 2023. "Orlando Magic Acquire Right to First Round Draft Pick Swap From Phoenix". www.nba.com. Archived from the original on October 8, 2023. Retrieved November 14, 2023. "Orlando Magic Acquire Right to First Round Draft Pick Swap From Phoenix". www.nba.com. Archived from the original on October 8, 2023. Retrieved November 14, 2023. "NBA.com: Orlando to host 2012 All-Star Game in new arena". NBA.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. May 4, 2010. Archived from the original on June 26, 2015. Retrieved August 15, 2015. "Daktronics Helps Orlando Magic Open Amway Center". Archived from the original on March 3, 2012. Retrieved December 8, 2012. "Amway Center to Feature Daktronics Integrated Super System". NBA.com. Archived from the original on April 6, 2014. Retrieved December 8, 2012. "NBA.com: Orlando's Premier Downtown Sports and Entertainment Destination to be Renamed Kia Center". NBA.com. NBA. December 20, 2023. Archived from the original on December 20, 2023. Retrieved December 20, 2023. "Magic's Home Renamed 'Amway Arena'". Local6.com. Archived from the original on December 17, 2007. Retrieved March 9, 2008. "AMWAY ARENA". Orlando Venues. Archived from the original on August 20, 2006. Retrieved March 9, 2008. "Magic Logo Sparks Enthusiasm At Team's Colorful Unveiling". Archived from the original on December 20, 2016. Retrieved December 12, 2016. Pat Williams, James D. Denney (2014). Ahead of the Game: The Pat Williams Story. Revell. p. 191. ISBN 978-1441220455. "Suspense Over – Magic Unveil Designer Duds". Archived from the original on December 20, 2016. Retrieved December 12, 2016. "New-look Magic Leave Celtics Feeling Blue". Archived from the original on December 20, 2016. Retrieved December 12, 2016. "Magic Unveil Latest In Nba Fashions". Archived from the original on December 20, 2016. Retrieved December 12, 2016. "Going Retro: Orlando Magic". OrlandoMagic.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. September 23, 2003. Archived from the original on March 18, 2015. Retrieved August 15, 2015. "Pinstriped Party". OrlandoMagic.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. September 23, 2008. Archived from the original on November 11, 2015. Retrieved August 15, 2015. Dunlap, Evan (September 24, 2008). "Reviewing the Orlando Magic's New Uniforms". Orlando Pinstriped Post. Archived from the original on October 2, 2016. Retrieved August 15, 2015. "Orlando Magic 'turn the page,' unveil shocking new logo". Archived from the original on December 20, 2016. Retrieved January 15, 2017. "Orlando Magic Unveil New Black Alternate Uniforms". OrlandoMagic.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. November 26, 2010. Archived from the original on October 14, 2016. Retrieved August 15, 2015. Gates, Sara (February 29, 2012). "Orlando Debuts 'El Magic' Jersey For NBA's Noche Latina (Photos)". Archived from the original on December 20, 2016. Retrieved April 16, 2020 – via Huff Post. "Orlando Magic Unveil New Pride Jersey". OrlandoMagic.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. September 29, 2014. Archived from the original on December 20, 2014. Retrieved August 15, 2015. "Orlando Magic Unveil New Stars Alternate Uniforms". OrlandoMagic.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. August 9, 2016. Archived from the original on November 18, 2016. Retrieved November 18, 2016. "Magic unveil Statement Edition uniforms for 2022-23". NBA.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. September 15, 2022. Archived from the original on September 15, 2022. Retrieved September 15, 2022. "Orlando Magic Unveil New Threads from Nike". OrlandoMagic.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. September 5, 2017. Archived from the original on September 16, 2017. Retrieved September 16, 2017. "All New Nike Jerseys". OrlandoMagic.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. Archived from the original on May 26, 2019. Retrieved May 26, 2019. "Orlando Magic Unveil "City Edition" Threads from Nike". OrlandoMagic.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. December 27, 2017. Archived from the original on February 4, 2018. Retrieved February 3, 2018. "Orlando Magic Unveil "City Edition" Uniform Inspired by Dreamers". OrlandoMagic.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. November 1, 2018. Archived from the original on November 3, 2018. Retrieved November 3, 2018. Denton, John (November 14, 2019). "Orlando Magic's "City Edition" Uniform Inspired by the City of Orlando and its "Orange" Roots". OrlandoMagic.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. Archived from the original on November 15, 2019. Retrieved November 15, 2019. "Magic pay homage to the past with City Edition uniforms". NBA.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. November 11, 2020. Archived from the original on November 11, 2020. Retrieved November 12, 2020. "Orlando Magic 2023-24 City Edition Uniform: Coat of Armor". NBA.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. November 2, 2023. Archived from the original on January 7, 2024. Retrieved January 6, 2024. "Orlando Magic Unveil Earned Edition Uniform". NBA.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. March 11, 2021. Archived from the original on March 16, 2021. Retrieved March 20, 2021. Burry, Conrad. "Seven NBA Teams To Wear Classic Uniforms Next Season". sportslogos.net. Archived from the original on August 9, 2018. Retrieved August 8, 2018. Denton, John (August 8, 2018). "Orlando Magic Unveil 30 Years of Pure Magic". OrlandoMagic.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. Archived from the original on July 25, 2020. Retrieved May 18, 2020. "Magic unveil new uniforms for 2023-24". NBA.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. September 15, 2023. Archived from the original on September 16, 2023. Retrieved September 15, 2023. "The Magic's Lovable Dragon Is The Stuff Of Team Dreams". Archived from the original on December 20, 2016. Retrieved December 12, 2016. Williams, Denney (2014), p. 194-5 Coon, Larry. "NBA Salary Cap FAQ – 2011 Collective Bargaining Agreement". Archived from the original on May 27, 2015. Retrieved April 13, 2014. If the player is already under contract to, or signs a contract with a non-NBA team, the team retains the player's draft rights for one year after the player's obligation to the non-NBA team ends. Essentially, the clock stops as long as the player plays pro ball outside the NBA. "2018 NBA Draft Trade Tracker". NBA.com. Archived from the original on June 22, 2018. Retrieved June 21, 2018. "Magic Acquire Draft Rights to Jānis Timma; Trade Luke Ridnour". NBA.com. June 24, 2015. Archived from the original on December 22, 2015. Retrieved June 24, 2015. "Orlando Magic to Retire #32 in Honor of Shaquille O'Neal". NBA.com. National Basketball Association. Archived from the original on January 5, 2024. Retrieved January 5, 2024. "Bill Russell's No. 6 jersey to be retired throughout NBA". NBA.com. August 11, 2022. Archived from the original on August 17, 2022. Retrieved August 24, 2022. Golliver, Ben (August 11, 2022). "NBA permanently retires Bill Russell's No. 6". Washington Post. Archived from the original on November 7, 2022. Retrieved August 24, 2022. "Orlando Magic Announces Pat Williams and Nick Anderson as Inaugural Magic Hall of Fame Class". OrlandoMagic.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. April 9, 2014. Archived from the original on February 3, 2017. Retrieved January 26, 2017. "Orlando Magic Hall of Fame". OrlandoMagic.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. Archived from the original on February 3, 2017. Retrieved January 26, 2017. Denton, John (April 9, 2014). "Williams and Anderson Inducted Into Magic Hall of Fame". OrlandoMagic.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. Archived from the original on February 3, 2017. Retrieved January 26, 2017. Denton, John (March 12, 2015). "Magic to Induct Shaq Into Magic Hall Of Fame". OrlandoMagic.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. Archived from the original on February 3, 2017. Retrieved January 26, 2017. Denton, John (January 20, 2017). "Penny Hardaway Inducted Into Magic Hall of Fame". OrlandoMagic.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. Archived from the original on February 3, 2017. Retrieved January 26, 2017. Denton, John (February 21, 2020). "Darrell Armstrong Inducted Into Magic Hall of Fame". OrlandoMagic.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. Archived from the original on March 1, 2020. Retrieved May 19, 2020. "Dennis Scott to be Inducted Into Orlando Magic Hall of Fame". NBA.com. November 26, 2022. Archived from the original on January 6, 2024. Retrieved January 6, 2024. "Orlando Magic Senior Chairman Rich DeVos Inducted Into Magic Hall of Fame". OrlandoMagic.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. March 29, 2016. Archived from the original on February 3, 2017. Retrieved January 26, 2017. "Orlando Magic Induct John Gabriel and Brian Hill into the Magic Hall of Fame". NBA.com. March 2, 2022. Archived from the original on January 6, 2024. Retrieved January 6, 2024. SCANLON, DICK (November 27, 2005). "Magic's Hot, Not Heat, Surviving 3-Pointers". The Ledger. Archived from the original on December 31, 2023. Retrieved December 31, 2023. "Wade-less Heat struggle against Magic". Gainesville Sun. December 30, 2006. Archived from the original on December 31, 2023. Retrieved December 31, 2023. "Magic overcome Heat, Wade". Sarasota Herald-Tribune. December 28, 2007. Archived from the original on December 31, 2023. Retrieved December 31, 2023. "Heat is turning rivalry with Magic around". Los Angeles Times. December 18, 2009. Archived from the original on December 31, 2023. Retrieved December 31, 2023. "Lack of Dwyane Wade waters down Magic-Heat preseason rivalry game". Orlando Sentinel. October 21, 2010. Archived from the original on December 31, 2023. Retrieved December 31, 2023. Stoda, Greg (October 28, 2010). "Commentary: Miami Heat-Orlando Magic rivalry reaches a new level, starting Friday night". The Palm Beach Post. Archived from the original on December 31, 2023. Retrieved December 31, 2023. Brown, James (October 29, 2010). "Orlando Magic vs. Miami Heat: Is This the Best Rivalry in the NBA?". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on December 31, 2023. Retrieved December 31, 2023. Parry, Rod (September 8, 2020). "Magic part ways with longtime radio broadcasters". Orlando Sentinel. Archived from the original on September 22, 2020. Retrieved September 8, 2020. Parry, Rod (September 8, 2020). "Magic part ways with longtime radio broadcasters". The Orlando Sentinel. Archived from the original on September 22, 2020. Retrieved September 8, 2020. "Orlando Magic Career Leaders". Basketball Reference. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved April 13, 2019. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Orlando Magic. Official website Portals:  Basketball  Florida