.ar is the Internet country code top-level domain (ccTLD) for Argentina. It is administered by NIC Argentina. Registering an .ar domain (like website.ar) directly is allowed as of 2020. Previously, only 9 of the second-level domains listed below were open for registration, and a local presence in Argentina was required. Recently[when?] the extension has become synonymous with Augmented Reality and is being by many prominent AR and XR startups. As of January 2017 there are currently 12 second-level domains. com.ar – Companies and individuals resident in Argentina coop.ar – Registered cooperatives edu.ar – Educational institutions. Currently, this second-level domain is handled by ARIU (Asociación de Redes de Interconexión Universitaria). gob.ar, gov.ar – Local and national government int.ar – International entities and representatives of foreign international organizations in Argentina mil.ar – Military use mutual.ar – Registered mutual organizations net.ar – Providers of internet services licensed by the Comisión Nacional de Comunicaciones org.ar – Non-profit organizations, which must present a valid proof senasa.ar – Legal and human persons related to the National Food Safety and Quality Service[citation needed] .seg.ar - for companies authorised by the Superintendence of National Insurance. tur.ar – Tourism and travel companies licensed by the Ministerio de Turismo de la Nación. Provincial or municipal government agencies promoting their respective provinces or municipalities can also use this second-level domain. musica.ar – Any member listed in the National Registry of Musicians and National Musical Groups bet.ar – Online gambling operators, licensed by local and national government In November 2008, a resolution approved the use of special characters in domain names, including ñ, ç, á, é, í ó, ú, ä, ë, ï, ö, and ü. The .gob.ar domain was also approved for government entities (.gob stands for "gobierno", government in Spanish). Internet in Argentina "Estadísticas | NIC Argentina". NIC Argentina. 10 December 2022. Archived from the original on 7 December 2022. Retrieved 10 December 2022. "Comenzó el Registro de Interés de dominios '.ar'". NIC Argentina (in Spanish). Retrieved 12 February 2020. ".ar Domain Names". Retrieved 7 August 2013. "Dominios y Aranceles" (in Spanish). Retrieved 26 July 2018. "Understanding the .AR Top-Level Domain". www.nominus.com. "RESOL-2019-42-APN-SLYT - Establécense aranceles ".bet.ar"" (in Spanish). Retrieved 30 June 2020. "Aprueban la incorporación de la letra Ñ a los dominios argentinos en Internet". infobaeprofesional.com. Archived from the original on 6 February 2009. Retrieved 15 December 2008. NIC Argentina Resolution N° 904/2008 about tur.ar domains IANA .ar whois information v t e v t e