The Eurovision Song Contest (French: Concours Eurovision de la chanson), often known simply as Eurovision or by its initialism ESC, is an international song competition organised annually by the European Broadcasting Union. Each participating country submits an original song to be performed live and transmitted to national broadcasters via the Eurovision and Euroradio networks, with competing countries then casting votes for the other countries' songs to determine a winner. The contest was inspired by and based on Italy's national Sanremo Music Festival, held in the Italian Riviera since 1951. Eurovision has been held annually since 1956 (apart from 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic), making it the longest-running international music competition on TV and one of the world's longest-running television programmes. Active members of the EBU and invited associate members are eligible to compete; as of 2023,[update] 52 countries have participated at least once. Each participating broadcaster sends one original song of three minutes duration or less to be performed live by a singer or group of up to six people aged 16 or older. Each country awards 1–8, 10 and 12 points to their ten favourite songs, based on the views of an assembled group of music professionals and the country's viewing public, with the song receiving the most points declared the winner. Other performances feature alongside the competition, including a specially-commissioned opening and interval act and guest performances by musicians and other personalities, with past acts including Cirque du Soleil, Madonna, Justin Timberlake, Mika, Rita Ora and the first performance of Riverdance. Originally consisting of a single evening event, the contest has expanded as new countries joined (including countries outside of Europe, such as Israel and Australia), leading to the introduction of relegation procedures in the 1990s, before the creation of semi-finals in the 2000s. As of 2023,[update] Germany has competed more times than any other country, having participated in all but one edition, while Ireland and Sweden both hold the record for the most victories, with seven wins each in total. Traditionally held in the country which won the preceding year's event, the contest provides an opportunity to promote the host country and city as a tourist destination. Thousands of spectators attend each year, along with journalists who cover all aspects of the contest, including rehearsals in venue, press conferences with the competing acts, in addition to other related events and performances in the host city. Alongside the generic Eurovision logo, a unique theme is typically developed for each event. The contest has aired in countries across all continents; it has been available online via the official Eurovision website since 2001. Eurovision ranks among the world's most watched non-sporting events every year, with hundreds of millions of viewers globally. Performing at the contest has often provided artists with a local career boost and in some cases long-lasting international success. Several of the best-selling music artists in the world have competed in past editions, including ABBA, Celine Dion, Julio Iglesias, Cliff Richard and Olivia Newton-John; some of the world's best-selling singles have received their first international performance on the Eurovision stage. While having gained popularity with the viewing public in both participating and non-participating countries, the contest has also been the subject of criticism for its artistic quality as well as a perceived political aspect to the event. Concerns have been raised regarding political friendships and rivalries between countries potentially having an impact on the results. Controversial moments have included participating countries withdrawing at a late stage, censorship of broadcast segments by broadcasters, as well as political events impacting participation. Likewise, the contest has also been criticised for an over-abundance of elaborate stage shows at the cost of artistic merit. Eurovision has, however, gained popularity for its kitsch appeal, its musical span of ethnic and international styles, as well as emergence as part of LGBT culture, resulting in a large, active fanbase and an influence on popular culture. The popularity of the contest has led to the creation of several similar events, either organised by the EBU or created by external organisations; several special events have been organised by the EBU to celebrate select anniversaries or as a replacement due to cancellation. The Eurovision Song Contest was developed by the European Broadcasting Union (EBU) as an experiment in live television broadcasting and a way to produce cheaper programming for national broadcasting organisations. The word "Eurovision" was first used by British journalist George Campey in the London Evening Standard in 1951, when he referred to a BBC programme being relayed by Dutch television. Following several events broadcast internationally via the Eurovision transmission network in the early 1950s, including the coronation of Elizabeth II in 1953, an EBU committee, headed by Marcel Bezençon, was formed in January 1955 to investigate new initiatives for cooperation between broadcasters, which approved for further study a European song competition from an idea initially proposed by RAI manager Sergio Pugliese. The EBU's general assembly agreed to the organising of the song contest in October 1955, under the initial title of the European Grand Prix, and accepted a proposal by the Swiss delegation to host the event in Lugano in the spring of 1956. The Italian Sanremo Music Festival, held since 1951, was used as a basis for the initial planning of the contest, with several amendments and additions given its international nature. Seven countries participated in the first contest, with each country represented by two songs; the only time in which multiple entries per country were permitted. The winning song was "Refrain", representing the host country Switzerland and performed by Lys Assia. Voting during the first contest was held behind closed doors, with only the winner being announced on stage; the use of a scoreboard and public announcement of the voting, inspired by the BBC's Festival of British Popular Songs, has been used since 1957. The tradition of the winning country hosting the following year's contest, which has since become a standard feature of the event, began in 1958. Technological developments have transformed the contest: colour broadcasts began in 1968; satellite broadcasts in 1985; and streaming in 2000. Broadcasts in widescreen began in 2005 and in high-definition since 2007, with ultra-high-definition tested for the first time in 2022. By the 1960s, between 16 and 18 countries were regularly competing each year. Countries from outside the traditional boundaries of Europe began entering the contest, and countries in Western Asia and North Africa started competing in the 1970s and 1980s. Changes in Europe following the end of the Cold War saw an influx of new countries from Central and Eastern Europe applying for the first time. The 1993 contest included a separate pre-qualifying round for seven of these new countries, and from 1994 relegation systems were introduced to manage the number of competing entries, with the poorest performing countries barred from entering the following year's contest. From 2004 the contest expanded to become a multi-programme event, with a semi-final at the 49th contest allowing all interested countries to compete each year; a second semi-final was added to each edition from 2008. There have been 67 contests as of 2023, making Eurovision the longest-running annual international televised music competition as determined by Guinness World Records. The contest has been listed as one of the longest-running television programmes in the world and among the world's most watched non-sporting events. A total of 52 countries have taken part in at least one edition, with a record 43 countries participating in a single contest, first in 2008 and subsequently in 2011 and 2018. Australia became the first non-EBU member country to compete following an invitation by the EBU ahead of the contest's 60th edition in 2015; initially announced as a "one-off" for the anniversary edition, the country was invited back the following year and has subsequently participated every year since. Eurovision had been held every year until 2020, when that year's contest was cancelled in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. No competitive event was able to take place due to uncertainty caused by the spread of the virus in Europe and the various restrictions imposed by the governments of the participating countries. In its place a special broadcast, Eurovision: Europe Shine a Light, was produced by the organisers, which honoured the songs and artists that would have competed in 2020 in a non-competitive format. Over the years the name used to describe the contest, and used on the official logo for each edition, has evolved. The first contests were produced under the name of Grand Prix Eurovision de la Chanson Européenne in French and as the Eurovision Song Contest Grand Prix in English, with similar variations used in the languages of each of the broadcasting countries. From 1968, the English name dropped the 'Grand Prix' from the name, with the French name being aligned as the Concours Eurovision de la Chanson, first used in 1973. The contest's official brand guidance specifies that translations of the name may be used depending on national tradition and brand recognition in the competing countries, but that the official name Eurovision Song Contest is always preferred; the contest is commonly referred to in English by the abbreviation "Eurovision", and in internal documents by the acronym "ESC". On only four occasions has the name used for the official logo of the contest not been in English or French: the Italian names Gran Premio Eurovisione della Canzone and Concorso Eurovisione della Canzone were used when Italy hosted the 1965 and 1991 contests respectively; and the Dutch name Eurovisiesongfestival was used when the Netherlands hosted in 1976 and 1980. Original songs representing participating countries are performed in a live television programme broadcast via the Eurovision and Euroradio networks simultaneously to all countries. A "country" as a participant is represented by one television broadcaster from that country, a member of the European Broadcasting Union, and is typically that country's national public broadcasting organisation. The programme is staged by one of the participant countries and is broadcast from an auditorium in the selected host city. Since 2008, each contest is typically formed of three live television shows held over one week: two semi-finals are held on the Tuesday and Thursday, followed by a final on the Saturday. All participating countries compete in one of the two semi-finals, except for the host country of that year's contest and the contest's biggest financial contributors known as the "Big Five"—France, Germany, Italy, Spain and the United Kingdom. The remaining countries are split between the two semi-finals, and the 10 highest-scoring entries in each qualify to produce 26 countries competing in the final. Each show typically begins with an opening act consisting of music and/or dance performances by invited artists, which contributes to a unique theme and identity created for that year's event; since 2013, the opening of the contest's final has included a "Flag Parade", with competing artists entering the stage behind their country's flag in a similar manner to the procession of competing athletes at the Olympic Games opening ceremony. Viewers are welcomed by one or more presenters who provide key updates during the show, conduct interviews with competing acts from the green room, and guide the voting procedure in English and French. Competing acts perform sequentially, and after all songs have been performed, viewers are invited to vote for their favourite performances—except for the performance of their own country—via telephone, SMS and the official Eurovision app. The public vote comprises 50% of the final result alongside the views of a jury of music industry professionals from each country. An interval act is invariably featured during this voting period, which on several occasions has included a well-known personality from the host country or an internationally recognised figure. The results of the voting are subsequently announced; in the semi-finals, the 10 highest-ranked countries are announced in a random order, with the full results undisclosed until after the final. In the final, the presenters call upon a representative spokesperson for each country in turn who announces their jury's points, while the results of the public vote are subsequently announced by the presenters. In recent years, it has been tradition that the first country to announce its jury points is the previous host, whereas the last country is the current host (with the exception of 2023, when the United Kingdom hosted the contest on behalf of Ukraine, who went first). The winning delegation is invited back on stage, where a trophy is awarded to the winning performers and songwriters by the previous year's winner, followed by a reprise of the winning song. The full results of the competition, including detailed results of the jury and public vote, are released online shortly after the final, and the participating broadcaster of the winning entry is traditionally given the honour of organising the following year's event. Each participating broadcaster has sole discretion over the process it may employ to select its entry for the contest. Typical methods in which participants are selected include a televised national final using a public vote; an internal selection by a committee appointed by the broadcaster; and through a mixed format where some decisions are made internally and the public are engaged in others. Among the most successful televised selection shows is Sweden's Melodifestivalen, first established in 1959 and now one of Sweden's most watched television shows each year. Active members (as opposed to associate members) of the European Broadcasting Union are eligible to participate; active members are those who are located in states that fall within the European Broadcasting Area, or are member states of the Council of Europe. Active members include media organisations whose broadcasts are often made available to at least 98% of households in their own country which are equipped to receive such transmissions. Associate member broadcasters may be eligible to compete, dependent on approval by the contest's Reference Group. The European Broadcasting Area is defined by the International Telecommunication Union as encompassing the geographical area between the boundary of ITU Region 1 in the west, the meridian 40° East of Greenwich in the east, and parallel 30° North in the south. Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia, and the parts of Iraq, Jordan, Syria, Turkey and Ukraine lying outside these limits, are also included in the European Broadcasting Area. Eligibility to participate in the contest is therefore not limited to countries in Europe, as several states geographically outside the boundaries of the continent or which span more than one continent are included in the Broadcasting Area. Countries from these groups have taken part in past editions, including countries in Western Asia such as Israel and Cyprus, countries which span Europe and Asia like Russia and Turkey, and North African countries such as Morocco. Australia became the first country to participate from outside the European Broadcasting Area in 2015, following an invitation by the contest's Reference Group. EBU members who wish to participate must fulfil conditions as laid down in the rules of the contest, a separate copy of which is drafted annually. A maximum of 44 countries can take part in any one contest. Broadcasters must have paid the EBU a participation fee in advance to the deadline specified in the rules for the year in which they wish to participate; this fee is different for each country based on its size and viewership. Fifty-two countries have participated at least once. These are listed here alongside the year in which they made their debut: Represented West Germany until 1990; East Germany never competed. Presented on all occasions as 'Germany', except in 1967 as 'Federal Republic of Germany', in 1970 and 1976 as 'West Germany', and in 1990 as 'F.R. Germany'. Represented the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia until 1991, and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia in 1992. Presented as the 'Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia' before 2019. Presented as 'Czechia' from 2023. Associate member broadcaster; initially announced as a one-off participant to commemorate the contest's 60th anniversary, has subsequently participated every year since. The winning country traditionally hosts the following year's event, with some exceptions since 1958. Hosting the contest can be seen as a unique opportunity for promoting the host country as a tourist destination and can provide benefits to the local economy and tourism sectors of the host city. Preparations for each year's contest typically begin at the conclusion of the previous year's contest, with the winning country's head of delegation receiving a welcome package of information related to hosting the contest at the winner's press conference. Eurovision is a non-profit event, and financing is typically achieved through a fee from each participating broadcaster, contributions from the host broadcaster and the host city, and commercial revenues from sponsorships, ticket sales, televoting and merchandise. The host broadcaster will subsequently select a host city, typically a national or regional capital city, which must meet certain criteria set out in the contest's rules. The host venue must be able to accommodate at least 10,000 spectators, a press centre for 1,500 journalists, should be within easy reach of an international airport and with hotel accommodation available for at least 2,000 delegates, journalists and spectators. A variety of different venues have been used for past editions, from small theatres and television studios to large arenas and stadiums. The largest host venue is Parken Stadium in Copenhagen, which was attended by almost 38,000 spectators in 2001. With a population of 1,500 at the time of the 1993 contest, Millstreet, Ireland remains the smallest hosting settlement, although its Green Glens Arena is capable of hosting up to 8,000 spectators. Until 2004, each edition of the contest used its own logo and visual identity as determined by the respective host broadcaster. To create a consistent visual identity, a generic logo was introduced ahead of the 2004 contest. This is typically accompanied by a unique theme artwork designed for each individual contest by the host broadcaster, with the flag of the host country placed prominently in the centre of the Eurovision heart. The original logo was designed by the London-based agency JM International, and received a revamp in 2014 by the Amsterdam-based Cityzen Agency for the contest's 60th edition. An individual theme is utilised by contest producers when constructing the visual identity of each edition of the contest, including the stage design, the opening and interval acts, and the "postcards". The short video postcards are interspersed between the entries and were first introduced in 1970, initially as an attempt to "bulk up" the contest after a number of countries decided not to compete, but has since become a regular part of the show and usually highlight the host country and introduce the competing acts. A unique slogan for each edition, first introduced in 2002, was also an integral part of each contest's visual identity, which was replaced by a permanent slogan from 2024 onwards. The permanent slogan, "United by Music", had previously served as the slogan for the 2023 contest before being retained for all future editions as part of the contest's global brand strategy. Preparations in the host venue typically begin approximately six weeks before the final, to accommodate building works and technical rehearsals before the arrival of the competing artists. Delegations will typically arrive in the host city two to three weeks before the live show, and each participating broadcaster nominates a head of delegation, responsible for coordinating the movements of their delegation and being that country's representative to the EBU. Members of each country's delegation include performers, composers, lyricists, members of the press, and—in the years where a live orchestra was present—a conductor. Present if desired is a commentator, who provides commentary of the event for their country's radio and/or television feed in their country's own language in dedicated booths situated around the back of the arena behind the audience. Each country conducts two individual rehearsals behind closed doors, the first for 30 minutes and the second for 20 minutes. Individual rehearsals for the semi-finalists commence the week before the live shows, with countries typically rehearsing in the order in which they will perform during the contest; rehearsals for the host country and the "Big Five" automatic finalists are held towards the end of the week. Following rehearsals, delegations meet with the show's production team to review footage of the rehearsal and raise any special requirements or changes. "Meet and greet" sessions with accredited fans and press are held during these rehearsal weeks. Each live show is preceded by three dress rehearsals, where the whole show is run in the same way as it will be presented on TV. The second dress rehearsal, alternatively called the "jury show" or "evening preview show" and held the night before the broadcast, is used as a recorded back-up in case of technological failure, and performances during this show are used by each country's professional jury to determine their votes. The delegations from the qualifying countries in each semi-final attend a qualifiers' press conference after their respective semi-final, and the winning delegation attends a winners' press conference following the final. A welcome reception is typically held at a venue in the host city on the Sunday preceding the live shows, which includes a red carpet ceremony for all the participating countries and is usually broadcast online. Accredited delegates, press and fans have access to an official nightclub, the "EuroClub", and some delegations will hold their own parties. The "Eurovision Village" is an official fan zone open to the public free of charge, with live performances by the contest's artists and screenings of the live shows on big screens. The contest is organised annually by the European Broadcasting Union (EBU), together with the participating broadcaster of the host country. The event is monitored by an Executive Supervisor appointed by the EBU, and by the Reference Group which represents all participating broadcasters, who are each represented by a nominated Head of Delegation. The current Executive Supervisor is Martin Österdahl, who took over the role from Jon Ola Sand in May 2020. A detailed set of rules is written by the EBU for each contest and approved by the Reference Group. These rules have changed over time, and typically outline, among other points, the eligibility of the competing songs, the format of the contest, and the voting system to be used to determine the winner and how the results will be presented. All competing songs must have a duration of three minutes or less. This rule applies only to the version performed during the live shows. In order to be considered eligible, competing songs in a given year's contest must not have been released commercially before the first day of September of the previous year. All competing entries must include vocals and lyrics of some kind, a cappella songs and purely instrumental pieces are not allowed. Competing entries may be performed in any language, be that natural or constructed, and participating broadcasters are free to decide the language in which their entry may be performed. Rules specifying in which language a song may be performed have changed over time. No restrictions were originally enacted when the contest was first founded, however following criticism over the 1965 Swedish entry being performed in English, a new rule was introduced for the 1966 contest restricting songs to be performed only in an official language of the country it represented. This rule was first abolished in 1973, and subsequently reinstated for most countries in 1977, with only Belgium and Germany permitted freedom of language as their selection processes for that year's contest had already commenced. The language rule was once again abolished ahead of the 1999 contest. The rules for the first contest specified that only solo performers were permitted to enter; this criterion was changed the following year to permit duos to compete, and groups were subsequently permitted for the first time in 1971. Currently the number of people permitted on stage during competing performances is limited to a maximum of six, and no live animals are allowed. Since 1990, all contestants must be aged 16 or over on the day of the live show in which they perform. Sandra Kim, the winner in 1986 at the age of 13, shall remain the contest's youngest winner while this rule remains in place. There is no limit on the nationality or country of birth of the competing artists, and participating broadcasters are free to select an artist from any country; several winning artists have subsequently held a different nationality or were born in a different country to that which they represented. No performer may compete for more than one country in a given year. The orchestra was a prominent aspect of the contest from 1956 to 1998. Pre-recorded backing tracks were first allowed for competing acts in 1973, but any pre-recorded instruments were required to be seen being "performed" on stage; in 1997, all instrumental music was allowed to be pre-recorded, however the host country was still required to provide an orchestra. In 1999, the rules were changed again, making the orchestra an optional requirement; the host broadcaster of that year's contest, Israel's IBA, subsequently decided not to provide an orchestra, resulting in all entries using backing tracks for the first time. Currently all instrumental music for competing entries must now be pre-recorded, and no live instrumentation is allowed during performances. The main vocals of competing songs must be performed live during the contest. Previously live backing vocals were also required; since 2021 these may optionally be pre-recorded – this change has been implemented in an effort to introduce flexibility following the cancellation of the 2020 edition and to facilitate modernisation. Since 2013, the order in which the competing countries perform has been determined by the contest's producers, and submitted to the EBU Executive Supervisor and Reference Group for approval before public announcement. This was changed from a random draw used in previous years in order to provide a better experience for television viewers and ensure all countries stand out by avoiding instances where songs of a similar style or tempo are performed in sequence. Since the creation of a second semi-final in 2008, a semi-final allocation draw is held each year. Countries are placed into pots based on their geographical location and voting history in recent contests, and are assigned to compete in one of the two semi-finals through a random draw. Countries are then randomly assigned to compete in either the first or second half of their respective semi-final, and once all competing songs have been selected the producers then determine the running order for the semi-finals. The automatic qualifiers are assigned at random to a semi-final for the purposes of voting rights. Semi-final qualifiers make a draw at random during the winners' press conference to determine whether they will perform during the first or second half of the final; the automatic finalists then randomly draw their competing half in the run-up to the final, except for the host country, whose exact performance position is determined in a separate draw. The running order for the final is then decided following the second semi-final by the producers. The running orders are decided with the competing songs' musical qualities, stage performance, prop and lighting set-up, and other production considerations taken into account. Since 2023, the voting system used to determine the results of the contest works on the basis of positional voting. Each country awards 1–8, 10 and 12 points to the ten favourite songs as voted for by that country's general public or assembled jury, with the most preferred song receiving 12 points. In the semi-finals, each country awards one set of points based primarily on the votes cast by that country's viewing public via telephone, SMS or the official Eurovision app, while in the final, each country awards two sets of points, with one set awarded by the viewers and another awarded by a jury panel comprising five music professionals from that country. Since 2023, viewers in non-participating countries are also able to vote during the contest, with those viewers able to cast votes via an online platform, which are then aggregated and awarded as one set of points from an "extra country" for the overall public vote. This system is a modification of that used since 1975, when the "12 points" system was first introduced but with one set of points per country, and a similar system used since 2016 where two sets of points were awarded in both the semi-finals and final. National juries and the public in each country are not allowed to vote for their own country, a rule first introduced in 1957. Historically, each country's points were determined by a jury, consisting at various times of members of the public, music professionals, or both in combination. With advances in telecommunication technology, televoting was first introduced to the contest in 1997 on a trial basis, with broadcasters in five countries allowing the viewing public to determine their votes for the first time. From 1998, televoting was extended to almost all competing countries, and subsequently became mandatory from 2004. A jury was reintroduced for the final in 2009, with each country's points comprising both the votes of the jury and public in an equal split; this mix of jury and public voting was expanded into the semi-finals from 2010, and was used until 2023, when full public voting was reintroduced to determine the results of the semi-finals. The mix of jury and public voting continues to be used in the final. Should two or more countries finish with the same number of points, a tie-break procedure is employed to determine the final placings. As of 2016,[update] a combined national televoting and jury result is calculated for each country, and the country which has obtained more points from the public voting following this calculation is deemed to have placed higher. Since 1957, each country's votes have been announced during a special voting segment as part of the contest's broadcast, with a selected spokesperson assigned to announce the results of their country's vote. This spokesperson is typically well known in their country; previous spokespersons have included former Eurovision artists and presenters. Historically, the announcements were made through telephone lines from the countries of origin, with satellite links employed for the first time in 1994, allowing the spokespersons to be seen visually by the audience and TV spectators. Scoring is done by both a national jury and a national televote. Each country's jury votes are consecutively added to the totals scoreboard as they are called upon by the contest presenter(s). The scoreboard was historically placed at the side of the stage and updated manually as each country gave their votes; in 1988 a computer graphics scoreboard was introduced. The jury points from 1–8 and 10 are displayed on screen and added automatically to the scoreboard, then the country's spokesperson announces which country will receive the 12 points. Once jury points from all countries have been announced, the presenter(s) announce the total public points received for each finalist, with the votes for each country being consolidated and announced as a single value. Since 2019, the public points have been revealed in ascending order based on the jury vote, with the country that received the fewest points from the jury being the first to receive their public points. A full breakdown of the results across all shows is published on the official Eurovision website after the final, including each country's televoting ranking and the votes of its jury and individual jury members. Each country's individual televoting points in the final are typically displayed on-screen by that country's broadcaster following the announcement of the winner. Participating broadcasters are required to air live the semi-final in which they compete, or in the case of the automatic finalists the semi-final in which they are required to vote, and the final, in its entirety; this includes all competing songs, the voting recap containing short clips of the performances, the voting procedure or semi-final qualification reveal, and the reprise of the winning song in the final. Since 1999, broadcasters who wished to do so were given the opportunity to provide advertising during short, non-essential hiatuses in the show's schedule. In exceptional circumstances, such as due to developing emergency situations, participating broadcasters may delay or postpone broadcast of the event. Should a broadcaster fail to air a show as expected in any other scenario they may be subject to sanctions by the EBU. Several broadcasters in countries that are unable to compete have previously aired the contest in their markets. As national broadcasters join and leave the Eurovision feed transmitted by the EBU, the EBU/Eurovision network logo ident (not to be confused with the logo of the song contest itself) is displayed. The accompanying music (used on other Eurovision broadcasts) is the Prelude (Marche en rondeau) to Marc-Antoine Charpentier's Te Deum. Originally, the same logo was used for both the Eurovision network and the European Broadcasting Union, however, they now have two different logos; the latest Eurovision network logo was introduced in 2012, and when the ident is transmitted at the start and end of programmes it is this Eurovision network logo that appears. The EBU now holds the recordings of all but two editions of the contest in its archives, following a project initiated in 2011 to collate footage and related materials of all editions ahead of the event's 60th edition in 2015. Although cameras were present to practice pan-European broadcasting for the first contest in 1956 to the few Europeans who had television sets, its audience was primarily over the radio. The only footage available is a Kinescope recording of Lys Assia's reprise of her winning song. No full recording of the 1964 contest exists, with conflicting reports of the fate of any copies that may have survived. Audio recordings of both contests do however exist, and some short pieces of footage from both events have survived. From the original seven countries which entered the first contest in 1956, the number of competing countries has steadily grown over time. 18 countries participated in the contest's tenth edition in 1965, and by 1990, 22 countries were regularly competing each year. Besides slight modifications to the voting system and other contest rules, no fundamental changes to the contest's format were introduced until the early 1990s, when events in Europe in the late 1980s and early 1990s resulted in a growing interest from new countries in the former Eastern Bloc, particularly following the merger of the Eastern European rival OIRT network with the EBU in 1993. 29 countries registered to take part in the 1993 contest, a figure the EBU considered unable to fit reasonably into a single TV show. A pre-selection method was subsequently introduced for the first time in order to reduce the number of competing entries, with seven countries in Central and Eastern Europe participating in Kvalifikacija za Millstreet, held in Ljubljana, Slovenia one month before the event. Following a vote among the seven competing countries, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and Slovenia were chosen to head to the contest in Millstreet, Ireland, and Estonia, Hungary, Romania and Slovakia were forced to wait another year before being allowed to compete. A new relegation system was introduced for entry into the 1994 contest, with the lowest-placed countries being forced to sit out the following year's event to be replaced by countries which had not competed in the previous contest. The bottom seven countries in 1993 were required to miss the following year's contest, and were replaced by the four unsuccessful countries in Kvalifikacija za Millstreet and new entries from Lithuania, Poland and Russia. This system was used again in 1994 for qualification for the 1995 contest, but a new system was introduced for the 1996 contest, when an audio-only qualification round held in the months before the contest in Oslo, Norway; this system was primarily introduced in an attempt to appease Germany, one of Eurovision's biggest markets and financial contributors, which would have otherwise been relegated under the previous system. 29 countries competed for 22 places in the main contest alongside the automatically qualified Norwegian hosts, however Germany would ultimately still miss out, and joined Hungary, Romania, Russia, Denmark, Israel, and Macedonia as one of the seven countries to be absent from the Oslo contest. For the 1997 contest, a similar relegation system to that used between 1993 and 1995 was introduced, with each country's average scores in the preceding five contests being used as a measure to determine which countries would be relegated. This was subsequently changed again in 2001, back to the same system used between 1993 and 1995 where only the results from that year's contest would count towards relegation. In 1999, an exemption from relegation was introduced for France, Germany, Spain and the United Kingdom, giving them an automatic right to compete in the 2000 contest and in all subsequent editions. This group, as the highest-paying EBU members which significantly fund the contest each year, subsequently became known as the "Big Four" countries. This group was expanded in 2011 when Italy began competing again, becoming the "Big Five". Originally brought in to ensure that the financial contributions of the contest's biggest financial backers would not be missed, since the introduction of the semi-finals in 2004, the "Big Five" now instead automatically qualify for the final along with the host country. There remains debate on whether this status prejudices the countries' results, based on reported antipathy over their automatic qualification and the potential disadvantage of having spent less time on stage through not competing in the semi-finals, however this status appears to be more complex given that the results of the "Big Five" countries can vary widely. This status has caused consternation from other competing countries, and was cited, among other aspects, as a reason why Turkey had ceased participating after 2012. An influx of new countries applying for the 2003 contest resulted in the introduction of a semi-final from 2004, with the contest becoming a two-day event. The top 10 countries in each year's final would qualify automatically to the following year's final, alongside the "Big Four", meaning all other countries would compete in the semi-final to compete for 10 qualification spots. The 2004 contest in Istanbul, Turkey saw a record 36 countries competing, with new entries from Albania, Andorra, Belarus and Serbia and Montenegro and the return of previously relegated countries. The format of this semi-final remained similar to the final proper, taking place a few days before the final; following the performances and the voting window, the names of the 10 countries with the highest number of points, which would therefore qualify for the final, were announced at the end of the show, revealed in a random order by the contest's presenters. The single semi-final continued to be held between 2005 and 2007; however, with 42 countries competing in the 2007 contest in Helsinki, Finland, the semi-final had 28 entries competing for 10 spots in the final. Following criticism over the mainly Central and Eastern European qualifiers at the 2007 event and the poor performance of entries from Western European countries, a second semi-final was subsequently introduced for the 2008 contest in Belgrade, Serbia, with all countries now competing in one of the two semi-finals, with only the host country and the "Big Four", and subsequently the "Big Five" from 2011, qualifying automatically. 10 qualification spots would be available in each of the semi-finals, and a new system to split the competing countries between the two semi-finals was introduced based on their geographic location and previous voting patterns, in an attempt to reduce the impact of bloc voting and to make the outcome less predictable. The contest has been used as a launching point for artists who went on to achieve worldwide fame, and several of the world's best-selling artists are counted among past Eurovision Song Contest participants and winning artists. ABBA, the 1974 winners for Sweden, have sold an estimated 380 million albums and singles since their contest win brought them to worldwide attention, with their winning song "Waterloo" selling over five million records. Celine Dion's win for Switzerland in 1988 helped launch her international career, particularly in the anglophone market, and she would go on to sell an estimated 200 million records worldwide. Julio Iglesias was relatively unknown when he represented Spain in 1970 and placed fourth, but worldwide success followed his Eurovision appearance, with an estimated 100 million records sold during his career. Australian-British singer Olivia Newton-John represented the United Kingdom in 1974, placing fourth behind ABBA, but went on to sell an estimated 100 million records, win four Grammy Awards, and star in the critically and commercially successful musical film Grease. A number of performers have competed in the contest after having already achieved considerable success. These include winning artists Lulu, Toto Cutugno, and Katrina and the Waves, and acts that failed to win such as Nana Mouskouri, Cliff Richard, Baccara, Umberto Tozzi, Plastic Bertrand, t.A.T.u., Las Ketchup, Patricia Kaas, Engelbert Humperdinck, Bonnie Tyler, and Flo Rida. Many well-known composers and lyricists have penned entries of varying success over the years, including Serge Gainsbourg, Goran Bregović, Diane Warren, Andrew Lloyd Webber, Pete Waterman, and Tony Iommi, as well as producers Timbaland and Guy-Manuel de Homem-Christo. Past participants have contributed to other fields in addition to their music careers. The Netherlands' Annie Schmidt, lyricist of the first entry performed at Eurovision, has gained a worldwide reputation for her stories and earned the Hans Christian Andersen Award for children's literature. French "yé-yé girls" Françoise Hardy and contest winner France Gall are household names of 1960s pop culture, with Hardy also being a pioneer of street style fashion trends and an inspiration for the global youthquake movement. Figures who carved a career in politics and gained international acclaim for humanitarian achievements include contest winner Dana as a two-time Irish presidential candidate and Member of the European Parliament (MEP); Nana Mouskouri as Greek MEP and a UNICEF international goodwill ambassador; contest winner Ruslana as member of Verkhovna Rada, Ukraine's parliament and a figure of the Orange Revolution and Euromaidan protests, who gained global honours for leadership and courage; and North Macedonia's Esma Redžepova as member of political parties and a two-time Nobel Peace Prize nominee. Competing songs have occasionally gone on to become successes for their original performers and other artists, and some of the best-selling singles globally received their first international performances at Eurovision. "Save Your Kisses for Me", the winning song in 1976 for the United Kingdom's Brotherhood of Man, went on to sell over six million singles, more than any other winning song. "Nel blu, dipinto di blu", also known as "Volare", Italy's third-placed song in 1958 performed by Domenico Modugno, is the only Eurovision entry to win a Grammy Award. It was the first Grammy winner for both Record of the Year and Song of the Year and it has since been recorded by various artists, topped the Billboard Hot 100 in the United States and achieved combined sales of over 22 million copies worldwide. "Eres tú", performed by Spain's Mocedades and runner-up in 1973, became the first Spanish-language song to reach the top 10 of the Billboard Hot 100, and the Grammy-nominated "Ooh Aah... Just a Little Bit", which came eighth in 1996 for the United Kingdom's Gina G, sold 790,000 records and achieved success across Europe and the US, reaching #1 on the UK Singles Chart and peaking at #12 on the Billboard Hot 100. The turn of the century has also seen numerous competing songs becoming successes. "Euphoria", Loreen's winning song for Sweden in 2012, achieved Europe-wide success, reaching number one in several countries and by 2014 had become the most downloaded Eurovision song to date. The video for "Occidentali's Karma" by Francesco Gabbani, which placed sixth for Italy in 2017, became the first Eurovision song to reach more than 200 million views on YouTube, while "Soldi" by Mahmood, the Italian runner-up in 2019, was the most-streamed Eurovision song on Spotify until it was overtaken by that year's winner for the Netherlands, "Arcade" by Duncan Laurence, following viral success on TikTok in late 2020 and early 2021; "Arcade" later became the first Eurovision song since "Ooh Aah... Just a Little Bit" and the first Eurovision winning song since "Save Your Kisses for Me" to chart on the Billboard Hot 100, eventually peaking at #30. The 2021 contest saw the next major breakthrough success from Eurovision, with Måneskin, that year's winners for Italy with "Zitti e buoni", attracting worldwide attention across their repertoire immediately following their victory. Johnny Logan was the first artist to have won multiple contests as a performer, winning for Ireland in 1980 with "What's Another Year", written by Shay Healy, and in 1987 with the self-penned "Hold Me Now". Logan was also the winning songwriter in 1992 for the Irish winner, "Why Me?" performed by Linda Martin, and has therefore achieved three contest victories as either a performer or writer. Four further songwriters have each written two contest-winning songs: Willy van Hemert, Yves Dessca, Rolf Løvland, and Brendan Graham. Following their introduction in 2004, Alexander Rybak became the first artist to win multiple Eurovision semi-finals, finishing in first at the second semi-finals in 2009 and 2018; he remains the only entrant to have done so to date. 70 songs from 27 countries have won the Eurovision Song Contest as of 2023.[update] Ireland and Sweden have recorded the most wins with seven each, followed by France, Luxembourg, the United Kingdom and the Netherlands with five each. Of the 52 countries to have taken part, 25 have yet to win. On only one occasion have multiple winners been declared in a single contest: in 1969, four countries finished the contest with an equal number of votes and due to the lack of a tie-break rule at the time, all four countries were declared winners. A majority of winning songs have been performed in English, particularly since the language rule was abolished in 1999. Since that contest, seven winning songs have been performed either fully or partially in a language other than English. Two countries have won the contest on their first appearance: Switzerland, by virtue of being declared the winner of the first contest in 1956; and Serbia, which won in 2007 in its first participation as an independent country, following entries in previous editions as part of the now-defunct Yugoslavia and then Serbia and Montenegro. Other countries have had relatively short waits before winning their first contest, with Ukraine victorious on its second contest appearance in 2004 and Latvia winning with its third entry in 2002. Conversely, some countries have competed for many years before recording their first win: Greece recorded its first win in 2005, 31 years after its first appearance, while Finland ended a 45-year losing streak in 2006. Portugal waited the longest, recording its first win in 2017, 53 years after its first participation. Countries have in the past had to wait many years to win again: Switzerland went 32 years between winning in 1956 and 1988; Denmark held a 37-year gap between wins in 1963 and 2000; the Netherlands waited 44 years to win again in 2019, its most recent win having been in 1975; and Austria won its second contest in 2014, 48 years after its first win in 1966. The United Kingdom holds the record for the highest number of second-place finishes, having finished runner-up sixteen times. Meanwhile, Norway has come last more than any other country, appearing at the bottom of the scoreboard on eleven occasions, including scoring nul points four times. A country has recorded back-to-back wins on four occasions: Spain recorded consecutive wins in 1968 and 1969; Luxembourg did likewise in 1972 and 1973; Israel in 1978 and 1979; and Ireland became the first country to win three consecutive titles, winning in 1992, 1993 and 1994. Ireland's winning streak in the 1990s includes the 1996 contest, giving it a record four wins in five years. The winning artists and songwriters receive a trophy, which since 2008 has followed a standard design: a handmade piece of sandblasted glass with painted details in the shape of a 1950s-style microphone, designed by Kjell Engman of the Swedish-based glassworks Kosta Boda. The trophy is typically presented by the previous year's winner; others who have handed out the award in the past include representatives from the host broadcaster or the EBU, and politicians; in 2007, the fictional character Joulupukki (original Santa Claus from Finland) presented the award to the winner Marija Šerifović. Alongside the song contest and appearances from local and international personalities, performances from non-competing artists and musicians have been included since the first edition, and have become a staple of the live show. These performances have varied widely, previously featuring music, art, dance and circus performances, and past participants are regularly invited to perform, with the reigning champion traditionally returning each year to perform the previous year's winning song. The contest's opening performance and the main interval act, held following the final competing song and before the announcement of the voting results, has become a memorable part of the contest and has included both internationally known artists and local stars. Contest organisers have previously used these performances as a way to explore their country's culture and history, such as in "4,000 Years of Greek Song" at the 2006 contest held in Greece; other performances have been more comedic in nature, featuring parody and humour, as was the case with "Love Love Peace Peace" in 2016, a humorous ode to the history and spectacle of the contest itself. Riverdance, which later became one of the most successful dance productions in the world, first began as the interval performance at the 1994 contest in Ireland; the seven-minute performance of traditional Irish music and dance was later expanded into a full stage show that has been seen by over 25 million people worldwide and provided a launchpad for its lead dancers Michael Flatley and Jean Butler. Among other artists who have performed in a non-competitive manner are Danish Europop group Aqua in 2001, Russian pop duo t.A.T.u. in 2009, and American entertainers Justin Timberlake and Madonna in 2016 and 2019 respectively. Other notable artists, including Cirque du Soleil (2009), Alexandrov Ensemble (2009), Vienna Boys' Choir (1967 and 2015) and Fire of Anatolia (2004), also performed on the Eurovision stage, and there have been guest appearances from well-known faces from outside the world of music, including actors, athletes, and serving astronauts and cosmonauts. Guest performances have been used as a channel in response to global events happening concurrently with the contest. The 1999 contest in Israel closed with all competing acts performing a rendition of Israel's 1979 winning song "Hallelujah" as a tribute to the victims of the war in the Balkans, a dance performance entitled "The Grey People" in 2016's first semi-final was devoted to the European migrant crisis, the 2022 contest featured known anti-war songs "Fragile", "People Have the Power" and "Give Peace a Chance" in response to the Russian invasion of Ukraine that same year, and an interval act in 2023's first semi-final alluded to the refugee crisis caused by the aforementioned invasion. The contest has been the subject of considerable criticism regarding both its musical content and what has been reported to be a political element to the event, and several controversial moments have been witnessed over the course of its history. Criticism has been levied against the musical quality of past competing entries, with a perception that certain music styles seen as being presented more often than others in an attempt to appeal to as many potential voters as possible among the international audience. Power ballads, folk rhythms and bubblegum pop have been considered staples of the contest in recent years, leading to allegations that the event has become formulaic. Other traits in past competing entries which have regularly been mocked by media and viewers include an abundance of key changes and lyrics about love and/or peace, as well as the pronunciation of English by non-native users of the language. Given Eurovision is principally a television show, over the years competing performances have attempted to attract the viewers' attention through means other than music, and elaborate lighting displays, pyrotechnics, and extravagant on-stage theatrics and costumes having become a common sight at recent contests; criticism of these tactics have been levied as being a method of distracting the viewer from the weak musical quality of some of the competing entries. While many of these traits are ridiculed in the media and elsewhere, for others these traits are celebrated and considered an integral part of what makes the contest appealing. Although many of the competing acts each year will fall into some of the categories above, the contest has seen a diverse range of musical styles in its history, including rock, heavy metal, jazz, country, electronic, R&B, hip hop and avant-garde. As artists and songs ultimately represent a country, the contest has seen several controversial moments where political tensions between competing countries as a result of frozen conflicts, and in some cases open warfare, are reflected in the performances and voting. The continuing conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan has affected the contest on numerous occasions. Conflicts between the two countries at Eurovision escalated quickly since both countries began competing in the late 2000s, resulting in fines and disciplinary action for both countries' broadcasters over political stunts, and a forced change of title for one competing song due to allegations of political subtext. Interactions between Russia and Ukraine in the contest had originally been positive, however as political relations soured between the two countries so too have relations at Eurovision become more complex. Complaints were levied against Ukraine's winning song in 2016, "1944", whose lyrics referenced the deportation of the Crimean Tatars, but which the Russian delegation claimed had a greater political meaning in light of Russia's annexation of Crimea. As Ukraine prepared to host the following year's contest, Russia's selected representative, Yuliya Samoylova, was barred from entering the country due to having previously entered Crimea illegally according to Ukrainian law. Russia eventually pulled out of the contest after offers for Samoylova to perform remotely were refused by Russia's broadcaster, Channel One Russia, resulting in the EBU reprimanding the Ukrainian broadcaster, UA:PBC. In the wake of the Russian invasion of Ukraine and subsequent protests from other participating countries, Russia was barred from competing in the 2022 contest, where Ukraine went on to win. Georgia's planned entry for the 2009 contest in Moscow, Russia, "We Don't Wanna Put In", caused controversy as the lyrics appeared to criticise Vladimir Putin, in a move seen as opposition to the then-Russian prime minister in the aftermath of the Russo-Georgian War. After requests by the EBU for changes to the lyrics were refused, Georgia's broadcaster GPB subsequently withdrew from the event. Belarus' planned entry in 2021, "Ya nauchu tebya (I'll Teach You)", also caused controversy in the wake of demonstrations against disputed election results, resulting in the country's disqualification when the aforementioned song and another potential song were deemed to breach the contest's rules on neutrality and politicisation. Israel's participation in the contest has resulted in several controversial moments in the past, with the country's first appearance in 1973, less than a year after the Munich massacre, resulting in an increased security presence at the venue in Luxembourg City. Israel's first win in 1978 proved controversial for Arab states broadcasting the contest which would typically cut to advertisements when Israel performed due to a lack of recognition of the country, and when it became apparent Israel would win many of these broadcasters cut the feed before the end of the voting. Arab states which are eligible to compete have declined to participate due to Israel's presence, with Morocco the only Arab state to have entered Eurovision, competing for the first, and as of 2023[update] the only time, in 1980 when Israel was absent. Israeli participation has been criticised by those who oppose current government policies in the state, with calls raised by various political groups for a boycott ahead of the 2019 contest in Tel Aviv, including proponents of the Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions (BDS) movement in response to the country's policies towards Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza, as well as groups who take issue with perceived pinkwashing in Israel. Others campaigned against a boycott, asserting that any cultural boycott would be antithetical to advancing peace in the region. The contest has been described as containing political elements in its voting process, a perception that countries will give votes more frequently and in higher quantities to other countries based on political relationships, rather than the musical merits of the songs themselves. Numerous studies and academic papers have been written on this subject, which have corroborated that certain countries form "clusters" or "cliques" by frequently voting in the same way; one study concludes that voting blocs can play a crucial role in deciding the winner of the contest, with evidence that on at least two occasions bloc voting was a pivotal factor in the vote for the winning song. Other views on these "blocs" argue that certain countries will allocate high points to others based on similar musical tastes, shared cultural links and a high degree of similarity and mutual intelligibility between languages, and are therefore more likely to appreciate and vote for the competing songs from these countries based on these factors, rather than political relationships specifically. Analysis on other voting patterns have revealed examples which indicate voting preferences among countries based on shared religion, as well as "patriotic voting", particularly since the introduction of televoting in 1997, where foreign nationals vote for their country of origin. Voting patterns in the contest have been reported by news publishers, including The Economist and BBC News. Criticism of the voting system was at its highest in the mid-2000s, resulting in a number of calls for countries to boycott the contest over reported voting biases, particularly following the 2007 contest where Eastern European countries occupied the top 15 places in the final and dominated the qualifying spaces. The poor performance of the entries from more traditional Eurovision countries had subsequently been discussed in European national parliaments, and the developments in the voting was cited as among the reasons for the resignation of Terry Wogan as commentator for the UK, a role he had performed at every contest from 1980. In response to this criticism, the EBU introduced a second semi-final in 2008, with countries split based on geographic proximity and voting history, and juries of music professionals were reintroduced in 2009, in an effort to reduce the impacts of bloc voting. Eurovision has had a long-held fan base in the LGBT community, and contest organisers have actively worked to include these fans in the event since the 1990s. Paul Oscar became the contest's first openly gay artist to compete when he represented Iceland in 1997. Israel's Dana International, the contest's first trans performer, became the first LGBT artist to win in 1998. In 2021, Nikkie de Jager became the first trans person to host the contest. Several open members of the LGBT community have since gone on to compete and win: Conchita Wurst, the drag persona of openly gay Thomas Neuwirth, won the 2014 contest for Austria; openly bisexual performer Duncan Laurence was the winner of the 2019 contest for the Netherlands; and rock band Måneskin, winners of the 2021 contest for Italy, features openly bisexual Victoria De Angelis as its bassist. Marija Šerifović, who won the 2007 contest for Serbia, subsequently came out publicly as a lesbian in 2013. Past competing songs and performances have included references and allusions to same-sex relationships; "Nous les amoureux", the 1961 winning song, contained references to the difficulties faced by a homosexual relationship; Krista Siegfrids' performance of "Marry Me" at the 2013 contest included a same-sex kiss with one of her female backing dancers; and the stage show of Ireland's Ryan O'Shaughnessy's "Together" in 2018 had two male dancers portraying a same-sex relationship. Drag performers, such as Ukraine's Verka Serduchka, Denmark's DQ and Slovenia's Sestre, have appeared, including Wurst winning in 2014. In recent years, various political ideologies across Europe have clashed in the Eurovision setting, particularly on LGBT rights. Dana International's selection for the 1998 contest in Birmingham was marked by objections and death threats from orthodox religious sections of Israeli society, and at the contest her accommodation was reportedly in the only hotel in Birmingham with bulletproof windows. Turkey, once a regular participant and a one-time winner, first pulled out of the contest in 2013, citing dissatisfaction in the voting rules and more recently Turkish broadcaster TRT have cited LGBT performances as another reason for their continued boycott, refusing to broadcast the 2013 event over Finland's same sex kiss. LGBT visibility in the contest has been cited as a deciding factor for Hungary's non-participation since 2020, although no official reason was given by the Hungarian broadcaster MTVA. The rise of anti-LGBT sentiment in Europe has led to a marked increase in booing from contest audiences, particularly since the introduction of a "gay propaganda" law in Russia in 2013. Conchita Wurst's win was met with criticism on the Russian political stage, with several conservative politicians voicing displeasure in the result. Clashes on LGBT visibility in the contest have occurred in countries which do not compete, such as in China, where broadcasting rights were terminated during the 2018 contest due to censorship of "abnormal sexual relationships and behaviours" that went against Chinese broadcasting guidelines. The Eurovision Song Contest has amassed a global following and sees annual audience figures of between 100 and 600 million. The contest has become a cultural influence worldwide since its first years. It is regularly described as having kitsch appeal, and is included as a topic of parody in television sketches and in stage performances at the Edinburgh Fringe and Melbourne Comedy festivals amongst others. Several films have been created which celebrate the contest, including Eytan Fox's 2013 Israeli comedy Cupcakes, and the Netflix 2020 musical comedy, Eurovision Song Contest: The Story of Fire Saga, produced with backing from the EBU and starring Will Ferrell and Rachel McAdams. Eurovision has a large online following and multiple independent websites, news blogs and fan clubs are dedicated to the event. One of the oldest and largest Eurovision fan clubs is OGAE, founded in 1984 in Finland and currently a network of over 40 national branches across the world. National branches regularly host events to promote and celebrate Eurovision, and several participating broadcasters work closely with these branches when preparing their entries. In the run-up to each year's contest, several countries regularly host smaller events between the conclusion of the national selection shows in March and the contest proper in May, known as the "pre-parties". These events typically feature the artists which will go on to compete at that year's contest, and consist of performances at a venue and meet-and-greets with fans and the press. Eurovision in Concert, held annually in Amsterdam, was one of the first of these events to be created, holding its first edition in 2008. Other events held regularly include the London Eurovision Party, PrePartyES in Madrid, and Israel Calling in Tel Aviv. Several community events have been held virtually, particularly since the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic in Europe in 2020, among these EurovisionAgain, an initiative where fans watched and discussed past contests in sync on YouTube and other social media platforms. Launched during the first COVID-19 lockdowns, the event subsequently became a top trend on Twitter across Europe and facilitated over £20,000 in donations for UK-based LGBTQ+ charities. Several anniversary events, and related contests under the "Eurovision Live Events" brand, have been organised by the EBU with its member broadcasters. In addition, participating broadcasters have occasionally commissioned special Eurovision programmes for their home audiences, and a number of other imitator contests have been developed outside of the EBU framework, on both a national and international level. The EBU has held several events to mark selected anniversaries in the contest's history: Songs of Europe, held in 1981 to celebrate its twenty-fifth anniversary, had live performances and video recordings of all Eurovision Song Contest winners up to 1981; Congratulations: 50 Years of the Eurovision Song Contest was organised in 2005 to celebrate the event's fiftieth anniversary, and featured a contest to determine the most popular song from among 14 selected entries from the contest's first 50 years; and in 2015 the event's sixtieth anniversary was marked by Eurovision Song Contest's Greatest Hits, a concert of performances by past Eurovision artists and video montages of performances and footage from previous contests. Following the cancellation of the 2020 contest due to Covid, the EBU organised a special non-competitive broadcast, Eurovision: Europe Shine a Light, which provided a showcase for the songs that would have taken part in the competition. Other contests organised by the EBU include Eurovision Young Musicians, a classical music competition for European musicians between the ages of 12 and 21; Eurovision Young Dancers, a dance competition for non-professional performers between the ages of 16 and 21; Eurovision Choir, a choral competition for non-professional European choirs produced in partnership with the Interkultur [de] and modelled after the World Choir Games; and the Junior Eurovision Song Contest, a similar song contest for singers aged between 9 and 14 representing primarily European countries. The Eurovision Dance Contest was an event featuring pairs of dancers performing ballroom and Latin dancing, which took place for two editions, in 2007 and 2008. Similar international music competitions have been organised externally to the EBU. The Sopot International Song Festival has been held annually since 1961; between 1977 and 1980, under the patronage of the International Radio and Television Organisation (OIRT), an Eastern European broadcasting network similar to the EBU, it was rebranded as the Intervision Song Contest. An Ibero-American contest, the OTI Festival, was previously held among hispanophone and lusophone countries in Europe, North America and South America; and a contest for countries and autonomous regions with Turkic links, the Turkvision Song Contest, has been organised since 2013. Similarly, an adaption of the contest for artists in the United States, the American Song Contest, was held in 2022 and featured songs representing U.S. states and territories. Adaptions of the contest for artists in Canada and Latin America are in development, though development on the former has been halted. "The Origins of Eurovision". Eurovision Song Contest. 27 May 2019. Retrieved 15 April 2023. Vuletic, Dean (2018). Postwar Europe and the Eurovision Song Contest. Bloomsbury Academic. ISBN 9781474276276. Roxburgh 2012, pp. 93–96. Jaquin, Patrick (1 December 2004). "Eurovision's Golden Jubilee". European Broadcasting Union. Archived from the original on 11 August 2004. Retrieved 18 July 2009. "Eurovision: About us – who we are". Eurovision Song Contest. Retrieved 28 June 2020. Sommerlad, Joe (18 May 2019). "Eurovision 2019: What exactly is the point of the annual song contest and how did it begin?". The Independent. Retrieved 27 June 2020. O'Connor 2010, pp. 8–9. "Eurovision Song Contest: In a Nutshell". Eurovision Song Contest. 31 March 2017. Retrieved 27 June 2020. "Eurovision Song Contest: Facts & Figures". Eurovision Song Contest. 12 January 2017. Retrieved 27 June 2020. "Eurovision Song Contest: Winners". Eurovision Song Contest. Archived from the original on 12 May 2018. Retrieved 23 May 2021. Roxburgh 2012, p. 152. O'Connor 2010, pp. 12–13. Roxburgh 2012, p. 160. "Eurovision Song Contest: London 1968". Eurovision Song Contest. Retrieved 5 July 2020. Laven, Philip (July 2002). "Webcasting and the Eurovision Song Contest". European Broadcasting Union. Archived from the original on 28 May 2008. Retrieved 28 June 2020. Polishchuk, Tetiana (17 May 2005). "Eurovision to Be Broadcast in Widescreen, With New Hosts". The Day. Archived from the original on 22 November 2020. Retrieved 23 February 2021. "The end of a decade: Helsinki 2007". Eurovision Song Contest. 30 December 2009. Retrieved 30 June 2020. Cafarelli, Donato (23 April 2022). "Eurovision Song Contest 2022: la Rai trasmetterà l'evento per la prima volta in 4K" [Eurovision Song Contest 2022: Rai will broadcast the event for the first time in 4K]. Eurofestival News (in Italian). Retrieved 23 April 2022. "Eurovision Song Contest: History by events". Eurovision Song Contest. Archived from the original on 25 August 2017. Retrieved 27 June 2020. "Eurovision Song Contest 1993". Eurovision Song Contest. Retrieved 27 June 2020. Lynch, Kevin (23 May 2015). "Eurovision recognised by Guinness World Records as the longest-running annual TV music competition (international)". Guinness World Records. Archived from the original on 22 January 2020. Retrieved 26 June 2020. Escudero, Victor M. (23 May 2015). "Eurovision Song Contest awarded Guinness world record". Eurovision Song Contest. Retrieved 9 July 2020. "Culture & Entertainment | Eurovision". Brand EU. 26 June 2015. Retrieved 19 March 2021. "Press Release: 60th Eurovision Song Contest Seen by Nearly 200 Million Viewers". European Broadcasting Union. 3 June 2015. Retrieved 19 March 2021. Ritman, Alex (3 June 2015). "Eurovision Song Contest Draws Almost 200 Million Viewers". Billboard. Retrieved 20 March 2021. "Australia to compete in the 2015 Eurovision Song Contest". Eurovision Song Contest. 10 February 2015. Retrieved 27 June 2020. Kemp, Stuart; Plunkett, John (10 February 2015). "Eurovision Song Contest invites Australia to join 'world's biggest party'". The Guardian. Retrieved 27 June 2020. "Australia to return to the Eurovision Song Contest!". Eurovision Song Contest. 17 November 2015. Retrieved 27 June 2020. "Australia secures spot in Eurovision for the next five years". Eurovision Song Contest. 12 February 2019. Retrieved 27 June 2020. "Eurovision 2024: 37 broadcasters head to Malmö". Eurovision Song Contest. 5 December 2023. Retrieved 5 December 2023. "Official EBU statement & FAQ on Eurovision 2020 cancellation". Eurovision Song Contest. 6 April 2020. Retrieved 27 June 2020. "Eurovision: Europe Shine A Light". Eurovision Song Contest. 9 April 2020. Retrieved 27 June 2020. "Eurovision still shines despite cancelled final". The Guardian. PA Media. 17 May 2020. Retrieved 27 June 2020. "Palmarès du Concours Eurovision de la Chanson" (PDF). European Broadcasting Union. 2002. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 May 2008. Retrieved 28 June 2020. "Concours Eurovision de la Chanson 2019". France Télévisions. Retrieved 28 June 2020. "Eurovision Song Contest: Brand". Eurovision Song Contest. Archived from the original on 1 February 2021. Retrieved 3 July 2020. "How it works – Eurovision Song Contest". Eurovision Song Contest. 15 January 2017. Retrieved 28 June 2020. LaFleur, Louise (30 August 2019). "Rotterdam to host Eurovision 2020!". Eurovision Song Contest. Retrieved 9 July 2020. "Eurovision 2019: Five lessons learned". BBC News. 19 May 2019. Retrieved 1 July 2020. "Looking back: the Grand Final". European Broadcasting Union. 16 May 2020. Archived from the original on 1 April 2021. Retrieved 1 April 2021. "The Most Iconic Opening & Interval Acts of the Eurovision Song Contest". Eurovision Song Contest. 16 August 2019. Retrieved 28 June 2020. "Presenters – Eurovision Song Contest". Eurovision Song Contest. 31 March 2017. Retrieved 28 June 2020. Jordan, Paul (1 March 2017). "Behind the scenes with the hosts of the 2017 Eurovision Song Contest". European Broadcasting Union. Archived from the original on 28 September 2020. Retrieved 1 April 2021. "Eurovision Song Contest: Rules". European Broadcasting Union. 12 January 2017. Archived from the original on 26 August 2022. Retrieved 28 June 2020. "Eurovision Song Contest: Voting". Eurovision Song Contest. 3 May 2017. Retrieved 5 July 2020. Tarbuck, Sean (12 May 2023). "Jury voting order revealed for Eurovision 2023". ESCUnited. Retrieved 12 May 2023. "Eurovision Song Contest: Trophy". Eurovision Song Contest. 14 January 2017. Retrieved 30 June 2020. "Eurovision Song Contest: National Selections". Eurovision Song Contest. 21 March 2017. Retrieved 7 July 2020. Rosney, Daniel (7 March 2020). "Sweden's Melfest: Why a national Eurovision show won global fans". BBC News. Retrieved 7 July 2020. "EBU – Admission". European Broadcasting Union. 27 April 2018. Archived from the original on 13 September 2019. Retrieved 28 June 2020. "Regulation on Detailed Membership Criteria under Article 3.6 of the EBU Statutes" (PDF). European Broadcasting Union. June 2013. Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 May 2019. Retrieved 28 June 2020. "Which countries can take part?". Eurovision Song Contest. Archived from the original on 17 March 2017. Retrieved 28 June 2020. "ITU-R Radio Regulations 2012–15" (PDF). International Telecommunication Union, available from the Spectrum Management Authority of Jamaica. 2012. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 August 2013. Retrieved 28 June 2019. "ITU-R Radio Regulations – Articles edition of 2004 (valid in 2004–07)" (PDF). International Telecommunication Union. 2004. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 October 2017. Retrieved 28 June 2020. "FAQ – Eurovision Song Contest". Eurovision Song Contest. 12 January 2017. Archived from the original on 23 June 2020. Retrieved 28 June 2020. "Historical Milestones". European Broadcasting Union. Archived from the original on 26 May 2006. Retrieved 3 July 2020. Boyle, Stephen (13 May 2016). "The cost of winning the Eurovision Song Contest". Royal Bank of Scotland. Archived from the original on 21 August 2022. Retrieved 20 March 2021. "Winner's Press Conference with Portugal's Salvador Sobral". Eurovision Song Contest. 14 May 2017. Retrieved 3 July 2020. "Winner's Press Conference with the Netherlands' Duncan Laurence". Eurovision Song Contest. 19 May 2019. Retrieved 3 July 2020. "What does it take to become a Eurovision host city?". Eurovision Song Contest. 30 July 2007. Retrieved 3 July 2020. "Eurovision Song Contest: Copenhagen 2001". Eurovision Song Contest. Retrieved 1 July 2020. "Eurovision Song Contest: Millstreet 1993". Eurovision Song Contest. Retrieved 1 July 2020. "Millstreet Town: Green Glens Arena". millstreet.ie. Archived from the original on 1 April 2019. Retrieved 3 July 2020. "Eurovision Song Contest logo evolves". Eurovision Song Contest. 31 July 2014. Retrieved 3 July 2020. "Eurovision Song Contest: Logos and Artwork". Eurovision Song Contest. 12 January 2017. Retrieved 17 March 2021. Groot, Evert (28 October 2018). "Tel Aviv 2019: Dare to Dream". Eurovision Song Contest. Retrieved 7 July 2020. LaFleur, Louise (25 October 2019). "The making of 'Open Up'". Eurovision Song Contest. Retrieved 7 July 2020. "2020 postcard concept revealed as Dutch people can join in on the fun". Eurovision Song Contest. 9 December 2019. Retrieved 7 July 2020. Gleave, Amy (2 May 2023). "Eurovision branding over the years". Dawn Creative. Retrieved 2 September 2023. "Happy 50th Anniversary, Eurovision 1970!". Eurovision Song Contest. 29 April 2020. Retrieved 7 July 2020. O'Connor 2010, pp. 40–43. "'United By Music' chosen as permanent Eurovision slogan". Eurovision Song Contest. 14 November 2023. Retrieved 14 November 2023. "Anforderungsprofil an die Austragungsstätte des Eurovision Song Contest 2015" [Requirements to the venue of the Eurovision Song Contest 2015] (PDF) (in German). ORF. Archived from the original (PDF) on 31 May 2014. Retrieved 3 July 2020. "Rules of the 2005 Eurovision Song Contest". Eurovision Song Contest. Archived from the original on 10 February 2006. Retrieved 3 July 2020. "Eurovision Song Contest: Heads of Delegation". Eurovision Song Contest. 14 January 2017. Retrieved 5 July 2020. "Commentator's guide to the commentators". Eurovision Song Contest. 15 May 2011. Retrieved 3 July 2020. Escudero, Victor M. (14 May 2017). "Commentators: The national hosts of Eurovision". Eurovision Song Contest. Retrieved 3 July 2020. "Eurovision Song Contest 2008: Rehearsal schedule" (PDF). Eurovision Song Contest. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 December 2008. Retrieved 3 July 2020. Granger, Anthony (10 May 2023). "Eurovision 2023: EBU & BBC Discuss Voting, Rehearsals & Qualifiers Announcement". Eurovoix. Retrieved 11 May 2023. "Your ultimate guide to the Eurovision 2018 event weeks". Eurovision Song Contest. 27 April 2018. Archived from the original on 18 May 2019. Retrieved 3 July 2020. "Eurovision Song Contest: Event weeks". Eurovision Song Contest. 21 March 2017. Retrieved 3 July 2020. "Tickets for Eurovision 2024 in Malmö". Eurovision Song Contest. 27 March 2019. Retrieved 3 December 2023. "Time now for the all important Jury Final". Eurovision Song Contest. 17 May 2013. Archived from the original on 2 September 2019. Retrieved 25 March 2021. "Welcome Reception: Pink champagne for the stars". Eurovision Song Contest. 25 May 2010. Retrieved 3 July 2020. "Tel Aviv prepares for glamorous Orange Carpet". Eurovision Song Contest. 12 May 2019. Retrieved 3 July 2020. "Eurovision Song Contest: EuroClub". Eurovision Song Contest. 21 April 2017. Retrieved 3 July 2020. ""Big Five" meet to take a trip down the Rhine". Eurovision Song Contest. 14 May 2011. Retrieved 3 July 2020. "Eurovision Song Contest: Eurovision Village". Eurovision Song Contest. 23 April 2018. Retrieved 3 July 2020. "Eurovision Song Contest: Organisers". Eurovision Song Contest. 12 January 2017. Retrieved 5 July 2020. "Martin Österdahl announced as new Eurovision Song Contest Executive Supervisor". European Broadcasting Union. 20 January 2020. Retrieved 25 July 2020. Muldoon, Padraig (30 March 2018). "Italy: Ermal Meta & Fabrizio Moro release three-minute Eurovision 2018 version of "Non mi avete fatto niente"". wiwibloggs.com. Retrieved 27 February 2021. "Eurovision: Rules, facts and controversies". The Scotsman. 7 March 2013. Retrieved 21 March 2021. O'Connor 2010, pp. 28–29. "Eurovision Song Contest: Naples 1965". Eurovision Song Contest. Retrieved 4 July 2020. "Eurovision Song Contest: Luxembourg 1966". Eurovision Song Contest. Retrieved 4 July 2020. O'Connor 2010, pp. 68–71. "Eurovision Song Contest: Luxembourg 1973". Eurovision Song Contest. Retrieved 4 July 2020. "Eurovision Song Contest: London 1977". Eurovision Song Contest. Retrieved 4 July 2020. "Eurovision Song Contest: Jerusalem 1999". Eurovision Song Contest. Retrieved 1 July 2020. O'Connor 2010, pp. 156–159. "Eurovision Song Contest: Lugano 1956". Eurovision Song Contest. Retrieved 5 July 2020. "Eurovision Song Contest: Frankfurt 1957". Eurovision Song Contest. Retrieved 5 July 2020. "Eurovision Song Contest: Dublin 1971". Eurovision Song Contest. Retrieved 19 March 2021. "Eurovision Song Contest: Lausanne 1989". Eurovision Song Contest. Retrieved 4 July 2020. "Eurovision Song Contest: Bergen 1986". Eurovision Song Contest. Retrieved 4 July 2020. O'Connor 2010, pp. 104–107. Roxburgh 2012, pp. 387–396. O'Connor 2010, pp. 148–151. "Rules of the 44th Eurovision Song Contest, 1999" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 18 April 2019. Retrieved 1 July 2020. "Public Rules of the 60th Eurovision Song Contest" (PDF). Eurovision Song Contest. Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 April 2015. Retrieved 4 July 2020. "Changes announced to ensure Eurovision comes 'back for good'". Eurovision Song Contest. 18 June 2020. Retrieved 4 July 2020. Katsoulakis, Manos (25 August 2022). "The rules of Eurovision 2023 are released: Pre-recorded backing vocals permitted again". EurovisionFun. Retrieved 26 August 2022. "Running order Malmö 2013 to be determined by producers". Eurovision Song Contest. 7 November 2012. Retrieved 9 July 2020. "Eurovision Song Contest: Semi-Final Allocation Draw". Eurovision Song Contest. 14 January 2017. Retrieved 2 July 2020. "All you need to know for Monday's draw!". Eurovision Song Contest. 24 January 2008. Retrieved 21 March 2021. Zwart, Josianne; Jordan, Paul (29 January 2018). "Which countries will perform in which Semi-Final at Eurovision 2018?". Eurovision Song Contest. Retrieved 9 July 2020. "Eurovision 2013: Semi-Final running order revealed". Eurovision Song Contest. 28 March 2013. Retrieved 9 July 2020. Groot, Evert (6 May 2018). "Portugal and 'Big Five' rehearse for the second time". Eurovision Song Contest. Retrieved 9 July 2020. "How is the Running Order being decided?". Eurovision Song Contest. 12 May 2017. Retrieved 9 July 2020. "Voting changes announced for Eurovision Song Contest 2023". Eurovision Song Contest. 22 November 2022. Archived from the original on 22 November 2022. Retrieved 22 November 2022. "Eurovision scraps jury voting in semi-finals". BBC News. 22 November 2022. Archived from the original on 22 November 2022. "Voting changes (2023) FAQ". Eurovision Song Contest. 22 November 2022. Archived from the original on 22 November 2022. Retrieved 22 November 2022. "Eurovision 2023: Votes from 144 countries". Eurovisionworld. 25 May 2023. Retrieved 30 May 2023. Jordan, Paul (18 February 2016). "Biggest change to Eurovision Song Contest voting since 1975". Eurovision Song Contest. Retrieved 5 July 2020. "Eurovision Song Contest overhauls voting rules". BBC News. 18 February 2016. Retrieved 5 July 2020. "Eurovision Song Contest: Birmingham 1998". Eurovision Song Contest. Retrieved 7 July 2020. "Rules of the 2004 Eurovision Song Contest" (PDF). European Broadcasting Union. Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 May 2005. Retrieved 22 March 2021. "Televoting/jury mix in 2009 Final voting". Eurovision Song Contest. 14 September 2008. Retrieved 5 July 2020. "Juries also get 50% stake in Semi-Final result". Eurovision Song Contest. 11 October 2009. Retrieved 2 July 2020. Roxburgh, Gordon (14 May 2016). "The 42 spokespersons for the 2016 Grand Final". Eurovision Song Contest. Retrieved 5 July 2020. "Eurovision Song Contest: Dublin 1994". Eurovision Song Contest. Retrieved 1 July 2020. "Eurovision Song Contest: Dublin 1988". Eurovision Song Contest. Retrieved 5 July 2020. "Milestone Moments: 1988 – When Celine was crowned Queen". Eurovision Song Contest. 12 September 2016. Retrieved 5 July 2020. "Eurovision Song Contest: Broadcasting Rights". Eurovision Song Contest. 12 January 2017. Retrieved 5 July 2020. "The end of a decade: Stockholm 2000". Eurovision Song Contest. 21 December 2009. Retrieved 5 July 2020. "Albania to broadcast tonight's Semi-Final deferred". Eurovision Song Contest. 22 May 2012. Retrieved 5 July 2020. Royston, Benny (15 May 2009). "Spain to face sanctions over late broadcast". esctoday.com. Retrieved 5 July 2020. Escartín, Javier (15 May 2009). "Los problemas de Soraya en Eurovisión" [Soraya's problems at Eurovision]. ABC (in Spanish). Retrieved 5 July 2020. "Here's where to watch Eurovision: Europe Shine A Light". Eurovision Song Contest. 16 April 2020. Retrieved 3 July 2020. "The Eurovision Song Contest". BBC UKTV. Retrieved 3 July 2020. "Netflix Picks Up U.S. VOD Rights To Eurovision Song Contest 2019 & 2020". Deadline Hollywood. 19 July 2019. Retrieved 3 July 2020. "Stage Set for Animated Eurovision Logo". European Broadcasting Union. 29 November 2012. Archived from the original on 17 May 2019. Retrieved 22 February 2021. EUROVISION Animated logo on YouTube "How Eurovision Again came to your screens". Eurovision Song Contest. 27 June 2020. Retrieved 3 July 2020. Roxburgh 2012, pp. 348–358. Grønbech, Jens (2 May 2014). "BT afslører: Her er DRs største grandprix-brøler" [BT reveals: DR's biggest Eurovision groan] (in Danish). B.T. Retrieved 6 July 2020. Dohrman, Jan (20 March 2019). "Billeder: I denne uge er det 55 år siden, Danmark holdt sit første Eurovision i Tivoli" [Pictures: This week marks 55 years since Denmark held its first Eurovision at Tivoli] (in Danish). DR. Retrieved 6 July 2020. "Eurovision Song Contest: Copenhagen 1964". Eurovision Song Contest. Retrieved 5 July 2020. O'Connor 2010, pp. 24–25. "Eurovision Song Contest: Zagreb 1990". Eurovision Song Contest. Retrieved 27 February 2021. 50 Years of Eurovision (PDF). European Broadcasting Union. 2004. pp. 32–33. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 January 2005. Retrieved 1 July 2020. O'Connor 2010, pp. 132–135, 219. O'Connor 2010, pp. 136–139. "Eurovision Song Contest: Oslo 1996". Eurovision Song Contest. Retrieved 1 July 2020. O'Connor 2010, pp. 144–147. "Eurovision Song Contest: Dublin 1997". Eurovision Song Contest. Retrieved 1 July 2020. O'Connor 2010, pp. 164–167. "43 nations on 2011 participants list!". Eurovision Song Contest. 31 December 2010. Retrieved 1 July 2020. "The end of a decade: Istanbul 2004". Eurovision Song Contest. 25 December 2009. Retrieved 1 July 2020. O'Connor 2010, pp. 176–180. Rowe, Callum (26 September 2023). "Swedish commentator urging Martin Österdahl to change Big Five rule". The Euro Trip Podcast. Retrieved 27 September 2023. "Eurovision: Is Brexit to blame for the UK's latest flop?". BBC News. 20 May 2019. Retrieved 1 July 2020. Adessi, Antonio (2 June 2021). "Eurovision 2022: cambiamenti in vista per Germania, Spagna e Regno Unito" [Eurovision 2022: Changes in sight for Germany, Spain and the United Kingdom]. Eurofestival News (in Italian). Retrieved 7 September 2021. "Turkey to return Eurovision 'if no more bearded divas'". Hürriyet Daily News. 4 August 2018. Retrieved 1 July 2020. Bakker, Sietse (29 January 2003). "EBU confirms new Eurovision Song Contest format". esctoday.com. Archived from the original on 29 October 2020. Retrieved 22 March 2021. O'Connor 2010, pp. 172–175. O'Connor 2010, pp. 177–179. "Countdown to Baku – Helsinki 2007". Eurovision Song Contest. 18 January 2012. Retrieved 2 July 2020. "Eurovision Song Contest: Two Semi-Finals in 2008" (PDF). European Broadcasting Union. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 September 2012. Retrieved 2 July 2020. "Two Semi-Finals Eurovision Song Contest in 2008". Eurovision Song Contest. 11 January 2008. Retrieved 2 July 2020. "All you need to know for Monday's draw!". Eurovision Song Contest. 24 January 2008. Retrieved 2 July 2020. O'Connor 2010, pp. 192–195. Harrison, Andrew (21 October 2014). "Why are Abba so popular?". BBC Culture. Retrieved 30 June 2020. Murrells, Joseph (1978). The Book of Golden Discs (2nd, illustrated ed.). Barrie & Jenkins. p. 395. ISBN 0-214-20480-4. Southern, Kieran (21 May 2019). "Celine Dion and James Corden recreate famous Titanic scene for Carpool Karaoke". Irish Independent. PA Media. Retrieved 30 June 2020. "Iglesias praises Eurovision as a learning moment". Eurovision Song Contest. 11 October 2008. Retrieved 20 March 2021. "Julio Iglesias pulls out of NZ tour". Stuff. 2 November 2016. Retrieved 20 March 2021. "Milestone Moments: 1974 - The arrival of ABBA". Eurovision Song Contest. 5 September 2016. Retrieved 20 March 2021. "Olivia Newton-John displays movie memorabilia in Newbridge". Raidió Teilifís Éireann. 25 July 2019. Retrieved 20 March 2021. "Eurovision Song Contest: United Kingdom". eurovision.tv. Retrieved 15 March 2021. "Lulu at 70: singer celebrates landmark birthday". Belfast Telegraph. 3 November 2018. Retrieved 20 March 2021. Bensalhia, John (5 October 2018). "Music Maestros: Top 10 Best Selling Italian Music Artists and Acts". Italy Magazine. Retrieved 25 March 2021. Puglisi, Federica (8 July 2020). "Happy birthday Toto Cutugno, the most loved Italian singer abroad". italiani.it. Retrieved 26 March 2021. Kelly, Emma (7 September 2020). "Katrina And The Waves reckon Eurovision winner Love Shine A Light 'didn't get a look in' in the UK". Metro. Retrieved 20 March 2021. Keeb, Brigitte (21 April 1962). "Wendland Nearing One Million Mark". Billboard. Retrieved 23 March 2021. Papadatos, Markos (8 July 2018). ""Forever Young" with Nana Mouskouri, the biggest-selling female artist of all time!". Neo Magazine. Retrieved 23 March 2021. "Cliff Richard's 'Congratulations' beaten in Eurovision fix?". NME. 6 May 2008. Retrieved 20 March 2021. Escudero, Victor M. (19 November 2017). "Luxembourg: Small in size, big in Eurovision". Eurovision Song Contest. Retrieved 20 March 2021. Eames, Tom (16 November 2020). "How Scotland's football team has given Baccara's 'Yes Sir I Can Boogie' a sudden chart comeback". Smooth Radio. Retrieved 20 March 2021. Dondoni, Luca (20 June 2019). "Tozzi: "Ti amo" ha 40 anni, merita una festa". La Stampa (in Italian). Retrieved 25 March 2021. "Italy's Music Charts: Then and Now". La Gazzetta Italiana. August 2017. Retrieved 25 March 2021. Idato, Michael (19 May 2015). "Eurovision's honour roll: from Domenico Modugno to ABBA and Celine Dion". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 20 March 2021. "The end of a decade: Riga 2003". Eurovision Song Contest. 24 December 2009. Retrieved 29 June 2020. Paton Walsh, Nick (30 May 2003). "Vote switch 'stole Tatu's Eurovision win'". The Guardian. Retrieved 20 March 2021. "Las Ketchup: "We didn't choose to do Eurovision — we had to do it"". Wiwibloggs. 21 July 2019. Retrieved 14 May 2021. "Patricia Kaas représentera la France à l'Eurovision". Le Parisien (in French). 30 January 2009. Archived from the original on 23 March 2021. Retrieved 23 March 2021. Osborn, Michael (12 May 2009). "Battle of the Eurovision ballads". BBC News. Archived from the original on 15 May 2009. Retrieved 23 March 2021. "Engelbert Humperdinck is United Kingdom entrant!". Eurovision Song Contest. 1 March 2012. Retrieved 20 March 2021. "Bonnie Tyler to represent United Kingdom". Eurovision Song Contest. 7 March 2013. Retrieved 20 March 2021. Lanham, Tom (2 March 2021). "'Total Eclipse' singer Bonnie Tyler survived Eurovision". San Francisco Examiner. Retrieved 20 March 2021. "Flo Rida will join Senhit for San Marino". Eurovision.tv. 18 May 2021. Retrieved 18 May 2021. Jordan, Paul (7 January 2018). "France Gall, Luxembourg's Eurovision 1965 winner, dies at 70". Eurovision Song Contest. Retrieved 20 March 2021. Kennedy, Maev (7 January 2018). "France Gall: French singer who inspired My Way dies age 70". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 10 January 2018. Retrieved 23 March 2021. "Bregović to compose Serbian entry; picks from three artists". Eurovision Song Contest. 20 January 2010. Archived from the original on 28 November 2020. Retrieved 23 March 2021. "Diane Warren: Legendary songwriter". Eurovision Song Contest. 15 May 2009. Archived from the original on 19 September 2020. Retrieved 23 March 2021. "Andrew Lloyd Webber to compose the UK entry". Eurovision Song Contest. 18 October 2008. Retrieved 20 March 2021. Kelly, Emma (14 May 2020). "Andrew Lloyd Webber was almost replaced by a body double at Eurovision because he was so nervous". Metro. Retrieved 20 March 2021. "Pete Waterman to write UK entry for Eurovision". BBC. 29 January 2010. Retrieved 20 March 2021. "Pete Waterman's Eurovision entry finishes last". Coventry Telegraph. 31 May 2010. Retrieved 20 March 2021. "Sabbath star Tony Iommi writes Eurovision entry". BBC. 6 March 2013. Retrieved 14 May 2021. "Dima Bilan again conquers Russian hearts". eurovision.tv. 9 March 2008. Retrieved 14 May 2021. "Sébastien Tellier to represent France". eurovision.tv. 9 March 2008. Retrieved 14 May 2021. Lynch-Brown, Carol (22 December 2010). "A profile of Annie M. G. Schmidt, 1988 Hans Christian Andersen medalist". Early Child Development and Care. 48: 19–27. doi:10.1080/0300443890480104. Wilson, Eric (11 June 2014). "Now You Know: Françoise Hardy Was the Original Street Style Star". InStyle. Retrieved 27 March 2021. Borrelli-Persson, Laird (14 March 2017). "Sarah Jessica Parker Narrates the History of 1960s Fashion in Vogue". Vogue. Retrieved 27 March 2021. Mackenzie-Smith, Stevie. "A Tribute to France Gall, the Iconic Yé-Yé Star". Another Magazine. Retrieved 27 March 2021. "Dana Rosemary Scallon seeking presidency backing". BBC News. 20 September 2011. Retrieved 30 June 2020. "Irish presidential election: Michael D Higgins elected". BBC News. 29 October 2011. Retrieved 30 June 2020. "Nana Mouskouri Goodwill Ambassador". unicef.org. UNICEF. Archived from the original on 22 April 2021. Retrieved 25 March 2021. "European Parliament - Nana MOUSKOURI". Europarl.europa.eu. European Union. 13 October 1934. Retrieved 25 March 2021. Ahuja, Masuma (5 March 2014). "Why did Michelle Obama give a Ukrainian pop star the Women of Courage award?". The Washington Post. Retrieved 30 March 2021. Davies, Russell (15 February 2008). "Ruslana: sings major recording deal with Warner Records". ESCToday. Archived from the original on 4 December 2013. Retrieved 30 March 2021. Musicians liven up EuroMaidan stage, Kyiv Post (29 November 2013) Archived 29 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine Cartwright, Garth (14 December 2016). "Esma Redžepova obituary". The Guardian. Retrieved 30 March 2021. O'Connor, John Kennedy (2007). The Eurovision Song Contest: The Official History. Carlton Books. ISBN 978-1-8444-2994-3. West 2020, pp. 95–96. Pierluigi, Panza (17 February 1996). "Piramidi rotanti luci da record e 007 in azione". Corriere della Sera. Archived from the original on 2 August 2012. Retrieved 9 July 2020. Il brano presentato a Sanremo che ha venduto di piu' e' "Nel blu dipinto di blu" di Domenico Modugno (22 milioni di dischi). "Hispanic Heritage Month: The 50 Greatest Latin Songs of All Time". Billboard. 15 September 2017. Retrieved 9 July 2020. Roberts, David (2006). British Hit Singles & Albums (19th ed.). London: Guinness World Records Limited. p. 593. ISBN 1-904994-10-5. Anderson, Sarah (21 May 2012). "50 best-selling tracks of the '90s". NME. Retrieved 9 July 2020. "Gina G Chart History (Hot 100)". Billboard. Retrieved 9 July 2020. "Loreen's "Euphoria" Enjoys Biggest Chart Success From Eurovision Winner In Years". Warner Music Group. 5 June 2012. Kreisler, Lauren (9 May 2014). "The Most Downloaded Eurovision Songs of All Time Revealed!". Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on 29 September 2018. Retrieved 21 March 2021. "Occidentali's Karma hits 200 million views on Youtube!". escxtra.com. 16 September 2018. Archived from the original on 7 November 2019. Retrieved 13 April 2020. "Italy: Mahmood's "Soldi" is now the most-streamed Eurovision song on Spotify". Wiwibloggs. 16 October 2019. Retrieved 13 April 2020. ""Arcade" passes "Soldi" as the most-streamed Eurovision entry on Spotify". ESCXTRA.com. 29 January 2021. Retrieved 29 January 2021. "Duncan Laurence's 'Arcade' Is First Eurovision Song Contest Winner to Hit Hot 100 in 45 Years". Billboard. 13 April 2021. Retrieved 16 April 2021. "Duncan Laurence Has 'No Idea' How His Breakthrough Single 'Arcade' Keeps Going Viral". Billboard. 10 June 2021. Archived from the original on 11 June 2021. Retrieved 11 June 2021. Lee Adams, William (31 August 2021). "Eurovision winners Måneskin and Duncan Laurence crack Top 30 on Billboard charts". Wiwibloggs. Retrieved 6 September 2021. "Chartbreaker: Inside Måneskin's Unlikely, TikTok-Assisted Journey to Rock Stardom". Billboard. 3 August 2021. Retrieved 5 August 2021. Shaw, Lucas. "Maneskin Is Italy's First Rock Band to Rule the Charts". Bloomberg News. Retrieved 14 September 2021. Trendell, Andrew (21 October 2021). "Måneskin live in London: embrace the Eurovision winners' rock'n'roll circus". NME. Retrieved 22 October 2021. "Eurovision Song Contest: Malmö 1992". Eurovision Song Contest. Retrieved 30 June 2020. O'Connor 2010, p. 201. "Alexander Rybak - Norway - Moscow 2009". Eurovision Song Contest. Retrieved 14 June 2021. "Alexander Rybak - Norway - Lisbon 2018". Eurovision Song Contest. Retrieved 14 June 2021. "Eurovision Song Contest: Madrid 1969". Eurovision Song Contest. Retrieved 30 June 2020. O'Connor 2010, pp. 208–209. "Countdown to Baku – Athens 2006". Eurovision Song Contest. 27 December 2011. Retrieved 30 June 2020. "Salvador Sobral given a hero's welcome in Portugal". Eurovision Song Contest. 15 May 2017. Retrieved 30 June 2020. "Welcome home, Conchita!". Eurovision Song Contest. 15 May 2014. Retrieved 30 June 2020. "Eurovision Song Contest: United Kingdom". Eurovision Song Contest. Retrieved 30 June 2020. "Eurovision Song Contest: Norway". Eurovision Song Contest. Retrieved 30 June 2020. "Eurovision Song Contest: Ireland". Eurovision Song Contest. Retrieved 30 June 2020. "Eurovision Song Contest". Kosta Boda. Archived from the original on 16 May 2021. Retrieved 30 June 2020. O'Connor 2010, p. 216. "Star percussionist revealed as Eurovision interval act". Eurovision Song Contest. 18 March 2015. Archived from the original on 23 December 2019. Retrieved 29 June 2020. Siim, Jarmo (29 April 2015). "Conchita Wurst & a magical bridge to open the Eurovision Final". Eurovision Song Contest. Archived from the original on 26 September 2020. Retrieved 1 April 2021. Polychronakis, Ioannis (2019). "Singing Greece's Contemporary Socio-Cultural History". In Tragaki, Dafni (ed.). Made in Greece: Studies in Popular Music. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-315-74907-5. Retrieved 29 June 2020. Jordan, Paul (17 June 2016). "Stockholm Revisited Part Three: Writing the Script". Eurovision Song Contest. Retrieved 29 June 2020. "Riverdance: The Journey". riverdance.com. Retrieved 29 June 2020. "Amazing facts about the Irish dance phenomenon "Riverdance"". IrishCentral.com. 29 January 2015. Retrieved 29 June 2020. Collins, Simon (7 October 2018). "Aqua ride the highs and lows ahead of 2019 Australian tour". The West Australian. Retrieved 29 June 2020. "The end of a decade: Copenhagen 2001". Eurovision Song Contest. 22 December 2009. Retrieved 29 June 2020. "Russian army choir – Eurovision 2009 interval act – loses 64 members in plane crash tragedy". Eurovision Song Contest. 26 December 2016. Retrieved 29 June 2020. Jordan, Paul (9 May 2016). "Justin Timberlake makes world premiere live performance in the Eurovision Song Contest!". Eurovision Song Contest. Retrieved 29 June 2020. Picheta, Rob (19 May 2018). "Eurovision: Madonna mixes politics with a classic hit during performance". CNN. Retrieved 29 June 2020. Belam, Martin (19 May 2019). "Madonna was excruciating: what we learned from Eurovision 2019". The Guardian. Retrieved 29 June 2020. "Cirque du Soleil!". European Broadcasting Union. 15 May 2009. Retrieved 18 May 2021. "Cirque du Soleil: opener for the final!". Eurovision Song Contest. 15 May 2009. Retrieved 29 June 2020. "The end of a decade: Kyiv 2005". Eurovision Song Contest. 27 December 2009. Retrieved 29 June 2020. "Russian singer wins 2008 Eurovision Song Contest". CTV News. Associated Press. 24 May 2008. Retrieved 29 June 2020. Fry, Naomi (21 May 2019). "Eurovision's Sanitized Vision of Israel". The New Yorker. Retrieved 29 June 2020. "Jerusalem 1999". Eurovision Song Contest. Retrieved 29 June 2020. "Stockholm Revisited Part Five: Interval Acts". Eurovision Song Contest. 1 July 2016. Retrieved 29 June 2020. Åberg, Erik (11 May 2016). "Mellanakten hyllas av Eurovision-tittarna". Aftonbladet (in Swedish). Archived from the original on 29 June 2020. Retrieved 29 June 2020. "The Grey People (Interval act Semi – Final 1 of the 2016 Eurovision Song Contest)". Eurovision Song Contest. 11 May 2016. Retrieved 29 June 2020. Farren, Neil (11 May 2022). "Live From Turin: Semi-Final Two Jury Show". Eurovoix. Retrieved 14 May 2022. "Eurovision 2022: All about the Grand Final". Eurovisionworld. 14 May 2022. Retrieved 14 May 2022. Marshall, Alex (12 May 2023). "How Liverpool Put on a Song Contest for Ukraine". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 13 July 2023. Butterworth, Benjamin (12 May 2023). "'Ukrainian officials have been planning Eurovision with us from bunkers'". inews.co.uk. Retrieved 13 July 2023. Robinson, Frances (3 May 2017). "13 times Eurovision got super political". Politico. Retrieved 8 July 2020. "How to win the Eurovision Song Contest". The Economist. 16 May 2019. Retrieved 8 July 2020. Carniel, Jess (10 May 2018). "The Six Types of Eurovision Contestant". lifehacker.com.au. Retrieved 8 July 2020. Majendie, Paul (11 August 2007). "Fringe show celebrates Eurovision kitsch". Reuters. Retrieved 7 July 2020. "What makes the perfect Eurovision song?". Radio Times. 11 May 2018. Retrieved 8 July 2020. Picheta, Rob (29 June 2020). "Want to win Eurovision? Write a nice, slow song about love". CNN. Retrieved 8 July 2020. Picheta, Rob (18 May 2019). "Eurovision: What is it and what time is it on?". CNN. Retrieved 8 July 2020. Allatson, Paul (2007). "'Antes cursi que sencilla': Eurovision Song Contests and the Kitsch-Drive to Euro-Unity". Culture, Theory and Critique. 48 (1): 87–98. doi:10.1080/14735780701293540. S2CID 146449408. Campbell, Chuck (5 July 2020). "'Eurovision' soundtrack kicks up the camp". knoxnews.com. Retrieved 8 July 2020. Pattillo, Alice (14 May 2019). "The 10 Most Metal Moments in Eurovision". loudersound.com. Retrieved 8 July 2020. Escudero, Victor M. (11 August 2017). "Eurovision and all that jazz!". Eurovision Song Contest. Retrieved 8 July 2020. Osborn, Michael (16 May 2006). "Rapping for glory at Eurovision". BBC News. Retrieved 8 July 2020. Holden, Steve (4 June 2021). "Måneskin: The Eurovision winners storming the UK charts". BBC News. Retrieved 22 November 2021. Macdonald, Kyle (17 May 2022). "Serbia's viral Eurovision song featured Allegri's Miserere, and you might have missed it..." Classic FM. Retrieved 20 May 2022. Robinson, Frances (3 May 2017). "13 times Eurovision got super political". Politico. Retrieved 21 March 2021. "Can Eurovision Succeed Where Diplomacy Has Failed?". Ararat. Archived from the original on 6 June 2014. Retrieved 5 June 2014. Lomsadze, Giorgi (17 March 2015). "Armenia Dodges Eurovision Controversy". Eurasianet. Retrieved 8 July 2020. Halpin, Chris (11 May 2016). "EBU sanctions Armenian broadcaster over Nagorno-Karabakh flag incident". wiwibloggs.co.uk. Retrieved 8 July 2020. Savage, Mark (22 February 2016). "Eurovision: Ukraine's entry aimed at Russia". BBC News. Retrieved 8 July 2020. Withnall, Adam (15 May 2016). "Russian officials threaten to boycott next Eurovision after victory for 'political' Ukraine entry". The Independent. Retrieved 8 July 2020. "Eurovision 2017: Ukraine bars Russian singer Samoilova from contest". BBC News. 22 March 2017. Retrieved 8 July 2020. "EBU: "Russia no longer able to take part in Eurovision 2017"". Eurovision.tv. European Broadcasting Union (EBU). 13 April 2017. Retrieved 8 July 2020. "Eurovision threatens to ban Ukraine over Russian singer row". The Guardian. Agence France-Presse. Retrieved 8 July 2020. "EBU statement regarding the participation of Russia in the Eurovision Song Contest 2022". Eurovision.tv. EBU. 25 February 2022. Retrieved 25 February 2022. "Eurovision: Russia banned from competing at 2022 Song Contest". BBC News. 25 February 2022. Retrieved 26 February 2022. Belam, Martin; Cvorak, Monika (14 May 2022). "Ukraine wins 2022 Eurovision song contest as UK finishes second in Turin". The Guardian. Retrieved 15 May 2022. "Eurovision axes 'anti-Putin' song". BBC News. 10 March 2009. Retrieved 8 July 2020. West 2020, pp. 253–257. "EBU statement on Belarusian participation". Eurovision.tv. EBU. 26 March 2021. Retrieved 5 April 2021. Agadellis, Stratos (11 March 2021). "Belarus: EBU releases statement on the country's entry for Eurovision 2021". esctoday.com. Retrieved 5 April 2021. O'Connor 2010, pp. 52–55. West 2020, pp. 83–86. "Eurovision Song Contest: Paris 1978". Eurovision Song Contest. Retrieved 7 July 2020. O'Connor 2010, pp. 72–75. Roxburgh, Gordon (2014). Songs for Europe: The United Kingdom at the Eurovision Song Contest. Vol. Two: The 1970s. Prestatyn: Telos Publishing. ISBN 978-1-84583-093-9. O'Connor 2010, pp. 80–83. "Eurovision Song Contest: The Hague 1980". Eurovision Song Contest. Retrieved 7 July 2020. Farrell, Stephen (10 May 2019). "Israel counters Eurovision boycott campaign with Google ads". Reuters. Retrieved 7 July 2020. Maikey, Haneen; Aked, Hilary (4 March 2019). "L'Eurovision comme occasion de pinkwashing pour Israël – la communauté LGBT+ devrait le boycotter" [Eurovision as a pinkwashing opportunity for Israel – the LGBT+ community should boycott it]. agencemediapalestine.fr/ (in French). Agence Médias Palestine. Retrieved 7 July 2020. Sherwin, Adam (30 April 2019). "Eurovision 2019: Stephen Fry & Sharon Osbourne lead celebrities rejecting boycott of Israel Song Contest". i. Retrieved 7 July 2020. Snapes, Laura (30 April 2019). "Celebrities denounce proposed boycott of Eurovision in Israel". The Guardian. Retrieved 12 March 2021. Mantzaris, Rein & Hopkins 2018a. Mantzaris, Rein & Hopkins 2018b. "Eurovision votes 'farce' attack". BBC News. 16 May 2004. Archived from the original on 3 June 2004. Retrieved 6 July 2020. "Malta slates Eurovision's voting". BBC News. 14 May 2007. Archived from the original on 9 July 2007. Retrieved 6 July 2020. Fenn, Daniel; Suleman, Omer; Efstathiou, Janet; Johnson, Niel F. (1 February 2006). "How does Europe Make Its Mind Up? Connections, cliques, and compatibility between countries in the Eurovision Song Contest". Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and Its Applications. 360 (2): 576–598. arXiv:physics/0505071. Bibcode:2006PhyA..360..576F. doi:10.1016/j.physa.2005.06.051. S2CID 119406544. Gatherer, Derek (31 March 2006). "Comparison of Eurovision Song Contest Simulation with Actual Results Reveals Shifting Patterns of Collusive Voting Alliances". Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation. 9 (2). ISSN 1460-7425. Retrieved 6 July 2020. Ginsburgh, Victor; Noury, Abdul (October 2006). "The Eurovision Song Contest: Is Voting Political or Cultural?" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 September 2015. Retrieved 6 July 2020. Spierdijk, L; Vellekoop, M.H. (2006). "Geography, culture, and religion: Explaining the bias in Eurovision song contest voting". Applied Mathematics Memoranda. 1794. Retrieved 6 July 2020. "Is there a Eurovision migrant effect?". BBC News. 17 May 2016. Retrieved 6 July 2020. Alexander, Ruth (19 May 2008). "The maths of Eurovision voting". BBC News. Retrieved 7 July 2020. "Neighbourly voting in the Eurovision Song Contest". The Economist. 12 May 2018. Retrieved 7 July 2020. "Partisanship at Eurovision is becoming more blatant". The Economist. 11 May 2018. Retrieved 7 July 2020. O'Connor 2010, pp. 188–191. West 2020, pp. 241–245. "MP demands Eurovision vote change". BBC News. 15 May 2007. Retrieved 6 July 2020. "Terry Wogan 'very doubtful' about presenting Eurovision again". NME. 12 August 2008. Retrieved 6 July 2020. "Norton is Eurovision's new Wogan". BBC News. 5 December 2008. Retrieved 6 July 2020. "Revamp for Eurovision Song Contest". Eurovision Song Contest. 9 January 2008. Retrieved 7 July 2020. "How Eurovision became a gay-friendly contest". France 24. 22 May 2015. Retrieved 7 July 2020. West 2020, pp. 191–195. Roessink, Paulien (17 May 2021). "'Eurovision' gets first transgender host in YouTube star Nikkie de Jager". SBS Your Language. Archived from the original on 23 May 2021. Retrieved 23 May 2021. Bromwich, Kathryn (6 July 2014). "Conchita Wurst: 'Most artists are sensitive and insecure people. I am too'". The Guardian. Retrieved 7 July 2020. Moore, Matt (18 May 2019). "Dutch Eurovision contestant Duncan Laurence comes out as bisexual". Gay Times. Retrieved 7 July 2020. Boni, Federico (12 February 2021). "Sanremo 2021, i Maneskin a nudo tra bisessualità e "libertà sessuale" – la gallery social". Gay.it (in Italian). Retrieved 1 February 2022. "I Am A Lesbian! – Marija Serifovic Opens Up in Her Film "Confession"". InSerbia News. 28 November 2013. Retrieved 7 August 2015. "" Nous les amoureux " de Jean-Claude Pascal, une chanson qui annonce la révolution du mouvement gay..." La Première (in French). 16 May 2019. Retrieved 3 May 2020. "Eurovision 2013 final underway amid lesbian kiss controversy". Deutsche Welle. 18 May 2013. Retrieved 28 February 2021. Reynolds, Daniel (9 May 2018). "Ireland's Gay Dance on Eurovision Shows World That 'Love Is Love'". advocate.com. The Advocate. Retrieved 28 February 2021. Jordan, Paul (24 October 2016). "Life's a drag! Eurovision queens past and present". eurovision.tv. European Broadcasting Union. Retrieved 28 February 2021. "Transvestite Sisters stir Eurovision storm". bbc.co.uk. BBC News. 5 March 2002. Retrieved 28 February 2021. Banks, Martin (6 March 2002). "Transvestite Eurosong win sparks Slovenia accession doubts". politico.eu. Politico. Retrieved 28 February 2021. O'Connor 2010, pp. 152–155. "Transsexual singer stirs up passions". BBC News. 10 May 1998. Retrieved 7 July 2020. Marshall, Alex (18 March 2020). "Eurovision Song Contest Is Canceled Over Coronavirus Concerns". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 18 March 2020. Retrieved 7 July 2020. In 2018, the head of Turkey's public broadcaster said the boycott was also partly because some past winners, including the drag queen Conchita Wurst, had gone against Turkey's social values. Morgan, Joe (16 May 2013). "Turkey cancels Eurovision Song Contest over lesbian kiss". Gay Star News. Archived from the original on 28 May 2022. Retrieved 7 July 2020. Walker, Shaun; Garamvolgyi, Flora (27 November 2019). "Hungary pulls out of Eurovision amid rise in anti-LGBTQ+ rhetoric". The Guardian. Retrieved 16 July 2020. Kozlov, Vladimir (29 November 2019). "Hungary Exits 2020 Eurovision Over Contest's LGBT-Friendly Policies: Report". Billboard. Retrieved 16 July 2020. West 2020, pp. 283–286. Nelson, Fraser (11 May 2014). "Eurovision 2014: the booing of Russia was a disgrace". The Spectator. Archived from the original on 4 May 2015. Retrieved 7 July 2020. Davies, Caroline (11 May 2014). "Conchita Wurst pledges to promote tolerance after jubilant welcome home". The Guardian. Retrieved 7 July 2020. Royston, Benny (10 May 2018). "China banned from broadcasting Eurovision after cutting same-sex dance and tattooed singer". Metro. Retrieved 7 July 2020. Bakker, Sietse (10 May 2018). "EBU terminates this year's partnership with Mango TV". Eurovision Song Contest. Retrieved 7 July 2020. "Finland wins Eurovision contest". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 19 January 2020. Retrieved 26 June 2020. "Eurovision Song Contest – International Music Program". Museum of Broadcast Communications. Archived from the original on 13 January 2005. Retrieved 26 June 2020. Raykoff & Tobin 2016, p. 9. "comedyfestival.com.au". Melbourne International Comedy Festival: Eurowision. Archived from the original on 6 March 2020. Retrieved 7 July 2020. "'Cupcakes': Film Review". hollywoodreporter.com. The Hollywood Reporter. 26 March 2015. Retrieved 28 February 2021. "Eurovision Song Contest: The Story of Fire Saga – out now!". Eurovision Song Contest. 24 June 2020. Retrieved 3 July 2020. Scott, Sheena (26 June 2020). "'Eurovision Song Contest' Movie on Netflix Celebrates A Very European Show". Forbes. Retrieved 3 July 2020. "Eurovision Song Contest: Fans". Eurovision Song Contest. Archived from the original on 25 November 2020. Retrieved 19 February 2022. "About Eurovision in Concert". eurovisioninconcert.nl. Retrieved 3 July 2020. Groot, Evert (7 April 2019). "This was Eurovision in Concert 2019 in Amsterdam". Eurovision Song Contest. Retrieved 3 July 2020. Holden, Steve; Rosney, Daniel (12 May 2019). "Eurovision Tel Aviv 2019: Why the song contest is bigger than ever". BBC News. Retrieved 3 July 2020. Zwart, Josianne; Escudero, Victor M. (18 April 2018). "Over 20 acts to appear at Madrid's ESPreParty this weekend". Eurovision Song Contest. Retrieved 3 July 2020. Rössing, Dominik (31 March 2022). "Six more countries confirmed for Israel Calling 2022, making it 23 artists so far". ESCXTRA.com. Retrieved 3 April 2022. Rosney, Daniel (25 April 2020). "Eurovision Again: Why fans of the song contest get together every Saturday". BBC News. Retrieved 3 July 2020. "Eurovision Again wordt maandelijks initiatief" [Eurovision Again becomes a monthly initiative]. Algemeen Dagblad (in Dutch). 27 June 2020. Retrieved 3 July 2020. "Eurovision Live Events". Eurovision Song Contest. Retrieved 26 June 2020. Dahlander, Gustav (3 April 2020). "Klart för Eurovision-vecka i SVT". svt.se (in Swedish). Sveriges Television. Retrieved 15 July 2020. "May means Eurovision on the BBC". BBC. 1 May 2020. Retrieved 15 July 2020. "Songs of Europe – BBC Two "Radio Times" listing". BBC Genome Project. 25 September 1981. Retrieved 26 June 2020. O'Connor 2010, p. 87. "Congratulations Show – Eurovision History". Eurovision Song Contest. Archived from the original on 5 September 2015. Retrieved 26 June 2020. Adam, Karla (24 October 2005). "Abba's 'Waterloo' is voted best song of 50 Eurovision years". The Independent. Archived from the original on 28 June 2020. Retrieved 26 June 2020. "Official: London to host Eurovision's 60th Anniversary Event". Eurovision Song Contest. 5 February 2005. Retrieved 26 June 2020. "Eurovision's Greatest Hits – line-up". BBC. Retrieved 26 June 2020. "Eurovision: Europe Shine A Light". Eurovision Song Contest. 9 April 2020. Retrieved 26 June 2020. "Eurovision still shines despite cancelled final". The Guardian. PA Media. 17 May 2020. Retrieved 26 June 2020. "Live Event: Eurovision Young Musicians". European Broadcasting Union. 15 May 2018. Retrieved 26 June 2020. "Live Event: Eurovision Young Dancers". European Broadcasting Union. 22 June 2017. Retrieved 26 June 2020. "Eurovision Choir". European Broadcasting Union. 3 June 2020. Retrieved 26 June 2020. "Eurovision Events: Junior Eurovision Song Contest". Eurovision Song Contest. Archived from the original on 6 December 2021. Retrieved 26 June 2020. "Eurovision Dance Contest". BBC. Retrieved 23 April 2020. Morton, Elise (5 May 2019). "Intervision, the Communist Counterpart to Eurovision That Didn't Quite Work". theculturetrip.com. Culture Trip. Retrieved 28 February 2021. Rosenberg, Steve (14 May 2012). "The Cold War rival to Eurovision". bbc.co.uk. BBC News. Retrieved 28 February 2021. Escudero, Victor M. (28 January 2018). "Celebration! The best of Spain in Eurovision". eurovision.tv. European Broadcasting Union. Retrieved 28 February 2021. In 1995 [Marcos Llunas] won the latin version of Eurovision, the Festival OTI where Spain, Portugal and the American countries participated until the year 2000, when the last edition took place. "El Festival de la OTI, el olvidado Eurovisión de las Américas" [The OTI Festival, the forgotten Eurovision of the Americas]. elespanol.com (in Spanish). El Español. 22 January 2020. Retrieved 28 February 2021. "After snubbing the Eurovision Song Contest, Turkey officially launches 'Turkvision'". Eskişehir: Hürriyet Daily News. Doğan News Agency. 21 September 2013. Retrieved 28 February 2021. "The Eurovision Song Contest travels to America!". eurovision.tv. European Broadcasting Union. 7 August 2020. Retrieved 28 February 2021. "'American Song Contest' on screens in 2022". eurovision.tv. European Broadcasting Union. 14 May 2021. Retrieved 26 May 2021. White, Peter (14 May 2021). "'American Song Contest', U.S. Version Of Eurovision, Tunes Up For NBC". deadline.com. Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved 26 May 2021. Granger, Anthony (10 May 2023). "Partners Looking at Options For American Song Contest". Eurovoix World. Retrieved 11 May 2023. "'Eurovision Canada' will join the family in 2023". eurovision.tv. European Broadcasting Union. 25 April 2022. Retrieved 26 April 2022. "Eurovision Song Contest to launch in Latin America". European Broadcasting Union. 12 July 2022. Retrieved 12 July 2022. "La UER y RTVE se reunirán para explorar vías de colaboración en un proyecto de música en Latinoamérica" (in Spanish). RTVE. 12 July 2022. Retrieved 13 July 2022. Granger, Anthony (10 May 2023). "Eurovision Canada Has Taken a Step Back". Eurovoix World. Retrieved 11 May 2023. Mantzaris, Alexander V.; Rein, Samuel R.; Hopkins, Alexander D. (2018a). "Examining Collusion and Voting Biases Between Countries During the Eurovision Song Contest Since 1957". Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation. 21 (1): 1. arXiv:1705.06721. doi:10.18564/jasss.3580. Mantzaris, Alexander V.; Rein, Samuel R.; Hopkins, Alexander D. (2018b). "Preference and neglect amongst countries in the Eurovision Song Contest". Journal of Computational Social Science. 1 (2): 377–390. doi:10.1007/s42001-018-0020-2. O'Connor, John Kennedy (2010). The Eurovision Song Contest: The Official History (2nd ed.). London: Carlton Books. ISBN 978-1-84732-521-1. Raykoff, Ivan; Tobin, Robert Deam, eds. (2016). A Song for Europe: Popular Music and Politics in the Eurovision Song Contest. Abingdon-on-Thames: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-754658-79-5. Retrieved 3 July 2020. Roxburgh, Gordon (2012). Songs for Europe: The United Kingdom at the Eurovision Song Contest. Volume One: The 1950s and 1960s. Prestatyn: Telos Publishing. ISBN 978-1-84583-065-6. West, Chris (2020). Eurovision! A History of Modern Europe Through the World's Greatest Song Contest (2nd ed.). London: Melville House UK. ISBN 978-1-911545-55-2. Media related to Eurovision Song Contest at Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote has quotations related to Eurovision Song Contest. Official website EBU website Eurovision Song Contest's channel on YouTube