Albania (/ælˈbeɪniə, ɔːl-/ a(w)l-BAY-nee-ə; Albanian: Shqipëri or Shqipëria), officially the Republic of Albania (Albanian: Republika e Shqipërisë), is a country in Southeast Europe. The country is located in the Balkans on the Adriatic and Ionian Seas within the Mediterranean Sea and shares land borders with Montenegro to the northwest, Kosovo to the northeast, North Macedonia to the east and Greece to the south. Spanning an area of 28,748 km2 (11,100 sq mi), it displays a varied range of climatic, geological, hydrological and morphological conditions. The country's landscapes range from rugged snow-capped mountains in the Albanian Alps and the Korab, Skanderbeg, Pindus and Ceraunian Mountains, to fertile lowland plains extending from the coasts of the Adriatic and Ionian seas. Tirana is the capital and largest city in the country, followed by Durrës, Vlorë, and Shkodër. In ancient times, the Illyrians inhabited northern and central regions of Albania, whilst Epirotes inhabited the south. Several important ancient Greek colonies were also established on the coast. The Illyrian kingdom centered in what is now Albania was the dominant power before the Rise of Macedon. In the 2nd century BCE, the region was annexed by the Roman Republic, and after the division of the Roman Empire it became part of Byzantium. The first known Albanian autonomous principality – Arbanon – was established in the 12th century. The Kingdom of Albania, Principality of Albania and Albania Veneta were formed between the 13th and 15th centuries in different parts of the country, alongside other Albanian principalities and political entities. In the late 15th century, Albania became part of the Ottoman Empire until 1912, when the modern Albanian state declared independence. In 1939, Italy invaded the Kingdom of Albania, which became Greater Albania, and then a protectorate of Nazi Germany during World War II. Following the war, the People's Socialist Republic of Albania was formed, which lasted until the Revolutions of 1991 concluded with the fall of communism in Albania and eventually the establishment of the current Republic of Albania. Since its independence in 1912, Albania has undergone a diverse political evolution, transitioning from a monarchy to a communist regime before becoming a sovereign parliamentary constitutional republic. Governed by a constitution prioritising the separation of powers, the country's political structure includes a parliament, a ceremonial president, a functional prime minister and a hierarchy of courts. Albania is a developing country with an upper-middle income economy driven by the service sector, with manufacturing and tourism also playing significant roles. The country underwent a transition post the dissolution of communism, shifting from a centralised planning to adopting an open market economy. Citizens in Albania benefit from universal health care access and receive complimentary primary and secondary education. The historical origins of the term "Albania" can be traced back to medieval Latin, with its foundations believed to be associated with the Illyrian tribe of the Albani. This connection gains further support from the work of the Ancient Greek geographer Ptolemy during the 2nd century AD, where he included the settlement of Albanopolis situated to the northeast of Durrës. The presence of a medieval settlement named Albanon or Arbanon hints at the possibility of historical continuity. However, the precise relationship between these historical references and the question of whether Albanopolis was synonymous with Albanon remains a subject of scholarly debate. The Byzantine historian Michael Attaliates, in his 11th century historical account, provides the earliest undisputed reference to the Albanians, when he mentions them having taken part in a revolt against Constantinople in 1079. Additionally, he identified the Arbanitai as subjects under the governance of the Duke of Dyrrachium. In the Middle Ages, Albania was denoted as Arbëri or Arbëni by its inhabitants, who identified themselves as Arbëreshë or Arbëneshë. Albanians employ the terms Shqipëri or Shqipëria when referring to their nation, designations that trace their historical origins to the 14th century. However, it was not until the late 17th and early 18th centuries that these terms gradually superseded Arbëria and Arbëreshë among the Albanians. These two expressions are widely interpreted to symbolise "Children of the Eagles" and "Land of the Eagles". Mesolithic habitation in Albania has been evidenced in several open air sites which during that period were close to the Adriatic coastline and in cave sites. Mesolithic objects found in a cave near Xarrë include flint and jasper objects along with fossilised animal bones, while those discoveries at Mount Dajt comprise bone and stone tools similar to those of the Aurignacian culture. The Neolithic era in Albania began around 7000 BCE and is evidenced in finds which indicate domestication of sheep and goats and small-scale agriculture. A part of the Neolithic population may have been the same as the Mesolithic population of the southern Balkans like in the Konispol cave where the Mesolithic stratum co-exists with Pre-Pottery Neolithic finds. Cardium pottery culture appears in coastal Albania and across the Adriatic after 6500 BCE, while the settlements of the interior took part in the processes which formed Starčevo culture. The Albanian bitumen mines of Selenicë provide early evidence of bitumen exploitation in Europe, dating to Late Neolithic Albania (from 5000 BCE), when local communities used it as pigment for ceramic decoration, waterproofing, and adhesive for reparing broken vessels. The bitumen of Selenicë circulated towards eastern Albania from the early 5th millennium BCE. First evidence of its overseas trade export comes from Neolithic and Bronze Age southern Italy. The high quality bitumen of Selenicë has been exploited throughout all the historical ages since the Late Neolithic era until today. The Indo-Europeanization of Albania in the context of the IE-ization of the western Balkans began after 2800 BCE. The presence of the Early Bronze Age tumuli in the vicinity of later Apollonia dates to 2679±174 calBCE (2852-2505 calBCE). These burial mounds belong to the southern expression of the Adriatic-Ljubljana culture (related to later Cetina culture) which moved southwards along the Adriatic from the northern Balkans. The same community built similar mounds in Montenegro (Rakića Kuće) and northern Albania (Shtoj). The first archaeogenetic find related to the IE-ization of Albania involves a man with predominantly Yamnaya ancestry buried in a tumulus of northeastern Albania which dates to 2663–2472 calBCE. During the Middle Bronze Age, Cetina culture sites and finds appear in Albania. Cetina culture moved southwards across the Adriatic from the Cetina valley of Dalmatia. In Albania, Cetina finds are concentrated around southern Lake Shkodër and appear typically in tumulus cemeteries like in Shkrel and Shtoj and hillforts like Gajtan (Shkodër) as well as cave sites like Blaz, Nezir and Keputa (central Albania) and lake basin sites like Sovjan (southeastern Albania). The incorporated territory of Albania was historically inhabited by Indo-European peoples, amongst them numerous Illyrian and Epirote tribes. There were also several Greek colonies. The territory referred to as Illyria corresponded roughly to the area east of the Adriatic Sea in the Mediterranean Sea extending in the south to the mouth of the Vjosë. The first account of the Illyrian groups comes from Periplus of the Euxine Sea, a Greek text written in the 4th century BC. The Bryges were also present in central Albania, while the south was inhabited by the Epirote Chaonians, whose capital was at Phoenice. Other colonies such as Apollonia and Epidamnos were established by Greek city-states on the coast by the 7th century BC. The Illyrian Taulanti were a powerful Illyrian tribe that were among the earliest recorded tribes in the area. They lived in an area that corresponds much of present-day Albania. Together with the Dardanian ruler Cleitus, Glaucias, the ruler of the Taulantian kingdom, fought against Alexander the Great at the Battle of Pelium in 335 BC. As the time passed, the ruler of Ancient Macedonia, Cassander of Macedon captured Apollonia and crossed the river Genusus (Albanian: Shkumbin) in 314 BC. A few years later Glaucias laid siege to Apollonia and captured the Greek colony of Epidamnos. The Illyrian Ardiaei tribe, centred in Montenegro, ruled over most of the territory of northern Albania. Their Ardiaean Kingdom reached its greatest extent under King Agron, the son of Pleuratus II. Agron extended his rule over other neighbouring tribes as well. Following Agron's death in 230 BC, his wife, Teuta, inherited the Ardiaean kingdom. Teuta's forces extended their operations further southwards to the Ionian Sea. In 229 BC, Rome declared war on the kingdom for extensively plundering Roman ships. The war ended in Illyrian defeat in 227 BC. Teuta was eventually succeeded by Gentius in 181 BC. Gentius clashed with the Romans in 168 BC, initiating the Third Illyrian War. The conflict resulted in Roman conquest of the region by 167 BC. The Romans split the region into three administrative divisions. The Roman Empire was split in 395 upon the death of Theodosius I into an Eastern and Western Roman Empire in part because of the increasing pressure from threats during the Barbarian Invasions. From the 6th century into the 7th century, the Slavs crossed the Danube and largely absorbed the indigenous Greeks, Illyrians and Thracians in the Balkans; thus, the Illyrians were mentioned for the last time in historical records in the 7th century. In the 11th century, the Great Schism formalised the break of communion between the Eastern Orthodox and Western Catholic Church that is reflected in Albania through the emergence of a Catholic north and Orthodox south. The Albanian people inhabited the west of Lake Ochrida and the upper valley of River Shkumbin and established the Principality of Arbanon in 1190 under the leadership of Progon of Kruja. The realm was succeeded by his sons Gjin and Dhimitri. Upon the death of Dhimiter, the territory came under the rule of the Albanian-Greek Gregory Kamonas and subsequently under the Golem of Kruja. In the 13th century, the principality was dissolved. Arbanon is considered to be the first sketch of an Albanian state, that retained a semi-autonomous status as the western extremity of the Byzantine Empire, under the Byzantine Doukai of Epirus or Laskarids of Nicaea. Towards the end of the 12th and beginning of the 13th centuries, Serbs and Venetians started to take possession over the territory. The ethnogenesis of the Albanians is uncertain; however, the first undisputed mention of Albanians dates back in historical records from 1079 or 1080 in a work by Michael Attaliates, who referred to the Albanoi as having taken part in a revolt against Constantinople. At this point the Albanians were fully Christianised. After the dissolution of Arbanon, Charles of Anjou concluded an agreement with the Albanian rulers, promising to protect them and their ancient liberties. In 1272, he established the Kingdom of Albania and conquered regions back from the Despotate of Epirus. The kingdom claimed all of central Albania territory from Dyrrhachium along the Adriatic Sea coast down to Butrint. A catholic political structure was a basis for the papal plans of spreading Catholicism in the Balkan Peninsula. This plan found also the support of Helen of Anjou, a cousin of Charles of Anjou. Around 30 Catholic churches and monasteries were built during her rule mainly in northern Albania. Internal power struggles within the Byzantine Empire in the 14th century enabled Serbs' most powerful medieval ruler, Stefan Dusan, to establish a short-lived empire that included all of Albania except Durrës. In 1367, various Albanian rulers established the Despotate of Arta. During that time, several Albanian principalities were created, notably the Principality of Albania, Principality of Kastrioti, Lordship of Berat and Principality of Dukagjini. In the first half of the 15th century, the Ottoman Empire invaded most of Albania, and the League of Lezhë was held under Skanderbeg as a ruler, who became the national hero of the Albanian medieval history. With the fall of Constantinople, the Ottoman Empire continued an extended period of conquest and expansion with its borders going deep into Southeast Europe. They reached the Albanian Ionian Sea Coast in 1385 and erected their garrisons across Southern Albania in 1415 and then occupied most of Albania in 1431. Thousands of Albanians consequently fled to Western Europe, particularly to Calabria, Naples, Ragusa and Sicily, whereby others sought protection at the often inaccessible Mountains of Albania. The Albanians, as Christians, were considered an inferior class of people, and as such they were subjected to heavy taxes among others by the Devshirme system that allowed the Sultan to collect a requisite percentage of Christian adolescents from their families to compose the Janissary. The Ottoman conquest was also accompanied with the gradual process of Islamisation and the rapid construction of mosques. A prosperous and longstanding revolution erupted after the formation of the League of Lezhë until the fall of Shkodër under the leadership of Gjergj Kastrioti Skanderbeg, who consistently defeated major Ottoman armies led by Sultans Murad II and Mehmed II. Skanderbeg managed to unite several of the Albanian principalities, amongst them the Arianitis, Dukagjinis, Zaharias and Thopias, and establish a centralised authority over most of the non-conquered territories, becoming the Lord of Albania. The Ottoman Empire's expansion ground to a halt during the time that Skanderbeg's forces resisted, and he has been credited with being one of the main reasons for the delay of Ottoman expansion into Western Europe, giving the Italian principalities more time to better prepare for the Ottoman arrival. However, the failure of most European nations, with the exception of Naples, in giving him support, along with the failure of Pope Pius II's plans to organize a promised crusade against the Ottomans meant that none of Skanderbeg's victories permanently hindered the Ottomans from invading the Western Balkans. Despite his brilliance as a military leader, Skanderbeg's victories were only delaying the final conquests. The constant Ottoman invasions caused enormous destruction to Albania, greatly reducing the population and destroying flocks of livestock and crops. Besides surrender, there was no possible way Skanderbeg would be able to halt the Ottoman invasions despite his successes against them. His manpower and resources were insufficient, preventing him from expanding the war efforts and driving the Turks from the Albanian borders. Albania was therefore doomed to face an unending series of Ottoman attacks until it eventually fell years after his death. When the Ottomans were gaining a firm foothold in the region, Albanian towns were organised into four principal sanjaks. The government fostered trade by settling a sizeable Jewish colony of refugees fleeing persecution in Spain. The city of Vlorë saw passing through its ports imported merchandise from Europe such as velvets, cotton goods, mohairs, carpets, spices and leather from Bursa and Constantinople. Some citizens of Vlorë even had business associates throughout Europe. The phenomenon of Islamisation among the Albanians became primarily widespread from the 17th century and continued into the 18th century. Islam offered them equal opportunities and advancement within the Ottoman Empire. However, motives for conversion were, according to some scholars, diverse depending on the context though the lack of source material does not help when investigating such issues. Because of increasing suppression of Catholicism, most Catholic Albanians converted in the 17th century, while Orthodox Albanians followed suit mainly in the following century. Since the Albanians were seen as strategically important, they made up a significant proportion of the Ottoman military and bureaucracy. Many Muslim Albanians attained important political and military positions and culturally contributed to the broader Muslim world. Enjoying this privileged position, they held various high administrative positions with over two dozen Albanian Grand Viziers. Others included members of the prominent Köprülü family, Zagan Pasha, Muhammad Ali of Egypt and Ali Pasha of Tepelena. Furthermore, two sultans, Bayezid II and Mehmed III, both had mothers of Albanian origin. The Albanian Renaissance was a period with its roots in the late 18th century and continuing into the 19th century, during which the Albanian people gathered spiritual and intellectual strength for an independent cultural and political life within an independent nation. Modern Albanian culture flourished too, especially Albanian literature and arts, and was frequently linked to the influences of the Romanticism and Enlightenment principles. Prior to the rise of nationalism, Ottoman authorities suppressed any expression of national unity or conscience by the Albanian people. The victory of Russia over the Ottoman Empire following the Russian-Ottoman Wars resulted the execution of the Treaty of San Stefano which overlooked to assign Albanian-populated lands to the Slavic and Greek neighbours. However, the United Kingdom and Austro-Hungarian Empire consequently blocked the arrangement and caused the Treaty of Berlin. From this point, Albanians started to organise themselves with the goal to protect and unite the Albanian-populated lands into a unitary nation, leading to the formation of the League of Prizren. The league had initially the assistance of the Ottoman authorities whose position was based on the religious solidarity of Muslim people and landlords connected with the Ottoman administration. They favoured and protected the Muslim solidarity and called for defence of Muslim lands simultaneously constituting the reason for titling the league Committee of the Real Muslims. Approximately 300 Muslims participated in the assembly composed by delegates from Bosnia, the administrator of the Sanjak of Prizren as representatives of the central authorities and no delegates from Vilayet of Scutari. Signed by only 47 Muslim deputies, the league issued the Kararname that contained a proclamation that the people from northern Albania, Epirus and Bosnia and Herzegovina are willing to defend the territorial integrity of the Ottoman Empire by all possible means against the troops of Bulgaria, Serbia and Montenegro. Ottomans authorities cancelled their assistance when the league, under Abdyl Frashëri, became focused on working towards Albanian autonomy and requested merging four vilayets, including Kosovo, Shkodër, Monastir and Ioannina, into an unified vilayet, the Albanian Vilayet. The league used military force to prevent the annexing areas of Plav and Gusinje assigned to Montenegro. After several successful battles with Montenegrin troops, such as the Battle of Novšiće, the league was forced to retreat from their contested regions. The league was later defeated by the Ottoman army sent by the sultan. Albania declared independence from the Ottoman Empire on 28 November 1912, accompanied with the establishment of the Senate and Government by the Assembly of Vlorë on 4 December 1912. Its sovereignty was recognised by the Conference of London. On 29 July 1913, the Treaty of London delineated the borders of the country and its neighbours, leaving many Albanians outside Albania, predominantly partitioned between Montenegro, Serbia and Greece. Headquartered in Vlorë, the International Commission of Control was established on 15 October 1913 to take care of the administration of newly established Albania, until its own political institutions were in order. The International Gendarmerie was established as the first law enforcement agency of the Principality of Albania. In November, the first gendarmerie members arrived in the country. Prince of Albania Wilhelm of Wied (Princ Vilhelm Vidi) was selected as the first prince of the principality. On 7 March, he arrived in the provisional capital of Durrës and started to organise his government, appointing Turhan Pasha Përmeti to form the first Albanian cabinet. In November 1913, the Albanian pro-Ottoman forces had offered the throne of Albania to the Ottoman war Minister of Albanian origin, Ahmed Izzet Pasha. The pro-Ottoman peasants believed that the new regime was a tool of the six Christian Great Powers and local landowners, that owned half of the arable land. In February 1914, the Autonomous Republic of Northern Epirus was proclaimed in Gjirokastër by the local Greek population against incorporation to Albania. This initiative was short-lived, and in 1921 the southern provinces were incorporated into the Albanian Principality. Meanwhile, the revolt of Albanian peasants against the new Albanian regime erupted under the leadership of the group of Muslim clerics gathered around Essad Pasha Toptani, who proclaimed himself the saviour of Albania and Islam. In order to gain support of the Mirdita Catholic volunteers from the northern part of Albania, Prince Wied appointed their leader, Prênk Bibë Doda, to be the foreign minister of the Principality of Albania. In May and June 1914, the International Gendarmerie was joined by Isa Boletini and his men, mostly from Kosovo, and northern Mirdita Catholics, were defeated by the rebels who captured most of Central Albania by the end of August 1914. The regime of Prince Wied collapsed, and he left the country on 3 September 1914. The interwar period in Albania was marked by persistent economic and social difficulties, political instability and foreign interventions. After World War I, Albania lacked an established government and internationally recognised borders, rendering it vulnerable to neighboring entities such as Greece, Italy and Yugoslavia, all of which sought to expand their influence. This led to political uncertainty, highlighted in 1918 when the Congress of Durrës sought Paris Peace Conference protection but was denied, further complicating Albania's position on the international stage. Territorial tensions escalated as Yugoslavia, particularly Serbia, sought control of northern Albania, while Greece aimed dominance in southern Albania. The situation deteriorated in 1919 when the Serbs launched attacks on Albanian inhabitants, among others in Gusinje and Plav, resulting in massacres and large-scale displacement. Meanwhile, Italian influence continued to expand during this time driven by economic interests and political ambitions. Fan Noli, renowned for his idealism, assumed the role of Prime Minister in the year of 1924, with a vision to institute a Western-style constitutional government, abolish feudalism, counter Italian influence and enhance critical sectors including infrastructure, education and healthcare. He faced resistance from former allies, who had assisted in the removal of Zog from power, and struggled to secure the foreign aid to implement his agenda. Noli's decision to establish diplomatic ties with the Soviet Union, an adversary of the Serbian elite, ignited allegations of bolshevism from Belgrade. This, in turn, led to increased pressure from Italy and culminated in Zog's restoration to authority. Subsequently, in 1928, Zogu transitioned Albania from a republic to a monarchy that garnered backing from Fascist Italy, with Zog assuming the title of King Zog I. Key constitutional changes dissolved the Senate and established a unicameral National Assembly, while preserving Zog's authoritative powers. In 1939, Italy led by Benito Mussolini, launched a military invasion of Albania, resulting to the exile of Zog and the creation of an Italian protectorate. As World War II progressed, Italy aimed to expand its territorial dominion in the Balkans, including territorial claims on regions of Greece (Chameria), Macedonia, Montenegro and Kosovo. These ambitions laid the foundation of Greater Albania, which aimed to unite all areas with Albanian-majority populations into a single country. In 1943, as Italy's control declined, Nazi Germany assumed control of Albania, subjecting Albanians to forced labor, economic exploitation and repression under German rule. The tide shifted in 1944 when the Albanian partisan forces, under the leadership of Enver Hoxha and other communist leaders, successfully liberated Albania from German occupation. The establishment of the People's Republic of Albania with the leadership of Enver Hoxha characterised a significant epoch in the modern history of Albania. Hoxha's regime embraced Marxism–Leninism ideologies and implemented authoritarian policies, including the prohibition of religious practices, severe restrictions on travel and the abolition of private property rights. It was also defined by a persistent pattern of purges, extensive repression, instances of betrayal and a hostility towards external influences. Any form of opposition or resistance to his rule was met with expeditious and severe consequences, such as internal exile, extended imprisonment and execution. The regime confronted a multitude of challenges in Albania that encompassed widespread poverty, illiteracy, health crises and gender inequality. As a response, Hoxha initiated a modernisation initiative aimed at attaining economic and social liberation and transforming the country into an industrial society. The regime placed a high priority on the diversification of the economy through a programme of Soviet-style industrialisation, comprehensive infrastructure development such as the introduction of a transformative railway system, expansion of education and healthcare services, elimination of adult illiteracy and targeted advancements in areas such as women's rights. The diplomatic history of Albania during the communism was characterised by notable diplomatic conflicts. Initially aligned with Yugoslavia as a satellite state, the relationship deteriorated as Yugoslavia aimed to incorporate Albania within its territory. Subsequently, Albania established relations with the Soviet Union and engaged trade agreements with other Eastern European countries, but experienced disagreements over Soviet policies, leading to strained ties with Moscow and a diplomatic separation in 1961. Simultaneously, tensions with the West also heightened due to Albania's refusal to hold free elections and allegations of Western support for Anti-Communist uprisings. Albania's enduring partnership was with China as it sided with Beijing during the Sino-Soviet conflict, resulting in severed ties with the Soviet Union and withdrawal from the Warsaw Pact in response to the invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968. However, their relations stagnated in the 1970, prompting both sides to reassess their commitment, and Albania actively reduced its dependence on China. Under Hoxha's regime, Albania underwent a widespread campaign targeting religious clergy of various faiths, resulting in public persecution and executions, particularly targeting Muslims, Roman Catholics and Eastern Orthodox adherents. In 1946, religious estates underwent nationalisation, coinciding with the closure or transformation of religious institutions into various other purposes. The culmination occurred in 1976 when Albania attained the status of being the world's first constitutional atheist state. Under this regime, Albanians were forced to renounce their religious beliefs, adopt a secular way of life and embrace a socialist ideology. After four decades of communism paired with the revolutions of 1989, Albania witnessed a notable rise in political activism, particularly among the students, which ultimately lead to a transformation in the prevailing order. Subsequent to the attainment of widespread in the first multi-party elections of 1991, the communist party maintained a stronghold in the parliament until their defeat in the parliamentary elections of 1992 directed by the Democratic Party. Considerable economic and financial resources were devoted to pyramid schemes that were widely supported by the government. The schemes swept up somewhere between one sixth and one third of the population of the country. Despite the warnings of the International Monetary Fund, Sali Berisha defended the schemes as large investment firms, leading more people to redirect their remittances and sell their homes and cattle for cash to deposit in the schemes. The schemes began to collapse in late 1996, leading many of the investors to join initially peaceful protests against the government, requesting their money back. The protests turned violent in February 1997 as government forces responded by firing on the demonstrators. In March, the Police and Republican Guard deserted, leaving their armouries open. These were promptly emptied by militias and criminal gangs. The resulting civil war caused a wave of evacuations of foreign nationals and refugees. The crisis led both Aleksandër Meksi and Sali Berisha to resign from office in the wake of the general election. In April 1997, Operation Alba, a UN peacekeeping force led by Italy, entered the country with two goals exclusively to assist with the evacuation of expatriates and to secure the ground for international organisations. The main international organisation that was involved was the Western European Union's multinational Albanian Police element, which worked with the government to restructure the judicial system and simultaneously the Albanian police. Following the disintegration of the communist system, Albania embarked on an active path towards Westernisation with the ambition to obtain membership in the European Union (EU) and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). A notable milestone was reached in 2009 when the country attained membership in NATO, marking a pioneering achievement among the nations of Southeast Europe. In adherence to its vision for further integration into the EU, it formally applied for membership on 28 April 2009. Another milestone was reached on 24 June 2014, when the country was granted official candidate status. Edi Rama of the Socialist Party won both the 2013 and 2017 parliamentary elections. As Prime Minister, he implemented numerous reforms focused on modernising the economy, as well as democratising state institutions, including the country's judiciary and law enforcement. Unemployment has been steadily reduced, with Albania achieving the 4th lowest unemployment rate in the Balkans. Rama has also placed gender equality at the centre of his agenda; since 2017 almost 50% of the ministers are female, the largest number of women serving in the country's history. During the 2021 parliamentary elections, the ruling Socialist Party led by Edi Rama secured its third consecutive victory, winning nearly half of votes and enough seats in parliament to govern alone. On 26 November 2019, a 6.4 magnitude earthquake ravaged Albania with the epicentre positioned approximately 16 km (10 mi) southwest of the town of Mamurras. The tremor was felt in Tirana and in places as far away as Taranto, Italy, and Belgrade, Serbia, while the most affected areas were the coastal city of Durrës and the village of Kodër-Thumanë. Comprehensive response to the earthquake included substantial humanitarian aid from the Albanian diaspora and various countries around the world. On 9 March 2020, COVID-19 was confirmed to have spread to Albania. From March to June 2020, the government declared a state of emergency as a measure to limit the rapid spread of the pandemic in the country. The country's COVID-19 vaccination campaign started on 11 January 2021; however, as of 11 August 2021, the total number of vaccines administered so far in Albania amounts to 1,280,239 doses. With an area of 28,748 km2 (11,100 sq mi), Albania is situated along the Mediterranean Sea on the Balkan Peninsula in South and Southeast Europe. The country is bordered by the Adriatic Sea to the west, Montenegro to the northwest, Kosovo to the northeast, North Macedonia to the east, Greece to the south and the Ionian Sea to the southwest. It is positioned between latitudes 42° and 39° N, and longitudes 21° and 19° E. Geographic coordinates include Vërmosh at 42° 35' 34" northern latitude as the northernmost point, Konispol at 39° 40' 0" northern latitude as the southernmost point, Sazan at 19° 16' 50" eastern longitude as the westernmost point and Vërnik at 21° 1' 26" eastern longitude as the easternmost point. Mount Korab, rising at 2,764 m (9,068.24 ft) above the Adriatic, is the highest point, while the Mediterranean Sea, at 0 m (0.00 ft), is the lowest point. The country extends 148 km (92 mi) from east to west and around 340 km (211 mi) from north to south. Albania possesses a diverse and varied landscape with mountains and hills that traverse its territory in various directions. The country is home to extensive mountain ranges, including the Albanian Alps in the north, the Korab Mountains in the east, the Pindus Mountains in the southeast, the Ceraunian Mountains in the southwest and the Skanderbeg Mountains in the centre. In the northwest, the country boasts the remarkable Lake of Shkodër, recognised as the largest lake in Southern Europe. Towards the southeast, the Lake of Ohrid emerges, renowned as one of the world's oldest continuously existing lakes. Further to the south, the expanse includes the Large and Small Lake of Prespa, distinguished as some of the highest positioned lakes in the Balkans. Rivers rise mostly in the east of Albania and discharge into the Adriatic Sea but as well as into the Ionian Sea to a lesser extent. The longest river in the country, measured from its mouth to its source, is the Drin that starts at the confluence of its two headwaters, the Black and White Drin. Of particular concern is the Vjosë, which represents one of the last intact large river systems in Europe. The climate of Albania exhibits a distinguished level of variability and diversity due to the differences in latitude, longitude and altitude. Albania experiences a Mediterranean and Continental climate, characterised by the presence of four distinct seasons. According to the Köppen classification, Albania encompasses five primary climatic types, spanning from Mediterranean and subtropical in the western half to oceanic, continental and subarctic in the eastern half of the country. The coastal regions along the Adriatic and Ionian Seas in Albania are acknowledged as the warmest areas, while the northern and eastern regions encompassing the Albanian Alps and the Korab Mountains are recognised as the coldest areas in the country. Throughout the year, the average monthly temperatures fluctuate, ranging from −1 °C (30 °F) during the winter months to 21.8 °C (71.2 °F) in the summer months. Notably, the highest recorded temperature of 43.9 °C (111.0 °F) was observed in Kuçovë on 18 July 1973, while the lowest temperature of −29 °C (−20 °F) was recorded in Shtyllë, Librazhd on 9 January 2017. Albania receives most of the precipitation in winter months and less in summer months. The average precipitation is about 1,485 millimetres (58.5 inches). The mean annual precipitation ranges between 600 millimetres (24 inches) and 3,000 millimetres (120 inches) depending on geographical location. The northwestern and southeastern highlands receive the intenser amount of precipitation, whilst the northeastern and southwestern highlands as well as the Western Lowlands the more limited amount. The Albanian Alps in the far north of the country are considered to be among the most humid regions of Europe, receiving at least 3,100 mm (122.0 in) of rain annually. Four glaciers within these mountains were discovered at a relatively low altitude of 2,000 metres (6,600 ft), which is extremely rare for such a southerly latitude. A biodiversity hotspot, Albania possesses an exceptionally rich and contrasting biodiversity on account of its geographical location at the centre of the Mediterranean Sea and the great diversity in its climatic, geological and hydrological conditions. Because of remoteness, the mountains and hills of Albania are endowed with forests, trees and grasses that are essential to the lives for a wide variety of animals, among others for two of the most endangered species of the country, the lynx and brown bear, as well as the wildcat, grey wolf, red fox, golden jackal, Egyptian vulture and golden eagle, the latter constituting the national animal of the country. The estuaries, wetlands and lakes are extraordinarily important for the greater flamingo, pygmy cormorant and the extremely rare and perhaps the most iconic bird of the country, the dalmatian pelican. Of particular importance are the Mediterranean monk seal, loggerhead sea turtle and green sea turtle that use to nest on the country's coastal waters and shores. In terms of phytogeography, Albania is part of the Boreal Kingdom and stretches specifically within the Illyrian province of the Circumboreal and Mediterranean Region. Its territory can be subdivided into four terrestrial ecoregions of the Palearctic realm namely within the Illyrian deciduous forests, Balkan mixed forests, Pindus Mountains mixed forests and Dinaric Mountains mixed forests. Approximately 3,500 different species of plants can be found in Albania which refers principally to a Mediterranean and Eurasian character. The country maintains a vibrant tradition of herbal and medicinal practices. At the minimum 300 plants growing locally are used in the preparation of herbs and medicines. The trees within the forests are primarily fir, oak, beech and pine. Albania has been an active participant in numerous international agreements and conventions aimed at strengthing its commitment to the preservation and sustainable management of biological diversity. Since 1994, the country is a party to the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) and its associated Cartagena and Nagoya Protocols. To uphold these commitments, it has developed and implemented a comprehensive National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan (NBSAP). Furthermore, Albania has established a partnership with the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), advancing its conservation efforts on both national and international scales. Guided by the IUCN, the country has made substantial progress in the foundation of protected areas within its boundaries, encompassing 12 national parks among others Butrint, Karaburun-Sazan, Llogara, Prespa and Vjosa. As a signatory to the Ramsar Convention, Albania has granted special recognition upon four wetlands, designating them as Wetlands of International Importance, including Buna-Shkodër, Butrint, Karavasta and Prespa. The country's dedication to protection extends further into the sphere of UNESCO's World Network of Biosphere Reserves, operating within the framework of the Man and the Biosphere Programme, evidenced by its engagement in the Ohrid-Prespa Transboundary Biosphere Reserve. Furthermore, Albania is host to two natural World Heritage Sites, which encompass the Ohrid region and both the Gashi River and Rrajca as part of Ancient and Primeval Beech Forests of the Carpathians and Other Regions of Europe. The protected areas of Albania are areas designated and managed by the Albanian government. There are 12 national parks, 4 ramsar sites, 1 biosphere reserve and 786 other types of conservation reserves in Albania. Located in the north, the Albanian Alps National Park, comprising the former Theth National Park and Valbonë Valley National Park, is surrounded amidst the towering peaks of the Albanian Alps. In the east, portions of the rugged Korab, Nemërçka and Shebenik Mountains are conserved within the boundaries of Fir of Hotovë-Dangëlli National Park, Shebenik National Park and Prespa National Park, with the latter encompassing Albania's share of the Great and Small Lakes of Prespa. To the south, the Ceraunian Mountains define the Albanian Ionian Sea Coast, shaping the landscape of Llogara National Park, which extends into the Karaburun Peninsula, forming the Karaburun-Sazan Marine Park. Further southward lies Butrint National Park, occupying a peninsula surrounded by the Lake of Butrint and the Channel of Vivari. In the west, stretching along the Albanian Adriatic Sea Coast, the Divjakë-Karavasta National Park boasts the extensive Lagoon of Karavasta, one of the largest lagoon systems in the Mediterranean Sea. Notably, Europe's first wild river national park, Vjosa National Park, safeguards the Vjosa River and its primary tributaries, which originates in the Pindus Mountains and flows to the Adriatic Sea. Dajti Mountain National Park, Lurë-Dejë Mountain National Park and Tomorr Mountain National Park protect the mountainous terrain of the center of Albania, including the Tomorr and Skanderbeg Mountains. Environmental issues in Albania notably encompass air and water pollution, climate change impacts, waste management shortcomings, biodiversity loss and imperative for nature conservation. Climate change is predicted to exert significant impacts on the quality of life in Albania. The country is recognised as vulnerable to climate change impacts, ranked 79 among 181 countries in the Notre Dame Global Adaptation Index of 2020. Factors that account for the country's vulnerability to climate change risks include geological and hydrological hazards, including earthquakes, flooding, fires, landslides, torrential rains, river and coastal erosion. As a party to the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement, Albania is committed to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 45% and achieve carbon neutrality by 2050 which, along with national policies, will help to mitigate the impacts of the climate change. The country has a moderate and improving performance in the Environmental Performance Index with an overall ranking of 62 out of 180 countries in 2022. Albania's ranking has, however, decreased since its highest placement at position 15 in the Environmental Performance Index of 2012. In 2019, Albania had a Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 6.77 from 10, ranking it 64th globally out of 172 countries. Since declaring independence in 1912, Albania has experienced a significant political transformation, traversing through distinct periods that included a monarchical rule, a communist regime and the eventual establishment of a democratic order. In 1998, Albania transitioned into a sovereign parliamentary constitutional republic, marking a fundamental milestone in its political evolution. Its governance structure operates under a constitution that serves as the principal document of the country. The constitution is grounded in the principle of the separation of powers, with three arms of government that encompass the legislative embodied in the Parliament, the executive led by the President as the ceremonial head of state and the Prime Minister as the functional head of government, and the judiciary with a hierarchy of courts, including the constitutional and supreme courts as well as multiple appeal and administrative courts. Albania's legal system is structured to protect the political rights of its people, regardless of their ethnic, linguistic, racial or religious affiliations. Despite these principles, there are significant human rights concerns in Albania that demand attention. These concerns include issues related to the independence of the judiciary, the absence of a free media sector and the enduring problem of corruption within various governmental bodies, law enforcement agencies and other institutions. However, as Albania pursues its path towards European Union (EU) membership, active efforts are being made to achieve substantial improvements in these areas to align with EU criteria and standards. Emerging from decades of isolation during the communism, Albania has adopted a foreign policy orientation centered on active cooperation and engagement in international affairs. At the core of Albania's foreign policies lie a set of objectives, which encompass the commitment to protect its sovereignty and territorial integrity, the cultivation of diplomatic ties with other countries, advocating for international recognition of Kosovo, addressing the concerns related to the expulsion of Cham Albanians, pursuing Euro-Atlantic integration and protecting the rights of the Albanians in Kosovo, Greece, Italy, Montenegro, North Macedonia, Serbia and the diaspora. The external affairs of Albania underscore the country's dedication to regional stability and integration into major international institutions. Albania became a member of the United Nations (UN) in 1955, shortly after emerging from a period of isolation during the communist era. The country reached a major achievement in its foreign policy by securing membership in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) in 2009. Since obtaining candidate status in 2014, the country has also embarked on a comprehensive reform agenda to align itself with European Union (EU) accession standards, with the objective of becoming an EU member state. Albania and Kosovo maintain a fraternal relationship strengthened by their substantial cultural, ethnical and historical ties. Both countries foster enduring diplomatic ties, with Albania actively supporting Kosovo's development and international integration efforts. Its fundamental contribution to Kosovo's path to independence is underscored by its early recognition of Kosovo's sovereignty in 2008. Furthermore, both governments hold annual joint meetings, displayed by the inaugural meeting in 2014, which serves as an official platform to enhance bilateral cooperation and reinforce their joint commitment to policies that promote the stability and prosperity of the broader Albanian region. The Albanian Armed Forces consist of Land, Air and Naval Forces and constitute the military and paramilitary forces of the country. They are led by a commander-in-chief under the supervision of the Ministry of Defence and by the President as the supreme commander during wartime. However, in times of peace its powers are executed through the Prime Minister and the Defence Minister. The chief purpose of the armed forces of Albania is the defence of the independence, the sovereignty and the territorial integrity of the country, as well as the participation in humanitarian, combat, non-combat and peace support operations. Military service is voluntary since 2010 with the age of 19 being the legal minimum age for the duty. Albania has committed to increase the participations in multinational operations. Since the fall of communism, the country has participated in six international missions but only one United Nations mission in Georgia, where it sent three military observers. Since February 2008, Albania has participated officially in NATO's Operation Active Endeavor in the Mediterranean Sea. It was invited to join NATO on 3 April 2008, and it became a full member on 2 April 2009. Albania reduced the number of active troops from 65,000 in 1988 to 14,500 in 2009. The military now consists mainly of a small fleet of aircraft and sea vessels. Increasing the military budget was one of the most important conditions for NATO integration. As of 1996 military spending was an estimated 1.5% of the country's GDP, only to peak in 2009 at 2% and fall again to 1.5%. Albania is defined within a territorial area of 28,748 km2 (11,100 sq mi) in the Balkan Peninsula. It is informally divided into three regions, the Northern, Central and Southern Regions. Since its Declaration of Independence in 1912, Albania has reformed its internal organization 21 times. Presently, the primary administrative units are the twelve constituent counties (qarqe/qarqet), which hold equal status under the law. Counties had previously been used in the 1950s and were recreated on 31 July 2000 to unify the 36 districts (rrathë/rrathët) of that time. The largest county in Albania by population is Tirana County with over 800,000 people. The smallest county, by population, is Gjirokastër County with over 70,000 people. The largest in the county, by area, is Korçë County encompassing 3,711 square kilometres (1,433 sq mi) of the southeast of Albania. The smallest county, by area, is Durrës County with an area of 766 square kilometres (296 sq mi) in the west of Albania. The counties are made up of 61 second-level divisions known as municipalities (bashki/bashkia). The municipalities are the first level of local governance, responsible for local needs and law enforcement. They unified and simplified the previous system of urban and rural municipalities or communes (komuna/komunat) in 2015. For smaller issues of local government, the municipalities are organized into 373 administrative units (njësia/njësitë administrative). There are also 2980 villages (fshatra/fshatrat), neighborhoods or wards (lagje/lagjet), and localities (lokalitete/lokalitetet) previously used as administrative units. Shkodër Kukës Lezhë Dibër Durrës Tirana Elbasan Fier Berat Korçë Gjirokastër Vlorë The transition from a socialist planned economy to a capitalist mixed economy in Albania has been largely successful. The country has a developing mixed economy classified by the World Bank as an upper-middle income economy. In 2016, it had the fourth lowest unemployment rate in the Balkans with an estimated value of 14.7%. Its largest trading partners are Italy, Greece, China, Spain, Kosovo and the United States. The lek (ALL) is the country's currency and is pegged at approximately 132.51 lek per euro. The cities of Tirana and Durrës constitute the economic and financial heart of Albania due to their high population, modern infrastructure and strategic geographical location. The country's most important infrastructure facilities take course through both of the cities, connecting the north to the south as well as the west to the east. Among the largest companies are the petroleum Taçi Oil, Albpetrol, ARMO and Kastrati, the mineral AlbChrome, the cement Antea, the investment BALFIN Group and the technology Albtelecom, Vodafone, Telekom Albania and others. In 2012, Albania's GDP per capita stood at 30% of the European Union average, while GDP (PPP) per capita was 35%. Albania was one of three countries in Europe to record an economic growth in the first quarter of 2010 after the global financial crisis. The International Monetary Fund predicted 2.6% growth for Albania in 2010 and 3.2% in 2011. According to Forbes, as of December 2016[update], the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) was growing at 2.8%. The country had a trade balance of −9.7% and unemployment rate of 14.7%. Foreign direct investment has increased significantly in recent years as the government has embarked on an ambitious programme to improve the business climate through fiscal and legislative reforms. Agriculture in the country is based on small to medium-sized family-owned dispersed units. It remains a significant sector of the economy of Albania. It employs 41% of the population, and about 24.31% of the land is used for agricultural purposes. One of the earliest farming sites in Europe has been found in the southeast of the country. As part of the pre-accession process of Albania to the European Union, farmers are being aided through IPA funds to improve Albanian agriculture standards. Albania produces significant amounts of fruits (apples, olives, grapes, oranges, lemons, apricots, peaches, cherries, figs, sour cherries, plums, and strawberries), vegetables (potatoes, tomatoes, maize, onions, and wheat), sugar beets, tobacco, meat, honey, dairy products, traditional medicine and aromatic plants. Further, the country is a worldwide significant producer of salvia, rosemary and yellow gentian. The country's proximity to the Ionian Sea and the Adriatic Sea give the underdeveloped fishing industry great potential. The World Bank and European Community economists report that, Albania's fishing industry has good potential to generate export earnings because prices in the nearby Greek and Italian markets are many times higher than those in the Albanian market. The fish available off the coasts of the country are carp, trout, sea bream, mussels and crustaceans. Albania has one of Europe's longest histories of viticulture. Today's region was one of the few places where vine was naturally grown during the ice age. The oldest found seeds in the region are 4,000 to 6,000 years old. In 2009, the nation produced an estimated 17,500 tonnes of wine. The secondary sector of Albania has undergone many changes and diversification since the collapse of the communist regime in the country. It is very diversified, from electronics, manufacturing, textiles, to food, cement, mining, and energy. The Antea Cement plant in Fushë-Krujë is considered one of the largest industrial greenfield investments in the country. Albanian oil and gas represents of the most promising, albeit strictly regulated, sectors of its economy. Albania has the second largest oil deposits in the Balkan peninsula after Romania, and the largest oil reserves in Europe. The Albpetrol company is owned by the Albanian state and monitors the state petroleum agreements in the country. The textile industry has seen an extensive expansion by approaching companies from the European Union (EU) in Albania. According to the Institute of Statistics (INSTAT) as of 2016[update], the textile production marked an annual growth of 5.3% and an annual turnover of around 1.5 billion euros. Albania is a significant minerals producer and is ranked among the world's leading chromium producers and exporters. The nation is also a notable producer of copper, nickel and coal. The Batra mine, Bulqizë mine, and Thekna mine are among the most recognised Albanian mines that are still in operation. The tertiary sector represents the fastest growing sector of the country's economy. 36% of the population work in the service sector which contributes to 65% of the country's GDP. Ever since the end of the 20th century, the banking industry is a major component of the tertiary sector and remains in good conditions overall due to privatisation and the commendable monetary policy. Previously one of the most isolated and controlled countries in the world, telecommunication industry represents nowadays another major contributor to the sector. It developed largely through privatisation and subsequent investment by both domestic and foreign investors. Eagle, Vodafone and Telekom Albania are the leading telecommunications service providers in the country. Tourism is recognised as an industry of national importance and has been steadily increasing since the beginnings of the 21st century. It directly accounted for 8.4% of GDP in 2016 though including indirect contributions pushes the proportion to 26%. In the same year, the country received approximately 4.74 million visitors mostly from across Europe and the United States as well. The increase of foreign visitors has been dramatic. Albania had only 500,000 visitors in 2005, while in 2012 had an estimated 4.2 million, an increase of 740 percent in only 7 years. In 2015, tourism in summer increased by 25 percent in contrast the previous year according to the country's tourism agency. In 2011, Lonely Planet named as a top travel destination,[failed verification] while The New York Times placed Albania as number 4 global touristic destination in 2014. The bulk of the tourist industry is concentrated along the Adriatic and Ionian Sea in the west of the country. However, the Albanian Riviera in the southwest has the most scenic and pristine beaches; its coastline has a considerable length of 446 kilometres (277 miles). The coast has a particular character because it is rich in varieties of virgin beaches, capes, coves, covered bays, lagoons, small gravel beaches, sea caves and many landforms. Some parts of this seaside are very clean ecologically, which represent in this prospective unexplored areas, which are very rare within the Mediterranean. Other attractions include the mountainous areas such as the Albanian Alps, Ceraunian Mountains and Korab Mountains but also the historical cities of Berat, Durrës, Gjirokastër, Sarandë, Shkodër and Korçë. Transportation in Albania is managed within the functions of the Ministry of Infrastructure and Energy and entities such as the Albanian Road Authority (ARRSH), responsible for the construction and maintenance of the highways and motorways in Albania, as well as the Albanian Aviation Authority (AAC), with the responsibility of coordinating civil aviation and airports in the country. The international airport of Tirana is the premier air gateway to the country, and is also the principal hub for Albania's national flag carrier airline, Air Albania. The airport carried more than 3.3 million passengers in 2019 with connections to many destinations in other countries around Europe, Africa and Asia. The country plans to progressively increase the number of airports especially in the south with possible locations in Sarandë, Gjirokastër and Vlorë. The highways and motorways in Albania are properly maintained and often still under construction and renovation. The Autostrada 1 (A1) represents an integral transportation corridor in Albania and the longest motorway of the country. It will prospectively link Durrës on the Adriatic Sea across Pristina in Kosovo with the Pan-European Corridor X in Serbia. The Autostrada 2 (A2) is part of the Adriatic–Ionian Corridor as well as the Pan-European Corridor VIII and connects Fier with Vlorë. The Autostrada 3 (A3) is currently under construction and will connect, after its completion, Tirana and Elbasan with the Pan-European Corridor VIII. When all three corridors are completed, Albania will have an estimated 759 kilometres (472 mi) of highway linking it with all of its neighbouring countries. Durrës is the busiest and largest seaport in the country, followed by Vlorë, Shëngjin and Sarandë. As of 2014[update], it is as one of the largest passenger ports on the Adriatic Sea with annual passenger volume of approximately 1.5 million. The principal ports serve a system of ferries connecting Albania with numerous islands and coastal cities in Croatia, Greece and Italy. The rail network is administered by the national railway company Hekurudha Shqiptare which was extensively promoted by the dictator Enver Hoxha. There has been a considerable increase in private car ownership and bus usage while rail use decreased since the end of communism. However, a new railway line from Tirana and its airport to Durrës is currently planned. The specific location of this railway, connecting the most populated urban areas in Albania, makes it an important economic development project. In the country, education is secular, free, compulsory and based on three levels of education segmented in primary, secondary and tertiary education. The academic year is apportioned into two semesters beginning in September or October, and ending in June or July. Albanian serves as the primary language of instruction in all academic institutions across the country. The study of a first foreign language is mandatory and taught most often at elementary and bilingual schools. The languages taught in schools are English, Italian, French and German. The country has a school life expectancy of 16 years and a literacy rate of 98.7%, with 99.2% for males and 98.3% for females. Compulsory primary education is divided into two levels, elementary and secondary school, from grade one to five and six to nine, respectively. Pupils are required to attend school from the age of six until they turn 16. Upon successful completion of primary education, all pupils are entitled to attend high schools with specialising in any particular field including arts, sports, languages, sciences or technology. The country's tertiary education, an optional stage of formal learning following secondary education, has undergone a thorough reformation and restructuring in compliance with the principles of the Bologna Process. There is a significant number of private and public institutions of higher education well dispersed in the major cities of Albania. Studies in tertiary education are organised at three successive levels which include the bachelor, master and doctorate. The constitution of Albania guarantees equal, free and universal health care for all its citizens. The health care system of the country is currently organised in three levels, among others primary, secondary and tertiary healthcare, and is in a process of modernisation and development. The life expectancy at birth in Albania is at 77.8 years and ranks 37th in the world outperforming several developed countries. The average healthy life expectancy is at 68.8 years and ranks as well 37th in the world. The country's infant mortality rate is estimated at 12 per 1,000 live births in 2015. In 2000, the country had the 55th best healthcare performance in the world, as defined by the World Health Organization. Cardiovascular disease remain the principal cause of death in the country accounting 52% of total deaths. Accidents, injuries, malignant and respiratory diseases are other primary causes of death. Neuropsychiatric disease has also increased due to recent demographic, social and economic changes in the country. In 2009, the country had a fruit and vegetable supply of 886 grams per capita per day, the fifth highest supply in Europe. In comparison to other developed and developing countries, Albania has a relatively low rate of obesity probably thanks to the health benefits of the Mediterranean diet. According to World Health Organization data from 2016, 21.7% of adults in the country are clinically overweight, with a Body mass index (BMI) score of 25 or more. Due to its geographical location and natural resources, Albania has a wide variety of energy resources ranging from gas, oil and coal, to wind, solar and water as well as other renewable sources. According to the 2023 Energy Transition Index (ETI) published by the World Economic Forum, the country was ranked at position number 21 globally highlighting the notable progress in its energy transition agenda. Currently, the electricity generation sector of Albania is dependent on hydroelectricity simultaneously ranking fifth in the world in percentage terms. The Drin, located in the north, hosts four hydroelectric power stations, including Fierza, Koman, Skavica and Vau i Dejës. Two other power stations, such as the Banjë and Moglicë, are located along the Devoll in the south. Albania has considerable deposits of oil. It has the 10th largest oil reserves in Europe and the 58th in the world. The country's main petroleum deposits are located around the Albanian Adriatic Sea Coast and Myzeqe Plain within the Western Lowlands, where the country's largest reserve is located. Patos-Marinza, also located within the area, is the largest onshore oil field in Europe. The Trans Adriatic Pipeline (TAP), part of the planned Southern Gas Corridor, runs for 215 kilometres (134 miles) across Albania's territory before entering the Albanian Adriatic Sea Coast approximately 17 kilometres (11 miles) northwest of Fier. The water resources of Albania are particularly abundant in all the regions of the country and comprise lakes, rivers, springs and groundwater aquifers. The country's available average quantity of fresh water is estimated at 129.7 cubic metres (4,580 cubic feet) per inhabitant per year, which is one of the highest rates in Europe. According to the data presented by the Joint Monitoring Programme for Water Supply and Sanitation (JMP) in 2015, about 93% of the country's total population had access to improved sanitation. The freedom of press and speech, and the right to free expression is guaranteed in the constitution of Albania. Albania was ranked 84th on the Press Freedom Index of 2020 compiled by the Reporters Without Borders, with its score steadily declining since 2003. Nevertheless, in the 2020 report of Freedom in the World, the Freedom House classified the freedoms of press and speech in Albania as partly free from political interference and manipulation. Radio Televizioni Shqiptar (RTSH) is the national broadcaster corporation of Albania operating numerous television and radio stations in the country. The three major private broadcaster corporations are Top Channel, Televizioni Klan and Vizion Plus whose content are distributed throughout Albania and beyond its territory in Kosovo and other Albanian-speaking territories. Albanian cinema has its roots in the 20th century and developed after the country's declaration of independence. The first movie theater exclusively devoted to showing motion pictures was built in 1912 in Shkodër. During the Peoples Republic of Albania, Albanian cinema developed rapidly with the inauguration of the Kinostudio Shqipëria e Re in Tirana. In 1953, the Albanian-Soviet epic film, the Great Warrior Skanderbeg, was released chronicling the life and fight of the medieval Albanian hero Skanderbeg. It went on to win the international prize at the 1954 Cannes Film Festival. In 2003, the Tirana International Film Festival was established, the largest film festival in the country. The Durrës Amphitheatre is host to the Durrës International Film Festival, the second largest film festival. After the fall of communism in 1991, human resources in sciences and technology in Albania have drastically decreased. As of various reports, during 1991 to 2005 approximately 50% of the professors and scientists of the universities and science institutions in the country have left Albania. In 2009, the government approved the National Strategy for Science, Technology and Innovation in Albania covering the period 2009 to 2015. It aims to triple public spending on research and development to 0.6% of GDP and augment the share of GDE from foreign sources, including the framework programmes for research of the European Union, to the point where it covers 40% of research spending, among others. Albania was ranked 83rd in the Global Innovation Index in 2023. Telecommunication represents one of the fastest growing and dynamic sectors in Albania. Vodafone Albania, Telekom Albania and Albtelecom are the three large providers of mobile and internet in Albania. As of the Electronic and Postal Communications Authority (AKEP) in 2018, the country had approximately 2.7 million active mobile users with almost 1.8 million active broadband subscribers. Vodafone Albania alone served more than 931,000 mobile users, Telekom Albania had about 605,000 users and Albtelecom had more than 272,000 users. In January 2023, Albania launched its first two satellites, Albania 1 and Albania 2, into orbit, in what was regarded as a milestone effort in monitoring the country's territory and identifying illegal activities. Albanian-American engineer Mira Murati, the Chief Technology Officer of research organization OpenAI, played a substantial role in the development and launch of artificial intelligence services such as ChatGPT, Codex and DALL-E. In December 2023, Prime Minister Edi Rama announced plans for collaboration between the Albanian government and ChatGPT, facilitated by discussions with Murati. Rama emphasised the intention to streamline the alignment of Albanian laws with the regulations of the European Union, aiming to reduce costs associated with translation and legal services. As defined by the Institute of Statistics (INSTAT), the population of Albania was estimated in 2020 at 2,845,955. The country's total fertility rate of 1.51 children born per woman is one of the lowest in the world. Its population density stands at 259 inhabitants per square kilometre. The overall life expectancy at birth is 78.5 years; 75.8 years for males and 81.4 years for females. The country is the 8th most populous country in the Balkans and ranks as the 137th most populous country in the world. The country's population rose steadily from 2.5 million in 1979 until 1989, when it peaked at 3.1 million. Since then, the population has continually decreased every year. It is forecast that the population will continue shrinking for the next decade at least, depending on the actual birth rate and the level of net migration. In 2022, over 46,000 people migrated out of Albania, a 10% increase over the previous year. The explanation for the recent population decrease is the fall of communism in Albania in the late twentieth century. That period was marked by economic mass emigration from Albania to Greece, Italy and the United States. The migration affected the country's internal population distribution. It decreased particularly in the north and south, while it increased in the centre within the cities of Tirana and Durrës.[citation needed] Migration abroad has continued in recent years, particularly of the young and educated. As much as a third of those born in the country's borders now live outside of it, making Albania one of the countries with the highest rate of outmigration relative to its population in the world. In 2022 the birth rate was 20% lower than in 2021, largely due to emigration of people of childbearing age. About 53.4% of the country's population lives in cities. The three largest counties by population account for half of the total population. Almost 30% of the total population is found in Tirana County followed by Fier County with 11% and Durrës County with 10%. Over one million people are concentrated in Tirana and Durrës, making it the largest urban area in Albania. Tirana is one of largest cities in the Balkan Peninsula and ranks seventh with a population about 400,000. Albania recognises nine national or cultural minorities: Aromanian, Greek, Macedonian, Montenegrin, Serb, Roma, Egyptian, Bosnian and Bulgarian peoples. Other Albanian minorities are the Gorani people and Jews. Contrary to official statistics that show an over 97 per cent Albanian majority in the country, minority groups (such as Greeks, Macedonians, Montenegrins, Roma and Aromanians) have frequently disputed the official numbers, asserting a higher percentage of the country's population. According to the disputed 2011 census, ethnic affiliation was as follows: Albanians 2,312,356 (82.6% of the total), Greeks 24,243 (0.9%), Macedonians 5,512 (0.2%), Montenegrins 366 (0.01%), Aromanians 8,266 (0.30%), Romani 8,301 (0.3%), Balkan Egyptians 3,368 (0.1%), other ethnicities 2,644 (0.1%), no declared ethnicity 390,938 (14.0%), and not relevant 44,144 (1.6%). On the quality of the specific data the Advisory Committee on the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities stated that "the results of the census should be viewed with the utmost caution and calls on the authorities not to rely exclusively on the data on nationality collected during the census in determining its policy on the protection of national minorities". Regarding the Greeks, estimates vary between 60,000 and 300,000 ethnic Greeks in Albania. According to Ian Jeffries, most Western sources put the number at around 200,000. The 300,000 mark is supported by Greek government as well. The CIA World Factbook estimates the Greek minority to constitute 0.9% of the population. The US State Department estimates that Greeks make up 1.17%, and other minorities 0.23%, of the population. The latter questions the validity of the census data about the Greek minority, as measurements have been affected by boycott. The official language of the country is Albanian which is spoken by the vast majority of the country's population. Its standard spoken and written form is revised and merged from the two main dialects, Gheg and Tosk, though it is notably based more on the Tosk dialect. The Shkumbin river is the rough dividing line between the two dialects. Among minority languages, Greek is the second most-spoken language in the country, with 0.5 to 3% of the population speaking it as first language, mainly in the country's south where its speakers are concentrated. Other languages spoken by ethnic minorities in Albania include Aromanian, Serbian, Macedonian, Bosnian, Bulgarian, Gorani, and Roma. Macedonian is official in the Pustec Municipality in East Albania. According to the 2011 population census, 2,765,610 or 98.8% of the population declared Albanian as their mother tongue. Because of large migration flows from Albania, over half of Albanians during their life learn a second language. The main foreign language known is English with 40.0%, followed by Italian with 27.8% and Greek with 22.9%. The English speakers were mostly young people, the knowledge of Italian is stable in every age group, while there is a decrease of the speakers of Greek in the youngest group. Among young people aged 25 or less, English, German and Turkish have seen rising interest after 2000. Italian and French have had a stable interest, while Greek has lost much of its previous interest. The trends are linked with cultural and economic factors. Young people have shown a growing interest in the German language in recent years.[citation needed] Some of them go to Germany for studying or various experiences. Albania and Germany have agreements for cooperating in helping young people of the two countries know both cultures better. Due to a sharp rise in economic relations with Turkey, interest in learning Turkish, in particular among young people, has been growing on a yearly basis. Albania is a secular and religiously diverse country with no official religion and thus, freedom of religion, belief and conscience are guaranteed under the country's constitution. As of the 2011 census, there were 1,587,608 (56.7%) Sunni Muslims, 280,921 (10.03%) Catholics, 188,992 (6.75%) Eastern Orthodox, 58,628 (2.09%) Bektashi Muslims, 3,797 (0.14%) Evangelicals, 1,919 (0.07%) other Christians, 602 (0.02%) of other religions and 153,630 (5.49%) believers without denomination in Albania. 69,995 people (2.5%) were irreligious while 386,024 (13.79%) did not declare their religion. Albania is nevertheless ranked among the least religious countries in the world. Religion constitute an important role in the lives of only 39% of the country's population. In another report, 56% considered themselves religious, 30% considered themselves non-religious, while 9% defined themselves as convinced atheists. 80% believed in God. The preliminary results of the 2011 census seemed to give widely different results, with 70% of respondents refusing to declare belief in any of the listed faiths. The Albanian Orthodox Church officially refused to recognize the results, claiming that 24% of the total population adhered to its faith. Some Muslim Community officials expressed unhappiness with the data claiming that many Muslims were not counted and that the number of adherents numbered some 70% of the Albanian population. The Albanian Catholic Bishops Conference also cast doubts on the census, complaining that many of its believers were not contacted. The Muslim Albanians are spread throughout the country. Orthodox and Bektashis are mostly found in the south, whereas Catholics mainly live in the north. In 2008, there were 694 Catholic churches and 425 orthodox churches, 568 mosques and 70 bektashi tekkes in the country. During modern times, the Albanian republican, monarchic and later communist regimes followed a systematic policy of separating religion from official functions and cultural life. The country has never had an official religion either as a republic or as a kingdom. In the 20th century, the clergy of all faiths was weakened under the monarchy and ultimately eradicated during the 1950s and 1960s, under the state policy of obliterating all organised religion from the territories of Albania. The communist regime persecuted and suppressed religious observance and institutions and entirely banned religion. The country was then officially declared to be the world's first atheist state. Religious freedom has returned, however, since the end of communism. Islam survived communist era persecution and reemerged in the modern era as a practised religion in Albania. Some smaller Christian sects in Albania include Evangelicals and several Protestant communities including Seventh-day Adventist Church, Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and Jehovah's Witnesses. The first recorded Protestant of Albania was Said Toptani, who travelled around Europe and returned to Tirana in 1853, where he preached Protestantism. The first evangelical Protestants appeared in the 19th century and the Evangelical Alliance was founded in 1892. Nowadays, it has 160 member congregations from different Protestant denominations. Following mass emigration to Israel after the fall of communism, there are only 200 Albanian Jews left in the country. The red and black national colours are displayed on the flag of Albania that is adorned with a double-headed eagle as the foremost recognised national symbol of Albania. With the black eagle portraying bravery and strength, the red field symbolises the fortitude and sacrifices of the Albanian people. The eagle is linked with the legacy of the national hero Gjergj Kastrioti, renowned as Skanderbeg, who led a prosperous resistance movement against Ottoman rule. Rooted in the Middle Ages, it emerged as a heraldic symbol in the Principality of Arbër and among notable Albanian dynasties such as the Dukagjini, Kastrioti, Muzaka and Thopia clans. Amid the Albanian Renaissance, marking the resurgence of Albanian national identity and aspirations for independence, the Albanian eagle regained its prominence. Its importance reached its culmination with Albania's declaration of independence in 1912, when Ismail Qemali raised it as the national flag in Vlorë. The coat of arms of Albania is an adaptation of the flag of Albania and the seal of Skanderbeg. The coat comprises the black double-headed eagle positioned at the center of a red field. Above the eagle, it carries the helmet of Skanderbeg that is crowned with the head of a golden horned goat. Ti Shqipëri, më jep nder, më jep emrin Shqipëtar, which translates to "You Albania, give me honor, give me the name Albanian", is the national motto of Albania. It finds its foundation in the legacy of national poet Naim Frashëri, who held a renowned role during the Albanian Renaissance. The national anthem of Albania, "Himni i Flamurit", was composed by Asdreni and adopted as such following Albania's independence in 1912. Albanian traditional clothing, with its contrasting variations for the northern Gheg and southern Tosk Albanians, is a testament to Albania's history, cultural diversity and ethnic identity. Gheg men wear a light-colored shirt paired with wide loose-fitting trousers referred to as the Tirq. These trousers are securely fastened by a wide woven belt, the Brez. An integral component of their costume is the Xhamadan, a woolen red velvet vest adorned with folkloric motifs and gold patterns. They also wear a distinctive dome-shaped hat known as the Qeleshe, crafted from wool, with its origins tracing back to the Illyrians. Conversely, Tosk men opt for the Fustanella, a knee-length garment designated as the national costume, typically white with pleats, accompanied by a white shirt. They also wear a beige or dark blue Xhamadan reminiscent of the Gheg attire. To complete their attire, men wear knee-high socks referred to as Çorape and leather shoes known as Opinga. The attire of Gheg and Tosk women is renowned for its rich palette of colors and intricate filigree detailing, displayed across various components including ear ornaments, finger rings, necklaces, belt buckles and buttons. Key components include a long, light-toned shirt paired with an apron, often accompanied by a woolen or felt mantle referred to as the Xhoka. Additional upper garments, such as the Dollama or Mintan, may be layered, along with a headscarf known as Kapica or Shall. A distinctive variation incorporates a pair of aprons, including the Pështjellak at the rear and the Paranik at the front. Integral to the traditional attire of Gheg women is the ancient Xhubleta. Dedicated efforts have been undertaken to preserve and promote the dress, acknowledging its significance as an emblem of Albanian heritage. As a testament to its importance, the Xhubleta has been inscribed on the UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage List. The distinctive bell-shaped garment is fashioned in black and enriched with embroidered ethnic Albanian motifs, showcasing the remarkable craftsmanship of northern Albania. Its crafting process involves multiple intricate stages, encompassing the preparation of shajak fabric and the precise cutting techniques. The artistic history of Albania has been particularly influenced by a multitude of ancient and medieval people, traditions and religions. It covers a broad spectrum with mediums and disciplines that include painting, pottery, sculpture, ceramics and architecture all of them exemplifying a great variety in style and shape, in different regions and period. The rise of the Byzantine and Ottoman Empire in the Middle Ages was accompanied by a corresponding growth in Christian and Islamic art in the lands of Albania which are apparent in examples of architecture and mosaics throughout the country. Centuries later, the Albanian Renaissance proved crucial to the emancipation of the modern Albanian culture and saw unprecedented developments in all fields of literature and art whereas artists sought to return to the ideals of Impressionism and Romanticism. However, Onufri, Kolë Idromeno, David Selenica, Kostandin Shpataraku and the Zografi Brothers are the most eminent representatives of Albanian art. The architecture of Albania reflects the legacy of various civilisations tracing back to the classical antiquity. Major cities in Albania have evolved from within the castle to include dwellings, religious and commercial structures, with constant redesigning of town squares and evolution of building techniques. Nowadays, the cities and towns reflect a whole spectrum of various architectural styles. In the 20th century, many historical as well as sacred buildings bearing the ancient influence were demolished during the communist era. Ancient architecture is found throughout Albania and most visible in Byllis, Amantia, Phoenice, Apollonia, Butrint, Antigonia, Shkodër and Durrës. Considering the long period of rule of the Byzantine Empire, they introduced castles, citadels, churches and monasteries with spectacular wealth of visible murals and frescos. Perhaps the best known examples can be found in the southern Albanian cities and surroundings of Korçë, Berat, Voskopojë and Gjirokastër. Involving the introduction of Ottoman architecture there was a development of mosques and other Islamic buildings, particularly seen in Berat and Gjirokastër. A productive period of Historicism, Art Nouveau and Neoclassicism merged into the 19th century, best exemplified in Korçë. The 20th century brought new architectural styles such as the modern Italian style, which is present in Tirana such as the Skanderbeg Square and Ministries. It is also present in Shkodër, Vlorë, Sarandë and Durrës. Moreover, other towns received their present-day Albania-unique appearance through various cultural or economic influences. Socialist classicism arrived during the communist era in Albania after the Second World War. At this period many socialist-styled complexes, wide roads and factories were constructed, while town squares were redesigned and numerous of historic and important buildings demolished. Notable examples of that style include the Mother Teresa Square, Pyramid of Tirana, Palace of Congresses and so on. Three Albanian archaeological sites are included in the list of UNESCO World Heritage Sites. These include the ancient remains of Butrint, the medieval Historic Centres of Berat and Gjirokastër, and Natural and Cultural Heritage of the Ohrid region site shared with North Macedonia since 2019. Furthermore, the royal Illyrian tombs, the remains of Apollonia, the ancient Amphitheatre of Durrës and the Fortress of Bashtovë has been included on the tentative list of Albania. Throughout the centuries, Albanian cuisine has been widely influenced by Albanian culture, geography and history, and as such, different parts of the country enjoy specific regional cuisines. Cooking traditions especially vary between the north and the south, owing to differing topography and climate that essentially contribute to the excellent growth conditions for a wide array of herbs, fruits, and vegetables. Albanians produce and use many varieties of fruits such as lemons, oranges, figs, and most notably, olives, which are perhaps the most important element of Albanian cooking. Spices and other herbs such as basil, lavender, mint, oregano, rosemary, and thyme are widely used, as are vegetables such as garlic, onions, peppers, potatoes, tomatoes, as well as legumes of all types. With a coastline along the Adriatic and Ionian in the Mediterranean Sea, fish, crustaceans, and seafood are a popular and an integral part of the Albanian diet. Otherwise, lamb is the traditional meat for different holidays and religious festivals for both Christians and Muslims, although poultry, beef, and pork are also in plentiful supply. Tavë kosi ("soured milk casserole") is the national dish of Albania, consisting of lamb and rice baked under a thick, tart veil of yoghurt. Fërgesë is another national dish, made up of peppers, tomatoes, and cottage cheese. Pite is also popular, a baked pastry with a filling of a mixture of spinach and gjizë (curd) or mish (ground meat). Petulla, a traditional fried dough, is also a popular speciality, and is served with powdered sugar or feta cheese and different sorts of fruit jams. Flia consists of multiple crêpe-like layers brushed with cream and served with sour cream. Krofne, similar to Berliner doughnuts, are filled with jam, or chocolate and often eaten during winter. Coffee is an integral part of the Albanian lifestyle. The country has more coffee houses per capita than any other country in the world. Tea is also enjoyed both at home or outside at cafés, bars, or restaurants. Çaj Mali (Sideritis tea) is enormously beloved, and a part of the daily routine for most Albanians. It is cultivated across Southern Albania and noted for its medicinal properties. Black tea is also popular. Albanian wine is also common throughout the country, and has been cultivated for thousands of years. Albania has a long and ancient history of wine production, and belongs to the Old World of wine producing countries. Albanian folk music is a prominent part of the national identity, and continues to play a major part in overall Albanian music. Folk music can be divided into two stylistic groups, mainly the northern Gheg varieties, and southern Lab and Tosk varieties. Northern and southern traditions are contrasted by a rugged tone from the north, and the more relaxed southern form of music. Many songs concern events from Albanian history and culture, including traditional themes of honour, hospitality, treachery, and revenge. The first compilation of Albanian folk music was made by two Himariot musicians, Neço Muka and Koço Çakali, in Paris, during their work with Albanian soprano Tefta Tashko-Koço. Several gramophone compilations were recorded at the time by the three artists, which eventually led to the recognition of Albanian iso-polyphony as a UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage. Festivali i Këngës is a traditional Albanian song contest organised by the national broadcaster Radio Televizioni Shqiptar (RTSH). The festival is celebrated annually since its inauguration in 1962 and has launched the careers of some of Albania's most successful singers including Vaçe Zela and Parashqevi Simaku. It is significantly a music competition among Albanian performers presenting unreleased songs in premiere, composed by Albanian authors and voted by juries or by public. Contemporary artists Rita Ora, Bebe Rexha, Era Istrefi, Dua Lipa, Ava Max, Bleona, Elvana Gjata, Ermonela Jaho, and Inva Mula have achieved international recognition for their music, while soprano Ermonela Jaho has been described by some as the "world's most acclaimed soprano". Albanian opera singer Saimir Pirgu was nominated for the 2017 Grammy Award. The cultural renaissance was first of all expressed through the development of the Albanian language in the area of church texts and publications. The Protestant reforms invigorated hopes for the development of the local language and literary tradition, when cleric Gjon Buzuku translated the Catholic liturgy into Albanian, trying to do for Albanian what Martin Luther had done for German. Meshari (The Missal) written by Gjon Buzuku was published in 1555 and is considered one of the first literary work of written Albanian during the Middle Ages. The refined level of the language and the stabilised orthography must be the result of an earlier tradition of written Albanian, a tradition that is not well understood. However, there is some fragmented evidence, pre-dating Buzuku, which indicates that Albanian was written from at least the 14th century. Albanian writings from these centuries must not have been religious texts only, but historical chronicles too. They are mentioned by the humanist Marin Barleti, who in his book Siege of Shkodër (Rrethimi i Shkodrës) from 1504, confirms that he leafed through such chronicles written in the language of the people (in vernacula lingua) as well as his famous biography of Skanderbeg Historia de vita et gestis Scanderbegi Epirotarum principis (History of Skanderbeg) from 1508. The History of Skanderbeg is still the foundation of Skanderbeg studies and is considered an Albanian cultural treasure, vital to the formation of Albanian national self-consciousness. During the 16th and the 17th centuries, the catechism (E mbësuame krishterë) (Christian Teachings) from 1592 written by Lekë Matrënga, (Doktrina e krishterë) (The Christian Doctrine) from 1618 and (Rituale romanum) 1621 by Pjetër Budi, the first writer of original Albanian prose and poetry, an apology for George Castriot (1636) by Frang Bardhi, who also published a dictionary and folklore creations, the theological-philosophical treaty Cuneus Prophetarum (The Band of Prophets) (1685) by Pjetër Bogdani, the most universal personality of Albanian Middle Ages, were published in Albanian. The most famous Albanian writer in the 20th and 21st century is probably Ismail Kadare. Albania participated at the Olympic Games in 1972 for the first time. The country made their Winter Olympic Games debut in 2006. Albania missed the next four games, two of them due to the 1980 and 1984 boycotts, but returned for the 1992 games in Barcelona. Since then, Albania have participated in all games. Albania normally competes in events that include swimming, athletics, weightlifting, shooting and wrestling. The country have been represented by the National Olympic Committee of Albania since 1972. The nation has participated at the Mediterranean Games since the games of 1987 in Syria. The Albanian athletes have won a total of 43 (8 gold, 17 silver and 18 bronze) medals from 1987 to 2013. Popular sports in Albania include football, weightlifting, basketball, volleyball, tennis, swimming, rugby union and gymnastics. Football is by far the most popular sport in Albania. It is governed by the Football Association of Albania (Albanian: Federata Shqiptare e Futbollit, F.SH.F.), which has membership in FIFA and UEFA. The Albania national football team, ranking 51st in the World in 2017 (highest 22nd on 22 August 2015) have won the 1946 Balkan Cup and the Malta Rothmans International Tournament 2000, but had never participated in any major UEFA or FIFA tournament, until UEFA Euro 2016, Albania's first ever appearance at the continental tournament and at a major men's football tournament. Albania scored their first ever goal in a major tournament and secured their first ever win in European Championship when they beat Romania by 1–0 in a UEFA Euro 2016 match on 19 June 2016. The most successful football clubs are Skënderbeu, KF Tirana, Dinamo Tirana, Partizani and Vllaznia. Weightlifting is one of the most successful individual sport for the Albanians, with the national team winning medals at the European Weightlifting Championships and the rest international competitions. Albanian weightlifters have won a total of 16 medals at the European Championships with 1 of them being gold, 7 silver and 8 bronze. In the World Weightlifting Championships, the Albanian weightlifting team has won in 1972 a gold in 2002 a silver and in 2011 a bronze medal. Historically, the Albanian people have established several communities in many regions throughout Southern Europe. The Albanian diaspora has been formed since the late Middle Ages, when they emigrated to places such as Italy, especially in Sicily and Calabria, and Greece to escape either various socio-political difficulties or the Ottoman conquest of Albania. Following the fall of communism, large numbers of Albanians have migrated to countries such as Australia, Canada, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Scandinavia, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States. Albanian minorities are present in the neighbouring territories such as the west of North Macedonia, the east of Montenegro, Kosovo in its entirety and southern Serbia. In Kosovo, Albanians are the largest ethnic group in the country. Altogether, the number of ethnic Albanians living abroad is estimated to be higher than the total population inside Albania. Outline of Albania Bibliography of Albania pronounced [ʃcipəˈɾi(a)]; Gheg Albanian: Shqipni or Shqipnia, also Shqypni or Shqypnia. pronounced [ɾɛpuˈblika ɛ ʃcipəˈɾisə]. "Albania". The World Factbook (2024 ed.). Central Intelligence Agency. Retrieved 1 November 2021. (Archived 2021 edition) "Popullsia e Shqipërisë" (in Albanian). Instituti i Statistikës (INSTAT). 26 March 2020. Archived from the original on 22 August 2022. Retrieved 22 August 2022. "Population and Housing Census 2011" (PDF). Instituti i Statistikës (INSTAT). Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 August 2020. Retrieved 21 September 2020. "World Economic Outlook Database, October 2023 Edition. (Albania)". IMF.org. International Monetary Fund. 10 October 2023. Retrieved 11 October 2023. "Gini coefficient of equivalised disposable income – EU-SILC survey". ec.europa.eu. Eurostat. Retrieved 12 August 2021. "Human Development Report 2023/24" (PDF). United Nations Development Programme. 13 March 2024. Retrieved 13 March 2024. Giacomo Jungg (1 January 1895). Fialuur i voghel scc...p e ltinisct mle...un prei P. Jak Junkut t' Scocniis ... N'Sckoder t' Scc...pniis. Retrieved 23 July 2016 – via Internet Archive. Howe, T. (2017). "Plain tales from the hills: Illyrian influences on Argead military development". In Müller, S.; Howe, Tim; Bowden, H.; Rollinger, R. (eds.). The History of the Argeads: New Perspectives. Wiesbaden. ISBN 978-3447108515. p. 108. Zolo, D. (27 August 2002). Invoking Humanity: War, Law and Global Order. Continuum International Publishing Group. p. 180. ISBN 9780826456564. "Albania". The World Bank. Archived from the original on 21 September 2014. Retrieved 13 September 2014. Reports: Poverty Decreases in Albania After Years of Growth. Dow Jones Newswires, 201-938-5500 201-938-5500 201-938-5500.Nasdaq.com Madrugearu A, Gordon M. The wars of the Balkan Peninsula. Rowman & Littlefield, 2007. p. 146. Richard Talbert, Barrington Atlas of the Greek and Roman World, (ISBN 0-691-03169-X), Map 49 & notes. The Illyrians by J. J. Wilkes, 1992, ISBN 978-0-631-19807-9, page 279,"We cannot be certain that the Arbanon of Anna Comnena is the same as Albanopolis of the Albani, a place located on the map of Ptolemy (3.12)" Madgearu & Gordon 2008, p. 25. "It is still disputed by scholars that those Albanoi from 1042 were Normans from Sicily, [Southern Italy], or if they are in fact the Albanoi [a large clan of that belongs to the many clans of Albanians] found in Albanian lands during this time frame." Robert Elsei. The Albanian lexicon of Dion Von Kirkman. Earliest reference to the existence of the Albanian language, pp. 113–122. "pinocacozza.it". pinocacozza.it. Archived from the original on 30 December 2019. Retrieved 23 November 2007. Matasović, Ranko (2019). A Grammatical Sketch of Albanian for Students of Indo European (PDF). Zagreb. p. 39. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link) Lloshi, Xhevat (1999). "Albanian". In Hinrichs, Uwe; Büttner, Uwe (eds.). Handbuch der Südosteuropa-Linguistik. Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz Verlag. p. 277. ISBN 9783447039390. Kristo Frasheri. History of Albania (A Brief Overview). Tirana, 1964. Lloshi, Xhevat. "The Albanian Language" (PDF). United Nations Development Programme. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 July 2011. Retrieved 9 November 2010. F. Prendi, "The Prehistory of Albania", The Cambridge Ancient History, 2nd edn., vol. 3, part 1: The Prehistory of the Balkans; and the Middle East and the Aegean World, Tenth to Eighth Centuries B.C., ed. John Boardman et al. (Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1982), 189–90. Bunguri, Adem (2014). "Different models for the Neolithisation of Albania". Documenta Praehistorica. 32. Connan, J.; Elezi, G.; Engel, M. H.; Zumberge, A. (2024). "Natural asphalt on Late Neolithic (5000 – 4500 BCE) potsherds from southeastern Albania: A geochemical study". Journal of Archaeological Science: Reports. 53: 2–3, 11. Bibcode:2024JArSR..53j4343C. doi:10.1016/j.jasrep.2023.104343. eISSN 2352-4103. ISSN 2352-409X. Govedarica, Blagoje (2016). "The Stratigraphy of Tumulus 6 in Shtoj and the Appearance of the Violin Idols in Burial Complexes of the South Adriatic Region". Godišnjak Centra za balkanološka ispitivanja (45): 22–25. ISSN 0350-0020. Retrieved 7 January 2023. Lazaridis, Iosif; Alpaslan-Roodenberg, Songül; et al. (26 August 2022). "The genetic history of the Southern Arc: A bridge between West Asia and Europe". Science. 377 (6609): 29. doi:10.1126/science.abm4247. PMC 10064553. PMID 36007055. S2CID 251843620. : Supplementary Materials Gori, Maja; Recchia, Giulia; Tomas, Helen (2018). "The Cetina phenomenon across the Adriatic during the 2nd half of the 3rd millennium BC: new data and research perspectives". 38° Convegno Nazionale Sulla Preistoria, Protostoria, Storia della Daunia: 201. The Illyrians (The Peoples of Europe) by John Wilkes, 1996, ISBN 978-0-631-19807-9, page 92, "Appian's description of the Illyrian territories records a southern boundary with Chaonia and Thesprotia, where ancient Epirus began south of river Aoous (Vjose)" also map Cambridge University Press. The Cambridge ancient history. 2000. ISBN 0-521-23447-6, page 261,"... down to the mouth of Aous" Wilkes, John (1995). The Illyrians. Oxford, United Kingdom: Blackwell Publishing. pp. 94, 96, 104. ISBN 0-631-19807-5. Boardman, John; Hammond, Nicholas Geoffrey Lemprière (1982). The Cambridge Ancient History: The Expansion of the Greek World, Eighth to Six Centuries B.C. Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press. p. 284. ISBN 0-521-23447-6. Lewis, David Malcolm; Boardman, John (1994). The Cambridge Ancient History, Volume 6: The Fourth Century BC. Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press. pp. 430, 434. ISBN 0-521-23348-8. Wilson, Nigel Guy (2006). Encyclopedia of Ancient Greece. New York, New York and Oxford, United Kingdom: Routledge (Taylor & Francis). p. 594. ISBN 978-0-415-87396-3. Chamoux, François (2003). Hellenistic Civilization. Oxford, United Kingdom: Blackwell Publishing. p. 97. ISBN 0-631-22242-1. Justin, Epitome, 17.3 Hammond, Nicholas Geoffrey Lemprière; Walbank, Frank William (1 January 1972). A History of Macedonia: 336–167 B.C. Clarendon Press. ISBN 978-0-19-814815-9. Jackson-Laufer, Guida Myrl (1 January 1999). Women Rulers Throughout the Ages: An Illustrated Guide. ABC-CLIO. pp. 382–383. ISBN 978-1-57607-091-8. The History of Rome. D. Appleton & Company. 1 January 1846. p. 259. Wilkes, John (9 January 1996). The Illyrians. Wiley. p. 189. ISBN 978-0-631-19807-9. Marjeta Šašel Kos, "The Illyrian King Ballaeus – Some Historical Aspects", Épire, Illyrie, Macédoine: Mélanges offerts au professeur Pierre Cabanes, ed. Danièle Berranger (Clermont-Ferrand: Presses Universitaires Blaise Pascal, 2007), 127. Bideleux, Robert; Jeffries, Ian (24 January 2007). Balkans: A Post-Communist History. Routledge. p. 25. ISBN 978-1-134-58328-7. From AD 548 onward, the lands now known as Albania began to be overrun from the north by ever-increasing ... Schaefer, Richard T. (2008), Encyclopedia of Race, Ethnicity, and Society, SAGE Publications, ISBN 978-1-4129-2694-2 Nicol, Donald MacGillivray (1986). Studies in late Byzantine history and prosopography. Variorum Reprints. ISBN 9780860781905. Jireček, Konstantin; Thopia (1916). Illyrisch-albanische Forschungen. Duncker & Humblot. p. 239. Griechen Gregorios Kamonas Abulafia, David; McKitterick (21 October 1999). The New Cambridge Medieval History: Volume 5, C.1198-c.1300. Cambridge University Press. p. 786. ISBN 978-0-521-36289-4. Greco-Albanian lord Gregorios Kamonas The Genealogist. 1980. p. 40. Clements, John (1992), Clements encyclopedia of world governments, Vol. 10. Political Research, Inc. p. 31: "By 1190, Byzantium's power had so receded that the archon Progon succeeded in establishing the first Albanian state of the Middle Ages, a principality" Pickard, Rob; Çeliku, Florent (2008). Analysis and Reform of Cultural Heritage Policies in South-East Europe. Strasbourg: Council of Europe Publishing. p. 16. ISBN 978-92-871-6265-6. Norris, H. T. (1993). Islam in the Balkans: religion and society between Europe and the Arab world. University of South Carolina Press. p. 35. ISBN 978-0-87249-977-5. Pipa, Arshi; Repishti, Sami (1984). Studies on Kosova. East European Monographs #155. pp. 7–8. ISBN 978-0-88033-047-3. Zickel, Raymond; Iwaskiw, Walter R., eds. (1994). ""The Barbarian Invasions and the Middle Ages," Albania: A Country Study". Retrieved 9 April 2008. Madgearu, Alexandru; Gordon, Martin (2008). The wars of the Balkan Peninsula: Their medieval origins. Lanham: Scarecrow Press. p. 43. ISBN 9780810858466. Albanoi. Etleva, Lala (2008). Regnum Albaniae, the Papal Curia, and the Western Visions of a Borderline Nobility (PDF). Cambridge University Press. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Licursi, Emiddio Pietro (2011). Empire of Nations: The Consolidation of Albanian and Turkish National Identities in the Late Ottoman Empire, 1878–1913 (Thesis). New York: Columbia University. p. 19. hdl:10022/AC:P:10297. By 1415, after a chaotic interregnum, Sultan Mehmet I sent the military to erect the first Ottoman garrisons throughout southern Albania, establishing direct military authority in the region ... l jurisdiction over most of Albania ... The Balkans: From Constantinople to Communism by D. Hupchick, page 110 Gjonça, Arjan (2001). Communism, Health and Lifestyle: The Paradox of Mortality Transition in Albania, 1950–1990. Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 7. ISBN 978-0-313-31586-2. Norris, H. T. (1993). Islam in the Balkans: religion and society between Europe and the Arab world. University of South Carolina Press. p. 196. ISBN 978-0-87249-977-5. Zickel, Raymond; Iwaskiw, Walter R. (1994). "Albania: A Country Study ("Albanians under Ottoman Rule")". Retrieved 9 April 2008. Rob Pickard (2008). Analysis and Reform of Cultural Heritage Policies in South-East Europe (Europarat ed.). Council of Europe. p. 16. ISBN 978-92-871-6265-6. Hodgkinson 2005, p. 240. Hodgkinson 2005, p. xii. Donald Edgar Pitcher (1968). An Historical Geography of the Ottoman Empire: From Earliest Times to the End of the Sixteenth Century. Brill. p. 88. Fine, John V. A. (1994). The late medieval Balkans: a critical survey from the late twelfth century to the Ottoman conquest (2. print ed.). Ann Arbor: Univ. of Michigan Press. p. 598. ISBN 9780472082605. "Arnawutluḳ." in Encyclopaedia of Islam, Second Edition. Brill Online, 2012. Clayer, Nathalie (2012). "Albania" in Encyclopaedia of Islam, Gudrun Krämer, Denis Matringe, Rokovet, John Nawas, Everett Rowson (eds.). Brill Online. Babinger, Franz (1992). Mehmed the Conqueror and His Time. Princeton University Press. p. 51. ISBN 0-691-01078-1. Peirce, Leslie P. (1993). The Imperial Harem: Women and Sovereignty in the Ottoman Empire. New York: Oxford University Press, Inc. p. 94. ISBN 0-19-507673-7. Observator Cultural. "Dor de Dunăre şi alte nostalgii cosmopolite". observatorcultural.ro (in Romanian). Sarah Amsler (2007). Theorising Social Change in Post-Soviet Countries: Critical Approaches (Balihar Sanghera, Sarah Amsler, Tatiana Yarkova ed.). Peter Lang, 2007. p. 96105. ISBN 9783039103294. Kopecek, Michal; Ersoy, Ahmed; Gorni, Maciej; Kechriotis, Vangelis; Manchev, Boyan; Trencsenyi, Balazs; Turda, Marius (2006), Discourses of collective identity in Central and Southeast Europe (1770–1945), vol. 1, Budapest, Hungary: Central European University Press, p. 348, ISBN 978-963-7326-52-3, The position of the League in the beginning was based on religious solidarity. It was even called Komiteti i Myslimanëve të Vërtetë (The Committee of the Real Muslims) ... decisions are taken and supported mostly by landlords and people closely connected with Ottoman administration and religious authorities.. Kopeček, Michal; Ersoy, Ahmed; Gorni, Maciej; Kechriotis, Vangelis; Manchev, Boyan; Trencsenyi, Balazs; Turda, Marius (2006), "Program of the Albanian League of Prizren", Discourses of collective identity in Central and Southeast Europe (1770–1945), vol. 1, Budapest, Hungary: Central European University Press, p. 347, ISBN 978-963-7326-52-3, retrieved 18 January 2011, there were no delegates from Shkodra villayet and a few Bosnian delegates also participated. Present was also mutasarrif (administrator of sandjak) of Prizren as representative of the central authorities Elsie, Robert. "1878 The Resolutions of the League of Prizren". albanianhistory.net. Archived from the original on 8 September 2010. Retrieved 20 February 2011. On 10 June 1878, ... The League of Prizren, Alb. Lidhja e Prizrenit, ... On 13 June 1878, the League submitted an eighteen-page memorandum to Benjamin Disraeli, the British representative at the Congress of Berlin "Albanian League". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 5 January 2012. Giaro, Tomasz (2007). "The Albanian legal and constitutional system between the World Wars". Modernisierung durch Transfer zwischen den Weltkriegen. Frankfurt am Main, Germany: Vittorio Klosterman GmbH. p. 185. ISBN 978-3-465-04017-0. Retrieved 24 January 2011. From its own members congress elected a senate (Pleqësi), composed of 18 members, which assumed advisory role to the government. Qemali, Ismail. "Ismail Kemal bey Vlora: Memoirs". Archived from the original on 17 June 2010. Retrieved 23 January 2011. 15th–28th November 1912 ... Qemali, Ismail. "Ismail Kemal bey Vlora: Memoirs". Archived from the original on 17 June 2010. Retrieved 23 January 2011. On the resumption of the sitting, I was elected President of the Provisional Government, with a mandate to form a Cabinet ... Giaro, Tomasz (2007). "The Albanian legal and constitutional system between the World Wars". Modernisierung durch Transfer zwischen den Weltkriegen. Frankfurt am Main, Germany: Vittorio Klosterman GmbH. p. 185. ISBN 978-3-465-04017-0. Retrieved 24 January 2011. a provisional government, consisting of ten members and led by Vlora, was formed on 4 December. Elsie, Robert. "1913 The Conference of London". Archived from the original on 17 July 2011. Retrieved 5 January 2012. Jelavich, Barbara (1999) [1983], "The end of Ottoman rule in Europe", History of the Balkans: Twentieth century, vol. 2, Cambridge, United Kingdom: The Press Syndicate of University of Cambridge, p. 101, ISBN 978-0-521-27459-3, retrieved 21 January 2011, the International Commission ... had headquarters in Vlorë Zaharia, Perikli (24 March 2003). "The post – 1989 constitutional course of south east Europe". Athens: Centre for European Constitutional Law. Archived from the original on 16 June 2011. Retrieved 22 January 2011. Seton-Watson, R.W.; Wilson, J. Dover; Zimmern, Alfred E.; Greenwood, Arthur (10 January 2004) [1915], "III Germany", The War and Democracy (1st ed.), London: MacMillan, archived from the original on 13 November 2012, Prince William of Wied, the first Prince of Albania Elsie, Robert. "Albania under prince Wied". Archived from the original on 17 July 2011. Retrieved 25 January 2011. pro-Ottoman forces ... were opposed to the increasing Western influence ... In November 1913, these forces, ... had offered the vacant Albanian throne to General Izzet Pasha ... War Minister who was of Albanian origin. Jelavich, Barbara (1999) [1983], History of the Balkans: Twentieth century, vol. 2, Cambridge, United Kingdom: The Press Syndicate of University of Cambridge, p. 103, ISBN 978-0-521-27459-3, retrieved 25 January 2011, peasants..willing listeners to Ottoman propaganda ... attached the new regime as a tool of the beys and Christian powers Bowden, William (2003). Epirus Vetus : the archaeology of a late antique province. London: Duckworth. p. 28. ISBN 978-0-7156-3116-4. the Greek Epirote population of the area refused to be incorporated into the new Albanian state and in February 1914 declared the Autonomous Republic of Northern Epirus ... in 1921 Albania was recognised as an independent sovereign state, with its borders established on their present lines. ed, Gregory C. Ference (1994). Chronology of 20th century eastern European history. Detroit [u.a.]: Gale Research. p. 9. ISBN 978-0-8103-8879-6. February 28 George Zographos, a former foreign minister of Greece, proclaims at Gjirokaster the establishment of the Autonomous Republic of Northern Epirus, with Zographos as president. He notifies the International Commission that his government has been established because the Great Powers have not provided the Greeks in southern Albania any guarantees for the protection of the life, property and religious freedom, and ethnic existence. "The Efforts to settle amputated Albania state". albaniainbrief.com. Archived from the original on 1 June 2011. Retrieved 28 January 2011. Thousands of muslim peasants, ... were exploited by their leaders Haxhi Qamili, Arif Hiqmeti, Musa Qazimi and Mustafa Ndroqi, ... to rebel Vickers, Miranda (1999). The Albanians: a modern history. I.B. Tauris. p. 81. ISBN 978-1-86064-541-9. He gathered round him a group of discontented Muslim priests ... and proclaimed himself the savior of Albania and the Champion of Islam. Elsie, Robert. "Albania under prince Wied". Archived from the original on 17 July 2011. Retrieved 25 January 2011. mostly volunteers from Kosova under their leader Isa Boletini Elsie, Robert. "Albania under prince Wied". Archived from the original on 17 July 2011. Retrieved 25 January 2011. Panic broke out in Durrës, and the royal family sought refuge on an Italian vessel ... Springer, Elisabeth; Kammerhofer, Leopold (1993). Archiv und Forschung. Oldenbourg Wissenschaftsverlag. p. 346. ISBN 978-3-486-55989-7. Zickel, Raymond; Iwaskiw, Walter R. (eds.). Albania country study (PDF). Federal Research Division, Library of Congress. Archived (PDF) from the original on 11 September 2023. Retrieved 11 September 2023. Vickers, Miranda (29 November 1999). The Albanians: A Modern History. Bloomsbury Academic. p. 118. ISBN 978-1-86064-541-9. Archived from the original on 13 September 2023. Retrieved 13 September 2023. Davies, Norman (2011). Vanished Kingdoms: The History of Half-Forgotten Europe. Penguin Books Limited. p. 17. ISBN 978-0-14-196048-7. Archived from the original on 13 September 2023. Pettifer, James; Buchanan, Tom (2015). War in the Balkans: Conflict and Diplomacy before World War I. Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 32. ISBN 978-0-85772-641-4. Archived from the original on 13 September 2023. Retrieved 13 September 2023. Gerwarth, Robert (2007). Twisted Paths: Europe 1914-1945. Oxford University Press. pp. 242–261. ISBN 978-0-1992-8185-5. Archived from the original on 13 September 2023. Retrieved 13 September 2023. Keegan, John; Churchill, Winston (1986). The Second World War (Six Volume Boxed Set). Boston, United States: Mariner Books. p. 314. ISBN 0-395-41685-X. Archived from the original on 13 September 2023. Retrieved 13 September 2023. Zabecki, David T. (1999). World War II in Europe: an encyclopedia. New York: Garland Pub. p. 1353. ISBN 0-8240-7029-1. Bogdani, Mirela; Loughlin, John (15 March 2007). Albania and the European Union: The Tumultuous Journey Towards Integration and Accession. I.B. Tauris. p. 230. ISBN 978-1-84511-308-7. Morrock, Richard (11 October 2010). The Psychology of Genocide and Violent Oppression: A Study of Mass Cruelty from Nazi Germany to Rwanda. McFarland. p. 55. ISBN 978-0-7864-5628-4. The nationalist Balli Kombetar, which had fought against Italy, made a deal with the German invaders, and formed a "neutral" government in Tirana which ... "Albanian Nationalism". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 22 November 2016. "Envery Hoxha". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved 22 November 2016. "Human Rights in Post-Communist Albania". Human Rights Watch (HRW). Archived from the original on 11 September 2023. Retrieved 11 September 2023. Fischer, Bernd (10 June 2010). "Albania and Enver Hoxha's legacy". OpenDemocracy. Archived from the original on 11 September 2023. Retrieved 11 September 2023. Pano, Aristotel. "Panorama of the Economic-Social Development of Socialist Albania". Archived from the original on 31 May 2023. Retrieved 11 April 2012. 40 Years of Socialist Albania, Dhimiter Picani Qori, Arlind (22 February 2019). "From Faculty to Factory". Jacobin. Retrieved 14 March 2019. "Hapet dosja, ja harta e bunkerëve dhe tuneleve sekretë". Archived from the original on 17 September 2017. Retrieved 11 August 2016. Elsie, Robert (2010). Historical Dictionary of Albania. Historical Dictionaries of Europe, No. 75 (2nd ed.). Lanham, MD, and Plymouth: The Scarecrow Press. p. 27. ISBN 978-0-8108-6188-6. "Report: The Elections in Albania". Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE). 4 April 1991. Archived from the original on 1 October 2020. Retrieved 1 October 2020. Jarvis, Christopher (2000). "The Rise and Fall of the Albanian Pyramid Schemes". Finance and Development. 37 (1): 1. Bezemer, Dirk (2001). "Post-socialist Financial Fragility: The Case of Albania" (PDF). Cambridge Journal of Economics. 25 (1): 1–25. doi:10.1093/cje/25.1.1. hdl:10419/85494. JSTOR 23599718. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Musaraj, Smoki (2011). "Tales from Albarado: The Materiality of Pyramid Schemes in Post-socialist Albania". Cultural Anthropology. 26 (1): 84–110. doi:10.1111/j.1548-1360.2010.01081.x. For the most part, the Albanian refugees emigrated to Italy, Greece, Switzerland, Germany, or North America. National Geophysical Data Center / World Data Service (NGDC/WDS): NCEI/WDS Global Significant Earthquake Database. NOAA National Centers for Environmental Information (1972). "Significant Earthquake Information". NOAA National Centers for Environmental Information. doi:10.7289/V5TD9V7K. Burden, Brandon (December 2016). "Nato's small states: Albania as a case study" (PDF). Calhoun Naval Postgraduate School (NPS). pp. 44–60. Archived (PDF) from the original on 18 April 2021. Retrieved 16 August 2021. "Ceremony marks the accession of Albania and Croatia to NATO". North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). 7 April 2009. Retrieved 1 December 2019. "Albania in NATO". ambasadat.gov.al. Permanent Delegation of the Republic of Albania to NATO. "Albania – Eu-Albania relations". European Commission (EC). Archived from the original on 26 June 2013. Retrieved 1 December 2019. "EU candidate status for Albania". European Commission (EC). 24 June 2014. Archived from the original on 5 May 2023. Retrieved 1 December 2019. Shqip, Gazeta. "Ahmetaj: Premtimi për 300 mijë vende punë është mbajtur – Gazeta SHQIP Online". gazeta-shqip.com. "PM Rama at 'Global Leader Woman' Summit". ambasadat.gov.al. "Albania: PM Edi Rama secures third term for Socialist Party". Deutsche Welle (DW). 27 April 2021. Archived from the original on 10 June 2021. Retrieved 16 August 2021. Crowcroft, Orlando (27 April 2021). "Edi Rama claims 'beautiful victory' in Albanian election". Euronews. Archived from the original on 30 April 2021. Retrieved 16 August 2021. ANSS. "Albania 2019: M 6.4 – 16 km WSW of Mamurras, Albania". Comprehensive Catalog. U.S. Geological Survey. Retrieved 1 December 2019. "Very Strong earthquake – Albania – November 26, 2019". Earthquake-Report. 26 November 2019. Archived from the original on 28 November 2019. Retrieved 1 December 2019. "Albanians Raise $13 Million in 3 Days for Earthquake Relief". Exit News. 29 November 2019. Archived from the original on 3 August 2020. Retrieved 3 August 2020. "Ministria e Shëndetësisë: Konfirmohen dy rastet e para me koronavirusin e ri" (in Albanian). Ministry of Health and Social Protection. 9 March 2020. Archived from the original on 23 July 2020. Retrieved 3 August 2020. Ruci, Ani (9 March 2020). "Shqipëria preket nga virusi Corona" (in Albanian). Deutsche Welle (DW). Archived from the original on 3 August 2020. Retrieved 3 August 2020. "Masat për koronavirusin, Rama: Nga nesër postblloqe, gjobë 5000 euro kush thyen karantinën" (in Albanian). A2 CNN. 11 March 2020. Archived from the original on 3 August 2020. Retrieved 3 August 2020. Gjonaj, Arlinda (9 March 2020). "Rama: Mbyllja e kufijve nuk këshillohet nga OBSH, vetëm kufizime të pjesshme" (in Albanian). Albanian Telegraphic Agency (ATA). Archived from the original on 3 August 2020. Retrieved 3 August 2020. Cuka, Fatjon (1 June 2020). "COVID-19, në Shqipëri vazhdon lehtësimi i masave" (in Albanian). Anadolu Agency (AA). Archived from the original on 3 August 2020. Retrieved 3 August 2020. "Fushata e vaksinimit 'Shqipëria buzëqesh'" (in Albanian). Ministry of Health and Social Protection. Archived from the original on 16 August 2021. Retrieved 16 August 2021. "Vaksinimi antiCOVID/ Kryhen 1,280,239 vaksinime" (in Albanian). Ministry of Health and Social Protection. 11 August 2021. Archived from the original on 14 August 2021. Retrieved 16 August 2021. Eftimi, R. "Some Considerations on Seawater-freshwater Relationship in Albanian Coastal Area" (PDF). Tirana. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 July 2020. Retrieved 30 July 2020. "Tregues Sipas Qarqeve Indicators by Prefectures" (PDF). Instituti i Statistikës (INSTAT). Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 July 2011. Retrieved 30 July 2020. Bolevich, Maria (3 January 2017). "Largest lake in southern Europe under threat from "eco-resort"". New Scientist. "Natural and Cultural Heritage of the Ohrid region". UNESCO. pp. UNESCO. Situated on the shores of Lake Ohrid, the town of Ohrid is one of the oldest human settlements in Europe; Lake Ohrid is a superlative natural phenomenon, providing refuge for numerous endemic and relict freshwater species of flora and fauna dating from the tertiary period. As a deep and ancient lake of tectonic origin, Lake Ohrid has existed continuously for approximately two to three million years. "Environmental Performance Reviews Albania" (PDF). United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE). p. 30. Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 July 2023. Retrieved 8 July 2023. "The First National Communication of the Republic of Albania to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)" (PDF). Tirana: Ministry of Environment of Albania. pp. 33 –&#32, 34. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 8 July 2023. Ministry of Environment of Albania. "Albania's Second National Communication to the Conference of Parties under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change" (PDF). unfccc.int. Tirana. p. 28. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. "Albania: Climate Change Overview". World Bank Group. Archived from the original on 8 July 2023. Retrieved 8 July 2023. Alban Kuriqi. "Climate and climate change data for Albania" (PDF). drinkadria.fgg.uni-lj.si. Tirana. pp. 3–5. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 December 2017. Retrieved 26 November 2017. "PERGATITJA E PROFILIT KOMBETAR SHQIPETAR PER TE VLERESUAR STRUKTUREN KOMBETARE NE MENAXHIMIN E KIMIKATEVE DHE ZBATIMIN E UDHEZIMEVE TE SAICM" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 April 2019. Retrieved 4 March 2018. "Moti, regjistrohet temperatura rekord në Shqipëri, – 29 gradë në Librazhd". Archived from the original on 4 March 2018. Retrieved 4 March 2018. Hughes, Philip D. (30 November 2009). "Twenty-first Century Glaciers and Climate in the Prokletije Mountains, Albania". Arctic, Antarctic, and Alpine Research. 41 (4): 455–459. Bibcode:2009AAAR...41..455H. doi:10.1657/1938-4246-41.4.455. "Mediterranean Basin Biodiversity Hotspot" (PDF). BirdLife International. July 2017. Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 July 2020. Retrieved 30 July 2020. "Biodiversity in Albania" (PDF). National Agency of Protected Areas. Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 July 2020. Retrieved 30 July 2020. "Fifth National Report of Albania to the United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD)" (PDF). Ministry of Tourism and Environment. p. 4. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2020. UNECE. "Albania Environmental Performance Reviews" (PDF). unece.org. p. 141. "On the status and distribution of the large carnivores (Mammalia: Carnivora) in Albania" (PDF). Tirana. p. 4. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2020. "Die potentielle Verbreitung der Wildkatze (Felis silvestris silvestris) in Österreich als Entscheidungsgrundlage für weitere Schutzmaßnahmen" (PDF). wildkatze-in-oesterreich.at (in German). Salzburg. p. 19. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 September 2018. Retrieved 14 October 2018. Protection and Preservation of Natural Environment in Albania. "Albanian Nature". ppnea.org. Archived from the original on 31 August 2018. Retrieved 4 January 2019. NaturAL. "Albania towards NATURA 2000". natura.al. Tirana. p. 1. Archived from the original on 11 March 2017. Retrieved 26 November 2017. "The National Parks of Albania The fifteen national parks in Albania encompass an area of 210,668.48 hectares which accounts for about 3.65% of the overall territory of the country". worldatlas.com. 11 September 2019. The territory of Albania can be divided into four ecoregions: Dinaric Alpine (mixed forests in the far north). Balcanic (mixed forest in the north-east). Pindus mountain (mixed forests covering the central and southeast mountains). Illyrian deciduous (forest covering the rest of the country). Ministry of Environment. "Gap Analysis for Nature Protection Legal Acts on Wild Fauna Conservation and Hunting (Albania)" (PDF). al.undp.org. pp. 86–99. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 October 2018. Retrieved 4 January 2019. "Country Profiles: Albania – Main Details". Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD). Archived from the original on 4 September 2023. Retrieved 4 September 2023. "Për miratimin e ndryshimit të statusit dhe të sipërfaqes së ekosistemeve natyrore park kombëtar (kategoria ii) të zonave të mbrojtura mjedisore". Qendra e Botimeve Zyrtare. 26 January 2022. Retrieved 2 September 2023. "Annotated List of Wetlands of International Importance: Albania" (PDF). Ramsar Convention. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 September 2023. Retrieved 4 September 2023. "Ohrid-Prespa Transboundary Biosphere Reserve, Albania/North Macedonia". United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO). Archived from the original on 4 September 2023. Retrieved 4 September 2023. "Prespa-Ohrid region: Ancient lakes and undiscovered mountain ranges". Euronatur. Archived from the original on 20 September 2021. Retrieved 20 September 2021. "Ancient and Primeval Beech Forests of the Carpathians and Other Regions of Europe". United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO). Archived from the original on 12 September 2021. Retrieved 20 September 2021. Shumka, Spase. "Albania's Biodiversity and Protected Areas An Executive Summary" (PDF). United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 July 2020. Retrieved 26 October 2020. "Albania Environment and Climate Change Policy Brief" (PDF). Sida's Helpdesk for Environment and Climate Change (SLU). p. 2. Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 September 2021. Retrieved 5 September 2021. "Albania: Environment and Climate Change". United Nations Development Programme Albania (UNDP). Archived from the original on 22 September 2020. Retrieved 5 September 2021. "Climate Risk Country Profile Albania" (PDF). World Bank. p. 12. Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 September 2021. Retrieved 6 September 2021. "ND-GAIN Country Index". Notre Dame Global Adaptation Index (ND-GAIN). Archived from the original on 10 June 2023. Retrieved 10 June 2023. "Third National Communication of the Republic of Albania under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change" (PDF). Ministry of Environment. p. 143. Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 July 2021. Retrieved 6 September 2021. Shehu, Elfrida; Skrame, Klodian (3 March 2021). "Integrated methodologies for seismic risk mitigation in Durrës (Albania) after the seismic event of November 26th, 2019". Egu General Assembly Conference Abstracts. Bibcode:2021EGUGA..2314861S. doi:10.5194/egusphere-egu21-14861. S2CID 237983340. Archived from the original on 6 September 2021. Retrieved 6 September 2021. "Albanian National Statement ECOSOC Humanitarian Affairs Segment" (PDF). Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs. 23 June 2021. Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 July 2021. Retrieved 5 September 2021. "2022 Environmental Performance Index Results". Environmental Performance Index (EPI). Archived from the original on 10 June 2023. Retrieved 10 June 2023. "2012 Environmental Performance Index and Pilot Trend Environmental Performance Index" (PDF). Columbia University, Yale University. p. 10. Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 May 2020. Retrieved 5 September 2021. Grantham, H. S.; Duncan, A.; Evans, T. D.; Jones, K. R.; Beyer, H. L.; Schuster, R.; Walston, J.; Ray, J. C.; Robinson, J. G.; Callow, M.; Clements, T.; Costa, H. M.; Degemmis, A.; Elsen, P. R.; Ervin, J.; Franco, P.; Goldman, E.; Goetz, S.; Hansen, A.; Hofsvang, E.; Jantz, P.; Jupiter, S.; Kang, A.; Langhammer, P.; Laurance, W. F.; Lieberman, S.; Linkie, M.; Malhi, Y.; Maxwell, S.; et al. (2020). "Anthropogenic modification of forests means only 40% of remaining forests have high ecosystem integrity – Supplementary Material". Nature Communications. 11 (1): 5978. Bibcode:2020NatCo..11.5978G. doi:10.1038/s41467-020-19493-3. ISSN 2041-1723. PMC 7723057. PMID 33293507. "Legal and Institutional Reform in albania after the Democratic Revolution (1991 – 1997)" (PDF). North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 September 2023. Retrieved 10 September 2023. "Constitution of the Republic of Albania". Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE). Archived from the original on 10 September 2023. Retrieved 10 September 2023. "Constitution of Albania". Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). Archived from the original on 10 September 2023. Retrieved 10 September 2023. "Albania: Freedom in the World 2023". Freedom House. Archived from the original on 10 September 2023. Retrieved 10 September 2023. "2022 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices: Albania". United States Department of State. Archived from the original on 10 September 2023. Retrieved 10 September 2023. "Arbëreshët kërkojnë ndihmë nga Tirana (Video)" (in Albanian). Telegrafi. 4 April 2017. Retrieved 4 April 2017. Aydın, Abdurrahim F.; Progonati, Erjada (May 2011). "Albanian foreign policy in the post-communist era". Unisci Discussion Papers. 26. doi:10.5209/REV_UNIS.2011.V26.37824. S2CID 154016018. "Albania in the region". Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs. Archived from the original on 3 June 2023. Retrieved 3 September 2023. "Meeting Global Challenges Through Partnership Albania For UN Security Council 2022 – 2023" (PDF). Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 September 2023. Retrieved 4 September 2023. "Nato member countries". North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). 8 June 2023. Archived from the original on 3 September 2023. Retrieved 3 September 2023. "Ceremony marks the accession of Albania and Croatia to Nato". North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). 7 April 2009. Archived from the original on 3 September 2023. Retrieved 3 September 2023. "Relations with Regional Countries". Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs. Archived from the original on 4 September 2023. Retrieved 4 September 2023. Dhimolea, Antonela. "Comprehensive cooperation between Albania and Kosovo as an auxiliary instrument to a speedy regional economic integration" (PDF). Friedrich Ebert Foundation. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 September 2023. Retrieved 4 September 2023. "Article 169, Section 1". Constitution of Albania. 28 November 1998. Retrieved 6 July 2016. "Albania to end conscription by 2010". wri-irg.org. 22 August 2008. "Albania Military 2017". theodora.com. Ministry of Defence. "Engagement Policy and evidence of AAF participation in PK missions". mod.gov.al. sues/active_endeavour/index.html Operation Active Endeavour. nato.int Archived 30 August 2011 at the Wayback Machine "Albania membership Nato". NATO. Archived from the original on 28 July 2011. "Albania sells off its military hardware". BBC News. 17 April 2002. "Albania to abolish conscription by 2010". Southeast European Times. 21 August 2008. Retrieved 29 December 2009. "Albanian military expenditure as % of GDP". World Bank. "Reforma Administrativo-territoriale" (PDF) (in Albanian). Government of Albania. p. 8. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. "A Brief History of the Administrative-territorial Organisation in Albania". reformaterritoriale.al. Archived from the original on 9 June 2017. Retrieved 27 September 2017. "A Brief History of the Administrative-territorial Organization in Albania". Archived from the original on 24 May 2015. "STRATEGJIA NDËRSEKTORIALE PËR DECENTRALIZIMIN DHE QEVERISJEN VENDORE 2015–2020" (PDF) (in Albanian). Fletorja Zyrtare e Republikës së Shqipërisë. p. 9. Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 June 2017. Retrieved 23 November 2017. "On the Organization and Functioning of the Local Government, Republic of Albania, 2000" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 February 2010. Retrieved 27 August 2010. "Ndarja e re, mbeten 28 bashki, shkrihen komunat | Shekulli Online". Shekulli.com.al. 10 January 2014. Archived from the original on 13 January 2014. Retrieved 15 February 2014. "Reforma Territoriale – KRYESORE". Reformaterritoriale.al. Archived from the original on 14 May 2017. Retrieved 15 August 2014. "Ndarja administrative, njësitë vendore në lagje dhe fshatra". Archived from the original on 25 September 2017. Retrieved 7 December 2018. "Ndarja e re, mbeten 28 bashki, shkrihen komunat – Shekulli Online". Shekulli.com.al. Archived from the original on 13 January 2014. Retrieved 23 July 2016. "Popullsia në 1 Janar sipas qarqeve dhe gjinisë 2001 – 2020" (in Albanian). Instituti i Statistikës (INSTAT). Archived from the original on 10 October 2021. Retrieved 22 July 2020. "Sub-national HDI – Area Database–Global Data Lab". Retrieved 13 September 2018. "Albania". World Diplomacy. Archived from the original on 8 August 2014. Retrieved 1 August 2014. "GDP per capita in purchasing power standards in 2012" (PDF). Eurostat. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 December 2013. Retrieved 14 December 2013. Business: Albania, Cyprus register economic growth SEtimes.com Strong economic growth potential puts Albania and Panama top of long term investment list, Propertywire.com Archived 14 April 2009 at the Wayback Machine International Monetary Fund (IMF), 9 October 2010. Albania and the IMF "Instituti i Statistikave" (PDF). Instituti i Statistikave – Tiranë. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 December 2016. Retrieved 6 May 2016. "Albanian employment rate increases in agriculture, services sector in Q1 2016". fdi.gov.cn. Archived from the original on 22 September 2017. Retrieved 15 June 2016. "UC Research Reveals One of the Earliest Farming Sites in Europe". University of Cincinnati. 16 April 2012. Archived from the original on 10 September 2015. Retrieved 17 June 2016. "IPA National Programme 2011 for Albania Project Fiche 7: Support to Agriculture and Rural Development" (PDF). European Commission. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Dhimitër Doka. "Albaniens vergessener Exportschlager". humboldt-foundation.de (in German). Archived from the original on 1 December 2017. Retrieved 10 May 2016. winealbania.com Archived 8 February 2011 at the Wayback Machine Wine Albania Portal Tom Stevenson (2011). The Sotheby's Wine Encyclopedia. Dorling Kindersley. ISBN 978-1-4053-5979-5. "Wine production (tons)". Food and Agriculture Organization. p. 28. Archived from the original on 20 May 2011. Retrieved 18 April 2011. "Manufacturing & garment industry". 1 June 2014. "Mining sector". 1 June 2014. "ANTEA, the company with the highest working standards". anteacement.com. Archived from the original on 18 April 2017. Retrieved 17 April 2017. "UPDATE 1-Bankers Petroleum's key Albanian oilfield output jumps in Q1". Reuters. 7 April 2011. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 30 June 2017. "Textile industry in Albania is unprepared for a potential influx of import orders". balkaneu.com. 24 August 2014. Page, Kogan Kogan (2003). Europe Review 2003/04: The Economic and Business Report. Kogan Page Publishers. pp. 3–7. ISBN 9780749440671. "Albania – Mining and Minerals". 15 August 2016. Oltiana Muharremi, Filloreta Madani, Erald Pelari. "The Development of the Service Sector in Albania and Its Future". researchgate.net. pp. 2–9.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) "Analysis of the Albanian Banking System in the Transition Years" (PDF). ijbcnet.com. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. "TOURISM AND EMPLOYMENT IN ALBANIA – IS THERE A STRONG CORRELATION?" (PDF). asecu.gr. pp. 1–9. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Eglantina Hysa – Epoka University. "INFLUENCE OF TOURISM SECTOR IN ALBANIAN GDP: ESTIMATION USING MULTIPLE REGRESSION METHOD". researchgate.net. Tirana. pp. 1–6. World Travel & Tourism Council. "Travel & Tourism: Economic Impact 2017: Albania" (PDF). wttc.org. London. p. 12. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.[dead link] "Arrivals of foreign citizens by Lëvizjet e shtetasve shqiptarë dhe të huaj and Month". databaza.instat.gov.al.[dead link] "Number of tourists to Albania up 25 pct during summer 2015". Travel Gazette. 4 October 2015. Archived from the original on 11 March 2021. Retrieved 9 February 2017. "Lonely Planet's top 10 countries for 2011 – travel tips and articles – Lonely Planet". Retrieved 7 August 2013.[permanent dead link] "52 Places to Go in 2014". The New York Times. 5 September 2014.[dead link] Sustainable Development of Sea-Corridors and Coastal Waters: The TEN ECOPORT project in South East Europe (Chrysostomos Stylios, Tania Floqi, Jordan Marinski, Leonardo Damiani ed.). Springer. 7 April 2015. p. 85. ISBN 9783319113852. "Coastline | The Official website of Albanian Tourism". Albania.al. Archived from the original on 9 August 2014. Retrieved 15 August 2014. "Statistikat e transportit" (PDF) (in Albanian). Instituti i Statistikës (INSTAT). 27 January 2019. p. 2. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 8 July 2020. Tirana Times (17 January 2018). "Turkish consortium bids to build Vlora airport as Albania prepares to launch national carrier". tiranatimes.com. South East Europe Transport Observatory (SEETO). "THE CORE TRANSPORT NETWORK South-East Europe Transport Observatory SEETO" (PDF). European Commission. p. 2. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. "Serbia and Kosovo Only Beginning to Form Infrastructural Links: Peace Highway to Connect the Region". kossev.info. 15 April 2018. Rabeta, Lorenc. "Trenat e rinj Tiranë-Durrës-Rinas me 222 pasagjerë, 112 të ulur". dailynews.al. Archived from the original on 13 January 2017. Retrieved 12 January 2017. "Hekurudha Tiranë-Rinas-Durrës, Haxhinasto: Projekti përfundon në 2019". top-channel.tv (in Albanian). 25 June 2016. Archived from the original on 28 September 2017. Retrieved 4 January 2019. "Language Education Policy Profile: Albania Country Report". Tirana. October 2016. "The Albanian education system described and compared with the Dutch system" (PDF). 1 January 2015. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 October 2017. "Language Education Policy Profile 2015 – 2017 ALBANIA". rm.coe.int. Tirana. pp. 13–18. "SCHOOL LIFE EXPECTANCY". world.bymap.org. 31 January 2017. "Albania". The World Factbook (2024 ed.). Central Intelligence Agency. Retrieved 21 June 2013. (Archived 2013 edition) "Overview of the Higher Education System Albania" (PDF). European Commission. February 2017. pp. 12–16. Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 September 2018. Retrieved 30 October 2018. "Health Care Systems in Transition Albania 2002" (PDF). World Health Organization. p. 17. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. "1998 CONSTITUTION OF THE REPUBLIC OF ALBANIA". osce.org. p. 10. "Albania Demographic and Health Survey 2008–09" (PDF). dhsprogram.com. March 2010. p. 37. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. "Albania-prel.pmd" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 December 2009. Retrieved 29 December 2009. "Life Expectancy at Birth". CIA – The World Factbook. Archived from the original on 13 July 2014. Retrieved 10 October 2009. WHO. "Healthy life expectancy at birth, 2000–2015". World Health Organization. Archived from the original on 13 October 2019. Retrieved 9 December 2017. World Health Organization. "Measuring overall health system performance for 191 countries" (PDF). New York University. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help) "Nutrition, Physical Activity and Obesity Albania" (PDF). World Health Organization. p. 3. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. "The World Is Getting Fatter and No One Knows How to Stop It". Bloomberg.com. Bloomberg L.P. 6 April 2016. "Living Smart, the Mediterranean Way of Being Albanian". agroweb.org. 1 May 2017. Archived from the original on 17 September 2017. Retrieved 24 June 2017. "Prevalence of obesity, ages 18+, 2010–2014". WHO. World Health Organization. Archived from the original on 20 November 2019. Retrieved 26 February 2016. "Albania's Technology Needs Assessment (Final Draft)" (PDF). Ministry of Environment. March 2004. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 December 2017. Retrieved 29 August 2020. Zavalani, Orion. "Renewable energy potentials of Albania". European Commission (EC). Archived from the original on 29 August 2020. Retrieved 29 August 2020. "Fostering Effective Energy Transition 2023 Edition" (PDF). World Economic Forum. p. 12. Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 July 2023. Retrieved 8 July 2023. "Albania Renewable Energy Progress Reports 2014–2015" (PDF). Ministry of Infrastructure and Energy (Albania). p. 2. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. "Electricity production from hydroelectric sources (% of total)". World Bank. Retrieved 29 August 2020. "Electricity – from hydroelectric plants". The World Factbook. Archived from the original on 17 August 2020. Retrieved 29 August 2020. "Profile: Albania". International Hydropower Association (IHA). Archived from the original on 29 August 2020. Retrieved 29 August 2020. Energy Information Administration (3 September 2016). "Crude Oil Proved Reserves 2016". eia.gov. p. 1. Lorenc Gordani (21 June 2017). "Albania, from the largest continental onshore oil reserves in Europe, to the new bridge between the Balkans and Italy, by Dr Lorenc Gordani". esc.albaniaenergy.org. p. 1.[permanent dead link] "Scoping Report for the ESIA (Environmental and Social Impact Assessment) Albania" (PDF). Trans Adriatic Pipeline (TAP). April 2011. Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 July 2020. Retrieved 29 August 2020. "06/11347 – Albania – Benefits of Compliance with environmental acquis – final report" (PDF). European Commission (EC). October 2007. Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 August 2020. Retrieved 29 August 2020. "Water statistics". European Statistical Office (Eurostat). Archived from the original on 29 August 2020. Retrieved 29 August 2020. "Progress on Sanitation and Drinking Water : 2015 Update and MDG Assessment" (PDF). United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) and World Health Organization (WHO). Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 29 August 2020. "1998 Constitution of the Republic of Albania" (PDF). Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE). Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 July 2020. Retrieved 3 October 2020. "2020 World Press Freedom Index". Reporters Without Borders. 30 January 2013. Archived from the original on 3 October 2020. Retrieved 3 October 2020. "Freedom House–Countries and Territories". Freedom House. Archived from the original on 3 October 2020. Retrieved 3 October 2020. "Media Outlets in Albania". Konrad Adenauer Foundation (KAS). Archived from the original on 3 October 2020. Retrieved 3 October 2020. "Albania". The World Factbook (2024 ed.). Central Intelligence Agency. Retrieved 30 July 2020. (Archived 2020 edition) "An Overview of Albanian Film History". The Albanian Cinema Project. Archived from the original on 3 October 2020. Retrieved 3 October 2020. "Research for Development". DFID. Retrieved 13 September 2014. "Strategy of Science, Technology and Innovation 2009–2015" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 April 2011. Retrieved 27 August 2010. WIPO. "Global Innovation Index 2023, 15th Edition". www.wipo.int. doi:10.34667/tind.46596. Retrieved 29 October 2023. "Global Innovation Index". INSEAD Knowledge. 28 October 2013. Archived from the original on 2 September 2021. Retrieved 2 September 2021. "Plani Kombëtar për Zhvillimin e Qëndrueshëm të Infrastrukturës Digjitale Broadband 2020–2025" (PDF) (in Albanian). Ministry of Infrastructure and Energy. p. 8. Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 August 2020. Retrieved 30 August 2020. Muharremi, Oltiana; Madani, Filloreta; Pelari, Erald (October 2013). "The Development of the Service Sector in Albania and Its Future". Retrieved 30 August 2020. "2019 Raporti Vjetor" (PDF) (in Albanian). Electronic and Postal Communications Authority (AKEP). pp. 16, 19. Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 August 2020. Retrieved 30 August 2020. Petrushevska, Dragana (4 January 2023). "SpaceX launches two Albanian satellites – PM Rama". SeeNews. Archived from the original on 17 January 2023. Retrieved 17 January 2023. "Albania's first satellites launched into space". bne IntelliNews. 4 January 2023. Archived from the original on 17 January 2023. Retrieved 17 January 2023. Reyes, Marta (20 November 2023). "Who is OpenAI's Mira Murati: An AI innovation race from Tesla to ChatGPT". Medium. Archived from the original on 24 December 2023. Retrieved 24 December 2023. Metz, Cade; Mickle, Tripp (17 November 2023). "Meet Mira Murati, the Engineer Now Leading OpenAI". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 24 December 2023. Retrieved 24 December 2023. Aratani, Lauren (19 November 2023). "How OpenAI interim chief Mira Murati helped launch AI into the mainstream". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 24 December 2023. Retrieved 24 December 2023. Taylor, Alice (13 December 2023). "Albania to speed up EU accession using ChatGPT". Euractiv. Archived from the original on 24 December 2023. Retrieved 24 December 2023. "'Bisedova me Mira Muratin', Rama: Përafrimi i legjislacionit me BE-në bëhet me ChatGPT". Telegrafi (in Albanian). 9 December 2023. Archived from the original on 16 December 2023. Retrieved 24 December 2023. "Popullsia e Shqipërisë" (PDF) (in Albanian). Instituti i Statistikës (INSTAT). Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 July 2020. Retrieved 30 July 2020. "Albania Population and Population dynamics new demographic horizons?" (PDF). Instituti i Statistikës (INSTAT) and United Nations (UN). p. 25. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2020. Hoxhaj, Andi (28 June 2023). "Albania's brain drain: why so many young people are leaving and how to get them to stay". The Conversation. "Albania Population Projections 2011–2031" (PDF). Instituti i Statistikës (INSTAT). p. 37. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2020. "30% of Albanians live abroad amid increased migration woes – EURACTIV.com". 17 November 2022. "Article: Embracing Emigration: The Migration-Devel.. | migrationpolicy.org". 9 September 2015. "The other Albanian migrant crisis". openDemocracy. Institute of Statistics of Albania. "Population of Albania 1 January 2017" (PDF). instat.gov.al. Tirana. p. 4. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. "Popullsia e Shqipërisë" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 April 2016. Retrieved 19 February 2016. INSTAT. "POPULATION AND HOUSING CENSUS 2011" (PDF). instat.gov.al (in Albanian and English). Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 June 2017. staff (12 October 2017). "Albania has Recognized the Bulgarian Minority in the Country". novinite.com. Sofia News Agency. Retrieved 4 December 2017. United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (11 May 2005). "World Directory of Minorities and Indigenous Peoples – Albania : Overview". United Nations High Commission for Refugees. Archived from the original on 16 April 2013. Retrieved 5 May 2013. "Third Opinion on Albania adopted on 23 November 2011". Advisory Committee on the Framework for the Protection of National Minorities. Retrieved 29 June 2017. RFE/RL Research Report: Weekly Analyses from the RFE/RL Research Institute. Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, Incorporated. 1993. Albanian officials alleged that the priest was promoting irredentist sentiments among Albania's Greek minority – estimated at between 60,000 and 300,000. Robert Bideleux; Ian Jeffries (2006). The Balkans: A Post-Communist History. Routledge. p. 49. ISBN 978-0-203-96911-3. The Albanian government claimed that there were only 60,000, based on the biased 1989 census, whereas the Greek government claimed that there were upwards of 300,000. Most Western estimates were around the 200,000 mark ... Sabrina P. Ramet (1998). Nihil Obstat: Religion, Politics, and Social Change in East-Central Europe and Russia. Duke University Press. p. 222. ISBN 978-0-8223-2070-8. that between 250,000 and 300,000 Orthodox Greeks reside in Albania Jeffries, Ian (2002). Eastern Europe at the Turn of the Twenty-first Century: A Guide to the Economies in Transition. Routledge. p. 69. ISBN 978-0-415-23671-3. It is difficult to know how many ethnic Greeks there are in Albania. The Greek government, it is typically claimed, says that there are around 300,000 ethnic Greeks in Albania, but most Western estimates are around 200,000. Europa Publications (2008). The Europa World Year Book 2008. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-1-85743-452-1. and Greece formally annulled claims to North Epirus (southern Albania), where there is a sizeable Greek minority. ... strained by concerns relating to the treatment of ethnic Greeks residing in Albania (numbering an estimated 300,000) ... "Albania". The World Factbook (2024 ed.). Central Intelligence Agency. Retrieved 13 September 2014. (Archived 2014 edition) "Albania". U.S. Department of State. Retrieved 13 September 2014. "International Religious Freedom Report for 2014: Albania" (PDF). state.gov. United States Department of State. p. 5. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. Retrieved 20 October 2015. Ethnic Greek minority groups had encouraged their members to boycott the census, affecting measurements of the Greek ethnic minority and membership in the Greek Orthodox Church. "Constitution of the Republic of Albania". osce.org. p. 3. The official language in the Republic of Albania is Albanian. Nitsiakos, Vasilēs G. (2011). Balkan Border Crossings: Second Annual of the Konitsa Summer School. LIT Verlag Münster. p. 150. ISBN 9783643800923. in the Albanian south... The Greek language is spoken by an important percentage of the Albanians of the south. "What Languages Are Spoken in Albania?". WorldAtlas. August 2017. "The Second Most Spoken Languages Around the World". Kathimerini. Archived from the original on 29 July 2018. Retrieved 12 June 2017. .5% speak it as first language. "The Greek language is widely spoken in Albania (H Ελληνική γλώσσα γίνεται καθομιλουμένη στην Αλβανία)". Kathimerini. Retrieved 12 June 2017. "Languages of Albania". Archived from the original on 23 January 2009. Retrieved 31 October 2010. "Press release of the Adult Education Survey" (PDF). Albanian Institute of Statistics. 10 May 2018. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 August 2018. Retrieved 23 May 2018. Gjovalin Shkurtaj (2017). Urgjenca gjuhësore: -huazime të zëvendësueshme me fjalë shqipe- : (fjalorth). Naimi. pp. 15–16. ISBN 9789928234049. Sic u permend me lart, per shkak te shkaqeve kulturore dhe ekonomike, trendet e mesimit te gjuheve nga te rinjte (grupmosha deri ne 25 vjec) ndryshojne. Keto trende jane percaktues i nje sere fenomeneve shoqerore, sic do te shohim me tej. Keshtu nga viti 2000 e ketej, gjuha angleze, gjermane dhe ajo turke kane pasur nje rritje te interest. Gjuha italiane, por edhe ajo franceze kane pasur nje stabilitet, pra as rritje dhe as ulje te interesit te pergjithshem nga ana e grupmoshes te siperpermendur. Vihet re se gjuha greke ka pesuar nje renie te forte te interesit. Ne fakt, shumica e interesit ka rene per kete gjuhe. Arsyet per kete gjuhe specifike do ti trajtojme me tej ne kapitulin e trete. "Gjuha gjermane, shumë e kërkuar në Shqipëri". albinfo.ch. albinfo. 10 April 2014. Archived from the original on 3 May 2021. Retrieved 26 May 2018. "Në Shqipëri vazhdon të rritet interesi për gjuhën turke". voal.ch. voal. 5 October 2016. Retrieved 26 May 2018. Nurja, Ines. "Censusi i popullsisë dhe banesave/ Population and Housing Census (2011)" (PDF). Instituti i Statistikës (INSTAT). p. 71. Archived (PDF) from the original on 30 July 2020. Retrieved 30 July 2020. "1998 Constitution of the Republic of Albania" (PDF). Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE). Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 July 2020. Retrieved 30 July 2020. "Gallup Global Reports". Gallup. Archived from the original on 14 October 2013. Retrieved 25 March 2013. Smith, Oliver (14 January 2018). "Mapped: The world's most (and least) religious countries". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 16 August 2021. Retrieved 1 September 2021. Worldwide Independent Network/Gallup International Association. "Religion prevails in the world" (PDF). wingia.com. p. 4 & 7. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 November 2017. Retrieved 27 February 2018. "Regjistrimi: 70% e banorëve nuk kanë deklaruar besimin fetar". Ateistët. Archived from the original on 8 August 2017. Retrieved 18 April 2012. "Censusi permbys fete, 70 per qind refuzojne ose nuk e deklarojne besimin". Shqiperia.com. Archived from the original on 26 September 2020. Retrieved 30 March 2016. "Kisha Ortodokse Autoqefale e Shqipërisë – Deklaratë zyrtare". Peshku pa uje. Archived from the original on 12 December 2017. Retrieved 11 December 2017. "Kisha Ortodokse: Censusi fshehu 17% të besimtarëve". Shqiptarja.com. Archived from the original on 1 July 2016. Retrieved 23 July 2016. "Fete kunder censusit, bektashinjte: Nuk u pyetem". Panorama. Retrieved 8 December 2017. Jazexhi, Olsi (2013). "Albania". In Nielsen, Jørgen; Akgönül, Samim; Alibašić, Ahmet; Racius, Egdunas (eds.). Yearbook of Muslims in Europe: Volume 5. Leiden: Brill. pp. 21–36. ISBN 9789004255869. "Some officials from the Muslim community of Albania have expressed their unhappiness with the census result, claiming that according to their calculations the percentage of the Muslims was 70%. They have also claimed that many members of the Muslim Community were not counted in the census." "Katolikët kundër Censusit: Do të regjistrojmë besimtarët – Arkiva Shqiptare e Lajmeve". arkivalajmeve.com. Archived from the original on 26 September 2020. Retrieved 8 December 2017. "Albania: International Religious Freedom Report 2007". U.S. State Department. 14 September 2007. Retrieved 27 August 2010. "Korrieri online – Shqip". 23 May 2005. Archived from the original on 23 May 2005. Retrieved 17 November 2015. "Në Shqipëri P. ka 1119 kisha dhe 638 xhami". Ateistët. Archived from the original on 18 November 2015. Retrieved 17 November 2015. Merdjanova, Ina (2013). Rediscovering the Umma: Muslims in the Balkans between nationalism and transnationalism. Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp. 6–7, 39–40. ISBN 9780190462505. "Albania". TED Adventist. Archived from the original on 24 February 2013. Retrieved 25 March 2013. "Famous British celebrity visits ADRA Albania – Albania". ReliefWeb. 30 April 2001. "LDS Newsroom-Country Profile-Albania". The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Archived from the original on 25 August 2010. 2015 Yearbook of Jehovah's Witnesses. Watch Tower Society. p. 178. "1st chief rabbi inaugurated in Albania – Israel Jewish Scene, Ynetnews". Ynetnews. Retrieved 15 February 2014. Scheib, Ariel. "Albania Virtual Jewish Tour". Jewish Virtual Library. Retrieved 15 February 2014. "Për formën dhe përmasat e Flamurit kombëtar përmbajtjen e Himnit kombëtar, formën dhe përmasat e Stemës së Republikës të Shqiperisë dhe mënyrën e përdorimit të tyre" (PDF) (in Albanian). Tirana: Fletorja zyrtare e Republikës së Shqipërisë. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 August 2016. Retrieved 11 January 2019. Robert, Elsie (19 March 2010). Historical Dictionary of Albania. Scarecrow Press. p. 140. ISBN 978-0-8108-7380-3. Archived from the original on 29 September 2023. Retrieved 29 September 2023. James Minahan (23 December 2009). The Complete Guide to National Symbols and Emblems. ABC-CLIO. pp. 301 –&#32, 304. ISBN 978-0-313-34497-8. Archived from the original on 30 September 2023. Retrieved 30 September 2023. Paulist Fathers (1876). Catholic World, Band 23. Paulist Fathers. p. 235. Francis Tapon (8 December 2011). The Hidden Europe: What Eastern Europeans Can Teach Us. SonicTrek, Inc. p. 441. ISBN 9780976581222. Historia e popullit shqiptar (in Albanian) (Instituti i Historisë (Akademia e Shkencave e RSH) ed.). Tirana: Botimet Toena, 2002. pp. 294–298, 433–434. Gjergji, Andromaqi (2004). Albanian Costumes Through the Centuries: Origin, Types, Evolution. Academy of Sciences of Albania. p. 153. ISBN 978-99943-614-4-1. Archived from the original on 12 March 2023. Retrieved 23 September 2023. Blumi 2011, p. 19 Stipčević 1977, p. 89: "It is generally agreed, and rightly so, that the modern Albanian cap originates directly from the similar cap worn by the Illyrians." Recherches albanologiques: Folklore et ethnologie. Instituti Albanologijik i Prishtinës. 1982. p. 52. Retrieved 14 April 2013. Ne kuadrin e veshjeve me përkime ilire, të dokumentuara gjer më tani hyjnë tirqit, plisi, qeleshja e bardhë gjysmësferike, goxhufi-gëzofi etj "Xhubleta, skills, craftsmanship and forms of usage". UNESCO. Archived from the original on 24 September 2023. Retrieved 24 September 2023. "Robert Elsie: Arti Shqiptar". albanianart.net. Retrieved 22 November 2015. MaryLee Knowlton (2005). Albania – Band 23 von Cultures of the world. Marshall Cavendish, 2004. pp. 102–103. ISBN 9780761418528. Karin Myhrberg – University of Gothenburg. "Heritage from the Communist Period in Albania – An Unwanted Heritage Today?" (PDF). gupea.ub.gu.se. p. 12. Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022. UNESCO. "Butrint". UNESCO. UNESCO. "Historic Centres of Berat and Gjirokastra". UNESCO. "Albania Mania". agroweb.org. Archived from the original on 13 October 2017. Retrieved 13 October 2017. "Albania ranked first in the World for the number of Bars and Restaurants per inhabitant". Oculus News. 19 February 2018. "Why Albania Is A Great Destination For Wine Drinkers". epicureandculture.com. 5 January 2017. Retrieved 5 January 2017. "Wines of Albania". winesofbalkans.com. p. 1. Archived from the original on 7 January 2014. Retrieved 18 January 2019. "Albanian folk iso-polyphony". United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO). Archived from the original on 14 December 2020. Retrieved 14 December 2020. "Kujtimet për Koço Çakalin, themeluesin e këngës himariote". shekulli.com.al. Archived from the original on 29 August 2016. Retrieved 23 July 2016. "Historiku i Festivalit të Këngës" (in Albanian). Radio Televizioni Shqiptar (RTSH). Archived from the original on 7 January 2020. Retrieved 14 December 2020. "Era Istrefi requires Albanian citizenship, meets with President Nishani". ocnal. 12 November 2016. Retrieved 12 November 2016. "How Ermonela Jaho became the world's most acclaimed soprano". The Economist. 28 May 2016. Retrieved 28 May 2016. "Tenori shqiptar Saimir Pirgu nominohet në "Grammy Awards"! (Foto)". Telegrafi. 7 December 2016. Retrieved 7 December 2016. Amofa, Richard (19 June 2016). "Euro 2016: Albania 0–1 Romania – Armando Sadiku scores the only goal to seal his country's first ever win at a major competition". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 19 June 2016. "Romania 0–1 Albania – Sadiku scores landmark goal to provide last 16 hope". Daily Mirror. 19 June 2016. Retrieved 19 June 2016. Stafi i Akedemise se Shkencave (2003). Historia e popullit shqiptar. Botimet Toena. pp. 252–254. Hodgkinson, Harry (2005), Scanderbeg: From Ottoman Captive to Albanian Hero, I.B. Tauris, ISBN 1-85043-941-9 History of the Party of Labor of Albania. Tirana: Institute of Marxist–Leninist Studies, 1971. 691 p. Abrahams, Fred (2015). Modern Albania: From Dictatorship to Democracy in Europe. NYU Press. p. 384. ISBN 978-0-8147-0511-7. Blumi, Isa (10 May 2011), Reinstating the Ottomans: Alternative Balkan Modernities, 1800 – 1912, Palgrave Macmillan, ISBN 978-0-230-11908-6, archived from the original on 23 September 2023, retrieved 23 September 2023 Stipčević, Aleksandar (1977). The Illyrians: History and Culture. History and Culture Series. Noyes Press. ISBN 0815550529. Archived from the original on 25 May 2023. Retrieved 23 September 2023. Wikimedia Atlas of Albania albania.al – (in English) president.al – (in Albanian) kryeministria.al – (in Albanian) parlament.al Archived 5 December 2021 at the Wayback Machine – (in Albanian) Albania at The World Factbook by Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) Albania at Wikipedia's sister projects: Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Textbooks from Wikibooks Travel guides from Wikivoyage 41°N 20°E﻿ / ﻿41°N 20°E﻿ / 41; 20