Aubrey Drake Graham (born October 24, 1986) is a Canadian rapper and singer. An influential figure in contemporary popular music, he has been credited with popularizing R&B sensibilities in hip hop artists. Gaining recognition by starring as Jimmy Brooks in the CTV teen drama series Degrassi: The Next Generation (2001–08), Drake then started pursuing a recording career in 2006, releasing his debut mixtape Room for Improvement. He followed up with the mixtapes Comeback Season (2007) and So Far Gone (2009) before signing with Young Money Entertainment. His first three albums Thank Me Later (2010), Take Care (2011) and Nothing Was the Same (2013) were met with commercial success, containing the US top-ten singles "Find Your Love", "Take Care", "Started from the Bottom", and "Hold On, We're Going Home". Drake's fourth album Views (2016), received further success, remaining atop the Billboard 200 for 13 non-consecutive weeks, and featured the global hit singles "Hotline Bling" and "One Dance" (with WizKid and Kyla), the latter was credited for popularizing dancehall and Afrobeats in contemporary pop music. Views was followed by the double album Scorpion (2018), that spawned three US number-one singles: "God's Plan", "Nice for What", and "In My Feelings". His sixth album, Certified Lover Boy (2021), set the then-record (9) for most US top-ten hits from one album: its lead single "Way 2 Sexy" (with Future and Young Thug) reached number one. In 2022, he released the house-inspired album Honestly, Nevermind and the collaborative album, Her Loss (with 21 Savage) and his eighth album For All the Dogs in 2023: these contained the number-ones "Jimmy Cooks" (with 21 Savage), "Slime You Out" (with SZA), and "First Person Shooter" (with J. Cole). As an entrepreneur, Drake founded the OVO Sound record label with longtime collaborator 40 in 2012. In 2013, he became the "global ambassador" of the Toronto Raptors, joining their executive committee and later obtaining naming rights to their practice facility OVO Athletic Centre. In 2016, he began collaborating with Brent Hocking on the bourbon whiskey Virginia Black. Drake heads the OVO fashion label and the Nocta collaboration with Nike, and founded the production company DreamCrew and the fragrance house Better World. In 2018, he was reportedly responsible for 5 percent (CAD$440 million) of Toronto's CAD$8.8 billion annual tourism income. In 2022, he obtained partial ownership of Italian soccer club A.C. Milan. Among the world's best-selling music artists, with over 170 million records sold, Drake is ranked as the highest-certified digital singles artist in the United States by the RIAA. He has won five Grammy Awards, six American Music Awards, 39 Billboard Music Awards, two Brit Awards, and three Juno Awards. He has achieved 13 number-one hits on the Billboard Hot 100, a joint-record for the most number-one singles by a male solo artist (tied with Michael Jackson). Drake holds further Hot 100 records, including the most top 10 singles (77), and the most charted songs (329). From 2018 to 2023, Drake held the record for the most simultaneously charted songs in one week (27), the most Hot 100 debuts in one week (22); and held the most continuous time on the Hot 100 (431 weeks). He additionally has the most number-one singles on the R&B/Hip-Hop Airplay, Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs, Hot Rap Songs, and Rhythmic Airplay charts. Aubrey Drake Graham was born on October 24, 1986, in Toronto, Ontario. His father, Dennis Graham, is an African-American drummer from Memphis who once performed with musician Jerry Lee Lewis. His mother, Sandra "Sandi" Graham (née Sher), is a Canadian Ashkenazi Jew, who worked as an English teacher and florist. Graham performed at Club Bluenote in Toronto, where he met Sandra, who was in attendance. Drake is a dual citizen of the United States and Canada, the former derived from Graham. In his youth, he attended a Jewish day school and became a bar mitzvah. Drake's parents divorced when he was five years old. After the divorce, he and his mother remained in Toronto; his father returned to Memphis, where he was incarcerated for a number of years on drug-related charges. Graham's limited finances and legal issues caused him to remain in the U.S. until Drake's early adulthood. Prior to his arrest, Graham would travel to Toronto and bring Drake to Memphis every summer. Graham claimed in an interview that Drake's assertions of him being an absent father were embellishments used to sell music, which Drake vehemently denies. Drake was raised in two neighbourhoods. He lived on Weston Road in Toronto's working-class west end until grade six and attended Weston Memorial Junior Public School until grade four, playing minor hockey with the Weston Red Wings. Drake was a promising right winger, reaching the Upper Canada College hockey camp, but left at the behest of his mother following a vicious cross-check to his neck during a game by an opposing player. He moved to one of the city's affluent neighbourhoods, Forest Hill, in 2000. When asked about the move, Drake replied, "[We had] a half of a house we could live in. The other people had the top half, we had the bottom half. I lived in the basement, my mom lived on the first floor. It was not big, it was not luxurious. It was what we could afford." At age 10, Drake appeared in a comedic sketch which aired during the 1997 NHL Awards, featuring a riff of Martin Brodeur and Ron Hextall and their record as being the only goalies to have scored multiple goals. He attended Forest Hill Collegiate Institute for high school, and attended Vaughan Road Academy in Toronto's multicultural Oakwood–Vaughan neighbourhood; Drake described Vaughan Road Academy as "not by any means the easiest school to go to." During his teenage years, Drake worked at a now-closed Toronto furniture factory owned by his maternal grandfather, Reuben Sher. Drake said he was bullied at school for his racial and religious background, and upon determining that his class schedule was detrimental to his burgeoning acting career, he dropped out of school. Drake received his high school diploma in October 2012. At 15, Drake was introduced to a high school friend's father, an acting agent. He found Drake a role on the Canadian teen drama series Degrassi: The Next Generation, in which Drake portrayed Jimmy Brooks, a basketball star who became physically disabled after he was shot by a classmate. When asked about his early acting career, Drake replied, "My mother was very sick. We were very poor, like broke. The only money I had coming in was [from] Canadian TV." According to showrunners Linda Schuyler and Stephen Stohn, Drake regularly arrived late on set after spending nights recording music. To prevent this, Schuyler claimed Drake struck an agreement with the set's security guards to gain entry to the set after recording to be allowed to sleep in a dressing room. Drake's first recorded song, "Do What You Do", appeared on The N Soundtrack, which was released by The N (the night-time block for Noggin), as it was the network that Degrassi was airing on in the United States. Being musically inspired by Jay-Z and Clipse, Drake self-released his debut mixtape, Room for Improvement featuring Trey Songz and Lupe Fiasco, in 2006. Drake described the project as "pretty straightforward, radio friendly, [and] not much content to it." Room for Improvement was released for sale only and sold roughly 6,000 copies, for which Drake received $304.04 in royalties. He performed his first concert on August 19, 2006, at the Kool Haus nightclub as an opening act for Ice Cube, performing for half an hour and earning $100. In 2007, Drake released his second mixtape Comeback Season. Released from his recently founded October's Very Own label, it spawned the single "Replacement Girl" featuring Trey Songz. The song sampled "Man of the Year" by Brisco, Flo Rida and Lil Wayne, retaining Lil Wayne's verse; the rapper invited Drake to Houston to join his Tha Carter III tour. On tour, Drake and Lil Wayne recorded multiple songs together, including "Ransom", "Forever", and a remix to "Brand New". In 2009, Drake released his third mixtape So Far Gone. It was made available for free download through his OVO blog website, and featured Lil Wayne, Trey Songz, Omarion, Lloyd, and Bun B. It received over 2,000 downloads in the first 2 hours of release, finding mainstream commercial success from the singles "Best I Ever Had" and "Successful", both gaining Platinum certification by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), with the former also peaking at number two on the Billboard Hot 100. This prompted the mixtape's re-release as an EP, featuring four songs from the original, as well as the additions of the songs "I'm Goin' In" and "Fear". It debuted at number six on the Billboard 200, and won the Rap Recording of the Year at the 2010 Juno Awards. Due to the success of the mixtape, Drake was the subject of a bidding war from various labels, often reported as "one of the biggest bidding wars ever". He had secured a recording contract with Young Money Entertainment on June 29, 2009. Drake joined the rest of the label's roster on the America's Most Wanted Tour in July 2009. However, during a performance of "Best I Ever Had" in Camden, New Jersey, Drake fell on stage and tore the anterior cruciate ligament in his right knee. Drake planned to release his debut album, Thank Me Later, in late 2008, but the album's release date was thrice postponed up to June 15, 2010. On March 9, 2010, Drake released the lead single "Over", which peaked at number fourteen on the Billboard Hot 100, as well as topping the Rap Songs chart. It received a nomination for Best Rap Solo Performance at the 53rd Grammy Awards. His second single, "Find Your Love", became a bigger success. It peaked at number five on the Hot 100, and was certified 3× Multi-Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). The music video for the single was shot in Kingston, Jamaica, and was criticized by Jamaica's minister of tourism Edmund Bartlett. The third single and fourth singles, "Miss Me" and "Fancy" respectively, attained moderate commercial success; however, the latter garnered Drake his second nomination at the 53rd Grammy Awards for Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group. Thank Me Later was released on June 15, 2010, debuting at number one on the Billboard 200 with sales of over 447,000 copies in its first week. Upon the album's release, 25,000 fans gathered at New York City's South Street Seaport for a free concert hosted by Drake and Hanson, which was later cancelled by the police after a near-riot ensued due to overflowing crowds. The album became the top selling debut album for any artist in 2010 and had the highest sales week for any debut album in the 2010s and featured Lil Wayne, Kanye West, and Jay Z. Drake began his Away from Home Tour on September 20, 2010, in Miami, Florida, performing at 78 shows over four different legs. It concluded in Las Vegas in November 2010. Due to the tour's success, Drake hosted the first OVO Festival in 2010. Drake had an eco-friendly college tour to support the album. Drake announced his intentions to allow Noah "40" Shebib to record a more cohesive sound on his next album than on Thank Me Later. In November 2010, Drake revealed the title of his next studio album would be Take Care. He sought to expand on the low-tempo, sensuous, and dark sonic esthetic of Thank Me Later. Primarily a hip hop album, Drake also attempted to incorporate R&B and pop to create a languid, grandiose sound. In January 2011, Drake was in negotiations to join Eva Green and Susan Sarandon as a member of the cast in Nicholas Jarecki's Arbitrage, before ultimately deciding against starring in the movie to focus on the album. "Dreams Money Can Buy" and "Marvins Room" were released on Drake's October's Very Own Blog, on May 20 and June 9, respectively. Acting as promotional singles for Take Care, the former was eventually unincluded on the album's final track listing, while "Marvins Room" gained 3× Multi-Platinum certification by the RIAA, as well as peaking at number 21 on the Billboard Hot 100. "Headlines" was released on August 9 as the album's lead single. It met with positive critical and commercial response, reaching number thirteen on the Hot 100, as well as becoming Drake's tenth single to reach the summit of the Billboard Hot Rap Songs. It was eventually certified 4× Multi-Platinum in the United States and Platinum in Canada. The music video for the single was released on October 2. Take Care was released on November 15, 2011, and received generally positive reviews from music critics. It also won the Grammy Award for Best Rap Album at the 55th Annual Grammy Awards, and achieved great commercial success, eventually being certified six times platinum by the RIAA in 2019, with sales for the album marking 2.6 million in the U.S. The album's third and fourth singles, "The Motto" and Take Care", were released on November 29, 2011 and February 21, 2012, respectively. Each song achieved commercial success, and "The Motto" was later credited for popularizing the phrase "YOLO" in the United States. The music video for "Take Care" met with widespread acclaim, receiving four nominations at the 2012 MTV Video Music Awards, including for Video of the Year. "HYFR" was the final single to be released from the album, and became certified 2× Multi-Platinum. On August 5, 2012, Drake released "Enough Said", performed by Aaliyah and himself. Originally recorded prior to Aaliyah's 2001 death, Drake later finished the track with producer "40". In promotion of his second album, Drake embarked on the worldwide Club Paradise Tour. It became the most successful hip hop tour of 2012, grossing over $42 million. He then returned to acting, starring in Ice Age: Continental Drift as Ethan. By the Club Paradise Tour's European leg, Drake had begun working on his third studio album, which he said would retain 40 as the album's executive producer, include the influence of British producer Jamie xx, and stylistically differ from Take Care, departing from the ambient production and despondent lyrics previously prevalent. After he won the Grammy Award for Best Rap Album at the 55th Annual Grammy Awards on 10 February 2013, Drake announced his third album, Nothing Was the Same, and released its first single. The album's second single, "Hold On, We're Going Home", was released in August, peaking at number one on the Billboard Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart. Nothing Was the Same was released on September 24, 2013, debuting at number one on the US Billboard 200, with 658,000 copies sold in its first week of release. The album debuted atop the charts in Canada, Denmark, Australia and the United Kingdom. The album also enjoyed generally favourable reviews by contemporary music critics, commending the musical shift in terms of the tone and subject matter, comparing it to Kanye West's 808s & Heartbreak. The album, which sold over 1,720,000 copies in the United States, was further promoted by the "Would You like a Tour?" throughout late 2013 to early 2014. It became the 22nd-most successful tour of the year, grossing an estimated $46 million. Drake then returned to acting in January 2014, hosting Saturday Night Live, as well as serving as the musical guest. His versatility, acting ability and comedic timing were all praised by critics, describing it as what "kept him afloat during the tough and murky SNL waters". In late 2014, Drake announced that he began recording sessions for his fourth studio album. On February 12, 2015, Drake released If You're Reading This It's Too Late onto iTunes with no prior announcement. Despite debate on whether it was an album or a mixtape, its commercial stance quantifies it as his fourth retail project with Cash Money Records, a scheme that was rumoured to allow Drake to leave the label. However, he eventually remained with Cash Money, and If You're Reading This It's Too Late sold over 1 million units in 2015. On July 31, 2015, Drake released four singles: "Back to Back", "Charged Up", "Hotline Bling", and "Right Hand". On September 20, Drake released a collaborative mixtape with Future, which was recorded in Atlanta in just under a week. What a Time to Be Alive debuted at number one on the Billboard 200, making Drake the first hip hop artist to have two projects reach number one in the same year since 2004. It was later certified 2× multi platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) for combined sales, streaming and track-sales equivalent of over 2 million units. Drake announced in January 2016 that his fourth studio album would be launched during the spring, releasing the promotional single "Summer Sixteen" later that month. The album was originally titled Views from the 6, but was later shortened to Views. "Summer Sixteen" debuted at number six on the US Billboard Hot 100, and proved controversial— Drake's self-comparisons with more tenured artists divided many critics, who described his self-comparison as "goodly brash" or "conventionally disrespectful." Drake soon released the album's lead singles, "Pop Style" and the dancehall-infused "One Dance", on April 5. Both debuted within the top 40 of the Billboard Hot 100; however, the latter proved more commercially successful, with "One Dance" becoming Drake's first number-one single in Canada and the US as a leading artist. The single also became Drake's first number one single as a lead artist in the United Kingdom, and peaked at number one in many other countries. Views was previewed in London before its premiere a day later. It was released as an Apple Music and iTunes exclusive on April 29 before being made available to various other platforms later that week. Views would become Drake's most commercially successful album, sitting atop the Billboard 200 for thirteen weeks, as well as simultaneously leading the Billboard Hot 100 and the Billboard 200 for eight weeks. It achieved sextuple-platinum status in the U.S., and earned over 1 million album-equivalent units in the first week of its release, as well as gaining over half-billion overall streams. Despite its success, critical reception was mixed: the album drew criticism for its length, lack of a cohesive theme, and dearth of artistic challenge. Drake returned to host Saturday Night Live on May 14, serving as the show's musical guest. Drake and Future then announced the Summer Sixteen Tour to showcase their collective mixtape, as well as their respective studio albums. The latter dates of the tour were postponed due to Drake suffering an ankle injury. According to Pollstar, the Summer Sixteen Tour was the highest grossing hip-hop tour of all time, having earnt $84.3 million across 56 dates. On July 23, Drake announced that he was working on a new project, scheduled to be released in early 2017. During the 2016 OVO Festival, Kanye West confirmed that he and Drake had begun working on a collaborative album. Soon after, the music video for "Child's Play" was released. On September 26, Please Forgive Me was released as an Apple Music exclusive. It ran a total of 25 minutes, and featured music from Views. At the 2016 BET Hip-Hop Awards, Drake received the most nominations, with 10, winning the awards for Album of the Year and Best Hip-Hop Video. Drake later announced the Boy Meets World Tour on October 10. During an episode of OVO Sound Radio, Drake confirmed he would be releasing a project titled More Life, described as a "playlist of original music".> Drake later secured his second and third Grammy Awards, winning for Best Rap/Sung Performance and Best Rap Song at the 59th ceremony. Upon release on March 18, 2017, More Life received mostly positive reviews, and debuted atop the Billboard 200, earning 505,000 album-equivalent units in its first week. It also set a streaming record, becoming the highest ever streamed album in 24 hours, with a total of 89.9 million streams on Apple Music and 61.3 million on Spotify. He later won a record 13 awards at the 2017 Billboard Music Awards in May. By this time, Drake had been present on the Hot 100 chart for eight consecutive years, and had the most recorded entries by a solo artist. Drake hosted the first annual NBA Awards on June 26, and also appeared in The Carter Effect documentary. Drake released a mini EP titled Scary Hours on January 20, 2018, marking Drake's first solo release since More Life. Scary Hours featured the songs "Diplomatic Immunity" and "God's Plan", with the latter debuting at number one on the US Billboard Hot 100. The song was Drake's first song as a solo artist to reach number one. It also became his first song to be certified Diamond by the RIAA, and it is currently tied for the fourth highest certified digital single ever in the US He was later featured on BlocBoy JB's February 2018 debut single "Look Alive". The song's entry on the Hot 100 made Drake the rapper with the most top 10 hits on the Hot 100, with 23. On April 6, "Nice for What", a single from his fifth studio album, was released. It replaced his own "God's Plan" on the Billboard Hot 100 at number one, making Drake the first artist to have a new number-one debut replace their former number-one debut. He then announced the title of his fifth studio album as Scorpion, with a planned release date of June 29, 2018."I'm Upset" was released on May 26 as the album's third single. Scorpion was Drake's longest project, with a run-time of just under 90 minutes. The album broke both the one-day global records on Spotify and Apple Music, as it gained 132.45 million and 170 million plays on each streaming service, respectively. It eventually sold 749,000 album equivalent units in its first week of sales, and debuted at number one on the Billboard 200. Drake earned his sixth number-one hit with "In My Feelings" on July 21. The success of "In My Feelings" also made Drake the record holder for most number one hits among rappers. He then appeared on the Travis Scott album Astroworld, featuring uncredited vocals for the song "Sicko Mode", which peaked at number one on the Billboard Hot 100. Drake announced in July 2018 that he planned to "take 6 months to a year" to himself to return to television and films, producing the television series Euphoria and Top Boy. He then began the Aubrey & the Three Migos Tour with co-headliners Migos on August 12. This preceded a collaboration with Bad Bunny titled "Mia", which featured Drake performing in Spanish. In February 2019, he received his fourth Grammy Award for Best Rap Song, for "God's Plan", at the 61st Annual Grammy Awards. During his speech, producers abruptly cut to a commercial break, leading viewers to speculate they were censoring his speech during which he criticized The Recording Academy. A legal representative for the academy released a statement stating "a natural pause [led] the producers [to] assume that he was done and cut to commercial," and added the organization offered him an opportunity to return to stage, but he declined. On February 14, Drake re-released his third mixtape, So Far Gone, onto streaming services for the first time to commemorate its 10-year anniversary. On June 15, Drake released two songs, "Omertà" and "Money in the Grave", on his EP The Best in the World Pack to celebrate the NBA Championship win of the Toronto Raptors. On August 2, he released the compilation album Care Package, consisting of songs released between 2010 and 2016 that were initially unavailable for purchase or commercial streaming; it debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 with 109,000 album equivalent units in its first week of sales Drake released the song "War" on December 24, 2019, which was widely noted for its UK drill-inspired instrumental. The following day, he revealed that he was in the process of completing his sixth studio album. On April 3, he released "Toosie Slide" with a music video, which features a dance created in collaboration with social media influencer Toosie. It debuted at number one on the Billboard Hot 100, making Drake the first male artist to have three songs debut at number one. On May 1, 2020, Drake released the commercial mixtape Dark Lane Demo Tapes, with guest appearances from Chris Brown, Future, Young Thug, Fivio Foreign, Playboi Carti, and Sosa Geek. The mixtape is a compilation of new songs and tracks that leaked on the internet. It received mixed reviews and debuted at number two on the US Billboard 200, and at number one on the UK Albums Chart. Drake also announced that his sixth studio album would be released in the summer of 2020. On August 14, "Laugh Now Cry Later" featuring Lil Durk was released, which was intended as the lead single from the upcoming album Certified Lover Boy, but not included on the final track listing. It debuted at number two on the Hot 100, and was nominated for Best Rap Song at the 63rd Annual Grammy Awards. On his 34th birthday, Drake announced Certified Lover Boy was set to be released in January 2021. This was later pushed back after he sustained a serious knee injury. In January 2021, Drake became the first artist to surpass 50 billion combined streams on Spotify. On March 5, Drake released an EP titled Scary Hours 2, which includes three songs: "What's Next", "Wants and Needs" with Lil Baby, and "Lemon Pepper Freestyle" with Rick Ross. These three songs entered the charts at numbers one, two, and three, respectively, making Drake the first artist to have three songs debut in the top three on the Billboard Hot 100. He was named Artist of the Decade at the 2021 Billboard Music Awards. Certified Lover Boy was released on September 3, 2021, becoming Drake's tenth number-one album on the Billboard 200; every song debuted on the Billboard Hot 100, while the album was the first to chart nine songs on the top 10, with "Way 2 Sexy" becoming Drake's ninth number-one single. Certified Lover Boy was nominated for Best Rap Album and "Way 2 Sexy" was nominated for Best Rap Performance at the 64th Annual Grammy Awards. He was later named Billboard's Top Artist of the Year for 2021, and was the fourth most streamed artist on Spotify for the year, and the most streamed rapper. On December 6, he withdrew his music for consideration for the Grammys, with multiple outlets noting his contentious relationship with the Recording Academy. Drake accumulated 8.6 billion on-demand streams in 2021, making him the most overall streamed artist of the year in the United States; one out of every 131 streams was a Drake song. On March 3, 2022, Drake placed fourth on Forbes's ranking of highest paid rappers of 2021, with an estimated pre-tax income of $50 million. On April 16, it was calculated Drake generated more streams in 2021 than every song released prior to 1980 combined; his music accumulated 7.91 billion streams, while songs pre-1980 had generated 6.32 billion. Drake was then confirmed as a guest artist on Future's I Never Liked You (2022); one of the songs he featured on, "Wait for U", debuted atop the Billboard Hot 100, becoming Drake's tenth number-one song and making him the tenth act to achieve ten number ones. In early May, Drake re-signed with Universal Music Group in a multifaceted deal reported to be worth as much as $400 million, making it one of the largest recording contracts ever. On June 16, Drake announced his seventh album, Honestly, Nevermind, which released a day later; he also announced a third iteration of his Scary Hours EP series. Honestly, Nevermind sold 204,000 album-equivalent units in its first week, becoming Drake's eleventh US number-one album and making him the fifth artist with over 10 number one albums, after the Beatles (19), Jay-Z (14), Bruce Springsteen, and Barbra Streisand (both 11). "Jimmy Cooks" also became Drake's eleventh US number-one song. On July 14, it was announced Drake would reunite with Lil Wayne and Nicki Minaj on a Toronto exclusive concert series on July 28, July 29, and August 1. After the debut of "Staying Alive" on the US Billboard Hot 100, it marked the 30th Drake song to reach the top five on the chart, breaking a 55-year-old record for most songs to reach the top five on the chart (29), held by The Beatles. Drake refused to submit his music for Grammy consideration for a second consecutive year. On October 22, Drake announced Her Loss, a collaborative album with 21 Savage which would release on October 28; it was then delayed to November 4 after Drake's longtime producer, 40, was diagnosed with COVID-19. Her Loss debuted atop the Billboard 200, accumlating first week sales of 404,000 album-equivalent units. Eight of the album's songs debuted in the top ten on the Billboard Hot 100, extending Drake's record for most top ten entries, with 67 (with a record 49 as a lead artist). On November 15, Drake was nominated for four awards at the 2023 Grammy Awards, including Album of the Year for his writing on Beyoncé's Renaissance. In February 2023, Drake was named the most streamed act ever on Spotify. On July 23, via an announcement for his poetry book Titles Ruin Everything, Drake announced his eighth studio album, titled For All the Dogs. On September 15, Drake released the lead single of the album, "Slime You Out", featuring SZA. The song charted at number one on the US Billboard Hot 100. On October 5, Drake released the album's second single, "8AM in Charlotte", on his social media accounts. On March 8, 2024, Drake remixed "Act II: Date @ 8" with 4Batz via OVO Sound. Drake has cited several hip hop artists as influencing his rapping style, including Kanye West, Jay-Z, MF Doom, and Lil Wayne, while also attributing various R&B artists as influential to the incorporation of the genre into his own music, including Aaliyah and Usher. Drake has also credited several dancehall artists for later influencing his Caribbean-inflected style, including Vybz Kartel, whom he has called one of his "biggest inspirations". Drake is considered to be a pop rap artist. While Drake's earlier music primarily spanned hip hop and R&B, his music has delved into pop and trap since the albums Nothing Was the Same (2013) and Views (2016). Additionally, his music has drawn influence from regional scenes, including Jamaican dancehall and UK drill. Drake is known for his egotistical lyrics, technical ability, and integration of personal backstory when dealing with relationships with women. His vocal abilities have been lauded for an audible contrast between typical hip-hop beats and melody, with sometimes abrasive rapping coupled with softer accents, delivered on technical lyricism. His songs often include audible changes in lyrical pronunciation in parallel with his upbringing in Toronto, and connections with Caribbean and Middle Eastern countries which include such phrases as "ting", "touching road", "talkin' boasy" and "gwanin' wassy". Most of his songs contain R&B and Canadian hip hop elements, and he combines rapping with singing. He credits his father with the introduction of singing into his rap mixtapes, which have become a staple in his musical repertoire. His incorporation of melody into technically complex lyrics was supported by Lil Wayne, and has subsequently been a critically acclaimed component to Drake's singles and albums. Drake's style of R&B is characterized by vacant beats and a rap-sung dichotomy, which has also seen incredible mainstream success, spawning several imitators. The lyrical content that Drake deploys is typically considered to be emotional or boastful. However, Drake is often revered for incorporating "degrading" themes of money, drug use, and women into newer, idealized contexts, often achieving this through his augmentation of the typical meaning of phrases in which he combines an objective and subjective perspective into one vocal delivery. His songs often maintain tension between "pause and pace, tone timbre, and volume and vocal fermata." Drake is credited with innovating what has been referred to as "hyper-reality rap", characterized by its focus on themes of celebrity as distinct from the "real world." Drake's lyrical subject matter, which often revolves around relationships, have had widespread use on social media through photo captions to reference emotions or personal situations. However, this content has incited mixed reception from fans and critics, with some deeming him as sensitive and inauthentic, traits perceived as antithetical to traditional hip hop culture. He is also known for his large and extravagant lifestyle, including for high-end themed birthday parties; he maintained this image in his early career by renting a Rolls-Royce Phantom, which he was eventually gifted in 2021. He cultivated a reputation as a successful gambler; between December 2021 and February 2022, he was reported to have made bets of over $1 billion, which included winnings ranging between $354,000 and $7 million, however some of the forms of gambling he promotes, such as roulette, have negative expected values. The Washington Post editor Maura Judkis credits Drake for popularizing the phrase "YOLO" in the United States with his single "The Motto", which stands for, "You only live once." Drake later popularized the term "The Six" in 2015 in relation to his hometown Toronto, subsequently becoming a point of reference to the city. June 10 was declared "Drake Day" in Houston. In 2016, Drake visited Drake University after a show in Des Moines in response to an extensive social media campaign by students that began in 2009, advocating for his appearance. According to a report from Confused.com, Drake's Toronto home was one of the most Googled homes in the world, recording over a million annual searches in 2021; its features, such as its NBA-size indoor basketball court and Kohler Numi toilet, have also received widespread media attention. The music video for "Hotline Bling" went viral due to Drake's eccentric dance moves. The video has been remixed, memed, and was heavily commented on due to the unconventional nature on the song, causing it to gain popularity on YouTube, and spawning several parodies. Drake has also been critiqued for his expensive, product placement-heavy attire, exemplified by the video for "Hotline Bling". Drake modelled a $1,500 Moncler Puffer Jacket, a $400 Acne Studios turtleneck, and limited edition Timberland 6" Classic Boots. He was labeled by GQ magazine as "[one of] the most stylish men alive"; during promotion for Certified Lover Boy, Drake debuted a "heart haircut", which became popular and widely imitated. Writing for GQ, Anish Patel noted Drake's consistent incorporation of styles and themes not typically associated with hip hop, such as wearing gorpcore in the music video for his song "Sticky". Since 2016 Drake has been noted for an alleged "Drake curse", an internet meme based on the incidents where he appears to be support of particular sports team or person, just for that team or person to lose, often against the odds. In 2016, Drake spoke on the shooting of Alton Sterling, publishing an open letter expressing his concern for the safety of ethnic minorities against police brutality in the United States. In 2021, he joined a group of Canadian musicians to work with the Songwriters Association of Canada (SAC) to lobby Prime Minister Justin Trudeau to restructure the country's copyright law to allow artists and their families to regain ownership of copyrights during their lifetime. He also campaigned for the expansion of a Women's National Basketball Association (WNBA) franchise in Toronto, and headlined a benefit concert at the Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum with Kanye West on December 9, 2021, to raise clemency for Larry Hoover, although his solo performance was later removed from the Prime Video replay. On Christmas 2021, Drake gave away money to individuals in Toronto. In October 2023, he signed a letter calling for a ceasefire in the Israel–Hamas war. A prominent figure in pop culture, Drake is often praised one of the most influential figures in hip hop; particularly his use of singing over hip hop instrumentals has been noted as an influence on modern rappers. He is widely credited for popularizing the Toronto sound to the music industry and leading the "Canadian Invasion", a play on the British Invasion in the 1960s, of the American charts — alongside the likes of Justin Bieber and The Weeknd. In 2022, music recognition app Shazam revealed Drake to be their most searched artist by users, with music featuring Drake collecting 350 million recognitions; his 2016 single "One Dance" collected 17 million recognitions alone. In 2018, articles by The Guardian and Rolling Stone called him "the definitive pop star of his generation" and "perhaps [the] biggest post-Justin Timberlake male pop star of the new millennium", respectively. The Insider declared Drake the artist of the decade (2010s). Regarding the general view that Drake introduced singing in mainstream hip hop, the publication said that at the height of Auto-Tune in hip hop during the late 2000s, "there were virtually no artists who were both a legit rapper and a legit crooner who delivered velvety smooth pop/R&B hybrid vocals that could exist separately from his hip-hop songs." Commenting on Drake's Take Care, Elias Leight of Rolling Stone noticed in 2020 that "now nearly every singer raps, and nearly every rapper sings", as many artists "have borrowed or copied the template of [the album] that the boldness of the original is easily forgotten", according to the writer. Aaron Williams of Uproxx added "jump-starting the sad boy rapper craze alongside Kid Cudi" and "helping to renew stateside interest in UK grime and Caribbean dancehall with Skepta, PartyNextDoor, and Rihanna" to the modern trends Drake assisted. BBC Radio 1Xtra argued that his co-signs helped push the British hip-hop scene to a wider international market, as he did with the Toronto music scene. According to CBS Music in 2019, Drake has inspired "the next wave" of artists coming out of his hometown. Writing for Bloomberg, Lucas Shaw commented Drake's popularity has influenced the promotion of music, with Certified Lover Boy attaining large commercial success despite relatively minimal orthodox marketing techniques, stating "fans are consuming Drake's [music] in a way that is different to others". He also noted the album as novel in relation to consumption, with each song having relatively equivalent streams, as opposed to a dominant single(s). Justin Charity of The Ringer noted Drake's signature of producing "half-hearted" performances on songs to create a "natural and off-the-cuff" effect has become the "obvious touchpoint for [subsequent] male R&B singers". Charity further wrote Drake's success in the genre is "so thorough that it's all but impossible to hear certain vintages of R&B without hearing Drake". Beginning in 2022, Drake's music was canonized academically by Toronto Metropolitan University, which began teaching courses titled "Deconstructing Drake and the Weeknd", with the pair's music used to explore themes related to the Canadian music industry, race, class, marketing and globalization. With the release during LGBT Pride Month of his seventh album Honestly, Nevermind (2022), Mark Savage of the BBC wrote Drake's exploration of house, a genre with overt origins in black and queer spaces, would help "build a bridge to those [origin] subcultures" for younger music listeners. Drake is the highest-certified digital singles artist ever in the United States, having moved 142 million units based on combined sales and on-demand streams. His highest-certified single is "God's Plan" (15× Platinum), followed by "Hotline Bling" and "One Dance, which are certified Diamond. Drake was Spotify's most streamed artist of the 2010s. He holds several Billboard Hot 100 chart records; he has the most charted songs of any artist (329, the most top 10 singles (77), the most top 10 debuts (61), the most top 10 singles in a calendar year (13), the most cumulative weeks in the top 10 (384), the most songs peaking at number-two (10) (11 including his appearance as a member of Young Money on "BedRock"), and the most consecutive weeks spent on the chart (431 weeks). He has accumulated 13 number-one songs (14 including his uncredited feature on "Sicko Mode"), a record among rappers. In 2021, Drake became second act to occupy the entire Hot 100's top five in a single week, the other act being The Beatles in 1964. He also has the most number-one singles on the Hot Rap Songs (23), Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs (23), and Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Airplay. He is also the only artist to have two albums log 400 weeks each on the Billboard 200. As of 2021[update], Drake has won four Grammy Awards from 47 nominations. He has also won a record 29 Billboard Music Awards. In 2017, he surpassed Adele's record for most wins at the Billboard Music Awards in one night, winning 13 awards from 22 nominations. He was named Artist of the Decade at the 2021 Billboard Music Awards. Billboard editor Ernest Baker stated "Drake managed to rule hip-hop in 2014", adding "the best rapper in 2014 didn't need a new album or hit single to prove his dominance". From 2015 to 2017, Drake ranked within the top-five of the Billboard Year-End chart for Top Artists, before topping it in 2018. He was named the IFPI Global Recording Artist of 2016 and 2018. Pitchfork ranked Nothing Was the Same as the 41st best album of the decade "so far"—between 2010 and 2014, and ranked him fifth in the publication's list of the "Top 10 Music Artists" since 2010. Take Care was ranked at number 95 on Rolling Stone's 500 Greatest Albums of All Time (2020). He has been ranked by Complex on their "Best Rapper Alive Every Year Since 1979" list, awarding Drake the accolade in 2011, 2012, and 2015. On May 31, 2009, Drake was robbed at gunpoint in Toronto's Little Italy district and was forced to forfeit a gold and diamond necklace, an Audemars Piguet watch, and $2,000. Soccerties Cotterell and Paul Lelutiu were initially charged with armed robbery, conspiracy to commit armed robbery, three counts of pointing a firearm and possession of stolen property. All charges were later dropped, except conspiracy to commit armed robbery, to which the men pleaded guilty. They were sentenced to time served, amounting to just over six months in jail. In April 2017, Mesha Collins was arrested for criminal trespass after breaking into Drake's home in Calabasas; although no criminal charges were brought, Collins filed a $4 billion lawsuit against Drake for defamation in June 2021, which was dismissed that December. Drake then filed a restraining order against Collins in March 2022, which was granted that April. In March 2021, an unidentified woman armed with a knife was arrested after a failed attempt to break into Drake's Toronto home. In January 2023, a man was arrested for burglarizing Drake's L.A. home. In 2012, singer Ericka Lee filed a lawsuit against Drake for the usage of her voice on "Marvins Room". Claiming to have provided the female vocals, Lee also alleged she was owed songwriting credits and royalties. Despite Drake's legal team countering by claiming that Lee simply requested a credit in the liner notes of the album, the matter was resolved in February 2013, with both parties agreeing to an out-of-court settlement. In 2014, Drake was sued for $300,000 for sampling "Jimmy Smith Rap", a 1982 single by jazz musician Jimmy Smith. The suit was filed by Smith's estate, who said Drake never asked for permission when sampling it for the intro on "Pound Cake / Paris Morton Music 2", claiming Smith himself would have disagreed as he disliked hip hop. Drake would win the lawsuit in 2017, with federal judge William Pauley ruling the content used was transformative, and there was no liability for copyright infringement. Also in 2014, it emerged that Drake was sued by rapper Rappin' 4-Tay, claiming Drake misused his lyrics when collaborating with YG on the song "Who Do You Love?". He sought $100,000 for mistreatment and artistic theft, which Drake paid to the rapper later that year. In 2016, Drake caused a nightclub in Oklahoma City to close down, due to his usage of marijuana and other illegal drugs being prevalent at the club. In December 2021, Drake sued jeweler Ori Vechler and his company Gemma LTD for incorrectly using his likeness in promotional material; he also sought to return three items he purchased. In December 2022, a lawsuit brought by rapper Angelou Skywalker, who alleged that Drake stole his song "Reach for Skies" to make "Way 2 Sexy", was dismissed following "repeated misconduct" by Skywalker against prosecutors and U.S. district judge Colleen Kollar-Kotelly, who presided over the case; Skywalker was accused of filing no less than 50 irrelevant motions and was handed a restraining order, preventing contact with Drake. In 2017, Drake was embroiled in another lawsuit, being sued by producer Detail (Noel Fisher) over an alleged assault in 2014. Fisher claimed Drake's bodyguard, Nessel "Chubbs" Beezer, punched him in the face and allegedly broke his jaw over musical and financial disputes. Fisher also said the injuries caused him to be hospitalized for days and had to undergo several surgeries, following which he sued for damages related to medical bills and physical and emotional suffering. The case, which was set to undergo trial in May 2018, was dismissed by Superior Court Judge Elaine Lu after Fisher failed to show up for a final status conference. Lu ruled that Beezer solely acted in self-defense. In January 2019, Drake, Odell Beckham Jr., and Younes Bendjima were sued by a man named Bennett Sipes in regards to an alleged assault that occurred outside of a L.A. nightclub in 2018. Sipes claims he suffered "traumatic brain injury, as well as injuries to his back, neck, shoulders, etc." on March 24, 2018, when he was attacked by Bendjima, as well as members of Drake and Beckham's entourages in an alley near the nightclub and sought $250,000 in damages. The suit alleges Drake and Beckham followed their respective crews to the alley to watch Sipes get attacked. A video of the incident was recorded using the on-site surveillance system. The suit was eventually settled out of court. In October 2021, Drake and Chris Brown were sued by Braindon Cooper and Timothy Valentine for copyright infringement between "No Guidance" and their own song "I Love Your Dress", but Drake was dropped by Cooper and Valentine from the lawsuit in April 2022. Drake was handed another copyright lawsuit from Samuel Nicholas, citing infringement from Drake's "In My Feelings" and "Nice For What". That November, he was named co-defendant with Travis Scott in a multi-claimant lawsuit for inciting "a riot and violence" at the Astroworld Festival, to which he released a statement; he reportedly delayed the release of "Splash Brothers", a collaboration with French Montana, as a result. On July 14, 2022, Drake was detained by Swedish police, reportedly stemming from drugs present within a Stockholm nightclub. That November, Drake and 21 Savage were sued by Condé Nast, the publisher of Vogue, for using the Vogue name without permission to promote their collaborative album Her Loss; Drake and 21 Savage "voluntarily ceased" to a preliminary injunction to stop using Vogue trademarks to promote the album, and later reached a settlement with Condé Nast. In February 2023, Drake was ordered to appear for a deposition in the XXXTentacion murder trial after the defense team for Dedrick Williams — one of the three suspects — listed Drake as a potential witness, related to the purported feud between Drake and XXXTentacion; Drake was subpoenaed the month prior, and failed to show for his scheduled deposition date of January 27; the rescheduled deposition was set for February 24. It was later reported that armed guards at Drake's Beverly Hills home refused to accept the service of the deposition on February 14, which Drake's lawyer, Bradford Cohen, argued was not properly served in compliance with California law and done solely to "inject celebrity spectacle in a routine trial", ultimately leading to the deposition being dismissed. Drake and Chris Brown were allegedly involved in a physical altercation in June 2012 when Drake and his entourage threw glass bottles at Brown in a SoHo nightclub in Manhattan, New York City. Chris Brown tweeted about the incident, and criticized Drake in music until 2013, including on the "R.I.P." remix. Despite no response from Drake, he and Brown both appeared in a comedic skit for the 2014 ESPY Awards, and rehearsed the skit together prior to the televised airing, virtually ending the dispute. The pair later collaborated on "No Guidance" in 2019. In December 2014, Drake was involved in another altercation, being punched by Puff Daddy outside the LIV nightclub in Miami, Florida. The altercation was reported to be over Drake's usage of the instrumental for "0 to 100 / The Catch Up", allegedly produced by Boi-1da for Puff Daddy, before Drake appropriated the track for his own use. Drake was later rushed to the ER after aggravating an old arm injury during the dispute. Drake was also involved in a feud with Tyga, stemming from Tyga's negative comments about him during an interview with Vibe magazine. Drake would later respond on "6 God" and "6PM in New York", which has been interpreted as directly involved in Tyga's abrupt removal from Young Money Entertainment. Further controversy arose in July 2015 when it was alleged by Meek Mill that Drake had used ghostwriters during recording sessions for "RICO", one of the lead singles off Mill's second studio album. This proceeded further allegations that Drake did not help in promotion of the album, due to Mill discovering the ghostwriter, widely believed to be Quentin Miller. Despite Miller collaborating with Drake and receiving past credits, Mill assured that Miller had written Drake's verse for "R.I.C.O." Soon after, Funkmaster Flex aired reference tracks in support of Mill's claims, notably for "R.I.C.O.", "10 Bands", and "Know Yourself". This prompted Drake to respond with two diss tracks, titled "Charged Up" and "Back to Back", in the space of four days. Mill would later respond with "Wanna Know", before removing it from SoundCloud weeks later. Following several subliminal disses from either artist, Drake further sought to denounce Funkmaster Flex while performing in New York (Flex's home state) on the Summer Sixteen Tour. Following Mill's prison sentencing for probation violation, Drake stated "Free Meek Mill" at a concert in Australia, and ended their rivalry on "Family Feud"; the pair later collaborated on "Going Bad" in 2019. In 2016, Drake was embroiled in a feud with Joe Budden, stemming from Budden's derogatory comments when reviewing Views. Drake would allegedly respond to Budden through "4PM in Calabasas", prompting Budden to respond with two diss tracks in the space of five days, echoing the same sentiment Drake deployed during his feud with Meek Mill. Drake would later appear on "No Shopping" alongside French Montana, directly referencing Budden throughout the song, although, Montana claimed Drake's verse was recorded before the release of Budden's diss tracks. Despite Budden releasing two further songs in reference to Drake, he has yet to officially respond to Budden. In the same year, Drake dissed Kid Cudi on "Two Birds, One Stone" after Cudi launched an expletive-filled rant on the artist on Twitter. Cudi later checked into a rehabilitation facility following the release of the song, and continued to disparage Drake in further tweets; the pair eventually resolved their feud, and collaborated on "IMY2" in 2021. Pusha T would also use the same rationale to criticize Drake on "Infrared" in 2018, leading Drake to respond with the "Duppy Freestyle" diss track on May 25. Pusha T responded with "The Story of Adidon" on May 29, which presented several claims and revealed Drake's fatherhood. The pair are considered to have been in a rivalry since 2012, resulting from Pusha T's feuds with Lil Wayne and Birdman, with Drake yet to respond to "The Story of Adidon". In mid-2018, Drake was embroiled in a feud with long-time collaborator Kanye West. In an appearance on The Shop, Drake recounted several meetings with West, who voiced his desire to "be Quincy Jones" and work with Drake and replicate the producer-artist relationship between Jones and Michael Jackson. West requested Drake play and inform him of upcoming releases, while he gave Drake the instrumental to "Lift Yourself". West requested the pair work in Wyoming, with Drake arriving a day after close friend 40, who said West was instead recording an album. Judging the pair to have differing release schedules, Drake traveled to Wyoming, but "only worked on [West's] music"; they explored Drake's after he played West "March 14", which addressed Drake's relationship with his newborn son and co-parent. This prompted a conversation with West regarding his personal issues, after which, news of his son would be exposed by Pusha T, which Drake concluded was revealed to him by West; West also released "Lift Yourself" as a solo song and produced "Infrared". Drake then denounced West in songs and live performances. West would retaliate in a series of tweets in late 2018, and the pair continued to respond on social media and in music as of late 2021, which included Drake leaking West's song "Life of the Party". During their feud, West and Drake have had public attempts of reconciliation, which is reported to have occurred after they co-headlined a benefit concert in December 2021. Drake has also been involved in reported feuds with DMX, music critic Anthony Fantano, Kendrick Lamar, Common, The Weeknd, XXXTentacion, Jay-Z, Tory Lanez, and Ludacris, although the latter five, as well as his feud with DMX, have been reported to be resolved. Prior to venturing into business, Drake garnered several endorsement deals with various companies, notably gaining one with Sprite following his mention of drinking purple drank, a concoction that contains Sprite as a key ingredient. In the aftermath of his highly publicized feud with Meek Mill, Drake was also endorsed by fast food restaurants Burger King, White Castle and Whataburger. Business magazine Forbes commented his endorsement deals and business partnerships "combined heavily" for Drake's reported pre-tax earnings at $94 million between June 2016 to June 2017, being one of the highest-paid celebrities during that period. Drake receives an endorsement of $100 million per annum from the gambling firm Stake.com, as an ambassador of the online casino. The partnership with Stake.com has created "The Drake Effect”, which has increased the company's awareness. Drake has frequently posted about his bets on Stake and created content related to playing roulette on the platform. In January 2022, Drake announced in his Instagram the Stake's two-year naming sponsorship of the Sauber Formula 1 (F1) racing team, starting in 2024. During the composition of Nothing Was the Same, Drake started his own record label in late 2012 with producer Noah "40" Shebib and business partner Oliver El-Khatib. Drake sought for an avenue to release his own music, as well helping in the nurturing of other artists, while Shebib and El-Khatib yearned to start a label with a distinct sound, prompting the trio to team up to form OVO Sound. The name is an abbreviation derived from the October's Very Own moniker Drake used to publish his earlier projects. The label is currently distributed by Warner Bros. Records. Drake, 40, and PartyNextDoor were the label's inaugural artists. The label houses artists including Drake, PartyNextDoor, Majid Jordan, Roy Woods, and dvsn, as well as producers including 40, Boi-1da, Nineteen85, and Future the Prince. On September 30, 2013, at a press conference with Maple Leaf Sports and Entertainment CEO Tim Leiweke, Drake was announced as the new "global ambassador" of the Toronto Raptors, joining the executive committee of the NBA franchise. It was announced together with the 2016 NBA All-Star Game being awarded to the Air Canada Centre in Toronto. This was also the setting where Drake was given The Key to the City. In the role, it was announced that Drake would help to promote and serve as a host of festivities, beginning with the All-Star Game. He would also provide consulting services to rebrand the team, helping to redesign its image and clothing line in commemoration of the franchise's 20th anniversary. He also collaborated with the Raptors on pre-game practice jerseys, t-shirts, and sweatsuits, and began hosting an annual "Drake Night" segment with the organization, beginning in 2013. Following the launch of Apple Music, a music and video streaming service developed by Apple Inc., the company announced Drake as the figurehead for the platform at their Worldwide Developers Conference in 2015, with the artist also penning an exclusivity deal with the service worth a reported $19 million. This saw all future solo releases by Drake becoming available first on Apple Music, before seeing roll out to other streaming services and music retailers. Drake had also developed the OVO Sound Radio station on Beats 1, which is utilized as the primary avenue for debuting singles and projects, with the station overseeing over 300 million unique users when it debuted More Life. Drake's partnership with Apple Music has largely been credited for the platform's sharp success, as it attained 10 million subscribers after six months, as well as giving birth to exclusivity from artists, with many independent and signed artists, such as Frank Ocean and The Weeknd, also brokering exclusivity deals with streaming services. Through signing with the company, Drake was one of the artists, alongside Pharrell and Katy Perry, to exclusively own an Apple Watch before the smartwatch saw public release. In 2017, Drake and Adel "Future" Nur co-founded the production company DreamCrew, with functions in both management and entertainment. The company has produced the television series Euphoria and Top Boy. Their debut produced film was sports documentary The Carter Effect, detailing the impact of Vince Carter in Canada. On August 5, 2022, Drake was among those nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Drama Series for acting as a producer on Euphoria. In July 2021, Drake was announced as an executive producer, alongside LeBron James and Maverick Carter, for Black Ice, a documentary film charting the experiences of black and ethnic minority professional and amateur ice hockey players. It is due to be produced by Uninterrupted Canada in partnership with Drake's DreamCrew Entertainment, James' SpringHill Company, and Bell Media. DreamCrew also began production on the unscripted survival series Chillin' Island in 2021, due to air on HBO. In June 2021, Live Nation confirmed a long-standing partnership with Drake to open History, a 2,500 convertible capacity live-entertainment and general function venue in Toronto. It was in development for over three years and is situated in The Beaches. He also aided in the venue's interior design, which contains LED screens, soundproofing, quick-change rooms and a customizable staircase. In November 2022, DreamCrew invested near-$100 million to revive the open-air museum and amusement park Luna Luna; originally staged in Hamburg, it is set to go on a worldwide tour, with Drake stating, "[Luna Luna] is such a unique and special way to experience art. This is a big idea and opportunity that centers around what we love most: bringing people together". Drake signed as an investor and collaborator with Los Angeles-based sustainability and financial services startup Aspiration; he will also use the company's enterprise services to monitor and ensure personal carbon neutrality. He has also invested in robo-advisor Wealthsimple, the "livestreaming video commerce platform" NTWRK, the cannabis provider Bullrider, and several sports-related ventures, including online esports betting platform Players' Lounge, the sportstech firm StatusPro, and online sports network Overtime. In an analysis by Brennan Doherty for Toronto Star, Drake's investment "carry all the hallmarks" typical of musicians, which is often momentum investing, and cited Jason Pereira, who described Drake's business deals as typically angel investing and private equity (often venture capital) funds. Pereira also noted his "leveraging his personal brand to generate cash". On August 30, 2022, it was reported that Drake and LeBron James, as part of the investment fund Main Street Advisors, would partner with U.S. private equity group RedBird Capital and Yankee Global Enterprises to purchase Italian soccer club A.C. Milan for a rumored $1.2 billion. Drake has also invested in cryptocurrency and NFT payment solutions firm MoonPay. In 2018, Drake purchased an ownership stake in the gaming organization 100 Thieves, joining as a co-founder and co-owner. The investment was partly funded by music executive Scooter Braun and Cleveland Cavaliers owner Dan Gilbert. Two months prior to the release of Views, Drake announced the development of Virginia Black, a bourbon-based whiskey. This would be his second foray into selling foodstuffs, previously partnering with celebrity chef Susur Lee to open Fring's Restaurant and Antonio Park to open the sports bar Pick 6ix, both in Toronto and eventually closed. Virginia Black was created and distributed by Proximo Spirits and Brent Hocking, a spirits producer who founded DeLeón Tequila in 2008. The company described the partnership as "fruitful [as they] share a passion for style, music, and the pursuit of taste [on] a quest to redefine whiskey." In 2021, using ratings compiled from Vivino and complimentary website Distiller, Virginia Black was ranked the worst value celebrity liquor for quality and price. The product was launched in June 2016, and contained two, three and four-year old Bourbon whiskies. The company sold over 4,000 bottles in the first week domestically. The brand was also promoted and marketed through Drake's music and various tours, such as being part of the "Virginia Black VIP Lounge" additional package available for purchase during the Summer Sixteen Tour. Virginia Black shipped a further 30,000 units when rollout was extended to select international markets in late 2016. The company later aired commercials with Drake's father, Dennis Graham, which featured the mock tagline of "The Realest Dude Ever" (in reference toward "The Most Interesting Man in the World" tagline employed by Dos Equis) after extending the sale of the drink to Europe in 2017. In 2019, Drake began collaborating with Hocking on Mod Sélection, a luxury range of champagne, and in May 2021, formed part of a $40 million series B investment funding round led by D1 Capital Partners in Daring Foods Inc., a vegan meat analogue corporation. That September, he purchased a minority stake in Californian food chain Dave's Hot Chicken, and organized a promotion on October 24, 2022, to give away free chicken to Toronto residents on his 36th birthday. In December 2013, Drake announced he was signing with Nike and Air Jordan, saying "growing up, I'm sure we all idolized Michael Jordan. I [am] officially inducted into the Team Jordan family." Drake also released his own collection of Air Jordans, dubbed the "Air Jordan OVOs". This foresaw collaborations between OVO and Canada Goose, in which various items of clothing were produced. In 2020, A Bathing Ape announced a collaboration with Drake, releasing an OVO x BAPE collection of clothing, while he also partnered with candle manufacturer Revolve to create "Better World Fragrance", a line of scented candles. In December 2020, Drake announced Nocta, a sub-label with Nike. In a press release, Drake said "I always felt like there was an opportunity for Nike to embrace an entertainer the same way [as] athletes," he wrote, "to be associated with the highest level possible was always my goal." The apparel line is named after Drake's "nocturnal creative process", in which Nike described as a "collection for the collective", and noted by GQ as "fashion-forward, minimal-inspired sportswear". One clothing item features an image of Drake's muses, Elizabeth and Victoria Lejonhjärta, with a poem. After the first collection sold out, another was released in February 2021, which introduced t-shirts, adjustable caps, a utility vest, and a lightweight jacket. That July, OVO released the "Weekender Collection", which includes a line of hoodies, velour sweatsuits, t-shirts, shorts, and accessories for women. OVO then released a "Winter Survival Collection" that December which included puffer jackets, vests, and parkas made with 700-fill down and Oeko-Tex certified down feathers. They followed this with limited Jurassic Park-themed collection and an indoor footwear collaboration with Suicoke, as well as a Playboy-collaborated capsule collection. In July 2022, a capsule inspired by and in collaboration with Mike Tyson was released, featuring both blouson jackets and caps. In conjunction with Spotify's 12-year, $540 million sponsorship deal with FC Barcelona, the club wore special edition OVO owl silhouette branded jerseys in their El Clásico match against Real Madrid CF on October 16, 2022. OVO then partnered with former professional ice hockey player Tie Domi and fashion retailer Roots Canada to release a capsule collection on October 28, matching Domi's jersey number for the New York Rangers and Toronto Maple Leafs; a capsule collection was later released in collaboration with the Maple Leafs in November. Drake lives in Toronto, Ontario, in a 35,000-square-foot, $100 million estate nicknamed "The Embassy", which was built from the ground-up in 2017, and is seen in the video to his song "Toosie Slide". He owned a home nicknamed the "YOLO Estate" in Hidden Hills, California, from 2012 to 2022, and bought a Beverly Crest home in 2022 from Robbie Williams for $70 million. He owns a condominium adjacent to the CN Tower. He also owns a Boeing 767, and in 2021, rented a $65 million multi-purpose property in Beverly Hills. Drake has a variety of tattoos, some of which are symbols associated with personal accomplishments, such as a jack-o-lantern, "October Lejonhjärta" (transl. October Lionheart), owls, and a controversial Abbey Road (1969) inspired depiction of himself and the Beatles. He has portraits of Lil Wayne, Sade, Aaliyah, Jesús Malverde, Denzel Washington, 40, his parents, grandmother, maternal uncle, and son; and several related to Toronto, including the CN Tower and the number "416". On August 18, 2021, Drake revealed he contracted COVID-19 amidst the pandemic, which led to temporary hair loss. He was also one of the first celebrities to publicly test for the virus in March 2020. He contracted the disease again in 2022, causing the postponement of reunion concerts with Lil Wayne and Nicki Minaj. Drake's paternal uncles are bassist\guitarists and songwriters Larry Graham and Teenie Hodges. Graham was a member of Sly and the Family Stone, while Hodges contributed to songs for Al Green, including "Love and Happiness", "Here I Am (Come and Take Me)", and "Take Me to the River". He dated SZA between 2008 and 2009, and was in an on-again, off-again relationship with Rihanna from 2009 to 2016. He has mentioned the relationship in every one of his studio albums, and when presenting Rihanna with the Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award in 2016, he said "she's a woman I've been in love with since I was 22 years old." On his relationship with her, he said on the talk show The Shop: As life takes shape and teaches you your own lessons, I end up in this situation where I don't have the fairy tale [of] 'Drake started a family with Rihanna, [it's] so perfect.' It looks so good on paper [and] I wanted it too at one time. Drake is a father to a son named Adonis, who was born on October 11, 2017, to French painter and former model Sophie Brussaux. Brussaux's pregnancy was the subject of several rumours after featuring in a TMZ article in early 2017. After the nature of the pair's relationship was discussed in Pusha T's "The Story of Adidon", Drake confirmed his fatherhood on the album Scorpion in 2018, citing a desire for his child's privacy. Studio albums Thank Me Later (2010) Take Care (2011) Nothing Was the Same (2013) Views (2016) Scorpion (2018) Certified Lover Boy (2021) Honestly, Nevermind (2022) For All the Dogs (2023) Collaborative albums Her Loss (with 21 Savage) (2022) Away from Home Tour (2010) Club Paradise Tour (2012) Would You Like a Tour? (2013–2014) Jungle Tour (2015; six date promotional tour) Boy Meets World Tour (2017) Assassination Vacation Tour (2019) America's Most Wanted Tour (with Young Money) (2009) Drake vs. Lil Wayne (with Lil Wayne) (2014) Summer Sixteen Tour (with Future) (2016) Aubrey & the Three Migos Tour (with Migos) (2018) It's All a Blur Tour (with 21 Savage, J. Cole & Lil Durk) (2023–2024) Culture of Toronto List of artists who reached number one in the United States List of Canadian musicians List of people from Toronto List of artists who reached number one on the UK Singles Chart List of highest-certified music artists in the United States List of best-selling music artists List of Billboard Hot 100 chart achievements and milestones List of most-followed Instagram accounts List of Canadian hip hop musicians List of Canadian Jews List of Black Canadians Black Canadians in the Greater Toronto Area History of the Jews in Toronto List of artists who reached number one on the Canadian Hot 100 List of Canadian Grammy Award winners and nominees List of most-streamed artists on Spotify This excludes his appearance on the number-one single "Sicko Mode" for which he did not receive official credit. "11 Times Drake Channeled His 'Champagne Papi' Alter-Ego: From 'The Motto' to 'Mia'". Billboard. October 12, 2018. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "The Drake Look Book". GQ. October 2016. Retrieved August 28, 2019. Tigg, FNR (July 29, 2020). "Drake's Engineer Noel Shares How Close Rapper Is to Finishing New Album". Complex. Retrieved July 30, 2020. "Drake Signs To Young Money, Distribution By Universal Republic". Billboard. June 30, 2009. Retrieved March 5, 2022. XXL Staff (September 24, 2018). "How 'Nothing Was the Same' Made Drake the Face of Hip-Hop – XXL". XXL Mag. Retrieved May 28, 2022. "How Afrobeats Is Influencing American Pop Music, According to Producer P2J". Complex. Archived from the original on August 11, 2019. Retrieved August 25, 2019. Ellis-Petersen, Hannah (September 5, 2016). "Sean Paul: 'Drake and Bieber do dancehall but don't credit where it came from'". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved December 28, 2016. "Drake's whiskey venture breaks sales record". October 18, 2016. Retrieved May 2, 2020. "Drake Is Responsible for 5% of Toronto's Tourism Economy, Expert Finds". Billboard. July 6, 2018. Retrieved March 5, 2022. Mitchell, Gail (June 29, 2018). "Drake Certified as RIAA's New Top Digital Singles Artist". Billboard. Retrieved March 5, 2022. Hussey, Allison; Lindert, Hattie (October 16, 2023). "Drake Gets No. 1 Album and Single, Tying Michael Jackson for Billboard Hot 100 Record". Pitchfork. "Drake". Billboard. Retrieved March 19, 2024. Trust, Gary (March 27, 2017). "Drake Breaks Hot 100 Records: Most Hits Among Solo Artists & Most Simultaneously Charted Songs". Billboard. Retrieved March 5, 2022. Kellman, Andy. "Drake – Music Biography, Credits and Discography". AllMusic. "Drake". Biography. Retrieved June 29, 2018. "Drake's Competition in 2017 Might Just Be His Father". Billboard. Retrieved March 5, 2022. Siegel, Tatiana (November 8, 2017). "Drake's Hotline to Hollywood: Inside an Ambitious Push Into Film and TV". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved March 5, 2022. Doherty, Rosa (March 20, 2017). "Double helpings of Drake". The Jewish Chronicle. Retrieved May 4, 2018. Rapkin, Mickey (October 13, 2011). "Drake Looks for Love". Elle. Retrieved May 4, 2018. Beaumont-Thomas, Ben (April 6, 2018). "Drake's progress: the making of a modern superstar". The Guardian. Retrieved May 27, 2018. Friedman, Gabe (May 13, 2015). "Drake named his new Toronto club after his Jewish grandparents". Jewish Telegraphic Agency. Retrieved May 27, 2018. "Drake on His Mother's Influence, Kanye West & Andre 3000, and Obama Being a Fan?". November 16, 2011. Retrieved October 25, 2018. I was like, 'Well I'm a dual citizen!' Tanabe, Karin (November 16, 2011). "Drake hopes to meet Obama". Politico. "Justin Bieber 'applying for US citizenship' before marrying American model Hailey Baldwin". The Independent. September 15, 2018. Hip-hop star Drake also holds dual US-Canadian citizenship. Bandler, Aaron (November 9, 2017). "Rapper Drake Throws a Re-Bar Mitzvah Party on His 31st Birthday". Jewish Journal. Retrieved March 5, 2022. Markman, Rob (April 17, 2012). "Drake Proclaims 'I'm A Proud Young Jewish Boy' On 'HYFR' Set". MTV News. Retrieved May 27, 2018. "Drake's Relationship With His Mother Through Fame & Music". DJBooth. Retrieved June 29, 2018. "Drake's Dad On Raising Drake in the Hood in Memphis". XXL Mag. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Cover Story Uncut: Drake Talks About Romance, Rap, And What's Really Real". Complex. November 15, 2011. Archived from the original on November 17, 2011. Retrieved July 31, 2012. "Drake Reveals Childhood Struggles: 'I Had To Become A Man Very Quickly'". Neon Limelight. July 15, 2009. Archived from the original on July 20, 2010. Retrieved December 7, 2010. "Drake Responds To Dennis Graham's Claims: 'It's Sad When Family Gets Like This'". BET. I had a conversation with Drake about that. I've always been with Drake. I talk to him if not every day, every other day," Graham told Cannon. "We really got into a deep conversation about that." Graham admitted he was a bit hurt and confused by Drake's words. "I said, 'Drake, why are you saying all of this stuff about me, man? It's not cool,'" he explained. When he went to his son about it, the rap star allegedly replied, as Graham tells it, "Dad, it sells records." "I said, 'OK, well cool,'" the musician concluded. "Drake 'hurt' by father's allegations he faked drama to sell records". CNN. October 9, 2019. Glenesk, Matthew (August 18, 2010). "Drake's star rises with his NBA friends". ESPN. Retrieved March 5, 2022. Glenesk, Matthew (August 16, 2010). "Drake's star rises with his NBA friends". ESPN. Retrieved October 27, 2022. Ostroff, Joshua (March 23, 2009). "Aubrey Graham: from Degrassi to Drake". The Globe and Mail. Archived from the original on December 29, 2009. Retrieved March 5, 2022. Infantry, Ashante (June 21, 2009). "Chasing Drake". Toronto Star. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Cover Story Uncut: Drake Talks About Romance, Rap, And What's Really Real". Complex. Witner, Phil (June 19, 2017). "Watch a 10-Year-Old Drake Play Table Hockey and Be a True Canadian Patriot". Vice. Retrieved October 27, 2022. Jordan, Harrison (December 20, 2006). "Degrassi actor says being different made him stronger". The Canadian Jewish News. Archived from the original on December 1, 2007. Retrieved March 5, 2022. Kennedy, John R. (December 29, 2022). "No, Drake Didn't Work At 'His Uncle's Memphis Furniture Factory'". iHeartRadio. Retrieved December 30, 2022. Mirsky, Maya (October 15, 2018). "Drake Has His Own Brand of Jewishness". Haaretz. Garraud, Tracy (February 25, 2009). "Drake Discusses Degrassi, High School Years, and So Far Gone with Vibe Magazine". Vibe. Archived from the original on March 13, 2009. Retrieved February 25, 2009. Fekadu, Mesfin (October 19, 2012). "Drake:'I got my High School diploma". The Washington Times. "Preview: Drake rises from the rap pack with a moody, sensual style". Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. May 24, 2012. Archived from the original on July 29, 2013. Retrieved March 5, 2022. S., Madusa (June 20, 2021). "Drake Had A "Secret Deal" On 'Degrassi,' Says Show Creators". HotNewHipHop. Retrieved June 20, 2021. "Noggin Tackles Tween Issues with "Degrassi: The Next Generation"" (Press release). Viacom. March 27, 2002. Archived from the original on October 21, 2020. Retrieved October 16, 2020. "Drake on Lil Wayne". Interview. March 25, 2011. Retrieved August 29, 2016. "Drake's Uncle Has His 1st Royalty Check Framed — Dated 2007". HipHopDX. December 25, 2020. Retrieved December 27, 2020. Atad, Corey (October 19, 2022). "Drake Remembers Earning Just $100 To Open For Ice Cube When He Started Out". ET Canada. Archived from the original on October 19, 2022. Retrieved October 19, 2022. "Str8hiphop.com Alumni Artist Drake Has Made It to BET's 106 & Park". Str8 Hip Hop. May 7, 2007. Archived from the original on December 8, 2008. Retrieved July 14, 2009. Golden, Zara (June 11, 2015). "The Untold Story Of How Drake Met Lil Wayne". The Fader. Retrieved March 22, 2023. Reid, Shaheem (July 15, 2009). "Drake's So Far Gone Is The Hottest Mixtape of 2009 (So Far)". MTV. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Bublé scores Juno triumph in St. John's". Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. April 18, 2010. Archived from the original on April 20, 2010. Retrieved May 8, 2010. "UPDATE: Drake Not Signed To Universal Motown, Close To Inking Deal". XXL. May 5, 2009. Archived from the original on May 7, 2009. Retrieved March 5, 2022. Concepcion, Mariel (June 3, 2009). "Drake's Major Label Bidding War Heats Up, Universal Signing Likely". Billboard. Retrieved March 5, 2022. Reid, Shaheem (June 29, 2009). "Drake Signs With Lil Wayne's Young Money Label". MTV News. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Lil Wayne Kicks Off 'America's Most Wanted' Tour". Spin. July 28, 2009. Retrieved May 4, 2020. Drake Injured During Concert Fall Archived April 25, 2015, at the Wayback Machine HipHopDX. Retrieved March 5, 2022. Rodriguez, Jayson (December 30, 2009). "Drake Calls 'Light Up,' His Collabo With Jay-Z, 'Phenomenal'". MTV News. Retrieved March 5, 2022. Reid, Shaheem (April 5, 2009). "Exclusive: Drake's Thank Me Later Due June 15". MTV. Retrieved March 5, 2022. Drake – Over JefeMedia. Retrieved March 10, 2010. "Over". Billboard. Retrieved May 4, 2010. "Drake – "Find Your Love" Chart History". Billboard. Retrieved May 4, 2010. Rodriguez, Jayson (May 14, 2010). "Drake's 'Find Your Love' Video Criticized By Jamaica's Tourism Minister". MTV News. Retrieved March 5, 2022. Drake (September 14, 2009). "Drake's Leaked 'Fireworks' Addresses Rihanna Relationship". Billboard. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Drake Chart History – Singles". Billboard. Retrieved May 4, 2010. Lilah, Rose (April 29, 2010). "Drake Finishes 'Thank Me Later,' Reveals Next Single". Hotnewhiphop. Retrieved June 20, 2016. "Drake Debuts at No. 1 on Billboard 200". Billboard. June 23, 2010. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Drake Concert Erupts into Near Riot in New York". Billboard. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Drake Storms the Chart With 'Thank Me Later'". Rolling Stone. June 23, 2010. Retrieved May 6, 2019. Drake: Artist Profile Archived July 31, 2009, at the Wayback Machine The Boston Phoenix. Retrieved June 24, 2009. Roberson, Gee (March 27, 2009). "Drake: Biography". HipHopSince1978. Archived from the original on February 6, 2010. "Drake Lights Up Miami at Tour Kickoff". Rap-Up. September 20, 2010. Retrieved September 23, 2010. "Drake Goes Platinum, Maps Out Fall Tour". Rap-Up. Retrieved September 23, 2010. "Drake Announces Eco-Friendly College Tour". MTV. February 8, 2010. Retrieved June 20, 2016. Jones, Steve (November 16, 2011). "Drake takes 'Care' to stay grounded". USA Today. Retrieved November 18, 2011. Kaufman, Gil (November 17, 2010). "Drake Reveals Next Album To Be Called Take Care". MTV. Retrieved March 5, 2022. Verse (June 9, 2011). "Drake – "Marvin's Room" from Take Care | New Music". SoulCulture. Archived from the original on June 12, 2011. Retrieved July 4, 2011. Verse (October 9, 2011). "Drake Pushes Back Album". PopCrush.com. Retrieved August 2, 2012. Frere-Jones, Sasha (December 5, 2011). "The Fame Monster". The New Yorker. Retrieved March 5, 2022. Sneider, Jeff (January 21, 2011). "Exclusive: Hip Hop Star Drake in Talks to Star in 'Arbitrage'". TheWrap. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Dreams Money Can Buy". Octobersveryown.blogspot.com. May 20, 2011. Retrieved August 2, 2012. ""American single certifications – Drake – Marvins Room"". Recording Industry Association of America. Retrieved August 29, 2023. "Billboard: Drake discography". Billboard. Retrieved August 2, 2012. "Marc Anthony, Toby Keith, Drake, Coldplay Score Landmark No. 1s". Billboard. October 3, 2011. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Hot 100: Week of October 22, 2011 (11–20)". Billboard. Retrieved October 15, 2011. Pinchevsky, Tal (January 29, 2012). "Players thrilled to greet Drake at All-Star Game". National Hockey League. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Take Care Reviews, Ratings, Credits, and More at Metacritic". Metacritic. Retrieved November 12, 2011. McDonnell, John (November 18, 2011). "Drake – 'Take Care' review". NME. Retrieved March 5, 2022. Dombal, Ryan (November 14, 2011). "Drake: Take Care". Pitchfork. Retrieved November 14, 2011. Hutchins, Andy (November 15, 2011). "Drake Takes Center Stage on Take Care". The Village Voice. Archived from the original on November 16, 2011. Retrieved March 5, 2022. Kot, Greg (November 13, 2011). "Drake album review; Take Care reviewed". Chicago Tribune. Retrieved March 5, 2022. Caulfield, Keith (August 10, 2015). "Drake's 'If You're Reading This' Becomes First Million-Selling Album Released in 2015". Billboard. Retrieved August 11, 2015. "Drake". RIAA. Archived from the original on November 4, 2015. Retrieved August 1, 2012. "Chart Juice: Drake's Domination, The Latest Chapter". Billboard. February 17, 2012. Retrieved August 1, 2012. Judkis, Maura (June 29, 2012). "#YOLO: The newest acronym you'll love to hate". The Washington Post. Retrieved August 1, 2012. "Drake – The Motto Lyrics". Genius. Retrieved August 1, 2012. Montgomery, James. "Drake And Rihanna's 'Take Care' Video: Frozen Planet". MTV. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "2012 VMA Nominations: The Complete List". MTV. July 30, 2012. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Watch Drake's Videos for "Take Care" and "HYFR"". Pitchfork. April 6, 2012. Retrieved August 2, 2012. ""American single certifications – Drake – HYFR"". Recording Industry Association of America. Retrieved August 29, 2023. Ramirez, Erika (August 5, 2012). "Aaliyah Featuring Drake, 'Enough Said': Listen". Billboard. Retrieved March 5, 2022. Markman, Rob (August 6, 2012). "Aaliyah's 'Enough Said': Should Drake Helm Posthumous Project?". MTV News. Retrieved March 5, 2022. Pollstar (July 16, 2012). "Top 50 Worldwide Tours" (PDF). Pollstar. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 27, 2016. Retrieved July 16, 2012. Subers, Ray (July 2, 2012). "Around-the-World Roundup: 'Ice Age,' 'Spider-Man' Open Early Overseas". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Drake Updates on Third Album, Speaks on Work With 2 Chainz, Jamie xx & Noah "40" Shebib". HipHopDx. March 29, 2012. Archived from the original on June 18, 2012. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Drake Was 'Down' on 'Take Care,' Says Third Album Will Be Different". Billboard. April 24, 2012. Retrieved March 5, 2022. Horowitz, Steven J. (February 10, 2013). "Drake Announces Title of Third Album". HipHopDX. Archived from the original on September 27, 2013. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Drake Scores 11th No. 1 on Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs Chart". Billboard. October 4, 2013. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Drake's 'Nothing Was the Same' Debuts at No. 1 on Billboard 200". Billboard. October 1, 2013. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Arcade Fire, Drake, Shad make Polaris Music Prize short list". CTV News, July 15, 2014. "Drake debuts new song on Late Night with Jimmy Fallon". SheKnows. September 14, 2013. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Live Music's $20 Billion Year: Rolling Stones, One Direction, Live Nation Top Boxscore's Year-End". Billboard. December 12, 2014. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Drake Stole (Almost) Every Scene On 'Saturday Night Live': Recap". MTV. January 19, 2014. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Drake Shows Off Comedy Chops, Broods a Bit as 'SNL' Host". Billboard. January 19, 2014. Retrieved May 16, 2014. Highfill, Samantha (January 18, 2014). "Drake is 'SNL' host and musical guest: Discuss!". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Drake Announces Fourth Album: 'Views From The 6' (Exclusive)". Billboard. July 15, 2014. Retrieved March 5, 2022. Ramirez, Erika (February 12, 2015). "Drake Releases 'If You're Reading This It's Too Late' Album Out of Nowhere". Billboard. Retrieved March 5, 2022. Peters, Micah (February 12, 2015). "Drake surprised everyone and dropped a 17-track mixtape out of nowhere". USA Today. Young, Alex (February 13, 2015). "Surprise: Drake releases new 17-track album If You're Reading This It's Too Late". Consequence of Sound. Retrieved March 5, 2022. Beauchemin, Molly. "Drake Shares New Collection of Music If You're Reading This It's Too Late". Pitchfork Media. Archived from the original on February 13, 2015. Retrieved February 13, 2015. "Drake & Future's 'What A Time To Be Alive' Mixtape Is a Perfectly Timed Victory Lap: Album Review". Billboard. September 21, 2015. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Stream Drake and Future's Mixtape 'What a Time to Be Alive'". Rap-Up. Retrieved September 30, 2015. Vincent, James (September 21, 2015). "Drake and Future release 11-track mixtape What a Time To Be Alive". Retrieved October 30, 2016. "Drake and Future's Surprise Album Debuts at No. 1 on Billboard 200 Chart". Billboard. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Drake's RIAA certifications: December 8". RIAA. December 8, 2022. Retrieved July 11, 2023. Singleton, Micah (January 30, 2016). "Drake releases 'Summer Sixteen,' his first single off Views From The 6". The Verge. Retrieved February 15, 2016. "Drake's "Summer Sixteen" Gives Him His Highest Sales Week As A Lead Artist". HotNewHipHop. February 8, 2016. Retrieved April 15, 2016. "So, Exactly How Big Is Drake's Pool?". Complex. Retrieved April 15, 2016. "Drake – Summer Sixteen". Genius. Retrieved April 15, 2016. "Drake's 'Pop Style' & 'One Dance' Debut in Top 10 on Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs Chart". Billboard. April 13, 2016. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Drake Scores First Hot 100 No. 1 as Lead Artist With 'One Dance'". Billboard. May 9, 2016. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Drake Earns His First Canadian No. 1 Song With "One Dance"". Complex. Retrieved June 10, 2016. "One Dance by Drake featuring Wizkid and Kyla – Music Charts". Retrieved July 29, 2016. Hung, Steffen. "Norwegian charts portal". norwegiancharts.com. Archived from the original on August 29, 2016. Retrieved August 29, 2016. "Views by Drake". Apple Music. April 29, 2016. Retrieved March 5, 2022. McCluskey, Megan. "You Can Now Listen To Drake's New Album 'Views'". Time. Retrieved April 29, 2016. "On the Charts: Drake's 'Views' Sees Platinum Opening Week". Rolling Stone. May 8, 2016. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Drake's 'Views' Debuts at No. 1 on Billboard 200 Chart, Sets Streaming Record". Billboard. May 8, 2016. Retrieved March 5, 2022. Sisario, Ben (May 23, 2016). "Drake's 'Views' Passes the Half-Billion Mark in Streams". The New York Times. Retrieved June 14, 2016. Weiner, Jonah (May 2, 2016). "Views Album Review". Rolling Stone. Retrieved April 15, 2019. "'Saturday Night Live' recap: Drake hosts". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved June 10, 2016. "Drake & Future Add "Summer Sixteen Tour" Dates". HipHopDX. May 21, 2016. Retrieved October 30, 2016. "Sorry, Brooklyn, Philadelphia, and Newark; Drake Has to Postpone His Final Summer Sixteen Tour Dates". October 11, 2016. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Fitzgerald, Trent (January 8, 2023). "Drake and Future Break Highest-Grossing Record With Summer Sixteen Tour". XXL. Retrieved January 9, 2023. "Drake Is Working on a New Mixtape". Billboard. July 24, 2016. Retrieved March 5, 2022. McDermott, Maeve (August 2, 2016). "Drake, Kanye West announce joint album at OVO Fest". USA Today. Retrieved August 2, 2016. "Octobers Very Own: Drake – Child's Play". octobersveryown.blogspot.com. September 3, 2016. Retrieved September 4, 2016. "Drake's 'Please Forgive Me' Debuts As An Apple Music Exclusive". Forbes. September 26, 2016. Retrieved September 28, 2016. "Drake is leading the pack for the 2016 BET Hip-Hop Awards". BET. August 18, 2016. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "BET Hip Hop Awards 2016 Winners: The Complete List". E! Network. October 4, 2016. Retrieved October 5, 2016. "Drake Leads BET Hip-Hop Awards with 14 Nominations: Exclusive". Billboard. August 18, 2016. Retrieved March 5, 2022. Yoo, Noah (October 10, 2016). "Drake Announces 2017 Europe Tour". Pitchfork. Retrieved October 10, 2016. "Drake Announces New Project 'More Life'". Complex. October 24, 2016. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Grammy Awards 2017: See the Full Winners List". Billboard. February 12, 2017. Retrieved March 5, 2022. Caulfield, Keith (March 26, 2017). "Drake's 'More Life' Bows at No. 1 on Billboard 200 & Sets Streaming Record". Billboard. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Drake's More Life shatters streaming records with 89.9 million streams on Apple Music in 24 hours". The Verge. March 20, 2017. Retrieved March 20, 2017. "Drake wins top artist, breaks Adele's record at Billboard Music Awards". Chicago Tribune. May 21, 2017. Retrieved May 22, 2017. McIntyre, Hugh. "Drake Makes History With His Dominance of the Hot 100". Forbes. Retrieved June 17, 2017. "Drake to host first-ever NBA Awards on TNT". National Basketball Association. Retrieved March 5, 2022. Tsuji, Alysha (September 9, 2017). "LeBron James and Drake toast to Vince Carter and Toronto before 'The Carter Effect' debuts". USA Today. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved March 15, 2023. "Lil Wayne Taps Drake on New Song "Family Feud"". XXL Mag. December 30, 2017. Retrieved March 5, 2022. Trust, Gary (January 29, 2018). "Drake's 'God's Plan' Debuts at No. 1 on Billboard Hot 100". Billboard. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Drake's "God's Plan" Breaks Taylor Swift's Spotify Streaming Record". Spin. January 24, 2018. Retrieved January 25, 2018. "Drake's God's Plan Breaks Apple Music's Streaming Record". XXL Mag. January 25, 2018. Retrieved March 5, 2022. McIntyre, Hugh (September 19, 2019). "'God's Plan' Becomes Drake's First Diamond-Certified Single". Forbes. Retrieved August 30, 2023. "Highest Certified Digital Singles Ever List On RIAA'S Website". RIAA. Retrieved August 30, 2023. "Drake Jumps on BlocBoy JB's New Song "Look Alive": Listen". Pitchfork. February 9, 2018. Retrieved February 9, 2018. "Drake Passes JAY-Z for Most Billboard Hot 100 Top 10s Among Rappers". Billboard. January 30, 2018. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Drake's New "Nice for What" Video Stars Issa Rae, Olivia Wilde, Rashida Jones: Watch | Pitchfork". Pitchfork. April 6, 2018. Retrieved April 7, 2018. "Drake just dropped his new single as promised". The Independent. April 6, 2018. Retrieved April 7, 2018. "Drake Dethrones Himself Atop Billboard Hot 100, as 'Nice for What' Debuts at No. 1, Replacing 'God's Plan'". Billboard. April 16, 2018. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Drake Announces New Album "Scorpion," Dropping in June". HotNewHipHop. April 16, 2018. Retrieved April 16, 2018. "Drake is upset on new single "I'm Upset"". Vulture. May 26, 2018. Retrieved May 27, 2018. Aswad, Jem (June 30, 2018). "Drake Crushes Spotify and Apple Music's One-Day Streaming Records". Variety. Retrieved June 30, 2018. "Drake's "Scorpion" Total Sales Number Revealed". HotNewHipHop. Retrieved July 6, 2018. "Building Album Sales Chart". HITS Daily Double. Retrieved July 6, 2018. Trust, Gary (July 16, 2018). "Drake Dethrones Drake Atop Billboard Hot 100 as 'In My Feelings' Replaces 'Nice for What' at No. 1". Billboard. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Drake Now Holds the Record for Most No. 1 Hits Among Rappers". Genius. Archived from the original on December 23, 2021. Retrieved July 20, 2018. "5 Things We Learned On First Listen to Travis Scott's 'Astroworld' Album". Billboard. August 18, 2018. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Drake's Hotline to Hollywood: Inside an Ambitious Push Into Film and TV". The Hollywood Reporter. November 8, 2017. Retrieved March 5, 2022. But I do plan on expanding – to take six months or a year to myself and do some great films. Cowen, Trace William. "Bad Bunny and Drake Link for New Collab "MIA"". Complex. Rich Antoniello. Retrieved October 11, 2018. Lynch, Joe (December 7, 2018). "Grammys 2019 Nominees: The Complete List". Billboard. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Drake Makes Surprise Grammy Appearance, Gets Cut Off Mid-Speech". Variety. February 11, 2019. But he was cut off during his speech right after a pause and saying "But…," leading viewers to speculate whether show producers deliberately gave him the yank – amid some mild shade he was throwing at the very idea of awards shows – or whether they just figured he'd wrapped up. "Grammy Producers Try to Explain Why Drake's Speech Was Cut Short". Variety. February 11, 2019. "Drake Talks Young Money, Kanye Comparisons & Ghostwriting". Complex. February 19, 2009. Retrieved May 8, 2010. Arcand, Rob (June 14, 2019). "Drake Will Release 2 New Songs to Celebrate Raptors' NBA Finals Win". Spin. Retrieved June 14, 2019. "Drake is dropping a new compilation, Care Package, tonight". The Fader. August 1, 2019. Retrieved August 1, 2019. "Drake Achieves Ninth No. 1 Album on Billboard 200 Chart With 'Care Package'". Billboard. August 11, 2019. Retrieved March 5, 2022. Minsker, Evan (December 24, 2019). "Drake Shares Video for New Song "War": Watch". Pitchfork. Retrieved December 24, 2019. "Drake Is Doing up UK Drill on New Freestyle Track "War"". Versus. December 24, 2019. Retrieved December 25, 2019. "5 Biggest Takeaways From Drake's New Song "War"". Complex. Retrieved December 25, 2019. Elibert, Mark; Kaufman, Gil (December 26, 2019). "12 Takeaways From Drake's All-Encompassing 'Rap Radar' Interview". Billboard. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Drake Returns with New Single 'Toosie Slide'". Rap-Up. March 29, 2020. Retrieved April 11, 2020. "Drake's "Toosie Slide" No. 1 Hot 100 Debut". Billboard. April 13, 2020. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Drake to Release Demo Tape Compilation Tonight, New Album This Summer". XXL. May 2020. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "First Impressions of Drake's New Project Dark Lane Demo Tapes'". Complex. Retrieved May 2, 2020. Caulfield, Keith (May 10, 2020). "Kenny Chesney Lands Ninth No. 1 Album on Billboard 200 Chart With 'Here and Now'". Billboard. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Drake scores the Official UK Chart double". Official Charts Company. Retrieved May 11, 2020. Bloom, Madison (April 30, 2020). "Drake Releasing New Mixtape Dark Lane Demo Tapes Tonight". Pitchfork. Retrieved May 1, 2020. Bloom, Madison (August 14, 2020). "Drake and Lil Durk Share Video for New Song "Laugh Now Cry Later": Watch". Pitchfork. Retrieved August 14, 2020. "Drake Drops 'Certified Lover Boy' Release Date and Teaser". Billboard. October 24, 2020. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Drake to release new album 'Certified Lover Boy' in early 2021". The New Indian Express. October 26, 2020. Retrieved October 27, 2020. "Drake says 'Certified Lover Boy' will no longer be dropping in January". NME. January 21, 2021. Retrieved January 21, 2021. Moore, Sam (January 19, 2021). "Drake becomes the first artist ever to surpass 50 billion Spotify streams". NME. Retrieved January 19, 2021. Minsker, Evan (March 5, 2021). "Drake Shares 3 New Songs on Scary Hours 2 EP: Listen". Pitchfork. Retrieved March 5, 2021. "Drake Makes Historic Hot 100 Start at Nos. 1, 2 & 3, Led by 'What's Next'". Billboard. Retrieved March 5, 2022. Ferme, Antonio (May 25, 2021). "Drake Celebrates Artist of the Decade by Renting Out SoFi Stadium and Dining on 50 Yard Line". Variety. Retrieved May 27, 2021. Caulfield, Keith (September 12, 2021). "Drake's 'Certified Lover Boy' Debuts at No. 1 on Billboard 200 Chart With Biggest Week for an Album in Over a Year". Billboard. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Drake Lands All 21 'Certified Lover Boy' Tracks in Hot 100's Top 40". Billboard. September 13, 2021. Retrieved March 5, 2022. Trust, Gary (September 13, 2021). "Drake Dominates With Record 9 of Top 10 on Billboard Hot 100, Led by 'Way 2 Sexy' at No. 1". Billboard. Retrieved March 5, 2022. Sayles, Justin (November 23, 2021). "The Winners and Losers of the 2022 Grammy Nominations". The Ringer. Retrieved November 25, 2021. Caulfield, Keith (December 2, 2021). "The Year in Charts 2021: Drake Is Billboard's Top Artist of the Year". Billboard. Elibert, Mark (December 1, 2021). "Drake Crowned Biggest Rapper Of 2021 – By Spotify". HipHopDX. Horton, Adrian (December 6, 2021). "Drake withdraws his two 2022 Grammy nominations". The Guardian. Retrieved March 15, 2023. Caraan, Sophie (January 17, 2022). "Drake Named Most-Streamed Artist of 2021". Hype Beast. "Drake Reacts to His Placement on Hip-Hop's Highest-Paid Artists List". Rap Up. March 3, 2022. Retrieved March 6, 2022. Rossignol, Derrick (April 15, 2022). "Drake And Taylor Swift Each Had More Streams Than Every Pre-1980 Song Combined Last Year". Uproxx. Retrieved April 16, 2022. Garcia, Thania (May 9, 2022). "Future Scores Two No. 1s as 'I Never Liked You' Album, 'Wait for U' Featuring Drake and Tems Top Charts". Variety. Retrieved May 9, 2022. Halperin, Shirley (May 3, 2022). "Drake Strikes Massive, Multi-Faceted Deal With Universal Music Group". Variety. Retrieved May 4, 2022. Kaufman, Gil (June 17, 2022). "Drake Triples Down, Promises Poetry Book and Another 'Scary Hours' Pack in 2022". Billboard. Retrieved June 18, 2022. Bloom, Madison (June 26, 2022). "Drake Scores 11th No. 1 Album With Honestly, Nevermind". Pitchfork. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Rose, Jordan (July 6, 2022). "Drake's "Texts Go Green" Ties Biggest Single-Week Billboard Hot 100 Dip in History, Falling From No. 13 to No. 94". Complex. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Corcoran, Nina (July 13, 2022). "Drake Announces October World Weekend Concerts With Lil Wayne, Nicki Minaj, and More". Pitchfork. Retrieved July 14, 2022. Gbogbo, Mawunyo (August 17, 2022). "Drake smashes 55-year-old record previously held by The Beatles". ABC News (Australia). Retrieved August 18, 2022. Strauss, Matthew (October 13, 2022). "Drake and the Weeknd Continue to Snub Grammys, Don't Submit Solo Music for 2023 Consideration". Pitchfork. Retrieved October 16, 2022. "Drake and 21 Savage Link Up for "Jimmy Cooks" Video". Complex. Retrieved October 22, 2022. Breihan, Tom (October 27, 2022). "Drake & 21 Savage's Her Loss Pushed To Next Week Because Noah "40" Shebib Got Covid". StereoGum. Trust, Gary (November 14, 2022). "Taylor Swift's 'Anti-Hero' Holds Atop Hot 100, Drake Debuts 8 Songs in Top 10". Billboard. Friend, David (November 15, 2022). "2023 Grammys: Canadian nominees revealed". CTV News. Retrieved November 16, 2022. "Most streamed act on Spotify". February 16, 2023. Retrieved April 2, 2023. Shifferaw, Abel (June 24, 2023). "Drake Announces New Album With Poetry Book". Complex. Retrieved June 25, 2023. "Drake & SZA Drop 'Slime You Out' Collab: Stream It Now". Billboard. September 15, 2023. Retrieved September 16, 2023. Andriyashchuk, Yuriy (September 16, 2023). "Drake postpones "For All The Dogs" album to October 6". Hip Hop Vibe. Retrieved September 16, 2023. Zemler, Emily (October 5, 2023). "Drake Heralds Forthcoming Album With Single '8 AM in Charlotte'". Rolling Stone. Retrieved October 5, 2023. Espinoza, Joshua (March 8, 2024). "Drake Hops on 4batz's "Act II: Date @ 8" Remix". Complex. Retrieved March 8, 2024. Gonzalez, Alex (March 8, 2024). "4Batz And Drake Ball Out For Their Ladies On Their Charming New 'Act II: Date @ 8 Remix'". Uproxx. Retrieved March 8, 2024. "Drake Says Kanye West Is 'The Most Influential Person' On His Sound". MTV News. May 28, 2009. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Drake Talks Influences, Rap Stereotypes And More With CNN". HipHopDX. May 6, 2010. Archived from the original on July 8, 2014. Retrieved March 5, 2022. ""Some Of The Greatest Ever": Drake Praises The Roots, MF DOOM & Phonte On Instagram". Okayplayer. January 21, 2020. Retrieved January 2, 2021. "Lil Wayne says he's a better rapper than Drake: 'I annihilate that guy'". NME. Retrieved August 29, 2016. "Drake reflects: "Aaliyah had the biggest influence on my music"". Soul Train. January 16, 2011. "My Way: 10 Artists Usher Has Influenced". BET. Retrieved June 24, 2016. "Vybz Kartel Speaks: After Five Years in Prison, He Still Rules Dancehall". Rolling Stone. November 16, 2016. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Drake: 'Vybz Kartel Is One Of My Biggest Inspirations'". Hype Life Magazine. May 10, 2016. Archived from the original on March 26, 2017. Retrieved March 26, 2017. Suarez, Gary (September 7, 2021). "Drake's Certified Lover Boy sounds a little too familiar". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved September 7, 2021. Beaumont-Thomas, Ben (April 6, 2018). "Drake's progress: the making of a modern superstar". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved May 1, 2020. "Drake Talks Influences, Rap Stereotypes And More With CNN". HipHopDX. May 6, 2010. Retrieved July 10, 2016. "Peak Drake". The Fader. Retrieved July 10, 2016. "Drake Crowns himself as the first successful rap-singer". Vibe. July 27, 2012. "Lil Wayne Says He Encouraged Drake To Rap The Way He Does: 'Rap About Girls'". Design & Trend. September 15, 2015. Archived from the original on June 2, 2016. Retrieved May 7, 2016. Charity, Justin (August 19, 2022). "Brent Faiyaz, Drake, and the OVO-ification of Male R&B". The Ringer. Retrieved August 20, 2022. "Katy Perry Calls Drake A "Soft" Rapper". Retrieved July 29, 2016. Mic (March 6, 2016). "20 Drake Songs That Show He's Actually a Talented Rapper". Mic. Retrieved May 7, 2016. "Sonic Dictionary | Drake: Rap, Rhyme, and Rhythm · Captivating Voices". sonicdictionary.fhi.duke.edu. Archived from the original on June 1, 2016. Retrieved May 7, 2016. Reynolds, Simon (April 28, 2016). "How Drake became the all-pervading master of hyper-reality rap". The Guardian. Retrieved May 7, 2016. "13 'Views' Lines You Can Use on Instagram Right Now". Complex. Retrieved May 7, 2016. "Drake: Rap's Most Sensitive Rapper?". Complex. Archived from the original on September 22, 2017. Retrieved June 8, 2017. Fenwick, Julie (July 6, 2022). "Why Does Drake Give Me the Ick? An Investigation". Vice. Retrieved July 8, 2022. "Drake Celebrates 35th Birthday with 'Narcos'-Themed Party". Raptology. October 25, 2021. Retrieved October 25, 2021. Blanchet, Brenton (October 26, 2021). "Drake Gifted Rolls-Royce Phantom He Used to Rent for $5K a Month to 'Keep Up Appearances'". Complex. Saponara, Michael (February 7, 2022). "'Deep Pockets': Drake Has Bet Over $1B In Virtual Gambling Since December 2021". HipHop DX. Retrieved February 9, 2022. "High stakes: Inside the wild world of crypto casinos". Sky News. Retrieved September 20, 2023. "#YOLO: The newest acronym you'll love to hate". The Washington Post. April 6, 2012. Retrieved May 7, 2016. "Views From the 6: Inside Drake's Toronto". Pitchfork Media. March 5, 2015. Retrieved May 7, 2016. "June 10 Is Officially 'Drake Day' In Houston". MTV. Retrieved June 10, 2016. "There Is Now a Drake Day in Houston". Complex.com. Retrieved June 10, 2016. "June 10 Named 'Drake Day' in the City of Houston". Pitchfork Media. June 12, 2014. Retrieved June 10, 2016. "Students campaigned to get Drake to Drake University. But when he got there, things did not go to plan". October 7, 2016. Retrieved October 30, 2016. "Drake Stealthily Visited Drake University in the Dead of Night". MTV. Retrieved October 30, 2016. Longwell, Karen (January 27, 2021). "Drake's Toronto house makes most Googled list". BlogTo. Retrieved January 28, 2021. "Drake Releases New 'Hotline Bling' Video". digg.com. October 20, 2015. Retrieved May 7, 2016. Galil, Leor (July 30, 2015). "Drake proves ghostwriters don't matter with 'Hotline Bling'". Chicago Reader. Retrieved November 20, 2015. Greene, Jayson (August 5, 2015). "Drake: "Hotline Bling"". Pitchfork. Retrieved November 20, 2015. Woolf, Jake (October 20, 2015). "Where to Buy Everything in Drake's "Hotline Bling" Video". GQ. Retrieved May 7, 2016. "A Guide to Dressing Your Inner Drake". Elle. October 21, 2015. Retrieved May 7, 2016. "Drake and Future Are the "Most Stylish Men Alive," According to 'GQ'". Complex. Retrieved May 22, 2016. "Drake Ditched The Heart Haircut & Debuted A Completely New Look!". Hot97. December 3, 2021. Retrieved December 5, 2021. Patel, Anish (August 3, 2022). "Drake has gone full gorpcore in the video for "Sticky"". GQ. Retrieved August 3, 2022. Convery, Stephanie (June 4, 2019). "What is the Drake curse? Why is it hitting the NBA? What's Macaulay Culkin got to do with it?". The Guardian. Retrieved February 22, 2022. Flores, Elizabeth (February 10, 2024). "'Drake curse': The rapper has placed his Super Bowl bet. What fanbase should be worried?". USA Today. Archived from the original on February 12, 2024. Retrieved February 12, 2024. "Drake publishes open letter in response to Alton Sterling killing by police". The Guardian. Retrieved July 7, 2016. Harris, Christopher (June 5, 2021). "Drake and other Canadian artists sign letter requesting change to copyright law". Revolt. Srinivasan, Arun (November 3, 2021). "Drake makes it clear he wants a WNBA team in Toronto". Yahoo. Retrieved November 3, 2021. Corcoran, Nina (November 21, 2021). "Kanye West and Drake Officially Announce "Free Larry Hoover" Los Angeles Concert". Pitchfork. "Drake's Set Removed From Kanye West Amazon Prime Concert Edit". Rap Up. December 16, 2021. Li, Joyce (December 27, 2021). "Drake Hands Out Stacks of Cash to Toronto Fans for the Holidays". HypeBeast. Ellington, Andre (October 29, 2023). "Drake Signs Letter Calling For Gaza Ceasefire After Criticism For Not Speaking Up". HipHopDX. Retrieved October 30, 2023. "Drake's 15 Greatest Drake-Isms That Have Shaped Pop Culture, Ranked". Billboard. April 11, 2018. Retrieved March 5, 2022. Braboy, Mark. "Drake is the artist of the decade". Insider. Retrieved May 27, 2022. Caramanica, Jon (November 25, 2019). "Rappers Are Singers Now. Thank Drake". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved May 27, 2022. Bakare, Lanre (March 20, 2014). "Why the world revolves around Drake". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved May 1, 2020. Lackner, Chris (March 16, 2017). "The Drake factor: Canadian music industry in the spotlight". canada.com. Archived from the original on July 29, 2020. Retrieved May 1, 2020. "How Drake is inspiring the next wave of Toronto artists". CBC. November 8, 2019. Kaplan, Ben (December 9, 2011). "The Canadian Invasion: Michael Buble, Justin Bieber and Drake dominate U.S. charts". National Post. Archived from the original on December 10, 2011. Retrieved March 5, 2022. Serwer, Jesse (January 4, 2016). "A Complete History of Canada's Pop-Music Takeover". Thrillist. Retrieved May 3, 2020. Ross, Gemma (August 22, 2022). "Drake is the most Shazamed artist of all time". "Drake's progress: the making of a modern superstar". The Guardian. April 6, 2018. Spanos, Brittany (March 20, 2017). "Drake's 'More Life' Playlist Is Redefining Borders of Blackness in Pop". Rolling Stone. Retrieved October 25, 2018. "500 Greatest Albums: The Drake Era Kicks Into High Gear on 'Take Care'". Rolling Stone. September 25, 2020. "Why Drake's Influence In Hip-Hop Is Still Ahead Of Its Time". Uproxx. September 10, 2019. "Thank him later: 10 ways Drake changed the game". BBC Radio 1Xtra. "How Drake is inspiring the next wave of Toronto artists". CBS Music. Shaw, Lucas (December 12, 2021). "Drake Tops the Charts Without His Usual Smash-Hit Singles". Bloomberg. Isai, Vjosa (January 23, 2022). "When Drake Is on Your Course Syllabus". The New York Times. Savage, Mark (June 21, 2022). "Beyoncé, Drake and the revival of 90s house music". BBC. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Suarez, Gary. "Drake Is Now The RIAA's Top Certified Singles Artist Ever". Forbes. Retrieved June 30, 2018. "American single certifications – Drake". Recording Industry Association of America. Retrieved November 22, 2020. "How Did Drake Become The World's Biggest Pop Star?". Vogue. May 15, 2020. Zellner, Xander (October 16, 2023). "Here Are All the Hot 100 Records That Drake Has (and Hasn't) Broken". Billboard. Retrieved October 25, 2023. Trust, Gary (October 16, 2023). "Drake & J. Cole's 'First Person Shooter' Debuts Atop Billboard Hot 100, Tying Drake With Michael Jackson for Record". Billboard. Retrieved October 25, 2023. Trust, Gary (October 14, 2013). "Chart Highlights: Katy Perry, Drake, Bastille Score New No. 1s". Billboard. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Drake Becomes First Artist To Have Two Albums Each Spend 400 Weeks on Billboard 200". HypeBeast. November 19, 2021. Retrieved November 20, 2021. "Drake – National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences". The Recording Academy. February 13, 2017. "Why Drake Managed to Rule Hip-Hop in 2014 – Without a New Album or Hit Single". Billboard. December 12, 2014. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Top Artists 2015". Billboard. January 2, 2013. Retrieved October 30, 2016. "Top Artists – Year-End 2016". Billboard. Retrieved April 14, 2017. "Top Artists 2017". Billboard. January 2, 2013. "Top Artists 2018". Billboard. January 2, 2013. "Drake named IFPI Global Recording Artist 2016". ifpi.org. Archived from the original on April 15, 2017. Retrieved April 14, 2017. "Best Albums – Page 3". Pitchfork. August 19, 2014. Retrieved February 17, 2015. "Best Albums – Page 5". Pitchfork. February 17, 2015. "Top Music Artists". Pitchfork. July 21, 2016. "Best Rapper Alive Every Year Since 1979". Complex. July 22, 2016. "What happened after two men robbed Drake at gunpoint". The Globe and Mail. June 18, 2010. Retrieved May 1, 2020. Naumann, Ryan (December 3, 2021). "Drake's Female Trespasser Loses It During Phone Call With Rapper's Lawyer Over $4 Billion Lawsuit". Radar. Rose, Jordan (December 21, 2021). "Judge Dismisses $4 Billion Lawsuit Filed Against Drake by Alleged 2017 Home Intruder". Complex. Retrieved December 22, 2021. "Drake files restraining order against alleged stalker". The News. March 6, 2022. Baker, Cole (April 20, 2022). "Drake Granted Restraining Order Against Stalker". HotNewHipHop. Retrieved April 20, 2022. Espinoza, Joshua. "Police Reportedly Arrest Armed Woman Outside Drake's Toronto Mansion". Complex. Retrieved March 31, 2021. Cummings-Grady, Mackenzie (January 27, 2023). "Drake's $75M L.A. Mansion Burglarized; Suspect Arrested". HipHopDX. Retrieved February 10, 2023. "Drake Sued by Ex-Girlfriend Over 'Marvin's Room'". Rolling Stone. February 3, 2012. Retrieved September 30, 2015. Horowitz, Steven J. (February 11, 2013). "Drake Settles Lawsuit With Woman From 'Marvin's Room'". HipHopDX. Archived from the original on May 27, 2013. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Drake Sued Over 'Pound Cake' Sample". MTV News. Retrieved September 30, 2015. "Drake Reportedly Being Sued For Stealing Song Sample". HuffPost. April 17, 2014. Retrieved October 24, 2017. "Drake Beats Lawsuit Over Sampling With Winning 'Fair Use' Argument". The Hollywood Reporter. May 31, 2017. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Drake Pays $100,000 to Rappin' 4-Tay for Ripping Off "Playaz Club" Lyrics on YG's "Who Do You Love"". Pitchfork Media. July 16, 2014. Retrieved September 30, 2015. "Drake's Party Gives Oklahoma City Nightclub Trouble". Rolling Stone. March 26, 2012. Retrieved March 5, 2022. Naumann, Ryan (December 31, 2021). "Drake Sues Jeweler Over Diamond Necklace, Demands Company Stop Using His Face In Ads". RadarOnline. Retrieved January 1, 2022. Saint-Louis, Tai (December 4, 2022). "Drake 'Way 2 Sexy' Copyright Lawsuit Thrown Out After Prosecutors Harassed". HipHopDX. Retrieved December 4, 2022. "Drake Wants to Ban Social Media Posts From Being Used in Upcoming Assault Trial". TheBlast.com. April 2, 2018. Retrieved April 3, 2018. "Judge Tosses Detail's Assault Lawsuit Against Drake". Patch.com. April 9, 2018. Retrieved April 11, 2018. Martinez, Jose. "Man Reportedly Seeks $250K in Lawsuit Against Drake, Others Over Alleged Nightclub Assault (UPDATE)". Complex. Retrieved December 19, 2022. Naumann, Ryan (July 21, 2021). "Drake & Kourtney Kardashian's Ex-Boyfriend Settle Yearslong Court Battle With Man Who Sued Over Alleged Nightclub Assault". Radar. Retrieved December 19, 2022. "Drake and Chris Brown Sued for 'No Guidance' Song". XXL. October 7, 2021. Mahadevan, Tara C. (January 13, 2022). "Chris Brown, Drake Argue Copyright Suit Over "No Guidance" Is 'Baseless'". Complex. Retrieved February 6, 2022. "Chris Brown & Drake Respond to 'Baseless' 'No Guidance' Lawsuit". HipHopDX. January 13, 2022. Retrieved February 7, 2022. Callas, Brad (April 28, 2022). "Drake Dropped From Copyright Suit Over Chris Brown Collab "No Guidance"". Complex. Retrieved April 28, 2022. Li, Joyce (March 7, 2022). "Drake Hit With New Copyright Lawsuits for "In My Feelings" and "Nice for What"". Hype Beast. Retrieved March 10, 2022. "Astroworld: Travis Scott and Drake sued over deadly US festival crush". BBC. November 8, 2021. Beaumont-Thomas, Ben (November 9, 2021). "Drake makes Astroworld statement: 'My heart is broken'". The Guardian. Rice, Nicholas (November 18, 2021). "Drake Delays Release of New Song 'Splash Brothers' with French Montana amid Astroworld Tragedy". People. Aniftos, Rania (July 18, 2022). "Drake Shares Letter From Swedish Police After Team Denies He Was Arrested". Billboard. Retrieved July 30, 2022. Stempel, Jonathan (November 8, 2022). "Drake, 21 Savage are sued for using 'Vogue' name to promote album". Reuters. Retrieved November 8, 2022. "Drake and 21 Savage Sued by 'Vogue' Over Fake Magazine Cover Used for 'Her Loss' Promotion". Complex. Retrieved November 8, 2022. Stempel, Jonathan (November 17, 2022). "Drake, 21 Savage agree not to use 'Vogue' trademarks to promote No. 1 album". Reuters. Retrieved November 17, 2022. Garcia, Thania (February 16, 2023). "Drake and 21 Savage, Condé Nast Settle Lawsuit Over Fake Vogue Covers". Variety. Retrieved February 22, 2023. Rouhani, Neena (February 9, 2023). "Drake Ordered to Appear for Deposition in XXXTentacion Murder Trial". Billboard. Retrieved February 10, 2023. Blistein, Jon (February 21, 2023). "An Attempt to Subpoena Drake at His Mansion for the XXXTentacion Trial Did Not Go Well". Rolling Stone. Retrieved February 21, 2023. "Chris Brown Releases Drake Diss Track". Rolling Stone. June 30, 2012. Retrieved March 5, 2002. "News: Chris Brown Involved In Fight With Drake's Entourage [Updated]". KillerHipHop.com. June 27, 2012. "Chris Brown Fires Back At Drake On Diss Track; Meek Mill Reacts". Billboard. June 30, 2012. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Nicki Minaj releases only with Lil Wayne, Chris Brown, and Drake". Pitchfork. October 28, 2014. Retrieved August 28, 2016. Aniftos, Rania (June 5, 2019). "Chris Brown & Drake to Collab on New Song 'No Guidance'". Billboard. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Diddy vs. Drake". drakevseverybody.com. Archived from the original on March 4, 2021. Retrieved December 11, 2014. "Tyga vs. Drake". drakevseverybody.com. Archived from the original on May 13, 2017. Retrieved January 14, 2015. "On His Worst Behavior: A List Of All The Rappers Who Have Beefed With Drake". VH1. Archived from the original on July 27, 2015. Retrieved July 23, 2015. "Meek Mill Calls Out Drake: "He Don't Write His Own Raps"". BallerStatus.com. July 22, 2015. Archived from the original on July 23, 2015. Retrieved July 30, 2015. "Drake Responds To Meek Mill on New Track 'Charged Up'". BallerStatus.com. July 26, 2015. Archived from the original on July 27, 2015. Retrieved July 30, 2015. "Drake Disses Meek Mill Again In 'Back To Back Freestyle'". BallerStatus.com. July 29, 2015.[permanent dead link] "Tweet Mill Fires Back at Drake on 'Wanna Know'". Rap-Up.com. July 31, 2015. "Drake disses Meek Mill in new freestyle: 'Is that a world tour or your girl's tour?'". Entertainment Weekly. July 29, 2015. Retrieved February 15, 2016. "Drake Took Another Shot at Meek Mill During The NBA All-Star Celeb Game". MTV. February 12, 2016. Retrieved February 15, 2016. "More L's: Watch Drake Reference Killing Meek Mill's Career To Kevin Hart at NBA All-Star Game". Bossip. February 13, 2016. Archived from the original on February 17, 2016. Retrieved February 15, 2016. "Don't Fuck With Me (Dreams Money Can Buy)". HipHopDX. September 26, 2011. Archived from the original on May 3, 2015. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Meek Mill – War Pain (Drake Diss) Feat. Omelly (Prod. By Ben Billions) | Download & Listen [New Song]". HotNewHipHop. January 31, 2016. Retrieved January 31, 2016. "Forget Eminem – Drake is Going After Hot 97 and Funkmaster Flex". MTV. Retrieved August 7, 2016. "Music Drake Just Hit Back at Hot 97'S Funkmaster Flex with Serious Fighting Words". MTV. Retrieved August 8, 2016. "Drake Says 'Free Meek Mill' During Australia Concert". Billboard. Retrieved March 5, 2022. Holmes, Charles (February 7, 2019). "Meek Mill, Drake's 'Going Bad' Video: Black History Month Needed This". Rolling Stone. Retrieved March 1, 2019. "Everything We Know About Joe Budden, Meek Mill & Drake's Internet Beef". Billboard. July 6, 2016. Retrieved March 5, 2022. Lilah, Rose (July 28, 2016). "A Complete Timeline of Drake and Joe Budden's beef". HNHH. Retrieved July 28, 2016. "Kid Cudi responds to Drake diss: "I wanna see you say it to my face"". NME. October 28, 2016. "Kid Cudi thanks his fans and disses Drake from rehab". Daily News. New York. October 28, 2016. Archived from the original on January 3, 2017. Retrieved March 5, 2022. Robinson, Joshua (September 2, 2021). "Lil Wayne, Kid Cudi, & Rick Ross confirmed as features on Drake's 'Certified Lover Boy'". HotNewHipHop. Archived from the original on September 2, 2021. Retrieved September 3, 2021. "Pusha-T reignites feud with Drake on Daytona track "Infrared"". Consequence. May 25, 2018. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Drake Disses Pusha-T and Kanye on New Song "Duppy Freestyle": Listen". Pitchfork. May 25, 2018. Retrieved May 27, 2018. "The Ruthlessness of Pusha-T's Ferocious Diss Track". TheRinger. May 30, 2018. Retrieved May 30, 2018. "Pusha T Vs. Drake: A Complete History". HotNewHipHop. May 24, 2018. Retrieved May 26, 2018. "Drake goes after Kanye in new freestyle". Consequence. July 8, 2018. Retrieved March 5, 2022. Leight, Elias. "Quincy Jones Looks Back on the Making of Michael Jackson's 'Bad'". Rolling Stone. Retrieved October 15, 2018. "Drake details Kanye West feud". People. Retrieved October 15, 2018. "Drake Finally Addresses The Reasons Behind His Feud With Kanye West". Capital Xtra. April 16, 2018. Retrieved October 15, 2018. Peters, Micah (October 13, 2018). "Drake Aired Out Kanye West to LeBron James on 'The Shop'". The Ringer. Retrieved October 15, 2018. "Drake's Rumored Baby: Everything We Know". TheCut.com. May 30, 2018. Retrieved May 30, 2018. "Drake Disses Kanye West On French Montana's New Song "No Stylist"". HipHopDX.com. September 5, 2018. Retrieved September 5, 2018. "Drake disses Kanye West at Chicago show". Consequence. August 19, 2018. Retrieved March 5, 2022. Savage, Mark (December 14, 2018). "Kanye West vs Drake: What's the story behind their war of words (and emojis)?". BBC News. Retrieved December 14, 2018. Kreps, Daniel (September 4, 2021). "Drake Intensifies Kanye West Beef by Leaking 'Donda' Outtake 'Life of the Party'". Rolling Stone. Retrieved October 24, 2021. Ismael Ruiz, Matthew (November 8, 2021). "Kanye West Tells Drake He Wants to Squash Beef at Live Event: "It's Time to Put It to Rest"". Pitchfork. "Kanye West and Drake Pose for Photo Together in Apparent Beef Squash". Pitchfork. November 17, 2021. Retrieved November 17, 2021. Fu, Eddie (September 16, 2022). "YouTuber Anthony Fantano Trolls Drake Into Revealing Threatening DMs". Consequence. Retrieved September 16, 2022. Mier, Tomás (September 16, 2022). "Drake Disses Music Critic Anthony Fantano Over Fake DM Video With a Real, 'Salty Ass' Message". Rolling Stone. Retrieved September 16, 2022. Shanfeld, Ethan (September 16, 2022). "Drake Feuds With Music Critic Anthony Fantano: Your 'Existence' Is a 1/10". Variety. Retrieved September 16, 2022. "DRAKE: KENDRICK LAMAR'S 'NOT MURDERING ME'". MTV. Retrieved July 23, 2016. "The Complete List of Drake Feuds: Tyga, Chris Brown, Jay-Z And Other Rappers". Fashion&Style. Archived from the original on August 7, 2016. Retrieved July 23, 2016. "A Timeline of Drake and The Weeknd's complicated relationship". Complex. Retrieved December 9, 2017. "The Brief History Between Drake And Tory Lanez Explained". thefader.com. February 2, 2016. Retrieved August 29, 2016. "Drake Responds To Beefs With Pusha T, Ludacris And Future". HipHopDX. February 27, 2012. Retrieved July 23, 2016. "Drake and Tory Lanez squash their beef". XXL. May 19, 2017. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Ludacris confirms his beef with Drake is dead". XXL. Retrieved June 26, 2017. "JAY-Z references XXXTentacion's murder on Drake's new album". Fader. Retrieved June 29, 2018. "Drake, Nas Star in New Sprite Commercial". Billboard. June 15, 2015. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Drake Admits to Occasional Drug Use". BET. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Meek Mill, Drake Diss Song: White Castle, Burger King Add Their Beef". International Business Times. July 31, 2015. "Drake and The Weeknd Among Forbes' List of Highest Paid Celebrities in 2017". XXL. June 12, 2017. Retrieved March 5, 2022. [1] Francks, Troy (October 10, 2023). "The Drake Effect on Stake Casino and its Legitimacy". GRAND PRIX 247. Retrieved February 14, 2024. "📰 Why Isn't Drake Playing High Stakes Poker?". HighStakesDB. November 21, 2023. Retrieved February 14, 2024. "Inside the wild wins and losses of Drake's sports-betting history". July 5, 2022. Retrieved February 14, 2024. "Drake launches Sauber's new era as they unveil rebrand". www.formula1.com. Retrieved February 14, 2024. "10 Artists That Should Sign To Drake's OVO Sound". XXL Mag. August 12, 2013. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Kash Doll Signing With Drake's OVO Label". FemaleRappers. October 18, 2016. Archived from the original on December 21, 2016. Retrieved June 14, 2017. Muhammad, Latifah (September 30, 2013). "Drake Named Global Ambassador for Toronto Raptors". BET. Retrieved September 30, 2013. "Toronto to host NBA All-Star 2016" (Press release). National Basketball Association. September 30, 2013. Archived from the original on December 5, 2015. Retrieved August 18, 2015. "From rapper to Raptor, Drake takes on new role". National Basketball Association. Associated Press. September 30, 2013. Archived from the original on January 27, 2016. Retrieved August 18, 2015. "Raptors sign rap star Drake to add flash, promote all-star game". The Globe and Mail. September 30, 2013. Retrieved September 30, 2013. "Drake gets key to the city at NBA all-star celebrity game". Toronto Star. February 12, 2016. Retrieved February 12, 2016. Kelly, Cathal (September 29, 2013). "Raptors, Drake team up for rebranding: Kelly". Toronto Star. Retrieved September 30, 2013. Macleod, Robert (September 30, 2013). "Rap star Drake joins Raptors franchise as 'global ambassador'". The Globe and Mail. Retrieved September 30, 2013. Minsker, Evan (December 24, 2013). "Toronto Raptors to Host 'Drake Night'". Pitchfork Media. Retrieved May 12, 2016. "OVO and Toronto Raptors Drop Pre-Game Collection". Complex. Retrieved December 16, 2020. Rooney, Kyle (November 10, 2016). "Drake Hosts 'Drake Night' with Toronto Rappers November 16, 2016 against Golden State Warriors". Hotnewhiphop. Retrieved November 10, 2016. Machkovech, Sam (June 8, 2015). "Apple Music is "the next chapter in music," debuts June 30". Ars Technica. Retrieved June 8, 2017. "Apple Music Signs 'Power Move' Deal with Cash Money Records". Music Business Worldwide. Retrieved August 16, 2015. "Drake's Apple Music Partnership Is A Blockbuster". Fortune. Retrieved May 9, 2016. "Exclusive: How Drake and Apple Music Broke Streaming Records with More Life". The Verge. March 25, 2017. Retrieved March 25, 2017. "A bunch of celebrities have already been spotted wearing the Apple Watch". Business Insider. Retrieved August 29, 2016. William Cowen, Trace. "Showtime Orders Docuseries 'Ready for War,' Executive Produced by Drake". Complex. Retrieved June 20, 2020. "Q+A: Sean Menard, Director of 'The Carter Effect'". SLAMonline.com. October 7, 2017. Retrieved June 20, 2020. Davis, Clayton (August 5, 2022). "Drake, Selena Gomez and Two Beatles Added to Emmy Nomination List as Producers". Variety. Retrieved August 7, 2022. Vlessing, Etan (July 29, 2021). "Drake Exec-Producing Documentary About Black Hockey Players With LeBron James". Billboard. Retrieved March 5, 2022. Blanchet, Brenton (December 10, 2021). "Young Thug, Gunna, Lil Yachty, More Appear in 'Chillin Island' Trailer From HBO, Josh Safdie, and Drake's DreamCrew". Complex Networks. Retrieved December 31, 2021. Aswad, Jem (June 14, 2021). "Drake and Live Nation to Open History, a New Concert Venue in Toronto". Variety. Dingwall, Kate (February 7, 2022). "A look inside History, Drake's much-hyped east end concert venue". Toronto Life. Retrieved February 9, 2022. William Cowen, Trace (November 17, 2022). "Drake Helped Resurrect Famed Luna Luna Art Amusement Park, New Report Details $100 Million Investment". Complex. Retrieved November 17, 2022. "Drake Wants to Turn His Life Carbon Neutral With Eco-Finance Startup Aspiration". Rolling Stone. June 30, 2021. Retrieved June 30, 2021. Doherty, Brennan (December 29, 2021). "Drake is throwing money at companies like never before. What's his strategy?". The Star. Retrieved January 1, 2022. Saponara, Michael (August 30, 2022). "Drake & Lebron James Team Up To Invest In Italian Soccer Team AC Milan". HipHopDX. Egkolfopoulou, Misyrlena (April 13, 2022). "Justin Bieber, Gwyneth Paltrow, Diplo and Drake have something in common: they all just invested in crypto-payments startup MoonPay". Fortune Crypto. Retrieved October 7, 2023. Daniels, Tim. "Drake Buys Ownership Stake into Nadeshot's Esports Brand 100 Thieves". Bleacher Report. Retrieved September 9, 2020. Perez, Matt. "Drake And Scooter Braun Invest In Esports Company 100 Thieves". Forbes. Retrieved September 9, 2020. "Drake announces his own alcohol brand: Virginia Black". Fader. Retrieved August 13, 2017. Robertson, Becky (February 10, 2020). "Drake's Restaurant Pick 6ix has closed down". Retrieved November 16, 2022. "Drake, Chef Susur Lee open Toronto restaurant Fring's". Toronto Sun. September 22, 2015. "Introducing Drake's Virginia Black Whiskey x Brent Hocking Collaboration". BevMart. May 12, 2021. Cohen, Francine (July 2009). "DeLeon Diamante Tequila Delights". Food & Beverage Magazine: 16. "Virginia Black: Decadent American Whiskey". Virginia Black. Retrieved August 13, 2017. Eustice, Kyle (January 31, 2022). "Drake's Virginia Black Whiskey Deemed The 'Worst' Celebrity Liquor". Hiphopdex.com. Retrieved February 2, 2022. "Drake's Virginia Black Looks Like High End Champagne". Business Insider. August 25, 2016. Retrieved August 13, 2017. "Virginia Black Rollout Extended Worldwide". Business Insider. August 25, 2016. Retrieved August 13, 2017. "Drake and his Dad star in two new Virginia Black ads". XXL. July 30, 2017. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Drake Releases Two Very Expensive Champagnes". Food and Wine. Retrieved June 7, 2021. "Rapper Drake invests in faux-chicken maker's $40 million round". AdAge. May 18, 2021. Patton, Leslie (September 20, 2021). "Rapper Drake Buys Stake in Dave's Hot Chicken Restaurant Chain". Bloomberg.com. Bloomberg. Retrieved September 21, 2021. O'Brien, Abby (October 24, 2022). "Drake is giving away free chicken to Torontonians Monday to celebrate his birthday". CP24. Grow, Kory. "Drake Inks Shoe Deal With Michael Jordan's Nike Brand". Rolling Stone. First Full Look at Drake's OVO Air Jordan All-Star Collection. High Snobiety. February 10, 2016. Gustashaw, Megan (April 4, 2016). "Canada Goose and OVO Team Up on Some Dope Rain lGear". GQ. Retrieved May 7, 2016. "Drake Admits to Sweater Obsession". Vulture. September 9, 2011. Retrieved May 7, 2016. "Here's a Full Look at Bape's First Collab Collection With Drake's OVO". Complex. "Drake is selling a scented candle that smells like... Drake". CNN. December 2, 2020. Retrieved December 27, 2020. William Cowen, Trace (December 12, 2021). "Drake's Better World Fragrance House Rolls Out 'Winter Warmth' Holiday Candle". Complex. "Drake Unpacks the NOCTA Ethos". Nike. December 2, 2020. Archived from the original on December 15, 2020. Retrieved December 18, 2020. Wolf, Cam (December 3, 2020). "Drake Is Launching an Entirely New Label With Nike". GQ. Retrieved December 18, 2020. Bobb, Brooke (October 27, 2020). "Drake Dropped His New Nike Collaboration & Sealed It With a Kiss". British Vogue. "Drake And Nike Tease February 2021 NOCTA Drop". GQ. Retrieved December 27, 2020. "Drake's OVO Clothing Brand Releases "Weekender Collection" Modeled by Jasmine Tookes". Complex. Retrieved July 25, 2021. Dorsey, Avon (December 14, 2021). "Drake Drops New OVO "Winter Survival Collection" for Fall/Winter 2021". Hype Beast. Retrieved December 16, 2021. Brain, Eric (December 17, 2021). "Drake's OVO Puts a Luxe Suede Spin on Suicoke's Zavo Sandals and M2AB Mid Boot". HypeBeast. Elibert, Mark (March 16, 2022). "Drake Follows In Cardi B's Footsteps With OVO & Playboy Collaboration". HipHopDX. Retrieved March 17, 2022. Chow, Aaron (July 8, 2022). "Drake's OVO Celebrates Mike Tyson With Latest Capsule". HypeBeast. Retrieved July 8, 2022. "Drake's owl logo to grace front of Barcelona jersey in Clásico vs. Real Madrid". October 14, 2022. Roberts, Brian (October 27, 2022). "NHL Legend Tie Domi, Drake's OVO Brand, Roots Announce Capsule Collection". Forbes. Retrieved October 27, 2022. Lasarkis, Adam (November 23, 2022). "Drake-owned OVO teases upcoming collab with the Leafs". DailyHive. Retrieved November 24, 2022. Powers, Ann (April 3, 2020). "Drake, Quarantined In Style, Makes Social Isolation A Public Spectacle". NPR. Retrieved May 29, 2020. "Drake's 21,000-Square-Foot Mansion in Toronto Is Captured By Drone Video | Architectural Digest". Architectural Digest. Retrieved June 29, 2018. "Drake's Temporary Toronto Home Will Give You Serious House Envy – WATCH". Capital XTRA. Retrieved June 29, 2018. Saponara, Michael (April 3, 2020). "7 Things You Might Have Missed Inside Drake's House in 'Toosie Slide' Video". Billboard. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Drake Returns With New Single "Toosie Slide"". Rap-Up. April 3, 2020. Retrieved May 29, 2020. Fleming, Jack (June 27, 2022). "Drake's party compound, the 'Yolo Estate,' sells for $12 million". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved July 8, 2022. Flemming, Jack (February 28, 2022). "Drake is buying Robbie Williams' Beverly Crest mansion for more than $70 million". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved March 1, 2022. "Holiday Décor Inspo: Inside Drake's Spacious Toronto Condo". Essence. October 23, 2020. "Inside 'Air Drake': Rapper unveils new massive 767 plane, which could cost more than $187 million". CBS News. May 13, 2019. Retrieved May 18, 2019. Tim McGovern (May 11, 2019). "Drake Has Turned a Massive 767 Cargo Plane into a $185 Million Flying Oasis Named 'Air Drake'". People. Retrieved May 18, 2019. "Drake Moves Into $65 Million Beverly Hills Mansion". Rap Up. October 29, 2021. Schrodt, Paul. "Inside Drake's $8 million mansion with a pool that puts Hugh Hefner to shame". Business Insider. Retrieved June 27, 2020. "Drake Is Giving His YOLO Estate in L.A. a $300,000 Upgrade". W Magazine. Retrieved June 27, 2020. Ocampo, Joshua (June 3, 2021). "Drake tattoo gallery: Rihanna's face, Adonis, Aaliyah, the Beatles & more". Capital Xtra. Retrieved December 27, 2021. Ocampo, Joshua (March 8, 2021). "Drake Has 35 Epic Tattoos. We Tried to Find (and Explain) Them All". Men's Health. Retrieved December 27, 2021. Mazziotta, Julie (August 17, 2021). "Drake Reveals He Had COVID and Hair Loss Was a Lingering Side Effect: 'It's Coming Back'". Yahoo. Retrieved August 17, 2021. Monroe, Jazz (August 1, 2022). "Drake Postpones Reunion Show With Nicki Minaj and Lil Wayne After Contracting COVID-19". Pitchfork. Retrieved August 1, 2022. Deziel, Shanda (June 22, 2009). "Drake superior". Maclean's. Retrieved June 22, 2009. "Drake: Biography". TV Guide. Archived from the original on June 17, 2013. Retrieved July 29, 2012. Mervis, Scott (May 24, 2012). "Preview: Drake rises from the rap pack with a moody, sensual style". Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. Archived from the original on July 29, 2013. Retrieved July 29, 2012. Noz, Andrew (June 15, 2010). "Drake: 'Thank Me Later' ... No Thanks". NPR Music. Retrieved July 29, 2012. Callas, Brad (December 10, 2022). "SZA on Dating Drake Back in the Day: 'We've Always Been Cool'". Complex. Retrieved December 13, 2022. Marcus, Stephanie (June 6, 2013). "Drake Slams Chris Brown and Finally Admits He Dated Rihanna in New Interview". HuffPost. Retrieved April 13, 2013. "A Timeline of Rihanna & Drake's Complicated Relationship". Billboard. May 3, 2018. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Drake told the world he is in love with Rihanna at the VMAs". The Independent. August 29, 2016. Retrieved October 25, 2018. Lang, Cady (October 15, 2018). "Drake Wanted to Marry Rihanna and Have 'Perfect' Family". Time. Retrieved October 25, 2018. Kiefer, Halle. "Drake Confirms He Has a Son on His New Album Scorpion". Vulture. Retrieved June 29, 2018. "Drake acknowledges his son, Adonis, on new album Scorpion". Consequence. June 29, 2018. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Drake Confirms He Has a Son on New Album Scorpion: 'The Kid Is Mine'". People. Retrieved June 29, 2018. Arnold, Amanda. "Everything We Know About Drake's Rumored Baby". The Cut. Retrieved June 29, 2018. "Drake confirms he has a son in honest track on new album Scorpion". The Independent. Retrieved June 29, 2018. "Anupam Kher shoots with Drake for 'Breakaway'". Cinehour.com. Archived from the original on July 8, 2011. Retrieved February 21, 2011. "Watch '6IX RISING,' Our Definitive Look at Toronto's Rap Scene". November 21, 2017. Retrieved March 5, 2022. "Drake Featured in Mustafa the Poet's Short Film on Toronto's Gun Violence". Complex. Hayes, Dade (July 29, 2021). "SpringHill, DreamCrew And Uninterrupted Canada Team For Hockey Doc 'Black Ice', With Drake And LeBron James Exec Producing". Deadline. Retrieved July 29, 2021. St. Louis, Tai (January 8, 2023). "French Montana Says His Documentary Executive Produced By Drake Is Done". HipHopDX. Retrieved January 9, 2023. Andreeva, Nellie (March 29, 2022). "Victoria Pedretti To Headline 'Saint X' Hulu Drama Series". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved March 21, 2023. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Drake. Official website Drake at IMDb Portals:  Biography  Canada  Music  Pop music  R&B and Soul Music