Wladimir Klitschko (born 25 March 1976) is a Ukrainian former professional boxer who competed from 1996 to 2017. He held the world heavyweight championship twice, including the unified WBA (Super), IBF, WBO, IBO, and Ring magazine titles. A strategic and intelligent boxer, Klitschko is considered to be one of the greatest heavyweight champions of all time. He was known for his exceptional knockout power, using a strong jab, straight right hand and left hook, quick hand speed, great physical strength which he employed when clinching opponents, as well as athletic footwork and mobility, unusual for boxers of his size. As an amateur, Klitschko represented Ukraine at the 1996 Olympics, winning a gold medal in the super-heavyweight division. After turning professional later that year, he defeated Chris Byrd in 2000 to win the WBO heavyweight title. Klitschko's first reign as champion ended in an upset knockout loss to Corrie Sanders in 2003, which was followed by another upset knockout loss to Lamon Brewster in 2004. It was during this time that Klitschko hired Emanuel Steward as his trainer, which began an eight-year partnership that lasted until Steward's death in 2012. In particular, Steward was credited with Klitschko's transition from an aggressive puncher to a more defensively-oriented boxer, much as he had done with Lennox Lewis from 1995 to 2003. From 2004 to 2015, Wladimir and his brother Vitali Klitschko (himself a multiple-time world champion) dominated heavyweight boxing, a period typically known as the "Klitschko Era" of the division. In 2006, Wladimir regained a portion of the world heavyweight championship after defeating Byrd in a rematch to win the IBF and IBO titles. He won his second WBO title by defeating Sultan Ibragimov in 2008. Following his defeat of Ruslan Chagaev in 2009, Klitschko was awarded the Ring title, and lastly he won the WBA title from David Haye in 2011. After defeating Alexander Povetkin in October 2013 and until his loss to Tyson Fury in November 2015, Klitschko was recognised as the lineal champion by the Transnational Boxing Rankings Board. For a period of time in the fall of 2015, Klitschko was ranked as the world's best active boxer, pound for pound, by BoxRec. He was also ranked among 10 best pound for pound boxers in the world by The Ring from 17 August 2010 until 23 November 2015, reaching his career peak of No.2 on 25 November 2014. During Klitschko's reign as world heavyweight champion, his fights regularly generated a global television audience of 300–500 million viewers. Klitschko holds records for the longest cumulative heavyweight title reign of all time, with 4,382 days as world heavyweight champion, and most fighters beaten for the world heavyweight championship, at 23. He also holds records for the most wins and title defences of the unified championship in professional boxing history. In 2011, both Wladimir and Vitali entered the Guinness World Records book as brothers with most world heavyweight title fight wins (30 at the time; 40 as of 2020). Klitschko was inducted into the International Boxing Hall of Fame Class of 2021, having been elected in his first year of eligibility. Klitschko was born in Semipalatinsk, Kazakh SSR, Soviet Union (now Semey, Kazakhstan). He is the son of Nadiia Ulianivna Klychko (née Bulyno) and Volodymyr Rodionovych Klychko (1947–2011), a Soviet Air Force major general and a military attaché of USSR in East Germany. He is the younger brother of former WBC, WBO, and Ring magazine heavyweight champion Vitali Klitschko, the current Mayor of Kyiv. Klitschko's paternal grandmother was Jewish. His father was one of the commanders in charge of cleaning up the effects of the Chernobyl disaster in 1986 and was afterward diagnosed with cancer. The Klitschko brothers lived as children in Czechoslovakia from 1980 to 1985, where their father was stationed with the Soviet occupation forces. They attended a school designated for children of Soviet soldiers in the town of Mimoň in Northern Bohemia. Both Wladimir and Vitali hold PhDs in sports science, with Wladimir's dissertation discussing how much training to give to young athletes between 14 and 19 based on the development of their bodies. As a reference to their PhDs, Wladimir is announced as "Dr. Steelhammer", a nickname similar to his brother, Vitali, who goes by "Dr. Ironfist". Klitschko started training in amateur boxing with Brovary Olympic Reserve School in the late 1980s. In the early 1990s, Klitschko was coached in Poland's Gwardia Warszawa boxing club, where, according to Jerzy Kulej, "He and his brother used to demolish our boys." In 1993, he won the Junior European Championships as a heavyweight. In 1994, he received 2nd place at the Junior World Championships in Istanbul, Turkey, losing to Cuban Michel López Núñez in the finals. In 1995, he won the gold medal at the Military Championships in Ariccia, Italy, defeating Luan Krasniqi, to whom he had lost in the third round of the World Championships in Berlin, Germany earlier that year. In 1996, he captured 2nd place as a Super Heavyweight at the European Championships in Vejle, Denmark losing to Alexei Lezin in the finals. He defeated Lezin later that year in the semi-finals at the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta. He had an amateur record of 134–6. He first achieved world attention at the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta, Georgia. He defeated Paea Wolfgramm to win the Super-Heavyweight gold medal. Below are the notable achievements of Wladimir Klitschko in amateur boxing: "Wladimir hits very hard, harder than (Mike) Tyson. At one point, they ran twelve 800-meter [roughly a half mile] sprints, each under 3 minutes, with a minute rest between each one. I timed every one and every one was under 3 minutes. I never saw a heavyweight do anything even close to that. They work their asses off. To be able to do that, two 250-pound guys – whew. They're two of the best athletes I've ever trained." —Freddie Roach, who trained both the Klitschko brothers and Mike Tyson, on the athleticism of the brothers. Klitschko turned professional with Universum Box-Promotion in Hamburg under the tutelage of Fritz Sdunek, often being featured on fight cards alongside his elder brother Vitali. After building an undefeated record of 24–0 with 21 KOs, he suffered his first loss to 24–13–1 Ross Puritty, in what was Klitschko's first and only professional fight in Ukraine. Puritty forced Klitschko, who had at that time not gone beyond eight rounds, to punch himself out. Klitschko began to be overwhelmed in the tenth round and went down twice but was allowed to continue. At the start of the eleventh round, with Puritty continuing to land hard punches, Klitschko's trainer, Fritz Sdunek, entered the ring and stopped the fight. Three years later, Klitschko's brother Vitali stopped Puritty in the eleventh round himself. On 18 March 2000, Klitschko fought Paea Wolfgramm, whom he fought previously in the 1996 super-heavyweight Olympic finals. In their professional rematch, Klitschko knocked Wolfgramm out in the first round. Wladimir Klitschko got his chance to fight for the world heavyweight championship on 14 October 2000 against WBO champion Chris Byrd. Byrd, considered one of the most avoided fighters in the heavyweight division at the time, won the title six months earlier on 1 April from Wladimir's brother Vitali (who had a perfect record of 27 fights, 27 wins, 27 KOs coming into the fight), being a late replacement for Donovan Ruddock. In that fight, Byrd was trailing on the scorecards (83–88, 83–88, & 82–89) but was declared the winner after Vitali retired on his stool between 9th and 10th rounds due to shoulder injury. Byrd's title defence against Wladimir was scheduled to take place at Kölnarena in Cologne and was billed as "Revenge Of The Brother". In a fight that was aired on pay-per-view in the United Kingdom, Wladimir won the WBO world heavyweight title from Byrd by a wide unanimous decision (UD) with scores of 120–106, 119–107, and 118–108, flooring his opponent twice. Klitschko's first defence of the WBO title came on 24 March 2001 against Derrick Jefferson. Jefferson, regarded as a big and athletic brawler and a fan-friendly attraction, was coming into the bout with a record of 23 wins in 26 bouts, with 19 of those wins coming inside the distance (18 of them inside the first three rounds, 11 of them - in the first round). Jefferson was mostly known for the sixth-round knockout (KO) of Maurice Harris, which was named The Ring Knockout of the Year in 1999. He was 4–2 in the last six fights, losing by technical knockout (TKO) to David Izon, in a fight he was winning on the scorecards but punched himself out, and Oleg Maskaev in round four after breaking an ankle during the first knockdown in the first round. For the bout, Jefferson weighed in at 260.25 lbs, the heaviest in his professional career and 20 pounds heavier than in his previous bout. The additional weight appeared to be muscle. The fight lasted only two rounds. In the first round, Klitschko knocked Jefferson down with a short left hook. After the first round Jefferson's left eye was swollen. Klitschko knocked him down twice more in round two, once with a straight right hand and again with another left hook, with the fight being stopped after the last knockdown, declaring Klitschko the winner by TKO in the second round. Klitschko earned $1 million for the fight. Klitschko's next title defence was scheduled less than five months later on 4 August 2001. The fight took place at the Mandalay Bay Events Center in Paradise, Nevada against hometown fighter, Charles Shufford. At the time, Shufford had a 17–1 record, coming off of wins against Jimmy Thunder and Lamon Brewster. Shufford weighed in at 234 lbs., 17 pounds lighter than in his previous bout. Shufford, having played George Foreman opposite Will Smith in the movie Ali, entered the ring with Smith by his side. Klitschko knocked Shufford down three times, once in round two, once in round three (both times with a straight right hand) and in round six with a left hook, with referee stopping the bout after the third knockdown. According to punch stats, Klitschko landed 58 of 262 punches (22%) and Shufford connected on 16 of 190 (8%). Klitschko returned to Germany for the next defence of his WBO title against Francois Botha. The fight took place at Hanns-Martin-Schleyer-Halle in Stuttgart, the same venue where Botha had fought Axel Schulz for the IBF title six years earlier, in the most watched boxing match in German TV history. According to Botha's coach Abel Sanchez, Botha was in the best shape of his career. The South African contender was game in the opening rounds, trying to catch Klitschko with the right hook, but Klitschko was successfully keeping him at the end of his jab. In the eighth round, Klitschko caught him with a counter right hand and then hit Botha with several shots, knocking him down with a left hook. Botha got up, but was unsteady on his feet and had both eyes swollen, proceeding the referee to stop the bout. Klitschko had his next title defence scheduled three months later, on 29 June 2002 at Etess Arena in Atlantic City, New Jersey, against former WBO heavyweight champion Ray Mercer. It was the first time in his professional career that Klitschko fought an Olympic Gold medalist. 41-year-old Mercer, having fought Lennox Lewis and Evander Holyfield throughout his career, was expected to be a tough challenge for Klitschko that would give him and Lennox Lewis, the WBC and The Ring champion, a second common opponent (along with Francois Botha) and a bout comparable to Lewis vs. Tyson. During the build-up to the bout, Mercer referred to Klitschko as "Russian Tommy Morrison". Since his comeback in 2001, Mercer had won four fights over journeymen, three of them inside two rounds, prior to the Klitschko bout. Klitschko dominated Mercer throughout the entire bout, stopping Mercer in the sixth round. At 2:48 of the first round, Klitschko dropped Mercer with a left hook, becoming only the second man to drop Mercer. Throughout the fight, Klitschko was frequently landing combinations of stiff left jabs, left hooks, and straight right hands. By the fifth round, Mercer's face was swollen and his right eye was cut. In the sixth, Klitschko unleashed a barrage of punches, prompting the referee to stop the bout. Klitschko became the first fighter to defeat Mercer inside the distance. According to CompuBox statistics, Klitschko landed 193 total punches out of 429 thrown (104 power punches out of 167), while Mercer landed 54 shots out of 124 (only 5 power punches landed out of 10 thrown). Klitschko returned to Mandalay Bay Event Center for his sixth defence on 7 December 2002 against Jameel McCline. McCline, having made his professional boxing debut in 1995, became an established contender after defeating Michael Grant, knocking him down with the first punch thrown and ultimately stopping him in 43 seconds. Prior to fighting Klitschko, McCline had defeated two more heavyweight contenders, Lance Whitaker and Shannon Briggs, by wide unanimous decisions. Being 6 ft 6 in tall with an 82 in reach, McCline was of similar height and longer reach than Klitschko, while also being 22 lbs heavier. Many opinion polls gave Klitschko a 60–40 advantage over McCline. The fight was the main event of the card that also featured Floyd Mayweather Jr. defending the WBC lightweight title against Jose Luis Castillo. The fight turned out to be tentative, with Klitschko winning almost every round using his jab and superior footwork. At the end of the tenth round, Klitschko staggered McCline with a barrage of left hooks and overhand rights, and ultimately knocked him down with a left-right combination. Before the start of the eleventh round, McCline's corner threw in the towel, giving Klitschko his 36th career win by stoppage. At the time of the stoppage, the scorecards were 98–91, 99–90 (twice), all in favour of the champion. CompuBox stats showed that Klitschko landed 181 of his 433 punches thrown (42%), and McCline landed 61 of 307 (20%). The following week after Klitschko's win over McCline, Chris Byrd, whom Klitschko defeated for the WBO world title, beat Evander Holyfield to become IBF world champion. After failing to reach agreements with Kirk Johnson, Fres Oquendo, Lou Savarese and Danny Williams, Universum ultimately signed a 4-fight contract with Corrie Sanders, who was ranked No.9 contender by WBO at the time. According to the agreement, Sanders' first fight was going to be for the WBO world heavyweight title. The fight was scheduled to take place on 8 March 2003 in Hanover, Germany. Klitschko later admitted that he came to the fight unmotivated and was already thinking about the vacation he was going to enjoy after the fight. Klitschko suffered an upset TKO loss to Sanders. With thirty seconds left in the opening round, Wladimir threw a jab but Sanders countered with a big left hook, prompting Klitschko to enter a clinch. While in the clinch, Sanders landed another left hook that send Klitschko to the canvas. Klitschko got up but was dropped again almost immediately. The following round, Sanders continued his assault on a visibly hurt Klitschko, dropping him twice more at the beginning of the round. The referee waived it off after the fourth knockdown. The fight was named Upset of the Year by The Ring for 2003. After winning two minor bouts in Germany and enlisting the services of legendary boxing trainer Emanuel Steward, Klitschko again fought for the vacant WBO title on 10 April 2004, in Las Vegas, against Lamon Brewster. Klitschko dominated Brewster through the course of the first four rounds, sending him to the canvas in the fourth; however, things turned around in the fifth when Klitschko began tiring and Brewster's punches began backing him up. Not defending himself and leaning into ropes for support, Klitschko took a standing eight count. On unsteady legs, Klitschko fell to the canvas after the bell and the referee stopped the fight for his safety. When talking about the fight, Emmanuel Steward said: "Wladimir was in incredible shape. I've never seen anything like this in my career. I know what it looks like when a boxer is getting hurt from punches. There was definitely something else that caused problems for Wladimir". Shortly after the fight Klitschko was rushed into hospital. An examination showed Klitschko's blood sugar level almost two times higher than the permissible norm. According to members of Klitschko's team, the doctor told them that Klitschko had been "inches away" from falling into a diabetic coma, and that with blood sugar level that high, Klitschko would've been incapable of handling a single proper training session. After returning from the examination to the hotel, he fell ill with nausea, followed by physical weakness. On 12 April, he arrived in Las Vegas and donated blood and urine samples for an independent examination, which was supposed to be done by Donald Katlin, who specialised in such cases. The examination showed no signs of anabolic steroids in his blood, but Katlin suggested that Klitschko could have been poisoned with Haloperidol. The drug has no taste or smell and causes mental disorders, which are accompanied by impaired coordination, a weakening reaction and overall physical weakness.[failed verification] Following the results, Klitschko demanded the tests taken by the Medical Center of South Nevada and the Nevada Quest Diagnostics to be passed on to Dr. Robert Wow for further research, but the A sample had already been disposed of, while the B sample, which was supposed to be stored for years, disappeared. Dr Margaret Goodman, the chairwoman of the Nevada State Athletic Commission's medical advisory board and Nevada's chief ringside physician was in the ring and attending to Klitschko seconds after the referee stopped the fight. Her initial diagnosis of a Grade 3 concussion was confirmed at the hospital after further tests. Goodman was sceptical of the theory that Klitschko had been drugged. As a result of the circumstances that surrounded the fight, FBI started an investigation. Judd Bernstein, the lawyer representing Klitschko, suggested that he was a victim of an ongoing fight fixing in Las Vegas (which also included fraudulent medical reports), which was investigated by FBI at the time. Bernstein, along with some other journalists, pointed out that in the last 48 hours before the beginning of the fight, the betting odds in favour of Klitschko rapidly dropped from 11-to-1 to 3,5-to-1. According to journalist Keith Teixeira, a group of approximately 40 people associated with Brewster's manager Sam Simon bet from $50,000 to $100,000 on Brewster's victory. Members of Klitschko's team also pointed out that shortly before the fight, a security camera recorded a moment when two people entered Klitschko's booth and were there for four minutes. These people had badges, but weren't members of Wladimir's team. Wladimir's brother Vitali claimed that during registration of the boxer and his team, the card that belonged to Emmanuel Steward's assistant had already been registered on someone else, and that such card would allow its owner to enter any sporting hall in the building. After the fight, Wladimir's cutman Joe Souza was fired. During the fight, Souza used vaseline on Wladimir's face but also body, which had never been done in any of Klitschko's previous fights. As a replacement, the team hired Jacob "Stitch" Duran. Following his loss to Brewster, Klitschko began his journey back towards the top of the heavyweight division. First, he faced hard-hitting DaVarryl Williamson. The fight took place at Caesars Palace in Las Vegas, Nevada. Williamson dropped Klitschko forty seconds into the second round, but was outboxed throughout the rest of the bout. An accidental head butt in the closing seconds of the fifth round caused Klitschko bleeding from a cut above his right eye. Due to the cut, the fight was prematurely stopped, with Klitschko being declared the winner by technical decision. Two of the judges scored the fight identically 49–46 in favour of Klitschko, while the third judge had Williamson winning 48–47. After defeating Eliseo Castillo by fourth-round TKO, Klitschko signed to fight Samuel Peter in an IBF and WBO eliminator. Coming into the bout, Klitschko was viewed by many as the underdog against the 7-to-5 favourite Peter who had won all of his 24 fights, with 21 of them having ended inside the distance. At the time, Samuel Peter was considered one of the brightest prospects in the heavyweight division. Distinguished boxing coaches Angelo Dundee and Teddy Atlas expected Peter to win. Wladimir's team, including his brother Vitali, were worried about Wladimir, and were against this fight to happen. Wladimir, however, insisted on fighting Peter, claiming that beating a feared, hard-hitting fighter like Samuel Peter would help him to regain his stock and become mandatory challenger for two heavyweight belts. The first four rounds were tentative, with Klitschko working behind the jab, not allowing Peter to close the distance. At the end of the third, Peter staggered Klitschko with a powerful left hook. He hurt Klitschko again in the fifth with another left hook, sending Klitschko to the canvas with the rabbit punch. The referee counted it as the knockdown. Peter immediately went for the attack after Klitschko got up, dropping him again with the rabbit punch. The referee scored it as the second knockdown. Klitschko regained composure and outboxed Peter through sixth to ninth rounds, with Peter frequently trying to hit Klitschko with the rabbit punch whenever escaping from a clinch. Near the end of the tenth round Peter staggered Wladimir with a hard right hand, eventually sending Klitschko to the canvas with another right when Wladimir was backing away. In the 11th and 12th rounds, Klitschko was trying to keep Peter at the distance using straight punches. Peter caught him with a left hook in the last round, but was unable to capitalise on it. Instead, Klitschko caught him with a hard counter left hook of his own, staggering Peter for the first time in the fight. Eventually the bout went the distance, with Klitschko winning the fight by clear unanimous decision (UD). All the judges scored the bout identically 114–111. On 22 April 2006, in Mannheim, Germany, Klitschko faced Chris Byrd for a second time, this time for the IBF heavyweight title. At the time of the bout, Byrd was ranked as the best heavyweight by The Ring, while Klitschko was ranked eighth. Coming into the fight, Klitschko was viewed as the favourite. Many observers expected Klitschko to dominate Byrd similarly to their first bout. April 22nd, 2006 may be one of the most momentous dates in the history of boxing. On that day, Wladimir Klitschko of Ukraine will most likely easily defeat Chris Byrd of the United States for Byrd's IBF heavyweight title. If that result occurs, it may mark the dawning of a new era in boxing. Three of the four major titlists will be from Eastern Europe. Like the flood waters of Hurricane Katrina that swept away much of New Orleans, a rising tidal wave of Eastern European fighters threatens to sweep away American supremacy in the heavyweight division, putting an end to an era that began with the reign of John L. Sullivan — 124 years ago. (John Hively, boxingscene.com) Klitschko defeated Byrd by TKO in the seventh round, becoming a two-time heavyweight world champion in the process. Klitschko dominated the fight using his jab and superior reach, knocking Byrd down twice, once in round five and once in round seven. Byrd beat the count after the second knockdown, but his face was battered and bloody, and the fight was waved off. At the time of the stoppage, judge Roy Francis had the challenger winning every round, while two other judges, Steve Epstein and Robert Hoyle, gave Klitschko all but one round. In his first title defence, Klitschko agreed to face then-undefeated heavyweight contender Calvin Brock. With a record of 29–0, 22 KOs, Brock was considered one of the most promising and demanded American heavyweight prospects at the time. In an ESPN interview in July 2005, Mike Tyson named him and Samuel Peter as his favourite fighters from the new crop of heavyweights. In the build-up, Brock expressed confidence in his abilities: "I can adopt to every style. He's big like Jameel McCline, but a better fighter. I will beat him and become the heavyweight champion of the world. Klitschko has a good jab, but they also said Timur's best weapon was his jab. I have a good jab myself. I can adapt to anybody's style, anybody's strength and turn their weapon against them." He also dismissed claims that the division lacks strong competition: "The heavyweight division is stacked with a bunch of talent. It's not weak, definitely not weak. The division is pretty strong and that's why the title keeps changing hands." The fight took place on 11 November 2006 at Madison Square Garden. In the opening rounds, Brock's economical but effective movement made Klitschko reluctant to throw punches, with Wladimir not being able to fully establish his rhythm. In between the third and fourth rounds, Klitschko's trainer Emmanuel Steward urged Wladimir to press the action. Klitschko started fighting more aggressively, hurting Brock several times with the right cross. In the fifth round, Brock opened a cut under Klitschko's left eye that started bleeding heavily in the sixth. In the seventh round, Wladimir caught Brock with a counter right hand before sending him to the canvas with another straight right. Brock was able to get up but was unsteady on his feet, prompting the referee to stop the bout. Klitschko then faced mandatory challenger Ray Austin on 10 March 2007, at the SAP Arena in Mannheim, Germany. 36-year-old Austin was mostly known for draws against Sultan Ibragimov, Larry Donald and Lance Whitaker. In preparation for the fight, Austin was trained by a prominent coach Stacey McKinley. Klitschko won by a second-round KO with four consecutive left hooks to Austin's head. Klitschko did not throw a single right hand in that fight. Klitschko then avenged one of his previous losses as he defeated Lamon Brewster on 7 July 2007, in Cologne, Germany. Brewster's corner asked the referee to stop the fight at the end of the sixth round. It was later revealed that Klitschko fought most of the fight with a broken middle finger on his left hand. By the end of October 2007, Wladimir Klitschko started negotiations with then-WBO world heavyweight champion Sultan Ibragimov about the unification showdown in the near future. This would be the first heavyweight unification fight since 13 November 1999 when WBC champion Lennox Lewis defeated then-WBA and IBF champion Evander Holyfield. On 20 November, Klitschko and Ibragimov officially signed the contract for their unification clash to take place on 23 February 2008 at Madison Square Garden. Two days later in Moscow, a first pre-fight press-conference was held. Klitschko began his preparations for the fight on 18 December. His training camp was located between Santa Monica, Los Angeles and Palm Beach, Florida. Ibragimov began his preparations for the bout on 25 December. Among Ibragimov's sparring partners were Klitschko's former opponent Jameel McCline and Swedish heavyweight prospect Attila Levin. In the pre-fight prediction, a vast majority of Ukrainian, Russian and American observers expected Klitschko to win by either stoppage or unanimous decision. Out of six journalists of the Ukrainian magazine Ring, five predicted Klitschko to stop Ibragimov, with only one expecting Klitschko to win by decision. 24 of 26 members of boxingscene.com expected Klitschko to come out as the winner – 18 of them predicted the win to come by way of KO/TKO, one expert predicted decision, while the remaining five were unsure about either possibility. The remaining two experts predicted Ibragimov to win by decision. 10 of the 12 members of ringsidereport.com picked Klitschko to win, with eight of them expecting the victory to come by way of KO/TKO. The remaining two picked Ibragimov to win by stoppage. In the build-up to the fight, Klitschko's trainer Emmanuel Steward said that Sultan Ibragimov was going to be Wladimir's toughest opponent to date, praising Ibragimov for his hand speed and mobility, while Klitschko complimented Ibragimov on his accomplishments: "Sultan Ibragimov is a boxer that hasn't lost in any of his 23 fights, with the sole draw being against Ray Austin. His amateur career can be described as fantastic, and the fact that he's the heavyweight champion of the world speaks volumes about his professional career as well. I think he's a strong and dangerous opponent that should not be underestimated. His last two fights against Shannon Briggs and Evander Holyfield proved that." Ibragimov's trainer Jeff Mayweather was confident that Ibragimov would be able to establish his rhythm and "press Klitschko to the corner". The pre-fight build-up was marked with controversy after Ibragimov's manager Boris Grinberg insulted Klitschko during one of the interviews: "Sultan Ibragimov knocks out this Ukraine gay, motherf***er!". Grinberg later apologised to Klitschko. The day before the bout, Klitschko weighed in at 238 pounds (108 kg), the lightest since 1999, while Ibragimov's weight was 219 pounds (99 kg), his lightest since 2005. From the opening bell, both fighters fought tentatively, avoiding risks. Klitschko retreated onto the outside, fighting at a distance and remaining unreachable for Ibragimov who tried to establish his right jab but had his right hand constantly pushed down by Klitschko. By the end of the opening round, Klitschko became more active with his jab, while Ibragimov unsuccessfully tried to catch Wladimir with a series of right and left hooks. By the third round, Klitschko took control of the center of the ring, keeping Ibragimov at the end of his left jab and occasionally throwing right jabs as well. In the fifth round, Klitschko caught Ibragimov with a straight right hand, however Ibragimov appeared to be unhurt. Most of Ibragimov's attempts to close distance ended with Klitschko tying him up. In the second half of the fight, the situation did not change, with Klitschko keeping Ibragimov at distance with straight shots, while Ibragimov was only able to occasionally catch Klitschko with single shots to the body. Ibragimov's corner was almost silent from the sixth round onwards, unable to give their man any meaningful advice. Klitschko's dominance became even more visible after he caught Ibragimov with a straight right in round nine, almost knocking him down. He caught Ibragimov again with a counter left hook at the end of the eleventh. The twelfth round saw Ibragimov unsuccessfully trying to catch Klitschko with overhand shots. Ultimately, the fight went the distance, with Klitschko being declared the winner by unanimous decision. The judges scored the bout 119–110, 117–111 and 118–110. Klitschko reportedly earned $9 million for the fight. He donated $500,000 of his earnings to the Bronx's Laureus Sport for Good Foundation. The fight was heavily criticised by observers and prominent boxing public figures. Boxing promoter Bob Arum called the fight "an absolute shame", while Dan Goossen described it as "awful". Boxing journalist Phil Santos pointed out that Klitschko fought for the majority of the fight "only with his left hand", proving once again that he "is the best heavyweight in the world right now". Santos also noted that such cautious, safety-first style was not going to help Klitschko to increase his popularity in the United States. Some observers were more apologetic of Klitschko's performance: "It's really irritating that so many people, people that know very little about boxing, say that Klitschko's dominance means stagnation for the heavyweight division. There's no denying that once Klitschko collects all the belts, he will go down as one of the all-time greats. Yes, he fights cautiously and isn't willing to exchange shots, but who told us that greatness in boxing is measured with the number of knockdowns? Why the boxer that is able to not get hit with a hard shot over the course of twelve rounds is less great than the champions from the past that sacrificed their health for the sake of success?" On 12 July 2008, Klitschko faced mandatory challenger Tony Thompson. The fight took place at Color Line Arena in Hamburg, Germany, the same venue where Thompson had defeated then-highly regarded German boxer Luan Krasniqi in a WBO world heavyweight title eliminator almost a year prior. In the build-up to the fight, Klitschko praised Thompson for his defensive abilities, while Klitschko's trainer Emmanuel Steward described Thompson as "one of the most difficult fights we will have". In the pre-fight interview, Thompson promised that he wouldn't run away from Klitschko, and would stand in front of him and fight toe-to-toe. Being 6 ft 5 in tall with 81½ in reach, Thompson was of similar height and reach as Klitschko. Many observes predicted Thompson to be a tough challenge for Klitschko, expecting Klitschko to ultimately win by TKO in the second half of the fight before the fighters would enter the championship rounds. Coming into the fight, Klitschko weighed in at 241 pounds, 6.5 lbs lighter than Thompson. The opening rounds were tentative, with Klitschko seemingly struggling with Thompson's awkward southpaw style. All three judges gave the first round to Thompson. In the second round, both fighters suffered a cut above the right eye after an accidental headbutt. Klitschko's eye began to swell after Thompson caught him with the right hook in the fifth round. After the sixth round, however, Klitschko appeared to have established his dominance in the ring, hurting Thompson with several straight right hands. After the seventh round, both fighter started showing signs of fatigue. In the tenth round, Thompson fell to the canvas during a clinch. It appeared as if Thompson fell down mostly due to being tired rather than being pushed by Klitschko. In the middle of the eleventh, Klitschko caught Thompson with the straight right hand which Thompson did not see coming, falling to the canvas again, with the referee starting the count this time. Thompson beat the count but was unsteady on his feet, prompting the referee to stop the fight. At the time of the stoppage, Klitschko was unanimously winning on the scorecards, with scores 98–92 (twice) and 99–91. In the post-fight interview, Klitschko admitted that the fight turned out to be tougher than expected: "It is not so easy to defend all the titles and it has been a while since I last had a black eye so today I really look like a boxer. I did not expect the victory to come that hard." "I was fatigued, I thought he was fatigued too," Tony Thompson said after the fight. "He did what a great champion did, he took advantage when I was vulnerable. The only thing that hurts on me is my heart – for losing." Emmanuel Steward described the knockout sequence as the one that showed the difference between a great heavyweight and the best heavyweight in the world: "They were both tired, but Wladimir has experience now, then he came back with a second wind. The experience is what helped Wladimir to come back with the second wind and find an opportunity to secure the stoppage win." Former undisputed world heavyweight champion Lennox Lewis praised Klitschko for his performance: "I've been watching Klitschko for some time, and he's improving with every fight." Meanwhile, unified world cruiserweight champion David Haye criticised the champion for his performance: "If he fights me in the same way he fought that guy he will be knocked out in three rounds. He has got the perfect style for me. I don't want him to have any more fights before me as I don't want someone else to do what I will do against him." Klitschko reportedly earned €8 million (around $12.7 million) for the bout. Klitschko was scheduled to defend his titles against Alexander Povetkin later in 2008, but on 25 October, Povetkin withdrew from the fight due to an ankle injury. Instead, Klitschko faced Hasim Rahman on 13 December 2008 and won by TKO. This was the third time Klitschko fought at the SAP Arena in Mannheim, Germany. He dominated the fight, winning every round while making good use of his left jab. Rahman seemed unable to withstand the Klitschko's punch power. In the sixth round, Klitschko knocked Rahman down with a series of left hooks, leaving Rahman visibly disoriented. Between the sixth and seventh rounds, the referee warned Rahman he's going to stop the fight if Rahman continues absorbing punishment without firing back. The referee ultimately called a stop to the contest in the 7th round after Rahman failed to respond to a series of shots. At the time of the stoppage, Klitschko was leading on all three judges scorecards, respectively 60–53, 60–53, and 60–47. According to CompuBox, Klitschko landed 194 punches (50.4% accuracy) to Rahman's 35 (16.8% accuracy), a nearly six-fold disparity. Klitschko was scheduled to face David Haye on 20 June 2009, but Haye pulled out within weeks of the fight complaining of a back injury. Immediately after news about Haye's injury broke into public, a handful of heavyweight fighters, such as Alexander Povetkin, Chazz Witherspoon, James Toney, Odlanier Solis, Dominick Guinn and Eddie Chambers, expressed their interest in replacing Haye for the Klitschko showdown. Instead, Klitschko's team started negotiations with Ruslan Chagaev, who was ranked third best heavyweight in the world by The Ring, and WBA world champion Nikolai Valuev, who was regarded as a big draw in Germany at the time. Ultimately, Klitschko reached agreements with Chagaev who agreed to step in for Haye as a last-minute replacement (Valuev's team wanted the fight to be postponed until autumn of that year). Some observes believed that Chagaev was a better challenege for Klitschko than Haye, given his position in the ranking and the fact that, alongside WBO and IBF world titles, vacant The Ring world heavyweight title was also on the line. In the pre-fight comparison, The Ring was giving Klitschko an advantage in power, speed and athletic ability, as well as experience, while also crediting Chagaev for having better defence, praising him for his fundamentals and footwork. In terms of technique, both fighters were described as of equal level. The fight took place at Veltins Arena in Gelsenkirchen, with over 61,000 fans having attended the fight, the largest audience for a boxing fight in Germany since 1939, when Max Schmeling knocked out Adolf Heuser in front of 70,000 people in Stuttgart. Klitschko dominated the fight, keeping Chagaev at the end of his jab and throwing straight right hand whenever necessary. Klitschko dropped Chagaev near the end of the second round, and was gradually fighting more aggressively as the fight progressed. Chagaev's trainer Michael Timm did not allow Chagaev to come out for the tenth round, prompting the referee to wave the bout off, declaring Klitschko the winner by corner retirement (RTD). This win had added significance because even though the WBA title was not on the line, many saw Klitschko as the rightful champion. On 9 December 2009, Klitschko's management group, K2 Promotions, confirmed that a bout with Eddie Chambers had been agreed to take place in Germany on 20 March 2010. This mandatory title defence, originally scheduled for December 2009, had to be delayed due to a hand injury that Klitschko sustained in training that required surgery. In the build-up to the fight, Klitschko described Chambers as "the best American heavyweight right now". In the pre-fight comparison of the fighters, The Ring gave Chambers the upper hand in speed and athletic ability, as well as defence, while crediting Klitschko as more powerful and experienced. In the United States, the bout was not televised by any TV station but was aired on the Klitschko's official website for $14.95 instead. The official venue was the multi-functional football stadium ESPRIT Arena in Düsseldorf, Germany. The bout turned-out to be one-sided, with the champion winning rounds keeping Chambers at the end of his jab and occasionally throwing straight right hands. In the opening rounds, Chambers lifted Klitschko and took him down several times but was not deducted a point nor warned. In between the championship rounds, Klitschko was criticised by his trainer Emmanuel Steward for not fighting aggressively, despite comfortably winning on the scorecards. Klitschko picked up his pace during the final round and, with few seconds left, landed a left hook on Chambers' temple. The punch made Chambers fall forwards and lose consciousness for an extended period of time. The referee immediately stepped in and called an end to the contest. It remains the only stoppage loss of Chambers' career. Following the match with Chambers, a unification fight between Klitschko and David Haye, who, as of November 2009, had held the WBA title, appeared to be in the offing. Klitschko called out the Briton on YouTube in April 2010, stating, "I want to send this message to boxing fans and directly to David Haye. David, you've bitched out on fighting both Klitschko brothers twice already and now's the time to make it happen. On behalf of the boxing fans around the world, I am officially calling you out to fight me. You can't run away from me forever and you need to follow through with this fight if you want to be respected. I'm ready. What're you waiting for?" Haye's trainer, Adam Booth, indicated that Haye would be willing to accept the challenge. Both sides began negotiations for a potential fight and the bout was targeted for September. As the negotiations continued to move forward, the unification fight between Klitschko and Haye was expected to take place in Germany rather than England. The IBF set a deadline to end negotiations on 17 May. A few days before the deadline, Haye said he was interested in fighting the older Klitschko, Vitali, rather than Wladimir. The fight did not materialise and Klitschko was set to take on mandatory challenger Alexander Povetkin. On 17 May 2010, the 30-day period of negotiation began for Klitschko to defend his championship against Povetkin. Within this period, discussions to make a fight with Haye were still ongoing. The bout between Klitschko and Povetkin was initially tentatively scheduled to take place in Frankfurt, Germany, on 11 September 2010. In July 2010, it was confirmed that the bout would be taking place in Frankfurt, with Samuel Peter replacing Povetkin for the scheduled fight as Povetkin failed to show up to the press-conference, deciding to pull out of the fight at the advice of his coach Teddy Atlas who believed Povetkin was not ready to face Klitschko. Klitschko faced Peter for the second time, as they had fought in 2005 previously. Peter weighed in at 241 pounds, two pounds lighter than their first fight. Klitschko came in at a career heavy of 247 pounds. Peter started the fight very aggressively and caught Klitschko with a good left hook in the opening minute, although Klitschko ended the round well. Peter was caught with three hard right-hands in the second round, one of which seemed to stun him. Peter tried to duck under the Klitschko jab, but was being tied up on the inside. After four rounds, the fight became one-sided in Klitschko's favour. Peter's right eye was closing and he was taking heavy punishment. After the ninth round, Peter's trainer Abel Sanchez said he would give him one more round.[citation needed] Emmanuel Steward also implored Klitschko to be more aggressive. Peter swung wildly in the tenth and Klitschko put him down with a concussive combination. Referee Robert Byrd did not start a count and waved the fight off, awarding Klitschko the win by KO. Klitschko reportedly earned €5 million ($6.3 million) for the fight. Klitschko was set to fight Derek Chisora on 11 December, but the fight was later called off on 8 December due to Klitschko tearing a muscle in his abdomen. On 5 January 2011, it was announced that Derek Chisora would get his fight with Klitschko. This enraged David Haye's trainer Adam Booth, who described the move as a "disgrace" on a heated live phone-in with Sky Sports News. Booth alleged Haye had met every single one of Klitschko's demands. The fight against Chisora was rescheduled for 30 April 2011 and was going to take place in SAP Arena, Mannheim. However, on 4 March, it was announced that Klitschko had pulled out of the fight due to not being fully recovered from a torn abdominal muscle. On 5 March, it was instead announced that the highly anticipated fight against Haye would take place on 2 July 2011. The fight was contingent on Klitschko's recovery from a torn abdominal muscle. The contract was written so that if Klitschko was not fully healed, then Haye would fight his brother, Vitali. Klitschko fought Haye in a heavyweight unification fight for the WBA (Super), IBF, WBO, IBO, and Ring magazine heavyweight titles. The fight took place at the Imtech Arena in Hamburg, Germany on 2 July 2011. Klitschko and Haye agreed to a 50–50 split of the purse and Haye was allotted 7,000 seats at the venue. Klitschko won by UD, the three judges scored it 117–109, 118–108, and 116–110 all in favour of Klitschko. According to CompuBox, Klitschko landed 134 punches of 509 thrown (26.3% accuracy), while Haye connected on 72 shots out of 290 (24.8%). Klitschko outlanded Haye in every round but fourth. Haye revealed afterwards that he had a broken toe on his right foot, and claimed that it had hindered his game plan for the fight as he felt he was unable to jump out at Klitschko like he had previously in his career. Haye was subject to much derision and ridicule from within the boxing community and fans after citing his toe as part of the reason why he lost. Despite this Klitschko claims that Haye was unable to fight because he was just too good for him. Both Klitschko and Haye reportedly earned $24 million each for the fight. After winning the WBA title, all of the major heavyweight titles were in the hands of the Klitschko family. Wladimir and Vitali became the first and only pair of brothers to hold all of the heavyweight titles simultaneously. On 6 October 2011, Klitschko announced his next fight. It was originally to be on 10 December 2011 against the former two time unified cruiserweight world champion, Jean-Marc Mormeck (36–4, 22 KOs). The fight would have taken place at Esprit Arena, Düsseldorf. This was Wladimir's first title defence after his win over David Haye unified all major heavyweight belts in the hands of the Klitschko brothers. The fight was predicted to generate 500 million viewers worldwide, similarly to Wladimir's fight against Haye. On 5 December 2011, the fight was cancelled because Klitschko checked into a hospital to have a kidney stone removed. After the removal operation he suffered from fever and inflammation. The fight was rescheduled for 3 March 2012, with Klitschko dominating and knocking out Mormeck in the fourth round. CompuBox showed that in the 10 minutes and 12 seconds the fight lased, Klitschko landed 39 of 135 punches thrown (29%) and Mormeck landed just 3 of 19 thrown (16%). Mormeck failed to land anything in rounds 1 and 4. On 4 March 2012, Klitschko stated that he would next fight his mandatory challenger Tony Thompson (36–2, 24 KOs), who had been ranked as the world's eighth best heavyweight by BoxRec at the conclusion of the previous year, in a rematch from their first fight in 2008. At the time, he stated that the newly opened Barclays Arena in New York were interested in showcasing a Klitschko brother. Since they last fought, Thompson recorded five straight wins, all by KO. A purse bid was set by the IBF, where Klitschko, upon request, would receive 85% of the purse split, compared to the usual 75%. The fight was confirmed to take place at the Stade de Suisse in Berne, Switzerland on 7 July. In an interview, Klitschko admitted that Thompson was not his first choice and that he would have rather fought someone he had not fought before. "So far I've always been better in rematches. However, I must not take this lightly as Thompson knows me better than any other fighter", Klitschko said in the build-up to the fight. "I've been waiting for this rematch for so long", Thompson said during one of pre-fight press-conferences, "In Bern, I'm gonna finish what I've started 4 years ago - knock Klitschko out and take the belts back to the United States". Thompson weighed in at 244.75, dropping 10.75 lbs from his last fight, while Klitschko weighed in at 249, the heaviest in his entire career. The additional weight appeared to be muscle. In the first round, both fighters were cautious, patiently studying each other. Klitschko became more dominant in the second, working mostly with his jab. Thompson unsuccessfully went for the attack and in the process fell to the canvas. The referee did not rule it a knockdown. In the third round, Thompson hurt Klitschko for the first time in the fight with a counter left hand but was still being outboxed by Klitschko. In the fifth round, Klitschko pressed Thompson into a corner and hurt him with a straight right hand, knocking him down. Thompson beat the count but looked hurt, however he was able to survive that round. Klitschko continued his assault in the sixth, sending Thompson down again with a flurry of shots. Thompson got up but had to hold on to the ropes to stand, which prompted the referee to stop the fight, declaring Klitschko the winner by sixth-round TKO. "From the beginning, I had no doubt that I would successfully defend the titles. But it was hard to time an accurate shot. Thompson was elusive, he didn't lose an eye contact at any moment in the fight and was able to see most of my punches", said Klitschko in a post-fight interview. It was his twelfth consecutive title defence, the third-most in heavyweight history. CompuBox stats showed Klitschko landed 51 of 121 total punches thrown (42%) and Thompson landed only 25 of 183 thrown (14%). There was first mention of a potential Klitschko vs. Mariusz Wach (27–0, 15 KOs) fight in August 2011 when Klitschko's team approached Wach's promoters for a fight, however nothing materialised. Wach's promoter Global Boxing stated that it was Klitschko's advisor Shelly Finkel that contacted them. Bernd Boente denied these claims. In August 2012, serious negotiations took place for the fight. A date in November was considered with the venue likely to be in Hamburg, Germany. Terms were fully agreed within days of the negotiations for the fight to take place 10 November. Klitschko revealed he would train with Johnathon Banks due to Steward recovering from a bowel operation. On 25 October, Steward died at the age of 68. The fight was the first time in his 16-year professional career that he had faced an opponent taller than himself. At 2.02 metres tall, with a reach of 2.08 metres and weighing 251 pounds, Wach was four centimetres taller than Klitschko with a reach two centimetres longer. In Poland, the fight was available via pay-per-view platform on Canal+ Sport for 39 zł and Polsat Sport for 40 zł. On fight night, at the 02 World Arena, Klitschko dominated and retained his titles with a one sided UD. The three judges' scored the fight 120–107, 120–107, and 119–109. The bout opened with a battle between jabs which was won by Klitschko, who was following his jabs with his signature straight right. Wach managed to wobble Klitschko in round five but failed to take advantage. Wach also showed a great chin later in the fight when Klitschko began to let his hands go more landing thunderous shots. During the course of twelve rounds, Klitschko landed 274 of 693 punches landed (40%), whilst Wach landed 60 of his 308 thrown (19%). After the fight, there were allegations against Wach that he had used steroids. Klitschko reportedly earned €5.8 million (cca $7.25 million) for the fight. Days before the Klitschko vs. Wach fight took place, it was revealed that Team Sauerland offered Klitschko €5 million (around $6,5 million) for a possible fight against then-WBO cruiserweight champion Marco Huck in the future. At the time, Huck was preparing for a title defence against Firat Arslan. Klitschko's manager Bernd Boente turned down the offer stating money was not the issue. The reason the fight would never get made was due to the fact that the Klitschko's had a contract with German television network RTL and Huck was signed with their rival network ARD. At the end of 2012, the WBA ordered Klitschko to fight WBA (Regular) champion Alexander Povetkin of Russia by 24 February 2013, but the two sides couldn't reach an agreement. The WBA let Klitschko have another voluntary title defence before taking on Povetkin, but there should have been a signed contract with Povetkin before 28 February, with a new deadline for their bout no later than 31 July. On 5 March 2013, K2 Promotions announced that Klitschko would fight another undefeated contender, Italian Francesco Pianeta, on 4 May at SAP Arena in Mannheim, Germany. Klitschko had received criticism in regards to past opponents. Pianeta was no different. Speaking to ESPN, he said, "I'm getting always criticised with my opponents, it doesn't matter are they well known or not so much and it's always very difficult to fight against someone that is not known because you are always getting these critics." Pianeta said it was the biggest experience of his life, but not his biggest fight. He went on to say he won his biggest fight against cancer in 2009. From the start, Klitschko systematically broke down the Italian, consistently landing flush straight right hand shots. He dropped Pianeta with a right hand in round four, a left hand put Pianeta down in the fifth; the fight ended at 2:52 in round six when Klitschko put Pianeta down for the third time. According to CompuBox Stats, Klitschko landed 116 of 277 punches thrown (42%) and Pianeta landed 24 of 104 thrown (23%), an average of 4 punches landed per round. Promoter Vladimir Hryunov won the right to promote Klitschko vs. Povetkin with a purse bid of $23,333,330 and Russian businessman Andrey Ryabinsky putting up the money. Failed bids made were from K2 Promotions ($7,130,000) and Povetkin's promoter Sauerland Event's ($6,014,444). It allowed Ryabinsky to dictate the location of the fight and guaranteed the fighters the biggest purses of their careers. Based on being entitled to 75 per cent of the winning bid, Klitschko got $17,499,997, while Povetkin received $5,833,333. The Klitschko camp were said to be surprised by the bid. The fight was expected to generate around 100 million viewers in Europe. It was reported that the president of Russia, Vladimir Putin, was going to attend the fight. The fight took place on 5 October 2013 at the Olympic Stadium in Moscow. The bout was marred with over 160 clinches, most initiated by Klitschko, followed by several repeated roughhouse tactics throughout the match. This included Klitschko's leaning on his opponent and pushing his head down and throwing Povetkin away to prevent Povetkin from clinching, which resulted in the referee scoring some of Povetkin's fallings as knockdowns, as well as Povetkin's punching after the referee's break command and leaning his head too low. Klitschko won by UD, scoring a knockdown in round two from a quick left hook, and three knockdowns in round seven, including one prompted from a straight right hand. All three judges scored it 119–104 on the scorecards. Klitschko landed 139 of 417 punches (33%) and Povetkin connected on 59 of 283 (21%). After the fight, Klitschko told in the interview that he had little desire to go for the knockout as the Russian crowd would be disappointed, which lead to speculations about the alleged agreement between the champion and organisers to let the bout go the distance, which Klitschko later denied. With 9.2 rating, the fight became the most popular sporting event on Russian television in 2013, as well as the most watched TV programme of the year in Moscow with 13.9 rating, surpassing the Moscow Victory Day Parade. Overall, the fight was watched by 23 million people in Russia. The fight also became the most popular TV programme of the Ukrainian television in 2013 with 19.5 rating (audience 18+) and 23 million total viewers and the most watched programme of RTL Television in 2013, averaging 11 million viewers. In November 2013, Alex Leapai (30–4–3, 24 KOs) caused a huge upset in defeating then-unbeaten Denis Boytsov to become the WBO mandatory challenger. On 5 January 2014 K2 Promotions announced that a deal was close to being reached for the Klitschko vs. Leapai fight to take place in Germany on 26 April. Klitschko signed the contract on 3 February. It was revealed that former world title challenger David Tua declined a 'lucrative offer' to spar with Klitschko ahead of the fight. Tua told Australian newspaper The Courier-Mail he "didn't want to help anyone beat a 'Samoan brother'". On fight night, Klitschko knocked Leapai down three times, and referee Eddie Cotton stopped the fight with 55 seconds remaining in the fifth round. Despite all the pre-fight trash talk done by Leapai, Klitschko told him, "You have truly a lionheart. You never stopped. You were challenging, you were bold. You had great desire to become a champion. Not many of my opponents have that type of attitude, that type of heart." Klitschko landed 147 of 396 punches thrown (37%), while Leapai landed a dire 10 of his 69 (14%). The 10 punches landed were made up of 6 jabs and 4 power punches. The IBF finally ordered Klitschko vs. Kubrat Pulev on 8 May 2014 and gave a 30-day negotiation period. Klitschko's manager Bernd Boente stated that a potential fight with WBC champion Bermane Stiverne was their main priority, a fight which would see all of the heavyweight belts at stake. Kalle Sauerland stated that he would request to get Klitschko (62–3, 52 KOs) stripped of the IBF title if he didn't fight Pulev. At the same time Deontay Wilder was named as Stiverne's mandatory and the WBC stated he must fight Wilder next. With the IBF purse bid split being 75–25 in favour of the champion, Klitschko requested the split be 80–20 in his favour. The IBF accepted the request. A purse bid took place on 17 June, which was won by K2 Promotions. The winning bid was $7.25 million. Sauerland Event put in a bid for $5.29 million. As per the bid, K2 had the location set as the O2 World Arena in Hamburg, with a possible date being 6 September 2014. In August, Klitschko suffered a bicep injury, thus postponing the fight by at least two months. A new date of 15 November was set. HBO announced that they would air the fight live in the afternoon, making it the 19th Klitschko fight they would show. Two days before the fight, it was revealed only the IBF title would be at stake for Pulev, however if Klitschko loses, the remaining titles would be vacated. The fight's worldwide audience was estimated to be 300 million viewers. Despite making a spirited effort, Pulev suffered three knockdowns en route to being knocked out in round five by a devastating left hook. The time of stoppage was recorded as 2:11 of round five. In the post-fight interview, Pulev said, "Wladimir is a really good opponent, but he was lucky. I want a rematch". Klitschko praised Pulev, calling him a tough competitor. CompuBox stats showed that Klitschko landed 38 of 89 punches thrown (43%), this included 47% of his power punches. Pulev managed to land only 25 of his 110 thrown (23%). This was made up of 10 jabs and 15 power shots landed. The fight drew 10.5 million viewers in Germany and 1.8 million viewers in Bulgaria, becoming the most watched sports event on Bulgarian TV since 2007 and the most watched programme in the history of the television channel Nova TV. The fight also averaged 620,000 viewers on HBO and peaked at 700,000 viewers. On 20 January 2015 ESPN reported that the potential Klitschko vs. Jennings was confirmed and to take place on 25 April 2015 at Madison Square Garden. Negotiations initially started in November 2014. Klitschko's manager, Bernd Boente finally announced the fight and said all contracts had been signed. The Barclays Center in New York City was originally chosen to stage the fight, but no reason was given for the change of venue. It would be the fourth time Klitschko would fight at the Garden, his first time at the arena and the United States since 2008, defending his WBA (Super), IBF, WBO, IBO and The Ring heavyweight titles. He defeated Jennings by effective use of his jab and nullifying Jennings' offensive game on the inside, especially by holding Jennings, which resulted in the referee deducting a point in the tenth round for excessive holding, although Klitschko did end up winning via UD with scores of 116–111, 116–111, and 118–109. According to Compubox Stats, Klitschko landed 144 of his 545 punches thrown (26%) whilst Jennings landed 110 of 376 (29 per cent). According to Nielsen Media Research, the fight averaged 1.637 million viewers on HBO, peaking at 1.742 million viewers. With this win, Klitschko defeated 23rd boxer for the world heavyweight championship, beating a record held by Joe Louis for 66 years. Klitschko reportedly earned $12.5 million for the fight. Klitschko was scheduled to take on undefeated heavyweight contender Tyson Fury, the WBO mandatory challenger, on 24 October 2015. On 25 September 2015, Klitschko postponed the fight, citing a calf injury. It was rescheduled for 28 November 2015. On the night of the fight, there was much controversy, first starting with the gloves, then there was a complaint about the ring canvas. Klitschko reportedly had his hands wrapped without a representative of Fury present, so had to do them again. Klitschko lost the fight by UD, with scores of 115–112, 115–112, and 116–111 all in favour of Fury. It was the first defeat Klitschko had suffered in over ten years and marked the end of the 'Klitschko Era', referring to the time period where both Klitschko brothers dominated the division. Klitschko and Fury showed little offence during the twelve rounds, but Fury did enough to take the decision. Klitschko landed 52 of 231 punches thrown (22.5%) and Fury landed 86 of 371 thrown (23.2%). In the post-fight interview, an emotional Fury said, "This is a dream come true. We worked so hard for this. I've done it. It's hard to come to foreign countries and get decisions. It just means so much to me to come here and get the decision." He then took the microphone to thank Klitschko, "I'd like to say to Wladimir, you're a great champion. And thanks very much for having me. It was all fun and games during the buildup." Klitschko failed to throw his well-known right hand, mostly due to Fury's constant movement and mocking. He said, "Tyson was the faster and better man tonight. I felt quite comfortable in the first six rounds, but I was astonished that Tyson was so fast in the second half as well. I couldn't throw my right hand because the advantage was the longer distance he had." Klitschko had a rematch clause in place. Klitschko was entitled to a rematch with Fury as part of the contract for their first fight. The rematch was eventually announced on 8 April 2016 and set to take place in Fury's home town at the Manchester Arena in Manchester, England on 9 July 2016. However, Tyson Fury announced via a YouTube video that the fight would be postponed due to an ankle sprain he had received during training. He apologised to his fans and confirmed the fight would be rescheduled for a later date. On 7 July, Fury announced via his Twitter account that the rescheduled fight would take place on 29 October at the Manchester Arena. On 23 September, Fury again postponed the fight after being declared "medically unfit", before eventually vacating the WBA (Super), WBO, and IBO titles, citing problems with depression after testing positive for cocaine. The rematch with Klitschko was cancelled as a result. Days after the Fury rematch was called off, Klitschko was approached by Eddie Hearn, promoter of IBF champion Anthony Joshua, to fight on 28 November date they had set for a second defence. Terms seemed to have been agreed for a £30m fight showdown although an initial contract was yet to be signed. After Fury gave up his world titles, it was said that Klitschko wanted the WBA (Super) title up for grabs in the potential match up against Joshua and waiting for approval, which the WBA kept postponing. A reason as to why the WBA was delaying sanctioning the fight was due them having a legal settlement with Lucas Browne so he could fight for the vacant title next. Klitschko then turned his attention to fighting Browne instead on 10 December, a date his team had an arena set for in Germany. On 24 October, Klitschko suffered a minor calf injury which would rule him out until 2017. Talks between the Klitschko camp and Hearn remained active with a fight set for the first part of 2017. On 2 November, the WBA finally agreed to sanction a fight for their super title as long as Joshua defeats Eric Molina in December 2016. On 10 December, immediately after Joshua had defeated Molina at the Manchester Arena, Klitschko was invited into the ring by Hearn. It was announced that Klitschko and Joshua would face each other for the WBA (Super), IBF and vacant IBO titles at Wembley Stadium, London, on 29 April 2017. WBA president Gilberto Jesus Mendoza confirmed that the winner will have to face mandatory challenger Luis Ortiz next, with deadlines due to be set after the unification fight. A day later the IBF announced the winner must fight their mandatory challenger Kubrat Pulev. Because of this clashing with the WBA enforcing their mandatory, it was believed that either Joshua or Klitschko would have to vacate a title. In January 2017, Eddie Hearn announced that over 80,000 tickets had been sold, a new box office record, overtaking Carl Froch vs. George Groves II. He put a request in for 5,000 more tickets to be made available. At the weigh in, Klitschko weighed in at 240 and a quarter pounds, the lightest he has weighed since 2009. Joshua came in heavier at 250 pounds. In front of a post-war record crowd of 90,000 in attendance, Joshua won by TKO in a high-drama contest that saw both men giving their all. They fought a close and cautious first four rounds. In the fifth, Joshua came out and threw a barrage of punches, forcing Klitschko to the canvas. An angry Klitschko rose up and dominated Joshua for the remainder of the round, before landing a clean right hand and scoring his own knockdown in round six. The next few rounds were again cautious, both men wary of each other, until a reinvigorated Joshua attacked Klitschko in round eleven with an upper-cut blow to the right side of Klitschko's face which would be the beginning of the end for the Ukrainian. Joshua then put together a few small but powerful combinations which sent his opponent to the canvas. Klitschko again rose but Joshua knocked him down for a second time in the round by unleashing a seven-punch combination, flooring Klitschko with a left hook. Moments later Joshua tried to end the fight by swinging a few right hooks and managed to back Klitschko into the ropes where he again sent a barrage of punches with no reply. The referee then concluded that Klitschko had taken enough punishment and stopped the fight. At the time of stoppage, Joshua was ahead on two judges' scorecards at 96–93 and 95–93, while the third judge had Klitschko ahead 95–93. CompuBox stats showed that Joshua landed 107 of his 355 punches thrown (30.1%), and Klitschko landed 94 of 256 (36.7%). In the post-fight interviews, Klitschko spoke about the rematch clause, but gave no indication as to whether he would activate it, "Of course we have a rematch in the contract. I need to analyze and see what the heck happened. I wish I could have raised my hands, but congrats to him. He got up, he fought back, and he won the titles." In the press conference after the fight, Joshua said he would have no issues with having another fight with Klitschko, "I don't mind fighting him again, if he wants the rematch. Big respect to Wladimir for challenging the young lions of the division. It's up to him, I don't mind. As long as Rob thinks it's good I'm good to go." Eddie Hearn said Joshua's next fight would likely take place at the end of the year, possibly at the Principality Stadium in Cardiff. The fight averaged 659,000 viewers on Showtime in the United States. It was shown live and the fight began around 5 pm. ET and 2 pm. PT. Nielsen Media Research revealed the fight peaked at 687,000 viewers which was during rounds five and six. The delayed tape-replay on HBO was watched by an average 738,000 viewers and peaked at 890,000. In a press release, German TV channel RTL announced the fight was watched by an average 10.43 million viewers. The whole card averaged 9.59 million viewers. This was higher than the 8.91 million that tuned in to watch Klitschko vs. Fury in 2015. The fight did lower numbers than Klitschko's win over Mariusz Wach in 2012, which was watched by 11 million and Klitschko vs. Haye, which was seen by over 16 million. On 7 June 2017, the IBF granted Joshua an exception for him to rematch Klitschko instead of fighting mandatory challenger Kubrat Pulev. At this point, it was not said that the rematch would take place. Klitschko said he needed time to review his situation before agreeing to a rematch. It was only weeks after the fight, when Eddie Hearn filed the paperwork to the IBF to request the exception to the mandatory defence. The IBF explained that the rematch must take place no later than 2 December 2017 and the winner must fight Pulev next with no exceptions. On 11 July 2017, Eddie Hearn travelled to the US to apply for a Nevada boxing licence for promoting and to also scout potential locations in Las Vegas speaking to MGM. He had a tour of the T-Mobile Arena. Although Nigeria, Dubai and China were discussed, Hearn warmed up to the idea of the fight taking place in Las Vegas. Hearn told Sky Sports, "We met with Richard Sturm and the team at MGM in Las Vegas yesterday and had a full tour of the T-Mobile Arena which is very impressive. There is a huge appetite from both sides to hold the rematch there and we will be talking further over the next week or so to see if that can become a reality." Showtime's Stephen Espinoza said a deal could be reached quickly, as he was also eager to get Joshua, who has a contract with Showtime, to fight in US, "It's no secret we've been salivating about getting him over here and certainly that would be a phenomenal fight. It would be the biggest heavyweight Vegas fight in probably a couple of decades, so we would love to host it." On 25 July, Hearn pencilled on 11 November 2017 for the rematch to take place at the T-Mobile Arena. It was reported the fight could be pay-per-view in the US. On 3 August 2017, Klitschko announced on his official website and social media channels that he was retiring from boxing. He ended his professional career with 64 wins in 69 fights, 53 by knockout. He competed in 29 world title fights. During Klitschko's reign as world heavyweight champion, his fights regularly drew between 300 and 500 million viewers worldwide. Klitschko has been named multiple times among the 100 highest paid athletes in the world by Forbes: he was ranked 24th in 2012 (estimated earnings $28 million between June 2011 and June 2012), 41st in 2013 ($24 million), 25th in 2014 ($28 million), 63rd in 2015 ($22.5 million) and 98th in 2017 ($21.5 million). Klitschko was unranked by Forbes in 2016, despite the fact that he reportedly earned $22.5 million for the fight against Tyson Fury in November 2015 alone (100th-ranked Buster Posey earned $20.8 million; 85th-ranked Conor McGregor earned $22 million). Wladimir Klitschko's total professional career earnings' estimations vary between €150 million (cca $200 million) and $250 million. Known for charity work and philanthropy, Wladimir is one of only 15 current or former alive athletes that have been named UNESCO Champions for Sport. Considered national heroes in Ukraine, in 2008 the Klitschko brothers were ranked number 15 in Inter's list of the 100 Greatest Ukrainians following a nation-wide poll that saw around 2.5 million people casting their votes. Boxing fights involving one of the Klitschko brothers regularly attracted between 10 and 20 million viewers in Ukraine; Wladimir's fight against Alexander Povetkin generated even bigger viewership numbers, attracting 23 million viewers. Wladimir has been named multiple times among the 100 most influential people in Ukraine by Korrespondent: he was ranked 95th in 2006, 88th in 2010, 43rd in 2011, 51st in 2012 and 45th in 2013. Forbes named Klitschko the most popular celebrity in Ukraine in 2015, placing him ahead of a singer Svyatoslav Vakarchuk and Kvartal 95 Studio, and ranked him second and third in 2012 and 2013 respectively (the ranking wasn't conducted in 2014). In 2017, Wladimir was honoured with the Order of Liberty, the highest Ukrainian honour that can be awarded to a person of any nationality, for his achievements in sports and contribution to the economical, scientific and cultural development of Ukraine. The Klitschkos were also considered big stars in Germany. A survey carried out by TNS for the Horizont Sport Business in 2003 showed that 91.7% of Germans recognized Wladimir Klitschko while 70.5% celebrated his successes, making him the fourth most recognized and third most beloved athlete in Germany at the time. According to DW, another research conducted no later than 2011 showed that nearly 99% of people in Germany recognized the Klitschko brothers. The CPI Index conducted by the agency Celebrity Performance in 2012 had the Klitschkos ranked second on the list of the most marketable celebrities in Germany, while in January 2014, based on a survey of 1151 respondents that was conducted by the same agency, the Klitschko brothers were ranked 6th in the "2013 Person of the Year" category. Twelve of his fights generated above 10 million average viewers, and his world heavyweight title defence against Eddie Chambers in March 2010 drew bigger viewership numbers on RTL than the return of the Formula One legend voted the greatest German athlete of the 20th century Michael Schumacher. Credited for selling out sports stadiums, Klitschko had eight of his fights take place at sports stadiums in Germany, Switzerland and United Kingdom, with all but one having attendances ranging from 43,000 to 90,000. During his career, Wladimir defeated 23 boxers for the world heavyweight championship, the most in boxing history. Klitschko holds several historical records, including the longest combined world championship reign in heavyweight history at 4,382 days (12 years); the most beaten opponents and wins in world heavyweight title bouts since the international expansion of boxing governing bodies, at 23 and 25 respectively; the most wins in unified title bouts and the longest unified championship reign in professional boxing history at 15 title bouts and 14 consecutive defences respectively. He has the second most total successful title defences of any heavyweight boxer with 23 (including his first reign as WBO champion), behind Joe Louis (25) and ahead of Larry Holmes (20) and Muhammad Ali (19) and the third most consecutive title defenses in heavyweight history. Klitschko fought in 29 world heavyweight title fights, more than any other boxer in history. As of May 2023, BoxRec ranks Wladimir Klitschko as the 21st greatest European boxer of all time. According to BoxRec, Klitschko has also defeated 12 previously undefeated fighters with a combined record 267–0–5 (174 KOs) – these 12 included Najee Shaheed (professional record 16–0–1, 8 KOs coming into the fight), Zoran Vujicic (14–0, 6 KOs), Eliseo Castillo (18–0–1, 14 KOs), Samuel Peter (24–0, 21 KOs), Calvin Brock (29–0, 22 KOs), Sultan Ibragimov (22–0–1, 17 KOs), Ruslan Chagaev (25–0–1, 17 KOs), Mariusz Wach (27–0, 15 KOs), Francesco Pianeta (28–0–1, 15 KOs), Alexander Povetkin (26–0, 18 KOs), Kubrat Pulev (20–0, 11 KOs) and Bryant Jennings (19–0, 10 KOs). Wladimir has beaten 9 current or former world champions throughout his career. These included heavyweight champions Chris Byrd (twice), Ray Mercer, Lamon Brewster, Samuel Peter (twice), Sultan Ibragimov, Hasim Rahman and Ruslan Chagaev, two-weight world champion David Haye and unified cruiserweight champion Jean-Marc Mormeck. Known for his punching power, Klitschko defeated his opponent inside the distance 56 times in 69 fights, an 81% knockout-to-win ratio (this includes two DQs and one TD). Of his thirteen remaining bouts, four involved an opponent that Klitschko knocked out in a rematch (Everett Martin, Chris Byrd, Lamon Brewster, and Samuel Peter), three saw him knock his opponent down multiple times on the way to a wide decision victory (David Haye, Alexander Povetkin, and the first fight against Chris Byrd), two saw Klitschko hurt and knock down his opponent before being knocked out himself (Anthony Joshua and the first fight with Lamon Brewster), and three involved fighters who have never been knocked out by anyone before or after in all of their professional careers (Tyson Fury, Sultan Ibragimov, and Ross Puritty). Analyzing his legacy, Dan Rafael wrote that Klitschko proved himself to be an all-time great heavyweight, and that his legacy will be viewed more favourably as time passes, comparing him to Lennox Lewis in that regard. Rafael believes that Klitschko's 22-fight winning streak from 2004 to 2015, which included unifying three titles, cemented his legacy among the greatest of all time. Klitschko was criticized for his cautious boxing style, but Rafael argues that a lack of exciting fights is not equal to lack of quality. He also believes that the alleged weakness of the era in which Klitschko competed is overexaggerated, arguing that only two eras in heavyweight boxing, the 1970s and 1990s, could be considered great eras, and that Klitschko's era is no weaker than that of Mike Tyson who made only half as many title defenses as Wladimir did. Despite this, Rafael insists that Wladimir still has a lot of quality opponents on his resume, such as Chris Byrd, David Haye, Alexander Povetkin, Calvin Brock, Sultan Ibragimov and Ruslan Chagaev, and that those wins should not be dismissed due to their one-sided nature; in fact, it only emphasizes the quality of Klitschko's boxing skills and in-ring intelligence. Rafael wrote that even though Klitschko suffered some bad losses, the totality of his career must be considered. In 2021, Klitschko was inducted into the International Boxing Hall of Fame in his first year of eligibility, having been elected over Miguel Cotto and James Toney by a panel of around 200 international boxing historians. Klitschko is also a passionate golfer and was seen playing in the Alfred Dunhill Links Championship in Scotland. The tournament was played over three courses in 2008 including St Andrews, Carnoustie, and Kingsbarns in Fife and Angus. Klitschko was named curator of the Ukrainian pavilion at the 2009 Venice Biennale. As of October 2015, Klitschko was an adjunct professor at Switzerland's University of St. Gallen, where he taught master's students. From 2009, Klitschko was in a relationship with American actress Hayden Panettiere. Panettiere has appeared ringside at some of Klitschko's fights, including at Klitschko's 10th-round KO victory over Samuel Peter. The couple had a brief split in 2011, but were together again in 2013. In October 2013, Panettiere confirmed that she and Klitschko were engaged. They have one child together, a daughter, born in December 2014. In August 2018, according to Panettiere's mother, Lesley Vogel, the couple had split for a second time. They were said to be on 'good terms' for the sake of their daughter. On 6 December 2013, Klitschko and his then-fiancée Hayden Panettiere visited the Euromaidan-protests in Kyiv. His brother Vitali was one of the leading figures of these protests. He and Panettiere addressed the crowds. Wladimir and his brother Vitali have never fought each other in a professional fight as their mother made them promise to never fight each other. Klitschko speaks four languages: English, German, Russian, and Ukrainian. He was friends with the late German heavyweight legend Max Schmeling. On 29 March 2012, during a charitable auction in Kyiv, Ukraine, Klitschko auctioned off his 1996 Olympic gold medal to a buyer who bid $1 million. Klitschko said he would use the money to help the dreams of hundreds of thousands of Ukrainian children. After the sale, the buyer immediately returned the medal out of respect for Klitschko and because he wanted it to remain with the Klitschko family. In February 2022, Klitschko joined the Kyiv Territorial Defense Brigade (a military reserve component of the Ukrainian Armed Forces). Both he and his brother Vitali Klitschko, who has been Mayor of Kyiv since 2014, pledged to fight to protect the capital of Ukraine, Kyiv, through armed forces, in response to Russia's invasion of Ukraine that began on 24 February 2022. According to The Times, Wladimir and Vitali were on Vladimir Putin's personal hitlist of 24 high-profile Ukrainian figures whom he wanted assassinated. On 10 March 2022, the brothers announced via Telegram that they had raised €100 million of financial support for Ukraine with a fundraising campaign in Germany. Average viewers Total viewers Average number of households Pay television network Same day replay Viewers aged 18 and older Viewers aged 12 and older Viewers aged 15 and older Wladimir Klitschko is a German transliteration of Russian: Владимир Кличко, IPA: [vlɐˈdʲimʲɪr klʲɪˈʂko]; an equivalent English spelling is Vladimir Klichko /ˈklɪtʃkoʊ/. His full name in Ukrainian is: Володимир Володимирович Кличко, romanized: Volodymyr Volodymyrovych Klychko, IPA: [woloˈdɪmɪr woloˈdɪmɪrowɪtʃ klɪtʃˈkɔ]. Attributed to multiple sources: Attributed to multiple sources: WBA, WBC, IBF and WBO era Sky Sports tale of the tape prior to the Anthony Joshua fight. HBO World Championship Boxing tale of the tape prior to the Anthony Joshua fight. Hauser, Thomas (19 April 2017). "From the Ring: The Greatest Heavyweight of All Time". The Ring. Retrieved 10 August 2017. Iole, Kevin (3 August 2017). "Why Wladimir Klitschko is one of the greatest heavyweights of all time". Yahoo! Sports. Yahoo!. Retrieved 10 August 2017. Rafael, Dan (4 August 2017). "Anthony Joshua ordered to make mandatory defenses of IBF, WBA titles". ESPN. Retrieved 10 August 2017. "Ranking the 15 greatest heavyweight boxers of all time". The Daily Telegraph. Telegraph Media Group. 3 August 2017. Retrieved 10 August 2017. Wladimir Klitschko – An Analysis of the Surgeon at Work. Myboxingcoach.com (21 March 2012). Retrieved 28 November 2015. "Klitschko-Haye broken down by expert trainer James Gogue". Archived from the original on 23 April 2019. Retrieved 15 December 2017. Joshua vs Klitschko: David Haye and Adam Booth reveal the difficulty of facing Wladimir Klitschko Fighting Klitschko: What It’s Actually Like To Box Wladimir Sherdog.com. "Boxing: Wladimir Klitschko's Loss Signals End of Era". Sherdog. "Can Mariusz Wach End The Klitschko Era of Dominance?". 6 November 2012. "TBRB: Successions". tbrb.org. Retrieved 20 April 2020. "Boxer Lb for Lb Ratings". BoxRec. 15 October 2015. Archived from the original on 15 October 2015. Retrieved 20 January 2024. "Boxer Lb for Lb Ratings". BoxRec. 17 November 2015. Archived from the original on 17 November 2015. Retrieved 20 January 2024. "Володимира Кличка внесли до Міжнародної зали боксерської слави". obozrevatel.com. Retrieved 12 December 2020. "Zwei Brüder, fünf Titel, 500 Millionen TV-Zuschauer" (in German). Schleswig-Holsteinischer Zeitungsverlag. 4 July 2011. Retrieved 29 March 2023. "Провідні країни Європи борються за бій братів Кличків". tsn.ua (in Ukrainian). 31 October 2011. Retrieved 7 May 2021. "За право провести бой Кличко соревнуются европейские города" (in Russian). 30 October 2011. Retrieved 5 July 2022. "EXCLUSIVE: Boxing legend Wladimir Klitschko admits to 'biggest fight of my life' on war front line". Daily Mirror. 8 March 2022. Retrieved 16 August 2023. "30 шагов Независимости: история успехов и поражений в ярких фото" (in Russian). 18 August 2021. Retrieved 5 September 2021. "Brüder Gnadenlos". Focus (in German). No. 36. 5 September 2011. p. 130. Retrieved 10 June 2022. "Володимиру Кличку – 47: "Помста за брата" та інші видатні перемоги легендарного українця" (in Ukrainian). Channel 24. 25 March 2023. Retrieved 16 August 2023. "Most days as a heavyweight boxing champion". Guinness World Records. Retrieved 15 March 2024. "Wladimir Klitschko is plotting a spectacular boxing comeback, and he wants to break an old heavyweight record". businessinsider.sg. Business Insider Singapore. Archived from the original on 10 November 2019. Retrieved 26 July 2023. "Володимиру Кличку – 44: найкращі нокаути боксера" (in Ukrainian). 25 March 2020. Retrieved 5 February 2021. "Украина сделала свой выбор! Назван лучший боксер в истории страны" (in Russian). Retrieved 28 April 2022. "Władimir Kliczko wróci na ring? "Jeśli wojna się skończy..."" (in Polish). Polsat Sport. 25 April 2022. Retrieved 30 April 2022. "Fury 'mentally happy' to be in ring, eyes Klitschko-like reign". Reuters. 20 May 2020. Retrieved 8 February 2021. "Klitschko believes Hrgović will become world boxing champ". croatiaweek.com. 6 April 2019. Retrieved 9 March 2020. "Володимир Кличко виступив на Web Summit-2019 в Лісабоні". kreschatic.kiev.ua (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 17 April 2021. Retrieved 17 April 2021. "Володимир Кличко увійшов до Міжнародного залу боксерської слави". kremenchug.org.ua (in Ukrainian). 15 December 2020. Retrieved 17 April 2021. "Владимир Кличко" (in Russian). 6 August 2019. Retrieved 12 December 2020. "Most boxing heavyweight world title fights won by brothers". Guinness World Records. 2 July 2011. Retrieved 15 March 2024. "Boxing legends Oscar De La Hoya Mike Tyson and Floyd Mayweather snag Guinness World Records at WBC convention". Guinness World Records. 12 December 2011. "Klitschko brothers included in Guinness World Records". 2 October 2018. "Володимир Кличко включений до Міжнародного залу боксерської слави". sport.ua (in Ukrainian). Retrieved 16 December 2020. "Mayweather, Klitschko, Ward Elected To International Boxing Hall of Fame". boxingscene.com. 15 December 2020. Retrieved 16 December 2020. Wladimir Klitschko – Boxer. Boxrec.com. Retrieved 19 November 2014. Vester, Mark. "Wladimir Klitschko A Fan of Borat", BoxingScene.com, 22 November 2006 "Vitali & Wladimir Klitschko" (profile) Archived 24 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine, Tour2Kiev.com, n.d. У братьев Кличко умер отец Archived 24 November 2011 at the Wayback Machine. Komsomolskaya Profile, kp.ua, 13 July 2011. (in Russian) "Kyiv's mayor learns from the IDF how to defend Ukraine". 10 March 2022. Vavrouška, Petr (1 January 2011). Šťastné děti okupantů [Happy children of the occupiers] (in Czech). Retrieved 5 April 2022. {{cite book}}: |website= ignored (help) [1]. Klitschko.com - Wladimir Klitschko Bio. Retrieved 26 April 2017. [2]. Klitschko.com - Vitali Klitschko Bio. Retrieved 26 April 2017. Dwyre, Bill (14 October 2015). "Boxer Wladimir Klitschko is a heavyweight deep thinker". Los Angeles Times. Los Angeles. Retrieved 3 August 2017. Luscombe, Belinda (14 May 2012). "10 Questions for Wladimir Klitschko". Time. Retrieved 14 September 2021. "Kliczko już w Polsce nokautował", TVN24, 7 January 2011. "World Junior Champs1994". amateur-boxing.strefa.pl. "European Championships1996". amateur-boxing.strefa.pl. "Wladimir Klitschko - BoxRec". boxrec.com. Vladimir Klitschko Amateur Career (in Spanish) compiled by Pedro Cabrera Isidron of the Cuban Olympics Committee. Last updated: 13 August 2006. Rosenthal, Michael (19 March 2009). "What are we to make of the Klitschkos?". The Ring. Retrieved 10 May 2017. "Wladimir Klitschko vs. Ross Puritty - BoxRec". boxrec.com. Retrieved 5 June 2020. "Long read: Invisible while standing still: Chris Byrd interview". boxingmonthly.com. 9 February 2018. Archived from the original on 20 March 2020. Retrieved 13 March 2020. "What I Like About Chris Byrd". boxingscene.com. 7 February 2005. Retrieved 13 March 2020. "Bout: Chris Byrd v Vitali Klitschko". BoxRec. Retrieved 13 March 2020. "Wladimir Klitschko Fights in the Vault". Eye on the Ring. Retrieved 11 March 2020. "2000-10-14 Wladimir Klitschko vs Chris Byrd I". 5 November 2012. Retrieved 1 November 2020. "2000-10-14 Wladimir Klitschko vs Chris Byrd I - Video Dailymotion". Dailymotion. 5 November 2012. Retrieved 30 October 2016. "Forgotten Classics: Derrick Jefferson vs Maurice Harris". boxrec.com. Archived from the original on 29 October 2020. Retrieved 15 March 2020. Wladimir Klitschko v Derrick Jefferson "Professional boxing record: Derrick Jefferson". Retrieved 11 March 2020. David Izon vs. Derrick Jefferson: David Izon 232 lbs beat Derrick Jefferson 243 lbs by TKO at 0:11 in round 9 of 10 Oleg Maskaev vs. Derrick Jefferson "Wladimir Klitschko vs Derrick Jefferson - HBO World Championship Boxing March 24 2001". Archived from the original on 29 October 2021. Retrieved 11 March 2020 – via YouTube. "Vladimir Klitschko vs Derrick Jefferson: Klitschko annihilates Jefferson". boxing247.com. Retrieved 30 October 2016. "Wladimir Klitschko v Charles Shufford". Retrieved 11 March 2020. "Professional boxing record: Charles Shufford". Retrieved 11 March 2020. "Photo: Will Smith in the ring cheering on Charles Shufford. The German boxer Wladimir Klitschko won the fight against Shufford. (Photo by Chris Farina/Corbis via Getty Images)". 11 June 2016. Retrieved 11 March 2020. "Wladimir Klitschko vs. Charles Shufford". Retrieved 11 March 2020. "GERMAN BOXING SCENE STRONG — FOR NOW". ringtv.com. 17 June 2009. Retrieved 12 March 2020. "Damals: Der Skandalfight Schulz gegen Botha". sport.de. Retrieved 12 March 2020. "WBO HEAVYWEIGHT CHAMPION WLADIMIR KLITSCHKO SCORES IMPRESSIVE EIGHTH-ROUND TKO OVER FRANS BOTHA". boxing247.com. Retrieved 12 March 2020. "Wladimir Klitschko Vs Francois Botha 16 03 2002". Archived from the original on 29 October 2021. Retrieved 11 March 2020 – via YouTube. "WLAD IS BAD!!!!!! KLITSCHKO DESTROYS RAY MERCER". Retrieved 11 March 2020. "Geoffrey Ciani: Wladimir Klitschko has a chance to redefine his legacy". Archived from the original on 29 October 2021. Retrieved 11 March 2020 – via YouTube. "Wladimir Klitschko v Ray Mercer". Retrieved 11 March 2020. "Professional boxing record: Jameel McCline". boxrec.com. Retrieved 12 March 2020. "Jameel McCline details overcoming prison bid to have respectable heavyweight career". sportingnews.com. Retrieved 12 March 2020. "Wladimir Klitschko vs Jameel McCline". boxrec.com. Retrieved 12 March 2020. "Klitschko stops McCline in one-sided affair!". boxing247.com. Retrieved 12 March 2020. "Saturday 7, December 2002". Retrieved 12 March 2020. "Wladimir Klitschko vs. Jameel McCline". Retrieved 12 March 2020. "Sharkie's Machine: "The End Of A Legendary Career"". Retrieved 12 March 2020. "Он уничтожил Владимира Кличко за три с половиной минуты. После карьеры хотел стать тренером, но умер от пули" (in Russian). Retrieved 29 April 2021. "W. Klitschko: Loss to Sanders made me tougher". ESPN. Retrieved 30 October 2016. ""В меня не верил даже брат", или Переломный бой в карьере Кличко" (in Russian). 10 April 2020. Retrieved 23 May 2020. "On This Day: Lamon Brewster bludgeons Vladimir Klitschko to defeat - Boxing News". Boxing News. 10 April 2015. Retrieved 30 October 2016. "Кличко – Брюстер: переломный момент карьеры украинца". ua-football.com (in Russian). 12 April 2021. Retrieved 11 June 2021. "Виталий Кличко раскрыл подробности отравления брата Владимира в бою с Брюстером" (in Russian). Retrieved 27 April 2020. "#Cмотри Владимир Кличко - Лэймон Брюстер" (in Russian). Archived from the original on 29 October 2021. Retrieved 27 April 2020 – via YouTube. "Владимира Кличко отравили?" (in Russian). Retrieved 27 April 2020. "3 предыдущие поражения Владимира Кличко". Retrieved 2 May 2020. The Ring magazine, June 2004. "Poisonous KO?" Author: D. Lederman "Haloperidol". The American Society of Health-System Pharmacists. Archived from the original on 2 January 2015. Retrieved 2 January 2015. Product Information [Internet]. 2011 [cited 2013 Sep 29]. Available from: "TGA eBS - Product and Consumer Medicine Information Licence". Archived from the original on 14 March 2017. Retrieved 29 May 2014. "Klitschko is taking the mickey with sugary alibi". The Irish Times. 21 March 2013. Retrieved 4 March 2020. "Feds alerted to the case of the horizontal heavyweight". The Guardian. Retrieved 11 March 2020. "Владимира Кличко отравили" (in Russian). Retrieved 27 April 2020.[permanent dead link] "Адвокат Барштейн огласил скандальные подробности боя Владимира Кличко с Брюстером". sportrbc.ru (in Russian). 8 May 2004. Retrieved 27 April 2020. "Как отравили Кличко" (in Russian). Retrieved 27 April 2020. "У команды кличко есть косвенные доказательства, что перед боем за титул чемпиона мира владимира отравили" (in Russian). Retrieved 27 April 2020. ""Дело об отравлении" Кличко расследует ФБР". Kp.ru - (in Russian). 20 May 2004. Retrieved 27 April 2020. Андрей Соколов (26 October 2013). "Wladimir Klitschko vs DaVarryl Williamson". YouTube. Archived from the original on 26 June 2019. Retrieved 30 April 2017. "BoxRec: Davarryl Williamson". BoxRec. Retrieved 13 March 2020. "BoxRec: Bout: Wladimir Klitschko v DaVarryl Williamson". BoxRec. Retrieved 13 March 2020. "Klitschko wins split decision after head butt". BoxRec. Retrieved 13 March 2020. "Wladimir Klitschko VS Samuel Peter II". boxing247.com. 25 July 2010. Retrieved 23 March 2020. Wladimir Klitschko vs. Samuel Peter, 1st fight on YouTube. «Bolshoi ring». (rus.) "Bout: Wladimir Klitschko VS Samuel Peter I". boxrec.com. Retrieved 23 March 2020. "48. Wladimir Klitschko vs. Samuel Peter I. (24-09-2005)". klitschko-brothers.com. 3 November 2013. Archived from the original on 4 November 2018. Retrieved 3 November 2018. Documentary «Klitschko» on YouTube Alexander Belienkiy: Golden Klitschko brother, p. 188–190 (rus.). "Wladimir Klitschko Vs Samuel Peter 24 09 2005". Archived from the original on 29 October 2021. Retrieved 23 March 2020 – via YouTube. "Wladimir Klitschko vs. Samuel Peter". SecondsOut Boxing News. Retrieved 31 October 2016. "The Ring Magazine's Annual Ratings: 2005 - BoxRec". boxrec.com. Power Punches: Boxing's Best Of 2006. J. E. Grant. 26 November 2009. ISBN 9780557002351. Retrieved 24 March 2020. "Byrd-Klitschko: A Historic Turning Point in Heavyweight History?". boxingscene.com. 17 April 2006. Retrieved 24 March 2020. "Part II: The Klitschko Brothers' Path to The Undisputed Championship". SecondsOut Boxing News. Retrieved 31 October 2016. "Bout: Chris Byrd vs. Wladimir Klitschko". boxrec.com. Retrieved 24 March 2020. "Calvin Brock Speaks on Klitschko, Liakhovich". September 2006. Retrieved 24 November 2021. "Notebook: Brock in demand by promoters". 28 July 2006. Retrieved 24 November 2021. "Reviewing his career, Tyson tackles 20 topics". ESPN. 11 June 2005. Retrieved 23 October 2021. "WLAD FACES BROCK CHALLENGE". 10 November 2006. Retrieved 24 November 2021. "Bout: Wladimir Klitschko vs Calvin Brock". boxrec.com. Retrieved 24 March 2020. "Klitschko drops Brock in the seventh to defend title". 11 November 2006. Retrieved 5 April 2020. "Wladimir Klitschko vs. Calvin Brock – Full Fight & Knockout". Archived from the original on 29 October 2021. Retrieved 5 April 2020 – via YouTube. "El próximo ungido". ESPN. 9 March 2007. Retrieved 12 November 2021. "Wladimir Klitschko vs Ray Austin: Boxing Results". boxing247.com. Retrieved 31 October 2016. "Wladimir Klitschko vs Lamon Brewster 2: Boxing Results". boxing247.com. Retrieved 31 October 2016. "Начались переговоры об объединительном бое между Ибрагимовым и Кличко". sports.ru. 30 October 2007. Archived from the original on 17 July 2019. Retrieved 17 July 2019. "Бой между Султаном Ибрагимовым и Владимиром Кличко может состояться в феврале". sports.ru. 30 October 2007. Archived from the original on 17 July 2019. Retrieved 17 July 2019. "Владимир Кличко и Султан Ибрагимов подписали контракт на проведение объединительного боя". sports.ru. 20 November 2007. Archived from the original on 17 July 2019. Retrieved 17 July 2019. "В Москве прошла пресс-конференция Султана Ибрагимова и Владимира Кличко". sports.ru. 25 November 2007. Archived from the original on 17 July 2019. Retrieved 17 July 2019. "Владимир Кличко начал подготовку к бою против Ибрагимова". sports.ru/. 18 December 2007. Archived from the original on 17 July 2019. Retrieved 17 July 2019. "Ибрагимов вылетел из Москвы в США". sports.ru. 25 December 2007. Archived from the original on 17 July 2019. Retrieved 17 July 2019. "Дорогие билеты на бой Кличко уже распроданы". Archived from the original on 2 March 2019. Retrieved 1 March 2019. Ring (Ukrainian magazine) No.3, 2008, p.5 Ring (Ukrainian magazine) No.2, 2008, p.2 Ring (Ukrainian magazine) No.3, 2008, p.4 "Гринберг извинился перед Владимиром Кличко". sports.ru. 22 February 2008. Archived from the original on 17 July 2019. Retrieved 17 July 2019. "Professional boxing record: Wladimir Klitschko". boxrec.com. Retrieved 9 June 2020. "Professional boxing record: Sultan Ibragimov". boxrec.com. Retrieved 9 June 2020. Ring (Ukrainian magazine) No.3, 2008, p.6-7 Ring (Ukrainian magazine) No.3, 2008, p.7 "Владимир Кличко - Султан Ибрагимов 23-02-2008". Archived from the original on 29 October 2021. Retrieved 9 June 2020 – via YouTube. Alexander Belenkyi (2011). Властелины ринга. Бокс на въезде и выезде. Astrel. ISBN 978-5-9725-1978-1. Retrieved 9 June 2020. Alexander Belenkyi (2011). Властелины ринга. Бокс на въезде и выезде. Astrel. ISBN 978-5-9725-1978-1. Retrieved 9 June 2020. "Умом и кулаками: Владимир Кличко заработал 150 миллионов евро за карьеру". sportarena.com (in Russian). 11 July 2019. Retrieved 28 July 2020. "Владимир Кличко заработал 150 миллионов евро за карьеру". sport.24tv.ua (in Russian). 11 July 2019. Retrieved 28 July 2020. Klitschko donates money to children's foundation "Klitschko routs Ibragimov, unifies IBF and WBO titles". 24 February 2008. Retrieved 9 June 2020. "Klitschko victorious but uninspired". The Guardian. 24 February 2008. Retrieved 9 June 2020. Гуревич В. (25 February 2008). ""Этот бой – позор для бокса". Знаменитый промоутер Боб Арум раскритиковал поединок Владимира Кличко с Султаном Ибрагимовым". Советский спорт. Archived from the original on 19 July 2019. Retrieved 19 July 2019. "Дэн Гуссен: "На Кличко с Ибрагимовым было жалко смотреть"". sports.ru. 15 February 2008. Archived from the original on 19 July 2019. Retrieved 19 July 2019. Ring (Ukrainian magazine) No.3, 2008, p.9 "КЛИЧКО – ИБРАГИМОВ: КАК СКУЧНО БЫТЬ КОРОЛЕМ… АНАЛИЗ БОЯ". censor.net.ua (in Russian). 25 February 2008. Retrieved 9 June 2020. "Krasniqi Ready For Tony Thompson". boxing247.com. 5 June 2007. Retrieved 23 May 2020. "Krasniqi verprügelt und vorgeführt". Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung (in German). Retrieved 23 May 2020. Glindmeier, Mike (15 July 2007). "Der letzte Akt des Seiltänzers". Der Spiegel (in German). Retrieved 23 May 2020. "Das Ende vom Schmeling-Traum". Stern (in German). 15 July 2007. Retrieved 23 May 2020. "Professional boxing record: Tony Thompson". boxrec.com. Retrieved 19 May 2020. "Кличко: "Томпсон хорошо защищается"". eurosport.ru (in Russian). 17 June 2008. Retrieved 1 June 2020. "Klitschko retains heavyweight titles with 11th-round KO of Thompson". ESPN. 12 July 2008. Retrieved 1 June 2020. "Как Тони Томпсон пытался дважды победить Владимира Кличко". Коммерсантъ (in Russian). 14 July 2008. Retrieved 1 June 2020. "Bout: Wladimir Klitschko vs Tony Thompson". boxrec.com. Retrieved 1 June 2020. Лободин К. "Охота на голодного Тигра, p. 42-45". Ring, Ukraine. ISSN 1810-7338. Лободин К. "Ап! И тигры у ног моих сели..., p. 14-19". Ring, Ukraine. ISSN 1810-7338. "Как Тони Томпсон пытался дважды победить Владимира Кличко". sovsport.ru (in Russian). Archived from the original on 3 December 2020. Retrieved 1 June 2020. "Boxer Klitschko Retains World Title After Hamburg Bout". Deutsche Welle. Retrieved 1 June 2020. "12 июля: Кличко - Томпсон. На кого ставят букмекеры". vecherniy.kharkov.ua (in Russian). Retrieved 27 July 2020. "Кличко получил 8 миллионов евро за бой с Томпсоном". vesti.ru (in Russian). Retrieved 27 July 2020. Klitschko's company wins purse bid for 13 December fight. ESPN.go.com (16 September 2008). Retrieved 25 November 2011. HBO, Wladimir Klitschko vs Hasim Rahman #720p, archived from the original on 29 October 2021, retrieved 8 April 2020 HBO (7 January 2009), Wladimir Klitschko vs Hasim Rahman: Highlights (HBO Boxing), retrieved 26 April 2017 Claudio, EJ. "My Thoughts On Wladimir Klitschko vs. Hasim Rahman". Bleacher Report. Retrieved 26 April 2017. agencies, Telegraph staff and. "Vladimir Klitschko KO's Hasim Rahman". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 26 April 2017. "Bout: Wladimir Klitschko vs. Hasim Rahman". Retrieved 8 April 2020. "Compubox Stats: Wladimir Klitschko vs. Hasim Rahman". Retrieved 8 April 2020. "David Haye stuns Wladimir Klitschko by pulling out of title fight". The Guardian. 3 June 2009. Retrieved 6 April 2020. The Ring № 6: The circus of heavyweight proportions. 2009 "Boente: Chagaev to replace hurt Haye". 5 June 2009. Retrieved 6 April 2020. "Chagaev replaces Haye for Klitschko fight". Raidió Teilifís Éireann. 6 June 2009. Retrieved 6 April 2020. "Why Klitschko-Chagaev is the most important heavyweight fight in years, and why it won't be any good". 17 June 2009. Retrieved 6 April 2020. "Chagaev Vs. Klitschko: Is Ruslan A Tougher Opponent Than Haye?". 6 June 2009. Retrieved 6 April 2020. "HEAD-TO-HEAD: KLITSCHKO VS. CHAGAEV". 19 June 2009. Retrieved 6 April 2020. "KLITSCHKO HALTS CHAGAEV, WINS RING TITLE". 20 June 2009. Retrieved 6 April 2020. "Wladimir Klitschko secures technical knockout over Ruslan Chagaev". The Guardian. 20 June 2009. Retrieved 6 April 2020. "Klitschko wins by TKO, keeps heavyweight titles". ESPN. 20 June 2009. Retrieved 30 April 2017. J, King. "Wladimir Klitschko vs Eddie Chambers March 20 in Germany". Bleacher Report. Retrieved 30 April 2017. "Klitschko vs Chambers 10 years ago: How long-reigning champion destroyed America's dreams". Retrieved 27 March 2020. "HEAD TO HEAD: W. KLITSCHKO-CHAMBERS". 19 March 2010. Retrieved 27 March 2020. "THE FACT KLITSCHKO-CHAMBERS IS NOT ON U.S. TV IS A NEW LOW". 15 March 2010. Retrieved 16 November 2020. "Виталий Кличко: "Уйду, когда с братом соберем все чемпионские пояса"" (in Russian). Retrieved 1 November 2020. "Bout: Wladimir Klitschko vs Eddie Chambers". Retrieved 27 March 2020. "Wladimir Klitschko knocks out Eddie Chambers in final seconds". 20 March 2010. Retrieved 27 March 2020. "Klitschko KOs Chambers to keep titles". CNN. 21 March 2010. "Wladimir Klitschko knocks out Eddie Chambers in final seconds". Bad Left Hook. 20 March 2010. Retrieved 30 April 2017. Tylwalk, Nick. "Wladimir Klitschko Vs. Eddie Chambers: Round by Round". Bleacher Report. Retrieved 30 April 2017. "Klitschko knocks out Chambers to keep heavyweight crown". Deutsche Welle. Retrieved 27 March 2020. Vladimir calls out Haye. Skysports.com. Retrieved 19 June 2011. Vester, Mark (14 April 2010). "Klitschko: "David 'The Loser' Haye is scared and a liar"". BoxingScene.com. Booth: Wlad will do nicely. Skysports.com. Retrieved 19 June 2011. Vester, Mark (1 May 2010). "Vladimir Klitschko-David Haye Targeted For September". BoxingScene.com. Retrieved 9 May 2010. Chikov, Ruslan (3 May 2010). "Vladimir Klitschko-David Haye Talks Go Well With HBO". BoxingScene.com. Retrieved 9 May 2010. Chikov, Ruslan (4 May 2010). "Vladimir Klitschko-David Haye Is Heading To Germany". BoxingScene.com. Retrieved 9 May 2010. Satterfield, Lem (11 May 2010). "Vladimir Bitschko's Reps Sent Fight Offer To David Haye". BoxingScene.com. Retrieved 15 May 2010. Chikov, Ruslan (14 May 2010). "Haye Wants Vitali, Vladimir-Povetkin As Deadline Nears". BoxingScene.com. Retrieved 15 May 2010. Chikov, Ruslan (17 May 2010). "Klitschko vs Haye Negotiations Continue, Despite Deadline". BoxingScene.com. Retrieved 18 May 2010. Reeno, Rick (28 May 2010). "Klitschko's Trainer: If Haye Was a Man, He Would Respond". BoxingScene.com. Retrieved 28 May 2010. Kim, Jason (4 July 2010). "Klitschko vs. Povetkin in Frankfurt, Germany". BoxingNews24.com. Retrieved 5 July 2010. Dan Rafael (22 July 2010). "Klitschko-Peter rematch on Sept. 11". ESPN. Retrieved 2 August 2020. Dan Rafael (28 July 2010). "W. Klitschko, Peter agree to fight terms". ESPN. Retrieved 2 August 2020. "Klitschko vs Peter Details; Bowman vs Acevado Tops". BoxingScene.com. 30 July 2010. Retrieved 31 July 2010. Sukachev, Alexey (11 September 2010). "Klitschko Batters Peter For Ten Rounds, Knockout Win". BoxingScene.com. Retrieved 12 September 2010. "BoxRec: Wladimir Klitschko". BoxRec.com. 1 May 2010. Retrieved 12 March 2020. "Владимир Кличко за бой с Питером заработал 5 миллионов евро" (in Russian). championat.com. Retrieved 31 July 2020. Chris Mannix, SI.com (8 December 2010). "Klitschko tears adbominal muscle, pulls out of Saturday title defense". Sports Illustrated. Retrieved 9 December 2010. Dan Rafael (9 December 2010). "Wladimir Klitschko withdraws from fight". ESPN. Retrieved 9 December 2010. Staff (5 January 2011). "Chisora to get his chance". SkySports.com. Retrieved 5 January 2011. Klitschko.com. Retrieved 19 April 2011. Klitschko-Haye could take place outside Germany Archived 5 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine, Yahoo!.com (12 April 2011). Retrieved 19 April 2011. "Wladimir Klitschko-David Haye fight set". ESPN. 6 March 2011. Retrieved 7 March 2011. BoxRec Boxing Records. Boxrec.com. Retrieved 19 June 2011. Boxing – Klitschko-Haye in Hamburg Archived 24 April 2011 at the Wayback Machine. Fightnews.com (20 April 2011). Retrieved 19 June 2011. Profile, RTL.de. Retrieved 19 June 2011. "CompuBox: Wladimir Klitschko vs. David Haye". Retrieved 1 June 2020. Jackson, Jamie (18 January 2012). "Dereck Chisora ridicules David Haye bid to fight Vitali Klitschko". The Guardian. London. Bakowski, Gregg (2 July 2011). "David Haye v Wladimir Klitschko – as it happened". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 4 July 2011. Davies, Gareth A (2 July 2011). "Wladimir Klitschko breaks David Haye's resolve to become undisputed heavyweight champion of the world". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 5 July 2011. Retrieved 4 July 2011. "Klitschko comprehensively settles score with Haye". ESPN. 2 July 2011. Retrieved 2 July 2011. "Бой с Хэем принес Кличко $24 миллиона". Archived from the original on 25 September 2021. Retrieved 1 December 2020. Wladimir Klitschko profile, boxrec.com. Retrieved 8 July 2012. Official website of Vitali & Vladimir Klitschko, Klitschko.com. Retrieved 25 November 2011. "MELDUNG/605: Franzose Jean-Marc Mormeck als Herausforderer Wladimir Klitschkos bestätigt (SB)". schattenblick.de (in German). Retrieved 18 January 2021. "Klitschko pulls out of title bout". BBC News. 5 December 2011. "Wladimir Klitschko Demolishes Mormeck in Four Rounds". BoxingScene.com. Retrieved 12 December 2017. "Klitschko vs. Mormeck - CompuBox Stats". boxingscene.com. Retrieved 12 December 2017. "BoxRec's Annual Ratings: Heavyweight Annuals". Retrieved 13 December 2020. "Wladimir Admits Tony Thompson Rematch is Next Move". BoxingScene.com. Retrieved 11 December 2017. "Klitschko-Thompson Purse Bid: 85% Split For Vladimir". BoxingScene.com. Retrieved 11 December 2017. Wladimir Klitschko to make 12th title defense in a rematch vs. Tony Thompson, ESPN, 27 March 2012. Retrieved 8 July 2012. "Klitschko Confession: Thompson Was Not My First Choice". BoxingScene.com. Retrieved 11 December 2017. "Кличко: Томпсон меня знает - Eurosport". 30 November 2020. Archived from the original on 30 November 2020. Retrieved 7 November 2021. "Владимир Кличко: Томпсон - сильный и сложный". korrespondent.net (in Russian). Retrieved 27 July 2020. "Состоялось взвешивание перед поединком Владимир Кличко – Тони Томпсон". sports.ru (in Russian). 11 July 2008. Retrieved 27 July 2020. "Как Тони Томпсон пытался дважды победить Владимира Кличко" (in Russian). Retrieved 27 July 2020. "Kličko: Nepochyboval jsem, ale bylo těžké Thompsona trefit". sport.cz (in Czech). 8 July 2012. Retrieved 27 July 2020. Klitschko KOs Thompson again Archived 10 July 2012 at the Wayback Machine. Fightnews.com (7 July 2012). Retrieved 8 July 2012. "Wladimir Klitschko Batters Tony Thompson For TKO in Six". BoxingScene.com. Retrieved 11 December 2017. "Klitschko vs. Thompson - CompuBox". boxingscene.com. Retrieved 11 December 2017. "Klitschko-Wach: If The Money is Right, They Might Fight". BoxingScene.com. Retrieved 8 December 2017. "Klitschko-Wach: Conflicting Statements on Fight Status". BoxingScene.com. Retrieved 8 December 2017. "Klitschko-Wach Negotiations Intensify For The Fall". BoxingScene.com. Retrieved 8 December 2017. "Klitschko, Wach Reach Agreement on Terms: Fight is On!". BoxingScene.com. Retrieved 8 December 2017. Banks to train Wladimir Klitschko ESPN, 24 October 2012. Retrieved 28 April 2015. "Klitschko-Wach: Johnathon Banks To Replace Steward". BoxingScene.com. Retrieved 8 December 2017. "Emanuel Steward 1944-2012: A Legend Passes Away". BoxingScene.com. Retrieved 8 December 2017. "Wach confirms fight with Klitschko". Boxingnews24.com. Archived from the original on 29 May 2013. Retrieved 15 August 2012. Mariusz Wach Archived 17 June 2015 at the Wayback Machine BoxRec.com. Retrieved 28 April 2015 "W. Klitschko to defend title vs. 6-foot-7 Wach". ESPN. Retrieved 8 December 2017. "CYFRA+: Kliczko - Wach w PPV" (in Polish). Retrieved 6 June 2020. "WALKA KLICZKO vs. WACH: Transmisja za 39 złotych w Canal+" (in Polish). Retrieved 6 June 2020. "Walka Kliczko vs. Wach. Transmisja online w internecie i na żywo w tv" (in Polish). 9 November 2012. Retrieved 6 June 2020. "Event: Wladimir Klitschko vs Mariusz Wach". Retrieved 6 June 2020. "Klitschko Easily Beats Down Durable Wach Over Twelve". BoxingScene.com. Retrieved 8 December 2017. "Dominant Klitschko mauls brave Wach". ESPN. Retrieved 8 December 2017. "Klitschko vs. Wach - CompuBox". boxingscene.com. Retrieved 8 December 2017. "Wach's Promoter Explodes Over Steroid Allegations". BoxingScene.com. Retrieved 8 December 2017. "Кличко заработал 5,3 миллиона евро за бой с Вахом". lb.ua (in Russian). Retrieved 12 December 2017. "Historical Rates for the EUR/USD currency conversion on 12 November 2012 (12/11/2012)". exchangerates.org.uk. Retrieved 28 July 2020. "Доход Кличко за бой с Вахом составит почти 6 миллионов евро" (in Russian). Retrieved 1 November 2020. "Кличко заработал за бой с Вахом 5,3 млн. евро" (in Russian). 13 November 2012. Retrieved 1 November 2020. "Wladimir Klitschko Offered 5 Million Euro To Face Huck". BoxingScene.com. Retrieved 11 December 2017. "Boente: 100 Million Euro Won't Make Klitschko vs Huck". BoxingScene.com. Retrieved 12 December 2017. Klitschko vs Povetkin negotiations begin Archived 6 February 2013 at the Wayback Machine. Wbanews.com. Retrieved 1 May 2013. Purse Bids for Povetkin-Klitschko|Boxing/MMA|R-Sport. All the top sports news. En.rsport.ru (17 January 2013). Retrieved 1 May 2013. WBA lets Wladimir Klitschko delay fight against Povetkin. Kyiv Post. Retrieved 1 May 2013. WBA gives special permission to Klitschko but ratifies his mandatory against Povetkin Archived 3 February 2013 at the Wayback Machine. Wbanews.com. Retrieved 1 May 2013. "Klitschko-Pianeta Finalized For May 4th at The SAP Arena". BoxingScene.com. Retrieved 8 December 2017. "Klitschko is Not Bothered By Critics of Pianeta Clash". BoxingScene.com. Retrieved 8 December 2017. Christ, Scott (4 May 2013). "Results: Klitschko stops Pianeta in six". Bad Left Hook. Retrieved 4 November 2016. "Klitschko Dominates and Stops Pianeta in Six Rounds". BoxingScene.com. Retrieved 8 December 2017. "60 and 14: Klitschko Continues To Extend His Reign". BoxingScene.com. Retrieved 8 December 2017. "Klitschko vs. Pianeta - CompuBox". boxingscene.com. Retrieved 8 December 2017. "Wladimir Klitschko amped about long-awaited Alexander Povetkin bout". ESPN. Retrieved 30 April 2017. "Klitschko camp 'surprised' by $23m purse bid". ESPN. Retrieved 30 April 2017. "Boxing - Wladimir Klitschko v Alexander Povetkin: How Russia won the heavyweight war". Retrieved 18 May 2020. "Кличко – Поветкин: как Россия выиграла войну в тяжелом весе" (in Russian). Retrieved 3 July 2020. "Ньюсмейкер недели. Ключевые цитаты о бое Кличко – Поветкин" (in Russian). Retrieved 3 July 2020. "Путин придет на бой Кличко - Поветкин" (in Russian). Retrieved 21 January 2021. "Владимир Путин посетит бой Кличко и Поветкина" (in Russian). Retrieved 21 January 2021. "Event: Wladimir Klitschko vs Alexander Povetkin". Retrieved 16 June 2020. Поветкин наносил удары после команды "стоп" и слишком низко "нырял" под него "Scorecard: Klitschko grinds while Cotto shines". ESPN. Retrieved 30 April 2017. "Wladimir Klitschko beats Alexander Povetkin in Moscow". BBC Sport. 5 October 2013. Retrieved 30 April 2017. "Klitschko wins again, shuts out Povetkin". Bad Left Hook. 5 October 2013. Retrieved 30 April 2017. "CompuBox – ThrowdownFantasy.com Stats: Klitschko W 12 Povetkin". compuboxonline.com. Archived from the original on 3 October 2017. Retrieved 30 April 2017. Кличко объяснил, почему не добил Поветкина Кличко: не стал расстраивать россиян нокаутом Поветкина "Владимир Кличко рассказал, почему не захотел нокаутировать Поветкина". Archived from the original on 13 December 2017. Retrieved 12 December 2017. 20 самых рейтинговых трансляций России в 2013 году Итоги 2013 года глазами телезрителей 20-ти больших городов страны "Элитный бокс и футбол в лидерах ТВ-проектов РФ" (in Russian). 21 October 2020. Retrieved 23 October 2020. "Inter Media Group укрепила лидерство на украинском телевидении в 2013 году". 16 January 2014. Retrieved 23 January 2023. "Сегодня состоится масштабное телешоу, посвященное бою Александра Усика" (in Russian). 27 January 2018. Retrieved 28 April 2022. "Капітуляція російського "вітязя": 8 років тому в Москві Кличко побив Повєткіна – відео" (in Ukrainian). Channel 24. 5 October 2021. Retrieved 9 October 2021. RTL: television year 2013 (ger.) "WBO makes Alex Leapai the mandatory for Wladimir Klitschko". Boxing News 24. Retrieved 4 December 2013.[permanent dead link] "Klitschko and Leapai set April date for mandatory bout". World Boxing News. Archived from the original on 6 January 2014. Retrieved 5 January 2014. "Klitschko-Leapai Deal is Close For April 26 in Germany". BoxingScene.com. Retrieved 8 December 2017. "Photo: W. Klitschko Inks Contract To Face Leapai, 4/26". BoxingScene.com. Retrieved 8 December 2017. "David Tua Refuses To Help Klitschko in Leapai Camp". BoxingScene.com. Retrieved 8 December 2017. Lutton, Phil (27 April 2014). "Alex Leapai destroyed by Wladimir Klitschko as he lands just 10 punches". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 8 March 2017. "Klitschko finishes Leapai in five". Bad Left Hook. 26 April 2014. Retrieved 8 March 2017. "Klitschko Beats Down Overmatched Leapai in Five". BoxingScene.com. Retrieved 8 December 2017. "Wladimir Klitschko Gives Praise To Leapai For Efforts". BoxingScene.com. Retrieved 8 December 2017. "Klitschko vs. Leapai - CompuBox". boxingscene.com. Retrieved 8 December 2017. "Wladimir Klitschko vs. Kubrat Pulev Ordered By IBF". BoxingScene.com. Retrieved 8 December 2017. "Klitschko's Manager: Stiverne is Wlad's Target, Not Pulev". BoxingScene.com. Retrieved 8 December 2017. "Klitschko's 80-20 Purse Split Request Approved By IBF". BoxingScene.com. Retrieved 8 December 2017. "Klitschko-Pulev: K2 Outbids Sauerland, Wins Purse Bid". BoxingScene.com. Retrieved 8 December 2017. "Klitschko-Pulev Rescheduled For 11/15 In Hamburg". BoxingScene.com. Retrieved 8 December 2017. "HBO to air Wladimir Klitschko-Kubrat Pulev live". BoxingScene.com. Retrieved 8 December 2017. "Klitschko-Pulev: Only IBF Belt at Stake For Challenger". BoxingScene.com. Retrieved 8 December 2017. "Pulev can win only one of Klitschko's belts". 14 November 2014. "300 милиона за Кубрат и Кличко!" (in Bulgarian). 15 November 2014. Retrieved 26 March 2020. "300 милиона зрители на шоуто Пулев - Кличко" (in Bulgarian). Retrieved 26 March 2020. "300 милиона гледат мегасблъсъка Пулев - Кличко" (in Bulgarian). 15 November 2014. Retrieved 26 March 2020. "Wladimir Klitschko Drills Kubrat Pulev in The Fifth". BoxingScene.com. Retrieved 8 December 2017. Wladimir Klitschko retains title again. ESPN.go.com (15 November 2014). Retrieved 4 December 2016. "Klitschko vs. Pulev - CompuBox". boxingscene.com. Retrieved 8 December 2017. "Klitschko-Pulev brings in 10.5 million viewers on German TV". Boxing News 24. 2 December 2014. Retrieved 16 May 2020. "Кличко - Пулев най-гледаното предаване в историята на Нова ТВ" (in Bulgarian). Retrieved 30 November 2020. "1 млн. гледаха Крисия, Хасан и Ибрахим, 1,8 милиона предпочетоха Пулев-Кличко" (in Bulgarian). Retrieved 30 November 2020. "Πĸaepд! 1.8 милиeнo бългopи глĸдoли мoчo Eличae - Xyлĸв пe Beвo тĸлĸвизия" (in Bulgarian). 17 November 2014. Retrieved 30 November 2020. "Боят Кличко - Пулев взриви стандартите с 1,8 млн. зрители" (in Bulgarian). 17 November 2014. Retrieved 6 June 2020. "Klitschko's Return to HBO A Hit In The Ring And Ratings". BoxingScene.com. Retrieved 8 December 2017. "Klitschko-Jennings set for April 25 at Garden". ESPN. Retrieved 5 May 2017. "Wladimir Klitschko decisions Bryant Jennings to defend heavyweight title". ESPN. 26 April 2015. Retrieved 26 April 2015. "Klitschko delivers highest HBO rating since 2012". Bad Left Hook. 28 April 2015. Retrieved 5 May 2017. "Главные богачи спорта: больше всех зарабатывают Кличко и Ярмоленко, Свитолина – номер один у девушек". Retrieved 1 December 2020. Wladimir Klitschko v Tyson Fury postponed due to champion suffering calf injury | Boxing News. Sky Sports. Retrieved 28 November 2015. "Tyson Fury team makes Wladimir Klitschko re-do his hand wraps". Larry Brown Sports. 28 November 2015. Retrieved 27 December 2017. "Klitschko vs Fury: Tyson Fury wins unanimous decision against Wladimir Klitschko". Sky Sports. Retrieved 27 December 2017. Lutz, Tom (28 November 2015). "Tyson Fury beats Wladimir Klitschko: world heavyweight boxing – as it happened". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 27 December 2017. "Fury upsets Klitschko: Top stats to know". ESPN. Retrieved 27 December 2017. Dirs, Ben (2015) "Tyson Fury beats Wladimir Klitschko to become world champion", BBC, 29 November 2015. Retrieved 29 November 2015 "Fury ends Klitschko reign as heavyweight champ". ESPN. Retrieved 21 September 2017. "Fury & Klitschko set for 9 July rematch". BBC Sport. Retrieved 5 June 2020. "Wladimir Klitschko v Tyson Fury postponed: World heavyweight rematch on hold". BBC Sport. 23 September 2016. Retrieved 26 September 2016. "Tyson Fury writes emotional 127-word statement after vacating world titles". GiveMeSport. 13 October 2016. Archived from the original on 13 October 2016. Retrieved 13 October 2016. "Anthony Joshua vs Wladimir Klitschko date to be announced". The Independent. 16 October 2016. Retrieved 29 October 2016. WBN. "WBA decision on Joshua v Klitschko ruled out until Monday". WBN - World Boxing News. Archived from the original on 30 October 2016. Retrieved 30 October 2016. "Klitschko-Browne to clash for WBA crown? | Boxing News". Boxing News. 20 October 2016. Archived from the original on 31 October 2016. Retrieved 30 October 2016. "Wladimir Klitschko Out Of December 10 Fight With Injury - Boxing News". boxingscene.com. 24 October 2016. Retrieved 30 October 2016. "Anthony Joshua set for spring bout with Wladimir Klitschko". BT.com. Retrieved 30 October 2016. Jay, Phil D. (2 November 2016). "WBA resolution: Joshua v Klitschko sanctioned; Ortiz out; Browne v Briggs ordered". WBN - World Boxing News. Retrieved 4 November 2016. Elliott, Ryan (11 December 2016). "Anthony Joshua vs Wladimir Klitschko signed for April 29th". Boxing News TV. Archived from the original on 14 December 2016. Retrieved 11 December 2016. "Anthony Joshua or Wladimir Klitschko will advance to meet Luis Ortiz, orders WBA". Sky Sports. 20 December 2016. Retrieved 21 December 2016. "Luis Ortiz lined up to face winner of Anthony Joshua and Wladimir Klitschko fight". 20 December 2016. Retrieved 21 December 2016.[permanent dead link] "Joshua-Klitschko winner to face world-title dilemma". ESPN. Retrieved 26 April 2017. "Joshua vs. Klitschko - Over 80,000 Tickets Sold". Boxing Scene. 16 January 2017. Retrieved 17 January 2017. "JOSHUA'S CLASH WITH KLITSCHKO SELLS OVER 80,000 TIX". 16 January 2017. Retrieved 17 January 2017. "Joshua Weighs in at 250 Pounds; Klitschko Weighs 240¼ Pounds - Boxing News". boxingscene.com. 28 April 2017. Retrieved 28 April 2017. "Joshua Gets Off The Floor, Knocks Klitschko Out in Eleventh - Boxing News". boxingscene.com. 29 April 2017. Retrieved 30 April 2017. "BBC Sport". Retrieved 30 April 2017. "Joshua rallies to stop Klitschko in 11th round". ESPN. Retrieved 30 April 2017. "Klitschko: The Best Man Won, It's Really Sad That I Didn't Make It - Boxing News". boxingscene.com. 29 April 2017. Retrieved 30 April 2017. "Joshua On Board For Klitschko Rematch, Principality Stadium Eyed - Boxing News". boxingscene.com. 30 April 2017. Retrieved 30 April 2017. "Joshua-Klitschko Live Broadcast Drew 659K Viewers for Showtime - Boxing News". boxingscene.com. May 2017. Retrieved 2 May 2017. "HBO's Replay of Joshua-Klitschko Peaked at 890K Viewers - Boxing News". boxingscene.com. 2 May 2017. Retrieved 3 May 2017. "Joshua-Klitschko produce ratings for Showtime and HBO : MMAPayout.com: The Business of MMA". mmapayout.com. Retrieved 2 May 2017. "Ratings: Joshua-Klitschko pulls in 659k in US, exceeds 10 million in Germany". Bloody Elbow. 1 May 2017. Retrieved 2 May 2017. "Joshua given exception to mandatory defense". ESPN. Retrieved 10 June 2017. "Joshua-Klitschko II: Hearn Heads To Vegas To Speak With MGM - Boxing News". boxingscene.com. Retrieved 29 July 2017. "Joshua-Klitschko Rematch Could Land at T-Mobile Arena - Boxing News". boxingscene.com. 13 July 2017. Retrieved 29 July 2017. "SHO's Espinoza: Joshua-Klitschko II Decision is Getting Close - Boxing News". boxingscene.com. 15 July 2017. Retrieved 29 July 2017. "Hearn Confident Joshua-Klitschko Rematch Will Be 11/11 in Vegas - Boxing News". boxingscene.com. 25 July 2017. Retrieved 29 July 2017. "Joshua-Klitschko Rematch Could Be on PPV in United States - Boxing News". boxingscene.com. 27 July 2017. Retrieved 29 July 2017. "Decision". Klitschko.com. 3 August 2017. Retrieved 3 August 2017. "WLADIMIR KLITSCHKO ENDS HIS BOXING CAREER". 3 August 2017. Archived from the original on 3 August 2017. Retrieved 3 August 2017. "Wladimir Klitschko retires and will not fight Anthony Joshua in rematch". BBC Sport. 3 August 2017. Retrieved 5 August 2017. "Wladimir Klitschko Retires From Boxing - Boxing News". boxingscene.com. 3 August 2017. Retrieved 5 August 2017. "Forbes 100 Highest Paid Athletes: #24 Wladimir Klitschko". Retrieved 2 December 2020. "Forbes 100 Highest Paid Athletes: #41 Wladimir Klitschko". Retrieved 2 December 2020. "Forbes 100 Highest Paid Athletes: #25 Wladimir Klitschko". Retrieved 2 December 2020. "Forbes 100 Highest Paid Athletes: #63 Wladimir Klitschko". Archived from the original on 13 June 2015. Retrieved 2 December 2020. "Forbes 100 Highest Paid Athletes: #98 Wladimir Klitschko". Retrieved 2 December 2020. "Главные богачи спорта: больше всех зарабатывают Кличко и Ярмоленко, Свитолина – номер один у девушек" (in Russian). Retrieved 2 December 2020. "The World's 100 Highest-Paid Athletes 2016: By The Numbers". Retrieved 2 December 2020. "СМИ: Владимир Кличко заработал 150 миллионов евро за карьеру". klitschko-brothers.com (in Russian). 11 July 2019. Retrieved 28 July 2020. "Владимир Кличко. Доктор стальной молот. Большая биография знаменитого боксёра". boxanalitika.ru (in Russian). Retrieved 1 December 2020. "Vladimir Kličko: ukrajinský král, který stejně tak rozděloval i spojoval. Je legendou?". profiboxing.cz (in Czech). Retrieved 23 March 2021. "Champions for Sport". UNESCO. Retrieved 3 December 2020. "Ukrainian Boxers Vitality and Wladimir Klitschko named UNESCO Champion for Sport". UNESCO. 26 February 2013. Retrieved 3 December 2020. "Vitaly and Wladimir Klitschko designated UNESCO Champions for Sport". Archived from the original on 11 November 2009. Retrieved 31 August 2019. "Великі Українці - сто великих українців від 19 до 1" (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 29 October 2021. Retrieved 23 November 2020 – via YouTube. Свобода, Радіо (29 May 2008). "У проекті "Великі Українці" на телеканалі "Інтер" переміг князь Ярослав Мудрий". Радіо Свобода (in Ukrainian). Retrieved 23 November 2020. "Ярослав Мудрий, Микола Амосов, Степан Бандера - ВЕЛИКІ УКРАЇНЦІ". zaxid.net (in Ukrainian). 17 May 2008. Retrieved 23 November 2020. ""Великі Українці": Ярослав Мудрий обійшов Бандеру". unian.ua (in Ukrainian). Retrieved 23 November 2020. Linder, Leo G. (2013). Die Klitschkos. Germany: Neues Leben, Verlag (published 1 December 2013). ISBN 978-33-550-1817-3. "Witali Klitschko in Kiew geehrt" (in German). Retrieved 31 October 2020. "Бой Кличко – Вах в России посмотрели 400 тысяч человек" (in Russian). 11 July 2022. Retrieved 13 January 2023. "ТОП-100 журнала Корреспондент. Полный список самых влиятельных украинцев" (in Russian). Retrieved 9 November 2020. "ТОП-100 журнала Корреспондент. Полный список самых влиятельных людей Украины" (in Russian). Retrieved 12 November 2020. "ТОП-100 журнала Корреспондент. Полный список самых влиятельных людей Украины" (in Russian). Retrieved 9 November 2020. "Forbes назвал Владимира Кличко самым дорогим и популярным украинцем". capital.ua (in Russian). 24 December 2015. Retrieved 3 November 2020. "ТОП-10 самых дорогих и самых популярных звезд Украины". segodnya.ua (in Russian). Retrieved 3 November 2020. "Forbes назвал самых успешных звезд украинского шоу-бизнеса". korrespondent.net (in Russian). Retrieved 3 November 2020. "Рейтинг звезд 2013 - Forbes.ua". korrespondent.net (in Russian). Retrieved 3 November 2020. "Указ Президента України Про відзначення державними нагородами України з нагоди Дня незалежності України" (in Ukrainian). Verkhovna Rada. Retrieved 1 December 2020. "Boxing: How the Klitschkos came to rule German fight game". Retrieved 6 November 2020. Kulish, Nicholas (23 February 2008). "In Germany, Boxing Finds Appreciation and a Hub". The New York Times. Retrieved 6 November 2020. ""В Германии братьев Кличко знала каждая бабушка". Истории о раскрутке украинцев для немецкой публики" (in Russian). Archived from the original on 18 August 2020. Retrieved 6 November 2020. "Sven Hannawald ist der beliebteste deutsche Sportler" (in German). Retrieved 7 November 2020. "Кличко в кино: славные парни с железными кулаками" (in Russian). Retrieved 2 November 2020. "Ranking: "Werbemuffel" Günther Jauch ist beliebtestes Testimonial" (in German). Retrieved 17 November 2020. "Klopp: Der Aufsteiger der Testimonials" (in German). Retrieved 22 November 2020. "Markenwert steigern mit prominenten Testimonials" (in German). Retrieved 22 November 2020. "Angela Merkel outshines all VIPs" (in German). Retrieved 22 November 2020. "Schumacher voted German's sportsman of the century". Pitpass. 20 November 2004. Retrieved 27 February 2021. "6.11 million viewers watched the Athlete of the Century show by ZDF" (in German). 22 November 2004. Retrieved 23 April 2021. "Über 12 Mio. Zuschauer: Klitschko schlägt alle" (in German). Retrieved 6 November 2020. "Wladimir Klitschko besser als Michael Schumacher" (in German). Retrieved 6 November 2020. "Marktanteile im März: Boxen und Formel 1 beflügeln RTL" (in German). Retrieved 6 November 2020. Depaolo, Joe (22 April 2015). "Wladimir Klitschko Seeks Recognition of Himself and Ukraine". The New York Times. Retrieved 23 September 2023. "Wladimir Klitschko is on a roll and don't expect Thompson to stop him". Retrieved 23 September 2023. "Wladimir Klitschko announces retirement from boxing". Retrieved 23 September 2023. "Klitschkos K.O.-Sieg: Wo sind die Gegner?" (in German). Retrieved 23 September 2023. "Wladimir Klitschko vollzieht die Prugelstrafe" (in German). Retrieved 23 September 2023. "Der "Stahlhammer" hat wieder zugeschlagen" (in German). Retrieved 23 September 2023. "No longer a doubt: Boxing has its legitimate heavyweight champion". Retrieved 23 September 2023. "No longer a doubt: Boxing has its legitimate heavyweight champion" (in German). Retrieved 23 September 2023. "From Rumble in the Jungle to Cardiff, the biggest attendances in boxing history". ESPN. Retrieved 16 June 2020. "Klitschko verteidigt Titel gegen "Fast Eddie"" (in German). Retrieved 23 September 2023. "Engtanzparty mit klar verteilten Rollen" (in German). Retrieved 23 September 2023. "Anthony Joshua stops Wladimir Klitschko in the 11th round at Wembley". Retrieved 23 September 2023. "Most Opponents Beaten for World Heavyweight Title". Retrieved 28 November 2020. "Longest Combined World Heavyweight Title Reigns". Retrieved 28 November 2020. "Most Opponents Beaten for World Heavyweight Title – Era Of International Expansion (1949–present)". Retrieved 28 November 2020. "Most Wins in World Heavyweight Title Fights – Era Of International Expansion (1949–present)". Retrieved 28 November 2020. "WLADIMIR KLITSCHKO AND THE WORLD TITLE BOUT, TITLE-REIGN KINGS". The Ring. 25 April 2017. Retrieved 13 May 2020. "BoxRec ratings: Europe, lb for lb, active and inactive". BoxRec. Retrieved 14 August 2022. "Bout: Klitschko vs Shaheed". Retrieved 11 December 2020. "Bout: Klitschko vs Vujicic". Retrieved 11 December 2020. "Bout: Klitschko vs Castillo". Retrieved 11 December 2020. "Bout: Klitschko vs Peter". Retrieved 11 December 2020. "Bout: Klitschko vs Brock". Retrieved 11 December 2020. "Bout: Klitschko vs Ibragimov". Retrieved 11 December 2020. "Bout: Klitschko vs Chagaev". Retrieved 11 December 2020. "Bout: Bout: Klitschko vs Wach". Retrieved 11 December 2020. "Bout: Klitschko vs Pianeta". Retrieved 11 December 2020. "Bout: Klitschko vs Povetkin". Retrieved 11 December 2020. "Bout: Klitschko vs Pulev". Retrieved 11 December 2020. "Bout: Klitschko vs Jennings". Retrieved 11 December 2020. "It's the right time to appreciate Wladimir Klitschko's all-time great career". ESPN. 15 August 2017. Venice Biennale: The 'Olympic Games of the art world'. Edition.cnn.com (9 June 2009). Retrieved 19 June 2011. "CAS Change & Innovation Management | Executive School HSG". www.es.unisg.ch. Retrieved 7 November 2021. Eisinger, Amy (5 January 2010). "Hayden Panettiere Gets Cozy with Boxing Champ Wladimir Klitschko in Miami". New York: nydailynews.comcom. "Hayden Panettiere opens up about beau Wladimir Klitschko". Los Angeles Times. 2 April 2013. Retrieved 2 April 2013. Messer, Lesley (9 October 2013). "Hayden Panettiere Is Engaged!". ABC News. Retrieved 9 October 2013. "Hayden Panettiere and Wladimir Klitschko Welcome Baby Girl". Yahoo!. 13 December 2014. "Hayden Panettiere & Wladimir Klitschko Split After 9 Years!". Retrieved 4 August 2018. Shenton, Zoe (4 August 2018). "Hayden Panettiere and Wladimir Klitschko 'split' as she's seen with mystery man". mirror. Retrieved 4 August 2018. Panettiere on Euromaidan: I have a lot of respect for people who come out for what they believe in, Interfax-Ukraine (6 December 2013) Why do Ukraine protests matter?, BBC News (3 December 2013) Activists pitching army tents at Independence Square in Kyiv, Interfax-Ukraine (3 December 2013) (in Russian) Владимир Кличко и Хайден Панеттьери на Евромайдане: видео Wladimir Klitschko and Hayden Panettiere on Euromaidan: video, LIGA.net, 7 December 2013. Gary Morley and Matt Vigil (8 April 2015). "Wladimir Klitschko: Iron Curtain no barrier for 'Dr. Steelhammer'". CNN. Retrieved 4 January 2017. "Five facts about boxer Wladimir Klitschko". BBC Sport. 3 August 2017. Retrieved 10 August 2017. "Klitschko v Fury: Has Wladimir really killed heavyweight boxing?". BBC Sport. BBC. 23 November 2015. Retrieved 10 August 2017. Ruslan Chikov (29 March 2012). W. Klitschko's Gold Medal Grabs $1 Million at Charity Event, Boxingscene.com. Retrieved 8 July 2012. Boxer Klitschko auctions gold medal for $1 million. Retrieved 28 December 2014. (in Ukrainian) The younger Klitschko joined Kyiv's defense, Ukrayinska Pravda (2 February 2022) "Klitschko brothers to take up arms and fight for Ukraine". Reuters. 24 February 2022. Retrieved 24 February 2022. "HOF boxers Klitschko brothers to fight for Ukraine". ESPN. 24 February 2022. Retrieved 25 February 2022. "«Росія руйнує життя мільйонів людей»: інтерв'ю із Віталієм і Володимиром Кличками" (in Ukrainian). Radio Svoboda. 22 February 2023. Retrieved 12 April 2023. "Vitali Klitschko: the heavyweight on Putin's hitlist". The Times. 22 February 2023. Retrieved 12 April 2023. "Klitschko-Brüder sammeln in Deutschland 100 Millionen Euro für Spenden an die Ukraine". RedaktionsNetzwerk Deutschland. 10 March 2022. Retrieved 26 August 2023. "Wladimir Klitschko Profile - East Side Boxing". Retrieved 16 May 2020. "Die Schwergewichtsboxer Vitali und Wladimir Klitschko über Hiebe, Geld und den Showdown in Las Vegas" (in German). Archived from the original on 31 October 2020. Retrieved 16 May 2020. "Vitali Klitschko vs. Chris Byrd generates 9,79 million viewers, breaking the station's record held by Wladimir" (in German). 3 April 2000. Retrieved 16 May 2020. "Wladimir Klitschko is the new world champion" (in German). 15 October 2000. Retrieved 16 May 2020. "Boxen kehrt nach neun Jahren ins ZDF zurück" (in German). Retrieved 16 May 2020. "Fast acht Millionen Zuschauer sahen Klitschkos K.o.-Sieg live im ZDF". Retrieved 2 November 2020. "Boxen live im Zweiten ZDF-Pressemitteilung" (in German). Retrieved 22 September 2022. "ТВ-популярность видов спорта. Итоги-2011" (in Russian). Retrieved 19 November 2022. "Bis zu 8,90 Millionen Zuschauer sahen Sieg von Wladimir Klitschko im Ersten/ Im Durchschnitt verfolgten 6,44 Millionen Zuschauer (Marktanteil 30,7%) seinen Kampf gegen Eliseo Castillo". 24 April 2005. Retrieved 17 September 2023. "A Light In The Darkness: Boxing Ratings". Sports Business Journal. 10 October 2005. Retrieved 15 May 2022. "More than 10 million viewers saw Klitschko fight" (in German). Retrieved 16 May 2020. "Maske wird Quotenkönig" (in German). Retrieved 16 May 2020. "Almost 13 million viewers: Klitschko fight draws biggest numbers than Axel Schulz return" (in German). 11 March 2007. Retrieved 16 May 2020. "More than 11 million viewers saw Klitschko's win" (in German). Retrieved 16 May 2020. "Around 12,33 million viewers saw Vitali Klitschko fight Kevin Johnson" (in German). Retrieved 16 May 2020. "Популярность спорта на ТВ. Итоги года" (in Russian). Retrieved 14 October 2022. "Klitschko erboxt hohe Quoten in der Nacht" (in German). Retrieved 17 September 2023. Harms, Carsten (13 July 2008). "Klitschko kann trotz K.o.-Siegs nicht überzeugen". Die Welt (in German). Retrieved 16 May 2020. "Вадим Бухкалов: "Зрители аплодировали Кличко минут сорок"" (in Russian). Retrieved 15 March 2021. "Nur Boxen lockt Zuschauer". Hamburger Abendblatt. 15 December 2008. Retrieved 10 September 2022. "Бой Кличко увидели около шести миллионов украинцев". Korrespondent. 16 December 2008. Retrieved 19 November 2022. "Бой Кличко увидели около 6 миллионов украинцев". news.liga.net. 16 December 2008. Retrieved 19 November 2022. "Bundesliga, Boxen und Wintersport bringen klaren Tagessieg" (in German). 21 June 2009. Retrieved 7 April 2023. "Weekly top 10 programmes on TV sets (July 1998 – Sept 2018): from June 15 to June 21, 2009". Retrieved 23 July 2023. "Плакат боя Владимир Кличко - Эдди Чемберс". klitschko-brothers.com. Retrieved 22 March 2020. "How the Klitschkos came to rule German fight game". The Independent. 22 October 2011. Retrieved 16 May 2020. "Klitschko-Chambers draws the best numbers for German TV since Euro 2008" (in German). Archived from the original on 1 March 2020. Retrieved 16 May 2020. "Klitschko demolishes Samuel Peter: "Next, please!"" (in German). Retrieved 16 May 2020. "Weekly top 10 programmes on TV sets (July 1998 – Sept 2018): from September 6 to September 12, 2010". Retrieved 23 July 2023. "Top-notch ratings for boxing" (in German). Archived from the original on 11 September 2012. Retrieved 16 May 2020. "Karriereende – RTL verabschiedet Quoten-König Klitschko" (in German). 3 August 2017. Archived from the original on 26 November 2020. Retrieved 7 December 2020. "Walka Kliczko - Haye: 3,3 mln widzów w Polsce" (in Polish). Retrieved 10 September 2023. "3,5 miliona widzów Kliczko - Haye w Polsce" (in Polish). 4 July 2011. Retrieved 10 September 2023. "Rekordot döntött a Klicsko-meccsel a Duna TV" (in Hungarian). Retrieved 19 April 2023. "Duna tévés nézettségi csúcsot hozott Klicsko és Haye meccse" (in Hungarian). 4 July 2011. Retrieved 12 May 2023. "Tony Thompson Eager to Rematch Wladimir Klitschko, Not Impressed By Mormeck Fight". 5 March 2012. Retrieved 23 March 2021. "Бій Кличка з Мормеком подивилося понад 9 мільйонів українців" (in Ukrainian). 10 March 2012. Retrieved 21 January 2023. "Klitschko's win generates 41,5% market share" (in German). 8 July 2012. Retrieved 16 May 2020. "11,77 Millionen sehen Klitschko und das "Rätsel Wach"" (in German). 11 November 2012. Retrieved 22 January 2023. "Vladimir Klicsko kéri a következőt: újabb nagy ember jöhet?" (in Hungarian). 12 November 2012. Retrieved 12 May 2023. "Klicsko nézettségben is nagyot ütött" (in Hungarian). Retrieved 12 May 2023. "Félmillió magyar tévéző nézett bele a Klicsko-meccsbe" (in Hungarian). 12 November 2012. Retrieved 12 May 2023. "Klitschko büßt über drei Millionen Zuschauer ein" (in German). Retrieved 7 December 2020. "Klitschko vs. Povetkin: TV audience in Ukraine, Russia and Germany" (in Russian). Archived from the original on 1 March 2020. Retrieved 16 May 2020. "TV numbers: Klitschko easily defeats Markus Lanz" (in German). 6 October 2013. Retrieved 16 May 2020. "290.000 beim Boxen auf RTL, 556.000 für "Wetten, dass..?" im ORF" (in German). Retrieved 9 July 2023. "Talent v neděli porazil ČT 1, na Doktory z Počátků ale nestačil. I sobotu vyhrála Nova" (in Czech). Retrieved 10 July 2021. "Klitschko-Leapai does 9 million viewers on German RTL network". Retrieved 16 May 2020. "Kampf der Superlative: Klitschko vs. Joshua" (in German). Retrieved 16 May 2020. "Поединок Кличко-Фьюри на "Интере" посмотрели почти 10 млн. человек" (in Russian). Retrieved 28 October 2020. "Joshua-Klitschko pulled in 659,000 viewers on Showtime, exceeded 10 million in Germany". May 2017. Retrieved 16 May 2020. "Бой Кличко на "Интере" стал самым рейтинговым спортивным событием года. Что будет дальше?". Телеканал "Интер" (in Russian). Inter. 3 May 2017. Archived from the original on 24 April 2018. Retrieved 10 January 2020. "2000-10-14 Wladimir Klitschko vs Chris Byrd I". 5 November 2012. Retrieved 1 November 2020. "Klitschko Excited To Have Chambers Fight on Web PPV". 25 February 2010. Retrieved 11 September 2022. "Klitschko-Chambers: Virgin On Demand To Carry PPV". 18 March 2010. Retrieved 2 March 2021. Klitschko VS HAYE REPRODUCTION BOXING PROMO PHOTO Poster 40 x 30 cm "Weekly viewing summary (Sky Box Office Events buys between 13-19 June 2011)". Broadcasters' Audience Research Board. Retrieved 19 August 2023. "Weekly viewing summary (Sky Box Office Events buys between 20-26 June 2011)". Broadcasters' Audience Research Board. Retrieved 8 September 2019. "Weekly viewing summary (Sky Box Office Events buys between 27 June-3 July 2011)". Broadcasters' Audience Research Board. Retrieved 8 September 2019. "Wladimir Klitschko v Alex Leapai: Title Fight Preview". 24 April 2014. Retrieved 30 November 2020. "Boxing: Leapai no match for Klitschko; Browne wins Commonwealth title". 27 April 2014. Retrieved 30 November 2020. "Klitschko vs Leapai". Retrieved 30 November 2020. "Klitschko vs Leapai: Live streaming results and round-by-round coverage". 26 April 2014. Retrieved 30 November 2020. "Parker set for Klitschko undercard fight". Retrieved 30 November 2020. "Joseph Parker on Klitschko v Leapai undercard". Retrieved 30 November 2020. "Weekly viewing summary (Sky Box Office Events buys between 23-29 November 2015)". Broadcasters' Audience Research Board. Retrieved 4 May 2018. Jay, Phil (5 January 2020). "Joshua vs Klitschko UK PPV record". World Boxing News. Retrieved 10 January 2020. "Here's how much Anthony Joshua made for his stunning Wembley showpiece". Joe. 30 April 2017. Retrieved 14 September 2018. "Sky Box Office Events: buyrates between April, 24 and April 30, 2017" McKenna, Chris (31 March 2018). "Anthony Joshua to receive stunning record purse for Joseph Parker fight". Daily Express. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Volodymyr Klychko. Official website Wladimir Klitschko at BoxRec (registration required) Wladimir Klitschko at Olympedia CBZ Profile ESPN.com Wladimir Klitschko at IMDb  Real Stories: Vitali and Wladimir Klitschko at Grantland Portals:  Martial arts  Olympic Games  Ukraine