Mickey Mouse is an American cartoon character co-created in 1928 by Walt Disney and Ub Iwerks. The longtime icon and mascot of The Walt Disney Company, Mickey is an anthropomorphic mouse who typically wears red shorts, large yellow shoes, and white gloves. Inspired by such silent film personalities as Charlie Chaplin and Douglas Fairbanks, Mickey is traditionally characterized as a sympathetic underdog who gets by on pluck and ingenuity in the face of challenges bigger than himself. The character's depiction as a small mouse is personified through his diminutive stature and falsetto voice, the latter of which was originally provided by Disney. Mickey is one of the world's most recognizable and universally acclaimed fictional characters. Created as a replacement for a prior Disney character, Oswald the Lucky Rabbit, Mickey first appeared in the 1928 short Plane Crazy, which was not originally picked up for distribution; his public debut was in the same year's Steamboat Willie. The character was originally to be named "Mortimer Mouse", until Lillian Disney instead suggested "Mickey" during a train ride. The character went on to appear in over 130 films, including The Band Concert (1935), Brave Little Tailor (1938), and Fantasia (1940). Mickey appeared primarily in short films, but also occasionally in feature-length films. Ten of Mickey's cartoons were nominated for the Academy Award for Best Animated Short Film, one of which, Lend a Paw, won the award in 1941. In 1978, Mickey became the first cartoon character to have a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. Beginning in 1930, Mickey has also been featured extensively in comic strips and comic books. The Mickey Mouse comic strip, drawn primarily by Floyd Gottfredson, ran for 45 years. Mickey has also appeared in comic books such as Mickey Mouse, Disney Italy's Topolino and MM – Mickey Mouse Mystery Magazine, and Wizards of Mickey. Mickey also features in television series such as The Mickey Mouse Club (1955–1996) and others. He appears in other media such as video games as well as merchandising and is a meetable character at the Disney parks. Mickey generally appears alongside his girlfriend Minnie Mouse, his pet dog Pluto, his friends Donald Duck, Daisy Duck and Goofy, and his nemesis Pete, among others. Though originally characterized as a cheeky lovable rogue, Mickey was rebranded over time as a nice guy, usually seen as a spirited, yet impulsive hero. Mickey Mouse was created as a replacement for Oswald the Lucky Rabbit, an earlier cartoon character that was created by the Disney studio but owned at the time by Universal Pictures. Charles Mintz served as a middleman producer between Disney and Universal through his company, Winkler Pictures, for the series of cartoons starring Oswald. Ongoing conflicts between Disney and Mintz and the revelation that several animators from the Disney studio would eventually leave to work for Mintz's company ultimately resulted in Disney cutting ties with Oswald. Among the few people who stayed at the Disney studio were animator Ub Iwerks, apprentice artist Les Clark, and Wilfred Jackson. On his train ride home from New York, Walt brainstormed ideas for a new cartoon character. Mickey Mouse was conceived in secret while Disney produced the final Oswald cartoons he contractually owed Mintz. Disney asked Ub Iwerks to start drawing up new character ideas. Iwerks tried sketches of various animals, such as dogs and cats, but none of these appealed to Disney. A female cow and male horse were also rejected. (They would later turn up as Clarabelle Cow and Horace Horsecollar.) A male frog was also rejected, which later showed up in Iwerks' own Flip the Frog series. Walt Disney got the inspiration for Mickey Mouse from a tame mouse at his desk at Laugh-O-Gram Studio in Kansas City, Missouri. In 1925, Hugh Harman drew some sketches of mice around a photograph of Walt Disney. These inspired Ub Iwerks to create a new mouse character for Disney. "Mortimer Mouse" had been Disney's original name for the character before his wife, Lillian, convinced him to change it. Actor Mickey Rooney claimed that during his time performing as the title character of the Mickey McGuire film series (1927–1934), he met Walt Disney at the Warner Bros. studio, inspiring Disney to name the character after him. Disney historian Jim Korkis argues that Rooney's story is fictional, as Disney Studios was located on Hyperion Avenue at the time of Mickey Mouse's development, with Disney conducting no business at Warner Bros. Over the years, the name 'Mortimer Mouse' was eventually given to several different characters in the Mickey Mouse universe: Minnie Mouse's uncle, who appears in several comics stories, one of Mickey's antagonists who competes for Minnie's affections in various cartoons and comics, and one of Mickey's nephews, named Morty. Mickey was first seen in a test screening of the cartoon short Plane Crazy, on May 15, 1928, but it failed to impress the audience and Walt could not find a distributor for it. Walt went on to produce a second Mickey short, The Gallopin' Gaucho, which was also not released for lack of a distributor. Steamboat Willie was first released on November 18, 1928, in New York. It was co-directed by Walt Disney and Ub Iwerks. Iwerks again served as the head animator, assisted by Les Clark, Johnny Cannon, Wilfred Jackson and Dick Lundy.[citation needed] This short was a nod to Buster Keaton's Steamboat Bill, Jr., released earlier that year. Although it was the third Mickey cartoon produced, it was the first to find a distributor, and thus is considered by The Disney Company as Mickey's debut. It also featured some design refinements, and included the use of a bouncing ball on the film print to allow conductors and musicians to match the tempo of their music with the film. The cartoon was not the first cartoon to feature a soundtrack connected to the action. Fleischer Studios, headed by brothers Dave and Max Fleischer, had already released a number of sound cartoons using the DeForest system in the mid-1920s. However, these cartoons did not keep the sound synchronized throughout the film. For Willie, Disney had the sound recorded with a click track that kept the musicians on the beat. This precise timing is apparent during the "Turkey in the Straw" sequence when Mickey's actions exactly match the accompanying instruments. Animation historians have long debated who had served as the composer for the film's original music. This role has been variously attributed to Wilfred Jackson, Carl Stalling and Bert Lewis, but identification remains uncertain. Walt Disney himself was voice actor for both Mickey and Minnie and would remain the source of Mickey's voice through 1946 for theatrical cartoons. Jimmy MacDonald took over the role in 1946, but Walt provided Mickey's voice again from 1955 to 1959 for The Mickey Mouse Club television series on ABC.[citation needed] Audiences at the time of Steamboat Willie's release were reportedly impressed by the use of sound for comedic purposes. Sound films or "talkies" were still considered innovative. The first feature-length movie with dialogue sequences, The Jazz Singer starring Al Jolson, was released on October 6, 1927. Within a year of its success, most United States movie theaters had installed sound film equipment. Walt Disney apparently intended to take advantage of this new trend and, arguably, managed to succeed. Most other cartoon studios were still producing silent products and so were unable to effectively act as competition to Disney. As a result, Mickey would soon become the most prominent animated character of the time. Walt Disney soon worked on adding sound to both Plane Crazy and The Gallopin' Gaucho (which had originally been silent releases) and their new release added to Mickey's success and popularity. A fourth Mickey short, The Barn Dance, was also put into production; however, Mickey does not actually speak until The Karnival Kid in 1929 (see below). After Steamboat Willie was released, Mickey became a close competitor to Felix the Cat, and his popularity would grow as he was continuously featured in sound cartoons. By 1929, Felix would lose popularity among theater audiences, and Pat Sullivan decided to produce all future Felix cartoons in sound as a result. Audiences did not respond well to Felix's transition to sound and by 1930, Felix had faded from the screen. In Mickey's early films he was often characterized not as a hero, but as an ineffective young suitor to Minnie Mouse. The Barn Dance (March 14, 1929) is the first time in which Mickey is turned down by Minnie in favor of Pete. The Opry House (March 28, 1929) was the first time in which Mickey wore his white gloves. Mickey wears them in almost all of his subsequent appearances and many other characters followed suit. The three lines on the back of Mickey's gloves represent darts in the gloves' fabric extending from between the digits of the hand, typical of glove design of the era. When the Cat's Away (April 18, 1929), essentially a remake of the Alice Comedy, "Alice Rattled by Rats", was an unusual appearance for Mickey. Although Mickey and Minnie still maintained their anthropomorphic characteristics, they were depicted as the size of regular mice and living with a community of many other mice as pests in a home. Mickey and Minnie would later appear the size of regular humans in their own setting. In appearances with real humans, Mickey has been shown to be about two to three feet high. The next Mickey short was also unusual. The Barnyard Battle (April 25, 1929) was the only film to depict Mickey as a soldier and also the first to place him in combat. The Karnival Kid (1929) was the first time Mickey spoke. Before this he had only whistled, laughed, and grunted. His first words were "Hot dogs! Hot dogs!" said while trying to sell hot dogs at a carnival. Mickey's Follies (1929) introduced the song "Minnie's Yoo-Hoo" which would become the theme song for Mickey Mouse films for the next several years. The same song sequence was also later reused with different background animation as its own special short shown only at the commencement of 1930s theater-based Mickey Mouse Clubs. Mickey's dog Pluto first appeared as Mickey's pet in The Moose Hunt (1931) after previously appearing as Minnie's dog "Rover" in The Picnic (1930). The Cactus Kid (April 11, 1930) was the last film to be animated by Ub Iwerks at Disney. Shortly before the release of the film, Iwerks left to start his own studio, bankrolled by Disney's then-distributor Pat Powers. Powers and Disney had a falling out over money due Disney from the distribution deal. It was in response to losing the right to distribute Disney's cartoons that Powers made the deal with Iwerks, who had long harbored a desire to head his own studio. The departure is considered a turning point in Mickey's career, as well as that of Walt Disney. Walt lost the man who served as his closest colleague and confidant since 1919. Mickey lost the man responsible for his original design and for the direction or animation of several of the shorts released till this point. Advertising for the early Mickey Mouse cartoons credited them as "A Walt Disney Comic, drawn by Ub Iwerks". Later Disney Company reissues of the early cartoons tend to credit Walt Disney alone. Disney and his remaining staff continued the production of the Mickey series, and he was able to eventually find a number of animators to replace Iwerks. As the Great Depression progressed and Felix the Cat faded from the movie screen, Mickey's popularity would rise, and by 1932 The Mickey Mouse Club would have one million members. At the 5th Academy Awards in 1932, Mickey received his first Academy Award nomination, received for Mickey's Orphans (1931). Walt Disney also received an honorary Academy Award for the creation of Mickey Mouse. Despite being eclipsed by the Silly Symphony short the Three Little Pigs in 1933, Mickey still maintained great popularity among theater audiences too, until 1935, when polls showed that Popeye was more popular than Mickey. By 1934, Mickey merchandise had earned $600,000 a year. In 1935, Disney began to phase out the Mickey Mouse Clubs, due to administration problems. About this time, story artists at Disney were finding it increasingly difficult to write material for Mickey. As he had developed into a role model for children, they were limited in the types of gags they could present. This led to Mickey taking more of a secondary role in some of his next films, allowing for more emphasis on other characters. In Orphan's Benefit (1934), Mickey first appeared with Donald Duck who had been introduced earlier that year in the Silly Symphony series. The tempestuous duck would provide Disney with seemingly endless story ideas and would remain a recurring character in Mickey's cartoons. Mickey first appeared animated in color in Parade of the Award Nominees in 1932; however, the film strip was created for the 5th Academy Awards ceremony and was not released to the public. Mickey's official first color film came in 1935 with The Band Concert. The Technicolor film process was used in the film production. Here Mickey conducted the William Tell Overture, but the band is swept up by a tornado. It is said that conductor Arturo Toscanini so loved this short that, upon first seeing it, he asked the projectionist to run it again. In 1994, The Band Concert was voted the third-greatest cartoon of all time in a poll of animation professionals. By colorizing and partially redesigning Mickey, Walt would put Mickey back on top once again, and Mickey would reach popularity he never reached before as audiences now gave him more appeal. Also in 1935, Walt would receive a special award from the League of Nations for creating Mickey. However, by 1938, the more manic Donald Duck would surpass the passive Mickey, resulting in a redesign of the mouse between 1938 and 1940 that put Mickey at the peak of his popularity. The second half of the 1930s saw the character Goofy reintroduced as a series regular. Together, Mickey, Donald Duck, and Goofy would go on several adventures together. Several of the films by the comic trio are some of Mickey's most critically acclaimed films, including Mickey's Fire Brigade (1935), Moose Hunters (1937), Clock Cleaners (1937), Lonesome Ghosts (1937), Boat Builders (1938), and Mickey's Trailer (1938). Also during this era, Mickey would star in Brave Little Tailor (1938), an adaptation of The Valiant Little Tailor, which was nominated for an Academy Award. Mickey was redesigned by animator Fred Moore, as first seen onscreen in The Pointer (1939). Instead of having solid black eyes, Mickey was given white eyes with pupils, a Caucasian skin colored face, and a pear-shaped body. In the 1940s, he changed once more in The Little Whirlwind, where he used his trademark pants for the last time in decades, lost his tail, and got more realistic ears that changed with perspective and a different body anatomy. However, this change would only last for a short period of time before returning to the design in The Pointer, with the exception of his pants. In his final theatrical cartoons in the 1950s, he was given eyebrows, which were removed in the more recent cartoons. In 1940, Mickey appeared in his first feature-length film, Fantasia. His screen role as The Sorcerer's Apprentice, set to the symphonic poem of the same name by Paul Dukas, is perhaps the most famous segment of the film and one of Mickey's most iconic roles. The apprentice (Mickey), not willing to do his chores, puts on the sorcerer's magic hat after the sorcerer goes to bed and casts a spell on a broom, which causes the broom to come to life and perform the most tiring chore—filling up a deep well using two buckets of water. When the well eventually overflows, Mickey finds himself unable to control the broom, leading to a near-flood. After the segment ends, Mickey is seen in silhouette shaking hands with Leopold Stokowski, who conducts all the music heard in Fantasia. Mickey has often been pictured in the red robe and blue sorcerer's hat in merchandising. It was also featured into the climax of Fantasmic!, an attraction at the Disney theme parks. After 1940, Mickey's popularity would decline until his 1955 re-emergence as a daily children's television personality. Despite this, the character continued to appear regularly in animated shorts until 1943 (winning his only competitive Academy Award—with canine companion Pluto—for a short subject, Lend a Paw) and again from 1946 to 1952. In these later cartoons, Mickey was often just a supporting character in his own shorts, where Pluto would be the main character. The last regular installment of the Mickey Mouse film series came in 1953 with The Simple Things in which Mickey and Pluto go fishing and are pestered by a flock of seagulls. In the 1950s, Mickey became more known for his appearances on television, particularly with The Mickey Mouse Club. Many of his theatrical cartoon shorts were rereleased on television series such as Ink & Paint Club, various forms of the Walt Disney anthology television series, and on home video. Mickey returned to theatrical animation in 1983 with Mickey's Christmas Carol, an adaptation of Charles Dickens' A Christmas Carol in which Mickey played Bob Cratchit. This was followed up in 1990 with The Prince and the Pauper. Throughout the decades, Mickey Mouse competed with Warner Bros.' Bugs Bunny for animated popularity. But in 1988, the two rivals finally shared screen time in the Robert Zemeckis Disney/Amblin film Who Framed Roger Rabbit. Disney and Warner signed an agreement stating that each character had the same amount of screen time in the scene. Similar to his animated inclusion into a live-action film in Roger Rabbit, Mickey made a featured cameo appearance in the 1990 television special The Muppets at Walt Disney World where he met Kermit the Frog. The two are established in the story as having been old friends, although they have not made any other appearance together outside of this. His most recent theatrical cartoon short was 2013's Get a Horse! which was preceded by 1995's Runaway Brain, while from 1999 to 2004, he appeared in direct-to-video features like Mickey's Once Upon a Christmas, Mickey, Donald, Goofy: The Three Musketeers and the computer-animated Mickey's Twice Upon a Christmas. Many television series have centered on Mickey, such as the ABC shows Mickey Mouse Works (1999–2000), House of Mouse (2001–2003), Disney Channel's Mickey Mouse Clubhouse (2006–2016), Mickey Mouse Mixed-Up Adventures (2017–2021) and Mickey Mouse Funhouse (2021–present). Prior to all these, Mickey was also featured as an unseen character in the Bonkers episode "You Oughta Be In Toons". In 2013, Disney Channel started airing new 3-minute Mickey Mouse shorts, with animator Paul Rudish at the helm, incorporating elements of Mickey's late twenties-early thirties look with a contemporary twist. On November 10, 2020, the series was revived as The Wonderful World of Mickey Mouse and premiered on Disney+. , Furthermore, The creative team behind the 2017 DuckTales reboot had hoped to have Mickey Mouse in the series, but this idea was rejected by Disney executives. However, a watermelon bearing Mickey's physical likeness appears in one episode as a ventriloquist dummy companion to Donald Duck. In August 2018, ABC television announced a two-hour prime time special, Mickey's 90th Spectacular, in honor of Mickey's 90th birthday. The program featured never-before-seen short videos and several other celebrities who wanted to share their memories about Mickey Mouse and performed some of the Disney songs to impress Mickey. The show took place at the Shrine Auditorium in Los Angeles and was produced and directed by Don Mischer on November 4, 2018. On November 18, 2018, a 90th anniversary event for the character was celebrated around the world. In December 2019, both Mickey and Minnie served as special co-hosts of Wheel of Fortune for two weeks while Vanna White served as the main host during Pat Sajak's absence. Mickey is the subject of the 2022 documentary film Mickey: The Story of a Mouse, directed by Jeff Malmberg. Premiering at the South by Southwest film festival prior to its premiere on the Disney+ streaming service, the documentary examines the history and cultural impact of Mickey Mouse. The feature is accompanied by an original, hand-drawn animated short film starring Mickey titled Mickey in a Minute. Mickey appeared in Walt Disney Animation Studios' centennial short film, Once Upon a Studio, in which he corrals the characters of Disney's animated features to take a group picture. Mickey first appeared in comics after he had appeared in 15 commercially successful animated shorts and was easily recognized by the public. Walt Disney was approached by King Features Syndicate with the offer to license Mickey and his supporting characters for use in a comic strip. Disney accepted and Mickey Mouse made its first appearance on January 13, 1930. The comical plot was credited to Disney himself, art to Ub Iwerks and inking to Win Smith. The first week or so of the strip featured a loose adaptation of Plane Crazy. Minnie soon became the first addition to the cast. The strips first released between January 13, 1930, and March 31, 1930, have been occasionally reprinted in comic book form under the collective title Lost on a Desert Island. Animation historian Jim Korkis notes, "After the eighteenth strip, Iwerks left and his inker, Win Smith, continued drawing the gag-a-day format." In early 1930, after Iwerks' departure, Disney was at first content to continue scripting the Mickey Mouse comic strip, assigning the art to Win Smith. However, Disney's focus had always been in animation and Smith was soon assigned with the scripting as well. Smith was apparently discontent at the prospect of having to script, draw, and ink a series by himself as evidenced by his sudden resignation. Disney then searched for a replacement among the remaining staff of the Studio. He selected Floyd Gottfredson, a recently hired employee. At the time Gottfredson was reportedly eager to work in animation and somewhat reluctant to accept his new assignment. Disney had to assure him the assignment was only temporary and that he would eventually return to animation. Gottfredson accepted and ended up holding this "temporary" assignment from May 5, 1930, to November 15, 1975. Walt Disney's last script for the strip appeared May 17, 1930. Gottfredson's first task was to finish the storyline Disney had started on April 1, 1930. The storyline was completed on September 20, 1930, and later reprinted in comic book form as Mickey Mouse in Death Valley. This early adventure expanded the cast of the strip which to this point only included Mickey and Minnie. Among the characters who had their first comic strip appearances in this story were Clarabelle Cow, Horace Horsecollar, and Black Pete as well as the debuts of corrupted lawyer Sylvester Shyster and Minnie's uncle Mortimer Mouse. The Death Valley narrative was followed by Mr. Slicker and the Egg Robbers, first printed between September 22 and December 26, 1930, which introduced Marcus Mouse and his wife as Minnie's parents. Starting with these two early comic strip stories, Mickey's versions in animation and comics are considered to have diverged from each other. While Disney and his cartoon shorts would continue to focus on comedy, the comic strip effectively combined comedy and adventure. This adventurous version of Mickey would continue to appear in comic strips and later comic books throughout the 20th and into the 21st century. Floyd Gottfredson left his mark with stories such as Mickey Mouse Joins the Foreign Legion (1936) and The Gleam (1942). He also created the Phantom Blot, Eega Beeva, Morty and Ferdie, Captain Churchmouse, and Butch. Besides Gottfredson artists for the strip over the years included Roman Arambula, Rick Hoover, Manuel Gonzales, Carson Van Osten, Jim Engel, Bill Wright, Ted Thwailes and Daan Jippes; writers included Ted Osborne, Merrill De Maris, Bill Walsh, Dick Shaw, Roy Williams, Del Connell, and Floyd Norman. The next artist to leave his mark on the character was Paul Murry in Dell Comics. His first Mickey tale appeared in 1950 but Mickey did not become a specialty until Murry's first serial for Walt Disney's Comics and Stories in 1953 ("The Last Resort"). In the same period, Romano Scarpa in Italy for the magazine Topolino began to revitalize Mickey in stories that brought back the Phantom Blot and Eega Beeva along with new creations such as the Atomo Bleep-Bleep. While the stories at Western Publishing during the Silver Age emphasized Mickey as a detective in the style of Sherlock Holmes, in the modern era several editors and creators have consciously undertaken to depict a more vigorous Mickey in the mold of the classic Gottfredson adventures. This renaissance has been spearheaded by Byron Erickson, David Gerstein, Noel Van Horn, Michael T. Gilbert and César Ferioli. In Europe, Mickey Mouse became the main attraction of a number of comics magazines, the most famous being Topolino in Italy from 1932 onward, Le Journal de Mickey in France from 1934 onward, Don Miki in Spain and the Greek Miky Maous. Mickey was the main character for the series MM Mickey Mouse Mystery Magazine, published in Italy from 1999 to 2001. In 2006, he appeared in the Italian fantasy comic saga Wizards of Mickey. In 1958, Mickey Mouse was introduced to the Arab world through another comic book called "Sameer". He became very popular in Egypt and got a comic book with his name. Mickey's comics in Egypt are licensed by Disney and were published since 1959 by "Dar Al-Hilal" and they were successful, however Dar Al-Hilal stopped the publication in 2003 because of problems with Disney. The comics were re-released by "Nahdat Masr" in 2004 and the first issues were sold out in less than 8 hours. Mickey is traditionally characterized as a sympathetic underdog who gets by on pluck and ingenuity in the face of challenges much bigger than himself. As a mouse, an inherently vulnerable creature, Mickey is often depicted as having minimal resources and attributes at his disposal. Consequently, he must rely on sheer wit to overcome obstacles. The character is frequently pitted against larger-than-life villains to accentuate this idea; namely the hulking cat Pegleg Pete, and numerous one-shot antagonists such as the giants of Giantland (1933) and Brave Little Tailor (1938), the king of cards in Thru the Mirror (1936) and Mortimer Mouse in Mickey's Rival (1936). These adversaries were decidedly portrayed as overbearing figures of authority, thusly painting Mickey as a rebellious hero. When not facing an opponent, Mickey is oft placed in situations where his pursuits of grandeur or simple accomplishment lead to disastrous results, typically at the hands of his own impulsivity, as was the case in The Sorcerer's Apprentice (1940) among others. Mickey is not portrayed as a hero in the traditional sense, instead acting as a subversion of the stock archetype. He often fumbles his way through adventures; his small size and misplaced optimism serving as his dominating flaws. His manner of problem-solving is generally unorthodox to comedic effect; in Ye Olden Days (1933), Mickey's jousting horse was an infantile mule. In Shanghaied (1934), Mickey battled with a broadbill in place of a sword. The underdog nature of Mickey's character has been interpreted by historians as a symbolic reflection of Walt Disney's early struggles as a farm boy breaking into the imposing Hollywood industry in the 1920s. It has also been perceived as an allegory for the Great Depression in the United States, with Mickey's unrelenting optimism symbolizing the "American endurance to survive" in the face of economic woes. Charlie Chaplin, known by audiences of the time for his role as the "Little Tramp", was identified by Disney as a source of inspiration for the Mickey character. Disney himself was a noted admirer of Chaplin's work, ascribing his development as a storytelling to the actor. In The American Magazine for March 1931, Disney explained, "I think we were rather indebted to Charlie Chaplin for the idea [of Mickey Mouse]. We wanted something appealing and we thought of a tiny bit of a mouse that would have something of the wistfulness of Chaplin ... a little fellow trying to do the best he could." American journalist Alva Johnston noted the similarities between the two figures, stating, "Chaplin was a kind of godfather to Mickey Mouse. It is now and always has been the aim of Disney to graft the psychology of Chaplin upon Mickey. The two universal characters have something in common in their approach to their problems. They have the same blend of hero and coward, nitwit and genius, mug and gentleman." Besides Chaplin, other notable figures of the silent era have been credited to Mickey's characterization. Chief among them was Douglas Fairbanks, whose swashbuckling screen adventures would inspire Mickey's animated epics. Ub Iwerks wrote in 1970, "He was the super-hero of his day, always winning, gallant and swashbuckling. Mickey's action was in that vein. He was never intended to be a sissy, he was always an adventurous character. I thought of him in that respect, and I had him do naturally the sort of thing Doug Fairbanks would do." Disney was also noted to have been influenced by Fairbanks, along with other screen personalities including Harold Lloyd and Fred Astaire. An adaptive character, Mickey's personality lends itself to function within a multitude of situations, while retaining core elements of its design. He is not bound to a particular formula or motif, and as such, has been portrayed in a variety of settings and occupational roles. His film series, meanwhile, spans numerous genres besides the traditional musical comedy; The Mad Doctor (1933) and Runaway Brain (1995) parody the horror genre, whereas stories such as Mickey's Good Deed (1932) and The Prince and the Pauper (1990) are largely dramatic works. This versatility is said to have attributed to Mickey's popularity with audiences. As expressed by writer Chelsea Tatham, "From his beginnings, Mickey was able to appeal to a wide audience. He catered to neither the 'highbrow' nor the 'hick,' but the ordinary intelligent picturegoer." There are a number of catchphrases and colloquialisms associated with the character. Mickey's first spoken words, "Hot dog!" from The Karnival Kid (1929), has endured as a recurring phrase for the character, made especially recognizable to modern audiences for its extensive use in the preschool television program Mickey Mouse Clubhouse. Mickey's signature closing line, "See ya real soon!", is derived from the "Mickey Mouse March" reprise from the original 1955 run of The Mickey Mouse Club ("M-I-C; see you real soon!"). Mickey's original design strongly resembled Oswald the Lucky Rabbit, save for the ears, nose, and tail. Ub Iwerks designed Mickey's body out of circles (distinctly, the ears) to make the character easy to animate. Upon his creation, Mickey's features shared similarities to a number of his cartoon predecessors with large eyes and mouth on a black body (e.g. Oswald and Felix the Cat). From early 1929, Mickey wore white gloves (similar to those appearing on later characters, e.g. Bosko and Bimbo). Several sources state that this scheme evolved from blackface caricatures used in minstrel shows. Additionally, Mickey's original black hands could not be seen if they passed in front of his torso. This limitation encouraged animators to base their poses on silhouette, much in the manner of Chaplin films. Mickey's eyes were originally large and white with black outlines, with the tops able to deform like eyebrows. Starting with Steamboat Willie, the bottom portion of the black outlines was removed, often making the pupil placement look strange. The pupils began to be treated as stationary, dotlike eyes, requiring the entire head to be moved to make Mickey look around. In the 1930s, Fred Moore redesigned Mickey with small white pupilled eyes, to which lined eyebrows were later added, with the now-more-vacant facial area being given a light skin tone. Additionally, Moore tried giving Mickey's body more of a pear shape in an animation to increase his acting range. Walt Disney liked the new design and declared, "that's the way I want Mickey to be drawn from now on." Moore maintained that the character should always be drawn from a pleasing angle, ears included. Besides Mickey's gloves and shoes, he typically wears only a pair of shorts with two large buttons in the front. Before Mickey was seen regularly in color animation, Mickey's shorts were either red or a dull blue-green. With the advent of Mickey's color films, the shorts were always red. When Mickey is not wearing his red shorts, he is often still wearing red clothing such as a red bandmaster coat (The Band Concert, The Mickey Mouse Club), red overalls (Clock Cleaners, Boat Builders), a red cloak (Fantasia, Fun and Fancy Free), a red coat (Squatter's Rights, Mickey's Christmas Carol), or a red shirt (Mickey Down Under, The Simple Things). A large part of Mickey's screen persona is his famously shy, falsetto voice. From 1928 onward, Mickey was voiced by Walt Disney himself, a job in which Disney appeared to take great personal pride. Composer Carl W. Stalling was the first person to provide lines for Mickey in the 1929 shorts The Karnival Kid and Wild Waves, and J. Donald Wilson and Joe Twerp provided the voice in some 1938 broadcasts of The Mickey Mouse Theater of the Air, although Disney remained Mickey's official voice during this period. However, by 1946, Disney was becoming too busy with running the studio to do regular voice work which meant he could not do Mickey's voice on a regular basis anymore. It is also speculated that his cigarette habit had damaged his voice over the years. After recording the Mickey and the Beanstalk section of Fun and Fancy Free, Mickey's voice was handed over to veteran Disney musician and actor Jimmy MacDonald. Walt would reprise Mickey's voice occasionally until his passing in 1966, such as in the introductions to the original 1955–1959 run of The Mickey Mouse Club TV series, the "Fourth Anniversary Show" episode of the Walt Disney's Disneyland TV series that aired on September 11, 1957, and the Disneyland USA at Radio City Music Hall show from 1962. MacDonald voiced Mickey in most of the remaining theatrical shorts and for various television and publicity projects up until his retirement in 1976. However, other actors would occasionally play the role during this era. Clarence Nash, the voice of Donald Duck, provided the voice in three of Mickey's theatrical shorts, The Dognapper, R'coon Dawg, and Pluto's Party. Stan Freberg voiced Mickey in the Freberg-produced record Mickey Mouse's Birthday Party. Alan Young voiced Mickey in the Disneyland record album An Adaptation of Dickens' Christmas Carol, Performed by The Walt Disney Players in 1974. The 1983 short film Mickey's Christmas Carol marked the theatrical debut of Wayne Allwine as Mickey Mouse, who was the official voice of Mickey from 1977 until his death in 2009, although MacDonald returned to voice Mickey for an appearance at the 50th Academy Awards in 1978. Allwine once recounted something MacDonald had told him about voicing Mickey: "The main piece of advice that Jim gave me about Mickey helped me keep things in perspective. He said, 'Just remember kid, you're only filling in for the boss.' And that's the way he treated doing Mickey for years and years. From Walt, and now from Jimmy." In 1991, Allwine married Russi Taylor, the voice of Minnie Mouse from 1986 until her death in 2019. Les Perkins did the voice of Mickey in two TV specials, "Down and Out with Donald Duck" and "DTV Valentine", in the mid-1980s. Peter Renaday voiced Mickey in the 1980s Disney albums Yankee Doodle Mickey and Mickey Mouse Splashdance. He also provided his voice for The Talking Mickey Mouse toy in 1986. Quinton Flynn briefly filled in for Allwine as the voice of Mickey in a few episodes of the first season of Mickey Mouse Works whenever Allwine was unavailable to record. Bret Iwan, a former Hallmark greeting card artist, is the current official voice of Mickey. Iwan was originally cast as an understudy for Allwine due to the latter's declining health, but Allwine died before Iwan could get a chance to meet him and Iwan became the new official voice of the character at the time. Iwan's early recordings in 2009 included work for the Disney Cruise Line, Mickey toys, the Disney theme parks and the Disney on Ice: Celebrations! ice show. He directly replaced Allwine as Mickey for the Kingdom Hearts video game series and the TV series Mickey Mouse Clubhouse. His first video game voice-over of Mickey Mouse can be heard in Kingdom Hearts: Birth by Sleep. Iwan also became the first voice actor to portray Mickey during Disney's rebranding of the character, providing the vocal effects of Mickey in Epic Mickey as well as his voice in Epic Mickey 2: The Power of Two and the remake of Castle of Illusion. An openly gay man, Iwan is the character's first LGBT+ performer.[citation needed] In addition to Iwan, Chris Diamantopoulos was cast as Mickey for the Mickey Mouse 2013 animated series developed by Paul Rudish, as the producers were looking for a voice closer to Walt Disney's portrayal of the character in order to match the vintage look of that series. Diamantopoulos is the first voice of Mickey to be nominated for two Emmy Awards and two Annie Awards for his work in the series. He has reprised the role in the 2017 DuckTales reboot (in the form of a watermelon that Donald uses as a ventriloquist dummy), the Walt Disney World attraction Mickey and Minnie's Runaway Railway, and the Disney+ revival of the series, The Wonderful World of Mickey Mouse. He voiced Mickey once again for the 2023 short film Once Upon a Studio. Since his early years, Mickey Mouse has been licensed by Disney to appear on many different kinds of merchandise. Mickey was produced as plush toys and figurines, and Mickey's image has graced almost everything from T-shirts to lunchboxes. Largely responsible for early Disney merchandising was Kay Kamen, Disney's head of merchandise and licensing from 1932 until his death in 1949, who was called a "stickler for quality". Kamen was recognized by The Walt Disney Company as having a significant part in Mickey's rise to stardom and was named a Disney Legend in 1998. At the time of his 80th-anniversary celebration in 2008, Time declared Mickey Mouse one of the world's most recognized characters, even when compared against Santa Claus. Disney officials have stated that 98% of children aged 3–11 around the world are at least aware of the character. Disney expected the Mickey Mouse & Friends brand to make $9 billion in retail sales in 2011. As the official Walt Disney mascot, Mickey has played a central role in the Disney parks since the opening of Disneyland in 1955. As with other characters, Mickey is often portrayed by a non-speaking costumed actor. In this form, he has participated in ceremonies and countless parades, and poses for photographs with guests. As of the presidency of Barack Obama (who jokingly referred to him as "a world leader who has bigger ears than me") Mickey has met every U.S. president since Harry Truman, with the exception of Lyndon B. Johnson. Mickey also features in several specific attractions at the Disney parks. Mickey's Toontown (Disneyland and Tokyo Disneyland) is a themed land which is a recreation of Mickey's neighborhood. Buildings are built in a cartoon style and guests can visit Mickey or Minnie's houses, Donald Duck's boat, or Goofy's garage. This is a common place to meet the characters. Mickey's PhilharMagic (Magic Kingdom, Tokyo Disneyland, Hong Kong Disneyland, Disney California Adventure) is a 4D film which features Mickey in the familiar role of symphony conductor. At Main Street Cinema several of Mickey's short films are shown on a rotating basis; the sixth film is always Steamboat Willie.[citation needed] Mickey plays a central role in Fantasmic! (Disneyland Resort, Disney's Hollywood Studios) a live nighttime show which famously features Mickey in his role as the Sorcerer's Apprentice. Mickey was also a central character in the now-defunct Mickey Mouse Revue (Magic Kingdom, Tokyo Disneyland) which was an indoor show featuring animatronic characters. Mickey's face formerly graced the Mickey's Fun Wheel (now Pixar Pal-A-Round) at Disney California Adventure Park, where a figure of him also stands on top of Silly Symphony Swings. Mickey & Minnie's Runaway Railway at Disney's Hollywood Studios is a trackless dark ride themed to Mickey Mouse. In addition to Mickey's overt presence in the parks, numerous images of him are also subtly included in sometimes unexpected places. This phenomenon is known as "Hidden Mickeys", involving hidden images in Disney films, theme parks, and merchandise. Like many popular characters, Mickey has starred in many video games, including Mickey Mousecapade on the Nintendo Entertainment System, Mickey Mania: The Timeless Adventures of Mickey Mouse, Mickey's Ultimate Challenge, and Disney's Magical Quest on the Super Nintendo Entertainment System, Castle of Illusion Starring Mickey Mouse on the Mega Drive/Genesis, Mickey Mouse: Magic Wands! on the Game Boy, and many others. In the 2000s, the Disney's Magical Quest series were ported to the Game Boy Advance, while Mickey made his sixth generation era debut in Disney's Magical Mirror Starring Mickey Mouse, a GameCube title aimed at younger audiences. Mickey plays a major role in the Kingdom Hearts series, as the king of Disney Castle and aided to the protagonist, Sora and his friends. King Mickey wields the Keyblade, a weapon in the form of a key that has the power to open any lock and combat darkness. Epic Mickey, featuring a darker version of the Disney universe, was released in 2010 for the Wii. The game is part of an effort by The Walt Disney Company to re-brand the Mickey Mouse character by moving away from his current squeaky clean image and reintroducing the mischievous side of his personality. Mickey was famously featured on wristwatches and alarm clocks, typically utilizing his hands as the actual hands on the face of the clock. The first Mickey Mouse watches were manufactured in 1933 by the Ingersoll Watch Company. The seconds were indicated by a turning disk below Mickey. The first Mickey watch was sold at the Century of Progress in Chicago, 1933 for $3.75 (equivalent to $88 in 2023). Mickey Mouse watches have been sold by other companies and designers throughout the years, including Timex, Elgin, Helbros, Bradley, Lorus, and Gérald Genta. The fictional character Robert Langdon from Dan Brown's novels was said to wear a Mickey Mouse watch as a reminder "to stay young at heart." In 1989, Milton Bradley released the electronic talking game titled Mickey Says, with three modes featuring Mickey Mouse as its host. Mickey also appeared in other toys and games, including the Worlds of Wonder released The Talking Mickey Mouse. Fisher-Price has produced a line of talking animatronic Mickey dolls including "Dance Star Mickey" (2010) and "Rock Star Mickey" (2011). In total, approximately 40% of Disney's revenues for consumer products are derived from Mickey Mouse merchandise, with revenues peaking in 1997. In the United States, protest votes are often made in order to indicate dissatisfaction with the slate of candidates presented on a particular ballot or to highlight the inadequacies of a particular voting procedure. Since most states' electoral systems do not provide for blank balloting or a choice of "None of the Above", most protest votes take the form of a clearly non-serious candidate's name entered as a write-in vote. Mickey Mouse is often selected for this purpose. As an election supervisor in Georgia observed, "If Mickey Mouse doesn't get votes in our election, it's a bad election." The earliest known mention of Mickey Mouse as a write-in candidate dates back to the 1932 New York City mayoral elections. Mickey Mouse's name has also been known to appear fraudulently on voter registration lists, such as in the 2008 U.S. presidential election. "Mickey Mouse" is a slang expression meaning small-time, amateurish or trivial. In the United Kingdom and Ireland, it also means poor quality or counterfeit. In Poland the phrase "mały Miki", which translates to "small Mickey", means something very simple and trivial – usually used in the comparison between two things. However, in parts of Australia it can mean excellent or very good (rhyming slang for "grouse"). Examples of the negative usages include the following: From 1942 to 1945, during the Japanese occupation of the Philippines in World War II, the occupying Japanese government issued a new fiat currency which drastically decreased in value towards the war. As a result of hyperinflation, Filipinos at the time would refer to the currency in scorn as "Mickey Mouse money". In The Godfather Part II, Fredo's justification of betraying Michael is that his orders in the family usually were "Send Fredo off to do this, send Fredo off to do that! Let Fredo take care of some Mickey Mouse nightclub somewhere!" as opposed to more meaningful tasks. In an early episode of the 1978–82 sitcom Mork & Mindy, Mork stated that Pluto was "a Mickey Mouse planet", referring to the future dwarf planet having the same name as Mickey's pet dog Pluto. On November 19, 1983, just after an ice hockey game in which Wayne Gretzky's Edmonton Oilers beat the New Jersey Devils 13–4, Gretzky was quoted as saying to a reporter, "Well, it's time they got their act together, they're ruining the whole league. They had better stop running a Mickey Mouse organization and put somebody on the ice". Reacting to Gretzky's comment, Devils fans wore Mickey Mouse apparel when the Oilers returned to New Jersey on January 15, 1984, despite a 5–4 Devils loss. In the 1996 Warner Bros. film Space Jam, Bugs Bunny derogatorily comments on Daffy Duck's idea for the name of their basketball team, asking: "What kind of Mickey Mouse organization would name a team 'The Ducks?'" (This also referenced the Mighty Ducks of Anaheim, an NHL team that was then owned by Disney, as well as the Disney-made The Mighty Ducks movie franchise. This was referencing the Disney/Warner Brothers rivalry.) In schools a "Mickey Mouse course", "Mickey Mouse major", or "Mickey Mouse degree" is a class, college major, or degree where very little effort is necessary in order to attain a good grade (especially an A) or one where the subject matter of such a class is not of any importance in the labor market. In British football, the term "Mickey Mouse cup" is used to describe competitions that are regarded with lesser prestige than others. It has been used to describe elimination-based season competitions like the EFL Cup or the FIFA Club World Cup, as well as single-match trophies such as the FA Community Shield or UEFA Super Cup. Musicians often refer to a film score that directly follows each action on screen, sometimes pejoratively, as "Mickey Mousing" (also mickey-mousing and mickeymousing). In the beginning of the 1980s, then-British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher once called the European Parliament a "Mickey Mouse parliament", meaning a discussion club without influence. Mickey Mouse's global fame has made him both a symbol of The Walt Disney Company and of the United States itself. For this reason, Mickey has been used frequently in anti-American satire, such as the infamous underground cartoon Mickey Mouse in Vietnam (1969) and the Palestinian children's propaganda series Tomorrow's Pioneers where a Mickey Mouse-esque character named Farfour is used to promote Islamic extremism. There have been numerous parodies of Mickey Mouse, such as the two-page parody "Mickey Rodent" by Will Elder (published in Mad #19, 1955) in which the mouse walks around unshaven and jails Donald Duck out of jealousy over the duck's larger popularity. In The Simpsons Movie, Bart Simpson puts a black bra on his head to mimic Mickey Mouse and says: "I'm the mascot of an evil corporation!" The Simpsons would later become Disney property as its distributor Fox was acquired by Disney. In the Comedy Central series South Park, Mickey (voiced by Trey Parker) serves as one of the recurring antagonists, and is depicted as the sadistic, greedy, foul-mouthed boss of The Walt Disney Company, only interested in money. He also appears briefly with Donald Duck in the comic Squeak the Mouse by the Italian cartoonist Massimo Mattioli. Horst Rosenthal created a comic book, Mickey au Camp de Gurs (Mickey Mouse in the Gurs Internment Camp) while detained in the Gurs internment camp during the Second World War; he added "Publié Sans Autorisation de Walt Disney" ("Published without Walt Disney's Permission") to the front cover. In the 1969 parody novel Bored of the Rings, Mickey Mouse is satirized as Dickey Dragon. Although Mickey Mouse entered the public domain in 2024, the character, like all major Disney characters, remains trademarked. The trademark lasts in perpetuity, as long as it continues to be used commercially by its owner. So, whether or not a particular Disney cartoon goes into the public domain, the characters themselves may not be used as trademarks without authorization. Due to the Copyright Term Extension Act of the United States (sometimes called the "Mickey Mouse Protection Act" because of extensive lobbying by the Disney corporation) and similar legislation within the European Union and other jurisdictions where copyright terms have been extended, the early Steamboat Willie version of Mickey Mouse cartoons remained under copyright until the end of 2023 but since 2024 are in the U.S. public domain. Copyright scholars have argued that Disney's copyright on the earliest version of the character may have been invalid due to ambiguity in the copyright notice for Steamboat Willie. The Walt Disney Company is well known for zealously protecting its trademark on the Mickey Mouse character—whose likeness is synonymous and closely associated with the company. In 1989, Disney threatened legal action against three daycare centers in the Orlando, Florida region (where Walt Disney World is a dominant employer) for having Mickey Mouse and other Disney characters painted on their walls. The characters were removed, and the newly opened rival Universal Studios Florida allowed the centers to use their own cartoon characters with their blessing, to build community goodwill. In 1971, a group of underground cartoonists calling themselves the Air Pirates, after a group of villains from early Mickey Mouse films, produced a comic called Air Pirates Funnies. In the first issue, cartoonist Dan O'Neill depicted Mickey and Minnie Mouse engaging in explicit sexual behavior and consuming drugs. As O'Neill explained, "The air pirates were...some sort of bizarre concept to steal the air, pirate the air, steal the media....Since we were cartoonists, the logical thing was Disney." Rather than change the appearance or name of the character, which O'Neill felt would dilute the parody, the mouse depicted in Air Pirates Funnies looks like and is named "Mickey Mouse". Disney sued for copyright infringement, and after a series of appeals, O'Neill eventually lost and was ordered to pay Disney $1.9 million. The outcome of the case remains controversial among free-speech advocates. New York Law School professor Edward Samuels said, "The Air Pirates set parody back twenty years." Prior to 2024, there here had been multiple attempts to argue that certain versions of Mickey Mouse were in fact in the public domain. In the 1980s, archivist George S. Brown attempted to recreate and sell cels from the 1933 short The Mad Doctor, on the theory that they were in the public domain because Disney had failed to renew the copyright as required by current law. However, Disney successfully sued Brown to prevent such sale, arguing that the lapse in copyright for The Mad Doctor did not put Mickey Mouse in the public domain because of the copyright in the earlier films. Brown attempted to appeal, noting imperfections in the earlier copyright claims, but the court dismissed his argument as untimely. In 1999, Lauren Vanpelt, a law student at Arizona State University, wrote a paper making a similar argument. Vanpelt points out that copyright law at the time required a copyright notice specify the year of the copyright and the copyright owner's name. The title cards to early Mickey Mouse films Steamboat Willie, Plane Crazy, and Gallopin' Gaucho do not clearly identify the copyright owner, and also misidentify the copyright year. However, Vanpelt notes that copyright cards in other early films may have been done correctly, which could make Mickey Mouse "protected as a component part of the larger copyrighted films". A 2003 article by Douglas A. Hedenkamp in the Virginia Sports and Entertainment Law Journal analyzed Vanpelt's arguments, and concluded that she is likely correct. Hedenkamp provided additional arguments, and identified some errors in Vanpelt's paper, but still found that due to imperfections in the copyright notice on the title cards, Walt Disney forfeited his copyright in Mickey Mouse. He concluded: "The forfeiture occurred at the moment of publication, and the law of that time was clear: publication without proper notice irrevocably forfeited copyright protection." Disney threatened to sue Hedenkamp for slander of title, but did not follow through. The claims in Vanpelt and Hedenkamp's articles have not been tested in court.[citation needed] In a 2023 episode of Last Week Tonight with John Oliver, John Oliver suggested that without copyright protection to stop the unauthorized use of Mickey Mouse, the Walt Disney Company would likely use trademark law to achieve the same results, potentially arguing that Mickey Mouse is so closely associated with their brand that any unauthorized use would cause consumer confusion. Oliver then revealed that Last Week Tonight's opening titles had been using an image from Steamboat Willie since the start of the season and that he would begin to use his own version of Mickey Mouse as a mascot of the show. He stated: We are staking our claim to Mickey Mouse right now and, I know Disney’s lawyers might argue that this Mickey is closely associated with their brand, although they should know that he's pretty associated with our brand now too. On January 1, 2024, the copyrights of the first three animated Mickey Mouse cartoons and their portrayal of Mickey Mouse expired, and they entered the public domain. They are the silent versions of the cartoons Plane Crazy and The Gallopin' Gaucho, as well as the sound cartoon Steamboat Willie. Newer versions of Mickey Mouse will remain copyright protected. Quinton Hoover, a YouTube user who uploaded a copy of Steamboat Willie after its copyright expired on January 1, 2024, noted that three attempts to upload the short to the service triggered copyright claims from Disney, including one that claimed a copyright on the short's soundtrack. Users of Twitch noted similar behavior in that attempts to stream Steamboat Willie would end up with the audio muted. Disney withdrew a separate copyright strike from a different uploader shortly after it was challenged. In 1930, the German Board of Film Censors prohibited any presentations of the 1929 Mickey Mouse cartoon The Barnyard Battle. The animated short, which features the mouse as a kepi-wearing soldier fighting cat enemies in German-style helmets, was viewed by censors as a negative portrayal of Germany. It was claimed by the board that the film would "reawaken the latest anti-German feeling existing abroad since the War". The Barnyard Battle incident did not incite wider anti-Mickey sentiment in Germany in 1930; however, after Adolf Hitler came to power several years later, the Nazi regime unambiguously propagandized against Disney. A mid-1930s German newspaper article read: Mickey Mouse is the most miserable ideal ever revealed. Healthy emotions tell every independent young man and every honorable youth that the dirty and filth-covered vermin, the greatest bacteria carrier in the animal kingdom, cannot be the ideal type of animal. Away with Jewish brutalization of the people! Down with Mickey Mouse! Wear the Swastika Cross! American cartoonist and writer Art Spiegelman would later use this quote on the opening page of the second volume of his graphic novel Maus. In 1935, Romanian authorities also banned Mickey Mouse films from cinemas, purportedly fearing that children would be "scared to see a ten-foot mouse in the movie theatre". In 1938, based on the Ministry of Popular Culture's recommendation that a reform was necessary "to raise children in the firm and imperialist spirit of the Fascist revolution", the Italian Government banned foreign children's literature except Mickey; Disney characters were exempted from the decree for the "acknowledged artistic merit" of Disney's work. Actually, Mussolini's children were fond of Mickey Mouse, so they managed to delay his ban as long as possible. In 1942, after Italy declared war on the United States, fascism immediately forced Italian publishers to stop printing any Disney stories. Mickey's stories were replaced by the adventures of Tuffolino, a new human character that looked like Mickey, created by Federico Pedrocchi (script) and Pier Lorenzo De Vita (art). After the downfall of Italy's fascist government in 1945, the ban was removed. Steamboat Willie (1928) Plane Crazy (1928) The Karnival Kid (1929) Mickey's Orphans (1931) Building a Building (1933) The Mad Doctor (1933) The Band Concert (1935) Thru the Mirror (1936) Moving Day (1936) Clock Cleaners (1937) Lonesome Ghosts (1937) Brave Little Tailor (1938) The Pointer (1939) The Nifty Nineties (1941) Lend a Paw (1941) Symphony Hour (1942) Squatter's Rights (1946) Mickey and the Seal (1948) The Simple Things (1953) Mickey's Christmas Carol (1983) Runaway Brain (1995) Get a Horse! (2013) Once Upon a Studio (2023) Hollywood Party (cameo, 1934) Fantasia (1940) Fun and Fancy Free (1947) Who Framed Roger Rabbit (cameo, 1988) A Goofy Movie (cameo, 1995) Mickey's Once Upon a Christmas (1999) (DTV) Fantasia 2000 (1999) Mickey's Magical Christmas (2001) (DTV) Mickey's House of Villains (2002) (DTV) Mickey, Donald, Goofy: The Three Musketeers (2004) (DTV) Mickey's Twice Upon a Christmas (2004) (DTV) (Note: DTV means Direct-to-video) The Mickey Mouse Club (1955–1959; 1977–1979) Mickey Mouse Works (1999–2000) House of Mouse (2001–2003) Mickey Mouse Clubhouse (2006–2016) Mickey Mouse (2013–2019) Mickey Mouse Mixed-Up Adventures (2017–2021) The Wonderful World of Mickey Mouse (2020–2023) Mickey Mouse Funhouse (2021–present) Mickey Mouse has received ten nominations for the Academy Award for Best Animated Short Film. These are Mickey's Orphans (1931), Building a Building (1933), Brave Little Tailor (1938), The Pointer (1939), Lend a Paw (1941), Squatter's Rights (1946), Mickey and the Seal (1948), Mickey's Christmas Carol (1983), Runaway Brain (1995), and Get a Horse! (2013). Among these, Lend a Paw was the only film to actually win the award. Additionally, in 1932 Walt Disney received an honorary Academy Award in recognition of Mickey's creation. In 1994, four of Mickey's cartoons were included in the book The 50 Greatest Cartoons which listed the greatest cartoons of all time as voted by members of the animation field. The films were The Band Concert (#3), Steamboat Willie (#13), Brave Little Tailor (#26), and Clock Cleaners (#27). On November 18, 1978, in honor of his 50th anniversary, Mickey became the first cartoon character to have a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. The star is located on 6925 Hollywood Blvd. Melbourne (Australia) runs the annual Moomba festival street procession and appointed Mickey Mouse as their King of Moomba (1977).: 17–22  Although immensely popular with children, there was controversy with the appointment: some Melburnians wanted a "home-grown" choice, e.g. Blinky Bill; when it was revealed that Patricia O'Carroll (from Disneyland's Disney on Parade show) was performing the mouse, Australian newspapers reported "Mickey Mouse is really a girl!": 19–20  Mickey was the Grand Marshal of the Tournament of Roses Parade on New Year's Day 2005. He was the first cartoon character to receive the honor and only the second fictional character after Kermit the Frog in 1996. Portals:  Animation  Cartoon  Disney  United States Mickey Mouse Adventures, a short-lived comic starring Mickey Mouse as the protagonist Mouse Museum, a Russian museum featuring artifacts and memorabilia relating to Mickey Mouse Walt Disney (2015 PBS film) The first two seasons were titled Mickey and the Roadster Racers. Disney employees John Hench and Marc Davis believed that this initial design was part of Mickey's success as it made him more dynamic and appealing to audiences. Frank Thomas and Ollie Johnston explain that Mickey's original eyes consisted of goggle-like whites behind a small pupil (i.e., with no arbitrary 'hairline' beyond the exaggerated facial features.) Although not cited as influencing Ub Iwerks' design, from 1927 to 1928, animators Robert and Tom McKimson drew a children's book titled Mouse Tales, featuring mice with a strong resemblance to Mickey. They wear white gloves, but have white bodies (while a leprechaun has a dark upper body and comically exposed white legs). The McKimson brothers subsequently apprenticed as Disney animators c. mid-1929, and the drawings entered storage in the 1930s, where they stayed for six decades. In minstrel shows, gloves are part of a stereotype of the black "dandy" who imitates the life of a white slaver. M. Thomas Inge points out that although "None of these [minstrelesque cartoon] characters retained ... the language or cultural mannerisms of black life ... Mickey has sometimes been thought to retain some of the free-swinging style [associated with black culture]." Mickey and other Disney characters are explicitly depicted in blackface in Mickey's Mellerdrammer (1933), a sendup of Uncle Tom's Cabin. White gloves would appear on later Disney as well as non-Disney characters, notably including Bugs Bunny, Woody Woodpecker, Mighty Mouse, Mario, and Sonic the Hedgehog. Although the inclusion of only three fingers and a thumb on each hand had been developed for earlier characters, Walt Disney playfully explained the decision to retain this motif as being: "Artistically, five digits are too many for a mouse. His hand would look like a bunch of bananas. Financially, not having an extra finger in each of 45,000 drawings that make up a six and one-half minute short has saved the studio millions." This Mickey first appeared in 1938 on the cover of a party program. The original eye outlines were left, essentially forming a widow's peak. Colleague Ward Kimball praised Moore for being the first animator to break from Mickey's "rubber hose, round circle" design. While the silent version of Plane Crazy became public domain, that version is not known to be extant. The widely released sound version will remain under copyright until 2025. "Voice of Mickey Mouse dies – ABC News (Australian Broadcasting Corporation)". Abc.net.au. May 21, 2009. Archived from the original on June 29, 2011. Retrieved April 8, 2012. Jackson, Kathy (2003). Mickey and the Tramp: Walt Disney's Debt to Charlie Chaplin (26th ed.). The Journal of American Culture. pp. 439–444. Apgar 2015, pp. 77–78. Barrier, Michael (2008). The Animated Man: A Life of Walt Disney. University of California Press. p. 56. ISBN 978-0-520-25619-4. Kenworthy, John (2001). The Hand Behind the Mouse. New York: Disney. pp. 53–54. Walt Disney: Conversations (Conversations With Comic Artists Series) by Kathy Merlock Jackson with Walt Disney " ISBN 1-57806-713-8 page 120 "Mickey Mouse's Magic- Tweentimes – Indiatimes". The Times of India. Archived from the original on January 13, 2004. "Mickey Mouse was going to be Mortimer Mo". Uselessknowledge.co.za. May 8, 2010. Archived from the original on April 17, 2009. Retrieved April 8, 2012. Albin, Kira (1995). "Mickey Rooney: Hollywood, Religion and His Latest Show". GrandTimes.com. Senior Magazine. Archived from the original on March 18, 2021. Retrieved December 15, 2013. Korkis, Jim (April 13, 2011). "The Mickey Rooney-Mickey Mouse Myth". Mouse Planet. Retrieved April 9, 2014. Korkis 2012, pp. 157–161 "1928: Plane Crazy". Disney Shorts. Archived from the original on March 1, 2012. Retrieved April 8, 2012. "Ub Iwerks, Walt Disney. Steamboat Willie. 1928". The Museum of Modern Art. November 18, 1928. Retrieved March 3, 2024. Burke, Myles (January 2, 2024). "Steamboat Willie: How Mickey Mouse's first appearance saved Walt Disney from ruin and changed cinema forever". BBC Home. Retrieved March 3, 2024. Smith, Dave (October 2010). "Library of Congress - National Film Preservation Board Essays: Steamboat Willie" (PDF). Loc.gov. Archived (PDF) from the original on February 15, 2017. Retrieved March 13, 2022. Widmar, Aaron (November 17, 2021). "5 Facts About Disney Legend Les Clark". WDW Magazine. Retrieved March 3, 2024. "Film: STEAMBOAT WILLIE by Walt Disney". The International Buster Keaton Society. September 1, 2022. Retrieved March 3, 2024. "Felix the Cat". Toontracker.com. Archived from the original on January 26, 2012. Retrieved April 8, 2012. Gordon, Ian (2002). "Felix the Cat". St. James Encyclopedia of Pop Culture. Archived from the original on June 28, 2009. Mickey was first pictured with a real human in Fantasia in silhouette. Later a famous statue of Mickey and Walt Disney at Disneyland would maintain Mickey's size. "Disney Shorts: 1930: Minnie's Yoo Hoo". The Encyclopedia of Disney Animated Shorts. Archived from the original on April 2, 2013. Retrieved November 13, 2011. Polsson, Ken (June 2, 2010). Chronology of Walt Disney's Mickey Mouse (1930–1931) Archived December 5, 2010, at the Wayback Machine Ken Polsson personal page. Polsson, Ken (June 2, 2010). Chronology of Walt Disney's Mickey Mouse (1932–1934) Archived April 19, 2022, at the Wayback Machine Ken Polsson personal page. DeMille, William (November 1935). "Mickey vs. Popeye". The Forum. Koszarski, Richard (1976). Hollywood directors, 1914–1940, Volume 1 Archived April 20, 2023, at the Wayback Machine. Oxford University Press. (Quotes DeMille. 1935). Calma, Gordan (May 17, 2005). Popeye's Popularity – Article from 1935 Archived July 11, 2011, at the Wayback Machine GAC Forums. (Quotes DeMille, 1935). Solomon, Charles. "The Golden Age of Mickey Mouse". Disney.com. Archived from the original on March 1, 2007. Retrieved August 27, 2015. Polsson, Ken (June 2, 2010). Chronology of the Walt Disney Company (1935–1939) Archived January 15, 2023, at the Wayback Machine. Ken Polsson personal page. Solomon, Charles. "The Golden Age of Mickey Mouse". Disney.com guest services. Archived from the original on June 11, 2008. Solomon, Charles. "Mickey in the Post-War Era". Disney.com guest services. Archived from the original on June 15, 2008. ""Jump Into Wow" This Summer on Disney Junior with "Marvel's Spidey and His Amazing Friends" and "Mickey Mouse Funhouse"" (Press release). Disney Channel. June 16, 2021. Archived from the original on November 29, 2023. Retrieved June 16, 2021 – via The Futon Critic. "Mickey Mouse's first new short in 50 years; iconic character gets new retro look for big return to cartoon shorts to be featured on Disney Channel" Archived March 22, 2023, at the Wayback Machine, Don Kaplan, New York Daily News, December 3, 2013 Deitchman, Beth (September 14, 2020). "JUST ANNOUNCED: The Wonderful World of Mickey Mouse Comes to Disney+ in November". D23. Archived from the original on October 31, 2020. Retrieved September 14, 2020. "Frank Angones and the Suspenders of Disbelief". January 5, 2017. Archived from the original on November 24, 2022. Retrieved May 10, 2018. "Moonvasion!". DuckTales. Season 2. Episode 47. September 12, 2019. "ABC to celebrate 90 years of Mickey Mouse". Idaho Statesman. Associated Press. August 7, 2018. Retrieved August 7, 2018.[permanent dead link] "Mickey's 90th Spectacular airs on ABC on November 4, 2018". ABC. Archived from the original on August 24, 2019. Retrieved November 19, 2018. "Global celebrations for Mickey Mouse 90th Anniversary". Samsung Newsroom. Archived from the original on November 24, 2022. Retrieved November 19, 2018. Bucksbaum, Sydney (December 10, 2019). "Vanna White hosts Wheel of Fortune for first time while Pat Sajak recovers from emergency surgery". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on December 28, 2019. Retrieved December 28, 2019. "Mickey Documentary Film Released Date". Twitter. Archived from the original on December 7, 2022. Retrieved September 11, 2022. Croll, Ben (June 11, 2023). "Annecy Opens on Note of Artistic Defiance as Disney Premieres Centenary Short Once Upon a Studio". Variety. Archived from the original on June 22, 2023. "When Mickey's Career Turned a Page". D23. January 13, 2015. Archived from the original on June 16, 2023. Retrieved July 27, 2022. Korkis, Jim (August 10, 2003). "The Uncensored Mouse". Jim Hill Media. Archived from the original on February 2, 2010. Retrieved October 3, 2008. "Mickey Mouse In Egypt! Comic Book Guide". Comicbookguide.wordpress.com. March 12, 2011. Archived from the original on September 14, 2011. Retrieved April 8, 2012. "Video: Walt Disney". PBS. September 14, 2015. Archived from the original on December 13, 2015. Retrieved September 19, 2015. Tatham, Chelsea (2019). Mickey Mouse and Merry Melodies: How Disney and Warner Bros. Animation Entertained and Inspired Americans During the Great Depression. The Saber and Scroll Journal. p. 40. Korkis, Jim (August 24, 2016). "The Charlie Chaplin Connection Part Two: Mickey as Chaplin". Archived from the original on November 29, 2023. Retrieved August 15, 2023. Solomon, Charles (November 13, 1988). "Mickey Mouse : World's Most Famous Rodent Nears 60, and He's Had More Lives Than a Cat". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on August 15, 2023. Retrieved August 15, 2023. LIFE Mickey Mouse at 90: LIFE Celebrates an American Icon. Liberty Street. 2018. Van Luling, Todd (December 10, 2015). "Here's One Thing You Didn't Know About Disney's Origin Story". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on January 1, 2016. Retrieved December 11, 2015. Kindelan, Katie (November 29, 2011). "Lost Inspiration for Mickey Mouse Discovered in England Film Archive". ABC News. Archived from the original on February 6, 2023. Retrieved December 11, 2015. Suddath, Claire. "A Brief History of Mickey Mouse." Time. November 18, 2008. Thomas & Johnston 1995, pp. 125–126. Thomas & Johnston 1995, p. 447. The Opry House (1929) McKimson Jr., Robert (2012). "I Say, I Say ... Son!": A Tribute to Legendary Animators Bob, Chuck, and Tom McKimson. Santa Monica Press. pp. 18, 20–21, 23–24. ISBN 978-1-59580-069-5. Baxter, Devon (April 13, 2016). "Robert McKimson's 'Daffy Doodles' (1946)". Cartoon Research. Retrieved July 14, 2023. Multiple sources: Caswell, Estelle (February 2, 2017). "Why cartoon characters wear gloves". Vox. Archived from the original on August 17, 2019. Retrieved June 13, 2017. Holt, Patricia (May 21, 1996). "The Minstrel Show Never Faded Away". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on November 24, 2022. Retrieved March 12, 2020. Davis, James C. (January 1, 2007). Commerce in Color: Race, Consumer Culture, and American Literature, 1893–1933. University of Michigan Press. ISBN 9780472069873 – via Google Books. Sammond, Nicholas (August 17, 2015). Birth of an Industry: Blackface Minstrelsy and the Rise of American Animation. Duke University Press. ISBN 9780822375784 – via Google Books. Mickey Mouse isn't like a minstrel; he is a minstrel. Inge, M. Thomas (September 30, 2014). "Mickey Mouse". In Apgar, Garry (ed.). A Mickey Mouse Reader. University Press of Mississippi. pp. 341–342. ISBN 9781626743601. Archived from the original on November 29, 2023. Retrieved February 2, 2017 – via Google Books. Grosvenor, Edwin S.; Toll, Robert C. (2019). "Blackface: the Sad History of Minstrel Shows". American Heritage. Retrieved February 21, 2024. Reynolds, David S. (2011). Mightier than the Sword: Uncle Tom's Cabin and the Battle for America, 243. W. W. Norton & Company. Thomas & Johnston 1995, p. 56. "Mickey's body was black, his arms and his hands—all black. There was no way to stage an action except in silhouette. ... A hand in front of a chest would simply disappear." Frank Thomas (2002). Walt Disney Treasures: Wave Two- Mickey Mouse in Black & White (DVD), Disc 1, Bonus Features: Frank and Ollie... and Mickey featurette (2002) (DVD). The Walt Disney Company. There was an interesting bit of development there. They drew [Mickey Mouse] with black hands on the black arm against the black body and black feet. And if he said something in here (gestures in front of body), you couldn't see it and won't realize. Fairly early they had tried it on him, putting the white gloves on him here, and the white shoes, but it had to clear up. Alice, Matthew (November 14, 1996). "Mickey, Goofy, Donald, Pluto — all have three fingers". San Diego Reader. Retrieved February 27, 2024. Holliss, Richard; Sibley, Brian (1986). Walt Disney's Mickey Mouse: His Life and Times. New York City: Harper & Row. pp. 40–45. ISBN 0-06-015619-8. e.g., The Simple Things (1953) Thomas & Johnston 1995, p. 127. Barrier, Michael. "Funnyworld Revisited: Carl Stalling". MichaelBarrier.com. Archived from the original on November 10, 2017. Retrieved July 1, 2021. "Hit the Beach (Part 1)". cartoonresearch.com. Archived from the original on June 6, 2023. Retrieved July 1, 2021. Korkis, Jim (2014). The Book of Mouse: A Celebration of Mickey Mouse. Theme Park Press. ISBN 978-0984341504. Littlechild, Chris (September 7, 2021). "Why Walt Disney Stopped Being the Voice of Mickey Mouse". Grunge. Static Media. Archived from the original on March 28, 2023. Retrieved February 11, 2022. "Your Host, Walt Disney Review" Archived August 27, 2022, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved September 24, 2017. "Interview: Jimmy MacDonald – The Dundee voice of Disney". The Scotsman. December 23, 2009. Archived from the original on January 9, 2023. Retrieved October 26, 2020. Gerstein, David; Kaufman, J.B. (2018). Mickey Mouse: The Ultimate History. Taschen. ISBN 978-3836552844. "DisneylandRecords.com – 3811 An Adaptation Of Dickens' Christmas Carol". disneylandrecords.com. Archived from the original on August 11, 2022. Retrieved June 10, 2015. "Dickens' Christmas Carol by Disneyland Records | MouseVinyl.com". www.mousevinyl.com. Archived from the original on January 27, 2023. Retrieved April 5, 2022. "Disney Legends – Wayne Allwine". Legends.disney.go.com. May 18, 2009. Archived from the original on June 9, 2011. Retrieved April 8, 2012. Korkis, Jim (February 12, 2021). "Animated Characters At the Academy Awards". Cartoon Research. Archived from the original on July 13, 2023. Retrieved February 13, 2021. "Wayne Allwine, Voice of Mickey Mouse for 32 Years, Passes Away at Age 62 « Disney D23". D23.disney.go.com. Archived from the original on September 24, 2011. Retrieved April 8, 2012. Major, B.J. "A Disney Discography". Archived from the original on June 20, 2023. Retrieved May 20, 2015. "Character Records by Steve Burns – StartedByAMouse.com Features Section". Archived from the original on March 9, 2015. Dave (October 18, 2008). "Children's Records & More: TALKING MICKEY MOUSE READALONG BOOKS AND CASSETTES". Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved May 21, 2015. "Talking Mickey Mouse Show, The (1986, Toy) Voice Cast". Voice Chasers. Archived from the original on June 10, 2015. Retrieved May 21, 2015. Korkis, Jim (August 25, 2010). "A New Mouse Voice In Town by Wade Sampson". Mouseplanet. Archived from the original on November 29, 2023. Retrieved August 16, 2016. "Disney on Ice Celebrations features Princess Tiana and Mickey's New Voice, Bret Iwan – The Latest". Laughing Place. Archived from the original on September 11, 2009. Retrieved April 8, 2012. Taylor, Blake (June 27, 2013). "Disney Shorts Debut with New Voice for Mickey Mouse". The Rotoscopers. Archived from the original on July 3, 2013. Retrieved June 27, 2013. Smith, Dave (March 6, 2014). "Dave Smith Reveals Where the "33" in Disneyland's Exclusive and Famed Club 33 Comes From". D23. Archived from the original on March 29, 2014. Retrieved March 28, 2014. Donald Duck & Mickey Mouse & Goofy (November 13, 2020). The Wonderful World of Mickey Mouse (Album). Walt Disney Records. Archived from the original on November 29, 2023. Retrieved January 3, 2022 – via Amazon. "Trailer: Disney100 Short 'Once Upon a Studio' Will Air on ABC Next Month". www.animationmagazine.net. Archived from the original on October 11, 2023. Retrieved September 24, 2023. Kay Kamen at disney.com Claire Suddath (November 18, 2008). "A Brief History of Mickey Mouse". Time. Archived from the original on April 10, 2022. Retrieved March 21, 2016. "Disney Consumer Products Poised for Incremental Retail Sales Growth with New Disney Baby Store & Rich Franchise Investment". Business Wire. June 9, 2011. Archived from the original on September 5, 2023. Retrieved September 5, 2023. "Disney expects Cars merchandise to top Toy Story". Reuters. June 9, 2011. Archived from the original on September 5, 2023. Retrieved September 5, 2023. Auletta, Kate (January 19, 2012). "Obama Disney World Visit: President Touts Tourism, Mickey's Big Ears During Speech". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on March 8, 2017. Retrieved February 14, 2014. Mickey's House and Meet Mickey Archived May 16, 2013, at the Wayback Machine at disney.com "Disney Unveils First-ever Mickey Mouse Ride". Travel + Leisure. Archived from the original on January 26, 2022. Retrieved February 13, 2021. Sponagle, Michele (November 25, 2006). "Exposing hidden world of Mickey Mouse". Toronto Star. Archived from the original on February 24, 2008. Barnes, Brooks (November 4, 2009). "After Mickey's Makeover, Less Mr. Nice Guy". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 4, 2015. Retrieved November 5, 2009. "THE SYDNEY TARTS: Gérald Genta". Thesydneytarts.blogspot.com. November 29, 2009. Archived from the original on April 9, 2021. Retrieved April 8, 2012. The Original Mickey Mouse Watch: 11,000 Sold in One Day & Robert Langdon's Choice at hodinkee.com Archived October 15, 2014, at the Wayback Machine "Dance Star Mickey From Fisher-Price". Fisher-price.com. Archived from the original on March 13, 2012. Retrieved April 8, 2012. "Rock Star Mickey From Fisher-Price". Fisher-price.com. Archived from the original on October 19, 2011. Retrieved April 8, 2012. Friedman, Peter (June 10, 2008). "Write in Mickey Mouse for President". Whatisfairuse.blogspot.com. Archived from the original on November 29, 2023. Retrieved April 8, 2012. "MM among top write-in candidates in Wichita elections". Nbcactionnews.com. Associated Press. January 17, 2011. Archived from the original on September 27, 2011. Retrieved April 8, 2012. Rigsby, G.G. (November 15, 2012). "Elvis, Mickey Mouse and God get write-in votes". savannahnow. Archived from the original on March 9, 2013. Retrieved April 17, 2015. Fuller, Jaime (November 5, 2013). "If You Give a Mouse a Vote". The American Prospect. Archived from the original on January 14, 2018. Retrieved December 30, 2014. "Vote drives defended, despite fake names". St. Petersburg Times. Archived from the original on March 25, 2012. Retrieved April 8, 2012. "The ACORN investigations". The Economist. October 16, 2008. Archived from the original on October 20, 2008. Retrieved March 12, 2009. "Mickey Mouse". Dictionary.com. Archived from the original on October 27, 2021. Retrieved October 27, 2021. "Słownik Miejski – Mały Miki". Archived from the original on January 16, 2021. Retrieved October 27, 2021. Miller, John (2009). The lingo dictionary : of favourite Australian words and phrases. Wollombi, N.S.W.: Exisle Publishing. p. 180. ISBN 9781921497049. "Japanese Peso Note | McClung Museum of Natural History & Culture". McClung Museum of Natural History & Culture | University of Tennessee, Knoxville. October 20, 2017. Archived from the original on January 25, 2023. Retrieved January 25, 2023. Rosen, Dan. "1983–84: Growing Pains Lead to Promise". New Jersey Devils. Archived from the original on May 10, 2013. Retrieved March 25, 2006. "'Irresponsible' Hodge under fire". BBC News. January 14, 2003. Archived from the original on May 18, 2008. Retrieved May 12, 2010. "Film music". BBC. Archived from the original on November 12, 2010. Retrieved October 21, 2010. When the music is precisely synchronised with events on screen this is known as Mickey-Mousing, eg someone slipping on a banana skin could use a descending scale followed by a cymbal crash. Mickey-Mousing is often found in comedy films. "What does Mickey Mouse Have To Do With The European Parliament?". EU-Oplysnigen (Denmark). Archived from the original on May 7, 2008. Retrieved August 12, 2008. ""Mickey Rodent!" (Mad #19)". Johnglenntaylor.blogspot.com. January 2009. Archived from the original on August 6, 2017. Retrieved January 22, 2018. The Simpsons Movie (2007) – Memorable Quotes. The Internet Movie Database (IMDb) .Retrieved on March 20, 2008.. Retrieved on March 20, 2008. Rosenberg, Pnina (2002). "Mickey Mouse in Gurs – humour, irony and criticism in works of art produced in the Gurs internment camp". Rethinking History: The Journal of Theory and Practice. 6 (3): 273–292. doi:10.1080/13642520210164508. S2CID 143675622. Reed, Rachel. "Harvard Law IP expert explains how Disney has influenced US copyright law to protect Mickey Mouse and Winnie the Pooh". Harvard Law School. Retrieved November 3, 2023. "Mickey Mouse is Now in the Public Domain". Time. January 2, 2024. Retrieved January 4, 2024. "Copyright expires for early Mickey and Minnie Mouse". BBC News. January 1, 2024. Retrieved January 4, 2024. Cain, Sian (January 2, 2024). "Mickey Mouse's first 24 hours in the public domain: slasher flicks, horror games and NFTs". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved January 4, 2024. Menn, Joseph (August 22, 2008). "Disney's rights to young Mickey Mouse may be wrong". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on August 23, 2008. Retrieved August 22, 2008. Daycare Center Murals Archived November 29, 2023, at the Wayback Machine. Snopes.com, updated September 17, 2007. Retrieved July 27, 2010. Mann, Ron. Director (1989). Comic Book Confidential. Sphinx Productions. Levin, Bob (2003). The Pirates and the Mouse: Disney's War Against the Counterculture. Fantagraphics Books. ISBN 1-56097-530-X. Menn, Joseph (August 22, 2008). "Whose mouse is it anyway?". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 22, 2010. Retrieved December 13, 2018. Vanpelt, Lauren (Spring 1999). "Mickey Mouse – A Truly Public Character". Archived from the original on March 20, 2004. Retrieved December 13, 2018. Hedenkamp, Douglas (Spring 2003). "Free Mickey Mouse: Copyright Notice, Derivative Works, and the Copyright Act of 1909". Virginia Sports and Entertainment Law Journal. Archived from the original on June 22, 2004. Retrieved December 13, 2018. "John Oliver 'riskily' taunts Disney with Mickey Mouse stunt on Last Week Tonight". The Independent. April 3, 2023. Archived from the original on June 16, 2023. Retrieved June 16, 2023. "John Oliver Dares Disney to Sue Over Use of Mickey Mouse's 'Steamboat Willie' Image". Vanity Fair. April 3, 2023. Retrieved June 16, 2023. Seriac, Hanna (August 28, 2023). "Why Mickey Mouse entering the public domain in 2024 is more complicated than you think: Mickey Mouse was originally named Mortimer when he debuted". Deseret News. Salt Lake City. Archived from the original on October 16, 2023. Retrieved October 21, 2023. Colopy, Jess (January 3, 2024). "Disney & YouTube Aren't Allowing Legal 'Steamboat Willie' Use". Inside the Magic. Retrieved January 6, 2024. Binder, Matt (January 5, 2024). "Disney backs down from 'Steamboat Willie' YouTube copyright claim". Mashable. Retrieved January 6, 2024. The full 1929 cartoon The Barnyard Battle Archived November 29, 2023, at the Wayback Machine (7:48) is available for viewing on YouTube. Retrieved June 16, 2017. The Times (July 14, 1930). "Mickey Mouse in Trouble (German Censorship)" Archived July 7, 2012, at archive.today, The Times Archive (archive.timesonline.co.uk). Retrieved November 19, 2008. Hungerford, Amy (January 15, 2003). The Holocaust of Texts. University Of Chicago Press. p. 206. ISBN 0-226-36076-8. Archived from the original on November 29, 2023. Retrieved October 20, 2020. LaCapra, Dominick (March 1998). History and Memory After Auschwitz. Cornell University Press. p. 214. ISBN 0-8014-8496-0. Archived from the original on November 29, 2023. Retrieved October 20, 2020. Rosenthal, Jack (August 2, 1992). "On language; Mickey-Mousing". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 29, 2023. Retrieved December 30, 2008. Conner, Floyd (2002). Hollywood's Most Wanted: The Top 10 Book of Lucky Breaks, Prima Donnas, Box Office Bombs, and Other Oddities. illustrated. Brassey's Inc. p. 243. The Times (November 16, 1938). "The Banning of a Mouse". archive.timesonline.co.uk. London: The Times Archive. p. 15. Archived from the original on July 1, 2012. Retrieved July 27, 2010. "Italian Decree: Mickey Mouse Reprieved". The Evening Post. Vol. CXXVI, no. 151. Wellington, New Zealand. December 23, 1938. p. 16, column 3. Archived from the original on January 24, 2019. Retrieved August 26, 2010. Francesco De Giacomo, Quando il duce salvò Topolino, IF terza serie, n. 4, 1995. Yanni, Mary (August 26, 2018). "Does Mickey Mouse have an Oscar?". Disney Diary. Archived from the original on May 9, 2023. Retrieved May 7, 2023. "Walt Disney with Oscar statuette, Special Award, and model for Mickey Mouse, ca. 1932". digitalcollections.oscars.org. Archived from the original on June 10, 2023. Retrieved May 7, 2023. "The 50 Greatest Cartoons — As Selected by 1,000 Animation Professionals – Movie list". MUBI. Archived from the original on February 12, 2021. Retrieved May 7, 2023. Chad (October 25, 2019). "Mickey Mouse". Hollywood Walk of Fame. Archived from the original on May 7, 2023. Retrieved May 7, 2023. Craig Bellamy; Gordon Chisholm; Hilary Eriksen (February 17, 2006). "Moomba: A festival for the people" (PDF). City of Melbourne. Archived from the original (PDF) on August 25, 2006. Apgar, Garry (December 22, 2015). Mickey Mouse: Emblem of the American Spirit. San Francisco, CA: Weldon Owen. ISBN 978-1-61628-672-9. OCLC 1349253324 – via Internet Archive. Korkis, Jim (2012). Who Is Afraid of the Song of the South?: And Other Forbidden Disney Stories. Orlando, Fla.: Theme Park Press. ISBN 978-0984341559. OCLC 823179800. Thomas, Frank; Johnston, Ollie (1995) [1981]. Disney Animation: The Illusion of Life. Disney Publishing Worldwide. ISBN 0-7868-6070-7. Mickey Mouse at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Data from Wikidata Disney's Mickey Mouse character page Mickey Mouse at Inducks Mickey Mouse on IMDb Mickey Mouse's Campaign Website (as archived on August 3, 2008) Wayne Allwine – Daily Telegraph obituary Mickey Mouse comic strip reprints at Creators Syndicate Mickey Mouse at Don Markstein's Toonopedia.