The Uzbekistan national football team (Uzbek: Oʻzbekiston milliy futbol terma jamoasi / Ўзбекистон миллий футбол терма жамоаси) represents Uzbekistan in international football and is controlled by the Uzbekistan Football Association, the governing body for football in Uzbekistan. Uzbekistan holds the highest competitive results among teams from Central Asia. Although they have never qualified to the World Cup, the team has qualified for every AFC Asian Cup since post-independence formation. At the 2011 Asian Cup, Uzbekistan reached the semi-finals of the tournament for the first time. At other competitions such as the Asian Games, Uzbekistan won the gold medal in 1994 in Japan, while finishing as the runners-up at the Afro-Asian Cup of Nations in 1995. The year of birth of football in Uzbekistan is 1912 (read more in this article), since it was then that football teams were created in Kokand, a little later in Ferghana, Andijan, Tashkent, Samarkand, Bukhara and Urganch, between which began to be held long-distance matches. The first championship of Ferghana valley was held in 1914, the Championship of the Uzbekistan SSR began to be played since 1926, and the drawing of the Uzbekistan SSR Cup began to be carried out since 1939. From 1924 to 1991 Uzbekistan was part of the Soviet Union (USSR) as the Uzbekistan Soviet Socialist Republic (UzSSR). In 1928, the national team of Uzbekistan was created for the first time, which took part in the Spartakiade, which included representatives of some European countries. At this tournament, the national team of Uzbekistan Soviet Socialist Republic held its first international match against team of jobs Switzerland and won with a score of 8:4. Until mid-1991, Uzbekistan was part of the USSR and had its own national team as well as the rest of the Union republics, which mostly played matches within teams and teams of the USSR, in particular in football tournaments of the Spartakiad of Peoples of the USSR. The national team of the Uzbekistan SSR participated in all draws of the football tournament of the Spartakiad of Peoples of the USSR, and in the 1986 tournament reached the final, lost to the Ukrainian SSR (modern Ukraine) team with a score of 0–1, thereby winning the silver medal of the tournament. Throughout the history of Soviet Union, Uzbekistan SSR was one of five main center of football development in the country, alongside Russia SFSR, Ukraine SSR, Belarus SSR and Georgia SSR. The most powerful football clubs, as well as semi-professional and professional clubs of the Uzbekistan SSR participated in the USSR Football League (Higher League, First League, Second League and Second League B) and USSR Cup. Nonprofessional clubs of the Uzbekistan SSR participated in the Uzbekistan SSR Championship and the Uzbekistan SSR Cup. After the dissolution of the Soviet Union, and Uzbekistan gaining independence, the national team of Uzbekistan of the new convocation was organized. The national team held its first matches in 1992. The first game of the national team of Uzbekistan was a match against Tajikistan, in the framework of the Central Asian Cup 1992 (the tournament was held once) initiated by FIFA. These matches are officially registered by FIFA on the basis of the fact that the national team of Uzbekistan has been allowed since 1992 to participate in tournaments held under the auspices of FIFA. At the drawing of this tournament in the format of the league, the national team of Uzbekistan was the second after the national team of Kazakhstan. In the first year of existence, the national team of Uzbekistan held matches only with the teams of Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan. In 1993, the team has not played a single match. In 1992, Uzbekistan was also a member of the CIS national football team, which existed for one year and replaced the USSR national football team and instead participated in the Euro 1992. Most of the former Soviet republics became members of UEFA (Russia, Ukraine, Belarus, Moldova, Latvia, Lithuania, Estonia, Georgia, Armenia and Azerbaijan), and Uzbekistan also wanted to become a member of UEFA. But like the rest of the republics of Central Asia (Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Turkmenistan), chose AFC. In 2002, Kazakhstan became a member of UEFA for better development of its football, but Uzbekistan chose to remain in the AFC. In 1994, the Uzbekistan Football Federation was officially adopted by the AFC and FIFA. In the same year Uzbekistan won in the international tournament the Cup of Independence of Uzbekistan, and at the end of the year the national team won in the ending the national team of China with the score 4:2, became the winner of football tournament of the Asian Games of 1994 which took place in the Japanese city of Hiroshima. The 1994 Asian Games tournament was considered as the shocking successful birth of Uzbekistan, and gives prelude for the rise of Uzbekistan as a serious Asian contender. The tournament would go on remembered as "Miracle of 1994". Although the tournament was mostly for amateur players at the time (the under-23 competed only since 2002), Uzbekistan was not considered to be a favourite to win the tournament. In addition, the Uzbek team lacked support with only 17 players and a budget below $14.000 for the new born Football Federation. Conflict also emerged internally as Rustam Akramov was appointed as the head coach of Uzbekistan while the more popular Berador Abduraimov became assistant, which Abduraimov resented greatly. Not just that, many of its players, mostly Russian-ethnic based players, chose to represent Russia or Ukraine, or some to Nigeria, following the fall of USSR. The two major clubs, Pakhtakor and Neftchi, formed majority of their players for Uzbek team, traveling to Japan with little expectation. Nonetheless, Uzbekistan would mark the tournament with an outstanding performance. Grouped with powerhouse Saudi Arabia, two Southeast Asian sides Thailand and Malaysia, alongside Hong Kong, the Uzbeks shocked Hiroshima with a 4–1 victory over the Saudis. It was followed by 5–0 victory over Malaysia, hard-fought 1–0 win over Hong Kong before sealing its first place in a 5–4 thriller over Thailand. In the quarter-finals, Uzbekistan crushed neighbor Turkmenistan 3–0 to advance to the semi-finals where they faced South Korea. The Korean side included nine players that had already participated in the 1994 FIFA World Cup and was expected to steamroll Uzbekistan easily, having beaten hosts Japan in the previous match. However, Uzbekistan shocked South Korea with a 1–0 victory to advance to the final, its first ever final since gaining independence from the Soviet Union. In their final game against China, Uzbekistan created its miracle, beating the rising Chinese side 4–2 to capture its first and only Asian honor two years after its creation. This miraculous conquest gave Uzbekistan a new fresh image, and would boost Uzbekistan's position as a serious contender for future Asian competitions. Uzbekistan overcame its rival and neighbor Tajikistan in an insane comeback. Having been beaten 0–4 away in Dushanbe, Uzbekistan looked like would miss its debut. Yet, Uzbekistan overturned the game at home, crushing Tajikistan 5–0 to win 5–4 on aggregate, thus giving Uzbekistan its first ever debut in the tournament. In 1996 AFC Asian Cup, Uzbekistan was grouped with Japan, China and Syria. Unlike the Asian Games, the Asian Cup was regarded as tougher because it consisted of professional teams. Under these conditions, Uzbekistan, which only appeared in the 1994 Asian Games, was regarded very low. Yet, in their opening game against China, Uzbekistan stunned all predictions. Despite rampant Chinese pressure, Uzbekistan held their nerves and overcame China with two shock late goals to give them a 2–0 win and its first ever points in the tournament. This shock victory of Uzbekistan, however, raised alarms for other opponents, Japan and Syria didn't tolerate Uzbekistan, and destroyed the Uzbeks in the two decisive matches. Because of it, Uzbekistan stood bottom in their group and failed to make it through the first round. Uzbekistan put a decent performance in the country's first-ever attempt to qualify for World Cup, at the 1998 World Cup qualifiers. Grouped with Yemen, Cambodia and Indonesia in the first stage, Uzbekistan proved to be too strong for the rest, with the team only failed to win once, an away draw to the Indonesians. Shortly after, the Uzbeks gallantly marched into the final stage, however, things would prove to be more difficult, with Uzbekistan did not have luck in facing with more powerful South Korea, Japan and the UAE. The only win for Uzbekistan came after the match against neighbor Kazakhstan. Little to know for many Uzbek supporters, this would begin to make the country as the choker of every major World Cup qualifications, with the team often fell short in their final quest. The 2000 AFC Asian Cup for Uzbekistan was a whitewashed moment, in a terrible way as it became Uzbekistan's worst ever performance in many major competition. Grouped again with Japan, Saudi Arabia and the new opponent Qatar, Uzbekistan was dumped in the bottom once more, with two devastating losses to Saudi Arabia and Japan, alongside its 1–1 draw to Qatar. Uzbekistan participated in the first round in order to qualify for the 2002 FIFA World Cup in Japan and South Korea. As thing stood, Uzbekistan were able to dominate the group stage and qualify for the second round. The group contained themselves with China, the UAE, Oman and Qatar. The Uzbeks were unable to make any major breakthrough in the second round, losing twice to the Emirates, two away defeats toward China and Oman and an away draw to Qatar confirmed Uzbekistan's failure to qualify, despite a late win over already qualified China in the final match. Uzbekistan failed to make further impact on the continental stage until they reached the last eight of the 2004 Asian Cup, topping their group after winning all matches, where they were beaten by Bahrain after a penalty shoot-out. That performance was followed by a victory over Iraq in the second qualifying round for the 2006 World Cup in Germany, with goals from Maksim Shatskikh and Alexander Geynrikh sending them through to the last eight. They were knocked out in the final stage of the Asian qualification to the 2006 World Cup after losing on the away goals rule to Bahrain. The result was subject to controversy as actually three games were played; the first, a 1–0 win for Uzbekistan, was wiped out after FIFA declared the result void after a mistake by Toshimitsu Yoshida, a Japanese referee. The replay ended 1–1, and after the return finished 0–0, Uzbekistan were eliminated. In the 2007 Asian Cup, Uzbekistan was able to get past the group stage by beating Malaysia 5–0 and China PR 3–0. However, Uzbekistan was knocked out of the tournament in the quarter-finals by losing to Saudi Arabia 2–1. After having three foreign coaches (German Hans-Jürgen Gede, Englishman Bob Houghton and Russian Valeri Nepomniachi) in three years, Uzbekistan turned to former Uzbekistan Olympic team coach Rauf Inileev. During qualification for the 2010 World Cup, Uzbekistan advanced to the fourth round of the Asian qualifiers after winning their first four matches, but finished last in Group A of the final round behind favorites Australia, Japan, Bahrain and Qatar, with four points from eight matches. Four years later, in the 2011 Asian Cup, Uzbekistan ended in fourth place, their all-time best result in the tournament. After getting past the group stage and quarter-finals, the Uzbek team lost their first opportunity to reach the Asian Cup finals when Australia thrashed the team 0–6 in the semi-final game. Several days later, they were defeated again by South Korea in the third place match 3-2. In qualification for the 2014 World Cup, Uzbekistan advanced to the fourth round of the Asian qualifiers after winning their group in the third round over perennial favorites Japan. Uzbekistan finished with 16 points (five wins and one draw), which was more than any other team in the third round, including an impressive 1–0 away win against Japan. In the fourth round of the qualifiers, Uzbekistan finished third in Group A behind Iran and South Korea. Uzbekistan had the same number of points as South Korea (14 points), who had a better goal difference by one goal. The two teams who finished third in the fourth round groups (Jordan and Uzbekistan) played each other in the fifth round to determine the AFC participant in the intercontinental play-off. The games took place on 6 and 10 September 2013. With the two teams still evenly matched at full-time in the second leg, Jordan eventually progressed to the intercontinental play-off after winning 9–8 on penalties. In the 2015 Asian Cup, Uzbekistan advanced to the quarter-finals after finishing as runners-up in the tough Group B, which was won by China, while Saudi Arabia and North Korea were eliminated. However, the team was knocked out of the tournament in the quarter-finals after losing 2–0 in extra time to South Korea. Uzbekistan continued their quest to head to the World Cup during 2018 FIFA World Cup qualification in Russia, but their campaign had been shattered with a humiliating 2–4 defeat to North Korea. However, the Uzbeks soon bounced back and won the last remaining matches to top the group and qualified to the 2019 AFC Asian Cup as well as the last round. Once again, Uzbekistan in the last round, missed an opportunity when they finished fourth, behind Iran, South Korea and Syria, when Uzbekistan could only manage a 0–0 draw to the South Koreans last match. Uzbekistan started their 2019 Asian Cup campaign with a 2–1 victory over Oman and continued with a 4–0 win over neighbor Turkmenistan, which guaranteed Uzbekistan to progress from the group stage for the fifth consecutive time, despite ending with a 1–2 defeat to Japan in the last match. However, they had to face Australia, then-champions of Asia. Despite playing well, Uzbekistan could not break the deadlock as it ended 0–0 after 120 minutes. In the penalty shootout, Australia prevailed with a 4–2 win, thus Uzbekistan's dream was crushed in the round of sixteen. In the second qualifying round for the 2022 World Cup, Uzbekistan suffered another disappointment by failing to qualify for the final round, a first since the Central Asian team had always reached the final round since it took part in the qualifying rounds of a World Cup, the first time being the 1998 edition. The White Wolves did not manage to finish among the five best runners-up, with a record of 5 wins against 3 defeats (in the first and second leg against Saudi Arabia, leader of group D, as well as in the first leg away against Palestine), in which the latter's shock loss to Palestine proved detrimental. Moreover, Uzbekistan's failure was also compounded by the fact that North Korea, originally competed in the qualification's Group H of the same round, surprisingly withdrew due to the COVID-19 pandemic, in which FIFA and AFC then ruled North Korea's results as null and void, directly played a crucial role in helping other Group H opponent Lebanon to qualify ahead of Uzbekistan, since Lebanon's original results against North Korea were poor with a draw and a loss. Uzbekistan then took part in the third qualifying round for the 2023 Asian Cup. Designated as the host country of Group C (due to the COVID-19 pandemic in Asia), the Central Asians took advantage of this advantage and the relative weakness of most of their opponents to win all three games and finish top of their group without conceding a goal, validating their qualification for the 2023 AFC Asian Cup. The Uzbekistan national team has received several nicknames by supporters and media. The most common one used is "The White Wolves" (Uzbek: Oq boʻrilar / Оқ бўрилар). Also, the Uzbekistan national football team is called "Asian Italy" (Uzbek: Osiyo Italiyasi / Осиё Италияси). This is due to the similarity of colors (white and blue) clothing teams of Italy and Uzbekistan, as well as similar tactics (defensive football) of these teams. The Uzbekistan Super League is often considered to be similar to Italian Serie A. Also, the history of Uzbekistan is as rich and ancient as the history of Italy. Also the team of Uzbekistan is called "Huma birds" (Uzbek: Humo qushlari / Ҳумо қушлари). The mythical Huma bird is the national bird of Uzbekistan, and is depicted on the state emblem of Uzbekistan. The Huma bird is depicted on the emblem of the National Olympic Committee of the Republic of Uzbekistan.[citation needed] Sometimes the Uzbekistan national football is called "Turanians" (Uzbek: Turonliklar / Туронликлар), because the current country of Uzbekistan is located in the center of this ancient region Turan, and all the ancient and major cities of this region are located in this country, and therefore Uzbekistan is considered by some to be the successor of the Turan. The main rivals of the Uzbekistan national team are the countries of Central Asia, the national teams of Kazakhstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Kyrgyzstan. However, the main and most important rivals of the national team of Uzbekistan are Kazakhstan and Tajikistan. The matches between the countries of Central Asia have always aroused great interest among fans throughout the region, in spite of Uzbekistan's dominance since the fall of the USSR. Football is one of the instruments of rivalry between the states of Central Asia, dating back to the Soviet era. From the moment of its formation (1992) until the end of 2012, the main home stadium of the Uzbekistan national football team was the Pakhtakor Central Stadium in Tashkent, built and opened in 1956. This stadium is also the venue for home matches of Pakhtakor Football Club. During the USSR, this stadium was home for the Uzbekistan SSR national team. Was reconstructed in 1996, 2008 and 2012 and currently holds 35,000 spectators (before this capacity was 55,000 spectators). For today's time the national team of Uzbekistan holds only some of the matches at Pakhtakor Stadium. From 2013 to the present, the main home stadium of the Uzbekistan national team is the Milliy Stadium (until 2018 was named Bunyodkor Stadium), built in 2008–2012 and accommodating 34,000 spectators. This stadium is also a home for the Bunyodkor Football Club. Last updated: 26 March 2024. Statistics include official FIFA-recognised matches only. The following is a list of match results in the last 12 months, as well as any future matches that have been scheduled.   Win   Draw   Loss   Fixture Uzbekistan  v  Venezuela Uzbekistan  v  Oman Turkmenistan  v  Uzbekistan Uzbekistan  v  Tajikistan Uzbekistan  v  Iran United States  v  Uzbekistan Mexico  v  Uzbekistan Vietnam  v  Uzbekistan China  v  Uzbekistan Turkmenistan  v  Uzbekistan Uzbekistan  v  Iran Kyrgyzstan  v  Uzbekistan Palestine  v  Uzbekistan Uzbekistan  v  Syria India  v  Uzbekistan Australia  v  Uzbekistan Uzbekistan  v  Thailand Qatar  v  Uzbekistan Hong Kong  v  Uzbekistan Uzbekistan  v  Hong Kong Uzbekistan  v  Turkmenistan Iran  v  Uzbekistan As of 26 March 2024 The following 23 players were called for up for the Uzbekistan's 2026 FIFA World Cup qualification matches against  Hong Kong on 21 and 26 March. Caps and goals correct as of 26 March 2024 after the match against  Hong Kong. The following players have been called for the last 12 months and are still eligible to represent. As of 26 March 2024 Players in bold are still active with Uzbekistan. Football at the Asian Games has been an under-23 tournament since 2002. As of 26 March 2024 after the match against  Hong Kong.   Positive Record   Neutral Record   Negative Record FIFA-ranking yearly averages for Uzbekistan (1994–2024) As of 15 February 2024 Intercontinental Afro-Asian Cup of Nations Runners-up (1): 1995 Continental Asian Games Gold Medal (1): 1994 Asian Cup Fourth place (1): 2011 Regional CAFA Championship Runners-up: 2023 Frienly/Invitational Navruz Cup Champions (1): 2022 Merdeka Tournament Champions (1): 2001 Central Asian Cup Runners-up (1): 1992 China Cup Third place (1): 2019 Association football portal Uzbekistan portal Uzbekistan national football team results Uzbekistan national under-23 football team Uzbekistan national under-20 football team Uzbekistan national under-17 football team Uzbekistan national futsal team Football in Uzbekistan Sport in Uzbekistan "The FIFA/Coca-Cola World Ranking". FIFA. 15 February 2024. Retrieved 15 February 2024. Elo rankings change compared to one year ago. "World Football Elo Ratings". eloratings.net. 27 March 2024. Retrieved 27 March 2024. "Uzbekistan - Remembering the Miracle of 1994". Futbolgrad. 25 August 2017. Archived from the original on 15 November 2021. Retrieved 28 November 2021. "Uzbekistan and Bahrain to play it again". ESPN. Archived from the original on 23 September 2016. Retrieved 13 July 2016. "Uzbekistan 2–3 South Korea". Goal.com. 28 January 2011. Archived from the original on 18 January 2014. Retrieved 2 February 2011. "www.espn.com/video/clip?id=20590948". espn.com. Archived from the original on 1 December 2018. Retrieved 28 November 2021. "South Korea: North Koreans pull out of World Cup qualifying". AP News. 4 May 2021. Archived from the original on 6 May 2021. Retrieved 7 May 2021. "Latest update on Asian Qualifiers". Asian Football Confederation. 16 May 2021. Archived from the original on 20 May 2021. Retrieved 17 May 2021. "Latest decision on Asian Qualifiers". Asian Football Confederation. 27 May 2021. Archived from the original on 2 June 2021. Retrieved 6 March 2023. "Cuper ready to power Uzbekistan". AFC. Archived from the original on 30 November 2018. Retrieved 7 January 2019. "2018 FIFA World Cup Qualifiers: Uzbekistan 1-0 Qatar - White Wolves pile further misery on the Maroons". Goal.com. Archived from the original on 30 November 2018. Retrieved 7 January 2019. "Uzbekistan Football Federation President Mirabror Usmanov Met With Junior White Wolves". Championat.asia. Archived from the original on 30 November 2018. Retrieved 7 January 2019. Minahan, James B. (23 December 2009). James Minahan. The Complete Guide to National Symbols and Emblems. Abc-Clio. ISBN 9780313344978. Archived from the original on 20 September 2023. Retrieved 7 January 2019. "Кубок Азии – 2019. Группа F. Сборная Узбекистана. Белые волки Турана". sports.ru. 30 December 2018. Archived from the original on 7 January 2019. Retrieved 7 January 2019. "Кубок Азии – 2019. Группа F. Сборная Узбекистана. Белые волки Турана". sports.ru. 30 December 2018. Archived from the original on 7 January 2019. Retrieved 7 January 2019. Marko Polo — National Encyclopedia of Uzbekistan, 2000–2005 "Кубок Азии – 2019. Группа F. Сборная Узбекистана. Белые волки Турана". sports.ru. 30 December 2018. Archived from the original on 7 January 2019. Retrieved 7 January 2019. Turon — National Encyclopedia of Uzbekistan, 2000–2005 Бартольд В. В. Работы по истории и филологии тюркских и монгольских народов / В. В. Бартольд; — Перепеч. с изд. 1968 г. — М. — ISBN 9785020183391 (в пер.) "Swag. Хипстеры. Adidas. Модный показ сборной Узбекистана - Узбекская кухня - Блоги". Sports.ru. 7 March 2016. Archived from the original on 27 April 2016. Retrieved 28 November 2021. "Терма жамоаларимизда либос масаласи". stadion.uz. Archived from the original on 8 June 2016. Retrieved 28 November 2021. "JCh-2026 saralash bosqichi uchun Milliy jamoa yig'iniga jalb etilgan futbolchilar". fft.tj (in Uzbek). Uzbekistan Football Association. 13 March 2024. Retrieved 13 March 2024. Mamrud, Roberto. "Uzbekistan - Record International Players". RSSSF. Archived from the original on 22 October 2008. Retrieved 2 February 2023. "World Football Elo Ratings: Uzbekistan". "FIFA-ranking yearly averages for Uzbekistan". FIFA.com. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Uzbekistan national football team. Official website (in English and Uzbek) FIFA website AFC website