Spider-Man in film dates back to 1977, the rights belonging to Marvel until 1999, when Sony bought them for $7 million. He has been Marvel's most successful character in the cinema industry ever since. After selling the Spider-Man motion picture rights to Sony, Marvel eventually founded its own studio, developing the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU) based on the characters they still held the rights to. This would change in 2016, when Sony and Disney entered an agreement to include Spider-Man in the MCU. Despite some disagreements pertaining to finances and merchandising between the two parties, the agreement proved a successful endeavor for both companies. The following two Avengers sequels, finally with Spider-Man, crossed the $2 billion mark at worldwide box office for the first time. Meanwhile, Sony in association with Marvel launched the Sony's Spider-Man Universe (SSU), with Sony entering a 3 billion-dollar streaming agreement with Netflix and Disney. The fictional character Spider-Man, a comic book superhero created by Stan Lee and Steve Ditko and featured in Marvel Comics publications, has appeared as a main character in numerous theatrical and made-for-television films. The first four films were linked to television series and screened in theaters only in certain countries. Nicholas Hammond starred as Peter Parker / Spider-Man in the 1977 made-for-television film Spider-Man that spawned a broadcast series, and would appear as the character in two sequels edited from those episodes. In 1978, the Toei Company created a theatrical spin-off of their Spider-Man television series, with Shinji Todō reprising his role as Takuya Yamashiro / Spider-Man. None of these films had a theatrical release in the United States. By 1999, Sony Pictures Entertainment had acquired the motion picture rights to the character for cinema and TV, creating two Spider-Man animated TV series, and two film series comprising their own continuities: the Sam Raimi Spider-Man trilogy of films (2002–2007) starring Tobey Maguire as the character, and the Marc Webb Amazing Spider-Man films (2012–2014) starring Andrew Garfield in the role. In February 2015, Disney, Marvel Studios, and Sony made a deal to share the Spider-Man film rights, leading to a new iteration of Spider-Man being introduced and integrated into the Marvel Cinematic Universe. The deal allowed Sony Pictures to continue to own, finance, distribute, and have final creative control of the solo Spider-Man films, with Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures distributing the films with his other appearances in a supporting capacity. Tom Holland portrays this version of Spider-Man, and has appeared in six films to date, from Captain America: Civil War (2016) to Spider-Man: No Way Home (2021). In September 2019, following a brief stand-off resulting in the termination of the old agreement, Disney and Sony relented to fan outcry and reached a new agreement for Holland's version to return for future films; the first film to be produced afterward was Spider-Man: No Way Home (2021), where he appears alongside Maguire and Garfield who reprise their roles in the film as supporting characters. A fourth MCU Spider-Man film is in development at Sony and Disney. Plans for an animated Spider-Man film were officially announced by Sony in April 2015, which eventually became Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse (2018) from Sony Pictures Animation. Shameik Moore voices Miles Morales / Spider-Man in the film, along with various other versions of Peter Parker and alternate versions of Spider-Man from the multiverse also appearing. A sequel, titled Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse, was released in 2023, with a finale, titled Spider-Man: Beyond the Spider-Verse, currently in production. Potential spin-offs are also planned. The Spider-Man films have been generally well received. They have collectively grossed $10.2 billion at the global box office, with Far From Home becoming the first Spider-Man film to gross over $1 billion worldwide followed by No Way Home, which became Sony's highest-grossing film of all time. In 2019, Into the Spider-Verse won the Academy Award for Best Animated Feature. Fifteen years before, the Academy had awarded Spider-Man 2 the Oscar for Best Visual Effects. In 1977, the pilot episode of The Amazing Spider-Man television series was released by Columbia Pictures as Spider-Man outside of the United States. It was directed by E. W. Swackhamer, written by Alvin Boretz and stars Nicholas Hammond as the titular character, David White as J. Jonah Jameson and Jeff Donnell as May Parker. The film premiered on CBS on September 14, 1977, and received a VHS release in 1980. In 1978, the two-part episode "Deadly Dust" from the television series The Amazing Spider-Man was re-edited and released outside of the United States as a feature film, Spider-Man Strikes Back. Nicholas Hammond reprises his role as Peter Parker / Spider-Man while Robert F. Simon replaces David White in the role of J. Jonah Jameson. The film was theatrically released on 8 May 1978. In 1981, a film made from The Amazing Spider-Man television series finale "The Chinese Web", using the same method used to make Spider-Man Strikes Back, was released as Spider-Man: The Dragon's Challenge in European territories. Nicholas Hammond and Robert F. Simon respectively reprise their roles as Peter Parker / Spider-Man and J. Jonah Jameson. It was directed by Ron Satlof and written by Robert Janes. Other actors include Rosalind Chao, Benson Fong, and Ellen Bry. In 1978, Tōei released a theatrical spin-off of their Spider-Man TV series at the Tōei Cartoon Festival. The film was directed by Kōichi Takemoto, who also directed eight episodes of the TV series. The week after the film's release, a character introduced in the film, Jūzō Mamiya (played by Noboru Nakaya), began appearing in episodes of the TV series. The film was released on July 22, 1978. Like the rest of the series, the film was made available for streaming on Marvel's official website in 2009. The low box office performance of 1983's Superman III made feature-film adaptations of comic book properties a low priority in Hollywood until the late 1990s. In 1985, after a brief option on Spider-Man by Roger Corman expired, Marvel Comics optioned the property to Cannon Films. Cannon chiefs Menahem Golan and his cousin Yoram Globus agreed to pay Marvel Comics $225,000 over the five-year option period, plus a percentage of any film's revenues. However, the rights would revert to Marvel if a film was not made by April 1990. Tobe Hooper, then preparing both Invaders from Mars and The Texas Chainsaw Massacre 2, was mooted as director. Golan and Globus misunderstood the concept of the character ("They thought it was like The Wolf Man", said director Joseph Zito) and instructed writer Leslie Stevens, creator of The Outer Limits, to write a treatment reflecting their misconception. In Stevens' story, a corporate scientist intentionally subjects ID-badge photographer Peter Parker to radioactive bombardment, transforming him into a hairy, suicidal, eight-armed monster. This human tarantula refuses to join the scientist's new master-race of mutants, battling a succession of mutations kept in a basement laboratory. Unhappy with this perceived debasement of his comic book creation, Marvel's Stan Lee pushed for a new story and screenplay, written for Cannon by Ted Newsom and John Brancato. The variation on the origin story had Otto Octavius as a teacher and mentor to a college-aged Peter Parker. The cyclotron accident which "creates" Spider-Man also deforms the scientist into Doctor Octopus and results in his mad pursuit of proof of the Fifth Force. "Doc Ock" reconstructs his cyclotron and causes electromagnetic abnormalities, anti-gravity effects, and bilocation which threatens to engulf New York City and the world. Joseph Zito, who had directed Cannon's successful Chuck Norris film Invasion U.S.A., replaced Tobe Hooper. The new director hired Barney Cohen to rewrite the script. Cohen added action scenes, a non-canonical comic-book sidekick for the villain, gave Doc Ock the catch phrase, "Okey-dokey", and altered his goal from the Fifth Force to a quest for anti-gravity. Producer Golan (using his pen name "Joseph Goldman") then made a minor polish to Cohen's rewrite. Zito scouted locations and studio facilities in both the U.S. and Europe, and oversaw storyboard breakdowns supervised by Harper Goff. Cannon planned to make the film on the then-substantial budget of between $15 and $20 million. While no casting was finalized, Zito expressed interest in actor/stunt man Scott Leva, who had posed for Cannon's promotional photos and ads, and made public appearances as Spider-Man for Marvel. The up-and-coming actor Tom Cruise was also discussed for the leading role. Zito considered Bob Hoskins as Doc Ock. Stan Lee expressed his desire to play Daily Bugle editor J. Jonah Jameson. Lauren Bacall and Katharine Hepburn were considered for Aunt May, Peter Cushing as a sympathetic scientist, and Adolph Caesar as a police detective. With Cannon finances siphoned by the expensive Superman IV: The Quest for Peace and Masters of the Universe, the company slashed the proposed Spider-Man budget to under $10 million. Director Zito opted out, unwilling to make a compromised Spider-Man. The company commissioned low-budget rewrites from writers Shepard Goldman, Don Michael Paul, and finally Ethan Wiley, and penciled in company workhorse Albert Pyun as director, who also made script alterations. Scott Leva was still associated with the character through Marvel (he had appeared in photo covers of the comic), and he read each draft. Leva commented: "Ted Newsom and John Brancato had written the script. It was good, but it needed a little work. Unfortunately, with every subsequent rewrite by other writers, it went from good to bad to terrible." Due to Cannon's assorted financial crises, the project shut down after spending about $1.5 million on the project. In 1989, Pathé, owned by corrupt Italian financier Giancarlo Parretti, acquired the overextended Cannon. The filmmaking cousins parted, Globus remaining associated with Pathé, Golan leaving to run 21st Century Film Corporation, keeping a number of properties (including Spider-Man) in lieu of a cash buy-out. He also extended his Spider-Man option with Marvel up to January 1992. Golan shelved the low-budget rewrites and attempted to finance an independent production from the original big-budget script, already budgeted, storyboarded and laid out. At Cannes in May 1989, 21st Century announced a September start date, with ads touting the script by "Barney Cohen, Ted Newsom & John Brancato and Joseph Goldman". As standard practice, Golan pre-sold the unmade film to raise production funds, with television rights bought by Viacom and home video rights by Columbia Pictures, which wanted to establish a studio franchise. Stephen Herek was attached as director at this point. Golan submitted this "new" screenplay to Columbia in late 1989 (actually the 1985 script with an adjusted "1989" date) and the studio requested yet another rewrite. Golan hired Frank LaLoggia, who turned in his draft but grew disenchanted with 21st Century. Neil Ruttenberg was hired for one more draft, which was also "covered" by script readers at Columbia. Columbia's script analysts considered all three submissions "essentially the same story". A tentative production deal was set. Stan Lee said in 1990: "21st Century [is] supposed to do Spider-Man and now they're talking to Columbia and the way it looks now, Columbia may end up buying Spider-Man from 21st Century." 21st Century's Menahem Golan still actively immersed himself mounting "his" Spider-Man, sending the original "Doc Ock" script for production bids. In 1990, he contacted Canadian effects company Light and Motion Corporation regarding the visual effects, which in turn offered the stop-motion chores to Steven Archer (Krull, Clash of the Titans). Toward the end of shooting True Lies, Variety carried the announcement that Carolco Pictures had received a completed screenplay from James Cameron. This script bore the names of James Cameron, John Brancato, Ted Newsom, Barry [sic] Cohen and "Joseph Goldmari", a typographical scrambling of Golan's pen name ("Joseph Goldman") with Marvel executive Joseph Calamari. The script text was identical to the one Golan submitted to Columbia the previous year, with the addition of a new 1993 date. Cameron stalwart Arnold Schwarzenegger was frequently linked to the project as the director's choice for Doctor Octopus. Months later, James Cameron submitted an undated 57-page "scriptment" with an alternate story (the copyright registration was dated 1991), part screenplay, part narrative story outline. The "scriptment" told the Spider-Man origin, but used variations on the comic book characters Electro and Sandman as villains. This "Electro" (named Carlton Strand, instead of Max Dillon) was a megalomaniacal parody of corrupt capitalists. Instead of Flint Marko's character, Cameron's "Sandman" (simply named Boyd) is mutated by an accident involving Philadelphia Experiment-style bilocation and atom-mixing, in lieu of getting caught in a nuclear blast on a beach. The story climaxes with a battle atop the World Trade Center and had Peter Parker revealing his identity to Mary Jane Watson. In addition, the treatment was also heavy on profanity, and had Spider-Man and Mary Jane having sex on the Brooklyn Bridge. This treatment reflected elements in previous scripts: from the Stevens treatment, organic web-shooters, and a villain who tempts Spider-Man to join a coming "master race" of mutants; from the original screenplay and rewrite, weird electrical storms causing blackouts, freak magnetic events and bi-location; from the Ethan Wiley draft, a villain addicted to toxic super-powers and multiple experimental spiders, one of which escapes and bites Peter, causing a hallucinatory nightmare invoking Franz Kafka's The Metamorphosis; from the Frank LaLoggia script, a blizzard of stolen cash fluttering down onto surprised New Yorkers; and from the Neil Ruttenberg screenplay, a criminal assault on the NYC Stock Exchange. In 1991, Carolco Pictures extended Golan's option agreement with Marvel through May 1996, but in April 1992, Carolco ceased active production on Spider-Man due to continued financial and legal problems. During this time Leonardo DiCaprio was considered for Peter Parker/Spider-Man; Maggie Smith as Aunt May; Robyn Lively as Mary Jane Watson; R. Lee Ermey as J. Jonah Jameson; Michael Biehn as Boyd/Sandman; and Lance Henriksen as Carlton Strand/Electro. When James Cameron agreed to make Spider-Man, Carolco lawyers simply used his previous Terminator 2 contract as a template. A clause in this agreement gave Cameron the right to decide on movie and advertising credits. Show business trade articles and advertisements made no mention of Golan, who was still actively assembling the elements for the film. In 1993, Golan complained publicly and finally instigated legal action against Carolco for disavowing his contractual guarantee credit as producer. On the other hand, Cameron had the contractual right to decide on credits. Eventually, Carolco sued Viacom and Columbia to recover broadcast and home video rights, and the two studios countersued. 20th Century Fox, though not part of the litigation, contested Cameron's participation, claiming exclusivity on his services as a director under yet another contract. In 1996, Carolco, 21st Century, and Marvel went bankrupt. Via a quitclaim from Carolco dated March 28, 1995, MGM acquired 21st Century's film library and assets, and received "...all rights in and to all drafts and versions of the screenplay(s) for Spider-Man written by James Cameron, Ted Newsom & John Brancato, Menahem Golan, Jon [sic] Michael Paul, Ethan Wiley, Leslie Stevens, Frank Laloggia, Neil Ruttenberg, Barney Cohen, Shepard Goldman and any and all other writers." MGM also sued 21st Century, Viacom, and Marvel Comics, alleging fraud in the original deal between Cannon and Marvel. In 1998, Marvel emerged from bankruptcy with a reorganization plan that merged the company with Toy Biz. The courts determined that the original contract of Marvel's rights to Golan had expired, returning the rights to Marvel, but the matter was still not completely resolved. In 1999, Marvel licensed Spider-Man rights to Columbia, a subsidiary of Sony Pictures Entertainment. MGM disputed the legality, claiming it had the Spider-Man rights via Cannon, 21st Century, and Carolco. In the meantime, MGM/UA chief executive John Calley moved to Columbia Pictures. Intimately familiar with the legal history of producer Kevin McClory's claim to the rights to both Thunderball and other related James Bond characters and elements, Calley announced that Columbia would produce an alternate 007 series, based on the "McClory material", which Calley acquired for Columbia. Columbia had made the original 1967 film spoof of Casino Royale, a non-Eon production. Both studios now faced rival projects, which could undercut their own long-term financial stability and plans. Columbia had no consistent movie franchise, and had sought Spider-Man since 1989; MGM/UA's only reliable source of theatrical income was a new James Bond film every two or three years. An alternate 007 series could diminish or even eliminate the power of MGM/UA's long-running Bond series. Likewise, an MGM/UA Spider-Man film could negate Columbia's plans to create an exclusive cash cow. Both sides seemed to have strong arguments for the rights to do such films. The two studios made a trade-off in March 1999; Columbia relinquished its rights to create a new 007 series in exchange for MGM's giving up its claim to Spider-Man. Columbia acquired the rights to all previous scripts in 2000, but exercised options only on the "Cameron Material", i.e., both the completed multi-author screenplay and the subsequent scriptment. Other sources report that Columbia's owner Sony agreed to pay $10 million, plus 5% of any movies' gross revenue and half the revenue from consumer products. After more than a decade of attempts, Spider-Man truly went into production and since then all of the Spider-Man films were distributed by Columbia Pictures, the primary film production holding of Sony. The first three were directed by Sam Raimi, and the reboot and its sequel were directed by Marc Webb. Laura Ziskin served as producer until her death in 2011. Spider-Man follows Peter Parker (Tobey Maguire), an orphaned high schooler who pines after popular girl-next-door Mary Jane Watson (Kirsten Dunst). While on a science class field trip at Columbia University, a genetically-engineered "super spider" bites Peter. As a result, Peter gains superhuman abilities, including increased strength, speed, and the abilities to scale walls and generate organic webbing. After his beloved Uncle Ben (Cliff Robertson) is murdered, the teenager realizes that he must use his newfound abilities to protect New York City. Meanwhile, wealthy industrialist Norman Osborn (Willem Dafoe), the father of Peter's best friend Harry Osborn (James Franco), subjects himself to an experimental performance-enhancing serum, which creates a psychotic and murderous split personality. Donning a military battle suit, Norman becomes a freakish "Green Goblin", who begins to terrorize the city. Peter, as Spider-Man, now must battle with the Goblin, all while dealing with personal situations involving his domestic and his love life. Two years after the events of the first film, Peter struggles to balance his superhero and private lives and still pines after Mary Jane Watson, who is now engaged. Harry Osborn continues to believe Spider-Man is responsible for his father Norman Osborn's death. Spider-Man contends with scientist Otto Octavius (Alfred Molina), also known as Doctor Octopus, who initially mentors his alter-ego and has four mechanical tentacles fused to his spine following a failed fusion-based experiment and sets out to recreate the same that could destroy much of New York City. Peter is still with Mary Jane Watson, while Harry Osborn succeeds his father as the new Green Goblin (credited as New Goblin). Eddie Brock (Topher Grace), who, like Peter, is a photographer for the Daily Bugle, sets out to defame Spider-Man and incriminate him. Meanwhile, Flint Marko (Thomas Haden Church), an escaped convict, falls into a particle accelerator and becomes a shape-shifting sand monster known as Sandman. Peter later learns that Marko killed Uncle Ben, causing Peter's own dark intentions to grow. This vendetta is enhanced by the appearance of the mysterious black alien symbiotic substance that bonds to Peter, resulting in the formation of a new black costume. Once Peter separates himself from the alien, it finds a new host in the form of Brock, resulting in the creation of Venom and Peter Parker having to battle the villains in the end. In 2007, Spider-Man 4 entered development, with Raimi attached to direct and Maguire, Dunst, and other cast members set to reprise their roles. Both a fourth and a fifth film were planned and at one time the idea of shooting the two sequels concurrently was under consideration. However, Raimi stated in March 2009 that only the fourth film was in development at that time, and that if there were fifth and sixth films, those two films would actually be a continuation of each other. Zodiac screenwriter James Vanderbilt was hired by Sony Pictures in October 2007 to pen the screenplay after initial reports in January that Sony was in contact with David Koepp, who wrote the first Spider-Man film. The script was being rewritten by David Lindsay-Abaire and Gary Ross in November 2008 and October 2009. Sony also engaged Vanderbilt to write scripts for Spider-Man 5 and Spider-Man 6. In 2007, Raimi expressed interest in depicting the transformation of Dr. Curt Connors into his villainous alter-ego, the Lizard; the character's actor Dylan Baker and producer Grant Curtis were also enthusiastic about the idea. Raimi also discussed his desire to upgrade Bruce Campbell from a cameo appearance to a significant role, later revealed to be Quentin Beck / Mysterio. It was reported in December 2009 that John Malkovich was in negotiations to play Vulture and that Anne Hathaway would play Felicia Hardy, though she would not have transformed into the Black Cat as in the comics. Instead, Raimi's Felicia was expected to become a new superpowered figure called the Vulturess. Several years later, in 2013, Raimi re-clarified that the Vultress concept was discarded and Hathaway would've indeed been Black Cat if Spider-Man 4 had been made. Concept art by storyboard artist Jeffrey Henderson revealed in June 2016 showed the inclusion of an opening montage of Spider-Man going up against C and D-list villains, such as Mysterio, the Shocker, the Prowler, the Stilt-Man and the Rhino, with the Vulture serving as the main antagonist; Henderson recalls that the film would have opened with a montage of Spider-Man, now feeling free after breaking up with Mary Jane, catching all villains from his rogues gallery that the crew knew Raimi would never use in his films. Henderson also disclosed that Malkovich would have played the Vulture, who would have been a private contractor who committed terrible actions in behalf of the U.S. government, leading him to be called the "Vulture" because he never left anything but "bones" behind, and the film's climax would have shown the Vulture and Spider-Man fighting in a bloody fight that Spider-Man would have barely won by causing the Vulture's wings to make him tumble between building until crashing into the Citicorp Building's ether and off its top, killing him. In April 2022, Raimi stated that he had planned to include Kraven the Hunter in the film. As disagreements between Sony and Raimi threatened to push the film off the intended May 6, 2011, release date, Sony Pictures announced in January 2010 that plans for Spider-Man 4 had been canceled due to Raimi's withdrawal from the project. Raimi reportedly ended his participation due to his doubt that he could meet the planned May 6, 2011 release date while at the same time upholding the film creatively; he admitted that he was "very unhappy" with the way Spider-Man 3 had turned out, and was under pressure to make the fourth film the best that he could. Raimi purportedly went through four iterations of the script with different screenwriters and still "hated it". In June 2021, animatic producer David E. Duncan, who worked on Spider-Man 4, uploaded an animatic of the canceled project dated November 12, 2009 to his Vimeo account along with the description: "One of a half dozen animatics I produced for the ill-fated 4th Raimi Spider-Man. Studio politics, creative differences and bad internet reactions (to John Malkovich as Vulture) caused the plug to be pulled December of 2009, early in the prep stage. However, one month later, Sony moved forward with Andrew Garfield reboot...", the animatic depicts a battle between Spider-Man and The Vulture. Duncan later deleted the animatic from his page, but it can still be found on YouTube. Following his appearance in No Way Home, some fans called for Sony to make a fourth Tobey Maguire Spider-Man film using the hashtag "#MakeRaimiSpiderMan4" on Twitter. In addition, both director Sam Raimi and actress Kirsten Dunst expressed interest in a possible return in a fourth film, while Tobey Maguire stated that he is "open for anything". However, Raimi later stated that he had no plans to direct such a film. Following the cancelation of Spider-Man 4, Sony announced that the franchise would be rebooted with a new director and new cast. Marc Webb directed both of the Amazing Spider-Man films. The film focuses on Peter Parker (Andrew Garfield) developing his abilities in high school and his relationship with Gwen Stacy (Emma Stone). He fights the Lizard, the monstrous form of Dr. Curt Connors (Rhys Ifans), his father's former partner and a scientist at Oscorp. The film takes place one year after the first film's events. Peter Parker graduates from high school, continues his crime-fighting duties as Spider-Man, while combating the electricity-manipulating Electro (Jamie Foxx), rekindling his relationship with Gwen Stacy, and encountering his old friend Harry Osborn (Dane DeHaan), who is slowly dying from a genetic disease. In June 2013, Sony Pictures announced the release dates for the next two Spider-Man films. The third film was scheduled to be released on June 10, 2016, and the fourth to be released on May 4, 2018. Paul Giamatti confirmed that Rhino would return in the third film. That November, Sony Pictures Entertainment chief Michael Lynton told analysts: "We do very much have the ambition about creating a bigger universe around Spider-Man. There are a number of scripts in the works." Andrew Garfield stated that his contract was for three films, and was unsure of his involvement for the fourth film. In February 2014, Sony announced that Webb would return to direct the third Amazing Spider-Man film. In March, Webb stated that he would not be directing the fourth film, but would like to remain as a consultant for the series. Roberto Orci told IGN in July that he was not working on the third film due to his involvement in Star Trek Beyond. Alex Kurtzman stated in interview that the third film was still continuing production and that there was a possibility of seeing a Black Cat film. Sony Pictures later announced in July that The Amazing Spider-Man 3 had been delayed to 2018. After the announcement in February 2015 of a new series with Marvel Studios, the sequels to The Amazing Spider-Man 2 were canceled. In July 2015, Denis Leary, who had portrayed police Captain George Stacy in the previous two films, revealed that the film at one point had Spider-Man "take this formula and regenerate the people in his life that died." In December 2013, Sony issued a press release through the viral site Electro Arrives announcing that two films were in development, with Alex Kurtzman, Roberto Orci and Ed Solomon writing a spin-off to The Amazing Spider-Man focused on Venom (with Kurtzman attached to direct) and Drew Goddard writing one focused on the villain team Sinister Six. Hannah Minghella and Rachel O'Connor would oversee the development and production of these films for the studio. The Venom spinoff eventually became the 2018 film starring the character. In April 2014, it was announced that Goddard would direct the Sinister Six film, and that both spin-offs would be released before a fourth Amazing Spider-Man, with Spider-Man potentially appearing in both spin-offs. Later in the month, Tolmach and Arad revealed the Sinister Six film would be a redemption story, and that the film's lineup might differ from the comics. On July 23, 2014, Sony Pictures announced that The Sinister Six was scheduled for release on November 11, 2016. By August 2014, Sony was also looking to release a female-centered spin-off film in 2017, with Lisa Joy writing, and had given the Venom spin-off the potential title of Venom: Carnage. "I mean, yes, definitely open to something if it felt right. Peter and Spider-Man, those characters are all about service, to the greater good and the many. He's a working-class boy from Queens that knows struggle and loss and is deeply empathetic. I would try to borrow Peter Parker's ethical framework in that, if there was an opportunity to step back in and tell more of that story, I would have to feel very sure and certain in myself." Andrew Garfield on returning as Spider-Man Despite the announcement in February 2015 of a new series with Marvel Studios, the Sinister Six, Venom, and female-led spin-off films set in the Amazing Spider-Man timeline were then "still moving forward". Feige was not expected to be creatively involved with these films. However, the Sinister Six film was canceled due to The Amazing Spider-Man 2 underperforming commercially, and by November 2015, the other prospective spin-off films were canceled as well. However, Sony has reworked these plans into creating a new film series based on Marvel characters associated with Spider-Man separate from both the Marvel Cinematic Universe or the Amazing Spider-Man franchise, starting with the release of the 2018 film Venom. These include spinoff films centering around the characters of Morbius, Kraven the Hunter, and Silver and Black, a female-centric team up of the Spider-Man anti-heroes Silver Sable and Black Cat. Jared Leto portrayed the title character Morbius in the spin-off film, directed by Daniel Espinosa and was released on April 1, 2022, to critical and commercial failure. Kraven the Hunter was written by Richard Wenk, and has a set release date of August 30, 2024.[citation needed] Following his appearance in No Way Home, some fans called for Sony to make a third Andrew Garfield Spider-Man film using the hashtag "#MakeTASM3" on Twitter. In an interview with Entertainment Tonight, Garfield expressed interest in reprising his role as his Peter Parker for another Spider-Man film. Tom Holland later expressed support for Garfield to reprise the role in a potential third film. Sony's 1999 exclusive rights, covering all Spider-Man universes (including 900+ characters related to Spider-Man), is perpetual provided that Sony releases a new Spider-Man film at least once every 5.75 years. Sometime in 2014, prior to the release of The Amazing Spider-Man 2, there had been informal discussions between Amy Pascal and Marvel Studios president Kevin Feige about whether the world and characters of The Amazing Spider-Man films (including Andrew Garfield's version of Spider-Man) could be retroactively integrated into the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU), but discussions came to nothing. Pascal and Avi Arad had attempted to connect the two franchises prior to these discussions, with the pair revealing that they were intending on licensing out the design of the Oscorp Tower from The Amazing Spider-Man (2012) so it could appear in the New York City skyline of the MCU film The Avengers (2012), establishing the existence of Spider-Man and associated elements in the MCU. It never materialized as a result of the building's design being finalized too late into the latter film's post-production process. Sony also mooted with the idea of doing a crossover film between The Amazing Spider-Man films and the Sam Raimi films with Garfield and Tobey Maguire playing their respective versions of Spider-Man with Raimi reportedly eyed to direct, but this too never came to fruition. In December 2014, following the hacking of Sony Pictures' computers, Sony and Marvel Studios were revealed to have had discussions about licensing Spider-Man to appear in the MCU film Captain America: Civil War (2016) while having control of the film rights remaining with Sony. Talks between the studios then broke down. Instead, Sony had considered having Raimi return to direct a new trilogy. On February 9, 2015, Sony Pictures and Disney announced a licensing agreement that would allow Spider-Man to appear in the Marvel Cinematic Universe, with the character appearing in an MCU film and Sony releasing a Spider-Man film co-produced by Feige and Pascal. Sony Pictures would continue to own, finance, distribute, and exercise final creative control over the Spider-Man films. Feige stated that Marvel had been working to add Spider-Man to the MCU since at least October 2014. The next month, Marvel Entertainment CCO Joe Quesada indicated that the Peter Parker version of the character would be used, which Feige confirmed in April. The following June, Feige clarified that the initial Sony deal did not allow the character to appear in any of the MCU television series, as it was "very specific... with a certain amount of back and forth allowed." Tom Holland, who portrays Peter Parker / Spider-Man in the MCU, revealed in November 2016 that he was signed for "three Spider-Man movies and three solo movies". In June 2017, Holland, Feige, and Jon Watts, director of the MCU Spider-Man films, confirmed that a child (portrayed by Max Favreau) wearing an Iron Man mask whom Tony Stark saves from a drone in Iron Man 2 (2010), was a young Peter Parker, retroactively making it the introduction of the character to the MCU. In August 2019, Disney and Sony couldn't reach a new agreement regarding Spider-Man films, with Marvel Studios and Feige said to no longer have any involvement in any future films. Deadline Hollywood noted that Disney had hoped future films would be a "50/50 co-financing arrangement between the studios", with the possibility to extend the deal to other Spider-Man-related films, an offer Sony rejected and did not counter. Instead, Sony hoped to keep the terms of the previous agreement, where Marvel would receive 5% of the film's initial theatrical gross, with Disney refusing. The Hollywood Reporter added that the lack of a new agreement would see the end of Holland's Spider-Man in the MCU. Variety cited unnamed sources claiming negotiations had "hit an impasse" and that a new deal could still be reached. On August 24, Feige reportedly commented at Disney's D23 Expo: "We got to make five films within the MCU with Spider-Man: two standalone films and three with the Avengers. It was a dream that I never thought would happen. It was never meant to last forever. We knew there was a finite amount of time that we'd be able to do this, and we told the story we wanted to tell, and I'll always be thankful for that." The following month, in response to fan outcry, Disney and Sony reached a new deal, which includes a third Spider-Man film as well as one other film, both set in the MCU. At the time, Watts entered final negotiations to return as director. In November 2021, Pascal revealed in an interview that Sony and Marvel Studios are going to continue collaborating for another trilogy of films set in the MCU. Reports indicated that the first MCU film that Spider-Man would appear in as part of the deal, would be Captain America: Civil War. Directors Joe and Anthony Russo had lobbied for months to include the character in that film. Anthony Russo stated that, despite Marvel telling them to have a "plan B" should the deal with Sony fail, the Russos never created one because "it was very important to us to reintroduce" Spider-Man in the film, adding, "We only have envisioned the movie with Spider-Man." By the end of May 2015, Asa Butterfield, Tom Holland, Judah Lewis, Matthew Lintz, Charlie Plummer and Charlie Rowe screen tested for the lead role, against Robert Downey Jr., who portrays Tony Stark / Iron Man, for chemistry. The six were chosen out of a search of over 1,500 actors to test in front of Feige, Pascal, and the Russo brothers. In June, Feige and Pascal narrowed the actors considered to Holland and Rowe. Both screen tested again with Downey, with Holland also testing with Chris Evans, who portrays Steve Rogers / Captain America, and emerged as the favorite. Holland was ultimately cast as Spider-Man in June. The following month, Marisa Tomei was in talks for the role of May Parker, later appearing in Civil War. In the film, Parker, who has spent the last six months as a local costumed crimefighter named Spider-Man, is recruited by Stark to join his team of Avengers to stop Rogers and his rogue faction of Avengers, who oppose the Sokovia Accords, from fleeing with fugitive Bucky Barnes. During the fight with Rogers and his team, Parker, utilizing a Stark-upgraded version of his initial makeshift suit, proves to be a formidable opponent, and implements a tactic with which he, Stark, James Rhodes / War Machine and Vision disable Scott Lang / Ant-Man in his giant-sized form. Upon returning home, Parker discovers some of the Stark tech features of the suit he was given by Stark. Spider-Man: Homecoming was released on July 7, 2017. The film was directed by Jon Watts, from a screenplay by Jonathan M. Goldstein & John Francis Daley and Watts & Christopher Ford and Chris McKenna & Erik Sommers. Holland, Tomei, and Downey reprise their roles as Peter Parker, May Parker, and Stark, respectively, and are joined by Michael Keaton as Adrian Toomes / Vulture, Zendaya as MJ, Jacob Batalon as Ned Leeds, Laura Harrier as Liz, Tony Revolori as Flash Thompson, and Bokeem Woodbine as Herman Schultz / Shocker, who appears as a minor villain. Jon Favreau also appears as Happy Hogan, reprising his role from the Iron Man films. Production began in June 2016 in Atlanta, Georgia and ended in October. Set two months after the events of Civil War, Parker anxiously awaits his next assignment from Stark while simultaneously balancing his life at Midtown High with his vigilante life as Spider-Man. His investigation of a series of highly weaponized robberies leads him to mysterious weapons trafficker Adrian Toomes and despite Stark's warnings not to be involved attempts to stop him. In October 2016, Holland said the possibility of him appearing in Avengers: Infinity War was "all up in the air", but that "some sort of deal is in the mix" with Sony for him to appear. Holland was eventually confirmed to appear in the film, directed by the Russo brothers, as part of the ensemble cast in February 2017. Parker joins Iron Man, Doctor Strange, and the Guardians of the Galaxy in battling Thanos in the ruins of his home planet, Titan. However, Parker is among the many heroes who perish after Thanos snaps his fingers with a completed Infinity Gauntlet, which wipes out half of all life in the universe. Holland was confirmed to be a part of Avengers: Endgame, directed by the Russo brothers, in April 2017. After dying at the end of Infinity War, Parker along with the other victims of Thanos are resurrected by Bruce Banner five years later and joins the Avengers and their allies in a clash against Thanos and his army in upstate New York. At the battle's conclusion, Parker mourns Stark's death and attends his funeral with Aunt May before returning to high school to reunite with his best friend Ned. In December 2016, Sony Pictures announced a sequel to Spider-Man: Homecoming, for release on July 5, 2019. In June 2017, Feige stated that the film would be titled in a similar fashion to Homecoming, using a subtitle, and would not have a number in the title. A year later, Holland revealed the film's title as Spider-Man: Far From Home. Watts returned to direct, and Holland, Zendaya, Favreau, Batalon, Tomei, and Revolori reprise their roles from Homecoming, with Jake Gyllenhaal joining as Quentin Beck / Mysterio. As in Homecoming, other characters from MCU installments reprise their roles, with Samuel L. Jackson and Cobie Smulders appearing as Nick Fury and Maria Hill, respectively. In April 2019, Sony Pictures moved the release date to July 2, 2019. Set after the events of Endgame, the film features Parker and his friends going to Europe on summer vacation, where Parker, intending to take a break from superheroics is drawn back to it when he is forced to team up with Fury and Mysterio in battling the Elementals. In September 2019, Marvel Studios and Sony Pictures announced to produce a third film, after an impasse between the two companies during negotiations. Watts returned to direct, from a script by McKenna and Sommers. Holland, Zendaya, Favreau, Batalon, Tomei, and Revolori reprise their roles, and are joined by Benedict Cumberbatch and Benedict Wong in their MCU roles as Stephen Strange and Wong, respectively, with the events of this film tying into Doctor Strange in the Multiverse of Madness (2022). The film links the pre-MCU Spider-Man films via the multiverse and features Tobey Maguire and Andrew Garfield reprise their respective roles as their versions of Spider-Man, while Willem Dafoe, Alfred Molina and Thomas Haden Church reprise their roles as Norman Osborn / Green Goblin, Otto Octavius / Doctor Octopus and Flint Marko / Sandman respectively from Sam Raimi's Spider-Man trilogy, along with Jamie Foxx and Rhys Ifans as Max Dillon / Electro and Curt Connors / Lizard respectively from Marc Webb's The Amazing Spider-Man films. Charlie Cox reprises his role as Matt Murdock from Marvel Television's Netflix series and Tom Hardy appears, uncredited, as Eddie Brock, reprising the role from Sony's Spider-Man Universe. After Mysterio exposes Parker's identity as Spider-Man to the world in Far From Home in addition to incriminating him for his demise, ruining Parker's and his close ones' life in the process, Parker asks Strange to make it a secret again with magic, but this inadvertently breaks open the multiverse and allows visitors from alternate realities to enter Parker's universe. Amy Pascal confirmed plans for a sequel to Spider-Man: No Way Home and a second trilogy of films set in the MCU in November 2021 ahead of the film's release, with Kevin Feige confirming the active development of a fourth MCU Spider-Man film in addition to his next supporting appearance in the franchise the following month. Marvel Studios will return to co-produce the film with Sony Pictures and Pascal Pictures. Tom Holland is expected to reprise his role, with his character undergoing a soft-reset as a result of his "momentous decision" during No Way Home's climax, as insinuated by the final line of the screenplay of No Way Home reading: "Peter Parker is no more, but Spider-Man lives on", describing public knowledge of the character's civilian persona being erased by Doctor Strange's spell. In April 2015, Sony announced that Phil Lord and Christopher Miller were writing and producing a Spider-Man animated comedy in development at Sony Pictures Animation. As revealed by the e-mail leak one year before, the duo had been previously courted by Sony to take over the studio's animation division. Originally scheduled to be released on December 21, 2018, Sony changed the date a week earlier on December 14. Sony Pictures Animation president Kristine Belson unveiled the film's logo, with the working title Animated Spider-Man, at CinemaCon 2016, and declared that "conceptually and visually, [the film] will break new ground for the superhero genre." Bob Persichetti would direct the animated film, with Peter Ramsey and Rodney Rothman serving as co-directors and Miles Morales as the protagonist in the film. Into the Spider-Verse producers Phil Lord and Christopher Miller expressed interest in developing animated shorts starring Spider-Ham. The short film Spider-Ham: Caught in a Ham was released on February 26, 2019, along with the digital release of Into the Spider-Verse. In November 2018, it was revealed that Into the Spider-Verse had entered into sequel development. The sequel, which continues Morales' story and features a romance with Gwen Stacy / Spider-Woman, was directed by Joaquim Dos Santos and written by David Callaham. In February 2021, Christopher Miller revealed that both he and Phil Lord were co-writing the screenplay with Callaham, and that Peter Ramsey would serve as an executive producer, after co-directing the first film. By April, Kemp Powers and Justin K. Thompson (the latter of which had previously served as production designer on the first film) were announced to direct the film with Dos Santos. In April 2022, it was announced that the film had been retitled, with the (Part One) moniker removed in favor of separating the film and its sequel. It released on June 2, 2023 after being delayed from its initial April 8, 2022 release date. The Spider Within: A Spider-Verse Story is a short film that debuted at Annecy International Animation Film Festival on June 12, 2023. It was later released on YouTube on March 27, 2024. It was directed by Jarelle Dampier and written by Khaila Amazan through Sony Pictures Imageworks' LENS program and focuses on Morales' life between Into the Spider-Verse and the then-recently released Across the Spider-Verse as he, burdened by school work, exams and relationships, "starts to feel the pressure of his life as Spider-Man, which results in a scary, trippy little jaunt through his subconscious." In December 2021, Lord and Miller revealed that the film was being split into two parts after they had written down the story they wanted to tell for the sequel and realized that it was too much for a single film. Work on both parts was taking place simultaneously. The film was originally set to be released on March 29, 2024 after being delayed from its initial release window of 2022 and 2023, but was removed from Sony's release calendar in late July 2023 due to the concurrent 2023 SAG-AFTRA strike. Following the conclusion of the strike November 2023, Deadline Hollywood reported that the voice recording for the film was set to resume that same month, despite the lack of a new release date. Along with the announcement of a sequel, a spin-off focused on female Spider-characters was revealed to be in development, with Lauren Montgomery in talks to direct the film, while Bek Smith is set to write. The spin-off will star Spider-Gwen, and is set to feature the characters Cindy Moon / Silk and Jessica Drew / Spider-Woman. Producer Amy Pascal felt that "it's great that we're going to be able to tell movies about female superheroes in this realm" as she believes "there are going to be characters that really resonate for people". On how the spin-off film will be connected to Across the Spider-Verse, Pascal said that it will act as a "launching pad" for the spin-off. Hailee Steinfeld expressed interest in reprising her role as Spider-Gwen in the film. John Mulaney expressed interest in a spin-off film starring Spider-Ham, with the potential plot being a "Watergate-like story" which could focus on the character's career as a reporter. Work on an expanded universe using supporting characters from the Spider-Man films began by December 2013. After the relative critical and financial failure of The Amazing Spider-Man 2, these plans were abandoned and in February 2015, Sony announced a deal to collaborate with Marvel Studios on future Spider-Man films and integrate the character into the Marvel Cinematic Universe (MCU). This relationship produced Spider-Man: Homecoming, Spider-Man: Far From Home, and Spider-Man: No Way Home, while Sony separately redeveloped Venom (2018) as a standalone film beginning a new franchise named Sony's Spider-Man Universe (SSU). The franchise continued with Venom: Let There Be Carnage (2021) and Morbius (2022), both of which established that the MCU and SSU would be connected through the multiverse, a concept previously explored in No Way Home. The mid-credits scene of Let There Be Carnage sees Eddie Brock and Venom transported from their hotel to an unfamiliar location and witnesses the MCU version of J. Jonah Jameson talking about Spider-Man's identity as Peter Parker. This is continued in the mid-credits scene of No Way Home, where Brock and Venom are transported back into his original universe, leaving a small piece of the Venom symbiote behind. Michael Keaton reprises his Spider-Man: Homecoming role as Adrian Toomes / Vulture during the post-credits scenes in Morbius. Following the casting of Doctor Strange's second spell permanently erasing the world's knowledge of Peter Parker's civilian identity, Toomes is accidentally transported from the MCU to the SSU, ending up in a vacated prison cell in the latter universe. Upon being released immediately due to lacking a criminal record in the new universe, Toomes begins to surmise Spider-Man's involvement in his displacement. He soon constructs a new Vulture suit and arranges to meet Dr. Michael Morbius, to whom he proposes they form a team. The birth of the SSU's Peter Parker is depicted in the 2024 Madame Web, set in 2003. An uncredited infant actor portrays the character. The film also feature this universe versions of his uncle, Ben Parker (Adam Scott), and his mother, Mary Parker (Emma Roberts). On May 31, 2010, an animated 4D film, titled Marvel Super Heroes 4D, was launched at Madame Tussauds London, featuring Spider-Man and Iron Man leading the Avengers against Doctor Doom. On April 26, 2012, an updated version of the film with a different plot, featuring Spider-Man in a diminished capacity, was opened at Madame Tussauds New York. The film features Tom Kenny as the voice of Peter Parker / Spider-Man. At Comic-Con 2013, Dan Buckley, president of Marvel Worldwide, Inc announced the development of a crossover television film of the animated series Phineas and Ferb, that would feature characters from Marvel Entertainment. The film aired between August 16–25, 2013 on Disney Channel and Disney XD, featuring Drake Bell reprising his role from Ultimate Spider-Man and Avengers Assemble as Peter Parker / Spider-Man, alongside Danny Trejo as Venom. Producer Amy Pascal revealed in May 2023 that a live-action film centered on Miles Morales was in development after the character was featured in the animated Spider-Verse films. Pascal and Christopher Miller said the Miles Morales film would be made following Spider-Man: Beyond the Spider-Verse and the fourth MCU Spider-Man film. List indicator(s) This section includes characters who will appear or have appeared in more than two films in the series. An empty, dark grey cell indicates the character was not in the film, or that the character's official presence has not yet been confirmed.  A indicates an appearance through archival footage or audio.  U indicates an uncredited appearance. Stan Lee, one of the co-creators of Spider-Man, Appeared in varied cameos in all films from the Raimi-trilogy to Into the Spider-Verse. Bruce Campbell, a long-time colleague of Sam Raimi, Appeared in all three of his films. In Spider-Man, he was the announcer at the wrestling ring Peter was in and gave him the name "Spider-Man", instead of the "Human Spider" (the name with which Peter wanted to be introduced). In Spider-Man 2, he was an usher who refuses to let Peter enter the theatre for Mary Jane's play when arriving late. In Spider-Man 3, Campbell appears as a French maître d'. In the ultimately unmade Spider-Man 4, Campbell's character would have been revealed as Quentin Beck / Mysterio. Mysterio would later appear in Spider-Man: Far From Home (2019) played by Jake Gyllenhaal. Additionally, Max Charles portrays a young Peter Parker in both films. Additionally, Max Favreau plays a young Peter Parker in Iron Man 2. Appears alongside Holland and Garfield in Spider-Man: No Way Home. Appears alongside Holland and Maguire in Spider-Man: No Way Home. This Spider-Man is known as "Peter B. Parker". Additionally, Nicolas Cage, Chris Pine, Jorma Taccone, Josh Keaton, and Yuri Lowenthal voice other versions of Peter Parker: Spider-Man Noir, Spider-Man from Earth-1610B, Spider-Man from Earth-67, Spider-Man from The Spectacular Spider-Man, and Spider-Man from the Marvel's Spider-Man video game series, respectively. Despite being portrayed by the same actor from the Raimi films, this is a different version of the character belonging to the Marvel Cinematic Universe. Voicing different versions of the character Sturm voices Mary Jane Watson from Earth-616B. This version of the character uses the alias of the Green Goblin. Portraying the same version of the character from the Raimi films. Despite his alter ego being marketed and noted on the credits as the New Goblin in Spider-Man 3, the character never uses such alias in the film. This version of the Burglar is named Dennis Carradine. This version of the character is Otto Octavius as Appeared in the source material. This version of the character is female and named Olivia Octavius. 12 different variants of Doctor Octopus appear ATSV as anomalies captured by the Spider-Society, one of them being a female variant going by the name of Pirate Doctor Octopus and another being Superior Spider-Man. Additionally, the Lego variant of him from Earth-13122 appears on a newspaper in Earth-13122 Additionally, Alfred Molina's archival audio is used for a male version of Doctor Octopus. This version of the character has the Lizard alter ego. Portraying the same version of the character from the Webb films in the Marvel Cinematic Universe. Additionally, a student in Peter Parker's university class in Spider-Man 2, portrayed by Brianna Brown, is identified as Gwen Stacy in the film's novelization. This version of the character is known as Spider-Woman. Additionally, archive footage of Denis Leary is featured. This variant's real name is Adriano Toomino instead of Adrian Toomes and is from an alternate Renaissance inspired universe This version of the character uses the alias of Prowler. Additionally, Donald Glover portrays a live-action version of Prowler. Additionally, 2 variants Scorpion were among the individuals who were almost pulled into MCU due to a corrupted spell involving Spider-Man's secret identity. Doctor Strange was able to close the rift before they could cross in NHW This version of the character uses the alias of Scorpion. Chameleon appears as a photo in ITSV. He reappears in ATSV as one villains that Miles is shown to have fought The one-time supergroup includes Pharrell Williams, Johnny Marr, Mike Einziger, Junkie XL, Steve Mazzaro, and Andrew Kawczynski. The Sam Raimi trilogy was released on DVD, the first two being released exclusively as two-disc sets and on VHS, with the third film being released in both single and two-disc editions. All three films were later packaged in a "Motion Picture DVD Trilogy" box set. Spider-Man 3 was initially the only Spider-Man film to be released individually on the high-definition Blu-ray format. The first two films were made available on Blu-ray, but only as part of a boxed set with the third film, called Spider-Man: The High-Definition Trilogy. The first two films lacked the bonus features from the DVDs, although Spider-Man 2 did contain both cuts of the film.[citation needed] Sony re-released the three films on June 12, 2012. The DVDs of the first two films reinstated a selection of the bonus features missing from the earlier Blu-ray releases, although the Spider-Man 3 reissue did not include the bonus disc of additional special features that appeared on earlier Blu-ray releases. All three films which comprise the Raimi-trilogy are available in the U.S. on iTunes. The Amazing Spider-Man 2 became the first Spider-Man movie released on Ultra HD Blu-ray on March 1, 2016. Sony released the home video release of Homecoming on UHD and other home video formats on October 17, 2017, as well as sets featuring all of their other Spider-Man movies on UHD. This included Spider-Man: Limited Edition Collection, which includes all three Raimi films, and The Amazing Spider-Man: Limited Edition Collection, which includes both Webb films. In April 2021, Disney and Sony Pictures reached a multi-year deal to let Sony's titles (such as films from the Spider-Man, Jumanji, as well as Hotel Transylvania and other Sony Pictures Animation franchises) stream on Hulu and Disney+. A significant number of Sony titles began streaming on Hulu starting in June 2021. It includes films from 2022 onwards. While the deal only concerns the United States, titles from Sony Pictures began to also be added to Disney+ in regions outside of the U.S., as early as June 2022, starting with the majority of the Spider-Man films. All three films of the Raimi-trilogy set opening day records in North America. The Spider-Man films are among the top of North American rankings of films based on Marvel Comics, with Spider-Man: No Way Home ranking 2nd, Spider-Man ranking 10th, Spider-Man: Far From Home ranking 11th, Spider-Man 2 ranking 13th, Spider-Man 3 ranking 15th, and Spider-Man: Homecoming ranking 16th. In North America, Spider-Man: No Way Home, Spider-Man, Spider-Man: Far From Home, Spider-Man 2, Spider-Man 3 and Spider-Man: Homecoming are ranked 2nd, 14th, 15th, 17th, 19th, and 22nd for all superhero films. Worldwide, Spider-Man: No Way Home, Spider-Man: Far From Home, Spider-Man 3, and Spider-Man: Homecoming are ranked 3rd, 11th, 16th, and 17th for all superhero films. The Raimi-trilogy and the MCU films (Homecoming, Far From Home, and No Way Home) are six of the seven most successful films produced by Sony/Columbia Pictures in North America, with No Way Home becoming Sony's highest-grossing film both in North America and worldwide. David Ansen of Newsweek enjoyed Spider-Man as a fun film to watch, though he considered Spider-Man 2 to be "a little too self-important for its own good." Ansen saw Spider-Man 3 as a return to form, finding it "the most grandiose chapter and the nuttiest." Tom Charity of CNN appreciated the films' "solidly redemptive moral convictions", also noting the vast improvement of the visual effects from the first film to the third. While he saw the second film's Doc Ock as the "most engaging" villain, he applauded the third film's Sandman as "a triumph of CGI wizardry." Richard Corliss of Time enjoyed the action of the films and thought that they did better than most action movies by "rethinking the characters, the franchise and the genre." Colin Covert of the Star Tribune praised Spider-Man as a "superb debut" of the superhero as well as Spider-Man 2 as a "superior sequel" for filmgoers who are fans "of spectacle and of story." Covert expressed disappointment in Spider-Man 3 as too ambitious with the multiple storylines leaving one "feeling overstuffed yet shortchanged." Manohla Dargis of The New York Times enjoyed the humor of the first two films, but found it missing in the third installment. Dargis also noted, "The bittersweet paradox of this franchise is that while the stories have grown progressively less interesting the special effects have improved tremendously." Robert Denerstein of the Rocky Mountain News ranked the films from his favorite to his least favorite: Spider-Man 2, Spider-Man, and Spider-Man 3. While Denerstein missed the presence of Alfred Molina as Doctor Octopus from the second film, he found the third film – despite being "bigger, though not necessarily better" – to have a "satisfying conclusion." List of accolades received by the 2002–2007 Spider-Man film series List of films based on Marvel Comics Spider-Man in television 3 Dev Adam ("Three Giant Men"), 1973 Turkish film featuring an unauthorized depiction of Spider-Man Spider-Man Europe – 33,598,879 Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Japan – 18,648,173 China – 2.05 million Seoul City (South Korea) – 1,125,568 Spider-Man 2 Europe (excluding France and Italy) – 17,963,121 Brazil and Japan – 12,487,714 France and Italy – 8,948,733 China – 2,606,000 South Korea – 2,367,704 Spider-Man 3 Europe (excluding Russia) – 27,247,287 Brazil, China, Japan, Russia, South Korea – 23,990,127 The Amazing Spider-Man Argentina, Brazil, China, Japan, Mexico, Russia, South Korea – 31,377,180 Europe (excluding Russia) – 14,325,892 The Amazing Spider-Man 2 Argentina, Brazil, China, Mexico, South Korea – 23,372,211 Europe – 14,972,453 Spider-Man: Homecoming China – 21,891,581 Europe – 17,907,011 Brazil, Chile, South Korea, Venezuela – 15,570,692 Mexico – 9,800,000 Japan – 1.93 million Argentina – 1,118,453 Spider-Man: Far From Home China – 39,380,000 Europe – 24,849,626 Mexico – 10,810,870 South Korea – 8,023,606 Brazil – 6,562,228 Japan – 2.1 million India – 1,856,875 Argentina – 1,285,785 Spider-Man: No Way Home United Kingdom, Australia, Argentina, Brazil, Columbia, Czech Republic, Greece, Hungary, Mexico, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Spain, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates – 81,146,702 India – 11 million Russia – 10.8 million South Korea – 7,529,648 Japan – 2,770,000 Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse China – 11,763,454 Europe – 6,538,381 Mexico – 3,345,000 Brazil – 2,059,756 South Korea – 724,394 Argentina – 304,881 Pallotta, Frank (October 8, 2014). "Here's why Sony, and not Marvel Studios, owns the rights to Spider-Man". CNNMoney. Retrieved October 8, 2023. D'Alessandro, Anthony (September 27, 2019). "Spider-Man Back In Action As Sony Agrees To Disney Co-Fi For New Movie, Return To MCU: How Spidey's Web Got Untangled". Deadline. Retrieved February 23, 2024. "Huge Spider-man News: Alex Kurtzman Directing Venom Spinoff Movie and Drew Goddard Writing and Possibly Directing The Sinister Six". IMDb. Retrieved October 9, 2023. Wilson, Josh. "What Does Sony's Rumored $3 Billion Deal With Netflix And Disney Mean For Superhero Fans?". Forbes. Retrieved October 8, 2023. Bacon, Thomas (September 21, 2019). "Spider-Man TV Rights Explained (& Sony's Plan For The Future)". ScreenRant. Retrieved September 29, 2023. "All Time Worldwide Box Office for Sony Pictures Movies". The Numbers. Retrieved October 18, 2023. "Ron Satlof". IMDb. Retrieved May 15, 2023. Hiltzik, Michael A. (September 29, 1998). "Spidey's Movie Mess". Los Angeles Times. Kaye, Don. "A Tangled Web". MSN. Archived from the original on May 26, 2013. Retrieved July 8, 2012. Grover, Ronald (April 15, 2002). "Unraveling Spider-Man's Tangled Web". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on May 10, 2009. Retrieved April 21, 2022. Shprintz, Janet (August 19, 1998). "Spider-Man's legal web may finally be unraveled". Variety. Retrieved April 21, 2022. Hiltzik, Michael A. (March 24, 2002). "Untangling the Web". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on June 14, 2021. Retrieved April 21, 2022. Gross, Edward (2002). Spider-Man Confidential. Hyperion. O'Neill, Patrick Daniel (March 1990). "Screenwriter Ted Newsom". Comics Interview Magazine (85). Fictioneer Books Ltd. Wilson, William S. (June 28, 2010). "The "Never Got Made" File #19: Look Out! Here comes the SPIDER-MAN movie...or maybe not!". Video Junkie. Retrieved October 23, 2013. Jankiewicz, Pat (July 2002). "Scott Leva, the Man Who Was Almost Spider-Man". Starlog/Comics Scene Presents Spider-Man. 1 (1): 62–64. Teitelbaum, Sheldon (September 1987). "Spider-Man - The Movie: For Cannon Films it was a web too far". Cinefantastique. "21st Century Ad 1989". Variety. May 5, 1989. p. 11. Hughes, David. The Greatest Sci-Fi Movies Never Made ISBN 1-55652-449-8 Ryfle, Steve (May–June 2002). "Spider-Man's Tangled Web". Creative Screenwriting Magazine. CS Publications. Hagen, Dan (1990). "Publisher Stan Lee Speaks". Comics Interview. Fictioneer Books Ltd. Archer, Steven (1993). Willis O'Brien, Special Effects Genius. McFarland & Co. p. 177. ISBN 0-89950-833-2. Moerk, Christian (September 1, 1993). "Cameron Delivers Spider-Man Script". Variety. Archived from the original on September 23, 2020. Retrieved April 21, 2022. Cohen, Barry; Newson, Ted; Cameron, James; Goldmari, Joseph; Brancato, John (August 4, 1993). "Spider-Man". Hundland.com. Archived from the original on February 14, 2008. Retrieved May 20, 2009. "Web of questions arises as Marvel announces Spiderman reboot". CalTimes. Archived from the original on October 2, 2013. Retrieved August 23, 2012. "Who Is Spiderman?". Hollywood.com. January 26, 2000. Retrieved August 23, 2012. Chitwood, Scott (February 15, 2000). "Review of James Cameron's Spider-Man Scriptment". IGN. Archived from the original on March 12, 2022. Retrieved April 21, 2022. Bullard, Jim (April 17, 1992). "Spider-Man now 30". St. Petersburg Times. Hawkes, Rebecca (July 3, 2017). "James Cameron's Spider-Man: the greatest superhero movie never made?". The Telegraph – via www.telegraph.co.uk. "15 Things You Never Knew About James Cameron's Failed Spider-Man Movie". Screen Rant. July 14, 2017. Securities and Exchange Commission (April 15, 1995). "Securities and Exchange Commission Document 1-09264". SECInfo.com (requires registration). Retrieved November 5, 2007. "Marvel's Superhero Licensing". World Intellectual Property Organization. June 2012. Retrieved August 23, 2012. Hiltzik, Michael (March 2, 1999). "Studio Rights to Spider-Man Are Untangled". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved April 21, 2022. "Past 007 Attempts". MI6, Home of James Bond. September 14, 2004. Archived from the original on October 10, 2009. Retrieved November 7, 2007. Thompson, Anne (August 18, 2002). "A League of Her Own". Variety. Retrieved April 21, 2022. DG (November 29, 2006). "Kevin McClory (1926-2006)". MI6, Home of James Bond. Archived from the original on January 6, 2009. Retrieved November 7, 2007. Aguilar, Matthew (February 15, 2018). "Sony Once Turned Down The Opportunity To Buy Movie Rights To All Marvel Characters For Only $25 Million". Comic Book. Zeitchik, Steven; Sperling, Nicole (June 13, 2011). "Laura Ziskin dies at 61; 'Spider-Man' producer". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved April 21, 2022. Adler, Shawn (September 5, 2008). "Tobey Maguire, Sam Raimi Sign On For 'Spider-Man 4': Report". MTV.com. Archived from the original on March 26, 2010. Retrieved October 9, 2009. Carroll, Larry (October 16, 2008). "Sam Raimi Talks 'Spider-Man' Sequel Double-Shoot, Futures of Kirsten Dunst & The Lizard". MTV.com. Archived from the original on February 20, 2009. Retrieved October 16, 2008. Harlow, John (September 14, 2008). "Spider-Man Tobey Maguire spins deal for fatherhood". The Sunday Times. London, England. Archived from the original on April 21, 2022. Retrieved April 21, 2022. "Sam Raimi 'Can't Imagine' Doing 'Spider-Man 4' Without Kirsten Dunst, Only Working On Fourth Film". MTV.com. March 15, 2009. Archived from the original on March 17, 2009. Retrieved April 21, 2022. Fleming, Michael (January 21, 2007). "Columbia, Koepp talk 'Spider-Man'". Variety. Archived from the original on May 13, 2009. Retrieved April 21, 2022. Fleming, Michael (August 16, 2009). "Sony sets writer to spin 'Spider-Man'". Variety. Archived from the original on June 25, 2010. Retrieved April 21, 2022. Ditzian, Eric (October 9, 2009). "Sam Raimi Hopes To Start Shooting 'Spider-Man 4' In March 2010". MTV. Archived from the original on March 15, 2016. Retrieved April 21, 2022. Goldman, Eric (January 23, 2007). "Exclusive: Lizard Leapin' Into Spidey 4?". IGN. Archived from the original on December 30, 2008. Retrieved April 21, 2022. Elliott, Sean (May 29, 2008). "Exclusive Interview: 'Spider-Man 3' Producer Grant Curtis talks about villains for 'Spidey 4' + His own origins - Part 1". iF Magazine. Archived from the original on September 27, 2007. Retrieved May 29, 2008. Carroll, Larry (June 26, 2008). "Sam Raimi May Not Helm 'Spider-Man 4'; Wants Carnage, Vulture As Villains If He Does". MTV.com. Archived from the original on October 26, 2021. Retrieved April 21, 2022. Ditzian, Eric (October 19, 2009). "Sam Raimi Confirms Bruce Campbell Will Have 'Meaty Role' in 'Spider-Man 4'". MTV. Archived from the original on September 11, 2017. Retrieved April 21, 2022. Lussier, Germain (June 1, 2016). "Spider-Man 4 Storyboards Reveal Iconic Villains and Huge Action That Never Was". Gizmodo. Retrieved April 21, 2022. Buchanan, Kyle (December 8, 2009). "EXCLUSIVE: Spider-Man 4 Circling John Malkovich, Anne Hathaway". Movieline. Archived from the original on December 13, 2009. Retrieved December 12, 2009. "Sam Raimi Confirms That Anne Hathaway Would Have Been His Black Cat in Spider-Man 4". SuperHeroHype. March 5, 2013. Retrieved April 21, 2022. O'Connell, Sean (November 1, 2022). "Sam Raimi's Spider-Man 4: What We Learned About The Vulture's Origins, The Fight Scenes, And Other Villains Considered For The Sequel". CinemaBlend. Retrieved November 5, 2022. Hiatt, Brian (April 30, 2022). "From 'Spider-Man' to 'Doctor Strange': How Sam Raimi Conquered the Superhero Multiverse (Again)". Rolling Stone. Retrieved April 30, 2022. Buchanan, Kyle (March 6, 2013). "Sam Raimi on Oz, The Avengers, and Two Huge Movies He Never Made". Vulture. Retrieved March 6, 2013. Finke, Nikki; Fleming, Mike (January 11, 2010). "'Spider-Man 4' Scrapped; Sam Rami & Tobey Maguire & Cast Out; Franchise Reboot for 2012". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 1, 2022. Retrieved April 21, 2022. Pearson, Ben (June 14, 2021). "'Spider-Man 4' Fight Animatic Shows Off An Action Scene From Sam Raimi's Abandoned Sequel - /Film". /Film. "Spider-Man 4 Final Battle Animatic 2009 (FOUND MEDIA)". YouTube. Jon Arvedon (January 7, 2022). "Spider-Man Fans Target Sony With #MakeRaimiSpiderMan4 Campaign". Comic Book Resources. Comic Book Resources. Retrieved January 7, 2022. Sarah Little (April 16, 2022). "Sam Raimi Admits 'Spider-Man 4' Is 'Possible' — 'It Sounds Beautiful'". ShowbizCheatSheet. Showbiz CheatSheet. Retrieved April 16, 2022. Agar, Chris (May 2, 2022). "Sam Raimi Has Disappointing Update On Tobey Maguire Spider-Man 4 Movie". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on May 2, 2022. Retrieved May 23, 2022. "Sony Sets Release Dates for 3rd and 4th Spider-Man Films!". ComingSoon.net. June 17, 2013. Archived from the original on November 5, 2014. Retrieved February 18, 2020. McClintock, Pamela (June 17, 2013). "Sony Sets Release Dates for Third and Fourth 'Amazing Spider-Man' Films". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved June 17, 2013. "Paul Giamatti Talks Parkland, Downton Abbey, The Amazing Spider-Man 2 and 3, The Sinister Six, and More". Collider. October 2, 2013. Retrieved May 15, 2015. Lieberman, David (November 21, 2013). "Update: Sony Pictures Plans More Spider-Man Sequels And Spinoffs – But Still No Marvel Reunion". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved November 21, 2013. DiLeo, Adam (December 10, 2013). "Andrew Garfield May Not Be in The Amazing Spider-Man 4". IGN. Retrieved December 14, 2013. Cheney, Alexandra (February 25, 2014). "Analysts: Sony Needs More Bigscreen Franchises". Variety. Retrieved February 25, 2014. Stern, Marlow (March 15, 2014). "Marc Webb Takes Us Inside 'The Amazing Spider-Man 2' and Discusses His Rise to the A-List". The Daily Beast. Retrieved March 15, 2014. "Roberto Orci Off The Amazing Spider-Man Franchise, No Clear Timeline For TASM 3, Venom, or Sinister Six". IGN. July 11, 2014. Retrieved July 11, 2014. "Alex Kurtzman Gives Updates on Amazing Spider-Man 3, Sinister Six, and Venom; Talks Universal Monster Universe Plans". Collider. July 18, 2014. Retrieved July 18, 2014. Siegel, Tatiana (July 23, 2014). "Spider-Man Villains Movie 'Sinister Six' Gets Nov. 2016 Release Date". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved July 23, 2014. Lang, Brent (February 10, 2015). "Spider-Man: How Sony, Marvel Will Benefit from Unique Deal (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. Rodriguez, Cain (July 12, 2015). "Denis Leary Says 'The Amazing Spider-Man 3' Could Have Featured Resurrected Dead Characters". IndieWire. Retrieved February 23, 2019. Patten, Dominic (December 13, 2013). "Sony Sets Spider-Man Spinoffs 'Venom,' 'Sinister Six' With New "Franchise Brain Trust"". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved December 14, 2013. Kit, Borys (January 6, 2014). "Forget Franchises: Why 2014 Will Be Hollywood's Year of the 'Shared Universe'". The Hollywood Reporter. "Spider-Man Spinoff 'Sinister Six' Names Director". The Hollywood Reporter. April 7, 2014. Retrieved April 7, 2014. "Exclusive: Sinister Six and Venom Movies Will Arrive Before Amazing Spider-Man 4". Den ofGeek. April 10, 2014. Archived from the original on April 12, 2014. Retrieved April 10, 2014. "Matt Tolmach Addresses Spider-Man's Role in Sinister Six and Venom". Hey U Guys. April 10, 2014. Retrieved April 10, 2014. "The Sinister Six Movie Is a Tale of Redemption". IGN. April 11, 2014. Retrieved April 11, 2014. "The Sinister Six Movie Line-Up: "Nothing Is Sacred," Says Producer". IGN. April 15, 2014. Retrieved April 15, 2014. Busch, Anita (August 4, 2014). "Sony Launches Female Superhero Movie Mining Spider-Man Universe". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved August 5, 2014. Malhotra, Rahul (January 7, 2022). "Andrew Garfield on Whether He'd Play Spider-Man Again: "Yes, If It Felt Right"". Collider. Retrieved January 12, 2022. "Daredevil Season 2: Drew Goddard Says He's Involved". Collider. September 14, 2015. Retrieved October 19, 2015. Sneider, Jeff (November 10, 2015). "17 Movies Shaken by Sony Hack, From 'The Interview' to 'Spectre' to 'Steve Jobs'". TheWrap. Retrieved January 4, 2016. "Morbius: Spider-Man Spinoff Movie Gets Release Date". Den of Geek. Retrieved February 23, 2019.[permanent dead link] "Kraven the Hunter Spider-Man Spinoff Reportedly Taps The Equalizer 2 Writer". Den of Geek. Retrieved February 23, 2019.[permanent dead link] "A Little Update on Sony's Silver & Black Spider-Man Spinoff". Screen Rant. September 28, 2018. Retrieved February 23, 2019. Rubin, Rebecca (April 3, 2022). "Box Office: 'Morbius' Opens to No. 1 With Decent $39 Million". Variety. Archived from the original on April 27, 2022. Retrieved April 21, 2022. Brad Lang (December 20, 2021). "Andrew Garfield Spider-Man Fans Rally for a Third Movie". Comic Book Resources. Comic Book Resources. Retrieved December 20, 2021. RorMachine (December 20, 2021). "#MakeTASM3 Trends On Twitter As Fans Campaign For Andrew Garfield's SPIDER-MAN Return - SPOILERS". ComicBookMovie. ComicBookMovie. Retrieved December 20, 2021. IGN [@IGN] (December 20, 2021). "Now that Tom Holland's Spider-Man trilogy has concluded, fans are calling for Sony to bring back Andrew Garfield for a third Amazing Spider-Man film, with Amazing Spider-Man 3 trending over the weekend" (Tweet). Retrieved December 20, 2021 – via Twitter. Davis, Brandon (February 3, 2022). "Tom Holland 'Would Love' an 'Amazing Spider-Man 3' With Andrew Garfield". ComicBook. ComicBook. Archived from the original on March 7, 2022. Retrieved March 7, 2022. Pallotta, Frank (October 8, 2014). "Here's why Sony, and not Marvel Studios, owns the rights to Spider-Man". CNNMoney. Retrieved November 2, 2023. "Your Full List of All Upcoming Sony Spider-Man Universe Movies — With Key Details!". Retrieved October 6, 2023. Clark, Travis. "Spider-Man's movie adventures have been a headache for Sony for over a decade, but the character is too valuable to compromise on". Business Insider. Retrieved September 27, 2019. Collura, Scott (June 15, 2012), "A Spider-Man/Avengers Crossover Almost Happened", IGN, retrieved November 25, 2021 Iacobucci, Jordan (November 17, 2021). "10 Facts About The Canceled Amazing Spider-Man 3 Film". Screen Rant. Retrieved November 17, 2021. Fritz, Ben (December 9, 2014). "Sony, Marvel Discussed Spider-Man Movie Crossover". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved April 21, 2022. "Sony Pictures Entertainment Brings Marvel Studios Into The Amazing World Of Spider-Man". Marvel.com. February 9, 2015. Archived from the original on June 18, 2017. Retrieved February 10, 2015. Bibbiani, William (April 11, 2015). "Exclusive: Marvel's Spider-Man Reboot is NOT an Origin Story". Mandatory. Archived from the original on January 1, 2022. Retrieved April 21, 2022. Quesada, Joe (March 22, 2015). "Have you seen any visual concepts/early designs". Tumblr. Retrieved March 22, 2015. The trick to making any incarnation of Spider-Man great, whether comics, animation or film is Peter Parker. Get Peter's character right and the rest falls into place. Khatchatourian, Maane (April 11, 2015). "'Spider-Man': New Movie Stars Teen Peter Parker". Variety. Retrieved May 15, 2015. Faraci, Devin (June 28, 2015). "Kevin Feige: Next Spider-Man Will Have New Villains, John Hughes Vibe". Birth. Movies. Death. Archived from the original on April 13, 2022. Retrieved April 21, 2022. Siegel, Tatiana (November 9, 2016). "Tom Holland Learned He Got His 'Spider-Man: Homecoming' Role From a Marvel Instagram Post". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 12, 2022. Retrieved April 21, 2022. Bradley, Bill (June 26, 2017). "Tom Holland Confirms Popular Fan Theory: Spider-Man Was In 'Iron Man 2'". HuffPost. Archived from the original on April 15, 2022. Retrieved April 21, 2022. Ryan, Mark (June 27, 2017). "'Spider-Man: Homecoming' Director Jon Watts Explains Real Story Behind Peter Parker's 'Iron Man 2' Cameo". Uproxx. Archived from the original on April 12, 2022. Retrieved April 21, 2022. Fleming, Mike Jr. (August 20, 2019). "Disney-Sony Standoff Ends Marvel Studios & Kevin Feige's Involvement In 'Spider-Man'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 20, 2019. Retrieved August 20, 2019. Kit, Borys; McMillian, Graeme (August 20, 2019). "Sony, Marvel to Split on Future 'Spider-Man' Releases". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 20, 2019. Retrieved April 21, 2022. McNary, Dave (August 20, 2019). "Spider-Man Could Leave MCU if Disney, Sony Can't Reach Financing Deal". Variety. Archived from the original on August 20, 2019. Retrieved August 20, 2019. Coggan, Devan (August 24, 2019). "Tom Holland opens up about Spider-Man's future in wake of Disney-Sony rift". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved August 26, 2019. Lang, Brent (September 27, 2019). "Sony, Marvel Make Up: Companies Will Produce Third 'Spider-Man' Film". Variety. Archived from the original on September 27, 2019. Retrieved September 27, 2019. D'Alessandro, Anthony (September 27, 2019). "Jon Watts In Final Talks To Return As Director Of Third 'Spider-Man: Homecoming' Movie". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 27, 2019. Retrieved September 27, 2019. Davis, Eric (November 29, 2021). "'Spider-Man: No Way Home' Producer Amy Pascal Reveals More About the Historic Film and Confirms Tom Holland's Future as Spider-Man". Fandango. Retrieved November 29, 2021. Fritz, Ben (February 10, 2015). "Marvel and Sony Reach Deal on Spider-Man Movie Production". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved February 9, 2015. McNary, David (March 3, 2015). "Russo Brothers Sign First-Look Deal with Sony". Variety. Archived from the original on April 15, 2022. Retrieved April 21, 2022. Cabin, Chris (January 14, 2016). "'Captain America: Civil War' Directors on Landing Spider-Man, 'Infinity War' Shooting Schedule". Collider. Archived from the original on March 31, 2022. Retrieved April 21, 2022. Damore, Meagan (December 7, 2015). "Anthony Russo Reveals Spider-Man Was Always "Plan A" For "Captain America: Civil War"". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on March 20, 2022. Retrieved December 8, 2015. Kit, Borys (May 30, 2015). "Spider-Man Hopefuls Screen-Test in Atlanta as Marvel Decision Nears (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on June 23, 2015. Retrieved May 30, 2015. Kit, Borys; Siegel, Tatiana (June 23, 2015). "Robert Downey Jr. and Secret Screen-Tests: How the New 'Spider-Man' Team Was Chosen". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 13, 2022. Retrieved April 21, 2022. "Sony Pictures and Marvel Studios Find Their 'Spider-Man' Star and Director". Marvel.com. June 23, 2015. Archived from the original on June 24, 2015. Retrieved June 24, 2015. Kroll, Justin (July 8, 2015). "Marisa Tomei to Play Aunt May in New 'Spider-Man' Movie (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. Archived from the original on April 13, 2022. Retrieved April 21, 2022. Mallenbaum, Carly (April 13, 2016). "'Captain America: Civil War' premiere: 5 things we learned". USA Today. Archived from the original on October 6, 2021. Retrieved April 21, 2022. Siegel, Lucas (April 13, 2016). "Marvel and Sony's Spider-Man Reboot is Officially Spider-Man: Homecoming". Comicbook. Archived from the original on April 21, 2022. Retrieved April 21, 2022. Ford, Rebecca (January 20, 2016). "'Jumanji' Release Date Pushed, 'Spider-Man' Shifts Up". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 13, 2022. Retrieved April 21, 2022. Strom, Marc (July 23, 2016). "SDCC 2016: 'Spider-Man: Homecoming' Introduces Its Villain". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on July 24, 2016. Retrieved July 23, 2016. Kit, Borys (April 21, 2016). "Robert Downey Jr. Joins 'Spider-Man: Homecoming'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 3, 2021. Retrieved April 21, 2022. Truitt, Brian (December 8, 2016). "Exclusive photo: Spider-Man Tom Holland unmasked in 'Homecoming'". USA Today. Archived from the original on December 21, 2016. Retrieved December 8, 2016. Coggan, Devan (June 20, 2016). "Chris Pratt, Tom Holland cross paths as Spider-Man: Homecoming starts filming". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 13, 2022. Retrieved April 21, 2022. Leslie, Jennifer (May 5, 2016). ""Captain America: Civil War" was shot in, around Atlanta". WXIA-TV. Archived from the original on May 21, 2016. Retrieved April 21, 2022. Peters, Megan (October 2, 2016). "Tom Holland Shares Photo From Spider-Man: Homecoming's Last Day Of Filming". ComicBook. Archived from the original on April 21, 2022. Retrieved April 21, 2022. Lang, Brett (October 16, 2016). "Tom Holland Dishes on 'Spider-Man: Homecoming'". Variety. Archived from the original on October 18, 2016. Retrieved October 16, 2016. Couch, Aaron (February 10, 2017). "'Avengers: Infinity War' Featurette Shows Off First Footage From Set". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 20, 2022. Retrieved April 21, 2022. Kit, Borys; Couch, Aaron (April 18, 2017). "Marvel's Kevin Feige on Why the Studio Won't Make R-Rated Movies, 'Guardians 2' and Joss Whedon's DC Move". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 12, 2022. Retrieved April 21, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony (December 9, 2016). "'Spider-Man: Homecoming 2' Shoots Web Around Independence Day 2019 Frame; 'Bad Boys 4' Moves To Memorial Day". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on April 15, 2022. Retrieved April 21, 2022. Chitwood, Adam (June 26, 2017). "'Spider-Man: Homecoming 2' Filming Dates, Title Details Revealed". Collider. Archived from the original on March 20, 2022. Retrieved April 21, 2022. Patches, Matt (June 23, 2018). "Tom Holland just revealed the full title of Spider-man 2". Polygon. Archived from the original on April 1, 2022. Retrieved April 21, 2022. Schaefer, Sandy (April 17, 2019). "Spider-Man: Far From Home Release Date Moves Up 3 Days". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on April 10, 2022. Retrieved April 21, 2022. Kit, Borys (October 1, 2020). "'Spider-Man 3' Jolt: Jamie Foxx Returning as Electro (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 6, 2020. Retrieved October 8, 2020. Fleming, Mike Jr. (August 23, 2019). "Next Post-'Spider-Man' Skirmish For Sony & Disney: A Tug Of War Over 'Spider-Man' Helmer Jon Watts?". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 24, 2019. Retrieved August 24, 2019. "'Spider-Man: No Way Home' trailer: Here's what's revealed and what we still don't know". Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Retrieved August 27, 2021. Borys, Kit (October 8, 2020). "Benedict Cumberbatch Joins 'Spider-Man 3' as Doctor Strange (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 8, 2020. Retrieved October 8, 2020. Coggan, Devan (November 16, 2021). "New Spider-Man: No Way Home trailer swings headfirst into the multiverse". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on November 17, 2021. Retrieved November 16, 2021. "'Spider-Man: No Way Home' Producer Amy Pascal Reveals More About the Historic Film and Confirms Tom Holland's Future as Spider-Man". Fandango. November 29, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021. Barnes, Brooks (December 17, 2021). "Kevin Feige and Amy Pascal on the Future of 'Spider-Man' and the M.C.U." The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. Retrieved December 21, 2021. Bentz, Adam (January 27, 2022). "No Way Home Ending Explained By Script: Spider-Man & Peter Parker's Futures". Screen Rant. Retrieved February 21, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony (April 21, 2022). "'Spider-Man: Across The Spider-Verse' Heads To Summer 2023; Sony Dates 'Madame Web', 'Equalizer 3' Among Other Release Changes". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved April 21, 2022. Donnelly, Matt (July 28, 2023). "'Beyond the Spider-Verse' Taken Off Sony Release Calendar as Strikes Delay 'Kraven' and 'Ghostbusters' Sequel to 2024". Variety. Retrieved July 28, 2023. McNary, Dave (December 23, 2015). "Spider-Man Animated Movie Pushed Back to December 2018". Variety. Retrieved December 23, 2015. Freeman, Molly (April 26, 2017). "Animated Spider-Man Movie Release Date Moved Up a Week". Screen Rant. Retrieved April 27, 2017. Sciretta, Peter (April 13, 2016). "Sony Says Animated Spider-Man Movie Will Visually Break New Ground for the Superhero Genre (CinemaCon 2016)". SlashFilm. Retrieved April 23, 2016. Kit, Borys (June 20, 2016). "Sony Unveils Plans for Animated 'Spider-Man' and 'Emojimovie: Express Yourself'". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved June 20, 2016. Mendelson, Scott (January 18, 2017). "Sony's Animated 'Spider-Man' Movie To Star Miles Morales". Forbes. Retrieved February 7, 2017. Barnhardt, Adam (December 1, 2018). "'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse' Producers Want Spider-Ham Spinoffs". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on December 2, 2018. Retrieved December 3, 2018. Coogan, Devan (February 18, 2019). "Exclusive: Watch a clip from Spider-Ham's new 'Spider-Verse' short". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved February 18, 2019. McNary, Dave (November 27, 2018). "Sony Developing 'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse' Sequel and Spinoff". Variety. Archived from the original on November 28, 2018. Retrieved November 30, 2018. Abbate, Jake (December 14, 2018). "Amy Pascal Teases Into the Spider-Verse Sequel Plans, New Characters". SuperHeroHype. Retrieved December 15, 2018. "'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse' Sequel and All-Female Spinoff in the Works From Sony (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. November 27, 2018. @chrizmillr (February 25, 2021). "Actually not true. Phil and I are writing with Dave Callaham. Phil is currently working on the script this very second. Peter is an EP and is totally involved. Plus there are some other creative team announcements coming soon" (Tweet) – via Twitter. Vary, Adam B. (April 19, 2021). "'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse' Sequel Snares New Directing Trio (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. Retrieved April 19, 2021. Alexander, Julia (November 1, 2019). "Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse sequel arrives April 2022". The Verge. Goodfellow, Melanie (June 12, 2023). "Sony Unveils First Look At Spider-Verse Short Film Tackling Mental Issues & Showing Miles Morales Suffering An Anxiety Crisis – Annecy". Deadline. Retrieved June 12, 2023. Tangcay, Jazz (March 21, 2024). "'Spider-Verse' Animated Short to Debut on YouTube From Sony Pictures in Partnership With the Kevin Love Fund (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. Retrieved March 21, 2024. @cartoonbrew (June 12, 2023). "Sony hasn't said how or when they intend to release the short. Directed by Jarelle Dampier and written by Khaila Amazan as part of Sony's internal LENS program (Leading and Empowering New Storytellers) that gives leadership experience to underrepresented groups. Clara Chan (vfx supervisor) and Joe Darko (animation supervisor), both at Sony Imageworks, were also part of the LENS program" (Tweet). Retrieved June 12, 2023 – via Twitter. Coggan, Devan (December 4, 2021). "Get a first look at 'Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse (Part One)'". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved December 5, 2021. Kroll, Anthony D'Alessandro,Justin; D'Alessandro, Anthony; Kroll, Justin (November 9, 2023). "'Deadpool 3', 'Gladiator 2', 'Beetlejuice 2', 'Juror No. 2' & 'Venom 3' Among Film Productions To Restart ASAP As Hollywood Gets Back To Work Post-Strike". Deadline. Retrieved December 30, 2023.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) "Hailee Steinfeld Addresses Spider-Gwen's 'Into the Spider-Verse' Spinoff Movie". Marvel. Donnelly, Matt (December 18, 2018). "John Mulaney's Pitch for 'Spider-Ham' Film: 'Spotlight' … but Family Friendly'". Variety. Newby, Richard (April 1, 2022). "It's a Bird! It's a Bat! It's Morbius's Mid-Credits Scenes, Explained". Vulture. Retrieved April 2, 2022. Grebey, James (February 14, 2024). "How Madame Web Connects to the Spider-Man Cinematic Multiverse". Time. Archived from the original on February 15, 2024. Retrieved February 15, 2024. "New Marvel Super Heroes 4D at Madame Tussauds". Madame Tussauds. Archived from the original on August 20, 2012. Retrieved August 22, 2012. "MTV Geek – Marvel's Avengers Come To Life At New Madame Tussauds New York Exhibit". MTV Geek. April 20, 2012. Retrieved August 22, 2012. "Madame Tussauds New York Teases '4D' Marvel Super-Heroes Exhibit". Comics Alliance. Archived from the original on June 4, 2012. Retrieved August 22, 2012. "Madame Tussauds and Marvel Team Up to Bring Superheroes to Life in 4D". Entertainment Designer. December 16, 2013. Archived from the original on April 6, 2017. Retrieved May 16, 2016. "Marvel Super Heroes 4D". Behind The Voice Actors. "Phineas and Ferb and Marvel Team Up For Phineas and Ferb: Mission Marvel". LaughingPlace.com. July 17, 2012. Retrieved May 30, 2013. Blum, Matt (July 14, 2012). "First Animated Disney – Marvel Crossover Announced – And It's Phineas and Ferb! | GeekDad". Wired. Retrieved May 30, 2013. "Phineas and Ferb: Mission Marvel Debut Date Announced". IGN. June 28, 2013. Retrieved June 28, 2013. Goldman, Eric (June 28, 2013). "Phineas and Ferb: Mission Marvel Debut Date Announced". Malkin, Marc (May 31, 2023). "Spider-Man Producers Tease Live-Action Miles Morales Movie and Animated Spider-Woman Film: 'It's All Happening'". Variety. Archived from the original on May 31, 2023. Retrieved May 31, 2023. Barnhardt, Adam (February 12, 2024). "Live-Action Miles Morales Movie Teased by Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse Producer". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on February 24, 2024. Retrieved February 24, 2024. Acuna, Kirsten. "There are 7 versions of Spider-Man in 'Into the Spider-Verse' — here are the actors behind each one". Insider. Archived from the original on April 21, 2022. Retrieved April 21, 2022. Goldberg, Matt (July 5, 2018). "'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse': Nicolas Cage Confirmed to Play Another Spider-Man". Collider. Archived from the original on April 4, 2022. Retrieved April 21, 2022. Vejvoda, Jim (November 29, 2018). "Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse Official Credits Reveal Surprise Voice Actor Cameos". IGN. Archived from the original on November 30, 2018. Retrieved December 2, 2018. Desowtiz, Bill (February 19, 2019). "'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse': Making Doc Ock Olivia the Subversive Secret Weapon". IndieWire. Archived from the original on February 20, 2019. Retrieved May 28, 2020. Topel, Fred (May 1, 2007). "Campbell Explains "Spider-Man 3" Cameos to Maguire". Rotten Tomatoes. Lussier, Germain (June 2016). "Spider-Man 4 Storyboards Reveal Iconic Villains and Huge Action That Never Was". Gizmodo. "'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse' Sequel Snares New Directing Trio (EXCLUSIVE)". April 19, 2021. "Original Spider-Man Trilogy Coming to Blu-ray". April 2, 2012. Retrieved August 23, 2012. "Spider-Man". iTunes. May 3, 2002. Retrieved August 23, 2012. "Spider-Man 2". iTunes. June 30, 2004. Retrieved August 23, 2012. "Spider-Man 3". iTunes. May 4, 2007. Retrieved August 23, 2012. "Spider-Man: Homecoming 4K and 3D Blu-ray". Blu-ray.com. September 5, 2017. Retrieved May 23, 2018. "Spider-Man Limited Edition 4K Blu-ray Collections". Blu-ray.com. September 5, 2017. Retrieved May 23, 2018. Couch, Aaron (April 21, 2021). "Sony Films Will Move to Disney After Netflix Window Expires". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved February 26, 2023. "The Spider-Man franchise is swinging onto Disney+". Yahoo! Movies. June 14, 2022. Retrieved February 26, 2023. Hofius, Jason (2010). Age Of TV Heroes: The Live-Action Adventures Of Your Favorite Comic Book Characters. TwoMorrows Publishing. p. 95. ISBN 978-1605490106. "Spider-Man (2002)". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved April 21, 2022. "Spider-Man 2 (2004)". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved April 21, 2022. "Spider-Man 3 (2007)". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved April 21, 2022. "The Amazing Spider-Man (2012)". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved April 21, 2022. "The Amazing Spider-Man 2 (2014)". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved April 21, 2022. "Spider-Man: Homecoming (2017)". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved April 21, 2022. "Spider-Man: Far from Home". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved August 2, 2020. "Spider-Man: No Way Home". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved January 1, 2022. "Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse (2018)". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved April 21, 2022. "Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved June 8, 2023. "Spider-Man Movies at the Box Office". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on September 5, 2015. Retrieved November 26, 2019. "Movie Franchises and Brands Index". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on December 16, 2018. Retrieved July 24, 2019. "Spider-Man Special Briefing". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved May 22, 2007. "Marvel Comics Movies". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on August 3, 2004. Retrieved October 1, 2019. "Superhero Movies". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on June 12, 2004. Retrieved October 1, 2019. "Sony / Columbia All Time Box Office Results". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on December 10, 2005. Retrieved July 21, 2019. "Top Lifetime Adjusted Grosses". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved March 1, 2022. "Film #18675: Spider-Man". Lumiere. Archived from the original on September 26, 2019. Retrieved August 28, 2019. "Человек-паук — дата выхода в России и других странах" [Spider-Man — Release dates in Russia and other countries]. KinoPoisk (in Russian). Retrieved August 28, 2019. "Spider-Man". CBO (China Box Office). EntGroup. Archived from the original on August 28, 2019. Retrieved August 28, 2019. "Vanderbilt Journal of Entertainment and Technology Law". Vanderbilt Journal of Entertainment and Technology Law. 9. Vanderbilt University Law School: 409. October 31, 2002. China's national average price for a movie ticket is about 20 yuan ($2.40). "영화정보" [Movie Information]. KOFIC (in Korean). Korean Film Council. Archived from the original on December 25, 2018. Retrieved August 26, 2019. "Film #21912: Spider-Man 2". LUMIERE. Archived from the original on September 26, 2019. Retrieved September 1, 2019. "Человек-паук 2 — дата выхода в России и других странах" [Spider-Man 2 — Release dates in Russia and other countries]. KinoPoisk (in Russian). Archived from the original on May 12, 2016. Retrieved September 1, 2019. "Spider-Man 2 (2004)". JP's Box-Office. Archived from the original on July 4, 2019. Retrieved September 1, 2019. "Spider-Man 2". CBO (China Box Office). EntGroup. Archived from the original on September 1, 2019. Retrieved August 28, 2019. Focus 2006: World Film Market Trends. Marché du Film. 2006. p. 48. Average urban ticket price 2004 – 20 CNY "Film #27889: Spider-Man 3". Lumiere. Retrieved March 1, 2022. "Человек-паук 3: Враг в отражении — дата выхода в России и других странах" [Spider-Man 3: Enemy in Reflection — Release dates in Russia and other countries]. KinoPoisk (in Russian). Retrieved March 1, 2022. "Новый Человек-паук — дата выхода в России и других странах" [The Amazing Spider-Man — Release dates in Russia and other countries]. KinoPoisk (in Russian). Retrieved March 1, 2022. "Film #40120: The Amazing Spider-Man". Lumiere. Retrieved March 1, 2022. "Новый Человек-паук — дата выхода в России и других странах" [The Amazing Spider-Man 2 — Release dates in Russia and other countries]. KinoPoisk (in Russian). Retrieved March 1, 2022. "Film #44663: The Amazing Spider-Man 2". Lumiere. Retrieved March 1, 2022. "Top Ten CHINA 2017". Inside Kino (in German). Retrieved March 2, 2022. "Spider-Man: Homecoming". Lumiere. Retrieved March 1, 2022. "Die erfolgreichsten Filme des Jahres 2017 in 42 Ländern" [The most successful films of 2017 in 42 countries]. Inside Kino (in German). Retrieved March 2, 2022. "Resultados Definitivos 2017" [Final Results 2017] (PDF). Canacine (in Spanish). p. 7. Retrieved March 27, 2022. "Top Ten JAPAN 2017". Inside Kino (in German). Retrieved March 2, 2022. "Top Ten ARGENTINA 2017". Inside Kino (in German). Retrieved March 2, 2022. "Top Ten CHINA 2019". Inside Kino (in German). Retrieved March 2, 2022. "Spider-Man: Far from Home". Lumiere. Retrieved March 1, 2022. "Top Ten MEXIKO 2019" [Top Ten MEXICO 2019]. Inside Kino (in German). Retrieved March 2, 2022. "Top Ten BRASILIEN 2019" [Top Ten BRAZIL 2019]. Inside Kino (in German). Retrieved March 2, 2022. "Top Ten JAPAN 2019". Inside Kino (in German). Retrieved March 2, 2022. "Week 1 footfalls comparison: The Lion King v/s Spider-Man: Far From Home". Box Office India. July 27, 2019. Archived from the original on August 26, 2019. Retrieved August 26, 2019. "Top Ten ARGENTINA 2019". Inside Kino (in German). Retrieved March 2, 2022. "Die Zeit nach Avengers: Endgame" [The Time After Avengers: Endgame]. Inside Kino (in German). Retrieved March 2, 2022. "Avengers - Endgame". Inside Kino (in German). Singh, Jatinder (Charlie Jatinder) (January 5, 2022). "Spider Man: No Way Home Sells one crore tix in India; Twelfth from Hollywood". Pinkvilla. Retrieved March 2, 2022. "Spider-Man: No Way Home". Kinopoisk (in Russian). Retrieved March 23, 2022. "Top Ten JAPAN 2022". Inside Kino (in German). Retrieved March 23, 2022. "Top Ten CHINA 2018". Inside Kino (in German). Retrieved March 2, 2022. "Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse". Lumiere. Retrieved March 1, 2022. "Top Ten MEXIKO 2018" [Top Ten MEXICO 2018]. Inside Kino (in German). Retrieved March 2, 2022. "Spider-Man". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved October 28, 2023. "Spider-Man". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved May 9, 2022. "Cinemascore :: Movie Title Search". CinemaScore. Archived from the original on August 9, 2019. Retrieved August 9, 2019. "Spider-Man 2". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved January 20, 2024. "Spider-Man 2". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved May 9, 2022. "Spider-Man 3". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved October 28, 2023. "Spider-Man 3". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved May 9, 2022. "The Amazing Spider-Man". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved October 5, 2021. "The Amazing Spider-Man". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved May 9, 2022. Finke, Nikki (July 8, 2012). "#1 'Spider-Man' Blazes $341.2M July 4th Week; Hits 'Ted', 'Brave', 'Magic Mike' Still Hot; New 'Savages' Warm, 'Katy Perry' Cold". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved May 9, 2022. "The Amazing Spider-Man 2". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved October 28, 2023. "The Amazing Spider-Man 2". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved May 9, 2022. Busch, Anita (May 5, 2014). "FINAL BOX OFFICE: 'Amazing Spider-Man 2' – $91.6M; 'The Other Woman' Holding Strong; 'Rio 2' Passes $100M". Deadline. B+ CinemaScore and an A- for those under 25 "Spider-Man: Homecoming". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved March 26, 2022. "Spider-Man: Homecoming". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved May 9, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony (July 7, 2019). "Spider-Man: Far From Home Hooks $185M 6-Day Opening Records For Sony & Independence Day Stretch – Sunday Final". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on July 7, 2019. Retrieved May 9, 2022. "Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved January 20, 2024. "Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved May 9, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony (December 20, 2021). "'Spider-Man: No Way Home' Defeats 'Infinity War' & Notches 2nd Highest Domestic Opening At The Box Office With $260M". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on January 2, 2022. Retrieved May 4, 2022. "Spider-Man: Far From Home". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved July 28, 2023. "Spider-Man: Far from Home". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved May 9, 2022. "Spider-Man: No Way Home". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved December 15, 2023. "Spider-Man: No Way Home". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved May 9, 2022. "Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved October 28, 2023. "Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse". Metacritic. Fandom, Inc. Retrieved June 6, 2023. Murphy, J. Kim (June 3, 2023). "Box Office: 'Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse' Spots Spectacular $51.7 Million Opening Day". Variety. Retrieved June 3, 2023. Ansen, David (May 7, 2007). "Spidey the Swinger". Newsweek. Archived from the original on April 28, 2007. Retrieved May 20, 2009. Charity, Tom (May 3, 2007). "Review: 'Spider-Man 3' mixes highs and lows". CNN.com. Retrieved May 15, 2007. Corliss, Richard (May 3, 2007). "Spider-Man Gets Sensitive". Time. Archived from the original on May 5, 2007. Retrieved April 21, 2022. Covert, Colin (May 3, 2007). "Movie review: 'Spider-Man' weaves tangled web". Star Tribune. Archived from the original on May 6, 2007. Retrieved May 20, 2009. Dargis, Manohla (May 4, 2007). "Superhero Sandbagged". The New York Times. Retrieved May 15, 2007. Denerstein, Robert (May 4, 2007). "Denerstein: Spidey sense and sensibility". Rocky Mountain News. Archived from the original on September 30, 2007. Retrieved May 15, 2007. Spider-Man film franchise overview at Box Office Mojo Spider-Man film series at AllMovie Portals:  Speculative fiction  Film  United States