Mark Simon Cavendish MBE (born 21 May 1985) is a Manx professional road racing cyclist who currently rides for UCI WorldTeam Astana Qazaqstan Team. As a track cyclist he specialises in the madison, points race, and scratch race disciplines; as a road racer he is a sprinter. He is widely considered one of the greatest road sprinters of all time, and in 2021 was called "the greatest sprinter in the history of the Tour and of cycling" by Christian Prudhomme, director of the Tour de France. In his first years as an elite track rider, Cavendish won gold in the madison at the 2005 and 2008 UCI Track Cycling World Championships riding for Great Britain, with Rob Hayles and Bradley Wiggins respectively, and in the scratch race at the 2006 Commonwealth Games riding for Isle of Man. After failing to win a medal at the 2008 Summer Olympics he did not compete on track again until 2015, subsequently winning his third UCI Track Cycling World Championships title with Wiggins in the madison in 2016, and an individual silver medal in the omnium at the 2016 Summer Olympics. As a road cyclist, Cavendish turned professional in 2005 and achieved eleven wins in his first professional season. Cavendish has won 34 Tour de France stages, tying him for first on the all-time list with Eddy Merckx, contributing to a third-highest total of fifty-three Grand Tour stage victories. He won the men's road race at the 2011 Road World Championships, becoming the second male British rider to do so after Tom Simpson. Cavendish has also won the points classification in all three of the grand tours: the 2010 Vuelta a España, the 2011 and 2021 Tour de France and the 2013 Giro d'Italia. In 2012, he became the first person to win the final Champs-Élysées stage in the Tour de France in four consecutive years. He won seven Grand Tour stages in 2013, one in 2015 and four in 2016. This included a win on stage one of the 2016 Tour de France, claiming his first Tour de France yellow jersey. Cavendish crashed with Peter Sagan on stage four of the 2017 Tour de France, forcing him out of the race. Cavendish continued producing good results until August 2018, when he was diagnosed with Epstein–Barr virus. Before his diagnosis, Cavendish was able to compete in the 2018 Tour de France but was disqualified after not making the cut-off time on stage eleven. He returned to the Tour de France at the 2021 edition, winning four stages to take his total to 34 stage wins, equalling the overall stage victory record, and winning his second points classification. In the 2011 Queen's Birthday Honours, Cavendish was appointed a Member of the Order of the British Empire (MBE) "for services to British Cycling." He also won the 2011 BBC Sports Personality of the Year Award with nearly half of the votes going to him out of a field of ten nominees. Cavendish was born in Douglas, Isle of Man, the son of David, a native of the Isle, and Adele from Yorkshire, England. He began riding Bicycle motocross (BMX) at an early age, racing at the National Sports Centre in Douglas. He joined his local club in Douglas at the age of nine – his determination soon becoming apparent. "He didn't like losing", said Dot Tilbury, his former coach; "He started to win and often he would lap the other riders in the field". He said: "I was always riding a bike, getting dropped in little races." "My mum would laugh at me, and I said it was because all my mates had mountain bikes, so I asked for a mountain bike for my thirteenth birthday and got one. The very next day I went out and beat everyone." It was at that time that Cavendish met British cyclist David Millar at a race on the Isle of Man, who was an inspiration to him. Cavendish worked in a bank for two years after leaving school to earn enough money for an attempt at a professional career. He gained a place as one of the first six riders selected for British Cycling's Olympic Academy for junior riders in 2003 having almost been rejected because of his relatively poor performance in stationary bike tests. Coaches Rod Ellingworth, John Herety and Simon Lillistone lobbied British Cycling Performance Director Peter Keen to include him because of his potential. Although he initially struggled because of a lack of fitness, he recorded his first win in senior competition in March 2004; in the Girvan Three Day race he managed to latch back onto the lead group after being dropped over a climb before winning the finishing sprint ahead of Julian Winn. Whilst at the academy, he won two gold medals at the 2003 Island Games. Cavendish progressed well at the academy. Ellingworth said, "Cav kind of liked it" when asked about the rigid rules and "dictatorship style" of the academy. The junior riders lived on £58 a week and financial management became a part of life at the academy as well as cooking and cleaning. Cycling Weekly described the academy as "a boot camp style training regime" controlled by Ellingworth, who, after finding out they had skipped a three-hour training ride, made the juniors complete four hours hard training at night. He won gold in the madison with Rob Hayles at the 2005 track world championships in Los Angeles. They had not raced together before as Hayles' usual partner, Geraint Thomas, had crashed during training a few weeks earlier—but finished one lap ahead of the field to claim the gold medal, followed by the Dutch and Belgian teams, Cavendish's first world title. Cavendish also won the European championship points race. Cavendish turned professional in 2005 with Team Sparkasse. During this time, he rode the Tour de Berlin and the Tour of Britain. He began 2006 with the Continental team, Team Sparkasse, a feeder squad for the T-Mobile Team. In June, he won two stages and the points and sprint competitions in the Tour de Berlin. He rode for the Isle of Man on the track at the 2006 Commonwealth Games in Melbourne, riding the scratch race. He lapped the field with three others: England's Rob Hayles; Ashley Hutchinson of Australia; and James McCallum of Scotland. Hayles then led him out for the sprint to win gold for the Isle of Man. The race time was 23.05, an average 51.9 km/h (32.2 mph). His success at the 2006 Tour de Berlin led to a post as a stagiaire with the T-Mobile Team from August until the end of the season. His best result on the road was in the Tour of Britain where he came second twice and third once and won the points classification. His breakthrough came at the 2007 Scheldeprijs race in Belgium, which he won. He went on to win stages at the Four Days of Dunkirk and the Volta a Catalunya leading to his selection for the Tour de France. He crashed in stages one and two and abandoned the race at stage eight as it reached the Alps. Although he had taken two top-ten placings he was unhappy not to have had a top-five placing. His début season continued with ten stage wins, one behind Alessandro Petacchi's record eleven for a début season. Cavendish took his eleventh win in early October—the Circuit Franco-Belge—to equal Petacchi's record. Among the wins were three in UCI ProTour events—two in the Volta a Catalunya and one in the Eneco Tour. In 2008, Cavendish returned to the track for the world championships in Manchester. Cavendish was brought in to partner Bradley Wiggins in the madison, as Hayles failed a routine blood test, and was subsequently banned. At around halfway through the race they appeared to be out of contention, with their closest rivals all gaining a lap. With thirty-five laps left to race, however, Wiggins launched an attack which helped them reach the field ten laps later. They took the lead due to the superior points they had collected in the sprints. They held on to win the gold medal, finishing with nineteen points, ahead of Germany on thirteen. On the road, Cavendish won his first stages of a Grand Tour with two victories in the Giro d'Italia and four stages in the Tour de France, the first of which was on stage five. He won also stages eight, twelve and thirteen. After stage fourteen, Cavendish abandoned the Tour to concentrate on the Olympics in Beijing. He paired with Wiggins in the madison, and as the reigning world champions, they were favourites for the gold medal but finished ninth. Cavendish felt Wiggins had not performed to the best of his ability in the madison. The rest of his season was successful, with a total of eleven further race wins, including three each at the Tour of Ireland and the Tour of Missouri where he won his only points classification of the season. At the Tour de Romandie, he won the opening time trial, beating compatriot Wiggins and emphasising his short-distance time-trial abilities. Cavendish's 2009 season began at the Tour of Qatar, where he renewed his rivalry with Quick-Step's Tom Boonen. Boonen won the race and one stage, though Cavendish took two stages. He also won two stages at the Tour of California, again beating Boonen in the sprint finishes. The Tour of California also saw him win his first points of classification of the 2009 season. He was a surprise inclusion on the British squad for the 2009 UCI Track Cycling World Championships, where he competed in the scratch race and the madison, failing to pick up medals in either. He took up the European season at Tirreno–Adriatico, the Italian one-week stage race, winning one stage. He then entered his first classic race, Milan–San Remo, where he tracked down Cervélo TestTeam rider Heinrich Haussler in the last 200 m (220 yd) narrowly winning the sprint and the race—Cavendish's first victory in a race known as one of the five monuments of cycling. Cavendish repeated his 2008 two-stage victory at the Three Days of De Panne, also winning the points classification. At the start of the Giro d'Italia Team Columbia–High Road won the team time trial and Cavendish was given the pink leader's jersey, becoming the first Manx rider to wear it. The first two road stages, however, were fruitless for Cavendish, who was beaten to the line by Petacchi in the first stage. He was caught behind a crash and failed to make it back for the sprint the next day. Cavendish soon asserted his sprinting dominance on the race, however, gaining three stage wins before abandoning it after stage thirteen, citing a need to rest in preparation for the Tour de France. He continued his preparation by racing the Tour de Suisse where he won stage three and stage six. During the season, Cavendish developed a remarkable partnership with his lead out man, Mark Renshaw. Continuing his run of success, he won stages two, three, ten, eleven, nineteen and twenty-one of the Tour de France. In winning the third stage, he became the first Briton to hold the green jersey two days in a row. Cavendish's stage eleven win enabled him to reclaim the green jersey from rival Thor Hushovd of Cervélo TestTeam. It also equalled Barry Hoban's British record of eight stage wins. Winning stage nineteen, Cavendish set a new record for Tour de France stage wins by a British rider. In winning the last stage, he led home a one–two for his team, when his team-mate and lead out man, Renshaw, finished second on the Champs-Élysées. Following on from the Tour de France, Cavendish won the Sparkassen Giro Bochum and took part in the Tour of Ireland, winning stage two. In September he recorded the fiftieth win of his road racing career in a sprint finish in the opening stage of the Tour of Missouri. Before the race he confirmed he would remain with Team Columbia–HTC in 2010, ending speculation that he was moving to the newly created British team, Team Sky. Cavendish retained the leader's jersey by sprinting to victory in stage two but finished fifth in stage three, losing the overall lead to Hushovd. A lung infection forced him to withdraw from the race before stage four. Although selected for the British team for the road race at the 2009 UCI Road World Championships, his illness prevented him from taking part. After a dental problem, Cavendish delayed the start of his 2010 season until the Vuelta a Andalucía in mid-February. Following the lay off his form was poor, and he failed to defend his victory at the Milan–San Remo, coming in six minutes behind the winner in eighty-ninth place. His pre-season goals were to win the green jersey in the Tour de France and win the road race at the UCI Road World Championships. Cavendish raced in the Tour of Flanders but only to work for a teammate and gain experience. He was involved in a crash and did not finish. Following a poor start to the season, he found form at the Volta a Catalunya, finishing seventh in the time-trial and winning stage two. His team withdrew Cavendish from the Tour de Romandie for making an offensive gesture after winning the second stage. Missing the Giro d'Italia, he chose instead to compete at the Tour of California starting in May, where he won stage one—only his third victory of the season. In June, Cavendish crashed heavily whilst sprinting in the closing metres of stage four of the Tour de Suisse. He appeared to veer off line and brought down Haussler and several other riders, raising criticism from other teams regarding his riding style. Cavendish entered the Tour de France. During stage one, he crashed out of the final sprint, with just under 3 km (1.9 mi) remaining in the stage. Overhead camera footage showed him failing to negotiate a corner after entering too fast and turning too late. He then leaned his shoulder into a fellow rider as he travelled away from the racing line. Cavendish returned to form by winning the stage five, six, eleven, eighteen and twenty, bringing his career total to fifteen tour stage wins. He ended up second in the points classification, eleven points behind Petacchi. Cavendish's next race was the Vuelta a España. His team won the team time trial with Cavendish finishing first, taking the leader's jersey. He could place only second or third in the subsequent sprint stages but returned to form later in the race winning stage twelve, thirteen, eighteen and the points classification. Cavendish had a slow start to 2011 failing to win a race until late February when he won stage six of the Tour of Oman. His second victory of the season came in the Scheldeprijs—his third in this event following his wins in 2007 and 2008—bringing him to the record tied with Piet Oellibrandt. He failed to finish at the Paris–Roubaix. He came second in the second stage of the Giro d'Italia in contentious circumstances (Cavendish gestured at winner Petacchi for appearing to move across his path in the final sprint) to take the pink jersey into stage three. Cavendish got his first grand tour victory of the year by winning stage ten of the Giro, denying claims that he had illegally held on to his team car when climbing Mount Etna on stage nine. He won his second Giro victory of 2011 on stage twelve before leaving the race. On 11 June, it was announced that Cavendish was appointed a Member of the Order of the British Empire (MBE) in the Queen's Birthday Honours. He won stage five, seven, eleven, fifteen and twenty-one of the Tour de France — bringing his total to twenty career Tour de France stage wins. He also became the first person to win the final stage three years in succession. Cavendish was docked twenty points for finishing outside the time limit after stage nine and again after eighteen. He went on to win the points classification—the first British cyclist to do so. Over the following weeks, Cavendish took part in the post-Tour criteriums. He won the Stiphout Criterium in The Netherlands, beating brothers Andy and Fränk Schleck of Leopard Trek to the line. He then won the Profcriterium Wolvertem-Meise, followed by the Wateringse Wielerdag. In August, Cavendish's team HTC–Highroad announced they would fold at the end of the season, fuelling speculation that Cavendish would move to Team Sky. The following week, racing for team Great Britain, he won the London–Surrey Cycle Classic, the official test event for the road race at the 2012 Summer Olympics and part of the London Prepares series. Less than a week later, Cavendish started the Vuelta a España, but abandoned it during stage four due to the searing heat. After withdrawing from the Vuelta Cavendish was allowed to be a late addition to the line up of the Tour of Britain. Cavendish won stage one in Dumfries to take the leader's jersey, and the final stage in London. At the end of September, Cavendish went to the UCI Road World Championships in Copenhagen taking part in the road race with an eight-strong British team. After the team controlled the whole race it came down to a sprint finish with Cavendish crossing the line in first place taking the rainbow jersey. He became the second British male UCI world champion after Tom Simpson in 1965. In November, Cavendish made a cameo return to the track, competing in the Revolution event at Manchester Velodrome. He won the scratch race, his first win on the track of any kind since 2008. He announced he was starting his training for the 2012 season earlier than in previous years, with the aim of being more competitive in the Classics. In November, he won the 2011 Most Inspirational Sportsman of the Year Award at the Jaguar Academy of Sport Annual Awards at The Savoy Hotel in London. In December, Cavendish won the BBC Sports Personality of the Year Award with 169,152 (49.47%) of the votes cast, ahead of Mo Farah and Darren Clarke. Amid much speculation, it was announced in October 2011 that Cavendish would join Team Sky for the 2012 season. His HTC–Highroad team-mate Bernhard Eisel joined him. Cavendish began his 2012 season at the Tour of Qatar. After recovering from illness, he won stage three—his first victory for Team Sky. He won stage five later in the week, moving back into the top ten of the overall classification. He finished the race in sixth place, despite crashing on the final stage. Although he did not win any stages at the Tour of Oman, having suffered an injury in the first stage, he returned to win the Kuurne–Brussels–Kuurne. Cavendish targeted a second victory in Milan–San Remo in March, but was dropped on Le Manie, 100 km (62 mi) from the finish. He did not manage to finish high up in the remaining 2012 Classics. In the Tour de Romandie, he showed his ability in short time trials by finishing third in the prologue but did not take any stage wins. A week later, Cavendish took his season victories to five by winning the sprint on stage two of the Giro d'Italia. The following day, he was again in contention for victory on stage three, but in the sprint, Androni Giocattoli–Venezuela's Roberto Ferrari aggressively switched lanes, clipping Cavendish and sending him to the ground, causing other riders to fall including overall leader Taylor Phinney (BMC Racing Team). Cavendish later tweeted that Ferrari should be "ashamed to take out Pink, Red & World Champ jerseys". He recovered from minor injuries to win stages five and thirteen. Cavendish completed the Giro, but lost the points classification to Team Katusha's Joaquim Rodríguez by a single point. He did win the minor Azzurri d'Italia and stage combativeness classifications. Cavendish competed in the Ster ZLM Toer GP Jan van Heeswijk, in mid-June. Despite failing to win any of the four, mostly flat, stages, Cavendish's consistency ensured that he won the overall general classification—the first of his professional career—by eight seconds. In July, Cavendish won stage two of the Tour de France, his twenty-first tour stage win. Cavendish was in contention for another stage victory on stage four, but was taken out in a large crash in the final 3 km (1.9 mi). He then took on a supporting role as Team Sky attempted to win the overall race overall with Wiggins. He was seen carrying bottles for team-mates and even setting the pace on a Pyrenean climb. The team repaid Cavendish for his hard work by helping chase down a breakaway on stage eighteen, although Cavendish alone had to chase down Rabobank rider Luis León Sánchez and Nicolas Roche of Ag2r–La Mondiale in the last 200 m (220 yd) to take his 22nd Tour stage win, equalling André Darrigade. Cavendish won the final stage of the Tour de France on the Champs-Élysées for a record fourth successive year—the most successful sprinter in Tour history with twenty-three stage wins. He also became the first person to win on the Champs-Élysées in the rainbow jersey. During the Tour, French newspaper L'Équipe named Cavendish the Tour de France's best sprinter of all time. Cavendish's main target for the season was the road race at the Olympics, which was held six days after the final stage of the Tour de France. A strong British squad of Wiggins, Chris Froome, Ian Stannard and Millar was assembled around Cavendish. The team aimed to control the race and allow him to take a sprint victory on The Mall. However, the team were forced to set the pace for the majority of the race, with few nations offering any support, and on the final climb of the Box Hill circuit, a large breakaway group of over thirty riders formed. Despite the best efforts of Stannard, Wiggins, Millar, Froome and Sky team-mate Bernhard Eisel, the breakaway could not be brought back leaving Cavendish to finish twenty-ninth, forty seconds behind the winner, Alexander Vinokurov of Kazakhstan. Cavendish won three stages of the Tour of Britain, crossing the line first in Dumfries, Blackpool and Guildford. On 18 October 2012, he signed a three-year contract with Belgian team Omega Pharma–Quick-Step from the 2013 season. He started the 2013 season by winning the opening stage of the Tour de San Luis in Argentina on his début for Omega Pharma–Quick-Step. He then went on to win the Tour of Qatar, with four consecutive stage victories out of six. In March, he won the second stage of the Three Days of De Panne. In April he finished in second place to defending champion Marcel Kittel of Argos–Shimano at the Scheldeprijs; he faded in the final kilometre, but recovered to launch his sprint from around twenty riders back with 200 m (220 yd) remaining. In May, Cavendish won the opening stage of the Giro d'Italia, taking the pink jersey for the third time in his career. He went on to win stage six from a bunch sprint after a pan-flat stage. This victory moved him above Robert Millar to the top of Cycling Weekly's all-time ranking of British professional riders. He also won stage twelve, claiming his 100th professional victory and reclaiming the lead in the points classification. The next day, he timed his finish perfectly to win stage thirteen, his fourth victory of the 2013 race. His fifth victory of the Giro came on the final stage, wrapping up the points classification which he had led for much of the race. By doing so, Cavendish became only the fifth rider to win the points classification in all three Grand Tours. On 23 June, Cavendish won the British national road race championship, around the street circuit in Glasgow. He overtook David Millar on the home straight and held off a challenge by Ian Stannard, who recovered from a puncture in the penultimate lap to claim silver. In July, he won stage five of the Tour de France, giving him twenty-four career Tour stage wins. He was greeted on the line by André Darrigade, the previous record holder for most Tour stages won by a sprinter. In the eleventh stage, a 33 km (21 mi) individual time trial, a spectator doused Cavendish with urine. On the thirteenth stage from Tours to Saint-Amand-Montrond, he rode with a fourteen-man breakaway with 30 km (18.6 mi) to go and out-sprinted Peter Sagan to win the stage—his 25th Tour de France stage win. Later that month Cavendish decided to ride the Danmark Rundt winning the race's final stage. In September, he returned to the track for the first time since the 2008 Olympic Games in Beijing, competing at the velodrome in Ghent for the International Belgian Open. Finishing second in the scratch race and third in the madison with Owain Doull, Cavendish had not ruled out the prospect of competing in the 2016 Olympics in Rio de Janeiro having earned enough points to qualify for the UCI Track Cycling World Cup Classics. On 18 September, Cavendish won stage four of the Tour of Britain, outsprinting Elia Viviani in Llanberis in the Snowdonia national park. He repeated the win three days later to take stage seven—again out-sprinting Italy's Elia Viviani to the finish on Guildford High Street. He also won the final stage in London the next day. A quiet start to the year, Cavendish decided not to compete in the Giro d'Italia. His best Classics result was a fifth place in the Milan–San Remo. He won four stages and the points classification at the Tour of Turkey. In the first stage of the 2014 Tour de France, which started in Yorkshire, England, from Leeds to Harrogate, Cavendish crashed out during a collision he caused in the final few seconds of the sprint finish. He suffered a separated right shoulder and did not start the next stage. He came back to competition at the Tour de l'Ain, where he was winless. He then showed some form at the Tour du Poitou-Charentes, winning the first two stages. Cavendish competed in the Tour of Britain in September, coming third in the first stage in Liverpool and second in the final stage in London. Overall, his 2014 season proved to be one of his least successful, winning eleven races but gaining no Grand Tour stage wins. Cavendish ended 2014 competing on the track, taking second place at the Six Days of Ghent and winning the Six Days of Zurich, both with Iljo Keisse. He later ruled out an attempt to enter the track cycling competitions at the 2016 Summer Olympics due to his road commitments. In contrast to the previous year, he had a successful start to the 2015 season. He won five races by mid-February, including two stages, the points classification and the general classification at the Dubai Tour. In March, Cavendish won Kuurne–Brussels–Kuurne, for the second time in his career. He then participated in the Tirreno–Adriatico, where he was involved in a large crash on stage two due to Elia Viviani clipping his back wheel and causing his chain to drop. Cavendish next raced at the Tour of Turkey, where he won three stages and the points classification ahead of Daniele Ratto. Cavendish then participated in the Tour of California, showing good form by winning four stages and the points classification ahead of overall winner Sagan. His Tour de Suisse was unsuccessful; the best place he managed was sixth on stage six. At the Tour de France, Cavendish won stage seven by taking André Greipel's wheel before passing him in a sprint finish in Fougères. This was his 26th Tour de France win and the first since 2013. On 16 August, Cavendish returned to the track, winning the madison with Bradley Wiggins in the first round of the Revolution cycling series at the newly opened Derby Velodrome. It was the first time the pair had ridden the event together since the 2008 Olympics. On 29 September 2015, it was announced that Cavendish had signed for MTN–Qhubeka—to be renamed as Team Dimension Data—for the 2016 season, along with his Etixx–Quick-Step teammates Renshaw and Eisel, his former teammate from HTC and Sky. The team principal, Doug Ryder, described the move as "a big step forward for the team." In February, Cavendish rode the Tour of Qatar, taking the opening stage and the general classification for the second time. Cavendish wanted to win a medal at the Olympics in the omnium. In preparation he competed at the UCI track world championships; he placed sixth in the omnium. Partnered with Wiggins he won the madison. In April he rode the Tour of Croatia, winning stage two. On 2 July, he won the opening stage of the Tour de France in a sprint finish at Utah Beach, taking his twenty-seventh stage win, and donning the yellow jersey for the first time. He lost the jersey the following day when Sagan won stage two. Cavendish won stage three in a photo finish with André Greipel in Angers, taking his twenty-eighth win and equalling Bernard Hinault's tally. This win put him in the lead of points classification. He won stage six in a bunch sprint at Montauban, ahead of Marcel Kittel and Dan McLay, to increase his lead. Sagan retook the green jersey from Cavendish on the tenth stage, where the Slovakian was part of a breakaway that led the race until the end. He finished second to Michael Matthews at the finish line in Revel and won the stage's intermediate sprint. Cavendish went on to take his fourth stage of the 2016 Tour, and his thirtieth Tour stage victory on stage fourteen, passing Alexander Kristoff and Sagan at the finish in Villars-les-Dombes Parc des Oiseaux. He quit the Tour on the second rest day before the mountainous stages citing his need to prepare for the Olympics. Having competed in two previous Olympics, Cavendish finally won his first medal, finishing second in the men's omnium. After the Olympics, he returned to track racing, teaming up with Bradley Wiggins to race the Six Day London. The pair narrowly lost to Kenny De Ketele and Moreno De Pauw in the final moments of the sixth day, finishing in second position overall. The pair went on to race at the Six Days of Ghent, this time beating De Ketele and De Pauw to take the overall victory. After not winning any stages in his opening race, the 2017 Dubai Tour, he won the opening stage of the third event of the 2017 UCI World Tour, the Abu Dhabi Tour. In April, he was diagnosed with Epstein–Barr virus, preventing him from racing until the 2017 British National Championships. In a 2021 interview, Cavendish stated that his health was compromised by being told by doctors that he was fit to train again when Epstein-Barr was still in his system, leading to him reducing his intake of food to make his racing weight and eventually to a deterioration in his mental health and clinical depression. Cavendish was back to form by the 2017 Tour de France, but reigning World Champion Peter Sagan reportedly forced Cavendish into the barriers in the final sprint at the finish of stage four. Cavendish suffered a fractured shoulder blade, after landing on his right shoulder which he had dislocated three years earlier and withdrew from the race. Sagan was later disqualified as it appeared he had struck Cavendish with an elbow. In response, Cavendish said he was friendly with Sagan but he wasn't "a fan of him putting his elbow in". Rob Hayles, a former professional cyclist, said Cavendish was already heading into the barriers before Sagan put his elbow out. He also claimed no contact occurred between the two cyclists. Others shared Hayles' opinion, stating it was more Cavendish's fault for attempting to squeeze through a small gap than Sagan's. Race officials, however, said Sagan "endangered some of his colleagues seriously" in the sprint. Cavendish returned to race at the madison in the Six Day London. Following Bradley Wiggins' retirement, he teamed up with Peter Kennaugh, and finished second overall. Cavendish began his 2018 season at the Dubai Tour, winning stage three. He then raced the Tour of Oman, placing second on the opening stage. He then went on to start the Abu Dhabi Tour, only to crash in the neutralised zone of the first stage. He fell on the shoulder he fractured at the previous year's Tour de France and was forced to abandon the race. He returned to action at Tirreno–Adriatico, but suffered another crash during the opening team time trial. He fractured a rib, and despite getting back on his bike missed the time cut, and was unable to continue in the race. Cavendish was fit to start the Milan–San Remo, but crashed heavily into a bollard in the final 10 km (6.2 mi) as the peloton approached the crucial Poggio di San Remo climb. He suffered another fractured rib, bruising and abrasions, as well as a possible ankle ligament injury. His hopes of winning a Tour de France stage ended after failing to make the time cut on the stage eleven. He crossed the line one hour five minutes and 33 seconds after stage winner Geraint Thomas, well outside the time limit that had been set at 31:27. Cavendish was due to start the European Road Championships. However, he pulled out on the advice of his medical team, due to a number of injuries earlier in the season. Cavendish said that it was "incredibly disappointing". Cavendish returned to racing at the Vuelta a San Juan in Argentina, after not having raced since August 2018. He finished eighth and later said it was "nice to be back in the peloton". He was not selected for the Tour de France because of strained relations with Team Dimension Data principal and owner Douglas Ryder and other health issues since 2017. In response, Cavendish said he was "absolutely heart-broken" to be missing the tour in which he had competed each year since 2007. Douglas Ryder said it "was multiple people who made that decision" and that "there was a whole team involved". Team performance director, Rolf Aldag, however, said the decision had been made by Ryder alone. Aldag had made his intentions clear of selecting Cavendish for the tour, but later accepted it was ultimately the team owner's decision of who would be on the team. Aldag announced his departure from the team at the end of the season in a statement in early September. Cavendish crashed on stage one of the Tour de Pologne after a touch of wheels around a slow and sharp corner at roughly 4 km (2.5 mi) from the finish; he finished in last place. He was able to finish sixth on stage three, however. He eventually abandoned the race on stage six of the tour to focus on the European Road Championships, where he finished 31st. He was selected by Team Dimension Data to lead the team at the Deutschland Tour and to ride in the Tour of Britain. In late October 2019, Cavendish signed with Bahrain–McLaren for the 2020 season alongside Mikel Landa, Wout Poels, and Dylan Teuns. The announcement was followed by success in the 2019 Six Days of London where Cavendish, along with Owain Doull, finished second to Elia Viviani & Simone Consonni. At the beginning of 2020 Cavendish had his hopes of competing in the madison at the 2020 Olympics dashed when he was not selected in the British squads for the final round of the 2019–20 Track Cycling World Cup in Milton, Canada or the 2020 Track Cycling World Championships in Berlin, rendering him ineligible to be selected for the Games. He made his debut for Bahrain-McLaren at the Tour of Saudi Arabia in February 2020, where he helped team-mate Phil Bauhaus to two stage wins and the overall win, after Cavendish crashed twice on the second stage of the race. During the season he alternated between riding as a sprinter and as a lead-out man for team-mates, however Cavendish's racing programme was disrupted by the COVID-19 pandemic. After he was not selected for the delayed 2020 Tour de France, Cavendish said that he felt that he was not ready for the Tour, due to a lack of racing and the race's particularly tough, mountainous route, and backed team-mate Mikel Landa's bid for the yellow jersey. He rode in the delayed cobbled classics in the autumn, making a number of early breakaways. At Gent–Wevelgem he stated in an interview with Sporza that the race might be his last: He subsequently clarified that the comment related to rumours about subsequent Flemish classic races being cancelled, which turned out not to be the case: after riding in Scheldeprijs, the Tour of Flanders and the Three Days of Brugge-De Panne he declared in an interview with Het Nieuwsblad that he had had "(his) best racing month for a long time" and indicated that he wanted to continue racing "for a few more seasons". Following reports that he was due to retire due to difficulty in securing a World Tour contract, in December 2020, Cavendish announced his return to Deceuninck–Quick-Step for the 2021 season. His contract was for the UCI WorldTeam minimum salary of €40,000, and he had to bring his own sponsor to the team. In April he took his first four professional victories since 2018, winning stages 2, 3, 4 and 8 of the Tour of Turkey. In June he took another win in the fifth and final stage of the Tour of Belgium, triumphing over a field which included such names as Caleb Ewan, Tim Merlier, Pascal Ackermann, Dylan Groenewegen and Nacer Bouhanni. Cavendish's teammate, Sam Bennett had an increasingly strained relationship with the team's management, and when Bennett was ruled out of the Tour de France following a training injury, Cavendish was drafted in as the team's lead sprinter. He won stages four, six, ten and thirteen of the Tour, bringing his total of Tour de France stage victories to 34, making him the joint record holder for Tour stage wins along with Eddy Merckx. On the race's final stage to the Champs-Élysées, Cavendish missed out on the win, finishing third behind Wout van Aert and Jasper Philipsen, however he won the points classification for the second time in his career, ten years after his first win in 2011. Cavendish was backed by the "strongest sprint train in the race" with Michael Mørkøv as his lead-out man. Cavendish's 2021 season was abruptly ended by a crash in the final Madison session of the Six Days of Ghent track event. Cavendish was closely following world Madison champion Lasse Norman Hansen, behind Gerben Thijssen and Kenny De Ketele when Thijssen slipped on a damp patch on the track sending De Ketele up the banking to sweep away Hansen's front wheel, bringing down both Hansen and Cavendish. Cavendish was taken to the intensive care unit of Ghent University Hospital suffering from broken ribs and a punctured lung. In December, Cavendish extended his contract at Deceuninck–Quick-Step for another year. Cavendish opened his season in the Middle East with the Quick-Step Alpha Vinyl Team at the Tour of Oman. He finished second to Fernando Gaviria on the opening stage, but the following day he won the sprint for stage 2, taking the lead in both the general and points classifications. He finished the six-day event in fourth place in the points classification following a points deduction after stage 5, and being blocked by Maximiliano Richeze in the sprint for stage 6. Later in February, Cavendish won stage 2 of the UAE Tour. In March, Cavendish became the first British cyclist to win the Italian classic Milano–Torino. After racing at an average speed of 44 kilometres per hour (27 miles per hour) over a new 199-kilometre (124-mile) course from Magenta to Rivoli, Cavendish out-sprinted Nacer Bouhanni and Alexander Kristoff to take his first victory in Italy since a stage win at the 2014 Tirreno–Adriatico. In May, Cavendish contested the Giro d'Italia for the first time since 2013, and he won the third stage of the race in Hungary, his 16th Giro stage win. This win gave him 53 career Grand Tour stage wins, bringing him within four of Mario Cipollini and eleven of Eddy Merckx for the most Grand Tour stage wins of all-time. He took two further podium finishes during the race, and ultimately finished third in the points classification, behind Arnaud Démare and Gaviria. The following month, Cavendish won his second British National Road Race Championships title in Castle Douglas, nine years after he won his first title in Glasgow. The following month, his general manager Patrick Lefevere advised that his contract would not be extended beyond the end of the season. Having reportedly signed a contract with the B&B Hotels–KTM team prior to its disbanding, Cavendish started 2023 as a free agent; however, in mid-January, he signed a contract with the Astana Qazaqstan Team. He is scheduled to make his first starts with the team in Oman, at the Muscat Classic and the Tour of Oman. During the 2023 Giro d'Italia, Cavendish announced his intention to retire at the end of the 2023 racing season. A week later, on 28 May, in Rome, Cavendish out-sprinted his rivals to take the 21st and final stage, taking his final tally of Giro stage wins to seventeen. In July 2023, Cavendish missed out on extending his Tour de France stage win record, finishing second on stage 7. He abandoned the race after a fall during stage 8. In October of that year, he announced he had reconsidered his decision to retire, and would stay with Astana for the following season, in the hope of breaking the Tour de France stage win record in 2024. Cavendish has an aggressive riding style that has been compared to a sprinter pushing on the starting blocks. At the 2009 Tour de France, the points he gained in the intermediate sprint in stage fourteen were removed after he was judged to have driven Thor Hushovd too close to barriers on the course. After stage nineteen, he said he was "embarrassed" for his comments about "deserving" green jersey wearer Hushovd. After stage four of the 2010 Tour de Suisse, Cavendish was found to be at fault for a crash involving himself and Heinrich Haussler during the end of the sprint stage. The crash caused Haussler, Arnaud Coyot and Lloyd Mondory to quit the race because of their injuries, though Cavendish was able to continue. Cavendish received a thirty-second penalty and a CHF200 fine (£159 or €186 as of January 2020). The start of the next stage was disrupted by fellow riders protesting Cavendish's riding and style, and what they claimed was a lack of respect from him. His riding style resulted in organisers of the 2013 Boxmeer Criterium in the Netherlands to announce he was not welcome due to an incident during stage ten of the 2013 Tour de France, when he bumped Dutch rider Tom Veelers in a sprint finish, sending the Argos-Shimano rider tumbling. Another instance of dubious safety concerns while riding was witnessed on the opening stage of the 2014 Tour de France as Cavendish caused Simon Gerrans to crash while trying to push him out of the way during the sprint. In 2016, Cavendish accepted responsibility and apologised for the crash of South Korean cyclist Park Sang-hoon at the men's omnium event at the Olympics when an incident between them led to Park being thrown from his bike. After the crash, Park appeared unconscious and did not move while paramedics administered first aid; he was eventually taken away on a stretcher. Cavendish has been described as confident, even arrogant. In 2008 he said, "When journalists at the Tour de France ask me if I am the best sprinter, I answer 'Yes', and that's seen as arrogance, but if they don't ask me, I don't say I'm the best sprinter in the world." Cavendish has a "photographic" memory for the details of race routes. In a 2013 interview with Jonathan Liew, he said, "If I do a circuit then after three laps I could tell you where all the potholes were." As a test Jonathan asked him to recount the close of his win in San Remo five years earlier. It took him five minutes to recite every detail of the last 10 kilometres (6.2 mi). This is an obvious asset to Cavendish in planning and timing his races. On 5 October 2013, Cavendish married model Peta Todd in London, making him stepfather to her son from a previous relationship. Cavendish and Todd have four children together. He has three homes: one on the Isle of Man, which he said will always be his real home; one in Ongar, Essex, and a training base in Quarrata, Tuscany, Italy. Their house in Essex was robbed at knifepoint in November 2021, and two men were jailed at Chelmsford Crown Court in February 2023 for their involvement in the robbery. In January 2015 Cavendish announced the creation of the Rise Above Sportive, a cyclosportive to be held in Chester and North Wales in August 2015. In November 2015, he was awarded an honorary doctorate in science by the University of Chester for his contribution to cycling. He was diagnosed with Epstein–Barr virus in April 2017 and spent months out of action before returning to race the 2017 Tour de France. In August 2018 he was diagnosed with the virus a second time and withdrew from training and racing to recuperate. In June 2009, his autobiography Boy Racer, which covered his career up to that year, was published by Ebury Press. At a press conference in London ahead of the 2009 Tour de France, Cavendish explained the book was "more a biography of last year's Tour stage wins" than an autobiography. His "biggest motivation for writing it had been to explain himself better", to counter the way he came across during interviews immediately after races. In an interview with Cyclingnews.com, Cavendish said the book would "cause some controversy" before stating it is positive in respect to others. The book addresses many events including an offer of more money from elsewhere to leave Team Columbia–High Road in 2008, which Cavendish declined; relationships with teams and riders; and significant moments for him of some races. Each chapter describes a stage from the 2008 Tour de France stages one to fourteen, using other autobiographical moments from Cavendish's life. In November 2013 his second book At Speed was also published by Ebury. Following on from Boy Racer it covered the part of his career from 2010 to 2013. In November 2021, Ebury Press published Tour de Force: My history-making Tour de France, which detailed Cavendish's return to success at the 2021 Tour. Biography portal Sports portal Mark Cavendish: Never Enough Chasing Legends List of British cyclists List of British cyclists who have led the Tour de France general classification List of Giro d'Italia classification winners List of Manx people List of Tour de France secondary classification winners List of Vuelta a España classification winners ""Cannonball Cavendish" aims for new heights". Tom Pilcher. Reuters. 3 July 2009. it is little wonder he is nicknamed Cannonball Cavendish, "Mark Cavendish can leave Sky, says boss Dave Brailsford". BBC Sport. 22 July 2012. Archived from the original on 16 November 2012. Nicknamed the 'Manx Missile', Evans, Hilary; Gjerde, Arild; Heijmans, Jeroen; Mallon, Bill; et al. "Mark Cavendish". Olympics at Sports-Reference.com. Sports Reference LLC. Archived from the original on 24 September 2013. Retrieved 13 July 2013. "Mark Cavendish". Omega Pharma–Quick-Step. Decolef. Archived from the original on 16 March 2013. Retrieved 16 March 2013. "Mark Cavendish Tour de France profile". Archived from the original on 17 July 2016. Retrieved 19 July 2016. "Cavendish signs with Team Dimension Data for 2016". VeloNews. 29 September 2015. Archived from the original on 1 May 2016. Retrieved 10 January 2016. "Dimension Data finalise 2019 roster". Cyclingnews.com. 22 November 2018. Archived from the original on 26 December 2018. Ostanek, Daniel (26 December 2019). "2020 Team Preview: Bahrain McLaren". Cyclingnews.com. Archived from the original on 1 January 2020. "Deceuninck – Quick-Step". UCI.org. Union Cycliste Internationale. Archived from the original on 1 January 2021. Retrieved 1 January 2021. Ryan, Barry (5 December 2020). "Mark Cavendish signs for Deceuninck-QuickStep for 2021 season". Cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 5 December 2020. "Astana Qazaqstan Team". UCI. Retrieved 12 January 2023. "GREATEST ROAD SPRINTERS #1: MARK CAVENDISH". Peloton Magazine. 13 February 2017. Archived from the original on 16 January 2020. Kröner, Hedwig (21 December 2011). "The top ten sprinters of all time". cyclingnews.com. Archived from the original on 12 August 2019. "'Comeback kid' Mark Cavendish poised to join Tour de France immortals". The Guardian. 18 July 2021. Parker, Ian (18 July 2021). "Tour de France 2021: Tadej Pogacar wins as Mark Cavendish just misses out on stage record". independent.co.uk. Retrieved 19 July 2021. Cavendish 2010. "Isle of Man hopes for Cavendish gold". BBC News. 27 July 2012. Procycling, UK, October 2008, p59 L'Équipe, France, 19 July 2008 Moore 2012, p. 39. Birnie, Lionel (13 October 2011). "How Mark Cavendish conquered the world". Cycling Weekly. Archived from the original on 10 May 2018. "Race Results" (PDF). iiga.org. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 6 October 2019. "Island Games 2015: Who will be next to follow these stars?". BBC. 26 June 2015. Archived from the original on 29 July 2019. Moore 2012, p. 47. Moore 2012, p. 43. "British success in men's madison". BBC Sport. 28 March 2005. Archived from the original on 12 July 2012. "2005 European Track Championships". Archived from the original on 1 July 2013. Retrieved 6 September 2019. "Mark Cavendish: Rider Profile". Cycling Weekly. 1 March 2014. Archived from the original on 10 March 2014. "Meeting the Manx Missile – Mark Cavendish MBE". 13 March 2018. Archived from the original on 29 December 2019. "Gold medallist supports velodrome". BBC Sport. 23 December 2006. Archived from the original on 28 May 2007. Sawford, Mal (19 March 2011). "2006 Commonwealth Games". Cyclingnews.com. Archived from the original on 25 October 2012. "Mark Cavendish". procyclingstats.com. Retrieved 8 September 2019. "Grote Scheldeprijs – Vlaanderen – 2007". The-Sports.org. Archived from the original on 20 September 2011. Retrieved 24 July 2011. Fotheringham, William (10 May 2007). "Cavendish steals limelight from fellow Briton Wiggins". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 3 October 2014. Fotheringham, William (11 May 2007). "Cavendish proves his pedigree in stage win". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 3 October 2014. Cavendish, Mark (16 July 2007). "My race is over. I was trying to do things I am physically incapable of". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 4 November 2007. Fotheringham, Alasdair (6 October 2007). "Cavendish gets win number 11 in 2007". Cycling Weekly. Archived from the original on 19 September 2011. Moore, Richard (27 March 2008). "Hayles exclusion takes shine off Wiggins gold". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 5 January 2014. Atkins, Ben; Stokes, Shane (29 March 2008). "Wiggins and Cavendish get the High Road over the Germans". Cyclingnews.com. Archived from the original on 11 November 2012. "Mark Cavendish". Cycling Archives. de Wielersite. Archived from the original on 22 May 2013. Retrieved 17 March 2013. "Cavendish out of Tour de France". BBC Sport. 20 July 2008. Retrieved 15 July 2009. "Cavendish out of Tour de France". BBC. 20 July 2008. Retrieved 29 December 2019. Fotheringham, Alasdair (20 August 2008). "Wiggins and Cav' miss out on Olympic Madison". Cycling Weekly. Caroe, Charlie (30 September 2008). "Bradley Wiggins hasn't spoken to Mark Cavendish since Beijing Olympics". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 25 October 2013. Chadband, Ian (23 July 2012). "Bradley Wiggins and Mark Cavendish fired up to banish their Beijing heartache". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 24 July 2012. Fotheringham, Alasdair (29 August 2008). "Three in a row for Cav in Ireland". Cycling Weekly. Archived from the original on 19 September 2011. "Cavendish wins Romandie prologue". BBC Sport. 29 April 2008. Gallagher, Brendan (3 July 2009). "Tour de France 2009: Mark Cavendish aims to challenge Tom Boonen for points title". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 28 July 2010. "California double for Cavendish". BBC Sport. 20 February 2009. Archived from the original on 11 March 2009. "Cavendish captures green jersey". BBC Sport. 23 February 2009. Archived from the original on 11 March 2009. "Cavendish named in GB track team". BBC Sport. 23 March 2009. Archived from the original on 24 March 2009. "Cavendish takes Italian stage win". BBC Sport. 17 March 2009. Archived from the original on 21 March 2009. Haake, Bjorn; Westemeyer, Susan; Brown, Gregor (21 March 2009). "Cavendish pips Haussler on the line". Cyclingnews.com. Archived from the original on 18 June 2009. Gallagher, Brendan (2 April 2009). "Mark Cavendish and Bradley Wiggins win final two stages of Three Days of De Panne". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 27 April 2016. Lynch, Robin (9 May 2009). "Mark Cavendish and Columbia take Giro d'Italia opener ahead of Garmin". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 10 March 2016. Eurosport (17 May 2009). "Giro d'Italia – Cavendish wins farcical stage". Yahoo! Sports. Archived from the original on 23 May 2009. Retrieved 10 October 2009. Anthony Tan (10 May 2009). ""Lazy" Cavendish learns the hard way, but keeps maglia rosa". Cycling News. Archived from the original on 18 June 2009. Retrieved 10 May 2009. Anthony Tan (17 May 2009). "Cavendish wins a stage left wanting". Cycling News. Archived from the original on 21 June 2009. Retrieved 18 May 2009. Anthony Tan (20 May 2009). "Cavendish "floats" to second sprint win". Cycling News. Archived from the original on 18 June 2009. Retrieved 20 May 2009. Anthony Tan (22 May 2009). "By far the fastest in Firenze: A hat-trick for Cav". Cycling News. Archived from the original on 26 July 2014. Retrieved 22 May 2009. "Superb Cavendish triumphs again". BBC Sport. 6 July 2009. "Cavendish equals record with win". BBC Sport. 15 July 2009. "Embarrassed Cavendish apologises for outburst". BBC Sport. 24 July 2009. "Contador seals 2009 Tour victory". BBC Sport. 26 July 2009. Archived from the original on 30 July 2017. "Cavendish takes Irish stage win". BBC Sport. 22 August 2009. "Cavendish earns landmark victory". BBC Sport. 8 September 2009. "Sick Cavendish ends Missouri bid". BBC Sport. 11 September 2009. "Cavendish withdraws from Worlds". BBC Sport. 23 September 2009. Moore, Richard (19 February 2010). "Mark Cavendish prepares to play catch up at the Vuelta a Andalucía". The Guardian. "Cyclist Mark Cavendish starts 2010 season in Spain". BBC. 17 February 2010. "Result". Milan San Remo. 2010. Archived from the original on 6 August 2011. Moore, Richard (20 March 2010). "Mark Cavendish beaten by Óscar Freire in Milan–San Remo race". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 30 December 2015. "Cavendish reveals the pain of his dental problems". cyclingnews.com. 26 February 2010. Archived from the original on 21 August 2019. MacMichael, Simon (22 December 2009). "Cavendish targets Tour de France green jersey and World Championship gold in 2010". road.cc. Benson, Daniel (5 April 2010). "Cavendish tested in Flanders debut". cyclingnews.com. Archived from the original on 13 September 2011. "Catalunya stage win for Cavendish". BBC Sport. 23 March 2010. Moore, Richard (30 April 2010). "Mark Cavendish pulled from Tour de Romandie after obscene gesture". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 25 January 2016. Ford, Bonnie D (17 May 2010). "It's a sprint, it's a finish, it's Cavendish". ESPN. Archived from the original on 7 November 2012. "Mark Cavendish pulls out of Tour of Switzerland". BBC Sport. 17 June 2010. Murray, Alex (4 July 2010). "Tour de France Stage One as it happened". BBC Sport. Lewis, Tim (4 July 2010). "Mark Cavendish at heart of crash controversy". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 12 March 2016. Brown, Gregor (4 July 2010). "Cavendish jeered by Sky fans following rough Tour finish". Cycling Weekly. Archived from the original on 16 June 2012. "Alberto Contador seals third Tour de France victory". BBC Sport. 25 July 2010. Archived from the original on 25 July 2010. "2010 Tour de France Standings". Tour de France. Amaury Sport Organisation. Archived from the original on 14 August 2010. Retrieved 24 September 2011. Wynn, Nigel (28 August 2010). "Cavendish leads Vuelta after HTC–Columbia win team time trial". Cycling Weekly. Archived from the original on 31 August 2010. Gallagher, Brendan (19 September 2010). "Mark Cavendish wins points jersey as Vincenzo Nibali takes overall". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 14 March 2011. Bacon, Ellis (20 February 2011). "Cavendish takes final Tour of Oman stage; Gesink wins overall". Cycling Weekly. Archived from the original on 5 November 2011. "Mark Cavendish wins Scheldeprijs Classic for third time". BBC Sport. 6 April 2011. "Johan van Summeren wins Paris–Roubaix Classic". BBC Sport. 10 April 2011. Archived from the original on 20 February 2014. Gallagher, Brendan (17 May 2011). "Mark Cavendish sprints to stage ten victory while Alberto Contador retains overall lead". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 21 May 2011. "Mark Cavendish quits 2011 Giro d'Italia after win". BBC Sport. Retrieved 11 April 2011. "Manx cyclist Mark Cavendish honoured by Queen". BBC Sport. 11 June 2011. Archived from the original on 11 May 2012. Alleyne, Richard (11 June 2011). "Honours awards for a sporting line-up". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 14 June 2011. "Tour de France 2011: Mark Cavendish wins fifth stage". BBC Sport. 6 July 2011. "Tour de France: Wiggins crashes out, Cavendish wins stage". BBC Sport. 9 July 2011. "Andy Schleck secures stage 18 win". BBC Sport. 21 July 2011. Glendenning, Barry (22 July 2011). "Tour de France: stage 19 – as it happened". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 27 September 2015. Kröner, Hedwig (21 July 2011). "Cavendish loses 20 points on Tour de France queen stage". Cyclingnews.com. Archived from the original on 7 August 2011. "Mark Cavendish wins historic green jersey". BBC Sport. 24 July 2011. Ryan, Barry (27 July 2011). "Cavendish sets his sights on world championships". Cyclingnews.com. Archived from the original on 7 August 2011. "Cavendish sprints ahead of McEwen in Wolvertem". Cycling Weekly. 30 July 2011. Archived from the original on 9 October 2012. "Cavendish on top in Wateringse". Cyclingnews.com. 28 July 2011. Archived from the original on 7 August 2011. "Mark Cavendish's cycling team HTC–Highroad set to fold". BBC Sport. 4 August 2011. "Mark Cavendish decided on team for 2012". BBC Sport. 2 August 2011. Williams, Ollie (14 August 2011). "Mark Cavendish wins 2012 Summer Olympics road race test event". BBC Sport. Wynn, Nigel (23 August 2011). "Cavendish abandons Vuelta a España". Cycling Weekly. Archived from the original on 2 September 2012. Bull, Nick (5 September 2011). "Cavendish confirmed for the Tour of Britain". Cycling Weekly. Archived from the original on 2 September 2012. "Britain's Mark Cavendish wins stage one for HTC Highroad". BBC Sport. 11 September 2011. Wynn, Nigel (18 September 2011). "Boom wins Tour of Britain overall as Cavendish takes final stage". Cycling Weekly. Archived from the original on 26 September 2011. Williams, Ollie (25 September 2011). "Mark Cavendish and Britain win road race title". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 15 October 2011. Gladstone, Hugh (25 September 2011). "Mark Cavendish wins World Road Race Championship". Cycling Weekly. Archived from the original on 1 October 2011. "Mark Cavendish wins scratch race on track return". BBC Sport. 20 November 2011. Fotheringham, William (20 November 2011). "Mark Cavendish saddles up for a year when second will be failure". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 15 December 2013. "Cavendish in Green named Most Inspirational Sportsman of the Year". Jaguar Academy of Sport. 28 November 2011. Archived from the original on 1 December 2011. "Sports Personality of the Year 2011: Mark Cavendish wins BBC award". BBC Sport. 22 December 2011. "Mark Cavendish announces Team Sky move". BBC Sport. 11 October 2011. "Team Sky sign Eisel". Sky Sports. BSkyB. 11 October 2011. Archived from the original on 19 October 2011. "Mark Cavendish claims first Team Sky win at Tour of Qatar". BBC Sport. 7 February 2012. Archived from the original on 7 February 2012. "Mark Cavendish wins fifth stage of the Tour of Qatar for Team Sky". BBC Sport. 9 February 2012. Archived from the original on 9 February 2012. "Mark Cavendish crashes as Tom Boonen wins Tour of Qatar". BBC Sport. 10 February 2012. Archived from the original on 13 February 2012. Turner, Jonathan (26 February 2012). "Cav the hero in Kuurne". Team Sky. BSkyB. Archived from the original on 9 April 2012. McGrath, Andy (18 March 2012). "Cavendish's dire day at Milan–San Remo". Cycling Weekly. Archived from the original on 21 March 2012. "66th Tour de Romandie (WT)". procyclingstats.com. Archived from the original on 22 June 2019. Retrieved 4 September 2019. Brown, Gregor (7 May 2012). "Ferrari should be ashamed of Giro sprint, says Cavendish". Cycling Weekly. Archived from the original on 10 May 2012. "Mark Cavendish wins stage five in sprint finish". BBC Sport. 10 May 2012. Archived from the original on 13 May 2012. McGrath, Andy (18 May 2012). "Cavendish makes it three at the Giro". Cycling Weekly. Archived from the original on 25 May 2012. Brown, Gregor. "Giro jury disqualifies sprinters for holding onto team cars". Cycling Weekly. Archived from the original on 31 May 2012. Retrieved 28 May 2012. "Cavendish wins Ster ZLM Toer overall". Cyclingnews.com. Archived from the original on 19 June 2012. Retrieved 17 June 2012. "Mark Cavendish powers to 21st Tour stage win". BBC Sport. 2 July 2012. Archived from the original on 3 July 2012. "Tour de France 2012: Mark Cavendish crashes in stage four – video highlights". The Guardian. 4 July 2012. Archived from the original on 4 September 2019. Williams, Richard (17 July 2012). "Mark Cavendish puts yellow jersey before green glory". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 17 October 2015. "Mark Cavendish storms to 22nd stage win". BBC Sport. 20 July 2012. Archived from the original on 20 July 2012. "Bradley Wiggins wins Tour de France title". BBC Sport. 22 July 2012. Archived from the original on 23 July 2012. Gallagher, Brendan (22 July 2012). "Tour de France 2012: Mark Cavendish sets stage perfectly for Olympic road race glory". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 23 July 2012. Fotheringham, Alasdair (23 July 2012). "Tour de France: Mark Cavendish enters history as best-ever Tour sprinter". The Independent. Independent Print. Archived from the original on 25 July 2012. "Mark Cavendish's Olympic bid fails as Alexandre Vinokourov wins gold". BBC Sport. 28 July 2012. Archived from the original on 28 July 2012. Glendenning, Barry (28 July 2012). "Olympics road race: men's cycling – as it happened". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 20 March 2014. Benson, Daniel (28 July 2012). "Vinokourov wins Olympic gold medal". cyclingnews.com. Archived from the original on 16 August 2019. "Jonathan Tiernan-Locke wins race". BBC Sport. 16 September 2012. Archived from the original on 19 September 2012. "Team Sky rider Mark Cavendish to join Omega Pharma–Quick-Step". BBC Sport. 18 October 2012. Archived from the original on 18 October 2012. Benson, Daniel (21 January 2013). "Cavendish wins opening stage at Tour de San Luis". Cyclingnews.com. Archived from the original on 24 January 2013. Ryan, Barry (8 February 2013). "Tour of Qatar: Cavendish wins final stage and overall". Cyclingnews.com. Archived from the original on 11 February 2013. Scott-Elliot, Robin (28 March 2013). "Mark Cavendish takes stage in Three Days of De Panne". The Independent. Independent Print. Archived from the original on 5 March 2016. Decaluwé, Brecht (3 April 2013). "Kittel sprints to win Scheldeprijs". Cyclingnews.com. Archived from the original on 5 April 2013. Wynn, Nigel (6 May 2013). "Mark Cavendish wins Giro d'Italia opener in Naples". Cycling Weekly. Archived from the original on 6 May 2013. Wynn, Nigel; Birnie, Lionel (9 May 2013). "Mark Cavendish is Britain's best ever cyclist". Cycling Weekly. Archived from the original on 7 June 2013. "Mark Cavendish wins Giro d'Italia stage but Wiggins struggles". BBC Sport. 16 May 2013. Archived from the original on 13 June 2013. "Giro d'Italia 2013: stage 13 – as it happened". The Guardian. 17 May 2013. Archived from the original on 4 October 2015. Andrew Hood (26 May 2013). "Mark Cavendish caps stellar 2013 Giro d'Italia with 5th stage win, points jersey". VeloNews. Competitor Group, Inc. Archived from the original on 7 June 2013. "Mark Cavendish wins first road race title in Glasgow". BBC Sport. 23 June 2013. Archived from the original on 25 June 2013. Ingle, Sean (4 July 2013). "Mark Cavendish claims Tour de France stage five victory in Marseille". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 4 January 2014. Matt Slater (10 July 2013). "Tour de France: Mark Cavendish has urine thrown at him". Archived from the original on 5 September 2013. William Fotheringham (10 July 2013). "Mark Cavendish sprayed with urine during Tour de France time trial". Archived from the original on 4 January 2014. "Mark Cavendish sprints to 25th stage win". BBC Sport. 12 July 2013. Archived from the original on 15 July 2013. Wynn, Nigel (4 August 2013). "Mark Cavendish wins final stage of Tour of Denmark". Cycling Weekly. Archived from the original on 6 August 2013. Cav back on track: Cycling Weekly dated Thursday 12 September 2013 "Tour of Britain: Bradley Wiggins seals title as Cavendish wins stage". BBC. 22 September 2013. Archived from the original on 31 August 2019. "TUR 2014 – Sonuçlar". tourofturkey.org. Archived from the original on 28 April 2014. "Cavendish suffers separated shoulder, will apologise to Gerrans for causing crash". Cyclingtips.com.au. 6 July 2014. Archived from the original on 8 July 2014. "Mark Cavendish out of the Tour de France". Cycling News. 6 July 2014. Archived from the original on 11 July 2014. "Mark Cavendish is to make his return from injury by riding in the Tour de l'Ain next week". Pulse.ng. 2014 Pulse.ng. 6 August 2014. Archived from the original on 5 September 2014. "Mark Cavendish wins again in Tour de Poitou-Charentes stage two". The Guardian. 2014 Guardian News and Media Limited. 27 August 2014. Archived from the original on 5 September 2014. Cary, Tom (4 February 2015). "Mark Cavendish wins stage one of Tour of Dubai, and is 'super happy' with his form". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 18 February 2015. Windsor, Richard (12 February 2015). "Mark Cavendish: not finished yet". Cycling Weekly. Archived from the original on 14 February 2015. Retrieved 18 February 2015. "Gent, Six Days 2014". Cycling Archives. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 2 March 2015. "Zürich, Six Days 2014". Cycling Archives. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 2 March 2015. "Mark Cavendish: Final-stage win secures Tour of Dubai victory". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 9 February 2015. Retrieved 18 February 2015. "Mark Cavendish: Almeria Classic victory is fifth win of 2015". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 17 February 2015. Retrieved 18 February 2015. "Cavendish sprints to Kuurne–Brussels–Kuurne win". cyclingnews.com. 1 March 2015. Archived from the original on 3 March 2015. Stuart Clarke (12 March 2015). "Debusschere wins Tirreno–Adriatico stage two as Cavendish caught up in crash". Cycling Weekly. Archived from the original on 13 March 2015. Retrieved 12 March 2015. "Tour of Turkey: Mark Cavendish wins sprinter's jersey". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 29 May 2015. Retrieved 21 May 2015. "Tour of California: Peter Sagan wins by three seconds overall". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 21 May 2015. Retrieved 21 May 2015. "Sagan wins a second Suisse stage, Pinot keeps yellow jersey". VeloNews. 18 June 2015. Archived from the original on 18 June 2015. Glendenning, Barry (10 July 2015). "Mark Cavendish sprints to victory on stage seven of the Tour de France". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 26 August 2016. Fotheringham, Alasdair (10 July 2015). "Tour de France 2015: Mark Cavendish's stunning sprint stops the rot as Chris Froome reclaims yellow". The Independent. Archived from the original on 22 September 2019. "Sir Bradley Wiggins & Mark Cavendish win madison for GB". BBC Sport. 16 August 2015. Archived from the original on 17 June 2016. O'Shea, Sadhbh (29 September 2015). "Mark Cavendish joins Team Dimension Data for 2016". Cyclingnews.com. Archived from the original on 20 November 2015. "Mark Cavendish wins opening stage in Tour of Qatar". BBC. 8 February 2016. Archived from the original on 13 March 2016. "Mark Cavendish wins Tour of Qatar for the second time". BBC. 12 February 2016. Archived from the original on 17 March 2016. Fotheringham, William (22 June 2016). "Mark Cavendish set to be confirmed for controversial Rio Olympics rides". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 18 August 2016. Hurcom, Sophie (5 March 2016). "Cavendish not 'disheartened' by sixth in the omnium at Track Worlds". cyclingweekly.com. Archived from the original on 5 December 2017. Retrieved 19 January 2020. Lewis, Aimee (6 March 2016). "Sir Bradley Wiggins, Mark Cavendish and Laura Trott win world titles". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 16 July 2016. "Mark Cavendish takes Tour of Croatia lead by winning stage two". Sky Sports. Sky plc. 20 April 2016. Archived from the original on 25 June 2016. "Tour de France: Mark Cavendish in yellow jersey after stage one victory". BBC Sport. 2 July 2016. Archived from the original on 5 July 2016. "Tour de France: Peter Sagan wins stage two to take yellow jersey". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 7 July 2016. Retrieved 4 July 2016. France, Source: Tour de (4 July 2016). "Tour de France 2016 day three: Mark Cavendish wins stage". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 8 July 2016. "Tour de France: Mark Cavendish claims 28th stage win in photo finish". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 5 July 2016. Retrieved 5 July 2016. Fotheringham, William (7 July 2016). "Mark Cavendish 'looking to win more' with Tour de France record in sight". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 8 July 2016. Windsor, Richard (12 July 2016). "Michael Matthews beats Peter Sagan to Tour de France stage 10 win". Cycling Weekly. Archived from the original on 19 July 2016. Benson, Daniel (16 July 2016). "Tour de France: Cavendish wins stage 14 in Villars-les-Dombes". cyclingnews.com. Archived from the original on 19 July 2016. O'Shea, Sadhbh (19 July 2016). "Mark Cavendish leaves Tour de France to focus on Olympic Games". Cyclingnews.com. Archived from the original on 23 July 2016. "Rio Olympics 2016: Mark Cavendish wins silver medal in men's omnium". BBC. 16 August 2016. Archived from the original on 23 January 2018. Elton-Walters, Jack (30 October 2016). "London Six Day: Defending champions snatch last gasp victory from Cavendish and Wiggins". cyclingweekly.com. Archived from the original on 16 September 2017. "Gent Six Day: Wiggins and Cavendish claim overall in thrilling Madison finale". cyclingnews.com. 20 November 2016. Archived from the original on 23 June 2019. Charles, Andrews. "Mark Cavendish happy with form despite not managing Dubai Tour stage win". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on 23 February 2017. Retrieved 23 February 2017. "Mark Cavendish remporte la première étape du Tour d'Abu Dhabi au sprint". L'Équipe (in French). Archived from the original on 23 February 2017. Retrieved 23 February 2017. "Mark Cavendish Diagnosed with Epstein–Barr virus". The Guardian. 12 April 2017. Archived from the original on 1 July 2017. Retrieved 2 July 2017. Liew, Jonathan (21 November 2021). "Mark Cavendish: 'I knew I could be top again'". The Guardian. Retrieved 24 December 2021. Fotheringham, William. "Mark Cavendish out of Tour and Peter Sagan disqualified after horror crash". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 4 July 2017. Retrieved 6 July 2017. "Tour de France 2017: Peter Sagan appeals against disqualification over Mark Cavendish crash". BBC. 4 July 2017. Archived from the original on 4 January 2019. "Sagan was unlucky. Cavendish was already heading to the barriers". BBC. 4 July 2017. Archived from the original on 9 August 2017. "Peter Sagan Falls Victim to the Black Box of European Sport Governance". Forbes. Archived from the original on 13 April 2019. Retrieved 10 September 2019. Robertshaw, Henry (10 September 2019). "Peter Sagan disqualified from Tour de France". Cycling Weekly. Archived from the original on 6 July 2017. Nigel Wynn (9 March 2017). "Mark Cavendish to ride 2017 Six Day London". Cycling Weekly. Archived from the original on 30 June 2017. "Mark Cavendish and Peter Kennaugh team up for Six Day London event". BBC. 24 October 2017. Archived from the original on 21 February 2018. Retrieved 21 February 2018. "Six Day London: Mark Cavendish and Peter Kennaugh win madison event". BBC. 27 October 2017. Archived from the original on 21 February 2018. "Mark Cavendish continues busy February with Abu Dhabi Tour". cyclingnews.com. 20 February 2018. Archived from the original on 21 February 2018. Retrieved 21 February 2018. Ryan, Barry (21 February 2018). "Cavendish crashes out of Abu Dhabi Tour". cyclingnews.com. Archived from the original on 21 February 2018. Retrieved 21 February 2018. Vyas, Hardik (8 March 2018). "Cavendish suffers fractured rib in crash at Tirreno–Adriatico". Reuters. Archived from the original on 29 June 2018. Retrieved 14 July 2018. "Mark Cavendish fractures rib after heavy crash in Milan–San Remo". BBC. 17 March 2018. Archived from the original on 5 June 2018. Retrieved 14 July 2018. Pretot, Julien; Davis, Toby (18 July 2018). "Cycling: Cavendish Out of Tour de France After Failing to Make Time Cut". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 20 July 2018. "European Championships: Mark Cavendish withdraws from GB road team". BBC. 9 August 2018. Archived from the original on 4 September 2019. "British Cycling has today confirmed that Mark Cavendish has been advised by his medical team to withdraw from the Glasgow 2018 European Championships". britishcycling.org.uk. 9 August 2018. Archived from the original on 4 September 2019. "Mark Cavendish says it's 'nice to be back in the mix' after race return". BBC. 29 January 2019. Archived from the original on 11 February 2019. "Team Dimension Data". letour.fr. Archived from the original on 10 July 2019. Retrieved 4 September 2019. Cary, Tom (2 July 2019). "Mark Cavendish not selected by Dimension Data for the Tour de France". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 4 July 2019. "Tour de France 2019: Mark Cavendish 'heartbroken' by omission". BBC. 2 July 2019. Archived from the original on 31 August 2019. Retrieved 31 August 2019. Cary, Tom (6 July 2019). "Mark Cavendish's Tour de France non-selection: Dimension Data performance director could quit race amid fallout". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 4 September 2019. "Rolf Aldag to part ways with Dimension Data at end of season". cyclingnews.com. 4 September 2019. Archived from the original on 3 September 2019. "Late crash knocks Mark Cavendish from Tour de Pologne sprint". cyclingnews.com. 3 August 2019. Archived from the original on 31 August 2019. Tour de Pologne 2019 – Mark Cavendish Crash. 3 August 2019. Archived from the original on 22 December 2021. "Late crash knocks Mark Cavendish from Tour de Pologne sprint". cyclingnews.com. 3 August 2019. Archived from the original on 31 August 2019. Retrieved 31 August 2019. Fotheringham, Alasdair (8 August 2019). "Cavendish quits Tour de Pologne for European Road Race Championships". cyclingnews.com. Archived from the original on 31 August 2019. Retrieved 31 August 2019. "4th European Continental Championships – Road Race (CC)". procyclingstats.com. Archived from the original on 11 August 2019. Retrieved 8 September 2019. "Deutschland Tour: Mark Cavendish to lead Dimension Data". BBC. 29 August 2019. Archived from the original on 31 August 2019. "Mark Cavendish to race Tour of Britain". Cycling News. 3 September 2019. "Mark Cavendish joins Team Bahrain Merida for 2020 season". BBC. 25 October 2019. Archived from the original on 25 October 2019. Gray, James (26 October 2019). "Brits close in on Six Day glory". eurosport.co.uk. Archived from the original on 29 October 2019. "SIX DAY LONDON RESULTS". sixday.com. Archived from the original on 10 September 2019. Retrieved 27 October 2019. "Mark Cavendish's chances of competing in Tokyo 2020 Olympics recede following World Cup omission". cyclingnews.com. 16 January 2020. Retrieved 19 July 2021. "Mark Cavendish's Olympic dreams over after missing out on Track Worlds". cyclingnews.com. 10 February 2020. Retrieved 19 July 2021. Fletcher, Patrick (13 February 2020). "Mark Cavendish's Tour de France spot depends on WorldTour victories, Ellingworth suggests". cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 19 July 2021. "Mark Cavendish: I'm not ready for the Tour de France". cyclingnews.com. 13 February 2020. Retrieved 19 July 2021. "Mark Cavendish wants to carry on 'for a few more seasons'". cyclingnews.com. 22 October 2020. Retrieved 19 July 2021. Frattini, Kirsten (11 October 2020). "Mark Cavendish hints at early retirement after Gent–Wevelgem". cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 19 July 2021. Frattini, Kirsten (11 October 2020). "Mark Cavendish hints at early retirement after Gent–Wevelgem". cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 23 June 2021. "Cavendish returns to Quick Step for 2021". BBC Sport. Retrieved 12 April 2021. "Cavendish secures first win since 2018". BBC Sport. Retrieved 12 April 2021. Warwick, Matt (13 April 2021). "Mark Cavendish takes second stage win in Turkey". BBC Sport. Retrieved 13 April 2021. Ostanek, Daniel (14 April 2021). "Tour of Turkey: Mark Cavendish wins stage 4 after huge crash in sprint finish". Cycling News. Retrieved 14 April 2021. CyclingNews (18 April 2021). "Mark Cavendish wins final stage of Tour of Turkey". Cycling News. Retrieved 18 April 2021. Rogers, Owen (13 June 2021). "Mark Cavendish coy on Tour de France inclusion after Belgium Tour stage win". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 19 July 2021. Benson, Daniel (22 June 2021). "Tour de France: Lefevere's negative comments on Bennett are born out of revenge, says Kelly". cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 23 June 2021. Benson, Daniel (21 June 2021). "Mark Cavendish in for Sam Bennett as Deceuninck-QuickStep alter Tour de France team". cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 23 June 2021. Whittle, Jeremy (9 July 2021). "Mark Cavendish cements comeback with emotional win at Tour de France". The Guardian. Retrieved 9 July 2021. "Tour de France: Mark Cavendish wins green jersey – but narrowly misses out on record 35 stage wins". Sky News. 18 July 2021. Retrieved 8 February 2023. Skelton, Jack (6 July 2021). "Tour de France 2021: Mark Cavendish wins 33rd stage to move within one of all-time record". BBC Sport. Retrieved 22 August 2021. Fletcher, Patrick (24 June 2021). "Mørkøv proud to lead out 'living legend' Mark Cavendish at Tour de France". Cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 22 August 2021. Long, Jonny (27 November 2021). "Ghent Six crash 'ripped a hole in my lung behind my heart', reveals Mark Cavendish". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 1 December 2021. "Mark Cavendish extends with Quick-Step Alpha Vinyl". VeloNews.com. 2 December 2021. Retrieved 5 February 2022. Farrand, Stephen (6 February 2022). "Mark Cavendish to make 2022 debut at Tour of Oman". Cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 8 February 2023. "Tour of Oman: Fernando Gaviria wins stage 1". Cyclingnews.com. 10 February 2022. Retrieved 8 February 2023. Farrand, Stephen (11 February 2022). "Tour of Oman: Mark Cavendish wins stage 2". Cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 8 February 2023. Magee, Will (15 February 2022). "Mark Cavendish stripped of green jersey and fined at Tour of Oman after crash on stage 5". Eurosport. Retrieved 8 February 2023. Magee, Will (15 February 2022). "Mark Cavendish was left fuming at the finish line as Fernando Gaviria won Stage 6 of the Tour of Oman". Eurosport. Retrieved 20 February 2022. Fletcher, Patrick (21 February 2022). "UAE Tour: Mark Cavendish takes sprint win on stage 2". Cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 8 February 2023. "Cavendish just keeps on going". MILANO TORINO. Retrieved 12 April 2022. Ryan, Barry (30 April 2022). "Finishing school – Mark Cavendish and the Giro d'Italia". Cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 8 February 2023. Fletcher, Patrick (8 May 2022). "Giro d'Italia: Mark Cavendish wins stage 3". Cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 8 May 2022. Becket, Adam (29 May 2022). "Giro d'Italia 2022 standings: Final results from the 105th edition after stage 21". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 8 February 2023. "Mark Cavendish wins British National Road Championship title". BBC Sport. 26 June 2022. Retrieved 27 June 2022. Hood, Andrew (12 July 2022). "No room for Mark Cavendish at new Soudal-Quick-Step project". VeloNews. Outside Inc. Retrieved 8 February 2023. Davidson, Tom (5 December 2022). "Further blow to Mark Cavendish's future as B&B Hôtels boss tells riders to find new teams". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 8 February 2023. Becket, Adam; Davidson, Tom (17 January 2023). "Mark Cavendish signs for Astana-Qazaqstan and will remain on the WorldTour for 2023". Cycling Weekly. Retrieved 8 February 2023. O'Shea, Sadhbh (8 February 2023). "Tour of Oman preview: Mark Cavendish tests his new leadout in the desert". VeloNews. Retrieved 8 February 2023. Ingle, Sean (22 May 2023). "Mark Cavendish to retire from pro cycling at the end of 2023 season". The Guardian. Retrieved 28 May 2023. Farrand, Stephen (28 May 2023). "'What a way to end my Giro d'Italia' - Mark Cavendish strikes in Rome". cyclingnews.com. Retrieved 28 May 2023. "Mark Cavendish 'bitterly disappointed' after Tour record snatched away on line". The Independent. 7 July 2023. "Cavendish crashes, abandons Tour de France". Reuters.com. 8 July 2023. Warwick, Matt (4 October 2023). "Mark Cavendish delays retirement for 'one more year' to race in Tour de France". BBC Sport. Retrieved 4 October 2023. Vélo, France, August 2008, p34 "Tour de France 2009: Mark Cavendish abandons hopes of green jersey". The Daily Telegraph. 19 July 2009. Archived from the original on 24 July 2009. "Mark Cavendish penalised following crash at Tour of Switzerland". The Daily Telegraph. 16 June 2010. Archived from the original on 19 June 2010. "Cyclists delay Swiss stage in Cavendish protest". The Daily Telegraph. 16 June 2010. Archived from the original on 12 March 2011. "Mark Cavendish 'not welcome' at Dutch race after Tom Veelers Tour crash". The Guardian. 11 July 2013. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 9 February 2018. Masters, James (15 August 2016). "Mark Cavendish: Olympics omnium crash was my fault". CNN. Archived from the original on 6 July 2017. Retrieved 8 July 2017. "Watch Idiot Mark Cavendish Purposefully Wipe Out Competitors During Rio Race [Video] – 2oceansvibe.com". 16 August 2016. Archived from the original on 9 February 2018. Retrieved 8 July 2017. White, Jim (14 December 2010). "BBC Sports Personality of the Year 2010: When I say I am the best, it's honesty, not arrogance, says Mark Cavendish". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 16 December 2017. Hymas, Peter (3 January 2009). "Can anybody challenge Cavendish in the 2009 sprints?". cyclingnews.com. Archived from the original on 25 August 2009. Liew, Jonathan (5 November 2013). "Mark Cavendish: My position as cycling's greatest sprinter is under threat – now I have a point to prove". The Daily Telegraph. p. 10. Archived from the original on 14 July 2017. Stevenson, John (9 October 2013). "Mark Cavendish and Peta Todd wed". road.cc. Farrelly Atkinson. Archived from the original on 3 August 2014. McNally, Kelby (24 April 2015). "Mark Cavendish and wife Peta announce they're expecting baby number 2". OK!. Archived from the original on 26 May 2015. "Mark Cavendish and wife Peta Todd announce they've welcomed their third child together". goodtoknow.co.uk. 25 May 2018. Archived from the original on 8 April 2019. "Cyclist Mark Cavendish becomes a father". BBC News. 4 April 2012. Archived from the original on 6 April 2012. "Mark Cavendish: 'I never demand the impossible – but there's no excuse for failure'". The Independent. Independent Print. 7 May 2009. Archived from the original on 6 February 2012. Farrand, Stephen (2 March 2011). "Cavendish to ride Giro d'Italia, Tour de France and Vuelta in 2011". Cyclingnews.com. Archived from the original on 17 August 2011. "Mark Cavendish: Robbery at Essex home was 'planned invasion'". BBC News. 3 January 2023. "Mark Cavendish: Two robbery suspects still at large, trial hears". BBC News. 4 January 2023. "Mark Cavendish robbery: Two men jailed for raid at cyclist's home". BBC News. 7 February 2023. Retrieved 8 February 2023. Clarke, Stuart (28 January 2015). "Mark Cavendish launches his new sportive around Chester". Cycling Weekly. Archived from the original on 16 April 2015. "Mark Cavendish receives honorary degree". cyclingnews.com. 5 November 2015. Archived from the original on 7 November 2015. "Mark Cavendish returns to training after Epstein Barr diagnosis". Cycling News. 17 October 2018. Archived from the original on 3 January 2019. "Mark Cavendish diagnosed with Epstein Barr virus for second time". Cycling News. 29 August 2018. Archived from the original on 3 January 2019. Benson, Daniel (1 June 2009). "Cavendish's tale of a Boy Racer". Cyclingnews.com. Slater, Matt (3 June 2009). "True greatness beckons for boy racer". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 29 June 2009. "Mark Cavendish: Boy Racer". cyclingnews.com. 24 June 2009. Archived from the original on 14 January 2012. Ly, Matthew (21 December 2013). "Mark Cavendish Boy Racer". Archived from the original on 1 August 2014. Cavendish 2013. Moore, Richard (2012). Sky's the Limit: Wiggins and Cavendish: British Cycling's Quest to Conquer the Tour De France. HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-00-734183-2. Cavendish, Mark (2010). Boy Racer: My Journey to Tour de France Record-Breaker. Ebury Publishing. ISBN 978-0-09-193277-0. Cavendish, Mark (2013). At Speed: My Life in the Fast Lane. Boulder, Colorado: VeloPress. ISBN 978-1-937715-04-5. Cavendish, Mark (2021). Tour de Force: My history-making Tour de France. Ebury Publishing. ISBN 978-1-52-914947-0. Edworthy, Sarah; Brailsford, Dave (2012). 21 Days to Glory: The Official Team Sky Book of the 2012 Tour de France. HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-00-750661-3. Ellingworth, Rod (2013). Project Rainbow: How British Cycling Reached the Top of the World. Faber & Faber. ISBN 978-0-571-30349-6. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Mark Cavendish. Wikinews has related news: Contador wins 2009 Tour de France; Cavendish wins six stages Official website Mark Cavendish at UCI Mark Cavendish at Cycling Archives Mark Cavendish at ProCyclingStats Mark Cavendish at Team GB Mark Cavendish at Olympics.com Mark Cavendish at Olympedia