Joseph Sargent (born Giuseppe Danielle Sorgente; July 22, 1925 – December 22, 2014) was an American film director. Though he directed many television movies, his best known feature-length works were arguably the action movie White Lightning starring Burt Reynolds, the biopic MacArthur starring Gregory Peck, and the horror anthology Nightmares. His most popular feature film was the subway thriller The Taking of Pelham One Two Three. Sargent won four Emmy Awards over his career. He is the father of voice actress Lia Sargent. Sargent was born Giuseppe Danielle Sorgente in Jersey City, New Jersey, the son of Italians Maria (née Noviello) and Domenico Sorgente. Sargent served in the U.S. Army during World War II, where he fought in the Battle of the Bulge. Sargent began his career as an actor, appearing in numerous films and television programs. He appeared in an uncredited role as a soldier in the film From Here to Eternity (1953) where he also met his first wife Mary Carver on the set. In the mid 1950s Sargent switched to directing; over the next 15 years his directing credits would include episodes of television series Lassie, The Invaders (four episodes), The Man from U.N.C.L.E. and the Star Trek episode "The Corbomite Maneuver". He appeared in the Western series Gunsmoke, once in 1957 as a man, turned drunk, who lost his drive to live, in the episode “Skid Row” (S2E22); then again as a drunk cowboy who gets killed in The Longbranch Saloon in the 1959 episode “”There Never Was A Horse” (S4 E35). In 1969, he directed his first feature, the science fiction thriller Colossus: The Forbin Project. In 1971, he was hired to direct Buck and the Preacher but, after a few days of shooting, was replaced by Sidney Poitier who cited creative differences. The next year, however, he directed The Man, starring James Earl Jones, which was begun as a television movie. He alternated between television movies and feature films during the 1970s. Sargent's directorial work from this period includes The Taking of Pelham One Two Three, the TV movies Hustling with Lee Remick and Jill Clayburgh, Maybe I'll Come Home in the Spring with Sally Field and Tribes with Jan-Michael Vincent and Darren McGavin, as well as international award-winning ABC film The Night That Panicked America. In 1974, he won his first Directors Guild of America Award for The Marcus-Nelson Murders (1973), which was the TV movie pilot for the Kojak series. In the 1980s, Sargent directed mini-series Manions of America, which featured Pierce Brosnan, and Space. In 1987 he directed Jaws: The Revenge, the third sequel to Steven Spielberg's 1975 classic. The film received entirely negative reviews. Roger Ebert called his directing of the climactic sequence "incompetent," and he was nominated for Worst Director in the 1987 Golden Raspberry Awards. He concentrated on TV movies after Jaws: The Revenge, including The Karen Carpenter Story, The Long Island Incident, Dostoevsky's Crime and Punishment and the 2007 remake of Sally Field docudrama Sybil. Joseph Sargent and his wife Carolyn Nelson Sargent laid the groundwork for Deaf West Theatre. Sargent spent time as the Senior Filmmaker-in-Residence for the Directing program at the American Film Institute Conservatory in Los Angeles. Sargent died of complications from heart disease at his home in Malibu, California, on December 22, 2014. He was 89. One Spy Too ManyRe-edit of a two-part The Man from U.N.C.L.E. episodes Alexander the Greater Affair with different shots and dialog. The Spy in the Green HatRe-edit of a two-part The Man from U.N.C.L.E. episodes The Concrete Overcoat Affair with new scenes added. Sargent was nominated for several Emmy awards. He won four. Early in his career, he won a Directors Guild of America award for the Kojak pilot. Sargent was nominated for eight DGA awards for television movies, more than any other director in this category. Tribes Nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing for a Limited Series, Movie, or Dramatic Special The Marcus-Nelson Murders Winner of Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing for a Limited Series, Movie, or Dramatic Special Won the Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directing – Miniseries or TV Film Amber Waves Nominated for Outstanding Directorial Achievement in Drama - A Single Program Nightmares Won the Brussels International Fantastic Film Festival Love Is Never Silent Won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing for a Limited Series, Movie, or Dramatic Special Space Emmy Award, Outstanding Film Sound Mixing for a Limited Series or a Special Emmy Award nominee, Outstanding Limited Series Artios Award nominee, Best Casting for TV Miniseries Jaws: The Revenge Nominated—Razzie Award for Worst Picture Nominated—Razzie Award for Worst Director Final theatrical film as director Caroline? Won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing for a Limited Series, Movie, or Dramatic Special Miss Rose White Won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing for a Limited Series, Movie, or Dramatic Special World War II: When Lions Roared Nominated for the Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directing – Miniseries or TV Film Miss Evers' Boys Nominated for Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directing – Miniseries or TV Film A Lesson Before Dying Nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing for a Limited Series, Movie, or Dramatic Special For Love or Country: The Arturo Sandoval Story Nominated for Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directing – Miniseries or TV Film Something the Lord Made Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directing in a Television Film Nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing for a Limited Series, Movie, or Dramatic Special Warm Springs Won the Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directing – Miniseries or TV Film Nominee for a Primetime Emmy for Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing for a Limited Series, Movie, or Dramatic Special BRUCE BENNETT. "New York's Greatest Starring Roles". nysun.com. "Joseph Sargent Biography (1925-)". filmreference.com. Joseph Sargent dies at 89; prize-winning film and TV movie director Los Angeles Times via Internet Archive. Retrieved March 12, 2022. Joseph Sargent, Emmy-winning director of TV and film productions, dies at 89 The Washington Post via Internet Archive. Retrieved March 12, 2022. Emmy-Winning Director Joseph Sargent Dies at 89 Variety. Retrieved March 12, 2022. Sargent, Joseph 1925 - (Joe Sargent, Joseph D. Sargent) PERSONAL Encyclopedia.com. Retrieved March 12, 2022. Shandell, Jonathan (2018). The American Negro Theatre and the Long Civil Rights Era. University of Iowa Press. p. 161. ISBN 978-1609385958. Ebert, Roger. "Jaws the Revenge". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on November 5, 2012. Retrieved September 18, 2006. "1987 Archive". Razzies.com. Archived from the original on May 1, 2014. Retrieved December 11, 2006. "The Deaf West Theatre". DeafWest.org. Retrieved January 21, 2010. Joseph Sargent at Memory Alpha Joseph Sargent at IMDb Biography at Hollywood.com at archive.today (archived 2013-01-25) Includes details of awards. Joseph Sargent at The Interviews: An Oral History of Television