The national flag of Mali (French: drapeau du Mali) is a tricolour with three equal vertical stripes. From the hoist (the place where the flagpole meets the flag) the colours are green, gold, and red, the pan-African colours. The flag of Mali is almost identical to the flag of Guinea, with the exception that the colours are in reverse order. The current flag was adopted on March 1, 1961. The original flag was adopted on April 4, 1959, when Mali joined the Mali Federation. This flag was the same, except the golden stripe had a black kanaga, a shape of a squatter man with arms raised to the sky. The figure was removed due to the opposition, in a country whose population is 90% Muslim (95% Sunni 5% Shia) of Islamic fundamentalists (see Aniconism in Islam, the belief against making pictures of the human figure). The green stands for fertility of the land, gold stands for purity and mineral wealth, and the red symbolizes the blood shed for independence from the French. Historical flag of the Massina Empire (1818–1862), located in the present-day regions of Mopti and Ségou Historical flag of the Wassoulou Empire (1878–1898), located in the Wassoulou region (part of present-day Mali, Guinea, and Côte d'Ivoire). Flag of the Arab Movement of Azawad, a militant organization active in Azawad/northern Mali. Flag of the Imghad Tuareg Self-Defense Group and Allies, a militant organization active in the Gao and Kidal regions. Flag of the Movement for the Salvation of Azawad, a militant organization and political movement active in the Gao and Kidal regions. Roundel of the Mali Air Force Roundel of the Mali Air Force (variant) List of Malian flags Coat of arms of Mali Flag of Senegal, a very similar flag Flag of Guinea, a mirrored version of the flag Flag of Bolivia, a rotated version of the flag Pan-African colours The colonial region of French Sudan went through a number of administrative reorganizations between 1880 and 1959, changing names several times throughout the process. See: French Sudan § Administration and jurisdiction "Flag of Mali". Encyclopedia Britannica. Guide to the Flags of the World by Mauro Talocci, revised and updated by Whitney Smith (ISBN 0-688-01141-1), p. 124. "What Do The Colors And Symbols Of The Flag Of Mali Mean?". WorldAtlas. 24 February 2021. Mali at Flags of the World Wikimedia Commons has media related to Flags of Mali.