Columbus (/kəˈlʌmbəs/, kə-LUM-bəs) is the capital and most populous city of the U.S. state of Ohio. With a 2020 census population of 905,748, it is the 14th-most populous city in the U.S., the second-most populous city in the Midwest after Chicago, and the third-most populous U.S. state capital after Phoenix, Arizona and Austin, Texas. Columbus is the seat of government of Franklin County; it also extends into Delaware and Fairfield counties. It is the core city of the Columbus metropolitan area, which encompasses ten counties in central Ohio. It had a population of 2,138,926 in 2020, making it the largest metropolitan area entirely in Ohio and 32nd-largest metro area in the U.S. Columbus originated as numerous Native American settlements on the banks of the Scioto River. Franklinton, now a city neighborhood, was the first European settlement, laid out in 1797. The city was founded in 1812 at the confluence of the Scioto and Olentangy rivers, and laid out to become the state capital. The city was named for Italian explorer Christopher Columbus. The city assumed the function of state capital in 1816 and county seat in 1824. Amid steady years of growth and industrialization, the city has experienced numerous floods and recessions. Beginning in the 1950s, Columbus began to experience significant growth; it became the largest city in Ohio in land and population by the early 1990s. Growth has continued in the 21st century, with redevelopment occurring in numerous city neighborhoods, including Downtown. The city has a diverse economy based on education, government, insurance, banking, defense, aviation, food, clothes, logistics, steel, energy, medical research, health care, hospitality, retail and technology. The metropolitan area is home to the Battelle Memorial Institute, the world's largest private research and development foundation; Chemical Abstracts Service, the world's largest clearinghouse of chemical information; and the Ohio State University, one of the largest universities in the United States. The Greater Columbus area is further home to the headquarters of six Fortune 500 companies, namely Cardinal Health, American Electric Power, L Brands, Nationwide, Bread Financial and Huntington Bancshares. The city of Columbus was named after 15th-century Italian explorer Christopher Columbus at the city's founding in 1812. It is the largest city in the world named for the explorer, who sailed to and settled parts of the Americas on behalf of Isabella I of Castile and Spain. Although no reliable history exists as to why Columbus, who had no connection to the city or state of Ohio before the city's founding, was chosen as the name for the city, the book Columbus: The Story of a City indicates a state lawmaker and local resident admired the explorer enough to persuade other lawmakers to name the settlement Columbus. Since the late 20th century, historians have criticized Columbus for initiating the European conquest of America and for abuse, enslavement, and subjugation of natives. Efforts to remove symbols related to the explorer in the city date to the 1990s. Amid the George Floyd protests in 2020, several petitions pushed for the city to be renamed. A proposed rename for the city which first garnered notability in 2020 is "Flavortown" in honor of celebrity chef Guy Fieri, who was born in Columbus before moving to California; Fieri, though not behind the proposal, expressed flattery and support for the name. The name is additionally noted by local media outlets as honoring the city's significance as a test market for various restaurants and as a reference to the city's culinary culture. The beer company AB InBev, through its social media page for its brand Bud Light, also backed the rename, offering free hard seltzers for the city if the proposal succeeded. Nicknames for the city have included "the Discovery City", "Arch City", "Cap City", "Cowtown", "The Biggest Small Town in America" and "Cbus." Between 1000 B.C. and 1700 A.D., the Columbus metropolitan area was a center to indigenous cultures known as the Mound Builders, including the Adena, Hopewell and Fort Ancient peoples. Remaining physical evidence of the cultures are their burial mounds and what they contained. Most of Central Ohio's remaining mounds are located outside of Columbus city boundaries, though the Shrum Mound is maintained, now as part of a public park and historic site. The city's Mound Street derives its name from a mound that existed by the intersection of Mound and High Streets. The mound's clay was used in bricks for most of the city's initial brick buildings; many were subsequently used in the Ohio Statehouse. The city's Ohio History Center maintains a collection of artifacts from these cultures. The area including present-day Columbus once comprised the Ohio Country, under the nominal control of the French colonial empire through the Viceroyalty of New France from 1663 until 1763. In the 18th century, European traders flocked to the area, attracted by the fur trade. The area was often caught between warring factions, including American Indian and European interests. In the 1740s, Pennsylvania traders overran the territory until the French forcibly evicted them. Fighting for control of the territory in the French and Indian War (1754–1763) became part of the international Seven Years' War (1756–1763). During this period, the region routinely suffered turmoil, massacres and battles. The 1763 Treaty of Paris ceded the Ohio Country to the British Empire. Up until the American Revolution, Central Ohio had continuously been the home of numerous indigenous villages. A Mingo village was located at the forks of the Scioto and Olentangy rivers, with Shawnee villages to the south and Wyandot and Delaware villages to the north. Colonial militiamen burned down the Mingo village in 1774 during a raid. After the American Revolution, the Virginia Military District became part of the Ohio Country as a territory of Virginia. Colonists from the East Coast moved in, but rather than finding an empty frontier, they encountered people of the Miami, Delaware, Wyandot, Shawnee and Mingo nations, as well as European traders. The tribes resisted expansion by the fledgling United States, leading to years of bitter conflict. The decisive Battle of Fallen Timbers resulted in the Treaty of Greenville in 1795, which finally opened the way for new settlements. By 1797, a young surveyor from Virginia named Lucas Sullivant had founded a permanent settlement on the west bank of the forks of the Scioto and Olentangy rivers. An admirer of Benjamin Franklin, Sullivant chose to name his frontier village "Franklinton." The location was desirable for its proximity to the navigable rivers – but Sullivant was initially foiled when, in 1798, a large flood wiped out the new settlement. He persevered, and the village was rebuilt, though somewhat more inland. After the Revolution, land comprising parts of Franklin and adjacent counties was set aside by the United States Congress for settlement by Canadians and Nova Scotians who were sympathetic to the colonial cause and had their land and possessions seized by the British government. The Refugee Tract, consisting of 103,000 acres (42,000 ha), was 42 miles (68 km) long and 3–4.5 miles (4.8–7.2 km) wide, and was claimed by 67 eligible men. The Ohio Statehouse sits on land once contained in the Refugee Tract. After Ohio achieved statehood in 1803, political infighting among prominent Ohio leaders led to the state capital moving from Chillicothe to Zanesville and back again. Desiring to settle on a location, the state legislature considered Franklinton, Dublin, Worthington and Delaware before compromising on a plan to build a new city in the state's center, near major transportation routes, primarily rivers. As well, Franklinton landowners had donated two 10-acre (4.0 ha) plots in an effort to convince the state to move its capital there. The two spaces were set to become Capitol Square, including for the Ohio Statehouse and the Ohio Penitentiary. Named in honor of Christopher Columbus, the city was founded on February 14, 1812, on the "High Banks opposite Franklinton at the Forks of the Scioto most known as Wolf's Ridge." At the time, this area was a dense forestland, used only as a hunting ground. The city was incorporated as a borough on February 10, 1816. Nine people were elected to fill the municipality's various positions of mayor, treasurer and several others. Between 1816 and 1817, Jarvis W. Pike served as the first appointed mayor. Although the recent War of 1812 had brought prosperity to the area, the subsequent recession and conflicting claims to the land threatened the new town's success. Early conditions were abysmal, with frequent bouts of fevers, attributed to malaria from the flooding rivers, and an outbreak of cholera in 1833. It led Columbus to create the Board of Health, now part of the Columbus Public Health department. The outbreak, which remained in the city from July to September 1833, killed 100 people. Columbus was without direct river or trail connections to other Ohio cities, leading to slow initial growth. The National Road reached Columbus from Baltimore in 1831, which complemented the city's new link to the Ohio and Erie Canal, both of which facilitated a population boom. A wave of European immigrants led to the creation of two ethnic enclaves on the city's outskirts. A large Irish population settled in the north along Naghten Street (presently Nationwide Boulevard), while the Germans took advantage of the cheap land to the south, creating a community that came to be known as the Das Alte Südende (The Old South End). Columbus's German population constructed numerous breweries, Trinity Lutheran Seminary and Capital University. With a population of 3,500, Columbus was officially chartered as a city on March 3, 1834. On that day, the legislature carried out a special act, which granted legislative authority to the city council and judicial authority to the mayor. Elections were held in April of that year, with voters choosing John Brooks as the first popularly elected mayor. Columbus annexed the then-separate city of Franklinton in 1837. In 1850, the Columbus and Xenia Railroad became the first railroad into the city, followed by the Cleveland, Columbus and Cincinnati Railroad in 1851. The two railroads built a joint Union Station on the east side of High Street just north of Naghten (then called North Public Lane). Rail traffic into Columbus increased: by 1875, eight railroads served Columbus, and the rail companies built a new, more elaborate station. Another cholera outbreak hit Columbus in 1849, prompting the opening of the city's Green Lawn Cemetery. On January 7, 1857, the Ohio Statehouse finally opened after 18 years of construction. Site construction continued until 1861. Before the abolition of slavery in the Southern United States in 1863, the Underground Railroad was active in Columbus and was led, in part, by James Preston Poindexter. Poindexter arrived in Columbus in the 1830s and became a Baptist preacher and leader in the city's African-American community until the turn of the century. During the Civil War, Columbus was a major base for the volunteer Union Army. It housed 26,000 troops and held up to 9,000 Confederate prisoners of war at Camp Chase, at what is now the Hilltop neighborhood of west Columbus. Over 2,000 Confederate soldiers remain buried at the site, making it one of the North's largest Confederate cemeteries. North of Columbus, along the Delaware Road, the Regular Army established Camp Thomas, where the 18th U.S. Infantry organized and trained. By virtue of the Morrill Act of 1862, the Ohio Agricultural and Mechanical College – which eventually became the Ohio State University – was founded in 1870 on the former estate of William and Hannah Neil. By the end of the 19th century, Columbus was home to several major manufacturing businesses. The city became known as the "Buggy Capital of the World," thanks to the two dozen buggy factories – notably the Columbus Buggy Company, founded in 1875 by C.D. Firestone. The Columbus Consolidated Brewing Company also rose to prominence during this time and might have achieved even greater success were it not for the Anti-Saloon League in neighboring Westerville. In the steel industry, a forward-thinking man named Samuel P. Bush presided over the Buckeye Steel Castings Company. Columbus was also a popular location for labor organizations. In 1886, Samuel Gompers founded the American Federation of Labor in Druid's Hall on South Fourth Street, and in 1890, the United Mine Workers of America was founded at the old City Hall. In 1894, James Thurber, who would go on to an illustrious literary career in Paris and New York City, was born in the city. Today, Ohio State's theater department has a performance center named in his honor, and his childhood home, the Thurber House, is located in the Discovery District and is on the National Register of Historic Places. Columbus earned one of its nicknames, "The Arch City," because of the dozens of wooden arches that spanned High Street at the turn of the 20th century. The arches illuminated the thoroughfare and eventually became the means by which electric power was provided to the new streetcars. The city tore down the arches and replaced them with cluster lights in 1914 but reconstructed them from metal in the Short North neighborhood in 2002 for their unique historical interest. On March 25, 1913, the Great Flood of 1913 devastated the neighborhood of Franklinton, leaving over 90 people dead and thousands of West Side residents homeless. To prevent flooding, the Army Corps of Engineers recommended widening the Scioto River through downtown, constructing new bridges and building a retaining wall along its banks. With the strength of the post-World War I economy, a construction boom occurred in the 1920s, resulting in a new civic center, the Ohio Theatre, the American Insurance Union Citadel and to the north, a massive new Ohio Stadium. Although the American Professional Football Association was founded in Canton in 1920, its head offices moved to Columbus in 1921 to the New Hayden Building and remained in the city until 1941. In 1922, the association's name was changed to the National Football League. Nearly a decade later, in 1931, at a convention in the city, the Jehovah's Witnesses took that name by which they are known today. The effects of the Great Depression were less severe in Columbus, as the city's diversified economy helped it fare better than its Rust Belt neighbors. World War II brought many new jobs and another population surge. This time, most new arrivals were migrants from the "extraordinarily depressed rural areas" of Appalachia, who would soon account for more than a third of Columbus's growing population. In 1948, the Town and Country Shopping Center opened in suburban Whitehall, and it is now regarded as one of the first modern shopping centers in the United States. The construction of the Interstate Highway System signaled the arrival of rapid suburb development in central Ohio. To protect the city's tax base from this suburbanization, Columbus adopted a policy of linking sewer and water hookups to annexation to the city. By the early 1990s, Columbus had grown to become Ohio's largest city in land area and in population. Efforts to revitalize downtown Columbus have had some success in recent decades, though like most major American cities, some architectural heritage was lost in the process. In the 1970s, landmarks such as Union Station and the Neil House hotel were razed to construct high-rise offices and big retail space. The PNC Bank building was constructed in 1977, as well as the Nationwide Plaza buildings and other towers that sprouted during this period. The construction of the Greater Columbus Convention Center has brought major conventions and trade shows to the city. The Scioto Mile began development along the riverfront, an area that already had the Miranova Corporate Center and The Condominiums at North Bank Park. The 2010 United States foreclosure crisis forced the city to purchase numerous foreclosed, vacant properties to renovate or demolish them – at a cost of tens of millions of dollars. In February 2011, Columbus had 6,117 vacant properties, according to city officials. Since 2010, Columbus has been growing in population and economy; from 2010 to 2017, the city added 164,000 jobs, which ranked second in the United States.[citation needed] In February and March 2020, Columbus reported its first official cases of COVID-19 and declared a state of emergency, with all nonessential businesses closed statewide. There were 69,244 cases of the disease across the city, as of March 11, 2021[update]. Later in 2020, protests over the murder of George Floyd took place in the city from May 28 into August. Columbus and its metro area have experienced growth in the high-tech manufacturing sector, with Intel announcing plans to construct a $20 billion factory and Honda expanding its presence along with LG Energy Solutions with a $4.4 billion battery manufactory facility in Fayette County. The COVID-19 pandemic muted activity in Columbus, especially in its downtown core, from 2020 to 2022. By late 2022, foot traffic in Downtown Columbus began to exceed pre-pandemic rates; one of the quickest downtown areas to recover in the United States. The confluence of the Scioto and Olentangy rivers is just northwest of Downtown Columbus. Several smaller tributaries course through the Columbus metropolitan area, including Alum Creek, Big Walnut Creek and Darby Creek. Columbus is considered to have relatively flat topography thanks to a large glacier that covered most of Ohio during the Wisconsin Ice Age. However, there are sizable differences in elevation through the area, with the high point of Franklin County being 1,132 ft (345 m) above sea level near New Albany, and the low point being 670 ft (200 m) where the Scioto River leaves the county near Lockbourne. Several ravines near the rivers and creeks also add variety to the landscape. Tributaries to Alum Creek and the Olentangy River cut through shale, while tributaries to the Scioto River cut through limestone. The numerous rivers and streams beside low-lying areas in Central Ohio contribute to a history of flooding in the region; the most significant was the Great Flood of 1913 in Columbus, Ohio. The city has a total area of 223.11 square miles (577.85 km2), of which 217.17 square miles (562.47 km2) is land and 5.94 square miles (15.38 km2) is water. Columbus currently has the largest land area of any Ohio city; this is due to Jim Rhodes's tactic to annex suburbs while serving as mayor. As surrounding communities grew or were constructed, they came to require access to waterlines, which was under the sole control of the municipal water system. Rhodes told these communities that if they wanted water, they would have to submit to assimilation into Columbus. Columbus has a wide diversity of neighborhoods with different characters, and is thus sometimes known as a "city of neighborhoods." Some of the most prominent neighborhoods include the Arena District, the Brewery District, Clintonville, Franklinton, German Village, The Short North and Victorian Village. The city's climate is humid continental (Köppen climate classification Dfa) transitional with the humid subtropical (Köppen climate classification Cfa) to the south characterized by warm, muggy summers and cold, dry winters. Columbus is within USDA hardiness zone 6b, bordering on 7a. Winter snowfall is relatively light, since the city is not in the typical path of strong winter lows, such as the Nor'easters that strike cities farther east. It is also too far south and west for lake-effect snow from Lake Erie to have much effect, although the lakes to the north contribute to long stretches of cloudy spells in winter. The highest temperature recorded in Columbus is 106 °F (41 °C), which occurred twice during the Dust Bowl of the 1930s: once on July 21, 1934, and again on July 14, 1936. The lowest recorded temperature was −22 °F (−30 °C), occurring on January 19, 1994. Columbus is subject to severe weather typical to the Midwestern United States. Severe thunderstorms can bring lightning, large hail and on rare occasions tornadoes, especially during the spring and sometimes through fall. A tornado that occurred on October 11, 2006, caused F2 damage. Floods, blizzards and ice storms can also occur from time to time. In the 2020 United States census, there were 905,748 people living in the city, for a population density of 4,109.64 people per square mile (1,586.74/km2). There were 415,456 housing units. The racial makeup of the city was 57.4% White, 29.2% Black or African American, 0.2% Native American or Alaska Native, and 5.9% Asian. Hispanic or Latino of any race made up 6.3% of the population. There were 392,041 households, out of which 25.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 30.8% were married couples living together, 25.1% had a male householder with no spouse present, and 33.7% had a female householder with no spouse present. 37.1% of all households were made up of individuals, and 9.7% were someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.26, and the average family size was 3.03. 21.0% of the city's population were under the age of 18, 67.5% were 18 to 64, and 11.5% were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 33.3. For every 100 females, there were 97.3 males. According to the U.S. Census American Community Survey, for the period 2016-2020 the estimated median annual income for a household in the city was $61,727, and the median income for a family was $76,383. About 18.1% of the population were living below the poverty line, including 26.1% of those under age 18 and 12.0% of those age 65 or over. About 67.2% of the population were employed, and 38.5% had a bachelor's degree or higher. In the 2010 United States census, there were 787,033 people, 331,602 households and 176,037 families residing in the city. The population density was 3,624 inhabitants per square mile (1,399.2/km2). There were 370,965 housing units at an average density of 1,708.2 per square mile (659.5/km2). The racial makeup of the city included 815,985 races tallied, as some residents recognized multiple races. The racial makeup was 61.9% White, 29.1% Black or African American, 1% Native American or Alaska Native, 4.6% Asian, 0.2% Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander, and 3.2% from other races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 5.9% of the population. Columbus historically had a significant population of white people. In 1900, whites made up 93.4% of the population. Although European immigration has declined, the Columbus metropolitan area has recently experienced increases in African, Asian and Latin American immigration, including groups from Mexico, India, Nepal, Bhutan, Somalia and China. While the Asian population is diverse, the city's Hispanic community is mainly made up of Mexican Americans, although there is a notable Puerto Rican population. Many other countries of origin are represented in lesser numbers, largely due to the international draw of Ohio State University. 2008 estimates indicate that roughly 116,000 of the city's residents are foreign-born, accounting for 82% of the new residents between 2000 and 2006 at a rate of 105 per week. 40% of the immigrants came from Asia, 23% from Africa, 22% from Latin America and 13% from Europe. The city had the second-largest Somali and Somali American population in the country, as of 2004, as well as the largest expatriate Bhutanese-Nepali population in the world, as of 2018. Due to its demographics, which include a mix of races and a wide range of incomes, as well as urban, suburban and nearby rural areas, Columbus is considered a "typical" American city, leading retail and restaurant chains to use it as a test market for new products. For similar reasons, the city was chosen as the launch city for the QUBE cable television service. Columbus has maintained a steady population growth since its establishment. Its slowest growth, from 1850 to 1860, is primarily attributed to the city's cholera epidemic in the 1850s. According to the 2017 Japanese Direct Investment Survey by the Consulate-General of Japan, Detroit, 838 Japanese nationals lived in Columbus, making it the municipality with the state's second-largest Japanese national population, after Dublin. Columbus is home to a proportional LGBT community, with an estimated 34,952 gay, lesbian or bisexual residents. The 2018 American Community Survey (ACS) reported an estimated 366,034 households, 32,276 of which were held by unmarried partners. 1,395 of these were female householder and female-partner households, and 1,456 were male householder and male-partner households. Columbus has been rated as one of the best cities in the country for gays and lesbians to live, and also as the most underrated gay city in the country. In July 2012, three years prior to legal same-sex marriage in the United States, the Columbus City Council unanimously passed a domestic partnership registry. Columbus has numerous Italian Americans, with groups including the Columbus Italian Club, Columbus Piave Club and the Abruzzi Club. Italian Village, a neighborhood near Downtown Columbus, has had a prominent Italian American community since the 1890s. The community has helped promote the influence Christopher Columbus had in drawing European attention to the Americas. The Italian explorer, erroneously credited with the lands' discovery, has been posthumously criticized by historians for initiating colonization and for abuse, enslavement and subjugation of natives. In addition to the city being named for the explorer, its seal and flag depict a ship he used for his first voyage to the Americas, the Santa María. A similar-size replica of the ship, the Santa Maria Ship & Museum, was displayed downtown from 1991 to 2014. The city's Discovery District and Discovery Bridge are named in reference to Columbus's "discovery" of the Americas; the bridge includes artistic bronze medallions featuring symbols of the explorer. Genoa Park, downtown, is named after Genoa, the birthplace of Christopher Columbus and one of Columbus's sister cities. The Christopher Columbus Quincentennial Jubilee, celebrating the 500th anniversary of Columbus's first voyage, was held in the city in 1992. Its organizers spent $95 million on it, creating the horticultural exhibition AmeriFlora '92. The organizers also planned to create a replica Native American village, among other attractions. Local and national native leaders protested the event with a day of mourning, followed by protests and fasts at City Hall. The protests prevented the native village from being exhibited, and annual fasts continued until 1997. A protest also took place during the dedication of the Santa Maria replica, an event held in late 1991 on the day before Columbus Day and in time for the jubilee. The city has three outdoor statues of the explorer; the statue at City Hall was acquired, delivered and dedicated with the assistance of the Italian American community. Protests in 2017 aimed for this statue to be removed, followed by the city in 2018 ceasing to recognize Columbus Day as a city holiday. During the 2020 George Floyd protests, petitions were created to remove all three statues and rename the city of Columbus. Two of the statues – one at City Hall and the other at Columbus State Community College – were removed, while the city is also looking into changing its flag and seal to remove the reference to Christopher Columbus. As of 2024[update] the third statue at the Ohio Statehouse remains in place. The city was one of eight cities to be offered the 360 ft (110 m) Birth of the New World statue, in 1993. The statue, also of Christopher Columbus, was completed in Puerto Rico in 2016 and is the tallest in the United States – 45 ft (14 m) taller than the Statue of Liberty, including its pedestal. At least six U.S. cities, including Columbus, rejected it based on its height and design. According to the 2019 American Values Atlas, 26% of Columbus metropolitan area residents are unaffiliated with a religious tradition. 17% of area residents identify as White evangelical Protestants, 14% as White mainline Protestants, 11% as Black Protestants, 11% as White Catholics, 5% as Hispanic Catholics, 3% as other nonwhite Catholics, 2% as other nonwhite Protestants and 2% as Mormons. Hindus, Buddhists, Jews and Latino Protestants each made up 1% of the population, while Jehovah's Witnesses, Orthodox Christians, Muslims, Unitarians, and members of New Age or other religions each made up under 0.5% of the population. Places of worship include Baptist, Evangelical, Greek Orthodox, Latter-day Saints, Lutheran, Presbyterian, Quaker, Roman Catholic, and Unitarian Universalist churches. Columbus also hosts several Islamic mosques, Jewish synagogues, Buddhist centers, Hindu temples and a branch of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness. Religious teaching institutions include the Pontifical College Josephinum and several private schools led by Christian organizations. Columbus has a generally strong and diverse economy based on education, insurance, banking, fashion, defense, aviation, food, logistics, steel, energy, medical research, health care, hospitality, retail and technology. In 2010, it was one of the 10 best big cities in the country, according to Relocate America, a real estate research firm. According to the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, the GDP of Columbus in 2019 was $134 billion (~$158 billion in 2023). During the Great Recession between 2007 and 2009, Columbus's economy was not impacted as much as the rest of the country, due to decades of diversification work by long-time corporate residents, business leaders and political leaders. The administration of former mayor Michael B. Coleman continued this work, although the city faced financial turmoil and had to increase taxes, allegedly due in part to fiscal mismanagement. Because Columbus is the state capital, there is a large government presence in the city. Including city, county, state and federal employers, government jobs provide the largest single source of employment within Columbus. In 2019, the city had six corporations named to the U.S. Fortune 500 list: Alliance Data, Nationwide Mutual Insurance Company, American Electric Power, L Brands, Huntington Bancshares and Cardinal Health in suburban Dublin. Other major employers include schools (e.g., Ohio State University) and hospitals (among others, Wexner Medical Center and Nationwide Children's Hospital, which are among the teaching hospitals of the Ohio State University College of Medicine), high-tech research and development such as the Battelle Memorial Institute, information/library companies such as OCLC and Chemical Abstracts Service, steel processing and pressure cylinder manufacturer Worthington Industries, financial institutions such as JPMorgan Chase and Huntington Bancshares, as well as Owens Corning. Fast-food chains Wendy's and White Castle are also headquartered in the Columbus area. Major foreign corporations operating or with divisions in the city include Germany-based Siemens and Roxane Laboratories, Finland-based Vaisala, Tomasco Mulciber Inc., A Y Manufacturing, as well as Switzerland-based ABB and Mettler Toledo. The city also has a significant fashion and retail presence, home to companies such as Big Lots, L Brands, Abercrombie & Fitch, DSW and Express. North Market, a public market and food hall, is located downtown near the Short North. It is the only remaining public market of Columbus's original four marketplaces. Numerous restaurant chains are based in the Columbus area, including Charleys Philly Steaks, Bibibop Asian Grill, Steak Escape, White Castle, Cameron Mitchell Restaurants, Bob Evans Restaurants, Max & Erma's, Damon's Grill, Donatos Pizza and Wendy's. Wendy's, the world's third-largest hamburger fast-food chain, operated its first store downtown as both a museum and a restaurant until March 2007, when the establishment was closed due to low revenue. The company is presently headquartered outside the city in nearby Dublin. Budweiser has a major brewery located on the north side, just south of I-270 and Worthington. Columbus is also home to many local micro breweries and pubs. Asian frozen food manufacturer Kahiki Foods was located on the east side of Columbus, created during the operation of the Kahiki Supper Club restaurant in Columbus. The food company now operates in the suburb of Gahanna and has been owned by the South Korean-based company CJ CheilJedang since 2018. Wasserstrom Company, a major supplier of equipment and supplies for restaurants, is located on the north side. Columbus has over 170 notable buildings listed on the National Register of Historic Places; it also maintains its own register, the Columbus Register of Historic Properties, with 82 entries. The city also maintains four historic districts not listed on its register: German Village, Italian Village, Victorian Village, and the Brewery District. Construction of the Ohio Statehouse began in 1839 on a 10-acre (4 ha) plot of land donated by four prominent Columbus landowners. This plot formed Capitol Square, which was not part of the city's original layout. Built of Columbus limestone from the Marble Cliff Quarry Co., the Statehouse stands on foundations 18 feet (5.5 m) deep that were laid by prison labor gangs rumored to have been composed largely of masons jailed for minor infractions. It features a central recessed porch with a colonnade of a forthright and primitive Greek Doric mode. A broad and low central pediment supports the windowed astylar drum under an invisibly low saucer dome that lights the interior rotunda. There are several artworks within and outside the building, including the William McKinley Monument dedicated in 1907. Unlike many U.S. state capitol buildings, the Ohio State Capitol owes little to the architecture of the national Capitol. During the Statehouse's 22-year construction, seven architects were employed. The Statehouse was opened to the legislature and the public in 1857 and completed in 1861, and is located at the intersection of Broad and High streets in downtown Columbus. Within the Driving Park heritage district lies the original home of Eddie Rickenbacker, a World War I fighter pilot ace. Built in 1895, the house was designated a National Historic Landmark in 1976. Demolition has been a common trend in Columbus for a long period of time, and continues into the present day. Preservationists and the public have sometimes run into conflict with developers hoping to revitalize an area, and historically with the city and state government, which led programs of urban renewal in the 20th century. Columbus has a wide variety of museums and galleries. Its primary art museum is the Columbus Museum of Art, which operates its main location as well as the Pizzuti Collection, featuring contemporary art. The museum, founded in 1878, focuses on European and American art up to early modernism that includes extraordinary examples of Impressionism, German Expressionism and Cubism. Another prominent art museum in the city is the Wexner Center for the Arts, a contemporary art gallery and research facility operated by the Ohio State University. The Ohio History Connection is headquartered in Columbus, with its flagship museum, the 250,000-square-foot (23,000 m2) Ohio History Center, 4 mi (6.4 km) north of downtown. Adjacent to the museum is Ohio Village, a replica of a village around the time of the American Civil War. The Columbus Historical Society also features historical exhibits, which focus more closely on life in Columbus. COSI is a large science and children's museum in downtown Columbus. The present building, the former Central High School, was completed in November 1999, opposite downtown on the west bank of the Scioto River. In 2009, Parents magazine named COSI one of the 10 best science centers for families in the country. Other science museums include the Orton Geological Museum and the Museum of Biological Diversity, which are both part of Ohio State University. The Franklin Park Conservatory is the city's botanical garden, which opened in 1895. It features over 400 species of plants in a large Victorian-style glass greenhouse building that includes rain forest, desert and Himalayan mountain biomes. The conservatory is located just east of Downtown in Franklin Park Biographical museums include the Thurber House (documenting the life of cartoonist James Thurber), the Jack Nicklaus Museum (documenting the golfer's career, located on the OSU campus) and the Kelton House Museum and Garden, the latter of which being a historic house museum memorializing three generations of the Kelton family, the house's use as a documented station on the Underground Railroad, and overall Victorian life. The National Veterans Memorial and Museum, which opened in 2018, focuses on the personal stories of military veterans throughout U.S. history. The museum replaced the Franklin County Veterans Memorial, which opened in 1955. Other notable museums in the city include the Central Ohio Fire Museum, Billy Ireland Cartoon Library & Museum and the Ohio Craft Museum. Columbus is the home of many performing arts institutions including the Columbus Symphony Orchestra, Opera Columbus, BalletMet Columbus, the ProMusica Chamber Orchestra, CATCO, Columbus Children's Theatre, Shadowbox Live, and the Columbus Jazz Orchestra. Throughout the summer, the Actors' Theatre of Columbus offers free performances of Shakespearean plays in an open-air amphitheater in Schiller Park in historic German Village. The Columbus Youth Ballet Academy was founded in the 1980s by ballerina and artistic director Shir Lee Wu, a discovery of Martha Graham. Wu is now the artistic director of the Columbus City Ballet School. Columbus has several large concert venues, including the Nationwide Arena, Value City Arena, Express Live!, Mershon Auditorium and the Newport Music Hall. In May 2009, the Lincoln Theatre, formerly a center for Black culture in Columbus, reopened after an extensive restoration. Not far from the Lincoln Theatre is the King Arts Complex, which hosts a variety of cultural events. The city also has several theaters downtown, including the historic Palace Theatre, the Ohio Theatre and the Southern Theatre. Broadway Across America often presents touring Broadway musicals in these larger venues. The Vern Riffe Center for Government and the Arts houses the Capitol Theatre and three smaller studio theaters, providing a home for resident performing arts companies. Movies filmed in the Columbus metropolitan area include Teachers in 1984, Tango & Cash in 1989, Little Man Tate in 1991, Air Force One in 1997, Traffic in 2000, Speak in 2004, Bubble in 2005, Liberal Arts in 2012, Parker in 2013, and I Am Wrath in 2016, Aftermath in 2017, They/Them/Us in 2021, and Bones and All in 2022. The 2018 film Ready Player One is set in Columbus, though not filmed in the city. Columbus hosts two major league professional sports teams: the Columbus Blue Jackets of the National Hockey League (NHL), which play at Nationwide Arena, and the Columbus Crew of Major League Soccer (MLS), which play at Lower.com Field. The Crew previously played at Historic Crew Stadium, the first soccer-specific stadium built in the United States for a Major League Soccer team. The Crew were one of the original members of MLS and won their first MLS Cup in 2008, with a second title in 2020. The Columbus Crew moved into Lower.com Field in the summer of 2021, which will also feature a mixed-use development site named Confluence Village. The Columbus Clippers, the International League affiliate of the Cleveland Guardians, play in Huntington Park, which opened in 2009. The city was home to the Panhandles/Tigers football team from 1901 to 1926; they are credited with playing in the first NFL game against another NFL opponent. In the late 1990s, the Columbus Quest won the only two championships during American Basketball League's two-and-a-half season existence. The Ohio Aviators were based in Obetz, Ohio, and began play in the only PRO Rugby season before the league folded. Since 2023, Columbus has been home to the Columbus Fury women's professional volleyball team, one of seven teams to launch with the Pro Volleyball Federation. The team plays home games at Nationwide Arena. Columbus is home to one of the nation's most competitive intercollegiate programs, the Ohio State Buckeyes of Ohio State University. The program has placed in the top 10 final standings of the Director's Cup five times since 2000–2001, including No. 3 for the 2002–2003 season and No. 4 for the 2003–2004 season. The university funds 36 varsity teams, consisting of 17 male, 16 female and three co-educational teams. In 2007–2008 and 2008–2009, the program generated the second-most revenue for college programs behind the Texas Longhorns of The University of Texas at Austin. The Ohio State Buckeyes are a member of the NCAA's Big Ten Conference, and their football team plays home games at Ohio Stadium. The Ohio State–Michigan football game (known colloquially as "The Game") is the final game of the regular season and is played in November each year, alternating between Columbus and Ann Arbor, Michigan. In 2000, ESPN ranked the Ohio State–Michigan game as the greatest rivalry in North American sports. Moreover, "Buckeye fever" permeates Columbus culture year-round and forms a major part of Columbus's cultural identity. Former New York Yankees owner George Steinbrenner, an Ohio native who received a master's degree from Ohio State and coached in Columbus, was an Ohio State football fan and major donor to the university who contributed to the construction of the band facility at the renovated Ohio Stadium, which bears his family's name. During the winter months, the Buckeyes basketball and hockey teams are also major sporting attractions. Columbus has a long history in motorsports, hosting the world's first 24-hour car race at the Columbus Driving Park in 1905, which was organized by the Columbus Auto Club. The Columbus Motor Speedway was built in 1945 and held its first motorcycle race in 1946. In 2010, the Ohio State University student-built Buckeye Bullet 2, a fuel-cell vehicle, set an FIA world speed record for electric vehicles in reaching 303.025 mph, eclipsing the previous record of 302.877 mph. The annual All American Quarter Horse Congress, the world's largest single-breed horse show, attracts approximately 500,000 visitors to the Ohio Expo Center each October. Columbus hosts the annual Arnold Sports Festival. Hosted by Arnold Schwarzenegger, the event has grown to eight Olympic sports and 22,000 athletes competing in 80 events. In conjunction with the Arnold Classic, the city hosted three consecutive Ultimate Fighting Championship events between 2007 and 2009, as well as other mixed martial arts events. Westside Barbell, a world-renowned powerlifting gym, is located in Columbus. Its founder, Louie Simmons, is known for his popularization of the "Conjugate Method," while he is also credited with inventing training machines for reverse hyper-extensions and belt squats. Westside Barbell is known for producing multiple world record holders in powerlifting. The Columbus Bullies were two-time champions of the American Football League (1940–1941). The Columbus Thunderbolts were formed in 1991 for the Arena Football League, and then relocated to Cleveland as the Cleveland Thunderbolts; the Columbus Destroyers were the next team of the AFL, playing from 2004 until the league's demise in 2008 and returned for single season in 2019 until the league folded a second time. Ohio Roller Derby (formerly Ohio Roller Girls) was founded in Columbus in 2005 and still competes internationally in Women's Flat Track Derby Association play. The team is regularly ranked in the top 60 internationally. Columbus's Recreation and Parks Department oversees about 370 city parks. Also in the area are 19 regional parks and the Metro Parks, which are part of the Columbus and Franklin County Metropolitan Park District. These parks include Clintonville's Whetstone Park and the Columbus Park of Roses, a 13-acre (5.3 ha) rose garden. The Chadwick Arboretum on Ohio State's campus features a large and varied collection of plants, while its Olentangy River Wetland Research Park is an experimental wetland open to the public. Downtown, the painting A Sunday Afternoon on the Island of La Grande Jatte is represented in topiary at Columbus's Topiary Park. Also near downtown, the Scioto Audubon Metro Park on the Whittier Peninsula opened in 2009 and includes a large Audubon nature center focused on the birdwatching the area is known for. The Columbus Zoo and Aquarium's collections include lowland gorillas, polar bears, manatees, Siberian tigers, cheetahs and kangaroos. Also in the zoo complex is the Zoombezi Bay water park and amusement park. Annual festivities in Columbus include the Ohio State Fair – one of the largest state fairs in the country – as well as the Columbus Arts Festival and the Jazz & Rib Fest, both of which occur on the downtown riverfront. In mid-May from 2007 to 2018, Columbus was home to Rock on the Range, which was held at Historic Crew Stadium and marketed as America's biggest rock festival. The festival, which took place on a Friday, Saturday and Sunday, has hosted Metallica, Red Hot Chili Peppers, Slipknot and other notable bands. In May 2019, it was officially replaced by the Sonic Temple Art & Music Festival. During the first weekend in June, the bars of Columbus's North Market District host the Park Street Festival, which attracts thousands of visitors to a massive party in bars and on the street. June's second-to-last weekend sees one of the Midwest's largest gay pride parades, Columbus Pride, reflecting the city's sizable gay population. During the last weekend of June, Goodale Park hosts ComFest (short for "Community Festival"), an immense three-day music festival marketed as the largest non-commercial festival in the U.S., with art vendors, live music on multiple stages, hundreds of local social and political organizations, body painting and beer. Greek Festival is held in August or September at the Greek Orthodox Church downtown. The Hot Times Community Arts & Music Festival, a celebration of music, arts, food and diversity, is held annually in the Olde Towne East neighborhood. The city's largest dining event, Restaurant Week Columbus, is held twice a year in mid-January and mid-July. In 2010, more than 40,000 diners went to 40 participating restaurants, and $5,000 (~$6,986 in 2023) was donated the Mid-Ohio Foodbank on behalf of sponsors and participating restaurants. The Juneteenth Ohio Festival is held each year at Franklin Park on Father's Day weekend. Started by Mustafaa Shabazz, Juneteenth Ohio is one of the largest African American festivals in the United States, including three full days of music, food, dance and entertainment by local and national recording artists. The festival holds a Father's Day celebration, honoring local fathers. Around the Fourth of July, Columbus hosts Red, White & Boom! on the Scioto riverfront downtown, attracting crowds of over 500,000 people and featuring the largest fireworks display in Ohio. The Doo Dah Parade is also held at this time. During Memorial Day Weekend, the Asian Festival is held in Franklin Park. Hundreds of restaurants, vendors and companies open up booths, and traditional music is played, martial arts are performed and cultural exhibits are set up. The Jazz & Rib Fest is a free downtown event held each July, featuring jazz artists like Randy Weston, D. Bohannon Clark and Wayne Shorter, along with rib vendors from around the country. The Short North is host to the monthly Gallery Hop, which attracts hundreds to the neighborhood's art galleries (which all open their doors to the public until late at night) and street musicians. The Hilltop Bean Dinner is an annual event held on Columbus's West Side that celebrates the city's Civil War heritage near the historic Camp Chase Cemetery. At the end of September, German Village throws an annual Oktoberfest celebration that features German food, beer, music and crafts. The Short North also hosts HighBall Halloween and Masquerade on High, a fashion show and street parade that closes down High Street. In 2011, in its fourth year, HighBall Halloween gained notoriety as it accepted its first Expy award. HighBall Halloween has much to offer for those interested in fashion and the performing and visual arts, or for those who want to celebrate Halloween with food and drinks from all around the city. Each year, the event is put on with a different theme. Columbus also hosts many conventions in the Greater Columbus Convention Center, a large convention center on the north edge of downtown. Completed in 1993, the 1.8-million-square-foot (170,000 m2) convention center was designed by architect Peter Eisenman, who also designed the Wexner Center. Both of the metropolitan area's major shopping centers are located in Columbus: Easton Town Center and Polaris Fashion Place. Developer Richard E. Jacobs built the area's first three major shopping malls in the 1960s: Westland, Northland and Eastland. Near Northland Mall was The Continent, an open-air mall in the Northland area, mostly vacant and pending redevelopment. Columbus City Center was built downtown in 1988, alongside the first location of Lazarus; this mall closed in 2009 and was demolished in 2011. Easton Town Center was built in 1999 and Polaris Fashion Place in 2001. The City of Columbus has focused on reducing its environmental impact and carbon footprint. In 2020, a citywide ballot measure was approved, giving Columbus an electricity aggregation plan which will supply it with 100% renewable energy by the start of 2023. Its vendor, AEP Energy, plans to construct new wind and solar farms in Ohio to help supply the electricity. The largest sources of pollution in the county, as of 2019, are Ohio State University's McCracken Power Plant, the landfill operated by the Solid Waste Authority of Central Ohio (SWACO) and the Anheuser-Busch Columbus Brewery. Anheuser-Busch has a company-wide goal of reducing emissions by 25% by 2025. Ohio State plans to construct a new heat and power plant, also powered by fossil fuels, but set to reduce emissions by about 30%. SWACO manages to capture 75% of its methane emissions to use in producing energy, and is looking to reduce emissions further. The city is administered by a mayor and a seven-member unicameral council elected in two classes every two years to four-year terms at large. Columbus is the largest city in the United States that elects its city council at large as opposed to districts. The mayor appoints the director of safety and the director of public service. The people elect the auditor, municipal court clerk, municipal court judges and city attorney. A charter commission, elected in 1913, submitted a new charter in May 1914, offering a modified federal form, with a number of progressive features, such as nonpartisan ballot, preferential voting, recall of elected officials, the referendum and a small council elected at large. The charter was adopted, effective January 1, 1916. Andrew Ginther has been the mayor of Columbus since 2016. As Ohio's capital and the county seat, Columbus hosts numerous federal, state, county and city government offices and courts. Federal offices include the Joseph P. Kinneary U.S. Courthouse, one of several courts for the District Court for the Southern District of Ohio, after moving from 121 E. State St. in 1934. Another federal office, the John W. Bricker Federal Building, has offices for U.S. Senator Sherrod Brown, as well as for the Internal Revenue Service, the Social Security Administration and the Departments of Housing & Urban Development and Agriculture. The State of Ohio's capitol building, the Ohio Statehouse, is located in the center of downtown on Capitol Square. It houses the Ohio House of Representatives and Ohio Senate. It also contains the ceremonial offices of the governor, lieutenant governor, state treasurer and state auditor. The Supreme Court, Court of Claims and Judicial Conference are located in the Thomas J. Moyer Ohio Judicial Center downtown by the Scioto River. The building, built in 1933 to house 10 state agencies along with the State Library of Ohio, became the Supreme Court after extensive renovations from 2001 to 2004. Franklin County operates the Franklin County Government Center, a complex at the southern end of downtown Columbus. The center includes the county's municipal court, common pleas court, correctional center, juvenile detention center and sheriff's office. Near City Hall, the Michael B. Coleman Government Center holds offices for the departments of building and zoning services, public service, development and public utilities. Also nearby is 77 North Front Street, which holds Columbus's city attorney office, income-tax division, public safety, human resources, civil service and purchasing departments. The structure, built in 1929, was the police headquarters until 1991, and was then dormant until it was given a $34 million renovation from 2011 to 2013. Municipal police duties are performed by the Columbus Division of Police, while emergency medical services (EMS) and fire protection are through the Columbus Division of Fire. Ohio Homeland Security operates the Strategic Analysis and Information Center (SAIC) fusion center in Columbus's Hilltop neighborhood. The facility is the state's primary public intelligence hub and one of the few in the country that uses state, local, federal and private resources. Columbus has a history of governmental and nonprofit support for low-income residents and the homeless. Nevertheless, the homelessness rate has steadily risen since at least 2007. Poverty and differences in quality of life have grown, as well; Columbus was noted as the second-most economically segregated large metropolitan area in 2015, in a study by the University of Toronto. It also ranked 45th of the 50 largest metropolitan areas in terms of social mobility, according to a 2015 Harvard University study. Columbus is the home of two public colleges: the Ohio State University, one of the largest college campuses in the United States, and Columbus State Community College. In 2009, Ohio State University was ranked No. 19 in the country by U.S. News & World Report on its list of best public universities, and No. 56 overall, scoring in the first tier of schools nationally. Some of Ohio State's graduate school programs placed in the top 5, including No. 5 for both best veterinary programs and best pharmacy programs. The specialty graduate programs of social psychology was ranked No. 2, dispute resolution was No. 5, vocational education was No. 2, and elementary education, secondary teacher education, administration/supervision was No. 5. Private institutions in Columbus include Capital University Law School, the Columbus College of Art and Design, Fortis College, DeVry University, Ohio Business College, Miami-Jacobs Career College, Ohio Institute of Health Careers, Bradford School and Franklin University, as well as the religious schools Bexley Hall Episcopal Seminary, Mount Carmel College of Nursing, Ohio Dominican University, Pontifical College Josephinum and Trinity Lutheran Seminary. Three major suburban schools also have an influence on Columbus's educational landscape: Bexley's Capital University, Westerville's Otterbein University and Delaware's Ohio Wesleyan University. Columbus City Schools (CCS) is the largest district in Ohio, with 55,000 pupils. CCS operates 142 elementary, middle and high schools, including a number of magnet schools (which are referred to as alternative schools within the school system). The suburbs operate their own districts, typically serving students in one or more townships, with districts sometimes crossing municipal boundaries. The Roman Catholic Diocese of Columbus also operates several parochial elementary and high schools. The area's second-largest school district is South-Western City Schools, which encompasses southwestern Franklin County, including a slice of Columbus itself. Other portions of Columbus are zoned to the Dublin, Hilliard, New Albany-Plain, Westerville and Worthington school districts. There are also several private schools in the area, such as St. Paul's Lutheran School, a K-8 Christian school of the Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod in Columbus. Some sources determine that the first kindergarten in the United States was established here by Louisa Frankenberg, a former student of Friedrich Fröbel. Frankenberg immigrated to the city in 1838 and opened her kindergarten in the German Village neighborhood in that year. The school did not work out, so she returned to Germany in 1840. In 1858, Frankenberg returned to Columbus and established another early kindergarten in the city. Frankenberg is often overlooked, with Margarethe Schurz instead given credit for her "First Kindergarten" she operated for two years. In addition, Indianola Junior High School (now the Graham Elementary and Middle School) became the nation's first junior high school in 1909, helping to bridge the difficult transition from elementary to high school at a time when only 48% of students continued their education after the ninth grade. The Columbus Metropolitan Library (CML) has served central Ohio residents since 1873. The system has 23 locations throughout Central Ohio, with a total collection of 3 million items. This library is one of the country's most-used library systems and is consistently among the top-ranked large city libraries according to Hennen's American Public Library Ratings. CML was rated the No. 1 library system in the nation in 1999, 2005 and 2008. It has been in the top four every year since 1999, when the rankings were first published in the American Libraries magazine, often challenging upstate neighbor Cuyahoga County Public Library for the top spot. The classes of the Columbus Japanese Language School, a weekend Japanese school, are held in a facility from the school district in Marysville, while the school office is in Worthington. Previously it held classes at facilities in the city of Columbus. Several weekly and daily newspapers serve Columbus and Central Ohio. The major daily newspaper in Columbus is The Columbus Dispatch. There are also neighborhood- or suburb-specific papers, such as the Dispatch Printing Company's ThisWeek Community News, the Columbus Messenger, the Clintonville Spotlight and the Short North Gazette. The Lantern and 1870 serve the Ohio State University community. Alternative arts, culture or politics-oriented papers include ALIVE (formerly the independent Columbus Alive and now owned by the Columbus Dispatch), Columbus Free Press and Columbus Underground (digital-only). The Columbus Magazine, CityScene, 614 Magazine and Columbus Monthly are the city's magazines. Columbus is the base for 12 television stations and is the 32nd-largest television market as of September 24, 2016. Columbus is also home to the 36th-largest radio market. Numerous medical systems operate in Columbus and Central Ohio. These include OhioHealth, which has three hospitals in the city proper: Grant Medical Center, Riverside Methodist Hospital, and Doctors Hospital; Mount Carmel Health System, which has one hospital among other facilities; the Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, which has a primary hospital complex and an east campus in Columbus; and Nationwide Children's Hospital, which is an independently operated hospital for pediatric health care. Hospitals in Central Ohio are ranked favorably by the U.S. News & World Report, where numerous hospitals are ranked as among the best in particular fields in the United States. Nationwide Children's is regarded as among the top 10 children's hospitals in the country, according to the report. Numerous utility companies operate in Central Ohio. Within Columbus, power is sourced from Columbus Southern Power, an American Electric Power subsidiary. Natural gas is provided by Columbia Gas of Ohio, while water is sourced from the City of Columbus Division of Water. The city's two main corridors since its founding are Broad and High Streets. They both traverse beyond the extent of the city; High Street is the longest in Columbus, running 13.5 mi (21.7 km) (23.4 across the county), while Broad Street is longer across the county, at 25.1 mi (40.4 km). The city's street plan originates downtown and extends into the old-growth neighborhoods, following a grid pattern with the intersection of High Street (running north–south) and Broad Street (running east–west) at its center. North–south streets run 12 degrees west of due north, parallel to High Street; the avenues (vis. Fifth Avenue, Sixth Avenue, Seventh Avenue, and so on) run 12 degrees off from east–west. The address system begins its numbering at the intersection of Broad and High, with numbers increasing in magnitude with distance from Broad or High, as well as cardinal directions used alongside street names. Numbered avenues begin with First Avenue, about 1+1⁄4 mi (2.0 km) north of Broad Street, and increase in number as one progresses northward. Numbered streets begin with Second Street, which is two blocks west of High Street, and Third Street, which is a block east of High Street, then progress eastward from there. Even-numbered addresses are on the north and east sides of streets, putting odd addresses on the south and west sides of streets. A difference of 700 house numbers means a distance of about 1 mi (1.6 km) (along the same street). Other major, local roads in Columbus include Main Street, Morse Road, Dublin-Granville Road (SR-161), Cleveland Avenue/Westerville Road (SR-3), Olentangy River Road, Riverside Drive, Sunbury Road, Fifth Avenue and Livingston Avenue. Columbus is bisected by two major Interstate Highways: Interstate 70 running east–west and Interstate 71 running north to roughly southwest. They combine downtown for about 1.5 mi (2.4 km) in an area locally known as "The Split", which is a major traffic congestion point, especially during rush hour. U.S. Route 40, originally known as the National Road, runs east–west through Columbus, comprising Main Street to the east of downtown and Broad Street to the west. U.S. Route 23 runs roughly north–south, while U.S. Route 33 runs northwest-to-southeast. The Interstate 270 Outerbelt encircles most of the city, while the newly redesigned Innerbelt consists of the Interstate 670 spur on the north side (which continues to the east past the Airport and to the west where it merges with I-70), State Route 315 on the west side, the I-70/71 split on the south side and I-71 on the east. Due to its central location within Ohio and abundance of outbound roadways, nearly all of the state's destinations are within a two- or three-hour drive of Columbus. The Columbus riverfront hosts several bridges. The Discovery Bridge connects downtown to Franklinton across Broad Street. The bridge opened in 1992, replacing a 1921 concrete arch bridge; the first bridge at the site was built in 1816. The 700 ft (210 m) Main Street Bridge opened on July 30, 2010. The bridge has three lanes for vehicular traffic (one westbound and two eastbound) and another separated lane for pedestrians and bikes. The Rich Street Bridge opened in July 2012 adjacent to the Main Street Bridge, connecting Rich Street on the east side of the river with Town Street on the west. The Lane Avenue Bridge is a cable-stayed bridge that opened on November 14, 2003, in the University District. The bridge spans the Olentangy River with three lanes of traffic each way. The city's primary airport, John Glenn Columbus International Airport, is on the city's east side. Formerly known as Port Columbus, John Glenn provides service to Toronto, Ontario, Canada, and Cancun, Mexico (on a seasonal basis), as well as to most domestic destinations, including all the major hubs along with San Francisco, Salt Lake City and Seattle. The airport was a hub for discount carrier Skybus Airlines and continues to be home to NetJets, the world's largest fractional ownership air carrier. According to a 2005 market survey, John Glenn Columbus International Airport attracts about 50% of its passengers from outside of its 60-mile (97 km) radius primary service region. It is the 52nd-busiest airport in the United States by total passenger boardings. Rickenbacker International Airport, in southern Franklin County, is a major cargo facility that is used by the Ohio Air National Guard. Allegiant Air offers nonstop service from Rickenbacker to Florida destinations. Ohio State University Don Scott Airport and Bolton Field are other large general-aviation facilities in the Columbus area. In 1907, 14-year-old Cromwell Dixon built the SkyCycle, a pedal-powered blimp, which he flew at Driving Park. Three years later, one of the Wright brothers' exhibition pilots, Phillip Parmalee, conducted the world's first commercial cargo flight when he flew two packages containing 88 kilograms of silk 70 miles (110 km) from Dayton to Columbus in a Wright Model B. Military aviators from Columbus distinguished themselves during World War I. Six Columbus pilots, led by top ace Eddie Rickenbacker, achieved 42 "kills" – a full 10% of all US aerial victories in the war, and more than the aviators of any other American city. After the war, Port Columbus Airport (now known as John Glenn Columbus International Airport) became the axis of a coordinated rail-to-air transcontinental system that moved passengers from the East Coast to the West. TAT, which later became TWA, provided commercial service, following Charles Lindbergh's promotion of Columbus to the nation for such a hub. Following the failure of a bond levy in 1927 to build the airport, Lindbergh campaigned in the city in 1928, and the next bond levy passed that year. On July 8, 1929, the airport opened for business with the inaugural TAT westbound flight from Columbus to Waynoka, Oklahoma. Among the 19 passengers on that flight was Amelia Earhart, with Henry Ford and Harvey Firestone attending the opening ceremonies. In 1964, Ohio native Geraldine Fredritz Mock became the first woman to fly solo around the world, leaving from Columbus and piloting the Spirit of Columbus. Her flight lasted nearly a month and set a record for speed for planes under 3,858 pounds (1,750 kg). Columbus maintains a widespread municipal bus service called the Central Ohio Transit Authority (COTA). The service operates 41 routes with a fleet of 440 buses, serving approximately 19 million passengers per year. COTA operates 23 regular fixed-service routes, 14 express services, a bus rapid transit route, a free downtown circulator, night service, an airport connector and other services. LinkUS, an initiative between COTA, the city, and the Mid-Ohio Regional Planning Commission, is planning to add more rapid transit to Columbus, with three proposed corridors operating by 2030, and potentially a total of five by 2050. Intercity bus service is provided at the Columbus Bus Station by Greyhound, Barons Bus Lines, Miller Transportation, GoBus and other carriers. Columbus does not have passenger rail service. The city's major train station, Union Station, was a stop along Amtrak's National Limited train service until 1977 and was razed in 1979, and the Greater Columbus Convention Center now stands in its place. Until Amtrak's founding in 1971, the Penn Central ran the Cincinnati Limited to Cincinnati to the southwest (in prior years the train continued to New York City to the east); the Ohio State Limited between Cincinnati and Cleveland, with Union Station serving as a major intermediate stop (the train going unnamed between 1967 and 1971); and the Spirit of St. Louis, which ran between St. Louis and New York City until 1971. The station was also a stop along the Pennsylvania Railroad, the New York Central Railroad, the Chesapeake and Ohio Railway, the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad, the Norfolk and Western Railway, the Cleveland, Columbus and Cincinnati Railroad, and the Pittsburgh, Cincinnati, Chicago and St. Louis Railroad. As the city lacks local, commuter or intercity trains, Columbus is now the largest city and metropolitan area in the U.S. without any passenger rail service. Numerous proposals to return rail service have been introduced; currently Amtrak plans to restore service to Columbus by 2035. Cycling as transportation is steadily increasing in Columbus with its relatively flat terrain, intact urban neighborhoods, large student population and off-road bike paths. The city has put forth the 2012 Bicentennial Bikeways Plan, as well as a move toward a Complete Streets policy. Grassroots efforts such as Bike to Work Week, Consider Biking, Yay Bikes, Third Hand Bicycle Co-op, Franklinton Cycleworks and Cranksters, a local radio program focused on urban cycling, have contributed to cycling as transportation. Columbus also hosts urban cycling "off-shots" with messenger-style "alleycat" races, as well as unorganized group rides, a monthly Critical Mass ride, bicycle polo, art showings, movie nights and a variety of bicycle-friendly businesses and events throughout the year. All this activity occurs despite Columbus's frequently inclement weather. The Main Street Bridge, opened in 2010, features a dedicated bike and pedestrian lane separated from traffic. The city has its own public bicycle system. CoGo Bike Share has a network of about 600 bicycles and 80 docking stations. PBSC Urban Solutions, a company based in Canada, supplies technology and equipment. Bird electric scooters have also been introduced. The city of Columbus has a higher-than-average percentage of households without a car. In 2015, 9.8% of Columbus households lacked a car, a number that fell slightly to 9.4% in 2016. The national average was 8.7% in 2016. Columbus averaged 1.55 cars per household in 2016, compared to a national average of 1.8. Columbus has 10 sister cities as designated by Sister Cities International. Columbus established its first sister city relationship in 1955 with Genoa, Italy. To commemorate this relationship, Columbus received as a gift from the people of Genoa, a bronze statue of Christopher Columbus. The statue overlooked Broad Street in front of Columbus City Hall from 1955 to 2020; it was removed during the George Floyd protests. List of sister cities: Genoa, Italy (1955) Tainan, Taiwan (1980) Hefei, China (1988) Odense, Denmark (1988) Seville, Spain (1988) Dresden, Germany (1992) Herzliya, Israel (1996) Ahmedabad, India (2008) Curitiba, Brazil (2014) Accra, Ghana (2015) Ohio portal Cities portal United States portal Geography portal Racism in Columbus, Ohio USS Columbus, two ships named for the city The Cincinnati metropolitan area, partially in Kentucky, has a larger population, at 2,256,884 in 2020. Mean monthly maxima and minima (i.e. the expected highest and lowest temperature readings at any point during the year or given month) calculated based on data at said location from 1991 to 2020. Official records for Columbus were kept downtown from July 1878 to December 1947, and at John Glenn Int'l since January 1948. For more information, see Threadex From 15% sample Assembly, Ohio General (May 22, 1912). "Legislative Manual of the State of Ohio". Archived from the original on September 20, 2023. Retrieved May 11, 2020 – via Google Books. "City Council: Staff Directory". City of Columbus. Archived from the original on April 24, 2020. Retrieved April 17, 2020. "ArcGIS REST Services Directory". United States Census Bureau. Archived from the original on January 19, 2022. Retrieved September 20, 2022. U.S. Geological Survey Geographic Names Information System: Columbus, Ohio "2020 Population and Housing State Data". United States Census Bureau. Archived from the original on August 12, 2021. Retrieved August 22, 2021. "Things you'll never hear a Columbusite say". News Radio 610 WTVN. April 25, 2014. Archived from the original on October 31, 2014. "Total Gross Domestic Product for Columbus, OH (MSA)". www.bea.gov. "Zip Code Lookup". USPS. Archived from the original on September 3, 2007. Retrieved November 15, 2014. "QuickFacts: Columbus city, Ohio". United States Census Bureau. Archived from the original on March 7, 2023. Retrieved August 20, 2021. "Places in Franklin County, OH". Find a County. National Association of Counties. Archived from the original on June 16, 2008. Retrieved April 13, 2010. "2 counties added to Columbus metro area" Archived July 30, 2017, at the Wayback Machine. Columbus Dispatch. 2013. Retrieved April 16, 2014. "Metropolitan and Micropolitan Statistical Areas Population Totals and Components of Change: 2010–2019". United States Census Bureau, Population Division. April 2019. Archived from the original on June 16, 2020. Retrieved April 18, 2020. Flynn, Meagan (October 8, 2018). "Columbus, Ohio, once spent $95 million to help celebrate Columbus Day. Now, it's canceled". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on July 11, 2020. Retrieved July 29, 2020. Thomas, G. Scott (October 10, 2011). "54 U.S. communities carry Columbus's legacy in their names". The Business Journals. Archived from the original on March 8, 2021. Retrieved July 29, 2020. Pember, Mary Annette (June 25, 2020). "Those statues didn't topple overnight". Indian Country Today. Archived from the original on July 28, 2020. Retrieved July 29, 2020. Howard Zinn. "A People's History of the United States". Newhumanist.com. Archived from the original on July 29, 2008. Retrieved September 5, 2008. Bigelow, B. (1992). Once upon a Genocide: Christopher Columbus in Children's Literature. "Christopher Columbus Statues Fall in Other Cities, Remain Intact in Ohio". Columbus Underground. June 11, 2020. Archived from the original on June 13, 2020. Retrieved June 13, 2020. Enquirer, Sarah Brookbank, Cincinnati. "'Flavortown' to replace Columbus? Thousands want Ohio capital renamed for native Guy Fieri". The Columbus Dispatch. Retrieved October 23, 2023.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Staff, Jarrod Clay, WSYX/WTTE (June 30, 2020). "Guy Fieri weighs in on petition to rename Columbus "Flavortown"". WSYX. Retrieved October 23, 2023.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Lee, Alicia (June 21, 2020). "Thousands sign petition to rename Columbus, Ohio to 'Flavortown' after native son Guy Fieri". CNN. Retrieved October 23, 2023. Clay, Jarrod (September 22, 2022). "Guy Fieri gets behind idea to rename Columbus Main Library 'Flavortown HQ'". WTTE. Retrieved October 23, 2023. "Ohio STEM Learning Network / Columbus". Archived from the original on November 29, 2014. Retrieved June 21, 2010. "A century ago, Columbus was the nation's 'Arch City'". Archived from the original on July 18, 2011. Retrieved June 21, 2010. "Columbus was once known as 'Arch City'". Archived from the original on January 2, 2013. Retrieved June 21, 2010. "Prize For Double Light Arch Design Won By W. A. Paine". The Columbus Dispatch. March 21, 1909. Archived from the original on September 20, 2023. Retrieved December 26, 2022. "As It Were: Arches' first job: Deter ruffians". Archived from the original on April 17, 2021. Retrieved April 17, 2021. Columbus and the State of Ohio: Cool Stuff Every Kid Should Know. Arcadia. 2011. ISBN 9781439600870. Archived from the original on June 30, 2023. Retrieved March 19, 2023. Gapp, Paul (March 29, 1980). "The American City – Challenge of The '80s". Chicago Tribune. pp. 1, 10–11. The Columbus Dispatch, May 11, 1986: "Progress, growth are not in 'Hicksville' dictionary" pp.B2 (By Bob Young) The Columbus Dispatch, April 26, 1986: "Bigger is not always better, growth not always progress" pp. 10A (By Brenda Petruzzella) "Like it or not, Cbus now city's nicknames". Archived from the original on March 5, 2014. Retrieved February 28, 2014. "6 Places in Central Ohio to Experience Native American History". www.experiencecolumbus.com. July 5, 2018. Archived from the original on July 28, 2020. Retrieved May 17, 2020. Strobel, Christoph (2008). The Testing Grounds of Modern Empire: The Making of Colonial Racial Order in the American Ohio Country and the South African Eastern Cape, 1770s-1850s. Peter Lang. ISBN 978-1-4331-0123-6. Archived from the original on September 20, 2023. Retrieved September 6, 2015. "The French and Indian War in Pennsylvania". Explore PA History. Archived from the original on December 26, 2022. Retrieved December 26, 2022. Jennings, Francis (1984). The Ambiguous Iroquois Empire: The Covenant Chain Confederation of Indian Tribes with English Colonies from Its Beginnings to the Lancaster Treaty of 1744 (reprint ed.). Norton. p. 351. ISBN 9780393303025. Retrieved May 27, 2016. "As It Were: Treaty couldn't oust local Indians". Archived from the original on July 15, 2021. Retrieved July 15, 2021. Lentz, p. 33 Moore, p. 101 Knepper, George W. (2002). The Official Ohio Lands Book (PDF). The Auditor of the State of Ohio. p. 51. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 24, 2014. Retrieved May 10, 2020. "Statehouse". Ohio Statehouse. Capitol Square Review and Advisory Board. Archived from the original on May 31, 2020. Retrieved May 18, 2020. Lentz, pp. 41–43 Moore, p. 122 "Summer 1833 was a time of cholera in Columbus". ThisWeek Community News. Archived from the original on July 28, 2020. Retrieved May 11, 2020. Lentz, p. 58 Lentz, pp. 63–64 Moore, p. 156 Barrett, Richard E. (April 26, 2006). Columbus 1860-1910. Arcadia. ISBN 9780738539621. Archived from the original on September 20, 2023. Retrieved March 15, 2013. Darbee, Jeffrey (2003). Taking the Cars: A History of Columbus Union Station. Columbus: The Ohio Historical Society. ISBN 0-9742573-0-3. Tebben, Gerald. "Columbus Mileposts | July 11, 1849: Cholera begins filling Green Lawn". The Columbus Dispatch. Archived from the original on July 28, 2020. Retrieved May 22, 2020. Lentz, pp. 70–71 Cole, Charles Chester (2001). A Fragile Capital: Identity and the Early Years of Columbus, Ohio. Ohio State University Press. pp. 193–204. ISBN 9780814208533. Archived from the original on September 20, 2023. Retrieved October 25, 2020. "A Notable Colored Man has just Passed Away". Xenia Daily Gazette. Xenia, Ohio. February 8, 1907. p. 7. Archived from the original on September 20, 2023. Retrieved October 5, 2016 – via Newspapers.com. Lentz, p. 78 Lentz, p.57 "Columbus Buggy Company". touringohio.com. Archived from the original on April 8, 2017. Retrieved April 7, 2017. Lentz, pp. 85–87 Lentz, pp. 91–92 Lentz, pp. 94–95 Lentz, pp. 112–113 "NFL History". CBS Sportsline.com. Archived from the original on April 10, 2016. Retrieved December 24, 2006. Lentz, pp.116–118 Lentz, p. 122 Lentz, p. 129 Schneider, Keith (May 31, 2016). "Open Spaces Bring Light to Downtown Columbus". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on February 11, 2018. Retrieved June 16, 2017. Ferenchik, Mark (February 26, 2011). "City spends millions renovating, demolishing eyesore properties". The Columbus Dispatch. Archived from the original on February 28, 2011. Retrieved February 27, 2011. "City of Columbus and Franklin County Jurisdictions Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Summary of Cases". The City of Columbus. May 18, 2020. Archived from the original on July 28, 2020. Retrieved July 27, 2020. Kovac, Mark; Burger, Beth; Sullivan, Lucas (May 30, 2020). "Columbus downtown business owners clean up after protests". Columbus Dispatch. Archived from the original on July 28, 2020. Retrieved July 27, 2020. "Intel in Ohio: You Were Built For This". Intel. Archived from the original on April 10, 2023. Retrieved April 10, 2023. "Honda to spend billions on Fayette County battery plant". The Columbus Dispatch. Archived from the original on June 21, 2023. Retrieved April 10, 2023. "Which American downtowns are thriving — and which are struggling". Axios. May 4, 2023. Archived from the original on May 22, 2023. Retrieved May 22, 2023. Ringle, Dean C. (2007). Franklin County Ohio Road Map & Street Locator. Franklin County, Ohio: Franklin County Engineer. Foster, Stephanie. "Meet Your Farmer event draws crowd". The Columbus Dispatch. Archived from the original on March 4, 2023. Retrieved March 4, 2023. "US Gazetteer files 2010". United States Census Bureau. Archived from the original on July 2, 2012. Retrieved January 6, 2013. Zimmerman, Richard Z. (2007). Lamis, Alexander P.; Usher, Brian (eds.). Ohio Politics: Revised and Updated. Kent State University Press. p. 87. ISBN 978-0-87338-613-5. Barghouty, Ghezal; Stacy, Sara (September 4, 2017). "A breakdown of Columbus' many neighborhoods". The Lantern. Archived from the original on September 5, 2017. Retrieved October 27, 2021. "The Short North: A History". WOSU 89.7 NPR News. March 5, 2010. Archived from the original on May 21, 2021. Retrieved October 27, 2021. "Local 4 You". NBC4 WCMH-TV. March 9, 2021. Archived from the original on April 13, 2021. Retrieved October 27, 2021. Records for Columbus. Archived December 21, 2014, at the Wayback Machine National Weather Service. Retrieved on November 16, 2008. Tullis, Matt; Mark Ferenchik (October 13, 2006). "Ruin, relief and rebuilding Tornado aftermath". The Columbus Dispatch. pp. NEWS 01A. "Station: Columbus Port Columbus INTL AP, OH". U.S. Climate Normals 2020: U.S. Monthly Climate Normals (1991–2020). National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Retrieved May 9, 2021. "NowData – NOAA Online Weather Data". National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Retrieved May 9, 2021. "Records for Columbus". National Weather Service. Retrieved February 27, 2017. "WMO Climate Normals for COLUMBUS WSO AP, OH 1961–1990". National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Retrieved March 11, 2014. "Columbus, Ohio, USA - Monthly weather forecast and Climate data". Weather Atlas. Retrieved June 14, 2019. Federal Writers' Project (1940). Ohio Guide. American Guide Series. Oxford University Press. Retrieved May 10, 2020. "Census of Population and Housing". United States Census Bureau. Archived from the original on March 21, 2021. Retrieved November 15, 2014. Taylor, William Alexander (1909). Centennial History of Columbus and Franklin County, Ohio. S. J. Clarke Publishing Company. ISBN 9780832828300. Archived from the original on September 20, 2023. Retrieved May 11, 2020. "Census of Population and Housing". Census.gov. Archived from the original on June 26, 2015. Retrieved June 4, 2016. "P2: Hispanic or Latino, and Not Hispanic or Latino by Race". Census.gov. Archived from the original on May 2, 2022. Retrieved May 2, 2022. "Columbus (city), Ohio". State & County QuickFacts. United States Census Bureau. Archived from the original on July 10, 2014. "Race and Hispanic Origin for Selected Cities and Other Places: Earliest Census to 1990". U.S. Census Bureau. Archived from the original on August 12, 2012. "U.S. Census Bureau QuickFacts: Columbus city, Ohio". www.census.gov. Archived from the original on October 3, 2021. Retrieved April 7, 2022. "Columbus city, Ohio - Census Bureau Profile". United States Census Bureau. Retrieved January 9, 2024. "P004 HISPANIC OR LATINO, AND NOT HISPANIC OR LATINO BY RACE – 2000: DEC Summary File 1 – Columbus city, Ohio". United States Census Bureau. "P2: Hispanic or Latino, and Not Hispanic or Latino by Race – 2010: DEC Redistricting Data (PL 94-171) - Columbus city, Ohio". United States Census Bureau. "P2: Hispanic or Latino, and Not Hispanic or Latino by Race – 2020: DEC Redistricting Data (PL 94-171) - Columbus city, Ohio". United States Census Bureau. "Race (Total Races Tallied)". 2010 Decennial Census. United States Census Bureau. 2010. Archived from the original on May 21, 2021. Retrieved May 21, 2021. "Hispanic Or Latino Origin By Race (Total Races Tallied)". 2010 Decennial Census. United States Census Bureau. 2010. Archived from the original on May 21, 2021. Retrieved May 21, 2021. Pyle, Encarnacion (March 14, 2006). "Columbus becoming a mini melting pot". The Columbus Dispatch. pp. News 01A. "Capacity Building Initiative: Immigrant and Refugee Organizations" Archived May 14, 2013, at the Wayback Machine, Columbus Foundation. 2006. Retrieved July 3, 2012. King, Danae (September 26, 2018). "City Council gives $45,000 to Bhutanese-Nepali community center". Columbus Dispatch. Archived from the original on February 20, 2020. Retrieved February 20, 2020. "Dalayad Haji Hashi Jama, 72; Somalia's Former First Lady". Los Angeles Times. July 31, 2004. Archived from the original on August 7, 2016. Retrieved June 10, 2016. Wolf, Barnet D. (December 5, 2006). "Fresch Approach Long John Silver's test site tries grilling on for size". The Columbus Dispatch. Studer, Jacob Henry (May 22, 1873). "Columbus, Ohio: Its History, Resources, and Progress". J.H. Studer. Archived from the original on September 20, 2023. Retrieved May 11, 2020 – via Google Books. "2017 Japanese Direct Investment Survey: Summary of Ohio Results Archived July 28, 2020, at the Wayback Machine. Consulate-General of Japan in Detroit. October 1, 2017. Retrieved on March 11, 2020. "Same-sex Couples and the Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual Population: New Estimates from the American Community Survey" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on June 9, 2013. Retrieved July 3, 2012. Retrieved July 3, 2012. "Unmarried-Partner Households by Sex of Partner: Columbus city, Ohio". American FactFinder, 2018 American Community Survey 1-Year Estimates. United States Census Bureau. Archived from the original on May 21, 2021. Retrieved May 21, 2021. "The Most Underrated Gay-Friendly Cities in America". About.com. Archived from the original on November 23, 2009. Retrieved January 6, 2010. "Columbus City Council Creates Domestic Partner Registry". Plunderbund.com. July 31, 2012. Archived from the original on August 24, 2014. Retrieved September 1, 2012. WSYX/WTTE (June 18, 2020). "City of Columbus to remove Christopher Columbus statue outside City Hall". WSYX. Archived from the original on June 19, 2020. Retrieved June 18, 2020. "Italian Village Guidelines" (PDF). Italian Village Commission. August 7, 1990. Archived (PDF) from the original on May 21, 2021. Retrieved May 21, 2021. Gray, Kathy Lynn. "Who wants the Santa Maria? - Lifestyle - Columbus Monthly - Columbus, OH". Columbus Monthly. Archived from the original on July 27, 2021. Retrieved February 25, 2021. Gerald Tebben. "Columbus Mileposts | Aug. 21, 1947: Lightning led bridge to explode, killing one". The Columbus Dispatch. Archived from the original on May 11, 2021. Retrieved February 25, 2021. Mattox, Ronald K. "Discovery Bridge" (PDF). Fourth International Bridge Engineering Conference. Archived (PDF) from the original on June 20, 2020. Retrieved February 19, 2022. "Genoa Park". columbus.gov. City of Columbus, Ohio. Archived from the original on October 22, 2018. Retrieved October 21, 2018. Garbarek, Ben (August 20, 2017). "Protest at City Hall calls for removal of Columbus statue". WSYX. Archived from the original on July 28, 2020. Retrieved June 13, 2020. Wilhelm, Jim; Rouan, Rick (October 4, 2018). "Columbus Day no longer a holiday for namesake Ohio city". The Columbus Dispatch. Archived from the original on May 24, 2020. Retrieved May 9, 2020. "Christopher Columbus statue welcomed in Puerto Rico after US cities rejected it". The Guardian. June 19, 2016. Archived from the original on July 21, 2016. Retrieved June 13, 2020. "Columbus: Religious Tradition". The American Values Atlas. Public Religion Research Institute. 2019. Archived from the original on February 21, 2019. Retrieved May 21, 2021. "Ranking: Columbus among top 10 big cities". Columbus Business First. April 21, 2010. Archived from the original on May 28, 2022. Retrieved December 26, 2022. "Total Gross Domestic Product for Columbus, OH (MSA) (NGMP18140) | FRED | St. Louis Fed". Fred.stlouisfed.org. January 2001. Archived from the original on January 5, 2022. Retrieved November 20, 2021. "Recount Still Possible" Archived July 17, 2011, at the Wayback Machine, This Week Community Papers, Retrieved November 13, 2009. NBC 4, Columbus Budget Shortfall, Tax Increase Retrieved July 26, 2009. "Top 100 U.S. metro economies" Archived June 25, 2010, at the Wayback Machine, U.S. Conference of Mayors. Retrieved April 22, 2010. "Plano set to lose Fortune 500 HQ as Alliance Data Systems shifts to Ohio - Dallas Business Journal". Archived from the original on November 25, 2020. Retrieved June 11, 2019. Eaton, Dan (August 27, 2018). "Frozen food maker Kahiki getting a new owner". bizjournals. Archived from the original on September 20, 2023. Retrieved February 22, 2021. "Columbus Register of Historic Places: Individual Listings & Historic Districts" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on January 27, 2020. Retrieved May 8, 2020. "City of Columbus Historic Districts" (PDF). City of Columbus Department of Development. November 2013. Archived (PDF) from the original on January 11, 2023. Retrieved January 11, 2023. "Captain Edward V. Rickenbacker House". National Historic Landmark summary listing. National Park Service. Archived from the original on June 6, 2011. Retrieved November 6, 2010. Warren, Brent (February 17, 2023). "10 Things I've Learned Writing About Development in Columbus for 10 Years". Columbus Underground. Archived from the original on February 17, 2023. Retrieved February 17, 2023. "Columbus Museum of Art | Columbus OH Arts & Events". Columbusarts.com. Archived from the original on January 20, 2013. Retrieved March 15, 2013. Cicero, Karen. "The 10 Best Science Centers". Parents. Archived from the original on November 23, 2011. Retrieved October 27, 2011. "Franklin Park Conservatory - Welcome to Franklin Park Conservatory and Botanical Gardens". Archived from the original on June 14, 2017. Retrieved June 16, 2017. "About". National Veterans Memorial and Museum. Archived from the original on April 12, 2019. Retrieved April 12, 2019. "History". Columbus City Ballet School. November 4, 2006. Archived from the original on November 4, 2006. Retrieved December 26, 2022. Siegel, Jim (August 19, 2006). "Theater's future about more than politics, mayor says". The Columbus Dispatch. pp. News 05D. Siegel, Jim (December 5, 2006). "State readies projects budget". The Columbus Dispatch. pp. News 01D. Ohio Theatre, History of Shows Retrieved July 26, 2009. Film Columbus, Movies filmed in Columbus metropolitan area Archived February 21, 2009, at the Wayback Machine Retrieved July 26, 2009. Wiley, Chelsea (January 4, 2023). "Does This Scene Look Familiar? A Look At Films Made In Ohio". Archived from the original on February 19, 2023. Retrieved February 19, 2023. Trombly, Monroe. "Oscars: 5 movies filmed in Columbus to watch before the Academy Awards on Sunday". The Columbus Dispatch. Archived from the original on March 7, 2023. Retrieved February 19, 2023. "Top Ten Biggest Sports Stadiums In The World | Top 10 Land". www.top10land.com. Archived from the original on December 26, 2022. Retrieved December 26, 2022. "Columbus Crew SC Resumes Season July 8". Columbus Underground. June 10, 2020. Archived from the original on June 13, 2020. Retrieved June 15, 2020. Wong, Glenn (June 7, 2011). The Comprehensive Guide to Careers in Sports. Jones & Bartlett Learning. ISBN 978-0-7637-2884-7. "Professional rugby team to begin play in Obetz in April". The Columbus Dispatch. Archived from the original on March 16, 2016. Retrieved March 24, 2016. "Pro Volleyball Federation to bring professional women's volleyball to Columbus in 2024". The Columbus Dispatch. Retrieved February 24, 2024. McLaughlin, Jack (April 13, 2023). "The name and logo of Columbus' newest professional sports team has finally been revealed". 614NOW. Archived from the original on April 24, 2023. Retrieved April 24, 2023. "Columbus' pro volleyball team the Fury earn first win in home debut". The Columbus Dispatch. Retrieved February 24, 2024. "Stanford has built the nation's most successful athletics program". The Mercury News. June 23, 2010. Archived from the original on December 26, 2022. Retrieved December 26, 2022. "Ohio State Buckeyes | Ohio State University Athletics". Ohio State Buckeyes. Archived from the original on September 21, 2019. Retrieved December 26, 2022. "Report: OSU No. 2 for sports revenue". Columbus Business First. June 15, 2009. Archived from the original on May 31, 2023. Retrieved December 26, 2022. "Big Ten expansion: E-mails hint eyes are upon Texas" Archived August 19, 2010, at the Wayback Machine, Bill Rabinowitz. Columbus Dispatch. June 4, 2010. Retrieved September 6, 2010. "ESPN.go.com". ESPN.go.com. Archived from the original on October 25, 2008. Retrieved March 15, 2013. "Clippers alert: Steinbrenner is on his way". www.bizjournals.com. Archived from the original on June 9, 2023. Retrieved December 26, 2022. "Motor Sports, 24 Hour Race, Columbus Driving Park". Motorsport.com. March 15, 2005. Archived from the original on November 16, 2008. Retrieved March 15, 2013. "The Buckeye Bullet 2" Archived September 4, 2010, at the Wayback Machine, Green Muze. August 31, 2010. Retrieved September 5, 2010. "All American Quarter Horse Congress"[permanent dead link], Experience Columbus. 2009. Retrieved September 6, 2010. Krasniewicz, Louise; Blitz, Michael (2006). Arnold Schwarzenegger: A Biography. Greenwood Press. ISBN 978-0-313-08128-6. Archived from the original on September 20, 2023. Retrieved September 6, 2015. "Westside Barbell®". www.westside-barbell.com. Archived from the original on November 3, 2022. Retrieved October 25, 2022. "Columbus Recreation and Parks Guide | Fall 2019". Issuu. September 9, 2019. Archived from the original on July 28, 2020. Retrieved April 7, 2020. Gebolys, Debbie (November 16, 2006). "Grange donating $4 million". The Columbus Dispatch. pp. Business 01G. "5 Largest Zoos In The United States". May 6, 2016. Archived from the original on November 10, 2017. Retrieved November 10, 2017. "info". thelantern.com. November 27, 2018. Archived from the original on July 4, 2020. Retrieved July 26, 2020. "Restaurant Week January 2023". 614NOW. June 9, 2022. Archived from the original on December 26, 2022. Retrieved December 26, 2022. Budzak, Gary (May 29, 2005). "Revelry is plentiful not too far away". Columbus Dispatch. Retrieved May 2, 2009.[dead link] Robison, Elwin (1994). "Eisenman's chip-board fantasy: The Greater Columbus Convention Center, Columbus, Ohio". Archived from the original on September 26, 2007. Retrieved September 25, 2007. Showalter, Kathy (March 3, 2003). "New owners poised to revive Westland". Columbus Business First. Archived from the original on December 14, 2013. Retrieved April 1, 2013. "Election results: Voters approve Columbus Issue 1 on energy". Dispatch.com. Archived from the original on November 4, 2020. Retrieved February 25, 2021. "Ohio State, landfill among largest greenhouse gas emitters in Franklin County". Dispatch.com. Archived from the original on January 23, 2021. Retrieved February 25, 2021. New International Encyclopedia. Vol. 5 (Second ed.). Dodd and Mead. 1914. p. 637. Archived from the original on January 6, 2017. Retrieved September 6, 2015. "Ohio Federal Buildings". U.S. General Services Administration. Archived from the original on November 17, 2019. Retrieved March 22, 2020. "John W. Bricker Federal Building". www.gsa.gov. Archived from the original on March 22, 2020. Retrieved March 22, 2020. "Statehouse | Ohio Statehouse". www.ohiostatehouse.org. Archived from the original on October 11, 2018. Retrieved October 11, 2018. "Office of the Ohio Treasurer". www.tos.ohio.gov. Archived from the original on October 11, 2018. Retrieved October 11, 2018. Legislatures, National Conference of State. "Location of Offices for Governor and Other Constitutional Officers". www.ncsl.org. Archived from the original on November 23, 2018. Retrieved October 11, 2018. "The Ohio Judicial Center" (PDF). The Supreme Court of Ohio. The Supreme Court of Ohio Office of Public Information. November 2008. Archived (PDF) from the original on December 31, 2008. Retrieved April 26, 2020. Clark, Ryan (April 17, 2013). "City workers moving into renovated police headquarters". The Columbus Dispatch. Archived from the original on March 22, 2020. Retrieved March 22, 2020. NBC 4, Columbus Police Helicopters Archived January 20, 2013, at the Wayback Machine Retrieved July 3, 2012. "Ohio center fuses intelligence data" Archived February 24, 2017, at the Wayback Machine, Jim Siegel. Columbus Dispatch. September 28, 2010. Retrieved February 24, 2017 "Strategic Analysis and Information Center" Archived February 9, 2017, at the Wayback Machine, Ohio Homeland Security. Retrieved February 24, 2017 Bill Bush. "Central Ohio's homeless rate rising despite low unemployment rate - News - The Columbus Dispatch - Columbus, OH". Dispatch.com. Archived from the original on November 2, 2020. Retrieved February 25, 2021. Rosenberg, Gabe (November 6, 2017). "Same City, Different Worlds". WOSU. PBS. Archived from the original on January 25, 2021. Retrieved February 25, 2021. Chris Gaitten. "The Defining Decade: The Segregated City - Lifestyle - Columbus Monthly - Columbus, OH". Columbus Monthly. Archived from the original on November 1, 2020. Retrieved February 25, 2021. "Hearing from Low-Wage Working Mothers: How a Housing Program in Ohio Connects Children to Better Schools". August 4, 2020. Archived from the original on November 3, 2020. Retrieved October 30, 2020. U.S. News and Reports, Best Colleges Archived August 26, 2009, at the Wayback Machine Retrieved July 26, 2009. Ohio State University, News Release Archived July 29, 2009, at the Wayback Machine Retrieved July 26, 2009. "Columbus City Schools – Employment Website". Columbus City Schools. Archived from the original on October 10, 2007. Retrieved September 25, 2007. "Get to Know St. Paul's". Archived from the original on October 2, 2017. Retrieved October 2, 2017. Lascarides, V. Celia; Hinitz, Blythe F. (2011). History of Early Childhood Education. Routledge. ISBN 978-1136705533. Archived from the original on September 20, 2023. Retrieved May 3, 2020. "Ohio History Central". Ohio History Central. Archived from the original on January 20, 2013. Retrieved March 15, 2013. Phillips, Jeb (October 5, 2005). "Check it out: Columbus Library notches no. 1 rating". The Columbus Dispatch. p. 01B. Archived from the original on September 20, 2023. Retrieved August 16, 2020. "HAPLR 100 for 1999 to 2006". Hennen's American Public Library Ratings. 1999–2006. Archived from the original on March 23, 2009. Retrieved May 3, 2007. "About Us" (in Japanese). Columbus Japanese Language School. Archived from the original on February 11, 2022. Retrieved February 11, 2022. (3) 借用校 * Marysville市教育委員会（貸主） "補習校の歩み". Columbus Japanese Language School. Archived from the original on February 11, 2022. Retrieved February 11, 2022. 2003年4月から2019年3月まで、[...]の移転が必要となった。 - Granby Elementary (グランビー小) and McCord Middle (マッコード中) are in the city of Columbus and in the Worthington school district Archived February 11, 2022, at the Wayback Machine. "Audience is Everything®" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on September 9, 2016. Retrieved September 8, 2016. Arbitron Radio Market Rankings: Spring 2010 Archived October 16, 2010, at the Wayback Machine, Arbitron, Spring 2010, Retrieved May 2, 2010 "Columbus Hospitals - General, Medical & Surgical". Columbus Chamber of Commerce. August 12, 2020. Archived from the original on September 27, 2021. Retrieved July 9, 2021. "From infants to elders, Columbus hospitals receive highest marks". August 12, 2020. Archived from the original on July 9, 2021. Retrieved July 9, 2021. "Best Hospitals in Columbus, OH - US News Best Hospitals". Archived from the original on April 2, 2011. "Local Utility Companies". Relocatecolumbus.com. Archived from the original on July 12, 2021. Retrieved November 20, 2021. Elliott, Susannah (July 28, 2015). "What is the longest, continuously running street in Columbus?". The Columbus Dispatch. Archived from the original on July 9, 2020. Retrieved May 21, 2020. Moore, p. 127 "The Start of Broad and High". The Columbus Dispatch. October 14, 1962. p. 163. Archived from the original on September 20, 2023. Retrieved October 23, 2021. Federal Writers' Project employees (1946). The Ohio Guide (3rd ed.). Oxford University Press. p. 246. ISBN 9781603540346. Retrieved April 27, 2020. "Broad Street Bridge". Ohio National Road Association. August 26, 2015. Archived from the original on October 26, 2019. Retrieved October 26, 2019. "Main Street Bridge: Steel Structure Makes Dramatic Visual Impact on Downtown Columbus Skyline". Downtown Columbus. Archived from the original on January 6, 2009. Retrieved August 6, 2010. The Columbus Dispatch (July 2, 2012). "Fireworks spectators first to use Rich Street bridge | The Columbus Dispatch". Dispatch.com. Archived from the original on January 20, 2013. Retrieved March 15, 2013. "Rich Street Bridge Replacement" (PDF). City of Columbus. Archived from the original (PDF) on December 22, 2009. Retrieved August 6, 2010. "Regional Airports economic impact study, Wilbur Smith Associates, Inc., January 2005, Chap 1 pp2-4" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on January 20, 2013. Retrieved July 5, 2012. Columbus Dispatch, February 26, 2012: "Can't get there from here (At least, not without a layover"), pp. D1-2 (By Steve Wartenberg) "75 Years of Flight in Columbus". Port Columbus International Airport. February 5, 2005. Archived from the original on February 5, 2005. Retrieved December 26, 2022. Allaz, Camille (March 2005). History of Air Cargo and Airmail from the 18th Century. Google Consultant. ISBN 978-0-9548896-0-9. Archived from the original on September 20, 2023. Retrieved September 6, 2015. Lyon, C.C. (March 30, 1919). "Six Columbus, O., Airmen Shot Down 42 Hun Planes". The Washington Herald. Washington, DC. Archived from the original on September 20, 2023. Retrieved August 10, 2015 – via Newspapers.com. "Spirit of Columbus - Ohio History Central". ohiohistorycentral.org. Archived from the original on December 26, 2022. Retrieved December 26, 2022. "2019 Annual Report". Central Ohio Transit Authority. 2019. Archived from the original on March 23, 2020. Retrieved March 23, 2020. "Archived copy". Archived from the original on April 26, 2015. Retrieved September 9, 2016.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) "Columbus Union Station". October 13, 2006. Archived from the original on October 28, 2006. "Metropolitan Areas Served by Amtrak". November 23, 2006. Archived from the original on June 24, 2009. Retrieved May 2, 2009. "Phoenix debuts light-rail system". December 27, 2008. Archived from the original on December 31, 2008. "Columbus (OH) Bikeways Plan". Altaprojects.net. Archived from the original on February 2, 2009. Retrieved May 5, 2009. "Public Service Home". publicservice.columbus.gov. Archived from the original on January 20, 2013. Retrieved July 6, 2012. Reed, Michael. "About Us | Yay Bikes! | Columbus, Oh". Yay Bikes!. Archived from the original on August 5, 2012. Retrieved July 5, 2012. "Third Hand Bike Co-Op". Archived from the original on June 25, 2017. Retrieved June 22, 2017. WCRS LP Columbus Community Radio (November 15, 2008). "Cranksters | WCRS LP Columbus Community Radio". Wcrsfm.org. Archived from the original on April 27, 2009. Retrieved May 5, 2009. "Critical Mass Columbus". Comacrew.homestead.com. Archived from the original on March 29, 2009. Retrieved May 5, 2009. "Meet CoGo Bike Share". www.cogobikeshare.com. Archived from the original on September 15, 2016. Retrieved September 7, 2016. Austen, Ian (January 9, 2015). "The Uphill Push to Save a Bike-Share Pioneer". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on March 5, 2017. Retrieved September 7, 2016. "Bird electric scooters now in Columbus: What are they, are they legal and could they come to Cleveland?". cleveland.com. Archived from the original on October 17, 2018. Retrieved October 17, 2018. "Car Ownership in U.S. Cities Data and Map". Governing. Archived from the original on May 11, 2018. Retrieved May 4, 2018. "Our Sister Cities". Sister Cities International. Archived from the original on October 22, 2021. Retrieved October 22, 2021. Franken, Harry (1991). Columbus: The Discovery City. Windsor Publications. p. 22. ISBN 0-89781-397-9. "Columbus, Ohio, Takes Down Statue Of Christopher Columbus". WMOT. July 2020. Archived from the original on July 24, 2020. Retrieved July 24, 2020. Lentz, Ed (2003). Columbus: The Story of a City. The Making of America Series. Arcadia Publishing. ISBN 9780738524290. OCLC 52740866. Moore, Opha (1930). History of Franklin County, Ohio. Historical Publishing Company. Cole, Charles Chester (2001). A Fragile Capital: Identity and the Early Years of Columbus, Ohio. Columbus, Ohio: Ohio State University Press. ISBN 9780814208533. Hunker, Henry L. (2000). Columbus, Ohio: A Personal Geography. Ohio State University Press. ISBN 9780814208571. columbus, ohio: a personal geography. Columbus, Ohio at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Travel information from Wikivoyage Official website "Columbus, Ohio". C-SPAN Cities Tour. A program that features the history of and literary life in Columbus.