Jack Roosevelt Robinson (January 31, 1919 – October 24, 1972) was an American professional baseball player who became the first African American to play in Major League Baseball (MLB) in the modern era. Robinson broke the color line when he started at first base for the Brooklyn Dodgers on April 15, 1947. The Dodgers signing Robinson heralded the end of racial segregation in professional baseball that had relegated black players to the Negro leagues since the 1880s. Robinson was inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1962. Born in Cairo, Georgia, Robinson was raised in Pasadena, California. A four-sport student athlete at Pasadena Junior College and the University of California, Los Angeles, he was better known for football than he was for baseball, becoming a star college player with the UCLA Bruins football team. Following his college career, Robinson was drafted for service during World War II but was court martialed for refusing to sit at the back of a segregated Army bus, eventually being honorably discharged. Afterwards, he signed with the Kansas City Monarchs of the Negro leagues from where he caught the eye of Branch Rickey, general manager of the Brooklyn Dodgers, who thought he would be the perfect candidate for breaking the color line in Major League Baseball. During his 10-year MLB career, Robinson won the inaugural Rookie of the Year Award in 1947, was an All-Star for six consecutive seasons from 1949 through 1954, and won the National League (NL) Most Valuable Player Award in 1949—the first black player so honored. Robinson played in six World Series and contributed to the Dodgers' 1955 World Series championship. In 1997, Major League Baseball retired his uniform No. 42 across all major league teams; he was the first professional athlete in any sport to be so honored. MLB also adopted a new annual tradition, "Jackie Robinson Day", for the first time on April 15, 2004, on which every player on every team wears No. 42. Robinson's character, his use of nonviolence, and his talent challenged the traditional basis of segregation that had then marked many other aspects of American life. He influenced the culture of and contributed significantly to the civil rights movement. Robinson also was the first black television analyst in MLB and the first black vice president of a major American corporation, Chock full o'Nuts. In the 1960s, he helped establish the Freedom National Bank, an African-American-owned financial institution based in Harlem, New York. After his death in 1972, Robinson was posthumously awarded the Congressional Gold Medal and Presidential Medal of Freedom in recognition of his achievements on and off the field. Jack Roosevelt Robinson was born on January 31, 1919, into a family of sharecroppers in Cairo, Georgia. He was the youngest of five children born to Mallie (née McGriff) and Jerry Robinson, after siblings Edgar, Frank, Matthew (nicknamed "Mack"), and Willa Mae. His middle name honored former President Theodore Roosevelt, who died 25 days before Robinson was born. After Robinson's father left the family in 1920, they moved to Pasadena, California. The extended Robinson family established itself on a residential plot containing two small houses at 121 Pepper Street in Pasadena. Robinson's mother worked various odd jobs to support the family. Growing up in relative poverty in an otherwise affluent community, Robinson and his minority friends were excluded from many recreational opportunities. As a result, Robinson joined a neighborhood gang, but his friend Carl Anderson persuaded him to abandon it. In 1935, Robinson graduated from Washington Junior High School and enrolled at John Muir Technical High School. Recognizing his athletic talents, Robinson's older brothers, Frank and Mack (himself an accomplished track and field athlete and silver medalist behind Jesse Owens in the 200 meters at the Berlin 1936 Summer Olympics) inspired Jackie to pursue his interest in sports. At Muir Tech, Robinson played numerous sports at the varsity level and lettered in four of them: football, basketball, track and field, and baseball. He played shortstop and catcher on the baseball team, quarterback on the football team, and guard on the basketball team. With the track and field squad, he won awards in the broad jump. He was also a member of the tennis team. In 1936, Robinson won the junior boys singles championship in the annual Pacific Coast Negro Tennis Tournament and earned a place on the Pomona annual baseball tournament all-star team, which included future Hall of Famers Ted Williams and Bob Lemon. In late January 1937, the Pasadena Star-News newspaper reported that Robinson "for two years has been the outstanding athlete at Muir, starring in football, basketball, track, baseball, and tennis." After Muir, Robinson attended Pasadena Junior College (PJC), where he continued his athletic career by participating in basketball, football, baseball, and track. On the football team, he played quarterback and safety. He was a shortstop and leadoff hitter for the baseball team, and he broke an American junior college broad-jump record held by his brother Mack with a jump of 25 ft. 6+1⁄2 in. on May 7, 1938. As at Muir High School, most of Jackie's teammates were white. While playing football at PJC, Robinson suffered a fractured ankle, complications from which would eventually delay his deployment status while in the military. In 1938, he was elected to the All-Southland Junior College Team for baseball and selected as the region's Most Valuable Player. That year, Robinson was one of 10 students named to the school's Order of the Mast and Dagger (Omicron Mu Delta), awarded to students performing "outstanding service to the school and whose scholastic and citizenship record is worthy of recognition." Also while at PJC, he was elected to the Lancers, a student-run police organization responsible for patrolling various school activities. An incident at PJC illustrated Robinson's impatience with authority figures he perceived as racist—a character trait that would resurface repeatedly in his life. On January 25, 1938, he was arrested after vocally disputing the detention of a black friend by police. Robinson received a two-year suspended sentence, but the incident—along with other rumored run-ins between Robinson and police—gave Robinson a reputation for combativeness in the face of racial antagonism. While at PJC, he was motivated by a preacher (the Rev. Karl Downs) to attend church on a regular basis, and Downs became a confidant for Robinson, a Christian. Toward the end of his PJC tenure, Frank Robinson (to whom Robinson felt closest among his three brothers) was killed in a motorcycle accident. The event motivated Jackie to pursue his athletic career at the nearby University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), where he could remain closer to Frank's family. After graduating from PJC in spring 1939, Robinson enrolled at UCLA, where he became the school's first athlete to win varsity letters in four sports: baseball, basketball, football, and track. He was one of four black players on the Bruins' 1939 football team; the others were Woody Strode, Kenny Washington, and Ray Bartlett. Washington, Strode, and Robinson made up three of the team's four backfield players. At a time when only a few black students played mainstream college football, this made UCLA college football's most integrated team. They went undefeated with four ties at 6–0–4. Robinson finished the season with 12.2 yards per attempt on 42 carries, which is the school football record for highest rushing yards per carry in a season as of 2022. Robinson also led the NCAA in punt return average in the 1939 and 1940 seasons. In track and field, Robinson won the 1940 NCAA championship in the long jump at 24 ft 10+1⁄4 in (7.58 m). Baseball was Robinson's "worst sport" at UCLA; he hit .097 in his only season, although in his first game he went 4-for-4 and twice stole home. While a senior at UCLA, Robinson met his future wife, Rachel Isum (b.1922), a UCLA freshman who was familiar with Robinson's athletic career at PJC. He played football as a senior, but the 1940 Bruins won only one game. In the spring, Robinson left college just shy of graduation, despite the reservations of his mother and Isum. He took a job as an assistant athletic director with the government's National Youth Administration (NYA) in Atascadero, California. After the government ceased NYA operations, Robinson traveled to Honolulu in the fall of 1941 to play football for the semi-professional, racially integrated Honolulu Bears. After a short season, Robinson returned to California in December 1941 to pursue a career as running back for the Los Angeles Bulldogs of the Pacific Coast Football League. By that time, however, the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor had taken place, which drew the United States into World War II and ended Robinson's nascent football career. In 1942, Robinson was drafted and assigned to a segregated Army cavalry unit at Fort Riley, Kansas. Having the requisite qualifications, Robinson and several other black soldiers applied for admission to an Officer Candidate School (OCS) then located at Fort Riley. Although the Army's initial July 1941 guidelines for OCS had been drafted as race-neutral, few black applicants were admitted into OCS until after subsequent directives by Army leadership. The applications of Robinson and his colleagues were delayed for several months. After protests by heavyweight boxing champion Joe Louis (then stationed at Fort Riley) and with the help of Truman Gibson (then an assistant civilian aide to the Secretary of War), the men were accepted into OCS. The experience led to a personal friendship between Robinson and Louis. Upon finishing OCS, Robinson was commissioned as a second lieutenant in January 1943. Shortly afterward, Robinson and Isum were formally engaged. After receiving his commission, Robinson was reassigned to Fort Hood, Texas, where he joined the 761st "Black Panthers" Tank Battalion. While at Fort Hood, Robinson often used his weekend leave to visit the Rev. Karl Downs, President of Sam Huston College (now Huston–Tillotson University) in nearby Austin, Texas; in California, Downs had been Robinson's pastor at Scott United Methodist Church while Robinson attended PJC. An event on July 6, 1944, derailed Robinson's military career. While awaiting results of hospital tests on the ankle he had injured in junior college, Robinson boarded an Army bus with a fellow officer's wife; although the Army had commissioned its own unsegregated bus line, the bus driver ordered Robinson to move to the back of the bus. Robinson refused. The driver backed down, but after reaching the end of the line, summoned the military police, who took Robinson into custody. When Robinson later confronted the investigating duty officer about racist questioning by the officer and his assistant, the officer recommended Robinson be court-martialed. After Robinson's commander in the 761st, Paul L. Bates, refused to authorize the legal action, Robinson was summarily transferred to the 758th Battalion—where the commander quickly consented to charge Robinson with multiple offenses, including, among other charges, public drunkenness, even though Robinson did not drink. By the time of the court-martial in August 1944, the charges against Robinson had been reduced to two counts of insubordination during questioning. Robinson was acquitted by an all-white panel of nine officers. Although his former unit, the 761st Tank Battalion, became the first black tank unit to see combat in World War II, Robinson's court-martial proceedings prohibited him from being deployed overseas, and he was never in combat. After his acquittal, he was transferred to Camp Breckinridge, Kentucky, where he served as a coach for army athletics until receiving an honorable discharge in November 1944. While there, Robinson met a former player for the Kansas City Monarchs of the Negro American League, who encouraged Robinson to write the Monarchs and ask for a tryout. Robinson took the former player's advice and wrote to Monarchs co-owner Thomas Baird. After his discharge, Robinson briefly returned to his old football club, the Los Angeles Bulldogs. Robinson then accepted an offer from his old friend and pastor Rev. Karl Downs to be the athletic director at Samuel Huston College in Austin, then of the Southwestern Athletic Conference. The job included coaching the school's basketball team for the 1944–45 season. As it was a fledgling program, few students tried out for the basketball team, and Robinson even resorted to inserting himself into the lineup for exhibition games. Although his teams were outmatched by opponents, Robinson was respected as a disciplinarian coach, and drew the admiration of, among others, Langston University basketball player Marques Haynes, a future member of the Harlem Globetrotters. In early 1945, while Robinson was at Sam Huston College, the Kansas City Monarchs sent him a written offer to play professional baseball in the Negro leagues. Robinson accepted a contract for $400 per month. Although he played well for the Monarchs, Robinson was frustrated with the experience. He had grown used to a structured playing environment in college, and the Negro leagues' disorganization and embrace of gambling interests appalled him. The hectic travel schedule also placed a burden on his relationship with Isum, with whom he could now communicate only by letter. In all, Robinson played 47 games at shortstop for the Monarchs, hitting .387 with five home runs, and registering 13 stolen bases. He also appeared in the 1945 East–West All-Star Game, going hitless in five at-bats. During the season, Robinson pursued potential major league interests. No black man had played in the major leagues since Moses Fleetwood Walker in 1884, but the Boston Red Sox nevertheless held a tryout at Fenway Park for Robinson and other black players on April 16. The tryout, however, was a farce chiefly designed to assuage the desegregationist sensibilities of powerful Boston City Councilman Isadore H. Y. Muchnick. Even with the stands limited to management, Robinson was subjected to racial epithets. He left the tryout humiliated, and more than 14 years later, in July 1959, the Red Sox became the final major league team to integrate its roster. Other teams, however, had more serious interest in signing a black ballplayer. In the mid-1940s, Branch Rickey, club president and general manager of the Brooklyn Dodgers, began to scout the Negro leagues for a possible addition to the Dodgers' roster. Rickey selected Robinson from a list of promising black players and interviewed him for possible assignment to Brooklyn's International League farm club, the Montreal Royals. Rickey was especially interested in making sure his eventual signee could withstand the inevitable racial abuse that would be directed at him. In a famous three-hour exchange on August 28, 1945, Rickey asked Robinson if he could face the racial animus without taking the bait and reacting angrily—a concern given Robinson's prior arguments with law enforcement officials at PJC and in the military. Robinson was aghast: "Are you looking for a Negro who is afraid to fight back?" Rickey replied that he needed a Negro player "with guts enough not to fight back." After obtaining a commitment from Robinson to "turn the other cheek" to racial antagonism, Rickey agreed to sign him to a contract for $600 a month, equal to $10,155 today. Rickey did not offer compensation to the Monarchs, instead believing all Negro league players were free agents due to the contracts not containing a reserve clause. Among those with whom Rickey discussed prospects was Wendell Smith, writer for the black weekly Pittsburgh Courier, who, according to Cleveland Indians owner and team president Bill Veeck, "influenced Rickey to take Jack Robinson, for which he's never completely gotten credit." Although he required Robinson to keep the arrangement a secret for the time being, Rickey committed to formally signing Robinson before November 1, 1945. On October 23, it was publicly announced that Robinson would be assigned to the Royals for the 1946 season. On the same day, with representatives of the Royals and Dodgers present, Robinson formally signed his contract with the Royals. In what was later referred to as "The Noble Experiment", Robinson was the first black baseball player in the International League since the 1880s. He was not necessarily the best player in the Negro leagues, and black talents Satchel Paige and Josh Gibson were upset when Robinson was selected first. Larry Doby, who broke the color line in the American League the same year as Robinson, said, "One of the things that was disappointing and disheartening to a lot of the black players at the time was that Jack was not the best player. The best was Josh Gibson. I think that's one of the reasons why Josh died so early—he was heartbroken." Rickey's offer allowed Robinson to leave behind the Monarchs and their grueling bus rides, and he went home to Pasadena. That September, he signed with Chet Brewer's Kansas City Royals, a post-season barnstorming team in the California Winter League. Later that off-season, he briefly toured South America with another barnstorming team, while his fiancée Isum pursued nursing opportunities in New York City. On February 10, 1946, Robinson and Isum were married by their old friend, the Rev. Karl Downs. In 1946, Robinson arrived at Daytona Beach, Florida, for spring training with the Montreal Royals of the Class AAA International League. Clay Hopper, the manager of the Royals, asked Rickey to assign Robinson to any other Dodger affiliate, but Rickey refused. Robinson's presence was controversial in racially segregated Florida. He was not allowed to stay with his white teammates at the team hotel, and instead lodged at the home of Joe and Dufferin Harris, a politically active African American couple who introduced the Robinsons to civil rights activist Mary McLeod Bethune. Since the Dodgers organization did not own a spring training facility, scheduling was subject to the whim of area localities, several of which turned down any event involving Robinson or Johnny Wright, another black player whom Rickey had signed to the Dodgers' organization in January. In Sanford, Florida, the police chief threatened to cancel games if Robinson and Wright did not cease training activities there; as a result, Robinson was sent back to Daytona Beach. In Jacksonville, the stadium was padlocked shut without warning on game day, by order of the city's Parks and Public Property director. In DeLand, a scheduled day game was postponed, ostensibly because of issues with the stadium's electrical lighting. After much lobbying of local officials by Rickey himself, the Royals were allowed to host a game involving Robinson in Daytona Beach. Robinson made his Royals debut at Daytona Beach's City Island Ballpark on March 17, 1946, in an exhibition game against the team's parent club, the Dodgers. Robinson thus became the first black player to openly play for a minor league team against a major league team since the de facto baseball color line had been implemented in the 1880s. Later in spring training, after some less-than-stellar performances, Robinson was shifted from shortstop to second base, allowing him to make shorter throws to first base. Robinson's performance soon rebounded. On April 18, 1946, Roosevelt Stadium hosted the Jersey City Giants' season opener against the Montreal Royals, marking the professional debut of the Royals' Jackie Robinson and the first time the color barrier had been broken in a game between two minor league clubs. Pitching against Robinson was Warren Sandel who had played against him when they both lived in California. During Robinson's first at bat, the Jersey City catcher, Dick Bouknight, demanded that Sandel throw at Robinson, but Sandel refused. Although Sandel induced Robinson to ground out at his first at bat, Robinson ended up with four hits in his five at bats; his first hit was a three-run home run in the game's third inning. He also scored four runs, drove in three, and stole two bases in the Royals' 14–1 victory. Robinson proceeded to lead the International League that season with a .349 batting average and .985 fielding percentage, and he was named the league's Most Valuable Player. Although he often faced hostility while on road trips (the Royals were forced to cancel a Southern exhibition tour, for example), the Montreal fan base enthusiastically supported Robinson. Whether fans supported or opposed it, Robinson's presence on the field was a boon to attendance; more than one million people went to games involving Robinson in 1946, an astounding figure by International League standards. In the fall of 1946, following the baseball season, Robinson returned home to California and briefly played professional basketball for the short-lived Los Angeles Red Devils. In 1947, the Dodgers called Robinson up to the major leagues six days before the start of the season. With Eddie Stanky entrenched at second base for the Dodgers, Robinson played his initial major league season as a first baseman. Robinson made his debut as a Dodger wearing uniform number 42 on April 11, 1947, in a preseason exhibition game against the New York Yankees at Ebbets Field with 24,237 in attendance. On April 15, Robinson made his major league debut at the relatively advanced age of 28 at Ebbets Field before a crowd of 26,623 spectators, more than 14,000 of whom were black. Although he failed to get a base hit, he walked and scored a run in the Dodgers' 5–3 victory. Robinson became the first player since 1884 to openly break the major league baseball color line. Black fans began flocking to see the Dodgers when they came to town, abandoning their Negro league teams. Robinson's promotion met a generally positive, although mixed, reception among newspapers and white major league players. However, racial tension existed in the Dodger clubhouse. Some Dodger players insinuated they would sit out rather than play alongside Robinson. The brewing mutiny ended when Dodgers management took a stand for Robinson. Manager Leo Durocher informed the team, "I do not care if the guy is yellow or black, or if he has stripes like a fuckin' zebra. I'm the manager of this team, and I say he plays. What's more, I say he can make us all rich. And if any of you cannot use the money, I will see that you are all traded." Robinson was also derided by opposing teams. According to a press report, the St. Louis Cardinals threatened to strike if Robinson played and spread the walkout across the entire National League. Existence of the plot was said to have been leaked by the Cardinals' team physician, Robert Hyland, to a friend, the New York Herald Tribune's Rutherford "Rud" Rennie. The reporter, concerned about protecting Hyland's anonymity and job, in turn leaked it to his Tribune colleague and editor, Stanley Woodward, whose own subsequent reporting with other sources protected Hyland. The Woodward article made national headlines. After it was published, National League President Ford Frick and Baseball Commissioner Happy Chandler let it be known that any striking players would be suspended. "You will find that the friends that you think you have in the press box will not support you, that you will be outcasts," Frick was quoted as saying. "I do not care if half the league strikes. Those who do it will encounter quick retribution. All will be suspended and I don't care if it wrecks the National League for five years. This is the United States of America and one citizen has as much right to play as another." Woodward's article received the E. P. Dutton Award in 1947 for Best Sports Reporting. The Cardinals players denied that they were planning to strike, and Woodward later told author Roger Kahn that Frick was his true source; writer Warren Corbett said that Frick's speech "never happened". Regardless, the report led to Robinson receiving increased support from the sports media. Even The Sporting News, a publication that had backed the color line, came out against the idea of a strike. Robinson nonetheless became the target of rough physical play by opponents (particularly the Cardinals). At one time, he received a seven-inch gash in his leg from Enos Slaughter. On April 22, 1947, during a game between the Dodgers and the Philadelphia Phillies, Phillies players and manager Ben Chapman called Robinson a "nigger" from their dugout and yelled that he should "go back to the cotton fields". Rickey later recalled that Chapman "did more than anybody to unite the Dodgers. When he poured out that string of unconscionable abuse, he solidified and united thirty men." However, Robinson received significant encouragement from several major league players. Robinson named Lee "Jeep" Handley, who played for the Phillies at the time, as the first opposing player to wish him well. Dodgers teammate Pee Wee Reese once came to Robinson's defense with the famous line, "You can hate a man for many reasons. Color is not one of them." In 1947 or 1948, Reese is said to have put his arm around Robinson in response to fans who shouted racial slurs at Robinson before a game in Boston or Cincinnati. A statue by sculptor William Behrends, unveiled at KeySpan Park on November 1, 2005, depicts Reese with his arm around Robinson. Jewish baseball star Hank Greenberg, who had to deal with ethnic epithets during his career, also encouraged Robinson. Following an incident where Greenberg collided with Robinson at first base, he "whispered a few words into Robinson's ear", which Robinson later characterized as "words of encouragement". Greenberg had advised him to overcome his critics by defeating them in games. Robinson also talked frequently with Larry Doby, who endured his own hardships since becoming the first black player in the American League with the Cleveland Indians, as the two spoke to each other via telephone throughout the season. Robinson finished the season having played in 151 games for the Dodgers, with a batting average of .297, an on-base percentage of .383, and a .427 slugging percentage. He had 175 hits (scoring 125 runs) including 31 doubles, 5 triples, and 12 home runs, driving in 48 runs for the year. Robinson led the league in sacrifice hits, with 28, and in stolen bases, with 29. His cumulative performance earned him the inaugural Major League Baseball Rookie of the Year Award (separate National and American League Rookie of the Year honors were not awarded until 1949). That year, the Brooklyn Dodgers won the National League pennant and went on to face the Yankees in the 1947 World Series. Robinson became the first black player to play in the World Series. He appeared in all seven games, with the Dodgers ultimately losing in Game 7. Following Stanky's trade to the Boston Braves in March 1948, Robinson took over second base, where he logged a .980 fielding percentage that year (second in the National League at the position, fractionally behind Stanky). Robinson had a batting average of .296 and 22 stolen bases for the season. In a 12–7 win against the St. Louis Cardinals on August 29, 1948, he hit for the cycle—a home run, a triple, a double, and a single in the same game. The Dodgers briefly moved into first place in the National League in late August 1948, but they ultimately finished third as the Braves went on to win the pennant and lose to the Cleveland Indians in the World Series. Racial pressure on Robinson eased in 1948 when a number of other black players entered the major leagues. Larry Doby (who broke the color barrier in the American League on July 5, 1947, just 11 weeks after Robinson) and Satchel Paige played for the Cleveland Indians, and the Dodgers had three other black players besides Robinson. In February 1948, he signed a $12,500 contract (equal to $158,518 today) with the Dodgers; while a significant amount, this was less than Robinson made in the off-season from a vaudeville tour, where he answered pre-set baseball questions and a speaking tour of the South. Between the tours, he underwent surgery on his right ankle. Because of his off-season activities, Robinson reported to training camp 30 pounds (14 kg) overweight. He lost the weight during training camp, but dieting left him weak at the plate. In 1948, Wendell Smith's book, Jackie Robinson: My Own Story, was released. In the spring of 1949, Robinson turned to Hall of Famer George Sisler, working as an advisor to the Dodgers, for batting help. At Sisler's suggestion, Robinson spent hours at a batting tee, learning to hit the ball to right field. Sisler taught Robinson to anticipate a fastball, on the theory that it is easier to subsequently adjust to a slower curveball. Robinson also noted that "Sisler showed me how to stop lunging, how to check my swing until the last fraction of a second". The tutelage helped Robinson raise his batting average from .296 in 1948 to .342 in 1949. In addition to his improved batting average, Robinson stole 37 bases that season, was second place in the league for both doubles and triples, and registered 124 runs batted in with 122 runs scored. For the performance Robinson earned the Most Valuable Player Award for the National League. Baseball fans also voted Robinson as the starting second baseman for the 1949 All-Star Game — the first All-Star Game to include black players. That year, a song about Robinson by Buddy Johnson, "Did You See Jackie Robinson Hit That Ball?", reached number 13 on the charts; Count Basie recorded a famous version. Ultimately, the Dodgers won the National League pennant, but lost in five games to the New York Yankees in the 1949 World Series. Summer 1949 brought an unwanted distraction for Robinson. In July, he was called to testify before the United States House of Representatives' Committee on Un-American Activities (HUAC) concerning statements made that April by black athlete and actor Paul Robeson. Robinson was reluctant to testify, but he eventually agreed to do so, fearing it might negatively affect his career if he declined. In 1950, Robinson led the National League in double plays made by a second baseman with 133. His salary that year was the highest any Dodger had been paid to that point: $35,000 ($443,237 in 2023 dollars). He finished the year with 99 runs scored, a .328 batting average, and 12 stolen bases. The year saw the release of a film biography of Robinson's life, The Jackie Robinson Story, in which Robinson played himself, and actress Ruby Dee played Rachel "Rae" (Isum) Robinson. The project had been previously delayed when the film's producers refused to accede to demands of two Hollywood studios that the movie include scenes of Robinson being tutored in baseball by a white man. The New York Times wrote that Robinson, "doing that rare thing of playing himself in the picture's leading role, displays a calm assurance and composure that might be envied by many a Hollywood star." Robinson's Hollywood exploits, however, did not sit well with Dodgers co-owner Walter O'Malley, who referred to Robinson as "Rickey's prima donna". In late 1950, Rickey's contract as the Dodgers' team President expired. Weary of constant disagreements with O'Malley, and with no hope of being re-appointed as President of the Dodgers, Rickey cashed out his one-quarter financial interest in the team, leaving O'Malley in full control of the franchise. Rickey shortly thereafter became general manager of the Pittsburgh Pirates. Robinson was disappointed at the turn of events and wrote a sympathetic letter to Rickey, whom he considered a father figure, stating, "Regardless of what happens to me in the future, it all can be placed on what you have done and, believe me, I appreciate it." Before the 1951 season, O'Malley reportedly offered Robinson the job of manager of the Montreal Royals, effective at the end of Robinson's playing career. O'Malley was quoted in the Montreal Standard as saying, "Jackie told me that he would be both delighted and honored to tackle this managerial post"—although reports differed as to whether a position was ever formally offered. During the 1951 season, Robinson led the National League in double plays made by a second baseman for the second year in a row, with 137. He also kept the Dodgers in contention for the 1951 pennant. During the last game of the regular season, in the 13th inning, he had a hit to tie the game and then hit a home run in the 14th inning, which proved to be the winning margin. This forced a best-of-three playoff series against the crosstown rival New York Giants. Despite Robinson's regular-season heroics, on October 3, 1951, the Dodgers lost the pennant on Bobby Thomson's famous home run, known as the Shot Heard 'Round the World. Overcoming his dejection, Robinson dutifully observed Thomson's feet to ensure he touched all the bases. Dodgers sportscaster Vin Scully later noted that the incident showed "how much of a competitor Robinson was." He finished the season with 106 runs scored, a batting average of .335, and 25 stolen bases. Robinson had what was an average year for him in 1952. He finished the year with 104 runs, a .308 batting average, and 24 stolen bases. He did, however, record a career-high on-base percentage of .436. The Dodgers improved on their performance from the year before, winning the National League pennant before losing the 1952 World Series to the New York Yankees in seven games. That year, on the television show Youth Wants to Know, Robinson challenged the Yankees' general manager, George Weiss, on the racial record of his team, which had yet to sign a black player. Sportswriter Dick Young, whom Robinson had described as a "bigot", said, "If there was one flaw in Jackie, it was the common one. He believed that everything unpleasant that happened to him happened because of his blackness." The 1952 season was the last year Robinson was an everyday starter at second base. Afterward, Robinson played variously at first, second, and third bases, shortstop, and in the outfield, with Jim Gilliam, another black player, taking over everyday second base duties. Robinson's interests began to shift toward the prospect of managing a major league team. He had hoped to gain experience by managing in the Puerto Rican Winter League, but according to the New York Post, Commissioner Happy Chandler denied the request. In 1953, Robinson had 109 runs, a .329 batting average, and 17 steals, leading the Dodgers to another National League pennant (and another World Series loss to the Yankees, this time in six games). Robinson's continued success spawned a string of death threats. He was not dissuaded, however, from addressing racial issues publicly. That year, he served as editor for Our Sports magazine, a periodical focusing on Negro sports issues; contributions to the magazine included an article on golf course segregation by Robinson's old friend Joe Louis. Robinson also openly criticized segregated hotels and restaurants that served the Dodger organization; a number of these establishments integrated as a result, including the five-star Chase Park Hotel in St. Louis. In 1954, Robinson had 62 runs scored, a .311 batting average, and 7 steals. His best day at the plate was on June 17, when he hit two home runs and two doubles. The following autumn, Robinson won his only championship when the Dodgers defeated the New York Yankees in the 1955 World Series. Although the team enjoyed ultimate success, 1955 was the worst year of Robinson's individual career. He hit .256 and stole only 12 bases. The Dodgers tried Robinson in the outfield and as a third baseman, both because of his diminishing abilities and because Gilliam was established at second base. Robinson, then 36 years old, missed 49 games and did not play in Game 7 of the World Series. He missed the game because manager Walter Alston decided to play Gilliam at second and Don Hoak at third base. That season, the Dodgers' Don Newcombe became the first black major league pitcher to win twenty games in a year. In 1956, Robinson had 61 runs scored, a .275 batting average, and 12 steals. By then, he had begun to exhibit the effects of diabetes and to lose interest in the prospect of playing or managing professional baseball. Robinson ended his major league career when he struck out to end Game 7 of the 1956 World Series. After the season, the Dodgers traded Robinson to the arch-rival New York Giants for Dick Littlefield and $35,000 cash (equal to $392,240 today). The trade, however, was never completed; unbeknownst to the Dodgers, Robinson had already agreed with the president of Chock full o'Nuts to quit baseball and become an executive with the company. Since Robinson had sold exclusive rights to any retirement story to Look magazine two years previously, his retirement decision was revealed through the magazine, instead of through the Dodgers organization. Robinson's major league debut brought an end to approximately sixty years of segregation in professional baseball, known as the baseball color line. After World War II, several other forces were also leading the country toward increased equality for blacks, including their accelerated migration to the North, where their political clout grew, and President Harry Truman's desegregation of the military in 1948. Robinson's breaking of the baseball color line and his professional success symbolized these broader changes and demonstrated that the fight for equality was more than simply a political matter. Civil rights movement leader Martin Luther King Jr. said that he was "a legend and a symbol in his own time", and that he "challenged the dark skies of intolerance and frustration." According to historian Doris Kearns Goodwin, Robinson's "efforts were a monumental step in the civil-rights revolution in America ... [His] accomplishments allowed black and white Americans to be more respectful and open to one another and more appreciative of everyone's abilities." Beginning his major league career at the relatively advanced age of 28, he played only ten seasons from 1947 to 1956, all of them for the Brooklyn Dodgers. During his career, the Dodgers played in six World Series, and Robinson himself played in six All-Star Games. In 1999, he was one of 30 players named to the Major League Baseball All-Century Team. Robinson's career is generally considered to mark the beginning of the post–"long ball" era in baseball, in which a reliance on raw power-hitting gave way to balanced offensive strategies that used footspeed to create runs through aggressive baserunning. Robinson exhibited the combination of hitting ability and speed which exemplified the new era. He scored more than 100 runs in six of his ten seasons (averaging more than 110 runs from 1947 to 1953), had a .311 career batting average, a .409 career on-base percentage, a .474 slugging percentage, and substantially more walks than strikeouts (740 to 291). Robinson was one of only two players during the span of 1947–56 to accumulate at least 125 steals while registering a slugging percentage over .425 (Minnie Miñoso was the other). He accumulated 197 stolen bases in total, including 19 steals of home. None of the latter were double steals (in which a player stealing home is assisted by a player stealing another base at the same time). Robinson has been referred to by author David Falkner as "the father of modern base-stealing". Historical statistical analysis indicates Robinson was an outstanding fielder throughout his ten years in the major leagues and at virtually every position he played. After playing his rookie season at first base, Robinson spent most of his career as a second baseman. He led the league in fielding among second basemen in 1950 and 1951. Toward the end of his career, he played about 2,000 innings at third base and about 1,175 innings in the outfield, excelling at both. Assessing himself, Robinson said, "I'm not concerned with your liking or disliking me ... all I ask is that you respect me as a human being." Regarding Robinson's qualities on the field, Leo Durocher said, "Ya want a guy that comes to play. This guy didn't just come to play. He came to beat ya. He came to stuff the goddamn bat right up your ass." Robinson portrayed himself in the 1950 motion picture The Jackie Robinson Story. Other portrayals include: John Lafayette, in the 1978 ABC television special "A Home Run for Love" (broadcast as an ABC Afterschool Special). David Alan Grier, in the 1981 Broadway production of the musical The First. Michael-David Gordon, in the 1989 Off-Broadway production of the musical Play to Win. Sterling Macer Jr. in the 1989 Edward Schmidt play Mr. Rickey Calls a Meeting, a fictionalized version of the meeting in which Branch Rickey offered Robinson a major-league contract. Andre Braugher, in the 1990 TNT television movie The Court-Martial of Jackie Robinson. Blair Underwood, in the 1996 HBO television movie Soul of the Game. Antonio Todd in "Colors", a 2005 episode of the CBS television series Cold Case. Chadwick Boseman, in the 2013 motion picture 42. Robert Hamilton in "Sundown", a 2020 episode of the HBO television series Lovecraft Country. Robinson was also the subject of a 2016 PBS documentary, Jackie Robinson, which was directed by Ken Burns and features Jamie Foxx doing voice-over as Robinson. Robinson once told future Hall of Fame inductee Hank Aaron that "the game of baseball is great, but the greatest thing is what you do after your career is over." Robinson retired from baseball at age 37 on January 5, 1957. Later that year, after he complained of numerous physical ailments, he was diagnosed with diabetes, a disease that also afflicted his brothers. Although Robinson adopted an insulin injection regimen, the state of medicine at the time could not prevent the continued deterioration of Robinson's physical condition from the disease. In October 1959, Robinson entered the Greenville Municipal Airport's whites-only waiting room. Airport police asked Robinson to leave, but he refused. At a National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) speech in Greenville, South Carolina, Robinson urged "complete freedom" and encouraged black citizens to vote and to protest their second-class citizenship. The following January, approximately 1,000 people marched on New Year's Day to the airport, which was desegregated shortly thereafter. In his first year of eligibility for the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1962, Robinson encouraged voters to consider only his on-field qualifications, rather than his cultural impact on the game. He was elected on the first ballot, becoming the first black player inducted into the Cooperstown museum. In 1965, Robinson served as an analyst for ABC's Major League Baseball Game of the Week telecasts, the first black person to do so. In 1966, Robinson was hired as general manager for the short-lived Brooklyn Dodgers of the Continental Football League. In 1972, he served as a part-time commentator on Montreal Expos telecasts. On June 4, 1972, the Dodgers retired his uniform number, 42, alongside those of Roy Campanella (39) and Sandy Koufax (32). From 1957 to 1964, Robinson was the vice president for personnel at Chock full o'Nuts; he was the first black person to serve as vice president of a major American corporation. Robinson always considered his business career as advancing the cause of black people in commerce and industry. He also chaired the NAACP's million-dollar Freedom Fund Drive in 1957, and served on the organization's board until 1967. In 1964, he helped found, with Harlem businessman Dunbar McLaurin, Freedom National Bank—a black-owned and operated commercial bank based in Harlem. He also served as the bank's first chairman of the board. In 1970, Robinson established the Jackie Robinson Construction Company to build housing for low-income families. Robinson was active in politics throughout his post-baseball life. He identified himself as a political independent, although he held conservative opinions on several issues, including the Vietnam War (he once wrote to Martin Luther King Jr. to defend the Johnson Administration's military policy). After supporting Richard Nixon in his 1960 presidential race against John F. Kennedy, Robinson later praised Kennedy effusively for his stance on civil rights. Robinson was angered by the 1964 presidential election candidacy of conservative Republican Senator Barry Goldwater of Arizona, who had opposed the Civil Rights Act of 1964. He became one of six national directors for Nelson Rockefeller's unsuccessful campaign to be nominated as the Republican candidate for the election. After the party nominated Goldwater instead, Robinson left the party's convention commenting that he now had "a better understanding of how it must have felt to be a Jew in Hitler's Germany". He later became special assistant for community affairs when Rockefeller was re-elected governor of New York in 1966 and in 1971 was appointed to the New York State Athletic Commission by Rockefeller. In 1968, he broke with the Republican party and supported Hubert Humphrey against Nixon in that year's presidential election. Robinson protested against the major leagues' ongoing lack of minority managers and central office personnel, and he turned down an invitation to appear in an old-timers' game at Yankee Stadium in 1969. He made his final public appearance on October 15, 1972, nine days before his death, throwing the ceremonial first pitch before Game 2 of the World Series at Riverfront Stadium in Cincinnati. He gratefully accepted a plaque honoring the twenty-fifth anniversary of his MLB debut, but also commented, "I'm going to be tremendously more pleased and more proud when I look at that third base coaching line one day and see a black face managing in baseball." This wish was only fulfilled after Robinson's death: following the 1974 season, the Cleveland Indians gave their managerial post to Frank Robinson (no relation to Jackie), a Hall of Fame-bound player who would go on to manage three other teams. Despite the success of these two Robinsons and other black players, the number of African-American players in Major League Baseball has declined since the 1970s. After Robinson's retirement from baseball, his wife Rachel Robinson pursued a career in academic nursing. She became an assistant professor at the Yale School of Nursing and director of nursing at the Connecticut Mental Health Center. She also served on the board of the Freedom National Bank until it closed in 1990. She and Jackie had three children: Jackie Robinson Jr. (1946–1971), Sharon Robinson (b. 1950), and David Robinson (b. 1952). Robinson's eldest son, Jackie Robinson Jr., had emotional trouble during his childhood and entered special education at an early age. He enlisted in the Army in search of a disciplined environment, served in the Vietnam War, and was wounded in action on November 19, 1965. After his discharge, he struggled with drug problems. Robinson Jr. eventually completed the treatment program at Daytop Village in Seymour, Connecticut, and became a counselor at the institution. On June 17, 1971, he was killed in an automobile accident at age 24. The experience with his son's drug addiction turned Robinson Sr. into an avid anti-drug crusader toward the end of his life. Robinson did not outlive his son by very long. In 1968, he suffered a heart attack. Complications from heart disease and diabetes weakened Robinson and made him almost blind by middle age. On October 24, 1972, Robinson died of a heart attack at his home at 95 Cascade Road in North Stamford, Connecticut; he was 53 years old. Robinson's funeral service on October 27, 1972, at Upper Manhattan's Riverside Church in Morningside Heights, attracted 2,500 mourners. Many of his former teammates, other famous baseball players, and basketball star Bill Russell served as pallbearers, and the Rev. Jesse Jackson gave the eulogy. Tens of thousands of people lined the subsequent procession route to Robinson's interment site at Cypress Hills Cemetery in Brooklyn, where he was buried next to his son Jackie and mother-in-law Zellee Isum. Twenty-five years after Robinson's death, the Interboro Parkway was renamed the Jackie Robinson Parkway in his memory. This parkway bisects the cemetery in close proximity to Robinson's gravesite. After Robinson's death, his widow founded the Jackie Robinson Foundation, and she remains an officer as of 2024. On April 15, 2008, she announced that in 2010 the foundation would open a museum devoted to Jackie in Lower Manhattan. Robinson's daughter, Sharon, became a midwife, educator, director of educational programming for MLB, and the author of two books about her father. His youngest son, David, who has ten children, is a coffee grower and social activist in Tanzania. According to a poll conducted in 1947, Robinson was the second most popular man in the country, behind Bing Crosby. In 1999, he was named by Time on its list of the 100 most influential people of the 20th century. Robinson was ranked No. 44 on The Sporting News list of "Baseball's 100 Greatest Players" in 1999. That same year, he was one of 30 players elected to the Major League Baseball All-Century Team. In 2020, The Athletic ranked Robinson at number 42 on its "Baseball 100" list, complied by sportswriter Joe Posnanski. Baseball writer Bill James, in The New Bill James Historical Baseball Abstract, ranked Robinson as the 32nd greatest player of all time strictly on the basis of his performance on the field, noting that he was one of the top players in the league throughout his career. Robinson was among the 25 charter members of UCLA's Athletics Hall of Fame in 1984. In 2002, Molefi Kete Asante included Robinson on his list of 100 Greatest African Americans. Robinson has also been honored by the United States Postal Service on three separate postage stamps, in 1982, 1999, and 2000. The City of Pasadena has recognized Robinson with a baseball diamond and stadium named Jackie Robinson Field in Brookside Park next to the Rose Bowl, and with the Jackie Robinson Center (a community outreach center providing health services). In 1997, a $325,000 bronze sculpture (equal to $616,853 today) by artists Ralph Helmick, Stu Schecter, and John Outterbridge depicting oversized nine-foot busts of Robinson and his brother Mack was erected at Garfield Avenue, across from the main entrance of Pasadena City Hall; a granite footprint lists multiple donors to the commission project, which was organized by the Robinson Memorial Foundation and supported by members of the Robinson family. Major League Baseball has honored Robinson many times since his death. In 1987, both the National and American League Rookie of the Year Awards were renamed the "Jackie Robinson Award" in honor of the first recipient (Robinson's Major League Rookie of the Year Award in 1947 encompassed both leagues). On April 15, 1997, Robinson's jersey number, 42, was retired throughout Major League Baseball, the first time any jersey number had been retired throughout one of the four major American sports leagues. Under the terms of the retirement, a grandfather clause allowed the handful of players who wore number 42 to continue doing so in tribute to Robinson, until such time as they subsequently changed teams or jersey numbers. This affected players such as the Mets' Butch Huskey and Boston's Mo Vaughn. The Yankees' Mariano Rivera, who retired at the end of the 2013 season, was the last player in Major League Baseball to wear jersey number 42 on a regular basis. Since 1997, only Wayne Gretzky's number 99, retired by the NHL in 2000, and Bill Russell's number 6, retired by the NBA in 2022, have been retired league-wide in any of the four major sports. There have also been calls for MLB to retire number 21 league-wide in honor of Roberto Clemente, a sentiment opposed by the Robinson family. As an exception to the retired-number policy, MLB began honoring Robinson by allowing players to wear number 42 on April 15, Jackie Robinson Day, which is an annual observance that started in 2004. For the 60th anniversary of Robinson's major league debut, MLB invited players to wear the number 42 on Jackie Robinson Day in 2007. The gesture was originally the idea of outfielder Ken Griffey Jr., who sought Rachel Robinson's permission to wear the number. After Griffey received her permission, Commissioner Bud Selig not only allowed Griffey to wear the number, but also extended an invitation to all major league teams to do the same. Ultimately, more than 200 players wore number 42, including the entire rosters of the Los Angeles Dodgers, New York Mets, Houston Astros, Philadelphia Phillies, St. Louis Cardinals, Milwaukee Brewers, and Pittsburgh Pirates. The tribute was continued in 2008, when, during games on April 15, all members of the Mets, Cardinals, Washington Nationals, and Tampa Bay Rays wore Robinson's number 42. On June 25, 2008, MLB installed a new plaque for Robinson at the Baseball Hall of Fame commemorating his off-the-field impact on the game as well as his playing statistics. In 2009, all of MLB's uniformed personnel (including players) wore number 42 on April 15; this tradition has continued every year since on that date. At the November 2006 groundbreaking for Citi Field, the new ballpark for the New York Mets, it was announced that the main entrance, modeled on the one in Brooklyn's old Ebbets Field, would be called the Jackie Robinson Rotunda. The rotunda was dedicated at the opening of Citi Field on April 16, 2009. It honors Robinson with large quotations spanning the inner curve of the facade and features a large freestanding statue of his number, 42, which has become an attraction in itself. Mets owner Fred Wilpon announced that the Mets—in conjunction with Citigroup and the Jackie Robinson Foundation—would create the Jackie Robinson Museum and Learning Center, located at the headquarters of the Jackie Robinson Foundation at One Hudson Square, along Canal Street in lower Manhattan. Along with the museum, scholarships will be awarded to "young people who live by and embody Jackie's ideals." The museum opened in 2022. At Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles, a statue of Robinson was introduced in 2017. The New York Yankees honor Robinson with a plaque in Monument Park. Since 2004, the Aflac National High School Baseball Player of the Year has been presented the "Jackie Robinson Award". Robinson has also been recognized outside of baseball. In December 1956, the NAACP recognized him with the Spingarn Medal, which it awards annually for the highest achievement by an African-American. President Ronald Reagan posthumously awarded Robinson the Presidential Medal of Freedom on March 26, 1984, and on March 2, 2005, President George W. Bush gave Robinson's widow the Congressional Gold Medal, the highest civilian award bestowed by Congress; Robinson was only the second baseball player to receive the award, after Roberto Clemente. On August 20, 2007, California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger and his wife, Maria Shriver, announced that Robinson was inducted into the California Hall of Fame, located at The California Museum for History, Women and the Arts in Sacramento. A number of buildings have been named in Robinson's honor. The UCLA Bruins baseball team plays in Jackie Robinson Stadium, which, because of the efforts of Jackie's brother Mack, features a memorial statue of Robinson by sculptor Richard H. Ellis. The stadium also unveiled a new mural of Robinson by Mike Sullivan on April 14, 2013. City Island Ballpark in Daytona Beach, Florida was renamed Jackie Robinson Ballpark in 1990 and a statue of Robinson with two children stands in front of the ballpark. His wife Rachel was present for the dedication on September 15. 1990. A number of facilities at Pasadena City College (successor to PJC) are named in Robinson's honor, including Robinson Field, a football/soccer/track facility named jointly for Robinson and his brother Mack. The New York Public School system has named a middle school after Robinson, and Dorsey High School plays at a Los Angeles football stadium named after him. His home in Brooklyn, the Jackie Robinson House, was declared a National Historic Landmark in 1976, and Brooklyn residents sought to turn his home into a city landmark. In 1978, Colonial Park in Harlem was renamed after Robinson. Robinson also has an asteroid named after him, 4319 Jackierobinson. In 1997, the United States Mint issued a Jackie Robinson commemorative silver dollar, and five-dollar gold coin. That same year, New York City renamed the Interboro Parkway in his honor. A statue of Robinson at Journal Square Transportation Center in Jersey City, New Jersey, was dedicated in 1998. In 2011, the U.S. placed a plaque at Robinson's Montreal home to honor the ending of segregation in baseball. The house, at 8232 avenue de Gaspé near Jarry Park, was Robinson's residence when he played for the Montreal Royals during 1946. In a letter read during the ceremony, Rachel Robinson, Jackie's widow, wrote: "I remember Montreal and that house very well and have always had warm feeling for that great city. Before Jack and I moved to Montreal, we had just been through some very rough treatment in the racially biased South during spring training in Florida. In the end, Montreal was the perfect place for him to get his start. We never had a threatening or unpleasant experience there. The people were so welcoming and saw Jack as a player and as a man." On November 22, 2014, UCLA announced that it would officially retire the number 42 across all university sports, effective immediately. While Robinson wore several different numbers during his UCLA career, the school chose 42 because it had become indelibly identified with him. The only sport this did not affect was men's basketball, which had previously retired the number for Walt Hazzard (although Kevin Love was actually the last player in that sport to wear 42, with Hazzard's blessing). In a move paralleling that of MLB when it retired the number, UCLA allowed three athletes (in women's soccer, softball, and football) who were already wearing 42 to continue to do so for the remainder of their UCLA careers. The school also announced it would prominently display the number at all of its athletic venues. A jersey that Robinson brought home with him after his rookie season ended in 1947 was sold at an auction for $2.05 million on November 19, 2017. The price was the highest ever paid for a post-World War II jersey. Civil Rights Game (including MLB Beacon Awards) DHL Hometown Heroes List of African-American firsts List of sports desegregation firsts List of first black Major League Baseball players List of Major League Baseball batting champions List of Major League Baseball annual stolen base leaders List of Major League Baseball career stolen bases leaders List of Major League Baseball career batting average leaders List of Major League Baseball career on-base percentage leaders List of Major League Baseball players who spent their entire career with one franchise List of Major League Baseball players to hit for the cycle List of Major League Baseball retired numbers List of NCAA major college football yearly rushing leaders List of NCAA major college yearly punt and kickoff return leaders List of Negro league baseball players who played in Major League Baseball List of Presidential Medal of Freedom recipients "Jackie Robinson (SABR BioProject)". Society for American Baseball Research. Rampersad, p. 15. Eig, p. 7. Rampersad, pp. 15–18 Robinson, Jackie (1972), p. 9. Eig, p. 8. Robinson, Rachel, p. 17. Rampersad, pp. 33–35. Eig, p. 10. Rampersad, p. 36. Robinson, Rachel, p. 20. Castrovince, Anthony (April 13, 2022). "Olympian Mack Robinson was much more than 'Jackie's brother'". MLB.com. Rampersad, pp. 36–37. Rampersad, p. 37. Rampersad, p. 39. Rampersad, pp. 40–41. Glick, Shav (March 31, 1997). "Robinson a Baseball Star? That's Only a Quarter of Story". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved October 18, 2021. Falkner, p. 44. Stone, Bob (November 23, 1945). "Sports: Jackie Robinson". Yank, the Army Weekly (PDF). Vol. 4, no. 23. p. 23. Rampersad, p. 54. Rampersad, pp. 59–60. Rampersad, p. 47. Linge, p. 18. Rampersad, pp. 50–51. Rampersad, pp. 52–53. Falkner, p. 51. Falkner, p. 49. Eig, p. 11. "Breaking the color line: 1940–1946". Baseball, the Color Line, and Jackie Robinson. Library of Congress. Retrieved September 12, 2009. Violett, B.J. (1997). "Teammates Recall Jackie Robinson's Legacy". UCLA Today. Archived from the original on March 6, 2010. Retrieved October 12, 2008. "Washington, Kenny". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on January 6, 2009. Retrieved May 5, 2019. Demas, Lane (2007). "Beyond Jackie Robinson: racial integration in American college football and new directions in sport history". History Compass. 5 (2): 675–690. doi:10.1111/j.1478-0542.2007.00412.x. Stefani, Raymond (March 17, 2015). "The Interrelated Back Stories of Kenny Washington Reintegrating the NFL in 1946 and Jackie Robinson Integrating Major League Baseball in 1947". The Sport Journal. Retrieved November 25, 2017. Wittry, Andy (April 14, 2022). "Jackie Robinson's football career at UCLA hinted at greatness to come, and a 'Toy Story' character". National Collegiate Athletic Association. Retrieved June 8, 2022. "Outdoor Track and Field: Division I Men's" (PDF). National Collegiate Athletic Association. p. 8. Retrieved March 10, 2013. Greenwald, Dave (February 1, 2005). "Alumnus Jackie Robinson honored by Congress". UCLA Athletics. Archived from the original on December 10, 2008. Retrieved November 19, 2017. Robinson, Jackie (1972), pp. 10–11. Linge, p. 27. Sources point to various reasons for Robinson's departure from UCLA. Family sources cite financial concerns. ("Jackie Robinson Biography".) In addition, Robinson himself cited his growing disillusionment about the value of a college degree for a black man of his era. (Robinson, Jackie (1972), p. 11.) Other sources suggest that Robinson was uninterested in academics, and behind on class work at the time he left UCLA. (Falkner, p. 45; Eig, p. 13.) "Black History Biographies Jackie Robinson". Gale Cengage Learning. Archived from the original on January 15, 2009. Retrieved November 24, 2008. Linge, p. xiii. Robinson, Jackie (1972), p. 12. Gill, Bob (1987). "Jackie Robinson: Pro Football Prelude" (PDF). The Coffin Corner. 9 (3): 1–2. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 27, 2010. Retrieved May 27, 2009. "United States v. 2LT Jack R. Robinson". The National WWII Museum. February 5, 2021. Retrieved July 29, 2021. Linge, p. 33. MacGregor, Morris J. (1981). "Chapter 2: World War II: The Army". Integration of the Armed Forces, 1940–65. Washington, D.C.: G.P.O. ISBN 978-1-153-75539-9. n. 94. Archived from the original on July 27, 2010. Robinson, Jackie (1972), p. 13. Library of Congress: Truman K. Gibson Papers. Library of Congress. Archived from the original on May 9, 2009. Retrieved May 22, 2009. Goldstein, Richard (January 2, 2006). "Truman K. Gibson, who fought Army segregation, is dead at 93". The New York Times. Retrieved September 13, 2009. Rampersad, p. 91. Enders, Eric (April 15, 1997). "Jackie Robinson, College Basketball Coach". Austin American-Statesman. Archived from the original on October 17, 2009. Retrieved April 8, 2009. Vernon, John (2008). "Jim Crow, meet Lieutenant Robinson". Prologue Magazine. Vol. 40, no. 1. Retrieved January 20, 2019. Tygiel, Jules (August–September 1984). "The Court-Martial of Jackie Robinson". American Heritage. Archived from the original on November 19, 2008. Retrieved November 25, 2008. (also published at Tygiel (2002), pp. 14–23). Linge, p. 37. Robinson, Jackie (1972), p. 18. Robinson, Jackie (1972), p. 19. Robinson, Jackie (1972), pp. 20–21. "Jackie Makes Good". Time. August 26, 1946. Archived from the original on March 12, 2010. Retrieved July 21, 2021. Featured Baseball Personalities – Jackie Robinson – Historic Baseball Resources. Library of Congress. Archived from the original on October 10, 2008. Retrieved October 6, 2008. McElderry, Michael (2002). "Jackie Robinson A Register of His Papers in the Library of Congress". Library of Congress. Archived from the original on November 12, 2008. Retrieved November 24, 2008. Robinson, Jackie (1972), p. 23. Rampersad, p. 113. Rampersad, p. 114. Eig, p. 16. Tramel, Jimmie (June 25, 2008). "Globetrotting tales". Tulsa World. Retrieved May 5, 2019. Eig, p. 17. Robinson, Jackie (1972), p. 24. Tygiel (1983), p. 63. Bryant, p. 30. Robinson, Jackie (1972), p. 25. Lester, Larry; Sammy J. Miller (2000). Black Baseball in Kansas City. Arcadia Publishing. p. 55. ISBN 978-0-7385-0842-9. Lester, Larry (2002). Black Baseball's National Showcase: The East–West All-Star Game, 1933–1953. University of Nebraska Press. p. 457. ISBN 978-0-8032-8000-7. Bryant, p. 31. Robertson & Saunders, p. 15. Simon, pp. 46–47. "The Boston Red Sox and Racism: With New Owners, Team Confronts Legacy of Intolerance". National Public Radio. October 11, 2002. Archived from the original on April 5, 2008. Retrieved April 21, 2018. O'Connell, Jack (April 13, 2007). "Robinson's many peers follow his lead". MLB.com. Archived from the original on August 22, 2011. Retrieved December 24, 2017. Povich, Shirley (March 28, 1997). "The Ball Stayed White, but the Game Did Not". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 12, 2008. Hill, Justice B. (April 15, 2008). "One meeting, two men, a changed world". MLB.com. Archived from the original on April 15, 2008. Retrieved January 5, 2018. Schwartz, Larry (2007). "Jackie changed face of sports". ESPN. Archived from the original on April 10, 2010. Retrieved September 25, 2009. Robinson, Jackie (1972), p. 33. Rampersad, p. 127. Robinson, Jackie (1972), p. 34. Thorn, John; Tygiel, Jules. "Jackie Robinson's Signing: The Real Story". Society for American Baseball Research. Ilan Stavans, ed. (2012). Béisbol. The Ilan Stavans Library of Latino Civilization. Santa Barbara, California: Greenwood. p. 37. ISBN 978-0-313-37513-2. Moore, Joseph Thomas (1988). Pride and Prejudice: The Biography of Larry Doby. New York: Praeger Publishers. p. 40. ISBN 978-0-275-92984-8. Rampersad, pp. 127–128. Lamb, p. 43. Rampersad, p. 129. Tygiel (1983), p. 79. Lamb, p. 6. Pennington, Bill (July 27, 2006). "Breaking a barrier 60 years before Robinson". The New York Times. Retrieved September 13, 2009. Ribowsky, Mark (2000). Don't Look Back: Satchel Paige In the Shadows of Baseball. Da Capo Press. p. 313. ISBN 978-0-306-80963-7. Paige, Satchel; David Lipman (1993). Maybe I'll Pitch Forever: A Great Baseball Player Tells the Hilarious Story Behind the Legend. U of Nebraska Press. pp. xi, xii. ISBN 978-0-8032-8732-7. Moore, Joseph Thomas (1988). Pride and Prejudice: The Biography of Larry Doby. New York: Praeger Publishers. p. 30. ISBN 978-0-275-92984-8. Tygiel (2002), p. 28. "Jackie Robinson". www.britannica.com. January 30, 2024. Retrieved January 31, 2024. Robinson, Jackie (1972), p. 37. Linge, p. 49. Robinson, Jackie (1972), p. 38. Lamb, Chris (April 7, 2013). "Opinion: The redemption of Clay Hopper". Montreal Gazette. Archived from the original on April 5, 2013. Retrieved April 13, 2013. Lamb, p. 93. Robinson, Jackie (1972), p. 41. "A Field of Dreams: The Jackie Robinson Ballpark" (PDF). Teaching with Historic Places. National Park Service. 2016. pp. 18–20. Retrieved September 4, 2019. Lamb, p. 88. Robinson, Jackie (1972), pp. 42–43. "Royals' Game Off at Jacksonville". The New York Times. March 23, 1946 – via TimeMachine. Lamb, pp. 135–136. Lamb, p. 140. Reichard, Kevin (November 29, 2008). "Jackie Robinson Ballpark / Daytona Cubs". BallparkDigest.com. Retrieved May 6, 2017. Lamb, p. 104. Robinson, Jackie (1972), p. 45. Vasile, Sarah (February 10, 2023). "Before Jackie Robinson, This Forgotten Man Broke Baseball's Color Barrier". Sports Illustrated. Martin, Alfred M.; Martin, Alfred T. (2008). The Negro Leagues in New Jersey: A History. Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland & Company, Inc. p. 15. ISBN 978-0-7864-3900-3. Van Blair, Rick (1994) Dugout to Foxhole: Interviews with Baseball Players Whose Careers Were Affected by World War II. Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland & Company, pp. 180–191 Tygiel (1983), pp. 3, 7 Simon, p. 97. Linge, p. 54. Matheson, Keegan (February 5, 2022). "Montreal was Jackie's 'paradise' in 1946". MLB.com. Tygiel (1983), pp. 163–164. Rampersad, pp. 158–159. Weiner, Steven. "April 11, 1947: Jackie Robinson debuts in a Dodgers uniform at Ebbets Field". Society for American Baseball Research. Morehouse, Ward (April 23, 1947). "Jackie Robinson makes his debut with the Dodgers". The Sporting News. Retrieved April 14, 2023. "Boston Braves at Brooklyn Dodgers Box Score: April 15, 1947". Baseball-Reference.com. Retrieved April 11, 2019. "How media covered Jackie Robinson's Debut". USA Today. Associated Press. January 31, 2019. "Jackie Robinson breaks major league color barrier". History Channel. Retrieved October 21, 2011. Kirwin, p. 198. Giglio, pp. 150–151. Corbett, Warren (Spring 2017). "The 'Strike' Against Jackie Robinson: Truth or Myth?". Baseball Research Journal. Vol. 46, no. 1. pp. 88–93. ISSN 0734-6891. Retrieved January 20, 2019. Kahn, pp. 259–267. Krell, David (2015). "Our Bums": The Brooklyn Dodgers in History, Memory and Popular Culture. New York: McFarland. pp. 93–94. ISBN 978-1-4766-1973-6. Giglio, pp. 152–153. Kirwin, p. 199. Eig, p. 95. Bryant, p. 70. Wormser, Richard (2002). "Jackie Robinson integrates Baseball". Public Broadcasting Service. Retrieved September 14, 2009. Williams and Sielski, p. 9. Burns, Ken (writer and director) (1994). Baseball, Part 6 (Television production). Public Broadcasting Service. Astor, Gerald (1988). The Baseball Hall of Fame 50th Anniversary Book. Prentice Hall Press. pp. 221–222. ISBN 978-0-13-056573-0. Newman, Mark (April 13, 2007). "1947: A time for change". MLB.com. Archived from the original on April 7, 2009. Retrieved May 5, 2019. Barra, Allen (April 24, 2007). "Debunkers Strike Out". The Village Voice. Retrieved December 2, 2020. Posnanski, Joe (April 27, 2016). "The Embrace". NBC Sports. Retrieved December 2, 2020. Sandomir, Richard (June 1, 2008). "From Clay to Bronze to the Hall". The New York Times. Retrieved July 12, 2009. Mathews, Jack (January 12, 2000). "'Greenberg' A Home Run". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on July 6, 2010. Retrieved October 12, 2008. Livingston, Otis (October 6, 2022). "Larry Doby: Second to none". CBS News. Eig, p. 224. "Rookies of the Year". MLB.com. Archived from the original on November 24, 2009. Retrieved June 20, 2022. Schoor, pp. 208–213. "Jackie Robinson Career Statistics". Baseball-Reference.com. Lester, Larry (2007). "My Hero – Jackie Robinson". LarryLester42.com. Archived from the original on November 20, 2008. Retrieved October 30, 2008. Lowenfish, Lee (2007). "A Year of Disappointment, Odd Choices, and an Adieu to Leo". Branch Rickey: Baseball's Ferocious Gentleman. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press. p. 461. ISBN 978-0-8032-1103-2. Linge, pp. 71–72. Berry, Adam (April 14, 2021). "Pittsburgh reporter stood by Jackie's side". MLB.com. Retrieved March 26, 2024. Huhn, Rick (2004). "Full Circle". The Sizzler: George Sisler, Baseball's Forgotten Great. Columbia: University of Missouri Press. p. 260. ISBN 978-0-8262-1555-0. In addition to Robinson, the 1949 All-Star game featured Larry Doby, Roy Campanella, and Don Newcombe. See Johnson, Chuck (July 13, 1999). "An All-Star Game for all". USA Today. Archived from the original on July 18, 2009. Retrieved October 7, 2017. Paul Humphrey, ed. (2003) [1995]. America in the 20th Century: 1940–1949. Vol. 5 (2nd ed.). Tarrytown, New York: Marshall Cavendish. p. 709. ISBN 978-0-7614-7369-5. "Did You See Jackie Robinson Hit That Ball?". Library of Congress. Archived from the original on October 9, 2006. Retrieved April 16, 2019. Schoor, pp. 219–222. Duberman, pp. 361–362. Brody, Richard (April 19, 2013). "When Jackie Robinson Played "Jackie Robinson"". The New Yorker. "Jackie Robinson's Double Play". LIFE. May 8, 1950. Retrieved February 24, 2013. Crowther, Bosley (May 17, 1950). "'Jackie Robinson Story', With Baseball Star Playing Himself, Is Shown in Astor Theatre". The New York Times. Stout, p. 160. Stout, p. 162. Long, p. 7. Robinson, Jackie (1950). Letter to Branch Rickey. Library of Congress. Retrieved September 12, 2009. Hanc, John (April 10, 2013). "Document Deep Dive: The Heartfelt Friendship Between Jackie Robinson and Branch Rickey". Smithsonian. Retrieved September 19, 2017. "Robinson Linked to Montreal Job". The Pittsburgh Press. United Press. March 25, 1951. p. 37. Retrieved September 7, 2020. "Robinson Offered Managerial Berth". Reading Eagle. United Press. March 25, 1951. p. 27. Retrieved September 7, 2020. Bitker, Steve (2001). The Original San Francisco Giants: The Giants of '58. Sports Publishing LLC. p. 196. ISBN 978-1-58261-335-2. Bloom, Barry (April 13, 2007). "Robinson made impact on field, too". MLB.com. Retrieved October 11, 2008. Shiner, David. "Jackie Robinson and the Third Age of Modern Baseball". Jackie Robinson: Race, Sports, and the American Dream. p. 154. Schoor, pp. 230–234. "The Legacy of Race Through Time". New York Daily News. April 13, 1997. Archived from the original on April 8, 2010. Retrieved October 28, 2008. Falkner, p. 213. Tygiel (2002), p. 34. Schoor, pp. 235–238. Long, pp. 10–11. "Jackie Robinson and baseball highlights, 1860s–1960s". Library of Congress. September 26, 2002. Archived from the original on August 10, 2009. Retrieved September 13, 2009. "Robinson as a Dodger: 1947–1956". Baseball, the Color Line, and Jackie Robinson. Library of Congress. Retrieved September 12, 2009. Erskine and Rocks, pp. 61–74. Schoor, pp. 243–248. Eig, p. 269. Shaikin, Bill (April 14, 2020). "It's Jackie Robinson Day on Wednesday. Here's how you can watch him play". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved September 4, 2020. Hoffman, Benjamin (February 20, 2019). "In Don Newcombe, Baseball Got Its First Black Ace". The New York Times. Schoor, pp. 249–253. Linge, p. 114. Bloom, Barry M. (June 4, 2007). "Jackie Robinson: Gone but not forgotten". MLB.com. Archived from the original on March 2, 2008. Retrieved May 5, 2019. Klarman, Michael J. (May 17, 2004). "Better Late Than Never". The New York Times. Retrieved September 16, 2009. Robinson, Rachel; John Kerry (March 2, 2005). "A pioneer in civil rights". The Boston Globe. Retrieved April 17, 2020. Williams and Sielski, pp. 211–212. Kindred, Dave (July 21, 1999). "The No. 1 Most Significant Development in the 20th Century". The Sporting News. Archived from the original on October 12, 1999. Retrieved October 31, 2008. "The All-Century Team". MLB.com. Archived from the original on January 19, 2010. Retrieved February 15, 2007. Shiner, David. "Jackie Robinson and the Third Age of Modern Baseball". Jackie Robinson: Race, Sports, and the American Dream. pp. 151–152. Simon, Mark (April 16, 2004). "Remembering Jackie Robinson". ESPN. Retrieved October 31, 2008. Camps, Mark (April 7, 1997). "By The Numbers – Robinson Was All-Around Player". San Francisco Chronicle. Retrieved July 12, 2009. Williams and Sielski, p. 97. Falkner, p. 171. James and Wirth, pp. 502–503. Singer, Tom. "The pioneer". MLB.com. Retrieved October 12, 2008. "1950 National League Standard Fielding". Baseball-Reference.com. Retrieved July 12, 2009. "1951 National League Standard Fielding". Baseball-Reference.com. Retrieved July 12, 2009. "The Jackie Robinson Story (1950)". Turner Classic Movies. "A Homerun for Love (1978)". Turner Classic Movies. "Jackie is 'The First' again". Sports Illustrated. November 30, 1981. Retrieved May 5, 2019. Rich, Frank (November 18, 1981). "STAGE: 'First,' Baseball Musical". The New York Times. Retrieved March 24, 2013. Smith, Sid (April 11, 1993). "Jackie Robinson and the Great American Pastime". Chicago Tribune. Retrieved March 24, 2013. Bruckner, D. J. R. (July 21, 1989). "Review/Theater; 'Play to Win,' a Musical About the Integration of Baseball". The New York Times. Retrieved January 6, 2016. Braunagel, Don (May 12, 1992). "Review: 'Mr. Rickey Calls a Meeting'". Variety. Retrieved December 11, 2016. "The Court-Martial of Jackie Robinson (1990)". Turner Classic Movies. Hiltbrand, David (October 15, 1990). "Picks and Pans Review: The Court-Martial of Jackie Robinson". People. "Soul of the Game (1996)". Turner Classic Movies. James, Caryn (April 20, 1996). "Across the Color Line With Satchel Paige". The New York Times. Retrieved March 24, 2013. "Cold Case: Colors". TV.com. Archived from the original on January 3, 2014. Retrieved June 20, 2022. "42 (2013)". Turner Classic Movies. Scott, A. O. (April 11, 2013). "That Rookie at First Is in a New Position". The New York Times. "Lovecraft Country: Sundown". IMDb.com. Retrieved February 14, 2021. Lloyd, Robert (April 11, 2016). "Review: Ken Burns' 'Jackie Robinson' documentary is a lump-in-the-throat trip that goes beyond baseball". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved April 17, 2020. Patrick, Dan (November 7, 2016). "Just My Type". Sports Illustrated. "Jackie Robinson Career Chronology". BaseballLibrary.com. Archived from the original on January 8, 2012. Retrieved May 4, 2009. Rampersad, pp. 319–320. Rampersad, p. 320. "Jan. 1, 1960: Greenville Airport Protest". Zinn Education Project. Retrieved June 19, 2020. "Jackie Robinson urged blacks to work toward 'complete freedom' during 1959 Greenville visit". The Greenville News. July 12, 2019. Retrieved May 24, 2020. "History museum exhibit explores Greenville's civil rights struggles, successes". The Greenville News. January 17, 2014. Retrieved June 19, 2020. "Robinson honored with new Hall of Fame plaque". ESPN. June 25, 2008. Retrieved October 31, 2008. "Robinson, Jackie". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Retrieved September 2, 2023. Smith, Curt (2005). "The New Kids in Town (Cable's Rise, 1980–89)". Voices of Summer: Ranking Baseball's 101 All-Time Best Announcers. New York: Carroll & Graf. p. 316. ISBN 978-0-7867-1446-9. "A Roundup of the Sports Information of the Week". Sports Illustrated. May 9, 1966. Archived from the original on January 12, 2012. Retrieved May 5, 2019. Hired: Jackie Robinson, 47, former Brooklyn Dodger baseball star, as general manager of the new Brooklyn Dodger professional football team of the Continental League. "People". Sports Illustrated. May 16, 1966. Archived from the original on January 12, 2012. Retrieved May 5, 2019. Snyder, Brodie (June 3, 1972). "Expos on English TV: The picture clears up". Montreal Gazette. "Dodgers Retired Numbers". MLB.com. "Robinson's later career: 1957–1972". Baseball, the Color Line, and Jackie Robinson. Library of Congress. Archived from the original on September 3, 2009. Retrieved November 22, 2015. Long, p. 174. Robinson, Rachel, p. 190. Falkner, p. 340. Robinson, p. 139. Long, p. 43. Long, pp. 255–257. Long, pp. 171–172. Burns, Sarah (2017). "Seeking a More Authentic Jackie Robinson". In Simons, William M. (ed.). The Cooperstown Symposium on Baseball and American Culture, 2015–2016. Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland. ISBN 978-1-4766-2886-8. (Unpaginated version consulted online via Google Books) Greenberg, Cheryl Lynn (2010). Troubling the Waters: Black-Jewish Relations in the American Century. Princeton University Press. p. 235. ISBN 978-0-691-14616-4. "Robinson Is Appointed To Athletic Commission". The New York Times. May 6, 1971 – via TimesMachine. "The Torch of Friendship". Florida Memory. State Archives of Florida. Retrieved June 8, 2016. Schmidt, Michael S.; Keh, Andrew (August 11, 2010). "Baseball's Praised Diversity Is Stranded at First Base". The New York Times. Retrieved August 12, 2010. "Remembering Jackie". National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum. Retrieved April 1, 2022. Walker, Rhiannon (October 21, 2022). "Jackie Robinson's final public appearance: 50 years ago at 1972 World Series". The Athletic. Helyar, John (April 9, 2007). "Robinson would have mixed view of today's game". ESPN. Retrieved October 7, 2008. Linge, p. 148. Stone, Larry (August 28, 2005). "The changing face of baseball: African-American players on the decline". The Seattle Times. Retrieved May 6, 2017. "Less than 9 Percent of Players Black". ESPN. April 21, 2011. Retrieved April 21, 2011. Lee, Cynthia (May 5, 2009). "Rachel Robinson to receive UCLA's highest honor". UCLA Today. Archived from the original on May 13, 2009. Retrieved May 27, 2009. Robinson, Rachel, p. 192. Robinson, Rachel, p. 194. Robinson, Rachel, p. 200. Robinson, Rachel, p. 201. Anderson, Dave (October 25, 1972). "Jackie Robinson, First Black in Major Leagues, Dies". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 15, 2009. Retrieved June 11, 2022. Robinson, Rachel, p. 202. Rampersad, pp. 438, 443. Linge, p. 149. Cady, Steve (October 28, 1972). "Jackie Goes Home to Brooklyn". The New York Times. "Russell remembers Robinson". Boston.com. April 12, 2007. Retrieved August 29, 2022. Copquin, Claudia Gryvatz; Jackson, Kenneth T. (2007). The Neighborhoods of Queens. Yale University Press. p. 76. ISBN 978-0-300-11299-3. "Board of Directors". Jackie Robinson Foundation. Retrieved March 1, 2024. "Baseball remembers Jackie Robinson". The New York Times. April 16, 2008. Retrieved September 27, 2009. Robinson, Sharon (2001). Jackie's Nine: Jackie Robinson's Values to Live By. New York: Scholastic. ISBN 978-0-439-23764-2. Robinson, Sharon (2004). Promises To Keep: How Jackie Robinson Changed America. New York: Scholastic. ISBN 978-0-439-42592-6. Lambert, Pam (May 5, 2003). "Field of Dreams". People. Archived from the original on February 4, 2009. Retrieved March 7, 2022. Duke, Lynne (July 4, 2005). "Mr. Coffee: How a Baseball Scion Put Down Roots in Africa, and Grew a Very Rich Blend". The Washington Post. Retrieved June 16, 2010. "David Robinson – Jackie Robinson Foundation". Jackie Robinson Foundation. Retrieved December 29, 2020. Gruber, Robert. "It Happened in Brooklyn: Reminiscences of a Fan". Jackie Robinson: Race, Sports, and the American Dream. p. 47. "Time 100: Jackie Robinson". Time. June 14, 1999. Archived from the original on May 27, 2000. Retrieved July 21, 2021. "Baseball's 100 Greatest Players: No. 44, Jackie Robinson". The Sporting News. 1999. Archived from the original on April 16, 2005. Retrieved July 1, 2023. Posnanski, Joe (February 14, 2020). "The Baseball 100: No. 42, Jackie Robinson". The Athletic. Retrieved September 13, 2023. James, Bill (2003). "The Players". The New Bill James Historical Baseball Abstract. New York: Free Press. p. 361. ISBN 978-0-7432-2722-3. Asante, Molefi Kete (2002). "Jackie Robinson". 100 Greatest African Americans: A Biographical Encyclopedia. Amherst, New York: Prometheus. pp. 264–267. ISBN 978-1-57392-963-9. "African-American Subjects on United States Postage Stamps" (PDF). United States Postal Service. 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on December 7, 2012. Retrieved March 5, 2013. Images: 1982 Archived February 13, 2010, at the Wayback Machine, 1999 Archived May 20, 2009, at the Wayback Machine, 2000 Archived February 13, 2010, at the Wayback Machine "Arroyo Seco". PasadenaHeritage.org. Archived from the original on July 27, 2011. Retrieved September 12, 2009. "Jackie Robinson Center". City of Pasadena. Archived from the original on March 30, 2013. Retrieved May 12, 2019. "Bronze Busts Unveiled in Tribute to Robinson Brothers". Los Angeles Times. November 7, 1997. Retrieved April 17, 2020. Lehr, Dick (May 20, 1997). "Jackie's still larger than life; Newton sculptor creates 9-foot tribute". The Boston Globe. Wulf, Steve, ed. (July 27, 1987). "Scorecard: 'Nicely Done'". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on May 1, 2010. Retrieved May 12, 2019. Bloss, Bob (2005). Rookies of the Year. Temple University Press. pp. 6–7. ISBN 978-1-59213-164-8. Smith, Claire (April 16, 1997). "A Grand Tribute to Robinson and His Moment". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 1, 2007. Retrieved October 11, 2008. Bloom, Barry M. (April 13, 2009). "MLB ready to celebrate Jackie Robinson Day". MLB.com. Archived from the original on April 16, 2009. Retrieved May 12, 2019. Rivera, Mariano (March 9, 2013). "The final '42': Rivera pays tribute to Jackie Robinson". USA Today. Retrieved June 10, 2013. "League retires Gretzky's No. 99". USA Today. Associated Press. February 6, 2000. Archived from the original on February 11, 2011. Retrieved October 7, 2017. Lopez, Andrew (August 11, 2022). "Bill Russell's No. 6 to be retired across NBA following legend's death last month". ESPN. Retrieved September 9, 2022. "Sharon Robinson: honor Clemente some other way". ESPN. Associated Press. January 24, 2006. Retrieved August 17, 2009. Pennington, Bill (April 13, 2007). "A measure of respect for Jackie Robinson turns into a movement". The New York Times. Retrieved September 13, 2009. Caldwell, Dave (April 16, 2004). "Baseball; Special Day Honors Jackie Robinson". The New York Times. Retrieved April 12, 2017. Stone, Larry (April 15, 2009). "Ken Griffey Jr. on Jackie Robinson and the decline of African-Americans in baseball". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on April 17, 2009. Retrieved May 27, 2009. "Griffey, Jr., others to wear No. 42 as part of Jackie Robinson Day tribute". MLB.com. April 4, 2007. Archived from the original on April 7, 2007. Retrieved May 12, 2019. Bloom, Barry M. (April 16, 2008). "Robinson's legacy celebrated at Shea". MLB.com. Archived from the original on May 21, 2008. Retrieved May 12, 2019. "Baseball remembers Jackie Robinson". The New York Times. April 16, 2008. Retrieved September 13, 2009. "MLB players to wear #42 Monday to honor Jackie Robinson Day". WFTX-TV. April 15, 2019. Retrieved September 28, 2019. "Jackie Robinson Rotunda dedicated at Citi Field". Associated Press. April 16, 2009. Retrieved May 27, 2009. Colford, Paul D. (November 14, 2006). "Mets Honor Robinson at New Home". New York Daily News. Retrieved February 9, 2013. O'Connell, Jack (March 4, 2008). "Plans unveiled for Robinson Museum". MLB.com. Archived from the original on March 6, 2009. Retrieved May 12, 2019. Fordin, Spencer (April 13, 2011). "Museum in NY to tell Jackie's story". MLB.com. Archived from the original on April 15, 2011. Retrieved May 12, 2019. "Jackie Robinson Museum opens in Manhattan after 14 years of planning". ESPN. July 26, 2022. Retrieved March 23, 2023. "Los Angeles Dodgers Foundation extends partnership with The Jackie Robinson Foundation through $800,000 grant for college scholarships" (Press release). Major League Baseball. February 27, 2020. Retrieved May 10, 2020. Padilla, Doug (April 16, 2017). "Jackie Robinson statue unveiled at Dodger Stadium". ESPN. Retrieved June 13, 2017. Giorgi, Hilary (December 15, 2017). "Yankees Magazine: A Place for Heroes". Yankees Magazine. Retrieved May 30, 2019. "The 2010 Aflac National High School Player of The Year Nominees Announced". Satellite Television. August 9, 2010. Archived from the original on January 9, 2012. Retrieved November 10, 2011. Named in honor of the late Hall of Famer and first man to break Major League Baseball's color barrier, the Jackie Robinson Award recognizes the nation's top high school player entering his senior year that demonstrates outstanding character, exhibits leadership and embodies the values of being a student athlete in both his schoolwork and community affairs. See also: Baseball awards#U.S. high-school baseball. "Recipients of the Presidential Medal of Freedom, 1981–1989". Ronald Reagan Presidential Library. Retrieved May 12, 2019. "Jackie Robinson receives Congressional Gold Medal". USA Today. March 2, 2005. Retrieved September 13, 2009. "Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger and First Lady Maria Shriver Announce the California Hall of Fame 2007 Inductees". PR Newswire. August 20, 2007. Archived from the original on June 24, 2013. Retrieved May 12, 2019. "Steele Field at Jackie Robinson Stadium". UCLA Athletics. Archived from the original on July 25, 2011. Retrieved September 13, 2009. "UCLA history project: Robinson statue". UCLA.edu. Archived from the original on June 23, 2013. Retrieved June 20, 2022. "Jack Roosevelt "Jackie" Robinson – Daytona Beach, Florida". waymarking.com. Retrieved April 12, 2013. "Jackie Robinson Ballpark". City of Daytona Beach. Retrieved April 12, 2013. "Robinson Stadium". Pasadena City College Foundation. Archived from the original on July 20, 2011. Retrieved January 17, 2011. Anderson, Dave (April 1, 1997). "Robinson 'stood up for what he believed'". The New York Times. Retrieved September 12, 2009. Reinhold, Robert (November 3, 1991). "Fearing gang violence, school forfeits a game". The New York Times. Retrieved September 12, 2009. Lee, Jane (July 26, 2007). "Historic sports sites rarely take landmark status". USA Today. Retrieved October 7, 2008. "Residents Want To Turn Jackie Robinson's Brooklyn Home into City Landmark". NY1. April 11, 2013. Archived from the original on May 17, 2013. Retrieved April 12, 2013. Pantorno, Joe (June 25, 2020). "NYC Parks unveils renovated Jackie Robinson Park in Harlem". amNewYork. Retrieved January 11, 2021. Hanson, Kimberly (February 11, 2010). "A Closer Look at New York City's Historic Harlem Parks (Part II)". The Daily Plant. 25 (5130). New York City Department of Parks & Recreation. Retrieved January 11, 2021. "4319 Jackierobinson (1981 ER14)". Jet Propulsion Laboratory. May 11, 2009. Retrieved September 26, 2009. "The Jackie Robinson Commemorative Coin Set". United States Mint. Archived from the original on May 28, 2010. Retrieved February 18, 2023. "Mayor Giuliani Unveils the New Jackie Robinson Parkway Sign" (Press release). Office of the Mayor of New York City. April 14, 1997. Retrieved October 23, 2019. Brennan, John (2007). "Jersey City, Journal Square, plaque at base of Jackie Robinson statue". RUcore: Rutgers University Community Repository. Rutgers University. doi:10.7282/T3CZ37M8. Retrieved October 23, 2019. "Robinson's apartment in Montreal to be marked with plaque". CBC Sports. The Canadian Press. February 27, 2011. Phillips, Randy (February 28, 2011). "Baseball great's home away from hate". Montreal Gazette. Archived from the original on March 3, 2011. Retrieved March 1, 2011. "UCLA Honors Jackie Robinson by Retiring #42 Across All Sports" (Press release). UCLA Athletics. November 22, 2014. Retrieved November 23, 2014. "UCLA retires No. 42 for all teams". ESPN. Associated Press. November 22, 2014. Retrieved November 23, 2014. "2011–12 UCLA Men's Basketball Media Guide" (PDF). UCLA Athletic Department. 2011. pp. 116–118. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 7, 2012. Retrieved July 4, 2019. Smith, Shelley (November 18, 2011). "Walt Hazzard lived for others". ESPN. Archived from the original on April 3, 2015. Retrieved July 4, 2019. "Rare Jackie Robinson jersey sold for $2.05 million". The Spokesman-Review. Associated Press. November 20, 2017. Retrieved December 9, 2017. Bryant, Howard (2002). Shut Out: A Story of Race and Baseball in Boston. New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-0415927796. (2002 CASEY Award winner). Dorinson, Joseph; Warmund, Joram, eds. (1999). Jackie Robinson: Race, Sports, and the American Dream. Armonk, New York: M.E. Sharpe. ISBN 978-0765603173. Duberman, Martin (1989). "The Right to Travel". Paul Robeson. New York: Knopf. ISBN 978-0394527802. Eig, Jonathan (2007). Opening Day: The Story of Jackie Robinson's First Season. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0743294607. (2007 CASEY Award nominee). Erskine, Carl; Rocks, Burton (2005). "Wait Till Next Year". What I Learned from Jackie Robinson: A Teammate's Reflections On and Off the Field. New York: McGraw-Hill. ISBN 978-0071450850. Falkner, David (1995). Great Time Coming: The Life of Jackie Robinson, from Baseball to Birmingham. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0671793364. Giglio, James N. (2001). Musial: From Stash to Stan the Man. Columbia, Mo.: University of Missouri Press. ISBN 978-0826263131. James, Bill; Wirth, Mary A. (1988). Bill James Historical Baseball Abstract. New York: Random House. ISBN 978-0394758053. Kahn, Roger (2014). Rickey & Robinson: The True, Untold Story of the Integration of Baseball. New York: Rodale Press. ISBN 978-1623362973. Kirwin, Bill (2005). Out of the Shadows: African American Baseball from the Cuban Giants to Jackie Robinson. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press. ISBN 978-0803278257. Lamb, Chris (2006). Blackout: The Untold Story of Jackie Robinson's First Spring Training. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press. ISBN 978-0803280472. Linge, Mary Kay (2007). Jackie Robinson: A Biography. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press. ISBN 978-0313338281. Long, Michael G., ed. (2007). First Class Citizenship: the Civil Rights Letters of Jackie Robinson. New York: Henry Holt. ISBN 978-0805087109. Schoor, Gene (1990). The History of the World Series: The Complete Chronology of America's Greatest Sports Tradition. William Morrow and Company. ISBN 0-688-07995-4. Rampersad, Arnold (1997). Jackie Robinson: A Biography. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 978-0679444954. (1997 CASEY Award nominee). Robertson, John G.; Saunders, Andy (2016). The Games That Changed Baseball: Milestones in Major League History. Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland. ISBN 978-1476662268. Robinson, Jackie; Duckett, Alfred (1972). I Never Had It Made. New York: HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0060555979. Robinson, Rachel; Daniels, Lee (1996). Jackie Robinson: An Intimate Portrait. New York: Harry N. Abrams. ISBN 978-0810937925. (1996 CASEY Award nominee). Simon, Scott (2002). Jackie Robinson and the Integration of Baseball. Hoboken: Wiley. ISBN 978-0471261537. Stout, Glenn; Richard A. Johnson (phot. ed.) (2004). The Dodgers: 120 Years of Dodgers Baseball. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. ISBN 978-0618213559. Tygiel, Jules (1983). Baseball's Great Experiment: Jackie Robinson and His Legacy. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0195033007. (1983 CASEY Award nominee). Tygiel, Jules (2002). Extra Bases: Reflections on Jackie Robinson, Race, and Baseball History. University of Nebraska Press. ISBN 978-0803294479. Williams, Pat; Mike, Sielski (2005). How to Be Like Jackie Robinson: Life Lessons from Baseball's Greatest Hero. HCI Books. ISBN 978-0757301735. Kahn, Roger (1972). The Boys of Summer. Harper & Row. ISBN 978-0060883966. Robinson, Jackie; Tygiel, Jules (1997). The Jackie Robinson Reader: Perspectives on an American Hero. Dutton Penguin. ISBN 978-0525940968. Kashatus, William C. (2014). Jackie & Campy: The Untold Story of Their Rocky Relationship and the Breaking of Baseball's Color Line. University of Nebraska Press. ISBN 978-0803246331. Kennedy, Kostya (2022). True: The Four Seasons of Jackie Robinson. St. Martin's Press. ISBN 978-1250274045. Graham, John; Lardner, Rex (January 7, 1950). "Success: Jackie Robinson's Second Job". The New Yorker. Dawidoff, Nicholas (September 28, 1987). "Recalling Jackie Robinson". Sports Illustrated. Dreier, Peter (April 11, 2013). "The Real Story of Baseball's Integration That You Won't See in 42". The Atlantic. Hertzberg, Hendrik (May 17, 2013). "Summers of "42"". The New Yorker. Williams, Andrea (April 15, 2022). "The Complicated Legacy of Jackie Robinson's Dodgers Debut". Sports Illustrated. Rapoport, Ron (April 14, 2022). "Baseball reveres Jackie Robinson, but Robinson didn't revere baseball. Here's why". Los Angeles Times. Wikiquote has quotations related to Jackie Robinson. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Jackie Robinson. Career statistics and player information from MLB, or ESPN, or Baseball Reference, or Fangraphs, or Baseball Reference (Minors), or Retrosheet, or Seamheads Official website Jackie Robinson at the Baseball Hall of Fame Jackie Robinson at the SABR Baseball Biography Project Jackie Robinson at IMDb Portals:  Biography  Baseball  Georgia (state)  California