Roberto Baggio OMRI (Italian pronunciation: [roˈbɛrto ˈbaddʒo]; born 18 February 1967) is an Italian former professional footballer who mainly played as a second striker, or as an attacking midfielder, although he was capable of playing in several offensive positions. He is the former president of the technical sector of the Italian Football Federation. A technically gifted creative playmaker and set piece specialist, renowned for his curling free-kicks, dribbling skills, and goalscoring, Baggio is widely regarded as one of the greatest players of all time. In 1999, he came fourth in the FIFA Player of the Century internet poll, and was chosen on the FIFA World Cup Dream Team in 2002. In 1993, he was named FIFA World Player of the Year and won the Ballon d'Or. In 2004, he was named by Pelé in the FIFA 100, a list of the world's greatest living players. Baggio played for Italy in 56 matches, scoring 27 goals, and is the joint fourth-highest goalscorer for his national team, alongside Alessandro Del Piero. He starred in the Italian team that finished third in the 1990 FIFA World Cup, scoring twice. At the 1994 World Cup, he led Italy to the final, scoring five goals, received the World Cup Silver Ball and was named in the World Cup All-Star Team. Although he was the star performer for Italy at the tournament, he missed the decisive penalty in the shootout of the final against Brazil. At the 1998 World Cup, he scored twice before Italy were eliminated by eventual champions France in the quarter-finals. Baggio is the only Italian to score in three World Cups, and with nine goals holds the record for most goals scored in World Cup tournaments for Italy, along with Paolo Rossi and Christian Vieri. In 2002, Baggio became the first Italian player in over 50 years to score more than 300 career goals; he is the fifth-highest scoring Italian in all competitions with 318 goals. In 2004, during the final season of his career, Baggio became the first player in over 30 years to score 200 goals in Serie A, and is the seventh-highest goalscorer of all time in Serie A, with 205 goals. In 1990, he moved from Fiorentina to Juventus for a world record transfer fee. Baggio won two Serie A titles, a Coppa Italia, and a UEFA Cup, playing for seven different Italian clubs during his career (Vicenza, Fiorentina, Juventus, AC Milan, Bologna, Inter Milan, and Brescia). Baggio is known as Il Divin Codino ("The Divine Ponytail"), for the hairstyle he wore for most of his career, for his talent, and for his Buddhist beliefs. In 2002, Baggio was nominated Goodwill Ambassador of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. In 2003, he was the inaugural winner of the Golden Foot award. In recognition of his human rights activism, he received the Man of Peace award from the Nobel Peace Prize Laureates in 2010. In 2011, he was the first footballer to be inducted into the Italian Football Hall of Fame. Roberto Baggio was born in Caldogno, Veneto, the son of Matilde and Florindo Baggio, the sixth of eight siblings. His younger brother, Eddy Baggio, was also a footballer who played 86 matches in Serie B. Baggio began his youth career after being noticed by his hometown youth team, Caldogno, at age nine. By the time he turned 11, he had scored 45 goals and provided 20 assists in 26 matches, also scoring six goals in one match. His talent was recognised by scout Antonio Mora, and he was acquired by the Vicenza youth team at age 13 for £300 (500,000 Lit). After scoring 110 goals in 120 matches, Baggio began his professional career with the Vicenza senior side in 1983, at age 15. At the age of 16, Baggio made his Serie C1 debut with Vicenza on 5 June 1983, a 1–0 home loss against Piacenza, in the final league match of the season, coming on as a second-half substitute. He scored his first goal in Serie C1 during the following season, on 3 June 1984, from a penalty in a 3–0 win against Brescia, the club with which he retired in 2004. Baggio scored the first professional goal of his career in the Coppa Italia Serie C in a 4–1 away win over Legnano on 30 November 1983. He also made his Coppa Italia debut with the club on 31 August 1983, against Palermo, and he scored his first Coppa Italia goal in a 4–2 away loss to Empoli, on 26 August 1984. During the 1984–85 Serie C1 season under manager Bruno Giorgi, he scored 12 goals in 29 appearances, helping the club to gain promotion to Serie B. Baggio began to draw the attention of larger Italian clubs, in particular Serie A side Fiorentina, and his playing style was compared to that of his idol Zico. Baggio was also awarded the Guerin d'Oro in 1985 as the Best Player in Serie C1. During the end of his final season at Vicenza, Baggio shattered both the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) and the meniscus of his right knee while playing against Rimini on 5 May 1985, while attempting a slide tackle. The injury occurred two days before his official transfer deal to Fiorentina had been finalised, and it seriously threatened his career, at age 18. Although several team doctors feared he would not play again, Fiorentina retained their faith in him, agreeing to commit to the transfer as well as fund the required surgery, one of many reasons for Baggio's attachment to the club. Fiorentina purchased Baggio in 1985 for £1.5 million. During his time at the club, despite initial injuries, he became extremely popular, and is regarded as one of the club's best ever players. In his first season with the club, Baggio did not appear in Serie A as he was sidelined by injury; Fiorentina finished in fifth place in the league and reached the semi-finals of the Coppa Italia, with Baggio making his club debut in the latter competition. He finally made his Serie A debut the following season on 21 September 1986, in a 2–0 home win against Sampdoria, and he also made his European debut that season on 17 September 1986, in an UEFA Cup match against Boavista. Baggio suffered another knee injury on 28 September, and he was operated again, requiring 220 stitches to have it rebuilt, losing 12 kg as a result and missing most of the season. Baggio returned, and scored his first league goal from a free-kick on 10 May 1987 in a 1–1 draw against Diego Maradona's Napoli, the eventual Serie A champions; Baggio's equaliser saved Fiorentina from relegation. "The angels sing in his legs." —Former Fiorentina manager Aldo Agroppi on Baggio. Baggio led Fiorentina to a Coppa Italia quarter-final during the 1988–89 season under manager Sven-Göran Eriksson, scoring nine goals, as Fiorentina were eliminated by eventual champions Sampdoria. This season would be Baggio's breakthrough, as he scored 15 goals in Serie A, finishing third in the capocannoniere (top goalscorer) title. He also helped Fiorentina finish in seventh place in Serie A and win an UEFA Cup spot, assisting the only goal by Roberto Pruzzo in the tiebreak qualifier against Roma. He formed a notable attacking partnership with Stefano Borgonovo, and the pair scored 29 of Fiorentina's 44 Serie A goals, earning the nickname "B2". Baggio's performances elevated him to hero status among the fans, and he drew praise from several pundits. His characteristics led former Fiorentina playmaker Miguel Montuori to say Baggio was "more productive than Maradona; he is without doubt the best number 10 in the league", also stating that Baggio had "ice in his veins" due to his composure in front of goal. Although Fiorentina were struggling against relegation during the 1989–90 season, Baggio led the club to the 1990 UEFA Cup Final, only to be defeated by his future club, Juventus. Baggio scored 1 goal in 12 appearances in the competition, in a round of 16 1–0 home win against Dynamo Kyiv, from a penalty, on 22 November 1989; this was his first goal in European competitions. He also scored the decisive penalty in the first round shootout against Atlético Madrid. With 17 goals, Baggio was the second-highest goalscorer in the 1989–90 Serie A season after Marco van Basten, and was awarded the Bravo Award as the best under-23 player in European competitions. He also placed eighth in the 1990 Ballon d'Or. With Fiorentina, Baggio scored 55 goals in 136 appearances, 39 of which were in Serie A, from 94 appearances. "One game stands out in particular, one against Ancona [actually Udinese] which we won 5–1 [actually 5–0]. Baggio scored four goals in the first 20 minutes and killed the game off. I don't think I've seen a better performance from any player in any game I've ever played in. For half an hour, he was on fire. As footballers go, he's a genius." —Former Juventus teammate David Platt on Baggio, 1995. In 1990, Baggio was sold to one of Fiorentina's rivals, Juventus, for £8 million, the world record transfer for a footballer at the time. He inherited the number 10 shirt, formerly worn by Michel Platini. Following the transfer, there were riots on the streets of Florence, where 50 people were injured. Baggio replied to his fans, saying: "I was compelled to accept the transfer." When Juventus played Fiorentina on 7 April 1991, Baggio refused to take a penalty, stating Fiorentina goalkeeper Gianmatteo Mareggini knew him too well. However, Luigi De Agostini, Baggio's replacement, missed the penalty and Juventus eventually lost the match. When Baggio was substituted, he picked up a Fiorentina scarf thrown onto the field, a gesture which, although appreciated by his former club's fans, caused outrage among the Juventus supporters, who were initially reluctant to accept Baggio. He claimed to be "always purple" in his heart, with purple being the colour of Fiorentina. In this first season at Juventus, Baggio scored 14 goals and provided 12 assists in Serie A, often playing behind the forwards under Luigi Maifredi, although Juventus finished in seventh place in Serie A, outside the European qualification spots. However, Juventus did reach the semi-finals of the European Cup Winners' Cup that year, a tournament in which Baggio was top scorer with nine goals, bringing his seasonal total to 27 goals. Juventus would ultimately be eliminated by Johan Cruyff's Barcelona "Dream Team". Juventus were also eliminated in the quarter-finals of the Coppa Italia to eventual winners Roma, with Baggio scoring three goals. Juventus also lost the Supercoppa Italiana against Napoli at the beginning of the season; Baggio scored Juventus's only goal from a free-kick. Baggio made his 100th Serie A appearance in a 0–0 draw against Lazio on 21 October 1990. In his second season, under new manager Giovanni Trapattoni, Baggio finished runner-up to Marco van Basten for the Serie A top scorer title, scoring 18 goals and providing 8 assists, as Juventus finished runners-up to Fabio Capello's AC Milan in Serie A, and to Parma in the Coppa Italia final, in which Baggio scored in his club's 1–0 victory in the first leg from a penalty. It was during his second season with the club that Baggio came to be accepted by the Juventus fans, as he was seen as a leader around whom the club's play revolved. However, Trapattoni often deployed Baggio in a more advanced role, which led to minor disagreements between the player, his coach and Juventus management. Baggio was appointed team captain for the 1992–93 season. He had a dominant season, winning the only European club trophy of his career after helping Juventus to the UEFA Cup final, in which he scored twice and assisted another goal over both legs, defeating Borussia Dortmund 6–1 on aggregate. En route to the final, Baggio scored two goals in the 2–1 home victory against Paris Saint-Germain, in the first leg of the semi-final, and he went on to score the only goal in the return leg. Juventus also reached the semi-finals of the Coppa Italia, losing on away goals to local rivals and winners Torino. Juventus finished fourth in Serie A that season, although they managed a 3–1 away win against the Serie A champions Milan, with Baggio scoring a memorable individual goal while also setting-up Andreas Möller's first goal of the match. One of the highlights of the season involved Baggio scoring four goals in open play against Udinese in a 5–0 Juventus home win. Baggio was once again runner-up for the Serie A capocannoniere title with 21 goals and 6 assists. He scored a personal best of 30 goals in all club competitions that season, in addition to five goals with the Italy national team. During the 1993 calendar year, Baggio managed a personal record 39 goals across all competitions, scoring 23 goals in Serie A, 3 in the Coppa Italia, 8 goals in European competitions and 5 goals for Italy, helping his national side qualify for the World Cup. Baggio's performances throughout the year earned him both the European Footballer of the Year, with 142 points from a possible 150, and the FIFA World Player of the Year awards. He was also awarded the Onze d'Or, and the World Soccer Player of the Year Award. In the 1993–94 season, Baggio often played as a second striker alongside Gianluca Vialli or Fabrizio Ravanelli, and occasionally the young Alessandro Del Piero; Juventus once again finished runners up to Milan in Serie A, and Baggio finished third in the capocannoniere title with 17 goals and 8 assists, while the club suffered a quarter-final elimination in the UEFA Cup against Cagliari. On 31 October 1993, Baggio scored a hat-trick in a 4–0 win over Genoa, which included his 100th Serie A goal; he also set up a goal for Möller during the match. Baggio made his 200th Serie A appearance on 5 December 1993 in a 1–0 win over Napoli. After sustaining an injury earlier that season, Baggio was operated on his meniscus in March 1994. Baggio placed second in the 1994 Ballon d'Or, third in the 1994 FIFA World Player of the Year, and was awarded the 1994 Onze de Bronze. In the 1994–95 season, Trapattoni's replacement, Marcello Lippi, wanted to create a more cohesive team, less dependent on Baggio, who was deployed as an outside forward in a 4–3–3 formation. Baggio was injured for most of the season, being ruled out for over three months after sustaining a knee injury against Padova on 27 November 1994. After scoring from a free-kick, he was substituted by Alessandro Del Piero, who temporarily took his place in the team. Baggio returned to the starting line-up in the first leg of the Coppa Italia semi-final against Lazio in Rome on 8 March 1995, setting up Fabrizio Ravanelli's winner. On his first Serie A match back from injury, on 12 March 1995, Baggio scored Juventus' second goal in a 2–0 win over Foggia, and set up Ravanelli's goal. Due to his injury, Baggio only managed 17 Serie A appearances, but still contributed to his first scudetto with Juventus by contributing eight goals and eight assists. He provided assists for three of the goals in the title-deciding match against Parma, which Juventus won 4–0 in Turin on 21 May 1995. He helped Juventus win the Coppa Italia that year, notching two goals and two assists, scoring the winning goal in the second leg of the semi-final. He helped lead Juventus to another UEFA Cup final by scoring four goals, including two goals and an assist over both legs of the semi-finals against Borussia Dortmund. Despite Baggio's strong performance, Juventus were defeated in the UEFA Cup final by Parma. Baggio scored 115 goals in 200 appearances during his five seasons at Juventus; 78 were scored in Serie A in 141 appearances. In 1995, Baggio was nominated for the Ballon d'Or and placed fifth in the 1995 FIFA World Player of the Year Award. He was also awarded the 1995 Onze d'Argent Award, behind George Weah. Baggio is currently Juventus' ninth-highest goalscorer in all competitions, and is the joint tenth-highest goalscorer for Juventus in Serie A, alongside Pietro Anastasi. He is the sixth-highest Juventus goalscorer in the Coppa Italia with 14 goals, and is also the joint fourth all-time Juventus goalscorer in European competitions, as well as the joint fifth all-time Juventus goalscorer in international competitions, with 22 goals, alongside Anastasi once again. In 2010, he was named one of the club's 50 greatest legends. "Baggio on the bench? It's something that I will never understand in my lifetime." —Zinedine Zidane on Baggio starting on the bench. In 1995, Marcello Lippi, Roberto Bettega and Umberto Agnelli announced that Baggio no longer featured in their plans at Juventus and decided to focus on the emerging star Alessandro Del Piero, who would inherit Baggio's number 10 shirt. Baggio faced difficulties with Agnelli, Luciano Moggi, and Juventus management during his final season, as they stated they would only renew his contract if he reduced his salary by 50%. After strong pressure from AC Milan chairman Silvio Berlusconi and manager Fabio Capello, Baggio was sold to the Milanese club for £6.8 million, amidst several protests from Juventus fans. At the time, Baggio had been linked with Inter Milan, Real Madrid, and English Premier League clubs Manchester United and Blackburn Rovers. Although Baggio initially struggled with injuries at the beginning of his first season with Milan, he came back into the starting line-up and was appointed the main penalty taker. He helped Milan win the Serie A title, notably scoring a goal against his former team Fiorentina from a penalty in the title-deciding match. Baggio finished the season with 10 goals in all competitions, in 34 appearances; seven of his goals were scored in Serie A, in 28 appearances, and he also provided 12 assists in Serie A, making him the top assist provider of the season. He became one of only six players to win the scudetto in consecutive years with different teams, and was voted the club's best player of the season by the fans, despite playing a more creative role. Towards the end of the season, Baggio had disagreements with Capello due to limited playing time, as Capello believed he was no longer fit enough to play for 90 minutes; although Baggio frequently started matches, he was often substituted during the second half; during the course of the season, he only played nine matches in their entirety, being substituted on 17 occasions, and coming off the bench twice. During the opening of the 1996–97 Serie A under new Milan manager Óscar Tabárez, Baggio was initially left out of the first team, with the former commenting "[t]here is no place for poets in modern football." Baggio was later able to convince the Uruguayan manager of his abilities and earn himself a spot in the starting line-up; he became the focal point of the team's offensive play, and was initially started in his preferred role behind George Weah, and on occasion as a left-winger or as a central-midfielder playmaker. After a series of disappointing results, Baggio was relegated to the bench, and Milan's former coach Arrigo Sacchi, also the former Italy manager with whom Baggio had argued following the 1994 World Cup, was called in as a replacement. Although their relationship initially improved, Sacchi gave Baggio limited playing time, and he soon fell out of form, along with the rest of the squad, which caused their relationship to deteriorate again. Milan failed to retain their league title, finishing the season in a disappointing 11th place, and they were knocked out once again in the quarter-finals of the Coppa Italia. Baggio made his UEFA Champions League debut in the 1996–97 season, scoring his first goal in the competition, although Milan were eliminated in the group stage. Milan also lost the 1996 Supercoppa Italiana to Fiorentina, as Baggio was left on the bench. During his time at Milan, Baggio scored 19 goals in 67 appearances in all competitions; 12 of his goals were scored in Serie A, in 51 appearances, 3 were scored in the Coppa Italia in 6 appearances, and 4 were scored in European competitions, in 10 appearances. "I said, 'No, you have to play striker.' Baggio went to another club. That year Baggio scored 25 [actually 22] goals – for Bologna! I lost 25 goals! Big mistake." —Carlo Ancelotti talking to Simon Kuper of the Financial Times in 2014, reminiscing his greatest regret in football, choosing a system over a generational talent. In 1997, Capello returned to Milan, subsequently stating Baggio was not a part of his plans with the club. Baggio chose to move to Parma, but the manager at the time, Carlo Ancelotti, impeded the transfer, as he also did not feel Baggio would fit into his tactical plans. Ancelotti would later state he regretted this decision, stating that in his naïveté, he believed that the 4–4–2 formation was the ideal formation for success, and he felt that at the time, creative players such as Gianfranco Zola and Baggio were not compatible with this system. Baggio subsequently transferred to Bologna, aiming to save the squad from relegation, and earn a place at the 1998 FIFA World Cup. Baggio refound his form with the club and had a dominant season, scoring a personal best of 22 goals in Serie A, as well as providing 9 assists, leading Bologna to an eighth-place finish, allowing them to qualify for the UEFA Intertoto Cup. Baggio was the highest scoring Italian in Serie A that season, and the third-highest goalscorer in Serie A. His performances earned him a place in Italy's 1998 World Cup squad. Baggio also led Bologna to the round of 16 in the Coppa Italia, where he scored one goal in three appearances. Although he rose to hero status amongst the fans, he had difficulties with his manager Renzo Ulivieri, in particular when he was left out of the starting 11 against Juventus. Ulivieri later denied ever having any difficulties with Baggio. At the beginning of the season, Baggio cut off his iconic ponytail, signifying his rebirth. Baggio was named as Bologna's captain for part of the season, before handing the armband to Giancarlo Marocchi. Baggio made his 300th Serie A appearance while at Bologna, in a 0–0 draw against Empoli on 11 January 1998. Baggio received nominations for both the Ballon d'Or and the FIFA World Player of the Year due to his performances for Bologna and Italy that season. He was also nominated for the 1998 Serie A Italian Footballer of the Year and Serie A Footballer of the Year awards, losing out to Alessandro Del Piero and Ronaldo, respectively. After the 1998 World Cup, Baggio signed with his favourite childhood club Inter Milan in order to compete in the UEFA Champions League. He made his club debut on 12 August 1998, in the first leg of the second round of the qualifying stages of the latter competition, scoring a goal and providing three assists in a 4–0 win over Skonto FC in Pisa. After injuries, disappointing results, and several managerial changes throughout the season, including Luigi Simoni, Mircea Lucescu, and Roy Hodgson, Baggio struggled to gain playing time, and was used out of position as a winger, often as a substitute. Baggio scored five league goals and provided 10 assists in 23 appearances during the 1998–99 season, as Inter finished in eighth place, missing out on a European spot. He helped Inter to a Coppa Italia semi-final, losing out to eventual winners Parma. Baggio scored a goal against his former club Bologna in a European play-off match, but Inter lost both matches, failing to qualify for the UEFA Cup. Baggio also scored four goals in the Champions League, helping lead Inter through the qualifying rounds to the quarter-finals, where they were eliminated by eventual winners Manchester United, also scoring a memorable brace against defending champions Real Madrid in the group stage. In the 1999–2000 season, Marcello Lippi, Baggio's former manager at Juventus, was appointed as Inter's new coach. Lippi did not favour Baggio and left him out of the squad for most of the season, stating Baggio was out of shape. In his autobiography, Baggio stated Lippi had dumped him after Baggio refused to point out which of Inter's players had expressed negative opinions about the coach, also highlighting an incident during a training session where he called out Christian Vieri and Christian Panucci for applauding Baggio for a notable assist. Baggio was used scarcely and often as a substitute, scoring 4 goals in 18 appearances during the regular Serie A season. He made five appearances in the Coppa Italia, with his only goal coming against local rivals A.C. Milan in the second leg of the quarter-finals, as he helped Inter reach the final, only to be defeated by Lazio. Despite his limited playing time, Baggio still managed several important goals to help Inter to a fourth-place finish, alongside Parma, such as his match winning goal against Hellas Verona, which he scored after coming off the bench, after being excluded from the team since 18 December 1999. Baggio had also previously helped to set up Inter's equaliser during the match. This was the first time Baggio had scored for Inter since his goal on 27 May of the previous season, and in the post-match the interview, he denied accusations made by Lippi in regard to his personal form. Baggio's last important contribution to Inter was scoring two memorable goals against Parma in the play-off match for the last remaining Champions League place, which Inter won 3–1; Lippi had been forced to field Baggio due to several injuries. Baggio was given a perfect 10 rating from the Italian sports newspaper La Gazzetta dello Sport, which described his performance as "absolutely perfect all game". This match is considered an example of professionalism shown by Baggio, as Inter president Massimo Moratti had stated Lippi would only stay on if the team qualified for the Champions League. "Roberto Baggio was the best Italian fantasista; he was better than Meazza and Boniperti, and he was amongst the greatest of all time, right behind Maradona, Pelé, and maybe Cruyff. Without the injury problems and the difficulties with his knees, he would have been the very best player in history." —Carlo Mazzone, Baggio's coach at Brescia. After two years with Inter, Baggio decided not to renew his expiring contract due to his conflicts with Marcello Lippi, making him a free agent at age 33. He was linked with several Serie A clubs, such as Napoli and Reggina, and also various Premier League and La Liga clubs, including Barcelona. Baggio ultimately transferred to Serie A newcomers Brescia under head coach Carlo Mazzone, aiming to save them from relegation; he remained in Italy in order to have a greater opportunity of being called up for the 2002 World Cup. He was made captain and was given the number 10 shirt, playing as an attacking midfielder. Despite injury problems during the first half of the season, Baggio re-found his form and managed ten goals and ten assists in the 2000–01 season. Brescia finished in a joint seventh place, their best Serie A finish since the league's re-establishment in 1946, and qualified for the UEFA Intertoto Cup, also reaching the quarter-finals of the Coppa Italia, losing to eventual winners Fiorentina. Baggio helped Brescia to the final of the 2001 UEFA Intertoto Cup, where they were defeated by Paris Saint-Germain on away goals. Baggio scored one goal in the tournament, in the final from a penalty. His performances earned him a nomination for the 2001 Ballon d'Or, and he finished 25th overall in the rankings. Baggio was one of the best offensive playmakers in the league, winning the Guerin d'oro Award in 2001, awarded by the Italian sports magazine Guerin Sportivo, to the player with the highest average rating throughout the season with at least 19 appearances. At the start of 2001–02 season, Baggio scored eight goals in the first nine matches, leading him to the top of the Serie A goalscoring table. In his eighth league appearance of the season, against Piacenza, Baggio scored a goal but later suffered an injury. A week later, against Venezia, he scored from a penalty, but he endured a more serious injury following a hard challenge which caused him to tear the ACL of his left knee, keeping him out of action for four months. He suffered a second serious injury that season, tearing the meniscus in his left knee, after returning to the team, and coming off the bench, in the Coppa Italia semi-final against Parma on 31 January 2002. He was operated on 4 February 2002 and he returned for three matches before the end of the season, making a recovery in 76 days. On 21 April 2002, in the first game after his comeback, Baggio came on as a substitute to score two goals against Fiorentina, helping Brescia win the match. He scored again against Bologna, saving Brescia from relegation on the final matchday, and bringing his seasonal tally to 11 goals in 12 Serie A matches. Despite Baggio's performances and public demand, Italy national team head coach Giovanni Trapattoni did not deem him fully fit, prompting the coach to leave Baggio out of the final squad for the 2002 World Cup. Trapattoni also expressed concern about bringing Baggio to the World Cup due to the presence of Francesco Totti and Alessandro Del Piero in his role, believing that this could create a rivalry between the players. After missing out on the tournament, Baggio reversed his initial decision to retire after the World Cup, expressing his intention to surpass the 200 Serie A goal mark. Baggio maintained a high level of performance under new coach Gianni De Biasi. Baggio managed 12 goals and 9 assists during the 2002–03 season, helping Brescia to an eighth-place finish and another UEFA Intertoto Cup spot. He scored his 300th career goal from a penalty on 15 December 2002, in Brescia's 3–1 home victory over Perugia, also setting-up one of Igli Tare's goals. In the 2003–04 season, the final season of his career, Baggio recorded 12 goals and 11 assists. He scored his 200th goal in Serie A in a 2–2 draw against Parma on 14 March 2004, saving Brescia from relegation, as they finished the season in 11th place. Baggio was the first player in almost 30 years to surpass the 200-goal milestone, and is currently only one of seven players to have accomplished the feat. Baggio scored his final and 205th Serie A career goal on the second last matchday, in a 2–1 home win over Coppa Italia winners Lazio on 9 May 2004; he also set up Brescia's first goal in that match. Baggio played his last career match on 16 May 2004 on the final matchday of the season at the San Siro against Milan, which ended in a 4–2 loss to the Serie A champions; during the game, he set-up Matuzalém's second goal. In the 88th minute, De Biasi substituted Baggio, prompting the 80,000 present at the San Siro to give him a standing ovation; Milan's captain, defender Paolo Maldini, who was Baggio's former teammate both with the Italy national team and Milan, also embraced him before he left the pitch. With Brescia, Baggio scored 46 goals in 101 appearances in all competitions, scoring 45 goals in 95 Serie A appearances, and one goal in two European matches. Baggio also made four Coppa Italia appearances with Brescia. Baggio retired as Brescia's all-time leading goalscorer in Serie A. He ended his career with 205 goals in Serie A, making him the seventh-highest scorer of all time, behind Silvio Piola, Francesco Totti (who overtook him in 2011), Gunnar Nordahl, Giuseppe Meazza, José Altafini, and Antonio Di Natale (who overtook him in 2015). Baggio's number 10 shirt was retired by Brescia in his honour, and he is considered the club's greatest ever player. Before Baggio had joined Brescia, they had never been able to avoid relegation after being newly promoted to Serie A, in over 40 years. During the four years under Baggio, Brescia recorded their best ever Serie A run and were never relegated. Baggio totalled 27 goals in 56 caps for his national team at senior level, making him Italy's fourth-highest all-time goalscorer, tied with Del Piero, who managed the tally in 91 appearances. At youth level, he was capped for the Italy U16 on four occasions in 1984, scoring three goals. Under Cesare Maldini, he was called up for one Italy under-21 match against Switzerland on 16 October 1987, although he was an unused substitute, and strangely failed to make an appearance for the azzurrini. His first senior International call-up was given to him by manager Azeglio Vicini, and he made his first appearance for Italy on 16 November 1988 at age 21 in a 1–0 friendly victory over the Netherlands, assisting Gianluca Vialli's match-winning goal. He scored his first goal for Italy on 22 April 1989, from a free-kick in a 1–1 draw against Uruguay in an international friendly in Verona. Later that year, in his following international appearance in Italy's friendly against Bulgaria, held in Cesena on 20 September, he scored his first brace for Italy in a 4–0 victory, also later assisting Andrea Carnevale's goal with a cross from a free kick, and contributing to Nikolay Iliev's own goal by setting-up Vialli, whose shot was subsequently deflected by the Bulgarian defender. "Baggio. Oh yes, oh yes…oh yes! What a goal by Baggio! That's the goal they've all been waiting for!" —ITV Commentator Alan Parry's reaction to Baggio's goal in Italy's group stage match against Czechoslovakia, during the 1990 World Cup. Baggio was called up for his first World Cup tournament in 1990, on home soil. Baggio appeared in five matches, starting in four of them, as Italy manager Azeglio Vicini preferred the more experienced Gianluca Vialli to start against Argentina. Baggio was still able to display his ability throughout the tournament, and Vicini's decision not to use him more frequently was later criticised, as Baggio's creative combinations with Salvatore Schillaci were praised. Baggio scored twice during the tournament, including the "goal of the tournament" in a 2–0 win in his first competitive international fixture, in Italy's final group match against Czechoslovakia. The goal, which drew him comparisons with Giuseppe Meazza, involved an exchange with Giuseppe Giannini on the left wing, followed by a dribbling run from midfield, in which Baggio beat several players, wrong-footing the last defender with a feint, before putting the ball past the goalkeeper. This goal was later recognised as the seventh-best goal in World Cup history in a FIFA poll. In the round of 16 match against Uruguay, which Italy won 2–0, Baggio started the play which led to Italy's first goal, scored by Schillaci. Baggio also scored a goal from a direct free-kick, but it was disallowed as the referee had awarded an indirect free-kick. Baggio also had a goal incorrectly ruled offside in the quarter-final against the Republic of Ireland, which Italy won 1–0; Baggio was once again involved in the build-up which led to Schillaci's match winning goal. Italy were eliminated on penalties against defending champions Argentina in the semi-finals after a 1–1 draw, although Baggio was able to score his penalty in the shootout. Baggio had come off the bench in the second half for Giannini, and came close to winning the match with a free-kick, but it was saved by Sergio Goycochea. In the bronze medal match against England, Baggio returned to the starting line-up, playing behind Schillaci. He scored Italy's first goal of the match after stealing the ball from Peter Shilton. David Platt momentarily equalised, but with five minutes left on the clock, Baggio set up Schillaci, who was fouled inside the area by Paul Parker. Although Baggio was the regularly designated penalty taker for his national team, he stepped aside to allow Schillaci to score and capture the Golden Shoe, a gesture which was praised by the Italian media. Baggio assisted a goal by Nicola Berti in the dying minutes of the match, but it was incorrectly ruled offside. Italy won the match 2–1, capturing the third place medal. Following the World Cup, Baggio was not called up often by Vicini for the Euro 1992 Qualification matches, only making three appearances and scoring two goals as Italy failed to qualify for the tournament, finishing second in their qualifying group behind the Soviet Union. Under Italy's new manager, Arrigo Sacchi, Baggio was his team's top scorer during their qualifying campaign for the 1994 World Cup, scoring five goals of the team's 14 goals in the eight games in also providing seven assists. He helped Italy top their group and qualify for the 1994 World Cup, notably contributing to Dino Baggio's winner in the decisive final group match against Portugal, which secured Italy's place in the final competition. One of his best performances during the qualifying campaign occurred on 14 October 1992 against Switzerland; Italy were trailing 2–0 at home and Baggio led his team to a 2–2 draw comeback, scoring a goal. Under Sacchi, Baggio made his first and only starting appearance as Italy's captain in the 1994 World Cup qualifying match in Glasgow against Scotland on 18 November 1992. However, he was substituted off in the final minutes of the 0–0 draw after injuring his rib. Despite a series of injuries prior to the tournament, Baggio was expected to be one of the stars of the 1994 World Cup, entering the competition as the reigning Ballon d'Or winner and FIFA World Player of the Year, and at the peak of his career; after a lacklustre start, he led his team to the final with three match winning performances in the knockout rounds, wearing the number 10 shirt, and scoring five goals in the process. In a disappointing first match against Republic of Ireland at Giants Stadium, New Jersey, Italy were defeated 1–0. In the second match against Norway, he appeared more inspired; however, Italy goalkeeper Gianluca Pagliuca was sent off for handling the ball outside the area. Luca Marchegiani was brought in to replace him, and Arrigo Sacchi decided to sacrifice Baggio in what produced an outcry amidst the fans. Baggio later stated that Sacchi was "crazy." Italy won the match 1–0. Italy continued to disappoint, as their final group match ended in a 1–1 draw against Mexico, and he again failed to influence the result. The Italians finished third in their group, drawing much criticism from the press, and only advancing from the first round as the fourth-best third-placed team; Juventus president Gianni Agnelli famously called Baggio un coniglio bagnato ("a wet rabbit"), referring to his despondent demeanour, hoping the jab would spur him on to score. After under-performing during the group stage, Baggio refound his form in the knockout stages, where he scored five memorable goals. He scored two in the round of 16, helping a ten-man Italy defeat Nigeria 2–1 at Foxboro Stadium in Boston, after trailing for most of the match. He scored his first goal of the match with two minutes left on the clock, after receiving ball at the edge of the area from Roberto Mussi. He then went on to score the winning goal from a penalty in extra time after setting up Antonio Benarrivo with a lobbed pass, who was then fouled in the penalty area. Baggio scored another match-winning goal in the quarter-finals to defeat Spain 2–1 with three minutes remaining. After receiving the ball from Giuseppe Signori, he dribbled past the Spanish goalkeeper Andoni Zubizarreta, scoring off-balance from a tight angle. He was also involved in the build-up which led to Italy's first goal by his unrelated namesake Dino Baggio. Baggio gave a man of the match performance in the semi-finals; he scored two more goals to beat Bulgaria 2–1 at Giants Stadium, leading Italy to the World Cup final for the first time in 12 years. He scored his first goal after beating two players and curling the ball from outside the area into the bottom-right corner. His second was scored with a half volley from a tight angle, assisted by Demetrio Albertini with a lobbed ball. "I knew what I had to do and my concentration was perfect. But I was so tired that I tried to hit the ball too hard." —Baggio on his physical and mental state before taking the penalty in the final. Baggio was not fully fit for the final against Brazil at the Rose Bowl in Pasadena, California, after pulling his hamstring during the semi-final and playing with the aid of a painkiller injection. Despite being far less dominant than in previous matches, he still tested Brazilian goalkeeper Cláudio Taffarel and was able to set up a few chances for his teammates. The match ended 0–0 after extra time; he took Italy's last penalty in the resulting shootout, but he put the decisive spot-kick over the crossbar, which meant the Brazilians won the title, resulting in one of the most upsetting moments in World Cup history, and a miss with which his career would frequently become associated. Immediately after the match, Baggio stated the he was "very disappointed," also noting that "a shock of pain" went through his leg as he kicked. Baggio has since described the infamous miss as the worst moment of his career, stating that it affected him for years, and that he still "dreams" about it to this day. In his autobiography, when recounting the miss, he later reflected: "Penalties are only missed by those who have the courage to take them." Before him, two other Italians, Franco Baresi and Daniele Massaro, had already missed penalties. Having led Italy to the final with his memorable performances, Baggio received the Silver Ball as the second-best player of the tournament, behind Romário, and also finished tied for second in goals scored throughout the tournament, although he missed out on the Bronze Boot, which went to Kennet Andersson and Romário. He was also named in the World Cup All-Star Team. Baggio finished runner-up for the Ballon d'Or, with 136 points from a possible 245, and third place for the FIFA World Player of the Year in 1994. Despite Baggio's association with missing the decisive penalty in the 1994 World Cup final shoot-out, former Telelatino broadcaster Alf De Blasis stated in 2010 that he believed that Baggio's performance throughout the entire tournament cemented his legacy as a footballer; he also stated that one of his favourite World Cup memories was Baggio's performance against Nigeria in the round of 16 of the tournament, commenting: "Roberto Baggio put the Azzurri on his shoulders and carried them to victory, scoring the tying goal on a wonderful solo effort late in the match and then the winning goal on a penalty in extra time. Baggio, of course, would go on to lead Italy to the final, where he is remembered for an unfortunate miss from the penalty spot. Truly a bittersweet World Cup for one of the game's greatest stars, but a World Cup that I think defined his legacy in the game." Reflecting on Baggio's performance at the 1994 World Cup in 2001, Stefano Bozzi of BBC Sport stated: "At the USA 94 World Cup, [Baggio] single-handedly hauled Italy to the final." In 2006, the BBC described him as "Italy's best player throughout the [1994] tournament." In 2017, Emmet Gates instead described Baggio's run-up to the 1994 World Cup final with Italy as "the greatest show of individual excellence since another equally majestic number ten [Maradona] dominated the 1986 tournament." When summarising Baggio's 1994 World Cup in 2018, Ed Dove of ESPN FC stated that "'[t]he Divine Ponytail' had arguably been the outstanding player of the tournament, bailing Italy out on numerous occasions, but his inspirational touch deserted him when it mattered most." His colleague Nick Miller instead stated that "Roberto Baggio was the best player at the 1994 World Cup, dragging Italy to the final virtually on his own." After the 1994 World Cup, Italy head coach Arrigo Sacchi and Baggio infamously fell out. Their relationship deteriorated in September 1994 following a 1–1 draw against Slovenia in a Euro 1996 qualifying match, where Baggio was benched. After a 2–1 defeat to Croatia in a Euro 1996 qualifying match in November, their relationship hit the breaking point, and Baggio, supported by his teammates, asked for the manager's dismissal. Due to his disagreements with Sacchi, Baggio was called up to the national team less frequently, only making one more substitute appearance in a 1–0 home win against Slovenia in a Euro 1996 qualifier in September 1995. He eventually lost his spot in the squad, missing out on Italy's Euro 1996 squad, despite winning the scudetto that year with Milan. Sacchi justified his decision by stating Baggio was not fully fit, and that Enrico Chiesa helped the team more when possession was lost. Italy were eliminated in the group stage of the competition. Baggio was also excluded from Cesare Maldini's Italian Olympic squad in 1996. After a lengthy absence from the national team, Baggio was called up by Cesare Maldini for a World Cup qualifying match against Poland on 30 April 1997, in Naples; Baggio came off the bench and scored a goal in a 3–0 win. He was subsequently selected as one of Italy's 22 players for the 1998 World Cup following his performances with Bologna. "I had the image of my miss from four years ago stuck in my mind. I was stepping up to the penalty spot and I thought to myself: 'Just hit it hard, hit it hard...' —Baggio on his penalty against Chile in the 1998 World Cup. In Italy's opening match of the 1998 World Cup in France, against Chile, Baggio started alongside Christian Vieri, playing all 90 minutes, as Alessandro Del Piero was still recovering from an injury. Vieri opened the scoring from a Baggio assist, but Chile managed to equalise and take the lead through Marcelo Salas. Baggio created several chances, but Italy were unable to equalise. Towards the end of the match, Baggio played a low cross into the box which unintentionally touched Chilean defender Ronald Fuentes's hand at the edge of the penalty area, resulting in a fortunate penalty for Italy. Despite missing the decisive penalty in the 1994 World Cup final shootout, Baggio stepped up to take the penalty, and he scored Italy's equalising goal, becoming the first Italian player to score in three World Cups. This was the first penalty he had taken for Italy since the 1994 World Cup final miss; Baggio described the goal as "liberating." In Italy's 3–0 second group match win over Cameroon, Baggio assisted Luigi Di Biagio's opening goal with a cross following a corner; however, he was replaced by Del Piero during the second half after sustaining a minor injury. Baggio scored his second goal of the tournament in Italy's final group match against Austria, which ended in a 2–1 win to Italy. Baggio came on during the second half, replacing Del Piero, after the crowd had begun to chant his name. He scored the winning goal of the match, after combining with Francesco Moriero and Filippo Inzaghi, as Italy topped their group. With this goal, he tied Paolo Rossi's record for most goals by an Italian player in the World Cup finals, with nine; this was also his 27th and final goal for Italy. He was left on the bench for the round of 16 win over Norway as Italy advanced to the quarter-finals. In the quarter-final match against eventual champions France, Baggio came on as a substitute for Del Piero in the second half, and managed to create some scoring opportunities. The score remained 0–0, and the match went to extra time, although Baggio came the closest to scoring the golden goal, with a volley from a lobbed pass by Albertini, but his shot was put just wide of Fabien Barthez's far post. The match eventually went to a penalty shootout. Although Baggio converted his penalty Italy's first, the shootout was won by the host nation and Italy was eliminated from a World Cup on penalties for the third consecutive time. Italy's coach was criticised for starting the recovering Del Piero ahead of Baggio, and for not allowing the two players to play alongside each other. Despite rumours that the substitutions had created a rivalry between the players, Baggio and Del Piero remain friends. In 2008, Baggio stated that he has great respect for Del Piero, and that there had never been disagreements between them. In turn, Del Piero expressed his admiration for Baggio in 2011. Baggio was initially a regular squad member under Dino Zoff, appearing as a substitute in two UEFA Euro 2000 qualifying matches, and in a 2–0 win against Wales in 1998, setting up a goal for Vieri; and in a 1–1 draw against Belarus in 1999. Baggio made a starting appearance in a 0–0 friendly draw against Norway in 1999, creating several chances, helping to set-up a goal which was ruled offside, and hitting the post from a free-kick. However, he was later dropped from the squad after Inter's poor 1998–99 season, and he was not called up for UEFA Euro 2000 due to his limited playing time during the 1999–2000 season, and accusations made against his fitness. Zoff centred his squad around younger offensive players, such as Francesco Totti, Alessandro Del Piero, Stefano Fiore, Marco Delvecchio, Filippo Inzaghi and Vincenzo Montella. Baggio was voted Italy's Player of the Century in 2000. Baggio was controversially excluded from Italy's 2002 World Cup squad by coach Giovanni Trapattoni, who believed him to not have fully recovered from the serious injury he had sustained during the season. Although he was initially keen to include Baggio in the final 23-man list, he ultimately excluded him from the squad; Baggio had made a direct appeal to him prior to the tournament by writing him a letter. Fans and pundits criticised the omission, as Italy were eliminated by co-hosts South Korea in the round of 16. Many fans hoped to see him play for Italy at Euro 2004, or with the 2004 Olympic squad that eventually managed a bronze medal, but this was not to be the case. However, he was given an international send-off by Trapattoni at age 37 in a friendly match against Spain on 28 April 2004, in which he wore the number 10 shirt for the final time, as well as the captain's armband for part of the match. Although Baggio entertained the crowd with his creativity and skill, he was unable to score, despite winning a free-kick from which Vieri's equalising goal arose. The match finished 1–1 and Baggio was given a standing ovation after being substituted off for Fabrizio Miccoli. This was Baggio's 56th and final match for Italy, and it was the first time an Italian footballer's career had been celebrated this way since Silvio Piola retired. Baggio is the only Italian player ever to score in three World Cups with nine career World Cup goals, putting him equal with Christian Vieri and Paolo Rossi as Italy's top World Cup goalscorers. Despite his performances for Italy in the 1990, 1994, and 1998 World Cups, he never played for Italy in the UEFA European Championships, and is currently the Italian player with the most caps without playing in a European Championship. "He's without doubt the most skilful number ten in the modern game, the archetypal playmaker, if you like, who can create chances and score goals." —Brian Laudrup on Baggio, 1995. Described as a fantasista, trequartista, mezzapunta, or rifinitore throughout his career in the Italian media, due to his role on the pitch and creative playing style, Baggio was a world class playmaker with an eye for goal, who was renowned for his vision, creativity, ability to read the game, crossing accuracy, and passing ability, which made him an excellent assist provider; however, he usually played as a second striker throughout his career, as he was known for scoring goals as well as creating them. This led Michel Platini to describe him as a "9 and a half", namely a player whose role lay half-way between that of a forward and a midfielder, as he was not a true number 9 (the shirt number usually associated with a striker), due to his creative ability, but he scored more than a number 10 (the shirt number commonly associated with an advanced playmaker), a description which often saw him identified with the role of an inside forward. He also stated that Baggio's playing style coincided with the re-emergence of the attacking midfielder in Italy during the early 2000s; indeed, he served as an inspiration to many future players. Baggio was a tactically versatile player, with a good understanding of the game, and was comfortable attacking on either flank or through the centre of the pitch; this allowed him to operate anywhere along the front-line. His preferred position was in a free playmaking role behind the forwards, as a creative attacking midfielder, although he was rarely deployed in this position throughout his career due to the prevalence of the 4–4–2 formation, in which he usually functioned either as a main striker, or more frequently in a supporting role as a deep-lying forward. It was only in later years that he was able to play in this free role more frequently. He was also occasionally deployed out of position as a left winger in an attacking trident, as a wide midfielder, or even in central midfield as a mezzala or deep-lying playmaker on rarer instances. During the lead-up to the 1994 World Cup, he was also initially employed by Italy's manager Arrigo Sacchi as a centre-forward, in a role known in Italian football jargon as centravanti di manovra (which literally translates to "manoeuvring centre-forward"), which was a precursor to the modern false-nine role; in this position, Baggio was expected to link-up with other players and create chances for them, in addition to creating space with his movement by dropping deep into midfield, and allowing the team's wingers to cut inside and make attacking runs into the centre. A prolific goalscorer, Baggio was an accurate finisher from both inside and outside the area, and was known for his accurate bending shots and composure in front of goal, rather than his power. Due to his excellent technique, he was a precise volleyer, and he had a penchant for scoring from chip shots. Moreover, he was also a set piece specialist, who was highly regarded for his ball delivery from dead-ball situations, as well as his precision from direct free-kicks and his ability to curl the ball, which earned him a reputation as one of the best free kick takers of his generation. His free-kick technique influenced several other players who came to be renowned for their prowess from dead-ball situations, such as Alessandro Del Piero and Andrea Pirlo. During his time with Juventus, his free kick technique was described as a cross between that of Maradona's, Zico's, and Platini's, as at the time, his ball-striking technique was thought to resemble Platini's, although, like Zico and Maradona, he preferred to take free kicks from close range, usually from a distance of around 20 to 16 metres from the goal, or even just outside the area, and to have the ball touched by a teammate first before striking it. Despite his decisive miss in the 1994 World Cup final shootout, Baggio was also a penalty kick specialist. Although naturally right-footed, Baggio was comfortable using either foot, and often began dribbling with his left foot. Not particularly imposing physically, or in the air, due to his diminutive stature and slender physique, he was known however for his pace and acceleration over short distances, which, along with his movement, positioning, anticipation, technical ability, quick feet, low centre of gravity, and resulting agility, allowed him to lose his markers when making offensive runs into the area, both on and off the ball. Regarded as one of the greatest dribblers ever, and as one of the most technically accomplished players of all time, Baggio possessed an excellent first touch, and was renowned for his skilful dribbling, ball control and balance, as well as his spatial awareness, speed of thought and execution, reactions, close control at speed, and ability to beat opponents with flair, tricks, body feints, or sudden changes of pace or direction, both in one-on-one situations, or during individual dribbling runs. Zico once described Baggio as "technically flawless," while Gianluigi Buffon, in his 2008 autobiography Numero 1, described Baggio as the "most technical player" with whom he had ever shared a pitch, adding that his touch and ball control were "unique." In 2004, Sacchi stated: "Baggio is creativity, flair, unpredictability, intuition, harmony." In 2016, Rob Smyth of The Guardian praised Baggio for his "instinctive intelligence," when commenting on his playing style, also describing him as a "conductor" on the pitch "who knew when and how to change the tempo of an attack." Considered by pundits to be a highly promising prospect in his youth, Baggio later established himself as one of the best players of his generation, and as one of Italy's greatest players ever; Baggio is regarded by many in the sport, including his former Milan manager Fabio Capello, as the best Italian footballer of all time, and by many in the sport, as one of the greatest players in the history of the game. Italian journalist Gianni Brera, who had observed both Giuseppe Meazza and Gianni Rivera, stated that Baggio was the best Italian player he had ever seen. During his time at Juventus, the club's former chairman, Gianni Agnelli, referred to Baggio as an "artist", comparing his elegance to the painter Raffaello, while he described the emerging talent Alessandro Del Piero as Pinturicchio. In a 2011 interview with La Gazzetta dello Sport, Del Piero stated that Baggio, along with Zinedine Zidane, was the best player with whom he had ever played, a view shared by Baggio's fellow former Juventus teammate Angelo Peruzzi and his former Brescia teammate Pep Guardiola in 2010, as well as his former Inter teammate Javier Zanetti in 2020, while Matthew Le Tissier named Baggio as his best ever opponent in 2012. In 2017, Baggio's former teammate Ravanelli instead labelled Baggio as the greatest player of all time. In 1993, Giampiero Boniperti stated that he believed that Baggio was "already one of the greatest number tens ever." In 2018, Cathal Kelly of The Globe and Mail described Baggio playing in the 1994 World Cup as "the best player in the world" at the time, while The Guardian described him as "[t]he definitive player of the decade", also adding that "the 1990s belonged to Il Divin Codino", and labelled him as "probably the finest player in the world between 1992 and 1995." In 2015, Les Carpenter of The Guardian described Baggio as "perhaps the greatest player of his time," while his colleague Emmet Gates dubbed him "the best player of his generation." In 2010, Marco Gori of TuttoMercatoWeb labelled Baggio as "one of the best footballers in history." Throughout his career, pundit Gianni Brera compared his playing style to that of Italian former footballer Giuseppe Meazza, while manager Trapattoni instead compared Baggio's technical characteristics to other former number 10s such as Zico, Platini, and Juan Alberto Schiaffino. In 2017, Baggio received praise from numerous sporting figures and pundits ahead of his 50th birthday, with Stefano Edel of La Gazzetta di Mantova describing Baggio as "the Italian Maradona", and echoing Sacchi's words prior to the 1994 World Cup, when he compared Baggio's importance to Italy with that of Maradona to Argentina. Zico described him as "one of the best players in the history of Italian football", while Tommaso Pellizzari of Il Corriere della Sera called him "the greatest pure talent of Italian football." James McHie of Calciomercato.com instead named him as Italy's greatest player, calling him "the greatest player [...] to pull on the Azzurri shirt", a view shared by Stefano Discreti of Mediaset, who called Baggio "the best Italian footballer of all time" in 2019. Also in 2017, Giuseppe Bergomi described Baggio as "extraordinary" and as a "pure talent", who was "devastating when he played because he was capable of deciding games on his own." In 2004, Gianni Rivera described him as "one of the greatest Italian footballers ever." In 2019, Marco Gentile of Il Giornale described Baggio as "one of the best Italian [...] players in the history of football", and also as "one of the best players in the history of world football." In 2020, Luca Stamerra of Eurosport described him as one of the "best number 10s in the history of this sport." In 2019, his former Italy manager Dino Zoff listed Baggio as one of the best players he ever coached, while his former Fiorentina manager Sven-Göran Eriksson named him as the most talented player he had ever coached alongside Wayne Rooney in 2021, commenting: "He had everything: incredible technique, vision, pace." In 2019, author Paolo Condò ranked Baggio among the greatest players of all time, a view shared by Emmanuel Amunike in 2020 as well as Roberto Mancini and John Keilman of the Chicago Tribune, who both described Baggio as one of the "all-time greats" in 2018 and 2019, respectively. Former RAI commentator Bruno Pizzul, who served as a pundit for the Italy national team's World Cup matches between 1986 and 2002, named Baggio as his favourite player, and as one of the best footballers he ever saw, among both Italian and non-Italian players. In 2020, Matteo Marani of La Stampa dubbed Baggio as "one of the purest expressions of talent that world football has produced", also adding "Roberto was the game of football in its pureness. The beauty of one of his technical gestures, the polished movements, the speed of thought. Throughout his career he painted football, filling the eyes of those who were passionate about this sport and not only of the fans of the clubs whose shirts he wore. Vicenza, Fiorentina, Juventus, Milan, Bologna, Inter, Brescia and the Italian national team enjoyed his talent, his strength and his goals. Roberto Baggio is undoubtedly one of the names that made football great." Known for his dislike of the defensive, physical and tactical nature of Italian football in the 1990s, Baggio drew criticism from certain pundits and some of his managers for his limited defensive work-rate when possession was lost, as well as the fact that the athletic part of his game was not his main focus during training sessions in his youth, while in his later career, his physical ailments often forced him to train independently with a personal fitness coach and physiotherapist, rather than with his team; as such, Baggio's Milan manager Capello believed that he was not capable of playing for 90 minutes, due to the precarious physical condition of his knees. Luigi Simoni, one of his Inter managers, lauded Baggio for his work-rate in training, stating in 2009 that he would do up to six or seven hours of gym work a day under his tenure, a view which was also shared by Baggio's former Bologna teammate Daniele Carnasciali in 2013. Carlo Mazzone and Gianni De Biasi, his managers at Brescia, as well as his former teammates Luca Toni and Emanuele Filippini, also praised Baggio for his discipline, professionalism, and dedication in training during his time with the club, with De Biasi calling him "an example." Known to be an introvert in the media, due to his quiet private life and reluctance to give interviews, some in the sport, including Gianni Rivera, argued that Baggio lacked leadership qualities on the pitch, despite having served as captain for both Juventus and Brescia. His personality is thought to have limited him from being more successful, in particular with larger clubs, with some pundits instead arguing that he excelled more with smaller teams; others instead believed that he had a difficult character due to his disagreements with several of his managers throughout his career, although he was generally regarded as a "correct" and co-operative player by officials, and as a classy and well-behaved footballer in the media. Mazzone also said of him: "Baggio was one of the greatest Italian football players of all time. But I can tell you this, he was an even greater man. He was quiet, polite, respectful, humble. He never let his great talent weigh on anyone else. He was a friend who helped me win games on a Sunday." In 1995, Fabio Capello described Baggio as a player who was "decisive." His former teammate Andrea Pirlo instead commented that "[Baggio] was a silent leader, and above all, he was a leader on the pitch. When he played for the team, he made you win the games", also later describing him as a player who "carried his teammates." Despite his talent, success, popularity with the fans, and reputation as one of the greatest players of all time, critical reception of Baggio was occasionally divided throughout his career; this was in part due to his recurring injury struggles, as well as the fact that tactically certain managers struggled to find a suitable playing position for him. His role as a playmaker between the midfield and forward lines, as well as his skilful and creative playing style, were often regarded as being obsolete in modern football, in which managers often favoured the use of the 4–4–2 formation and a more athletic approach to the game; moreover, while Baggio was not an outright forward, he was also thought to lack the stamina to play in midfield, which made him less suited to this particular system, and occasionally led him to be excluded by his managers, although he was ultimately able to adapt to playing as a forward effectively. Baggio's unique playing position, style, and approach to the game, combined with his talent, limited work-rate, and injury struggles, led him to have both many admirers and several detractors. Maradona once described Baggio as "a genius" but also as "a great player who was never able to fulfil his entire potential", something with which Michel Platini concurred, while Pelé instead called him a "legend." A 1994 article on Baggio by The Independent stated: "Among professionals, [Baggio] is regarded as the best", quoting Ryan Giggs, who said: "You look to Roberto Baggio, and you realise what a good player looks like." However, the newspaper also went on to say that "Baggio's is a brittle influence. There are no half measures in his play. He is either brilliant, or he disappears, looking confused and unhappy. Since Juventus's whole pattern of play depends on him, his disappearances can be tricky. The press has interpreted his inconsistency as a lack of commitment." In 2015, The Daily Telegraph accused him of going "missing in big games." In 2020, Daniel Story of Planet Football stated he believed that Baggio was one of the most underrated players of the past 30 years. In 2016, Luke Chandley of The Huffington Post described Baggio as "Italian football's great oxymoron", noting: "For all the skill he possessed going forward, he was the opposite of the reputation given to Italian football spanning across his whole career. Italian football was defensive know-how and structured play." His former manager Arrigo Sacchi believed that Baggio was often misused by his coaches, and that he would have been an even greater player had he been born abroad, a view which was also held by journalist Mattia Losi, who felt that Baggio would have been more appreciated had he been born in Brazil or Argentina, rather than in a country with a football legacy like Italy's, which often failed to recognise young local talent, and Emmet Gates, who said in 2013 that "Baggio unfortunately was born in the wrong country, or rather, he was born in Italy at the wrong time." Regarding this contrast and Baggio's overall career, Tim Collings of The Guardian described him as "Italy's greatest player of fantasia" in 2004 but also wrote: "Baggio's record, as a player for club and country, fails to match his reputation. He is less known for his acts of great success than for his injuries, his misfortunes and his courage; he is an artist in sport whose work is appreciated but no longer used in modern currency. Baggio's career is filled by cameos of sublime skill, particular games when his imagination and ability enabled his team to transcend all normal expectations. Yet the lasting memory will be of his missed penalty in the shootout at the end of the 1994 World Cup final in Pasadena." In 2017, Antonio Martelli of La Presse described Baggio as "one of the greatest Italian players of all time maybe the best of the last thirty years", and as "an "authentic champion who could have been even greater without a series of extremely severe knee injuries that undermined his career since its dawning", a view shared by Raffaele Di Fusco, who said "who knows what he could have become without all of those injuries", and also Renzo Ulivieri, who stated that "if he had had fewer injuries, he would have won more." In 2018, Greg Murray of Football Italia described Baggio as "one of the greatest football players of all time" but also lamented that "we never saw him at full fitness and are fortunate we got to enjoy him at all." He summarised Baggio's career with the following: "It is perhaps one of football's great injustices that Il Divin Codino is best known globally for his penalty miss in the Final of the 1994 World Cup against Brazil. For fans of Serie A, Baggio is recognised as the best of his generation, despite a career that was blighted by injury and clashes with his Coaches." He also added: "Retiring in 2004, it has been suggested that Baggio was a victim of the era in which he lived. As player with transcendent creativity, but physically fragile, he struggled to fit into his Coaches’ plans during a time when tactics and hard work were everything. Had he been born in the current era, where players are far more protected, he would perhaps have achieved even more. It's heart-breaking to think what we missed out on, but we’re also grateful to have experienced the Divine Ponytail at all." Baggio's career was affected by many serious injuries, which led to a gradual loss of pace and mobility as his career progressed, as well as increasing weight-gain in the final years of his career, which eventually forced him to undergo a training regime in order to build muscle mass in his legs and prolong his career during his time at Brescia; his continual physical struggles ultimately led him to retire in 2004, which he later described as a "liberation." Since suffering his first series of career-threatening injuries with Vicenza and Fiorentina in 1985 and 1986, respectively, he was prone to persistent knee problems in particular, which often limited his playing time; injuries led certain pundits, such as Benedetto Ferrara of La Repubblica in 2010, to label Baggio as a "superfine talent" but who was also "inconsistent." In 1995, Maurizio Crosetti, Ferrara's colleague, had previously described Baggio as "fragile." Regarding the injuries that threatened his career as a youngster, and which haggled him until he retired, Baggio wrote in his 2001 autobiography that "all of my professional career, I played it with a leg and a half. Thousands of hours of work to keep alive a leg which, if it were up to her, would diminish each day. I played it without being fully all right, ever, because if I were to play matches only when I felt one-hundred percent I would play three matches a year." Despite the numerous physical impairments he faced throughout his career, Baggio also stood out for his longevity, and was able to maintain a consistently high level of performance even in the final years of his career with Brescia into his late 30s. In 2004, Sacchi praised Baggio for his strength of character, which he believed even surpassed his talent, as it allowed him to overcome his injuries and physical struggles, and ultimately "win [his] personal battles against bad luck." In 2017, Capello noted that Baggio had the extraordinary willpower to carry on playing despite his physical struggles. Baggio attributes his inner strength to Buddhism. Widely considered to be one of the greatest footballers of all time, Baggio came fourth in the 1999 FIFA Player of the Century internet poll, and was ranked 16th in World Soccer's list of the 100 greatest footballers of the 20th century, the highest ranked Italian player; in IFFHS's election for the best player of the 20th century in the same year, he was elected the ninth-best Italian player and the 53rd-best European player of the Century. He was voted Italy's player of the century in 2000. In 2002, Baggio was elected to the FIFA World Cup Dream Team, and in 2003, he was the inaugural winner of the Golden Foot award, awarded for ability and personality. In 2004, he was named by Pelé in the FIFA 100 list of the world's greatest living players, and was voted 24th in the online UEFA Golden Jubilee Poll, celebrating the best European footballers of the past 50 years. In 2010, Baggio was named one of the 50 greatest Juventus legends. In 2011, he was the first footballer to be inducted into the Italian Football Hall of Fame. In a 2014 FIFA poll, Baggio was voted the ninth-greatest number 10 of all time, and later that year he was ranked 24th in The Guardian's list of the 100 greatest World Cup players of all time, ahead of the 2014 World Cup in Brazil. In 2015, journalists of La Gazzetta dello Sport elected the greatest Italian player of all time, with Baggio finishing in second place behind only Gianni Rivera; in a fan poll that was subsequently organised by the newspaper, Baggio was instead voted as the greatest Italian footballer of all time, while Majid Mohamed of UEFA ranked him as the twentieth-best player ever not to have won the UEFA Champions League. That same year, The Daily Telegraph also included Baggio at number 12 in their list of "The top 20 overrated football players of all time." FourFourTwo placed Baggio at number 52 in their 2017 list of the "100 Greatest Footballers Ever" and also named him in 2019 as the sixth best player never to win the UEFA Champions League. In July 2019, the same magazine ranked Baggio at number ten in their list of the "101 greatest football players of the last 25 years" since their first edition in the summer of 1994, while in September 2023, he was ranked 27th in their list of the "100 best football players of all time." In 2020, Jack Gallagher of 90min.com placed Baggio at number nine in his list of "The 50 Greatest Footballers of All Time", while Sky Sports ranked him as the fifth-best player ever never to have won the Champions League or European Cup. Baggio played in 16 World Cup matches for Italy; the Republic of Ireland is the only nation against which he played more than once. He is the joint-highest Italian goalscorer of all time in the World Cup, with nine goals, alongside Paolo Rossi and Christian Vieri. Baggio is the only Italian to have scored in three World Cups (two goals in 1990, five in 1994 and two in 1998). Three of his World Cup goals were scored in the group stage and six were scored during knockout matches. Baggio is the joint fourth-highest scorer for Italy with 27 goals in 56 appearances, with a 0.48 goal per match average. With Baggio, Italy was always eliminated from the World Cup in penalty shootouts: in 1990, in the semi-finals against Argentina; in 1994, in the final against Brazil; and in 1998, in the quarter-finals against France. Despite his decisive penalty miss in the 1994 World Cup final shoot-out, Baggio is statistically one of the greatest penalty kick specialists in Italian football history, as he scored 85% of his career penalties with only 19 misses, scoring 108 out of 127 penalties in official matches, the most in Italian football history. Baggio scored 10 with Vicenza, 25 with Fiorentina, 38 with Juventus, 5 with Milan, 11 with Bologna, 1 with Inter Milan, 11 with Brescia and 7 with Italy (from 7 attempts, the most goals scored from the spot by a member of the national team). 68 of his penalties were scored in Serie A, from 83 attempts, with an 82% conversion rate, one of the best records in Serie A history. In Serie A, Baggio scored 17 penalties for Fiorentina (from 19 attempts), 25 for Juventus (from 28 attempts), 3 for Milan (from 5 attempts), 11 for Bologna (from 11 attempts), 1 for Inter Milan (from 2 attempts), and 11 for Brescia (from 18 attempts). Baggio has scored penalties for six different Serie A clubs. Four of his fifteen misses in Serie A were then scored on rebounds. Behind Totti, Baggio has scored the most penalties in Serie A history. Of his other penalties, 8 were scored in Serie C (from 8 attempts), 8 in European competitions (from 9 attempts), and 17 in the Coppa Italia (from 20 attempts). In shoot-outs, Baggio converted three of four career penalties: one in the UEFA Cup with Fiorentina, and the other two with Italy at the World Cup; in World Cup shootouts, Baggio scored twice (1990 and 1998), with his only miss in 1994. Although he never won the Serie A top goalscorer title, Baggio is currently the seventh all-time highest scorer in Serie A, with 205 goals in 452 appearances. Of these goals, 96 were decisive (either equalisers or match winners). Alongside Totti, Baggio has also scored the fourth-highest number of free-kicks in Serie A with 21 goals; ahead of him are only Alessando Del Piero, Andrea Pirlo, and Siniša Mihajlović. Of his open play goals in Serie A, 84 were with his right foot, 26 with his left, and 6 were headers. He also assisted 123 goals in Serie A, making him the second–highest assist provider of all time in Serie A, behind only Totti. He is the fourth-highest scoring Italian in all competitions, behind Del Piero, Giueseppe Meazza and Silvio Piola, with 318 professional career goals in 699 appearances. Alongside Totti and Alberto Gilardino, he has scored against the most different clubs (38) in Serie A. With eight hat-tricks in Serie A, he has also scored the joint-tenth most hat-tricks in the history of the Italian league, alongside Amedeo Amadei, Giampiero Boniperti, Hernán Crespo, and Marco van Basten. Throughout his career, including friendlies, Baggio scored 425 goals. In August 2010, Baggio was appointed president of the technical sector of the Italian Football Federation, replacing his former Italy national team manager Azeglio Vicini. On 23 January 2013, Baggio stepped down from the position, stating the federation had ignored his ideas about improving the system and focusing on youth talent, which prompted him to resign. Baggio obtained his Italy Category 2 Coaching License (UEFA A License) in mid-2011, which made him eligible to coach Lega Pro teams, or work as vice-coach in Serie A and Serie B. On 5 July 2012, Baggio obtained his Category 1 UEFA Pro Coaching Licence at Coverciano, which officially allows him to coach a professional Serie A club. After his career threatening injury in 1985, Baggio, formerly a Roman Catholic, converted to Buddhism, practicing Nichiren Buddhism, and is a member of the Soka Gakkai International Buddhist organisation. The captain's armband that he wore throughout his career bore the colours of this religious school (blue, yellow, and red) and the Japanese motto "We win. We must win" in ideograms of the language. Despite his conversion, he married his long-time girlfriend Andreina Fabbi in 1989 in a traditional Roman Catholic ceremony. They have a daughter, Valentina (1990), and two sons, Mattia (1994) and Leonardo (2005). Between 1991 and 2012, Baggio was the owner of a sporting goods store in Thiene, Vicenza, called Baggio Sport, which he was eventually forced to close due to losses as a result of the 2008 recession. In 2001, Baggio wrote an autobiography entitled Una porta nel cielo (literally "A Door in the Sky", also known as "A Goal in the Sky"), including details about his career, childhood, religion, personal life and rifts with managers. It won the award for best football book at the 2002 Serie A Awards. Baggio has close ties with Argentina; he speaks Spanish and owns a ranch property in Rivera, where he enjoys hunting wild game. In March 2008, he gave a lengthy interview with La Gazzetta Dello Sport, in which he revealed that he came to support Argentine club Boca Juniors due to their passionate fanbase. On 16 October 2002, Baggio was named a Goodwill Ambassador of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Through the organisation, Baggio helped to fund hospitals, raise money for the victims of the Haiti earthquake, contribute to tackling bird flu, and was involved in the Burmese pro-democracy movement, which supported the opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi and her release from prison. Baggio was awarded the 2010 Man of Peace title in Hiroshima, presented by the World Summit of Nobel Peace Laureates in recognition of his charitable work and contribution to social justice and peace. On 8 October 2008, Baggio appeared in a charity match between Milan and Fiorentina, which had been organised in honour of his former Fiorentina teammate Stefano Borgonovo to raise money for his foundation, his treatment and for ALS research. In 2014, Baggio was one of the many celebrities to take part in the "ALS Ice Bucket Challenge" to raise awareness about the disease and funds for ALS research. On 1 September 2014, Baggio took part in the "Match for Peace", which was played at the Stadio Olimpico in Rome, with the proceeds being donated to charity. Baggio set up Juan Iturbe's goal and scored from a Diego Maradona assist. On 25 October 2014, Baggio inaugurated in Milan the opening of the largest Buddhist temple in Europe. In 1994, Italian satirist Corrado Guzzanti parodied Baggio's advertisement for Italian Petrol Company IP prior to the 1994 World Cup. Italian poet Giovanni Raboni composed the sonnet "Lode a Baggio" in a tribute to him. He has been referenced in several songs, such as "Baggio, Baggio" by Lucio Dalla, "Marmellata n. 25" by Cesare Cremonini and "Baggio" by Miles Kane. Baggio has featured in two Italian commercials which reference his infamous penalty miss in the 1994 World Cup final. The first was made for WIND in 2000, and shows Baggio scoring the final penalty to win the tournament. The second, made for Johnnie Walker in 2001, showed how he managed to conquer his grief from the miss by believing in himself and scoring the equalising penalty against Chile in the 1998 World Cup. He has featured in several Diadora commercials, as he endorsed their products. In July 2017, Diadora teamed up with Baggio once again to launch the new Signature Match Winner RB Capsule Collection. Baggio is popular in Japan, and has held close ties with the country since his conversion to Buddhism. He has endorsed several Japanese football video games, such as Human Entertainment's Super Formation Soccer 95: della Serie A, and Sega's Virtua Pro Football and Let's Make a Soccer Team!. An animated version of himself appeared in the Japanese football cartoon Captain Tsubasa, best known in Italy as Che Campioni: Holly & Benji. In the Channel 4 sitcom Father Ted, Baggio (and Alessandro Costacurta) is mentioned during the 1995 episode "Grant Unto Him Eternal Rest" by Father Dougal McGuire (portrayed by Ardal O'Hanlon), who, when prompted to say the last rites in Latin, ends up saying the footballers' names. (This stems from Graham Linehan and O'Hanlon being fans of Football Italia). In the music video for the 2010 World Cup song "Waka Waka (This Time for Africa)" by Shakira, footage of Baggio's goal against Spain and his penalty miss from the 1994 World Cup are shown. Throughout his career, Baggio has been nicknamed the Divin' Codino ("Divine Ponytail" in Italian, a reference to the iconic hairstyle he wore for a large part of his career as well as his playing ability and Buddhist beliefs) and Robi, or Roby, by his fans. An alter-ego of his is referenced in the Italian children's comics of "Mickey Mouse" and "Duck Tales" (Topolino) in the volume Topolino e il Giallo alla World Cup in which he is known as Roberto Paggio. In 2011, Italian sports newspaper La Gazzetta dello Sport issued a collection of DVDs entitled Io Che Sarò Roberto Baggio recounting his career. Baggio's impact on football has been celebrated with the release of an online game called Baggio's Magical Kicks, in which players try to replicate his accuracy on free-kicks and penalties. In 2015, the arcade game company Konami announced Baggio would feature in their football video game Pro Evolution Soccer 2016 as one of the new myClub Legends. On 3 August 2018, EA Sports announced on their official Twitter account that Baggio would feature in EA Sports' football video game FIFA 19 as one of the new Ultimate Team Icons. In 2019, Netflix announced the development of a documentary on Roberto Baggio in partnership with Mediaset. In March 2021, Netflix released the trailer of a docudrama film on Baggio's career, entitled Baggio: The Divine Ponytail, which was released on 26 May 2021; Andrea Arcangeli portrayed Baggio. Two appearances in the 1983–84 Coppa Italia Serie C Appearances in the UEFA Cup Appearance in the 1988–89 Serie A seventh-place tiebreaker match against Roma to qualify for the 1989–90 UEFA Cup Appearances in the UEFA Cup Winners' Cup Appearance in Supercoppa Italiana Appearances in the UEFA Champions League Appearances in the UEFA Champions League; includes two appearances, one goal in the second qualifying round Two appearances in the two-legged 1998–99 Coppa Italia third-place tiebreaker round against Bologna to qualify for the 1999–2000 UEFA Cup Appearance in the 1999–2000 Serie A fourth-place tiebreaker match against Parma to qualify for the 2000–01 UEFA Champions League Appearances in the UEFA Intertoto Cup Scores and results list Italy's goal tally first, score column indicates score after each Baggio goal. Juventus Serie A: 1994–95 Coppa Italia: 1994–95 UEFA Cup: 1992–93 AC Milan Serie A: 1995–96 Italy FIFA World Cup runner-up: 1994; third place 1990 Individual Guerin d'Oro (Serie C best player): 1985 Bravo Award: 1990 UEFA Cup Winners' Cup top scorer: 1990–91 (9 goals) World Soccer's World Player of the Year: 1993 Ballon d'Or: 1993 2nd place: 1994 8th place: 1990 FIFA World Player of the Year: 1993 3rd place: 1994 5th place: 1995 Onze d'Or: 1993 Onze de Bronze: 1994 Onze d'Argent: 1995 Onze de Onze: 1993, 1994, 1995 FIFA World Cup Silver Ball: 1994 FIFA World Cup All-Star Team: 1994 Don Balón Award: 1994 Super Onze d'Or (4th place): 1995 Serie A top assist-provider: 1995–96 (12 assists) Planète Foot's Best 50 Players of All Time: 1996 Il Venerdì's Best 100 Players of All Time: 1997 (32nd place) World Soccer's Greatest Players of the 20th Century: 1999 (16th place) Guerin Sportivo's Greatest Players of the 20th Century: 1999 (27th place) IFFHS Italian Player of the 20th Century: 1999 (9th place) IFFHS European Player of the 20th Century: 1999 (53rd place) France Football's Football Player of the Century: 1999 (18th place) Placar's Best 100 Players of All Time: 1999 (91st place) FIFA XI: 2000, 2002 Guerin d'Oro: 2001 Premio Nazionale Carriera Esemplare "Gaetano Scirea": 2001 Gran Galà del Calcio 'Best Football Book' Award: 2001 FIFA World Cup Dream Team: 2002 Gran Galà del Calcio 'Serie A Most Loved Player' Award: 2002 Golden Foot: 2003 FIFA 100: 2004 UEFA Golden Jubilee Poll: 2004 (24th place) Giuseppe Prisco Award: 2004 San Siro Gentleman Nazionale Award: 2004 Placar's Best 100 World Cup Players: 2005 (24th place) Association of Football Statisticians's Best 100 Players of All Time: 2007 (79th place) AC Milan Hall of Fame Man of Peace: 2010 Italian Football Hall of Fame: 2011 Juventus F.C. 50 Club Legends: 2011 Gentleman di Platino: 2015 Walk of Fame of Italian sport: 2015 IFFHS' 48 Football Men's Legend Players Orders 5th Class / Knight: Cavaliere Ordine al Merito della Repubblica Italiana: 1991 See Baggio's first goal of the match, which came from the penalty spot, was Italy's 500th goal in home matches. See See See See See See See See See 321 goals in 703 appearances if his three goals and four caps for the Italy U-16 team are also included. "Comunicato Ufficiale N. 442" [Official Press Release No. 442] (PDF) (in Italian). Lega Serie A. 8 May 2001. p. 4. Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 September 2021. Retrieved 13 December 2020. Adriano Stabile (2 January 2005). "Roberto Baggio - Goals in Serie A". RSSF. Retrieved 9 March 2017. Baggio 2001, pp. 49–59 "Roberto Baggio". FIGC profile (in Italian). Retrieved 25 April 2014. Andrea di Nicola (6 October 2001). "Del Piero, Totti e Baggio la fantasia al potere". La Repubblica (in Italian). Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 16 February 2016. ""Divine by moniker, divine by magic"". FIFA.com. Archived from the original on 21 March 2020. Retrieved 1 June 2014. "A History of the Gala: Part I - European legends". FIFA. 13 December 2002. Archived from the original on 22 December 2015. Retrieved 18 July 2015. "24-22: Baggio to Beckham". UEFA.com. Archived from the original on 17 September 2015. Retrieved 9 February 2015. "All-time Top 20: No. 7 Roberto Baggio". ESPN FC. 13 April 2014. Archived from the original on 11 August 2018. Retrieved 9 February 2015. Marcelo Leme de Arruda (14 December 2007). "AFS Top-100 Players of All-Time". RSSSF. Archived from the original on 30 May 2023. Retrieved 19 August 2015. Marcelo Leme de Arruda (19 June 2009). "The Best of The Best". RSSSF. Archived from the original on 26 January 2010. Retrieved 28 September 2017. "Baggio: 'I wanted to die'". Football Italia. 19 September 2015. Archived from the original on 22 September 2015. Retrieved 21 September 2015. Louis Massarella (5 November 2015). "Pele or Puskas? Maradona or Messi? Just who is the best No.10 of all-time?". FourFourTwo. Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 11 February 2016. "Three ex-Bianconeri number 10s in FIFA's all-time list". Juventus.com. 3 March 2014. Archived from the original on 15 April 2016. Retrieved 11 February 2016. Luke Chandley (1 April 2016). "Roberto Baggio: Transfers That Broke the Richter Scale". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on 4 April 2016. Retrieved 2 April 2016. Mario Sconcerti (28 March 2016). "Riva il migliore per i lettori di CM. Sconcerti: 'Ma Rivera era al suo livello'" (in Italian). Calciomercato.com. Archived from the original on 14 February 2017. Retrieved 13 February 2017. Greg Murray (18 February 2018). "Baggio: The Divine Ponytail". Football Italia. Archived from the original on 21 February 2018. Retrieved 20 February 2018. "Ravanelli elogia Baggio: "Il più forte di sempre"" (in Italian). Il Corriere dello Sport. 18 February 2017. Archived from the original on 7 November 2018. Retrieved 6 November 2018. Giulia Crivelli. "Gianni Agnelli e "roi Michel", una passione infinita". Il Sole 24 Ore (in Italian). Archived from the original on 31 July 2013. Retrieved 16 May 2012. "FIFA Player of the Century" (PDF). FIFA. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 April 2012. Retrieved 19 August 2015. Marcelo Leme de Arruda (24 July 2014). "World All-Time Teams". RSSSF. Archived from the original on 22 January 2020. Retrieved 19 August 2015. "Pele's list of the greatest". BBC Sport. 4 March 2004. Archived from the original on 19 October 2015. Retrieved 15 June 2013. "10 Leggende Mondiali" [10 World Cup Legends] (in Italian). Eurosport. Archived from the original on 16 December 2013. Retrieved 29 June 2012. "When Totti Surpassed Baggio". fantasista10.co.uk. Archived from the original on 27 April 2014. Retrieved 2 May 2014. "The history of the world transfer record". BBCSport. 1 September 2013. Archived from the original on 2 January 2016. Retrieved 1 May 2014. "Roberto Baggio: Italy's Finest no. 10". FourFourTwo. Archived from the original on 9 January 2014. Retrieved 29 June 2012. "Eddy Baggio: Profile". Archived from the original on 23 February 2014. Retrieved 29 June 2012. "Fantasista Legends: Roberto Baggio". fantasista10.co.uk. Archived from the original on 28 May 2014. Retrieved 26 May 2014. Mangini, Lorenzo (15 February 2004). "E la Samp battezzò il Codino". La Repubblica (in Italian). Archived from the original on 19 June 2018. Retrieved 12 September 2018. "Roberto Baggio: Statistiche". gocalcio.it (in Italian). Archived from the original on 4 September 2014. Retrieved 30 August 2014. "Inutile la vendemmiata del Vicenza sul Brescia" (in Italian). La Stampa Sera. 4 June 1984. p. 7. Archived from the original on 19 June 2018. Retrieved 12 September 2018. "Le partite della stagione 1982/1983" (in Italian). www.storiapiacenza1919.it. Archived from the original on 6 August 2020. Retrieved 12 September 2018. "Roberto Baggio: Statistiche". robertobaggio.org (in Italian). Archived from the original on 10 August 2014. Retrieved 29 July 2014. Gaetano Mocciaro (21 September 2016). "21 settembre 1986, Roberto Baggio esordisce in Serie A" (in Italian). Tutto Mercato Web.com. Archived from the original on 22 September 2016. Retrieved 20 September 2016. "I giocatori che hanno fatto la storia della Fiorentina: Roberto Baggio" (in Italian). FiorentinaCalcio.net. Archived from the original on 20 October 2014. Retrieved 20 October 2014. "Biografia: Roberto Baggio". robertobaggio.org (in Italian). Archived from the original on 8 August 2007. Retrieved 19 January 2015. "Biografia e Carriera di Baggio". La Gazzetta dello Sport (in Italian). Archived from the original on 6 August 2020. Retrieved 19 April 2020. Hersh, Phil (15 June 1994). "A Passion Beyond the Game". The Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on 28 July 2020. Retrieved 19 April 2020. "Fiorentina vs. Boavista: 1-0". worldfootball.net. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 18 March 2016. David Hirshey (11 October 2010). "The U.S. needs a true No. 10". ESPN. Archived from the original on 21 March 2016. Retrieved 31 October 2015. "Coppa Italia Top Scorers". RSSSF. Archived from the original on 29 October 2015. Retrieved 19 May 2012. "Il passato e' domani: Fiorentina in coppa Uefa" (in Italian). Mediaset.it. 29 June 2011. Archived from the original on 19 January 2015. Retrieved 19 January 2015. "Baggio: "Borgonovo? E' un eroe moderno"". La Gazzetta dello Sport (in Italian). 8 October 2008. Archived from the original on 11 October 2008. Retrieved 7 January 2015. "Fiorentina vs. Dinamo Kiev (1-0) UEFA Cup, 1989-90". UEFA.com. Archived from the original on 20 November 2015. Retrieved 18 March 2016. "Fiorentina Atlético de Madrid: 0-1 (3-1)" (in Italian). calcio.com. Archived from the original on 19 January 2015. Retrieved 13 January 2015. "Legends: Roberto Baggio". Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 2 May 2014.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) Pierrend, José Luis (26 March 2005). "European Footballer of the Year ("Ballon d'Or") 1990". RSSSF. Archived from the original on 14 March 2013. Retrieved 15 November 2013. "Roberto Baggio", FourFourTwo, June 1995, p. 8. "Da Platini a Del Piero, tutti i numeri 10 della Juventus aspettando Bernardeschi" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 25 July 2017. Archived from the original on 29 August 2017. Retrieved 26 July 2017. "Roberto Baggio's World". pro-paul.net. Archived from the original on 3 February 2016. Retrieved 2 February 2016. "Roberto Baggio, Former Soccer Star, Shines Through His Charity". The New York Times. 10 November 2010. Retrieved 1 September 2014. Giuseppe Bagnati (12 March 2009). "Le sfide nel segno di Baggio R." La Gazzetta dello Sport (in Italian). Archived from the original on 16 October 2017. Retrieved 18 June 2012. Piri, Stefano (14 November 2016). "Roberto Baggio detto Roby" (in Italian). Ultimo Uomo. Retrieved 17 April 2020. "La Supercoppa italiana al Napoli" (in Italian). Mondi.it. Archived from the original on 12 February 2015. Retrieved 12 February 2015. Maurizio Mariani (31 October 2000). "Italy Championship 1991/92". RSSSF. Archived from the original on 3 April 2003. Retrieved 22 January 2018. "Eight-goal Milan make history in Foggia". FIFA.com. 24 May 2012. Archived from the original on 22 September 2015. Retrieved 22 January 2018. Roberto Di Maggio (17 November 2005). "Coppa Italia 1991/92". RSSSF. Archived from the original on 23 October 2022. Retrieved 22 January 2018. Luca Valdiserri (18 February 1992). "Baggio, il nome della Juve" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. Archived from the original on 25 September 2015. Retrieved 31 May 2014. "Trapattoni a Baggio: " divorzio? non e' la fine del mondo "" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 5 December 1992. Archived from the original on 19 November 2015. Retrieved 2 May 2014. "Baggio firma l' armistizio con Trapattoni" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 4 November 1992. Archived from the original on 29 October 2015. Retrieved 2 May 2014. "Baggio trasmette il malumore in diretta: " la societa' deve difendermi dalle critiche "" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 30 November 1992. Archived from the original on 20 November 2015. Retrieved 2 May 2014. "la Juve vince 3 1 Coppa prenotata" (in Italian). Il Corriere dello Sport. 6 May 1993. Archived from the original on 5 November 2012. Retrieved 31 May 2014. "Tutto Baggio e la Juve puo' sperare" (in Italian). Il Corriere dello Sport. 7 April 1993. Archived from the original on 26 October 2015. Retrieved 31 May 2014. "La Juve vola sulle ali di Baggio" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 23 April 1993. Archived from the original on 7 April 2014. Retrieved 31 May 2014. "Milan-Juve, da più di un secolo a suon di goal". spaziojuve.it (in Italian). Archived from the original on 12 February 2015. Retrieved 11 February 2015. "Baggio. Van Basten, il gol perpetuo" [Baggio. Van Basten, the perpetual goal] (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 10 November 1992. Archived from the original on 5 March 2014. Retrieved 25 May 2014. "Roberto Baggio: Tutti i suoi Gol e le sue Statistiche". golcalcio.it (in Italian). Archived from the original on 4 September 2014. Retrieved 30 August 2014. "European Footballer of the Year ("Ballon d'Or") 1993". RSSSF. Archived from the original on 28 July 2022. Retrieved 6 February 2014. José Luis Pierrend (6 March 2012). ""Onze Mondial" Awards: Onze de Onze 1976-2011". RSSSF. Retrieved 14 September 2015. Jamie Rainbow (14 December 2012). "World Soccer Awards – previous winners". World Soccer. Archived from the original on 29 June 2016. Retrieved 21 November 2015. "Baggio Del Piero? Trapattoni lo ha gia' fatto" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 14 June 1998. Archived from the original on 19 November 2015. Retrieved 31 May 2014. "Esce Ravanelli e la Juve di Baggio rimonta e vince" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 6 August 1993. Archived from the original on 18 November 2015. Retrieved 31 May 2014. "Juve, il ricordo della tripletta di Baggio al Genoa Video" (in Italian). www.calciomercato.com. 18 October 2018. Archived from the original on 19 October 2018. Retrieved 19 October 2018. "Baggio, e' menisco: sara' operato dopo Juve Cagliari" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 8 March 1994. Archived from the original on 25 November 2015. Retrieved 31 May 2014. "Baggio elogia Stoichkov a Barcellona: "giusto che il Pallone d' oro sia suo"". Il Corriere della Sera (in Italian). 16 December 1994. Archived from the original on 7 April 2014. Retrieved 30 August 2014. Gates, Emmet (15 March 2013). "The Oppression of Roberto Baggio". Forza Italian Football. Archived from the original on 25 October 2021. Retrieved 4 June 2021. "Il "disoccupato" Roberto Baggio prova a stregare il Real Madrid alla festa della Francia pigliatutto" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 17 August 2000. Archived from the original on 20 November 2015. Retrieved 2 May 2014. "Baggio Zola, varata la coppia impossibile " Il goleador del Parma avrebbe giocato comunque, l' altro mi e' piaciuto col Borussia " " Uno dei due mi ha detto: un anno fa avrei rifiutato, adesso sono pronto "" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 25 April 1995. Archived from the original on 26 November 2015. Retrieved 31 May 2014. "11 giugno 1995, la Juventus vince la nona Coppa Italia". spaziojuve.it (in Italian). 11 June 2012. Archived from the original on 22 June 2012. Retrieved 7 January 2015. "Juventus-Foggia, 12 Marzo 1995 (2-0)" (in Italian). legaseriea.it. 12 March 1995. Retrieved 29 August 2014.[dead link] "Storie di Calcio: Roberto Baggio, Il Poeta Errante" (in Italian). Storie di Caldio. Archived from the original on 18 January 2015. Retrieved 14 January 2015. "#3 – Baggio: immensa fantasia, poche parole, tanti litigi". spaziomilan.it (in Italian). 3 February 2012. Archived from the original on 25 February 2021. Retrieved 10 August 2012. "21 maggio 1995, Juventus-Parma 4-0: di nuovo scudetto dopo nove anni di digiuno!". Juventus News Radio. Archived from the original on 7 January 2015. Retrieved 7 January 2015. "Coppa Italia 1994/95". RSSSF. Archived from the original on 27 September 2022. Retrieved 29 August 2014. "Juventus vs. Borussia Dortmund, UEFA Cup, 1994-95 (2-2)". UEFA.com. Archived from the original on 28 September 2014. Retrieved 30 August 2014. "Il sigillo di Baggio su Juve Parma" [Baggio's seal on Juve Parma] (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 19 April 1995. Archived from the original on 26 November 2015. Retrieved 21 April 2015. "La vendetta dell'ex si abbatte sulla Juventus" [The ex's revenge strikes against Juventus] (in Italian). Storie di Calcio. Archived from the original on 7 January 2015. Retrieved 21 April 2015. "Juve, ora ti roviniamo la festa scudetto" [Juve, now we will ruin your scudetto celebrations] (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 19 May 1995. Archived from the original on 5 November 2015. Retrieved 7 January 2015. "Carlos Tevez: Striker proud to take Juventus number 10 shirt". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 2 June 2014. Retrieved 1 June 2014. José Luis Pierrend. "FIFA Awards – World Player of the Year - Top 10". RSSSF. Archived from the original on 12 January 2016. Retrieved 31 March 2016. "Statistiche: Reti" (in Italian). myjuve.it. Archived from the original on 24 March 2017. Retrieved 23 February 2017. "Statistiche: Reti - Campionato Serie A" (in Italian). myjuve.it. Archived from the original on 13 August 2016. Retrieved 23 February 2017. "Juve, 50 stelle da onorare" (in Italian). Tutto Sport. 19 April 2010. Archived from the original on 12 September 2014. Retrieved 11 September 2014. "Baggio, l' ex " Pallone d' oro " si sente solo" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 27 December 1994. Archived from the original on 12 March 2014. Retrieved 2 May 2014. Hughes, Rob (11 September 1996). "Juventus Gambles on Youth : Soccer's Old Lady Prefers Younger Men". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 23 January 2014. Retrieved 10 August 2012. "C' e' una sorpresa nel bilancio Juve Vialli guadagna la meta' di Baggio" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 26 June 1995. Archived from the original on 22 December 2015. Retrieved 2 May 2014. "Baggio Juve, divorzio davanti agli ultra'" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 1 June 1995. Archived from the original on 22 December 2015. Retrieved 2 May 2014. "Baggio-Milan: Anche una Firma" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 18 June 1995. Archived from the original on 28 July 2020. Retrieved 19 May 2012. "Tifosi di Baggio manifestano Umberto Agnelli: va al Milan" [Baggio's fans protest Umberto Agnelli: he's going to Milan] (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 2 July 1995. Archived from the original on 22 December 2015. Retrieved 19 May 2012. "Baggio Al Milan, Ore Decisive" [Baggio to Milan, decisive hours]. La Repubblica (in Italian). 15 June 1995. Archived from the original on 9 January 2014. Retrieved 10 August 2012. Kevin McKarra (28 April 2004). "Loved by the people, distrusted by coaches, Baggio bows out". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 6 February 2015. Retrieved 6 February 2015. "Milan nel tunnel: Baggio fiuta l' uscita" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 11 September 1995. Archived from the original on 22 December 2015. Retrieved 2 May 2014. "Roby Baggio s' infortuna Meno dilemmi per il c. t." (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 2 October 1995. Archived from the original on 8 December 2015. Retrieved 2 May 2014. "15° scudetto rossonero" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. Archived from the original on 21 November 2014. Retrieved 19 January 2015. "Serie A" (in Italian). Archived from the original on 9 January 2014. Retrieved 10 August 2012.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) Raphael Hassine (10 October 2018). "Le meilleur Ballon d'Or de l'Histoire : 22ème – Roberto Baggio" (in French). www.labeautedufootball.fr. Archived from the original on 23 June 2019. Retrieved 23 June 2019. Marcotti, Gabriele (2008). Capello: The Man Behind England's World Cup Dream. Bantam Books. p. 193. ISBN 978-0-553-82566-4. Stabile, Adriano (17 February 2017). "Roberto Baggio, campione vero o mito sopravvalutato?" (in Italian). Il Posticipo. Archived from the original on 6 August 2020. Retrieved 16 May 2020. Currò, Enrico (24 September 1996). "Baggio – Zidane, Ciao Fantasia". La Repubblica (in Italian). Archived from the original on 28 July 2020. Retrieved 20 April 2020. "Roby Baggio - SoloCalcio.com". solocalcio.com. Archived from the original on 9 February 2015. Retrieved 6 February 2015. Alberto Costa (1 August 1996). "Tabarez tenta il trapianto di Baggio. E Codino regista è il faro del Milan" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. Archived from the original on 7 April 2014. Retrieved 5 March 2014. "Maldini Il Peggiore In Campo". La Repubblica (in Italian). 12 September 1996. Archived from the original on 6 August 2020. Retrieved 20 April 2020. "Baggio, "Divin Codino" Who Won AC Milan's Heart". A.C. Milan. 18 February 2018. Archived from the original on 28 July 2020. Retrieved 20 April 2020. "Baggio, che sorpresa! Fa felice il Take That" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 10 November 1996. Archived from the original on 22 December 2015. Retrieved 2 May 2014. "Sacchi e Baggio, attenti a quei due" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 30 June 1994. Archived from the original on 22 December 2015. Retrieved 10 August 2012. "Baggio Milan, scoppia la pace " Resto al servizio di Sacchi "" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 19 December 1996. Archived from the original on 22 December 2015. Retrieved 2 May 2014. "Arrigo e Codino separati in casa: solo Carmignani convince Baggio a giocare" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 8 April 1997. Archived from the original on 22 December 2015. Retrieved 2 May 2014. Fiorenzo Radogna (23 October 2017). "Milan: c'era anche quando si stava peggio, tutte le annate da dimenticare: Tra Tabarez e il ritorno di Sacchi" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. Archived from the original on 15 January 2018. Retrieved 15 January 2018. "Roberto Baggio". Archived from the original on 18 June 2010. Retrieved 19 May 2012. "Milan 4-2 Göteborg". uefa.com. Archived from the original on 24 April 2017. Retrieved 20 November 2016. "UEFA Champions League 1996/97 - History - Milan". uefa.com. Archived from the original on 27 July 2016. Retrieved 20 November 2016. "Classic Match: The 1996 Supercoppa Italiana – AC Milan 1-2 Fiorentina". The Gentleman Ultra. 16 January 2016. Archived from the original on 20 November 2016. Retrieved 20 November 2016. Roberto Di Maggio; Sorin Arotaritei (17 August 2017). "Italy Super Cup Finals". RSSSF. Archived from the original on 20 July 2017. Retrieved 15 January 2018. Wiltse, Matt (1 April 2017). "How Zidane's experience in Italy shaped his coaching philosophy". Managing Madrid. Archived from the original on 3 April 2017. Retrieved 4 April 2017. "Baggio: "Sparavo con papa', ora faccio la lepre con i miei figli" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 24 February 1999. Archived from the original on 19 November 2015. Retrieved 2 May 2014. "Tanzi pensa al mercato: Baggio al Parma" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 10 July 1997. Archived from the original on 19 November 2015. Retrieved 2 May 2014. "Ancelotti: 'Pirlo and Baggio'". Football Italia. 17 January 2014. Archived from the original on 27 November 2020. Retrieved 2 May 2014. Luca Valdisseri (20 January 1998). "Baggio e Bologna, una pace armata". Il Corriere della Sera (in Italian). Archived from the original on 1 July 2012. Retrieved 3 March 2014. "Ulivieri: "Baggio? Un campione, mai avuto problemi con lui"" (in Italian). Tutto Mercato Web.com. Archived from the original on 20 February 2010. Retrieved 10 August 2012. "Gli Oscar del Calcio" (in Italian). Storie di Calcio. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 6 February 2015. "La notte degli Oscar" [Oscar Night]. rai.it (in Italian). Rai Sport. 22 September 1998. Archived from the original on 8 December 2015. Retrieved 4 January 2016. Badolato, Franco (13 August 1998). "Baggio ha l'Inter in pugno". La Stampa (in Italian). p. 25. Retrieved 29 February 2024. Stefano Bedeschi (18 February 2014). "Gli eroi in bianconero: Roberto BAGGIO" (in Italian). Tutto Juve. Archived from the original on 9 April 2016. Retrieved 20 April 2016. Fabio Monti; Giancarla Ghisi (11 January 1999). "Inter, una miniera piena di gol". Il Corriere della Sera (in Italian). Archived from the original on 7 April 2014. Retrieved 11 March 2014. Giovanni Marino (9 November 2010). "Le confessioni di Capitan Zanetti "Dal caos alle vittorie con l'Inter"". La Repubblica (in Italian). Archived from the original on 8 May 2016. Retrieved 20 April 2016. Kristjánsson, Tryggvi (27 July 2015). "In celebration of Roberto Baggio: the divine ponytail". thesefootballtimes.co. Archived from the original on 6 August 2020. Retrieved 16 May 2020. Alessandro Forti (9 March 1999). "Parma in finale". rai.it (in Italian). Rai Sport. Archived from the original on 27 April 2016. Retrieved 20 April 2016. "Spareggio UEFA 1998-99: Inter-Bologna 1-2". rai.it (in Italian). Rai Sport. Archived from the original on 22 July 2015. Retrieved 29 July 2014. Gaetano Mocciaro (18 March 2011). "Baggio: due maglie, una città, zero Champions" (in Italian). TuttoChampions.it. Archived from the original on 8 May 2016. Retrieved 20 April 2016. "Inter-Real Madrid 3-1". rai.it (in Italian). Rai Sport. Archived from the original on 29 June 2015. Retrieved 19 January 2015. "Baggio regala all'Inter la semifinale di Coppa Italia" [Baggio earns Inter a place in the Coppa Italia semi-final]. La Repubblica (in Italian). 27 January 2000. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 28 April 2015. Dario Di Gennaro (18 May 2000). "Anche la Coppa Italia". rai.it (in Italian). Rai Sport. Archived from the original on 27 April 2016. Retrieved 20 April 2016. "BAGGIO Un gol contro tutti" [Baggio A goal against everyone] (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 24 January 2000. Archived from the original on 22 December 2015. Retrieved 2 May 2014. "Baggio porta l'Inter tra i Campioni". rai.it (in Italian). Rai Sport. 23 May 2000. Archived from the original on 1 December 2013. Retrieved 30 October 2014. "Totti tops 40 years of Gazzetta ratings but Baggio is perfect 10". fantasista10.co.uk. Archived from the original on 27 May 2014. Retrieved 26 May 2014. "Grande Baggio, l'Inter è in Champions League". La Repubblica (in Italian). 23 May 2000. Archived from the original on 8 May 2016. Retrieved 20 April 2016. "Roberto Baggio: il più grande del calcio italiano". calciopro.com (in Italian). Archived from the original on 15 October 2014. Retrieved 9 October 2014. "Baggio eyes Spain". SBS. 8 August 2000. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 20 October 2014. Astrid Andersson (15 September 2000). "'Ambitious' Baggio joins Brescia". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 26 September 2015. Retrieved 20 October 2014. ENRICO CURRO' (17 September 2000). "Mazzone-Juve, accuse e veleni". La Repubblica (in Italian). Archived from the original on 28 January 2016. Retrieved 22 January 2016. "Brescia, Baggio subito contro la Juve". La Repubblica (in Italian). 16 September 2000. Archived from the original on 28 January 2016. Retrieved 22 January 2016. "Storie di Provincia: le quattro stagioni del Brescia di Baggio e Mazzone (e non solo)". mondopallone.it (in Italian). 18 July 2013. Archived from the original on 20 October 2014. Retrieved 20 October 2014. "Mazzone fa il capolavoro Brescia settimo in classifica". La Repubblica (in Italian). 17 June 2001. Archived from the original on 19 June 2021. Retrieved 22 January 2016. "PSG edge past Brescia". UEFA. 21 August 2001. Archived from the original on 18 October 2015. Retrieved 29 May 2015. "Pallone d'Oro 2001: Anche Baggio fra i Magnifici 50". La Repubblica (in Italian). 13 November 2001. Archived from the original on 28 July 2014. Retrieved 10 June 2012. "Part II of a Tactical Thesis: "The Trequartista" by Roberto Mancini". Archived from the original on 20 October 2014. Retrieved 20 October 2014.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) "Italy - Footballer of the Year". RSSSF. Archived from the original on 21 January 2015. Retrieved 6 February 2015. "Codino Decisivo Baggio: gol da tre punti e infortunio E il Brescia dopo tredici anni espugna lo stadio Garilli di Piacenza" (in Italian). La Nuova Sardegna. 22 October 2001. Archived from the original on 9 January 2015. Retrieved 7 January 2015. "Baggio operato, addio al sogno Mondiale" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 5 February 2002. Archived from the original on 22 December 2015. Retrieved 7 January 2015. "Coppa Italia, Baggio si infortuna ancora". La Repubblica (in Italian). Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 7 January 2015. "Baggio fa felice il calcio ritorno record e due gol". La Repubblica (in Italian). Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 7 January 2015. "Brescia-Bologna (3-0)". legaseriea.it. Retrieved 7 January 2015.[dead link] "Trapattoni: "Basta con Baggio Ora pensiamo al Mondiale"". La Repubblica (in Italian). 12 May 2002. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 7 January 2015. "La logica di Trapattoni esclude Robi Baggio". La Repubblica (in Italian). Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 20 October 2014. "Baggio, il ritorno". sport.it (in Italian). Archived from the original on 24 September 2010. Retrieved 20 October 2014.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) "Con Tare e Baggio da record il Brescia supera il Perugia". La Repubblica (in Italian). Archived from the original on 14 January 2015. Retrieved 14 January 2015. "Parma vs. Brescia, 2004 - Baggio 200 gol". La Repubblica (in Italian). Archived from the original on 30 January 2011. Retrieved 10 June 2012. "Lazio: brutto tonfo, Champions lontana Il Brescia in festa nell'addio di Baggio". La Repubblica (in Italian). 9 May 2004. Archived from the original on 14 January 2015. Retrieved 14 January 2015. "A San Siro la festa del Milan E il saluto a Roby Baggio". La Repubblica (in Italian). 16 May 2004. Archived from the original on 14 January 2015. Retrieved 14 January 2015. "Tutti in piedi, Baggio dice basta" (in Italian). www.tgcom24.mediaset.it. 16 May 2004. Archived from the original on 7 March 2019. Retrieved 6 March 2019. "Un uomo, un numero, una maglia" (in Italian). EuroCalcioNews. Retrieved 10 June 2012.[permanent dead link] "Il Grande Brescia di Baggio". gocalcio.it (in Italian). Archived from the original on 26 May 2012. Retrieved 19 May 2012. "FIGC: Classifica Marcatori" (in Italian). FIGC. Archived from the original on 31 July 2013. Retrieved 29 June 2012. "16 Novembre 1988: Roby, dal viola all'azzurro" (in Italian). MuseoFiorentina.it. Archived from the original on 12 March 2016. Retrieved 7 January 2015. Gaetano Mocciaro (16 November 2016). "16 novembre 1988, Roberto Baggio fa il suo esordio in Nazionale" (in Italian). Tutto Mercato Web.com. Archived from the original on 17 November 2016. Retrieved 16 November 2016. Mocciaro, Gaetano (20 September 2019). "20 settembre 1989, prima doppietta di Roberto Baggio in Nazionale" (in Italian). www.tuttomercatoweb.com. Archived from the original on 25 September 2019. Retrieved 25 September 2019. Brera, Gianni (21 September 1989). "Illuminati da Baggio". La Repubblica (in Italian). Archived from the original on 19 June 2018. Retrieved 5 September 2018. Bruno Perrucca (21 September 1989). "Gli azzurri nel segno di Baggio". La Stampa (in Italian). p. 21. Archived from the original on 19 June 2018. Retrieved 5 September 2018. "Baggio e la prima doppietta in Nazionale: 20 settembre 1989". La Gazzetta dello Sport (in Italian). 7 September 2018. Archived from the original on 22 September 2018. Retrieved 21 September 2018. "Gli 80 anni di Azeglio Vicini È il c.t. delle Notti Magiche". La Gazzetta dello Sport (in Italian). 20 March 2013. Archived from the original on 23 March 2013. Retrieved 26 May 2014. "Italia-Stati Uniti: 1-0 - Giannini, poi il buio" (in Italian). Storie di Calcio. Archived from the original on 14 August 2014. Retrieved 26 June 2014. "Calcio, La beffa di Maradona rovina le notti magiche". La Gazzetta dello Sport (in Italian). 21 May 2014. Archived from the original on 22 August 2017. Retrieved 26 May 2014. "Italia-Cecoslovacchia: 2-0 - E lo Stadio urlò: è nato il genio che ci farà felici" (in Italian). Storie di Calcio. Archived from the original on 13 May 2014. Retrieved 26 June 2014. "Diego Maradona goal voted the FIFA World Cup™ Goal of the Century". FIFA. 30 May 2002. Archived from the original on 23 May 2012. Retrieved 5 August 2012. "Italia - Uruguay: 2-0 - Un Serena per amico" (in Italian). Storie di Calcio. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 26 June 2014. "Italia - Eire: 1-0 - Schillaci ci prende gusto" (in Italian). Storie di Calcio. Archived from the original on 6 June 2014. Retrieved 26 June 2014. "Storie Mondiali: l'Italia e i maledetti rigori" (in Italian). olimpiazzurra.com. 17 May 2014. Archived from the original on 19 May 2014. Retrieved 19 May 2014. "Italia-Inghilterra: 2-1 - L'Italia non s'è persa" (in Italian). Storie di Calcio. Archived from the original on 24 June 2014. Retrieved 26 June 2014. "Schillaci ricorda a FFT: "Dopo Italia '90 ho pianto e fumato"". FourFourTwo (in Italian). Archived from the original on 16 May 2014. Retrieved 19 May 2014. "Euro 1992 Qualifying Group 3 - Italy". UEFA.com. Archived from the original on 26 September 2010. Retrieved 29 June 2012. Gianfranco Teotino (25 February 1993). "la Juve di Sacchi spazza il Portogallo" [Sacchi's Juve sweeps Portugal away] (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. Archived from the original on 9 January 2016. Retrieved 12 February 2015. Giancarlo Padovan; Gianfranco Teotino (18 November 1993). "Baggio 2 timbra il visto per l' America" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. Archived from the original on 13 March 2014. Retrieved 27 April 2015. "il cuore e' grande, ma l'Italia no" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 15 October 1992. Archived from the original on 5 November 2015. Retrieved 3 September 2014. "Roberto Baggio". eu-football.info. Archived from the original on 5 April 2017. Retrieved 16 November 2016. "Capitani" [Captains]. figc.it (in Italian). Italian Football Federation. Archived from the original on 3 May 2016. Retrieved 2 May 2016. "Baggio rotto, fuori un mese" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 20 November 1992. Archived from the original on 22 December 2015. Retrieved 2 May 2014. "Qui Milan: " Baggio e' proprio nostro "" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 4 July 1995. Archived from the original on 12 March 2014. Retrieved 2 May 2014. Fabio Monti (11 October 1993). "Sta male anche Baggio Roberto giocherà ma ha una tendinite. Allarme per Eranio". Il Corriere della Sera (in Italian). Archived from the original on 7 April 2014. Retrieved 11 March 2014. Leggende Azzurre: Roberto Baggio Pietro Cesaro. "Il Fantasista, l'Incompreso". assoallenatori.it (in Italian). Archived from the original on 21 June 2010. Retrieved 16 May 2012. Gianfranco Teotino (30 June 1994). "Il dilemma Baggio e il dito di Effenberg" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. Archived from the original on 7 April 2014. Retrieved 2 March 2014. "Baggio parte con il piede sinistro" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 18 June 1994. Archived from the original on 18 November 2015. Retrieved 7 January 2015. Giancarlo Padovan (22 June 1994). "Sacchi ordina: Baggio, alzati e corri" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. Archived from the original on 18 November 2015. Retrieved 7 January 2015. "Italia-Norvegia, Coppa del Mondo USA 1994 - 1-0" (in Italian). Storie di Calcio. Archived from the original on 21 June 2012. Retrieved 13 June 2012. "" basta processi a Baggio". Sacchi e i compagni lo difendono" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 30 June 1994. Archived from the original on 18 November 2015. Retrieved 7 January 2015. "Baggio Coniglio Bagnato". La Repubblica (in Italian). 1 July 1994. Archived from the original on 28 January 2015. Retrieved 14 September 2014. "Nigeria-Italia, Coppa del Mondo USA 1994 - 1-2" (in Italian). Storie di Calcio. Archived from the original on 2 June 2012. Retrieved 13 June 2012. "all' ultimo respiro Baggio trovo' se stesso" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 6 July 1994. Archived from the original on 7 July 2012. Retrieved 7 January 2015. "The greatest World Cup tragedies: Roberto Baggio, USA 1994". The Score. 6 June 2014. Archived from the original on 1 August 2015. Retrieved 6 June 2014. "la resurrezione dell' Arrigo" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 10 July 1994. Archived from the original on 5 November 2012. Retrieved 7 January 2015. "Italia-Bulgaria, Coppa del Mondo USA 1994 - 2-1" (in Italian). Storie di Calcio. Archived from the original on 21 June 2012. Retrieved 13 June 2012. "Baggio ci porta in paradiso" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 14 July 1994. Archived from the original on 8 November 2009. Retrieved 7 January 2015. "ci resta un filo di Baggio" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 15 July 1994. Archived from the original on 18 November 2015. Retrieved 7 January 2015. "Has so much ever hung on a hamstring? - Roberto Baggio, Italy's Footballing Hero". The Independent. London. 16 July 1994. Archived from the original on 29 July 2012. Retrieved 29 June 2012. "e Baggio sbaglia il tiro della sua vita" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 18 July 1994. Archived from the original on 25 November 2015. Retrieved 7 January 2015. "Da Baggio a McEnroe e Schumi Come si sbaglia un punto decisivo" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 31 October 2006. Archived from the original on 31 October 2015. Retrieved 7 January 2015. Molinaro, John F. (20 May 2010). "World Cup memories: Roberto Baggio, 1994". CBC Sports. Archived from the original on 23 November 2022. Retrieved 17 April 2020. Howard, Johnette (18 July 1994). "1994 Final Kick Means World to Brazil". The Washington Post. Retrieved 17 January 2024. Steven Green; Jamie Rainbow (16 November 2013). "The redemption of Roberto Baggio". World Soccer. Archived from the original on 20 November 2013. Retrieved 3 September 2014. "Footballers Who Became Defined by a Penalty Miss". 90min.com. 14 May 2020. Retrieved 17 January 2024. "Auguri Campione: La Juve Non T Ha Dimenticato" (in Italian). Tutto Juve. Archived from the original on 2 June 2014. Retrieved 1 May 2014. "Italia-Brasile, Coppa del Mondo USA 1994 - 0-1" (in Italian). Storie di Calcio. Archived from the original on 21 June 2012. Retrieved 13 June 2012. "Happy birthday to you!". FIFA.com. 12 February 2012. Archived from the original on 9 April 2016. Retrieved 13 January 2017. José Luis Pierrend. "FIFA Awards – FIFA World Cup Golden Ball Awards". RSSSF. Archived from the original on 12 January 2016. Retrieved 13 January 2017. "World Cup '94; Romario and Baggio Among First All-Star Cast". The New York Times. 16 July 1994. Retrieved 27 May 2015. "European Footballer of the Year ("Ballon d'Or") 1994". RSSSF. Archived from the original on 1 October 2022. Retrieved 7 February 2014. Bozzi, Stefano (8 November 2001). "Baggio's final World Cup fling". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 28 July 2020. Retrieved 17 April 2020. "World Cup history - USA 1994". BBC Sport. 4 May 2006. Archived from the original on 13 April 2020. Retrieved 17 April 2020. Emmet Gates. "The redemption of Roberto Baggio". Ibwm. In Bed With Maradona. Archived from the original on 18 July 2017. Retrieved 23 May 2017. Dove, Ed (8 May 2018). "World Cup moments - Baggio's heartbreak - 1994". ESPN FC. Archived from the original on 28 July 2020. Retrieved 17 April 2020. Miller, Nick (16 April 2018). "Roberto Baggio's skied penalty, Graham Poll's three-card trick in top World Cup bloopers". Espn. ESPN FC. Archived from the original on 6 August 2020. Retrieved 17 April 2020. "Sacchi si sfoga, Baggio lo gela" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 7 September 1995. Archived from the original on 29 October 2015. Retrieved 3 September 2014. "piccola Italia in bambola, e' solo Croazia" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 17 November 1994. Archived from the original on 26 November 2015. Retrieved 3 September 2014. "caos Italia: Baggio scarica Sacchi" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 19 November 1994. Archived from the original on 29 October 2015. Retrieved 3 September 2014. "I left Roberto Baggio out of Euro '96 because of fitness concerns, not arguments - former Italy coach Arrigo Sacchi". Goal.com. 2 December 2011. Archived from the original on 2 March 2015. Retrieved 31 December 2014. "Sacchi da' un appuntamento a Baggio" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 19 May 1996. Archived from the original on 16 October 2015. Retrieved 2 May 2014. "L' Italia ha un sogno olimpico: Baggio" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 29 March 1996. Archived from the original on 8 November 2015. Retrieved 12 August 2014. "1998 Francia, Capitolo II: Le scelte di Cesare" (in Italian). Storie di Calcio. Archived from the original on 5 March 2016. Retrieved 25 April 2016. "Cile-Italia, 1998 2-2 - Rai-Sport". rai.it (in Italian). Rai Sport. Archived from the original on 4 July 2009. Retrieved 13 June 2012. "Quante polemiche per quel rigore". la Repubblica (in Italian). 12 June 1998. Archived from the original on 1 June 2017. Retrieved 1 June 2017. "Il Cile fa tremare l'Italia: Italia-Cile, 1998 (2-2)" (in Italian). Storie di Calcio. Archived from the original on 14 August 2014. Retrieved 29 August 2014. "Roberto Baggio torna in Nazionale". blitzquotidiano.it (in Italian). 10 July 2010. Archived from the original on 9 January 2015. Retrieved 3 September 2014. "Italia-Camerun, 1998 - 3-0" (in Italian). Storie di Calcio. Archived from the original on 3 November 2016. Retrieved 13 June 2012. "Italia-Austria, 1998 - 2-1". rai.it (in Italian). Rai Sport. Archived from the original on 4 July 2009. Retrieved 13 June 2012. "Italia-Norvegia, 1998 (1-0)" (in Italian). Storie di Calcio. Archived from the original on 26 October 2011. Retrieved 13 June 2012. "Italia 1998: la traversa di Di Biagio. Del Piero o Baggio? Voto 5 in simpatia". blitzquotidiano.it (in Italian). 3 June 2014. Archived from the original on 28 January 2015. Retrieved 19 January 2015. Di Gennaro, Dario. "Italia-Francia, 1998 0-0 (3-4)". rai.it (in Italian). Rai Sport. Archived from the original on 16 June 2012. Retrieved 13 June 2012. "Francia-Italia, world Cup France 98 - 0-0 (4-3)" (in Italian). Storie di Calcio. 24 February 2016. Archived from the original on 11 November 2016. Retrieved 19 March 2016. "Baggio: "Messi mi entusiasma"". La Gazzetta dello Sport (in Italian). 28 March 2008. Archived from the original on 3 April 2008. Retrieved 20 May 2012. "Baggio Speaks About Calcio". Archived from the original on 10 July 2012. Retrieved 20 May 2012. "Del Piero: "Gioco fino a 40 anni" E Agnelli: "Per lui porte aperte"" (in Italian). La Gazzetta dell Sport. 14 November 2011. Archived from the original on 22 February 2012. Retrieved 20 May 2012. "Galles-Italia 0-2" (in Italian). Rai Sport. Archived from the original on 4 September 2014. Retrieved 29 August 2014. "Galles-Italia (0-2)" (in Italian). UEFA.com. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 29 August 2014. "Italia-Bielorussia (1-1)" (in Italian). UEFA.com. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 29 August 2014. "Passo falso degli azzurri". rai.it (in Italian). Rai Sport. Archived from the original on 4 September 2014. Retrieved 29 August 2014. "Italia-Norvegia 0-0". rai.it (in Italian). Rai Sport. Archived from the original on 22 July 2015. Retrieved 29 August 2014. "Italia-Norvegia: 0-0". Italia 1910. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 29 August 2014. "Baggio, una hola privata". La Gazzetta dello Sport (in Italian). 17 February 2007. Archived from the original on 6 February 2015. Retrieved 6 February 2015. "Baggio scrive al Trap "Portami ai Mondiali"". La Repubblica (in Italian). 6 May 2002. Archived from the original on 13 August 2002. Retrieved 6 May 2002. Luca Bertelli (19 May 2016). "Trapattoni: "Nessun rimpianto per Baggio, senza Moreno avremmo vinto il mondiale"" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. Archived from the original on 13 October 2016. Retrieved 5 September 2018. Diego Antonelli (27 April 2004). "Baggio: "All'Europeo da riserva"" [Baggio: "At the Euros even as a reserve"]. La Gazzetta dello Sport (in Italian). Archived from the original on 2 August 2015. Retrieved 26 April 2015. "Olimpiadi, Carraro possibilista Baggio fuori quota con l'Under?" [Olympics, Carraro possible Baggio over-age player with the Under-21 side?]. La Repubblica (in Italian). 9 January 2004. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 21 April 2015. "Baggio: Euro 2004?" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 5 February 2003. Archived from the original on 1 November 2015. Retrieved 8 July 2012. "Baggio, lungo, emozionante addio ma Italia-Spagna è poca cosa" [Baggio, a long, emotional farewell but Italy-Spain amounts to little]. La Repubblica (in Italian). 28 April 2004. Archived from the original on 28 January 2015. Retrieved 19 January 2015. "Italia: Speciale Mondiali" [Italy: World Cup Special]. La Gazzetta dello Sport (in Italian). Archived from the original on 24 May 2013. Retrieved 29 June 2012. Ribecchini, Maurizio (3 June 2016). "Calcio, Europei: quanti azzurri non vi hanno mai partecipato! Fra loro tre 'palloni d'oro'". SuperNews (in Italian). Archived from the original on 4 June 2021. Retrieved 4 June 2021. Germano, Bovolenta (14 September 1997). "Baggio e Ronaldo devoti a San Zico". La Gazzetta dello Sport (in Italian). Retrieved 16 May 2020. "Baggio to join Italy federation staff". Fox Sports. 3 August 2010. Retrieved 12 May 2017. "A.C. Milan Hall of Fame: Roberto Baggio". A.C. Milan.com. Retrieved 9 December 2014. "The Buddha of Milan". Irish Times. 27 February 1999. Archived from the original on 23 July 2015. Retrieved 19 July 2015. Falcone, Gabriella. "Roberto Baggio. Breve viaggio nel mondo del Codino più amato". alleniamo.com (in Italian). Archived from the original on 27 June 2012. Retrieved 16 May 2012. "Baggio Takes Great Strides Toward Soccer Greatness". The Orlando Sentinel. 15 June 1994. Archived from the original on 14 November 2015. Retrieved 13 January 2015. Richard Williams (1 March 1999). "Football: Greatness has a last flowering in Baggio". The Independent. Archived from the original on 14 February 2017. Retrieved 13 February 2017. Miguel Delaney (19 July 2017). "Roberto Baggio on USA 94, playing through the pain and putting the beautiful in the beautiful game". The Independent. Archived from the original on 22 July 2017. Retrieved 21 July 2017. "Tare-Baggio, il Brescia vola" (in Italian). Il Tirreno. 16 December 2002. Archived from the original on 21 September 2018. Retrieved 20 September 2018. Licia Granello (23 March 1989). "Borgonovo - Baggio: C'è Spazio per Loro". La Repubblica (in Italian). Archived from the original on 9 October 2018. Retrieved 8 October 2018. Preston, Mike (16 July 1994). "'Other' Baggio ready to step into hero's role WORLD CUP 1994". The Baltimore Sun. Archived from the original on 22 August 2017. Retrieved 20 July 2014. Dave Taylor (5 May 2014). "Baggio's month of May". Football Italia. Archived from the original on 8 November 2022. Retrieved 14 November 2015. Joe McGiniss (11 June 2000). "Italy's season of discontent". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 27 April 2016. Retrieved 20 April 2016. Alex Hess (25 July 2017). "FourFourTwo's 100 Greatest Footballers Ever: 60 to 51". FourFourTwo. Archived from the original on 7 April 2020. Retrieved 18 January 2018. Max Towle (9 May 2013). "25 Most Skilled Passers in World Football History". bleacherreport.com. Archived from the original on 8 July 2019. Retrieved 10 October 2018. Nerozzi, Massimiliano (26 February 2017). "Estro e fantasia al servizio del collettivo. Una persona per bene". La Stampa (in Italian). Retrieved 17 April 2020. "Roberto Baggio: 'Allenare l'Italia? Non si sa mai'". GQ (in Italian). 5 January 2011. Archived from the original on 9 January 2014. Retrieved 16 May 2012. Khalil Garriot (21 June 2014). "Mystery solved: Why do the best soccer players wear No. 10?". Yahoo. Archived from the original on 26 June 2014. Retrieved 19 May 2015. "Looking Back On Football Italia As Roberto Baggio Turns 50". punditarena.com. 18 February 2017. Archived from the original on 28 July 2020. Retrieved 17 April 2020. Mattia Fontana (21 July 2015). "L'evoluzione del numero dieci: da Pelé a Pirlo" (in Italian). Eurosport.com. Retrieved 9 April 2016. Benedetto Ferrara (31 December 2003). "Baggio a sorpresa: "Smetto" L'addio del grande incompreso". La Repubblica (in Italian). Retrieved 22 March 2015. Crosetti, Maurizio (11 May 1993). "Piano con Baggio". La Repubblica (in Italian). Retrieved 16 May 2020. Baggio 2001, pp. 9–10 "Baggio, Roberto" (in Italian). Treccani: Enciclopedia dello Sport (2002). Archived from the original on 23 July 2015. Retrieved 19 July 2015. Tommasi, Alessandro (11 July 1994). "I Signori Baggios". La Repubblica (in Italian). Archived from the original on 7 August 2020. Retrieved 24 April 2020. "Come fare gol su calcio d'angolo" (in Italian). Il Post. 23 February 2012. Archived from the original on 5 June 2014. Retrieved 2 May 2014. Emanuela Audisio (13 February 2017). "Baggio, il campione diverso rimasto tra noi con la sua assenza". La Repubblica (in Italian). Archived from the original on 13 February 2017. Retrieved 13 February 2017. Luca Calamai (17 February 2017). "Roberto Baggio compie 50 anni: ha unito il mondo del calcio". La Gazzetta dello Sport (in Italian). Archived from the original on 19 February 2017. Retrieved 18 February 2017. Emmet Gates (17 February 2017). "Roberto Baggio at 50: celebrating his five greatest free-kicks". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 23 January 2018. Retrieved 22 January 2018. Paolo Menicucci (18 February 2017). "Roberto Baggio turns 50: five of his best UEFA goals". UEFA.com. Archived from the original on 21 September 2018. Retrieved 20 September 2018. Tom Bogert (4 August 2017). "FIFA 18 Icons: 7 all-time legends we really want to see included". FourFourTwo. Archived from the original on 21 September 2018. Retrieved 20 September 2018. "Brescia-Reggina da ottovolante". La Gazzetta dello Sport (in Italian). 21 September 2003. Archived from the original on 21 September 2018. Retrieved 20 September 2018. Perucca, Bruno (9 July 1990). "Carnevale e Vialli i due insufficienti". La Stampa Sera (in Italian). p. 5. Archived from the original on 2 September 2019. Retrieved 2 September 2019. Maurizio, Nicita (15 December 1998). "Mihajlovic, tripletta fatta in casa". La Gazzetta dello Sport (in Italian). Archived from the original on 28 July 2020. Retrieved 19 April 2020. Bizzarri, Cosimo (30 October 2015). "Fisica del gol olímpico" (in Italian). Ultimo Uomo. Archived from the original on 23 February 2020. Retrieved 24 April 2020. "La " Perla" Della Settimana Con Baggio salvarsi in corner è rischioso". La Nuova Sardegna (in Italian). 7 May 2001. Archived from the original on 28 July 2020. Retrieved 24 April 2020. "Breve storia del "gol olimpico": l'antica arte di segnare dalla bandierina" (in Italian). sport.sky.it. 4 February 2018. Archived from the original on 28 July 2020. Retrieved 24 April 2020. Preston, Mike (17 July 1994). "World Cup ready to go fourth san". The Baltimore Sun. Archived from the original on 28 July 2020. Retrieved 16 May 2020. M., Mattia (6 June 2020). "Alex Del Piero svela i suoi "gol alla Del Piero": "Sicuramente c'è quello a Dortmund, è stato speciale"" (in Italian). Tribuna.com. Archived from the original on 21 May 2021. Retrieved 21 May 2021. Alessandra Bocci; Silvano Stella (19 January 1998). "Baggio, meglio a casa che in panchina: "sono schifato"" [Baggio, better at home than on the bench: "I'm disgusted"]. La Gazzetta dello Sport (in Italian). Archived from the original on 24 December 2015. Retrieved 29 October 2015. Currò, Enrico (29 March 2005). "Pirlo l'uomo nuovo "Ho imparato guardando Baggio"". La Repubblica (in Italian). Archived from the original on 30 November 2022. Retrieved 16 May 2012. "Del Piero? Tira alla Platini" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 24 October 1995. p. 44. Archived from the original on 6 November 2015. "Record di Serie A: I rigoristi" (in Italian). Archived from the original on 5 September 2014. Retrieved 29 August 2014. "Roberto Baggio, il fu nove e mezzo" (in Italian). Archived from the original on 4 June 2013. Retrieved 16 May 2012. "My Perfect 10: Roberto Baggio". FourFourTwo. 30 August 2010. Archived from the original on 14 February 2017. Retrieved 13 February 2017. Mike Preston (16 July 1994). "'Other' Baggio ready to step into hero's role WORLD CUP 1994". The Baltimore Sun. Archived from the original on 22 August 2017. Retrieved 14 February 2017. Gildea, William (17 June 1994). "Part Maradona, Part Madonna, Bag-gio Takes The Stage". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 28 July 2020. Retrieved 17 April 2020. Renzo Marmugi (15 July 1997). "Professione fantasista in un calcio sempre più muscolare Scatto, dribbling, fiuto del gol Ecco le armi del Divin Codino". La Repubblica (in Italian). Archived from the original on 7 January 2015. Retrieved 7 January 2015. Germano Bovolenta (22 February 2010). "Mito Baggio in 10 motivi" [Baggio A Legend in 10 reasons]. La Gazzetta dello Sport (in Italian). Archived from the original on 11 January 2015. Retrieved 22 March 2015. "Guardiola's world: Cruyff, the best Real Madrid and how the Premier League sells itself". Marca.com. 13 September 2018. Archived from the original on 29 September 2018. Retrieved 28 September 2018. "Football's Greatest – Roberto Baggio". Youtube. 27 March 2020. Archived from the original on 28 July 2020. Retrieved 31 March 2020. "Hodgson Baggio, stelle e polvere di derby" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 12 March 1996. Archived from the original on 8 November 2015. Retrieved 2 May 2014. "Italy's All-Time No 10s". Football Italia. 9 March 2014. Archived from the original on 22 July 2015. Retrieved 19 July 2015. Altafini, José; Pardo, Pierluigi (2009). Incredibile amici! Il mio manuale del calcio (in Italian). Milan: Rizzoli Libri. ISBN 978-88-58-60527-1. Retrieved 14 February 2017. Walter Veltroni (18 September 2015). "Veltroni intervista Baggio: "Caro Balotelli, ascoltami"" [Veltroni Baggio interview: "Dear Balotelli, listen to me"] (in Italian). Il Corriere dello Sport. Archived from the original on 25 September 2015. Retrieved 31 October 2015. Scott Murray (15 October 2010). "The Joy of Six: Great dribbles". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 24 September 2016. Retrieved 14 February 2017. Sagnik Kundu (20 February 2017). "10 best dribblers of all time". www.sportskeeda.com. Archived from the original on 23 December 2017. Retrieved 22 December 2017. Allan Jiang (25 January 2012). "50 Greatest Dribblers in World Football History". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on 23 December 2017. Retrieved 22 December 2017. Tighe, Sam (30 January 2013). "50 Greatest Dribblers in World Football History". Bleacher Report. Retrieved 8 November 2023. Harmer, Alfie Potts (8 November 2018). "7 Greatest Dribblers of All Time". www.hitc.com. Archived from the original on 30 July 2020. Retrieved 8 April 2020. Emmett Gates (20 September 2017). "Golazos galore: the 25 best goals from the golden era of Serie A". The Guardian. Retrieved 27 September 2017. Rob Smyth (11 November 2011). "The Joy of Six: football first touches". The Guardian. Retrieved 22 March 2016. Mario Sconcerti (11 January 2017). "Da Buffon a Riva, il gioco infinito della squadra ideale" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. Retrieved 13 February 2017. Alberto Ortega; Joseba Arroyo (18 February 2017). "Roberto Baggio: la coleta rebelde enemiga del 'catenaccio' que falló el penalti de su vida". Marca (in Italian). Retrieved 18 February 2017. Matteo Dovellini (18 February 2017). "Fiorentina, Sousa: "Saponara può giocare col Milan. E Baggio va ricordato sempre"". La Repubblica (in Italian). Retrieved 18 February 2017. Caruso, Francesco (18 February 2017). "Baggio 5x10: "Ricordo i quarti di Francia '98: pochi centimetri e Roby cambiava la storia di quel mondiale" Angelo Di Livio racconta Baggio" (in Italian). Gianluca Di Marzio. Retrieved 18 September 2021. Donato Bulfon (11 October 2018). "Capello: "Il calciatore italiano numero uno? Roberto Baggio"" (in Italian). www.pianetamilan.it. Archived from the original on 15 October 2018. Retrieved 14 October 2018. Tom Guerriero-Davies (20 July 2016). "The transfer that sparked a riot: Baggio to Juventus (1990)". gentlemanultra.com. Retrieved 7 August 2018. Jackson, Steve (13 January 2009). "Lessons in Calcio - Roberto Baggio". www.footballitaliano.co.uk. Archived from the original on 6 August 2020. Retrieved 20 September 2019. Gullit, Ruud (14 May 2010). "Perfect 10s". Espn.com. ESPN FC. Retrieved 8 April 2020. Timossi, Giampiero; Gozzini, Alessandra (11 April 2006). "Zola, futuro coi giovani e cuore rossoblù "Sono certo che il mio Cagliari ce la farà"". La Gazzetta dello Sport (in Italian). Retrieved 16 May 2020. ""Baggio fantastico: una fortuna giocare con lui"". Brescia Oggi (in Italian). 5 December 2017. Retrieved 22 May 2021. Buffon, Gianluigi; Perrone, Roberto (2008). Numero 1 (in Italian). Rizzoli. p. 170. ISBN 9788817024389. Retrieved 23 September 2023. "L'omaggio di Sacchi: lui e Signori ancora più grandi del loro talento". La Nuova Ferrara (in Italian). 11 May 2004. Archived from the original on 28 July 2020. Retrieved 24 April 2020. Smyth, Rob (22 July 2016). "Golden Goal: Roberto Baggio for Juventus against Internazionale (1992)". The Guardian. Retrieved 17 April 2020. Alessandro Rialti (3 October 1987). "Battistini non perde l'azzurro". La Stampa (in Italian). p. 20. Retrieved 28 May 2019. Hughes, Rob (18 December 1991). "The Orbiting of Roberto Baggio". The New York Times. Retrieved 17 April 2020. Majumdar, Amlan (21 June 2012). "Matthew Le Tissier Interview: "Roberto Baggio was the Best Player I Ever Played Against"". The Hard Tackle.com. Retrieved 29 August 2014. "Four Four Two - Ivan Zamorano: Perfect XI". FourFourTwo. Retrieved 9 October 2014. Mork, Martin (1 April 2001). "A divine turning point". Football Italia. Retrieved 7 April 2020. "Fifa, Pelè il miglior dieci di sempre. Maradona secondo, Baggio nella top ten" [FIFA, Pelé the greatest number ten of all time. Maradona second, Baggio in the top ten]. La Repubblica (in Italian). 2 March 2014. Retrieved 9 September 2015. "Cassano, addio al calcio dopo il ritorno all'Entella: "Stavolta è finita davvero"". La Gazzetta dello Sport (in Italian). 13 October 2018. Retrieved 14 October 2018. "Buffon reveals 'greatest Italians'". fantasista10.co.uk. Archived from the original on 16 July 2014. Retrieved 29 September 2014. Gamba, Emanuele (20 May 1995). "'Baggio, dai l'esempio'". La Repubblica (in Italian). Retrieved 17 April 2020. Nicita, Maurizio (16 February 2010). "Peruzzi rilancia Nesta "Sei grande, torna azzurro"". La Gazzetta dello Sport (in Italian). Retrieved 10 October 2021. Schianchi, Andrea (2 October 2019). "Festival dello Sport, a Trento ci sarà anche Roberto Baggio!". La Gazzetta dello Sport (in Italian). Retrieved 17 April 2020. "Cambiasso a Zanetti in diretta Instagram: "Perché sull'aereo dormi sempre?". Video" (in Italian). sport.sky.it. 18 April 2020. Retrieved 18 April 2020. Kelly, Cathal (3 July 2018). "England kicks its nasty habit of losing on penalties". The Globe and Mail. Retrieved 17 April 2020. "The Serie A team of the 1990s". The Guardian. 31 August 2018. Retrieved 17 April 2020. Carpenter, Les (10 June 2015). "An oral history of USA at Italia '90: the World Cup that changed US soccer". The Guardian. Retrieved 17 April 2020. Gates, Emmet (21 January 2015). "Remembering Dino, the other Baggio". The Guardian. Retrieved 17 April 2020. Gori, Marco (18 February 2010). "Baggio Day – Vicini: "Faceva sembrare facili le cose più difficili"" (in Italian). www.tuttomercatoweb.com. Retrieved 17 April 2020. Brera, Gianni (28 April 1992). "Un Colpo di Genio a S. Siro". La Repubblica (in Italian). Retrieved 18 September 2021. Edel, Stefano (18 February 2017). "Le 50 sfumature di Baggio Quel genio figlio dell'Italia". La Gazzetta di Mantova (in Italian). Retrieved 17 April 2020. "Udinese, il ritorno di Zico: "Sognavo lo scudetto"" (in Italian). sport.sky.it. 17 February 2017. Retrieved 17 April 2020. Pellizzari, Tommaso (23 July 2017). "Roberto Baggio: 'Ripenso ancora al rigore di Pasadena. E fa ancora male come il primo giorno...'". Il Corriere della Sera (in Italian). Retrieved 16 April 2020. McGhie, James (22 February 2017). "Baggio at 50 - A tribute". Calciomercato.com. Retrieved 17 April 2020. Discreti, Stefano (14 October 2019). "Cuore Tifoso Juve: cancellare quelle stelle vuol dire cancellare la storia" (in Italian). www.sportmediaset.mediaset.it. Retrieved 17 April 2020. "Mi piace chi punta sui giovani E Brocchi sta lavorando bene". Brescia Oggi (in Italian). 14 January 2017. Archived from the original on 28 July 2020. Retrieved 19 April 2020. Gentile, Marco (13 October 2019). "Roberto Baggio amaro: "Ripenso sempre al rigore sbagliato a Usa 94"". Il Giornale (in Italian). Retrieved 17 April 2020. Stamerra, Luca (13 April 2020). "Pasadena è solo un brutto sogno. Roberto Baggio, colui che ci ha fatto innamorare del calcio" (in Italian). Eurosport. Retrieved 17 April 2020. "Gascoigne torna in campo, l'ovazione dei 50 mila del nuovo Tottenham Hotspurs Stadium". Il Messaggero (in Italian). 1 April 2019. Retrieved 17 April 2020. Gates, Emmet (16 February 2021). "TGU Interview: Sven-Goran Eriksson". The Gentleman Ultra. Retrieved 12 May 2021. Conca, Liborio (13 October 2019). "I 50 che hanno fatto la storia del calcio" (in Italian). Esquire. Retrieved 18 April 2020. Iacobellis, Giacomo (22 July 2020). "TMW - Amunike: "Ricorderò sempre il gol all'Italia a USA '94. Baggio tra i più forti mai affrontati"" (in Italian). www.tuttomercatoweb.com. Retrieved 22 July 2020. Keilman, John (27 June 2019). "From high school to the World Cup, penalty kicks can unnerve the steeliest soccer player". The Chicago Tribune. Retrieved 18 April 2020. Horncastle, James (6 September 2018). "Italy's got talent: Roberto Mancini needs to trust in youth to progress". ESPN FC. Retrieved 18 April 2020. Simeoli, Antonio (17 August 2017). "Bruno Pizzul: "Le telecronache? Mi manca un campione come Baggio"". Il Tirreno (in Italian). Archived from the original on 18 August 2017. Retrieved 20 April 2020. Maggi, Tommaso (23 September 2015). "Pizzul: "La mia top 11 di sempre della Nazionale"". Il Corriere dello Sport (in Italian). Retrieved 20 April 2020. Cecere, Nicola (6 March 2018). "Pizzul: "Tifo Torino e amavo Baggio. Ma avrei voluto raccontare l'Italia vincere"". La Gazzetta dello Sport (in Italian). Retrieved 20 April 2020. Marani, Matteo (20 February 2020). ""Il caso Baggio", così il talento più puro del calcio italiano infiammò l'estate del 1990". La Stampa (in Italian). Retrieved 24 April 2020. Vincenzi, Massimo (6 August 2000). "Baggio, disoccupato speciale che sogna la Nazionale". La Repubblica (in Italian). Retrieved 16 April 2020. Agnew, Paddy (17 September 1996). "Cracks begin to show in Milan". The Irish Times. Retrieved 20 April 2020. Sconcerti, Mario (2009). Storia delle idee del calcio (in Italian). Milan: Baldini & Castoldi. ISBN 978-88-6865-114-5. Retrieved 16 April 2020. Panizza, Raffaele (28 April 2017). "Dario Hubner, 50 anni da bomber: Pirlo, Baggio, sigarette e campi di provincia". La Gazzetta dello Sport (in Italian). Retrieved 16 April 2020. Laffranchi, Gian Paolo (10 January 2016). "Filippini a Cosmi "Su Sodinha sbagli Serve costanza"". Brescia Oggi (in Italian). Archived from the original on 6 August 2020. Retrieved 19 April 2020. Masini, Claudio (18 February 2017). "Capello: 'Baggio e Rivera i veri fuoriclasse assoluti. Aveva una voglia matta con quelle ginocchia'" (in Italian). www.calciomercato.com. Retrieved 16 May 2020. "R. Baggio, Gli auguri del mondo del calcio" (in Italian). Firenze Viola. 18 February 2009. Retrieved 20 April 2020. Biondini, Chiara (27 July 2013). "Carnasciali racconta la sua carriera: "Batistuta un campione. Baggio? Il più grande"" (in Italian). TuttoMercatoWeb. Retrieved 16 May 2020. Stefano Boldrini (4 March 2010). "Mazzone: "Baggio rotto? Macché, era magico"". La Gazzetta dello Sport (in Italian). Retrieved 14 February 2017. "TONI: "Con Baggio e Guardiola ho imparato l'umiltà"" (in Italian). Tutto Brescia. 26 May 2017. Archived from the original on 25 February 2021. Retrieved 16 April 2020. Luigi, Garlando (16 May 2004). "Ultimo giorno con un amico". La Gazzetta dello Sport (in Italian). Retrieved 20 April 2020. "Roberto Baggio lascerà il calcio nel 2004". Il Corriere della Sera (in Italian). 29 December 2003. Retrieved 16 May 2020. Guglielmo Buccheri (28 August 2014). "Rizzoli: Mi piace il dialogo, ma solo con chi lo accetta. Baggio, Maldini e Zanetti i più collaborativ" (in Italian). Vivo Azzurro.it. Retrieved 27 March 2015. "Baggio e gli altri: giocatori e allenatori. A Bologna si vive da… Signori" (in Italian). Il Posticipo. 24 April 2020. Retrieved 16 May 2020. "I quarant'anni di Roberto Baggio un campione che manca al calcio". La Repubblica (in Italian). 16 February 2007. Retrieved 7 April 2020. Crosetti, Maurizio (1 June 1995). "' Mi Avete Venduto All' Inter'". La Repubblica (in Italian). Retrieved 19 April 2020. "Baggio, Mazzone e Brescia decisivi per la mia carriera". Brescia Oggi (in Italian). 5 May 2018. Archived from the original on 6 August 2020. Retrieved 19 April 2020. "The Top 20". The Telegraph. 10 March 2004. Retrieved 17 April 2020. Lippi, Gabriele (7 June 2019). "Roberto Baggio, la leggendaria carriera del Divin Codino" (in Italian). Esquire. Retrieved 7 April 2020. Nicola, Cecere (23 April 1999). "Baggio, la fantasia e' un optional". La Gazzetta dello Sport (in Italian). Retrieved 16 April 2020. Metelli, Marco (20 June 2018). "La favola di Baggio ai tempi di Brescia: una storia di mercato leggendaria" (in Italian). Calciomercato. Retrieved 16 April 2020. Allsop, Derick (16 February 1994). "Football: Free spirit with the world at his feet". The Independent. Retrieved 19 April 2020. Losi, Mattia (17 February 2017). "Roberto Baggio, cinquant'anni da uomo libero". Il Sole 24 Ore (in Italian). Retrieved 17 April 2020. "The top 20 overrated football players of all time - in pictures". The Telegraph. 3 April 2015. Retrieved 16 May 2020. Storey, Daniel (5 February 2020). "10 of the best playmakers of the 90s: Zizou, Laudrup, Baggio, Bergkamp..." Planet Football. Retrieved 29 June 2020. Bulfon, Donato (17 April 2017). "Sacchi: "Van Basten un grandissimo. Su Baggio e Cruijff…"" (in Italian). Pianeta Milan. Retrieved 17 April 2020. Collings, Tim (25 April 2004). "Final cut for Divine Ponytail". The Guardian. Retrieved 17 April 2020. Martelli, Antonio (17 February 2020). "I 50 anni del 'Divin Codino' Baggio: campione unico che ha unito il mondo del calcio". La Presse (in Italian). Retrieved 17 April 2020. Malfitano, Salvatore (18 February 2017). "Baggio 5x10 - L'inizio del campione, da Vicenza a Firenze. Una questione d'amore, Volpecina: "Amato da tutti: era questa la sua grandezza"" (in Italian). gianlucadimarzio.com/. Retrieved 17 April 2020. "Baggio e Rivera, il ritorno dei numeri 10" [Baggio and Rivera, the return of the number 10s]. La Stampa (in Italian). Archived from the original on 4 August 2010. Retrieved 16 May 2012. Piri, Stefano (10 March 2020). "Roberto Baggio. Avevo solo un pensiero" (in Italian). Ultimo Uomo. Retrieved 16 May 2020. Ferrara, Benedetto (11 July 2010). "Baggio, fine dell' esilio insegnerà calcio all' Italia". La Repubblica (in Italian). Retrieved 7 April 2020. Crosetti, Maurizio (7 July 1995). "Baggio di Cristallo". La Repubblica (in Italian). Retrieved 7 April 2020. Antonini, Damiano; Severgnini, Beppe (4 March 2019). "Italians: Il caso Roberto Baggio". Il Corriere della Sera (in Italian). Retrieved 7 April 2020. "Baggio set for Italian renaissance". CNN. 27 April 2004. Retrieved 19 April 2020. "Baggio Apre Un Centro Buddista". La Repubblica (in Italian). 15 May 1996. Retrieved 24 April 2020. "Dalla A alla Zico, i grandi numeri 10 del calcio internazionale" (in Italian). Sport.Sky.it. 10 October 2010. Archived from the original on 2 August 2017. Retrieved 23 July 2017. "World Soccer Players of the Century". World Soccer. Retrieved 29 August 2014. Karel Stokkermans (30 January 2000). "IFFHS' Century Elections". IFFHS. Retrieved 28 September 2017. "Golden Foot: Roberto Baggio". Golden Foot. Archived from the original on 21 November 2015. Retrieved 12 June 2012. "Zinedine Zidane voted top player by fans" (PDF). UEFA.com. Retrieved 24 July 2014. "Serie A Hall of Fame 2011" (in Italian). Ansa.it. 5 December 2011. Retrieved 10 June 2012. "Pelè è più forte di Maradona, Zidane 3°, Baggio 9°: i migliori 10 secondo la Fifa" [Pelè better than Maradona, Zidane 3rd, Baggio 9th: the best 10s according to FIFA]. La Gazzetta dello Sport (in Italian). 2 March 2014. Retrieved 24 September 2014. George Arnett; Ami Sedghi (29 May 2014). "The World Cup's top 100 footballers: by nationality, goals scored and votes". The Guardian. Retrieved 3 December 2016. Gasparotto, Manlio (15 August 2015). "La Gazzetta dello Sport vota Rivera: è il miglior calciatore italiano di tutti i tempi". La Gazzetta dello Sport (in Italian). Retrieved 18 April 2020. "Baggio sorpassa Rivera nella classifica del miglior italiano di sempre". La Gazzetta dello Sport (in Italian). 17 August 2015. Retrieved 18 April 2020. Mohamed, Majid (19 May 2015). "The best not to have won the Champions League". UEFA.com. Retrieved 11 August 2020. Lea, Greg (28 May 2019). "The 25 best players never to win the Champions League. #6 Baggio". FourFourTwo. Retrieved 28 August 2019. "Ranked! The 101 greatest football players of the last 25 years: full list". FourFourTwo. 26 July 2019. Archived from the original on 6 April 2020. Retrieved 6 April 2020. White, Mark (5 September 2023). "Ranked! The 100 best football players of all time: full list". FourFourTwo (356 ed.). Retrieved 17 November 2023. Gallagher, Jack (17 March 2020). "Roberto Baggio: The Reverse Jimmy Glass & Remembering the Real Il Divin Codino". 90min.com. Archived from the original on 25 November 2022. Retrieved 7 April 2020. Solhekol, Kaveh; Sheth, Dharmesh (30 May 2020). "Ronaldo, Eric Cantona, Zlatan Ibrahimovic: The best players never to win Champions League 25-1". Sky Sports. Retrieved 1 June 2020. "World Cup All-Time Top Goal Scorers". soccerlens.com. 20 April 2010. Retrieved 10 August 2012. "Italy - Record International Players". RSSSF. Retrieved 10 August 2012. "Francia '98: r.baggio, "finisce tutto coi rigori"" (in Italian). agi.it. 3 July 1998. Retrieved 8 June 2016.[permanent dead link] "Totale: Rigori realizzati" [Totals: Penalties scored] (in Italian). Italia1910. Retrieved 3 May 2016. "Totale: Rigori realizzati" (in Italian). Italia1910. Retrieved 3 May 2016. "I 10 migliori rigoristi della storia della Serie A" (in Italian). Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 29 August 2014. Alessandra Bocci (28 March 2013). "Balotelli infallibile dal dischetto: per lui 15 rigori su 15". La Gazzetta dello Sport (in Italian). Retrieved 23 February 2017. "Record di Serie A: I Rigori" (in Italian). Retrieved 29 August 2014. "Adesso Totti sogna di superare Nordhal". Il Sole 24 Ore (in Italian). 3 May 2011. Retrieved 29 July 2014. "Totti riscrive la storia: Baggio superato sui calci di rigore, Higuain per media-goal" [Totti rewrites history: Baggio overtaken on penalties, Higuain in terms of goalscoring average] (in Italian). Goal.com. 22 April 2016. Retrieved 25 April 2016. "Se la mira è di rigore Fare gol dal dischetto: sembra facile, ma anche i migliori sbagliano" (in Italian). Archived from the original on 6 March 2013. Retrieved 10 August 2012. "Roma's Francesco Totti thrilled after breaking Roberto Baggio's Serie A goal record". Goal.com. 1 May 2011. Retrieved 10 August 2012. "I 50 anni di Roberto Baggio: le 10 frasi più belle" (in Italian). Il Corriere dello Sport. 14 February 2017. Retrieved 23 February 2017. Susy Campanale (3 May 2016). "Serie A Week 36: Did You Know?". Football Italia. Retrieved 3 May 2016. "'Sentenza' Pirlo su punizione, solo Mihajlovic ha fatto meglio in Serie A" (in Italian). Goal.com. 18 March 2014. Retrieved 27 July 2014. "Roberto Baggio - Career Statistics". Soccer Europe. Retrieved 6 June 2012. "Campionato di Calcio Serie A: record, primati, numeri e statistiche". Il Corriere dello Sport (in Italian). 30 October 2023. Retrieved 12 February 2024. "Gilardino come Totti e Baggio: gol da record al Carpi" (in Italian). Mediaset. 30 January 2016. Archived from the original on 31 January 2016. Retrieved 6 February 2016. Niccolò Mariotto (23 November 2016). "TOP 10 - I dieci giocatori autori di più triplette nella storia della Serie A" (in Italian). www.90min.com. Archived from the original on 27 July 2021. Retrieved 21 May 2017. "Roberto Baggio". Archived from the original on 27 November 2021. Retrieved 27 November 2021. "FIGC: Contenuto Generico" (PDF) (in Italian). FIGC. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 November 2012. Retrieved 8 July 2012. "Baggio lascia la Federcalcio" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 23 January 2013. Retrieved 25 January 2013. "Comunicato Ufficiale n° 006 (2011–12)" (PDF). Settore Tecnico della F.I.G.C. (in Italian). 15 July 2011. Retrieved 20 September 2011. "Baggio: Allenatore a Coverciano" (in Italian). La Nazione. 5 July 2012. Retrieved 8 July 2012. "Roberto Baggio in Contention for Modena Job?". Goal.com. 7 July 2012. Retrieved 8 July 2012. Sandro Magister (4 September 1997). "Buddisti Soka Gakkai. Una Sabina vi convertirà" (in Italian). L'Espresso. Retrieved 25 January 2016. "Da Belotti a Baggio: quando la fascia è speciale" (in Italian). sport.sky.it. 5 March 2017. Retrieved 19 April 2020. "Roberto Baggio - Biography". Archived from the original on 31 July 2013. Retrieved 29 June 2012. "R. Baggio". Retrieved 29 June 2012. Giulio Todescan (7 September 2012). "Chiude il negozio Roberto Baggio Sport" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. Retrieved 19 July 2015. Baggio 2001 "Roberto Baggio and the Essence of Buddhism: "Baggio took all that in his stride silently and he later said that his Buddhist values had made him handle his toughest days with serenity"". Goaldentimes.org. Archived from the original on 7 October 2015. Retrieved 2 February 2015. "Baggio: Una Porta Nel Cielo". rai.it (in Italian). Rai Sport. 28 November 2001. Archived from the original on 12 August 2009. Retrieved 8 July 2012. "FAO Ambassadors - Get Involved: Roberto Baggio". FAO.org. Archived from the original on 16 May 2012. Retrieved 15 July 2012. "A very sporting gesture". Business Standard. New Delhi. 14 November 2010. Retrieved 29 August 2014. "Borgonovo, notte da brividi" [Borgonovo, night of shivers]. La Gazzetta dello Sport (in Italian). 8 October 2008. Retrieved 13 October 2008. "Video: Baggio calls for ALS research". Football Italia. 23 August 2014. Retrieved 1 December 2016. "Interreligious Match for Peace: 1/9/2014". matchforpeace.org. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 1 September 2014. "Il Papa a Maradona: "Ti aspettavo". Diego show con Baggio, poi si infuria: "Icardi non doveva giocare"". La Gazzetta dello Sport (in Italian). 1 September 2014. Retrieved 1 September 2014. "Milano, Baggio inaugura il centro buddista più grande d'Europa". La Gazzetta dello Sport (in Italian). 27 October 2014. Retrieved 30 October 2014. "Corrado Guzzanti" (in Italian). Archived from the original on 15 March 2013. Retrieved 8 July 2012. "Baggio verso i 40 senza codino". La Gazzetta dello Sport (in Italian). 18 January 2007. Retrieved 10 June 2012. "Lucio Dalla: Album - Luna Matana (Baggio, Baggio)" (in Italian). Retrieved 10 June 2012. {{cite and "Baggio" by Miles Kane web|url=http://www.ilgiornale.it/spettacoli/cesare_cremonini_pop_maturo_conquisto_lestate/06-08-2005/articolo-id=20259-page=0-comments=1%7Ctitle=Cesare Cremonini: Un pop Maturo Conquista l'Estate|publisher=Il Giornale|language=it|date=6 August 2005|access-date=10 June 2012|archive-date=28 July 2020|archive-url=https://web.archive.org/web/20200728114131/https://www.ilgiornale.it/news/cesare-cremonini-pop-maturo-conquisto-l-estate.html%7Curl-status=dead}} Baggio, 17 May 2023, retrieved 23 May 2023 "Baggio e lo spot del rigore "E' la fine di un incubo"". La Repubblica (in Italian). Retrieved 8 July 2012. "Johnnie Walker ads - Baggio: Keep On Walking". The Daily Telegraph. London. 23 January 2001. Retrieved 8 July 2012. "Pubblicità: La Passione di Baggio, Cassano e Kuerten Per Diadora". marketpress.info (in Italian). Retrieved 8 July 2012. "Respect the past, own the future". www.diadora.com. Archived from the original on 19 July 2017. Retrieved 21 July 2017. "Foreign Celebrities in Japan: Codino Divino". Retrieved 30 June 2012. Super Formation Soccer 95: della Serie A "World Football Climax pub Roberto Baggio". YouTube. Archived from the original on 15 November 2021. Retrieved 1 July 2012. "Pro Soccer Club o Tsukurou! Europe Championship pub#1 Roberto Baggio". YouTube. Archived from the original on 27 February 2013. Retrieved 1 July 2012. "Pro Soccer Club o Tsukurou! Europe Championship pub#2 Roberto Baggio". YouTube. Archived from the original on 15 November 2021. Retrieved 1 July 2012. "Robertobaggio.it: Curiosità". robertobaggio.it (in Italian). Archived from the original on 23 April 2012. Retrieved 8 July 2012. Linehan, Graham; Mathews, Arthur. Father Ted DVD Commentaries (Podcast). United Kingdom: Channel 4. Archived from the original on 17 May 2014. Retrieved 6 April 2014. "Shakira launches clip 'Waka Waka' Cup official music" (in Portuguese). Reforma. 8 June 2010. Retrieved 9 June 2010. "È il Mondiale del Codino. I miracoli e le lacrime". La Gazzetta dello Sport (in Italian). 28 May 2014. Retrieved 2 September 2014. "Topolino e il Giallo alla World Cup" (in Italian). Archived from the original on 9 January 2014. Retrieved 8 July 2012. "Io che sarò Roberto Baggio". La Gazzetta dello Sport (in Italian). Archived from the original on 18 February 2013. Retrieved 10 June 2012. "Baggio's Magical Kicks - Football Games". myfootballgames.co.uk. Archived from the original on 28 January 2016. Retrieved 2 February 2016. "Djorkaeff's Dream Comes True". The New York Times. 22 February 2005. Retrieved 26 October 2019. Emma Clark (3 December 2015). "PES 2016's myClub Legends to be announced on December 8". The Irish Independent. Retrieved 4 December 2015. EA Sports FIFA (3 August 2018). "Roberto Baggio ICON confirmed for #FUT19. Tune in on Saturday to find out who will join him". Twitter.com. Retrieved 11 September 2018. Beresford, Chloe (10 October 2019). "Netflix Announce Roberto Baggio Documentary With Mediaset Partnership". Forbes. Retrieved 27 February 2021. Campanale, Susy (3 March 2021). "Netflix release Baggio drama trailer". Football Italia. Retrieved 4 June 2021. Roberto Baggio at National-Football-Teams.com "Roberto Baggio: History". soccer-europe.com. Retrieved 17 July 2012. "Serie A Archives: Statistics 1998/99 Season". soccer-europe.com. Retrieved 17 July 2012. Rota, Davide; Miladinovich, Misha (17 August 1999). "Italy Cup 1998/99". Rec. Sport. Soccer Statistics Foundation. Retrieved 15 December 2014. Di Maggio, Roberto (11 May 2005). "Roberto Baggio - Goals in International Matches". Rec. Sport. Soccer Statistics Foundation. Retrieved 15 December 2014. 1994 FIFA World Cup USA, FIFA.com 1990 FIFA World Cup Italy, FIFA.com José Luis Pierrend (8 January 2015). "The "Bravo" Award". RSSSF. Retrieved 20 August 2020. Jarek Owsianski; Davide Rota (18 December 2013). "Cup Winners Cup Topscorers". RSSSF. Retrieved 20 November 2015. "Roberto Baggio - FIFA Profile". FIFA.com. Archived from the original on 2 June 2014. Retrieved 13 January 2017. "FIFA World Cup All-Star Team – Football world Cup All Star Team". Football.sporting99.com. Archived from the original on 30 June 2016. Retrieved 28 June 2012. José Luis Pierrend (6 March 2012). ""Onze Mondial" Awards: Super Onze d'Or 1976 - 1995 (top 5)". RSSSF. Retrieved 14 September 2015. Karel Stokkermans (5 February 2001). "Planète Foot's 50 Meilleurs Joueurs du Monde". RSSSF. Archived from the original on 31 December 2015. Retrieved 12 August 2015. Marcelo Leme de Arruda (19 September 1999). "Venerdì's All-Time Top-100 (100 Magnifici)". RSSSF. Retrieved 28 September 2017. Karel Stokkermans (5 February 2001). "Guerin' Sportivo's I 50 Grandi del Secolo by Adalberto Bortolotti". RSSSF. Archived from the original on 31 December 2015. Retrieved 12 August 2015. Karel Stokkermans (23 December 2015). "The Best x Players of the Century/All-Time:France Football's Football Player of the Century". RSSSF. Retrieved 28 September 2017. Karel Stokkermans (23 December 2015). "The Best x Players of the Century/All-Time: Placar's 100 Craques do Século". RSSSF. Retrieved 28 September 2017. "FIFA XI´s Matches - Full Info". RSSSF. Archived from the original on 17 November 2015. Retrieved 4 January 2016. "Roberto Baggio si aggiudica il premio ®Scirea¯ alla carriera" (in Italian). Il Corriere della Sera. 15 July 2001. Retrieved 30 August 2014. Christopher Davies (5 March 2004). "Pele open to ridicule over top hundred". The Telegraph. Retrieved 9 July 2015. "Calcio: premio Giuseppe Prisco a Moratti, Mazzone e Baggio". La Repubblica (in Italian). 2 April 2004. Retrieved 9 July 2015. "Premio San Siro Gentleman 2004" (in Italian). Premio Gentleman. Retrieved 16 April 2020. Marcelo Leme de Arruda (21 December 2005). "Os 100 Craques das Copas (Placar Magazine)". RSSSF. Retrieved 12 August 2015. "Baresi, Capello and Rivera Accepted in Hall of Fame". A.C. Milan.com. 26 November 2013. Retrieved 20 April 2015. "Journey through the Stars: Roberto Baggio". Juventus.com. 17 June 2011. Retrieved 6 February 2015. "Il Gentleman di Platino a Roberto Baggio" (in Italian). Calcio Mercato. 18 May 2015. Retrieved 21 May 2015. "Inaugurata la Walk of Fame: 100 targhe per celebrare le leggende dello sport italiano" (in Italian). Coni. 7 May 2015. Archived from the original on 12 July 2019. Retrieved 26 August 2015. "CNA 100 Leggende CONI per data di nascita" (PDF) (in Italian). Coni. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 July 2019. Retrieved 23 September 2015. "IFFHS announce the 48 football legend players". IFFHS. 25 January 2016. Archived from the original on 16 February 2016. Retrieved 14 September 2016. "Baggio Sig. Roberto - Cavaliere Ordine al Merito della Repubblica Italiana" (in Italian). Quirinale.it. 30 July 1991. Retrieved 16 March 2015. Baggio, Roberto (2001). Una porta nel cielo [A goal in the sky] (in Italian). Arezzo: Limina Edizioni. pp. 49–59. ISBN 88-88551-92-1. Nappi, Raffaele (2018). Roberto Baggio. Divin codino [Roberto Baggio. Divine ponytail] (in Italian). Rome: Giulio Perrone Editore. ISBN 978-88-6004-465-5. Wikiquote has quotations related to Roberto Baggio. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Roberto Baggio. The time allocated for running scripts has expired. The time allocated for running scripts has expired.The time allocated for running scripts has expired. Profile at FIGC.it The time allocated for running scripts has expired. The time allocated for running scripts has expired. The time allocated for running scripts has expired. The time allocated for running scripts has expired. The time allocated for running scripts has expired. The time allocated for running scripts has expired.The time allocated for running scripts has expired.The time allocated for running scripts has expired. The time allocated for running scripts has expired. The time allocated for running scripts has expired. The time allocated for running scripts has expired. The time allocated for running scripts has expired. The time allocated for running scripts has expired. The time allocated for running scripts has expired. The time allocated for running scripts has expired. The time allocated for running scripts has expired. The time allocated for running scripts has expired. The time allocated for running scripts has expired. The time allocated for running scripts has expired. The time allocated for running scripts has expired. The time allocated for running scripts has expired. The time allocated for running scripts has expired.The time allocated for running scripts has expired.The time allocated for running scripts has expired. The time allocated for running scripts has expired.