Nicole Mary Kidman AC (born 20 June 1967) is an Australian and American actress and producer. Known for her work in film and television productions across many genres, she has consistently ranked among the world's highest-paid actresses. She is the recipient of numerous accolades, including an Academy Award, a BAFTA Award, two Primetime Emmy Awards, and six Golden Globe Awards. She received the New York Film Festival Gala Tribute in 2012 and is the first Australian actor to receive the AFI Life Achievement Award honor. Kidman began her career in Australia with the 1983 film BMX Bandits. Her breakthrough came with lead roles in Dead Calm and the miniseries Bangkok Hilton (both 1989). She came to international prominence with a supporting role in Days of Thunder (1990), and soon gained greater recognition with starring parts in Far and Away (1992), To Die For (1995), Eyes Wide Shut (1999), The Others (2001), and Cold Mountain (2003). Kidman won the Academy Award for Best Actress for her portrayal of Virginia Woolf in The Hours (2002), receiving further Oscar nominations for Moulin Rouge! (2001), Rabbit Hole (2010), Lion (2016), and Being the Ricardos (2021). In addition to other mainstream projects such as The Golden Compass (2007), Australia (2008), Paddington (2014), Aquaman (2018), and Bombshell (2019), she is known for her work in small-scale and often experimental productions, such as Dogville (2003), Birth (2004), Margot at the Wedding (2007), The Paperboy (2012), Stoker (2013), The Killing of a Sacred Deer (2017), Destroyer, and Boy Erased (both 2018). Kidman's television roles include Hemingway & Gellhorn (2012), Top of the Lake: China Girl (2017), The Undoing (2020), Nine Perfect Strangers (2021), and Special Ops: Lioness (2023). For the HBO series Big Little Lies (2017–2019), she received Primetime Emmy Awards for Outstanding Lead Actress and Outstanding Limited Series as executive producer. Kidman has served as a goodwill ambassador for UNICEF since 1994 and UNIFEM since 2006. She was appointed Companion of the Order of Australia in 2006. Kidman was married to actor Tom Cruise from 1990 to 2001, and has been married to country music singer Keith Urban since 2006. In 2010, she founded the production company Blossom Films. In 2004 and 2018, Time included her on its list of the 100 most influential people in the world, and in 2020, The New York Times named her one of the greatest actors of the 21st century. Nicole Mary Kidman was born on 20 June 1967 in Honolulu, Hawaii, while her Australian parents were temporarily in the United States on student visas. Her mother, a nursing instructor and member of the Women's Electoral Lobby edited her husband's books; her father, Antony Kidman, was a biochemist, clinical psychologist, and author. She also has a younger sister, Antonia Kidman, who is a journalist and TV presenter. Having been born in the American state of Hawaii to Australian parents, Kidman holds dual citizenship of Australia and the United States. She has English, Irish, and Scottish ancestry. Being born in Hawaii, she was given the Hawaiian name "Hōkūlani" ([hoːkuːˈlɐni]), meaning "heavenly star". The inspiration came from a baby elephant born around the same time at the Honolulu Zoo. When Kidman was born, her father was a graduate student at the University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa. He became a visiting fellow at the National Institute of Mental Health of the United States. Opposed to the Vietnam War, her parents participated in anti-war protests while living in Washington, D.C., having moved there shortly after Kidman's birth. Her family eventually returned to Australia three years later. She grew up in Sydney where she attended Lane Cove Public School and North Sydney Girls' High School. She was enrolled in ballet at the age of three and showed her natural talent for acting during her primary and high school years. Kidman has said she first aspired to become an actress upon watching Margaret Hamilton's performance as the Wicked Witch of the West in The Wizard of Oz. She revealed that she was timid as a child, saying, "I am very shy – really shy – I even had a stutter as a kid, which I slowly got over, but I still regress into that shyness. So I don't like walking into a crowded restaurant by myself; I don't like going to a party by myself." During her teenage years, she attended the Phillip Street Theatre, alongside fellow actress Naomi Watts, and the Australian Theatre for Young People, where she took up drama and mime as she found acting to be a refuge. Owing to her fair skin and naturally red hair, the sun drove her to rehearse in the halls of the theatre. A regular at the Phillip Street Theatre, she was encouraged to pursue acting full-time, which she did by dropping out of high school. In 1983, 16-year-old Kidman made her film debut in a remake of the Australian holiday classic Bush Christmas. By the end of that year, she had a supporting role in the television series Five Mile Creek. In 1984, her mother was diagnosed with breast cancer, which caused Kidman to halt her acting work temporarily while she studied massage therapy to help her mother with physical therapy. She began gaining recognition during this decade after appearing in several Australian films, such as the action comedy BMX Bandits (1983) and the romantic comedy Windrider (1986). Throughout the rest of the 1980s, she appeared in various Australian television programs, including the 1987 miniseries Vietnam, for which she won her first Australian Film Institute Award. Kidman next appeared in the Australian film Emerald City (1988), based on the play of the same name, which earned her a second Australian Film Institute Award. She then starred alongside Sam Neill in the 1989 thriller Dead Calm as Rae Ingram, the wife of a naval officer who is menaced by a castaway at sea, played by Billy Zane. The film proved to be her breakthrough role, and was one of the first films for which she gained international recognition. Regarding her performance, Variety commented how "throughout the film, Kidman is excellent. She gives the character of Rae real tenacity and energy." Meanwhile, critic Roger Ebert noted the excellent chemistry between the leads, stating, "Kidman and Zane do generate real, palpable hatred in their scenes together." She followed that up with the Australian miniseries Bangkok Hilton before moving on to star alongside her then-boyfriend and future ex-husband, Tom Cruise, in the 1990 sports action film Days of Thunder, as a young doctor who falls in love with a NASCAR driver. Considered to be her international breakout film, it was among the highest-grossing films of the year. In 1991, Kidman co-starred alongside Thandiwe Newton and former classmate Naomi Watts in the Australian independent film Flirting. They portrayed high school girls in this coming of age story, which won the Australian Film Institute Award for Best Film. That same year, her work in the film Billy Bathgate earned Kidman her first Golden Globe Award nomination, for Best Supporting Actress. The New York Times, in its film review, called her "a beauty with, it seems, a sense of humor". The following year, she and Cruise re-teamed for Ron Howard's Irish epic Far and Away (1992), which was a modest critical and commercial success. In 1993, she starred in the thriller Malice, opposite Alec Baldwin, and the drama My Life, opposite Michael Keaton. In 1995, Kidman played Dr. Chase Meridian, the damsel in distress, in the superhero film Batman Forever, opposite Val Kilmer as the film's title character. That same year, she starred in Gus Van Sant's critically acclaimed dark comedy To Die For, in which she played the murderous newscaster Suzanne Stone. Regarding her performance, Mick LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle said "[she] brings to the role layers of meaning, intention and impulse. Telling her story in close-up – as she does throughout the film – Kidman lets you see the calculation, the wheels turning, the transparent efforts to charm that succeed in charming all the same." For her performance, she received her first Golden Globe Award. In the following years, she appeared alongside Barbara Hershey and John Malkovich in The Portrait of a Lady (1996), based on the novel of the same name, and starred in The Peacemaker (1997) as nuclear expert Dr. Julia Kelly, opposite George Clooney. The latter film grossed US$110 million worldwide. In 1998, she starred alongside Sandra Bullock in the romantic comedy Practical Magic as two witch sisters who face a threatening curse that prevents them from finding lasting love. While the film opened at the top of the charts during its North American opening weekend, it was a commercial box office failure. She returned to the stage that same year for the David Hare play The Blue Room, which opened in London. For her performance, she received a Laurence Olivier Award nomination for Best Actress. In 1999, Kidman reunited with then-husband Tom Cruise to portray a couple on a sexual odyssey in Eyes Wide Shut, their third film together and the final film of director Stanley Kubrick. It was subject to censorship controversies due to the explicit nature of its sex scenes. After a brief hiatus and a highly publicised divorce from Cruise, Kidman returned to the screen to play a mail-order bride in the British-American drama Birthday Girl. In 2001, she took on the role of cabaret actress and courtesan Satine in Baz Luhrmann's musical Moulin Rouge!, opposite Ewan McGregor. Her performance and her singing received positive reviews; Paul Clinton of CNN called it her best work since To Die For, and wrote "[she] is smoldering and stunning as Satine. She moves with total confidence throughout the film [...] Kidman seems to specialize in 'ice queen' characters, but with Satine, she allows herself to thaw, just a bit." She subsequently received her second Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture Musical or Comedy, among several other awards and nominations, including her first Academy Award nomination for Best Actress. Also in 2001, Kidman starred in Alejandro Amenábar's psychological horror film The Others (2001) as Grace Stewart, a mother living in the Channel Islands during World War II who suspects her house is haunted. Grossing over US$210 million worldwide, her performance earned her several award nominations, including a Goya Award nomination for Best Actress, in addition to receiving her second BAFTA Award and fifth Golden Globe Award nominations. Roger Ebert commented that "Alejandro Amenábar has the patience to create a languorous, dreamy atmosphere, and Nicole Kidman succeeds in convincing us that she is a normal person in a disturbing situation, and not just a standard-issue horror movie hysteric." The following year, Kidman garnered critical acclaim for her portrayal of Virginia Woolf in Stephen Daldry's The Hours, co-starring alongside Meryl Streep and Julianne Moore. Kidman wore prosthetics, which were applied to her nose, to portray the author during 1920s England, making her look almost unrecognisable. The film was a critical success, earning several awards and nominations, including a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Picture. The New York Times wrote that "Ms. Kidman, in a performance of astounding bravery, evokes the savage inner war waged by a brilliant mind against a system of faulty wiring that transmits a searing, crazy static into her brain". She won numerous critic and industry awards for her performance, including her first BAFTA Award, third Golden Globe Award, and the Academy Award for Best Actress, becoming the first Australian to win the award. During her Oscar's acceptance speech, she referenced the Iraq War which was occurring at the time when speaking about the importance of art saying, "Why do you come to the Academy Awards when the world is in such turmoil? Because art is important. And because you believe in what you do and you want to honour that, and it is a tradition that needs to be upheld." That same year, she was named the World's Most Beautiful Person by People magazine. Following her Oscar win, Kidman appeared in three distinctly different films in 2003. The first of those, a leading role in director Lars von Trier's Dogville, was an experimental film set on a bare soundstage. Though the film divided critics in the United States, Kidman earned praise for her performance. Peter Travers of Rolling Stone stated, "Kidman gives the most emotionally bruising performance of her career in Dogville, a movie that never met a cliche it didn't stomp on." The second film was an adaptation of Philip Roth's novel The Human Stain, opposite Anthony Hopkins. Her third film that year was Anthony Minghella's war drama Cold Mountain, where she starred opposite Jude Law and Renée Zellweger, playing Southerner Ada Monroe, a woman who falls in love with Law's character and become separated by the American Civil War. Regarding her performance, Time magazine wrote, "Kidman takes strength from Ada's plight and grows steadily, literally luminous. Her sculptural pallor gives way to warm radiance in the firelight". The film garnered several awards and nominations, most notably for the performances of the cast, with Kidman receiving her sixth Golden Globe Award nomination for Best Actress. In 2004, Kidman starred in the drama film Birth, which sparked controversy over a scene in which she shares a bath with her co-star Cameron Bright, then aged ten. During a press conference at the 61st Venice International Film Festival, she addressed the controversy saying, "It wasn't that I wanted to make a film where I kiss a 10-year-old boy. I wanted to make a film where you understand love". For her performance, she received her seventh Golden Globe nomination. That same year, she starred alongside Matthew Broderick, Bette Midler, Christopher Walken and Glenn Close in the black comedy science-fiction film The Stepford Wives, a remake of the 1975 film of the same name, directed by Frank Oz. The following year, she starred opposite Sean Penn in the Sydney Pollack thriller The Interpreter, playing UN translator Silvia Broome, and starred alongside Will Ferrell in the romantic comedy Bewitched, based on the 1960s TV sitcom of the same name. While neither film fared well in the United States, both were international successes. For the latter film, she and Ferrell earned the Razzie Award for Worst Screen Couple. In conjunction with her success within the film industry, Kidman became the face of the Chanel No. 5 perfume brand. She starred in a campaign of television and print ads with Rodrigo Santoro, directed by Moulin Rouge! director Baz Luhrmann, to promote the fragrance during the holiday seasons of 2004, 2005, 2006 and 2008. No. 5 the Film, a three-minute commercial produced for Chanel No. 5, made Kidman the record holder for the most money paid per minute to an actor after she reportedly earned US$12 million for the three-minute advert. During this time, she was also featured as the 45th Most Powerful Celebrity on Forbes' 2005 Celebrity 100 List. She made a reported US$14.5 million between 2004 and 2005. On People magazine's list of 2005's highest-paid actresses, Kidman came in second behind Julia Roberts, with a US$16–17 million per-film price tag. In 2006, Kidman portrayed photographer Diane Arbus in the biographical film Fur, opposite Robert Downey Jr., and lent her voice to the animated film Happy Feet, which grossed over US$384 million worldwide, becoming her highest-grossing film at the time. The following year, she starred in the science-fiction film The Invasion, a remake of the 1956 Invasion of the Body Snatchers, directed by Oliver Hirschbiegel, and starred opposite Jennifer Jason Leigh and Jack Black in Noah Baumbach's comedy-drama Margot at the Wedding, which earned her a Satellite Award nomination for Best Actress – Musical or Comedy. Also in 2007, she starred as the main antagonist Marisa Coulter in the fantasy-adventure film The Golden Compass, which grossed over US$370 million worldwide, also becoming one of her highest-grossing films to date. The following year, Kidman reunited with Moulin Rouge! director Baz Luhrmann for the Australian period film Australia (2008), set in the remote Northern Territory during the Japanese attack on Darwin during World War II. Starring opposite Hugh Jackman, she played an Englishwoman feeling overwhelmed by the continent. Though the film received mixed reviews from critics, it turned out to be a box office success, grossing over $211 million worldwide against a budget of $130 million. In 2009, she appeared in the Rob Marshall musical Nine, portraying the muse Claudia Jenssen, alongside an ensemble cast consisting of Daniel Day-Lewis, Marion Cotillard, Penélope Cruz, Judi Dench, Fergie, Kate Hudson and Sophia Loren. Kidman, whose screen time was brief in comparison to the other actresses, performed the musical number "Unusual Way" alongside Day-Lewis. The film received several Golden Globe Award and Academy Award nominations, with Kidman earning her fourth Screen Actors Guild Award nomination, as part of the Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture award. Kidman began the 2010s by producing and starring in the film adaptation of the Pulitzer Prize-winning play Rabbit Hole, alongside Aaron Eckhart. Her performance as a grieving mother coping with the death of her son earned her critical acclaim, and she received nominations for the Academy Award, Golden Globe Award and Screen Actors Guild Award for Best Actress. The following year, she appeared with Adam Sandler and Jennifer Aniston in Dennis Dugan's romantic comedy Just Go with It, as a trophy wife, and subsequently starred alongside Nicolas Cage in director Joel Schumacher's action-thriller Trespass, with the stars playing a married couple taken hostage. In 2012, Kidman starred alongside Clive Owen in the HBO film Hemingway & Gellhorn, which depicted the relationship between journalist couple Ernest Hemingway and Martha Gellhorn. For her performance as Gellhorn, she received her first Primetime Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Miniseries or Movie. That same year, she portrayed death row groupie Charlotte Bless in Lee Daniels' adaptation of the Pete Dexter novel, The Paperboy (2012). The film competed at the 2012 Cannes Film Festival and Kidman's performance garnered her nominations for the Screen Actors Guild Award and the Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actress, in addition to her second Golden Globe Award nomination for Best Supporting Actress, her tenth nomination overall. Also in 2012, her audiobook recording of Virginia Woolf's To the Lighthouse was released through Audible. The following year she starred as an unstable mother in Park Chan-wook's Stoker, which was released to positive reception and a Saturn Award nomination for Best Supporting Actress. In April 2013, she was selected as a member of the main competition jury at the 2013 Cannes Film Festival. In 2014, Kidman starred as the titular character in the biographical film Grace of Monaco, which chronicles the 1962 crisis in which Charles de Gaulle blockaded the tiny principality, angered by Monaco's status as a tax haven for wealthy French subjects and Kelly's contemplative Hollywood return to star in Alfred Hitchcock's Marnie. Opening out of competition at the 2014 Cannes Film Festival, the film received largely negative reviews. She also starred in two films with Colin Firth that year, the first being the British-Australian historical drama The Railway Man, in which she played an officer's wife. Katherine Monk of the Montreal Gazette said of Kidman's performance, "It's a truly masterful piece of acting that transcends Teplitzky's store-bought framing, but it's Kidman who delivers the biggest surprise: For the first time since her eyebrows turned into solid marble arches, the Australian Oscar winner is truly terrific". Her second film with Firth was the British thriller film Before I Go To Sleep, portraying a car crash survivor with brain damage. Also in 2014, she appeared in the live-action animated comedy film Paddington as the film's main antagonist. In 2015, Kidman starred in the drama Strangerland, which opened at the 2015 Sundance Film Festival, and the Jason Bateman-directed The Family Fang, produced by Kidman's production company, Blossom Films, which premiered at the 2015 Toronto International Film Festival. In her other 2015 film release, the biographical drama Queen of the Desert, she portrayed writer, traveller, political officer, administrator and archaeologist Gertrude Bell. That same year, she played a district attorney, opposite Julia Roberts and Chiwetel Ejiofor, in the film Secret in Their Eyes, a remake of the 2009 Argentine film of the same name, both based on the novel La pregunta de sus ojos by author Eduardo Sacheri. After more than 15 years, she returned to the West End in the UK premiere of Photograph 51 at the Noël Coward Theatre. She starred as British scientist Rosalind Franklin, working for the discovery of the structure of DNA, in the production from 5 September to 21 November 2015, directed by Michael Grandage. The production was met with considerable praise from critics, particularly for Kidman, and her return to the West End was hailed a success. For her performance, she won an Evening Standard Theatre Award and received a second Laurence Olivier Award nomination for Best Actress. In 2016's Lion, Kidman portrayed Sue, the adoptive mother of Saroo Brierley, an Indian boy who was separated from his birth family, a role she felt connected to as she herself is the mother of adopted children. She received positive reviews for her performance, in addition to her first Academy Award nomination for Best Supporting Actress, her fourth nomination overall, and her eleventh Golden Globe Award nomination, among several others. Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun-Times thought that "Kidman gives a powerful and moving performance as Saroo's adoptive mother, who loves her son with every molecule of her being, but comes to understand his quest. It's as good as anything she's done in the last decade." Budgeted at US$12 million, Lion earned over US$140 million globally. She also gave a voice-over performance for the English version of the animated film The Guardian Brothers. In 2017, Kidman returned to television for Big Little Lies, a drama series based on Liane Moriarty's novel of the same name, which premiered on HBO. She also served as executive producer alongside her co-star, Reese Witherspoon, and the show's director, Jean-Marc Vallée. She played Celeste Wright, a former lawyer and housewife, who conceals an abusive relationship with her husband, played by Alexander Skarsgård. Matthew Jacobs of The Huffington Post considered that she "delivered a career-defining performance", while Ann Hornaday of The Washington Post wrote that "Kidman belongs in the pantheon of great actresses". She won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Limited Series or Movie for her performance, as well as the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Limited Series as a producer. She also received a Screen Actors Guild Award, two Critics' Choice Television Awards and two Golden Globe Awards for her work in the show. Kidman next played Martha Farnsworth, the headmistress of an all-girls school during the American Civil War, in Sofia Coppola's drama The Beguiled, a remake of the 1971 film of the same name, which premiered at the 2017 Cannes Film Festival, competing for the Palme d'Or. Both films were adaptations of a novel by Thomas P. Cullinan. The film was an arthouse success, and Katie Walsh of the Tribune News Service found Kidman "particularly, unsurprisingly excellent in her performance as the steely Miss Martha. She is controlled and in control, unflappable. Her genteel manners and femininity co-exist easily with her toughness." Kidman had two other films premiere at the festival: the science-fiction romantic comedy How to Talk to Girls at Parties, reuniting her with director John Cameron Mitchell, and the psychological thriller The Killing of a Sacred Deer, directed by Yorgos Lanthimos, which also competed for the Palme d'Or. Also in 2017, she played supporting roles in the BBC Two television series Top of the Lake: China Girl and in the comedy-drama The Upside, a remake of the 2011 French comedy The Intouchables, starring Bryan Cranston and Kevin Hart. In 2018, Kidman starred in two dramas—Destroyer and Boy Erased. In the former, she played a detective troubled by a case for two decades. Peter Debruge of Variety and Brooke Marine of W both found her "unrecognizable" in the role and Debruge added that "she disappears into an entirely new skin, rearranging her insides to fit the character's tough hide", whereas Marine highlighted Kidman's method acting. The latter film is based on Garrard Conley's Boy Erased: A Memoir, and features Russell Crowe and Kidman as socially conservative parents who send their son (played by Lucas Hedges) to a gay conversion program. Richard Lawson of Vanity Fair credited all three performers for "elevating the fairly standard-issue material to poignant highs". That same year, Kidman took on the role of Queen Atlanna, the mother of the title character, in the DC Extended Universe superhero film Aquaman, which grossed over US$1.1 billion worldwide, becoming her highest-grossing film to date. Also in 2018, she was interviewed for a BAFTA event A Life in Pictures, where she reflected on her extensive film career. Forbes ranked her as the fourth highest-paid actress in the world in 2019, with an annual income of $34 million. In 2019, she took on the supporting part of a rich socialite in John Crowley's drama The Goldfinch, an adaptation of the novel of the same name by Donna Tartt, starring Ansel Elgort. Although it was poorly received, Owen Gleiberman commended Kidman for playing her part with "elegant affection". She next co-starred alongside Charlize Theron and Margot Robbie in the drama Bombshell, a film depicting the scandal concerning the sexual harassment accusations against former Fox News CEO Roger Ailes, in which she portrayed journalist Gretchen Carlson. Manohla Dargis of The New York Times opined that despite lesser screen time than her two co-protagonists, Kidman successfully made Carlson "ever-so-slightly ridiculous, adding a sharp sliver of comedy that underscores how self-serving and futile her rebellious gestures at the network are". For her performance, she received an additional Screen Actors Guild Award nomination for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Supporting Role. Kidman started off the 2020s with her role of Grace Fraser, a successful New York therapist, in the HBO psychological thriller miniseries The Undoing, based on the novel You Should Have Known by Jean Hanff Korelitz. She served as executive producer alongside the show's director, Susanne Bier, and David E. Kelley, who previously adapted and produced Big Little Lies. For her performance, she received additional Golden Globe Award and Screen Actors Guild Award nominations. Her only film release of 2020 was the musical comedy The Prom, based on the Broadway musical of the same name, starring alongside Meryl Streep, James Corden and Keegan-Michael Key. In August 2021, she starred and served as executive producer on the Hulu drama series Nine Perfect Strangers, based on the novel of the same name by Liane Moriarty. That same year, she portrayed actress-comedian Lucille Ball alongside Javier Bardem as Ball's husband, Desi Arnaz, in the biographical drama Being the Ricardos, directed by Aaron Sorkin. Despite unfavourable reactions in response to her casting as Ball, her portrayal was met with critical acclaim. She subsequently won the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Drama for her performance, in addition to receiving nominations for the Critics' Choice Movie Award for Best Actress and the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Leading Role, as well as her fourth Academy Award nomination for Best Actress, her fifth nomination overall. In September 2021, Kidman starred in a commercial for AMC Theatres entitled "We Make Movies Better", which would play before every film in the theatres owned by the chain beginning that month and Kidman's sponsorship was later extended for another year in August 2022. The commercial and Kidman's delivery of her speech proved popular with audiences who viewed it as a way to drive moviegoers back to seeing films theatrically in the midst of the COVID-19 pandemic. AMC's CEO Adam Aron described Kidman’s viral ad was “iconic and revered” during a 2022 earnings call and CNN reported that the ad "has inspired memes, homages and debate" and became "cultural thing". In April 2022, Kidman appeared in an episode of the anthology series Roar, based on Cecelia Ahern's 2018 short story collection, in addition to serving as executive producer. That same month, she starred alongside her Big Little Lies co-star Alexander Skarsgård, Anya Taylor-Joy, Ethan Hawke and Willem Dafoe in the historical drama The Northman, directed by Robert Eggers. The film was received with widespread acclaim upon its release. In July 2023, Kidman joined the cast of the Paramount+ television series Special Ops: Lioness, on which she was already serving as an executive producer. In December 2023, Kidman reprised the role of Queen Atlanna in the sequel to the 2018 superhero film Aquaman, titled Aquaman and the Lost Kingdom. In January 2024, Kidman starred in and served as executive producer of the drama television series Expats. Kidman is also set to voice Queen Ellsmere in the animated fantasy film Spellbound. She will also be seen in Netflix's A Family Affair in 2024. One of her project is Amazon's Holland, Michigan directed by Mimi Cave, which was wrapped up and expected to release in 2024. Kidman is set to star in, and serve as executive producer on, numerous projects: the Netflix series The Perfect Couple, based on Elin Hilderbrand's novel; the Australian television series The Last Anniversary, adapted from Liane Moriarty's novel; an Amazon Prime Video Kay Scarpetta series based on Patricia Cornwell's Kay Scarpetta novels; an HBO series The Perfect Nanny adapted from the Leïla Slimani novel The Perfect Nanny; and the Apple TV+ series Margo’s Got Money Troubles. She will also star in and executive produce four television series: the psychosexual love story series Crime Farm for WarnerMedia; the series Hope, which adapted from the Norwegian drama film Hope; the thriller miniseries Pretty Things, based on the upcoming novel of the same name by Janelle Brown; and the family-drama series Things I Know To Be True, based on the Australian play of the same name. The three latters are for Amazon Prime Video. Unlike her other television projects, Things I Know To Be True is envisioned as an ongoing series with multiple seasons rather than a miniseries. Her other credited film roles include Babygirl for A24, written and directed by Halina Reijn and Mice directed by Justin Kurzel. Kidman is often regarded to be among the finest actresses of her generation. She has been noted for seeking eccentric roles in risky projects helmed by auteurs, as well as for her volatile performances and versatile work, having appeared in a variety of eclectic films from several genres throughout her extensive career spanning over nearly four decades. Vanity Fair stated that, despite struggling with her personal life being publicly scrutinised by the media during the early years of her career, "[Kidman] has shown herself to be a major talent, a remarkable actress who can get in there with the best of them, go toe-to-toe, and come out with her credibility intact. What's more, she's proved herself to be a star with a capital S, the one-in-a-generation kind who, like Elizabeth Taylor, is bigger than the Hollywood system, and is also unafraid to be human and real, which only makes her more popular." According to The New York Times, "the plucky, disciplined indomitability she brings to her performances, even more than the artistry she displays within them, may be the secret of her appeal, the source of her bond with the audience." Emily Nussbaum of The New Yorker commented how "in each role, there is something waxen and watchful and self-possessed about Kidman, so that, even when she's smiling, she never seems liberated. While other actors specialize in transparency, Kidman has a different gift: she can wear a mask and simultaneously let you feel what it's like to hide behind it." In 2004 and 2018, Time magazine named Kidman one of the 100 most influential people in the world on their annual Time 100 list. In 2020, The New York Times ranked her fifth on its list of the greatest actors of the 21st century, and in a 2022 readers' poll by Empire magazine, she was voted one of the 50 greatest actors of all time. "I'm a character [actor]. I was trained as a character actor. That's what I want to do. I believe in changing the way you look, the way you move, the way you speak. I'm not great at playing myself, so what really gives me the greatest satisfaction is changing into something else." — Kidman on her approach to acting Kidman is known to practise method acting for many of her roles. It has been noted that she oftentimes transforms herself physically, mentally and emotionally to resemble her characters, to the point where it has adversely affected her health. Mark Caro from the Los Angeles Times stated that "to Nicole Kidman, acting isn't a mere technical feat; it's the art of transformation. To hear her tell it, the change can be as dramatic as a caterpillar-into-butterfly metamorphosis. She'll be working and working to get under the skin of a character." W Magazine described her as a "cipher", and pointed out how "she gets under her character's skin so thoroughly, it's nearly impossible to distinguish the actress from the role. It's why she has become so synonymous with a few key roles [...] and why those films are so defined by Kidman's presence in them." Scholars have also commented on her acting style and approach to roles. Sharon Marie Carnicke, a professor of critical studies and acting at the USC School of Dramatic Arts, mentioned that "Kidman's [acting] choices are believable and natural as reactions to the specific circumstances in her world" and described her work as "kinetic". Dennis Bingham, a professor of English and director of film studies at Indiana University–Purdue University Indianapolis, stated that "Kidman acts always a step or two outside the character, telegraphing her reactions, elongating the time she takes to articulate her decisions and conclusions. Even her emotional responses are presented as signs." Pam Cook, a professor of film at the University of Southampton, suggests in her biography of Kidman that "her emphasis on artifice and technique points to a conception of screen acting that looks to cinematic expression rather than to the actor's body and intentions for the realisation of character." Mary Luckhurst, a professor and head of the University of Bristol School of Arts with credentials in theatre and performance, stated how "she has strategically pursued a high-risk mutability and versatility, and regularly traverses between naturalist and non-naturalist roles and artforms." She continues saying that "she can continually test her own emotional limits, physical skills, politics, values and frames of reference" and mentions how "her conception of character acting involves metamorphosing gradually into something that she feels is so 'other' that she frequently speaks of losing herself or getting lost in the role, and her preparedness to challenge herself in this respect has continually surprised other actors, directors and producers." Kidman has also been described as a fashion icon. The chartreuse Dior gown she wore to the 1997 Academy Awards is regarded as one of the greatest dresses in Oscar history and has been credited with changing red carpet fashion forever. Vogue described how "from her embroidered chartreuse John Galliano for Christian Dior gown in 1997, at the side of then-husband Tom Cruise, to that impeccable red Balenciaga moment at the 2007 Oscars, to the unforgettable Calvin Klein ballerina dress she wore to the 2017 Cannes Film Festival, the Australian native has mastered the art of red carpet dressing, always piquing our [interest] and taking risks while never overdoing it." Insider stated that "over the years, Kidman has experimented with all sorts of trends, including bold colors, statement jewelry, and everything in between, making herself one of the most iconic celebrities when it comes to her fashion choices." In 2003, she received the Fashion Icon Award, which was awarded to her by the Council of Fashion Designers of America. Regarding her bestowal, Peter Arnold, executive director of the CFDA, said, "Nicole Kidman's style, both on and off the screen, has had an undeniable impact on fashion. As an actress, she has developed her many memorable characters with an innate understanding of the artistry of clothes. At the same time, she has elegantly established her personal style and own iconic presence worldwide." Kidman was married to actor Tom Cruise from 1990 to 2001 and has been married to country singer Keith Urban since 2006. Kidman met Cruise in 1989 while working on the set of Days of Thunder, a film in which they both starred, and they married on Christmas Eve of 1990 in Colorado. While married, the couple adopted a daughter and a son. On 5 February 2001, the couple's spokesperson announced their separation. Cruise filed for divorce two days later, and their marriage was dissolved later that year, with Cruise citing irreconcilable differences. In a 2007 interview with Marie Claire, Kidman noted the incorrect reporting of a miscarriage early in her marriage: "It was wrongly reported as miscarriage by everyone who picked up the story. So it's huge news, and it didn't happen. I had a miscarriage at the end of my marriage, but I had an ectopic pregnancy at the beginning of my marriage." In the June 2006 issue of Ladies' Home Journal, Kidman revealed that she still loved Cruise despite their divorce: "He was huge; still is. To me, he was just Tom, but to everybody else, he is huge. But he was lovely to me and I loved him. I still love him". In addition, she expressed shock about the divorce. In 2015, former Church of Scientology executive Mark Rathbun claimed in a documentary film that he was instructed to "facilitate [Cruise's] break-up with Nicole Kidman". Cruise's auditor further claimed Kidman had been wiretapped on Cruise's suggestion. In an interview with Tina Brown at the 2015 Women in the World conference, she expressed that the attention surrounding her at the time of her divorce from Cruise led to increased public attention to her career, stating, "Out of my divorce came work that was applauded, so that was an interesting thing for me." She went on to receive an Academy Award in 2003, shortly after her divorce. Prior to marrying Cruise, Kidman had been involved in relationships with Australian actor Marcus Graham and Windrider co-star Tom Burlinson. The film Cold Mountain brought rumours that an affair between Kidman and co-star Jude Law was responsible for the break-up of his marriage. Both denied the allegations, and Kidman won an undisclosed sum from the British tabloids that published the story. She began dating musician Lenny Kravitz in 2003 before becoming engaged to him, but they ultimately decided to break off their engagement. She was also romantically involved with rapper Q-Tip. During an interview for Vanity Fair in 2007, Kidman mentioned that she had been secretly engaged to someone, later revealed to have been Lenny Kravitz, prior to her present relationship with New Zealand-Australian country singer Keith Urban, whom she met in 2005 at G'Day LA, an event honouring Australians. Kidman married Urban on 25 June 2006 at Cardinal Cerretti Memorial Chapel on the grounds of St Patrick's Estate, Manly, in Sydney. In a 2015 interview, regarding her relationship with Urban, Kidman said, "We didn't really know each other – we got to know each other during our marriage." They maintain homes in Nashville (Tennessee, U.S.), Beverly Hills (California, U.S.), two apartments in Sydney (New South Wales, Australia), a farmhouse in Sutton Forest (New South Wales, Australia), and an apartment in Manhattan (New York, U.S.) . The couple's first daughter (Sunday Rose) was born in 2008, in Nashville. In 2010, Kidman and Urban welcomed their second daughter (Faith Margaret) via gestational surrogacy at Nashville's Centennial Women's Hospital. Kidman was brought up in a Catholic family and remains practising. She attended Mary Mackillop Chapel in North Sydney. Following criticism by Catholic leaders regarding her role in The Golden Compass as anti-Catholic, Kidman told Entertainment Weekly that the source material had been "watered down a little" and that her religious beliefs would prevent her from taking a role in a film she perceived as anti-Catholic. Since her divorce from Tom Cruise, she has been reluctant to discuss Scientology. A supporter of women's rights, Kidman testified before the United States House of Representatives Committee on Foreign Affairs to support the International Violence Against Women Act in 2009. In January 2017, she stated her support for the legalisation of same-sex marriage in Australia. Kidman has also donated to U.S. Democratic party candidates. Net worth Kidman has featured in annual rankings of the world's highest-paid actors multiple times, including the leading place for a female actor in 2006. In 2002, she first appeared on the Australian Financial Review Rich List, following her divorce from Tom Cruise, with an estimated net worth of A$122 million. As of May 2023[update], Kidman's net worth, listed jointly with Urban's, was assessed at A$596 million by the Financial Review, after several years of not meeting the threshold for inclusion on the Rich List. In 2021 it was reported that Celebrity Net Worth had assessed Kidman's net worth, not including that of Urban's, at US$250 million. Philanthropy Kidman has raised money for, and drawn attention to, disadvantaged children around the world. In 1994, she was appointed a Goodwill Ambassador for UNICEF. She also joined the Little Tee Campaign for breast cancer care to design T-shirts or vests to raise money to fight the disease; motivated by her mother's own battle with breast cancer in 1984. Kidman was also appointed Goodwill Ambassador of the United Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) in 2006. She visited Kosovo in 2006 to learn about women's experiences of conflict and UNIFEM's support efforts. She is also the international spokesperson for UNIFEM's Say NO – UNiTE to End Violence against Women initiative. Kidman and the UNIFEM executive director presented over five million signatures collected during the first phase of this to the UN Secretary-General on 25 November 2008. On 8 January 2010, alongside Nancy Pelosi, Joan Chen and Joe Torre, Kidman attended the ceremony to help the Family Violence Prevention Fund break ground on a new international centre located in the Presidio of San Francisco. In 2014, Kidman designed a gold coloured Paddington Bear statue, one of fifty located around London prior to the release of the film Paddington, which was auctioned to raise funds for the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children (NSPCC). In 2016, she donated $50,000 to UN Women. Honours In 2004, Kidman was honoured as a "Citizen of the World" by the United Nations. During the 2006 Australia Day Honours, she was appointed Companion of the Order of Australia (AC) for "service to the performing arts as an acclaimed motion picture performer, to health care through contributions to improve medical treatment for women and children and advocacy for cancer research, to youth as a principal supporter of young performing artists, and to humanitarian causes in Australia and internationally". However, due to film commitments and her wedding to Urban, it was not until 13 April 2007 that she was presented with the honour. It was presented by the Governor-General of Australia, Major General Michael Jeffery, in a ceremony at Government House, Canberra. At the beginning of 2009, Kidman appeared in a series of postage stamps featuring Australian actors. She, Geoffrey Rush, Russell Crowe, and Cate Blanchett each appear twice in the series: once as themselves and once as their Academy Award-nominated characters, with Kidman appearing as Satine from Moulin Rouge!. Kidman has taken part in several endorsement deals representing various companies. In 2003, she served as the face of the Chanel No. 5 perfume. She has also served as an ambassador for Omega watches since 2005. In 2007, Nintendo announced that she would be the new face of Nintendo's advertising campaign for the Nintendo DS game More Brain Training in its European market. In 2010, Kidman starred in the inauguration campaign of the Brazilian mall VillageMall, owned by the company Multiplan, located in Barra da Tijuca, in Rio de Janeiro. In 2013, she served as the face of Jimmy Choo shoes. In 2015, she became the brand ambassador for Etihad Airways. In 2017, she was announced as the new face of Neutrogena. In 2020, she joined SeraLabs as their global brand ambassador. In December 2023, she joined Balenciaga as their brand ambassador. Kidman supports the Nashville Predators, being seen and photographed almost nightly throughout the season. Additionally, she supports the Sydney Swans in the Australian Football League and once served as a club ambassador. According to the review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes, which assigns film scores based on critic reviews and audience reception, some of Kidman's highest-scoring films include Paddington (2014), Flirting (1990), To Die For (1995), Rabbit Hole (2010), Lion (2016), The Others (2001), The Family Fang (2015), Dead Calm (1989), Boy Erased (2018), The Killing of a Sacred Deer (2017) and The Northman (2022). Her most financially successful films include Aquaman (2018) and its sequel Aquaman and the Lost Kingdom (2023), Happy Feet (2006), The Golden Compass (2008), Batman Forever (1995) and Paddington (2014), as listed by the box office tracking website The Numbers as her highest-grossing films. Her other screen credits include: Eyes Wide Shut (1999) Moulin Rouge! (2001) The Hours (2002) Dogville (2003) Cold Mountain (2003) Birth (2004) Australia (2008) The Paperboy (2012) The Beguiled (2017) Destroyer (2018) Bombshell (2019) Being the Ricardos (2021) Kidman has been recognized by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences for the following: 74th Academy Awards: Best Actress, nomination, for Moulin Rouge! (2001) 75th Academy Awards: Best Actress, win, for The Hours (2002) 83rd Academy Awards: Best Actress, nomination, for Rabbit Hole (2010) 89th Academy Awards: Best Supporting Actress, nomination, for Lion (2016) 94th Academy Awards: Best Actress, nomination, for Being the Ricardos (2021) In 2003, Kidman received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for her achievements in the motion picture industry. In addition to her Academy Award for Best Actress win, she has received many other awards and nominations for her performances on the screen and stage, including four additional Academy Award nominations, one BAFTA Award from five nominations, two Laurence Olivier Award nominations, two Primetime Emmy Awards from three nominations, a Screen Actors Guild Award from fifteen nominations, three Critics' Choice Awards from fifteen nominations and six Golden Globe Awards from seventeen nominations, among various others. Kidman's discography consists of several audio recordings, including one spoken word album, one extended play and three singles. Kidman, primarily known for her acting career, entered the music industry during the early 2000s after recording a number of tracks for the original motion picture soundtrack to Baz Luhrmann's 2001 musical film Moulin Rouge!, which she starred in. Her duet with Ewan McGregor entitled "Come What May" was released as her debut single and the second single off of the film's original soundtrack album through Interscope Records on 24 September 2001. The composition became the eighth-highest selling single by an Australian artist that year, being certified Gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association, while peaking at number twenty-seven on the UK Singles Chart. In addition, the song received a Best Original Song nomination at the 59th Golden Globe Awards and was listed at eighty-fifth within AFI's 100 Years...100 Songs by the American Film Institute. "Somethin' Stupid", a cover version of Frank and Nancy Sinatra's version, followed soon after. The track, recorded as a duet with English singer-songwriter Robbie Williams, was issued on 14 December 2001 by Chrysalis Records as the lead single off his fourth studio album, Swing When You're Winning. Kidman's second single topped the official music charts in New Zealand, Portugal, and the UK, in addition to reaching top ten placings all over Europe, including Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Germany, the Netherlands, Norway and Switzerland, as well as Australia. Apart from being certified either Gold in a number of countries, it was ranked as the thirteenth best-selling single of 2002 in the UK, the fifty-ninth in Australia and the ninety-third in France, respectively. The song peaked at No. 8 on the Australian ARIAnet Singles Chart and at No. 1, for three weeks, in the UK. On 5 April 2002, Kidman released through Interscope Records her third single, a cover of Randy Crawford's "One Day I'll Fly Away". The song, a Tony Philips remix, was promoted as the pilot single for the follow-up to the Moulin Rouge! original soundtrack, titled Moulin Rouge! Vol. 2. In 2006, she contributed to the original motion picture soundtrack of Happy Feet, recording a rendition of the Prince song "Kiss" for the film. In 2009, she was featured on the original soundtrack of Rob Marshall's 2009 musical film Nine, recording the song "Unusual Way". In 2012, she narrated an audiobook and in 2017, she contributed with background vocals to her husband's, country music singer Keith Urban, song titled "Female". In 2022, Kidman joined Luke Evans to release a single named Say Something, which was a "poignant rendition of Christina Aguilera and A Great Big World's 2014 hit". Nicole Kidman was selected for the 49th AFI Life Achievement Award, originally scheduled to be received at Hollywood's Dolby Theatre on 10 June 2023, but was postponed to 27 April 2024 due to the WGA strike. Australia portal Biography portal Film portal List of Australian Academy Award winners and nominees List of actors with Academy Award nominations List of actors with two or more Academy Award nominations in acting categories ^[note 1] : Net worth reported as held jointly with Keith Urban. Moore, Julia (30 May 2022). "Nicole Kidman Calls Herself 'Nicole Urban' in Surprise Appearance at Keith Urban's Las Vegas Show". People. Archived from the original on 12 December 2022. "NYFF to honor Nicole Kidman". Variety. Retrieved 16 March 2024. Grobar, Matt (13 November 2023). "Nicole Kidman's AFI Life Achievement Award Tribute Gets New Date – Update". Archived from the original on 11 February 2024. Retrieved 11 February 2024. "Nicole Kidman". Los Angeles Times. 28 November 2021. Archived from the original on 23 February 2022. Retrieved 23 February 2022. Everett, Cristina (20 June 2017). "Nicole Kidman through the years". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on 23 February 2022. Retrieved 23 February 2022. "Archived copy". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on 23 February 2022. Retrieved 23 February 2022.{{cite magazine}}: CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) Haar, Kara (20 March 2017). "14 Hollywood Stars Who Immigrated to the U.S. and Became Citizens". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on 28 August 2021. Retrieved 20 October 2021. Murrihy, Rachael (19 September 2014). "Dr Antony Kidman: Nicole Kidman's father's legacy of nurture". The Sydney Morning Herald. Australia. Archived from the original on 24 October 2015. Retrieved 27 October 2015. Keneally, Tom (24 May 1992). "Film; Nicole Kidman, From Down Under to 'Far and Away'". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 28 December 2007. Retrieved 9 December 2007. Thomson, David (2006). Nicole Kidman. Knopf. ISBN 978-1-4000-4273-9. "Nicole Kidman's father, Antony Kidman, dies following fall in Singapore". ABC News. 12 September 2014. Archived from the original on 23 January 2022. Retrieved 4 November 2021. "Antonia Kidman". Nine MSN. Archived from the original on 10 November 2013. Retrieved 9 November 2013. "Nicole Kidman: 'Back to my core', 'Birthday Girl' is 'about the "unlikeness" of two people'". CNN. 18 January 2002. Archived from the original on 27 April 2006. Retrieved 11 February 2016. Stone, Natalie (20 June 2015). "Nicole Kidman: 5 Things You Didn't Know About the Actress". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on 17 October 2019. Retrieved 17 October 2019. "Nicole Kidman Biography". The Biography Channel UK. Archived from the original on 7 May 2011. Retrieved 11 January 2012. "Nicole Kidman: Aussie Icon And Her Fascinating Family Ancestry" Archived 1 July 2022 at the Wayback Machine (31 July 2019). The Carousel. Retrieved 27 March 2022. "Meryl Streep and Nicole Kidman discuss their birth names". The Graham Norton Show. BBC. 9 October 2015. Archived from the original on 11 December 2021. Retrieved 10 May 2018 – via YouTube. Dickerson, James L. Nicole Kidman, Citadel Press, 2003, p. 2 Stone, Natalie (20 June 2015). "Nicole Kidman: 5 Things You Didn't Know About the Actress". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on 8 August 2021. Retrieved 27 May 2021. "Nicole Kidman Biography". Yahoo!. Archived from the original on 22 June 2011. Retrieved 25 March 2011. Nicole Kidman (28 October 2014). "Nicole Kidman, Dylan McDermott, Music from Blood Orange and Cookin' with Auntie Fee" (Interview). Interviewed by Jimmy Kimmel. Jimmy Kimmel Live!. Archived from the original on 30 October 2014. Kidman in Talk magazine, via "Nicole Kidman – a brief profile of high ability and complexity". Talent Development Resources. Archived from the original on 8 January 2011. Retrieved 26 March 2011. Ellis, Lucy; Sutherland, Bryony (October 2002). Nicole Kidman: the biography. Aurum. p. 34. ISBN 9781854109262. Retrieved 9 November 2015. Nicole withdrew from all acting jobs and enrolled on a massage course so that she could relieve her mother's suffering with physical therapy. Petersen, Anne Helen (2 April 2017). "How Many Times Does Nicole Kidman Have To Prove Herself?". BuzzFeed News. Archived from the original on 25 January 2022. Retrieved 25 January 2022. "Nicole Kidman". Lifetime. Archived from the original on 19 April 2015. Retrieved 1 May 2021. Bradshaw, Peter (10 January 2019). "Nicole Kidman's top 10 films – ranked!". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Retrieved 13 January 2022. "Dead Calm". Variety. 1 January 2007. Archived from the original on 27 December 2008. Retrieved 10 March 2007. Ebert, Roger (7 April 1989). "Dead Calm". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on 21 January 2013. Retrieved 10 March 2007 – via RogerEbert.com. "Domestic Box Office For 1990". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on 7 June 2011. Retrieved 15 November 2010. Ivie, Devon (24 August 2017). "Nicole Kidman and Naomi Watts's Quarter-Century-Long Best Friendship: A Timeline". Vulture. Archived from the original on 4 January 2018. Retrieved 3 January 2018. "AFI Award Winners Feature Categories 1958–2009". Australian Film Institute. Archived from the original on 7 March 2011. Retrieved 21 April 2011. Canby, Vincent (1 November 1991). "Billy Bathgate (1991)". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 23 October 2013. Retrieved 26 March 2010. Gene, Siskel (22 May 1992). "Cinematography And Acting Save Far And Away". The Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on 14 September 2011. Retrieved 16 April 2011. Dolman, Bob (25 May 1992). "Surviving in a New World". Time. Archived from the original on 29 November 2010. Retrieved 16 April 2011. "Far and Away (1992)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on 8 September 2011. Retrieved 16 April 2011. "Malice". Empire. Archived from the original on 10 November 2013. Retrieved 9 November 2013. Ebert, Roger (12 November 1993). "My Life". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on 19 April 2015. Retrieved 9 November 2013 – via RogerEbert.com. LaSalle, Mike (6 October 1995). "Film Review-- Kidman Monstrously Good in 'To Die For'". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on 9 November 2011. Retrieved 29 April 2009. "The Peacemaker". Metacritic. Archived from the original on 31 July 2011. Retrieved 30 May 2011. "The Peacemaker". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on 14 July 2011. Retrieved 30 May 2011. Sims, David (16 October 2018). "Thank the '90s for Practical Magic". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on 10 January 2019. Retrieved 10 January 2019. "Practical Magic (1998) – Financial Information". The Numbers. Archived from the original on 20 April 2019. Retrieved 5 February 2019. Rich, Frank (30 December 1998). "Journal; Nicole Kidman's Behind". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 14 November 2013. Retrieved 9 November 2013. "Olivier Winners 1999". Society of London Theatre. Archived from the original on 29 October 2021. Retrieved 30 September 2021. Castle, Robert (January 2002). "Eyes Wide Shut". Bright Lights Film Journal. Archived from the original on 14 July 2009. Retrieved 24 May 2009. "Kidman Tells Oprah Divorce Is 'Awful'". ABC News. 21 May 2001. Archived from the original on 29 January 2011. Retrieved 26 March 2011. "Birthday presence in Herts". BBC. 1 August 2002. Archived from the original on 8 September 2014. Retrieved 9 November 2013. Clinton, Paul (31 May 2001). "Review: 'Moulin Rouge' dazzling, electrifying". CNN. Archived from the original on 13 December 2017. Retrieved 25 June 2017. "Nicole Kidman, Australian actress". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on 29 December 2020. Retrieved 1 May 2021. "Nicole Kidman – Golden Globes". Golden Globe Awards. Archived from the original on 25 March 2018. Retrieved 1 May 2021. "Film in 2002 – British Academy Film Awards". British Academy of Film and Television Arts. Archived from the original on 4 November 2014. Retrieved 10 April 2018. "Winners & Nominees – Nicole Kidman". Hollywood Foreign Press Association. Archived from the original on 25 March 2018. Retrieved 10 April 2018. Ebert, Roger (10 August 2001). "The Others (2001)". RogerEbert.com. Archived from the original on 24 December 2009. Retrieved 28 April 2010. Holden, Stephen (27 December 2002). "Film Review; Who's Afraid Like Virginia Woolf?". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 23 January 2022. Retrieved 11 February 2017. "Memorable Moments From Oscar Night". ABC News. 23 March 2003. Archived from the original on 4 January 2018. Retrieved 10 March 2007. "Nicole "the most beautiful person in the world"". The Age. Melbourne. 2 May 2002. Archived from the original on 16 October 2015. Retrieved 15 February 2015. Travers, Peter (23 March 2004). "Dogville". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 14 October 2016. Retrieved 12 October 2016. Corliss, Richard (14 December 2003). "O Lover, Where Art Thou?". Time. Archived from the original on 29 November 2010. Retrieved 7 April 2011. Hadadi, Roxana (25 February 2021). "Nicole Kidman's 15 Career Golden Globe Nominations, Ranked". Vulture. Archived from the original on 23 January 2022. Retrieved 4 November 2021. Born, Matt (9 September 2004). "Bacall delivers a legendary snub to Kidman". The Daily Telegraph. UK. Archived from the original on 23 February 2010. Retrieved 3 June 2008. "Box Office Mojo: Bewitched / Summary". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on 16 December 2008. Retrieved 27 September 2008. "Box Office Mojo: The Interpreter / Summary". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on 6 December 2008. Retrieved 27 September 2008. "Oscar winners who also have Razzies". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on 2 May 2021. Retrieved 1 May 2021. "Chanel No.5 Commercial: The Film (Nicole Kidman)". Funny Commercials World. Archived from the original on 22 February 2015. Retrieved 22 February 2015. "Julia Roberts again tops list of highest-paid actresses". BBC News. 30 November 2005. Archived from the original on 27 April 2017. Retrieved 26 April 2017. "Happy Feet (2006)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on 15 August 2010. Retrieved 2 January 2011. "Nicole Kidman". International Press Academy. Archived from the original on 2 May 2021. Retrieved 1 May 2021. "The Golden Compass (2007)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on 29 April 2022. Retrieved 29 April 2022. "Australia (2008)". Metacritic. Archived from the original on 1 December 2008. Retrieved 13 April 2022. "Australia". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on 16 July 2019. Retrieved 30 July 2009. "Nominations Announced for the 16th Annual Screen Actors Guild Awards®". SAG AFTRA. 17 December 2009. Archived from the original on 2 May 2021. Retrieved 1 May 2021. "Nicole Kidman sweats new producer role". The Independent. London. 18 September 2011. Archived from the original on 3 February 2012. Retrieved 25 March 2011. Charity, Tom (17 December 2010). "Review: Kidman shines in painfully honest 'Rabbit Hole'". CNN. Archived from the original on 15 April 2022. Retrieved 15 April 2022. Mercer, Benjamin (8 April 2011). "'Rabbit Hole': Nicole Kidman's Ignored, Oscar-Nominated Film". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on 15 April 2022. Retrieved 15 April 2022. "Nicole Kidman Reveals Keith Urban's Reaction To Her Steamy 'Just Go With It' Scenes With Dave Matthews". Access Hollywood. 9 February 2011. Archived from the original on 6 July 2022. Retrieved 15 April 2022. Child, Ben (16 June 2010). "Nicole Kidman and Nicolas Cage to co-star for first time in Trespass". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 22 September 2016. Couch, Aaron (29 May 2012). "'Hemingway & Gellhorn': What the Critics Are Saying". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on 29 April 2022. Retrieved 29 April 2022. Hunt, Stacey Wilson (22 August 2012). "Emmys 2012: Nicole Kidman's American Accent Is Still a Work in Progress". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on 29 April 2022. Retrieved 29 April 2022. Kit, Borys (27 June 2011). "Nicole Kidman in Talks to Join Lee Daniels' 'Paperboy' Amid Cast Shuffle (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on 30 June 2011. Asi, Husam Sam (5 October 2012). "Nicole Kidman: I am very shy". UK Screen. Archived from the original on 25 September 2013. Retrieved 22 May 2013. "Nicole Kidman Performs 'To The Lighthouse' for Audible". Nicole Kidman Official. 9 July 2012. Archived from the original on 7 July 2013. Retrieved 26 April 2013. Zeitchik, Steven (11 February 2011). "Hot with Oscar buzz, Colin Firth and Nicole Kidman look to new roles in 'Stoker'". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 13 February 2011. Retrieved 11 February 2011. Saperstein, Pat (23 April 2013). "Nicole Kidman, Christopher Waltz, Ang Lee Among Cannes Jury Members". Variety. Archived from the original on 26 April 2013. Retrieved 23 April 2013. Smith, Neil (15 May 2014). "Grace of Monaco slammed at Cannes Film Festival". BBC News. Archived from the original on 27 December 2014. Retrieved 25 January 2015. Lacey, Liam (25 April 2014). "The Railway Man: Firth is fine, but still can't keep this on track". The Globe and Mail. Archived from the original on 7 January 2015. Retrieved 25 January 2015. Monk, Katherine (22 April 2014). "Movie review: The Railway Man highlights Firth, Kidman (with video)". Montreal Gazette. Archived from the original on 26 December 2014. Retrieved 25 January 2015. Hall, Sandra (19 October 2014). "Before I Go to Sleep review: Nicole Kidman dazzles in thriller". The Sydney Morning Herald. Australia. Archived from the original on 18 January 2015. Retrieved 25 January 2015. "Nicole Kidman: Paddington film is too vicious for my children to see". The Daily Telegraph. 5 September 2014. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 5 May 2021. Gibbs, Ed (25 January 2015). "Nicole Kidman wows at Sundance in Strangerland". The Sydney Morning Herald. Australia. Archived from the original on 25 January 2015. Retrieved 26 January 2015. "Secret in Their Eyes". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on 30 April 2019. Retrieved 5 February 2019. Porteous, Jacob (24 April 2015). "Nicole Kidman Returns To The West End In Photograph 51". London Theatre Direct. Archived from the original on 16 October 2015. Retrieved 27 October 2015. Hitchings, Henry (15 September 2015). "Photograph 51 review: Nicole Kidman gives a finely poised performance". London Evening Standard. London. Archived from the original on 2 October 2015. Retrieved 27 October 2015. Cavendish, Dominic (14 September 2015). "Photograph 51, Noël Coward Theatre, review: 'Kidman holds us in thrall'". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 7 October 2015. Retrieved 27 October 2015. Dalton, Stephen (14 September 2015). "'Photograph 51': Theatre Review". The Hollywood Reporter. Los Angeles. Archived from the original on 4 October 2015. Retrieved 27 October 2015. Taylor, Paul (15 September 2015). "Photograph 51, Noel Coward Theatre, review: Nicole Kidman gives a compelling performance". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 19 October 2015. Retrieved 27 October 2015. Brantley, Ben (14 September 2015). "Review: In 'Photograph 51', Nicole Kidman is a Steely DNA Scientist". The New York Times. New York City. Archived from the original on 17 September 2015. Retrieved 27 October 2015. Billington, Michael (14 September 2015). "Photograph 51 review". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 10 July 2017. Retrieved 2 October 2015. Masters, Tim (23 November 2015). "Nicole Kidman and James McAvoy win at Evening Standard Theatre Awards". BBC News. Archived from the original on 18 November 2016. Retrieved 22 December 2016. Brown, Mark (22 November 2015). "Nicole Kidman wins best actress award for role in Photograph 51". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 21 December 2016. Retrieved 22 December 2016. Gee, Catherine (22 November 2015). "Nicole Kidman wins best actress at the Evening Standard awards. Plus, full list of winners". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 2 June 2016. Retrieved 22 December 2016. "Olivier Winners 2016". Society of London Theatre. Archived from the original on 28 April 2020. Retrieved 30 September 2021. Berardinelli, James (26 December 2016). "Lion (Australia, 2016)". Reelviews. Archived from the original on 9 July 2017. Retrieved 25 June 2017. Roeper, Richard (22 December 2016). "Beautifully told 'Lion' an inspirational story sure to draw tears". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on 6 June 2017. Retrieved 25 June 2017. "Lion (2016)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on 4 August 2017. Retrieved 4 August 2017. Perry, Spencer (18 August 2017). "The Weinstein Company Announces Animation Label Mizchief". ComingSoon.net. Archived from the original on 19 August 2017. Retrieved 18 August 2017. Jacobs, Matthew (2 April 2017). "Nicole Kidman Delivered A Career-Defining Performance On 'Big Little Lies'". HuffPost. Archived from the original on 9 April 2017. Retrieved 10 April 2017. Hornaday, Ann (8 April 2017). "Why Nicole Kidman belongs in the pantheon of great actresses". Daily Herald. Archived from the original on 10 April 2017. Retrieved 10 April 2017. "The Television Critics Association Announces 2017 TCA Award Nominees". Television Critics Association. 19 June 2017. Archived from the original on 22 June 2017. Retrieved 19 June 2017. "Big Little Lies". Academy of Television Arts & Sciences. Archived from the original on 17 July 2017. Retrieved 13 July 2017. "The 2017 Official Selection". Cannes Film Festival. 13 April 2017. Archived from the original on 17 April 2017. Retrieved 13 April 2017. Archived 14 April 2017 at the Wayback Machine Walsh, Katie (20 June 2017). "Movie review: 'The Beguiled' is a tale of feminine warfare". ArcaMax. Archived from the original on 18 September 2017. Retrieved 25 June 2017. "The 2017 Official Selection". Cannes Film Festival. 13 April 2017. Archived from the original on 17 April 2017. Retrieved 13 April 2017. Archived 14 April 2017 at the Wayback Machine Winfrey, Graham (13 April 2017). "2017 Cannes Film Festival Announces Lineup: Todd Haynes, Sofia Coppola, 'Twin Peaks' and More". IndieWire. Archived from the original on 5 May 2019. Retrieved 13 April 2017. Fleming, Mike Jr. (9 January 2017). "'Lion's Nicole Kidman, Amara Karan Eye 'Intouchables' Remake". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on 11 February 2017. Retrieved 7 February 2017. Debruge, Peter (1 September 2018). "Telluride Film Review: Nicole Kidman in 'Destroyer'". Variety. Archived from the original on 3 September 2018. Retrieved 3 September 2018. Marine, Brooke (28 November 2018). "Nicole Kidman Stayed in Character as a Cop the Entire Time She Filmed Destroyer". W. Archived from the original on 7 January 2019. Retrieved 7 January 2019. Lawson, Richard (1 September 2018). "Review: Boy Erased Is Finely Acted, but Familiar". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on 14 January 2019. Retrieved 3 September 2018. Sperling, Nicole (31 March 2017). "Nicole Kidman explains why she's diving in for Aquaman". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on 1 April 2017. Retrieved 1 April 2017. "Aquaman". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on 29 April 2022. Retrieved 29 April 2022. "Nicole Kidman | A Life in Pictures". British Academy of Film and Television Arts. Archived from the original on 10 January 2021. Retrieved 8 January 2021. Berg, Madeline (23 August 2019). "The Highest-Paid Actresses 2019: Scarlett Johansson Leads With $56 Million". Forbes. Archived from the original on 24 August 2019. Retrieved 25 August 2019. "Filming is Underway on Warner Bros. Pictures and Amazon Studios' Powerful Drama 'The Goldfinch'" (Press release). Warner Bros. Pictures. 23 January 2018. Archived from the original on 3 September 2018. Retrieved 24 January 2017 – via BusinessWire. "Filming is Underway on Warner Bros. Pictures and Amazon Studios' Powerful Drama "The Goldfinch" | Business Wire" (Press release). 23 January 2018. Archived from the original on 27 June 2019. Retrieved 3 September 2018.{{cite press release}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) "The Goldfinch (2019)". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on 10 September 2019. Retrieved 11 September 2019. Gleiberman, Owen (8 September 2019). "Toronto Film Review: 'The Goldfinch'". Variety. Archived from the original on 10 September 2019. Retrieved 11 September 2019. Kroll, Justin (1 August 2018). "Nicole Kidman to Play Gretchen Carlson in Fox News Movie". Variety. Archived from the original on 2 August 2018. Retrieved 1 August 2018. Dargis, Manohla (12 December 2019). "'Bombshell' Review: Blind Ambition and Blond Sedition at Fox News". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 13 December 2019. Retrieved 29 August 2020. Hipes, Patrick (11 December 2019). "SAG Awards Nominations: 'Bombshell', 'The Irishman', 'Once Upon A Time In Hollywood' Top Film List, 'Maisel,' 'Fleabag' Score In TV – Complete List Of Noms". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on 11 December 2019. Retrieved 11 December 2019. Highfill, Samantha (6 August 2020). "Nicole Kidman, Hugh Grant face 'ugly truths' in exclusive The Undoing trailer". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on 6 August 2020. Retrieved 9 August 2020. "Archived copy". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on 9 November 2020. Retrieved 10 August 2020.{{cite magazine}}: CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) Andreeva, Nellie (13 March 2018). "HBO Orders 'The Undoing' Limited Series With 'BLL's Nicole Kidman Starring & David E. Kelley Writing". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on 14 July 2018. Retrieved 23 July 2018. Archived 27 February 2021 at the Wayback Machine "Golden Globe awards 2021 nominations for Cate Blanchett, Nicole Kidman, Emma Corrin, Anja Taylor Joy, Chadwick Boseman". ABC News. 3 February 2021. Archived from the original on 3 February 2021. Retrieved 3 February 2021. Respers, Lisa (4 February 2021). "SAG Award 2021: See the full list of nominees". CNN. Archived from the original on 23 January 2022. Retrieved 4 February 2021. Lattanzio, Ryan (22 October 2020). "'The Prom' First Trailer: Ryan Murphy's Netflix Musical Confection with Streep, Kidman, and More". IndieWire. Archived from the original on 28 October 2020. Retrieved 29 October 2020. Petski, Denise (1 May 2019). "Hulu Orders 'Nine Perfect Strangers' Series From Nicole Kidman, Confirms 'The Dropout' Starring Kate McKinnon". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on 28 August 2019. Retrieved 20 December 2019. Ferme, Antonio (18 May 2021). "Hulu Sets Premiere Dates for 'Nine Perfect Strangers' and 'Only Murders in the Building' (TV News Roundup)". Variety. Archived from the original on 24 September 2021. Retrieved 24 September 2021. Kroll, Justin (11 January 2021). "Nicole Kidman And Javier Bardem Eyed To Play Lucille Ball And Desi Arnaz With Aaron Sorkin Directing 'Being The Ricardos' For Amazon Studios". Deadline. Archived from the original on 28 January 2021. Retrieved 11 January 2021. Malkin, Mark (27 January 2021). "Nicole Kidman on Becoming Grace in 'The Undoing' and Preparing to Play Lucille Ball". Variety. Archived from the original on 27 January 2021. Retrieved 28 January 2021. Hines, Ree (20 December 2021). "Nicole Kidman addresses doubts, criticisms about being cast as Lucille Ball". Today. Archived from the original on 24 December 2021. Retrieved 25 December 2021. Macdonald, Moira (9 December 2021). "'Being the Ricardos' review: With Nicole Kidman as the comedy icon, will you love this Lucy?". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on 16 December 2021. Retrieved 16 December 2021. Roeper, Richard (9 December 2021). "'Being the Ricardos': Nicole Kidman amazes as the Lucy easy to love and the Lucy hard as nails". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on 1 February 2022. Retrieved 1 February 2022. Travers, Peter (10 December 2021). "'Being the Ricardos' review: Nicole Kidman is all-stops-out fabulous as Lucille Ball". ABC News. Archived from the original on 23 January 2022. Retrieved 16 December 2021. Hipes, Patrick (9 January 2022). "Golden Globes: The Complete Winners List". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 10 January 2022. VanHoose, Benjamin (13 December 2021). "Critics Choice Awards 2022 Nominations: Lady Gaga, Will Smith and Nicole Kidman Score Nods". People. Archived from the original on 16 December 2021. Retrieved 16 December 2021. "SAG award nominees 2022: Nicole Kidman, Cate Blanchett, Sarah Snook and Kodi Smit-McPhee recognised". ABC News. Australia. 12 January 2022. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Verhoeven, Beatrice (8 February 2022). "Nicole Kidman Calls 'Being the Ricardos' Oscar Nomination "More Intense, More Appreciated" Than Previous Nods". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on 8 February 2022. Retrieved 8 February 2022. Perry, Spencer (4 August 2022). "Nicole Kidman Renews AMC Theatres Spokesperson Deal". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on 5 August 2022. Retrieved 5 August 2022. Drum, Nicole (21 April 2022). "Nicole Kidman Is Returning for Another AMC Theatres Commercial". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on 31 August 2022. Retrieved 31 August 2022. Kring, Jake (23 March 2022). "How the Magic of Nicole Kidman's Beloved AMC Commercial Was Made". GQ. Archived from the original on 26 June 2022. Retrieved 26 June 2022. Haring, Bruce (26 November 2023). "Nicole Kidman's AMC Theatres Ad Touched A Surprise Nerve In The Culture, Keith Urban Says". Deadline. Archived from the original on 26 November 2023. Retrieved 23 February 2024. Andrew, Scottie (28 November 2023). "How the Magic of Nicole Kidman's Beloved AMC Commercial Was Made". CNN. Archived from the original on 28 November 2023. Retrieved 23 February 2024. Framke, Caroline (11 April 2022). "'Roar' Throws Nicole Kidman, Issa Rae, Alison Brie and More Into a Mixed Bag of Feminist Fables: TV Review". Variety. Archived from the original on 28 April 2022. Retrieved 28 April 2022. Welk, Brian (14 May 2021). "Robert Eggers' 'The Northman' With Nicole Kidman, Anya Taylor-Joy and Björk Set for April 2022". TheWrap. Archived from the original on 14 May 2021. Retrieved 28 November 2021. "The Northman Reviews". Metacritic. Archived from the original on 16 June 2022. Retrieved 25 April 2022. Duralde, Alonso (21 April 2022). "The Northman Film Review: Viking Revenge Saga Conquers With Bloody, Trippy Thrills". TheWrap. Archived from the original on 25 April 2022. Retrieved 25 April 2022. Petski, Denise (5 January 2023). "Nicole Kidman Cast In Taylor Sheridan's CIA Drama Series Lioness At Paramount+". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on 12 January 2023. Retrieved 13 January 2023. Jackson, Angelique (16 October 2021). "Jason Momoa Shares Behind-the-Scenes Look at 'Aquaman and the Lost Kingdom' at DC FanDome". Variety. Archived from the original on 14 January 2022. Retrieved 13 January 2022. Seddon, Dan (23 December 2021). "Aquaman 2 confirms plot details with new synopsis". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on 14 January 2022. Retrieved 13 January 2022. Jarvey, Natalie (12 December 2019). "'The Farewell's' Lulu Wang Books Next Project: Amazon's Nicole Kidman Drama Series (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on 13 December 2019. Retrieved 20 December 2019. Grobar, Matt (21 June 2022). "Nicole Kidman, Javier Bardem, John Lithgow, Nathan Lane, Jenifer Lewis & More Board Animated Pic 'Spellbound' From Apple & Skydance Animation". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on 21 June 2022. Retrieved 21 June 2022. Asatryan, Tigran (31 January 2023). "'A Family Affair' Nicole Kidman Rom-Com is Coming to Netflix in November 2023". What's on Netflix. Archived from the original on 27 June 2023. Retrieved 6 June 2023. "Nicole Kidman to Star & Produce Thriller Feature 'Holland, Michigan' at Amazon Studios; Mimi Cave Directing". 17 June 2022. "Filming for thriller movie starring Nicole Kidman wraps up in Holland". 26 April 2023. "Nicole Kidman, Liev Schreiber, Eve Hewson, Dakota Fanning to Star in Netflix Limited Series 'The Perfect Couple'". 31 March 2023. "From 'Doctor Who' to 'The Count of Monte Cristo': Deadline's 15 Buzzy International TV Dramas to Look Out for in 2024". 24 December 2023. "Nicole Kidman & Jamie Lee Curtis to Star in & EP Patricia Cornwell's 'Kay Scarpetta' TV Series at Amazon from Liz Sarnoff & Blumhouse". 8 February 2023. "Nicole Kidman and Maya Erskine to Star in 'The Perfect Nanny' Limited Series at HBO". 27 January 2023. "'Margo's Got Money Troubles' Series from Nicole Kidman, Elle Fanning, David E. Kelley Lands at Apple". 2 February 2024. Kroll, Justin (28 January 2021). "Nicole Kidman To Star And Exec Produce Series Adaptation Of 'Hope' For Amazon Studios". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on 28 April 2022. Retrieved 28 April 2022. White, Peter (2 April 2020). "Nicole Kidman To Star In & Produce Series Adaptation Of Janelle Brown's 'Pretty Things' For Amazon With Reed Morano Attached To Direct". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on 3 April 2020. Retrieved 2 April 2020. Otterson, Joe (9 July 2019). "Nicole Kidman to Produce Drama Series 'Crime Farm' in Development at WarnerMedia Streaming". Variety. Archived from the original on 9 July 2019. Retrieved 24 March 2024. Ausiello, Michael (28 October 2020). "Nicole Kidman to Star in Amazon Series Things I Know To Be True". TVLine. Archived from the original on 23 January 2022. Retrieved 29 October 2020. Rubin, Rebecca (21 November 2023). "Nicole Kidman, Antonio Banderas Join A24's Erotic Thriller 'Babygirl'". Variety. Archived from the original on 21 November 2023. Retrieved 24 March 2024. D'Alessandro, Anthony (24 March 2024). "Nicole Kidman & Bruna Papandrea Team On Feature Film Adaptation Of YA Novel 'Mice'". Deadline. Archived from the original on 11 March 2021. Retrieved 24 March 2024. Gay, Jason (20 July 2015). "Nicole Kidman, in a Rare, Down-to-Earth Interview, on Her New Adventure". Vogue. Archived from the original on 9 March 2023. Retrieved 7 December 2020. "Nicole Kidman in a Rare, Down-to-Earth Interview, on Her Next Adventure | Vogue". 20 July 2015. Archived from the original on 9 March 2023. Retrieved 5 December 2020.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) Hornaday, Ann (6 April 2017). "Nicole Kidman belongs in our pantheon of great actresses". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 29 July 2021. Retrieved 7 December 2020. White, Adam (15 October 2020). "Nicole Kidman: Her 10 best performances ranked, from Moulin Rouge to Big Little Lies". The Independent. Archived from the original on 20 June 2022. Retrieved 23 January 2022. Kiang, Jessica (20 June 2013). "Nicole Kidman's 5 Bravest Roles". IndieWire. Archived from the original on 26 February 2021. Retrieved 7 December 2020. Ashton, Will (31 May 2019). "The 9 Best Nicole Kidman Movies, Ranked". CinemaBlend. Archived from the original on 9 March 2023. Retrieved 6 May 2021. Sischy, Ingrid (1 December 2002). "Nicole's New Light". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on 16 April 2021. Retrieved 6 May 2021. Scott, A.O. (2 November 2003). "A Unified Theory Of Nicole Kidman". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 7 May 2021. Retrieved 6 May 2021. Nussbaum, Emily (26 February 2017). "The Surprising Generosity of 'Big Little Lies'". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on 16 April 2021. Retrieved 6 May 2021. Luscombe, Belinda (26 April 2004). "The 2004 Time 100". Time. Archived from the original on 17 April 2019. Retrieved 17 October 2019. Watts, Naomi. "Nicole Kidman is on the 2018 TIME 100 List". Time. Archived from the original on 1 July 2019. Retrieved 6 May 2021. Dargis, Manohla; Scott, A. O. (25 November 2020). "The 25 Greatest Actors of the 21st Century (So Far)". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 17 September 2021. Retrieved 7 December 2020. Travis, Ben; Butcher, Sophie; De Semlyen, Nick; Dyer, James; Nugent, John; Godfrey, Alex; O'Hara, Helen (20 December 2022). "Empire's 50 Greatest Actors of All Time List, Revealed". Empire. Archived from the original on 29 December 2022. Retrieved 4 February 2023. Nicole Kidman on Acting. BAFTA Guru. 18 January 2017. Archived from the original on 29 January 2022. Retrieved 29 January 2022 – via Youtube. "Nicole Kidman on Acting – YouTube". YouTube. Archived from the original on 29 January 2022. Retrieved 29 January 2022.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) Shanfeld, Ethan (18 August 2021). "Nicole Kidman Went Full Method Acting for Hulu's 'Nine Perfect Strangers'". Variety. Archived from the original on 24 August 2021. Retrieved 29 January 2022. Selzer, Jillian (20 June 2019). "11 times Nicole Kidman drastically changed her appearance for movie roles". Insider. Retrieved 29 January 2022.[dead link] Nzengung, Camille (28 November 2018). "Why Keith Urban Couldn't Wait for Nicole Kidman to Finish Filming Destroyer". InStyle. Archived from the original on 29 January 2022. Retrieved 29 January 2022. Stump, Scott (12 January 2021). "Nicole Kidman talks about toll her 'Undoing' role took on her mental health". Today. Archived from the original on 29 January 2022. Retrieved 29 January 2022. Caro, Mark (3 January 2003). "Nicole Kidman explains her disappearing act in 'The Hours'". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 29 January 2022. Retrieved 29 January 2022. Cusumano, Katherine (2 April 2017). "Nicole Kidman's 13 Most Transformative On-Screen Roles, From Big Little Lies to Eyes Wide Shut". W Magazine. Archived from the original on 29 January 2022. Retrieved 29 January 2022. "Nicole Kidman's 13 Most Transformative On-Screen Roles, from Big Little Lies to Eyes Wide Shut". 2 April 2017. Archived from the original on 29 January 2022. Retrieved 29 January 2022.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) Carnicke, Sharon Marie (2006). "The Material Poetry of Acting: "Objects of Attention," Performance Style, and Gender in The Shining and Eyes Wide Shut". Journal of Film and Video. 58 (1/2). University of Illinois Press: 21–30. ISSN 0742-4671. JSTOR 20688513. Archived from the original on 29 January 2022. Retrieved 29 January 2022. Baron, Cynthia (2004). More Than a Method: Trends and Traditions in Contemporary Film Performance. Detroit: Wayne State University Press. pp. 260–261. ISBN 0-8143-3079-7. OCLC 54035239. Cook, Pam (2012). Nicole Kidman. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. p. 3. ISBN 978-1-84457-488-9. OCLC 782997908. Luckhurst, Mary (December 2019). "Nicole Kidman: Transformation and the Business of Acting". Australasian Drama Studies (75): 72–100. "Kidman named fashion icon". BBC News. 20 April 2003. Archived from the original on 23 January 2022. Retrieved 7 December 2020. "A look back at the most memorable Oscars red carpet dresses of all time". The Daily Telegraph. 9 February 2020. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 7 December 2020. Cusumano, Katherine (23 May 2017). "Don't Call It a Comeback: Nicole Kidman Has a Long History of Wearing Daring Dresses on the Red Carpet". W Magazine. Archived from the original on 3 February 2022. Retrieved 3 February 2022. "Don't Call It a Comeback: Nicole Kidman Has a Long History of Wearing Daring Dresses on the Red Carpet". 23 May 2017. Archived from the original on 3 February 2022. Retrieved 3 February 2022.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) Hines, Alice (19 February 2015). "What Is the Most Influential Oscar Dress of All-Time?". Smithsonian. Archived from the original on 18 January 2021. Retrieved 7 December 2020. "What is the Most Influential Oscar Dress of All-Time? | Arts & Culture | Smithsonian Magazine". Archived from the original on 18 January 2021. Retrieved 7 December 2020.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) Lai, Gladys (4 March 2021). "67 of the most memorable red carpet looks in modern history". Vogue. Archived from the original on 23 January 2022. Retrieved 7 May 2021.Archived 23 January 2022 at the Wayback Machine Bakshi, Pema (29 April 2021). "110 red carpet moments that solidified Nicole Kidman's style icon status". Vogue. Archived from the original on 7 May 2021. Retrieved 7 May 2021. Selzer, Jillian (31 October 2018). "Nicole Kidman's been walking the red carpet since the early '90s — here are 21 of her most iconic looks". Insider. Retrieved 7 May 2021.[dead link] "Nicole Kidman wins 2003 Fashion Icon Award". The Sydney Morning Herald. 20 April 2003. Archived from the original on 23 January 2022. Retrieved 11 December 2020. Weiner Campbell, Caren (18 December 1998). "Tom Cruise and Nicole Kidman wed eight years ago". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on 27 January 2022. Retrieved 27 January 2022. "Archived copy". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on 27 January 2022. Retrieved 27 January 2022.{{cite magazine}}: CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) Hoffman, Claire; Christensen, Kim (18 December 2005). "Tom Cruise and Scientology". Archived from the original on 23 July 2012. Among other things, Britt said, Miscavige and his wife attended the star's 1990 wedding to Kidman in Colorado and then followed up with frequent gifts. Dawn, Randee (30 September 2016). "'I was so young': Nicole Kidman looks back on marriage to Tom Cruise". The Today Show. Archived from the original on 30 September 2021. Retrieved 30 September 2021. Tresniowski, Alex (19 February 2001). "Hearts Wide Shut". People. Archived from the original on 2 July 2012. Retrieved 1 May 2012. "Nicole Kidman says she still loves Tom Cruise". The Today Show. 9 May 2006. Archived from the original on 2 October 2021. Retrieved 2 October 2021. Gordon, Meryl (11 November 2007). "Nicole Kidman Tells It Like It Is". Marie Claire. Archived from the original on 17 January 2013. Retrieved 14 December 2012. Stern, Marlow (26 January 2015). "Scientology Doc 'Going Clear' Claims the Church Split Up Tom Cruise and Nicole Kidman". The Daily Beast. Archived from the original on 7 April 2015. Retrieved 6 April 2015. Reinstein, Mara (27 January 2015). "Tom Cruise Had Nicole Kidman's Phone Wiretapped and More Revelations in Scientology Doc Going Clear: Review". Us Weekly. Archived from the original on 7 April 2015. Retrieved 22 September 2020. Finnigan, Lexi; Loveluck, Louisa (10 October 2015). "Nicole Kidman: Divorcing Tom Cruise was the best thing to happen to my career". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 11 October 2015. Retrieved 10 October 2015. Sams, Christine (7 May 2006). "Best wishes for Kidman". The Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on 26 October 2013. Browne, Rachel (16 April 2007). "Other Tom gives Nic saddle tips". The Age. Australia. Archived from the original on 19 April 2007. Retrieved 1 May 2012. "Kidman wins affair libel case". CNN. 31 July 2003. Archived from the original on 23 July 2012. Retrieved 17 October 2007. "Nicole Kidman reveals she was once engaged to Lenny Kravitz: 'He's a great guy'". Today. 16 February 2017. Archived from the original on 10 May 2021. Retrieved 5 May 2021. "Madonna and Tupac in love: Hollywood's most unconventional celebrity couples". The Telegraph. 13 February 2017. Archived from the original on 4 November 2019. Retrieved 4 November 2019. Jones, Isabel (1 November 2018). "Nicole Kidman Reveals Why She and Lenny Kravitz Called Off Their Engagement". Yahoo. Archived from the original on 5 November 2021. Retrieved 5 November 2021. Smith, Krista (October 2007). "The Lady Is Yar". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on 5 November 2021. Retrieved 5 November 2021. Salaky, Kristin (25 October 2017). "How Keith Urban and Nicole Kidman have made their 10-year relationship stronger than ever". Insider. Retrieved 5 November 2021.[dead link] Thomas, Karen (25 June 2006). "Kidman weds Urban in intimate ceremony". USA Today. Archived from the original on 13 January 2012. Retrieved 28 May 2011. "Nicole & Keith Say 'I Do'". People. Archived from the original on 28 March 2011. Retrieved 28 May 2011. Wood, E. Thomas (4 April 2008). "Headline homes: Nashville's top 10 sales, March 2008". Nashville Post. Tennessee. Archived from the original on 3 September 2016. Retrieved 4 April 2008. "Hot Property: Nicole Kidman takes Beverly Hills". Los Angeles Times. 2 August 2008. Archived from the original on 30 November 2021. Retrieved 29 November 2021. Olito, Frank (1 June 2019). "From Australia to NYC, take a look inside Nicole Kidman and Keith Urban's sprawling real estate empire". Business Insider Australia. Archived from the original on 18 December 2019. Retrieved 18 December 2019. Rodriguez, Brenda; Silverman, Stephen M. (7 July 2008). "Nicole Kidman and Keith Urban Welcomed a Baby Girl". People. Archived from the original on 9 July 2008. Retrieved 7 July 2008. Tauber, Michelle (8 July 2008). "The Secret Behind Baby Sunday Rose's Name Revealed!". People. Archived from the original on 28 July 2008. Retrieved 29 July 2008. "Faith, Love and Happiness". 60 Minutes (Interview). Interviewed by Karl Stefanovic. Australia. 18 February 2011. Archived from the original on 22 February 2011. Jordan, Julie (17 January 2011). "Nicole Kidman and Keith Urban Welcome a Daughter!". People. Archived from the original on 3 September 2011. Retrieved 17 January 2011. "Nicole Kidman & Keith Urban: 'Blessed' by Faith". People. 19 January 2011. Archived from the original on 21 January 2011. Retrieved 19 January 2011. McAloon, Dan (9 June 2006). "Kidman wedding in Australia seen as spiritual homecoming". Catholic Online. Archived from the original on 27 June 2006. Retrieved 17 October 2007. Archived 6 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine Kilbane, Brennan (13 November 2018). "Nothing Keeps Nicole Kidman From Her Work, Not Even a 102-Degree Fever". Allure. Archived from the original on 30 December 2018. Retrieved 30 December 2018. "Some Catholic Leaders Upset Over New Nicole Kidman Movie". Fox News. 10 October 2007. Archived from the original on 9 November 2007. Retrieved 9 January 2012. "Is 'Golden Compass' Anti-Catholic?". CBS News. 11 February 2009. Archived from the original on 4 June 2011. Retrieved 9 January 2012. "The Golden Compass". Entertainment Weekly. 3 December 2007. Archived from the original on 8 August 2021. Retrieved 30 March 2021. "Scientology a sore point with Nicole Kidman". The Age. Melbourne. 14 December 2009. Archived from the original on 12 September 2012. Retrieved 13 December 2009. Cooney, Jenny (8 November 2018). "Nicole Kidman finally breaks silence on Connor and Bella Cruise". Who. Archived from the original on 5 November 2021. Retrieved 5 November 2021. Casserly, Meghan (22 October 2009). "Nicole Kidman Champions Women's Rights". Forbes. Archived from the original on 28 December 2009. Retrieved 6 January 2020. MacInnes, Paul (22 October 2009). "Nicole Kidman: Hollywood plays role in violence against women". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 4 October 2015. Retrieved 6 January 2020. Andrews, Travis M. (13 January 2017). "Nicole Kidman on Trump: 'We as a country need to support whoever's the president'". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 29 November 2018. Retrieved 6 January 2020. "Nicole Kidman's Federal Campaign Contribution Report". NewsMeat. 16 October 2006. Archived from the original on 12 July 2006. Retrieved 22 October 2006. "Kidman knocks Roberts off high-paid actress list". Reuters. 20 January 2007. Archived from the original on 24 September 2021. Retrieved 24 September 2021. Murphy, Damien (23 May 2002). "Nicole cruises on to the rich list with $122 million". The Sydney Morning Herald. Australia. Archived from the original on 26 December 2010. Retrieved 16 September 2011. Bailey, Michael; Sprague, Julie-anne (26 May 2023). "The 200 richest people in Australia revealed". Australian Financial Review. Archived from the original on 6 June 2023. Retrieved 6 June 2023. Lusk, Darian (24 April 2021). "Keith Urban And Nicole Kidman: Who Has The Higher Net Worth?". Nikki Swift. Archived from the original on 6 August 2023. Retrieved 6 August 2023. "BRW Rich 200 2011: Nicole Kidman". BRW. 26 May 2011. Archived from the original on 18 October 2013. Retrieved 16 September 2011. Fitzsimmons, Caitlin (8 March 2015). "The 30 richest self-made women in Australia". BRW. Archived from the original on 27 October 2015. Retrieved 27 October 2015. "Bridges among Australia's richest women". Sky News Australia. 8 March 2015. Archived from the original on 16 October 2015. Retrieved 27 October 2015. Carmody, Broede (26 May 2017). "Nicole Kidman Australia's richest actor with estimated wealth of $347 million". Forbes Advocate. Archived from the original on 6 August 2023. Retrieved 6 August 2023. "Kidman becomes ambassador for UN". BBC News. 26 January 2006. Archived from the original on 17 July 2018. Retrieved 22 October 2006. "Kidman joins the Breast Cancer Care crusade". newKerala. 2 July 2006. Archived from the original on 3 November 2015. Retrieved 22 October 2006. Morgan, John (3 March 2004). "Nicole Kidman fashions fight against women's cancers". USA Today. Archived from the original on 20 March 2009. Retrieved 22 October 2006. "UN Women Goodwill Ambassador Nicole Kidman". UN Women. Archived from the original on 5 October 2012. "Kidman undertakes UN Kosovo tour". BBC News. 15 October 2006. Archived from the original on 4 October 2015. Retrieved 6 January 2020. "Goodwill Ambassador Nicole Kidman Calls for Ending Pandemic of Violence Against Women and Announces Partnership at Groundbreaking for International Centre to End Violence". UNIFEM. 8 January 2010. Archived from the original on 13 June 2010. Retrieved 3 July 2010. "UNIFEM Goodwill Ambassador and Say NO Spokesperson". SayNoToViolence. Archived from the original on 15 July 2010. "Family Violence Prevention Fund Will Break Ground on a New International Conference Center and Exhibit Hall in San Francisco's Presidio on Friday, 8 January". Earth Times. 8 January 2010. Archived from the original on 5 September 2012. Retrieved 12 January 2010. "Pelosi, Kidman, Torre Help FVPF Break Ground on New International Center". Family Violence Prevention Fund. Archived from the original on 22 October 2010. Retrieved 15 January 2010. Marcus, Lilit (24 November 2014). "Why Paddington Bear Statues Have Taken Over London". Condé Nast. Archived from the original on 9 June 2022. Retrieved 12 June 2022. Lederer, Edith M. (18 November 2016). "Nicole Kidman speaks out to help women victims of violence". Associated Press. Archived from the original on 13 August 2020. Retrieved 6 January 2020. "Kidman becomes 'Citizen of the World'". Australia: ABC. 5 December 2004. Archived from the original on 28 October 2013. Retrieved 22 May 2013. Stafford, Annabel (14 April 2007). "Kidman and the Kennedys honoured for their service". The Age. Melbourne. Archived from the original on 16 December 2008. Retrieved 14 April 2007. "Nicole Kidman". Australian Honours Database. Archived from the original on 27 December 2018. Retrieved 12 April 2007. [1] Archived 27 December 2018 at the Wayback Machine Byrnes, Holly (12 April 2007). "Nicole's new bridal path". The Daily Telegraph. Sydney, Australia. Archived from the original on 14 November 2007. Retrieved 12 April 2007.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) "Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia". Government of Australia. 13 April 2007. Archived from the original on 27 September 2007. Retrieved 17 October 2007. "Oscar winning Aussies go postal". BBC News. 3 February 2009. Archived from the original on 9 February 2009. Retrieved 1 November 2021. Creswell, Julie (22 June 2008). "Nothing Sells Like Celebrity". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 23 May 2021. Retrieved 23 May 2021. Haria, Sonia (31 January 2021). "Chanel No. 5 turns 100: the story behind the world's most famous perfume". The Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 23 May 2021. "OMEGA women's event with Nicole Kidman". OMEGA. Archived from the original on 25 September 2021. Retrieved 25 September 2021. "Nicole Kidman to Promote Nintendo Brain-Training Game". Fox News. 27 June 2007. Archived from the original on 13 December 2017. Retrieved 29 June 2017. Lawson, Richard (20 August 2010). "Nicole Kidman Now Shilling for Brazilian Shopping Malls". Gawker. Archived from the original on 5 January 2023. Retrieved 5 January 2023. Conti, Samantha (14 May 2013). "Nicole Kidman to Appear in Jimmy Choo Ads". WWD. Archived from the original on 25 September 2021. Retrieved 25 September 2021. Dang, Annie (16 March 2015). "Nicole Kidman stars in Etihad's 'Flying Reimagined' commercial". Stuff. Archived from the original on 17 March 2015. Retrieved 19 March 2015. Rodulfo, Kristina (6 February 2017). "Nicole Kidman Is the New Face of Neutrogena". ELLE. Archived from the original on 23 May 2021. Retrieved 23 May 2021. Smith, Erica (11 December 2020). "Nicole Kidman's Face Has a New Job". The Cut. Archived from the original on 19 April 2021. Retrieved 23 May 2021. Borgogno, Pauline (20 February 2024). "Balenciaga Names Nicole Kidman as New Brand Ambassador". L'Officiel USA. Archived from the original on 3 December 2023. Retrieved 20 February 2024. Richards, Bailey (20 February 2024). "Nicole Kidman Is 'Excited' to Be Balenciaga's Newest Brand Ambassador". People. Archived from the original on 3 December 2023. Retrieved 20 February 2024. Erdman, Shelby Lin (5 June 2017). "Keith Urban, Nicole Kidman showing Predator pride in Nashville". Dayton Daily News. Archived from the original on 6 February 2020. Retrieved 7 February 2020. Beveridge, Riley (29 January 2016). "Your AFL club's most famous supporters, from Barack Obama to Cam Newton". Fox Sports. Archived from the original on 29 June 2016. Retrieved 29 January 2016. Archived 7 June 2017 at the Wayback Machine "All Nicole Kidman Movies Ranked". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on 5 November 2021. Retrieved 30 September 2021. "Nicole Kidman – Box Office". The Numbers. Archived from the original on 30 September 2021. Retrieved 18 February 2024. Goldstein, Gary. "Nicole Kidman". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 9 February 2015. Retrieved 9 February 2015. Aiello, McKenna (20 June 2017). "Why This May Be Nicole Kidman's Best Year Yet: How After Three Decades in Hollywood, She's Only Getting Started". E! Online. Archived from the original on 28 January 2022. Retrieved 27 January 2022. *"Search Results – Academy Awards Search". Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. Archived from the original on 30 September 2021. Retrieved 30 September 2021. "BAFTA Awards Search". British Academy of Film and Television Arts. Archived from the original on 30 September 2021. Retrieved 30 September 2021. "Nicole Kidman – Emmy Awards, Nominations and Wins". Academy of Television Arts & Sciences. Archived from the original on 17 November 2021. Retrieved 30 September 2021. "Nicole Kidman". Hollywood Foreign Press Association. Archived from the original on 25 March 2018. Retrieved 30 September 2021. "The 24TH Annual Screen Actors Guild Awards". SAG Awards. Archived from the original on 30 September 2021. Retrieved 30 September 2021. "Kidman, Nicole *1967 – Overview – Roles". WorldCat. OCLC. Archived from the original on 14 July 2014. Retrieved 1 July 2014. "Entertainment – Music – Acting Like a Singer". BBC News. 23 November 2001. Archived from the original on 8 September 2014. Retrieved 1 July 2014. "ARIA Charts – End of Year Charts – Top Australian Singles 2001". Australian Recording Industry Association. Archived from the original on 4 February 2014. Retrieved 30 June 2014. "ARIA Charts – Accreditations – 2001 Singles". Australian Recording Industry Association. Archived from the original on 25 October 2012. Retrieved 30 June 2014. Archived 5 February 2014 at the Wayback Machine "UK Top 40 Singles Charts – 6 October 2001". Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on 20 February 2018. Retrieved 30 May 2011. "Golden Globes > 2001 > The 59th Annual Golden Globe Awards (2002)". Hollywood Foreign Press Association. Archived from the original on 29 June 2015. Retrieved 30 June 2014. "AFI's 100 Years...100 Songs" (PDF). AFI. Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 March 2011. Retrieved 30 June 2014. "Official Singles Chart Top 100". Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on 25 February 2018. Retrieved 18 July 2018. For peak positions of Kidman's singles in New Zealand, use the austriancharts.at links depending on a release. "New Zealand – "Somethin' Stupid" with Robbie Williams". RM NZ. Archived from the original on 20 May 2017. Retrieved 30 June 2014. "Portugal – "Somethin' Stupid" with Robbie Williams". 9 February 2002. Archived from the original on 13 August 2021. Retrieved 30 June 2014. Archived 9 March 2023 at the Wayback Machine For peak positions of Kidman's singles in Austria, use the austriancharts.at links depending on a release. "Austria – "Somethin' Stupid" with Robbie Williams". Austrian charts (in German). Musikmarkt. Archived from the original on 30 March 2014. Retrieved 30 June 2014. For peak positions of Kidman's singles in Belgium, use the ultratop.be links depending on a release. "Belgium – "Somethin' Stupid" with Robbie Williams". Ultratop (in Dutch). BEA. Archived from the original on 19 June 2015. Retrieved 30 June 2014. For peak positions of Kidman's singles in Denmark, use the danishcharts.dk links depending on a release. "Denmark – "Somethin' Stupid" with Robbie Williams". Danish Charts. Nielsen SoundScan. Archived from the original on 1 September 2020. Retrieved 30 June 2014. For peak positions of Kidman's singles in Germany, use the officialcharts.de links depending on a release. "Germany – "Come What May" with Ewan McGregor". Official Charts (in German). Bundesverband Musikindustrie. Archived from the original on 14 July 2014. Retrieved 30 June 2014. "Germany – "Somethin' Stupid" with Robbie Williams". Official Charts (in German). Bundesverband Musikindustrie. Archived from the original on 14 July 2014. Retrieved 30 June 2014. For peak positions of Kidman's singles in Netherlands, use the dutchcharts.nl links depending on a release. "Netherlands – "Come What May" with Ewan McGregor". Dutch Charts (in Dutch). MegaCharts. Archived from the original on 14 July 2014. Retrieved 30 June 2014. "Netherlands – "Somethin' Stupid" with Robbie Williams". Dutch Charts (in Dutch). MegaCharts. Archived from the original on 21 August 2014. Retrieved 30 June 2014. For peak positions of Kidman's singles in Norway, use the danishcharts.com links depending on a release. "Norway – "Somethin' Stupid" with Robbie Williams". Norwegian Charts. Nielsen SoundScan. Archived from the original on 3 January 2015. Retrieved 30 June 2014. For peak positions of Kidman's singles in Switzerland, use the hitparade.ch links depending on a release. "Switzerland – "Come What May" with Ewan McGregor" (in German). Swiss Hitparade. Archived from the original on 19 July 2014. Retrieved 30 June 2014. "Switzerland – "Somethin' Stupid" with Robbie Williams" (in German). Swiss Hitparade. Archived from the original on 27 June 2014. Retrieved 30 June 2014. "ARIA Charts – Accreditations – 2002 Singles". ARIA. Archived from the original on 12 December 2012. Retrieved 30 June 2014. Archived 5 February 2014 at the Wayback Machine "IFPI Austria – Verband der Österreichischen Musikwirtschaft" (in German). IFPI. Archived from the original on 16 July 2007. Retrieved 2 April 2014. "Germany – Wirtschaft" (in German). IFPI. Archived from the original on 27 September 2007. Archived 1 May 2015 at the Wayback Machine "Top 50 Singles Chart: Chart #1292 (Sunday 20 January 2002)". Recorded Music NZ. Archived from the original on 3 July 2013. Retrieved 2 June 2013. "Switzerland – Certification – Robbie Williams & Nicole Kidman – "Something Stupid". Swiss Hitparade. Archived from the original on 7 April 2014. Retrieved 30 June 2014. "British certifications". British Phonographic Industry. Retrieved 19 January 2022. "French certifications – Somethin' Stupid" (in French). Syndicat National de l'Édition Phonographique. Retrieved 19 January 2022. "ARIA Charts – End of Year Charts – Top Australian Singles 2002". Australian Recording Industry Association. Archived from the original on 6 July 2011. Retrieved 30 June 2014. "France – Le Bilan des Ventes de Singles en 2002" (in French). SNEP. Archived from the original on 24 September 2014. Retrieved 30 June 2014. "Official Singles Chart Top 100". Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on 25 February 2018. Retrieved 30 May 2011. "Moulin Rouge, Vol. 2 – Original Soundtrack". AllMusic. Archived from the original on 19 July 2018. Retrieved 18 July 2018. McGovern, Joe (23 April 2016). "Nicole Kidman on Prince: 'I had my first kiss, first love, first of a lot of stuff while listening to him'". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on 28 January 2022. Retrieved 27 January 2022. "Archived copy". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on 28 January 2022. Retrieved 28 January 2022.{{cite magazine}}: CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) "Nine – How Kate Hudson and Nicole Kidman sang and danced". Film Review Online. 21 December 2009. Archived from the original on 10 November 2013. Retrieved 10 November 2013. "Nicole Kidman Performs To the Lighthouse by Virginia Woolf". Apple. Archived from the original on 11 February 2015. Retrieved 30 June 2014. "Nicole Kidman sings backup on Keith Urban's 'Female' song inspired by Harvey Weinstein". World Entertainment News Network. 11 November 2017. Archived from the original on 12 November 2017. Retrieved 11 November 2017 – via WJLA. "Luke Evans and Nicole Kidman become musical icons on new duet". Entertainment Weekly. Gardner, Chris (22 November 2022). "Nicole Kidman to Receive AFI Life Achievement Award". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on 25 November 2022. Retrieved 25 November 2022. Wu, Jazz Tangcay,Valerie; Tangcay, Jazz; Wu, Valerie (13 November 2023). "AFI Gala Honoring Nicole Kidman Rescheduled for 2024 – Film News in Brief". Archived from the original on 19 November 2023. Retrieved 11 February 2024.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Dickerson, James (2003). Nicole Kidman. Citadel. ISBN 978-0-8065-2490-0. Thomson, David (2006). Nicole Kidman. Knopf. ISBN 978-1-4000-4273-9. Tylski, Alexandre (2016). Nicole Kidman. Phaidon. ISBN 978-0714868035. Nicole Kidman at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Nicole Kidman at IMDb  Nicole Kidman at the TCM Movie Database Nicole Kidman at the Internet Broadway Database Nicole Kidman at Curlie Nicole Kidman at AllMovie Nicole Kidman at People.com Nicole Kidman on Instagram