Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva (Brazilian Portuguese: [luˈiz iˈnasju ˈlulɐ dɐ ˈsiwvɐ] ; born Luiz Inácio da Silva; 27 October 1945), also known as Lula da Silva or simply Lula, is a Brazilian politician who is the 39th and incumbent President of Brazil since 2023. A member of the Workers' Party, Lula was also the 35th president from 2003 to 2010. He also holds the presidency of the G20 since 2023. Lula quit school after second grade to work, and did not learn to read until he was ten years old. As a teenager, he worked as a metalworker and became a trade unionist. Between 1978 and 1980 he led workers' strikes during Brazil's military dictatorship, and in 1980 he helped start the Workers' Party during Brazil's political opening. Lula was one of the leaders of the 1984 Diretas Já movement, which demanded direct elections. In 1986, he was elected a federal deputy in the state of São Paulo. He ran for president in 1989, but lost in the second round. He went on to also lose two other presidential elections, both in 1994, and then in 1998. He finally became president in 2002, in a runoff. In 2006, he was re-elected in the second round. Described as left-wing, his first presidency coincided with South America's first pink tide and was marked by the consolidation of social welfare programs such as Bolsa Família and Fome Zero. During his two terms in office, he undertook reforms which eventually led to growth in GDP, reduction in public debt and inflation, and helping 20 million Brazilians escape poverty. He also played a role in foreign policy, both on a regional level and as part of global trade and environment negotiations. During his first two terms, Lula was considered one of the most popular politicians in Brazil's history while president, and one of the most popular in the world. His first term was marked by notable scandals, including the Mensalão vote-buying scandal. After the 2010 Brazilian general election, he was succeeded by his former chief of staff, Dilma Rousseff, and remained active in politics and gave lectures. In July 2017, Lula was convicted on charges of money laundering and corruption in a trial, after which he spent a total of 580 days in prison. He attempted to run in the 2018 Brazilian presidential election, but was disqualified under Brazil's Ficha Limpa law; he was released the following year in 2019, and his conviction was nullified in 2021 by the Supreme Court. The same ruling, which also found serious biases in the case against him, also annulled all other pending cases against him. Now legally allowed to make another run for president, he did so in the 2022 election and ultimately defeated the incumbent Jair Bolsonaro in a runoff. Sworn in on 1 January 2023 at the age of 77, he is the oldest Brazilian president at time of inauguration, as well as the first-ever candidate to have defeated an incumbent president and be elected to a third term. Luiz Inácio da Silva was born on 27 October 1945 (registered with a date of birth of 6 October 1945) in Caetés (then a district of Garanhuns), 250 km (150 miles) from Recife, capital of Pernambuco, a state in the Northeast of Brazil. He was the seventh of eight children of Aristides Inácio da Silva and Eurídice Ferreira de Melo, farmers who experienced the famine in one of the poorest parts of the agreste. He was raised Roman Catholic. Lula's mother was of Portuguese and partial Italian descent. Two weeks after Lula's birth, his father moved to Santos, São Paulo, with--though his wife was not aware of it--Valdomira Ferreira de Góis, a younger cousin of his mother. In December 1952, when Lula was seven years old, his mother moved the family to São Paulo to rejoin her husband. After a journey of 13 days in a pau-de-arara (open truck bed), they arrived in Guarujá and discovered that Aristides had formed a second family with Valdomira, with whom he had 10 more children. Aristides's two families lived in the same house for some time, but they did not get along very well, and four years later, his mother moved with him and his siblings to a small room behind a bar in São Paulo. After that, Lula rarely saw his father, who died illiterate and an alcoholic in 1978. In 1982, he added the nickname Lula to his legal name. Lula has been married three times, and has a daughter from a fourth relationship. In 1969, he married Maria de Lourdes Ribeiro. She died of hepatitis in 1971 while pregnant with a child, who also died. In March 1974, Lula had an illegitimate daughter, Lurian, with his then-girlfriend, Miriam Cordeiro. The two never married. Lula only began participating in his daughter's life when she was already a young adult. Two months later, in May 1974, Lula married Marisa Letícia Rocco Casa, a 24-year-old widow whom he had met the prior year. He had three sons with her, and adopted her son from her first marriage. The two remained married for 43 years, until her death on 2 February 2017 after a stroke. Still in 2017, he met and started a relationship with Rosângela da Silva, known as Janja. The relationship only became public in 2019 while he was serving time in jail in Curitiba, Paraná, on corruption charges. Lula and Janja married on 18 May 2022. Lula had little formal education. He did not learn to read until he was ten years old. He quit school after the second grade to work. His first job at age eight was as a street vendor. When he was 12, he also worked as a shoeshiner. In 1960, when he was 14, he got his first formal job, in a warehouse. In 1961, he started working as an apprentice of a press operator in a metallurgical company that produced screws, while studying in a vocational course. There, Lula had his first contact with strike movements. After the movement failed in its negotiations, Lula left the company for another metallurgical company. From 1966 to 1980 he worked at Villares Metals S.A [pt], a new metalworking firm. There, in 1974, he lost his left pinky finger in a machinery accident, while working as a press operator in the factory. After the accident, he had to run to several hospitals before he received medical attention. This experience increased his interest in participating in the Workers' Union. Around that time, he became involved in union activities and held several union posts. Inspired by his brother Frei Chico, a member of the Brazilian Communist Party, Lula joined the labour movement when he worked at Villares Metals, rising through the ranks. He was elected in 1975, and re-elected in 1978, as president of the Steel Workers' Union of São Bernardo do Campo and Diadema. Both cities are located in the ABCD Region, home to most of Brazil's automobile manufacturing facilities, including Ford, Volkswagen, Toyota, and Mercedes-Benz. In the late 1970s, when Brazil was under military rule, Lula helped organize union activities, including major strikes. Labour courts found the strikes illegal, and in 1980 Lula was jailed for a month. Due to this, and like other people imprisoned for political activities under the military government, Lula was awarded a lifetime pension after the fall of the military regime. On 10 February 1980, a group of academics and union leaders, including Lula, founded the Partido dos Trabalhadores (PT) or Workers' Party, a left-wing party with progressive ideas. In 1983, he helped found the Central Única dos Trabalhadores (CUT) trade union association. Lula first ran for office in 1982 for the state government of São Paulo, but lost with 11% of the vote. Cuban president Fidel Castro urged him to continue on as a politician, during a trip by Lula to Cuba. In the 1986 election, Lula won a seat in the National Congress with the most votes nationwide. In 1989, Lula ran for president as the PT candidate. Lula advocated immediate land reform and that Brazil default on its external debt. A minor candidate, Fernando Collor de Mello, quickly amassed support with a more business-friendly agenda and by taking emphatic anti-corruption positions. He beat Lula in the second round of the 1989 elections. Lula decided not to run for re-election as a Congressman in 1990. Lula ran again for president, and lost again, in the next two Brazilian elections. Former PSDB Minister of Finance Fernando Henrique Cardoso defeated Lula who received only 27% of the vote in the presidential elections in 1994, and again, by an even wider margin, as Lula garnered only 32% of the vote in 1998. An article in The Washington Post said that before 2002 Lula had been a "strident union organizer known for his bushy beard and Che Guevara T-shirts". In the 2002 campaign, Lula abandoned both his informal clothing style and his platform plank that Brazil should not pay its foreign debt unless it links the payment to a prior thorough audit. This last point had worried economists, businessmen, and banks, who feared that even a partial Brazilian default would have a massive ripple effect through the world economy. Lula in the 2002 election, defeated PSDB candidate José Serra in a runoff, to become the country's first leftist president following the fall of the military dictatorship in Brazil.[citation needed] In the 2006 election, Lula won a run-off over the PSDB's Geraldo Alckmin. In September 2018, Brazil's top electoral court banned Lula from running for president in 2018 due to his corruption conviction, in accordance with Brazil's Lei da Ficha Limpa law. Instead, Fernando Haddad ran for president on the Workers Party ticket, and was defeated by Jair Bolsonaro. Lula, described as left-wing, served two terms as president from 2003 through 2010. During his farewell speech he said he felt a burden to prove that he could handle the presidency despite his humble beginnings. "If I failed, it would be the workers' class which would be failing; it would be this country's poor who would be proving they did not have what it takes to rule". Very few of the reforms that Lula proposed were actually implemented during Lula's terms of office. Some wings of the Worker's Party disagreed with the increasing moderation in focus since the late eighties, and left the party to form other parties, such as during Lula's presidency, the Socialism and Liberty Party. Alliances with old, traditional oligarch politicians, like former presidents José Sarney and Fernando Collor, have been a cause of disappointment for some. A number of educational initiatives were launched during Lula's first presidency. A free school meals program was extended to 37 million pupils while a programme was launched which aimed to provide "whole or partial remission of student fees for low-income students". In 2006, primary education was extended from 8 to 9 years. A Fund for the Maintenance and Development of Basic Education was set up to improve the quality of education. The PED (an education development plan) conditioned the disbursement of public funds to state schools on the schools' performance. Still, in 2006 many Brazilians and commentators felt that Lula had not done enough to improve the quality of public education. And in 2010, while education was compulsory for all children in Brazil aged 7 to 14, in practice that requirement was only loosely enforced; 90% of children in rural areas attended school for less than four years, and only 25% of children living in favelas attended school. Lula's top social program sought to eradicate hunger. It was financed by an increase in tax revenues, coupled with a decrease in government expenditures on both wages and on benefits paid to public employees, as well as a decrease in government expenditures on infrastructure. The program followed the lead of a project that had already been put into practice in 1995 by the Fernando Henrique Cardoso administration, which was named Bolsa Escola (School Stipend). It expanded that initiative with the new Fome Zero ("Zero Hunger") program, which was part of the Bolsa Família (Family Allowance) plan. Five months after Lula took office, however, the budget for Fome Zero was cut down a third from its original amount, and one year later, about $800 million was budgeted toward the program, but only $130 million of that was actually disbursed. Lula’s program was accused of having become more bark than bite, inasmuch as of May 2005, two years after the effort began, the program had fallen far short of expectations. During Lula's first term, child malnutrition decreased by 46%. In May 2010, the UN World Food Programme (WFP) awarded Lula the title of "World Champion in the Fight against Hunger". A number of other social projects were introduced during Lula's first presidency. Lula launched a housing aid program that was larger in scope to the policies developed until then. More than 15 billion euros were invested in water purification and the urbanization of favelas, and more than 40 billion in housing. The government proposed to relocate the poor populations that occupied the "risk zones", prone to floods or landslides; at the end of the day, however, at least 212 people died and at least 15,000 people were made homeless by the April 2010 Rio de Janeiro floods and mudslides alone. It proposed to then extend the electricity network, to relocate the streets and to improve the precarious housing. The government undertook to democratize access to real estate credit. Lula's first two terms coincided with a strong boom in commodities prices. This fueled an economic boom in Brazil, which in turn allowed Lula to spend heavily on social programs and pay off a $15 billion IMF loan a year early. In the run-up to the 2002 elections, the fear of Lula taking drastic measures, and comparisons of him with Hugo Chávez of Venezuela, increased internal market speculation. This led to a drop in the value of the Brazilian real, and a downgrade of Brazil's credit rating. Lula chose Henrique Meirelles of the Brazilian Social Democracy Party (PDSB), a market-oriented economist, as head of the Brazilian Central Bank. As a former CEO of BankBoston he was well known to the market. Lula and his cabinet followed, to an extent, the lead of the previous government in economics. It renewed all agreements with the International Monetary Fund (IMF), which were signed by the time Argentina defaulted on its own deals in 2001. His government achieved a satisfactory primary budget surplus in the first two years, as required by the IMF agreement, exceeding the target for the third year. In late 2005, the government paid off its debt to the IMF in full, two years ahead of schedule. The Brazilian economy was generally not affected by the 2005 Mensalão scandal, which related to vote buying in the Brazilian Congress. In June 2005, economist and attorney José Dirceu, Lula's chief-of-staff since 2003l, resigned after he was caught up in a massive corruption scheme in the legislature, the Mensalão corruption scandal. In March 2006, Lula's finance minister Antonio Palocci, who had continued the anti-inflation and pro-market policies of the previous centrist government, resigned due to his involvement in a corruption and abuse of power scandal. Lula then appointed Guido Mantega, a PT economist, as finance minister. Not long after the start of his second term, in 2007 Lula's government announced the Growth Acceleration Program (Programa de Aceleração de Crescimento, PAC), an investment program which sought to solve many of the problems that prevented the Brazilian economy from expanding more rapidly. The measures included investment in the creation and repair of roads and railways, simplification and reduction of taxation, and modernization of the country's energy production to avoid further shortages. The money pledged to be spent on this program was to be around R$ 500 billion (US $260 billion) over four years. However, by 2010 many projects remained mired in bureaucracy, and only 11% of the projects outlined in the plan had been completed, while just over half had not even been launched. Prior to taking office, Lula had been a critic of privatization. His administration created public-private partnership concessions for seven federal roadways. After decades with the largest foreign debt among emerging economies, Brazil became a net creditor for the first time in January 2008. By mid-2008, both Fitch Ratings and Standard & Poor's had elevated the classification of Brazilian debt from speculative to investment grade. Banks made record profits under Lula's government. The crash of Wall Street in 2008 might have been a tsunami in the US and Europe, Lula declared, but in Brazil it would be no more than a little 'ripple' ("uma marolinha"). The phrase was seized on by the Brazilian press as proof of Lula's reckless economic ignorance and irresponsibility. In 2008, Brazil enjoyed economic good health to fight the global financial crisis with a large economic stimulus lasting, at least, until 2014. According to The Washington Post: "Under Lula, Brazil became the world's eighth-largest economy, [and] more than 20 million people rose out of acute poverty ..." At the same time, in 2010 The Wall Street Journal noted that: "[Brazil’s] public sector is bloated and riddled with corruption. Crime is rampant. Its infrastructure is badly in need of repair and expansion. The business environment is restrictive, with a labor code ripped from the pages of Benito Mussolini's economic playbook. Brazil also risks patting itself on the back so much that it fails to see the colossal work that remains to be done." Initially, Lula's administration pushed for progressive policies that significantly curbed deforestation in the Amazon. Despite this, he did not support legislation that would have required the country to phase out its fossil fuels. In May 2008, environmental minister Marina Silva resigned, blamed “stagnation” in the government, after she lost disagreements with Lula when she opposed approval of new hydroelectric dams in the Amazon and criticized Lula's biofuels program. Dr. Daniel Nepstad of the Woods Hole Research Center said the growing demand for biofuels may ultimately result in more Amazon deforestation. In particular, environmentalists warn that while biofuels reduce emissions of greenhouse gases, they may well also trigger a significant expansion of the biofuel crops; that, in turn, may pushe agriculture deeper into forests, destroying habitat and biodiversity. The creation of conservation areas and indigenous reserves led to a decrease of around 75% in deforestation starting in 2004. In Lula's first year in office, in 2003-04, 25,000 square kilometers of Brazilian forest were destroyed, the second-worst devastation since 1977. In late 2006, the Instituto Soicioambiental environmental group said that deforestation in Lula's first four years had been worse than in any four-year period since 1988. By 2009, Brazil's Amazon destruction--though lower--was still about 7,000 square kilometers a year, larger than the US state of Delaware. Critics said, however, that Brazil's lowest rate of deforestation in 2009 was a function of the global financial crisis. Paulo Adario of Greenpeace said that it was a function not of efforts to protect the climate, but of the fact that the "demand for beef, soya and wood ha[d] dramatically fallen". In 2009, Lula gave a speech in which he said that "gringos" should pay Amazon nations to prevent deforestation. In February 2010, Lula's government approved the construction of a controversial hydroelectric mega Belo Monte Dam in the middle of the Amazon rain forest in the Brazilian state of Pará. It was to be the third-largest hydroelectric dam in the world. Environmental activists protested the building of the dam. It was expected to cause a significant decline in the water table, resulting in significant losses of aquatic and terrestrial fauna, and adversely impact aquatic mammals. Approximately 20,000-40,000 indigenous people were to be resettled with little or no compensation, and 516 square kilometers (199 square miles) of rain forest were to be flooded for the dam's construction. In 1979, Lula was asked in an interview which historical figures he admired most. He answered: Gandhi, Che Guevara, and Mao Zedong. Upon being asked to give additional examples, he added Hitler, Castro, and Ayatollah Khomeini, saying: "I admire in a man the fire to want to do something, and then his going out to try to do it." Leading a large agricultural state, Lula generally opposed and criticized farm subsidies, and this position has been seen as one of the reasons for the walkout of developing nations and subsequent collapse of the Cancún World Trade Organization talks in 2003 over G8 agricultural subsidies. Brazil played a role in negotiations regarding internal conflicts in Venezuela and Colombia, and made efforts to strengthen Mercosur. During the Lula administration, Brazilian foreign trade increased dramatically, changing from deficits to several surpluses after 2003. In 2004, the surplus was US$29 billion, due to a substantial increase in global demand for commodities. Brazil also provided UN peace-keeping troops and led a peace-keeping mission in Haiti. According to The Economist of 2 March 2006, Lula had a pragmatic foreign policy, seeing himself as a negotiator, not an ideologue, a leader adept at reconciling opposites. As a result, he befriended both Venezuelan president Hugo Chávez and U.S. President George W. Bush. Former Finance Minister, and current advisor, Delfim Netto, said: "Lula is the ultimate pragmatist". He travelled to more than 80 countries during his presidency. A goal of Lula's foreign policy was for the country to gain a seat as a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council. In this he was unsuccessful. From 2003 to 2010, Lula embraced China as central to reforming what he considered an unjust global order. He intertwined the Chinese and Brazilian economies. Lula stated Brazil's commitment to the One China principle that is the position held by the People's Republic of China and the ruling Chinese Communist Party, saying that the government of the People's Republic of China was the sole legal government representing the whole of China, including Taiwan -- as part of China. Lula and Cuban president Fidel Castro were longtime friends. Under Lula, Brazil provided money and corporate support to Cuba. The state-controlled Brazilian oil company Petrobras studied the possibility of drilling for oil off of Cuba, while the Odebrecht construction firm headed a revamp of the Cuban port of Mariel into the island's main commercial port. Brazil's state-run Brazilian Development Bank gave $300 million to Odebrecht to build new roads, rail lines, wharves, and warehouses at Mariel. Brazil also offered Cuba up to $1 billion in credit lines to pay for Brazilian goods and services. In 2003, Lula condemned the U.S.-led invasion of Iraq, saying that the United States had no right "to decide unilaterally what is good and what is bad for the world". He said that "the behaviour of the United States in relation to Iraq has weakened the United Nations". The conviction by an Iranian court of Iranian Sakineh Mohammadi Ashtiani for the crime of adultery, with a sentence in 2006 of execution by stoning, led to calls for Lula to intercede on her behalf. In July 2010 Lula said "I need to respect the laws of a [foreign] country. If my friendship with the president of Iran and the respect that I have for him is worth something, if this woman has become a nuisance, we will receive her in Brazil". The Iranian government declined his offer. Mina Ahadi, an Iranian Communist politician, welcomed Lula's offer, but reiterated a call for an end to stoning altogether and requested a cessation of recognition and support for the Iranian government. Jackson Diehl, deputy editorial page editor of The Washington Post, called Lula the "best friend of tyrants in the democratic world," and criticised his actions. Shirin Ebadi, Iranian human rights activist and Nobel Peace Prize laureate called Lula's comments a "powerful message to the Islamic Republic". In 2009, Lula warmly hosted Iranian president Ahmadinejad, who made a controversial visit to Iran. Some demonstrators expressed displeasure over Ahmadinejad's positions on human rights and his denial of the Holocaust. In May 2010, Lula and Turkey's prime minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan negotiated a preliminary fuel swap agreement with the Iranian government on uranium enrichment, that ultimately failed. The preliminary agreement that they presented to the United Nations was at odds with what the International Atomic Energy Agency and other countries viewed as necessary actions to stop Iran from obtaining weapons grade materials. And within hours of signing the agreement, Iran did an about-face and announced that it would continue to enrich some uranium. U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton said Brazil was being "used" by Tehran. The UN Security Council ultimately rejected it when permanent member country representatives argued that “the swap proposal negotiated by Brazil and Turkey would leave Iran with enough material to make a nuclear weapon,” and that “Iran intends to continue a new program of enriching uranium to a higher level.”Pulitzer Prize winning journalist Thomas Friedman wrote: "Is there anything uglier than watching democrats sell out other democrats to a Holocaust-denying, vote-stealing Iranian thug just to tweak the U.S. and show that they, too, can play at the big power table?" Moisés Naím, editor in chief of Foreign Policy magazine and former Minister of Trade in Venezuela, said "Lula is a political giant, but morally he has been a deep disappointment." In 2010, in addition, Brazilians largely disagreed with Lula as to how to handle Iran and Iran's nuclear weapons program. While Lula opposed additional international economic sanctions against Iran, of the 85% of Brazilians who opposed Iran acquiring nuclear weapons, two-thirds approved of tighter international sanctions on Iran to try to prevent it from developing nuclear weapons. Brazil, as a non-permanent member of the UN Security Council, abstained from the vote authorising "all necessary measures" against Libya’s Muammar Gaddafi. It opposed the bombing in Libya to implement United Nations Security Council Resolution 1973. Lula said: "These invasions only happen because the United Nations is weak." Lula was close with Venezuela's president Hugo Chávez, a close ally of Communist Cuba and an antagonist of the United States. In November 2007, Lula defended Chávez as the democratic choice of his people. He said: "There is no risk with Chávez." Expressing his admiration for Chávez, he said "Only thanks to Chávez’s leadership, the people [of Venezuela] have had extraordinary achievements," and that in 2008 that Chávez was "the best president the country has had in 100 years." Brazilians had a different view than Lula in 2010, however, as only 13% had at least some confidence in Chávez, while seven-in-ten had little or no confidence in him. After Lula was infuriated by a May 9, 2004, New York Times article that claimed he had a drinking problem, Brazil ordered the New York Times reporter, Larry Rohter, to leave the country and revoked his visa because he had written a story "offensive to the honour of the president." Lula said: "Certainly its author ... must be more worried than I am ... it deserves action." Brazil's presidential palace threatened to take legal action against the New York Times, which stood by the story and said that the expulsion raised serious questions about freedom of expression and freedom of the press in Brazil. No journalist had been expelled from Brazil since its military dictatorship ended in the mid-1980s. Brazilian opposition senator Tasso Jereissati said: "This is ridiculous. It's more like the immature act of a dictator of a third-rate republic..." Brazil's second largest union, Força Sindical, issued a statement expressing concern that: "it is a reaction typical of authoritarian governments that don't like contrary voices." Despite criticism, on May 13, 2004, Lula said "he would not consider revoking the action." The government subsequently changed its position, and allowed the reporter to remain. Three months later Lula introduced legislation to create a Brazil National Journalists’ Council that would have the power to “orient, discipline and monitor” journalists and their work. Critics called the draft law the worst affront to press freedom since censorship under the military dictatorship. The government also proposed the establishment of a National Cinema and Audiovisual Agency that would have the power to conduct prior reviews of programming and to veto certain programs if they believed that they did not to meet standards of “editorial responsibility.” Lula's administration was plagued by numerous corruption scandals, notably the Mensalão $50 million vote-buying scandal and Escândalo dos sanguessugas [pt] during Lula's first term. In the 2005 Mensalão $50 million vote-buying scandal, Brazilian attorney general Álvaro Augusto Ribeiro Costa presented charges against 40 politicians and officials involved in the Mensalão affair, including several charges against Lula himself. Lula said that he knew nothing about the scandals. Among those convicted were Jose Dirceu (who was Lula's chief of staff and right-hand man from 2003 to 2005; he was sentenced to over 10 years in jail), and both the former head of Lula's Workers Party, Jose Genoino, and its treasurer, Delubio Soares. Dirceu and officials Luiz Gushiken and Humberto Costa said that Lula was not involved. Roberto Jefferson said that if Lula didn't "commit a crime by action, he committed it by omission." But one of Lula's own party members, Arlindo Chinaglia, alleged that Lula had been warned about the matter, and businessman Marcos Valério, who was sentenced to more than 40 years in prison for his involvement in the scandal, alleged in testimony after he was convicted that Lula had authorized loans for the scheme and used some of the money to pay for his personal expenses. His administration was heavily criticized for relying on local, right-of-centre political barons, like José Sarney, Jader Barbalho, Renan Calheiros and Fernando Collor to ensure a majority in Congress. Another frequent reproach was his ambiguous treatment of the left wing of the PT. Analysts felt that he would occasionally give in to left-wing calls for tighter government control on media and increased state intervention: in 2004, he pushed for the creation of a "Federal Council of Journalists" (CFJ) and a "National Cinema Agency" (Ancinav), the latter designed to overhaul funding for electronic communications. Both proposals ultimately failed amid concerns over the effect of state control on free speech. Before a G-20 summit in London in March 2009, Lula caused an uproar by declaring that the economic crisis was caused by "the irrational behavior of white people with blue eyes, who before seemed to know everything, and now have shown they don't know anything". He added: "I don't know any black or indigenous bankers." He repeated the accusation the following month. When Italian far-left terrorist Cesare Battisti of the Armed Proletarians for Communism, wanted for four murders, was arrested in Rio de Janeiro in March 2007 by Brazilian and French police officers, Brazilian Minister of Justice Tarso Genro granted him status as a political refugee. It was a controversial decision, which divided Italy and the Brazilian and international press. In February 2009, the European Parliament adopted a resolution in support of Italy, and held a minute's silence in memory of Battisti's victims. In November 2009, the Brazilian Supreme Court declared the grant of refugee status illegal and allowed Battisi's extradition, but also stated that the Brazilian constitution gave the president the personal power to deny the extradition if he chose to, effectively putting the final decision in the hands of Lula. Lula barred Battisti's extradition. On 31 December 2010, Lula's last day in office, his decision not to allow Battisti's extradition was officially announced. Battisti was released on 9 June 2011 from prison, after the Brazilian Constitutional Court denied Italy's request to extradite him. Italy planned to appeal to the International Court of Justice in the Hague, saying Brazil had breached an extradition treaty. Lula's successor, President Michel Temer, revoked his status as a permanent resident in December and an arrest warrant was issued; Battisti then entered Bolivia illegally, and was arrested and extradited from Bolivia in January 2019. In 2015 Lula, along with his former chief of staff Gilberto Carvalho [pt] and five others, was indicted in a corruption probe as part of Operation Zelotes [pt], regarding payment of R$6 million in bribes (US $1.5 million). Prosecutors alleged they helped pass Provisional Measure 471 (which was later converted into Law 12,218/2010) in 2009 in order to benefit the automotive companies Grupo Caoa and MMC. On 21 June 2021, Judge Frederico Botelho de Barros Viana of the 10th Federal Court of Brasilia acquitted all the accused, saying that the prosecution did not convincingly demonstrate that the defendants were involved in a criminal conspiracy. In 2014, Brazil began Operação Lava Jato (English: Operation Car Wash), resulting in several arrests and convictions, including nine suits against Lula. In April 2015, the Public Ministry of Brazil opened an investigation into allegations of influence peddling by Lula, which alleged that between 2011 and 2014 he had lobbied for government contracts in foreign countries for the Odebrecht company and had also persuaded the Brazilian Development Bank to finance the projects in Ghana, Angola, Cuba, and the Dominican Republic. In June 2015, Marcelo Odebrecht, president of Odebrecht, was arrested on charges that he had paid politicians $230 million in bribes. Three other company executives were also arrested, as well as the chief executive of Andrade Gutierrez, another construction conglomerate. On 4 March 2016, as part of "Operation Car Wash", Brazilian authorities raided Lula's home. After the raid, the police detained Lula for questioning. A police statement alleged that Lula had collaborated in illegal bribes from the oil company Petrobras to benefit his political party and presidential campaign. Prosecutor Carlos Fernando said, "The favors to Lula from big construction companies involved in the fraud at Petrobras were many and hard to quantify". Lula said that he and his party were being politically persecuted. On 16 March 2016, Rousseff appointed Lula as her chief of staff, a position comparable to that of prime minister. This would have shielded him from arrest due to the immunity that went with the position. Cabinet ministers in Brazil are among close to seven hundred senior government officials enjoying special judicial standing, which means they can only be tried by Brazil's Supreme Federal Court. Supreme Court Judge Gilmar Mendes suspended Lula's appointment on the grounds that Rousseff was trying to help Lula circumvent prosecution. On 28 July 2016, Lula filed a petition with the United Nations Human Rights Committee, a panel of experts, requesting that it provide a view on his accusation that Moro had violated his rights. The Committee ultimately accepted the case. On 14 September 2016, prosecutors filed corruption charges against Lula, accusing him of being the mastermind or 'maximum commander of the scheme'. On 19 September 2016, 13th Circuit (Paraná) federal judge Sergio Moro, who was leading the corruption probe, accepted an indictment for money laundering against Lula and his wife Marisa Letícia Lula da Silva. On 11 May 2017, Lula answered a summons by appearing in Curitiba and was questioned by Moro. The closed-court hearing lasted five hours. Thousands of Lula supporters went to Curitiba, together with Dilma Rousseff. After the hearing, Lula and Rousseff gave speeches to his supporters; Lula attacked what he called bias in the Brazilian media. Lula was found guilty by the lower court of accepting R$3.7 million in bribes ($940,000 US) in the form of improvements to his beachfront house, made by construction company Grupo Metha [pt], which in turn received lucrative contracts from the state-owned oil company Petrobras. Lula also faced other charges, including money laundering, influence peddling and obstruction of justice. On 12 July 2017, Sergio Moro sentenced Lula to nine and a half years in prison. Lula remained free pending his appeal. Lula's lawyer accused the judge of bias and the judge replied that nobody, not even the former president, should be above the rule of law. On 25 January 2018, the Appeal Court of Porto Alegre found Lula guilty of corruption and money laundering and increased his sentence to 12 years of prison for one of the nine charges, while the other eight were still pending. On 26 March 2018, that same court upheld its own sentence, thus ending the case in that court. On 5 April 2018, Brazil's Supreme Federal Court (STF) voted 6–5 to deny Lula's habeas corpus petition. The court ruled that Lula must begin serving his sentence relating to his 12 July 2017 graft conviction for taking bribes from an engineering firm in return for help land contracts with state-run oil company Petroleo Brasileiro SA, despite his not having exhausted all of his appeals, but rather only one appeal, at which the appellate court had unanimously upheld his sentence. Brazilian financial markets rallied, as the decision increased the chances a market-friendly candidate winning the election. Lula and his party vowed to continue his campaign from prison following the court's decision that he must surrender himself by 6 April. The head of Brazil's army, General Eduardo Villas Boas, called for Lula to be placed behind bars. Following Judge Moro's issuance of an arrest warrant for Lula on 6 April 2018, Lula appealed to the UN Human Rights Committee to - in addition to his primary case - take emergency action by asking the government of Brazil to prevent his arrest until he had exhausted all appeals, arguing that the Brazilian Supreme Court had narrowly adopted its ruling with only six votes against five, which "shows the need for an independent court"; the Committee ultimately denied Lula's request. In June 2018, the Committee denied Lula's request. Lula failed to turn himself in at the scheduled time, but he did so on the following day on 7 April 2018. After Lula was imprisoned, protesters took to the streets in cities across Brazil. Lula's imprisonment led to the formation of the Free Lula Movement. On 28 May 2018, the UN Human Rights Committee initiated an investigation into Lula's case. In August, the Committee "requested Brazil to take all necessary measures to ensure that Lula can enjoy and exercise his political rights while in prison, as candidate in the 2018 presidential elections"; Brazil’s foreign ministry noted that the recommendation had no legal significance. On 8 July 2018, on-call weekend duty federal judge for the 4th region Rogério Favreto ordered Lula's release. Moro said that Favreto did not have the authority to release Lula, and Favreto's ruling was overturned the same day by the Judge Pedro Gebran Neto, president of the 4th regional court. On 2 August 2018, Pope Francis received three former allies of Lula in Rome: Celso Amorim, Alberto Fernández and Carlos Ominami. Later, the pope addressed a handwritten note to Lula (posted on his Twitter account) with the following text: "To Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva with my blessing, asking him to pray for me, Francisco". On 9 June 2019, The Intercept published leaked Telegram messages between the judge in Lula's case, Sergio Moro, and the Operation Car Wash lead prosecutor, Deltan Dallagnol, in which they allegedly conspired to convict Lula to prevent his candidacy for the 2018 presidential election. Moro was accused of lacking impartiality in Lula's trial. Following the disclosures, the resumption of legal proceedings was determined by the Supreme Court. Moro denied any wrongdoing or judicial misconduct during the course of Operation Car Wash and his investigation of Lula, claiming that the conversations leaked by The Intercept were misrepresented by the press and that conversations between prosecutors and judges are normal. Moro became Minister of Justice and Public Security after the election of president Jair Bolsonaro. The information published by The Intercept prompted reactions both in Brazil and overseas. A group of 17 lawyers, ministers of Justice, and high court members from eight countries reacted to the leaks by describing formera Lula as a political prisoner and calling for his release. United States Senator Bernie Sanders said Lula should be released and his conviction annulled. American Congressman Ro Khanna asked the Trump administration to investigate Lula's case, saying that "Moro was a bad actor and part of a larger conspiracy to send Lula to jail". A number of international intellectuals, activists and political leaders, including professor Noam Chomsky and 12 US Congressmen, complained that the legal proceedings appeared to be designed to prevent Lula from running for president in 2018.[better source needed] American talk show host Michael Brooks, a vocal advocate for Lula, opined that Lula's imprisonment and Moro's alleged political motives had rendered the results of the 2018 election "fundamentally illegitimate". On 8 November 2019, Lula was released from prison after 580 days when the Brazilian Supreme Court ended mandatory imprisonment of convicted criminals after their first appeal failed. His release allowed him to remain out of prison until all of his appeals of his corruption and money laundering convictions were exhausted. On 27 November, the Federal Regional Tribunal of Region 4 [pt] in Porto Alegre increased Lula's sentence to 17 years. On 8 March 2021, Judge Edson Fachin of the Supreme Federal Court annulled all convictions against Lula, ruling that the court in Curitiba, in Paraná state, which convicted him lacked jurisdiction to do so because the crimes he was accused of did not take place in that state, as at the time Lula resided in the capital, Brasilia. Justice Fachin said the cases against him should therefore be retried by a court in that city. The judge did not rule as to whether Lula was guilty or not of the corruption charges. On 15 April, a full Supreme Court upheld the ruling in an 8–3 decision. On 23 March 2021, the Supreme Federal Court ruled by a 3–2 decision that Moro, who had overseen Lula's trial in a case, was biased against him. On 23 June it upheld the ruling in a 7–4 decision. On 24 June, Judge Gilmar Mendes of the Supreme Federal Court annulled the two other cases Moro had brought against Lula, reasoning that there was a link between them and the case in which Moro was declared biased. This meant that all evidence Moro had collected against Lula was inadmissible in court, and that fresh trials would be needed. On 29 October 2011, it was announced that Lula, a former smoker, had a malignant tumor in his larynx. His tumor was detected after his voice became unusually hoarse. He had chemotherapy to counteract the tumor. He was later treated with radiation therapy, and his laryngeal cancer went into remission. Lula announced his recovery in March 2012. On 21 January 2021, Lula tested positive for COVID-19 while participating in the filming of an Oliver Stone documentary in Cuba, five days after arriving on the island. He did not need to be admitted to a hospital, and was able to recover. On 13 March 2021, Lula received his first dose of the CoronaVac vaccine. In October 2023 Lula had hip joint replacement surgery to implant a hip prosthesis, replacing the top of his right femur with an implant to treat his arthrosis. He also had a blepharoplasty, a cosmetic plastic surgery to remove excess skin from both of his eyelids. In 2017, Lula announced he would stand as the Workers' Party candidate for president again in the 2018 election. In September, he led a caravan of supporters which travelled through the states of Brazil, starting with Minas Gerais, whose governor was Lula's political ally Fernando Pimentel. While traveling through the South of Brazil, the caravan became the target of protests. In Paraná, a campaign bus was shot, and in Rio Grande do Sul, rocks were thrown at pro-Lula militants. Despite Lula's imprisonment in April 2018, the Workers' Party kept Lula as the party's presidential candidate. In a poll conducted by Ibope in June 2018, Lula led with 33% of vote intentions, with the PSL candidate Jair Bolsonaro polling second with 15%. Lula negotiated a national coalition with the PCdoB and regional alliances with the Socialist Party. The Workers' Party officially nominated Lula as its candidate on 5 August 2018, in São Paulo. Actor Sérgio Mamberti read a letter written by Lula, who was unable to attend because of his prison sentence. Former São Paulo mayor Fernando Haddad was named as Lula's running mate and intended to represent Lula in events and debates. In the event that Lula were declared ineligible, Haddad would replace Lula as candidate, with Manuela d'Ávila replacing Haddad as the vice presidential candidate. In response to a petition from Lula, the UN Human Rights Committee on 17 August 2018 suggested to the Brazilian government that it allow Lula to exercise his political rights. In a 26 August poll, Lula had 39 percent of vote intentions within one month of the first round. The same opinion polling put Lula ahead of all his challengers in a second round run-off, including the nearest one, PSL candidate Jair Bolsonaro, by 52 to 32. Lula's candidacy was denied by the Superior Electoral Court on 31 August 2018, as the majority of the seven-judge panel voted to bar Lula from running in the presidential race. On 11 September 2018, Lula officially dropped out of the election and was replaced by Fernando Haddad, whom Lula endorsed. In May 2021, Lula said that he would run for a third term in the October 2022 general election, against the incumbent President Jair Bolsonaro. He was 17% ahead of Bolsonaro in a poll in January 2022. In April 2022, Lula announced that his running mate would be Geraldo Alckmin, a three-term governor of São Paulo state who had run against Lula in the 2006 presidential elections. On 2 October, in the first round vote, Lula was in first place with 48% of the electorate, qualifying for the second round with Bolsonaro, who received 43% of the votes. Lula was elected in the second round on 30 October with 50.89% of the vote, the smallest margin in the history of Brazil's presidential elections, three days after his 77th birthday. He became the first president of Brazil elected to three terms, the first since Getúlio Vargas to serve in non-consecutive terms, and the first to unseat an incumbent president. He was sworn in on 1 January 2023. At age 77, he was the oldest Brazilian president at the time of inauguration. Lula said that his main commitments were: the reconstruction of the country in the face of the economic crisis; democracy, sovereignty and peace; economic development and stability; fighting poverty; education; implementation of a National System of Culture and the expansion of housing programs. He has held the presidency of the G20 since 2023. Lula's popularity declined; in September 2023 38% of those polled considered him to be good or excellent, while 30% considered him to be average, and 31% viewed him as bad or terrible. In March 2023, Lula met in China with Chinese President Xi Jinping, and signed 15 memoranda of understanding and 20 agreements on a wide range of issues. Lula gave a speech in which he said that no one would keep Brazil from improving its relationship with China—which was taken as a reference to the United States. In January 2024, Lula reaffirmed to Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi his recognition of China's policy of "one China", under which China claims Taiwan. Human Rights Watch, in the meantime, cautioned Lula against cozying up to China, while remaining silent about China's human rights abuses. In September 2023, Lula called Cuba a "victim" of an "illegal" United States embargo against Cuba. He also denounced the inclusion of Cuba on the US list of state sponsors of terrorism. In March 2023, Lula's administration allowed two Iranian Navy warships, forward base ship IRIS Makran and frigate IRIS Dena, to dock in Rio de Janeiro. U.S. Ambassador to Brazil Elizabeth Bagley said that in the past the warships had facilitated terrorist activities, and US Senator Ted Cruz said that "the docking of Iranian warships in Brazil is a dangerous development and a direct threat to the safety and security of Americans." Lula endorsed admitting Iran into the BRICS club, and in August 2023 met with met with Iranian president Ebrahim Raeisi. Lula stopped short of condemning Iran’s rights abuses. In June 2023, at an Organization of American States (OAS) summit, Lula tried to soften OAS criticism of Nicaragua’s government, which was accused of repression and of violations of human rights and property rights. Nicaragua's former ambassador to the OAS, Arturo McFields, said that the proposed softening was "shameful," and that "President Lula is lying and telling another story that never existed in Nicaragua." In May 2023, he declined an invitation to the Saint Petersburg International Economic Forum, saying that he "can't visit Russia at the moment", while confirming that he had spoken to Putin. In December 2023, Lula said that he will invite Vladimir Putin to Brazil. In February 2024, he was visited by Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov. Lula has commented often on the Russian invasion of Ukraine. Ukraine described his comments as "Russian attempts to distort the truth". In May 2022, Lula placed blame on Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskyy for Russia's invasion of Ukraine, saying "This guy is as responsible as Putin for the war". Lula also repeatedly attacked NATO and the European Union as having caused the war. He accused NATO of "claiming for itself the right to install military bases in the vicinity of another country". In April 2023, Lula declared after a state visit to China that "the United States needs to stop encouraging war and start talking about peace". U.S. National Security Council spokesman John Kirby responded by accusing Lula of "parroting Russian and Chinese propaganda", describing his comments as "simply misguided" and "suggesting the United States and Europe are somehow not interested in peace, or that we share responsibility for the war". In April 2023, Lula initially condemned Russia's violation of Ukraine's territorial integrity and said Russia should withdraw from Ukrainian territory it has occupied since February 2022. Later, however, that same month, he suggested that Ukraine should "give up Crimea" to Russia in exchange for peace and Russia's withdrawal from Ukrainian territory it occupied after February 2022, saying Zelenskyy "cannot want everything". After Germany appealed to Lula to provide military aid to Ukraine by selling it arms, Lula refused. On 26 April, in a joint press conference, Spanish prime minister Pedro Sánchez questioned Lula's position, stressing that as the victimized country Ukraine needed to be supported.[better source needed] Lula said that he is seeking peace in accordance with a binding foreign policy principle in the pacifist Brazilian Constitution of 1988. He said that the countries of the Global South, including Brazil, India, Indonesia and China "want peace", but both Putin and Zelenskyy "are convinced that they are going to win the war" and do not want to talk about peace. He noted the human cost of the war, as well as the war's impact on food security, energy costs, and global supply chains. In November 2023, Lula met in Riyadh with the prime minister and crown prince of Saudi Arabia, Mohammed bin Salman. They discussed strengthening bilateral relations, and investments in both countries. Salman said that a more robust strategic partnership between the two countries would benefit both sides. The $10 billion that the sovereign wealth fund of Saudi Arabia pledged to invest in Brazil was one topic of conversation. Lula mentioned Brazil's rapprochement with Arab countries. Salman also discussed Saudi Arabia's entry into BRICS in January 2024. Lula invited Salman to visit Brazil in 2024. In February 2024, Saudi Ambassador to Brazil Faisal Ghulam participated in a reception held by the ambassadors of Arab countries and Islamic countries in honor of Lula, and on behalf of the ambassadors of the Arab and Islamic countries, Ghulam delivered a speech in which he reviewed the developing relations between the Arab and Islamic countries and Brazil. Lula condemned the Hamas attack on Israel carried out on 7 October 2023. On 11 October 2023, he called for a ceasefire in the Israel–Hamas war, stating, it was "urgently needed in defense of Israeli and Palestinian children". Lula urged Hamas to release kidnapped Israeli children and Israel to stop bombing the Gaza Strip and allow Palestinian children and their mothers to leave the war zone. On 25 October 2023, Lula stated, "It's not a war, it's a genocide". On 18 February 2024, he drew comparisons to the Nazi Holocaust. That same day, he was accused of "blatant antisemitism" by Dani Dayan, the Chairman of Yad Vashem, the World Holocaust Remembrance Center, for comparing Israel’s actions to Adolf Hitler. Brazil's ambassador to Israel Frederico Meyer was recalled after these comments, and President Lula was designated a persona non grata in the State of Israel. Lula subsequently declined to apologise and despite having invoked a comparison with Adolf Hitler, he stated "I did not say the word Holocaust, that was the interpretation of the prime minister of Israel, it was not mine.” In April 2023, alluding to the support of the United States for Ukraine in the wake of the Russian invasion of Ukraine, Lula said that the US needs to “stop encouraging war.” In May 2023, he said that US economic sanctions on Venezuela were “worse than a war” and “kill” women and children. In February 2024, University of Sao Paulo foreign policy expert Feliciano de Sa Guimaraes said Lula only listens to one side in his government, "the left-wing, anti-American voices who very aggressively speak of a radical change in the global order." Lula restored diplomatic ties that Brazil had cut off with Venezuela’s Nicolas Maduro government after 2018 elections that had been condemned by critics as a sham. In March 2023, Lula refused to join 54 other nations and sign a United Nations declaration criticizing Venezuala’s human rights abuses. In May 2023 Lula met with Maduro in Brazil. In May 2023, Lula warmly embraced and fully supported Venezuela’s authoritarian leftist President Nicolás Maduro. Lula dismissed charges against Maduro of human rights and civil rights abuses as a political “constructed narrative.” Lula was criticized by Uruguay’s President Luis Lacalle Pou, who said that the "worst thing we can do" is pretend there are no significant human rights problems in Venezuela, and by Chile’s President Gabriel Boric, who said that Lula was making light of human rights violations in Venezuela. Lula also criticized as "unjustified" U.S. sanctions on Venezuela for its alleged human rights abuses, and criticized the United States for denying the legitimacy of Maduro, who the U.S. said had not allowed free elections. In March 2023 Lula reinforced the Bolsa Família program. The program was created during the first term of Lula and then significantly cut by Jair Bolsonaro. The program should help around 60 million Brazilians suffering from poverty. According to the World Bank estimates, the reinforced program will reduce the poverty rate in Brazil to 24.3% - the level before the COVID-19 pandemic. In August 2023, Lula announced a vast infrastructure investment program of over $350 billion over four years. Part of this sum is earmarked to finance the "My home, my life" social housing project. The program also includes 100 billion for energy and 65 billion for transport and roads. Education and health are also concerned, with the construction of schools and hospitals. The project also aims to boost economic growth and develop clean energy. At the beginning of September, he presented a major plan to eradicate hunger, as 33 million Brazilians do not have enough to eat, and more than half the country is affected to varying degrees by some form of food insecurity. To this end, he set up a national network of food banks to prevent wastage, increased the budget allocated to school meals and increased the purchase of food from family farms to supply public canteens. These measures are part of a broader policy to build social housing and raise the minimum wage and other social benefits. The fight against world hunger is also high on the Brazilian president's international agenda. In the first quarter of 2023 Brazilian economy grew by 1.9%. In the second quarter by 0.9%, 3 times more than expected, while many of the neighbors of Brazil saw a shrinkage in their economy. The possible reasons of this phenomenon include reduced inflation, a good harvest, and an improved credit rating. The economic policy of Lula regarding taxation, spendings, public ownership of some companies probably played a major role in this. Explaining his economic philosophy Lula once said: "“[Brazilians] need to understand that the money that exists in this country needs to circulate in the hands of many people,” “We do not want the concentration of wealth. We want more people to have access to credit to make the wheel of the economy turn. The growing economy needs to be distributed.” During his campaign Lula pledged to end illegal logging. In 2004, Lula had presented a road map for curbing deforestation. It was part of "The Action Plan for the Prevention and Control of Deforestation in the Legal Amazon", which sought to decrease deforestation in the Amazon by 80% by 2020. This plan was largely responsible for the 83% decrease in the Amazon deforestation rate in the years 2004 through 2012, but it was suspended during Bolsonaro's presidency. Lula re-affirmed the plan's goals in his third term, with a new target of zero illegal deforestation by the year 2030. The plan includes different measures for creating a sustainable economy in the Amazon region, like bioeconomy, rural credits and managed fishing. According to Amazon Conservation's MAAP forest monitoring program, the deforestation rate in the Brazilian Amazon from the 1 of January to the 8 of November 2023 decreased by 59% in comparison to the same period in 2022. In July 2023 the deforestation rate was 66% lower than in July 2022. In the beginning of August Lula participated in the Belem summit, 8 Amazonian nations renewed the Amazon cooperation treaty.[needs update] However, there are concerns that illegal loggers have partly moved their action from the Amazon rainforest to Cerrado, where the environmental destruction has increased. Bolsonaro had strongly cut spending for security in the Brazilian Amazon, and in 2022 34 environmental defenders were murdered in this region. When Lula re-assumed office, he sent troops to restore law enforcement in the region. As of October 2023 there were still "reports of violence, threats, torture, intimidation, attempts at criminalization and other non-lethal violations". In April Biden pledged to give $500 million to the Amazon Fund which was frozen during the rule of Bolsonaro and reactivated when Lula returned to power, to deal with climate change". According to John Kerry, the overall financial help from US to Brazil for stopping deforestation through different channels will be around 2 billion US dollars. Lula pledged to recognize 14 new indigenous reserves. Six were recognized as of May 2023. Lula and American president Joe Biden committed to work together on the issue. Several hours after Lula talked about leaving fossil fuels at COP 28, his government held an auction in which it offered 603 territorial blocks for oil extraction. The territories cover 2% of the territory of Brazil, overlap with many protected areas or areas belonging to indigenous people and can result in a release of 1 gigaton of CO2. In March 2023, the Lula government launched a campaign to fight “misinformation”. The initiative was viewed by many as a tool for Lula’s administration to delegitimize criticism it faces--under the guise of “fact-checking”, and raised serious concerns about freedom of expression. In response, the senior programme director of the International Center for Journalists, Christina Tardáliga, tweeted "There is no such thing as government fact-checking. This appropriation of the term is misguided and offensive. What the government does is propaganda." In Brazil, liberal is often avoided by leftists because of connotations with pro-business policies. He advocated "socialism of the 21st century", but Lulism is considered to be substantially similar to social liberalism. Although he showed a moderate centre-left liberal tendency economically, he highlighted his closeness with the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and negatively evaluated Juan Guaidó during the Venezuelan crisis. He is "personally against" abortion, but maintains that it should be treated as a public health issue. Lula criticized the decisions by Western countries to cut funding to UNRWA and in response pledged to the Palestinian government that Brazil would increase its funding to UNRWA. Lula has called for a two-state solution with Palestine "definitively recognised as a full and sovereign state". On 18 February 2024, Lula told reporters in Addis Ababa while attending the African Union Summit, "What's happening in the Gaza Strip isn't a war, it's a genocide. ... It's not a war of soldiers against soldiers. It's a war between a highly prepared army and women and children. ... What's happening in the Gaza Strip with the Palestinian people hasn't happened at any other moment in history. Actually, it has happened: when Hitler decided to kill the Jews". The list of Lula's awards since 2003: In 2008 he was awarded the UNESCO Félix Houphouët-Boigny Peace Prize. In 2012 he received the Four Freedoms Award. Academy Award-nominated film Brazilian director Fábio Barreto directed the 2009 Brazilian biographical film Lula, Son of Brazil that depicts the life of Lula up to 35 years of age. Upon its release, it was the most expensive Brazilian film ever. The film was a commercial and critical failure. Critics charged that it was election propaganda, fostering a cult of personality. The Netflix Brazilian series The Mechanism deals with Operation Car Wash, and has a charachter inspired by Lula, who is referred to as João Higino in the series. The 2019 Brazilian documentary The Edge of Democracy, written and directed by Petra Costa, chronicled the rise and fall of Lula and Dilma Rousseff, and the socio-political upheaval in Brazil during the period. Jeff Wallenfeldt (10 April 2018). "Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on 2 July 2019. Retrieved 27 July 2018. de Almeida, Paulo Roberto (2009), Love, Joseph L.; Baer, Werner (eds.), "Lula's Foreign Policy: Regional and Global Strategies", Brazil under Lula: Economy, Politics, and Society under the Worker-President, New York: Palgrave Macmillan US, pp. 167–183, doi:10.1057/9780230618374_10, ISBN 978-0-230-61837-4, archived from the original on 14 January 2023, retrieved 1 November 2022 Igor Gielow (15 September 2023). "Datafolha: Lula Has Stable Approval of 38%, and Disapproval Rises to 31%". Folha de S.Paulo. Paulo Cabral (31 December 2010). "Lula leaves office as Brazil's 'most popular' president". BBC News. BBC. Archived from the original on 2 January 2011. Retrieved 4 January 2011. "The Most Popular Politician on Earth". Newsweek. 31 December 2010. Archived from the original on 29 December 2010. Retrieved 4 January 2011. "Lula's last lap". The Economist. 8 January 2009. Archived from the original on 7 February 2018. Retrieved 4 January 2011. Magalhaes, Luciana; Pearson, Samantha (30 October 2022). "Brazil's Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva Wins Presidential Election, Beating Jair Bolsonaro; The leftist former president's win marks an extraordinary comeback for a man who was in jail for corruption three years ago". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 2 November 2022. Retrieved 1 November 2022. Feltrin, Ricardo (6 April 2005). ""Lula é um católico a seu modo", diz d. Cláudio Hummes". Folha de S.Paulo. Archived from the original on 2 October 2018. Retrieved 3 October 2010. Paraná, Denise (2009). Lula, o filho do Brasil. Objetiva. ISBN 9788539000371. Archived from the original on 14 January 2023. Retrieved 25 October 2018. Bearak, Barry (27 June 2004). "Poor Man's Burden". The New York Times Magazine. "terra.com.br". Yamily Habib (13 July 2017). "Lula: the sad end of a dream; Brazil's former president Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva has been sentenced to nine years and six months in prison for corruption and money laundering". Al Día News. Bourne, Richard (2008). Lula of Brazil; The Story so Far, University of California Press. Archived 5 August 2020 at the Wayback Machine Barrionuevo, Alexei (26 August 2012). "Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 21 April 2014. Retrieved 27 January 2018. John D. French (2020). Lula and His Politics of Cunning; From Metalworker to President of Brazil, Zed Books. Narciso, Paulo. "Da distante Paulicéia, Lula vinha namorar todas as noites". Hoje em Dia (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 21 October 2011. Retrieved 14 December 2009. Fordeleone, Yolanda. "Lurian, filha de Lula, foi atendida no hospital Sírio-Libanês". Estadão. Grupo Estado. Archived from the original on 3 June 2013. Retrieved 3 October 2010. Souza Cruz, Bruna; Bianchi, Paula (2 February 2017). "Marisa Letícia tem morte cerebral, e família autoriza doação de órgãos". UOL Notícias. Grupo Folha. Archived from the original on 2 February 2017. Retrieved 2 July 2017. "Casamento de Lula: Conheça Janja, socióloga e noiva do ex-presidente". exame. 18 May 2022. Archived from the original on 19 May 2022. Retrieved 19 May 2022. Phillips, Tom; Malleret, Constance (30 October 2022). "Lula stages astonishing comeback to beat far-right Bolsonaro in Brazil election". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 2 November 2022. Retrieved 1 November 2022. "Lula: Fourth time lucky?". BBC News. British Broadcasting Corp. 28 October 2002. Archived from the original on 19 August 2018. Retrieved 27 April 2007. Jeantet, Diane; Saverese, Mauricio (30 October 2022). "Lula defeats Bolsonaro to again become Brazil's president". AP News. Associated Press. Archived from the original on 30 October 2022. Retrieved 31 October 2022. "Biography". Presidency of the Federative Republic of Brazil. 2005. Archived from the original on 13 December 2007. Retrieved 2 September 2007. French, John D. (2020). Lula and his politics of cunning: from metalworker to president of Brazil. Project Muse. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 978-1-4696-5578-9. OCLC 1197700354. Archived from the original on 14 January 2023. Retrieved 2 January 2023. "Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva". Encyclopædia Britannica. 2024. Archived from the original on 2 July 2019. Retrieved 27 October 2019. Goertzel, Ted (2018). "Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva and the Brazilian Workers' Party (PT)". Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Latin American History. doi:10.1093/acrefore/9780199366439.013.463. ISBN 978-0-19-936643-9. Phillips, Tom (3 January 2022). "Rebuilding bridges: Former president's mission to defeat Bolsonaro in Brazil". The Guardian. "Brazilian Profiles and Personalities | Modern Latin America". library.brown.edu. "Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva". coe.int. Anderson, Jon Lee (23 January 2023). "After Bolsonaro, Can Lula Remake Brazil?". The New Yorker. "Brazil's Ex-president Lula In Dates". Barrons. 15 April 2021. Phillips, Tom (31 October 2022). "Lula: the rise and fall and rise again of Brazil's president-elect". The Guardian. Arjun Sengupta (3 January 2023). "The story of Lula: how a shoe-shiner became Brazil's beloved president". Indian Express. ISBN 978-0520261556. "Eleições 2006 – Com votação recorde, Lula chega ao segundo mandato". G1. Grupo Globo. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 3 October 2010. Krieger, Joel (28 February 2024). The Oxford Companion to Comparative Politics. Oup USA. ISBN 978-0-19-973859-5. Forero, Juan (4 October 2010). "Brazilian president's handpicked successor leads, faces runoff". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 1 November 2018. Retrieved 4 September 2017. "Brazil re-elects President Lula". BBC News. British Broadcasting Corporation. 30 October 2006. Archived from the original on 12 January 2009. Retrieved 27 April 2007. Lopes, Marina (31 August 2018). "Brazil's jailed former president Lula barred from running again by electoral court". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 1 September 2018. Retrieved 1 September 2018. Paraguassu, Lisandra (11 September 2018). "Brazil's jailed former leader Lula ends presidential bid". Reuters. Archived from the original on 9 February 2019. Retrieved 9 February 2019. Magalhaes, Luciana; Pearson, Samantha (30 October 2022). "Brazil's Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva Wins Presidential Election, Beating Jair Bolsonaro". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 2 November 2022. Retrieved 1 November 2022. Phillips, Tom; Malleret, Constance (30 October 2022). "Lula stages astonishing comeback to beat far-right Bolsonaro in Brazil election". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 2 November 2022. Retrieved 1 November 2022. "Lula bids a tearful goodbye". Al Jazeera English. 30 December 2010. Archived from the original on 14 October 2012. Retrieved 29 March 2012. "Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva" (in Portuguese). Biblioteca da Presidência da República. Archived from the original on 22 March 2017. Retrieved 30 June 2017. "Where dinausaurs still roam". The Economist. 5 February 2009. Archived from the original on 4 April 2009. Retrieved 12 May 2009. "BTI 2010 | Brazil Country Report" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 January 2022. Retrieved 7 May 2023. "Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva | Biography, Facts, & Involvement with Petrobras Scandal". Britannica. 27 February 2024. Schwarcz, Lilia M. (19 November 2010). "Brazil in the Shadow of Lula". The New York Review of Books. "Profile: Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva". BBC. 28 January 2010. Sonja Salzburger (17 November 2010). "Child Labor in Brazil, an Overview Article". The Child Labor Coalition. Barbosa-Filho, Nelson H. (2008). "An Unusual Economic Arrangement: The Brazilian Economy during the First Lula Administration, 2003-2006". International Journal of Politics, Culture, and Society. 19 (3/4): 193–215. doi:10.1007/s10767-008-9026-8. JSTOR 40206141. S2CID 153921012 – via JSTOR. "Luiz Ignácio Lula da Silva | Brazil: Five Centuries of Change". library.brown.edu. "The rebirth of Bolsa Família". London Politica. Kirksey, Emily (21 June 2006). "Lula – Brazil's Lost Leader". Council on Hemispheric Affairs. Archived from the original on 22 May 2008. Retrieved 5 April 2008. "The Fome Zero Program – Brazil's Losing Struggle to Help the Hungry: Lula's Leadership Fading". 26 July 2005. Rohter, Larry (29 May 2005). "Effort to Reduce Poverty and Hunger in Brazil Falls Short of Its Goals". The New York Times. ¿Cuál es el balance social de Lula? Archived 4 March 2022 at the Wayback Machine, Geisa Maria Rocha, septiembre de 2010 "A política social do Governo Lula (2003-2010): perspectiva histórica by Eduardo Fagnani" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 February 2023. Retrieved 4 June 2023. Et Lula apporta l'eau et la lumière aux favelas Archived 4 March 2022 at the Wayback Machine, Chantal Rayes, 11 août 2007 "A look at the life of convicted ex-Brazilian president Silva". AP News. 13 July 2017. Populista; The Rise of Latin America's 21st Century Strongman The Passenger: Brazil "Brazil hit by debt downgrade". BBC News. British Broadcasting Corporation. 21 June 2002. Archived from the original on 16 November 2018. Retrieved 9 August 2007. "Henrique de Campos Meirelles". Banco Central do Brazil. Archived from the original on 27 September 2007. Retrieved 9 August 2007. Balbi, Sandra (18 December 2005). "Economistas Alertam para Desindustrialização". Folha de S.Paulo (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 22 December 2008. Retrieved 5 April 2008. "Brazil to pay off IMF debts early". BBC News. British Broadcasting Corporation. 14 December 2005. Archived from the original on 8 March 2008. Retrieved 27 April 2007. Newsroom. "O Chefe (The Boss) by Ivo Patarra". Archived from the original on 22 April 2018. Retrieved 19 December 2018. "Dirceu involves Lula da Silva in bribes scandal". MercoPress. "José Dirceu". www.v-brazil.com. "Brazil judge says Lula aid 'masterminded' vote buying". France 24. 4 October 2012. "Lula's leap". The Economist. "Brazil's finance minister resigns amid scandal". NBC News. 28 March 2006. Constantino, Rodrigo (25 April 2016). "Trauma in Brazil - Rodrigo Constantino". "Palocci, the brainchild behind the successful years of ex president Lula da Silva". MercoPress. Prada, Paulo. "For Brazil, It's Finally Tomorrow". WSJ. "Lula gives state heavier hand in Brazil economy | Reuters". Reuters. Clemente, Isabel; Leal, Andréa; Neves, Maria Laura. "Enfim, Lula privatizou..." Época (in Portuguese). Rede Globo. Archived from the original on 12 October 2007. Retrieved 5 April 2008. Parra-Bernal, Guillermo; Pimentel, Lester. "Brazil Became Net Creditor for First Time in January". Bloomberg.com. Bloomberg. Archived from the original on 10 May 2011. Retrieved 6 January 2008. "Lula e o lucro recorde dos bancos" (in Portuguese). La Agencia Latinoamericana de Información – ALAI. 16 August 2007. Archived from the original on 24 November 2011. Retrieved 23 June 2009. Lula's Brazil Archived 2 May 2019 at the Wayback Machine by Perry Anderson – Vol. 33 No. 7 · 31 March 2011 pages 3–12 Rathbone, John Paul (31 March 2014). "After Latin America's boom years, anticipating the deluge". The Financial Times. Archived from the original on 6 April 2014. Freedman, Andrew (31 October 2022). "Bolsonaro's defeat is a climate turning point". Axios. Archived from the original on 31 October 2022. "Taxas de desmatamento (Deforestation rates)". TerraBrasilis. 2022. Archived from the original on 29 October 2022. Barrionuevo, Alexei (16 May 2008). "'Stagnation' Made Brazil's Environment Chief Resign". The New York Times. "Smart biofuels that don't hurt people or the environment are possible". Mongabay Environmental News. 16 July 2009. Cesar, Gleidson (16 October 2006). "Biofuel Boom Sparks Environmental Fears". Reducing Deforestation in the Brazilian Amazon, 2003–2012 Archived 3 October 2022 at the Wayback Machine, Princeton University, 2015 [1] Global Environmental Governance Encyclopedia of the Developing World: O-Z Press, Associated (27 November 2009). "Brazilian president says 'gringos' must pay to protect Amazon". The Guardian. "Brazilian dilemma". DW. 15 June 2010. "Brazil's Native Peoples and the Belo Monte Dam: A Case Study". NACLA. "Lula declarou admirar Hitler e Khomeini". Folha de S.Paulo. 21 April 1994. Bearak, Barry (27 June 2004). "Poor Man's Burden". The New York Times. Padgett, Tim (26 April 2004). "Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva". Time. Archived from the original on 28 October 2007. Retrieved 26 March 2008. Lapper, Richard; Wheatley, Jonathan; Silva, Luiz Inácio Lula da (11 July 2006). "Interview transcript: Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva". The Financial Times. Brasília, Brazil. Archived from the original on 5 March 2008. Retrieved 5 April 2008. Cirilo Junior (16 January 2010). "Tropas brasileiras ainda lideram missão no Haiti, diz Jobim". Folha de S.Paulo. Archived from the original on 22 March 2012. Retrieved 29 March 2012. "Brazil: Lula's leap; The Economist talks to Brazil's president". The Economist. 2 March 2006. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 27 October 2015. Kraul, Chris; McDonnell, Patrick J. (5 October 2008). "Brazil's Lula takes center stage in Latin America". The Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 8 October 2008. Retrieved 2 July 2009. Davies, Rhodri (22 May 2010). "The axis of Brazil". Al Jazeera English. Archived from the original on 1 February 2011. Retrieved 3 October 2010. "Lula Should Be Clear-Eyed About Beijing". Human Rights Watch. 13 April 2023. "China signs $10 bln loan-for-oil deal with Brazil". Reuters. 19 May 2009. ""Economic Relations between Brazil and China: A Difficult Partnership"" (PDF). "Joint Communiqué Between the People's Republic of China and The Federative Republic of Brazil on Further Strengthening China-Brazil Strategic Partnership". mfa.gov.cn. "Lula, Fidel Castro hold "emotional" meeting". Reuters. 24 February 2010. Rohter, Larry (28 October 2002). "Leftist Handily Wins Brazilian Presidential Race". The New York Times. "Brazil, Cuba Sign $200M in Business Deals". MercoPress. Siddique, Haroon (25 February 2010). "Fidel Castro holds 'emotional' meeting with Brazilian president". The Guardian. "Brazil's Lula offers Cuba oil knowhow, credit". Reuters. "Latin Americans Rally Against Iraq War". VOA News. 23 March 2003. Archived from the original on 11 July 2023. Retrieved 11 July 2023. "Lula blasts US over De Mello tragedy". Al Jazeera. 23 August 2003. Archived from the original on 11 July 2023. Retrieved 11 July 2023. Diehl, Jackson (3 August 2010). "Lula: Stonewalled by Iran". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 1 August 2016. Retrieved 26 July 2017. "Iran stoning woman offered asylum by Brazil's president Lula". The Guardian. London. 1 August 2010. Archived from the original on 14 January 2017. Retrieved 17 December 2016. "Press Release 29: On Brazilian offer of asylum to Sakineh Mohammadi Ashtiani" (Press release). International Committee Against Stoning. 31 July 2010. Archived from the original on 11 May 2011. Retrieved 3 October 2010. Ahadi, Mina (2 August 2010). "Open letter to the Brazilian president Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva A regime of stoning should not be recognised". International Committee Against Stoning. Archived from the original on 11 May 2011. Retrieved 3 October 2010. Mirian (21 August 2010). "Porta voz do Comitê Internacional contra Apedrejamento envia carta aberta a Lula". Veja. Grupo Abril. Archived from the original on 20 August 2010. Retrieved 3 October 2010. Amauri Arrais (30 July 2010). "G1 – Lula pode ajudar a libertar condenada a apedrejamento, diz ativista iraniana – notícias em Mundo". G1. Grupo Globo. Archived from the original on 2 August 2010. Retrieved 3 October 2010. Shirin Ebadi: When Adultery Means Death Archived 9 August 2017 at the Wayback Machine. Huffingtonpost.com. Retrieved on 29 November 2010. Maaike Warnaar (2013). Iranian Foreign Policy During Ahmadinejad; Ideology and Actions "Why Iran's Ahmadinejad is warmly welcomed in Brazil". Christian Science Monitor. "Ahmadinejad's visit to Brazil draws criticism". CNN. "Brazil in the Middle East". 17 June 2010. "Obama administration tries to dampen dispute with allies over Iran". CNN. Hanan Awarekeh (18 May 2010). "Al-ManarTV: Iran 'Checkmated' US as It Awaits Quick Response to 3-Way Nuclear Deal". Almanar.com.lb. Retrieved 3 October 2010.[permanent dead link] Friedman, Thomas L. (25 May 2010). "As Ugly as It Gets". The New York Times. Center, Pew Research (22 September 2010). "Brazilians Upbeat About Their Country, Despite Its Problems". Grandin, Greg. "Brazil stares down US on Libya". Al Jazeera. Terrence McCoy and Marina Dias (May 20, 2023). "Brazil’s Lula promised to save democracy. Why is he embracing Maduro?" The Washington Post. "Brazil's Lula defends Chavez as referendum nears". Reuters. 25 November 2007. "x". The Financial Times. Rohter, Larry (9 May 2004). "Brazilian Leader's Tippling Becomes National Concern". The New York Times. Chetwynd, Gareth (13 May 2004). "Brazil expels New York Times reporter for offensive story". The Guardian. Brazil: Events of 2004. Human Rights Watch. 31 January 2005. "Brasil - Lula quer conselho para fiscalizar jornalismo 4". Folha. 6 August 2004. Ramos, Natalia (13 March 2016). "Scandal taints Brazil's working-class hero Lula". Agence France-Presse. Archived from the original on 1 November 2022. Retrieved 1 November 2022. Colitt, Raymond (21 January 2007). "Brazil's Lula pledges economic growth in 2nd term". Reuters. Archived from the original on 1 November 2022. Retrieved 1 November 2022. "Brazil's Future in the Shadow of the Mensalão". Americas Quarterly. "Veja tudo o que Lula 'não sabia'". Estadão\ (in Portuguese). Grupo Estado. 2 August 2007. Archived from the original on 2 February 2017. Retrieved 24 January 2017. "Brazil 'Mensalao' corruption trial concludes". BBC. 17 December 2012. "Brazil's Congress Expels Corruption Whistle-Blower". The New York Times. 16 September 2005. "Lula sabia, sim, do mensalão, confirma Chinaglia". Veja. Grupo Abril. 30 October 2009. Archived from the original on 28 May 2012. Retrieved 22 February 2013. "Lula's Involvement in Mensalão Corruption Scandal to Be Investigated". Americas Quarterly. Caram, Fabio. Conselho, imprensa e controle, Observatório da Imprensa, 17 August 2004. Op. Ed. O Estado de S. Paulo, 6 September 2009. Barrionuevo, Alexei (2 April 2009). "Brazil's 'Teflon' Leader Nicked by Slump". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 26 January 2018. Retrieved 23 July 2017. "Brazil's Lula repeats 'blue eyes' crisis comment". Reuters. International Extradition Treaty-Protocol are made between presidents – Brazil International Extradition Treaty-Protocol with the United States Archived 5 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine 18 June 1962, Date-Signed Bonin, Robson (31 December 2010). "Lula nega extradição de Cesare Battisti para a Itália". G1 (in Portuguese). Grupo Globo. Archived from the original on 2 February 2017. Retrieved 24 January 2017. "Italy to appeal against Brazil's refusal to extradite convicted killer". The Guardian. 9 June 2011. Archived from the original on 2 February 2017. Retrieved 24 January 2017. "Cesare Battisti: Ex-militant extradited by Bolivia arrives in Italy". BBC. 14 January 2019. Archived from the original on 5 December 2019. Retrieved 27 October 2019. Gabriela Coelho; Leonardo Lellis (21 June 2021). "Justiça Federal absolve Lula de suspeita de favorecer montadoras". CNN Brazil (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 15 July 2021. Retrieved 15 July 2021. Isador Peron (21 June 2021). "Juiz de Brasília absolve Lula em ação da Zelotes sobre benefício a montadoras". Valor Investe (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 15 July 2021. Retrieved 15 July 2021. "As suspeitas de tráfico de influência internacional sobre o ex-presidente Lula: O Ministério Público Federal abre uma investigação contra o petista – ele é suspeito de ajudar a Odebrecht em contratos bilionários". Época. Rede Globo. 30 April 2015. Archived from the original on 26 October 2015. Retrieved 27 October 2015. "Brazil Arrests Head of Odebrecht in Petrobras Scandal". The New York Times. 19 June 2015. Horch, Dan (19 June 2015). "Brazil Arrests Head of Odebrecht in Petrobras Scandal". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 30 September 2020. Retrieved 26 July 2017. Romero, Simon (4 March 2016). "Police Raid Home of Ex-President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva of Brazil". The New York Times. Rio de Janeiro. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 4 March 2016. "Police Question Brazil's Ex-President in Corruption Probe". The Premium Herald. 4 March 2016. Archived from the original on 8 March 2016. Retrieved 4 March 2016. "Former Brazil president Lula da Silva detained amid corruption investigation". Euronews. 4 March 2016. Archived from the original on 5 March 2016. Retrieved 4 March 2016. Machado, Adriano (4 March 2016). "Brazil police detain former president Lula in anti-graft probe: source". Reuters. Sao Paulo. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 4 March 2016. "Brazil's Lula received 'many' favors from corrupt companies". The Citizen. AFP. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 4 March 2016. Kenneth Rapoza (29 July 2016). "Brazil's Ex-President Lula Wants UN To Save Him From Petrobras Noose". Forbes. Archived from the original on 17 October 2016. Retrieved 26 January 2017. "No depoimento à PF, Lula critica Lava Jato e admite amizade com Bumlai". Folha de S.Paulo (in Portuguese). 18 December 2015. Archived from the original on 20 September 2016. Retrieved 26 January 2017. "Assessoria de Lula critica Lava Jato e compara operação com vídeo do Porta dos Fundos" (in Portuguese). InfoMoney. 11 October 2016. Archived from the original on 2 February 2017. Retrieved 26 January 2017. Romero, Simon (16 March 2016). "Ex-President 'Lula' Joins Brazil's Cabinet, Gaining Legal Shield". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 27 February 2017. Retrieved 2 March 2017. "Supreme Court Justice in Brazil Blocks appointment for Ex-President". The Premium Herald. 19 March 2016. Archived from the original on 3 December 2021. Retrieved 19 March 2016. "Brazilian judge blocks Lula da Silva appointment". CNN. Archived from the original on 19 March 2016. Retrieved 19 March 2016. "Brazil judge blocks Lula appointment to government". BBC News. British Broadcasting Corporation. 17 March 2016. Archived from the original on 17 March 2016. Retrieved 17 March 2016. "Justice Gilmar Mendes suspends Lula's nomination as Chief of Staff". Correio Braziliense (in Portuguese). 18 March 0321. Archived from the original on 20 March 2016. Retrieved 18 March 2016. "Brazil's Lula tells U.N. his rights violated in corruption probe," Reuters. Archived 7 April 2018 at the Wayback Machine published on 28 July 2016 "Lula, like all Brazilians, faced a fair trial". The Guardian. 14 April 2019. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 7 June 2019. Retrieved 14 June 2019. Romero, Simon (14 September 2016). "'Lula,' Brazil's Ex-President, Is Charged With Corruption". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 15 September 2016. Retrieved 15 September 2016. Phillips, Dom (11 May 2017). "Brazil's ex-president Lula decries persecution as he faces corruption charges in court". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 11 May 2017. Retrieved 12 May 2017. Londoño, Ernesto (12 July 2017). "Ex-President of Brazil Sentenced to Nearly 10 Years in Prison for Corruption". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 12 July 2017. Retrieved 10 July 2017. "Profile: Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva". BBC News. 12 July 2017. Archived from the original on 13 July 2017. Retrieved 14 July 2017. Phillips, Dom (12 July 2017). "Brazil's ex-president Lula sentenced to nearly 10 years in prison for corruption". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 14 July 2017. Retrieved 14 July 2017. "Former Brazilian President Lula found guilty of corruption". Reuters. 12 July 2017. Archived from the original on 12 July 2017. Retrieved 10 July 2017. "Brazil ex-President Lula loses appeal". BBC News. 2018. Archived from the original on 1 July 2018. Retrieved 3 September 2018. "TRF-4 nega recurso da defesa de Lula sobre condenação em segunda instância no processo do triplex". G1 (in Portuguese). 26 March 2018. Archived from the original on 9 November 2020. Retrieved 20 January 2021. ""STF rejeita habeas corpus de Lula por 6 votos a 5" Archived 5 April 2018 at the Wayback Machine," Estadão Ao Vivo, 5 April 2018. Retrieved 5 April 2018. Silva, Daniel; Wilkinson, Bard (5 April 2018). "Judge orders arrest of ex-Brazil president Lula da Silva". CNN. "Internacional - En - Brazil - In Vote of 6 to 5, Federal Supreme Court Denies Lula Habeas Corpus". Folha de S.Paulo. 5 April 2018. Anthony Boadie. "Brazil judge orders ex-president Lula jailed by Friday". Reuters. ""Lula ordered to jail, plunging Brazil into political chaos ahead of presidential election," The Washington Post. Archived 5 April 2018 at the Wayback Machine," 5 April 2018, Retrieved 5 April 2018. "Brazil army commander 'repudiates impunity' on eve of Lula ruling," Reuters. Archived 19 April 2018 at the Wayback Machine by Brad Brooks, published on 3 April 2018 "Former Brazil President Lula Given Nearly 13 years in New Conviction". The Globe Post. 6 February 2019. Archived from the original on 21 April 2020. Retrieved 14 June 2019. "Lula appeals to UN and court in bid to avoid jail," Gulf Times. Archived 9 April 2018 at the Wayback Machine published on 7 April 2018 "UN denies Lula's request for emergency action against his imprisonment". MercoPress. Archived from the original on 20 June 2018. Retrieved 20 June 2018. ""Lula Da Silva, Brazil's Beloved Ex-President, Says He Will Surrender After Standoff" Archived 7 April 2018 at the Wayback Machine," NPR, 7 April 2018, Retrieved 7 April 2018. ""Lula: Former Brazilian president surrenders to police" Archived 16 June 2018 at the Wayback Machine," BBC, 7 April 2018, Retrieved 7 April 2018. "Brazil's Lula spends first night in jail amid fight for freedom" Archived 19 April 2018 at the Wayback Machine by Reuters staff. Published on 8 April 2018. Retrieved 18 April 2018 Darlington, Shasta; Andreoni, Manuela (31 August 2018). "Brazilian Court Rules That 'Lula' Cannot Run for President". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 12 June 2019. Retrieved 14 June 2019. "Brazil Slaps Down UN Human Rights Committee Request on Lula". Bloomberg. 17 August 2018. Archived from the original on 25 August 2018. Retrieved 24 August 2018. Brad Brooks (17 August 2018). "Brazil's Lula should have political rights: U.N. Human Rights Committee". Reuters. Archived from the original on 17 August 2018. Retrieved 24 August 2018. "Judge overrules order for Brazil ex-president's to be freed". 9 July 2018. "Brazil judge orders Lula to remain in prison overturning earlier ruling to release former president". The Telegraph. Agence France-Presse. 8 July 2018. ISSN 0307-1235. Archived from the original on 8 July 2018. Retrieved 9 July 2018. (in Italian) Il Papa riceve il libro dell'ex presidente brasiliano Lula e firma una breve dedica: "Prega per me" Archived 9 November 2019 at the Wayback Machine, La Stampa, 3 August 2018. "Pope sends message of support to jailed Lula". Morning Star. 4 August 2018. Archived from the original on 5 August 2018. Retrieved 2 May 2019. Sutto, Giovanna. "Como hackers conseguiram acessar o celular de Sérgio Moro". infomoney.com.br (in Portuguese). Retrieved 27 August 2019. Greenwald, Glenn; Pougy, Victor (9 June 2019). "Hidden Plot: Exclusive: Brazil's Top Prosecutors Who Indicted Lula Schemed in Secret Messages to Prevent His Party From Winning 2018 Election". The Intercept. Archived from the original on 16 June 2019. Retrieved 3 July 2019. Waldron, Travis (1 July 2019). "Brazil's Anti-Corruption Superstar Faces A Scandal Of His Own". HuffPost. Archived from the original on 3 July 2019. Retrieved 3 July 2019. Fogel, Benjamin (1 July 2019). "Opinion: Brazil's anti-corruption drive has been exposed as corrupt and it could bring down Bolsonaro". The Independent. Archived from the original on 2 July 2019. Retrieved 3 July 2019. Londoño, Ernesto; Casado, Letícia (10 June 2019). "Leaked Messages Raise Fairness Questions in Brazil Corruption Inquiry". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 30 June 2019. Retrieved 3 July 2019. "Brésil: Les enquêteurs anticorruption auraient conspiré pour empêcher le retour au pouvoir de Lula" (in French). 20 Minutes. 10 June 2019. Archived from the original on 10 June 2019. Retrieved 10 June 2019. Fishman, Andrew; Martins, Rafael Moro; Demori, Leandro; Santi, Alexandre de; Greenwald, Glenn (9 June 2019). "Breach of Ethics: Exclusive: Leaked Chats Between Brazilian Judge and Prosecutor Who Imprisoned Lula Reveal Prohibited Collaboration and Doubts Over Evidence". The Intercept. Archived from the original on 16 June 2019. Retrieved 10 June 2019. Londoño, Ernesto (25 July 2019). "Jair Bolsonaro, Brazil President, Says His Phones Were Hacked". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 1 August 2019. Retrieved 1 August 2019. "Mitschnitte stellen Urteil gegen Ex-Präsident Lula infrage". Die Zeit (in German). 11 June 2019. Archived from the original on 11 June 2019. Retrieved 12 June 2019. "Moro nega ter orientado procuradores da Lava-Jato e abandona entrevista". Correio Braziliense (in Portuguese). 10 June 2019. Archived from the original on 1 July 2019. Retrieved 16 October 2019. "Juristas estrangeiros se dizem chocados e defendem libertação de Lula". Folha de São Paulo. 11 August 2019. Archived from the original on 2 September 2019. Retrieved 4 September 2019. Chavez, Aida; Lacy, Akela (12 June 2019). "BERNIE SANDERS CALLS FOR BRAZIL'S JUDICIARY TO RELEASE LULA IN WAKE OF CORRUPTION EXPOSURE". The Intercept. Archived from the original on 12 June 2019. Retrieved 13 June 2019. "Deputados americanos divulgam carta de apoio a Lula," Folha de S. Paulo. Archived 7 April 2018 at the Wayback Machine by Patricia C. Mello, published on 18 January 2018 "UN Lawyer Geoffrey Robertson to monitor Lula's appeal hearing Brazilian justice system scrutinized by international legal community," Brasilwire. Archived 7 April 2018 at the Wayback Machine published by "BrasilWire" on 23 January 2018. "500 Days in Prison For Political Prisoner Lula Da Silva As The Amazon Burns #LulaLivre (TMBS 103)". YouTube. The Michael Brooks Show. Archived from the original on 12 August 2020. Retrieved 24 July 2020. Sergio Lima, Mario; Adghirni, Samy (5 April 2018). "Brazilian Judge Orders Arrest of Former President Lula". Bloomberg.com. Bloomberg. Archived from the original on 9 October 2019. Retrieved 6 April 2018. Lopes, Marina (5 April 2018). "Lula verdict plunges Brazil into political chaos ahead of presidential election". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on 5 April 2018. Retrieved 5 April 2018. "Brazil's former president Lula walks free from prison after supreme court ruling". The Guardian. 8 November 2019. Archived from the original on 15 March 2021. Retrieved 18 March 2021. "Brazil's former President Lula released from prison". CNN. 8 November 2019. Archived from the original on 8 November 2019. Retrieved 9 November 2019. "Lula deixa a cadeia após 580 dias preso em Curitiba". Archived from the original on 8 November 2019. Retrieved 8 November 2019. "Justiça autoriza que Lula seja libertado e deixe a PF em Curitiba". UOL. Archived from the original on 8 November 2019. Retrieved 8 November 2019. Conservative, The American; Miguel, Felipe (25 April 2023). "The New Brazil Embraces the Post-American Order". The American Conservative. "Relator no TRF4 condena Lula a 17 anos de prisão em caso do sítio". Agência Brasil (in Portuguese). 27 November 2019. Archived from the original on 28 May 2021. Retrieved 19 January 2020. "Lula: Brazil ex-president's corruption convictions annulled". BBC. 8 March 2021. Brito, Ricardo; de Castro, José; Stargardter, Gabriel; McGeever, Jamie; Eisenhammer, Stephen (8 March 2021). "Brazil judge annuls Lula's convictions, opens door to 2022 run". Reuters. Archived from the original on 14 July 2021. Retrieved 14 July 2021. "Brazil high court confirms annulment of Lula graft convictions". Agence France-Presse. France24. 16 April 2021. Archived from the original on 14 July 2021. Retrieved 14 July 2021. "Lula judge was biased, Brazil supreme court rules, paving way to challenge Bolsonaro". The Guardian. Associated Press. 24 March 2021. Archived from the original on 14 July 2021. Retrieved 14 July 2021. Brito, Ricardo (24 June 2021). "Brazil Supreme Court confirms ruling that judge was biased against Lula". Reuters. Archived from the original on 14 July 2021. Retrieved 14 July 2021. "Brazil judge annuls all of Moro's cases against ex-president Lula". France 24. Agence France-Presse. 24 June 2021. Archived from the original on 15 July 2021. Retrieved 15 July 2021. "Brazil ex-President Lula's cancer treatment 'a success'". BBC News. 28 March 2012. Romero, Simon (29 October 2011). "Former Leader of Brazil Is Said to Have Throat Cancer". The New York Times. "Brazil's Lula da Silva shaves beard in cancer battle". BBC News. British Broadcasting Corporation. 16 November 2011. Archived from the original on 10 April 2018. Retrieved 21 June 2018. "Lula da Silva announces his back in politics after defeating cancer". MercoPress. 29 March 2012. Archived from the original on 31 March 2012. Retrieved 29 March 2012. "Brazil's Lula had COVID-19 while in Cuba for Oliver Stone film". Reuters. 21 January 2021. Archived from the original on 25 January 2021. Retrieved 27 January 2021. "Brazil's Lula receives first dose of coronavirus vaccine". 13 March 2021. Archived from the original on 14 March 2021. Retrieved 15 March 2021. "Brazil's Lula Leaves Hospital After Hip, Eyelid Surgery". BNN. Bloomberg. 1 October 2023. "Lula successfully underwent hip prosthesis implant surgery". Ground News. "Brazilian President Lula to undergo hip surgery, will work from home for 3 weeks". AP News. 26 September 2023. Presse, AFP-Agence France. "Brazil's Lula Undergoes Hip Surgery 'Without Complications': Doctor". www.barrons.com. "Após depoimento, Lula retoma caravana por Minas Gerais". Gazeta do Povo. Archived from the original on 10 August 2018. Retrieved 12 August 2018. "Ônibus da caravana de Lula no Paraná são atingidos por tiros". G1. 27 March 2018. Archived from the original on 10 August 2018. Retrieved 12 August 2018. "Lula tem 33%, Bolsonaro, 15%, Marina, 7%, e Ciro, 4%, aponta pesquisa Ibope". G1. 28 June 2018. Archived from the original on 10 August 2018. Retrieved 12 August 2018. "Da cadeia, Lula articulou ações que resultaram no isolamento de Ciro". Folha de S.Paulo. 1 August 2018. Archived from the original on 10 August 2018. Retrieved 12 August 2018. "PT anuncia Haddad como vice na chapa de Lula e acordo com o PCdoB". G1. 6 August 2018. Archived from the original on 10 August 2018. Retrieved 12 August 2018. "UN: Brazil's jailed ex-president Lula can't be disqualified from election". The Guardian. Agence France-Presse. 17 August 2018. Archived from the original on 17 April 2021. Retrieved 16 April 2021. "Pesquisa Datafolha: Lula, 39%; Bolsonaro, 19%; Marina, 8%; Alckmin, 6%; Ciro, 5%". G1 (in Portuguese). 22 August 2018. Archived from the original on 23 August 2018. Retrieved 26 August 2018. "Brazil electoral court bars Lula from presidential race". Yahoo. Archived from the original on 1 September 2018. Retrieved 1 September 2018. Phillips, Tom; Phillips, Dom (11 September 2018). "Jailed leftwing leader Lula drops out of Brazil presidential race". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 12 September 2018. Retrieved 12 September 2018. Cristiane Agostine (20 May 2021). "Lula reitera candidatura presidencial contra Bolsonaro em 2022". Valor. Archived from the original on 5 August 2021. Retrieved 5 August 2021. "Lula Is Back. But Which Lula?". Americas Quarterly. 7 July 2021. Archived from the original on 5 August 2021. Retrieved 5 August 2021. "Lula 2022? Brazil poised for sensational political comeback". The Guardian. 30 July 2021. Archived from the original on 5 August 2021. Retrieved 5 August 2021. With former president's political rights restored, polls suggest he would thrash Jair Bolsonaro if he stands for election Anthony Boadle (18 January 2022). "Brazil poll shows Lula gaining over Bolsonaro, third candidate 'embryonic'". Nasdaq. Reuters. Archived from the original on 13 July 2022. Retrieved 19 January 2022. Brazil's former leftist President Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva increased his lead to 17 percentage points over far-right President Jair Bolsonaro in a new survey of voter preferences ahead of an October election. "Brazil's Lula taps former rival as his pick for running mate". ABC News. Archived from the original on 22 April 2022. Retrieved 22 April 2022. Gortázar, Naiara Galarraga (31 October 2022). "Lula defeats Bolsonaro in the closest election in Brazil's history". EL PAÍS English. Spectator, The (3 November 2022). "Brazilian democracy is in danger". Medium. "Análise das Eleições 2022: Veja Detalhes dos Resultados da Votação". noticias.uol.com.br (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 30 October 2022. Retrieved 31 October 2022. "Resultados – TSE". resultados.tse.jus.br. Archived from the original on 2 November 2022. Retrieved 31 October 2022. Savavrese, Mauricio; Bridi, Carla (1 January 2022). "Lula sworn in as president to lead polarized Brazil". Associated Press. Archived from the original on 1 January 2023. Retrieved 1 January 2022. Nicas, Jack (30 October 2022). "Brazil Elects Lula, a Leftist Former Leader, in a Rebuke of Bolsonaro". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 30 October 2022. Retrieved 1 November 2022. Boadle, Anthony (31 October 2022). "Brazil leftist Lula wins third presidential term to redeem tarnished legacy". Reuters. Archived from the original on 2 November 2022. Retrieved 1 November 2022. "Conheça o programa de governo dos 12 candidatos à Presidência". R7.com (in Portuguese). 15 August 2022. Archived from the original on 31 October 2022. Retrieved 31 October 2022. "India hands over G20 presidency to Brazil". The Jerusalem Post. 10 September 2023. Retrieved 18 February 2024. Berg, Ryan C.; Baena, Carlos (19 April 2023). "The Great Balancing Act: Lula in China and the Future of U.S.-Brazil Relations". Csis. "Lula tells Xi ‘nobody can stop’ Brazil-China relationship," The Washington Post. "Lula fala em autonomia e diz que 'ninguém vai proibir que o Brasil aprimore suas relações' com China". Estadão. "Brazil's Lula meets with Chinese chancellor in preparatory meeting prior to visit by the president of China". Planalto. "Brazil: President Lula Should Pursue a Rights Agenda". Human Rights Watch. 15 December 2022. "Brazil's Lula meets Cuban leader, slams 'illegal' US embargo". DW. 17 September 2023. "Brazil's president calls U.S. economic embargo on Cuba 'illegal,' condemns terrorist list label". Reuters. "Speech by President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva at the G77 + China Summit in Cuba". Planalto. "None". Mohnblatt, Debbie (28 February 2023). "Brazil Allows Iranian Warships To Dock in Rio Despite US Opposition". The Media Line. "Iranian Warships Finally Dock in Rio de Janeiro After U.S. Issues Sanction Threat - USNI News". "Lula says Iran is an important partner in BRICS". radiohc.cu. "An Iranian bear in Brazil's backyard: How Iran is wooing South America". The Week. "Brazil's Lula will ask Nicaragua's Ortega to release jailed bishop". Reuters. "At OAS summit, Brazil seeks to soften criticism of Nicaragua's government". 21 June 2023. "Brazil's president offers to try to win release of bishop imprisoned in Nicaragua". Associated Press News. 22 June 2023. "Lula da Silva's government seeks to soften OAS declaration critical of Nicaragua - Confidencial". "Brazil's Lula says spoke to Putin on war, declined economic forum invitation". Reuters. 26 May 2023. Archived from the original on 4 June 2023. Retrieved 4 June 2023. "Lula invites Putin to Brazil, sidesteps on war crimes arrest". POLITICO. 4 December 2023. "Russian foreign minister Lavrov discussed Ukraine with Brazil's Lula, Moscow says". The Guardian. 24 February 2024. Retrieved 23 February 2024. Stargardter, Gabriel. "Lula's Ukraine comments are 'Russian attempts to distort truth,' Ukrainian official says". Reuters. Archived from the original on 11 December 2023. Retrieved 11 December 2023. "Brazil's Lula Intensifies Diplomatic Push for Peace in Ukraine". 24 February 2023. Archived from the original on 8 April 2023. Retrieved 8 April 2023. "Lula Talks to TIME About Ukraine, Bolsonaro, and Brazil's Fragile Democracy". 4 May 2022. Archived from the original on 12 April 2023. Retrieved 11 December 2023. "Biden-Lula meeting: War in Ukraine high on the agenda". Le Monde. 10 February 2023. Archived from the original on 8 April 2023. Retrieved 8 April 2023. "Ukraine war: US accuses Lula of parroting propaganda". BBC News. 18 April 2023. Archived from the original on 3 June 2023. Retrieved 3 June 2023. "Brazil's Lula condemns invasion of Ukraine, touts peace initiative". Reuters. 19 April 2023. Archived from the original on 23 April 2023. Retrieved 23 April 2023. "'The world needs tranquillity': Ukraine urged to give up Crimea by Brazil's Lula". 7 April 2023. Archived from the original on 8 April 2023. Retrieved 8 April 2023. "Lula diz que Putin não pode ficar com 'terreno' da Ucrânia e critica EUA". Metrópoles (in Brazilian Portuguese). 6 April 2023. Archived from the original on 7 April 2023. Retrieved 18 April 2023. "Lula Brushes Off Scholz's Appeal for Brazil to Send Arms to Kyiv". Bloomberg.com. 31 January 2023. Archived from the original on 1 February 2023. Retrieved 18 April 2023. "Choque de Lula da Silva con Pedro Sánchez por el envío de armas a Ucrania". El Mundo. YouTube. 26 April 2023. Archived from the original on 30 April 2023. Retrieved 30 April 2023. "See Article 4, VI, VII" (PDF). "Lula 'upset' after Zelenskyy's no-show to Hiroshima meeting". EFE. 22 May 2023. Archived from the original on 6 June 2023. Retrieved 14 June 2023. "Brazil condemns 'violation' of Ukraine's territory amid criticism". Al Jazeera. 19 April 2023. Archived from the original on 19 April 2023. Retrieved 23 April 2023. Soares, Ingrid (10 February 2023). "Visita de Lula a Biden tem objetivo de estreitar relação com os EUA". Política (in Brazilian Portuguese). Archived from the original on 18 April 2023. Retrieved 18 April 2023. "Saudi Arabia and Brazil detail areas of joint cooperation". Arab News. 30 November 2023. "Lula, MBS Want To Boost Bilateral Trade To USD 20 Bn". menafn.com. Nova, Redazione Agenzia (28 November 2023). "Brazil-Saudi Arabia: Lula meets bin Salman, focus on investments in renewable energy". "Lula highlights Brazilian investment in green energy". Agência Brasil. 29 November 2023. "Arab and Islamic ambassadors' reception honors Brazilian President Lula". Arab News. 10 February 2024. "Lula Says He Condemned 'Terrorist Attacks' in Conversation with Israeli President". Folha de S.Paulo. 13 October 2023. Archived from the original on 3 November 2023. Retrieved 3 November 2023. "Brazil's Lula calls for ceasefire, humanitarian intervention in Israel-Palestinian conflict". Reuters. 11 October 2023. Archived from the original on 1 November 2023. Retrieved 3 November 2023. "Brazil's Lula Calls To Protect Children In Israel-Gaza War". Barron's. 11 October 2023. Archived from the original on 3 November 2023. Retrieved 3 November 2023. Verdélio, Andreia (25 October 2023). "President Lula says war in the Middle East is genocide". Agência Brasil. Archived from the original on 7 November 2023. Retrieved 3 November 2023. "Brazil's Lula compares Israel's war on Gaza with the Holocaust". Al Jazeera. 18 February 2024. Retrieved 24 February 2024. "Israel livid as Brazil's Lula says Israel like 'Hitler,' committing genocide in Gaza". The Times of Israel. 18 February 2024. Retrieved 18 February 2024. Ionova, Ana; Motoryn, Paulo (19 February 2024). "Brazil's President Lula Recalls Ambassador to Israel, Escalating Dispute". The New York Times. Retrieved 19 February 2024. Berman, Lazar (19 February 2024). "Israel declares Brazil's Lula persona non grata for comparing Gaza war to Holocaust". The Times of Israel. Retrieved 19 February 2024. "Middle East crisis live". The Guardian. Retrieved 28 February 2024. "Lula diz que EUA precisam parar de "incentivar guerra" – DW – 15/04/2023". DW. "Lula critica sanções à Venezuela e diz que bloqueios matam pessoas". R7.com. 29 May 2023. "Brazil's Lula: Row with Israel has 'divided his own base". DW. 25 February 2024. "Could the West fall out of love with Lula?". euronews. 21 April 2023. "Lula and Maduro launch 'new era' in Brazil-Venezuela ties". Le Monde. 30 May 2023. Bridi, Carla; Jeantet, Diane (31 May 2023). "Brazilian president's support of Venezuela's leader mars unity at South America summit". AP News. Retrieved 13 March 2024. "Maduro and Lula hit out at US sanctions on Venezuela". Reuters. 29 May 2023. Retrieved 13 March 2024. "Venezuela sanctions: Brazil's President Lula condemns US measures and hints at currency to challenge dollar". Sky News. 30 May 2023. Retrieved 13 March 2024. Grant, Will; Lukiv, Jaroslav (29 May 2023). "Lula welcomes back banned Venezuelan leader Maduro". BBC. Retrieved 13 March 2024. "Brazil's Lula re-launches program known for lifting millions out of poverty". La Prensa Latina. 2 March 2023. Archived from the original on 29 October 2023. Retrieved 13 September 2023. "Food Insecurity and Food Inflation in Brazil". The World Bank. Archived from the original on 19 October 2023. Retrieved 13 September 2023. "How left-wing on economics is Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva?". The Economist. ISSN 0013-0613. Archived from the original on 1 November 2022. Retrieved 1 November 2022. "Brazil's Lula unveils $350 bln 'growth acceleration' plan". Reuters. 11 August 2023. Retrieved 18 February 2024. "Novo PAC: Lula lança programa nesta sexta, e governo prevê R$ 1,68 trilhão em investimentos". 11 August 2023. Archived from the original on 14 October 2023. Retrieved 5 January 2024. "Brazil's fight against hunger is back at the forefront". Le Monde.fr. 13 July 2023. Archived from the original on 5 January 2024. Retrieved 5 January 2024. "Brazil removed from UN World Hunger Map". AP News. 16 September 2014. Archived from the original on 1 November 2022. Retrieved 1 November 2022. Lasarte, Diego (5 September 2023). "After two straight quarters of economic growth in Brazil, Lula is back to beating expectations". Quartz. Archived from the original on 12 September 2023. Retrieved 12 September 2023. Malleret, Constance (10 March 2023). "Record deforestation in Brazil's Amazon rainforest shows challenge facing Lula". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 21 April 2023. Retrieved 21 April 2023. Oliveira Pires, Mauro; María Majano, Ana; José Gutiérrez, María. "Implementing prevention and control policies for reducing deforestation" (PDF). Global Good Practice Analysis on LEDS, NAMAs and MRV. Partnership on Transparency in the Paris Agreement: 3. Archived (PDF) from the original on 31 May 2023. Retrieved 23 January 2024. "Brazil's Lula lays out plan to halt Amazon deforestation". Politico. ASSOCIATED PRESS. 6 June 2023. Archived from the original on 20 June 2023. Retrieved 20 June 2023. "Brazil's Lula lays out plan to halt Amazon deforestation, make country "global reference" on climate". AP News. 5 June 2023. Archived from the original on 22 January 2024. Retrieved 22 January 2024. Spring, Jake (29 November 2023). "Climate boost: 2023 Amazon deforestation drops 55.8%, study finds". The NRI Nation. Reuters. Archived from the original on 3 December 2023. Retrieved 3 December 2023. Prange de Oliveira, Astrid. "The Amazon: Once again a Model of Climate Protection, even Beyond Brazil?". WELTHUNGERHILFE.ORG. Archived from the original on 30 October 2023. Retrieved 30 October 2023. "Amazon Deforestation Down 40 Percent So Far This Year". Yale Environment 360. Yale School of the Environment. Archived from the original on 13 May 2023. Retrieved 14 May 2023. "Amazon deforestation continues to fall under Lula". Mongabay. 5 August 2023. Archived from the original on 6 August 2023. Retrieved 6 August 2023. Watts, Jonathan (2 August 2023). "Amazon deforestation falls over 60% compared with last July, says Brazilian minister". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 6 August 2023. Retrieved 6 August 2023. LOGIURATTO, Eugenia (5 August 2023). "Lula to host S.American summit on saving the Amazon". Terra Daily. Archived from the original on 6 August 2023. Retrieved 6 August 2023. Alves, Thiago (14 October 2023). "The Amazon: The most dangerous place in the world for environmental defenders". The Brazilian Report. Archived from the original on 7 December 2023. Retrieved 9 January 2024. Pozzebon, Stefano; John, Tara; Judd, DJ (20 April 2023). "US President Joe Biden pledges $500 million to curb Amazon deforestation". CNN. Archived from the original on 20 April 2023. Retrieved 21 April 2023. Silva, Cede (20 April 2023). "Biden pledge USD 500 million for Amazon Fund". The Brazilian Report. Archived from the original on 20 April 2023. Retrieved 21 April 2023. Hemingway Jaynes, Cristen (1 May 2023). "Lula Recognizes Six New Brazilian Indigenous Reserves". Ecowatch. Archived from the original on 9 May 2023. Retrieved 10 May 2023. Unterstell, Natalie; Marie Oseland, Karen (2 March 2023). "Comment: Biden and Lula want to save the Amazon. Will the private sector answer their call?". Reuters. Archived from the original on 21 April 2023. Retrieved 21 April 2023. Cabette Fabio, Andre (15 December 2023). "Brazil oil auction angers activists after Lula's COP28 vow". Context. Archived from the original on 18 December 2023. Retrieved 9 January 2024. Garcia, Raphael Tsavkko. "A Brazilian 'Ministry of Truth' is in the making". Al Jazeera. Viapiana, Tabata (27 April 2023). "Proposed bill to regulate social media in Brazil raises discussion on freedom of speech and the fight against fake news". "US tech giant Telegram calls Brazil disinformation law 'attack on democracy'". France 24. 9 May 2023. Jeffrey Sluyter-Beltrão, ed. (2010). Rise and Decline of Brazil's New Unionism: The Politics of the Central Única Dos Trabalhadores. Peter Lang. p. 15. ISBN 9783034301145. Archived from the original on 14 January 2023. Retrieved 9 April 2022. This neo-liberal about face by the small core group of PT leaders (núcleo duro) around Lula reflected, in good part, the group's own shift away from anti-systemic, transformative goals and toward social liberalism. Alejandro M. Peña, ed. (2016). Transnational Governance and South American Politics: The Political Economy of Norms. Springer. p. 240. ISBN 9781137538635. Archived from the original on 14 January 2023. Retrieved 9 April 2022. In this manner, while the social liberalism of Lulismo favored the agenda of the local actors advancing sustainability and CSR projects in Brazil, and further tilted the discursive field in favor of the transnational sustainability ... Mário Maestri, ed. (2018). Abdias Do Nascimento (in Portuguese). Clube de Autores. p. 7. ISBN 9788567542249. Archived from the original on 14 January 2023. Retrieved 9 April 2022. ... que teve as portas do poder escancaradas pela longa gestão social-liberal de Lula da Silva e Dilma Rousseff. [... which had the doors of power thrown open by the long social-liberal administration of Lula da Silva and Dilma Rousseff.] "Juan Guaidó respondió las críticas de Lula da Silva: "Por nuestra Constitución soy Presidente Encargado, usted es un ladrón condenado"" [Juan Guaidó responded to Lula da Silva's criticism: "By our Constitution I am President-in-Office, you are a convicted thief."]. Infobae (in Spanish). 24 November 2019. Archived from the original on 15 January 2022. Retrieved 15 January 2022. "Lula, sobre aborto: 'deveria ser transformado numa questão de saúde pública e todo mundo ter direito'". G1 (in Portuguese). 6 April 2022. Archived from the original on 31 October 2022. Retrieved 31 October 2022. "PT lança vídeo com Lula dizendo ser contra o aborto: "A favor da vida"". metropoles.com (in Portuguese). 6 October 2022. Archived from the original on 6 October 2022. Retrieved 31 October 2022. "Brazil's Lula compares Israel's war on Gaza with the Holocaust". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 18 February 2024. United Nations (13 May 2009). Brazilian President awarded UN cultural agency's peace prize Archived 2 January 2023 at the Wayback Machine. "Cerimonial". 2 September 2010. Archived from the original on 2 September 2010. Retrieved 30 July 2019. "Cerimonial". 26 September 2010. Archived from the original on 26 September 2010. Retrieved 30 July 2019. "Ordem do Mérito Militar". 14 April 2011. Archived from the original on 14 April 2011. Retrieved 30 July 2019. "Ordem Nacional do Mérito" (PDF). 15 May 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 May 2013. Retrieved 30 July 2019. "Parceria entre governos: Edvaldo inaugura Viaduto do DIA ao lado de Lula e Déda". www.aracaju.se.gov.br (in Brazilian Portuguese). Retrieved 29 March 2024. "Lula e Bouteflika convocam empresários a buscar parcerias — Portal Computador Para Todos". 13 May 2011. Archived from the original on 13 May 2011. Retrieved 30 July 2019. "Ex-presidente Lula recebe Ordem Nacional do Benin". institutolula.org. Archived from the original on 2 September 2019. Retrieved 30 July 2019. "Lula recibió de regalo Cóndor de los Andes". Los Tiempos (in Spanish). 18 December 2007. Archived from the original on 6 January 2023. Retrieved 6 January 2023. "Notícias de Cabo Verde | Lula diz que vai assumir "compromisso histórico com África"". noticiaslusofonas.com. Archived from the original on 29 January 2018. Retrieved 30 July 2019. "Uribe oferece ao Brasil saída ao Pacífico por estrada amazônica – 14/12/2005 – UOL Últimas Notícias". noticias.uol.com.br. Archived from the original on 8 February 2020. Retrieved 30 July 2019. "Lula condecorado com a Ordem Carlos Manuel de Céspedes". misiones.minrex.gob.cu. 20 December 2019. Archived from the original on 24 June 2021. Retrieved 18 June 2021. Pedersen, Jørgen (23 August 2012). "Tilføjelser og rettelser til bogen: Riddere af Elefantordenen 1559-2009" [Additions and corrections to the book: Knights of the Order of the Elephant 1559-2009] (PDF). Orders and Medals Society of Denmark (in Danish). Archived (PDF) from the original on 11 August 2022. Retrieved 6 January 2023. "Lula recibe El Gran Collar Nacional de la Orden de San Lorenzo". El Telégrafo (in Spanish). 7 June 2013. Archived from the original on 6 January 2023. Retrieved 6 January 2023. "BBC Brasil". BBC. Archived from the original on 4 November 2018. Retrieved 30 July 2019. "Lula honoured with Ghana's highest state award". ghanaweb.com. 30 November 2001. Archived from the original on 24 June 2021. Retrieved 18 June 2021. "Lula decorated by Guinea-Bissau's President Malam Sanha". 25 August 2010. Archived from the original on 31 October 2022. Retrieved 26 March 2022. "Guiana". Archived from the original on 31 October 2022. Retrieved 27 March 2022. "Lula será condecorado com Ordem da Águia Asteca no México – 03/08/2007 – UOL Últimas Notícias". noticias.uol.com.br. Archived from the original on 27 February 2020. Retrieved 30 July 2019. "Página principal do Portal A TARDE". Portal A TARDE (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 19 October 2018. Retrieved 30 July 2019. "Lula realiza visita para entablar alianza comercialcon entre países del Mercosur y naciones andinos – Economía – Historicos". EL UNIVERSO. 25 August 2003. Archived from the original on 31 January 2020. Retrieved 30 July 2019. "ENTIDADES ESTRANGEIRAS AGRACIADAS COM ORDENS PORTUGUESAS – Página Oficial das Ordens Honoríficas Portuguesas". ordens.presidencia.pt. Archived from the original on 18 January 2021. Retrieved 30 July 2019. "Otras disposiciones" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 March 2022. Retrieved 25 March 2022. "State Visit by President Lula from Brazil". Archived from the original on 19 January 2018. Retrieved 25 March 2022. "Про нагородження орденом князя Ярослава Мудрого". Офіційний вебпортал парламенту України (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 14 January 2023. Retrieved 5 April 2022. "Про нагородження орденом Свободи". Офіційний вебпортал парламенту України (in Ukrainian). Archived from the original on 14 January 2023. Retrieved 5 April 2022. Braziliense, Correio (20 September 2009). "Em menos de sete anos de mandato Lula já acumula 263 condecorações". Correio Braziliense (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 30 July 2019. Retrieved 30 July 2019. "Zâmbia". Archived from the original on 31 October 2022. Retrieved 27 March 2022. "Lula da Silva – Laureates – Princess of Asturias Awards". The Princess of Asturias Foundation. Archived from the original on 3 October 2022. Retrieved 3 October 2022. Coimbra, Universidade de. "Doutoramentos Honoris Causa". Doutoramentos Honoris Causa (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 30 July 2019. Retrieved 30 July 2019. "HONORARY DOCTORATES". Sciences Po. Archived from the original on 22 July 2021. Retrieved 22 July 2021. "Lula, investido doctor honoris causa por la universidad Sciences Po de París". La Información (in Spanish). 27 September 2011. Archived from the original on 4 October 2022. Retrieved 4 October 2022. "Lula recebe prêmio Lech Walesa e o oferece à África" [Lula receives Lech Walesa Prize and offers to Africa]. Lula.com.br (in Portuguese). 29 September 2011. Archived from the original on 15 October 2018. Retrieved 24 October 2022. "Lula recebe na Polônia Prêmio Lech Walesa" [Lula receives the Lech Walesa Prize in Poland]. G1 (in Portuguese). 29 September 2011. Archived from the original on 24 October 2022. Retrieved 24 October 2022. "Young Labour: Why we've just made Lula our honorary president". Labour List. 3 October 2018. Archived from the original on 3 October 2018. Retrieved 3 October 2018. Nikolaeva, Maya (2 March 2020). "Paris makes former Brazil president Lula an honorary citizen". Reuters. Archived from the original on 2 March 2020. Retrieved 2 March 2020. "Paris makes former Brazil president Lula an honorary citizen". Reuters. 2 March 2020. Archived from the original on 4 October 2022. Retrieved 4 October 2022. "Lula, Doctor Honoris Causa". Radio Universidad 103.3 Universidad Nacional de Rosario (in Spanish). 22 May 2020. Archived from the original on 24 September 2020. Retrieved 22 May 2020. "Lula, Doctor Honoris Causa". radio.unr.edu.ar (in Spanish). 22 May 2020. Archived from the original on 24 September 2020. Retrieved 4 October 2022. da Silva, Luiz Inácio Lula [@LulaOficial] (25 January 2023). "Tive a honra de receber hoje a medalha Más Verde, como reconhecimento do trabalho em defesa do meio ambiente. Agradeço a prefeita de Montevidéu, @CosseCarolina, pela premiação e hospitalidade. Vamos trabalhar na defesa do futuro do planeta" (Tweet) (in Portuguese) – via Twitter. Holden, Stephen (12 January 2012). "'Lula: Son of Brazil,' Directed by Fábio Barreto – Review". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 17 February 2018. Retrieved 14 July 2017. (in Portuguese) BERGAMO, Mônica. "Orçamento de filme sobre Lula já passa dos R$ 17 milhões". Folha de S. Paulo. July 31, 2009. "Filme sobre Lula é fracasso de bilheteria, diz ´El país' | Brasil | b…". Archived from the original on 19 April 2013. Retrieved 11 June 2012. "Lula, the Son of Brazil". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on 1 December 2017. Retrieved 21 February 2020. "Filme sobre Lula pode influenciar eleição presidencial, diz 'NYT'". 12 January 2010. Archived from the original on 15 January 2010. Retrieved 14 July 2017. "Dilma admite que filme de Lula pode ajudar nas eleições de 2010". Archived from the original on 29 September 2010. Retrieved 14 July 2017. "O culto da personalidade na indicação ao Oscar". Veja. Grupo Abril. 23 September 2010. Archived from the original on 25 January 2011. ""O Mecanismo": saiba quais personagens foram inspirados em nomes como Lula e Moro na série da Netflix". Gauchazh [pt]. 23 March 2018. Archived from the original on 5 April 2018. Retrieved 5 April 2018. "Folha de S.Paulo - Internacional - En - Culture - Netflix and Director Padilha are Criticized and Boycotted for Series about Car Wash Investigation - 27/03/2018". www1.folha.uol.com.br. Scott, A. O. (18 June 2019). "Review: 'Edge of Democracy' Looks at Brazil With Outrage and Heartbreak". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 24 October 2021. Retrieved 6 January 2020. Silva, Luis Inácio da; Castro, Cassiana Rosa de; Machado, Sueli de Fátima; Santos, Alveci Oliveira de Orato; Ferreira, Luiz Tarcísio Teixeira; Teixeira, Paulo; Suplicy, Marta; Dutra, Olívio (2003). "The programme for land tenure legalization on public land in São Paulo, Brazil". Environment and Urbanization 15 (2): 191–200. Bourne, R (2008). Lula of Brazil : The story so far. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-24663-8. Goertzel, Ted (2011). Brazil's Lula: The Most Popular Politician on Earth. Boca Raton, Florida: Brown Walker Press. ISBN 978-1-61233-505-6. Cardim de Carvalho, Fernando J. (2007). "Lula's Government in Brazil: A New Left or the Old Populism?". In Arestis, Philip; Saad-Filho, Alfredo (eds.). Political Economy of Brazil. London: Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 24–41. ISBN 978-0-230-54277-8. Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva (category) Wikiquote has quotations related to Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva. Wikinews has news related to: Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva's official page on Facebook Appearances on C-SPAN Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva on Charlie Rose Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva at IMDb Profile: Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva. BBC News. 28 January 2010. Moore, Michael (20 April 2010). "The 2010 TIME 100: Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva". Time. Speeches "Transcript of statements by Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, President of Brazil, to the high-level meeting for foreign investors"(PDF) Archived 9 April 2008 at the Wayback Machine. United Nations Conference on Trade and Development. 29 January 2004. (Meeting press release). "General Debate of the 64th Session" (2009). United Nations. Portals:  Brazil  Latin America  Politics  Socialism  Liberalism  Education  History