Condoleezza Rice (/ˌkɒndəˈliːzə/ KON-də-LEE-zə; born November 14, 1954) is an American diplomat and political scientist who is the current director of the Hoover Institution at Stanford University. A member of the Republican Party, she previously served as the 66th United States secretary of state from 2005 to 2009 and as the 19th U.S. national security advisor from 2001 to 2005. Rice was the first female African-American secretary of state and the first woman to serve as national security advisor. Until the election of Barack Obama as president in 2008, Rice and her predecessor, Colin Powell, were the highest-ranking African Americans in the history of the federal executive branch (by virtue of the secretary of state standing fourth in the presidential line of succession). At the time of her appointment as Secretary of State, Rice was the highest-ranking woman in the history of the United States to be in the presidential line of succession. Rice was born in Birmingham, Alabama, and grew up while the South was racially segregated. She obtained her bachelor's degree from the University of Denver and her master's degree from the University of Notre Dame, both in political science. In 1981, she received a PhD from the School of International Studies at the University of Denver. She worked at the State Department under the Carter administration and served on the National Security Council as the Soviet and Eastern Europe affairs advisor to President George H. W. Bush during the dissolution of the Soviet Union and German reunification from 1989 to 1991. Rice later pursued an academic fellowship at Stanford University, where she later served as provost from 1993 to 1999. On December 17, 2000, she joined the Bush administration as President George W. Bush's national security advisor. In Bush's second term, she succeeded Colin Powell as Secretary of State, thereby becoming the first African-American woman, second African-American after Powell, and second woman after Madeleine Albright to hold this office. Following her confirmation as secretary of state, Rice pioneered the policy of Transformational Diplomacy directed toward expanding the number of responsible democratic governments in the world and especially in the Greater Middle East. That policy faced challenges as Hamas captured a popular majority in Palestinian elections, and influential countries including Saudi Arabia and Egypt maintained authoritarian systems (with U.S. backing). While in the position, she chaired the Millennium Challenge Corporation's board of directors. In March 2009, Rice returned to Stanford University as a political science professor and the Thomas and Barbara Stephenson Senior Fellow on Public Policy at the Hoover Institution. In September 2010, she became a faculty member of the Stanford Graduate School of Business and a director of its Global Center for Business and the Economy. In January 2020, it was announced that Rice would succeed Thomas W. Gilligan as the next director of the Hoover Institution on September 1, 2020. She is on the Board of Directors of Dropbox and Makena Capital Management, LLC. Rice was born in Birmingham, Alabama, the only child of Angelena (née Ray) Rice, a high school science, music, and oratory teacher, and John Wesley Rice Jr., a high school guidance counselor, Presbyterian minister, and dean of students at Stillman College, a historically black college in Tuscaloosa, Alabama. Her name, Condoleezza, derives from the music term con dolcezza (Italian for 'sweetly, softly', lit. 'with sweetness'). Rice has roots in the American South going back to the pre-Civil War era, and some of her ancestors worked as sharecroppers for a time after emancipation. Rice discovered on the PBS series Finding Your Roots that she is of 51% African, 40% European, and 9% Asian or Native American genetic descent, while her mtDNA is traced back to the Tikar people of Cameroon. In her 2017 book, Democracy: Stories from the Long Road to Freedom, she writes, "My great-great-grandmother Zina on my mother's side bore five children by different slave owners" and "My great-grandmother on my father's side, Julia Head, carried the name of the slave owner and was so favored by him that he taught her to read." Rice grew up in the Titusville neighborhood of Birmingham, and then Tuscaloosa, Alabama, at a time when the South was racially segregated. The Rices lived on the campus of Stillman College. Rice began to learn French, music, figure skating and ballet at the age of three. At the age of fifteen, she began piano classes with the goal of becoming a concert pianist. In 1967, the family moved to Denver, Colorado. She attended St. Mary's Academy, an all-girls Catholic high school in Cherry Hills Village, Colorado, and graduated at age 16 in 1971. Rice enrolled at the University of Denver, where her father was then serving as an assistant dean.[citation needed] Rice initially majored in music, and after her sophomore year, she went to the Aspen Music Festival and School. There, she later said, she met students of greater talent than herself, and she doubted her career prospects as a pianist. She began to consider an alternative major. She attended an International Politics course taught by Josef Korbel, which sparked her interest in the Soviet Union and international relations. Rice later described Korbel (who is the father of Madeleine Albright, then a future U.S. Secretary of State), as a central figure in her life. In 1974, at age 19, Rice was inducted into the Phi Beta Kappa Society, and was awarded a B.A., cum laude, in political science by the University of Denver. While at the University of Denver she was a member of Alpha Chi Omega, Gamma Delta chapter. She obtained a master's degree in political science from the University of Notre Dame in 1975. She first worked in the State Department in 1977, during the Carter administration, as an intern in the Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs. She also studied Russian at Moscow State University in the summer of 1979, and interned with the RAND Corporation in Santa Monica, California. In 1981, at age 26, she received her Ph.D. in political science from the Josef Korbel School of International Studies at the University of Denver. Her dissertation centered on military policy and politics in what was then the communist state of Czechoslovakia. From 1980 to 1981, she was a fellow at Stanford University's Arms Control and Disarmament Program, having won a Ford Foundation Dual Expertise Fellowship in Soviet Studies and International Security. Rice was one of only four women – along with Janne E. Nolan, Cindy Roberts, and Gloria Duffy – studying international security at Stanford on fellowships at the time. Her fellowship at Stanford began her academic affiliation with the university and time in Northern California. Rice was a Democrat until 1982, when she changed her political affiliation to Republican, in part because she disagreed with the foreign policy of Democratic President Jimmy Carter, and because of the influence of her father, who was Republican. As she told the 2000 Republican National Convention, "My father joined our party because the Democrats in Jim Crow Alabama of 1952 would not register him to vote. The Republicans did." Rice was hired by Stanford University as an assistant professor of political science (1981–1987). She was promoted to associate professor in 1987, a post she held until 1993. She was a specialist on the Soviet Union and gave lectures on the subject for the Berkeley-Stanford joint program led by UC Berkeley professor George W. Breslauer in the mid-1980s. At a 1985 meeting of arms control experts at Stanford, Rice's performance drew the attention of Brent Scowcroft, who had served as National Security Advisor under Gerald Ford. With the election of George H. W. Bush, Scowcroft returned to the White House as National Security Adviser in 1989, and he asked Rice to become his Soviet expert on the United States National Security Council. According to R. Nicholas Burns, President Bush was "captivated" by Rice, and relied heavily on her advice in his dealings with Mikhail Gorbachev and Boris Yeltsin. Because she would have been ineligible for tenure at Stanford if she had been absent for more than two years, she returned there in 1991. She was taken under the wing of George Shultz (Ronald Reagan's secretary of state from 1982 to 1989), who was a fellow at the Hoover Institution. Shultz included Rice in a "luncheon club" of intellectuals who met every few weeks to discuss foreign affairs. In 1992, Shultz, who was a board member of Chevron Corporation, recommended Rice for a spot on the Chevron board. Chevron was pursuing a $10 billion development project in Kazakhstan and, as a Soviet specialist, Rice knew the president of Kazakhstan, Nursultan Nazarbayev. She traveled to Kazakhstan on Chevron's behalf and, in honor of her work, in 1993, Chevron named a 129,000-ton supertanker SS Condoleezza Rice. During this period, Rice was also appointed to the boards of Transamerica Corporation (1991) and Hewlett-Packard (1992). At Stanford, in 1992, Rice volunteered to serve on the search committee to replace outgoing president Donald Kennedy. The committee ultimately recommended Gerhard Casper, the provost of the University of Chicago. Casper met Rice during this search, and was so impressed that in 1993, he appointed her as Stanford's provost, the chief budget and academic officer of the university in 1993 and she also was granted tenure and became full professor. Rice was the first female, first African-American, and youngest provost in Stanford's history. She was also named a senior fellow of the Institute for International Studies, and a senior fellow (by courtesy) of the Hoover Institution. Former Stanford president Gerhard Casper said the university was "most fortunate in persuading someone of Professor Rice's exceptional talents and proven ability in critical situations to take on this task. Everything she has done, she has done well; I have every confidence that she will continue that record as provost." Acknowledging Rice's unique character, Casper told The New Yorker in 2002 that it "would be disingenuous for me to say that the fact that she was a woman, the fact that she was black and the fact that she was young weren't in my mind." As Stanford's provost, Rice was responsible for managing the university's multibillion-dollar budget. The school at that time was running a deficit of $20 million. When Rice took office, she promised that the budget would be balanced within "two years." Coit Blacker, Stanford's deputy director of the Institute for International Studies, said there "was a sort of conventional wisdom that said it couldn't be done ... that [the deficit] was structural, that we just had to live with it." Two years later, Rice announced that the deficit had been eliminated and the university was holding a record surplus of over $14.5 million. Rice drew protests when, as the provost, she departed from the practice of applying affirmative action to tenure decisions and unsuccessfully sought to consolidate the university's ethnic community centers. During a farewell interview in early December 2008, Rice indicated she would return to Stanford and the Hoover Institution, "back west of the Mississippi where I belong," but beyond writing and teaching did not specify what her role would be. Rice's plans for a return to campus were elaborated in an interview with the Stanford Report in January 2009. She returned to Stanford as a political science professor and senior fellow at the Hoover Institution on March 1, 2009. Condoleezza Rice is currently the Denning Professor in Global Business and the Economy at the Stanford Graduate School of Business; the Thomas and Barbara Stephenson Senior Fellow on Public Policy at the Hoover Institution; and a professor of political science at Stanford University. In 1986, Rice was appointed special assistant to the director of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to work on nuclear strategic planning as part of a Council on Foreign Relations fellowship. In 2005, Rice assumed office as Secretary of State. Rice played an important role in trying to stop the nuclear threat from North Korea and Iran. North Korea signed the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty in 1985, but in 2002 revealed they were operating a secret nuclear weapons program that violated the 1994 agreement. The 1994 agreement between the United States and North Korea included North Korea agreeing to freeze and eventually dismantle its graphite moderated nuclear reactors, in exchange for international aid which would help them to build two new light-water nuclear reactors. In 2003, North Korea officially withdrew from the Non-Proliferation Treaty. Rice played a key role in the idea of "six-party talks" that brought China, Japan, Russia, and South Korea into discussion with North Korea and the United States. During these discussions, Rice gave strong talks to urge North Korea to dismantle their nuclear power program. In 2005, North Korea agreed to give up its entire nuclear program in exchange for security guarantees and economic benefits to ensure its survival. Despite the agreement in 2005, in 2006, North Korea test fired long range missiles. The UN Security Council demanded North Korea suspend the program. In 2007, Rice was involved in another nuclear agreement with North Korea (Pyongyang). Rice, other negotiators for the United States and four other nations (six-party talks) reached a deal with North Korea. In this deal North Korea agreed to close its main nuclear reactor in exchange for $400 million in fuel and aid. In 2006, Indian prime minister Manmohan Singh announced the Agreement for Cooperation between the United States and India involving peaceful uses of nuclear energy. As Secretary of State, Rice was involved in the negotiation of this agreement and declared "India's society is open and free, transparent and stable. Its multiethnic and multi-religious democracy is characterized by individual freedom and the rule of law. We share common values...India is a rising global power that can be a pillar of stability in a rapidly changing Asia. India is, in short, a natural partner for the United States. Rice headed Chevron's committee on public policy until she resigned on January 15, 2001, to become National Security Advisor to President George W. Bush. Chevron honored Rice by naming an oil tanker Condoleezza Rice after her, but controversy led to its being renamed Altair Voyager. Rice has served as an instructor at MIT Seminar XXI. She also served on the board of directors for the Carnegie Corporation, the Charles Schwab Corporation, the Chevron Corporation, Hewlett-Packard, the Rand Corporation, the Transamerica Corporation, and other organizations. In 1992, Rice founded the Center for New Generation, an after-school program created to raise the high school graduation numbers of East Palo Alto and eastern Menlo Park, California. After her tenure as secretary of state, Rice was approached in February 2009 to fill an open position as a Pac-10 Commissioner, but chose instead to return to Stanford University as a political science professor and the Thomas and Barbara Stephenson Senior Fellow on Public Policy at the Hoover Institution. In 2014, Rice joined the Ban Bossy campaign as a spokesperson advocating leadership roles for girls. On July 11, 2022, the Denver Broncos announced that Rice had joined the Walton-Penner ownership group (consisting of S. Robson Walton, Greg Penner, Carrie Walton Penner, Mellody Hobson, and Sir Lewis Hamilton), which recently agreed to buy the NFL team for $4.65 billion. On August 9, 2022, the NFL owners approved the purchase of the Denver Broncos by the Walton-Penner group. In 1986, while an international affairs fellow of the Council on Foreign Relations, Rice served as special assistant to the director of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. From 1989 through March 1991 (the period of the fall of Berlin Wall and the final days of the Soviet Union), she served in President George H. W. Bush's administration as director, and then senior director, of Soviet and East European affairs in the National Security Council, and a special assistant to the president for national security affairs. In this position, Rice wrote what would become known as the "Chicken Kiev speech" in which Bush advised the Verkhovna Rada, Ukraine's parliament, against independence. She also helped develop Bush's and Secretary of State James Baker's policies in favor of German reunification. She impressed Bush, who later introduced her to Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev, as the one who "tells me everything I know about the Soviet Union." In 1991, Rice returned to her teaching position at Stanford, although she continued to serve as a consultant on the former Soviet Bloc for numerous clients in both the public and private sectors. Late that year, California governor Pete Wilson appointed her to a bipartisan committee that had been formed to draw new state legislative and congressional districts in the state. In 1997, she sat on the Federal Advisory Committee on Gender-Integrated Training in the Military.[citation needed] During George W. Bush's 2000 presidential election campaign, Rice took a one-year leave of absence from Stanford University to serve as his foreign policy advisor. The group of advisors she led called itself the Vulcans in honor of the monumental Vulcan statue, which sits on a hill overlooking her hometown of Birmingham, Alabama. Rice would later go on to give a noteworthy speech at the 2000 Republican National Convention. The speech asserted that "...  America's armed forces are not a global police force. They are not the world's 911." On December 16, 2000, Rice was named as National Security Advisor, upon which she stepped down from her position at Stanford. She was the first woman to occupy the post. Rice earned the nickname of "Warrior Princess", reflecting strong nerve and delicate manners. On January 18, 2003, The Washington Post reported that Rice was involved in crafting Bush's position on race-based preferences. Rice has stated that "while race-neutral means are preferable", race can be taken into account as "one factor among others" in university admissions policies. During the summer of 2001, Rice met with CIA director George Tenet to discuss the possibilities and prevention of terrorist attacks on American targets. On July 10, 2001, Rice met with Tenet in what he referred to as an "emergency meeting" held at the White House at Tenet's request to brief Rice and the NSC staff about the potential threat of an impending al Qaeda attack. Rice responded by asking Tenet to give a presentation on the matter to Secretary Donald Rumsfeld and Attorney General John Ashcroft. Rice characterized the August 6, 2001, President's Daily Brief Bin Ladin Determined To Strike in US as historical information. Rice indicated "It was information based on old reporting." Sean Wilentz of Salon magazine suggested that the PDB contained current information based on continuing investigations, including that Bin Laden wanted to "bring the fighting to America." On September 11, 2001, Rice was scheduled to outline a new national security policy that included missile defense as a cornerstone and played down the threat of stateless terrorism. When asked in 2006 about the July 2001 meeting, Rice asserted she did not recall the specific meeting, commenting that she had met repeatedly with Tenet that summer about terrorist threats. Moreover, she stated that it was "incomprehensible" to her that she had ignored terrorist threats two months before the September 11 attacks. In 2003, Rice received the U.S. Senator John Heinz Award for Greatest Public Service by an Elected or Appointed Official, an award given out annually by Jefferson Awards. In August 2010, Rice received the U.S. Air Force Academy's 2009 Thomas D. White National Defense Award for contributions to the defense and security of the United States. In March 2004, Rice declined to testify before the National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States (the 9/11 Commission). The White House claimed executive privilege under constitutional separation of powers and cited past tradition. Under pressure, Bush agreed to allow her to testify so long as it did not create a precedent of presidential staff being required to appear before Congress when so requested. In April 2007, Rice rejected, on grounds of executive privilege, a House subpoena regarding the prewar claim that Iraq sought yellowcake uranium from Niger. Rice was a proponent of the 2003 invasion of Iraq. After Iraq delivered its declaration of weapons of mass destruction to the United Nations on December 8, 2002, Rice wrote an editorial for The New York Times entitled "Why We Know Iraq Is Lying". In a January 10, 2003, interview with CNN's Wolf Blitzer, Rice made headlines by stating regarding Iraqi president Saddam Hussein's nuclear capabilities: "The problem here is that there will always be some uncertainty about how quickly he can acquire nuclear weapons. But we don't want the smoking gun to be a mushroom cloud." In October 2003, Rice was named to run the Iraq Stabilization Group, to "quell violence in Iraq and Afghanistan and to speed the reconstruction of both countries." By May 2004, The Washington Post reported that the council had become virtually nonexistent. Leading up to the 2004 presidential election, Rice became the first National Security Advisor to campaign for an incumbent president. She stated that while: "Saddam Hussein had nothing to do with the actual attacks on America, Saddam Hussein's Iraq was a part of the Middle East that was festering and unstable, [and] was part of the circumstances that created the problem on September 11." After the invasion, when it became clear that Iraq did not have nuclear WMD capability, critics called Rice's claims a "hoax", "deception" and "demagogic scare tactic". Dana Milbank and Mike Allen wrote in The Washington Post: "Either she missed or overlooked numerous warnings from intelligence agencies seeking to put caveats on claims about Iraq's nuclear weapons program, or she made public claims that she knew to be false". A Senate Intelligence Committee reported that on July 17, 2002, Rice met with CIA director George Tenet to personally convey the Bush administration's approval of the proposed waterboarding of alleged Al Qaeda leader Abu Zubaydah. "Days after Dr Rice gave Mr Tenet her approval, the Justice Department approved the use of waterboarding in a top secret August 1 memo." Waterboarding is considered to be torture by a wide range of authorities, including legal experts, war veterans, intelligence officials, military judges, human rights organizations, former U.S. attorney general Eric Holder, and many senior politicians, including former U.S. President Barack Obama. In 2003 Rice, Vice President Dick Cheney and Attorney General John Ashcroft met with the CIA again and were briefed on the use of waterboarding and other methods including week-long sleep deprivation, forced nudity and the use of stress positions. The Senate report says that the Bush administration officials "reaffirmed that the CIA program was lawful and reflected administration policy". The Senate report also "suggests Miss Rice played a more significant role than she acknowledged in written testimony to the Senate Armed Services Committee submitted in the autumn." At that time, she had acknowledged attending meetings to discuss the CIA's use of torture, but she claimed that she could not recall the details, and she "omitted her direct role in approving the programme in her written statement to the committee." In a conversation with a student at Stanford University in April 2009, Rice stated that she did not authorize the CIA to use the torture. Rice said, "I didn't authorize anything. I conveyed the authorization of the administration to the agency that they had policy authorization, subject to the Justice Department's clearance. That's what I did." She added, "We were told, nothing that violates our obligations under the Convention Against Torture. And so, by definition, if it was authorized by the president, it did not violate our obligations under the Conventions Against Torture." In 2015, citing her role in authorizing the use of so-called "enhanced interrogation techniques", Human Rights Watch called for the investigation of Rice "for conspiracy to torture as well as other crimes." On November 16, 2004, Bush nominated Rice to be Secretary of State. On January 26, 2005, the Senate confirmed her nomination by a vote of 85–13. The negative votes, the most cast against any nomination for Secretary of State since 1825, came from Senators who, according to Senator Barbara Boxer, wanted "to hold Dr. Rice and the Bush administration accountable for their failures in Iraq and in the war on terrorism." Their reasoning was that Rice had acted irresponsibly in equating Saddam's regime with Islamist terrorism and some could not accept her previous record. Senator Robert Byrd, a prominent Senate institutionalist who was concerned with executive over-reach, voted against Rice's appointment, indicating that she "has asserted that the President holds far more of the war power than the Constitution grants him." As Secretary of State, Rice championed the expansion of democratic governments and other American values: "American values are universal." "An international order that reflects our values is the best guarantee of our enduring national interest ..." Rice stated that the September 11 attacks in 2001 were rooted in "oppression and despair" and so, the U.S. must advance democratic reform and support basic rights throughout the greater Middle East. Rice also reformed and restructured the department, as well as U.S. diplomacy as a whole. "Transformational Diplomacy" is the goal that Rice describes as "work[ing] with our many partners around the world ... [and] build[ing] and sustain[ing] democratic, well-governed states that will respond to the needs of their people and conduct themselves responsibly in the international system." As Secretary of State, Rice traveled heavily and initiated many diplomatic efforts on behalf of the Bush administration; she holds the record for most miles logged in the position. Her diplomacy relied on strong presidential support and is considered to be the continuation of style defined by former Republican secretaries of state Henry Kissinger and James Baker. After the end of the Bush Administration, Rice returned to academia and joined the Council on Foreign Relations. In October 2010, Rice met with President Obama for a discussion on national security issues. In November, Rice participated in the groundbreaking of the George W. Bush Presidential Center. Two years later, Rice introduced world leaders such as Tony Blair and Jose Maria Aznar at the center's dedication ceremony. In May 2011, after the killing of Osama bin Laden, Rice told Zain Verjee that bin Laden's death was "gratifying because for our country this brings an important chapter to a close and it shows that the United States can, with patience and persistence, do something like this." She argued against removing troops from Afghanistan until the US finished helping the country "get more decent governance". That year, she appeared as herself on the NBC sitcom 30 Rock in the fifth-season episode "Everything Sunny All the Time Always", in which she engages in a classical-music duel with Jack Donaghy (Alec Baldwin). Within the world of the show, Donaghy had had a relationship with Rice during the show's first season. In May 2012, Rice served as the keynote speaker at the Southern Methodist University commencement ceremony. Rice delivered a speech at the 2012 Republican National Convention. Daniel W. Drezner of Foreign Affairs praised Rice's address as the best speech of the convention. In 2013, Rice charged Iran with having "done everything to make certain that you can't trust them", citing Iran's decades-long hiding of its nuclear program and giving the International Atomic Energy Agency "the runaround." In 2015, Rice initially declined taking a public position on Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action "because I know how hard it is to be in there as opposed to out here", but added, "This particular deal I think has some good elements but the price that was paid was pretty high. It’s entirely possible that they are already at threshold status and we will never know it." As the Trump administration weighed pulling out of the agreement, Rice said she would have "stayed in for alliance management reasons more than anything else" and charged the verification methods of the deal as not being "very strong." In August 2015, High Point University announced that Rice would speak at the 2016 commencement ceremony. Her commencement address was highlighted by The Huffington Post, Fortune, Business Insider, NBC News, Time, and USA Today. On January 26, 2017, Rice participated in a talk with the University of San Francisco, where she opined the United States had entered "uncharted territory" with President Donald Trump due to his lack of government experience and that the new president should be given time to realize the limitations of his powers. On March 31, Rice met with Vice President Mike Pence and President Trump at the White House. In May, Rice said that alleged Russian hacking of DNC emails should "absolutely not" delegitimize Trump's presidency. Rice supported the Trump administration "painting a very bleak picture for the Chinese", opining that the cabinet saw the region as the only country with leverage over North Korea. In 2018, Rice called decisions by North Korean leader Kim Jong Un to make overtures to the South Koreans "clever" and expressed that he was more isolated and reckless than his father. Ahead of the Singapore Summit, Rice stated her support for negotiations with North Korea, but warned the US should "go step by step, make sure there's good verification of everything the North Koreans are doing, and keep your eye on the prize of denuclearization. Because what we want to do is stop them short of threatening the American homeland." By September 2019, Rice publicly stated her dislike for Trump's rhetoric, especially on immigration, and warned that Trump needed "to be a lot more careful in the way that he speaks about these things because race is a very delicate and raw nerve in America." In November, as House Democrats moved forward with their impeachment inquiry into President Trump for his correspondence with Ukraine, Rice commented that she did not "like for the President of the United States to mention an American citizen for investigation to a foreign leader" and that she was troubled by "a state of conflict between the foreign policy professionals and someone in Rudy Giuliani who says he was acting on behalf of the President." In August 2021, Rice wrote an op-ed arguing that the United States withdrew from Afghanistan too quickly and called claims that Afghans were to blame for Taliban takeover a "corrosive and deeply unfair narrative". In October, Rice appeared as a guest cohost on The View, where she asserted that Americans were more interested in household issues than continuing to investigate the January 6 United States Capitol attack. In December, Rice joined Governor of Alabama Kay Ivey in Birmingham to announce the recommendations of the Alabama Innovation Commission, which had worked with the Hoover Institution, on means of advancing statewide technology and entrepreneurship. In April 2022, Rice attended Madeleine Albright's funeral, where she delivered a reading from the Bible. In July, Rice participated in an Aspen Security Forum with fellow former National Security Advisors Thomas E. Donilon and Stephen Hadley. In October, Rice met with Secretary of State Antony Blinken at the Hoover Institution Hauck Auditorium and asked the incumbent about issues such as protests in Iran and the Russian invasion of Ukraine. In 2023, after former President Trump and Governor of Florida Ron DeSantis criticized US support for Ukraine, Rice stressed the need for any potential presidential candidates to understand the essence of the conflict, which she defined as "defending a rules-based system that says might doesn’t make right, you can’t just extinguish your neighbor." In February 2009, it was announced that Rice had signed a three-book deal with Crown Publishers worth at least 2.5 million. Crown reported that Rice would "combine candid narrative and acute analysis to tell the story of her time in the White House and as America's top diplomat, and her role in protecting American security and shaping foreign policy during the extraordinary period from 2001-2009." In 2010, Rice released Extraordinary, Ordinary People: A Memoir of Family, an account of her upbringing. John McWhorter of The New York Times summarized, "If there is a lesson from Rice’s book, it is that the civil rights revolution made it possible for an extremely talented black person (a woman, no less) to embrace a race-neutral subject and ride it into service as secretary of state, all the while thinking of herself largely as just a person." In 2011, Rice wrote No Higher Honor: A Memoir of My Years in Washington, a memoir of her time in the Bush administration. In an interview with George Stephanopoulos, Rice explained that she chose the title "because there really is no higher honor than serving your country" and named the Bush administration's attempts to consider "a different kind of Middle East" the hardest challenge they faced. Susan Chira wrote that the book "shows us two Condoleezza Rices: one, the impatient unilateralist who was national security adviser, the other the born-again diplomat who, as secretary of state, worked to repair some of the damage that had been done to American credibility by its unilateralism." It was announced in 2013 that Rice was writing a book to be published in 2015 by Henry Holt & Company. In 2017, Rice released Democracy: Stories from the Long Road to Freedom, a book in which she makes the case for democracy over totalitarianism or authoritarianism. In an interview, Rice said she began writing the book three years before its release and pondered that her desire to write about democracy stemmed from her youth in Birmingham "when black citizens did not experience full democracy" under segregation. In October 2013, Rice was selected to be one of the thirteen inaugural members of the College Football Playoff selection committee. Her appointment caused a minor controversy in the sport. In October 2014, she revealed that she watched "14 or 15 games every week live on TV on Saturdays and recorded games on Sundays." Her term on the committee expired at the conclusion of the 2016 college football season. On November 18, 2018 ESPN's Adam Schefter reported that a league source had told him that Rice was being considered as a candidate in the Cleveland Browns' head coach search. This report sparked jokes at the expense of the Browns and outcry due to both Rice's lack of any experience in coaching and Rice being a woman. Shortly after the initial report, the Browns and General Manager John Dorsey denied the report saying, "Our coaching search will be thorough and deliberate, but we are still in the process of composing the list of candidates and Secretary Rice has not been discussed." Rice, who is a lifelong Browns fan, also denied the reports but joked that she "would like to call a play or two next season if the Browns need ideas." As early as 2003, there were reports that Rice was considering a run for governor of California, while ruling out running for the Senate in 2004. There was also speculation that Rice would run for the Republican nomination in the 2008 primaries, which she ruled out on Meet the Press. On February 22, 2008, Rice played down any suggestion that she may be on the Republican vice presidential ticket: "I have always said that the one thing that I have not seen myself doing is running for elected office in the United States." During an interview with the editorial board of The Washington Times on March 27, 2008, Rice said she was "not interested" in running for vice president. In a Gallup poll from March 24 to 27, 2008, Rice was mentioned by eight percent of Republican respondents to be their first choice to be John McCain's Republican vice presidential running mate, slightly behind Mike Huckabee and Mitt Romney. Republican strategist Dan Senor said on ABC's This Week on April 6, 2008, that "Condi Rice has been actively, actually in recent weeks, campaigning for" the vice presidential nomination. He based this assessment on her attendance of Grover Norquist's Americans for Tax Reform conservative leader's meeting on March 26, 2008. In response to Senor's comments, Rice's spokesperson denied that Rice was seeking the vice presidential nomination, saying, "If she is actively seeking the vice presidency, then she's the last one to know about it." In August 2008, the speculation about a potential McCain–Rice ticket finally ended when then-Governor Sarah Palin of Alaska was selected as McCain's running-mate. In early December 2008, Rice praised President-elect Barack Obama's selection of New York senator Hillary Clinton to succeed her as Secretary of State, saying "she's terrific". Rice, who spoke to Clinton after her selection, said Clinton "is someone of intelligence and she'll do a great job". Rumors arose once again during the 2012 presidential race that presumptive nominee Mitt Romney was looking into vetting Rice for the vice presidency. Rice once again denied any such intentions or desires to become the vice president, reiterating in numerous interviews that she "is a policy maker, not a politician." Speculation ended in August 2012 when Romney announced that Representative Paul Ryan was chosen as his running-mate. Rice campaigned for the Romney-Ryan ticket in the general election. According to Bob Woodward's 2018 book Fear: Trump in the White House, then-Republican National Committee chairman Reince Priebus told then Republican nominee Donald Trump, that he should drop out of the race for the good of the party following the release of the Access Hollywood tapes. During these discussions, it was revealed that Mike Pence, the vice presidential nominee, had agreed to replace Trump on the top of the ticket as the Republican presidential nominee, with Rice agreeing to be Pence's running mate. While promoting his book Out of Many, One: Portraits of America's Immigrants, former President Bush revealed he wrote-in Rice in the 2020 election and said that although Rice was aware of the vote, she told him she "would refuse to accept the office." Condoleezza Rice is often described as a centrist or moderate Republican. On The Issues, a non-partisan organization which rates candidates based on their policy positions, considers Rice to be a centrist. She takes both liberal and conservative positions; she is pro-choice on abortion, supports gun rights, opposes same-sex marriage but supports civil unions, and supports building oil pipelines such as the Keystone XL pipeline. Rice's policy as Secretary of State viewed counter-terrorism as a matter of being preventative, and not merely punitive. In an interview on December 18, 2005, Rice stated: "We have to remember that in this war on terrorism, we're not talking about criminal activity where you can allow somebody to commit the crime and then you go back and you arrest them and you question them. If they succeed in committing their crime, then hundreds or indeed thousands of people die. That's why you have to prevent, and intelligence is the long pole in the tent in preventing attacks." Rice has promoted the idea that counterterrorism involves not only confronting the governments and organizations that promote and condone terrorism, but also the ideologies that fuel terrorism. In a speech given on July 29, 2005, Rice asserted that "[s]ecuring America from terrorist attack is more than a matter of law enforcement. We must also confront the ideology of hatred in foreign societies by supporting the universal hope of liberty and the inherent appeal of democracy." In January 2005, during Bush's second inaugural ceremonies, Rice first used the term "outposts of tyranny" to refer to countries Rice thought to threaten world peace and human rights. This term has been called a descendant of Bush's phrase, "Axis of Evil", used to describe Iraq, Iran and North Korea. She identified six such "outposts" in which she said the United States has a duty to foster freedom: Cuba, Zimbabwe, Burma and Belarus, as well as Iran and North Korea. Rice said "If you go back to 2000 when I helped the president in the campaign. I said that I was, in effect, kind of libertarian on this issue. And meaning by that, that I have been concerned about a government role in this issue. I am a strong proponent of parental choice—of parental notification. I am a strong proponent of a ban on late-term abortion. These are all things that I think unite people and I think that that's where we should be. I've called myself at times mildly pro-choice." She would not want the federal government "forcing its views on one side or the other." She did not want the Supreme Court decision legalizing abortion, Roe v. Wade, to be overturned. Rice said she believes President Bush "has been in exactly the right place" on abortion, "which is we have to respect the culture of life and we have to try and bring people to have respect for it and make this as rare a circumstance as possible". However, she added that she has been "concerned about a government role" but has "tended to agree with those who do not favor federal funding for abortion, because I believe that those who hold a strong moral view on the other side should not be forced to fund" the procedure. Rice has taken a centrist approach to "race and gender preferences" in affirmative action policies. She described affirmative action as being "still needed," but she does not support quotas. In March 2014, Rice joined and appeared in video spots for the Ban Bossy campaign, a television and social media campaign designed to ban the word "bossy" from general use because of its harmful effect on young girls. Several video spots with other notable spokespersons including Beyoncé, Jennifer Garner and others were produced along with a web site providing school training material, leadership tips, and an online pledge form to which visitors can promise not to use the word. Condoleezza Rice supported the comprehensive immigration plan backed by the Bush administration and shared that it was among her regrets that it did not pass through Congress. In 2014, Rice criticized the Obama administration from seeking to approve immigration reforms through executive action. In February 2017 Rice publicly announced her opposition to the Trump administration's travel ban. Rice says that she became a "Second Amendment absolutist" due to her experience of growing up in Birmingham and facing threats from the KKK. "Rice's fondness for the Second Amendment began while watching her father sit on the porch with a gun, ready to defend his family against the Klan's night riders." While Rice does not support same-sex marriage, she does support civil unions. In 2010, Rice stated that she believed "marriage is between a man and a woman ... But perhaps we will decide that there needs to be some way for people to express their desire to live together through civil union." When asked to select a view on a survey, Rice selected a response that said "Same-sex couples should be allowed to form civil unions, but not marry in the traditional sense." In May 2017, Rice said she opposes the removal of Confederate monuments and memorials or the renaming of buildings named after Confederate generals. She argued, "If you forget your history, you're likely to repeat it. ... When you start wiping out your history, sanitizing your history to make you feel better, it's a bad thing." Rice experienced firsthand the injustices of Birmingham's discriminatory laws and attitudes. She was instructed to walk proudly in public and to use the facilities at home rather than subject herself to the indignity of "colored" facilities in town. As Rice recalls of her parents and their peers, "they refused to allow the limits and injustices of their time to limit our horizons." However, Rice recalls various times in which she suffered discrimination on account of her race, which included being relegated to a storage room at a department store instead of a regular dressing room, being barred from going to the circus or the local amusement park, being denied hotel rooms, and even being given bad food at restaurants. Also, while Rice was mostly kept by her parents from areas where she might face discrimination, she was very aware of the civil rights struggle and the problems of Jim Crow laws in Birmingham. A neighbor, Juliemma Smith, described how "[Condi] used to call me and say things like, 'Did you see what Bull Connor did today?' She was just a little girl and she did that all the time. I would have to read the newspaper thoroughly because I wouldn't know what she was going to talk about." Rice herself said of the segregation era: "Those terrible events burned into my consciousness. I missed many days at my segregated school because of the frequent bomb threats." During the violent days of the Civil Rights Movement, Reverend Rice armed himself and kept guard over the house while Condoleezza practiced the piano inside. Reverend Rice instilled in his daughter and students that black people would have to prove themselves worthy of advancement, and would simply have to be "twice as good" to overcome injustices built into the system. Rice said "My parents were very strategic, I was going to be so well prepared, and I was going to do all of these things that were revered in white society so well, that I would be armored somehow from racism. I would be able to confront white society on its own terms." While the Rices supported the goals of the civil rights movement, they did not agree with the idea of putting their child in harm's way. Rice was eight when her schoolmate Denise McNair, aged 11, was murdered in the bombing of the primarily black Sixteenth Street Baptist Church by white supremacists on September 15, 1963. Rice has commented upon that moment in her life: I remember the bombing of that Sunday School at 16th Street Baptist Church in Birmingham in 1963. I did not see it happen, but I heard it happen, and I felt it happen, just a few blocks away at my father's church. It is a sound that I will never forget, that will forever reverberate in my ears. That bomb took the lives of four young girls, including my friend and playmate, Denise McNair. The crime was calculated to suck the hope out of young lives, bury their aspirations. But those fears were not propelled forward, those terrorists failed. Rice states that growing up during racial segregation taught her determination against adversity, and she needed to be "twice as good" as non-minorities. Rice has appeared four times on the Time 100, Time magazine's list of the world's 100 most influential people. Rice is one of only nine people in the world whose influence has been considered enduring enough to have made the list—first compiled in 1999 as a retrospective of the 20th century and made an annual feature in 2004—so frequently. However, the list contains people who have the influence to change for better or for worse, and Time has also accused her of squandering her influence, stating on February 1, 2007, that her "accomplishments as Secretary of State have been modest, and even those have begun to fade" and that she "has been slow to recognize the extent to which the U.S.'s prestige has declined." In its March 19, 2007, issue it followed up stating that Rice was "executing an unmistakable course correction in U.S. foreign policy." In 2004 and 2005, she was ranked as the most powerful woman in the world by Forbes magazine and number two in 2006 (following the chancellor of Germany, Angela Merkel). California Democratic senator Barbara Boxer has also criticized Rice in relation to the war in Iraq. During Rice's confirmation hearing for U.S. secretary of state in January 2005, Boxer stated, "I personally believe—this is my personal view—that your loyalty to the mission you were given, to sell the war, overwhelmed your respect for the truth." On January 11, 2007, Boxer, during a debate over the war in Iraq, said, "Now, the issue is who pays the price, who pays the price? I'm not going to pay a personal price. My kids are too old, and my grandchild is too young. You're not going to pay a particular price, as I understand it, within immediate family. So who pays the price? The American military and their families, and I just want to bring us back to that fact." The New York Post and White House press secretary Tony Snow called Boxer's statement an attack on Rice's status as a single, childless female and referred to Boxer's comments as "a great leap backward for feminism." Rice later echoed Snow's remarks, saying "I thought it was okay to not have children, and I thought you could still make good decisions on behalf of the country if you were single and didn't have children." Boxer responded to the controversy by saying "They're getting this off on a non-existent thing that I didn't say. I'm saying, she's like me, we do not have families who are in the military." According to The Washington Post in late July 2008, former undersecretary of state and U.N. ambassador John R. Bolton was referring to Rice and her allies in the Bush Administration whom he believes abandoned earlier hard-line principles when he said: "Once the collapse begins, adversaries have a real opportunity to gain advantage. In terms of the Bush presidency, this many reversals this close to the end destroys credibility ... It appears there is no depth to which this administration will not sink in its last days." Former secretary of defense Donald Rumsfeld repeatedly criticized Rice after their terms in office ended. In his book Known and Unknown: A Memoir, he portrayed her as a young, inexperienced academic who did not know her place. In 2011 she responded, saying that Rumsfeld "doesn't know what he's talking about." She further addresses the issue in her own book saying, "He would become frustrated when my staff would reach out to military officers in the Pentagon to coordinate the particulars of a policy among the agencies. This was a routine responsibility for the NSC, but for some reason Don interpreted such actions as a violation of his authority." In his book In My Time, Dick Cheney suggested that Rice had misled the president about nuclear diplomacy with North Korea, saying that she was naïve. He called her advice on the issue "utterly misleading." He also chided Rice for clashing with White House advisers on the tone of the president's speeches on Iraq and said that she, as the secretary of state, ruefully conceded to him that the Bush administration should not have apologized for a claim the president made in his 2003 State of the Union address, on Saddam's supposed search for yellowcake uranium. She "came into my office, sat down in the chair next to my desk, and tearfully admitted I had been right," Cheney wrote. Rice responded: "It certainly doesn't sound like me, now, does it?", saying that she viewed the book as an "attack on my integrity." Rice has also been criticized by other conservatives. Stephen Hayes of the Weekly Standard accused her of jettisoning the Bush Doctrine, including the Iraq War troop surge of 2007. Other conservatives criticized her for her approach to Russia policy and other issues. Rice's ratings decreased following a heated battle for her confirmation as Secretary of State and following Hurricane Katrina in August 2005. Rice's rise within the George W. Bush administration initially drew a largely positive response from many in the black community. In a 2002 survey, then National Security Advisor Rice was viewed favorably by 41% of black respondents, but another 40% did not know Rice well enough to rate her and her profile remained comparatively obscure. As her role increased, some black commentators began to express doubts concerning Rice's stances and statements on various issues. In 2005, The Washington Post columnist Eugene Robinson asked, "How did [Rice] come to a worldview so radically different from that of most black Americans?" In August 2005, American musician, actor, and social activist Harry Belafonte, who serves on the Board of TransAfrica, referred to blacks in the Bush administration as "black tyrants." Belafonte's comments received mixed reactions. Rice dismissed these criticisms during a September 14, 2005 interview when she said, "Why would I worry about something like that? ... The fact of the matter is I've been black all my life. Nobody needs to tell me how to be black." Black commentators have defended Rice, including Mike Espy, Andrew Young, C. Delores Tucker (chair of the National Congress of Black Women),[citation needed] Clarence Page, Colbert King, Dorothy Height (chair and president emerita of the National Council of Negro Women) and Kweisi Mfume (Congressman and former CEO of the NAACP). Rice has never married and has no children. In the 1970s, she dated and was briefly engaged to professional American football player Rick Upchurch but left him because, according to biographer Marcus Mabry, she "knew the relationship wasn't going to work." Rice's mother, Angelena Rice, died of breast cancer in 1985, aged 61, when Rice was 30. In 1989, Rice's father, John Wesley Rice, wed Clara Bailey, to whom he remained married until his death in 2000, aged 77.[self-published source?] From 2003 to 2017, Rice co-owned a home in Palo Alto, California with Randy Bean. According to public records, the two initially purchased the home with a third investor, Stanford University professor Coit D. Blacker, who later sold his line of credit to the two women. The property arrangement was first revealed in Glenn Kessler's book The Confidante: Condoleezza Rice and the Creation of the Bush Legacy (2007), sparking rumors about the nature of Rice and Bean's relationship. Kessler has stated he "did not know if this meant there was something more to the relationship between the women beyond a friendship." On August 20, 2012, Rice was one of the first two women to be admitted as members to Augusta National Golf Club; the other was South Carolina financier Darla Moore. In 2014, Rice was named to the ESPNW Impact 25. While Rice ultimately did not become a professional pianist, she still practices often and plays with a chamber music group. She accompanied cellist Yo-Yo Ma playing Johannes Brahms' Violin Sonata in D minor at Constitution Hall in April 2002 for the National Medal of Arts Awards. At the age of 15, she played Mozart with the Denver Symphony, and while Secretary of State she played regularly with a chamber music group in Washington. She does not play professionally, but has performed at diplomatic events at embassies, including a performance for Queen Elizabeth II, and she has performed in public with cellist Yo-Yo Ma and singer Aretha Franklin. In 2005, Rice accompanied Charity Sunshine Tillemann-Dick, a 21-year-old soprano, for a benefit concert for the Pulmonary Hypertension Association at the Kennedy Center in Washington. She performed briefly during her cameo appearance in the "Everything Sunny All the Time Always" episode of 30 Rock. She has stated that her favorite composer is Johannes Brahms, because she thinks Brahms's music is "passionate but not sentimental." On a complementary note, on Friday, April 10, 2009, on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno, she stated that her favorite band is Led Zeppelin.[citation needed] As Secretary of State, Rice was ex officio a member of the Board of Trustees of the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts. As the end of their tenures approached in January 2009, outgoing President Bush appointed her to a six-year term as a general trustee, filling a vacancy on the board.[citation needed] Rice has received several honorary degrees from various American universities, including: Honorary degrees Knight's Cross of the Order of Polonia Restituta, 1998 Grand Officer of the Order of the Star of Romania, 2003 Grand Cross with Gold Badge of the Order of San Carlos, 2009 Grand Cordon of the Order of the Rising Sun, 2017 Rice, Condoleezza (1984). The Soviet Union and the Czechoslovak Army: Uncertain Allegiance. Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-06921-2 Rice, Condoleezza & Dallin, Alexander (eds.) (1986). The Gorbachev Era. Stanford Alumni Association, trade paperback (1986), ISBN 0-916318-18-4; Garland Publishing, Incorporated, hardcover (1992), 376 pages, ISBN 0-8153-0571-0. Rice, Condoleezza with Zelikow, Philip D. (1995). Germany Unified and Europe Transformed: A Study in Statecraft. Harvard University Press. (1995), 520 pp., ISBN 0-674-35324-2, 0-674-35325-0. Rice, Condoleezza, "Campaign 2000: Promoting the National Interest" in Foreign Affairs, 2000. Rice, Condoleezza, with Kiron K. Skinner, Serhiy Kudelia, and Bruce Bueno de Mesquita (2007). The Strategy of Campaigning: Lessons from Ronald Reagan and Boris Yeltsin Archived May 27, 2019, at the Wayback Machine, paperback, 356 pp., ISBN 978-0-472-03319-5. University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor. Rice, Condoleezza (2010), Extraordinary, Ordinary People: A Memoir of Family, Crown Archetype, ISBN 978-0-307-58787-9 Rice, Condoleezza (2011), No Higher Honor: A Memoir of My Years in Washington. Crown Archetype, ISBN 978-0-307-58786-2 Rice, Condoleezza (2017), Democracy: Stories from the Long Road to Freedom, Twelve, 496 pp., ISBN 978-1455540181. Rice, Condoleezza; Zegart, Amy (2018). Political Risk: How Businesses and Organizations Can Anticipate Global Insecurity. New York: Twelve. ISBN 978-1455542352. OCLC 1019846069. List of African-American United States Cabinet members List of female United States Cabinet members "Condoleezza Rice". Stanford Graduate School of Business. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved April 11, 2018. Plotz, David (May 12, 2000). "Condoleezza Rice: George W. Bush's celebrity adviser". Slate. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved May 27, 2019. "Board of Directors". Millennium Challenge Corporation. Archived from the original on June 7, 2008. Retrieved January 21, 2009. The Secretary of State is the Chair of the Board ... "Condi Rice website at Stanford University". Stanford University. Archived from the original on June 20, 2015. Retrieved May 27, 2009 – via tec.fsi.stanford.edu. Rice, Condoleezza. "Condi Rice website at the Hoover Institution". hoover.org. Hoover Institution. Archived from the original on April 29, 2009. Retrieved May 27, 2009. Gloeckler, Geoff. "Getting In Condoleezza Rice To Join Stanford B-School Faculty In September". Bloomberg Businessweek. Bloomberg.com. Archived from the original on October 7, 2010. Retrieved September 15, 2010. "Condoleezza Rice to lead Stanford's Hoover Institution". Stanford News. Stanford University. January 28, 2020. Archived from the original on March 12, 2020. Retrieved March 13, 2020. "About - Dropbox". Dropbox. Archived from the original on July 5, 2018. Retrieved March 12, 2018. "Dr. Condoleezza Rice - Makena Capital Management". makenacap.com. Archived from the original on June 19, 2018. Retrieved August 20, 2018. Wohlsen, Marcus (April 10, 2014). "Internet Revolt Begins as Condi Rice Joins Dropbox Board". Wired. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved August 20, 2018. Blunt, Sheryl Henderson (September 1, 2003). "The Unflappable Condi Rice". Christianity Today. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved March 8, 2012. Horton, Ebony (December 6, 2004). "Stillman College educators recall Rice's ties to town". The Tuscaloosa News. Archived from the original on September 21, 2018. Retrieved January 1, 2018. Rice moved from Titusville, near Birmingham, to Tuscaloosa in 1966 when her father, John Rice, became the dean of students at Stillman. The family resided on campus in a brick home behind Hay Residence Hall, while Rice, then 11, attended what is now Central High School. Callaway, Ewen (June 6, 2012). "Ancestry testing goes for pinpoint accuracy: Companies use whole genomes to trace geographical origins". Nature. Archived from the original on September 6, 2019. Retrieved August 20, 2018. "Episode 7: Finding Your Roots with Henry Louis Gates, Jr., DNA". Your Genetic Genealogist. Archived from the original on March 29, 2020. Retrieved August 20, 2018. Dr. Gates' team also ordered an admixture test for Condoleeza. This DNA analysis revealed that her genetic makeup is 51% African, 40% European and 9% Native American or Asian", and "Condoleezza was surprised to learn that her mtDNA traced back to the Tikar people of Cameroon. "Samuel L. Jackson, Condoleezza Rice and Ruth Simmons". Finding Your Roots. April 29, 2012. Archived from the original on September 3, 2019. Retrieved August 20, 2018. Rice, Condoleezza (2017). Democracy: Stories from the Long Road to Freedom. New York: Grand Central Publishing. p. 27. ISBN 9781455540181. Beck, Emma (February 28, 2005). "Growing up with Condoleezza Rice". BBC News. Archived from the original on September 16, 2018. Retrieved September 25, 2013. Hawkins, B. Denise (September–October 2002). "Condoleezza Rice's Secret Weapon". Today's Christian. Archived from the original on January 9, 2008. Retrieved October 26, 2008. "Condoleezza Rice". Mad About Music. January 2, 2005. WNYC. Archived from the original on May 26, 2019. Mad About Music. Retrieved October 18, 2014. Chapman, Tamara (Summer 2010). "Facing Forward, Looking Back". University of Denver Magazine. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved September 1, 2010. Dobbs, Michael (December 28, 2000). "Josef Korbel's Enduring Foreign Policy Legacy; Professor Mentored Daughter Albright and Student Rice". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on May 27, 2019. Retrieved May 27, 2019. "Famous Alumnae". USC Alpha Chi Omega. Archived from the original on October 17, 2007. Retrieved September 12, 2018. Rice, Condoleezza (2010). Extraordinary Ordinary People: A Memoir of Family. Three Rivers Press. pp. 184–8. ISBN 978-0-307-88847-1. Rice, Condoleezza (1981). The Politics of Client Command: Party-Military Relations in Czechoslovakia, 1948–1975. PhD dissertation. University of Denver. OCLC 51308999. Archived from the original on September 27, 2013. Stout, David (July 8, 2019). "Janne E. Nolan, Principled Adviser on World Affairs, Is Dead at 67". The New York Times. Retrieved April 21, 2021. Conteras, Nancy (May 29, 2009). "Transcript of CISAC 25th Anniversary Celebration" (PDF). Stanford CISAC. Retrieved May 5, 2021. Chip actively brought women into the discussion, starting with what have been called the "4 fellowettes" here at CISAC: Condi Rice, Janne Nolan, Cindy Roberts and me [Gloria Duffy], in 1980-82. Balz, Dan (August 1, 2000). "The Republicans Showcase a Rising Star; Foreign Policy Fueled Rice's Party Switch and Her Climb to Prominence". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved May 27, 2019. Becker, Maki (April 4, 2004). "20 Things You Probably Didn't Know About". Daily News. Archived from the original on December 11, 2008. Retrieved November 2, 2008. Rice, Condoleezza (August 1, 2000). "Text: Condoleezza Rice at the Republican National Convention". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on September 26, 2019. Retrieved October 27, 2008. Baker, Russell (April 3, 2008). "Condi and the Boys". New York Review of Books. 55 (5): 9–11. ISSN 0028-7504. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved March 19, 2008. "Condoleezza Rice". Forbes. October 18, 2001. Archived from the original on October 7, 2008. Retrieved October 27, 2008. "Stanford's New Provost Is First Woman, Black to Hold Position". LA Times. May 20, 1993. Retrieved November 25, 2021. "John Hennessy, dean of the School of Engineering, named next provost". Stanford News. April 14, 1999. Retrieved November 25, 2021. "Condoleezza Rice: U.S. national security adviser". CNN. February 2002. Archived from the original on February 23, 2002. Retrieved October 27, 2008. "Casper selects Condoleezza Rice to be next Stanford provost" (Press release). Stanford University. May 19, 1993. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved October 27, 2008. Lemann, Nicholas (October 14, 2002). "Without a Doubt". The New Yorker. p. 181. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved August 17, 2018. Barabak, Mark Z. (January 16, 2005). "Not Always Diplomatic in Her First Major Post". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 10, 2016. Retrieved August 17, 2018. Robinson, James (June 9, 1999). "Velvet-glove forcefulness: Seven years of provostial challenges and achievements". Stanford Report. Stanford University. Archived from the original on December 31, 2010. Retrieved October 27, 2008. Stephanopoulos, George (December 7, 2008). "Interview on ABC's This Week With George Stephanopoulos". This Week. ABC News. Archived from the original on November 17, 2017. Retrieved August 20, 2018 – via state.gov. Gorlick, Adam (January 28, 2009). "Condoleezza Rice on returning to campus". Stanford Report. Archived from the original on September 16, 2018. Retrieved August 16, 2018. Krieger, Lisa M. (March 1, 2009). "Former Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice returns to Stanford University". The Mercury News. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved March 2, 2009. Bumiller, Elisabeth (December 11, 2007). Condoleezza Rice: An American Life (1st ed.). New York: Random House. ISBN 978-1-4000-6590-5. Mabry, Marcus (2007). Twice as good: Condoleezza Rice and her path to power. Emmaus, Pa.: Rodale. ISBN 978-1-59486-362-2. "U.S.-India Civilian Nuclear Cooperation Agreement". US Department of State Archive. Marinucci, Carla (May 5, 2001). "Chevron redubs ship named for Bush aide". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on July 14, 2012. Retrieved October 13, 2008. Marinucci, Carla (April 5, 2001). "Critics knock naming oil tanker Condoleezza". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved August 20, 2018. Art, Robert (September 1, 2015). "From the Director: September, 2015". MIT Seminar XXI. Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Kazak, Don (May 22, 2007). "Condoleezza Rice to visit program she started". Palo Alto Online News. Archived from the original on June 23, 2015. Retrieved October 27, 2008. "Rice not interested in being Pac-10 commissioner". Associated Press. February 3, 2009. Archived from the original on June 4, 2011. Retrieved July 8, 2011. Lee, Jolie (May 10, 2014). "Beyonce, Jennifer Garner, Jane Lynch join 'Ban Bossy' campaign". USA Today. Archived from the original on July 28, 2018. Retrieved August 8, 2014. "Beyoncé, Jennifer Garner, Jane Lynch join prominent women in #BanBossy campaign". New York Daily News. March 10, 2014. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved August 8, 2014. Garfinkel, Noah (July 11, 2022). "Condoleezza Rice added to Denver Broncos ownership group". Axios. Retrieved July 11, 2022. "NFL owners approve Walton-Penner group's purchase of Denver Broncos franchise". NFL.com. August 9, 2022. Retrieved August 14, 2022. Kettmann, Steve (May 20, 2000). "Bush's secret weapon". Salon.com. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved November 3, 2008. "Exclusive Interview: Conversation with Terror". Time. January 11, 1999. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved November 3, 2008. Rice, Condoleezza (August 1, 2000). "Republican National Convention: Remarks". Archived from the original on June 17, 2019. Retrieved May 27, 2019 – via sbc.edu. "Bush Nominates Rice to Be Secretary of State". ABC News. January 7, 2006. Archived from the original on November 16, 2004. Retrieved November 24, 2021. Oppel, Richard A. Jr.; Bruni, Frank (December 18, 2000). "The 43rd President: The White House Staff; Bush Adviser Gets National Security Post". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved May 27, 2019. Serafin, Tatiana (November 2005). "#1 Condoleezza Rice". The Most Powerful Women. Forbes. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved November 3, 2008. "Rice says race can be 'one factor' in considering admissions". CNN. January 18, 2003. Archived from the original on December 10, 2008. Retrieved November 3, 2008. Shenon, Philip; Mark Mazzetti (October 2, 2006). "Records Show Tenet Briefed Rice on Al Qaeda Threat". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 27, 2019. Retrieved November 3, 2008. Landay, Jonathan S.; Warren P. Strobel; John Walcott; Matt Stearns; Drew Brown (October 2, 2006). "Rumsfeld, Ashcroft said to have received warning of attack". McClatchy. Archived from the original on May 27, 2019. Retrieved November 3, 2008. "Excerpts from April 8, 2004 Testimony of Dr. Condoleezza Rice Before the 9/11 Commission Pertaining to The President's Daily Brief of August 6, 2001". 9/11 Commission. National Security Archive. April 8, 2004. Archived from the original on August 25, 2017. Retrieved November 3, 2008. Wilentz, Sean (April 13, 2004). "Don't know much about history". Salon.com. Archived from the original on May 27, 2019. Retrieved May 27, 2019. Wright, Robin (April 1, 2004). "Top Focus Before 9/11 Wasn't on Terrorism". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on September 21, 2018. Retrieved August 20, 2018. "Past Winners". Jefferson Awards Foundation. Archived from the original on April 16, 2019. Retrieved May 27, 2019. Branum, Don (August 30, 2010). "Dr. Condoleezza Rice receives 2009 TD White Award". US Air force. Archived from the original on October 12, 2017. Retrieved December 12, 2010. "Transcript of Rice's 9/11 commission statement". CNN. May 19, 2004. Archived from the original on April 18, 2010. Retrieved November 3, 2008. "Rice says Saddam questions answered". The Washington Times. April 26, 2007. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved November 3, 2008. Rice, Condoleezza (January 23, 2003). "Why We Know Iraq Is Lying". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved November 3, 2008. Blitzer, Wolf (January 10, 2003). "Search for the 'smoking gun'". CNN. Archived from the original on December 10, 2008. Retrieved November 3, 2008. Sanger, David E. (October 6, 2003). "White House to Overhaul Iraq and Afghan Missions". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved May 27, 2019. Milbank, Dana (May 18, 2004). "Stabilization Is Its Middle Name". The Washington Post. p. A17. Archived from the original on February 17, 2019. Retrieved August 20, 2018. "Rice defends decision to go to war in Iraq". CNN. Associated Press. October 22, 2004. Archived from the original on November 17, 2004. Retrieved November 3, 2008. Drash, Wayne (October 7, 2004). "Report: No WMD stockpiles in Iraq". CNN. Archived from the original on November 7, 2017. Retrieved November 3, 2008. Milbank, Dana; Mike Allen (July 27, 2003). "Iraq Flap Shakes Rice's Image". The Washington Post. p. A0. Archived from the original on August 20, 2018. Retrieved November 3, 2008. Hines, Nico (April 23, 2009). "Condoleezza Rice gave nod for 'torture' techniques". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved April 23, 2009. "Open Letter to Attorney General Alberto Gonzales". Human Rights Watch. April 5, 2006. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved April 17, 2009. Davis, Benjamin (October 8, 2007). "Endgame on Torture: Time to Call the Bluff". JURIST. Archived from the original on December 20, 2007. Retrieved December 18, 2007. Wallach, Evan (2007). "Drop by Drop: Forgetting the History of Water Torture in U.S. Courts". Columbia Journal of Transnational Law. 45 (2): 468–506. ISSN 0010-1931. Archived from the original on April 18, 2010. Retrieved May 7, 2009. A rough draft Archived May 21, 2009, at the Wayback Machine is also available. National Lawyers Guild (ed.). "White Paper on the Law of Torture and Holding Accountable Those Who Are Complicit in Approving Torture of Persons in U.S. Custody" (PDF). National Lawyers Guild, International Association of Democratic Lawyers. Archived (PDF) from the original on January 5, 2009. Retrieved June 26, 2012. "French Journalist Henri Alleg Describes His Torture Being Waterboarded by French Forces During Algerian War". Democracy Now!. November 5, 2007. Archived from the original on December 15, 2007. Retrieved December 18, 2007. McCain, John (November 21, 2005). "Torture's Terrible Toll". Newsweek. Archived from the original on May 2, 2009. Retrieved April 17, 2009. Grey, Stephen (2006). Ghost plane: the true story of the CIA torture program. New York City: St. Martin's Press. p. 226. ISBN 0-312-36023-1. OCLC 70335397. As one former CIA official, once a senior official for the directorate of operations, told me: 'Of course it was torture. Try it and you'll see.' Another, also a former higher-up in the directorate of operations, told me: 'Yes, it's torture ... ' Bell, Nicole (November 2, 2007). "Retired JAGs Send Letter To Leahy: 'Waterboarding is inhumane, it is torture, and it is illegal.'". Crooks and Liars. Archived from the original on February 2, 2009. Retrieved April 17, 2009. "CIA Whitewashing Torture". Human Rights Watch. November 21, 2005. Archived from the original on April 18, 2009. Retrieved April 17, 2009. Memmott, Mark (January 15, 2009). "Holder: Water-boarding is torture; president can't authorize it". USA Today. Archived from the original on May 28, 2009. Retrieved July 1, 2009. "Raw Data: Transcript of Obama's News Conference". Fox News. April 29, 2009. Archived from the original on January 19, 2010. Retrieved May 7, 2009. "As Bush Adviser, Rice Gave OK to Waterboard". Fox News. Associated Press. April 22, 2009. Archived from the original on June 4, 2011. Retrieved May 8, 2009. Kessler, Glenn (May 1, 2009). "Rice Defends Use Of Enhanced Techniques". The Washington Post. p. 4. Archived from the original on June 23, 2016. Retrieved August 12, 2018. "No More Excuses: A Roadmap to Justice for CIA Torture". Human Rights Watch. December 2015. Archived from the original on December 1, 2015. Retrieved December 2, 2015. "Rice sworn in as secretary of state". NBCNews.com. Associated Press. January 26, 2005. Archived from the original on October 16, 2015. Retrieved January 29, 2013. Boxer, Barbara (January 27, 2005). "This is just the beginning". PAC for a Change. Archived from the original on May 11, 2013. Retrieved January 29, 2013. "President's Jury: 100 Interested Parties". Washington Post. January 13, 1999. "Standing for the Founding Principles of the Republic: Voting No on the Nomination of Dr. Rice as Secretary of State" (Press release). Robert Byrd. January 25, 2005. Archived from the original on April 9, 2010. Condoleezza, Rice (January 2000). "Campaign 2000: Promoting the National Interest". Foreign Affairs. 79 (1): 50. Archived from the original on September 16, 2018. Retrieved September 12, 2018. Rice, Condoleezza (July 2008). "Rethinking the National Interest". Foreign Affairs. Vol. 87, no. 4. Archived from the original on August 17, 2018. Retrieved September 12, 2018. "Princeton University's Celebration of the 75th Anniversary Of the Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs" (Press release). United States Department of State. September 30, 2005. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved November 3, 2008. "Transformational Diplomacy" (Press release). United States Department of State. January 18, 2006. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved November 3, 2008. "Georgetown University address" (Press release). United States Department of State. January 18, 2006. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved November 3, 2008. "Rice travel diplomacy year – up close and personal". Reuters. October 11, 2005. Archived from the original on April 20, 2010. Retrieved September 11, 2009. Landler, Mark (January 4, 2013). "Scare Adds to Fears That Clinton's Work Has Taken Toll". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 12, 2018. Retrieved September 12, 2018. "Membership Roster". Council on Foreign Relations. Archived from the original on August 18, 2019. Retrieved August 27, 2015. "Rice meets with Obama". Denver Post. October 15, 2010. "Obama to Hold Oval Office Meeting With Rice on Friday". Roll Call. October 14, 2010. "The George W. Bush Presidential Center breaks ground at SMU". SMU. November 16, 2010. "Bush presidential library groundbreaking". cecildaily.com. November 17, 2010. "Rice welcomes leaders to Bush library ceremony". AP News. April 25, 2013. "Condoleezza Rice on bin Laden's Death". CNN. May 3, 2011. Gustini, Ray (April 29, 2011). "Condoleezza Rice's Strange '30 Rock' Cameo". The Atlantic. Lyons, Margaret (April 29, 2011). "Condoleezza Rice Was Pretty Good on 30 Rock Last Night". Vulture. "Condoleezza Rice offers education as inspiration during SMU commencement speech". Dallas News. May 12, 2012. "Condoleezza Rice RNC speech (text, video)". Politico. August 29, 2012. LoGiurato, Brett (August 29, 2012). "The GOP Convention Went Nuts For Condi Rice's Speech". Business Insider. "If you skip that first paragraph, Condoleezza Rice gave a great speech". Foreign Affairs. August 30, 2012. "Condoleezza Rice: Iran "absolutely" cannot be trusted". CBS News. October 2, 2013. "Obama administration attacked by Condoleezza Rice over Iran nuclear deal". Independent. October 29, 2015. Shelbourne, Mallory (May 1, 2018). "Condoleezza Rice defends Trump leaving Iran nuclear deal". The Hill. Flatley, Daniel (May 2, 2018). "Quitting Iran Deal a Bad Idea But Not End of World, Condoleezza Rice Says". Bloomberg. High Point University (August 18, 2015). "Condoleezza Rice To Serve As 2016 Commencement Speaker". High Point University. Archived from the original on August 25, 2015. Retrieved August 27, 2015. "Condoleeza Rice Tells Grads To Find People They Disagree WIth". The Huffington Post. May 17, 2016. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved May 27, 2016. "8 Inspiring Women Leaders Share Their Best Advice For 2016 Grads". Fortune. May 25, 2016. Archived from the original on May 28, 2016. Retrieved May 27, 2016. "Instagram photo by Business Insider • May 24, 2016 at 3:58pm UTC". Instagram. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved May 27, 2016. "Rutgers students decry Rice as commencement speaker". USA Today. Archived from the original on February 19, 2019. Retrieved February 19, 2019. Allday, Erin. "Condoleezza Rice, in SF talk, says Trump and nation must adjust". SFGate. Diamond, Jeremy (March 31, 2017). "Trump meets with Condoleezza Rice". CNN. Jackson, David (March 31, 2017). "Trump meets with Condoleezza Rice — who called for his ouster in October". USA Today. "Condoleezza Rice: U.S. should 'move on' from Russian election interference". Yahoo News. May 9, 2017. Archived from the original on August 16, 2018. Retrieved August 16, 2018. Delk, Josh (September 2, 2017). "Condoleezza Rice: Trump right to paint 'bleak picture' of North Korea". The Hill. "Condoleezza Rice: Kim Jong Un is 'actually pretty clever'". CNN. January 14, 2018. Song, Jean (May 1, 2018). "Condoleezza Rice warns ahead of North Korea talks: "Beware"". CBS News. "Condoleezza Rice wants Trump to be 'More careful' with his Rhetoric, insists we 'need to all back off'". defendernetwork.com. September 18, 2019. Cole, Devan (November 12, 2019). "Condoleezza Rice says Trump asking Ukraine to investigate Biden is 'out of bounds'". CNN. "Condoleezza Rice speaks out on Afghan withdrawal: 'The Afghan people didn't choose the Taliban'". Independent. August 18, 2021. Dorman, John L. (October 24, 2021). "Condoleezza Rice says Jan. 6 riot was 'wrong' and yet lawmakers should 'move on' as Americans are more concerned about 'their kitchen-table issues'". Business Insider. Miranda, Gabriela (October 21, 2021). "Condoleezza Rice says that while Jan. 6 Capitol riot was 'wrong,' it's time to move on". USA Today. "Condoleezza Rice said she cried on Jan. 6, but it's time to 'move on'". Washington Post. October 21, 2021. Clark, Michael (December 14, 2021). "Gov. Kay Ivey, Condoleezza Rice share plans to grow Alabama's economy". CBS42. "Gov. Ivey, Condoleezza Rice, tout vision for innovation in Alabama". AL.com. December 14, 2021. "Biden, Clintons herald Madeleine Albright as force for good at Washington funeral". Reuters. April 27, 2022. Weiss, Melissa (July 25, 2022). "Rice: Israel's booming tech sector key to warming relations in region". Jewish Insider. "Secretary of State Antony Blinken visits campus, seeks to harness technology to solve global challenges on America's terms". Stanford Daily. October 17, 2022. Rubin, Ann (October 17, 2022). "Secretary of State Antony Blinken sits down with Condoleezza Rice at Stanford". ktuv.com. "Condoleezza Rice warns GOP candidates against pulling back from Ukraine: 'These conflicts always come home'". The Hill. February 26, 2023. "Condoleezza Rice agrees to a three-book deal". Today. February 22, 2009. "Rice, Crown agree to 3-book deal". Tampa Bay Times. February 23, 2009. Siegel, Micah (November 5, 2010). "Review: 'Extraordinary, Ordinary People'". The Stanford Daily. Sellers, Pamela (October 12, 2010). "Condoleezza Rice's civil rights era memoir goes on sale". CNN. Itzkoff, Dave (January 26, 2010). "Condoleezza Rice Reveals Details of First Memoir". McWhorter, John (October 15, 2010). "A Life Between". The New York Times. "Book review: Condoleezza Rice is thorough in 'No Higher Honor'". Los Angeles Times. November 4, 2011. Hayes, Stephen F. (November 1, 2011). "Present at the Re-creation". Wall Street Journal. "Rice reflects on Bush tenure, Gadhafi in new memoir". ABC News. October 30, 2011. "Full Transcript: George Stephanopoulos and Condoleezza Rice". ABC News. November 2, 2011. Chira, Susan (December 9, 2011). "Condoleezza Rice Looks Back". The New York Times. Kaufman, Leslie (March 19, 2013). "Condoleezza Rice to Write Book for Henry Holt". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved September 12, 2018. Mead, Walter Russell (May 3, 2017). "America First? No, Says Former Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice". The New York Times. Retrieved January 1, 2018. Ikenberry, G. John (September–October 2017). "Democracy: Stories From the Long Road to Freedom". Foreign Affairs. Retrieved January 1, 2018. Glasser, Susan B. (May 15, 2017). "Condoleezza Rice: The Full Transcript". Politico. "College Football Playoff officially unveils 13-member selection committee". SI.com. Archived from the original on October 19, 2013. Retrieved September 12, 2018. "Condoleezza Rice discusses her role on the selection committee". SI.com. October 16, 2013. Archived from the original on March 30, 2014. Retrieved September 12, 2018. Dinich, Heather (October 8, 2014). "Condi Rice talks committee ins, outs". ESPN. Archived from the original on July 30, 2018. Retrieved August 20, 2018. "CFP SELECTION COMMITTEE". Archived from the original on May 12, 2020. Retrieved December 30, 2019. "Source: Browns eye Condi Rice for HC interview". ESPN.com. November 18, 2018. @AdamSchefter (November 18, 2018). "Browns interested in interviewing Condoleezza Rice for head coaching job, source tells ESPN" (Tweet) – via Twitter. "Condoleezza Rice and Browns deny ESPN report that team wants to interview her for head coach". The Washington Post. November 18, 2018. Retrieved May 26, 2022. "Adam Schefter shares story behind Condoleezza Rice-Browns report". March 3, 2020. Benjamin, Cody (November 22, 2021). "Condoleezza Rice addresses old reports of Browns' interest: 'I certainly don't wanna be a head coach'". CBS Sports. Marinucci, Carla (February 27, 2003). "Security adviser Rice weighs run for governor". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved May 27, 2019. "Rice says has no plan to run for vice president". Reuters. February 22, 2008. Archived from the original on January 22, 2010. Retrieved March 28, 2008. I have always said that the one thing that I have not seen myself doing is running for elected office. "Transcript of Secretary Condoleezza Rice's Interview with the Washington Times Editorial Board". The Washington Times. United States Department of State. March 28, 2008. Archived from the original on February 5, 2009. Retrieved March 28, 2008.Question: "And would you consider vice president?" Rice: "Not interested." "Gallup Polls on GOP VP Preferences". RealClearPolitics. April 4, 2008. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved September 12, 2018. Bruce, Mary (April 6, 2008). "Dan Senor: Condoleezza Rice Is Pursuing the VP Spot". ABC News. Archived from the original on April 7, 2008. Retrieved September 12, 2018. Kessler, Glenn (April 7, 2008). "Rice: Still Not Running for VP". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on March 26, 2012. Retrieved November 3, 2008. McCormack dismissed both as perfectly ordinary. 'I think if you look back at her tenure, in terms of her activities, you will find all of these activities perfectly normal and consistent with the way she has done her job over the past three years or so,' he said. 'If she is actively seeking the vice presidency, then she's the last one to know about it.' Stephanopoulos, George (December 7, 2008). "Rice on Hillary: 'She's Terrific'". ABC News. Archived from the original on December 8, 2008. Retrieved December 7, 2008. "Condoleezza Rice's thoughts on a vice presidency". YouTube. Archived from the original on December 30, 2021. Retrieved January 13, 2021. "Mitt Romney chooses Paul Ryan as running mate". August 11, 2012. Walshe, Shushannah (October 17, 2012). "Condoleezza Rice Joins Paul Ryan on the Campaign Trail". ABC News. Sonmez, Felicia (October 17, 2012). "Condoleezza Rice gives Paul Ryan a boost". Washington Post. "Here are the top takeaways from Bob Woodward's new book on Donald Trump". ABC News. September 4, 2018. Retrieved January 13, 2021. "George W Bush reveals he voted for Condoleezza Rice in 2020 US election". The Guardian. April 23, 2021. Stracqualurs, Veronica (April 23, 2021). "Bush says he wrote in Condoleezza Rice for president in 2020". CNN. Purdum, Todd S. (February 24, 2015). "Dreaming of Condi". Politico. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved November 29, 2018. "The Condoleezza Rice effect". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on November 29, 2018. Retrieved November 29, 2018. OnTheIssues.org. "Condoleezza Rice on the Issues". www.ontheissues.org. Archived from the original on November 29, 2018. Retrieved November 29, 2018. "Rice's stance on controversial issues". POLITICO. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved November 29, 2018. Dana Bash. "The pros and cons of Condi - CNNPolitics". CNN. Archived from the original on November 29, 2018. Retrieved November 29, 2018. "Interview on Fox News Sunday With Chris Wallace". U.S. State Department. December 18, 2005. Archived from the original on November 17, 2017. Retrieved September 12, 2018. "Remarks With Senator Richard Lugar on the U.S. Department of State and the Challenges of the 21st century". U.S. State Department. July 29, 2005. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved June 26, 2012. Allen, Mike (March 13, 2005). "'Mildly Pro-Choice' Rice Won't Rule Out Presidential Bid". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on November 19, 2016. Retrieved August 22, 2017. "2008 run, abortion engage her politically". The Washington Times. March 11, 2005. Archived from the original on September 16, 2018. Retrieved September 12, 2018. Gerhart, Ann (July 19, 2005). "Women Closest to Bush Are Pro-Choice". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved November 29, 2018. Silverstein, Stuart (January 25, 2003). "Rice Considered a Centrist on Affirmative Action at Stanford". Los Angeles Times. ISSN 0458-3035. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved November 29, 2018. "Rice Weighs In on Affirmative Action". Fox News. March 25, 2015. Archived from the original on November 29, 2018. Retrieved November 29, 2018. Zarya, Valentina (February 2, 2017). "Condoleezza Rice and Madeleine Albright Say Trump's Immigration Ban Is a Bad Idea". Fortune. Archived from the original on January 29, 2018. Retrieved January 28, 2018. Breitman, Kendall (November 6, 2014). "Rice warns Obama on immigration". Politico. Archived from the original on January 29, 2018. Retrieved January 28, 2018. Garner, Dwight (October 12, 2010). "Condoleezza Rice's 'Extraordinary, Ordinary People'". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on January 29, 2018. Retrieved January 28, 2018. Bergstrom, William (July 13, 2012). "Rice's stance on controversial issues". POLITICO. Archived from the original on April 11, 2019. Retrieved January 25, 2017. "Condoleezza Rice on Civil Rights". www.ontheissues.org. Archived from the original on February 1, 2017. Retrieved January 25, 2017. Jagannathan, Meera (May 8, 2017). "Condoleezza Rice argues tearing down slave owners' statues is 'sanitizing' history". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on May 16, 2017. Retrieved May 18, 2017. "Condi Rice weighs in on Confederate history". The Dothan Eagle. May 17, 2017. Archived from the original on May 18, 2017. Retrieved May 18, 2017. "Condoleezza Rice's Opening Statement". The Wall Street Journal. January 18, 2005. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved September 12, 2018. "CNN Programs: People in the News". Archived from the original on May 28, 2010. Retrieved June 25, 2010. "Profile: Condoleezza Rice". BBC News. September 25, 2001. Archived from the original on June 28, 2006. Retrieved August 2, 2006. Russakoff, Dale (September 9, 2001). "Lessons of Might and Right: How Segregation and an Indomitable Family Shaped National Security Adviser Condoleezza Rice". Washington Post Magazine. Archived from the original on August 7, 2007. Retrieved April 2, 2007. Correy, Stan (April 3, 2005). "Condoleezza, Condoleezza". Australian Broadcasting Corporation's Radio National. Archived from the original on September 11, 2005. Retrieved July 26, 2006. Jackson, Derrick Z. (November 20, 2002). "A lesson from Condoleezza Rice". racematters.org. Archived from the original on March 14, 2006. Retrieved February 21, 2006. Shannon, Elaine; Ratnesar, Romesh (February 1, 2007). "Rice's Toughest Mission: How Condoleezza Rice hopes to bring peace to the Middle East - and salvage the Administration's foreign policy". Time. Archived from the original on February 4, 2007. Retrieved September 12, 2018. "Cheney In Twilight". Time. March 19, 2007. Archived from the original on April 6, 2013. Retrieved August 20, 2018. MacDonald, Elizabeth; Schoenberger, Chana R. (September 1, 2006). "The World's Most Powerful Women". Forbes. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved August 16, 2018. King, Colbert I. (January 22, 2005). "Why the Crass Remarks About Rice?". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved September 12, 2018. "Barbara Boxer hits Condi below the belt". Foreign Policy. January 12, 2007. Archived from the original on September 21, 2018. Retrieved September 12, 2018. Drosjack, Melissa; Simmons, Greg (January 13, 2007). "White House Spokesman Blasts Sen. Boxer's Exchange With Secretary Rice". Fox News. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved August 20, 2018. Cooper, Helene; Shanker, Thom (January 12, 2007). "Exchange Turns Into Political Flashpoint". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved August 20, 2018. Eggen, Dan (July 20, 2008). "U.S. Talks With Iran Exemplify Bush's New Approaches". The Washington Post. p. A4. Archived from the original on October 13, 2008. Retrieved July 21, 2008. Savage, Luiza (February 14, 2011). "Rumsfeld lashes out at John McCain, Condoleezza Rice, and others. Bush's former secretary of defence is still swinging". Maclean's. Archived from the original on March 20, 2015. Retrieved April 5, 2012. Hartman, Rachel Rose (April 28, 2011). "Condoleezza Rice fires back at 'grumpy' Donald Rumsfeld". The Ticket — Yahoo News. Archived from the original on June 1, 2008. Retrieved June 26, 2012. Rice, Condoleezza (2011). No Higher Honor: A Memoir of My Years in Washington (eBook ed.). New York: Broadway Books. p. 18. ISBN 978-0-307-95247-9. Haq, Husna (September 1, 2011). "Condi Rice fires back at Dick Cheney". The Christian Science Monitor. Archived from the original on March 21, 2017. Retrieved May 5, 2017. Hayes, Stephen F. (October 9, 2006). "In the Driver's Seat". Weekly Standard. 13 (36). Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved May 27, 2019. Rosett, Claudia (August 12, 2008). "Georgia and the American Cowboy". National Review. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved May 27, 2019. Tilove, Jonathon (March 11, 2004). "For Black America, The Thrill of Powell and Rice Is Gone". Newhouse News Service. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved June 26, 2011. Robinson, Eugene (October 25, 2005). "What Rice Can't See". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved August 16, 2018. "Interview with Bill O'Reilly of the O'Reilly Factor on Fox News". O'Reilly Factor. September 14, 2005. Archived from the original on October 22, 2011. Retrieved June 26, 2012 – via state.gov. "Mrs President". October 25, 2005. Archived from the original on March 3, 2008. Retrieved August 16, 2018 – via Mmegi. Page, Clarence (January 10, 2006). "Why Condi's star is rising". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on May 6, 2006. Retrieved July 29, 2006. King, Colbert (January 22, 2005). "Why the Crass Remarks About Rice?". The Washington Post. p. A17. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved August 29, 2006. "NAACP: Calling Rice 'Aunt Jemima' is wrong". Associated Press. November 22, 2004. Archived from the original on June 25, 2008. Retrieved August 17, 2018. Reitwiesner, William Addams. "The Ancestors of Condoleezza Rice". WARGS. Archived from the original on September 16, 2018. Retrieved September 12, 2018. "John Wesley Rice Jr., 77, Father of Bush Adviser". The New York Times. December 29, 2000. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved January 20, 2009. Reitwiesner, William Addams. "Ancestry of Condoleezza Rice". Archived from the original on December 2, 2010. Retrieved March 8, 2010.[self-published source] Zap, Claudine (January 25, 2017). "Ex-Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice Selling Palo Alto Home for $2.35M". Realtor.com. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved September 12, 2018. Rogers, Michael (September 14, 2007). "Yes, Condi, it is Relevant". HuffPost. Archived from the original on February 2, 2017. Retrieved September 12, 2018. Kessler, Glenn (2007). The Confidante: Condoleezza Rice and the Creation of the Bush Legacy. St. Martin's Press. ISBN 978-0312363802. Signorile, Michelangelo (September 14, 2007). "Condi's 'Closest Female Friend'". The Gist. Archived from the original on September 12, 2018. Retrieved September 12, 2018. "Augusta adds first woman members". ESPN.com. Associated Press. August 20, 2012. Archived from the original on August 17, 2018. Retrieved August 20, 2018. "2014 espnW Impact 25". espnW. Retrieved August 27, 2015. Tommasini, Anthony (April 9, 2006). "Condoleezza Rice on Piano". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 8, 2015. Retrieved November 3, 2008. "Yo-Yo Ma and Condoleezza Rice perform a duet". C-SPAN. April 22, 2002. Archived from the original on March 26, 2017. Retrieved May 5, 2017. "Condoleezza Rice plays piano for the Queen". The Daily Telegraph. December 1, 2008. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved August 20, 2018. "Rice performs recital for the Queen". BBC News. December 2, 2008. Archived from the original on July 30, 2018. Retrieved August 20, 2018. Midgette, Anne (July 29, 2010). "Condoleezza Rice, Aretha Franklin: A Philadelphia show of a little R-E-S-P-E-C-T". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on November 13, 2012. Retrieved August 16, 2018. Epstein, Edward (January 1, 2007). "Lantos the master storyteller, communicator". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved August 20, 2018. Watson, Roland (June 13, 2005). "Condoleezza Rice plays it again for Charity". The Times. London. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved September 12, 2018. "MSU Honorary Degree Recipients: Alphabetical List". msu.edu. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved August 27, 2015. "Condoleezza Rice to deliver Commencement address". bc.edu. Archived from the original on September 23, 2015. Retrieved August 27, 2015. "U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice to Receive Honorary Air University Degree". state.gov. April 9, 2008. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved August 27, 2015. "Johnson C. Smith University – Honorary Degrees". jcsu.edu. Archived from the original on July 25, 2015. Retrieved August 27, 2015. "Condoleezza Rice: Honorary Degree Citation". smu.edu. Archived from the original on November 20, 2018. Retrieved August 27, 2015. Erin Zagursky (May 16, 2015). "W&M celebrates more than 2,500 new graduates". wm.edu. Archived from the original on August 13, 2017. Retrieved May 20, 2017. "Condoleezza Rice: "Education is transformative". sewanee.edu. Archived from the original on August 23, 2020. Retrieved May 19, 2018. "Former U.S. Secretary of State to Address the Class of '21". Retrieved December 7, 2021. "::SP FOTOS - Presidencia de la República de Colombia::". historico.presidencia.gov.co. Alexander-Floyd, Nikol G. "Framing Condi (licious): Condoleezza Rice and the Storyline of 'Closeness' in US National Community Formation." Politics & Gender 4.3 (2008): 427–449. online[permanent dead link] Bashevkin, Sylvia. Women as Foreign Policy Leaders: National Security and Gender Politics in Superpower America (Oxford UP, 2018) excerpt; also online review Bracey, Christopher Alan. Saviors or Sellouts: The Promise and Peril of Black Conservatism, from Booker T. Washington to Condoleezza Rice (2008) Burke, John P. "Condoleezza Rice as NSC Advisor: A Case Study of the Honest Broker Role" Presidential Studies Quarterly 35#3 pp 554–575. De Castilla, Clariza Ruiz, and Zazil Elena Reyes García. "From sexual siren to race traitor: Condoleezza Rice in political cartoons." in Howard and Jackson, eds. Black Comics (2013) pp: 169–88. online Dolan, Chris J., and David B. Cohen. "The War About the War: Iraq and the Politics of National Security Advising in the GW Bush Administration's First Term." Politics & Policy 34.1 (2006): 30–64. Gates, Henry Louis, and Condoleezza Rice. "A Conversation with Condoleezza Rice: On Leadership." Du Bois Review: Social Science Research on Race 12.1 (2015): online, a primary source Jones, Jason. "Controlling the discourse: interviews with Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice." Critical Discourse Studies 7.2 (2010): 127–141. [1] Lusane, Clarence. Colin Powell and Condoleezza Rice: Foreign Policy, Race, and the New American Century (2006) online Mann, James. Rise of the Vulcans: The History of Bush's War Cabinet (2004) Pennington, Dorthy. "The 'Rhetorical Condition' as Mediator in the Response of African Americans to Perceptions of Terrorism: Condoleezza Rice as Symbol." The Howard Journal of Communications 22.2 (2011): 123–139. online Bumiller, Elisabeth. Condoleezza Rice: an American life: a biography (Random House, 2007). Cunningham, Kevin (2005). Condoleezza Rice: U.S. Secretary Of State (Journey to Freedom) Child's World ISBN 1-59296-231-9 Ditchfield, Christin (2003). Condoleezza Rice: National Security Advisor (Great Life Stories) middle school audience Franklin Watts Archived April 24, 2023, at the Wayback Machine ISBN 0-531-12307-3 Flanders, Laura. (2004). Bushwomen: Tales of a Cynical Species (Verso) ISBN 978-1-85984-587-5 Kessler, Glenn (2007). The Confidante: Condoleezza Rice and the Creation of the Bush Legacy. ISBN 978-0-312-36380-2 Morris, Dick with Eileen McGann. (2005) Condi vs. Hillary: The Next Great Presidential Race Regan Books ISBN 0-06-083913-9 Marcus Mabry. Twice As Good: Condoleezza Rice and Her Path to Power (Modern Times/Rodale, 2007). Rice, Condoleezza, and President George W. Bush. Hand-Off: The Foreign Policy George W. Bush Passed to Barack Obama (Brookings Institution Press, 2023). excerpt Ryan, Bernard Jr. (2003). Condoleezza Rice: National Security Advisor and Musician (Ferguson Career Biographies) Facts on File ISBN 0-8160-5480-0 Wade, Linda R. (2002). Condoleezza Rice: A Real-Life Reader Biography (Real-Life Reader Biography) Mitchell Lane Publishers ISBN 1-58415-145-5, middle school audience Wade, Mary Dodson (2003). Condoleezza Rice: Being The Best Millbrook Press Lerner Books ISBN 0-7613-1927-1, middle school audience online Rice, Condoleezza (2010). Condoleezza Rice: A Memoir of My Extraordinary, Ordinary Family and Me Ember ISBN 978-0385738804 "Smart, savvy, strong-willed Rice charts her own course". CNN (2001). Cornwell, Rupert (January 20, 2005). "From the axis of evil to the outposts of tyranny". The Independent. Nordlinger, Jay (August 30, 1999). "Star-in-waiting: meet George W.'s foreign-policy czarina". National Review. Richter, Paul (March 15, 2005). "Rice Reshaping Foreign Policy". Los Angeles Times. Richter, Paul (October 11, 2005). "Under Rice, Powell's Policies Are Reborn". Los Angeles Times. Sullivan, Andrew (March 24, 2002). Bush-Rice 2004?. The Sunday Times (London). Biography from the U.S. Department of State Hoover Institution on YouTube. Director: Dr. Condoleeza Rice Appearances on C-SPAN Norwood, Arlisha. "Condoleezza Rice". National Women's History Museum. 2017. Interview with Dr. Condoleeza Rice, 1991-10-01, In Black America; KUT Radio, American Archive of Public Broadcasting (WGBH and the Library of Congress), Portals:  United States  Biography  Politics Condoleezza Rice at Wikipedia's sister projects: Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Data from Wikidata