Spider-Man is a superhero appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics. Created by writer-editor Stan Lee and artist Steve Ditko, he first appeared in the anthology comic book Amazing Fantasy #15 (August 1962) in the Silver Age of Comic Books. He has been featured in comic books, television shows, films, video games, novels, and plays. Spider-Man's secret identity is Peter Benjamin Parker. Initially, Peter was depicted as a teenage high-school student and an orphan raised by his Aunt May and Uncle Ben in New York City after his parents Richard and Mary Parker died in a plane crash. Lee and Ditko had the character deal with the struggles of adolescence and financial issues and gave him many supporting characters, such as Flash Thompson, J. Jonah Jameson, and Harry Osborn; romantic interests Gwen Stacy, Mary Jane Watson, and the Black Cat; and enemies such as the Green Goblin, Doctor Octopus, and Venom. In his origin story, Spider-Man gets his superhuman spider-powers and abilities after being bitten by a radioactive spider. These powers include superhuman strength, agility, reflexes, stamina, durability, coordination, and balance; clinging to surfaces and ceilings like a spider; and detecting danger with his precognition ability called "spider-sense". He builds wrist-mounted "web-shooter" devices that shoot artificial spider-webs of his own design, which he uses both for fighting and for web-swinging across the city. Peter Parker originally used his powers for his own personal gain, but after his Uncle Ben was killed by a thief that Peter could not stop, he began to use his powers to fight crime by becoming Spider-Man. When Spider-Man first appeared in the early 1960s, teenagers in superhero comic books were usually relegated to the role of sidekick to the protagonist. The Spider-Man comic series broke ground by featuring Peter Parker, a high school student from Queens, New York, as Spider-Man's secret identity, whose "self-obsessions with rejection, inadequacy, and loneliness" were issues to which young readers could relate. While Spider-Man was a quintessential sidekick, unlike previous teen heroes Bucky Barnes and Robin, Spider-Man had no superhero mentor like Captain America and Batman; he had learned the lesson for himself that "with great power comes great responsibility"—a line included in a text box in the final panel of the first Spider-Man's origin story, but later retroactively attributed to the late Uncle Ben Parker. Marvel has featured Spider-Man in several comic book series, the first and longest-lasting of which is The Amazing Spider-Man. Since his introduction, the main-continuity version of Peter has gone from a high school student to attending college to currently being somewhere in his late 20s. Peter has been a member of numerous superhero teams, most notably the Avengers and Fantastic Four. Doctor Octopus also took on the identity for a story arc spanning 2012–2014, following a body swap plot in which Peter appears to die. Marvel has also published comic books featuring alternate versions of Spider-Man, including Spider-Man 2099, which features the adventures of Miguel O'Hara, the Spider-Man of the future; Ultimate Spider-Man, which features the adventures of a teenage Peter Parker in the alternate universe; and Ultimate Comics: Spider-Man, which depicts a teenager named Miles Morales who takes up the mantle of Spider-Man after Ultimate Peter Parker's apparent death. Miles later became a superhero in his own right and was brought into mainstream continuity during the Secret Wars event, where he sometimes works alongside the mainline version of Peter. Spider-Man is one of the most popular and commercially successful superheroes. He has appeared in countless forms of media, including several animated TV series: the first original animated series Spider-Man, with Paul Soles voicing the titular character, a live-action television series, syndicated newspaper comic strips, and multiple series of films. Spider-Man was first portrayed in live-action by Danny Seagren in Spidey Super Stories, a recurring skit on The Electric Company from 1974 to 1977. In live-action films, Spider-Man has been portrayed by actors Tobey Maguire in Sam Raimi's Spider-Man trilogy, by Andrew Garfield in two films directed by Marc Webb, and in the Marvel Cinematic Universe by Tom Holland. Reeve Carney originally starred as Spider-Man in the 2010 Broadway musical Spider-Man: Turn Off the Dark. Spider-Man was also voiced by Jake Johnson and Chris Pine in the animated film Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse, with the former reprising his role in the sequel, Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse. In 1962, with the success of the Fantastic Four, Marvel Comics editor and head writer Stan Lee was casting for a new superhero idea. He said the idea for Spider-Man arose from a surge in teenage demand for comic books and the desire to create a character with whom teens could identify.: 1  As with Fantastic Four, Lee saw Spider-Man as an opportunity to "get out of his system" what he felt was missing in comic books. In his autobiography, Lee cites the non-superhuman pulp magazine crime fighter the Spider as a great influence,: 130  and in a multitude of print and video interviews, Lee stated he was inspired by seeing a spider climb up a wall—adding in his autobiography that he has told that story so often he has become unsure of whether or not this is true. Besides the name, the Spider was wanted by both the law and the criminal underworld (a defining theme of Spider-Man's early years) and had through years of ceaseless struggle developed a "sixth sense", which warns him of danger, the inspiration for Spider-Man's "spider-sense". Although at the time teenage superheroes were usually given names ending with "boy", Lee says he chose "Spider-Man" because he wanted the character to age as the series progressed, and felt the name "Spider-Boy" would have made the character sound inferior to other superheroes. He also decided to insert a hyphen in the name, as he felt it looked too similar to Superman, another superhero with a red and blue costume that starts with an "S" and ends with "man" (although artist Steve Ditko intended the character to have an orange and purple costume). At that time, Lee had to get only the consent of Marvel publisher Martin Goodman for the character's approval. In a 1986 interview, Lee described in detail his arguments to overcome Goodman's objections. Goodman eventually agreed to a Spider-Man tryout in what Lee, in numerous interviews, recalled as what would be the final issue of the science-fiction and supernatural anthology series Amazing Adult Fantasy, which was renamed Amazing Fantasy for issue #15 (cover-dated August 1962, on sale June 5, 1962). In particular, Lee stated that the fact that it had already been decided that Amazing Fantasy would be canceled after issue #15 was the only reason Goodman allowed him to use Spider-Man. While this was the final issue, its editorial page anticipated the comic continuing and that "The Spider-Man ... will appear every month in Amazing." Regardless, Lee received Goodman's approval for the name Spider-Man and the "ordinary teen" concept and approached artist Jack Kirby. As comics historian Greg Theakston recounts, Kirby told Lee about an unpublished character on which he had collaborated with Joe Simon in the 1950s, in which an orphaned boy living with an old couple finds a magic ring that granted him superhuman powers. Lee and Kirby "immediately sat down for a story conference," Theakston writes, and Lee afterward directed Kirby to flesh out the character and draw some pages. Steve Ditko would be the inker. When Kirby showed Lee the first six pages, Lee recalled, "I hated the way he was doing it! Not that he did it badly—it just wasn't the character I wanted; it was too heroic".: 12  Lee turned to Ditko, who developed an art style Lee found satisfactory. Ditko recalled: One of the first things I did was to work up a costume. A vital, visual part of the character. I had to know how he looked ... before I did any breakdowns. For example: A clinging power so he wouldn't have hard shoes or boots, a hidden wrist-shooter versus a web gun and holster, etc. ... I wasn't sure Stan would like the idea of covering the character's face but I did it because it hid an obviously boyish face. It would also add mystery to the character.... Although the interior artwork was by Ditko alone, Lee rejected Ditko's cover art and commissioned Kirby to pencil a cover that Ditko inked. As Lee explained in 2010, "I think I had Jack sketch out a cover for it because I always had a lot of confidence in Jack's covers." In an early recollection of the character's creation, Ditko described his and Lee's contributions in a mail interview with Gary Martin published in Comic Fan #2 (Summer 1965): "Stan Lee thought the name up. I did costume, web gimmick on wrist & spider signal." At the time, Ditko shared a Manhattan studio with noted fetish artist Eric Stanton, an art-school classmate who, in a 1988 interview with Theakston, recalled that although his contribution to Spider-Man was "almost nil", he and Ditko had "worked on storyboards together and I added a few ideas. But the whole thing was created by Steve on his own ... I think I added the business about the webs coming out of his hands.": 14  Ditko claimed in a rare interview with Jonathan Ross that the costume was initially envisioned with an orange and purple color scheme, rather than the recognizable red and blue. Kirby disputed Lee's version of the story and claimed Lee had minimal involvement in the character's creation. According to Kirby, the idea for Spider-Man had originated with Kirby and Joe Simon, who in the 1950s had developed a character called the Silver Spider for the Crestwood Publications comic Black Magic, but the character was left unused. Simon, in his 1990 autobiography, disputed Kirby's account, asserting that Black Magic was not a factor and that Simon devised the name "Spider-Man" (later changed to "The Silver Spider"), while Kirby outlined the character's story and powers. Simon later elaborated that his and Kirby's character conception became the basis for Simon's Archie Comics superhero, the Fly. Artist Steve Ditko stated that Lee liked the name Hawkman from DC Comics, and that "Spider-Man" was an outgrowth of that interest. Simon concurred that Kirby had shown the original Spider-Man version to Lee, who liked the idea and assigned Kirby to draw sample pages of the new character, but disliked the results—in Simon's description, "Captain America with cobwebs". Writer Mark Evanier notes that Lee's reasoning that Kirby's character was too heroic seems unlikely—Kirby still drew the covers for Amazing Fantasy #15 and the first issue of The Amazing Spider-Man. Evanier also disputes Kirby's given reason that he was "too busy" to draw Spider-Man in addition to his other duties, since Kirby was, said Evanier, "always busy".: 127  Neither Lee's nor Kirby's explanation explains why key story elements like the magic ring were dropped; Evanier states that the most plausible explanation for the sudden change was that Goodman, or one of his assistants, decided that Spider-Man, as drawn and envisioned by Kirby, was too similar to the Fly.: 127  Author and Ditko scholar Blake Bell writes that it was Ditko who noted the similarities to the Fly. Ditko recalled that "Stan called Jack about the Fly", adding that "[d]ays later, Stan told me I would be penciling the story panel breakdowns from Stan's synopsis." It was at this point that the entire concept of the strip went through a major overhaul. "Out went the magic ring, adult Spider-Man and whatever legend ideas that Spider-Man story would have contained." Lee gave Ditko the premise of a teenager bitten by a spider and developing powers, where Ditko would expand upon to the point he became what Bell describes as "the first work for hire artist of his generation to create and control the narrative arc of his series". On the issue of the initial creation, Ditko stated, "I still don't know whose idea was Spider-Man". Ditko did, however, view the published version of Spider-Man as a separate creation to the one he saw in the five pencilled pages that Kirby had completed. To support this, Ditko used the analogy of the Kirby/Marvel Thor, which was based on a name or idea of a character in Norse mythology: "If Marvel's Thor is a valid created work by Jack, his creation, then why isn't Spider-Man by Stan and me valid created work, our creation?" Kirby noted in a 1971 interview that it was Ditko who "got Spider-Man to roll, and the thing caught on because of what he did". Lee, while claiming credit for the initial idea, had acknowledged Ditko's role, stating, "If Steve wants to be called co-creator, I think he deserves [it]". He has further commented that Ditko's costume design was key to the character's success; since the costume completely covers Spider-Man's body, people of all races could visualize themselves inside the costume and thus easily identify with the character. A few months after Spider-Man's introduction, publisher Goodman reviewed the sales figures for that issue and was shocked to find it was one of the nascent Marvel's highest-selling comics.: 97  A solo ongoing series followed, beginning with The Amazing Spider-Man #1 (cover-dated March 1963). The title eventually became Marvel's top-selling series: 211  with the character swiftly becoming a cultural icon; a 1965 Esquire poll of college campuses found that college students ranked Spider-Man and fellow Marvel hero the Hulk alongside Bob Dylan and Che Guevara as their favorite revolutionary icons. One interviewee selected Spider-Man because he was "beset by woes, money problems, and the question of existence. In short, he is one of us.": 223  Following Ditko's departure after issue #38 (July 1966), John Romita Sr. replaced him as penciller and would draw the series for the next several years. In 1968, Romita would also draw the character's extra-length stories in the comics magazine The Spectacular Spider-Man, a proto-graphic novel designed to appeal to older readers. It lasted for two issues and represented the first Spider-Man spin-off publication, aside from the original series' summer Annuals that began in 1964. An early 1970s Spider-Man story ultimately led to the revision of the Comics Code Authority. Previously, the Code forbade the depiction of the use of illegal drugs, even negatively. However, in 1970, the Nixon administration's Department of Health, Education, and Welfare asked Stan Lee to publish an anti-drug message in one of Marvel's top-selling titles.: 239  Lee chose the top-selling The Amazing Spider-Man; issues #96–98 (May–July 1971) feature a story arc depicting the negative effects of drug use. In the story, Peter Parker's friend Harry Osborn becomes addicted to pills. When Spider-Man fights the Green Goblin (Norman Osborn, Harry's father), Spider-Man defeats him by revealing Harry's drug addiction. While the story had a clear anti-drug message, the Comics Code Authority refused to issue its seal of approval. Marvel nevertheless published the three issues without the Comics Code Authority's approval or seal. The issues sold so well that the industry's self-censorship was undercut, and the Code was subsequently revised.: 239  In 1972, a second monthly ongoing series starring Spider-Man began: Marvel Team-Up, in which Spider-Man was paired with other superheroes and supervillains. From that point on, there have generally been at least two ongoing Spider-Man series at any time. In 1976, his second solo series, Peter Parker, the Spectacular Spider-Man, began running parallel to the main series. A third series featuring Spider-Man, Web of Spider-Man, launched in 1985 to replace Marvel Team-Up. The launch of a fourth monthly title in 1990, the "adjectiveless" Spider-Man (with the storyline "Torment"), written and drawn by popular artist Todd McFarlane, debuted with several different covers, all with the same interior content. All four versions combined sold over three million copies, an industry record at the time. Several miniseries, one-shot issues, and loosely related comics have also been published, and Spider-Man makes frequent cameos and guest appearances in other comic book series. In 1996, The Sensational Spider-Man was created to replace Web of Spider-Man. In 1998, writer-artist John Byrne revamped the origin of Spider-Man in the 13-issue limited series Spider-Man: Chapter One (Dec. 1998–Oct. 1999), similar to Byrne's adding details and some revisions to Superman's origin in DC Comics' The Man of Steel. During that time, the original The Amazing Spider-Man ended with issue #441 (Nov. 1998), and The Amazing Spider-Man started with volume 2, #1 (Jan. 1999). In 2003, Marvel reintroduced the original numbering for The Amazing Spider-Man and what would have been volume 2, #59, became issue #500 (Dec. 2003). When the main series The Amazing Spider-Man reached issue #545 (Dec. 2007), Marvel dropped its spin-off ongoing series and instead began publishing The Amazing Spider-Man three times monthly, beginning with #546–548 (all January 2008). The scheduling of The Amazing Spider-Man lasted until November 2010, when the comic book expanded from 22 pages to 30 pages for each issue. Later on, The Amazing Spider-Man was published twice a month, beginning with #648–649 (both November 2010). The following year, Marvel launched Avenging Spider-Man as the first spin-off ongoing series in addition to The Amazing Spider-Man, since the previous ones were canceled at the end of 2007. The Amazing series temporarily ended with issue #700 in December 2012 and was replaced by The Superior Spider-Man, which had Doctor Octopus serve as the new Spider-Man by taking over Peter Parker's body. Superior was an enormous commercial success for Marvel, and ran for 31 issues before the real Peter Parker returned in a newly relaunched The Amazing Spider-Man #1 in April 2014. Following the 2015 Secret Wars crossover event, a number of Spider-Man-related titles were either relaunched or created as part of the "All-New, All-Different Marvel" event. Among them, The Amazing Spider-Man was relaunched and primarily focuses on Peter Parker continuing to run Parker Industries and becomes a successful businessman who is operating worldwide. In Forest Hills, Queens, New York City, Midtown High School student Peter Benjamin Parker is a science-whiz orphan living with his Uncle Ben and Aunt May. As depicted in Amazing Fantasy #15 (Aug. 1962), he is bitten by a radioactive spider (erroneously classified as an insect in the panel) at a science exhibit and "acquires the agility and proportionate strength of an arachnid". Along with heightened athletic abilities, Parker gains the ability to adhere to walls and ceilings. Through his knack for science, he develops a gadget that lets him fire adhesive webbing of his own design through small, wrist-mounted barrels. Initially seeking to capitalize on his new abilities, Parker dons a costume and, as "Spider-Man", becomes a novelty television star. However, "[h]e blithely ignores the chance to stop a fleeing thief, [and] his indifference ironically catches up with him when the same criminal later robs and kills his Uncle Ben." Spider-Man tracks and subdues the killer and learns, in the story's next-to-last caption, "With great power there must also come—great responsibility!" In the first issue of The Amazing Spider-Man (March 1963), despite his superpowers, Peter struggles to help his widowed Aunt May pay the rent, is taunted by Flash, and continues fighting crime and saving the city as Spider-Man, but his heroic deeds engender the editorial wrath of newspaper publisher of the Daily Bugle, J. Jonah Jameson, holds a grudge against Spider-Man, and continues making false statements about Spider-Man despite his heroism. Peter gets hired as a freelance photographer by Mr. Jameson to take pictures of Spider-Man, with him being unaware that Spider-Man is Peter Parker. Spider-Man fights his enemies, including superpowered and non-superpowered supervillains—his archenemy and nemesis Green Goblin and then Doctor Octopus, Sandman, Chameleon, Lizard, Vulture, Kraven the Hunter, Electro, and Mysterio, defeating them one by one—but Peter finds juggling his personal and superhero life difficult. In time, Peter graduates from high school and enrolls at Empire State University (a fictional institution evoking the real-life Columbia University and New York University), where he meets roommate and best friend Harry Osborn and girlfriend Gwen Stacy, and Aunt May introduces him to Mary Jane Watson. As Peter deals with Harry's drug problems, and Harry's father, Norman Osborn, is revealed to be the Green Goblin, Peter attempts to give up his costumed identity for a while. Gwen Stacy's father, New York City Police detective Captain George Stacy, is accidentally killed during a battle between Spider-Man and Doctor Octopus (issue #90, November 1970). In issue #121 (June 1973), the Green Goblin throws Gwen Stacy from a tower of either the Brooklyn Bridge (as depicted in the art) or the George Washington Bridge (as given in the text). She dies during Spider-Man's rescue attempt, and Spider-Man swears revenge against his nemesis; a note on the letters page of issue #125 states: "It saddens us to say that the whiplash effect she underwent when Spidey's webbing stopped her so suddenly was, in fact, what killed her." The following issue, Spider-Man vengefully attacks and overpowers the Green Goblin, who kills himself accidentally in the ensuing battle with Spider-Man. Working through his grief, Peter eventually develops tentative feelings toward Mary Jane, and the two "become confidants rather than lovers". A romantic relationship eventually develops, with Parker proposing to her in issue #182 (July 1978), and being turned down an issue later. Peter went on to graduate from college in issue #185, and becomes involved with the shy Debra Whitman and the extroverted, flirtatious costumed thief Felicia Hardy, a.k.a. the Black Cat, whom he meets in issue #194 (July 1979). From 1984 to 1988, Spider-Man wore a black costume with a white spider design on his chest. The new costume originated in the Secret Wars miniseries on an alien planet where Spider-Man participates in a battle between Earth's major superheroes and supervillains. He continues wearing the costume when he returns, starting in The Amazing Spider-Man #252. The change to a longstanding character's design met with controversy, "with many hardcore comics fans decrying it as tantamount to sacrilege. Spider-Man's traditional red and blue costume was iconic, they argued, on par with those of his D.C. rivals Superman and Batman." The creators then revealed the costume was an alien symbiote, which Spider-Man rejects after a difficult struggle, though the symbiote returns several times as Venom for revenge. Peter proposes to Mary Jane in The Amazing Spider-Man #290 (July 1987), and she accepts two issues later, with the wedding taking place in The Amazing Spider-Man Annual #21 (1987)—promoted with a real-life mock wedding using actors at Shea Stadium, with Stan Lee officiating, on June 5, 1987. David Michelinie, who scripted based on a plot by editor-in-chief Jim Shooter, said in 2007, "I didn't think they actually should [have gotten] married. ... I had actually planned another version, one that wasn't used." Peter publishes a book of Spider-Man photographs called Webs, and returns to his Empire State University graduate studies in biochemistry in #310 (Dec. 1988). In the controversial 1990s storyline the "Clone Saga", a clone of Parker, created in 1970s comics by insane scientist Miles Warren, a.k.a. the Jackal, returns to New York City upon hearing of Aunt May's health worsening. The clone had lived incognito as Ben Reilly, but now assumes the superhero guise the Scarlet Spider and allies with Parker. To the surprise of both, new tests indicate Ben is the original and Peter is the clone. Complicating matters, Mary Jane announces in The Spectacular Spider-Man #220 (Jan. 1995) that she is pregnant with Peter's baby. Later, however, a resurrected Green Goblin (Norman Osborn) has Mary Jane poisoned, causing premature labor and the death of her and Peter's unborn daughter. It is later revealed that The Green Goblin switched the results of the clone test in an attempt to destroy Peter's life by making him believe himself to be the clone. Ben is killed while saving Peter, in Peter Parker: Spider-Man #75 (Dec. 1996), and his body immediately crumbles into dust, confirming Ben was the clone. In issue #97 (Nov. 1998) of the second series titled Peter Parker: Spider-Man, Parker learns his Norman Osborn kidnapped Aunt May and her apparent death in The Amazing Spider-Man #400 (April 1995) had been a hoax. Shortly afterward, in The Amazing Spider-Man (vol. 2) #13 (#454, Jan. 2000), Mary Jane is killed in an airplane explosion. She is revealed to be alive in volume 2, issue #28 (#469, April 2001), but she and Peter are completely separated in the following issue. Babylon 5 creator J. Michael Straczynski began writing The Amazing Spider-Man, illustrated by John Romita Jr., beginning with volume 2, #30 (#471, June 2001). Two issues later, Peter, now employed as a teacher at his old high school, meets the enigmatic Ezekiel Sims, who possesses similar spider powers and suggests that Peter, having gained such abilities, might not have been a fluke—that Parker has a connection to a totemic spider spirit. In vol. 2, #37 (#478, Jan. 2002), Aunt May discovers her nephew is Spider-Man. Peter and Mary Jane reconcile in (vol. 2) #50 (#491, April 2003), and in #512 (Nov. 2004)—the original issue numbering having returned with #500—Parker learns his late girlfriend Gwen Stacy had had two children with Norman Osborn. He joins the superhero team The New Avengers in New Avengers #1–2. After a deranged, superpowered former high-school classmate destroys their respective homes, Peter, Mary Jane, and May move into Stark Tower, and Peter begins working as Tony Stark's assistant while freelancing for The Daily Bugle and continuing his teacher career. In the 12-part 2005 story arc "The Other", Peter undergoes a transformation that evolves his powers. In the comic Civil War #2 (June 2006), part of the company-wide crossover arc of that title, the U.S. government's Superhuman Registration Act leads Spider-Man to reveal his true identity publicly. A growing unease about the Registration Act prompts him to escape with May and Mary Jane and joins the anti-registration underground. In issue #537 (Dec. 2006), Aunt May is critically wounded from Wilson Fisk's sniper, and enters into a coma. Peter, desperate to save her, exhausts all possibilities and makes a pact with the demon-lord Mephisto, who saves May's life in exchange for Peter and Mary Jane agreeing to have their marriage and all memory of it disappear. In this changed reality, Spider-Man's identity is secret once again, and in #545 (Jan. 2008), Mary Jane returns and is cold toward him. The controversial storyline "One More Day" rolled back much of the fictional continuity at the behest of editor-in-chief Joe Quesada, who said, "Peter being single is an intrinsic part of the very foundation of the world of Spider-Man". It caused unusual public friction between Quesada and writer Straczynski, who "told Joe that I was going to take my name off the last two issues of the [story] arc", but was talked out of doing so. At issue with Straczynski's climax to the arc, Quesada said, was ...that we didn't receive the story and methodology to the resolution that we were all expecting. What made that very problematic is that we had four writers and artists well underway on [the sequel arc] "Brand New Day" that were expecting and needed "One More Day" to end in the way that we had all agreed it would. ... The fact that we had to ask for the story to move back to its original intent understandably made Joe upset and caused some major delays and page increases in the series. Also, the science that Joe was going to apply to the retcon of the marriage would have made over 30 years of Spider-Man books worthless, because they never would have had happened. ...[I]t would have reset way too many things outside of the Spider-Man titles. We just couldn't go there.... In this new continuity, designed to have very limited repercussions throughout the remainder of the Marvel Universe, Parker returns to work at the Daily Bugle, which has been renamed The DB under a new publisher. He soon switches to the alternative press paper The Front Line. J. Jonah Jameson becomes the Mayor of New York City in issue #591 (June 2008). Jonah's estranged father, J. Jonah Jameson Sr., marries May in issue #600 (Sept. 2009). During the "Secret Invasion" by shape-shifting extraterrestrials, the Skrulls, Norman Osborn shoots and kills the Skrull queen Veranke. He leverages this widely publicized success, positioning himself as the new director of the S.H.I.E.L.D.-like paramilitary force H.A.M.M.E.R. to advance his agenda, while using his public image to start his own Dark Avengers. Norman, by himself, leads the Dark Avengers as the Iron Patriot, a suit of armor fashioned by himself after Iron Man's armor with Captain America's colors. Harry is approached by Norman with the offer of a job within the Dark Avengers. It is later revealed that it is a ruse to coerce Harry into taking the American Son armor, whom Norman had planned to kill, in order to increase public sympathy. When Harry has the option of killing Norman, Spider-Man says to decapitate him, since Norman's healing factor may repair a blow to the head. Spider-Man also cautions Harry that killing Norman will cause Harry to "become the son Norman always wanted". Harry instead backs down, and turns away from his father forever. At Loki's suggestion, Norman Osborn creates a rationale to invade Asgard, claiming the world poses a national security threat. He is defeated, and ends up incarcerated in the Raft penitentiary. A conflict between Spider-Man and Doctor Octopus over Osborn's son ends when it is revealed the child's father is Harry, who leaves town to raise him. One of Doctor Octopus' Octobots swaps his and Spider-Man's personality, causing Peter to become trapped in the Doctor's dying body, while he in turn claimed Peter's life for himself. Though Peter failed to reverse the change, he manages to establish a weak link with the Doctor's mind, forcing him to relive all of his memories; Otto understands Peter's ideals of power and responsibility and swears to carry on with Peter's life with dignity as a "Superior" Spider-Man. A portion of Peter survived in his original body in the form of a subconsciousness. Later, realizing that he failed in his role as the "Superior" Spider-Man, Otto willingly allows Peter to reclaim his body in order to defeat Osborn and save Anna Maria Marconi, Otto's love. In the aftermath of these events, Peter began to amend the relationships damaged by Otto's arrogance and negligence, both as Peter Parker and Spider-Man. He additionally took up the reins of Parker Industries, a small company founded by Otto after leaving Horizon Labs. Peter soon learns a second person had been bitten by the radioactive spider, Cindy Moon. Spider-Man tracks her down and frees her from a bunker owned by the late Ezekiel Simms. Not long after rescuing Cindy, who went on to adopt her own heroine identity as Silk, Spider-Man encounters a contingent of spider-people from all over the Multiverse that banded together to fight the Inheritors, a group of psychic vampires who had begun to hunt down the spider-totems of other realities. During a mission to gather more recruits in 2099, the Spider-Army stumbled upon another party of spider-people led by an alternate version of Otto Octavius. Together, they neutralize the Inheritors. Peter then stops a nefarious plan put forward by the Jackal. After the events of "Go Down Swinging", Peter's life was plagued with problems on both sides. As Spider-Man, Mayor Fisk publicly supports him, condemning all other vigilantes in order to isolate him from his superhero peers. As Peter Parker, his academic credentials were revoked after accusations of plagiarizing his doctoral dissertation from Octavius, resulting in Peter being fired from the Daily Bugle. Subsequently, Peter became romantically involved with Mary Jane. Briefly, Peter Parker and Spider-Man split into separate beings due to an accident involving the reverse-engineered Isotope Genome Accelerator. Peter eventually manages to reverse the process, and merges his two halves back together before the side-effects worsen and result in their death. Kindred uses the resurrected Sin-Eater's sins to possess Miles Morales, Spider-Gwen, Spider-Woman, Anya Corazon, and Julia Carpenter. Doctor Strange, who manages to restrain a possessed Silk, agrees to help Spider-Man. However, Peter dies when fighting Kindred. While dead, Peter's consciousness remembers the fateful day of the start of One More Day; Kindred is willing to resurrect Peter. "People often say glibly that Marvel succeeded by blending super hero adventure stories with soap opera. What Lee and Ditko actually did in The Amazing Spider-Man was to make the series an ongoing novelistic chronicle of the lead character's life. Most super heroes had problems no more complex or relevant to their readers' lives than thwarting this month's bad guys... Parker had far more serious concern in his life: coming to terms with the death of a loved one, falling in love for the first time, struggling to make a living, and undergoing crises of conscience." Comics historian Peter Sanderson Sally Kempton for the Village Voice opined in 1965 that "Spider-Man has a terrible identity problem, a marked inferiority complex, and a fear of women. He is antisocial, castration-ridden, racked with Oedipal guilt, and accident-prone ... [a] functioning neurotic". Agonizing over his choices, always attempting to do right, he is nonetheless viewed with suspicion by the authorities, who seem unsure as to whether he is a helpful vigilante or a clever criminal. Cultural historian Bradford W. Wright notes: Spider-Man's plight was to be misunderstood and persecuted by the very public that he swore to protect. In the first issue of The Amazing Spider-Man, J. Jonah Jameson, publisher of the Daily Bugle, launches an editorial campaign against the "Spider-Man menace". The resulting negative publicity exacerbates popular suspicions about the mysterious Spider-Man and makes it impossible for him to earn any more money by performing. Eventually, the bad press leads the authorities to brand him an outlaw. Ironically, Peter finally lands a job as a photographer for Jameson's Daily Bugle.: 212  The mid-1960s stories reflect the political tensions of the time; early 1960s Marvel stories often deal with the Cold War and communism.: 220–223  Wright writes: From his high-school beginnings to his entry into college life, Spider-Man remained the superhero most relevant to the world of young people. Fittingly, then, his comic book also contained some of the earliest references to the politics of young people. In 1968, in the wake of actual militant student demonstrations at Columbia University, Peter Parker finds himself in the midst of similar unrest at his Empire State University.... Peter has to reconcile his natural sympathy for the students with his assumed obligation to combat lawlessness as Spider-Man. As a law-upholding liberal, he finds himself caught between militant leftism and angry conservatives.: 234–235  Peter Parker has superhuman spider-powers and abilities derived from mutations resulting from the bite of a radioactive spider. Since the original Lee-Ditko stories, Spider-Man has had the ability to cling to walls. This has been speculated to be based on a distance-dependent interaction between his body and surfaces, known as the van der Waals force, though in the 2002 Spider-Man film, his hands and feet are lined with tiny clinging cilia in the manner of a real spider's feet. Spider-Man's other powers include superhuman strength, agility, and balance and a precognitive sixth sense referred to as his "spider-sense", which alerts him to danger. Spider-Man has a healing factor that allows him to recover from injuries sustained during battle. In the aftermath of the 1989 "Acts of Vengeance" storyline, Spider-Man was said to have "superhuman recuperative abilities" that sped up his recovery from the exhaustion he suffered in defeating the Tri-Sentinel. The character was originally conceived by Stan Lee and Steve Ditko as intellectually gifted, and later writers have depicted his intellect at genius level. After years of fighting, Peter honed his skill into an equivalent of martial arts that is unique to his powers. Academically brilliant, Peter has expertise in the fields of applied science, chemistry, physics, biology, engineering, mathematics, and mechanics. With his talents, he sews his own costume to conceal his identity, and he constructs many devices that complement his powers, most notably mechanical web-shooters that allow him to shoot webs, swing at high speeds throughout the city, and navigate and trap his enemies with his webs, additionally with a spider-signal as a flashlight and a warning beacon to criminals. Thomas Fireheart's scientists, world-renowned, are unable to replicate the fluid Parker created while in high school. Original depiction In Marvel Comics Universe 2410, a boy named Petor was about to be born to a mother named Mari and a father named Rikkar, when suddenly an evil witch came to their village and contaminated the water well with her blood. Therefore, all the children of that village were born as mutants and monsters and were killed at birth. But Petor's mother did not want to kill him and raised him in the forest (without her husband knowing). 15 years later, the village was attacked by invaders called the Creons, so Petor came to the village to defend it. He managed to defeat the attackers, but he lost his mother and his father did not recognize him, and as a result, he was once again rejected from the village. This Spider-Man was seen in What If...? V1 55, titled "What If... The Avengers Lost Operation Galactic Storm?" In fact, "Operation Galactic Storm" was one of the most important and controversial events of Marvel, which was published in 1992. In this event, the Avengers get involved in a war between two alien races, the Kree and the Shi'ar. In this story, the Shi'ar detonate a bomb that kills millions of Kree. Then the Avengers realize that everything is under the supervision of a being called the Supreme Intelligence. They decide to execute him. Captain America strongly opposes this act. This controversial decision was unprecedented in the world of comics at that time. The Avengers manage to stop the killing of the Kree, but surprisingly, instead of thanking the Avengers, they attack and destroy Earth. In a panel, we see that Spider-Man takes the body of his wife, Mary Jane, and then everything is destroyed. Spider-Man has had a large range of supporting characters introduced in the comics that are essential in the issues and storylines that star him. After his parents died, Peter Parker was raised by his loving aunt, May Parker, and his uncle and father figure, Ben Parker. After Uncle Ben is murdered by a burglar, Aunt May is virtually Peter's only family, and she and Peter are very close. J. Jonah Jameson is the publisher of the Daily Bugle and Peter Parker's boss. A harsh critic of Spider-Man, he constantly features negative articles about the superhero in his newspaper. Despite his role as Jameson's editor and confidant, Robbie Robertson is always depicted as a supporter of both Spider-Man and his alter ego Peter Parker. Eugene "Flash" Thompson is commonly depicted as Peter Parker's high school tormentor and bully, who idolizes Spider-Man, but is unaware that Spider-Man is Peter Parker. Later, he becomes a friend of Peter and adopts his own superhero identity, Agent Venom, after merging with the Venom symbiote. Meanwhile, Harry Osborn, son of Norman Osborn, is most commonly recognized as Peter's best friend, although some versions depicted him as his rival. Writers and artists over the years have established a rogues gallery of supervillains to face Spider-Man, in comics and in other media. As with Spider-Man, the majority of the villains' powers originate with scientific accidents or the misuse of scientific technology, and many have animal-themed costumes or powers. The following Spider-Man villains are listed in the ordering of their original chronological appearance:   Indicates a group. Unlike most superheroes, Spider-Man does not have a single villain with whom he has come into conflict the most. Instead, he is often regarded as having three archenemies: ^ Doctor Octopus (a.k.a. Doc Ock) is a highly intelligent mad scientist who uses four mechanical appendages for both movement and combat. He has been described as Spider-Man's greatest enemy, and the man Peter Parker might have become if he had not been raised with a sense of responsibility. Doc Ock is infamous for defeating him the first time in battle and for almost marrying Peter's Aunt May. He is also the core leader of the Sinister Six, and at one point adopted the "Master Planner" alias. ("If This Be My Destiny...!") Later depictions revealed him in Peter Parker's body, where he was the titular character for a while. ^ The Norman Osborn version of the Green Goblin is most commonly regarded as Spider-Man's arch-enemy. While Norman is usually portrayed as an amoral industrialist and the head of the Oscorp scientific corporation, the Goblin is a psychopathic alternate personality, born after Norman's exposore to some unstable chemicals that also increased his strength and agility. The Goblin is a Halloween-themed villain, dressing up like an actual goblin and utilizing a large arsenal of high tech weapons, including a glider and pumpkin-shaped explosives. Unlike most villains, who only aim to kill Spider-Man, the Goblin also targets his loved ones and shows no remorse in killing them as long as it caused pain to Spider-Man. His most infamous feat is killing Spider-Man's girlfriend, in what became one of the most famous Spider-Man stories of all time and helped to end the Silver Age of Comic Books and begin the Bronze Age of Comic Books. While the Goblin was killed in the same story, he returned in the 1990s to plague Spider-Man once again, committing more heinous acts (such as being involved in the murder of Aunt May). He also came into conflict with other heroes, such as the Avengers. Norman is sometimes depicted as an enemy of Spider-Man, even when not being the Green Goblin. ^ The Eddie Brock incarnation of Venom is often regarded as Spider-Man's deadliest foe, and has been described as an evil mirror version of Spider-Man in many ways. He is also among Spider-Man's most popular villains. Originally a reporter who grew to despise Spider-Man, Eddie later came into contact with the Venom symbiote, which had been rejected by Spider-Man. The symbiote merges with Eddie and gives him the same powers as Spider-Man, in addition to making him immune to the web-slinger's "spider-sense". Venom's main goal is to ruin Peter Parker's life and mentally confuse him in any way he can. The character has a sense of honor and justice, and later starred in his own comic book stories, where he is depicted as an antihero and has a desire to protect innocent people from harm. On several occasions, he and Spider-Man even put their differences aside and became allies. Peter Parker's romantic interests range between his first crush, fellow high-school student Liz Allan, to having his first date with Betty Brant, secretary to the Daily Bugle newspaper publisher J. Jonah Jameson. After his breakup with Betty Brant, Peter eventually falls in love with his college girlfriend Gwen Stacy, daughter of New York City Police Department detective Captain George Stacy, both of whom are later killed by supervillain enemies of Spider-Man. Mary Jane Watson became Peter's best friend and eventually his wife. Felicia Hardy, the Black Cat, is a reformed cat burglar who had been Spider-Man's sole superhuman girlfriend and partner at one point. Over the course of the comics, Peter Parker had several biological children across different continuities, usually with Mary Jane Watson, including Spider-Girl (Mayday Parker) and Benjy Parker from the MC2 universe, and Spiderling (Annie Parker) from Earth-18119. Within the Marvel Universe, there exists a multiverse with many variations of Spider-Man. An early character included in the 1980s is the fictional anthropomorphic animal parody of Spider-Man as a pig named Spider-Ham (Peter Porker). Many imprints of Spider-Men were created, like the futuristic version of Spider-Man in Marvel 2099 named Miguel O'Hara. In the Marvel Comics 2 imprint, Peter marries Mary Jane and has a daughter named Mayday Parker, who carries on Spider-Man's legacy, while Marvel Noir has a 1930s version of Peter Parker. Other themed versions exist within the early 2000s, such as a Marvel Mangaverse version and an Indian version from Spider-Man: India, Pavitr Prabhakar. Ultimate Spider-Man was a popular modern retelling of Spider-Man, Peter Parker. The version of Peter Parker would later be depicted as being killed off and replaced by a Black Hispanic Spider-Man named Miles Morales. The storyline "Spider-Verse" brought back many alternate takes on Spider-Man and introduced many new ones, such as an alternate world where Gwen Stacy gets bitten by a radioactive spider instead, along with a British-themed version named Spider-UK, who is Billy Braddock from the Captain Britain Corps. In The Creation of Spider-Man, comic book writer-editor and historian Paul Kupperberg calls the character's superpowers "nothing too original"; what was original was that outside his secret identity, he was a "nerdy high school student".: 5  Going against typical superhero fare, Spider-Man included "heavy doses of soap-opera and elements of melodrama". Kupperberg feels that Lee and Ditko had created something new in the world of comics: "the flawed superhero with everyday problems". This idea spawned a comics revolution.: 6  The insecurity and anxieties in Marvel's early 1960s comic books, such as The Amazing Spider-Man, The Incredible Hulk, The Fantastic Four, and The X-Men ushered in a new type of superhero, very different from the certain and all-powerful superheroes before them, and changed the public's perception of them. After the comics depicted a real address in Forest Hills, Queens, New York, as May Parker's residence, its residents received many letters from children to the superhero. Spider-Man has become one of the most recognizable fictional characters in the world, and has been used to sell toys, games, cereal, candy, soap, and many other products. He has been used as the company mascot. When Marvel became the first comic book company to be listed on the New York Stock Exchange in 1991, The Wall Street Journal announced "Spider-Man is coming to Wall Street"; the event was in turn promoted with an actor in a Spider-Man costume accompanying Stan Lee to the Stock Exchange.: 254  Since 1962, hundreds of millions of comics featuring the character have been sold around the world. Spider-Man is the world's most profitable superhero.[needs update] In 2014, global retail sales of licensed products related to Spider-Man reached approximately $1.3 billion. Comparatively, this amount exceeds the global licensing revenue of Batman, Superman, and the Avengers combined. Spider-Man joined the Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade from 1987 to 1998 as one of the balloon floats, designed by John Romita Sr., one of the character's signature artists. A new, different Spider-Man balloon float also appeared from 2009 to 2014. When Marvel wanted to issue a story dealing with the immediate aftermath of the September 11 attacks, the company chose the December 2001 issue of The Amazing Spider-Man. In 2006, Spider-Man garnered major media coverage with the revelation of the character's secret identity, an event detailed in a full-page story in the New York Post before the issue containing the story was even released. In 2008, Marvel announced plans to release a series of educational comics the following year in partnership with the United Nations, depicting Spider-Man alongside the UN Peacekeeping Forces to highlight UN peacekeeping missions. A BusinessWeek article listed Spider-Man as one of the top 10 most intelligent fictional characters in American comics. In 2015, the Supreme Court of the United States decided Kimble v. Marvel Entertainment, LLC, a case concerning royalties on a patent for an imitation web shooter. The opinion for the Court, by Justice Elena Kagan, included several Spider-Man references, concluding with the statement that "with great power, there must also come—great responsibility". Spider-Man has become a subject of scientific inquiry. In 1987, researchers at Loyola University conducted a study into the utility of Spider-Man comics for informing children and parents about issues relating to child abuse. The culmination of nearly every superhero that came before him, Spider-Man is the hero of heroes. He's got fun and cool powers, but not on the god-like level of Thor. He's just a normal guy with girlfriend problems and money issues, so he's more relatable than playboy billionaire Iron Man. And he's an awkward teenager, not a wizened adult like Captain America. Not too hot and not too cold, Spider-Man is just right. —IGN staff on placing Spider-Man as the number one hero of Marvel. In 2005, Bravo's Ultimate Super Heroes, Vixens, and Villains TV series declared that Spider-Man was the number 1 superhero. Empire magazine ranked him the fifth-greatest comic book character of all time. Wizard magazine placed Spider-Man as the third-greatest comic book character on their website. In 2011, Spider-Man placed third on IGN's Top 100 Comic Book Heroes of All Time, behind DC Comics characters Superman and Batman, and sixth in their 2012 list of "The Top 50 Avengers". In 2014, IGN identified Spider-Man the greatest Marvel Comics character of all time. A 2015 poll at Comic Book Resources named Spider-Man the greatest Marvel character of all time. IGN described him as the common everyman that represents many normal people, but also noted his uniqueness compared to many superheroes with his depicted flaws as a superhero. IGN wrote that despite being one of the most tragic superheroes of all time, he is "one of the most fun and snarky superheroes in existence." Empire praised Spider-Man's always-present sense of humor and wisecracks in the face of the many tragedies he faces. The magazine website appraised the depiction of his "iconic" superhero poses, describing it as "a top artist's dream". George Marston of Newsarama called Spider-Man's origin the greatest origin story of all time, opining that "Spider-Man's origin combines all of the most classic aspects of pathos, tragedy and scientific wonder into the perfect blend for a superhero origin." Real-life people who have been compared to Spider-Man for their climbing feats include: In 1981, skyscraper-safety activist Dan Goodwin, wearing a Spider-Man suit, scaled the Sears Tower in Chicago, Illinois, the Renaissance Tower in Dallas, Texas, and the John Hancock Center in Chicago. Alain Robert, nicknamed "Spider-Man", is a rock and urban climber who has scaled more than 70 tall buildings using his hands and feet, without using additional devices. He sometimes wears a Spider-Man suit during his climbs. In May 2003, he was paid approximately $18,000 to climb the 95-metre (312 ft) Lloyd's building to promote the premiere of the movie Spider-Man on the British television channel Sky Movies. "The Human Spider", alias Bill Strother, scaled the Lamar Building in Augusta, Georgia, in 1921. In Argentina, criminals that climb buildings and trespass into private property through the open balconies are said to use the "Spider-Man method" (in Spanish, el Hombre Araña). Spider-Man in film Spider-Man has appeared in comics, cartoons, films, video games, coloring books, novels, records, children's books, and theme park rides. On television, he first starred in the ABC animated series Spider-Man (1967–1970), Spidey Super Stories (1974–1977) on PBS, and the CBS live-action series The Amazing Spider-Man (1978–1979), starring Nicholas Hammond. Other animated series featuring the superhero include the syndicated Spider-Man (1981–1982), Spider-Man and His Amazing Friends (1981–1983), Fox Kids' Spider-Man (1994–1998), Spider-Man Unlimited (1999–2000), Spider-Man: The New Animated Series (2003), The Spectacular Spider-Man (2008–2009), Ultimate Spider-Man (2012–2017), Disney XD's Spider-Man (2017–2020), and Spidey and His Amazing Friends (2021–present). A tokusatsu series featuring Spider-Man was produced by Toei and aired in Japan. It is commonly referred to by its Japanese pronunciation Supaidā-Man. Spider-Man also appeared in other print forms besides the comics, including novels, children's books, and the daily newspaper comic strip The Amazing Spider-Man, which debuted in January 1977, with the earliest installments written by Stan Lee and drawn by John Romita Sr. Spider-Man has been adapted to other media including games, toys, collectibles, and miscellaneous memorabilia, and has appeared as the main character in numerous computer and video games on over 15 gaming platforms. Spider-Man was featured in a trilogy of live-action films directed by Sam Raimi and starring Tobey Maguire as the titular superhero. The first Spider-Man film of the trilogy was released on May 3, 2002, followed by Spider-Man 2 (2004) and Spider-Man 3 (2007). A third sequel was originally scheduled to be released in 2011; however, Sony later decided to reboot the franchise with a new director and cast. The reboot, titled The Amazing Spider-Man, was released on July 3, 2012, directed by Marc Webb, and starred Andrew Garfield as the new Spider-Man. It was followed by The Amazing Spider-Man 2 (2014). In 2015, Sony and Disney made a deal for Spider-Man to appear in the Marvel Cinematic Universe. Tom Holland made his debut as Spider-Man in the MCU film Captain America: Civil War (2016), before later starring in his standalone film Spider-Man: Homecoming (2017), directed by Jon Watts. Holland reprised his role as Spider-Man in Avengers: Infinity War (2018), Avengers: Endgame (2019), Spider-Man: Far From Home (2019), and Spider-Man: No Way Home (2021); Maguire and Garfield reprise their roles in the latter film. Jake Johnson voiced an alternate universe version of Spider-Man in the animated film Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse, and reprised the role in its sequel Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse (2023). Chris Pine also voiced another version of Peter Parker in Into the Spider-Verse. Following a brief contract dispute over financial terms, in 2019, Sony and Disney reached a deal to allow Spider-Man to return to the MCU, with the two studios jointly producing Spider-Man films. A Broadway musical, Spider-Man: Turn Off the Dark, began previews on November 14, 2010, at the Foxwoods Theatre on Broadway, with the official opening night on June 14, 2011. The music and lyrics were written by Bono and The Edge of the rock group U2, with a book by Julie Taymor, Glen Berger, and Roberto Aguirre-Sacasa. Turn Off the Dark is currently the most expensive musical in Broadway history, costing an estimated $70 million. In addition, the show's unusually high running costs are reported to have been about $1.2 million per week. In the fine arts, since the Pop Art period of the 1960s, the character of Spider-Man has been "appropriated" by multiple visual artists and incorporated into contemporary artwork, including Andy Warhol, Roy Lichtenstein, Mel Ramos, Dulce Pinzon, Mr. Brainwash, and F. Lennox Campello,. List of Spider-Man storylines List of Marvel Comics superhero debuts With great power comes great responsibility The Leopard from Lime Street Lee, Stan; Mair, George (2002). Excelsior!: The Amazing Life of Stan Lee. Fireside. p. 135. ISBN 978-0-684-87305-3. Detroit Free Press interview with Stan Lee, quoted in The Steve Ditko Reader by Greg Theakston (Pure Imagination, Brooklyn, NY; ISBN 1-56685-011-8), p. 12 (unnumbered). "He gave me 1,000 reasons why Spider-Man would never work. Nobody likes spiders; it sounds too much like Superman, and how could a teenager be a superhero? Then I told him I wanted the character to be a very human guy, someone who makes mistakes, who worries, who gets acne, has trouble with his girlfriend, and things like that. [Goodman replied,] 'He's a hero! He's not an average man!' I said, 'No, we make him an average man who happens to have superpowers, that's what will make him good.' He told me I was crazy". Ditko, Steve (2000). Roy Thomas (ed.). Alter Ego: The Comic Book Artist Collection. TwoMorrows Publishing. ISBN 978-1-893905-06-1. "'Stan said a new Marvel hero would be introduced in #15 [of what became titled Amazing Fantasy]. He would be called Spider-Man. Jack would do the penciling, and I was to ink the character.' At this point still, Stan said Spider-Man would be a teenager with a magic ring that could transform him into an adult hero—Spider-Man. I said it sounded like the Fly, which Joe Simon had done for Archie Comics. Stan called Jack about it, but I don't know what was discussed. I never talked to Jack about Spider-Man... Later, at some point, I was given the job of drawing Spider-Man'". Jack Kirby in "Shop Talk: Jack Kirby", Will Eisner's Spirit Magazine #39 (February 1982): "Spider-Man was discussed between Joe Simon and myself. It was the last thing Joe, and I had discussed. We had a strip called 'The Silver Spider.' The Silver Spider was going into a magazine called Black Magic. Black Magic folded with Crestwood (Simon & Kirby's 1950s comics company) and we were left with the script. I believe I said this could become a thing called Spider-Man, see, a superhero character. I had a lot of faith in the superhero character that they could be brought back... and I said Spider-Man would be a fine character to start with. But Joe had already moved on. So the idea was already there when I talked to Stan". Simon, Joe, with Jim Simon. The Comic Book Makers (Crestwood/II, 1990) ISBN 1-887591-35-4. "There were a few holes in Jack's never-dependable memory. For instance, there was no Black Magic involved at all. ... Jack brought in the Spider-Man logo that I had loaned to him before we changed the name to The Silver Spider. Kirby laid out the story to Lee about the kid who finds a ring in a spiderweb, gets his powers from the ring, and goes forth to fight crime armed with The Silver Spider's old web-spinning pistol. Stan Lee said, 'Perfect, just what I want.' After obtaining permission from publisher Martin Goodman, Lee told Kirby to pencil-up an origin story. Kirby... using parts of an old rejected superhero named Night Fighter... revamped the old Silver Spider script, including revisions suggested by Lee. But when Kirby showed Lee the sample pages, it was Lee's turn to gripe. He had been expecting a skinny young kid who is transformed into a skinny young kid with spider powers. Kirby had him turn into... Captain America with cobwebs. He turned Spider-Man over to Steve Ditko, who... ignored Kirby's pages, tossed the character's magic ring, web pistol and goggles... and completely redesigned Spider-Man's costume and equipment. In this life, he became high-school student Peter Parker, who gets his spider powers after being bitten by a radioactive spider. ... Lastly, the Spider-Man logo was redone and a dashing hyphen added". Mondello, Salvatore (March 2004). "Spider-Man: Superhero in the Liberal Tradition". The Journal of Popular Culture. X (1): 232–238. doi:10.1111/j.0022-3840.1976.1001_232.x. In Marvel comics, the term "mutate" is used as a noun to designate characters that received superpowers from an external source, as opposed to Marvel's mutants. Content in this article was copied from Spider-Man at the Fictional Characters wiki, which is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike 3.0 (Unported) (CC BY-SA 3.0) license. Amazing Spider-Man #434 Spider-Man #91 Spectacular Spider-Man #257 Sensational Spider-Man #27 Amazing Spider-Man Annual #36 Amazing Spider-Man #149–151 What If? (vol. 2) #31 Wright, Bradford W. (2001). Comic Book Nation. Johns Hopkins Press: Baltimore. ISBN 978-0-8018-7450-5. OCLC 53175529. Sacks, Ethan (January 12, 2014). "Exclusive: Peter Parker to return from death in 'Amazing Spider-Man' #1 this April". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on July 12, 2014. Retrieved January 12, 2014. "Why Spider-Man is popular". ABC News. May 1, 2002. Archived from the original on April 30, 2011. Retrieved November 18, 2010. Weiss, Brett (October 2010). "Spidey Super Stories". Back Issue! (44). TwoMorrows Publishing: 23–28. "It's Official! Andrew Garfield to Play Spider-Man!". Comingsoon.net. July 2, 2010. Archived from the original on July 19, 2012. Retrieved October 9, 2010. "Complete Cast Announced for Spider-Man: Turn Off the Dark". Broadway.com. August 16, 2010. Archived from the original on January 12, 2012. Retrieved October 9, 2010. Lee, Stan; Mair, George (2002). Excelsior!: The Amazing Life of Stan Lee. Fireside. ISBN 978-0-684-87305-3. DeFalco, Tom; Lee, Stan (2001). O'Neill, Cynthia (ed.). Spider-Man: The Ultimate Guide. New York: Dorling Kindersley. ISBN 978-0-7894-7946-4. Harrington, Richard (February 4, 1992). "Stan Lee: Caught in Spidey's Web". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on November 23, 2020. Retrieved May 27, 2021. Murray, Will (August 2020). "The Secret Origin of Spider-Man". RetroFan (10). United States: TwoMorrows Publishing: 24–29. Thomas, Roy (August 2011). "Stan Lee's Amazing Marvel Interview!". Alter Ego (104). TwoMorrows Publishing: 3–45. "Little-known sci-fi fact: Why Stan Lee put a hyphen in Spider-Man – Syfy". Archived from the original on June 25, 2019. Retrieved June 25, 2019. Johnston, Rich (August 31, 2020). "Steve Ditko Designed Spider-Man to be Orange and Purple". Archived from the original on September 2, 2020. Retrieved August 31, 2020. Amazing Fantasy (Marvel, 1962 series) Archived March 10, 2011, at the Wayback Machine at the Grand Comics Database: "1990 copyright renewal lists the publication date as June 5, 1962"; "[T]he decision to cancel the series had not been made when it went to print, since it is announced that future issues will include a Spider-Man feature." "Important Announcement from the Editor!", Amazing Fantasy #15 (Aug. 1962), reprinted at Sedlmeier, Cory, ed. (2007). Amazing Fantasy Omnibus. Marvel Publishing. p. 394. ISBN 978-0785124580. Theakston, Greg (2002). The Steve Ditko Reader. Brooklyn, New York: Pure Imagination. ISBN 978-1-56685-011-7. Ditko, Steve (2000). Roy Thomas (ed.). Alter Ego: The Comic Book Artist Collection. TwoMorrows Publishing. ISBN 978-1-893905-06-1. "Deposition of Stan Lee". Los Angeles, California: United States District Court, Southern District of New York: "Marvel Worldwide, Inc., et al., vs. Lisa R. Kirby, et al.". December 8, 2010. p. 37. Archived from the original on February 5, 2023. Retrieved August 8, 2011. Ditko interview (Summer 1965). "Steve Ditko – A Portrait of the Master". Comic Fan #2 (Larry Herndon) via Ditko.Comics.org (Blake Bell, ed.). Archived from the original on June 13, 2002. Retrieved April 3, 2008. Additional, February 28, 2012. Johnston, Rich (August 31, 2020). "Steve Ditko Designed Spider-Man to be Orange and Purple". Bleeding Cool. Archived from the original on September 2, 2020. Retrieved August 31, 2020. Simon, Joe (2011). Joe Simon: My Life in Comics. London, UK: Titan Books. ISBN 978-1-84576-930-7. Evanier, Mark; Gaiman, Neil (2008). Kirby: King of Comics. Abrams. ISBN 978-0-8109-9447-8. Bell, Blake. Strange and Stranger: The World of Steve Ditko (2008). Fantagraphic Books.p.54-57. Ditko, Steve (Winter 1999). "An Insider's Part of Comics History Jack Kirby's Spider-Man". Alter Ego (3): 6. Skelly, Tim. "Interview II: 'I created an army of characters, and now my connection to them is lost.'" (Initially broadcast over WNUR-FM on "The Great Electric Bird", May 14, 1971. Transcribed and published in The Nostalgia Journal #27.) Reprinted in The Comics Journal Library Volume One: Jack Kirby, George, Milo ed. May 2002, Fantagraphics Books. p. 16 Ross, Jonathan. In Search of Steve Ditko, BBC Four, September 16, 2007. Daniels, Les (1991). Marvel: Five Fabulous Decades of the World's Greatest Comics. New York: Harry N. Abrams. ISBN 978-0-8109-3821-2. Saffel, Steve. Spider-Man the Icon: The Life and Times of a Pop Culture Phenomenon (Titan Books, 2007) ISBN 978-1-84576-324-4, "A Not-So-Spectacular Experiment", p. 31 Manning, Matthew K. (2012). "1970s". In Gilbert, Laura (ed.). Spider-Man Chronicle Celebrating 50 Years of Web-Slinging. Dorling Kindersley. p. 60. ISBN 978-0756692360. David, Peter; Greenberger, Robert (2010). The Spider-Man Vault: A Museum-in-a-Book with Rare Collectibles Spun from Marvel's Web. Running Press. p. 113. ISBN 978-0762437726. Manning, Matthew K. (2012). "1980s". In Gilbert, Laura (ed.). Spider-Man Chronicle Celebrating 50 Years of Web-Slinging. Dorling Kindersley. p. 147. ISBN 978-0756692360. Cowsill, Alan (2012). "1990s". In Gilbert, Laura (ed.). Spider-Man Chronicle Celebrating 50 Years of Web-Slinging. Dorling Kindersley. p. 184. ISBN 978-0756692360. Manning, Matthew K. (2012). "1970s". In Gilbert, Laura (ed.). Spider-Man Chronicle Celebrating 50 Years of Web-Slinging. Dorling Kindersley. ISBN 978-0756692360. Michael Thomas (August 22, 2000). "John Byrne: The Hidden Story". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on October 15, 2012. Retrieved May 27, 2011. Michael Thomas (August 5, 2008). "The Marvel 500s: How Many Are There?". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on July 9, 2015. Retrieved July 9, 2015. Schedeen, Jesse (November 8, 2011). "The Avenging Spider-Man #1 Review". IGN. j2 Global. Archived from the original on March 23, 2013. Retrieved July 9, 2015. "IGN: SDCC 10: Spider-Man: The End of Brand New Day". IGN. j2 Global. July 25, 2010. Archived from the original on January 16, 2014. Retrieved July 9, 2015. Bremmer, Robyn; Morse, Ben (September 27, 2010). "The Next Big Thing: Spider-Man: Big Time". Marvel.com. Marvel Entertainment. Archived from the original on July 18, 2012. Retrieved July 9, 2015. "Peter Parker Resurrected in Slott's Amazing Spider-Man". Comic Book Resources. January 12, 2014. Archived from the original on April 29, 2014. Retrieved April 30, 2014. Hanks, Henry (April 29, 2014). "Back from the brain dead, Peter Parker returns to 'Spider-Man' comics". CNN. Archived from the original on July 15, 2014. Retrieved July 9, 2015. Arrant, Chris (June 30, 2015). "Peter Parker 'Stepped Up' As High Tech Tycoon In Amazing Spider-Man". Newsarama. Archived from the original on September 6, 2015. Kempton, Sally, "Spider-Man's Dilemma: Super-Anti-Hero in Forest Hills", The Village Voice, April 1, 1965 Lee, Stan (w), Ditko, Steve (a). Amazing Fantasy, no. 15 (August 1962). New York City, NY: Marvel Comics. Daniels, Les. Marvel: Five Fabulous Decades of the World's Greatest Comics (Harry N. Abrams, New York, 1991) ISBN 0-8109-3821-9, p. 95. Saffel, Steve. Spider-Man the Icon: The Life and Times of a Pop Culture Phenomenon (Titan Books, 2007) ISBN 978-1-84576-324-4, p. 21. Lee, Stan (w), Ditko, Steve (a). "Spider-Man; Spider-Man vs. the Chameleon"; "Duel to the Death with the Vulture; "The Uncanny Threat of the Terrible Tinkerer!" The Amazing Spider-Man, vol. 1, no. 1–2 (March, May 1963). New York, NY: Marvel Comics. Amazing Spider-Man, The (Marvel, 1963 Series) Archived July 22, 2010, at the Wayback Machine at the Grand Comics Database Lee, Stan (w), Ditko, Steve (a). "The Menace of the Molten Man!" The Amazing Spider-Man, vol. 1, no. 28 (September 1965). New York, NY: Marvel Comics. Saffel, p. 51 Sanderson, Peter (2007). The Marvel Comics Guide to New York City. New York City: Pocket Books. pp. 30–33. ISBN 978-1-4165-3141-8. Lee, Stan (w), Romita, John (a). "The Birth of a Super-Hero!" The Amazing Spider-Man, vol. 1, no. 42 (November 1966). New York, NY: Marvel Comics. Saffel, p. 27 Lee, Stan (w), Romita, John (p), Mickey Demeo (i). "Spider-Man No More!" The Amazing Spider-Man, vol. 1, no. 50 (July 1967). New York, NY: Marvel Comics. Lee, Stan (w), Kane, Gil (p), Giacoia, Frank (i). "The Spider or the Man?" The Amazing Spider-Man, vol. 1, no. 100 (September 1971). New York, NY: Marvel Comics. Saffel, p. 60 "To address the contradiction in future reprints of the tale, though, Spider-Man's dialogue was altered so that he's referring to the Brooklyn Bridge. But the original snafu remains as one of the more visible errors in the history of comics." Saffel, p. 65 Sanderson, Marvel Universe, p. 84, notes, "[W]hile the script described the site of Gwen's demise as the George Washington Bridge, the art depicted the Brooklyn Bridge, and there is still no agreement as to where it actually took place." Saffel, p. 65 Conway, Gerry (w), Kane, Gil (p), Romita, John (i). "The Night Gwen Stacy Died" The Amazing Spider-Man, vol. 1, no. 121 (June 1973). New York, NY: Marvel Comics. Sanderson, Marvel Universe, p. 85 Blumberg, Arnold T. (Spring 2006). "'The Night Gwen Stacy Died': The End of Innocence and the 'Last Gasp of the Silver Age'". International Journal of Comic Art. 8 (1): 208. Sanderson, Marvel Universe, p. 83 Shooter, Jim (w), Zeck, Michael (p), Beatty, John, Jack Abel (i). "Invasion" Marvel Super-Heroes Secret Wars, vol. 1, no. 8 (December 1984). New York, NY: Marvel Comics. Leupp, Thomas. "Behind the Mask: The Story of Spider-Man's Black Costume" Archived May 15, 2007, at the Wayback Machine, ReelzChannel.com, 2007, n.d. WebCitation archive. Simonson, Louise (w), LaRocque, Greg (p), Mooney, Jim and Vince Colletta (i). "'Til Death Do Us Part!" Web of Spider-Man, vol. 1, no. 1 (April 1985). New York, NY: Marvel Comics. Saffel, p. 124 Ferraro, Ron. "Spidey Classics: Amazing Spider-Man #304" (review), SpiderManReviews.com, February 2010. WebCitation archive. Goletz, Andrew, and Glenn Greenberg.""Life of Reilly", 35-part series, GreyHaven Magazine, 2003, n.d." NewComicsReviews.com. Archived from the original on March 27, 2006. Retrieved January 17, 2019. Saunders, et al., Marvel Chronicle, p. 271 Saunders, et al., Chronicle, p. 281 Spider-Man (Marvel, 1990 Series) Archived July 18, 2010, at the Wayback Machine at the Grand Comics Database: "Cover title beginning with issue #75 is Peter Parker, Spider-Man". Saunders, et al. Chronicle, p. 273 Amazing Spider-Man, The, Marvel, 1999 Series Archived July 29, 2010, at the Wayback Machine (The Amazing Spider-Man vol. 2) at the Grand Comics Database Ruby, Sam. "Mary Jane Watson", SamRuby.com (fan site). WebCitation archive. Blumberg, Arnold T. "Face it Tiger – A Brief Look at the Life of Mary Jane Watson-Parker, Part 2", Mania.com, July 17, 2002. WebCitation archive. Amazing Spider-Man, The, Marvel, 2003 Series Archived June 29, 2010, at the Wayback Machine (renumbering to return to original numbering from 1963) at the Grand Comics Database Weiland, Jonah. storyline "The 'One More Day' Interviews with Joe Quesada, Pt. 1 of 5" Archived October 26, 2008, at the Wayback Machine, Newsarama, December 28, 2007. WebCitation archive. Weiland, Jonah. "The 'One More Day' Interviews with Joe Quesada, Pt. 2 of 5" Archived October 26, 2008, at the Wayback Machine, Newsarama, December 31, 2007. WebCitation archive. Amazing Spider-Man #549 Amazing Spider-Man #568 Amazing Spider-Man #600 Brian Michael Bendis (w), Leinil Francis Yu (p), Mark Morales (i). "Secret Invasion" Secret Invasion: Dark Reign, no. 8 (January 2009). Marvel Comics. Brian Michael Bendis (w), Mike Deodato (p), Mike Deodato (i). "Secret Invasion: Dark Reign" Dark Avengers, no. 1 (Jan. 2009). Marvel Comics. Joe Kelly (w), Paulo Siqueira, Marco Checchetto (p), Paulo Siqueira, Marco Checchetto (i). "Dark Reign" The Amazing Spider-Man, no. 596–9 (Jun. 2009). Marvel Comics. Bendis, Brian Michael. Siege #1–4. Marvel Comics. Brian Michael Bendis (w), Mike Deodato (p), Mike Deodato (i). "Siege" Dark Avengers, no. 16 (May 2010). Marvel Comics. Amazing Spider-Man #648–654 The Amazing Spider-Man #699. The Amazing Spider-Man #700. The Spider-Man #1 The Superior Spider-Man #27–30. The Superior Spider-Man #31. Amazing Spider-Man (vol. 3) #1 Amazing Spider-Man (vol. 3) #4 Amazing Spider-Man (vol. 3) #5 Silk (vol. 1) #1 Amazing Spider-Man (vol. 3) #9 Amazing Spider-Man (vol. 3) #10 Dead No More: The Clone Conspiracy (vol. 1) #1–5. Amazing Spider-Man (vol. 5) #1 Amazing Spider-Man (vol. 5) #2–5 Nick Spencer (w). "Last Remains" The Amazing Spider-Man, no. 50–55 (October – December 2020). Marvel Comics. Sanderson, Peter. Marvel Universe: The Complete Encyclopedia of Marvel's Greatest Characters (Harry N. Abrams, New York, 1998) ISBN 0-8109-8171-8, p. 75 Daniels, p. 96 Gresh, Lois H., and Robert Weinberg. "The Science of Superheroes" (John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2002) ISBN 0-471-02460-0 (preview Archived July 22, 2011, at the Wayback Machine) Sanderson, Peter; Lerner, Mark; DeFalco, Tom (w), Romita, John Jr. (p), Rubinstein, Josef (i). "Spider-Man" The Official Handbook of the Marvel Universe, no. 10, p. 22 (October 1983). Marvel Comics. Harn, Darby (November 26, 2020). "10 Powers Spider-Man Technically Has (But Rarely Uses)". CBR.com. Archived from the original on November 27, 2020. Retrieved October 25, 2021. Michelenie, David (w), Larsen, Erik (p), Mushynsky, Andy (i). "Power Prey" The Amazing Spider-Man, no. 329 (February 1990). Marvel Comics. Kiefer, Kit; Couper-Smartt, Jonathan (2003). Marvel Encyclopedia Volume 4: Spider-Man. New York: Marvel Comics. ISBN 978-0-7851-1304-1. Owsley, James (w), Kupperberg, Alan, Jim Fern, Al Milgrom (p), Ferriter, Julianna (col), Parker, Rick (let), Salicrup, Jim (ed). "The Honeymoon" The Spectacular Spider-Man, vol. 1, no. Annual 7 (1986). Marvel Comics. DeFalco, Tom (2008). "1960s". In Gilbert, Laura (ed.). Marvel Chronicle A Year by Year History. Dorling Kindersley. p. 87. ISBN 978-0756641238. Siegel, Lucas. "The 10 Greatest SPIDER-MAN Villains of ALL TIME!". Newsarama. Archived from the original on March 9, 2014. Retrieved January 2, 2014. Beard, Jim. "ARCHRIVALS: SPIDER-MAN VS THE VULTURE". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on November 24, 2021. Retrieved January 2, 2014. Kyle, Scmidlin (June 13, 2013). "10 Spider-Man Villains (And Combinations) Deserving Of The Big Screen (7. The Vulture)". What Culture!. Archived from the original on January 26, 2016. Retrieved January 2, 2014. DeFalco "1960s" in Gilbert (2008), p. 92. DeFalco "1960s" in Gilbert (2008), p. 93. Lee, Stan (w), Ditko, Steve (p), Ditko, Steve (i). "Spider-Man Versus Doctor Octopus" The Amazing Spider-Man, no. 3 (July 1963). Manning, Matthew K. (2012). "1960s". In Gilbert, Laura (ed.). Spider-Man Chronicle Celebrating 50 Years of Web-Slinging. Dorling Kindersley. p. 20. ISBN 978-0756692360. Lee, Stan (w), Ditko, Steve (p), Ditko, Steve (i). "Nothing Can Stop...The Sandman!" The Amazing Spider-Man, no. 4 (September 1963). DeFalco "1960s" in Gilbert (2008), p. 95 Lee, Stan (w), Ditko, Steve (p), Ditko, Steve (i). "Face-to-Face With...the Lizard!" The Amazing Spider-Man, no. 6 (November 1963). Manning, Matthew K. (2012). "1960s". In Gilbert, Laura (ed.). Spider-Man Chronicle Celebrating 50 Years of Web-Slinging. Dorling Kindersley. p. 20. ISBN 978-0756692360. DeFalco "1960s" in Gilbert (2008), p. 98 Lee, Stan (w), Ditko, Steve (p), Ditko, Steve (i). "The Man Called Electro!" The Amazing Spider-Man, no. 9 (February 1964). Manning, Matthew K. (2012). "1960s". In Gilbert, Laura (ed.). Spider-Man Chronicle Celebrating 50 Years of Web-Slinging. Dorling Kindersley. p. 24. ISBN 978-0756692360. Lee, Stan (w), Ditko, Steve (p), Ditko, Steve (i). "The Menace of... Mysterio!" The Amazing Spider-Man, no. 13 (June 1964). Manning, Matthew K. (2012). "1960s". In Gilbert, Laura (ed.). Spider-Man Chronicle Celebrating 50 Years of Web-Slinging. Dorling Kindersley. p. 25. ISBN 978-0756692360. Albert, Aaron. "Green Goblin Profile". About.com. Archived from the original on April 24, 2008. Retrieved January 3, 2014. Beard, Jim. "SPIDER-MAN 3: THE SPIDER & THE GOBLIN". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on January 25, 2016. Retrieved January 3, 2014. Manning, Matthew K. (2012). "1960s". In Gilbert, Laura (ed.). Spider-Man Chronicle Celebrating 50 Years of Web-Slinging. Dorling Kindersley. p. 26. ISBN 978-0756692360. Lee, Stan (w), Ditko, Steve (p), Ditko, Steve (i). "Kraven the Hunter!" The Amazing Spider-Man, no. 15 (August 1964). Valentine, Eve (December 21, 2013). "Who Are the Sinister Six? – An Introduction to Spider-Man's Supervillain Group". Collider. Archived from the original on June 10, 2015. Retrieved June 14, 2015. Manning, Matthew K. (2012). "1960s". In Gilbert, Laura (ed.). Spider-Man Chronicle Celebrating 50 Years of Web-Slinging. Dorling Kindersley. p. 27. ISBN 978-0756692360. Manning, Matthew K. (2012). "1960s". In Gilbert, Laura (ed.). Spider-Man Chronicle Celebrating 50 Years of Web-Slinging. Dorling Kindersley. p. 28. ISBN 978-0756692360. Lee, Stan (w), Romita, John Sr. (p), Esposito, Mike (i). "The Horns of the Rhino!" The Amazing Spider-Man, no. 41 (October 1966). Manning, Matthew K. (2012). "1960s". In Gilbert, Laura (ed.). Spider-Man Chronicle Celebrating 50 Years of Web-Slinging. Dorling Kindersley. p. 36. ISBN 978-0756692360. Lee, Stan (w), Romita, John Sr. (p), Romita, John Sr. (i). "The Sinister Shocker!" The Amazing Spider-Man, no. 46 (March 1967). Manning, Matthew K. (2012). "1960s". In Gilbert, Laura (ed.). Spider-Man Chronicle Celebrating 50 Years of Web-Slinging. Dorling Kindersley. p. 38. ISBN 978-0756692360. DeFalco "1960s" in Gilbert (2008), p. 122: "Stan Lee wanted to create a new kind of crime boss. Someone who treated crime as if it were a business...He pitched this idea to artist John Romita and it was Wilson Fisk who emerged in The Amazing Spider-Man #50." Lee, Stan (w), Romita, John Sr. (p), Esposito, Mike (i). "Spider-Man No More!" The Amazing Spider-Man, no. 50 (July 1967). Manning, Matthew K. (2012). "1960s". In Gilbert, Laura (ed.). Spider-Man Chronicle Celebrating 50 Years of Web-Slinging. Dorling Kindersley. p. 40. ISBN 978-0756692360. Yehl, April; Schedeen, Jesse (April 16, 2014). "Top 25 Spider-Man villains: Part 2". IGN. Archived from the original on April 18, 2014. Retrieved April 19, 2014. Manning, Matthew K. (2012). "1970s". In Gilbert, Laura (ed.). Spider-Man Chronicle Celebrating 50 Years of Web-Slinging. Dorling Kindersley. p. 59. ISBN 978-0756692360. Gross, Edward (2002). Spider-Man Confidential: From Comic Icon to Hollywood Hero. Hyperion. ISBN 978-0786887224. Manning "1970s" in Gilbert (2012), p. 107: "Spider-Man wasn't exactly sure what to think about his luck when he met a beautiful new thief on the prowl named the Black Cat, courtesy of a story by writer Marv Wolfman and artist Keith Pollard." David, Peter. "The Amazing Spider-Man #289 (June 1987)". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on November 11, 2022. Retrieved November 10, 2022. Manning "1980s" in Gilbert (2012), p. 133: "Writer Roger Stern and artists John Romita Jr. and John Romita Sr. introduced a new – and frighteningly sane – version of the [Green Goblin] concept with the debut of the Hobgoblin." David and Greenberger, pp. 68–69: "Writer Roger Stern is primarily remembered for two major contributions to the world of Peter Parker. One was a short piece entitled 'The Kid Who Collects Spider-Man'...[his] other major contribution was the introduction of the Hobgoblin." Greenberg, Glenn (August 2009). "When Hobby Met Spidey". Back Issue!. No. 35. TwoMorrows Publishing. pp. 10–23. "Venom is the 33rd greatest comic book character". Empire.com. Archived from the original on July 1, 2015. Retrieved April 25, 2015. Manning "1980s" in Gilbert (2012), p. 169: "In this landmark installment [issue #298], one of the most popular characters in the wall-crawler's history would begin to step into the spotlight courtesy of one of the most popular artists to ever draw the web-slinger." Comics Creators on Spider-Man, pg 148, Tom DeFalco. (Titan Books, 2004) "Venom is number 22 on greatest comic book villain of all time". IGN. Archived from the original on February 27, 2015. Retrieved April 25, 2015. "Carnage is number 90 on greatest comic book villain of all time". IGN. Archived from the original on March 7, 2015. Retrieved April 25, 2015. Cowsill, Alan (2012). "1990s". In Gilbert, Laura (ed.). Spider-Man Chronicle Celebrating 50 Years of Web-Slinging. Dorling Kindersley. p. 197. ISBN 978-0756692360. Michelinie, David (w), Bagley, Mark (p), Emberlin, Randy (i). "Carnage: Part One" The Amazing Spider-Man, no. 361 (April 1992). Papageorgiou, Solon. "10 facts about Batman, Spider-Man, Iron Man you didn't know". Moviepilot. Archived from the original on April 25, 2015. Retrieved April 25, 2015. Albert, Aaron. "Top ten comic book archenemies". About.com. Archived from the original on January 28, 2012. Retrieved January 3, 2014. Hanks, Henry (December 26, 2012). "Events in landmark 'Spider-Man' issue have fans in a frenzy". CNN. Archived from the original on June 4, 2013. Retrieved January 2, 2014. Cronin, Brian (May 2012). "50 Greatest Friends and Foes of Spider-Man: Villains #1–3". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on April 18, 2015. Retrieved January 2, 2014. "The ULTIMATE SPIDER-MAN writer talks about Spidey's new Amazing Friends and lays the Osborns to rest once and for all | Marvel.com News". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on March 30, 2010. Retrieved April 27, 2010. "Love is in the air as Marvel.com's Secret Cabal picks the greatest Marvel romances of all in time for Valentine's Day | Marvel.com News". Marvel.com. Archived from the original on February 12, 2010. Retrieved April 27, 2010. Yehl, Joshua; Schedeen, Jess (April 16, 2014). "Top 25 Spider-Man Villain: Part 5". IGN. Archived from the original on April 18, 2014. Retrieved April 19, 2014. "Norman Osborn is number 13 on greatest comic book villain of all time". IGN. Archived from the original on October 21, 2013. Retrieved January 3, 2014. "Spider-Man villains tournament: Championship". IGN. February 2006. Archived from the original on June 18, 2015. Retrieved April 25, 2015. Shutt, Craig (August 1997). "Villain Turned Hero: Venom". Wizard. No. 72. p. 37. Lee, Stan, Origins of Marvel Comics (Simon and Schuster/Fireside Books, 1974) p. 137 Marston, George (April 27, 2022). "Spider-Man's children: The Marvel Comics history of Spider-Kids". GamesRadar+. Retrieved July 6, 2023. "Meet Spider-Man's Amazing Kids". Marvel Entertainment. Retrieved July 6, 2023. Whitbrook, James (July 7, 2017). "The Greatest Spider-Men of All Time, Ranked". io9. Archived from the original on December 30, 2017. Retrieved December 30, 2017. "Top 10 Oddest Marvel Characters". Time. September 3, 2009. Archived from the original on January 7, 2012. Retrieved March 4, 2010. "10 Best SPIDER-MEN Of All Time". Newsarama. Archived from the original on July 29, 2017. Retrieved December 30, 2017. Robinson, Bryan (August 16, 2011). "Remembering the First – and Forgotten – Latino Spider-Man". Fox News Latino. Archived from the original on September 12, 2011. Retrieved August 19, 2011. Ong, Benjamin; Kean Pang (July 16, 2008). "Remembering When West Has Met East". Newsarama. Archived from the original on December 31, 2017. Retrieved July 26, 2015. Truitt, Brian (August 2, 2011). "Half-black, half-Hispanic Spider-Man revealed". USA Today. Archived from the original on August 3, 2011. Ching, Albert (March 13, 2015). "Slott Details the Unexpected Origins of Spider-Gwen and Spider-Punk". ComicBookResources.com. Archived from the original on September 9, 2016. Retrieved September 9, 2016. Kupperberg, Paul (2007). The Creation of Spider-Man. The Rosen Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-4042-0763-9. spiderman legacy ditko lee. Fleming, James R. (2006). "Review of Superman on the Couch: What Superheroes Really Tell Us about Ourselves and Our Society. By Danny Fingeroth". ImageText. University of Florida. ISSN 1549-6732. Archived from the original on December 9, 2015. Retrieved December 4, 2015. Barron, James (February 7, 2023). "Spider-Man, We Know Where You Live". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved March 1, 2023. Knowles, Christopher (2007). Our Gods Wear Spandex. illustrated by Joseph Michael Linsner. Weiser. p. 139. "Spider-Man Weaving a spell". Screen India. 2002. Retrieved February 13, 2009.[permanent dead link] Davis, Lauren (November 14, 2014). "This Superhero Is More Lucrative Than Batman And The Avengers Combined". io9. Gizmodo Media Group. Archived from the original on March 13, 2016. Retrieved November 14, 2014. Block, Alex (November 13, 2014). "Which Superhero Earns $1.3 Billion a Year?". The Hollywood Reporter. Lynne Segall. Archived from the original on November 16, 2014. Retrieved November 13, 2014. "Spider-Man Returning to Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade", Associated Press via WCBS (AM), August 17, 2009, Archived November 6, 2009, at the Wayback Machine Spurlock, J. David, and John Romita. John Romita Sketchbook. (Vanguard Productions: Lebanon, N.J. 2002) ISBN 1-887591-27-3, p. 45: Romita: "I designed the Spider-Man balloon float. When we went to Macy's to talk about it, Manny Bass was there. He's the genius who creates all these balloon floats. I gave him the sketches and he turned them into reality". Yarbrough, Beau (September 24, 2001). "Marvel to Take on World Trade Center Attack in "Amazing Spider-Man"". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on October 26, 2008. Retrieved April 28, 2008. "Spider-Man Removes Mask at Last". BBC. June 15, 2006. Archived from the original on August 23, 2006. Retrieved September 29, 2006. Brady, Matt (June 14, 2006). "New York Post Spoils Civil War #2". Newsarama. Archived from the original on October 11, 2007. Retrieved April 2, 2008. Lane, Thomas (January 4, 2008). "Can Spider-Man help UN beat evil?". BBC. Archived from the original on February 19, 2008. Retrieved April 29, 2008. Pisani, Joseph (June 1, 2006). "The Smartest Superheroes". Business Week Online. Archived from the original on January 11, 2012. Retrieved November 25, 2007. Caldwell, Patrick (June 22, 2015), "Justice Elena Kagan Had Some Fun Writing About Spider-Man", Mother Jones, archived from the original on June 23, 2015, retrieved June 23, 2015 Garbarino, J (1987). "Children's response to a sexual abuse prevention program: A study of the Spiderman comic". Child Abuse & Neglect. 11 (1): 143–148. doi:10.1016/0145-2134(87)90044-5. PMID 3828869. "IGN's Top 100 Comic Book Heroes". Archived from the original on January 6, 2012. Retrieved May 9, 2011. "Ultimate Super Heroes, Vixens, and Villains Episode Guide 2005 – Ultimate Super Villains". TV Guide.com. Archived from the original on May 1, 2011. Retrieved October 9, 2010. "The 50 Greatest Comic Book Characters". Empire Online. Archived from the original on January 22, 2012. Retrieved February 8, 2009. "Top 200 comic book characters". Wizard. "The Top 50 Avengers". IGN. April 30, 2012. Archived from the original on August 31, 2015. Retrieved July 28, 2015. Yehl, Joshua; Lakes, Jeff. "Top 25 Best Marvel Superheroes – IGN – Page 5". IGN. Archived from the original on May 7, 2016. Retrieved May 4, 2016. Conin, Brian (November 5, 2015). "2015 Top 50 Marvel Characters 3–1 | Page 2 of 2 | Comics Should Be Good @ CBR". Comic Book Resources. Archived from the original on April 23, 2016. Retrieved May 4, 2016. Marston, George. "The 10 Best Superhero Origin Stories of ALL TIME!". Newsarama.com. Archived from the original on May 8, 2016. Retrieved May 4, 2016. "Skyscraper Defense". Archived from the original on July 16, 2011. Retrieved July 4, 2011. Moss, Stephen (May 14, 2003). "I'm Spider-Man". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved July 29, 2023. Cobb, Jocelyn (September 19, 1999). "Recalls 1921 climb of 'human spider'". The Augusta Chronicle. Archived from the original on December 11, 2007. Retrieved June 2, 2013. "Video: un robo con la modalidad "hombre araña"en un departamento de Belgrano" [Video: a theft with the "Spider-Man" method at a Belgrano apartment] (in Spanish). Infobae. February 17, 2017. Archived from the original on November 10, 2017. Retrieved November 10, 2017. "Un "hombre araña" asaltó y violó a una profesora de gimnasia" [A "Spider-man" raped and stole from a gym teacher]. Clarín (in Spanish). January 17, 2008. Archived from the original on November 10, 2017. Retrieved November 10, 2017. "Spider-Man (1967)". UGO Networks. Archived from the original on April 24, 2008. Retrieved February 13, 2009. "Ultimate Spider-Man". November 30, 1999. Archived from the original on January 13, 2012. Retrieved November 18, 2010. "Japanese Spider-Man". Archived from the original on January 3, 2012. Retrieved November 18, 2010. "John Romita Interview". www.keefestudios.com. Archived from the original on February 6, 2012. Retrieved February 8, 2009. "EXCLUSIVE: 'Spider-Man 4' Scrapped; Sam Rami & Tobey Maguire & Cast Out; Franchise Reboot for 2012". Deadline.com. January 11, 2010. Archived from the original on August 4, 2011. Retrieved January 11, 2010. ""Spider-Man" Film Gets Reboot; Sam Raimi, Tobey Maguire Out". Zap2It.com. January 11, 2010. Archived from the original on September 7, 2011. Retrieved January 11, 2010. "Tobey Maguire and Sam Raimi part ways with Spider-Man franchise". January 12, 2010. Archived from the original on April 28, 2018. Retrieved April 5, 2018. "Andrew Garfield & Marc Webb Return For 'Amazing Spider-Man 2'". Huffington Post. September 28, 2012. Archived from the original on December 13, 2013. Retrieved December 15, 2013. Truitt, Brian (July 20, 2013). "Garfield relishes web-swinging in 'Amazing Spider-Man 2'". USA Today. Archived from the original on September 21, 2013. Retrieved December 15, 2013. Lesnick, Silas (February 9, 2015). "It's Official: Spider-Man Enters the Marvel Cinematic Universe!". SuperHeroHype. Archived from the original on February 10, 2015. Retrieved February 10, 2015. Lang, Brett (April 12, 2016). "'Spider-Man' Movie Gets Official Title". Variety. Archived from the original on April 13, 2016. Retrieved April 13, 2016. "Sony Pictures and Marvel Studios Find Their 'Spider-Man' Star and Director" (Press release). Marvel.com. June 23, 2015. Archived from the original on June 23, 2015. Retrieved June 24, 2015. Busch, Anita (February 11, 2017). "Robert Downey Jr. Confirms Spider-Man Character in 'Avengers: Infinity War' On FB Live". Deadline. Archived from the original on February 11, 2017. Retrieved February 11, 2017. Goldberg, Matt. "'Avengers: Infinity War': Kevin Feige Reveals Spider-Man's Screentime". Archived from the original on April 28, 2018. Retrieved April 27, 2018. Kit, Borys; Couch, Aaron (April 18, 2017). "Marvel's Kevin Feige on Why the Studio Won't Make R-Rated Movies, 'Guardians 2' and Joss Whedon's DC Move". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 18, 2017. Retrieved April 18, 2017. D'Alessandro, Anthony (December 9, 2016). "'Spider-Man: Homecoming 2' Shoots Web Around Independence Day 2019 Frame; 'Bad Boys 4' Moves To Memorial Day". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on December 10, 2016. Retrieved December 9, 2016. Debruge, Peter (December 14, 2021). "'Spider-Man: No Way Home' Review: Tom Holland Cleans Out the Cobwebs of Sprawling Franchise With Multiverse Super-Battle". Variety. Archived from the original on December 14, 2021. Retrieved December 14, 2021. Kit, Borys (June 22, 2016). "Sony Unveils Plans for Animated 'Spider-Man' and 'Emojimovie: Express Yourself'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 26, 2017. Retrieved December 31, 2018. Schmidt, J.K. (November 29, 2018). "'Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse' Features Chris Pine in a Surprising Cameo". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on November 30, 2018. Retrieved November 30, 2018. Alexander, Julia (September 27, 2019). "Spider-Man returns to the Marvel Cinematic Universe as Sony and Disney strike a new deal". Archived from the original on September 30, 2019. Retrieved July 4, 2021. Lustig, Jay. "Spider-Man: Turn off the Dark" Archived January 21, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. New Jersey On-Line. January 18, 2011. Retrieved January 25, 2011. Gans, Andrew. "Reeve Carney, Jennifer Damiano, Patrick Page to Star in Spider-Man; Performances Begin in November" Archived May 1, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. Playbill.com, August 10, 2010 "SpidermanBroadway.Marvel.com". Spidermanonbroadway.marvel.com. Archived from the original on January 4, 2012. Retrieved April 10, 2010. Hetrick, Adam. "Troubled Spider-Man Turn Off the Dark Delays Broadway Opening Again" Archived January 17, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. Playbill.com. January 13, 2011. Retrieved January 15, 2011. "Could Spider-Man the Musical be the 'biggest disaster in Broadway history'?" Archived January 20, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. The Week. August 13, 2010 (updated November 4, 2010). Sargent, Antwaun (November 1, 2018). "Seven Artists on the Warhol Influence". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on June 18, 2020. Retrieved July 9, 2020. "Marvels". The Andy Warhol Museum. Archived from the original on July 17, 2020. Retrieved July 9, 2020. Grebey, James (December 11, 2018). "Forget Uncle Ben – Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse's real hero is Ben-Day dots". SYFY WIRE. Archived from the original on October 19, 2020. Retrieved July 9, 2020. "From Superheroes to Pin-Up Girls". Arts Scene. January 30, 2020. Archived from the original on August 7, 2020. Retrieved July 9, 2020. Pinzon, Dulce. "Mexican Superheroes". Mother Jones. Archived from the original on January 18, 2018. Retrieved July 9, 2020. "30 Life Is Beautiful Graffiti Pop Art By Mr Brainwash". Painted.com. October 18, 2019. Archived from the original on August 6, 2020. Retrieved July 9, 2020. "Spiderman Naked (2013) | Washington Project for the Arts". Washington Project for the Arts. Archived from the original on August 7, 2020. Retrieved July 15, 2020. Spider-Man at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Spider-Man at Marvel Universe Wiki Spider-Man at Curlie Spider-Man at the Comic Book DB (archived from the original) The science of Spider-Man, Cosmos Peter Parker (Earth-616) on Marvel Database, a Marvel Comics wiki Portals:  United States  Comics  Speculative fiction