UTC+06:00 is an identifier for a time offset from UTC of +06:00. This time is used in: Principal cities: Chittagong, Dhaka, Omsk, Thimphu, Bangladesh – Bangladesh Standard Time Bhutan – Bhutan Time United Kingdom British Indian Ocean Territory / Mauritius (see Chagos Archipelago sovereignty dispute) Chagos Archipelago Kyrgyzstan – Kyrgyzstan Time (since August 12, 2005) Russia – Omsk Time Siberian Federal District Omsk Oblast Some bases in Antarctica. See also Time in Antarctica. Australia Australian Antarctic Territory Russia Vostok Station Using UTC+05:00: The very easternmost parts of Ural Federal District, Russia Using UTC+05:30: Parts of India: Assam Meghalaya West Bengal Nagaland Manipur Tripura Mizoram Arunachal Pradesh Bihar Sikkim The northeast part of Andhra Pradesh The eastern part of Uttar Pradesh The northeast part of Chhattisgarh Most of Odisha Andaman and Nicobar Islands Using UTC+05:45: Most of Nepal, with its capital city Kathmandu Using UTC+06:30: Most of Myanmar, including the nation's capital Naypyidaw Cocos (Keeling) Islands Using UTC+07:00: The westernmost part of Indonesia including most of the province Aceh with its capital Banda Aceh The westernmost part of Mongolia Parts of Russia: A large part of Krasnoyarsk Krai Tuva Khakassia Altai Republic Altai Krai Kemerovo Oblast Smaller parts of Novosibirsk Oblast Parts of Tomsk Oblast Using UTC+08:00: Western Mongolia Parts of China: Most of Tibet Autonomous Region Most of Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region (see also "Use in Xinjiang") Parts of Kazakhstan: Kostanay Smaller parts of Turkistan Western parts of Karaganda, Akmola, North Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan British Indian Ocean Territory Russia Omsk Oblast Kazakhstan, most parts of its territories: Shymkent Turkistan Karaganda North Kazakhstan Akmola, with its nation's capital Nur-Sultan In Xinjiang, China, this time offset is known as the Xinjiang Time or Urumqi Time (Uyghur: شىنجاڭ ۋاقتى). It is set due to its geographical location in the westernmost part of China. It has been approved by Chinese authorities for civil purposes since February 1986, although the decision had been rejected by the local ethnic Han population and some Han-dominated regional governments. According to Human Rights Watch, a Uyghur man was arrested and detained by Chinese authorities in 2018 over "terrorist charges" for setting his watch to Xinjiang Time. Bangladesh Standard Time Time in Antarctica – some stations use this time zone Time in Russia Xinjiang Time "Russia Time Zone Map". WorldTimeZone.com. Retrieved 22 March 2018. Alexandra Ma (September 9, 2018). "China reportedly detained a man on terrorist charges because he set his watch 2 hours behind Beijing time". Business Insider. Media related to UTC+06:00 at Wikimedia Commons