UTC+12:00 is an identifier for a time offset from UTC of +12:00. Principal cities: Anadyr, Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky, Mata Utu, Funafuti, Majuro, Yaren, South Tarawa on Tarawa Russia – Kamchatka Time Far Eastern Federal District Chukotka Autonomous Okrug and Kamchatka Krai France Wallis and Futuna Tuvalu United States Wake Island – Time in the United States Marshall Islands Kiribati Gilbert Islands (Including the Islands of Abaiang, Abemama, Aranuka, Arorae, Banaba, Beru, Butaritari, Kuria, Maiana, Makin, Marakei, Nikunau, Nonouti, Onotoa, Tabiteuea, Tamana and Tarawa) Nauru Fiji Principal cities: Wellington, Auckland, Suva New Zealand (except Chatham Islands) – New Zealand Standard Time Some research bases in Antarctica, in particular the South Pole and the McMurdo Station. At New Year, these places are the first in the world to see the Sun, which is then visible at midnight. Principal towns: Burnt Pine, Kingston Australia Norfolk Island Using UTC-10:00 United States The western part of Aleutian Islands, Alaska (standard time) Russia The western part of Chukotka Autonomous Okrug Kamchatka Krai United States Wake Island Marshall Islands Nauru New Zealand Kermadec Islands Fiji Eastern parts, including: Ringgold Isles Northern Lau Group Southern Lau Group Eastern of Moala Group Vatoa Island Ono-i-Lau Tuvana-i-Tholo France Wallis and Futuna Russia The eastern of Wrangel Island The easternmost part of Chukotka Autonomous Okrug, including Chukchi Peninsula and Big Diomede Island (partly within the "physical" UTC-11:00 area) Kwajalein Atoll, in the Marshall Islands, advanced 24 hours to the Eastern Hemisphere side of the International Date Line by skipping August 21, 1993. Time in New Zealand Time in Russia UTC−12:00 Wake Island Time Zone "Russia Time Zones – Russia Current Times". TimeTemperature.com. Retrieved 20 November 2016. "Time Zone: UTC +12". Time Zones and contained Regions / Areas. WorldTimeZone.com. Retrieved 26 August 2012. Hardgrave, Gary (3 September 2015). "Norfolk Island standard time changes 4 October 2015" (Press release). Administrator of Norfolk Island. Retrieved 4 October 2015. "In Marshall Islands, Friday Is Followed by Sunday". New York Times. Associated Press. 22 August 1993. Retrieved 20 January 2019. Media related to UTC+12:00 at Wikimedia Commons