UTC−07:00 is an identifier for a time offset from UTC of −07:00. In North America, it is observed in the Mountain Time Zone during standard time, and in the Pacific Time Zone during the other eight months (see Daylight saving time). Some locations use it year-round. Principal cities: Denver, Salt Lake City, Phoenix (year-round), Edmonton, Ciudad Juárez Canada (Mountain Time Zone) Alberta British Columbia Southeastern communities of Cranbrook, Golden, Invermere and Kimberley Northwest Territories Nunavut Kitikmeot Region Saskatchewan Lloydminster Mexico (near US border with New Mexico & western Texas) Chihuahua Municipalities of Janos, Ascensión, Juárez, Práxedis G. Guerrero and Guadalupe United States (Mountain Time Zone) Arizona – Navajo Nation only (most of Arizona uses MST year-round) Colorado Idaho South of Salmon River Kansas Western counties of Greeley, Hamilton, Sherman and Wallace Montana Nebraska Western counties of Cherry (western part), Hooker, Arthur, Keith, Perkins, Chase and Dundy, and all counties to the west of these Nevada West Wendover New Mexico North Dakota Southwestern counties of Adams, Billings, Bowman, Dunn (southern part), Golden Valley, Grant, Hettinger, McKenzie (southern part), Sioux (west of ND route 31), Slope and Stark Oklahoma Kenton Oregon Malheur County (except a small strip in the south) South Dakota Western counties of Corson, Dewey, Stanley (western part), Jackson and Bennett, and all counties to the west of these Texas Western counties of Culberson (northwestern part), El Paso and Hudspeth Utah Wyoming Principal cities: Los Angeles, Vancouver, Tijuana Canada (Pacific Time Zone) British Columbia Except Northern Rockies Regional Municipality, Peace River Regional District, and the southeastern communities of Cranbrook, Golden and Invermere Mexico Baja California United States (Pacific Time Zone) California Idaho North of Salmon River Nevada (except West Wendover) Oregon All of the state except Malheur County (but including a small strip in the south of Malheur) Washington Principal cities: Phoenix, Hermosillo Canada (Mountain Time Zone) British Columbia Northern Rockies Regional Municipality Peace River Regional District Yukon Mexico (Zona Pacifico) Baja California Sur Nayarit (except the municipality of Bahía de Banderas) Sinaloa Sonora United States (Mountain Time Zone) Arizona, except the Arizona Navajo Nation, which observes DST "North American time zones: MST – Mountain Standard Time". Time and Date. Retrieved 28 September 2012. New Time Zone in Fort Nelson, timeanddate.com, September 21, 2015. "Canada Time Zone Map". WorldTimeZone.com. Retrieved 9 November 2012. "Hora Oficial en los Estados Unidos Mexicanos" (in Spanish). Centro Nacional de Metrologîa. 2 April 2023. Retrieved 21 October 2023. "Time Zones of the United States". Statoids. Retrieved 25 August 2012. "15 USC § 264 – Part of Idaho in Fourth Zone". Legal Information Institute. Cornell University Law School. Retrieved 15 July 2012. "North American time zones: PST – Pacific Standard Time". Time and Date. Retrieved 28 September 2012. Media related to UTC−07:00 at Wikimedia Commons