UTC−06:00 is an identifier for a time offset from UTC of −06:00. In North America, it is observed in the Central Time Zone during standard time, and in the Mountain Time Zone during the other eight months (see daylight saving time). Several Latin American countries and a few other places use it year-round. Principal cities: Winnipeg, Chicago, Dallas, Houston, St. Louis, Minneapolis, Austin, Memphis, Kansas City, San Antonio, Nashville, New Orleans, Milwaukee, Oklahoma City, Reynosa CST is standard time in the 6th time zone west of Greenwich, reckoned at the 90th meridian; used in North America in some parts of Canada, Mexico and the United States. Canada (Central Time Zone) Manitoba Nunavut Kivalliq Region except Southampton Island (Coral Harbour) Ontario West of 90° west Mexico (near US border with Texas) Chihuahua The municipalities of Coyame del Sotol, Ojinaga and Manuel Benavides Coahuila de Zaragoza The municipalities of Acuña, Allende, Guerrero, Hidalgo, Jiménez, Morelos, Nava, Ocampo, Piedras Negras, Villa Unión and Zaragoza Nuevo León The municipality of Anahuac Tamaulipas The municipalities of Nuevo Laredo, Guerrero, Mier, Miguel Alemán, Camargo, Gustavo Díaz Ordaz, Reynosa, Río Bravo, Valle Hermoso and Matamoros United States (Central Time Zone) Alabama Arkansas Florida The counties of Bay, Calhoun, Escambia, Holmes, Jackson, Okaloosa, Santa Rosa, Walton, and Washington, and northern Gulf county (panhandle) Illinois Indiana Northwestern counties of Jasper, Lake, LaPorte, Newton, Porter and Starke Southwestern counties of Gibson, Perry, Posey, Spencer, Vanderburgh and Warrick Iowa Kansas Entire state except Greeley, Hamilton, Sherman and Wallace counties Kentucky The counties of Breckinridge, Grayson, Hart, Green, Adair, Russell and Clinton, and all counties to the west of these Louisiana Michigan The western counties of Dickinson, Gogebic, Iron and Menominee Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Nebraska Central and eastern Nebraska North Dakota Entire state except southwest Oklahoma Entire state except Kenton South Dakota Eastern half Tennessee Counties to the west of the counties of Scott, Morgan, Roane, Rhea, and Hamilton Texas All except westernmost counties Wisconsin Principal cities: Calgary, Edmonton, Yellowknife, Denver, Billings, Boise, Salt Lake City, Albuquerque, El Paso, Ciudad Juárez Canada (Mountain Time Zone) Alberta British Columbia The south-eastern communities of Cranbrook, Golden, Invermere and Kimberley Northwest Territories Nunavut Kitikmeot Region Saskatchewan Lloydminster Mexico (near US border with New Mexico & western Texas) Chihuahua The municipalities of Janos, Ascensión, Juárez, Práxedis G. Guerrero and Guadalupe United States (Mountain Time Zone) Arizona - Navajo Nation only Colorado Idaho South of Salmon River Kansas The western counties of Greeley, Hamilton, Sherman and Wallace Montana Nebraska The western counties of Cherry (western part), Hooker, Arthur, Keith, Perkins, Chase and Dundy, and all counties to the west of these Nevada West Wendover New Mexico North Dakota The Southwestern counties of Adams, Billings, Bowman, Dunn (southern part), Golden Valley, Grant, Hettinger, McKenzie (southern part), Sioux (west of ND route 31), Slope and Stark Oklahoma Kenton Oregon Malheur County (except a small strip in the south) South Dakota The western counties of Corson, Dewey, Stanley (western part), Jackson and Bennett, and all counties to the west of these Texas The western counties of Culberson (northwestern part), El Paso and Hudspeth Utah Wyoming Principal cities: Regina, Saskatoon, Huntsville, Little Rock, Puebla, Orizaba, Mexico City, Guadalajara, Monterrey, Guatemala City, Tegucigalpa, Managua, Belmopan, Belize City, San José, San Salvador, San Pedro Sula, Liberia. Belize Costa Rica El Salvador Guatemala Honduras Nicaragua Called Central America Time Zone Canada (Central Time Zone) Saskatchewan All province except Lloydminster Mexico (Zona Centro) All except Baja California, Baja California Sur, most of Nayarit, Quintana Roo, Sinaloa, Sonora and the northern municipalities of Chihuahua, Coahuila, Nuevo León and Tamaulipas. A small enclave of the UTC−6 time zone is followed in the municipality of Bahía de Banderas, Nayarit, due to its strong economic ties with the neighboring municipality of Puerto Vallarta, Jalisco. In most UNIX-like operating systems this area is represented as America/Bahia_Banderas. Ecuador Galápagos Province Principal settlement: Hanga Roa Chile Easter Island Time in Canada Time in Chile Time in Ecuador Time in Mexico Time in the United States "WordNet Search – 3.1". wordnetweb.princeton.edu. Retrieved 9 July 2017. "Ontario Time Zone – Ontario Current Local Time – Daylight Saving Time". TimeTemperature.com. Retrieved 1 February 2015. "Hora Oficial en los Estados Unidos Mexicanos" (in Spanish). Centro Nacional de Metrologîa. 2 April 2023. Retrieved 21 October 2023. "Time Zones of the United States". Statoids. Retrieved 25 August 2012. "Time zone map (spring)" (PDF). Indiana State. 13 March 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 May 2012. Retrieved 14 July 2012. "Kentucky County Map". Kentucky Map Collection. Geology.com. Retrieved 6 October 2012. "Michigan Time Zone – Michigan Current Local Time – Daylight Saving Time". TimeTemperature.com. Retrieved 25 August 2012. "Tennessee County Map". Tennessee Map Collection. Geology.com. Retrieved 6 October 2012. "North American time zones: MST – Mountain Standard Time". Time and Date. Retrieved 28 September 2012. New Time Zone in Fort Nelson, timeanddate.com, September 21, 2015. "Canada Time Zone Map". WorldTimeZone.com. Retrieved 9 November 2012. "15 USC § 264 – Part of Idaho in Fourth Zone". Legal Information Institute. Cornell University Law School. Retrieved 15 July 2012. Media related to UTC−06:00 at Wikimedia Commons