UTC−05:00 is an identifier for a time offset from UTC of −05:00. In North America, it is observed in the Eastern Time Zone during standard time, and in the Central Time Zone during the other eight months (see Daylight saving time). The western Caribbean uses it year round. Principal cities: New York, Washington, Philadelphia, Boston, Atlanta, Miami, Detroit, Baltimore, Cleveland, Pittsburgh, Indianapolis, Orlando, Charlotte, Charleston, Wilmington, Key West, Toronto, Montreal, Ottawa, Quebec City, Iqaluit, Nassau, Havana, Kingston, Port-au-Prince, Cockburn Town, Providenciales Canada (Eastern Time Zone) Nunavut Qikiqtaaluk Region except Resolute Ontario East of 90° West Quebec Most of province except easternmost area United States (Eastern Time Zone) Delaware District of Columbia Florida Entire state except the counties of Bay, Calhoun, Escambia, Holmes, Jackson, Okaloosa, Santa Rosa, Walton, and Washington, and northern Gulf county (panhandle) Georgia Indiana Except the northwestern counties of Jasper, Lake, LaPorte, Newton, Porter and Starke, and the southwestern counties of Gibson, Perry, Posey, Spencer, Vanderburgh and Warrick Kentucky Counties to the east of the counties of Breckinridge, Grayson, Hart, Green, Adair, Russell and Clinton Maine Maryland Michigan Except the western counties of Dickinson, Gogebic, Iron and Menominee New England (states of Connecticut, Massachusetts, Maine, New Hampshire, Rhode Island and Vermont) New Jersey New York North Carolina Ohio Pennsylvania South Carolina Tennessee The counties of Scott, Morgan, Roane, Rhea and Hamilton, and all counties to the east of these Virginia West Virginia Bahamas Cuba Haiti United Kingdom Turks and Caicos Islands Principal cities: Winnipeg, Regina, Chicago, Dallas, Houston, St. Louis, Minneapolis, Austin, Memphis, Kansas City, San Antonio, Nashville, New Orleans, Milwaukee, Oklahoma City, Reynosa Canada (Central Time Zone) Manitoba Nunavut All of Kivalliq Region (Coral Harbour) Ontario West of 90° west longitude Mexico (near US border with Texas) Chihuahua The municipalities of Coyame del Sotol, Ojinaga and Manuel Benavides Coahuila de Zaragoza The municipalities of Acuña, Allende, Guerrero, Hidalgo, Jiménez, Morelos, Nava, Ocampo, Piedras Negras, Villa Unión and Zaragoza Nuevo León The municipality of Anahuac Tamaulipas The municipalities of Nuevo Laredo, Guerrero, Mier, Miguel Alemán, Camargo, Gustavo Díaz Ordaz, Reynosa, Río Bravo, Valle Hermoso and Matamoros United States (Central Time Zone) Alabama Arkansas Florida The counties of Bay, Calhoun, Escambia, Holmes, Jackson, Okaloosa, Santa Rosa, Walton, and Washington, and northern Gulf county (panhandle) Indiana Northwestern counties of Jasper, Lake, LaPorte, Newton, Porter and Starke Southwestern counties of Gibson, Perry, Posey, Spencer, Vanderburgh and Warrick Iowa Kansas Entire state except westernmost counties Kentucky The counties of Breckinridge, Grayson, Hart, Green, Adair, Russell and Clinton, and all counties to the west of these Louisiana Michigan The western counties of Dickinson, Gogebic, Iron and Menominee Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Nebraska Central and eastern Nebraska North Dakota Entire state except southwest Oklahoma Entire state except Kenton South Dakota Eastern half Tennessee Counties to the west of the counties of Scott, Morgan, Roane, Rhea, and Hamilton Texas All except westernmost counties Wisconsin Principal cities: Cancún, Bogotá, Lima, Kingston, Quito, Panama City, George Town Brazil Acre Amazonas (13 western municipalities, approximately marked by a line between Tabatinga and Porto Acre) Colombia – Time in Colombia Ecuador – Time in Ecuador (except Galápagos Islands) Peru – Time in Peru Jamaica United Kingdom British Overseas Territories Cayman Islands United States United States Minor Outlying Islands Navassa Island Canada – Eastern Time Zone Atikokan and New Osnaburgh/Pickle Lake area Southampton Island Mexico (Zona Sureste) Quintana Roo Panama Principal settlement: Hanga Roa Chile Easter Island Central Daylight Time Eastern Standard Time List of places using UTC−05:00 Time in Brazil Time in Canada Time in Chile Time in Colombia Time in Ecuador Time in Mexico Time in Panama Time in Peru Time in the United States Time in Belize "Ontario Time Zone – Ontario Current Local Time – Daylight Saving Time". TimeTemperature.com. Retrieved 1 February 2015. "Time Zones of the United States". Statoids. Retrieved 25 August 2012. "Time zone map (spring)" (PDF). Indiana State. 13 March 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 May 2012. Retrieved 14 July 2012. "Michigan Time Zone – Michigan Current Local Time – Daylight Saving Time". TimeTemperature.com. Retrieved 25 August 2012. "Hora Oficial en los Estados Unidos Mexicanos" (in Spanish). Centro Nacional de Metrologîa. 2 April 2023. Retrieved 21 October 2023. "Kentucky County Map". Kentucky Map Collection. Geology.com. Retrieved 6 October 2012. "Tennessee County Map". Tennessee Map Collection. Geology.com. Retrieved 6 October 2012. "Brazil: Acre and parts of Amazonas switch time zones". Time and Date. 31 October 2013 [9 October 2013]. Retrieved 17 November 2013. "Navassa Island". WorldTimeZone. Retrieved 6 October 2012. Media related to UTC−05:00 at Wikimedia Commons