The 2001 FIBA European Championship, commonly called FIBA EuroBasket 2001, was the 32nd FIBA EuroBasket regional basketball championship held by FIBA Europe, which also served as Europe qualifier for the 2002 FIBA World Championship, giving a berth to the top four (or five, depending on Serbia reaching one of the top four places) teams in the final standings. It was held in Turkey between 31 August and 9 September 2001. Sixteen national teams entered the event under the auspices of FIBA Europe, the sport's regional governing body. The cities of Ankara, Antalya and Istanbul hosted the tournament. Serbia won its third FIBA European title (eighth and the last FIBA European title under the name of Yugoslavia) by defeating hosts Turkey with a 78–69 score in the final. Vlado Šćepanović scored 19 points for Serbia, while İbrahim Kutluay scored 19 for Turkey. Serbia's Peja Stojaković was voted the tournament's MVP. Of the sixteen teams that participated in EuroBasket 2001, the top eight teams from the previous tournament qualified directly. The other eight teams earned their berths via a qualifying tournament. The teams were split in four groups of four teams each where they played a round robin. The first team from each group qualified directly to the knockout stage. To define the other four teams that advanced to the knockout stage, second and third-placed teams from each group where cross-paired (2A vs. 3B, 3A vs. 2B, 2C vs. 3D, 3C vs. 2D) and the winner from each match advanced to the knockout stage. In the knockout quarterfinals, the winners advanced to the semifinals. The winners from the semifinals competed for the championship in the final, while the losing teams play a consolation game for the third place. The losing teams from the quarterfinals play in a separate bracket to define 5th through 8th place in the final standings. At the start of tournament, all 16 participating countries had 12 players on their roster. Times given below are in Eastern European Summer Time (UTC+3). PPG Leaders at FIBA.com RPG Leaders at FIBA.com APG Leaders at FIBA.com SPG Leaders at FIBA.com SPG Leaders at FIBA.com MPG Leaders at FIBA.com Team Leaders – PPG Team Leaders – RPG Team Leaders – APG Team Leaders – SPG Team Leaders – SPG Linguasport.com Tournament Team. 2001 European Championship for Men archive.FIBA.com