42°00′N 14°00′E﻿ / ﻿42.000°N 14.000°E﻿ / 42.000; 14.000 The Italian Peninsula (Italian: penisola italica or penisola italiana), also known as the Italic Peninsula, Apennine Peninsula or Italian Boot, is a peninsula extending from the southern Alps in the north to the central Mediterranean Sea in the south. It is nicknamed lo Stivale (the Boot). Three smaller peninsulas contribute to this characteristic shape, namely Calabria (the "toe"), Salento (the "heel") and Gargano (the "spur"). The backbone of the Italian Peninsula consists of the Apennine Mountains, from which it takes one of its names. The peninsula comprises much of Italy and also includes the enclaved microstates of San Marino and Vatican City. Geographically, the minimum extent of the Italian Peninsula consists of the land south of a line extending from the Magra to the Rubicon rivers, north of the Tuscan–Emilian Apennines. It excludes the Po Valley and the southern slopes of the Alps. The Italian Peninsula has the only active volcano on continental Europe, Mount Vesuvius. In general discourse, "Italy" and the "Italian Peninsula" are often used as synonymous terms. However, Northern Italy may be excluded from the Italian Peninsula. From a political point of view, the Italian Peninsula in the strict sense (therefore excluding Insular Italy and Northern Italy) is divided into various states listed in the following table: Italy portal Vatican City portal Apennine Mountains Italy Italy (geographical region) San Marino Southern Europe Vatican City "The BOOT of ITALY". Retrieved 5 October 2023. De Agostini Ed., L'Enciclopedia Geografica – Vol. I - Italia, 2004, p. 78. Touring Club Italiano, Conosci l'Italia – Vol. I: L'Italia fisica, 1957. "Mount Vesuvius, Italy: Map, Facts, Eruption Pictures, Pompeii". Vocabolario Treccani, Peninsulare De Agostini Ed., L'Enciclopedia Geografica - Vol. I - Italia, 2004, p.78 Touring Club Italiano, Conosci l'Italia - Vol. I: L'Italia fisica, 1957 Population includes only the inhabitants of the Italian Peninsula, excluding Northern Italy and Insular Italy (Sardinia and Sicily). Media related to Italian Peninsula at Wikimedia Commons