Verónica Michelle Bachelet Jeria (Spanish: [βeˈɾonika miˈʃel βaʃeˈle ˈxeɾja]; born 29 September 1951) is a Chilean politician who served as United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights from 2018 to 2022. She previously served as President of Chile from 2006 to 2010 and from 2014 to 2018 for the Socialist Party of Chile. She is the first woman to hold the Chilean presidency. After leaving the presidency in 2010 and before becoming eligible for re-election, she was appointed as the first executive director of the newly established United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women. In December 2013, Bachelet was re-elected with over 62% of the vote, surpassing the 54% she received in 2006. She was the first President of Chile to be re-elected since 1932. Bachelet, a physician who has studied military strategy at the university level, previously served as the Health Minister and Defense Minister under her predecessor, Ricardo Lagos. She is a separated mother of three and identifies as an agnostic. In addition to her native Spanish, she speaks English fluently and has some proficiency in German, French, and Portuguese. Bachelet is the second child of archaeologist Ángela Jeria Gómez (1926–2020) and Air Force Brigadier General Alberto Bachelet Martínez (1923–1974). Bachelet's great-great-grandfather, Louis-Joseph Bachelet Lapierre (1820–1864), was a French wine merchant from Chassagne-Montrachet who immigrated to Chile with his Parisian wife, Françoise Jeanne Beault, in 1860. He was hired as a wine-making expert by the Subercaseaux vineyards in Santiago. Bachelet Lapierre's son, Germán, was born in Santiago in 1862 and, in 1891, married Luisa Brandt Cadot, a Chilean of French and Swiss descent. They gave birth to Alberto Bachelet Brandt in 1894. Bachelet's maternal great-grandfather, Máximo Jeria Chacón, of Spanish (Basque region) and Greek heritage, was the first person to receive a degree in agronomic engineering in Chile. He founded several agronomy schools in the country and married Lely Johnson, the daughter of an English physician working in Chile. Their son, Máximo Jeria Johnson, married Ángela Gómez Zamora and had five children, with Bachelet's mother being the fourth. Bachelet was born in La Cisterna, a middle-class suburb of Santiago. She was named after French actress Michèle Morgan. Bachelet spent many of her childhood years traveling around her native Chile, moving with her family from one military base to another. She lived and attended primary schools in, among other places, Quintero, Antofagasta, and San Bernardo. In 1962, she moved with her family to the United States, where her father was assigned to the military mission at the Chilean Embassy in Washington, D.C. Her family lived for almost two years in Bethesda, Maryland, where she attended Western Junior High School and learned to speak English fluently. Returning to Chile in 1964, she graduated in 1969 from Liceo Nº 1 Javiera Carrera, a prestigious girls' public high school, finishing near the top of her class. There she was class president, a member of the choir and volleyball teams, and part of a theater group and a band, "Las Clap Clap," which she co-founded and which toured around several school festivals. In 1970, after obtaining a relatively high score on the university admission test, she entered medical school at the University of Chile, where she was selected in the 113th position (out of 160 admitted applicants). She originally intended to study sociology or economics, but was prevailed upon by her father to study medicine instead. She has said she opted for medicine because it was 'a concrete way of helping people cope with pain' and 'a way to contribute to improve health in Chile.' Facing growing food shortages, the government of Salvador Allende placed Bachelet's father in charge of the Food Distribution Office. When General Augusto Pinochet suddenly came to power via the 11 September 1973 coup d'état, Bachelet's father was detained at the Air War Academy on charges of treason. Following months of daily torture at Santiago's Public Prison, he suffered a cardiac arrest that resulted in his death on 12 March 1974. In early January 1975, Bachelet and her mother were detained at their apartment by two DINA agents, who blindfolded them and drove them to Villa Grimaldi, a notorious secret detention center in Santiago, where they were separated and subjected to interrogation and torture. In 2013, Bachelet said she had been interrogated by DINA chief Manuel Contreras there. Some days later, Bachelet was transferred to Cuatro Álamos ("Four Poplars") detention center, where she was held until the end of January. Thanks to the assistance of Roberto Kozak, Bachelet was able to go into exile in Australia, where her older brother, Alberto, had moved in 1969. Of her torture, Bachelet said, in 2004, that "it was nothing in comparison to what others suffered". She was "yelled at using abusive language, shaken", and both she and her mother were "threatened with the killing of the other". She was "never tortured with electricity", but she did see it done to other prisoners. In May 1975, Bachelet left Australia and later relocated to East Germany, where she was assigned an apartment in Am Stern, Potsdam by the German Democratic Republic (GDR). Her mother joined her a month later and lived separately in Leipzig. In October 1976, Bachelet began working at a communal clinic in the Babelsberg neighborhood as a stepping stone to furthering her medical studies at a university in East Germany. During this time, she met architect Jorge Leopoldo Dávalos Cartes, another Chilean exile, and they married in 1977. In January 1978, Bachelet went to Leipzig to study German at the Herder Institute of Karl Marx University (now the University of Leipzig). She gave birth to her first child with Dávalos, Jorge Alberto Sebastián, in June 1978. She returned to Potsdam in September 1978 to continue her medical studies at the Humboldt University of Berlin for two years. Five months after enrolling as a student, however, she obtained authorization to return to her country. After four years in exile, Bachelet returned to Chile in 1979. Her medical school credits from the GDR were not recognized, so she had to restart her studies where she left off before she fled the country.[citation needed] Despite this setback, she graduated as physician-surgeon on January 7, 1983. Bachelet wanted to work in the public sector where she could make the most impact, but her request to work as a general practitioner was denied by the military government on "political grounds". However, Bachelet's academic achievements and published papers earned her a scholarship from the Chilean Medical Chamber to specialize in pediatrics and public health at the Roberto del Río Children's Hospital at the University of Chile' (1983–86). She completed the program with excellent grades but did not receive her certification for "financial reasons". During this time, Bachelet also worked at PIDEE (Protection of Children Injured by States of Emergency Foundation), a non-governmental organization that provided support for the children of the missing and the tortured in Santiago and Chillán. She served as the head of the Medical Department of the foundation from 1986 and 1990. Some time after the birth of her second child with Dávalos, Francisca Valentina, in February 1984, she and her husband legally separated. Between 1985 and 1987, Bachelet had a romantic relationship with Alex Vojkovic Trier, an engineer and spokesman for the Manuel Rodríguez Patriotic Front, an armed group that, among other actions, attempted to assassinate Pinochet in 1986. The affair was a minor issue during her presidential campaign, during which she stated that she never supported any of Vojkovic's activities. After Chile's transition to democracy in 1990, Bachelet worked for the Ministry of Health's West Santiago Health Service and served as a consultant for the Pan-American Health Organization, the World Health Organization, and the Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit. While working for the National AIDS Commission (Conasida), she became romantically involved with Aníbal Hernán Henríquez Marich, a fellow physician and a right-wing supporter of Pinochet, who fathered her third child, Sofía Catalina, in December 1992. Their relationship ended a few years later. From March 1994 and July 1997, Bachelet worked as Senior Assistant to the Deputy Health Minister. Driven by an interest in civil-military relations, Bachelet began studying military strategy at the National Academy of Political and Strategic Studies (ANEPE) in Chile in 1996, earning first place in her class. This achievement earned her a presidential scholarship, allowing her to continue her studies in the United States at the Inter-American Defense College in Washington, D.C., where she completed a Continental Defense Course in 1998. That same year she returned to Chile to work for the Defense Ministry as the Senior Assistant to the Defense Minister and went on to graduate from a Master's program in military science at the Chilean Army's War Academy.[citation needed] In 1970, during her first year as a university student, Bachelet joined the Socialist Youth and was an active supporter of the Popular Unity. In the immediate aftermath of the coup, she and her mother worked as couriers for the underground Socialist Party directorate, which was trying to organize a resistance movement. Eventually, almost all of them were captured and disappeared. In the second half of the 1980s, Bachelet, after her return from exile, became politically active, fighting for the restoration of democracy in Chile, although not on the front line. In 1995, she became a member of the party's Central Committee and, from 1998 to 2000, she was an active member of the Political Commission.[citation needed] In 1996, she ran against future presidential opponent Joaquín Lavín for the mayorship of Las Condes, a wealthy suburb of Santiago and a right-wing stronghold.[citation needed] Lavín won the 22-candidate election with nearly 78% of the vote, while Bachelet finished fourth with 2.35%.[citation needed] On March 11, 2000, virtually unknown at the time, Bachelet was appointed Minister of Health by President Ricardo Lagos. She conducted an in-depth study of the public healthcare system which resulted in the creation of the AUGE plan a few years later. During her tenure, she was given the challenging task of eliminating the waiting lists in the overburdened public hospital system within the first 100 days of Lagos's government. Although she was successful in reducing the waiting lists by 90%, she was unable to completely eliminate them and offered her resignation, which was promptly rejected by the President. Bachelet authorized the free distribution of the morning-after pill for victims of sexual abuse, which sparked controversy.[citation needed] On January 7, 2002, Bachelet was appointed Minister of National Defense, becoming the first woman in a Latin American country and one of the few in the world to hold this position. As Minister of Defense, she fostered reconciliatory gestures between the military and victims of the dictatorship, leading to General Juan Emilio Cheyre, head of the army, making a historic declaration in 2003 that the military would "never again" subvert democracy in Chile. Additionally, she oversaw reforms of the military pension system and continued with the modernization process of the Chilean armed forces, including purchasing of new military equipment and participating in international peace operations. One key moment that has been cited as a factor in Bachelet's chances to the presidency occurred in mid-2002, during a flood in northern Santiago. As Defense Minister, she led a rescue operation while wearing a cloak and military cap, perched atop an amphibious tank. By the end of 2004, Bachelet's surging popularity in opinion polls made her the only politician within the Coalition of Parties for Democracy (Concertación de los Partidos por la Democracia; CPD) who was capable of defeating Joaquín Lavín in the presidential election. As a result, she was chosen as the Socialist Party's candidate for the presidency. Initially hesitant to accept the nomination, as it was never a goal of hers, she eventually agreed as she felt she could not let her supporters down. On 1 October of that year, she stepped down from her government position to fully focus on her campaign and to support the CPD in the municipal elections held later that month. On January 28, 2005, she was officially named the Socialist Party's presidential candidate. An open primary was scheduled for July 2005 to determine the CPD's sole presidential candidate, but it was canceled after Bachelet's only rival, Christian Democrat Soledad Alvear, a cabinet member in the first three CPD administrations, withdrew early due to a lack of support within her own party and in opinion polls.[citation needed] In the December 2005 election, Bachelet ran against three candidates: Sebastián Piñera from the center-right (RN), Joaquín Lavín from the right-wing (UDI), and Tomás Hirsch from the left (JPM). As predicted by opinion polls, she didn't receive the absolute majority needed to win the election outright, obtaining 46% of the vote. On 15 January 2006, she went on to face Piñera in the runoff election and won the presidency with 53.5% of the vote, becoming Chile's first female president and the first woman in Latin America to reach the presidency through a direct election without being the wife of a previous head of state or political leader. On 30 January 2006, Bachelet was declared President-elect by the Elections Certification Court (Tricel) and announced her cabinet, which, for the first time, was composed of an equal number of men and women, as promised during her campaign. To reflect the balance of power within the Coalition, Bachelet named seven ministers from the Christian Democrat Party (PDC), five from the Party for Democracy (PPD), four from the Socialist Party (PS), one from the Social Democrat Radical Party (PRSD), and three without party affiliation.[citation needed] Bachelet was sworn in as President of the Republic of Chile on 11 March 2006 in a ceremony held in a plenary session of the National Congress in Valparaíso attended by many foreign heads of states and delegates. Much of Bachelet's first three months as president were spent working on 36 measures she had promised during her campaign to implement during her first 100 days in office. They ranged from simple presidential decrees, such as providing free health care for older patients, to complex bills to reform the social security system and the electoral system. For her first state visit, Bachelet chose Argentina, arriving in Buenos Aires on 21 March. There she met with president Néstor Kirchner, with whom she signed strategic agreements on energy and infrastructure, including the possibility of launching a bidding process to operate the Transandine Railway. In March 2006 Bachelet created an advisory committee to reform the pension system, which was headed by former budget director Mario Marcel. The commission issued its final report in July 2006, and in March 2008 Bachelet signed the bill into law. The new legislation established a Basic Solidarity Pension (PBS) and a Solidarity Pension Contribution (APS), guaranteeing a minimum pension for the 60% poorest segment of the population, regardless of their contribution history. The reform also grants a bonus to female pensioners for every child born alive. In October 2006 Bachelet enacted legislation to protect subcontracted employees, which would benefit an estimated 1.2 million workers. In June 2009 she introduced pay equality legislation, guaranteeing equal pay for equal work in the private sector, regardless of gender. In September 2009 Bachelet signed the "Chile Grows with You" plan into law, providing comprehensive social services to vulnerable children from ages zero to six. That law also established a social welfare management framework called the "Intersectoral Social Protection System", made up of subsystems such as "Chile Solidario" and "Chile Grows with You". Between 2008 and 2010 the Bachelet administration delivered a so-called "literary briefcase" (a box of books including encyclopedias, dictionaries, poetry works and books for both children and adults) to the 400,000 poorest families with children attending primary school from first to fourth grade. In March 2009, Bachelet launched the "I Choose my PC" program, awarding free computers to poor seventh-graders with excellent academic performance attending government-subsidized schools. During 2009 and 2010 Bachelet delivered maternity packages to all babies born in public hospitals, which are about 80% of total births. In January 2010, Bachelet promulgated a law allowing the distribution of emergency contraception pills in public and private health centers, including to persons under 14, without parental consent. The law also requires high schools to add a sexual education program to their curriculum. Bachelet's first political crisis came in late April 2006, when massive high school student demonstrations – unseen in three decades – broke out throughout the country, demanding better public education. In June 2006, she sought to dampen the student protests by setting up an 81-member advisory committee, including education experts from all political backgrounds, representatives of ethnic groups, parents, teachers, students, school owners, university rectors, people from diverse religious denominations, etc. Its purpose was to propose changes to the country's educational system and serve as a forum to share ideas and views. The committee issued its final report in December 2006. In August 2009, she signed the education reform bill into law, which created two new regulatory bodies: a Superintendency on Education and a Quality Agency. During her presidency Bachelet opened 18 new subway stations in Santiago, nine in 2006, one in 2009 and eight in 2010. In December 2009 Bachelet announced the construction of a new subway line in Santiago, to be operational by 2014 (the date was later changed to mid-2016). In February 2007 Santiago's transport system was radically altered with the introduction of Transantiago, designed under the previous administration. The system was nearly unanimously condemned by the media, the users and the opposition, significantly damaging her popularity, and leading to the sacking of her Transport minister. On her decision not to abort the plan's start, she said in April 2007 she was given erroneous information which caused her to act against her "instincts." In September 2008, Chile's Constitutional Court declared a US$400 million loan by the Inter-American Development Bank to fund the transport system unconstitutional. Bachelet – who had been forced to ask for the loan after Congress had refused to approve funds for the beleaguered program in November 2007 – made use of an emergency clause in the Constitution that grants funds equivalent to 2% of the fiscal budget. In November 2008, she invoked the emergency clause again after Congress denied once again funds for the system for 2009. On February 27, 2010, during the last week of summer vacations and less than two weeks before Bachelet's term was set to expire, Chile was struck by an 8.8-magnitude earthquake that killed over 500 people and caused widespread damage, including the collapse of apartment buildings and bridges and tsunamis that destroyed fishing villages. Bachelet and the government faced criticism for their slow response to the disaster, which hit on a Saturday at 3:34 am and left most of the country without electricity, phone, and Internet access. Bachelet declared a state of catastrophe and, on Sunday afternoon, sent military troops to the most affected areas in an effort to quell instances of looting and arson. She also imposed night curfews in the most affected cities, but was criticized for not deploying the troops quickly enough. In January 2010 Bachelet opened the Museum of Memory and Human Rights in Santiago, documenting the horrors of Pinochet's 16+1⁄2-year dictatorship. In November she promulgated a law (submitted to Congress during the previous administration) creating the National Institute for Human Rights, with the goal of protecting and promoting human rights in the country. The law also allowed for the reopening of the Rettig and Valech commissions for 18 months. She used her power as president to send a bill to legalize gay marriages, and sponsored a reproductive rights bill. On 10 August 2018 the outgoing UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein warmly welcomed the UN General Assembly's appointment of Michelle Bachelet to succeed him. He said that "She has all the attributes – courage, perseverance, passion, and a deep commitment to human rights". In August 2008, Bachelet signed a freedom of information bill into law, which became effective in April 2009. In January 2010, Bachelet enacted a law creating the Ministry for the Environment. The new legislation also created the Environmental Evaluation Service and the Superintendency for the Environment. Half of the ministries in her first government were occupied by women; in her successor's team, Sebastián Piñera, 18% were. Bachelet was widely credited for resisting calls from politicians within her own coalition to spend the country's huge copper revenues to close the income gap. Instead in 2007 she created the Economic and Social Stabilization Fund, a sovereign wealth fund which accumulates fiscal surpluses above 1% of GDP. This allowed her to finance new social policies and provide economic stimulus packages when the 2008 financial crisis hit the country. During her four years in office, the economy grew at an average rate of 3.3% per year (2.3% on per capita basis), reaching a high of 5.7% in 2006 and a low of −1.0% in 2009 due to the global financial crisis. The real minimum wage increased an average of 2% per year, the lowest increase of any president since 1990, while unemployment hovered between 7 and 8% for the first three years, then rose to nearly 11% during 2009. Inflation averaged 4.5% per year, reaching close to 9% in 2008 due to rising food prices. Absolute poverty fell from 13.7% in November 2006 to 11.5% in November 2009. Bachelet began her term with an unprecedented absolute majority in both chambers of Congress. Prior to the elimination of appointed senators in the 2005 constitutional reforms, the CPD had never held a majority in the Senate. However, she was soon met with internal opposition from several discontented lawmakers in both chambers of Congress, known as díscolos ("disobedient", "ungovernable"). This opposition jeopardized the coalition's fragile and historic congressional majority on a number of key executive-sponsored bills during much of her first two years in office and forced Bachelet to negotiate with a right-wing opposition that she perceived as "obstructionist". By 2007, the CPD had lost its absolute majority in both chambers of Congress as several senators and deputies from the coalition became independent. In December 2006, Pinochet died. Bachelet decided not to grant him a state funeral, an honour bestowed upon constitutionally elected Chilean presidents, but a military funeral as former commander-in-chief of the Army appointed by President Salvador Allende. She also refused to declare an official national day of mourning, but did authorize flags at military barracks to fly at half staff. Pinochet's coffin was also allowed to be draped in a Chilean flag. Bachelet did not attend his funeral, saying it would be "a violation of [her] conscience", and sent Defense Minister Vivianne Blanlot instead. In April 2008, Bachelet's Education Minister, Yasna Provoste, was impeached by Congress for her handling of a scandal involving mismanagement of school subsidies. Her conviction was the first for a sitting minister in 36 years. During her first year in office Bachelet faced continuing problems from neighbors Argentina and Peru. In July 2006, she sent a letter of protest to Argentine president Néstor Kirchner after his government issued a decree increasing export tariffs on natural gas to Chile, which was considered by Bachelet to be a violation of a tacit bilateral agreement.[citation needed] In early 2007, Peru accused Chile of unilaterally redefining their shared sea boundary in a section of a law passed by Congress that detailed the borders of the new administrative region of Arica and Parinacota. The impasse was resolved by the Chilean Constitutional Tribunal, which declared that section unconstitutional. In March 2007, the Chilean state-owned and independent public broadcaster Televisión Nacional de Chile (TVN) canceled the broadcast of a documentary about the War of the Pacific after a cautionary call was made to the stations' board of directors by Chilean Foreign Relations Minister Alejandro Foxley, apparently acting on demands made by the Peruvian ambassador to Chile;[citation needed] the show was finally broadcast in late May of that year. In August 2007 the Chilean government filed a formal diplomatic protest with Peru and summoned home its ambassador after Peru published an official map claiming a part of the Pacific Ocean that Chile considers its sovereign territory. Peru said this was just another step in its plans to bring the dispute to the International Court of Justice in The Hague. In January 2008 Peru asked the court to consider the dispute, prompting Bachelet to summon home the Chilean ambassador in Lima for consultations. The United Nations Security Council election held on October 16, 2006, which saw a deadlock between Venezuela and Guatemala for the two-year, non-permanent Latin American and Caribbean seat on the Security Council, developed into a significant ideological issue in Chile and was viewed as a test for Bachelet. The governing coalition was split, with the Socialists supporting Venezuela's bid and the Christian Democrats strongly opposing it. The day before the vote, the president announced through her spokesman that Chile would abstain, citing the lack of regional consensus on a single candidate, ending months of speculation. In March 2007, Chile's ambassador to Venezuela, Claudio Huepe, said in an interview with teleSUR that Bachelet personally told him that she had initially intended to vote for Venezuela but then "there were a series of circumstances that forced me to abstain". The government quickly recalled Huepe and accepted his resignation. In May 2008, Bachelet became the first President pro tempore of the Union of South American Nations (Unasur) and in September she called for an urgent summit after Bolivian President Evo Morales warned of a possible coup attempt against him. The presidents of Bolivia, Ecuador, Uruguay, Argentina, Paraguay, Brazil and Colombia, and the Secretary-General of the Organization of American States, met with Bachelet at the La Moneda Palace in Santiago, where they agreed to send two commissions to Bolivia: one to mediate between the executive and the opposition, and another to investigate the killings in Pando Department. In February 2009, Bachelet visited Cuba and met with Fidel Castro. There she urged the United States to put an end to the embargo. No Chilean head of state had visited the country in 37 years. Despite petitions from the Christian Democratic Party of her own governing coalition, and of the opposition parties, Bachelet did not met with Cuban dissidents during her visit. Soon after the meeting, Castro wrote that the "fascist and vengeful Chilean oligarchy is the same which more than 100 years ago robbed Bolivia of its access to the Pacific and of copper-rich lands in a humiliating war". In March 2009, Bachelet hosted in Viña del Mar the "Progressive Leaders Summit", meeting with U.S. Vice President Joe Biden, British Prime Minister Gordon Brown, Spanish Prime Minister José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero and presidents Tabaré Vázquez of Uruguay, Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva of Brazil and Cristina Fernández de Kirchner of Argentina. The meeting garnered some media interest because it took place six days before the highly anticipated G-20 Summit in London. Continuing the coalition's free-trade strategy, in August 2006 Bachelet promulgated a free trade agreement with the People's Republic of China (signed under the previous administration of Ricardo Lagos), the first Chinese free-trade agreement with a Latin American nation; similar deals with Japan and India were promulgated in August 2007. In October 2006, Bachelet promulgated a multilateral trade deal with New Zealand, Singapore and Brunei, the Trans-Pacific Strategic Economic Partnership (P4), also signed under Lagos's presidency. She held free-trade talks with other countries, including Australia, Vietnam, Turkey and Malaysia. Regionally, she signed bilateral free trade agreements with Panama, Peru and Colombia.[citation needed] In October 2007, Bachelet granted amnesty to undocumented migrants from other Latin American countries. The measure was expected to benefit around 15,000 Peruvians and 2,000 Bolivians. In December 2007 she signed in Bolivia a trilateral agreement with the presidents of Brazil and Bolivia to complete and improve a 4,700 km road to connect the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans, via Arica and Iquique in Chile and Santos in Brazil. In May 2008, following months of intense lobbying, Chile was elected as member of the United Nations Human Rights Council, obtaining the largest vote among Latin American countries. In December 2009 Chile became the first country in South America, and the second in Latin America after Mexico, to receive an invitation to join the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Bachelet signed the accession agreement in January 2010, but it formally became a member in May 2010, after she had left office. Bachelet enjoyed an approval rating above 50% for her first three months in office, during the so-called "honeymoon period". Her popularity fell during the student protests that year, hovering in the mid-40s. In July she had a disastrous public relations incident when a group of residents she was visiting in the southern city of Chiguayante who were affected by a landslide berated her publicly on television, accusing her of using their tragedy to boost her falling popularity. One woman demanded that she leave the scene so rescue efforts could continue. In July, after only four months in office, Bachelet was forced to reshuffle her cabinet, in what was the fastest ministerial adjustment since 1990. Bachelet's popularity dipped further in her second year, reaching a low of 35% approval, 46% disapproval in September 2007. This fall was mainly attributed to the Transantiago fiasco. That same month she had a second negative incident when a group of earthquake and tsunami victims she was visiting in the southern region of Aisén received her bearing black flags and accused her of showing up late. The city mayor, who told Bachelet to "go to hell", later apologized. Over the following 12 months, however, Bachelet's approval ratings did not improve. At the onset of the global financial crisis in September 2008 Bachelet's popularity was at 42%, but gradually her job approval ratings began to rise. When she left office in March 2010 her popular support was at a record 84%, according to conservative polling institute Adimark GfK. The Chilean Constitution does not allow a president to serve two consecutive terms and Bachelet endorsed Christian Democratic Party candidate Eduardo Frei Ruiz-Tagle for the December 2009 election. In April 2010, Bachelet inaugurated her own think-tank, "Fundación Dialoga". Its headquarters are located in Providencia, a suburb of Santiago. Bachelet is a member of the Club of Madrid, the world's largest forum of former heads of state and government. Since 2010 she has also been a member of the Inter-American Dialogue, the leading think tank on Western Hemisphere relations and affairs, and served as the organization's co-chair. On 14 September 2010, Bachelet was appointed head of the newly created United Nations body UN Women by UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon. She took office on 19 September 2010. On 15 March 2013 she announced her resignation. On 27 March 2013, Bachelet announced that she would seek a second term as President of Chile in the 2013 elections. The well-respected CEP released a poll in May 2012 suggesting that 51% of voters wished to see her become the next president, far ahead of any other would-be candidate. On 30 June 2013, Bachelet became the Nueva Mayoría's candidate for president after she won a four-way primary election with the support of five center and left parties (PS, PPD, PC, IC, MAS) and 73% of the vote. In the 17 November 2013 presidential election, Bachelet fell short of the absolute majority needed for an outright win. In the runoff election, held on 15 December of that year, she beat former senator and Minister of Labor Evelyn Matthei with over 62% of the vote; turnout was significantly lower than in the first round. Bachelet was sworn in as President of the Republic of Chile for her second term on March 11, 2014, at the National Congress in Valparaíso. Isabel Allende, the daughter of former President Salvador Allende and newly elected President of the Senate, administered the affirmation of office to Bachelet, marking the first time in the country's history that both parties involved were women. Among Bachelet's main campaign promises for the 2013 election was the introduction of free university education in Chile and the end of profit-making educational institutions, as a response to the 2011–13 Chilean student protests. The intention was that revenue from the increase in corporate tax rate by 2017 would be used to fund free education. The proposals were criticized and quickly became unpopular due to the opposition from students who felt that the proposals did not go far enough in removing profit making. Opposition parties, lower middle class voters and certain members of Bachelet's Nueva Mayoría coalition attacked the proposals as the law that would prevent individuals from earning profits on public resources would not address making improvements in quality of education. In 2015, the Chile Constitutional Court rejected large portions of Bachelet's plan to offer free college education to half of the nation's poorest students on grounds that requiring them to attend certain schools participating in the program could be considered discrimination. However, what remained of the plan allowed Bachelet to send 200,000 students from low-income families to college free of cost. In January 2018, the Chilean Senate passed a law guaranteeing free education which was supported by conservative opposition parties as well, allowing the poorest 60% of students to study for free and doubled state funding for public universities. The new legislation created a higher education Superintendent empowered to supervise and penalize institutions which do not provide quality of education or have for-profit operations. In September 2014, the Chilean Congress passed Bachelet's tax reform proposal which aimed to increase revenue by 3% of gross domestic product. Measures included in the reform were: increased corporate tax rate from 20% to 25% or 27% the maximum tax bracket for personal income tax lowered to 35 percent from 40 percent starting in 2018 increased excise taxes for sweetened beverages, alcohol and tobacco "Green" taxes including a tax on carbon emissions for thermoelectric plants bigger than 50 MW and a tax on the import of diesel vehicles with higher cylinder capacity, excluding work vehicles measures against tax evasion Critics blamed tax reforms for complexity driving away investment and for the slowdown of the Chilean economy during Bachelet's second period in office. However, Bachelet's supporters argue that falling copper prices were more to blame for the economic slowdown. They argue that economic forecasts of faster growth in conjunction with rising copper prices and exports from 2018 onwards (after Bachelet's term) suggest that the tax reforms did not negatively affect the economy. Others, such as MIT-trained economist and academic Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel, have found that Chile's overall terms of trade under Bachelet's second term worsened only marginally compared to those of her predecessor Sebastián Piñera, due in part to a lower cost of key imports like petroleum. Consequently, he concludes that Bachelet's reforms and governance likely were instrumental in causing a period of dampened growth throughout her presidency. After Easter Island's Rapa Nui inhabitants voted 73% in favor of establishing a conservation zone, Michelle Bachelet designated a new 720,000 square kilometer protection area in September 2017, protecting at least 142 endemic marine species, including 27 threatened with extinction. Five new national parks in the Patagonia region were created under a presidential decree, covering 10 million acres in January 2018, including 1 million acres of land contributed by conservationist Kris Tompkins. On 9 March 2018, Bachelet created nine marine reserves to protect biodiversity with her final presidential decree, increasing the area of the sea under state protection from 4.2 percent to 42.4 percent. The measure is expected to benefit marine life in approximately 1.4 million square kilometers. When Michelle Bachelet again took office of President in March 2014, she made passing Piñera's civil union bill a priority. The name of the bill was changed to Civil Union Pact (Pacto de Unión Civil) on 17 December, and Congress reiterated their intention to hold the final vote by January 2015. On 6 January 2015, a provision recognizing foreign marriages as civil unions was approved in the Constitutional Committee while the child adoption clause was turned down. The bill went to a final vote before both the Senate and the Chamber of Deputies as it was amended. On 13 January, the full Chamber of Deputies reinserted the adoption provision. On 20 January 2015, the Chamber approved the bill on a vote of 86 to 23 with 2 abstentions. On 27 January, the Senate rejected all the Chamber's amendments, so the bill was headed to the joint committee of both houses. The committee reached the agreement in regard to the text of the bill and changed its name to Civil Union Agreement (Acuerdo de Unión Civil) the same day. The bill was passed in both houses on 28 January 2015. Several lawmakers asked the Chilean Constitutional Court to verify the bill's constitutionality, which was upheld by the court in a ruling released on 6 April 2015. The bill was signed into law by President Bachelet on 13 April 2015. It was published in the Official Gazette on 21 April 2015 and took effect on 22 October 2015. Chile's civil union provisions enable couples to claim pension benefits and inherit property if their civil partner dies as well as more easily co-own property and make medical decisions for one another. The Government estimated at the time of the law going into effect that some two million Chilean couples cohabiting could have their unions legally recognized. In the day following the law going into effect, approximately 1,600 couples signed up to register their unions. On 1 December 2016, the Chamber of Deputies unanimously approved (except for 6 abstentions) a bill to give couples who enter in a civil union five days off, like what married couples have. The bill was approved by the Senate in October 2017, in a unanimous 15–0 vote. A new Ministry for Women and Gender Inequality was formed, replacing the National Women's Service in June 2016 which aimed to formulate policies against abuse of women and gender inequality.[citation needed] Claudia Pascual was appointed as the first ever Minister for Women and Gender Inequality.[citation needed] The Chilean Congress approved Bachelet's abortion legalization bill in some circumstances in July 2017, but was subjected to challenge in the Constitutional Court. Later, Chile's total abortion ban implemented under the Pinochet regime in 1989 was lifted in August 2017 after the Constitutional Court voted 6–4 to allow the procedure under some circumstances: in cases of pregnancy as a result of rape (up to 12 weeks), if the fetus endangers the mother's life, or if the fetus is not viable. Prior to this, Chile was one of only four nations in the Americas that had a total ban on abortions, the others being El Salvador, Nicaragua and the Dominican Republic. The Chilean Congress passed Bachelet's proposed abolishment of the binomial voting system introduced by the Augusto Pinochet regime and restoring proportional representation for election to both chambers of the Chilean Congress and requirements that 40% of candidates nominated are female in January 2015. The new system took effect from the 2017 elections, increasing the members of the Chamber of Deputies from 120 to 155 seats and the Senate from 38 seats to 43 seats in 2017 and 50 seats in 2021. As a result, the 2017 election saw the end of the dominance of Bachelet's Nueva Mayoría and conservative coalitions and increased number of new political parties represented in Congress. Following revelations that President Bachelet's son and daughter in-law were caught in an influence-peddling scandal, she appointed a Presidential Advisory Council on Conflicts of Interest, Influence Peddling, and Corruption (known as the Engel Commission) headed by economist Eduardo Engel. Subsequently, reforms recommended by the commission were implemented which included, ability to remove politicians from office if found guilty for transparency and election spending limits violations with disqualification for two subsequent elections and constitutional autonomy to Chile's electoral service (SERVEL), giving it complete independence from the government to more effectively oversee electoral processes and the functioning of politics in general. In 2016, overseas voting rights for Chilean women and men living outside the country were introduced, allowing Chilean citizens who live abroad to exercise their right to vote beginning from the 2017 elections. On 8 March 2018, three days before Bachelet left office, the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP) multilateral trade agreement was signed in Santiago with Chile and 10 other signatory countries in the Asia Pacific region, following renegotiation of the original Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) which was signed in February 2016. The TPP was renegotiated into the CPTPP following the United States' withdrawal from the original TPP in January 2017. In September 2015, Bachelet's approval rating was 24%, compared to 72% disapproval. Chileans' support for her dropped sharply after revelations of corruption scandals such as the Caval scandal, which involved her son and daughter-in-law accepting millions of dollars in the form of a loan from vice-chairman of the Banco de Chile Andrónico Luksic Craig. The couple's company (Caval) used the money to purchase land and resell it at a $5 million profit after repaying the loan. Bachelet maintains that she was unaware of her family's actions and found out about the agreement between Luksic and her daughter-in-law through the press. By August 2016, Bachelet's approval rating dropped to 15%, the lowest for any President since the return of free elections in 1990, and in March 2017, Bachelet's approval rating remained low, at about 23%. Bachelet left office in March 2018 with an approval rating at 39% according to Adimark, in contrast to the 84% rating when she left office in 2010. On 10 September 2018, Bachelet urged China to allow observers into Xinjiang and expressed concern about the situation there. She said that: "The UN rights group had shown that Uyghurs and other Muslims are being detained in camps across Xinjiang and I expect discussions with Chinese officials to begin soon". China called for Bachelet to respect its sovereignty. In September 2018, Bachelet criticized the Saudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen. She has called on Saudi Arabia to hold accountable those responsible for airstrikes on civilians in Yemen. On 5 October 2019, Bachelet said she was "troubled by the high levels of violence associated with some demonstrations" during the 2019–20 Hong Kong protests, and stressed that any measures to quell the unrest must be grounded in law. She also stated that "Freedom of peaceful assembly … should be enjoyed without restriction to the greatest extent possible. But on the other hand, we cannot accept people who use masks to provoke violence." Regarding the November 2019 Iranian protests, Nasrin Sotoudeh, a jailed Iranian lawyer, asked Bachelet to administrate an independent investigation into the alleged atrocities committed by the Iranian security forces in the uprising. In January 2020, Bachelet has issued a report on Israeli settlements in the Occupied Palestinian Territory and in the occupied Syrian Golan. This report said that "the establishment and expansion of settlements in the Occupied Palestinian Territory amounts to the transfer by Israel of its population into the Occupied Palestinian Territory, which is prohibited under international humanitarian law. The transfer of an occupying Power's population to a territory it occupies amounts to a war crime that may engage the individual criminal responsibility of those involved. A number of international bodies have confirmed the illegality of Israeli settlements in the Occupied Palestinian Territory and the occupied Syrian Golan, including the International Court of Justice, the Security Council, the General Assembly and the Human Rights Council." During the COVID-19 pandemic, Bachelet asked the United States to suspend its sanctions regimes as way to help alleviate the pandemic's impact on the people of sanctioned countries. On 9 October 2020, Bachelet expressed concern about the suffering of civilians during the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan. In January 2021, in preparation for the 2021 spring session of the UN Human Rights Council, Bachelet has issued a report on Sri Lanka. The report criticizes the failure of the current Sri Lankan government to address documented accusations of grave and numerous human rights crimes perpetrated during and after the Civil war in Sri Lanka, even though the war ended in 2009. In February 2022, Bachelet report on Human rights situation in the Occupied Palestinian Territory said that "there are serious concerns that steps taken thus far by Israel and the Palestinian authorities to investigate alleged violations of international humanitarian law during the escalation of hostilities in May 2021 have not been sufficient" and "there was an almost total failure to ensure accountability for numerous allegations of the excessive use of force by Israeli forces in the context of law enforcement operations in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, resulting in the killing and injury of Palestinians. With regard to the Palestinian authorities, few steps were documented in the investigation and prosecution of members of Palestinian security forces or of the security forces in Gaza responsible for the alleged excessive use of force and other human rights violations committed against Palestinians." Bachelet's visited Xinjiang in May 2022 which marked the first time in 17 years that a UN high commissioner for human rights had travelled to China. Bachelet's statement following the visit praised China's "[p]overty alleviation and the eradication of extreme poverty, 10 years ahead of its target date" as "tremendous achievements", noting also that China's "introduction of universal health care and almost universal unemployment insurance scheme go a long way in ensuring protection of the right to health and broader social and economic rights". Bachelet stated that in Xinjiang she "raised questions and concerns about the application of counter-terrorism and de-radicalisation measures and their broad application – particularly their impact on the rights of Uyghurs and other predominantly Muslim minorities" and that "the Government assured me that the [Vocational and Educational Training Center] system has been dismantled". She also "encouraged the Government to undertake a review of all counter terrorism and deradicalization policies to ensure they fully comply with international human rights standards, and in particular that they are not applied in an arbitrary and discriminatory way". Bachelet's visit was criticized by organizations such as Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch, the Campaign for Uyghurs, and the World Uyghur Congress. The New York Times described Bachelet's comments regarding Xinjiang as "couched in the language of the Chinese government" and the editorial boards of The Guardian and The Washington Post criticized the visit. On 13 June 2022, Bachelet announced that she would not seek a second term as UN High Commissioner on Human Rights following the expiration of her term on 31 August 2022. She said the decision was motivated by her desire to spend more time with her family in Chile and was unrelated to her recently concluded trip to Xinjiang. According to Al Jazeera, the United Nation's Human Rights Office is politically charged and nearly all its high commissioners have avoided seeking term extensions. In her final brief at the UN's summer session, Bachelet touched on a number of issues, including the work her office was doing to provide an updated assessment on the human rights situation in Xinjiang and supporting calls for investigation into Israel's alleged killing of journalist Shireen Abu Akleh, stating that the "now chronically high levels of killings and injuries of Palestinians, including children by Israeli forces in the occupied Palestinian territory, have continued in the first six months of 2022". Bachelet's report on Xinjiang was published on her final day in the role of high commissioner, but unusually she did not sign off on the report with her signature. Ranked 17th most powerful women in the world by Forbes magazine in 2006 (she was No. 22 in 2009, No. 25 in 2008, and No. 27 in 2007). As of 2014, she was ranked 25th. Defense of Freedom and Democracy Award by Ramón Rubial Foundation (January 2007). Ranked world's 15th most influential person by TIME magazine in 2008. Shalom Award by the World Jewish Congress (June 2008). Maximum Leadership Award (Argentina, October 2008). Global Trailblazer Award by Vital Voices (October 2008). South American Football Honorary Order of Merit in the Extraordinary Great Collar degree by CONMEBOL in July 2009. She is the first woman to receive such recognition. Keys to the City of Lisbon (December 2009). Woman of the Bicentenary at the 2010 Energy of Woman Awards by Chilectra (April 2010). Federation of Progressive Women's International Prize (Spain, November 2010). Keys to the City of Miami (November 2010). The Association of Bi-National Chambers of Commerce in Florida's 2010 Award for Leadership in Global Trade (November 2010). Member, Inter-American Dialogue (since 2010). Washington Office on Latin America's Human Rights Award (November 2010). Women's eNews' Newsmaker of the Decade Award (May 2011). Ministry of Defense of Argentina's first Generala Juana Azurduy Award (April 2012). Eisenhower Fellowships's Eisenhower Medal for Leadership and Service (May 2012). 2012 – "10 Most Influential Ibero American Intellectuals" of the year – Foreign Policy magazine. She was recognized as one of the BBC's 100 women of 2017. University of Brasilia (April 2006). Universidad de San Carlos de Guatemala (May 2007). University of Essex (April 2008). Pompeu Fabra University (May 2010). National University of Córdoba (June 2010). Catholic University of Córdoba (June 2010). Universidad Internacional Menéndez Pelayo (September 2010). Universidad Autónoma de Santo Domingo (November 2010). University of Paris III: Sorbonne Nouvelle (November 2010). Columbia University (May 2012). Freiberg University of Mining and Technology (October 2014). Katholieke Universiteit Leuven (June 2015). University of Évora (March 2017). Grand Master (2006–2010 and 2014–2018) and Collar of the Order of Merit Grand Master (2006–2010 and 2014–2018) and Collar of the Order of Bernardo O'Higgins  Australia: Honorary Companion of the Order of Australia (5 October 2012)  Ecuador: Grand Collar of the National Order of San Lorenzo (2010)  Finland: Grand Cross with Collar of the Order of the White Rose of Finland (2007)  Hungary: Grand Cross with Chain of the Order of Merit of the Republic of Hungary (2008)  Italy: Knight Grand Cross with Collar of the Order of Merit of the Italian Republic (9 October 2007)  Lithuania: Grand Cross with Golden Chain of the Order of Vytautas the Great (23 July 2008)  Malaysia: Honorary Recipient of the Order of the Crown of the Realm (2009)  Mexico: Collar of the Order of the Aztec Eagle (2007)  Netherlands: Dame Grand Cross of the Order of the Netherlands Lion, The Netherlands (25 May 2009)  Portugal: Grand Collar of the Order of Liberty (30 March 2017) Grand Collar of the Order of Prince Henry (7 November 2007) Grand Cross of the Order of Christ (1 December 2009)  Spain: Collar of the Order of Charles III, Spain (30 October 2014) Collar of the Order of Isabella the Catholic (26 February 2010)  Sweden: Member of Royal Order of the Seraphim (10 May 2016). Received on her state visit to Sweden.  Venezuela: Collar of the Order of the Liberator (28 October 2009)  Uruguay: Recipient of the Medal of the Oriental Republic of Uruguay (2006) As Dame of the Seraphim (Sweden) As Grand Master of the Chilean Order of Merit (Chile) As Dame of the Order of Charles III (Spain) Michelle Bachelet – Symbol des neuen Chile (Ebbo Demant/SWR, 2004) La hija del General ["The General's Daughter"] (María Elena Wood/2006) Bachelet, Michelle. 2002. Los estudios comparados y la relación civil-militar. "Reflexiones tras una década de consolidación democrática en Chile", Revista Fuerzas Armadas y Sociedad, 17(4): 29–35. In this Spanish name, the first or paternal surname is Bachelet and the second or maternal family name is Jeria. "Austria's Turk appointed UN human rights chief". CNA. 9 September 2022. Retrieved 9 September 2022.[permanent dead link] "Certficado de Nacimiento" [Birth certificate] (PDF). Dirección Nacional del Registro Civil Nacional de la República de Chile. 3 October 1951. Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 February 2021. "Michelle Bachelet será la nueva Alta Comisionada de la ONU para los Derechos Humanos" [Michelle Bachelet will be the new UN High Commissioner for Human Rights]. Noticias ONU (in Spanish). 8 August 2018. Archived from the original on 24 January 2021. Retrieved 8 August 2018. "15 women leading the way for girls' education". www.globalpartnership.org. Archived from the original on 22 March 2019. Retrieved 22 March 2019. "Michelle Bachelet: primera mujer presidenta y primer presidente reelecto desde 1932" [Michelle Bachelet: first female president and first re-elected president since 1932]. Facebook. 16 December 2013. Archived from the original on 5 March 2016. Retrieved 11 March 2016. "Bachelet critica a la derecha por descalificarla por ser agnóstica" [Bachelet criticises the political right for discounting her because of her agnosticism] (in Spanish). El Mercurio. 30 December 2005. Archived from the original on 25 December 2014. Retrieved 25 November 2014. "Biografía Michelle Bachelet" [Michelle Bachelet biography]. Gobierno de Chile (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 12 March 2008. Retrieved 2 February 2007. "Biographical Sketch: Michelle Bachelet". UN Women. Archived from the original on 28 April 2012. Retrieved 12 May 2012. "Familia Jeria (Geria)" [Jeria (Geria) family]. Genealog.cl. Archived from the original on 22 June 2012. Retrieved 9 September 2011. "Biografías de Líderes Políticos CIDOB: Michelle Bachelet Jeria" [Biographies of Political Leaders CIDOB: Michelle Bachelet Jeria]. Fundació CIDOB (in Spanish). 9 March 2007. Archived from the original on 25 April 2015. Retrieved 18 May 2007. Fernando Jimenez (15 December 2013). "La vida de Bachelet, la historia de Chile en sus espaldas" [The life of Bachelet, the history of Chile on her back]. 24horas.cl. Archived from the original on 13 May 2015. Retrieved 11 March 2016. "Michelle Bachelet, présidente du Chili" [Michelle Bachelet, President of Chile] (in French). CBC/Radio-Canada. 3 March 2006. Archived from the original on 19 December 2013. Retrieved 11 March 2016. Rohter, Larry (16 January 2006). "Woman in the News; A Leader Making Peace With Chile's Past". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 3 May 2006. Retrieved 16 January 2006. "La vida de la primera Presidenta de Chile" [The life of the first President of Chile]. La Nación (in Spanish). 16 January 2006. Archived from the original on 12 February 2006. Retrieved 16 January 2006. "Los años de Alvear y Bachelet en el Liceo 1" [The years of Alvear and Bachelet at Liceo 1]. La Tercera (in Spanish). 10 October 2004. Archived from the original on 16 January 2013. Retrieved 25 January 2008. "De 376 a 780 puntos: Los resultados de los políticos en la Prueba de Aptitud Académica" [From 376 to 780 points: The results of politicians in the Academic Aptitude Test] (in Spanish). El Mercurio. 5 January 2014. Archived from the original on 6 January 2014. Retrieved 6 January 2014. Michelle Bachelet. Año en que rindió: 1969. Verbal: 712. Matemáticas: 707. Biología: 724. Esp. Ciencias Sociales: 705. Física y Química: 603 575. Ciencias Naturales: 632. Ponderación: 720,6 para medicina en Universidad de Chile. Fue 113 de 160. "Biografía de Michelle Bachelet" [Biography of Michelle Bachelet]. La Nación (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 4 August 2012. Retrieved 15 January 2006. "Bachelet confirma que Krassnoff participó en su detención" [Bachelet confirms that Krasnov participated in her arrest]. Emol.com. Archived from the original on 18 December 2013. Retrieved 9 October 2013. Davison, Phil (12 December 2005). "Single mother poised to be Chilean President". The Independent. London, UK. Archived from the original on 28 June 2013. Retrieved 12 December 2005. Cea, Rodrigo (8 October 2013). "Bachelet revela que fue interrogada por el jefe de la policía secreta de Pinochet" [Bachelet reveals that she was interrogated by the head of Pinochet's secret police]. El País. Archived from the original on 10 October 2013. Retrieved 9 October 2013. "Latin America's Schindler: a forgotten hero of the 20th century". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 29 April 2019. Retrieved 14 December 2016. "Michelle Bachelet spotlights remarkable Australian women in her address to students at the Australian National University". Headquarters. 24 August 2012. Archived from the original on 11 March 2016. Retrieved 11 March 2016. "BACHELET DA SU TESTIMONIO DE TORTURA EN DICTADURA" [BACHELET GIVES HER TESTIMONY OF TORTURE IN DICTATORSHIP] (in Spanish). 14 November 2004. Archived from the original on 9 October 2013. "Chiles Vorzeigefrau Michelle Bachelet: Zurück zum Präsidentenjob?". cicero.de. Retrieved 14 June 2022. „Ja, mein Kopf steckte in einer Kapuze. Ja, ich wurde bedroht, geschmäht, geschlagen. Aber die ‚parrilla' (der Grill) ist mir erspart geblieben." Das war jenes eiserne Gestell, an das die nackten Leiber der Gefangenen geschnallt wurden, um ihnen die Namen ihrer Freunde oder Komplizen zu entreißen. "Las huellas de Bachelet en Alemania Oriental" [Bachelet's footprints in East Germany]. La Tercera (in Spanish). 9 April 2006. Archived from the original on 8 July 2006. Retrieved 9 April 2006. Superintendencia de Salud. "Certificado de Inscripción en el Registro Nacional de Prestadores Individuales de Salud" [Certificate of Registration in the National Registry of Individual Health Providers]. Superintendencia de Salud. Archived from the original on 15 April 2017. Retrieved 29 April 2017. Registro Nacional de Prestadores Individuales de Salud, Superintendencia de Salud. Archived 24 April 2009 at the Wayback Machine "Los currículos y biografías de los candidatos presidenciales contrastados con la realidad" [The resumes and biographies of the presidential candidates contrasted with reality]. El Mercurio D4 (in Spanish). 23 September 2013. Archived from the original on 19 December 2013. Retrieved 23 September 2013. "La historia del ex frentista que fue pareja de Bachelet" [The story of the former frentista who was Bachelet's partner]. La Tercera (in Spanish). 10 July 2005. Archived from the original on 27 April 2006. Retrieved 10 July 2005. "Michelle Bachelet | Biography, Presidency, & Facts". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on 22 December 2017. Retrieved 20 December 2017. "Las historias clandestinas de Bachelet" [The clandestine stories of Bachelet]. La Tercera (in Spanish). 9 December 2007. Archived from the original on 26 December 2007. Retrieved 27 December 2007. "Michelle Bachelet : Biographie de Michelle Bachelet" [Michelle Bachelet : Biography of Michelle Bachelet]. aufeminin.com. Archived from the original on 22 December 2017. Retrieved 20 December 2017. Huneeus, Carlos, Berríos, Fabiola, y Gamboa, Ricardo (editores). "Las elecciones chilenas de 2005: partidos, coaliciones y votantes en transición", Santiago de Chile: Catalonia, 2007. ISBN 978-956-8303-60-0 In Google Books Archived 8 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine "Asumió Bachelet e hizo historia" [Bachelet took office and made history]. La Nación. Lanacion.com.ar. 12 March 2006. Archived from the original on 8 January 2016. Retrieved 13 September 2011. Franklin, Jonathan (22 November 2005). "'All I want in life is to walk along the beach, holding my lover's hand". The Guardian. London, UK. Archived from the original on 7 April 2020. Retrieved 22 November 2005. Santa María, Orietta (19 January 2006). "Estuve una semana encerrada en un cajón, vendada, atada" [I was locked in a crate for a week, blindfolded, tied]. Las Últimas Noticias (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 27 May 2006. Retrieved 19 January 2006. Barrionuevo, Alexei (11 March 2010). "Michelle Bachelet profile". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 6 September 2015. Retrieved 10 September 2011. Pike, John. "Veronica Michelle Bachelet Jeria". globalsecurity.org. Archived from the original on 26 October 2018. Retrieved 20 December 2017. "Presidentes Bachelet y Kirchner firmaron acuerdo estratégico" [Presidents Bachelet and Kirchner signed strategic agreement]. Emol.com. 21 March 2006. Archived from the original on 26 October 2018. Retrieved 12 May 2012. "Comisión Reforma Previsional será encabezada por Mario Marcel" [The Pension Reform Commission will be headed by Mario Marcel]. Economia.terra.cl. Archived from the original on 31 March 2012. Retrieved 9 September 2011. "Comisión Marcel propone equiparar edad de jubilación de hombres y mujeres" [Marcel Commission proposes equalizing retirement age for men and women]. Emol.com. Archived from the original on 26 October 2018. Retrieved 9 September 2011. Incentives under the New Pension Solidarity Pillar in Chile Archived 14 February 2017 at the Wayback Machine, Eduardo Fajnzylber. March 2010. "Bono por hijo nacido vivo – Superintendencia de Pensiones – Gobierno de Chile" [Bonus for live born child – Superintendency of Pensions – Government of Chile]. Safp.cl. Archived from the original on 8 September 2011. Retrieved 9 September 2011. "Presidenta Bachelet promulgó la ley de Subcontratación" [President Bachelet enacted the Subcontracting Law]. Cooperativa.cl. 16 October 2006. Archived from the original on 11 December 2018. Retrieved 12 May 2012. "Bachelet promulga ley sobre igualdad de sueldos entre hombres y mujeres" [Bachelet enacts law on equal pay between men and women]. Lanacion.cl. 2 June 2009. Archived from the original on 12 June 2009. Retrieved 4 October 2011. "LEY-20379 12-SEP-2009 MINISTERIO DE PLANIFICACIÓN – Ley Chile – Biblioteca del Congreso Nacional" [LAW-20379 12-SEP-2009 MINISTRY OF PLANNING – Chilean Law – Library of the National Congress]. Leychile.cl. 12 September 2009. Archived from the original on 26 October 2018. Retrieved 14 December 2016. "Bachelet comenzó la entrega del Maletín Literario" [Bachelet began the delivery of the Literary Portfolio]. Dianoticias.cauquenesnet.com. Archived from the original on 14 July 2012. Retrieved 12 May 2012. "Enlaces – CET – Ministerio de Educación" [Links – CET – Ministry of Education]. Enlaces.cl. Archived from the original on 1 April 2012. Retrieved 9 September 2011. "Presidenta Michelle Bachelet inicia entrega de ajuares a recién nacidos" [President Michelle Bachelet begins delivery of trousseaus to newborns]. Biobiochile.cl. 30 September 2009. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 12 May 2012. "Bachelet inició entrega de ajuares para recién nacidos" [Bachelet began delivery of trousseaus for newborns]. 3tv.cl. 10 January 2009. Archived from the original on 21 July 2012. Retrieved 12 May 2012. "LEY-20418 28-ENE-2010 MINISTERIO DE SALUD, SUBSECRETARÍA DE SALUD PÚBLICA – Ley Chile – Biblioteca del Congreso Nacional" [LAW-20418 28-JAN-2010 MINISTRY OF HEALTH, UNDERSECRETARIAT OF PUBLIC HEALTH – Chilean Law – Library of the National Congress]. Leychile.cl. 28 January 2010. Archived from the original on 26 October 2018. Retrieved 14 December 2016. "Bachelet recibe informe de educaciĂłn agradeciendo labor del Consejo" [Bachelet receives education report thanking the Council for its work]. Lanacion.cl. 11 December 2006. Archived from the original on 18 October 2007. Retrieved 9 September 2011. "Bachelet promulgó la nueva Ley General de Educación" [Bachelet enacted the new General Education Law]. Cooperativa.cl. Archived from the original on 11 October 2012. Retrieved 9 September 2011. "Bachelet inaugura Línea 4 A de Metro de Santiago" [Bachelet inaugurates Line 4 A of the Santiago Metro]. Emol.com. Archived from the original on 7 October 2012. Retrieved 9 September 2011. "PRESIDENTA MICHELLE BACHELET INAUGURÓ EXTENSIÓN DE LA LÍNEA 2 NORTE DEL METRO QUE BENEFICIA A MÁS DE 670.000 PERSONAS" [PRESIDENT MICHELLE BACHELET INAUGURATED EXTENSION OF LINE 2 NORTH OF THE METRO THAT BENEFITS MORE THAN 670,000 PEOPLE]. Mtt.gob.cl. 30 January 2007. Archived from the original on 2 April 2012. Retrieved 9 September 2011. "Bachelet anuncia construcción de nueva línea del Metro" [Bachelet announces construction of new Metro line]. Emol.com. Archived from the original on 7 October 2012. Retrieved 9 September 2011. "Cooperativa.cl" (PDF). Cooperativa.cl. 25 June 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 October 2013. Retrieved 9 October 2013. "Belisario Velasco afirma que Bachelet también conoció informe del Metro que advertía colapso del Transantiago" [Belisario Velasco affirms that Bachelet also knew of the Metro report that warned of the collapse of Transantiago]. La Tercera (in Spanish). 30 July 2007. Archived from the original on 19 December 2007. Retrieved 24 December 2007. "UPDATE: Chile Govt To Use Emergency Funding For Transit System". Forexdaily.org.ru. 5 September 2008. Archived from the original on 21 December 2012. Retrieved 9 September 2011. "MASIVO TERREMOTO DE MAGNITUD 8,8 SACUDE CHILE: 122 MUERTOS". El19digital.com. Archived from the original on 26 March 2012. Retrieved 13 September 2011. "Ya son 723 los muertos por el fuerte terremoto de 8.8 grados que destruyó gran parte de Chile". Peru.com. Archived from the original on 8 August 2011. Retrieved 16 September 2011. "Massive earthquake strikes Chile". BBC News. 28 February 2010. Archived from the original on 3 September 2019. Retrieved 16 September 2011. Barrionuevo, Alexei (1 March 2010). "Chile Officials Call for Aid as Devastation Sinks In". The New York Times. Chile. Archived from the original on 25 September 2011. Retrieved 16 September 2011. Hough, Andrew (3 March 2010). "Chile earthquake: President Michelle Bachelet 'failed to grasp scale of devastation'". The Daily Telegraph. London, UK. Archived from the original on 1 June 2010. Retrieved 10 September 2011. "Chile's Leader Faces Criticism Over Quake Response". NPR. 3 March 2010. Archived from the original on 23 April 2010. Retrieved 10 September 2011. "Chile: Michelle Bachelet impresionada con objetos saqueados tras terremoto". Informe21.com. 7 March 2010. Archived from the original on 27 March 2012. Retrieved 10 September 2011. "The Politics of Memory Museums". The Daily Beast. 31 March 2010. Archived from the original on 24 August 2013. Retrieved 9 September 2011. "Presidenta Bachelet promulga ley que crea el Instituto Nacional de Derechos Humanos". Biobiochile.cl. 24 November 2009. Archived from the original on 24 August 2013. Retrieved 12 May 2012. "Mandatario recibió en La Moneda el segundo informe de la Comisión Valech". La Tercera. Archived from the original on 12 April 2016. Retrieved 12 May 2012. "Chile's President Bachelet sends gay marriage bill to Congress". Reuters. 28 August 2017. Archived from the original on 9 June 2018. Retrieved 23 May 2018. Zeid warmly welcomes appointment of new UN Human Rights Chief Zeid warmly welcomes appointment of new UN Human Rights Chief Archived 12 August 2018 at the Wayback Machine "Bachelet promulgó ley que crea ministerio de Medio Ambiente". latercera.com. 31 July 2010. Archived from the original on 1 April 2012. Retrieved 10 September 2011. "Chile: New Law Creates Ministry for the Environment, Other Environmental Agencies – Global Legal Monitor – Law Library of Congress (Library of Congress)". Loc.gov. 17 February 2010. Archived from the original on 4 November 2012. Retrieved 10 September 2011. "Lo que cambia para las mujeres". Archived from the original on 16 June 2019. Retrieved 11 June 2019. Rohter, Larry (7 January 2007). "Chile Copper Windfall Forces Hard Choices on Spending". The New York Times. Chile. Archived from the original on 5 June 2015. Retrieved 10 September 2011. "Sovereign Wealth Fund Institute – Social and Economic Stabilisation Fund – Chile". Swfinstitute.org. Archived from the original on 19 April 2019. Retrieved 10 September 2011. "Report for Selected Countries and Subjects". World Economic Outlook Database. International Monetary Fund. April 2012. Archived from the original on 28 June 2013. Retrieved 14 May 2012. "Panorama social de América Latina" (PDF). ECLAC. 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 July 2011. Carlos Huneeus. "REFORMA ELECTORAL EN CHILE" (PDF). p. 374. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 April 2012. "La Moneda fustigó el "obstruccionismo" de la derecha en 2006". Radio Cooperativa (in Spanish). 26 December 2006. Archived from the original on 30 July 2007. Retrieved 10 December 2007. "Gobierno quiere debate 'pausado y sin presiones'". La Nación (in Spanish). 22 November 2007. Archived from the original on 25 November 2007. Retrieved 10 December 2007. "Clashes Break out after Pinochet's death", Yahoo! News, 11 December 2006 "Chilean minister voted out of job". BBC News. 17 April 2008. Archived from the original on 19 July 2013. Retrieved 16 September 2011. "La destitución de ministra por el Senado causa polémica en Chile". Eldeber.com.bo. 18 April 2008. Archived from the original on 11 August 2012. Retrieved 16 September 2011. Sanhueza, José. "Las miradas de la política regional a la destitución de Yasna Provoste". Laopinon.cl. Archived from the original on 2 April 2012. Retrieved 16 September 2011. "Chile-Peru spat over sea border". BBC News. 17 January 2008. Archived from the original on 8 February 2011. Retrieved 9 September 2011. "Chilevisión Noticias Última Mirada". Chilevisión. 13 March 2007. Archived from the original on 24 February 2011. Retrieved 13 March 2007. "La cumbre de Unasur "abortó" un golpe contra Evo Morales, afirma Hugo Chávez". Jornada.unam.mx. 17 September 2008. Archived from the original on 8 January 2011. Retrieved 9 September 2011. "Bachelet condemns US embargo on Cuba". Argentinaindependent.com. 12 February 2009. Archived from the original on 13 September 2011. Retrieved 13 September 2011. "Bachelet se reúne con Fidel Castro tras condenar el bloqueo". El País (in Spanish). 12 February 2009. Retrieved 28 March 2023. "Bachelet se reunió con Fidel Castro". BBC News. 13 February 2009. Archived from the original on 19 July 2013. Retrieved 9 September 2011. "Fidel Castro critica a la oligarquía chilena". Peru21.pe. Archived from the original on 28 March 2012. Retrieved 9 September 2011. "Fidel Castro afirma que la oligarquía chilena le arrebató el mar a Bolivia en la guerra de 1879". Larepublica.pe. Archived from the original on 13 September 2012. Retrieved 13 September 2011. "Cumbre de líderes progresistas finaliza hoy en Viña del Mar". Emol.com. 28 March 2009. Archived from the original on 7 October 2012. Retrieved 9 September 2011. Conway, Edmund (9 March 2009). "G20 ministers set for clash over economic crisis solutions". The Daily Telegraph. London, UK. Archived from the original on 23 August 2013. Retrieved 13 September 2011. "Chile anuncia amnistía a inmigrantes". BBC News. 23 October 2007. Archived from the original on 30 March 2012. Retrieved 9 September 2011. Chile obtiene cupo en Consejo de Derechos Humanos de la ONU[dead link], El Mercurio, 22 May 2008. "Chile invited to become a member of the OECD". Oecd.org. Archived from the original on 20 April 2010. Retrieved 10 September 2011. "Chile joins the OECD's economic club". BBC. 12 January 2010. Archived from the original on 25 April 2014. Retrieved 10 September 2011. "Chile signs up as first OECD member in South America". OECD. 11 January 2010. Archived from the original on 16 March 2010. Retrieved 9 March 2010. "Damnificados de Chiguayante acusan a Bachelet de abusar de la tragedia". Emol.com. Archived from the original on 7 October 2012. Retrieved 9 September 2011. "Bachelet debió enfrentar la rabia de afectados por temporal en Chiguayante". Cooperativa.cl. 12 July 2006. Archived from the original on 20 December 2013. Retrieved 9 September 2011. Ignacio Nieto. "Especiales Emol – Michelle Bachelet, a un año de su llegada a la Moneda". Emol.com. Archived from the original on 21 June 2013. Retrieved 12 May 2012. "Life & Arts – First among unequals: Chile's president". Financial Times. 29 September 2007. Archived from the original on 11 September 2011. Retrieved 9 September 2011. "Con banderas negras protestan en Puerto Aisén por llegada de Bachelet". Emol.com. Archived from the original on 10 October 2007. Retrieved 9 September 2011. "Alcalde de Puerto Aysén: La Presidenta "se puede ir a la punta del cerro"". Cooperativa.cl. 23 April 2007. Archived from the original on 20 December 2013. Retrieved 9 September 2011. "Alcalde insistió que Bachelet "le faltó el respeto" a la gente de Aysén". Cooperativa.cl. 24 April 2007. Archived from the original on 11 October 2012. Retrieved 9 September 2011. "Alcalde de Aysén ofreció disculpas públicas a Bachelet". Cooperativa.cl. 18 June 2007. Archived from the original on 11 October 2012. Retrieved 9 September 2011. Washington, The (12 March 2010). "More quakes hit Chile as new president takes office". The Washington Times. Archived from the original on 19 October 2012. Retrieved 9 September 2011. "Bachelet: "Inequívocamente apoyo a Frei como candidato"". Lanacion.cl. 6 July 2009. Archived from the original on 27 September 2012. Retrieved 9 September 2011. "Bachelet inaugura Fundación Dialoga en contrapeso a la concentración de poderes existente en Chile". Biobiochile.cl. 16 August 2011. Archived from the original on 24 August 2013. Retrieved 10 September 2011. "Michelle Bachelet | Club de Madrid". Clubmadrid.org. Archived from the original on 22 March 2012. Retrieved 13 September 2011. "Inter-American Dialogue | Michelle Bachelet". www.thedialogue.org. 31 March 2016. Archived from the original on 14 April 2017. Retrieved 13 April 2017. Krause, Flavia (16 March 2013). "Bachelet Quits UN to Return to Chile Before Elections". Bloomberg.com. Bloomberg. Archived from the original on 29 December 2013. Retrieved 9 October 2013. "Bachelet seeks a second term". ABC News. Archived from the original on 28 March 2013. Retrieved 9 October 2013. "Encuesta CEP: Bachelet lidera por lejos la carrera presidencial con 51% de las preferencias" (in Spanish). EMOL. 10 May 2012. Archived from the original on 13 May 2012. Retrieved 14 May 2012. Ibáñez, Graciela (July 2013). "Bachelet Wins Primary for Chile President". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 11 June 2015. Retrieved 4 July 2013. "Ex-president Michelle Bachelet wins Chile poll run-off". BBC News. 16 December 2013. Archived from the original on 19 July 2016. Retrieved 11 March 2016. "Michelle Bachelet sworn in as Chile's president". BBC News. 11 March 2014. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 11 March 2016. "The complicated journey of Bachelet's flagship reforms". El País. 22 August 2014. Archived from the original on 13 March 2018. Retrieved 13 March 2018. "Students in Chile Are Demanding Free Tuition, and Protests Are Turning Violent". Vice News. 3 June 2016. Archived from the original on 13 March 2018. Retrieved 13 March 2018. "Major higher education reforms secured by senators". universityworldnews.com. 31 January 2018. Archived from the original on 3 December 2021. Retrieved 13 March 2018. "Chile passes landmark tax reform into law". Reuters. 9 September 2014. Archived from the original on 13 March 2018. Retrieved 13 March 2018. "Factbox: Chile tax reform set to be approved". Reuters. 9 September 2014. Archived from the original on 13 March 2018. Retrieved 13 March 2018. "Michelle Bachelet's Underappreciated Legacy in Chile". Americas Quarterly. 9 March 2018. Archived from the original on 13 March 2018. Retrieved 13 March 2018. "La tarea número uno es crecer, todo lo demás es música". El Mercurio. 12 September 2017. Retrieved 17 March 2018. "One of world's largest marine parks created off coast of Easter Island". The Guardian. 9 September 2017. Archived from the original on 15 March 2018. Retrieved 13 March 2018. "Chile creates five national parks over 10m acres in historic act of conservation". The Guardian. 29 January 2018. Archived from the original on 13 March 2018. Retrieved 13 March 2018. Case, Jean (2020). Be Fearless: 5 Principles for a Life of Breakthroughs and Purpose. Simon and Schuster. p. 28. ISBN 9781501196355. "Government announces priority for same-sex civil unions and tax reform". Santiago Times. 17 March 2014. Archived from the original on 23 March 2014. "Otorgan suma urgencia al AVP y le cambian el nombre por Pacto de Unión Civil (PUC)". MOVILH. 17 December 2014. Archived from the original on 26 April 2019. Retrieved 18 December 2014. "Comisión de Constitución de la Cámara despacha el Pacto de Unión Civil limitando los derechos de hijos e hijas". Archived from the original on 10 May 2019. Retrieved 13 March 2018. (in Spanish) Pacto de Unión Civil: Senado rechaza texto aprobado por la Cámara para zanjar disensos en comisión mixta Archived 4 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine Esposito, Anthony. "Socially-conservative Chile approves civil unions". Reuters. Archived from the original on 16 October 2015. Retrieved 28 January 2015. (in Spanish) Comisión mixta concluye revisión de proyecto de Unión Civil: Mañana se vota en la Cámara y el Senado Archived 4 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine "Chilean court upholds constitutionality of civil unions bill". The Washington Blade. 6 April 2015. Archived from the original on 21 April 2019. Retrieved 13 March 2018. "Chilean president signs civil unions bill". 13 April 2015. Archived from the original on 12 April 2019. Retrieved 13 March 2018. "Chilean president signs same-sex civil union law". 13 April 2015. Archived from the original on 3 May 2019. Retrieved 13 March 2018. Michael Lavers (22 October 2015). "Chile civil unions law takes effect". Washington Blade. Archived from the original on 22 April 2019. Retrieved 13 March 2018. (in Spanish) Acuerdo de Unión Civil Archived 25 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine (in Spanish) Ley número 20.830. – Crea el Acuerdo de Unión Civil Archived 16 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine "Chile civil union law comes into force". BBC News. 23 October 2015. Archived from the original on 23 October 2020. Retrieved 22 June 2018. Chile, Cámara de Diputados de. "Cámara de Diputados de Chile". camara.cl. Archived from the original on 21 August 2016. Retrieved 21 July 2016. "Cámara de Diputados de Chile. Trabajo en sala: Detalle de Votación". camara.cl. Archived from the original on 2 December 2016. Retrieved 1 December 2016. Chile, Cámara de Diputados de. "Avanza proyecto para que trabajadores que celebren Acuerdo de Unión Civil tengan derecho a cinco días libres" (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 2 December 2016. Retrieved 1 December 2016. (in Spanish) Tema: Proyecto de ley, en segundo trámite constitucional, que modifica el Código del Trabajo, con el objeto de aplicar al trabajador que celebra un acuerdo de unión civil el permiso laboral que se otorga a quien contrae matrimonio. Archived 19 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine "Chile passes bill to legalize abortion in certain cases". The Guardian. 19 July 2017. Archived from the original on 19 July 2017. Retrieved 13 March 2018. "'A triumph of reason': Chile approves landmark bill to ease abortion ban". The Guardian. 22 August 2017. Archived from the original on 24 March 2018. Retrieved 13 March 2018. "Chile court ruling ends abortion ban; new law allows in limited cases". Reuters. 22 August 2017. Archived from the original on 13 March 2018. Retrieved 13 March 2018. "Chile reforms Pinochet's voting system". El País. 21 January 2015. Archived from the original on 13 March 2018. Retrieved 13 March 2018. "Review some of the outstanding achievements of the government's second year". Government of Chile. 22 March 2016. Archived from the original on 13 March 2018. Retrieved 13 March 2018. "A third year of Government progressing toward a better Chile". Government of Chile. 14 March 2017. Archived from the original on 13 March 2018. Retrieved 13 March 2018. "CPTPP: 11 countries sign Pacific Trade Deal in Chile". The Santiago Times. 9 March 2018. Archived from the original on 12 March 2018. Retrieved 13 March 2018. Rosario Álvarez, Adimark: Bachelet obtiene 24% de aprobación registrando la peor cifra en la historia de la encuesta Archived 24 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine Politica, 02 de septiembre del 2015 "Aprobación de Michelle Bachelet cae ocho puntos y llega a un mínimo histórico de 31%". 1 April 2015. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 11 March 2016. Nicole Rojas (14 April 2015). "Chilean President Michelle Bachelet's son Sebastián Dávalos testifies in Caval corruption scandal". International Business Times UK. Archived from the original on 11 March 2016. Retrieved 11 March 2016. "Chile president approval plunges to lowest since return to democracy". Reuters. 19 August 2016. Archived from the original on 27 November 2016. Retrieved 26 November 2016. Massai, Nicolás (6 March 2017). "Adimark y Bachelet: Un 23% aprueba la conducción de la Presidenta". El Ciudadano (in Spanish). Retrieved 19 November 2023. "Adimark: Bachelet finaliza su mandato con un 39% de aprobación". EL MOSTRADOR. 9 March 2018. Archived from the original on 13 March 2018. Retrieved 13 March 2018. "New UN Rights Chief Takes on China, Other Powers". Voice of America. 10 September 2018. Archived from the original on 8 March 2021. Retrieved 17 December 2018. "China Tells U.N. Rights Chief to Respect Its Sovereignty After Xinjiang Comments". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 13 September 2018. Retrieved 11 September 2018. "U.N. calls for probe into violence related to Hong Kong protests". Reuters. 5 October 2019. Archived from the original on 11 October 2019. Retrieved 11 October 2019. "Jailed Rights Defender Demands Full Investigation Of Iran Protest Deaths". 10 December 2019. Archived from the original on 10 December 2019. Retrieved 10 December 2019. "A/HRC/43/67 - Israeli settlements in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and in the occupied Syrian Golan". ohchr.org. p. 14, para 65. Retrieved 22 October 2022. Davis, Stuart (2023). Sanctions as War: Anti-Imperialist Perspectives on American Geo-Economic Strategy. Haymarket Books. p. 11. ISBN 978-1-64259-812-4. OCLC 1345216431. "Nagorno-Karabakh: UN rights chief calls for urgent ceasefire as hostilities mount". UN News. 9 October 2020. Archived from the original on 15 November 2020. Retrieved 30 October 2020. BBC News (23 February 2021). "Sri Lanka Human Rights: UK seeks new UN resolution". BBC News. Archived from the original on 23 February 2021. Retrieved 25 January 2021. UN Human Rights Council (27 January 2021). "UN human Rights Commissioners' Report Spring2021". UNHRC, Geneva. Archived from the original on 27 January 2021. Retrieved 25 January 2021. "A/HRC/49/25 - Human rights situation in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and the obligation to ensure accountability and justice". ohchr.org. p. 15, para 45. Retrieved 22 October 2022. "UN rights chief defends China trip amid criticism". www.aljazeera.com. 28 May 2022. Retrieved 2 June 2022. "Statement by UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Michelle Bachelet after official visit to China | OHCHR". 2 August 2022. Archived from the original on 2 August 2022. Retrieved 2 August 2022. "China: UN visit falls short of addressing crimes against humanity in Xinjiang". Amnesty International. 28 May 2022. Retrieved 31 May 2022. "UN: Rights Chief's Credibility at Stake in China Visit". Human Rights Watch. 20 May 2022. Retrieved 18 June 2022. Allen-Ebrahimian, Bethany (31 May 2022). "Advocates denounce UN official's China visit as "ultimate betrayal"". Axios. Retrieved 31 May 2022. Seytoff, Alim (31 May 2022). "Uyghur groups urge resignation of UN rights chief for 'Potemkin-style' Xinjiang tour". Radio Free Asia. Retrieved 1 June 2022. "U.N. Human Rights Chief Tempers Criticism at End of China Trip - The New York Times". The New York Times. 2 August 2022. Archived from the original on 2 August 2022. Retrieved 2 August 2022. "The Guardian view on the UN in Xinjiang: a grave error". The Guardian. 31 May 2022. Retrieved 31 May 2022. "Truth emerges about Chinese repression of Uyghurs — no thanks to the U.N." The Washington Post. 29 May 2022. Retrieved 31 May 2022. "Michelle Bachelet, U.N. rights chief, says no to second term amid China trip backlash Wendell Roelf". Reuters. "After China trip criticism, UN rights chief to not seek 2nd term". www.aljazeera.com. Retrieved 15 June 2022. "After China trip criticism, UN rights chief to not seek 2nd term". www.aljazeera.com. Retrieved 22 June 2022. Cumming-Bruce, Nick; Ramzy, Austin (31 August 2022). "U.N. Says China May Have Committed 'Crimes Against Humanity' in Xinjiang". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 1 September 2022. "The 100 Most Powerful Women: #17 Michelle Bachelet". Forbes. 31 August 2006. Archived from the original on 25 October 2006. Retrieved 31 August 2006. "The 100 Most Powerful Women: #22 Michelle Bachelet". Forbes. 19 August 2009. Archived from the original on 26 January 2010. Retrieved 22 January 2010. "The 100 Most Powerful Women: #25 Michelle Bachelet". Forbes. 27 August 2008. Archived from the original on 31 August 2008. Retrieved 28 August 2008. "The 100 Most Powerful Women: #27 Michelle Bachelet". Forbes. 31 August 2007. Archived from the original on 27 October 2007. Retrieved 31 August 2007. "The World's 100 Most Powerful Women". Forbes. Archived from the original on 20 September 2017. Retrieved 24 June 2014. "Bachelet y De la Vega estrenan los premios Ramón Rubial". El Pais. 11 January 2007. Archived from the original on 22 March 2007. Retrieved 16 September 2011. "The World's Most Influential People – The 2008 TIME 100 – Leaders & Revolutionaries – Michelle Bachele". Time. 1 May 2008. Archived from the original on 5 May 2008. Retrieved 2 May 2008. "Congreso Judío Mundial entrega Premio Shalom a Presidenta Bachelet". Emol.com. Archived from the original on 19 June 2008. Retrieved 16 September 2011. "Bachelet fue premiada por mujeres líderes y luego se reunió con Crist…". 26 January 2013. Archived from the original on 26 January 2013. Retrieved 9 December 2017. "Conmebol condecoró a Bachelet". Oem.com.mx. Archived from the original on 11 October 2012. Retrieved 13 September 2011. "Bachelet recibió el "Gran Collar Extraordinario" del Fútbol Sudamericano". Cooperativa.cl. Archived from the original on 11 October 2012. Retrieved 13 September 2011. "Ex Presidenta Bachelet recibirá el premio "Mujer del Bicentenario"". Cooperativa.cl. Archived from the original on 11 October 2012. Retrieved 16 September 2011. "Chaves y Bachelet, premiados por la Federación de Mujeres Progresistas". El Correo de Andalucía (in Spanish). 15 November 2010. Archived from the original on 2 August 2012. Retrieved 16 September 2011. "Miami Honors Michelle Bachelet – Head of UN Women and Former President of Chile for Leadership" (PDF). Retrieved 16 September 2011.[dead link] "Inter-American Dialogue | Michelle Bachelet". www.thedialogue.org. 31 March 2016. Archived from the original on 14 April 2017. Retrieved 17 April 2017. "WOLA's Human Rights Awards Ceremony and Benefit Gala". WOLA. 1 October 2012. Archived from the original on 6 April 2012. Retrieved 17 December 2013. "Remarks by Michelle Bachelet on Receiving Women's eNews' Newsmaker of the Decade Award". Unwomen.org. 3 May 2011. Archived from the original on 10 May 2011. Retrieved 16 September 2011. "Bachelet recibe distinción del Ministerio de Defensa argentino por su lucha a favor de la igualdad de género". EFE via El Mostrador. 25 April 2012. Archived from the original on 20 May 2012. Retrieved 26 April 2012. "Colin Powell entrega condecoración a Bachelet y elogia su trayectoria" (PDF) (in Spanish). La Tercera. 18 May 2012. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 June 2013. Retrieved 21 May 2012. "LOS 10 INTELECTUALES IBEROAMERICANOS MÁS INFLUYENTES 2012". Fp-es.org. Archived from the original on 2 July 2007. Retrieved 9 October 2013. "BBC 100 Women 2017: Who is on the list?". BBC News. 27 September 2017. Retrieved 17 December 2022. "La Republica". Larepublica.pe. 12 April 2006. Archived from the original on 4 August 2012. Retrieved 13 September 2011. "Honoris causa a Bachelet". Lahora.com.gt. Archived from the original on 20 March 2012. Retrieved 13 September 2011. "Oration given on 3 April 2008, presented at the Canning House Annual Lecture". essex.ac.uk. Archived from the original on 24 August 2013. Retrieved 28 November 2011. "UPF awards Michelle Bachelet with a degree honoris causa". Upf.edu. Archived from the original on 28 May 2010. Retrieved 13 September 2011. "Michelle Bachelet recibirá doble doctorado "honoris causa" en Argentina". Cooperativa.cl. Archived from the original on 11 October 2012. Retrieved 13 September 2011. "Discurso de Michelle Bachelet al recibir Doctor Honoris Causa de la Universidad Internacional Menéndez Pelayo". Dialoga.cl. 23 August 2011. Archived from the original on 2 April 2012. Retrieved 13 September 2011. "UASD otorgará Doctorado Honoris Causa a Michelle Bachelet, ex presidenta de Chile". DiarioLibre.com. 16 November 2010. Archived from the original on 1 April 2012. Retrieved 13 September 2011. "Université Sorbonne Nouvelle – Paris3 – Docteur Honoris Causa 2010 de l'Université Sorbonne Nouvelle". Univ-paris3.fr. Archived from the original on 24 March 2012. Retrieved 13 September 2011. "La ex presidenta chilena Bachelet, doctora honoris causa por la Sorbona – Noticias internacionales en MSN Latino". MSN. Archived from the original on 2 April 2012. Retrieved 13 September 2011. "Michelle Bachelet 2012 Commencement Speech at Columbia University Mailman School of Public Health". 12 May 2012. Archived from the original on 6 August 2012. Retrieved 6 August 2012. "Ehrenpromotion für Staatspräsidentin Michelle Bachelet" (in German). TU Freiberg. 28 October 2014. Archived from the original on 6 April 2020. Retrieved 6 April 2020. "KULeuven". KULeuven.be. Archived from the original on 3 February 2015. Retrieved 3 February 2015. "Presidente chilena recebe doutoramento Honoris Causa em Évora" (in Portuguese). Expresso. Archived from the original on 30 March 2017. Retrieved 30 March 2017. "Untitled image of heraldic symbols". Archived from the original on 25 October 2021. Retrieved 25 October 2021. "Commonwealth of Australia Gazette No. S160" (PDF). Governor General of Australia. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 December 2012. Retrieved 7 November 2012. "Ex presidenta Bachelet fue condecorada". El Universo (in Spanish). 11 June 2010. Archived from the original on 23 August 2019. Retrieved 23 August 2019. "Suomen Valkoisen Ruusun ritarikunnan suurristin ketjuineen ulkomaalaiset saajat". www.ritarikunnat.fi. Archived from the original on 2 November 2019. Retrieved 23 August 2019. "Bachelet Jeria S.E. Verónica Michelle decorato di Gran Cordone" (in Italian). Presidenza della Repubblica. Archived from the original on 28 September 2013. Retrieved 20 September 2012. "Lithuanian Orders searching form" (in Lithuanian). Lithuanian Presidency. Archived from the original on 25 August 2013. Retrieved 21 May 2012. "Semakan Penerima Darjah Kebesaran, Bintang, dan Pingat Persekutuan". Archived from the original on 19 July 2019. Retrieved 15 June 2016. "Photographic image". Gpdhome.typepad.com. Archived from the original on 24 February 2021. Retrieved 14 December 2016. "III. OTRAS DISPOSICIONES PRESIDENCIA DEL GOBIERNO" (PDF). 10 January 2015. Archived from the original on 10 January 2015. Retrieved 9 December 2017.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) "picture of three dignitaries". 25 January 2015. Archived from the original on 25 January 2015. "III. OTRAS DISPOSICIONES MINISTERIO DE ASUNTOS EXTERIORES Y DE COOPERACIÓN" (PDF). 2 April 2015. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015. Retrieved 9 December 2017.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) "22 bilder från kungens stora fest på slottet". svenskdam.se. 11 May 2016. Retrieved 20 June 2023. "Chile's Bachelet, Venezuela's Chavez Agree to Ease Political Tensions". Voice of America. 1 November 2009. Retrieved 4 March 2024. "Resolución N° 222/006". www.impo.com.uy. Archived from the original on 2 December 2020. Retrieved 24 December 2020. "PHOENIX Sendeplan Samstag, 18. März 2006". Bankkaufmann.com. 17 March 2006. Archived from the original on 21 October 2016. Retrieved 14 December 2016. "December 2016 Calendar". Bakerinstitute.org. Archived from the original on 14 September 2013. Retrieved 14 December 2016. Skard, Torild (2014). "Michelle Bachelet". Women of Power: Half a Century of Female Presidents and Prime Ministers Worldwide. Bristol: Policy Press. ISBN 9781447315780. Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Michelle Bachelet (category) Wikiquote has quotations related to Michelle Bachelet. Wikisource has original works by or about: Michelle Bachelet Official presidential campaign site (in Spanish) Biography by CIDOB Foundation (in Spanish) Appearances on C-SPAN "The woman taking Chile's top job" (BBC News) "The unexpected travails of the woman who would be president" (The Economist, 8 December 2005) "Bachelet's citizens' democracy" (The Economist, 10 March 2006) "With a New Leader, Chile Seems to Shuck Its Strait Laces" (The New York Times, 8 March 2006) "Welcome Madam Chilean President to Washington" Archived 25 May 2008 at the Wayback Machine (Council on Hemispheric Affairs, 7 June 2006)