The New York Times (NYT) is an American daily newspaper based in New York City. The New York Times covers domestic, national, and international news, and comprises opinion pieces, investigative reports, and reviews. As one of the longest-running newspapers in the United States, it serves as one of the country's newspapers of record. As of February 2024, the newspaper has a readership of 9.7 million digital-only subscribers and 660,000 print subscribers, making it the second-largest newspaper in the country by print circulation. The Times has received 137 Pulitzer Prizes as of 2023, the most of any publication, among other accolades. The New York Times is published by The New York Times Company; since 1896, the company has been chaired by the Ochs-Sulzberger family, including its current chairman and the paper's publisher, A. G. Sulzberger. The Times is headquartered at The New York Times Building in Manhattan. The Times was founded as the conservative New-York Daily Times in 1851, and came to national recognition in the 1870s with its aggressive coverage of corrupt politician William M. Tweed. Following the Panic of 1893, Chattanooga Times publisher Adolph Ochs gained a controlling interest in the company. In 1935, Ochs was succeeded by his son-in-law, Arthur Hays Sulzberger, who began a push into European news. Sulzberger's son-in-law Arthur Ochs became publisher in 1963, adapting to a changing newspaper industry and introducing radical changes. The New York Times was involved in the landmark 1964 Supreme Court case New York Times Co. v. Sullivan, which restricted the ability of public officials to sue the media for defamation. In 1971, The New York Times published the Pentagon Papers, an internal Department of Defense document detailing the United States's historical involvement in the Vietnam War, despite pushback from then-president Richard Nixon. In the landmark decision New York Times Co. v. United States (1971), the Supreme Court ruled that the First Amendment guaranteed the right to publish the Pentagon Papers. In the 1980s, the Times began a two-decade progression to digital technology and launched nytimes.com in 1996. In the 21st century, The New York Times has shifted online amid the decline of newspapers. The Times has expanded to several other publications, including The New York Times Magazine, The New York Times International Edition, The New York Times Book Review. In addition, the paper has produced several television series, podcasts—including The Daily—and games through The New York Times Games. The New York Times has been involved in several controversies in its history. The New-York Daily Times was established in 1851 by New-York Tribune journalists Henry Jarvis Raymond and George Jones. The Times experienced significant circulation, particularly among conservatives; New-York Tribune publisher Horace Greeley praised the New-York Daily Times. During the American Civil War, Times correspondents gathered information directly from Confederate states. In 1869, Jones inherited the paper from Raymond, who had changed its name to The New-York Times. Under Jones, the Times began to publish a series of articles criticizing Tammany Hall political boss William M. Tweed, despite vehement opposition from other New York newspapers. In 1871, The New-York Times published Tammany Hall's accounting books; Tweed was tried in 1873 and sentenced to twelve years in prison. The Times earned national recognition for its coverage of Tweed. In 1891, Jones died, creating a management imbroglio in which his children had insufficient business acumen to inherit the company and his will prevented an acquisition of the Times. Editor-in-chief Charles Ransom Miller, editorial editor Edward Cary, and correspondent George F. Spinney established a company to manage The New-York Times, but faced financial difficulties during the Panic of 1893. In August 1896, Chattanooga Times publisher Adolph Ochs acquired The New-York Times, implementing significant alterations to the newspaper's structure. Ochs established the Times as a merchant's newspaper and removed the hyphen from the newspaper's name. In 1905, The New York Times opened Times Tower, marking expansion. The Times experienced a political realignment in the 1910s amid several disagreements within the Republican Party. The New York Times reported on the sinking of the Titanic as other newspapers were cautious about bulletins from the Associated Press. Through managing editor Carr Van Anda, the Times focused on scientific advancements, reporting on Albert Einstein's then-unknown theory of general relativity and becoming involved in the discovery of the tomb of Tutankhamun. In April 1935, Ochs died, leaving his son-in-law Arthur Hays Sulzberger as publisher. The Great Depression forced Sulzberger to reduce The New York Times's operations, and developments in the New York newspaper landscape resulted in the formation of larger newspapers, such as the New York Herald Tribune and the New York World-Telegram. In contrast to Ochs, Sulzberger encouraged wirephotography. The New York Times extensively covered World War II through large headlines, reporting on exclusive stories such as the Yugoslav coup d'état. Amid the war, Sulzberger began expanding the Times's operations further, acquiring WQXR-FM in 1944—the first non-Times investment since the Jones era—and established a fashion show in Times Hall. Despite reductions as a result of conscription, The New York Times retained the largest journalism staff of any newspaper. The Times's print edition became available internationally during the war through the Army & Air Force Exchange Service; The New York Times Overseas Weekly later became available in Japan through The Asahi Shimbun and in Germany through the Frankfurter Zeitung. The international edition would develop into a separate newspaper. Journalist William L. Laurence publicized the atomic bomb race between the United States and Germany, resulting in the Federal Bureau of Investigation seizing copies of the Times. The United States government recruited Laurence to document the Manhattan Project in April 1945. Laurence became the only witness of the Manhattan Project, a detail realized by employees of The New York Times following the atomic bombing of Hiroshima. Following World War II, The New York Times continued to expand. The Times was subject to investigations from the Senate Internal Security Subcommittee, a McCarthyist subcommittee that investigated purported communism from within press institutions. Arthur Hays Sulzberger's decision to dismiss a copyreader who plead the Fifth Amendment drew ire from within the Times and from external organizations. In April 1961, Sulzberger resigned, appointing his son-in-law, The New York Times Company president Orvil Dryfoos. Under Dryfoos, The New York Times established a newspaper based in Los Angeles. In 1962, the implementation of automated printing presses in response to increasing costs mounted fears over technological unemployment. The New York Typographical Union staged a strike in December, altering the media consumption of New Yorkers. The strike left New York with three remaining newspapers—the Times, the Daily News, and the New York Post—by its conclusion in March 1963. In May, Dryfoos died of a heart ailment in May. Following weeks of ambiguity, Arthur Ochs Sulzberger became The New York Times's publisher. Technological advancements leveraged by newspapers such as the Los Angeles Times and improvements in coverage from The Washington Post and The Wall Street Journal necessitated adaptations to nascent computing. The New York Times published "Heed Their Rising Voices" in 1960, a full-page advertisement purchased by supporters of Martin Luther King Jr. criticizing law enforcement in Montgomery, Alabama for their response to the civil rights movement. Montgomery Public Safety commissioner L. B. Sullivan sued the Times for defamation. In New York Times Co. v. Sullivan (1964), the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that the verdict in Alabama county court and the Supreme Court of Alabama violated the First Amendment. The decision is considered to be landmark. After financial losses, The New York Times ended its international edition, acquiring a stake in the Paris Herald Tribune, forming the International Herald Tribune. The Times initially published the Pentagon Papers, facing opposition from then-president Richard Nixon. The Supreme Court ruled in The New York Times's favor in New York Times Co. v. United States (1971), allowing the Times and The Washington Post to publish the papers. The New York Times remained cautious in its initial coverage of the Watergate scandal. As Congress began investigating the scandal, the Times furthered its coverage, publishing details on the Huston Plan, alleged wiretapping of reporters and officials, and testimony from James W. McCord Jr. that the Committee for the Re-Election of the President paid the conspirators off. The exodus of readers to suburban New York newspapers, such as Newsday and Gannett papers, adversely affected The New York Times's circulation. Contemporary newspapers balked at additional sections; Time devoted a cover for its criticism and New York wrote that the Times was engaging in "middle-class self-absorption". The New York Times, the Daily News, and the New York Post were the subject of a strike in 1978, allowing emerging newspapers to leverage halted coverage. The Times deliberately avoided coverage of the AIDS epidemic, running its first front page article in May 1983. Max Frankel's editorial coverage of the epidemic, with mentions of anal intercourse, contrasted with then-executive editor A. M. Rosenthal's puritan approach, intentionally avoiding descriptions of the luridity of gay venues. Following years of waning interest in The New York Times, Sulzberger resigned in January 1992, appointing his son, Arthur Ochs Sulzberger Jr., as publisher. The Internet represented a generational shift within the Times; Sulzberger, who negotiated The New York Times Company's acquisition of The Boston Globe in 1993, derided the Internet, while his son expressed antithetical views. @times appeared on America Online's website in May 1994 as an extension of The New York Times, featuring news articles, film reviews, sports news, and business articles. Despite opposition, several employees of the Times had begun to access the Internet. The online success of publications that traditionally co-existed with the Times—such as America Online, Yahoo, and CNN—and the expansion of websites such as Monster.com and Craigslist that threatened The New York Times's classified advertisement model increased efforts to develop a website. nytimes.com debuted on January 19 and was formally announced three days later. The Times published domestic terrorist Ted Kaczynski's essay Industrial Society and Its Future in 1995, contributing to his arrest after his brother David recognized the essay's penmanship. Following the establishment of nytimes.com, The New York Times retained its journalistic hesitancy under executive editor Joseph Lelyveld, refusing to publish an article reporting on the Clinton–Lewinsky scandal from Drudge Report. nytimes.com editors conflicted with print editors on several occasions, including wrongfully naming security guard Richard Jewell as the suspect in the Centennial Olympic Park bombing and covering the death of Diana, Princess of Wales in greater detail than the print edition. The New York Times Electronic Media Company was adversely affected by the dot-com crash. The Times extensively covered the September 11 attacks. The following day's print issue contained sixty-six articles, the work of over three hundred dispatched reporters. Journalist Judith Miller was the recipient of a package containing a white powder during the 2001 anthrax attacks, furthering anxiety within The New York Times. In September 2002, Miller and military correspondent Michael R. Gordon wrote an article for the Times claiming that Iraq had purchased aluminum tubes. The article was cited by then-president George W. Bush to claim that Iraq was constructing weapons of mass destruction; the theoretical use of aluminum tubes to produce nuclear material was subject of debate. In March 2003, the United States invaded Iraq, beginning the Iraq War. The New York Times attracted controversy after thirty-six articles from journalist Jayson Blair were discovered to be plagiarized. Criticism over then-executive editor Howell Raines and then-managing editor Gerald M. Boyd mounted following the scandal, culminating in a town hall in which a deputy editor criticized Raines for failing to question Blair's sources in article he wrote on the D.C. sniper attacks. In June 2003, Raines and Boyd resigned. Arthur Ochs Sulzberger Jr. appointed Bill Keller as executive editor. Miller continued to report on the Iraq War as a journalistic embed covering the country's weapons of mass destruction program. Keller and then-Washington bureau chief Jill Abramson unsuccessfully attempted to subside criticism. Conservative media criticized the Times over its coverage of missing explosives from the Al Qa'qaa weapons facility. An article in December 2005 disclosing warrantless surveillance by the National Security Agency contributed to further criticism from the George W. Bush administration and the Senate's refusal to renew the Patriot Act. In the Plame affair, a Central Intelligence Agency inquiry found that Miller had become aware of Valerie Plame's identity through then-vice president Dick Cheney's chief of staff Scooter Libby, resulting in Miller's resignation. During the Great Recession, The New York Times suffered significant fiscal difficulties as a consequence of the subprime mortgage crisis and a decline in classified advertising. Exacerbated by Rupert Murdoch's revitalization of The Wall Street Journal through his acquisition of Dow Jones & Company, The New York Times Company began enacting measures to reduce the newsroom budget. The company was forced to borrow US$250 million (equivalent to $353,786,707.88 in 2023) from Mexican billionaire Carlos Slim and fired over one hundred employees by 2010. nytimes.com's coverage of the Eliot Spitzer prostitution scandal, resulting in the resignation of then-New York governor Eliot Spitzer, furthered the legitimacy of the website as a journalistic medium. The Times's economic downturn renewed discussions of an online paywall; The New York Times implemented a paywall in March 2011. Abramson succeeded Keller, continuing her characteristic investigations into corporate and government malfeasance into the Times's coverage. Following conflicts with newly-appointed chief executive Mark Thompson's ambitions, Abramson was dismissed by Sulzberger Jr., who named Dean Baquet as her replacement. Leading up to the 2016 presidential election, The New York Times elevated the Hillary Clinton email controversy and the Uranium One controversy; national security correspondent Michael S. Schmidt initially wrote an article in March 2015 stating that Hillary Clinton had used a private email server as secretary of state. Donald Trump's upset victory contributed to an increase in subscriptions to the Times. The New York Times experienced unprecedented indignation from Trump, who referred to publications such as the Times as "enemies of the people" at the Conservative Political Action Conference and tweeting his disdain for the newspaper and CNN. In October 2017, The New York Times published an article by journalists Jodi Kantor and Megan Twohey alleging that dozens of women had accused film producer and The Weinstein Company co-chairman Harvey Weinstein of sexual misconduct. The investigation resulted in Weinstein's resignation and conviction, precipitated the Weinstein effect, and served as a catalyst for the #MeToo movement. The New York Times Company vacated the public editor position and eliminated the copy desk in November. Sulzberger Jr. announced his resignation in December 2017, appointing his son, A. G. Sulzberger, as publisher. Trump's relationship—equally diplomatic and negative—marked Sulzberger's tenure. In September 2018, The New York Times published "I Am Part of the Resistance Inside the Trump Administration", an anonymous essay by a self-described Trump administration official later revealed to be Department of Homeland Security chief of staff Miles Taylor. The animosity—which extended to nearly three hundred instances of Trump disparaging the Times by May 2019—culminated in Trump informing federal agencies to cancel their subscriptions to The New York Times and The Washington Post in October 2019. Trump's tax returns have been the subject of three separate investigations. During the COVID-19 pandemic, the Times began implementing data services and graphs. On May 23, 2020, The New York Times's front page solely featured U.S. Deaths Near 100,000, An Incalculable Loss, a subset of the 100,000 people in the United States who died of COVID-19, the first time that the Times's front page lacked images since they were introduced. Since 2020, The New York Times has focused on broader diversification, developing online games, producing television series. The New York Times Company acquired The Athletic in January 2022. Since 1896, The New York Times has been published by the Ochs-Sulzberger family, having previously been published by Henry Jarvis Raymond until 1869 and by George Jones until 1896. Adolph Ochs published the Times until his death in 1935, when he was succeeded by his son-in-law, Arthur Hays Sulzberger. Sulzberger was publisher until 1961 and was succeeded by Orvil Dryfoos, his son-in-law, who served in the position until his death in 1963. Arthur Ochs Sulzberger succeeded Dryfoos until his resignation in 1992. His son, Arthur Ochs Sulzberger Jr., served as publisher until 2018. The New York Times's current publisher is A. G. Sulzberger, Sulzberger Jr.'s son. As of 2023, the Times's executive editor is Joseph Kahn and the paper's managing editors are Marc Lacey and Carolyn Ryan, having been appointed in June 2022. The New York Times's deputy managing editors are Sam Dolnick, Monica Drake, and Steve Duenes, and the paper's assistant managing editors are Matthew Ericson, Jonathan Galinsky, Hannah Poferl, Sam Sifton, Karron Skog, and Michael Slackman. The New York Times is owned by The New York Times Company, a publicly traded company. The New York Times Company, in addition to the Times, owns Wirecutter, The Athletic, The New York Times Cooking, and The New York Times Games, and acquired Serial Productions and Audm. The New York Times Company holds undisclosed minority investments in multiple other businesses, and formerly owned The Boston Globe and several radio and television stations. The New York Times Company is majority-owned by the Ochs-Sulzberger family through elevated shares in the company's dual-class stock structure held largely in a trust, in effect since the 1950s; as of 2022, the family holds ninety-five percent of The New York Times Company's Class B shares, allowing it to elect seventy percent of the company's board of directors. Class A shareholders have restrictive voting rights. As of 2023, The New York Times Company's chief executive is Meredith Kopit Levien, the company's former chief operating officer who was appointed in September 2020. As of March 2023, The New York Times Company employs 5,800 individuals, including 1,700 journalists according to deputy managing editor Sam Dolnick. Journalists for The New York Times may not run for public office, provide financial support to political candidates or causes, endorse candidates, or demonstrate public support for causes or movements. Journalists are subject to the guidelines established in "Ethical Journalism" and "Guidelines on Integrity". According to the former, Times journalists must abstain from using sources with a personal relationship to them and must not accept reimbursements or inducements from individuals who may be written about in The New York Times, with exceptions for gifts of nominal value. The latter requires attribution and exact quotations, though exceptions are made for linguistic anomalies. Staff writers are expected to ensure the veracity of all written claims, but may delegate researching obscure facts to the research desk. In March 2021, the Times established a committee to avoid journalistic conflicts of interest with work written for The New York Times, following columnist David Brooks's resignation from the Aspen Institute for his undisclosed work on the initiative Weave. The New York Times editorial board was established in 1896 by Adolph Ochs. With the opinion department, the editorial board is independent of the newsroom. Then-editor-in-chief Charles Ransom Miller served as opinion editor from 1883 until his death in 1922. Rollo Ogden succeeded Miller until his death in 1937. From 1937 to 1938, John Huston Finley served as opinion editor; in a prearranged plan, Charles Merz succeeded Finley. Merz served in the position until his retirement in 1961. John Bertram Oakes served as opinion editor from 1961 to 1976, when then-publisher Arthur Ochs Sulzberger appointed Max Frankel. Frankel served in the position until 1986, when he was appointed as executive editor. Jack Rosenthal was the opinion editor from 1986 to 1993. Howell Raines succeeded Rosenthal until 2001, when he was made executive editor. Gail Collins succeeded Raines until her resignation in 2006. From 2007 to 2016, Andrew Rosenthal was the opinion editor. James Bennet succeeded Rosenthal until his resignation in 2020. As of 2023, the editorial board comprises fourteen opinion writers. The New York Times's opinion editor is Kathleen Kingsbury and the deputy opinion editor is Patrick Healy. The New York Times's editorial board was initially opposed to liberal beliefs, opposing women's suffrage in 1900 and 1914. The editorial board began to espouse progressive beliefs during Oakes' tenure, conflicting with the Ochs-Sulzberger family, of which Oakes was a member as Adolph Ochs's nephew; in 1976, Oakes publicly disavowed with Sulzberger's endorsement of Daniel Patrick Moynihan over Bella Abzug in the 1976 Senate Democratic primaries in a letter sent from Martha's Vineyard. Under Rosenthal, the editorial board took positions supporting assault weapons legislation and the legalization of marijuana, but publicly criticized the Obama administration over its portrayal of terrorism. Since 1960, The New York Times has endorsed Democratic candidates, supporting a total of twelve Republican candidates and thirty Democratic candidates. With the exception of Wendell Willkie, the Times's Republican presidential endorsements have won the general election. In 2016, the editorial board issued an anti-endorsement against Donald Trump for the first time in its history. Since 1940, editorial, media, and technology workers of The New York Times have been represented by the New York Times Guild. The Times Guild, along with the Times Tech Guild, are represented by the NewsGuild-CWA. In 1940, Arthur Hays Sulzberger was called upon by the National Labor Relations Board amid accusations that he had discouraged Guild membership in the Times. Over the next few years, the Guild would ratify several contracts, expanding to editorial and news staff in 1942 and maintenance workers in 1943. The New York Times Guild has walked out several times in its history, including for six and a half hours in 1981 and in 2017, when copy editors and reporters walked out at lunchtime in response to the elimination of the copy desk. On December 7, 2022, the union held a one-day strike, the first interruption to The New York Times since 1978. The New York Times Guild reached an agreement in May 2023 to increase minimum salaries for employees and a retroactive bonus. The Times Tech Guild is the largest technology union with collective bargaining rights in the United States. As of February 2024, The New York Times has 10.36 million subscribers, with 9.7 million online subscribers and 660,000 print subscribers, the second-largest newspaper by print circulation in the United States behind The Wall Street Journal. The New York Times Company intends to have fifteen million subscribers by 2027. The Times's shift towards subscription-based revenue with the debut of an online paywall in 2011 contributed to subscription revenue exceeding advertising revenue the following year, furthered by the 2016 presidential election and Donald Trump. In 2022, Vox wrote that The New York Times's subscribers skew "older, richer, whiter, and more liberal"; to reflect the general population of the United States, the Times has attempted to alter its audience by acquiring The Athletic, investing in verticals such as The New York Times Games and The New York Times Games, and beginning a marketing campaign showing diverse subscribers to the Times. The New York Times Company chief executive Meredith Kopit Levien stated that the average age of subscribers has remained constant. In October 2001, The New York Times began publishing DealBook, a financial newsletter edited by Andrew Ross Sorkin. The Times had intended to publish the newsletter in September, but delayed its debut following the September 11 attacks. A website for DealBook was established in March 2006. The New York Times began shifting towards DealBook as part of the newspaper's financial coverage in November 2010 with a renewed website and a presence in the Times's print edition. In 2011, the Times began hosting the DealBook Summit, an annual conference hosted by Sorkin. During the COVID-19 pandemic, The New York Times hosted the DealBook Online Summit in 2020 and 2021. The 2022 DealBook Summit featured—among other speakers—former vice president Mike Pence and Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu, culminating in an interview with former FTX chief executive Sam Bankman-Fried; FTX had filed for bankruptcy several weeks prior. The 2023 DealBook Summit's speakers included vice president Kamala Harris, Israeli president Isaac Herzog, and businessman Elon Musk. In June 2010, The New York Times licensed the political blog FiveThirtyEight in a three-year agreement. The blog, written by Nate Silver, had garnered attention during the 2008 presidential election for predicting the elections in forty-nine of fifty states. FiveThirtyEight appeared on nytimes.com in August. According to Silver, several offers were made for the blog; Silver wrote that a merger of unequals must allow for editorial sovereignty and resources from the acquirer, comparing himself to Groucho Marx. According to The New Republic, FiveThirtyEight drew as much as a fifth of the traffic to nytimes.com during the 2012 presidential election. In July 2013, FiveThirtyEight was sold to ESPN. In an article following Silver's exit, public editor Margaret Sullivan wrote that he was disruptive to the Times's culture for his perspective on probability-based predictions and scorn for polling—having stated that punditry is "fundamentally useless", comparing him to Billy Beane, who implemented sabermetrics in baseball. According to Sullivan, his work was criticized by several notable political journalists. The New Republic obtained a memo in November 2013 revealing then-Washington bureau chief David Leonhardt's ambitions to establish a data-driven newsletter with presidential historian Michael Beschloss, graphic designer Amanda Cox, economist Justin Wolfers, and The New Republic journalist Nate Cohn. By March, Leonhardt had amassed fifteen employees from within The New York Times; the newsletter's staff included individuals who had created the Times's dialect quiz, fourth down analyzer, and a calculator for determining buying or renting a home. The Upshot debuted in April 2014. Fast Company reviewed an article about Illinois Secure Choice—a state-funded retirement saving system—as "neither a terse news item, nor a formal financial advice column, nor a politically charged response to economic policy", citing its informal and neutral tone. The Upshot developed "the needle" for the 2016 presidential election and 2020 presidential elections, a reviled thermometer dial displaying the probability of a candidate winning. In January 2016, Cox was named editor of The Upshot. Kevin Quealy was named editor in June 2022. According to an internal readership poll conducted by The New York Times in 2019, eighty-four percent of readers identified as liberal. In February 1942, The New York Times crossword debuted in The New York Times Magazine; according to Richard Shepard, the attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941 convinced then-publisher Arthur Hays Sulzberger of the necessity of a crossword. The New York Times has published recipes since the 1850s and has had a separate food section since the 1940s. In 1961, restaurant critic Craig Claiborne published The New York Times Cookbook, an unauthorized cookbook that drew from the Times's recipes. Since 2010, former food editor Amanda Hesser has published The Essential New York Times Cookbook, a compendium of recipes from The New York Times. The Innovation Report in 2014 revealed that the Times had attempted to establish a cooking website since 1998, but faced difficulties with the absence of a defined data structure. In September 2014, The New York Times introduced NYT Cooking, an application and website. Edited by food editor Sam Sifton, the Times's cooking website features 21,000 recipes as of 2022. NYT Cooking features videos as part of an effort by Sifton to hire two former Tasty employees from BuzzFeed. In August 2023, NYT Cooking added personalized recommendations through the cosine similarity of text embeddings of recipe titles. The website also features no-recipe recipes, a concept proposed by Sifton. In May 2016, The New York Times Company announced a partnership with startup Chef'd to form a meal delivery service that would deliver ingredients from The New York Times Cooking recipes to subscribers; Chef'd shut down in July 2018 after failing to accrue capital and secure financing. The Hollywood Reporter reported in September 2022 that the Times would expand its delivery options to US$95 cooking kits curated by chefs such as Nina Compton, Chintan Pandya, and Naoko Takei Moore. That month, the staff of NYT Cooking went on tour with Compton, Pandya, and Moore in Los Angeles, New Orleans, and New York City, culminating in a food festival. In addition, The New York Times offered its own wine club originally operated by the Global Wine Company. The New York Times Wine Club was established in August 2009, during a dramatic decrease in advertising revenue. By 2021, the wine club was managed by Lot18, a company that provides proprietary labels. Lot18 managed the Williams Sonoma Wine Club and its own wine club Tasting Room. The New York Times archives its articles in a basement annex beneath its building known as "the morgue", a venture started by managing editor Carr Van Anda in 1907. The morgue comprises news clippings, a pictures library, and the Times's book and periodicals library. As of 2014, it is the largest library of any media company, dating back to 1851. In November 2018, The New York Times partnered with Google to digitize the Archival Library. Additionally, The New York Times has maintained a virtual microfilm reader known as TimesMachine since 2014. The service launched with archives from 1851 to 1980; in 2016, TimesMachine expanded to include archives from 1981 to 2002. The Times built a pipeline to take in TIFF images, article metadata in XML and an INI file of Cartesian geometry describing the boundaries of the page, and convert it into a PNG of image tiles and JSON containing the information in the XML and INI files. The image tiles are generated using GDAL and displayed using Leaflet, using data from a content delivery network. The Times ran optical character recognition on the articles using Tesseract and shingled and fuzzy string matched the result. The New York Times uses a proprietary content management system known as Scoop for its online content and the Microsoft Word-based content management system CCI for its print content. Scoop was developed in 2008 to serve as a secondary content management system for editors working in CCI to publish their content on the Times's website; as part of The New York Times's online endeavors, editors now write their content in Scoop and send their work to CCI for print publication. Since its introduction, Scoop has superseded several processes within the Times, including print edition planning and collaboration, and features tools such as multimedia integration, notifications, content tagging, and drafts. The New York Times uses private articles for high-profile opinion pieces, such as those written by Russian president Vladimir Putin and actress Angelina Jolie, and for high-level investigations. In January 2012, the Times released Integrated Content Editor (ICE), a revision tracking tool for WordPress and TinyMCE. ICE is integrated within the Times's workflow by providing a unified text editor for print and online editors, reducing the divide between print and online operations. By 2017, The New York Times began developing a new authoring tool to its content management system known as Oak, in an attempt to further the Times's visual efforts in articles and reduce the discrepancy between the mediums in print and online articles. The system reduces the input of editors and supports additional visual mediums in an editor that resembles the appearance of the article. Oak is based on ProseMirror, a JavaScript rich-text editor toolkit, and retains the revision tracking and commenting functionalities of The New York Times's previous systems. Additionally, Oak supports predefined article headers. In 2019, Oak was updated to support collaborative editing using Firebase to update editors's cursor status. Several Google Cloud Functions and Google Cloud Tasks allow articles to be previewed as they will be printed, and the Times's primary MySQL database is regularly updated to update editors on the article status. Since 1895, The New York Times has maintained a manual of style in several forms. The New York Times Manual of Style and Usage was published on the Times's intranet in 1999. The New York Times uses honorifics when referring to individuals. With the AP Stylebook's removal of honorifics in 2000 and The Wall Street Journal's omission of courtesy titles in May 2023, the Times is the only national newspaper that continues to use honorifics. According to former copy editor Merrill Perlman, The New York Times continues to use honorifics as a "sign of civility". The Times's use of courtesy titles led to an apocryphal rumor that the paper had referred to singer Meat Loaf as "Mr. Loaf". Several exceptions have been made; the former sports section and The New York Times Book Review do not use honorifics. A leaked memo following the killing of Osama bin Laden in May 2011 revealed that editors were given a last-minute instruction to omit the honorific from Osama bin Laden's name, consistent with deceased figures of historic significance, such as Adolf Hitler, Napoleon, and Vladimir Lenin. The New York Times uses academic and military titles for individuals prominently serving in that position. In 1986, the Times began to use Ms, and introduced the gender-neutral title Mx. in 2015. The New York Times uses initials when a subject has expressed a preference, such as Donald Trump. The New York Times maintains a strict but not absolute obscenity policy, including phrases. In a review of the Canadian hardcore punk band Fucked Up, music critic Kelefa Sanneh wrote that the band's name—entirely rendered in asterisks—would not be printed in the Times "unless an American president, or someone similar, says it by mistake"; The New York Times did not repeat then-vice president Dick Cheney's use of "fuck" against then-senator Patrick Leahy in 2004 or then-vice president Joe Biden's remarks that the passage of the Affordable Care Act in 2010 was a "big fucking deal". The Times's profanity policy has been tested by former president Donald Trump. The New York Times published Trump's Access Hollywood tape in October 2016 containing the words "fuck", "pussy", "bitch", and "tits", the first time the publication had published an expletive on its front page, and repeated an explicit phrase for fellatio stated by then-White House communications director Anthony Scaramucci in July 2017. The New York Times omitted Trump's use of the phrase "shithole countries" from its headline in favor of "vulgar language" in January 2018. The Times banned certain words, such as "bitch", "whore", and "sluts", from Wordle in 2022. Journalists for The New York Times do not write their own headlines, but rather copy editors who specifically write headlines. The Times's guidelines insist headline editors get to the main point of an article but avoid giving away endings, if present. Other guidelines include using slang "sparingly", avoiding tabloid headlines, not ending a line on a preposition, article, or adjective, and chiefly, not to pun. The New York Times Manual of Style and Usage states that wordplay, such as "Rubber Industry Bounces Back", is to be tested on a colleague as a canary is to be tested in a coal mine; "when no song bursts forth, start rewriting". The New York Times has amended headlines due to controversy. In 2019, following two back-to-back mass shootings in El Paso and Dayton, the Times used the headline, "Trump Urges Unity vs. Racism", to describe then-president Donald Trump's words after the shootings. After criticism from FiveThirtyEight founder Nate Silver, the headline was changed to, "Assailing Hate But Not Guns". Online, The New York Times's headlines do not face the same length restrictions as headlines that appear in print; print headlines must fit within a column, often six words. Additionally, headlines must "break" properly, containing a complete thought on each line without splitting up prepositions and adverbs. Writers may edit a headline to fit an article more aptly if further developments occur. The Times uses A/B testing for articles on the front page, placing two headlines against each other. At the end of the test, the headlines that receives more traffic is chosen. The alteration of a headline regarding intercepted Russian data used in the Mueller special counsel investigation was noted by Trump in a March 2017 interview with Time, in which he claimed that the headline used the word "wiretapped" in the print version of the paper on January 20, while the digital article on January 19 omitted the word. The headline was intentionally changed in the print version to use "wiretapped" in order to fit within the print guidelines. The nameplate of The New York Times has been unaltered since 1967. In creating the initial nameplate, Henry Jarvis Raymond sought to model The London Times, which used textura popularized following the fall of the Western Roman Empire and regional variations of Alcuin's script, as well as a period. With the change to The New-York Times on September 14, 1857, the nameplate followed. Under George Jones, the terminals of the "N", "r", and "s" were intentionally exaggerated into swashes. The nameplate in the January 15, 1894, issue trimmed the terminals once more, smoothed the edges, and turned the stem supporting the "T" into an ornament. The hyphen was dropped on December 1, 1896, after Adolph Ochs purchased the paper. The descender of the "h" was shortened on December 30, 1914. The largest change to the nameplate was introduced on February 21, 1967, when type designer Ed Benguiat redesigned the logo, most prominently turning the arrow ornament into a diamond. Notoriously, the new logo dropped the period that remained with the Times up until that point; one reader compared the omission of the period to "performing plastic surgery on Helen of Troy." Picture editor John Radosta worked with a New York University professor to determine that dropping the period saved the paper US$41.28 (equivalent to $377.21 in 2023). As of December 2023, The New York Times has printed sixty thousand issues, a statistic represented in the paper's masthead to the right of the volume number, the Times's years in publication written in Roman numerals. The volume and issues are separated by four dots representing the edition number of that issue; on the day of the 2000 presidential election, the Times was revised four separate times, necessitating the use of an em dash in place of an ellipsis. The em dash issue was printed hundreds times over before being replaced by the one-dot issue. Despite efforts by newsroom employees to recycle copies sent to The New York Times's office, several copies were kept, including one put on display at the Museum at The Times. From February 7, 1898, to December 31, 1999, the Times's issue number was incorrect by five hundred issues, an error suspected by The Atlantic to be the result of a careless front page type editor. The misreporting was noticed by news editor Aaron Donovan, who was calculating the number of issues in a spreadsheet and noticed the discrepancy. The New York Times celebrated fifty thousand issues on March 14, 1995, an observance that should have occurred on July 26, 1996. The New York Times has reduced the physical size of its print edition while retaining its broadsheet format. The New-York Daily Times debuted at 18 inches (460 mm) across. By the 1950s, the Times was being printed at 16 inches (410 mm) across. In 1953, an increase in paper costs to US$10 (equivalent to $113.88 in 2023) a ton increased newsprint costs to US$21.7 million (equivalent to $308,616,417.91 in 2023) On December 28, 1953, the pages were reduced to 15.5 inches (390 mm). On February 14, 1955, a further reduction to 15 inches (380 mm) occurred, followed by 14.5 inches (370 mm) and 13.5 inches (340 mm). On August 6, 2007, the largest cut occurred when the pages were reduced to 12 inches (300 mm), a decision that other broadsheets had previously considered. Then-executive editor Bill Keller stated that a narrower paper would be more beneficial to the reader but acknowledged a net loss in article space of five percent. In 1985, The New York Times Company established a minority stake in a US$21.7 million (equivalent to $308,616,417.91 in 2023) newsprint plant in Clermont, Quebec through Donahue Malbaie. The company sold its equity interest in Donahue Malbaie in 2017. The New York Times often uses large, bolded headlines for major events. For the print version of the Times, these headlines are written by one copy editor, reviewed by two other copy editors, approved by the masthead editors, and polished by other print editors. The process is completed before 8 p.m., but it may be repeated if further development occur, as did take place during the 2020 presidential election. On the day Joe Biden was declared the winner, The New York Times utilized a "hammer headline" reading, "Biden Beats Trump", in all caps and bolded. A dozen journalists discussed several potential headlines, such as "It's Biden" or "Biden's Moment", and prepared for a Donald Trump victory, in which they would use "Trump Prevails". During Trump's first impeachment, the Times drafted the hammer headline, "Trump Impeached". The New York Times altered the ligatures between the E and the A, as not doing so would leave a noticeable gap due to the stem of the A sloping away from the E. The Times reused the tight kerning for "Biden Beats Trump" and Trump's second impeachment, which simply read, "Impeached". In cases where two major events occur on the same day or immediately after each other, The New York Times has used a "paddle wheel" headline, where both headlines are used but split by a line. The term dates back to August 8, 1959, when it was revealed that the United States was monitoring Soviet missile firings and when Explorer 6—shaped like a paddle wheel—launched. Since then, the paddle wheel has been used several times, including on January 21, 1981, when Ronald Reagan was sworn in minutes before Iran released fifty-two American hostages, ending the Iran hostage crisis. At the time, most newspapers favored the end of the hostage crisis, but the Times placed the inauguration above the crisis. Since 1981, the paddle wheel has been used twice; on July 26, 2000, when the 2000 Camp David Summit ended without an agreement and when Bush announced that Dick Cheney would be his running mate, and on June 24, 2016, when the United Kingdom European Union membership referendum passed, beginning Brexit, and when the Supreme Court deadlocked in United States v. Texas. The New York Times has run editorials from its editorial board on the front page twice. On June 13, 1920, the Times ran an editorial opposing Warren G. Harding, who was nominated during that year's Republican Party presidential primaries. Amid growing acceptance to run editorials on the front pages from publications such as the Detroit Free Press, The Patriot-News, The Arizona Republic, and The Indianapolis Star, The New York Times ran an editorial on its front page on December 5, 2015, following a terrorist attack in San Bernardino, California, in which fourteen people were killed. The editorial advocates for the prohibition of "slightly modified combat rifles" used in the San Bernardino shooting and "certain kinds of ammunition". Conservative figures, including Texas senator Ted Cruz, The Weekly Standard editor Bill Kristol, Fox & Friends co-anchor Steve Doocy, and then-New Jersey governor Chris Christie criticized the Times. Talk radio host Erick Erickson acquired an issue of The New York Times to fire several rounds into the paper, posting a picture online. Since 1997, The New York Times's primary distribution center is located in College Point, Queens. The facility is 300,000 sq ft (28,000 m2) and employs 170 people as of 2017. The College Point distribution center prints 300,000 to 800,000 newspapers daily. On most occasions, presses start before 11 p.m. and finish before 3 a.m. A robotic crane grabs a roll of newsprint and several rollers ensure ink can be printed on paper. The final newspapers are wrapped in plastic and shipped out. As of 2018, the College Point facility accounted for 41 percent of production. Other copies are printed at 26 other publications, such as The Atlanta Journal-Constitution, The Dallas Morning News, The Santa Fe New Mexican, and the Courier Journal. With the decline of newspapers, particularly regional publications, the Times must travel further; for example, newspapers for Hawaii are flown from San Francisco on United Airlines, and Sunday papers are flown from Los Angeles on Hawaiian Airlines. Computer glitches, mechanical issues, and weather phenomena affect circulation but do not stop the paper from reaching customers. The College Point facility prints over two dozen other papers, including The Wall Street Journal and USA Today. The New York Times has halted its printing process several times to account for major developments. The first printing stoppage occurred on March 31, 1968, when then-president Lyndon B. Johnson announced that he would not seek a second term. Other press stoppages include May 19, 1994, for the death of former first lady Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis, and July 17, 1996, for Trans World Airlines Flight 800. The 2000 presidential election necessitated two press stoppages. Al Gore appeared to concede on November 8, forcing then-executive editor Joseph Lelyveld to stop the Times's presses to print a new headline, "Bush Appears to Defeat Gore", with a story that stated George W. Bush was elected president. However, Gore held off his concession speech over doubts over Florida. Lelyveld reran the headline, "Bush and Gore Vie for an Edge". Since 2000, three printing stoppages have been issued for the death of William Rehnquist on September 3, 2005, for the killing of Osama bin Laden on May 1, 2011, and for the passage of the Marriage Equality Act in the New York State Assembly and subsequent signage by then-governor Andrew Cuomo on June 24, 2011. nytimes.com has undergone several major redesigns and infrastructure developments since its debut. In April 2006, The New York Times redesigned its website with an emphasis on multimedia. In preparation for Super Tuesday in February 2008, the Times developed a live election system using the Associated Press's File Transfer Protocol (FTP) service and a Ruby on Rails application; nytimes.com experienced its largest traffic on Super Tuesday and the day after. The NYTimes application debuted with the introduction of the App Store on July 10, 2008. Engadget's Scott McNulty wrote critically of the app, negatively comparing it to The New York Times's mobile website. An iPad version with select articles was released on April 3, 2010, with the release of the first-generation iPad. In October, The New York Times expanded NYT Editors' Choice to include the paper's full articles. NYT for iPad was free until 2011. The Times applications on iPhone and iPad began offering in-app subscriptions in July 2011. The Times released a web application for iPad—featuring a format summarizing trending headlines on Twitter—and a Windows 8 application in October 2012. Efforts to ensure profitability through an online magazine and a "Need to Know" subscription emerged in Adweek in July 2013. In March 2014, The New York Times announced three applications—NYT Now, an application that offers pertinent news in a blog format, and two unnamed applications, later known as NYT Opinion and NYT Cooking—to diversify its product laterals. The Daily is the modern front page of The New York Times. —Sam Dolnick, speaking to Intelligencer in January 2020 The New York Times manages several podcasts, including multiple podcasts with Serial Productions. The Times's longest-running podcast is The Book Review Podcast, debuting as Inside The New York Times Book Review in April 2006. The New York Times's defining podcast is The Daily, a daily news podcast hosted by Michael Barbaro and, since March 2022, Sabrina Tavernise. The podcast debuted on February 1, 2017. In October 2021, The New York Times began testing "New York Times Audio", an application featuring podcasts from the Times, audio versions of articles—including from other publications through Audm, and archives from This American Life. The application debuted in May 2023 exclusively on iOS for Times subscribers. New York Times Audio includes exclusive podcasts such as The Headlines, a daily news recap, and Shorts, short audio stories under ten minutes. In addition, a "Reporter Reads" section features Times journalists reading their articles and providing commentary. The New York Times has used video games as part of its journalistic efforts, among the first publications to do so, contributing to an increase in Internet traffic; the publication has also developed its own video games. In 2014, The New York Times Magazine introduced Spelling Bee, a word game in which players guess words from a set of letters in a honeycomb and are awarded points for the length of the word and receive extra points if the word is a pangram. The game was proposed by Will Shortz, created by Frank Longo, and has been maintained by Sam Ezersky. In May 2018, Spelling Bee was published on nytimes.com, furthering its popularity. In February 2019, the Times introduced Letter Boxed, in which players form words from letters placed on the edges of a square box, followed in June 2019 by Tiles, a matching game in which players form sequences of tile pairings, and Vertex, in which players connect vertices to assemble an image. In July 2023, The New York Times introduced Connections, in which players identify groups of words that are connected by a common property. In April, the Times introduced Digits, a game that required using operations on different values to reach a set number; Digits was shut down in August. In March 2024, The New York Times released Strands, a themed word search. In January 2022, The New York Times Company acquired Wordle, a word game developed by Josh Wardle in 2021, at a valuation in the "low-seven figures". The acquisition was proposed by David Perpich, a member of the Sulzberger family who proposed the purchase to Knight over Slack after reading about the game. The Washington Post purportedly considered acquiring Wordle, according to Vanity Fair. At the 2022 Game Developers Conference, Wardle stated that he was overwhelmed by the volume of Wordle facsimiles and overzealous monetization practices in other games. Concerns over The New York Times monetizing Wordle by implementing a paywall mounted; Wordle is a client-side browser game and can be played offline by downloading its webpage. Wordle moved to the Times's servers and website in February. The game was added to the NYT Games application in August, necessitating it be rewritten in the JavaScript library React. In November, The New York Times announced that Tracy Bennett would be the Wordle's editor. In April 2009, The New York Times released a crossword application for iOS developed by Magmic. A sudoku application developed by Magmic was released in October. NYT Crosswords debuted on the Google Play Store in November 2016. In April 2017, the application was added to the Amazon Appstore. NYT Crosswords supports saving across devices and nytimes.com. In March 2023, NYT Crosswords was renamed to NYT Games to address the application's other games, including Wordle, Spelling Bee, Tiles, and Sudoku. According to Jonathan Knight, chief executive of The New York Times Games, the Times was concerned over how the application would rank in search results for "crossword". In May 2007, The New York Times released The New York Times Crosswords for the Nintendo DS. The game, developed by Budcat Creations and published by Majesco Entertainment, features The New York Times crossword puzzles from March 2004 to November 2006. The New York Times Crosswords includes a campaign mode, in which the player solves seven successive puzzles with increasing difficulty. The New York Times Magazine and The Boston Globe Magazine are the only weekly Sunday magazines following The Washington Post Magazine's cancellation in December 2022. In February 2016, The New York Times introduced a Spanish website, The New York Times en Español. The website, intended to be read on mobile devices, would contain translated articles from the Times and reporting from journalists based in Mexico City. The Times en Español's style editor is Paulina Chavira, who has advocated for pluralistic Spanish to accommodate the variety of nationalities in the newsroom's journalists and wrote a stylebook for The New York Times en Español Articles the Times intends to publish in Spanish are sent to a translation agency and adapted for Spanish writing conventions; the present progressive tense may be used for forthcoming events in English, but other tenses are preferable in Spanish. The Times en Español consults the Real Academia Española and Fundéu and frequently modifies the use of diacritics—such as using an acute accent for the Cártel de Sinaloa but not the Cartel de Medellín—and using the gender-neutral pronoun elle. Headlines in The New York Times en Español are not capitalized. The Times en Español publishes El Times, a newsletter led by Elda Cantú intended for all Spanish speakers. In September 2019, The New York Times ended The New York Times en Español's separate operations. A study published in The Translator in 2023 found that the Times en Español engaged in tabloidization. In June 2012, The New York Times introduced a Chinese website, 纽约时报中文, in response to Chinese editions created by The Wall Street Journal and the Financial Times. Conscious to censorship, the Times established servers outside of China and affirmed that the website would uphold the paper's journalistic standards; the government of China had previously blocked articles from nytimes.com through the Great Firewall, and the website was blocked in China until August 2001 after then-general secretary Jiang Zemin met with journalists from The New York Times. Then-foreign editor Joseph Kahn assisted in the establishment of cn.nytimes.com, an effort that contributed to his appointment as executive editor in April 2022. In October, 纽约时报中文 published an article detailing the wealth of then-premier Wen Jiabao's family. In response, the government of China blocked access to nytimes.com and cn.nytimes.com and references to the Times and Wen were censored on microblogging service Sina Weibo. In March 2015, a mirror of 纽约时报中文 and the website for GreatFire were the targets for a government-sanctioned distributed denial of service attack on GitHub in March 2015, disabling access to the service for several days. Chinese authorities requested the removal of The New York Times's news applications from the App Store in December 2016. As of 2023, The New York Times has received 137 Pulitzer Prizes, the most of any publication. The New York Times is considered a newspaper of record in the United States. The Times is the largest metropolitan newspaper in the United States; as of 2022, The New York Times is the second-largest newspaper by print circulation in the United States behind The Wall Street Journal. A study published in Science, Technology, & Human Values in 2013 found that The New York Times received more citations in academic journals than the American Sociological Review, Research Policy, or the Harvard Law Review. With sixteen million unique records, the Times is the third-most referenced source in Common Crawl, a collection of online material used in datasets such as GPT-3, behind Wikipedia and a United States patent database. The New Yorker's Max Norman wrote in March 2023 that the Times has shaped mainstream English usage. In a January 2018 article for The Washington Post, Margaret Sullivan stated that The New York Times affects the "whole media and political ecosystem". The New York Times's nascent success has led to concerns over media consolidation, particularly amid the decline of newspapers. In 2006, economists Lisa George and Joel Waldfogel examined the consequences of the Times's national distribution strategy and audience with circulation of local newspapers, finding that local circulation decreased among college-educated readers. The effect of The New York Times in this manner was observed in The Forum of Fargo-Moorhead, the newspaper of record for Fargo, North Dakota. Axios founder Jim VandeHei opined that the Times is "going to basically be a monopoly" in an opinion piece written by then-media columnist and former BuzzFeed News editor-in-chief Ben Smith; in the article, Smith argued that the strength of The New York Times's journalistic workforce, broadening content, and the expropriation of Gawker editor-in-chief Choire Sicha, Recode editor-in-chief Kara Swisher, and Quartz editor-in-chief Kevin Delaney. Smith compared the Times to the New York Yankees during their 1927 season containing Murderers' Row. The New York Times's coverage of the Israeli–Palestinian conflict has received criticism, and the paper's stance on Israel has been a topic of contention. The New York Times published a headline claiming that Israel was responsible for the Al-Ahli Arab Hospital explosion, attributing the explosion to claims by Hamas. The Times issued an editors' note several days later; president Joe Biden reportedly privately expressed that the headline could have escalated the Israel–Hamas war. The New York Times has received criticism regarding its coverage of transgender people. When it published an opinion piece by Weill Cornell Medicine professor Richard A. Friedman called "How Changeable Is Gender?" in August 2015, Vox's German Lopez criticized Friedman as suggesting that parents and doctors might be right in letting children suffer from severe dysphoria in case something changes down the line, and as implying that conversion therapy may work for transgender children. In February 2023, nearly one thousand current and former Times writers and contributors wrote an open letter addressed to standards editor Philip B. Corbett, criticizing the paper's coverage of transgender, non⁠-⁠binary, and gender-nonconforming people; some of the Times' articles have been cited in state legislatures attempting to justify criminalizing gender-affirming care. Contributors wrote in the open letter that "the Times has in recent years treated gender diversity with an eerily familiar mix of pseudoscience and euphemistic, charged language, while publishing reporting on trans children that omits relevant information about its sources." Includes 9,700,000 online-only and 660,000 print subscribers. Also referred to as simply the Times or the NY Times. The New York Times uses the domain nytimes.com. Based in Warsaw, Poland. Based in Washington, D.C. Based in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. Based in New Delhi, India. Based in Bangkok, Thailand. Based in Dakar, Senegal. In 1896, the Times endorsed John M. Palmer, the National Democratic Party nominee, its only endorsement for a candidate who is not a member of the Republican Party or the Democratic Party. The national edition of The New York Times uses 11.5 inches (290 mm) pages. Attributed to multiple references: Attributed to multiple references: Diamond 2023. Campinoti & Frehse 2024. Lee 2013. Berger 1951, p. 31. Berger 1951, p. 105. The New York Times 1935. The New York Times 1968. The New York Times 1963. Haberman 2012. Ember 2017b. Grynbaum 2022a. Grynbaum & Windolf 2022. Bruell 2023d. Robertson & Koblin 2023. Manjoo 2023. Gallogly 2023. The New York Times 2015b. Farago 2022. The New York Times 2022b. Nocera 2012. Barker & Fontanella-Khan 2022. Ellison 2007. Lee 2020. Patel 2023. Fischer 2023. The New York Times 2022a. Calame 2007. The New York Times 2018a. The New York Times 1999. Moore 2021. The New York Times Company 2023c. The New York Times Company 2022a. The New York Times Company 2019d. Korach 2023. The New York Times Company 2021h. The New York Times Company 2021g. The New York Times Company 2022b. The New York Times Company 2022e. The New York Times Company 2020b. The New York Times Company 2021c. The New York Times Company 2020f. The New York Times Company 2021b. The New York Times Company 2022g. The New York Times Company 2022i. The New York Times Company 2020e. The New York Times Company 2021d. The New York Times Company 2019a. The New York Times Company 2022h. Mazzei 2021. The New York Times Company 2023b. The New York Times Company 2022j. The New York Times Company 2022k. The New York Times Company 2019c. The New York Times Company 2023a. The New York Times Company 2020d. The New York Times Company 2022l. The New York Times Company 2017a. Knight 2023. The New York Times Company 2019b. The New York Times Company 2020c. The New York Times Company 2021e. The New York Times Company 2021f. Seo 2022. Astle 2021. Takenaga 2019. The New York Times Company 2022c. The New York Times Company 2021a. The New York Times Company 2022d. Bennet 2020. The New York Times 1922. The New York Times 1937. The New York Times 1938. McQuiston 1977. McFadden 2001a. The New York Times 1986. Roberts 2017. McFadden 2001b. Seelye 2006. Dunlap 2016b. Tracy 2020. The New York Times 2018b. Tracy 2021. Adams, Louttit & Taylor 2016. The Editorial Board 2020. Williamson 2016. Fu 2021. Berger 1951, p. 496. Izadi 2022. Ember 2017a. The New York Times 2022c. McCreesh 2022. Robertson 2023a. Robertson 2022. Robertson 2024. de Visé 2022. Robertson 2023b. Kafka & Molla 2017. Kafka 2022b. Sorkin 2011. DealBook 2006. Barnett 2010. The New York Times 2023. The New York Times 2020. Sorkin et al. 2021. Marantz 2022. Kim 2022. Stelter 2010. Silver 2010. Carr 2011. Tracy 2012. Stelter 2013. Sullivan 2013b. Tracy 2013. McDuling 2014. Leonhardt 2014. Wilson 2015. Wilson 2020. The New York Times Company 2016. The New York Times Company 2022f. Nagourney 2023, p. 464. Shepard 1992. Hesser 2010a. Hesser 2010b, p. 1. Disis 2018. Reuters 2010. Wilson 2014. Smith 2016. Gapper 2022. Fitts & Eddy 2023. Weinstein 2019. Opam 2016. Haddon 2018. Chan 2022. The New York Times 2009. Asimov 2021. Allen 2014. Vincent 2018. Cotler & Sandhaus 2016. Chayka 2019. Vnenchak 2014. Myers 2012. Miller 2017. Edmonds 2018. Ciocca 2018. Ciocca & Sisson 2019. Kallaur 2016. Branign 2023. Stevens 2022. Padnani & Chambers 2020. Bonner 2011. Corbett 2017. Corbett 2015. Bagli 2016. Sanneh 2007. Stolberg 2004. Herszenhorn 2010. Eskin 2016. LaFrance 2017. Grynbaum 2018. Diaz 2022a. Hiltner 2017b. Chiu 2019. Bulik 2016. Symonds 2017. Dunlap 2017c. Dunlap 2023c. Dunlap 2014c. Dunlap 2023a. Rosen 2014. Dunlap 2016f. Reuters 1985. The New York Times Company 2020a, p. 22. Ernst & Vecsey 2020. Sondern 2021. Dunlap 2016e. Goldfarb 2015. Tompkins 2015. Nelson 2015. Kludt 2015. Peterson 1997. Lee, Koppel & Quick 2017. Van Syckle 2018. Dunlap 2023b. Dunlap 2016d. Apcar 2006. Willis 2008. McNulty 2008. Chittum 2010. Sorrel 2010. Schramm 2011. Heater 2012a. Heater 2012b. D'Orazio 2013. Meyer 2014b. Williams 2014. Schneier 2020. Bisley 2017. Paul 2015. Quah 2022. Barbaro 2017. Smith 2021. Khalid 2023. Gómez-García & de la Hera Conde-Pumpido 2023, p. 451. Usher 2014, p. 150. Amlen 2020. Lippman 2020. Sarkar 2019. The New York Times Company 2023d. Morris 2023. Peters 2023c. Levine 2024. Pisani 2022. Klein 2023d. Bruell 2023b. Machkovech 2022. Mukherjee & Datta 2022. Hollister 2022. Carpenter 2022. Hicks 2022. Orland 2023. Orland 2022. The New York Times Company 2009. Metacritic 2009. Amlen 2016. The New York Times Company 2017b. Peters 2023b. Harris 2007. Burchfield 2007. Ellison 2022. Polgreen 2016. Yu 2016. Archibold 2018. Budasoff 2019. McGinley 2023. Narea 2019. Valdeón 2023. Haughney 2012. Bradsher 2012. Grynbaum 2022b. Goodin 2015. Benner & Wee 2017. Ax 2023. Folkenflik 2022a. Martin & Hansen 1998, p. 7. Schwarz 2012, p. 29. Sterling 2009, p. 1020. Communications and Digital Committee 2008, p. 123. Hicks & Wang 2013. Timmer 2023. Norman 2023. Sullivan 2018. George & Waldfogel 2006, p. 446. George & Waldfogel 2006, p. 435. Smith 2020a. Klein 2023c. Jones 2023. The New York Times 2015c. Lopez 2015. Oladipo 2023. Klein 2023a. Migdon 2023. Yurcaba 2023. Kalish 2023. Yang 2023. Adams, Taylor; Louttit, Meghan; Taylor, Rumsey (September 23, 2016). "New York Times Endorsements Through the Ages". The New York Times. Retrieved December 24, 2023. Allen, Erika (May 20, 2014). "News Gets New Life When Exhumed From the Morgue". The New York Times. Retrieved July 26, 2023. Allen, Erika (August 13, 2015). "Using a Chat Tool to Cover the Republican Debate". The New York Times. Retrieved November 25, 2023. Amlen, Deb (November 17, 2016). "The New York Times Launches the Android App for Crosswords". The New York Times. Retrieved January 14, 2024. Amlen, Deb (October 16, 2020). "The Genius of Spelling Bee". The New York Times. Retrieved January 14, 2024. Apcar, Leonard (April 2, 2006). "A Letter to Our Readers". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 16, 2015. Retrieved November 6, 2023. Appelman, Hillary (March 29, 2000). "Spinning Off Can Mean Big Money, but Big Danger Too". The New York Times. Retrieved October 18, 2023. Archibold, Randal (June 23, 2018). "World Cup Soccer's Spanish Accent Mark: For Mexico and a Times Editor, It's a Win-Win". The New York Times. Retrieved January 5, 2024. Aridi, Sara (February 23, 2020). "The Coronavirus Briefing: A Reporting Relay Across Time Zones". The New York Times. Retrieved November 25, 2023. Asimov, Eric (May 10, 2021). "So You're Thinking About Joining a Wine Club ..." The New York Times. Retrieved January 6, 2024. Bagli, Charles (October 14, 1999). "Times Is Said to Consider a New Tower". The New York Times. Retrieved October 30, 2023. Bagli, Charles (February 19, 2000). "Times Co. Picks Developer For New Home in Times Sq". The New York Times. Retrieved October 30, 2023. Bagli, Charles (June 14, 2016). "Why Do We Call Him Donald J. Trump?". The New York Times. Retrieved January 14, 2024. Bahr, Sarah (August 22, 2021). "A Rush of News, Moment by Moment: Behind Our Live Coverage". The New York Times. Retrieved November 25, 2023. Bahr, Sarah (December 23, 2022). "'Snow Fall' at 10: How It Changed Journalism". The New York Times. Retrieved October 31, 2023. Barbaro, Michael (February 1, 2017). "'The Daily': Making Sense of the Gorsuch Pick". The New York Times. Retrieved January 31, 2024. Barnes, Brooks (February 26, 2018). "Weinstein Co. Will File for Bankruptcy After Deal Talks Collapse". The New York Times. Retrieved November 18, 2023. Barron, James (September 11, 2001). "Thousands Feared Dead as World Trade Center Is Toppled". The New York Times. Retrieved October 18, 2023. Barron, James (October 19, 2016). "A.G. Sulzberger: Leading Change at The New York Times as Journalism Evolves". The New York Times. Retrieved November 10, 2023. Barry, Dan; Barstow, David; Glader, Jonathan; Liptak, Adam; Steinberg, Jacques (May 11, 2003). "Times Reporter Who Resigned Leaves Long Trail of Deception". The New York Times. Retrieved October 21, 2023. Barstow, David; Broad, William; Gerth, Jeff (October 3, 2004). "How White House Embraced Suspect Iraq Arms Intelligence". The New York Times. Retrieved October 20, 2023. Barstow, David; Craig, Susanne; Buettner, Russ; Twohey, Megan (October 2, 2016). "Donald Trump Tax Records Show He Could Have Avoided Taxes for Nearly Two Decades, The Times Found". The New York Times. Retrieved November 1, 2023. Barstow, David; Craig, Susanne; Buettner, Russ (October 2, 2018). "Trump Engaged in Suspect Tax Schemes as He Reaped Riches From His Father". The New York Times. Retrieved November 1, 2023. Becker, Jo; McIntire, Mike (April 23, 2015). "Cash Flowed to Clinton Foundation Amid Russian Uranium Deal". The New York Times. Retrieved November 1, 2023. Benner, Katie; Wee, Sui-Lee (January 4, 2017). "Apple Removes New York Times Apps From Its Store in China". The New York Times. Retrieved January 4, 2024. Bennet, James (January 13, 2020). "What Is an Editorial Board?". The New York Times. Retrieved December 31, 2023. Bradsher, Keith (October 25, 2012). "China Blocks Web Access to Times After Article". The New York Times. Retrieved January 4, 2024. Budasoff, Eliezer (July 4, 2019). "How Do You Say 'The New York Times' in Spanish?". The New York Times. Retrieved January 5, 2024. Bulik, Mark (June 13, 2016). "Which Headlines Attract Most Readers?". The New York Times. Retrieved July 20, 2023. Bulik, Mark; Hiltner, Stephen (November 16, 2016). "In 13 Headlines, the Drama of Election Night". The New York Times. Retrieved November 5, 2023. Buettner, Russ; Craig, Susanne; McIntire, Mike (September 27, 2020). "Long-Concealed Records Show Trump's Chronic Losses and Years of Tax Avoidance". The New York Times. Retrieved November 1, 2023. Bures, Sarah (March 27, 2020). "Socially Distanced, but Working Together". The New York Times. Retrieved October 29, 2023. Bures, Sarah (July 16, 2021). "Product Design at the Pace of News". The New York Times. Retrieved November 25, 2023. Butterfield, Fox (July 13, 1987). "A Correction: Times Was in Error On North's Secret-Fund Testimony". The New York Times. Retrieved October 8, 2023. Calame, Byron (October 23, 2005). "The Miller Mess: Lingering Issues Among the Answers". The New York Times. Retrieved October 20, 2023. Calame, Byron (May 4, 2007). "The 'Guidelines on Our Integrity' from 1999 Are Worth a Look". The New York Times. Retrieved December 31, 2023. Carlsen, Audrey; Salam, Maya; Cain Miller, Claire; Lu, Denise; Ngu, Ash; Patel, Jugal; Wichter, Zach (October 23, 2018). "#MeToo Brought Down 201 Powerful Men. Nearly Half of Their Replacements Are Women". The New York Times. Retrieved November 18, 2023. Carr, David (September 11, 2011). "News Trends Tilt Toward Niche Sites". The New York Times. Retrieved January 15, 2024. Carr, David; Somaiya, Ravi (May 14, 2014). "Times Ousts Jill Abramson as Executive Editor, Elevating Dean Baquet". The New York Times. Retrieved November 7, 2023. Chen, Brian; Mac, Ryan (March 31, 2023). "Twitter's Blue Check Apocalypse Is Upon Us. Here's What to Know". The New York Times. Retrieved December 10, 2023. Ciocca, Sophia (April 12, 2018). "Building a Text Editor for a Digital-First Newsroom". The New York Times. Retrieved December 27, 2023. Ciocca, Sophia; Sisson, Jeff (August 1, 2019). "We Built Collaborative Editing for Our Newsroom's CMS. Here's How". The New York Times. Retrieved December 27, 2023. Chen, Brian (June 25, 2012). "Flipboard in Content Deal With New York Times". The New York Times. Retrieved January 5, 2024. Chokshi, Niraj (December 12, 2017). "Behind the Race to Publish the Top-Secret Pentagon Papers". The New York Times. Retrieved September 24, 2023. Coleman, Nancy (February 21, 2021). "On the Front Page, a Wall of Grief". The New York Times. Retrieved October 29, 2023. Corbett, Philip (December 3, 2015). "'Mx.'? Did The Times Adopt a New, Gender-Neutral Courtesy Title?". The New York Times. Retrieved January 14, 2024. Corbett, Philip (November 8, 2017). "Why The Times Calls Trump 'Mr.' (No, We're Not Being Rude)". The New York Times. Retrieved January 14, 2024. Cotler, Jane; Sandhaus, Evan (February 1, 2016). "How to Build a TimesMachine". The New York Times. Retrieved July 26, 2023. Cotton, Tom (June 3, 2020). "Tom Cotton: Send In the Troops". The New York Times. Retrieved November 5, 2023. Craig, Susanne (October 2, 2016). "The Time I Found Donald Trump's Tax Records in My Mailbox". The New York Times. Retrieved November 2, 2023. Davis, Julie; Grynbaum, Michael (February 24, 2017). "Trump Intensifies His Attacks on Journalists and Condemns F.B.I. 'Leakers'". The New York Times. Retrieved January 31, 2024. Dempsey, Helen (August 28, 2023). "A Week in the Life of a Team during The New York Times Annual Hackathon". The New York Times. Retrieved November 30, 2023. Diamond, Sarah (July 2, 2023). "The Naming of Gaming (and Its History)". The New York Times. Retrieved July 20, 2023. In 1934, The Times ran excerpts from sermons from two churches in New York City in which the pastors denounced lotteries. Dowd, Maureen (March 12, 1984). "20 years after the murder of Kitty Genovese, The question remains: Why?". The New York Times. Retrieved September 23, 2023. Dudding, Will (January 6, 2020). "How the Lady Became Less Gray". The New York Times. Retrieved July 20, 2023. Dunlap, David (October 13, 2000). "Times Chooses Architect, and His Vision, for New Building". The New York Times. Retrieved October 30, 2023. Dunlap, David (November 14, 2001). "150th Anniversary: 1851–2001; Six Buildings That Share One Story". The New York Times. Retrieved July 21, 2023. Dunlap, David (June 10, 2007). ""Copy!"". The New York Times. Retrieved October 31, 2023. Dunlap, David (August 16, 2011). "A Happy 200th to The Times's First Publisher, Whom Boss Tweed Couldn't Buy or Kill". The New York Times. Retrieved July 20, 2023. Dunlap, David (September 25, 2014). "1985 | An Illness at The Times". The New York Times. Retrieved October 2, 2023. Dunlap, David (October 9, 2014). "1971 | A Great Day, but the Lady Was Gray". The New York Times. Retrieved September 20, 2023. Dunlap, David (November 6, 2014). "2000 | When Election Night Became Election Month". The New York Times. Retrieved September 20, 2023. Dunlap, David (December 26, 2014). "1961 | The C.I.A. Readies a Cuban Invasion, and The Times Blinks". The New York Times. Retrieved December 13, 2023. Dunlap, David (March 5, 2015). "1977 | Home Opens Its Doors". The New York Times. Retrieved September 28, 2023. Dunlap, David (July 16, 2015). "1943 | In Tehran, The Times's International Edition Is Born". The New York Times. Retrieved August 20, 2023. Dunlap, David (September 11, 2015). "1968 | The Washington Bureau Chief Who Wasn't". The New York Times. Retrieved September 23, 2023. Dunlap, David (September 27, 2015). "1978 | The Times Misses an Entire Papacy". The New York Times. Retrieved October 1, 2023. Dunlap, David (October 8, 2015). "1985 | Reaching an Earlier Million". The New York Times. Retrieved October 2, 2023. Dunlap, David (January 22, 2016). "1996 | 'In Gamble, Newspapers Push Into On-Line Publishing'". The New York Times. Retrieved October 15, 2023. Dunlap, David (March 18, 2016). "2007–2016 | The Rosenthal Era in the Editorial Department". The New York Times. Retrieved January 14, 2024. Dunlap, David (April 6, 2016). "1964 | How Many Witnessed the Murder of Kitty Genovese?". The New York Times. Retrieved September 23, 2023. Dunlap, David (June 9, 2016). "'Shut Down the Presses as Soon as Possible'". The New York Times. Retrieved October 31, 2023. Dunlap, David (June 24, 2016). "Two Banner Headlines, but Only One Page 1". The New York Times. Retrieved July 22, 2023. Dunlap, David (August 23, 2016). "2007 | Honey, I Shrunk The Times". The New York Times. Retrieved December 10, 2023. Dunlap, David (September 15, 2016). "1962–1964 | Yesterday's 'California Today'". The New York Times. Retrieved September 24, 2023. Dunlap, David (January 19, 2017). "1994 | A Road Map to the Information Superhighway". The New York Times. Retrieved September 30, 2023. Dunlap, David (April 6, 2017). "1986 | 'Ms.' Joins The Times's Vocabulary". The New York Times. Retrieved September 30, 2023. Dunlap, David (June 17, 2017). "1967 | A Modern Identity Takes Form in Ancient Lettering". The New York Times. Retrieved August 6, 2023. Dunlap, David (June 29, 2017). "1964 | A Libel Suit Yields a Vigorous Defense of Free Speech". The New York Times. Retrieved September 23, 2023. Dunlap, David (June 30, 2017). "1971 | Supreme Court Allows Publication of Pentagon Papers". The New York Times. Retrieved September 25, 2023. Dunlap, David (July 24, 2017). "1972 | Pressmen Balk at an Impeachment Ad in The Times". The New York Times. Retrieved September 25, 2023. Dunlap, David (August 24, 2017). "1967 | The Times Plans a Second, Sparkling Newspaper". The New York Times. Retrieved September 23, 2023. Dunlap, David (October 1, 2023). "Close Enough to Call Back". The New York Times. Retrieved December 13, 2023. Dunlap, David (December 9, 2023). "Printed With Company". The New York Times. Retrieved December 13, 2023. Dunlap, David (December 11, 2023). "With Issue No. 60,000, One Correction Comes to Mind". The New York Times. Retrieved December 13, 2023. Eder, Steve; Twohey, Megan (October 10, 2016). "Donald Trump Acknowledges Not Paying Federal Income Taxes for Years". The New York Times. Retrieved November 1, 2023. The Editorial Board (September 24, 2016). "Hillary Clinton for President". The New York Times. Retrieved November 1, 2023. The Editorial Board (September 25, 2016). "Why Donald Trump Should Not Be President". The New York Times. Retrieved November 1, 2023. The Editorial Board (October 6, 2020). "Elect Joe Biden, America". The New York Times. Retrieved December 24, 2023. Ember, Sydney (July 21, 2015). "Some New York Times Articles to Appear Free on Starbucks App". The New York Times. Retrieved January 12, 2024. Ember, Sydney (June 29, 2017). "Times Staff Members Protest Cuts and Changes to News Operation". The New York Times. Retrieved October 2, 2023. Ember, Sydney (December 14, 2017). "A.G. Sulzberger, 37, to Take Over as New York Times Publisher". The New York Times. Retrieved October 27, 2023. Ernst, Sean; Vecsey, David (November 21, 2020). "A Headline (or Five) for History". The New York Times. Retrieved July 22, 2023. Etim, Bassey (June 13, 2017). "The Times Sharply Increases Articles Open for Comments, Using Google's Technology". The New York Times. Retrieved October 2, 2023. Etim, Bassey (September 27, 2017). "Why No Comments? It's a Matter of Resources". The New York Times. Retrieved October 2, 2023. Farago, Jason (July 31, 2022). "What's a Critic Doing in a War Zone?". The New York Times. Retrieved December 30, 2023. Firestone, David; Canedy, Dana (September 15, 2001). "F.B.I. Documents Detail the Movements of 19 Men Believed to Be Hijackers". The New York Times. Retrieved October 18, 2023. Fitts, Kyelee; Eddy, Celia (October 13, 2023). "How The New York Times Cooking Team Makes Personalized Recipe Recommendations". The New York Times. Retrieved January 6, 2024. Flegenheimer, Matt; Barbaro, Michael (November 9, 2016). "Donald Trump Is Elected President in Stunning Repudiation of the Establishment". The New York Times. Retrieved November 5, 2023. Friedman, Richard A. (August 22, 2015). "How Changeable Is Gender?". The New York Times. Retrieved February 21, 2024. Gallogly, Nell (January 11, 2023). "A Newsroom Team That Sees Data in the Air". The New York Times. Retrieved December 30, 2023. Grippe, John (May 23, 2020). "The Project Behind a Front Page Full of Names". The New York Times. Retrieved October 27, 2023. Grynbaum, Michael (January 11, 2018). "After Donald Trump Said It, How News Outlets Handled It". The New York Times. Retrieved November 25, 2023. Grynbaum, Michael (April 19, 2022). "Joe Kahn Is Named Next Executive Editor of The New York Times". The New York Times. Retrieved December 30, 2023. Grynbaum, Michael (April 19, 2022). "A Quiet Intensity, Matched With Big Ambitions". The New York Times. Retrieved January 4, 2024. Grynbaum, Michael; Windolf, Jim (April 20, 2022). "New York Times Names Marc Lacey and Carolyn Ryan as Managing Editors". The New York Times. Retrieved December 30, 2023. Grynbaum, Michael; Mac, Ryan (December 27, 2023). "The Times Sues OpenAI and Microsoft Over A.I. Use of Copyrighted Work". The New York Times. Retrieved December 27, 2023. Hakim, Danny; Rashbaum, William (March 10, 2008). "Spitzer Is Linked to Prostitution Ring". The New York Times. Retrieved October 31, 2023. Haberman, Clyde (September 29, 2012). "Arthur O. Sulzberger, Publisher Who Transformed The Times for New Era, Dies at 86". The New York Times. Retrieved December 30, 2023. Harlan, Jennifer (December 31, 2022). "Day 31: How The Times Started a Beloved Tradition, in 10 … 9 … 8 …". The New York Times. Retrieved August 7, 2023. Harmon, Amy (September 14, 1998). "Hacker Group Commandeers The New York Times Web Site". The New York Times. Retrieved October 16, 2023. Haughney, Christine (March 11, 2008). "The 'Elite' Rental Where the Spitzers Live (Pets Allowed)". The New York Times. Retrieved October 31, 2023. Haughney, Christine (June 27, 2012). "The Times Is Introducing a Chinese-Language News Site". The New York Times. Retrieved January 4, 2024. Herszenhorn, David (March 23, 2010). "At White House, Biden's Expletive Caught on Open Mike". The New York Times. Retrieved November 25, 2023. Hesser, Amanda (October 6, 2010). "Recipe Redux: The Community Cookbook". The New York Times Magazine. Retrieved January 6, 2024. Higginbotham, Will (October 4, 2018). "When the Gray Lady Started Wearing Color". The New York Times. Retrieved October 17, 2023. Hiltner, Stephen (November 9, 2016). "'Madam President': An Iconic Front Page That Wasn't to Be". The New York Times. Retrieved November 1, 2023. Hiltner, Stephen (March 2, 2017). "How to Tell a Secret in the Digital Age". The New York Times. Retrieved November 2, 2023. Hiltner, Stephen (April 9, 2017). "How to Write a New York Times Headline". The New York Times. Retrieved July 22, 2023. Hiltner, Stephen (September 19, 2018). "How to Tell Us a Secret". The New York Times. Retrieved November 2, 2023. Hirsch, Lauren; Draper, Kevin; Rosman, Katherine (January 6, 2022). "New York Times Co. to Buy The Athletic for $550 Million in Cash". The New York Times. Retrieved October 30, 2023. Huetteman, Emmarie (April 6, 2017). "Devin Nunes to Step Aside From House Investigation on Russia". The New York Times. Retrieved January 31, 2024. Ingber, Hannah (November 24, 2015). "The Live Blog: A Fast Way to Report Breaking News". The New York Times. Retrieved November 25, 2023. Johnston, David; van Natta Jr., Don (October 27, 2002). "Miscues in Sniper Pursuit, Then Calls and a Big Break". The New York Times. Retrieved October 20, 2023. Kallaur, Andrei (August 26, 2016). "Putting {Style} into the Online New York Times Stylebook". The New York Times. Retrieved November 5, 2023. Kantor, Jodi; Twohey, Megan (October 5, 2017). "Harvey Weinstein Paid Off Sexual Harassment Accusers for Decades". The New York Times. Retrieved November 18, 2023. Knight, Heather (September 28, 2023). "Introducing The Times's New San Francisco Bureau Chief". The New York Times. Retrieved January 7, 2024. Lee, Jasmine; Quealy, Kevin (January 28, 2016). "The 598 People, Places and Things Donald Trump Has Insulted on Twitter: A Complete List". The New York Times. Retrieved November 23, 2023. Lee, Chang; Koppel, Niko; Quick, Samantha (March 21, 2017). Where It's Made: The Times Newspaper. The New York Times. Retrieved August 20, 2023. Lee, Edmund (July 22, 2020). "The New York Times Co. Names Meredith Kopit Levien as Chief Executive". The New York Times. Retrieved December 31, 2023. Leonhardt, David (April 22, 2014). "Navigate News With The Upshot". The New York Times. Retrieved January 15, 2024. Levine, Elie (March 4, 2024). "Putting a New Twist on a Classic Puzzle". The New York Times. Retrieved March 27, 2024. Lewis, Peter (October 5, 1994). "Mead to Sell On-Line Unit to Reed Elsevier". The New York Times. Retrieved October 14, 2023. Lindner, Emmett (November 17, 2022). "Read All About It: A History of Breaking News at The Times". The New York Times. Retrieved November 25, 2023. Liptak, Adam (July 2, 2021). "Two Justices Say Supreme Court Should Reconsider Landmark Libel Decision". The New York Times. Retrieved September 23, 2023. Long, Kat (July 1, 2017). "Keeping The Times Civil, 16 Million Comments and Counting". The New York Times. Retrieved October 2, 2023. Manjoo, Farhad (April 21, 2023). "ChatGPT Is Already Changing How I Do My Job". The New York Times. Retrieved December 30, 2023. Markoff, John (January 20, 2017). "Putting The Times's First Email Address to Bed". The New York Times. Retrieved October 15, 2023. Mazzei, Patricia (October 13, 2021). "'Once a City Hall Reporter, Always a City Hall Reporter'". The New York Times. Retrieved January 7, 2024. McFadden, Robert (April 6, 2001). "John B. Oakes, Impassioned Editorial Page Voice of The Times, Dies at 87". The New York Times. Retrieved January 14, 2024. McFadden, Robert (May 22, 2001). "Times Names Raines as Successor To Lelyveld as Executive Editor". The New York Times. Retrieved January 14, 2024. McGinley, Terence (October 17, 2023). "A Spanish-Language Newsletter for the Fluent and the Curious". The New York Times. Retrieved January 5, 2024. McQuiston, John (September 1, 1977). "Charles Merz, a Former Times Editor, Is Dead at 84". The New York Times. Retrieved January 14, 2024. Miller, Judith (April 21, 2003). "Illicit Arms Kept Till Eve of War, An Iraqi Scientist Is Said to Assert". The New York Times. Retrieved October 28, 2023. Mueller, Benjamin; Feuer, Alan (May 25, 2018). "Arrested on Rape Charges, Weinstein Posts $1 Million Bail". The New York Times. Retrieved November 18, 2023. "A Word about Ourselves". New-York Daily Times. New York City. September 18, 1851. Retrieved July 20, 2023. "Facing the Fires of Defeat". New-York Daily Times. New York City. June 7, 1884. Retrieved July 20, 2023. "A New Home For The New York Times". The New York Times. New York City. August 4, 1902. Retrieved August 3, 2023. "Election Results by Times Building Flash". The New York Times. New York City. November 6, 1904. Retrieved August 3, 2023. "New York Times Building Supplement". The New York Times. New York City. January 1, 1905. Retrieved August 3, 2023. "A Times Annex Near Times Square". The New York Times. New York City. March 29, 1911. Retrieved August 7, 2023. "Death of Charles Ransom Miller, Editor of The New York Times". The New York Times. New York City. July 19, 1922. Retrieved January 14, 2024. "Adolph S. Ochs Dead at 77; Publisher of Times Since 1896". The New York Times. New York City. April 9, 1935. Retrieved December 30, 2023. "Rollo Ogden Held High Place Among Nation's Editors For Nearly 50 Years". The New York Times. New York City. February 23, 1937. Retrieved January 14, 2024. "Merz is Appointed Editor of Times". The New York Times. New York City. November 16, 1938. Retrieved January 14, 2024. "John H. Finley Dead". The New York Times. New York City. March 8, 1940. Retrieved August 12, 2023. "Orvil E. Dryfoos Dies at 50; New York Times Publisher". The New York Times. New York City. May 26, 1963. Retrieved December 30, 2023. "Arthur Hays Sulzberger, Times Chairman, 77, Dies". The New York Times. New York City. December 12, 1968. Retrieved December 30, 2023. "A.M. Rosenthal Leaving Executive Editor's Post at The Times, and Max Frankel is His Successor". The New York Times. New York City. October 12, 1986. Retrieved January 14, 2024. "The Times Appoints Three Editors to Major Posts". The New York Times. September 12, 1992. Retrieved October 14, 2023. "Excerpts From Letter by 'Terrorist Group,' FC, Which Says It Sent Bombs". The New York Times. April 26, 1995. Retrieved October 17, 2023. "The Times Appoints a President For New Digital Ventures Unit". The New York Times. June 23, 1995. Retrieved October 15, 2023. "Guidelines on Integrity". The New York Times. May 7, 1999. Retrieved December 31, 2023. The New York Times (May 21, 2001). "Raines to Succeed Lelyveld as Executive Editor of Times". The New York Times. Retrieved October 9, 2023. "Jennifer Chacón, Jonathan Glater". The New York Times. September 29, 2002. Retrieved October 26, 2023. "Times Company Creating a Wine Club". The New York Times. August 13, 2009. Retrieved January 6, 2024. The New York Times (January 6, 2015). "Wanted: Better Basketball for a Beleaguered Reporter". The New York Times. Retrieved October 30, 2023. "The Masthead of The New York Times". The New York Times. February 6, 2015. Retrieved December 30, 2023. "The New York Times to Offer Open Access on Web and Apps for the Election". The New York Times. November 3, 2016. Retrieved November 1, 2023. The New York Times (October 13, 2017). "The Times Issues Social Media Guidelines for the Newsroom". The New York Times. Retrieved October 31, 2023. "Ethical Journalism". The New York Times. January 5, 2018. Retrieved December 31, 2023. "The New York Times Editorial Board". The New York Times. March 1, 2018. Retrieved November 2, 2023. The New York Times (February 1, 2019). "Read Excerpts: The Times Publisher Asks Trump About 'Anti-Press Rhetoric'". The New York Times. Retrieved November 23, 2023. "DealBook Online Summit: LeBron James on Voting, Elizabeth Warren on Stimulus, Jamie Dimon on Leadership". The New York Times. November 18, 2020. Retrieved November 29, 2023. "How New York Times reporters avoid personal involvement in politics". The New York Times. June 30, 2022. Retrieved December 31, 2023. "What does The New York Times own?". The New York Times. July 20, 2022. Retrieved December 30, 2023. The New York Times (December 7, 2022). "New York Times Union Holds One-Day Strike". The New York Times. Retrieved October 2, 2023. The New York Times (November 29, 2023). "New York Times Forum Includes Global and Business Leaders". The New York Times. Retrieved November 29, 2023. Okrent, Daniel (May 22, 2005). "13 Things I Meant to Write About but Never Did". The New York Times. Retrieved October 28, 2023. Nocera, Joe (October 1, 2012). "How Punch Protected The Times". The New York Times. Retrieved December 30, 2023. Norman, Derek (January 20, 2021). "Three News Hubs, 24-Hour Coverage: The Times's Global Relay". The New York Times. Retrieved November 25, 2023. Padnani, Amisha; Chambers, Veronica (May 15, 2020). "Examining the Meaning of 'Mrs.'". The New York Times. Retrieved January 14, 2024. Parker-Pope, Tara (July 20, 2009). "A Game to Measure Multitasking Skill". The New York Times. Retrieved December 16, 2023. Patel, Sona (September 4, 2021). "How Your Comments Make Our Journalism Better". The New York Times. Retrieved October 2, 2023. Paul, Pamela (September 14, 2015). "Listening to the Book Review". The New York Times. Retrieved November 12, 2023. Peón, Tiffany (November 23, 2020). "Traffic, Turkey and No-Knead Bread". The New York Times. Retrieved November 15, 2023. Pérez-Peña, Richard (May 24, 2009). "2 Ex-Timesmen Say They Had a Tip on Watergate First". The New York Times. Retrieved September 26, 2023. Peters, Jeremy (March 20, 2011). "Times's Online Pay Model Was Years in the Making". The New York Times. Retrieved November 1, 2023. Peterson, Iver (January 22, 1997). "Times Expanding Nationwide Distribution". The New York Times. Retrieved August 20, 2023. Polgreen, Lydia (February 7, 2016). "Bienvenidos a The New York Times en Español" [Welcome to The New York Times in Spanish]. The New York Times. Retrieved January 5, 2024. Prabhat, Pranay (December 17, 2020). "To Serve Better Ads, We Built Our Own Data Program". The New York Times. Retrieved December 3, 2023. Reuters (November 1985). "Newsprint Pact". The New York Times. Retrieved December 10, 2023. Robertson, Katie (March 3, 2022). "New York Times Tech Workers Vote to Certify Union". The New York Times. Retrieved October 2, 2023. Roberts, Sam (August 24, 2017). "Jack Rosenthal, Times Journalist and Civic Leader, Is Dead at 82". The New York Times. Retrieved January 14, 2024. Robertson, Katie (May 23, 2023). "The Times Reaches a Contract Deal With Its Newsroom Union". The New York Times. Retrieved October 2, 2023. Robertson, Katie (November 8, 2023). "The New York Times Passes 10 Million Subscribers". The New York Times. Retrieved November 8, 2023. Robertson, Katie; Koblin, John (July 10, 2023). "The New York Times to Disband Its Sports Department". The New York Times. Retrieved October 30, 2023. Robertson, Katie (February 7, 2024). "New York Times Co. Adds 300,000 Digital Subscribers in Quarter". The New York Times. Retrieved February 7, 2024. Salganik, Matthew; Lee, Robin (April 30, 2020). "To Apply Machine Learning Responsibly, We Use It in Moderation". The New York Times. Retrieved November 3, 2023. Sandvik, Runa (October 27, 2017). "The New York Times is Now Available as a Tor Onion Service". The New York Times. Retrieved December 26, 2023. Sanneh, Kelefa (November 12, 2007). "Outrage, Bile, Hardcore Punk ... and a Sensible Lost-and-Found". The New York Times. Retrieved November 25, 2023. Schmidt, Michael (March 2, 2015). "Hillary Clinton Used Personal Email Account at State Dept., Possibly Breaking Rules". The New York Times. Retrieved November 1, 2023. Schmidt, Michael; Mazzetti, Mark; Apuzzo, Matt (February 14, 2017). "Trump Campaign Aides Had Repeated Contacts With Russian Intelligence". The New York Times. Retrieved January 31, 2024. Steel, Emily; Schmidt, Michael (April 1, 2017). "Bill O'Reilly Thrives at Fox News, Even as Harassment Settlements Add Up". The New York Times. Retrieved January 31, 2024. Steel, Emily; Schmidt, Michael (April 19, 2017). "Bill O'Reilly Is Forced Out at Fox News". The New York Times. Retrieved January 31, 2024. Scott, Janny (January 7, 2021). "Now It Can Be Told: How Neil Sheehan Got the Pentagon Papers". The New York Times. Retrieved October 3, 2023. Seelye, Katharine (October 12, 2006). "Times Editorial Page Editor Steps Down". The New York Times. Retrieved January 14, 2024. Shear, Michael (October 28, 2020). "Miles Taylor, a Former Homeland Security Official, Reveals He Was 'Anonymous'". The New York Times. Retrieved October 29, 2023. Shepard, Richard (February 16, 1992). "Bambi Is a Stag and Tubas Don't Go 'Pah-Pah': The Ins and Outs of Across and Down". The New York Times Magazine. Retrieved January 3, 2024. Silver, Nate (August 25, 2010). "Welcome (and Welcome Back) to FiveThirtyEight". The New York Times. Retrieved January 15, 2024. Smith, Ben (March 1, 2020). "Why the Success of The New York Times May Be Bad News for Journalism". The New York Times. Retrieved December 10, 2023. Smith, Ben (June 7, 2020). "Inside the Revolts Erupting in America's Big Newsrooms". The New York Times. Retrieved December 14, 2023. Sondern, Andrew (January 21, 2021). "Letters Close Enough to Touch". The New York Times. Retrieved July 22, 2023. Sorkin, Andrew (October 7, 2011). "DealBook Celebrates 10-Year Anniversary". The New York Times. Retrieved November 29, 2023. Sorkin, Andrew; Karaian, Karaian; Kessler, Sarah; Gandel, Stephen; de la Merced, Michael; Hirsch, Lauren; Livni, Ephrat (November 11, 2021). "What We Learned From Tim Cook, Antony Blinken, Mary Barra and More". The New York Times. Retrieved November 29, 2023. Stack, Liam (May 3, 2023). "Judge Dismisses Trump's Lawsuit Against The New York Times". The New York Times. Retrieved January 14, 2024. Stelter, Brian (June 3, 2010). "Times to Host Blog on Politics and Polls". The New York Times. Retrieved January 15, 2024. Stelter, Brian (July 19, 2013). "Nate Silver of FiveThirtyEight Blog Is to Join ESPN Staff". The New York Times. Retrieved January 15, 2024. Stetson, Damon (November 6, 1978). "The Times and News Resume Publication". The New York Times. Retrieved October 1, 2023. Stevens, Matt (January 21, 2022). "No, We Didn't Call Him 'Mr. Loaf.' (Mostly.)". The New York Times. Retrieved January 14, 2024. Stolberg, Sheryl (June 25, 2004). "Salty Language as Cheney and Senator Clash". The New York Times. Retrieved November 25, 2023. Sullivan, Margaret (May 4, 2013). "Repairing the Credibility Cracks". The New York Times. Retrieved October 20, 2023. Sullivan, Margaret (July 22, 2013). "Nate Silver Went Against the Grain for Some at The Times". The New York Times. Retrieved January 15, 2024. Symonds, Alexandria (March 23, 2017). "When a Headline Makes Headlines of Its Own". The New York Times. Retrieved July 22, 2023. Takenaga, Lara (February 16, 2019). "Our Tokyo Bureau Chief on Where She Finds 'Bolts of Insight' (Hint: It's Outside the Office)". The New York Times. Retrieved January 7, 2024. Taylor, Miles (September 5, 2018). "I Am Part of the Resistance Inside the Trump Administration". The New York Times. Retrieved October 29, 2023. Tracy, Marc; Abrams, Rachel; Lee, Edmund (June 4, 2020). "New York Times Says Senator's Op-Ed Did Not Meet Standards". The New York Times. Retrieved December 14, 2023. Tracy, Marc (June 7, 2020). "James Bennet Resigns as New York Times Opinion Editor". The New York Times. Retrieved December 14, 2023. Tracy, Marc (January 22, 2021). "Kathleen Kingsbury Is Named New York Times Opinion Editor". The New York Times. Retrieved December 31, 2023. Traub, Alex (April 1, 2020). "When All the Zingers Were Fit to Print". The New York Times. Retrieved October 1, 2023. Van Syckle, Katie (August 5, 2018). "See How The Times Gets Printed and Delivered". The New York Times. Retrieved August 20, 2023. Victor, Daniel (May 31, 2017). "New York Times Will Offer Employee Buyouts and Eliminate Public Editor Role". The New York Times. Retrieved November 18, 2023. Vnenchak, Luke (June 17, 2014). "Scoop: A Glimpse Into the NYTimes CMS". The New York Times. Retrieved December 27, 2023. Wakin, Daniel (June 4, 2021). "'Those We've Lost,' a Chronicle of Covid Death, Comes to a Halt". The New York Times. Retrieved November 5, 2023. Weinstein, Emily (February 16, 2019). "Behind the NYT Cooking Section That's All About Ditching the Recipe". The New York Times. Retrieved January 6, 2024. Weiser, Benjamin (September 22, 2021). "Trump Sues His Niece and The New York Times Over Leaked Tax Documents". The New York Times. Retrieved January 14, 2024. Wilgoren, Jodi; Wong, Edward (September 13, 2001). "On Doomed Flight, Passengers Vowed To Perish Fighting". The New York Times. Retrieved October 18, 2023. Williams, Josh; Fehr, Tiff (June 17, 2021). "Tracking Covid-19 From Hundreds of Sources, One Extracted Record at a Time". The New York Times. Retrieved October 29, 2023. Williamson, Elizabeth (September 27, 2016). "How New York Times Endorsements Happen". The New York Times. Retrieved December 24, 2023. Willis, Derek (February 12, 2008). "Election Night at NYTimes.com". The New York Times. Retrieved December 3, 2023. Wilson, Joseph (July 6, 2003). "What I Didn't Find in Africa". The New York Times. Retrieved October 29, 2023. Wright, Will (September 20, 2020). "'These Are Real People Dying': Why an Artist Filled His Yard With Flags". The New York Times. Retrieved October 29, 2023. "The New York Times Launches Crossword Application for iPhone and iPod Touch". The New York Times Company. April 1, 2009. Retrieved January 13, 2023. "Amanda Cox Named Editor, The Upshot". The New York Times Company. January 26, 2016. Retrieved January 15, 2023. "Coming Home for Jason Horowitz". The New York Times Company. January 6, 2017. Retrieved January 7, 2024. "NYT Launches Crossword App for Kindle Fire". The New York Times Company. April 6, 2017. Retrieved January 14, 2024. "Our London Bureau Chief". The New York Times Company. April 11, 2019. Retrieved January 7, 2024. "Comings and Goings on National". The New York Times Company. May 30, 2019. Retrieved January 7, 2024. "Metro's New City Hall Bureau Chief". The New York Times Company. October 17, 2019. Retrieved January 7, 2024. "Our New Andes Bureau Chief". The New York Times Company. October 25, 2019. Retrieved January 7, 2024. The New York Times Company 2019 Annual Report (PDF) (Report). The New York Times Company. April 2020. Retrieved December 10, 2023. "Our Next Cairo Bureau Chief". The New York Times Company. April 17, 2020. Retrieved January 11, 2024. "Our New Correspondent in India". The New York Times Company. September 30, 2020. Retrieved January 12, 2024. "Our Next Paris Bureau Chief". The New York Times Company. October 15, 2020. Retrieved January 7, 2024. "Our Next Jerusalem Bureau Chief". The New York Times Company. October 29, 2020. Retrieved January 7, 2024. "Two New Bureau Chiefs for International". The New York Times Company. November 10, 2020. Retrieved January 7, 2024. "New White House Team". The New York Times Company. February 22, 2021. Retrieved January 11, 2024. "National's Growing Footprint in Texas". The New York Times Company. March 8, 2021. Retrieved January 7, 2024. "Julie Bosman Elevated to Chicago Bureau Chief; Mitch Smith Named Midwest National Correspondent". The New York Times Company. March 31, 2021. Retrieved January 11, 2024. "John Eligon Named Johannesburg Bureau Chief". The New York Times Company. April 7, 2021. Retrieved January 7, 2024. "Mujib Mashal Promoted to South Asia Bureau Chief". The New York Times Company. October 14, 2021. Retrieved January 7, 2024. "Sui-Lee Wee Named Southeast Asia Bureau Chief". The New York Times Company. October 25, 2021. Retrieved January 7, 2024. "Promotion for Matina Stevis-Gridneff". The New York Times Company. December 21, 2021. Retrieved January 7, 2024. "New Bureau Chief in Brazil". The New York Times Company. December 27, 2021. Retrieved January 7, 2024. "A Promotion for Luis Ferré-Sadurní". The New York Times Company. March 10, 2022. Retrieved January 7, 2024. "Familiar Faces, Fresh Roles: Our China Team Is Changing (and It's Not)". The New York Times Company. April 4, 2022. Retrieved January 7, 2024. "Our Next United Nations Bureau Chief is Farnaz Fassihi". The New York Times Company. April 5, 2022. Retrieved January 11, 2024. "Our Next West Africa Correspondent Is Elian Peltier". The New York Times Company. April 6, 2022. Retrieved January 11, 2024. "New Correspondent in Berlin". The New York Times Company. April 29, 2022. Retrieved January 7, 2024. "Kevin Quealy is the next editor of The Upshot". The New York Times Company. June 9, 2022. Retrieved January 31, 2024. "Ben Hubbard to Lead Our Istanbul Bureau". The New York Times Company. June 10, 2022. Retrieved January 7, 2024. "Corina Knoll Named Los Angeles Bureau Chief". The New York Times Company. July 14, 2022. Retrieved January 11, 2024. "Andrew Kramer Named Ukraine Bureau Chief". The New York Times Company. July 22, 2022. Retrieved January 7, 2024. "New Roles for Maria Abi-Habib and Natalie Kitroeff in Mexico City". The New York Times Company. September 1, 2022. Retrieved January 7, 2024. "Jenna Russell Joins The Times as New England Bureau Chief". The New York Times Company. October 27, 2022. Retrieved January 7, 2024. "Our New Gulf Bureau Chief". The New York Times Company. October 27, 2022. Retrieved January 11, 2024. "Maria Cramer Is New Police Bureau Chief". The New York Times Company. January 5, 2024. Retrieved January 11, 2024. "New Roles for Emily Cochrane and Campbell Robertson". The New York Times Company. January 27, 2024. Retrieved January 11, 2024. "Promotion for Christina Goldbaum". The New York Times Company. April 24, 2023. Retrieved January 11, 2024. "Tiles and Sudoku Join NYT Games App". The New York Times Company. May 16, 2023. Retrieved January 14, 2024. Library resources about The New York Times Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Anderson, C. W. (2018). Apostles of Certainty: Data Journalism and the Politics of Doubt. Oxford: Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/oso/9780190492335.001.0001. ISBN 978-0-19-049233-5. Berger, Meyer (1951). The Story of the New York Times, 1851-1951. New York City: Simon & Schuster. Davis, Elmer (1921). History of the New York Times: 1851–1921. Hesser, Amanda (2010). The Essential New York Times Cookbook: Classic Recipes for a New Century (1 ed.). New York City: W. W. Norton & Company. ISBN 9780393061031. Jones, Alex; Tifft, Susan (2000). The Trust: The Private and Powerful Family Behind The New York Times (2 ed.). Boston: Little, Brown and Company. ISBN 9780316836319. Kantor, Jodi; Twohey, Megan (2019). She Said. London: Penguin Press. ISBN 9780525560340. Knapp, Shepherd (1909). A history of the Brick Presbyterian Church in the City of New York. Lankevich, George J. (2001). Postcards from Times Square. Square One Publishers. ISBN 9780757001000. Martin, Shannon; Hansen, Kathleen (1998). Newspapers of Record in a Digital Age: From Hot Type to Hot Link. London: Bloomsbury Academic. ISBN 9780275959609. Mnookin, Seth (2004). Hard News: The Scandals at the New York Times and Their Meaning for American Media. New York City: Random House. ISBN 9780812972511. Nagourney, Adam (2023). The Times: How the Newspaper of Record Survived Scandal, Scorn, and the Transformation of Journalism. New York City: Crown Publishing Group. ISBN 9780451499363. Phelps, Robert (2009). God and the Editor: My Search for Meaning at The New York Times. Syracuse: Syracuse University Press. ISBN 9780815609148. Rosenthal, A. M. (1964). Thirty-Eight Witnesses: The Kitty Genovese Case. Berkeley: University of California Press. ISBN 9781510710030. Salisbury, Harrison (1980). Without Fear or Favor: The New York Times and Its Times. New York City: Ballantine Books. Schwarz, Daniel (2012). End Times? Crises and Turmoil at The New York Times, 1999–2009. Albany: SUNY Press. ISBN 9781438438986. Shipnuck, Alan (2007). The Battle for Augusta National: Hootie, Martha, and the Masters of the Universe. New York City: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 9780743255011. Sterling, Christopher H. (2009). Encyclopedia of Journalism. Vol. 3. New York City: SAGE Publishing. ISBN 9780761929574. Stern, Robert A. M.; Mellins, Thomas; Fishman, David (1999). New York 1880: Architecture and Urbanism in the Gilded Age. Monacelli Press. ISBN 9781580930277. Sullivan, Margaret (2022). Newsroom Confidential: Lessons (and Worries) from an Ink-Stained Life. New York City: St. Martin's Press. ISBN 9781250281906. Talese, Gay (1969). The Kingdom and the Power (1 ed.). Cleveland: World Publishing Company. ISBN 9780440143970. Talese, Gay (1981). The Kingdom and the Power (2 ed.). Cleveland: World Publishing Company. Usher, Nikki (2014). Making News at the New York Times. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. ISBN 9780472035960. The ownership of the news (PDF) (Report). Communications and Digital Committee. June 27, 2008. Retrieved September 24, 2023. Hood, Clifton (1978). The Impact of the IRT in New York City (PDF) (Report). Historic American Engineering Record. Retrieved August 3, 2023. Kumar, Vineet; Anand, Bharat; Gupta, Sunil; Oberholzer-Gee, Felix (February 2012). The New York Times Paywall (Report). Harvard Business School. Retrieved November 1, 2023. (Former) New York Times Building (PDF) (Report). New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission. March 16, 1999. Retrieved July 20, 2023. New York Times Building (originally the Times Annex) (PDF) (Report). New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission. April 24, 2001. Retrieved August 7, 2023. Patch, Kimberly (June 2014). Salvation or Mirage? The New York Times Paywall (PDF) (Report). Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism. Retrieved November 1, 2023. Scarangello, Thomas; Krall, Kyle; Callow, Jeffrey (2008). A Statement in Steel: The New York Times Building (PDF) (Report). Council on Tall Buildings and Urban Habitat. Retrieved October 31, 2023. Trimble, Chris (2002). New York Times Digital (PDF) (Report). Tuck School of Business. Retrieved October 15, 2023. Chittum, Ryan (April 2010). "IPad Review: New York Times vs. Wall Street Journal". Columbia Journalism Review. New York City: Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism. Grossman, Laurence (March 1997). "To err is human, to admit it divine". Columbia Journalism Review. Vol. 35, no. 6. New York City: Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism. Katz, Jon (June 1994). "The Times Enters The Nineties; Doesn't Like It Much". New York. New York City. Stephens, Suzanne (February 19, 2008). "The New York Times Building". Architectural Digest. Vol. 196. New York City: Condé Nast. George, Lisa; Waldfogel, Joel (2006). "The New York Times and the Market for Local Newspapers". American Economic Review. 96 (1): 435–447. doi:10.1257/000282806776157551. Retrieved December 10, 2023. Gómez-García, Salvador; de la Hera Conde-Pumpido, Teresa (June 2023). "Newsgames: The Use of Digital Games by Mass-Media Outlets to Convey Journalistic Messages". Games and Culture. 18 (4): 449–474. doi:10.1177/15554120221105461. S2CID 258568580. Retrieved December 16, 2023. Hicks, Diana; Wang, Jian (July 2013). "The New York Times as a Resource for Mode 2". Science, Technology, & Human Values. 38 (6): 851–877. doi:10.1177/0162243913497806. hdl:1887/59069. S2CID 73641050. Retrieved November 27, 2023. Hirschhorn, Larry (2007). "The fall of Howell Raines and The New York Times: A study in the moralization of organizational life". Consulting Psychology Journal: Practice and Research. 59 (3): 155–174. doi:10.1037/1065-9293.59.3.155. Retrieved October 14, 2023. Hindman, Elizabeth (June 2005). "Jayson Blair, The New York Times, and Paradigm Repair". Journal of Communication. 55 (2): 225–241. doi:10.1111/j.1460-2466.2005.tb02669.x. Retrieved October 20, 2023. Seo, Soomin (June 2022). "Why the media gets it wrong when it comes to North Korea: Cases of 'dead' North Koreans in the Kim Jong-un era". Journalism. 24 (9): 1899–1918. doi:10.1177/14648849221105924. S2CID 249327054. Retrieved January 7, 2024. Valdeón, Roberto (2023). "Translation and the tabloidization of the New York Times in Spanish". The Translator. 29 (3): 346–361. doi:10.1080/13556509.2022.2145880. S2CID 254201781. Retrieved January 5, 2024. Astle, David (October 11, 2021). "New York Times' Damien Cave shares the lessons he learnt in Australia" (Podcast). Australian Broadcasting Company. Retrieved January 11, 2024. Inskeep, Steve (January 5, 2006). "Breaking the NSA Eavesdropping Story" (Podcast). NPR. Retrieved October 29, 2023. Patel, Nilay (March 23, 2023). "How to play the long game, with New York Times CEO Meredith Kopit Levien". The Verge (Podcast). Retrieved November 9, 2023. Abate, Carolyn (January 19, 2017). "History of 911: America's Emergency Service, Before and After Kitty Genovese". PBS. Retrieved September 23, 2023. Allyn, Bobby (August 16, 2023). "'New York Times' considers legal action against OpenAI as copyright tensions swirl". NPR. Retrieved November 30, 2023. Alterman, Eric (March 22, 2023). "The New York Times and Israel: What Is (and Isn't) Fit for Print". The New Republic. Retrieved November 14, 2023. "Sorry Trump, NY Times says subscriptions rose since election". Associated Press. November 17, 2016. Retrieved November 1, 2023. Ax, Joseph (May 8, 2023). "Associated Press, New York Times win Pulitzers for Ukraine coverage". Associated Press. Retrieved November 12, 2023. Barker, Alex; Fontanella-Khan, James (August 11, 2022). "ValueAct takes 7% stake in New York Times with call for new approach". Financial Times. Retrieved December 30, 2023. Barnett, Emma (November 6, 2010). "Andrew Ross Sorkin: The man behind Dealbook". The Daily Telegraph. Retrieved November 29, 2023. Batelle, John (November 1, 1994). "Pipeline". Wired. Retrieved October 15, 2023. Bauder, David (June 7, 2020). "NY Times editorial page editor resigns amid fury over op-ed". Associated Press. Retrieved December 14, 2023. Bauder, David (July 2, 2021). "Capitol rioters' footage powers NYT's 'Day of Rage' project". Associated Press. Retrieved November 9, 2023. Belanger, Ashley (August 17, 2023). "Report: Potential NYT lawsuit could force OpenAI to wipe ChatGPT and start over". Ars Technica. Retrieved November 30, 2023. Bernstein, Carl; Woodward, Bob (August 1, 1972). "Bug Suspect Got Campaign Funds". The Washington Post. Retrieved September 26, 2023. Bisley, Alexander (June 28, 2017). "How the books editor of the New York Times decides what to read". Vox. Retrieved November 12, 2023. Bonanos, Christopher (September 12, 2016). "A Short-lived (But Not Completely Vanished) Newspaper, 50 Years On". Intelligencer. Retrieved September 23, 2023. Bond, Shannon (February 2, 2017). "'Failing' New York Times gets digital Trump boost". Financial Times. Retrieved November 18, 2023. Bond, Shannon (November 1, 2017). "NYTimes revenues boosted by digital subscriptions, online ads". Financial Times. Retrieved November 22, 2023. Bonner, Stayton (May 2, 2011). "Goodbye, Mr. Terrorist". Slate. Retrieved January 14, 2024. Boyer, Peter (August 14, 1994). "The Howell Raines Question". The New Yorker. Retrieved October 14, 2023. Branign, Anne (May 18, 2023). "Bye, Mister: Why (most) journalists turned against courtesy titles". The Washington Post. Retrieved January 14, 2024. Brodkin, Jon (August 16, 2023). "X apparently added 5-second delay for links to sites Musk doesn't like". Ars Technica. Retrieved October 31, 2023. Bruell, Alexander (May 8, 2023). "New York Times to Get Around $100 Million From Google Over Three Years". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved November 26, 2023. Bruell, Alexander (July 9, 2023). "He Pushed the New York Times to Buy Wordle. Now He Has to Make Sports Work". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved October 30, 2023. Bruell, Alexander (July 10, 2023). "New York Times to Close Sports Desk, Rely on the Athletic for Daily Coverage". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved October 30, 2023. Bruell, Alexander (December 12, 2023). "New York Times Hires First Newsroom Leader Focused on Artificial Intelligence". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved December 12, 2023. Bruell, Alexander (December 27, 2023). "New York Times Sues Microsoft and OpenAI, Alleging Copyright Infringement". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved December 27, 2023. Burchfield, Evan (June 29, 2007). "The New York Times Crosswords". NintendoWorldReport. Retrieved January 13, 2024. Byers, Dylan (June 29, 2020). "The New York Times pulls out of Apple's news app". NBC News. Retrieved November 22, 2023. Campbell, W. Joseph (February 10, 2012). "Story of the most famous seven words in US journalism". BBC News. Retrieved July 24, 2023. Campinoti, Maria; Frehse, Rob (January 12, 2024). "NY judge orders Trump to pay legal fees to NY Times after failed lawsuit over disclosure of his tax documents". CNN. Retrieved January 14, 2024. Carey, Matthew (January 12, 2022). ""It's Quite High-Octane, Intense Stuff": Oscar-Shortlisted 'Day Of Rage' Documents Exactly How January 6 Insurrection Unfolded". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved November 9, 2023. Carras, Christi (July 13, 2021). "'Framing Britney Spears' lands 2021 Emmy nominations as conservatorship case looms". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved November 10, 2023. Carpenter, Nicole (February 10, 2022). "Wordle streaks return for some players impacted by NYT migration". Polygon. Retrieved January 13, 2024. "NYT reporters on breaking Harvey Weinstein story, #MeToo "reckoning"". CBS News. December 19, 2017. Retrieved November 18, 2023. Chaey, Christina (February 27, 2013). "The 'New York Times' Is Offering Starbucks Customers 15 Free Articles A Day". Fast Company. Retrieved January 12, 2024. Chan, J. Clara (September 14, 2022). "New York Times to Sell $95 At-Home Cooking Kits Curated by Guest Chefs". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved January 6, 2024. Chayka, Kyle (January 14, 2019). "In the Shadow of the CMS". The Nation. Retrieved December 27, 2023. Chiu, Allyson (August 7, 2019). "Trump lashes out after New York Times amends 'bad' headline about his response to mass shootings". The Washington Post. Retrieved July 22, 2023. Clark, Mitchell; Heath, Alex; Lopatto, Elizabeth (December 16, 2022). "Elon Musk starts banning critical journalists from Twitter". The Verge. Retrieved October 31, 2023. Crecente, Brian (November 4, 2016). "New York Times game turns voter suppression into Oregon Trail knock-off". Polygon. Retrieved December 10, 2023. Cummings, William (June 10, 2020). "'They folded like a house of cards': McConnell slams New York Times' handling of Tom Cotton op-ed". USA Today. Retrieved December 16, 2023. D'Anastasio, Cecilia (November 4, 2016). "New York Times Publishes Intense Game About Voter Suppression". Kotaku. Retrieved November 22, 2023. D'Orazio, Dante (July 12, 2013). "New York Times working on digital-only magazine, cheaper 'Need to Know' subscription". The Verge. Retrieved January 6, 2024. Darcy, Oliver (June 4, 2020). "New York Times staffers revolt over publication of Tom Cotton op-ed". CNN. Retrieved December 16, 2023. Davies, Alys (April 2, 2023). "Twitter's blue ticks disappear as Musk attacks NY Times". BBC News. Retrieved October 31, 2023. David, Emilia (January 8, 2024). "OpenAI claims The New York Times tricked ChatGPT into copying its articles". The Verge. Retrieved January 8, 2024. Davis, Wes (December 19, 2023). "Apple News Plus gets The New York Times' sports coverage, but not the NYT itself". The Verge. Retrieved December 19, 2023. Dawsey, Josh; Nakamura, David; Rucker, Philip (September 7, 2018). "Trump says Justice Department should investigate anonymous op-ed author". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 29, 2023. de Visé, Daniel (December 4, 2022). "Is long-form journalism dying? A five-minute read". The Hill. Retrieved November 27, 2023. DealBook (March 1, 2006). "DealBook FAQ". DealBook. Retrieved November 29, 2023. Dewar, Helen (November 2, 1978). "Pressmen Reach Tentative Pact In 84-Day N.Y. Newspaper Strike". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 1, 2023. Diamond, Jeremy; Sullivan, Kate (September 6, 2018). "Trump slams damning New York Times op-ed as 'gutless'". CNN. Retrieved October 29, 2023. Diaz, Ana (February 11, 2022). "Wordle blocks certain offensive words, now that it's owned by NYT". Polygon. Retrieved November 25, 2023. Diaz, Jaclyn (October 28, 2022). "Where the #MeToo movement stands, 5 years after Weinstein allegations came to light". NPR. Retrieved November 18, 2023. Disis, Jill (November 21, 2018). "How NYT Cooking amassed 120,000 subscriptions in a year and a half". CNN. Retrieved January 6, 2024. Edmonds, Rick (February 6, 2018). "Don't look now, but digital photo display runs rings around print". Poynter Institute. Retrieved December 27, 2023. Edwards, Benj (August 14, 2023). "The New York Times prohibits AI vendors from scraping its content without permission". Ars Technica. Retrieved November 30, 2023. Ellefson, Lindsey (June 5, 2020). "New York Times Pitched Sen. Tom Cotton on 'Send in the Troops' Op-Ed Topic". TheWrap. Retrieved December 14, 2023. Ellison, Sarah; Karnitschnig, Michael (August 1, 2007). "Murdoch Wins His Bid for Dow Jones". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved October 31, 2023. Ellison, Sarah (March 21, 2007). "How a Money Manager Battled New York Times". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved December 30, 2023. Ellison, Sarah (November 30, 2022). "The Washington Post will end its Sunday magazine, eliminate positions". The Washington Post. Retrieved November 27, 2023. Eskin, Blake (November 1, 2016). "When it comes to swear words, data reveals the New York Times is surprisingly squeamish about reality". Quartz. Retrieved November 25, 2023. Farhi, Paul (September 19, 2015). "How publishing a 35,000-word manifesto led to the Unabomber". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 17, 2023. Farhi, Paul (October 24, 2019). "Trump instructs federal agencies to end Washington Post and New York Times subscriptions". The Washington Post. Retrieved November 30, 2023. Farokhmanesh, Megan (November 4, 2016). "This game about voting is 2016's Oregon Trail". The Verge. Retrieved November 22, 2023. Farrow, Ronan (October 10, 2017). "From Aggressive Overtures to Sexual Assault: Harvey Weinstein's Accusers Tell Their Stories". The New Yorker. Retrieved November 18, 2023. Feinberg, Ashley (June 4, 2020). "Newsroom Breaks Into Open Revolt After New York Times Publishes Call for Military Crackdown". Slate. Retrieved December 26, 2023. Field, Matthew (April 3, 2023). "Elon Musk deletes New York Times' blue tick in Twitter row". The Daily Telegraph. Retrieved October 31, 2023. "New York Times: Slim fit". Financial Times. December 20, 2017. Retrieved November 22, 2023. Fischer, Sara (July 14, 2020). "Exclusive: The N.Y. Times doubles down on TV and film ambitions". Axios. Retrieved November 9, 2023. Fischer, Sara (April 7, 2022). "NYT's top editor says he wants newsroom to tweet less". Axios. Retrieved October 31, 2023. Fischer, Sara (May 18, 2023). "The New York Times launches subscriber-only podcast app NYT Audio". Axios. Retrieved December 31, 2023. Fisher, Christine (June 29, 2020). "The New York Times removes its articles from Apple News". Engadget. Retrieved November 22, 2023. Fleming, Mike Jr. (October 5, 2017). "NY Times Article Alleges Decades Of Sexual Harassment Against Harvey Weinstein: Ashley Judd, Rose McGowan Named: How Will Board Respond?". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved November 18, 2023. Folkenflik, David (May 8, 2022). "'The New York Times' can't shake the cloud over a 90-year-old Pulitzer Prize". NPR. Retrieved July 20, 2023. Folkenflik, David (June 8, 2022). "The New York Times' new editor will run its biggest newsroom ever — and most outspoken". NPR. Retrieved July 20, 2023. Frommer, Dan (February 2, 2017). "Donald Trump helped the New York Times add its most digital subscribers since 2011". Vox. Retrieved November 18, 2023. Fu, Angela (August 11, 2021). "New York Times tech workers escalate union conflict with half-day walkout". Poynter Institute. Retrieved July 28, 2023. Gapper, John (February 3, 2022). "Wordle and recipes are the secret sauce of news". Financial Times. Retrieved January 6, 2024. Garrahan, Matthew (October 19, 2016). "Sulzberger son steps up at New York Times". Financial Times. Retrieved November 22, 2023. Gartenberg, Chaim (June 29, 2020). "Apple News just lost The New York Times". The Verge. Retrieved November 22, 2023. Goldfarb, Zachary (December 5, 2015). "N.Y. Times calls U.S. gun laws 'national disgrace' in first front-page editorial since 1920". The Washington Post. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Goodin, Dan (March 31, 2015). "Massive denial-of-service attack on GitHub tied to Chinese government". The New York Times. Retrieved December 30, 2023. Greenfield, Rebecca (December 20, 2012). "What the New York Times's 'Snow Fall' Means to Online Journalism's Future". The Atlantic. Retrieved November 7, 2023. Haddon, Heather (July 17, 2018). "Chef'd Meal-Kit Maker Suspending Business". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved January 6, 2024. Harris, Craig (May 29, 2007). "New York Times Crosswords Review". IGN. Retrieved January 13, 2024. Harwell, Drew (April 2, 2023). "Twitter strikes New York Times' verified badge on Elon Musk's orders". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 31, 2023. Harwell, Drew (October 19, 2023). "Elon Musk's X removes the New York Times' verification badge". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 31, 2023. Hayes, Christal (September 5, 2018). "Whodunit? Social media users search for anonymous Trump official who penned scathing NYT essay". USA Today. Retrieved October 29, 2023. Heater, Brian (October 2, 2012). "New York Times releases 'experimental' HTML5 iPad app, puts Twitter trends front and center". Engadget. Retrieved January 12, 2024. Heater, Brian (October 25, 2012). "New York Times releases Windows 8 app for all the news that's fit to tile". Engadget. Retrieved January 12, 2024. Hernandez, Macarena (May 25, 2003). "He Stole a Lot More Than My Words". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved October 20, 2023. Hicks, Jasmine (August 24, 2022). "Wordle snags a place inside the New York Times Crossword app". The Verge. Retrieved January 13, 2024. Hollister, Sean (February 1, 2022). "Wordle will be free forever because you can right-click to save the whole game". The Verge. Retrieved January 13, 2024. Howard, Andrew (January 12, 2024). "Trump ordered to pay $393,000 in legal fees for NYT, reporters". Politico. Retrieved January 14, 2024. Izadi, Elahe; Barr, Jeremy (July 14, 2020). "Bari Weiss resigns from New York Times, says 'Twitter has become its ultimate editor'". The Washington Post. Retrieved December 26, 2023. Izadi, Elahe (December 8, 2022). "New York Times staffers walk out en masse; first time in decades". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 2, 2023. Jackson, Hallie; Welker, Kristen (September 5, 2018). "On the hunt for a betrayer, a 'volcanic' Trump lashes out". NBC News. Retrieved October 29, 2023. Jones, Tom (June 5, 2020). "An op-ed controversy led to a New York Times revolt. Here's what happened and why the Times was wrong". Poynter Institute. Retrieved December 14, 2023. Jones, Tom (October 31, 2023). "Joe Biden is the latest to criticize The New York Times' Gaza coverage". Poynter Institute. Retrieved November 14, 2023. Kafka, Peter; Molla, Rani (May 4, 2017). "How the New York Times saved itself". Vox. Retrieved November 18, 2023. Kafka, Peter (January 6, 2022). "Why the New York Times is buying the Athletic". Vox. Retrieved October 30, 2023. Kafka, Peter (April 6, 2022). "The New York Times's old white Democrats problem". Vox. Retrieved February 7, 2024. Kalish, Lil (February 15, 2023). "These New York Times Contributors Say The Paper's Coverage Of Gender Issues Is Hurting Trans People". BuzzFeed News. Retrieved February 19, 2024. Kastor, Elizabeth (July 14, 1987). "N.Y. Times Corrects Fund Story". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 8, 2023. Khalid, Amrita (May 17, 2023). "The New York Times launches an audio app to court its heaviest podcast listeners". The Verge. Retrieved November 12, 2023. Kim, Whizy (November 30, 2022). "Sam Bankman-Fried's first post-scandal public interview was a riveting train wreck". Vox. Retrieved November 29, 2023. Kirby, Jen (December 7, 2017). "Study: Hillary Clinton's emails got as much front-page coverage in 6 days as policy did in 69". Vox. Retrieved November 1, 2023. Klein, Ezra (May 15, 2014). "The home page isn't dead. It's just resting". Vox. Retrieved December 16, 2023. Klein, Charlotte (February 15, 2023). "Nearly 200 New York Times Contributors Are Denouncing the Paper's Anti-Trans Coverage". Vanity Fair. Retrieved February 4, 2024. Klein, Charlotte (August 16, 2023). "The New York Times Has Had a Summer of AI Anxiety: "They're Freaking Out"". Vanity Fair. Retrieved November 30, 2023. Klein, Charlotte (October 24, 2023). ""You Don't Want to Hedge It?": Inside the New York Times Debate Over Its Gaza Hospital Bombing Coverage". Vanity Fair. Retrieved November 14, 2023. Klein, Charlotte (December 19, 2023). "Inside The New York Times' Big Bet on Games". Vanity Fair. Retrieved January 13, 2024. Kludt, Tom (December 7, 2015). "Conservatives take shots at New York Times gun control editorial". CNN. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Krasnoff, Barbara (September 7, 2023). "Amazon has ended its periodicals program, and independent publishers are panicking". The Verge. Retrieved January 5, 2024. Korach, Natalie (August 7, 2023). "The New York Times Fires Baghdad Bureau Chief for Overpaying Local Journalists". TheWrap. Retrieved January 11, 2024. Kues, Franziska (April 6, 2017). "Blendle, the Dutch 'iTunes for news' lands investment from Financial Times owner Nikkei". Poynter Institute. Retrieved January 5, 2024. Kurtz, Howard (April 20, 1991). "Furor at N.Y. Times Over Rape Policy". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 14, 2023. Kurtz, Howard (May 26, 2003). "Intra-Times Battle Over Iraqi Weapons". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 28, 2023. LaFrance, Adrienne (August 18, 2014). "118 Years Ago, The New York Times Crowdsourced a New Motto". The Atlantic. Retrieved July 24, 2023. LaFrance, Adrienne (July 28, 2017). "Trump Tests the F-Bomb Policy at The New York Times". The Atlantic. Retrieved November 25, 2023. Lee, Timothy (August 27, 2013). "The New York Times Web site was taken down by DNS hijacking. Here's what that means". The Washington Post. Retrieved July 20, 2023. Lee, Timothy (May 19, 2014). "The New York Times probably won't implement its brilliant innovation report". Vox. Retrieved November 14, 2023. LeFebvre, Rob (March 21, 2018). "The New York Times brings Bowie exhibit to your phone with AR". Engadget. Retrieved January 12, 2024. Levine, Marianne (June 10, 2020). "McConnell accuses NYT of 'lying' over Tom Cotton op-ed". Politico. Retrieved December 14, 2023. Lewis, Alfred (June 18, 1972). "5 Held in Plot to Bug Democrats' Office Here Here's what that means". The Washington Post. Retrieved September 26, 2023. Lippman, Laura (February 19, 2020). "The NYT Spelling Bee Gives Me L-I-F-E". Slate. Retrieved January 14, 2024. Locklear, Mallory (November 27, 2017). "Twitter: Suspension of New York Times account was human error". Engadget. Retrieved November 19, 2023. Lopez, German (August 24, 2015). "The catastrophically bad New York Times op-ed on transgender research, debunked". Vox. Retrieved December 10, 2023. Machkovech, Sam (March 25, 2022). "Wordle creator describes game's rise, says NYT sale was "a way to walk away"". Ars Technica. Retrieved January 13, 2024. Malone, Claire (February 18, 2022). "Dean Baquet Never Wanted to Be an Editor". The New Yorker. Retrieved July 21, 2023. Malone, Noreen (March 20, 2012). "The NYT Ups Its Paywall: Only Ten Free Articles Per Month". Intelligencer. Retrieved November 1, 2023. Marantz, Andrew (December 2, 2022). "Sam Bankman-Fried Made the DealBook Summit Into a Nail-Biter". The New Yorker. Retrieved November 29, 2023. McCreesh, Shawn (December 2, 2022). "The New York Times Newsroom Gets Ready to Walk Out". Intelligencer. Retrieved January 13, 2024. McDuling, John (March 10, 2014). ""The Upshot" is the New York Times' replacement for Nate Silver's FiveThirtyEight". Quartz. Retrieved January 15, 2024. McHenry, Jackson (July 27, 2018). "New York Times Critic Gets Dragged for Misgendering in Head Over Heels Review". Vulture. Retrieved December 10, 2023. McNulty, Scott (July 10, 2008). "First Look: NYTimes". Engadget. Retrieved November 19, 2023. Merrill, Jeremy; Harwell, Drew (August 15, 2023). "Elon Musk's X is throttling traffic to websites he dislikes". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 31, 2023. Messmer, Ellen (September 18, 1998). "Security expert explains New York Times site break in". CNN. Retrieved October 16, 2023. "The New York Times Sudoku Daily". Metacritic. October 20, 2009. Retrieved January 13, 2023. Meyer, Robinson (April 2, 2014). "The New York Times's New App Tries to One-Up Facebook". The Atlantic. Retrieved January 6, 2024. Meyer, Robinson (June 4, 2014). "Who's Going to Buy The New York Times's New Opinion App?". The Atlantic. Retrieved January 6, 2024. Migdon, Brooke (February 15, 2023). "NYT contributors blast paper's coverage of transgender people". The Hill. Retrieved February 19, 2024. Miller, Ross (May 24, 2007). "NY Times now publishing Persuasive's newsgames". Engadget. Retrieved December 16, 2023. Miller, Meg (June 13, 2017). "Why You May Not Even Notice The New York Times' Major Home Page Redesign". Fast Company. Retrieved December 27, 2023. Moore, Thomas (March 23, 2021). "New York Times committee to review staff's outside work". The Hill. Retrieved December 31, 2023. Moreau, Jordan (March 10, 2021). "New York Times Defends Reporter Taylor Lorenz From Tucker Carlson's 'Cruel' Attack". Variety. Retrieved October 31, 2023. Morris, Chris (August 15, 2023). "NYT 'Connections', and the company's quest to create the next 'Wordle'". Fast Company. Retrieved January 14, 2024. Mukherjee, Supantha; Datta, Tiyashi (February 1, 2022). "Wordle buyout by New York Times draws backlash from fans". Reuters. Retrieved January 13, 2024. Myers, Steve (January 23, 2012). "New York Times releases code to help journalists collaborate on WordPress, other platforms". Poynter Institute. Retrieved December 27, 2023. Narea, Nicole (September 18, 2019). "The New York Times is the latest news outlet to end its Spanish-language coverage". Vox. Retrieved January 5, 2024. Nelson, Libby (December 5, 2015). "The New York Times's first front-page editorial in 95 years calls gun violence a "national disgrace"". Vox. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Norman, Max (March 7, 2023). "Do You Speak New York Times?". The New Yorker. Retrieved November 14, 2023. O'Brien, Miles (February 7, 1996). "Books present two sides of super-hacker Mitnick". CNN. Retrieved October 15, 2023. Oladipo, Gloria (February 17, 2023). "Nearly 1,000 contributors protest New York Times' coverage of trans people". The Guardian. Retrieved February 19, 2024. Opam, Kwame (May 5, 2016). "The New York Times is starting a meal delivery service". The Verge. Retrieved January 6, 2024. Oremus, Will (September 25, 2018). "The Temptation of Apple News". Slate. Retrieved November 22, 2023. Orland, Kyle (November 12, 2022). "How "Wordle editor" became a real job at The New York Times". Ars Technica. Retrieved January 13, 2024. Orland, Kyle (March 24, 2023). "How The New York Times managed to avoid ruining Wordle". Ars Technica. Retrieved January 13, 2024. Otterson, Joe (July 7, 2020). "FX & Hulu Set New York Times Documentary Series, First Episode to Tackle COVID-19 Pandemic". Variety. Retrieved November 10, 2023. Pai, Tanya; Grady, Constance (March 11, 2020). "Harvey Weinstein has been sentenced to 23 years in prison". Vox. Retrieved November 18, 2023. Peters, Justin (June 27, 2007). "World of Borecraft". Slate. Retrieved December 16, 2023. Peters, Jay (March 16, 2023). "Amazon stops selling magazines and newspapers through Kindle Newsstand". The Verge. Retrieved January 5, 2024. Peters, Jay (May 30, 2023). "The New York Times' push into games meant a major change for its crosswords app". The Verge. Retrieved January 14, 2024. Peters, Jay (July 18, 2023). "The New York Times is shutting down its math-based puzzle game". The Verge. Retrieved January 14, 2024. Peters, Jay; Davis, Wes (August 21, 2023). "The New York Times blocks OpenAI's web crawler". The Verge. Retrieved November 30, 2023. Pisani, Joseph (January 31, 2022). "New York Times Buys Wordle". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved January 12, 2024. Pompeo, Joe; Weprin, Alex (December 9, 2015). "Micropayment platform Blendle coming to the U.S." Politico. Retrieved January 5, 2024. Pompeo, Joe (October 9, 2018). ""The Time Will Come When This Is a Digital-Only News Organization": A.G. Sulzberger, Sam Dolnick, and David Perpich Open Up About Succession, Trump, and the Eventual End of Print". Vanity Fair. Retrieved November 23, 2023. Pompeo, Joe (November 5, 2018). ""Certain Readers May Have a Nervous Reaction": The New York Times Election Needle Is Back, with a Few New Safety Features". Vanity Fair. Retrieved December 10, 2023. Pompeo, Joe (September 1, 2020). ""Everything's Now Up in the Air": 2020 Upheaval Has Scrambled Succession at the New York Times". Vanity Fair. Retrieved November 14, 2023. Popper, Ben (May 26, 2016). "Blendle now lets you pay-per-article from US apps". The Verge. Retrieved January 5, 2024. Pulley, Brett (January 28, 2011). "New York Times Fixes Paywall to Balance Free and Paid". Bloomberg News. Retrieved November 1, 2023. Quah, Nicholas (March 4, 2022). "The Daily Adds Familiar Voice As New Co-host". Vulture. Retrieved November 12, 2023. Rahman, Abid (June 3, 2020). "New York Times Staffers React With Fury Over Tom Cotton's "Send In the Troops" Op-Ed". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved December 14, 2023. Remnick, David (July 30, 2018). "Trump vs. the Times: Inside an Off-the-Record Meeting". The New Yorker. Retrieved November 23, 2023. Reuters (November 30, 2010). "World Chefs: A deep-dive into NY Times recipe archive". Reuters. Retrieved January 6, 2024. Reuters (October 27, 2014). "Pay-per-story start-up Blendle wins backing from major publishers". Reuters. Retrieved January 5, 2024. Reuters (April 2, 2023). "New York Times says it won't pay for Twitter verified check mark". Reuters. Retrieved October 31, 2023. Robertson, Adi (February 6, 2018). "The New York Times puts Olympic athletes in augmented reality". The Verge. Retrieved January 12, 2024. Rosen, Rebecca (January 15, 2014). "The New York Times Had a Mistake on Its Front Page Every Day for More Than a Century". The Atlantic. Retrieved December 13, 2023. Roth, Emma (February 4, 2023). "Twitter will let businesses keep their gold checkmarks — for $1,000 per month". The Verge. Retrieved October 31, 2023. Roth, Emma (December 27, 2023). "The New York Times is suing OpenAI and Microsoft for copyright infringement". The Verge. Retrieved December 27, 2023. Salmon, Felix (March 17, 2011). "The New York Times Paywall Is ... Weird". Wired. Retrieved November 1, 2023. Sarkar, Samit (February 1, 2019). "New York Times develops new word game for crossword section". Polygon. Retrieved January 14, 2024. Savov, Vlad (March 29, 2011). "Kindle subscription to the New York Times will net you free web access as well". Engadget. Retrieved January 5, 2024. Savov, Vlad (April 5, 2011). "Nook matches Kindle by bundling free web access to NYTimes.com with digital edition sub". Engadget. Retrieved January 5, 2024. Schmidt, Samantha (June 30, 2017). "Why hundreds of New York Times employees staged a walkout". The Washington Post. Retrieved November 18, 2023. Schmidt, Susan (July 10, 2004). "Plame's Input Is Cited on Niger Mission". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 29, 2023. Schneier, Matthew (January 21, 2020). "Michael Barbaro and the Raging Success of The Daily". Intelligencer. Retrieved November 12, 2023. Schramm, Mike (July 1, 2011). "New York Times updates iPhone, iPad apps to offer in-app subscriptions". Engadget. Retrieved January 12, 2024. Seal, Thomas (March 18, 2019). "New York Times Cools on Apple, Whose News Subscription App Looms". Bloomberg News. Retrieved November 22, 2023. Segers, Grace (September 6, 2018). "Anonymous senior Trump official writes op-ed on "resistance" within administration". CBS News. Retrieved October 29, 2023. Shafer, Jack (October 9, 2018). "The New York Times Bombshell That Bombed". Politico Magazine. Retrieved November 6, 2023. Smith, Lilly (April 23, 2020). "How the 'New York Times' is capturing the unprecedented impact of COVID-19". Fast Company. Retrieved November 27, 2023. Smith, Gerry (May 5, 2016). "New York Times to Start Delivering Meal Kits to Your Home". Bloomberg News. Retrieved January 6, 2024. Smith, Gerry (October 12, 2021). "New York Times Tests New App as a Home for Audio Journalism". Bloomberg News. Retrieved November 12, 2023. Snyder, Gabriel (February 12, 2017). "The New York Times Claws Its Way Into the Future". Wired. Retrieved November 8, 2023. Sorrel, Charlie (October 15, 2010). "NYT for iPad Now Offers Full Content, Still Free (For Now)". Wired. Retrieved January 12, 2024. Spangler, Todd (July 22, 2020). "New York Times Buys Serial Productions for $25 Million, Inks Deal With 'This American Life'". Variety. Retrieved November 10, 2023. Spangler, Todd (April 24, 2023). "Twitter Restores Blue Check-Marks for Many Celebs, Including Several Dead Ones". Variety. Retrieved October 31, 2023. Stelter, Brian (January 2, 2018). "Trump's love-hate relationship with the (not) 'failing' New York Times". CNN. Retrieved November 23, 2023. Sterne, Peter (October 25, 2016). "New York Times has big plans for 'Wirecutter' after $30 M. acquisition". Politico. Retrieved November 18, 2023. Stewart, Emily (October 2, 2018). "An NYT investigation dismantles Trump's "self-made" image and alleges sketchy tax schemes". Vox. Retrieved November 1, 2023. Strauss, Ben (October 7, 2022). "At the Athletic and New York Times, a marriage with promise and tension". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 30, 2023. Sullivan, Margaret (January 3, 2018). "Powerful yet addicted to power: Why the New York Times is in the hot seat so often". The Washington Post. Retrieved November 23, 2023. Sulzberger, A. G. (June 19, 2019). "Accusing the New York Times of 'Treason,' Trump Crosses a Line". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved November 23, 2023. Tanzer, Myles (May 15, 2014). "Exclusive: New York Times Internal Report Painted Dire Digital Picture". BuzzFeed News. Retrieved November 10, 2023. Temperton, James (November 21, 2015). "Apple News has launched: here's what you need to know". Wired. Retrieved November 22, 2023. Thom, Kai (November 29, 2018). "The Pain—and Joy—of Transition". Slate. Retrieved December 10, 2023. "The Press: Family Fief". Time. April 28, 1961. Retrieved September 20, 2023. Timmer, John (January 20, 2010). "New York Times to spend 2010 erecting a partial paywall". Ars Technica. Retrieved November 14, 2023. Timmer, John (December 27, 2023). "NY Times copyright suit wants OpenAI to delete all GPT instances". Ars Technica. Retrieved December 27, 2023. Tompkins, Al (December 5, 2015). "New York Times publishes front-page editorial advocating gun control". Poynter Institute. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Tracy, Marc (November 5, 2012). "Nate Silver Is a One-Man Traffic Machine for the Times". The New Republic. Retrieved January 15, 2024. Tracy, Marc (November 20, 2013). "David Leonhardt Explains How the NYT Will Replace Nate Silver". The New Republic. Retrieved January 15, 2024. van Tartwijk, Maarten (October 28, 2014). "New York Times, Axel Springer Invest in Dutch Startup Blendle". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved January 5, 2024. Vincent, James (November 9, 2018). "Google is using AI to help The New York Times digitize 5 million historical photos". The Verge. Retrieved July 26, 2023. Williams, Christopher (March 4, 2014). "New York Times cooks up recipe app to expand digital subscriptions". The Daily Telegraph. Retrieved January 6, 2024. Wilson, Mark (May 28, 2014). "NYT Cooking: The Recipe Collection You've Been Waiting For". Fast Company. Retrieved January 6, 2024. Wilson, Mark (January 20, 2015). "The Upshot: Where The New York Times Is Redesigning News". Fast Company. Retrieved January 15, 2024. Wilson, Mark (February 3, 2020). "The most hated data visualization in politics is back to spike your blood pressure". Fast Company. Retrieved January 15, 2024. Wired (February 1, 2000). "All the News That's Fit to Pixel". Wired. Retrieved October 18, 2023. Yang, Mary (February 15, 2023). "'New York Times' stories on trans youth slammed by writers — including some of its own". NPR. Retrieved February 19, 2024. Yglesias, Matthew (May 16, 2014). "How The New York Times lost the internet, and how it plans to win it back". Vox. Retrieved December 16, 2023. Yu, Roger (February 8, 2016). "NYTimes launches Spanish site". USA Today. Retrieved January 5, 2024. Yurcaba, Jo (February 15, 2023). "N.Y. Times contributors and LGBTQ advocates send open letters criticizing paper's trans coverage". NBC News. Retrieved February 19, 2024. Zak, Dan; Ellison, Sarah; Terris, Ben (July 30, 2018). "'He doesn't like bullies': The story of the 37-year-old who took over the New York Times and is taking on Trump". The Washington Post. Retrieved November 23, 2023. The New York Times Carmel, Julia (December 25, 2020). "In One Person, the Story of a Place". The New York Times. Retrieved October 31, 2023. Gallagher, Brian; Harlan, Jennifer; Scott, Janny (June 9, 2021). "'We're Going to Publish': An Oral History of the Pentagon Papers". The New York Times. Retrieved September 24, 2023. Insider Staff (June 16, 2016). "Watch the Orlando Shooting Story Take Shape". The New York Times. Retrieved November 30, 2023. The New York Times (September 8, 2018). "How the Anonymous Op-Ed Came to Be". The New York Times. Retrieved October 29, 2023. Sedacca, Matthew (September 18, 2018). "How the NYT Cooking Team (Obsessively) Tests Recipes". The New York Times. Retrieved January 6, 2024. Podcasts Martin, Michel (May 5, 2014). "How A Disgraced Reporter Tested The Public's Trust In Journalism" (Podcast). NPR. Retrieved November 25, 2023. Books Folkenflik, David (2011). Page One: Inside The New York Times and the Future of Journalism. New York City: PublicAffairs. ISBN 9781586489601. Taylor, S. J. (1990). Stalin's Apologist: Walter Duranty: The New York Times's Man in Moscow. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Articles Remnick, David (June 10, 2023). "A. G. Sulzberger on the Battles Within and Against the New York Times". The New Yorker. Retrieved December 16, 2023. New York Times at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Official websites Official website TimesMachine Official Tor site: nytimesn7cgmftshazwhfgzm37qxb44r64ytbb2dj3x62d2lljsciiyd.onion (Accessing link help) Others Curated collection of articles before 1923 Works by or about The New York Times at Internet Archive (archives) Works by The New York Times at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks)