Heywood Allen (born Allan Stewart Konigsberg; November 30, 1935) is an American filmmaker, actor, and comedian whose career spans more than six decades. Allen has received many accolades, including the most nominations (16) for the Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay. He has won four Academy Awards, ten BAFTA Awards, two Golden Globe Awards and a Grammy Award, as well as nominations for a Emmy Award and a Tony Award. Allen was awarded an Honorary Golden Lion in 1995, the BAFTA Fellowship in 1997, an Honorary Palme d'Or in 2002, and the Golden Globe Cecil B. DeMille Award in 2014. Two of his films have been inducted into the National Film Registry by the Library of Congress. Allen began his career writing material for television in the 1950s, alongside Mel Brooks, Carl Reiner, Larry Gelbart, and Neil Simon. He also published several books of short stories and wrote humor pieces for The New Yorker. In the early 1960s, he performed as a stand-up comedian in Greenwich Village, where he developed a monologue style (rather than traditional jokes) and the persona of an insecure, intellectual, fretful nebbish. During this time, he released three comedy albums, earning a Grammy Award for Best Comedy Album nomination for the self-titled Woody Allen (1964). After writing, directing, and starring in a string of slapstick comedies, such as Take the Money and Run (1969), Bananas (1971), Sleeper (1973), and Love and Death (1975), he directed his most successful film, Annie Hall (1977), a romantic comedy featuring Allen and his frequent collaborator Diane Keaton. The film won four Academy Awards, for Best Picture, Best Director, Best Original Screenplay, and Best Actress for Keaton. Allen has directed many films set in New York City, including Manhattan (1979), Hannah and Her Sisters (1986), and Crimes and Misdemeanors (1989). Allen continued to garner acclaim, making a film almost every year, and is often identified as part of the New Hollywood wave of auteur filmmakers whose work has been influenced by European art cinema. His films include Interiors (1978), Stardust Memories (1980), Zelig (1983), Broadway Danny Rose (1984), The Purple Rose of Cairo (1985), Radio Days (1987), Husbands and Wives (1992), Bullets Over Broadway (1994), Deconstructing Harry (1997), Match Point (2005), Vicky Cristina Barcelona (2008), Midnight in Paris (2011), and Blue Jasmine (2013). In 1979, Allen began a professional and personal relationship with actress Mia Farrow. Over a decade-long period, they collaborated on 13 films. The couple separated after Allen began a relationship in 1991 with Mia's and Andre Previn's adopted daughter Soon-Yi Previn. Allen married Previn in 1997. They have two adopted daughters. In 1992, Farrow publicly accused Allen of sexually abusing their adopted daughter, Dylan Farrow. The allegation gained substantial media attention, but Allen was never charged or prosecuted, and vehemently denied the allegation. Hollywood remained largely split over the allegation. Some defended Dylan's allegation, while others vouched for Allen's innocence, citing potential extortion from Farrow as a result of Allen and Soon-Yi's courtship. Allen was born Allan Stewart Konigsberg at Mount Eden Hospital in Bronx, New York City, on November 30, 1935, to Nettie (née Cherry; 1906–2002), a bookkeeper at her family's delicatessen, and Martin Konigsberg (1900–2001), a jewelry engraver and waiter. His grandparents were immigrants to the U.S. from Austria and Panevėžys, Lithuania. They spoke German, Hebrew, and Yiddish. He and his younger sister, film producer Letty, were raised in the Midwood neighborhood of Brooklyn. He is Jewish. Both their parents were born and raised on the Lower East Side of Manhattan. Allen's parents did not get along, and he had an estranged relationship with his authoritarian, ill-tempered mother. He spoke German in his early years.[citation needed] He later joked that he was often sent to interfaith summer camps when he was young. While attending Hebrew school for eight years, he attended Public School 99, now the Isaac Asimov School for Science and Literature, and then Midwood High School, from which he graduated in 1953. Unlike his comic persona, he was more interested in baseball than school and his strong arm ensured he was picked first for teams. He impressed students with his talent for cards and magic tricks. Allen wrote jokes (or "gags") for agent David O. Alber to make money, and Alber sold them to newspaper columnists. At age 17, he legally changed his name to Heywood Allen and later began to call himself Woody. According to Allen, his first published joke read: "Woody Allen says he ate at a restaurant that had O.P.S. prices—over people's salaries." He was soon earning more than both of his parents combined. After high school, he attended New York University, studying communication and film in 1953, before dropping out after failing the course "Motion Picture Production". He briefly attended City College of New York in 1954, dropping out during his first semester. He taught himself rather than studying in the classroom. He later taught at The New School and studied with writing teacher Lajos Egri. Allen began writing short jokes when he was 15, and the next year began offering them to various Broadway writers for sale.: 539  One of them, Abe Burrows, co-author of Guys and Dolls, wrote, "Wow! His stuff was dazzling." Burrows wrote Allen letters of introduction to Sid Caesar, Phil Silvers, and Peter Lind Hayes, who immediately sent Allen a check for just the jokes Burrows included as samples. As a result of the jokes Allen mailed to various writers, he was invited, then age 19, to join the NBC Writer's Development Program in 1955, followed by a job on The NBC Comedy Hour in Los Angeles. He was later hired as a full-time writer for humorist Herb Shriner, initially earning $25 a week. He began writing scripts for The Ed Sullivan Show, The Tonight Show, specials for Sid Caesar post-Caesar's Hour (1954–1957), and other television shows. By the time he was working for Caesar, he was earning $1,500 a week. He worked alongside Mel Brooks, Carl Reiner, Larry Gelbart, and Neil Simon. He also worked with Danny Simon, whom Allen credits for helping form his writing style. In 1962 alone, he estimated that he wrote twenty thousand jokes for various comics. Allen also wrote for Candid Camera and appeared in several episodes. He wrote jokes for the Buddy Hackett sitcom Stanley and The Pat Boone Chevy Showroom, and in 1958 he co-wrote a few Sid Caesar specials with Larry Gelbart. After writing for many of television's leading comedians and comedy shows, Allen was gaining a reputation as a "genius", composer Mary Rodgers said. When given an assignment for a show he would leave and come back the next day with "reams of paper", according to producer Max Liebman. Similarly, after he wrote for Bob Hope, Hope called him "half a genius". His daily writing routine could last as long as 15 hours, and he could focus and write anywhere necessary. Dick Cavett was amazed at Allen's capacity to write: "He can go to a typewriter after breakfast and sit there until the sun sets and his head is pounding, interrupting work only for coffee and a brief walk, and then spend the whole evening working." When Allen wrote for other comedians, they would use eight out of ten of his jokes. When he began performing as a stand-up, he was much more selective, typically using only one out of ten jokes. He estimated that to prepare for a 30-minute show, he spent six months of intensive writing. He enjoyed writing, despite the work: "Nothing makes me happier than to tear open a ream of paper. And I can't wait to fill it! I love to do it." Allen started writing short stories and cartoon captions for magazines such as The New Yorker; he was inspired by the tradition of New Yorker humorists S. J. Perelman, George S. Kaufman, Robert Benchley, and Max Shulman, whose material he modernized. His collections of short pieces include Getting Even, Without Feathers, Side Effects, and Mere Anarchy. His early comic fiction was influenced by the zany, pun-ridden humor of S.J. Perelman. In 2010 Allen released audio versions of his books in which he read 73 selections entitled, The Woody Allen Collection. He was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album. From 1960 to 1969 Allen performed as a comedian to supplement his comedy writing. He worked in various places around Greenwich Village, including The Bitter End and Cafe Au Go Go, alongside such contemporaries as Lenny Bruce, the team of Mike Nichols and Elaine May, Joan Rivers, George Carlin, Richard Pryor, Dick Cavett, Bill Cosby and Mort Sahl (his personal favorite), as well as such other artists of the day as Bob Dylan and Barbra Streisand. Comedian Milton Berle claims to have suggested to Allen to go into standup comedy and even introduced him at the Village Vanguard. Comedy historian Gerald Nachman writes that Allen, while not the first to do standup, eventually had greater impact than all the others in the 1960s, and redefined standup comedy: "He helped turn it into biting, brutally honest satirical commentary on the cultural and psychological tenor of the times." After Allen was taken under the wing of his new manager, Jack Rollins, who had recently discovered Nichols and May, Rollins suggested he perform his written jokes as a stand-up. Allen was resistant at first, but after seeing Mort Sahl on stage, he felt safer to give it a try: "I'd never had the nerve to talk about it before. Then Mort Sahl came along with a whole new style of humor, opening up vistas for people like me." Allen made his professional stage debut at the Blue Angel nightclub in Manhattan in October 1960, where comedian Shelley Berman introduced him as a young television writer who would perform his own material. His early stand-up shows with his different style of humor were not always well received or understood by his audiences. Unlike other comedians, Allen spoke to his audiences in a gentle and conversational style, often appearing to be searching for words, although he was well rehearsed. He acted "normal", dressed casually, and made no attempt to project a stage "personality". And he did not improvise: "I put very little premium on improvisation," he told Studs Terkel. His jokes were created from life experiences, and typically presented with a dead serious demeanor that made them funnier: "I don't think my family liked me. They put a live teddy bear in my crib." The subjects of his jokes were rarely topical, political or socially relevant. Unlike Bruce and Sahl, he did not discuss current events such as civil rights, women's rights, the Cold War, or Vietnam. And although he was described as a "classic nebbish", he did not tell the standard Jewish jokes of the period. Comedy screenwriter Larry Gelbart compared Allen's style to Elaine May's: "He just styled himself completely after her". Like Nichols and May, he often made fun of intellectuals. Cavett, who was among the minority to quickly appreciate Allen's style, recalls seeing the Blue Angel audience mostly ignore Allen's monologue: "I recognized immediately that there was no young comedian in the country in the same class with him for sheer brilliance of jokes, and I resented the fact that the audience was too dumb to realize what they were getting." It was his subdued stage presence that eventually became one of Allen's strongest traits, Nachman argues: "The utter absence of showbiz veneer and shtick was the best shtick any comedian had ever devised. This uneasy onstage naturalness became a trademark." When the media finally noticed, writers like The New York Times's Arthur Gelb described Allen's nebbish quality as "Chaplinesque" and "refreshing". Allen developed an anxious, nervous, and intellectual persona for his stand-up act, a move that secured regular gigs for him in nightclubs and on television. He brought innovation to the comedy monologue, genre and his stand-up comedy is considered influential. Allen first appeared on The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson on November 1, 1963, and over nine years his guest appearances included 17 in the host's chair. He subsequently released three LP albums of live nightclub recordings: the self-titled Woody Allen (1964), Volume 2 (1965), and The Third Woody Allen Album (1968), recorded at a fund-raiser for Senator Eugene McCarthy's presidential run. In 1965, Allen filmed a half-hour standup special in England for Granada Television, titled The Woody Allen Show in the U.K. and Woody Allen: Standup Comic in the U.S. It is the only complete standup show of Allen's on film. The same year, Allen, along with Nichols and May, Barbra Streisand, Carol Channing, Harry Belafonte, Julie Andrews, Carol Burnett, and Alfred Hitchcock, took part in Lyndon B. Johnson's inaugural gala in Washington, D.C., on January 18, 1965. First Lady Lady Bird Johnson described Allen and the event in her published diary, A White House Diary, writing in part, "Woody Allen, that forlorn, undernourished little comedian, stopped shooting a movie in Paris and flew across the Atlantic for about five minutes of jokes". In 1966, Allen wrote an hourlong musical comedy television special for CBS, Gene Kelly in New York City. It focused on Gene Kelly in a musical tour around Manhattan, dancing along such landmarks as Rockefeller Center, the Plaza Hotel and the Museum of Modern Art, which serve as backdrops for the show's production numbers. Allen appeared in the special alongside Kelly. Guest stars included choreographer Gower Champion, British musical comedy star Tommy Steele, and singer Damita Jo DeBlanc. In 1967, Allen hosted a TV special for NBC, Woody Allen Looks at 1967. It featured Liza Minnelli, who acted alongside Allen in some skits; Aretha Franklin, the musical guest; and conservative writer William F. Buckley, the featured guest. In 1969, Allen hosted his first American special for CBS television, The Woody Allen Special, which included skits with Candice Bergen, a musical performance by the 5th Dimension, and an interview between Allen and Billy Graham. Allen also performed standup comedy on other series, including The Andy Williams Show and The Perry Como Show, where he interacted with other guests and occasionally sang.[citation needed] In 1971, he hosted one of his final Tonight Shows, with guests Bob Hope and James Coco. Hope praised Allen on the show, calling him "one of the finest young talents in show business and a great delight". Life magazine put Allen on the cover of its March 21, 1969, issue. Allen's first movie was the Charles K. Feldman production What's New Pussycat? (1965), for which he wrote the screenplay. He was disappointed with the final product, which led him to direct every film he wrote thereafter except Play It Again, Sam. Allen's first directorial effort was What's Up, Tiger Lily? (1966, co-written with Mickey Rose), in which an existing Japanese spy movie—Kokusai himitsu keisatsu: Kagi no kagi (International Secret Police: Key of Keys, 1965)—was redubbed in English by Allen and friends with fresh new, comic dialogue. In 1967, Allen played Jimmy Bond in the James Bond spoof Casino Royale. In 1966, Allen wrote the play Don't Drink the Water. The play starred Lou Jacobi, Kay Medford, Anita Gillette, and Allen's future movie co-star Tony Roberts. A film adaptation of the play, directed by Howard Morris, was released in 1969, starring Jackie Gleason. Because he was not particularly happy with that version, in 1994 Allen directed and starred in a second version for television, with Michael J. Fox and Mayim Bialik. The next play Allen wrote for Broadway was Play It Again, Sam, in which he also starred. The play opened on February 12, 1969, and ran for 453 performances. It featured Diane Keaton and Roberts. The play was significant to Keaton's budding career, and she has said she was in "awe" of Allen even before auditioning for her role, which was the first time she met him. In a 2013 interview Keaton said that she "fell in love with him right away", adding, "I wanted to be his girlfriend so I did something about it." After co-starring alongside Allen in the subsequent film version of Play It Again, Sam, she later co-starred in Sleeper, Love and Death, Annie Hall, Interiors and Manhattan. "He showed me the ropes and I followed his lead. He is the most disciplined person I know. He works very hard," Keaton has said. In 1969, Allen directed, starred in, and co-wrote with Mickey Rose Take the Money and Run, which he considers his true film directorial debut. The film is directed as a "mockumentary spoof" about a inept bank robber played by Allen. The film received positive reviews; critic Vincent Canby of The New York Times wrote, "Allen has made a movie that is, in effect, a feature-length, two-reel comedy—something very special and eccentric and funny." Allen received a Writers Guild of America Award nomination and later signed a deal with United Artists to produce several films. During the 1970s, Allen wrote, directed and starred in films later known as his "early, funny" work. In 1971, he made Bananas, in which he plays Fielding Mellish, a bumbling New Yorker who travels to Latin America, where he unwittingly becomes a leader of a nation amid a rebellion. The film co-stars Allen's then girlfriend, Louise Lasser, and Carlos Montalbán. It also features a brief appearance by Sylvester Stallone as a train thief and Howard Cosell as himself. In an interview with Roger Ebert, Allen said of making the movie, "The big, broad laugh comedy is a form that's rarely made these days and sometimes I think it's the hardest kind of movie to make...with a comedy like 'Bananas,' if they're not laughing, you're dead, because laughs are all you have." The next year, he made the anthology comedy film Everything You Always Wanted to Know About Sex* (*But Were Afraid to Ask), loosely based on the 1969 book of the same name. It stars Allen, Gene Wilder, Lou Jacobi, Anthony Quayle, Tony Randall, and Burt Reynolds. The film received mixed reviews, with Time writing, "the jokes are well-worn, and good, manic ideas are congealing into formulas". The same year, Allen wrote and starred in the film Play It Again, Sam, based on his 1969 play of the same name. It was directed by Herbert Ross and co-stars Diane Keaton (their first film collaboration). He reunited with Keaton in Sleeper (1973), about a man who is cryogenically frozen and later defrosted in a science fiction dystopia. Allen has said the film is a tribute to Groucho Marx and Bob Hope. Sleeper was the first of four screenplays co-written by Allen and Marshall Brickman. Allen collaborated again with Keaton in the comedy Love and Death (1975), set during the Napoleonic era and a satire of Russian literature and film. Vincent Canby of The New York Times called it Allen's "finest work" to date. In 1976, he starred as cashier Howard Prince in The Front, directed by Martin Ritt. The Front was a humorous and poignant account of Hollywood blacklisting during the 1950s; Ritt, screenwriter Walter Bernstein, and three cast members—Zero Mostel, Herschel Bernardi, and Lloyd Gough—had been blacklisted. I don't like meeting heroes. There's nobody I want to meet and nobody I want to work with—I'd rather work with Diane Keaton than anyone—she's absolutely great, a natural. —Woody Allen in July 1976 Then came two of Allen's most popular films: Annie Hall and Manhattan. Annie Hall (1977) won four Academy Awards, including Best Picture, Best Actress in a Leading Role for Diane Keaton, Best Original Screenplay and Best Director for Allen. It set the standard for modern romantic comedy and ignited a fashion trend with the clothes Keaton wore in the film. In an interview with journalist Katie Couric, Keaton did not deny that Allen wrote the part for and about her. The film is ranked 35th on the American Film Institute's "100 Best Movies" and fourth on the AFI list of the "100 Best Comedies". In 1979, Allen paid tribute to one of his comedy idols, Bob Hope, at the Film Society at Lincoln Center, creating a special for the event titled "My Favorite Comedian" that included clips from Hope's films, selected and narrated by Allen. Hope said of the honor, "It's great to have your past spring up in front of your eyes, especially when it's done by Woody Allen, because he's a near genius. Not a whole genius, but a near genius". Dick Cavett hosted the event, but Allen was absent, editing Manhattan. Guests included Keaton, Kurt Vonnegut, and Andy Warhol. Manhattan (1979) is a black-and-white romantic comedy often viewed as an homage to New York City. It has iconic scenes filmed in the city, including an opening montage of scenes around the city, and Allen and Keaton's silhouette on a bench by the Queensboro Bridge. As in many Allen films, the main protagonists are upper-middle-class writers and academics. Manhattan focuses on the complicated relationship between middle-aged Isaac Davis (Allen) and 17-year-old Tracy (Mariel Hemingway), and co-stars Keaton and Meryl Streep. It was a box-office and critical hit, and received two Academy Award nominations, for Hemingway for Best Supporting Actress and for Allen's screenplay. Keaton, who has made eight movies with Allen, has said, "He just has a mind like nobody else. He's bold. He's got a lot of strength, a lot of courage in terms of his work. And that is what it takes to do something really unique. Along with a genius imagination." Allen's films in the 1980s, even the comedies, became somber with philosophical undertones, influenced by European directors, especially Ingmar Bergman and Federico Fellini. Stardust Memories was based on 8½, which it parodies, and Wild Strawberries. A Midsummer Night's Sex Comedy was adapted from Smiles of a Summer Night. In Hannah and Her Sisters, part of the film's structure and background is borrowed from Fanny and Alexander. Fellini's Amarcord inspired Radio Days. September resembles Bergman's Autumn Sonata. Another Woman and Crimes and Misdemeanors have elements reminiscent of Wild Strawberries. Stardust Memories (1980) features Sandy Bates, a successful filmmaker played by Allen, who expresses resentment and scorn for his fans. Overcome by the recent death of a friend from illness, Bates says, "I don't want to make funny movies anymore" and a running gag has various people (including visiting space aliens) telling him that they appreciate his films, "especially the early, funny ones." Allen considers this one of his best films. Mia's a good actress who can play many different roles. She has a very good range, and can play serious to comic roles. She's also very photogenic, very beautiful on screen. She's just a good realistic actress ... and no matter how strange and daring it is, she does it well. —Woody Allen (1993) In 1981, Allen's play The Floating Light Bulb, starring Danny Aiello and Bea Arthur, premiered on Broadway and ran for 65 performances. While receiving mixed reviews, it gave autobiographical insight into Allen's childhood, specifically his fascination with magic tricks. The play, set in 1945, is a semi-autobiographical tale of a lower-middle-class Brooklyn family. New York Times critic Frank Rich gave the play a mild review, writing, "there are a few laughs, a few well-wrought characters, and, in Act II, a beautifully written scene that leads to a moving final curtain". Rich compared it to Tennessee Williams's work. Allen has written several off-Broadway one-act plays, including Riverside Drive, Old Saybrook (at the Atlantic Theater Company), and A Second Hand Memory (at the Variety Arts Theatre). A Midsummer Night's Sex Comedy (1982) was the first movie Allen made starring Mia Farrow, who stepped into Diane Keaton's role when Keaton was shooting Reds. He next directed Zelig, in which he starred as a man who has the ability to transform his appearance to match the people around him. Allen has combined tragic and comic elements in such films as Hannah and Her Sisters (1986) and Crimes and Misdemeanors (1989), in which he tells two stories that connect at the end. He has also made three films about show business: Broadway Danny Rose, in which he plays a down-on-his-luck New York show business agent; The Purple Rose of Cairo, set during the Great Depression, in which a movie character comes to life to romance an unhappy housewife; and Radio Days, a film about his childhood in Brooklyn and the importance of the radio. The film co-starred Farrow in a part Allen wrote for her. Time magazine called The Purple Rose of Cairo one of the 100 best films of all time. Allen has called it one of his three best films, with Stardust Memories and Match Point. By "best", he said he meant they came closest to his vision. In 1989, Allen and directors Francis Ford Coppola and Martin Scorsese made New York Stories, an anthology film about New Yorkers. Allen's short, Oedipus Wrecks, is about a neurotic lawyer and his critical mother. Film critic Vincent Canby of The New York Times praised the segment as a "priceless contribution" to the film. Allen's 1991 film Shadows and Fog is a black-and-white homage to the German expressionists and features the music of Kurt Weill. Allen then made his critically acclaimed comedy-drama Husbands and Wives (1992), which received two Oscar nominations: Best Supporting Actress for Judy Davis and Best Original Screenplay for Allen. Manhattan Murder Mystery (1993) combined suspense with dark comedy and marked the return of Diane Keaton, Alan Alda and Anjelica Huston. He returned to lighter fare such as the showbiz comedy involving mobsters Bullets Over Broadway (1994), which earned an Academy Award nomination for Best Director, followed by a musical, Everyone Says I Love You (1996). The singing and dancing scenes in Everyone Says I Love You are similar to musicals starring Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers. The comedy Mighty Aphrodite (1995), in which Greek drama plays a large role, won an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress for Mira Sorvino. Allen's 1999 jazz-based comedy-drama Sweet and Lowdown was nominated for two Academy Awards, for Sean Penn (Best Actor) and Samantha Morton (Best Supporting Actress). In contrast to these lighter movies, Allen veered into darker satire toward the end of the decade with Deconstructing Harry (1997) and Celebrity (1998). On March 8, 1995, Allen's one-act play Central Park West opened off-Broadway as a part of a larger piece titled Death Defying Acts, with two other one-act plays, one by David Mamet and one by Elaine May. Critics described Allen's contribution as "the longest and most substantial of the evening". During this decade Allen also starred in the television film The Sunshine Boys (1995), based on the Neil Simon play of the same name, and made a sitcom "appearance" via telephone in a 1997 episode, "My Dinner with Woody", of Just Shoot Me! that paid tribute to several of his films. He provided the voice of Z in DreamWorks' first animated film, Antz (1998), which featured many actors he had worked with; Allen's character was similar to his earlier roles. Small Time Crooks (2000) was Allen's first film with the DreamWorks studio and represented a change in direction: he began giving more interviews and made an attempt to return to his slapstick roots. The film is similar to the 1942 film Larceny, Inc. (from a play by S. J. Perelman). Allen never commented on whether this was deliberate or if his film was in any way inspired by it. Small Time Crooks was a relative financial success, grossing over $17 million domestically, but Allen's next four films foundered at the box office, including Allen's most costly film, The Curse of the Jade Scorpion (with a budget of $26 million). Hollywood Ending, Anything Else, and Melinda and Melinda have "rotten" ratings on film-review website Rotten Tomatoes and each earned less than $4 million domestically. Some critics claimed that Allen's early 2000s films were subpar and expressed concern that his best years were behind him. Others were less harsh; reviewing the little-liked Melinda and Melinda, Roger Ebert wrote, "I cannot escape the suspicion that if Woody had never made a previous film, if each new one was Woody's Sundance debut, it would get a better reception. His reputation is not a dead shark but an albatross, which with admirable economy Allen has arranged for the critics to carry around their own necks." "In the United States things have changed a lot, and it's hard to make good small films now", Allen said in a 2004 interview. "The avaricious studios couldn't care less about good films—if they get a good film they're twice as happy but money-making films are their goal. They only want these $100 million pictures that make $500 million." Allen traveled to London, where he made Match Point (2005), one of his most successful films of the decade, garnering positive reviews. Set in London, it starred Jonathan Rhys Meyers and Scarlett Johansson. It is markedly darker than Allen's first four films with DreamWorks SKG. In Match Point Allen shifts focus from the intellectual upper class of New York to the moneyed upper class of London. The film earned more than $23 million domestically (more than any of his films in nearly 20 years) and over $62 million in international box office sales. It earned Allen his first Academy Award nomination since 1998, for Best Writing – Original Screenplay, with directing and writing nominations at the Golden Globes, his first Globe nominations since 1987. In a 2006 interview with Premiere Magazine he said it was the best film he had ever made. Allen reached an agreement to film Vicky Cristina Barcelona in Avilés, Barcelona, and Oviedo, Spain, where shooting started on July 9, 2007. The movie featured Scarlett Johansson, Javier Bardem, Rebecca Hall and Penélope Cruz. The film premiered at the 2008 Cannes Film Festival to rapturous reviews, and became a box office success. Vicky Cristina Barcelona won Best Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy at the Golden Globe awards. Cruz received the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress. In April 2008 he began filming Whatever Works, a film aimed more toward older audiences, starring Larry David, Patricia Clarkson, and Evan Rachel Wood. Released in 2009 and described as a dark comedy, it follows the story of a botched suicide attempt turned messy love triangle. Allen wrote Whatever Works in the 1970s, and David's character was written for Zero Mostel, who died the year Annie Hall came out. Allen was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 2001. You Will Meet a Tall Dark Stranger, filmed in London, stars Antonio Banderas, Josh Brolin, Anthony Hopkins, Anupam Kher, Freida Pinto and Naomi Watts. Filming started in July 2009. It was released theatrically in the U.S. on September 23, 2010, following a Cannes debut in May 2010, and a screening at the Toronto International Film Festival on September 12, 2010. Allen announced that his next film would be titled Midnight in Paris, starring Owen Wilson, Marion Cotillard, Rachel McAdams, Michael Sheen, Corey Stoll, Allison Pill, Tom Hiddleston, Adrien Brody, Kathy Bates, and Carla Bruni, the First Lady of France at the time of production. The film follows a young engaged couple in Paris who see their lives transformed. It debuted at the 2011 Cannes Film Festival on May 12, 2011. Allen said he wanted to "show the city emotionally" during the press conference. "I just wanted it to be the way I saw Paris—Paris through my eyes", he said. The film was almost universally praised, receiving a 93% on Rotten Tomatoes. Midnight in Paris won the Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay and became his highest-grossing film, making $151 million worldwide on a $17 million budget. On October 20, 2011, Allen's one-act play Honeymoon Motel opened on Broadway as part of a larger piece titled Relatively Speaking, with two other one-act plays by Ethan Coen and Elaine May. In February 2012, Allen appeared on a panel at the 92nd Street Y in New York City with moderators Dick Cavett and Annette Insdorf, discussing his films and career. His next film, To Rome with Love (2012), was a Rome-set comedy that starred Jesse Eisenberg, Elliot Page, Alec Baldwin, Penelope Cruz, Greta Gerwig, and Judy Davis. The film was structured in four vignettes featuring dialogue in both Italian and English. It marked Allen's return to acting since his last role in Scoop. Bob Mondello gave it a mixed review, writing, "To Rome with Love is just froth—a romantic sampler with some decent jokes and gorgeous Roman backdrops. It goes down easily, but I have to say it's interesting less for what it is than for how it is." Allen's next film, Blue Jasmine, debuted in July 2013. The film is set in San Francisco and New York, and stars Alec Baldwin, Cate Blanchett, Louis C.K., Andrew Dice Clay, Sally Hawkins, and Peter Sarsgaard. It opened to critical acclaim, with Eric Kohn of IndieWire calling it "his most significant movie in years". The film earned Allen another Academy Award nomination for Best Original Screenplay, and Blanchett received the Academy Award for Best Actress. Allen co-starred with John Turturro in Fading Gigolo, written and directed by Turturro, which premiered in September 2013. Also in 2013, Allen shot the romantic comedy Magic in the Moonlight with Emma Stone, and Colin Firth in Nice, France. The film is set in the 1920s on the French Riviera. The film was a modest financial success, earning $51 million on a budget of $16 million. For the BBC, Owen Gleiberman wrote, "Magic in the Moonlight is Allen's most gratifyingly airy concoction in a while, but it's also a comedy that insists, in the end, on making an overly rational case for the power of the irrational." It's really cool to work with a director who's done so much, because he knows exactly what he wants. The fact that he does one shot for an entire scene—[and] this could be a scene with eight people and one to two takes—it gives you a level of confidence... he's very empowering. —Blake Lively, on acting in Café Society, June 2016 On March 11, 2014, Allen's musical Bullets over Broadway opened on Broadway at the St. James Theatre. It was directed and choreographed by Susan Stroman and starred Zach Braff, Nick Cordero, and Betsy Wolfe. The production received mixed reviews, with The Hollywood Reporter writing, "this frothy show does provide dazzling art direction and performances, as well as effervescent ensemble numbers." Allen received a Tony Award nomination for Best Book of a Musical. The show received six Tony nominations. In July and August 2014, Allen filmed the mystery drama Irrational Man in Newport, Rhode Island, with Joaquin Phoenix, Emma Stone, Parker Posey and Jamie Blackley. Allen said that this film, as well as the next three he had planned, had the financing and full support of Sony Pictures Classics. Jonathan Romney of Film Comment gave the film a mixed review, praising Stone's performance but calling the film "disconcertingly impersonal—all the more so as it overtly carries certain traditional marks of his patented brand, being a light-highbrow comedy of manners, peppered with bookish in-jokes." On January 14, 2015, Amazon Studios announced a full-season order for a half-hour Amazon Prime Instant Video series that Allen would write and direct, marking the first time he has developed a television show. Allen said of the series, "I don't know how I got into this. I have no ideas and I'm not sure where to begin. My guess is that Roy Price [the head of Amazon Studios] will regret this." At the 2015 Cannes Film Festival, Allen said of his upcoming Amazon show: "It was a catastrophic mistake. I don't know what I'm doing. I'm floundering. I expect this to be a cosmic embarrassment." On September 30, 2016, Amazon Video debuted Allen's first television series production, Crisis in Six Scenes. The series is a comedy set during the 1960s. It focuses on the life of a suburban family after a surprise visitor creates chaos among them. It stars Allen, Elaine May, and Miley Cyrus, with the latter playing a radical hippie fugitive who sells marijuana. Allen's next film, Café Society, starred an ensemble cast, including Jesse Eisenberg, Kristen Stewart, and Blake Lively. Bruce Willis was set to co-star, but was replaced by Steve Carell during filming. The film is distributed by Amazon Studios, and opened the 2016 Cannes Film Festival on May 11, 2016, the third time Allen has opened the festival. Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian gave the film a positive review, writing, "The film looks ravishing, with shots of New York which recall images in Allen's great work, Manhattan, but however wonderfully composed, there is something almost touristy in both them, and in his evocation of golden age Tinseltown, like his homages to Paris and Rome. Allen brings it all together in his closing moments which conjure something unexpectedly melancholy and shrewdly judged. It has entertainment and charm." In September 2016 Allen started filming the drama film Wonder Wheel, set in the 1950s in Coney Island, and starring Kate Winslet, Justin Timberlake, Juno Temple, and Jim Belushi. The film served as the closing night selection at the 55th New York Film Festival on October 15, 2017, and was theatrically released on December 1, 2017, as the first movie self-distributed to theaters by Amazon Studios. The film received mixed reviews, with critics praising Winslet's leading performance. Owen Gleiberman of Variety wrote, "Wonder Wheel isn't a comedy—on the contrary, it often feels like the most earnest kitchen-sink drama that Clifford Odets never wrote. It may or may not turn out to be an awards picture, but it's a good night out, and that's not nothing." In 2017, Allen received a standing ovation when he made a rare public appearance at the 45th Annual Life Achievement Tribute award ceremony for Diane Keaton. Before presenting her with the award he spoke about their longtime collaboration and friendship, saying, "From the minute I met her, she was a great, great inspiration to me. Much of what I have accomplished in my life I owe for sure to her". Allen returned to filming in New York City with the romantic film A Rainy Day in New York, starring Timothée Chalamet, Selena Gomez, Elle Fanning, Jude Law, Diego Luna, Liev Schreiber and Rebecca Hall. The production in New York began in September 2017. During the film's release, Chalamet, Gomez, and Hall announced, in the light of the Me Too movement, that they would donate their salaries to various charities. The film received mixed reviews but earned praise for its performances. In February 2019 it was announced that Amazon Studios had dropped A Rainy Day in New York and would no longer finance, produce, or distribute films with Allen. He filed a lawsuit for $68 million, alleging Amazon gave "vague reasons" to terminate the contract, dropped the film over "a 25-year old, baseless allegation", and did not make payments. The case was later settled and dismissed. It was released throughout Europe beginning in July 2019, receiving mixed reviews and grossing $20 million. After over a year's delay, the film was released in the U.S. on October 9, 2020, by MPI Media Group and Signature Entertainment. In May 2019, it was announced that Allen's next film would be titled Rifkin's Festival, and Variety magazine confirmed that its cast would include Christoph Waltz, Elena Anaya, Louis Garrel, Gina Gershon, Sergi López, and Wallace Shawn, and that it would be produced by Gravier Productions. The film was produced with Mediapro, an independent Spanish TV-film company. Rifkin's Festival completed filming in October 2019. On September 18, 2020, it premiered at the San Sebastián International Film Festival. It received mixed reviews, though Jessica Kiang of The New York Times called it "to the ravenous captive, like finding an unexpected stash of dessert". On March 2, 2020, it was announced that after shopping the book from publishers it was decided that Grand Central Publishing would release Allen's autobiography, Apropos of Nothing, on April 7, 2020. According to the publisher, the book is a "comprehensive account of Allen's life, both personal and professional, and describes his work in films, theater, television, nightclubs, and print...Allen also writes of his relationships with family, friends, and the loves of his life." The decision to publish the book was criticized by Dylan and Ronan Farrow, the latter of whom cut ties with the publisher. The announcement also incited criticism from employees of the publishers. On March 6, the publisher announced that it had canceled the book's release, saying in part, "The decision to cancel Mr. Allen's book was a difficult one." Hachette's decision also drew criticism from novelist Stephen King, Executive director of PEN America Suzanne Nossel, and others. On March 6, 2020, Manuel Carcassonne of Hachette's French branch, the publishing company Stock, announced it would publish the book if Allen permitted it. On March 23, 2020, Arcade published the memoir. In June 2020, Allen appeared on Alec Baldwin's podcast Here's the Thing and talked about his career as a standup comedian, comedy writer, and filmmaker, and his life during the COVID-19 pandemic. In September 2022, Allen suggested that he might retire from filmmaking after the release of his next film. In an interview with La Vanguardia, Allen said, "My idea, in principle, is not to make more movies and focus on writing." Allen's publicist later said, "Woody Allen never said he was retiring, nor did he say he was writing another novel. He said he was thinking about not making films, as making films that go straight or very quickly to streaming platforms is not so enjoyable for him, as he is a great lover of the cinema experience. Currently, he has no intention of retiring and is very excited to be in Paris shooting his new movie, which will be the 50th." Allen has made 50 feature films to date, with his latest film, Coup de chance (2023), a domestic thriller set in Paris. The film is Allen's first French-language film. It premiered at the 80th Venice International Film Festival to positive reviews. Chris Vognar of Rolling Stone called it "a pretty slight and minor film, but for an 87-year-old American working in a second language, it can't help but seem impressive". Owen Gleiberman of Variety called it "his best since Blue Jasmine". In February 2024, it was reported that Allen had expressed interest in starting a new film as soon as summer 2024: "In a new interview with Spanish filmmaker David Trueba, the 88-year-old Allen confirms that he is currently trying to launch a new film, which could start shooting as early as this summer in Italy." While best known for his films, Allen has also had a successful theater career, starting as early as 1960, when he wrote sketches for the revue From A to Z. His first great success was Don't Drink the Water, which opened in 1968 and ran for 598 performances on Broadway. His success continued with Play It Again, Sam, which opened in 1969, starring Allen and Diane Keaton. The show played for 453 performances and was nominated for three Tony Awards, although none of the nominations were for Allen's writing or acting. In the 1970s, Allen wrote a number of one-act plays, such as God and Death, which were published in his 1975 collection Without Feathers. In 1981, Allen's play The Floating Light Bulb opened on Broadway. It was a critical success and a commercial flop. Despite two Tony Award nominations, a Tony win for the acting of Brian Backer (who won the 1981 Theater World Award and a Drama Desk Award for his work), the play only ran for 62 performances. In 1995, after a long hiatus from the stage, Allen returned to theater with the one-act Central Park West, an installment in an evening of theater, Death Defying Acts, that also included new work by David Mamet and Elaine May. For the next few years, Allen had no direct involvement with the stage, but productions of his work were staged. God was staged at The Bank of Brazil Cultural Center in Rio de Janeiro, and theatrical adaptations of Allen's films Bullets Over Broadway and September were produced in Italy and France, respectively, without Allen's involvement. In 2003, Allen returned to the stage with Writer's Block, an evening of two one-acts, Old Saybrook and Riverside Drive, that played Off-Broadway's Atlantic Theatre. The production marked his stage-directing debut and sold out the entire run. In 2004, Allen's first full-length play since 1981, A Second Hand Memory, was directed by Allen and enjoyed an extended run Off-Broadway. In June 2007 it was announced that Allen would make two more creative debuts in the theater, directing a work he did not write and an opera—a reinterpretation of Puccini's Gianni Schicchi for the Los Angeles Opera—which debuted at the Dorothy Chandler Pavilion on September 6, 2008. Of his direction of the opera, Allen said, "I have no idea what I'm doing." His production of the opera opened the Festival of Two Worlds in Spoleto, Italy, in June 2009. In October 2011, Allen's one-act play Honeymoon Motel premiered as one in a series of one-act plays on Broadway titled Relatively Speaking. Also contributing to the series were Elaine May and Ethan Coen; John Turturro directed. It was announced in February 2012 that Allen would adapt Bullets over Broadway into a Broadway musical. It ran from April 10 to August 24, 2014. The cast included Zach Braff, Nick Cordero and Betsy Wolfe. The show was directed and choreographed by Susan Stroman, known for directing the stage and film productions of Mel Brooks's The Producers. The show drew mixed reviews from critics but received six Tony Award nominations, including one for Allen for Best Book of a Musical. Allen is a passionate fan of jazz, which appears often in the soundtracks to his films. He began playing clarinet as a child and took his stage name from clarinetist Woody Herman. He has performed publicly at least since the late 1960s, including with the Preservation Hall Jazz Band on the soundtrack of Sleeper. Woody Allen and his New Orleans Jazz Band have been playing each Monday evening at the Carlyle Hotel in Manhattan for many years specializing in New Orleans jazz from the early 20th century. He plays songs by Sidney Bechet, George Lewis, Johnny Dodds, Jimmie Noone, and Louis Armstrong. The documentary film Wild Man Blues (directed by Barbara Kopple) chronicles a 1996 European tour by Allen and his band, as well as his relationship with Previn. The band released the albums The Bunk Project (1993) and the soundtrack of Wild Man Blues (1997). In 2005, Allen, Eddy Davis and Conal Fowkes released the trio album Woody With Strings. In a 2011 review of a concert by Allen's jazz band, critic Kirk Silsbee of the Los Angeles Times suggested that Allen should be regarded a competent musical hobbyist with a sincere appreciation for early jazz: "Allen's clarinet won't make anyone forget Sidney Bechet, Barney Bigard or Evan Christopher. His piping tone and strings of staccato notes can't approximate melodic or lyrical phrasing. Still his earnestness and the obvious regard he has for traditional jazz counts for something." Allen and his band played at the Montreal International Jazz Festival on two consecutive nights in June 2008. For many years he wanted to make a film about the origins of jazz in New Orleans. Tentatively titled American Blues, the film would follow the different careers of Louis Armstrong and Sidney Bechet. Allen stated that the film would cost between $80 and $100 million and is therefore unlikely to be made. Allen has said that he was enormously influenced by comedians Bob Hope, Groucho Marx, Mort Sahl, Charlie Chaplin, W.C. Fields, playwright George S. Kaufman and filmmakers Ernst Lubitsch and Ingmar Bergman. Many comedians have cited Allen as an influence, including Louis C.K., Larry David, Jon Stewart, Chris Rock, Steve Martin, John Mulaney, Bill Hader, Aziz Ansari, Sarah Silverman, Conan O'Brien, Seth MacFarlane, Seth Meyers, Richard Ayoade, Bill Maher, Albert Brooks, John Cleese, Garry Shandling, Bob Odenkirk, Richard Kind, Rob McElhenney, and Mike Schur. Many filmmakers have also cited Allen as an influence, including Wes Anderson, Greta Gerwig, Noah Baumbach, Luca Guadagnino, Nora Ephron, Whit Stillman, Mike Mills, Ira Sachs, Richard Linklater, Charlie Kaufman, Nicole Holofcener, Rebecca Miller, Tamara Jenkins, Alex Ross Perry, Greg Mottola, Lynn Shelton, Lena Dunham, Lawrence Michael Levine, Olivier Assayas, the Safdie brothers, and Amy Sherman-Palladino. Directors who admire Allen's work include Quentin Tarantino, who called him "one of the greatest screenwriters of all time", as well as Martin Scorsese, who said in Woody Allen: A Documentary, "Woody's sensibilities of New York City is one of the reasons why I love his work, but they are extremely foreign to me. It's not another world; it's another planet". Stanley Donen stated he liked Allen's films, Spike Lee has called Allen a "great, great filmmaker" and Pedro Almodóvar has said he admires Allen's work. In 2012, directors Mike Leigh, Asghar Farhadi, and Martin McDonagh respectively included Radio Days (1987), Take the Money and Run (1969), and Manhattan among their Top 10 films for Sight & Sound. Other admirers of his work include Olivia Wilde and Jason Reitman, who staged live readings of Hannah and Her Sisters and Manhattan respectively. Filmmaker Edgar Wright listed five of Allen's films (Take the Money and Run, Bananas, Play It Again, Sam, Sleeper, Annie Hall) in his list of 100 Favorite Comedy films. Bill Hader cited Allen's mockumentary films Take the Money and Run and Zelig as the biggest inspirations of the IFC series Documentary Now! Film critics including Roger Ebert and Barry Norman have highly praised Allen's work. In 1980, on Sneak Previews, Siskel and Ebert called Allen and Mel Brooks "the two most successful comedy directors in the world today ... America's two funniest filmmakers." Pauline Kael wrote of Allen that "his comic character is enormously appealing to people partly because he's the smart, urban guy who at the same time is intelligent, is vulnerable, and somehow by his intelligence, he triumphs".[citation needed] In 2012, Allen participated in the Sight & Sound film polls. Held every ten years to select the greatest films of all time, contemporary directors were asked to select ten films of their choice. Allen's choices, in alphabetical order, were: The 400 Blows (France, 1959) 8½ (Italy, 1963) Amarcord (Italy, 1972) Bicycle Thieves (Italy, 1948) Citizen Kane (USA, 1941) The Discreet Charm of the Bourgeoisie (France, 1972) La Grande Illusion (France, 1937) Paths of Glory (USA, 1957) Rashomon (Japan, 1950) The Seventh Seal (Sweden, 1957) In his 2020 autobiography Apropos of Nothing Allen praised Elia Kazan's A Streetcar Named Desire (1951): the movie of Streetcar is for me total artistic perfection... It's the most perfect confluence of script, performance, and direction I've ever seen. I agree with Richard Schickel, who calls the play perfect. The characters are so perfectly written, every nuance, every instinct, every line of dialogue is the best choice of all those available in the known universe. All the performances are sensational. Vivien Leigh is incomparable, more real and vivid than real people I know. And Marlon Brando was a living poem. He was an actor who came on the scene and changed the history of acting. The magic, the setting, New Orleans, the French Quarter, the rainy humid afternoons, the poker night. Artistic genius, no holds barred. In 1987, Allen joined Ginger Rogers, Sydney Pollack, and Miloš Forman at a Senate Judiciary committee hearing in Washington, D.C., where they each gave testimony against Ted Turner's and other companies' colorizing films without the artists' consent. Only one senator, Patrick Leahy, was present for the testimony. Allen testified: If directors had their way, we would not let our films be tampered with in any way—broken up for commercial or shortened or colorized. But we've fought the other things without much success, and now colorization—because it's so horrible and preposterous and more acutely noticeable by audiences—is the straw that broke the camel's back...The presumption that colorizers are doing him [the director] a favor and bettering his movie is a transparent attempt to justify the mutilation of art for a few extra dollars. Allen also spoke about his decisions to make films in black and white, such as Manhattan, Stardust Memories, Broadway Danny Rose, and Zelig. Film director John Huston appeared in a pretaped video, and Rogers read a statement by Jimmy Stewart criticizing the colorization of his film It's a Wonderful Life. In 1990, The Film Foundation was founded as a nonprofit film preservation organization that collaborates with film studios to restore prints of old or damaged films to meet the vision of the original filmmaker. Allen was part of the founding and sat on the foundation's original board of directors alongside Martin Scorsese, Robert Altman, Francis Ford Coppola, Clint Eastwood, Stanley Kubrick, George Lucas, Sydney Pollack, Robert Redford, and Steven Spielberg. In addition to directing, writing, and acting in films, Allen has written and performed in a number of Broadway theater productions. Getting Even (1971) Without Feathers (1975) Side Effects (1980) The Insanity Defense: The Complete Prose (2007) Mere Anarchy (2007) Apropos of Nothing (2020) (memoirs) Zero Gravity (2022) Woody Allen (Colpix Records, 1964) Woody Allen Vol. 2 (Colpix Records, 1965) The Third Woody Allen Album (Capitol Records, 1968) The Nightclub Years 1964–1968 (United Artists Records, 1972) Standup Comic (Casablanca Records, 1978) Wild Man Blues (RCA Victor, 1998) Woody With Strings (New York Jazz Records, 2005) Over his more than 50-year film career, Allen has received many award nominations. He holds the record for most Academy Award nominations for Best Original Screenplay, with 16 nominations and three wins (Annie Hall, Hannah and Her Sisters, and Midnight in Paris). Allen has been nominated for Best Director seven times and won for Annie Hall. Three of Allen's films have been nominated for Academy Award for Best Picture, Annie Hall, Hannah and Her Sisters, and Midnight in Paris. Allen shuns award ceremonies, citing their subjectivity. His first and only appearance at the Academy Awards was at the 2002 Oscars, where he received a standing ovation. As a New York icon, he had been asked by the Academy to introduce a film montage of clips of New York City in the movies that Nora Ephron compiled to honor the city after the 9/11 attacks. Two of his films have been inducted into the National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as "culturally, historically or aesthetically significant". Allen has received numerous honors, including an Honorary Golden Palm from the Cannes Film Festival in 2002 and a Career Golden Lion from the Venice International Film Festival in 1995. He also received a BAFTA Fellowship in 1997, a Lifetime Achievement Award from the Directors Guild of America and a Golden Globe Cecil B. DeMille Award in 2014. He was elected a member of the American Philosophical Society in 2010. In 2015, the Writers Guild of America named his screenplay for Annie Hall first on its list of the "101 Funniest Screenplays". In 2011, PBS televised the film biography Woody Allen: A Documentary on its series American Masters. In 2004, Comedy Central ranked Allen fourth on a list of the 100 greatest stand-up comedians, while a UK survey ranked Allen the third-greatest comedian. Allen has been married three times: to Harlene Rosen from 1956 to 1959, Louise Lasser from 1966 to 1970, and Soon-Yi Previn since 1997. He also had a 12-year relationship with actress Mia Farrow and relationships with Stacey Nelkin and Diane Keaton. In 1956, Allen married Harlene Rosen. He was 20 and she was 17. The marriage lasted until 1959. Rosen, whom Allen called "the Dread Mrs. Allen" in his standup act, sued him for defamation as a result of comments he made during a television appearance shortly after their divorce. In his mid-1960s album Standup Comic, Allen said that Rosen had sued him because of a joke he made in an interview. Rosen had been sexually assaulted outside her apartment. According to Allen, the newspapers reported that she had been "violated". In the interview, Allen said, "Knowing my ex-wife, it probably wasn't a moving violation." In an interview on The Dick Cavett Show, Allen repeated his comments and said that she "sued me for a million dollars". In 1966, Allen married Louise Lasser. They divorced in 1970. Lasser provided voice dubbing in Allen's What's Up, Tiger Lily? and appeared in three of his other films: Take the Money and Run, Bananas, and Everything You Always Wanted to Know About Sex* (*But Were Afraid to Ask). She also appeared briefly in Stardust Memories. According to the Los Angeles Times, Manhattan was based on Allen's romantic relationship with actress Stacey Nelkin. Her bit part in Annie Hall ended up on the cutting room floor, and their relationship, never publicly acknowledged by Allen, reportedly began when she was 17 and a student at Stuyvesant High School in New York. In December 2018 The Hollywood Reporter interviewed Babi Christina Engelhardt, who said she had an eight-year affair with Allen that began in 1976 when she was 17 years old (they met when she was 16), and that she believes the character of Tracy in Manhattan is a composite of any number of Allen's presumed other real-life young paramours from that period, not necessarily Nelkin or Engelhardt. When asked, Allen declined to comment. In 1968, Allen cast Diane Keaton in his Broadway show Play It Again, Sam. During the run she and Allen became romantically involved. Although they broke up after a year, she continued to star in his films, including Sleeper as a futuristic poet and Love and Death as a composite character based on the novels of Tolstoy and Dostoevsky. Annie Hall was very important in Allen's and Keaton's careers. It is said that the role was written for her, as Keaton's birth name was Diane Hall. She then starred in Interiors as a poet, followed by Manhattan. In 1987, she had a cameo as a nightclub singer in Radio Days, and she was chosen to replace Mia Farrow in Manhattan Murder Mystery after Allen and Farrow began having problems with their relationship. In total Keaton has starred in eight of Allen's films. As of 2018 Keaton and Allen remain close friends. In a rare public appearance, Allen presented Keaton with the AFI Life Achievement Award in 2017. Allen and Mia Farrow met in 1979 and began a relationship in 1980; Farrow starred in 13 of Allen's films from 1982 to 1992. Throughout the relationship they lived in separate apartments on opposite sides of Central Park in Manhattan. Farrow had seven children when they met: three biological sons from her marriage to composer André Previn, three adopted girls (two Vietnamese and one South Korean, Soon-Yi Previn), and an adopted South Korean boy, Moses Farrow. In 1984, she and Allen tried to conceive a child together; Allen agreed to this on the understanding that he need not be involved in the child's care. When the effort failed, Farrow adopted a baby girl, Dylan Farrow, in July 1985. Allen was not involved in the adoption, but when Dylan arrived he assumed a parental role toward her and began spending more time in Farrow's home. On December 19, 1987, Farrow gave birth to their son Satchel Ronan O'Sullivan Farrow. According to Allen, his intimate relationship with Mia Farrow ceased completely after Satchel's birth and he was asked to return her apartment key; they maintained a working relationship when they filmed a movie, and he regularly visited Moses, Dylan and Satchel, but he and Mia were only "social companions on those occasions where there'd be a dinner, an event, but after the event she'd go home and I'd go home." In 1991, Farrow wanted to adopt another child. According to a 1993 custody hearing, Allen told her he would not object to another adoption so long as she would agree to his adoption of Dylan and Moses; that adoption was finalized in December 1991. Eric Lax, Allen's biographer, wrote in The New York Times that Allen was "there before they [the children] wake up in the morning, he sees them during the day and he helps put them to bed at night". In 1977, Mia Farrow and André Previn adopted Soon-Yi Previn from Seoul, South Korea. She had been abandoned. The Seoul Family Court established a Family Census Register (legal birth document) on her behalf on December 28, 1976, with a presumptive birth date of October 8, 1970; according to Maureen Orth, a bone scan in the U.S. estimated that she was between five and seven years old. According to Previn, her first friendly interaction with Allen took place when she was injured playing soccer during 11th grade and Allen offered to transport her to school. After her injury, she began attending New York Knicks basketball games with Allen in 1990. They attended more games and by 1991 had become closer. In September 1991, she began studies at Drew University in New Jersey. In January 1992, Farrow found nude photographs of Previn in Allen's home. Allen, then 56, told Farrow that he had taken the photos the day before, approximately two weeks after he first had sex with Previn. Both Farrow and Allen contacted lawyers shortly after the photographs were discovered. Previn was asked to leave summer camp because she was spending too much time taking calls from a "Mr. Simon", who turned out to be Allen. In an August 1992 interview with Time Magazine Allen said, "I am not Soon-Yi's father or stepfather", adding, "I've never even lived with Mia. I've never in my entire life slept at Mia's apartment, and I never even used to go over there until my children came along seven years ago. I never had any family dinners over there. I was not a father to her adopted kids in any sense of the word." Adding that Soon-Yi never treated him as a father figure and that he rarely spoke to her before their romantic relationship, Allen seemed to see few or no problems with their relationship. On August 17, 1992, Allen issued a statement saying that he was in love with Previn. Their relationship became public and "erupted into tabloid headlines and late-night monologues in August 1992." Allen and Previn were married in Venice, Italy, on December 23, 1997. They have two adopted daughters, and live in the Carnegie Hill section of Manhattan's Upper East Side. According to court testimony, on August 4, 1992, Allen visited the children at Mia Farrow's home in Bridgewater, Connecticut, while she was shopping with a friend. The next day, that friend's babysitter told her employer that she had seen that "Dylan was sitting on the sofa, and Woody was kneeling on the floor, facing her, with his head in her lap". When Farrow asked Dylan about it, Dylan allegedly said that Allen had touched Dylan's "private part" while they were alone together in the attic. Allen strongly denied the allegation, calling it "an unconscionable and gruesomely damaging manipulation of innocent children for vindictive and self-serving motives". He then began proceedings in New York Supreme Court for sole custody of his and Farrow's son Satchel, as well as Dylan and Moses, their two adopted children. In March 1993, a six-month investigation by the Child Sexual Abuse Clinic of Yale-New Haven Hospital concluded that Dylan had not been sexually abused. In June 1993, Judge Elliott Wilk rejected Allen's bid for custody and rejected the allegation of sexual abuse. Wilk said he was less certain than the Yale-New Haven team that there was conclusive evidence that there was no sexual abuse and called Allen's conduct with Dylan "grossly inappropriate", although not sexual. In September 1993, the state prosecutor announced that despite having "probable cause", he would not pursue charges in order "to avoid the unjustifiable risk of exposing a child to the rigors and uncertainties of a questionable prosecution". In October 1993 the New York Child Welfare Agency of the State Department of Social Services closed a 14-month investigation and concluded there was not credible evidence of abuse or maltreatment, and the allegation was unfounded. In 2014, when Allen received a Golden Globe Cecil B. DeMille Award for Lifetime Achievement, the issue returned to the forefront of media attention, with Mia Farrow and Ronan Farrow making disparaging remarks about Allen on Twitter. On February 1, 2014, New York Times journalist Nicholas Kristof, with Dylan's permission, published a column that included excerpts from a letter Dylan had written to Kristof restating the allegation against Allen, and called out fellow actors who have continued to work in his films. Allen responded to the allegation in an open letter, also in The New York Times, strongly denying it. "Of course, I did not molest Dylan...No one wants to discourage abuse victims from speaking out, but one must bear in mind that sometimes there are people who are falsely accused and that is also a terribly destructive thing", he wrote. In 2018, Moses Farrow (Mia Farrow's and Allen's adopted son who was present at her Bridgewater house during Allen's visit) published a blog post called "A Son Speaks Out." In the post, Moses strenuously denied the abuse allegations, writing, "given the incredibly inaccurate and misleading attacks on my father, Woody Allen, I feel that I can no longer stay silent as he continues to be condemned for a crime he did not commit." He also recounted a series of instances of alleged physical abuse at the hands of Mia Farrow: "It pains me to recall instances in which I witnessed siblings, some blind or physically disabled, dragged down a flight of stairs to be thrown into a bedroom or a closet, then having the door locked from the outside. [Mia] even shut my brother Thaddeus, paraplegic from polio, in an outdoor shed overnight as punishment for a minor transgression". From 1976 to 1984 Stuart Hample wrote and drew Inside Woody Allen, a comic strip based on Allen's film persona. The 1997 documentary Wild Man Blues, directed by Barbara Kopple, focuses on Allen, and other documentaries featuring Allen include the 2002 cable television documentary Woody Allen: A Life in Film, directed by Time film critic Richard Schickel, which interlaces interviews of Allen with clips of his films, and the 1986 short film Meetin' WA, in which Allen is interviewed by French New Wave director Jean-Luc Godard. In 2003, a life-size bronze statue of Allen was installed in Oviedo, Spain. He had visited the city the previous year to accept a Prince of Asturias Award. In 2011 the PBS series American Masters co-produced the documentary Woody Allen: A Documentary, directed by Robert B. Weide. New interviews provide insight and backstory with Diane Keaton, Scarlett Johansson, Penélope Cruz, Dianne Wiest, Larry David, Chris Rock, Martin Scorsese, Dick Cavett, and Leonard Maltin, among others. Eric Lax wrote the book Woody Allen: A Biography. In 2015 David Evanier published Woody: The Biography, which was billed as the first new biography of Allen in over a decade. In early March 2020, Grand Central Publishing, a division of Hachette Book Group, announced that it would publish Allen's memoir, Apropos of Nothing, on April 7, 2020. Days later, after employee walkouts, parent company Hachette announced that the title was canceled and rights had reverted to Allen. On March 23, 2020, Skyhorse Publishing announced that it had acquired and released Apropos of Nothing through its Arcade imprint. In February 2021, HBO released Kirby Dick's and Amy Ziering's four-part documentary Allen v. Farrow, which explores the sexual abuse allegations against Allen. The series drew largely positive reviews from critics. Lorraine Ali of the Los Angeles Times wrote that it "makes a compelling argument that Allen got away with the unthinkable thanks to his fame, money, and revered standing in the world of film—and that a little girl never received justice." Rachel Brodsky wrote in The Independent that the "documentary will sound the death knell for Woody Allen's career." Hadley Freeman in The Guardian wrote that the series "sets itself up as an investigation but much more resembles PR, as biased and partial as a political candidate's advert vilifying an opponent in election season." A statement on behalf of Allen and Previn denounced the documentary as "a hatchet job riddled with falsehoods" and said that they were approached two months before it was aired on HBO and "given only a matter of days 'to respond.' Of course, they declined to do so." The filmmakers said they gave Allen and Previn two weeks to comment, which is "more than ample time by journalistic standards." Despite most references listing his birth date as December 1, in his 2020 autobiography, Apropos of Nothing, Allen writes that he was actually born on November 30: "Actually, I was born on the thirtieth of November very close to midnight, and my parents pushed the date so I could start off on a day one." The discrepancy first came to light in 2015, when author David Evanier addressed it in his book Woody Allen: The Biography. Since Allen's confirmation, various sources have corrected the date in their databases. Maureen Orth (Vanity Fair, November 1992): "Nobody knows how old Soon-Yi really is. Without ever seeing her, Korean officials put her age down as seven on her passport. A bone scan Mia had done on her in the U.S. put her age at between five and seven. In the family, Soon-Yi is considered to have turned 20 this year [1992], on October 8. Allen 2020, p. 11. Evanier 2015, p. 66. Horgan, Richard (December 14, 2015). "Woody Allen's Bronx Bump". Adweek. "Woody's birthday is not really December 1; it is November 30." "Revisiting Woody Allen’s Highs, Lows On His 80th Birthday". MetroFocus. December 1, 2015. "Today on Dec. 1, film legend Woody Allen celebrates his 80th birthday. However, it's not his real birthday. He was born on Nov. 30 but chose the first of December as his birthday so he could be no. 1." Evanier, David (November 9, 2015). "How Woody Allen Got His Nickname". Time. "Woody Allen | Biography, Movies, & Facts". Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved January 11, 2024. Leonte, Tudor (November 28, 2022). "Celebrity Actor & Director Birthdays This Week: Woody Allen Turns 87". Y! Entertainment. "Woody Allen". British Film Institute. Archived from the original on September 3, 2023. "Woody Allen - Social Networks and Archival Context". snaccooperative.org. Retrieved January 5, 2024. "Woody Allen". Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved January 5, 2024. "Woody Allen (Actor, Screenwriter and Director)". OnThisDay.com. "Woody Allen". Almanac.com. Retrieved January 19, 2024. "Woody Allen Will Be a No Show, Per Tradition". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved March 21, 2020. Gross 2012, p. [page needed]. "Woody Allen – Artist". The Recording Academy. November 19, 2019. Retrieved March 21, 2020. ""Annie Hall" beats out "Star Wars" for Best Picture". History Channel. Retrieved May 7, 2023. Newton, Michael (January 13, 2012). "Woody Allen: cinema's great experimentalist". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on January 19, 2018. Retrieved April 9, 2012. In the 1970s, Allen looked irreverent, hip, a part of the New Hollywood generation. In an age of 'auteurs', he was the auteur personified, the writer, director and star of his films, active in the editing, choosing the soundtrack, initiating the projects "Midnight in Paris Is Woody Allen's Biggest Hit, Passes 1986's Hannah and Her Sisters $40 Million". IndieWire. July 19, 2011. Retrieved May 7, 2023. "Soon Yi- Previn on Mia Farrow and Woody Allen". Vulture. Retrieved April 6, 2021. Deb, Sopan; Leiderman, Deborah; Bahr, Sarah (February 22, 2021). "Woody Allen, Mia Farrow, Soon-Yi Previn, Dylan Farrow: A Timeline". The New York Times. Flanagan, Caitlin (June 8, 2021). "What Mia Farrow Knew". The Atlantic. Retrieved June 21, 2021. Marks, Peter (March 30, 1993). "Doctor Recounts Threats By Farrow Against Allen". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved March 16, 2024. Lax 1992, p. [page needed]. The New York Times: Marion Meade (2000). The Unruly life of Woody Allen. Scribner. ISBN 0-684-83374-3. decided to deliver the baby in the Bronx, at Mt. Eden Hospital. "Jewish Virtual Library". "Martin Konigsberg". Variety. January 16, 2001. Retrieved October 22, 2014. "Woody Allen Biography (1935–)". Filmreference.com. Retrieved March 9, 2010. Baxter 1998, p. 11. Norwood & Pollack 2008, p. [page needed]. Newman, Andy; Kilgannon, Corey (June 5, 2002). "Curse of the Jaded Audience: Woody Allen, in Art and Life". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 18, 2009. Retrieved January 16, 2008. 'I think he's slacked off the last few movies', said Norman Brown, 70, a retired draftsman from Mr. Allen's old neighborhood, Midwood, Brooklyn, who said he had seen nearly all of Mr. Allen's 33 films. Lax 1992, pp. 12–13. Meade, Marion. "The Unruly Life of Woody Allen". The New York Times. Retrieved November 14, 2018. Meade 2000, p. 31. "Woody Allen on Life, Films and Whatever Works". National Public Radio. June 15, 2009. "Woody Allen: Comedian Profile". Comedy-Zone.net. Retrieved January 16, 2008. Bromberg 2020, p. 46. sfn error: no target: CITEREFBromberg2020 (help) Nachman 2003, p. 525. "Woody Allen: Rabbit Running". Time. July 7, 1972. Schmitz, Paul (December 31, 2011). "Lessons from famous college dropouts". CNN. Retrieved September 2, 2013. Lax 1992, p. 74. Kelley, Ken (July 1, 1976). "A Conversation with the Real Woody Allen (or Someone Just like Him)". Rolling Stone. pp. 34–40. Nachman 2003, p. 541. Lax 1992, p. 111. Bernstein, Adam. "TV Comedy Writer Danny Simon Dies". The Washington Post. Retrieved January 17, 2008. Nachman 2003, p. 533. O'Connor, John J. (February 17, 1987). "'Candid Camera' Marks 40 Years with a Special". The New York Times. Retrieved November 14, 2018. Nachman 2003, p. 542. Nachman 2003, p. 551. Allen & Luttazzi 2004, p. 7"Daniele Luttazzi's preface to the Italian translation of Allen's trilogy Complete Prose" Burr, Ty. "Deconstructing Woody". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on August 19, 2007. Retrieved May 19, 2017. Allen, Woody (October 24, 2004). "I Appreciate George S. Kaufman". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 7, 2005. Retrieved November 14, 2018. "Woody Allen: Rabbit Running". Time. July 7, 1972. pp. 5–6. I never had a teacher who made the least impression on me. If you ask me who are my heroes, the answer is simple and truthful: George S. Kaufman and the Marx Brothers. Kakutani 1995, p. [page needed]. Galef 2003, pp. 146–160&#91, page range too broad&#93, . Itzkoff, Dave (July 20, 2010). "Immortalized by Not Dying: Woody Allen Goes Digital". The New York Times. Retrieved November 14, 2018. Ramirez, Anthony (July 19, 2007). "Singing a Sad Song for Their Piano Bar". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 24, 2007. Retrieved October 25, 2020. "Milton Berle on meeting Woody Allen". EMMYTVLEGENDS.ORG. Retrieved February 19, 2022. Nachman 2003, p. 545. Nachman 2003, p. 532. "Let There Be Laughter – Jewish Humor Around the World". Beit Hatfutsot. February 6, 2017. Archived from the original on June 13, 2020. Retrieved October 10, 2019. Nachman 2003, p. 546. Nachman 2003, p. 550. Nachman 2003, p. 530. Scanzi, Andrea (2002). "Man on the moon, interview with comedian Daniele Luttazzi". Il mucchio selvaggio (in Italian). "1968 Presidential RaceDemocrats". The Pop History Dig. Retrieved February 27, 2018. Benedictus, Leo (October 24, 2013). "Comedy gold: The Woody Allen Show". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved February 23, 2023. Johnson 2007, p. 223. "VOTW: Woody Allen on Gene Kelly 1966 TV Special". WoodyAllenPages.com. August 10, 2014. "Gene Kelly on Television". UCLA Film & Television Archive. "Film and Television Archive". UCLA. Retrieved March 2, 2020. Billy Graham on Woody Allen Show, 1967 Finch, Cox & Giles 2003, p. 113. William F. Buckley on Woody Allen Show, 1967 Woody Allen guest hosts The Tonight Show, 1971 "Woody Allen Bob Hope Tonight Show 1971". Youtube. Retrieved April 29, 2021. "Life 1969". 2Neat.com. Retrieved November 14, 2018. Woody Allen: A Documentary. American Masters. July 21, 2011. Retrieved November 14, 2018. "Don't Drink the Water – Broadway Play – Original". Internet Broadway Database. Retrieved July 18, 2016. John 1994, p. 92–. sfn error: no target: CITEREFJohn1994 (help) "Play It Again, Sam – Broadway Play – Original". Internet Broadway Database. Retrieved July 18, 2016. O'Grady, Megan (October 19, 2011). "Diane Keaton: The Big Picture". Vogue. Retrieved November 14, 2018. "Actress Diane Keaton Talks About Woody Allen, Her Career and Personal Life". Netquake. June 2, 2013. Archived from the original on October 17, 2013. Canby, Vincent (August 19, 1969). "By and With Woody Allen: 'Take the Money and Run'". The New York Times. Retrieved September 14, 2020. "Woody Allen goes 'Bananas'". Rogerebert.com. Retrieved July 16, 2023. "Flailings and Failings". Time. Archived from the original on July 21, 2013. Retrieved July 16, 2023. Liebenson, Donald (April 20, 2017). "The Annie Hall That Might Have Been: Inside Woody Allen's Anhedonia". Vanity Fair. Retrieved November 14, 2018. Stevens & Johnson 2016, pp. 37–. "Annie Hall Interview with Diane Keaton by Katie Couric" on YouTube, video interview, 2 min. Taxel, Judy Klemesrud Barney (May 8, 1979). "Bob Hope Honored at Film Society Gala". The New York Times. Retrieved May 10, 2020. Wilmington, Michael (October 22, 1989). "Commentary: Woody Allen Keeps the Faith: 'Crimes and Misdemeanors' tears down the wall between his serious and comic sides". Los Angeles Times. p. 2. Archived from the original on November 24, 2015. Retrieved April 13, 2016. "Stardust Memories review". Triviana.com. Retrieved January 17, 2008. Kamp, David (November 18, 2007). "Woody Talks". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 17, 2007. Retrieved March 9, 2010. Allen 1993, p. 133. sfn error: no target: CITEREFAllen1993 (help) "The Floating Light Bulb – Broadway Play – Original". Internet Broadway Database. Retrieved July 18, 2016. Rich, Frank (April 28, 1981). "Stage: 'Light Bulb,' by Woody Allen". The New York Times. Sullivan, Dan (January 12, 1987). "Stage Review : Few Laughs In Allen's 'Light Bulb'". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved July 18, 2016. Morgan, David (August 3, 2013). "The films of Woody Allen". CBS News. Retrieved April 13, 2016. Canby, Vincent (July 17, 1983). "Woody Allen Continues to Refine His Cinematic Art". The New York Times. Retrieved November 14, 2018. Corliss, Richard (January 15, 2010). "Best Movies of All Time". Time. Retrieved April 13, 2016. Matloff, Jason. "Woody Allen Speaks!". Premiere. Archived from the original on March 17, 2006. Retrieved December 1, 2010. Canby, Vincent (March 12, 1989). "Anthologies Can Be A Bargain". The New York Times. Retrieved November 14, 2018. Dowd, A.A. (July 26, 2013). "Woody does German Expressionism in Shadows and Fog". The A.V. Club. Retrieved April 3, 2016. Allen, Woody. "Central Park West". Concord Theatricals. Retrieved October 26, 2023. A well to do psychiatrist has just discovered that her best friend is having an affair with her husband Canby, Vincent (March 7, 1995). "THEATER REVIEW: DEATH DEFYING ACTS; Really a Jungle Out There, a Jungle of Urban Neuroses". The New York Times. Retrieved October 26, 2023. "Death Defying Acts". Concord Theatricals. Retrieved October 26, 2023. "'Death Defying Acts' Falls Short of Exhilarating". The Christian Science Monitor. March 10, 1995. Evans, Greg (December 21, 1997). "Review: 'The Sunshine Boys'". Variety. Retrieved April 3, 2016. Clinton, Paul (October 2, 1998). "Review: Woody Allen still Woody in 'Antz'". CNN. Retrieved April 3, 2016. Robert Osborne of Turner Classic Movies on June 15, 2006 "Woody Allen – Rotten Tomatoes Celebrity Profile". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on June 25, 2007. Retrieved January 17, 2008. "Melinda and Melinda review (2004) Woody Allen – Qwipster's Movie Reviews". Retrieved January 17, 2008. Ebert 2006, p. [page needed]. Garfield, Simon (August 8, 2004). "Why I Love London". The Guardian. Retrieved November 14, 2018. "Match Point Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved December 30, 2011. "Box Office Mojo – People Index". Retrieved January 17, 2008. Matloff, Jason (February 2006). "Woody Allen's European Vacation". Premiere. Vol. 19, no. 5. pp. 98–101. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. I think it turned out to be the best film I've ever made. Friedman, Roger (March 25, 2015). "Woody Allen's Next Star: Penelope Cruz". Fox News. Retrieved November 14, 2018. Hopewell, John (January 3, 2006). "Spain woos Woody". Variety. Retrieved November 14, 2018. Harris, Mark (May 24, 2009). "Twilight of the Tummlers". NYMag.com. Retrieved November 14, 2018. "Larry David, Evan Rachel Wood to star in Woody Allen's next movie". Hollywood Insider. Archived from the original on February 18, 2008. Retrieved February 7, 2008. "Book of Members, 1780–2010: Chapter A" (PDF). American Academy of Arts and Sciences. Retrieved April 15, 2011. McNary, Dave (April 22, 2010). "Woody Allen reveals details of upcoming pic". Variety. Retrieved November 14, 2018. Bagnetto, Laura Angela (May 12, 2011). "Woody Allen's film featuring Carla Bruni opens Cannes Film Festival". RFI. Retrieved November 14, 2018. "Midnight in Paris (2011)". June 10, 2011 – via www.rottentomatoes.com. "Midnight in Paris (2011) – Box Office Mojo". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved November 14, 2018. Isherwood, Charles (October 10, 2011). "'Relatively Speaking' at Brooks Atkinson Theater — Review". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 27, 2011. Retrieved November 14, 2018. "Woody Allen's kind of crowd, patrons of the 92nd St. Y, pull up chairs for a nostalgia trip". Politico. Retrieved December 30, 2020. Hickman, Angela (May 9, 2011). "Woody Allen adds himself to the cast of his next picture". National Post. Archived from the original on May 12, 2011. Retrieved June 18, 2015. "'To Rome With Love': Eternal City, Scrambled Time". NPR. Retrieved August 7, 2023. Brody, Richard (July 25, 2013). "Woody Allen's Blue Jasmine". The New Yorker. Retrieved November 14, 2018. Kilday, Gregg (June 4, 2012). "Believe It: Woody Allen's Next Movie Features Louis C.K., Andrew Dice Clay". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved June 18, 2015. "Review: Why Woody Allen's 'Blue Jasmine,' Starring Cate Blanchett, Is His Most Significant Movie In Years". IndieWire. July 19, 2013. Retrieved August 7, 2023. "Blue Jasmine (2013)". Rotten Tomatoes. July 26, 2013. Retrieved January 27, 2014. "The 86th Academy Awards". Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. March 2, 2014. Bailey, Cameron (undated). "Fading Gigolo" Archived May 9, 2015, at the Wayback Machine. Toronto International Film Festival. Retrieved June 18, 2015. Miller, William (August 4, 2013). "Woody Allen 2014 Film Update: More Images from Antibes and Nice, France". The Woody Allen Pages. Retrieved June 18, 2015. "Magic In the Moonlight box office ('Foreign' Tab)". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved March 3, 2019. "Review: Woody Allen's Magic in the Moonlight". BBC. Retrieved August 7, 2023. Sieracki, Jill (June 29, 2016). "Blake Lively Talks Working with Woody Allen..." Hamptons. Southampton, New York: GreenGale Publishing. Archived from the original on November 16, 2018. Retrieved March 1, 2019. "Don't Speak, Sing! Bullets Over Broadway, Starring Zach Braff, Opens on the Great White Way". Broadway.com. "Tony Awards Nominations: The Complete List". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved May 14, 2020. Goldstein, Meredith; Shanahan, Mark (July 8, 2014). "Emma Stone stays in Rhode Island for Woody Allen film". The Boston Globe. Retrieved June 18, 2015. Itzkoff, Dave (July 20, 2014). "A Master of Illusion Endures". The New York Times. Retrieved July 23, 2014. "Review: Irrational Man". Film Comment. Retrieved August 7, 2023. Weinstein, Shelli (January 13, 2015). "Woody Allen to Create His First Television Series for Amazon". Variety. Archived from the original on January 13, 2015. Retrieved June 18, 2015. Steel, Emily (January 13, 2015). "Amazon Signs Woody Allen to Write and Direct TV Series". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 20, 2015. Retrieved January 13, 2015. Massa, Annie; Soper, Spencer; Palmeri, Chris (January 13, 2015). "Amazon's Woody Allen Hiring Underscores Video Risk". Bloomberg News. Archived from the original on January 13, 2015. Retrieved June 18, 2015. Zeitchik, Steven (May 15, 2015). "Cannes 2015: Woody Allen Sings a Bleak Tune". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved June 18, 2015. Chi, Paul (September 16, 2016). "Miley Cyrus Explains Why She's in Awe of Woody Allen: 'He's Never Fake'". Vanity Fair. New York City. Retrieved March 1, 2019. Kreps, Daniel (August 8, 2016). "Watch First Clip From Woody Allen's 'Crisis in Six Scenes' TV Show". Rolling Stone LLC. New York City. Retrieved March 1, 2019. Fleming, Mike Jr. (March 9, 2015). "Jesse Eisenberg, Bruce Willis, Kristen Stewart To Star In Next Woody Allen Pic". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved January 28, 2016. Jaafar, Ali; Hipes, Patrick (August 28, 2015). "Steve Carell Replacing Bruce Willis In Woody Allen Movie". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved January 28, 2016. Chang, Justin; Keslassy, Elsa (March 29, 2016). "Cannes: Woody Allen's 'Cafe Society' to Open Film Festival". Variety. Retrieved April 3, 2016. Bradshaw, Peter (May 11, 2016). "Café Society review – Woody Allen's amiable, if insubstantial, tribute to golden-age Hollywood". The Guardian. Retrieved August 7, 2023. Ford, Rebecca (June 21, 2016). "Kate Winslet Joining Woody Allen's Next Film". The Hollywood Reporter. Los Angeles, California. Retrieved September 15, 2016. "Woody Allen's Wonder Wheel Will Close NYFF55". July 27, 2017. Retrieved July 27, 2017. Lang, Brent (June 12, 2017). "Woody Allen's 'Wonder Wheel' Scores December Release". Variety. Los Angeles, California. Retrieved July 14, 2017. Lang, Brent (July 27, 2017). "Amazon Moves Into Self-Distribution With Woody Allen's 'Wonder Wheel'". Variety. Los Angeles, California. Retrieved July 27, 2017. "Film Review: 'Wonder Wheel'". Variety. October 13, 2017. Retrieved August 7, 2023. "Woody Allen Makes Rare L.A. Appearance at Diane Keaton AFI Event". The Hollywood Reporter. June 8, 2017. Retrieved May 10, 2020. Kilday, Gregg (September 11, 2017). "Diego Luna, Liev Schreiber Join Woody Allen's New Movie". The Hollywood Reporter. Los Angeles, California. Retrieved September 11, 2017. Lee, Benjamin (June 4, 2018). "Woody Allen: 'I should be the poster boy for the #MeToo movement'". The Guardian. London, England. Retrieved March 1, 2019. Gardner, Eriq (February 7, 2019). "Woody Allen Sues Amazon for Terminating Movie Deal". The Hollywood Reporter. Los Angeles, California. Retrieved February 7, 2019. Hopewell, John (February 22, 2019). "Woody Allen Teams With Spain's Mediapro for Next Film". Vigdor, Neil (November 9, 2019). "Woody Allen and Amazon Settle Breach of Contract Lawsuit". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 10, 2019. Retrieved November 17, 2019. Maddaus, Gene (November 9, 2019). "Woody Allen Settles $68 Million Suit Against Amazon". Variety. Retrieved November 17, 2019. "W DESZCZOWY DZIEŃ W NOWYM JORKU". Kino Świat. Retrieved June 18, 2019. Marshall, Alex (May 9, 2019). "Amazon Dropped Woody Allen's Latest Film. Europe Has Picked It Up". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on May 9, 2019. Retrieved May 11, 2019. "A Rainy Day in New York". Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved March 5, 2020. "A Rainy Day in New York Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved March 5, 2020. "A Rainy Day in New York". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved March 5, 2020. Geier, Thom (September 17, 2020). "Woody Allen's 'A Rainy Day in New York' to Hit US Theaters Next Month". TheWrap. Retrieved October 1, 2020. Nickolai, Nate (June 4, 2019). "Woody Allen to Begin Filming New Movie This Summer". Variety. Maddaus, Gene (February 7, 2019). "Woody Allen Files $68 Million Suit Against Amazon for Film Deal Breach". Variety. New York City. Retrieved February 7, 2019. Galuppo, Mia (June 4, 2019). "Woody Allen Sets New Feature With Christoph Waltz, Gina Gershon". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved October 29, 2019. "Everything We Know About Rifkin's Festival Woody Allens 2020 film". Woody Allen Pages. December 28, 2019. Retrieved March 10, 2020. Kiang, Jessica (September 18, 2020). "'Rifkin's Festival' Review: Woody Allen Travels to Movie Memory Lane". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 18, 2020. Retrieved October 21, 2020. "Woody Allen Memoir to be Published in April". The Wrap Magazine. March 2, 2020. Retrieved March 2, 2020. Alter, Alexandra; Buckley, Cara (May 2, 2019). "Woody Allen Pitched a Memoir. Publishers Weren't Interested". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 2, 2019. Retrieved March 6, 2020. Rico, Klartiza (March 2, 2020). "Woody Allen Memoir Gets Release Date". Variety. Retrieved March 2, 2020. "Woody Allen Memoir Sets April Debut". The Hollywood Reporter. March 2, 2020. Retrieved March 2, 2020. Williams, John (March 6, 2020). "Hachette Says It Won't Publish Woody Allen's Book". The New York Times. Sinha, Charu (March 3, 2020). "Ronan Farrow Cuts Ties With Hachette Over Woody Allen Memoir". New York. Retrieved March 6, 2020. Tsioulcas, Anastasia (March 5, 2020). "After Woody Allen's Memoir Was Signed, Book Publisher's Employees Walk Out". NPR. Retrieved March 5, 2020. Lattanzio, Ryan (March 5, 2020). "Woody Allen Memoir Incites Walkout of Dozens of Publisher's Employees". IndieWire. Retrieved March 6, 2020. Patten, Dominic (March 5, 2020). "Woody Allen Memoir Publication Spurs Hachette Employee Walkout; "In Solidarity" With Ronan Farrow". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved March 6, 2020. Drury, Sharareh (March 6, 2020). "Woody Allen Memoir Dropped by Hachette After Staff Walk-Out". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved March 6, 2020. Helmore, Edward (March 8, 2020). "Stephen King attacks axing of Woody Allen book". The Observer. Retrieved March 9, 2020. Williams, John (March 6, 2020). "Hachette Says It Won't Publish Woody Allen's Book". The New York Times. Retrieved March 9, 2020. Italie, Hillel (March 23, 2020). "AP Exclusive: Allen has new publisher, memoir out Monday". Associated Press. Retrieved March 23, 2020. Alter, Alexandra; Williams, John (March 23, 2020). "Woody Allen's Memoir Is Published". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 23, 2020. Retrieved March 23, 2020. "Autobiografia di Woody Allen, l'ebook in anteprima mondiale". ANSA. March 22, 2020. Retrieved March 23, 2020. "Alec Baldwin Defends Promoting a Podcast Episode Featuring Woody Allen on 'Blackout Tuesday'". Us Weekly Magazine. Retrieved June 1, 2020. "The twilight of the cinema gods News". JellyPages.com. Frost, Caroline (September 18, 2022). "Woody Allen Announces Retirement From Filmmaking At 86, Says 'Wasp 22' Will Be Final Movie". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved September 18, 2022. "Woody Allen denies reports of retirement as he shoots his 50th film". The Guardian. September 19, 2022. Retrieved September 19, 2022. Roxborough, Scott (February 10, 2023). "Woody Allen's New Film 'Coup de Chance' Goes On Sale in Berlin". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved February 10, 2023. "Venice International Film Festival's 2023 lineup includes Woody Allen". USA Today. Retrieved August 7, 2023. "'Coup de Chance' Is Woody Allen's Best Film in a Decade". Rolling Stone. Retrieved September 12, 2023. "'Coup de Chance' Review: Woody Allen's Drama of Upper-Middle-Class Murder Is His Best Movie Since 'Blue Jasmine' (or Maybe 'Match Point')". Variety. September 4, 2023. Retrieved September 12, 2023. World of Reel. February 22, 2024. [1] The Broadway League (March 14, 1970). "Internet Broadway Database: Play It Again, Sam Production Credits". Ibdb. Retrieved March 9, 2010. The Broadway League. "Internet Broadway Database: The Floating Light Bulb Production Credits". Ibdb.com. Retrieved March 9, 2010. Marks, Peter (July 1, 2005). "From Woody Allen, Sex, Lies And Expensive Real Estate". Washington Post. Retrieved October 26, 2023. ...Theater J...one-act plays, "Central Park West" (1995) and "Riverside Drive" (2003)... "Death Defying Acts and No One Shall Be Immune – David Mamet Society". Mamet.eserver.org. Archived from the original on February 24, 2010. Retrieved March 9, 2010. "Allen's God Shows Up in Rio, Jan. 16". Playbill. January 15, 1998. Archived from the original on February 6, 2008. Retrieved March 9, 2010. "Playbill News: Woody Allen Adaptation Debuts at Italian Theater Festival, Aug. 1". Playbill. July 31, 1998. Archived from the original on February 6, 2008. Retrieved March 9, 2010. "Playbill News: Stage Version of Woody Allen's September to Bow in France, Sept. 16". Playbill. September 15, 1999. Archived from the original on December 27, 2008. Retrieved March 9, 2010. "Old Saybrook". Concord Theatricals. Retrieved October 26, 2023. "Riverside Drive". Concord Theatricals. Retrieved October 26, 2023. "Woody Allen to Direct Two One-Acts at OB's Atlantic in April". playbill.com. October 18, 2002. Retrieved October 26, 2023. "Playbill News: Woody Allen's Writer's Block, with Neuwirth and Reiser, Opens Off Broadway May 15". Playbill. Archived from the original on December 27, 2008. Retrieved March 9, 2010. "Playbill News: Two Weeks Added to Woody Allen's New Play, Second Hand Memory, at Off-Bway's Atlantic". Playbill. Archived from the original on December 27, 2008. Retrieved March 9, 2010. "Playbill News: Woody Allen Directs His Second Hand Memory, Opening Nov. 22 Off-Broadway". Playbill. Archived from the original on December 27, 2008. Retrieved March 9, 2010. "Woody Allen makes debut at opera". BBC News. September 8, 2008. Retrieved September 8, 2008. Tommasini, Anthony (September 7, 2008). "Puccini With a Sprinkling of Woody Allen Whimsy". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 8, 2008. Retrieved September 8, 2008. Itzkoff, Dave (May 7, 2009). "Woody Allen's Puccini Goes to Spoleto". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 11, 2009. Retrieved April 6, 2010. relatively speaking broadway .com Archived November 9, 2013, at the Wayback Machine relativelyspeakingbroadway.com. Retrieved January 4, 2012 Isherwood, Charles (October 20, 2011). "Each Family, Tortured in Its Own Way". The New York Times. Healy, Patrick (February 23, 2012). "'Bullets Over Broadway' Is Heading There". The New York Times. Retrieved February 28, 2012. "Woody Allen Tony Awards Info". www.broadwayworld.com. Gonzalez, Victor (September 19, 2011). "Woody Allen and His New Orleans Jazz Band Announce Miami Beach Hanukkah Show". Miami New Times. Archived from the original on October 26, 2011. Retrieved November 5, 2011. Stafford, Jeff. "Sleeper". Turner Classic Movies. Retrieved November 5, 2011. Olsen, Erik (October 19, 2005). "New York City: Catch Woody Allen at the Cafe Carlyle". Gadling. Retrieved November 15, 2018. "New Orleans Trombone, Jerry Zigmont – Jazz Trombone, Eddy Davis & His New Orleans Jazz Band featuring Woody Allen, Cafe Carlyle, Woody Allen Band". Archived from the original on February 2, 2008. Retrieved January 17, 2008. "Woody Allen en concert ce lundi à Monaco" [Woody Allen in concert this Monday in Monaco]. Monaco-Matin (in French). December 28, 2014. Archived from the original on October 16, 2015. "Woody With Strings". March 23, 2023. Silsbee, Kirk (December 30, 2011). "Jazz review: Woody Allen's New Orleans band at Royce Hall". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved November 15, 2018. "Concert: Woody Allen And His New Orleans Jazz Band – Festival International de Jazz de Montreal". Montreal Jazz Festival. Archived from the original on March 31, 2012. Retrieved November 5, 2011. Lax & Allen 2009, pp. 315–316. Gerdes, Tim (October 28, 2013). "Woody Allen Talks About Talent, Luck and Comedy at Princeton". The Wall Street Journal. "The Two Hollywoods: The Directors; Woody Allen; Martin Scorsese". New York. November 11, 1997. Retrieved November 16, 2020. "Louis C.K.: Woody Allen is 'a big deal in my life'". Today.com. June 25, 2012. Levere, Jane (July 9, 2011). "Curb Your Enthusiasm's Larry David Discusses His Roots, His Comedy". Forbes. Brownfield, Paul (December 25, 1998). "Our take on Jon Stewart in 1998: 'He's practically made a career out of almost hosting other people's talk shows'". Los Angeles Times. Hiatt, Brian (December 3, 2014). "Chris Rock: The Rolling Stone Interview". Rolling Stone. Fisher, Carrie (July 25, 1999). "It wasn't in the script: Carrie Fisher interviews Steve Martin about writing". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved April 7, 2020. Hahn, Valerie Schremp (October 13, 2017). "Q&A: 'Kid Gorgeous' John Mulaney on Jesuits, timeless jokes and Sinatra". St. Louis Today. McGlynn, Katla (July 14, 2014). "11 Bill Hader Facts You Probably Didn't Know". HuffPost. Lidz, Franz; Rushin, Steve (January 30, 2000). "Here A Comic Genius, There A Comic Genius". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 7, 2011. "Sarah Silverman: We Are Miracles – Interview with Sarah Silverman". HBO. Inside Comedy, Season 4 Episode 6 Smith, Tim (July 25, 2015). "Seth MacFarlane to sing standards with the BSO". The Baltimore Sun. Archived from the original on March 29, 2019. Retrieved March 13, 2019. Heidemann, Jason (February 25, 2014). "Seth Meyers on the Forces That Made Him Funny". Chicago. "Richard Ayoade: Comic's sensibility anchors Submarine". Variety Magazine. January 7, 2011. Retrieved March 28, 2020. "CNN.com – Transcripts". transcripts.cnn.com. Williams, Craig (August 5, 2016). "In praise of Modern Romance – Albert Brooks' rom-com masterpiece". Little White Lies. "How Heartbreak Helped Garry Shandling Find His Comedic Voice". NPR. March 25, 2016. Sacks, Mike (July 2, 2009). "How I Made It in Comedy: Bob Odenkirk". Chicago Reader. Retrieved March 11, 2022. Wilstein, Matt (July 15, 2020). "Richard Kind Defends Woody Allen". Daily Beast. Retrieved February 18, 2023. "I am Rob McElhenney AMA!". Reddit. October 16, 2013. Heritage, Stuart (January 26, 2022). "It's a daily gut punch that people are anti-mask". The Guardian. Retrieved July 26, 2023. Seitz, Matt Zoller (October 7, 2013). "How Wes Anderson Made The Royal Tenenbaums". Vulture. Retrieved January 2, 2022. Morgenstern, Hans (May 24, 2013). "Frances Ha's Greta Gerwig on Lena Dunham, Woody Allen, and Her Dream of Directing". Miami New Times. Kohn, Eric (October 3, 2017). "Noah Baumbach Reveals the Key Movies That Made Him Want to Be a Filmmaker". Thompson, Anne (May 24, 2019). "Luca Guadagnino Defends Woody Allen and Calls Kyle MacLachlan 'the Eternal Masculine'". IndieWire. Retrieved March 6, 2020. "Nora Ephron and Lena Dunham". Criterion Channel. Archived from the original on March 21, 2020. Retrieved March 21, 2020. "Whit Stillman on 10 of his Biggest Influences". Vulture. August 10, 2015. Retrieved March 21, 2020. "'20th Century Women' Director Mike Mills On Honing Material From His Own Life: "I Don't Want To Make A Memoir"". Deadline Hollywood. January 4, 2017. Retrieved May 20, 2020. Jorgenson, Todd (September 5, 2014). "Filmmaker Ira Sachs on How Personal Experience Shaped Love Is Strange". D Magazine. Retrieved March 6, 2020. "Richard Linklater Talks BERNIE, a Third BEFORE SUNRISE, Woody Allen, Favorite Movies, and More". Collider. April 26, 2012. Retrieved March 21, 2020. Child 2010, p. 4. "Nicole Holofcener's Human Comedies". The New Yorker. July 30, 2018. Retrieved March 28, 2020. "Five Questions with MAGGIE'S PLAN Director Rebecca Miller". Scene Creek. June 12, 2016. Retrieved April 1, 2020. "Slums of Beverly Hills". Variety Magazine. May 25, 1998. Retrieved April 1, 2020. "Alex Ross Perry Is Pissed At the Film Industry and Not Afraid to Explain Himself". IndieWire. April 12, 2019. Retrieved March 21, 2020. ""Adventureland" Director Greg Mottola on First Jobs and Generation Gaps". IndieWire. January 18, 2009. Retrieved June 9, 2020. Rochlin, Margy (May 4, 2012). "Scriptless in Seattle: A Filmmaker's Map". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 8, 2012. Retrieved May 15, 2020. "Lena Dunham loves Woody Allen and Nora Ephron and Judd Apatow". The Baltimore Sun. February 10, 2011. Retrieved March 28, 2020. "Interview: Lawrence Michael Levine on going bigger with 'Wild Canaries'". Metro. February 27, 2015. Retrieved July 20, 2020. "Director Olivier Assayas' 'Non-Fiction' Is An Old-Fashioned, Fleet-Footed Bedroom Farce". WBUR. May 16, 2019. Retrieved October 1, 2020. "The Emotional, Sloppy, Manic World of the Safdie Brothers". FilmFestivals.com. August 13, 2020. Retrieved March 6, 2020. "What To Watch 'To Drown Out' The Voices In Your Head". NPR. Retrieved May 26, 2023. "In Conversation: Quentin Tarantino". Vulture. August 23, 2015. Retrieved April 10, 2020. Weinraub, Bernard (February 8, 1996). "The Man Who Helped Kelly Put His Best Foot Forward". The New York Times. Retrieved November 23, 2020. "Spike Lee defends Woody Allen against 'this cancel thing': 'Woody's a friend of mine'". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved June 13, 2020. "Pedro Almodóvar on Aging, Mom and 'Pain and Glory'". AARP.com. Retrieved July 17, 2020. "Mike Leigh's Top 10 Directors Poll". British Film Institute. Archived from the original on February 23, 2016. Retrieved May 27, 2020. "Asghar Farhadi's Top 10 Directors Poll". British Film Institute. Archived from the original on May 17, 2016. Retrieved May 27, 2020. "Martin McDonah's Top 10 Directors Poll". British Film Institute. Archived from the original on February 23, 2016. Retrieved May 27, 2020. "How Olivia Wilde Used Her Star-Studded 'Hannah And Her Sisters' To Reintroduce NYC To The Live Read". IndieWire. May 20, 2016. Retrieved May 20, 2020. "Jason Reitman to re-create Woody Allen's 'Manhattan' in live reading". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved May 20, 2020. "From Woody Allen to Wes Anderson: Edgar Wright names his top 100 comedy films of all time". Far Out. March 25, 2020. Retrieved November 16, 2020. "Why Bill Hader and Fred Armisen Are Parodying Documentaries in Their Latest, Ingenious Project". Smithsonian. Retrieved January 27, 2023. Ebert, Roger (May 25, 2011). "Midnight in Paris". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on January 19, 2018. Retrieved June 20, 2011 – via RogerEbert.com. "Star Wars hailed best film". BBC News. July 11, 1999. Retrieved November 3, 2021. Siskel, Gene; Ebert, Roger (May 1, 1980). "Take 2: Who's Funnier: Mel Brooks or Woody Allen?". Sneak Previews. Season 4. Chicago. PBS. "Wood Allen's Picks for 2012 Sight and Sound Poll". British Film Institute. Archived from the original on February 10, 2016. Retrieved May 27, 2020. "Woody Allen's Top 10 Films Revealed In Sight & Sound Greatest Film Poll". woodyallenpages.com. August 4, 2012. Retrieved May 27, 2020. "Woody Allen Lists the Greatest Films of All Time: Includes Classics by Bergman, Truffaut & Fellini". Open Culture. Retrieved May 27, 2020. Dowd, Maureen (May 13, 1987). "Film Stars Protest Coloring". The New York Times. Retrieved May 20, 2020. "Colorization of Black-and-White Movies". C-Span. Retrieved May 20, 2020. Allen, Woody. "True Colors". New York Review of Books. Retrieved May 20, 2020. Cruikshank, Douglas (October 19, 2006). "Martin Scorsese: Teaching Visual Literacy". Edutopia. George Lucas Educational Foundation. Retrieved November 3, 2014. Acuna, Kirsten (February 24, 2013). "Why Woody Allen Never Attends The Oscars". Business Insider. "APS Member History". search.amphilsoc.org. Retrieved April 21, 2021. McNary, Dave (November 11, 2015). "'Annie Hall' Named Funniest Screenplay by WGA Members". Variety. "Comedy Central's 100 Greatest Stand-Ups of All Time". Everything2.com. April 18, 2004. Archived from the original on July 15, 2012. Retrieved May 4, 2012. 100 Greatest Stand-Ups of All Time [Part 5] (YouTube). Comedy Central via Goofy Cartoon. Event occurs at 33:03. Archived from the original on December 11, 2021. Retrieved January 19, 2018. Thorpe, Vanessa (January 2, 2005). "Cook tops poll of comedy greats". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on January 19, 2018. Retrieved January 19, 2018. "Woody Allen: Rabbit Running". Time. July 3, 1972. p. 3. Archived from the original on May 1, 2008. Retrieved August 4, 2009. "Dick & Woody discuss particle physics". YouTube. Archived from the original on December 11, 2021. Retrieved November 18, 2013. "Stacey Nelkin". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on May 21, 2014. Retrieved September 3, 2018. Fox 1996, pp. 111–112. Bailey 2001, p. 61. Baxter 1998, pp. 226, 248, 249, 250, 253, 273–74, 385, 416. Baum, Gary (December 17, 2018). "Woody Allen's Secret Teen Lover Speaks: Sex, Power and a Conflicted Muse Who Inspired 'Manhattan'". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved December 17, 2018. Raechal Shewfelt (January 30, 2018). "Woody Allen defender Diane Keaton's long history with the director". Yahoo!. Mumford, Gwilym (January 30, 2018). "Diane Keaton: 'Woody Allen is my friend and I continue to believe him'". The Guardian – via www.theguardian.com. "Woody Allen Makes Rare L.A. Appearance at Diane Keaton AFI Event". The Hollywood Reporter. June 8, 2017. Lax, Eric (February 24, 1991). "Woody and Mia: A New York Story". The New York Times. Retrieved November 15, 2018. "Woody Allen, Mia Farrow family tree". CNN. May 11, 2016. Retrieved November 15, 2018. Stern, Marlow (February 10, 2014). "Inside the Shocking Custody Case Court Documents that Shed Light on the Dylan Farrow-Woody Allen Saga". The Daily Beast. "Son Born to Mia Farrow And Woody Allen". The New York Times. Associated Press. December 22, 1987. "Exclusive: Mia Farrow and Eight of Her Children Speak Out on Their Lives, Frank Sinatra, and the Scandals They've Endured". Vanity Fair. October 2, 2013. Archived from the original on October 31, 2013. Allen 2020, p. [page needed]. United States Congressional serial set. 1977. Congressional Serial Set. U.S. Government Printing Office. 1978. Orth, Maureen (August 5, 2008). "Mia's Story". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on February 21, 2009. Retrieved November 16, 2012. Merkin, Daphne (September 16, 2018). "After Decades of Silence, Soon-Yi Previn Speaks". Vulture. Retrieved November 14, 2018. Hoban, Phoebe (September 21, 1992). "Everything You Always Wanted to Know About Woody and Mia (But Were Afraid to Ask)". New York. pp. 40–. Retrieved November 14, 2018. Perez-Pena, Richard (March 23, 1993). "Nude Photographs Are Focus Of Woody Allen's Testimony". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 17, 2018. "A history of Woody Allen and Soon-Yi Previn describing their relationship, from "the heart wants what it wants" to "I was paternal"". Salon. July 30, 2015. Weber, Bruce (August 18, 1992). "Public Disclosures From the Private Life of Woody Allen". The New York Times. Retrieved November 14, 2018. Klepp, L. S. (February 18, 2000). "The Unruly Life of Woody Allen". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved November 14, 2018. Collins, Glenn (December 25, 1997). "Mixed Reviews Greet Woody Allen Marriage". The New York Times. Retrieved November 14, 2018. "Woody Allen and Wife Have a Baby Daughter". The New York Times. April 27, 1999. Retrieved November 14, 2018. Shoard, Catherine (August 25, 2016). "Woody Allen: 'There are traumas in life that weaken us. That's what has happened to me'". The Guardian. Retrieved November 14, 2018. Thurman, Judith (September 21, 2016). "Tour Woody Allen's English Country–Style Manhattan Townhouse". Architectural Digest. Retrieved November 14, 2018. Marks, Peter (April 10, 1993). "Sitter Questions Allen Actions With Daughter". The New York Times. Groteke 1994, p. [page needed]After Alison Stickland left Frog Hollow on the afternoon of August 4, she told Casey in passing, "I had seen something at Mia's that was bothering me." What she claimed to have seen was this: In the television room that afternoon, Dylan was sitting on the sofa, and Woody was kneeling on the floor, facing her, with his head in her lap. Casey phoned Mia the next day, August 5, and, in passing, related Alison's remark. Barron, James (August 19, 1992). "Striking Back, Woody Allen Denies Child Sex-Abuse Allegation". The New York Times. Weber, Bruce (August 14, 1992). "Woody Allen Files Child-Custody Lawsuit". The New York Times. Perez-Pena, Richard (March 19, 1993). "Woody Allen Says Report Clears Him". The New York Times. Marks, Peter (April 28, 1993). "Yale Study About Allen Flawed, Expert Testifies". The New York Times. Henneberger, Melinda (September 25, 1993). "Connecticut Prosecutor Won't File Charges Against Woody Allen". The New York Times. Marks, Peter (June 8, 1993). "Allen Loses to Farrow in Bitter Custody Battle". The New York Times. Wilk, Elliot J. (July 6, 1993), Custody Case Ruling, Supreme Court: New York County, The evidence suggests that it is unlikely that he could be successfully prosecuted for sexual abuse. I am less certain, however, than is the Yale-New Haven team, that the evidence proves conclusively that there was no sexual abuse. Wilk, Elliot J. (June 7, 1993), Custody Case Ruling, Supreme Court: New York County, I did not see it as sexual, but I saw it as inappropriately intense because it excluded everybody else Maco, Frank, S. (November 24, 1993). "Statement of Decision 9-24-1993". Scribd. Retrieved March 23, 2019.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Perez-Pena, Richard (October 26, 1993). "Agency Drops Abuse Inquiry in Allen Case". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved March 24, 2019. "Golden Globes 2014: Mia and Ronan Farrow tweet about Woody Allen". Entertainment Weekly. January 13, 2014. Retrieved March 28, 2020. Pulver, Andrew (January 13, 2014). "Woody Allen Golden Globe greeted with derision by Mia and Ronan Farrow". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved March 28, 2020. Kristof, Nicholas (February 2, 2014). "Dylan Farrow's Story". The New York Times. Archived from the original on February 2, 2014. Retrieved September 11, 2018. Farrow, Dylan (February 1, 2014). "An Open Letter From Dylan Farrow". On the Ground. Retrieved September 8, 2020. Allen, Woody (February 9, 2014). "Woody Allen Speaks Out". The New York Times. Archived from the original on February 8, 2014. Retrieved September 14, 2020. Freeman, Hadley (December 11, 2020). "Moses Farrow: 'I'd be very happy to take my father's surname'". The Guardian. Retrieved December 28, 2021. Holson, Laura M. (May 24, 2018). "Moses Farrow Defends Woody Allen, and His Family Pushes Back". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on May 24, 2018. Retrieved December 28, 2021. Hoyle, Ben (May 25, 2018). "Mia Farrow abused me, says son Moses". The Times. ISSN 0140-0460. Retrieved February 3, 2022. "A SON SPEAKS OUT By Moses Farrow". A SON SPEAKS OUT By Moses Farrow. Retrieved December 28, 2021. Hample, Stuart (October 19, 2009). "How I turned Woody Allen into a comic strip". The Guardian. Archived from the original on January 14, 2014. Retrieved April 13, 2016. "Stuart Hample". lambiek.net. Retrieved March 25, 2021. "Woody Allen: A Life in Film (2002)". Turner Classic Movies. Retrieved November 20, 2021. "Watch Meetin' WA: Jean-Luc Godard Films Woody Allen in 1986 Short Film". Open Culture. Retrieved November 20, 2021. Erickson, Amanda (January 22, 2018). "'An abuser and pervert': Women in Spain want a statue of Woody Allen removed". Retrieved March 12, 2022. Bradshaw, Peter (June 7, 2012). "Woody Allen: A Documentary – review". The Guardian – via www.theguardian.com. "Woody Allen autobiography to be published next month". Guardian. Associated Press. March 3, 2020. Retrieved March 3, 2020. Pineda, Dorany (March 6, 2020). "Publisher cancels Woody Allen's memoir a month before publication". LA Times. Retrieved March 6, 2020. Sperling, Nicole (February 5, 2021). "Filmmakers Look at Woody Allen Abuse Allegations in Four-Part Series". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 28, 2021. Retrieved February 5, 2021. Siegel, Tatiana (February 5, 2021). "Secret, Explosive Woody Allen Doc Series From Kirby Dick, Amy Ziering Coming to HBO". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved February 5, 2021. Ali, Lorraine (February 19, 2021). "Review: HBO's devastating 'Allen v. Farrow' is a nail in the coffin of Woody Allen's legacy". Los Angeles Times. Brodsky, Rachel (February 22, 2021). "Allen v Farrow will sound the death knell for Woody Allen's career – review". The Independent. Retrieved May 19, 2021. Freeman, Hadley (March 3, 2021). "Allen v Farrow is pure PR. Why else would it omit so much?". The Guardian. Retrieved March 15, 2021. Rahman, Abid (February 21, 2021). "Woody Allen, Soon-Yi Previn Respond to 'Allen v. Farrow' Filmmakers: "These Documentarians Had No Interest in the Truth"". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved February 21, 2021. Stern, Marlow (March 9, 2021). "'Allen v. Farrow' Filmmakers Call Out Woody Allen: 'What Are You Afraid Of?'". The Daily Beast. Retrieved May 19, 2021. "Woody Allen on Life, Films and Whatever Works". National Public Radio. June 15, 2009. Allen, Woody; Luttazzi, Daniele Daniele (2004). Rivincite (in Italian). Bompiani. ISBN 978-88-452-3306-7. Allen, Woody (2020). Apropos of Nothing (1st ed.). Arcade Publishing. ISBN 978-1-951627-34-8. OCLC 1146226397. Bailey, Peter J. (2001). The Reluctant Film Art of Woody Allen. University Press of Kentucky. ISBN 978-0813190419. Baxter, John (1998). Woody Allen: A Biography. New York: Carroll & Graf. ISBN 978-0786708079. Björkman, Stig (1993). Woody Allen on Woody Allen. Faber & Faber. Child, Doreen (2010). Charlie Kaufman: Confessions of an Original Mind. Praeger. ISBN 9780313358616. Ebert, Roger (November 2006). Roger Ebert's Movie Yearbook 2007. Andrews McMeel Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7407-6157-7. Evanier, David (2015). Woody: The Biography. New York City: St. Martin's Press. ISBN 978-1250047267. Finch, John; Cox, Michael; Giles, Marjorie (November 8, 2003). Granada Television--The First Generation. Manchester University Press. ISBN 978-0-7190-6515-6. Fox, Julian (1996). Woody: Movies from Manhattan. Woodstock, New York: Overlook Press. ISBN 978-0879516925. Galef, David (February 21, 2003). "Getting Even: Literary Posterity and the Case for Woody Allen". South Atlantic Review. 64 (2): 146–160. doi:10.2307/3201987. JSTOR 3201987. Gross, Terry (January 27, 2012). "Woody Allen: Blending Real Life With Fiction". Fresh Air. Archived from the original on September 11, 2012. Retrieved April 7, 2012. Groteke, Kristi (1994). Mia & Woody: Love and Betrayal. Carroll & Graf. ISBN 9780786700660. OCLC 1036704501. After Alison Stickland left Frog Hollow on the afternoon of August 4, she told Casey in passing, "I had seen something at Mia's that was bothering me." What she claimed to have seen was this: In the television room that afternoon, Dylan was sitting on the sofa, and Woody was kneeling on the floor, facing her, with his head in her lap. Casey phoned Mia the next day, August 5, and, in passing, related Alison's remark. Johnson, Lady Bird (November 1, 2007). A White House Diary. University of Texas Press. ISBN 978-0-292-71749-7. Kakutani, Michiko (1995). "Woody Allen, The Art of Humor No. 1". The Paris Review. Fall 1995 (136). Retrieved November 14, 2018. Lax, Eric (1992). Woody Allen: A Biography. Da Capo Press. ISBN 978-0-306-80985-9. Lax, Eric; Allen, Woody (2009). Conversations with Woody Allen: His Films, the Movies, and Moviemaking. Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 978-1-4000-3149-8. Meade, Marion (2000). The unruly life of Woody Allen: a biography. New York: Scribner. ISBN 978-0-684-83374-3. OCLC 42291110. Nachman, Gerald (2003). Seriously Funny: The Rebel Comedians of the 1950s and 1960s. Pantheon Books. ISBN 978-0-375-41030-7. Norwood, Stephen Harlan; Pollack, Eunice G. (2008). Encyclopedia of American Jewish history – Stephen Harlan Norwood, Eunice G. Pollack – Google Books. Bloomsbury Academic. ISBN 9781851096381. Retrieved July 24, 2013. Stevens, Matt; Johnson, Claudia (March 31, 2016). Script Partners: How to Succeed at Co-Writing for Film & TV: How to Succeed at Co-Writing for Film & TV. CRC Press. ISBN 978-1-317-41792-7. Woody Allen at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Official website Woody Allen at IMDb  Woody Allen at the TCM Movie Database Woody Allen on National Public Radio (Fresh Air), June 15, 2009