Hubertus or Hubert (c. 656 – 30 May 727 A.D.) was a Christian saint who became the first bishop of Liège in 708 A.D. He is the patron saint of hunters, mathematicians, opticians and metalworkers. Known as the "Apostle of the Ardennes", he was called upon, until the early 20th century, to cure rabies through the use of the traditional Saint Hubert's Key. Hubert was widely venerated during the Middle Ages. The iconography of his legend is entangled with the legend of the martyr Saint Eustace. The Bollandists published seven early lives of Hubertus (Acta Sanctorum, November 3, 759 – 930 A.D.); the first of these was the work of a contemporary, although it offers few details. Hubertus died 30 May 727 A.D. in or near a place called (in Latin) Fura. In the later Middle Ages, this location was claimed to have been identified as Tervuren near Brussels; recent scholarship, however, considers Voeren (Fourons), a location much closer to Liège than Brussels, to be the saint's likelier resting place. His feast day is 3 November. Hubert was born about the year 656, the eldest son of a Frankish duke. At the age of 10 he nearly died from a fever. As a youth, Hubert was sent to the Neustrian court of Theuderic III (r. 673–691) at Paris, where his charm and agreeable address led to his investment with the dignity of "count of the palace". Like many nobles of the time, Hubert was a hunting enthusiast. About this time (682), Hubert married Floribanne, daughter of Dagobert, Count of Leuven. (Their son Floribert of Liège later would succeed his father as Bishop of Liège - in office: 727 to c. 737; bishoprics were all but accounted as fiefs heritable in the great families of the Merovingian kingdoms.) Hubert moved to the Austrasian court where he was warmly welcomed by Pepin of Herstal, Mayor of the palace, who entitled him almost immediately Grand Master of the household. Hubert's wife died giving birth to their son Floribert, and his grief prompted him to retreat from the court. He withdrew into the forests of the Ardennes and gave himself up entirely to hunting. Legend holds that on a Good Friday morning, while the faithful were in church, Hubert was hunting in the forest. As he pursued a magnificent stag or hart, the animal turned and Hubert was astounded to see a crucifix floating between its antlers. He heard a voice saying: "Hubert unless thou turnest to the Lord and leadest a holy life, thou shalt quickly go down into Hell." Hubert dismounted and prostrated himself, and after asking "Lord, what wouldst Thou have me do?" is told, "Go and seek Lambert, and he will instruct you." The story of the stag first appears in one of the later legendary hagiographies (Bibliotheca hagiographic Latina, nos. 3994–4002) and has been appropriated from the legend of Saint Eustace or Placidus. It was only attributed to Saint Hubert in the 15th century. Hubert set out immediately for Maastricht, to meet Lambert, a bishop who received him kindly and became his spiritual director. Hubert renounced all his very considerable honors and gave up his birthright to the Aquitaine to his younger brother, Odo, whom he made guardian of his infant son, Floribert. Having distributed all his personal wealth among the poor, Lambert sent him to the Ardennes to live amongst the people and the forest creatures. Hubert studied for the priesthood, was ordained, and soon afterward became one of Lambert's chief associates in the administration of his diocese. At the request of Lambert, Hubert made a pilgrimage to Rome in 708 in Lambert's name, but during his absence, Lambert was assassinated in Liège by the followers of Pepin. According to the hagiographies of Hubert, this act was simultaneously revealed to the pope in a vision, together with an injunction to appoint Hubert bishop of Maastricht. Hubert distributed his episcopal revenues among the poor, was diligent in fasting and prayer, and became well known for his eloquence in the pulpit. In 720, in obedience to a vision, Hubert translated St. Lambert's remains from Maastricht to Liège with great pomp and ceremony, with several neighboring bishops assisting. A basilica for the relics was built upon the site of Lambert's martyrdom, and was consecrated as a cathedral the following year, the see being removed from Maastricht to Liège, then only a small village. This laid the foundation of the future greatness of Liège, of which Lambert is honored as patron, and Hubert as founder and first bishop. Hubert actively evangelized among pagans in the extensive Ardennes forests and in Toxandria, a district stretching from near Tongeren to the confluence of the rivers Waal and the Rhine. He gained the trust (and the faith) of its people through the outdoors-man skills he acquired in his hunting life. He became a sought authority whenever matters of the forest came up. Hubertus died peacefully in a place called Fura, located 30 miles from Liège, 30 May 727 or 728. Initially he was buried in the collegiate St Peter's Church, Liège, but his bones were translated to the Benedictine Abbey of Amdain in the Ardennes in 825. The abbey became a locus for pilgrimages, until Hubert's coffin disappeared during the Reformation. His feast day is 3 November, probably the date of the translation of his relics to Amdain. Hubert was widely venerated in the Middle Ages and partly because of his noble birth, several military orders were named after him: the Bavarian, the Bohemian International Order of St. Hubertus and that of the Archbishop-Elector of Cologne. Hubertus, along with Quirinus of Neuss, Cornelius and Anthony, was venerated as one of the Four Holy Marshals (Vier Marschälle Gottes) in the Rhineland. The St. Hubertus Orden (Order of Saint Hubert), a chivalric order, was founded in 1444 by Gerhard V of Jülich and Berg. In the Anglican Communion, at least two churches were dedicated to Saint Hubertus within the Church of England. St. Hubert of Liège is patron of archers; dogs; forest workers; trappers; hunting and huntsmen; opticians; mathematicians; metal workers; smelters and the city of Liège. St. Hubert has been described as the patron saint of hunters and is honored by sportsmen as the originator of ethical hunting behavior. However, he renounced hunting after having his vision of encountering the stag, as it was believed that God had seen his hunting life as an unholy, idolatrous one which would lead him to Hell. When Hubert became a priest, clergy were subsequently forbidden to hunt and if they did, would be required to do penance. Hubert is honored among sport hunters as the originator of ethical hunting behavior. In some versions of the story, the stag is said to have lectured Hubert to hold animals in higher regard and have compassion for them as God's creatures with value in their own right. For example, the hunter ought to only shoot when a clean, quick, and therefore humane kill is assured. He ought to shoot only old stags which are past their prime breeding years and forego a much-anticipated shot on a trophy to instead euthanize a sick or injured animal that might appear on the scene. Further, one ought never to shoot a female with young in tow, to assure the young deer have a mother to guide them to food during the winter. Such is the legacy of Hubert, which is still taught today and who held in high regard in the extensive, rigorous German and Austrian hunter education courses. His legacy is also followed by the French chasse à courre (riding to hounds) masters, huntsmen, and followers who hunt deer, boar, and roe on horseback and are the last direct heirs of Hubert in Europe. Chasse à course is currently enjoying a revival in France. These hunters apply a specific set of ethics, rituals, rules, and tactics that date from the early Middle Ages. Hubert is venerated every year by the hunts in formal ceremonies. The St. Hubert Club of Great Britain is dedicated to responsible deer management. The St. Hubertus Club Chicago is a German cultural organization that promotes German heritage and hunting in the German tradition. The Svätý Anton manor house, which houses a Forestry, Wood and Hunting Museum, hosts a festival, St. Hubertus Days each September. Saint Hubertus Deer, the coat of arms of the municipality of Hollola The Vision of Saint Hubert (c. 1617) by J. Brueghel and P. P. Rubens, Prado, Madrid. A print in the style of an illuminated manuscript showing Hubert of Liège with the stag. Cenotaph of Hubertus in the basilica of Saint-Hubert (1847) Russian Orthodox church and monastery, interior in Sint Hubert, Netherlands Stained glass window in St. Ethelbert's Church, Herringswell, Suffolk, dedicated to the memory of Llewellyn Sidney Davies. A zinc statue of Saint Hubert and a deer outside Bistra Castle in Slovenia Depiction of the miracle of the stag at Château d'Amboise, France. Glass window with St. Hubert from Vorarlberg, Austria. St. Hubert's stag is the logo of Jägermeister ("Master Hunter") liqueur. Saint Hubertus Deer, the coat of arms of the city of Grodno Saints portal Chronological list of saints in the 8th century Jägermeister Saint Eustace St. Hubert's hound Crystal, David (1994). The Cambridge Biographical Encyclopedia. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 471. ISBN 0521434211. St Hubert's Key in the Science Museum, London R. de la Haye, "Lambertus, laatste bisschop van Maastricht; Hubertus, eerste bisschop van Luik: Hun eigentijdse levensbeschrijvingen", Publications de la Société Historique et Archéologique dans le Limbourg (PSHAL) 143 (2007), 9–66. Brown, C.F. Wemyss. "St. Hubert." The Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol. 7. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1910. 12 Aug. 2014 "How did Saint Hubertus Become the Patron Saint of Hunters?", County Deer Stalking, January 15, 2019 Delehaye, Hippolyte (1911). "Hubert, St" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 13 (11th ed.). p. 846. Guérin, Paul. Les Petits Bollandistes: Vies des Saints, Bloud et Barral: Paris, 1882, Vol. 13 "History of St Hubertus", international order of Saint Hubertus Rudge, F.M. "Military Orders of St. Hubert." The Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol. 7. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1910. 13 Aug. 2014 Quirinus von Rom (von Neuss) – Ökumenisches Heiligenlexikon marschaelle "Die Kapelle". Archived from the original on 11 February 2012. Retrieved 28 March 2008. History of Orders of Chivalry Farmer, David Hugh (2004). The Oxford Dictionary of Saints. Oxford University Press. p. 414. ISBN 9780198609490. Two churches were dedicated to him in England and the Sarum calendar eventually included his feast. "Saint Hubert of Liege". CatholicSaints.Info. 3 January 2009. Retrieved 18 January 2018. The School of Compassion by Dr. Deborah Jones, Gracewing 2001 The St. Hubert Club of Great Britain St. Hubertus Club Chicago "St. Hubertus Days", Ministry of Transport of the Slovak Republic Wikimedia Commons has media related to Saint Hubertus. Painting from the National Gallery, London The Conversion of Saint Hubert