Uzbekistan, officially the Republic of Uzbekistan, is a country located in Central Asia. It is surrounded by five countries: Kazakhstan to the north, Kyrgyzstan to the northeast, Tajikistan to the southeast, Afghanistan to the south, and Turkmenistan to the southwest, making it one of only two doubly landlocked countries on Earth, along with Liechtenstein. Uzbekistan is part of the Turkic world, as well as a member of the Organization of Turkic States. Uzbek is the majority language, while Russian is widely spoken and understood. Islam is the predominant religion, and most Uzbeks are Sunni Muslims. The first recorded settlers in the land of what is modern Uzbekistan were Eastern Iranian nomads, known as Scythians, who founded kingdoms in Khwarazm, Bactria, and Sogdia in the 8th–6th centuries BC, as well as Fergana and Margiana in the 3rd century BC – 6th century AD. The area was incorporated into the Achaemenid Empire and, after a period of Greco-Bactrian rule, was ruled by the Parthian Empire and later by the Sasanian Empire, until the Muslim conquest of Persia in the seventh century. The early Muslim conquests and the subsequent Samanid Empire converted most of the people into adherents of Islam. During this period, cities began to grow rich from the Silk Road, and became a center of the Islamic Golden Age. The local Khwarazmian dynasty was destroyed by the Mongol invasion in the 13th century, leading to a dominance by Turkic peoples. Timur (Tamerlane) in the 14th century established the Timurid Empire. Its capital was Samarkand, which became a centre of science under the rule of Ulugh Beg, giving birth to the Timurid Renaissance. The territories of the Timurid dynasty were conquered by Uzbek Shaybanids in the 16th century. Conquests by Emperor Babur towards the east led to the foundation of the Mughal Empire in India. All of Central Asia was gradually incorporated into the Russian Empire during the 19th century, with Tashkent becoming the political center of Russian Turkestan. In 1924, national delimitation created the Uzbek Soviet Socialist Republic as a republic of the Soviet Union. It declared independence as the Republic of Uzbekistan in 1991. Uzbekistan is a secular state, with a presidential constitutional government in place. Uzbekistan comprises 12 regions (vilayats), Tashkent City, and one autonomous republic, Karakalpakstan. While non-governmental organisations have defined Uzbekistan as "an authoritarian state with limited civil rights", significant reforms under Uzbekistan's second president, Shavkat Mirziyoyev, have been made following the death of the first president, Islam Karimov. Owing to these reforms, relations with the neighbouring countries of Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, and Afghanistan have drastically improved. A United Nations report of 2020 found much progress toward achieving the UN's Sustainable Development Goals. The Uzbek economy is in a gradual transition to the market economy, with foreign trade policy being based on import substitution. In September 2017, the country's currency became fully convertible at market rates. Uzbekistan is a major producer and exporter of cotton. With the gigantic power-generation facilities from the Soviet era and an ample supply of natural gas, Uzbekistan has become the largest electricity producer in Central Asia. From 2018 to 2021, the republic received a BB− sovereign credit rating by both Standard and Poor (S&P) and Fitch Ratings. The Brookings Institution described Uzbekistan as having large liquid assets, high economic growth, low public debt, and a low GDP per capita. Uzbekistan is a member of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), United Nations (UN) and the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO). The name "Uzbegistán" appears in the 16th century Tarikh-i Rashidi. The origin of the word Uzbek remains disputed. "free", "independent" or "own master/leader", requiring an amalgamation of uz (Turkic: "own"), bek ("master" or "leader") eponymously named after Oghuz Khagan, also known as Oghuz Beg A contraction of Uğuz, earlier Oğuz, that is, Oghuz (tribe), amalgamated with bek "oguz-leader". All three have the middle syllable/phoneme being cognate with the Turkic title Beg. The name of the country was often spelled as "Ўзбекистон" in Uzbek Cyrillic or "Узбекистан" in Russian during Soviet rule. The region currently known as the country of Uzbekistan has been referred to by many names over the millennia. The name, Uzbekistan first appears in 16th century literature. Other names for the region include: Transoxonia, Sogdia, and the Khanate of Bukhara. In the 14th century the region served as the birthplace, home, and capital of Tamerlane. Under Tamerlane, the region was a part of the Timurid Empire which extended from the Black Sea to the Arabian Sea, and to just outside of Delhi, India The first people known to have inhabited Central Asia were Scythians who came from the northern grasslands of what is now Uzbekistan, sometime in the first millennium BC; when these nomads settled in the region they built an extensive irrigation system along the rivers. At this time, cities such as Bukhoro (Bukhara) and Samarqand (Samarkand) emerged as centres of government and high culture. By the fifth century BC, the Bactrian, Sogdian, and Tokharian states dominated the region. As East Asia began to develop its silk trade with the West, Using an extensive network of cities and rural settlements in the province of Transoxiana, and further east in what is today Xinjiang, the Sogdian intermediaries became the wealthiest of these merchants. As a result of this trade on what became known as the Silk Route, Bukhara and Samarkand eventually became extremely wealthy cities, and at times Transoxiana (Mawarannahr) was one of the most influential and powerful provinces of antiquity. In 327 BC, Macedonian ruler Alexander the Great conquered the Persian Empire provinces of Sogdiana and Bactria, which contained the territories of modern Uzbekistan. Popular resistance to the conquest was fierce, causing Alexander's army to be bogged down in the region that became the northern part of the Macedonian Greco-Bactrian Kingdom. The kingdom was replaced with the Yuezhi-dominated Kushan Empire in the first century BC. For many centuries thereafter the region of Uzbekistan was ruled by the Parthian and Sassanid Empires, as well as by other empires, for example, those formed by the Turkic Gokturk peoples. The Muslim conquests from the seventh century onward saw the Arabs bring Islam to Uzbekistan. In the same period, Islam began to take root among the nomadic Turkic peoples. In the eighth century, Transoxiana, the territory between the Amudarya and Syrdarya rivers, was conquered by the Arabs (Qutayba ibn Muslim), becoming a focal point soon after the Islamic Golden Age. In the ninth and tenth centuries, Transoxiana was brought into the Samanid State. In the tenth century it was gradually dominated by the Turkic-ruled Karakhanids, as well as their Seljuk (Sultan Sanjar) overseer's. The Mongol conquest under Genghis Khan during the 13th century brought change to the region. The invasions of Bukhara, Samarkand, Urgench and others resulted in mass murders and unprecedented destruction, which saw parts of Khwarezmia being completely razed. Following the death of Genghis Khan in 1227, his empire was divided among his four sons and his family members. Despite the potential for serious fragmentation, there was an orderly succession for several generations, and control of most of Transoxiana stayed in the hands of the direct descendants of Chagatai Khan, the second son of Genghis Khan. Orderly succession, prosperity, and internal peace prevailed in the Chaghatai lands, and the Mongol Empire as a whole remained a strong and united kingdom, the Golden Horde. In the early 14th century, however, as the Persian empire began to break up into its constituent parts, the Chaghatai territory was disrupted as the princes of various tribal groups competed for influence. One tribal chieftain, Timur (Tamerlane), emerged from these struggles in the 1380s as the dominant force in Transoxiana. Although he was not a descendant of Genghis Khan, Timur became the de facto ruler of Transoxiana and proceeded to conquer all of western Central Asia, Iran, the Caucasus, Mesopotamia, Asia Minor, and the southern steppe region north of the Aral Sea. He also invaded Russia before dying during an invasion of China in 1405. Timur was also known for his extreme brutality and his conquests were accompanied by genocidal massacres in the cities he occupied. Timur initiated the last flowering of Transoxiana by gathering together numerous artisans and scholars from the vast lands he had conquered into his capital, Samarkand, thus imbuing his empire with a rich Perso-Islamic culture. During his reign and the reigns of his immediate descendants, a wide range of religious and palatial construction masterpieces were undertaken in Samarkand and other population centres. Tamerlane also established an exchange of medical discoveries and patronised physicians, scientists and artists from the neighbouring regions such as India; His grandson Ulugh Beg was one of the world's first great astronomers. It was during the Timurid dynasty that Turkic, in the form of the Chaghatai dialect, became a literary language in its own right in Transoxiana, although the Timurids were Persianate in culture. The greatest Chaghataid writer, Ali-Shir Nava'i, was active in the city of Herat (now in northwestern Afghanistan) in the second half of the 15th century. The Timurid state quickly split in half after the death of Timur. The chronic internal fighting of the Timurids attracted the attention of the Uzbek nomadic tribes living to the north of the Aral Sea. In 1501, the Uzbek forces began a wholesale invasion of Transoxiana. The slave trade in the Emirate of Bukhara became prominent and was firmly established at this time. The Khanate of Bukhara was eventually invaded by the foreign government of Persia in 1510, and then became a part of the Persian empire of the day. Before the arrival of the Russians, present-day Uzbekistan was divided between the Emirate of Bukhara and the khanates of Khiva and Kokand. In the 19th century, the Russian Empire began to expand and spread into Central Asia. There were 210,306 Russians living in Uzbekistan in 1912. The "Great Game" period is generally regarded as running from approximately 1813 to the Anglo-Russian Convention of 1907. A second, less intensive phase followed the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917. At the start of the 19th century, there were some 3,200 kilometres (2,000 mi) separating British India and the outlying regions of Tsarist Russia. Much of the land between was unmapped. In the early 1890s, Sven Hedin passed through Uzbekistan, during his first expedition. By the beginning of 1920, Central Asia was firmly in the hands of Russia and, despite some early resistance to the Bolsheviks, Uzbekistan and the rest of Central Asia became a part of the Soviet Union. On 27 October 1924 the Uzbek Soviet Socialist Republic was created. From 1941 to 1945, during World War II, 1,433,230 people from Uzbekistan fought in the Red Army against Nazi Germany. A number also fought on the German side. As many as 263,005 Uzbek soldiers died in the battlefields of the Eastern Front, and 32,670 went missing in action. During the Soviet-Afghan War, a number of Uzbek troops fought in neighbouring Afghanistan. At least 1,500 lost their lives and thousands more paralysed. On 20 June 1990, Uzbekistan declared its state sovereignty. On 31 August 1991, Uzbekistan declared independence after the failed coup attempt in Moscow. 1 September was proclaimed National Independence Day. The Soviet Union was dissolved on 26 December of that year. Islam Karimov, previously first secretary of the Communist Party of Uzbekistan since 1989, was elected president of the Uzbek Soviet Socialist Republic in 1990. After the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, he was elected president of independent Uzbekistan. An authoritarian ruler, Karimov died in September 2016. He was replaced by his long-time Prime Minister, Shavkat Mirziyoyev, on 14 December of the same year. On 6 November 2021, Mirziyoyev was sworn into his second term in office, after gaining a landslide victory in presidential election. Uzbekistan has an area of 448,978 square kilometres (173,351 sq mi). It is the 56th largest country in the world by area and the 40th by population. Among the CIS countries, it is the fourth largest by area and the second largest by population. Uzbekistan lies between latitudes 37° and 46° N, and longitudes 56° and 74° E. It stretches 1,425 kilometres (885 mi) from west to east and 930 kilometres (580 mi) from north to south. Bordering Kazakhstan and the Aralkum Desert (former Aral Sea) to the north and northwest, Turkmenistan and Afghanistan to the southwest, Tajikistan to the southeast, and Kyrgyzstan to the northeast, Uzbekistan is one of the largest Central Asian states and the only Central Asian state to border all the other four. Uzbekistan also shares a short border (less than 150 km or 93 mi) with Afghanistan to the south. Uzbekistan is a hot, dry, landlocked country. It is one of two doubly landlocked countries in the world (that is, a landlocked country completely surrounded by other landlocked countries), the other being Liechtenstein. In addition, due to its location within a series of endorheic basins, none of its rivers lead to the sea. Less than 10% of its territory is intensively cultivated irrigated land in river valleys and oases, and formerly in the Aral Sea, which has largely desiccated in one of the world's worst environmental disasters. The rest is the vast Kyzylkum Desert and mountains. The highest point in Uzbekistan is Alpomish Peak, at 4,668 metres (15,315 ft) above sea level, in the southern part of the Gissar Range in the Surxondaryo Region on the border with Tajikistan, just northwest of Dushanbe. The climate in Uzbekistan is continental, with little precipitation expected annually (100–200 millimetres, or 3.9–7.9 inches). The average summer high temperature tends to be 40 °C (104 °F), while the average winter low temperature is around −23 °C (−9 °F). Uzbekistan is home to six terrestrial ecoregions: Alai-Western Tian Shan steppe, Gissaro-Alai open woodlands, Badghyz and Karabil semi-desert, Central Asian northern desert, Central Asian riparian woodlands, and Central Asian southern desert. Uzbekistan has a rich and diverse natural environment. However, decades of Soviet policies in pursuit of greater cotton production have resulted in a catastrophic scenario with the agricultural industry being the main contributor to the pollution and devastation of both air and water in the country. The Aral Sea was once the fourth-largest inland sea on Earth, humidifying the surrounding air and irrigating the arid land. Since the 1960s, when the overuse of the Aral Sea water began, it has shrunk to about 10% of its former area and divided into parts, with only the southern part of the narrow western lobe of the South Aral Sea remaining permanently in Uzbekistan. Much of the water was and continues to be used for the irrigation of cotton fields, a crop requiring a large amount of water to grow. Due to the Aral Sea loss, high salinity and contamination of the soil with heavy elements are especially widespread in Karakalpakstan, the region of Uzbekistan adjacent to the Aral Sea. The bulk of the nation's water resources is used for farming, which accounts for nearly 84% of the water use and contributes to high soil salinity. Heavy use of pesticides and fertilisers for cotton growing further aggravates soil contamination. According to the UNDP (United Nations Development Program), climate risk management in Uzbekistan should consider its ecological safety. Numerous oil and gas deposits have been discovered in the south of the country. Uzbekistan has also been home to seismic activity, as evidenced by the 1902 Andijan earthquake, 2011 Fergana Valley earthquake, and 1966 Tashkent earthquake. A dam collapse at Sardoba Reservoir in May 2020 flooded much farmland and many villages. The devastation extended into areas inside neighbouring Kazakhstan. After Uzbekistan declared independence from the Soviet Union in 1991, an election was held, and Islam Karimov was elected as the first President of Uzbekistan on 29 December 1991. The elections of the Oliy Majlis (Parliament or Supreme Assembly) were held under a resolution adopted by the 16th Supreme Soviet in 1994. In that year, the Supreme Soviet was replaced by the Oliy Majlis. The third elections for the bicameral 150-member Oliy Majlis, the Legislative Chamber, and the 100-member Senate for five-year terms, were held on 27 December 2009. The second elections were held from December 2004 to January 2005. The Oliy Majlis was unicameral up to 2004. Its size increased from 69 deputies (members) in 1994 to 120 in 2004–05 and currently stands at 150. Karimov's first presidential term was extended to 2000 via a referendum, and he was re-elected in 2000, 2007, and 2015, each time receiving over 90% of the vote. Most international observers refused to participate in the process and did not recognise the results, dismissing them as not meeting basic standards. The 2002 referendum also included a plan for a bicameral parliament consisting of a lower house (the Oliy Majlis) and an upper house (Senate). Members of the lower house are to be "full-time" legislators. Elections for the new bicameral parliament took place on 26 December. Following Islam Karimov's death on 2 September 2016, the Oliy Majlis appointed Prime Minister Shavkat Mirziyoyev as interim president. Although the chairman of the Senate, Nigmatilla Yuldashev, was constitutionally designated as Karimov's successor, Yuldashev proposed that Mirziyoyev take the post of the interim president instead in light of Mirziyoyev's "many years of experience". Mirziyoyev was subsequently elected as the country's second president in the December 2016 presidential election, winning 88.6% of the vote, and was sworn in on 14 December. Deputy Prime Minister Abdulla Aripov replaced him as prime minister. Mirziyoyev removed most of Karimov's officials and urged the government to employ "new, young people who love their country." After a year in office, Mirziyoyev moved away from many of his predecessor's policies. He visited all the Uzbek regions and big cities to get acquainted with the implementation of the projects and reforms which he ordered. Many analysts and Western media compared his rule with Chinese Communist Party leader Deng Xiaoping or Soviet Communist Party general secretary Mikhail Gorbachev. His rule has been quoted as being an "Uzbek Spring". Uzbekistan joined the Commonwealth of Independent States in December 1991. However, it is opposed to reintegration and withdrew from the CIS collective security arrangement in 1999. Since that time, Uzbekistan has participated in the CIS peacekeeping force in Tajikistan and in UN-organized groups to help resolve the Tajikistan and Afghanistan conflicts, both of which it sees as posing threats to its own stability. Previously close to Washington (which gave Uzbekistan half a billion dollars in aid in 2004, about a quarter of its military budget), the government of Uzbekistan has recently restricted American military use of the airbase at Karshi-Khanabad for air operations in neighbouring Afghanistan. Uzbekistan was an active supporter of U.S. efforts against worldwide terrorism. The relationship between Uzbekistan and the United States began to deteriorate after the so-called "colour revolutions" in Georgia and Ukraine (and to a lesser extent Kyrgyzstan). When the U.S. joined in a call for an independent international investigation of the bloody events at Andijan, the relationship further declined, and President Islam Karimov changed the political alignment of the country to bring it closer to Russia and China. In late July 2005, the government of Uzbekistan ordered the United States to vacate an airbase in Karshi-Kanabad (near Uzbekistan's border with Afghanistan) within 180 days. Karimov had offered use of the base to the U.S. shortly after 9/11. It is also believed by some Uzbeks that the protests in Andijan were brought about by the UK and U.S. influences in the area of Andijan. This is another reason for the hostility between Uzbekistan and the West. Uzbekistan is a member of the United Nations (UN) (since 2 March 1992), the Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council (EAPC), Partnership for Peace (PfP), and the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE). It belongs to the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) and the Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO) (comprising the five Central Asian countries, Azerbaijan, Iran, Turkey, Afghanistan, and Pakistan). In 1999, Uzbekistan joined the GUAM alliance (Georgia, Ukraine, Azerbaijan and Moldova), which was formed in 1997 (making it GUUAM), but pulled out of the organisation in 2005. Uzbekistan is also a member of the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO) and hosts the SCO's Regional Anti-Terrorist Structure (RATS) in Tashkent. Uzbekistan joined the new Central Asian Cooperation Organisation (CACO) in 2002. The CACO consists of Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, Kazakhstan, and Kyrgyzstan. It is a founding member of, and remains involved in, the Central Asian Union, formed with Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan, and joined in March 1998 by Tajikistan. In December 1994 Uzbekistan applied for the World Trade Organization membership and received an observer status to start the accession process. The Working Party on the Accession of Uzbekistan to the WTO held its fourth meeting on 7 July 2020 — almost 15 years after its last formal meeting. In September 2006, UNESCO presented Islam Karimov an award for Uzbekistan's preservation of its rich culture and traditions. Despite criticism, this seems to be a sign of improving relationships between Uzbekistan and the West. The month of October 2006 also saw a decrease in the isolation of Uzbekistan from the West. The EU announced that it was planning to send a delegation to Uzbekistan to talk about human rights and liberties, after a long period of hostile relations between the two. Although it is equivocal about whether the official or unofficial version of the Andijan Massacre is true, the EU is evidently willing to ease its economic sanctions against Uzbekistan. Nevertheless, it is generally assumed among Uzbekistan's population that the government will stand firm in maintaining its close ties with the Russian Federation and in its theory that the 2004–2005 protests in Uzbekistan were promoted by the US and UK. In January 2008, Lola Karimova-Tillyaeva was appointed to her current role as Uzbekistan's ambassador to UNESCO. Karimova-Tillyaeva and her team have been instrumental in promoting inter-cultural dialogue by increasing European society's awareness of Uzbekistan's cultural and historical heritage. Non-governmental human rights organisations, such as IHF, Human Rights Watch, Amnesty International, as well as United States Department of State and Council of the European Union, define Uzbekistan as "an authoritarian state with limited civil rights" and express profound concern about "wide-scale violation of virtually all basic human rights". According to the reports, the most widespread violations are torture, arbitrary arrests, and various restrictions of freedoms: of religion, of speech and press, of free association and assembly. It has also been reported that forced sterilisation of rural Uzbek women has been sanctioned by the government. The reports maintain that the violations are most often committed against members of religious organisations, independent journalists, human rights activists and political activists, including members of the banned opposition parties. As of 2015, reports on violations on human rights in Uzbekistan indicated that violations were still going on without any improvement. The Freedom House has consistently ranked Uzbekistan near the bottom of its Freedom in the World ranking since the country's founding in 1991. In the 2018 report, Uzbekistan was one of the 11 worst countries for Political Rights and Civil Liberties. The 2005 civil unrest in Uzbekistan, which resulted in several hundred people being killed, is viewed by many as a landmark event in the history of human rights abuse in Uzbekistan. Concern has been expressed and requests for an independent investigation of the events has been made by the United States, the European Union, the United Nations, the OSCE Chairman-in-Office and the OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights. The government of Uzbekistan is accused of unlawful termination of human life and of denying its citizens freedom of assembly and freedom of expression. The government vehemently rebuffs the accusations, maintaining that it merely conducted an anti-terrorist operation, exercising only necessary force. In addition, some officials claim that "an information war on Uzbekistan has been declared" and the human rights violations in Andijan are invented by the enemies of Uzbekistan as a convenient pretext for intervention in the country's internal affairs. Male homosexuality is illegal in Uzbekistan. Punishment ranges from a fine to 3 years in prison. There are an estimated 1.2 million modern slaves in Uzbekistan, most work in the cotton industry. The government allegedly forces state employees to pick cotton in the autumn months. World Bank loans have been connected to projects that use child labour and forced labour practices in the cotton industry. Islam Karimov died in 2016 and his successor Shavkat Mirziyoyev is considered by most to be pursuing a less autocratic path by increasing co-operation with human rights NGOs, scheduling Soviet-style exit visas to be abolished in 2019, and reducing sentences for certain misdemeanor offences. The Amnesty International report on the country for 2017–2018 found some remnant repressive measures and lack of rule of law in eradicating modern slavery. In February 2020, the United Nations announced that Uzbekistan had made "major progress" on stamping out forced labour in its cotton harvest as 94% of pickers worked voluntarily. Uzbekistan is divided into twelve regions (viloyatlar, singular viloyat, compound noun viloyati e.g., Toshkent viloyati, Samarqand viloyati, etc.), one autonomous republic (respublika, compound noun respublikasi e.g. Qoraqalpogʻiston Muxtor Respublikasi, Karakalpakstan Autonomous Republic, etc.), and one independent city (shahar, compound noun shahri, e.g., Toshkent shahri). Names are given below in Uzbek, Russian, and Karakalpak languages when applicable, although numerous variations of the transliterations of each name exist. Karakalpakstan Navoiy Khorezm Bukhara Qashqadaryo Surxondaryo Samarkand Jizzakh Fergana Andijan Namangan Sirdaryo Tashkent Tashkent City The regions are further divided into districts (tuman). Uzbekistan mines 80 tons of gold annually, seventh in the world. Uzbekistan's copper deposits rank tenth in the world and its uranium deposits twelfth. The country's uranium production ranks seventh globally. The Uzbek national gas company, Uzbekneftegaz, ranks 11th in the world in natural gas production with an annual output of 60 to 70 billion cubic metres (2.1–2.5 trillion cubic feet). The country has significant untapped reserves of oil and gas: there are 194 deposits of hydrocarbons in Uzbekistan, including 98 condensate and natural gas deposits and 96 gas condensate deposits. Uzbekistan improved marginally in the 2020 Ease of Doing Business ranking by the World Bank. The largest corporations involved in Uzbekistan's energy sector are the China National Petroleum Corporation (CNPC), Petronas, the Korea National Oil Corporation, Gazprom, Lukoil, and Uzbekneftegaz.[citation needed] Along with many Commonwealth of Independent States or CIS economies, Uzbekistan's economy declined during the first years of transition and then recovered after 1995, as the cumulative effect of policy reforms began to be felt. It has shown robust growth, rising by 4% per year between 1998 and 2003 and accelerating thereafter to 7%–8% per year. According to IMF estimates, the GDP in 2008 will be almost double its value in 1995 (in constant prices). Since 2003, annual inflation rates varied, reaching almost 40% in 2010 and less than 20% in 2019. Uzbekistan has a GNI per capita of US$2,020 in current dollars in 2018, giving a PPP equivalent of US$7,230. Economic production is concentrated in commodities. In 2011, Uzbekistan was the world's seventh-largest producer and fifth-largest exporter of cotton as well as the seventh-largest world producer of gold. It is also a regionally significant producer of natural gas, coal, copper, oil, silver and uranium. Agriculture employs 27% of Uzbekistan's labour force and contributes 17.4% of its GDP (2012 data). Cultivable land is 4.4 million hectares, or about 10% of Uzbekistan's total area. While official unemployment is very low, underemployment – especially in rural areas – is estimated to be at least 20%. Cotton production in Uzbekistan is important to the national economy of the country. Uzbek cotton is even used to make banknotes in South Korea. Uzbek cotton exports have become the cause of a scandal related to the Russian-Ukrainian war and sanctions imposed on the Russian military industry. According to the Organized Crime and Corruption Reporting Project (OCCRP), Vlast, and iStories, after February 24, 2022, Uzbekistan significantly increased its exports of cotton pulp and nitrocellulose to Russia, key components for the manufacture of explosives and gunpowder. According to Ekonomichna Pravda, at least two large Uzbek exporters have been working with Russian military-industrial complex enterprises. Documents from the Federal Tax Service of the Russian Federation confirm that at least three Russian companies - Bina Group, Khimtrade, and Lenakhim - sold imported cotton pulp in Russia to military plants under US sanctions. The country has a considerable production of carrots as well. The use of child labour in Uzbekistan has led several companies, including Tesco, C&A, Marks & Spencer, Gap, and H&M, to boycott Uzbek cotton. Facing a multitude of economic challenges upon acquiring independence, the government adopted an evolutionary reform strategy, with an emphasis on state control, reduction of imports and self-sufficiency in energy. Since 1994, the state-controlled media have repeatedly proclaimed the success of this "Uzbekistan Economic Model" and suggested that it is a unique example of a smooth transition to the market economy while avoiding shock, pauperism and stagnation. As of 2019, Uzbekistan's economy is one of the most diversified in Central Asia which makes the country an attractive economic partner for China. The gradualist reform strategy has involved postponing significant macroeconomic and structural reforms. The state in the hands of the bureaucracy has remained a dominant influence in the economy. Corruption permeates the society and grows more rampant over time: Uzbekistan's 2005 Corruption Perception Index was 137 out of 159 countries, whereas in 2007 Uzbekistan was 175th out of 179 countries. A February 2006 report on the country by the International Crisis Group suggests that revenues earned from key exports, especially cotton, gold, maize and increasingly gas, are distributed among a very small circle of the ruling elite, with little or no benefit for the populace at large. The early-2010s high-profile corruption scandals involving government contracts and large international companies, notably TeliaSonera, have shown that businesses are particularly vulnerable to corruption when operating in Uzbekistan. According to the Economist Intelligence Unit, "the government is hostile to allowing the development of an independent private sector, over which it would have no control". The economic policies have repelled foreign investment, which is the lowest per capita in the CIS. For years, the largest barrier to foreign companies entering the Uzbekistan market has been the difficulty of converting currency. In 2003 the government accepted the obligations of Article VIII under the International Monetary Fund (IMF) providing for full currency convertibility. However, strict currency controls and the tightening of borders have lessened the effect of this measure. Uzbekistan experienced rampant inflation of around 1000% per year immediately after independence (1992–1994). Stabilisation efforts implemented with guidance from the IMF paid off. The inflation rates were brought down to 50% in 1997 and then to 22% in 2002. Since 2003 annual inflation rates averaged less than 10%. Tight economic policies in 2004 resulted in a drastic reduction of inflation to 3.8% (although alternative estimates based on the price of a true market basket put it at 15%). The inflation rates moved up to 6.9% in 2006 and 7.6% in 2007 but have remained in the single-digit range. The government of Uzbekistan restricts foreign imports in many ways, including high import duties. Excise taxes are applied in a highly discriminatory manner to protect locally produced goods, although the excises taxes were removed for foreign cars in 2020. Official tariffs are combined with unofficial, discriminatory charges resulting in total charges amounting to as much as 100 to 150% of the actual value of the product, making imported products virtually unaffordable. Import substitution is an officially declared policy and the government proudly reports a reduction by a factor of two in the volume of consumer goods imported. A number of CIS countries are officially exempt from Uzbekistan import duties. Uzbekistan has a Bilateral Investment Treaty with fifty other countries. The Republican Stock Exchange (RSE) opened in 1994. The stocks of all Uzbek joint stock companies (around 1,250) are traded on RSE. The number of listed companies as of January 2013 exceeds 110. Securities market volume reached 2 trillion in 2012, and the number is rapidly growing due to the rising interest by companies of attracting necessary resources through the capital market. According to Central Depository as of January 2013 par value of outstanding shares of Uzbek emitters exceeded 9 trillion.[citation needed] Thanks in part to the recovery of world market prices of gold and cotton (the country's key export commodities), expanded natural gas and some manufacturing exports, and increasing labour migrant transfers, the current account turned into a large surplus (between 9% and 11% of GDP from 2003 to 2005). In 2018, foreign exchange reserves, including gold, totalled around US$25 billion. Foreign exchange reserves amounted in 2010 to US$13 billion. Uzbekistan is predicted to be one of the fastest-growing economies in the world (top 26) in future decades, according to a survey by global bank HSBC. Uzbekistan was ranked 82nd in the Global Innovation Index in 2023. As of 2022, Uzbekistan has the largest population out of all the countries in Central Asia. Its 36 million citizens comprise nearly half the region's total population. The population of Uzbekistan is very young though it is slowly aging. 23.1% of its people are younger than 16 (2020 estimate). According to official sources, Uzbeks comprise a majority (84.5%) of the total population. Other ethnic groups include Russians 2.1%, Tajiks 4.8%, Kazakhs 2.4%, Karakalpaks 2.2% and Tatars 0.5% as of 2021. There is some controversy about the percentage of the Tajik population. While official state numbers from Uzbekistan put the number around 5%, the number is said to be an understatement and some Western scholars put the number up to 10%–20%. Uzbekistan has an ethnic Korean population that was forcibly relocated to the region by Stalin from the Soviet Far East in 1937–1938. There are also small groups of Armenians in Uzbekistan, mostly in Tashkent and Samarkand. The nation is 96% Muslim (mostly Sunni, with a Shi'a minority), 2.3% Eastern Orthodox and 1.7% other faiths. The U.S. State Department's International Religious Freedom Report 2004 reports that 0.2% of the population are Buddhist (these being ethnic Koreans). The Bukharan Jews have lived in Central Asia, mostly in Uzbekistan, for thousands of years. There were 94,900 Jews in Uzbekistan in 1989 (about 0.5% of the population according to the 1989 census), but now, since the dissolution of the Soviet Union, most Central Asian Jews left the region for the United States, Germany, or Israel. Fewer than 5,000 Jews remained in Uzbekistan in 2007. Russians in Uzbekistan represented 5.5% of the total population in 1989. During the Soviet period, Russians and Ukrainians constituted more than half the population of Tashkent. The country counted nearly 1.5 million Russians, 12.5% of the population, in the 1970 census. After the dissolution of the Soviet Union, significant emigration of ethnic Russians has taken place, mostly for economic reasons. In the 1940s, the Crimean Tatars, along with the Volga Germans, Chechens, Pontic Greeks, Kumaks and many other nationalities were deported to Central Asia. Approximately 100,000 Crimean Tatars continue to live in Uzbekistan. The number of Greeks in Tashkent has decreased from 35,000 in 1974 to about 12,000 in 2004. The majority of Meskhetian Turks left the country after the pogroms in the Fergana valley in June 1989. Almost 10% of Uzbekistan's labour force works abroad, mostly in Russia and Kazakhstan. Uzbekistan has a 100% literacy rate among adults older than 15 (2019 estimate). Life expectancy in Uzbekistan is 75 years average. 72 years among men and 78 years among women. President Shavkat Mirziyoyev signed a law in March 2020 that demands a national census take place at least every 10 years. The population has not been officially counted in over 30 years. In November 2020, the first census was cancelled due to concerns about coronavirus and the sheer size of the task. It now has been postponed to 2023. Uzbekistan is a secular country and Article 61 of its constitution states that religious organizations and associations shall be separated from the state and equal before law. The state shall not interfere in the activity of religious associations. Islam is the dominant religion in Uzbekistan, although Soviet power (1924–1991) discouraged the expression of religious belief, and it was repressed during its existence as a Soviet Republic. The CIA Factbook (2004) estimates that Muslims constitute 88% of the population, while 9% of the population follow Russian Orthodox Christianity, 3% other religions and non-religious, while a 2020 Pew Research Center projection stated that Uzbekistan's population is 96.7% Muslim and Christians (mostly Russian Orthodox Christians) comprised 2.3% of the population (630,000). An estimated 93,000 Jews lived in the country in the early 1990s. In addition, there are about 7,400 Zoroastrians left in Uzbekistan, mostly in Tajik areas like Khojand. Despite the predominance of Islam and its rich history in the country, the practice of the faith is far from monolithic. Uzbeks have practised many versions of Islam. The conflict of Islamic tradition with various agendas of reform or secularisation throughout the 20th century has left a wide variety of Islamic practices in Central Asia. The end of Soviet control in Uzbekistan in 1991 did not bring an immediate upsurge of religion-associated fundamentalism, as many had predicted, but rather a gradual re-acquaintance with the precepts of the Islamic faith and a gradual resurgence of Islam in the country. However, since 2015 there has been a slight increase in Islamist activity, with small organisations such as the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan declaring allegiance to ISIL and contributing fighters abroad, although the terror threat in Uzbekistan itself remains low. (See Terrorism in Uzbekistan). The Jewish community in the Uzbek lands flourished for centuries, with occasional hardships during the reigns of certain rulers. During the rule of Tamerlane in the 14th century, Jews contributed greatly to his efforts to rebuild Samarkand, and a great Jewish centre was established there. After the area came under Russian rule in 1868, Jews were granted equal rights with the local Muslim population. In that period some 50,000 Jews lived in Samarkand and 20,000 in Bukhara. After the Russian revolutions in 1917 and the establishment of the Soviet regime, Jewish religious life (as with all religions) became restricted. By 1935 only one synagogue out of 30 remained in Samarkand; nevertheless, underground Jewish community life continued during the Soviet era. By 1970 there were 103,000 Jews registered in the Uzbek SSR. Since the 1980s most of the Jews of Uzbekistan emigrated to Israel or to the United States of America. A small community of several thousand remained in the country as of 2013[update]: some 7,000 lived in Tashkent, 3,000 in Bukhara and 700 in Samarkand. The Uzbek language is one of the Turkic languages, close to the Uyghur language, and both of them belong to the Karluk branch of the Turkic language family. It is the only official national language and since 1992 is officially written in the Latin alphabet. Before the 1920s, the written language of Uzbeks was called Turki (known to Western scholars as Chagatai) and used the Nastaʿlīq script. In 1926 the Latin alphabet was introduced and went through several revisions throughout the 1930s. Finally, in 1940, the Cyrillic alphabet was introduced by Soviet authorities and was used until the fall of Soviet Union. In 1993 Uzbekistan shifted back to the Latin script (Uzbek alphabet), which was modified in 1996 and is being taught in schools since 2000. Educational establishments teach only the Latin notation. At the same time, the Cyrillic notation is common among the older generation. Even though the Cyrillic notation of Uzbek has now been abolished for official documents, it is still used by a number of some newspapers and websites. Karakalpak, belonging to the Kipchak branch of the Turkic language family and thus closer to Kazakh, is spoken by half a million people, primarily in the Republic of Karakalpakstan, and has an official status in that territory. Although the Russian language is not an official language in the country, it is widely used in many fields as a second official de-facto language. Digital information from the government is bilingual. The country is also home to approximately one million native Russian speakers. Signs throughout the country are both in Uzbek and Russian. The Tajik language (a variety of Persian) is widespread in the cities of Bukhara and Samarkand because of their relatively large population of ethnic Tajiks. It is also found in large pockets in the Tashkent region, and Kasansay, Chust, Rishtan and Sokh in Ferghana Valley, as well as in Burchmulla, Ahangaran, Baghistan in the middle Syr Darya district, and finally in, Shahrisabz, Qarshi, Kitab and the river valleys of Kafiringan and Chaganian, forming altogether, approximately 25–30% of the population of Uzbekistan. There are no language requirements to attain citizenship in Uzbekistan. In April 2020, a draft bill was introduced in Uzbekistan to regulate the exclusive use of the Uzbek language in government affairs. Under this legislation, government workers could incur fines for doing work in languages other than Uzbek. Though unsuccessful, it was met with criticism by the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs spokeswoman, Maria Zakharova. In response, a group of Uzbek intellectuals signed an open letter arguing for the instatement of Russian as an official language alongside Uzbek, citing historical ties, the large Russian-speaking population in Uzbekistan, and the usefulness of Russian in higher education, together with the argument that only Russian language opened the communication with the other peoples of the region and the literature of the outside world. The Cyrillic Uzbek alphabet is still widely used, and 862 Russian-language schools are functioning in the country, compared to 1,100 in 1991, despite the fact that the Russian minority there has decreased from 1,7 million in 1990 to nearly 700,000 in 2022. In business, the Russian language outpaces Uzbek. Many Uzbeks in urban areas, as of 2019, are feeling more comfortable to speak in Russian, while Uzbek is more present in the agricultural regions. Uzbek did not manage to become a state language, and many blame the intelligentsia. According to the official source report, as of 10 March 2008, the number of cellular phone users in Uzbekistan reached 7 million, up from 3.7 million on 1 July 2007. Mobile users in 2017 were more than 24 million. The largest mobile operator in terms of number of subscribers is MTS-Uzbekistan (former Uzdunrobita and part of Russian Mobile TeleSystems) and it is followed by Beeline (part of Russia's Beeline) and UCell (ex Coscom) (originally part of the U.S. MCT Corp., now a subsidiary of the Nordic/Baltic telecommunication company TeliaSonera AB). As of 2019, the estimated number of internet users was more than 22 million or about 52% of the population. Internet Censorship exists in Uzbekistan and in October 2012 the government toughened internet censorship by blocking access to proxy servers. Reporters Without Borders has named Uzbekistan's government an "Enemy of the Internet" and government control over the internet has increased dramatically since the start of the Arab Spring. The press in Uzbekistan practices self-censorship and foreign journalists have been gradually expelled from the country since the Andijan massacre of 2005 when government troops fired into crowds of protesters killing 187 according to official reports and estimates of several hundred by unofficial and witness accounts. Tashkent, the nation's capital and largest city, has a four-line metro built in 1977, and expanded in 2001 after ten years' independence from the Soviet Union. Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan are currently the only two countries in Central Asia with a subway system. It is promoted as one of the cleanest systems in the former Soviet Union. The stations are exceedingly ornate. For example, the station Kosmonavtlar built in 1984 is decorated using a space travel theme to recognise the achievements of humankind in space exploration and to commemorate the role of Vladimir Dzhanibekov, the Soviet cosmonaut of Uzbek origin. A statue of Vladimir Dzhanibekov stands near a station entrance. There are government-operated trams and buses running across the city. There are also many taxis, registered and unregistered. Uzbekistan has plants that produce modern cars. The car production is supported by the government and the Korean auto company Daewoo. In May 2007 UzDaewooAuto, the car maker, signed a strategic agreement with General Motors-Daewoo Auto and Technology (GMDAT, see GM Uzbekistan also). The government bought a stake in Turkey's Koc in SamKochAvto, a producer of small buses and lorries. Afterward, it signed an agreement with Isuzu Motors of Japan to produce Isuzu buses and lorries. Train links connect many towns in Uzbekistan, as well as neighbouring former republics of the Soviet Union. Moreover, after independence two fast-running train systems were established. Uzbekistan launched the first high-speed railway in Central Asia in September 2011 between Tashkent and Samarqand. The new high-speed electric train Talgo 250, called Afrosiyob, was manufactured by Patentes Talgo S.L. (Spain) and took its first trip from Tashkent to Samarkand on 26 August 2011. There is a large aeroplane plant that was built during the Soviet era – Tashkent Chkalov Aviation Manufacturing Plant or ТАПОиЧ in Russian. The plant originated during World War II, when production facilities were evacuated south and east to avoid capture by advancing Nazi forces. Until the late 1980s, the plant was one of the leading aeroplane production centres in the USSR. With dissolution of the Soviet Union, its manufacturing equipment became outdated; most of the workers were laid off. Now it produces only a few planes a year, but with interest from Russian companies growing, there are rumours of production-enhancement plans. With close to 65,000 servicemen, Uzbekistan possesses the largest armed forces in Central Asia. The military structure is largely inherited from the Turkestan Military District of the Soviet Army. The Uzbek Armed Forces' equipment is standard, mostly consisting those of post-Soviet inheritance and newly crafted Russian and some American equipment. The government has accepted the arms control obligations of the former Soviet Union, acceded to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (as a non-nuclear state), and supported an active program by the U.S. Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA) in western Uzbekistan (Nukus and Vozrozhdeniye Island). The Government of Uzbekistan spends about 3.7% of GDP on the military but has received a growing infusion of Foreign Military Financing (FMF) and other security assistance funds since 1998. Following 11 September 2001 terrorist attacks in the U.S., Uzbekistan approved the U.S. Central Command's request for access to an air base, the Karshi-Khanabad airfield, in southern Uzbekistan. However, Uzbekistan demanded that the U.S. withdraw from the airbases after the Andijan massacre and the U.S. reaction to this massacre. The last US troops left Uzbekistan in November 2005. In 2020, it was revealed that the former US base was contaminated with radioactive materials which may have resulted in unusually high cancer rates in US personnel stationed there. Yet the government of Uzbekistan has denied this statement claiming that there has never been such a case. On 23 June 2006, Uzbekistan became a full participant in the Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO), but informed the CSTO to suspend its membership in June 2012. Uzbekistan has a wide mix of ethnic groups and cultures, with the Uzbek being the majority group. In 1995 about 71% of Uzbekistan's population was Uzbek. The chief minority groups were Russians (8%), Tajiks (3–4.7%), Kazakhs (4%), Tatars (2.5%) and Karakalpaks (2%). It is said, however, that non-Uzbeks decline as Russians and other minority groups slowly leave and Uzbeks return from other parts of the former Soviet Union. When Uzbekistan gained independence in 1991, there was concern that Muslim fundamentalism would spread across the region. The expectation was that a country long denied freedom of religious practice would undergo a very rapid increase in the expression of its dominant faith. According to a 2009 Pew Research Center report, Uzbekistan's population is 96.3% Muslim; around 54% identifies as non-denominational Muslim, 18% as Sunni and 1% as Shia. Furthermore, 11% say they belong to a Sufi order. Central Asian classical music is called Shashmaqam, which arose in Bukhara in the late 16th century when that city was a regional capital. [3] Shashmaqam is closely related to Azerbaijani Mugam and Uyghur muqam. The name, which translates as six maqams refers to the structure of the music, which contains six sections in six different Musical modes, similar to classical Persian traditional music. Interludes of spoken Sufi poetry interrupt the music, typically beginning at a lower register and gradually ascending to a climax before calming back down to the beginning tone. Uzbekistan has a high literacy rate, with 99.9% of adults above the age of 15 being able to read and write. However, with only 76% of the under-15 population currently enrolled in education (and only 20% of the 3–6 year olds attending pre-school), this figure may drop in the future. Students attend school Monday through Saturday during the school year, and education officially concludes at the end of the 11th grade. Uzbekistan has encountered severe budget shortfalls in its education program. The education law of 1992 began the process of theoretical reform, but the physical base has deteriorated and curriculum revision has been slow. Corruption within the education system is rampant, with students from wealthier families routinely bribing teachers and school executives to achieve high grades without attending school, or undertaking official examinations. Several universities, including Westminster University, Turin University, Management University Institute of Singapore, Bucheon University in Tashkent, TEAM University and Inha University Tashkent maintain a campus in Tashkent offering English language courses across several disciplines. The Russian-language high education is provided by most national universities, including foreign Moscow State University and Gubkin Russian State University of Oil and Gas, maintaining campuses in Tashkent. As of 2019, Webster University, in partnership with the Ministry of Education (now Ministry of Higher Education, Science and Innovation), has opened a graduate school offering an MBA in Project Management and a MA in Teaching English as a Second Language (TESL). There are three Islamic institutes and an academy in Uzbekistan. They are Tashkent islamic institute, Mir Arab high school, School of hadith knowledge, International islamic academy of Uzbekistan.[citation needed] 1 January: New Year's Day, "Yangi Yil Bayrami" 14 January: Day of Defenders of the Motherland, "Vatan Himoyachilari kuni" 8 March: International Women's Day, "Xalqaro Xotin-Qizlar kuni" 21 March: Nowruz, "Navroʻz Bayrami" 9 May: Day of Remembrance and Honour, "Xotira va Qadrlash kuni" 1 September: Independence Day, "Mustaqillik kuni" 1 October: Teachers' Day, "Oʻqituvchi va Murabbiylar kuni" 8 December: Constitution Day, "Konstitutsiya kuni" Variable date End of Ramadan, Ramazon Hayiti (Eid al-Fitr) 70 days later, Qurbon Hayiti (Eid al-Adha) Uzbek cuisine is influenced by local agriculture; since there is a great deal of grain farming in Uzbekistan, bread and noodles are of importance and Uzbek cuisine has been characterised as "noodle-rich". Mutton is a popular variety of meat due to the abundance of sheep in the country and it is part of various Uzbek dishes. Uzbekistan's signature dish is palov (or plov), a main course typically made with rice, meat, carrots, and onions, though it was not available to ordinary people until the 1930s.[citation needed] There are many regional variations of the dish. Often the fat found near the sheep tail, qurdiuq, is used. In the past, the cooking of palov was reserved for men, but the Soviets allowed women to cook it as well. Since then, it seems, the old gender roles have been restored. Other notable national dishes include shurpa, a soup made of large pieces of fatty meat (usually mutton), and fresh vegetables; norin and laghman, noodle-based dishes that may be served as a soup or a main course; manti, chuchvara, and somsa, stuffed pockets of dough served as an appetizer or a main course; dimlama, a meat and vegetable stew; and various kebabs, usually served as a main course. Green tea is the national hot beverage consumed throughout the day; teahouses (chaikhanas) are of cultural importance. Black tea is preferred in Tashkent, but both green and black teas are consumed daily, without milk or sugar. Tea always accompanies a meal, but it is also a drink of hospitality that is automatically offered: green or black to every guest. Ayran, a chilled yogurt drink, is popular in summer. The use of alcohol is less widespread than in the West, but wine is comparatively popular for a Muslim nation as Uzbekistan is largely secular. Uzbekistan has 14 wineries, the oldest and most famous being the Khovrenko Winery in Samarkand (established in 1927). A number of vineyards in and around Tashkent are also growing in popularity, including Chateau Hamkor. Uzbekistan is home to former racing cyclist Djamolidine Abdoujaparov. Abdoujaparov has won the green jersey points contest in the Tour de France three times. Abdoujaparov was a specialist at winning stages in tours or one-day races when the bunch or peloton would finish together. He would often 'sprint' in the final kilometer and had a reputation as being dangerous in these bunch sprints as he would weave from side to side. This reputation earned him the nickname 'The Terror of Tashkent'. Artur Taymazov won Uzbekistan's inaugural wrestling medal at the 2000 Summer Olympics, followed by three Olympic gold medals in Men's 120 kg in 2004, 2008 and 2012. His 2008 gold was taken away in 2017 after a re-testing of samples from the Beijing Games and Taymazov was later stripped of his London 2012 Olympic gold medal after re-analysis of stored samples in 2019. His London gold had made him the most successful freestyle competitor in Olympic history. He is the 60th athlete to be disqualified from the London Olympics after the event. Ruslan Chagaev is a former professional boxer representing Uzbekistan in the WBA. He won the WBA champion title in 2007 after defeating Nikolai Valuev. Chagaev defended his title twice before losing it to Vladimir Klitschko in 2009. Another young talented boxer Hasanboy Dusmatov, light flyweight champion at the 2016 Summer Olympics, won the Val Barker Trophy for the outstanding male boxer of Rio 2016 on 21 August 2016. On 21 December 2016 Dusmatov was honoured with the AIBA Boxer of the Year award at a 70-year anniversary event of AIBA. Michael Kolganov, an Uzbek–born sprint canoer, was world champion and won an Olympic bronze in Sydney in the K1 500-meter in 2000 on behalf of Israel. In 2009 and 2011, another Uzbek émigré, gymnast Alexander Shatilov, won a world bronze medal as an artistic gymnast in floor exercise, though he lives in and represents Israel in international competitions.[citation needed] Oksana Chusovitina has attended eight Olympic games, and won five world medals in artistic gymnastics including an Olympic gold. Some of those medals were won while representing Germany and the Soviet Union, though she currently competes for Uzbekistan. Uzbekistan is the home of the International Kurash Association. Kurash is an internationalised and modernised form of traditional Uzbek wrestling. Football is the most popular sport in Uzbekistan. Uzbekistan's premier football league is the Uzbek Super League, which has consisted of 16 teams since 2015. The current champions (2022) are FC Pakhtakor. Pakhtakor holds the record for the most Uzbekistan champion titles, having won the league ten times. Uzbekistan's football clubs regularly participate in the AFC Champions League and the AFC Cup. FC Nasaf Qarashi won the AFC Cup in 2011, the first international club cup for Uzbek football. Humo Tashkent, a professional ice hockey team was established in 2019 with the aim of joining Kontinental Hockey League (KHL), a top level Eurasian league in the future. Humo will join the second-tier Supreme Hockey League (VHL) for the 2019–20 season. Humo play their games at the Humo Ice Dome which cost over €175 million in construction; both the team and arena derive their name from the mythical Huma bird, a symbol of happiness and freedom. Uzbekistan Hockey Federation (UHF) began preparation for forming national ice hockey team in joining IIHF competitions. Before Uzbekistan's independence in 1991, the country was part of the Soviet Union football, rugby union, basketball, ice hockey, and handball national teams. After independence, Uzbekistan created its own football, rugby union, basketball and futsal national teams. Tennis is a very popular sport in Uzbekistan, especially after Uzbekistan's sovereignty in 1991. Uzbekistan has its own Tennis Federation called the "UTF" (Uzbekistan Tennis Federation), created in 2002. Uzbekistan also hosts an International WTA tennis tournament, the "Tashkent Open", held in Uzbekistan's capital city. This tournament has been held since 1999, and is played on outdoor hard courts. The most notable active players from Uzbekistan are Denis Istomin and Akgul Amanmuradova. Chess is quite popular in Uzbekistan. The country boasts Rustam Kasimdzhanov, who was the FIDE World Chess Champion in 2004, and many junior players like Nodirbek Abdusattorov, the 2021 World Rapid Chess Champion. The Uzbek team – consisting of GM Nodirbek Abdusattorov, GM Nodirbek Yakubboev, GM Javokhir Sindarov, GM Shamsiddin Vokhidov and GM Jahongir Vakhidov won gold at the 44th Chess Olympiad in Chennai. Other popular sports in Uzbekistan include basketball, judo, team handball, baseball, taekwondo, and futsal. Ulugbek Rashitov, won the country's first Olympic gold medal in taekwondo, at the Summer Olympic Games in Tokyo 2021. In 2022, the World Judo Championships were held in Tashkent. In 2024, the FIFA Futsal World Cup will be held in Uzbekistan. Uzbekistan portal Health in Uzbekistan Outline of Uzbekistan Uzbek: Oʻzbekiston, Ўзбекистон; UK: /ʊzˌbɛkɪˈstɑːn, ʌz-, -ˈstæn/, US: /ʊzˈbɛkɪstæn, -stɑːn/ Oʻzbekiston Respublikasi, Ўзбекистон Республикаси "Uzbekistan: Law "On Official Language"". Refworld. Archived from the original on 8 May 2019. Retrieved 26 November 2022. "Constitution of the Republic of Uzbekistan". constitution.uz. Archived from the original on 15 December 2015. Retrieved 26 November 2022. "Permanent population by national and / or ethnic group, urban / rural place of residence". Data.egov.uz. 2-001-1779. Archived from the original on 2 February 2023. Retrieved 16 September 2022. "2021 Report on International Religious Freedom: Uzbekistan". United States Department of State. Archived from the original on 2 June 2022. Retrieved 26 November 2022. "Uzbekistan". Central Intelligence Agency. 27 February 2023. Archived from the original on 10 January 2021. Retrieved 24 February 2023 – via CIA.gov. "Demographic situation in the Republic of Uzbekistan - 1/1/2023" (PDF). Statistics Agency of Uzbekistan. p. 23. Retrieved 23 December 2023. "World Economic Outlook Database, November 2023 Edition. (Uzbekistan)". IMF.org. International Monetary Fund. 10 November 2023. Retrieved 12 November 2023. "World Economic Outlook Database, October 2023". IMF.org. International Monetary Fund. Retrieved 12 November 2023. "Income Gini coefficient". Human Development Reports. Archived from the original on 10 June 2010. Retrieved 6 December 2017. "GINI index – Uzbekistan". MECOMeter – Macro Economy Meter. Archived from the original on 4 April 2015. Retrieved 6 December 2017. "Human Development Report 2021/2022" (PDF). United Nations Development Programme. 8 September 2022. Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 September 2022. Retrieved 26 November 2022. Wells, John C. (2008). Longman Pronunciation Dictionary (3rd ed.). Longman. ISBN 978-1-4058-8118-0.. This source gives the British pronunciation as /ˌʊzbɛkɪˈstɑːn, ʌz-, -ˈstæn/, rather than /ʊzˌbɛk-/ found in CEPD. It also does not list the /ʊzˈbɛkɪstɑːn/ variant in American English. Roach, Peter (2011). Cambridge English Pronouncing Dictionary (18th ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-15253-2. This source does not list the /-ˈstæn/ pronunciation in British English. "Chapter 1: Religious Affiliation". The World's Muslims: Unity and Diversity. Pew Research Center's Religion & Public Life Project. 9 August 2012. Retrieved 4 September 2013. "Uzbek, the penguin of Turkic languages" Archived 13 November 2021 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved 26 November 2022. US Department of State, 2008 Country Report on Human Rights Practices in Uzbekistan Archived 21 April 2020 at the Wayback Machine, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labour, 25 February 2009 "Eurasia's Latest Economic Reboot Can Be Found in Uzbekistan". Forbes. 14 September 2017. Archived from the original on 14 September 2017. Retrieved 18 September 2017. Lillis, Joanna (3 October 2017). "Are decades of political repression making way for an 'Uzbek spring'?". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 1 December 2017. Retrieved 19 November 2017. "Uzbekistan: A Quiet Revolution Taking Place – Analysis". Eurasia Review. 8 December 2017. Archived from the original on 8 December 2017. Retrieved 8 December 2017. "The growing ties between Afghanistan and Uzbekistan – CSRS En". CSRS En. 28 January 2017. Archived from the original on 22 December 2017. Retrieved 25 December 2017. "Uzbekistan". UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs. Archived from the original on 13 November 2021. Retrieved 8 July 2021. "Uzbekistan | Energy 2018". GLI – Global Legal Insights. Archived from the original on 3 December 2017. Retrieved 2 December 2017. "Uzbekistan Sovereign credit ratings - data, chart". TheGlobalEconomy.com. Retrieved 8 July 2021. Pajank, Daniel (23 January 2019). "Uzbekistan's star appears in the credit rating universe". Brookings. Brookings Institution. Archived from the original on 19 December 2021. Retrieved 30 December 2019. Kenzheakhmet Nurlan (2013). The Qazaq Khanate as Documented in Ming Dynasty Sources. p. 140. A. H. Keane, A. Hingston Quiggin, A. C. Haddon, Man: Past and Present, p.312, Cambridge University Press, 2011, Google Books, quoted: "Who take their name from a mythical Uz-beg, Prince Uz (beg in Turki=a chief, or hereditary ruler)." MacLeod, Calum; Bradley Mayhew. Uzbekistan: Golden Road to Samarkand. p. 31. Kenzheakhmet Nurlan (2013). The Qazaq Khanate as Documented in Ming Dynasty Sources. p. 140. Lubin (1997), pp. 385–6. Davidovich, E.A. (1998). "The Karakhanids (Chapter 6)". In M.S. Asimov; Clifford Edmund Bosworth (eds.). History of civilizations of Central Asia. Vol. 4.1 The age of achievement: A.D. 750 to the end of the fifteenth century, pt. 1, the historical, social and economic setting. UNESCO Publishing. pp. 119–44. ISBN 92-3-103467-7. Modelski, George. "Central Asian world cities (XI – XIII century)". faculty.washington.edu. Archived from the original on 18 January 2012. Lubin (1997), pp. 389–90. Sicker, Martin (2000) The Islamic World in Ascendancy: From the Arab Conquests to the Siege of Vienna Archived 12 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine. Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 154. ISBN 0-275-96892-8 Totten, Samuel and Bartrop, Paul Robert (2008) Dictionary of Genocide: A-L Archived 18 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine, ABC-CLIO, p. 422, ISBN 0313346429 Forbes, Andrew, & Henley, David: Timur's Legacy: The Architecture of Samarkand Archived 24 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine (CPA Media). Medical Links between India & Uzbekistan in Medieval Times by Hakim Syed Zillur Rahman, Historical and Cultural Links between India & Uzbekistan, Khuda Bakhsh Oriental Library, Patna, 1996. pp. 353–381. "Adventure in the East". Time. 6 April 1959. Archived from the original on 1 February 2011. Retrieved 28 January 2011. Shlapentokh, Vladimir; Sendich, Munir; Payin, Emil (1994) The New Russian Diaspora: Russian Minorities in the Former Soviet Republics Archived 8 April 2015 at the Wayback Machine. M.E. Sharpe. p. 108. ISBN 1-56324-335-0. Chahryar Adle, Madhavan K. Palat, Anara Tabyshalieva (2005). "Towards the Contemporary Period: From the Mid-nineteenth to the End of the Twentieth Century Archived 29 March 2018 at the Wayback Machine". UNESCO. p.232. ISBN 9231039857 "Islam Karimov | president of Uzbekistan". Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved 8 July 2021. "Obituary: Uzbekistan President Islam Karimov". BBC News. 2 October 2016. Archived from the original on 3 September 2016. "Uzbekistan elects Shavkat Mirziyoyev as president". TheGuardian.com. 5 December 2016. "Uzbek president secures second term in landslide election victory". www.aljazeera.com. 25 October 2021. "Uzbek president pledges constitutional reform | Eurasianet". eurasianet.org. 7 November 2021. "Countries of the world". worldatlas.com. Archived from the original on 7 May 2010. Retrieved 2 May 2010. Uzbekistan will publish its own book of records – Ferghana.ru Archived 13 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine. 18 July 2007. Retrieved 29 July 2009. "Aral Sea 'one of the planet's worst environmental disasters'". The Daily Telegraph. London. 5 April 2010. Archived from the original on 8 April 2010. Retrieved 1 May 2010. "Alpomish - Peakbagger.com". www.peakbagger.com. Retrieved 28 March 2024. "Alpomish, Uzbekistan Highpoint". Country Highpoints. 30 August 2023. Retrieved 28 March 2024. Climate Archived 22 September 2008 at the Wayback Machine, Uzbekistan : Country Studies – Federal Research Division, Library of Congress. Dinerstein, Eric; et al. (2017). "An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm". BioScience. 67 (6): 534–545. doi:10.1093/biosci/bix014. ISSN 0006-3568. PMC 5451287. PMID 28608869. "Environment Archived 8 December 2013 at the Wayback Machine". In Glenn E. Curtis (Ed.), Uzbekistan: A Country Study Archived 23 September 2006 at the Wayback Machine. Washington: Government Printing Office for the Library of Congress, 1996. Online version retrieved 2 May 2010. "Uzbekistan: Environmental disaster on a colossal scale". Médecins Sans Frontières. 1 November 2000. Archived from the original on 30 September 2007. Retrieved 2 May 2010. "Cotton production linked to images of the dried up Aral Sea basin". The Guardian. 1 October 2014. Archived from the original on 25 March 2020. Retrieved 18 August 2019. Aral Sea Crisis Environmental Justice Foundation Report Archived 7 April 2012 at the Wayback Machine Climate Risk Knowledge Management Platform for Central Asia, UNDP Archived 26 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine. Ca-crm.info. Retrieved on 29 November 2015. "Uzbekistan energy profile". IEA. International Energy Agency. April 2020. Archived from the original on 22 March 2022. Retrieved 22 March 2022. Uzbekistan is one of the world's largest natural gas producers, annually producing around 60 billion cubic metres (bcm)... "UZBEKISTAN - Gas Production & Reserves". The Free Library. Farlex Inc. 18 October 2004. Retrieved 22 March 2022. The fields in Kokdumalak, Shurtan, Olan, Urgin and South-Tandirchi - all in south-western Uzbekistan - are being developed rapidly. Now they account for more than 90% of the country's output of gas and condensate. "Country Facts (Uzbekistan)". UN. United Nations. Retrieved 10 May 2019. Simonov, Eugene (23 June 2020). "Uzbekistan dam collapse was a disaster waiting to happen". The Third Pole. Retrieved 29 December 2021. "Image of the Week - Dam Failure in Uzbekistan". YouTube. Archived from the original on 29 December 2021. Retrieved 29 December 2021. "Uzbekistan PM Mirziyoyev named interim president". BBC News. 8 September 2016. Archived from the original on 9 May 2019. Retrieved 20 December 2021. Abdukerimov, Bahtiyar; Güldoğan, Diyar (14 December 2016). "Uzbekistan: President Mirziyoyev takes oath of office". Anadolu Agency. Archived from the original on 20 December 2021. Retrieved 20 December 2021. "Longtime Official Dismissed By Karimov Chosen As Uzbek Prime Minister". RadioFreeEurope/RadioLiberty. 12 December 2016. Archived from the original on 17 September 2023. "Spring in Tashkent: Is Uzbekistan really opening up?". BBC News. 31 March 2018. Archived from the original on 9 November 2020. Retrieved 5 January 2021. "Can We Call It An Uzbek Spring Yet?". The Diplomat. Archived from the original on 17 April 2021. Retrieved 5 January 2021. Marquardt, Erich and Wolfe, Adam (17 October 2005) Rice Attempts to Secure US Influence in Central Asia Archived 3 May 2012 at the Wayback Machine, Global Policy Forum. Hill, Fiona (13 December 2001). "Contributions of Central Asian Nations to the Campaign Against Terrorism". Brookings. Archived from the original on 9 July 2021. Retrieved 7 July 2021. "Uzbekistan kicks US out of military base". The Guardian. 31 July 2005. Archived from the original on 15 January 2021. Retrieved 5 January 2021. "Uzbekistan resumes WTO membership negotiations". www.wto.org. Archived from the original on 8 September 2021. Retrieved 24 September 2021. "Surprise at Unesco award for President Karimov | Reporters without borders". RSF. 12 September 2006. Archived from the original on 17 April 2021. Retrieved 5 January 2021. IHF,"International Helsinki Federation for Human Rights". Archived from the original on 29 January 2010. Retrieved 9 February 2016., 23 June 2004 OMCT and Legal Aid Society, Denial of justice in Uzbekistan – an assessment of the human rights situation and national system of protection of fundamental rights Archived 5 December 2010 at the Wayback Machine, April 2005. Antelava, Natalia (21 December 2012). "Tweets from Gulnara the dictator's daughter". New Yorker. Archived from the original on 4 January 2013. World Report 2015: Uzbekistan | Human Rights Watch Archived 23 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine. Hrw.org. Retrieved on 20 March 2016. "Uzbekistan". Freedom House. Archived from the original on 23 February 2018. Retrieved 23 February 2018. Thomas, Jeffrey (26 September 2005). "Freedom of Assembly, Association Needed in Eurasia, U.S. Says". USINFO.STATE.GOV. Archived from the original on 21 April 2007. Retrieved 22 January 2008. McMahon, Robert (7 June 2005). "Uzbekistan: Report Cites Evidence Of Government 'Massacre' In Andijon – Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty/Radio Liberty/Radio Liberty". Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. Archived from the original on 3 September 2010. Retrieved 2 May 2010. "Uzbekistan: Independent international investigation needed into Andizhan events". Amnesty International. 23 June 2005. Archived from the original on 12 October 2007. Retrieved 2 May 2010. Labott, Elise (18 May 2005). "Pressure for Uzbek violence probe". edition.cnn.com. Archived from the original on 17 April 2021. Retrieved 5 January 2021. Donovan, Jeffrey (8 April 2008). "Uzbekistan: UN, EU Call For International Probe Into Violence". Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. Retrieved 5 January 2021. "Annan: Uzbekistan rejects inquiry". www.aljazeera.com. Archived from the original on 17 April 2021. Retrieved 5 January 2021. "OSCE Chairman repeats calls for an investigation into Andijan events following OSCE/ODIHR report". osce.org. Archived from the original on 17 April 2021. Retrieved 5 January 2021. "Press-service of the President of the Republic of Uzbekistan". Press-service.uz. 17 May 2005. Archived from the original on 8 March 2008. Retrieved 2 May 2010. Акмаль Саидов (27 October 2005). "Андижанские события стали поводом для беспрецедентного давления на Узбекистан". Kreml.Org. Archived from the original on 5 August 2014. Retrieved 2 May 2010. Avery, Daniel (4 April 2019). "71 Countries Where Homosexuality is Illegal". Newsweek. Archived from the original on 11 December 2019. Retrieved 18 August 2019. "State-Sponsored Homophobia". International Lesbian Gay Bisexual Trans and Intersex Association. 20 March 2019. Archived from the original on 8 February 2020. Retrieved 18 August 2019. Findings – Walk Free Foundation – Global Slavery Index 2014 Archived 26 December 2014 at the Wayback Machine. Globalslaveryindex.org. Retrieved on 29 November 2015. "Forced Cotton-Picking Earns Uzbekistan Shameful Spot In 'Slavery Index'". rferl.org. Archived from the original on 16 January 2017. Retrieved 14 January 2017. "Uzbekistan: Forced Labor Linked to World Bank". Human Rights Watch. 27 June 2017. Archived from the original on 18 July 2017. "Human Rights Watch Delegation To Visit Uzbekistan". Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. 20 July 2017. Archived from the original on 22 February 2018. Retrieved 22 February 2018. akbaryusupov. "Shavkat Mirziyoyev meets UN High Commissioner for Human Rights". Archived from the original on 22 February 2018. Retrieved 22 February 2018. "Uzbekistan To Abolish Exit Visa System In 2019". Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. 16 August 2017. Archived from the original on 22 February 2018. Retrieved 22 February 2018. "Uzbekistan Flirts With Disaster – Geopolitical Futures". 11 July 2017. Archived from the original on 11 July 2017. "Uzbekistan 2017/2018". Amnesty International. Archived from the original on 20 December 2016. Retrieved 26 May 2018. U.N. sees 'major progress' on forced labour in Uzbek cotton harvest Archived 25 April 2020 at the Wayback Machine, Reuters, 5 February 2020 "Hududlar kesimida 2024 yil boshiga doimiy aholi soni" (in Uzbek). O‘ZBEKISTON RESPUBLIKASI PREZIDENTI HUZURIDAGI STATISTIKA AGENTLIGI. "Число постоянных жителей в Республики Каракалпакстан". Портал открытых данных Республики Узбекистан. Archived from the original on 18 August 2018. Retrieved 25 January 2018. "Демографическая ситуация в Ферганской области". Портал открытых данных Республики Узбекистан. Archived from the original on 24 September 2020. Retrieved 25 January 2018. "Численность населения Узбекистана по городам, 2018". poltavareview.com. Archived from the original on 11 March 2018. Retrieved 25 January 2018. "Численность населения Кашкадарьи". Statistics. Archived from the original on 14 October 2014. Retrieved 25 January 2018. Supply of Uranium Archived 9 May 2008 at the Wayback Machine. World Nuclear Association. August 2012. Uranium resources Archived 22 May 2008 at the Wayback Machine. European Nuclear Society The World Mineral Statistics dataset: 100 years and counting Archived 20 October 2013 at the Wayback Machine. British Geological Survey "New head of NHC Uzbekneftegaz appointed". Gazprom International. Gazprom. Archived from the original on 21 April 2019. Retrieved 21 April 2019. "Economy". Invest in Uzbekistan. Uzbekistani Government. Retrieved 21 April 2019. "2020 Ease of Doing Business report". The World Bank. "Republic of Uzbekistan". Imf. Archived from the original on 22 April 2019. Retrieved 22 April 2019. IMF World Economic Outlook Database Archived 6 October 2014 at the Wayback Machine, October 2007 "Inflation, GDP deflator (annual %) - Uzbekistan | Data". data.worldbank.org. Archived from the original on 17 April 2021. Retrieved 5 January 2021. "World Bank Country Profile". World Bank. Archived from the original on 9 March 2020. Retrieved 19 November 2019. "The National Cotton Council of America: Rankings". 2011. Archived from the original on 15 April 2012. Retrieved 26 April 2012. "Country Profile: Uzbekistan". IRIN. Archived from the original on 27 August 2010. Retrieved 2 May 2010. "Demographic situation in the Republic of Uzbekistan". The State Committee of the Republic of Uzbekistan on statistics. Archived from the original on 17 November 2019. Retrieved 28 January 2011. "Uzbekistan: Korean government uses Uzbek cotton to make banknotes". BS-AGRO. 12 December 2013. Archived from the original on 20 December 2013. "Central Asian Cotton Powers Russia's Sanctioned Gunpowder Plants". "White and fluffy death. How Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan help Russians produce gunpowder". "Порох, хлопок и принудительный труд. Кто поставляет сырье российским оружейным заводам?".(in Russian) "Tesco Ethical Assessment Programme" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 July 2010. Retrieved 2 May 2010. "C&A Code of Conduct for Uzbekistan". C&A. Archived from the original on 27 May 2010. Retrieved 2 May 2010. Saidazimova, Gulnoza (12 June 2008). "Central Asia: Child Labor Alive And Thriving". Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. Archived from the original on 27 July 2011. Retrieved 8 July 2008. "Islam Karimov's interview to Rossijskaya Gazeta". Пресс-служба Президента Республики Узбекистан (in Russian). 7 July 1995. Archived from the original on 22 September 2008. Retrieved 22 November 2005. Vakulchuk, Roman and Indra Overland (2019) "China's Belt and Road Initiative through the Lens of Central Asia Archived 24 October 2021 at the Wayback Machine", in Fanny M. Cheung and Ying-yi Hong (eds) Regional Connection under the Belt and Road Initiative. The Prospects for Economic and Financial Cooperation. London: Routledge, pp. 115–133. ISBN 9781138607491. Thomas, Gary (16 February 2006). "New Report Paints Grim Picture of Uzbekistan". Archived from the original on 25 August 2009. Retrieved 1 June 2016.. Voice of America. "Business Corruption in Uzbekistan". Business Anti-Corruption Portal. Archived from the original on 24 March 2014. Retrieved 27 March 2014. "Uzbekistan: Economic Overview". eurasiacenter.org. Archived from the original on 11 May 2011. Retrieved 2 May 2010. 2011 Investment Climate Statement – Uzbekistan Archived 21 April 2020 at the Wayback Machine. US Department of State, March 2011 "Press Release: The Republic of Uzbekistan Accepts Article VIII Obligations". Imf.org. Archived from the original on 21 November 2010. Retrieved 2 May 2010. Uzbekistan's Ministry of Foreign Affairs on IMF's role in economic stabilisation Archived 10 May 2011 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 22 June 2009 "Asian Development Outlook 2005 – Uzbekistan". ADB.org. 1 January 2005. Archived from the original on 20 November 2010. Retrieved 2 May 2010. "Uzbekistan CPI 2003–2007". Indexmundi.com. 19 February 2010. Archived from the original on 10 May 2011. Retrieved 2 May 2010. "Doing Business in Usbekistan - 2014" (PDF). www.pwc.de. PWC. Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 April 2021. Retrieved 5 January 2021. "Uzbekistan to scrap excise tax on imported cars". Reuters. 4 June 2020. Archived from the original on 1 January 2021. Retrieved 5 January 2021. "UZBEKISTAN" (PDF). FOREIGN TRADE BARRIERS. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 August 2008. Retrieved 20 December 2005.. NTE 2004 FINAL 3.30.04 "Uzbekistan Bilateral Investment Treaties". UNCTAD Division on Investment and Enterprise. United Nations. Archived from the original on 7 November 2017. "Uzbekistan's gold and foreign exchange reserves at US$ 25.49 billion". Tashkent Times. Archived from the original on 1 May 2019. Retrieved 1 May 2019. "Uzbekistan" (in Russian). The world bank. Archived from the original on 5 June 2013. "the World in 2050" (PDF). HSBC. p. 2. Archived (PDF) from the original on 14 October 2017. WIPO. "Global Innovation Index 2023, 15th Edition". www.wipo.int. Retrieved 29 October 2023. "World Population Prospects 2022". United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. Retrieved 17 July 2022. "World Population Prospects 2022: Demographic indicators by region, subregion and country, annually for 1950-2100" (XSLX) ("Total Population, as of 1 July (thousands)"). United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. Retrieved 17 July 2022. "Uzbekistan population surpasses 36 million". ashkenttimes.uz. 9 December 2022. Archived from the original on 12 December 2022. Retrieved 12 December 2022. Cordell, Karl (1998) Ethnicity and Democratisation in the New Europe, Routledge, ISBN 0415173124, p. 201: "Consequently, the number of citizens who regard themselves as Tajiks is difficult to determine. Tajikis within and outside of the republic, Samarkand State University (SamGU) academic and international commentators suggest that there may be between six and seven million Tajiks in Uzbekistan, constituting 30% of the republic's 22 million population, rather than the official figure of 4.7% (Foltz 1996, p. 213; Carlisle 1995:88[incomplete short citation]). Jonson, Lena (1976) Tajikistan in the New Central Asia, I.B.Tauris, ISBN 085771726X, p. 108: "According to official Uzbek statistics there are slightly over 1.7 million Tajiks in Uzbekistan or about 5% of the population. The unofficial figure is over 6 million Tajiks. They are concentrated in the Sukhandarya, Samarqand and Bukhara regions." Foltz (1996), pp. 213–6. Cornell, Svante E. (2000). "Uzbekistan: A Regional Player in Eurasian Geopolitics?". European Security. 9 (2): 115. doi:10.1080/09662830008407454. S2CID 154194469. Archived from the original on 5 May 2009. World Jewish Population 2001 (PDF). American Jewish Yearbook. Vol. 101. 2001. p. 561. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 December 2013. World Jewish Population 2007 (PDF). American Jewish Yearbook. Vol. 107. 2007. p. 592. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 March 2009. Allworth, Edward (1994) Central Asia, 130 years of Russian dominance: a historical overview Archived 15 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine. Duke University Press. p. 102. ISBN 0-8223-1521-1 "The Russian Minority in Central Asia: Migration, Politics, and Language Archived 6 December 2013 at the Wayback Machine" (PDF). Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars. The Russians are Still Leaving Uzbekistan For Kazakhstan Now Archived 11 February 2009 at the Wayback Machine. Journal of Turkish Weekly. 16 December 2004. Agtzidis, Vlasis (1991). "The Persecution of Pontic Greeks in the Soviet Union". Journal of Refugee Studies. 4 (4): 372–381. doi:10.1093/jrs/4.4.372. ISSN 0951-6328. Kuzio, Taras (24 June 2009). "Crimean Tatars Divide Ukraine and Russia". Eurasia Daily Monitor. 6 (121). The Jamestown Foundation. Greece overcomes its ancient history, finally Archived 25 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine. The Independent. 6 July 2004. World Directory of Minorities and Indigenous Peoples – Uzbekistan : Meskhetian Turks Archived 16 October 2012 at the Wayback Machine. Minority Rights Group International. "Uzbekistan: Labor Migrants Looking Beyond Russia". 10 May 2016. Archived from the original on 25 December 2016 – via EurasiaNet. "Uzbekistan: Stagnation and Uncertainty". Asia Briefing N°67. International Crisis Group. 22 August 2007. Archived from the original on 11 November 2009. Retrieved 15 September 2007. "Uzbekistan Adult literacy rate, 1960-2021". "Islam Karimov: Uzbekistan president's death confirmed". BBC News. Archived from the original on 3 September 2016. Retrieved 4 September 2016. "ЗРУ-611-сон 16.03.2020. О переписи населения". lex.uz. Archived from the original on 9 July 2021. Retrieved 9 July 2021. "Uzbekistan postpones first census because of coronavirus | Eurasianet". eurasianet.org. Archived from the original on 17 June 2021. Retrieved 9 July 2021. "Constitution of Uzbekistan. Part II. Basic human and civil rights, freedoms and duties". Archived from the original on 9 February 2021. Retrieved 24 October 2020. "Uzbekistan". CIA. 19 October 2021. Archived from the original on 3 February 2021. Retrieved 24 January 2021. "Religions in Uzbekistan | PEW-GRF". www.globalreligiousfutures.org. Archived from the original on 29 January 2018. Retrieved 6 June 2020. "A Country Study: Uzbekistan". Federal Research Division. 1988–1998. Archived from the original on 31 August 2013. Retrieved 27 December 2013. "UZBEKISTAN Zoroastrian Association Registered". Zoroastrians.net. 21 August 2013. Archived from the original on 6 November 2019. Retrieved 24 July 2019. AFP (27 May 2019). "Muslims seek voice in changing Uzbekistan | New Straits Times". NST Online. Archived from the original on 6 June 2020. Retrieved 6 June 2020. "The Rising Islamic State threat in Central Asia". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on 3 August 2017. Retrieved 3 August 2017. "Uzbekistan's real problem is not terrorism, it's politics". Politico. 6 September 2016. Archived from the original on 3 August 2017. Retrieved 3 August 2017. "Uzbekistan". Jewish Virtual Library. 30 July 2004. Archived from the original on 12 July 2015. Retrieved 29 November 2015. "Bukharan Jews now in Queens recreate their Sukkot memories". The Jewish News of Northern California. 20 September 2002. Archived from the original on 30 July 2019. Retrieved 30 July 2019. Euro-Asian Jewish Congress Archived 24 December 2013 at the Wayback Machine (retrieved 29 December 2013) Anthony J. Liddicoat, "Uzbekistan", in Liddicoat and Andy Kirkpatrick, eds., The Routledge International Handbook of Language Education Policy in Asia (London: Routledge, 2019), 495. ISBN 9781317354499 Kamp, Marianne (2008). The New Woman in Uzbekistan: Islam, Modernity, and Unveiling Under Communism. University of Washington Press. ISBN 978-0-295-98819-1. Archived from the original on 5 April 2015. "State Education Portal of Uzbekistan". Ziyonet. Government of Uzbekistan. Archived from the original on 26 August 2018. Retrieved 26 August 2018. "President's FaceBook". FaceBook. Retrieved 26 August 2018. "Presidential Site of Uzbekistan". President.uz. The Government of Uzbekistan. Archived from the original on 2 September 2018. Retrieved 26 August 2018. Юрий Подпоренко (2001). "Бесправен, но востребован. Русский язык в Узбекистане". Дружба Народов. Archived from the original on 13 May 2016. Retrieved 27 May 2016. Шухрат Хуррамов (11 September 2015). "Почему русский язык нужен узбекам?". 365info.kz. Archived from the original on 1 July 2016. Retrieved 27 May 2016. Евгений Абдуллаев (2009). "Русский язык: жизнь после смерти. Язык, политика и общество в современном Узбекистане". Неприкосновенный запас. Archived from the original on 23 June 2016. Retrieved 27 May 2016. А. Е. Пьянов. "СТАТУС РУССКОГО ЯЗЫКА В СТРАНАХ СНГ". 2011. Archived from the original on 28 May 2016. Retrieved 27 May 2016. Languages in Uzbekistan Archived 11 September 2016 at the Wayback Machine – Facts and Details "Uzbekistan's Russian-Language Conundrum". Eurasianet.org. 19 September 2006. Archived from the original on 29 November 2010. Retrieved 2 May 2010. Tolipov, Farkhod. "Soft or Hard Power? Russia Reacts to Uzbekistan's Draft Language Policy". The Central Asia-Caucasus Analyst. CACI Analyst. Archived from the original on 14 August 2020. Retrieved 1 September 2020. "Russian is not foreign to us". Vesti.uz. 30 April 2019. Archived from the original on 3 August 2020. Retrieved 1 September 2020. "Uzbekistan: A second coming for the Russian language? | Eurasianet". eurasianet.org. Archived from the original on 1 August 2022. Retrieved 1 August 2022. Uzbekistan agency for Communication and Information (UzACI) [1] Archived 15 July 2007 at the Wayback Machine and UzDaily.com [2] Archived 26 June 2007 at the Wayback Machine "ITU Statistics". ITU. Archived from the original on 17 April 2020. Retrieved 20 November 2019. TeleSonera AB acquires Coscom Archived 8 June 2010 at the Wayback Machine, UzDaily.com, 17 July 2007. Retrieved 18 January 2009. uz, Kun. "Number of Internet users in Uzbekistan exceeds 22.1 million". Kun.uz. Archived from the original on 19 January 2021. Retrieved 5 January 2021. "Individuals using the Internet (% of population) - Uzbekistan | Data". data.worldbank.org. Archived from the original on 17 April 2021. Retrieved 5 January 2021. Uzbekistan toughens Internet censorship. uznews.net (11 October 2012) "Uzbekistan profile". BBC News. 5 January 2012. Archived from the original on 21 August 2013. Retrieved 29 November 2015. Tashkent Subway for Quick Travel to Hotels, Resorts, and Around the City! Archived 18 January 2012 at the Wayback Machine tashkent.org "Uzbekistan, General Motors sign strategic deal". Uzdaily.com. Archived from the original on 16 May 2011. Retrieved 2 May 2010. SamAuto supplies 100 buses to Samarkand firms Archived 27 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine, UZDaily.com. Japanese firm buys 8% shares in SamAuto Archived 27 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine, UZDaily.com. First high-speed electricity train carries out first trip from Samarkand and Tashkent, 27 August 2011 Archived 11 January 2012 at the Wayback Machine. Uzdaily (27 August 2011). Retrieved 19 February 2012. "Uzbekistan | Countries | Collection of Cooper Hewitt, Smithsonian Design Museum". collection.cooperhewitt.org. Archived from the original on 13 March 2013. Retrieved 7 July 2021. "U.S. Troops Leave Uzbekistan". www.cbsnews.com. 21 November 2005. Archived from the original on 30 August 2014. Retrieved 5 January 2021. Herridge, Catherine; Kegu, Jessica (26 October 2020). "Uzbek base that housed U.S. troops allegedly had "7 to 9 times higher than normal" radiation, yellowcake uranium". CBS News. Archived from the original on 26 October 2020. Retrieved 5 January 2021. "Uzbekistan Suspends CSTO Membership". Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. 28 June 2012. Archived from the original on 27 October 2020. Retrieved 5 November 2020. "Uzbekistan's History With Islam Might Explain a Lot About the New York Attack Suspect". Time. Archived from the original on 9 November 2020. Retrieved 5 January 2021. "Religious Identity Among Muslims". Pew Research Center's Religion & Public Life Project. 9 August 2012. Archived from the original on 20 June 2018. Retrieved 8 July 2021. "Shashmaqam - Music and Poetry of Central Asia". Voices On Central Asia. 19 October 2018. Archived from the original on 9 July 2021. Retrieved 7 July 2021. "Musical and Ontological Possibilities of Mugham Creativity in pre-Soviet, Soviet, and post-Soviet Azerbaijan" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 30 August 2021. Retrieved 7 July 2021. "Uzbekistan". uis.unesco.org. 27 November 2016. Archived from the original on 28 January 2021. Retrieved 5 January 2021. Kozlova, Marina (21 January 2008) Uzbekistan: Lessons in Graft Archived 8 June 2012 at the Wayback Machine. Chalkboard.tol.org "Mutton from Central Asia". Pilot Guides. Archived from the original on 9 July 2021. Retrieved 8 July 2021. Buell, Paul David; Anderson, Eugene N.; Moya, Montserrat de Pablo; Oskenbay, Moldir, eds. (2020). Crossroads of Cuisine: The Eurasian Heartland, the Silk Roads and Food. BRILL. ISBN 9789004432109. Archived from the original on 2 February 2023. Retrieved 3 July 2022. "Uzbek shurpa – one of the most popular dishes in the Uzbek cuisine". www.people-travels.com. Archived from the original on 9 July 2021. Retrieved 8 July 2021. "10 Most Popular Foods You Have To Eat In Uzbekistan (2019)". uzwifi.com. Archived from the original on 9 July 2021. Retrieved 8 July 2021. "Guide to Uzbekistan Tea Traditions". TeaMuse. Archived from the original on 9 July 2021. Retrieved 8 July 2021. "Tea traditions in Uzbekistan". uzbek-travel.com. Archived from the original on 9 July 2021. Retrieved 8 July 2021. "Uzbek sour-milk products – indelible dishes of the Uzbek dastarkhan". www.people-travels.com. Archived from the original on 9 July 2021. Retrieved 8 July 2021. "What to eat and drink in Uzbekistan". World Travel Guide. Archived from the original on 24 July 2021. Retrieved 8 July 2021. "Не только плов и голубые купола: чем впечатляет Узбекистан за | Perito". Archived from the original on 22 November 2022. Retrieved 22 November 2022. "Le Tours archive". Archived from the original on 11 January 2012. Retrieved 23 August 2011. "Where Are They Now? Djamolidine Abdoujaparov". CyclingTips. 13 May 2014. Archived from the original on 9 July 2021. Retrieved 8 July 2021. "artur-taymazov latest news & coverage". CNA. Archived from the original on 9 July 2021. Retrieved 8 July 2021. "Uzbek wrestler Taymazov stripped of London 2012 gold medal". Reuters. 23 July 2019. Archived from the original on 9 July 2021. Retrieved 7 July 2021. Starck, Peter (15 April 2007). "Chagaev beats Valuev to lift heavyweight title". Reuters. Archived from the original on 9 July 2021. Retrieved 8 July 2021. "Uzbekistan's new Olympic Light Flyweight Champion Hasanboy Dusmatov wins the Val Barker Trophy for the outstanding male boxer of Rio 2016". AIBA. Archived from the original on 23 August 2016. Retrieved 21 August 2016. "AIBA celebrates 70-year anniversary with Gala Dinner in the company of Boxing Legends". AIBA. Archived from the original on 24 December 2016. Retrieved 21 December 2016. IOC. "Sydney 2000 Canoe Sprint - Olympic Results by Discipline". Olympics.com. Archived from the original on 10 July 2021. Retrieved 8 July 2021. "The most incredible athlete in Rio?". ESPN.com. 3 August 2016. Archived from the original on 15 August 2019. Retrieved 8 July 2021. "IKA | International Kurash Association". Archived from the original on 15 July 2021. Retrieved 8 July 2021. "Stock Photo - Players of Uzbekistan's Nasaf FC celebrate their winning AFC Cup 2011 final soccer match against Al-Kuwait of Kuwait in Karshi October 29, 2011. REUTERS/Tariq AlAli". Alamy. Archived from the original on 9 July 2021. Retrieved 8 July 2021. "Where are they now? FC Nasaf's 2011 AFC Cup winners | Football | News | AFC Cup 2021". the-AFC. Archived from the original on 9 July 2021. Retrieved 8 July 2021. "Ice Hockey - Humo Tashkent (Uzbekistan) : palmares, results and name". www.the-sports.org. Archived from the original on 9 July 2021. Retrieved 7 July 2021. "Bird of Happiness - a symbol of the HC HUMO" (in Russian). 22 July 2019. Archived from the original on 20 July 2019. Retrieved 27 July 2019. akbaryusupov. "Tashkent-based Humo club to play in Higher Hockey League in 2019-2020 season". tashkenttimes.uz. Archived from the original on 9 July 2021. Retrieved 8 July 2021. UzDaily. "UTF has played a big role in promotion of tennis in Uzbekistan- Kafelnikov". UzDaily.uz (in Russian). Archived from the original on 9 July 2021. Retrieved 7 July 2021. UzDaily. "Denis Istomin wins, Amanmuradova loses". UzDaily.uz (in Russian). Archived from the original on 9 July 2021. Retrieved 7 July 2021. "Rustam Kasimdzhanov | Top Chess Players". Chess.com. Archived from the original on 29 July 2020. Retrieved 7 July 2021. "Nodirbek Abdusattorov | Top Chess Players". Chess.com. Archived from the original on 6 May 2022. Retrieved 17 May 2022. "Uzbekistan youngsters surprise winners of 44th Chess Olympiad". Fide.com. Archived from the original on 9 August 2022. Retrieved 9 August 2022. Nahaylo, Bohdan and Victor Swoboda. Soviet Disunion: A History of the Nationalities problem in the USSR (1990) excerpt Rashid, Ahmed. The Resurgence of Central Asia: Islam or Nationalism? (2017) Smith, Graham, ed. The Nationalities Question in the Soviet Union (2nd ed. 1995) Foltz, Richard (1996). "The Tajiks of Uzbekistan". Central Asian Survey. 15 (2): 213–216. doi:10.1080/02634939608400946. Lubin, Nancy (1997). "Uzbekistan". In Glenn E. Curtis (ed.). Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan: Country Studies. Washington, DC: Federal Research Division, Library of Congress. ISBN 9780844409382. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Uzbekistan. Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Uzbekistan. National Information Agency of Uzbekistan Lower House of Uzbekistan parliament Digital Agency Archived 10 February 2019 at the Wayback Machine Uzbekistan To Business Digital Agency Chief of State and Cabinet Members General information Uzbekistan. The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. Uzbekistan Corruption Profile Archived 24 March 2014 at the Wayback Machine from the Business Anti-Corruption Portal Uzbekistan from the U.S. Library of Congress includes Background Notes, Country Study and major reports Uzbek Publishing and National Bibliography from the University of Illinois Slavic and East European Library Uzbekistan at UCB Libraries GovPubs List of cities and populations[dead link] Uzbekistan at Curlie Uzbekistan profile from the BBC News Wikimedia Atlas of Uzbekistan Key Development Forecasts for Uzbekistan from International Futures Media National Television and Radio Company of Uzbekistan 42°N 64°E﻿ / ﻿42°N 64°E﻿ / 42; 64