Monica Anna Maria Bellucci (Italian: [ˈmɔːnika belˈluttʃi]; born 30 September 1964) is an Italian actress and model. She began her career as a fashion model before transitioning to Italian and later American and French films. She has played starring roles, supporting roles and guest appearances within an eclectic filmography spanning a range of genres and languages. Her accolades include the David di Donatello, Globo d'oro and Nastro d'Argento awards. In 2018, Forbes Italy named her one of the 100 most successful Italian women. Bellucci was an Elite model and the protagonist of Dolce & Gabbana campaigns. She made her acting debut in the Italian television miniseries Vita coi figli (1991). Bellucci went on to play one of Dracula's brides in the horror film Bram Stoker's Dracula (1992) and then enrolled in acting classes. After appearing in Italian productions, she had her breakthrough role in the arthouse film The Apartment (1996), for which she received a César Award nomination for Most Promising Actress. Bellucci came to the attention of American audiences in Under Suspicion (2000) and gained greater international recognition as Malèna Scordia in Malèna (2000). Bellucci starred in the period drama Brotherhood of the Wolf (2001) and the comedy Asterix & Obelix: Mission Cleopatra (2002). She portrayed a rape victim in the controversial arthouse thriller Irréversible (2002) and Persephone in the 2003 science-fiction sequels The Matrix Reloaded and The Matrix Revolutions. Bellucci was praised for portraying Mary Magdalene in the drama The Passion of the Christ (2004). She played a prostitute in How Much Do You Love Me? (2005) and Shoot 'Em Up (2007) and acted in a diverse array of roles in other films, including in The Whistleblower (2010), The Ages of Love (2011), and The Wonders (2014). Her role in Ville-Marie (2015) earned her the Dublin Film Critics' Circle Award for Best Actress. At the age of 50 she appeared in the James Bond film Spectre (2015), becoming the oldest Bond girl in the history of the franchise. She later played in films such as On the Milky Road (2016) and The Man Who Sold His Skin (2020). Her television appearances include the series Mozart in the Jungle (2016) and Call My Agent!'s original French version (2018). Bellucci made her stage debut in 2019 as Maria Callas in Letters and Memoirs. Bellucci starred alongside her second husband, Vincent Cassel, in on-screen partnerships that spanned ten years. She has remained involved in modelling and as an ambassador for luxury brands such as Cartier and Dior. She has been labelled a sex symbol by various media outlets. Bellucci received the knight insignias of the Order of Arts and Letters in 2006 and of the Legion of Honour in 2016. She represents Italy as a permanent member of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. Monica Anna Maria Bellucci was born in Città di Castello, Umbria, on 30 September 1964. Her father, Pasquale Bellucci, owned a trucking company. Her mother, Brunella Briganti, was a housewife and amateur painter. She is their only child, as her parents did not want another. Bellucci grew up in Selci-Lama, in the comune (municipality) of San Giustino, on the banks of the Tiber. Bellucci received a Catholic education. She was known to be an "intelligent child". Discreet and increasingly interested in fashion, she grew up "surrounded by love", her father said. Bellucci was introduced to modelling at age 13 by posing for a photographer friend of the family in Città di Castello. She was distant from other children her age, regularly making detours to get home after school and not spending time with them in the comune's public space. Her father recalled that she complained that everyone stared at her. Her father helped her to gain self-confidence. Bellucci developed a taste for cinema, watching films by Vittorio De Sica, Federico Fellini, Roberto Rossellini, Luchino Visconti, and also by Marcel Carné and Jean-Luc Godard. Bellucci has said that her personality largely reflects her upbringing: "Certainly a lot of positivity also depends on the climate in which my parents raised me." Bellucci, then 16, was asked to do photographic sessions by her father's friend, the director of a fashion agency. Having made her modelling debut at 16, she would travel periodically to Milan and Paris while continuing her studies at Città di Castello. "I approached the adult universe very early", said Bellucci, because she worked with models ten years older than her. "Modelling came to me naturally, and I loved pictures. I loved the world of image", she said. While hitchhiking, she met a hairdresser from Città di Castello named Piero Montanucci, who persuaded her to become his model. Bellucci, a student at the liceo classico, attracted attention wherever they went due to her striking appearance. She was considered a local model when she was a teenager. Bellucci studied philosophy, literature, Latin and Greek. Dressed by Città di Castello-based fashion entrepreneur Pina Alberti, Bellucci enthralled the crowd at a fashion show in 1983 at the Teatro degli Illuminati (the city's municipal theatre) as part of the Momento Donna event hosted by Maria Giovanna Elmi. She was accompanied by Montanucci, her mentor at the time. While in high school, her father's friend allowed her to debut on the runway during a fashion show in Florence and a second in Milan. Bellucci studied law at the University of Perugia to become a lawyer. She financed her studies by working as a model through her father's friend. After a friend encouraged her to apply to modelling agencies during her studies, Bellucci moved to Milan, one of Europe's fashion centres. Modelling agent Piero Piazzi witnessed Bellucci's arrival at the Elite Model Management agency and considered that she could have been an actress. Piazzi had been critical in his assessment when he first saw Bellucci in 1987, telling her she was "not ready". Elite signed her to a contract between 1988 and 1989. In 1988, she featured on the cover of Elle France, photographed by Oliviero Toscani, and Vogue Spain. Her work as a model for Elite required her to travel, and she decided to leave university. Bellucci would say later that being a lawyer would not have suited her. She appeared in numerous international advertising campaigns, and Dolce & Gabbana recruited her to become their muse. Her physical attributes aligned with the image that the founders of Dolce & Gabbana desired to portray. In 1989, Bellucci lived in New York, where she was already a dollar millionaire. She was the Italian model that the "fashion world" vied to have. As a model represented by Elite, she worked in Milan, Paris, and New York. In 1990, Bellucci lent her image and name to the Haute Couture line of the French luxury house Dior. Photographed by Richard Avedon, she became the "protagonist" of Dolce & Gabbana campaigns, "which elevated her to an icon of Mediterranean beauty". She also walked the runway for the luxury fashion house Fendi. In 1991, Bellucci was the brand ambassador for the cosmetics company, L'Oréal. The same year, she appeared in the Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue, which featured photographs of her in the Caribbean. She also advertised for Givenchy, Nina Ricci, Yves Saint Laurent, Versace and others. In 1992, Bellucci combined her work as a model with her acting debut. In 1993, she first met Giuseppe Tornatore when he directed her in a Dolce & Gabbana perfume television advertisement. Bellucci opted to follow her passion for cinema, and turned to acting and stopped modelling full-time, although she remained active within the industry. She was appointed a brand ambassador by the Italian luxury company Breil and starred in advertising campaigns. In the 1990s, she regularly appeared in "sexy" calendar shoots, beginning in 1997 at the age of 33 when Avedon photographed her for the Pirelli Calendar. In 1997, Bellucci became the brand ambassador and muse of Cartier jewellery. Nina Hald of Berlingske said, "Cartier chose for the first time to associate an actress closely with the house". Cartier would accompany her throughout her acting career, notably on the red carpets, wearing haute joaillerie (high jewellery) collections, and she would work as a model for opulent creations. Italian fashion photographer Fabrizio Ferri photographed her for the Max magazine's calendar. Bellucci posed for the GQ calendar in 2000 and was photographed by Gian Paolo Barbieri. In 2004, while pregnant with her first child, she posed nude for the Italian cover of Vanity Fair in protest against the Italian laws that opposed in vitro fertilisation. In the same year, it was made public that Bellucci was the only actress contractually bound to Cartier. In 2006, she was named brand ambassador for Dior and the face of a range of products until 2010. Cartier designed a collection of luxury diamond jewellery inspired by Bellucci's private commission and bearing her name. It was first presented at a Cartier event in Dubai in 2007. A jewellery collection named after an actress was unprecedented in Cartier's history. Bellucci's appearances in television advertisements include Martini Gold, a collaboration between Martini and Dolce & Gabbana in 2010. She again posed pregnant and semi-nude for the cover of the April 2010 issue of Vanity Fair Italy. Cashmere goods manufacturer Éric Bompard chose her as the brand ambassador for his winter 2011/2012 advertising campaign. In 2012, Bellucci was the face of a Dolce & Gabbana lipstick collection named after her. She also featured in other seasonal fashion campaigns for Dolce & Gabbana. She was signed to Storm Management in London and D'Management Group in Milan. She was chosen as the face of German Nivea cosmetic products for its 2018 and 2019 campaigns. Bellucci walked the runway for Dolce & Gabbana in June 2018 when she opened the second day of Milan Fashion Week. According to Stefano Gabbana, Bellucci returned to the catwalk for the house for the first time since 1992. She also walked the spring 2019 Milan fashion week runway for Dolce & Gabbana, along with Helena Christensen, Eva Herzigová and Isabella Rossellini, who joined the influx of 1990s supermodels returning to the fashion spotlight. Bellucci remained the "muse" and ambassador of the Cartier brand in the 2020s. Through the years, Bellucci has appeared on national and international covers of Elle, GQ, Harper's Bazaar, Marie Claire, Maxim, Paris Match, Schön!, The Sunday Times Style, Vanity Fair, and Vogue, among others. In 1990, Italian director Carlo Vanzina noticed a photography of Bellucci in a magazine and recommended her to Dino Risi who was looking for a "new face" for his television miniseries Vita coi figli. Bellucci had never envisioned becoming an actress, and was surprised to be chosen for a role. Bellucci made her acting debut in Risi's Vita coi figli, a two-part television film broadcast in Italy in May 1991, where she played Elda. That same year, she made her film debut in La Riffa, directed by Francesco Laudadio. In 1992, Bellucci played one of the three brides of Dracula in the horror film Bram Stoker's Dracula. Initially, Roman Coppola spotted her in the Italian magazine Zoom and then implored his father, Francis Ford, to offer her a role in his film. Francis Ford Coppola called her to arrange a meeting in Los Angeles while she was in New York for a photo shoot. Discussing with Coppola, she realised she would embark on an acting career. Although she stayed in Los Angeles during filming at Coppola's request, she was apprehensive about the city and, by her own admission, believed that her English needed improvement. She decided that her subsequent work as an actress would be in Italy. Her role as a "sensual vampire" exposed her to the international audience for the first time. Following her minor role in Bram Stoker's Dracula, Bellucci returned to Italy, where she enrolled in acting classes to realise her ambitions. "I craved it ... I needed to act", she said, even though she recalled a challenging period while all her friends were leaving the faculty. Bellucci had to overcome, not without difficulty, the prejudices related to her modelling and her physical appearance, and had to work to establish her credibility. She starred in Italian films for the next four years but was ultimately dissatisfied due to the lack of opportunities, and she aspired to an international acting career. Bellucci nevertheless played in the Emmy-winning biblical television miniseries Joseph (1995). In her view, the Italian film industry needed to invest more money to promote films internationally. Bellucci eventually moved to France in anticipation of improved career prospects. She settled in Paris in 1995. Her portrayal of Lisa in The Apartment (1996), a "moody" French film noir, earned Bellucci a César Award nomination for Most Promising Actress. This launched her towards stardom in France and strengthened her position as an actress. It was her first French-language film. Gavanndra Hodge of The Sunday Times stated that her "break-out role" was in the European arthouse film The Apartment. BBC's Almar Haflidason used the terms "seductive" and "startling" when referring to the film, giving it a top rating of five stars. Bellucci's second French release was Jan Kounen's Dobermann (1997), in which she portrayed a mute Gypsy and had to learn sign language beforehand to embody her character. Recalling the filming process, she expressed an inclination for mise-en-scènes (stage settings) "that pass more through bodies than through words". At this point in her career, she made a significant impact on European audiences. Pierce Brosnan performed a screen test with Bellucci for the James Bond film Tomorrow Never Dies (1997), then pressed that she be given the role of Paris [Carver], but the studio stated that only an American actress could be cast. For her leading role as Giulia Giovannini in the Italian comedy-drama L'ultimo capodanno (1998), Bellucci received a Globo d'oro Award for Best Actress. The Apartment later won a British Academy Film Award for best film not in the English language, prompting film director Stephen Hopkins to take a close interest in Bellucci. In 2000, Bellucci caught the attention of American audiences with Hopkins' Under Suspicion, her first English-language lead role, in which she starred opposite Morgan Freeman and Gene Hackman. Hopkins cast Bellucci after observing her perform in The Apartment and then retained her ideas for creating the character of Chantal [Hearst]. Journalist Garth Pearce commented in The Times on her improved spoken English. Under Suspicion was selected as one of the 2000 Cannes Film Festival's closing films, marking her red carpet debut at the annual event. After the film's release, Freeman said, "It's all there in her eyes. She has this quality that reminds me of Jeanne Moreau. There is a sense of having been there, that she's had a life." Variety listed Bellucci among "the ten young actresses to keep an eye on". Bellucci returned to Italian cinema, portraying Malèna Scordia, an enigmatic, envied and coveted World War II widow whose life unfolded before the captivated eyes of a 13-year-old boy in the Tornatore-directed film Malèna (2000), which took place in Sicily. Los Angeles Times film critic Kevin Thomas said the film emphasised the seductive appeal of the film's protagonist, Scordia, to whom Bellucci gave an "heroic" portrayal, delivered with a few lines of dialogue. Writing for The Guardian, Mark Salisbury considered Bellucci's portrayal in the Oscar-nominated film as her "breakout performance". She began to become known to global audiences thanks to Malèna. Malèna was Bellucci's first international success and, in addition to her allure, caused her to be "besieged by offers" from Hollywood when Miramax secured the film for US distribution. For the US release, ten minutes of explicit erotic scenes from the film were censored. Bellucci starred with Samuel Le Bihan and Vincent Cassel in Christophe Gans' Brotherhood of the Wolf, a 2001 French period drama film based on historical events involving the beast of Gévaudan that decimated the population of Lozère in 18th-century France. The Washington Post film critic Stephen Hunter found the film's stylistic approach too dense, obscuring Bellucci's "fabulous natural asset", who played an "underused" role as a courtesan–papist spy. The film elicited positive responses from other critics. Brotherhood of the Wolf was a box-office success in France, where it attracted five million viewers to movie theatres and grossed US$70 million worldwide, including $11 million in the US, against a budget of about €32 million. The film earned her a Best Supporting Actress nomination at the 2002 Saturn Awards in Los Angeles. The filming of Asterix & Obelix: Mission Cleopatra (2002) was one of Bellucci's favourite cinematographic experiences, with its light-hearted and comic atmosphere with Jamel Debbouze. She portrayed the "prickly" Cleopatra, the queen of Egypt, in the comedy film directed by Alain Chabat. The Guardian film critic Peter Bradshaw wrote that she was "certainly talented enough ... to merit getting the role of Cleopatra in some serious treatment", but before then, had to perform in a "funny mainstream commercial" French production. The film was a great success, selling 14 million tickets in France at the time of its release and grossing more than $128 million worldwide. In 2002, Bellucci co-starred with Cassel in Gaspar Noé's "violent" arthouse thriller Irréversible. Shot on 16 mm with hand-held cameras, the revenge film depicted Bellucci playing Alex, who was seen being graphically raped for nine minutes without a break in an underpass; a scene she had to shoot four times. Bellucci's "indelible scene" was filmed in an underpass frequented by prostitutes on the outskirts of Paris. Bellucci and Cassel, a couple at the time, were some of "the country's biggest talents". Audiences at the 2002 Cannes Film Festival were outraged during the midnight premiere of Irréversible, with some characterising it as "unsustainable". Lisa Nesselson of Variety thought Bellucci showed "responses to peril and joy particularly memorable". Subsequently, the film has been studied in film schools. Noé said he "has never seen an actress so charismatic ... with that much guts ... her performance is incredibly audacious". K. Austin Collins of Rolling Stone called Irréversible "one of the most controversial movies ever". In 2003, Bellucci played Alessia in the Italian film Remember Me, My Love, directed by Gabriele Muccino, which earned her the Nastro d'Argento for Best Supporting Actress. Bellucci co-starred with Bruce Willis in Antoine Fuqua's Tears of the Sun (2003), an action-adventure film set in a civil war in Nigeria. She played the role of doctor Lena Kendricks, working for a humanitarian organisation within a village threatened by rebels. Film critic David Denby of The New Yorker felt that some of Bellucci's scenes were exaggeratedly stylised but praised the film's visual prowess. Los Angeles Times film critic Kenneth Turan lauded Bellucci's "fierce" portrayal of Kendricks, who also possessed a "stereotypically fiery temperament". Tears of the Sun garnered mixed reviews from critics and was a box-office disappointment. Bellucci successively portrayed the character of Persephone in the two 2003 science fiction films, The Matrix Reloaded and The Matrix Revolutions. She described her character as "dangerous, sensual with some sense of humor", recalling fond memories with Carrie-Anne Moss, Laurence Fishburne, and Keanu Reeves throughout the filming process in Australia. Film critic Andrew Sarris of The New York Observer gave The Matrix Reloaded a positive review, grossing $742.1 million worldwide against a budget of $150 million. Alongside its release, she appeared on the Rolling Stone Spanish edition cover. The Merovingian, played by Lambert Wilson, once again accompanied Bellucci as her husband in The Matrix Revolutions. The film received mixed reviews from critics. Nonetheless, it grossed $427 million against a production and marketing budget of $185 million. In Rome, before filming Tears of the Sun, Bellucci was notified that a Mel Gibson's film about Jesus Christ was in the works and asked to meet with him for the role of Mary Magdalene. Her agent advised her against making this film due to its potential failure, as its distribution was undetermined at the time. However, Bellucci ignored his suggestion and turned down another film. Gibson chose her because they "liked each other". She aspired to create an interpretation of the character that would be "strong and deep", even though no one believed the film would succeed. Eventually, Bellucci played an expressive Mary Magdalene in Gibson's drama The Passion of the Christ (2004), which depicted the final hours of the life of Jesus Christ. The film feature dialogues in Aramaic and Latin languages that she had to learn expressly. The New York Times film critic A. O. Scott said she was the only "exception" to the "absence of identifiable movie stars". Expressing a similar opinion, Le Monde considered that in the film portraying a "fundamentalist" view of the Gospel, Bellucci stood out the most from the cast list. Film critic Paul Clinton wrote that she "is excellent as Mary Magdalene". Catholics, meanwhile, objected to Bellucci playing the Magdalene. Film critic Roger Ebert described The Passion of the Christ as "the most violent film I have ever seen", adding he was "moved by the depth of feeling, by the skill of the actors" and gave a rating of four stars out of four. Overall, critics were divided in their response to the film. The Passion of the Christ was a major commercial success, with a worldwide gross of over $611 million against a budget of $30 million. On 2 July 2005, Bellucci was awarded the European Golden Globe for cinema at Rome's 45th Globo d'oro ceremony. She emphasised that she appreciated acting in both American and European films. In Terry Gilliam's fantasy adventure film The Brothers Grimm (2005), Bellucci played the 500-year-old Mirror Queen, starring opposite Matt Damon and Heath Ledger. Gilliam would later say, "[i]mmediately she comes on-screen, it seems to me the whole film lifts up into another realm, a realm of sex and sensuality and danger". San Francisco Chronicle film critic Mick LaSalle opined that she convincingly portrayed her character whose centuries-old age appeared to him to be discordant with her "allure". She also voiced Cappy for the French version of the 2005 animated film Robots. Bellucci had a leading role in Bertrand Blier's French romantic comedy How Much Do You Love Me?, a film which also starred Gérard Depardieu. She portrayed Daniela, the most beautiful prostitute in Pigalle, Paris, to whom a lottery-winning office worker offered to pay her to live with him. A journalist at Le Monde wrote that it was "a hymn to the beauty of Monica Bellucci" and that it was neither Blier's best film nor his most failed. Nesselson commented that she was optimally used in the film as she stimulated the spectator's senses and intellect. In 2006, Bellucci starred alongside Daniel Auteuil in Paolo Virzì's period comedy-drama Napoleon and Me. She portrayed baroness Emilia, who had a turbulent relationship with the character named Martino, played by Elio Germano, in the film depicting Napoleon Bonaparte during his exile to Elba from 1814 to 1815. Author Mark Feeney remarked that she did not take "things too seriously" in the film. Bellucci said she declined to play a role in the blockbuster 300 and oriented herself towards the film d'auteur (auteur film) The Stone Council. She was selected, after the initial announcement of Sophie Marceau, for the lead role in the thriller The Stone Council, adapted from the novel of the same name by Jean-Christophe Grangé. The film differed by character names as the book's heroine was Diane Thiberge, whereas Bellucci was Laura Siprien, a tormented adoptive mother confronted by killers who wanted her child. Sébastien Le Fol of Le Figaro wrote that she "delivers one of her best performances on the big screen" with a muted sex appeal. Her hair was cut short for the film, a preference of French cinema hairstylist John Nollet, who had worked for her on the sets of Brotherhood of the Wolf and Asterix & Obelix: Mission Cleopatra. Bellucci starred opposite Paul Giamatti and Clive Owen in Michael Davis' action thriller Shoot 'Em Up, released in the US in September 2007. She portrayed Donna Quintano, who teamed up with Owen's character, Mr Smith, to protect a baby amid a bloody settling of scores. Playing a prostitute again, albeit with a different approach than in How Much Do You Love Me?, Bellucci would say she felt empathy for female sex workers, who she believes retain "faith in humanity". She was fond of this sort of paradox and sought to highlight this virtue in her portrayals of characters of all types but noted that she could explore the opposite spectrum. Richard James Havis of the South China Morning Post writes, "It's the latest in a slew of extreme roles". She dubbed her own voice for the French and Italian releases of Shoot 'Em Up, saying it was a frequent practice for her to accomplish each film three times. Bellucci continued to work in French film productions and starred alongside Auteuil in Alain Corneau's The Second Wind, a remake of the critically acclaimed Jean-Pierre Melville's 1966 gangster film of the same title. She portrayed Manouche, a tenacious character enamoured of a gangster who escaped prison. Bellucci had the idea of dyeing her hair blond to adhere to the style of film noir main characters played by French actresses of the 1950s and 1960s. Thierry Jousse, a critic for Libération, wrote that Bellucci was alone in a "fatally virile" context, but she managed to get through it "to the point of becoming the spectator's compass and the flesh of a film that sometimes lacks it". In November 2007, Le Monde reported on the commercial failures of The Second Wind and The Stone Council. Bellucci felt a "visceral" need to play regularly in films from her native country. Thus, in 2008, she starred in Marco Tullio Giordana's Wild Blood and co-star Luca Zingaretti. The historical panorama examined the fate of Luisa Ferida and Osvaldo Valenti, a couple of leading actors during the Italian fascism period, portrayed respectively by Bellucci and Zingaretti. Author Barry Forshaw called Bellucci "charismatic", and author Gino Moliterno praised her performance as "extremely powerful". Next, Bellucci played Alba in the Italian film The Man Who Loves, where she was enamoured of Pierfrancesco Favino's character, Roberto, through a cinematic flashback. On 5 March 2009, she received the World Actress Award at the Women's World Award in Vienna. That same year, Bellucci co-starred with Marceau in the thriller Don't Look Back, a sequel to In My Skin, both directed by Marina de Van. The film depicted Marceau's character seeing changes around her and noticing her body transform into Bellucci's. J.B. Morain of Les Inrockuptibles said that Bellucci's physical attitude and "attention to others have never been so well filmed". Variety's Derek Elley described that she "looks elegant and mystified", although both film critics stressed the clumsily written dialogue. She reunited with Reeves in Rebecca Miller's romantic comedy-drama The Private Lives of Pippa Lee (2009), featuring Winona Ryder and Robin Wright. Bellucci portrayed Gigi Lee, the former wife of a successful publisher, Herb, played by Alan Arkin. She next appeared in a cameo role in Tornatore's autobiographical film Baarìa, a family saga traversing several generations and shot in Bagheria, Sicily. In 2010, Bellucci portrayed Laura Leviani in Larysa Kondracki's biopic drama thriller The Whistleblower, primarily filmed in Romania and depicting a vast human trafficking network discovered in post-war Bosnia and Herzegovina in 1999. Hélène Delye of Le Monde described Bellucci's character as a "grizzled, stubborn, insensitive civil servant". The Whistleblower received a mixed critical reception. Bellucci shot three films in seven months including, Giovanni Veronesi's The Ages of Love, Philippe Garrel's A Burning Hot Summer, and Bahman Ghobadi's Rhino Season. In the third segment of the comedy The Ages of Love, an anthology film released in 2011, Bellucci starred opposite Robert De Niro, a divorced American art history professor living in Rome who fell in love with her character, Viola. De Niro was delighted to collaborate with Bellucci, saying she had "worked her magic" on him and admitting that he had accepted the role because he wanted to play alongside her. It was filmed two months after the birth of Bellucci's second child. A scene based on improvisation showed De Niro doing a striptease in front of Bellucci, which echoed in reverse a sequence of the 1963 film Yesterday, Today and Tomorrow, where Sophia Loren performed it for Marcello Mastroianni. For her role in Rhino Season (2012), she learned to speak Farsi (Persian), the Iranian language. Journalist Helen Barlow of SBS Australia said Bellucci "brought her natural poise and grace" to the character and "surprises with a stoic minimalist performance". In 2014, Alice Rohrwacher's The Wonders featured Bellucci as Milly Catena, host of the Countryside Wonders televised contest. In the film, combining autobiographical aspects and fiction, her character is depicted in a pagan priestess style, wearing elaborate clothes with ancient figures surrounding her. Critically acclaimed, The Wonders won the Grand Prix Award at the 2014 Cannes Film Festival. In 2015, Bellucci had the leading role of Sophie Bernard in the Canadian drama film Ville-Marie directed by Guy Édoin. The film traces the journey of Bernard, a European actress visiting Montreal for a film shoot and trying to reconcile with her son. Bellucci stated Édoin had offered her "one of the most beautiful roles" of her career and described a stimulating fear of embodying Bernard's character that had affected her emotionally. The film garnered generally positive reviews, and Bellucci's performance was unanimously praised. For her portrayal of Bernard, she received the Best Actress Award from the Dublin Film Critics' Circle at the Dublin International Film Festival. At 50, she became the oldest Bond girl ever in the James Bond film franchise, playing Lucia Sciarra in Sam Mendes' Spectre (2015). She was initially sceptical about Mendes' project, but he argued that a mature woman in a James Bond film would be innovative. She felt gratified to have been the first to portray a role she defined as a "James Bond lady". Spectre was released to mixed reviews from critics. The British press responded more positively. The film grossed $880 million worldwide against a $250–300 million production budget. Guy Lodge of Variety called Bellucci "One of the most restlessly globe-trotting stars in world cinema", who does not want national borders or age brackets to dictate her filmography. In 2016, Bellucci had a guest role in the third season of the American comedy-drama streaming television series Mozart in the Jungle, an adaptation of the memoir Blair Tindall's Mozart in the Jungle: Sex, Drugs, and Classical Music, portraying Alessandra, an opera singer and latest collaborator of New York symphony orchestra conductor, Rodrigo, played by Gael García Bernal. Variety's Nick Vivarelli labelled her the "Italian actress with international star power". Bellucci portrayed Nevesta in the film On the Milky Road (2016), a romance set during the 1990s Bosnian War whose lead role was played by the film's director, Emir Kusturica. Reflecting on the film and her other cinematic experiences, Bellucci says, "I decided to be an actress, not a politician, I recount political choices through my artistic choices." Kusturica asked her to learn all her dialogue in the Serbian language to interpret her character. She had to adapt to challenging production conditions in a "land of beauty and violence", with Kusturica suffering "great [mental] pain" during filming, which spanned four summers. The Hollywood Reporter's Neil Young felt the Golden Lion-nominated film's approach lacked nuance, while Bellucci performed "admirably well" and kept her "dignity intact" in a physically demanding role. Her performance in the film earned her the Nastro d'Argento europeo (European Silver Ribbon Award), held on 1 July 2017 at the ancient theatre of Taormina in Sicily. In 2017, Bellucci appeared in the third season of Mark Frost and David Lynch's television series Twin Peaks. The same year, Bellucci received the honorary Donostia Award at the San Sebastián International Film Festival. In 2018, Bellucci had one of the leading roles in the Australian comedy science-fiction horror film Nekrotronic, playing a necromancer and demonic soul-eater. In his appraisal of the film, Stephen Dalton of The Hollywood Reporter appreciated that she portrayed her "diva" character through an "operatic camp-vamp" performance but was less enthusiastic about the plot, believing her acting style would be best suited to films by Tim Burton and Guillermo del Toro. Also in 2018, she appeared in the third season of the France 2 comedy television series Dix pour cent, playing herself with self-mockery, a well-received show initially renamed Call My Agent! after its Netflix purchase. In Claude Lelouch's The Best Years of a Life (2019), a film set in Normandy, Bellucci had a cameo role as Elena, the daughter of Jean-Louis Duroc, portrayed by Jean-Louis Trintignant. The film garnered positive critical responses. Following his documentary film Maria by Callas (2017), writer and director Tom Volf proposed to Bellucci his project based on his book, Maria Callas: Lettres & Mémoires, containing the writings of opera singer Maria Callas. As a one-woman show directed by Volf, Maria Callas: Letters and Memoirs is a narrative form of letters recited by Bellucci alone on stage and wearing two dresses that had belonged to Callas, thus making her theatrical debut at the Marigny Theatre in Paris held from 27 November to 6 December 2019. She would perform it intermittently over the years. In 2020, Bellucci starred in the role of Soraya in the Oscar-nominated The Man Who Sold His Skin, directed by Kaouther Ben Hania. Time film critic Stephanie Zacharek ironically opined that Soraya was a "frosty, willowy blond" acted by "a deviously silky-smooth Monica Bellucci". Maria Callas: Letters and Memoirs visited European theatres, including Venice's Teatro Goldoni and Athens's Odeon of Herodes Atticus, with an orchestra that attracted 4,000 people each night. In 2021, Bellucci received a David Special Award for her career achievements at the 66th David di Donatello ceremony. She co-starred as part of an ensemble cast featuring Liam Neeson and Guy Pearce in Martin Campbell's action thriller Memory (2022), in which she played Davana Sealman, an unscrupulous real estate magnate. She was initially interested in the duality of the antagonist's persona she would play and wanted to extricate herself from typecasting based on her physical appearance, which had been assigned to her recurrently in her life. Entertainment Weekly critic Leah Greenblatt deemed Memory "wrapped in leaden dialogue and B-movie cliché" with Bellucci appearing "blasé". In 2022, she brought Maria Callas: Letters and Memoirs to Her Majesty's Theatre in London, Chatelet Theatre in Paris, and Istanbul and Los Angeles. In January 2023, at 58, Bellucci performed the play at the Beacon Theatre in New York City. Recalling Irréversible, Bellucci told The New York Times in 2023 that her "days of acting in transgressive movies are behind her" as she is a mother. In 2023, Bellucci entered talks to star in Beetlejuice Beetlejuice. She will play Delores, Beetlejuice's ex-wife and the movie’s villain. She won the Nastro d'Argento Award for Protagonist of the Year in Documentaries 2024 for her interpretation of Callas in Letters and Memoirs. Bellucci was mistress of ceremonies at the 56th Cannes Film Festival, presiding over the opening and closing ceremonies held on the Croisette from 14 to 25 May 2003. From 17 to 28 May 2006, she was a jury member at the 59th Cannes Film Festival. In 2009, Bellucci signed a petition alongside filmmakers from Europe and the US and 70 other industry names to support film director Roman Polanski, who had been arrested on his way to the Zurich Film Festival due to his 1977 sexual abuse charges. She returned to her role of mistress of ceremonies at the 70th Cannes Film Festival, in charge of opening and closing one of the major international film events, which took place from 17 to 28 May 2017. In 2017, Bellucci was invited by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences to be a permanent member representing Italy, becoming one of the voting juries responsible for awarding the annual Academy Awards (Oscars). From 26 to 30 September 2018, she chaired the judging panel of the 29th Dinard British Film Festival. Bellucci was to be chairwoman of the 15th Crystal Globe Awards, scheduled for 14 March 2020 at the Wagram auditorium in Paris, but the ceremony was cancelled due to the coronavirus pandemic. In 2008, Bellucci supported a fundraising campaign in favour of a centre for children with cancer located in Prima Porta. It was initiated by the Associazione Genitori Oncologia Pediatrica (Association of Parents in Pediatric Oncology), also known as AGOP, created by parents of children with cancer and leukemia at the Agostino Gemelli Polyclinic in Rome. In 2010, Bellucci became patron of Paroles de Femmes (Words of Women), an apolitical and secular French association promoting equality between men and women in society. In March 2010, she organised the Nuit des Femmes (Women's Night), bringing together female politicians, researchers, doctors, lawyers, writers, painters, and business leaders to assess the evolution of women's rights in France. The funds raised went to construct centres for accommodation, reintegration and support for single mothers in precarious situations. In 2010, Rizzoli and La Martinière Groupe published a book prefaced by Tornatore retracing Bellucci's modelling and acting careers through photos taken by photographers such as Peter Lindbergh and Helmut Newton. All proceeds from the book's sales were donated to AGOP and Words of Women. She donated €10,000 to the City of Cannes for a solidarity campaign to support recovery efforts caused by the deadly floods of October 2015 in the Alpes-Maritimes. Bellucci is also a patron of the SOS Autism France association. Corriere della Sera's Stefano Montefiori commented that Bellucci is regarded as a sort of ambassador of Italy to the French population. She has been involved in state dinners chaired by the president of the French Republic and organised as part of foreign heads of state visits. On 21 November 2012, Bellucci attended the state dinner hosted by French President François Hollande at the Elysée Palace in Paris on the occasion of the visit of Italian President Giorgio Napolitano and his ministers. On 5 July 2021, she was invited to a state dinner hosted by French President Emmanuel Macron at the Elysée Palace in honour of Italian President Sergio Mattarella and his daughter Laura. In 2001, Bellucci was featured nude with caviar on her breasts on the cover of Esquire's Desire issue. In their reviews of Malèna (2000), Thomas wrote in the Los Angeles Times that she "has the impact of the great Italian stars", and Paul Tatara of CNN International called her a "world-class bombshell". In 2002, AskMen named her number one on the "Top 99 Most Desirable Women". She was featured in Empire's "Sexiest Women" list. In 2003, Chris Campion of The Daily Telegraph stated, "'La Bellucci' is Italy's national sweetheart and an icon of European cinema". On 23 November 2004, Bellucci pressed the button triggering the Christmas illuminations of the Champs-Élysées avenue consisting of 45 km (28 mi) of electric garlands descending from the Place de l'Étoile towards Place de la Concorde, in the presence of the First Deputy Mayor Anne Hidalgo. Bellucci was the first-ever foreign public figure invited by the City of Paris and the Champs-Élysées Committee to inaugurate this annual celebration. Bellucci was voted the "Most Beautiful Woman in the World" in 2004 and 2007 based on an Ipsos survey of 1002 people in France commissioned by TF1. Paris' Grévin Museum unveiled a wax statue of her in April 2005. In The Times, Pearce called Bellucci "arguably the world's most beautiful actress", suggesting that she has, by contrast, the propensity to specialise in playing "[u]gly scenes", exemplified by the rape scene of Irréversible (2002). Salisbury wrote in The Guardian in 2005 that she represents an "international object of desire" and "[i]n person, as on screen, Bellucci radiates a rare, otherworldly beauty." Based on the criteria of her projected image and her work for Cartier, Kommersant described her as the "type of diva whose fame depends little on her roles". In the words of Blier, she is "completely relaxed with her image and with her own sense of modesty as well". Blier compared her to "Ava Gardner, the stars of yesteryear". On 9 May 2008, L'Obs reported on a survey of 1,003 people conducted by the Superior Audiovisual Council as part of Europe Day, where Bellucci was the second of the European personalities (excluding France) favourite of the French. In 2011, Bellucci was ranked fourth in Los Angeles Times Magazine's list of the "50 most beautiful women in film". She was voted number one on NRJ 12's "100 sexiest stars of 2011", a nationwide survey conducted in France that featured American and French actresses, models, singers, women athletes and television presenters. In 2012, Bellucci said she has never undergone cosmetic procedures: "I don't like the idea of having my face retouched and, frankly, I think it's quite dangerous for an actress. ... Compared to a plastic face, I prefer wrinkles." On 10 April 2016, the Karin Models agency, representing Bellucci, opened an official Instagram account for her. A photograph taken by Fred Meylan in 2016 showing Bellucci naked, swimming on her back in a pool, was censored by Instagram with body parts hidden in yellow. Christophe Narbonne of Première wrote: "Behind the advertising muse, the image of the (re)incarnated Italian diva and the globalised sexual icon, we sometimes forget Monica Bellucci the out-of-norm actress, collector of a pile of international cult auteurs". De Morgen wrote that "most roles fit Bellucci like a glove", while Christophe Carrière of L'Express said that others of "variable geometry" compose her filmography. In 2018, she was named among Forbes Italy's "Successful women: the 100 winning Italian women", listed alphabetically. Bellucci's physical characteristics have led her to be included on all-time beauties and sex symbols lists compiled by magazines such as Esquire Japan and Men's Health in the US and Australia. The press refers to her as a style "icon". Associated with the wearing of high-value jewellery and an "unwavering commitment" to Cartier, but also to Boucheron and Chopard, Naomi Pike of British Vogue referred to her as "A Modern Day Liz Taylor". Dressed in diamonds, "few contemporary Hollywood stars can rival Italian actor Monica Bellucci", said Pike. Federico Roberto Antonelli, director of the Italian Cultural Institute in China, said that "everyone dreams of Malèna's Monica Bellucci" in the country. In 2021, Vogue France ranked her fourth of the "most beautiful Italian actresses of all time". She is considered an Italian sex symbol by the media. Rolling Stone Italy included Bellucci in its "10 greatest sex symbols of the 1990s" list, in no particular order. She takes a "peaceful" attitude towards ageing and mainly believes in pasta, wine, and a little Pilates for her "beauty regime", not being addicted to exercise and dieting. In 2023, Bellucci said it "didn't bother" her having been "objectified" during her film career and was aware that she had made the most of her body for specific roles. Elisabeth Vincentelli wrote for The New York Times in 2023 that she has achieved a "reputation as a symbol of European glamour and sophistication" that is "firmly established". Bellucci's first marriage was with Italian photographer Claudio Carlos Basso. In a 2006 interview, Bellucci said she met Basso in 1987 when he recruited her for a photo shoot. She was 23, and he was five years older. They married on 3 January 1990 in Monte-Carlo. They divorced a year later. Bellucci was in a relationship with Italian actor Nicola Farron [it] for several years. Farron said they met in 1990 on the set of Vita coi figli. He described "an overwhelming passion". Their relationship became unstable because other men increasingly lusted after Bellucci. The couple separated in 1995. Bellucci and French actor Vincent Cassel met in 1995 on the set of their film The Apartment. They married at the beginning of August 1999 in Monaco. Bellucci and Cassel have two daughters, Deva (born 12 September 2004) and Léonie (born 21 May 2010). Their daughters were born in Rome. Film critic Jason Solomons wrote that Bellucci and Cassel were "the golden couple of European cinema." The couple acted in nine films together between 1996 and 2006. In March 2013, Bellucci reflected on the evolution of their marriage when the two often lived separately in Italy, France, Brazil and England. The couple's separation by "mutual agreement" was announced on 26 August 2013. They later divorced. In October 2013, Bellucci said that she had almost always been in a relationship since her first boyfriend at the age of fourteen. Bellucci was in a relationship with French sculptor and former model Nicolas Lefebvre. They had been dating since 2017. Lefebvre, then aged 36, and Bellucci made it "official" in early March 2019 during a Chanel show at the Grand Palais in Paris. She told Italian magazine F about the end of their relationship, which was reported by other media in early July 2019. In February 2023, Paris Match reported that Bellucci and American filmmaker Tim Burton were a couple, a relationship originating in October 2022. In June 2023, she confirmed her relationship with Burton. They made their first public appearance at the Rome Film Festival in October 2023. Besides the Italian language, Bellucci is fluent in French and English and proficient in Portuguese and Spanish. After her divorce from Cassel, Bellucci lived with her daughters in England, France and Italy. By 2015, she decided to reside in France. Bellucci said, however, that "I am entirely Italian. Everything about me is Italian" and acknowledged that "Paris is part of my history". Bellucci said she votes in Italy, not France. She does not have French nationality. She owns houses in Rome and Lisbon, and in 2023, she purchased a villa on the Greek island of Paros. Bellucci has emphasised that she has moved away from her religious roots: "I come from a Catholic religion, but I'm not Catholic". She has called herself an agnostic. Bellucci faced a French tax authorities investigation in 2018 for non-declaration of a safe and bank accounts in Switzerland linked to an offshore company in the British Virgin Islands. They attempted to recover French tax years 2011 to 2013 because they suspected tax evasion, although her lawyer stated she lived in the UK and not Paris. In September 2021, Bellucci said being "up to date with my tax obligations both in France and abroad". The results of the investigation into her Swiss bank accounts remain undisclosed. Consequently, she was named in the Pandora Papers, published in October 2021, a massive data leak from offshore entities of high-profile figures. In 2018, Forbes valued Bellucci's wealth at $45 million, ranking her as the third richest of Italian actors and actresses. Bellucci has developed her acting career by alternating low-budget arthouse and auteur films with big-budget blockbusters within the European and American industries. Bellucci received honours from the French and Italian governments. In 2006, French Minister of the Interior Nicolas Sarkozy conferred her with the knight insignia of the Order of Arts and Letters. In 2016, French President François Hollande presented her with the knight insignia in the National Order of the Legion of Honour at the Elysée Palace. In 2020, Mayor Dario Nardella awarded Bellucci the Key to the City of Florence. "Selci" and "Lama" are two toponyms together designating a frazione (hamlet) of San Giustino. Riccardo Carnovalini wrote for La Stampa: "This is the Umbria of Val Tiberina, a stone's throw from the Tuscany of Piero della Francesca". In August 2015, Bellucci was featured on the cover of GQ Italy for the seventh time. Bellucci first appeared on the cover of Paris Match in June 2001. She made her eighth cover in December 2012. In a March 1991 interview for L'Officiel Paris, she stated: "It happened in an accidental way. I was not expecting that at all. I was noticed by the producers of the film as a model. They came across photos of me that appeared in a magazine." To the question of whether she "never dreamed of one day being an actress?", she responded: "No. Being a model, working a lot, being in demand... were enough for me. As a child, I already dreamed of this: posing for fashion photos." The Globo d'oro Awards are the Italian equivalent of the American Golden Globe. The Globo d'oro, the David di Donatello and the Nastro d'Argento are Italy's three most prestigious film awards. The average exchange rate of the US dollar to the euro was 0.99 in late January 2000 (US$0.99 bought €1). A confident Gaspar Noé had initially asked Vincent Cassel to star alongside Bellucci in a pornographic film. After listening to Noé's offer, "we told him there was no way we could do that", said Cassel. While discussing it with Noé, they diverted his intention in another direction, and Irréversible emerged. "[Noé] is also very free, he doubts nothing", said Bellucci. At the screening of Irréversible at the Cannes Film Festival on 24 May 2002, "visceral reactions from the audience" were reported: faintings, nervous breakdowns, 200 hasty departures, and people passing out in the lobby. Opinions differed; comments such as "an accomplished work" would burst forth from the crowd. Other participants included French ministers, LVMH Moët Hennessy Louis Vuitton's co-founder, chairman and CEO Bernard Arnault, Dior's creative director Maria Grazia Chiuri, Kering's chairman and CEO François-Henri Pinault, and French actress Carole Bouquet. Many photographs of Bellucci taken by fashion photographer Fabrizio Ferri, notably where she was drizzled with honey, appeared regularly in the two direct competitor magazines, Esquire and GQ's Italian edition. The association, founded in 1916, represents retailers on the Champs-Élysées avenue and unites 180 commercial companies. Beatrice Loayza wrote for The New York Times that Bellucci and Cassel "were like the French equivalent" of Nicole Kidman and Tom Cruise. Bellucci and Cassel's separation entered the top 10 trending topics on Twitter following the announcement. In a December 2014 interview, Bellucci said of Cassel: "Love, especially when there are children, is always there." The two have remained close ever since. According to Paris Match, Bellucci and American filmmaker Tim Burton briefly met at the 2006 Cannes Film Festival. They reconnected in October 2022 at the Lumière Film Festival in Lyon. Bellucci elaborated further: "I am an agnostic, even though I respect and am interested in all religions ... If there's something I believe in, it's a mysterious energy; the one that fills the oceans during tides, the one that unites nature and beings." According to Alcogal, the British Virgin Islands offshore company that served to manage her image rights operated from 2011 to 2015 and was liquidated in 2016. "Monica Bellucci". Karin Models agency. Paris. Archived from the original on 13 March 2023. Retrieved 13 March 2023. Lussier, Marc-André (1 October 2015). "Monica Bellucci: l'envie d'émotions fortes" [Monica Bellucci: the desire for strong emotions]. La Presse (in Canadian French). Archived from the original on 29 July 2023. Retrieved 14 August 2023. Silvestri, Giuseppe (6 December 2019). "Monica Bellucci, la 55enne che fa impazzire il mondo" [Monica Bellucci, the 55-year-old who is driving the world crazy]. Corriere dell'Umbria (in Italian). Archived from the original on 14 August 2020. Retrieved 4 June 2023. Lévy-Frébault, Tiphaine (11 October 2013) [First published 11 April 2013]. "Monica Bellucci est célibataire" [Monica Bellucci is single]. L'Express (in French). Archived from the original on 19 February 2023. Retrieved 26 February 2023. Williams, Sally (15 July 2017). "Monica Bellucci on life after divorce and finding herself in her 50s". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 21 May 2022. Retrieved 26 November 2023. Christopher R. (11 December 2014). "Monica Bellucci à 18 ans: La nymphe italienne, beauté incandescente et naturelle" [Monica Bellucci at 18: The Italian nymph, incandescent and natural beauty]. Interview with Pasquale Bellucci and Brunella Briganti. Purepeople (in French). Webedia. Archived from the original on 17 November 2022. Retrieved 4 February 2024. Couvreur, Daniel (14 January 2020). "Monica Bellucci, star des Magritte" [Monica Bellucci, Magritte star]. Le Soir (in French). Archived from the original on 12 November 2023. Retrieved 17 November 2023. Carnovalini, Riccardo (19 January 2013). "In marcia alla scoperta" [On the march to discover]. La Stampa (in Italian). Archived from the original on 17 November 2023. Retrieved 17 November 2023. Morgoglione, Claudia (17 October 2006). "L'altra faccia di Monica Bellucci 'Ma quella sono proprio io?'" [The other side of Monica Bellucci 'But is that really me?']. la Repubblica (in Italian). Archived from the original on 26 June 2007. Retrieved 17 February 2023. See: 5th paragraph. Flynn, Gaynor (10 August 2009). "Monica Bellucci's beautiful mind". The Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on 26 July 2021. Retrieved 27 January 2024. "Monica Bellucci posta una foto su Instagram di quando aveva 13 anni: era già una incredibile bellezza" [Monica Bellucci posts a photo on Instagram from when she was 13: she was already an incredible beauty]. HuffPost (in Italian). 24 August 2017. Archived from the original on 19 February 2023. Retrieved 19 February 2023. Hattersley, Giles (22 February 2015). "The spy who loved me | Not Shaken or Stirred". Interview. Style (The Sunday Times supplement). London, UK: Times Newspapers Ltd. p. 24. OCLC 1368155993. Her father, Pasquale, said: One day, I asked her why she didn't want to be in the square with the others, and she said, 'When I go in the piazza, everyone looks at me. The men look at me. The women look at me. All the kids from school. I feel ashamed.' ... She had a starter marriage to a photographer in the early 1990s Bradfer, Fabienne (25 January 2020). "Monica Bellucci au 'Soir': 'J'ai mis ma beauté au service du cinéma'" [Monica Bellucci to 'Le Soir': 'I have put my beauty at the service of cinema']. Le Soir (in French). Archived from the original on 2 April 2023. Retrieved 7 October 2023. Laura Giovagnini, Maria (6 August 2010). "'Ottengo sempre quello che voglio'" ['I always get what I want']. Interview. IO Donna (in Italian). Archived from the original on 9 November 2017. Retrieved 12 February 2023 – via Corriere della Sera. See: 3rd paragraph Hélie, Mathilde (19 January 2018). "Monica Bellucci: ses photos quand elle était jeune" [Monica Bellucci: her photos when she was young]. Paris Match (in French). Archived from the original on 19 February 2023. Retrieved 24 November 2023. [Spotted by the Elite agency, she signed a contract in 1989.] Gianorio, Richard (24 April 2020). "Monica Bellucci: 'Mes filles sont les réponses à toutes mes questions'" [Monica Bellucci: 'My daughters are the answers to all my questions']. Madame Figaro (in French). Archived from the original on 14 August 2023. Retrieved 4 February 2024. Gurrey, Béatrice (16 February 2020). "Monica Bellucci: 'L'essentiel du travail d'artiste se fait dans la solitude'" [Monica Bellucci: 'Most of the work of an artist is done in solitude']. Le Monde (in French). Archived from the original on 21 August 2022. Retrieved 18 November 2023. "Pettine E Forbibi. I Quaranta Anni di Attivita' di Piero Montanucci" [Comb And Scissors. Piero Montanucci's Forty Years of Activity]. Interview. Comune di Città di Castello (in Italian). Agenzia Stampa del Comune di Città di Castello. 16 November 2017. Archived from the original on 28 February 2023. Retrieved 4 October 2023. Douin, Jean-Luc (26 March 2004). "Monica Bellucci, 'Italienne à 100%?'" [Monica Bellucci, '100% Italian?']. Interview. Le Monde (in French). Archived from the original on 25 November 2023. Retrieved 26 November 2023. [She was born in Citta di Castello ... 'I am 100% Italian, I am proud of it; brunette, latin, I claim it'] "Fu la prima a 'vestire' Monica Bellucci, premiata Pina Alberti" [She was the first to 'dress' Monica Bellucci, awarded Pina Alberti]. Agenzia Nazionale Stampa Associata (in Italian). 8 March 2023. Archived from the original on 9 March 2023. Retrieved 4 February 2024. Salisbury, Mark (23 October 2005). "Danger woman". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 16 August 2022. Retrieved 27 January 2024. "Monica Bellucci". Elle (in French). n.d. Archived from the original on 3 February 2023. Retrieved 1 March 2023. "Monica Bellucci: 'Vivo a Parigi, ma mi sento figlia dell'Europa'" [Monica Bellucci: 'I live in Paris, but I feel like a daughter of Europe']. Vanity Fair (in Italian). 26 May 2014. Archived from the original on 24 November 2023. Retrieved 2 January 2024. [Monica Bellucci was born on 30 September 1964 in Città di Castello, Umbria.] Airoldi, Simona (4 June 2017). "Piero Piazzi, l'uomo che sussurra alle top" [Piero Piazzi, the man who whispers to the tops]. Vanity Fair (in Italian). Archived from the original on 26 August 2018. Retrieved 18 November 2023. Morvillo, Candida (23 October 2023). "Piero Piazzi: 'Da Carla Bruni a Naomi, sono stato il re delle top model. Ho preso a sberle gli stilisti'" [Piero Piazzi: 'From Carla Bruni to Naomi, I was the king of the top models. I slapped the stylists']. Corriere della Sera (in Italian). Archived from the original on 3 February 2024. Retrieved 3 February 2024. (22 February 1988). Elle (in French). No. 2198: "Les plus belles couvertures de Elle" [Elle's most beautiful covers]. Elle (in French). 22 November 2013. Archived from the original on 17 February 2023. Retrieved 7 January 2024. Le Scouarnec, Jean-Marc (7 October 2017). "Oliviero Toscani: 'Je suis de retour avec Benetton et on va s'amuser'" [Oliviero Toscani: 'I'm back with Benetton and we're going to have fun']. Interview. La Dépêche du Midi (in French). Archived from the original on 25 November 2023. Retrieved 25 November 2023. [I discovered Monica in Milan. ... I saw this very awake girl, with a tremendous allure. 'Elle' immediately fell for her.] "Junio 1988" [June 1988]. Vogue (in Spanish). 3 January 209. Archived from the original on 16 May 2022. Retrieved 18 February 2023. Yildiz, Alev (2015). "Le style de Monica Bellucci" [Monica Bellucci's style]. Marie Claire (in French). Archived from the original on 19 February 2023. Retrieved 19 February 2023. "Reconversion de stars: des podiums au cinéma" [Retraining of stars: from runway podiums to cinema]. Elle (in French). 31 August 2013. Archived from the original on 5 November 2023. Retrieved 5 November 2023. de Chirée, Sylvie (2015) [First published 2 April 1990]. "Ma première interview dans Elle: Monica Bellucci en 1989" [My first interview in Elle: Monica Bellucci in 1989]. Elle (in French). No. 2308. pp. 148–153. Archived from the original on 6 December 2015. Retrieved 31 January 2024. "Le fondateur de l'agence de mannequins Elite est mort" [The founder of Elite modelling agency dies]. Le Monde (in French). 22 July 2013. Archived from the original on 1 January 2017. Retrieved 5 November 2023. [His agency, created in 1972 in Paris, launched the careers of Cindy Crawford, Claudia Schiffer, Monica Bellucci, as well as Naomi Campbell, Gisele Bündchen and Heidi Klum.] Moliterno 2020, p. 62. "A 'passion' for Dior". The Nation. 13 June 2006. p. 25. Archived from the original on 22 October 2023. Retrieved 22 October 2023. Luperini, Silvia (30 September 2022). "Buon compleanno Monica Bellucci. La star compie 58 anni (ma non si vede)" [Happy birthday Monica Bellucci. The star turns 58 (but you can't see it)]. la Repubblica (in Italian). Archived from the original on 26 November 2023. Retrieved 26 November 2023. "La belle Italienne Monica Bellucci était ambassadrice de L'Oréal en 1991" [The beautiful Italian Monica Bellucci was an ambassador for L'Oréal in 1991]. Purepeople (in French). Webedia. n.d. Archived from the original on 28 February 2023. Retrieved 28 February 2023. Shore, Rebecca (5 December 2014). "The new Bond Girl was indeed an SI Swimsuit model, but it's not who you might think". Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue. Archived from the original on 6 March 2023. Retrieved 6 March 2023. Bréhal, Nicolas (March 1991). "Cinéma − Monica Bellucci comédienne pour Dino Risi" [Cinema − Monica Bellucci actress for Dino Risi]. Interview. L'Officiel Paris (in French). No. 762, Haute Couture Special, cover: M. Bellucci. pp. 8, 198–207. ISSN 0030-0403. Standfirst: Elle fait son entrée au cinéma dans le nouveau film de Dino Risi qui sort en mai: Vita coi figli. Efn: C'est arrivé d'une manière accidentelle. Je ne m'y attendais pas du tout. J'ai été remarquée par les producteurs du film comme mannequin. Ils sont tombés sur des photos de moi, parues dans une revue. ... De votre côté, vous n'aviez jamais rêvé d'être un jour comédienne? Non. Etre mannequin, travailler beaucoup, être demandée... me suffisaient. Enfant, je rêvais déjà de cela: poser pour des photos de mode. [Standfirst: She makes her cinema debut in Dino Risi's new film which is released in May: Vita coi figli.] Blackman, Lori (3 January 2001). "Monica Bellucci". CNN International. Archived from the original on 2 December 2023. Retrieved 2 December 2023. Campion, Chris (18 January 2003). "Fantasy made flesh". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 16 June 2023. "La espectacular hija de Monica Bellucci y otras 'nepo babies' de poderosa genética" [Monica Bellucci's spectacular daughter and other 'nepo babies' with powerful genetics]. El Mundo (in Spanish). 7 January 2023. Archived from the original on 27 January 2024. Retrieved 27 January 2024. ... Bellucci sigue activa. [... Bellucci is still active.] De Vecchi, Paolo (11 June 2012). "Binda, lo spot d'autore sbarca in Rete" [Binda, the signature advert lands on the Internet]. la Repubblica (in Italian). Archived from the original on 24 November 2023. Retrieved 24 November 2023. Digiuni, Valentina (9 August 2022). "I 10 più grandi sex symbol degli anni '90 − Donne" [The 10 greatest sex symbols of the 1990s − Women]. Rolling Stone (in Italian). Archived from the original on 11 February 2023. Retrieved 12 January 2023. Hald, Nina (29 April 2007). "Åh Monica, Monica, Monica..." [Oh Monica, Monica, Monica...]. Berlingske (in Danish). Archived from the original on 20 August 2023. Retrieved 2 September 2023. Overraskelsesmomentet var derfor stort, da Cartier i 1997 for første gang valgte at knytte en skuespillerinde tæt til huset. [The moment of surprise was therefore great when, in 1997, Cartier chose for the first time to associate an actress closely with the house.] Mabrut, Claire (11 June 2007). "Monica Bellucci et Cartier: songe endiamanté" [Monica Bellucci and Cartier: a diamond dream]. Madame Figaro (in French). Archived from the original on 13 June 2021. Retrieved 12 February 2023. La piquante Italienne est l'égérie de Cartier depuis tout juste dix ans. [The spicy Italian has been the muse of Cartier for just ten years.] Reybaud, Fabienne (11 July 2020). "Monica Bellucci, star pour des joyaux éternels" [Monica Bellucci, star for eternal gems]. Paris Match (in French). No. 3714. Archived from the original on 13 January 2023. Retrieved 7 May 2023. Vivarelli, Nick (21 May 2022). "Nexo Digital Sells 'Portait of The Queen' to U.S., European Territories (Exclusive)". Variety. Archived from the original on 5 November 2023. Retrieved 5 November 2023. Owen, Richard (4 June 2005). "Actresses fight Pope over fertility". The Times. Archived from the original on 11 July 2021. Retrieved 17 December 2023. Fiorilli, Thierry; Zintzen, Pascale; Willot, Isabelle; Van Roey, Laurent (10 April 2004). "'Liv Tyler est une star qui ne se la joue pas' 'En haute couture, ça marche au coup de coeur' Fashion and the City Sarah Jessica 'Lux' Parker Séguéla: 'L'idée doit être plus forte que la notoriété' 'Pour avoir le même fond que la star'" ['Liv Tyler is a star who does not show off' 'In haute couture, it works on a crush' Fashion and the City Sarah Jessica 'Lux' Parker Séguéla: 'The idea must be stronger than notoriety' 'To have the same base as the star']. Le Soir (in French). Archived from the original on 7 April 2023. Retrieved 8 April 2023. Dior 2006–2010 campaigns: "Mónica Bellucci tiñe de rojo la capital de España" [Monica Bellucci dyes the Spanish capital red]. ABC (in Spanish). 16 November 2006. Archived from the original on 12 December 2023. Retrieved 12 December 2023. ... la nueva musa de Dior [... Dior's new muse] "Natalie Portman new face of Christian Dior". The Indian Express. 8 June 2010. Archived from the original on 12 December 2023. Retrieved 12 December 2023. other celebrities endorsing the fashion house in advertisements include Sharon Stone, Charlize Theron, Monica Bellucci, Jude Law and Alain Delon Boquet-Vautor, Lorelei (6 May 2011). "Mélanie Laurent égérie pour Dior Parfums" [Mélanie Laurent muse for Dior Perfumes]. Vogue France (in French). Archived from the original on 12 December 2023. Retrieved 12 December 2023. Elle succédera à Monica Bellucci et Milla Jovovich [She will succeed Monica Bellucci and Milla Jovovich] Caprotti, Elisabetta (23 December 2020). "Martini, fashion e mixology. Storia di un aperitivo all'italiana" [Martini, fashion and mixology. History of an Italian aperitif]. Vogue Italia (in Italian). Archived from the original on 24 May 2022. Retrieved 1 March 2023. Guignon, Jordane (24 March 2010). "Monica Bellucci enceinte et presque nue pour 'Vanity Fair'" [Monica Bellucci pregnant and almost nude for 'Vanity Fair']. Grazia (in French). Archived from the original on 7 October 2022. Retrieved 27 May 2023. "La Maison Bompard s'associe au charme et à la féminité de Monica Bellucci" [Maison Bompard associates itself with the charm and femininity of Monica Bellucci]. La Dépêche du Midi (in French). 20 June 2011. Archived from the original on 8 May 2023. Retrieved 8 May 2023. Lawrenson, Amy (17 February 2012). "Monica Bellucci Dolce & Gabbana's new face". Elle. Archived from the original on 22 January 2013. Trochu, Eugénie (21 February 2013). "Behind the scenes on the Dolce & Gabbana Spring/Summer 2013 campaign". Vogue France. Translated by Eliza Chubb. Archived from the original on 2 February 2024. Retrieved 2 February 2024. "Fall/Winter 2015-2016 Campaigns". Vogue France. 23 September 2015. Archived from the original on 2 February 2024. Retrieved 2 February 2024. "Photos − Jenaye, la fille de Yannick Noah, en bikini sur Instagram" [Photos − Jenaye, Yannick Noah's daughter, in a bikini on Instagram]. Femme Actuelle (in French). Prisma Press. 17 January 2017. Archived from the original on 4 February 2023. Retrieved 26 February 2023. Hodge, Gavanndra (5 December 2021). "Monica Bellucci: 'Women are feeling free to get old in a different way'". The Sunday Times. Archived from the original on 5 December 2021. Retrieved 10 February 2024. Richebois, Véronique (27 May 2018). "Monica Bellucci bouscule son image pour Nivéa" [Monica Bellucci shakes up her image for Nivea]. Les Echos (in French). Archived from the original on 20 October 2020. Retrieved 2 September 2023. "Naomi Campbell et Monica Bellucci en mannequins stars de Dolce & Gabbana" [Naomi Campbell and Monica Bellucci as Dolce & Gabbana star models]. La Libre Belgique (in French). Agence France-Presse. 16 June 2023. Archived from the original on 3 December 2023. Retrieved 31 January 2024. "Monica Bellucci sfila per Dolce & Gabbana" [Monica Bellucci parades for Dolce & Gabbana]. Agenzia Nazionale Stampa Associata (in Italian). 17 June 2018. Archived from the original on 3 December 2023. Retrieved 31 January 2024. Brookins, Laurie (24 September 2018). "Milan Fashion Week: Dolce & Gabbana's DNA Is in the Beauty of All Women". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on 25 February 2023. Retrieved 5 March 2023. Carrière, Christophe (15 November 2022). "Monica Bellucci: 'La Callas que j'incarne est la femme fragile que peu de gens connaissaient'" [Monica Bellucci: 'The Callas I play is the fragile woman that few people knew']. Interview. Paris Match (in French). Archived from the original on 8 April 2023. Retrieved 2 March 2024. Urzino, Chiara (4 June 2023). "Il vestito lungo nero di Monica Bellucci è l'abito elegante per l'Estate 2023" [Monica Bellucci's long black dress is the elegant dress for Summer 2023]. Elle (in Italian). Archived from the original on 7 January 2024. Retrieved 7 January 2024. "Monica Bellucci en couverture de GQ Italie" [Monica Bellucci on the cover of GQ Italy]. GQ (in French). 24 July 2015. Archived from the original on 16 August 2022. Retrieved 18 February 2023. Magazine covers1: For Elle, see "Sesenta años de complicidad con las lectoras" [Sixty years of complicity with readers]. El Mundo (in Spanish). 25 November 2005. Archived from the original on 24 November 2023. Retrieved 24 November 2023. For GQ, see "Monica Belluci en une de GQ Italie" [Monica Belluci on the cover of GQ Italy]. Vanity Fair (in French). 24 July 2015. Archived from the original on 25 February 2024. Retrieved 25 February 2024. For Harper's Bazaar, see Matsenko, Lisa (15 February 2022). Как всегда невероятна: Моника Беллуччи появилась на обложке Harper's Bazaar Russia [As always incredible: Monica Bellucci appeared on the cover of Harper's Bazaar Russia]. Grazia (in Russian). Archived from the original on 9 December 2023. Retrieved 9 December 2023. For Marie Claire, see Wolff, Bérengère (2011). "Nouveau Marie Claire en kiosque" [New Marie Claire on newsstands]. Marie Claire (in French). Archived from the original on 16 March 2021. Retrieved 19 February 2023. For Maxim, see Freeman, Thomas (30 September 2016). "Happy Birthday, Monica Bellucci". Maxim. Archived from the original on 10 August 2022. Retrieved 19 February 2023. "Monica Bellucci, bellissima pour Match" [Monica Bellucci, bellissima for Match]. Paris Match (in French). 30 September 2014. Archived from the original on 18 February 2023. Retrieved 19 February 2023. Magazine covers2: For Paris Match, see "Monica Bellucci, c'è un uomo nella mia vita" [Monica Bellucci, there is a man in my life]. Agenzia Nazionale Stampa Associata (in Italian). 4 May 2017. Archived from the original on 24 November 2023. Retrieved 24 November 2023. For Schön!, see Claudel, Marie (21 February 2022). "Monica Bellucci gorgeous". Femme Actuelle (in French). Prisma Press. Archived from the original on 7 April 2023. Retrieved 7 April 2023. For The Sunday Times Style, see Wlaszczuk, Julia (4 December 2021). "Monica Bellucci w obiektywie Soni Szóstak" [Monica Bellucci in the lens of Sonia Szóstak]. Vogue Poland (in Polish). Archived from the original on 26 November 2023. Retrieved 26 November 2023. For Vanity Fair, see "Monica Bellucci, seins nus en couverture de Vanity Fair" [Monica Bellucci, topless on the cover of Vanity Fair]. RTL Belgium (in French). 28 January 2013. Archived from the original on 24 November 2023. Retrieved 24 November 2023. For Vogue, see Εκτάκτως το Σάββατο 25/2: Η Vogue Greece Μαρτίου συναντά την απόλυτη-ντίβα Monica Bellucci [Extraordinary on Saturday 25/2: Vogue Greece March meets the absolute diva Monica Bellucci]. Kathimerini (in Greek). 20 February 2023. Archived from the original on 20 August 2023. Retrieved 20 August 2023. Fumarola, Silvia (24 October 2019). "Festa di Roma, Carlo Vanzina nei ricordi degli amici. La figlia Assia: 'C'eravamo noi e il cinema'" [Rome Festival, Carlo Vanzina in the memories of friends. Daughter Assia: 'There was us and the cinema']. la Repubblica (in Italian). Archived from the original on 9 September 2023. Retrieved 17 December 2023. Caprara, Valerio (1993). Dino Risi: maître de la comédie Italienne [Dino Risi: master of Italian comedy] (in French). Translated by Bovard, C.; Piauton, M. Rome: Gremese. pp. 78–79. ISBN 978-8-8730-1020-3. Archived from the original on 15 April 2023. Retrieved 15 December 2023. "Vita coi figli". British Film Institute. n.d. Archived from the original on 15 December 2023. Retrieved 17 December 2023. Date: 1991-05-28 (Television) "Morto il regista Francesco Laudadio" [Director Francesco Laudadio has died]. Corriere della Sera (in Italian). 6 April 2005. Archived from the original on 7 April 2005. Retrieved 20 October 2023. Bradshaw, Peter (5 October 2022). "Bram Stoker's Dracula review − Gary Oldman is Pierrot from hell in blood-red 90s take". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 18 October 2023. Retrieved 20 October 2023. Narbonne, Christophe (12 July 2017). "Monica Bellucci commente sa filmographie" [Monica Bellucci comments on her filmography]. Interview. Première (in French). Archived from the original on 9 December 2022. Retrieved 14 January 2024. Garson, Charlotte (24 June 2001). "Monica Bellucci". Europe of Cultures. France 2: 8 p.m. Newscast presented by Béatrice Schönberg (transcriptions). National Audiovisual Institute. Archived from the original on 18 May 2023. Retrieved 29 December 2023. "Joseph − Full Cast & Crew". TV Guide. n.d. Archived from the original on 18 November 2023. Retrieved 19 November 2023. "1995 Emmy Award Winners". The New York Times. 12 September 1995. p. 18. Archived from the original on 23 May 2023. Retrieved 18 November 2023. Winters, Laura (17 December 2000). "Film; Beauty, Her Moreau Eyes Say, Isn't Everything". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 7 September 2017. Retrieved 12 November 2023. Cohn-Bendit, Daniel; Lemoine, Patrick (2023). Français mais pas Gaulois − Des étrangers qui ont fait la France [French but not Gauls − Foreigners who made France] (in French). Paris: Robert Laffont. p. 67. ISBN 978-2-2212-6095-1. O'Shea, Stephen (7 October 1996). "The Apartment". Variety. Archived from the original on 12 April 2023. Retrieved 7 October 2023. Bradfer, Fabienne (9 July 2003). "Fantasme sur voix avec Monica Bellucci. La belle Italienne double en français Marina, l'héroïne moderne de 'Sinbad', de DreamWorks" [Vocal fantasy with Monica Bellucci. The beautiful Italian is dubbing in French Marina, the modern heroine of 'Sinbad', by DreamWorks]. Interview. Le Soir (in French). Archived from the original on 16 April 2023. Retrieved 31 January 2024. Vita coi fligi, votre premier film ... votre premier film français, L'appartement [Vita coi fligi, your first film ... your first French film, The Apartment] Haflidason, Almar (5 December 2000). "Movies − L'Appartement". BBC Online. Archived from the original on 3 February 2022. Retrieved 22 February 2024. Larman, Alexander (15 July 2017). "James Bond's China conflict: is Tomorrow Never Dies the most chaotic, prophetic 007 film so far?". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 9 December 2022. Retrieved 5 November 2023. "L'ultimo capodanno (1998)". British Film Institute. n.d. Archived from the original on 1 October 2023. Retrieved 1 October 2023. "Il Globo d'oro della Stampa estera alla Cineteca di Bologna" [The Golden Globe of the Foreign Press at the Cineteca di Bologna]. Agenzia Nazionale Stampa Associata (in Italian). 4 August 2022. Archived from the original on 10 September 2023. Retrieved 10 September 2023. "Arriva il David speciale per Monica Bellucci 'Un'icona di bellezza'" [Here comes the David Special for Monica Bellucci, 'An icon of beauty']. L'Arena (in Italian). 9 May 2021. Archived from the original on 9 May 2021. Retrieved 5 February 2023. "Winners of the 1998 Bafta film awards". BBC Online. 19 April 1998. Archived from the original on 11 March 2023. Retrieved 11 March 2023. Pearce, Garth (30 October 2005). "Monica Bellucci". The Times. Archived from the original on 26 November 2021. Retrieved 16 February 2024. "Tous les films en sélection officielle au Festival de Cannes 2000" [All films in official selection at the 2000 Cannes Film Festival]. Le Monde (in French). 18 April 2000. Archived from the original on 12 March 2023. Retrieved 12 March 2023. Van Egmond, Nedjma (12 May 2017). "Festival de Cannes: Monica Bellucci, reine du bal" [Cannes Film Festival: Monica Bellucci, prom queen]. Interview. Le Parisien (in French). Archived from the original on 20 January 2021. Retrieved 12 March 2023. Frini, Roberto (2006). Monica Bellucci (in Italian). Rome: Gremese. p. 54. ISBN 978-8-8844-0441-1. Archived from the original on 7 February 2024. ... prestigiosa rivista americana 'Variety', che la colloca tra le dieci giovani attrici da tenere d'occhio. Thomas, Kevin (25 December 2000). "'Malena' Emerges as an Evocative Beauty". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 1 January 2024. Retrieved 6 January 2024. James Havis, Richard (1 November 2007). "Continental drift". South China Morning Post. Archived from the original on 11 November 2023. Retrieved 6 January 2024. Rooney, David (29 October 2000). "Malèna". Variety. Archived from the original on 10 May 2018. Retrieved 18 March 2023. Hunter, Stephen (11 January 2002). "How Do You Say Dog in French? 'Wolf'". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 11 March 2023. Retrieved 20 October 2023. Critical response to Brotherhood of the Wolf: Bradshaw, Peter (19 October 2001). "Brotherhood of the Wolf". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 7 April 2023. Retrieved 12 December 2023. Maher, Kevin (12 May 2023). "Brotherhood of the Wolf (2001) review – a nutty Gallic mash-up". The Times. Archived from the original on 12 May 2023. Retrieved 12 December 2023. Sarris, Andrew (28 January 2002). "The Real World? Solondz at School". The New York Observer. Archived from the original on 16 February 2024. Retrieved 16 February 2024. "Euro slides to record low". CNN Business. 27 January 2000. Archived from the original on 9 July 2023. Retrieved 9 July 2023. Box office performance of Brotherhood of the Wolf: Caravani, Marc (6 August 2021). "Aussi fou que cela puisse paraître, Le Pacte des Loups est un film culte aux Etats-Unis" [As crazy as it sounds, Brotherhood of the Wolf is a cult film in the United States]. GQ (in French). Archived from the original on 11 March 2023. Retrieved 9 July 2023. Major, Tim (2001). "Cumbria films − Brotherhood of the Wolf". BBC Online. Archived from the original on 16 August 2011. Retrieved 9 July 2023. 5 million admissions in France "Nominees for 28th Annual Saturn Awards". United Press International. 14 March 2002. Archived from the original on 24 March 2023. Retrieved 24 March 2023. Aurélien, David (24 November 2022). "Monica Bellucci se souvient du tournage d'Astérix: 'une de mes plus belles expériences de cinéma'" [Monica Bellucci remembers filming Asterix: 'one of my best cinema experiences']. Interview. RTBF (in French). Archived from the original on 4 April 2023. Retrieved 4 April 2023. Reynaud, Floriane (12 August 2022). "5 actress who played Cleopatra". Vogue France. Archived from the original on 4 April 2023. Retrieved 4 April 2023. Bradshaw, Peter (18 October 2002). "Asterix & Obelix: Mission Cleopatra". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 9 July 2022. Retrieved 4 April 2023. Roxborough, Scott (3 March 2021). "Netflix Orders Animated 'Asterix & Obelix' Series". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on 16 May 2022. Retrieved 4 April 2023. Dawson, Tom (22 January 2003). "Movies − Vincent Cassel: Irréversible". BBC Online. Archived from the original on 10 December 2023. Retrieved 10 December 2023. Maher, Kevin (12 January 2003). "What's behind the gore?". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 24 September 2022. Retrieved 13 March 2023. Loayza, Beatrice (7 March 2023). "Twenty Years Later, 'Irreversible' Still Shocks". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 8 March 2023. Retrieved 17 June 2023. "Cinéma: Le jour où 'Irréversible' a fait souffler un vent de scandale sur la Croisette" [Cinema: The day when 'Irreversible' blew a wind of scandal on the Croisette]. Vanity Fair (in French). 26 August 2020. Archived from the original on 11 March 2023. Retrieved 16 February 2024. Austin Collins, K. (16 February 2023). "One of the Most Controversial Movies Ever Is Back in Theaters". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 17 February 2023. Retrieved 16 February 2024. Nesselson, Lisa (24 May 2002). "Film Review: Irreversible". Variety. Archived from the original on 5 March 2016. Retrieved 12 March 2023. Sajip, Arjun (22 June 2018). "Monica Bellucci tells Glass how she leads her life through her work". Interview. The Glass Magazine. No. 33, Timeless. London, UK. ISSN 2041-6318. Archived from the original on 4 May 2021. Retrieved 12 November 2023. "Pour Gaspar Noé, 'plus personne n'oserait financer Irréversible'" [For Gaspar Noé, 'no one would dare to finance 'Irreversible' anymore']. 20 minutes (in French). Agence France-Presse. 2 September 2019. Archived from the original on 3 August 2021. Retrieved 31 January 2024. Jennings, Sheri (15 May 2003). "D'Argento awards note top 2 helmers". Variety. Archived from the original on 22 April 2014. Retrieved 20 March 2023. Denby, David (9 March 2003). "Riding Into Battle". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on 17 March 2023. Retrieved 17 March 2023. Turan, Kenneth (7 March 2003). "Guts, gore − and do-gooders". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 10 December 2023. Retrieved 10 December 2023. M. Holson, Laura (14 April 2003). "Media; Appetite for War Films Seems Less Heart". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 30 August 2019. Retrieved 17 March 2023. Bradshaw, Peter (23 May 2003). "The Matrix Reloaded". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 22 September 2022. Retrieved 18 March 2023. "The Matrix Revolutions". Entertainment Weekly. 14 August 2003. Archived from the original on 21 October 2023. Retrieved 21 October 2023. Morales, Wilson (March 2003). "Tears of the Sun: An Interview with Monica Bellucci". Blackfilm.com. Greenwich Street, New York City. Archived from the original on 24 February 2020. Retrieved 18 March 2023. Sarris, Andrew (9 June 2003). "Keanu's Neo-Classical Cool Lightens Overloaded Matrix". The New York Observer. Archived from the original on 16 February 2024. Retrieved 16 February 2024. Lang, Brent (29 March 2016). "'Deadpool' Overtakes 'Matrix Reloaded' as Highest-Grossing R-Rated Movie". Variety. Archived from the original on 15 January 2017. Retrieved 18 March 2023. Farhi, Paul (5 July 2003). "Back in a Big Way". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 23 March 2024. Retrieved 23 March 2024. "Un beso de dos días" [A two-day kiss]. El País (in Spanish). 30 May 2003. Archived from the original on 11 September 2023. Retrieved 11 September 2023. Denby, David (2 November 2003). "When Worlds Collide". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on 16 February 2024. Retrieved 16 February 2024. Scott, A. O. (5 November 2003). "Film Review; The Game Concludes With Light And Noise". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 8 June 2021. Retrieved 18 March 2023. Kit, Borys; Gardner, Chris (7 January 2022). "Will Box Office Scuttle 'Matrix' Reboot Possibilities?". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on 3 February 2023. Retrieved 17 February 2024. Isidore, Chris (16 December 2003). "Much riding on 'Rings'". CNN Business. Archived from the original on 27 October 2020. Retrieved 18 March 2023. Pickle, Betsy (26 August 2005). "Monica Bellucci". The Globe and Mail. Archived from the original on 9 April 2023. Retrieved 6 November 2023. Scott, A. O. (25 February 2004). "Film Review; Good and Evil Locked In Violent Showdown". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 16 May 2022. Retrieved 21 October 2023. "Sur fond de polémique, 'La Passion du Christ' est sorti sur les écrans américains" [Against a backdrop of controversy, 'The Passion of the Christ' is released on American screens]. Le Monde; with BBC Online (in French). Agence France-Presse; Associated Press. 25 February 2004. Archived from the original on 18 March 2023. Retrieved 31 January 2024. Clinton, Paul (26 February 2004). "Review: A powerful, personal 'Passion'". CNN International. Archived from the original on 11 August 2023. Retrieved 6 January 2024. "What the critics are saying". CNN International. 26 February 2004. Archived from the original on 31 December 2019. Retrieved 16 February 2024. Alexander, Bryan (29 January 2018). "New 'Passion of the Christ' will be 'the biggest film in history', Jim Caviezel promises". USA Today. Archived from the original on 11 December 2018. Retrieved 19 March 2023. "Actress Bellucci wins 'Globo d'Oro' prize". The Globe and Mail. Agence France-Presse. 21 June 2005. Archived from the original on 16 April 2023. Retrieved 7 October 2023. Palmer, Martyn (29 October 2005). "Monica Bellucci". The Times. Archived from the original on 26 November 2021. Retrieved 16 February 2024. LaSalle, Mick (26 August 2005). "The fakers Grimm, before they became famous storytellers". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on 7 March 2023. Retrieved 11 November 2023. "Cinéma: Vincent Cassel retrouve Monica Bellucci" [Cinema: Vincent Cassel finds Monica Bellucci again]. La Dernière Heure (in French). 18 November 2004. Archived from the original on 30 March 2023. Retrieved 21 October 2023. "'Combien tu m'aimes?': hymne à l'actrice Monica Bellucci et à son corps déshabillé" ['How much do you love me ?': hymn to actress Monica Bellucci and her undressed body]. Le Monde (in French). 25 October 2005. Archived from the original on 22 March 2023. Retrieved 24 March 2024. Nesselson, Lisa (1 November 2005). "Film Review: How Much Do You Love Me?". Variety. Archived from the original on 25 February 2018. Retrieved 23 March 2023. Feeney, Mark (20 December 2007). "'Napoleon' has charm enough to intrigue". Boston.com. Archived from the original on 5 December 2017. Retrieved 21 October 2023. Croiset, Laure (17 May 2017). "Ce que vous ignorez (peut-être) sur Monica Bellucci" [What you (perhaps) don't know about Monica Bellucci]. Challenges (in French). Archived from the original on 9 November 2023. Retrieved 11 November 2023. Le Fol, Sébastien (10 November 2006). "Le Thriller a la Française" [The French Thriller]. Le Figaro (in French). Archived from the original on 24 March 2023. Retrieved 7 November 2023. Le Fort, Marie (9 May 2008). "John Nollet: artiste du cheveux" [John Nollet: hair artist]. Interview. Les Echos (in French). Archived from the original on 28 April 2019. Retrieved 23 March 2023. Scott, A. O. (7 September 2007). "Never Mind Those Bullets, a Newborn Needs Rescuing". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 26 November 2022. Retrieved 21 October 2023. Lussier, Marc-André (1 September 2007). "Monica Bellucci à l'américaine" [American-style Monica Bellucci]. Interview. La Presse (in Canadian French). Archived from the original on 25 March 2023. Retrieved 25 March 2023. "Monica Bellucci's balancing act". Interview. CraveOnline. 5 September 2007. Archived from the original on 31 March 2010. Retrieved 30 March 2023. "The Second Wind (Le deuxieme souffle)". The Hollywood Reporter. 11 September 2007. Archived from the original on 25 March 2023. Retrieved 7 November 2023. "Second Breath". Rotten Tomatoes. n.d. Archived from the original on 25 March 2023. Retrieved 25 March 2023. Aloisi, Silvia (18 October 2007). "Sultry Bellucci opens Rome film festival". Reuters. Archived from the original on 25 March 2023. Retrieved 27 December 2023. Jousse, Thierry (24 October 2007). "Alain Corneau trouve un second 'Souffle'" [Alain Corneau finds a second 'Wind']. Libération (in French). Archived from the original on 17 September 2021. Retrieved 25 March 2023. Vulser, Nicole (14 November 2007). "'Sa Majesté Minor', flop majeur au cinéma" ['His Majesty Minor', major flop at the cinema]. Le Monde (in French). Archived from the original on 18 February 2024. Retrieved 18 February 2024. Forshaw, Barry (2017). Italian Cinema: Arthouse to Exploitation (2nd ed.). London: Kamera Books. p. 138. ISBN 978-1-843-44910-2. Moliterno 2020, pp. 62–63. Senjanovic, Natasha (23 October 2008). "The Man Who Loves". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on 25 March 2023. Retrieved 25 March 2023. "World's Women Honored". CBS News. 6 March 2009. Archived from the original on 27 March 2023. Retrieved 27 March 2023. Lunn, Pierre (11 July 2021). "Marina De Van: 'Ne te retourne pas est la suite logique de Dans Ma Peau'" [Marina De Van: 'Don't Look Back is the logical sequel to In My Skin']. Interview. Première (in French). Archived from the original on 25 May 2022. Retrieved 21 October 2023. Morain, J.B. (29 May 2009). "Ne te retourne pas" [Don't look back]. Les Inrockuptibles (in French). Archived from the original on 26 March 2023. Retrieved 21 October 2023. Elley, Derek (16 May 2009). "Don't Look Back". Variety. Archived from the original on 22 October 2021. Retrieved 26 March 2023. Holden, Stephen (4 August 2011). "In a Wife's Crème Brûlée, Visions of a Stormy Past". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 2 November 2022. Retrieved 21 October 2023. Schwarzbaum, Lisa (24 November 2009). "The Private Lives of Pippa Lee". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on 23 September 2020. Retrieved 27 March 2023. Senjanovic, Natasha (2 September 2009). "Baarìa − Film Review". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on 26 March 2023. Retrieved 21 October 2023. Holden, Stephen (4 August 2011). "American in Bosnia Discovers the Horrors of Human Trafficking". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 10 February 2023. Retrieved 21 October 2023. Delye, Hélène (12 November 2011). "Seule contre tous" [Alone against everyone]. Le Monde (in French). Archived from the original on 8 May 2023. Retrieved 8 May 2023. Punter, Jennie (12 August 2011). "The Whistleblower: A crusader steps out of her comfort zone". The Globe and Mail. Archived from the original on 16 February 2024. Retrieved 16 February 2024. Willmore, Alison (13 August 2011). "The Whistleblower". The A.V. Club. Archived from the original on 2 April 2023. Retrieved 2 April 2023. Genone, Paola (14 June 2011). "Monica Bellucci: 'Jouer avec De Niro est une leçon de vie'" [Monica Bellucci: 'Playing with De Niro is a life lesson']. Interview. L'Express (in French). Archived from the original on 17 September 2023. Retrieved 17 September 2023. Senjanovic, Natasha (24 February 2011). "Manual of Love 3: Film Review". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on 31 March 2023. Retrieved 21 October 2023. M. Steblin-Kamenskij, Ivan (30 December 2012). "Central Asia xiii. Iranian Languages". Encyclopædia Iranica. Archived from the original on 21 October 2023. Retrieved 21 October 2023. Barlow, Helen (24 July 2013). "Rhino Season: Bahman Ghobadi, Monica Bellucci interview". Special Broadcasting Service. Archived from the original on 1 January 2024. Retrieved 2 January 2024. Barnard, Linda (26 March 2015). "The Wonders review: Coming of age among the bees". Toronto Star. Archived from the original on 24 February 2021. Retrieved 21 October 2023. Bondanella, Peter; Pacchioni, Federico (2017). A History of Italian Cinema (2nd ed.). UK: Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 629. ISBN 978-1-5013-0764-5. Archived from the original on 5 May 2023. Dunlevy, T'Cha (8 October 2015). "Movie review: Ville-Marie illuminated by Monica Bellucci's presence". Montreal Gazette. Archived from the original on 1 April 2023. Retrieved 21 October 2023. Vallet, Stéphanie (16 October 2014). "Ville-Marie: sous le charme de Monica Bellucci" [Ville-Marie: under the charm of Monica Bellucci]. Interview. La Presse (in Canadian French). Montreal. Archived from the original on 22 April 2019. Retrieved 1 April 2023. Critical response to Ville-Marie: Brady, Tara (22 February 2016). "ADiff review: Monica Bellucci impresses in Ville-Marie". The Irish Times. Archived from the original on 29 September 2022. Retrieved 14 April 2023. van Hoeij, Boyd (14 September 2015). "'Ville-Marie': TIFF Review". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on 1 April 2023. Retrieved 1 April 2023. Ramachandran, Naman (2 March 2016). "Viva, Mustang, Evolution win at Dublin". Cineuropa. Archived from the original on 1 April 2023. Retrieved 1 April 2023. Child, Ben (23 February 2015). "Monica Bellucci on joining Spectre: 'I thought I was replacing Judi Dench'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 3 October 2022. Retrieved 1 April 2023. Heilpern, Will (22 October 2015). "Is the new James Bond movie, 'Spectre', worth watching? The critics say yes". CNN International. Archived from the original on 6 October 2022. Retrieved 17 February 2024. McNary, Dave (24 March 2016). "'Spectre' Lifts MGM Earnings by 62%". Variety. Archived from the original on 17 February 2024. Retrieved 17 February 2024. Turan, Kenneth (4 November 2015). "Review: The 'Spectre' of burnout hovers over latest Bond film". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 25 July 2023. Retrieved 17 February 2024. Lodge, Guy (9 May 2016). "Miami: Monica Bellucci on 'Ville-Marie', Kusturica's Latest and Defying Ageism". Variety. Archived from the original on 15 April 2023. Retrieved 15 April 2023. Rampton, James (8 December 2016). "Mozart In the Jungle: The fact that Placido Domingo and Monica Bellucci have agreed to appear underscores the show's global popularity". The Independent. Archived from the original on 2 November 2021. Retrieved 21 October 2023. Vivarelli, Nick (3 June 2016). "Monica Bellucci to Guest Star on 'Mozart in the Jungle' Season 3". Variety. Archived from the original on 5 April 2023. Retrieved 5 April 2023. Bouttier, Louise-Camille (18 May 2017). "Emir Kusturica s'allie à la vestale Bellucci" [Emir Kusturica joins forces with the Vestal Bellucci]. Rolling Stone (in French). Archived from the original on 13 June 2023. Retrieved 16 June 2023. Bradshaw, Peter (14 October 2016). "On the Milky Road review – booze, bears and illicit affairs in wartime Bosnia". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 27 November 2022. Retrieved 19 September 2023. Aftab, Kaleem (23 September 2016). "Monica Bellucci interview: 'Love and sexuality is a matter of energy not age'". The Independent. Archived from the original on 1 April 2023. Retrieved 1 April 2023. Young, Neil (9 September 2016). "'On the Milky Road' ('Na Mlijecnom Putu'): Film Review | Venice 2016". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on 1 April 2023. Retrieved 1 April 2023. Corsi, Margherita (6 June 2017). "Nastri d'Argento 2017: sfida tra Amelio, Castellitto e De Angelis" [Nastro d'Argento 2017: challenge between Amelio, Castellitto and De Angelis]. Vanity Fair (in Italian). Archived from the original on 1 April 2023. Retrieved 16 September 2023. Quinn, Ben (25 April 2016). "Twin Peaks revival to feature Monica Bellucci and David Duchovny". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 2 April 2023. Retrieved 2 April 2023. Mayorga, Emilio (8 September 2017). "Monica Bellucci, Agnès Varda to Receive Donostia Awards at San Sebastián". Variety. Archived from the original on 19 February 2018. Retrieved 2 April 2023. Dalton, Stephen (28 September 2018). "'Nekrotronic': Film Review". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on 24 March 2022. Retrieved 18 February 2024. Dufour, Nicolas (28 October 2018). "'Dix pour cent' est déjà une institution française" ['Ten percent' is already a French institution]. Le Temps (in French). Archived from the original on 17 August 2023. Retrieved 3 March 2024. Jones, Ralph (26 April 2022). "The French TV series that stormed the world". BBC Online. Archived from the original on 3 March 2024. Retrieved 8 March 2024. Fabre, Clarisse (19 May 2019). "Festival de Cannes 2019: Anouk Aimée et Jean-Louis Trintignant font fondre la Croisette sous une pluie de nostalgie" [Cannes Film Festival 2019: Anouk Aimée and Jean-Louis Trintignant melt the Croisette under a rain of nostalgia]. Le Monde (in French). Archived from the original on 2 April 2023. Retrieved 21 October 2023. Critical response to The Best Years of a Life: Dalton, Stephen (18 May 2019). "'The Best Years of a Life' ('Les plus belles annees d'une vie'): Film Review | Cannes 2019". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on 2 April 2023. Retrieved 2 April 2023. Lodge, Guy (31 May 2019). "Cannes Film Review: 'The Best Years of a Life'". Variety. Archived from the original on 2 April 2023. Retrieved 2 April 2023. Vincentelli, Elisabeth (25 January 2023). "Monica Bellucci Tries on the Dress, and Life, of Maria Callas". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 25 January 2023. Retrieved 4 March 2024. "Monica Bellucci fait revivre Maria Callas" [Monica Bellucci revives Maria Callas]. Vanity Fair (in French). 27 November 2019. Archived from the original on 8 April 2023. Retrieved 8 April 2023. Zacharek, Stephanie (9 April 2021). "In the Oscar-Nominated The Man Who Sold His Skin, a Refugee Stakes His Future on a Tattoo". Time. Archived from the original on 17 August 2023. Retrieved 17 August 2023. "A Monica Bellucci il David Speciale 2021: 'Carismatica, cosmopolita e profondamente italiana'" [To Monica Bellucci the David Speciale 2021: 'Charismatic, cosmopolitan and deeply Italian]. La Stampa (in Italian). 6 May 2021. Archived from the original on 5 June 2023. Retrieved 5 June 2023. Jackson, Angelique (14 April 2021). "Guy Pearce, Monica Bellucci Join Liam Neeson in Action Thriller 'Memory'". Variety. Archived from the original on 22 October 2023. Retrieved 22 October 2023. Sim, Jonathan (9 May 2022). "Interview: Monica Bellucci Discusses Memory, Choosing Her Roles". ComingSoon. Archived from the original on 2 January 2024. Retrieved 1 February 2024. Greenblatt, Leah (29 April 2022). "Musts & Misses: We don't Love That for you, and Liam Neeson's Memory is fading". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on 17 August 2023. Retrieved 17 August 2023. Akbar, Arifa (25 April 2022). "Maria Callas: Letters and Memoirs review – Monica Bellucci's homage to a superstar". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 15 December 2022. Retrieved 2 March 2024. Kit, Borys (11 May 2023). "'Beetlejuice 2': Monica Bellucci Joins Jenna Ortega, Michael Keaton (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on 11 May 2023. Retrieved 11 May 2023. Aricò, Giacomo (23 February 2024). "Monica Bellucci vince il Nastro d'Argento per l'interpretazione di Maria Callas: 'Profondamente grata'" [Monica Bellucci wins the Nastro d'Argento for her interpretation of Maria Callas: 'Deeply grateful']. Vogue Italia (in Italian). Archived from the original on 1 March 2024. Retrieved 4 March 2024. Klaussmann, Liza (13 April 2003). "'Fanfan', Bellucci to open Cannes fest". Variety. Archived from the original on 16 February 2022. Retrieved 12 February 2023. "Monica Bellucci, Patrice Leconte et Samuel L. Jackson parmi les jurés" [Monica Bellucci, Patrice Leconte and Samuel L. Jackson among the juries]. Le Monde (in French). Agence France-Presse. 20 April 2006. Archived from the original on 14 April 2021. Retrieved 12 February 2023. Shoard, Catherine (29 September 2009). "Release Polanski, demands petition by film industry luminaries". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 28 June 2019. Retrieved 11 June 2023. Richford, Rhonda (20 March 2017). "Cannes: Monica Bellucci Named Master of Ceremonies". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on 4 October 2022. Retrieved 13 February 2023. "70e Festival de Cannes: Monica Bellucci en maîtresse de cérémonie" [70th Cannes Film Festival: Monica Bellucci as mistress of ceremonies]. Le Figaro (in French). Agence France-Presse. 20 March 2017. Archived from the original on 14 April 2021. Retrieved 12 February 2023. Gallo, Di Francesco (6 May 2021). "David speciale alla Bellucci icona bellezza italiana" [David Special to Italian beauty icon Bellucci]. Agenzia Nazionale Stampa Associata (in Italian). Archived from the original on 6 May 2021. Retrieved 5 February 2023. Grandgeorge, Maxime (31 August 2018). "Le Festival de Dinard dévoile sa programmation" [The Dinard Festival unveils its program]. Première (in French). Archived from the original on 3 March 2024. Retrieved 3 March 2024. "Monica Bellucci, présidente d'honneur des prochains Globes de cristal" [Monica Bellucci, honorary chairwoman of the Crystal Globes]. Le Figaro (in French). 10 January 2020. Archived from the original on 19 March 2023. Retrieved 19 March 2023. "Coronavirus: les sorties de 'Mulan' et 'Sans un bruit 2' reportées" [Coronavirus: the releases of 'Mulan' and 'A Quiet Place 2' postponed]. Les Inrockuptibles (in French). 13 March 2020. Archived from the original on 27 August 2023. Retrieved 27 August 2023. "Monica per i bimbi malati" [Monica for sick children]. Corriere della Sera (in Italian). 2 December 2008. Archived from the original on 13 July 2023. Retrieved 13 July 2023. "Monica Bellucci, marraine de l'association Paroles de Femmes" [Monica Bellucci, patron of the Words of Women association]. Elle (in French). 2010. Archived from the original on 26 January 2023. Retrieved 20 May 2023. "La Bellucci celebra la sua bellezza in un libro fotografico: in cui appare senza veli" [Bellucci celebrates her beauty in a photographic book: in which she appears without veils]. Corriere della Sera (in Italian). 26 October 2010. Archived from the original on 27 August 2023. Retrieved 27 August 2023. Busnel, François (9 November 2010). "Monica Bellucci". France Inter (Podcast). The great Busnel interview (transcriptions) (in French). Archived from the original on 19 May 2023. Retrieved 27 August 2023. Daniel, Gilles (24 February 2016). "Inondations à Cannes: au fait, les stars de cinéma ont-elle répondu au SOS de la mairie?" [Floods in Cannes: by the way, did the film stars respond to the town hall's SOS?]. TF1 Info (in French). Archived from the original on 9 February 2024. Retrieved 9 February 2024. Fontana, Céline (29 November 2018). "Arnaud Ducret soutient SOS Autisme: 'Les enfants me tiennent à coeur'" [Arnaud Ducret supports SOS Autism: 'Children are close to my heart']. TV Magazine (in French). Archived from the original on 22 April 2023. Retrieved 19 May 2023 – via Le Figaro. "Monsieur je-sais-tout (France 3) − Arnaud Ducret: 'Je ne suis pas juste un prof de sport qui fait rire" [Mr. know-it-all (France 3) − Arnaud Ducret: 'I'm not just a sports teacher who makes you laugh']. Yahoo! News (in French). 30 August 2021. Archived from the original on 23 February 2024. Retrieved 23 February 2024. Montefiori, Stefano (29 September 2022). "Monica Bellucci: 'Io diva? Faccio la spesa e porto i figli a scuola. È vero, gli uomini francesi sono più freddini degli italiani'" [Monica Bellucci: 'Me diva? I do grocery shopping and take my children to school. It's true, the French are colder than Italians']. Corriere della Sera (in Italian). Archived from the original on 15 August 2023. Retrieved 16 February 2024. Qui è considerata un'ambasciatrice del nostro Paese ... L'amore per Parigi non significa per forza prendere la nazionalità francese—'No, ho ancora il passaporto italiano' [Here she is considered an ambassador of our country ... Love for Paris does not necessarily mean taking French nationality—'No, I still have an Italian passport'] "Diner d'Etat à l'Elysée pour le président italien" [State dinner at the Elysée for the Italian president]. Paris Match (in French). 22 November 2012. Archived from the original on 18 February 2023. Retrieved 18 February 2023. Jacob, Etienne; Le Cain, Blandine; Boudisseau, Julien (25 March 2019). "Le dîner d'État à l'Elysée, un moment convoité et symbolique" [The State dinner at the Elysée, a coveted and symbolic moment]. Le Figaro (in French). Archived from the original on 11 September 2022. Retrieved 18 February 2023. Cabot, Emilie (6 July 2021). "Dîner d'Etat à l'Elysée en l'honneur du président italien avec Monica Bellucci et Carole Bouquet" [State dinner at the Elysée in honour of the Italian President with Monica Bellucci and Carole Bouquet]. Paris Match (in French). Archived from the original on 18 February 2023. Retrieved 18 February 2023. "Il vestito Dior di Monica Bellucci all'Eliseo è il legame più sublime tra Italia e Francia" [Monica Bellucci's Dior dress at the Elysée is the most sublime link between Italy and France]. Elle (in Italian). 7 July 2021. Archived from the original on 6 August 2021. Retrieved 18 February 2023. [The actress confirms herself as an eternal style icon] Rose, Matthew; Ball, Deborah (14 November 2001). "Caviar Controversy: Esquire, GQ Use Same Photo on Their Covers". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 6 March 2023. Retrieved 27 May 2023. Tatara, Paul (4 January 2001). "'Malena': Bombshell in a bomb". CNN International. Archived from the original on 21 November 2010. Retrieved 12 February 2023. Schneider, Peer (17 February 2006). "Jessica Alba Tops AskMen's Top 99 Most Desirable Women of 2006". IGN. Archived from the original on 1 October 2023. Retrieved 1 October 2023. Alexander, Ella (5 December 2014). "Monica Bellucci: Inside the world of the new Bond woman, not the new Bond girl". The Independent. Archived from the original on 21 May 2022. Retrieved 17 February 2023. Benarrous, Julia (10 June 2018). "Les Champs-Élysées s'offrent un cinéma géant en plein air cet été" [The Champs-Élysées offer themselves a giant open-air cinema this summer]. Le Figaro (in French). Archived from the original on 4 August 2021. Retrieved 23 February 2024. "Monica Bellucci illumine les Champs-Elysées" [Monica Bellucci illuminates the Champs-Elysées]. Obsession (L'Obs supplement) (in French). 3 December 2004. ISSN 2259-4760. Archived from the original on 2 September 2023. Retrieved 13 September 2023 – via L'Obs. "Monica illumine Paris" [Monica illuminates Paris]. La Dernière Heure (in French). 28 November 2004. Archived from the original on 2 September 2023. Retrieved 2 September 2023. Dupont, Joan (14 May 2008). "Vincent Cassel as France's 'Public Enemy Number One'". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 18 August 2023. Retrieved 2 December 2023. "La plus belle, c'est Monica" [The most beautiful, is Monica]. Le Parisien (in French). 10 November 2004. Archived from the original on 24 March 2024. Retrieved 24 March 2024. C.P. (4 June 2010). "La plus belle femme du monde est..." [The most beautiful woman in the world is...]. 20 minutes (in French). Archived from the original on 5 March 2023. Retrieved 8 May 2023. Deslandes, Mathieu (25 April 2005). "Monica Bellucci fait son entrée au musée Grévin" [Monica Bellucci makes her entry to the Grévin museum]. Interview with Grévin Museum's artisans. Le Parisien (in French). Archived from the original on 3 March 2024. Retrieved 3 March 2024. Каждому свой час [To each his own hour]. Kommersant (in Russian). No. 93. 31 May 2007. p. 42. Archived from the original on 9 February 2024. Retrieved 22 February 2024. Sirtori, Sara (28 February 2018). "Delevingne, Theron, Bellucci e le altre modelle diventate attrici. Con più o meno successo" [Delevingne, Theron, Bellucci and other models turned actresses. With more or less success]. IO Donna (in Italian). Archived from the original on 3 December 2020. Retrieved 19 February 2023. "Sondage: Schumacher préféré des Français" [Survey: Schumacher preferred by the French]. L'Obs (in French). 9 May 2008. Archived from the original on 2 September 2023. Retrieved 13 February 2023. "Isabelle Adjani tops Time Magazine's beautiful women list". Deccan Herald. 9 February 2011. Archived from the original on 19 August 2023. Retrieved 19 August 2023. "Les 100 stars les plus sexy: Monica Bellucci numéro 1... encore!" [The 100 sexiest stars: Monica Bellucci number 1... again!]. Première (in French). 12 April 2011. Archived from the original on 7 May 2023. Retrieved 18 February 2024. Audiffredi, Giovanni (24 April 2012). "Monica Bellucci: 'Io non mi rifaccio'" [Monica Bellucci: 'I don't change myself']. Vanity Fair (in Italian). Archived from the original on 23 August 2023. Retrieved 23 August 2023. "Monica Bellucci se dévoile sur son nouveau compte Instagram" [Monica Bellucci reveals herself on her new Instagram account]. Vanity Fair (in French). 15 April 2016. Archived from the original on 13 March 2023. Retrieved 13 March 2023. "Instagram censura atrevida foto de Mónica Bellucci para revista" [Instagram censors daring photo of Monica Bellucci for magazine]. El Comercio (in Spanish). 12 September 2016. Archived from the original on 26 November 2023. Retrieved 26 November 2023. "Cocoonen met Monica" [Cocooning with Monica]. De Morgen (in Dutch). 12 November 2005. Archived from the original on 28 November 2023. Retrieved 3 February 2024. Carrière, Christophe (7 May 2017). "Monica Bellucci: 'Enfant, je percevais les actrices comme des déesses'" [Monica Bellucci: 'As a child, I perceived actresses as goddesses']. L'Express (in French). Archived from the original on 11 November 2023. Retrieved 28 January 2024. "Donne di successo: le 100 donne italiane vincenti" [Successful women: the 100 winning Italian women]. Forbes (in Italian). 27 March 2018. Archived from the original on 14 August 2023. Retrieved 3 December 2023. Esquire Japan, Men's Health USA and Australia: Esquire が選ぶ「史上もっとも美しい女性28人」 [Esquire's '28 Most Beautiful Women of All Time']. Esquire (in Japanese). 28 February 2018. Archived from the original on 2 December 2023. Retrieved 2 December 2023. "The 100 Hottest Sex Symbols of All Time". Men's Health. 1 July 2020. Archived from the original on 11 February 2023. Retrieved 12 February 2023. "100 Hottest Women of All Time". Men's Health. Australia. 1 May 2021. Archived from the original on 11 February 2023. Retrieved 12 February 2023. "style icon": Descombes, Apolline (13 July 2023). "20 times Monica Bellucci was a divine icon at the Cannes Film Festival". Vogue France. Translated by Anissa Agrama. Archived from the original on 18 February 2023. Retrieved 18 February 2023. Нажать на культ [Click on the cult]. Kommersant (in Russian). 23 March 2021. p. 28. Archived from the original on 23 February 2024. Retrieved 23 February 2024. Моника Беллуччи стала амбассадором бренда Cartier четверть века назад. ... в очередной раз подтвердила свой статус иконы стиля [Monica Bellucci became a Cartier brand ambassador a quarter century ago. ... once again confirmed her status style icon] Pike, Naomi (10 April 2021). "Monica Bellucci's Most Dramatic Jewellery Moments Make Her A Modern Day Liz Taylor". British Vogue. Archived from the original on 7 May 2023. Retrieved 25 February 2024. Santevecchi, Guido (25 August 2022). "Come i cinesi vedono gli italiani: 'Sempre in ritardo e un po' infantili. Noi sogniamo la Bellucci di Malena'" [How the Chinese see the Italians: 'Always late and a little childish. We dream of the Bellucci of Malena']. Corriere della Sera (in Italian). Archived from the original on 26 August 2022. Retrieved 15 August 2023. Guarrigues, Manon (15 June 2021). "The most beautiful Italian actresses of all time". Vogue France. Translated by Stephanie Green. Archived from the original on 14 January 2022. Retrieved 12 February 2023. "sex symbol": Barlow, Helen (25 September 2011). "Bella donna won't be tamed". The Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on 31 January 2024. Retrieved 31 January 2024. Hiatt, Brian (11 January 2002). "Monica Bellucci gets intimate with EW.com". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on 17 September 2023. Retrieved 17 September 2023. "Bellucci: con Scamarcio la scena più erotica" [Bellucci: with Scamarcio the most erotic scene]. Corriere della Sera (in Italian). 4 December 2006. Archived from the original on 31 January 2024. Retrieved 31 January 2024. "Monica Bellucci, dalla moda al cinema (e l'amore per Burton): 'Il mio corpo mi ha aiutato. A volte la bellezza crea maschere'" [Monica Bellucci, from fashion to cinema (and love for Burton): 'My body helped me. Sometimes beauty creates masks']. Harper's Bazaar (in Italian). 23 August 2023. Archived from the original on 6 January 2024. Retrieved 8 January 2024 – via Il Messaggero. "Monica Bellucci: 'dopo due divorzi serve tempo per ricominciare'. Ma a Parigi ufficializza la relazione con Nicolas Lefebvre" [Monica Bellucci: 'after two divorces you need time to start again'. But in Paris she formalises her relationship with Nicolas Lefebvre]. la Repubblica (in Italian). 11 April 2019. Archived from the original on 30 January 2024. Retrieved 30 January 2024. "Bellucci, il primo e austero 'sì'" [Bellucci, the first and austere 'yes']. Chi (in Italian). 20 December 2006. Archived from the original on 21 November 2023. Retrieved 22 November 2023 – via TgCom24. [the one who said her first 'yes' on 3 January 1990 in Monte Carlo ... 'I met Claudio in 1987, when I was working as a model to pay for my studies'] Boschi, Silvana (27 November 2009). "Siamo unna coppia di Zingari" [We are a Gypsy couple]. Interview. Grand Hotel (in Italian). No. 48, cover: Barbara D'Urso). Edizioni Del Duca. p. 25. Infatti, dopo essersi sposati in gran segreto nel 1999 con ritto civile nelprincipato di Monaco (proprio dove Monica il 3 gennaio del 1990 sposò in prime nozze il fotografo Claudio Basso da cui divorziò un anno dopo) [In fact, after getting married in great secrecy in 1999 in a civil ceremony in the principality of Monaco (precisely where Monica married the photographer Claudio Basso for her first wedding on 3 January 1990, from whom she divorced a year later)] Ascione, Arianna (1 September 2019). "Bellucci-Cassel-Kunakey, dal grande amore alle frecciate (e al gelo)" [Bellucci-Cassel-Kunakey, from great love to the barbs (and frost)]. Corriere della Sera (in Italian). Archived from the original on 3 September 2023. Retrieved 3 September 2023. I due, che si erano conosciuti sul set di 'Vita coi figli' di Dino Risi ... la storia finì definitivamente quando lei conobbe Vincent Cassel, il suo futuro marito [The two, who had met on the set of Dino Risi's 'Vita coi figli' ... Nicola Farron said in 2012: 'the story ended definitively when she met Vincent Cassel, her future husband'.] Desando, Concetta (29 June 2023). "Monica Bellucci conferma la nuova love story: 'Amo Tim Burton'" [Monica Bellucci confirms the new love story: 'I love Tim Burton']. IO Donna (in Italian). Archived from the original on 26 November 2023. Retrieved 26 November 2023. "Farron: 'Ero ricco e la Bellucci mi amava'" [Farron: 'I was rich and Bellucci loved me']. DiPiù (in Italian). 8 May 2012. Archived from the original on 26 November 2023. Retrieved 26 November 2023 – via TgCom24. "Monica Bellucci". Elle (in Italian). 9 September 2008. Archived from the original on 18 August 2022. Retrieved 18 August 2022. "Monica Bellucci, prima di Vincent Cassel la storia con Nicola Farron: 'Non credo nella fedeltà carnale'" [Monica Bellucci, before Vincent Cassel the story with Nicola Farron: 'I don't believe in carnal fidelity']. Corriere dell'Umbria (in Italian). 19 December 2021. Archived from the original on 18 August 2022. Retrieved 4 June 2023. Solomons, Jason (22 March 2009). "France's most wanted". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 30 January 2024. Retrieved 30 January 2024. "Photos − Monica Bellucci: 'Ma relation avec Vincent est une vraie réussite'" [Photos − Monica Bellucci: 'My relationship with Vincent is a real success']. Première (in French). 24 October 2013. Archived from the original on 31 January 2024. Retrieved 31 January 2024. Lévy-Frébault, Tiphaine (26 August 2013). "En Images. Vincent Cassel et Monica Bellucci, la fin de la Dolce Vita" [In images. Vincent Cassel and Monica Bellucci, the end of the Dolce Vita]. L'Express (in French). Archived from the original on 19 August 2022. Retrieved 3 December 2023. Uccello, Luca (4 March 2023). "Monica Bellucci e Tim Burton: 'Un fantastico colpo di fulmine'. I due paparazzati a Parigi" [Monica Bellucci and Tim Burton: 'A fantastic love at first sight'. The two photographed in Paris]. Il Messaggero (in Italian). Archived from the original on 30 January 2024. Retrieved 30 January 2024. Minucci, Emanuela (22 February 2023). "Monica Bellucci in coppia con Tim Burton. Il regista: 'Sono pazzo di lei'" [Monica Bellucci in pair with Tim Burton. The director: 'I'm crazy about her']. La Stampa (in Italian). Archived from the original on 15 September 2023. Retrieved 4 November 2023. "Heureux événement pour Monica Belluci et Vincent Cassel" [Happy event for Monica Bellucci and Vincent Cassel]. La Dépêche du Midi (in French). 26 May 2010. Archived from the original on 18 August 2022. Retrieved 4 November 2023. Mazzacurati, Iris (27 August 2013). "En Images: Bellucci-Cassel: 18 ans et 9 films en commun" [In Images. Bellucci-Cassel: 18 years and 9 films in common]. L'Express (in French). Archived from the original on 20 August 2022. Retrieved 23 March 2023. Perrin, Olivier (27 August 2013). "Monica Bellucci e Vincent Cassel, è finito". Le Temps (in French). Archived from the original on 2 December 2023. Retrieved 2 December 2023. Alwan, Margaret (26 August 2013). "Monica Bellucci et Vincent Cassel: le couple en cinq films" [Monica Bellucci and Vincent Cassel: the couple in five films]. Le Figaro (in French). Archived from the original on 12 April 2023. Retrieved 31 January 2024. Nudd, Tim (2 December 2020) [First published August 2013]. "Monica Bellucci and Vincent Cassel Separate". People. Archived from the original on 31 January 2024. Retrieved 31 January 2024. "Monica Bellucci toujours amoureuse de Vincent Cassel après la séparation" [Monica Bellucci still in love with Vincent Cassel after the separation]. Paris Match (in French). 31 December 2014. Archived from the original on 18 August 2022. Retrieved 18 August 2022 – via BFM TV. Robey, Tim (28 May 2016). "Vincent Cassel: 'Women like security. Men prefer adventure'". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 13 December 2021. Retrieved 13 December 2021. Jacobbi, Paola (22 October 2013). "Monica Bellucci: 'Single (per la prima volta in vita mia)'" [Monica Bellucci: 'Single (for the first time in my life)']. Vanity Fair (in Italian). Archived from the original on 2 February 2024. Retrieved 2 February 2024. "Monica Bellucci: chi è il suo nuovo fidanzato?" [Monica Bellucci: who is her new boyfriend?]. Vogue Italia. 6 March 2019. Archived from the original on 2 September 2023. Retrieved 2 September 2023. Saltalamacchia, Stefania (8 June 2019). "Monica Bellucci e Nicolas Lefebvre, Parigi mon amour" [Monica Bellucci and Nicolas Lefebvre, Paris my love]. Vanity Fair (in Italian). Archived from the original on 4 March 2023. Retrieved 4 March 2023. Saltalamacchia, Stefania (6 March 2019). "Monica Bellucci e l'amore che diventa 'ufficiale' con Nicolas Lefebvre" [Monica Bellucci and the love that becomes 'official' with Nicolas Lefebvre]. Vanity Fair (in Italian). Archived from the original on 2 September 2023. Retrieved 9 December 2023. Huin, Eva (3 July 2019). "'Cet homme m'a appris tant de choses': Monica Bellucci annonce s'être séparée de l'artiste Nicolas Lefebvre" ['This man taught me so many things': Monica Bellucci announces that she has separated from the artist Nicolas Lefebvre]. TF1 Info (in French). Archived from the original on 13 March 2023. Retrieved 13 March 2023. "Monica Bellucci et Tim Burton sont en couple: une histoire née à Lyon" [Monica Bellucci and Tim Burton are a couple: a story born in Lyon]. Paris Match (in French). 21 February 2023. Archived from the original on 20 March 2023. Retrieved 4 March 2023. "Monica Bellucci y Tim Burton, pareja sorpresa por las calles de París" [Monica Bellucci and Tim Burton, a surprise couple on the streets of Paris]. El País (in Spanish). 22 February 2023. Archived from the original on 12 November 2023. Retrieved 12 November 2023. Ng, Kate (29 June 2023). "Monica Bellucci opens up about romance with Tim Burton for first time: 'I love him'". The Independent. Archived from the original on 10 July 2023. Retrieved 18 August 2023. Colosimo, Valentina (20 October 2023). "Monica Bellucci e Tim Burton, la nostra coppia preferita da red carpet" [Monica Bellucci and Tim Burton, our favorite red carpet couple]. Vanity Fair (in Italian). Archived from the original on 25 October 2023. Retrieved 20 October 2023. Cancellotti, Martina (21 March 2017). "Monica Bellucci: 6 cose che non sai sulla sua vita privata" [Monica Bellucci: 6 things you don't know about her private life]. Elle (in Italian). Archived from the original on 6 December 2021. Retrieved 12 February 2023. Louaguef, Sarah (23 January 2015). "Monica Bellucci choisit la France pour ses filles − 'J'ai décidé de vivre à Paris'" [Monica Bellucci chooses France for her daughters − 'I decided to live in Paris']. Paris Match (in French). Archived from the original on 19 August 2022. Retrieved 5 June 2023. Savva, Maria (13 September 2023). Monica Bellucci: Αγόρασε πολυτελή βίλα στην Πάρο [Monica Bellucci: She has bought a luxury villa in Paros]. Kathimerini (in Greek). Archived from the original on 15 September 2023. Retrieved 15 September 2023. "Monica Bellucci Interview". Whoa is (Not) Me. Singapore. 9 May 2003. Archived from the original on 30 March 2023. Retrieved 30 March 2023. Zantonelli, Franco (4 May 2018). "Monica Bellucci accusata dal Fisco francese. La Svizzera sceglie di collaborate" [Monica Bellucci accused by the French tax authorities. Switzerland chooses to collaborate]. la Repubblica (in Italian). Archived from the original on 4 February 2024. Retrieved 4 February 2024. "Pandora Papers, Monica Bellucci attrice. Società offshore per i diritti d'immagine" [Pandora Papers, Monica Bellucci actress. Offshore companies for image rights]. L'Espresso; ICIJ (in Italian). 8 October 2021. Archived from the original on 4 February 2024. Retrieved 4 February 2024. Biondani, Paolo; Malagutti, Vittorio; Sisti, Leo (8 October 2021). "Pandora Papers, ecco i nomi dei vip italiani con i soldi offshore" [Pandora Papers, here are the names of Italian VIPs with offshore money]. L'Espresso (in Italian). Archived from the original on 4 February 2024. Retrieved 4 February 2024. "Il patrimonio di Benigni stimato in 245 milioni" [Benigni's wealth estimated at 245 million]. Forbes (in Italian). 28 December 2019. Archived from the original on 18 November 2023. Retrieved 18 November 2023 – via Il Tirreno. Ascione, Giulia (9 July 2020). "I vip italiani più ricchi: a quanto ammonta il loro patrimonio?" [The richest Italian VIPs: how much is their wealth?]. alfemminile (in Italian). Archived from the original on 22 September 2021. Retrieved 8 January 2024. "Un Magritte d'honneur pour Monica Bellucci" [An honorary Magritte for Monica Bellucci]. Le Soir (in French). Belga. 14 January 2020. Archived from the original on 3 April 2023. Retrieved 6 January 2024. "Monica Bellucci at San Sebastian Film Festival: We will always need beauty". The San Diego Union-Tribune. EFE. 19 September 2016. Archived from the original on 11 November 2023. Retrieved 6 January 2024. "Nicolas Sarkozy". Der Spiegel (in German). 29 January 2006. Archived from the original on 6 August 2023. Retrieved 16 August 2023. Le Moal, Océane (25 November 2016). "Monica Bellucci émue de recevoir la légion d'honneur à l'Elysée" [Monica Bellucci moved to receive the Legion of Honour at the Élysée]. TF1 Info (in French). Archived from the original on 7 June 2022. Retrieved 18 November 2023. Crivelli, Giulia (3 September 2020). "Dolce&Gabbana a Firenze con Monica Bellucci madrina del Rinascimento" [Dolce&Gabbana in Florence with Monica Bellucci godmother of the Renaissance]. Il Sole 24 Ore (in Italian). Archived from the original on 17 November 2023. Retrieved 17 November 2023. Moliterno, Gino (2020). Historical Dictionary of Italian Cinema (2nd ed.). Maryland: Rowman & Littlefield. ISBN 978-1-53811-948-8. Archived from the original on 19 February 2023. Retrieved 19 February 2023. Monica Bellucci at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Monica Bellucci at AllMovie Monica Bellucci at Fashion Model Directory Monica Bellucci at Rotten Tomatoes Monica Bellucci at IMDb