UTC+09:00 is an identifier for a time offset from UTC of +09:00. During the Japanese occupations of British Borneo, Burma, Hong Kong, Dutch East Indies, Malaya, Philippines, Singapore, and French Indochina, it was used as a common time with Tokyo until the fall of the Empire of Japan. Principal cities: Tokyo, Osaka, Nagoya, Fukuoka, Yokohama, Sapporo, Hiroshima, Kyoto, Seoul, Busan, Daegu, Gwangju, Ulsan, Incheon, Pyeongyang, Yakutsk, Koror, Dili, Jayapura, Ambon Russia – Yakutsk Time Far Eastern Federal District Amur Oblast, Sakha Republic (western part; west of the Lena River as well as territories adjacent to the Lena on the eastern side) Zabaykalsky Krai Japan – Japan Standard Time North Korea – Korea Standard Time South Korea – Korea Standard Time Palau East Timor – Time in East Timor Indonesia – Eastern Indonesia Time Eastern zone, including: Maluku Islands Maluku North Maluku Western New Guinea Papua West Papua Central Papua South Papua Southwest Papua Highland Papua This concerns areas within 127°30′ E and 142°30′ E longitude. Parts of Northeast China, including eastern half of Heilongjiang Province and Yanbian Korean Autonomous Prefecture in Jilin Province, where UTC+08:00 is used. The easternmost parts of Western Australia where UTC+08:00 is used, Eucla and nearby areas where (unofficial) UTC+08:45 is used. The Northern Territory, where UTC+09:30 is used, and South Australia and Broken Hill where UTC+09:30 and DST UTC+10:30 are used, respectively, despite the borders of the territory and state fitting perfectly within the ideal meridians of UTC+09:00. The western parts of Queensland where UTC+10:00 is used, and westernmost parts of Victoria and New South Wales where UTC+10:00 and UTC+11:00 in summer time, is used. Parts of Federated States of Micronesia, including western parts of Yap State, where UTC+10:00 is used. The very westernmost parts of Papua New Guinea, where UTC+10:00 is used. Parts of Russia, including Jewish Autonomous Oblast, Primorsky Krai, central part of Sakha, and most of Khabarovsk Krai where UTC+10:00 is used, and westernmost parts of eastern Sakha Republic and Sakhalin Island, where UTC+11:00 is used. Russia A westernmost part of Sakha Republic, including the urban localities Aykhal and Udachny Russia Zabaykalsky Krai Most of western Sakha Republic East Timor Indonesia The western islands in the provinces of Maluku and North Maluku (from south to north): Liran Island Wetar Island Kisar Island Ambelau Island Buru Island Sanana Island Mangole Island Taliabu and surrounding islands Japan Parts of Okinawa Prefecture: Sakishima Islands Yaeyama Islands Miyako Islands Okinawa Islands Kume Island Aguni Islands The western parts of Kerama Islands North Korea The western parts of Korea, including the capital city, Pyongyang South Korea The western parts of Korea, including the capital city, Seoul Japan The eastern parts of Hokkaido, including Obihiro, Kushiro, and Nemuro Minami-Tori-shima in Ogasawara municipality Russia New Siberian Islands Novaya Sibir Faddeyevsky Island A smaller part of Kotelny Island The eastern part of Great Lyakhovsky Island Time in Russia Time in North Korea Time in South Korea Time in Indonesia "Russia Time Zones - Russia Current Times". TimeTemperature.com. Retrieved 14 July 2012. "Sakha – Western, Russia Time Zone". TimeTemperature.com. Retrieved 25 March 2018. "Indonesia Time Zones – Indonesia Current Time". TimeTemperature.com. Retrieved 27 October 2012. Gwlliam Law. "Provinces of Indonesia". Statoids. Retrieved 27 October 2012. Media related to UTC+09:00 at Wikimedia Commons