Mixed martial arts (MMA) is a full-contact combat sport based on striking, grappling and ground fighting, incorporating techniques from various combat sports from around the world. The first documented use of the term mixed martial arts was in a review of UFC 1 by television critic Howard Rosenberg in 1993. During the early 20th century, various interstylistic contests took place throughout Japan and in the countries of the East Asia. At the same time, in Brazil, there was a phenomenon called vale tudo, which became known for unrestricted fights between various styles such as judo/Brazilian jiu-jitsu, catch wrestling/luta livre, Muay Thai, and capoeira. Another precursor to modern MMA was the 1976 Ali vs. Inoki exhibition bout (which ended in a draw after 15 rounds), fought between boxer Muhammad Ali and wrestler Antonio Inoki in Japan, where it later inspired the foundation of Shooto in 1985, Pancrase in 1993, and the Pride Fighting Championships in 1997. In the 1990s, the Gracie family brought their Brazilian jiu-jitsu style, first developed in Brazil from the 1920s, to the United States – which culminated in the founding of the Ultimate Fighting Championship (UFC) promotion company in 1993. The company held an event with almost no rules, mostly due to the influence of Art Davie and Rorion Gracie attempting to replicate vale tudo fights that existed in Brazil and would later implement a different set of rules (example: eliminating kicking a grounded opponent), which differed from other leagues which were more in favour of realistic, street like fights. Originally promoted as a competition to find the most effective martial arts for real unarmed combat, competitors from different fighting styles were pitted against one another in contests with relatively few rules. Later, individual fighters incorporated multiple martial arts into their style. MMA promoters were pressured to adopt additional rules to increase competitors' safety, to comply with sport regulations and to broaden mainstream acceptance of the sport. Following these changes, the sport has seen increased popularity with a pay-per-view business that rivals boxing and professional wrestling. In Ancient China, combat sport appeared in the form of Leitai, a no-holds-barred mixed combat sport that combined Chinese martial arts, boxing and wrestling. In Ancient Greece, there was a sport called pankration, which featured grappling and striking skills similar to those found in modern MMA. Pankration was formed by combining the already established wrestling and boxing traditions and, in Olympic terms, first featured in the 33rd Olympiad in 648 BC. All strikes and holds were allowed with the exception of biting and gouging, which were banned. The fighters, called pankratiasts, fought until someone could not continue or signaled submission by raising their index finger; there were no rounds. According to the historian E. Norman Gardiner, "No branch of athletics was more popular than the pankration." There is also evidence of similar mixed combat sports in Ancient Egypt, India and Japan. The mid-19th century saw the prominence of the new sport savate in the combat sports circle. French savate fighters wanted to test their techniques against the traditional combat styles of its time. In 1852, a contest was held in France between French savateurs and English bare-knuckle boxers in which French fighter Rambaud alias la Resistance fought English fighter Dickinson and won using his kicks. However, the English team still won the four other match-ups during the contest. Contests occurred in the late 19th to mid-20th century between French savateurs and other combat styles. Examples include a 1905 fight between French savateur George Dubois and a judo practitioner Re-nierand which resulted in the latter winning by submission, as well as the highly publicized 1957 fight between French savateur and professional boxer Jacques Cayron and a young Japanese karateka named Mochizuki Hiroo which ended when Cayron knocked Hiroo out with a hook. Catch wrestling appeared in the late 19th century, combining several global styles of wrestling, including Indian pehlwani and English wrestling. In turn, catch wrestling went on to greatly influence modern MMA. No-holds-barred fighting reportedly took place in the late 1880s when wrestlers representing the style of catch wrestling and many others met in tournaments and music-hall challenge matches throughout Europe. In the US, the first major encounter between a boxer and a wrestler in modern times took place in 1887 when John L. Sullivan, then heavyweight world boxing champion, entered the ring with his trainer, wrestling champion William Muldoon, and was slammed to the mat in two minutes. The next publicized encounter occurred in the late 1890s when future heavyweight boxing champion Bob Fitzsimmons took on European wrestling champion Ernest Roeber. In September 1901, Frank "Paddy" Slavin, who had been a contender for Sullivan's boxing title, knocked out future world wrestling champion Frank Gotch in Dawson City, Canada. The judo-practitioner Ren-nierand, who gained fame after defeating George Dubois, would fight again in another similar contest, which he lost to Ukrainian Catch wrestler Ivan Poddubny. Another early example of mixed martial arts was Bartitsu, which Edward William Barton-Wright founded in London in 1899. Combining catch wrestling, judo, boxing, savate, jujutsu and canne de combat (French stick fighting), Bartitsu was the first martial art known to have combined Asian and European fighting styles, and which saw MMA-style contests throughout England, pitting European catch wrestlers and Japanese judoka champions against representatives of various European wrestling styles. Among the precursors of modern MMA are mixed style contests throughout Europe, Japan, and the Pacific Rim during the early 1900s. In Japan, these contests were known as merikan, from the Japanese slang for "American [fighting]". Merikan contests were fought under a variety of rules, including points decision, best of three throws or knockdowns, and victory via knockout or submission. Sambo, a martial art and combat sport developed in Russia in the early 1920s, merged various forms of combat styles such as wrestling, judo and striking into one unique martial art. The popularity of professional wrestling, which was contested under various catch wrestling rules at the time, waned after World War I, when the sport split into two genres: "shoot", in which the fighters actually competed, and "show", which evolved into modern professional wrestling. In 1936, heavyweight boxing contender Kingfish Levinsky and professional wrestler Ray Steele competed in a mixed match, which catch wrestler Steele won in 35 seconds. 27 years later, Ray Steele's protégé Lou Thesz fought boxer Jersey Joe Walcott twice in mixed style bouts. The first match was a real contest which Thesz won while the second match was a work, which Thesz also won. In the 1940s in the Palama Settlement in Hawaii, five martial arts masters, under the leadership of Adriano Emperado, curious to determine which martial art was best, began testing each other in their respective arts of kenpo, jujitsu, Chinese and American boxing and tang soo do. From this they developed kajukenbo, the first American mixed martial arts. In 1963, a catch wrestler and judoka Gene Lebell fought professional boxer Milo Savage in a no-holds-barred match. Lebell won by Harai Goshi to rear naked choke, leaving Savage unconscious. This was the first televised bout of mixed-style fighting in North America. The hometown crowd was so enraged that they began to boo and throw chairs at Lebell. On February 12, 1963, three karatekas from Oyama dojo (kyokushin later) went to the Lumpinee Boxing Stadium in Thailand and fought against three Muay Thai fighters. The three kyokushin karate fighters were Tadashi Nakamura, Kenji Kurosaki and Akio Fujihira (also known as Noboru Osawa), while the Muay Thai team of three authentic Thai fighter. Japan won 2–1: Tadashi Nakamura and Akio Fujihira both knocked out their opponents with punches while Kenji Kurosaki, who fought the Thai, was knocked out by elbows. The Japanese fighter who lost, Kenji Kurosaki, was a kyokushin instructor, rather than a contender, and that he had stood in as a substitute for the absent chosen fighter. In June of the same year, karateka and future kickboxer Tadashi Sawamura faced top Thai fighter Samarn Sor Adisorn: Sawamura was knocked down sixteen times on his way to defeat. Sawamura went on to incorporate what he learned in that fight in kickboxing tournaments. During the late 1960s to early 1970s, the concept of hybrid martial arts was popularized in the West by Bruce Lee via his system of Jeet Kune Do. Lee believed that "the best fighter is not a boxer, karate or judo man. The best fighter is someone who can adapt to any style, to be formless, to adopt an individual's own style and not following the system of styles." In 2004, UFC President Dana White would call Lee the "father of mixed martial arts" stating: "If you look at the way Bruce Lee trained, the way he fought, and many of the things he wrote, he said the perfect style was no style. You take a little something from everything. You take the good things from every different discipline, use what works, and you throw the rest away". A contemporary of Bruce Lee, Wing Chun practitioner Wong Shun Leung, gained prominence fighting in 60–100 illegal beimo fights against other Chinese martial artists of various styles. Wong also fought and won against Western fighters of other combat styles, such as his match against Russian boxer Giko, his televised fight against a fencer, and his fight against Taiwanese kung fu master Wu Ming Jeet. Wong combined boxing and kickboxing into his kung fu, as Bruce Lee did. Muhammad Ali vs. Antonio Inoki took place in Japan in 1976. The classic match-up between professional boxer and professional wrestler turned sour as each fighter refused to engage in the other's style, and after a 15-round stalemate it was declared a draw. Muhammad Ali sustained a substantial amount of damage to his legs, as Antonio Inoki slide-kicked him continuously for the duration of the bout, causing him to be hospitalized for the next three days. The fight played an important role in the history of mixed martial arts. The basis of modern mixed martial arts in Japan can be found across several shoot-style professional wrestling promotions like UWF International and Pro Wrestling Fujiwara Gumi, both founded in 1991, that attempted to create a combat-based style which blended wrestling, kickboxing and submission grappling. Another promotion formed around the same time by Akira Maeda called Fighting Network RINGS initially started as a shoot-style professional wrestling promotion but it also promoted early mixed martial arts contests. From 1995 onwards it began identifying itself as a mixed martial arts promotion and moved away from the original shoot style. Professional wrestlers Masakatsu Funaki and Minoru Suzuki founded Pancrase in 1993 which promoted legitimate contests initially under professional wrestling rules. These promotions inspired Pride Fighting Championships which started in 1997. Pride was acquired by its rival Ultimate Fighting Championship in 2007. A fight between Golden Gloves boxing champion Joey Hadley and Arkansas Karate Champion David Valovich happened on June 22, 1976, at Memphis Blues Baseball Park. The bout had mixed rules: the karateka was allowed to use his fists, feet and knees, while the boxer could only use his fists. Hadley won the fight via knockout on the first round. In 1988 Rick Roufus challenged Changpuek Kiatsongrit to a non-title Muay Thai vs. kickboxing super fight. Roufus was at the time an undefeated Kickboxer and held both the KICK Super Middleweight World title and the PKC Middleweight U.S. title. Kiatsongrit was finding it increasingly difficult to get fights in Thailand as his weight (70 kg) was not typical for Thailand, where competitive bouts tended to be at the lower weights. Roufus knocked Changpuek down twice with punches in the first round, breaking Changpuek's jaw, but lost by technical knockout in the fourth round due to the culmination of low kicks to the legs that he was unprepared for. This match was the first popular fight which showcased the power of such low kicks to a predominantly Western audience. The movement that led to the creation of present-day mixed martial arts scenes emerged from a confluence of several earlier martial arts scenes: the vale tudo events in Brazil, rooftop fights in Hong Kong's street fighting culture, and professional wrestlers, especially in Japan. Vale tudo began in the 1920s and became renowned through its association with the "Gracie challenge", which was issued by Carlos Gracie and Hélio Gracie and upheld later by descendants of the Gracie family. The "Gracie Challenges" were held in the garages and gyms of the Gracie family members. When the popularity grew, these types of mixed bouts were a staple attraction at the carnivals in Brazil. In the mid-20th century, mixed martial arts contests emerged in Hong Kong's street fighting culture in the form of rooftop fights. During the early 20th century, there was an influx of migrants from mainland China, including Chinese martial arts teachers who opened up martial arts schools in Hong Kong. In the mid-20th century, soaring crime in Hong Kong, combined with limited Hong Kong Police manpower, led to many young Hongkongers learning martial arts for self-defence. Around the 1960s, there were about 400 martial arts schools in Hong Kong, teaching their own distinctive styles of martial arts. In Hong Kong's street fighting culture, there emerged a rooftop fight scene in the 1950s and 1960s, where gangs from rival martial arts schools challenged each other to bare-knuckle fights on Hong Kong's rooftops, in order to avoid crackdowns by colonial British Hong Kong authorities. The most famous fighter to emerge from Hong Kong's rooftop fight scene was Bruce Lee, who combined different techniques from different martial arts schools into his own hybrid martial arts system called Jeet Kune Do. Lee went on to popularize the concept of mixed martial arts internationally. Early mixed-match martial arts professional wrestling bouts in Japan (known as Ishu Kakutōgi Sen (異種格闘技戦), literally "heterogeneous combat sports bouts") became popular with Antonio Inoki only in the 1970s. Inoki was a disciple of Rikidōzan, but also of Karl Gotch, who trained numerous Japanese wrestlers in catch wrestling. Regulated mixed martial arts competitions were first introduced in the United States by CV Productions, Inc. Its first competition, called Tough Guy Contest was held on March 20, 1980, New Kensington, Pennsylvania, Holiday Inn. During that year the company renamed the brand to Super Fighters and sanctioned ten regulated tournaments in Pennsylvania. In 1983, Pennsylvania State Senate passed a bill known as the "Tough Guy Law" that specifically called for: "Prohibiting Tough Guy contests or Battle of the Brawlers contests", and ended the sport. Japan had its own form of mixed martial arts discipline, Shooto, which evolved from shoot wrestling in 1985, as well as the shoot wrestling derivative Pancrase, which was founded as a promotion in 1993. Pancrase 1 was held in Japan in September 1993, two months before UFC 1 was held in the United States in November 1993. In 1993, the sport was reintroduced to the United States by the Ultimate Fighting Championship (UFC). UFC promoters initially pitched the event as a real-life fighting video game tournament similar to Street Fighter and Mortal Kombat. The sport gained international exposure and widespread publicity when jiu-jitsu fighter Royce Gracie won the first Ultimate Fighting Championship tournament, submitting three challengers in a total of just five minutes. sparking a revolution in martial arts. The first Vale Tudo Japan tournaments were held in 1994 and 1995 and were both won by Rickson Gracie. Around the same time, International Vale Tudo competition started to develop through (World Vale Tudo Championship (WVC), VTJ, IVC, UVF etc.). Interest in mixed martial arts as a sport resulted in the creation of the Pride Fighting Championships (Pride) in 1997. The sport reached a new peak of popularity in North America in December 2006: a rematch between then UFC light heavyweight champion Chuck Liddell and former champion Tito Ortiz, rivaled the PPV sales of some of the biggest boxing events of all time, and helped the UFC's 2006 PPV gross surpass that of any promotion in PPV history. In 2007, Zuffa LLC, the owners of the UFC MMA promotion, bought Japanese rival MMA brand Pride FC, merging the contracted fighters under one promotion. Comparisons were drawn to the consolidation that occurred in other sports, such as the AFL-NFL Merger in American football. The first documented use of the name mixed martial arts was in a review of UFC 1 by television critic, Howard Rosenberg, in 1993. The term gained popularity when the website, newfullcontact.com (one of the biggest websites covering the sport at the time), hosted and reprinted the article. The first use of the term by a promotion was in September 1995 by Rick Blume, president and CEO of Battlecade Extreme Fighting, just after UFC 7. UFC official, Jeff Blatnick, was responsible for the Ultimate Fighting Championship officially adopting the name mixed martial arts. It was previously marketed as "Ultimate Fighting" and "No Holds Barred (NHB)", until Blatnick and John McCarthy proposed the name "MMA" at the UFC 17 rules meeting in response to increased public criticism. The question as to who actually coined the name is still in debate. The first state-regulated MMA event was held in Biloxi, Mississippi on August 23, 1996, with the sanctioning of IFC's Mayhem in Mississippi show by the Mississippi Athletic Commission under William Lyons. The rules used were an adaptation of the kickboxing rules already accepted by most state athletic commissions. These modified kickboxing rules allowed for take downs and ground fighting and did away with rounds, although they did allow for fighters to be stood up by the referee and restarted if there was no action on the ground. These rules were the first in modern MMA to define fouls, fighting surfaces and the use of the cage. In March 1997, the Iowa Athletic Commission officially sanctioned Battlecade Extreme Fighting under a modified form of its existing rules for Shootfighting. These rules created the three 'five-minute round/one-minute break' format, and mandated shootfighting gloves, as well as weight classes for the first time. Illegal blows were listed as groin strikes, head butting, biting, eye gouging, hair pulling, striking an opponent with an elbow while the opponent is on the mat, kidney strikes, and striking the back of the head with closed fist. Holding onto the ring or cage for any reason was defined as a foul. While there are minor differences between these and the final Unified Rules, notably regarding elbow strikes, the Iowa rules allowed mixed martial arts promoters to conduct essentially modern events legally, anywhere in the state. On March 28, 1997, Extreme Fighting 4 was held under these rules, making it the first show conducted under a version of the modern rules.[citation needed] In April 2000, the California State Athletic Commission voted unanimously in favor of regulations that later became the foundation for the Unified Rules of Mixed Martial Arts. However, when the legislation was sent to the California capital in Sacramento for review, it was determined that the sport fell outside the jurisdiction of the CSAC, rendering the vote meaningless. On September 30, 2000, the New Jersey State Athletic Control Board (NJSACB) began allowing mixed martial arts promoters to conduct events in New Jersey. The first event was an IFC event titled Battleground 2000 held in Atlantic City. The intent was to allow the NJSACB to observe actual events and gather information to establish a comprehensive set of rules to regulate the sport effectively. On April 3, 2001, the NJSACB held a meeting to discuss the regulation of mixed martial arts events. This meeting attempted to unify the myriad rules and regulations which had been utilized by the different mixed martial arts organizations. At this meeting, the proposed uniform rules were agreed upon by the NJSACB, several other regulatory bodies, numerous promoters of mixed martial arts events and other interested parties in attendance. At the conclusion of the meeting, all parties in attendance were able to agree upon a uniform set of rules to govern the sport of mixed martial arts. The rules adopted by the NJSACB have become the de facto standard set of rules for professional mixed martial arts across North America. On July 30, 2009, a motion was made at the annual meeting of the Association of Boxing Commissions to adopt these rules as the "Unified Rules of Mixed Martial Arts". The motion passed unanimously. In November 2005, the United States Army began to sanction mixed martial arts with the first annual Army Combatives Championships held by the US Army Combatives School. Canada formally decriminalized mixed martial arts with a vote on Bill S-209 on June 5, 2013. The bill allows for provinces to have the power to create athletic commissions to regulate and sanction professional mixed martial arts bouts. According to MMA portal Tapology.com listings, hundreds of MMA promotions around the world produce MMA events. Since the UFC came to prominence in mainstream media in 2006, and with their 2007 merger with Pride FC and purchases of WEC and Strikeforce, no companies have presented significant competition, and the UFC is regarded as having most of the top ranked talent. Fighters usually get contracts in the UFC after competing successfully in other MMA promotions from around the world. Some MMA promotions tend to exist more to build up prospects while others have a mix of prospects and veterans. Some exist only to be feeder leagues to the bigger promotions (e.g. LFA, CWFC), others exist to try to be the best in the world (e.g. ACB, ONE Championship). Some promotions only do four shows a year while others are doing them monthly. According to ScorecardMMA.com, one of the world's top statistical rankings services for MMA, and the only one currently ranking MMA promotions worldwide statistically; "To rank MMA Promotions we use an index that we calculate weekly- Promotion Score.Promo Score calculation is based on the strength of Events and Fighters that Promotion has at that time. Promo Score has three main components: Event Index: based on the quality of events in the last quarter and in the last year. Owned Fighter Index: calculated based on the quality of fighters that the promotion currently owns (contracted, or used recently). Utilized Fighters Index: fighters that the promotion has used in the last four months and in the last three quarters. As of May 26, 2018, the top 15 MMA promotions (out of 41 ranked) in the world are: Ultimate Fighting Championship (UFC). Based in Las Vegas, United States. Broadcasts their fights locally on ESPN (prior to 2019 on Fox Sports) and on other networks around the world. Bellator MMA. Based in Newport Beach, California, United States. Broadcasts their fights locally on the Showtime (prior to 2021 on Paramount Network) and other networks around the world. Absolute Championship Berkut (ACB). Based in Grozny, Russia. Broadcasts their fights locally on Match TV and streaming on YouTube (with Russian commentary) and Facebook (with English commentary). Fight Nights Global (FNG). Based in Moscow, Russia. Broadcasts their fights locally on Match TV, and streaming on VKontakte. ONE Championship. Based in Kallang, Singapore. Broadcasts their fights regionally on Fox Sports Asia and streaming on their Mobile app (without Geo-blocking). Rizin Fighting Federation (Rizin FF). Based in Tokyo, Japan. Broadcast their fights locally on Fuji Television and for Pay-per-view on SKY PerfecTV! (Japan only) and FITE TV (internationally). Invicta FC (all female MMA). Based in Enka, North Carolina, United States. Broadcasts their fights on UFC Fight Pass. Pancrase. Based in Tokyo, Japan. Broadcast their fights locally on Tokyo MX and streaming on AbemaTV (with Japanese commentary) and on UFC Fight Pass (with English commentary). M-1 Global. Based in St. Petersburg, Russia. Broadcasts their fights locally on Russia-2 and streaming on their mobile app (with English commentary). Legacy Fighting Alliance (LFA). Based in Houston, Texas, US. Broadcasts their fights locally on AXS TV Fights. World Fighting Championship Akhmat (WFCA). Based in Grozny, Russia. Broadcasts their fights locally on Grozny TV (also streaming on Grozny.tv). Konfrontacja Sztuk Walki (KSW). Based in Warsaw, Poland. Broadcasts their fights locally on Polsat Sport and on Fight Network internationally. Deep. Based in Nagoya, Japan. Broadcast their fights locally on SKY PerfecTV! (Fighting TV Samurai channel) and streaming on AbemaTV. Road Fighting Championship (Road FC). Based in Wonju, South Korea. Broadcasts their fights locally on MBC Sports+ and streaming on afreecaTV (with Korean commentary) and YouTube (with English commentary). Cage Warriors (CWFC). Based in London, England, UK. Broadcasts their fights locally on BT Sport and on UFC Fight Pass. There are hundreds of MMA training facilities throughout the world. These are the current top MMA Gyms in the world based on how many top ranked UFC fighters they currently train. There are 160 fighters, who train at over 80 different gyms, in the top 15 of the UFC's 10 divisions. The rankings are based on a system where a champion earns their gym 25 points, A #1 contender is 15, a #2 contender 10 and then a decrease in ranking equaling a decrease of 1 point until the ranking reaches #10. From there, rankings 11–15 are each worth one point. (updated July 2015): Nova União located in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil Jackson-Winkeljohn MMA located in Albuquerque, New Mexico American Kickboxing Academy (AKA) located in San Jose, California. Team Alpha Male located in Sacramento, California. American Top Team (ATT) located in Coconut Creek, Florida. Kings MMA located in Huntington Beach, California. Blackzilians located in Boca Raton, Florida. Serra-Longo located in Long Island, New York. Black House (Team Nogueira) based out of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Teixeira MMA & Fitness (Teixeira MMA) located in Bethel, Connecticut. As a result of an increased number of competitors, organized training camps, information sharing, and modern kinesiology, the understanding of the effectiveness of various strategies has been greatly improved. UFC commentator Joe Rogan claimed that martial arts evolved more in the ten years following 1993 than in the preceding 700 years combined. "During his reign atop the sport in the late 1990s he was the prototype – he could strike with the best strikers; he could grapple with the best grapplers; his endurance was second to none. " — describing UFC champion Frank Shamrock's early dominance The high profile of modern MMA promotions such as UFC and Pride has fostered an accelerated development of the sport. The early 1990s saw a wide variety of traditional styles competing in the sport. However, early competition saw varying levels of success among disparate styles. In the early 1990s, practitioners of grappling based styles such as Brazilian jiu-jitsu dominated competition in the United States. Practitioners of striking based arts such as boxing, kickboxing, and karate, who were unfamiliar with submission grappling, proved to be unprepared to deal with its submission techniques. As competitions became more and more common, those with a base in striking arts became more competitive as they cross-trained in styles based around takedowns and submission holds. Likewise, those from the varying grappling styles added striking techniques to their arsenal. This increase of cross-training resulted in fighters becoming increasingly multidimensional and well-rounded in their skill-sets. The new hybridization of fighting styles can be seen in the technique of "ground and pound" developed by wrestling-based UFC pioneers such as Dan Severn, Don Frye and Mark Coleman. These wrestlers realized the need for the incorporation of strikes on the ground as well as on the feet, and incorporated ground striking into their grappling-based styles. Mark Coleman stated at UFC 14 that his strategy was to "Ground him and pound him", which may be the first televised use of the term. Since the late 1990s, both strikers and grapplers have been successful at MMA, though it is rare to see any fighter who is not schooled in both striking and grappling arts reach the highest levels of competition. The greatest MMA fighter of all time is considered by experts, fighters and fans to be either middleweight Anderson Silva, heavyweight Fedor Emelianenko, light heavyweight Jon Jones, welterweight Georges St-Pierre, flyweight Demetrious Johnson or lightweight Khabib Nurmagomedov. The rules for modern mixed martial arts competitions have changed significantly since the early days of vale tudo, Japanese shoot wrestling, and UFC 1, and even more from the historic style of pankration. As the knowledge of fighting techniques spread among fighters and spectators, it became clear that the original minimalist rule systems needed to be amended. The main motivations for these rule changes were protection of the health of the fighters, the desire to shed the perception of "barbarism and lawlessness", and to be recognized as a legitimate sport.[citation needed] The new rules included the introduction of weight classes; as knowledge about submissions spread, differences in weight had become a significant factor. There are nine different weight classes in the Unified Rules of Mixed Martial Arts. These nine weight classes include flyweight (up to 125 lb / 56.7 kg), bantamweight (up to 135 lb / 61.2 kg), featherweight (up to 145 lb / 65.8 kg), lightweight (up to 155 lb / 70.3 kg), welterweight (up to 170 lb / 77.1 kg), middleweight (up to 185 lb / 83.9 kg), light heavyweight (up to 205 lb / 93.0 kg), heavyweight (up to 265 lb / 120.2 kg), and super heavyweight with no upper weight limit. Small, open-fingered gloves were introduced to protect fists, reduce the occurrence of cuts (and stoppages due to cuts) and encourage fighters to use their hands for striking to allow more captivating matches. Gloves were first made mandatory in Japan's Shooto promotion and were later adopted by the UFC as it developed into a regulated sport. Most professional fights have the fighters wear 4 oz gloves, whereas some jurisdictions require amateurs to wear a slightly heavier 6 oz glove for more protection for the hands and wrists. Time limits were established to avoid long fights with little action where competitors conserved their strength. Matches without time limits also complicated the airing of live events. The time limits in most professional fights are three 5 minute rounds, and championship fights are normally five 5-minute rounds. Similar motivations produced the "stand up" rule, where the referee can stand fighters up if it is perceived that both are resting on the ground or not advancing toward a dominant position. In the U.S., state athletic and boxing commissions have played a crucial role in the introduction of additional rules because they oversee MMA in a similar fashion to boxing. In Japan and most of Europe, there is no regulating authority over competitions, so these organizations have greater freedom in rule development and event structure.[citation needed] Previously, Japan-based organization Pride Fighting Championships held an opening 10-minute round followed by two five-minute rounds. Stomps, soccer kicks and knees to the head of a grounded opponent are legal, but elbow strikes to the head are not. This rule set is more predominant in the Asian-based organizations as opposed to European and American rules. More recently, Singapore-based organization ONE Championship allows soccer kicks and knees to the head of a grounded opponent as well as elbow strikes to the head, but does not allow head stomps. In 2016, ONE later banned soccer kicks. However, they still allow knees to the head of a grounded opponent. Victory in a match is normally gained either by the judges' decision after an allotted amount of time has elapsed, a stoppage by the referee (for example if a competitor cannot defend themself intelligently) or the fight doctor (due to an injury), a submission, by a competitor's cornerman throwing in the towel, or by knockout. As soon as a fighter is unable to continue due to legal strikes, his opponent is declared the winner. As MMA rules allow submissions and ground and pound, the fight is stopped to prevent further injury to the fighter. Referee stoppage: The referee may stop a match in progress if: a fighter becomes dominant to the point where the opponent cannot intelligently defend themself and is taking excessive damage as a result a fighter appears to be losing consciousness as he/she is being struck a fighter appears to have a significant injury such as a cut or a broken bone Doctor stoppage/cut: the referee will call for a time out if a fighter's ability to continue is in question as a result of apparent injuries, such as a large cut. The ring doctor will inspect the fighter and stop the match if the fighter is deemed unable to continue safely, rendering the opponent the winner. However, if the match is stopped as a result of an injury from illegal actions by the opponent, either a disqualification or no contest will be issued instead. Corner stoppage: a fighter's corner may announce defeat on the fighter's behalf by throwing in the towel during the match in progress or between rounds. This is normally done when a fighter is being beaten to the point where it is dangerous and unnecessary to continue. In some cases, the fighter may be injured. Retirement: a fighter is so dazed or exhausted that he/she cannot physically continue fighting. Usually occurs between rounds. A fighter may admit defeat during a match by: a physical tap on the opponent's body or mat/floor tapping verbally Technical Submission: the referee stops the match when the fighter is caught in a submission hold and is in danger of being injured. This can occur when a fighter is choked unconscious, or when a bone has been broken in a submission hold (a broken arm due to a kimura, etc.) If the match goes the distance, then the outcome of the bout is determined by three judges. The judging criteria are organization-specific. Technical decision: in the unified rules of MMA, if a fighter is unable to continue due to an accidental illegal technique late in the fight, a technical decision is rendered by the judges based on who is ahead on the judges' scorecards at that time. In a three-round fight, two rounds must be completed for a technical decision to be awarded and in a five-round fight, three rounds must be completed. Forfeit: a fighter or their representative may forfeit a match prior to the beginning of the match, thereby losing the match. Disqualification: a "warning" will be given when a fighter commits a foul or illegal action or does not follow the referee's instruction. Three warnings will result in a disqualification. Moreover, if a fighter is unable to continue due to a deliberate illegal technique from his opponent, the opponent will be disqualified. No contest: in the event that both fighters commit a violation of the rules, or a fighter is unable to continue due to an injury from an accidental illegal technique, the match will be declared a "no contest", except in the case of a technical decision in the unified rules. A result can also be overturned to a no contest if the fighter that was originally victorious fails a post fight drug test for banned substances. MMA fighters are ranked according to their performance and outcome of their fights and level of competition they faced. The most popular and used, ranking portals are: Fight Matrix: Ranks up to 250–500 fighters worldwide for every possible division male and female. Sherdog: Ranks top 10 fighters worldwide only for current available UFC divisions. Also used by ESPN. SB Nation: Ranks top 14 fighters worldwide only for male divisions. Also used by USA Today. MMAjunkie.com: Ranks top 10 fighters worldwide for current UFC available divisions. UFC: Ranks top 15 contenders, UFC signed fighters only, as per UFC divisions. (For example: #2 means the fighter is #3 for the UFC, behind the Champion and the #1.) Tapology: Ranks top 10 fighters worldwide for every possible division. Ranking MMA: Top 50 MMA World Rankings for all Men's Divisions and Top 25 MMA World Rankings for all Women's Divisions. RankingMMA publishes Independent Mixed Martial Arts rankings that does not exclude any fighter based on their promotion. RankingMMA also provides UFC Rankings (Complete Roster), Historical MMA Rankings, Non-UFC Rankings, and MMA Prospect Rankings. Ranking MMA has published MMA World Rankings since 2006. Sports Illustrated: Ranks top 10 fighters worldwide for current UFC available divisions. MMA Rising: Ranks top 10 fighters worldwide in every possible division. Notable for their Unified Women's Mixed Martial Arts. Rankings MMA Weekly: Ranks top 10 male fighters worldwide in every possible division, and P4P for female fighters. Also used by Yahoo! Sports. Bleacher Report: Ranks top 10 UFC fighters in each division. Fight! Magazine: Ranks top 5 fighters and only in male divisions. Oddsshark.com: Ranks top 10 fighters worldwide in current UFC divisions. GroundandPound.de: Ranks top 10 European male fighters in all divisions. MMAViking: Ranks top 5 Scandinavian male fighters in all divisions and Scandinavian female pound for pound. Mixed martial arts promotions typically require that male fighters wear shorts in addition to being barechested, thus precluding the use of gi or fighting kimono to inhibit or assist submission holds. Male fighters are required by most athletic commissions to wear groin protectors underneath their trunks. Female fighters wear short shorts and sports bras or other similarly snug-fitting tops. Both male and female fighters are required to wear a mouthguard. The need for flexibility in the legs combined with durability prompted the creation of various fighting shorts brands, which then spawned a range of mixed martial arts clothing and casual wear available to the public.[citation needed] According to the Unified Rules of Mixed Martial Arts, an MMA competition or exhibition may be held in a ring or a fenced area. The fenced area can be round or have at least six sides. Cages vary: some replace the metal fencing with a net, others have a different shape from an octagon, as the term "The Octagon" is trademarked by the UFC (though the 8-sided shape itself is not trademarked). The fenced area is called a cage generically, or a hexagon, an octagon or an octagon cage, depending on the shape. A ring used by PRIDE. An octagon cage used by the UFC. Most 'traditional' martial arts have a specific focus and these arts may be trained to improve in that area. Popular disciplines of each type include: Stand-up: Boxing, kickboxing, karate, taekwondo, capoeira, combat sambo, savate and sanda are trained to improve stand-up striking. Clinch: judo, freestyle wrestling, folkstyle wrestling, Greco-Roman wrestling, sanda and sambo are trained to improve clinching, takedowns and throws, while Muay Thai is trained to improve the striking aspect of the clinch. Ground: Brazilian jiu-jitsu, judo, sambo, folkstyle, freestyle wrestling, Greco-Roman wrestling and luta livre are trained to improve ground control and position, as well as to achieve submission holds, and defend against them. Most styles have been adapted from their traditional forms, such as boxing stances, which lack effective counters to leg kicks, the Muay Thai stance, which is poor for defending against takedowns due to its static nature, and judo or Brazilian jiu-jitsu techniques, which must be adapted for no-gi competition. It is common for a fighter to train with multiple coaches of different styles or an organized fight team to improve various aspects of their game at once. Cardiovascular conditioning, speed drills, strength training and flexibility are also important aspects of a fighter's training. Some schools advertise their styles as simply "mixed martial arts", which has become a style in itself, but the training will still often be split into different sections. While mixed martial arts was initially practiced almost exclusively by competitive fighters, this is no longer the case. As the sport has become more mainstream and more widely taught, it has become accessible to wider range of practitioners of all ages. Proponents of this sort of training argue that it is safe for anyone, of any age, with varying levels of competitiveness and fitness. Brazilian jiu-jitsu (BJJ) came to international prominence in the martial arts community in the early 1990s, when BJJ expert Royce Gracie won the first, second, and fourth Ultimate Fighting Championships, which at the time were single-elimination martial arts tournaments. Royce often fought successfully against larger opponents who practiced other styles, including boxing, wrestling, shoot-fighting, karate, and taekwondo. It has since become a staple art and key component for many MMA fighters. BJJ is largely credited for bringing widespread attention to the importance of ground fighting. BJJ is primarily a ground-based fighting style that applies close range grappling techniques and uses joint locks and chokeholds to submit the adversary. But standup techniques can also be used such as throws, holds, and strikes. Some notable fighters who are known for using BJJ skills or hold a black belt include: Alexandre Pantoja, Antônio Carlos Júnior, Amanda Nunes, Anderson Silva, Antônio Rodrigo Nogueira, Charles Oliveira, Aljamain Sterling, Cris Cyborg, Deiveson Figueiredo, Demian Maia, Fabrício Werdum, Glover Teixeira, José Aldo, Junior dos Santos, Lyoto Machida, Rafael dos Anjos, Ronaldo Souza, Vitor Belfort, Wanderlei Silva, Mackenzie Dern, Chael Sonnen, Tony Ferguson, Demetrious Johnson, Frank Mir, Georges St-Pierre, Jim Miller, B.J. Penn, Nate Diaz, Jan Błachowicz, Marlon Vera, Patrício Pitbull and Brian Ortega. Wrestling (including freestyle, Greco-Roman and American folkstyle) gained tremendous respect due to its effectiveness in mixed martial arts competitions. It is widely studied by mixed martial artists as Wrestling allows competitors to control where the match will go: superior wrestlers can dominate the Clinch and take their opponents into the ground with its excellent takedowns, particularly against the legs, where they will transition into groundfighting and can either get a superior top position and start striking their opponent (a tactic known as Ground-and-Pound) or start grappling for submissions. While wrestlers with stronger striking base can use defensive wrestling to defend takedowns maintain the fight in the feet where they use their superior striking, a tactic known as "Sprawl-and-Brawl", or use wrestling to escape submission attempts. It is also credited for conferring an emphasis on conditioning for explosive movement and stamina, both of which are critical in competitive mixed martial arts. There are multiple wrestling styles around the world which MMA fighters have as their base. American fighters are usually trained in Folkstyle wrestling, the style competed in high school and college competitions. Many American champions were former NCAA Division I Wrestling Champions, such as Kevin Randleman and Mark Kerr. While fighters from around the world train primarily in "international" olympic styles such as Greco-Roman and Freestyle wrestling. Some former wrestlers who competed in the Olympics have joined MMA competition, such as Daniel Cormier, Dan Henderson, Ben Askren, silver medalists Matt Lindland and Yoel Romero, and gold medalist Henry Cejudo. Some fighters have also come from local Folk wrestling backgrounds, UFC flyweight champion Deiveson Figueiredo is trained at Luta Marajoara, a folk wrestling style from Marajó island. Notable wrestlers who were MMA competitors include: Khabib Nurmagomedov, Chael Sonnen, Jon Jones, Johny Hendricks, Georges St-Pierre, Cain Velasquez, Chad Mendes, Randy Couture, Brock Lesnar, Mark Coleman, Frankie Edgar, Colby Covington, Kamaru Usman, Justin Gaethje, Chris Weidman, Daniel Cormier, Dan Henderson, Tito Ortiz, Ilia Topuria, Khamzat Chimaev, Tyron Woodley, Yoel Romero, Deiveson Figueiredo, Mark Schultz, Anatoly Malykhin, Jason Jackson, Ryan Bader, Johnny Eblen and Henry Cejudo. Greco-Roman wrestling is one of two styles of wrestling contested at the Olympic Games, the other being Freestyle. Greco-Roman wrestling only allows for holds above the waist and has a strong emphasis on clinch fighting. Due to the difficulty to achieve takedowns when one is not allowed to attack the legs, Greco-Roman is not utilized in MMA as often as styles that do allow fighters to attack the legs, like Freestyle and Catch. Despite this, there have been fighters who come from a background in Greco-Roman wrestling. Notable examples are Randy Couture, Dan Henderson, Mark Madsen, Matt Lindland (all four were Olympic wrestlers or Olympic alternates), Dan Severn, Jon Jones, Ilia Topuria, Alexander Volkanovski, Magomed Ankalaev and Sergei Pavlovich. Main pages: KickBoxing and Mixed martial artists utilizing Kickboxing Kickboxing, along with boxing, are recognised as a foundation for striking in mixed martial arts, and are both widely practiced and taught. Although both may seem identical, each has different techniques. kickboxing is a group of stand-up combat martial arts based on kicking and punching. The modern style originated in Japan, developed from Karate, and had additional development in the Netherlands and the United States. Different governing bodies apply different rules, such as allowing the use of elbows, knees, clinching or throws, etc. Notable fighters nclude former UFC women's strawweight champion Joanna Jędrzejczyk, current UFC women' s strawweight champion Zhang Weili, Edson Barboza, Darren Till, Anderson Silva, José Aldo, Charles Oliveira, Mauricio Rua, Wanderlei Silva, Ciryl Gane, Donald Cerrone, Jiří Procházka and Cris Cyborg, while some kickboxers in MMA include Stephen Thompson, Mirko Cro Cop, Alistair Overeem, Israel Adesanya, Alex 'Poatan' Pereira, Sean O'Malley, Michael Page, Cory Sandhagen, Alexander Volkanovski, Volkan Oezdemir, Dricus Du Plessis and Leon Edwards. Boxing is a combat form that is widely used in MMA and is one of the primary striking bases for many fighters. Boxing punches account for the vast majority of strikes during the stand up portion of a bout and also account for the largest number of significant strikes, knock downs and KOs in MMA matches. Several aspects of boxing are extremely valuable such as footwork, combinations, and defensive techniques like slips, head movement and stance (including chin protection and keeping hands up) commonly known as the Guard position. Boxing-based fighters have also been shown to throw and land a higher volume of strikes when compared with other striking bases, at a rate of 3.88 per minute with 9.64 per minute thrown (compared with Muay Thai at 3.46 and 7.50, respectively). Fighters known for using boxing include: Petr Yan, Dustin Poirier, Conor McGregor, Max Holloway, Rob Font, Calvin Kattar, Sean Strickland, Cain Velasquez, Nick Diaz, Glover Teixeira, José Aldo, Ilia Topuria, Junior dos Santos, B.J. Penn, Dan Hardy, Shane Carwin, Jack Della Maddalena, Francis Ngannou, Alexander Gustafsson, Jamahal Hill, Justin Gaethje and Andrei Arlovski. Luta Livre (also referred to Luta Livre Brasileira, Submission or Esportiva) is a Brazilian submission wrestling style, developed in Brazil in the 1920s by catch wrestling practitioner Euclydes "Tatu" Hatem, including techniques from catch wrestling, judo, wrestling and Brazilian jiu-jitsu. Luta livre is divided in the categories of esportiva, which is a form of submission grappling, differentiating from no-gi BJJ with its focus on quick and energetic submissions, and vale tudo, which includes strikes both standing up and on the ground in addition to grappling and submissions. Luta livre was important to the development of mixed martial arts, as rivalry between jiu-jitsu and luta livre fueled the vale tudo scene. However, the success of Brazilian jiu-jitsu over luta livre practitioners, especially after the Desafio: Jiu Jitsu vs Luta Livre event in 1991 (which was broadcast live by Rede Globo), resulted in the style waning in popularity, although it seems to be making a resurgence, especially as an alternative to both Brazilian jiu-jitsu and catch wrestling. Some notable luta livre practitioners in MMA include: Marco Ruas, Eugenio Tadeu, José Aldo, Renato Sobral, Pedro Rizzo, Alexandre Franca Nogueira, Terry Etim, Jesus Pinedo and Darren Till. Judo is a Japanese grappling martial art which has both ne-waza (ground grappling) and tachi-waza (standing grappling), several judo practitioners have competed in mixed martial arts matches. They use their knowledge in judo for clinching and for doing explosive and fast takedowns which quickly transition into submission holds in the ground. However, judo is traditionally and exclusively trained using the judogi, as such, many techniques and strategies from judo can not be translated into MMA. Fighters who hold a black belt in judo include Fedor Emelianenko, Marco Ruas, Khabib Nurmagomedov, Ian Garry, Dong Hyun Kim, Cub Swanson, Don Frye, Antônio Rodrigo Nogueira, Fabricio Werdum, Vitor Belfort, Benoît Saint-Denis, Merab Dvalishvili, Reinier de Ridder and Olympian judokas Ronda Rousey, Hector Lombard, Rick Hawn and Hidehiko Yoshida. Former WEC middleweight champion Paulo Filho has credited judo for his success in an interview. Sambo is a Russian martial art, combat sport and self-defense system. It is a mixture of judo and freestyle wrestling using a keikogi known as kurtka. Sambo focuses on throwing, takedowns, grappling, and includes submissions from judo and catch wrestling. Sports sambo is characterized as a grappling style focused in pinning and in explosive takedowns which can be quickly transitioned into devastating leglocks. Sambo also has a modality known as combat sambo, which adds punches, kicks, elbows and knees, making it a proto-MMA hybrid fighting style. Sambo is popular in Russia and eastern Europe, where it is taught as a complement to judo and wrestling training, Sambo also provides a good base for MMA with all-around skills for combining grappling and striking. Some notable Sambo fighters that transitioned into MMA include: Fedor Emelianenko, Igor Vovchanchyn, Oleg Taktarov, Andrei Arlovski, Yaroslav Amosov, Khabib Nurmagomedov, Islam Makhachev and Shavkat Rakhmonov. Karate is a striking-based Japanese with Okinawan origins martial art using punches, kicks, sometimes elbows, knees and even limited grappling. It is divided in various schools and styles, which distinguishes techniques, training methods, among other things. Some styles, especially Kyokushin and other full contact styles, has proven to be effective in MMA as it is one of the core foundations of kickboxing, and specializes in striking techniques. Karate from all styles has also been a common base, with many getting introduced to martial arts and combat sports by training Karate in their youth. Various styles of karate are practiced by some MMA fighters, notably Chuck Liddell, Bas Rutten, Lyoto Machida, Stephen Thompson, John Makdessi, Uriah Hall, Ryan Jimmo, Georges St-Pierre, Kyoji Horiguchi, Giga Chikadze, Robert Whittaker, Henry Cejudo, and Louis Gaudinot. Liddell is known to have an extensive striking background in Kenpō with Fabio Martella. Lyoto Machida practices Shotokan Ryu, and St-Pierre practices Kyokushin. Sanda, or Sanshou, is one of the two disciplines of sport wushu. It is a modernized and full contact version of wushu, created in the late 20th century as a condensation of traditional Chinese kung fu techniques to be used in a full contact competition environment. It is a kickboxing style which has punching, kicking, some use of elbows and knee strikes—similar to Kickboxing or Muay Thai— but it has the distinction of allowing a range of takedowns, throws and sweeps, similar to judo and wrestling. They can be highly effective in competition due to their mixture of striking and takedowns, which can be easily synthesized with the rest of MMA training, such as groundfighting. It is prominently used by fighters from China, but it has found a following amongst many fighters around the world. Chief amongst these fighters is Cung Le, who is most notable for his TKO and KO victories over former UFC champions Frank Shamrock and Rich Franklin, and UFC strawweight champion Zhang Weili, the first Chinese champion in the UFC. Other wushu sanshou based fighters who have entered MMA include Michael Page, Song Yadong, K. J. Noons, Pat Barry, Zhang Tiequan, Muslim Salihov, and Zabit Magomedsharipov. Taekwondo is a Korean martial art, emerging in the 1950s as a mixture between Japanese Karate, traditional Korean martial arts and some Chinese kung fu. It is a striking-based style with heavy focus on various styles of kicking, such as head-height kicks, spinning jump kicks, and fast kicking techniques. Several accomplished MMA fighters have an extensive background in taekwondo, and many were introduced to martial arts through it. Some fighters who use taekwondo techniques in MMA are former UFC lightweight champion and WEC lightweight champion Anthony Pettis, who is 3rd dan black belt as well as an instructor, Benson Henderson, Yair Rodriguez, Marco Ruas and former UFC middleweight champion Anderson Silva, who is a 5th dan black belt. In his instructional book, Anderson Silva admitted the influence of taekwondo in the formation of his unique style. "In each of my fights, I tried to utilize techniques from all the various styles I had studied. I threw taekwondo kicks. I threw Muay Thai knees and elbows, and I used my knowledge of Brazilian jiu-jitsu on the ground." Anthony Pettis has also stated that he is "definitely a traditional martial artist first and a mixed martial artist second", as well as his "style of attacking is different [because of his] taekwondo background." Other notable fighters who have a base in Taekwondo or are known for using their Taekwondo skills while fighting include Edson Barboza, Valentina Shevchenko, Cung Le, Patrick Smith, Mirko Cro Cop, Cory Sandhagen, Israel Adesanya and Conor McGregor. Capoeira has been incorporated into MMA in more recent years and is often used as an addition to Brazilian jiu-jitsu; both originate from Brazil. Several fighters use this martial art when fighting, although not fully, as music and dancing are major components of the discipline. Anderson Silva, Conor McGregor, Deiveson Figueiredo, Thiago Santos, Marco Ruas and Michel Pereira incorporated some techniques and has in turn helped capoeira gain more attention in MMA. It is known for its quick and complex maneuvers, which use power, speed, and leverage across a wide variety of kicks, spins and techniques. Although not as common as other disciplines, some fighters have used Savate effectively in MMA. Savate restricts the use of shins and knees, allowing only foot kicks. It focuses on kicking more than punching, and its kicks are characteristically very fast, mobile and flexible. It also possesses a complex and evasive footwork. However, because Savatuers train wearing shoes, adjustments have to be made to how they throw kicks in MMA. Notable Savate fighters include Karl Amoussou, Gerard Gordeau, Cheick Kongo, and former Bellator Light Heavyweight Champion Christian M'Pumbu. The techniques utilized in mixed martial arts competition generally fall into two categories: striking techniques (such as kicks, knees, punches and elbows) and grappling techniques (such as clinch holds, pinning holds, submission holds, sweeps, takedowns and throws). Today, mixed martial artists must cross-train in a variety of styles to counter their opponent's strengths and remain effective in all the phases of combat and have a strategy. Sprawl-and-Brawl is a stand-up fighting tactic that consists of effective stand-up striking while avoiding ground fighting typically by using sprawls to defend against takedowns or throws. A Sprawl-and-Brawler is usually a boxer, kickboxer, or karateka who has trained in various styles of wrestling, judo, and/or sambo to avoid takedowns to keep the fight standing. This is a form which is heavily practiced in the amateur leagues. These fighters will often study submission wrestling to avoid being forced into submission should they find themselves on the ground. This style can be deceptively different from traditional kickboxing styles, since sprawl-and-brawlers must adapt their techniques to incorporate takedown and ground fighting defense. A few notable examples are Igor Vovchanchyn, Mirko Filipović, Chuck Liddell, Mark Hunt and more recently Junior dos Santos, Justin Gaethje, Andrei Arlovski, and Joanna Jędrzejczyk. Ground-and-pound is a strategy consisting of taking an opponent to the ground using a takedown or throw, obtaining a top, or dominant grappling position, and then striking the opponent, primarily with fists, hammerfists, and elbows. Ground-and-pound is also used as a precursor to attempting submission holds. The style is used by fighters well-versed in submission defense and skilled at takedowns. They take the fight to the ground, maintain a grappling position, and strike until their opponent submits or is knocked out. Although not a traditional style of striking, the effectiveness and reliability of ground-and-pound has made it a popular tactic. It was first demonstrated as an effective technique by Mark Coleman, then popularized by fighters such as Chael Sonnen, Glover Teixeira, Don Frye, Frank Trigg, Jon Jones, Cheick Kongo, Mark Kerr, Frank Shamrock, Tito Ortiz, Matt Hughes, Chris Weidman, and Khabib Nurmagomedov. While most fighters use ground-and-pound statically, by way of holding their opponents down and mauling them with short strikes from the top position, a few fighters manage to utilize it dynamically by striking their opponents while changing positions, thus not allowing their opponents to settle once they take them down. Cain Velasquez is one of the most devastating ground strikers in MMA and is known for continuing to strike his opponents on the ground while transitioning between positions. Fedor Emelianenko, considered among the greatest masters of ground-and-pound in MMA history, was the first to demonstrate this dynamic style of striking in transition. He was striking his opponents on the ground while passing guard, or while his opponents were attempting to recover guard. In the year 2000, MMA play-by-play commentator Stephen Quadros coined the popular phrase lay and pray. This refers to a situation where a wrestler or grappler keeps another fighter pinned or controlled on the mat to avoid a stand up, yet exhibits little urgency to finish the grounded opponent with a knockout or a submission for the majority or entirety of the fight. The implication of "lay and pray" is that after the wrestler/grappler takes the striker down and 'lays' on him to neutralize the opponent's striking weapons, he 'pray's that the referee does not return them to the standing position. This style is considered by many fans as the most boring style of fighting and is highly criticized for intentionally creating non-action, yet it is effective. Some argue that 'lay-and-pray' is justified and that it is the responsibility of the downed fighter to be able to protect himself from this legitimate fighting technique. Many consider Jon Fitch's style to epitomize 'lay and pray'. Former UFC Welterweight champion Georges St-Pierre has been criticized by fans for playing it safe and applying the lay-and-pray tactic in his fights, as has former Bellator MMA Welterweight champion Ben Askren, who justified the tactic, explaining that championship fights are much harder, as they are five rounds long compared with the usual three. Submission-seeking is a reference to the strategy of taking an opponent to the ground using a takedown or throw and then applying a submission hold, forcing the opponent to submit. While grapplers will often work to attain dominant position, some may be more comfortable fighting from other positions. It enable fighters to force opponents into submission through joint locks or chokes. Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu (BJJ) plays a significant role in MMA submission grappling, with techniques like armbars, triangles, rear-naked chokes, guillotines, and kimuras being commonly utilized. If a grappler finds themselves unable to force a takedown, they may resort to pulling guard, whereby they physically pull their opponent into a dominant position on the ground. This was one of the first fighting styles that had shown success, popularized by BJJ exponent Royce Gracie during early UFC events. Submissions are an essential part of many disciplines, most notably Brazilian jiu-jitsu, catch wrestling, judo, sambo, luta livre and shoot wrestling. Submission-based styles were popularized in the early UFC events by Royce Gracie and Ken Shamrock, and were the dominant tactic in the early UFCs. Modern proponents of the submission-seeking style, such as Demian Maia, Ronaldo Souza, Charles Oliveira, Ryan Hall, Marcin Held, and Paul Craig tend to come from a Brazilian jiu-jitsu background. Clinch-Fighting is a tactic consisting of using a clinch hold to prevent the opponent from moving away into more distant striking range, while also attempting takedowns or throws and striking the opponent using knees, stomps, elbows, and punches. The clinch is often utilized by wrestlers and judokas that have added components of the striking game (typically boxing), and Muay Thai fighters. Ken Shamrock was known for his impressive clinch work when he submitted Dan Severn with a standing guillotine choke at UFC 6 Wrestlers and judoka may use clinch fighting as a way to neutralize the superior striking skills of a stand-up fighter to prevent takedowns or throws by a superior ground fighter. Ronda Rousey, with her judo background, is considered a master at initiating throws from the clinch to set up armbars. The clinch or "plum" of a Muay Thai fighter is often used to improve the accuracy of knees and elbows by physically controlling the position of the opponent. Anderson Silva is well known for his devastating Muay Thai clinch. He defeated UFC middle weight champion Rich Franklin using the Muay Thai clinch and kneeing Franklin repeatedly to the body and face – breaking Franklin's nose. In their rematch Silva repeated this and won again. Other fighters may use the clinch to push their opponent against the cage or ropes, where they can effectively control their opponent's movement and restrict mobility while striking them with punches to the body or stomps also known as dirty boxing or "Wall and Maul". Randy Couture used his Greco-Roman wrestling background to popularize this style en route to six title reigns in the Ultimate Fighting Championship. Especially used by fighters with strong wrestling background when facing a highly skilled grappler, or by wrestlers who prefer stand-up fights. Usually fighters who adopt this strategy use takedowns only for scoring, allowing the adversary to stand up and continue the fight. They also want to land clear strikes and control the octagon. In order to win the fight by decision all score oriented fighters have to have strong defensive techniques and avoid takedowns. In general, fighters who cannot win fights through lightning offense, or are more suited to win fights in the later rounds or via decision are commonly known as grinders. Grinders aim to shut down their opponent's game plan and chip away at them via clinching, smothering and ground-and-pound for most of the rounds. Prominent examples of grinders are Pat Healy, Chael Sonnen, and Colby Covington. While mixed martial arts is primarily a male dominated sport, it does have female athletes. Female competition in Japan includes promotions such as the all-female Valkyrie, and Jewels (formerly known as Smackgirl). However historically there has been only a select few major professional mixed martial arts organizations in the United States that invite women to compete. Among those are Strikeforce, Bellator Fighting Championships, the all female Invicta Fighting Championships, and the now defunct EliteXC.[citation needed] There has been a growing awareness of women in mixed martial arts due to popular female fighters and personalities such as Megumi Fujii, Miesha Tate, Cristiane "Cyborg" Santos, Ronda Rousey, Joanna Jędrzejczyk, Holly Holm and Gina Carano among others. Carano became known as "the face of women's MMA" after appearing in a number of EliteXC events. This was furthered by her appearances on MGM Television's 2008 revival of their game show American Gladiators.[citation needed] Additionally, U.S. Congresswoman Sharice Davids (D-KS-3), elected in 2018, is a former professional MMA fighter. In Japan, female competition has been documented since the mid-1990s. Influenced by female professional wrestling and kickboxing, the Smackgirl competition was formed in 2001 and became the only major all-female promotion in mixed martial arts. Other early successful Japanese female organizations included Ladies Legend Pro-Wrestling, ReMix (a predecessor to Smackgirl), U-Top Tournament, K-Grace, and AX.[citation needed] Aside from all-female organizations, most major Japanese male dominated promotions have held select female competitions. These have included DEEP, MARS, Gladiator, HEAT, Cage Force, K-1, Sengoku, Shooto (under the name G-Shooto), and Pancrase (under the name Pancrase Athena).[citation needed] In the United States, prior to the success of The Ultimate Fighter reality show that launched mixed martial arts into the mainstream media,[citation needed] there was no major coverage of female competitions. Some early organizations who invited women to compete included, International Fighting Championships, SuperBrawl, King of the Cage, Rage in the Cage, Ring of Combat, Bas Rutten Invitational, and HOOKnSHOOT. From the mid-2000s, more coverage came when organizations such as Strikeforce, EliteXC, Bellator Fighting Championships, and Shark Fights invited women to compete. Outside Japan and the United States, female competition is almost exclusively found in minor local promotions. However, in Europe some major organizations have held select female competitions, including It's Showtime, Shooto Europe, Cage Warriors, and M-1 Global. Following Zuffa's acquisition of Strikeforce in March 2011, the UFC began promoting women's fights, with Ronda Rousey rapidly becoming one of the promotion's biggest draws. Controversy arose in 2013, when CFA (Championship Fighting Alliance) fighter Fallon Fox came out as a transgender woman. The case became a centerpiece of debates concerning whether it was fair to have a transgender woman compete against cisgender women in a contact sport. Neither the UFC nor Invicta FC says they will allow her to fight, and then-UFC Bantamweight champion Ronda Rousey said she would not fight her. Amateur Mixed Martial Arts is the amateur version of the Mixed Martial Arts in which participants engage largely or entirely without remuneration. Under the International Mixed Martial Arts Federation (IMMAF) and World MMA Association (WMMAA), it is practiced within a safe and regulated environment which relies on a fair and objective scoring system and competition procedures similar to those in force in the professional Mixed Martial Arts rules. Amateur MMA is practiced with board shorts and with approved protection gear that includes shin protectors, and amateur MMA gloves. The International Mixed Martial Arts Federation and the World Mixed Martial Arts Association announced an amalgamation on April 11, 2018, uniting the two organisations behind one bid for Olympic sport recognition after being instructed by Global Association of International Sport Federations (GAISF). The WMMAA and the IMMAF signed a legally binding affiliation memorandum of understanding (MOU) in May 2018 and finalized the agreement by November 2018, along with the first unfiied world championships. World Mixed Martial Arts Association (WMMAA) was founded in 2012 in Monaco by M-1 Global commercial promoters and is under the leadership of the General Secretary Alexander Endelgarth, President Finkelstein and Fedor Emelianenko. The World MMA Association was an organization that managed and developed mixed martial arts, establishing rules and procedures, hosting MMA competitions. On October 20, 2013, the first World MMA Championship was held in Saint Petersburg, Russia. By December 2013, WMMAA had 38 member states, representing the sport and registered in accordance with national laws.. In 2017, WMMAA had expanded to 83 members: Afghanistan, Albania, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Colombia, Czech Republic, France, Guatemala, Georgia, Greece, India, Iran, Italy, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Macedonia, Moldova, Monaco, Mongolia, the Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russia, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, South Korea, Spain, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Ukraine, Uzbekistan, Venezuela. On February 29, 2012, the International Mixed Martial Arts Federation (IMMAF) was set up to bring international structure, development and support to mixed martial arts worldwide. IMMAF launched with support of market leader, the Ultimate Fighting Championship (UFC). The IMMAF is a non-profit, democratic federation organized according to international federation standards to ensure that MMA as a sport is allowed the same recognition, representation and rights as all other major sports. The IMMAF is registered under Swedish law and is founded on democratic principles, as outlined in their statutes. As of March 2015, there are 39 total members from 38 countries, which come from Austria, Bahrain, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Iceland, India, Ireland (Northern Ireland), Italy, Jordan, Lebanon, Lithuania, Malaysia, Nepal, The Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Pakistan, Paraguay, Poland, Portugal, Romania, The Seychelles, South Africa, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Ukraine, the United Kingdom, and the United States of America. The IMMAF held its first Amateur World Championships in Las Vegas, US, from June 30 to July 6, 2014. Mixed Martial Arts competitions have changed dramatically since the first Ultimate Fighting Championship in 1993, specifically with the inception of the Unified Rules of Mixed Martial Arts. There remains a paucity of data on injuries that occur in MMA, and resulting concerns with regard to MMA's safety remain. A 2014 systematic review concluded that the injury incidence rate in MMA appears to be greater than in most, if not all, other popular and commonly practiced combat sports. In a 2014 meta-analysis of the available injury data in MMA, the injury incidence rate was estimated to be 228.7 injuries per 1000 athlete-exposures (one athlete-exposure is defined as one athlete participating in a single fight). The estimated injury incidence rate in MMA is greater than in other full-contact combat sports such as judo (44.0 injuries per 1000 athlete-exposures), taekwondo (79.4 injuries per 1000 athlete-exposures), amateur boxing (77.7 injuries per 1000 athlete-exposures), and professional boxing (118.0–250.6 injuries per 1000 athlete-exposures). In general, the injury pattern in MMA is very similar to that in professional boxing but unlike that found in other combat sports such as judo and taekwondo. The most commonly injured body region is the head (66.8% to 78.0% of reported injuries) followed by the wrist/hand (6.0% to 12.0% of reported injuries), while the most frequent types of injury were laceration (36.7% to 59.4% of reported injuries), fracture (7.4% to 43.3% of reported injuries), and concussion (3.8% to 20.4% of reported injuries). The frequency of impact to the ear and low utilization of ear protection leads to a high frequency of perichondral hematoma that can lead to cauliflower ear. Knocking a person unconscious or even causing a concussion may cause permanent brain damage. There is no clear division between the force required to knock a person out and the force likely to kill a person. Also, contact sports, especially combat sports, are directly related to a brain disease called chronic traumatic encephalopathy, abbreviated CTE. This disease begins to develop during the life of the athlete, and continues to develop even after sports activity has ceased. In addition, repetitive and subconcussive blows to the head, and not just concussions, cause CTE. Because the disease is detected post-mortem, and MMA are relatively young, there are still few cases of CTE recognized in MMA, although there are more and more suspected and confirmed cases of CTE. In preliminary results reported in April 2012 as part of an ongoing study of a 109 professional boxers and MMA fighters being conducted by Charles Bernick and his colleagues at Cleveland Clinic's Lou Ruvo Center for Brain Health, fighters with more than six years of ring experience were observed to have reductions in size in their hippocampus and thalamus, while fighters with more than twelve years of ring experience were observed to have both reductions in size and symptoms such as memory loss (the hippocampus and thalamus deal with memory and alertness). Bernick speculates that the cumulative damage over time from lesser blows may eventually prove an even more important topic of study than that of infrequent concussions. In January 2021, veteran UFC fighter Spencer Fisher confirmed to MMA Fighting that he suffered from all the symptoms of CTE: "I'm just beat up, and it's just gotten worse, like all my injuries are catching up with me now, aside from the brain thing, which is the biggest one, because it adds, it adds the depression, and putting things, thoughts together and staying on track". Later, Dana White ruled on this: "He's not the first and he's definitely not going to be the last. This is a contact sport and anybody who's ever done this younger, myself included, is dealing with brain issues. It's part of the gig". In late 2021, Rose Gracie, daughter of UFC founder Rorion Gracie, in an interview about CTE on the MMA Fighting podcast, calls lack of CTE awareness in MMA 'criminal negligence'. There have been seven known deaths in MMA to date.[failed verification] There were no documented cases of deaths after a sanctioned MMA event prior to 2007. Since 2007, there have been six fatalities in mixed martial arts matches. The first was the death of Sam Vasquez on November 30, 2007. Vasquez collapsed shortly after being knocked out by Vince Libardi in the third round of an October 20, 2007, fight at the Toyota Center in Houston, Texas. Vasquez had two separate surgeries to remove blood clots from his brain, and shortly after the second operation suffered a stroke and did not regain consciousness. The second death stemming from a sanctioned mixed martial arts contest occurred in South Carolina on June 28, 2010, when 30-year-old Michael Kirkham was knocked out and never regained consciousness. He was pronounced dead two days after the fight. The third death on August 11, 2012, involved 30 year old Tyrone Mims, who was making his amateur MMA debut at "Conflict MMA: Fight Night at the Point VI" in South Carolina, making his the second MMA-related death in the state. After being TKO'd in the second round of the fight he became unresponsive and was taken to Medical University Hospital, where he was pronounced dead one hour later. No evidence of brain trauma or concussion was found and the initial autopsy has proved inconclusive. Coroner Rae Wooten explained that his death may likely have been from an irregular heartbeat caused by over exertion; however whether or not his death was a direct result of his fight remains a mystery. On February 27, 2014, 29-year-old Booto Guylain was transported to Johannesburg General Hospital to be treated for swelling and bleeding on the brain after suffering a KO loss via elbow in the last round of his fight in South African promotion "Extreme Fighting Championship Africa". He was unable to make a recovery, and after one week in the hospital he was pronounced dead. On April 9, 2016, 28-year-old João Carvalho, died following a Total Extreme Fighting event at the National Stadium in Dublin (Ireland). The Portuguese fighter was beaten by technical knockout in a fight on 9 April 2016 against Charlie Ward, and fell ill twenty minutes after the fight. He was taken immediately to Beaumont hospital, where he underwent emergency brain surgery, but died two days later. On July 15, 2017, after a TKO loss resulting from unanswered punches in the second round of his fight, 37 year old Donshay White became unresponsive and collapsed in his locker room and was rushed to the KentuckyOne Health Sts. Mary & Elizabeth Hospital in Kentucky. He was soon pronounced dead and was revealed to be caused by hypertensive/atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. Another death occurred in the UK on 17 November 2019 when 26-year-old Saeideh Aletaha died in hospital after being knocked out in the third round of a contest at Central Hall in Southampton that was part of the Fast and Furious fight series. MMA in Australia is permitted in all states and territories of Australia by various combat sports authorities and organizations. There is debate about the use of the cage, which was banned in Victoria in 2007 and then relegalized in 2015. The cage was banned in Western Australia in 2013, but its use was again permitted in 2017. MMA is legal in Bahrain. Bahrain National MMA Federation (BNMMAF) has been set up under the patronage of Sheikh Khalid bin Hamad Al Khalifa and the jurisdiction of the Sports Minister Sheikh Nasser bin Hamad Al Khalifa. The development of MMA in the nation is convened through KHK MMA, which also owns Brave Combat Federation, which is the largest Mixed Martial Arts promotion in the Middle East. Bahrain will be hosting World MMA Amateurs Championship 2017 supported by International Mixed Martial Arts Federation. MMA is tolerated in Belgium but not supported. In May 2012 the Belgian MMA Federation (BMMAF) was accepted by the International Mixed Martial Arts Federation as its third member, after several years of carrying out many of the tasks of a national federation under the former name of the Belgian Shooto and MMA Federation. Active in developing MMA in Belgium from 2005, the group later redefined their activities to include MMA in order to be able to use a cage. Registered as a federation in Belgium in 2006, the former Belgian Shooto and MMA Federation organized more than 1500 MMA bouts (Amateur, B class and A class), and built a structure for the sport nationally that included insurance, rules and regulation, and experience levels for fighters and technical seminars. The BMMAF has continued its activities as part of the wider MMA community under IMMAF. January 17, 2013, saw the announcement that the Brazilian MMA Athletic Commission, or Comissao Atletica Brasileira de MMA (CABMMA), had joined the International MMA Federation. The CABMMA represents state federations across Brazil and is spearheaded by lawyers Giovanni Biscardi and Rafael Favettia, a former Executive Secretary of the Minister of Justice and Interim Minister of Justice. The CABMMA supervised its first event with "UFC on FX 7" on January 19, 2013, at Ibirapuera Gymnasium in São Paulo. The CABMMA first hit international sports headlines when it suspended fighter Rousimar Palhares for prolonging a submission on opponent Mike Pierce, despite him tapping several times, during UFC Fight Night 29 in Barueri, Brazil on October 9, 2013. The CABMMA was called to preside over another controversial situation involving a Brazilian competitor, when Vitor Belfort's use of Testosterone Replacement Therapy came to light over UFC on FX 8 (May 18, 2013) Appearing on professional basis around 2008–2009, MMA is a new sport in Bulgaria and growing rapidly. With a strong wrestling and boxing culture in the region, general interest in the sport is huge. However, it remains unregulated. The Bulgarian Federation for Mixed Martial Arts was elected as the national federation representing the Republic of Bulgaria under the International Mixed Martial Arts Federation in October 2014; and like all IMMAF members, is a non-profit, democratic organization. Established in November 2013 by 10 MMA clubs, the organization is headed by UFC competitor Stanislav Nedkov. The federation's registration to the Ministry of Justice was approved in June 2014 and its application for formal recognition by the Ministry of Sport is in its advanced stages. In January 2013, the Cambodian Mixed Martial Arts Association was created under the Cambodian Martial Arts Federation. At this time there are no MMA events organized with the CMMAA approval. Television channel MYTV holds its KWC promotion under the sanctioning of the Cambodian Boxing Federation, responsible for sanctioning all boxing and Kun Khmer events in the country, in direct contrast to the situation in neighbouring Thailand. For many years, professional MMA competitions were illegal in Canada. Section 83(2) of the Canadian Criminal Code deemed that only boxing matches where only fists are used are considered legal. However most provinces regulated it by a provincial athletic commission (skirting S. 83(2) by classifying MMA as "mixed boxing"), such as the provinces of Manitoba, Ontario, Nova Scotia, Quebec, and Northwest Territories. The legality of MMA in the provinces of Alberta, British Columbia, and New Brunswick varies depending on the municipality. Professional MMA competitions remain illegal in the Canadian provinces of Newfoundland and Labrador, Prince Edward Island, Saskatchewan, Yukon, and Nunavut because it is not regulated by an athletic commission. Canada formally decriminalized mixed martial arts with a vote on Bill S-209 on June 5, 2013. The bill formally gives provinces the power to create athletic commissions to regulate and sanction professional mixed martial arts bouts. Bill S-209 does not in and of itself make MMA legal across Canada; it allows provinces to make it legal on a province by province basis. The first professional mixed martial arts promotion was Art of War Fighting Championship which was founded by Andy Pi, a Chinese American BJJ practitioner. After defeating Xu Xiaodong in a televised MMA match he noticed the lack of formal rules, medical care or oversight which could have led to MMA and BJJ being banned in China so he came up with an idea to create a regulated professional MMA promotion. When setting up the promotion, Pi sought out grapplers to compete in it. He met Zhao Xuejun, a renowned Sanda coach who convinced Pi that he did not need to seek out pure grapplers and that Sanda fighters were just as capable of competing in MMA. Art of War I was held at the Beijing Sports University on November 6, 2005, making it the first professional MMA event to be held in China. In 2011, the Ranik Ultimate Fighting Federation (RUFF) hosted the first MMA event in Shanghai sanctioned by China's governing body for combat sports, the Wushu Sports Management Center of the General Administration of Sport in China. RUFF formally crowned the first Chinese national MMA champions in 2013 with each champion receiving 1,000,000 RMB in prize money. Other MMA promotions in China include the 'Real Fight Championship', which has produced three events in Henan and Beijing. In Denmark, Mixed Martial Arts may be practiced but is not an official or legally regulated sport. On November 11, 2012, the voluntary Danish Mixed Martial Arts Federation held its first official general assembly in Odense, Denmark. There the DMMAF was officially founded and a board was elected headed up by President Claus Larsen. The Federation was publicly launched on Friday November 24, inviting Danish MMA organizations, gyms and academies to sign up as members. The DMMAF is working towards recognition under the Danish Sports Federation, Dansk Idræts Forbund. On November 25 the DMMAF's application to the International Mixed Martial Arts Federation was approved. There remains political opposition to MMA in France and full contact MMA competition was banned until 2020. All bouts on French soil recorded as Mixed Martial Arts were in fact held under Pancrase rules and other variants (pankration, pempo, pankido). These bouts involved no striking on the ground as it was illegal in the country. The Commission nationale de Mixed Martial Arts (CNMMA) was founded as a non-profit organization for the development of MMA in 2009. The CNMMA had worked over four years to put an educational structure in place, including a technical system for the safe progression from grass-roots level, all the way up to the top professional level. Comprising 11 regional leagues working under regional technical advisers and teams, the CNMMA joined the International Mixed Martial Arts Federation (IMMAF) in March 2013 as the Commission française de Mixed Martial Arts (CFMMA). In 2012, CFMMA president Bertrand Amoussou ascended to the position of President of the International Mixed Martial Arts Federation.[citation needed] On June 24, 2019, Roxana Maracineanu, France's minister of sport announced the legalization of mixed martial arts as of January 1, 2020. On October 8, 2020, the country's first officially regulated MMA event, dubbed the Mixed Martial Arts Grand Prix, went ahead in Vitry-sur-Seine. The Indian Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports has not recognized Mixed Martial Arts as a sport in India. There exist multiple bodies of association and federations which offer services to organize Mixed martial Arts events across India. Among them are MMAFI-Mixed Martial Arts Federation,India, All India Mixed Martial Arts Association (AIMMAA) and MMA India – National Sports Federation. Mixed Martial Arts events have been organized in India by Super Fight League, Brave Combat Federation, and Kumite 1 League. There is another emerging national MMA promotion in India called the 'Soul of Warriors MMA Fight Night'. The Irish Martial Arts Commission, which is recognized by the Irish Sports Council, does not include MMA among its recognized martial arts. The Department of Transport, Tourism and Sport does not recognise MMA as a sport.[failed verification] UFC Fight Night 46, featuring Conor McGregor, was held in Dublin in 2014. Mixed Martial Arts Federation Ireland (MMAFI), intended as a federation for amateur MMA clubs, gained observer status at IMMAF in June 2012. MMAFI had a meeting in March 2013 with the Northern Ireland sports minister, Carál Ní Chuilín about the prospect of getting recognition from Sport Northern Ireland. MMA competition has been legal in Japan since at least the mid-1980s, when Pancrase fights began to be held. There are several MMA-related organizations, including RIZIN FF, DEEP, Pancrase, Shooto, Fighting Nexus, Deep, Grachan and ZST. In July 2013 the Malaysia Mixed Martial Arts Association (MASMMAA) was formally announced as the official national governing body for MMA in Malaysia, ahead of its formation in December 2013. MASMMAA is registered under the Malaysian Sports Development Act 1997 and recognized by the Commissioner of Sports, under the auspices of the office of the Youth & Sports Ministry. The federation comprises representatives of ten states out of fourteen in Malaysia. MASMMAA became affiliated to the International Mixed Martial Arts Federation in April 2014. The first amateur MMA match was held in Kathmandu, Nepal, on July 8, 2022. Nepal's own MMA promotion Nepal Warriors Championship, was founded in 2023. On June 16, 2023, they staged the first-ever professional fight. In Norway, professional MMA is illegal. Since 1981, all sports involving knockouts as a method of victory were banned but it was lifted for professional boxing in late 2014. Norwegian MMA fighters must therefore travel abroad to compete. The Norwegian MMA Federation (NMMAF) was elected as a full member of the International MMA Federation (IMMAF) on April 22, 2012, representing 49 member gyms across Norway. In 2012 the "Merkekamper" concept was introduced by the NMMAF, with government sanctioning, which enables member MMA gyms to hold events with sparring matches, but governed by strict rules concerning how hard a fighter is permitted to strike. On April 5, 2019, MMA was recognized by and welcomed into the Norwegian Martial Arts Federation (Norwegian Kampsportforbundet), a federation of the Norwegian Olympic and Paralympic Committee and Confederation of Sports (NIF) with the goal of growing the amateur sport. In Pakistan, Mixed Martial Arts Pakistan organizes MMA events. The organization was founded in 2007 by veteran Pakistani MMA fighter Bashir Ahmad for promotion of MMA in Pakistan. The FMMAP is recognized by the Portuguese government as a non-profit sports federation and oversees Amateur MMA competition and coaching nationally. Based in Vila do Conde, the Federação de Mixed Martial Arts de Portugal (FMMAP) was founded as a collaborative effort between six existing non-profit organizations in 2012, as Portugal's first dedicated MMA Federation. This is in line with government requirements for all sport federations in Portugal which stipulates that they consist of at least three associated, non-profit groups. The composite FMMAP organisations are all involved in the coaching and promotion of MMA with a shared goal for the amateur sport, but come from various martial arts that include karate, kickboxing, Muay Thai, pankration athlima, mixed martial arts, Jeet Kune Do, freestyle martial arts, Brazilian jiu-jitsu and wrestling. Affiliated groups at launch were AAMU – Associação Artes Marciais, Associação de Artes Marciais e Desportos de Combate (Açores), Associação Areagon (Chaves City), Associação Mirandelense de Artes Orientais (Mirandela City), Associação Portuguesa de Ciências de Combate/JKD Unlimited Portugal (Lisbon City), KMD MMA system (Porto City), Barcelos Gym (Barcelos City). The FMMAP is affiliated to the International Mixed Martial Arts Federation (IMMAF). The Romanian Mixed Martial Arts Federation (RMMAF) was established in 2012 as a legal non-profit federation under the Ministry of Youth and Sport in Romania. The Federation was formed by the board of MMA organization AGON and backed by a broad representation of the Romanian MMA community, including around twenty MMA clubs and non-profit MMA organizations around the country. Based in Bucharest, Romania AGON club was founded in its present legal form in June 2012, following a long period of time of acting under different other organisations, with Gheorghe Stanciu elected as its president. The RMMAF is affiliated to the International Mixed Martial Arts Federation (IMMAF). In September 2012, MMA was given 'National Sport' status in Russia, and on the same day fighter and M-1 Global promoter Fedor Emelianenko was appointed to the role of Russian MMA Union president. The MMA program at Singapore is licensed by the Cantonment Police Division.[citation needed] MMA competition is legal and under the purview of the Swedish Mixed Martial Arts Federation (SMMAF), which was formed in 2007 and began overseeing MMA events and governing the sport as a whole in 2008. In 2009 the SMMAF was accepted into the Association of Swedish Budo and Martial Arts Federation, thus granting MMA "national sport" status and making its approved clubs eligible for partial government subsidization. On April 30, 2011, the SMMAF sanctioned the first event under its purview to utilize the Unified Rules of Mixed Martial Arts. The Swedish Mixed Martial Arts Federation governs the sport of MMA in Sweden as a member affiliated to the International Mixed Martial Arts Federation. The SMMAF hit the headlines when it withdrew Swedish headliner, Alexander Gustafsson, from competing at UFC on FUEL 9 in Sweden (April 6, 2013), due to a facial laceration. MMA competition is legal and under the purview of the Professional Mixed Martial Arts Council or PROMMA Africa,[citation needed] which was formed in 2010 with the main purpose to regulate MMA at larger MMA promotions such as EFC Worldwide (Formerly known as EFC Africa). PROMMA Africa began overseeing Rise of the Warrior MMA events in 2010. In 2012 the PROMMA Africa Council was accepted into the Mixed Martial Arts Association of South Africa (MASA) thus granting MMA "national sport" status.[citation needed] In addition to EFC Africa, there are other leagues such as Dragon Legends MMA. MMA is officially sanctioned by the government and sports authorities of Taiwan and numerous Taiwanese MMA fighters are currently training and competing at international level, with several in the UFC and other MMA organizations. Many major international MMA fights are held at stadiums in Taiwan every year. Additionally, many martial arts schools and gyms in Taiwan provide professional level MMA training. In 2012, the Sports Authority of Thailand banned competitions. It has been speculated that the Muay Thai industry played a factor in the Sports Authority of Thailand (SAT)'s final decision, as MMA could potentially take away business from Muay Thai. SAT Deputy Governor Sakol Wannapong has said "Organizing a MMA event here would hurt the image of Muay Thai, if you want to do this kind of business, you should do it in another country. Organizing MMA here could mislead the public into believing that Muay Thai is brutal." Jussi Saloranta, the owner of Thailand's only MMA promotion, DARE Fight Sports, revealed that his lawyers found that the ban was actually premature, and that from a legal standpoint, there is no law banning mixed martial arts in the country, suggesting that the SAT's ban was more of a scare tactic. DARE continue to showcase events, informing fans only at the last minute through texts on the day of the event, and presenting the videos on YouTube as The Most Dangerous Gameshow. Saloranta has also helped set up the MMA Association of Thailand, in the hopes of reaching a compromise with SAT and regulating mixed martial arts in Thailand. On September 12, 2013, DARE Fight Sports released a statement announcing SAT had removed the ban on MMA and would henceforth sanction the sport in Thailand. Dare Fight Sports is currently the only MMA organization in Thailand to be officially sanctioned and publicized by the tourism authority of Thailand, although there are new MMA organizations appearing around the country. In the United States, professional MMA is overseen by the Association of Boxing Commissions. According to the Associations of Boxing Commissions, professional MMA competitions are allowed in all states. Alaska has no boxing or athletic commission. Montana has a state athletic commission, although it does not regulate MMA. However, MMA is legal in both states. West Virginia became the 44th state to regulate mixed martial arts on March 24, 2011. On March 8, 2012, Wyoming became the 45th state to regulate MMA. On May 4, 2012, it was announced that Vermont had become the 46th state to regulate MMA. Legislation allowing MMA in Connecticut came into effect on October 1, 2013, making it the 47th state to regulate the sport. On March 22, 2016, the New York State Assembly voted to lift the State's 1997 ban on MMA and on April 14, 2016, Governor Cuomo signed the bill legalizing and regulating the sport into law. On February 20, 2020, deputy minister of Internal Affairs, Tran Anh Tuan signed the legalisation of the MMA sport in Vietnam. Martial arts portal Boxing (disambiguation) List of current mixed martial arts champions List of female mixed martial artists List of male mixed martial artists List of undefeated mixed martial artists List of mixed martial artists with the most sanctioned fights List of mixed martial arts attendance records Mixed martial arts competition for children U-Kei (martial arts) Prior to the widespread adoption of mixed martial arts, or MMA, as the name of the sport, multiple other names were used to refer to what is now known as "MMA". Early in the sport's history, it was typically referred to in the United States and Brazil as "No Holds Barred", or "NHB", (United States) and "Vale Tudo" (Brazil). Two of the earliest MMA promotion companies in Japan, Shooto and Pancrase, referred to the sport as "Shooting" (Shooto) and "Hybrid Wrestling" (Pancrase), respectively. The sport is also commonly referred to colloquially as "ultimate fighting", "shootfighting", and "cage fighting"; it was often referred to derisively in the United States as "human cockfighting". Bateman, Oliver Lee (July 6, 2018). "The Early Years of MMA Were a 'No-Holds-Barred Freakshow' That Couldn't Be More Different From Today". MEL Magazine. Retrieved December 15, 2021. Barbosa Rozendo Lima, Vitor; Levi Fraga, Nicolas; Nobre de Carvalho, Vitor; Bettine de Almeida, Marco Antonio (September 22, 2015). "Influência do Vale-Tudo nos atletas atuais de MMA". EFdeportes. Archived from the original on September 13, 2017. Retrieved January 7, 2021. "Shooto". jkd.gr. Retrieved January 18, 2022. Breen, Jordan (May 8, 2009). "A Blood Called Shooto". Sherdog.com. Retrieved May 13, 2009. "What's Pancrase?". Pancrase. Retrieved September 26, 2023. In addition to producing professional Pancrase competitors who are known as Pancraseism (captain/ Kiuma Kunioku); Pancrase Inagakigumi(captain / Katsuomi Inagaki); Pancrase GRABAKA (captain/ Sanae Kikuta); Pancrase Mission(captain / Minoru Suzuki); Pancrase Megaton(captain/ Keigo Takamori). Pancrase Organization has its own gyms in Japan which is called P's LAB with plans to establish additional Pancrase amateur gyms and also to spread Hybrid Wrestling around the world. Flinn, Jenny (March 9, 2016). "The rise and rise of ultimate fighting (and why boxing is now so passé)". The Conversation. Retrieved September 26, 2023. "What Is Shootfighting?". MMA Channel. August 31, 2020. Retrieved September 26, 2023. In fact, some might claim that shootfighting was the original form of Mixed Martial Arts. Haines, Matthew (October 13, 2015). "Cage fighting has become even more dangerous thanks to extreme dieting". The Conversation. Retrieved September 26, 2023. Grenne, Nick (August 26, 2018). "How John McCain Grew to Tolerate MMA, the Sport he Likened to "Human Cockfighting"". Slate. Retrieved September 26, 2023. "mixed martial arts | Britannica". www.britannica.com. August 21, 2023. Rosenberg, Howard (November 15, 1993). "'Ultimate' Fight Lives Up to Name". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on November 6, 2011. Retrieved June 22, 2016. Grant, T.P. "History of Jiu-Jitsu: Coming to America and the Birth of the UFC". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on October 11, 2012. Retrieved May 7, 2018. Sonmez, Can. "UFC 1: The Beginning". Mixed Martial Arts.com. Archived from the original on September 28, 2013. Retrieved September 26, 2013. Plotz, David (November 16, 1997). "Fight Clubbed". Slate. Archived from the original on December 31, 2006. Retrieved December 26, 2006. McFarland, Matt (May 6, 2008). "Ultimate Fighting wants to come to NY". WNYT.com. Archived from the original on May 9, 2008. Retrieved May 6, 2008. Trembow, Ivan (March 1, 2007). "UFC PPV Revenue Tops $200 Million in 2006". MMA Weekly. Archived from the original on May 22, 2007. Retrieved June 18, 2007. Brownell, Susan Elaine (1990). The olympic movement on its way into Chinese culture. University of California, Santa Barbara. pp. 29, 63. Archived from the original on May 13, 2018. Retrieved May 13, 2018. In both ancient China and Greece, the most popular sports were probably wrestling, boxing, and combinations thereof (Greek pankration, Chinese leitai). The same might be argued for ancient Egypt, India and Japan. [...] In both ancient China and Greece, the no-holds-barred combat sport (Greek pankration, Chinese leitai) was probably the most popular one. Gardiner, E. Norman, 'The Pankration' in Greek Athletic Sports and Festivals, London: MacMillan, 1910, p. 435 Green, Thomas A., 'Pankration' in Martial Arts of the World: An Encyclopedia of History and Innovation, California: ABC-CLIO, 2010, p. 237 Gardiner, E. Norman, 'The Pankration' in Greek Athletic Sports and Festivals, London: MacMillan, 1910, pp. 436–437 Green, Thomas A. Martial Arts of the World [2 volumes]: An Encyclopedia of History and Innovation. ABC-CLIO (2010). pp. 259–260. ISBN 978-1598842432. "Pitting catch wrestling against Brazilian jiu-jitsu". The Manila Times. March 8, 2014. Retrieved January 12, 2020. Nauright, John; Zipp, Sarah (2020). Routledge Handbook of Global Sport. Routledge. p. 179. ISBN 978-1-317-50047-6. Nauright, John; Zipp, Sarah (2020). Routledge Handbook of Global Sport. Routledge. p. 179. ISBN 978-1-317-50047-6. Graeme Kent (1968). A Pictorial History of Wrestling. Spring Books; 1 edition. Noble, Graham (March 2001). "An Introduction to E. W. Barton-Wright (1860–1951) and the Eclectic Art of Bartitsu". Journal of Manly Arts. Archived from the original on August 18, 2007. Retrieved June 14, 2007. "Journal of Combative Sport: Jujitsu versus Boxing". Journal of Combative Sport. Archived from the original on July 20, 2008. Retrieved May 7, 2008. "Fighting Spirit: An Introductory History of Korean Boxing, 1926–1945". Journal of Combative Sport. Archived from the original on February 25, 2009. Retrieved February 16, 2009. "MMA Fan's Guide to Grappling: Sambo". Bloody Elbow. August 8, 2013. Archived from the original on February 1, 2014. Retrieved February 7, 2014. Adams, Andy (March 22, 2013). "Classic Black Belt Article From 1967: Russia Prepares to Export Sambo (Part 2)". Blackbeltmag.com. Archived from the original on January 12, 2014. Retrieved February 7, 2014. Willoughby, David P. (1970). The Super Athletes. A.S. Barnes & Co., Inc. pp. 376–380. ISBN 0-498-06651-7. "Judo vs. Boxing: "Judo" Gene LeBell Defeats Boxer Milo Savage in First MMA Fight". blackbeltmag.com.[permanent dead link] Sylvie von Duuglas-Ittu (December 28, 2015). "Origins of Japanese Kickboxing – The Karate vs Muay Thai Fight That Started It All". 8 Limbs. Archived from the original on April 12, 2016. Retrieved March 29, 2016. December 28, 2015 Chris Crudelli (2008). The Way of the Warrior. Dorling Kindersley Ltd. pp. 318–319. ISBN 978-14-0533-750-2. (Regarding Mixed Martial Arts (MMA)) With [Bruce Lee's] philosophy of "absorbing what is useful and disgarding what is not", Bruce Lee's influence can be seen in the development of MMA. Jake Shannon (2011). Say Uncle!: Catch-As-Catch Can Wrestling and the Roots of Ultimate Fighting, Pro Wrestling & Modern Grappling. ECW Press. p. 12. ISBN 978-1-55022-961-5. Wickert, Marc. 2004. Dana White and the future of UFC. kucklepit.com. See Wikiquotes for the text. Peterson, D.: Wong Shun Leung: The Legend behind the Legend; Recalling the life of Bruce Lee's teacher Archived March 3, 2016, at the Wayback Machine Retrieved on June 25, 2009. Lam, G., & LeBlanc, G. E.: The Wing Chun double knife training: Baat Jaam Do Archived February 17, 2012, at the Wayback Machine Retrieved on July 7, 2009. Longley, K.: Dave Lacey 'Lai Dai Wai': Buck Sing Choy Lay Fut's unrepentant 'Black Panther' Archived March 4, 2016, at the Wayback Machine (originally published in Impact International Martial Arts Magazine). Retrieved July 7, 2009. Bull, Andy (November 11, 2009). "The forgotten story of ... Muhammad Ali v Antonio Inoki". The Guardian. Archived from the original on December 26, 2015. Retrieved June 8, 2014. Gross, Josh (2016). Ali vs. Inoki: The Forgotten Fight That Inspired Mixed Martial Arts and Launched Sports Entertainment. BenBella Books. ISBN 978-1-942952-19-0. "What role did boxer Muhammad Ali play in early MMA? Let 'Ali vs. Inoki' author Josh Gross explain". MMAjunkie. June 13, 2016. Archived from the original on September 16, 2016. Retrieved September 4, 2016. Grant, T. P. (May 2, 2013). "MMA Origins: Fighting For Pride". BloodyElbow. Archived from the original on March 24, 2016. Retrieved September 4, 2016. Kelley, Steve. Karate's Prestige Takes a Nosedive (June 22, 1976). Press Scimitar Sports Black Belt Apr 1999 (Rick Roufus interview – mentions fight). April 1999. Archived from the original on May 13, 2016. Retrieved June 6, 2011. "MMA Origins: Vale Tudo and The Original MMA Rivalry". Bloody Elbow. January 1, 2012. Archived from the original on August 22, 2014. Retrieved June 8, 2014. Robles, Pablo; Wong, Dennis; Scott, Mathew (May 21, 2019). "How Bruce Lee and street fighting in Hong Kong helped create MMA". South China Morning Post. Retrieved July 6, 2021. Nash, John S. (May 23, 2012) The Martial Chronicles: Before Fighting Was Ultimate It Was Super Archived September 3, 2014, at the Wayback Machine, SB Nation (bloodyelbow.com) Retrieved August 31, 2014 Werner, Sam (June 24, 2011) MMA roots were planted in New Kensington Archived January 29, 2015, at the Wayback Machine, Pittsburgh Post-Gazette Retrieved September 1, 2014 "MMA History, myths, facts, rumorsPittsburgh MMA". Archived from the original on September 3, 2014. Retrieved August 31, 2014. Sánchez Garcia, R.; D. Malcolm (2010). "Decivilizing, civilizing or informalizing? The international development of mixed martial arts". International Review for the Sociology of Sport. 45 (1): 39–58. doi:10.1177/1012690209352392. S2CID 145356954. Snowden, Jonathan (November 12, 2018). "UFC 1, 25 Years Later: The Story Behind the Event That Started an Industry". Bleacher Report. Retrieved November 5, 2020. "Fight Finder – UFC 1 The Beginning". Sherdog.com. Archived from the original on April 20, 2008. Retrieved May 5, 2008. Peligro, Kid (2003). The Gracie Way: An Illustrated History of the World's Greatest Martial Arts Family. Invisible Cities Press. pp. 79–84. ISBN 1-931229-28-7. "What is MMA (Mixed Martial Arts)?". Allout Fight Shop. Archived from the original on March 15, 2014. "What is Pride?". Pride. Archived from the original on February 2, 2007. Retrieved December 23, 2006. Sievert, Steve (December 29, 2006). "UFC 66 to make MMA history". Houston Chronicle. Archived from the original on January 14, 2009. Retrieved June 18, 2007. Doyle, Dave (April 4, 2000). "UFC scores TKO on its business rival". Fox Sports, MSN. Archived from the original on April 6, 2007. Retrieved March 27, 2007. "Source: UFC buys Pride for less than $70M". Associated Press, ESPN. March 27, 2007. Archived from the original on January 1, 2011. Retrieved June 15, 2007. "This is really going to change the face of MMA. Literally creating a sport that could be as big around the world as soccer. I liken it somewhat to when the NFC and AFC came together to create the NFL" —Lorenzo Fertitta, one of the UFC's majority owners "JRE MMA Show #26 with Big John McCarthy". Archived from the original on May 17, 2018 – via www.youtube.com. Umstead, R. Thomas (September 18, 1995). "Operators struggle again with UFC time overrun. (multiple-systems operators; Ultimate Fighting Championships)". Multichannel News. Archived from the original on October 11, 2011. Retrieved June 8, 2014. "Jeff Blatnick's funeral and how the term MMA came to be". MMA Fighting. October 27, 2012. Archived from the original on May 2, 2014. Retrieved June 8, 2014. Kirik Jenness (February 4, 2012). "Did LA reporter coin the term Mixed Martial Arts?". Mixed Martial Arts News. Archived from the original on October 17, 2014. Retrieved June 8, 2014. NO HOLDS BARRED:The complete history of Mixed Martial Arts in America by Clyde Gentry Eddie Goldman. "Extreme Fighting 4 Rules Meeting Goes on as Planned". Archived from the original on February 3, 1998. Retrieved June 8, 2014. "Chapter 74: Professional Shoot Fighting" (PDF). Legis.iowa.org. Archived (PDF) from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved June 12, 2015. Gross, Josh (February 22, 2005). "MMA Vote Takes Place Today in California". Sherdog.com. Archived from the original on April 20, 2011. Retrieved May 17, 2011. "Mixed Martial arts Unified Rules of Conduct". New Jersey State Athletic Control Board. September 5, 2002. Archived from the original on April 3, 2009. Retrieved June 18, 2006. "Summary Report Discussion and Review of Unified Rules of Mixed Martial Arts". ABCBoxing.com. Archived from the original on July 5, 2012. Retrieved May 17, 2011. "Army Embraces MMA for Inaugural Combatives Tournament". Sherdog.com. November 3, 2005. Archived from the original on June 7, 2011. Retrieved April 17, 2011. "Members of Parliament Vote to Give MMA Legal Framework in Canada!". TopMMANews.com. June 5, 2013. Archived from the original on June 9, 2013. Retrieved June 5, 2013. "MMA Promotions Index". Tapology.com. Archived from the original on May 2, 2015. Retrieved June 12, 2015. "UFC's Dana White Talks Competition". BloodyElbow.com. April 14, 2011. Archived from the original on April 17, 2011. Retrieved April 16, 2011. "Current MMA Rankings". Fightmatrix.com. March 25, 2015. Archived from the original on June 26, 2015. Retrieved June 12, 2015. "Out of Obscurity: FNG 71, 1RC 4 and Rizin World GP 2017". CombatPress.com. Archived from the original on May 27, 2018. Retrieved May 27, 2018. "New Feeder Leagues Jockey to Be the UFC's NCAA". Vice. October 11, 2016. Archived from the original on July 15, 2018. Retrieved June 1, 2018. "Rival's threat: 'we will swallow up UFC'". news.com.au. Archived from the original on June 3, 2018. Retrieved June 2, 2018. "Combat Press 2016 MMA Awards: Promotion of the Year – Absolute Championship Berkut". Combat Press. Archived from the original on May 27, 2018. Retrieved May 26, 2018. "Promo Score and Ranking". ScoreCardMMA.com. Archived from the original on May 27, 2018. Retrieved May 26, 2018. "MMA Gyms and Academies Directory". Tapology.com. Archived from the original on May 31, 2015. Retrieved June 12, 2015. "Gyms". MMATraining.com. Archived from the original on May 14, 2015. Retrieved June 12, 2015. Hutchinson, Michael (July 29, 2015) UFC Gyms fight camp rankings Archived October 4, 2015, at the Wayback Machine, SB Nation (BloodyElbow.com) retrieved September 22, 2015 "Teixeira MMA & Fitness". www.teixeirammaandfitness.com. UFC 40: Vendetta (Television production). Zuffa (November 22, 2002). Event occurs at 1:00 into Chuck Liddell vs. Renato Sobral. "The evolution of martial arts since 1993, since the UFC came around, martial arts have evolved more than they have in the last 700 years. We know exactly now what works in a real live situation with two warriors fighting. For a long time that was just speculation." —Joe Rogan Sloan, Mike (June 22, 2007). "No Win Situation is Must Win for Shamrock". Sherdog, ESPN. Archived from the original on June 26, 2007. Retrieved June 22, 2007. Rousseau, Robert. "A History and Style Guide of MMA". About.com. Archived from the original on July 25, 2011. Retrieved April 20, 2011. Breen, Jordan (March 11, 2009). "Art Jimmerson: Where Is He Now?". Sherdog.com. Archived from the original on November 9, 2011. Retrieved April 20, 2011. Martin, Todd (August 16, 2010). "Boxing vs. MMA? More Like Boxer vs. Reality". Sherdog.com. Archived from the original on November 9, 2011. Retrieved April 20, 2011. Hunt, Loretta (August 29, 2010). "White, Couture Soften Toney's Fall at UFC 118". Sherdog.com. Archived from the original on September 26, 2011. Retrieved April 20, 2011. Rossen, Jake (August 31, 2010). "Respecting James Toney". Sherdog.com. Archived from the original on November 9, 2011. Retrieved April 20, 2011. Strickland, Jonathan (May 2007). "UFC History". HowStuffWorks.com. Archived from the original on July 12, 2011. Retrieved May 18, 2011. Tim Marchman (February 10, 2011). Silva or Fedor? Who you prefer says lots about why you watch, Sports Illustrated, Archived May 17, 2014, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved May 17, 2014 Fraser Coffeen (December 31, 2013). Anderson Silva vs Fedor Emelianenko: Debating MMA's Greatest of All Time, Bloody Elbow, Archived January 27, 2014, at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved May 17, 2014 Jack Slack (January 3, 2014). Fedor Emelianenko vs. Anderson Silva: Comparing and Contrasting 2 Legends, Bleacher report, Archived May 18, 2014, at the Wayback Machine, Retrieved May 17, 2014 Fraser Coffeen (January 2, 2014). BE's Baddest MMA Greatest of All Time Tournament Winner: Fedor Emelianenko, Bloody Elbow, Archived January 5, 2014, at the Wayback Machine, Retrieved May 17, 2014 Tim Burke (September 4, 2012). Fedor Emelianenko Voted The Greatest Fighter Of All Time By Brazilian Fans, Bloody Elbow, Archived May 17, 2014, at the Wayback Machine, Retrieved May 17, 2014 "MMA's worldwide leader in UFC news, gear and events". Mixedmartialarts.com. Archived from the original on April 13, 2014. Retrieved June 8, 2014. Krauss, Erich (2004). Warriors of the Ultimate Fighting Championship. US: Citadel Press Inc. ISBN 0-8065-2657-2. "PRIDE Rules". PRIDE FC Official Website. Archived from the original on July 9, 2014. Retrieved June 8, 2014. "Rules". ONE Official Website. Archived from the original on March 7, 2015. Retrieved June 29, 2014. "ONE Championship bans use of soccer kick in fights". Rappler. August 13, 2016. Retrieved April 10, 2021. "The Current Best Pound-for-Pound MMA Fighters". Tapology MMA Rankings. Archived from the original on June 18, 2014. Retrieved June 8, 2014. Jeff Wagenheim. "Jon Jones's suspension means Ronda Rousey is No. 1 in pound for pound rankings – MMA". Sports Illustrated. SI.com. Archived from the original on July 12, 2017. Retrieved December 10, 2017. "Fighter Rankings For June 1, 2014". MMARising.com. June 1, 2014. Archived from the original on May 30, 2014. Retrieved June 8, 2014. McKinley Noble. "Bellator". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on December 22, 2014. Retrieved October 20, 2014. "The attitude of erasure – An op-ed on WMMA rankings by Fallon Fox". Bloody Elbow. October 16, 2014. Archived from the original on October 21, 2014. Retrieved October 20, 2014. "MMAWeekly World Top 10 MMA Rankings". MMAWeekly.com. October 5, 2010. Archived from the original on July 1, 2014. Retrieved June 8, 2014. "MMA Rankings". FIGHT! Magazine. Archived from the original on October 21, 2013. Retrieved June 8, 2014. "GroundandPound . Kampfsportnews . MMA, Thaiboxen, Kickboxen, Boxen, Grappling". groundandpound.de. Archived from the original on January 18, 2010. "MMA Viking's Official Nordic Rankings – March Update". Nordic MMA Everyday at MMA Viking. March 10, 2015. Archived from the original on April 15, 2015. Retrieved April 12, 2015. "What Gear Do I Need for MMA". Habrok. Archived from the original on January 21, 2021. Retrieved January 23, 2021. "Unified Rules and Other MMA Regulations". Archived from the original on April 16, 2016. Retrieved July 8, 2014. "UFC® Martial Arts Styles – Fighters Train in Multiple Disciplines". ufc.com. Archived from the original on March 3, 2015. Retrieved March 3, 2015. Gree, Andrew (December 20, 2005). "Kids in MMA". Innovative Martial arts. Archived from the original on July 9, 2007. Retrieved December 13, 2006. Gutierrez, Luis. "JKD and Children". One Dragon Martial arts. Archived from the original on January 2, 2007. Retrieved December 13, 2006. "UFC 10: Birth of ground 'n' pound is also well known for his ground and pound, as is Fedor Emelianenko". Yahoo. April 12, 2009. Archived from the original on August 5, 2011. Retrieved January 19, 2010. Jonathan Snowden; Kendall Shields (2010). The MMA Encyclopedia. ECW Press. p. 961. ISBN 978-1-55490-844-8. Archived from the original on January 5, 2016. Retrieved November 17, 2015. Rondina, Steven. "Olympians in MMA: Top 10 Fighters of Today Who Competed in the Olympic Games". Bleacher Report. Retrieved February 14, 2022. "Bloody Canvas is under construction". Archived from the original on April 9, 2022. Retrieved February 14, 2022. "Striking Styles and Statistics, Part 1: Volume". Bloody Elbow. September 30, 2012. Archived from the original on July 27, 2014. Retrieved August 12, 2014. "FightMetric LLC: The World's First Comprehensive MMA Statistics Provider". Fightmetric.com. Archived from the original on August 19, 2014. Retrieved August 12, 2014. "Recipe For Success: Becoming well rounded in mixed martial arts (Part Four)". MMAmania.com. December 2010. Archived from the original on July 28, 2014. Retrieved August 12, 2014. "Andyconda Luta Livre – the art of grappling and MMA". www.lutalivre.net. Archived from the original on January 23, 2019. Retrieved November 26, 2019. "The Biggest Rivalry in Martial Arts History: BJJ vs Luta Livre". BJJ Heroes. Retrieved November 26, 2019. Winston, Dallas (May 26, 2012). "Marcelo Brigadeiro On The Resurgence Of Luta Livre Fighters In MMA". Bloody Elbow. Retrieved November 28, 2019. "Judo "The Gentle Way": Why Judo Is so Underrated in MMA Today". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on January 19, 2015. Retrieved January 19, 2015. "The Gentle Way: Strikeforce Champion Ronda Rousey and the Birth of a Judo Star". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on January 19, 2015. Retrieved January 19, 2015. "The Gentle Way Part II: Olympians Ronda Rousey and Rick Hawn Adapt to MMA". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on March 5, 2016. Retrieved January 19, 2015. "entrevista a paulo filho" [Interview with Paulo Filho] (in Portuguese). youtube.com. Archived from the original on July 2, 2016. Retrieved November 26, 2016. Grant, T. P. (February 6, 2014). "BE Open Mat: Sambo Fighter Success". Bloody Elbow. Archived from the original on January 21, 2019. Retrieved January 21, 2019. "Thompson champions karate in MMA, seeks UFC welterweight title". November 10, 2016. Archived from the original on March 4, 2017. Retrieved July 24, 2017. "Technique Talk: Stephen Thompson Retrofits Karate for MMA". MMA Fighting. February 18, 2012. Archived from the original on May 2, 2014. Retrieved June 8, 2014. Schneiderman, R. M. (May 23, 2009). "Contender Shores Up Karate's Reputation Among U.F.C. Fans". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 7, 2013. Retrieved January 30, 2010. "Lyoto Machida and the Revenge of Karate". Sherdog. Archived from the original on February 27, 2010. Retrieved February 13, 2010. "Biography and Profile of Chuck Liddell". Martialarts.about.com. Archived from the original on November 19, 2012. Retrieved November 25, 2012. Jack Slack (February 14, 2014). "Lyoto Machida: Old-School Karate". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on March 14, 2014. Retrieved June 8, 2014. Wickert, Marc. "Montreal's MMA Warrior". Archived from the original on June 13, 2007. Retrieved July 6, 2007. "Sanda: When Kung Fu created a solution to its problems - then threw it away". Dynasty Clothing. Retrieved July 28, 2022. "Welcome to KungFuMagazine". www.kungfumagazine.com. Retrieved July 28, 2022. Payne, Johny (January 24, 2017). "5 Martial Arts that are underutilised in MMA". www.sportskeeda.com. Retrieved July 28, 2022. Beacham, Greg (September 29, 2010). "Zhang hoping to lead Chinese wave into MMA". USA Today. Archived from the original on October 19, 2010. Retrieved November 25, 2010. "UFC potpisao nevjerojatno atraktivnog dagestanskog kung fu nokautera (VIDEO)". Fight Site (in Croatian). Archived from the original on February 15, 2019. Retrieved February 15, 2019. Snowden, Jonathan. "Learn the Name: Zabit Magomedsharipov Has the Tools to Be a UFC Star". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on February 15, 2019. Retrieved February 15, 2019. "Korea: Korean Martial Arts". www.koreaorbit.com. "Judo Chop: John Makdessi Brings Taekwondo Kicks to the UFC". April 18, 2011. "Taekwondo in MMA ! Australia magazine". Insidemma.com.au. Archived from the original on April 11, 2013. Retrieved February 29, 2016. "5 Minutes With Anthony Pettis". FIGHT! Magazine. Archived from the original on December 13, 2014. Retrieved December 11, 2014. "Taekwondo Salto open 2010-anderson silva final -87kg(Professor Agnaldo Martins)". YouTube. Archived from the original on January 10, 2015. Retrieved December 11, 2014. Anderson Silva; Erich Krauss; Glen Cordoza (2008). The Mixed Martial Arts Instruction Manual: Striking. Victory Belt Publishing. ISBN 978-0-9815044-1-4. Archived from the original on January 5, 2016. Retrieved November 17, 2015. "Realer Sports w/ Rosenberg: UFC Champ Anthony Pettis". YouTube. Archived from the original on December 7, 2014. Retrieved December 11, 2014. UFC 160 Judo Chop: The Best and Worst of Junior Dos Santos Archived July 15, 2013, at the Wayback Machine "...Cigano's sprawl and brawl is a true throwback to the early days of MMA, when men like Chuck Liddell, Wanderlei Silva, Rampage Jackson, and Mirko Cro Cop...". Bloodyelbow.com. Retrieved July 16, 2013. Ruebusch, Connor (March 11, 2015). "UFC 185 Judo Chop – Joanna Jedrzejczyk: Payback and Fighting Dirty". SB Nation (BloodyElbow.com). Archived from the original on August 12, 2016. Retrieved July 12, 2016. Andrew Richardson (May 24, 2013). "UFC 160 complete fighter breakdown, Cain Velasquez edition". MMAmania.com. Archived from the original on October 5, 2013. Retrieved July 19, 2013. OBI, NEDU (December 12, 2011). UFC 140 Results: Tito Ortiz and the 5 Best Ground-and-Pound Artists Eve Archived May 17, 2014, at the Wayback Machine "...'The Emperor', fallen though he might be of late, takes the No. 1 spot as the greatest ground-and-pound artist in MMA history...". bleacher Report. Retrieved June 19, 2013. Slack, Jack (June 4, 2012). Analyzing Fedor: Revolutionizing Ground And Pound Archived January 22, 2014, at the Wayback Machine "...What Fedor will always be remembered for by fans who saw him compete in his prime, however, was his revolutionizing of ground and pound...". bloodyelbow.com. Retrieved June 19, 2013. Correspondent (November 22, 2008). "The Ultimate Takedown Championship? Ways to End Lay and Pray". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on October 23, 2013. Retrieved August 12, 2014. Featured Columnist (November 2, 2010). "MMA: The Falsities of Lay and Pray". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on October 23, 2013. Retrieved August 12, 2014. Analyst (November 8, 2009). ""How I Mastered the Art of Lay-and-Pray" by Jake Shields". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on October 23, 2013. Retrieved August 12, 2014. "Judges need to punish lay-and-pray tactics". ESPN.co.uk. September 7, 2010. Archived from the original on August 26, 2014. Retrieved August 12, 2014. "UFC and Jon Fitch: 5 Reasons Why the Jon Fitch Issue Is the Most Toxic in MMA". Bleacher Report. July 22, 2011. Archived from the original on October 23, 2013. Retrieved August 12, 2014. "Rashad Evans Follows Georges St Pierre Down the Boring Road to Victory". Bloody Elbow. June 2010. Archived from the original on August 22, 2014. Retrieved August 12, 2014. I Don't Really Care Being Called Lay & Pray – Ben Askren on YouTube TAYLOR, RYAN (February 29, 2024). "Must-Know MMA Basics for Beginners". AQF Sports Official Blog. Retrieved March 20, 2024. "UFC Fighting Styles". Zewkey.com. Archived from the original on May 29, 2013. Retrieved August 12, 2014. "UFC Dream Match: Jacare Souza vs. Demian Maia". May 23, 2016. Archived from the original on November 7, 2017. Retrieved November 3, 2017. Marrocco, Steven (February 22, 2013). UFC 157 preview: How can Liz Carmouche beat heavy favorite Ronda Rousey? Archived July 6, 2013, at the Wayback Machine "...While Rousey is generally a master at initiating throws from the clinch to set up armbars...". MMAjunkie.com. Retrieved July 16, 2013. Slack, Jack (March 29, 2013). Best of the Best: Anderson Silva's Muay Thai Clinch Work Archived April 2, 2013, at the Wayback Machine "...This is truly the difference between fighters who flail to grab a hold of their opponents head and try to knee, and someone like Silva who will set up his grips scientifically...". Bleacher Report. Retrieved July 16, 2013. Sllack, Jack (January 4, 2013). Randy Couture Judo Chop: Boxing into the Clinch Archived January 22, 2014, at the Wayback Machine "...The first major exponent of Greco-Roman wrestling in MMA, Randy Couture remains one of the few fighters to make full use of opportunities to clinch and the damage which can be done to the opponent from there...". bloodyelbow.com. Retrieved July 16, 2013. "Mixed Martial Arts Council UFC Rules update 6/99". Fcfighter.com. Archived from the original on March 28, 2014. Retrieved August 12, 2014. "Khabib Nurmagomedov vs. Pat Healy set for UFC 165 in Toronto". MMAmania.com. July 21, 2013. Archived from the original on October 15, 2013. Retrieved June 8, 2014. Fowlkes, Ben (August 17, 2013). "UFC Fight Night: Sonnen submits Rua in first round". USA Today. Archived from the original on July 11, 2017. Retrieved September 5, 2017. Sherdog.com (October 8, 2008). "Valkyrie Takes Flight Nov. 8". Sherdog.com. Archived from the original on December 8, 2008. Retrieved September 12, 2009. "Bleacher Report". Bleacher Report. January 14, 2010. Archived from the original on October 27, 2012. Retrieved November 25, 2012. Fowlkes, Ben (March 15, 2011). "Zuffa-Strikeforce Deal Could Mean Uncertain Future for Women's MMA". MMA Fighting. Archived from the original on June 6, 2012. Retrieved November 25, 2012. "canada.com – Blogs". Communities.canada.com. November 20, 2012. Archived from the original on July 9, 2012. Retrieved November 25, 2012. "Is This the End of Women's MMA?". Bleacher Report. August 16, 2009. Archived from the original on October 11, 2012. Retrieved November 25, 2012. "Power Rankings: MMA, UFC's 10 biggest draw cards from Conor McGregor to Ronda Rousey based on star power". www.foxsports.com.au. December 20, 2015. Archived from the original on May 15, 2018. Retrieved May 15, 2018. Sean Gregory, Should A Former Man Be Able To Fight Women? Archived September 24, 2014, at the Wayback Machine, Time magazine, May 24, 2013. Brynn Tannehill, Fallon Fox and the Legacy of Satchel Paige Archived January 4, 2015, at the Wayback Machine, Huffington Post, December 16, 2014. "worldmmacouncil.org". Archived from the original on April 11, 2019. Retrieved June 12, 2015. "Rules | IMMAF – International Mixed Martial Arts Federation". Immaf.org. Archived from the original on July 7, 2014. Retrieved August 12, 2014. "MMA's rival governing bodies amalgamate, with GAISF in sight". www.sportcal.com. Archived from the original on May 13, 2018. Retrieved May 13, 2018. "IMMAF | The tale of IMMAF & WMMAA: How two global MMA federations merged to create a super organisation". IMMAF. August 5, 2020. Retrieved November 22, 2023. "Ошибка: обслуживание сайта было приостановлено". Wmmaa.org. Archived from the original on September 10, 2014. Retrieved August 12, 2014. Export Strategy Dublin Ireland (May 23, 2013). "Vadim Finkelstein on UFC in Sweden, Dana White, M-1 Challenge 38 & Emelianenko brothers". Combatbear.com. Archived from the original on August 26, 2014. Retrieved August 12, 2014. "Грязная политика". Mixfight.ru. Archived from the original on July 21, 2014. Retrieved August 12, 2014. "M-1 Global намерена организовать поединок Емельяненко – Веласкес в Москве – Чемпионат". Championat.com. Archived from the original on September 1, 2014. Retrieved August 12, 2014. "Press-release: 2013 World MMA Championship results and video". Archived from the original on May 2, 2014. Retrieved December 16, 2013. "Members – World Mixed Martial Arts Association". World Mixed Martial Arts Association. Archived from the original on October 15, 2013. Retrieved December 16, 2013. "International MMA Federation founded". Archived from the original on May 20, 2013. Retrieved April 12, 2010. "UFC Supports Creation of International MMA Federation". UFC. Archived from the original on February 5, 2015. Retrieved April 22, 2015. "UFC backs creation of International Mixed Martial Arts Federation (IMMAF)". MMAmania.com. April 12, 2012. Archived from the original on January 6, 2015. Retrieved April 22, 2015. "IMMAF Statutes 29 February 2012" (PDF). Immaf.org. Archived (PDF) from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved June 12, 2015. "Members". IMMAF – International Mixed Martial Arts Federation. Archived from the original on March 16, 2015. "IMMAF Launches World Championships". Reuters. May 24, 2013. Archived from the original on November 23, 2015. "IMMAF World Championships: Las Vegas 2014". Immaf.org. Archived from the original on July 30, 2015. Retrieved June 12, 2015. "First Amateur MMA World Championships To Be Held in the USA". MMA Platinum Gloves. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved January 22, 2014. Lystad, Reidar P.; Kobi Gregory; Juno Wilson (2014). "The epidemiology of injuries in mixed martial arts: A systematic review and meta-analysis". Orthopaedic Journal of Sports Medicine. 2 (1): 2325967113518492. doi:10.1177/2325967113518492. PMC 4555522. PMID 26535267. Frey, A.; D. Rousseau; B. Vesselle; Y. Hervouet des Forges; M. Egoumendes (2004). "Neuf saisons de surveillance médicale de compétitions de judo: une analyse nationale de la traumatologie du judo en compétition". J Traumatologie Sport. 21 (2): 100–109. doi:10.1016/s0762-915x(04)97390-1. Lystad, Reidar P.; Henry Pollar; Petra L. Graham (2009). "Epidemiology of injuries in competition taekwondo: a meta-analysis of observational studies". Journal of Science and Medicine in Sport. 12 (6): 614–621. doi:10.1016/j.jsams.2008.09.013. PMID 19054714. Estwanik, J.J.; M. Boitano; N. Ari (1984). "Amateur boxing injuries at the 1981 and 1982 USA/ABF national championships". Phys Sportsmed. 11 (10): 123–128. doi:10.1080/00913847.1984.11701972. Bledsoe, G.H.; G. Li; F. Levy (2005). "Injury risk in professional boxing". South Med J. 98 (10): 994–998. doi:10.1097/01.smj.0000182498.19288.e2. PMID 16295814. S2CID 21838053. Zazryn, T.R.; C.F. Finch; P. McCrory (2003). "A 16 year study of injuries to professional boxers in the state of Victoria, Australia". Br J Sports Med. 37 (4): 321–324. doi:10.1136/bjsm.37.4.321. PMC 1724673. PMID 12893717. Zazryn, T.R.; P. Cameron; P. McCrory (2006). "A prospective cohort study of injury in amateur and professional boxing". Br J Sports Med. 40 (8): 670–674. doi:10.1136/bjsm.2006.025924. PMC 2579447. PMID 16807306. Zazryn, T.R.; P. McCrory; P. Cameron (2006). "Injury rates and risk factors in competitive professional boxing". Clin J Sport Med. 19 (1): 20–25. doi:10.1097/JSM.0b013e31818f1582. PMID 19124979. S2CID 46530865. Roy, Soham; Smith, Lee P. (January 2010). "A novel technique for treating auricular hematomas in mixed martial artists (ultimate fighters)". American Journal of Otolaryngology. 31 (1): 21–24. doi:10.1016/j.amjoto.2008.09.005. ISSN 0196-0709. PMID 19944894. "Boxing: The health risks". Archived from the original on September 18, 2002. Retrieved May 6, 2010. Carter, Neil (June 2006). "Better and Safer Boxing: Ringside and Boardroom Medical Control of Boxing Careers in the Twentieth Century". Dora.dmu.ac.uk. hdl:2086/4437. Archived from the original on November 4, 2021. Retrieved September 22, 2014. Castellani, Rudy J. (June 24, 2015). "Chronic traumatic encephalopathy: A paradigm in search of evidence?". Laboratory Investigation. 95 (6): 576–584. doi:10.1038/labinvest.2015.54. PMID 25867769. Ridler, Charlotte (April 24, 2017). "New insights into the long-term effects of mild brain injury". Nature Reviews Neurology. 13 (4): 195. doi:10.1038/nrneurol.2017.32. PMID 28257129. Tagge, Chad A; Fisher, Andrew M; Minaeva, Olga V; Gaudreau-Balderrama, Amanda; Moncaster, Juliet A; Zhang, Xiao-Lei; Wojnarowicz, Mark W; Casey, Noel; Lu, Haiyan; Kokiko-Cochran, Olga N; Saman, Sudad; Ericsson, Maria; Onos, Kristen D; Veksler, Ronel; Senatorov, Vladimir V Jr; Kondo, Asami; Zhou, Xiao Z; Miry, Omid; Vose, Linnea R; Gopaul, Katisha R; Upreti, Chirag; Nowinski, Christopher J; Cantu, Robert C; Alvarez, Victor E; Hildebrandt, Audrey M; Franz, Erich S; Konrad, Janusz; Hamilton, James A; Hua, Ning; Tripodis, Yorghos; Anderson, Andrew T; Howell, Gareth R; Kaufer, Daniela; Hall, Garth F; Lu, Kun P; Ransohoff, Richard M; Cleveland, Robin O; Kowall, Neil W; Stein, Thor D; Lamb, Bruce T; Huber, Bertrand R; Moss, William C; Friedman, Alon; Stanton, Patric K; McKee, Ann C; Goldstein, Lee E (February 1, 2018). "Concussion, microvascular injury, and early tauopathy in young athletes after impact head injury and an impact concussion mouse model". Brain. 141 (2): 422–458. doi:10.1093/brain/awx350. PMC 5837414. PMID 29360998 – via Silverchair. Montenigro, Philip H; Baugh, Christine M; Daneshvar, Daniel H; Mez, Jesse; Budson, Andrew E; Au, Rhoda; Katz, Douglas I; Cantu, Robert C; Stern, Robert A (October 2014). "Clinical subtypes of chronic traumatic encephalopathy: literature review and proposed research diagnostic criteria for traumatic encephalopathy syndrome". Alzheimer's Research & Therapy. 6 (5–8): 68. doi:10.1186/s13195-014-0068-z. PMC 4288217. PMID 25580160. Johnson, Brian; Neuberger, Thomas; Gay, Michael; Hallett, Mark; Slobounov, Semyon (December 2014). "Effects of Subconcussive Head Trauma on the Default Mode Network of the Brain". Journal of Neurotrauma. 31 (23): 1907–1913. doi:10.1089/neu.2014.3415. PMC 4238241. PMID 25010992. Di Virgilio, Thomas G.; Ietswaart, Magdalena; Wilson, Lindsay; Donaldson, David I.; Hunter, Angus M. (July 24, 2019). "Understanding the Consequences of Repetitive Subconcussive Head Impacts in Sport: Brain Changes and Dampened Motor Control Are Seen After Boxing Practice". Frontiers in Human Neuroscience. 13: 294. doi:10.3389/fnhum.2019.00294. PMC 6746992. PMID 31551732. Lim, Lucas J.H.; Ho, Roger C.M.; Ho, Cyrus S.H. (January 2019). "Dangers of Mixed Martial Arts in the Development of Chronic Traumatic Encephalopathy". International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health. 16 (2): 254. doi:10.3390/ijerph16020254. ISSN 1661-7827. PMC 6352039. PMID 30658408. EMagraken (June 14, 2019). "Documenting CTE in Mixed Martial Arts". Combat Sports Law. Retrieved February 19, 2022. Study of Fighters Shows Brain Changes Are Seen Before Symptoms Archived July 1, 2017, at the Wayback Machine, The New York Times, Timothy Pratt, April 24, 2012. '...This is part of the Professional Fighters Brain Health Study, now a year old ... Dr. Bernick will present these findings on Wednesday in New Orleans at the American Academy of Neurology's annual meeting ... Though Dr. Bernick intends to continue his study of boxers for at least five years, he said the preliminary findings were worth the attention of the neurology association's annual meeting, as "nobody has the numbers we do."' Colman, Gabriel (January 13, 2021). "Dana White gives cold reaction to tragic footage of UFC veteran Spencer Fisher suffering with CTE". www.sportskeeda.com. Retrieved February 19, 2022. Cruz, Guilherme (December 1, 2021). "Rose Gracie, daughter of UFC founder Rorion Gracie, calls lack of CTE awareness in MMA 'criminal negligence'". MMA Fighting. Retrieved February 19, 2022. "A Third Fatality for Modern Mixed Martial Arts | Martial History Magazine". Martialhistory.com. December 18, 2007. Archived from the original on June 9, 2013. Retrieved November 25, 2012. Sievert, Steve (November 26, 2007). "Mixed Martial Arts Notebook: Vasquez in toughest fight". Houston Chronicle. Archived from the original on December 19, 2007. Retrieved December 2, 2007. "Update: Sam Vasquez Dead at 35". Sherdog.com. December 2, 2007. Archived from the original on March 20, 2013. Retrieved February 13, 2013. "Fighter Dies in South Carolina After First Pro Bout". Sherdog.com. June 28, 2010. Archived from the original on July 1, 2010. Retrieved June 28, 2010. "Tyrone Mims, MMA Fighter, Dies Following Amateur Bout in South Carolina". MMA Fighting. Archived from the original on August 26, 2017. Retrieved November 29, 2017. "Final autopsy results inconclusive on South Carolina MMA fighter following August death". MMAjunkie. November 9, 2012. Archived from the original on December 1, 2017. Retrieved November 29, 2017. "EFC Africa fighter Booto Guylain dies from injuries suffered in February bout". MMAjunkie. March 5, 2014. Archived from the original on December 1, 2017. Retrieved November 29, 2017. "Pro MMA Ffghter Booto Guylain dies after bout in South Africa". NY Daily News. Archived from the original on May 16, 2017. Retrieved November 29, 2017. "Portuguese MMA fighter João Carvalho dies after TKO in Dublin". April 12, 2016. Archived from the original on December 22, 2017. Retrieved December 20, 2017. "Amateur MMA fighter Donshay White dies in Louisville after collapsing in locker room". MMAjunkie. July 17, 2017. Archived from the original on December 1, 2017. Retrieved November 29, 2017. Corsey, Gil. "No drugs and no foul play involved in MMA fighter death in Louisville". Archived from the original on December 1, 2017. Retrieved November 29, 2017. Morris, Steven (September 6, 2019). "Family of woman killed in cage fight express 'mismatch' concerns". The Guardian. "Victoria needs the 'cage' to lure UFC". October 10, 2013. Archived from the original on January 3, 2014. Retrieved December 3, 2013. Savage, Alison (March 3, 2015). "MMA cage fighting: Victorian Government to lift ban on octagon". ABC.net.au. Archived from the original on March 7, 2015. Retrieved March 4, 2015. Rake, Justin (June 2, 2017). "West Australian 'cage fighting' ban lifted by Labor government". Mandurah Mail. Retrieved October 3, 2019. Duane Finley (August 20, 2015). "The Fighting Life: The Rise of MMA in Bahrain". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on February 23, 2017. Retrieved March 23, 2017. "Brave To Host 9 Events in Middle East in 2017; UAE to Have An Edition in March". ArabsMMA. June 20, 2014. Archived from the original on February 23, 2017. Retrieved March 23, 2017. "Bahrain News Agency | Bahrain to host World MMA Amateurs Championship2017". Bna.bh. Archived from the original on February 23, 2017. Retrieved March 23, 2017. [1] Archived November 4, 2013, at the Wayback Machine [2] Archived November 10, 2014, at the Wayback Machine Application for IMMAF membership documentation [3] Archived April 30, 2013, at the Wayback Machine "Brazilian MMA Athletic Commission joins IMMAF regulatory group". MMAjunkie. January 17, 2013. Archived from the original on February 2, 2014. Retrieved January 22, 2014. "Brazil Establishes New MMA Regulatory Commission, Joins IMMAF". 411MANIA.com. January 17, 2013. Archived from the original on May 2, 2014. Retrieved June 12, 2015. "UFC on FX 7 – Belfort vs. Bisping". Sherdog.com. January 19, 2013. Archived from the original on June 9, 2015. Retrieved June 12, 2015. "Brazilian commission suspends Rousimar Palhares for 120 days". MMA Fighting. October 11, 2013. Archived from the original on October 15, 2013. Retrieved January 22, 2014. "CABMMA suspends Rousimar Palhares 120 days following UFC Fight Night 29". MMAjunkie. October 11, 2013. Archived from the original on December 8, 2013. Retrieved January 22, 2014. "Brazil medical commissioner defends Belfort's TRT". Archived from the original on May 3, 2014. Paul Quigley. "Bulgaria joins the IMMAF". Archived from the original on December 4, 2014. "IMMAF Welcomes the Bulgarian Federation of MMA". Sherdog. Archived from the original on November 10, 2014. Retrieved November 10, 2014. "Criminal Code". Laws-lois.justice.gc.ca. Archived from the original on October 10, 2012. Retrieved November 25, 2012. Dave Deibert, Postmedia News, March 20, 2012. Bill introduced to legalize mixed martial arts in Canada Archived from the original Archived July 11, 2012, at the Wayback Machine Magraken, Erik (June 6, 2013). "Now That We're Done Celebrating Bill S-209, Time to Get To Work". CanadianMMALawBlog.com. Archived from the original on July 2, 2013. Retrieved July 16, 2013. "Ontario joins list of provinces to allow mixed martial arts". Shaw Communications Inc. August 16, 2010. Archived from the original on July 23, 2011. Retrieved November 16, 2010. "Mixed Martial Arts Regulation in North America" (PDF). January 22, 2010. Archived (PDF) from the original on September 17, 2010. Retrieved September 10, 2010. "States for Kickboxing or MMA". International Sport Combat Federation. July 13, 2010. Archived from the original on December 12, 2010. Retrieved September 10, 2010. "China's MMA Origins". October 23, 2020. Archived from the original on October 23, 2020. Retrieved July 23, 2021. "RDX Sports MMA". Retrieved May 16, 2022. "Art of War Fighting Championship 17". PRWeb. Retrieved July 23, 2021. "RUFF new combat sport to contend with China's traditional martial arts". Archived from the original on December 19, 2012. [4] Archived February 22, 2014, at the Wayback Machine "DMMA – Danish Mixed Martial Arts Federation". Dmmaf.dk. Archived from the original on June 29, 2015. Retrieved June 12, 2015. Kyle Symes. "France's Sports Ministry Says Non Merci to UFC, Upholds Ban on MMA". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on December 25, 2014. Retrieved November 10, 2014. "The Legalization of MMA in France". MMAWeekly.com. February 22, 2008. Archived from the original on November 10, 2014. Retrieved November 10, 2014. "Despite UFC Lobbying Efforts, France Upholds Ban on Mixed Martial Arts". MMAWeekly.com. July 22, 2013. Archived from the original on November 10, 2014. Retrieved November 10, 2014. "100% Fight 38 – Résultats: notre débrief complet de la soirée de samedi" [100% Fight 38 – Results: Our complete debrief of the Saturday evening]. mma4fight.fr. November 3, 2019. "100% FIGHT". Facebook. Archived from the original on October 17, 2015. Retrieved November 10, 2014. "Commission nationale de Mixed Martials Arts". Website-Modern. Archived from the original on November 10, 2014. Retrieved November 10, 2014. "French MMA commission joins International Mixed Martial Arts Federation". MMAjunkie. March 20, 2013. Archived from the original on November 10, 2014. Retrieved November 10, 2014. "411MANIA – French MMA Commission Joins International Mixed Martial Arts Federation". French MMA Commission Joins International Mixed Martial Arts Federation. Archived from the original on November 10, 2014. "Enfin, MMA en France: France legalizing MMA starting in 2020". MMA Junkie. June 25, 2019. Retrieved June 25, 2019. "IMMAF Celebrates France's First Two MMA Events Since Ban Lifted". Around the Rings. October 8, 2020. Archived from the original on October 11, 2020. Retrieved April 14, 2020. "IMMAF | Home International Mixed Martial Arts Federation". IMMAF. "Sanjay Dutt-Raj Kundra launch mixed martial arts league". The Times of India. March 12, 2012. Retrieved April 14, 2021. Laghate, Gaurav (October 2, 2018). "Mercury Sports aims to raise Rs 100 Crore". Economic Times. Retrieved April 14, 2021. IANS (August 23, 2018). "World Kickboxing Network extends support to Kumite 1 League". Business Standard India. Retrieved June 15, 2019. "IMAC Structure". Irish Martial Arts Commission. June 15, 2011. Archived from the original on December 22, 2015. Retrieved December 19, 2015. "Martial Arts". Governing Bodies: NGB Sports Investment. Irish Sports Council. Archived from the original on January 5, 2016. Retrieved December 19, 2015. "Senator backtracks on call to ban Conor McGregor's Dublin title fight after fan outcry". Independent.ie. January 14, 2015. "Irish federation gets full political support". IMMAF. March 18, 2013. Archived from the original on July 8, 2014. Retrieved December 19, 2015. "パンクラス・オフィシャルサイト | Pancrase". www.pancrase.co.jp. Retrieved July 15, 2019. "日本修斗協会公認サイト | PRO SHOOTO MMA Japan – 修斗 – サステイン". www.shooto-mma.com. Retrieved July 15, 2019. "Fighting Nexus | Official Web Site". fighting-nexus.net. Retrieved July 15, 2019. "総合格闘技イベントDEEP2001オフィシャルサイト". 総合格闘技イベントDEEP2001オフィシャルサイト (in Japanese). Retrieved July 15, 2019. "GRACHAN" (in Japanese). Retrieved July 15, 2019. "MMA Promotions and Organizations List". Mmawild.com. June 13, 2012. Archived from the original on November 20, 2012. Retrieved November 25, 2012. "ＥＤがもっともかかりやすい生活習慣病といわれる理由". Hero-s.com. Archived from the original on December 8, 2012. Retrieved November 25, 2012. "IMMAF Regulation Around The World: Update". MMA Uncaged. Archived from the original on November 10, 2014. Retrieved November 10, 2014. [5] Archived July 28, 2014, at the Wayback Machine "Press Release From MASMMAA". Archived from the original on November 10, 2014. Republica. "Three Nepali athletes selected for MMA Championship in Germany". My Republica. Retrieved August 7, 2023. "Nepal Warriors Championship - NWC | MMA Promoter". Tapology. Retrieved August 7, 2023. hamrokhelkud (June 14, 2023). "Nepal Warriors Championship Set to Begin This Friday". HamroKhelkud. Retrieved August 7, 2023. "Suyash Jadhav vs. Mandip Rana Magar, NWC FN 1 | MMA Bout". Tapology. Retrieved August 7, 2023. Ghimire, Sujana (June 17, 2023). "Dhant remains unbeaten, Nepalis dominate as all 7 fights at NWC 1 end in stoppages". Desh Sanchar. Retrieved August 7, 2023. "Nordic MMA Overview". Nordic MMA Everyday at MMA Viking. Archived from the original on February 1, 2014. Retrieved January 22, 2014. Jim McGrady (December 17, 2014). "Norway legalizes boxing after three decades ban". theboxingtribune.no. The Boxing Tribune. Retrieved June 26, 2019. [6] Archived February 2, 2014, at the Wayback Machine [7] Archived December 6, 2013, at the Wayback Machine "NMMAF Merkekamper". Archived from the original on February 1, 2014. Retrieved January 22, 2014. NMMAF Merkekamper 6: Invasjon fra Nord: Robertsen vs Davila on YouTube "MMA og Muy Thau er tatt opp som nye iedretter". kampsport.no (in Norwegian). Norges Kampsportforbund. April 5, 2019. Retrieved June 26, 2019. "FMMAP – Federação de Mixed Martial Arts de Portugal". Archived from the original on October 18, 2014. [8] Archived June 19, 2013, at the Wayback Machine IMMAF member application document "RMMAF – Zi importanta pentru comunitatea de MMA din Romania". RMMAF. September 30, 2013. Archived from the original on November 10, 2014. Retrieved November 10, 2014. [9] Archived February 17, 2014, at the Wayback Machine IMMAF member documentation "RMMAF a definitivat lotul Romaniei pentru Mondialele din Las Vegas". www.natiuneamma.ro. Archived from the original on November 10, 2014. Retrieved November 10, 2014. "Fedor Emelianenko Now President Of Russian MMA Union". Fightline.com. Archived from the original on January 17, 2013. Leidecker, Tim (May 31, 2007). "European Throwdown: Notes From Iberia to Siberia". Sherdog.com. Archived from the original on November 9, 2011. Retrieved May 23, 2011. O'Leary, Ryan (February 10, 2011). "Sweden Closer to Hosting UFC". Sherdog.com. Archived from the original on February 14, 2011. Retrieved May 23, 2011. O'Leary, Ryan. "Bright Lights in Sweden's Dark November". Sherdog.com. Archived from the original on August 23, 2011. Retrieved May 23, 2011. O'Leary, Ryan (April 14, 2011). "Unified Rules Adopted for Superior Challenge 7". Sherdog.com. Archived from the original on April 18, 2011. Retrieved May 23, 2011. Morgan, John (April 12, 2012). "International MMA Federation launches in Sweden, expected to receive UFC backing". MMAjunkie. Archived from the original on February 1, 2014. Retrieved January 22, 2014. Al-Shatti, Shaun (April 2, 2013). "Swedish MMA Federation rules Alexander Gustafsson medically unfit for UFC on FUEL 9 main event". MMA Fighting. Archived from the original on May 2, 2014. Retrieved January 22, 2014. Holland, Jesse (April 2, 2013). "SMMAF rules against Alexander Gustafsson; 'Mauler' medically unfit to compete at UFC on FUEL TV 9". MMAmania.com. Archived from the original on May 8, 2014. Retrieved January 22, 2014. Reinsmith, Trent (April 4, 2013). "Dana White's Call out of SMMAF for Gustafsson's Removal Misses the Point". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on May 8, 2014. Brookhouse, Brent (April 12, 2013). "SMMAF issues statement on Alexander Gustafsson's removal from UFC on Fuel 9". Bloody Elbow. Archived from the original on May 8, 2014. Retrieved January 22, 2014. Bynight, Ricky (May 10, 2012). "UMF Muaythai & Dragon Legends MMA 'Underground' Fight Night". My City by Night. Archived from the original on July 8, 2017. Retrieved October 21, 2013. Kittipong Thongsombat (March 31, 2012). "Thailand bans mixed martial arts". Bangkok Post. p. S6. SAT officials met this week to discuss whether holding an MMA event was lawful or not following a request from a private company and they finally agreed that under the 1999 boxing law, it is unlawful to stage an MMA event in Thailand. "Organising a MMA event here would hurt the image of Muay Thai," Sakol Wannapong said. "Thailand Government Bans MMA". FightersOnlyMag.com. September 27, 2012. Archived from the original on March 31, 2012. Retrieved March 29, 2012. "Legal grey: DARE Championship defying Thailand's ban on MMA". mmafighting.com. September 27, 2012. Archived from the original on December 4, 2012. Retrieved March 29, 2012. "Universalcombatnews.com". Archived from the original on June 14, 2015. Retrieved June 12, 2015. "MMA organizations and upcoming MMA event news in Thailand". Combat 360X Muay Thai and MMA Camp Khao Lak. Retrieved June 12, 2015.[dead link] "ABC Boxing – Association of Boxing Commissions". Archived from the original on February 2, 2014. "West Virginia becomes 45th state to regulate mixed martial arts". MMAJunkie.com. March 24, 2011. Archived from the original on August 23, 2011. "Wyoming becomes state No. 46 to regulate MMA". MMAJunkie.com. March 12, 2012. Archived from the original on March 15, 2012. Retrieved March 12, 2012. "Vermont becomes state No. 46 to regulate MMA". MMAJunkie.com. May 4, 2012. Archived from the original on May 8, 2012. Retrieved May 4, 2012. "Conn. gov signs bill legalizing mixed martial arts". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. July 11, 2013. Archived from the original on July 13, 2013. Retrieved July 12, 2013. "NY clears way to allowing professional mixed martial arts". Sports.yahoo.com. March 22, 2016. Archived from the original on April 4, 2016. Retrieved April 2, 2016. Cruz, Jason (April 14, 2016). "Governor Cuomo signs NY MMA Bill into law; UFC announces event at MSG November 12th". MMAPayout.com. Archived from the original on April 23, 2016. Retrieved April 14, 2016. "MMA legalised in Vietnam". SportBusiness. February 21, 2020. Retrieved February 21, 2020. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Mixed martial arts.