UTC+05:00 is an identifier for a time offset from UTC of +05:00. This time is used in: Principal cities: Astana, Almaty, Kokshetau, Tashkent, Ashgabat, Dushanbe, Malé, Yekaterinburg, Martin-de-Viviès, Port-aux-Français, Aktobe, Atyrau, Kyzylorda, Aktau, Islamabad, Karachi Maldives – Time in the Maldives Pakistan - Time in Pakistan Kazakhstan - Time in Kazakhstan Tajikistan – Time in Tajikistan Turkmenistan – Time in Turkmenistan Uzbekistan – Time in Uzbekistan Russia – Yekaterinburg Time Volga Federal District Bashkortostan, Orenburg Oblast and Perm Krai Ural Federal District Chelyabinsk Oblast, Khanty-Mansi Autonomous Okrug, Kurgan Oblast, Sverdlovsk Oblast, Tyumen Oblast and Yamalo-Nenets Autonomous Okrug France Kerguelen Islands Île Saint Paul and Île Amsterdam Australia Heard Island and McDonald Islands Some bases in Antarctica. See also Time in Antarctica. Australia Mawson Station Russia Vostok Station Armenia and Azerbaijan used this as daylight saving time (DST) in 1981–2012 and 1981–2016 respectively, called Armenia Summer Time (AMST) and Azerbaijan Summer Time (AZST). Using UTC+08:00: China Parts of western in the country, including western Xinjiang province (Kashgar) (although most locals observe UTC+06:00) Using UTC+07:00: Russia Most parts of Novosibirsk Oblast Partly of Tomsk Oblast Using UTC+06:00: Kyrgyzstan British Indian Ocean Territory Russia Omsk Oblast Kazakhstan Most parts of its territories: Turkistan Karagandy North Kazakhstan Akmola, with its nation's capital Astana Using UTC+05:45: Nepal Parts of western in the country, including: Sudurpashchim mostly part of Karnali western part of Lumbini Using UTC+05:30: Sri Lanka India, with parts of its territories: Gujarat Rajasthan Punjab Ladakh Uttarakhand Maharashtra Telangana Karnataka Kerala Haryana Tamil Nadu Himachal Pradesh Madhya Pradesh Jammu and Kashmir Delhi, including nation's capital New Delhi A smaller parts of Odisha Most parts of Uttar Pradesh Most parts of Andhra Pradesh Southwest of Chhattisgarh Using UTC+04:30: Afghanistan Eastern parts, where the nation's capital Kabul is Using UTC+03:00: Russia The very east of Severny Island with 69°2' E as the easternmost point Russia The very easternmost parts of Ural Federal District Turkmenistan Kazakhstan Aktobe Kyzylorda parts of Mangystau, Atyrau, and West Kazakhstan Uzbekistan Most parts, including Samarkand Pakistan Western parts, including Karachi Russia Most parts of Ural Federal District Russia Western tip of Perm Krai Western parts of the Orenburg Oblast Kyrgyzstan adopted this time zone as its standard time from 2 May 1924 to 21 June 1930, and from 31 March 1991 to 12 August 2005.[citation needed] Pakistan Standard Time Time in Kazakhstan Time in Pakistan Time in Russia Time in Tajikistan Time in Uzbekistan "Commonwealth of independent States (CIS) Time Zone Map". WorldTimeZone.com. Retrieved 14 July 2012. "Russia Time Zone Map". WorldTimeZone.com. Retrieved 22 March 2018. Find cities currently in UTC+05