North Korea, officially the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK), is a country in East Asia. It constitutes the northern half of the Korean Peninsula and borders China and Russia to the north at the Yalu (Amnok) and Tumen rivers, and South Korea to the south at the Korean Demilitarized Zone. The country's western border is formed by the Yellow Sea, while its eastern border is defined by the Sea of Japan. North Korea, like its southern counterpart, claims to be the legitimate government of the entire peninsula and adjacent islands. Pyongyang is the capital and largest city. In 1945, after the Japanese surrender at the end of World War II, Korea was divided into two zones along the 38th parallel, with the north occupied by the Soviet Union and the south occupied by the United States. In 1948, separate governments were formed in Korea: the socialist and Soviet-aligned Democratic People's Republic of Korea in the north, and the capitalist, Western-aligned Republic of Korea in the south. The Korean War began when North Korean forces invaded South Korea in 1950. In 1953, the Korean Armistice Agreement brought about a ceasefire and established a demilitarized zone (DMZ), but no formal peace treaty has ever been signed. Post-war North Korea benefited greatly from economic aid and expertise provided by other Eastern Bloc countries. However, Kim Il Sung, North Korea's first leader, promoted his personal philosophy of Juche as the state ideology. Pyongyang's international isolation sharply accelerated from the 1980s onwards as the Cold War came to an end. The fall of the Soviet Union in 1991 then brought about a sharp decline to the North Korean economy. From 1994 to 1998, North Korea suffered a famine with the population continuing to suffer from malnutrition. In 2024, North Korea formally abandoned efforts to peacefully reunify Korea. North Korea is a totalitarian dictatorship with a comprehensive cult of personality around the Kim family. Amnesty International considers the country to have the worst human rights record in the world. Officially, North Korea is an "independent socialist state" which holds democratic elections; however, outside observers have described the elections as unfair, uncompetitive, and pre-determined, in a manner similar to elections in the Soviet Union. The Workers' Party of Korea is the ruling party of North Korea. According to Article 3 of the constitution, Kimilsungism–Kimjongilism is the official ideology of North Korea. The means of production are owned by the state through state-run enterprises and collectivized farms. Most services—such as healthcare, education, housing, and food production—are subsidized or state-funded. North Korea follows Songun, a "military first" policy which prioritizes the Korean People's Army in state affairs and the allocation of resources. It possesses nuclear weapons. Its active-duty army of 1.28 million soldiers is the fourth-largest in the world. In addition to being a member of the United Nations since 1991, North Korea is also a member of the Non-Aligned Movement, G77, and the ASEAN Regional Forum. The modern spelling of Korea first appeared in the late 17th century in the travel writings of the Dutch East India Company's Hendrick Hamel. After the division of the country into North and South Korea, the two sides used different terms to refer to Korea: Chosun or Joseon (조선) in North Korea, and Hanguk (한국) in South Korea. In 1948, North Korea adopted Democratic People's Republic of Korea (Korean: 조선민주주의인민공화국, Chosŏn Minjujuŭi Inmin Konghwaguk; listen) as its official name. In the wider world, because its government controls the northern part of the Korean Peninsula, it is commonly called North Korea to distinguish it from South Korea, which is officially called the Republic of Korea in English. Both governments consider themselves to be the legitimate government of the whole of Korea. For this reason, the people do not consider themselves as 'North Koreans' but as Koreans in the same divided country as their compatriots in the South, and foreign visitors are discouraged from using the former term. According to Korean mythology in 2333 BCE, the Gojoseon Kingdom was established by the god-king Dangun. Following the unification of the Three Kingdoms of Korea under Unified Silla in 668 AD, Korea was subsequently ruled by the Goryeo dynasty (918–1392) and the Joseon dynasty (1392–1897). In 1897, King Gojong proclaimed the Korean Empire, which was annexed by the Empire of Japan in 1910. From 1910 to the end of World War II in 1945, Korea was under Japanese rule. Most Koreans were peasants engaged in subsistence farming. In the 1930s, Japan developed mines, hydro-electric dams, steel mills, and manufacturing plants in northern Korea and neighboring Manchuria. The Korean industrial working class expanded rapidly, and many Koreans went to work in Manchuria. As a result, 65% of Korea's heavy industry was located in the north, but, due to the rugged terrain, only 37% of its agriculture. Northern Korea had little exposure to modern, Western ideas. One partial exception was the penetration of religion. Since the arrival of missionaries in the late nineteenth century, the northwest of Korea, and Pyongyang in particular, had been a stronghold of Christianity. As a result, Pyongyang was called the "Jerusalem of the East". A Korean guerrilla movement emerged in the mountainous interior and in Manchuria, harassing the Japanese imperial authorities. One of the most prominent guerrilla leaders was the Communist Kim Il Sung. After the Japanese surrender at the end of World War II in 1945, the Korean Peninsula was divided into two zones along the 38th parallel, with the northern half of the peninsula occupied by the Soviet Union and the southern half by the United States. Negotiations on reunification failed. Soviet general Terenty Shtykov recommended the establishment of the Soviet Civil Administration in October 1945, and supported Kim Il Sung as chairman of the Provisional People's Committee of North Korea, established in February 1946. In September 1946, South Korean citizens rose up against the Allied Military Government. In April 1948, an uprising of the Jeju islanders was violently crushed. The South declared its statehood in May 1948 and two months later the ardent anti-communist Syngman Rhee became its ruler. The Democratic People's Republic of Korea was established in the North on 9 September 1948. Shtykov served as the first Soviet ambassador, while Kim Il Sung became premier. Soviet forces withdrew from the North in 1948, and most American forces withdrew from the South in 1949. Ambassador Shtykov suspected Rhee was planning to invade the North and was sympathetic to Kim's goal of Korean unification under socialism. The two successfully lobbied Soviet leader Joseph Stalin to support a quick war against the South, which culminated in the outbreak of the Korean War. The military of North Korea invaded the South on 25 June 1950, and swiftly overran most of the country. The United Nations Command (UNC) was subsequently established following the UN Security Council's recognition of North Korean aggression against South Korea. The motion passed because the Soviet Union, a close ally of North Korea and a member of the UN Security Council, was boycotting the UN over its recognition of the Republic of China rather than the People's Republic of China. The UNC, led by the United States, intervened to defend the South, and rapidly advanced into North Korea. As they neared the border with China, Chinese forces intervened on behalf of North Korea, shifting the balance of the war again. Fighting ended on 27 July 1953, with an armistice that approximately restored the original boundaries between North and South Korea, but no peace treaty was signed. Approximately 3 million people died in the Korean War, with a higher proportional civilian death toll than World War II or the Vietnam War. In both per capita and absolute terms, North Korea was the country most devastated by the war, which resulted in the death of an estimated 12–15% of the North Korean population (c. 10 million), "a figure close to or surpassing the proportion of Soviet citizens killed in World War II," according to Charles K. Armstrong. As a result of the war, almost every substantial building in North Korea was destroyed. Some have referred to the conflict as a civil war, with other factors involved. A heavily guarded demilitarized zone (DMZ) still divides the peninsula, and an anti-communist and anti-North Korea sentiment remains in South Korea. Since the war, the United States has maintained a strong military presence in the South which is depicted by the North Korean government as an imperialist occupation force. It claims that the Korean War was caused by the United States and South Korea. The post-war 1950s and 1960s saw an ideologicial shift in North Korea, as Kim Il Sung sought to consolidate his power. Kim Il Sung was highly critical of Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev and his de-Stalinization policies and echoed Chinese critiques of Khrushchev as "revisionist". During the 1956 August Faction Incident, Kim Il Sung successfully resisted efforts by the Soviet Union and China to depose him in favor of Soviet Koreans or the pro-Chinese Yan'an faction. Some scholars believe that the 1956 August incident was an example of North Korea demonstrating political independence. However, most scholars consider the final withdrawal of Chinese troops from North Korea in October 1958 to be the latest date when North Korea became effectively independent. In the late 1950s and early 1960s, North Korea sought to distinguish itself internationally by becoming a leader of the Non-Aligned Movement and promoting the ideology of Juche. In United States policymaking, North Korea was considered among the Captive Nations. Despite its efforts to break out of the Soviet and Chinese spheres of influence, North Korea remained closely aligned with both countries throughout the Cold War. Industry was the favored sector in North Korea. Industrial production returned to pre-war levels by 1957. In 1959, relations with Japan had improved somewhat, and North Korea began allowing the repatriation of Japanese citizens in the country. The same year, North Korea revalued the North Korean won, which held greater value than its South Korean counterpart. Until the 1960s, economic growth was higher than in South Korea, and North Korean GDP per capita was equal to that of its southern neighbor as late as 1976. However, by the 1980s, the economy had begun to stagnate; it started its long decline in 1987 and almost completely collapsed after the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, when all Soviet aid was suddenly halted. An internal CIA study acknowledged various achievements of the North Korean government post-war: compassionate care for war orphans and children in general, a radical improvement in the status of women, free housing, free healthcare, and health statistics particularly in life expectancy and infant mortality that were comparable to even the most advanced nations up until the North Korean famine. Life expectancy in the North was 72 before the famine which was only marginally lower than in the South. The country once boasted a comparatively developed healthcare system; pre-famine North Korea had a network of nearly 45,000 family practitioners with some 800 hospitals and 1,000 clinics. The relative peace between the North and South following the armistice was interrupted by border skirmishes, celebrity abductions, and assassination attempts. The North failed in several assassination attempts on South Korean leaders, such as in 1968, 1974, and the Rangoon bombing in 1983; tunnels were found under the DMZ and tensions flared over the axe murder incident at Panmunjom in 1976. For almost two decades after the war, the two states did not seek to negotiate with one another. In 1971, secret, high-level contacts began to be conducted culminating in the 1972 July 4 South–North Joint Statement that established principles of working toward peaceful reunification. The talks ultimately failed because in 1973, South Korea declared its preference that the two Koreas should seek separate memberships in international organizations. The Soviet Union was dissolved on 26 December 1991, ending its aid and support to North Korea. In 1992, as Kim Il Sung's health began deteriorating, his son Kim Jong Il slowly began taking over various state tasks. Kim Il Sung died of a heart attack in 1994; Kim Jong Il declared a three-year period of national mourning, afterward officially announcing his position as the new leader. North Korea promised to halt its development of nuclear weapons under the Agreed Framework, negotiated with U.S. president Bill Clinton and signed in 1994. Building on Nordpolitik, South Korea began to engage with the North as part of its Sunshine Policy. Kim Jong Il instituted a policy called Songun, or "military first". Flooding in the mid-1990s exacerbated the economic crisis, severely damaging crops and infrastructure and leading to widespread famine that the government proved incapable of curtailing, resulting in the deaths of between 240,000 and 420,000 people. In 1996, the government accepted UN food aid. The international environment changed once George W. Bush became U.S. President in 2001. His administration rejected South Korea's Sunshine Policy and the Agreed Framework. Bush included North Korea in his axis of evil in his 2002 State of the Union Address. The U.S. government accordingly treated North Korea as a rogue state, while North Korea redoubled its efforts to acquire nuclear weapons. On 9 October 2006, North Korea announced it had conducted its first nuclear weapons test. U.S. President Barack Obama adopted a policy of "strategic patience", resisting making deals with North Korea. Tensions with South Korea and the United States increased in 2010 with the sinking of the South Korean warship Cheonan and North Korea's shelling of Yeonpyeong Island. On 17 December 2011, Kim Jong Il died from a heart attack. His youngest son Kim Jong Un was announced as his successor. In the face of international condemnation, North Korea continued to develop its nuclear arsenal, possibly including a hydrogen bomb and a missile capable of reaching the United States. Throughout 2017, following Donald Trump's ascension to the US presidency, tensions between the United States and North Korea increased, and there was heightened rhetoric between the two, with Trump threatening "fire and fury" if North Korea ever attacked U.S. territory amid North Korean threats to test missiles that would land near Guam. The tensions substantially decreased in 2018, and a détente developed. A series of summits took place between Kim Jong Un of North Korea, President Moon Jae-in of South Korea, and President Trump. On 10 January 2021, Kim Jong Un was formally elected as the General Secretary in 8th Congress of the Workers' Party of Korea, a title previously held by Kim Jong Il. On 24 March 2022, North Korea conducted a successful ICBM test launch for the first time since the 2017 crisis. In September 2022, North Korea passed a law that declared itself a nuclear state. On December 30, 2023, North Korean leader Kim Jong-un provocatively declared South Korea a 'colonial vassal state,' marking a significant departure from the longstanding position of mutual claims over the entire Korean Peninsula by both North and South Korea. This statement was followed by a call on January 15, 2024, for a constitutional amendment to redefine the boundary with South Korea as the 'Southern National Borderline,' further intensifying the rhetoric against South Korea. Kim Jong-un also stated that in the event of a war, North Korea would seek to annex the entirety of South Korea. North Korea occupies the northern portion of the Korean Peninsula, lying between latitudes 37° and 43°N, and longitudes 124° and 131°E. It covers an area of 120,540 square kilometers (46,541 sq mi). To its west are the Yellow Sea and Korea Bay, and to its east lies Japan across the Sea of Japan. Early European visitors to Korea remarked that the country resembled "a sea in a heavy gale" because of the many successive mountain ranges that crisscross the peninsula. Some 80 percent of North Korea is composed of mountains and uplands, separated by deep and narrow valleys. All of the Korean Peninsula's mountains with elevations of 2,000 meters (6,600 ft) or more are located in North Korea. The highest point in North Korea is Paektu Mountain, a volcanic mountain with an elevation of 2,744 meters (9,003 ft) above sea level. Considered a sacred place by North Koreans, Mount Paektu holds significance in Korean culture and has been incorporated in the elaborate folklore and personality cult around the Kim family. For example, the song, "We Will Go To Mount Paektu" sings in praise of Kim Jong Un and describes a symbolic trek to the mountain. Other prominent ranges are the Hamgyong Range in the extreme northeast and the Rangrim Mountains, which are located in the north-central part of North Korea. Mount Kumgang in the Taebaek Range, which extends into South Korea, is famous for its scenic beauty. The coastal plains are wide in the west and discontinuous in the east. A great majority of the population lives in the plains and lowlands. According to a United Nations Environmental Programme report in 2003, forest covers over 70 percent of the country, mostly on steep slopes. North Korea had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 8.02/10, ranking it 28th globally out of 172 countries. The longest river is the Amnok (Yalu) River which flows for 790 kilometers (491 mi). The country contains three terrestrial ecoregions: Central Korean deciduous forests, Changbai Mountains mixed forests, and Manchurian mixed forests. North Korea experiences a humid continental climate within the Köppen climate classification scheme. Winters bring clear weather interspersed with snow storms as a result of northern and northwestern winds that blow from Siberia. Summer tends to be by far the hottest, most humid, and rainiest time of year because of the southern and southeastern monsoon winds that carry moist air from the Pacific Ocean. Approximately 60 percent of all precipitation occurs from June to September. Spring and autumn are transitional seasons between summer and winter. The daily average high and low temperatures for Pyongyang are −3 and −13 °C (27 and 9 °F) in January and 29 and 20 °C (84 and 68 °F) in August. North Korea functions as a highly centralized, one-party totalitarian dictatorship. According to its constitution, it is a self-described revolutionary and socialist state "guided in its building and activities only by great Kimilsungism–Kimjongilism". In addition to the constitution, North Korea is governed by the Ten Principles for the Establishment of a Monolithic Ideological System (also known as the "Ten Principles of the One-Ideology System") which establishes standards for governance and a guide for the behaviors of North Koreans. The Workers' Party of Korea (WPK), a communist party led by a member of the Kim family, has an estimated 6.5 million members and dominates every aspect of North Korean politics. It has two satellite parties, the Korean Social Democratic Party and the Chondoist Chongu Party. Kim Jong Un of the Kim family is the current Supreme Leader or Suryeong of North Korea. He heads all major governing structures: he is the general secretary of the Workers' Party of Korea and president of the State Affairs. His grandfather Kim Il Sung, the founder and leader of North Korea until his death in 1994, is the country's "eternal President", while his father Kim Jong Il who succeeded Kim Il Sung as the leader was announced "Eternal General Secretary" and "Eternal Chairman of the National Defence Commission" after his death in 2011. According to the constitution, there are officially three main branches of government. The first of these is the State Affairs Commission (SAC), which acts as "the supreme national guidance organ of state sovereignty". Its role is to deliberate and decide the work on defense building of the State, including major policies of the State, and to carry out the directions of the president of the commission, Kim Jong Un. The SAC also directly supervises the Ministry of Defence, Ministry of State Security and the Ministry of Social Security. Legislative power is held by the unicameral Supreme People's Assembly (SPA). Its 687 members are elected every five years by universal suffrage, though the elections have been described by outside observers as similar to elections in the Soviet Union. Elections in North Korea have also been described as a form of government census, due to the near 100% turnout. Although the elections are not pluralistic, North Korean state media describes the elections as "an expression of the absolute support and trust of all voters in the DPRK government". Supreme People's Assembly sessions are convened by the SPA Standing Committee, whose Chairman (Choe Ryong-hae since 2019) is the third-ranking official in North Korea. Deputies formally elect the chairman, the vice chairpersons and members of the Standing Committee and take part in the constitutionally appointed activities of the legislature: pass laws, establish domestic and foreign policies, appoint members of the cabinet, review and approve the state economic plan, among others. The SPA itself cannot initiate any legislation independently of party or state organs. It is unknown whether it has ever criticized or amended bills placed before it, and the elections are based around a single list of WPK-approved candidates who stand without opposition. Executive power is vested in the Cabinet of North Korea, which has been headed by Premier Kim Tok Hun since 14 August 2020, who's officially the second-ranking official after Kim Jong Un. The Premier represents the government and functions independently. His authority extends over two vice premiers, 30 ministers, two cabinet commission chairmen, the cabinet chief secretary, the president of the Central Bank, the director of the Central Bureau of Statistics and the president of the Academy of Sciences. North Korea, like its southern counterpart, claims to be the legitimate government of the entire Korean Peninsula and adjacent islands. Despite its official title as the "Democratic People's Republic of Korea", some observers have described North Korea's political system as a "hereditary dictatorship". It has also been described as a Stalinist dictatorship. Kimilsungism–Kimjongilism is the official ideology of North Korea and the WPK, and is the cornerstone of party works and government operations. Juche, part of the larger Kimilsungism–Kimjongilism along with Songun under Kim Jong Un, is viewed by the official North Korean line as an embodiment of Kim Il Sung's wisdom, an expression of his leadership, and an idea which provides "a complete answer to any question that arises in the struggle for national liberation". Juche was pronounced in December 1955 in a speech called On Eliminating Dogmatism and Formalism and Establishing Juche in Ideological Work in order to emphasize a Korea-centered revolution. Its core tenets are economic self-sufficiency, military self-reliance and an independent foreign policy. The roots of Juche were made up of a complex mixture of factors, including the cult of personality centered on Kim Il Sung, the conflict with pro-Soviet and pro-Chinese dissenters, and Korea's centuries-long struggle for independence. Juche was introduced into the constitution in 1972. Juche was initially promoted as a "creative application" of Marxism–Leninism, but in the mid-1970s, it was described by state propaganda as "the only scientific thought... and most effective revolutionary theoretical structure that leads to the future of communist society". Juche eventually replaced Marxism–Leninism entirely by the 1980s, and in 1992 references to the latter were omitted from the constitution. The 2009 constitution dropped references to communism and elevated the Songun military first policy while explicitly confirming the position of Kim Jong Il. However, the constitution retains references to socialism. The WPK reasserted its commitment to communism in 2021. Juche's concepts of self-reliance have evolved with time and circumstances, but still provide the groundwork for the spartan austerity, sacrifice, and discipline demanded by the party. Scholar Brian Reynolds Myers views North Korea's actual ideology as a Korean ethnic nationalism similar to statism in Shōwa Japan and European fascism. Since the founding of the nation, North Korea's supreme leadership has stayed within the Kim family, which in North Korea is referred to as the Mount Paektu Bloodline. It is a three-generation lineage descending from the country's first leader, Kim Il Sung, who developed North Korea around the Juche ideology, and stayed in power until his death. Kim developed a cult of personality closely tied to the state philosophy of Juche, which was later passed on to his successors: his son Kim Jong Il in 1994 and grandson Kim Jong Un in 2011. In 2013, Clause 2 of Article 10 of the newly edited Ten Fundamental Principles of the Workers' Party of Korea stated that the party and revolution must be carried "eternally" by the "Mount Paektu Bloodline". According to New Focus International, the cult of personality, particularly surrounding Kim Il Sung, has been crucial for legitimizing the family's hereditary succession. The control the North Korean government exercises over many aspects of the nation's culture is used to perpetuate the cult of personality surrounding Kim Il Sung, and Kim Jong Il. While visiting North Korea in 1979, journalist Bradley Martin wrote that nearly all music, art, and sculpture that he observed glorified "Great Leader" Kim Il Sung, whose personality cult was then being extended to his son, "Dear Leader" Kim Jong Il. Claims that the family has been deified are contested by B. R. Myers: "Divine powers have never been attributed to either of the two Kims. In fact, the propaganda apparatus in Pyongyang has generally been careful not to make claims that run directly counter to citizens' experience or common sense." He further explains that the state propaganda painted Kim Jong Il as someone whose expertise lay in military matters and that the famine of the 1990s was partially caused by natural disasters out of Kim Jong Il's control. The song "No Motherland Without You", sung by the North Korean army choir, was created especially for Kim Jong Il and is one of the most popular tunes in the country. Kim Il Sung is still officially revered as the nation's "Eternal President". Several landmarks in North Korea are named for Kim Il Sung, including Kim Il Sung University, Kim Il Sung Stadium, and Kim Il Sung Square. Defectors have been quoted as saying that North Korean schools deify both father and son. Kim Il Sung rejected the notion that he had created a cult around himself and accused those who suggested this of "factionalism". Following the death of Kim Il Sung, North Koreans were prostrating and weeping to a bronze statue of him in an organized event; similar scenes were broadcast by state television following the death of Kim Jong Il. Critics maintain that Kim Jong Il's personality cult was inherited from his father. Kim Jong Il was often the center of attention throughout ordinary life. His birthday is one of the most important public holidays in the country. On his 60th birthday (based on his official date of birth), mass celebrations occurred throughout the country. Kim Jong Il's personality cult, although significant, was not as extensive as his father's. One point of view is that Kim Jong Il's cult of personality was solely out of respect for Kim Il Sung or out of fear of punishment for failure to pay homage, while North Korean government sources consider it genuine hero worship. As a result of its isolation, North Korea is sometimes known as the "hermit kingdom", a term that originally referred to the isolationism in the latter part of the Joseon Dynasty. Initially, North Korea had diplomatic ties only with other communist countries, and even today, most of the foreign embassies accredited to North Korea are located in Beijing rather than in Pyongyang. In the 1960s and 1970s, it pursued an independent foreign policy, established relations with many developing countries, and joined the Non-Aligned Movement. In the late 1980s and the 1990s its foreign policy was thrown into turmoil with the collapse of the Soviet Bloc. Suffering an economic crisis, it closed a number of its embassies. At the same time, North Korea sought to build relations with developed free market countries. North Korea joined the United Nations in 1991 together with South Korea. North Korea is also a member of the Non-Aligned Movement, G77 and the ASEAN Regional Forum. As of 2015[update], North Korea had diplomatic relations with 166 countries and embassies in 47 countries. North Korea does not have diplomatic relations with Argentina, Botswana, Estonia, France, Iraq, Israel, Japan, Taiwan, the United States, and Ukraine. North Korea enjoys a close relationship with China which is often called North Korea's closest ally. Relations were strained beginning in 2006 because of China's concerns about North Korea's nuclear program. Relations improved after Xi Jinping, General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party and Chinese President visited North Korea in April 2019. North Korea continues to have strong ties with several Southeast Asian countries such as Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia, and Indonesia. Relations with Malaysia were strained in 2017 by the assassination of Kim Jong-nam. North Korea has a close relationship with Russia and has supported the Russian invasion of Ukraine. North Korea was previously designated a state sponsor of terrorism by the U.S. because of its alleged involvement in the 1983 Rangoon bombing and the 1987 bombing of a South Korean airliner. On 11 October 2008, the United States removed North Korea from its list of states that sponsor terrorism after Pyongyang agreed to cooperate on issues related to its nuclear program. North Korea was re-designated a state sponsor of terrorism by the U.S. under the administration of Donald Trump on 20 November 2017 after continued nuclear tests. The kidnapping of at least 13 Japanese citizens by North Korean agents in the 1970s and the 1980s has had a detrimental effect on North Korea's relationship with Japan. US President Trump met with Kim in Singapore on 12 June 2018. An agreement was signed between the two countries endorsing the 2017 Panmunjom Declaration signed by North and South Korea, pledging to work towards denuclearizing the Korean Peninsula. They met in Hanoi from 27 to 28 February 2019, but failed to achieve an agreement. On 30 June 2019, Trump met with Kim along with South Korean president Moon Jae-in at the Korean DMZ. The Korean Demilitarized Zone with South Korea remains the most heavily fortified border in the world. Inter-Korean relations are at the core of North Korean diplomacy and have seen numerous shifts in the last few decades. North Korea's policy is to seek reunification without what it sees as outside interference, through a federal structure retaining each side's leadership and systems. In 1972, the two Koreas agreed in principle to achieve reunification through peaceful means and without foreign interference. On 10 October 1980, the then North Korean leader Kim Il Sung proposed a federation between North and South Korea named the Democratic Federal Republic of Korea in which the respective political systems would initially remain. However, relations remained cool well until the early 1990s, with a brief period in the early 1980s when North Korea offered to provide flood relief to its southern neighbor. Although the offer was initially welcomed, talks over how to deliver the relief goods broke down and none of the promised aid ever crossed the border. The two countries also organized a reunion of 92 separated families. The Sunshine Policy instituted by South Korean president Kim Dae-jung in 1998 was a watershed in inter-Korean relations. It encouraged other countries to engage with the North, which allowed Pyongyang to normalize relations with a number of European Union states and contributed to the establishment of joint North-South economic projects. The culmination of the Sunshine Policy was the 2000 inter-Korean summit, when Kim Dae-jung visited Kim Jong Il in Pyongyang. Both North and South Korea signed the June 15th North–South Joint Declaration, in which both sides promised to seek peaceful reunification. On 4 October 2007, South Korean president Roh Moo-hyun and Kim Jong Il signed an eight-point peace agreement. However, relations worsened when South Korean president Lee Myung-bak adopted a more hard-line approach and suspended aid deliveries pending the de-nuclearization of the North. In 2009, North Korea responded by ending all of its previous agreements with the South. It deployed additional ballistic missiles and placed its military on full combat alert after South Korea, Japan and the United States threatened to intercept a Unha-2 space launch vehicle. The next few years witnessed a string of hostilities, including the alleged North Korean involvement in the sinking of South Korean warship Cheonan, mutual ending of diplomatic ties, a North Korean artillery attack on Yeonpyeong Island, and growing international concern over North Korea's nuclear program. In May 2017, Moon Jae-in was elected president of South Korea with a promise to return to the Sunshine Policy. In February 2018, a détente developed at the Winter Olympics held in South Korea. In April, South Korean president Moon Jae-in and Kim Jong Un met at the DMZ, and, in the Panmunjom Declaration, pledged to work for peace and nuclear disarmament. In September, at a joint news conference in Pyongyang, Moon and Kim agreed upon turning the Korean Peninsula into a "land of peace without nuclear weapons and nuclear threats". In January 2024, North Korea officially announced through its leader Kim Jong Un that it would no longer seek reunification with South Korea. Kim instead called for “completely occupying, subjugating and reclaiming” South Korea if war breaks out. Kim Jong Un also announced to the Supreme People's Assembly that the constitution should be changed such that South Korea would be considered the "primary foe and invariable principal enemy" of North Korea. Additionally, government agencies tasked with promoting reunification were closed. North Korea has a civil law system based on the Prussian model and influenced by Japanese traditions and communist legal theory. Judiciary procedures are handled by the Central Court (the highest court of appeal), provincial or special city-level courts, people's courts, and special courts. People's courts are at the lowest level of the system and operate in cities, counties and urban districts, while different kinds of special courts handle cases related to military, railroad, or maritime matters. Judges are theoretically elected by their respective local people's assemblies, but in practice they are appointed by the Workers' Party of Korea. The penal code is based on the principle of nullum crimen sine lege (no crime without a law), but remains a tool for political control despite several amendments reducing ideological influence. Courts carry out legal procedures related to not only criminal and civil matters, but also political cases as well. Political prisoners are sent to labor camps, while criminal offenders are incarcerated in a separate system. The Ministry of Social Security maintains most law enforcement activities. It is one of the most powerful state institutions in North Korea and oversees the national police force, investigates criminal cases and manages non-political correctional facilities. It handles other aspects of domestic security like civil registration, traffic control, fire departments and railroad security. The Ministry of State Security was separated from the Ministry of Public Security in 1973 to conduct domestic and foreign intelligence, counterintelligence and manage the political prison system. Political camps can be short-term reeducation zones or "kwalliso" (total control zones) for lifetime detention. Camp 15 in Yodok and Camp 18 in Pukchang have been described in detailed testimonies. The security apparatus is extensive, exerting strict control over residence, travel, employment, clothing, food and family life. Security forces employ mass surveillance. It is believed they tightly monitor cellular and digital communications. Pukchang Chongjin Hoeryong Hwasong Kaechon Yodok The state of human rights in North Korea has been widely condemned. A 2014 UN inquiry into the DPRK's human rights record found evidence for "systematic, widespread and gross human rights violations" and stated that "the gravity, scale and nature of these violations reveal a state that does not have any parallel in the contemporary world", with Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch holding similar views. North Koreans have been referred to as "some of the world's most brutalized people" by Human Rights Watch, because of the severe restrictions placed on their political and economic freedoms. The North Korean population is strictly managed by the state and all aspects of daily life are subordinated to party and state planning. According to US government reports, employment is managed by the party on the basis of political reliability, and travel is tightly controlled by the Ministry of People's Security. The US State Department says that North Koreans do not have a choice in the jobs they work and are not free to change jobs at will. There are severe restrictions on the freedom of association, expression and movement; arbitrary detention, torture and other ill-treatment result in death and execution. Citizens in North Korea are denied freedom of movement including the right to leave the country at will and its government denies access to international human rights observers. The Ministry of State Security extrajudicially apprehends and imprisons those accused of political crimes without due process. People perceived as hostile to the government, such as Christians or critics of the leadership, are deported to labor camps without trial, often with their whole family and mostly without any chance of being released. Forced labor is part of an established system of political repression. Based on satellite images and defector testimonies, an estimated 200,000 prisoners are held in six large political prison camps, where they are forced to work in conditions approaching slavery. Supporters of the government who deviate from the government line are subject to reeducation in sections of labor camps set aside for that purpose. Those who are deemed politically rehabilitated may reassume responsible government positions on their release. North Korean defectors have provided detailed testimonies on the existence of the total control zones where abuses such as torture, starvation, rape, murder, medical experimentation, forced labor, and forced abortions have been reported. On the basis of these abuses, as well as persecution on political, religious, racial, and gender grounds, forcible transfer of populations, enforced disappearance of persons, and forced starvation, the United Nations Commission of Inquiry has accused North Korea of crimes against humanity. The International Coalition to Stop Crimes Against Humanity in North Korea (ICNK) estimates that over 10,000 people die in North Korean prison camps every year. With 1,100,000 people in modern slavery (via forced labor), North Korea is ranked highest in the world in terms of the percentage of population in modern slavery, with 10.4 percent enslaved according to the Walk Free's 2018 Global Slavery Index. North Korea is the only country in the world that has not explicitly criminalized any form of modern slavery. A United Nations report listed slavery among the crimes against humanity occurring in North Korea. Based on interviews with defectors, North Korean women are routinely subjected to sexual violence, unwanted sexual contact, and rape. Men in positions of power, including police, high-ranking officials, market supervisors, and guards can abuse women at will and are not prosecuted for it. It happens so often that it is accepted as a routine part of life. Women assume they can not do anything about it. The only ones with protection are those whose husbands or fathers are themselves in positions of power. According to the US State Department, the North Korean government does not fully comply with the minimum standards for the elimination of human trafficking and is not making significant efforts to do so. North Korea has trafficked thousands of its own citizens allegedly as forced laborers to Russia, China, Poland, Malaysia, and various parts of Africa and the Persian Gulf where most of the laborers' earnings are pocketed by Pyongyang. The North Korean government rejects the human rights abuse claims, calling them "a smear campaign" and a "human rights racket" aimed at government change. In a 2014 report to the UN, North Korea dismissed accusations of atrocities as "wild rumors". The official state media, KCNA, responded with an article that included homophobic insults against the author of the human rights report, Michael Kirby, calling him "a disgusting old lecher with a 40-odd-year-long career of homosexuality ... This practice can never be found in the DPRK boasting of the sound mentality and good morals ... In fact, it is ridiculous for such gay [sic] to sponsor dealing with others' human rights issue." The government, however, admitted some human rights issues related to living conditions and stated that it is working to improve them. The North Korean armed forces, or the Korean People's Army (KPA), is estimated to comprise 1,280,000 active and 6,300,000 reserve and paramilitary troops, making it one of the largest military institutions in the world. With an active duty army consisting of 4.9% of its population, North Korea maintains the fourth largest active military force in the world behind China, India and the United States. About 20 percent of men aged 17–54 serve in the regular armed forces, and approximately one in every 25 citizens is an enlisted soldier. The KPA is divided into five branches: Ground Force, Navy, Air and Anti-Air Force, Special Operations Force, and Rocket Force. Command of the KPA lies in both the Central Military Commission of the Workers' Party of Korea and the independent State Affairs Commission, which controls the Ministry of Defence. Of all the KPA's branches, the Ground Force is the largest, comprising approximately one million personnel divided into 80 infantry divisions, 30 artillery brigades, 25 special warfare brigades, 20 mechanized brigades, 10 tank brigades and seven tank regiments. It is equipped with 3,700 tanks, 2,100 armored personnel carriers and infantry fighting vehicles, 17,900 artillery pieces, 11,000 anti-aircraft guns and some 10,000 MANPADS and anti-tank guided missiles. The Air Force is estimated to possess around 1,600 aircraft (with between 545 – 810 serving combat roles), while the Navy operates approximately 800 vessels, including the largest submarine fleet in the world. The KPA's Special Operation Force is also the world's largest special forces unit. North Korea is a nuclear-armed state, though the nature and strength of the country's arsenal is uncertain. As of September 2023[update], estimates of its size ranged between 40 and 116 assembled nuclear warheads. Delivery capabilities are provided by the Rocket Force, which has some 1,000 ballistic missiles with a range of up to 11,900 km (7,400 mi). According to a 2004 South Korean assessment, North Korea also possesses a stockpile of chemical weapons estimated to amount to between 2,500–5,000 tons, including nerve, blister, blood, and vomiting agents, as well as the ability to cultivate and produce biological weapons including anthrax, smallpox, and cholera. As a result of its nuclear and missile tests, North Korea has been sanctioned under United Nations Security Council resolutions 1695 of July 2006, 1718 of October 2006, 1874 of June 2009, 2087 of January 2013, and 2397 in December 2017. The sale of weapons to North Korea by other states is prohibited by UN sanctions, and the KPA's conventional capabilities are limited by a number of factors including obsolete equipment, insufficient fuel supplies and a shortage of digital command and control assets. To compensate for these deficiencies, the KPA has deployed a wide range of asymmetric warfare technologies including anti-personnel blinding lasers, GPS jammers, midget submarines and human torpedoes, stealth paint, and cyberwarfare units. In 2015, North Korea was reported to employ 6,000 sophisticated computer security personnel in a cyberwarfare unit operating out of China. KPA units were blamed for the 2014 Sony Pictures hack and have allegedly attempted to jam South Korean military satellites. Much of the equipment in use by the KPA is engineered and manufactured by the domestic defense industry. Weapons are manufactured in roughly 1,800 underground defense industry plants scattered throughout the country, most of them located in Chagang Province. The defense industry is capable of producing a full range of individual and crew-operated weapons, artillery, armored vehicles, tanks, missiles, helicopters, submarines, landing and infiltration craft and Yak-18 trainers, and may even have limited jet aircraft manufacturing capacity. According to North Korean state media, military expenditure amounted to 15.8 percent of the state budget in 2010. The U.S. State Department has estimated that North Korea's military spending averaged 23% of its GDP from 2004 to 2014, the highest level in the world. North Korea successfully tested a new type of submarine-launched ballistic missile on 19 October 2021. North Korea's population was 10.9 million in 1961. With the exception of a small Chinese community and a few ethnic Japanese, North Korea's 25,971,909 people are ethnically homogeneous. Demographic experts in the 20th century estimated that the population would grow to 25.5 million by 2000 and 28 million by 2010, but this increase never occurred due to the North Korean famine. The famine began in 1995, lasted for three years, and resulted in the deaths of between 240,000 and 420,000 North Koreans. International donors led by the United States initiated shipments of food through the World Food Program in 1997 to combat the famine. Despite a drastic reduction of aid under the George W. Bush administration, the situation gradually improved: the number of malnourished children declined from 60% in 1998 to 37% in 2006 and 28% in 2013. Domestic food production almost recovered to the recommended annual level of 5.37 million tons of cereal equivalent in 2013, but the World Food Program reported a continuing lack of dietary diversity and access to fats and proteins. By the mid-2010s national levels of severe wasting, an indication of famine-like conditions, were lower than in other low-income countries and about on par with developing nations in the Pacific and East Asia. Children's health and nutrition is significantly better on a number of indicators than in many other Asian countries. The famine had a significant impact on the population growth rate, which declined to 0.9% annually in 2002. It was 0.5% in 2014. Late marriages after military service, limited housing space and long hours of work or political studies further exhaust the population and reduce growth. The national birth rate is 14.5 births per year per 1,000 population. Two-thirds of households consist of extended families mostly living in two-room units. Marriage is virtually universal and divorce is extremely rare. North Korea has a life expectancy of 72.3 years in 2019, according to HDR 2020. While North Korea is classified as a low-income country, the structure of North Korea's causes of death (2013) is unlike that of other low-income countries. Instead, it is closer to worldwide averages, with non-communicable diseases—such as cardiovascular disease and cancers—accounting for 84 percent of the total deaths in 2016. According to the World Bank report of 2016 (based on WHO's estimate), only 9.5% of the total deaths recorded in North Korea are attributed to communicable diseases and maternal, prenatal and nutrition conditions, a figure which is slightly lower than that of South Korea (10.1%) and one fifth of other low-income countries (50.1%) but higher than that of high income countries (6.7%). Only one out of ten leading causes of overall deaths in North Korea is attributed to communicable diseases (lower respiratory infection), a disease which is reported to have declined by six percent since 2007. In 2013, cardiovascular disease as a single disease group was reported as the largest cause of death in North Korea. The three major causes of death in North Korea are stroke, COPD and Ischaemic heart disease. Non-communicable diseases risk factors in North Korea include high rates of urbanization, an aging society, and high rates of smoking and alcohol consumption amongst men. Maternal mortality is lower than other low-income countries, but significantly higher than South Korea and other high income countries, at 89 per 100,000 live births. In 2008 child mortality was estimated to be 45 per 1,000, which is much better than other economically comparable countries. Chad for example had a child mortality rate of 120 per 1,000, despite the fact that Chad was most likely wealthier than North Korea at the time. Healthcare Access and Quality Index, as calculated by IHME, was reported to stand at 62.3, much lower than that of South Korea. According to a 2003 report by the United States Department of State, almost 100% of the population has access to water and sanitation. Further, 80% of the population had access to improved sanitation facilities in 2015. North Korea has the highest number of doctors per capita amongst low-income countries, with 3.7 physicians per 1,000 people, a figure which is also significantly higher than that of South Korea, according to WHO's data. Conflicting reports between Amnesty and WHO have emerged, where the Amnesty report claimed that North Korea had an inadequate health care system, while the Director of the World Health Organization claimed that North Korea's healthcare system was considered the envy of the developing world and had "no lack of doctors and nurses". A free universal insurance system is in place. Quality of medical care varies significantly by region and is often low, with severe shortages of equipment, drugs and anesthetics. According to WHO, expenditure on health per capita is one of the lowest in the world. Preventive medicine is emphasized through physical exercise and sports, nationwide monthly checkups and routine spraying of public places against disease. Every individual has a lifetime health card which contains a full medical record. The 2008 census listed the entire population as literate. An 11-year free, compulsory cycle of primary and secondary education is provided in more than 27,000 nursery schools, 14,000 kindergartens, 4,800 four-year primary and 4,700 six-year secondary schools. 77% of males and 79% of females aged 30–34 have finished secondary school. An additional 300 universities and colleges offer higher education. Most graduates from the compulsory program do not attend university but begin their obligatory military service or proceed to work in farms or factories instead. The main deficiencies of higher education are the heavy presence of ideological subjects, which comprise 50% of courses in social studies and 20% in sciences, and the imbalances in curriculum. The study of natural sciences is greatly emphasized while social sciences are neglected. Heuristics is actively applied to develop the independence and creativity of students throughout the system. The study of Russian and English was made compulsory in upper middle schools in 1978. North Korea shares the Korean language with South Korea, although some dialectal differences exist within both Koreas. North Koreans refer to their Pyongan dialect as munhwaŏ ("cultured language") as opposed to the dialects of South Korea, especially the Seoul dialect or p'yojun'ŏ ("standard language"), which are viewed as decadent because of its use of loanwords from Chinese and European languages (particularly English). Words of Chinese, Manchu or Western origin have been eliminated from munhwa along with the usage of Chinese hancha characters. Written language uses only the Chosŏn'gŭl (Hangul) phonetic alphabet, developed under Sejong the Great (1418–1450). North Korea is officially an atheist state. Its constitution guarantees freedom of religion under Article 68, but this principle is limited by the requirement that religion may not be used as a pretext to harm the state, introduce foreign forces, or harm the existing social order. Religious practice is therefore heavily restricted, despite nominal constitutional protections. Proselytizing is also prohibited due to concerns about foreign influence. The number of Christian churchgoers nonetheless more than doubled between the 1980s and the early 2000s due to the recruitment of Christians who previously worshipped privately or in small house churches. The Open Doors mission, a Protestant group based in the United States and founded during the Cold War era, claims the most severe persecution of Christians in the world occurs in North Korea. There are no known official statistics of religions in North Korea. According to a 2020 study published by the Centre for the Study of World Christianity, 73% of the population are irreligious (58% agnostic, 15% atheist), 13% practice Chondoism, 12% practice Korean shamanism, 1.5% are Buddhist, and less than 0.5% practice another religion such as Christianity, Islam, or Chinese folk religion. Amnesty International has expressed concerns about religious persecution in North Korea. Pro-North groups such as the Paektu Solidarity Alliance deny these claims, saying that multiple religious facilities exist across the nation. Some religious places of worship are located in foreign embassies in the capital city of Pyongyang. Five Christian churches built with state funds stand in Pyongyang: three Protestant, one Roman Catholic, and one Russian orthodox. Critics claim these are showcases for foreigners. Buddhism and Confucianism still influence spirituality. Chondoism ("Heavenly Way") is an indigenous syncretic belief combining elements of Korean shamanism, Buddhism, Taoism and Catholicism that is officially represented by the WPK-controlled Chondoist Chongu Party. Chondoism is recognized and favored by the government, being seen as an indigenous form of "revolutionary religion". According to North Korean documents and refugee testimonies, all North Koreans are sorted into groups according to their Songbun, an ascribed status system based on a citizen's assessed loyalty to the government. Based on their own behavior and the political, social, and economic background of their family for three generations as well as behavior by relatives within that range, Songbun is allegedly used to determine whether an individual is trusted with responsibility, given opportunities, or even receives adequate food. Songbun allegedly affects access to educational and employment opportunities and particularly whether a person is eligible to join North Korea's ruling party. There are 3 main classifications and about 50 sub-classifications. According to Kim Il Sung, speaking in 1958, the loyal "core class" constituted 25% of the North Korean population, the "wavering class" 55%, and the "hostile class" 20%. The highest status is accorded to individuals descended from those who participated with Kim Il Sung in the resistance against Japanese occupation before and during World War II and to those who were factory workers, laborers, or peasants in 1950. While some analysts believe private commerce recently changed the Songbun system to some extent, most North Korean refugees say it remains a commanding presence in everyday life. The North Korean government claims all citizens are equal and denies any discrimination on the basis of family background. North Korea has maintained one of the most closed and centralized economies in the world since the 1940s. For several decades, it followed the Soviet pattern of five-year plans with the ultimate goal of achieving self-sufficiency. Extensive Soviet and Chinese support allowed North Korea to rapidly recover from the Korean War and register very high growth rates. Systematic inefficiency began to arise around 1960, when the economy shifted from the extensive to the intensive development stage. The shortage of skilled labor, energy, arable land and transportation significantly impeded long-term growth and resulted in consistent failure to meet planning objectives. The major slowdown of the economy contrasted with South Korea, which surpassed the North in terms of absolute GDP and per capita income by the 1980s. North Korea declared the last seven-year plan unsuccessful in December 1993 and thereafter stopped announcing plans. The loss of Eastern Bloc trading partners and a series of natural disasters throughout the 1990s caused severe hardships, including widespread famine. By 2000, the situation improved owing to a massive international food assistance effort, but the economy continues to suffer from food shortages, dilapidated infrastructure and a critically low energy supply. In an attempt to recover from the collapse, the government began structural reforms in 1998 that formally legalized private ownership of assets and decentralized control over production. A second round of reforms in 2002 led to an expansion of market activities, partial monetization, flexible prices and salaries, and the introduction of incentives and accountability techniques. Despite these changes, North Korea remains a command economy where the state owns almost all means of production and development priorities are defined by the government. North Korea has the structural profile of a relatively industrialized country where nearly half of the gross domestic product is generated by industry and human development is at medium levels. Purchasing power parity (PPP) GDP is estimated at $40 billion, with a very low per capita value of $1,800. In 2012, Gross national income per capita was $1,523, compared to $28,430 in South Korea. The North Korean won is the national currency, issued by the Central Bank of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. The economy has been developing dramatically in recent years despite sanctions. The Sejong Institute describes these changes as "astonishing". The economy is heavily nationalized. Food and housing are extensively subsidized by the state; education and healthcare are free; and the payment of taxes was officially abolished in 1974. A variety of goods are available in department stores and supermarkets in Pyongyang, though most of the population relies on small-scale jangmadang markets. In 2009, the government attempted to stem the expanding free market by banning jangmadang and the use of foreign currency, heavily devaluing the won and restricting the convertibility of savings in the old currency, but the resulting inflation spike and rare public protests caused a reversal of these policies. Private trade is dominated by women because most men are required to be present at their workplace, even though many state-owned enterprises are non-operational. Industry and services employ 65% of North Korea's 12.6 million labor force. Major industries include machine building, military equipment, chemicals, mining, metallurgy, textiles, food processing and tourism. Iron ore and coal production are among the few sectors where North Korea performs significantly better than its southern neighbor—it produces about 10 times more of each resource. Using ex-Romanian drilling rigs, several oil exploration companies have confirmed significant oil reserves in the North Korean shelf of the Sea of Japan, and in areas south of Pyongyang. The agricultural sector was shattered by the natural disasters of the 1990s. Its 3,500 cooperatives and state farms were moderately successful until the mid-1990s but now experience chronic fertilizer and equipment shortages. Rice, corn, soybeans and potatoes are some of the primary crops. A significant contribution to the food supply comes from commercial fishing and aquaculture. Smaller specialized farms, managed by the state, also produce high-value crops, including ginseng, honey, matsutake and herbs for traditional Korean and Chinese medicine. Tourism has been a growing sector for the past decade. North Korea has been aiming to increase the number of foreign visitors through projects like the Masikryong Ski Resort. On 22 January 2020, North Korea closed its borders to foreign tourists in response to the threat of the COVID-19 pandemic in North Korea. Foreign trade surpassed pre-crisis levels in 2005 and continues to expand. North Korea has a number of special economic zones (SEZs) and Special Administrative Regions where foreign companies can operate with tax and tariff incentives while North Korean establishments gain access to improved technology. Initially four such zones existed, but they yielded little overall success. The SEZ system was overhauled in 2013 when 14 new zones were opened and the Rason Special Economic Zone was reformed as a joint Chinese-North Korean project. The Kaesong Industrial Region is a special economic zone where more than 100 South Korean companies employ some 52,000 North Korean workers. As of August 2017[update], China is the biggest trading partner of North Korea outside inter-Korean trade, accounting for more than 84% of the total external trade ($5.3 billion) followed by India at 3.3% share ($205 million). In 2014, Russia wrote off 90% of North Korea's debt and the two countries agreed to conduct all transactions in rubles. Overall, external trade in 2013 reached a total of $7.3 billion (the highest amount since 1990), while inter-Korean trade dropped to an eight-year low of $1.1 billion. North Korea's energy infrastructure is obsolete and in disrepair. Power shortages are chronic and would not be alleviated even by electricity imports because the poorly maintained grid causes significant losses during transmission. Coal accounts for 70% of primary energy production, followed by hydroelectric power with 17%. The government under Kim Jong Un has increased emphasis on renewable energy projects like wind farms, solar parks, solar heating and biomass. A set of legal regulations adopted in 2014 stressed the development of geothermal, wind and solar energy along with recycling and environmental conservation. North Korea's long-term objective is to curb fossil fuel usage and reach an output of 5 million kilowatts from renewable sources by 2044, up from its current total of 430,000 kilowatts from all sources. Wind power is projected to satisfy 15% of the country's total energy demand under this strategy. North Korea also strives to develop its own civilian nuclear program. These efforts are under much international dispute due to their military applications and concerns about safety. Transport infrastructure includes railways, highways, water and air routes, but rail transport is by far the most widespread. North Korea has some 5,200 kilometers (3,200 mi) of railways mostly in standard gauge which carry 80% of annual passenger traffic and 86% of freight, but electricity shortages undermine their efficiency. Construction of a high-speed railway connecting Kaesong, Pyongyang and Sinuiju with speeds exceeding 200 kilometers per hour (120 mph) was approved in 2013.[needs update] North Korea connects with the Trans-Siberian Railway through Rajin. Road transport is very limited—only 724 kilometers (450 mi) of the 25,554 kilometers (15,879 mi) road network are paved, and maintenance on most roads is poor. Only 2% of the freight capacity is supported by river and sea transport, and air traffic is negligible. All port facilities are ice-free and host a merchant fleet of 158 vessels. Eighty-two airports and 23 helipads are operational and the largest serve the state-run airline, Air Koryo. Cars are relatively rare, but bicycles are common. There is only one international airport—Pyongyang International Airport—serviced by Russia and China (see List of public airports in North Korea) R&D efforts are concentrated at the State Academy of Sciences, which runs 40 research institutes, 200 smaller research centers, a scientific equipment factory and six publishing houses. The government considers science and technology to be directly linked to economic development. A five-year scientific plan emphasizing IT, biotechnology, nanotechnology, marine technology, and laser and plasma research was carried out in the early 2000s. A 2010 report by the South Korean Science and Technology Policy Institute identified polymer chemistry, single carbon materials, nanoscience, mathematics, software, nuclear technology and rocketry as potential areas of inter-Korean scientific cooperation. North Korean institutes are strong in these fields of research, although their engineers require additional training, and laboratories need equipment upgrades. Under its "constructing a powerful knowledge economy" slogan, the state has launched a project to concentrate education, scientific research and production into a number of "high-tech development zones". International sanctions remain a significant obstacle to their development. The Miraewon network of electronic libraries was established in 2014 under similar slogans. Significant resources have been allocated to the national space program, which is managed by the National Aerospace Technology Administration (formerly managed by the Korean Committee of Space Technology until April 2013). Domestically produced launch vehicles and the Kwangmyŏngsŏng satellite class are launched from two spaceports, the Tonghae Satellite Launching Ground and the Sohae Satellite Launching Station. After four failed attempts, North Korea became the tenth spacefaring nation with the launch of Kwangmyŏngsŏng-3 Unit 2 in December 2012, which successfully reached orbit but was believed to be crippled and non-operational. It joined the Outer Space Treaty in 2009 and has stated its intentions to undertake crewed and Moon missions. The government insisted the space program is for peaceful purposes, but the United States, Japan, South Korea and other countries maintained that it serves to advance North Korea's ballistic missile program. On 7 February 2016, a statement broadcast on Korean Central Television said that a new Earth observation satellite, Kwangmyongsong-4, had successfully been put into orbit. Usage of communication technology is controlled by the Ministry of Post and Telecommunications. An adequate nationwide fiber-optic telephone system with 1.18 million fixed lines and expanding mobile coverage is in place. Most phones are installed for senior government officials and installation requires written explanation why the user needs a telephone and how it will be paid for. Cellular coverage is available with a 3G network operated by Koryolink, a joint venture with Orascom Telecom Holding. The number of subscribers has increased from 3,000 in 2002 to almost two million in 2013. International calls through either fixed or cellular service are restricted, and mobile Internet is not available. Internet access itself is limited to a handful of elite users and scientists. Instead, North Korea has a walled garden intranet system called Kwangmyong, which is maintained and monitored by the Korea Computer Center. Its content is limited to state media, chat services, message boards, an e-mail service and an estimated 1,000–5,500 websites. Computers employ the Red Star OS, an operating system derived from Linux, with a user shell visually similar to that of OS X. On 19 September 2016, a TLDR project noticed the North Korean Internet DNS data and top-level domain was left open which allowed global DNS zone transfers. A dump of the data discovered was shared on GitHub. Despite a historically strong Chinese influence, Korean culture has shaped its own unique identity. It came under attack during the Japanese rule from 1910 to 1945, when Japan enforced a cultural assimilation policy. Koreans were forced to learn and speak Japanese, adopt the Japanese family name system and Shinto religion, and were forbidden to write or speak the Korean language in schools, businesses, or public places. After the peninsula was divided in 1945, two distinct cultures formed out of the common Korean heritage. North Koreans have little exposure to foreign influence. The revolutionary struggle and the brilliance of the leadership are some of the main themes in art. "Reactionary" elements from traditional culture have been discarded and cultural forms with a "folk" spirit have been reintroduced. Korean heritage is protected and maintained by the state. Over 190 historical sites and objects of national significance are cataloged as National Treasures of North Korea, while some 1,800 less valuable artifacts are included in a list of Cultural Assets. The Historic Monuments and Sites in Kaesong and the Complex of Koguryo Tombs are UNESCO World Heritage Sites. Visual arts are generally produced in the aesthetic of socialist realism. North Korean painting combines the influence of Soviet and Japanese visual expression to instill a sentimental loyalty to the system. All artists in North Korea are required to join the Artists' Union, and the best among them can receive an official license to portray the leaders. Portraits and sculptures depicting Kim Il Sung, Kim Jong Il and Kim Jong Un are classed as "Number One works". Most aspects of art have been dominated by Mansudae Art Studio since its establishment in 1959. It employs around 1,000 artists in what is likely the biggest art factory in the world where paintings, murals, posters and monuments are designed and produced. The studio has commercialized its activity and sells its works to collectors in a variety of countries including China, where it is in high demand. Mansudae Overseas Projects is a subdivision of Mansudae Art Studio that carries out construction of large-scale monuments for international customers. Some of the projects include the African Renaissance Monument in Senegal, and the Heroes' Acre in Namibia. The Goguryeo tombs are registered on UNESCO's list of World Heritage Sites. These remains were registered as the first World Heritage property of North Korea in the UNESCO World Heritage Committee (WHC) in July 2004. There are 63 burial mounds on the site, with clear murals preserved. The burial customs of the Goguryeo culture have influenced Asian civilizations beyond Korea, including Japan. "Song of Comradeship" performed by the KPA State Chorus "Let us Dash towards the Future" performed by Moranbong Band Problems playing these files? See media help. The government emphasized optimistic folk-based tunes and revolutionary music throughout most of the 20th century. Ideological messages are conveyed through massive orchestral pieces like the "Five Great Revolutionary Operas" based on traditional Korean ch'angguk. Revolutionary operas differ from their Western counterparts by adding traditional instruments to the orchestra and avoiding recitative segments. Sea of Blood is the most widely performed of the Five Great Operas: since its premiere in 1971, it has been played over 1,500 times, and its 2010 tour in China was a major success. Western classical music by Brahms, Tchaikovsky, Stravinsky and other composers is performed both by the State Symphony Orchestra and student orchestras. Pop music appeared in the 1980s with the Pochonbo Electronic Ensemble and Wangjaesan Light Music Band. Improved relations with South Korea following the 2000 inter-Korean summit caused a decline in direct ideological messages in pop songs, but themes like comradeship, nostalgia and the construction of a powerful country remained. In 2014, the all-girl Moranbong Band was described as the most popular group in the country. North Koreans also listen to K-pop which spreads through illegal markets. All publishing houses are owned by the government or the WPK because they are considered an important tool for agitprop. The Workers' Party of Korea Publishing House is the most authoritative among them and publishes all works of Kim Il Sung, ideological education materials and party policy documents. The availability of foreign literature is limited, examples being North Korean editions of Indian, German, Chinese and Russian fairy tales, Tales from Shakespeare, some works of Bertolt Brecht and Erich Kästner, and the Harry Potter series. Kim Il Sung's personal works are considered "classical masterpieces" while the ones created under his instruction are labeled "models of Juche literature". These include The Fate of a Self-Defense Corps Man, The Song of Korea and Immortal History, a series of historical novels depicting the suffering of Koreans under Japanese occupation. More than four million literary works were published between the 1980s and the early 2000s, but almost all of them belong to a narrow variety of political genres like "army-first revolutionary literature". Science fiction is considered a secondary genre because it somewhat departs from the traditional standards of detailed descriptions and metaphors of the leader. The exotic settings of the stories give authors more freedom to depict cyberwarfare, violence, sexual abuse, and crime, which are absent in other genres. Sci-fi works glorify technology and promote the Juche concept of anthropocentric existence through depictions of robotics, space exploration, and immortality. Government policies towards film are no different from those applied to other arts—motion pictures serve to fulfill the targets of "social education". Some of the most influential films are based on historic events (An Jung-geun shoots Itō Hirobumi) or folk tales (Hong Gildong). Most movies have predictable propaganda story lines which make cinema an unpopular entertainment; viewers only see films that feature their favorite actors. Western productions are only available at private showings to high-ranking Party members, although the 1997 film Titanic is frequently shown to university students as an example of Western culture. Access to foreign media products is available through smuggled DVDs and television or radio broadcasts in border areas. Western films like The Interview, Charlie's Angels, and the aforementioned Titanic are just a few films that have been smuggled across the borders of North Korea, allowing for access to the North Korean citizens. North Korean media are under some of the strictest government control in the world. The censorship in North Korea encompasses all the information produced by the media. Monitored heavily by government officials, the media is strictly used to reinforce ideals approved by the government. There is no freedom of press in North Korea as all the media is controlled and filtered through governmental censors. Freedom of the press in 2017 was 180th out of 180 countries in Reporters Without Borders' annual Press Freedom Index. According to Freedom House, all media outlets serve as government mouthpieces, all journalists are party members and listening to foreign broadcasts carries the threat of the death penalty. The main news provider is the Korean Central News Agency. All 12 major newspapers and 20 periodicals, including Rodong Sinmun, are published in the capital. There are three state-owned TV stations. Two of them broadcast only on weekends and the Korean Central Television is on air every day in the evenings. Uriminzokkiri and its associated YouTube and Twitter accounts distribute imagery, news and video issued by government media. The Associated Press opened the first Western all-format, full-time bureau in Pyongyang in 2012. Media coverage of North Korea has often been inadequate as a result of the country's isolation. Stories like Kim Jong Un executing his ex-girlfriend or feeding his uncle to a pack of hungry dogs have been circulated by foreign media as truth despite the lack of a credible source. Many of the claims originate from the South Korean right-wing newspaper The Chosun Ilbo. Max Fisher of The Washington Post has written that "almost any story [on North Korea] is treated as broadly credible, no matter how outlandish or thinly sourced". Occasional deliberate disinformation on the part of North Korean establishments further complicates the issue. Korean cuisine has evolved through centuries of social and political change. Originating from ancient agricultural and nomadic traditions in southern Manchuria and the Korean Peninsula, it has gone through a complex interaction of the natural environment and different cultural trends. Rice dishes and kimchi are staple Korean food. In a traditional meal, they accompany both side dishes (panch'an) and main courses like juk, pulgogi or noodles. Soju liquor is the best-known traditional Korean spirit. North Korea's most famous restaurant, Okryu-gwan, located in Pyongyang, is known for its raengmyeon cold noodles. Other dishes served there include gray mullet soup with boiled rice, beef rib soup, green bean pancake, sinsollo and dishes made from terrapin. Okryu-gwan sends research teams into the countryside to collect data on Korean cuisine and introduce new recipes. Some Asian cities host branches of the Pyongyang restaurant chain where waitresses perform music and dance. Most schools have daily practice in association football, basketball, table tennis, gymnastics, boxing and others. The DPR Korea League is popular inside the country and its games are often televised. The national football team, Chollima, competed in the FIFA World Cup in 2010, when it lost all three matches against Brazil, Portugal and Ivory Coast. Its 1966 appearance was much more successful, seeing a surprise 1–0 victory over Italy and a quarter final loss to Portugal by 3–5. A national team represents the nation in international basketball competitions as well. In December 2013, former American basketball professional Dennis Rodman visited North Korea to help train the national team after he developed a friendship with Kim Jong Un. North Korea's first appearance in the Olympics came in 1964. The 1972 Olympics saw its summer games debut and five medals, including one gold. With the exception of the boycotted Los Angeles and Seoul Olympics, North Korean athletes have won medals in all summer games since then. Weightlifter Kim Un-guk broke the world record of the Men's 62 kg category at the 2012 Summer Olympics in London. Successful Olympians receive luxury apartments from the state in recognition for their achievements. The Arirang Mass Games has been recognized by the Guinness World Records as the biggest choreographic event in the world. Some 100,000 athletes perform rhythmic gymnastics and dances while another 40,000 participants create a vast animated screen in the background. The event is an artistic representation of the country's history and pays homage to Kim Il Sung and Kim Jong Il. Rungrado 1st of May Stadium, the largest stadium in the world with its capacity of 150,000, hosts the Festival. The Pyongyang Marathon is another notable sports event. It is an IAAF Bronze Label Race where amateur runners from around the world can participate. North Korea portal Asia portal Outline of North Korea Bibliography of North Korea 58% agnostic, 15% atheist. North Korea is officially an atheist state. Including Christianity, Islam, and Chinese folk religion. North Koreans use the name Chosŏn (조선, 朝鮮) when referring to North Korea or Korea as a whole. The literal translation of North Korea, Pukchosŏn (북조선, 北朝鮮), is rarely used, although it may be found in sources which predate the Korean War. South Koreans use Bukhan (북한, 北韓) when referring to North Korea, derived from the South Korean name for Korea, Hanguk (한국, 韓國). Also abbreviated as DPR Korea and Korea, DPR Korean: 조선민주주의인민공화국, Hancha: 朝鮮民主主義人民共和國, MR: Chosŏn Minjujuŭi Inmin Konghwaguk North Korea's border with South Korea is a disputed border as both countries claim the entirety of the Korean Peninsula. The constitution of the DPRK, Article 1, states that "The Democratic People's Republic of Korea is an independent socialist State representing the interests of all the Korean people." In spite of the United States' recognition of South Korea de jure, Sweden acts as its protecting power. United States Congress (2016). North Korea: A Country Study. Nova Science Publishers. p. 6. ISBN 978-1-59033-443-0. "Han Chinese built four commanderies, or local military units, to rule the peninsula as far south as the Han River, with a core area at Lolang (Nangnang in Korean), near present-day P'yongyang. It is illustrative of the relentlessly different historiography practiced in North Korea and South Korea, as well as both countries' dubious projection backward of Korean nationalism, that North Korean historians denied that the Lolang district was centered in Korea and placed it northwest of the peninsula, possibly near Beijing." Connor, Edgar V. (2003). Korea: Current Issues and Historical Background. Nova Science Publishers. p. 112. ISBN 978-1-59033-443-0. "They place it northwest of the peninsula, possibly near Beijing, in order to de-emphasize China's influence on ancient Korean history." Kim, Jinwung 2012, p. 18 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFKim,_Jinwung2012 (help) "Immediately after destroying Wiman Chosŏn, the Han empire established administrative units to rule large territories in the northern Korean peninsula and southern Manchuria." Hyung, Hyung Il (2000). Constructing "Korean" Origins. Harvard University Press. p. 129. ISBN 978-0-674-00244-9. "When material evidence from the Han commandery site excavated during the colonial period began to be reinterpreted by Korean nationalist historians as the first full-fledged "foreign" occupation in Korean history, Lelang's location in the heart of the Korean peninsula became particularly irksome because the finds seemed to verify Japanese colonial theories concerning the dependency of Korean civilization on China." Hyung, Hyung Il (2000). Constructing "Korean" Origins. Harvard University Press. p. 128. ISBN 978-0-674-00244-9. "At present, the site of Lelang and surrounding ancient Han Chinese remains are situated in the North Korean capital of Pyongyang. Although North Korean scholars have continued to excavate Han dynasty tombs in the postwar period, they have interpreted them as manifestations of the Kochoson or the Koguryo kingdom." Xu, Stella Yingzi (2007). That glorious ancient history of our nation. University of California, Los Angeles. p. 223. ISBN 978-0-549-44036-9. "Lelang Commandery was crucial to understanding the early history of Korea, which lasted from 108 BCE to 313 CE around the Pyongyang area. However, because of its nature as a Han colony and the exceptional attention paid to it by Japanese colonial scholars for making claims of the innate heteronomy of Koreans, post 1945 Korean scholars intentionally avoided the issue of Lelang." Lee, Peter H. (1996). Sourcebook of Korean Civilization: Volume 2: From the Seventeenth Century to the Modern. New York: Columbia University Press. p. 227. ISBN 978-0-231-07912-9. "But when Emperor Wu conquered Choson, all the small barbarian tribes in the northeastern region were incorporated into the established Han commanderies because of the overwhelming military might of Han China." "Korea, North". The World Factbook. Central Intelligence Agency. 6 December 2023. Demographic Yearbook – Table 3: Population by sex, rate of population increase, surface area and density (PDF). United Nations Statistics Division. 2012. p. 5. Retrieved 29 November 2014. "North Korea country profile". BBC News. 17 October 2023. Retrieved 17 October 2023. "Korea North". The World Factbook (2024 ed.). Central Intelligence Agency. Retrieved 8 April 2023. "Real GDP (purchasing power parity)". www.cia.gov. CIA World Factbook. "GDP (PPP) per capita Field listing". CIA World Factbook. Archived from the original on 25 June 2014. Retrieved 31 May 2014. "UNData app". data.un.org. "Decree on Redesignating Pyongyang Time". Naenara. 30 April 2018. Retrieved 4 May 2018. "Telephone System Field Listing". CIA The World Factbook. Archived from the original on 25 June 2014. Retrieved 17 June 2014. Hersher, Rebecca (21 September 2016). "North Korea Accidentally Reveals It Only Has 28 Websites". NPR. Archived from the original on 22 September 2016. Retrieved 22 September 2016. "Chapter I. Politics". Socialist Constitution of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea (2019) . 2019 – via Wikisource. Korea原名Corea？ 美國改的名 (in Chinese). United Daily News. 5 July 2008. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 28 March 2014. Buzo, Adrian (2002). The Making of Modern Korea. London: Routledge. p. 72. ISBN 978-0-415-23749-9. Cumings, Bruce (2005). Korea's Place in the Sun: A Modern History. New York: W. W. Norton & Company. pp. 505–506. ISBN 978-0-393-32702-1. Young, Benjamin R (7 February 2014). "Why is North Korea called the DPRK?". NK News. Archived from the original on 9 February 2014. Retrieved 9 February 2014. "Early Korea". Archived from the original on 25 June 2015. 매국사학의 몸통들아, 공개토론장으로 나와라!. ngonews. 24 December 2015. Archived from the original on 19 September 2016. 요서 vs 평양… 한무제가 세운 낙랑군 위치 놓고 열띤 토론. Segye Ilbo. 21 August 2016. Archived from the original on 13 April 2017. "갈석산 동쪽 요서도 고조선 땅" vs "고고학 증거와 불일치". The Dong-a Ilbo. 22 August 2016. Retrieved 14 April 2017. Yi, Ki-baek (1984). A New History of Korea. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. pp. 12, 56. ISBN 978-0-674-61576-2. Cumings, Bruce (2005). Korea's Place in the Sun: A Modern History. New York: W. W. Norton & Company. p. 182. ISBN 978-0-393-32702-1. Cumings, Bruce (2005). Korea's Place in the Sun: A Modern History. New York: W. W. Norton & Company. pp. 174–175, 407. ISBN 978-0-393-32702-1. Robinson, Michael E (2007). Korea's Twentieth-Century Odyssey. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press. pp. 84–86. ISBN 978-0-8248-3174-5. Lone, Stewart; McCormack, Gavan (1993). Korea since 1850. Melbourne: Longman Cheshire. pp. 184–185. Lone, Stewart; McCormack, Gavan (1993). Korea since 1850. Melbourne: Longman Cheshire. p. 175. Robinson, Michael E (2007). Korea's Twentieth-Century Odyssey. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press. p. 113. ISBN 978-0-8248-3174-5. Lankov, Andrei (16 March 2005). "North Korea's missionary position". Asia Times Online. Archived from the original on 18 March 2005.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Robinson, Michael E (2007). Korea's Twentieth-Century Odyssey. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press. pp. 85–87, 155. ISBN 978-0-8248-3174-5. "Administrative Population and Divisions Figures (#26)" (PDF). DPRK: The Land of the Morning Calm. Permanent Committee on Geographical Names for British Official Use. April 2003. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 September 2006. Retrieved 10 October 2006. Lankov, Andrei (25 January 2012). "Terenti Shtykov: the other ruler of nascent N. Korea". The Korea Times. Archived from the original on 17 April 2015. Retrieved 14 April 2015. Dowling, Timothy (2011). "Terentii Shtykov". History and the Headlines. ABC-CLIO. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Retrieved 26 April 2015. Lankov, Andrei. "North Korea in 1945–48: The Soviet Occupation and the Birth of the State". From Stalin to Kim Il Sung – The Formation of North Korea, 1945–1960. pp. 2–3. Lankov, Andrei (10 April 2013). The Real North Korea: Life and Politics in the Failed Stalinist Utopia. Oxford University Press. p. 7. "United Nations Security Council – History". Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved 12 May 2021. "U.S.: N. Korea Boosting Guerrilla War Capabilities". Fox News Network, LLC. Associated Press. 23 June 2009. Archived from the original on 27 June 2009. Retrieved 4 July 2009. Kim, Samuel S. (2014). "The Evolving Asian System". International Relations of Asia. Rowman & Littlefield. p. 45. ISBN 978-1442226418. With three of the four major Cold War fault lines—divided Germany, divided Korea, divided China, and divided Vietnam – East Asia acquired the dubious distinction of having engendered the largest number of armed conflicts resulting in higher fatalities between 1945 and 1994 than any other region or sub-region. Even in Asia, while Central and South Asia produced a regional total of 2.8 million in human fatalities, East Asia's regional total is 10.4 million including the Chinese Civil War (1 million), the Korean War (3 million), the Vietnam War (2 million), and the Pol Pot genocide in Cambodia (1 to 2 million). Cumings, Bruce (2011). The Korean War: A History. Modern Library. p. 35. ISBN 978-0812978964. Various encyclopedias state that the countries involved in the three-year conflict suffered a total of more than 4 million casualties, of which at least 2 million were civilians—a higher percentage than in World War II or Vietnam. A total of 36,940 Americans lost their lives in the Korean theater; of these, 33,665 were killed in action, while 3,275 died there of nonhostile causes. Some 92,134 Americans were wounded in action, and decades later, 8,176 were still reported as missing. South Korea sustained 1,312,836 casualties, including 415,004 dead. Casualties among other UN allies totaled 16,532, including 3,094 dead. Estimated North Korean casualties numbered 2 million, including about one million civilians and 520,000 soldiers. An estimated 900,000 Chinese soldiers lost their lives in combat. McGuire, James (2010). Wealth, Health, and Democracy in East Asia and Latin America. Cambridge University Press. p. 203. ISBN 978-1139486224. In Korea, war in the early 1950s cost nearly 3 million lives, including nearly a million civilian dead in South Korea. Painter, David S. (1999). The Cold War: An International History. Routledge. p. 30. ISBN 978-0415153164. Before it ended, the Korean War cost over 3 million people their lives, including over 50,000 US servicemen and women and a much higher number of Chinese and Korean lives. The war also set in motion a number of changes that led to the militarization and intensification of the Cold War. Lewy, Guenter (1980). America in Vietnam. Oxford University Press. pp. 450–453. ISBN 978-0199874231. For the Korean War the only hard statistic is that of American military deaths, which included 33,629 battle deaths and 20,617 who died of other causes. The North Korean and Chinese Communists never published statistics of their casualties. The number of South Korean military deaths has been given as in excess of 400,000; the South Korean Ministry of Defense puts the number of killed and missing at 281,257. Estimates of communist troops killed are about one-half million. The total number of Korean civilians who died in the fighting, which left almost every major city in North and South Korea in ruins, has been estimated at between 2 and 3 million. This adds up to almost 1 million military deaths and a possible 2.5 million civilians who were killed or died as a result of this extremely destructive conflict. The proportion of civilians killed in the major wars of this century (and not only in the major ones) has thus risen steadily. It reached about 42 percent in World War II and may have gone as high as 70 percent in the Korean War. ... we find that the ratio of civilian to military deaths [in Vietnam] is not substantially different from that of World War II and is well below that of the Korean War. Armstrong 2010, p. 1: "The number of Korean dead, injured or missing by war's end approached three million, ten percent of the overall population. The majority of those killed were in the North, which had half of the population of the South; although the DPRK does not have official figures, possibly twelve to fifteen percent of the population was killed in the war, a figure close to or surpassing the proportion of Soviet citizens killed in World War II." Cumings, Bruce (1997). Korea's Place in the Sun: A Modern History. WW Norton & Company. pp. 297–298. ISBN 978-0-393-31681-0. Jager 2013, pp. 237–242. Stewart, Richard W., ed. (2005). "The Korean War, 1950–1953". American Military History, Volume 2. United States Army Center of Military History. CMH Pub 30-22. Archived from the original on 28 May 2008. Retrieved 20 August 2007. Abt 2014, pp. 125–126. Brune, Lester H. (1996). The Korean War: Handbook of the Literature and Research. Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 60. ISBN 978-0-313-28969-9. Armstrong 2010, p. 9. Chung, Chin O. Pyongyang Between Peking and Moscow: North Korea's Involvement in the Sino-Soviet Dispute, 1958–1975. University of Alabama, 1978, p. 45. Zagoria, Donald S.; Kim, Young Kun (December 1975). "North Korea and the Major Powers". Asian Survey. 15 (12): 1017–1035. doi:10.2307/2643582. JSTOR 2643582. Country Study 2009, p. XV. Schaefer, Bernd. "North Korean 'Adventurism' and China's Long Shadow, 1966–1972". Washington, D.C .: Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars, 2004. Campbell, John Coert (196). American Policy Toward Communist Eastern Europe: The Choices Ahead. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. p. 116. ISBN 0-8166-0345-6. Armstrong, Charles. Tyranny of the Weak: North Korea and the World, 1950–1992. Studies of the Weatherhead East Asian Institute, Columbia University. Cornell University Press. pp. 99–100. Country Study 2009, pp. xxxii, 46. French 2007, pp. 97–99. Cumings, Bruce (2011). North Korea: Another Country. The New Press. p. 9. ISBN 978-1-59558-739-8. Lankov, Andrei (2013). The Real North Korea: Life and Politics in the Failed Stalinist Utopia. OUP US. p. 64. ISBN 978-0-19-996429-1. Demick, Barbara (16 July 2010). "North Korea's giant leap backwards". The Guardian. Retrieved 21 January 2021. Kirkbride, Wayne (1984). DMZ, a story of the Panmunjom axe murder. Hollym International Corp. Bandow, Doug; Carpenter, Ted Galen, eds. (1992). The U.S.–South Korean Alliance: Time for a Change. New Brunswick: Transaction Publishers. pp. 99–100. ISBN 978-1-4128-4086-6. Archived from the original on 13 September 2016. Chinoy, Mike (8 July 1997). "North Korea ends mourning for Kim Il Sung". CNN. Archived from the original on 19 May 2015. Retrieved 9 May 2015. Kwak, Tae-Hwan; Joo, Seung-Ho (2003). The Korean peace process and the four powers. Ashgate Publishing, Ltd. ISBN 978-0-7546-3653-3. DeRouen, Karl; Heo, Uk (2005). Defense and Security: A Compendium of National Armed Forces and Security Policies. ABC-CLIO. "North Korea's Military Strategy" Archived 24 February 2013 at the Wayback Machine, Parameters, U.S. Army War College Quarterly. Spoorenberg, Thomas; Schwekendiek, Daniel (2012). "Demographic Changes in North Korea: 1993–2008". Population and Development Review. 38 (1): 133–158. doi:10.1111/j.1728-4457.2012.00475.x. Jager 2013, p. 456. Abt 2014, pp. 55, 109, 119. Oberdorfer, Don; Carlin, Robert (2014). The Two Koreas: A Contemporary History. Basic Books. pp. 357–359. ISBN 978-0465031238. Burns, Robert; Gearan, Anne (13 October 2006). "U.S.: Test Points to N. Korea Nuke Blast". The Washington Post. Retrieved 18 January 2020. Bliss, Jeff (16 October 2006). "North Korea Nuclear Test Confirmed by U.S. Intelligence Agency". Bloomberg News. Archived from the original on 30 September 2007. Retrieved 16 October 2006. Lee, Sung-Yoon (26 August 2010). "The Pyongyang Playbook". Foreign Policy. Archived from the original on 4 September 2010. Retrieved 6 November 2010. "Anger at North Korea over sinking". BBC News. 20 May 2010. Archived from the original on 23 May 2010. Retrieved 23 May 2010. Deok-hyun Kim (24 November 2010). "S. Korea to toughen rules of engagement against N. Korean attack". Archived from the original on 1 December 2010. Retrieved 24 November 2010. Korean Central News Agency. "Lee Myung Bak Group Accused of Scuttling Dialogue and Humanitarian Work". Archived from the original on 28 November 2010. Retrieved 24 November 2010. "North Korean leader Kim Jong Il, 69, has died". Associated Press. 19 December 2011. Archived from the original on 20 December 2011. Retrieved 19 December 2011. Albert, Eleanor (3 January 2018). "North Korea's Military Capabilities". Council on Foreign Relations. Bierman, Noah (31 August 2017). "Trump warns North Korea of 'fire and fury'". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved 4 August 2018. "N Korea promises Guam strike plan in days". BBC News. 10 August 2017. Retrieved 4 August 2018. Ji, Dagyum (12 February 2018). "Delegation visit shows N. Korea can take 'drastic' steps to improve relations: MOU". NK News. Retrieved 18 January 2020. Donald Trump meets Kim Jong Un in DMZ; steps onto North Korean soil. USA Today. 30 June 2019. Hyonhee Shin (11 January 2021). "Mixed signals for North Korean leader's sister as Kim seeks to cement power". Reuters. Retrieved 11 January 2021. Seo, Yoonjung; Bae, Gawon; Jozuka, Emiko; Lendon, Brad (24 March 2022). "North Korea fires first suspected ICBM since 2017". CNN. Retrieved 12 June 2022. "North Korea declares itself a nuclear weapons state". BBC News. 9 September 2022. Retrieved 9 September 2022. "조선로동당 중앙위원회 제8기 제9차전원회의 확대회의에 관한 보도". www.rodong.rep.kp. 로동신문. Retrieved 25 January 2024. "공화국의 부흥발전과 인민들의 복리증진을 위한 당면과업에 대하여". www.rodong.rep.kp. 로동신문. Retrieved 25 January 2024. "Topography and Drainage". Library of Congress. 1 June 1993. Archived from the original on 17 November 2004. Retrieved 17 August 2009. Song, Yong-deok (2007). "The recognition of mountain Baekdu in the Koryo dynasty and early times of the Joseon dynasty". History and Reality V.64. United Nations Environmental Programme. "DPR Korea: State of the Environment, 2003" (PDF). p. 12. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 July 2010. Grantham, H. S.; et al. (2020). "Anthropogenic modification of forests means only 40% of remaining forests have high ecosystem integrity – Supplementary Material". Nature Communications. 11 (1): 5978. Bibcode:2020NatCo..11.5978G. doi:10.1038/s41467-020-19493-3. ISSN 2041-1723. PMC 7723057. PMID 33293507. Caraway, Bill (2007). "Korea Geography". The Korean History Project. Archived from the original on 6 July 2007. Retrieved 1 August 2007. Dinerstein, Eric; et al. (2017). "An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm". BioScience. 67 (6): 534–545. doi:10.1093/biosci/bix014. ISSN 0006-3568. PMC 5451287. PMID 28608869. "North Korea Country Studies. Climate". Lcweb2.loc.gov. Archived from the original on 12 December 2012. Retrieved 23 June 2010. "North Korea country profile". BBC News. 9 April 2018. "Kim Jong Un's North Korea: Life inside the totalitarian state". Washington Post. "Totalitarianism". Encyclopædia Britannica. 2018. "Korea, North". Britannica Book of the Year 2014. London: Encyclopedia Britannica, Inc. 2014. p. 642. ISBN 978-1-62513-171-3. "DPRK Socialist Constitution". www.naenara.com.kp. Archived from the original on 15 August 2021. Retrieved 24 April 2020. Namgung Min (13 October 2008). "Kim Jong Il's Ten Principles: Restricting the People". Daily NK. Archived from the original on 8 April 2014. Retrieved 20 January 2014. Audrey Yoo (16 October 2013). "North Korea rewrites rules to legitimise Kim family succession". South China Morning Post. Archived from the original on 28 October 2013. Retrieved 16 October 2013. "북한 노동당 규약 주요 개정 내용" [Major revisions to North Korea's Workers' Party rules]. Yonhap News Agency. 1 June 2021. Retrieved 13 August 2022. Na, Hye-yoon (6 January 2021). 北, 당원 대폭 늘었나 ... 당 대회 참석수로 '650만 명' 추정 [Has party membership surged in the north? Estimated attendance of '6.5 million' at party convention]. News1 Korea (in Korean). Retrieved 28 August 2022. Country Study 2009, p. 192. Petrov, Leonid (12 October 2009). "DPRK has quietly amended its Constitution". Korea Vision. Archived from the original on 16 October 2015. Retrieved 21 July 2015. "North Korea profile: Leaders". BBC News. 26 March 2014. Archived from the original on 18 May 2014. Retrieved 18 May 2014. "North Korea: Kim Jong-un hailed 'supreme commander'". BBC News. 24 December 2011. Archived from the original on 7 January 2014. Retrieved 18 May 2014. Hitchens, Christopher (24 December 2007). "Why has the Bush administration lost interest in North Korea?". Slate. Archived from the original on 20 May 2010. Retrieved 9 April 2010. Article 109 of the Constitution of North Korea "DPRK Constitution Text Released Following 2016 Amendments". North Korea Leadership Watch. 4 September 2016. Archived from the original on 18 April 2017. Retrieved 18 April 2017. "Organizational Chart of North Korean Leadership" (PDF). Seoul: Political and Military Analysis Division, Intelligence and Analysis Bureau; Ministry of Unification. January 2018. Retrieved 17 October 2018. "North Korea | Facts, Map, & History | Britannica". www.britannica.com. 7 February 2024. Retrieved 8 February 2024. "Preamble". Socialist Constitution of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. Pyongyang: Foreign Languages Publishing House. 2014. p. 1. ISBN 978-9946-0-1099-1. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 August 2016. Amended and supplemented on 1 April, Juche 102 (2013), at the Seventh Session of the Twelfth Supreme People's Assembly. Choe Sang-Hun (9 March 2014). "North Korea Uses Election To Reshape Parliament". The New York Times. Retrieved 18 March 2014. Hotham, Oliver (3 March 2014). "The weird, weird world of North Korean elections". NK News. Retrieved 17 July 2015. "North Korea election turnout 99.99 percent: State media". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 11 February 2024. "North Korea elections: What is decided and how?". BBC News. 19 July 2015. Retrieved 11 February 2024. "North Korea's premier now ranks as top official. Is he Kim Jong Un's successor?". NK PRO. 1 August 2022. Retrieved 28 August 2022. Country Study 2009, p. 198. Country Study 2009, pp. 197–198. "Pak Opens Account with Conservative Aire". Daily NK. 23 April 2013. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 18 May 2014. Country Study 2009, p. 200. 국가법령정보센터 | 법령 > 본문 – 대한민국헌법. www.law.go.kr (in Korean). Retrieved 25 October 2019. Hallam, Jonny; Magramo, Kathleen; Seo, Yoonjung (20 March 2023). "Kim says North Korea must be ready to launch nuclear counterattack as daughter watches latest missile test". CNN. North Korea has been ruled as a hereditary dictatorship since its founding in 1948 by Kim Il Sung. His son, Kim Jong Il, took over after his father's death in 1994. And Kim Jong Un took power 17 years later when Kim Jong Il died. Lim, Sora; Ko, Sunghwah (31 December 2020). "North Korean Leaders' Personality Reflection on Provocation Patterns: Narcissism and Fear". Journal of Contemporary Eastern Asia. 19 (2): 216–233. doi:10.17477/JCEA.2020.19.2.216. Flannery, Nathaniel Parish (25 May 2016). "Most Corrupt Countries". Forbes. Retrieved 10 February 2024. Spencer, Richard (28 August 2007). "North Korea power struggle looms". The Telegraph (online version of United Kingdom's national newspaper). London. Archived from the original on 20 November 2007. Retrieved 31 October 2007. A power struggle to succeed Kim Jong-il as leader of North Korea's Stalinist dictatorship may be looming after his eldest son was reported to have returned from semi-voluntary exile. Parry, Richard Lloyd (5 September 2007). "North Korea's nuclear 'deal' leaves Japan feeling nervous". The Times (online version of United Kingdom's national newspaper of record). London. Archived from the original on 26 July 2008. Retrieved 31 October 2007. The US Government contradicted earlier North Korean claims that it had agreed to remove the Stalinist dictatorship's designation as a terrorist state and to lift economic sanctions, as part of talks aimed at disarming Pyongyang of its nuclear weapons. Brooke, James (2 October 2003). "North Korea Says It Is Using Plutonium to Make A-Bombs". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 6 December 2007. Retrieved 31 October 2007. North Korea, run by a Stalinist dictatorship for almost six decades, is largely closed to foreign reporters and it is impossible to independently check today's claims. "A portrait of North Korea's new rich". The Economist. 29 May 2008. Archived from the original on 2 August 2008. Retrieved 18 June 2009. EVERY developing country worth its salt has a bustling middle class that is transforming the country and thrilling the markets. So does Stalinist North Korea. Alton & Chidley 2013. Country Study 2009, p. 203. Country Study 2009, p. 204. Wikisource:Constitution of North Korea (1972) Martin 2004, p. 111: "Although it was in that 1955 speech that Kim Il-sung gave full voice to his arguments for juche, he had been talking along similar lines as early as 1948." Country Study 2009, p. 206. Country Study 2009, p. 186. Herskovitz, Jon; Kim, Christine (28 September 2009). "North Korea drops communism, boosts "Dear Leaders"". Reuters. Archived from the original on 16 August 2011. Retrieved 17 July 2011. JH Ahn (30 June 2016). "N.Korea updates constitution expanding Kim Jong Un's position". NK News. 권, 영전 (1 June 2021). [표] 북한 노동당 규약 주요 개정 내용. Yonhap News Agency (in Korean). Retrieved 13 August 2022. Country Study 2009, p. 207. Lankov, Andrei (4 December 2009). "Review of The Cleanest Race". Far Eastern Economic Review. Archived from the original on 4 January 2010. Retrieved 5 June 2015. Hitchens, Christopher (1 February 2010). "Kim Jong-il's regime is even weirder and more despicable than you thought". Slate Magazine. Retrieved 28 August 2022. Myers, Brian Reynolds (1 October 2009). "The Constitution of Kim Jong Il". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 10 November 2012. Retrieved 20 December 2012. From its beginnings in 1945 the regime has espoused—to its subjects if not to its Soviet and Chinese aid-providers—a race-based, paranoid nationalism that has nothing to do with Marxism-Leninism. [...] North Korea has always had less in common with the former Soviet Union than with the Japan of the 1930s, another 'national defense state' in which a command economy was pursued not as an end in itself, but as a prerequisite for rapid armament. North Korea is, in other words, a national-socialist country "Kim Il-Sung | Biography, Facts, Leadership of North Korea, Significance, & Death | Britannica". www.britannica.com. 17 May 2023. The Twisted Logic of the N.Korean Regime Archived 13 January 2017 at the Wayback Machine. Chosun Ilbo. 13 August 2013. Accessed date: 11 January 2017. "We have just witnessed a coup in North Korea". New Focus International. 27 December 2013. Archived from the original on 26 January 2014. Retrieved 22 January 2014. Myers 2011, p. 100. Myers 2011, p. 113. Martin 2004, p. 353. Myers 2011, p. 7. Myers 2011, p. 114, 116. Kang Chol-hwan Rigoulot, Pierre (2001). The Aquariums of Pyongyang: Ten Years in a North Korean Gulag. New York: BasicBooks. p. 2. ISBN 978-0-465-01101-8. Martin 2004, p. 105. "DEATH OF A LEADER: THE SCENE; In Pyongyang, Crowds of Mourners Gather at Kim Statue". The New York Times. 10 July 1994. Retrieved 19 November 2007. McCurry, Justin (19 December 2011). "North Koreans' reaction to Kim Jong-il's death is impossible to gauge". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 23 April 2016. Retrieved 29 May 2016. "North Korea marks leader's birthday". BBC. 16 February 2002. Archived from the original on 23 November 2008. Retrieved 18 December 2007. Mansourov, Alexandre. "Korean Monarch Kim Jong Il: Technocrat Ruler of the Hermit Kingdom Facing the Challenge of Modernity". The Nautilus Institute. Archived from the original on 22 September 2013. Retrieved 18 December 2007. LaBouyer, Jason (May/June 2005) "When friends become enemies – Understanding left-wing hostility to the DPRK" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 February 2008. Retrieved 3 July 2009., Lodestar, pp. 7–9. Korea-DPR.com. Retrieved 18 December 2007. Lankov, Andrei (10 June 2015). "N Korea: Tuning into the 'hermit kingdom'". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 21 March 2015. Retrieved 20 February 2015. 北 수교국 상주공관, 평양보다 베이징에 많아. Yonhap News (in Korean). 2 March 2009. Archived from the original on 29 April 2011. Retrieved 13 December 2010. Wertz, Daniel; JJ Oh; Kim Insung (August 2015). "Issue Brief: DPRK Diplomatic Relations" (PDF). The National Committee on North Korea. pp. 1–7, n4. Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 17 April 2016. "A Single Flag – North And South Korea Join U.N. And The World". The Seattle Times. 17 September 1991. Retrieved 3 September 2017. "Botswana Cuts Ties with North Korea". www.gov.bw. Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation. 20 February 2014. Archived from the original on 6 January 2015. Retrieved 5 January 2015. Commission de la défense nationale et des forces armées (30 March 2010). "Audition de M. Jack Lang, envoyé spécial du Président de la République pour la Corée du Nord" (in French). Archived from the original on 21 April 2010. Retrieved 2 May 2010. Kennedy, Pamela (14 May 2019). "Taiwan and North Korea: Star-Crossed Business Partners". 38 North. Retrieved 18 November 2019. Haggard, M (1965). "North Korea's International Position". Asian Survey. 5 (8): 375–388. doi:10.2307/2642410. ISSN 0004-4687. JSTOR 2642410. OCLC 48536955. Seung-Ho Joo, Tae-Hwan Kwak - Korea in the 21st Century "North Korea recognises breakaway of Russia's proxies in east Ukraine". Reuters. 13 July 2022. Retrieved 14 July 2022. Nanto, Dick K.; Manyin, Mark E. (2011). "China-North Korea Relations". North Korean Review. 7 (2): 94–101. doi:10.3172/NKR.7.2.94. ISSN 1551-2789. JSTOR 43908855. Shih, Gerry; Denyer, Simon (17 June 2019). "China's Xi to visit North Korea as both countries lock horns with United States". The Washington Post. Retrieved 25 October 2019. "Understanding the China-North Korea Relationship". Council on Foreign Relations. Shi, Jiangtao; Chan, Minnie; Zheng, Sarah (27 March 2018). "Kim's visit evidence China, North Korea remain allies, analysts say". South China Morning Post. Retrieved 25 July 2019. "Kim Yong Nam Visits 3 ASEAN Nations To Strengthen Traditional Ties". The People's Korea. 2001. Archived from the original on 30 September 2007. Retrieved 1 August 2007. "A New U.N. Vote Shows Russia Isn't as Isolated as the West May Like to Think". Time. 13 October 2022. "Putin thanks North Korea for supporting Ukraine war as Pyongyang displays its nukes in parade". CNN. 28 July 2023. Office of the Coordinator for Counterterrorism (30 April 2008). "Country Reports on Terrorism: Chapter 3 – State Sponsors of Terrorism Overview". Retrieved 26 June 2008. "Country Guide". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 24 May 2010. Retrieved 26 June 2008. "U.S. takes North Korea off terror list". CNN. 11 October 2008. Archived from the original on 12 October 2008. Retrieved 11 October 2008. "Trump declares North Korea 'sponsor of terror'". BBC News. 20 November 2017. Retrieved 20 November 2017. "N Korea to face Japan sanctions". BBC News. 13 June 2006. Archived from the original on 15 January 2009. Retrieved 26 June 2008. Rosenfeld, Everett (12 June 2018). "Read the full text of the Trump-Kim agreement here". CNBC. Retrieved 2 October 2018. Rosenfeld, Everett (28 February 2019). "Trump-Kim summit was cut short after North Korea demanded an end to all sanctions". CNBC. Retrieved 28 February 2019. "Donald Trump meets Kim Jong Un in DMZ; steps onto North Korean soil". USA Today. 30 June 2019. "Koreas agree to military hotline". CNN. 4 June 2004. Archived from the original on 30 November 2009. Retrieved 22 April 2020. Sang-Hun, Choe (27 November 2020). "How Did the North Korean Defector Cross the Border? Loose Screws". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 26 December 2023. Country Study 2009, p. 218. Kim, Il Sung (10 October 1980). "REPORT TO THE SIXTH CONGRESS OF THE WORKERS' PARTY OF KOREA ON THE WORK OF THE CENTRAL COMMITTEE". Songun Politics Study Group (USA). Archived from the original on 29 August 2009. Retrieved 4 July 2009. "North Korea (11/05)". U.S. Department of State. Koreans disagree on aid by North Archived 18 April 2017 at the Wayback Machine – NY Times Country Study 2009, p. 220. Country Study 2009, p. 222. "North-South Joint Declaration". Naenara. 15 June 2000. Archived from the original on 13 November 2007. Retrieved 1 August 2007. "Factbox – North, South Korea pledge peace, prosperity". Reuters. 4 October 2007. Archived from the original on 23 December 2007. Retrieved 4 October 2007. "North Korea tears up agreements". BBC News. 30 January 2009. Archived from the original on 6 March 2009. Retrieved 8 March 2009. "North Korea deploying more missiles". BBC News. 23 February 2009. Archived from the original on 24 August 2010. "North Korea warning over satellite". BBC News. 3 March 2009. Archived from the original on 9 March 2009. Retrieved 8 March 2009. Text from North Korea statement Archived 5 June 2010 at the Wayback Machine, by Jonathan Thatcher, Reuters, 25 May 2010 Branigan, Tania; MacAskill, Ewen (23 November 2010). "North Korea: a deadly attack, a counter-strike – now Koreans hold their breath". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 27 December 2016. MacAskill, Ewen (29 March 2013). "US warns North Korea of increased isolation if threats escalate further". The Guardian. Washington, DC. Archived from the original on 25 September 2013. Retrieved 5 April 2013. "South Korea's likely next president warns the U.S. not to meddle in its democracy". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 2 May 2017. Retrieved 2 May 2017. "Koreas make nuclear pledge after summit". BBC News. 27 April 2018. Retrieved 27 April 2018. "North Korea's Kim says to scrap missile sites, visit Seoul". Reuters. Retrieved 19 September 2018. Delury, John (16 March 2024). "Opinion | A Solution on North Korea Is There, if Biden Will Only Grasp It". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 16 March 2024. "North Korea's Kim Jong Un abandons unification goal with South". BBC. 16 January 2024. Retrieved 17 January 2024. "North Korea's Kim shuts agencies working for reunification with South Korea". Al Jazeera English. 16 January 2024. Retrieved 17 January 2024. "Legal System field listing". CIA The World Factbook. Archived from the original on 18 May 2014. Retrieved 18 May 2014. Country Study 2009, p. 274. Country Study 2009, p. 201. "Outside World Turns Blind Eye to N. Korea's Hard-Labor Camps". The Washington Post. 20 July 2009. Archived from the original on 19 September 2010. Retrieved 19 May 2014. Country Study 2009, p. 276. Country Study 2009, p. 277. Country Study 2009, pp. 277–278. "North Korea: A case to answer – a call to act" (PDF). Christian Solidarity Worldwide. 20 June 2007. pp. 25–26. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 October 2013. Retrieved 10 April 2012. "Subcommittee on International Human Rights, 40th Parliament, 3rd session, February 1, 2011: Testimony of Ms. Hye Sook Kim". Parliament of Canada. Archived from the original on 12 November 2012. Retrieved 22 April 2020. "The Hidden Gulag – Exposing Crimes against Humanity in North Korea's Vast Prison System" (PDF). The Committee for Human Rights in North Korea. Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 March 2015. Retrieved 14 September 2012. Country Study 2009, p. 272. Country Study 2009, p. 273. Kim Yonho (2014). Cell Phones in North Korea (PDF). pp. 35–38. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 June 2014. Retrieved 3 June 2014. "Report: Torture, starvation rife in North Korea political prisons". CNN. 4 May 2011. Archived from the original on 28 December 2014. Kirby, Darusman & Biserko 2014, p. 346. Amnesty International (2007). "Our Issues, North Korea". Human Rights Concerns. Archived from the original on 29 March 2007. Retrieved 1 August 2007. Kay Seok (15 May 2007). "Grotesque indifference". Human Rights Watch. Archived from the original on 29 September 2007. Retrieved 1 August 2007. "Human Rights in North Korea". hrw.org. Human Rights Watch. 17 February 2009. Archived from the original on 29 April 2011. Retrieved 13 December 2010. Country Study 2009, pp. 272–273. This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain: "North Korea". Trafficking in Persons Report 2019. U.S. Department of State (17 June 2020). "Annual Report 2011: North Korea". Amnesty International. Archived from the original on 14 March 2012. Retrieved 20 April 2012. "North Korea: Freedom of Movement, Opinion and Expression". Amnesty International. 2009. Retrieved 4 March 2014. "North Korea". www.amnesty.org. Retrieved 12 June 2020. Country Study 2009, p. 278. "North Korea: Political Prison Camps". Amnesty International. 4 May 2011. Retrieved 10 April 2012. "Concentrations of Inhumanity (p. 40–44)" (PDF). Freedom House, May 2007. Archived (PDF) from the original on 30 October 2012. Retrieved 10 April 2012. "Survey Report on Political Prisoners' Camps in North Korea (p. 58–73)" (PDF). National Human Rights Commission of Korea, December 2009. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 April 2012. Retrieved 10 April 2012. "North Korea: Catastrophic human rights record overshadows 'Day of the Sun'". Amnesty International. 12 April 2012. Archived from the original on 13 April 2012. Retrieved 10 April 2012. "Images reveal scale of North Korean political prison camps". Amnesty International. 3 May 2011. Archived from the original on 7 April 2012. Retrieved 10 April 2012. "Report on political prisoners in North soon"[usurped] article by Han Yeong-ik in Korea Joongang Daily 30 April 2012 Badt, Karin (21 April 2010). "Torture in North Korea: Concentration Camps in the Spotlight". Huffington Post. Archived from the original on 4 May 2010. Retrieved 8 October 2010. "North Korea: UN Commission documents wide-ranging and ongoing crimes against humanity, urges referral to ICC". United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights. 17 February 2014. Archived from the original on 18 February 2014. Retrieved 18 February 2014. Kirby, Darusman & Biserko 2014. Walker, Peter (17 February 2014). North Korean human rights abuses recall Nazis, says UN inquiry chair Archived 18 February 2014 at the Wayback Machine. The Guardian. Retrieved 17 February 2014. "Human Rights Groups Call on UN Over N.Korea Gulag". The Chosunilbo. 4 April 2012. Archived from the original on 5 April 2012. Retrieved 10 April 2012. "Maps | Global Slavery Index". www.globalslaveryindex.org. "North Korea". The Global Slavery Index. Walk Free Foundation. 2016. Archived from the original on 5 October 2016. Retrieved 12 October 2016. "Asia-Pacific". Global Slavery Index 2016. The Minderoo Foundation. 2016. Archived from the original on 28 September 2017. Retrieved 12 October 2016. "UN uncovers torture, rape and slavery in North Korea". The Times. 15 February 2014. Kathleen Joyce (1 November 2018). "North Korean women suffer serious sexual violence by authorities, report says". Fox News. Retrieved 1 November 2018. North Korean 'worker brigades' in Russia, BBC, 15 July 2015, retrieved 31 October 2023 Jo Harper (14 February 2019). "Dutch shipbuilder in the dock". Dw.com. Retrieved 31 October 2023. Hodal, Kate (24 November 2014). "North Koreans are needed to do the dangerous jobs, says Malaysia". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 31 October 2023. Tycho A. van der Hoog (2018). "Uncovering North Korean Forced Labour in Africa: Towards a Research Framework". Leiden University. ONLY ON AP NKorea sends workers to Gulf nations, AP Archive, 2 August 2017, retrieved 31 October 2023 John Sifton; Tom Lantos (29 April 2015). "North Korea's Forced Labor Enterprise: A State-Sponsored Marketplace in Human Trafficking". Human Rights Watch. Retrieved 31 October 2023. "North Korea defends human rights record in report to UN". BBC News. 8 October 2014. Archived from the original on 12 November 2014. Retrieved 8 October 2014. Taylor, Adam (22 April 2014). "North Korea slams U.N. human rights report because it was led by gay man". The Washington Post. Retrieved 23 April 2014. "KCNA Commentary Slams Artifice by Political Swindlers". kcna.co.jp. Korean Central News Agency. 22 April 2014. Archived from the original on 29 July 2014. Retrieved 17 August 2015. KCNA Assails Role Played by Japan for UN Passage of "Human Rights" Resolution against DPRK Archived 1 April 2012 at the Wayback Machine, KCNA, 22 December 2005. KCNA Refutes U.S. Anti-DPRK Human Rights Campaign Archived 1 April 2012 at the Wayback Machine, KCNA, 8 November 2005. "February 2012 DPRK (North Korea)". United Nations Security Council. February 2012. "The State of the North Korean Military". Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. 2020. Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs (April 2007). "Background Note: North Korea". United States Department of State. Retrieved 1 August 2007. "Armed forces: Armied to the hilt". The Economist. 19 July 2011. Archived from the original on 28 July 2011. Retrieved 28 July 2011. "Army personnel (per capita) by country". NationMaster. 2007. Archived from the original on 17 February 2007. Retrieved 1 August 2007. Country Study 2009, p. 239. Country Study 2009, p. 247. Country Study 2009, p. 248. Country Profile 2007, p. 19 – Major Military Equipment. "Worls militaries: K". soldiering.ru. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 23 May 2014. Country Study 2009, pp. 288–293. Cordesman, Anthony H. (2011). The Korean Military Balance (PDF). Center for Strategic & International Studies. p. 156. ISBN 978-0-89206-632-2. Archived (PDF) from the original on 11 October 2011. Retrieved 28 July 2011. The DPRK has implosion fission weapons. "How the Nuclear Missile Threat from North Korea Keeps Growing". Bloomberg.com. 1 August 2023. Retrieved 26 December 2023. Hipwell, Deirdre (24 April 2009). "North Korea is fully fledged nuclear power, experts agree". The Times. London. Archived from the original on 25 May 2010. Retrieved 25 April 2009. Ryall, Julian (9 August 2017). "How far can North Korean missiles travel? Everything you need to know". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 9 August 2017. Country Study 2009, p. 260. "New Threat from N. Korea's 'Asymmetrical' Warfare". The Chosun Ilbo. 29 April 2010. Archived from the original on 24 December 2010. Retrieved 13 December 2010. "UN Documents for DPRK (North Korea): Security Council Resolutions [View All Security Council Resolutions]". securitycouncilreport.org. Retrieved 2 October 2015. "North Korea's military aging but sizable". CNN. 25 November 2010. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 23 May 2014. "N.Korea Developing High-Powered GPS Jammer". The Chosun Ilbo. 7 September 2011. Archived from the original on 24 September 2012. Retrieved 8 September 2012. "North Korea's Human Torpedoes". Daily NK. 6 May 2010. Archived from the original on 30 August 2014. Retrieved 23 May 2014. "North Korea 'develops stealth paint to camouflage fighter jets'". The Daily Telegraph. 23 August 2010. Archived from the original on 16 September 2014. Retrieved 23 May 2014. "N.Korea Boosting Cyber Warfare Capabilities". The Chosun Ilbo. 5 November 2013. Archived from the original on 10 December 2013. Retrieved 23 May 2014. Kwek, Dave Lee and Nick (29 May 2015). "North Korean hackers 'could kill'". BBC News. "Satellite in Alleged NK Jamming Attack". Daily NK. 15 November 2012. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 12 December 2012. "Defense". Federation of American Scientists. Archived from the original on 2 June 2013. Retrieved 11 October 2013. "Report on Implementation of 2009 Budget and 2010 Budget". Korean Central News Agency. 9 April 2010. Archived from the original on 29 April 2011. "N. Korea ranks No. 1 for military spending relative to GDP: State Department report". Yonhap News Agency. 23 December 2016. "North Korea Confirms Test of New Type of Submarine-Launched Ballistic Missile – October 20, 2021". Daily News Brief. 20 October 2021. Retrieved 20 October 2021. "World Population Prospects – Population Division – United Nations". population.un.org. Archived from the original on 6 May 2011. "World Population Prospects 2022". United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. Retrieved 17 July 2022. "World Population Prospects 2022: Demographic indicators by region, subregion and country, annually for 1950-2100" (XSLX) ("Total Population, as of 1 July (thousands)"). United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. Retrieved 17 July 2022. "Field Listing: Ethnic Groups". CIA World Factbook. Archived from the original on 25 June 2014. Retrieved 21 July 2014. Country Study 2009, p. 69. "Foreign Assistance to North Korea: Congressional Research Service Report for Congress" (PDF). Federation of American Scientists. 26 April 2012. Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 June 2014. Retrieved 22 July 2014. Solomon, Jay (20 May 2005). "US Has Put Food Aid for North Korea on Hold". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 16 February 2007. Retrieved 1 August 2007. Country Study 2009, p. xxii. "Asia-Pacific : North Korea". Amnesty International. 2007. Archived from the original on 29 May 2007. Retrieved 1 August 2007. "National Nutrition Survey final report". The United Nations Office in DPR Korea. 19 March 2013. Archived from the original on 29 July 2014. Retrieved 22 July 2014. "The State of North Korean Farming: New Information from the UN Crop Assessment Report". 38 North. 18 December 2013. Archived from the original on 10 July 2014. Retrieved 22 July 2014. "Korea, Democratic People's Republic (DPRK) | WFP | United Nations World Food Programme – Fighting Hunger Worldwide". WFP. Archived from the original on 14 May 2014. Retrieved 22 July 2014. Smith, Hazel (2016). "Nutrition and Health in North Korea: What's New, What's Changed and Why It Matters". North Korea Review. 12 (1): 7–36. ISSN 1551-2789. "Field Listing: Population Growth Rate". CIA World Factbook. Archived from the original on 25 June 2014. Retrieved 22 July 2014. "Country Comparison: Birth Rate". CIA World Factbook. Archived from the original on 4 August 2014. Retrieved 22 July 2014. "North Korea Census Reveals Poor Demographic and Health Conditions". Population Reference Bureau. December 2010. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 22 July 2014. "UN HDR 2020 PDF" (PDF). Lee, Yo Han; Yoon, Seok-Jun; Kim, Young Ae; Yeom, Ji Won; Oh, In-Hwan (1 May 2013). "Overview of the Burden of Diseases in North Korea". Journal of Preventive Medicine and Public Health. 46 (3): 111–117. doi:10.3961/jpmph.2013.46.3.111. PMC 3677063. PMID 23766868. "Cause of death, by non-communicable diseases (% of total) – Korea, Dem. People's Rep. | Data". data.worldbank.org. Retrieved 11 July 2020. "Cause of death, by communicable diseases and maternal, prenatal and nutrition conditions (% of total) – Korea, Dem. People's Rep., Korea, Rep., Low income, High income | Data". data.worldbank.org. Retrieved 11 July 2020. "North Korea". Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation. 9 September 2015. Retrieved 11 July 2020. "Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000 live births) – Korea, Dem. People's Rep., Low income, Middle income | Data". data.worldbank.org. Retrieved 11 July 2020. "Healthcare Access and Quality Index". Our World in Data. Retrieved 11 July 2020. "Life Inside North Korea". U.S. Department of State. Retrieved 18 November 2008. "Democratic People's Republic of Korea: WHO statistical profile" (PDF). World Health Organization. "Physicians (per 1,000 people) – Low income, Korea, Dem. People's Rep., Korea, Rep. | Data". data.worldbank.org. Retrieved 12 July 2020. "Aid agencies row over North Korea health care system". BBC News. 16 July 2010. Retrieved 11 January 2021. Country Profile 2007, pp. 7–8. Country Study 2009, p. 127. Cha, Victor (2012). The Impossible State. Ecco. Country Study 2009, p. 126. Country Study 2009, p. 122. Country Study 2009, p. 123. "Educational themes and methods". Lcweb2.loc.gov. Archived from the original on 12 December 2012. Retrieved 23 June 2010. Country Study 2009, p. 124. "The Korean Language". Library of Congress Country Studies. June 1993. Retrieved 25 July 2014. Minahan, James B. (2014). Ethnic Groups of North, East, and Central Asia: An Encyclopedia. Santa Barbara: ABC-CLIO. p. 147. ISBN 978-1-61069-018-8.[permanent dead link] Alton & Chidley 2013, p. 89. Country Study 2009, p. 18. World and Its Peoples: Eastern and Southern Asia. Marshall Cavendish. 2007. ISBN 9780761476313. Retrieved 20 May 2019. North Korea is officially an atheist state in which almost the entire population is nonreligious. O'Brien, Joanne; Palmer, Martin (December 1993). The State of Religion Atlas. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 9780671793760. Retrieved 20 May 2019. Atheism continues to be the official position of the governments of China, North Korea and Cuba. Boer 2019, p. 216. Country Study 2009, p. 115. "Human Rights in North Korea". Human Rights Watch. July 2004. Archived from the original on 1 December 2006. Retrieved 2 August 2007. "Constitution of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea" (PDF). Boer 2019, p. 233. "Open Doors International : WWL: Focus on the Top Ten". Open Doors International. Open Doors (International). Archived from the original on 22 June 2007. Retrieved 4 July 2009. "2020 Report on International Religious Freedom: Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK)". Office of International Religious Freedom. U.S. Department of State. "Freedom of Ideas and Religious Belief in DPRK". Paektu Solidarity Alliance. 19 February 2020. "Inside North Korea's only Mosque During Eid al-Fitr". 18 May 2021. United States Commission on International Religious Freedom (21 September 2004). "Annual Report of the United States Commission on International Religious Freedom". Nautilus Institute. Archived from the original on 11 March 2007. Retrieved 2 August 2007. "N Korea stages Mass for Pope". BBC News. 10 April 2005. Archived from the original on 7 March 2008. Retrieved 2 August 2007. Country Study 2009, p. 14. Country Study 2009, p. 120. Collins, Robert (6 June 2012). Marked for Life: Songbun, North Korea's Social Classification System (PDF). Committee for Human Rights in North Korea. Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 September 2013. Retrieved 8 June 2012. McGrath, Matthew (7 June 2012). "Marked for Life: Songbun, North Korea's Social Classification System". NK News. Archived from the original on 18 March 2013. Retrieved 8 June 2012. Hunter, Helen-Louise (1999). Kim Il-song's North Korea. Foreword by Stephen J. Solarz. Westport, Connecticut, London: Praeger. pp. 3–11, 31–33. ISBN 978-0-275-96296-8. Winzig, Jerry. "A Look at North Korean Society" (book review of 'Kim Il-song's North Korea' by Helen-Louise Hunter). winzigconsultingservices.com. Retrieved 8 June 2011. In North Korea, one's songbun, or socio-economic and class background, is extremely important and is primarily determined at birth. People with the best songbun are descendants of the anti-Japanese guerrillas who fought with Kim Il-sung, followed by people whose parents or grandparents were factory workers, laborers, or poor, small farmers in 1950. "Ranked below them in descending order are forty-seven distinct groups in what must be the most class-differentiated society in the world today." Anyone with a father, uncle, or grandfather who owned land or was a doctor, Christian minister, merchant, or lawyer has low songbun. Sullivan, Tim (29 December 2012). "North Korea's Songbun Caste System Faces Power Of Wealth". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on 28 January 2013. Retrieved 28 February 2013. KINU White Paper on Human Rights in North Korea 2011, pp. 216, 225. Kinu.or.kr (30 August 2011). Retrieved on 6 April 2013. Country Study 2009, p. 135. Country Study 2009, p. 138. Country Study 2009, p. 142. Country Study 2009, p. 140. "Economy". Encyclopædia Britannica Online. Archived from the original on 6 July 2014. Retrieved 31 May 2014. Country Study 2009, pp. 143, 145. Country Profile 2007, p. 9. Country Study 2009, p. 145. "GDP Composition by sectory field listing". CIA The World Factbook. Archived from the original on 22 May 2014. Retrieved 31 May 2014. "Filling Gaps in the Human Development Index" (PDF). United Nations ESCAP. February 2009. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 October 2011. "North Korean Economy Records Positive Growth for Two Consecutive Years". The Institute for Far Eastern Studies. 17 July 2013. Archived from the original on 23 April 2015. Retrieved 15 June 2014. North Korea Handbook 2003, p. 931. "Report: North Korea economy developing dramatically despite sanctions". UPI. Retrieved 14 January 2021. Country Study 2009, p. xxiii. Country Study 2007, p. 152. sfn error: no target: CITEREFCountry_Study2007 (help) "Pyongyang glitters but most of North Korea still dark". AP through MSN News. 28 April 2013. Archived from the original on 7 July 2014. Retrieved 15 June 2014. Jangmadang Will Prevent "Second Food Crisis" from Developing Archived 22 December 2010 at the Wayback Machine, DailyNK, 26 October 2007 2008 Top Items in the Jangmadang Archived 23 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine, The DailyNK, 1 January 2009 Kim Jong Eun's Long-lasting Pain in the Neck Archived 3 December 2010 at the Wayback Machine, TheDailyNK, 30 November 2010 "NK is no Stalinist country". The Korea Times. 9 October 2011. Archived from the original on 16 October 2015. Retrieved 9 October 2011. "Labor Force by occupation field listing". CIA The World Factbook. Archived from the original on 22 May 2014. Retrieved 7 June 2014. "Labor Force field listing". CIA The World Factbook. Archived from the original on 25 June 2014. Retrieved 7 June 2014. "Major Industries field listing". CIA The World Factbook. Archived from the original on 25 June 2014. Retrieved 7 June 2014. In limited N.Korean market, furor for S.Korean products Archived 9 January 2011 at the Wayback Machine, The Hankyoreh, 6 January 2011 Bermudez, Joseph S. Jr. (14 December 2015). North Korea's Exploration for Oil and Gas (Report). 38 North. pp. 8–9. Country Study 2009, p. 154. Country Study 2009, p. 143. Country Study 2009, p. 47. French 2007, p. 155. Paris, Natalie (20 February 2013). "North Korea welcomes increase in tourism". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 15 June 2014. "Skiing in North Korea: Mounting Problems". The Economist. 14 February 2014. Archived from the original on 9 June 2014. Retrieved 15 June 2014. "North Korea temporarily closes border until further notice – Coronavirus precaution". Young Pioneer Tours. January 2020. Retrieved 15 August 2023. Country Study 2009, p. 173. Boydston, Kent (1 August 2017). "North Korea's Trade and the KOTRA Report". Peterson Institute for International Economics. Retrieved 22 May 2018. Country Study 2009, p. 165. "North Korea's crusade for more special economic zones". NK News. 1 December 2013. Archived from the original on 6 July 2014. Retrieved 15 June 2014. "North Korea Plans To Expand Special Economic Zones". The Huffington Post. 16 November 2013. Archived from the original on 12 April 2014. Retrieved 15 June 2014. "Cumulative output of Kaesong park reaches US$2.3 bln". Yonhap News Agency. 12 June 2014. Archived from the original on 12 August 2014. Retrieved 15 June 2014. "India is North Korea's second biggest trading partner after China". Moneycontrol. 16 August 2017. Retrieved 16 August 2017. "Russia, North Korea Agree to Settle Payments in Rubles in Trade Pact". RIA Novosti. 28 March 2014. Archived from the original on 3 June 2014. Retrieved 15 June 2014. "North Korean Foreign Trade Volume Posts Record High of USD 7.3 Billion in 2013". The Institute for Far Eastern Studies. 28 May 2014. Archived from the original on 4 September 2015. Retrieved 15 June 2014. "South Korea has lost the North to China". Financial Times. 20 February 2014. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 15 June 2014. Schielke, Thomas (17 April 2018). "How Satellite Images of the Earth at Night Help Us Understand Our World and Make Better Cities". ArchDaily. Retrieved 15 September 2020. Country Study 2009, p. 146. Wee, Heesun (11 April 2019). "Kim Jong Un is skirting sanctions and pursuing this energy strategy to keep North Korea afloat". CNBC. Retrieved 9 January 2020. Country Study 2009, p. 147. "North Korea to Utilize Science and Technology to Overcome Its Energy Crisis". The Institute of Far Eastern Studies. 3 April 2014. Archived from the original on 23 April 2015. Retrieved 15 June 2014. "North Korea Adopts Renewable Energy Law". The Institute for Far Eastern Studies. 17 September 2013. Archived from the original on 23 April 2015. Retrieved 15 June 2014. "Progress in North Korea's Renewable Energy Production". NK Briefs. The Institute for Far Eastern Studies. 2 March 2016. Archived from the original on 20 December 2016. Retrieved 18 December 2016. "Activity Seen at North Korean Nuclear Plant". The New York Times. 24 December 2013. Archived from the original on 26 July 2014. Retrieved 15 June 2014. "High Speed Rail and Road Connecting Kaesong-Pyongyang-Sinuiju to be Built". The Institute for Far Eastern Studies. 20 December 2013. Archived from the original on 23 April 2015. Retrieved 15 June 2014. "Roadways field listing". CIA The World Factbook. Archived from the original on 22 May 2014. Retrieved 16 June 2014. Country Study 2009, p. 150. "Merchant marine field listing". CIA The World Factbook. Archived from the original on 25 June 2014. Retrieved 16 June 2014. "Airports field listing". CIA The World Factbook. Archived from the original on 25 June 2014. Retrieved 16 June 2014. "Helipads field listing". CIA The World Factbook. Archived from the original on 4 June 2011. Retrieved 16 June 2014. "Cars on Pyongyang streets can tell us a lot about the country". EJ Insight. 23 May 2018. Retrieved 25 October 2019. "70% of Households Use Bikes". Daily NK. 30 October 2008. Archived from the original on 6 July 2014. Retrieved 16 June 2014. "North Korea's bike path". NK News. 21 March 2016. Retrieved 25 October 2019. Lankov, Andrei (1 April 2007). "Academies". The Korea Times. Archived from the original on 25 July 2014. Retrieved 16 June 2014. "North Korea to Become Strong in Science and Technology by Year 2022". The International Institute for Far Eastern Studies. 21 December 2012. Archived from the original on 4 September 2015. Retrieved 17 June 2014. N. Korea moves to develop cutting-edge nanotech industry Archived 7 April 2014 at the Wayback Machine Yonhap News – 2 August 2013 (access date: 17 June 2014) "Two Koreas can cooperate in chemistry, biotech and nano science: report". Yonhap News Agency. 6 January 2010. Archived from the original on 3 December 2013. Retrieved 17 June 2014. "High-Tech Development Zones: The Core of Building a Powerful Knowledge Economy Nation". The International Institute for Far Eastern Studies. 5 June 2014. Archived from the original on 23 April 2015. Retrieved 17 June 2014. ". 'Miraewon' Electronic Libraries to be Constructed Across North Korea". The International Institute for Far Eastern Studies. 22 May 2014. Archived from the original on 4 September 2015. Retrieved 17 June 2014. Pearlman, Robert (2 April 2014). "North Korea's 'NADA' Space Agency, Logo Are Anything But 'Nothing'". Space.com. Archived from the original on 14 May 2016. Lele, Ajey (2013). Asian Space Race: Rhetoric Or Reality. Springer. pp. 70–72. ISBN 978-81-322-0732-0. Talmadge, Eric (18 December 2012). "Crippled NKorean probe could orbit for years". AP. Archived from the original on 29 October 2013. Retrieved 18 December 2012. "Japan to launch spy satellite to keep an eye on North Korea". Wired. 23 January 2013. Archived from the original on 9 July 2014. Retrieved 17 June 2014. "High five: Messages from North Korea". The Asia Times. 19 March 2009. Archived from the original on 23 March 2009. Retrieved 17 June 2014.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Walker, Peter (1 April 2014). "North Korea appears to ape Nasa with space agency logo". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 4 July 2014. Retrieved 17 June 2014. "UN Security Council vows new sanctions after N Korea's rocket launch". BBC News. 7 February 2016. Archived from the original on 7 February 2016. Retrieved 7 February 2016. "Country Comparison: Telephones – main lines in use". The World Factbook. CIA. Archived from the original on 27 December 2016. French 2007, p. 22. "North Korea embraces 3G service". BBC. 26 April 2013. Archived from the original on 28 May 2014. Retrieved 17 June 2014. MacKinnon, Rebecca (17 January 2005). "Chinese Cell Phone Breaches North Korean Hermit Kingdom". Yale Global Online. Archived from the original on 9 October 2009. Retrieved 2 August 2007. "North Korea: On the net in world's most secretive nation". BBC. 10 December 2012. Archived from the original on 8 July 2014. Retrieved 17 June 2014. Lintner, Bertil (24 April 2007). "North Korea's IT revolution". Asia Times. Archived from the original on 27 April 2007. Retrieved 11 May 2007.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) "North Korea has 'Bright' idea for internet". News.com.au. 4 February 2014. Archived from the original on 18 July 2014. Retrieved 17 June 2014. Bryant, Matthew (19 September 2016). "North Korea DNS Leak". Archived from the original on 21 September 2016. Retrieved 22 September 2016. Fairbank, John K.; Reischauer, Edwin O.; Craig, Albert M. (1978). East Asia: Tradition & Transformation. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. ISBN 978-0-395-25812-5. Bruce G. Cumings. "The Rise of Korean Nationalism and Communism". A Country Study: North Korea. Library of Congress. Call number DS932 .N662 1994. Archived from the original on 10 April 2007. "Contemporary Cultural Expression". Library of Congress Country Studies. 1993. Archived from the original on 13 December 2012. Retrieved 3 July 2014. North Korea Handbook 2003, pp. 496–497. "Democratic People's Republic of Korea". UNESCO. Archived from the original on 1 July 2014. Retrieved 6 June 2014. Lankov, Andrei (13 February 2011). "Socialist realism". The Korea Times. Archived from the original on 26 July 2014. Retrieved 6 July 2014. Rank, Michael (16 June 2012). "A window into North Korea's art world". Asia Times. Archived from the original on 26 March 2013. Retrieved 14 July 2014.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) "Mansudae Art Studio, North Korea's Colossal Monument Factory". Bloomberg Business Week. 6 June 2013. Archived from the original on 24 February 2015. Retrieved 14 July 2014. "Senegal President Wade apologises for Christ comments". BBC News. London. 31 December 2009. Retrieved 14 July 2014. "Heroes' monument losing battle". The Namibian. 5 June 2005. Archived from the original on 24 July 2014. Retrieved 14 July 2014. "Complex of Koguryo Tombs". unesco.org. Retrieved 1 September 2017. "Literature, Music, and Film". Library of Congress Country Studies. 1993. Retrieved 14 July 2014. Melvin, Sheila (28 July 2010). "North Korean Opera Draws Acclaim in China". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 26 July 2014. Retrieved 14 July 2014. "Revolutionary opera 'Sea of Blood' 30 years old". KCNA. August 2001. Archived from the original on 12 October 2014. Retrieved 14 July 2014. "North Korea: Bringing modern music to Pyongyang". BBC News. 3 January 2013. Archived from the original on 9 July 2014. Retrieved 14 July 2014. "Meet North Korea's new girl band: five girls who just wanna have state-sanctioned fun". The Telegraph. 29 May 2013. Archived from the original on 1 July 2014. Retrieved 14 July 2014. North Korea Handbook 2003, p. 478. "Moranbong: Kim Jong-un's favourite band stage a comeback". The Guardian. 24 April 2014. Archived from the original on 26 August 2014. Retrieved 14 July 2014. Hoban, Alex (1 February 2011). "Pyongyang goes pop: How North Korea discovered Michael Jackson". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 25 July 2014. Retrieved 14 July 2014. Youna Kim (2019). South Korean Popular Culture and North Korea. London: Routledge. pp. 155–156. ISBN 978-1-351-10410-4. North Korea Handbook 2003, pp. 423–424. North Korea Handbook 2003, p. 424. Park, Han-na (24 June 2020). "North Korea lauds Harry Potter". The Korea Herald. North Korea Handbook 2003, p. 475. "Benoit Symposium: From Pyongyang to Mars: Sci-fi, Genre, and Literary Value in North Korea". SinoNK. 25 September 2013. Archived from the original on 13 June 2014. Retrieved 14 July 2014. Country Study 2009, p. 114. Country Study 2009, p. 94. Hoban, Alex (22 February 2011). "Pyongyang goes pop: Inside North Korea's first indie disco". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 20 July 2014. Retrieved 14 July 2014. Kretchun, Nat; Kim, Jane (10 May 2012). "A Quiet Opening: North Koreans in a Changing Media Environment" (PDF). InterMedia. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 January 2013. Retrieved 19 January 2013. The primary focus of the study was on the ability of North Koreans to access outside information from foreign sources through a variety of media, communication technologies and personal sources. The relationship between information exposure on North Koreans' perceptions of the outside world and their own country was also analyzed. Harvard International Review. Winter 2016, Vol. 37 Issue 2, pp. 46–50. Crocker, L. (22 December 2014). North Korea's Secret Movie Bootleggers: How Western Films Make It Into the Hermit Kingdom. Journalists, C. T. (25 April 2017). "North Korean censorship". "North Korea". Reporters Without Borders. 2017. Archived from the original on 26 April 2017. Retrieved 28 April 2017. "Freedom of the Press: North Korea". Freedom House. Archived from the original on 7 July 2014. Retrieved 14 July 2014. Pervis, Larinda B. (2007). North Korea Issues: Nuclear Posturing, Saber Rattling, and International Mischief. Nova Science Publishers. p. 22. ISBN 978-1-60021-655-8. "Meagre media for North Koreans". BBC News. 10 October 2006. Archived from the original on 20 August 2014. Retrieved 14 July 2014. "North Korea Uses Twitter, YouTube For Propaganda Offensive". The Huffington post. 17 August 2010. Archived from the original on 7 October 2014. Retrieved 14 July 2014. Calderone, Michael (14 July 2014). "Associated Press North Korea Bureau Opens As First All-Format News Office In Pyongyang". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on 16 April 2012. Retrieved 26 March 2012. O'Carroll, Chad (6 January 2014). "North Korea's invisible phone, killer dogs and other such stories – why the world is transfixed". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 8 October 2014. Retrieved 14 July 2014. Taylor, Adam (29 August 2013). "Why You Shouldn't Necessarily Trust Those Reports Of Kim Jong-un Executing His Ex-Girlfriend". businessinsider.com. Business Insider. Archived from the original on 19 January 2014. Retrieved 19 January 2014. Fisher, Max (3 January 2014). "No, Kim Jong Un probably didn't feed his uncle to 120 hungry dogs". Washington Post. Washington, DC. Archived from the original on 26 July 2014. Korean Cuisine (한국요리 韓國料理) (in Korean). Naver / Doosan Encyclopedia. Retrieved 15 July 2014.[permanent dead link] "Food". Korean Culture and Information Service. Archived from the original on 3 July 2014. Retrieved 15 July 2014. Lankov, Andrei (2007). North of the DMZ: Essays on daily life in North Korea. McFarland. pp. 90–91. ISBN 978-0-7864-2839-7. "Okryu Restaurant Becomes More Popular for Terrapin Dishes". Korean Central News Agency. 26 May 2010. Archived from the original on 9 June 2011. Retrieved 15 July 2014. "Okryu restaurant". Korean Central News Agency. 31 August 1998. Archived from the original on 8 January 2011. Retrieved 15 July 2014. "The mystery of North Korea's virtuoso waitresses". BBC News. 8 June 2014. Archived from the original on 25 July 2014. Retrieved 15 July 2014. "Fifa investigates North Korea World Cup abuse claims". BBC News. 11 August 2010. Archived from the original on 29 August 2014. Retrieved 15 July 2014. "When Middlesbrough hosted the 1966 World Cup Koreans". BBC News. 15 June 2010. Archived from the original on 18 May 2014. Retrieved 15 July 2014. "Rodman returns to North Korea amid political unrest". Fox News. 19 December 2013. Archived from the original on 19 December 2013. Retrieved 20 December 2013. "Democratic People's Republic of Korea". International Olympic Committee. Archived from the original on 2 July 2014. Retrieved 15 July 2014. "North Korea's Kim Un Guk wins 62kg weightlifting Olympic gold". BBC News. 30 July 2012. Archived from the original on 16 October 2015. Retrieved 15 July 2014. "North Korea rewards athletes with luxury apartments". Reuters. 4 October 2013. Archived from the original on 20 December 2013. Retrieved 20 December 2013. "North Korea halts showcase mass games due to flood". Reuters. 27 August 2007. Archived from the original on 10 February 2009. Watts, Jonathan (17 May 2002). "Despair, hunger and defiance at the heart of the greatest show on earth". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 9 September 2014. Retrieved 15 July 2014. Ryall, Julian (26 September 2013). "Kim Jong-un orders spruce up of world's biggest stadium as 'millions starve'". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 12 June 2014. Retrieved 15 July 2014. Demetriou, Danielle (3 April 2014). "North Korea allows tourists to run in Pyongyang marathon for the first time". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 1 August 2014. Retrieved 15 July 2014. "Country Profile: North Korea" (PDF). Library of Congress – Federal Research Division. July 2007. Retrieved 4 July 2009. Abt, Felix (2014). A Capitalist in North Korea: My Seven Years in the Hermit Kingdom. Tuttle Publishing. ISBN 9780804844390. Alton, David; Chidley, Rob (2013). Building Bridges: Is There Hope for North Korea?. Oxford: Lion Books. ISBN 978-0-7459-5598-8. Armstrong, Charles K. (20 December 2010). "The Destruction and Reconstruction of North Korea, 1950–1960" (PDF). The Asia-Pacific Journal. 8 (51). Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 January 2022. Retrieved 13 September 2019. Armstrong, Charles K. "North Korea in 2016." Asian Survey 57.1 (2017): 119–27. abstract Boer, Roland (2019). Red theology : on the Christian Communist tradition. Boston: Haymarket Books. ISBN 978-90-04-38132-2. OCLC 1078879745. French, Paul (2007). North Korea: The Paranoid Peninsula: A Modern History (Second ed.). London: Zed Books. ISBN 978-1-84277-905-7. Hayes, Peter, and Roger Cavazos. "North Korea in 2015." Asian Survey 56.1 (2016): 68–77. abstract Hayes, Peter, and Roger Cavazos. "North Korea in 2014." Asian Survey 55.1 (2015): 119–31. abstract; also full text online Jackson, Van (2016). Rival Reputations: Coercion and Credibility in US–North Korea Relations. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-107-13331-0., covers 1960s to 2010. Jackson, Van. "Deterring a Nuclear-Armed Adversary in a Contested Regional Order: The 'Trilemma' of US–North Korea Relations." Asia Policy 23.1 (2017): 97–103. online Jager, Sheila Miyoshi (2013). Brothers at War – The Unending Conflict in Korea. London: Profile Books. ISBN 978-1-84668-067-0. Lee, Hong Yung. "North Korea in 2013: Economy, Executions, and Nuclear Brinksmanship." Asian Survey 54.1 (2014): 89–100. Online. Kirby, Michael; Darusman, Marzuki; Biserko, Sonja (17 February 2014). "Report of the Commission of Inquiry on Human Rights in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea". United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights. Archived from the original on 17 February 2014. Retrieved 18 February 2014. Martin, Bradley K. (2004). Under the Loving Care of the Fatherly Leader: North Korea and the Kim Dynasty. New York: Thomas Dunne Books. ISBN 978-0-312-32322-6. Myers, Brian Reynolds (2011). The Cleanest Race: How North Koreans See Themselves and Why It Matters. Melville House. ISBN 978-1933633916. "North Korea – A Country Study" (PDF). Library of Congress Country Studies. 2009. Ryang, Sonia (2013). "The North Korean Homeland of Koreans in Japan". In Ryang, Sonia (ed.). Koreans in Japan: Critical Voices from the Margin. London: Routledge. pp. 32–54. ISBN 978-1-136-35305-5. Yonhap News Agency, ed. (2003). North Korea Handbook. Yonhap T'ongsin. ISBN 978-0-7656-1004-1. North Korea at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Travel information from Wikivoyage KCNA Archived 4 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine – website of the Korean Central News Agency Naenara Archived 18 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine – the official North Korean governmental portal Naenara DPRK Foreign Ministry Archived 24 April 2019 at the Wayback Machine – official North Korean foreign ministry website The Pyongyang Times – official foreign language newspaper of the DPRK North Korea at the Encyclopædia Britannica North Korea at Curlie Official website of the DPR of Korea – Administered by the Korean Friendship Association 38North North Korea profile at BBC News North Korea – link collection (University of Colorado at Boulder Libraries GovPubs) NKnews – a news agency covering North Korean topics. Friend.com.kp Archived 6 November 2015 at archive.today – website of the Committee for Cultural Relations with Foreign Countries Korea Education Fund Rodong Sinmun – the newspaper of the Central Committee of the Workers' Party of Korea Rodong Sinmun Uriminzokkiri Archived 7 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine DPRK Portal Archived 5 October 2022 at the Wayback Machine United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights – Report of the Commission of Inquiry on Human Rights in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea 40°N 127°E﻿ / ﻿40°N 127°E﻿ / 40; 127