This article contains Burmese script. Without proper rendering support, you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Burmese script. Aung San Suu Kyi (/aʊŋ ˌsɑːn suː ˈtʃiː/; Burmese: အောင်ဆန်းစုကြည်; MLCTS: aung hcan: cu. krany [ʔàʊɰ̃ sʰáɰ̃ sṵ tɕì]; born 19 June 1945), sometimes abbreviated to Suu Kyi, is a Burmese politician, diplomat, author, and a 1991 Nobel Peace Prize laureate who served as State Counsellor of Myanmar (equivalent to a prime minister) and Minister of Foreign Affairs from 2016 to 2021. She has served as the general secretary of the National League for Democracy (NLD) since the party's founding in 1988 and was registered as its chairperson while it was a legal party from 2011 to 2023. She played a vital role in Myanmar's transition from military junta to partial democracy in the 2010s. The youngest daughter of Aung San, Father of the Nation of modern-day Myanmar, and Khin Kyi, Aung San Suu Kyi was born in Rangoon, British Burma. After graduating from the University of Delhi in 1964 and St Hugh's College, Oxford in 1968, she worked at the United Nations for three years. She married Michael Aris in 1972, with whom she had two children. Aung San Suu Kyi rose to prominence in the 8888 Uprising of 8 August 1988 and became the General Secretary of the NLD, which she had newly formed with the help of several retired army officials who criticized the military junta. In the 1990 elections, NLD won 81% of the seats in Parliament, but the results were nullified, as the military government (the State Peace and Development Council – SPDC) refused to hand over power, resulting in an international outcry. She had been detained before the elections and remained under house arrest for almost 15 of the 21 years from 1989 to 2010, becoming one of the world's most prominent political prisoners. In 1999, Time magazine named her one of the "Children of Gandhi" and his spiritual heir to nonviolence. She survived an assassination attempt in the 2003 Depayin massacre when at least 70 people associated with the NLD were killed. Her party boycotted the 2010 elections, resulting in a decisive victory for the military-backed Union Solidarity and Development Party (USDP). Aung San Suu Kyi became a Pyithu Hluttaw MP while her party won 43 of the 45 vacant seats in the 2012 by-elections. In the 2015 elections, her party won a landslide victory, taking 86% of the seats in the Assembly of the Union—well more than the 67% supermajority needed to ensure that its preferred candidates were elected president and second vice president in the presidential electoral college. Although she was prohibited from becoming the president due to a clause in the constitution—her late husband and children are foreign citizens—she assumed the newly created role of State Counsellor of Myanmar, a role akin to a prime minister or a head of government. When she ascended to the office of state counsellor, Aung San Suu Kyi drew criticism from several countries, organisations and figures over Myanmar's inaction in response to the genocide of the Rohingya people in Rakhine State and refusal to acknowledge that the Myanmar's military has committed massacres. Under her leadership, Myanmar also drew criticism for prosecutions of journalists. In 2019, Aung San Suu Kyi appeared in the International Court of Justice where she defended the Myanmar military against allegations of genocide against the Rohingya. Aung San Suu Kyi, whose party had won the November 2020 Myanmar general election, was arrested on 1 February 2021 following a coup d'état that returned the Tatmadaw (Myanmar Armed Forces) to power and sparked protests across the country. Several charges were filed against her, and on 6 December 2021, she was sentenced to four years in prison on two of them. Later, on 10 January 2022, she was sentenced to an additional four years on another set of charges. On 12 October 2022, she was convicted of two further charges of corruption and she was sentenced to two terms of three years' imprisonment to be served concurrent to each other. On 30 December 2022, her trials ended with another conviction and an additional sentence of seven years' imprisonment for corruption. Aung San Suu Kyi's final sentence was of 33 years in prison, later reduced to 27 years. The United Nations, most European countries, and the United States condemned the arrests, trials, and sentences as politically motivated. Aung San Suu Kyi, like other Burmese names, includes no surname, but is only a personal name, in her case derived from three relatives: "Aung San" from her father, "Suu" from her paternal grandmother, and "Kyi" from her mother Khin Kyi. In Myanmar, Aung San Suu Kyi is often referred to as Daw Aung San Suu Kyi. Daw, literally meaning "aunt", is not part of her name but is an honorific for any older and revered woman, akin to "Madam". She is sometimes addressed as Daw Suu or Amay Suu ("Mother Suu") by her supporters. Aung San Suu Kyi was born on 19 June 1945 in Rangoon (now Yangon), British Burma. According to Peter Popham, she was born in a small village outside Rangoon called Hmway Saung. Her father, Aung San, allied with the Japanese during World War II. Aung San founded the modern Burmese army and negotiated Burma's independence from the United Kingdom in 1947; he was assassinated by his rivals in the same year. She is a niece of Thakin Than Tun who was the husband of Khin Khin Gyi, the elder sister of her mother Khin Kyi. She grew up with her mother, Khin Kyi, and two brothers, Aung San Lin and Aung San Oo, in Rangoon. Aung San Lin died at the age of eight when he drowned in an ornamental lake on the grounds of the house. Her elder brother emigrated to San Diego, California, becoming a United States citizen. After Aung San Lin's death, the family moved to a house by Inya Lake where Aung San Suu Kyi met people of various backgrounds, political views, and religions. She was educated in Methodist English High School (now Basic Education High School No. 1 Dagon) for much of her childhood in Burma, where she was noted as having a talent for learning languages. She speaks four languages: Burmese, English (with a British accent), French, and Japanese. She is a Theravada Buddhist. Aung San Suu Kyi's mother, Khin Kyi, gained prominence as a political figure in the newly formed Burmese government. She was appointed Burmese ambassador to India and Nepal in 1960, and Aung San Suu Kyi followed her there. She studied in the Convent of Jesus and Mary School in New Delhi, and graduated from Lady Shri Ram College, a constituent college of the University of Delhi in New Delhi, with a degree in politics in 1964. Suu Kyi continued her education at St Hugh's College, Oxford, obtaining a B.A. degree in Philosophy, Politics and Economics in 1967, graduating with a third-class degree that was promoted per tradition to an MA in 1968. After graduating, she lived in New York City with family friend Ma Than E, who was once a popular Burmese pop singer. She worked at the United Nations for three years, primarily on budget matters, writing daily to her future husband, Dr. Michael Aris. On 1 January 1972, Aung San Suu Kyi and Aris, a scholar of Tibetan culture and literature, living abroad in Bhutan, were married. The following year, she gave birth to their first son, Alexander Aris, in London; their second son, Kim Aris, was born in 1977. Between 1985 and 1987, Aung San Suu Kyi was working toward a Master of Philosophy degree in Burmese literature as a research student at the School of Oriental and African Studies (SOAS), University of London. She was elected as an Honorary Fellow of St Hugh's in 1990. For two years, she was a Fellow at the Indian Institute of Advanced Studies (IIAS) in Shimla, India. She also worked for the government of the Union of Burma. In 1988, Aung San Suu Kyi returned to Burma to tend for her ailing mother. Aris' visit in Christmas 1995 was the last time that he and Aung San Suu Kyi met, as she remained in Burma and the Burmese dictatorship denied him any further entry visas. Aris was diagnosed with prostate cancer in 1997 which was later found to be terminal. Despite appeals from prominent figures and organizations, including the United States, UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan and Pope John Paul II, the Burmese government would not grant Aris a visa, saying that they did not have the facilities to care for him, and instead urged Aung San Suu Kyi to leave the country to visit him. She was at that time temporarily free from house arrest but was unwilling to depart, fearing that she would be refused re-entry if she left, as she did not trust the military junta's assurance that she could return. Aris died on his 53rd birthday on 27 March 1999. Since 1989, when his wife was first placed under house arrest, he had seen her only five times, the last of which was for Christmas in 1995. She was also separated from her children, who live in the United Kingdom, until 2011. On 2 May 2008, after Cyclone Nargis hit Burma, Aung San Suu Kyi's dilapidated lakeside bungalow lost its roof and electricity, while the cyclone also left entire villages in the Irrawaddy delta submerged. Plans to renovate and repair the house were announced in August 2009. Aung San Suu Kyi was released from house arrest on 13 November 2010. Coincidentally, when Aung San Suu Kyi returned to Burma in 1988, the long-time military leader of Burma and head of the ruling party, General Ne Win, stepped down. Mass demonstrations for democracy followed that event on 8 August 1988 (8–8–88, a day seen as auspicious), which were violently suppressed in what came to be known as the 8888 Uprising. On 24 August 1988, she made her first public appearance at the Yangon General Hospital, addressing protestors from a podium. On 26 August, she addressed half a million people at a mass rally in front of the Shwedagon Pagoda in the capital, calling for a democratic government. However, in September 1988, a new military junta took power. Influenced by both Mahatma Gandhi's philosophy of non-violence and also by the Buddhist concepts, Aung San Suu Kyi entered politics to work for democratization, helped found the National League for Democracy on 27 September 1988, but was put under house arrest on 20 July 1989. She was offered freedom if she left the country, but she refused. Despite her philosophy of non-violence, a group of ex-military commanders and senior politicians who joined NLD during the crisis believed that she was too confrontational and left NLD. However, she retained enormous popularity and support among NLD youths with whom she spent most of her time. During the crisis, the previous democratically elected Prime Minister of Burma, U Nu, initiated to form an interim government and invited opposition leaders to join him. Indian Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi had signaled his readiness to recognize the interim government. However, Aung San Suu Kyi categorically rejected U Nu's plan by saying "the future of the opposition would be decided by masses of the people". Ex-Brigadier General Aung Gyi, another influential politician at the time of the 8888 crisis and the first chairman in the history of the NLD, followed the suit and rejected the plan after Aung San Suu Kyi's refusal. Aung Gyi later accused several NLD members of being communists and resigned from the party. In 1990, the military junta called a general election, in which the National League for Democracy (NLD) received 59% of the votes, guaranteeing NLD 80% of the parliament seats. Some claim that Aung San Suu Kyi would have assumed the office of Prime Minister. Instead, the results were nullified and the military refused to hand over power, resulting in an international outcry. Aung San Suu Kyi was placed under house arrest at her home on University Avenue (16°49′32″N 96°9′1″E﻿ / ﻿16.82556°N 96.15028°E﻿ / 16.82556; 96.15028) in Rangoon, during which time she was awarded the Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought in 1990, and the Nobel Peace Prize one year later. Her sons' Alexander and Kim accepted the Nobel Peace Prize on her behalf. Aung San Suu Kyi used the Nobel Peace Prize's US$1.3 million prize money to establish a health and education trust for the Burmese people. Around this time, Aung San Suu Kyi chose nonviolence as an expedient political tactic, stating in 2007, "I do not hold to nonviolence for moral reasons, but for political and practical reasons." The decision of the Nobel Committee mentions: The Norwegian Nobel Committee has decided to award the Nobel Peace Prize for 1991 to Aung San Suu Kyi of Myanmar (Burma) for her non-violent struggle for democracy and human rights. ... Suu Kyi's struggle is one of the most extraordinary examples of civil courage in Asia in recent decades. She has become an important symbol in the struggle against oppression ... ... In awarding the Nobel Peace Prize for 1991 to Aung San Suu Kyi, the Norwegian Nobel Committee wishes to honour this woman for her unflagging efforts and to show its support for the many people throughout the world who are striving to attain democracy, human rights, and ethnic conciliation by peaceful means. — Oslo, 14 October 1991 In 1995 Aung San Suu Kyi delivered the keynote address at the Fourth World Conference on Women in Beijing. On 9 November 1996, the motorcade that Aung San Suu Kyi was traveling in with other National League for Democracy leaders Tin Oo and Kyi Maung, was attacked in Yangon. About 200 men swooped down on the motorcade, wielding metal chains, metal batons, stones and other weapons. The car that Aung San Suu Kyi was in had its rear window smashed, and the car with Tin Oo and Kyi Maung had its rear window and two backdoor windows shattered. It is believed the offenders were members of the Union Solidarity and Development Association (USDA) who were allegedly paid Ks.500/- (@ USD $0.50) each to participate. The NLD lodged an official complaint with the police, and according to reports the government launched an investigation, but no action was taken. (Amnesty International 120297) Aung San Suu Kyi was placed under house arrest for a total of 15 years over a 21-year period, on numerous occasions, since she began her political career, during which time she was prevented from meeting her party supporters and international visitors. In an interview, she said that while under house arrest she spent her time reading philosophy, politics and biographies that her husband had sent her. She also passed the time playing the piano and was occasionally allowed visits from foreign diplomats as well as from her personal physician. Although under house arrest, Aung San Suu Kyi was granted permission to leave Burma under the condition that she never return, which she refused: "As a mother, the greater sacrifice was giving up my sons, but I was always aware of the fact that others had given up more than me. I never forget that my colleagues who are in prison suffer not only physically, but mentally for their families who have no security outside – in the larger prison of Burma under authoritarian rule." The media were also prevented from visiting Aung San Suu Kyi, as occurred in 1998 when journalist Maurizio Giuliano, after photographing her, was stopped by customs officials who then confiscated all his films, tapes and some notes. In contrast, Aung San Suu Kyi did have visits from government representatives, such as during her autumn 1994 house arrest when she met the leader of Burma, Senior General Than Shwe and General Khin Nyunt on 20 September in the first meeting since she had been placed in detention. On several occasions during her house arrest, she had periods of poor health and as a result was hospitalized. The Burmese government detained and kept Aung San Suu Kyi imprisoned because it viewed her as someone "likely to undermine the community peace and stability" of the country, and used both Article 10(a) and 10(b) of the 1975 State Protection Act (granting the government the power to imprison people for up to five years without a trial), and Section 22 of the "Law to Safeguard the State Against the Dangers of Those Desiring to Cause Subversive Acts" as legal tools against her. She continuously appealed her detention, and many nations and figures continued to call for her release and that of 2,100 other political prisoners in the country. On 12 November 2010, days after the junta-backed Union Solidarity and Development Party (USDP) won elections conducted after a gap of 20 years, the junta finally agreed to sign orders allowing Aung San Suu Kyi's release, and her house arrest term came to an end on 13 November 2010. The United Nations (UN) has attempted to facilitate dialogue between the junta and Aung San Suu Kyi. On 6 May 2002, following secret confidence-building negotiations led by the UN, the government released her; a government spokesman said that she was free to move "because we are confident that we can trust each other". Aung San Suu Kyi proclaimed "a new dawn for the country". However, on 30 May 2003 in an incident similar to the 1996 attack on her, a government-sponsored mob attacked her caravan in the northern village of Depayin, murdering and wounding many of her supporters. Aung San Suu Kyi fled the scene with the help of her driver, Kyaw Soe Lin, but was arrested upon reaching Ye-U. The government imprisoned her at Insein Prison in Rangoon. After she underwent a hysterectomy in September 2003, the government again placed her under house arrest in Rangoon. The results from the UN facilitation have been mixed; Razali Ismail, UN special envoy to Burma, met with Aung San Suu Kyi. Ismail resigned from his post the following year, partly because he was denied re-entry to Burma on several occasions. Several years later in 2006, Ibrahim Gambari, UN Undersecretary-General (USG) of Department of Political Affairs, met with Aung San Suu Kyi, the first visit by a foreign official since 2004. He also met with her later the same year. On 2 October 2007 Gambari returned to talk to her again after seeing Than Shwe and other members of the senior leadership in Naypyidaw. State television broadcast Aung San Suu Kyi with Gambari, stating that they had met twice. This was Aung San Suu Kyi's first appearance in state media in the four years since her current detention began. The United Nations Working Group for Arbitrary Detention published an Opinion that Aung San Suu Kyi's deprivation of liberty was arbitrary and in contravention of Article 9 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 1948, and requested that the authorities in Burma set her free, but the authorities ignored the request at that time. The U.N. report said that according to the Burmese Government's reply, "Daw Aung San Suu Kyi has not been arrested, but has only been taken into protective custody, for her own safety", and while "it could have instituted legal action against her under the country's domestic legislation ... it has preferred to adopt a magnanimous attitude, and is providing her with protection in her own interests". Such claims were rejected by Brigadier-General Khin Yi, Chief of Myanmar Police Force (MPF). On 18 January 2007, the state-run paper New Light of Myanmar accused Aung San Suu Kyi of tax evasion for spending her Nobel Prize money outside the country. The accusation followed the defeat of a US-sponsored United Nations Security Council resolution condemning Burma as a threat to international security; the resolution was defeated because of strong opposition from China, which has strong ties with the military junta (China later voted against the resolution, along with Russia and South Africa). In November 2007, it was reported that Aung San Suu Kyi would meet her political allies National League for Democracy along with a government minister. The ruling junta made the official announcement on state TV and radio just hours after UN special envoy Ibrahim Gambari ended his second visit to Burma. The NLD confirmed that it had received the invitation to hold talks with Aung San Suu Kyi. However, the process delivered few concrete results. On 3 July 2009, UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon went to Burma to pressure the junta into releasing Aung San Suu Kyi and to institute democratic reform. However, on departing from Burma, Ban Ki-moon said he was "disappointed" with the visit after junta leader Than Shwe refused permission for him to visit Aung San Suu Kyi, citing her ongoing trial. Ban said he was "deeply disappointed that they have missed a very important opportunity". 20 July 1989: Placed under house arrest in Rangoon under martial law that allows for detention without charge or trial for three years. 10 July 1995: Released from house arrest. 23 September 2000: Placed under house arrest. 6 May 2002: Released after 19 months. 30 May 2003: Arrested following the Depayin massacre, she was held in secret detention for more than three months before being returned to house arrest. 25 May 2007: House arrest extended by one year despite a direct appeal from U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan to General Than Shwe. 24 October 2007: Reached 12 years under house arrest, solidarity protests held at 12 cities around the world. 27 May 2008: House arrest extended for another year, which is illegal under both international law and Burma's own law. 11 August 2009: House arrest extended for 18 more months because of "violation" arising from the May 2009 trespass incident. 13 November 2010: Released from house arrest. Protests led by Buddhist monks during Saffron Revolution began on 19 August 2007 following steep fuel price increases, and continued each day, despite the threat of a crackdown by the military. On 22 September 2007, although still under house arrest, Aung San Suu Kyi made a brief public appearance at the gate of her residence in Yangon to accept the blessings of Buddhist monks who were marching in support of human rights. It was reported that she had been moved the following day to Insein Prison (where she had been detained in 2003), but meetings with UN envoy Ibrahim Gambari near her Rangoon home on 30 September and 2 October established that she remained under house arrest. On 3 May 2009, an American man, identified as John Yettaw, swam across Inya Lake to her house uninvited and was arrested when he made his return trip three days later. He had attempted to make a similar trip two years earlier, but for unknown reasons was turned away. He later claimed at trial that he was motivated by a divine vision requiring him to notify her of an impending terrorist assassination attempt. On 13 May, Aung San Suu Kyi was arrested for violating the terms of her house arrest because the swimmer, who pleaded exhaustion, was allowed to stay in her house for two days before he attempted the swim back. Aung San Suu Kyi was later taken to Insein Prison, where she could have faced up to five years' confinement for the intrusion. The trial of Aung San Suu Kyi and her two maids began on 18 May and a small number of protesters gathered outside. Diplomats and journalists were barred from attending the trial; however, on one occasion, several diplomats from Russia, Thailand and Singapore and journalists were allowed to meet Aung San Suu Kyi. The prosecution had originally planned to call 22 witnesses. It also accused John Yettaw of embarrassing the country. During the ongoing defence case, Aung San Suu Kyi said she was innocent. The defence was allowed to call only one witness (out of four), while the prosecution was permitted to call 14 witnesses. The court rejected two character witnesses, NLD members Tin Oo and Win Tin, and permitted the defence to call only a legal expert. According to one unconfirmed report, the junta was planning to, once again, place her in detention, this time in a military base outside the city. In a separate trial, Yettaw said he swam to Aung San Suu Kyi's house to warn her that her life was "in danger". The national police chief later confirmed that Yettaw was the "main culprit" in the case filed against Aung San Suu Kyi. According to aides, Aung San Suu Kyi spent her 64th birthday in jail sharing biryani rice and chocolate cake with her guards. Her arrest and subsequent trial received worldwide condemnation by the UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon, the United Nations Security Council, Western governments, South Africa, Japan and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, of which Burma is a member. The Burmese government strongly condemned the statement, as it created an "unsound tradition" and criticised Thailand for meddling in its internal affairs. The Burmese Foreign Minister Nyan Win was quoted in the state-run newspaper New Light of Myanmar as saying that the incident "was trumped up to intensify international pressure on Burma by internal and external anti-government elements who do not wish to see the positive changes in those countries' policies toward Burma". Ban responded to an international campaign by flying to Burma to negotiate, but Than Shwe rejected all of his requests. On 11 August 2009, the trial concluded with Aung San Suu Kyi being sentenced to imprisonment for three years with hard labour. This sentence was commuted by the military rulers to further house arrest of 18 months. On 14 August, US Senator Jim Webb visited Burma, visiting with junta leader General Than Shwe and later with Aung San Suu Kyi. During the visit, Webb negotiated Yettaw's release and deportation from Burma. Following the verdict of the trial, lawyers of Aung San Suu Kyi said they would appeal against the 18-month sentence. On 18 August, United States President Barack Obama asked the country's military leadership to set free all political prisoners, including Aung San Suu Kyi. In her appeal, Aung San Suu Kyi had argued that the conviction was unwarranted. However, her appeal against the August sentence was rejected by a Burmese court on 2 October 2009. Although the court accepted the argument that the 1974 constitution, under which she had been charged, was null and void, it also said the provisions of the 1975 security law, under which she has been kept under house arrest, remained in force. The verdict effectively meant that she would be unable to participate in the elections scheduled to take place in 2010—the first in Burma in two decades. Her lawyer stated that her legal team would pursue a new appeal within 60 days. Aung San Suu Kyi has received vocal support from Western nations in Europe, Australia and North and South America, as well as India, Israel, Japan the Philippines and South Korea. In December 2007, the US House of Representatives voted unanimously 400–0 to award Aung San Suu Kyi the Congressional Gold Medal; the Senate concurred on 25 April 2008. On 6 May 2008, President George W. Bush signed legislation awarding Aung San Suu Kyi the Congressional Gold Medal. She is the first recipient in American history to receive the prize while imprisoned. More recently, there has been growing criticism of her detention by Burma's neighbours in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), particularly from Indonesia, Thailand, the Philippines and Singapore. At one point Malaysia warned Burma that it faced expulsion from ASEAN as a result of the detention of Aung San Suu Kyi. Other nations including South Africa, Bangladesh and the Maldives also called for her release. The United Nations has urged the country to move towards inclusive national reconciliation, the restoration of democracy, and full respect for human rights. In December 2008, the United Nations General Assembly passed a resolution condemning the human rights situation in Burma and calling for Aung San Suu Kyi's release—80 countries voting for the resolution, 25 against and 45 abstentions. Other nations, such as China and Russia, are less critical of the regime and prefer to cooperate only on economic matters. Indonesia has urged China to push Burma for reforms. However, Samak Sundaravej, former Prime Minister of Thailand, criticised the amount of support for Aung San Suu Kyi, saying that "Europe uses Aung San Suu Kyi as a tool. If it's not related to Aung San Suu Kyi, you can have deeper discussions with Myanmar." Vietnam, however, did not support calls by other ASEAN member states for Myanmar to free Aung San Suu Kyi, state media reported Friday, 14 August 2009. The state-run Việt Nam News said Vietnam had no criticism of Myanmar's decision 11 August 2009 to place Aung San Suu Kyi under house arrest for the next 18 months, effectively barring her from elections scheduled for 2010. "It is our view that the Aung San Suu Kyi trial is an internal affair of Myanmar", Vietnamese government spokesman Le Dung stated on the website of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. In contrast with other ASEAN member states, Dung said Vietnam has always supported Myanmar and hopes it will continue to implement the "roadmap to democracy" outlined by its government. Nobel Peace Prize winners (Archbishop Desmond Tutu, the Dalai Lama, Shirin Ebadi, Adolfo Pérez Esquivel, Mairead Corrigan, Rigoberta Menchú, Prof. Elie Wiesel, US President Barack Obama, Betty Williams, Jody Williams and former US President Jimmy Carter) called for the rulers of Burma to release Aung San Suu Kyi to "create the necessary conditions for a genuine dialogue with Daw Aung San Suu Kyi and all concerned parties and ethnic groups to achieve an inclusive national reconciliation with the direct support of the United Nations". Some of the money she received as part of the award helped fund higher education grants to Burmese students through the London-based charity Prospect Burma. It was announced prior to the 2010 Burmese general election that Aung San Suu Kyi may be released "so she can organize her party", However, Aung San Suu Kyi was not allowed to run. On 1 October 2010 the government announced that she would be released on 13 November 2010. US President Barack Obama personally advocated the release of all political prisoners, especially Aung San Suu Kyi, during the US-ASEAN Summit of 2009. The US Government hoped that successful general elections would be an optimistic indicator of the Burmese government's sincerity towards eventual democracy. The Hatoyama government which spent 2.82 billion yen in 2008, has promised more Japanese foreign aid to encourage Burma to release Aung San Suu Kyi in time for the elections; and to continue moving towards democracy and the rule of law. In a personal letter to Aung San Suu Kyi, UK Prime Minister Gordon Brown cautioned the Burmese government of the potential consequences of rigging elections as "condemning Burma to more years of diplomatic isolation and economic stagnation". Aung San Suu Kyi met with many heads of state and opened a dialog with the Minister of Labor Aung Kyi (not to be confused with Aung San Suu Kyi). She was allowed to meet with senior members of her NLD party at the State House, however these meetings took place under close supervision. On the evening of 13 November 2010, Aung San Suu Kyi was released from house arrest. This was the date her detention had been set to expire according to a court ruling in August 2009 and came six days after a widely criticised general election. She appeared in front of a crowd of her supporters, who rushed to her house in Rangoon when nearby barricades were removed by the security forces. Aung San Suu Kyi had been detained for 15 of the past 21 years. The government newspaper New Light of Myanmar reported the release positively, saying she had been granted a pardon after serving her sentence "in good conduct". The New York Times suggested that the military government may have released Aung San Suu Kyi because it felt it was in a confident position to control her supporters after the election. Her son Kim Aris was granted a visa in November 2010 to see his mother shortly after her release, for the first time in 10 years. He visited again on 5 July 2011, to accompany her on a trip to Bagan, her first trip outside Yangon since 2003. Her son visited again on 8 August 2011, to accompany her on a trip to Pegu, her second trip. Discussions were held between Aung San Suu Kyi and the Burmese government during 2011, which led to a number of official gestures to meet her demands. In October, around a tenth of Burma's political prisoners were freed in an amnesty and trade unions were legalised. In November 2011, following a meeting of its leaders, the NLD announced its intention to re-register as a political party to contend 48 by-elections necessitated by the promotion of parliamentarians to ministerial rank. Following the decision, Aung San Suu Kyi held a telephone conference with US President Barack Obama, in which it was agreed that Secretary of State Hillary Clinton would make a visit to Burma, a move received with caution by Burma's ally China. On 1 December 2011, Aung San Suu Kyi met with Hillary Clinton at the residence of the top-ranking US diplomat in Yangon. On 21 December 2011, Thai Prime Minister Yingluck Shinawatra met Aung San Suu Kyi in Yangon, marking Aung San Suu Kyi's "first-ever meeting with the leader of a foreign country". On 5 January 2012, British Foreign Minister William Hague met Aung San Suu Kyi and his Burmese counterpart. This represented a significant visit for Aung San Suu Kyi and Burma. Aung San Suu Kyi studied in the UK and maintains many ties there, whilst Britain is Burma's largest bilateral donor. During Aung San Suu Kyi's visit to Europe, she visited the Swiss parliament, collected her 1991 Nobel Prize in Oslo and her honorary degree from the University of Oxford. In December 2011, there was speculation that Aung San Suu Kyi would run in the 2012 national by-elections to fill vacant seats. On 18 January 2012, Aung San Suu Kyi formally registered to contest a Pyithu Hluttaw (lower house) seat in the Kawhmu Township constituency in special parliamentary elections to be held on 1 April 2012. The seat was previously held by Soe Tint, who vacated it after being appointed Construction Deputy Minister, in the 2010 election. She ran against Union Solidarity and Development Party candidate Soe Min, a retired army physician and native of Twante Township. On 3 March 2012, at a large campaign rally in Mandalay, Aung San Suu Kyi unexpectedly left after 15 minutes, because of exhaustion and airsickness. In an official campaign speech broadcast on Burmese state television's MRTV on 14 March 2012, Aung San Suu Kyi publicly campaigned for reform of the 2008 Constitution, removal of restrictive laws, more adequate protections for people's democratic rights, and establishment of an independent judiciary. The speech was leaked online a day before it was broadcast. A paragraph in the speech, focusing on the Tatmadaw's repression by means of law, was censored by authorities. Aung San Suu Kyi also called for international media to monitor the by-elections, while publicly pointing out irregularities in official voter lists, which include deceased individuals and exclude other eligible voters in the contested constituencies. On 21 March 2012, Aung San Suu Kyi was quoted as saying "Fraud and rule violations are continuing and we can even say they are increasing." When asked whether she would assume a ministerial post if given the opportunity, she said the following: I can tell you one thing—that under the present constitution, if you become a member of the government you have to vacate your seat in the national assembly. And I am not working so hard to get into parliament simply to vacate my seat. On 26 March 2012, Aung San Suu Kyi suspended her nationwide campaign tour early, after a campaign rally in Myeik (Mergui), a coastal town in the south, citing health problems due to exhaustion and hot weather. On 1 April 2012, the NLD announced that Aung San Suu Kyi had won the vote for a seat in Parliament. A news broadcast on state-run MRTV, reading the announcements of the Union Election Commission, confirmed her victory, as well as her party's victory in 43 of the 45 contested seats, officially making Aung San Suu Kyi the Leader of the Opposition in the Pyidaungsu Hluttaw. Although she and other MP-elects were expected to take office on 23 April when the Hluttaws resumed session, National League for Democracy MP-elects, including Aung San Suu Kyi, said they might not take their oaths because of its wording; in its present form, parliamentarians must vow to "safeguard" the constitution. In an address on Radio Free Asia, she said "We don't mean we will not attend the parliament, we mean we will attend only after taking the oath ... Changing that wording in the oath is also in conformity with the Constitution. I don't expect there will be any difficulty in doing it." On 2 May 2012, National League for Democracy MP-elects, including Aung San Suu Kyi, took their oaths and took office, though the wording of the oath was not changed. According to the Los Angeles Times, "Suu Kyi and her colleagues decided they could do more by joining as lawmakers than maintaining their boycott on principle." On 9 July 2012, she attended the Parliament for the first time as a lawmaker. On 16 June 2012, Aung San Suu Kyi was finally able to deliver her Nobel acceptance speech (Nobel lecture) at Oslo's City Hall, two decades after being awarded the peace prize. In September 2012, Aung San Suu Kyi received in person the United States Congressional Gold Medal, which is the highest Congressional award. Although she was awarded this medal in 2008, at the time she was under house arrest, and was unable to receive the medal. Aung San Suu Kyi was greeted with bipartisan support at Congress, as part of a coast-to-coast tour in the United States. In addition, Aung San Suu Kyi met President Barack Obama at the White House. The experience was described by Aung San Suu Kyi as "one of the most moving days of my life". In 2014, she was listed as the 61st-most-powerful woman in the world by Forbes. On 6 July 2012, Aung San Suu Kyi announced on the World Economic Forum's website that she wanted to run for the presidency in Myanmar's 2015 elections. The current Constitution, which came into effect in 2008, bars her from the presidency because she is the widow and mother of foreigners—provisions that appeared to be written specifically to prevent her from being eligible. The NLD won a sweeping victory in those elections, winning at least 255 seats in the House of Representatives and 135 seats in the House of Nationalities. In addition, Aung San Suu Kyi won re-election to the House of Representatives. Under the 2008 constitution, the NLD needed to win at least a two-thirds majority in both houses to ensure that its candidate would become president. Before the elections, Aung San Suu Kyi announced that even though she is constitutionally barred from the presidency, she would hold the real power in any NLD-led government. On 30 March 2016 she became Minister for the President's Office, for Foreign Affairs, for Education and for Electric Power and Energy in President Htin Kyaw's government; later she relinquished the latter two ministries and President Htin Kyaw appointed her State Counsellor, a position akin to a Prime Minister created especially for her. The position of State Counsellor was approved by the House of Nationalities on 1 April 2016 and the House of Representatives on 5 April 2016. The next day, her role as State Counsellor was established. As soon as she became foreign minister, she invited Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi, Canadian Foreign Minister Stephane Dion and Italian Foreign Minister Paolo Gentiloni in April and Japanese Foreign Minister Fumio Kishida in May and discussed how to have good diplomatic relationships with these countries. Initially, upon accepting the State Counsellor position, she granted amnesty to the students who were arrested for opposing the National Education Bill, and announced the creation of the commission on Rakhine State, which had a long record of persecution of the Muslim Rohingya minority. However, soon Aung San Suu Kyi's government did not manage with the ethnic conflicts in Shan and Kachin states, where thousands of refugees fled to China, and by 2017 the persecution of the Rohingya by the government forces escalated to the point that it is not uncommonly called a genocide. Aung San Suu Kyi, when interviewed, has denied the allegations of ethnic cleansing. She has also refused to grant citizenship to the Rohingya, instead taking steps to issue ID cards for residency but no guarantees of citizenship. Her tenure as State Counsellor of Myanmar has drawn international criticism for her failure to address her country's economic and ethnic problems, particularly the plight of the Rohingya following the 25 August 2017 ARSA attacks (described as "certainly one of the biggest refugee crises and cases of ethnic cleansing since the Second World War"), for the weakening of freedom of the press and for her style of leadership, described as imperious and "distracted and out of touch". During the COVID-19 pandemic in Myanmar, Suu Kyi chaired a National Central Committee responsible for coordinating the country's pandemic response. In 2017, critics called for Aung San Suu Kyi's Nobel prize to be revoked, citing her silence over the genocide of Rohingya people in Myanmar. Some activists criticised Aung San Suu Kyi for her silence on the 2012 Rakhine State riots (later repeated during the 2015 Rohingya refugee crisis), and her indifference to the plight of the Rohingya, Myanmar's persecuted Muslim minority. In 2012, she told reporters she did not know if the Rohingya could be regarded as Burmese citizens. In a 2013 interview with the BBC's Mishal Husain, Aung San Suu Kyi did not condemn violence against the Rohingya and denied that Muslims in Myanmar have been subject to ethnic cleansing, insisting that the tensions were due to a "climate of fear" caused by "a worldwide perception that global Muslim power is 'very great'". She did condemn "hate of any kind" in the interview. According to Peter Popham, in the aftermath of the interview, she expressed anger at being interviewed by a Muslim. Husain had challenged Aung San Suu Kyi that almost all of the impact of violence was against the Rohingya, in response to Aung San Suu Kyi's claim that violence was happening on both sides, and Peter Popham described her position on the issue as one of purposeful ambiguity for political gain. However, she said that she wanted to work towards reconciliation and she cannot take sides as violence has been committed by both sides. According to The Economist, her "halo has even slipped among foreign human-rights lobbyists, disappointed at her failure to make a clear stand on behalf of the Rohingya minority". However, she has spoken out "against a ban on Rohingya families near the Bangladeshi border having more than two children". In a 2015 BBC News article, reporter Jonah Fisher suggested that Aung San Suu Kyi's silence over the Rohingya issue is due to a need to obtain support from the majority Bamar ethnicity as she is in "the middle of a general election campaign". In May 2015, the Dalai Lama publicly called upon her to do more to help the Rohingya in Myanmar, claiming that he had previously urged her to address the plight of the Rohingya in private during two separate meetings and that she had resisted his urging. In May 2016, Aung San Suu Kyi asked the newly appointed United States Ambassador to Myanmar, Scot Marciel, not to refer to the Rohingya by that name as they "are not recognized as among the 135 official ethnic groups" in Myanmar. This followed Bamar protests at Marciel's use of the word "Rohingya". In 2016, Aung San Suu Kyi was accused of failing to protect Myanmar's Rohingya Muslims during the Rohingya genocide. State crime experts from Queen Mary University of London warned that Aung San Suu Kyi is "legitimising genocide" in Myanmar. Despite continued persecution of the Rohingya well into 2017, Aung San Suu Kyi was "not even admitting, let alone trying to stop, the army's well-documented campaign of rape, murder and destruction against Rohingya villages". On 4 September 2017, Yanghee Lee, the UN's special rapporteur on human rights in Myanmar, criticised Aung San Suu Kyi's response to the "really grave" situation in Rakhine, saying: "The de facto leader needs to step in—that is what we would expect from any government, to protect everybody within their own jurisdiction." The BBC reported that "Her comments came as the number of Rohingya fleeing to Bangladesh reached 87,000, according to UN estimates", adding that "her sentiments were echoed by Nobel Peace laureate Malala Yousafzai, who said she was waiting to hear from Ms Suu Kyi—who has not commented on the crisis since it erupted". The next day George Monbiot, writing in The Guardian, called on readers to sign a change.org petition to have the Nobel peace prize revoked, criticising her silence on the matter and asserting "whether out of prejudice or out of fear, she denies to others the freedoms she rightly claimed for herself. Her regime excludes—and in some cases seeks to silence—the very activists who helped to ensure her own rights were recognised." The Nobel Foundation replied that there existed no provision for revoking a Nobel Prize. Archbishop Desmond Tutu, a fellow peace prize holder, also criticised Aung San Suu Kyi's silence: in an open letter published on social media, he said: "If the political price of your ascension to the highest office in Myanmar is your silence, the price is surely too steep ... It is incongruous for a symbol of righteousness to lead such a country." On 13 September it was revealed that Aung San Suu Kyi would not be attending a UN General Assembly debate being held the following week to discuss the humanitarian crisis, with a Myanmar's government spokesman stating "perhaps she has more pressing matters to deal with". In October 2017, Oxford City Council announced that, following a unanimous cross-party vote, the honour of Freedom of the City, granted in 1997 in recognition of her "long struggle for democracy", was to be withdrawn following evidence emerging from the United Nations which meant that she was "no longer worthy of the honour". A few days later, Munsur Ali, a councillor for City of London Corporation, tabled a motion to rescind the Freedom of the City of London: the motion was supported by Catherine McGuinness, chair of the corporation's policy and resources committee, who expressed "distress ... at the situation in Burma and the atrocities committed by the Burmese military". On 13 November 2017, Bob Geldof returned his Freedom of the City of Dublin award in protest over Aung San Suu Kyi also holding the accolade, stating that he does not "wish to be associated in any way with an individual currently engaged in the mass ethnic cleansing of the Rohingya people of north-west Burma". Calling Aung San Suu Kyi a "handmaiden to genocide", Geldof added that he would take pride in his award being restored if it is first stripped from her. The Dublin City Council voted 59–2 (with one abstention) to revoke Aung San Suu Kyi's Freedom of the City award over Myanmar's treatment of the Rohingya people in December 2017, though Lord Mayor of Dublin Mícheál Mac Donncha denied the decision was influenced by protests by Geldof and members of U2. At the same meeting, the Councillors voted 37–7 (with 5 abstentions) to remove Geldof's name from the Roll of Honorary Freemen. In March 2018, the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum revoked Aung San Suu Kyi's Elie Wiesel Award, awarded in 2012, citing her failure "to condemn and stop the military's brutal campaign" against Rohingya Muslims. In May 2018, Aung San Suu Kyi was considered complicit in the crimes against Rohingyas in a report by Britain's International Development Committee. In August 2018, it was revealed that Aung San Suu Kyi would be stripped of her Freedom of Edinburgh award over her refusal to speak out against the crimes committed against the Rohingya. She had received the award in 2005 for promoting peace and democracy in Burma. This will be only the second time that anyone has ever been stripped of the award, after Charles Stewart Parnell lost it in 1890 due to a salacious affair. Also in August, a UN report, while describing the violence as genocide, added that Aung San Suu Kyi did as little as possible to prevent it. In early October 2018, both the Canadian Senate and its House of Commons voted unanimously to strip Aung San Suu Kyi of her honorary citizenship. This decision was caused by the Government of Canada's determination that the treatment of the Rohingya by Myanmar's government amounts to genocide. On 11 November 2018, Amnesty International announced it was revoking her Ambassador of Conscience award. In December 2019, Aung San Suu Kyi appeared in the International Court of Justice at The Hague where she defended the Burmese military against allegations of genocide against the Rohingya. In a speech of over 3,000 words, Aung San Suu Kyi did not use the term "Rohingya" in describing the ethnic group. She stated that the allegations of genocide were "incomplete and misleading", claiming that the situation was actually a Burmese military response to attacks by the Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army (ARSA). She also questioned how there could be "genocidal intent" when the Burmese government had opened investigations and also encouraged Rohingya to return after being displaced. However, experts have largely criticized the Burmese investigations as insincere, with the military declaring itself innocent and the government preventing a visit from investigators from the United Nations. Many Rohingya have also not returned due to perceiving danger and a lack of rights in Myanmar. In January 2020, the International Court of Justice decided that there was a "real and imminent risk of irreparable prejudice to the rights" of the Rohingya. The court also took the view that the Burmese government's efforts to remedy the situation "do not appear sufficient" to protect the Rohingya. Therefore, the court ordered the Burmese government to take "all measures within its power" to protect the Rohingya from genocidal actions. The court also instructed the Burmese government to preserve evidence and report back to the court at timely intervals about the situation. In December 2017, two Reuters journalists, Wa Lone and Kyaw Soe Oo, were arrested while investigating the Inn Din massacre of Rohingyas. Suu Kyi publicly commented in June 2018 that the journalists "weren't arrested for covering the Rakhine issue", but because they had broken Myanmar's Official Secrets Act. As the journalists were then on trial for violating the Official Secrets Act, Aung San Suu Kyi's presumption of their guilt was criticized by rights groups for potentially influencing the verdict. American diplomat Bill Richardson said that he had privately discussed the arrest with Suu Kyi, and that Aung San Suu Kyi reacted angrily and labelled the journalists "traitors". A police officer testified that he was ordered by superiors to use entrapment to frame and arrest the journalists; he was later jailed and his family evicted from their home in the police camp. The judge found the journalists guilty in September 2018 and to be jailed for seven years. Aung San Suu Kyi reacted to widespread international criticism of the verdict by stating: "I don't think anyone has bothered to read" the judgement as it had "nothing to do with freedom of expression at all", but the Official Secrets Act. She also challenged critics to "point out where there has been a miscarriage of justice", and told the two Reuters journalists that they could appeal their case to a higher court. In September 2018, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights issued a report that since Aung San Suu Kyi's party, the NLD, came to power, the arrests and criminal prosecutions of journalists in Myanmar by the government and military, under laws which are too vague and broad, have "made it impossible for journalists to do their job without fear or favour." On 1 February 2021, Aung San Suu Kyi was arrested and deposed by the Myanmar's military, along with other leaders of her National League for Democracy (NLD) party, after the Myanmar's military declared the November 2020 general election results fraudulent. A 1 February court order authorized her detainment for 15 days, stating that soldiers searching her Naypyidaw villa had uncovered imported communications equipment lacking proper paperwork. Aung San Suu Kyi was transferred to house arrest on the same evening, and on 3 February was formally charged with illegally importing ten or more walkie-talkies. She faces up to three years in prison for the charges. According to The New York Times, the charge "echoed previous accusations of esoteric legal crimes (and) arcane offenses" used by the military against critics and rivals. As of 9 February, Aung San Suu Kyi continues to be held incommunicado, without access to international observers or legal representation of her choice. US President Joe Biden raised the threat of new sanctions as a result of the Myanmar's military coup. In a statement, the UN Secretary-General António Guterres believes "These developments represent a serious blow to democratic reforms in Myanmar." Volkan Bozkir, President of the UN General Assembly, also voiced his concerns, having tweeted "Attempts to undermine democracy and rule of law are unacceptable", and called for the "immediate release" of the detained NLD party leaders. On 1 April 2021, Aung San Suu Kyi was charged with the fifth offence in relation to violating the official secrets act. According to her lawyer, it is the most serious charge brought against her after the coup and could carry a sentence of up to 14 years in prison if convicted. On 12 April 2021, Aung San Suu Kyi was hit with another charge, this time "under section 25 of the natural disaster management law". According to her lawyer, it is her sixth indictment. She appeared in court via video link and now faces five charges in the capital Naypyidaw and one in Yangon. On 28 April 2021, the National Unity Government (NUG), in which Aung San Suu Kyi symbolically retained her position, anticipated that there would be no talks with the junta until all political prisoners, including her, are set free. This move by her supporters come after an ASEAN-supported consensus with the junta leadership in the past days. However, on 8 May 2021, the junta designated NUG as a terrorist organization and warned citizens not to cooperate, nor to give aid to the parallel government, stripping Aung San Suu Kyi of her symbolic position. On 10 May 2021, her lawyer said she would appear in court in person for the first time since her arrest after the Supreme Court ruled that she could attend in person and meet her lawyers. She had been previously only allowed to do so remotely from her home. On 21 May 2021, a military junta commission was formed to dissolve Aung San Suu Kyi's National League for Democracy (NLD) on grounds of election fraud in the November 2020 election. On 22 May 2021, during his first interview since the coup, junta leader Min Aung Hlaing reported that she was in good health at her home and that she would appear in court in a matter of days. On 23 May 2021, the European Union expressed support for Aung San Suu Kyi's party and condemned the commission aimed at dissolving the party, echoing the NLD's statement released earlier in the week. On 24 May 2021, Aung San Suu Kyi appeared in person in court for the first time since the coup to face the "incitement to sedition" charge against her. During the 30-minute hearing, she said that she was not fully aware of what was going on outside as she had no access to full information from the outside and refused to respond on the matters. She was also quoted on the possibility of her party’s forced dissolution as "Our party grew out of the people so it will exist as long as people support it." In her meeting with her lawyers, Aung San Suu Kyi also wished people "good health". On 2 June 2021, it was reported that the military had moved her (as well as Win Myint) from their homes to an unknown location. On 10 June 2021, Aung San Suu Kyi was charged with corruption, the most serious charge brought against her, which carries a maximum penalty of 15 years' imprisonment. Aung San Suu Kyi's lawyers say the charges are made to keep her out of the public eye. On 14 June 2021, the trial against Aung San Suu Kyi began. Any conviction would prevent her from running for office again. Aung San Suu Kyi's lawyers attempted to have prosecution testimony against her on the sedition charge disqualified but the motion was denied by the judge. On 13 September 2021, court proceedings were to resume against her, but it was postponed due to Aung San Suu Kyi presenting "minor health issues" that impeded her from attending the court in person. On 4 October 2021, Aung San Suu Kyi asked the judge to reduce her times of court appearances because of her fragile health. Aung San Suu Kyi described her health as "strained". In November, the Myanmar courts deferred the first verdicts in the trial without further explanation or giving dates. In the same month, she was again charged with corruption, related to the purchase and rental of a helicopter, bringing the total of charges to nearly a dozen. On 6 December 2021, Suu Kyi was sentenced to 4 years in jail. Suu Kyi, who is still facing multiple charges and further sentences, was sentenced on the charge of inciting dissent and violating COVID-19 protocols. Following a partial pardon by the chief of the military government, Aung San Suu Kyi's four-year sentence was reduced to two years' imprisonment. On 10 January 2022, the military court in Myanmar sentenced Suu Kyi to an additional four years in prison on a number of charges including "importing and owning walkie-talkies" and "breaking coronavirus rules". The trials, which are closed to the public, the media, and any observers, were described as a "courtroom circus of secret proceedings on bogus charges" by the deputy director for Asia of Human Rights Watch. On 27 April 2022, Aung San Suu Kyi was sentenced to five years in jail on corruption charges. On 22 June 2022, junta authorities ordered that all further legal proceedings against Suu Kyi will take place in prison venues, instead of a courtroom. No explanation of the decision was given. Citing unidentified sources, the BBC reported that Suu Kyi was also moved on 22 June from house arrest, where she had had close companions, to solitary confinement in a specially-built area inside a prison in Naypyidaw. This is the same prison in which Win Myint had similarly been placed in solitary confinement. The military confirmed that Suu Kyi had been moved to prison. On 15 August 2022, sources following Aung San Suu Kyi's court proceedings said that she was sentenced to an additional six years' imprisonment after being found guilty on four corruption charges, bringing her overall sentences to 17 years in prison. In September 2022, she was convicted of election fraud and breaching the state's secrets act and sentenced to a total of six years in prison for both convictions, increasing her overall sentence to 23 years in prison. By 12 October 2022, she had been sentenced to 26 years imprisonment on ten charges in total, including five corruption charges. On 30 December 2022, her trials ended with another conviction and an additional sentence of seven years' imprisonment for corruption. Aung San Suu Kyi's final sentence is of 33 years in prison. On 12 July 2023, Thailand's foreign minister Don Pramudwinai said at the ASEAN Foreign Ministers' Meeting in Jakarta that he met with Aung San Suu Kyi during his visit to Myanmar. On 1 August 2023, the military junta granted Suu Kyi a partial pardon, reducing her sentence to a total of 27 years in prison. Prior to the pardon, she was moved from prison to a VIP government residence, according to an official from NLD party. However, it was reported that since the beginning of September 2023, she is back in prison. The exact time when she was sent back to prison is unknown. Since January, Aung San Suu Kyi and her lawyers are trying to get six corruption charges overturned. To this date, the requests are repeatedly denied. It is not power that corrupts, but fear. Fear of losing power corrupts those who wield it and fear of the scourge of power corrupts those who are subject to it. —Freedom from Fear Asked what democratic models Myanmar could look to, she said: "We have many, many lessons to learn from various places, not just the Asian countries like South Korea, Taiwan, Mongolia, and Indonesia." She also cited "Eastern Europe and countries, which made the transition from communist autocracy to democracy in the 1980s and 1990s, and the Latin American countries, which made the transition from military governments. And we cannot of course forget South Africa, because although it wasn't a military regime, it was certainly an authoritarian regime." She added: "We wish to learn from everybody who has achieved a transition to democracy, and also ... our great strong point is that, because we are so far behind everybody else, we can also learn which mistakes we should avoid." In a nod to the deep US political divide between Republicans led by Mitt Romney and the Democrats by Barack Obama—then battling to win the 2012 presidential election—she stressed, "Those of you who are familiar with American politics I'm sure understand the need for negotiated compromise." Freedom Now, a US-based non-profit organisation, was retained in 2006 by a member of her family to help secure Aung San Suu Kyi's release from house arrest. The organisation secured several opinions from the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention that her detention was in violation of international law; engaged in political advocacy such as spearheading a letter from 112 former Presidents and Prime Ministers to UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon urging him to go to Burma to seek her release, which he did six weeks later; and published numerous op-eds and spoke widely to the media about her ongoing detention. Its representation of her ended when she was released from house arrest on 13 November 2010. Aung San Suu Kyi has been an honorary board member of International IDEA and ARTICLE 19 since her detention, and has received support from these organisations. The Vrije Universiteit Brussel and the University of Louvain (UCLouvain), both located in Belgium, granted her the title of Doctor Honoris Causa. In 2003, the Freedom Forum recognised Aung San Suu Kyi's efforts to promote democracy peacefully with the Al Neuharth Free Spirit of the Year Award, in which she was presented over satellite because she was under house arrest. She was awarded one million dollars. In June of each year, the U.S. Campaign for Burma organises hundreds of "Arrest Yourself" house parties around the world in support of Aung San Suu Kyi. At these parties, the organisers keep themselves under house arrest for 24 hours, invite their friends, and learn more about Burma and Aung San Suu Kyi. The Freedom Campaign, a joint effort between the Human Rights Action Center and US Campaign for Burma, looks to raise worldwide attention to the struggles of Aung San Suu Kyi and the people of Burma. The Burma Campaign UK is a UK-based NGO (Non-Governmental Organisation) that aims to raise awareness of Burma's struggles and follow the guidelines established by the NLD and Aung San Suu Kyi. St Hugh's College, Oxford, where she studied, had a Burmese theme for their annual ball in support of her in 2006. The university later awarded her an honorary doctorate in civil law on 20 June 2012 during her visit to her alma mater. Aung San Suu Kyi is the official patron of The Rafto Human Rights House in Bergen, Norway. She received the Thorolf Rafto Memorial Prize in 1990. She was made an honorary free person of the City of Dublin, Ireland in November 1999, although a space had been left on the roll of signatures to symbolize her continued detention. This was subsequently revoked on 13 December 2017. In November 2005 the human rights group Equality Now proposed Aung Sun Suu Kyi as a potential candidate, among other qualifying women, for the position of U.N. Secretary General. In the proposed list of qualified women Aung San Suu Kyi was recognised by Equality Now as the Prime Minister-Elect of Burma. The UN' special envoy to Myanmar, Ibrahim Gambari, met Aung San Suu Kyi on 10 March 2008 before wrapping up his trip to the military-ruled country. Aung San Suu Kyi was an honorary member of The Elders, a group of eminent global leaders brought together by Nelson Mandela. Her ongoing detention meant that she was unable to take an active role in the group, so The Elders placed an empty chair for her at their meetings. The Elders have consistently called for the release of all political prisoners in Burma. Upon her election to parliament, she stepped down from her post. In 2010, Aung San Suu Kyi was given an honorary doctorate from the University of Johannesburg. In 2011, Aung San Suu Kyi was named the Guest Director of the 45th Brighton Festival. She was part of the international jury of Human Rights Defenders and Personalities who helped to choose a universal Logo for Human Rights in 2011. In June 2011, the BBC announced that Aung San Suu Kyi was to deliver the 2011 Reith Lectures. The BBC covertly recorded two lectures with Aung San Suu Kyi in Burma, which were then smuggled out of the country and brought back to London. The lectures were broadcast on BBC Radio 4 and the BBC World Service on 28 June 2011 and 5 July 2011. 8 March 2012, Canadian Foreign Affairs Minister John Baird presented Aung San Suu Kyi a certificate of honorary Canadian citizenship and an informal invitation to visit Canada. The honorary citizenship was revoked in September 2018 due to the Rohingya conflict. In April 2012, British Prime Minister David Cameron became the first leader of a major world power to visit Aung San Suu Kyi and the first British prime minister to visit Burma since the 1950s. In his visit, Cameron invited Aung San Suu Kyi to Britain where she would be able to visit her 'beloved' Oxford, an invitation which she later accepted. She visited Britain on 19 June 2012. In 2012 she received the Honorary degree of Doctor of Civil Law from the University of Oxford. In May 2012, Aung San Suu Kyi received the inaugural Václav Havel Prize for Creative Dissent of the Human Rights Foundation. 29 May 2012 PM Manmohan Singh of India visited Aung San Suu Kyi. In his visit, PM invited Aung San Suu Kyi to India as well. She started her six-day visit to India on 16 November 2012, where among the places she visited was her alma mater Lady Shri Ram College in New Delhi. In 2012, Aung San Suu Kyi set up the charity Daw Khin Kyi Foundation to improve health, education and living standards in underdeveloped parts of Myanmar. The charity was named after Aung San Suu Kyi's mother. Htin Kyaw played a leadership role in the charity before his election as President of Myanmar. The charity runs a Hospitality and Catering Training Academy in Kawhmu Township, in Yangon Region, and runs a mobile library service which in 2014 had 8000 members. Seoul National University in South Korea conferred an honorary doctorate degree to Aung San Suu Kyi in February 2013. University of Bologna, Italy conferred an honorary doctorate degree in philosophy to Aung San Suu Kyi in October 2013. Monash University, The Australian National University, University of Sydney and University of Technology, Sydney conferred an honorary degree to Aung San Suu Kyi in November 2013. The life of Aung San Suu Kyi and her husband Michael Aris is portrayed in Luc Besson's 2011 film The Lady, in which they are played by Michelle Yeoh and David Thewlis. Yeoh visited Aung San Suu Kyi in 2011 before the film's release in November. In the John Boorman's 1995 film Beyond Rangoon, Aung San Suu Kyi was played by Adelle Lutz. Irish songwriters Damien Rice and Lisa Hannigan released in 2005 the single "Unplayed Piano", in support of the Free Aung San Suu Kyi 60th Birthday Campaign that was happening at the time. Irish rock band U2 wrote the song "Walk On" in tribute to Aung San Suu Kyi. It is the fourth track on their tenth studio album, All That You Can't Leave Behind (2000), and would later be issued as a single. Lead singer Bono is wearing a t-shirt with her image and name on the front in their official video of the song. "Walk On" won Record of the Year at the 2002 Grammy Awards, that also featured U2 performing the song. Bono publicized her plight during the U2 360° Tour, 2009–2011. Saxophonist Wayne Shorter composed a song titled "Aung San Suu Kyi". It appears on his albums 1+1 (with pianist Herbie Hancock) and Footprints Live!. Aung San Suu Kyi underwent surgery for a gynecological condition in September 2003 at Asia Royal Hospital during her house arrest. She also underwent minor foot surgery in December 2013 and eye surgery in April 2016. In June 2012, her doctor Tin Myo Win said that she had no serious health problems, but weighed only 48 kilograms (106 lb), had low blood pressure, and could become weak easily. After being arrested and detained on 1 February 2021, there were concerns that Aung San Suu Kyi's health was deteriorating. However, according to military's spokesperson Zaw Min Tun, special attention is given to her health and living condition. Don Pramudwinai also said that "she was in good health, both physically and mentally". Although a junta spokesperson claimed that she is in good health, since being sent back to prison in September 2023, it is reported that her health condition is worsening and "suffering a series of toothache and unable to eat". Her request to see a dentist had been denied. Her son is urging the junta to allow Aung San Suu Kyi to receive medical assistance. Freedom from Fear (1991) Letters from Burma (1991) Let's Visit Nepal (1985) (ISBN 978-0222009814) List of honours of Aung San Suu Kyi Myanmar portal Asia portal Biography portal Politics portal List of civil rights leaders List of Nobel laureates affiliated with Kyoto University State Counsellor of Myanmar List of foreign ministers in 2017 List of current foreign ministers "The School of Oriental and African Studies, University of London". Complete University Guide. Archived from the original on 27 November 2012. Retrieved 28 November 2012. "Aung San Suu Kyi". Desert Island Discs. 27 January 2013. BBC Radio 4. Archived from the original on 26 December 2018. Retrieved 18 January 2014. "Definition of 'Aung San Suu Kyi'". Collins Dictionary. Ba Kaung (13 November 2010). "Suu Kyi Freed at Last". The Irrawaddy. Archived from the original on 19 November 2010. Retrieved 14 November 2010. CNN Editorial Research (25 April 2021). "Aung San Suu Kyi Fast Facts". CNN. Retrieved 29 May 2021. {{cite news}}: |author1= has generic name (help) Tharoor, Ishaan (9 November 2015). "What happened when Aung San Suu Kyi's party last won an election in Burma". The Washington Post. Retrieved 29 May 2021. Min Ye Kyaw; Rebecca Ratcliffe (28 March 2023). "Aung San Suu Kyi's National League for Democracy party dissolved". The Guardian. Bangkok, Thailand. Retrieved 30 April 2023. "5,000 days in captivity: The world's most famous political prisoner". The Independent. 23 October 2011. Retrieved 29 June 2021. "The Children of Gandhi" (excerpt). Time. 31 December 1999. Archived from the original on 5 October 2013. Zarni Mann (31 May 2013). "A Decade Later, Victims Still Seeking Depayin Massacre Justice". The Irrawaddy. Retrieved 1 June 2013. Taub, Amanda; Fisher, Max (31 October 2017). "Did the World Get Aung San Suu Kyi Wrong?". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 14 November 2017. Retrieved 14 November 2017. Beech, Hannah (25 September 2017). "What Happened to Myanmar's Human-Rights Icon?". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on 14 November 2017. Retrieved 14 November 2017. "Dispatches – On Demand – All 4". Channel 4. Archived from the original on 15 May 2018. Retrieved 14 May 2018. Ratcliffe, Rebecca (12 November 2018). "Aung San Suu Kyi stripped of Amnesty's highest honour over 'shameful betrayal'". The Guardian. Retrieved 1 February 2021. Nebehay, Stephanie; Naing, Shoon; Collett-White, Mike. "Myanmar army, government aim to silence independent journalism: U.N." Reuters. Archived from the original on 12 September 2018. Retrieved 13 September 2018. "Myanmar's Aung San Suu Kyi: 'Defending the indefensible'". Al Jazeera. 13 January 2020. Archived from the original on 25 January 2020. Retrieved 24 January 2020. Ratcliffe, Rebecca (10 January 2022). "Aung San Suu Kyi handed four-year jail term in military 'courtroom circus'". The Guardian. "Graft convictions extend Suu Kyi's prison term to 26 years". ABC News. 12 October 2022. "Suu Kyi's secretive Myanmar trials end with 7 more years of jail". Reuters. 30 December 2022. Retrieved 30 December 2022. "Myanmar Junta Grants Partial Clemency to Aung San Suu Kyi". Time. 1 August 2023. Retrieved 1 August 2023. Ratcliffe, Rebecca (6 December 2021). "Myanmar's junta condemned over guilty verdicts in Aung San Suu Kyi trial". The Guardian. Aung San Suu Kyi – Biography Archived 27 October 2007 at the Wayback Machine Nobel Prize Foundation "Myanmar Family Roles and Social Relationships". Government of Myanmar. Archived from the original on 26 October 2007. Retrieved 24 September 2007. Min Lwin (28 May 2009). "Suu Kyi Protester Arrested". The Irrawaddy. Archived from the original on 2 March 2011. Retrieved 7 August 2011. The Next United Nations Secretary-General: Time for a Woman Archived 4 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine Equality Now.org November 2005 MPs to Suu Kyi: You are the real PM of Burma Archived 30 April 2011 at the Wayback Machine. The Times of India 13 June 2007 Deutsche Welle Article: Sentence for Burma's Aung San Suu Kyi sparks outrage and cautious hope Quote: The NLD won a convincing majority in elections in 1990, the last remotely fair vote in Burma. That would have made Aung San Suu Kyi the prime minister, but the military leadership immediately nullified the result. Now her party must decide whether to take part in a poll that shows little prospect of being just Popham, Peter (April 2013). The Lady and the Peacock: The Life of Aung San Suu Kyi. New York, NY: The Experiment, LLC. p. 163. ISBN 978-1-61519-081-2.[permanent dead link] "Junta Watch: Coup Leader's Wife Draws Public Ire; Suu Kyi's New Charge and More". The Irrawaddy. 4 December 2021. Stewart (1997), p. 31 Stewart (1997), p. 32 Aung San Suu Kyi: A Biography, p. 142 A biography of Aung San Suu Kyi Archived 5 December 2012 at the Wayback Machine Burma Campaign.co.uk Retrieved 7 May 2009 "Aung San Suu Kyi – Biography". Nobel Foundation. Archived from the original on 28 April 2006. Retrieved 4 May 2006. "Aung San Suu Kyi – Biographical". The Nobel Foundation. 1991. Archived from the original on 25 March 2016. Retrieved 27 March 2016. Phadnis, Aditi (30 May 2012). "Much warmth, some restraint at Manmohan's meeting with Suu Kyi". Business Standard India. Business Standard. Archived from the original on 16 May 2016. Retrieved 27 March 2016. Popham, Peter (2012). "Aung San Suu Kyi" (PDF). St. Hughs College Magazine. Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 December 2016. Retrieved 27 March 2016. "AUNG SAN SUU KYI: HER EARLY LIFE, FAMILY AND CHARACTER". Facts and Details. May 2014 [2008 Jeffrey Hays, last updated May 2014]. Archived from the original on 8 April 2016. Retrieved 27 March 2016. Aditi Phadnis (30 May 2012). "Much warmth, some restraint at Manmohan's meeting with Suu Kyi". Business Standard India. Business Standard. Archived from the original on 16 May 2016. Retrieved 30 May 2012. Staff reporter (18 June 2009) Before the storm: Aung San Suu Kyi photograph peels back the years Archived 21 December 2016 at the Wayback Machine The Guardian Irwin Abrams (1999). "Aung San Suu Kyi – Biographical". Nobel Foundation. Archived from the original on 16 December 2014. Retrieved 29 November 2014. "The School of Oriental and African Studies, University of London". Complete University Guide. Archived from the original on 27 November 2012. Retrieved 28 November 2012. "SOAS alumna Aung San Suu Kyi calls for 'Peaceful Revolution' in Burma". SOAS Alumni. Archived from the original on 15 June 2013. Retrieved 28 November 2012. Suu Kyi rejects UK visit offer Archived 5 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine BBC News 26 March 1999 "Obituary: A courageous and patient man". BBC News. London. 27 March 1999. Archived from the original on 25 August 2007. Retrieved 4 July 2006. "Official: UN plane lands in Myanmar with aid after cyclone". Associated Press. 5 May 2008. Archived from the original on 6 March 2016. Retrieved 1 December 2012. Aung San Suu Kyi's home to be renovated Archived 31 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine Mizzima 10 August 2009 Win, Sein (24 July 1988). "BURMESE LEADER NE WIN RESIGNS IN SURPRISE MOVE". The Washington Post. Retrieved 26 August 2023. "The day daw aung san suu kyi made first public appearance". The Irrawaddy. 24 August 2020. Silverstein, Josef (1996). "The Idea of Freedom in Burma and the Political Thought of Daw Aung San Suu Kyi". Pacific Affairs. 69 (2): 211–228. doi:10.2307/2760725. JSTOR 2760725. ProQuest 217675265. "Profile: Aung San Suu Kyi". BBC News. London. 25 May 2006. Archived from the original on 12 June 2007. Retrieved 26 May 2007. "The Nobel Peace Prize 1991 Presentation Speech". Nobel Foundation. Archived from the original on 19 May 2007. Retrieved 26 May 2007. Houtman, Gustaaf, Mental culture in Burmese crisis politics: Aung San Suu Kyi and the National League for Democracy Archived 6 April 2015 at the Wayback Machine (ILCAA Study of Languages and Cultures of Asia and Africa Monograph Series), 1999, ISBN 978-4-87297-748-6 Retrieved 1 December 2012 See also Buddhism in Burma "National League for Democracy". National League for Democracy. Archived from the original on 18 June 2013. Retrieved 26 September 2011. (Note: The date is in the "description" meta element of the web page and can be verified by viewing the page HTML code) Kyaw Yin Hlaing (August 2007). "Aung San Suu Kyi of Myanmar: A Review of the Lady's Biographies". Contemporary Southeast Asia: A Journal of International & Strategic Affairs. 29 (2): 365. Susanne Prager-Nyein (February 2013). "Aung San Suu Kyi: Between Biographical Myth and Hard Realities". Journal of Contemporary Asia. 3 (43): 546–554. doi:10.1080/00472336.2013.771942. S2CID 154402781. "Burma: 20 Years After 1990 Elections, Democracy Still Denied". Human Rights Watch. 26 May 2010. "Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, Burma's Icon of Democracy, Hope and Grace Under Pressure". Amnesty International Women's Action Council Stop Violence Against Women Campaign. Archived from the original on 21 August 2006. Miller (2001), p. 21 Simpson, John (27 June 2011). "Is Aung San Suu Kyi rethinking her tactics?". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 30 September 2013. Retrieved 27 June 2011. "The Nobel Peace Prize 1991". NobelPrize.org. Retrieved 20 February 2024. "The Nobel Peace Prize 1991". Nobel Foundation. Archived from the original on 27 November 2012. Retrieved 10 December 2012. "Aung San Suu Kyi's Prison Diaries". bushywood.com. "Aung San Suu Kyi profile". Assistance Association for Political Prisoners (Burma). Archived from the original on 4 November 2010. Retrieved 5 November 2010. "Burma: Chronology of Aung San Suu Kyi's Detention". Human Rights Watch. 13 November 2010. Moe, Wait (3 August 2009). Suu Kyi Questions Burma's Judiciary, Constitution Archived 20 February 2013 at the Wayback Machine. The Irrawaddy. Aung San Suu Kyi interview (video) Archived 29 December 2013 at the Wayback Machine. YouTube. Buncombe, Andrew (5 July 2009). 5,000 days in captivity: The world's most famous political prisoner and a dismal landmark Archived 20 September 2017 at the Wayback Machine. The Independent. Aung San Suu Kyi (1998). The Voice of Hope: Conversations with Alan Clements. Seven Stories Press. p. 132. ISBN 978-1888363838. Burma expels Italian reporter for "illegal reporting Archived 7 October 2012 at the Wayback Machine, TV Myanmar, Rangoon, 18 August 1998. Wadhams, Nick (9 June 2006). "Myanmar's Suu Kyi Hospitalized". The Washington Post. Associated Press. Archived from the original on 28 April 2011. Retrieved 9 June 2006. Opposition Condemns Extension of Suu Kyi's Detention Archived 7 July 2012 at the Wayback Machine, The Irrawaddy, 27 May 2006. Retrieved 1 April 2012. "Government took action against appeal plaintiff Daw Aung San Suu Kyi in accord with existing laws within framework of law" (PDF). New Light of Myanmar (government newspaper). 19 September 2009. Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 October 2012. Retrieved 1 December 2012. Suu Kyi appeals to Myanmar junta against her detention: party Archived 7 July 2009 at the Wayback Machine AFP, 11 October 2008. Ehrlich, Richard S., Suppressing Burma's 'beacon' Archived 18 February 2011 at the Wayback Machine, The Washington Times, 24 October 2008. Retrieved 1 April 2012. EU envoy urges lifting of Aung San Suu Kyi's house arrest, eubusiness.com, 24 October 2008. Retrieved 1 April 2012. Reuters in Rangoon (9 November 2010). "Burmese election won by military-backed party". The Guardian. UK. Archived from the original on 11 November 2010. Retrieved 11 November 2010. "The Depayin Massacre 2 Years On, Justice Denied" (PDF). ASEAN Inter-Parliamentary Burma Caucus. 30 May 2005. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 June 2007. Retrieved 4 February 2007. "Suu Kyi has 'major' operation". BBC News. London. 19 September 2003. Archived from the original on 23 June 2007. Retrieved 4 July 2006. "Annan expresses sadness for the resignation of his envoy for Burma". Democratic Voice of Burma. 10 January 2006. Archived from the original on 28 September 2007. Retrieved 4 July 2006. "After meeting Aung San Suu Kyi, UN envoy leaves Burma". United Nations. 20 May 2006. Archived from the original on 28 May 2006. Retrieved 22 May 2006. "Rare visite" (in French). CBC/Radio-Canada. 8 January 2007. Archived from the original on 14 January 2009. Retrieved 12 January 2007. "UN envoy meets with Burma's top general to discuss 'current situation'". UN News Service. 2 October 2007. Archived from the original on 10 March 2008. Retrieved 6 October 2007. "Burma junta releases footage of Suu Kyi (AFP)". ABC News (Australia). 6 October 2007. Archived from the original on 11 October 2007. Retrieved 6 October 2007. Daw Aung San Suu Kyi v. Myanmar Archived 29 April 2013 at the Wayback Machine, U.N. Working Group on Arbitrary Detention, U.N. Doc. E/CN.4/2005/6/Add.1 at 47 (2004). Mydans, Seth (18 January 2008). "Burmese Daily at Odds With Democracy Advocate". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 17 April 2009. Retrieved 19 January 2007. "Suu Kyi to meet party colleagues". BBC News. 8 November 2007. Archived from the original on 9 November 2007. Retrieved 8 November 2007. John Heilprin (5 July 2009). "UN chief leaves Myanmar 'disappointed' with junta". The Jakarta Post. Archived from the original on 14 July 2009. Nakashima, Ellen (13 October 2003). Burma's Iron 'Aunty' Archived 25 July 2018 at the Wayback Machine. The Washington Post. "Burma extends Suu Kyi detention". Bangkok Post. 27 May 2006. Archived from the original on 16 July 2009. Retrieved 27 May 2006. Campaigners mark 12 years of detention for Aung San Suu Kyi Archived 11 March 2008 at the Wayback Machine, Burma Campaign UK, 24 October 2007 UN: Suu Kyi detention 'illegal' Archived 17 December 2013 at the Wayback Machine. Al Jazeera. 16 May 2009 "Burma releases pro-democracy leader Aung San Suu Kyi". BBC News. 13 November 2010. Archived from the original on 14 November 2010. Retrieved 14 November 2010. "Monks put Myanmar junta in tight spot". Associated Press. 21 September 2007. Archived from the original on 15 April 2018. Retrieved 14 April 2018. Government opponents began demonstrating over the price hikes Aug. 19, but the protests were quickly contained by the junta with waves of arrests and beatings. With activists in jail or hiding, the leadership role fell to the monks. "Democracy Icon Aung San Suu Kyi Greets Myanmar Monks". Agence France-Presse. 22 September 2007. Archived from the original on 15 April 2018. Retrieved 14 April 2018. Suu Kyi moved to Insein prison[dead link]. Reuters. 25 September 2007 Inside Burma's Insein jail Archived 15 October 2007 at the Wayback Machine. BBC News. 14 May 2009 Security tight amid speculation Suu Kyi jailed Archived 30 April 2013 at the Wayback Machine. The Australian. 28 September 2007 Burmese Junta silences the monks Archived 13 October 2007 at the Wayback Machine. Time. 28 September 2007 UN envoy sees top Burma dissident Archived 9 April 2012 at the Wayback Machine, BBC News, 30 September 2007 UN envoy holds key Burmese talks Archived 1 January 2013 at the Wayback Machine. BBC News. 2 October 2007 McDonald, Mark (7 May 2009). U.S. Man Held After Swim to Burmese Nobel Peace Laureate's Home Archived 2 August 2017 at the Wayback Machine. The New York Times. James, Randy (20 May 2009). John Yettaw: Suu Kyi's Unwelcome Visitor Archived 23 May 2009 at the Wayback Machine. Time. The Times, 28 May 2009, Richard Lloyd Parr, "God asked me to warn her, swimmer John Yettaw tells Suu Kyi trial" Kennedy, Maev (14 May 2009). Lake swimmer could cost Suu Kyi her freedom Archived 5 March 2017 at the Wayback Machine. The Guardian. Burma opposition leader on trial Archived 3 July 2009 at the Wayback Machine, Financial Times, 19 May 2009 Burma's Aung San Suu Kyi on trial Archived 7 September 2012 at the Wayback Machine, BBC News, 18 May 2009 'composed' at Burma trial Archived 11 September 2013 at the Wayback Machine, BBC News, 20 May 2009 Lawyers for Aung San Suu Kyi protest innocence as trial begins Archived 21 May 2009 at the Wayback Machine, The Times, 18 May 2009 Myanmar Court Charges Suu Kyi Archived 2 August 2017 at the Wayback Machine, The Wall Street Journal, 22 May 2009 "Court Rejects Two Suu Kyi Defense Witnesses". Irrawaddy.org. 9 June 2009. Archived from the original on 10 August 2009. Retrieved 10 June 2009. "Myanmar Aung San Suu Kuy to be put under detention – Asia News". Asianews.it. 14 February 2006. Archived from the original on 30 June 2009. Retrieved 10 June 2009. Suu Kyi's witnesses 'rejected' Archived 24 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine, BBC News, 28 May 2009 Myanmar says American main culprit in Suu Kyi case. AP. 25 June 2009 Archived 3 July 2009 at the Wayback Machine Aung San Suu Kyi celebrates 64th birthday with jail guards Archived 5 March 2017 at the Wayback Machine. The Guardian. 19 June 2009 UN calls for release of Suu Kyi Archived 27 May 2009 at the Wayback Machine, The Age, 24 May 2009 Western outcry over Suu Kyi case Archived 25 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine, BBC News, 18 May 2009 SAfrica urges immediate Aung San Suu Kyi release Archived 1 October 2011 at the Wayback Machine, AFP at IC Publications, 22 May 2009 Asian leaders call for release of Aung San Suu Kyi Archived 22 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine, Radio Australia, 15 May 2009 Asian leaders condemn Burma trial Archived 2 August 2017 at the Wayback Machine, BBC News, 19 May 2009 Myanmar protests ASEAN alternate chairman statement on Aung San Suu Kyi Archived 28 May 2009 at the Wayback Machine, Xinhua News Agency, 24 May 2009 Burma lashes out at Thailand over Suu Kyi, Bangkok Post, 25 May 2009 Free Burma's Political Prisoners Now! Archived 7 July 2009 at the Wayback Machine Campaign. Horn, Robert (5 July 2009). Ban Ki-Moon Leaves Burma Disappointed Archived 6 July 2009 at the Wayback Machine. Time. Burma court finds Suu Kyi guilty. BBC News. 11 August 2009. "Senator wins release of US prisoner in Myanmar". Associated Press. 15 August 2009. Archived from the original on 15 April 2018. Retrieved 14 April 2018. McCurry, Justin (12 August 2009). Lawyers to appeal against Aung San Suu Kyi sentence Archived 5 March 2017 at the Wayback Machine. The Guardian. Obama appeals to Myanmar junta to release Aung San Suu Kyi Archived 14 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine. The Times of India. 18 August 2009. "Burmese court rejects appeal against Aung San Suu Kyi house arrest". The Guardian. UK. Associated Press. 2 October 2009. Archived from the original on 13 October 2010. Retrieved 30 September 2010. Myanmar offer is a 'sop' to the West. IOL. 7 October 2007 "US House honours Burma's Suu Kyi". 18 December 2007. Retrieved 20 February 2024. "Israel calls on Myanmar government to release Suu Kyi". Mfa.gov.il. Archived from the original on 20 December 2016. Retrieved 8 November 2011. "Japan calls for Suu Kyi release". BBC News. 24 June 2003. Archived from the original on 6 June 2004. Retrieved 28 December 2010. "Leaders demand Suu Kyi's release". 15 May 2007. Archived from the original on 11 October 2007. Schor, Elana (25 April 2008). Burmese detainee receives US honour Archived 5 March 2017 at the Wayback Machine. The Guardian. Burma's cyclone death toll soars Archived 8 May 2008 at the Wayback Machine. BBC News. 6 May 2008. U.S., Indonesia call for Suu Kyi's release Archived 20 August 2009 at the Wayback Machine. Mizzima. 9 June 2009 Burma lashes out at Thailand over Suu Kyi. Bangkok Post. 25 May 2009 Philippine Daily Inquirer. 27 January 2008. Myanmar urged to release peace activist Suu Kyi Archived 29 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine. Gulf News. 30 May 2007. S'pore disappointed with extension of Aung San Suu Kyi's detention Archived 30 June 2009 at the Wayback Machine. Channel NewsAsia. 27 May 2009 Burma 'faces ASEAN expulsion' Archived 26 June 2004 at the Wayback Machine. BBC News. 20 July 2003 SA calls for immediate release of Aung San Suu Kyi Archived 23 May 2009 at the Wayback Machine. Mail & Guardian. 22 May 2009 432 eminent citizens call for Suu Kyi's freedom Archived 30 June 2009 at the Wayback Machine. Daily Star. 19 June 2006 "President Nasheed calls for immediate release of Aung San Suu Ky". Maldiveschronicle.com. 12 February 2009. Archived from the original on 30 June 2009. Retrieved 10 June 2009. UN Secretary Repeats Call for Release of Daw Aung San Suu Kyi Archived 4 May 2012 at the Wayback Machine 27 May 2007. UN General Assembly condemns Myanmar Archived 30 April 2011 at the Wayback Machine. Taipei Times. 26 December 2008 Myanmar breaks own law holding Suu Kyi: UN panel Archived 3 November 2011 at the Wayback Machine. Daily Times of Pakistan. 25 March 2009 RI woos India, China over Suu Kyi Archived 17 June 2009 at the Wayback Machine. Jakarta Post. 13 June 2009 Thai PM says West uses Myanmar Archived 16 August 2013 at the Wayback Machine. NASDAQ. 25 August 2008 dT (14 August 2009). "Vietnam supports Myanmar's efforts for reconciliation". En.vietnamplus.vn. Archived from the original on 28 April 2011. Retrieved 30 September 2010. "Vietnam: Suu Kyi verdict 'internal' matter for Myanmar". Abitsu.org. 13 August 2009. Archived from the original on 30 April 2011. Retrieved 30 September 2010. "Home". Prospect Burma. Archived from the original on 13 August 2006. Retrieved 10 June 2009. "PB FAQ". Prospect Burma. Archived from the original on 1 December 2021. Retrieved 1 December 2021. Tran, Mark (9 November 2009). "Burma claims it will release Aung San Suu Kyi". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 8 September 2013. Retrieved 25 April 2010. "Burma announces elections ? but not for Aung San Suu Kyi". The Daily Telegraph. London. 4 January 2010. Archived from the original on 9 January 2010. Retrieved 25 April 2010. "Lawyers skeptical about Myanmar releasing Suu Kyi". CNN. 1 October 2010. Archived from the original on 15 April 2018. Retrieved 14 April 2018. "Obama to appeal on Suu Kyi". The Straits Times. Singapore. 10 November 2009. Archived from the original on 5 February 2010. Retrieved 30 September 2010. McCartan, Brian (30 September 2009). "US takes a radical turn on Myanmar". Asia Times. Archived from the original on 7 October 2009. Retrieved 30 September 2010.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) "Ceremonial transformation of NDAK to BGF". Mizzima.com. 10 November 2009. Archived from the original on 14 August 2010. Retrieved 30 September 2010. "Brown pledges support to Suu Kyi". BBC News. 30 December 2009. Archived from the original on 15 January 2010. Retrieved 25 April 2010. Dialogs with government officials and Foreign Diplomats "Join her!". BBC News. 16 December 2009. Archived from the original on 2 December 2010. Retrieved 30 September 2010. "Aung San Suu Kyi được thả sau khi hết hạn quản thúc tại gia".[permanent dead link] "Myanmar's Aung San Suu Kyi released – Asia-Pacific". Al Jazeera. 13 November 2010. Archived from the original on 14 November 2010. Retrieved 13 November 2010. "Aung San Suu Kyi Freed From House Arrest". Sky News. Archived from the original on 17 November 2010. Retrieved 13 November 2010. "Freed Myanmar Dissident Urges Reconciliation and Change". The New York Times. 14 November 2010. Archived from the original on 24 July 2016. Retrieved 5 February 2017. "New Light of Myanmar". Myanmar.com. 7 November 2010. Archived from the original on 13 November 2010. Retrieved 15 November 2010. Kennedy, Phoebe (24 November 2010). "Suu Kyi and son reunited after 10-year separation". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 25 January 2012. Retrieved 13 July 2011. Moe, Wai (30 June 2011). "Suu Kyi to Visit Pagan Next Week". The Irrawaddy. Archived from the original on 13 July 2011. Retrieved 13 July 2011. Moe, Wai (8 August 2011). "Suu Kyi to Visit Pegu Next Week". The Irrawaddy. Archived from the original on 9 August 2011. Retrieved 8 August 2011. "Burma frees dozens of political prisoners". BBC News. 12 October 2011. Archived from the original on 18 November 2011. Retrieved 19 November 2011. "Burma law to allow labour unions and strikes". BBC News. 14 October 2011. Archived from the original on 18 November 2011. Retrieved 19 November 2011. "Suu Kyi's NLD democracy party to rejoin Burma politics". BBC News. 18 November 2011. Archived from the original on 19 November 2011. Retrieved 19 November 2011. Sly, Liz (19 November 2011). "U.S. sees Burma reforms as strategic opening to support democracy". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 28 July 2013. Retrieved 19 November 2011. "[Hillary] Clinton Says U.S. Will Relax Some Curbs on Aid to Myanmar". The New York Times. 1 December 2011. Archived from the original on 1 December 2011. Retrieved 5 February 2017. "PM Yingluck backs Suu Kyi in landmark Myanmar talks". WBDJ7. 21 December 2011. Archived from the original on 23 July 2012. Retrieved 24 December 2011. "Aung San Suu Kyi to visit Swiss parliament". BBC News. 15 June 2012. Archived from the original on 13 November 2018. Retrieved 21 June 2018. Sharpe, Penny. "Daw Aung San Suu Kyi". Penny Sharpe MLC. Archived from the original on 30 March 2010. In 1990, Aung San Suu Kyi stood as the National League for Democracy's candidate for Prime Minister in the Burmese general election. The NLD won in a landslide but the military junta refused to hand over power. twist in Aung San Suu Kyi's fate Archived 25 June 2009 at the Wayback Machine Article: How a Missouri Mormon may have thwarted democracy in Myanmar. By Patrick Winn — GlobalPost Quote: "Suu Kyi has mostly lived under house arrest since 1990 when the country's military junta refused her election to the prime minister's seat. The Nobel Peace Laureate remains backed by a pro-democracy movement-in-exile, many of them also voted into a Myanmar parliament that never was." Published: 21 May 2009 00:48 ETBANGKOK, Thailand Kyaw Hsu Mon (12 December 2011). "Daw Aung San Suu Kyi eyes Kawhmu seat". The Myanmar Times. Archived from the original on 17 June 2013. Retrieved 19 January 2012. Aye Aye Win (19 January 2012). "Suu Kyi Registers for By-Election". The Irrawaddy. Archived from the original on 19 January 2012. Retrieved 19 January 2012. "Aung San Suu Kyi registers for Burma election run". BBC News. 18 January 2012. Archived from the original on 18 January 2012. Retrieved 19 January 2012. "By-elections Special". Alternative Asean Network on Burma. Archived from the original on 16 March 2012. Retrieved 7 March 2012. Marshall, Andrew (24 March 2012). "In Myanmar, old soldier fights losing war against Suu Kyi". Reuters. Archived from the original on 28 March 2012. Retrieved 26 March 2012. "Myanmar's opposition leader Suu Kyi falls ill at election rally, recovers". China Post. Taiwan (ROC). Associated Press. 4 March 2012. Archived from the original on 15 August 2013. Retrieved 15 March 2012. "Burma's Aung San Suu Kyi makes landmark campaign speech". BBC News. 14 March 2012. Archived from the original on 15 March 2012. Retrieved 15 March 2012. "Suu Kyi's Speech Leaked on Internet Before Broadcast". The Irrawaddy. 13 March 2012. Archived from the original on 14 March 2012. Retrieved 15 March 2012. {{cite magazine}}: Unknown parameter |agency= ignored (help) "Burmese gov't censors Suu Kyi's campaign speech". Mizzima. 11 March 2012. Archived from the original on 15 March 2012. Retrieved 15 March 2012. "Suu Kyi Warns Canadian FM of Voter List Problems". The Irrawaddy. 9 March 2012. Archived from the original on 14 March 2012. Retrieved 15 March 2012. {{cite magazine}}: Unknown parameter |agency= ignored (help) "Suu Kyi: media must monitor Burma". UK Press Association. 11 March 2012. Archived from the original on 21 March 2012. Retrieved 15 March 2012. "Western Election Observers Invited". Radio Free Asia. 21 March 2012. Retrieved 22 March 2012. Ljunggren, David (29 February 2012). "Myanmar's Suu Kyi says reforms could be reversed". Reuters. Ottawa. Archived from the original on 10 March 2012. Retrieved 15 March 2012. "Aung San Suu Kyi suspends Burma election tour after falling ill". The Guardian. London. Associated Press. 26 March 2012. Archived from the original on 12 October 2015. Retrieved 26 March 2012. "Burma's Aung San Suu Kyi wins by-election: NLD party". BBC News. 1 April 2012. Archived from the original on 20 December 2016. Retrieved 9 December 2016. Kyaw Myo Win (2 April 2012). "Winning NLD candidate list announced in state tv". MRTV. Archived from the original on 1 March 2013. Retrieved 2 April 2012. Aung Hla Tun (20 April 2012). "Suu Kyi Myanmar parliament debut in doubt over oath stalemate". Reuters. Archived from the original on 21 April 2012. Retrieved 21 April 2012. The line in question is Schedule Four of the 2008 Constitution (Form of Oaths or Affirmation), which states: "After being elected as an MP, I do solemnly swear to preserve, protect, and nurture the Constitution while following the nation's laws." (ကျွန်ုပ် ... သည် လွှတ်တော်ကိုယ်စားလှယ်အဖြစ်ရွေးချယ်ခံရပြီးဖြစ်သဖြင့် နိုင်ငံတော်ဖွဲ့စည်းပုံအခြေခံဥပဒေကို ထိန်းသိမ်းကာကွယ် စောင့်ရှောက်ပြီး နိုင်ငံတော်၏ ဥပဒေများကိုလည်း လိုက်နာပါမည်။), officially translated as: "I do solemnly and sincerely promise that as an elected representative of the Hluttaw, I will uphold and abide by the Constitution of the Union." Aung Hla Tun (19 April 2012). "Myanmar oath standoff puts Suu Kyi's MP debut in doubt". Reuters. Archived from the original on 21 April 2012. Retrieved 21 April 2012. "Aung San Suu Kyi makes history by taking Myanmar parliament seat". Los Angeles Times. 2 May 2012. Archived from the original on 8 May 2012. Retrieved 5 May 2012. "Suu Kyi makes her parliamentary debut". The Hindu. Chennai, India. 9 July 2012. Archived from the original on 2 December 2017. Retrieved 15 April 2018. Fuller, Thomas, Democracy Advocate Elected to Myanmar's Parliament, Her Party Says Archived 1 April 2012 at the Wayback Machine, The New York Times, 1 April 2012. Kyi, Aung San Suu. "Nobel Lecture". Archived from the original on 29 June 2017. Retrieved 13 June 2017. Erlanger, Steven (16 June 2012). "21 Years Later, Aung San Suu Kyi Receives Her Nobel Peace Prize". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 17 June 2012. Retrieved 16 June 2012. "Burma's Aung San Suu Kyi given US Congressional medal". BBC. 19 September 2012. Archived from the original on 19 September 2012. Retrieved 20 September 2012. Spetalnick, Matt (19 September 2012). "Suu Kyi meets Obama, receives medal from Congress". Reuters. Archived from the original on 20 September 2012. Retrieved 20 September 2012. "The World's 100 Most Powerful Women". Forbes. Archived from the original on 25 June 2014. Retrieved 26 June 2014. "Canada makes Myanmar's Suu Kyi an honorary citizen". Reuters. 17 October 2007. Archived from the original on 9 December 2015. Retrieved 28 December 2010. "Update: Mawlana Hazar Imam is made an honorary citizen of Canada". The Ismaili. 19 June 2009. Archived from the original on 4 January 2011. Retrieved 28 December 2010. "Burma's Aung San Suu Kyi given US Congressional medal". BBC News. 19 July 2012. Archived from the original on 30 October 2018. Retrieved 21 June 2018. Maierbrugger, Arno (6 June 2013). "Suu Kyi wants to run for president". Inside Investor. Archived from the original on 10 June 2013. Retrieved 7 June 2013. "Aung San Suu Kyi: The halo slips". The Economist. 15 June 2013. Archived from the original on 19 June 2013. Retrieved 19 June 2013. "Suu Kyi's National League for Democracy Wins Majority in Myanmar". BBC News. 13 November 2015. Archived from the original on 13 November 2015. Retrieved 13 November 2015. "ဒေါ်စု နိုင်ငံခြားရေးဝန်ကြီး ဖြစ်လာမလား". 21 March 2016. Archived from the original on 25 March 2016. NLD Claims Suu Kyi Victory Archived 1 April 2012 at the Wayback Machine, The Irrawaddy, 4 April 2012. "Myanmar constitution summit 'impractical': presidential spokesman". Reuters. 27 November 2014. Archived from the original on 28 November 2014. Aye Aye Win, Myanmar's Suu Kyi Released From Hospital Archived 4 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine, Associated Press (via the Washington Post), 10 June 2006. "Suu Kyi's National League for Democracy Wins Majority in Myanmar". BBC News. 13 November 2015. Retrieved 13 November 2015. Perlez, Jane (30 November 2017). "In China, Aung San Suu Kyi Finds a Warm Welcome (and No Talk of Rohingya)". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 1 January 2022. Retrieved 30 July 2020. "Suu Kyi receives award on visit to UK despite protest". www.thenews.com.pk. Retrieved 30 July 2020. "Foreign Minister Aung San Suu Kyi Visits Japan, Seeking Investment". The Irrawaddy. 1 November 2016. Retrieved 30 July 2020. McPherson, Poppy (31 March 2017). "Aung San Suu Kyi: Myanmar's great hope fails to live up to expectations". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 31 March 2017. Retrieved 31 March 2017. Keane, Fergal (5 April 2017). "Myanmar: Aung San Suu Kyi exclusive interview". BBC. Archived from the original on 8 April 2017. Retrieved 6 April 2017. Bengali, Shashank (9 April 2017). "Myanmar's long-suffering Rohingya Muslims hoped that Aung San Suu Kyi would make them full citizens. They were wrong". Los Angeles Times. ISSN 0458-3035. Archived from the original on 11 April 2017. Retrieved 11 April 2017. "Is the world getting Myanmar wrong?". The Economist. 26 October 2017. Archived from the original on 28 October 2017. Retrieved 30 October 2017. "Press freedom is waning in Myanmar". The Economist. 8 March 2018. Archived from the original on 8 March 2018. Retrieved 9 March 2018. Oo, Myo Minn; Tun, Nilar Aye; Lin, Xu; Lucero-Prisno, Don Eliseo (10 October 2020). "COVID-19 in Myanmar: Spread, actions and opportunities for peace and stability". Journal of Global Health. 10 (2): 020374. doi:10.7189/jogh.10.020374. PMC 7568915. PMID 33110565. Schwartz, Kirrily (6 September 2017). "Should Aung San Suu Kyi give back her Nobel Peace Prize?". News.com.au. Archived from the original on 6 September 2017. Retrieved 6 September 2017. Goldman, Russell (4 September 2017). "Why Aung San Suu Kyi's Nobel Peace Prize Won't Be Revoked". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 6 September 2017. Retrieved 6 September 2017. "Rohingya boat people: Myanmar's shame". The Economist. 23 May 2015. Archived from the original on 25 May 2015. Retrieved 25 May 2015. Mehdi Hasan (24 May 2015). "Aung San Suu Kyi's inexcusable silence". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 24 May 2015. Retrieved 25 May 2015. Misha Hussain (22 June 2012). "Rohingya refugees leave Burma to seek help in Bangladesh". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 16 January 2014. Retrieved 29 July 2012. "Suu Kyi blames Burma violence on 'climate of fear'". BBC. 24 October 2013. Archived from the original on 15 April 2016. Retrieved 7 May 2016. Nicola Harley (25 March 2016). "Aung San Suu Kyi in anti-Muslim spat with BBC presenter". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 27 March 2016. Retrieved 4 April 2018. Peter Popham (2016). The Lady and the Generals: Aung San Suu Kyi and Burma's Struggle for Freedom. Penguin Books. p. 193. Anjana Pasricha (15 November 2012). "Aung San Suu Kyi Explains Silence on Rohingyas". Voice of America. Archived from the original on 18 November 2012. Retrieved 15 November 2012. "The halo slips". The Economist. Archived from the original on 29 August 2017. Retrieved 24 August 2017. "Aung San Suu Kyi: Where are you?". BBC News. 2 June 2015. Archived from the original on 25 November 2018. Retrieved 21 June 2018. "Dalai Lama presses Aung San Suu Kyi over Rohingya migrants". BBC. 28 May 2015. Archived from the original on 2 June 2015. Retrieved 3 June 2015. "Aung San Suu Kyi Asks U.S. Not to Refer to Rohingya". The New York Times. 6 May 2016. Archived from the original on 8 May 2016. Retrieved 7 May 2016. "Sanctions on Myanmar". The Economist. 20 May 2016. Archived from the original on 20 May 2016. Retrieved 20 May 2016. Suu Kyi unsettled Western diplomats (who not long ago used unequivocally to adore her) when she asked the new American ambassador not to refer to a persecuted Muslim minority by their name, the Rohingyas. Burman chauvinists had demonstrated in Yangon and Mandalay against the new ambassador's use of the word, which in their eyes graces the Rohingyas with the dignity of citizenship which they wish to deny to them. Is The Lady listening? Aung San Suu Kyi accused of ignoring Myanmar's Muslims Archived 17 February 2017 at the Wayback Machine. CNN. 25 November 2016. Burma's Aung San Suu Kyi accused of "legitimising genocide of Rohingya Muslims" Archived 27 August 2017 at the Wayback Machine. The Independent. 25 November 2016. "South-East Asia's future looks prosperous but illiberal". The Economist. 18 July 2017. Archived from the original on 18 July 2017. Retrieved 19 July 2017. "Myanmar conflict: Aung San Suu Kyi 'must step in'". BBC News. 4 September 2017. Archived from the original on 4 September 2017. Retrieved 4 September 2017. Monbiot, George (5 September 2017). "Take away Aung San Suu Kyi's Nobel peace prize. She no longer deserves it". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 13 November 2017. Retrieved 8 September 2017. Nobel institute: Suu Kyi cannot be stripped of prize The Hindu. 8 September 2017 Zhou, Naaman; Safi, Michael (8 September 2017). "Desmond Tutu condemns Aung San Suu Kyi: 'Silence is too high a price'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 12 September 2017. Retrieved 8 September 2017. "Myanmar's Aung San Suu Kyi to miss UN General Assembly debate". BBC News. 13 September 2017. Archived from the original on 17 August 2018. Retrieved 21 June 2018. Quinn, Ben (7 October 2017). "City of London to debate stripping Aung San Suu Kyi of freedom award". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 7 October 2017. Retrieved 7 October 2017. "Aung San Suu Kyi will be stripped of Freedom of Oxford". BBC News. 3 October 2017. Archived from the original on 29 October 2018. Retrieved 21 June 2018. "Bob Geldof calls Aung San Suu Kyi 'handmaiden to genocide'". Reuters. Archived from the original on 5 December 2017. Retrieved 29 December 2017. Bennett, Isabel (13 November 2017). "Bob Geldof renounces honour also held by Aung San Suu Kyi". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 13 November 2017. Retrieved 13 November 2017. "Councillors vote to revoke award from Aung San Suu Kyi". RTÉ News. 14 December 2017. Archived from the original on 14 December 2017. Retrieved 15 December 2017. "Aung San Suu Kyi has Freedom of Dublin award revoked". The Guardian. Agence France-Presse. 14 December 2017. Archived from the original on 14 December 2017. Retrieved 15 December 2017. Kilraine, John [@John_Kilraine] (13 December 2017). "Dublin councillors voted 37 in favour with 7 against and 5 abstentions to also remove Bob Geldof's name from the Roll of Honorary Freemen #rtenews" (Tweet). Archived from the original on 15 December 2017. Retrieved 15 December 2017 – via Twitter. Schwirtz, Michael (7 March 2018). "U.S. Holocaust Museum Revokes Award to Aung San Suu Kyi". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 7 March 2018. Retrieved 7 March 2018. "Rescinding Elie Wiesel Award from Daw Aung San Suu Kyi". ushmm.org. 7 March 2018. Archived from the original on 7 March 2018. Retrieved 7 March 2018. Boorstein, Michelle (7 March 2018). "Holocaust Museum rescinds Elie Wiesel Award to Nobel winner Aung San Suu Kyi". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on 7 March 2018. Retrieved 7 March 2018. R.C. (23 May 2018). "The Rohingya crisis bears all the hallmarks of a genocide". The Economist. Archived from the original on 24 May 2018. Retrieved 25 May 2018. Ellis-Petersen, Hannah (22 August 2018). "Aung San Suu Kyi to be stripped of Freedom of Edinburgh award". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 22 August 2018. Retrieved 22 August 2018. "Myanmar leader Aung San Suu Kyi to be stripped of freedom of Edinburgh". Archived from the original on 21 August 2018. Retrieved 22 August 2018. Ellis-Petersen, Hannah (22 August 2018). "Aung San Suu Kyi to be stripped of Freedom of Edinburgh award". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 23 August 2018. Retrieved 24 August 2018. "The UN reports that the assault on the Rohingyas amounted to genocide". The Economist. 28 August 2018. Archived from the original on 29 August 2018. Retrieved 29 August 2018. "Canada Revokes Honorary Citizenship of Aung San Suu Kyi". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 3 October 2018. Retrieved 9 September 2018. Beake, Nick (12 November 2018). "Aung San Suu Kyi: Amnesty strips Myanmar leader of top prize". BBC. Archived from the original on 13 November 2018. Retrieved 12 November 2018. Safdar, Anealla; Siddiqui, Usaid (13 December 2019). "ICJ speech: Suu Kyi fails to use 'Rohingya' to describe minority". Retrieved 24 January 2020. Safi, Michael (11 December 2019). "Factchecking Aung San Suu Kyi's claims over genocide allegations". The Guardian. Retrieved 24 January 2020. Pierson, David; Diamond, Cape (11 December 2019). "Myanmar's Aung San Suu Kyi dismisses claims of genocide at The Hague". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 24 January 2020. Retrieved 24 January 2020. Mandhana, Niharika; Solomon, Feliz. "U.N. Court Orders Myanmar to Take Steps to Protect Rohingya Muslims". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 23 January 2020. Retrieved 24 January 2020. Paddock, Richard (23 January 2020). "U.N. Court Orders Myanmar to Protect Rohingya Muslims". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 23 January 2020. Retrieved 24 January 2020. Rezaian, Jason. "These journalists were jailed for investigating atrocities in Burma. This is what they found". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 9 July 2018. Retrieved 9 September 2018. "Myanmar defends Suu Kyi's silence over jailed reporters". Agence France-Presse. 16 January 2012. Archived from the original on 9 September 2018. Retrieved 9 September 2018. "Exclusive: Interview with Aung San Suu Kyi". NHK. Archived from the original on 9 September 2018. Retrieved 9 September 2018. Goldberg, Jacob (5 September 2018). "Jailed reporters' wives 'devastated' by Aung San Suu Kyi response". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 9 September 2018. Retrieved 9 September 2018. "Suu Kyi's image in shreds as Myanmar jails Reuters pair". Agence France-Presse. 16 January 2012. Archived from the original on 9 September 2018. Retrieved 9 September 2018. Naw, Betty Han (May 2018). "Whistle-blower police officer gets one-year jail sentence". Myanmar Times. Archived from the original on 26 June 2018. Retrieved 9 September 2018. Mahtani, Shibani. "Aung San Suu Kyi defends prison sentences for Reuters journalists". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 13 September 2018. Retrieved 13 September 2018. "Myanmar's Aung San Suu Kyi 'detained by military', NLD party says". BBC News. Retrieved 31 January 2021. Stephen Coates (1 February 2021). "Myanmar military seizes power, detains elected leader Aung San Suu Kyi". Reuters. Retrieved 1 February 2021. Beech, Hannah (3 February 2021). "After Coup, Myanmar Military Charges Aung San Suu Kyi With Obscure Infraction". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 28 December 2021. Retrieved 4 February 2021. "Myanmar's military overturned a democratic election. Now they're warning protesters not to 'destroy democracy'". KTVZ. 9 February 2021. Retrieved 10 February 2021. "Myanmar coup: Calls for Suu Kyi release as lawmakers held". BBC News. 2 February 2021. "Arrests, military control 'a serious blow' to democratic reforms in Myanmar: UN chief". UN. 1 February 2021. Regan, Helen; Harileta, Sarita (2 April 2021). "Myanmar's Aung San Suu Kyi charged with violating state secrets as wireless internet shutdown begins". CNN. Retrieved 2 April 2021. "Myanmar's Aung San Suu Kyi slapped with new criminal charge". Al Jazeera. 12 April 2021. Retrieved 19 April 2021. "Myanmar unity government tells ASEAN no talks until prisoners freed". Channel News Asia. 28 April 2021. Archived from the original on 28 April 2021. Retrieved 28 April 2021. "Myanmar junta designates shadow government as a 'terrorist' group". Straits Times. 8 May 2021. Retrieved 9 May 2021. "Myanmar junta brands ousted lawmakers 'terrorists'". The Independent. 9 May 2021. Retrieved 9 May 2021. "Myanmar junta designates shadow government as 'terrorist' group". Deutsche Welle. 8 May 2021. Retrieved 9 May 2021. "Myanmar's Suu Kyi expected to appear in court soon - lawyer". Reuters. 10 May 2021. Retrieved 10 May 2021. "Myanmar junta-appointed electoral body to dissolve Suu Kyi party -media". Reuters. 21 May 2021. Retrieved 21 May 2021. "Myanmar junta leader says Suu Kyi will soon appear". Reuters. 22 May 2021. Retrieved 22 May 2021. "EU denounces Myanmar junta's electoral body plan to dissolve Suu Kyi party". Reuters. 23 May 2021. Retrieved 23 May 2021. "Myanmar's Suu Kyi appears in court for first time since coup". Deutsche Welle. 24 May 2021. Retrieved 24 May 2021. "Myanmar's Suu Kyi appears in court in person for first time since coup". Reuters. 24 May 2021. Retrieved 24 May 2021. "Myanmar's military junta relocates Aung San Suu Kyi to an unknown location, according to allies". Market Research Telecast. 2 June 2021. Retrieved 3 June 2021. "Myanmar: Aung San Suu Kyi charged with corruption". Deutsche Welle. 10 June 2021. Retrieved 10 June 2021. "Aung San Suu Kyi trial begins in Myanmar". Deutsche Welle. 14 June 2021. Retrieved 14 June 2021. "Myanmar court denies bid by Suu Kyi to disqualify testimony". The Independent. 29 June 2021. Retrieved 2 July 2021. "Myanmar's Suu Kyi dizzy and drowsy, skips court appearance". Reuters. 13 September 2021. Retrieved 13 September 2021. Ratcliffe, Rebecca (4 October 2021). "Aung San Suu Kyi asks to reduce court time due to 'strained' health". Retrieved 4 October 2021. "Aung San Suu Kyi: Myanmar court defers first verdicts at trial of deposed leader". The Guardian. 30 November 2021. Retrieved 30 November 2021. "Myanmar's military govt files new corruption charge against Suu Kyi - state TV". Reuters. 30 November 2021. Retrieved 30 November 2021. "Myanmar's Suu Kyi sentenced to four years in jail: Reports". www.aljazeera.com. 6 December 2021. Archived from the original on 6 December 2021. "Aung San Suu Kyi: Myanmar court sentences ousted leader to four years jail". BBC News. 6 December 2021. Archived from the original on 6 December 2021. "Ousted Myanmar leader Suu Kyi gets jail sentence halved to 2 years". The Straits Times (Singapore). 6 December 2021. Retrieved 6 December 2021. Paddock, Richard C. (27 April 2022). "Aung San Suu Kyi Found Guilty in Myanmar Ahead of Biden Summit". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 27 April 2022. "Aung San Suu Kyi: Myanmar sentences ex-leader to jail for corruption". BBC News. 27 April 2022. Retrieved 27 April 2022. "Myanmar minister joins Asean defence meeting as junta shifts Suu Kyi trial to prison". South China Morning Post. 22 June 2022. Fraser, Simon (23 June 2022). "Aung San Suu Kyi: Myanmar ex-leader sent to solitary confinement". BBC News. Lin Kyaw, Khine (15 August 2022). "Ex-Myanmar Leader Suu Kyi Said to Get Six More Years in Prison". Bloomberg. Retrieved 15 August 2022. Slow, Oliver (2 September 2022). "Myanmar: Aung San Suu Kyi given three more years for 'election fraud'". BBC News. Retrieved 12 September 2022. "Aung San Suu Kyi, Australian economic adviser jailed in Myanmar". Al Jazeera. 29 September 2022. Retrieved 29 September 2022. "Myanmar court extends Suu Kyi's prison sentence to 26 years". NPR. The Associated Press. 12 October 2022. Retrieved 13 October 2022. Lamb, Kate (12 July 2023). "Thai foreign minister says he met with Aun San Suu Kyi". Reuters. Retrieved 22 August 2023. Stambaugh, Alex; McCarthy, Simone (1 August 2023). "Myanmar junta pardons some Suu Kyi offences, but former leader still faces decades in detention". CNN. Retrieved 1 August 2023. "Myanmar's Aung San Suu Kyi Moved From Prison: Party Official". VOA. 28 July 2023. Retrieved 22 August 2023. "Myanmar Suu Kyi Unwell, Back in Prison". The Irrawaddy. 6 September 2023. Retrieved 8 October 2023. Zan, Hein Htoo (7 October 2023). "Myanmar Junta Rejects Daw Aung San Suu Kyi Appeal". The Irrawaddy. Retrieved 8 October 2023. "Freedom from Fear speech by Aung Sang Suu Kyi, 1990". Thirdworldtraveler.com. Archived from the original on 9 May 2013. Retrieved 19 June 2013. Myanmar's Suu Kyi ends US trip, hailing democracy, AFP, 3 October 2012 www.freedom-now.org. www.freedom-now.org. Retrieved 2 April 2012. "Aung San Suu Kyi | International IDEA". www.idea.int. Retrieved 8 December 2021. "Myanmar: Letter to Minister Aung Kyi on publishing bill". ARTICLE 19. 12 October 2013. Retrieved 8 December 2021. "Overzicht Eredoctoraten Vrije Universiteit Brussel" (in Dutch). Vrije Universiteit Brussel. Archived from the original on 28 August 2006. Retrieved 4 July 2006. "freedomforum.org". Archived from the original on 22 October 2008. "Arrest Yourself". US Campaign for Burma. Archived from the original on 15 July 2006. Retrieved 4 July 2006. "Library of Congress". US Campaign for Burma. Archived from the original on 19 October 2020. "Home". Burma Campaign UK. Retrieved 8 December 2021. "St. Hugh's Full Moon Ball". The Burma Campaign UK. Archived from the original on 23 August 2006. Retrieved 4 July 2006. "Aung San Suu Kyi receives honorary degree". University of Oxford. Archived from the original on 21 June 2012. Retrieved 21 June 2012. "Aung San Suu Kyi". The Rafto Foundation. Archived from the original on 8 December 2021. Retrieved 8 December 2021. Fitzgerald, Cormac (13 December 2017). "Councillors vote to strip Aung San Suu Kyi of the Freedom of Dublin". Archived from the original on 16 October 2018. Retrieved 13 November 2018. "Arrest Yourself". CNN. Archived from the original on 15 March 2008. Retrieved 11 March 2008. "www.theElders.org Aung San Suu Kyi". Theelders.org. Archived from the original on 15 August 2010. Retrieved 30 September 2010. Photo: Jeff Moore / AP (26 May 2009). "San Francisco Chronicle Absent but not forgotten". San Francisco Chronicle. Retrieved 30 September 2010.[permanent dead link] "www.theElders.org The Elders demand release of Aung San Suu Kyi". Theelders.org. 26 May 2009. Archived from the original on 14 July 2010. Retrieved 30 September 2010. "The Elders congratulate Aung San Suu Kyi ahead of her appearance in parliament in Burma/Myanmar". Theelders.org. 19 April 2012. Archived from the original on 31 January 2013. Retrieved 30 July 2012. [1] Archived 4 January 2014 at the Wayback Machine "Guest Director". Brighton Festival. Archived from the original on 1 November 2017. Retrieved 27 January 2018. "A Logo for Human Rights". Archived from the original on 3 December 2012. Retrieved 1 December 2012. BBC News – Aung San Suu Kyi to present the BBC's Reith Lectures Archived 6 November 2018 at the Wayback Machine. BBC (10 June 2011). Retrieved 10 August 2011. "Securing Freedom: 2011, The Reith Lectures - BBC Radio 4". BBC. MacCharles, Tonda (27 September 2018). "Canada revokes honorary citizenship for Aung San Suu Kyi". Toronto Star. Archived from the original on 28 September 2018. Retrieved 27 September 2018. The Telegraph (20 June 2012). "Aung San Suu Kyi honoured by Oxford University with honorary degree". Archived from the original on 12 June 2014. Retrieved 20 May 2017 – via YouTube. "A Prize for Creative Dissent". The Wall Street Journal. 13 May 2012. Archived from the original on 5 July 2015. Retrieved 16 May 2012. "Delhi's Lady Shri Ram College to felicitate Aung San Suu Kyi". NDTV.com. Retrieved 8 December 2021. Moe, Wai; Paddock, Richard. "Aung San Suu Kyi's Party Puts Loyalist in Line for Myanmar President". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 9 September 2018. Retrieved 9 September 2018. [s.n.] (30 March 2016). Myanmar swears in first elected civilian president in 50 years Archived 9 September 2018 at the Wayback Machine. BBC News. Retrieved April 2016 Aung Kyaw Min (12 June 2015). "Daw Aung San Suu Kyi's hospitality training school seeks new youth applicants". Myanmar Times. Archived from the original on 12 March 2016. Retrieved 12 March 2016. Roy, Mantra (11 July 2014). "Libraries in Myanmar are Taking Strides in the Right Direction". WebJunction. OCLC. Archived from the original on 12 March 2016. Retrieved 12 March 2016. "Aung San Suu Kyi to receive honorary degree from S. Korean univ". Yonhap News. Yonhap. 17 January 2013. Archived from the original on 8 April 2014. Retrieved 13 June 2014. "Aung San Suu Kyi in Aula Magna". magazine.unibo.it (in Italian). Retrieved 8 December 2021. "Monash to host Daw Aung San Suu Kyi". Monash University. 27 November 2013. Retrieved 8 December 2021. "How well do you know ANU?". ANU Reporter. Archived from the original on 8 December 2021. Retrieved 8 December 2021. "Honorary Doctors". University of Technology Sydney. 3 May 2018. Retrieved 8 December 2021. Mark, Brown; Simon, Hattenstone (19 December 2010). "Aung San Suu Kyi's tragic love and incredible life come to the big screen". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 27 September 2016. Retrieved 5 October 2016. James, Caryn (25 August 1995). "Beyond Rangoon (1995): Sad Tourist Trapped in Burma". The New York Times. Parinatha, Sampathi (11 July 2014). "Rukmini Vijayakumar in The Lady of Burma". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 19 October 2017. Retrieved 5 October 2016. "New Damien Rice & Lisa Hannigan Single "Unplayed Piano" to Be Released June 21 in Support of Free Aung San Suu Kyi 60th Birthday Campaign". Marketwire. Archived from the original on 23 September 2018. Retrieved 23 September 2018. "Aung San Suu Kyi and Bono discuss U2's song Walk On". BBC News. 18 June 2012. Archived from the original on 24 April 2021. Retrieved 15 January 2024. "Walk On With Aung San Suu Kyi". U2. 16 November 2001. Retrieved 4 June 2018. "Aung San Suu Kyi and Bono discuss U2's song Walk On – 2012-06-18". BBC News. Archived from the original on 12 November 2015. Retrieved 12 November 2015. "Aung San Suu Kyi Recovering from Surgery in Rangoon – 2003-09-19". Voice of America. 30 October 2009. Archived from the original on 31 December 2013. Retrieved 29 December 2013. "Suu Kyi cancels trips after foot surgery – ANN". Asianewsnet.net. 23 December 2013. Archived from the original on 23 December 2013. Retrieved 29 December 2013.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Associated Press in Rangoon (15 June 2012). "Aung San Suu Kyi doctor fears for her health after illness on Europe tour". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 31 December 2013. Retrieved 29 December 2013. "UN Myanmar envoy 'very concerned' about Aung San Suu Kyi's health". Aljazeera. 5 September 2022. Retrieved 24 August 2023. "Myanmar's Daw Aung San Suu Kyi Reportedly Suffering Health Problems in Prison". The Irrawaddy. 14 September 2022. Retrieved 24 August 2023. "Special attention given to Daw Aung San Suu Kyi's health and living situation: SAC spokesperson". Eleven Media. 3 July 2022. Retrieved 24 August 2023. Lamb, Kate (12 July 2023). "Thai foreign minister says he met with Aun San Suu Kyi". Reuters. Retrieved 24 August 2023. "Myanmar's Aung San Suu Kyi Unwell, Back in Prison". The Irrawaddy. 6 September 2023. Retrieved 8 October 2023. Ng, Kelly (6 September 2023). "Aung San Suu Kyi ill but denied urgent care, says son". BBC News. Retrieved 8 October 2023. Hilliard, Mark. "Freedom from Fear: Fund targeting violence against women launches". The Irish Times. Retrieved 2 March 2022. Miller, J. E. (2001). Who's Who in Contemporary Women's Writing. Routledge. Reid, R., Grosberg, M. (2005). Myanmar (Burma). Lonely Planet. ISBN 978-1-74059-695-4. Stewart, Whitney (1997). Aung San Suu Kyi: Fearless Voice of Burma. Twenty-First Century Books. ISBN 978-0-8225-4931-4. Combs, Daniel. Until the World Shatters: Truth, Lies, and the Looting of Myanmar (2021).[ISBN missing] Aung Zaw (2014). The Face of Resistance: Aung San Suu Kyi and Burma's Fight for Freedom. Chiang Mai: Mekong Press.[ISBN missing] Aung San Suu Kyi (Modern Peacemakers) (2007) by Judy L. Hasday, ISBN 978-0-7910-9435-8 The Lady: Aung San Suu Kyi: Nobel Laureate and Burma's Prisoner (2002) by Barbara Victor, ISBN 978-0-571-21177-7, or 1998 hardcover: ISBN 978-0-571-19944-0 The Lady and the Peacock: The Life of Aung San Suu Kyi (2012) by Peter Popham, ISBN 978-1-61519-064-5 Perfect Hostage: A Life of Aung San Suu Kyi (2007) by Justin Wintle, ISBN 978-0-09-179681-5 Tyrants: The World's 20 Worst Living Dictators (2006) by David Wallechinsky, ISBN 978-0-06-059004-8 Aung San Suu Kyi (Trailblazers of the Modern World) (2004) by William Thomas, ISBN 978-0-8368-5263-9 No Logo: No Space, No Choice, No Jobs (2002) by Naomi Klein ISBN 978-0-312-42143-4 Mental culture in Burmese crisis politics: Aung San Suu Kyi and the National League for Democracy (ILCAA Study of Languages and Cultures of Asia and Africa Monograph Series) (1999) by Gustaaf Houtman, ISBN 978-4-87297-748-6 Aung San Suu Kyi: Standing Up for Democracy in Burma (Women Changing the World) (1998) by Bettina Ling ISBN 978-1-55861-197-9 Prisoner for Peace: Aung San Suu Kyi and Burma's Struggle for Democracy (Champions of Freedom Series) (1994) by John Parenteau, ISBN 978-1-883846-05-3 Des femmes prix Nobel de Marie Curie à Aung San Suu Kyi, 1903–1991 (1992) by Charlotte Kerner, Nicole Casanova, Gidske Anderson, ISBN 978-2-7210-0427-7 Aung San Suu Kyi, towards a new freedom (1998) by Chin Geok Ang ISBN 978-981-4024-30-3 Aung San Suu Kyi's struggle: Its principles and strategy (1997) by Mikio Oishi ISBN 978-983-9861-06-8 Finding George Orwell in Burma (2004) by Emma Larkin ISBN 0-14-303711-0 Character Is Destiny: Inspiring Stories Every Young Person Should Know and Every Adult Should Remember (2005) by John McCain, Mark Salter. Random House ISBN 978-1-4000-6412-0 Silverstein, Josef (Summer 1996). "The Idea of Freedom in Burma and the Political Thought of Daw Aung San Suu Kyi" (PDF). Pacific Affairs. 69 (2): 211–228. doi:10.2307/2760725. JSTOR 2760725. Under the Dragon: A Journey Through Burma (1998/2010) by Rory MacLean ISBN 978-1-84511-622-4 Richard, Shannon (2007). The Lady of Burma. London: Oberon Books Ltd. ISBN 978-1849438919. Retrieved 5 October 2016.[permanent dead link] Aung San Suu Kyi at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Aung San Suu Kyi's website (Site appears to be inactive. Last posting was in July 2014) Aung San Suu Kyi on Nobelprize.org Works by Aung San Suu Kyi at Open Library Aung San Suu Kyi collected news and commentary at The Guardian Aung San Suu Kyi collected news and commentary at The New York Times Appearances on C-SPAN