Cristina Elisabet Fernández de Kirchner (Spanish pronunciation: [kɾisˈtina eˈlisaβet feɾˈnandes ðe ˈkiɾʃneɾ] ; born Cristina Elisabet Fernández, 19 February 1953), often referred to by her initials CFK, is an Argentine lawyer and politician who served as president of Argentina from 2007 to 2015 and later as vice president of Argentina from 2019 to 2023 under President Alberto Fernández, as well as the first lady of Argentina during the tenure of her husband, Néstor Kirchner, from 2003 to 2007. She was the second female president of Argentina (after Isabel Perón) and the first elected female president of Argentina. Ideologically, she identifies herself as a Peronist and a progressive, with her political approach called Kirchnerism. Born in La Plata, Buenos Aires Province, she studied law at the University of La Plata, and moved to Patagonia with her husband Néstor Kirchner upon graduation. She was elected to the provincial legislature; her husband was elected mayor of Río Gallegos. She was elected national senator in 1995, and had a controversial tenure, while her husband was elected governor of Santa Cruz Province. In 1994, she was also elected to the constituent assembly that amended the Constitution of Argentina. She was the First Lady from 2003 to 2007 after her husband was elected president. Néstor Kirchner did not run for reelection. Instead, his wife was the candidate for the Front for Victory alliance, becoming president in the 2007 presidential election. Her first term of office started with a conflict with the agricultural sector, and her proposed taxation system was rejected. After this she nationalised private pension funds, and fired the president of the Central Bank. The price of public services remained subsidised and she renationalised energy firm YPF as a result. The country had good relations with other South American nations, and strained relations with the western bloc as part of the regional political movement known as pink tide. She also continued her husband's human rights policies, and had a rocky relationship with the press. Néstor Kirchner died in 2010, and she was re-elected for a second term in 2011. She won the 2011 general election with 54.11% of the votes, the highest percentage obtained by any presidential candidate since 1983. The 37.3% difference between votes for hers and the runner-up ticket Binner-Morandini was the second largest in the history of Argentine general elections. She established currency controls during her second term, and the country fell into sovereign default in 2014. She left office in 2015 with approval ratings above 50%. During her two terms as president, several corruption scandals took place and subsequently her government faced several demonstrations against her rule. She was charged for fraudulent low price sales of dollar futures, and later acquitted. In 2015, she was indicted for obstructing the investigation into the 1994 AMIA Bombing, after Alberto Nisman's controversial accusation of a purported "pact" (a memorandum) signed between her government and Iran which was supposedly seeking impunity for Iranians involved in the terrorist attack. In 2017, an arrest warrant issued by Claudio Bonadio for Fernández de Kirchner charged her with "treason", but due to her parliamentary immunity, she did not go to prison, and the treason accusation was later dropped, while other charges related to Nisman's accusation remained. In 2018, she was also indicted for corruption on charges alleging that her administration had accepted bribes in exchange for public works contracts. On 30 September 2020, the federal criminal cassation court confirmed the corruption trials of Fernández de Kirchner, ruling the former president's objections to be inadmissible. After analyzing the claims of the defendants in the case for the never-ratified Memorandum with Iran, on 7 October 2021, the Federal Oral Court 8 declared the case null and void. The judges concluded that there was no crime in the signing of the agreement with Iran, and declared a judicial dismissal of Cristina Kirchner and the other defendants. On 6 December 2022, she was sentenced to six years in prison and a lifetime ban from holding public office for corruption, and has stated her intention to appeal the verdict. Cristina Fernández was born on 19 February 1953 in Tolosa, a suburb of La Plata, capital of the Buenos Aires Province. She is the daughter of Eduardo Fernández and Ofelia Esther Wilhelm. Eduardo was a bus driver and an anti-Peronist, and Ofelia was a Peronist union leader and a single mother. Fernández married her and moved into her house when Cristina was two years old. Most details about her childhood such as her elementary school are unknown. She attended high school at Popular Mercantil and Misericordia schools. Three of her grandparents were Spanish immigrants, specifically from Galicia. She began her college studies at the National University of La Plata. She studied psychology for a year, then dropped it and studied law instead. She met fellow student Néstor Kirchner in 1973. He introduced her to political debates. There were heated political controversies at the time caused by the decline of the Argentine Revolution military government, the return of the former president Juan Perón from exile, the election of Héctor Cámpora as president of Argentina, and the early stages of the Dirty War. She became influenced by Peronism, left-wing politics, and anti-imperialism. Despite the presence of sympathizers of the Montoneros guerrillas in La Plata, the Kirchners had never been involved themselves. Cristina and Néstor married in a civil ceremony on 9 May 1975. Her mother got them administrative jobs at her union. The 1976 Argentine coup d'état took place the following year. Cristina proposed to move to Río Gallegos, Néstor's home city, but he delayed their departure until his graduation on 3 July 1976. Cristina had not yet graduated when they moved to Río Gallegos and completed the remaining subjects with distance education. There have been claims made that she never graduated, and that she may have worked as a lawyer without having a degree. This idea was proposed by the constitutionalist Daniel Sabsay, and fueled by the reluctance of the National University of La Plata (UNLP) to release her degree. She registered at the Tribunal Superior de Justicia of Santa Cruz in 1980, the Comodoro Rivadavia's chamber of appeals in 1985 and worked as an attorney for the Justicialist Party in 1983. There are also logs of minor cases where she acted as a lawyer. The claim has been sent to trial four times, and the judges Norberto Oyarbide, Ariel Lijo, Sergio Torres, and Claudio Bonadio all ruled that she has a degree. Néstor established a law firm that Cristina joined in 1979. The firm worked for banks and financial groups that filed eviction lawsuits, which had a growing rate at the time because the 1050 ruling of the Central Bank had increased the interest rates for mortgage loans. The Kirchners acquired twenty-one land lots at cheap prices as they were about to be auctioned. Their law firm defended military personnel accused of committing crimes during the Dirty War. Forced disappearances were common at the time, but unlike other lawyers the Kirchners never signed a habeas corpus. Julio César Strassera, prosecutor in the 1985 Trial of the Juntas against the military, criticized the Kirchners' lack of legal actions against the military, and considered their later interest in the issue a form of hypocrisy. Cristina Kirchner was elected deputy for the provincial legislature of Santa Cruz in 1989. The Justicialist Party (PJ), led by Carlos Menem, returned to the presidency in the 1989 general elections. She served as interim governor of Santa Cruz for a couple of days, after the impeachment of Ricardo del Val in 1990. She organized Néstor's political campaign when he was elected governor of Santa Cruz in 1991. In 1994, she was elected to the constituent assembly that amended the Constitution of Argentina. She was elected national senator in the 1995 general elections. She opposed some bills proposed by Menem, such as a treaty with Chilean president Patricio Aylwin that benefited Chile in a dispute over the Argentina–Chile border. The Minister of Defense Oscar Camilión was questioned in Congress about the Argentine arms trafficking scandal; Kirchner told him that he had to resign, which he refused to do. As a result, she made a name for herself as a troublemaker. She was removed from the PJ bloc in the Congress in 1997 for misconduct. She resigned her senatorial seat that year and ran for national deputy in the 1997 midterm elections instead. Menem ended his term of office in 1999 and was replaced by Fernando de la Rúa. Fernández de Kirchner took part in a commission to investigate money laundering with fellow legislator Elisa Carrió, and got into conflicts with her. She ran again for senator in the 2001 midterm elections. Néstor Kirchner was elected president in 2003, and she became the First Lady. Under these circumstances, she sought a lower profile in Congress. Her husband had a political dispute with the previous president, Eduardo Duhalde. Their dispute continued during the 2005 midterm elections. Without consensus in the PJ for a single candidate for senator of the Buenos Aires province, both leaders had their respective wives run for the office: Hilda González de Duhalde for the PJ, and Cristina Fernández de Kirchner for the Front for Victory. She won the election. The presidential election was held on 28 October 2007. With Fernández de Kirchner leading all the pre-election polls by a wide margin, her challengers focused on forcing her into a ballotage. To win in a single round, a presidential candidate in Argentina needs either more than 45% of the vote, or 40% of the vote and a lead of more than 10 percentage points over the runner-up. However, with 13 challengers splitting the vote, she won the election decisively in the first round with just over 45% of the vote, compared to 23% for Elisa Carrió (candidate for the Civic Coalition) and 17% for former Economy Minister Roberto Lavagna. Fernández de Kirchner was popular among the suburban working class and the rural poor, while Carrió and Lavagna both received more support from the urban middle class. She lost the election in the large cities of Buenos Aires and Rosario. On 14 November, the president-elect announced the names of her new cabinet, which was sworn in on 10 December. Of the twelve ministers appointed, seven had been ministers in Néstor Kirchner's government, while the other five took office for the first time. The selections anticipated the continuation of the policies implemented by Néstor Kirchner. She began a four-year term on 10 December 2007, facing challenges including: inflation, poor public security, international credibility, a faulty energy infrastructure, and protests from the agricultural sectors over an increase of nearly 30% on export taxes. Fernández de Kirchner was the second female president of Argentina, after Isabel Perón but, unlike Perón, she was elected to the office, whereas Isabel Perón was elected Juan Perón's vice president, and automatically assumed the presidency on his death. The transition from Néstor Kirchner to Cristina Fernández de Kirchner was also the first time a democratic head of state was replaced by their spouse without the death of either. He remained highly influential during his wife's term, supervising the economy and leading the PJ. Their marriage has been compared with those of Juan and Eva Perón and Bill and Hillary Clinton. Media observers suspected that Mr. Kirchner stepped down as president to circumvent the term limit, swapping roles with his wife. When Néstor Kirchner refused to run for re-election in 2007 and proposed his wife instead, it was rumored that they could alternate in the presidency for the next 12 years to circumvent the constitutional limit of two consecutive terms. This scenario would have had Cristina standing down in favor of Néstor in 2011, and Néstor would in turn hand the FPV candidacy back to Cristina in 2015. The death of Néstor Kirchner in 2010 derailed such a plan. She had a low positive image, below 30%. On 21 June 2011, she announced that she would run for a second term as president. A few days later, she announced that her economic minister Amado Boudou would run for vice president on her ticket. She personally chose most of the candidates for deputy in the Congress, favoring members of the Cámpora. The elections took place on 23 October. She was re-elected with 54% of the vote, followed by socialist Hermes Binner, 37 points behind her. The opposition was divided between several candidates and the perceived economic prosperity prevailed over voter's concerns about corruption and cronyism. It was the largest victory percentage in national elections since 1983. The Peronist party also won eight of the nine elections for governor held that day, increased their number of senators, and obtained the majority in the chamber of deputies, including the number of legislators needed for quorum. They had lost that majority in the 2009 elections. She invited children on stage during the celebrations, and Vice President Amado Boudou played an electric guitar. As she had in 2007, she gave a conciliatory speech. When she first took office, Cristina Kirchner replaced the previous minister of economy, Miguel Gustavo Peirano, who had been appointed by her husband as former president. Peirano was succeeded by Martín Lousteau in December 2007. He served as the first of several ministers of economy under her presidency. The attempt to increase taxes on agricultural exports caused a conflict with the agricultural sector and protests broke out. As a result, taxes were not increased, and Lousteau resigned by April 2008, only a few months after he had been appointed. He was replaced by Argentina's tax agency chief Carlos Rafael Fernández. As an alternative to increasing taxes, and facing debt payments the following year, the government nationalized private pension funds, known as "Administradoras de Fondos de Jubilaciones y Pensiones" (AFJP). The amount of money involved in this operation was nearly 30 billion dollars, and debt obligations were nearly 24 billion dollars. The nationalization was justified by the president as government protectionism during the crisis and compared with the bank bailouts in Europe and the United States. It was criticized as a threat to property rights and the rule of law. Fernández resigned after the Kirchnerist defeat in the 2009 elections, and was replaced by Amado Boudou, president of the ANSES which had worked for that nationalization. Although inflation was nearing 25% and on the rise, Boudou did not consider it a significant problem. In January 2010, Fernández de Kirchner created the bicentennial fund employing a necessity and urgency decree in order to pay debt obligations with foreign-exchange reserves. Martín Redrado, president of the Central Bank, refused to implement it, and was fired by another decree. Judge María José Sarmiento annulled both decrees on the grounds that the Central Bank was independent. Redrado resigned one month later and was replaced by Mercedes Marcó del Pont. In an attempt to combat poverty, the government introduced in 2009 the Universal Child Allowance, a cash transfer program to parents who are unemployed or in the informal economy. It was later expanded to cover other disadvantaged groups. The extent to which Kirchner's policies have lowered poverty is controversial, with the government's reported poverty rate being questioned by some experts. According to a 2017 UNICEF report, the cash transfers reduced extreme poverty by 30.8% and general poverty by 5.6%. Fernández de Kirchner was reelected in 2011, along with Amado Boudou as vice president and the Front for Victory regained control over both chambers of Congress. Hernán Lorenzino became the new minister of economy. The government established currency controls that limited the power to buy or sell foreign currencies, especially American dollars. Many Argentines kept their savings in dollars as a hedge against inflation. The government believed the controls were required to prevent the capital flight and tax evasion. They initiated a period of fiscal reform, which included several tax increases, limits to wage increases, but increases in protectionism and reorganization of state-owned enterprises. Hugo Moyano, main union leader, who was a strong supporter of kirchnerism, began to oppose the President. Moyano would later organize a big protest at Plaza de Mayo, with 30,000 people, requesting the abolition of capital gains tax. Axel Kicillof was appointed minister in 2013 and served for the remainder of Kirchner's term. He arranged payment of the debt to the Paris Club, and the compensation requested by Repsol for the nationalization of YPF. One month later, negotiations with hedge funds failed, and American judge Thomas Griesa issued an order that Argentina had to pay to all creditors and not just those who had accepted a reduced payment as outlined in the Argentine debt restructuring plan. Kicillof refused to agree that the country had fallen into a sovereign default. When Argentina devalued the peso in January 2014, Kicillof placed blame on the exchange-market speculation by Juan José Aranguren, chief of Royal Dutch Shell in Argentina; later in the year, when the peso was at its lowest ever position in relation to the dollar, he blamed "vulture funds" from the United States.[citation needed] At the 2014 United Nations conference, she accused the "vulture funds" of destabilizing the economy of the countries and called them "economic terrorists". According to The Economist, the Kirchners returned Argentina to "economic nationalism and near-autarky". In 2002, Eduardo Duhalde fixed the prices for public services such as electricity, gas and water supply. These remained fixed during the terms of Duhalde and Néstor and Cristina Kirchner, despite the crisis that motivated them having ended. As the inflation rate grew during the period, the state financed part of these prices with subsidies. Investment in these areas decreased, and the generation and distribution networks suffered. Argentina lost its self-supply of energy, and had to import it, rather than being able to export surpluses. She proposed a fiscal austerity program in early 2012, including the gradual removal of subsidies. The proposal turned out to be unpopular, and was not implemented. She opted instead to send a bill to Congress for the renationalization of YPF, privatized in 1993, blaming the Spanish company Repsol for the energy trade deficit. The bill was approved by the Chamber of Deputies by a 207-32 margin. It was criticized as an authoritarian move, as there was no negotiation with Repsol. As well, the Vaca Muerta oil field had been discovered by this time. However, YPF was unable to afford the costs to exploit the oil at the site, and the rights to drill at Vaca Muerta were sold to the Chevron Corporation. The costs of energy imports increased the trade deficit and the inflation rate, and power outages became frequent. Outages usually took place on the hottest days of the summer season, as the use of air conditioning increased electricity consumption to peak levels. In March 2008, Fernández de Kirchner introduced a new sliding-scale taxation system for agricultural exports, so that rates fluctuated with international prices. This would effectively raise levies on soybean exports from 35% to 44% at the time of the announcement. This new taxation scheme, proposed by Minister Martín Lousteau, led to a nationwide lockout by farming associations, with the aim of forcing the government to back down on new tax system. They were joined on 25 March by thousands of pot-banging demonstrators massed around the Buenos Aires Obelisk and the presidential palace. These demonstrations were followed by others at locations across the country that included road blockades and food shortages. The protests were highly polarizing. The government argued that the new taxes would allow for a better redistribution of wealth and keep down the food prices. It also claimed the farmers were staging a coup d'état against Fernández de Kirchner. Farmers argued that the high taxes made cultivation unviable. The activist Luis D'Elía interrupted one of the demonstrations leading stick-wielding pro-government supporters, who attacked the participants. Minister Lousteau resigned during the crisis, and the Peronist governors opted to negotiate on their own with the farmers, ignoring her approach. Her public image plummeted to its lowest level since the election in October 2007. After four months of conflict and having the majority in both houses of the Argentine Congress, the president introduced the new taxation bill. However, many legislators gave priority to the local agendas of their provinces as their economies depended heavily on agriculture. Many FPV legislators, such as Rubén Marín, opposed the bill. Marín argued: "For us, agriculture is the economy". There were two demonstrations the day of the vote: one against the bill, attended by 235,000 people, and the other in support of the bill, attended by 100,000 people. Farmers had announced that they would continue their demonstrations if the bill was approved without amendments. Senator Emilio Rached from Santiago del Estero cast the vote that resulted in a 36–36 tie. In the case of a tie, the vice president, who also serves as president of the Senate but without the right to vote, is required to cast the tie-breaking vote. Julio Cobos voted against the bill, which was then rejected, saying that: "My vote is not in favor, my vote is against". Despite the chilly relations between Cobos and Cristina Kirchner since that event, he completed his term as vice president. Fernández de Kirchner was reelected in 2011. The Constitution of Argentina allows only one reelection. Many of her supporters proposed an amendment to the Constitution to allow indefinite reelections. She did not publicly support the proposal but did not discourage or reject it either. The proposal was not taken to the Congress, as the FPV still lacked the required two-thirds majority to approve an amendment bill. It was rejected by many sectors of society. The first big demonstration (a cacerolazo) took place in September 2012. It was not called by specific politicians or social leaders, but by the public using social networks. The massive turnout was completely unexpected by both the government and the opposition. People also protested the 2012 Buenos Aires rail disaster, the conflict between Kirchnerism and the media, rising crime rates, and the tight currency controls. She dismissed the demonstration and said that she would continue working as before. Most of the Fernández de Kirchner loyalists, however, preferred simply to ignore the protest. A larger demonstration, the 8N, took place two months later. It was attended by nearly half a million people. They protested a variety of issues such as those of the previous demonstration, as well as the growing rate of inflation and the corruption scandals. She promised to keep her policies unchanged, and Senator Aníbal Fernández dismissed the significance of the demonstrations. Journalist Jorge Lanata explained the polarization was because the government and its supporters thought they were engaged in a revolution, and this justified being against freedom of the press and other public rights. Cabinet Chief Juan Manuel Abal Medina said the demonstrators belonged to a class that was against social justice and compared the demonstrations to a coup d'état. A similar view was held by Fernández de Kirchner's loyalists. Buenos Aires and La Plata suffered floods in April, resulting in more than 70 deaths. Mayor Mauricio Macri pointed out that the national government had prevented the city from taking out international loans, which would have been used for infrastructure improvements. A week later, Fernández de Kirchner announced a proposed amendment of the Argentine judiciary. Three bills were controversial: the first proposed to limit injunctions against the state; the second would include people selected in national elections on the body that appoints or removes judges; the third would create a new court that would limit the number of cases heard by the Supreme Court. The opposition considered the bills an attempt to control the judiciary. The 2013 season of the investigative journalism program Periodismo para todos revealed an ongoing case of political corruption involving Néstor Kirchner, called "The Route of the K-Money", which generated a huge political controversy. This led to a new cacerolazo on 18 April, known as the 18A. Prosecutor Alberto Nisman, who worked on the investigation of the 1994 Asociación Mutual Israelita Argentina (Argentine-Israeli Mutual Association) AMIA bombing, accused Fernández de Kirchner of engaging in a criminal, cover-up conspiracy to cover up the attack. He was found dead in his home the day before he was to explain his denunciation in Congress. Argentine law enforcement concluded that Nisman's death was a homicide. The unsolved case was highly controversial. The 18F demonstration took place a month after his death. It was organized as a silent demonstration, as an homage to Alberto Nisman, and was devoid of political flags or banners. The rule was followed, with occasional exceptions, by waves of spontaneous clapping or people singing the Argentine national anthem. The city police estimated that the demonstration was attended by 400,000 people. Several high-profile cases took place during the Fernández de Kirchner administration. The first involved the detention of Venezuelan-American businessman Antonini Wilson in an airport after being found with a suitcase filled with $800,000. This money was illegally provided by Petróleos de Venezuela, the state oil company, to be used for her 2007 general election campaign. Details of the case were explained by businessman Carlos Kauffmann and lawyer Moisés Maiónica, who pleaded guilty. The FPV financing of the 2007 elections caused another scandal years later. Three pharmaceutical businessmen, Sebastián Forza, Damián Ferrón, and Leopoldo Bina, were found dead in 2008, a case known as the "Triple Crime". Further investigation of Forza, who contributed $200,000 to the campaign, identified him as a provider of ephedrine to the Sinaloa Cartel. In 2015, Martín Lanatta and José Luis Salerno, convicted for the killings, claimed that Aníbal Fernández was the boss of a mafia ring that ordered those killings to secure the illegal traffic of ephedrine. Fernández denied the charges, maintaining that it was a set up to undermine his chances in the 2015 general election. General illegal drug trade grew in Argentina during Kirchnerism, and saw Mexican and Colombian syndicates working with Peruvian and Bolivian smugglers. Conviction rates for money laundering were almost nonexistent. Mariano Federici, head of the Financial Information Unit, said that the "magnitude of the threat is very serious, and this would never have been possible without collaboration from government officials in this country". Amado Boudou, who served as minister of economy during Fernández de Kirchner's first term and vice president during the second, was suspected of corruption in 2012 case. The Ciccone Calcografica printing company filed for bankruptcy in 2010, but this request was cancelled when businessman Alejandro Vandenbroele bought it. The company received tax breaks to pay its debts, and was selected to print banknotes of the Argentine peso. It is suspected that Vandenbroele is actually a frontman for Boudou, and that he employed his clout as minister of economy to benefit a company that actually belonged to him. In 2013, the TV program Periodismo para todos launched an investigation in purported political corruption. They named their investigation "the route of the K-Money", to imply that former president Néstor Kirchner and then-president Cristina Fernández de Kirchner were involved. Businessman Leonardo Fariña said in a television interview that he helped businessman Lázaro Báez to divert money from public works, and take it to a financial firm located in the Madero Center luxury hotel. This firm, informally known as "La Rosadita", would have sent the money abroad to tax havens, using shell companies. Given the amounts of money involved, the money was weighed instead of counted to determine the value. Federico Elaskar, owner of the firm, confirmed Fariña's claims in another televised interview. Both of them retracted their statements after the program was aired, but prosecutor José María Campagnoli confirmed their links with Báez. Báez denied any wrongdoing. Campagnoli was suspended as a prosecutor, accused of leaking information, and abusing his authority. Báez is also linked with the Kirchners to the Hotesur case, a suspected case of money laundering. According to a criminal complaint by opposition deputy Margarita Stolbizer, his company Valle Mitre S.A. has rented 1,100 rooms per month, for years, at the Hotesur and Alto Calafate hotels, but without occupying them. These hotels, located in the city of El Calafate, belong to the Kirchners. An official investigation into the events related by the "route of the K-Money" case was launched in 2013. In June 2023, the judicial case looking into possible wrongdoing by Fernández de Kirchner was dismissed after the prosecution failed to produce evidence that she had been involved with any embezzled funds. The Fernández de Kirchner presidency continued the trials of military personnel involved in the Dirty War started by her husband. There have been more than 500 people sentenced, and 1,000 convicted, in a process that was unprecedented in Latin America. De facto president Jorge Rafael Videla, who was convicted and given a life sentence in 1985 and pardoned years later, received a new life sentence in 2010. General Luciano Benjamín Menéndez, who waged war against the leftist guerrillas in the northern Argentine provinces, received a life sentence as well. Another related investigation involved the fate of the children of captured pregnant guerrillas, who were given up for adoption by the military junta. An estimated 500 children were involved. The investigation became controversial during the Fernández de Kirchner administration, as those involved had become adults and some of them refused to participate in DNA testing. One of those cases was the Noble siblings case, involving the adopted sons of Ernestina Herrera de Noble, owner of the Clarín newspaper. The Kirchners advanced a bill in Congress to make the genetic testing of suspected victims mandatory. Although the measure had popular support, critics considered it a breach of the right to privacy, and politically motivated because of a dispute between her and the Clarín newspaper. The Noble siblings tests in 2011 were negative, and the case was closed in January 2016, after Fernández de Kirchner left the presidency. Hilario Bacca, a confirmed son of disappeared guerrillas, appealed a judicial ruling that sought to change his name, asking to keep the name he had been using. Football broadcasting was nationalized on the program Fútbol para todos and then filled with pro-government advertisements. On the other hand, the country's largest selling newspaper Clarín, published by the Clarín Group, is not aligned with the government. The Fernández de Kirchner government launched an illegal campaign against Clarín Group, which included over 450 legal and administrative acts of harassment, as reported by the Global Editors Network. One of those actions was a selective use of state advertising, to benefit the media aligned with the government. The government tried to enforce a controversial media law that would see Clarín Group lose licenses and be forced to sell most of its assets. The law was initially sanctioned as a competition law for the media, but critics pointed out that it was only being used to further the campaign against Clarín Group. The government had little interest in enforcing measures of the law that were not related to Clarín Group. Clarín Group launched a constitutional challenge against some articles of the law with the judiciary. The government released an anti-Clarín advertisement claiming it refused to obey the law and may be subverting democracy. The conflict led to disputes with the judiciary. Minister Julio Alak said that extending an injunction that allowed Clarín Group to keep its assets during the trial would be an insurrection, and it was rumored that judges who did not rule as the government wished might face impeachment. The court extended the injunction. She claims that journalistic objectivity does not exist, and that all journalists act on behalf of certain interests. She also justified the lack of press conferences, arguing that it is not important for her administration. Anthony Mills, deputy director of the International Press Institute, compared the harassment against the press in Argentina with cases in Venezuela and Ecuador. He considered it unfortunate that the president disparaged journalism, and pointed that the freedom of the press may be declining in Argentina. The 2009 midterm elections took place a year after the crisis with the farmers. The Kirchners were highly unpopular at the time, and people rejected their policies and governing style. The growing rates of inflation and crime also eroded their public support. Seeking to reverse their declining popularity, Néstor Kirchner led the list for deputy candidates at the Buenos Aires province. He was narrowly defeated by Francisco de Narváez, who led a Peronist faction opposed to the Kirchners. The Kirchners lost the majority of Congress as a result of the election. The Front for Victory recovered the majority in both chambers of the Congress during the 2011 presidential elections, when she was re-elected for a second term. The party had projects to amend the constitution and allow indefinite reelections, but lacked the supermajority required for it. A victory at the 2013 midterm elections would have given such majority, but the party was defeated in most provinces. Sergio Massa, a former cabinet minister of the Kirchners, won in the Buenos Aires Province by nearly 10 points with his new party, the Renewal Front. Argentina lacked a big opposition party since the collapse of the Radical Civic Union in 2001. Instead, Massa created an alternative party that also stood for Peronism. However, the party still retained a simple majority in Congress. This election was the first one where teenagers from 16 to 18 could vote. President Fernández de Kirchner, who had undergone brain surgery some weeks before, was hospitalized during the election and unable to join the campaign. Fernández de Kirchner was part of the "pink tide", a group of populist, left-wing presidents who ruled several Latin American countries in the 2000s. This group included, among others, Néstor and Cristina Kirchner in Argentina, Hugo Chávez and Nicolás Maduro in Venezuela, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva and Dilma Rousseff in Brazil, Evo Morales in Bolivia and Rafael Correa in Ecuador. She has been an unconditional supporter of Chávez and Maduro. As Paraguay rejected the incorporation of Venezuela into the Mercosur trade bloc, she took advantage of the impeachment of Fernando Lugo to claim that Paraguay had suffered a coup d'état and proposed to temporarily remove the country from the bloc. With the support of the other presidents, Paraguay was removed for a time, and Venezuela was incorporated into the Mercosur. She maintained her support of Venezuela even during the large 2014 Venezuela protests and the imprisonment of its leader, Leopoldo López. She had a rocky relationship with the United States. Several items from a US Air Force plane, such as drugs and GPS devices, were seized by Argentine officials, which caused a diplomatic crisis. US State Department spokesman Philip J. Crowley said that they were standard tools used in counter-terrorism tactics which were being taught to the Argentine police during the joint operation, and asked for the return of the seized materials. She blamed the whole country for the 2014 default, ruled by US judge Thomas P. Griesa. She said in a cadena nacional ("national network") address that the US may be trying to oust her from power, or even assassinate her. She said this a few days after accusing the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant of similar assassination plans against her. The idea was rejected by opposition leader Elisa Carrió as a mere conspiracy theory. The 30th anniversary of the Falklands War was in 2012, and Fernández de Kirchner was increasingly critical of the UK, reiterating the Argentine claims in the Falkland Islands sovereignty dispute. British Prime minister David Cameron rejected her comments. Relations were also strained by recent oil explorations in the area, and she threatened to sue Rockhopper Exploration for it. When Archbishop Jorge Bergoglio was elected as Pope Francis, the initial reactions were mixed. Most of Argentine society cheered it, but the pro-government newspaper Página/12 published renewed allegations about the Dirty War, and the president of the National Library described a global conspiracy theory. The president took more than an hour to congratulate him, and only did so in a passing reference within a routine speech. However, due to the Pope's popularity in Argentina, Fernández de Kirchner made what the political analyst Claudio Fantini called a "Copernican shift" in her relations with him and fully embraced the Francis phenomenon. On the day before his inauguration as pope, Bergoglio, now Francis, had a private meeting with Fernández de Kirchner. They exchanged gifts and lunched together. This was the new pope's first meeting with a head of state, and there was speculation that the two were mending their relations. Página/12 removed their controversial articles about Bergoglio, written by Horacio Verbitsky, from their web page, as a result of this change. Argentina suffered a terrorist attack in 1994, the AMIA bombing targeting a Buenos Aires Jewish center, that killed 85 people and wounded 300. The investigation remained open for years, and prosecutor Alberto Nisman was appointed to the case. He accused Iran of organizing the attack, and the Hezbollah group of carrying it out. He intended to prosecute five Iranian officials, including former Iranian president Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani, but Argentina signed a memorandum of understanding with Iran for a joint investigation. Nisman accused the president of signing that memorandum for oil and trade benefits, according to hundreds of hours of wiretaps. On 19 January 2015, he was found dead at his home, a day before a congressional hearing to explain his accusation, which caused a great controversy. As of 2016, both the cases of the AMIA bombing and the death of Nisman remain unresolved, and the courts declined at the time to investigate his denunciation of Fernández de Kirchner. Fernández de Kirchner maintained her positions during several speeches at the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA) during its yearly meetings of September and had a rocky relationship with Iranian President Ahmadinejad. In 2009, Fernández de Kirchner personally asked Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad to cooperate with the Argentine justice to help bring closure to the AMIA bombing. She pointed the belief of both mandataries in God and condemned Ahmadinejad's denial of the Holocaust as well as other "Western tragedies" In the September 2009 UNGA, she clashed with Ahmadinejad and ordered the Argentine delegation to walk out on Ahmadinejad's speech, denouncing his rhetoric. In return, Iran responded that Argentina's accusations were "unfounded and irresponsible" and denounced the "inept Argentine judicial system and its vulnerabiities to internal and foreign pressures." Mauricio Macri, mayor of Buenos Aires, was elected president in the 2015 presidential elections, defeating the Kirchnerist candidate Daniel Scioli in a ballotage. During the transition period, Macri reported that Fernández de Kirchner was creating obstacles and problems in an attempt to undermine his government. She changed the 2016 budget, increasing spending in several areas (even the broadcasting of soccer matches), despite the huge fiscal deficit. A number of Kirchnerist officials refused to resign their offices to allow Macri to appoint his own people. Even the handover ceremony became controversial, as she refused to attend it. It was the first time since the end of military rule in 1983 that the outgoing president did not hand over power to the incoming one. In 2016, she founded a think tank under the name of Patria Institute, intended to centralize her post-presidency activities. She also wrote a book called Sinceramente, which was published in 2019. Both Fernández de Kirchner and her former interior minister Florencio Randazzo wanted to run for senator for the Buenos Aires Province at the 2017 midterm elections. Refusing to run in primary elections, she asked for a shared ticket as a condition to run for senator. Randazzo did not accept the proposal. As both candidates enlisted to run in the general election, the FPV broke apart with the Justicialist Party of Buenos Aires Province backing Randazzo and the rest of the FPV parties backing Fernández de Kirchner; the remaining parties formed the Citizen's Unity (Unidad Ciudadana) coalition. Esteban Bullrich was the candidate of Cambiemos. Fernández de Kirchner won the mandatory primary elections by a slim margin of 0,08%, but lost in the general election 36% to 42%. However, she still took office according to Argentine Senate election procedure where the balloting results in two of the three senate seats being claimed by the party winning the largest vote share, with the second-place finisher claiming the third senate seat. On 27 October 2019, Cristina Fernández de Kirchner was elected vice president, making her the first former head of state to assume the Argentine vice presidency. She was the running mate of Alberto Fernández (no relation), who was elected president. She resigned from the Senate on 27 November 2019 after assuming the vice presidency, and was replaced by her former foreign minister Jorge Taiana. Cristina Fernández de Kirchner faced several charges in court after leaving office. One of those concerned the sale of dollar futures at very low prices near the end of her term of office. This became a problem during Macri's presidency. The operation was carried out by the Central Bank, but judge Claudio Bonadio believes Fernández de Kirchner is the instigator. She is also being investigated for her role in "The Route of the K-Money" scandal. About US$1 million of her assets was frozen while Bonadio investigated the case. She took advantage of the hearing to organize her first political rally since leaving power. Lázaro Báez who has close ties with the Kirchners was detained in April 2016 as it was suspected that he might flee escape. José López, an official from the ministry of public works, was detained while trying to hide bags filled with millions in cash at a monastery. On 27 December 2016, Federal Judge Julián Ercolini ordered the freezing of US$633 million of Fernández de Kirchner's assets and approved charges of illicit association and fraudulent administration against her. The case presented by Nisman was finally opened for investigation in December 2016. In December 2017, Judge Bonadio indicted her and charged her with high treason. However, as a sitting senator, she enjoyed immunity from prosecution. On 5 March 2018, Fernández de Kirchner was indicted for obstructing investigation into the 1994 AMIA Bombing which killed 85 people, with her allegedly making a deal with the Iranian government to stop investigating Iranian officials who may have been involved in the attack in exchange for better prices on Iranian oil and other products. She can still face trial despite her immunity, while legislators also have the choice to strip her of immunity. Human Rights Watch claims, based mainly on reports and testimonies made by the ex-secretary-general of Interpol Ronald Noble, that these charges have no grounds. Noble refuted the claim of cover-up made by judge Bonadio, calling the judge's report "false, misleading and incomplete". In April 2021, Fernández de Kirchner's lawyers anticipated that they will ask for the cause against her regarding the memorandum of understanding between Argentina and Iran to be nullified, alleging that it was tampered by the visits of two different judges to former President Mauricio Macri, which coincided with the time of indictments on the cause against her.[clarification needed] On 6 December 2022, the Court of First Instance found Fernández de Kirchner guilty of "fraudulent administration" over the awarding of a public works contract to a friend, businessman Lázaro Báez. The court sentenced Fernández de Kirchner to six years in prison and a lifetime ban from holding public office for corruption. She had temporary immunity and was able to remain free due to her role as a vice president, and can appeal the verdict. She denied the allegations against her and confirmed that she will not run for reelection in 2023. Cristina Kirchner is considered to be a populist leader. She had been accused of building a system of propaganda, referred to by critics as the Relato K. Axel Kaiser, a follower of the Austrian School, claims that this propaganda glorifies the state to the detriment of individual rights, uses conspiracy theories to explain the government's mistakes, blames neoliberalism for poverty, and glorifies democracy while only maintaining the appearance of it, justifies economic interventionism by describing economic activity as a zero-sum game (where any wealth is the result of exploitation), and blames class conflict and imperialism for problems such as inflation. To Kaiser, this system divides the political world into two halves: the people and those against the people, with the Kirchners described as the saviors of the people, interpreting their collective will beyond the boundaries of parliaments and parties. This division is used to justify the rejection of those described as being against the people, and to polarize the population. He claims that Fernández de Kirchner's election in 2011 was used to justify authoritarian policies in the name of the general will, criticism being described as antidemocratic or as the plotting of a coup. According to Richard Bourke, political theorist and Kirchner supporter Ernesto Laclau considered this the perfect form of democracy, a vision of that has been criticized by other writers as leaving little room for opposition, reducing the citizen to a spectator unable to contest government policies. In 1973, during her studies at the National University of La Plata, she met her future spouse, Néstor Kirchner. They were married on 9 May 1975 and had two children: Máximo (born 1977, currently serving as National Deputy for Buenos Aires Province and the leader for Frente de Todos in the chamber) and Florencia (born 1990). Néstor Kirchner died on 27 October 2010 after suffering a heart attack. Following the death of her husband, she dressed in black for over three years. Fernández de Kirchner's health first became a topic of public concern in 2005 when Noticias magazine reported that she might suffer from bipolar disorder. Journalist Franco Lindner interviewed the psychiatrist who treated her without revealing his name. Journalist Nelson Castro investigated further and discovered that the psychiatrist was Alejandro Lagomarsino, who died in 2011. Lagomarsino was the leading specialist in the treatment of bipolar disorder in Argentina. Castro's investigation revealed that Fernández de Kirchner was treated by Lagomarsino for a short period. He could not determine the length of her treatment or the medicine she received, or whether another psychiatrist continued treating her or not. Castro considers that some of her outlandish phrases or projects, and her frequent periods of hiding from public view, may be explained by the disorder's periods of mania and depression, as well as being a regular political strategy. Eduardo Duhalde said that Néstor Kirchner once confided in him that she had a bipolar disorder, while she was having a violent outburst. During the United States diplomatic cables leak it was revealed that Hillary Clinton questioned Fernández de Kirchner's mental health and asked the US embassy whether she was receiving treatment or not; she later apologized to Fernández de Kirchner for those leaks. She said in her book La Presidenta that it was all a misunderstanding; it is her sister who suffers from bipolar disorder. On 27 December 2011, presidential spokesman Alfredo Scoccimaro announced that Fernández de Kirchner had been diagnosed with thyroid cancer on 22 December and that she would undergo surgery on 4 January 2012. The standard procedure in these operations is to expose the thyroid gland so that a pathologist can take a sample, analyze it looking for carcinogenic cells, and then decide whether it needs to be removed. In her case, this step was omitted and the gland was removed directly. After the operation, it was revealed that she had been misdiagnosed and did not have cancer. On 5 October 2013, doctors ordered Fernández de Kirchner to rest for a month after they found blood on her brain caused by a head injury she received on 8 August 2012. She was re-admitted to hospital and had successful surgery on 8 October 2013 to remove blood from under a membrane covering her brain. On 4 November 2021, Fernández de Kirchner was admitted at the Santorio Otamendi after doctors found out that she had a uterine polyp and had to undergo hysterectomy. On 6 November 2021, she was later discharged after a successful surgery. On 1 September 2022, a man attempted to assassinate Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, Vice President of Argentina. The assailant approached Fernández de Kirchner as she met with supporters outside of her official residence in Recoleta, Buenos Aires, and attempted to shoot her in the head with a semi-automatic pistol. The pistol failed to fire, and the suspect was immediately arrested on scene. Police arrested Fernando André Sabag Montiel, a 35-year-old man who was born in Brazil and has lived in Argentina since 1993. He is in detention awaiting trial for attempted homicide. Fernández legally added "de Kirchner" to her name after her marriage to Néstor Kirchner in 1975.[citation needed] Presented on an electoral list. The data shown represents the share of the vote the entire party/alliance received in that constituency.  Brazil: Grand Cross with Collar of the Order of the Southern Cross. (2015)  Ecuador: Manuela Sánchez Award from the National Assembly of Ecuador.  Palestine: Star of Palestine. (12 August 2015)  Peru: Grand Cross with Diamonds of the Order of the Sun of Peru. (22 March 2010)  Spain: Knight Grand Cross with Collar of the Order of Isabella the Catholic. (11 February 2009) Honorary Doctorate from the National University of La Plata. Honorary Doctorate from the National University of Quilmes. She is variously known as Cristina Fernández, Cristina K, or Cristina. "CFK back at Olivos presidential residency after CELAC summit". Buenos Aires Herald. 29 January 2014. Archived from the original on 2 February 2014. "CFK to Harvard students: there is no 'dollar clamp'; don't repeat monochord questions". MercoPress. 28 September 2012. Archived from the original on 2 February 2014. "Profile: Cristina Fernandez de Kirchner". BBC News. 8 October 2013. Archived from the original on 29 January 2014. "Aerolineas takeover shadows Cristina K visit to Spain". MercoPress. 9 February 2009. Archived from the original on 28 June 2014. Petras & Veltmeyer 2016, p. 60. BBC News. 18 April 2006. Analysis: Latin America's new left axis. Archived 4 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine "Elecciones 2011". Argentina.gob.ar (in Spanish). 29 August 2017. Archived from the original on 19 November 2021. Retrieved 19 November 2021. Gallego-Díaz, Soledad; Rebossio, Alejandro (24 October 2011). "Histórica victoria de Cristina Fernández de Kirchner". El País (in Spanish). ISSN 1134-6582. Archived from the original on 19 November 2021. Retrieved 19 November 2021. Clarín.com (24 October 2011). "Cerca de la mayor diferencia en la historia, y con el porcentaje más alto desde 1983". Clarín (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 19 November 2021. Retrieved 19 November 2021. "Argentina elections: There may be trouble ahead". BBC News. 24 October 2015. Archived from the original on 19 November 2021. Retrieved 19 November 2021. Politi, Daniel (24 March 2017). "Argentine Ex-President Faces Trial in $3.5 Billion Fraud Case". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 12 November 2020. Retrieved 13 January 2020. "Sobreseyeron a Cristina Kirchner y Axel Kicillof en la causa "dólar futuro" | el fallo fue por unanimidad y asegura que no existió delito". 13 April 2021. Archived from the original on 28 November 2021. Retrieved 28 November 2021. Goñi, Uki (14 January 2015). "Argentinian president accused of covering up details about the country's worst terrorist attack". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 26 September 2017. Retrieved 1 February 2020. "Cristina Fernandez de Kirchner, ex-president of Argentina, faces arrest warrant". Deutsche Welle. 26 October 2017. Archived from the original on 29 July 2020. Retrieved 13 January 2020. Confalonieri, Mariano. "Por qué Bonadio acusa a Cristina Kirchner de 'traición a la patria'". Perfil. Archived from the original on 29 July 2020. Retrieved 13 January 2020. Mander, Benedict. "What's at stake as Cristina Fernández goes on trial in Argentina". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 25 November 2020. Retrieved 13 January 2020. Salinas, Lucia. "Pacto con Irán: pidieron que Cristina Kirchner vaya a juicio oral por traición a la Patria". Clarin (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 13 January 2020. Retrieved 13 January 2020. "Former Argentinian President Indicted". Reuters. 18 September 2018. Archived from the original on 9 November 2020. Retrieved 23 November 2018. "Argentina ex-President Kirchner hit with more corruption charges". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 23 November 2018. Retrieved 23 November 2018. "Buenos Aires Times | Court confirms corruption trail for Fernández de Kirchner, De Vido". www.batimes.com.ar. Archived from the original on 17 October 2020. Retrieved 15 October 2020. Cristina Kirchner was dismissed for signing the Pact with Iran: the judges decided that there was no crime. By Hernán Cappiello Archived 3 November 2021 at the Wayback Machine 10-08-2021, La Nación (in Spanish) "Argentina's Cristina Fernández guilty of corruption". BBC News. 6 December 2022. Archived from the original on 6 December 2022. Retrieved 6 December 2022. Kahn, Carrie (6 December 2022). "Argentina's vice president is found guilty of corruption". NPR. Archived from the original on 7 December 2022. Retrieved 7 December 2022. Uki Goñi (21 February 2015). "Cristina Fernández de Kirchner: is the fairytale ending for Argentina's new Evita?". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 25 July 2016. Retrieved 26 July 2016. Carlos Pagni (9 December 2015). "Cristina, la presidenta" [Cristina, the president]. La Nación (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 13 April 2013. Retrieved 26 July 2016. CRISTINA FERNANDEZ DE KRISCHNER, GENEALOGÍA. "EL PORTAL DE GALICIA PARA EL MUNDO". GALICIA DIGITAL. LUIS LOPEZ POMBO. Archived from the original on 29 June 2020. Retrieved 26 June 2020. "Cristina Fernandez challenged to show her law degree and Timerman described as a 'traitor'". Merco Press. 25 October 2014. Archived from the original on 5 August 2016. Retrieved 24 July 2016. Laura Di Marco (2 November 2014). "Cristina no es abogada: la noticia deseada de los anti-K" [Cristina is not a lawyer: the desired news of the anti-K]. La Nación (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 1 March 2016. Retrieved 17 February 2016. Hernán Cappiello (7 June 2016). "Bonadio sobreseyó a Cristina Kirchner por su título de abogada" [Bonadio acquitted Cristina Kirchner over her lawyer degree]. La Nación (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 13 August 2016. Retrieved 29 July 2016. Mariela Arias (28 September 2012). "Cómo fueron los "exitosos años" de Cristina Kirchner como abogada en Santa Cruz" [How were the "successful years" of Cristina Kirchner in Santa Cruz]. La Nación (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 9 November 2013. Retrieved 27 August 2013. Majul, p. 22 Majul, p. 20 "Los Kirchner no firmaron nunca un hábeas corpus" [The Kirchner never signed any habeas corpus]. La Nación (in Spanish). 13 December 2014. Archived from the original on 2 June 2016. Retrieved 3 May 2016. Lucía Salinas. "La historia de los días en que la Presidenta fue gobernadora" [The history of the days when the president was governor]. Clarín (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 12 October 2016. Retrieved 14 September 2016. Andrés Gil Domínguez (23 June 2012). "Constituyentes desmemoriados de aquel 1994" [Forgetful constituent assembly members of that 1994]. Clarín (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 4 February 2018. Retrieved 16 June 2017. Maia Jastreblansky (5 September 2011). "Cristina legisladora: 10 recuerdos de una opositora mediática y rebelde" [Cristina, legislator: 10 scenes of a noteworthy and rebellious opposition]. La Nación (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 31 July 2016. Retrieved 16 August 2016. Carlos M. Reymundo Roberts (9 May 1996). "Impidió el Gobierno la interpelación a Camilión" [The government prevented the interpellation of Camilion]. La Nación (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 31 December 2016. Retrieved 25 August 2016. "Fracasó la negociación entre Kirchner y Duhalde" [The negotiations between Kirchner and Duhalde failed]. La Nación (in Spanish). 1 July 2005. Archived from the original on 1 June 2016. Retrieved 3 May 2016. Ramón Indart (25 December 2009). "El PJ bonaerense se resquebraja por la pelea Duhalde – Kirchner" [The PJ in Buenos Aires gets fragmented by the Duhalde – Kirchner conflict] (in Spanish). Perfil. Archived from the original on 25 June 2016. Retrieved 3 May 2016. Attewill, Fred (29 October 2007). "Argentina elects first woman president". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 14 July 2014. Retrieved 1 July 2014. Goni, Uki (29 October 2007). "A Mixed Message in Argentina's Vote". Time. Buenos Aires. Archived from the original on 26 January 2013. Retrieved 22 January 2013. "New Argentine cabinet targeted to face pending agenda". Merco Press. 24 November 2007. Archived from the original on 7 November 2014. Retrieved 7 November 2014. Daniel Schweimler (18 June 2008). "Argentina's farm row turns to crisis". BBC. Archived from the original on 15 April 2016. Retrieved 12 June 2016. Barrionuevo, Alexei (27 October 2010). "Argentine Ex-Leader Dies; Political Impact Is Murky". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 31 December 2016. Retrieved 12 June 2016. Kevin Gray (7 December 2007). "Argentina's Kirchner to become "first gentleman"". Reuters. Archived from the original on 8 August 2016. Retrieved 12 June 2016. "Argentina ex-leader Kirchner to be buried". BBC. 29 October 2010. Archived from the original on 27 August 2016. Retrieved 12 June 2016. Barrionuevo, Alexei (23 October 2011). "Kirchner Achieves an Easy Victory in Argentina Presidential Election". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 22 October 2015. Retrieved 19 August 2015. Wiñazki, Nicolás (22 May 2011). "La Cámpora avanza en las listas del oficialismo de todo el país" [The Campora advances in the official tickets in all the country]. Clarín (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 4 February 2018. Retrieved 16 June 2017. Aires, Associated Press in Buenos (24 October 2011). "Cristina Kirchner re-elected as Argentina's president in landslide". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 12 November 2020. Retrieved 28 February 2018. "A one-woman show". The Economist. 24 October 2011. Archived from the original on 23 September 2015. Retrieved 19 August 2015. "BBC NEWS | Business | Argentina's economy chief quits". BBC News. 25 April 2008. Archived from the original on 30 December 2008. Barrionuevo, Alexei (21 October 2008). "Argentina Nationalizes $30 Billion in Private Pensions". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 31 December 2016. Retrieved 19 September 2016. Uki Goni (28 August 2011). "Amado Boudou set to be Argentina's first rock'n'roll vice-president". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 28 September 2016. Retrieved 20 September 2016. Matt Moffett (8 January 2010). "Kirchner Fires Central Banker, Steering Into Crisis". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 27 September 2016. Retrieved 20 September 2016. Barrionuevo, Alexei (3 February 2010). "Argentine Bank President Is Formally Dismissed". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 31 December 2016. Retrieved 20 September 2016. Lopreite, Debora. "Gender Policies in Argentina after Neoliberalism, Opportunities and Obstacles for Women's Rights". Latin American Perspectives. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.859.191. Valente, Marcela (27 May 2013). "Poverty Down in Argentina – But By How Much?". Inter Press Service. Archived from the original on 20 June 2017. Retrieved 16 July 2017. Jueguen, Francisco (7 June 2017). "Según Unicef, hay 5,6 millones de chicos pobres en la Argentina". La Nacion. Archived from the original on 24 June 2017. Retrieved 16 July 2017. "El kirchnerismo recupera el control del Congreso". La Nación. 24 October 2012. Archived from the original on 16 January 2013. Retrieved 16 November 2012. "Argentina tightens dollar exchange controls". BBC. 1 November 2011. Archived from the original on 27 September 2016. Retrieved 20 September 2016. Cristina apela a la sintonía fina para disimular el ajuste Archived 17 January 2013 at the Wayback Machine (in Spanish) Fraga, Rosendo (15 December 2011). "El contrapunto Cristina-Moyano". La Nación. Archived from the original on 8 January 2012. Retrieved 16 November 2012. "Moyano llenó la Plaza contra la "soberbia abrumadora" de CFK" [Moyano filled the plaza against the "overwhelming arrogance" of CFK] (in Spanish). Perfil. 27 June 2012. Archived from the original on 31 May 2015. Retrieved 22 August 2012. Ken Parks (29 May 2014). "Argentina Agrees to Pay $9.7 Billion to Paris Club". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 26 September 2016. Retrieved 20 September 2016. Angela Monaghan (31 July 2014). "Argentina's government blames 'conspiracy' for defaulting on debt". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 28 September 2016. Retrieved 20 September 2016. "Saying Argentina has defaulted is 'an atomic nonsense' underlines Kicillof". Merco Press. 1 August 2014. Archived from the original on 27 September 2016. Retrieved 20 September 2016. Staff writers. "Leaders from Latin America, Caribbean region urge action to erase inequality, spur development". UN news center. Archived from the original on 2 October 2014. Retrieved 15 October 2014. "Cristina characterized the vulture funds as "terrorists" and accused them of destabilization". Fact Check: Argentina. 25 September 2014. Archived from the original on 13 October 2014. Retrieved 14 October 2014. "The persistence of Peronism". The Economist. 15 October 2015. Archived from the original on 18 July 2019. Retrieved 2 September 2022. Jude Webber (14 July 2011). "Argentina restricts foreign trade". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 23 September 2016. Retrieved 22 September 2016. Matt Moffett (6 January 2012). "Era of Argentine Subsidies Ending". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 23 September 2016. Retrieved 22 September 2016. Hugh Bronstein (4 May 2012). "Argentina nationalizes oil company YPF". Reuters. Archived from the original on 22 October 2016. Retrieved 22 September 2016. Taos Turner (16 July 2013). "Chevron, YPF Sign $1.5 Billion Shale-Oil Deal". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 24 September 2016. Retrieved 23 September 2016. "Blackouts continue in Argentina while government keeps threatening power distributors". Merco Press. 27 December 2013. Archived from the original on 23 September 2016. Retrieved 22 September 2016. Andrew Willis (1 July 2008). "Argentine farmers take tax battle to parliament". The Irish Times. Archived from the original on 5 October 2016. Retrieved 23 September 2016. Barrionuevo, Alexei (18 July 2008). "Argentina Blocks Farm Export Tax". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 19 February 2018. Retrieved 23 September 2016. Oliver Balch (25 May 2008). "Argentina turns against new president as strike worsens". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 31 December 2016. Retrieved 23 September 2016. Rosalba O'Brien (10 December 2011). "Argentine leader vows to fine-tune model in second term". Reuters. Archived from the original on 31 December 2016. Retrieved 26 September 2016. "Thousands across Argentina take to the streets to protest against re-re-election". Merco Press. 14 September 2012. Archived from the original on 1 October 2016. Retrieved 27 September 2016. "Argentinians protest against their government, corruption and crime". The Guardian. 9 November 2012. Archived from the original on 31 December 2016. Retrieved 27 September 2016. Uki Goñi (9 November 2012). "Argentina protests: up to half a million rally against Fernández de Kirchner". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 16 September 2016. Retrieved 27 September 2016. Uki Goñi (6 September 2012). "Fernández de Kirchner reforms spark Argentina protests". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 31 December 2016. Retrieved 27 September 2016. Gilbert, Jonathan (3 April 2013). "Dozens of Argentines Die in Flash Flooding". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 9 April 2013. Retrieved 12 May 2013. Mary Anastasia O'Grady (28 April 2013). "Kirchner Targets Argentina's Judiciary". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 23 February 2015. Retrieved 8 September 2014. "Allegations of a network of corruption money involves former president Kirchner". Merco Press. 15 May 2013. Archived from the original on 7 April 2014. Retrieved 27 March 2014. Taos Turner; Ken Parks (18 April 2013). "Thousands March in Argentina to Protest Kirchner's Judicial Plan". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 23 February 2015. Retrieved 1 September 2014. "New Argentina probe says prosecutor Nisman was murdered". ABC. Associated Press. 6 November 2017. Archived from the original on 7 November 2017. Retrieved 5 February 2018. Uki Goñi (18 February 2015). "Buenos Aires marches to honour deceased prosecutor Alberto Nisman". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 18 February 2015. Retrieved 19 February 2015. Barrionuevo, Alexei; Aires, CARMEN GENTILE; Alexei Barrionuevo reported from Buenos; Miami, Carmen Gentile from (4 November 2008). "Venezuelan Convicted in U.S. Spy Trial Over Suitcase That Rattled South America". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018. Retrieved 28 February 2018.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Barrionuevo, Alexei (8 December 2008). "Venezuelan Given 15 Months in Suitcase of Cash Scandal". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 31 December 2016. Retrieved 27 September 2016. Joel Keep (5 September 2014). "Argentine drug probe zeroes in on Presidential Palace". The Miami Herald. Archived from the original on 2 October 2016. Retrieved 27 September 2016. Uki Goñi (7 August 2015). "Murder and drug trafficking allegations cast pall over Argentina primary election". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 25 July 2016. Retrieved 27 September 2016. Benedict Mander (25 January 2016). "Mauricio Macri steps up fight against Argentina drug traffickers". Financial Times. Archived from the original on 2 October 2016. Retrieved 27 September 2016. Alexander, Harriet (10 December 2015). "Argentina elections: Highs and lows of 12 years of the Kirchners". The Daily Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Archived from the original on 11 October 2016. Retrieved 28 February 2018. "Argentine Vice-President Boudou charged in corruption case". BBC. 28 June 2014. Archived from the original on 24 August 2016. Retrieved 29 September 2016. Taos Turner (28 July 2014). "In Argentina, Mix of Money and Politics Stirs Intrigue Around Kirchner". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 22 October 2016. Retrieved 28 September 2016. Taos Turner (27 November 2014). "Argentine Probe Sparks Dispute Between Government, Judiciary". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 18 August 2016. Retrieved 28 September 2016. "Suspenden proceso contra Cristina Kirchner, acusada de lavado de dinero en Argentina". El Universal (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 7 June 2023. Retrieved 7 June 2023. Página|12 (5 June 2023). "Cristina Kirchner fue sobreseída en la causa de la "ruta del dinero" | Un freno al lawfare". PAGINA12 (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 7 June 2023. Retrieved 7 June 2023.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) Alexander, Harriet (10 December 2015). "Argentina elections: Highs and lows of 12 years of the Kirchners". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 11 October 2016. Retrieved 6 October 2016. "Argentina's former dictator Jorge Videla given life sentence". The Guardian. 23 December 2010. Archived from the original on 12 October 2016. Retrieved 11 October 2016. Carroll, Rory (30 December 2009). "Argentina's authorities order DNA tests in search for stolen babies of dirty war". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 10 October 2016. Retrieved 6 October 2016. Hernán Cappiello (4 January 2016). "La jueza Sandra Arroyo Salgado sobreseyó a Ernestina Herrera de Noble en la causa por apropiación de niños durante la dictadura" [Judge Arroyo Salgado declared Ernestina Herrera de Noble innocent in the case of baby theft during the dictatorship]. La Nación (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 31 December 2016. Retrieved 6 October 2016. Uki Goni (23 September 2011). "Child of Argentina's 'disappeared' fights for right to keep adoptive name". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 12 October 2016. Retrieved 11 October 2016. Mary Anastasia O'Grady (13 October 2013). "Kirchner Moves Against Argentina's Free Press". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 26 December 2015. Retrieved 1 September 2014. (subscription required) Greenslade, Roy (10 October 2012). "Global editors group raises alarm over Argentina press freedom threat". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 1 September 2014. Politi, Daniel (14 December 2012). "Kirchner Stumbles Again". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 1 September 2014. Griffen, Scott (27 September 2012). "IPI condemns Argentine government's attacks on Grupo Clarín". International Press Institute. Archived from the original on 10 March 2016. Retrieved 1 September 2014. Carroll, Rory (30 June 2009). "Argentina's Kirchners lose political ground in mid-term elections". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 17 August 2016. Retrieved 12 October 2016. Parks, Ben (29 June 2013). "Argentine President Stumps for Congressional Candidates". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 25 December 2015. Retrieved 19 August 2015. Jonathan Watts and Uki Goñi (27 October 2013). "Cristina Fernández's party loses ground to former ally in Argentina's election". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 13 October 2016. Retrieved 12 October 2016. "Profile: Cristina Fernandez de Kirchner". BBC News. 8 October 2013. Archived from the original on 26 April 2018. Retrieved 28 February 2018. Nick Caistor (11 December 2015). "Latin America: The 'pink tide' turns". BBC. Archived from the original on 27 August 2016. Retrieved 13 October 2016. "Mercosur suspends Paraguay over Lugo impeachment". BBC. 29 June 2012. Archived from the original on 14 October 2016. Retrieved 13 October 2016. Juan Forero (23 November 2015). "A Populist 'Pink Tide' Is Ebbing in South America, Argentine Vote Suggests". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 31 December 2016. Retrieved 13 October 2016. Gallego-Diaz, S. (16 February 2011). "Argentina accuses US of trying to sneak in illegal drugs and arms". El País. Archived from the original on 31 December 2016. Retrieved 13 October 2016. Uki Goñi (1 October 2014). "Argentina president claims US plotting to oust her". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 14 October 2016. Retrieved 13 October 2016. Uki Goñi (2 April 2012). "Argentinian president attacks UK refusal to negotiate on Falklands". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 19 October 2016. Retrieved 14 October 2016. Hélène Mulholland (14 June 2012). "Falklands anniversary: David Cameron defiant over Argentinian 'threats'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 19 October 2016. Retrieved 14 October 2016. Andrew Critchlow (28 May 2015). "New Falklands oil discovery could stir trouble with Argentina". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 18 October 2016. Retrieved 14 October 2016. Associated Press in Buenos Aires (27 March 2013). "Cristina Fernández de Kirchner turns Pope Francis from foe to friend". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 17 March 2014. Retrieved 15 March 2014. "Pope's diplomacy put to test as leaders flock to Rome". CP24. Associated Press. 18 March 2013. Archived from the original on 20 June 2015. Retrieved 15 May 2015. Gilbert, Jonathan (18 March 2013). "Making nice? Argentina's Kirchner and Pope Francis meet in Rome". The Christian Science Monitor. Archived from the original on 25 March 2013. Retrieved 26 March 2013. Daniel García (19 November 2014). "La nota completa que Página/12 intento borrar" [The complete article that Página 12 attempted to delete] (in Spanish). Todo Noticias. Archived from the original on 18 April 2017. Retrieved 16 April 2017. "One year on, Nisman death still roils Argentina's Jews". The Times of Israel. 18 January 2016. Archived from the original on 31 December 2016. Retrieved 13 October 2016. Vittori, Gustavo J. (9 March 2015). "¿Con cuál Cristina me quedo?" [Which Cristina do I prefer?]. El Litoral (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 3 May 2021. Retrieved 3 May 2021. Rosales, Jorge (24 September 2009). "El viaje presidencial / Reuniones en las Naciones Unidas. Cristina Kirchner denunció a Irán en su discurso ante la ONU" [The presidential trip / Meetings at the United Nations. Cristina Kirchner denounced Iran in her speech to the UN]. La Nación (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 3 May 2021. Retrieved 3 May 2021. "Irán responde con fuerza a Argentina por atentado contra la AMIA" [Iran responds strongly to Argentina for attack against AMIA]. La Tercera (in Spanish). 3 October 2009. Archived from the original on 3 May 2021. Retrieved 3 May 2021. Alexander, Harriet (7 December 2015). "Cristina Kirchner 'creating as many problems as possible for the new government'". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 1 May 2017. Retrieved 14 October 2016. Alexander, Harriet (9 December 2015). "Cristina Kirchner refuses to attend Mauricio Macri's inauguration". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 11 November 2016. Retrieved 14 October 2016. "Cristina lanzó el Instituto Patria pero desde las redes sociales". Clarín (in Spanish). 13 April 2016. Archived from the original on 7 December 2022. Retrieved 7 December 2022. "El furor por el libro de Cristina Kirchner llegó a Tucumán". el tucumano (in Spanish). 28 April 2019. Archived from the original on 7 December 2022. Retrieved 7 December 2022. "Argentina: A New Political Party Further Divides the Opposition". Stratfor. 15 June 2017. Archived from the original on 8 September 2017. Retrieved 16 June 2017. Nicolás Misculin (13 September 2017). "Macri ally gains ground in Argentina Senate election against Fernandez". Reuters. Archived from the original on 23 December 2017. Retrieved 22 December 2017. Charlie Devereux (22 October 2017). "Argentina's Macri Wins Big Endorsement in Midterm Elections". Bloomberg L.P. Archived from the original on 23 December 2017. Retrieved 22 December 2017. "Argentine Congress welcomes 24 new senators this Wednesday". Prensa Latina. 27 November 2019. Archived from the original on 29 July 2020. Retrieved 27 November 2019. "NÚMERO DE EXPEDIENTE 3320/19" (in Spanish). Senado de Argentina. 27 November 2019. Archived from the original on 28 November 2019. Retrieved 28 November 2019. Staff, Our Foreign (14 May 2016). "Former Argentinian President Cristina Kirchner indicted over currency trade that lost billions". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 18 October 2016. Retrieved 14 October 2016. "Kirchnerite businessman arrested; faces charges of money laundering and fiscal fraud". Merco Press. 6 April 2016. Archived from the original on 18 October 2016. Retrieved 14 October 2016. "Argentina ex-minister arrested over cash bags at monastery". BBC. 15 June 2016. Archived from the original on 19 October 2016. Retrieved 14 October 2016. "Argentina ex-leader Cristina Fernandez charged in corruption case". BBC News. London. 27 December 2016. Archived from the original on 27 December 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2016. Ryan Dube (29 December 2016). "Argentina Reopens Probe of Kirchner Related to 1994 Bombing". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on 30 December 2016. Retrieved 31 December 2016. Max Radwin and Anthony Faiola (7 December 2017). "Argentine ex-president Cristina Fernández de Kirchner charged with treason". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 29 December 2017. Retrieved 22 December 2017. "Argentina ex-leader on trial for alleged cover-up in bombing". ABC News. Archived from the original on 7 March 2018. Retrieved 7 March 2018. "Argentina: Far-Fetched 'Treason' Charges Against Ex-Officials". Human Rights Watch. 19 December 2017. Archived from the original on 9 November 2020. Retrieved 10 November 2020. Kollmann, Raúl (26 June 2020). "Interpol enterró el corazón de la causa por el Memorándum con Irán: punto final a la historia de las alertas rojas Nuevo informe que demuestra que CFK y Timerman nunca intentaron beneficiar a los iraníes". PAGINA12. Archived from the original on 31 October 2020. Retrieved 10 November 2020. Politi, Daniel (15 December 2017). "Former Interpol Chief Says Argentina Bungled Investigation of '94 Attack (Published 2017)". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 9 November 2020. Retrieved 10 November 2020. "Visitas de jueces a Olivos: el abogado de Cristina Kirchner anunció que pedirá la nulidad del caso del memorándum" [Visits of judges to Olivos: Cristina Kirchner's lawyer announced that he will request the annulment of the memorandum case]. La Nación. 5 April 2021. Archived from the original on 5 April 2021. Retrieved 5 April 2021. "Fernández de Kirchner: Argentina vice-president found guilty of corruption". BBC News. 6 December 2022. Archived from the original on 6 December 2022. Retrieved 8 December 2022. "Court sentences Vice-President Cristina Fernández de Kirchner to six years in prison for corruption". batimes.com.ar. 7 December 2022. Archived from the original on 7 December 2022. Retrieved 7 December 2022. Delfino, Sahar Akbarzai,Emilia (7 December 2022). "Argentina's Cristina Fernández de Kirchner sentenced to six years in prison for corruption". CNN. Archived from the original on 8 December 2022. Retrieved 8 December 2022.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Molina, Federico Rivas (7 December 2022). "Cristina Fernández de Kirchner redraws political map of Argentina after being handed six-year jail term for corruption". EL PAÍS English Edition. Archived from the original on 10 December 2022. Retrieved 10 December 2022. Kaiser, p. 17 Robert Muggah (23 October 2017). "Is Populism Making a Comeback in Latin America?". Foreign Policy. Archived from the original on 22 November 2020. Retrieved 27 November 2020. Rafael Di Tella; Sebastian Galiani; Ernesto Schargrodsky (October 2019). "Persuasive propaganda during the 2015 Argentine ballotage" (PDF). LATIN AMERICAN AND THE CARIBBEAN ECONOMIC ASSOCIATION. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2 July 2020. Retrieved 27 November 2020. Kaiser, pp. 21–22 Kaiser, p. 31 Kaiser, p. 30 Linette Lopez (1 August 2014). "The President Of Argentina Compared Her Country's Default To Violence In Gaza". Business Insider. Archived from the original on 4 November 2016. Retrieved 2 November 2016. Kaiser, p. 22 Kaiser, p. 55 Bourke, p. 354 Bourke, p. 355 Barrionuevo, Alexei (27 October 2010). "Argentine Ex-Leader Dies; Political Impact Is Murky". The New York Times. São Paulo. Archived from the original on 1 April 2013. Retrieved 22 December 2012. "Definitivo: el paso a paso de cómo Cristina abandonó el luto" [Definitive: the step by step of how did Cristina left her widowness] (in Spanish). Todo Noticias. 26 November 2013. Archived from the original on 10 November 2014. Retrieved 31 October 2014. Castro, p. 25 Castro, p. 48 Castro, p. 29 Castro, pp. 30–36 "President Cristina Kirchner expected to resume activities Tuesday". Merco Press. 10 May 2011. Archived from the original on 18 October 2016. Retrieved 17 October 2016. Castro, p. 40 Harnden, Toby (30 November 2010). "WikiLeaks: Hillary Clinton questions the mental health of Cristina Kirchner". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 18 October 2016. Retrieved 17 October 2016. "Hillary Clinton rings Cristina Fernandez and apologizes for the cables". Merco Press. 3 December 2010. Archived from the original on 18 October 2016. Retrieved 17 October 2016. Castro, p. 39 Castro, p. 61 Bronstein, Hugh; Rizzi, Maximiliano (7 January 2012). "Argentina's Fernandez sent home, never had cancer". Reuters. Archived from the original on 15 March 2013. Retrieved 22 December 2012. Warren, Michael (5 October 2013). "Blood on brain, rest ordered for Argentine leader". Associated Press. Archived from the original on 28 June 2014. "Cristina Fernández de Kirchner to have surgery following head injury". The Guardian. 7 October 2013. Archived from the original on 25 July 2016. Retrieved 26 September 2016. "Cristina Kirchner será operada este jueves en el Otamendi: le harán una histerectomía". Todo Noticias. 3 November 2021. Archived from the original on 7 November 2021. Retrieved 23 August 2022. "Tras ser sometida a una histerectomía, Cristina Kirchner fue dada de alta". Clarín. 6 November 2021. Archived from the original on 23 August 2022. Retrieved 23 August 2022. Nicas, Jack; Alcoba, Natalie (1 September 2022). "Argentina's Vice President Unharmed After Failed Assassination Attempt". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 2 September 2022. Retrieved 2 September 2022. Goñi, Uki; Phillips, Tom; Jones, Sam (2 September 2022). "Cristina Fernández de Kirchner: arrest after attempted shooting of Argentina vice-president". The Guardian. Retrieved 2 September 2022. "Man detained after pointing handgun at Cristina Fernández de Kirchner". Buenos Aires Times. 1 September 2022. Archived from the original on 2 September 2022. Retrieved 2 September 2022. "Man detained after pointing gun at Argentine vice president". ABC News. Archived from the original on 2 September 2022. Retrieved 2 September 2022. Seifert, Daniel (1 September 2022). "Ataque a Cristina Kirchner: quién es el detenido que apuntó con un arma a la vicepresidenta". Clarín (in Spanish). Retrieved 4 September 2022. "Argentina VP unharmed after assailant threatens her with gun". finance.yahoo.com. 2 September 2022. Archived from the original on 2 September 2022. Retrieved 2 September 2022. "Ataque a Cristina Kirchner, EN VIVO: Mauricio Macri pidió un 'inmediato y profundo esclarecimiento' del hecho". Clarín (in Spanish). 1 September 2022. Archived from the original on 2 September 2022. Retrieved 2 September 2022. "Ataque a Cristina Kirchner: detuvieron a un hombre que le apuntó con un arma frente a su casa". Clarín (in Spanish). 1 September 2022. Archived from the original on 2 September 2022. Retrieved 2 September 2022. "'I pulled the trigger and it didn't fire,' says CFK's would-be assassin". www.batimes.com.ar. Buenos Aires Times. Retrieved 17 September 2023. "Elecciones 2007". argentina.gob.ar (in Spanish). Dirección Nacional Electoral. 14 February 2019. Archived from the original on 5 February 2023. Retrieved 4 February 2023. "Elecciones 2011". argentina.gob.ar (in Spanish). Dirección Nacional Electoral. 29 August 2017. Archived from the original on 19 November 2021. Retrieved 4 February 2023. "Elecciones 2019". argentina.gob.ar (in Spanish). Dirección Nacional Electoral. Retrieved 4 February 2023.[permanent dead link] "Escrutinio Definitivo" (PDF). mininterior.gov.ar (in Spanish). Subsecretaría de Asuntos Institucionales. Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 March 2018. Retrieved 4 February 2023. "Escrutinio Definitivo" (PDF). mininterior.gov.ar (in Spanish). Subsecretaría de Asuntos Institucionales. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 August 2013. Retrieved 4 February 2023. "Elecciones 1997". argentina.gob.ar (in Spanish). Dirección Nacional Electoral. 6 February 2019. Archived from the original on 5 February 2023. Retrieved 4 February 2023. "Elecciones 2001". argentina.gob.ar (in Spanish). Dirección Nacional Electoral. 7 February 2019. Archived from the original on 5 February 2023. Retrieved 4 February 2023. "Elecciones 2005". argentina.gob.ar (in Spanish). Dirección Nacional Electoral. 8 February 2019. Archived from the original on 4 February 2023. Retrieved 4 February 2023. "Elecciones 2017". argentina.gob.ar (in Spanish). Dirección Nacional Electoral. 27 September 2017. Archived from the original on 4 February 2023. Retrieved 4 February 2023. El origen gallego de C.F.K. Archived 26 November 2015 at the Wayback Machine The Galician origin of C.F.K. "Ofelia Wilhelm, la madre de Cristina, de empleada estatal a jubilada VIP". Perfil.com. 14 March 2019. Archived from the original on 25 November 2015. Cristina Kirchner dijo sentir envidia de la Furia Roja Archived 22 December 2015 at the Wayback Machine "España no es un país cualquiera: tres de mis cuatro abuelos son españoles y para todos los argentinos hay un lazo especial". Three of my grandparents are Spanish "Dilma Rousseff se emocionó al condecorar a Cristina con la "Orden del Sur de Brasil"" [Dilma Rousseff became emotional when she condecorated Cristina with the Brazilian "Order of the Southern Cross"]. Los Andes (in Spanish). 17 July 2015. Archived from the original on 31 December 2016. Retrieved 20 October 2016. "Condecoraron a Cristina Kirchner en Ecuador" [Cristina Kirchner was condecorated in Ecuador]. La Nación (in Spanish). 29 September 2016. Archived from the original on 21 October 2016. Retrieved 20 October 2016. "Cristina encabezará un acto en el que recibirá la condecoración de Palestina" [Cristina led an event where she will receive the Star of Palestine] (in Spanish). Minuto Uno. 12 August 2015. Archived from the original on 24 October 2016. Retrieved 20 October 2016. "President García awards the Order of the Sun to Argentinean head of state". Peruvian Times. 22 March 2010. Archived from the original on 31 December 2016. Retrieved 26 September 2016. Edith Pardo San Martín (11 February 2009). "Las gaffes protocolares de la gira" [The diplomatic mistakes of the tour]. La Nación (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 21 October 2016. Retrieved 20 October 2016. "Néstor Kirchner fue distinguido post mortem como Doctor "Honoris Causa"" [Néstor Kirchner was distinguished post-mortem as "Honoris Causa"] (in Spanish). Perfil. Archived from the original on 21 October 2016. Retrieved 20 October 2016. "Cristina Fernández de Kirchner recibirá el Doctorado Honoris Causa" [Cristina Fernández de Kirchner will receive the "Honoris Causa"] (in Spanish). University of Quilmes. 12 October 2016. Archived from the original on 21 October 2016. Retrieved 20 October 2016. Argentina portal Biography portal Politics portal Skard, Torild (2014). "Cristina Fernández de Kirchner". Women of Power: Half a Century of Female Presidents and Prime Ministers Worldwide. Bristol: Policy Press. ISBN 978-1-4473-1578-0. Bourke, Richard (2016). Popular Sovereignty in Historical Perspective. United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-107-13040-1. Di Marco, Laura (2012). La Cámpora. Buenos Aires: Sudamericana. ISBN 978-950-07-3798-2. Gelb, Joyce; Lief Palley, Marian (2009). Women & Politics around the world. United States: ABC Clio, Inc. ISBN 978-1-85109-988-7. Ibarra, Vilma (2015). Cristina vs. Cristina. Argentina: Planeta. ISBN 978-950-49-4613-7. Kaiser, Axel (2016). El engaño populista [The populist lie] (in Spanish). Colombia: Ariel. ISBN 978-987-38-0439-7. Majul, Luis (2009). El Dueño (PDF) (in Spanish). Argentina: Planeta. ISBN 978-950-49-2157-8. Mendelevich, Pablo (2013). El Relato Kirchnerista en 200 expresiones [The Kirchnerist speech in 200 words] (in Spanish). Argentina: Ediciones B. ISBN 978-987-627-412-8. McCloskey, Erin (September 2011). Argentina. England: The Globe Pequot Press. ISBN 978-1-84162-351-1. Panizza, Francisco (2014). Moments of Truth: The Politics of Financial Crises in Comparative Perspective. United States: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-83411-7. Castro, Nelson (2015). Secreto de estado. Argentina: Sudamericana. ISBN 978-950-07-5356-2. Vargas Llosa, Álvaro (2014). Últimas noticias del nuevo idiota iberoamericano [Latest news from the new iberoamerican useful idiot] (in Spanish). Colombia: Planeta. ISBN 978-950-49-4106-4. Petras, James; Veltmeyer, Henry (2016). What's Left in Latin America?: Regime Change in New Times. Routledge. ISBN 978-1-134-76162-3. Cristina Fernández de Kirchner at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata (in Spanish) Official site of Cristina Fernández de Kirchner (in Spanish) Senate of the Argentine Republic website (in Spanish) Biography by CIDOB Foundation Cristina Fernández de Kirchner at IMDb Youtube channel Appearances on C-SPAN