Marilyn Manson is an American rock band formed by namesake lead singer Marilyn Manson and guitarist Daisy Berkowitz in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, in 1989. Originally named Marilyn Manson & the Spooky Kids, they gained a local cult following in South Florida in the early 1990s with their theatrical live performances. In 1993, they were the first act signed to Trent Reznor's Nothing Records label. Until 1996, the name of each member was created by combining the first name of a female sex symbol and the last name of a serial killer‍—‍for example, Marilyn Monroe and Charles Manson. Their lineup has changed between many of their album releases; the eponymous lead singer is the only remaining original member. In the past, band members dressed in outlandish makeup and costumes, and engaged in intentionally shocking behavior both onstage and off. Their lyrics often received criticism for their anti-religious sentiment and references to sex, violence and drugs, while their live performances were frequently called offensive and obscene. On several occasions, protests and petitions led to the group being blocked from performing, with at least three US states passing legislation banning the group from performing at state-owned venues. They released a number of platinum-selling albums, including Antichrist Superstar (1996) and Mechanical Animals (1998). These albums, along with their highly stylized music videos and worldwide touring, brought public recognition to Marilyn Manson. In 1999, news media, infamously, falsely blamed the band for influencing the perpetrators of the Columbine High School massacre. As this controversy began to wane throughout the 2000s, so did the band's mainstream popularity. Despite this, Jon Wiederhorn of MTV, in June 2003, referred to Marilyn Manson as "the only true artist today". Marilyn Manson is widely regarded as being one of the most iconic and controversial figures in rock music, with the band and its lead singer influencing numerous other groups and musicians, both in metal-associated acts and also in wider popular culture. VH1 ranked Marilyn Manson as the seventy-eighth best rock band on their 100 Great Artists of Hard Rock. They were inducted into the Kerrang! Hall of Fame in 2000, and have been nominated for four Grammy Awards. In the U.S., the band has seen ten of its releases debut in the top ten, including two number-one albums. Marilyn Manson have sold in excess of 50 million records worldwide. In 1989, Brian Warner was a college student working towards a degree in journalism at Broward College, gaining experience by writing music articles for the South Florida lifestyle magazine 25th Parallel. It was in this capacity that he met several of the musicians to whom his own band would later be compared, including My Life with the Thrill Kill Kult and Trent Reznor of Nine Inch Nails. That December, he met Scott Putesky, who proposed the two form a band, after reading some lyrics and poems written by Warner. Warner, guitarist Putesky and bassist Brian Tutunick recorded their first demo tape as Marilyn Manson & the Spooky Kids in 1990, taking on the stage names of Marilyn Manson, Daisy Berkowitz and Olivia Newton Bundy, respectively. Bundy left the band soon after, and was replaced by Gidget Gein, born Brad Stewart. They were later joined on keyboard by Stephen Bier, who called himself Madonna Wayne Gacy. In 1991, drummer Fred Streithorst joined the band under the name Sara Lee Lucas. The stage names adopted by each member were representative of a concept the band considered central: the dichotomy of good and evil, and the existence of both, together, in every whole. "Marilyn Monroe had a dark side", explained Manson in his autobiography, "just as Charles Manson has a good, intelligent side." Over the next six years, all of the band's members would adopt names that combined the first name of a female sex symbol and the surname of a serial killer. Images of both Monroe and Manson, as well as of other famous and infamous figures, were common in the band's early promotional materials. The Spooky Kids' popularity in the area grew quickly and because of the band's highly visual concerts, which drew from performance art and used many shock techniques such as "naked women nailed to a cross, a child in a cage, or bloody animal body parts." Band members variously performed in women's clothing or bizarre costumes; and, for lack of a professional pyrotechnician, would set their own stage props on fire. The band would contrast these theatrics with elements drawn from their youth: characters from 1970s and '80s children's television made regular, often grotesquely altered, appearances on band flyers and newsletters, and were frequently sampled in their music. They continued to perform and release cassettes – shortening their name to Marilyn Manson in 1992 – until the summer of 1993, when they drew the attention of Reznor, who had just founded his own label, Nothing Records. Reznor offered the band a contract with the label, as well as an opening slot supporting Nine Inch Nails on their upcoming "Self Destruct Tour". After accepting both offers, recording sessions for their debut studio album began in July 1993 with Swans producer Roli Mosimann at Criteria Studios in Miami, Florida. Recording a selection of new songs along with material from their Spooky Kids repertoire, the first version of their debut, titled The Manson Family Album, was completed by the end of the month. However, it was not well received. The band's members, along with Reznor, criticized Mosimann's production as being flat, lifeless and poorly representative of the band's live performances. At the same time, Gidget Gein had begun to lose control of his addiction to heroin. Before reworking the album, the band played two shows in Florida under the name Mrs. Scabtree. This band featured Manson on drums, Gacy on keyboard, Berkowitz on guitar, and Jessicka from Jack Off Jill sharing vocal duties with Jeordie White of Coral Springs thrash band Amboog-a-Lard. Four other local musicians, bassists Mark Dubin of Sister Venus and Patrick Joyce from The Itch, guitarist Miles Hie and violinist Mary Karlzen were also involved. Reznor agreed to rework production of The Manson Family Album in October 1993 at Record Plant Studios in Los Angeles. Gein, who had been hospitalized after his fourth heroin overdose, was not invited to participate, and was fired from the band soon after, replaced by White, of Amboog-a-Lard, who undertook the alias Twiggy Ramirez. After seven weeks of mixing, re-recording and remixing, the album – now titled Portrait of an American Family – was presented to Nothing's parent label Interscope. The album was released on July 19, 1994, and peaked at number thirty-five on Billboard's Top Heatseekers album chart. The band began its first national headlining tour in December 1994, with Jack Off Jill opening. During the band's stint as opening act on the Nine Inch Nails tour, Manson met Church of Satan founder Anton LaVey. LaVey bestowed the title of "Reverend" on Manson– meaning a person who is revered by the church, and not necessarily one who dedicates their life to preaching the religion to others, as with a priest or minister. Manson would use this title in the liner notes of the band's following album, citing himself as "Reverend Marilyn Manson". In March 1995, the band began a two-month tour, this time with Monster Voodoo Machine as support. This would be drummer Sara Lee Lucas's last tour with the band. Kenneth Wilson, better known by his stage name Ginger Fish, then joined the group before they embarked on a tour with rock band Danzig and metal band Korn. The band then relocated to the new home of Nothing Studios in New Orleans to begin work on remixes and b-sides for Portrait's third single, "Dope Hat", releasing a music video inspired by the boat ride scene from the 1971 movie Willy Wonka & the Chocolate Factory. The proposed single eventually developed into Smells Like Children, which included the band's version of the Eurythmics' "Sweet Dreams (Are Made of This)", their first hit; the song's music video was placed in heavy rotation on MTV, in stark contrast with the "Dope Hat" video, which the same channel had banished to late-night airplay only a few months prior. This is perhaps the sickest group ever promoted by a mainstream record company. —Former U.S. Senator Joe Lieberman The band's second studio album, Antichrist Superstar, was released on October 8, 1996. It was recorded at Nothing Studios with Reznor, Manson, Sean Beavan and former Skinny Puppy member and longtime producer Dave Ogilvie sharing co-production duties; members of both Marilyn Manson and Nine Inch Nails took part in its recording. The process of making the album was a long and difficult one, highlighted by experiments involving sleep deprivation and near-constant drug use, in an effort to create a violent and hostile environment suited to the album's content. During this time, antagonism between band members was high. Daisy Berkowitz, the band's founding guitarist, departed the band partway through the album's recording process, with Twiggy performing much of the album's guitar work. Timothy Linton responded to an advert seeking Berkowitz's replacement. He would form a close relationship with Madonna Wayne Gacy, who was responsible for the inclusion of one of the major sources of inspiration for the album: Kabbalah. Breaking with the six-year tradition of naming band members after female icons and serial killers, Zim Zum was chosen as Linton's stage name. It was derived from the Lurianic Kabbalah concept of Tzimtzum. "The Beautiful People" was released as the album's lead single. It created enough anticipation for Antichrist Superstar that the album debuted at number three on the Billboard 200 with first-week sales of 132,000 copies. Manson also appeared on the cover of Rolling Stone, who awarded the band their 'Best New Artist' accolade in 1997. The year-long "Dead to the World Tour" followed, which was the band's longest and widest-ranging tour yet. In the US, however, the band was receiving more attention than ever before, and not all of it was positive. As the tour was getting underway, the band found itself the target of bipartisan congressional hearings, led by conservative violent entertainment watchdog group Empower America (now known as FreedomWorks) co-directors Republican Secretary of Education William Bennett and Democratic U.S. Senator Joseph Lieberman, to determine the effects, if any, of violent lyrics on young listeners. In addition, nearly every performance of the tour was picketed by religious organizations. In July 1997, Manson collaborated with British trip hop group Sneaker Pimps for the single "Long Hard Road Out of Hell" from the soundtrack to the 1997 film Spawn. The band released their second EP, Remix & Repent, on November 25, 1997. It featured new versions of Antichrist Superstar's four singles: "The Beautiful People", "Tourniquet", "Antichrist Superstar" and "Man That You Fear". In February 1998, Manson released his autobiography, The Long Hard Road Out of Hell, as well as a live video entitled Dead to the World. It was also confirmed that Antichrist Superstar would be the first installment in a concept album trilogy which the band called their triptych. The band released the second part of their triptych, Mechanical Animals, on September 15, 1998. Co-produced by the band's lead singer with Sean Beavan and Michael Beinhorn, the album moved away from the industrial rock production of its predecessor and was strongly influenced by 1970s glam rock, particularly David Bowie's 1974 album Diamond Dogs. Billy Corgan served as an unofficial consultant to the band during the early development of the album. After playing a few songs for him, Corgan advised them that "This is definitely the right direction" but to "go all the way with it. Don't just hint at it", referring to its inclusion of glam influences. To suit their new musical style, the band also recast itself as a glam rock outfit, setting aside the "rotting-corpse chic" of the previous era in favor of attire more suited to the genre, incorporating leather, platform boots and brightly dyed hair. The band also relocated from New Orleans to Los Angeles, while Zim Zum was replaced by guitarist John Lowery of 2wo, whose stage name, John 5, was given to him by Manson during their first lunch meeting. Interscope's promotion of the album was massive, with the label erecting enormous billboards of the lead singer as an androgynous extraterrestrial in both Times Square and Sunset Strip. Repeated appearances on MTV and other networks helped propel the album's lead single, "The Dope Show", to number twelve on Billboard's Mainstream Rock chart, becoming the band's highest-charting single yet. The song's music video was critically acclaimed, winning two awards at the 1998 Billboard Music Video Awards as well as the Best Cinematography award at the 1999 MTV VMA's; while the song was also nominated for Best Hard Rock Performance at the 41st Annual Grammy Awards. The album would go on to debut at number one on the Billboard 200, with first week sales of over 223,000. After a brief promotional campaign, the band set out on the "Beautiful Monsters Tour" with Hole. The tour would be a problematic one, and was marred by frequent on–and–off stage exchanges between Manson and Hole vocalist Courtney Love. Private disputes also arose over the tour's financial arrangements, with Hole unwittingly financing most of Manson's production costs, which were disproportionately high relative to Hole's. The tour was to include thirty-seven shows spanning over a two-month period, although Hole left after taking part in just nine of the scheduled dates. A broken ankle from Manson also forced the postponement of the next two shows, with the remainder of the tour being renamed "Rock Is Dead" and Jack Off Jill and Nashville Pussy taking over select opening slots. The final four dates of the tour were canceled out of respect for the victims of the Columbine High School massacre. The latter half of 1999 and much of 2000 was a period of relative silence for the band, who refused to take part in interviews and retreated from public life. They shelved plans for a proposed single and music video for their cover of AC/DC's "Highway to Hell", which appeared on the soundtrack to Detroit Rock City. They spent this period writing and recording in a secluded studio in Death Valley, with only the live album The Last Tour on Earth appearing during this time. A studio outtake from Antichrist Superstar, titled "Astonishing Panorama of the Endtimes", served as its only single. 1999 was a pivotal year—as was 1969, the year of my birth. The two years share many similarities. Woodstock '99 became an Altamont of its own. Columbine became the Manson murders of our generation. Things happened that could've made me want to stop making music. Instead, I decided to come out and really punish everyone for daring to fuck with me. I've got a big fight ahead of me on this one. And I want every bit of it. —Marilyn Manson Holy Wood (In the Shadow of the Valley of Death) was released on November 11, 2000. Produced by the band's lead singer with Dave Sardy, the album also features programming and pre-production editing by Bon Harris of Nitzer Ebb. The band wrote over 100 songs for the album, which was a return to the darker, more abrasive sound of Antichrist Superstar. Much of its content was written in response to the Columbine massacre, with the album's third single, "The Nobodies", directly referring to the shootings. Described by the band's frontman as the third part of a trilogy which began with Antichrist Superstar and continued in Mechanical Animals, its overarching theme is an exploration of the relationship between death and fame in American culture, and its lyrics and artwork contain many references to John F. Kennedy and Lee Harvey Oswald, John Lennon and Mark David Chapman, and Abraham Lincoln and John Wilkes Booth. The "Guns, God and Government Tour" elaborated on Holy Wood's central theme, and with its logo – a rifle and handguns arranged to resemble the Christian cross – Manson made no attempt to conceal what he saw as the source of that fascination. The band also revealed that within their concept album trilogy, Holy Wood serves as prequel to Mechanical Animals and Antichrist Superstar despite the latter two preceding Holy Wood in release date. Each album contains its own distinct storyline, which can be linked together to create a larger overarching storyline encompassing all three. Manson has offered this much in the way of an interpretation: "[Holy Wood is about] wanting to fit into a world that didn't want me, and fighting really hard to get there. [The album's deepest elements] are idealism and the desire to start a revolution. If you begin with Holy Wood, then Mechanical Animals really talks about how that revolution gets taken away from you and turned into a product, and then Antichrist Superstar is where you're given a choice to decide if you're going to be controlled by the power that you created or if you want to destroy yourself and then start over. It just becomes a cycle." The band initially declined to join the 2001 lineup of Ozzy Osbourne's Ozzfest, as its June 21 date in Denver would mark their first appearance in Colorado since the Columbine massacre. After the band announced on their website that they would perform in Denver, they were protested by religious groups. The band planned to "balance out" their "violent lyrics" by quoting biblical texts, "so we can examine the virtues of wonderful Christian stories of disease, murder, adultery, suicide and child sacrifice." The tour was documented by a DVD of the same name, which was released on October 29, 2002. In addition to a compilation style concert [songs from multiple individual shows edited together to appear as a single performance], it includes a thirty-minute short film titled "The Death Parade". This was followed by Guns, God and Government – Live in LA in 2009, which depicts their performance of January 13, 2001, at Los Angeles's Grand Olympic Auditorium in its entirety. Earlier in 2001, the band released a cover of Gloria Jones's "Tainted Love" on the soundtrack to Not Another Teen Movie. The song became the band's biggest international hit yet, peaking at number one in numerous European territories. In 2002, Jonathan Davis of Korn invited Marilyn Manson to record vocals on a track titled "Redeemer", which was released on his soundtrack to Queen of the Damned. Manson also appeared in Michael Moore's 2002 documentary, Bowling for Columbine; his appearance was filmed on the same day as their Denver Ozzfest performance. When Moore asked what Manson would have said to the students at Columbine, he replied, "I wouldn't say a single word to them. I would listen to what they have to say, and that's what no one did." With the "triptych" of previous albums complete, the band was free to begin a fresh project. In 2002, Manson created an original score for the Resident Evil film with former KMFDM multi-instrumentalist Tim Skold. Soon after, Skold became an official band member when Twiggy Ramirez amicably left the group, citing creative differences. After finding inspiration through Manson's girlfriend Dita Von Teese in the swing and burlesque movements of 1920s Berlin, the band recorded The Golden Age of Grotesque, which was released on May 7, 2003, and debuted atop the Billboard 200 album chart, selling over 118,000 copies on its first week. It was also an international success, particularly in Europe, where it sold over 400,000 copies on its first week, and topping various national record charts, as well as Billboard's European Albums Chart. The album also appeared on several critics' year-end lists, and won a 2003 Metal Edge Readers' Choice Award for "Album of the Year". Eschewing the lyrical depth and symbolism found on Holy Wood, the album was relatively straightforward: in an extended metaphor, Manson compares his own often-criticized work to the Entartete Kunst banned by the Nazi regime. Lyrically, Manson utilizes the narrative mode of stream of consciousness throughout the album to examine the human psyche in times of crisis, specifically focusing on the mindset of lunatics and children, as, according to Manson, "they don't follow the rules [of society]." Several songs incorporate elements commonly found in playground chants and nursery rhymes, which Manson would "pervert into something ugly and lurid." The work of Kurt Weill was also noted as an influence, along with the lucid dreams the singer was having during its production, with Manson explaining that he would "wake up and say, 'I want to write a song that sounds like a stampeding elephant,' or 'I want to write a song that sounds like a burning piano.'" Manson began his long-term collaboration with Austrian-Irish artist Gottfried Helnwein, working together on several multi-media projects associated with the album, including the exhibitions and installation art projects featured at the album's launch party at The Key Club in Los Angeles, the album artwork, the music video to lead single "mOBSCENE", as well as the artwork which accompanied Manson's essay for The Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and Museum. Limited edition copies of the album included a DVD titled Doppelherz (Double-heart), a 25-minute surrealist short film directed by Manson which featured art direction by Helnwein. Another world tour followed, "Grotesk Burlesk", which furthered the album's Weimar Republic-inspired theme by adding Helnwein-created stage dressing and elements of German Kabarett to the group's performances. Manson and the band members began appearing both on-and off-stage in designer suits created by Jean-Paul Gaultier. Lest We Forget: The Best Of was released on September 28, 2004, and was referred to by Manson as a "farewell" compilation. It was the last album released under Nothing Records, as the label was dissolved following a lawsuit filed by Reznor against his former manager and business partner, John Malm. The compilation was supported by the "Against All Gods Tour", as well as a single–a cover of Depeche Mode's "Personal Jesus". It was the first and only tour to feature Mark Chaussee of Rob Halford's Fight on lead guitar, replacing John 5, whose relationship with Manson had soured over the previous year. Former Nine Inch Nails drummer Chris Vrenna also replaced Ginger Fish, who fractured his wrist, skull and cheekbone after falling several feet off his drum riser during a performance at a German awards ceremony. By late 2005, the band had composed 18 new songs, but work on their sixth studio album was halted when Manson focused his attention on various film and art projects, including the development of his screenplay, Phantasmagoria: The Visions of Lewis Carroll, as well as a minor role in the Lucy Liu movie Rise: Blood Hunter. He also launched a self-proclaimed art movement, the Celebritarian Corporation, which included artist Gottfried Helnwein, fashion designer Steven Klein and director Anthony Silva, as well as announcing plans to open an art gallery and publish a book of his paintings. It was after opening the Celebritarian Corporation Gallery Of Fine Art on Melrose Avenue in 2006 that work started on new material, with Manson writing lyrics over Skold's already existing compositions. The resulting material was composed and recorded entirely by Skold, and does not feature writing or performance contributions from any other member of the band. Its content is largely inspired by personal troubles relating to Manson's failed marriage to Von Teese, and his burgeoning relationship with then-19-year old actress Evan Rachel Wood. The band made their debut appearance on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno on October 31, 2006, performing their cover of "This Is Halloween" from a deluxe edition re-release of The Nightmare Before Christmas soundtrack. This would be their last performance featuring longtime keyboardist Madonna Wayne Gacy, who would go on to file a $20m lawsuit against the band the following year for unpaid "partnership proceeds". The album was preceded by the release of a single, "Heart-Shaped Glasses (When the Heart Guides the Hand)", whose music video was shot using director James Cameron's 3D Fusion Camera System technology. The video caused controversy upon release, with several sources claiming that it featured genuine footage of Manson and Wood engaged in sexual intercourse. Wood was reportedly paid "the highest [music] video salary in history" to appear in the video. Eat Me, Drink Me was released on June 5, 2007, and entered the Billboard 200 at number eight with first week sales of 88,000 copies. It also peaked in the top ten of most major international album charts, as well as at number two on Billboard's European Albums Chart. "Putting Holes in Happiness" was released as the album's second single. To promote the album, the band embarked on the nine-month "Rape of the World Tour", which featured Skold on lead guitar, former The Prodigy bassist Rob Holliday and longtime drummer Ginger Fish; while Vrenna rejoined the band as their live keyboardist. The first leg of the tour was a co-headlining set with American thrash metal band Slayer, with support coming from Bleeding Through. In November 2007, Manson confirmed that he and Skold had begun work on the band's next studio album, with Slayer's Kerry King, former The Smashing Pumpkins guitarist James Iha and Nick Zinner of Yeah Yeah Yeahs set to feature. By the beginning of 2008, however, Twiggy Ramirez had rejoined the band as bassist, resulting in the exit of Skold, with Holliday moving from bass to lead guitar for the remaining duration of the tour. Future collaborations with Skold were not ruled out. In 2008, former Limp Bizkit guitarist Wes Borland joined the band for their headlining show at the 2008 ETP Fest in South Korea. However, Borland left the group to reunite with Limp Bizkit, later saying that he was reluctant to be a "hired gun", citing the band's refusal to record any of the nine songs he submitted for their upcoming album. R&B singer Ne-Yo claimed in early December that he would hold writing sessions with the band's frontman on new material, although Manson denied it, saying that he had "never even met Ne-Yo. I can assure him that he would not want to be associated with something this godless." The High End of Low was recorded throughout 2008, with Manson recording vocals at his Hollywood Hills home studio between November and January 5, 2009. Produced by Manson, Twiggy and Vrenna with Antichrist Superstar and Mechanical Animals co-producer Sean Beavan, Manson described the album as containing "extreme" autobiographical content relating to the dissolution of his engagement to Wood, and as being "very ruthless, heavy and violent". Its fifteen songs appear on the album in the order they were written. The penultimate track, "Into the Fire", portrays the vocalist's mental state on Christmas Day, wherein he attempted to contact Wood 158 times, cutting himself with a razorblade on the face or hands for each corresponding attempt. The album's final song, "15", was completed on Manson's January 5 birthday – hence the name. Manson utilized his entire home as a canvas to document the disintegration of the relationship, writing its lyrics on walls and coupling them with paintings and drawings relating to Wood, as well as used condoms, bags of cocaine and other drug paraphernalia. "Arma-goddamn-motherfuckin-geddon" Album version, as it appeared on The High End of Low. A heavily-censored version of the track performed poorly on US radio. Problems playing this file? See media help. "We're from America" was released as a free download on the band's website on March 27, 2009, while a Hot Topic-exclusive CD single followed two weeks later. After playing an instrumental version of "Arma-goddamn-motherfuckin-geddon" to Interscope's A&R department, it was chosen as the album's official lead single, with an employee telling Manson, "This is gonna be a hit!". Manson then quipped to the employee, "Well, I'm glad that you have no consideration for what I [might] put on top of it." A heavily censored version of the profanity-laced track – re-titled to "Arma ... geddon" – was serviced to radio from April 13, and peaked at number thirty-seven on Billboard's Mainstream Rock chart, becoming their lowest-peaking single in the process. The album was released on May 20, 2009 and debuted at number four on the Billboard 200 with sales of over 49,000 copies, their lowest opening week figure since The Last Tour on Earth debuted with 26,000 copies in 1999. Prior to The High End of Low's release, Manson made a series of disparaging comments regarding Interscope and its artistic censorship; as well as its then-CEO Jimmy Iovine, who Manson said "wasn't smart enough to understand what [we] do", and publicly claiming that the label "cares more about Vitamin Water [the private equity venture of Interscope-signed 50 Cent] than music." Reznor – who, as of 2015, remains friends with Iovine – responded by calling Manson a "dopey clown" and claiming that "He is a malicious guy and will step on anybody's face to succeed and cross any line of decency." While promoting the album in the UK, Manson appeared inebriated in a series of interviews. An interview for Alan Carr: Chatty Man recorded during this time remains unaired, due to graphic language and content. A music video for "Running to the Edge of the World" – in which Manson beats a Wood lookalike to death – was released on November 4 and was condemned as a perceived glorification of violence against women. The band parted ways with Interscope on December 3. They settled the lawsuit filed by former keyboardist Stephen Bier (aka M.W. Gacy), with Manson's insurance company paying Bier's attorney's fees and Bier receiving no monetary value. Upon parting with Interscope, Manson said "a lot of the creative control on which my hands were tied [has been regained]", while stating that the band had been writing new material while touring their previous album. Manson attested that its lyrical content would be "more romantic" yet "self-abusive", and described its sonic elements as being "suicide death metal". Fred Sablan joined the band in July 2010. By October, Twiggy described the album as being "almost done", and opined that "It's our best record yet. I mean, everyone always says that, but I think this is our best work so far. It's kind of like a little more of a punk rock Mechanical Animals, without sounding too pretentious." The following month, it was announced that the band had signed a joint-venture deal with London-based indie label Cooking Vinyl. As part of the deal, the band would retain creative control over their artistic direction, with the band and label sharing profits equally after the label recoups costs associated with marketing, promotion and distribution. For much of 2011, Manson removed himself from the public spotlight and ceased almost all communication with fans, only taking a break from his self-imposed sequestration to appear in the music video for "Tempat Ku" by Brunei rock band D'Hask. On February 24, longtime drummer Ginger Fish announced his resignation from the group. On May 22, their website underwent a complete overhaul. A 26-second clip of an unreleased song, tentatively titled "I am among no one", was uploaded to their Vimeo account, along with a new logo. After being impressed by his directorial work on one of Kid Cudi's music videos, Manson employed actor Shia LaBeouf to direct a short film entitled Born Villain. Contrary to media reports that the project would be a "making-of" video documenting the album's recording, Born Villain was a surrealist short featuring a previously unreleased track, "Overneath the Path of Misery". Containing numerous references to Macbeth, it was inspired by Jodorowsky's The Holy Mountain and Luis Buñuel and Salvador Dalí's 1929 silent film Un Chien Andalou. To promote the project, LaBeouf and his girlfriend, photographer Karolyn Pho, graffitied areas of LA with its artwork. LaBeouf and Pho later photographed their work, and released it as a limited edition book titled Campaign, which was bundled with a DVD of the film. In November, Vrenna departed the band to focus on other production work, whilst indicating that production of their eighth studio album was "largely completed". The album was preceded by the release of "No Reflection", which Manson leaked to KROQ-FM on March 7, 2012. Cooking Vinyl CEO Martin Goldschmidt called the leak a "masterstroke", saying "we had all these exclusives lined up around the world, and then Manson blew them all. We're already getting more radio play than the whole of the last record." The song went on to peak at number twenty-six on the Mainstream Rock chart, spending fourteen weeks on the chart, and was their best-performing single there since "Personal Jesus" in 2004. Born Villain was released worldwide from April 25, debuting at number ten on the Billboard 200 and atop both the Independent Albums and Top Hard Rock Albums charts. The album spent two weeks at number one on the UK Rock Albums Chart. A remix EP for "Slo-Mo-Tion" followed on November 5. The band embarked on the seventeen-month "Hey Cruel World... Tour" from the end of April, which was interspersed by co-headlining tours with Rob Zombie ("Twins of Evil") and Alice Cooper ("Masters of Madness"). In August 2012, it was announced that Manson would play a fictionalized version of himself in a four-episode arc of the sixth season of TV series Californication. While filming its season finale at the Greek Theatre in LA, Manson met the series' composer, Tyler Bates, and the two discussed a potential collaboration. Manson confirmed that production started on new material by May 2013. Four months later, Sablan announced that he had left the group. One track from the album, "Cupid Carries a Gun" was used as the opening theme to Salem from its second episode onwards, which premiered on US television on April 27. In October, a large portion of the album track "Killing Strangers" was predominantly featured in the Keanu Reeves movie John Wick. "Third Day of a Seven Day Binge" was released for free download on the band's website on October 26, and served as the album's first official single. The band performed several new songs live for the first time as they played a handful of concerts around southern California in October and early November. "Deep Six" was released on December 16, with a music video following three days later. It went on to peak at number eight on Billboard's Mainstream Rock chart, making it the band's highest-ever peaking single on Billboard. "Cupid Carries a Gun" was released as the album's third official single on January 8, 2015. The Pale Emperor was released on January 15 in the US. It is dedicated to Manson's mother, who died in May 2014 after an eight-year battle with Alzheimer's disease and dementia. It was both a critical and commercial success, debuting at number eight on the Billboard 200 with sales of over 51,000 copies, their largest opening-week figure since Eat Me, Drink Me in 2007. Numerous publications referred to it as the band's best album in over a decade. It would go on to appear on several 'best of 2015' lists, with Rolling Stone dubbing it the 'best metal album' of 2015. Music videos for both "The Mephistopheles of Los Angeles" and "Third Day of a Seven Day Binge" were released in May and July, respectively. The band embarked on the nearly-two year-long The Hell Not Hallelujah Tour in support of the album, which was interspersed by a co-headlining tour with The Smashing Pumpkins titled The End Times. In February 2016, Manson contributed vocals to a version of David Bowie's "Cat People (Putting Out Fire)" on Countach (For Giorgio), a tribute album to Giorgio Moroder curated by Shooter Jennings. A 16-bit music video for the song was released five months later. Also in February, details were announced of another co-headlining tour, this time with Slipknot. The tour was scheduled to begin on June 9 in Salt Lake City and consist of thirty-four dates in Amphitheatres throughout North America, with support from Of Mice & Men. However, the first twelve dates of the tour were postponed after an examination revealed that Corey Taylor had broken two vertebrae in his neck. The tour began on June 28 in Nashville, Tennessee, with the postponed shows rescheduled for August. While touring with The Smashing Pumpkins, Manson indicated a "strong possibility" of working with Corgan on new material, and also revealed plans to collaborate with Korn frontman Jonathan Davis on a "Southern-sounding, acoustic" project. Manson announced in an interview with KEGL in November that work had begun on the band's tenth studio album, while also confirming that Twiggy, Bates and Sharone would all be involved in its recording. Antichrist Superstar was reissued on cassette exclusively in Europe as part of Record Store Day 2016. To celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the album's release, Manson indicated that a special edition of Antichrist Superstar would be issued on October 20, although this failed to materialize. Among its bonus content would have been a previously unreleased film, created during the "Dead to the World Tour". On July 19, Manson announced that the band's tenth studio album had the working title SAY10, and predicted a release date of Valentine's Day 2017. In September, Manson confirmed that the band were "putting the finishing touches" on the album, and said: "It's not very much in any way like The Pale Emperor. It's pretty violent in its nature for some reason, and it's not emotional in the same way. It's got a chip on its shoulder. I can't wait for people to hear it. I think they're going to be quite surprised." On November 8 – the day of the 2016 US presidential election – Manson released a teaser clip of a new music video created alongside Final Girl director Tyler Shields. It featured scenes of Manson brandishing a knife while standing over a decapitated corpse. According to The Daily Beast's Marlow Stern, the decapitated figure is dressed to resemble Donald Trump. Manson would later say that the figure in the video "wasn't anyone except if you wanted it to be them." The album was not released in February 2017, and instead a long series of cryptic videos were posted to Marilyn Manson's personal Instagram account over the course of just under 2 months, before Manson revealed on May 9 that the album had been named Heaven Upside Down. The band began their Heaven Upside Down Tour on July 20, 2017, in Budapest. The first single from the album, "We Know Where You Fucking Live", was released on September 11, with the album due to follow on October 6. A second single, "Kill4Me", was released on September 20. The band's founding guitarist, Daisy Berkowitz, died on October 22, 2017, at the age of 49; he had been diagnosed with Stage IV colorectal cancer in 2013. Two days later, Manson announced he had "decided to part ways" with bassist Twiggy, after a rape allegation was made against Twiggy by his former girlfriend, Jack Off Jill vocalist Jessicka; for the rest of the tour, Juan Alderete (formerly of Racer X and The Mars Volta) joined. In July 2018, Manson embarked on the Twins of Evil: The Second Coming Tour in the US with co-headliner Rob Zombie and special guest Deadly Apples. In March 2019, Manson announced that he was nearly finished recording his next studio album and that country musician Shooter Jennings was involved. Later that year, drummer Gil Sharone announced he was leaving the band to pursue "other current and future projects", with former Black Flag drummer Brandon Pertzborn hired as his replacement. Manson also revealed that Bates is no longer involved with the group, and that the album would be produced by Jennings and feature contributions from his drummer Jamie Douglass. In July, Manson embarked on the Twins of Evil: Hell Never Dies Tour in the US and Canada with co-headliner Rob Zombie, followed by festivals and headline dates with support from Deadly Apples. The band released their cover of The Doors' "The End" on streaming music services in November, with a limited edition vinyl scheduled to be issued on March 6, 2020. The song was recorded for the soundtrack to the upcoming miniseries The Stand, based on Stephen King's novel of the same name. Manson is set to appear in the miniseries. The band are set to appear as the opening act for Ozzy Osbourne during his No More Tours II series, a North American tour beginning in May 2020. However the tour was eventually cancelled along with Manson's performances after Ozzy Osbourne was diagnosed with Parkinson's disease. On January 13, 2020, live bassist Juan Alderete was involved in a bicycle accident which left him with a diffuse axonal injury, a type of traumatic brain injury. A GoFundMe page has been created to help cover the cost of his medical expenses. On April 29, Manson and Jennings confirmed they had finished work on the band's eleventh studio album, with both calling it a "masterpiece". On July 28, Manson announced that a new single titled "We Are Chaos" would be released the following day. The next day, the track was released alongside the announcement of the band's upcoming eleventh studio album titled We Are Chaos set for release on September 11, 2020. At the same time, the band revealed the album cover and the track list. The album debuted at number eight on the Billboard 200, making it their tenth top ten release on the chart. In February 2021, Loma Vista Recordings announced they would not promote or participate in the distribution of any future recordings released by the band, following former girlfriend Evan Rachel Wood and various other accusations that the band's vocalist sexually and psychologically abused them. In November 2021, former band member Tim Skold announced he was again working on new material with Marilyn Manson. In May 2023, Brandon Pertzborn left Marilyn Manson to join The Offspring as their drummer. Also in May, Marilyn Manson became active again on social media, posting two new pictures and announcing that there's "something new for you to hear". Although the band's music has often been labeled as shock rock by mainstream media, Manson disputes the use of the label, preferring instead to identify his band's music as rock and roll. The band combined industrial, goth, shock rock and metal into a "creative bricolage". AllMusic's Stephen Thomas Erlewine wrote that the band "draws equally from schlock metal, progressive metal, new wave, goth rock, and industrial rock". AllMusic also described the band's music as "glam-influenced industrial metal".The Daily Texan wrote that the band "originally found success during the rise and popularity of nu metal", however "Manson distanced himself from that movement, preferring alternative metal anguish over cookie monster-sounding raps." According to The Evolution of Goth Culture, the goth subculture "resisted this takeover of the goth name by Marilyn Manson and their fans" initially, but the band's music would eventually be identified as being goth rock and industrial metal, even though Manson himself has been reluctant to "pigeonhole" his band as goth or metal. Rolling Stone described the band's music as "heavy, industrialized goth rock", while AllMusic contends that the band merely borrows from gothic rock's imagery. Consequence of Sound wrote that "gothic darkness and industrial rock [pervades] all of" the band's music. Stereogum wrote that "metal has never been an integral part of Manson’s sound" and although the band utilizes "varying degrees [of] gritty, distorted guitar", the magazine suggested that the core of their music was actually pop music. From 1996 to his departure in 2002, Twiggy was their chief musical contributor, co-writing many of the band's biggest hits with Manson during this period. Despite never receiving a writing credit, drummer Ginger Fish provided substantial pre-production assistance to both Manson and Twiggy while composing demos for Antichrist Superstar. His drums loops and sound effects would go on to be predominantly featured on several tracks, most notably "The Beautiful People". John 5 and Tim Skold were also prevalent composers, while The Pale Emperor and Heaven Upside Down were composed entirely by Tyler Bates. All of the band's lyrics are written by Manson, whose songwriting style varies between albums. Utilizing aesthetics often found within spoken-word poetry, his writing features comedy, puns, and double entendres, and he makes frequent use of alliteration. The band's witticisms often take the form of neologisms, delivered several at a time in rapid-fire succession. Lyrical content has emerged from a wide range of subjects, including love, sex and sexuality, sexual abuse, rape, consumerism, politics, revenge, suicide, capitalism, violence and mortality, as well as the Bible and Greek mythology. Manson predominantly delivers lyrics in a melodic fashion, although he invariably enhances his vocal register by utilizing several extended vocal techniques, such as vocal fry, screaming, growling and crooning. His voice can emit five different tones simultaneously, which mixing engineer Robert Carranza discovered can form a pentagram when imported into a phrasal analyzer. He possesses a baritone vocal type. His lowest bass note of A1 can be heard in "Arma-goddamn-motherfuckin-geddon", while his highest note, an E6 – the first note of the whistle register – can be heard on the Born Villain song "Hey, Cruel World ...". Manson's earliest musical memory was listening to Kiss during a family road trip; he has since cited the band as a major influence. As a child, he would imitate Kiss's kabuki-like makeup and draw pictures of Gene Simmons and Peter Criss. The earliest incarnation of the band was conceived by Manson at a Fort Lauderdale nightclub called The Reunion Room in December 1989, where he was introduced to Big Black's Songs About Fucking by his future keyboardist, Stephen Bier. Daisy Berkowitz played in several punk rock outfits before co-founding the Spooky Kids, and was influenced by acts such as the New York Dolls and the Jim Carroll Band, whose "People Who Died" was covered regularly at live shows. As its only permanent member, Manson heads the direction of the band's sound; he has been influenced by the shock rock of artists such as Arthur Brown, Alice Cooper, The Doors, Black Sabbath/Ozzy Osbourne and Iggy Pop. His biggest influence, however, was David Bowie, whom he credited with "changing [his] life forever". The two have often been compared by mainstream media, particularly in relation to their ability to shift genre and style – replete with a new look and musical philosophy – with each studio release. Manson's two favorite songs are Bowie's "Quicksand" and "Ashes to Ashes". For several years, Manson sang Bowie's "Cat People (Putting Out Fire)" as a vocal warm up exercise before live performances; he later covered the song with musician Shooter Jennings. During their period at Nothing Records, the band's sound gathered sonic elements from other outfits on that label's roster, particularly Nine Inch Nails, with Reznor co-producing their first two studio albums. Manson has cited Queen as an influence on the band's more melodic work, while new wave and synthpop acts such as Depeche Mode and Gary Numan have been noted as influencing their electronic material. Manson said of the latter, "I was always into his apocalyptic fiction lyrics. He pioneered electronic dance music." The work of gothic rock acts such as The Cure and Bauhaus has also been cited, with Twiggy saying that "as far as guitar and bass combinations go", Bauhaus's Daniel Ash and David J were "a really big influence". Manson's other influences include The Beatles, Rihanna, Madonna, Prince, White Zombie, Johnny Cash, Jimi Hendrix, N.W.A, The Smashing Pumpkins, Justin Timberlake, Ministry, Led Zeppelin, the occult, horror comics, and the King James Bible. It's clear Manson isn't merely a freak rocker, media manipulator or one-trick pony. The secret to his longevity lies not in his sometimes schlocky image, but in the content of his work. Not only are his songs sonically compelling and his themes fresh and intriguing, but his actions speak louder than his words. His imagery, sounds and theatrics all still have a point, and like all true artists, he continues to wring significant messages from the lining of his contorted innards. Manson doesn't just bleed for his art. He drinks, pukes, fornicates and risks his life for it. —Jon Wiederhorn of MTV on Marilyn Manson, 2003 Marilyn Manson have been credited with creating some of the most recognizable and visually defining music videos of the MTV Generation, with some commentators suggesting that their music videos played a significant role in the band's commercial success. Their work frequently incorporates surrealist iconography and purposefully grotesque imagery, and their style has been emulated by other performers. Joseph Schafer of Stereogum said in 2015 that "perhaps no single artist has mastered the music video as a medium so well [as Marilyn Manson]." They have received numerous awards and accolades for their work. Three of their videos – "Sweet Dreams (Are Made of This)", "The Beautiful People" and "The Dope Show" – received a total of five MTV Video Music Award nominations, with the latter winning the Award for Best Cinematography at the 1999 ceremony. The clip for "The Dope Show" also won two awards at the 1998 Billboard Music Video Awards. "The Beautiful People" appeared at number fifty-four on MTV's list of the '100 Greatest Music Videos Ever Made'. as well as at number one-hundred on MuchMusic's 100 Greatest Videos Ever. Their 2003 video for "(s)AINT" was referred to by NME as "one of the most explicit music videos ever made", and was included in lists of the 'Most Controversial Music Videos' by both Time and SF Weekly. The band have received several Kerrang! Awards throughout their career, and were inducted into the Kerrang! Hall of Fame in 2000. Manson also received their Icon Award in 2005, as well as their Lifetime Achievement Award ten years later. The publication has ranked Holy Wood (In the Shadow of the Valley of Death) as the eleventh greatest rock album of the 2000s, and in 2015 they listed Manson as the twenty-eighth greatest rockstar in the world. VH1 included Marilyn Manson at seventy-eight on their list of the '100 Greatest Artists of Hard Rock', and also included "The Beautiful People" at number eighty-six on their list of the 100 Greatest Hard Rock Songs. Similarly, Gigwise included Manson at number thirty-six in their list of the '60 Greatest Solo Artists of All Time'. In 2016, Manson was presented with an Icon Award at the Alternative Press Music Awards. The band has also received four Grammy Award nominations, including two for Best Metal Performance, along with nominations for Best Hard Rock Performance and Best Hard Rock/Metal Performance. Marilyn Manson have sold over 50 million records worldwide. Several commentators have referred to the band's lead singer as being one of the most iconic and controversial figures in heavy metal music, with some going so far as to call him a "pop culture icon". Paste magazine said there were "few artists in the 90s as shocking as Marilyn Manson, the most famous of the shock-rockers." Rolling Stone editor Lorraine Ali credited Antichrist Superstar with marking the end of the reign of grunge within popular music, writing that Marilyn Manson "[offered] total escapism as a true alternative", elaborating that the album was "a volatile reaction to five years of earnest, post-Nirvana rock." In 2003, Jon Wiederhorn of MTV called Manson "the only major performer today who can justifiably call himself an artist." Graham Hartmann of Loudwire said that the band's best songs document "a career that is unlike any other that came before", highlighting their mix of a "rock 'n' roll mentality with profound lyrics narrating the progression of society in real time, Manson has developed a polarizing identity as both a beloved hero and a reviled villain." Hannah Ewers of The Guardian wrote in 2016 that the band's music has "never been more relevant [than] at this time of cultural and political turbulence. Whether [his lyrics are addressing] America's gun crime problem, sexual abuse, religious hypocrisy or consumerism, Manson remains a relevant cultural figure rather than a 90s one, because he continues to address the times without lapsing into a parody", and opined: "As long as young people are angry (which they are), he will have listeners." The band has been noted as influencing numerous groups within metal-associated genres, such as American Head Charge, Babymetal, Black Veil Brides, Combichrist, Kittie, Korn, Motionless in White, Murderdolls, Mushroomhead, New Years Day, September Mourning, Slipknot, and Vanna. Outside of heavy metal, both the band and its lead singer have inspired a diverse group of acts, including the Astroid Boys, Avril Lavigne, Charli XCX, Creeper, Die Antwoord, Eminem, Grimes, Halsey, Lady Gaga, Lana Del Rey, Lil Uzi Vert, Lisa Marie Presley, Muse, My Chemical Romance, Mykki Blanco, Natalia Kills, Porcelain Black, Salem, Skrillex, Skylar Grey and Years & Years. Garbage vocalist Shirley Manson has called Manson an "amazing figure and provocateur and agitator" and said that he was "always challenging you to think about the church, to think about sexuality and to think about society in different ways. We just don't have singers like that anymore." Billy Corgan of The Smashing Pumpkins has commended Manson's manipulation of the culture of celebrity, saying: "He's very savvy, in that he lets people think things about him or plays into things to see what will happen, almost like a performance artist. He's a visionary in a way, because he identified a culture that was coming and now that culture is everywhere." In December 1996, Secretary of Education William Bennett, along with U.S. Senator Joe Lieberman and former Pennsylvania Secretary of State C. DeLores Tucker, held a press conference wherein they questioned MCA – the owner of Interscope – president Edgar Bronfman Jr.'s ability to head the label competently whilst profiting from "profanity-laced" albums by artists such as Tupac Shakur, Snoop Doggy Dogg and Marilyn Manson. The following November, Representative Sam Brownback chaired a hearing of the Committee on Government Affairs. At this subcommittee, Lieberman once again criticized the band's music, calling it "vile, hateful, nihilistic and damaging", and repeated his request that Seagram – then-owner of MCA – "start ... disassociating itself from Marilyn Manson." The subcommittee also heard from Raymond Kuntz, of Burlington, North Dakota, who blamed his son Richard's suicide on Antichrist Superstar—specifically the song "The Reflecting God". The band's live performances have also come under fire—the Dead to the World Tour, in particular, was followed by protesters at nearly every North American venue it visited. Several state legislatures, including the Utah State Legislature, South Carolina Legislature and the Virginia General Assembly, enacted legislation specifically targeting the group, which banned them from performing in state-operated venues. These laws would later be repealed, following separate lawsuits from fans, the American Civil Liberties Union, and Ozzy Osbourne, who sued the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority after they forced the cancellation of the New Jersey date of the 1997 Ozzfest at Giants Stadium. On June 30, 2003, the mutilated body of fourteen-year old schoolgirl Jodi Jones was discovered in woodland near her home in Easthouses, Scotland. The injuries sustained by Jones closely resembled those of actress Elizabeth Short, who was murdered in 1947 and was popularly referred to by media as the Black Dahlia. Jones's boyfriend, then-fifteen year old Luke Mitchell, was arrested on suspicion of her murder ten months later. During a search of his home, detectives confiscated a copy of The Golden Age of Grotesque containing the short film Doppelherz. It was purchased two days after Jones's death. A ten-minute excerpt from the film, as well as several paintings by Manson depicting the Black Dahlia's mutilated body, were presented as evidence during the trial. Mitchell was found guilty of murder and sentenced to serve a minimum of twenty years in prison. The band's scheduled appearance at the Park Live Festival in Moscow on June 27, 2014, was canceled moments before they were due to arrive on stage, after authorities received numerous bomb threats, while hundreds of activists affiliated with the Russian Orthodox Church protested outside the venue. The incident culminated in the assault of several members of the band and crew near their hotel.[citation needed] Two days later, a performance in Novosibirsk was also canceled when authorities refused to grant permission for the show to go ahead, accusing Manson of insulting the beliefs of the Orthodox church and of "promoting sadomasochism". Later that year, Manson garnered significant media attention when a video depicting the simulated rape of Lana Del Rey was posted onto YouTube by production company Sturmgruppe. The video, titled "Sturmgruppe 2013 Reel", showed simulated footage of film director Eli Roth attacking Del Rey, which was interspersed by unrelated images from two of the band's previous music videos—"No Reflection" and "Slo-Mo-Tion". Manson's representatives released a statement to Billboard denying any involvement in the production of the rape scenes. In October 2017, Twiggy Ramirez was accused of sexual assault by ex-girlfriend Jessicka Addams during their relationship in the mid-90s. Soon after, Manson announced that he had "decided to part ways" with his longterm bassist. Several days later, Ramirez released a statement which said: "I have only recently been made aware of these allegations from over 20 years ago. I do not condone non-consensual sex of any kind. I will be taking some time to spend with my family and focus on maintaining my several years of sobriety. If I have caused anyone pain, I apologize and truly regret it." I couldn't care less about those kids' reasoning. What reason do we have to go to war? It's all the same. Killing somebody can't be justified by having a reason. I think it says a lot about the media that those two kids were on the cover of Time magazine twice, because I'm sure that's everything they wanted. They wanted fame. America sold them the idea that an obituary is just another headline. —Marilyn Manson on the Columbine massacre. On April 20, 1999, Columbine High School students Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold killed twelve students and a teacher, and wounded twenty-one others before committing suicide. In the days following the massacre, media reports surfaced alleging that they were influenced by violence in entertainment, specifically movies, video games and music. The pair were widely reported as being fans of German bands KMFDM and Rammstein, but the majority of blame was directed at Marilyn Manson. Five days after the incident, longtime music industry critics Republican former Secretary of Education William Bennett and Democratic U.S. Senator Joseph Lieberman cited the band as a contributing factor to the massacre during an appearance on Meet the Press. Soon after, sensationalist headlines such as "Killers Worshipped Rock Freak Manson" and "Devil-Worshipping Maniac Told Kids To Kill" began appearing in media coverage of the tragedy (such as Fox News). The Mayor of Denver, Wellington Webb, successfully petitioned promoters to cancel KBPI-FM's annual 'Birthday Bash', at which the band was scheduled to appear. Coloradoan politicians such as Governor Bill Owens and Republican Representative Tom Tancredo accused Manson of promoting "hate, violence, death, suicide, drug use and the attitudes and actions of the Columbine High School killers." Later reports stated that neither Harris nor Klebold was a fan of Marilyn Manson. The band canceled the remaining four dates of the Rock Is Dead Tour out of respect for the victims, while maintaining that music, movies, books or video games were not to blame. Eleven days after the massacre, Manson wrote an op-ed piece for Rolling Stone, titled "Columbine: Whose Fault Is It?", where he rebuked the ensuing hysteria and "witch hunt", and castigated America's gun culture, the political influence of the National Rifle Association, and the media's culpability in similarly violent events in the future – through their irresponsible coverage – in facilitating the placement of blame on a scapegoat, instead of informing the populace of genuine societal issues. The controversy connecting the band and school shootings continued on October 10, 2007, following the SuccessTech Academy shooting. After being punched in the face by another student while exiting a bathroom, Asa Coon shot his attacker – Michael Peek – in the abdomen. Armed with two revolvers, he then proceeded down a hallway, where he wounded another student and two teachers by firing into two occupied classrooms, before entering a nearby bathroom and committing suicide. Coon was wearing a black Marilyn Manson T-shirt during the incident. On May 18, 2009, 15-year-old Justin Doucet, a student at Larose Middle School in Lafourche Parish, Louisiana, entered the school armed with a .25-caliber Automatic Colt Pistol. When seventh-grade teacher Jessica Plaisance refused to comply with Doucet's demand to say "Hail Marilyn Manson", he fired two shots, narrowly missing her head, before turning the gun on himself. He died from his injuries a week later. Current members Marilyn Manson – lead vocals, guitars, keyboards, programming, drums, percussion, tambourine, saxophone, pan flute (1989–present) Paul Wiley – guitars, programming, backing vocals (2018–present; touring 2014–2018) Juan Alderete – bass, backing vocals (2018–present; touring 2017–2018) Former members Zsa Zsa Speck – keyboards (1990) Olivia Newton Bundy – bass (1989–1990) Gidget Gein – bass (1990–1993; died 2008) Sara Lee Lucas – drums, programming (1991–1995) Daisy Berkowitz – guitars, programming, percussion, harmonica (1989–1996; died 2017) Zim Zum – guitars, keyboards (1996–1998) John 5 – guitars, keyboards (1998–2004) Madonna Wayne Gacy – keyboards, synthesizers, programming, samples, percussion, brass instruments (1990–2007) Tim Skold – guitars, bass, keyboards, backing vocals (2002–2008) Ginger Fish – drums, programming (1995–2011) Chris Vrenna – keyboards, synthesizers, programming, samples (2007–2011); drums (2011; touring 2004–2005) Fred Sablan – bass, guitars (2010–2014) Twiggy Ramirez – bass, guitars, keyboards, backing vocals (1993–2002, 2008–2014; touring 2014–2017) Tyler Bates – guitars, keyboards, backing vocals (2014–2015, 2015–2018) Gil Sharone – drums (2014–2019) Brandon Pertzborn – drums (2019–2023) Former touring members Mark Chaussee – guitars (2004–2005) Rob Holliday – guitars (2008); bass, backing vocals (2007–2008) Wes Borland – guitars (2008–2009) Andy Gerold – bass (2009) Jason Sutter – drums (2012–2013) Spencer Rollins – keyboards, guitars (2013) Daniel Fox – keyboards, percussion (2015–2017) Portrait of an American Family (1994) Antichrist Superstar (1996) Mechanical Animals (1998) Holy Wood (In the Shadow of the Valley of Death) (2000) The Golden Age of Grotesque (2003) Eat Me, Drink Me (2007) The High End of Low (2009) Born Villain (2012) The Pale Emperor (2015) Heaven Upside Down (2017) We Are Chaos (2020) Independent Touring (The Spooky Kids) (1990–93) Portrait of an American Family (1994–95) Smells Like Children Tour (1995–1996) Dead to the World Tour (1996–97) Mechanical Animals Tour (1998–99) Beautiful Monsters Tour (1999) Rock Is Dead Tour (1999) Guns, God and Government Tour (2000–01) Grotesk Burlesk Tour (2003–04) Against All Gods Tour (2004–05) Rape of the World Tour (2007–08) The High End of Low Tour (2009) Hey Cruel World... Tour/Twins of Evil Tour/Masters of Madness Tour (2012–13) The Hell Not Hallelujah Tour/The End Times Tour (2015) Heaven Upside Down Tour/Twins of Evil: The Second Coming Tour/Twins of Evil: Hell Never Dies Tour (2017–19) Grammy Awards Wiederhorn, Jon (June 13, 2003). "The Argument: Marilyn Manson Is The Only True Artist Today". MTV. Viacom. Archived from the original on February 22, 2015. Retrieved June 29, 2012. Manson & Strauss 1998, pp. 64–65. Hamersly, Michael (February 4, 2008). "Interview with your vampire: Marilyn Manson". PopMatters. Archived from the original on June 14, 2016. Retrieved October 25, 2017. Buchanan, David (August 24, 2014). "Top 11 Influential Minds of Industrial Metal". Consequence of Sound. Archived from the original on June 30, 2016. Retrieved March 24, 2016. Tron, Gina (April 10, 2014). "Daisy Berkowitz: Portrait of an American Ex-Marilyn Manson Member". Vice. Archived from the original on April 2, 2016. Retrieved March 24, 2016. Hawk, Mike (January 7, 2013). "Scott Mitchell Putesky (Daisy Berkowitz) Interview". Blankman, Inc. Archived from the original on June 20, 2013. Retrieved March 24, 2016. Manson & Strauss 1998, pp. 84, 90. Kissell, Ted B. "Manson: The Florida Years". Cleveland Scene. Euclid Media Group. Archived from the original on August 9, 2016. Retrieved March 24, 2016. Kaufman, Gil (October 13, 2008). "Former Marilyn Manson Bassist Gidget Gein Dead At 39". MTV. Viacom Media Networks. Archived from the original on June 29, 2015. Retrieved March 24, 2016. Manson & Strauss 1998, p. 91-92. Feemster, Scott. "Marilyn Manson – Biography". Amoeba Music. Archived from the original on June 24, 2016. Retrieved March 24, 2016. Manson & Strauss 1998, pp. 122–123. Finn, Natalie (August 5, 2007). "Marilyn Manson Accused of Bilking the Band". E!. Archived from the original on May 8, 2016. Retrieved March 24, 2016. Manson & Strauss 1998, pp. 85, 87, 90. Reighley, Kurt (1998). Marilyn Manson. St. Martin's Griffin, New York. p. 15. ISBN 9780312181338. Diamond, Ollie H. (May 11, 2014). "Sunday Old School: Marilyn Manson". Metal Underground. Archived from the original on June 5, 2016. Retrieved March 24, 2016. Baker, Greg (July 20, 1994). "Manson Family Values". Miami New Times. Archived from the original on May 4, 2016. Retrieved March 24, 2016. Manson & Strauss 1998, p. 116. Ankeny, Jason. "Marilyn Manson – Biography & History". AllMusic. All Media Network. Archived from the original on April 26, 2015. Retrieved October 25, 2017. Manson & Strauss 1998, p. 143. Wiederhorn, Jon. "21 Years Ago: Marilyn Manson Issues 'Portrait of an American Family'". Loudwire. Townsquare Media. Archived from the original on May 1, 2017. Retrieved March 24, 2016. Manson & Strauss 1998, p. 144. Baker, Greg (March 16, 1993). "Program Notes 48". Miami New Times. Village Voice Media. Archived from the original on January 12, 2016. Retrieved March 24, 2016. Baker, Greg (February 9, 1994). "Program Notes". Miami New Times. Village Voice Media. Archived from the original on August 4, 2016. Retrieved March 24, 2016. Manson & Strauss 1998, p. 146. Manson & Strauss 1998, pp. 149–150. "Portrait of an American Family". AllMusic. Rovi. Archived from the original on January 28, 2013. Retrieved March 28, 2016. Baker, Greg (January 5, 1995). "Program Notes 38". Miami New Times. Village Voice Media. Archived from the original on May 3, 2016. Retrieved March 24, 2016. Manson & Strauss 1998, p. 170. Revolver Staff (July 15, 2014). "Marilyn Manson and 10 Famous Members of the Church of Satan". Revolver. Archived from the original on March 24, 2016. Retrieved March 24, 2016. Anderson, Jason. "Monster Voodoo Machine – Biography & History". AllMusic. All Media Network. Archived from the original on January 11, 2014. Retrieved March 24, 2014. Manson & Strauss 1998, pp. 161, 178. Manson & Strauss 1998, pp. 190–191. Garis, Mary Grace (October 27, 2015). "13 Creepy Music Videos Perfect For Halloween That Are Even Better Than Watching A Movie". Bustle. Archived from the original on August 13, 2016. Retrieved March 24, 2016. "Smells Like Children – Marilyn Manson – Songs, Reviews, Credits". AllMusic. Rovi. Archived from the original on March 22, 2016. Retrieved March 24, 2016. "Marilyn Manson Biography". Biography.com. FYI. Archived from the original on April 4, 2016. Retrieved March 24, 2016. Evers, Derek (February 13, 2009). "Flashback Friday Video – Marilyn Manson "Dope Hat"". The Fader. Archived from the original on August 12, 2016. Retrieved March 24, 2016. Neil Strauss (May 17, 1997). "A Bogey Band to Scare Parents With". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 6, 2016. Retrieved March 31, 2016. Childers, Chad (October 8, 2015). "19 Years Ago: Marilyn Manson Makes Creative Leap With 'Antichrist Superstar'". Loudwire. Townsquare Media. Archived from the original on April 29, 2017. Retrieved March 31, 2016. Jackson, Alex (September 10, 1996). "Recording Antichrist Superstar A "Trying Experience" For Manson". MTV. Viacom. Archived from the original on June 10, 2016. Retrieved March 31, 2016. Miller, Gerri (December 1, 1998). "Zim Zum Speaks". Metal Edge. Zenbu Media. Thigpen, David E. (February 24, 1997). "Music: Satan's Little Helpers". Time. Archived from the original on June 26, 2013. Retrieved March 31, 2016. Dansby, Andrew (May 21, 2003). "Manson Golden at Number One". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on March 20, 2016. Retrieved March 31, 2016. Kretkowski, Paul D. (November 11, 1997). "Blaming the Shock Rockers: Now that Frank Zappa's dead, who will stick up for Marilyn Manson?". Mother Jones. Foundation For National Progress. Archived from the original on April 8, 2016. Retrieved March 31, 2016. Kaufman, Gil (December 11, 1996). "Another Right Wing Attack On Rap & Rock". MTV. Viacom Media Network. Archived from the original on January 13, 2019. Retrieved January 13, 2019. Mirapaul, Matthew (April 24, 1997). "The Traveling Controversy That Is Marilyn Manson". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 8, 2016. Retrieved March 31, 2016. Prato, Greg. "Remix & Repent – Marilyn Manson | Songs, Reviews, Credits". AllMusic. All Media Network. Archived from the original on January 9, 2016. Retrieved April 20, 2017. "Running With the Devil, by Marilyn Manson". Spin. SpinMedia. February 1998. Archived from the original on April 19, 2016. Retrieved April 19, 2016. Lorraine Ali (September 2, 1998). "Marilyn Manson's New (Happy) Face". Rolling Stone. Wenner Media LLC. Archived from the original on April 15, 2016. Retrieved April 19, 2016. MTV News Staff (December 3, 1997). "Manson, Weiland, Wyclef, Beck Line Up For Dust Brothers". MTV. Viacom. Archived from the original on November 6, 2012. Retrieved April 19, 2016. Childers, Chad (September 15, 2015). "17 Years Ago: Marilyn Manson Goes Glam With 'Mechanical Animals'". Loudwire. Townsquare Media. Archived from the original on May 29, 2016. Retrieved April 21, 2016. Stephen Thomas Erlewine (1998). "Mechanical Animals – Marilyn Manson". AllMusic. All Media Network. Archived from the original on January 1, 2011. Retrieved November 20, 2017. Olsen, Chad. "Marilyn Manson – Mechanical Animals (1998)". Metal Forces. Rockzone Publications. Retrieved April 21, 2016. Kaufman, Gil (August 22, 1998). "Zim Zum Quits Marilyn Manson To Pursue Solo Career". MTV. Viacom. Archived from the original on August 9, 2016. Retrieved August 3, 2016. St. James, Adam. "John 5 – Marilyn Manson's Dirty Little Secret". Guitar.com. Archived from the original on June 10, 2016. Retrieved April 21, 2016. "Rob Halford Says His Two Project Has 'Stood The Test Of Time'". Blabbermouth.net. September 28, 2014. Archived from the original on July 1, 2016. Retrieved May 26, 2016. Vanhorn, Teri (September 15, 1998). "Marilyn Manson Fans Queue Up For Mechanical Animals". MTV. Viacom. Archived from the original on June 10, 2016. Retrieved April 21, 2016. Hochman, Steve (August 16, 1998). "Marilyn Manson Aims to Change Tide of the Mainstream". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on May 18, 2016. Retrieved April 21, 2016. "Marilyn Manson – Mainstream Rock Chart History". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 1, 2016. Retrieved April 21, 2016. MTV News Staff (November 9, 1998). "Marilyn Manson, 'N Sync, Beastie Boys, Lauryn Hill Win at the Billboard Music Video Awards". MTV. Viacom. Archived from the original on June 10, 2016. Retrieved April 21, 2016. "Lauryn Hill The Big Winner At MTV Video Music Awards". Chicago Tribune. tronc. September 10, 1999. Archived from the original on March 22, 2016. Retrieved April 21, 2016. McKinstry, Lee (February 6, 2015). "20 artists you may not have known were nominated for (and won) Grammy Awards". Alternative Press. Alternative Press Magazine, Inc. Archived from the original on February 21, 2017. Retrieved November 16, 2017. Boehlert, Eric (September 24, 1998). "Marilyn Manson Shows He's Dope". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 17, 2015. Retrieved April 16, 2015. Kaufman, Gil (January 27, 1999). "Marilyn Manson, Hole Schedule 'Beautiful Monsters' Tour". MTV. Viacom. Archived from the original on July 27, 2015. Retrieved April 27, 2016. Kaufman, Gil (March 10, 1999). "Best Of '99: Boston Promoter Says Hole Dropping Off Manson Tour". MTV. Viacom. Archived from the original on March 17, 2016. Retrieved April 27, 2016. MTV News Staff (March 15, 1999). "Hole Walks Out On Tour, Manson Injury Postpones Several Dates". MTV. Viacom. Archived from the original on December 20, 2014. Retrieved April 27, 2016. Kaufman, Gil (March 11, 1999). "Hole Threaten To Drop Off Marilyn Manson Joint Tour". MTV. Viacom. Archived from the original on July 28, 2015. Retrieved April 27, 2016. MTV News Staff (March 22, 1999). "Manson Resumes Tour Without Hole, Taps Nashville Pussy And Jack Off Jill For Upcoming Dates". MTV. Viacom. Archived from the original on May 15, 2016. Retrieved April 27, 2016. Sterngold, James (April 29, 1999). "Terror in Littleton: The Culture; Rock Concerts Are Cancelled". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 28, 2016. Retrieved April 27, 2016. "Manson cancels rest of US tour". BBC News. BBC. April 29, 1999. Archived from the original on April 15, 2016. Retrieved April 27, 2016. Christopher Scapelliti (Winter 2000). "Dark Angel". Revolver. No. 3. Future US, Inc. pp. 72–77. Archived from the original on April 7, 2015. MTV News Staff (June 16, 1999). "Marilyn Manson To Shoot Video For "Highway To Hell"". MTV. Viacom. Archived from the original on June 10, 2016. Retrieved April 27, 2016. Tom Bryant (November 10, 2010). "Screaming For Vengeance". Kerrang!. Bauer Media Group. pp. 40–42. Lanham, Tom (November 2000). "Marilyn Manson: Absinthe Makes The Heart Grow Fonder". Alternative Press. No. 148. Alternative Press Magazine, Inc. pp. 76–86. Stephen Robinson (November 24, 1999). "The Last Tour On Earth – Music Review – Album". Hot Press. Archived from the original on August 7, 2016. Retrieved May 26, 2016. Manson, Marilyn (June 8, 1999). "Manson Penning New Music Material". Seems Like Salvation News. Archived from the original on August 16, 2000. Retrieved November 16, 2017. Kessler, Ted (September 9, 2000). ""It's Time For Chaos!" – Marilyn Manson Goes Ape". NME. Time Inc. UK. pp. 28–31. ISSN 0028-6362. "Critic Reviews for Holy Wood (In the Shadow of the Valley of Death) – Metacritic". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Archived from the original on March 16, 2016. Retrieved May 1, 2016. Vanhorn, Teri (December 16, 1999). "Marilyn Manson Gets More Mercurial". MTV. Viacom. Archived from the original on June 10, 2016. Retrieved May 1, 2016. Bezer, Terry (August 15, 2014). "Modern Classics: Marilyn Manson – Holy Wood – Features". Classic Rock. TeamRock. Archived from the original on June 2, 2016. Retrieved May 1, 2016. France, Lisa Respers (April 20, 2009). "Columbine left its indelible mark on pop culture". CNN. Time Warner. Archived from the original on April 15, 2016. Retrieved April 27, 2016. Basham, David (December 16, 1999). "Manson To Walk In The "Valley Of Death" For Next LP". MTV. Viacom. Archived from the original on June 10, 2016. Retrieved May 1, 2016. Myers, Ben (November 18, 2000). "Holy Wood". Kerrang!. No. 831. Bauer Media Group. pp. 29–36. Segal, David (November 27, 2000). "Welcome to His Nightmare: Acceptance". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on June 25, 2016. Retrieved May 1, 2016. Goldyn, A.R. (June 18, 2001). "Guns, God and Government: Interview with Marilyn Manson". The Omaha Reader (latterly by AlterNet.org). Pioneer Publishing. Archived from the original on April 7, 2016. Retrieved May 1, 2016. Quelland, Sarah (December 14, 2000). "Into the Mind of Marilyn". Metroactive Music. Archived from the original on November 2, 2013. Retrieved May 1, 2016. D'Angelo, Joe (March 22, 2001). "Marilyn Manson Bows Out Of Denver Ozzfest Date". MTV. Viacom. Archived from the original on May 8, 2016. Retrieved May 1, 2016. D'Angelo, Joe (May 21, 2001). "Colorado Governor, Congressman Support Anti-Manson Group". MTV. Viacom. Archived from the original on April 25, 2016. Retrieved April 27, 2016. Bychawski, Adam (May 13, 2001). "Manson To Lead Bible Studies Class". NME. Time Inc. UK. Archived from the original on April 15, 2016. Retrieved May 1, 2016. "Marilyn Manson – Guns, God and Government World Tour (2001)". Amazon. October 29, 2002. Retrieved May 1, 2016. "Marilyn Manson: Guns, God and Government – Live in L.A. [Blu-ray] (2009)". Amazon. November 17, 2009. Retrieved May 1, 2016. "Not Another Teen Movie – Original Soundtrack". AllMusic. All Media Network. Archived from the original on May 21, 2016. Retrieved November 23, 2017. Jose Promis (September 27, 2003). "Missing Tracks Mean Fewer U.S. Album Sales". Billboard. Vol. 115, no. 39. p. 14. ISSN 0006-2510. Retrieved May 1, 2016. Payne, Chris (June 30, 2015). "Marilyn Manson & Korn's Jonathan Davis Are Collaborating: What's It Gonna Sound Like?". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 12, 2016. Retrieved May 1, 2016. Tietelman, Brian (July 20, 2012). "In The Wake Of Today's Massacre, Here's Marilyn Manson's Columbine Essay". MetalInsider.net. Archived from the original on June 9, 2016. Retrieved May 1, 2016. Revolver Staff (August 16, 2014). "Marilyn Manson: Survival of the Filthiest". Revolver. Archived from the original on July 29, 2017. Retrieved July 18, 2017. Wiederhorn, Jon (November 21, 2001). "Marilyn Manson Says Scoring Comes Naturally For Him". MTV. Viacom. Archived from the original on June 10, 2016. Retrieved May 1, 2016. Michael, Troy (April 1, 2009). "Sköld vs. KMFDM: Anything But Competition". InnocentWords.com. Archived from the original on June 24, 2016. Retrieved May 1, 2016. Saul, Heather (March 24, 2016). "Dita Von Teese on remaining friends with Marilyn Manson: 'He encouraged all of my eccentricities'". The Independent. Archived from the original on May 10, 2016. Retrieved May 1, 2016. Sexton, Paul (May 26, 2003). "Kelly, Timberlake Continue U.K. Chart Reign". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 18, 2017. Retrieved January 11, 2017. "Hits Of The World". Billboard. Vol. 115, no. 22. May 31, 2003. pp. 80–81. ISSN 0006-2510. Retrieved May 1, 2016. Metal Edge Staff (June 2004). "Readers' Choice Awards: The Results". Metal Edge. Los Angeles: Zenbu Media. pp. 12–41. ISSN 1068-2872. "Marilyn Manson über Stimmung in USA und "Entartete Kunst"" [Marilyn Manson on the mood in the US and "Degenerate Art"]. Der Standard (in German). May 5, 2003. Archived from the original on July 1, 2016. Retrieved May 1, 2016. Wiederhorn, Jon (May 12, 2003). "Marilyn Manson Draws From Dreams, Lunatics For Golden Age Of Grotesque". MTV. Viacom. Archived from the original on June 10, 2016. Retrieved May 1, 2016. "Marilyn Manson: 'The Golden Age Of Grotesque' Cover Art Posted Online". Blabbermouth.net. February 19, 2003. Archived from the original on June 25, 2016. Retrieved May 1, 2016. "Marilyn Manson Launches New Album With Grotesk Burlesk Party". PR Newswire. TheFreeLibrary.com. May 8, 2003. Archived from the original on June 24, 2016. Retrieved May 1, 2016. "Die Grotesk Burlesk Tour Von Marilyn Manson" [The Grotesk Burlesk Tour Of Marilyn Manson]. Ruhr-Guide.de (in German). Gottfried-Helnwein.at. June 1, 2003. Archived from the original on July 1, 2016. Retrieved May 1, 2016. "Doppelherz, video with Marilyn Manson". Helnwein.com. January 1, 2003. Archived from the original on March 15, 2016. Retrieved May 1, 2016. MTV News Staff (April 28, 2003). "For The Record: Quick News on Marilyn Manson and Jean Paul Gaultier". MTV. Viacom. Archived from the original on May 5, 2016. Retrieved May 1, 2016. "Marilyn Manson Calls His 'Best Of' Collection 'A Farewell Compilation'". Blabbermouth.net. September 23, 2004. Archived from the original on June 25, 2016. Retrieved May 4, 2016. Harris, Chris (May 31, 2005). "Nine Inch Nails' Trent Reznor Wins Case Against His Former Partner". MTV News. Viacom. Archived from the original on June 10, 2016. Retrieved May 4, 2016. "Manson To Tour 'Against All Gods'". Billboard. October 5, 2004. Archived from the original on August 3, 2016. Retrieved May 27, 2016. D'Angelo, Joe (September 30, 2004). "Marilyn Manson Loses His Religion For Upcoming Tour". MTV News. Viacom. Archived from the original on June 10, 2016. Retrieved May 4, 2016. "Marilyn Manson: Former Fight/Danzig Guitarist Joins The Fold?". Blabbermouth.net. October 20, 2004. Archived from the original on August 4, 2016. Retrieved May 27, 2016. Wiederhorn, Jon (April 6, 2004). "Fired Marilyn Manson Guitarist Wonders What Went Wrong". MTV News. Viacom. Archived from the original on May 23, 2016. Retrieved May 4, 2016. "Manson's Drummer Injured In Fall". Billboard. September 27, 2004. Archived from the original on March 26, 2016. Retrieved May 4, 2016. "Marilyn Manson Guests On New York's K-Rock 92.3 FM: Audio Available". Blabbermouth.net. November 20, 2004. Archived from the original on June 25, 2016. Retrieved May 4, 2016. "Marilyn Manson's home movies". Hot Press. July 18, 2005. Archived from the original on August 6, 2016. Retrieved May 4, 2016. Harris, Chris (October 28, 2005). "Marilyn Manson Likens His New Guitar God To A Naked Woman". MTV News. Viacom. Archived from the original on March 2, 2016. Retrieved May 4, 2016. Bychawski, Adam (July 18, 2005). "Marilyn Manson Unleashes 'Horrorpilation'". NME. Time Inc. UK. Archived from the original on June 17, 2016. Retrieved May 4, 2016. Ames, Jonathan (May 2007). "Marilyn Manson: Return of the Living Dead". Spin. SpinMedia. Archived from the original on April 13, 2016. Retrieved May 4, 2016. Rosenberg, Axl (May 14, 2007). "Marilyn Manson Likes Cats, Tim Sköld". MetalSucks. Archived from the original on June 29, 2016. Retrieved May 6, 2016. "Marilyn Manson To Perform On 'Tonight Show With Jay Leno'". Blabbermouth.net. October 6, 2006. Archived from the original on June 25, 2016. Retrieved May 6, 2016. DiVita, Joe (February 1, 2016). "Ex-Marilyn Manson Keyboardist Extends Death Wish to Singer". Loudwire. Townsquare Media. Archived from the original on April 23, 2016. Retrieved May 6, 2016. Breihan, Tom (February 1, 2016). "Madonna Wayne Gacy Wishes Death Upon Former Bandmate Marilyn Manson". Stereogum. SpinMedia. Archived from the original on April 7, 2016. Retrieved May 6, 2016. MTV News Staff (December 22, 2007). "Marilyn Manson Countersues Bandmate; Plus Chingy, DMX, Yung Berg, Jordin Sparks, Mario, Kid Rock & More, In For The Record". MTV News. Viacom. Archived from the original on June 10, 2016. Retrieved May 6, 2016. Harris, Chris (May 15, 2007). "Marilyn Manson's Sex Scene: 'Stellar Acting' Or The Real Deal?". MTV News. Viacom. Archived from the original on April 25, 2016. Retrieved May 6, 2016. Bychawski, Adam (May 16, 2007). "Marilyn Manson in video controversy". NME. Time Inc. UK. Archived from the original on June 17, 2016. Retrieved May 6, 2016. SPIN Staff (May 23, 2007). "Marilyn Manson's 'Heart-Shaped Glasses' Music Video". Spin. SpinMedia. Archived from the original on June 4, 2016. Retrieved May 6, 2016. "Marilyn Manson Says Sex Scenes In New Video Are 'Simulated'". Blabbermouth.net. May 15, 2007. Archived from the original on June 25, 2016. Retrieved May 6, 2016. "Manson pays Wood highest video salary in history". Irish Examiner. Landmark Media Investments. May 16, 2007. Archived from the original on June 11, 2016. Retrieved May 6, 2016. "Marilyn Manson – Eat Me, Drink Me". Amazon.com. Archived from the original on March 16, 2016. Retrieved May 6, 2016. Hasty, Katie (June 13, 2007). "T-Pain Soars To No. 1 Ahead Of Rihanna, McCartney". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 26, 2013. Retrieved May 6, 2016. "Hits Of The World". Billboard. Vol. 119, no. 25. Nielsen Business Media, Inc. June 23, 2007. pp. 86–87. ISSN 0006-2510. Retrieved May 6, 2016. "Putting Holes In Happiness – EP von Marilyn Manson in iTunes". iTunes Germany (in German). January 2007. Archived from the original on August 23, 2016. Retrieved May 6, 2016. Harris, Chris (April 5, 2007). "Marilyn Manson Reveals He Came Close To Suicide; LP 'Was My Salvation'". MTV News. Viacom. Archived from the original on October 8, 2016. Retrieved May 10, 2016. Cohen, Jonathan (April 24, 2007). "Devils, Vampires Rub Elbows On Manson Album". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 3, 2016. Retrieved May 10, 2016. Syrjala, Marko (January 7, 2008). "News, Interviews, Concert Reviews >> Marilyn Manson – Live in Helsinki". Metal Rules. Archived from the original on June 16, 2016. Retrieved May 10, 2016. Guitar World Staff (May 7, 2007). "Slayer and Marilyn Manson Announce Dates for Co-Headlining Tour". Guitar World. Archived from the original on June 17, 2016. Retrieved May 10, 2016. Harris, Chris (June 18, 2007). "Slayer's Kerry King Warns Marilyn Manson About Co-Headlining Run". MTV News. Viacom. Archived from the original on October 8, 2016. Retrieved May 10, 2016. Saavedra, David (November 16, 2007). "Marilyn Manson: 'Puedo vivir como quiera en mi mundo de vanidad'" [Marilyn Manson: 'I can live as I want in my world of vanity']. El Mundo (in Spanish). Unidad Editorial. Archived from the original on June 11, 2016. Retrieved May 10, 2016. Zaleski, Annie (January 9, 2008). "Marilyn Manson and Twiggy Ramirez are back together!". The Riverfront Times. Euclid Media Group. Archived from the original on October 8, 2016. Retrieved May 10, 2016. "Twiggy Ramirez Rejoins Marilyn Manson". Blabbermouth.net. January 9, 2008. Archived from the original on June 25, 2016. Retrieved May 10, 2016. "Wes Borland to play guitar for Marilyn Manson". Metal Injection. August 15, 2008. Archived from the original on October 8, 2016. Retrieved May 13, 2016. "Marilyn Manson Vs. Limp Bizkit's Wes Borland". Blabbermouth.net. May 13, 2009. Archived from the original on October 8, 2016. Retrieved May 13, 2016. Springer, Anthony (December 13, 2008). "Ne-Yo on Marilyn Manson, Country Music and Reaching R. Kelly Status". HipHopDX. Archived from the original on June 5, 2016. Retrieved May 13, 2016. Harris, Chris (December 3, 2008). "Marilyn Manson Is Not Working With Ne-Yo, Spokesperson Insists". MTV News. Viacom. Archived from the original on June 10, 2016. Retrieved May 13, 2016. Snead, Elizabeth (December 26, 2008). "Hey, gals and ghouls! Marilyn Manson is still on the market". Zap2it. Archived from the original on July 1, 2016. Retrieved May 13, 2016. Bosso, Joe (April 17, 2009). "Marilyn Manson says new album 'left many scars'". MusicRadar. Future plc. Archived from the original on June 25, 2016. Retrieved May 13, 2016. Powers, Nicole (June 5, 2009). "Marilyn Manson: The High End of Low". SuicideGirls. Archived from the original on October 8, 2016. Retrieved May 13, 2016. "Marilyn Manson: 'The High End Of Low' Artwork, Track Listing Revealed". Blabbermouth.net. April 16, 2009. Archived from the original on October 8, 2016. Retrieved May 13, 2016. Young, Alex (May 27, 2009). "Marilyn Manson – The High End of Low – Album Review". Consequence of Sound. Archived from the original on June 30, 2016. Retrieved May 13, 2016. Hayden, Chaunce (January 30, 2009). "The Return of Shock Rocker Marilyn Manson". Steppin' Out. Larry Collins. pp. 61–63, 86. Archived from the original on October 8, 2016. Retrieved May 14, 2016. Goodman, William (June 24, 2009). "Q&A: Marilyn Manson". Spin. SpinMedia. Archived from the original on April 17, 2016. Retrieved May 13, 2016. Kreps, Daniel (March 24, 2009). "Marilyn Manson Offers Free Song As New Album "The High End of Low" Lurks". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on October 8, 2016. Retrieved May 13, 2016. "Marilyn Manson – We're From America (CD Single)". Discogs. Zink Media, Inc. Archived from the original on October 26, 2016. Retrieved May 13, 2016. "ShockHound – Shock TV – Marilyn Manson: The ShockHound Interview – Chapter II". ShockHound. Hot Topic. June 11, 2009. Archived from the original on June 14, 2009. Retrieved October 23, 2016. Kreps, Daniel (April 17, 2009). "Marilyn Manson Courts Controversy With "The High End of Low"". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on October 8, 2016. Retrieved May 13, 2016. Caulfield, Keith (June 3, 2009). "Eminem Stays Atop Billboard 200; Grizzly Bear, Manson Debut Top 10". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 28, 2016. Retrieved May 13, 2016. Hartmann, Graham (April 17, 2012). "Marilyn Manson: I'm Not Trying To Be Reborn, I'm Trying to Transform". Loudwire. Townsquare Media. Archived from the original on June 24, 2016. Retrieved May 13, 2016. Howard, Theresa. "50 Cent, Glaceau forge unique bond". USA Today. ABC News. Archived from the original on June 3, 2016. Retrieved May 13, 2016. Epstein, Dan (March–April 2012). "Man That You Fear – Feature". Revolver. pp. 17–23. Archived from the original on October 8, 2016. Retrieved May 13, 2016. Aswad, Jem (August 14, 2015). "Zane Lowe Talks Beats 1's First Weeks, Working With Trent Reznor and Dr. Dre, And 'Gorging On Pearl Jam Radio'". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 22, 2016. Retrieved May 13, 2016. Kreps, Daniel (June 2, 2009). "Trent Reznor Says Marilyn Manson Has "Become A Dopey Clown"". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on October 8, 2016. Retrieved May 13, 2016. Youngs, Ian (June 3, 2009). "The mad world of Marilyn Manson". BBC News. BBC. Archived from the original on July 1, 2016. Retrieved May 13, 2016. Hugo Rifkind (June 5, 2009). "A most bizarre encounter with Marilyn Manson". The Times. Archived from the original on October 8, 2016. Retrieved May 13, 2016. Nissim, Mayer (September 23, 2013). "'Alan Carr: Chatty Man': Alan's top guests and memorable moments". Digital Spy. Hearst Media. Archived from the original on August 20, 2016. Retrieved May 13, 2016. Alan Carr (August 13, 2009). "Manson Man Action". alancarr.net. Archived from the original on October 8, 2016. Retrieved May 13, 2016. San Roman, Gabriel (April 11, 2012). "Marilyn Manson's 'No Reflection' Latest to Mirror Images of Violence Against Women". OC Weekly. Duncan McIntosh. Archived from the original on October 8, 2016. Retrieved May 13, 2016. Kaufman, Gil (August 6, 2010). "Eminem's 'Love The Way You Lie' Isn't First Video To Deal With Domestic Abuse". MTV News. Viacom. Archived from the original on October 8, 2016. Retrieved May 13, 2016. "Marilyn Manson Splits With Interscope". Blabbermouth.net. December 3, 2009. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved May 13, 2016. "Marilyn Manson's Attorney Says Former Keyboardist Will Not Get Any Proceeds From Settlement". Blabbermouth.net. December 22, 2009. Archived from the original on June 25, 2016. Retrieved May 13, 2016. "Marilyn Manson, ex-bandmate Bier settle lawsuit". Toronto Star. December 27, 2009. Archived from the original on June 29, 2016. Retrieved May 13, 2016. "Marilyn Manson, Former Bandmate Settle Lawsuit". Billboard. December 28, 2009. Archived from the original on August 14, 2016. Retrieved May 13, 2016. Goodman, William (December 3, 2009). "Marilyn Manson: "I'm Back with Evan Rachel Wood"". Spin. SpinMedia. Archived from the original on October 8, 2016. Retrieved May 18, 2016. Chris D. (May 5, 2011). "New Marilyn Manson = "Suicide Death Metal"". Decibel. Archived from the original on June 23, 2016. Retrieved May 18, 2016. Fred Sablan. "Fred Sablan – Biography". FredSablan.com. Archived from the original on December 30, 2013. Retrieved May 19, 2016. "Marilyn Manson Signs With Cooking Vinyl Records". Blabbermouth.net. November 7, 2010. Archived from the original on May 29, 2016. Retrieved May 18, 2016. Shaw, Zach (November 8, 2010). "Marilyn Manson Signs New Record Deal With Cooking Vinyl Records". MetalInsider.net. Archived from the original on June 9, 2016. Retrieved May 18, 2016. Paine, Andre (November 8, 2010). "Marilyn Manson: Antichrist indie star". Reuters. Archived from the original on April 27, 2016. Retrieved May 18, 2016. Kerrang! Staff (March 18, 2011). "Marilyn Manson stars in My Chemical Romance-esque pop video". Kerrang!. Bauer Media Group. Archived from the original on May 14, 2016. Retrieved May 18, 2016. "Marilyn Manson Guest Stars In D'Hask's "Tempat Ku" Music Video". The PRP. March 17, 2011. Archived from the original on June 30, 2016. Retrieved May 18, 2016. Bychawski, Adam (February 24, 2011). "Marilyn Manson drummer Ginger Fish quits after 15 years in singer's band". NME. Time Inc. UK. Archived from the original on January 5, 2016. Retrieved May 18, 2016. Bychawski, Adam (May 23, 2011). "Marilyn Manson previews eighth studio". NME. Time Inc. UK. Archived from the original on April 15, 2016. Retrieved May 18, 2016. Coplan, Chris (September 1, 2011). "Marilyn Manson's Shia LaBeouf-directed short film: "Born Villain"". Consequence of Sound. Archived from the original on June 30, 2016. Retrieved May 19, 2016. Blumeyer, Kevin (September 1, 2011). "Shia LaBeouf Directed the Marilyn Manson Music Video 'Born Villain' and This is the Result". ComingSoon.net. CraveOnline. Archived from the original on June 6, 2016. Retrieved May 16, 2016. Weingarten, Christopher (July 1, 2011). "Shia LaBeouf to Direct Marilyn Manson Documentary". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on July 29, 2016. Retrieved May 19, 2016. "Marilyn Manson Taps Shia LaBeouf to Direct Doc". Spin. SpinMedia. July 1, 2011. Archived from the original on June 4, 2016. Retrieved May 19, 2016. Lecaro, Lina (September 13, 2011). "Marilyn Manson's Born Villain Tracks: We Heard Them First". LA Weekly. Archived from the original on February 2, 2016. Retrieved May 19, 2016. Warner, Kara (August 31, 2011). "Shia LaBeouf Calls Marilyn Manson Video 'A Cool Diversion'". MTV News. Viacom. Archived from the original on May 6, 2016. Retrieved May 19, 2016. Rao, Mallika (August 31, 2011). "'Born Villain': The Shia LaBeouf/Marilyn Manson Collaboration Has Arrived (VIDEO)". The Huffington Post. AOL. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved May 19, 2016. Bychawski, Adam (November 23, 2011). "Marilyn Manson drummer Chris Vrenna quits the band". NME. Time Inc. UK. Archived from the original on June 17, 2016. Retrieved May 19, 2016. "Marilyn Manson: 'Born Villain' Release Date Announced". Blabbermouth.net. March 12, 2012. Archived from the original on June 25, 2016. Retrieved May 19, 2016. Smirke, Richard (May 3, 2012). "Cooking Vinyl's Martin Goldschmidt On Universal-EMI Deal, Marilyn Manson, the Rise of Indies". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 18, 2015. Retrieved May 19, 2016. "Born Villain – Marilyn Manson / Awards". AllMusic. Rovi. Archived from the original on March 15, 2016. Retrieved May 19, 2016. "Official Rock & Metal Albums Chart Top 40: 13 May 2012 – 19 May 2012". Official Charts Company. May 19, 2012. Archived from the original on August 3, 2016. Retrieved May 19, 2016. "Marilyn Manson: "Slo-Mo-Tion" Proxy Remix Exclusive". Vice. October 25, 2012. Archived from the original on August 28, 2016. Retrieved May 19, 2016. Ouellette, Mary (June 15, 2012). "Marilyn Manson, April 2012". Loudwire. Townsquare Media. Archived from the original on June 24, 2016. Retrieved May 19, 2016. Kaufman, Spencer (July 12, 2012). "Rob Zombie and Marilyn Manson Team Up for 2012 Twins of Evil Tour". Loudwire. Townsquare Media. Archived from the original on May 5, 2016. Retrieved May 19, 2016. Childers, Chad (April 22, 2013). "Marilyn Manson + Alice Cooper – 2013 Must-See Rock Concerts". Loudwire. Townsquare Media. Retrieved May 19, 2016. Baltin, Steve (August 3, 2012). "Marilyn Manson, Steve Jones Rock 'Californication' Season Finale Event". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on August 3, 2016. Retrieved May 23, 2016. Nepales, Ruben (August 17, 2012). "David Duchovny talks about 'Californication' and Marilyn Manson". Inquirer.net. Philippine Daily Inquirer. Archived from the original on March 13, 2016. Retrieved May 23, 2016. Scully, Alan (January 23, 2015). "Marilyn Manson to unveil 'Pale Emperor' in Bethlehem". The Morning Call. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved May 23, 2016. Lauvou, Jim (May 30, 2013). "Marilyn Manson: "I Like To Smoke and Hang Out With The Gangsta Rappers"". Phoenix New Times. Archived from the original on March 12, 2015. Retrieved May 23, 2016. Fred Sablan (June 25, 2014). "Twitter / Fredsablan: Lots of love for my brother ..." Archived from the original on September 15, 2014. Retrieved June 27, 2014. Grow, Kory (January 8, 2015). "Hear Marilyn Manson's Eerie New 'Cupid Carries a Gun'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on September 16, 2017. Retrieved January 13, 2018. O'Connell, Michael (April 24, 2014). "WGN America's 'Salem' Enlists Marilyn Manson for Opening Titles (Video)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved May 23, 2016. Taylor, Drew (October 23, 2014). "Review: 'John Wick' Is A B-Movie Pleasure, Anchored By Keanu Reeves' Raw Charisma". Indiewire. Penske Media Corporation. Archived from the original on October 31, 2015. Retrieved May 23, 2016. Rosenberg, Axl (October 27, 2014). "Marilyn Manson is on the "Third Day of a Seven Day Binge"". MetalSucks. Archived from the original on May 4, 2016. Retrieved May 23, 2016. Grow, Kory (October 27, 2014). "Hear Marilyn Manson's Punkish New 'Third Day of a Seven Day Binge'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 21, 2016. Retrieved May 23, 2016. "Marilyn Manson Premieres New Song, "Third Day of a Seven Day Binge"". Revolver. October 26, 2014. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved May 23, 2016. Bezer, Terry (November 3, 2014). "Marilyn Manson, Live in Los Angeles". Metal Hammer. TeamRock. Archived from the original on April 20, 2016. Retrieved September 19, 2016. Khomami, Nadia (December 16, 2014). "Marilyn Manson drops new single 'Deep Six' from forthcoming album 'The Pale Emperor' – listen". NME. Time Inc. UK. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved May 23, 2016. Grow, Kory (December 19, 2014). "See Marilyn Manson's Unsettling, Phallic 'Deep Six' Video". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 29, 2016. Retrieved May 23, 2016. "Rock Music: Top Mainstream Rock Songs Chart – The Week of March 14, 2015". Billboard. March 5, 2015. Archived from the original on February 2, 2016. Retrieved May 23, 2015. Styles, Wes (January 8, 2015). "Marilyn Manson Releases 3rd New Song 'Cupid Carries A Gun'". WQLZ. Mid-West Family Broadcasting. Archived from the original on August 3, 2016. Retrieved May 23, 2016. Crane, Matt (April 25, 2014). "Marilyn Manson previews new song, "Cupid Carries A Gun"". Alternative Press. Alternative Press Magazine, Inc. Archived from the original on June 24, 2016. Retrieved May 23, 2016. Ryzik, Melena (January 15, 2015). "A Dark Prince Steps Into the Light". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 26, 2015. Retrieved May 23, 2016. Brophy, Aaron (January 20, 2015). "Why Marilyn Manson's 'The Pale Emperor' Is A 'F*ck You' To The Devil". The Huffington Post. AOL Music. Archived from the original on March 6, 2016. Retrieved May 23, 2016. "Marilyn Manson's Mother Dies After Battle With Dementia". Blabbermouth.net. May 18, 2014. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved May 23, 2016. Lynch, Joe (January 28, 2015). "Who Says Rock Is Dead? Marilyn Manson, Fall Out Boy & More Notch Big Debuts". Billboard. Archived from the original on January 30, 2016. Retrieved May 23, 2016. Caulfield, Keith (January 28, 2015). "Fall Out Boy Scores Third No. 1 Album on Billboard 200". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 29, 2016. Retrieved January 28, 2015. Thompson, Barry (January 20, 2015). "Marilyn Manson Interview – Marilyn Manson on 'The Pale Emperor', Grunge, Courtney Love". Esquire. Hearst Media. Archived from the original on January 22, 2015. Retrieved January 20, 2015. Sosa, Chris (February 2, 2015). "Marilyn Manson Just Made an Unexpected Comeback". The Huffington Post. AOL. Archived from the original on August 9, 2016. Retrieved February 2, 2015. "Marilyn Manson, 'The Pale Emperor' – 20 Best Metal Albums of 2015". Rolling Stone. December 10, 2015. Archived from the original on February 2, 2016. Retrieved December 10, 2015. Spanos, Brittany (May 11, 2015). "Watch Marilyn Manson Become 'Mephistopheles of Los Angeles'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 26, 2015. Retrieved June 24, 2015. Reed, Ryan (July 10, 2015). "Watch Marilyn Manson's Creepy 'Third Day of a Seven Day Binge' Video". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 21, 2016. Retrieved September 20, 2016. Blistein, Jon (March 31, 2015). "Smashing Pumpkins, Marilyn Manson Plot End Times Tour". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on May 19, 2016. Retrieved May 23, 2016. Asulin, Chelsi (March 31, 2015). "Marilyn Manson & Smashing Pumpkins Announce Co-Headlining North American Tour". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 16, 2016. Retrieved May 23, 2016. Vanderbilt, Mike (January 5, 2016). "Neon noir meets outlaw country in Shooter Jennings' tribute to Giorgio Moroder". The A.V. Club. The Onion. Archived from the original on March 5, 2016. Retrieved March 2, 2016. Leahey, Andrew (January 4, 2016). "Shooter Jennings Enlists Marilyn Manson, Brandi Carlile for 'Countach'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on May 5, 2016. Retrieved March 2, 2016. Kaye, Ben (February 18, 2016). "Marilyn Manson covers the hell out of David Bowie's "Cat People" – listen". Consequence of Sound. Archived from the original on June 28, 2016. Retrieved March 2, 2016. Moore, Sam (August 3, 2016). "Watch Marilyn Manson star in disturbing 16-bit video for his cover of David Bowie's 'Cat People'". NME. Time Inc. UK. Archived from the original on August 27, 2016. Retrieved August 12, 2016. DiVita, Joe (February 29, 2016). "Slipknot + Marilyn Manson Reveal Itinerary for 2016 Summer Tour; Corey Taylor Launching Apple Music Show". Loudwire. Townsquare Media. Archived from the original on June 8, 2016. Retrieved May 30, 2016. Payne, Chris (February 16, 2016). "Slipknot Plots U.S. Tour With Marilyn Manson and Of Mice & Men". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 31, 2016. Retrieved May 30, 2016. "Slipknot singer has surgery on his neck, which he didn't realise he'd broken". BBC Online. BBC. June 7, 2016. Archived from the original on September 17, 2016. Retrieved June 8, 2016. NME News Desk (July 1, 2015). "Marilyn Manson making 'acoustic and Southern-sounding' music with Korn frontman". NME. Time Inc. UK. Archived from the original on December 14, 2015. Retrieved May 30, 2016. Cindy Scull (November 2, 2015). "Marilyn Manson – 97.1FM – The Eagle". KEGL. iHeartMedia. Retrieved May 30, 2016. Copsey, Rob (March 8, 2016). "Record Store Day 2016: The full list of 557 exclusive music releases revealed". Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on June 11, 2016. Retrieved May 30, 2016. "Record Store Day 2016: The good, the bad and the ugly from this year's release list". Fact. The Vinyl Factory. March 9, 2016. Archived from the original on May 14, 2016. Retrieved May 30, 2016. John Earls (September 28, 2016). "Marilyn Manson says new album 'Say10' is 'The last thing people will expect'". NME. Time Inc. UK. Archived from the original on September 29, 2016. Retrieved September 28, 2016. Kennelty, Greg (September 27, 2016). "Marilyn Manson To Release An Unreleased, "Legendary" Video From 1996". Metal Injection. Archived from the original on October 1, 2016. Retrieved September 27, 2016. DeVita, Joe (July 19, 2016). "Marilyn Manson Announces New Album 'Say10'". Loudwire. Townsquare Media. Archived from the original on July 20, 2016. Retrieved July 20, 2016. Grow, Kory (September 16, 2016). "Marilyn Manson Teases 'Pretty Violent' New Album 'SAY10'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on September 19, 2016. Retrieved September 20, 2016. Stern, Marlow (November 8, 2016). "Marilyn Manson's Shocking Trump Video". The Daily Beast. IAC. Archived from the original on November 9, 2016. Retrieved November 9, 2016. Segall, Bryce (October 4, 2017). "Fire Away: A Conversation with Marilyn Manson". Consequence of Sound. Archived from the original on November 11, 2017. Retrieved December 2, 2017. "May 8th, 2017 Interview With Marilyn Manson on Fabulous TV". YouTube. May 9, 2017. Archived from the original on January 15, 2018. Retrieved May 9, 2017. Gaca, Anna (September 11, 2017). "Marilyn Manson Releases Single "We Know Where You Fucking Live", Announces New Album Heaven Upside Down". Spin. Archived from the original on September 11, 2017. Retrieved September 11, 2017. Grow, Kory (September 20, 2017). "Hear Marilyn Manson's New Love Song 'Kill4Me'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on September 21, 2017. Retrieved September 20, 2017. Folgar, Abel (October 26, 2017). "Marilyn Manson's Scott "Daisy Berkowitz" Putesky Remembered". Miami New Times. Archived from the original on November 11, 2017. Retrieved November 10, 2017. Young, Alex (October 24, 2017). "Marilyn Manson parts ways with Twiggy Ramirez following rape allegations | Consequence of Sound". Consequence of Sound. Archived from the original on October 25, 2017. Retrieved October 25, 2017. Fu, Eddie (November 7, 2017). "The Mars Volta's Juan Alderete is Marilyn Manson's new bassist". Consequence of Sound. Retrieved June 4, 2019. "Rob Zombie and Marilyn Manson Unite For Beatles Cover as 'Twins Of Evil 2' Tour Kicks Off In Detroit". Billboard. Retrieved December 25, 2019. Kelly, Brendan (May 16, 2018). "Rockfest founder's band Deadly Apples touring with Rob Zombie, Marilyn Manson". Montreal Gazette. Retrieved December 25, 2019. Edwards, Briony (March 18, 2019). "Marilyn Manson has nearly finished his new album". Metal Hammer. Retrieved February 8, 2020. Reilly, Nick (March 28, 2019). ""It's been a blast": Marilyn Manson's drummer Gil Sharone quits band after five years". NME. Retrieved May 16, 2019. Kaufman, Spencer (June 18, 2019). "Marilyn Manson officially reveals new drummer Brandon Pertzborn". Consequence of Sound. Retrieved June 22, 2019. Childers, Chad (July 8, 2019). "Marilyn Manson: New Album 'Full of Drama'". Loudwire. Retrieved February 9, 2020. "ROB ZOMBIE And MARILYN MANSON Announce 'Twins Of Evil: Hell Never Dies Tour 2019'; BLABBERMOUTH.NET Presale Available". Blabbermouth.net. February 19, 2019. Retrieved December 25, 2019. Grow, Kory (November 22, 2019). "Marilyn Manson Covers the Doors for Stephen King's The Stand". Rolling Stone. Retrieved February 14, 2020. Revolver Staff (November 22, 2019). "Hear Marilyn Manson's Southern Gothic Cover of the Doors' "The End"". Revolver. Retrieved February 14, 2020. "GoFundMe Launched For Marilyn Manson/Mars Volta Bassist Juan Alderete". Kerrang!. February 4, 2020. Retrieved February 8, 2020. Richards, Will (April 30, 2020). "Marilyn Manson says he's finished his "masterpiece" of a new album". NME. Retrieved April 30, 2020. "Marilyn Manson To Release 'We Are Chaos' Single Tomorrow". Blabbermouth.net. July 28, 2020. Retrieved July 28, 2020. "MARILYN MANSON To Release New Album 'We Are Chaos' In September; Video For Title Track Available". Blabbermouth.net. July 29, 2020. Retrieved July 29, 2020. Shaffer, Claire (July 29, 2020). "Marilyn Manson Announces New Album 'We Are Chaos,' Shares Title Track". Rolling Stone. Retrieved July 31, 2020. Caulfield, Keith (September 20, 2020). "YoungBoy Never Broke Again Achieves Third No. 1 Album in Less Than a Year on the Billboard 200 Chart With 'Top'". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 24, 2020. Retrieved September 20, 2020. "Marilyn Manson dropped by record label Loma Vista following abuse allegations". The Independent. February 2, 2021. Retrieved February 2, 2021. Newman, Jason; Grow, Kory (November 15, 2021). "Marilyn Manson: The Monster Hiding in Plain Sight". Rolling Stone. Linzinmeir, Taylor (May 13, 2023). "Former Suicidal Tendencies, Marilyn Manson Drummer Brandon Pertzborn Joins The Offspring". Loudwire. Retrieved June 28, 2023. Sevinc, Bihter (May 16, 2023). "Marilyn Manson's Wife Lindsay Usich Breaks Social Media Silence". Rock Celebrities. Retrieved August 19, 2023. Distefano, Alex (November 21, 2013). "Top 10 Shock Rock Bands of All Time". OC Weekly. Duncan McIntosh Co. Archived from the original on May 21, 2016. Retrieved June 2, 2016. Garza, Richard (January 29, 2015). "Marilyn Manson trades shock rock for new sound in The Pale Emperor". Western Herald. Western Michigan University. Retrieved June 2, 2016. Wolgamott, L. Kent (May 30, 2013). "High Guru of shock rock". Boulder Weekly. Stewart Sallo. Archived from the original on September 16, 2016. Retrieved June 2, 2016. Hartmann, Graham (March 2, 2012). "Marilyn Manson Calls New Album His 'Grandest Concept Record' + Disputes 'Shock Rock' Label". Loudwire. Townsquare Media. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved June 2, 2016. "Friday Night with Jonathan Ross". Friday Night with Jonathan Ross. Season 4. Episode 11. June 6, 2003. 14 minutes in. BBC. BBC One. Archived from the original on January 23, 2016. Retrieved June 13, 2016. Ross: How would you describe your band? I've heard the new album and there's so much going on. Do you consider it heavy metal or glam rock or dance – what is it? / Manson: I don't really care for genres. When we first started out, grunge was everywhere. After that, it was the whole industrial thing. Then it was nu metal. And we've outlasted them all. We're a rock 'n' roll band. Weinstein, Deena (July 7, 2016). "Playing with gender in the key of metal". In Heesch, Florian; Scott, Niall (eds.). Heavy Metal, Gender and Sexuality. Taylor & Francis. p. 18. ISBN 9781317122982. "Marilyn Manson – Antichrist Superstar". AllMusic. Rovi. Archived from the original on May 25, 2016. Retrieved June 2, 2016. Watson, Elijah (April 30, 2012). "Marilyn Manson returns with signature darkness, intelligence". The Daily Texan. Archived from the original on February 19, 2013. Retrieved January 25, 2018. Karl, Spracklen; Spracklen, Beverly (August 15, 2018). "Goths and the Globalisation". The Evolution of Goth Culture. Emerald Publishing Limited. p. 97. ISBN 9781787146761. Serpick, Evan. "Marilyn Manson – Rolling Stone Biography". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 27, 2016. Retrieved June 2, 2016. "Goth Rock Music Genre Overview". AllMusic. Retrieved January 25, 2018. Kaufman, Spencer (September 11, 2020). "Marilyn Manson Masterfully Embraces His Influences on WE ARE CHAOS: Review". Consequence of Sound. Archived from the original on September 11, 2020. Retrieved September 11, 2020. Schafer, Joseph (April 8, 2015). "The 10 Best Marilyn Manson Songs". Stereogum. SpinMedia. Archived from the original on June 27, 2015. Retrieved June 2, 2016. D'Angelo, Joe (May 29, 2002). "Marilyn Manson Splits With Bassist Twiggy Ramirez". MTV. Viacom. Archived from the original on May 20, 2015. Retrieved June 2, 2016. Riemenschneider, Chris (February 7, 2008). "The Big Gigs: Shows and highlights of the upcoming entertainment week". Star Tribune. Michael J. Klingensmith. Archived from the original on August 10, 2016. Retrieved June 2, 2016. Doerschuk, Andy (September 24, 2009). "From The Archive: Ginger Fish Vs. Marilyn Manson". Drum!. Enter Music Publishing, Inc. Archived from the original on February 20, 2016. Retrieved June 2, 2016. Dolan, Jon (January 20, 2015). "Marilyn Manson: The Pale Emperor". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on May 6, 2016. Retrieved June 2, 2016. "Marilyn Manson – The High End of Low | Album Reviews". Consequence of Sound. May 27, 2009. Archived from the original on June 30, 2016. Retrieved June 19, 2016. Bailey, Thomas. "Marilyn Manson : Born Villain". Beat.com.au. Furst Media. Archived from the original on August 16, 2016. Retrieved June 2, 2016. "Review: Marilyn Manson Born Villain". KASC. Arizona State University. May 2, 2012. Archived from the original on September 17, 2016. Retrieved June 19, 2016. Grow, Kory (December 15, 2014). "Hear Marilyn Manson's Vicious Dance-Floor Metal Banger 'Deep Six'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 21, 2016. Retrieved June 19, 2016. Macgregor, Jody (January 15, 2016). "First Impressions: Marilyn Manson – Pale Emperor". Junkee. Junkee Media. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved June 19, 2016. Nissim, Mayer (May 1, 2012). "Marilyn Manson: 'Born Villain' – Album review". Digital Spy. Hearst Media. Archived from the original on October 8, 2016. Retrieved June 19, 2016. "Metroactive Music | Marilyn Manson". Metro Silicon Valley. Metro Newspapers. May 15, 2003. Archived from the original on June 17, 2016. Retrieved June 19, 2016. Paulet, Emma (February 11, 2015). "The Pale Emperor: Marilyn Manson". Perdeby.co.za. Perdeby Newspaper. Archived from the original on August 19, 2016. Retrieved June 19, 2016. Furness, Dyllan (May 12, 2015). "Marilyn Manson Releases New Video for "The Mephistopheles of Los Angeles"". New Times Broward-Palm Beach. Archived from the original on October 8, 2016. Retrieved June 19, 2016. Chris Norris (January 13, 1997). "The Satanic Verses". New York. Vol. 30, no. 1. New York Media, LLC. pp. 48, 62, 79. ISSN 0028-7369. Retrieved June 19, 2016. Ewens, Hannah (July 29, 2016). "The evolution of Marilyn Manson: from Columbine scapegoat to Belieber". The Guardian. Archived from the original on October 15, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016. Wray, Tyson. "Marilyn Manson Interview | Beat Magazine". Beat.com.au. Furst Media. Archived from the original on June 19, 2016. Retrieved June 19, 2016. Shultz, Steve (February 12, 2015). "Marilyn Manson at the Fillmore Auditorium in Denver (photos, review)". HeyReverb.com. The Denver Post. Archived from the original on April 28, 2016. Retrieved June 19, 2016. Strauss, Neil (January 23, 1997). "Marilyn Manson: Sympathy for the Devil". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 23, 2017. Retrieved January 13, 2018. "Album Review: Marilyn Manson – The Pale Emperor". Nouse. University of York Students' Union. February 13, 2015. Archived from the original on September 19, 2016. Retrieved June 19, 2016. Semley, Jon (January 28, 2015). "Marilyn Manson – NOW Toronto Magazine". Now. Now Communications. Archived from the original on August 28, 2016. Retrieved June 19, 2016. Bogosian, Dan (January 30, 2015). "Live Review: Marilyn Manson at New York City's Terminal 5 (1/29)". Consequence of Sound. Archived from the original on March 18, 2016. Retrieved June 19, 2016. Robinson, Melina (February 17, 2015). "Review: Marilyn Manson brings Valentine's Day mayhem to HOB". Las Vegas Sun. Greenspun Media Group. Archived from the original on June 25, 2016. Retrieved June 19, 2016. Price, Dale (November 13, 2000). "Album Review: Marilyn Manson – Holy Wood (In The Shadow of the Valley of Death) / Releases". Drowned in Sound. Silentway. Archived from the original on September 21, 2016. Retrieved June 19, 2016. Robb, John (May 12, 2009). "Marilyn Manson's High End Of Low Reviewed Track-By-Track". The Quietus. Archived from the original on July 19, 2012. Retrieved June 19, 2016. Grow, Kory (February 9, 2015). "PAPERMAG – Marilyn Manson Shows Us His Soft Side". Paper. Paper Communications. Archived from the original on March 7, 2016. Retrieved June 19, 2016. Knopper, Steve (January 29, 2015). "A poignant, mystical Marilyn Manson holds forth". Chicago Tribune. tronc. Archived from the original on August 19, 2016. Retrieved June 19, 2016. Swan, David (February 16, 2015). "Marilyn Manson: "I'm somewhere between a peacock and a panther"". FasterLouder. Junkee Media. Archived from the original on February 6, 2016. Retrieved June 19, 2016. Hudak, Joseph (February 18, 2016). "Hear Marilyn Manson, Shooter Jennings Cover David Bowie's 'Cat People'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on August 9, 2017. Retrieved January 13, 2018. Hit Parader Staff (December 2012). "Top 100 Vocalists". Hit Parader. Vol. 12, no. 12. Charlton Publications. p. 22. Scaggs, Austin (October 14, 2004). "Q&A: Marilyn Manson". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on May 11, 2016. Retrieved June 14, 2017. MTV News Staff (February 24, 1997). "Marilyn Manson Protestors Target Kiss". MTV. Viacom. Archived from the original on October 23, 2017. Retrieved June 14, 2017. Liz Raiss (February 20, 2015). "Marilyn Manson Explains His Life-Long Love Affair With Makeup". The Fader. Archived from the original on December 7, 2017. Retrieved December 7, 2017. Stratton, Jeff (April 15, 2016). "Manson Family Feud". New Times Broward-Palm Beach. Archived from the original on October 9, 2016. Retrieved October 7, 2016. Manson & Strauss 1998, p. 81. Manson & Strauss 1998, p. 93. "The God of Hellfire Speaks: 73 Years Inside the Crazy World of Arthur Brown" Archived December 29, 2017, at the Wayback Machine. Vice. Retrieved December 29, 2017 Baltin, Steve (August 12, 2012). "Q&A: A Conversation With Marilyn Manson and Ray Manzarek". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on August 19, 2016. Retrieved June 29, 2016. Finn, Natalie (January 11, 2016). "Inspired by David Bowie: 10 Artists Who Borrowed a Page From the Late Icon's Truly Original Playbook". E! Online. E!. Archived from the original on July 8, 2016. Retrieved June 29, 2016. Saul, Heather (January 12, 2016). "David Bowie death: Marilyn Manson and gender fluid stars pay tribute to the ultimate gender fluid icon". The Independent. Archived from the original on August 22, 2016. Retrieved June 29, 2016. Mattingly, David (September 21, 1998). "Marilyn Manson living the lead role in his own show". CNN. Archived from the original on August 19, 2016. Retrieved June 29, 2016. "Rock's 'Gothic Chameleon' Marilyn Manson sets his sights on an intimate show at the Casino Ballroom". The Portsmouth Herald. Local Media Group. March 8, 2012. Archived from the original on August 18, 2016. Retrieved June 29, 2016. Chuck Klosterman (November 5, 2004). "Marilyn Manson, 'Lest We Forget' (Interscope)". Spin. SpinMedia. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved June 29, 2016. Kaye, Ben (February 18, 2016). "Marilyn Manson covers the hell out of David Bowie's "Cat People" – listen". Consequence of Sound. Archived from the original on June 28, 2016. Retrieved June 29, 2016. Payne, Chris (February 18, 2016). "Hear Marilyn Manson & Shooter Jennings Cover David Bowie's 'Cat People'". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 6, 2016. Retrieved June 29, 2016. Grow, Kory (August 11, 2016). "Are Depeche Mode Metal's Biggest Secret Influence?". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 21, 2016. Retrieved June 29, 2016. Epting, Chris (October 16, 2013). "Gary Numan Discusses Influencing NIN and Marilyn Manson + Making New Album 'Splinter (Songs From a Broken Mind)'". Diffuser.fm. Townsquare Media. Archived from the original on August 26, 2016. Retrieved June 29, 2016. "Gary Numan – All Tomorrow's Parties". All Tomorrow's Parties. Archived from the original on September 14, 2016. Retrieved June 29, 2016. Adams, Chip (August 26, 2004). "Marilyn Manson To Honor The Cure On MTV". The Fader. Andy Cohn. Archived from the original on September 17, 2016. Retrieved June 29, 2016. DiPerna, Alan. "Marilyn Manson: Shock, Rattle and Roll". Guitar World. No. December 1996. Harris Publications. pp. 56–64, 209–214. Archived from the original on October 23, 2013. Retrieved June 29, 2016. Stagg, Natasha (September 26, 2016). "Marilyn Manson: all-American nightmare". Dazed. Retrieved November 14, 2022. Hill, John (May 24, 2018). "See Marilyn Manson, Rob Zombie Discuss First Time They Heard Each Other's Music". Revolver. Retrieved June 8, 2018. "Marilyn Manson: The Music That Made Me". Rolling Stone. May 8, 2015. Archived from the original on May 7, 2016. Retrieved June 29, 2016. Wiederhorn, Jon (November 27, 2001). "Marilyn Manson Drawing From Ministry, Marquis De Sade". MTV News. Viacom. Archived from the original on May 20, 2017. Retrieved July 19, 2017. Murray, Chris (August 1998). "Keeping the Fear Alive: Marilyn Manson". Seven Magazine. DMC Publishing. Stagg, Natasha (September 27, 2016). "Marilyn Manson: all-American nightmare". Dazed Digital. Dazed. Archived from the original on September 29, 2016. Retrieved September 30, 2016. Ford, Chris (January 3, 2014). "10 Best Marilyn Manson Videos". Noisecreep. Townsquare Media. Archived from the original on November 3, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016. Barkan, Jonathan (May 13, 2015). "[From Worst To Best] The Music Videos Of Marilyn Manson". Bloody Disgusting. The Collective. Archived from the original on October 8, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016. Crane, Matt (October 31, 2014). "16 Music Videos That Will Give You Nightmares – Features". Alternative Press. Alternative Press Magazine, Inc. Archived from the original on August 16, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016. Lau, Melody (October 23, 2014). "The 13 Scariest Music Videos of All Time". Vulture. New York. Archived from the original on August 3, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016. "60 Top Disturbing Horror Music Videos of All Time". HorrorNews.net. April 13, 2016. Archived from the original on July 23, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016. "MTV: 100 Greatest Music Videos Ever Made". MTV. Rock On The Net. December 1999. Archived from the original on August 10, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016. "Much Music's 100 Greatest Videos Ever". Much. Bell Media. August 30, 2014. Archived from the original on January 5, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016. NME Staff (June 17, 2016). "NSFW! – It's The 19 Most Explicit Music Videos Ever". NME. Time Inc. UK. Archived from the original on July 31, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016. Rosenfeld, Everett (June 6, 2011). "'(S)aint' | Top 10 Controversial Music Videos". Time. Archived from the original on August 1, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016. Schaffer, Dean (August 1, 2011). "MTV at 30: The Top 10 Most Controversial Music Videos (NSFW)". SF Weekly. San Francisco Media Co. Retrieved August 1, 2016. "The 20 Greatest Moments of the Relentless Kerrang! Awards | Kerrang! Radio – Everything That Rocks". Kerrang! Radio. Bauer Media Group. June 5, 2013. Retrieved August 3, 2016. Jones, Sam (August 26, 2005). "Green Day triumph at Kerrang! awards | Media". The Guardian. Archived from the original on October 8, 2016. Retrieved August 3, 2016. "Entertainment | Green Day rock Kerrang! honours". BBC News. BBC. August 26, 2005. Archived from the original on August 20, 2016. Retrieved August 3, 2016. Brown, August (June 12, 2015). "Marilyn Manson's comeback validated by Kerrang lifetime achievement award". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on March 6, 2016. Retrieved August 3, 2016. Emily Carter (February 21, 2016). "The 50 Best Rock Albums Of The 2000s". Kerrang!. Bauer Media Group. Archived from the original on August 7, 2016. Retrieved August 3, 2016. Emily Carter (August 15, 2015). "The 50 Greatest Rockstars In The World 2015". Kerrang!. Bauer Media Group. Archived from the original on August 15, 2016. Retrieved August 3, 2016. "VH1: '100 Greatest Hard Rock Artists': 51–100". VH1. Rock On The Net. December 2000. Archived from the original on July 30, 2016. Retrieved August 6, 2016. Stosuy, Brandon (January 5, 2009). "VH1's 100 Greatest Hard Rock Songs". Stereogum. SpinMedia. Archived from the original on August 7, 2016. Retrieved August 6, 2016. "The 60 greatest solo artists of all time, ranked". Gigwise. Giant Digital. April 21, 2016. Archived from the original on July 30, 2016. Retrieved August 3, 2016. Al-Sharif, Rabab (May 13, 2016). "Marilyn Manson to receive APMAs 2016 Icon Award – News – Alternative Press". Alternative Press. Alternative Press Magazine, Inc. Archived from the original on August 22, 2016. Retrieved August 3, 2016. Carole Cadwalladr (January 18, 2015). "Marilyn Manson: 'I created a fake world because I didn't like the one I was living in'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on August 27, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016. Hedegaard, Erik (January 6, 2015). "Marilyn Manson: The Vampire of the Hollywood Hills". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on September 26, 2015. Retrieved August 3, 2016. Stern, Marlow (January 21, 2015). "Marilyn Manson on Charlie Hebdo and Why You Should Avoid Foursomes". The Daily Beast. Archived from the original on July 5, 2016. Retrieved August 3, 2016. Lloyd, Gavin (January 14, 2015). "The A-Z Of Marilyn Manson – Feature". Metal Hammer. TeamRock. Archived from the original on August 12, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016. Gasparek, Brian (February 6, 2015). "25 Unexpected Facts About Marilyn Manson (Only One Of Which Involves Mario Kart)". HuffPost. Verizon. Archived from the original on August 19, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016. Eggertsen, Chris (August 12, 2015). "Outrage Watch: Johnny Depp can probably relate to this Marilyn Manson controversy". HitFix. Woven Digital. Archived from the original on August 15, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016. Chaz, Kangas (September 6, 2012). "The 1997 Edition Was the Best MTV Video Music Awards". LA Weekly. Archived from the original on January 2, 2017. Retrieved August 1, 2016. DeWolf, Annna (June 20, 2016). "Marc Jacobs casts Marilyn Manson and Courtney Love in new ad | Dazed". Dazed Digital. Waddell Limited. Archived from the original on July 26, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016. "47 years of Marilyn Manson: Has society finally understood him?". RadioandMusic.com. The Times Group. January 5, 2016. Archived from the original on August 17, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016. Bonaime, Ross (October 31, 2011). "The 13 Scariest Bands of All Time :: Music :: Lists". Paste. Wolfgang's Vault. Archived from the original on August 17, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016. Lorraine Ali (October 29, 1996). "Marilyn Manson: Antichrist Superstar". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on April 23, 2017. Retrieved June 2, 2016. Hartmann, Graham (January 27, 2013). "10 Best Marilyn Manson Songs". Loudwire. Townsquare Media. Archived from the original on July 27, 2016. Retrieved August 1, 2016. The Grim Lord (March 30, 2016). "Album Review: American Head Charge – 'Tango Umbrella'". New Noise Magazine. Archived from the original on October 3, 2016. Retrieved August 4, 2016. Tuset, Eduard (June 17, 2016). "Babymetal, entrevista en MondoSorono (2016)" [Babymetal, MondoSorono interview (2016)]. Mondo Sorono (in Spanish). Archived from the original on July 21, 2016. Retrieved August 4, 2016. Grow, Kory (April 27, 2016). "Watch Babymetal Show 'Karate' Dance Moves, Talk Song's Empowering Message". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on July 20, 2016. Retrieved August 4, 2016. Ewart, Alan (June 22, 2015). "Interview and Live Review: Black Veil Brides – we caught up with the Cali post-hardcore / glam rockers at this year's Download". Louder Than War. Archived from the original on March 26, 2020. Retrieved March 26, 2020. Ferris, D.X. (June 17, 2009). "Combichrist". The Riverfront Times. Archived from the original on January 14, 2018. Retrieved January 13, 2018. Friedman, Michael (April 3, 2018). "Continuing the Conversation With Kittie". Psychology Today. Retrieved March 27, 2020. Richardson, Sean (December 2, 2004). "Music | All the Rage". Portland Phoenix. Phoenix Media/Communications Group. Archived from the original on August 26, 2016. Retrieved August 4, 2016. Encina, Sol (September 30, 2014). "Album Review: Motionless In White – Reincarnate". Metal Injection. Archived from the original on August 20, 2016. Retrieved August 4, 2016. Roadrunner Records Staff (February 12, 2008). "Roadrunner Records UK // Interview With A Murderdoll (Tripp)". Roadrunner Records. Archived from the original on September 15, 2016. Retrieved August 4, 2016. Henderson, Alex (October 14, 2003). "XIII – Mushroomhead | Songs, Reviews, Credits". AllMusic. Rovi. Archived from the original on June 9, 2016. Retrieved August 4, 2016. Geist, Brandon (October 19, 2011). "Exclusive Interview: Hot Chick in Hard Rock Ash Costello of New Years Day". Revolver. Archived from the original on September 16, 2016. Retrieved August 4, 2016. Kaufman, Spencer (December 22, 2014). "September Mourning, 'Children of Fate' – Song Premiere". Loudwire. Townsquare Media. Archived from the original on July 27, 2016. Retrieved August 4, 2016. AntiHero Magazine Staff (January 7, 2015). "September Mourning Releases New Single "Children Of Fate" From Upcoming Album". AntiHero Magazine. AntiHero Media. Archived from the original on August 8, 2016. Retrieved August 4, 2016. Full Metal Jackie (April 26, 2016). "Corey Taylor Talks Slipknot's Evolution, Future Plans + More". Loudwire. Townsquare Media. Archived from the original on July 29, 2016. Retrieved August 4, 2016. "Vanna cover Marilyn Manson's "The Beautiful People" for new EP". Alternative Press. September 3, 2015. Archived from the original on March 29, 2020. Retrieved March 29, 2020. Astroid Boys (September 17, 2017). "A Bluffer's Guide To Marilyn Manson". Clash. Archived from the original on January 18, 2018. Retrieved January 17, 2018. Stephen Thomas Erlewine. "Influences: Avril Lavigne – Various Artists | Songs, Reviews, Credits". AllMusic. Rovi. Archived from the original on May 2, 2016. Retrieved August 5, 2016. Austin Scaggs (June 24, 2004). "Q&A: Avril Lavigne". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on September 27, 2016. Retrieved August 5, 2016. Morris, Andy (February 13, 2015). "Charli XCX on the wisdom of Marilyn Manson + Kanye". Gigwise. Giant Digital. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved August 5, 2016. Lipshutz, Jason (December 13, 2014). "5 Things We Want to See Charli XCX Do on 'SNL'". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 8, 2016. Retrieved August 30, 2016. Gould, Will (August 22, 2016). "The First Album I Ever Bought: Will Gould, Creeper". Team Rock. Archived from the original on April 4, 2017. Retrieved December 17, 2017. Noakes, Tim (March 1, 2015). "Marilyn Manson: a nose for trouble". Dazed Digital. Dazed. Archived from the original on August 18, 2016. Retrieved August 5, 2016. Ames, Jonathan (May 17, 2014). "On the Cover: Marilyn Manson". Spin. Eldridge Industries. Archived from the original on February 26, 2017. Retrieved January 6, 2018. Rodriguez, Jayson (March 24, 2009). "Eminem's Video Legacy, On The Eve Of 'We Made You'". MTV. Viacom. Archived from the original on August 9, 2016. Retrieved August 5, 2016. Claire Boucher (July 10, 2012). "Grimes on the importance of Marilyn Manson". Electronic Beats. T-Mobile. Archived from the original on August 12, 2016. Retrieved August 5, 2016. Stalder, Erika (February 13, 2019). "Halsey Just Got A Huge Marilyn Manson Tattoo — & Fans Are Divided". Refinery29. Retrieved August 22, 2019. Williams, Tia (July 19, 2014). "10 Ways That Marilyn Manson Inspired Lady Gaga". VH1. Viacom. Archived from the original on August 11, 2016. Retrieved August 31, 2016. Carroll, Grace (July 18, 2012). "Marilyn Manson: 'I have a hard time liking Lady Gaga'". Gigwise. Giant Digital. Archived from the original on September 17, 2016. Retrieved September 2, 2016. Steven Hyden (June 17, 2014). "The United States of Lana «". Grantland. ESPN. Archived from the original on December 26, 2015. Retrieved August 5, 2016. Horowitz, Steven J. (June 9, 2017). "Artists to Watch In 2017: Lil Uzi Vert, Rap's Tradition-Bucking, Marilyn Manson-Loving Star". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 28, 2017. Retrieved June 5, 2017. Diep, Eric (January 20, 2016). "Next Wave: Meet Lil Uzi Vert, the Next Phenom in Rap". Complex. Complex Media Inc. Archived from the original on June 2, 2016. Retrieved June 4, 2016. "Lisa Marie Presley Cites Marilyn Manson As An Influence". Blabbermouth.net. April 8, 2003. Archived from the original on October 18, 2016. Retrieved October 17, 2016. Dionne, Zach (June 8, 2015). "Muse's Muses: 9 of the British Band's Funky, Heavy, Wacky Influences". Fuse. Archived from the original on September 4, 2016. Retrieved August 29, 2016. Stephen Thomas Erlewine (October 31, 2006). "The Black Parade – My Chemical Romance | Songs, Reviews, Credits". AllMusic. Rovi. Archived from the original on August 16, 2016. Retrieved August 5, 2016. Empire, Kitty (February 7, 2017). "Mykki Blanco – review". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on December 4, 2013. Retrieved May 4, 2013. Freger, Halley (September 25, 2015). "Mykki Blanco returns to Grinnell". Scarlet and Black. Grinnell College. Archived from the original on September 6, 2016. Retrieved August 28, 2016. Woods, Mickey (September 3, 2013). "Exclusive: Natalia Kills Shares Her Obsessions and Premieres "Boys Don't Cry" With Us!". Glamour. Archived from the original on August 18, 2016. Retrieved August 28, 2016. Sokol, Stephanie (August 13, 2013). "Detroit native Porcelain Black teases album with live video series". The Oakland Press. 21st Century Media. Archived from the original on September 11, 2016. Retrieved August 31, 2016. Geffen, Sasha (October 11, 2017). "Marilyn Manson Heaven Upside Down". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on October 24, 2017. Retrieved October 24, 2017. "Required Listening For Fall". mtvU. Viacom. September 26, 2011. Archived from the original on November 9, 2012. Retrieved August 28, 2016. Sciarretto, Holly (October 19, 2011). "Skylar Grey: Interview". Gigwise. Giant Digital. Archived from the original on September 14, 2016. Retrieved August 30, 2016. Corner, Lewis (January 9, 2015). "Years & Years interview: 'We now have a responsibility to not be s**t!'". Digital Spy. Hearst Media. Archived from the original on April 23, 2016. Retrieved August 31, 2016. Chris Bitonti (April 9, 2013). "The Weekly interview: Shirley Manson of Garbage". Las Vegas Weekly. Greenspun Media Group. Archived from the original on August 17, 2016. Retrieved August 5, 2016. Chuck Philips (December 10, 1996). "Critics expected to take on MCA for explicit rap lyrics". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on May 13, 2016. Retrieved May 31, 2016. "Music Violence: How Does It Affect Our Children – Hearing before the Committee of Governmental Affairs, United States Senate" (PDF). United States Government Publishing Office. November 7, 1997. Archived (PDF) from the original on August 22, 2016. Retrieved May 31, 2016. Nelson, Chris (November 7, 1997). "Senate Hearing Attempts To Connect Manson To Suicide". MTV. Viacom. Archived from the original on August 9, 2016. Retrieved August 6, 2016. MTV News Staff (June 24, 1997). "Marilyn Manson Fans Settle Lawsuit Over Canceled Utah Show". MTV News. Viacom. Archived from the original on June 16, 2016. Retrieved June 1, 2016. Spencer, Jim (April 20, 1997). "Richmond Makes Martyr Out Of Manson". Daily Press. Archived from the original on August 4, 2016. Retrieved May 31, 2016. Nelson, Chris (April 19, 1997). "Ozzy Osbourne To Sue New Jersey Over Marilyn Manson". MTV News. Viacom. Archived from the original on June 16, 2016. Retrieved June 1, 2016. Neil Strauss (June 17, 1997). "Heavy Metal Upstaged By a Fury Offstage". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 1, 2016. Retrieved June 1, 2016. Glendinning, Lee (May 16, 2008). "Luke Mitchell loses appeal in Jodi Jones murder". The Guardian. Archived from the original on September 20, 2016. Retrieved August 20, 2016. Cramb, Auslan (January 7, 2005). "Jodi Jones death 'similar to Hollywood killing'". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on July 6, 2016. Retrieved August 20, 2016. PA (January 21, 2005). "Teenager convicted of Jodi murder | Crime | News". The Independent. Archived from the original on August 29, 2016. Retrieved August 20, 2016. "Killer 'obsessed by occult'". BBC News. January 21, 2005. Archived from the original on September 19, 2016. Retrieved August 20, 2016. Bychawski, Adam (December 24, 2004). "Marilyn Manson DVD Played In Murder Trial". NME. Time Inc. UK. Archived from the original on August 28, 2016. Retrieved August 20, 2016. Peterkin, Tom (January 22, 2005). "Jodi killed by boyfriend attracted to sex, drugs and Satan". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on July 6, 2016. Retrieved August 20, 2016. "I did not inspire Jodi's killer, says rock star Marilyn Manson". The Scotsman. Johnston Press. February 14, 2005. Archived from the original on August 27, 2016. Retrieved August 20, 2016. PA (February 14, 2005). "Blame Jodi killer's upbringing: Manson". The Sydney Morning Herald. Fairfax Media. Archived from the original on October 12, 2016. Retrieved August 20, 2016. "Murderer Luke Mitchell has latest appeal over Jodi Jones conviction rejected". STV. STV Group. April 15, 2011. Archived from the original on August 20, 2016. Retrieved August 20, 2016. Crane, Matt (June 27, 2014). "Bomb threats, protests cancel Marilyn Manson shows in Russia". Alternative Press. Alternative Press Magazine, Inc. Archived from the original on June 24, 2016. Retrieved May 23, 2016. "Marilyn Manson: Bomb Threats And Protests Force Cancelation Of Two Shows in Russia". Blabbermouth.net. June 27, 2014. Archived from the original on June 25, 2016. Retrieved May 23, 2016. "Russian Christians in Novosibirsk Block Marilyn Manson Concert". NBC News. NBCUniversal. June 27, 2014. Archived from the original on August 26, 2016. Retrieved May 23, 2016. "Authorities not allowing Marilyn Manson concert to go ahead as hundreds of religious activists protest". SBS Australia. June 28, 2014. Archived from the original on June 4, 2016. Retrieved May 23, 2016. Khomami, Nadia (November 21, 2014). "Marilyn Manson denies involvement in Lana Del Rey 'rape' video". NME. Time Inc. UK. Archived from the original on June 27, 2015. Retrieved May 23, 2016. Sean Michaels (November 21, 2014). "Marilyn Manson denies involvement in Lana Del Rey rape horror video". The Guardian. Archived from the original on May 9, 2016. Retrieved May 23, 2016. Denham, Jess (November 21, 2014). "Marilyn Manson denies involvement in shocking leaked footage from Lana Del Rey rape video". The Independent. Archived from the original on April 12, 2016. Retrieved May 23, 2016. Gordon, Jeremy (November 21, 2014). "Marilyn Manson Denies Involvement in Lana Del Rey Sexual Assault Depiction Footage". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on December 10, 2014. Retrieved May 23, 2016. Warner, Denise (November 20, 2014). "Marilyn Manson's Camp on Lana Del Rey Footage: We Had Nothing to Do With This Video". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 11, 2016. Retrieved May 23, 2016. Nyren, Erin (October 21, 2017). "Twiggy Ramirez, Marilyn Manson Bassist, Accused of Rape". Variety. Archived from the original on January 14, 2018. Retrieved January 13, 2018. O'Connor, Róisín (October 26, 2017). "Twiggy Ramirez: Former Marilyn Manson bassist responds to rape allegation". The Independent. Archived from the original on November 7, 2017. Retrieved November 2, 2017. Aviva Shen (December 14, 2012). "A Timeline Of Mass Shootings In The US Since Columbine". ThinkProgress. Archived from the original on April 30, 2016. Retrieved April 27, 2016. Powers, Ann (April 25, 2000). "The Nation; The Stresses of Youth, The Strains of Its Music". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 18, 2016. Retrieved April 27, 2016. "Never mind the headlines ..." BBC News. BBC. February 9, 2001. Archived from the original on April 15, 2016. Retrieved April 27, 2016. O'Connor, Christopher (April 26, 1999). "Colorado Tragedy Continues To Spark Manson Bashing". MTV. Viacom. Archived from the original on June 10, 2016. Retrieved June 1, 2016. Jones 2002, pp. 126–127. MTV News Staff (April 22, 1999). "Marilyn Manson Concert, Other Denver Events Cancelled In Wake Of High School Shooting". MTV. Viacom. Archived from the original on April 25, 2016. Retrieved April 27, 2016. Cullen, Dave (September 23, 1999). "Inside the Columbine High investigation". Salon. Salon Media Group. Archived from the original on April 12, 2016. Retrieved April 27, 2016. Holland, Meegan (April 20, 2009). "Columbine High School massacre on 10th anniversary: 5 myths surrounding deadliest school attack in U.S. history". The Grand Rapids Press. Booth Newspapers. Archived from the original on April 15, 2016. Retrieved April 17, 2016. Marilyn Manson (June 24, 1999). "Columbine: Whose Fault Is It?". Rolling Stone. No. 815. Archived from the original on July 21, 2012. Retrieved April 10, 2017. Bychawski, Adam (May 1, 1999). "Marilyn Manson: The Write To Be Wrong". NME. Time Inc. UK. Archived from the original on January 19, 2012. Retrieved April 27, 2016. Gumbel, Andrew (October 10, 2007). "Boy, 14, kills himself after shooting four in school rampage". The Independent. Archived from the original on August 6, 2016. Retrieved June 2, 2016. "Police: Suspended boy shoots 4 at Ohio school". NBCNews.com. NBCUniversal. October 10, 2007. Archived from the original on March 14, 2016. Retrieved June 2, 2016. "Police chief: Teen shoots four, kills self at Cleveland high school". CNN. Time Warner. October 11, 2007. Archived from the original on August 7, 2016. Retrieved June 1, 2016. "Shooting Spree At Cleveland High School". CBS News. CBS Corporation. October 10, 2007. Archived from the original on June 29, 2016. Retrieved June 2, 2016. Kaufman, Gil (October 11, 2007). "Cleveland School Shooter Fit Sadly Predictable Profile: Bullied Loner From Troubled Home". MTV News. Viacom. Archived from the original on June 16, 2016. Retrieved June 2, 2016. Jervis, Rick (May 18, 2009). "La. student shoots self, misses teacher". USA Today. Archived from the original on August 18, 2016. Retrieved June 2, 2016. Hernandez, Jenn (May 19, 2009). "Eighth Grader Attempts Suicide After Marilyn Manson-Related Altercation With Teacher". The Fader. Andy Cohn. Archived from the original on August 15, 2016. Retrieved June 2, 2016. Fitzmaurice, Larry (May 19, 2009). "Teen Classroom Shooter: "Hail Marilyn Manson"". Spin. SpinMedia. Archived from the original on June 10, 2016. Retrieved June 2, 2016. "Marilyn Manson Fan Who Shot Himself After Firing At Teacher Dies". Blabbermouth.net. May 25, 2009. Archived from the original on August 5, 2016. Retrieved June 2, 2016. Fu, Eddie (November 7, 2017). "The Mars Volta's Juan Alderete is Marilyn Manson's new bassist". Consequence of Sound. Archived from the original on November 7, 2017. Retrieved November 7, 2017. Baddeley, Gavin (2000). Dissecting Marilyn Manson. Plexus. ISBN 0859652831. Manson, Marilyn; Strauss, Neil (1998). The Long Hard Road Out of Hell. HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-098746-6. Jones, Steve (2002). Jones, Steve (ed.). Pop music and the press. Philadelphia: Temple University Press. ISBN 978-1-56639-966-1. Retrieved April 27, 2016. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Marilyn Manson (musical group). Official website The Official Marilyn Manson Encyclopedia Marilyn Manson at AllMusic