.ug is the Internet country code top-level domain (ccTLD) for Uganda. Registrations were traditionally made under these second-level subdomains: .co.ug – Commercial entities .ac.ug – Educational Institution offering diplomas, degrees and higher academic awards .sc.ug – Primary, secondary and lower educational branches .go.ug – Government Agencies and independent authorities under government .ne.ug – Network providers or special equipment for network provision .or.ug – Non governmental institutions .org.ug – Non governmental institutions .com.ug – Commercial entities .med.ug – Medical entities or health institutions .ngo.ug – Non governmental organizations in Uganda .law.ug – Legal firms and practitioners in Uganda .ltd.ug – Commercial companies and business entities in Uganda (public or private limited companies) .inc.ug – Commercial companies and business entities in Uganda (corporations) In 2014, Ugandan Members of Parliament called for an investigation after a revelation that a private firm, Infinity Computers and Communication Company (i3c, formerly known as Computer Frontiers), owned Uganda's top-level Internet domain. During a Finance Committee the MPs pressed ICT minister John Nasasira to explain how the private company came to own the domain, which could endanger national security. The MPs resolved to contact the registrar of companies to furnish them with the details of the proprietors of i3c and asked the minister to explain the circumstances under which the company took over the domain. Unlike countries like China which put restrictions on the domain purchasing process, Uganda ccTLD managers don't put any restriction on who can register domain names. Ayebare, Mucunguzi (17 February 2020). "A Step by Step Guide to buying Uganda's .ug Domain Name". Campaign Digital Marketing Uganda. Retrieved 17 February 2020. Yasin, Mugerwa (27 August 2014). "A private firm owns Uganda's Internet domain name – MPs call for Investigation". Daily Monitor. Retrieved 28 August 2018. "A Step by Step Guide to buying Uganda's .ug Domain Name". Campaign. 17 February 2020. Retrieved 17 February 2020. IANA .ug whois information registry.co.ug v t e