Benjamin Géza Affleck (born August 15, 1972) is an American actor and filmmaker. He is the recipient of many accolades including two Academy Awards, two BAFTA Awards, and three Golden Globes. Affleck began his career as a child when he starred in the PBS educational series The Voyage of the Mimi (1984, 1988). He later appeared in the independent comedy Dazed and Confused (1993) and several Kevin Smith comedies, including Chasing Amy (1997). Affleck gained wider recognition when he and Matt Damon won the Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay for writing Good Will Hunting (1997), which they also starred in. He established himself as a leading man in studio films, including the disaster film Armageddon (1998), the action crime thriller Reindeer Games (2000), the war drama Pearl Harbor (2001), and the thriller The Sum of All Fears (2002). After a career downturn, Affleck made a comeback by portraying George Reeves in the biopic Hollywoodland (2006), winning the Volpi Cup for Best Actor. His directorial debut, Gone Baby Gone (2007), which he also co-wrote, was well received. He then directed and starred in the crime drama The Town (2010) and the political thriller Argo (2012), both of which were critical and commercial successes. For the latter, Affleck won the BAFTA Award for Best Director, and the BAFTA and Academy Award for Best Picture. Affleck then starred in the psychological thriller Gone Girl (2014) and played the superhero Batman in the DC Extended Universe (2016–2023). He starred in the thriller The Accountant (2016) and the sports drama The Way Back (2020). Affleck had supporting roles in the dramas The Last Duel (2021), The Tender Bar (2021), and Air (2023), the latter of which he also directed. Affleck is the co-founder of the Eastern Congo Initiative, a grantmaking and advocacy-based nonprofit organization. He is a supporter of the Democratic Party. Affleck and Damon are co-owners of the production company Artists Equity and were also co-owners of Pearl Street Films. Affleck was born Benjamin Géza Affleck-Boldt on August 15, 1972, in Berkeley, California. His family moved to Massachusetts when he was three, living in Falmouth, where his brother Casey was born, before settling in Cambridge. His mother, Christopher Anne "Chris" Boldt, was a Harvard-educated elementary school teacher. His father, Timothy Byers Affleck, was an aspiring playwright who was "mostly unemployed." He worked sporadically as a carpenter, auto mechanic, bookie, electrician, bartender, and janitor at Harvard. In the mid-1960s, he had been an actor and stage manager with the Theater Company of Boston. During Affleck's childhood, his father had a self-described "severe, chronic problem with alcoholism", and Affleck has recalled him drinking "all day ... every day". His father was "very difficult", and Affleck felt a sense of "relief" at the age of 11 when his parents divorced, and his father exited the family home. His father continued to drink heavily and eventually became homeless, spending two years living on the streets of Cambridge. When Affleck was 16, his father entered a rehabilitation facility in Indio, California. He lived at the facility for twelve years to maintain his sobriety and worked there as an addiction counselor. Affleck was raised in a politically active, liberal household. He and his brother, Casey, were surrounded by people who worked in the arts; the boys regularly attended theater performances with their mother and were encouraged to make their own home movies. David Wheeler, a family friend, later remembered Affleck as a "very bright and intensely curious" child. The brothers auditioned for roles in local commercials and film productions because of their mother's friendship with a Cambridge-area casting director, and Affleck first acted professionally at the age of seven. His mother saved his wages in a college trust fund and hoped her son would ultimately become a teacher, worrying that acting was an insecure and "frivolous" profession. When Affleck was 13, he filmed a children's television program in Mexico. He learned to speak Spanish during a year spent travelling around the country with his mother and brother. As a Cambridge Rindge and Latin high school student, Affleck acted in theater productions and was inspired by drama teacher Gerry Speca. He became close friends with fellow student Matt Damon, whom he had known since the age of eight. Although Damon was two years older, the pair had "identical interests" and both wanted to pursue acting careers. They traveled to New York together for acting auditions and saved money for train and airline tickets in a joint bank account. While Affleck had high SAT scores, he was largely an unfocused student with poor attendance. He spent a few months studying Spanish at the University of Vermont, chosen because of its proximity to his then-girlfriend, but he left after fracturing his hip while playing basketball. At 18, Affleck moved to Los Angeles, studying Middle Eastern affairs at Occidental College for a year and a half. Affleck acted professionally throughout his childhood but, in his own words, "not in the sense that I had a mom that wanted to take me to Hollywood or a family that wanted to make money from me ... I kind of chanced into something." He first appeared, at the age of seven, in an independent film, The Dark End of the Street (1981), directed by a family friend. His biggest success as a child actor was as the star of the PBS children's series The Voyage of the Mimi (1984) and The Second Voyage of the Mimi (1988), produced for sixth-grade science classes. Affleck worked "sporadically" on Mimi from the age of eight to fifteen in both Massachusetts and Mexico. As a teenager, he appeared in the ABC after school special Wanted: A Perfect Man (1986), the television film Hands of a Stranger (1987), and a 1989 Burger King commercial. After high school, Affleck moved briefly to New York in search of acting work. Later, while studying at Occidental College in Los Angeles, Affleck directed student films. As an actor, he had a series of "knock-around parts, one to the next". He played Patrick Duffy's son in the television film Daddy (1991), made an uncredited appearance as a basketball player in the Buffy the Vampire Slayer film (1992), and had a supporting role as a prep school student in School Ties (1992). He played a high school quarterback in the NBC television series Against the Grain (1993), and a steroid-abusing high school football player in Body to Die For: The Aaron Henry Story (1994). Affleck's most notable role during this period was as a high school bully in Richard Linklater's cult classic Dazed and Confused (1993). Linklater wanted a likeable actor for the villainous role, and, while Affleck was "big and imposing", he was "so smart and full of life ... I just liked him." Affleck later said Linklater was instrumental in demystifying the filmmaking process for him. Affleck's first starring film role was as an aimless art student in the college drama Glory Daze (1995), with Stephen Holden of The New York Times remarking that his "affably mopey performance finds just the right balance between obnoxious and sad sack". He then played a bully in filmmaker Kevin Smith's comedy Mallrats (1995) and became friends with Smith during the filming. Affleck had begun to worry that he would be relegated to a career of "throwing people into their lockers", but Smith wrote him a lead role in the romantic comedy Chasing Amy (1997). The film was Affleck's breakthrough. Janet Maslin of The New York Times praised Affleck's "wonderful ease" playing the role, combining "suave good looks with cool comic timing". Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly described it as a "wholesome and quick-witted" performance. When Affleck starred as a recently returned Korean War veteran in the coming-of-age drama Going All the Way (1997), Todd McCarthy of Variety found him "excellent", while Janet Maslin of The New York Times noted that his "flair for comic self-doubt made a strong impression." The success of 1997's Good Will Hunting, which Affleck co-wrote and acted in, marked a turning point in his career. The screenplay originated in 1992 when Damon wrote a 40-page script for a playwriting class at Harvard University. He asked Affleck to act out the scenes with him in front of the class and, when Damon later moved into Affleck's Los Angeles apartment, they began working on the script in earnest. The film, which they wrote mainly during improvisation sessions, was set partly in their hometown of Cambridge and drew from their own experiences. The screenplay was borne of their desire to create "an acting reel" for themselves. They sold the screenplay to Castle Rock in 1994 when Affleck was 22 years old. During the development process, they received notes from industry figures, including Rob Reiner and William Goldman. Following a lengthy dispute with Castle Rock about a suitable director, Affleck and Damon persuaded Miramax to purchase the screenplay. The two friends moved back to Boston for a year before the film finally went into production, directed by Gus Van Sant, and co-starring Damon, Affleck, Minnie Driver, and Robin Williams. On its release, Janet Maslin of The New York Times praised the "smart and touching screenplay", while Emanuel Levy of Variety found it "funny, nonchalant, moving and angry". Jay Carr of The Boston Globe wrote that Affleck brought "a beautifully nuanced tenderness" to his role as the working-class friend of Damon's mathematical prodigy character. Affleck and Damon eventually won the Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay. Affleck has described this period of his life as "dreamlike": "It was like one of those scenes in an old movie when a newspaper comes spinning out of the black on to the screen. You know, '$100 Million Box Office! Awards!' " He remains the youngest writer (at age 25) ever to win an Oscar for screenwriting. Armageddon, released in 1998, established Affleck as a viable leading man for Hollywood studio films. Good Will Hunting had not yet been released during the casting process and, after Affleck's screen test, director Michael Bay dismissed him as "a geek". Producer Jerry Bruckheimer convinced Bay that Affleck would be a star, but he was required to lose weight, become tanned, and get his teeth capped before filming began. The film, where he starred opposite Bruce Willis as a blue-collar driller tasked by NASA with stopping an asteroid from colliding with Earth, was a box office success. Daphne Merkin of The New Yorker remarked: "Affleck demonstrates a sexy Paul Newmanish charm and is clearly bound for stardom." Later in 1998, Affleck had a supporting role as an arrogant English actor in the period romantic comedy Shakespeare in Love, starring his then-girlfriend Gwyneth Paltrow. Lael Loewenstein of Variety remarked that Affleck "does some of his very best work, suggesting that comedy may be his true calling," while Janet Maslin of The New York Times found him "very funny". Shakespeare in Love won seven Academy Awards, including Best Picture, while the cast won the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Cast. Affleck then appeared as a small-town sheriff in the supernatural horror film Phantoms. Stephen Holden of The New York Times wondered why actors like Affleck and Peter O'Toole had agreed to appear in the "junky" film: "Affleck's thudding performance suggests he is reading his dialogue for the first time, directly from cue cards." Affleck and Damon had an on-screen reunion in Kevin Smith's religious satire Dogma, which premiered at the 1999 Cannes Film Festival. Janet Maslin of The New York Times remarked that the pair, playing fallen angels, "bring great, understandable enthusiasm to Mr. Smith's smart talk and wild imaginings". Affleck starred opposite Sandra Bullock in the romantic comedy Forces of Nature (1999), playing a groom whose attempts to get to his wedding are complicated by his free-spirited traveling companion. Joe Leydon of Variety praised "his winning ability to play against his good looks in a self-effacing comic turn". Affleck then appeared opposite Courtney Love in the little-seen ensemble comedy 200 Cigarettes (1999). Interested in a directorial career, Affleck shadowed John Frankenheimer throughout pre-production of the action thriller Reindeer Games (2000). Frankenheimer, directing his last feature film, described Affleck as having "a very winning, likable quality about him. I've been doing this for a long time and he's really one of the nicest." He starred opposite Charlize Theron as a hardened criminal, with Elvis Mitchell of The New York Times enjoying the unexpected casting choice: "Affleck often suggests one of the Kennedys playing Clark Kent ... He looks as if he has never missed a party or a night's sleep. He's game, though, and his slight dislocation works to the advantage of Reindeer Games." He then had a supporting role as a ruthless stockbroker in the crime drama Boiler Room (2000). A.O. Scott of The New York Times felt Affleck had merely "traced over" Alec Baldwin's performance in Glengarry Glen Ross, while Peter Rainer of New York Magazine said he "does a series of riffs on Baldwin's aria, and each one is funnier and crueler than the next". He provided the voice of Joseph in the animated Joseph: King of Dreams. In his last film role of 2000, Affleck starred opposite his girlfriend Paltrow in the romantic drama Bounce. Stephen Holden of The New York Times praised the "understated intensity and exquisite detail" of his performance: "His portrait of a young, sarcastically self-defined 'people person' who isn't half as confident as he would like to appear is close to definitive." Affleck reunited with director Michael Bay for the critically derided war drama Pearl Harbor (2001). Todd McCarthy of Variety wrote "the blandly handsome Affleck couldn't convince that he'd ever so much as been turned down for a date, much less lost the love of his life to his best friend". Affleck then parodied Good Will Hunting with Damon and Van Sant in Kevin Smith's Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back (2001), made a cameo in the comedy Daddy and Them (2001), and had a supporting role in the little-seen The Third Wheel (2002). He portrayed the CIA analyst Jack Ryan in the thriller The Sum of All Fears (2002). Stephen Holden of The New York Times felt he was miscast in a role previously played by both Harrison Ford and Alec Baldwin: "Although Mr. Affleck can be appealing when playing earnest young men groping toward maturity, he simply lacks the gravitas for the role." Affleck had an "amazing experience" making the thriller Changing Lanes (2002), and later cited Roger Michell as someone he learned from as a director. Robert Koehler of Variety described it as one of his "most thoroughly wrought" performances: "The journey into a moral fog compels him to play more inwardly and thoughtfully than he ever has before." Affleck became more involved with television and film production in the early 2000s. He and Damon had set up Pearl Street Films in 1998, named after the street that ran between their childhood homes. Their next production company LivePlanet, co-founded in 2000 with Sean Bailey and Chris Moore, sought to integrate the Internet into mainstream television and film production. LivePlanet's biggest success was the documentary series Project Greenlight, aired on HBO and later Bravo, which focused on first-time filmmakers being given the chance to direct a feature film. Project Greenlight was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Reality Program in 2002, 2004 and 2005. Push, Nevada (2002), created, written and produced by Affleck and Bailey, was an ABC mystery drama series that placed a viewer-participation game within the frame of the show. Caryn James of The New York Times praised the show's "nerve, imagination and clever writing", but Robert Bianco of USA Today described it as a "knock-off" of Twin Peaks. The show was cancelled by ABC after seven episodes due to low ratings. Over time, LivePlanet's focus shifted from multimedia projects to more traditional film production. Affleck and his partners signed a film production deal with Disney in 2002; it expired in 2007. While Affleck had been a tabloid figure for much of his career, he was the subject of increased media attention in 2003 because of his relationship with Jennifer Lopez. By the end of the year, Affleck had become, in the words of GQ, the "world's most over-exposed actor". His tabloid fame coincided with a series of poorly received films. The first of these was Daredevil (2003), in which Affleck starred as the blind superhero. Affleck was a longtime comic book fan, and, in 1999, had written a foreword for Kevin Smith's Guardian Devil about his love for the character of Daredevil. The film was a commercial success, but received a mixed response from critics. Elvis Mitchell of The New York Times said Affleck was "lost" in the role: "Affleck is shriveled by the one-dimensional role ... [Only his scenes with Jon Favreau have] a playful side that allows Mr. Affleck to show his generosity as an actor." In 2014, Affleck described Daredevil as the only film he regretted making. He next appeared as a low-ranking mobster in the romantic comedy Gigli (2003), co-starring Lopez. The film was almost uniformly panned, with Manohla Dargis of the Los Angeles Times remarking that "Affleck doesn't have the chops or the charm to maneuver around (or past) bad material." Rex Reed of The Observer criticized the co-stars, writing that the film reminds the world how "pathetically incompetent they both are in the only two things that matter in career longevity - craft and talent." Yet Affleck has repeatedly defended director Martin Brest since the film's release, describing him as "one of the really great directors". In his last film role of 2003, Affleck starred as a reverse engineer in the sci-fi thriller Paycheck (2003). Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian remarked on Affleck's "self-deprecating charm" and wondered why he could not find better scripts. Manohla Dargis of the Los Angeles Times found it "almost unfair" to critique Affleck, given that he "had such a rough year". Affleck's poor critical notices continued in 2004 when he starred as a bereaved husband in the romantic comedy Jersey Girl, directed by longtime collaborator Smith. Stephen Holden of The New York Times described Affleck as an actor "whose talent has curdled as his tabloid notoriety has spread." Later that year, he starred opposite James Gandolfini in the holiday comedy Surviving Christmas. Holden noted in The New York Times that the film "found a clever way to use Ben Affleck's disagreeable qualities. The actor's shark-like grin, cocky petulance and bullying frat-boy swagger befit his character." At this point, the quality of scripts offered to Affleck "was just getting worse and worse", the negative press coverage "really started to affect" him, and he decided to take a career break. The Los Angeles Times published a piece on the downfall of Affleck's career in late 2004. The article noted that, unlike film critics and tabloid journalists, "few industry professionals seem to be gloating over Affleck's travails". Affleck began a career comeback in 2006 with his acclaimed performance as Superman actor George Reeves in the noir biopic Hollywoodland. Peter Travers of Rolling Stone praised "an award-caliber performance ... This is feeling, nuanced work from an actor some of us had prematurely written off." Geoffrey Macnab of The Guardian said he "beautifully" captured "the character's curious mix of charm, vulnerability and fatalism". He was awarded the Volpi Cup at the Venice Film Festival and was nominated for a Golden Globe for Best Supporting Actor. Also in 2006, he made a cameo in Smith's Clerks II, starred in the little-seen Man About Town and had a minor role in the crime drama Smokin' Aces. In 2007, Affleck made his feature film directorial debut with Gone Baby Gone, a crime drama set in a working-class Boston neighborhood, starring his brother Casey as a private investigator searching for a young abductee. Affleck co‑wrote the screenplay, based on the book by Dennis Lehane, with childhood friend Aaron Stockard, having first mentioned his intention to adapt the story in 2003. It opened to enthusiastic reviews. Manohla Dargis of The New York Times praised the film's "sensitivity to real struggle", while Stephen Farber of The Hollywood Reporter described it as "thoughtful, deeply poignant, [and] splendidly executed". While Affleck intended to "keep a primary emphasis on directing" going forward in his career, he acted in three films in 2009. In the ensemble romantic comedy He's Just Not That Into You, the chemistry between Affleck and Jennifer Aniston was praised. Affleck played a congressman in the political thriller State of Play. Wesley Morris of The Boston Globe found him "very good in the film's silliest role," but David Edelstein of New York Magazine remarked of Affleck: "He might be smart and thoughtful in life [but] as an actor his wheels turn too slowly." He had a supporting role as a bartender in the little-seen comedy film Extract. Peter Travers of Rolling Stone described his performance as "a goofball delight", while Manohla Dargis of The New York Times declared it "a real performance". In 2010, Affleck starred in The Company Men as a mid-level sales executive who is made redundant during the financial crisis of 2007–2008. David Denby of The New Yorker declared that Affleck "gives his best performance yet", while Richard Corliss of Time found he "nails Bobby's plunge from hubris to humiliation". Following the modest commercial success of Gone Baby Gone, Warner Bros. developed a close working relationship with Affleck and offered him his choice of the studio's scripts. He decided to direct the crime drama The Town (2010), an adaptation of Chuck Hogan's novel Prince of Thieves. He also re-wrote the screenplay and starred in the film as a bank robber. The film became a surprise box office hit, and gained further critical acclaim for Affleck. A.O. Scott of The New York Times praised his "skill and self-confidence as a serious director," while Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times noted: "Affleck has the stuff of a real director. Everything is here. It's an effective thriller, he works closely with actors, he has a feel for pacing." Also in 2010, Affleck and Damon's production company, Pearl Street Films, signed a first-look producing deal at Warner Bros. Affleck soon began work on his next directorial project, Argo (2012), for Warner Bros. Written by Chris Terrio and starring Affleck as a CIA operative, the film tells the story of the CIA plan to save six U.S. diplomats during the 1979 Iran hostage crisis by faking a production for a large-scale science fiction film. Anthony Lane of The New Yorker said the film offered "further proof that we were wrong about Ben Affleck". Peter Travers of Rolling Stone remarked: "Affleck takes the next step in what looks like a major directing career ... He directs the hell out of it, nailing the quickening pace, the wayward humor, the nerve-frying suspense." A major critical and commercial success, Argo won the Academy Award, Golden Globe Award, and BAFTA Award for Best Picture. The cast won the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Cast. Affleck himself won the Golden Globe Award, Directors Guild of America Award, and BAFTA Award for Best Director, becoming the first director to win these awards without a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Director. The following year, Affleck played a romantic lead in Terrence Malick's experimental drama To the Wonder. Malick, a close friend of Affleck's godfather, first met Affleck in the 1990s to offer advice about the plot of Good Will Hunting. Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian enjoyed "a performance of dignity and sensitivity," while The New Yorker's Richard Brody described Affleck as "a solid and muscular performer" who "conveys a sense of thoughtful and willful individuality". Affleck's performance as a poker boss was considered a highlight of the poorly reviewed thriller Runner Runner (2013). Betsy Sharkey of the Los Angeles Times remarked that it was "one killer of a character, and Affleck plays him like a Bach concerto – every note perfectly played." He then pushed back production on his own directorial project to star as a husband accused of murder in David Fincher's psychological thriller Gone Girl (2014). Fincher cast him partly because he understood what it felt like to be misrepresented by tabloid media: "What many people don't know is that he's crazy smart, but since he doesn't want that to get awkward, he downplays it. I think he learned how to skate on charm." David Edelstein of New York Magazine noted that Fincher's controlled style of directing had a "remarkable" effect on Affleck's acting: "I never thought I'd write these words, but he carries the movie. He's terrific." Justin Chang of Variety found Affleck "perfectly cast": "It's a tricky turn, requiring a measure of careful underplaying and emotional aloofness, and he nails it completely." In 2015, Affleck and Damon's Project Greenlight was resurrected by HBO for one season. Given Affleck's growing reputation as a filmmaker, his decision to star as Batman in the 2016 superhero film Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice was regarded by Dave Itzkoff of The New York Times as "a somewhat bewildering choice". Although the casting announcement was met with intense fan backlash, Affleck's performance ultimately earned a positive reception. Andrew Barker of Variety found him "a winningly cranky, charismatic presence," while Brian Truitt of USA Today enjoyed his "strong" and "surprisingly emotional" take on the character. Affleck reprised his role as Batman later that year, making a brief cameo appearance in Suicide Squad (2016). He starred as an autistic accountant in the action thriller The Accountant (2016), which was an unexpected commercial success. Peter Debruge of Variety felt Affleck's "boy-next-door" demeanor – "so normal and non-actorly that most of his performances feel like watching one of your buddies up on screen" – was "a terrific fit" for the role. Stephen Holden of The New York Times wondered why Affleck, "looking appropriately dead-eyed and miserable," committed himself to the film. In August 2016,Variety reported that Affleck was in talks to direct and star in an adaptation of the Agatha Christie short story The Witness for the Prosecution. Christopher Keyser was to write the script, and Affleck would produce, with Matt Damon, Jennifer Todd and the Agatha Christie estate. As of 2024, the project has never materialized. Live by Night, which Affleck wrote, directed, co-produced, and starred in, was released in late 2016. Adapted from Dennis Lehane's novel of the same name, the Prohibition-era gangster drama received largely unenthusiastic reviews and failed to recoup its $65 million production budget. David Sims of The Atlantic described it as "a fascinating mess of a movie" and criticized Affleck's "stiff, uncomfortable" performance. He noted that one of the last action scenes "is so wonderfully staged, its action crisp and easy to follow, that it reminds you what skill Affleck has with the camera". In October 2016, Affleck and Damon made a one-off stage appearance for a live reading of the Good Will Hunting screenplay at New York's Skirball Theater. The superhero film Justice League, in which Affleck returned as Batman, was released in 2017. He later described it as a "difficult" on-set experience. Snyder stepped down during filming due to the death of his daughter by suicide, the replacement director Joss Whedon's treatment of actors was the subject of complaints, and Affleck himself was struggling with addiction issues. The film drew mixed opinions from critics; Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter wrote that Affleck "looks like he'd rather be almost anywhere else but here." In August 2018, 20th Century Fox announced plans for a film based on the Jacobson McDonald's Monopoly fraud scheme, with Affleck attached as director, Paul Wernick and Rhett Reese as writers and Matt Damon in an acting role. Affleck revealed the movie was in development hell due to the Acquisition of 21st Century Fox by Disney. Amidst an alcoholism relapse, Affleck did not work in 2017. He stepped down as director, writer and, ultimately, as the star of The Batman, saying he "couldn't crack it" and no longer felt "passionate" about the story. Filming of the drug-trafficking thriller Triple Frontier was postponed by six months in order to accommodate his treatment for "health issues". Upon Triple Frontier's release in 2019, Rodrigo Perez of The Playlist remarked that director J.C. Chandor "gets a lot of mileage out of the Sad Affleck narrative and perhaps both director and actor lean into the idea." Later in 2019, Affleck made a cameo appearance in Jay and Silent Bob Reboot, having had little contact with Kevin Smith since the making of Clerks II in 2006. Affleck played a supporting role as a diplomat in Dee Rees's political thriller The Last Thing He Wanted (2020). The Netflix movie, filmed in mid-2018, received negative reviews from critics, with Tomris Laffly of Variety describing Affleck's performance as "oddly removed". Affleck's starring role as a recovering alcoholic in the sports drama The Way Back (2020) was widely praised. The themes of the movie were "close to home" for Affleck. He relapsed during pre-production in 2018 and the movie was shot in the days after he left rehab; Affleck agreed to put his salary in escrow and was accompanied to set by a sober coach. Richard Lawson of Vanity Fair said it was hard to avoid the movie's "meta angle": "Affleck handles his self-conscious task with a generous humility—giving a performance built not out of histrionics or big actor moments, but instead from the messy details of a man in a plateaued distress". David Sims of The Atlantic praised the "subtlety", "vulnerability" and "lumbering physicality" of his performance, describing it as "the rawest and most natural" work of his career. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, cinemas closed in the second week of the movie's release and Warner Bros. made it available to view-on-demand earlier than scheduled. He received a Best Actor nomination at the 2021 Critics' Choice Awards. Also in 2021, Snyder's director's cut of Justice League featured a newly filmed scene with Affleck. Affleck had supporting roles in two 2021 releases. He played Peter II, Count of Alençon, a hedonistic aristocrat in Ridley Scott's medieval drama The Last Duel; he also co-wrote the movie's screenplay with Damon and Nicole Holofcener. Bilge Ebiri of New York Magazine was impressed by Affleck's "imperious" performance as the "wonderfully skeezy Pierre, a marvelously out-there creation who shouldn't work at all and yet becomes an engine of uneasy delights." Brian Truitt of USA Today said he "steals the movie": "He seems to have written the most entertaining character in the movie for himself, but we'll allow it." Later that year, Affleck appeared as a substitute father figure in George Clooney's coming-of-age drama The Tender Bar. The film premiered at the London Film Festival, with Clooney remarking that he cast Affleck because he is "very intelligent, and he can also come off as the big goomba." Pete Hammond of Deadline described it as "a part he was born to play", writing that he "beautifully and knowingly" delivered "an unforgettable portrait of the uncle you wish you had." Kevin Maher of The Times said he played the role with "extraordinary subtly and depth": "He dominates his every scene, with deftly delivered quips, comedy reaction shots or sheer hang-dog charisma alone." For the role, Affleck was nominated for the Golden Globe Award and Screen Actors Guild Award for Best Supporting Actor. In 2021, it was reported that Affleck would direct a film adaptation of the children's fantasy novel, Keeper of the Lost Cities. Though as of January 2024, no updates have been provided. In 2022, Affleck and Ana de Armas starred in Adrian Lyne's thriller Deep Water, an adaptation of Patricia Highsmith's novel. It was released on streaming service Hulu and received largely negative reviews. Justin Chang of the Los Angeles Times said Affleck "excels at playing the emasculated dreamboat, the golden boy gone to seed." Adam Nayman of The Ringer said the film "serves as an example of his formidable skill set within a very specific range": "What used to seem like the callow cockiness of a handsome front-runner has hardened—and deepened—into a kind of grizzled charisma, the gravitas of a frat boy facing down his own expiration date." He also made a cameo appearance in Smith's Clerks III. Affleck's fifth directorial project, Air, about Nike's signing of Michael Jordan, premiered at the 2023 SXSW Film Festival to critical acclaim; it was given a wide theatrical release by Amazon Studios in April, then offered for streaming on Amazon Prime. Affleck portrayed the supporting role of Phil Knight, while other cast members include Matt Damon, Viola Davis, Chris Tucker, and Jason Bateman. It marked the first release from Affleck and Damon's independent production company Artists Equity, which aims to share profits with all stakeholders. Affleck serves as the company's CEO and intends to work exclusively for Artists Equity as a filmmaker. Affleck starred as a detective in Robert Rodriguez's action thriller Hypnotic, which was released in theatres in May 2023. He made a cameo appearance as Batman in the film The Flash released in June 2023 and was also set to reprise the role for Aquaman and the Lost Kingdom before his scenes in the film were deleted. Artists Equity entered into a strategic partnership with Chris Hemsworth's Wild State production company on film and television projects in December 2023. In January 2024, it was reported that Affleck would direct a crime thriller titled Animals, starring Matt Damon. The film is planned to begin filming in March 2024. After travelling in the region between 2007 and early 2010, Affleck and Whitney Williams co-founded the nonprofit organization Eastern Congo Initiative in 2010. ECI acts as a grant maker for Congolese-led, community-based charities. It offers training and resources to cooperatives of Congolese farmers while leveraging partnerships with companies including Theo Chocolate and Starbucks. ECI also aims to raise public awareness and drive policy change in the United States. Affleck has written op-eds about issues facing eastern Congo for the Washington Post, Politico, the Huffington Post, Time, The New York Times and the Los Angeles Times. He has appeared as a discussion panelist at many events, including at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, the Global Philanthropy Forum, and the Clinton Global Initiative. During visits to Washington D.C., Affleck has testified before the House Subcommittee on Africa, Global Health and Human Rights, the House Armed Services Committee, the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, and the Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on State, Foreign Operations, and Related Projects. Affleck is a supporter of the A-T Children's Project. While filming Forces of Nature in 1998, Affleck befriended ten-year-old Joe Kindregan (1988–2015), who had the rare disease ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T), and his family. He became actively involved in fundraising for A-T, and he and Kindregan testified before the House Appropriations Subcommittee on Labor, Health & Human Services, and Education in 2001, asking senators to support stem-cell research and to double the budget of the National Institutes of Health. In 2007, Affleck was the keynote speaker at Kindregan's high school graduation ceremony in Fairfax, Virginia. Kindregan appeared as an extra in Argo (2012). In 2013, in celebration of Kindregan's 25th birthday and "15 years of friendship with Joe and his family," Affleck and Garner matched donations made to the A-T Children's Project. Affleck appeared in CinemAbility (2013), a documentary film which explores Hollywood's portrayals of people with disabilities. As part of USO-sponsored tours, Affleck visited marines stationed in the Persian Gulf in 2003, and troops at Germany's Ramstein Air Base in 2017. He is a supporter of Paralyzed Veterans of America. He filmed public service announcements for the organization in both 2009 and 2014. He has also volunteered on behalf of Operation Gratitude. Affleck is a member of Feeding America's Entertainment Council. He made an appearance at the Greater Boston Food Bank in 2007, and at a Denver food bank in 2008. Affleck spoke at a Feeding America rally in Washington D.C. in 2009, and filmed a public service announcement for the charity in 2010. Affleck and Ellen DeGeneres launched Feeding America's Small Change Campaign in 2011. Also that year, he and Howard Graham Buffett co-wrote an article for The Huffington Post, highlighting the "growing percentage of the food insecure population that is not eligible for federal nutrition programs". During the COVID-19 pandemic, Affleck organized an online celebrity poker tournament to benefit the charity, made a personal donation and urged others to support the cause. Affleck is a supporter of the Los Angeles-based homelessness charity Midnight Mission, having volunteered at and donated to the charity. He has also volunteered at Atlanta Mission. Affleck has described himself as "moderately liberal." He was raised in "a very strong union household". In 2000, he spoke at a rally at Harvard University in support of an increased living wage for all workers on campus; his father worked as a janitor at the university. He later narrated a documentary, Occupation (2002), about a sit-in organized by the Harvard Living Wage Campaign. Affleck and Senator Ted Kennedy held a press conference on Capitol Hill in 2004, pushing for an increase in the minimum wage. He spoke at a 2007 press conference at Boston's City Hall in support of SEIU's unionization efforts for the city's low-paid hospital workers. During the Writers' Strike in 2008, Affleck voiced support for the picketers. Affleck is pro-choice. In a 2000 interview, he stated that he believes "very strongly in a woman's right to choose". In 2012, he supported the Draw the Line campaign, describing reproductive rights as "fundamental". Affleck was a longtime supporter of legalizing gay marriage, saying in 2004 that he hoped to look back on the marriage debate "with some degree of embarrassment for how antiquated it was". Also that year, he remarked that it was "outrageous and offensive" to suggest members of the transgender community were not entitled to equal rights. He appeared alongside his gay cousin in a 2005 Parents and Friends of Lesbians and Gays print advertising campaign. Affleck appeared at a press conference with New York Senator Chuck Schumer in 2002, in support of a proposed Anti-Nuclear Terrorism Prevention Act. In 2003, he criticized the "questionable and aggressive" use of the Patriot Act and the resulting "encroachments on civil liberties". A reporter for The Washington Post overheard Affleck denouncing the Israeli invasion of Gaza at a Washington party in 2009. Steven Clemons, a participant in the conversation, said Affleck listened "to alternative takes ... What Affleck spoke about that night was reasoned, complex and made a lot of sense." Later that year, in a New York Times interview, Affleck remarked that his views were closer to those of the Israeli Labor Party than Likud. Affleck criticized the Bush tax cuts on many occasions. In 2007, he filmed a public service announcement for Divided We Fail, a nonpartisan AARP campaign seeking affordable, quality healthcare for all Americans. During the 2008 presidential campaign, Affleck expressed concern about conspiracy theories claiming Barack Obama was an Arab or a Muslim: "This prejudice that we have allowed to fester in this campaign ... the acceptance of both of those things as a legitimate slur is really a problem." In 2012, he praised Senator John McCain's leadership in defending Huma Abedin against anti-Muslim attacks. Affleck engaged in a discussion about the relationship between liberal principles and Islam during a 2014 appearance on Real Time with Bill Maher. In a 2017 Guardian interview, he said: "I strongly believe that no one should be stereotyped on the basis of their race or religion. It's one of the most fundamental tenets of liberal thought." Affleck supports the Second Amendment, and said in 2012 that he owned several guns, both for skeet shooting and for the protection of his family. In 2020, he said trips to gun ranges as a young adult made him "uncomfortable to remember ... given the subsequent tragedies with young people and guns." Affleck appeared alongside then-Senator Barack Obama at a 2006 rally in support of Proposition 87, which sought to reduce petroleum consumption in favor of alternative energy. He appeared in a global warming awareness video produced by the Center for American Progress Action Fund in 2007. Also that year, Affleck admitted he was not "particularly good at being green" while, in 2014, he named "a 1966 Chevelle" as his guilty pleasure. In 2016, Affleck filmed an endorsement for Rezpect Our Water, an online petition to stop construction of the Dakota Access Pipeline. Affleck registered to vote as a Democrat in 1992, and has campaigned on behalf of several Democratic presidential nominees. He supported Al Gore in the final weeks of the 2000 presidential campaign, attending rallies in California, Pennsylvania, and Florida. However, Affleck was unable to vote due to a registration issue in New York, where he was residing at the time, and later joked, "I'm going to vote twice next time, in true Boston fashion." Affleck was involved in the 2004 presidential campaign of John Kerry. During the Democratic National Convention in Boston, he spoke to many delegations, appeared on political discussion shows, and attended fundraising events. Affleck took part in a voter registration public service announcement, and traveled with Kerry during the opening weekend of his Believe in America Tour, making speeches at rallies in Pennsylvania, West Virginia, and Ohio. Affleck campaigned for President Barack Obama. He appeared alongside the then-Senator at a 2006 rally, introducing him as "the most galvanizing leader to come out of either party, in my opinion, in at least a decade". He donated to Obama's presidential campaign in 2007, and hosted two fundraisers for the candidate during the 2008 Democratic Primary. Affleck urged voters to "help make history" in a MoveOn.org campaign, and made several appearances during the 2008 Democratic National Convention. In the week of the presidential election, he appeared on Saturday Night Live to jokingly endorse Senator John McCain. Affleck did not actively campaign for Obama's reelection in 2012, though he still supported him. Affleck supported Hillary Clinton's 2016 presidential election campaign. He first met Clinton at Camp David in 1998 and, when she was a Senate candidate in 2000, he introduced her at a Cornell University rally and helped fundraise for her campaign. Affleck pointed to the First Lady's work with children, women and "working families". He supported Obama during the 2008 Democratic Primary, noting that Clinton had "moved toward the center" during the campaign. Affleck donated to Clinton's campaign fund during the 2016 Democratic Primary. During the 2016 presidential election, Affleck recorded a New Hampshire voter public service announcement, and was named by the Clinton campaign as a "Hillblazer" – one of 1,100 individuals who had contributed or raised at least $100,000. OpenSecrets reported that he raised $149,028. During the latter stages of the 2020 Democratic Party presidential primaries, Affleck said during an interview conducted in Spanish: "I like Bernie, I like Biden, I like Warren but the thing is that most of all; I don't like Trump." When Biden became the Democratic candidate, he donated to his campaign fund. In 2002, Affleck donated to Dick Gephardt's Congressional campaign, Robert Reich's campaign for Governor of Massachusetts, and appeared in campaign literature for former classmate Marjorie Decker, running as a city councillor in Massachusetts. He made donations to the presidential campaigns of both Dennis Kucinich and Wesley Clark in 2003. In 2005, he donated to the campaign fund of Deval Patrick, a candidate for Governor of Massachusetts. In 2006, Affleck contributed to Cory Booker's Newark mayoral campaign, to Eliot Spitzer's New York gubernatorial campaign, and introduced Congressmen Joe Courtney and Chris Murphy at rallies in Connecticut. He donated to the 2008 Congressional campaign of Pennsylvania's Patrick Murphy, and to the 2010 Senate campaign of Kirsten Gillibrand. Affleck hosted a 2012 fundraiser for Senate candidate Elizabeth Warren, endorsed her in a Progressive Change Campaign Committee video, and made a campaign donation. In 2013, he hosted a fundraiser for Cory Booker, and made donations to the Senate campaigns of both Booker and Alison Lundergan Grimes. In 2014, he donated to Bobby Shriver's Los Angeles County Supervisor campaign, and to Prophet La'omar Walker's California State Assembly campaign. He donated to the campaign of Senate candidate Kamala Harris in 2015 and, in 2016, he donated to the Congressional campaign of Melissa Gilbert and the West Virginia Senate campaign of Corey Palumbo. In 2017, he donated to the Senate reelection campaigns of Elizabeth Warren and Chris Coons, and to Adam Schiff's Congressional campaign. In 2018, he made contributions to the Congressional campaigns of Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, Sharice Davids and Leann Jacobsen, and to Michigan gubernatorial candidate Abdul El-Sayed and Georgia gubernatorial candidate Stacey Abrams. In 2019, Affleck donated to the presidential campaigns funds of both Cory Booker and Kamala Harris, and hosted a fundraiser for Booker. Also in 2019, he contributed to the congressional campaign funds of both Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and Ilhan Omar. In 2020, he spoke at a virtual rally in support of Whitney Williams, a candidate in the 2020 Montana gubernatorial election, and donated to her campaign fund. In the early 2000s, Affleck often expressed an interest in running for political office one day, but since 2007, he has denied any political ambitions and spoken repeatedly about the need for campaign finance reform. In 2005, The Washington Post reported that Virginia Democrats were trying to persuade Affleck to run as a Senate candidate. His publicist dismissed the rumor. In 2012, political pundits and Democratic strategists including Bob Shrum and Tad Devine speculated that Affleck was considering running for a Massachusetts Senate seat. Affleck denied the rumor, and joked that he "also won't be throwing my hat in the ring to run the U.N." In October 2023, Affleck signed the Artists4Ceasefire open letter calling for a ceasefire during the Israeli bombardment of Gaza. Affleck was married to actress Jennifer Garner from 2005 to 2018. They began dating in August 2004, having established a friendship on the sets of Pearl Harbor (2001) and Daredevil (2003). They were married on June 29, 2005, in a private Turks and Caicos ceremony. Victor Garber, who officiated the ceremony, and his partner, Rainer Andreesen, were the only guests. Affleck and Garner have three children together: daughters Violet Anne (born December 2005) and Seraphina Rose Elizabeth (born January 2009), and son Samuel Garner (born February 2012). They publicly announced their separation in June 2015, with Affleck continuing to live in a guesthouse at the family home until mid-2017. They jointly filed for divorce in April 2017, seeking joint physical and legal custody of their children. They jointly hired a mediator to help them negotiate a financial settlement and the divorce was finalized in October 2018. In 2020, Affleck described the divorce as "the biggest regret of my life" and "a painful experience, even if you're on the best possible terms and you agree it's the best choice." While Affleck believes paparazzi attention is "part of the deal" of stardom, he has spoken out against photographs taken at his private residence and paparazzi interest in his children specifically, who he says became the "big money" draw for photographers waiting outside his home. In 2013, Affleck and Garner hosted an event for lawmakers at their home in support of a bill that would protect celebrities' children from harassment by photographers; their six-year-old daughter made a speech about her personal experiences. Garner also testified before the California Assembly Judiciary Committee in support of the bill, which later became law. Despite the legislation, photographers still regularly wait outside their children's school and police assistance is sometimes required. In 2014, Affleck argued in favor of United Kingdom-style legislation that requires media outlets to blur children's faces in published photos. He has said there are "real practical dangers" involved in paparazzi attention, citing Garner's longtime stalker, Steven Burky, who was arrested in December 2009 while trying to blend in with paparazzi outside their daughter's preschool. He was charged with two counts of stalking, to which he pleaded not guilty by reason of insanity. In March 2010, he was ruled insane, sent to California's state mental hospital, and ordered to stay away from the Affleck-Garner family for 10 years if released. Affleck first dated Jennifer Lopez from 2002 to 2004. They became friends on the set of Gigli in December 2001, having previously encountered each other at industry parties. They began a romantic relationship in July 2002 when Lopez filed for divorce from her second husband, Cris Judd. Their relationship was extensively publicized, with tabloids referring to the couple as Bennifer, the first celebrity portmanteau of its kind. They appeared together in the music video for her song "Jenny from the Block" and the film Jersey Girl. Lopez's album This Is Me... Then was dedicated to and inspired by Affleck. They became engaged in November 2002 but their planned wedding on September 14, 2003, was postponed with four days' notice because of "excessive media attention". They called off the engagement in January 2004. Affleck and Lopez remained in occasional contact in the years after their breakup and spoke highly of each other in public. According to Lopez, Affleck's discomfort with the media scrutiny was one reason for their split and, years later, she described it as her "first real heartbreak": "I think different time, different thing, who knows what could've happened but there was a genuine love there." Both during the relationship and in the months after the break-up, Affleck characterized some of the media commentary as rooted in racism, classism and sexism: "We were thought of as two different kinds of people." In subsequent years, he pushed back against the "curious notion" that he should view the relationship as a mistake, and reflected on the prevailing tabloid culture at the time "where it's about one person and everybody focuses on them." Affleck acknowledged that "there were ways I did contribute to it", citing the "Jenny from the Block" music video and a joint promotional interview for Gigli. He said neither of them "anticipated" the degree of attention they would receive: "I think Jen and I made a mistake in that we fell in love, we were excited and maybe too accessible." Affleck and Lopez began dating again in April 2021, 20 years after they had first met, and announced their second engagement in April 2022. They were married in a Las Vegas ceremony on July 16, 2022 and hosted a larger celebration for family and friends at Affleck's Georgia house later that summer. Affleck is step-father to Lopez's twins. Affleck began dating actress Gwyneth Paltrow in October 1997 after they met at a Miramax dinner, and they later worked together on Shakespeare in Love (1998). Although they first broke up in January 1999, months later, Paltrow persuaded Affleck to co-star with her in Bounce (2000) and they soon resumed their relationship. They separated again in October 2000. In 2015, Paltrow said they were friends. Affleck had a long-distance relationship with New York-based television producer Lindsay Shookus from mid-2017 to mid-2018; they briefly dated again in early 2019. Shookus served as the head of Saturday Night Live's talent department at the time, a show which Affleck has hosted five times since 2000. Affleck dated Cuban actress Ana de Armas, whom he met on the set of Deep Water in the fall of 2019, from early 2020 to early 2021. Affleck has both anxiety and depression, and has taken antidepressants since age 26. He is a recovering alcoholic and follows a twelve-step program. He said he used alcohol to alleviate a constant feeling of "discomfort" and remarked that it "took me a long time to fundamentally, deeply, without a hint of doubt, admit to myself that I am an alcoholic." There is a history of addiction and mental illness in Affleck's family. Two of his grandparents were alcoholics. His paternal grandmother, addicted to both alcohol and barbiturates, died by suicide at age 46. His paternal uncle was an addict who died from a self-inflicted gunshot wound. His aunt was a heroin addict. Affleck attended Al-Anon support meetings as a child due to his father's addiction issues. His brother is a recovering alcoholic. Affleck's own drinking became a concern when he was fifteen. His mother sent him to an Outward Bound wilderness camp for at-risk teenagers, having first considered a residential recovery program. Affleck became sober in his mid-twenties, stating in a 1998 interview that alcohol was "dangerous" for him. He received residential treatment for addiction in 2001 and maintained his sobriety for a "couple of years" afterward. In subsequent years, he refused to discuss his alcoholism in detail and later described it as a period where he "drank relatively normally". "I thought, 'I want to just drink like a normal person. I want to have wine at dinner.' And I was able to for about eight years." Affleck gradually began to drink "more and more" and eventually, was drinking until he "passed out" on a nightly basis. Garner supported Affleck's struggles with alcoholism during and after their marriage and said in 2020 that attending Al-Anon meetings empowered her to change "the dance" of their relationship. Affleck returned to residential treatment in 2017 and following a publicly documented relapse and intervention, again in 2018. He received further outpatient treatment over the following year. In late 2019, TMZ filmed him stumbling on a Los Angeles street; he acknowledged the following day that he had a brief "slip" after over a year of sobriety. He later described the incident as "embarrassing": "I wish it didn't happen. I really wish it wasn't on the internet for my kids to see." During press for The Way Back (2020), in which he plays an alcoholic, Affleck stressed that he felt "vulnerable" when talking about his addiction and did not intend to "go on talking about this issue forever": "I think the value, if there is value in me talking about being a recovering alcoholic, is that that doesn't have to be who you are. That doesn't have to be the label on your head." In 2023, he said he often advises fellow actors to avoid speaking publicly about their addiction issues where possible: "You don't need to be anybody's poster child." Affleck won the 2004 California State Poker Championship, taking home the first prize of $356,400 and qualifying for the 2004 World Poker Tour final tournament. He was one of many celebrities, along with Leonardo DiCaprio and Tobey Maguire, who took part in Molly Bloom's high-stakes poker games in the mid-2000s. In 2014, Affleck was asked to refrain from playing blackjack at the Hard Rock Hotel in Las Vegas, after a series of wins aroused suspicion that he was counting cards, which is a legal gambling strategy, though frowned upon by casinos. Affleck has repeatedly denied tabloid reports of a gambling addiction. Affleck came from an Episcopalian family, but was not raised in a religious household. In 2008, he listed the Gospel of Matthew as one of the books that made a difference in his life. As infants, each of his three children were baptized as members of the United Methodist Church and, from 2015 to 2020, Affleck, Garner and their children were regularly photographed at Methodist church services in Los Angeles. Affleck is agnostic and has described faith as a "struggle": "But the twelve-step program is faith-based ... Faith has served me well in recovery as an alcoholic." He identifies more with the teachings of Buddhism: "I have a difficult time with the theistic aspects of AA ... One of the things I like about Buddhism is it's like, believe what you believe." Much of Affleck's ancestry is English, Welsh, Scottish and German with a smattering of Irishness. Affleck's said-to-be maternal great-great-grandfather, Heinrich Boldt, who, aged 12, accidentally discovered the Curmsun Disc, emigrated from Prussia in the late 1840s.[additional citation(s) needed] Affleck appeared on the PBS genealogy series Finding Your Roots in 2014. When told that an ancestor had been a slave owner in Georgia, Affleck responded: "God. It gives me kind of a sagging feeling to see a biological relationship to that. But, you know, there it is, part of our history ... We tend to separate ourselves from these things by going like, 'It's just dry history, and it's all over now'." Leaked emails from the 2015 Sony email hacking scandal showed that, after filming, Affleck felt uncomfortable about the segment, which was not included in the final broadcast. The show's host, professor Henry Louis Gates Jr., stated: "We focused on what we felt were the most interesting aspects of his ancestry." An internal investigation by PBS concluded that Affleck had exerted "improper influence" over the editorial process and that the producers of the show, including Gates, had violated PBS standards by improperly withholding information. The show was temporarily postponed, resuming after a fact-checker and an "independent genealogist" were added to the show's staff. Affleck's episode was removed from the show's online archive. In 2009, the New England Historic Genealogical Society discovered that Affleck is an 11th cousin of the 44th president of the United States, Barack Obama. During the Me Too movement in 2017, Affleck was accused by two women of inappropriate behavior. Actress Hilarie Burton stated that, during an on-air appearance on TRL Uncensored in 2003, Affleck "wraps his arm around me, and comes over and tweaks my left boob". Affleck responded on Twitter: "I acted inappropriately toward Ms. Burton and I sincerely apologize." Annamarie Tendler, a makeup artist, said that Affleck "grabbed my ass at a Golden Globes party in 2014 ... He tried to play it like he was politely moving me out of the way." In response to the Harvey Weinstein scandal, Affleck pledged to donate any future profits from his early Miramax films to charities supporting victims of sexual assault, and said he had only been aware that Weinstein "was sleazy and a bully." In a tweet, actress Rose McGowan responded: "You lie." She said she met Affleck after being sexually assaulted by Weinstein during the Sundance Film Festival in 1997 and told him, while crying, that she had "just come from Harvey's and he said, 'Goddamnit, I told him to stop doing that.'" In a leaked email regarding McGowan's case, Affleck stated: "I never saw Rose at any hotel in Sundance. She never told me nor did I ever infer that she was attacked by anyone." In a 2019 interview, Affleck said: "I don't really want to get into other people's individual stories because I feel like those are their stories and they're entitled to tell as much or as little of those as they want. I believe Rose. I support her. I really like and admire her tenacity and I wish her the best." In 2020, McGowan clarified her comments: "It's not like I'm raging at Ben Affleck. I never said to him, 'I was just raped.' It's just more to illustrate the point of this continual thing of everybody knowing and everybody being part of it, unwittingly or proactively." Affleck has appeared in more than 50 films and won many accolades throughout his career as an actor, writer, and director. He first gained recognition as a writer when he won the Golden Globe and the Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay for Good Will Hunting (1997), which he co-wrote with Matt Damon; Affleck remains the youngest person ever to win a Best Original Screenplay Oscar, at 25 years old. As an actor, he received Golden Globe nominations for his performances in Hollywoodland (2006) and The Tender Bar (2021). The film Argo (2012), which he directed, co-produced, and starred in, won him the Golden Globe Award, BAFTA, and Directors Guild Award for Best Director, as well as the Golden Globe Award, BAFTA, the Producers Guild Award, and the Academy Award for Best Picture. Naming laws in California do not allow special letters with accents (é). Affleck was born with the surname Affleck-Boldt but has since removed Boldt from his official surname. White, Abbey (July 17, 2022). "Jennifer Lopez and Ben Affleck Announce Marriage". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved July 19, 2022. Radloff, Jessica (February 15, 2015). "You Won't Believe Shonda Rhime's Method for Knowing Whether a Story Works". Glamour. Archived from the original on May 2, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2015. Casey, Nora Sørena. "Ben Affleck – American actor, writer, and director". Encyclopædia Britannica. Archived from the original on August 23, 2017. Retrieved August 23, 2017. McCarthy, Kevin (1997). "Cinezine – Frank Discussions With Ben Affleck". View Askew Productions. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved April 11, 2017. Morris, Wesley (September 15, 2010). "With New Film, Affleck Ties Boston Knot Tighter". Boston Globe. Archived from the original on July 14, 2014. Retrieved June 29, 2014. "Tidbits, One Ringtailed". Harvard Magazine. March 1, 2010. Archived from the original on July 2, 2017. Retrieved April 11, 2017. Galloway, Stephen (November 17, 2011). "Confessions of Ben Affleck". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 14, 2012. Retrieved March 9, 2022. "Christopher Anne Affleck – Events – 20th Anniversary Luminaries". Breakthrough Greater Boston. Archived from the original on June 28, 2017. Retrieved April 11, 2017. Lidz, Franz (September 10, 2000). "I Bargained With Devil for Fame". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 18, 2017. Retrieved April 11, 2017. "'Awards Chatter' Podcast – Ben Affleck ('The Way Back')". The Hollywood Reporter. January 14, 2021. Retrieved March 9, 2022. Weinraub, Bernard (December 1, 1999). "Playboy Interview: Ben Affleck". Playboy. Fleming, Michael (January 27, 2014). "Ben Affleck on Argo, His Distaste For Politics and the Batman Backlash". Playboy. Archived from the original on July 2, 2014. Retrieved June 5, 2014. Leiby, Richard (May 10, 2002). "The 'Sum' and The Substance". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on April 12, 2017. Retrieved April 11, 2017. Atkinson, Kim (May 15, 2006). "Casey, the Other Affleck". Boston. Archived from the original on February 28, 2017. Retrieved April 12, 2017. Powell, Alvin (May 11, 2000). "Damon, Affleck Rally to Living Wage Cause". Harvard Gazette. Archived from the original on March 13, 2005. Retrieved April 12, 2017. Sorbello, Donna (January 27, 2012). "Father Of The Boston Theatre Scene". Actors' Equity Association. Archived from the original on May 27, 2014. Retrieved April 11, 2017. Schneider, Karen (February 21, 2000). "Cover Story: Good Time Hunting". People. Vol. 53, no. 7. Archived from the original on April 12, 2017. Retrieved April 12, 2017. Shanahan, Mark (March 15, 2017). "Ben Affleck has Struggled with Alcohol for a Long Time". The Boston Globe. Archived from the original on April 12, 2017. Retrieved April 11, 2017. Spencer, Amy (February 28, 2020). "Ben Affleck Talks Raising Kids With His Ex, Facing His Demons and Tackling His Most Personal Movie Role Yet". Parade. Retrieved February 29, 2020. Drysdale, Jennifer. "Ben Affleck's History With Alcohol Addiction: A Timeline". Entertainment Tonight. Retrieved November 6, 2019. "An Interview With Erwin McManus and Ben Affleck". Archived from the original on November 14, 2021. Retrieved March 11, 2020. "Interview: Ben Affleck, Actor". The Scotsman. September 19, 2010. Archived from the original on April 1, 2017. Retrieved April 10, 2017. "Episode 767 – Casey Affleck". WTF with Marc Maron Podcast. December 12, 2016. Retrieved August 26, 2018. McGinty, Kate (January 5, 2013). "Palm Springs Film Festival: Ben Affleck Spit on Me". The Desert Sun. Archived from the original on May 27, 2014. Retrieved April 12, 2017. Reiter, Amy (November 8, 2000). "Ben Affleck: "I Hope Nader Can Still Sleep"". Salon. p. 6(7), 36–100. Archived from the original on August 19, 2014. Retrieved August 27, 2014. Berk, Sheryl (July 2002). "Ben Affleck on Stardom, Settling Down, and Working with Best Buddy Matt Damon". Biography Magazine. pp. 36–100. Roberts, Sheila (August 12, 2013). "Casey Affleck Talks Ain't Them Bodies Saints, Working with Rooney Mara, His Relationship with His Brother, I'm Still Here, and More". Collider. Archived from the original on June 23, 2017. Retrieved April 11, 2017. Stern, Marlow (December 2, 2013). "Casey Affleck, Star of 'Out of the Furnace,' on His Hollywood Struggles". The Daily Beast. Archived from the original on March 14, 2017. Retrieved April 11, 2017. Miller, Samantha (December 2, 2002). "Cover Story: Sexiest Man Alive...Ben Affleck". People. Vol. 58, no. 23. Archived from the original on April 12, 2017. Retrieved April 12, 2017. Wallace, Amy (March 7, 1999). "Opportunity Knocked at Every Turn". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on February 8, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2015. Marr, Madeleine (February 20, 2020). "Ben Affleck just spoke perfect Spanish in Miami and now your single tía wants an intro". Miami Herald. Retrieved February 28, 2020. Garratt, Sheryl (May 30, 2008). "Casey Affleck's Time to Shine". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on January 10, 2016. Retrieved April 11, 2017. Booth, William (October 17, 2007). "Bond of Brothers". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on April 12, 2017. Retrieved April 11, 2017. Mitchell, Russ (September 12, 2010). "Ben Affleck: Insecurity, Fear Good Motivators". CBS News. Archived from the original on June 20, 2017. Retrieved April 11, 2017. Sischy, Ingrid (April 16, 2014). "New Again: Ben Affleck". Interview. Archived from the original on June 19, 2017. Retrieved April 11, 2017. Rader, Dotson (October 10, 2007). "Ben Affleck: 'I Have a Strong Sense of Where I Want to Go'". Parade Magazine. Archived from the original on April 11, 2008. Retrieved April 12, 2017. "Interview With 'The Adjustment Bureau' Star Matt Damon". CNN. March 3, 2011. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved April 12, 2017. "PrimeTime: The Real Ben Affleck". abcnews.go.com. ABC News. November 16, 2002. Archived from the original on August 21, 2014. Retrieved August 27, 2014. Edwards, Sian (October 29, 2012). "Enter Ben's World". Global Citizen Magazine. Archived from the original on November 20, 2016. Retrieved April 11, 2017. Singh, Ajay (January 15, 2013). "Did Ben Affleck Major in Middle Eastern Studies From Oxy?". Eagle Rock Patch. Patch Media. Archived from the original on April 13, 2017. Retrieved April 12, 2017. Riley, Jenelle (December 23, 2010). "Ben Affleck Knows His Way Around the 'Town'". Backstage. Archived from the original on July 14, 2014. Retrieved August 27, 2014. Sherman, Paul (May 1, 2008). Big Screen Boston: From Mystery Street to The Departed and Beyond. Black Bars Publishing. ISBN 978-0977639748. Retrieved April 11, 2017. "Profiles of Ex-Couple Ben Affleck, Jennifer Lopez". CNN.com. January 24, 2004. Archived from the original on March 5, 2016. Retrieved April 12, 2017. Davis, Edward (February 18, 2013). "Watch: Ben Affleck's Directorial Debut 'I Killed My Lesbian Wife, Ηung Ηer On A Μeathook & Νow I Have A Three-Picture Deal With Disney' [Short Film]". IndieWire. Archived from the original on July 14, 2014. Retrieved August 27, 2014. "School Ties, Ben Affleck". Entertainment Weekly. January 14, 2007. Archived from the original on October 8, 2014. Retrieved April 12, 2017. Stern, Marlow (September 24, 2013). "'Dazed and Confused' 20th Anniversary: 20 Craziest Facts About the Cult Classic". The Daily Beast. Archived from the original on July 14, 2014. Retrieved June 29, 2014. Stern, Marlow (September 24, 2013). "'Dazed and Confused' Director Richard Linklater on Its 20th Anniversary". The Daily Beast. Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Retrieved August 27, 2014. Spitz, Marc (December 27, 2013). "An Oral History of 'Dazed and Confused'". Maxim. Archived from the original on December 24, 2014. Retrieved August 27, 2014. Holden, Stephen (September 27, 1996). "A Major in Parties and a Minor in Art". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 26, 2014. Retrieved August 27, 2014. Maslin, Janet (April 4, 1997). "Chasing Amy (1997)". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Retrieved October 7, 2014. Gleiberman, Owen (April 4, 1997). "Movie Review: 'Chasing Amy' (1997)". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Retrieved October 7, 2014. McCarthy, Todd (January 30, 1997). "Review: Going All the Way". Variety. Archived from the original on December 26, 2014. Retrieved March 27, 2015. Maslin, Janet (January 27, 1997). "Independent Films Have Their Sundance Night". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Retrieved August 27, 2014. Nanos, Janelle (January 2013). "Good Will Hunting: An Oral History". Boston Magazine. Archived from the original on July 15, 2014. Retrieved June 5, 2014. Shone, Tom (February 26, 2011). "The Double Life of Matt Damon". The Times. Retrieved August 16, 2017. Keegan, Rebecca (March 16, 2023). "Ben Affleck on 'Air,' New CEO Gig and Those Memes: "I Am Who I Am"". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved March 16, 2023. Goldman, William (May 2, 2000). "Good Will Hunting: the Truth". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2015. Maslin, Janet (December 5, 1997). "Good Will Hunting: Logarithms and Biorhythms Test a Young Janitor". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 14, 2014. Retrieved March 27, 2015. Levy, Emanuel (November 30, 1997). "Review: Good Will Hunting". Variety. Archived from the original on December 26, 2014. Retrieved March 27, 2015. Carr, Jay (December 25, 1997). "'Will' Has its Way". The Boston Globe. Archived from the original on April 10, 2016. Retrieved April 12, 2017. Malla, Pasha (February 26, 2016). "What Makes a Great Script? The Oscar Nominees for Best Original Screenplay". The Globe and Mail. Archived from the original on February 27, 2016. Retrieved July 22, 2017. Fennessey, Sean (June 27, 2011). "An Oral History of Transformers Director Michael Bay". GQ. Archived from the original on February 14, 2017. Retrieved April 12, 2017. "Armageddon (1998) – Box Office Mojo". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on April 20, 2017. Retrieved April 12, 2017. Merkin, Daphne (July 20, 1998). "The Film File: Armageddon". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on January 5, 2008. Retrieved April 12, 2017. Loewenstein, Lael (December 6, 1998). "Review: 'Shakespeare in Love'". Variety. Archived from the original on September 7, 2014. Retrieved October 7, 2014. Maslin, Janet (December 11, 1998). "Shakespeare in Love (1998)". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 15, 2014. Retrieved October 7, 2014. Holden, Stephen (January 23, 1998). "Phantoms: A Monster Hungry for Attention". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 23, 2014. Retrieved March 27, 2015. Maslin, Janet (October 4, 1999). "Dogma: There's Devilment Afoot: 2 Fallen Angels Want Back In". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Retrieved March 27, 2015. Leydon, Joe (March 14, 1999). "Review: 'Forces of Nature'". Variety. Archived from the original on September 4, 2014. Retrieved October 7, 2014. "200 Cigarettes". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on March 3, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2015. Nashawaty, Chris (September 9, 2010). "Ben Affleck Calls The Shots". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on October 12, 2014. Retrieved October 7, 2014. Peretz, Evgenia. "Let's Try It Ben's Way". Vanity Fair. No. October 1999. p. 262. Mitchell, Elvis (February 25, 2000). "Reindeer Games: Santa Would Surely Be Useful Right Now". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 26, 2014. Retrieved March 27, 2015. Scott, A.O. (February 18, 2000). "Boiler Room (2000)". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 15, 2014. Retrieved October 7, 2014. Rainer, Peter (February 28, 2000). "Perfect Pitch". New York. Archived from the original on October 12, 2014. Retrieved October 7, 2014. Leydon, Joe (November 6, 2000). "Review: 'Joseph: King of Dreams'". Variety. Archived from the original on April 9, 2017. Retrieved April 8, 2017. Holden, Stephen (November 17, 2000). "Bounce (2000)". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 15, 2014. Retrieved October 7, 2014. Shone, Tom (November 6, 2012). "Ben Affleck Talks About His New Film, Argo". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on February 1, 2017. Retrieved April 12, 2017. McCarthy, Todd (May 23, 2001). "Review:Pearl Harbor". Variety. Archived from the original on January 11, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2015. Mitchell, Elvis (August 24, 2001). "Jay And Silent Bob Strike Back: Hitchhiking in a Hurry: What Does That Tell You?". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 26, 2014. Retrieved March 27, 2015. Cockrell, Eddie (August 28, 2001). "Review: Daddy and Them". Variety. Archived from the original on January 11, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2015. Holden, Stephen (May 31, 2002). "The Sum of all Fears: Terrorism That's All Too Real". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 27, 2014. Retrieved March 27, 2015. "Interview: Out on The Town with Ben Affleck". Emirates 24/7. Reuters. December 27, 2010. Archived from the original on December 19, 2016. Retrieved April 12, 2017. Koehler, Robert (April 5, 2002). "Review: 'Changing Lanes'". Variety. Archived from the original on September 14, 2014. Retrieved October 7, 2014. Petrikin, Chris (July 27, 1998). "Pearl Street Taps Kubena". Variety. Archived from the original on May 5, 2016. Retrieved April 12, 2017. Holson, Laura M. (May 27, 2001). "Bidding To Be Moguls Of a Risky Business- Page 2". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 15, 2014. Retrieved June 29, 2014. Holson, Laura (August 5, 2002). "Affleck and Damon Find Real-Life Obstacles to Their Media Venture". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 14, 2014. Retrieved June 29, 2014. Barile, Louise A. (August 21, 2002). "Ben & Matt To Give Second 'Greenlight'". People. Archived from the original on April 17, 2008. Retrieved June 9, 2008. Gallo, Phil (September 11, 2002). "Review: 'Push, Nevada'". Variety. Archived from the original on October 22, 2016. Retrieved April 12, 2017. Connolly, Kelly (October 10, 2002). "Ben Affleck & Matt Damon". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on June 18, 2009. Retrieved June 4, 2009. James, Caryn (September 17, 2002). "Sex in Unison: Just One Quirk Among Many". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 8, 2016. Retrieved April 12, 2017. Bianco, Robert (September 16, 2002). "Quirky 'Push' is Truly a Mystery Within a Mystery". USA Today. Archived from the original on May 8, 2016. Retrieved April 12, 2017. Friedman, Wayne (October 14, 2002). "Cancellation of Push, Nevada Miffs Marketers". Advertising Age. Archived from the original on April 16, 2017. Retrieved April 15, 2017. Fleming, Michael (August 5, 2002). "Planet in Disney Pic Prod'n Orbit". Variety. Archived from the original on May 5, 2016. Retrieved April 12, 2017. Fleming, Michael (January 30, 2008). "LivePlanet Film Unit Takes Final Bow". Variety. Archived from the original on May 22, 2017. Retrieved April 12, 2017. "The Verge: Building a New Ben". GQ. January 4, 2014. Archived from the original on July 14, 2014. Retrieved June 19, 2014. Downey, Ryan J. (June 24, 2002). "Affleck, Garner Open Up About 'Daredevil'". MTV. Archived from the original on August 22, 2015. Retrieved April 27, 2009. "Ben Affleck Movie Box Office Results". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on May 8, 2009. Retrieved April 27, 2009. Mitchell, Elvis (February 14, 2003). "Daredevil: Blind Lawyer As Hero In Red". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 21, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2015. "Gigli (2003)". Rotten Tomatoes. August 2003. Archived from the original on May 20, 2017. Retrieved July 7, 2017. Bailey, Jason (January 25, 2021). "Hear me out: why Gigli isn't a bad movie". Guardian. Retrieved June 15, 2022. Dargis, Manohla (August 1, 2003). "Gigli's Faults: More Than a Couple". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on January 21, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2015. "This Smash-Up Is Just Smashing!". Observer. August 11, 2003. Retrieved October 6, 2021. Shone, Tom (November 6, 2012). "Ben Affleck Talks About His New Film, Argo". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on June 2, 2014. Retrieved June 29, 2014. Bradshaw, Peter (January 15, 2004). "Paycheck". The Guardian. Archived from the original on January 21, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2015. Dargis, Manohla (December 24, 2003). "Director Woo Falls Down on the Job with 'Paycheck'". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 11, 2017. Retrieved April 10, 2017. Holden, Stephen (March 26, 2004). "How to End a Career: Take a Baby to a News Conference". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 6, 2014. Retrieved March 27, 2015. Holden, Stephen (October 22, 2004). "You Can't Go Home, or Perhaps You Just Shouldn't". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 28, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2015. "Ben Affleck is done worrying about what other people think". Los Angeles Times. January 7, 2022. Retrieved March 18, 2023. Silverman, Stephen M. (November 29, 2006). "Ben Affleck: 'I Would Love' More Kids". People. Archived from the original on April 13, 2017. Retrieved April 12, 2017. Masters, Kim (October 27, 2004). "Ben's Big Fall". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 21, 2014. Retrieved March 9, 2022. Travers, Peter (September 7, 2006). "Hollywoodland". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 28, 2011. Retrieved March 9, 2022. Macnab, Geoffrey (November 7, 2006). "Come Fly With Me". The Guardian. Archived from the original on October 15, 2014. Retrieved October 7, 2014. "HFPA – Awards Search". Hollywood Foreign Press Association. Archived from the original on August 1, 2012. Retrieved June 10, 2008.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) Bowles, Scott (July 21, 2006). "Inspired Moments are Too Few in Clerks II". USA Today. Archived from the original on February 8, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2015. "Man About Town – Box Office Mojo". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on August 19, 2017. Retrieved March 9, 2022. Siegel, Tatiana (January 2, 2014). "Chris Pine Reveals His Politics Amid High-Risk 'Jack Ryan' Play". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 17, 2017. Retrieved March 9, 2022. Archerd, Army (May 1, 2003). "Lopez Flies to Affleck During 'Life' Breaks". Variety. Archived from the original on May 9, 2016. Retrieved April 12, 2017. "Interviews: Ben Affleck Talks Paycheck". ComingSoon. December 15, 2003. Archived from the original on December 20, 2016. Retrieved April 12, 2017. "Gone Baby Gone (2007)". Rotten Tomatoes. October 19, 2007. Archived from the original on August 17, 2015. Retrieved April 12, 2017. Dargis, Manohla (October 19, 2007). "Human Frailty and Pain on Boston's Mean Streets". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 5, 2015. Retrieved October 7, 2014. Farber, Stephen (September 4, 2007). "Gone Baby Gone". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 13, 2014. Retrieved March 9, 2022. Stein, Ruthe (October 5, 2007). "Ben Affleck Behind the Camera in 'Gone Baby Gone'". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on May 9, 2016. Retrieved April 12, 2017. Gleiberman, Owen (February 4, 2009). "He's Just Not That Into You". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on November 7, 2016. Retrieved April 12, 2017. Burr, Ty (February 6, 2009). "Love and Star Power Mingle in 'He's Just Not That Into You'". The Boston Globe. Archived from the original on June 5, 2016. Retrieved April 12, 2017. Morris, Wesley (April 17, 2009). "'State of Play' Chases Juicy Story and Lionizes Print Reporters". The Boston Globe. Archived from the original on June 5, 2016. Retrieved April 12, 2017. Edelstein, David (April 17, 2009). "State of Play". New York. Archived from the original on December 21, 2016. Retrieved April 12, 2017. Lemire, Christy (August 31, 2009). "Review: 'Extract' Tastes Too Bland". Salon. Archived from the original on August 7, 2016. Retrieved December 28, 2009. Travers, Peter (September 3, 2009). "Extract". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on March 8, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2015. Dargis, Manohla (September 3, 2009). "Working in the Salt Mines: The Boss's View". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 10, 2015. Retrieved October 7, 2014. "Affleck: When 'Company Men' Lose A Firm Footing". NPR. December 21, 2010. Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Retrieved October 7, 2014. Denby, David (December 20, 2010). "Roundup". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on October 18, 2014. Retrieved October 7, 2014. Corliss, Richard (January 22, 2011). "The Company Men: You're Hired!". Time. Archived from the original on October 28, 2014. Retrieved October 7, 2014. Finke, Nikki (September 19, 2010). "Ben Affleck's 'The Town' Surprises For #1; 'Easy A' #2, 'Devil' #3, 'Alpha & Omega' #5". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on January 8, 2017. Retrieved April 12, 2017. "The Town (2010)". Rotten Tomatoes. September 17, 2010. Archived from the original on December 12, 2016. Retrieved July 7, 2017. Scott, A.O. (September 16, 2010). "Bunker Hill to Fenway: A Crook's Freedom Trail". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 13, 2015. Retrieved October 7, 2014. Ebert, Roger (September 15, 2010). "The Town". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on October 12, 2014. Retrieved October 7, 2014. McNary, Dave (February 17, 2010). "Affleck, Damon in Talks with Warner Bros". Variety. Archived from the original on May 5, 2016. Retrieved April 12, 2017. Lane, Anthony (October 15, 2012). "Film Within a Film". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on October 18, 2014. Retrieved October 7, 2014. Travers, Peter (October 11, 2012). "Argo". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on October 15, 2014. Retrieved October 7, 2014. McClintock, Pamela (November 2, 2013). "Box Office Milestone: Ben Affleck's 'Argo' Hitting $200 Million Worldwide". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 21, 2016. Retrieved March 9, 2022. Thompson, Anne (January 27, 2013). "SAG Awards: With Critics Choice, Globes, PGA and SAG Wins, 'Argo' Now Challenges 'Lincoln'". IndieWire. Archived from the original on January 31, 2013. Retrieved March 9, 2022. Feinberg, Scott (January 16, 2013). "How to Fix Oscar's Baffling Snub of Ben Affleck (Analysis)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on May 2, 2017. Retrieved March 9, 2022. Lyttelton, Oliver (January 6, 2011). "How Do You Like That? Terrence Malick Gave Ben Affleck & Matt Damon Notes On 'Good Will Hunting'". IndieWire. Archived from the original on July 10, 2017. Retrieved April 12, 2017. Bradshaw, Peter (February 21, 2013). "To the Wonder". The Guardian. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2015. Brody, Richard (April 10, 2013). "The Cinematic Miracle of 'To The Wonder'". The New Yorker. Archived from the original on March 13, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2015. Hornaday, Ann (October 3, 2013). "Runner Runner Review: Talented Cast, Director Deal a Weak Hand". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2015. Barker, Andrew (September 25, 2013). "Film Review: Runner Runner". Variety. Archived from the original on September 11, 2014. Retrieved March 27, 2015. Sharkey, Betsy (October 3, 2013). "'Runner Runner' Runs Hot, Cold with Ben Affleck, Justin Timberlake". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 10, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2015. Pierce, Nev (September 27, 2014). "David Fincher on Gone Girl: 'Bad Things Happen in This Movie...'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on April 17, 2017. Retrieved April 12, 2017. Robinson, Joanna (September 18, 2014). "Gone Girl Director David Fincher Cast Ben Affleck After Googling His Nervous Smile". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on October 25, 2016. Retrieved April 12, 2017. Edelstein, David (October 1, 2014). "David Fincher Puts Ben Affleck's Evasiveness to Good Use in Gone Girl". New York. Archived from the original on October 7, 2014. Retrieved October 7, 2014. Chang, Justin (September 21, 2014). "Film Review: 'Gone Girl'". Variety. Archived from the original on October 7, 2014. Retrieved October 7, 2014. Thompson, Anne (October 12, 2015). "The Unsinkable Effie Brown Makes HBO's 'Project Greenlight' a Must-See: "I'm not his favorite person"". IndieWire. Archived from the original on May 7, 2016. Retrieved April 12, 2017. Itzkoff, Dave (March 14, 2016). "Ben Affleck's 'Broken' Batman". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 12, 2017. Retrieved April 16, 2017. McDonald, Soraya Nadia (July 12, 2015). "Paging Hair and Makeup! Ben Affleck Makes his First Public Appearance Since Splitting with Jennifer Garner – at Comic-Con". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on July 13, 2015. Retrieved April 12, 2017. Barker, Andrew (March 22, 2016). "Film Review: 'Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice'". Variety. Archived from the original on February 3, 2017. Retrieved April 12, 2017. Truitt, Brian (March 22, 2016). "Review: New Heroes Shine in 'Batman v Superman'". USA Today. Archived from the original on March 18, 2017. Retrieved April 12, 2017. Berman, Eliza (August 5, 2016). "Does Suicide Squad Really Need That Post-Credits Scene?". Time. Archived from the original on July 26, 2017. Retrieved August 21, 2017. Lincoln, Kevin (October 16, 2016). "The Accountant Is a Hit, and Ben Affleck Is Truly a Movie Star Again". New York. Archived from the original on December 19, 2016. Retrieved March 18, 2017. Debruge, Peter (October 12, 2016). "Film Review: 'The Accountant'". Variety. Archived from the original on April 29, 2017. Retrieved April 12, 2017. Holden, Stephen (October 13, 2016). "Review: In 'The Accountant,' Ben Affleck Plays a Savant With a Dark Secret". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 6, 2017. Retrieved April 12, 2017. McNary, Dave (August 19, 2016). "Ben Affleck Directing, Starring in 'Witness for the Prosecution' Remake". Lincoln, Ross A. (June 18, 2016). "Warner Bros Pushes 'Lego Movie 2' Release To 2019". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on February 5, 2017. Retrieved April 12, 2017. McClintock, Pamela (January 14, 2017). "Box Office: Why Ben Affleck's 'Live by Night' and Martin Scorsese's 'Silence' Fared So Poorly". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on January 16, 2017. Retrieved March 9, 2022. Sims, David (January 13, 2017). "'Live by Night' Is Too Epic for Its Own Good". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on April 3, 2017. Retrieved April 12, 2017. Owen, Paul (October 8, 2016). "Matt Damon and Ben Affleck Surprise Fans with Good Will Hunting Reading". The Guardian. Archived from the original on April 16, 2017. Retrieved April 16, 2017. Child, Ben (November 1, 2017). "Five tasks Justice League must complete to save the DC universe". The Guardian. Archived from the original on December 14, 2017. Retrieved December 13, 2017. Guerrasio, Jason. "Ben Affleck says reprising his Batman role in 'The Flash' was fun after a 'difficult' shoot on 'Justice League'". Insider. Kit, Borys (May 22, 2017). "Zack Snyder Steps Down From 'Justice League' to Deal With Family Tragedy". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved October 16, 2021. Walsh, Savannah (May 10, 2021). "Gal Gadot Says Joss Whedon "Threatened" Her Career on the Set of Justice League". Vanity Fair Blogs. Retrieved October 16, 2021. "Ben Affleck Talks Alcohol Abuse During 'Justice League' & Why The "Suffering" Was All Worth It". theplaylist.net. Retrieved October 16, 2021. "Justice League Reviews". Metacritic. Archived from the original on November 17, 2017. Retrieved January 3, 2018. McCarthy, Todd (November 14, 2017). "'Justice League': Film Review". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 29, 2017. Retrieved March 9, 2022. McNary, Dave (August 2, 2018). "Ben Affleck, Matt Damon Team for Movie About a McDonald's Monopoly Scheme". Variety. Archived from the original on August 3, 2018. Retrieved August 2, 2018. "Ben Affleck, Matt Damon re-team for McDonald's Monopoly scam movie". Fast Company. August 3, 2018. Archived from the original on September 6, 2018. Retrieved September 6, 2018. Fleming, Mike Jr. (March 19, 2018). "'Triple Frontier' Finally Going: Affleck, Isaac, Pascal, Hunnam, Hedlund, Arjona In JC Chandor's Lineup". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 24, 2018. Retrieved March 26, 2018. Kroll, Justin (January 30, 2017). "Ben Affleck Will Not Direct 'The Batman' (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. Archived from the original on January 31, 2017. Retrieved January 30, 2017. Sippell, Margeaux (February 15, 2019). "Ben Affleck Explains Why He's Done Playing Batman: 'I Couldn't Crack It'". Variety. Retrieved July 3, 2020. "Ben Affleck on the pain and catharsis of 'The Way Back'". AP NEWS. April 20, 2021. Retrieved May 16, 2021. Barnes, Brooks (February 18, 2020). "Ben Affleck Tried to Drink Away the Pain. Now He's Trying Honesty". The New York Times. Retrieved December 2, 2020. "Ben Affleck's 'Health Issues' Delayed Triple Frontier by 6 Months, Says Director: 'Was Worth It'". People. Retrieved March 15, 2019. Perez, Rodrigo. "'Triple Frontier': J.C. Chandor Crafts A Tense Jungle Action Thriller About The Cost Of Greed [Review]". theplaylist.net. Retrieved August 3, 2019. Stern, Marlow (September 9, 2014). "Kevin Smith's Marijuanaissance: On 'Tusk,' 'Falling Out' with Ben Affleck, and 20 Years of 'Clerks'". The Daily Beast. Archived from the original on December 25, 2016. Retrieved April 15, 2017. "Kevin Smith On Reuniting With Ben Affleck, Being Proud Of His Daughter". ET Canada. Archived from the original on November 14, 2021. Retrieved August 2, 2019. "The Last Thing He Wanted (2020)". Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved February 11, 2020. Ramos, Dino-Ray (January 28, 2020). "'The Last Thing He Wanted': Anne Hathaway Talks Being "Too Sweet" For Dee Rees's Adaptation Of Joan Didion's Novel – Sundance Studio". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved February 11, 2020. Laffly, Tomris (January 28, 2020). "'The Last Thing He Wanted': Film Review". Variety. "The Way Back (2020)". Retrieved March 7, 2020. "Truth behind infamous 2018 Ben Affleck photos". NewsComAu. February 25, 2020. Retrieved February 26, 2020. Thompson, Gary. "This Penn grad directed Ben Affleck's new 'The Way Back,' but don't expect him to read about it on TMZ". inquirer.com. Retrieved March 1, 2020. Lawson, Richard. "Review: Ben Affleck Saves Himself in The Way Back". Vanity Fair. Retrieved March 4, 2020. Sims, David (March 7, 2020). "Ben Affleck Gives the Performance of His Career". The Atlantic. Retrieved March 7, 2020. D'Alessandro, Anthony (March 19, 2020). "Ben Affleck Drama 'The Way Back' Heads Into Homes As Theaters Close". Deadline. Retrieved March 20, 2020. Specter, Emma (March 8, 2021). "Critics' Choice Awards 2021: All The Winners In Full". Vogue. Retrieved March 31, 2021. Sharf, Zack (March 18, 2021). "Ben Affleck, Jared Leto Were Never on Set Together to Film the One New 'Justice League' Scene". IndieWire. Retrieved June 5, 2021. Greenblatt, Leah (January 11, 2022). "Ben Affleck, at the top of his game". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved May 31, 2022. Kroll, Justin (October 22, 2019). "Adam Driver in Talks to Join Matt Damon in Ridley Scott's 'Last Duel' (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. Retrieved November 6, 2019. D'Alessandro, Anthony (March 24, 2021). "Disney's Day-And-Date 'Black Widow' & 'Cruella' Decision Creates Aftershock In Industry Aching For Box Office Normalcy". Deadline. Retrieved March 31, 2021. Ebiri, Bilge (October 15, 2021). "The Last Duel Is a Bro-Down Epic With a Metal Heart". Vulture. Retrieved October 16, 2021. Truitt, Brian. "Review: 'The Last Duel' is dude-filled drama that doesn't do enough with its female perspective". USA Today. Retrieved October 12, 2021. Kroll, Justin (December 9, 2020). "Ben Affleck To Star In George Clooney-Directed 'The Tender Bar' Adaptation For Amazon". Deadline. Retrieved December 11, 2020. Fleming, Mike Jr. (October 10, 2021). "George Clooney & Grant Heslov On Their Coming Of Age Tale 'The Tender Bar,' And The State Of Film As Hollywood Struggles To Lift Out Of A Pandemic". Deadline. Retrieved October 16, 2021. Hammond, Pete (October 10, 2021). "'The Tender Bar' London Film Festival Review: Ben Affleck And George Clooney Team For A Warm And Memorable Story All About Family". Deadline. Retrieved October 11, 2021. Maher, Kevin (October 11, 2021). "The Tender Bar review – Affleck lights up dull collection of vignettes". The Times. Retrieved October 11, 2021. Hipes, Patrick (January 9, 2022). "Golden Globes: The Power Of The Dog, West Side Story, Succession Lead Way – Complete Winners List". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved January 10, 2022. Hipes, Patrick (January 12, 2022). "SAG Awards Nominations: 'House Of Gucci', 'Power Of The Dog', 'Succession', 'Ted Lasso' Top Lists". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved January 13, 2022. Kroll, Justin (January 11, 2021). "Ben Affleck To Direct Adaptation Of 'Keeper Of The Lost Cities' For Disney". Deadline. Retrieved October 5, 2021. Fleming, Mike (August 1, 2019). "New Regency Bringing Adrian Lyne Back To Directing With 'Deep Water;' Ben Affleck, Ana de Armas In Talks For Patricia Highsmith Adaptation". Deadline. Retrieved November 6, 2019. "Deep Water - Rotten Tomatoes". www.rottentomatoes.com. Retrieved March 17, 2023. "Review: 'Deep Water,' an erotic thriller with Ben Affleck and Ana de Armas, runs hot and cold". Los Angeles Times. March 16, 2022. Retrieved March 17, 2023. Nayman, Adam (March 18, 2022). "If Only 'Deep Water' Had a Satisfying Climax". The Ringer. Retrieved March 17, 2023. "Instagram". www.instagram.com. Retrieved August 9, 2022. Davids, Brian (September 9, 2022). "'Clerks III' Filmmaker Kevin Smith Talks Phase Two of His Ben Affleck Friendship and His 'Mallrats 2' Dreams". Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved September 9, 2022. Willis, Kim (March 19, 2023). "Ben Affleck's Michael Jordan biopic 'Air' gets raves at SXSW: 'Best movie of the year'". USA Today. Retrieved March 24, 2023. Giardina, Carolyn (June 1, 2022). "ARRI Launches New Alexa 35 Motion Picture Camera With First Productions Underway". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved June 5, 2022. Littleton, Cynthia (November 26, 2022). "Ben Affleck, Matt Damon Set Artists Equity Studio Launch with RedBird Capital Partners". Variety. Retrieved November 20, 2022. Grobar, Matt (April 19, 2022). "Ben Affleck To Direct Nike Drama For Amazon, Skydance Sports; Will Star Alongside Matt Damon". Deadline. Barnes, Brooks (November 20, 2022). "Ben Affleck and Matt Damon to Start Film Production Company". The New York Times. Retrieved November 21, 2022. Zilko, Christian (November 20, 2022). "Ben Affleck and Matt Damon to Start Film Production Company". IndieWire. Retrieved November 21, 2022. Wiseman, Andreas (March 17, 2023). "Robert Rodriguez & Ben Affleck's 'Hypnotic' Gets May Release Date Following Surprise SXSW "Work In Progress" Screening". Deadline. Retrieved March 17, 2023. Malkin, Marc (January 5, 2023). "Ben Affleck Says He Had 'Fun' Playing Batman in 'The Flash' After 'Justice League' Was 'Difficult' (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. Retrieved October 4, 2021. Kit, Borys (July 19, 2023). "Warner Bros.' Quest to Build a Better 'Aquaman' Sequel: 3 Reshoots, Two Batmans and Non-Stop Test Screenings". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 19, 2023. Retrieved August 22, 2023. Gomez, Dessi (December 11, 2023). "Artists Equity Partners With Chris Hemsworth and His Wild State Production Company". TheWrap. Retrieved January 27, 2024. Kit, Borys (January 29, 2024). "Ben Affleck, Matt Damon Reteam for Crime Thriller 'Animals'". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved January 29, 2024. Lerner, George (March 23, 2010). "Ben Affleck Launches Aid Group for Eastern Congo". CNN. Archived from the original on April 15, 2010. Retrieved August 31, 2010. Parker, Paige (Fall 2015). "Just Ask Whitney". Montanan. Archived from the original on September 20, 2015. Retrieved April 13, 2017. Lerner, George (March 23, 2010). "Ben Affleck Launches Initiative for Congo Aid". CNN. Archived from the original on October 14, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. "CBO Success Story Details". Eastern Congo Initiative. Archived from the original on October 16, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. Brancaccio, David (December 8, 2014). "Ben Affleck on Sustainable Aid in the Eastern Congo". Marketplace. Archived from the original on April 27, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2015. "Ben Affleck Launches Initiative to Support Local Solutions in Eastern Congo" (Press release). PR Newswire. March 23, 2010. Archived from the original on October 13, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. Affleck, Ben (November 30, 2010). "Ben Affleck: How the United States Can Help Secure Congo". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on October 18, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. Affleck, Ben (November 29, 2012). "Ben Affleck: Congo Urgently Needs U.S. Help". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on October 18, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. Affleck, Ben; Shah, Rajiv (June 13, 2012). "Opinion: Ending Child Mortality". Politico. Archived from the original on December 27, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. Affleck, Ben (March 14, 2012). "Kony 2012: Westerners Are Not And Will Never Be The 'Saviors' Of Africa". HuffPost. Archived from the original on October 16, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. Chi, Paul (February 16, 2009). "Ben Affleck Urges Hope in Eastern Congo – Good Deeds, Ben Affleck". People. Archived from the original on May 17, 2014. Retrieved June 5, 2014. Affleck, Ben (December 5, 2017). "Ben Affleck: Why I'm Hopeful About Congo". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 5, 2017. Retrieved August 5, 2019. Affleck, Ben (June 19, 2019). "Op-Ed: In the Democratic Republic of Congo, foreign aid matters". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved August 4, 2019. Tanabe, Karin (November 30, 2010). "Ben Affleck, John Kerry Join Forces". Politico. Archived from the original on September 23, 2011. Retrieved April 13, 2017. "In Conversation With Ben Affleck and Laurene Powell Jobs". Global Philanthropy Forum's YouTube. October 24, 2012. Archived from the original on May 18, 2015. Retrieved October 8, 2014. Kelly, Maura (September 26, 2016). "Ben Affleck, Bono, and Sting Help Bill Clinton Convene Final Clinton Global Initiative". HuffPost. Archived from the original on March 19, 2017. Retrieved April 13, 2017. Gavin, Patrick (March 7, 2011). "Congo Crisis Pairs Ben Affleck, Cindy McCain". Politico. Archived from the original on March 11, 2011. Retrieved April 13, 2017. Horn, John (December 19, 2012). "Ben Affleck Testifies in Congress About War-Torn Congo". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 24, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. Cassata, Donna (February 26, 2014). "Affleck Casts Spotlight on Situation in Congo". Associated Press. Archived from the original on October 18, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. Warren, James (March 26, 2015). "Ben Affleck, Bill Gates Nonprofits Praised at Senate Hearing". Daily News. New York. Archived from the original on June 19, 2017. Retrieved April 13, 2017. Fields-Meyer, Thomas (July 30, 2011). "A Friend in Need". People. Archived from the original on October 14, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. "Larry King Live: Interview With Ben Affleck". CNN. March 16, 2004. Archived from the original on October 7, 2016. Retrieved April 13, 2017. Shultz, Cara Lynn (June 25, 2010). "Ben Affleck & Jennifer Garner's Happy Marriage – Slide 3". People. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved April 13, 2017. "Ben Affleck Heads Back To School To Honor Graduate". Access Hollywood. June 1, 2007. Archived from the original on August 8, 2016. Retrieved April 13, 2017. "Joe Kindregan On His Heartwarming Friendship With Ben Affleck Over The Years". Access Hollywood. February 4, 2013. Archived from the original on August 13, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. "Ben, Jennifer and Joe". A-T Children's Project. 2013. Archived from the original on October 15, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. Kramer, Katharine (June 23, 2014). "CinemAbility" Explores Current Civil Rights Movement and Marks 6th Installment Of "Kat Kramer's Films That Change The World". HuffPost. Archived from the original on June 29, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. Silverman, Stephen (December 23, 2003). "Affleck Follows Fleet to Persian Gulf". People. Archived from the original on October 14, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. "KMC Notices and Events – Jan. 13, 2017". Kaiserslautern American. January 12, 2017. Retrieved June 21, 2017. Carnevale, Mary Lu (August 27, 2008). "Ben Affleck: Poker Champ in Denver". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on October 8, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. "Ben Affleck Supports Paralyzed Veterans". Paralyzed Veterans of America's YouTube. October 8, 2009. Archived from the original on May 25, 2015. Retrieved October 8, 2014. "Ben Affleck, Award-Winning Director, Producer and Actor, Joins Paralyzed Veterans of America in Helping to Support and Honor Our Nation's Injured Veterans". Marketwired. May 20, 2014. Archived from the original on April 13, 2017. Retrieved April 13, 2017. "Ben Affleck Joins Volunteers at Holiday Drive Kick-Off". Operation Gratitude. November 13, 2007. Archived from the original on August 12, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. Foster, Sharon (December 18, 2008). "Affleck, Other Celebrities Help Volunteers Assemble Care Packages". American Forces Press Service. Archived from the original on October 1, 2015. Retrieved October 8, 2014. Fee, Gayle (September 1, 2010). "Ben Affleck On Acting and Activism". Boston Common. Archived from the original on April 16, 2017. Retrieved April 15, 2017. Fee, Gayle (June 4, 2007). "Ben Serves Up Helping Hand for Hub Food Bank". Boston Herald. Archived from the original on June 7, 2007. Retrieved April 13, 2017. Davidson, Joanne (August 28, 2008). "Help Feed America". The Denver Post. Archived from the original on October 14, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. Parnes, Amie (January 19, 2009). "A Little Concert Sponsored by Feeding America". Politico. Archived from the original on December 17, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. Donnelly, Matt (November 18, 2010). "Matt Damon, Ben Affleck Reunite for Feeding America". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 24, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. McNary, Dave (January 14, 2015). "Ben Affleck Honored by Writers Guild With Valentine Davies Award". Variety. Archived from the original on September 10, 2016. Retrieved April 15, 2017. Affleck, Ben; Buffett, Howard Graham (March 31, 2011). "Hometown Hunger USA". HuffPost. Archived from the original on October 16, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. "Ben Affleck and Matt Damon's Poker Tournament Earns $1.75 Million for Coronavirus Relief". People. Retrieved April 16, 2020. Malkin, Marc (March 17, 2020). "Ryan Reynolds and Blake Lively Donate $1 Million to Feeding America and Food Banks Canada". Variety. Retrieved March 24, 2020. "Ben Affleck shows support for social services organization". boston.com. Retrieved March 27, 2020. "Ben Affleck Says Giving Back to Others Is a 'Really Powerful Thing to Do': 'It's Helpful to Me'". People. Retrieved March 27, 2020. "Ben Affleck Shares Smiling Photos from Charity Event: 'It Was a Pleasure to Be a Part of This'". People. Retrieved March 27, 2020. Affleck, Ben (March 25, 2020). "The @midnightmission's meal service lines tripled this past weekend. If you are able to, please join me in donating". @BenAffleck. Retrieved March 27, 2020. "Ben Affleck". facebook.com. Archived from the original on February 25, 2022. Retrieved March 27, 2020. O'Reilly, Bill (July 28, 2004). "Ben Affleck Talks Politics". Fox News Channel. Archived from the original on October 7, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. Reiter, Amy (November 8, 2000). "Ben Affleck: "I Hope Nader Can Still Sleep"". Salon. Archived from the original on October 13, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. Colin, Chris (June 4, 2002). "Welcome To The Occupation". Salon. Archived from the original on October 15, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. Ingrassia, Lisa (April 30, 2004). "New D.C. Duo: Ben Affleck and Ted Kennedy". People. Archived from the original on August 28, 2016. Retrieved April 15, 2017. Krasner, Jeffrey (October 17, 2007). "Affleck Backs Efforts to Organize Boston Teaching Hospital Workers". The Boston Globe. Archived from the original on August 20, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. "Ben on Strike: 'Every Day is a Shame'". Extra TV. January 16, 2008. Archived from the original on October 14, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. Affleck, Ben [@BenAffleck] (October 26, 2012). "I'm joining Meryl Streep & Amy Poehler to put the gov't on notice: @ReproRights are fundamental" (Tweet). Retrieved October 8, 2014 – via Twitter. Van Pileup, Minnie (July 28, 2004). Quotable Queer. Fair Winds Press. p. 100. ISBN 978-1592331208. Retrieved October 8, 2014. Grieve, Tim (July 29, 2004). "Hollywood Celebs Speak Out in Boston". Salon. Archived from the original on October 15, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. "Ben Affleck & His Cousin Jason". PFLAG. Archived from the original on September 27, 2007. Retrieved September 22, 2007. "Ben Affleck Soars to Sexy". People. April 26, 2004. Archived from the original on April 16, 2017. Retrieved October 8, 2014. Gensler, Howard (October 17, 2003). "Ben the 'Patriot' Can't Fathom 'Girlfriend' Attention". Philadelphia Daily News. Archived from the original on August 19, 2014. Retrieved April 15, 2017. Akers, Mary Ann (January 21, 2009). "The Sleuth – Grande Finale of Inauguralpalooza: God, Gays and Gaza". The Washington Post. Retrieved October 8, 2014. Clemons, Steve (January 28, 2009). "David Corn, Policy, DC Parties, and Me". The Washington Note. Archived from the original on October 14, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. Barbaro, Michael (May 6, 2009). "The Curious Friendship of Weiner and Affleck". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 27, 2015. Retrieved March 27, 2015. Hulse, Carl (July 26, 2004). "Ben Affleck Plays Himself at Convention". The New York Times. Archived from the original on October 16, 2015. Retrieved April 15, 2017. Maxwell, Scott (July 27, 2004). "Ben Affleck's Message On Taxes: Don't Give Me A Break". Orlando Sentinel. Archived from the original on October 15, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. Alexander, Bryan (November 12, 2007). "Ben Affleck, Reese Witherspoon Debut Political Ads". People. Archived from the original on April 16, 2017. Retrieved April 15, 2017. "HBO: Real Time with Bill Maher: Ep 137 : Synopsis". HBO. October 17, 2008. Archived from the original on November 17, 2014. Retrieved April 15, 2017. Ali, Wajahat (October 22, 2008). "Powell's Remarks Rebut the Idea of Muslims as Political Kryptonite". The Guardian. Archived from the original on January 18, 2017. Retrieved April 15, 2017. Affleck, Ben [@BenAffleck] (July 19, 2012). "Great to see leadership like this. Thank you @SenJohnMcCain" (Tweet). Retrieved October 8, 2014 – via Twitter. Wong, Scott (July 18, 2012). "John McCain Blasts 'Unjust' Attacks on Huma Abedin". Politico. Archived from the original on November 1, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. "Affleck and Maher Debate Radical Islam". HBO. October 3, 2014. Archived from the original on April 16, 2017. Retrieved April 15, 2017. Palmer, Martyn (January 1, 2017). "Ben Affleck: 'My Wildest Dreams Have Come True, But At a Price'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on April 23, 2017. Retrieved April 15, 2017. Kirkpatrick, Emily. "Ben Affleck Remembers Having to "Bill Clinton It" with Weed on the Set of Dazed and Confused". Vanity Fair. Retrieved March 2, 2021. "Angelenos Invited to Public Inauguration Celebrations". NBC. July 17, 2009. Archived from the original on October 15, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. Stockton Rhone, Paysha (July 23, 2007). "Ben Affleck Stars in 'Corny' Environmental Ad". People. Archived from the original on August 17, 2016. Retrieved April 15, 2017. "'Hardball with Chris Matthews' for June 7". MSNBC. June 7, 2007. Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. Yee, Laurence (September 7, 2016). "'Justice League' Cast Supports Dakota Access Pipeline Opposition". Variety. Archived from the original on March 21, 2017. Retrieved March 20, 2017. "The Stars Come Out to Play Politics". Kitsap Sun. November 2, 2000. Archived from the original on August 19, 2017. Retrieved August 18, 2017. Assad, Matt (November 6, 2000). "Stars Shine In Bethlehem At Election Rally For Gore Road Show For Dems Features Martin Sheen, Ben Affleck, Rob Reiner". The Morning Call. Archived from the original on October 14, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. "Gore and Exhausted Team Stay Up Late, Sweating It Out". The Washington Times. November 8, 2000. Archived from the original on October 22, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. Leiby, Richard (May 30, 2002). "The 'Sum' and The Substance". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on July 1, 2017. Retrieved April 15, 2017. Rosin, Hanna (July 28, 2004). "From Beantown to Bentown". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on November 7, 2013. Retrieved October 8, 2014. Noonan, Peggy (July 30, 2004). "Speaking for Kerry". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on October 16, 2015. Retrieved October 8, 2014. "It's 'All in the Family!'" (Press release). PR Newswire. July 23, 2004. Archived from the original on October 13, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. "MPR: Kerry Defines Himself as a Soldier, Father and Man of Values". Associated Press. July 29, 2004. Archived from the original on October 15, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. Thomson, Katherine (March 28, 2008). "Fundrace: What Celebrities Gave Candidates In 2007". Huffington Post. Archived from the original on April 16, 2017. Retrieved April 15, 2017. Beggy, Carol; Shanahan, Mark (March 17, 2008). "Affleck, Garner Create Their Own Political Party". The Boston Globe. Archived from the original on August 14, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. Kay, Julie (August 3, 2008). "The Afflecks & Damons: Baby Bumps for Obama". People. Archived from the original on October 14, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. Marre, Klaus (March 13, 2008). "MoveOn Launches Video Contest to Help Obama". The Hill. Archived from the original on October 27, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. Hebert, Melissa (August 25, 2008). "Ben Affleck Heading to Denver". The Plain Dealer. Archived from the original on October 12, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. Ryan, Maureen (November 2, 2008). "McCain Stops By 'Saturday Night Live'". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on September 14, 2016. Retrieved April 30, 2017. Pickler, Nedra (January 6, 2007). "Memoir Blasts Kerry's 2004 Campaign". The Boston Globe. Archived from the original on April 16, 2017. Retrieved April 15, 2017. Grove, Lloyd (November 9, 2000). "The Reliable Source". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on April 9, 2017. Retrieved April 15, 2017. Jakes, Lara (October 29, 2000). "Clinton, Lazio Embark Upstate for a Final Dash". Times Union. Archived from the original on August 19, 2014. Retrieved March 27, 2015. Kamisar, Ben (July 16, 2015). "Hollywood Stars Shell Out for Hillary". The Hill. Archived from the original on November 18, 2016. Retrieved April 15, 2017. Schilling, Dave (October 28, 2016). "Vote Hollywood: Ranking this Presidential Election's Celebrity PSAs". The Guardian. Archived from the original on December 24, 2016. Retrieved December 22, 2016. "Elite Bundlers Raise More Than $113 Million for Hillary Clinton". Fortune. September 24, 2016. Archived from the original on February 22, 2017. Retrieved April 15, 2017. "Top Individual Contributors: Hard Money, by Individual". OpenSecrets. 2016. Archived from the original on April 16, 2017. Retrieved April 15, 2017. ""Quise hacer una película de esperanza, de triunfo": Ben Affleck nos habla, en español, de su nueva película". Univision (in Spanish). Retrieved October 15, 2020. "Donor Lookup". OpenSecrets. Retrieved April 2, 2023. "Donor Lookup". OpenSecrets. Archived from the original on April 16, 2017. Retrieved April 15, 2017. Silverman, Stephen (September 4, 2002). "Political Roles for Damon and Affleck". People. Archived from the original on August 28, 2016. Retrieved April 15, 2017. Lemire, Christy (July 28, 2004). "Affleck Plugs his Latest Project: Getting Kerry Elected". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on July 14, 2017. Retrieved April 30, 2017. "Jen & Ben Get Political". People. December 26, 2005. Archived from the original on August 28, 2016. Retrieved April 15, 2017. Cramer, Ruby (August 23, 2013). "Cory Booker Is The Only One Excited About Ben Affleck Playing Batman – Maybe Because He's A Donor". BuzzFeed. Archived from the original on March 29, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. Daniela, Altimari (November 4, 2006). "Affleck: Star Adds His Clout To Courtney, Murphy Campaigns". Hartford Courant. Archived from the original on October 14, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. Toeplitz, Shira (September 6, 2012). "After Two Losses, Pennsylvania's Patrick Murphy Waits in the Wings". Roll Call. Archived from the original on October 16, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. Daunt, Tina (May 22, 2012). "Ben Affleck-Hosted Fundraiser for Elizabeth Warren Draws Big Stars, Big Bucks". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 15, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. Zakarin, Jordan (November 4, 2012). "Ben Affleck Stars in Spot for Hometown Senate Candidate Elizabeth Warren". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 15, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. Daunt, Tina (August 27, 2013). "Matt Damon, Ben Affleck to Co-Host Cory Booker Fundraiser (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 15, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. Jaffe, Alexandra (October 29, 2013). "Hollywood A-list Gangs Up on McConnell". The Hill. Archived from the original on October 27, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. Kurtz, Judy (August 13, 2014). "Hollywood Pumps Cash to Save Senate Majority for Democrats". The Hill. Archived from the original on October 24, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. "Donor Lookup". OpenSecrets. Retrieved August 3, 2019. Linskey, Annie. "Sen. Elizabeth Warren announces an end to high-dollar fundraisers for her presidential campaign". The Washington Post. Retrieved August 3, 2019. "Donor Lookup". OpenSecrets. Retrieved August 3, 2019. Lawler, Emily (August 3, 2018). "Abdul El-Sayed gets national boost as progressives look for their next big win". mlive. Retrieved October 14, 2019. Lejeune, Tristan (April 16, 2019). "Celebs start opening their wallets for 2020 Dems". The Hill. Retrieved August 3, 2019. "2020 celeb donations: Hanks loves Biden, Stamos stans Buttigieg". The Daily Dot. July 17, 2019. Retrieved August 3, 2019. Kiefer, Peter. "Cory Booker Sets L.A. Fundraiser With Ben Affleck and Jeffrey Katzenberg as Hosts (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved August 8, 2019. "Whitney Williams on Facebook Watch". Retrieved June 1, 2020. Hornaday, Ann (September 15, 2010). "'The Town,' 'Casino Jack' and 'Client 9' Take the Stage at Toronto Film Festival". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on October 18, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. Argetsinger, Amy (September 27, 2005). "Picture This: Ben Affleck, Senator From Va". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on October 18, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. "Virginia Democrats Want Ben Affleck for Senator". CNN. September 27, 2005. Archived from the original on August 20, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. Grove, Lloyd (December 21, 2012). "Ben Affleck for Senate? Actor Could Be Formidable Massachusetts Candidate". The Daily Beast. Archived from the original on August 19, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. Zapler, Mike (December 24, 2012). "Affleck Passes on Senate Run". Politico. Archived from the original on October 16, 2015. Retrieved October 8, 2014. Gross, Terry (January 15, 2013). "Affleck On 'Argo' And The 1979 Hostage Crisis". NPR. Archived from the original on October 14, 2014. Retrieved October 8, 2014. "Artists4Ceasefire". Artists4Ceasefire. Retrieved December 17, 2023. "Ben Affleck and Jennifer Garner Engaged". People. April 19, 2005. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved April 14, 2017. "Scoop – Vol. 62 No. 13". People. September 27, 2004. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved April 14, 2017. "Under the Radar". People. July 7, 2005. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved April 14, 2017. Smith, Krista (February 26, 2016). "Exclusive: Jennifer Garner's Frank Talk About Kids, Men, and Ben Affleck". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on January 11, 2017. Retrieved April 14, 2017. "Ben & Jen's Baby Violet Settles In". People. December 8, 2005. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved March 17, 2017. Jordan, Julie (January 13, 2009). "Jennifer Garner and Ben Affleck Reveal Baby's Name". People. Archived from the original on November 6, 2011. Retrieved October 16, 2011. "Jennifer Garner and Ben Affleck Welcome Third Child". People. February 29, 2012. Archived from the original on February 29, 2012. Retrieved February 28, 2012. Tauber, Michelle; Leonard, Elizabeth (June 30, 2015). "Ben Affleck and Jennifer Garner Divorcing After 10 Years of Marriage". People. Archived from the original on June 30, 2015. Retrieved June 30, 2015. "Ben Affleck Has Officially Moved Out: The Kids 'Have Been to Ben's New House,' Source Says". People. Retrieved November 2, 2019. Russian, Ale (April 13, 2017). "Jennifer Garner Officially Files for Divorce from Ben Affleck". People. Archived from the original on April 13, 2017. Retrieved April 13, 2017. La Ferla, Ruth (April 1, 2021). "Laura Wasser, She Who Will Cleave the Union of Kim and Kanye". The New York Times. Retrieved April 1, 2023. Barbour, Shannon (October 5, 2018). "Ben Affleck and Jennifer Garner Finalize Their Divorce". Cosmopolitan. Retrieved October 6, 2018. Barnes, Brooks (February 18, 2020). "Ben Affleck Tried to Drink Away the Pain. Now He's Trying Honesty". The New York Times. Retrieved March 13, 2021. Murfett, Andrew (March 5, 2020). "Divorce 'was very, very painful': Affleck on his breakdown and finding The Way Back". The Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved March 6, 2020. Duke, Alan (December 10, 2013). "Ben Affleck: Paparazzi scare his kids". CNN. Retrieved November 10, 2023. Stein, Joel (October 15, 2012). "Ben Affleck Directs One of the Year's Best Films". Time. Archived from the original on May 30, 2014. Retrieved June 29, 2014. "Jennifer Garner reveals how her children were negatively impacted by her fame in rare interview". HELLO!. May 13, 2019. Retrieved April 2, 2020. Child, Ben (August 15, 2013). "Jennifer Garner joins Halle Berry's fight for new anti-paparazzi law in California". The Guardian. Retrieved January 24, 2013. "Inside Jennifer Garner's Whole New World". E! Online. 2020. Retrieved April 1, 2020. "Garner 'feared for family safety'". BBC News. November 21, 2008. Retrieved April 3, 2017. "Jennifer Garner 'stalker' sent to mental hospital". BBC News. March 31, 2010. Retrieved February 12, 2017. Millat, Caitlin (March 30, 2010). "Judge Finds Accused Ben Affleck, Jennifer Garner Stalker Insane". WRC-TV/NBC4. Washington, D.C. Dunn, Jancee (April 1, 2004). "Ben Affleck's Hollywood Ending". Rolling Stone. Retrieved May 12, 2021. "At home with Ben and Jen". NBC News. July 18, 2003. Retrieved September 4, 2021. "Why is Bennifer 2.0 so exciting? Because last time, we screwed it up". Los Angeles Times. May 12, 2021. Retrieved May 13, 2021. Robinson, Lisa (August 4, 2011). "Jenny Back on the Block". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on July 14, 2016. Retrieved April 14, 2017. Goldstein, Patrick (October 14, 2007). "Ben Affleck's Roller Coaster Takes a New Turn". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved March 17, 2015. Dam, Julie (November 18, 2002). "Jewels of Engagement – Vol. 58 No. 21". People. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved April 14, 2017. Silverman, Stephen (November 11, 2002). "Ben's Proposal 'Beautiful, Says Lopez". People. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved April 14, 2017. Armstrong, Mark (September 10, 2003). "Lopez, Affleck Postpone Weekend Wedding". People. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved April 14, 2017. Dagostino, Mark (March 9, 2004). "Affleck on 'Good Terms' with Lopez". People. Archived from the original on April 15, 2017. Retrieved April 14, 2017. Galloway, Stephen (October 10, 2012). "THR Cover: Confessions of Ben Affleck". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved May 20, 2021. "Jennifer Lopez In 'Marie Claire UK': Talks Her Diet, Exes Affleck & Diddy". HuffPost. July 4, 2010. Retrieved May 16, 2021. "Jennifer Lopez thrilled with Ben Affleck's Argo success". Hollywood.com. January 16, 2013. Retrieved May 15, 2021. Duboff, Josh (February 25, 2015). "What Did Ben Affleck Whisper in Jennifer Lopez's Ear at the Oscars?". Vanity Fair. Retrieved May 31, 2022. Barnes, Brooks [@brooksbarnesNYT] (February 20, 2020). "On past flame Jennifer Lopez ... "She should have been nominated. She's the real thing. I keep in touch periodically with her and have a lot of respect for her. How awesome is it that she had her biggest hit movie at 50? That's fucking baller."" (Tweet). Archived from the original on October 29, 2021. Retrieved November 2, 2021 – via Twitter. VH1 Behind the Music, 2010 "Jennifer Lopez Reflects on Relationship with Ben Affleck". Extra TV. March 25, 2016. Archived from the original on December 21, 2016. Retrieved April 14, 2017. Bennetts, Leslie. "BEN'S OPEN ROAD". Vanity Fair | The Complete Archive. Retrieved August 26, 2021. Adekaiyero, Ayomikun (April 14, 2022). "Ben Affleck once asked Jennifer Lopez if media criticism bothered her but the star said she 'expected this'". Insider. Retrieved June 15, 2022. Woods, Sean (October 12, 2012). "Q&A: Ben Affleck on Directing 'Argo' and Surviving Hollywood". Rolling Stone. Retrieved May 16, 2021. Heath, Chris. "Ben Affleck – GQ's Filmmaker of 2012". GQ. Retrieved May 16, 2021. Synnot, Siobhan (May 11, 2008). "Why I regret rubbing suntan lotion on Jennifer Lopez's bottom, by Ben Affleck". Daily Record. Retrieved May 16, 2021. "Affleck opens up about Lopez split". Irish Examiner. October 28, 2008. Retrieved May 17, 2021. May 10, Karen Mizoguchi. "Jennifer Lopez and Ben Affleck 'Spent Several Days' Together in Montana, Source Says". People. Retrieved October 18, 2021.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) VanHoose, Benjamin (April 12, 2022). "Jennifer Lopez Details Ben Affleck's 'Bubble Bath' Proposal: 'Tears Were Coming Down My Face'". People. Retrieved June 1, 2022. Garcia, Thania (July 17, 2022). "Jennifer Lopez and Ben Affleck Get Married in Las Vegas". Variety. Retrieved July 17, 2022. VanHoose, Benjamin (September 13, 2022). "Ben Affleck Wrote a '12-Page Speech' for Vows to Jennifer Lopez, Kevin Smith Says: 'Very Inspiring'". People. Retrieved September 13, 2022. "Jennifer Lopez Reveals New Photos from Georgia Wedding with Ben Affleck: 'This Is Heaven'". Peoplemag. Retrieved April 1, 2023. June 20, Nicholas Rice. "Jennifer Lopez Calls Ben Affleck the Most 'Consistent, Selfless Daddy Ever' in Father's Day Tribute". People. Retrieved July 23, 2022.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) Perez, Lexy (September 1, 2022). "Jennifer Lopez Reflects on Wedding to Ben Affleck: "This Was the Perfect Timing"". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved November 26, 2022. Donnelly, Matt (January 14, 2015). "5 Gwyneth Paltrow Revelations From Howard Stern Interview: 'Iron Man's' Missing Script, Brad Pitt, Ben Affleck Breakups". The Wrap. Archived from the original on April 16, 2017. Retrieved April 15, 2017. Lidz, Frank (September 10, 2000). "Ben Affleck Shocker: I Bargained With Devil for Fame". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 24, 2017. Retrieved April 15, 2017. "Gwyneth Talks Sex, Exes". ABC News. January 6, 2006. Archived from the original on June 20, 2017. Retrieved April 14, 2017. "Ben Affleck and Girlfriend Lindsay Shookus Go On Dinner Date Day After Christmas". People. Retrieved March 16, 2020. "Why Lindsay Shookus Broke Up with Ben Affleck: 'She Had to Let Him Hit Bottom,' Says Source". People. Retrieved March 16, 2020. "Ben Affleck and Lindsay Shookus Have Split to Spend Time with Their Families: Source". People. Retrieved March 16, 2020. "Bill Hader". Interview Magazine. August 31, 2014. Retrieved April 10, 2020. "'SNL': Producer & Talent Chief Lindsay Shookus Exits After 20 Years". August 19, 2022. Cappadona, Bryanna (May 16, 2013). "Watch Ben Affleck's Top Sketches from 'Saturday Night Live'". Boston. Archived from the original on April 17, 2017. Retrieved April 16, 2017. Russian, Ale (January 18, 2021). "Ben Affleck and Ana de Armas Split, Says Source: 'They Are in Different Points in Their Lives'". People. Retrieved January 20, 2021. Crabtree, Erin (January 18, 2021). "Ben Affleck and Ana de Armas Split After Nearly 1 Year Together". US Magazine. Retrieved January 20, 2021. "Ben Affleck on Why He Drank: 'It Was Something I Was Doing to Avoid Painful Feelings'". People. Retrieved February 26, 2020. "Ben Affleck shares how he got better and moved on after struggles with alcohol". ABC News. Archived from the original on November 14, 2021. Retrieved February 21, 2020. Barnes, Brooks (February 18, 2020). "Ben Affleck Tried to Drink Away the Pain. Now He's Trying Honesty". The New York Times. Retrieved February 19, 2020. "Casey Affleck Got Candid About Ben Affleck's Alcoholism". Vanity Fair. Retrieved November 1, 2019. "Ben Affleck on the pain and catharsis of 'The Way Back'". thestar.com. February 27, 2020. Retrieved February 29, 2020. "Episode 767 – Casey Affleck". WTF with Marc Maron Podcast. Retrieved January 1, 2017. Mansfield, Stephanie (June 26, 1998). "Thank God for Unanswered Prayers". USA Weekend. Archived from the original on July 14, 2017. Retrieved April 30, 2017. "Ben Affleck Enters Rehab". BBC News. August 6, 2001. Archived from the original on January 14, 2009. Retrieved March 31, 2010. Miller, Julie (March 14, 2017). "Ben Affleck Reveals He Recently Completed Treatment for Alcohol Addiction". Vanity Fair. Retrieved April 14, 2017. "Jennifer Garner on Mother Growing Up in Poverty, Fame & Marriage". Entertainment Tonight. Retrieved November 22, 2020. "Ben Affleck Confirms 'Treatment for Alcohol Addiction'". ABC News. Archived from the original on March 17, 2017. Retrieved March 18, 2017. A source close to Affleck confirms he physically went to rehab, not an outpatient program. Guglielmi, Jodi (March 14, 2017). "Ben Affleck Reveals He Completed Rehab for Alcohol Addiction". People. Archived from the original on April 14, 2017. Retrieved April 14, 2017. Weaver, Hilary. "Jennifer Garner Has Reportedly Helped Ben Affleck Return to Rehab". Vanities. Retrieved November 3, 2018. Samhan, Jamie (June 28, 2019). "Ben Affleck Praises The Man Who Helped Him Through Alcoholism During Legal Issues". ET Canada. Archived from the original on April 2, 2023. Retrieved April 2, 2023. "Ben Affleck 'Didn't Try to Make Any Excuses' for Halloween Party Relapse: Source". People. October 29, 2019. Retrieved November 14, 2019. Harvilla, Rob (March 5, 2020). "The Real-Life Parallels Are Dominating Ben Affleck's 'Way Back' Press Tour". The Ringer. Retrieved December 6, 2020. "Ben Affleck covers everything from sobriety to 'Good Will Hunting' in this SXM interview". Hear & Now. March 4, 2020. Retrieved December 6, 2020. Macura, Rene (June 22, 2004). "Ben Affleck Wins $356,400 at Poker". USA Today. Archived from the original on October 17, 2008. Retrieved June 10, 2008. Lewi, Hilary (December 25, 2017). "'Molly's Game' Team Talks Making Timely Tale of Female Empowerment". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on December 29, 2017. Retrieved December 29, 2017. Leon, Anya (May 3, 2014). "Ben Affleck Banned from Blackjack at Hard Rock After Counting Cards". People. Archived from the original on April 16, 2017. Retrieved April 15, 2017. Dunn, Jancee (April 1, 2004). "Ben Affleck's Hollywood Ending". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on January 14, 2017. Retrieved April 15, 2017. Robbins, Stephanie (September 18, 2014). "Ben Affleck Discusses Gambling Rumors in Details". People. Archived from the original on April 15, 2017. Retrieved April 16, 2017. McGee, Celia (December 18, 2003). "Wild about Jen; Ben Opens Up to our Celia McGee". Daily News. New York. Archived from the original on September 15, 2014. Retrieved September 13, 2010. "Ben Affleck on his supportive friends in Hollywood, sobriety and new movie". ABC News. Archived from the original on November 14, 2021. Retrieved February 23, 2020. Affleck, Ben (August 2008). "Books That Made a Difference to Ben Affleck". O, The Oprah Magazine. Archived from the original on June 22, 2017. Retrieved April 15, 2017. Thompson, Bob (March 8, 2016). "Jennifer Garner on her Latest Emotional Role and Keeping It Professional as a Mom, On and Offscreen". National Post. Retrieved April 15, 2017. "Ben Affleck on Being a Christian and the Need For Redemption". beliefnet.com. Retrieved February 29, 2020. Keegan, Rebecca (March 16, 2023). "Ben Affleck on 'Air,' New CEO Gig and Those Memes: "I Am Who I Am"". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved April 1, 2023. Green, Matt (June 16, 2017). The Amazing Life of Ben Affleck. Retrieved January 10, 2018 – via Google Books. Rosborn, Sven (May 16, 2021). The Viking King's Golden Treasure. Rivengate AB. ISBN 9789198678017 – via Google Books. McDonald, Soraya (April 23, 2015). "Ben Affleck's Deleted Finding Your Roots Segment Shows his Savannah Ancestor Owned 25 Slaves". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on August 8, 2017. Retrieved July 20, 2017. "Ben Affleck Reveals the Name of his Slave-Owning Ancestor". Newsbeat. BBC News. April 23, 2015. Archived from the original on April 26, 2015. Retrieved April 15, 2017. Koblin, John (June 25, 2015). "A PBS Show, a Frustrated Ben Affleck, and a Loss of Face". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 26, 2015. Retrieved February 28, 2022. Guthrie, Marissa (October 19, 2015). "PBS' 'Finding Your Roots' Returns After Ben Affleck Scandal: "Hard Conversations," More Rigorous Process". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved February 28, 2022. Montalti, Victoria (May 10, 2022). "Celebrities who are related to US presidents". Insider.com. Retrieved December 4, 2023. Sblendorio, Peter (October 11, 2017). "Ben Affleck apologizes to Hilarie Burton after being accused of grabbing her breast". Daily News. New York. Archived from the original on December 1, 2017. Retrieved November 21, 2017. Cohen, Jess (2017). "Annamarie Tendler Accuses Ben Affleck of More Past Misconduct". E! Online. Retrieved August 3, 2019. Fernandez, Matt (November 6, 2017). "Ben Affleck Says He'll Donate Residuals From Weinstein, Miramax Films to Charity". Variety. Retrieved August 3, 2019. Nobil, Taryn (November 17, 2017). "Ben Affleck on Harvey Weinstein: 'I Knew He Was Sleazy'". Variety. Retrieved March 5, 2020. Livsey, Anna (October 12, 2017). "Rose McGowan suspended from Twitter after Ben Affleck tweets". The Guardian. Retrieved March 5, 2020. Ronan Farrow [@RonanFarrow] (March 4, 2020). ""I was crying...and I was like, 'I just came from Harvey's,' and he's like, 'God damn it. I told him to stop doing that.'" @rosemcgowan on seeing Ben Affleck after she says Weinstein assaulted her" (Tweet). Retrieved March 5, 2020 – via Twitter. "McGowan takes a shot at Affleck for being silent on Weinstein". Canoe. March 11, 2020. Archived from the original on March 12, 2020. Lewis, Hilary (November 17, 2017). "Ben Affleck Responds to Rose McGowan Harvey Weinstein Accusations". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved March 9, 2022. "Ben Affleck: Welcome Back to Oscar town". Los Angeles Times. September 21, 2010. Archived from the original on September 25, 2010. Retrieved April 15, 2017. Rosen, Christopher (February 22, 2013). "Ben Affleck First Oscars: 'Argo' Star Won Best Original Screenplay For 'Good Will Hunting' At 1998 Academy Awards". Huffpost. Retrieved August 15, 2022. Ben Affleck at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Ben Affleck at AllMovie Ben Affleck at IMDb  Ben Affleck at the TCM Movie Database Appearances on C-SPAN