The National Basketball Association's Sixth Man of the Year Award is an annual National Basketball Association (NBA) award given since the 1982–83 NBA season to the league's best performing player for his team coming off the bench as a substitute (or sixth man). A panel of sportswriters and broadcasters from throughout the United States and Canada votes on the recipient. Since the 2022–23 NBA season, winners receive the John Havlicek Trophy, named after the eight-time NBA champion. Each judge casts a vote for first, second and third place selections. Each first-place vote is worth five points; each second-place vote is worth three points; and each third-place vote is worth one point. The player with the highest point total, regardless of the number of first-place votes, wins the award. To be eligible for the award, a player must come off the bench in more games than he starts. The 2008–09 winner, Jason Terry, averaged the most playing time of any sixth man in an award-winning season; he finished the year with an average of 33.7 minutes played per game with the Dallas Mavericks. Bobby Jones was the inaugural winner of the award for the 1982–83 NBA season. The 2022–23 recipient was Malcolm Brogdon of the Boston Celtics. Jamal Crawford and Lou Williams are the only three time winners of the award. Kevin McHale, Ricky Pierce and Detlef Schrempf won the award twice. McHale, Toni Kukoč, Bobby Jones, Bill Walton, and Manu Ginóbili are the only Hall of Famers who have won the award; Walton, along with James Harden, are the only award winners to have earned NBA MVP honors in their careers. Manu Ginóbili is the only award winner to be named to an All-NBA team in the same season. Mike Miller and Malcolm Brogdon are the only award winners to have also won NBA Rookie of the Year. Manu Ginóbili, Detlef Schrempf, Leandro Barbosa, Toni Kukoč, and Ben Gordon are the only award winners not born in the United States. Gordon was the first player to win the award as a rookie. Of the five foreign-born winners, three were trained completely outside the U.S., namely Ginóbili, Barbosa and Kukoč. Schrempf played two years of high school basketball in Centralia, Washington before playing college basketball at Washington, and Gordon was raised in Mount Vernon, New York and went on to play in college at Connecticut. NBA records  Sports portal A player is not eligible for induction into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame until he has been fully retired for three calendar years. Ben Gordon holds both American and British citizenship as he was born in England but was raised in the United States. Jordan Clarkson was born in the United States but naturalized Filipino. He represents the Philippines in international games. General "NBA postseason awards: Sixth Man Award". NBA.com. Turner Sports Interactive, Inc. Archived from the original on February 2, 2012. Retrieved June 2, 2008. "Sixth Man of the Year Award Winners". basketball-reference.com. Sports Reference LLC. Retrieved July 11, 2008. Specific "Ginobili Wins 2007-08 Sixth Man of the Year Award Presented by Kia Motors". NBA.com. Turner Sports Interactive, Inc. April 21, 2008. Archived from the original on November 4, 2012. Retrieved July 11, 2008. "NBA & ABA Sixth Man of the Year Award Winners". Basketball-Reference.com. Sports Reference LLC. Retrieved August 3, 2018. "Most Valuable Player". NBA.com. Turner Sports Interactive, Inc. Retrieved June 15, 2009. "Gordon Wins NBA Sixth Man of the Year Award". NBA.com/Chicago Bulls. Turner Sports Interactive, Inc. May 3, 2005. Retrieved July 11, 2008. "2024 Hall of Fame Candidates". basketball-reference.com. Retrieved November 8, 2021. "First Person: Ben Gordon, Bulls Guard". Sports Illustrated. November 13, 2006. Retrieved August 14, 2008. "Change of plans, NBA clears Jordan Clarkson to play in Asian Games". sports.yahoo.com. Archived from the original on August 17, 2018. Retrieved August 15, 2018.