Edmonton (/ˈɛdməntən/ ED-mən-tən) is the capital city of the Canadian province of Alberta. Edmonton is situated on the North Saskatchewan River and is the centre of the Edmonton Metropolitan Region, which is surrounded by Alberta's central region. The city anchors the northern end of what Statistics Canada defines as the "Calgary–Edmonton Corridor", a region spanning between Edmonton and the city of Calgary, Alberta’s largest city, which includes the many smaller municipalities between the two. As of 2021, Edmonton had a city population of 1,010,899 and a metropolitan population of 1,418,118, making it the fifth-largest city and sixth-largest metropolitan area (CMA) in Canada. Edmonton is both the northernmost city and metropolitan area in North America to have a population of over one million. A resident of Edmonton is known as an Edmontonian. Edmonton was first inhabited by several First Nations peoples, namely of Algonquian, Athabaskan and Siouan origin. These peoples and their ancestors inhabited the area of the modern city to varying amounts beginning at the close of the last glacial period, perhaps as early as 12,000 BC. The city was also a historic site for the Métis, who held many narrow lots along the North Saskatchewan which gave access to many resources in the area. By 1882, these lots numbered about 44, which was their peak, as they would soon be displaced and integrated by the expansion of the city of Edmonton. Anthony Henday may have been the first European to enter the area of modern-day Edmonton, whilst exploring the prairies of Rupert's Land for the Hudson's Bay Company in the autumn of 1754. By 1795, many trading posts had been established around the present metropolitan area, and by 1801 they had all moved to the current site of the city of Edmonton. "Fort Edmonton", as it was known, became the main centre for trade in the area after the 1821 merger of the HBC and the NWC. Edmonton remained sparse until the Canadian acquisition of Rupert's Land in 1870, followed eventually by the arrival of the Canadian Pacific Railway in 1891, its inauguration as a city in 1904 and its designation as the capital of the new province of Alberta in 1906. Edmonton's historic growth as a city has been facilitated through the absorption of five adjacent urban municipalities (Strathcona, North Edmonton, West Edmonton, Beverly and Jasper Place) in addition to a series of annexations through 1982, and the annexation of 8,260 ha (82.6 km2; 31.9 sq mi) of land from Leduc County and the City of Beaumont on January 1, 2019. Known as the "Gateway to the North", the city is now a staging point for large-scale oil sands projects occurring in northern Alberta and large-scale diamond mining operations in the Northwest Territories. Edmonton is a cultural, governmental and educational centre. It hosts a year-round slate of festivals, reflected in the nickname "Canada's Festival City". It is home to Canada's largest mall, West Edmonton Mall (the world's largest mall from 1981 until 2004); and Fort Edmonton Park, Canada's largest living history museum. Established as the first permanent settlement in the area of what is now Edmonton, the Hudson's Bay Company trading post of Fort Edmonton (also known as Edmonton House) was named after Edmonton, Middlesex, England. The fort's name was chosen by William Tomison, who was in charge of its construction, taking the fort's namesake from the hometown of the Lake family – at least five of whom were influential members of the Hudson's Bay Company between 1696 and 1807. In turn, the name of Edmonton derives from Adelmetone, meaning 'farmstead/estate of Ēadhelm' (from Ēadhelm, an Old English personal name, and tūn); this earlier form of the name appears in the Domesday Book of 1086. Fort Edmonton was also called Fort-des-Prairies by French-Canadians, trappers, and coureurs des bois. Indigenous languages refer to the Edmonton area by multiple names which reference the presence of fur trading posts. In Cree, the area is known as ᐊᒥᐢᑿᒌᐚᐢᑲᐦᐃᑲᐣ amiskwacîwâskahikan, which translates to "Beaver Hills House" and references the location's proximity to the Beaver Hills east of Edmonton. In Blackfoot, the area is known as Omahkoyis; in Nakota Sioux, the area is known as Titâga; in Tsuutʼina, the area is known as Nââsʔágháàchú (anglicised as Nasagachoo). The Blackfoot name translates to 'big lodge', while the Nakota Sioux and Tsuutʼina names translate to 'big house'. In Denesuline, the area is known as Kuę́ Nedhé, a metonymic toponym which also generally means 'city'. The earliest known inhabitants arrived in the area that is now Edmonton around 3,000 BC and perhaps as early as 12,000 BC when an ice-free corridor opened as the last glacial period ended and timber, water, and wildlife became available in the region. The site of present-day Edmonton was home to several First Nations peoples, including the Cree, Nakota Sioux, Blackfoot, Tsuut'ina, Ojibwe, and Denesuline. The valley of the North Saskatchewan River, in particular the area of Edmonton, was settled to varying degrees for thousands of years, and provided many essential resources, including fish, medicine, and materials for tool making, such as chert or quartzite, which are abundant in the area around the modern city and which can be easily knapped into tools such as axes, knives, and arrowheads. In 1754, Anthony Henday, an explorer for the Hudson's Bay Company (HBC), may have been the first European to enter the Edmonton area. His expeditions across the Prairies of Rupert's Land were mainly to seek contact with the Indigenous population for establishing the fur trade, as the competition was fierce between the HBC and the North West Company (NWC). By 1795, Fort Edmonton was established on the river's north bank as a major trading post for the HBC, near the mouth of the Sturgeon River close to present-day Fort Saskatchewan. Fort Edmonton was built within "musket-shot range" of the rival NWC's Fort Augustus. Although both forts were initially successful, declines in beaver pelt hauls and firewood stocks forced both HBC and NWC to move their forts upstream. By 1813, after some changes in location, Fort Edmonton was established in the area of what is now Rossdale, beginning Edmonton's start as a permanent population centre. The fort was located on the border of territory that was disputed by the Blackfoot and Cree nations. Furthermore, the fort intersected territory patrolled by the Blackfoot Confederacy to the South, and the Cree, Dene, and Nakoda nations to the north. After the NWC merged with the HBC, Fort Augustus was closed in favour of Fort Edmonton. In 1876, Treaty 6, which includes what is now Edmonton, was signed between First Nations and the Crown, as part of the Numbered Treaties. The agreement includes the Plains and Woods Cree, Assiniboine, and other band governments of First Nations at Fort Carlton, Fort Pitt, and Battle River. The area covered by the treaty represents most of the central area of the current provinces of Saskatchewan and Alberta. The coming of the Canadian Pacific Railway (CPR) to southern Alberta in 1885 helped the Edmonton economy, and the 1891 building of the Calgary and Edmonton (C&E) Railway resulted in the emergence of a railway townsite (South Edmonton/Strathcona) on the river's south side, across from Edmonton. The arrival of the CPR and the C&E Railway helped bring settlers and entrepreneurs from eastern Canada, Europe, the U.S. and other parts of the world. The Edmonton area's fertile soil and cheap land attracted settlers, further establishing Edmonton as a major regional commercial and agricultural centre. Some people participating in the Klondike Gold Rush passed through South Edmonton/Strathcona in 1897. Strathcona was North America's northernmost railway point, but travel to the Klondike was still very difficult for the "Klondikers", and a majority of them took a steamship north to the Yukon from Vancouver, British Columbia. Incorporated as a town in 1892 with a population of 700 and then as a city in 1904 with a population of 8,350, Edmonton became the capital of Alberta when the province was formed a year later, on September 1, 1905. In November 1905, the Canadian Northern Railway (CNR) arrived in Edmonton, accelerating growth. During the early 1900s, Edmonton's rapid growth led to speculation in real estate. In 1912, Edmonton amalgamated with the City of Strathcona south of the North Saskatchewan River; as a result, the city held land on both banks of the North Saskatchewan River for the first time. Just before World War I, the boom ended, and the city's population declined from more than 72,000 in 1914 to less than 54,000 only two years later. Many impoverished families moved to subsistence farms outside the city, while others fled to greener pastures in other provinces. Recruitment to the army during the war also contributed to the drop in population. Afterwards, the city slowly recovered in population and economy during the 1920s and 1930s and took off again during and after World War II. The Edmonton City Centre Airport opened in 1929, becoming Canada's first licensed airfield. Originally named Blatchford Field in honour of former mayor Kenny Blatchford, pioneering aviators such as Wilfrid R. "Wop" May and Max Ward used Blatchford Field as a major base for distributing mail, food, and medicine to Northern Canada; hence Edmonton's emergence as the "Gateway to the North". World War II saw Edmonton become a major base for the construction of the Alaska Highway and the Northwest Staging Route. The airport was closed in November 2013. On July 31, 1987, an F4 tornado hit the city and killed 27 people. The storm hit the areas of Beaumont, Mill Woods, Bannerman, Fraser, and Evergreen. The day became known as "Black Friday" and earned the city the moniker "City of Champions". In 1892 Edmonton was incorporated as a town. The first mayor was Matthew McCauley, who established the first school board in Edmonton and Board of Trade (later Chamber of Commerce) and a municipal police service. Due to McCauley's good relationship with the federal Liberals, Edmonton maintained economic and political prominence over Strathcona, a rival town on the south side of the North Saskatchewan River. Edmonton was incorporated as a city in 1904 and became Alberta's capital in 1905. In 1904, the City of Edmonton purchased the Edmonton District Telephone Company for $17,000 from Alex Taylor, a Canadian entrepreneur, inventor, and politician. Amalgamated into a city department as City of Edmonton Telephone Department, City Telephone System (CTS), 'Edmonton telephones'. In 1989, City Council voted to create Edmonton Telephones Corporation (Ed Tel) to operate as an autonomous organization under a board of directors appointed by the city. In 1995, City of Edmonton ownership of its telephone service ended when Ed Tel was sold to the Telus corporation. City Bylaw 11713 created The Ed Tel Endowment Fund whereas the shares owned by Edmonton Telephones Corporation in Ed Tel Inc. were sold by the City of Edmonton to Telus on March 10, 1995, for $470,221,872 to be invested for the perpetual benefit of Edmontonians. Unions and radical organizations such as the Industrial Workers of the World struggled for progressive social change through the early years, with the first reformer, James East, elected in 1912, followed by the first official Labour alderman, James Kinney, the following year. Many thousands of workers participated in the Edmonton general strike of 1919 and a strong block of Labour representatives were on council after the next election: East, Kinney, Sam McCoppen, Rice Sheppard and Joe Clarke.[citation needed] Labour representation on city council became a near-majority in 1929, and a full majority from 1932 to 1934, during the Great Depression. Jan Reimer became the city's first female mayor when she was elected in 1989. In 2021, Amarjeet Sohi became the first person of colour to be elected as mayor of Edmonton. Edmonton is on the North Saskatchewan River, at an elevation of 671 m (2,201 ft). It is North America's northernmost city with a population over one million. It is at the same latitude as Hamburg (Germany); Dublin (Ireland); Liverpool (United Kingdom); and Magnitogorsk (Russia). It is south of Alberta's geographic centre, which is near the Hamlet of Fort Assiniboine. The terrain in and around Edmonton is generally flat to gently rolling, with ravines and deep river valleys, such as the North Saskatchewan River valley. The Canadian Rockies are west of Edmonton and about 220 km (140 mi) to the southwest. The North Saskatchewan River originates at the Columbia Icefield in Jasper National Park and bisects the city. It sometimes floods Edmonton's river valley, most notably in the North Saskatchewan River flood of 1915. It empties via the Saskatchewan River, Lake Winnipeg, and the Nelson River into Hudson Bay. It runs from the southwest to the northeast and is fed by numerous creeks throughout the city, including Mill Creek, Whitemud Creek and Blackmud Creek; these creeks have created ravines, some of which are used for urban parkland. Edmonton is within the Canadian Prairies Ecozone. Aspen parkland surrounds the city and is a transitional area from the prairies to the south and boreal forest in the north. The aspen woods and forests in and around Edmonton have long since been reduced by farming and residential and commercial developments including oil and natural gas exploration. Edmonton has a humid continental climate (Köppen Dfb) with typically freezing, dry winters and warm, sunny summers, prone to extremes and large swings at all times of the year. It falls into the NRC 4a Plant Hardiness Zone. Summer in Edmonton lasts from June until early September, while winter lasts from November until March and in common with all of Alberta varies greatly in length and severity. Spring and autumn are both short and highly variable. Edmonton's growing season on average lasts from May 9 to September 22; having an average 135–140 frost-free days each year, resulting in one of the longest growing seasons on the Canadian Prairies. At the summer solstice, Edmonton receives 17 hours and three minutes of daylight, with an hour and 46 minutes of civil twilight, and on average receives 2,299 hours of bright sunshine per year, making it one of Canada's sunniest cities. The city is known for having cold winters, though its weather is milder than Regina, Saskatoon or Winnipeg, all of which are on a more southerly latitude than Edmonton. Its average daily temperatures range from a low of −10.4 °C (13.3 °F) in January to a summer peak of 17.7 °C (63.9 °F) in July, with average maximum of 23.1 °C (73.6 °F) in July and minimum of −14.8 °C (5.4 °F) in January. Temperatures can exceed 30 °C (86 °F) for an average of four to five afternoons anytime from late April to mid-September and fall below −20 °C (−4 °F) for an average of 24.6 days in the winter. The highest temperature recorded in Edmonton was 37.2 °C (99.0 °F) on June 29, 1937 and on July 2, 2013, a record high humidex of 44 was recorded due to an unusually humid day with a temperature of 33.9 °C (93.0 °F) and a record high dew point of 23 °C (73 °F). The lowest temperature ever recorded in Edmonton was −49.4 °C (−56.9 °F) on January 19 and 21, 1886. Edmonton has a fairly dry climate. On average, it receives 455.7 mm (17.94 in) of precipitation, of which 347.8 mm (13.69 in) is rain and 111.2 mm (4.38 in) is the melt from 123.5 cm (48.6 in) of snowfall per annum. Over 75% of the average annual precipitation falls in the late spring, summer, and early autumn, with the wettest month being July, having a mean precipitation of 93.8 mm (3.69 in), and the driest months being February, March, October, November and December. Significant snowfall accumulation typically begins in late October and tapers off by late March. Dry spells are not uncommon and may occur at any time of the year. Extremes do occur, such as the 114 mm (4.49 in) of rainfall that fell on July 31, 1953. Much of the precipitation that Edmonton receives in the summer comes from late-day thunderstorms, which are frequent and occasionally severe enough to produce large hail, damaging winds, funnel clouds, and tornadoes. The summer of 2006 was particularly warm for Edmonton, as temperatures reached 29 °C (84 °F) or higher more than 20 times from mid-May to early September. Later, the summer of 2021 saw the temperature rise above 29 °C (84 °F) on 23 days between June and August, while nearly breaking the record high temperature on June 30 with a temperature of 37.0 °C (98.6 °F). The winter of 2011–12 was particularly warm: from December 22 through March 20 there were 53 occasions when Edmonton saw temperatures at or above 0.0 °C (32.0 °F) at the City Centre Airport, and even warmer in the city proper. A massive cluster of thunderstorms swept through Edmonton on July 11, 2004, with large hail and over 100 mm (3.9 in) of rain reported within an hour in many places. This "1-in-200 year event" flooded major intersections and underpasses and damaged both residential and commercial properties. The storm caused extensive damage to West Edmonton Mall; a small glass section of the roof collapsed under the weight of the rainwater, causing water to drain onto the mall's indoor ice rink. As a result, the mall was evacuated as a precautionary measure. Twelve tornadoes had been recorded in Edmonton between 1890 and 1989, and eight since 1990. An F4 tornado that struck Edmonton on July 31, 1987, killing 27, was unusual in many respects, including severity, duration, damage, and casualties. It is commonly referred to as Black Friday due both to its aberrant characteristics and the emotional shock it generated. Then-mayor Laurence Decore cited the community's response to the tornado as evidence that Edmonton was a "city of champions," which later became an unofficial slogan of the city. Edmonton is at the centre of Canada's sixth-largest census metropolitan area (CMA), which includes Edmonton and 34 other municipalities in the surrounding area. Larger urban communities include Sherwood Park (an urban service area within Strathcona County), the cities of St. Albert, Beaumont, Leduc, Spruce Grove and Fort Saskatchewan, and the towns of Stony Plain, Morinville, and Devon. Major employment areas outside Edmonton but within the CMA include the Nisku Industrial Business Park and the Edmonton International Airport (including a planned inland port logistics support facility in support of the Port Alberta initiative) in Leduc County, the Acheson Industrial Area in Parkland County, Refinery Row in Strathcona County and Alberta's Industrial Heartland within portions of Fort Saskatchewan, Strathcona County and Sturgeon County. Alberta's Industrial Heartland also extends beyond the CMA's northeastern boundary into Lamont County. The individual economic development interests and costs of service delivery in certain municipalities within the region have led to intermunicipal competition, strained intermunicipal relationships and overall fragmentation of the region. Although several attempts have been made by the City of Edmonton to absorb surrounding municipalities or annex portions of its neighbours, the city has not absorbed another municipality since the Town of Jasper Place joined Edmonton on August 17, 1964, and the city has not annexed land from any of its neighbours since January 1, 1982. After years of mounting pressure in the early 21st century, the Province of Alberta formed the Capital Region Board (CRB) on April 15, 2008. The CRB consists of 24 member municipalities – 22 of which are within the Edmonton CMA and two of which are outside the CMA. The City of Edmonton announced in March 2013 its intent to annex 156 square kilometres of land (including the Edmonton International Airport) from Leduc County. On November 30, 2016, the City of Edmonton and Leduc County came to an agreement on Edmonton's annexation proposal. The City of Edmonton was poised to annex 12,100 ha (121 km2; 47 sq mi) of land from Leduc County and Beaumont, including the Edmonton International Airport, as a result. On January 1, 2019, the City of Edmonton officially annexed 8,260 ha (82.6 km2; 31.9 sq mi) from Leduc County and the City of Beaumont, increasing the city's area to 767.85 km2 (296.47 sq mi), with discussions of annexing an additional 2,830 ha (28.3 km2; 10.9 sq mi) of Edmonton International Airport land still ongoing. Edmonton is divided into 375 neighbourhoods within seven geographic sectors – a mature area sector, which includes neighbourhoods that were essentially built out before 1970, and six surrounding suburban sectors. Edmonton's Downtown is within the city's mature area or inner city. It and the surrounding Boyle Street, Central McDougall, Cloverdale, Garneau, McCauley, Oliver, Queen Mary Park, Riverdale, Rossdale, Strathcona and University of Alberta form Edmonton's Central Core. Oliver and Garneau are the city's most populated and most densely populated neighbourhoods respectively. The mature area sector also contains the five former urban municipalities annexed by the city over its history: Beverly, Jasper Place, North Edmonton, Strathcona and West Edmonton (Calder). Larger residential areas within Edmonton's six suburban sectors, each comprising multiple neighbourhoods, include Heritage Valley, Kaskitayo, Riverbend, Terwillegar Heights and Windermere (southwest sector); The Grange, Lewis Farms and West Jasper Place (west sector); Big Lake (northwest sector); Castle Downs, Lake District and The Palisades (north sector); Casselman-Steele Heights, Clareview, Hermitage, Londonderry and Pilot Sound (northeast sector); and Ellerslie, The Meadows, Mill Woods and Southeast Edmonton (southeast sector). Mill Woods is divided into a town centre community (Mill Woods Town Centre) and eight surrounding communities: Burnewood, Knottwood, Lakewood, Millbourne, Millhurst, Ridgewood, Southwood, and Woodvale. Each has between two and four neighbourhoods. Several transit-oriented developments (TOD) have begun to appear along the LRT line at Clareview, with future developments planned at Belvedere (part of the Old Town Fort Road Redevelopment Project). Another TOD, Century Park, is being constructed at the site of what was once Heritage Mall, at the southern end of the LRT line. Century Park will eventually house up to 5,000 residents. The Edmonton City Centre Airport is being redeveloped into a sustainable community of 30,000 people called Blatchford, comprising a transit-oriented mixed use town centre, townhouses, low, medium and high rise apartments, neighbourhood retail and service uses, renewable energy, district heating and cooling, and a major park. The first residents moved into Blatchford in November 2020. Edmonton has four major industrial districts: the Northwest Industrial District, the Northeast Industrial District, the Southeast Industrial District, and the emerging Edmonton Energy and Technology Park, which is part of Alberta's Industrial Heartland. The northwest, northeast and southeast districts each have smaller industrial areas and neighbourhoods within them. The city has established 12 business revitalization zones: 124 Street and Area, Alberta Avenue, Beverly, Downtown, Chinatown and Little Italy, Fort Road and Area, Inglewood, Kingsway, North Edge, Northwest Industrial, Old Strathcona and Stony Plain Road. In the 2021 Census of Population conducted by Statistics Canada, the City of Edmonton had a population of 1,010,899 living in 396,404 of its 428,857 total private dwellings, a change of 8.3% from its 2016 population of 933,088. With a land area of 765.61 km2 (295.60 sq mi), it had a population density of 1,320.4/km2 (3,419.8/sq mi) in 2021. At the census metropolitan area (CMA) level in the 2021 census, the Edmonton CMA had a population of 1,418,118 living in 548,624 of its 589,554 total private dwellings, a change of 7.3% from its 2016 population of 1,321,441. With a land area of 9,416.19 km2 (3,635.61 sq mi), it had a population density of 150.6/km2 (390.1/sq mi) in 2021. The population of the City of Edmonton according to its 2019 municipal census is 972,223, a change of 8.1% from its 2016 municipal census population of 899,447. After factoring in dwellings that did not respond to the municipal census, Edmonton's population is further estimated to be 992,812. Per its municipal census policy, the city's next municipal census is scheduled for 2020. In the 2016 Census of Population conducted by Statistics Canada, the City of Edmonton had a population of 932,546 living in 360,828 of its 387,950 total private dwellings, a change of 14.8% from its 2011 population of 812,201. With a land area of 685.25 km2 (264.58 sq mi), it had a population density of 1,360.9/km2 (3,524.7/sq mi) in 2016. The 2016 municipal census captured more detailed demographic information on residents, including age and gender, marital status, employment status, length of residency, prior residence, employment transportation mode, citizenship, school residency, economic diversity, city resource access, highest educational attainment, household language and income, as well as dwellings and properties, including ownership, structure and status. The 2011 Census reported that 50.2 percent of the population (407,325) was female while 49.8 percent (404,875) was male. The average age of the city's population was 36.0 years while there was an average 2.5 people per household. The Edmonton census metropolitan area (CMA) has the fifth-greatest population of CMAs in Canada and the second-greatest in Alberta, but has the largest land area in Canada. It had a population of 1,159,869 in the 2011 Census compared to its 2006 population of 1,034,945. Its five-year population change of 12.1 percent was second only to the Calgary CMA between 2006 and 2011. With a land area of 9,426.73 km2 (3,639.68 sq mi), the Edmonton CMA had a population density of 123.0/km2 (318.7/sq mi) in 2011. Statistics Canada's latest estimate of the Edmonton CMA population, as of July 1, 2016, is 1,363,300 The Edmonton population centre is the core of the Edmonton CMA. This core includes the cities of Edmonton, Fort Saskatchewan and St. Albert, the Sherwood Park portion of Strathcona County, and portions of Parkland County and Sturgeon County. The Edmonton population centre, the fifth-largest in Canada, had a population of 960,015 in 2011, an 11.3 percent increase over its 2006 population of 862,544. The 2021 census reported that immigrants (individuals born outside Canada) comprise 324,315 persons or 32.5% of the total population of Edmonton. Of the total immigrant population, the top countries of origin were Philippines (54,850 persons or 16.9%), India (50,435 persons or 15.6%), China (21,110 persons or 6.5%), Vietnam (10,280 persons or 3.2%), United Kingdom (9,990 persons or 3.1%), Pakistan (8,895 persons or 2.7%), Hong Kong (6,985 persons or 2.2%), Poland (6,470 persons or 2.0%), United States of America (6,295 persons or 1.9%), and Somalia (5,765 persons or 1.8%). According to the 2016 census, 55.8% of Edmonton's population were of European ethnicities, the most frequent of which included the English (16.8%), Scottish (13.8%), German (13.6%), Irish (12.5%), Ukrainian (10.8%), French (9.4%), and Polish (5.1%) origins. Other ethnic groups and origins included, among others: Canadian (17.4%); East and Southeast Asian (15.9%) (7.4% Chinese, 6.2% Filipino, and 1.5% Vietnamese); South Asian (9.5%) (7.4% Indian); Aboriginal (6.4% (4% First Nations and 2.7% Métis); African (6.1%); Latin, Central and South American (2.3%); West Central Asian and Middle Eastern (4% (1.5% Lebanese)); and Caribbean (1.4%). The 2016 census also reported that 37.1% of Edmonton's population identified themselves as visible minorities. The most frequent visible minorities included South Asian (9.5%), Chinese (6.3%), Black (5.9%), Filipino (5.9%), and Arab (2.6%). Edmonton is home to members of a number of world religions. According to the 2021 Census, 44.6 percent of metropolitan Edmonton residents identify as Christian. Significant religious minorities include Muslims (8.3 percent), Sikhs (4.1 percent), Buddhists (1.5 percent), Hindus (3.4 percent), Jewish people (0.4 percent), and practitioners of traditional Aboriginal spirituality (0.2 percent). Those belonging to smaller religions account for 1.1 percent, while 36.4 percent profess no religious affiliation. Within Christianity, major denominations include the Roman Catholic Church (44.4 percent of self-identified Christians) and the United Church (10.5 percent). Edmonton is home to four major cathedrals, with St. Joseph's Basilica seating the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Edmonton, All Saints' Cathedral seating the Anglican Diocese of Edmonton, St. Josaphat Cathedral seating the Ukrainian Catholic Eparchy of Edmonton, and St. John Cathedral seating the Ukrainian Orthodox Eparchy of Western Canada. Additionally, members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints are served by the Edmonton Alberta Temple. Edmonton also hosts a Maronite Catholic church. In the 1930s, the local Muslim community began organizing to build a mosque. A local Muslim woman, Hilwie Hamdon, met with the mayor to acquire the land, and campaigned to raise $5,000 for the building. In 1938, Abdullah Yusuf Ali was present at the opening of the new Al-Rashid Mosque, which became the first mosque established in Canada and the third in North America. In the 1980s, Muslim students at the University of Alberta found it difficult to rent prayer rooms large enough to accommodate the local population, and opened the Muslim Community of Edmonton as a mosque and outreach centre in 1992. From these beginnings, Muslims now form the city's largest religious minority, with 83,015 members (2021) representing over 62 ethnic backgrounds at over 20 Edmonton-area mosques (2019). Edmonton's Jewish community is represented by the Jewish Federation of Edmonton, operating the historic Edmonton Jewish Cemetery, purchased in 1907. The city contains six synagogues. The oldest, Beth Israel, was established in 1912 and served as home of Canada's first Jewish day school. Other Abrahamic religions active in Edmonton include the Baháʼí Faith, operating a Baháʼí Centre in Norwood, and Druze, with its Canadian Druze Centre located in the Northwest Industrial District. The Hindu Community in Edmonton is served by the Hindu Society of Alberta (North Indian Temple) and the Maha Ganapathy Society of Alberta (South Indian Temple). The Sikh community in Edmonton is served by four gurdwaras. Edmonton is also home to two of Alberta's five Unitarian Universalist congregations – the Unitarian Church of Edmonton and the Westwood Unitarian Congregation; the other three are located in Calgary, Lethbridge, and Red Deer. Edmonton is the major economic centre for northern and central Alberta and a major centre for the oil and gas industry. As of 2014, the estimated value of major projects within the Edmonton Metropolitan Region was $57.8-billion, of which $34.4-billion are within the oil and gas, oil sands, and pipeline sectors. Edmonton traditionally has been a hub for Albertan petrochemical industries, earning it the nickname "Oil Capital of Canada" in the 1940s. Supply and service industries drive the energy extraction engine, while research develops new technologies and supports expanded value-added processing of Alberta's massive oil, gas, and oil sands reserves. These are reported to be the second-largest in the world, after Saudi Arabia. Much of the growth in technology sectors is due to Edmonton's reputation as one of Canada's premier research and education centres. Research initiatives are anchored by educational institutions such as the University of Alberta (U of A) as well as government initiatives underway at Alberta Innovates and Edmonton Research Park. The U of A campus is home to the National Institute for Nanotechnology. During the 1970s and 1980s, Edmonton became a major financial centre, with both regional offices of Canada's major banks and locally based institutions opening. However, the turmoil of the late-1980s economy radically changed the situation. Locally based operations such as Principal Trust and Canadian Commercial Bank would fail, and some regional offices were moved to other cities. The 1990s saw a solidification of the economy, and Edmonton is now home to Canadian Western Bank, the only publicly traded Schedule I chartered bank headquarters west of Toronto. Other major financial institutions include Alberta Investment Management Corporation (AIMCo), ATB Financial, Servus Credit Union (formerly Capital City Savings), TD Canada Trust and Manulife Financial. Edmonton has been the birthplace of several companies that have grown to international stature. The local retail market has also seen the creation of many successful store concepts, such as The Brick, Katz Group, AutoCanada, Boston Pizza, Pizza 73, Liquor Stores GP (which includes Liquor Depot, Liquor Barn, OK Liquor, and Grapes & Grains), Planet Organic, Shaw Communications, Empire Design, Running Room, Booster Juice, Earl's, Fountain Tire and XS Cargo. Edmonton's geographical location has made it an ideal spot for distribution and logistics. CN Rail's North American operational facility is located in the city, as well as a major intermodal facility that handles all incoming freight from the port of Prince Rupert, British Columbia. In early 2020, CN Rail announced that it was closing its Montreal control centre and would eventually close its Vancouver control centre as well, with a goal to consolidate all of its control operations into Edmonton. Edmonton is home to several shopping malls and the second largest mall in North America, West Edmonton Mall, which is also considered to be the 10th largest mall in the world. Other mentionable malls include Bonnie Doon Shopping Centre, Edmonton City Centre (a combination of the former Edmonton Centre and Eaton Centre malls), Southgate Centre, Kingsway Mall, Northgate Centre, Riverview Crossing, Londonderry Mall, and Mill Woods Town Centre. Edmonton also has many big box shopping centres and power centres. Some of the major ones include South Edmonton Common (one of North America's largest open air retail developments), RioCan Mayfield, Westpoint Centre, Skyview Centre, Terra Losa Centre, Unity Square, SouthPark Centre, The Meadows, Christy's Corner, Currents of Windermere, and Manning Village. In contrast to suburban centres, Edmonton has many urban retail locations. The largest of them all, Old Strathcona, includes many independent stores between 99 Street and 109 Street, on Whyte Avenue and in the surrounding area. Old Strathcona also houses the city's largest indoor farmer's market with over 130 vendors selling local and regional produce, meat, crafts, and clothing year-round. In and around Downtown Edmonton, there are a few shopping districts, including the Edmonton City Centre mall, Jasper Avenue, and 104 Street. Near Oliver, 124 Street is home to a significant number of retail stores. Edmonton is the Canadian testing ground for many American retailers, such as Bath & Body Works and Calvin Klein. Many events are anchored in the downtown Arts District around Churchill Square (named in honour of Sir Winston Churchill). On the south side of the river, the university district and Whyte Avenue contain theatres, concert halls, and various live music venues. The centrepiece of the square builds a life-size bronze statue of Churchill, unveiled by Lady Soames on May 24, 1989. It is a copy of a statue by Oscar Nemon.[citation needed] The Francis Winspear Centre for Music opened in 1997 after years of planning and fundraising. Described as one of the most acoustically perfect concert halls in Canada, it is home to the Edmonton Symphony Orchestra and hosts a wide variety of shows every year. It seats 1,932 patrons and houses the $3-million Davis Concert Organ, the largest concert organ in Canada. Across 102 Avenue is the Citadel Theatre, named after The Salvation Army Citadel in which Joe Shoctor first started the Citadel Theatre Company in 1965. It is now one of the largest theatre complexes in Canada, with five halls, each specializing in different kinds of productions. In 2015 the Citadel Theatre also became home to Catalyst Theatre. On the University of Alberta grounds is the 2,534-seat Northern Alberta Jubilee Auditorium, which had over a year of heavy renovations as part of the province's 2005 centennial celebrations. Both it and its southern twin in Calgary were constructed in 1955 for the province's golden jubilee and have hosted many concerts, musicals, and ballets. On the front of the building is a quote from Suetonius' Life of Augustus: "He found a city built of brick – left it built of marble."[citation needed] The Old Strathcona neighbourhood is home to the Theatre District, which holds the ATB Financial Arts Barns (headquarters of the Edmonton International Fringe Festival), The Walterdale Playhouse, and the Varscona Theatre (base of operations for several theatre companies, including Teatro la Quindicina, Shadow Theatre, Die-Nasty, Plane Jane Theatre, and Grindstone Theatre!). The Ukrainian Dnipro Ensemble of Edmonton, along with other Ukrainian choirs such as the Ukrainian Male Chorus of Edmonton, helps preserve the Ukrainian musical culture within the parameters of the Canadian multicultural identity in Edmonton. Edmonton hosts several large festivals each year, contributing to its nickname, "Canada's Festival City". Downtown Edmonton's Churchill Square host numerous festivals each summer. The Works Art & Design Festival, which takes place from late June to early July, showcases Canadian and international art and design from well-known award-winning artists as well as emerging and student artists. The Edmonton International Street Performer's Festival takes place in mid-July and is the biggest of its kind in North America. The TD Edmonton International Jazz Festival takes place in late June and, along with Montreal, were the first jazz festivals in Canada. Edmonton's main summer festival is K-Days, formerly Klondike Days, Capital Ex and originally the Edmonton Exhibition. Founded in 1879, the Edmonton Exhibition was originally an annual fair and exhibition that eventually adopted a gold rush theme, becoming Klondike Days in the 1960s. Northlands, the operators, renamed the festival "Edmonton's Capital Ex" or "Capital Ex" in 2006. In 2012 Edmonton Northlands conducted a poll to rename the festival that resulted in changing the name to "K-Days". The Canadian Finals Rodeo was held in Edmonton from 1974 to 2017, but moved to Red Deer in 2018 due to the closure of the Coliseum. The Edmonton International Fringe Festival, held in mid-August, is the largest fringe theatre festival in North America. Also in August Edmonton hosts the Edmonton Folk Music Festival, the fourth major folk festival in Canada. Other summer festivals in and around Edmonton include the Edmonton Heritage Festival, Taste of Edmonton, the Edmonton Pride Festival, Chaos Alberta Festival, Interstellar Rodeo, Big Valley Jamboree, Pigeon Lake Music Festival, Edmonton Rockfest, Edmonton International Reggae Jamboree Festival, Edmonton Blues Festival and Cariwest. Edmonton also hosts a number of winter festivals, one of the oldest being the Silver Skate Festival. Others are Flying Canoe Volant, Ice on Whyte and the Ice Magic Festival. In the city's early days, music was performed in churches and community halls. Edmonton has a history of opera and classical music performance; both have been supported by a variety of clubs and associations. Edmonton's first major radio station, CKUA, began broadcasting music in 1927. The city is a centre for music instruction; the University of Alberta began its music department in 1945, and MacEwan University opened a jazz and musical theatre program in 1980. Festivals of jazz, folk, and classical music are popular entertainment events in the city. The Edmonton Symphony Orchestra has existed under various incarnations since 1913. In 1952 the Edmonton Philharmonic and the Edmonton Pops orchestras amalgamated to form the 60-member modern version. The Orchestra performs at the Francis Winspear Centre for Music. The city also has a vibrant popular music scene, across genres including hip-hop, reggae, R&B, rock, pop, metal, punk, country and electronic. Notable past and present local musicians include Robert Goulet, Tommy Banks, Eleanor Collins, Stu Davis, Tim Feehan, Cadence Weapon, Kreesha Turner, the Smalls, SNFU, Social Code, Stereos, Ten Second Epic, Tupelo Honey, Mac DeMarco, Shout Out Out Out Out, Psyche, Purity Ring, The Wet Secrets, Nuela Charles, Celeigh Cardinal, and Ruth B. There are several key areas of nightlife in Edmonton. The most popular is the Whyte Avenue (82 Avenue) strip, between 109 Street and 99 Street; it has the highest number of heritage buildings in Edmonton, and bars, clubs, and restaurants throughout, but mostly west of Gateway Boulevard (103 Street). Once the heart of the town of Strathcona (annexed by Edmonton on February 1, 1912), it fell into disrepair during the middle of the 20th century. Beginning in the 1970s, a coordinated effort to revive the area through a business revitalization zone produced an area rich with restored historical buildings and pleasant streetscapes. Its proximity to the University of Alberta has led to a high number of restaurants, pubs, trendy clubs, and retail and specialty shops. This area also has two independent movie theatres, the Garneau and Princess, as well as several live theatre, music, and comedy venues. Downtown Edmonton has undergone a continual process of renewal and growth since the mid-1990s. Many buildings were demolished during the oil boom, starting in the 1960s and continuing into the 1980s, to make way for office towers. There have always been numerous pub-type establishments, hotel lounges, and restaurants. The past decade has seen a strong resurgence in more mainstream venues. Edmonton also has a high demand for pub crawl tours in the city. Various clubs are found along Edmonton's main street, Jasper Avenue. The Edmonton City Centre mall also houses a Landmark Cinemas movie theatre with nine screens. The nonprofit Metro Cinema shows a variety of alternative or otherwise unreleased films every week. West Edmonton Mall holds several after-hour establishments in addition to its many stores and attractions. Bourbon Street has numerous eating establishments; clubs and casinos can also be found within the complex. Scotiabank Theatre (formerly known as Silver City), at the west end of the mall, is a theatre with 12 screens and an IMAX. Edmonton is known for its natural scenery, food, history and facilities. It is home to Fort Edmonton Park, Canada's largest living history museum, and West Edmonton Mall, North America's largest shopping mall. Other notable attractions include the Royal Alberta Museum, the Muttart Conservatory, Alberta Legislature Building, Art Gallery of Alberta, Edmonton Valley Zoo, Alberta Railway Museum, and many other natural and man-made attractions. Edmonton's river valley constitutes the longest stretch of connected urban parkland in North America, and Edmonton has the highest amount of parkland per capita of any Canadian city; the river valley is 22 times larger than New York City's Central Park. The river valley is home to various parks ranging from fully serviced urban parks to campsite-like facilities with few amenities. This main "Ribbon of Green" is supplemented by tributary creeks and ravines, particularly the Whitemud Creek, Blackmud Creek, and Mill Creek Ravine. There are also numerous neighbourhood parks located throughout the city, to give a total of 111 km2 (27,400 acres) of parkland. Within the 7,400 ha (18,000 acres), 25 km (16 mi)-long river valley park system, there are 11 lakes, 14 ravines, and 22 major parks, and most of the city has accessible bike and walking trail connections. These trails are also part of the 235 km (146 mi) Waskahegan walking trail. The City of Edmonton has named five parks in its River Valley Parks System in honour of each of "The Famous Five". Edmonton's streets and parklands also contain one of the largest remaining concentrations of healthy American elm trees in the world, unaffected by Dutch elm disease, which has wiped out vast numbers of such trees in eastern North America. Jack pine, lodgepole pine, white spruce, white birch, aspen, mountain ash, Amur maple, Russian olive, green ash, basswood, various poplars and willows, flowering crabapple, Mayday tree and Manitoba maple are also abundant; bur oak, silver maple, hawthorn and Ohio buckeye are increasingly popular. Other introduced tree species include white ash, blue spruce, Norway maple, red oak, sugar maple, common horse-chestnut, McIntosh apple, and Evans cherry. Three walnut species – butternut, Manchurian walnut, and black walnut – have survived in Edmonton. Several golf courses, both public and private, are also located in the river valley; the long summer daylight hours of this northern city provide for extended play from early morning well into the evening. Golf courses and the park system become a winter recreation area during this season, and cross-country skiing and skating are popular during the long winter. Four downhill ski slopes are located in the river valley as well, two within the city and two immediately outside. The Edmonton & Area Land Trust (EALT) is a charity focused on conserving natural areas in Edmonton and surrounding municipalities. Its first project in Edmonton was conserving Larch Sanctuary, via a 0.24 km2 (59 acres) conservation easement with the city, straddling Whitemud Creek south of 23rd Avenue, and containing the only oxbow lake in the city. EALT works with many organizations in Edmonton, and is working to conserve the 0.94 km2 (233 acres) of forest and farmland in a loop of the river in northeast Edmonton. A variety of volunteer opportunities exist for citizens to participate in the stewardship of Edmonton's parkland and river valley. Volunteer programs include River Valley Clean-up, Root for Trees, and Partner in Parks. River Valley Clean-up engages volunteers to pick up hundreds of bags of litter each year. There are many museums in Edmonton of various sizes. The largest is the Royal Alberta Museum (RAM), which was formerly known as the Provincial Museum of Alberta until it was renamed in honour of Queen Elizabeth II's 2005 Alberta centennial visit. The RAM houses over 10 million objects in its collection and showcases the culture and practices of the diverse aboriginal tribes of the region. In 2018, the building relocated from its location in Glenora to a new building in downtown on 103A Avenue and 97 Street. The museum held a grand opening event and gave out 40,000 free tickets for its first few days of operation. The Telus World of Science is located in the Woodcroft neighbourhood northwest of the city centre. It opened in 1984 and has since been expanded several times. It contains five permanent galleries, one additional gallery for temporary exhibits, an IMAX theatre, a planetarium, an observatory, and an amateur radio station. The Edmonton Valley Zoo is in the river valley to the southwest of the city centre. The Alberta Aviation Museum, located in a hangar at the City Centre Airport, was built for the British Commonwealth Air Training Plan. Its collection includes both civilian and military aircraft, the largest of which are a Boeing 737 and two CF-101 Voodoos. It also has one of only three BOMARC missiles in Canada.[citation needed] The Prince of Wales Armouries Heritage Centre is home to the Loyal Edmonton Regiment Military Museum. The museum is dedicated to preserving the military heritage and the sacrifices made by the people of Edmonton and Alberta in general. The museum features two galleries and several smaller exhibits. The collection includes historic firearms, uniforms, souvenirs, memorabilia, military accoutrements, as well as a large photographic and archival collection spanning the pre-World War One period to the present. The museum features an exhibit on the role of the 49th Battalion, CEF in Canada's Hundred Days Offensive.[citation needed] The Telephone Historical Centre is a telephone museum also located in the Prince of Wales Armouries Heritage Centre. In addition to a collection of artifacts tracing the history of the telephone, the museum has its own theatre featuring a brief film led by the robot Xeldon. As of April 2019, the museum is permanently closed. The Alberta Railway Museum is located in the rural northeast portion of the city. It contains a variety of locomotives and railroad cars from different periods, and includes a working steam locomotive. Since most of its exhibits are outdoors, it is only open between Victoria Day and Labour Day. Fort Edmonton Park, Canada's largest living history museum, is located in the river valley southwest of the city centre. Edmonton's heritage is displayed through historical buildings (many of which are originals moved to the park), costumed historical interpreters, and authentic artifacts. In total, it covers the region's history from approximately 1795 to 1929 (represented by Fort Edmonton), followed chronologically by 1885, 1905, and 1920 streets, and a recreation of a 1920s midway. A steam train, streetcars, automobiles and horse-drawn vehicles may be seen in operation (and utilized by the public) around the park. The John Walter Museum and Historical Area (c. 1875 to 1901) is on the Canadian Register of Historic Places. The University of Alberta operates its own internal Museums and Collections service. The Art Gallery of Alberta (AGA) is the city's largest single gallery. Formerly housed in an iconic 1970s Brutalist building designed by Don Bittorf, the AGA collection had over 5,000 pieces of art. The former AGA building was demolished in July 2007 to make way for construction of a new facility designed by Randall Stout. It was estimated to cost over $88-million and the amount that Edmonton City Council donated towards its construction was met with some controversy. The AGA officially opened on January 31, 2010. Commercial art galleries can be found throughout the city, especially along the 124 Street/Jasper Avenue corridor, known as the "gallery walk". Edmonton is home to four artist-run centres all located in the downtown core Harcourt House, Latitude 53, Ociciwan Contemporary Art Collective and Society of Northern Alberta Print-Artists (SNAP). The University of Alberta and MacEwan University also have galleries: the Fine Arts Building Gallery and the Mitchell Art Gallery, respectively. The University of Alberta Museums and Collections also has 17 million objects, 29 registered museum collections and occasional exhibitions. Edmonton has a number of professional sports teams, including the Edmonton Elks, formerly referred to as the Edmonton Eskimos and, for a brief period, the Edmonton Football Team, of the Canadian Football League, Edmonton Oilers of the National Hockey League and Edmonton Stingers of the Canadian Elite Basketball League. Edmonton is the only city home to two teams in the semi-professional National Ringette League: the Edmonton WAM! and Edmonton Black Gold Rush. The city also hosts an amateur women's football team, the Edmonton Storm of the Western Women's Canadian Football League. Junior sports clubs include the Edmonton Huskies and Edmonton Wildcats of the Canadian Junior Football League, the Edmonton Oil Kings of the Western Hockey League, and the Edmonton Riverhawks of the West Coast League. Venues for Edmonton's professional and junior sports teams include Commonwealth Stadium (Edmonton Elks), Argyll Velodrome, Rogers Place (Oilers and Oil Kings), RE/MAX Field (Riverhawks), the Edmonton Expo Centre (Stingers), and Clarke Stadium (Huskies, Wildcats, and Storm). Edmonton's teams have rivalries with Calgary's teams and games between Edmonton and Calgary teams are often referred to as the Battle of Alberta. Past notable hockey teams in Edmonton include: the original junior hockey incarnation of the Edmonton Oil Kings, with multiple league and national Memorial Cup championships playing in the Western Hockey League; the Edmonton Flyers, with multiple Lester Patrick Cups and one national Allan Cup, and; the Edmonton Roadrunners of the American Hockey League. Other past notable sports teams include; the Edmonton Grads, a women's basketball team with 108 local, provincial, national, and international titles and the world champions for 17 years in a row; the Edmonton Trappers, a Triple-A level baseball team with multiple division and league titles in the Pacific Coast League, and; the Edmonton Rush, a box lacrosse team with one league championship.[citation needed] Local university-level sports teams include the U of A Golden Bears, the U of A Pandas, the NAIT Ooks, and the MacEwan Griffins. Local amateur teams, among others, include the Edmonton Gold of the Rugby Canada Super League and two flat track roller derby leagues: Oil City Roller Derby and E-Ville Roller Derby. The Castrol Raceway hosts regular sprint car and a national International Hot Rod Association (IHRA) events at their facility next to Edmonton International Airport. The airport also hosts horse racing at the Century Mile Racetrack and Casino. The Edmonton International Raceway, which hosts NASCAR Pinty's Series races, is located about 50 km (31 mi) to the south near Wetaskiwin. From 2005 to 2012, Edmonton hosted an annual circuit on the Indy Racing League known as the Edmonton Indy. Other past sporting events hosted by Edmonton include: 1978 Commonwealth Games 1981 U-18 Women's Softball World Cup, and 1981 U-18 Men's Softball World Cup 1983 World University Games (Universiade) 1981 and 1985 Intercontinental Cup 1990 Baseball World Cup 1990 North American Indigenous Games 1996 World Figure Skating Championships 1999 World Taekwondo Championships 2001 World Championships in Athletics 2002 World Ringette Championships 2005 World Masters Games 2006 Women's Rugby World Cup 2002 and 2007 FIFA U-20 World Cup 2014 FIFA U-20 Women's World Cup 2015 FIFA Women's World Cup 2004 and 2012 Women's Baseball World Cup CN Canadian Women's Open 1995 World Junior Ice Hockey Championships (co-hosted with Red Deer and Calgary), 2012 World Junior Ice Hockey Championships (co-hosted with Calgary), 2022 World Junior Ice Hockey Championships (co-host with Red Deer) 2007 World Men's Curling Championship and 2017 World Men's Curling Championship 2021 World Junior Ice Hockey Championships 2022 World Dodgeball Championships Despite submitting a bid, Edmonton was not selected as a host city for the 2026 Fifa World Cup. The Edmonton City Council consists of a mayor and twelve councillors serving four-year terms. Each councillor is elected in a ward (electoral district); the mayor is elected at-large through first-past-the-post voting. The elections are non-partisan. Council has the responsibility of approving the city's budget, and develops laws and policies intended to promote the health and safety of Edmonton residents. The council passes all legislation related to the city's police, firefighting, parks, and libraries, as well as its utilities – electricity, water supply, solid waste handling, and drainage.[citation needed] On July 22, 2009, City Council adopted an electoral system that divides Edmonton into 12 wards, instead of the previous system where two councillors were elected in each of six wards. As of 2010, each ward would elect one councillor by first-past-the-post voting. This system came into effect with the following election in October 2010. The most recent election was held in October 2021, and elected members to a four-year term. On December 7, 2020, a bylaw approving new ward boundaries and Indigenous ward names was passed by city council. Edmonton is the capital of the province of Alberta and holds all main provincial areas of government such as the Alberta Legislature. The Edmonton Metropolitan Region is represented by 20 MLAs, one for each provincial electoral district. Many of these boundaries have been changed, adjusted and renamed while the city has grown. In the current 31st Alberta Legislature all of Edmonton's districts are represented by members from the Opposition Alberta New Democratic Party. One of the MLAs, Rachel Notley, is the Leader of the Opposition and was the 17th premier of Alberta from 2015 to 2019. Edmonton is represented by nine Members of Parliament (MP), with one being elected to represent each of its federal electoral districts. In the 43rd Canadian Parliament, which was in session from late 2019 to late 2021, eight MPs were members of the Conservative Party of Canada, while the remaining MP was part of the New Democratic Party. After the 2019 federal election, Edmonton lacked elected representation in the federal government for the first time since 1980. Compared to the rest of Alberta, Edmonton tends to vote for more left of centre leaning parties. However, due to vote splitting, the Conservative Party dominates Edmonton, with Edmonton Strathcona the only electoral district not to have voted Conservative in the 2019 federal election. However, this changed in the 2021 federal election with the NDP also flipping the seat of Edmonton Griesbach alongside holding Edmonton Strathcona and the Liberals retaking the riding of Edmonton Centre. Edmonton Fire Rescue, established in 1892, is a full-time professional firefighting department which provides a variety of services in Edmonton and the surrounding region. Some of the service's major tasks include fire suppression, assistance in medical emergencies, watercraft rescues on the North Saskatchewan River, and emergencies which involve hazardous materials. Edmonton Fire Rescue is one of nine Canadian fire departments which are accredited by the Centre for Public Safety Excellence. The city's police force, the Edmonton Police Service, was founded in 1892, and had approximately 1,400 officers in 2012. Canadian Forces Base Edmonton is home to 1 Canadian Mechanized Brigade Group (1 CMBG), the Regular Force army brigade group of 3rd Canadian Division of the Canadian Army. Units in 1 CMBG include Lord Strathcona's Horse (Royal Canadians), 1 Combat Engineer Regiment, two of the three battalions of Princess Patricia's Canadian Light Infantry, and various headquarters, service, and support elements. Although not part of 1 CMBG, 408 Tactical Helicopter Squadron and 1 Field Ambulance are located with the brigade group. All of these units are located at Lancaster Park, immediately north of the city. From 1943, as CFB Namao (now CFB Edmonton/Edmonton Garrison), it was a major air force base. In 1996, all fixed-wing aviation units were transferred to CFB Cold Lake. The Canadian Parachute Centre was located in the city until 1996, when it was moved to CFB Trenton, Ontario, and renamed the Canadian Army Advanced Warfare Centre. The move of 1 CMBG and component units from Calgary occurred in 1996 in what was described as a cost-saving measure. The brigade had existed in Calgary since the 1950s, and Lord Strathcona's Horse had traditionally been a Calgary garrison unit dating back to before World War I. Edmonton also has a large army reserve element from 41 Canadian Brigade Group (41 CBG), including The Loyal Edmonton Regiment (4th Battalion, Princess Patricia's Canadian Light Infantry); 41 Combat Engineer Regiment; HQ Battery, 20th Field Artillery Regiment; and B Squadron of The South Alberta Light Horse, one of Alberta's oldest army reserve units. Despite being far from Canada's coasts, Edmonton is also the home of HMCS Nonsuch, a naval reserve division. There are numerous cadet corps of the different elements (naval, army and air force) within Edmonton as well. Edmonton experienced a decrease in crime in the 1990s, an increase in the early 2000s, and another downturn at the end of the decade.[which?] The Edmonton census metropolitan area (CMA) had a crime severity index of 84.5 in 2013, which is higher than the national average of 68.7. Its crime severity index was the fifth-highest among CMAs in Canada behind Regina, Saskatoon, Kelowna and Vancouver.In 2011, the city set a record for the most homicides in a year with 53 murders, giving the city a homicide rate of 6.5 per 100,000 people. Edmonton had the fourth-most homicides in 2013 with 27, a 49% decrease from 2011. However in 2017, Edmonton hit another peak in homicides with a slightly lower total of 49, giving a homicide rate of 5.2 per 100,000. There were 165 shootings reported in 2022. Noteworthy events that have occurred in Edmonton include the 1965 Edmonton aircraft bombing, the 2011 murder of Johnny Altinger, the 2012 University of Alberta shooting, the 2014 Edmonton shooting, and the 2017 Edmonton attack. Over $100,000 dollars of property damage to Edmonton City Hall occurred in a shooting and firebombs attack on 23 January 2024, where no one was injured. Edmonton is a major air transportation gateway to northern Alberta and northern Canada. The Edmonton International Airport (EIA) is the main airport serving the city. The airport provides passenger service to destinations in the United States, Europe, Mexico, and the Caribbean. The airport is located within Leduc County, adjacent to the City of Leduc and the Nisku Industrial Business Park. With direct air distances from Edmonton to places such as London in United Kingdom being shorter than to other main airports in western North America, Edmonton Airports is working to establish a major container shipping hub called Port Alberta. Edmonton serves as a major transportation hub for Canadian National Railway, whose North American operations management centre is located at their Edmonton offices. It is also tied into the Canadian Pacific Kansas City network, which provides service from Calgary to the south and extends northeast of Edmonton to serve Alberta's Industrial Heartland.[citation needed] Inter-city rail passenger rail service is provided by Via Rail's premier train, the Canadian, as it travels between Vancouver, British Columbia, and Toronto, Ontario. Passenger trains stop at the Edmonton railway station two days a week in both directions. The train connects Edmonton to multiple stops in British Columbia, Alberta, Saskatchewan, Manitoba, and Ontario. The Edmonton Transit Service (ETS) is the city's public transit agency, operating the Edmonton Light Rail Transit (LRT) network as well as a fleet of buses. In 2017, ETS served approximately 86,997,466 people; the bus system saw 62,377,183 riders, while the LRT network served 24,620,283 passengers. From the 1990s to early 2009, Edmonton was one of two cities in Canada still operating trolley buses, along with Vancouver. On June 18, 2008, City Council decided to abandon the Edmonton trolley bus system and the last trolley bus ran on May 2, 2009. Scheduled LRT service began on April 23, 1978, with nine extensions of the network completed since. The original Edmonton line is considered to be the first "modern" light rail line (i.e., built from scratch, rather than being an upgrade of an old system) in North America to be constructed in a city with a population of under one million people. It introduced the use of German-designed rolling stock that subsequently became the standard light rail vehicle of the United States. The Edmonton "proof-of-payment" fare collection system adopted in 1980 – modelled after European ticket systems – became the North American transit industry's preferred approach for subsequent light rail projects. The four-year South LRT extension was opened in full on April 24, 2010, which sees trains travelling to Century Park (located at 23 Avenue and 111 Street), making stops at South Campus and Southgate Centre along the way. A line to the Northern Alberta Institute of Technology in north-central Edmonton using the same high-floor technology of the existing system opened September 6, 2015. The southeast leg of the Valley Line, which starts in Mill Woods and ends in the downtown core, opened on November 4, 2023, after experiencing significant delays. Construction on the second and final phase of the Valley Line, which will extend the line west to Lewis Farms, commenced in 2021. Unlike the Capital and Metro lines, trains on the Valley Line use low-floor technology. Edmonton is a member of the Edmonton Metropolitan Transit Services Commission, which will begin service in mid-2022. The Edmonton Metropolitan Transit Services Commission is scheduled to be disestablished May 31, 2023, as a result of Edmonton's withdrawal. A largely gridded system forms most of Edmonton's street and road network. The address system is mostly numbered, with streets running south to north and avenues running east to west. In built-up areas built since the 1950s, local streets and major roadways generally do not conform to the grid system. Major roadways include Kingsway, Yellowhead Trail (Highway 16), Whitemud Drive and Anthony Henday Drive. The major roads connecting to other communities elsewhere in Alberta, British Columbia, and Saskatchewan are the Yellowhead Highway to the west and east and Highway 2 (Queen Elizabeth II Highway) to the south. Edmonton maintains over 160 km (99 mi) of multi-use trails; however, most of this is within the river valley parkland system. Edmonton's first power company established itself in 1891 and installed streetlights along the city's main avenue, Jasper Avenue. The power company was bought by the Town of Edmonton in 1902 and remains under municipal ownership today as EPCOR. Also in charge of water treatment, in 2002 EPCOR installed the world's largest ultraviolet (UV) water treatment (ultraviolet disinfection) system at its E. L. Smith Water Treatment Plant. Edmonton delivers source-separated organics waste collection to all single-unit, and some multi-unit homes. The city collects four streams of waste under this program: Garbage in black bins, organic waste in green bins, recycling in blue bags, and yard waste in large brown paper bags or clear plastic bags (four times per year). The rollout of the source-separated organics program began in March 2021, and was completed on September 3, 2021. During this period, Edmonton delivered approximately 10,000 new carts every week to a total of approximately 250,000 homes. City employees collect waste from half of these homes, and collection from the other homes is contracted to a private company. An anaerobic digester began service in April 2021, and has the capacity to process 40,000 tonnes of organic waste annually. This facility produces high-quality compost and generates renewable heat and electricity. Edmonton signed contracts for private partners to process the remaining 28,000 tonnes of organic waste generated annually. In spring 2021, the city started selling compost produced at this facility. The city will roll-out the new waste collection service to the remaining multi-unit households which receive curbside service, but were not included in the initial transition, in 2023. Meanwhile, the city has stopped offering curbside waste collection from commercial businesses, and has not yet said whether businesses will eventually be required to separate their organic waste. The rollout of the new waste collection system follows a successful two-year pilot program which began service in 2019, and included 8,000 households in 12 neighbourhoods. The Edmonton Composting Facility was the largest of its type in the world, and the largest stainless steel building in North America. Among the innovative uses for the city's waste included a Christmas tree recycling program. The trees were collected each January and put through a woodchipper; this material was used as an addition to the composting process. In addition, the wood chips absorbed much of the odour produced by the compost by providing a biofilter element to trap odour causing gaseous results of the process. The composting facility was permanently shut down in 2019 after an inspection found that the structural integrity of its roof was compromised. Together, the Waste Management Centre and Wastewater Treatment plant are known as the Edmonton Waste Management Centre of Excellence. Research partners include the University of Alberta, the Alberta Research Council, the Northern Alberta Institute of Technology, and Olds College. There are four main hospitals serving Edmonton: University of Alberta Hospital, Royal Alexandra Hospital, Misericordia Community Hospital, and Grey Nuns Community Hospital. Other area hospitals include Sturgeon Community Hospital in St. Albert, Leduc Community Hospital in Leduc, WestView Health Centre in Stony Plain, and Fort Saskatchewan Community Hospital in Fort Saskatchewan. Dedicated psychiatric care is provided at the Alberta Hospital. The Northeast Community Health Centre offers a 24-hour emergency room with no inpatient ward services. The University of Alberta Hospital is the centre of a larger complex of hospitals and clinics located adjacent to the university campus which comprises the Stollery Children's Hospital, Mazankowski Alberta Heart Institute, Cross Cancer Institute, Zeidler Gastrointestinal Health Centre, Ledcor Clinical Training Centre, and Edmonton Clinic. Several health research institutes, including the Heritage Medical Research Centre, Medical Sciences Building, Katz Group Centre for Pharmacy and Health Research, and Li Ka Shing Centre for Health Research Innovation, are also located at this site. A similar set-up is also evident at the Royal Alexandra Hospital, which is connected to the Lois Hole Hospital for Women and Orthopaedic Surgery Centre. All hospitals are under the administration of Alberta Health Services, the single provincial health authority that plans and delivers health services to Albertans, on behalf of the Ministry of Health. The Misericordia and Grey Nuns are run separately by Covenant Health. Edmonton has three publicly funded school boards (districts) that provide kindergarten and grades 1–12. The vast majority of students attend schools in the two large English-language boards: Edmonton Public Schools, and the separate Edmonton Catholic School District. Since 1994, the Francophone minority community has had their own school board based in Edmonton, the Greater North Central Francophone Education Region No. 2, which includes surrounding communities. The city also has a number of public charter schools that are independent of any board. All three school boards and public charter schools are funded through provincial grants and property taxes.[citation needed] Some private schools exist as well, including Edmonton Academy, Progressive Academy and Tempo School. Edmonton Public Schools is known for pioneering the concept of site-based decision making (decentralization) in Canada, which gives principals the authority, the financial resources and the flexibility to make decisions based on the individual needs of their schools. This initiative has led to Edmonton Public offering a school of choice model in which students have more options as to what school they want to attend to suit their interests, and has led to the creation of alternative programs such as Vimy Ridge Academy, Old Scona Academic and Victoria School of the Arts. The Edmonton Society for Christian Education and Millwoods Christian School (not part of the former) used to be private schools; however, have both also become part of Edmonton Public Schools as alternative programs. Both the Edmonton Public Schools and the Edmonton Catholic School District provide support and resources for those wishing to homeschool their children. Those post-secondary institutions based in Edmonton that are publicly funded include Concordia University of Edmonton, MacEwan University, King's University, NorQuest College, the Northern Alberta Institute of Technology (NAIT) and the University of Alberta (U of A). The publicly funded Athabasca University also has a campus in Edmonton. The U of A is a board-governed institution that has an annual revenue of over one billion dollars. In 2021/22, the university had over 40,000 students enrolled within over 700 undergraduate, graduate and professional programs, as well as over 7,000 students enrolled in its faculty of extension. The U of A is also home to the second-largest research library system in Canada. In 2019/20, MacEwan University had a total student population of over 18,000 full-time and part-time students enrolled in programs offering bachelor's degrees, university transfers, diplomas and certificates. NAIT has an approximate total of 41,000 students enrolled in more than 200 programs, while NorQuest College has approximately 21,000 students enrolled in various full-time, part-time and continuing education programs. Other post-secondary institutions within Edmonton include Newman Theological College, Taylor College and Seminary, and Yellowhead Tribal College (an Indigenous college). Edmonton has seven local broadcast television stations shown on basic cable TV or over-the-air, with the oldest broadcasters in the city being CTV Edmonton (1954) and CBC TV Edmonton (1961). Most of Edmonton's conventional television stations have made the switch to over-the-air digital broadcasting. The cable television providers in Edmonton are Telus (for IPTV) and Shaw Communications. Twenty-one FM and eight AM radio stations are based in Edmonton. Edmonton has two large-circulation daily newspapers, the Edmonton Journal and the Edmonton Sun. The Journal, established in 1903, has a daily circulation of 112,000. The Sun, established in 1978, has a circulation of 55,000. Both newspapers are owned by the Postmedia Network. The Journal no longer publishes a Sunday edition as of July 2012. Metro, Edmonton's only free daily newspaper, ceased printing on December 20, 2019. The magazine Vue Weekly, a weekly publication which focused on alternative news, was published in Edmonton from 1995 to 2018. The Edmonton Examiner is a citywide community-based paper also published weekly. There are also a number of smaller weekly and community newspapers. Edmonton has five sister cities. Gatineau, Quebec, Canada (1967) Harbin, China (1985) Nashville, Tennessee, United States (1990) Wonju, South Korea (1998) Bergen op Zoom, the Netherlands (2013) In the United States, American cities and their sisters are listed with that country's Sister Cities International. In 1990, Edmonton became the first sister city of Nashville. In 2015, Nashville Mayor Karl Dean visited Edmonton, addressing the crowd at the Edmonton Folk Music Festival, celebrating the 25th anniversary of becoming sister cities. That year, more than 150 Canadians visited Nashville to attend Alberta-born Brett Kissel's Grand Ole Opry debut and to meet with Sister Cities representatives. In November 2015, Doug Hoyer and Jeremy Witten represented Edmonton at World of Friendship, Nashville's annual sister cities celebration. Canada portal List of cities in Alberta List of communities in Alberta List of mayors of Edmonton List of municipalities in Alberta List of people from Edmonton List of tallest buildings in Edmonton Edmonton Federation of Community Leagues Make Something Edmonton Edmontosaurus annectens - a dinosaur, for "connected lizard from Edmonton" Statistic includes all persons that did not make up part of a visible minority or an indigenous identity. Statistic includes total responses of "Filipino" and "Southeast Asian" under visible minority section on census. Statistic includes total responses of "Chinese", "Korean", and "Japanese" under visible minority section on census. Statistic includes total responses of "West Asian" and "Arab" under visible minority section on census. Statistic includes total responses of "Visible minority, n.i.e." and "Multiple visible minorities" under visible minority section on census. Originally named Hull, Quebec until January 1, 2002, See:2000–06 municipal reorganization in Quebec "Economic Development Edmonton 'Branding Edmonton' Initiative" (Doc). City of Edmonton. March 28, 2003. Archived from the original on February 11, 2015. Retrieved February 10, 2015. "Edmonton". Geographical Names Data Base. Natural Resources Canada. "Location and History Profile: City of Edmonton" (PDF). Alberta Municipal Affairs. June 17, 2016. p. 43. Archived (PDF) from the original on March 25, 2016. Retrieved June 18, 2016. "City of Edmonton Population, Historical" (PDF). City of Edmonton, Planning and Development Department. August 2008. Archived (PDF) from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved June 18, 2016. "Municipal Officials Search". Alberta Municipal Affairs. May 9, 2019. Retrieved October 1, 2021. "Population and dwelling counts: Canada, provinces and territories, and census subdivisions (municipalities)". Statistics Canada. February 9, 2022. Retrieved February 9, 2022. "Alberta Private Sewage Systems 2009 Standard of Practice Handbook: Appendix A.3 Alberta Design Data (A.3.A. Alberta Climate Design Data by Town)" (PDF) (PDF). Safety Codes Council. January 2012. pp. 212–215 (PDF pages 226–229). Archived (PDF) from the original on October 16, 2013. Retrieved October 8, 2013. "2019 Municipal Census Results". City of Edmonton. September 5, 2019. Archived from the original on September 16, 2019. Retrieved September 5, 2019. "Census Subdivision (Municipal) Population Estimates, July 1, 2016 to 2022, Alberta". Alberta Municipal Affairs. January 11, 2023. Retrieved August 9, 2023. "Population and dwelling counts: Canada and population centres". Statistics Canada. February 9, 2022. Retrieved February 13, 2022. "Population and dwelling counts: Canada, provinces and territories, census metropolitan areas and census agglomerations". Statistics Canada. February 9, 2022. Retrieved March 28, 2022. "Gross domestic product (GDP) at basic prices, by census metropolitan area (CMA)". August 9, 2023. Why Calgary? Our Economy in Depth "Geographic Profile" (PDF). Capital Region Board. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 25, 2013. Retrieved November 24, 2012. Government of Canada, Statistics Canada (February 9, 2022). "Census Profile, 2021 Census of Population". www12.statcan.gc.ca. Retrieved February 9, 2022. "Population and dwelling counts, for Canada, provinces and territories, and census subdivisions (municipalities), 2016 and 2011 censuses – 100% data (Alberta)". Statistics Canada. February 8, 2017. Archived from the original on February 11, 2017. Retrieved February 8, 2017. "Statistics Canada. 2022. (table). Census Profile. 2021 Census. Statistics Canada Catalogue no. 98-316-X2021001. Ottawa. Released February 9, 2022". Statistics Canada, 2021 Census of Population. February 9, 2022. Retrieved February 9, 2022. "Population and dwelling counts, for census metropolitan areas, 2016 and 2011 censuses – 100% data". Statistics Canada. February 8, 2017. Archived from the original on February 11, 2017. Retrieved February 8, 2017. "About Edmonton | Radiology and Diagnostic Imaging". www.ualberta.ca. Retrieved April 23, 2023. Aubrey, Merrily (2004). Naming Edmonton: From Ada to Zoie. University of Alberta Press. pp. 17, 25, 34, 138, 214. ISBN 0-88864-423-X. "amiskwaciy-wâskahikan (Edmonton) History". Edmonton & Area Land Trust. February 3, 2020. Retrieved April 23, 2023. "Métis in Treaty 6 & Relationship to Fort Edmonton Park". www.fortedmontonpark.ca. January 2022. Retrieved April 23, 2023. "Anthony Henday | The Canadian Encyclopedia". www.thecanadianencyclopedia.ca. Retrieved April 23, 2023. "Edmonton | History, Facts, Map, & Points of Interest | Britannica". www.britannica.com. Retrieved April 23, 2023. Lambert, Tim (March 14, 2021). "A History of Edmonton". Local Histories. Retrieved April 23, 2023. "Population History". City of Edmonton. Archived from the original on October 16, 2012. Retrieved November 24, 2012. [Thus Edmonton is said to be a combination of two cities, two towns and two villages.] History of Annexations (PDF) (Map). City of Edmonton, Planning and Development Department. Archived (PDF) from the original on December 30, 2014. Retrieved December 29, 2014. City of Edmonton. "Leduc County Annexation". Archived from the original on January 6, 2019. Retrieved January 5, 2019. "City Centre Airport (Gateway to the North)". Aviation Edmonton. Archived from the original on August 7, 2013. Retrieved March 5, 2014. The Diavik Diamond Mine. "Historical The Diavik Diamond Mine". Archived from the original on August 29, 2008. Retrieved March 1, 2009. West Edmonton Mall. "Welcome to West Edmonton Mall's Website". West Edmonton Mall. Archived from the original on June 1, 2010. Retrieved February 27, 2009. "American Dream, a mega mall and entertainment complex, to open in N.J.: Who will come?". NBC News. The Associated Press. October 25, 2019. Retrieved July 16, 2021. Porter, David (March 13, 2020). "American Dream mall to close for March due to virus concerns". Rogers Media. The Associated Press. Retrieved July 16, 2021. Marketwire (March 17, 2009). "Edmonton Attractions Make Canada's Festival City a Family Affair". Reuters. Archived from the original on March 4, 2014. Retrieved December 7, 2011. "Naming Edmonton 1795". edmonton.ca. Alberta Source (January 1, 2010). "Fort Edmonton and Fort Augustus". Alberta Source. Archived from the original on December 8, 2010. Retrieved April 9, 2020. Mills, A. D. (2004). A dictionary of London place-names. Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 74. ISBN 0-19-860957-4. OCLC 56654940. Edmonton Historical Board, Heritage Sites Committee (2004). Aubrey, Merrily K. (ed.). Naming Edmonton: from Ada to Zoie. Edmonton: University of Alberta Press. p. 18. ISBN 9780888644237 – via Google Books. Cardinal, Jacquelyn. "Layers of Place". Recover – Urban Wellbeing in Edmonton. Retrieved June 14, 2021. Fromhold, Joachim (2010). 2001 Indian Place Names of the West – Part 1 -. Lulu.com. ISBN 9780557438365 – via Google Books. "Newcomer's Guide to Edmonton" (PDF). CIty of Edmonton. January 2018. Archived (PDF) from the original on March 26, 2015. Retrieved June 14, 2021. "Omahkoyis". www.ulethbridge.ca. Retrieved February 3, 2023. Many Guns, Payne (2019). Siksikawa Otaawahsinnowa = Where the Blackfoot People live (1st ed.). Calgary, Alta. ISBN 978-1-9992947-2-4. OCLC 1139336039.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link) "Stoney Nakoda Dictionary". dictionary.stoneynakoda.org. Retrieved May 13, 2022. "Taza Development Guidelines" (PDF). April 2019. Archived (PDF) from the original on September 23, 2020. Retrieved September 12, 2022. "Territorial Acknowledgement". Everyone's Canada. Archived from the original on June 14, 2021. Retrieved June 14, 2021. Frantz, Donald G. (2017). Blackfoot Grammar. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. p. 274. ISBN 9781487500863. OCLC 982378173. Chipweyan Dictionary, South Slave Divisional Education Council Link Archived June 23, 2020, at the Wayback Machine Walls, Martha; Mahaffy, Cheryl (2007). Edmonton Book of Everything: Everything You Wanted to Know about Edmonton and Were Going to Ask Anyway. MacIntyre & Purcell. p. 9. ISBN 978-0-9738063-4-2. James G., MacGregor (1975). Edmonton: A History. Hurtig. p. 17. ISBN 978-0-88830-100-0. Switzer, Jan (March 4, 2015) [February 7, 2006]. "Fort Edmonton". The Canadian Encyclopedia (online ed.). Historica Canada. Archived from the original on May 3, 2014. Goyette, Edmonton In Our Own Words, xxiii "Numbered Treaty Overview". Canadiana.org (Formerly Canadian Institute for Historical Microreproductions). Canada in the Making. Archived from the original on January 13, 2010. Retrieved November 16, 2009. The Numbered Treaties – also called the Land Cession or Post-Confederation Treaties – were signed between 1871 and 1921, and granted the federal government large tracts of land throughout the Prairies, Canadian North and Northwestern Ontario for white settlement and industrial use. In exchange for the land, Canada promised to give the Aboriginal peoples various items: cash, blankets, tools, farming supplies, and so on. The impact of these treaties can be still felt in modern times. Filice, Michelle (August 2, 2016). "Numbered Treaties". The Canadian Encyclopedia (online ed.). Historica Canada. Archived from the original on December 3, 2018. Retrieved December 2, 2018. "City of Edmonton, Treaty 6 Recognition Day". Edmonton.ca. March 31, 2017. Archived from the original on August 22, 2016. Retrieved April 14, 2017. Monto, Tom (2011). Old Strathcona: Edmonton's Southside Roots. Crang. ISBN 978-1-895097-13-9. City of Edmonton. "Population, Historical" (PDF). City of Edmonton. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 28, 2008. Retrieved February 26, 2007. Smith, P.J.; Sholdice, Mark (October 24, 2017) [March 24, 2006]. "Edmonton". The Canadian Encyclopedia (online ed.). Historica Canada. Archived from the original on May 3, 2014. "Edmonton, Alberta (2004)". Canadian Railway Hall of Fame. Archived from the original on July 26, 2010. Retrieved May 3, 2009. City of Edmonton. "Ward System (1970 – Present)". City of Edmonton. Archived from the original on September 22, 2010. Retrieved March 23, 2009. City of Edmonton. "Population, Historical" (PDF). City of Edmonton. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 28, 2008. Retrieved February 26, 2007. Monto (2011), pp. 346–349. Monto (2011), p. 354. "History and Milestones". City of Edmonton. Archived from the original on September 26, 2014. Retrieved May 24, 2014. Edmonton Airports. "History". Archived from the original on December 26, 2013. Retrieved May 3, 2014. Canadian Geographical Journal. "Historical". Archived from the original on September 5, 2010. Retrieved March 1, 2009. CBC News. "City Centre Airport shuts down". Archived from the original on November 10, 2015. Retrieved April 10, 2018. Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. "Edmonton Tornado". CBC News. Archived from the original on July 16, 2011. Retrieved February 27, 2009. Environment Canada. "A map of the city of Edmonton showing the path of the tornado". Archived from the original on March 19, 2009. Retrieved March 23, 2009. Reed Timmer. "20th Anniversary of "Black Friday"—The Edmonton, AB F4 Tornado". TornadoVideos.net. Archived from the original on February 4, 2008. Retrieved March 6, 2009. Walls, Martha (2007). Edmonton Book of Everything. Maclntyre Purcell Publishing Inc. p. 129. ISBN 978-0-9738063-4-2. "Ed Tel Endowment Fund Bylaw" (PDF). edmonton.ca. City of Edmonton. June 18, 2008. Archived (PDF) from the original on December 23, 2022. Retrieved December 30, 2022. Monto (2011), pp. 433, 164. Monto (2011), p. 326. Monto, Tom, Protest and Progress, Three Labour Radicals in Early Edmonton, Crang Publishing (available at Alhambra Books, Edmonton), 2012, 71–76 Edmonton election 2021: Amarjeet Sohi elected mayor. Global News Retrieved 2023-08-09 "Recreation and Tourism Map" (PDF). Woodlands County. January 4, 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 6, 2011. Retrieved January 1, 2012. Jim Willet. "Edmonton River Valley". Edmonton River Valley. Archived from the original on June 8, 2009. Retrieved February 27, 2009. The Canadian Heritage Rivers System. "North Saskatchewan". Archived from the original on April 14, 2012. Retrieved March 6, 2009. Herzog, Lawrence. "Industry on the river". Real Estate Weekly. Archived from the original on September 8, 2013. Retrieved March 6, 2009. "Prairies Ecozone". Ecological Framework of Canada. Archived from the original on May 29, 2016. Retrieved May 14, 2016. "Canadian Aspen forests and parklands". WEF. World Wildlife Foundation. Archived from the original on June 3, 2016. Retrieved May 14, 2016. Mining Exploration News. "Project of Gold Copper Mine Exploration Near Edmonton Delay". Archived from the original on October 7, 2008. Retrieved March 6, 2009. "Plant Hardiness Zone by Municipality". Natural Resources Canada. Government of Canada. Archived from the original on March 13, 2016. Retrieved March 26, 2016. See Szeto, Kit K. (2008). "Variability of Cold-Season Temperatures in the Mackenzie Basin". In Woo, M. (ed.). Cold Region Atmospheric and Hydrologic Studies. The Mackenzie GEWEX Experience. Heidelberg: Springer Berlin. pp. 61–82. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-73936-4_4. ISBN 978-3-540-73935-7. "Edmonton City Centre Airport". Canadian Climate Normals 1981–2010. Environment Canada. November 25, 2021. Retrieved May 13, 2016. "Frost Chart for Canada". The Old Farmer's Almanac. September 20, 2010. Archived from the original on October 22, 2010. Retrieved September 20, 2010. Walls, Martha (2007). Edmonton Book of Everything. Maclntyre Purcell Publishing Inc. p. 62. ISBN 978-0-9738063-4-2. "Canada Hardiness Zones Frost Dates | Veseys". www.veseys.com. Retrieved January 5, 2022. "Advanced options and sun angles". National Research Council Canada. August 7, 2012. Archived from the original on January 21, 2013. Retrieved March 18, 2013. "Sunniest Year Round". March 14, 2012. Archived from the original on April 15, 2012. Retrieved June 2, 2016. Liz Osborn. "Coldest Canadian Cities in Winter". Current Results Publishing Ltd. Archived from the original on August 5, 2009. Retrieved October 8, 2009. The cities included in these rankings are Canada's largest metropolitan areas. These are the 33 urban regions that had over 100,000 people according to the 2011 census by Statistics Canada. The temperature data are averages of weather measurements made from 1981 to 2010. "Climate Data for June 1937 for Edmonton". Climate Data Almanac. Environment Canada. February 17, 2016. Archived from the original on February 2, 2017. Retrieved February 17, 2016. "Hourly Data Report for July 02, 2013". Environment and Climate Change Canada. Government of Canada. October 31, 2011. Archived from the original on May 10, 2019. Retrieved May 9, 2019. Classen, Josh. "Hot, humid and stormy – July 2, 2013". CTV News Edmonton. Archived from the original on February 4, 2016. Retrieved January 30, 2016. "January 1886". Climate Data Almanac. Environment Canada. September 22, 2015. Archived from the original on June 10, 2016. Retrieved May 14, 2016. "Edmonton climate: average weather, temperature, precipitation, best time". www.climatestotravel.com. Retrieved January 2, 2021. "Thunderstorm | The Canadian Encyclopedia". www.thecanadianencyclopedia.ca. Retrieved April 1, 2021. Canada, Environment and Climate Change (October 31, 2011). "Daily Data Report for June 2021 – Climate – Environment and Climate Change Canada". climate.weather.gc.ca. Retrieved January 5, 2022. "Daily Data Report for December 2011". Environment Canada. Archived from the original on May 11, 2013. Retrieved September 30, 2012. "Daily Data Report for January 2012". Environment Canada. Archived from the original on May 11, 2013. Retrieved September 30, 2012. "Daily Data Report for February 2012". Environment Canada. Archived from the original on May 11, 2013. Retrieved September 30, 2012. "Daily Data Report for March 2012". Environment Canada. Archived from the original on May 11, 2013. Retrieved September 30, 2012. "The Edmonton Hailstorm of 2004" (PDF). University of Alberta, Meteorological Service of Canada. Archived (PDF) from the original on July 16, 2011. Retrieved April 16, 2011. CBC (July 12, 2004). "Adjusters assess storm damage to West Edmonton Mall". CBC News. Archived from the original on March 9, 2007. Retrieved February 27, 2009. "Atlas of the Edmonton Tornado and Hailstorm, 1987". University of Alberta. Archived from the original on September 27, 2016. Retrieved June 7, 2016. "Canadian National Tornado Database: Verified Events (1980–2009) – Public". Environment Canada Data. Archived from the original on December 21, 2016. Retrieved August 6, 2016. "Thirty years after deadly Edmonton tornado, storms remain difficult to track". CBC News. Archived from the original on March 7, 2018. Retrieved January 30, 2018. Graney, Juris (July 29, 2016). "All We Have Learned: 29 Years After Black Friday, Alberta's Worst Tornado Disaster". Edmonton Journal. Archived from the original on February 1, 2018. Retrieved January 30, 2018. "1987 Edmonton tornado". CBC Digital Archives. CBC. May 23, 2013. Archived from the original on October 7, 2014. Retrieved July 19, 2014. Elizabeth Withey (July 31, 2007). "Wanted: new slogan for Edmonton". Edmonton Journal. Postmedia Network. "Hourly Data Report for July 02, 2013". Historical Climate Data. Environment Canada. Archived from the original on March 5, 2017. Retrieved March 4, 2016. "Edmonton Monthly Data Report for 1880". Canadian Climate Data. Environment Canada. September 22, 2015. Archived from the original on June 10, 2016. Retrieved April 16, 2016. "Edmonton, Canada – Detailed climate information and monthly weather forecast". Weather Atlas. Archived from the original on July 6, 2019. Retrieved July 6, 2019. "Canadian Climate Normals 1991–2020". Environment and Climate Change Canada. Retrieved December 7, 2023. "Canadian Climate Normals 1981–2010". Environment and Climate Change Canada. Retrieved December 7, 2023. "Population and Dwelling Count Highlight Tables, 2016 Census". Statistics Canada. February 20, 2019. Retrieved May 28, 2020. "Census Profile, Geographic hierarchy: Edmonton (Census metropolitan area)". Statistics Canada. July 16, 2012. Retrieved November 24, 2012. "About the Regional Evaluation Framework (REF)" (PDF). Capital Region Board. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 25, 2013. Retrieved November 24, 2012. "Infrastructure". Port Alberta. Archived from the original on July 15, 2011. Retrieved May 10, 2012. "Capital Region Land Use Plan" (PDF). Capital Region Board. March 12, 2009. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 25, 2013. Retrieved November 24, 2012. "Alberta's Industrial Heartland: Eco Industrial Master Plan" (PDF). Alberta's Industrial Heartland Association. November 1, 2007. Retrieved November 24, 2012.[permanent dead link] Plunkett, T.J.; Lightbody, James (1982). "Tribunals, Politics, and the Public Interest: The Edmonton Annexation Case". Canadian Public Policy. 8 (2). University of Toronto Press: 207–221. doi:10.2307/3550157. JSTOR 3550157. "Edmonton shelves airport annexation talks". Leduc Representative. Sun Media. July 14, 2005. Province of Alberta (April 30, 1964). "Board Order No. 1234" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on July 14, 2011. Retrieved February 11, 2010. Province of Alberta (June 11, 1981). "Order in Council (O.C.) No. 538/81" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on July 14, 2011. Retrieved February 11, 2010. Province of Alberta (April 15, 2008). "Order in Council (O.C.) No. 127/2008". Archived from the original on July 16, 2011. Retrieved February 11, 2010. Stolte, Elise (March 5, 2013). "Edmonton wants to annex 15,600 hectares of Leduc County, including airport". Edmonton Journal. Postmedia Network. Archived from the original on March 8, 2013. Retrieved March 5, 2013. "Proposed Leduc County Annexation :: City of Edmonton". Edmonton.ca. December 6, 2016. Archived from the original on December 1, 2016. Retrieved April 14, 2017. "Neighbourhoods (data plus kml file)". City of Edmonton. Archived from the original on May 12, 2012. Retrieved September 10, 2012. "The Way We Grow: Municipal Development Plan Bylaw 15100" (PDF). City of Edmonton. June 23, 2010. Archived (PDF) from the original on March 13, 2016. Retrieved July 19, 2014. "Edmonton Developing and Planned Neighbourhoods, 2011" (PDF). City of Edmonton. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 4, 2013. Retrieved September 10, 2012. "City of Edmonton Wards & Standard Neighbourhoods" (PDF). City of Edmonton. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 3, 2014. Retrieved September 10, 2012. "City of Edmonton Plans in Effect Map" (PDF). City of Edmonton. October 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 26, 2014. Retrieved May 3, 2014. "Mill Woods Town Centre Neighbourhood Area Structure Plan (Office Consolidation)" (PDF). City of Edmonton. December 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 3, 2014. Retrieved November 28, 2012. "Mill Woods Development Concept" (PDF). City of Edmonton. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 3, 2014. Retrieved February 11, 2011. "Community Leagues". Mill Woods Presidents' Council. Archived from the original on June 27, 2013. Retrieved November 28, 2012. "Lee Ridge Neighbourhood Profile" (PDF). City of Edmonton. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 26, 2014. Retrieved November 27, 2012. City of Edmonton, Planning. "Fort Road Old Town Master Plan". City of Edmonton. Archived from the original on May 1, 2012. Retrieved May 10, 2012. Century Park Club and Residences. "centuryCentral". ProCura. Archived from the original on October 12, 2007. Retrieved October 27, 2007. City of Edmonton. "Century Park to Ellerslie Road Preliminary Engineering" (PDF). City of Edmonton. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 26, 2014. Retrieved February 27, 2009. "City Centre Redevelopment Area Redevelopment Plan" (PDF). City of Edmonton. May 2012. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 26, 2014. Retrieved November 24, 2012. "First show home opens in Edmonton's Blatchford neighbourhood". Global News. Retrieved December 4, 2020. "Edmonton's Industrial Neighbourhoods". City of Edmonton. Archived from the original on January 25, 2013. Retrieved November 26, 2012. "Edmonton Energy and Technology Park". City of Edmonton. Archived from the original on March 26, 2015. Retrieved May 3, 2014. The City of Edmonton. "Business Revitalization Zones". Archived from the original on May 3, 2014. Retrieved May 3, 2014. "Table IX: Population of cities, towns and incorporated villages in 1906 and 1901 as classed in 1906". Census of the Northwest Provinces, 1906. Vol. Sessional Paper No. 17a. Ottawa: Government of Canada. 1907. p. 100. "Table I: Area and Population of Canada by Provinces, Districts and Subdistricts in 1911 and Population in 1901". Census of Canada, 1911. Vol. I. Ottawa: Government of Canada. 1912. pp. 2–39. "Table I: Population of Manitoba, Saskatchewan, and Alberta by Districts, Townships, Cities, Towns, and Incorporated Villages in 1916, 1911, 1906, and 1901". Census of Prairie Provinces, 1916. Vol. Population and Agriculture. Ottawa: Government of Canada. 1918. pp. 77–140. "Table 8: Population by districts and sub-districts according to the Redistribution Act of 1914 and the amending act of 1915, compared for the census years 1921, 1911 and 1901". Census of Canada, 1921. Ottawa: Government of Canada. 1922. pp. 169–215. "Table 7: Population of cities, towns and villages for the province of Alberta in census years 1901–26, as classed in 1926". Census of Prairie Provinces, 1926. Vol. Census of Alberta, 1926. Ottawa: Government of Canada. 1927. pp. 565–567. "Table 12: Population of Canada by provinces, counties or census divisions and subdivisions, 1871–1931". Census of Canada, 1931. Ottawa: Government of Canada. 1932. pp. 98–102. "Table 4: Population in incorporated cities, towns and villages, 1901–1936". Census of the Prairie Provinces, 1936. Vol. I: Population and Agriculture. Ottawa: Dominion Bureau of Statistics. 1938. pp. 833–836. "Table 10: Population by census subdivisions, 1871–1941". Eighth Census of Canada, 1941. Vol. II: Population by Local Subdivisions. Ottawa: Dominion Bureau of Statistics. 1944. pp. 134–141. "Table 6: Population by census subdivisions, 1926–1946". Census of the Prairie Provinces, 1946. Vol. I: Population. Ottawa: Dominion Bureau of Statistics. 1949. pp. 401–414. "Table 6: Population by census subdivisions, 1871–1951". Ninth Census of Canada, 1951. Vol. I: Population, General Characteristics. Ottawa: Dominion Bureau of Statistics. 1953. p. 6.73–6.83. "Table 6: Population by sex, for census subdivisions, 1956 and 1951". Census of Canada, 1956. Vol. Population, Counties and Subdivisions. Ottawa: Dominion Bureau of Statistics. 1957. p. 6.50–6.53. "Table 6: Population by census subdivisions, 1901–1961". 1961 Census of Canada. Series 1.1: Historical, 1901–1961. Vol. I: Population. Ottawa: Dominion Bureau of Statistics. 1963. p. 6.77–6.83. "Population by specified age groups and sex, for census subdivisions, 1966". Census of Canada, 1966. Vol. Population, Specified Age Groups and Sex for Counties and Census Subdivisions, 1966. Ottawa: Dominion Bureau of Statistics. 1968. p. 6.50–6.53. "Table 2: Population of Census Subdivisions, 1921–1971". 1971 Census of Canada. Vol. I: Population, Census Subdivisions (Historical). Ottawa: Statistics Canada. 1973. p. 2.102–2.111. "Table 3: Population for census divisions and subdivisions, 1971 and 1976". 1976 Census of Canada. Census Divisions and Subdivisions, Western Provinces and the Territories. Vol. I: Population, Geographic Distributions. Ottawa: Statistics Canada. 1977. p. 3.40–3.43. "Table 4: Population and Total Occupied Dwellings, for Census Divisions and Subdivisions, 1976 and 1981". 1981 Census of Canada. Vol. II: Provincial series, Population, Geographic distributions (Alberta). Ottawa: Statistics Canada. 1982. p. 4.1–4.10. ISBN 0-660-51095-2. "Table 2: Census Divisions and Subdivisions – Population and Occupied Private Dwellings, 1981 and 1986". Census Canada 1986. Vol. Population and Dwelling Counts – Provinces and Territories (Alberta). Ottawa: Statistics Canada. 1987. p. 2.1–2.10. ISBN 0-660-53463-0. "Table 2: Population and Dwelling Counts, for Census Divisions and Census Subdivisions, 1986 and 1991 – 100% Data". 91 Census. Vol. Population and Dwelling Counts – Census Divisions and Census Subdivisions. Ottawa: Statistics Canada. 1992. pp. 100–108. ISBN 0-660-57115-3. "Table 10: Population and Dwelling Counts, for Census Divisions, Census Subdivisions (Municipalities) and Designated Places, 1991 and 1996 Censuses – 100% Data". 96 Census. Vol. A National Overview – Population and Dwelling Counts. Ottawa: Statistics Canada. 1997. pp. 136–146. ISBN 0-660-59283-5. "Population and Dwelling Counts, for Canada, Provinces and Territories, and Census Divisions, 2001 and 1996 Censuses – 100% Data (Alberta)". Statistics Canada. Retrieved April 1, 2012. "Population and dwelling counts, for Canada, provinces and territories, and census subdivisions (municipalities), 2006 and 2001 censuses – 100% data (Alberta)". Statistics Canada. January 6, 2010. Retrieved April 1, 2012. "Population and dwelling counts, for Canada, provinces and territories, and census subdivisions (municipalities), 2011 and 2006 censuses". Statistics Canada. February 8, 2012. Retrieved February 8, 2012. "Population and dwelling counts, for Canada, provinces and territories, and census subdivisions (municipalities), 2016 and 2011 censuses – 100% data (Alberta)". Statistics Canada. February 8, 2017. Retrieved February 8, 2017. "Census Profile, 2021 Census of Population, Edmonton, Alberta". Statistics Canada. February 25, 2022. Retrieved February 25, 2022. 2016 Municipal Affairs Population List (PDF). Alberta Municipal Affairs. ISBN 978-1-4601-3127-5. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 16, 2017. Retrieved January 28, 2017.2015 Municipal Affairs Population List (PDF). Alberta Municipal Affairs. ISBN 978-1-4601-2630-1. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 4, 2016. Retrieved January 28, 2017. "City of Edmonton population vibrant and growing steadily". City of Edmonton. September 5, 2019. Retrieved September 5, 2019. "Municipal Census Policy" (PDF). City of Edmonton. May 15, 2018. Archived (PDF) from the original on August 30, 2018. Retrieved August 30, 2018. Male, Mack (September 5, 2019). "Edmonton's official population rises to 972,223". Taproot Edmonton. Retrieved May 17, 2020. "Summary of All Questions: 2016 Municipal Census" (PDF). City of Edmonton. Archived from the original (PDF) on August 31, 2016. Retrieved August 31, 2016. "Census Profile: Edmonton, City, Alberta (Census subdivision)". Statistics Canada. November 2, 2012. Archived from the original on February 7, 2013. Retrieved January 12, 2013. "Population of census metropolitan areas". Statistics Canada. February 26, 2014. Archived from the original on December 16, 2016. "Census metropolitan area (CMA) and census agglomeration (CA)". Statistics Canada. August 23, 2012. Archived from the original on February 7, 2013. Retrieved January 12, 2013. "Census Tract by CMA / CA (Edmonton)" (PDF). Statistics Canada. November 16, 2011. Archived (PDF) from the original on February 7, 2013. Retrieved January 12, 2013. "Population and dwelling counts, for Canada, provinces and territories, and population centres, 2011 and 2006 censuses (Alberta)". Statistics Canada. February 8, 2012. Archived from the original on February 7, 2013. Retrieved February 8, 2012. Government of Canada, Statistics Canada (October 26, 2022). "Census Profile, 2021 Census of Population". www12.statcan.gc.ca. Retrieved November 11, 2022. Government of Canada, Statistics Canada (October 26, 2022). "Census Profile, 2021 Census of Population". www12.statcan.gc.ca. Retrieved January 7, 2023. "Census Profile, 2016 Census: Edmonton, City [Census subdivision], Alberta and Division No. 11, Census division [Census division], Alberta – Ethnic origin". Statistics Canada. April 24, 2018. Archived from the original on January 8, 2019. Retrieved January 6, 2019. "Census Profile, 2016 Census: Edmonton, City [Census subdivision], Alberta and Division No. 11, Census division [Census division], Alberta – Visible minority". Statistics Canada. April 24, 2018. Archived from the original on January 8, 2019. Retrieved January 6, 2019. Statistics Canada (February 9, 2022). "Census Profile, 2021 Census of Population". Government of Canada. Retrieved June 20, 2023. "Al-Rashid Mosque". The Friday Bulletin. Archived from the original on March 5, 2009. Retrieved February 28, 2009. "About Us". MCE Mosque. Archived from the original on September 20, 2019. Retrieved September 19, 2019. "The History of Al Rashid Mosque". Al Rashid. Archived from the original on July 8, 2019. Retrieved September 19, 2019. "Edmonton Metro". salatomatic. Archived from the original on September 20, 2019. Retrieved September 19, 2019. Janet Vlieg (October 24, 2015). "Edmonton synagogue led by husband-and-wife rabbi team". Edmonton Journal. Archived from the original on September 20, 2019. Retrieved September 19, 2019. Jewish Federation of Edmonton. "Jewish Federation of Edmonton". Archived from the original on May 28, 2008. Retrieved February 28, 2009. "About Us". Baháʼí Community of Edmonton. Archived from the original on September 4, 2013. Retrieved November 19, 2012. "The Druze Association of Edmonton". Retrieved September 19, 2019.[permanent dead link] "Hindu Society of Alberta". The Friday Bulletin. Archived from the original on January 14, 2009. Retrieved February 28, 2009. Maha Ganapathy Temple (Hindu Temple). "Maha Ganapathy Temple (Hindu Temple)". Archived from the original on February 27, 2009. Retrieved February 28, 2009. "Welcome to the Unitarian Church of Edmonton". Unitarian Church of Edmonton. Archived from the original on October 27, 2009. Retrieved May 4, 2010. "Welcome to Westwood". Westwood Unitarian Congregation. Archived from the original on April 8, 2010. Retrieved March 28, 2010. Canadian Unitarian Council. "Congregations". Archived from the original on May 23, 2014. Retrieved May 3, 2014. "Contact us". Alberta Innovates. Retrieved April 27, 2020. "Inventory of Major Projects (Capital Region)" (CSV). Government of Alberta. Archived from the original on February 25, 2014. Retrieved March 5, 2014. OMAC. "Edmonton Market Profile". Archived from the original on April 24, 2016. Retrieved March 6, 2009. "Alberta Fact Sheet" (PDF). Government of Alberta. Archived from the original (PDF) on December 5, 2010. Retrieved October 26, 2009. University of Alberta Faculty of Engineering. "U of A Receives $15 Million for Nanosystems Research Facility". University of Alberta Faculty of Engineering. Archived from the original on May 12, 2006. Retrieved March 6, 2009. Alberta's Real Estate History. "The Era of Urban Growth (1961–1981)". Archived from the original on December 8, 2010. Retrieved March 6, 2009. The Canadian Encyclopedia. "Canadian Commercial Bank". Archived from the original on May 3, 2014. Retrieved May 3, 2014. Canadian Western Bank Group. "Canadian Western Bank Group". Archived from the original on March 3, 2009. Retrieved March 6, 2009. Financial Services, Edmonton. "Financial Services, Edmonton". Archived from the original on February 18, 2009. Retrieved March 6, 2009. PCL. "PCL History". Archived from the original on April 26, 2012. Retrieved May 10, 2012. "Hoover's Company Directory". Edmonton. Archived from the original on February 8, 2010. Retrieved March 6, 2009. Hicks, Graham. "Edmonton and the Prince Rupert Container Port". Edmonton Sun. Archived from the original on May 10, 2008. Retrieved March 6, 2009.{{cite news}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) "CN to close Montreal's rail traffic control centre, affecting over 100 jobs". Global News. Retrieved May 17, 2020. Eastern Connecticut State University (January 2007). "World's Largest Shopping Malls". Archived from the original on March 5, 2012. Retrieved December 12, 2013. Emporis (February 7, 2012). "World's 10 biggest shopping malls" (PDF) (Press release). Archived from the original (PDF) on November 13, 2013. Retrieved December 12, 2013. Edmonton Shopping Malls. "Malls In Edmonton". Archived from the original on May 12, 2008. Retrieved March 7, 2009. South Edmonton Common. "South Edmonton Common". Archived from the original on February 12, 2008. Retrieved February 28, 2009. Collier International. "Windermere Power Centre". Archived from the original on April 12, 2013. Retrieved May 10, 2012. Real Estate Weekly. "The Plays the Thing in Old Strathcona". Archived from the original on September 8, 2013. Retrieved March 7, 2009. MacGregor, Sandra. "Discover Why Edmonton, Alberta Is One Of Canada's Hottest Destinations". Forbes. Retrieved December 29, 2020. Goyette, Linda; Roemmich, Carolina Jakeway (2005). Edmonton in Our Own Words. Edmonton: University of Alberta. ISBN 9780888644497. Archived from the original on December 24, 2017. Retrieved April 14, 2017. Francis Winspear Centre. "Winspear Centre History". Archived from the original on July 13, 2012. Retrieved June 22, 2012. Edmonton Symphony Orchestra. "Support ESO – Reasons to Give". Archived from the original on June 25, 2012. Retrieved June 22, 2012. The Canadian Encyclopedia. "Francis Winspear Centre for Music". Archived from the original on May 3, 2014. Retrieved May 3, 2014. Citadel Theatre. "About Us". The Citadel Theatre. Archived from the original on December 3, 2014. Retrieved July 19, 2014. Ukrainian Dnipro Ensemble of Edmonton. "Ukrainian Dnipro Ensemble of Edmonton". Archived from the original on May 3, 2014. Retrieved May 3, 2014. Neil, Graham (July 4, 2019). "'It's a legendary festival': Performers get set to hit the street". CTV News Edmonton. Archived from the original on July 5, 2019. Retrieved January 18, 2020. Levesque, Roger (June 18, 2019). "All that jazz: Edmonton festival marks 40 years playing host to jazz giants". Edmonton Journal. Archived from the original on June 24, 2019. Retrieved January 18, 2020. Krishnan, Manisha (July 29, 2012). "Capital Ex to be named K-Days (Poll)". Edmonton Journal. Postmedia Network. Archived from the original on July 31, 2012. Retrieved July 29, 2012. "It's official: Red Deer will host the CFR for 10 years". CBC News. Archived from the original on February 16, 2018. Retrieved June 1, 2018. Mertz, Emily (August 7, 2019). "Edmonton International Fringe Theatre Festival 2019 ready for 'the Wild Things'". Global News. Archived from the original on December 5, 2019. Retrieved January 18, 2020. Levesque, Roger (August 6, 2019). "Building on a 40-year foundation: Folk Fest has brought a world of music to our doorstep for four decades | Edmonton Journal". Edmonton Journal. Archived from the original on August 7, 2019. Retrieved January 18, 2020. Mertz, Emily (May 9, 2022). "Edmonton Pride Festival returns to Churchill Square under new organization - Edmonton | Globalnews.ca". Global News. Retrieved June 10, 2023. Griwkowsky, Fish (June 4, 2022). "Pride Month turns it up early with Pride Reunited at Grindstone this weekend". edmontonjournal. Retrieved June 10, 2023. Heidenreich, Phil (August 26, 2019). "Summer festivals and events for Edmontonians to experience in 2019". Global News. Archived from the original on October 31, 2019. Retrieved January 18, 2020. Reith, Terry (December 24, 2019). "Embracing an Edmonton winter takes layers of clothing — and a leap of faith". CBC News. Archived from the original on January 8, 2020. Hilash, Stephanie (January 17, 2020). "9 Things To Do In Alberta This Month If You're Still Broke From Christmas". Narcity. Retrieved January 18, 2020. Dulmage, Bill. "Alberta, Northern Alberta CKUA-AM (Educational), Edmonton, CKUA Radio Foundation". Radio Station History. Canadian Communications Foundation. Archived from the original on February 7, 2013. Retrieved January 5, 2013. McIntosh, R. Dale; Berg, Wesley. "Music in Edmonton". The Encyclopedia of Music in Canada. The Canadian Encyclopedia. Archived from the original on March 1, 2014. Retrieved May 3, 2014. "Edmonton Symphony Orchestra". Encyclopedia of Music in Canada. The Canadian Encyclopedia. Archived from the original on March 6, 2014. Retrieved May 3, 2014. Hale, Marjorie; Spier, Susan; Nygaard King, Betty. "Robert Goulet". The Encyclopedia of Music in Canada. The Canadian Encyclopedia. Archived from the original on May 3, 2014. Retrieved May 3, 2014. Sperounes, Sandra (December 30, 2005). "Edmonton music scene a knockout out out out in 2005". Edmonton Journal. ProQuest 253311714. oldstrathcona.ca. "Revitalization". oldstrathcona.ca. Archived from the original on July 6, 2011. Retrieved March 6, 2009. "The First Steps of Strathcona". Archived from the original on April 15, 2012. Retrieved December 7, 2011. The City of Edmonton. "Welcome to Old Strathcona". Archived from the original on March 1, 2009. Retrieved March 6, 2009. Metro Cinema. "Metro Cinema". Archived from the original on February 25, 2009. Retrieved February 28, 2009. Edmonton's Official Tourism Website. "Scenic Settings". Edmonton Economic Development Corporation. Archived from the original on October 25, 2013. Retrieved May 3, 2014. City of Edmonton Transportation (September 13, 2013). "Edmonton Bicycle Map" (PDF). City of Edmonton. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 4, 2016. Retrieved July 19, 2014. Heritage Community Foundation. "Parkland and environment". Alberta Online Encyclopedia. Archived from the original on October 23, 2007. Retrieved February 27, 2009. The City of Edmonton. "Selection List of Common Tree Species". Archived from the original on March 31, 2012. Retrieved February 27, 2009. Barkley, Shelley (May 22, 2007). "Juglans sp. (Butternut/Walnut)". Government of Alberta. Archived from the original on May 6, 2010. Retrieved October 27, 2007. Edmonton Golf. "Parkland and environment". Archived from the original on March 1, 2009. Retrieved February 27, 2009. "Edmonton – Ice and Snow". City of Edmonton. Archived from the original on September 21, 2010. Retrieved November 21, 2009. "Larch Sanctuary". Edmonton & Area Land Trust. Archived from the original on January 15, 2019. Retrieved January 4, 2019. "Potential Forest and Farmland". Edmonton & Area Land Trust. Archived from the original on January 5, 2019. Retrieved January 4, 2019. City of Edmonton. "volunteer opportunities". Archived from the original on January 28, 2015. Retrieved March 4, 2014. "Museums & Historical Sites". City of Edmonton. Archived from the original on September 5, 2013. Retrieved May 10, 2012. "More free tickets available Saturday for Royal Alberta Museum opening | CBC News". CBC. Archived from the original on September 15, 2018. Retrieved November 12, 2018. Valley Zoo. "Valley Zoo". City of Edmonton. Archived from the original on May 25, 2014. Retrieved May 24, 2014. "Prince of Wales Armouries Heritage Centre". City of Edmonton. Archived from the original on August 25, 2016. Retrieved August 19, 2016. Telephone Historical Centre. "Telephone Historical Centre". Archived from the original on July 16, 2011. Retrieved July 27, 2011. "Edmonton Telephone Museum hangs it up". edmontonjournal.com. Retrieved April 2, 2020. Alberta Railway Museum. "Alberta Railway Museum". Archived from the original on February 19, 2009. Retrieved February 28, 2009. Canada's Historic Places. "John walter museum and historical area". Archived from the original on February 12, 2009. Retrieved February 28, 2009. University of Alberta. "Museums". Archived from the original on March 2, 2009. Retrieved February 28, 2009. "Edmonton's Architectural Heritage". Edmontonsarchitecturalheritage.ca. January 31, 2009. Archived from the original on October 1, 2016. Retrieved April 14, 2017. "Who We Are". Art Gallery of Alberta. Archived from the original on April 28, 2014. Retrieved May 3, 2014. 124 Street. "Gallery Walk". Archived from the original on May 3, 2014. Retrieved May 3, 2014.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) "FAB Gallery | Faculty of Arts". www.ualberta.ca. Retrieved March 6, 2020. "Mitchell Art Gallery – MacEwan University". www.macewan.ca. Archived from the original on March 5, 2020. Retrieved March 6, 2020. "University of Alberta Museums". www.ualberta.ca. Retrieved March 6, 2020. Edmonton Public Library. "Sports History in Edmonton". Edmonton Public Library. Archived from the original on October 15, 2006. Retrieved February 27, 2009. "Welcome to the home of the Oil City Derby Girls!". Oilcityderbygirls.ca. Archived from the original on January 3, 2007. Retrieved January 31, 2012. "Don't Play Nice, Play E-Ville!". e-villederby.com. Archived from the original on April 4, 2012. Retrieved April 9, 2012. CBC News (January 12, 2011). "Edmonton Indy back this summer". Archived from the original on January 13, 2011. Retrieved January 18, 2011. "Century Mile Racetrack and Casino". Archived from the original on May 9, 2019. Retrieved June 3, 2019. "WBSC U-18 Women's Softball World Cup Historic Results". WBSC. World Baseball Softball Confederation. Archived from the original on December 12, 2021. Retrieved December 17, 2021. "WBSC U-18 Men's Softball World Cup Historic Results". WBSC. World Baseball Softball Confederation. Archived from the original on December 17, 2021. Retrieved December 17, 2021. Edmonton Super Summer. "2005 World Masters Games". Archived from the original on January 22, 2013. Retrieved February 27, 2009. "Canada sets U-20 World Cup attendance record". CBC Sports. July 20, 2007. Retrieved August 25, 2020. "Edmonton among cities to host 2014 U-20 women's World Cup". globalnews.ca. June 2, 2013. Retrieved August 25, 2020. Parrish, Julia (May 4, 2012). "Edmonton named one of six host cities for FIFA Women's World Cup 2015". CTV News. Retrieved August 25, 2020. "WBSC Women's Baseball World Cup Historic Results". WBSC. World Baseball Softball Confederation. Retrieved July 31, 2022. "Edmonton won't host 2026 World Cup matches as FIFA picks Toronto, Vancouver". Edmonton. June 16, 2022. Retrieved August 17, 2022. "Grey Cup Results from 1909 to present". The Grey Cup. Retrieved August 17, 2022. "A brief history: Edmonton Oilers". "Ward System". City of Edmonton. July 22, 2009. Archived from the original on September 22, 2010. Retrieved August 5, 2009. "Edmonton's new Indigenous ward names, explained". CTV News Edmonton. September 24, 2021. Retrieved October 23, 2021. "Indigenous Ward Naming Knowledge Committee | City of Edmonton". www.edmonton.ca. Retrieved October 23, 2021. "Members Information". Legislative Assembly of Alberta. Archived from the original on April 10, 2010. Retrieved March 27, 2010. "Official Voting Results by polling station (poll by poll results in Edmonton)". Elections Alberta. Retrieved March 6, 2023. "Election Results". Elections Alberta. Retrieved June 22, 2023. Canada, Elections (February 4, 2019). "Canada's Federal Electoral Districts". www.elections.ca. Retrieved May 26, 2020. "Current Members of Parliament – Members of Parliament – House of Commons of Canada". www.ourcommons.ca. Retrieved May 26, 2020. "Edmonton without seat in federal government for the first time since 1980 election". edmontonjournal.com. Retrieved May 26, 2020. "Edmonton's NDP candidates hope a surge of support builds into a new orange wave". CBC News. Retrieved October 1, 2021. "Official Voting Results Raw Data (poll by poll results in Edmonton)". Elections Canada. April 7, 2022. Retrieved March 6, 2023. "City of Edmonton. Fire Department – Alberta On Record". albertaonrecord.ca. Archived from the original on April 14, 2021. Retrieved October 18, 2020. Edmonton, City of (October 17, 2020). "Fire Rescue Services". www.edmonton.ca. Retrieved October 18, 2020. "Accredited Agencies". Center for Public Safety Excellence. Retrieved October 18, 2020. "History of the EPS". About EPS. Edmonton Police Service. Archived from the original on January 2, 2013. Retrieved January 13, 2013. Alberta's Aviation History. "CFB Namao". Archived from the original on October 9, 2008. Retrieved February 28, 2009. "Paratrooper: Airborne with the Army's advanced warfare centre | Canadian Army Today". Retrieved October 18, 2020. Government of Canada. "Proceedings of the Standing Senate Committee on National Security and Defence". Archived from the original on May 10, 2012. Retrieved May 10, 2012. Government of Canada. "HMCS Nonsuch". Archived from the original on June 30, 2013. Retrieved November 20, 2012. Government of Canada. "Cadets Canada". Archived from the original on May 3, 2014. Retrieved May 3, 2014. Savoie, Josée (March 2008). "Neighbourhood Characteristics and the Distribution of Crime: Edmonton, Halifax and Thunder Bay" (PDF). Crime and Justice Research Paper Series. Ottawa: Statistics Canada: 11–12. ISSN 1707-5203. Archived (PDF) from the original on February 7, 2013. Boyce, Jillian; Cotter, Adam; Perreault, Samuel (July 23, 2014). "Police-reported crime statistics in Canada, 2013" (PDF). Statistics Canada, Canadian Centre for Justice Statistics. pp. 13 & 30. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 23, 2015. Retrieved May 3, 2015. Government of Canada, Statistics Canada (April 13, 2021). "Number and rate of homicide victims, by Census Metropolitan Areas". www150.statcan.gc.ca. Retrieved July 17, 2023. Government of Canada, Statistics Canada (April 13, 2021). "Number and rate of homicide victims, by Census Metropolitan Areas". www150.statcan.gc.ca. Retrieved July 17, 2023. "'Brazenness' of shootings escalating, police say, as videos of public gun violence released". Edmonton. March 24, 2022. Retrieved August 4, 2023. "Gun Violence 2022". www.edmontonpolice.ca. Retrieved August 4, 2023. Damage in Edmonton city hall attack estimated at $100K, meetings canceled next week, 26 January 2024. ‘Heavily armed’ suspect acted alone in Edmonton City Hall shooting: police, 23 January 2024. Edmonton Airports. "Strategic Location" (PDF). Edmonton Airports. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 11, 2011. Retrieved November 1, 2007. Edmonton Airports (November 1, 2007). "Port Alberta". Edmonton Airports. Archived from the original on October 17, 2007. Retrieved November 1, 2007. Via Rail Canada. "Edmonton train station". Via Rail Canada. Archived from the original on May 3, 2014. Retrieved May 3, 2014. The City of Edmonton. "History of ETS". Archived from the original on March 14, 2016. Retrieved August 14, 2012. "LRT ridership increases, but overall Edmonton Transit use down slightly". Edmonton Journal. Retrieved September 30, 2020. "City Council Minutes – June 18, 2008". City of Edmonton. June 18, 2008. Archived from the original on July 6, 2011. Retrieved September 19, 2010. "Last Day of Trolley Operations". City of Edmonton. Archived from the original on June 16, 2011. Retrieved September 5, 2009. "Trolleys reach end of the line". Edmonton Journal. June 19, 2008. Archived from the original on July 28, 2011. Retrieved September 19, 2010. Edmonton, City of (September 30, 2020). "Future LRT". www.edmonton.ca. Retrieved September 30, 2020. Edmonton, City of (September 30, 2020). "History of ETS". www.edmonton.ca. Retrieved September 30, 2020. Edmonton Transit System's LRT History. "Edmonton Transit System's LRT History". Archived from the original on October 8, 2008. Retrieved March 7, 2009. Edmonton's Light Rail Transit From Concept to Operations (1981). Edmonton's Light Rail Transit From Concept to Operations. National Academy of Sciences. ISBN 9780309032582. Retrieved March 7, 2009. "South LRT Extension" (PDF). City of Edmonton. Archived from the original (PDF) on April 24, 2013. Retrieved November 27, 2012. Edmonton, City of (May 16, 2020). "Valley Line". www.edmonton.ca. Retrieved May 16, 2020. "Edmonton's Valley Line Southeast LRT set to open Nov. 4". CBC. October 24, 2023. Retrieved October 24, 2023. Edmonton, City of (May 16, 2020). "Valley Line – West". www.edmonton.ca. Retrieved May 16, 2020. Dyer, Kelsey (January 28, 2021). "Regional transit commission approved by the Alberta government". Edmonton. Retrieved February 16, 2021. Edmonton Transit System Advisory Board. "Edmonton Transit System Advisory Board" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on March 26, 2009. Retrieved February 27, 2009. Trans Canada Yellowhead Highway Association. "Trans Canada Yellowhead Highway Association". Archived from the original on September 28, 2007. Retrieved March 7, 2009. Government of Alberta. "Alberta Highway 2" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on July 5, 2010. Retrieved March 23, 2009. Edmonton, City of (May 25, 2020). "Trails & Pathways". www.edmonton.ca. Retrieved May 25, 2020. The City of Edmonton. "Trails & Pathways". Archived from the original on May 3, 2014. Retrieved May 3, 2014. EPCOR. "EPCOR UV". Archived from the original on August 31, 2010. Retrieved November 2, 2010. Edmonton, City of (March 16, 2021). "Edmonton Cart Rollout". www.edmonton.ca. Retrieved March 16, 2021. "Waste cart rollout starts Monday as Edmonton begins transition to source-separated collection". edmontonjournal. Retrieved March 16, 2021. Edmonton, City of (September 14, 2021). "Cart rollout delivers to more than 250,000 Edmonton households in six months". Transforming Edmonton. Retrieved September 14, 2021. Edmonton, City of (August 3, 2021). "New sorting stations a colourful addition to Edmonton's waste diversion story". Transforming Edmonton. Retrieved August 3, 2021. "Waste collection missed for about 13,000 southwest Edmonton homes last week due to contractor challenges adjusting to new system". edmontonjournal. Retrieved September 14, 2021. Edmonton, City of (March 16, 2021). "Organics Processing Program". www.edmonton.ca. Retrieved March 16, 2021. Edmonton, City of (March 16, 2021). "Apartment and Condo Communal Waste Collection". www.edmonton.ca. Retrieved March 16, 2021. Edmonton, City of (March 16, 2021). "Commercial Waste Management Services". www.edmonton.ca. Retrieved March 16, 2021. "Organics pilot project sets the tone for Edmonton's future waste system | CBC News". CBC. Retrieved March 16, 2021. City of Edmonton. "Edmonton Composting Facility". Archived from the original on September 21, 2010. Retrieved February 27, 2009. City of Edmonton. "Edmonton Composting Facility". Archived from the original on September 22, 2010. Retrieved February 27, 2009. "Edmonton Composting Facility shutting down immediately due to rotten roof". Global News. Retrieved May 16, 2020. Edmonton Waste Management Centre of Excellence. "Edmonton Waste Management Centre of Excellence". Archived from the original on January 6, 2009. Retrieved February 28, 2009. Capital Health. "Hospitals & Primary Care Facilities". Archived from the original on March 2, 2009. Retrieved February 27, 2009. Alberta Health Services (October 10, 2013). "AHS Edmonton Zone Brochure" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on April 8, 2016. Retrieved May 24, 2014. Edmonton Catholic Schools. "Edmonton Catholic Schools". Archived from the original on February 23, 2009. Retrieved February 28, 2009. "Edmonton Academy". Edmonton Academy. Archived from the original on May 14, 2008. Retrieved February 28, 2009. "About Us". Progressive Academy. Archived from the original on April 11, 2013. Retrieved January 24, 2013. "Welcome to Tempo School". Tempo School. Archived from the original on February 9, 2013. Retrieved January 24, 2013. "AASA | American Association of School Administrators". www.aasa.org. Retrieved April 9, 2020. "Alternative Programs Handbook" (PDF). Edmonton Public Schools. April 5, 2016. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 3, 2019. Retrieved March 31, 2020. "The Development of School-Based Management in the Edmonton Public School District". www.mun.ca. Retrieved March 31, 2020. "Retired Edmonton school superintendent bets he can overhaul massive Las Vegas school system". edmontonjournal.com. Retrieved March 31, 2020. Edmonton Society for Christian Education. "Edmonton Society for Christian Education". Archived from the original on September 25, 2012. Retrieved February 28, 2009. Edmonton Society for Christian Education. "Edmonton Society for Christian Education". Archived from the original on September 25, 2012. Retrieved April 18, 2010. Millwoods Christian School. "Millwoods Christian School". Archived from the original on January 25, 2010. Retrieved April 18, 2010. Home Schooling in Edmonton. "Home Schooling in Edmonton". Archived from the original on January 11, 2011. Retrieved February 28, 2009. "Publicly Funded Institutions". Alberta Enterprise and Advanced Education. Archived from the original on December 6, 2012. Retrieved November 19, 2012. "UA Locations". Athabasca University. Archived from the original on November 25, 2012. Retrieved November 19, 2012. "Faculty of Management Edmonton Campus". University of Lethbridge. Archived from the original on January 15, 2013. Retrieved November 19, 2012. "University Governance". University of Alberta. Archived from the original on November 12, 2012. Retrieved November 19, 2012. "Financial -UAlberta Facts". University of Alberta. Archived from the original on July 26, 2014. Retrieved July 19, 2014. "Facts | University of Alberta". www.ualberta.ca. Retrieved November 1, 2021. "About". UAlberta Extension. Retrieved November 1, 2021. "Distinctively U of A – UAlberta Facts". University of Alberta. Archived from the original on July 2, 2014. Retrieved July 19, 2014. "Facts and Figures – MacEwan University". www.macewan.ca. Archived from the original on November 1, 2021. Retrieved November 1, 2021. Northern Alberta Institute of Technology (January 1, 2021). "Quick Facts". NAIT. Retrieved November 1, 2021. "About Us – NorQuest College – Edmonton, Alberta". www.norquest.ca. Retrieved November 1, 2021. "Yellowhead Tribal College". Yellowhead Tribal College. Archived from the original on April 4, 2012. Retrieved April 10, 2012. "Existing Alberta Television Stations". Television Stations Listings. Canadian Communications Foundation. Archived from the original on July 24, 2005. Retrieved January 6, 2013. "Existing Northern Alberta Radio Stations". Radio Station history. Canadian Communications Foundation. Archived from the original on July 24, 2005. Retrieved January 6, 2013. "Postmedia-Sun Media deal officially closes". The Globe and Mail. April 13, 2015. Retrieved July 27, 2021. "Edmonton Journal cutting Sunday paper". CBC.ca. May 28, 2012. Archived from the original on May 25, 2014. Retrieved January 6, 2013. "About". Free Daily News Group Inc. Archived from the original on January 13, 2013. Retrieved January 6, 2013. Patil, Anjuli· (November 19, 2019). "Toronto Star shutting down StarMetro newspapers". CBC News. Retrieved May 9, 2020. "Newsweekly Directory". Association of Alternative Newsmedia. Archived from the original on October 2, 2013. Retrieved January 6, 2013. "Edmonton alt-paper Vue Weekly ends its run". Edmonton Journal. Retrieved May 10, 2020. "AWNA Member Listing". Alberta Weekly Newspaper Association. Archived from the original on August 12, 2013. Retrieved January 6, 2013. "Infofile Detail – Sister Cities". Edmonton Public Library. Archived from the original on April 5, 2016. Retrieved May 19, 2012. "Sister Cities". City of Edmonton. 2003. Archived from the original on October 6, 2003. Retrieved May 19, 2012. Aubrey, Merrily K (2004). Naming Edmonton : from Ada to Zoie. (Edmonton Historical Board. Heritage Sites Committee) University of Alberta Press. pp. 132, 277. ISBN 0-88864-423-X. Retrieved March 26, 2016. Edmonton. "Sister Cities of Nashville". SCNashville.org. Archived from the original on July 28, 2011. Retrieved August 3, 2011. "Gangwon – Alberta Relations" (PDF). Government of Alberta. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 26, 2014. Retrieved January 6, 2013. "Vriendschap Bergen op Zoom met Edmonton (Friendship Bergen op Zoom met Edmonton)" (in Dutch). BN DeStem. BN DeStem. July 21, 2013. Archived from the original on April 1, 2016. Retrieved March 26, 2016. "Edmonton, Canada". Sister Cities of Nashville. Archived from the original on May 22, 2018. Retrieved May 22, 2018. "World of Friendship reception". The Tennessean. Retrieved May 22, 2018. Aubrey, Merrily K (2004). Naming Edmonton : from Ada to Zoie. (Edmonton Historical Board. Heritage Sites Committee) University of Alberta Press. ISBN 0-88864-423-X. ASIN 088864423X. Retrieved April 13, 2017. Edmonton. Cashman, Tony (2002). Edmonton: stories from the river city. University of Alberta Press. ISBN 0-88864-392-6. ASIN 0888643926. Retrieved May 10, 2012. Edmonton. Merrett, Kathryn Chase (2001). A history of the Edmonton City Market, 1900–2000. University of Calgary Press. ISBN 1-55238-052-1. ASIN 1552380521. Retrieved May 10, 2012. Rooke, Charlene (2001). Edmonton: secrets of the city. Arsenal Pulp Press. ISBN 1-55152-103-2. ASIN 1551521032. Retrieved April 13, 2017. Walls, Martha (2007). Edmonton Book of Everything. Maclntyre Purcell Publishing Inc. ISBN 978-0-9738063-4-2. ASIN 0973806346. Retrieved May 3, 2014. MacGregor, James G. (1975). Edmonton:a history. Hurtig. ISBN 0-888301-00-6. ASIN 0888301006. Retrieved April 13, 2017. Edmonton at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Travel information from Wikivoyage Official website