The domestic or domesticated rabbit—more commonly known as a pet rabbit, bunny, bun, or bunny rabbit—is the domesticated form of the European rabbit, a member of the lagomorph order. A male rabbit is known as a buck, a female is a doe, and a young rabbit is a kit. Rabbits were first used for their food and fur by the Romans, and have been kept as pets in Western nations since the early 1900s. Rabbits can be housed inside but the idea of the domestic rabbit as a house companion, a so-called house rabbit similar to a house cat, was promoted much later. Rabbits can be litter box-trained and taught to come when called, but they require exercise and can damage a house that has not been "rabbit proofed" based on their innate need to chew. Accidental interactions between pet rabbits and wild rabbits, while seemingly harmless, are usually strongly discouraged due to the species' different temperaments as well as wild rabbits potentially carrying diseases. Unwanted pet rabbits end up in animal shelters, especially after the Easter season (see Easter Bunny). In 2017, they were the United States' third most abandoned pet. Some of them go on to be adopted and become family pets in various forms. Because their wild counterparts have become invasive in Australia, pet rabbits are banned in the state of Queensland. Pet rabbits, being a domesticated breed that lack survival instincts, do not fare well in the wild if they are abandoned or escape from captivity. Phoenician sailors visiting the coast of Spain c. 12th century BC, mistaking the European rabbit for a species from their homeland (the rock hyrax Procavia capensis), gave it the name i-shepan-ham (land or island of hyraxes). The captivity of rabbits as a food source is recorded as early as the 1st century BC, when the Roman writer Pliny the Elder described the use of rabbit hutches, along with enclosures called leporaria [fr]. A controversial theory is that a corruption of the rabbit's name used by the Romans became the Latin name for the peninsula, Hispania. In Rome, rabbits were raised in large walled colonies with walls extended underground. According to Pliny, the consumption of unborn and newborn rabbits, called laurices, was considered a delicacy. Evidence for the domestic rabbit is rather late. In the Middle Ages, wild rabbits were often kept for the hunt. Monks in southern France were crossbreeding rabbits at least by the 12th century AD. Domestication was probably a slow process that took place from the Roman period (or earlier) until the 1500s. In the 19th century, as animal fancy in general began to emerge, rabbit fanciers began to sponsor rabbit exhibitions and fairs in Western Europe and the United States. Breeds of various domesticated animals were created and modified for the added purpose of exhibition, a departure from the breeds that had been created solely for food, fur, or wool. The rabbit's emergence as a household pet began during the Victorian era. The keeping of the rabbit as a pet commencing from the 1800s coincides with the first observable skeletal differences between the wild and domestic populations, even though captive rabbits had been exploited for over 2,000 years. Domestic rabbits have been popular in the United States since the late 19th century. What became known as the "Belgian Hare Boom" began with the importation of the first Belgian Hares from England in 1888 and, soon after, the founding of the American Belgian Hare Association, the first rabbit club in America. From 1898 to 1901, many thousands of Belgian Hares were imported to America. Today, the Belgian Hare is one of the rarest breeds, with only 132 specimens found in the United States in a 2015 census. The American Rabbit Breeders Association (ARBA) was founded in 1910 and is the national authority on rabbit raising and rabbit breeds having a uniform Standard of Perfection, registration and judging system. The domestic rabbit continues to be popular as a show animal and pet. Many thousand rabbit shows occur each year and are sanctioned in Canada and the United States by the ARBA. Today, the domesticated rabbit is the third most popular mammalian pet in Britain after dogs and cats. Rabbits have been, and continue to be, used in laboratory work such as the production of antibodies for vaccines and research of human male reproductive system toxicology. The Environmental Health Perspective, published by the National Institute of Health, states, "The rabbit [is] an extremely valuable model for studying the effects of chemicals or other stimuli on the male reproductive system." According to the Humane Society of the United States, rabbits are also used extensively in the study of bronchial asthma, stroke prevention treatments, cystic fibrosis, diabetes, and cancer. Animal rights activists have opposed animal experimentation for non-medical purposes, such as the testing of cosmetic and cleaning products, which has resulted in decreased use of rabbits in these areas. Male rabbits are called bucks; females are called does. An older term for an adult rabbit is coney, while rabbit once referred only to the young animals. Another term for a young rabbit is bunny, though this term is often applied informally (especially by children and rabbit enthusiasts) to rabbits generally, especially domestic ones. More recently, the term kit or kitten has been used to refer to a young rabbit. A young hare is called a leveret; this term is sometimes informally applied to a young rabbit as well. A group of rabbits is known as a "colony" or a "nest". The study of rabbit genetics is of interest to fanciers, the fiber and fur industry, medical researchers, and the meat industry. Among rabbit fanciers, the genetics of rabbit health and diversity are paramount. The fiber & fur industry focuses on the genetics of coat color and hair properties. In the biomedical research community and the pharmaceutical industry, rabbit genetics are important in model organism research, antibody production, and toxicity testing. The meat industry relies on genetics for disease resistance, feed conversion ratios, and reproduction potential in rabbits. The rabbit genome has been sequenced and is publicly available. The mitochondrial DNA has also been sequenced. In 2011, parts of the rabbit genome were re-sequenced in greater depth in order to expose variation within the genome. Rabbit Coat Pattern & Color Genes Gene = du Pattern: Dutch Gene = B Color: Black (on white) Gene = e(j) Pattern: Harlequin Gene = Enen Pattern: Broken Gene = D Color: Chocolate (on white) Gene = si Silvering of the hair shaft There are 11 color gene groups (or loci) in rabbits. A rabbit's coat has either two pigments (pheomelanin for yellow, and eumelanin for dark brown) or no pigment (for an albino rabbit). Clusters of color genes plus their modifiers control such aspects as coat patterns (e.g. Dutch or English markings), color hues and their intensity or dilution, and the location of color bands on the hair shaft (e.g., silvering). As a refinement of the diet of the wild rabbit, the diet of the domestic rabbit is often a function of its purpose. Show rabbits are fed for vibrant health, strong musculoskeletal systems, and—like rabbits intended for the fur trade—optimal coat production and condition. Rabbits intended for the meat trade are fed for swift and efficient production of flesh, while rabbits in research settings have closely controlled diets for specific goals. Nutritional needs of the domestic rabbit may also be focused on developing a physique that allows for the safe delivery of larger litters of healthy kits. Optimizing costs and producing feces that meet local waste regulations may also be factors. The diet of a pet rabbit, too, is geared toward its purpose—as a healthy and long-lived companion. Hay is an essential part of the diet of all rabbits and it is a major component of the commercial food pellets that are formulated for domestic rabbits and available in many areas. Pellets are typically fed to adult rabbits in limited quantities once or twice a day, to mimic their natural behavior and to prevent obesity. It is recommended only a teaspoon to an egg cup full of pellets is fed to adult rabbits each day. Most rabbit pellets are alfalfa-based for protein and fiber, with other grains completing the carbohydrate requirements. "Muesli" style rabbit foods are also available; these contain separate components—e.g., dried carrot, pea flakes and hay pellets as opposed to a uniform pellet. These are not recommended as rabbits will choose favored parts and leave the rest. Muesli style feeds are often lower in fiber than pelleted versions of rabbit food. Additionally, numerous studies have found they increase the risk of obesity and dental disease. Minerals and vitamins are added during production of rabbit pellets to meet the nutritional requirements of the domestic rabbit. Along with pellets, many commercial rabbit raisers also feed one or more types of loose hay, for its freshness and important cellulose components. Alfalfa in particular is recommended for the growth needs of young rabbits. Alfalfa hay is not recommended for adult rabbits, as it is too rich in protein and too high in calcium. Grass hays are best because they are lower in protein and calcium. Common sources of hay for rabbits include bluegrass, brome, fescue, marsh, orchard, timothy, oat and ryegrass. Offering a diversity of hay is important nutritionally. A diversity of hay also desensitizes rabbits to small changes in smell and texture, resulting in good, consistent eaters. Easily digestible food is processed in the gastrointestinal tract & expelled as regular feces. But in order to get nutrients out of hard to digest fiber, rabbits ferment fiber in the cecum (in the GI tract) and then expel the contents as cecotropes, which are reingested (cecotrophy). The cecotropes are then absorbed in the small intestine to utilize the nutrients. Rabbits are prolific breeders, in part because rabbits reach breeding age quickly. To prevent unwanted offspring, rabbits may be spayed or neutered at sexual maturity. Sexual maturity is determined as the point at which the production rate of spermatozoa stops increasing, which ranges based on the size of the breed: 4–5 months for small breeds (e.g., Mini Rex, Netherland Dwarf), 4–6 months for medium-sized breeds (e.g., Rex, New Zealand), and 5–8 months for large breeds (e.g., Flemish Giant). Bucks usually require more time to sexually mature than does. Like all mammals, rabbits produce milk for their young. Female rabbits have six to eight nipples and can produce milk for more than six weeks after birthing. Rabbit milk is relatively high in fat, as a percentage by mass. While most herbivores produce approximately 5% milk fat, rabbits produce 12%. The excerpted table below compares milk characteristics among mammals. Disease is rare when rabbits are raised in sanitary conditions and provided with adequate care. Rabbits have fragile bones, especially in their spines, and need support on the bottom when they are picked up. Rabbits will gnaw on almost anything, including electrical cords (possibly leading to electrocution), potentially poisonous plants, and material like carpet and fabric that may cause life-threatening intestinal blockages, so areas to which they have access need to be pet-proofed. Neutering is possible for both female and male rabbits; however, spaying females can pose significant risks. This is because spaying female rabbits requires a far bigger surgery with a higher mortality rate (during or in relation to the procedure) compared to males, as their lower abdomen needs to be opened up in order to remove ovaries and uterus. In addition, spaying is known to have severe negative effects on a female rabbit's health. One particularly dangerous consequence is the development of osteoporosis due to the lack of estrogen caused by the removal of the ovaries, which, among other things, greatly increases the risk of dental problems and bone fractures. Other negative health outcomes that have been reported include colonic obstruction, urinary incontinence, ureteral stenosis, increased ageing of ligaments, and alterations of the rabbit's cornea. In general, due to the wide range and severity of possible negative health effects and the high risk for complications from anesthesia and the surgery itself, spaying female rabbits should only be considered in case of acute medical reasons (e.g., ovarian or uterine cancer), if they show signs of hormonal problems, like overly frequent phases of heat or pseudopregnancies, or unusually aggressive behavior, which cannot be attributed to environmental factors, e.g., a lack of exercise. As of today, assertions of female rabbits near inevitably developing cancer if left unneutered, as well as neutered females living longer, have no scientific foundation. However, castration of male pet rabbits is necessary, if they are to be kept species-appropriate (together with at least one other rabbit), which wouldn't otherwise be possible. Uncastrated male rabbits will engage in severe and often bloody fights with each other upon reaching adulthood, which can even end fatally. To prevent uncontrolled reproduction, it is advised to castrate males instead of females, as the necessary procedure, which requires only a small incision, has proven to be relatively safe and to have far less adverse effects on the rabbit's overall health. In most jurisdictions, including the United States (except where required by local animal control ordinances), rabbits do not require vaccination. Vaccinations exist for both rabbit hemorrhagic disease and myxomatosis. These vaccinations are usually given annually, two weeks apart. If there is an outbreak of myxomatosis locally, this vaccine can be administered every six months for extra protection. Myxomatosis immunizations are not available in all countries, including Australia, due to fears that immunity will pass on to feral rabbits. However, they are recommended by some veterinarians as prophylactics, where they are legally available.: 182  A rabbit cannot be declawed. Lacking pads on the bottoms of its feet, a rabbit requires its claws for traction. Removing its claws would render it unable to stand. Coping with stress is a key aspect of rabbit behavior, and this can be traced to part of the brain known as ventral tegmental area (VTA). Dopaminergic neurons in this part of the brain release the hormone dopamine. In rabbits, it is released as part of a coping mechanism while in a heightened state of fear or stress, and has a calming effect. Dopamine has also been found in the rabbit's medial prefrontal cortex, the nucleus accumbens, and the amygdala. Tonic immobility (TI) is sometimes called "trancing" or "playing dead". Physiological and behavioral responses to human-induced TI have been found to indicate a fear-motivated stress state in rabbits. Accordingly, even though people think the rabbits enjoy it, the promotion of TI to try to increase a bond between rabbits and their owners is misplaced. However, some researchers conclude that inducing TI in rabbits is appropriate for certain medical procedures, as it holds less risk than anesthesia. The formation of open sores on the rabbit's hocks, commonly called sore hocks, is a problem that commonly afflicts mostly heavy-weight rabbits kept in cages with wire flooring or soiled solid flooring. The problem is most prevalent in rex-furred rabbits and heavy-weight rabbits (over 4 kg (9 lb)), as well as those with thin foot bristles. The condition results when, over the course of time, the protective bristle-like fur on the rabbit's hocks thins down. Standing urine or other unsanitary cage conditions can exacerbate the problem by irritating the sensitive skin. The exposed skin in turn can result in tender areas or, in severe cases, open sores, which may then become infected and abscessed if not properly cared for. Gastrointestinal stasis (GI stasis) is a serious and potentially fatal condition that occurs in some rabbits in which gut motility is severely reduced and possibly completely stopped. When untreated or improperly treated, GI stasis can be fatal in as little as 24 hours. GI stasis is the condition of food not moving through the gut as quickly as normal. The gut contents may dehydrate and compact into a hard, immobile mass (impacted gut), blocking the digestive tract of the rabbit. Food in an immobile gut may also ferment, causing significant gas buildup and resultant gas pain for the rabbit. The first noticeable symptom of GI stasis may be that the rabbit suddenly stops eating. Treatment frequently includes intravenous or subcutaneous fluid therapy (rehydration through injection of a balanced electrolyte solution), pain control, possible careful massage to promote gas expulsion and comfort, drugs to promote gut motility, and careful monitoring of all inputs and outputs. The rabbit's diet may also be changed as part of treatment, to include force-feeding to ensure adequate nutrition. Surgery to remove the blockage is not generally recommended and comes with a poor prognosis. Some rabbits are more prone to GI stasis than others. The causes of GI stasis are not completely understood, but common contributing factors are thought to include stress, reduced food intake, low fiber in the diet, dehydration, reduction in exercise or blockage caused by excess fur or carpet ingestion. Stress factors can include changes in housing, transportation, or medical procedures under anesthesia. As many of these factors may occur together (poor dental structure leading to decreased food intake, followed by a stressful veterinary dental procedure to correct the dental problem), establishing a root cause may be difficult. GI stasis is sometimes misdiagnosed as "hair balls" by veterinarians or rabbit keepers not familiar with the condition. While fur is commonly found in the stomach following a fatal case of GI stasis, it is also found in healthy rabbits. Molting and chewing fur can be a predisposing factor in the occurrence of GI stasis; however, the primary cause is the change in motility of the gut. Dental disease has several causes, namely genetics, inappropriate diet, injury to the jaw, infection, or cancer. Malocclusion: Rabbit teeth are open-rooted and continue to grow throughout their lives, which is why they need constant abrasion. Since tooth enamel is the hardest substance in the body and much harder than anything a rabbit could chew, wearing down the teeth can only happen through chewing movements, i.e., by the teeth wearing down each other. If the teeth are not properly aligned, a condition called malocclusion, the necessary abrasion cannot happen naturally and needs to be done manually by an experienced veterinarian. Malocclusion can be either inborn or have a secondary cause. Inborn malocclusion usually presents as brachygnathism or prognathism and will generally show within the first few months of a rabbit's life. Any dental problems that start appearing in adult rabbits, however, cannot be inborn. The most common secondary causes of malocclusion are trauma (e.g., falls on the nose, nibbling on cage grids, clipping the teeth with unsuited tools), bacterial infection, and low-fiber diet. Molar spurs: These are caused by improper abrasion of the molars and can dig into the rabbit's tongue and/or cheek causing severe pain. They can develop into a secondary malocclusion and need to be filed down by an experienced veterinarian. If left untreated, molar spurs can be fatal. The underlying cause of molar spurs in rabbits without (inborn) malocclusion is usually a wrong diet. Since, as mentioned above, teeth cannot wear down on food, rabbits need high-fiber and other chewing intensive food, particularly hay, grass, potherbs, and herbs, to keep their teeth in shape. Some industrially produced ready-made rabbit foods, especially pellets and muesli, are very low-fiber and therefore are known to be one of the main causes of molar spurs and secondary malocclusion if fed over an extended period of time. Osteoporosis: Rabbits, especially neutered females and those that are kept indoors without adequate natural sunlight, can suffer from osteoporosis, in which holes appear in the skull by X-Ray imaging. This reflects the general thinning of the bone, and teeth will start to become looser in the sockets, making it uncomfortable and painful for the animal to chew hay. The inability to properly chew hay can result in molar spurs, as described above, and weight loss, leading into a downward spiral if not treated promptly. This can be reversible and treatable. A veterinary formulated liquid calcium supplement with vitamin D3 and magnesium can be given mixed with the rabbit's drinking water, once or twice per week, according to the veterinarian's instructions. The molar spurs should also be trimmed down by an experienced exotic veterinarian specialised in rabbit care, once every 1–2 months, depending on the case. Signs of dental difficulty include difficulty eating, weight loss and small stools and visibly overgrown teeth. However, there are many other causes of ptyalism, including pain due to other causes. An over-diagnosed ailment amongst rabbits is respiratory infection, known as rhinitis or colloquially as "snuffles". Pasteurella, a bacterium, was historically misdiagnosed as the main cause of respiratory disease in rabbits, as the bacterium is present in the respiratory tract of most adult rabbits. The bacterium may, under poor conditions, reproduce rapidly and produce symptoms of pasteurellosis, though this is known to be a factor in the overuse of antibiotics among rabbits and is not always the cause of respiratory disease. A runny nose, for instance, can have several causes, among those being high temperature or humidity, extreme stress, environmental pollution (like perfume or incense), a sinus infection or dental disorders. Options for treating this is removing the pollutant, lowering or raising the temperature accordingly, and medical treatment for sinus infections. Sneezing can be a sign of environmental pollution, such as too much dust or high ammonia levels. Runny eyes and other conjunctival problems can be caused by dental disease or a blockage of the tear duct. Environmental pollution, corneal disease, entropion, distichiasis, or inflammation of the eyes are also causes. Some conjunctival problems are effectively treated with topical or systemic gentamicin. Rabbits are subject to infection by a variety of viruses. Some have had deadly and widespread impact. Myxomatosis is a virulent threat to all rabbits but not to humans. The intentional introduction of myxomatosis in rabbit-ravaged Australia killed an estimated 500 million feral rabbits between 1950 and 1952. The Australian government will not allow veterinarians to purchase and use the myxomatosis vaccine that would protect domestic rabbits, for fear that this immunity would be spread into the wild via escaped livestock and pets. This potential consequence is also one motivation for the pet-rabbit ban in Queensland. In Australia, rabbits caged outdoors in areas with high numbers of mosquitoes are vulnerable to myxomatosis. In Europe, fleas are the carriers of myxomatosis. In some countries, annual vaccinations against myxomatosis are available. Rabbit hemorrhagic disease (RHD), also known as viral hemorrhagic disease (VHD) or rabbit calicivirus disease (RCD), is caused by a rabbit-specific calicivirus known as rabbit hemorrhagic disease virus (RHDV) or rabbit calicivirus (RCV). Discovered in 1983, RHD is highly infectious and usually fatal. Initial signs of the disease may be limited to fever and lethargy, until significant internal organ damage results in labored breathing, squealing, bloody mucus, and eventual coma and death. Internally, the infection causes necrosis of the liver and damages other organs, especially the spleen, kidneys, and small intestine. RHD, like myxomatosis, has been intentionally introduced to control feral rabbit populations in Australia and (illegally) in New Zealand, and RHD has, in some areas, escaped quarantine. The disease has killed tens of millions of rabbits in China (unintentionally) as well as Australia, with other epidemics reported in Bolivia, Mexico, South Korea, and continental Europe. Rabbit populations in New Zealand have bounced back after developing a genetic immunity to RHD, and the disease has, so far, had no effect on the genetically divergent native wild rabbits and hares in the Americas. In the United States, an October 2013 USDA document stated: RHD has been found in the United States as recently as 2010, and was detected in Canada in 2011. Thus far, outbreaks have been controlled quickly through quarantine, depopulation, disease tracing, and cleaning and disinfection; however, rabbit losses have been in the thousands. An RHD vaccine exists, but it is not recommended for use where the disease is not widespread in wildlife, as it may hide signs of disease and is not considered a practical response for such a rapidly spreading disease. In the UK, reports of RHD (as recently as February 2018) have been submitted to the British Rabbit Council's online "Notice Board". Vaccines for RHD are available—and mandatory—in the UK. A new strain of the virus has been discovered, called rabbit hemorrhagic disease virus 2 (RHDV2). West Nile virus is another threat to domestic as well as wild rabbits. It is a fatal disease, and while vaccines are available for other species, there are none yet specifically indicated for rabbits. Wry neck (or head tilt or torticollis) is a condition in rabbits that can be fatal, due to the resulting disorientation that causes the animal to stop eating, drinking or performing other tasks, or through other afflictions causing the condition, such as pasteurellosis. The causes of wry neck can be middle- or inner-ear infections, ear mites (Psoroptes cuniculi), nematodes (roundworms, Baylisascaris procyonis), cancer (in brain, neck, ear), cervical muscle contractions, ingestion of lead or toxic plants, or diseases or injuries affecting the brain (stroke, abscess, tumor, trauma). However, the most common cause is a parasitic microscopic fungus called Encephalitozoon cuniculi (E. cuniculi). Note that: "despite approximately half of all pet rabbits carrying the infection, only a small proportion of these cases ever show any illness". Symptoms may include drinking more water than usual, frequent peeing, seizures and even complete paralysis. Stressful situations may worsen the symptoms. There is a precedent for antibiotic treatment against E. cuniculi in rabbits exhibiting symptoms of torticollis. The usual drugs for treatment and prevention are the benzimidazole anthelmintics, particularly fenbendazole (also used as a deworming agent in other animal species). In the UK, fenbendazole (under the brand name Panacur Rabbit) is sold over-the-counter in oral paste form as a nine-day treatment. Fenbendazole is particularly recommended for rabbits kept in colonies and as a preventive before mixing new rabbits with each other, and there have been anecdotal reports of successful treatments with ponazuril. Ear Canker is caused by nonburrowing ear mites Psoroptes cuniculi. It causes severe scabbing and inflammation on the ears and is very painful. Infected rabbits scratch a lot, which causes secondary bacterial infections. Rabbits should be treated as soon as possible, as the mites & infections can cause severe complications. It can also cause Wry neck (as described above). Fur mites can be any of a variety of species including Leporacarus gibbus, but most commonly Cheyletiella parasitivorax. C. parasitivorax do not burrow into the skin but rather live in the keratin layer. They can cause dandruff, itching and fur loss. Diagnosis is not easy & it might take several tries to determine if mites are present. Sarcoptic mange (also known as scabies) is usually caused by the burrowing mite Sarcoptes scabiei (also known as S. scabei). Symptoms are beige crusts around the borders of the ears, edges of the eyelids, the nose, mouth and toes. Also loss of fur. Scratching can lead to secondary bacterial infection. If untreated, the crusts can cover extensive areas of the body. Even mild cases should be treated as soon a possible. Tropical rat mites (Ornithonyssus bacoti) (and pigeon mites) cause severe itching. While rabbits can be easily treated (described below), to prevent reinfection, the host species (e.g., rat, pigeon) must also be treated or removed. Burrowing mange mites (Trixacarus caviae) are rare in rabbits but can cause such painful itching that the rabbit can become aggressive. All mites that infect rabbits can be treated by drugs given orally, by injection or applied on the skin (most common treatment), at intervals, as dictated by a veterinarian. The environment must also be treated. Fly strike, or blowfly (Lucilia sericata) strike, is a condition that occurs when flies lay their eggs in a rabbit's damp or soiled fur, or in an open wound. Within 12 hours, the eggs hatch into the larval stage of the fly, known as maggots. Initially small but quickly growing to 15 mm (0.59 in) long, maggots can burrow into skin and feed on an animal's tissue, leading to shock and death. The most susceptible rabbits are those in unsanitary conditions, sedentary ones, and those unable to clean their excretory areas. Rabbits with diarrhea should be inspected often for fly strike, especially during the summer months. The topical treatment Rearguard (from Novartis) is approved in the United Kingdom for 10-week-per-application prevention of fly strike. Bot flies that infect rabbits (generally Cuterebra buccata) lay their eggs where rabbits live. The eggs hatch into larvae which enter the rabbit through the nose, mouth or open wound. The larvae migrate within the rabbit to just under the skin, where it forms a visible bump with breathing hole. It feeds off of the rabbit's flesh and bodily fluids for up to 30 days, reaching up to 3 cm (1.2 in) long. It then exits through the hole, pupates in the ground & emerges as an adult. These bot flies live in the eastern US and Canada and as far west as Arizona. Whereas flystrike occurs in rabbits with soiled fur, bot flies can infect even very clean rabbits. Even before the bump and hole are visible, the larvae are very painful and the rabbit may become depressed, weak, lose weight or even go into shock. The hole may become moist and cause secondary bacterial or fungal infections. The larvae can also migrate to the nasal cavity, eyes, trachea and brain. Larvae are typically treated through careful removal by a veterinarian when they are identified. If the larvae are damaged, the rabbit can die from an anaphylactic reaction. The most common tumor type of rabbits is uterine adenomcarcinoma, followed by neoplasia in hematopoietic organs, skin, mammary gland, testes, and the digestive system. Subsequently, female intact rabbits have highest prevalence of neoplasia (19.7%) as compared to all sex combined (prevalence: 14.4%). Overall prevalence of neoplasia continuously increases with age and may affect up to 45% of rabbits older than 6 years. Histologic criteria of malignancy is present in most tumor specimens and distant spread to other organs is common for lymphoma and uterine adenocarcinoma. Lymphoma commonly occur in younger rabbits and frequently affect lymph nodes, gastrointestinal tract, kidneys, spleen, and liver. As of 2017, there were at least 305 breeds of domestic rabbit in 70 countries around the world. The American Rabbit Breeders Association currently recognizes 52 rabbit breeds and the British Rabbit Council recognizes 106. Selective breeding has produced rabbits ranging in size from dwarf to giant. Across the world, rabbits are raised as livestock (in cuniculture) for their meat, pelts, and wool, and also by fanciers and hobbyists as pets. Rabbits have been selectively bred since ancient times to achieve certain desired characteristics. Variations include size and body shape, coat type (including hair length and texture), coat color, ear carriage (erect or lop), and ear length. As with any animal, domesticated rabbits' temperaments vary in such factors as energy level and novelty seeking. Many genetic defects in the domestic rabbit (such as dental problems in the Holland Lop breed) are due to recessive genes. Genetics are carefully tracked by fanciers who show rabbits, to breed out defects. Rabbits have been kept as pets in Western nations since the 19th century, but because of the destructive history of feral rabbits in Australia, domestic rabbits are illegal as pets in Queensland. Rabbits can bond with humans, can learn to follow simple voice commands and to come when called,: 166  and are curious and playful. Rabbits, like many other pets, do not make good pets for small children because rabbits are fragile and easily injured by rough handling, can bite when hurt or frightened, and are easily frightened by loud noises and sudden motions. With the right guidance, rabbits can be trained to live indoors perfectly. Rabbits are especially popular as pets in the United States during the Easter season, due to their association with the holiday. However, animal shelters that accept rabbits often complain that during the weeks and months following Easter, there is a rise in unwanted and neglected rabbits that were bought as Easter gifts, especially for children. Similar problems arise in rural areas after county fairs and the like, in jurisdictions where rabbits are legal prizes in fairground games. Thus, there are many humane societies, animal shelters, and rescue groups that have rabbits available for pet adoption. Fancy rabbit breeds are often purchased from pet stores, private breeders, and fanciers. Rabbits may be kept inside as small house pets. Rabbits that live indoors are less exposed to the dangers of predators, parasites, diseases, adverse weather, and pesticides, which in turn increases their lifespan. Cages are generally too small so it is recommended that instead of a cage, domestic rabbits free-roam. If they must be kept in a cage, they should be let out regularly for needed exercise. All areas should be "rabbit-proofed" to reduce the risks associated with their intrinsic need to chew. Rabbits are easily litter box trained. Rabbits are often compatible with others of their kind, or with birds or guinea pigs, but opinion differs regarding the dangers of housing different species together. For example, while rabbits can synthesize their own vitamin C, guinea pigs cannot, so the two species should not be fed the same diet. Also, most rabbits tend to be stronger than guinea pigs, so this may cause deliberate or inadvertent injury. Some people consider rabbits a pocket pet even though they are rather large. Rabbits as house companions began appearing with frequency in the late 19th century. The most notable documentation is from Beatrix Potter's published diaries and letters. Potter allowed both rabbits to live at least part time in the house with her. "Both were fond of the fire, and one used to lie inside the fender", and one rabbit slept, "under the grate on the hot ashes when the fire had gone out." The strongest push to keep rabbits as litter-trained spayed and neutered indoor pets came with the publication of Marinell Harriman's House Rabbit Handbook: How to Live with an Urban Rabbit in 1985. As the domestic descendants of wild prey animals, rabbits are alert, timid creatures that startle fairly easily, and many of their behaviors are triggered by the fight-or-flight response to perceived threats. According to the House Rabbit Society, the owner of a pet rabbit can use various behavioral approaches to gain the animal's trust and reduce aggression, though this can be a long and difficult process. In addition, there is evidence to suggest that young rabbits that occupy the periphery of the "litter huddle" obtain less milk from the mother and, as a result, have a lower weight. It has been suggested that this factor may contribute to behavioural differences in litter mates during adolescence. When bonding two rabbits, the journey usually commences with carefully supervised meetings on neutral territory. This helps minimize territorial aggression and allows the rabbits to establish a hierarchy. Over time, through these encounters, the rabbits will learn to tolerate with each other's presence, form a social bond, and engage in vital social behaviors such as grooming, playing, and snuggling. Once a successful bond is established, the rabbits can progress to sharing the same habitat, enabling them to coexist as companions in a safe and contented environment. However, not all bonding attempts result in success, and sometimes bonds may break due to various factors, including personality clashes or stress. In such cases, it is essential to carefully assess the situation and, if necessary, seek guidance from experienced rabbit caregivers or veterinarians to provide the best possible care for the rabbits involved. During bonding, as rabbits become more comfortable with each other's presence, they often engage in mutual grooming sessions. On the flip side, when rabbit bonds break, it can have detrimental effects on their physical and emotional well-being. Rabbits are highly social animals, and sudden separation from a bonded partner can cause stress and anxiety. This stress can lead to health issues, such as gastrointestinal problems, reduced appetite, and even a weakened immune system. Additionally, the sudden absence of a grooming partner can result in neglected fur, making the rabbit more susceptible to matting and skin issues. Not all veterinarians will treat rabbits, and pet owners may have to seek out an exotic animal veterinarian for their rabbit's care. Rabbits need annual checkups at the veterinarian because they may hide signs of illness or disease. They should be given things to chew on, the owner should check their teeth every month and they should have their nails trimmed every 6–8 weeks. They should be groomed every week; however, during their molts they should be groomed every day. Baby rabbits under eight weeks old should be watched for enteritis along with gut stasis and bloat. Pet rabbits can often exhibit behaviour problems, including aggression towards humans and conspecifics, particularly with poor husbandry. Rabbit owners can seek behaviour help through their vets and rabbit behaviourists. Some advantages of keeping rabbits as pets is that they can be friendly, sociable and playful. They may or may not react favorably to handling and petting, depending on their personality and how they were raised. There are many different sizes and characteristics available, owing to a long history of breeding. Rabbits can be friendly to each other, especially when introduced while young, and are often compatible with other pets given time and space. Rabbits are herbivores and their diet is relatively simple. Compared to other small animals kept as pets, rabbits are physically robust creatures with strong hind legs that enable them to run fast, and they have powerful teeth. Rabbits breed rapidly and so it is often easy, and affordable, to find one to buy or adopt; however, since they are a social species, it is better to keep at least 2 rabbits. A disadvantage of keeping rabbits as pets is that they may chew things in the house. Rabbits chew as a natural behavior to maintain their dental health and must be provided with a healthy way to do so. Rabbits can potentially be aggressive and territorial, and unneutered male rabbits may spray their territory with a strong-smelling urine. Unspayed female urine is also pungent, and a litter box may smell and requires training to use. Additonally, fearful rabbits can bite and scratch, and may do so to communicate displeasure. Rabbits should never be picked up by the ears or the "scruff" on the back of their neck, as their skeletons are light and fragile in comparison to their bodies, and are susceptible to trauma from falling, twisting and kicking. They have to be picked up and handled properly to avoid injury to the rabbit or the owner. Rabbits have needs that differ from other common household pets, which can lead to poor quality of life for the animal if their owners are unaware of these needs and often results in rabbits being returned to animal shelters. Inappropriate treatment of a rabbit can include inadequate diet, housing, or socialisation. A lack of knowledge may also lead to improper treatment and health care for rabbits. Rabbits also have a body language that is more subtle than that of common domestic pets, such as cats and dogs, and compared to these species are prey animals rather than predators, which poses different challenges to a potential owner. Rabbits have been kept as livestock since ancient times for their meat, wool, and fur. In modern times, rabbits are also utilized in scientific research as laboratory animals. Breeds such as the New Zealand and Californian are frequently utilized for meat in commercial rabbitries. These breeds have efficient metabolisms and grow quickly; they are ready for slaughter by approximately 14 to 16 weeks of age. The main consumer of rabbit meat in the world was China, as of 2017. Rabbit fryers are rabbits that are between 70 and 90 days of age, and weighing between 3–5 lb (1.4–2.3 kg) live weight. Rabbit roasters are rabbits from 90 days to 6 months of age weighing between 5–8 lb (2.3–3.6 kg) live weight. Rabbit stewers are rabbits from 6 months on weighing over 8 lb (3.6 kg). Any type of rabbit can be slaughtered for meat, but those exhibiting the "commercial" body type are most commonly raised for meat purposes. Dark fryers (any other color but albino whites) are sometimes lower in price than albino fryers because of the slightly darker tinge of the fryer (purely pink carcasses are preferred by consumers) and because the dark hairs are easier to see than if there are residual white hairs on the carcass. There is no difference in skinability. Rabbits such as the Angora, American Fuzzy Lop, and Jersey Wooly produce wool. However, since the American Fuzzy Lop and Jersey Wooly are both dwarf breeds, only the much larger Angora breeds such as the English Angora, Satin Angora, Giant Angora, and French Angoras are used for commercial wool production. Their long fur is sheared, combed, or plucked (gently pulling loose hairs from the body during molting) and then spun into yarn used to make a variety of products. Angora sweaters can be purchased in many clothing stores and is generally mixed with other types of wool due to the poor durability of angora fibers on their own. Rabbit breeds that were developed for their fur qualities include the Rex with its plush texture, the Satin with its lustrous color, and the Chinchilla for its exotic pattern. White rabbit fur may be dyed in an array of colors that are not produced naturally. Rabbits in the fur industry are fed a diet focused for robust coat production and pelts are harvested after the rabbit reaches prime condition, which takes longer than in the meat industry. Rabbit fur is used in local and commercial textile industries throughout the world. Rabbits have been and continue to be used in laboratory work such as production of antibodies for vaccines and research of human male reproductive system toxicology. In 1972, around 450,000 rabbits were used for experiments in the United States, decreasing to around 240,000 in 2006. The Environmental Health Perspective, published by the National Institute of Health, states, "The rabbit [is] an extremely valuable model for studying the effects of chemicals or other stimuli on the male reproductive system." According to the Humane Society of the United States, rabbits are also used extensively in the study of bronchial asthma, stroke prevention treatments, cystic fibrosis, diabetes, and cancer. The New Zealand White is one of the most commonly used breeds for research and testing. The use of rabbits for the Draize test, a method of testing cosmetics on animals, has been cited as an example of cruelty in animal research by animal rights activists. Albino rabbits are typically used in the Draize tests because they have less tear flow than other animals, and the lack of eye pigment makes the effects easier to visualize. Rabbits can live outdoors in properly constructed, sheltered hutches, which provide protection from the elements in winter and keep rabbits cool in summer heat. To protect from predators, rabbit hutches are usually situated in a fenced yard, shed, barn, or other enclosed structure, which may also contain a larger pen for exercise. Rabbits in such an environment can alternatively be allowed to roam the secured area freely, and simply be provided with an adapted doghouse for shelter. A more elaborate setup is an artificial warren. Inside housing is discussed in House rabbits. Rabbit show jumping, a form of animal sport between rabbits, began in the 1970s and has since become popular in Europe, particularly Sweden and the United Kingdom. When rabbit jumping was first starting out, the rules of competition were the same as horse jumping rules. However, rules were later changed to reflect a rabbit's abilities. The first national championship for rabbit show jumping was held in Stockholm, Sweden in 1987. Any rabbit, regardless of breed, may participate in this kind of competition, as it is based on athletic skill. Rabbits and hares portal Cuniculture Dwarf rabbit Lop rabbit Small pet Domestication of animals Domestic dog Domestic cat Domestic bird Irving-Pease, Evan K.; Frantz, Laurent A.F.; Sykes, Naomi; Callou, Cécile; Larson, Greger (2018). "Rabbits and the Specious Origins of Domestication". Trends in Ecology & Evolution. 33 (3): 149–152. doi:10.1016/j.tree.2017.12.009. ISSN 0169-5347. PMID 29454669. S2CID 3380288. "These Baby Bunny Hybrids Are 100% Adorable". 13 March 2015. "Can Wild and Domestic Rabbits Live Together?". 23 July 2019. "Here's why Easter Is bad for bunnies". Animals. 2017-04-12. Archived from the original on March 5, 2021. Retrieved 2021-12-21. Lovett, Ian (19 April 2014). "When Delight Turns to Reality, It's Goodbye, Easter Bunny". The New York Times. Retrieved 18 February 2018. "Rabbit Laws in QLD: Real life threat". Greencross Vets. Archived from the original on 19 February 2018. Retrieved 18 February 2018. Plummer, D. Brian (David Brian) (2001). In pursuit of Coney. [Place of publication not identified]: Coch-y-Bonddu Books. p. 1. ISBN 978-0-9533648-8-6. OCLC 786137135. Anthon, Charles (1850). A System of Ancient and Mediæval Geography for the Use of Schools and Colleges. New York: Harper. p. 14. Moore, Lucile C. (2005). A House Rabbit Primer: Understanding and Caring for your Companion Rabbit. Santa Monica, CA: Santa Monica Press, LLC. pp. 19–20. ISBN 1595808736. Pliny, the Elder, Natural history, 8.81 (55) The different species of hares, online: http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3Atext%3A1999.02.0137%3Abook%3D8%3Achapter%3D81 Irving-Pease, Evan K.; Frantz, Laurent A. F.; Sykes, Naomi; Callou, Cécile; Larson, Greger (1 March 2018). "Rabbits and the Specious Origins of Domestication". Trends in Ecology & Evolution. 33 (3): 149–152. doi:10.1016/j.tree.2017.12.009. ISSN 0169-5347. PMID 29454669. S2CID 3380288. Amato, Sarah (2015). Beastly Possessions : Animals In Victorian Consumer Culture. Toronto, Canada: University Of Toronto Press. pp. 31–32. ISBN 978-1-4426-1760-5. OCLC 1124537499. "Heritage Rabbits - Belgian Hare". The Livestock Conservancy. Retrieved 21 February 2018. Status: Threatened "Hare Survey - Submitted by the Rare Breed Rabbits Group". American Belgian Hare Club. Archived from the original on 21 February 2018. Retrieved 21 February 2018. Franco, Nuno (19 March 2013). "Animal Experiments in Biomedical Research: A Historical Perspective". Animals. 3 (1): 238–273. doi:10.3390/ani3010238. PMC 4495509. PMID 26487317. "coney | Search Online Etymology Dictionary". www.etymonline.com. "The Collective Noun Page". Retrieved 30 January 2008. "Genome of Oryctolagus cuniculus (rabbit)". Washington, DC: United States National Institutes of Health. Retrieved 19 February 2018. Gissi, C.; Gullberg, A.; Arnason, U. (1998). "The complete mitochondrial DNA sequence of the rabbit, Oryctolagus cuniculus". Genomics. 50 (2): 161–169. doi:10.1006/geno.1998.5282. PMID 9653643. Carneiro, Miguel; Afonso, Sandra; Geraldes, Armando; Garreau, Hervé; Bolet, Gerard; Boucher, Samuel; Tircazes, Aurélie; Queney, Guillaume; Nachman, Michael W.; Ferrand, Nuno (2011). "The Genetic Structure of Domestic Rabbits". Molecular Biology and Evolution. 28 (6): 1801–1816. doi:10.1093/molbev/msr003. PMC 3695642. PMID 21216839. Maertens, L. (1999). "Towards reduced feeding costs, dietary safety and minimal mineral excretion in rabbits: A review". World Rabbit Science. 7 (2): 65–74. Retrieved 24 February 2018. "Nutrient Constrain Calculator For Rabbits". Bunnyhorde.com. 11 April 2021. Retrieved 15 June 2021. "Hay and Pellets: What do you feed a bunny?". IndianaHRS.org. House Rabbit Society, Indiana Chapter. Retrieved 24 February 2018. "Feeding Your Rabbit". Retrieved 12 October 2020. "The Importance Of Hay by House Rabbit Society". Retrieved 12 October 2020. "Exploring a Rabbit's Unique Digestive System". Rabbits for Dummies. Retrieved 2013-08-14. Nowland, Megan H.; Brammer, David W.; Garcia, Alexis; Rush, Howard G. (2015). "Biology and Diseases of Rabbits". Laboratory Animal Medicine: 411–461. doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-409527-4.00010-9. ISBN 978-0-12-409527-4. PMC 7150064. Amann, R. P.; Lambiase, J. T. (1967-10-01). "THE MALE RABBIT". Reproduction. 14 (2): 329–332. doi:10.1530/jrf.0.0140329. ISSN 1470-1626. Varga, Molly (2014). "Rabbit Basic Science". Textbook of Rabbit Medicine. 1.6.2.4. Sex, age and sexual maturity. doi:10.1016/B978-0-7020-4979-8.00001-7. ISBN 978-0-7020-4979-8. PMC 7158370. Maertens, L.; Labas, F.; Szendro, Z. S. (2006). "Rabbit Milk: A review of quantity, quality, and non-dietary affecting factors". World Rabbit Science. 14 (4): 207. doi:10.4995/wrs.2006.565. hdl:10251/9560. Bremel (University of Wisconsin), Robert D.; Jensen (Handbook of Milk Composition), R.G. "Milk Composition - Species Table". Lactation Biology. University of Illinois - Department of Animal Sciences. Archived from the original on 5 September 2015. Retrieved 19 February 2018. "Outdoor and Indoor Hazards". Rabbit.org. House Rabbit Society. 2 March 2013. Dawson, Bronwyn (10 July 2011). "Dealing with Medical Emergencies". House Rabbit Journal. II (4). House Rabbit Society. Retrieved 2 October 2015. A differently formatted version is also available here. Crowell-Davis, Sharon L. (January 2007). "Behavior Problems in Pet Rabbits". Journal of Exotic Pet Medicine. 16 (1): 38–44. doi:10.1053/j.jepm.2006.11.022. Streicher, Michael; Hach, Volker (2006). "Das Uterus-Adenokarzinom des Kaninchens". Kleintierpraxis. 51 (6): 3–8. Perpiñán, David (2019-04-02). "Rabbit neutering". Companion Animal. 24 (4): 217–225. doi:10.12968/coan.2019.24.4.217. ISSN 2053-0889. S2CID 243376323. Southard, Thomas E.; Southard, Karin A.; Krizan, Kenneth E.; Hillis, Stephen L.; Haller, John W.; Keller, John; Vannier, Michael W. (February 2000). "Mandibular bone density and fractal dimension in rabbits with induced osteoporosis". Oral Surgery, Oral Medicine, Oral Pathology, Oral Radiology, and Endodontology. 89 (2): 244–249. doi:10.1067/moe.2000.102223. PMID 10673664. Guzman, David Sanchez-Migallon; Graham, Jennifer E.; Keller, Krista; Hunt, Geraldine; Tong, Nathan; Morrisey, James K. (2015-01-01). "Colonic Obstruction Following Ovariohysterectomy in Rabbits: 3 Cases". Journal of Exotic Pet Medicine. Neurology. 24 (1): 112–119. doi:10.1053/j.jepm.2014.11.006. ISSN 1557-5063. Bujok, Jolanta; Wincewicz, Edyta; Czerski, Albert; Zawadzki, Wojciech (2016-02-01). "Influence of ovariohysterectomy and deslorelin acetate on the spontaneous activity of the rabbit urinary bladder in vitro". Theriogenology. 85 (3): 441–446. doi:10.1016/j.theriogenology.2015.09.018. ISSN 0093-691X. PMID 26474688. Duhamelle, Alexis; Tessier, Emilie; Larrat, Sylvain (2017-04-01). "Ureteral Stenosis Following Ovariohysterectomy in a Rabbit (Oryctolagus cuniculus)". Journal of Exotic Pet Medicine. 26 (2): 132–136. doi:10.1053/j.jepm.2017.01.022. ISSN 1557-5063. Lemmex, Devin B.; Ono, Yohei; Reno, Carol R.; Hart, David A.; Lo, Ian K. Y.; Thornton, Gail M. (2016-02-08). "Increased lubricin/proteoglycan 4 gene expression and decreased modulus in medial collateral ligaments following ovariohysterectomy in the adult rabbit: Evidence consistent with aging". Journal of Biomechanics. 49 (3): 382–387. doi:10.1016/j.jbiomech.2015.12.026. ISSN 0021-9290. PMID 26776933. Achari, Yamini; Reno, Carol R.; Tsao, Helen; Morck, Douglas W.; Hart, David A. (2008-03-06). "Influence of timing (pre-puberty or skeletal maturity) of ovariohysterectomy on mRNA levels in corneal tissues of female rabbits". Molecular Vision. 14: 443–455. ISSN 1090-0535. PMC 2268760. PMID 18334964. Fry, Deborah J N (2018-11-02). "Human-directed aggression in rabbits: a behavioural case study". Companion Animal. 23 (11): 644–648. doi:10.12968/coan.2018.23.11.644. ISSN 2053-0889. S2CID 150169140. Whitehead, Martin L. (February 2017). "Neutering of pet rabbits". Veterinary Record. 180 (8): 204–205. doi:10.1136/vr.j826. PMID 28235931. S2CID 46044895. Bradbury, A. G.; Dickens, G. J. E. (December 2016). "Should we advocate neutering for all pet rabbits?". Veterinary Record. 179 (25): 654–655. doi:10.1136/vr.i6680. PMID 28008120. S2CID 28921499. Whitehead, Martin L. (2015). "'80% of entire female rabbits get uterine adenocarcinoma.' A case report of a veterinary factoid" (PDF). Proceedings of the British Veterinary Zoological Society Conference, March 2015, Loughborough University: 37. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2023-01-21. Retrieved 2023-01-21. "British Veterinary Association Rabbit Care Downloads" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2005-01-25. "The importance of vaccination for your rabbit" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 February 2009. Retrieved 26 May 2008. Intervet vaccination literature.[full citation needed] Pavia, Audrey (2003). Rabbits for Dummies. New York: Wiley. ISBN 978-0-7645-0861-5. "Why Rabbits Should Not Be Declawed". www.rabbit.org. Archived from the original on 2018-02-20. Retrieved 2017-04-06. "Rabbit Care: Rabbit Never Do's". www.rabbitwise.org. Archived from the original on 2017-02-04. Retrieved 2017-04-06. Guarraci, F.; Knapp, B. (1999). "An electrophysiological characterization of ventral tegmental area dopaminergic neurons during differential pavlovian fear conditioning in the awake rabbit" (PDF). Behavioural Brain Research. 99 (2): 169–179. doi:10.1016/S0166-4328(98)00102-8. PMID 10512583. S2CID 10451981. "HopperHome" (PDF). 24 November 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2010-11-24. McBride, Anne; Day, Simone; McAdie, Tina; Meredith, Anna; Barley, Jasmine; Hickman, Janice; Lawes, Lesley (2006). "Trancing rabbits: Relaxed hypnosis or a state of fear?". Proceedings of the VDWE International Congress on Companion Animal Behaviour and Welfare. Sint-Niklaas, Belgium: Vlaamse Dierenartsenvereniging (VDV): 135–137. Archived from the original on 12 July 2016. "Housing". Rabbit.org. House Rabbit Society. Harkness, John E. (2010). Biology and Medicine of Rabbits and Rodents (5th ed.). Ames, Iowa: Wiley-Blackwell. pp. 306–308. ISBN 978-0-8138-1531-2. Jenkins, Jeffery (1997). "Gastrointestinal Diseases". In Hillyer, E. V.; Quesenberry, K. (eds.). Ferrets, Rabbits and Rodents: Clinical Medicine and Surgery. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co. pp. 178–179. ISBN 978-0-7216-4023-5. "House Rabbit Society: Sluggish Motility in the Gastrointestinal Tract". Dana M. Krempels (July 1997). "Gastrointestinal Stasis, The Silent Killer". University of Miami Department of Biology. Retrieved March 20, 2024. "When Teeth Turn to Tusks". www.rabbit.org. Retrieved 2022-04-15. "Medirabbit". www.medirabbit.com. Retrieved 2022-04-15. Meredith, Anna. "Rabbit dentistry" (PDF). "Zolcal D liquid calcium". www.vetark.co.uk. Archived from the original on 20 December 2016. Retrieved 16 December 2016. "Differential diagnosis for ptyalism". www.medirabbit.com. Varga, Molly (2014). "Cardiorespiratory Disease". Textbook of Rabbit Medicine: 390–404. doi:10.1016/B978-0-7020-4979-8.00011-X. ISBN 978-0-7020-4979-8. PMC 7150336. Krempels, Dana. "Runny Eyes, Runny Nose. What do They Mean?". Georgia House Rabbit Society. Retrieved March 19, 2024. Brown, Susan. "Care of Rabbits" (PDF). Midwest Bird and Exotic Animal Hospital. Retrieved March 19, 2024. van der Woerdt, Alexandra (2012). "Ophthalmologic Diseases in Small Pet Mammals". Ferrets, Rabbits, and Rodents: 523–531. doi:10.1016/B978-1-4160-6621-7.00037-3. ISBN 978-1-4160-6621-7. PMC 7152055. "Myxomatosis (Chapter 2.6.1)" (PDF). Manual of Diagnostic Tests and Vaccines for Terrestrial Animals ("Terrestrial Manual 2014") (Lagomorpha (Chapter 2.6)). World Organization for Animal Health (OIE): 1–18. May 2014. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 March 2018. Retrieved 19 February 2018. "A Statement from the Chief Veterinary Officer (Australia) on myxomatosis vaccine availability in Australia". Australian Government - Department of Agriculture and Water Resources. 12 September 2017. Retrieved 19 February 2018. "Restricted Invasive Animals - Rabbit". Queensland [Australia] Government - Business Queensland. 22 November 2017. Retrieved 18 February 2018. Center for Food Security & Public Health; Institute for International Cooperation in Animal Biologics (September 2007). "Rabbit Hemorrhagic Disease: Viral Hemorrhagic Disease of Rabbits, Rabbit Calicivirus Disease" (PDF). CFSPH.IAState.edu. Iowa State University College of Veterinary Medicine. Retrieved 3 October 2015. Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service - Veterinary Services (October 2013). "Rabbit Hemorrhagic Disease: Standard Operating Procedures: 1. Overview of Etiology and Ecology" (PDF). Foreign Animal Disease Preparedness and Response Plan (FAD PReP). United States Department of Agriculture: 1–11. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 February 2017. Retrieved 19 February 2018. "Notice Board". The British Rabbit Council. Retrieved 19 February 2018. Mancinelli, Elisabetta; Cousquer, Glen. "West Nile virus infection (Lapis)". Vetstream. ISSN 2398-2969. Retrieved 21 February 2018. Suen, Willy W.; et al. (2015). "Experimental West Nile Virus Infection in Rabbits: An Alternative Model for Studying Induction of Disease and Virus Control". Pathogens. 4 (3): 529–558. doi:10.3390/pathogens4030529. PMC 4584271. PMID 26184326. Krempels, Dana. "Head Tilt in Rabbits: Don't Give Up". House Rabbit Society. Retrieved 2024-03-20. "Head Tilt in Rabbits". Disabled Rabbits. Retrieved 2023-12-31. "Rabbits and E. cuniculi (Encephalatizoon cuniculi)". Rabbit Welfare Association & Fund. 4 May 2013. Archived from the original on 19 February 2018. Retrieved 18 February 2018. Delaney, Martha. "Lagomorpha, Ectoparasites". Science Direct. Retrieved 2023-12-31. van Praag, Esther. "Ear mite: Psoroptes cuniculi". MediRabbit. Retrieved 2024-01-02. Rhodes, Karen Helton; Werner, Alexander H. (2011-01-25). Blackwell's Five-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion. Ames, Iowa: Wiley-Blackwell. p. 560. ISBN 978-0-8138-1596-1. van Praag, Esther. "Common Fur Mites or Cheyletiellosis". MediRabbit. Retrieved 2023-12-30. Kremples, Dana. "Fur Loss and Skin Problems in Rabbits". Kremples website. Retrieved 2023-12-31. van Praag, Esther. "Mange: burrowing mites Sarcoptes scabiei or Notoedres cati". MediRabbit. Retrieved 2024-01-02. Harriman, Marinell. "Fly Strike". House Rabbit Society. Retrieved 21 February 2018. "Summary of [Rearguard] Product Characteristics (AN. 01134/2015)" (MS Word document). Veterinary Medicines Directorate. Government of the United Kingdom (gov.uk). 15 December 2015. Retrieved 21 February 2018. Brown, Dave. "Cuterebra buccata". Animal Diversity Web (ADW). Retrieved 2024-01-06. "Warbles (Cuterebra Botfly Larvae)". Wisconsin Dept. of Natural Resources. Retrieved 2024-01-06. van Praag, Esther. "Myiasis (botfly) in rabbits". MediRabbit. Retrieved 2024-01-06. Bertram, Christof A.; Bertram, Beate; Bartel, Alexander; Ewringmann, Anja; Fragoso-Garcia, Marco A.; Erickson, Nancy A.; Müller, Kerstin; Klopfleisch, Robert (20 November 2020). "Neoplasia and Tumor-Like Lesions in Pet Rabbits (Oryctolagus cuniculus): A Retrospective Analysis of Cases Between 1995 and 2019". Veterinary Pathology. 58 (5): 901–911. doi:10.1177/0300985820973460. PMID 33213301. S2CID 227079099. "Data export". DAD-IS (Domestic Animal Diversity Information System). FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations). 21 November 2017. Retrieved 30 March 2018. "ARBA Recognized Breeds". American Rabbit Breeders Association. Retrieved 8 February 2024. "Breed Standards 2016-2020" (PDF). The British Rabbit Council. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 January 2018. Retrieved 18 February 2018. Whitman, Bob D. (October 2004). Domestic Rabbits & Their Histories: Breeds of the World. Leawood KS: Leathers Publishing. ISBN 978-1585972753. "Longest ears on a rabbit". Guinness World Records. Retrieved 9 February 2018. Botha, Miklos; Petrescu-Mag, Valentin; Hettig, Andrea (2014). "Genetic disorders in domestic rabbits (Oryctolagus cuniculus)" (PDF). Rabbit Genetics. 4 (1). Botha, Mariette; Petrescu-Mag, Ioan Valentin; Hettig, Andrea (2014). "Genetic disorders in domestic rabbits (Oryctolagus cuniculus)". Rabbit Genetics. 4 (1): 7–47. S2CID 85671191. Castle, William Ernest (1930). The Genetics of Domestic Rabbits: A Manual for Students of Mammalian Genetics, and an Aid to Rabbit Breeders and Fur Farmers. Harvard University Press. p. 30. ISBN 978-0-598-96820-3. "Companion rabbits: Assessing their needs and behaviour - Fellowship of Animal Behaviour Clinicians" (PDF). Ramnaraine, Amy (12 January 2017). "Bonding With Your Rabbit". House Rabbit Society. Retrieved 21 March 2018. Mixon, Carolyn (10 July 2011). "Children and Rabbits". House Rabbit Society. Retrieved 28 February 2018. "Rabbit Facts - Top 20 Facts about Rabbits". "Easter Rabbits". ABC7 News. Chicago: WLS-TV. 4 April 2007. Archived from the original on 2 February 2009. "Rabbit behaviour | rabbit advice and welfare | rspca advice". "Chewing". Rabbit.org. House Rabbit Society. Archived from the original on 10 November 2015. Retrieved 25 February 2010. "Litter Training". House Rabbit Society. Retrieved 18 February 2018. Rubins, Suzanne. "Guinea Pigs as Rabbit Buddies". Rabbit.org. House Rabbit Network. Archived from the original on 10 September 2012. Retrieved 10 June 2009. Taylor, Judy (1986). Beatrix Potter: Artist, Storyteller, and Countrywoman. Frederick Warne. ASIN B005MJF9OQ. Potter, Beatrix (1981). The Art of Beatrix Potter. VikingPress. "William Henry Lippincott, Farm Interior: Breton Children Feeding Rabbits, 1878, oil on canvas". Smithsonian American Art Museum. Taylow, Judy (1989). Beatrix Potter's Letters. Frederick Warne. Davis, Susan (2003). Stories Rabbits Tell. Lantern Books. ISBN 9781590560440. DeMello, M. (2010). "Becoming rabbit: Living with and knowing rabbits". Spring: A Journal of Archetype and Culture. 83: 237–252 – via animalstudiesrepository.org. Harriman, Marinell (2013). House Rabbit Handbook: How to Live with an Urban Rabbit (5th ed.). Drollery Press. ISBN 978-0940920187. Davis, Susan (2 April 2013). "Aggression". House Rabbit Society. Retrieved 21 March 2018. Reyes-Meza, Veronica; Hudson, Robyn; Martínez-Gómez, Margarita; Nicolás, Leticia; Rödel, Heiko G.; Bautista, Amando (24 October 2011). "Possible contribution of position in the litter huddle to long-term differences in behavioral style in the domestic rabbit". Physiology & Behavior. 104 (5): 778–785. doi:10.1016/j.physbeh.2011.07.019. PMID 21803066. S2CID 21342427. Bunnyhugga. "Understanding rabbit hierarchy and its importance". www.bunnyhugga.com. Retrieved 2023-10-01. "Bunny bonding basics | Animal Humane Society". www.animalhumanesociety.org. Retrieved 2023-09-21. "Bonding Rabbits". House Rabbit Society. Retrieved 2023-09-21. Parker, Karen (2010). The rabbit handbook. Hauppauge, N.Y.: Barron's Educational Series. pp. 53–87. ISBN 978-0764142536. "Holland Lop". RabbitPedia.com. Retrieved 2019-04-01. "Holland Lop Rabbit Breed". Lafeber Co. - Small Mammals. 2017-05-18. Retrieved 2019-04-01. "Hiding places". www.rspca.org.uk. RSPCA. Retrieved 29 December 2019. "Rabbits in Homes with Other Animals". Wisconsin Humane Society. Retrieved March 20, 2024. Rioja-Lang, Fiona; Bacon, Heather; Connor, Melanie; Dwyer, Cathy Mary (January 2019). "Rabbit welfare: determining priority welfare issues for pet rabbits using a modified Delphi method". Veterinary Record Open. 6 (1): e000363. doi:10.1136/vetreco-2019-000363. ISSN 2399-2050. PMC 6924855. PMID 31903189. Crowell-Davis, Sharon (January 2021). "Rabbit Behavior". Veterinary Clinics of North America: Exotic Animal Practice. 24 (1): 53–62. doi:10.1016/j.cvex.2020.09.002. PMID 33189256. O'Meara, Holly (10 February 2013). "An Uplifting Experience". House Rabbit Journal (Fall 1998). 3 (11). Retrieved 1 April 2018. Neville, Vikki; Hinde, Keith; Line, Elaine; Todd, Rae; Saunders, Richard Anthony (2019-04-03). "Rabbit relinquishment through online classified advertisements in the United Kingdom: when, why, and how many?". Journal of Applied Animal Welfare Science. 22 (2): 105–115. doi:10.1080/10888705.2018.1438287. hdl:1983/1a83e3d8-babf-4dac-8568-394d232378e5. ISSN 1088-8705. PMID 29508633. McMahon, Sarah A.; Wigham, Ellie (2020-09-23). "'All Ears': A Questionnaire of 1516 Owner Perceptions of the Mental Abilities of Pet Rabbits, Subsequent Resource Provision, and the Effect on Welfare". Animals. 10 (10): 1730. doi:10.3390/ani10101730. ISSN 2076-2615. PMC 7598668. PMID 32977692. Witherell, Melissa (27 October 2022). "What do Different Bunny Positions Mean?". PetMD. Dobos, Petra; Kulik, Laura Nikolett; Pongrácz, Péter (March 2023). "The amicable rabbit – interactions between pet rabbits and their caregivers based on a questionnaire survey". Applied Animal Behaviour Science. 260: 105869. doi:10.1016/j.applanim.2023.105869. "Global rabbit meat market has increased and will continue to grow". New Food Magazine. 16 May 2019. Onal, Levent; Korkmaz, Mahmut; Tutak, Mustafa (March 2007). "Relations between the characteristics of Angora rabbit fibre". Fibers and Polymers. 8 (2): 198–204. doi:10.1007/BF02875792. ISSN 1229-9197. Xian, Vivian (2007). "China, Where American Mink Gets Glamour". USDA Foreign Agricultural Service Global Agriculture Information Network. Retrieved March 20, 2024. "The reality of commercial rabbit farming in Europe" (PDF). Coalition Against the Fur Trade. Retrieved March 20, 2024. Kulpa-Eddy, Jodie; Snyder, Margaret; Stokes, William (2008). "A review of trends in animal use in the United States (1972–2006)" (PDF). AATEX (14, Special Issue: Proceedings of the 6th World Congress on Alternatives & Animal Use in the Life Sciences, 21–25 August 2007). Japanese Society for Alternatives to Animal Experiments: 163–165. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 March 2012. Retrieved 3 October 2015. Morton, Daniel (April 1988). "The use of rabbits in male reproductive toxicology". Environmental Health Perspectives. 77. U.S. National Institutes of Health: 5–9. doi:10.2307/3430622. JSTOR 3430622. PMC 1474531. PMID 3383822. Prinsen, M. K. (2006). "The Draize Eye Test and in vitro alternatives:A left-handed marriage?". Toxicology in Vitro. 20 (1): 78–81. doi:10.1016/j.tiv.2005.06.030. PMID 16055303. "Special Senses". Fundamentals of Toxicologic Pathology. Academic Press. 1 January 2018. pp. 673–747. doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-809841-7.00022-8. ISBN 9780128098417. S2CID 172116640. Retrieved 11 June 2020. "Rabbits in Laboratories". PETA. 23 June 2010. Retrieved 11 June 2020. "Do Cosmetic Companies Still Test on Live Animals?". Scientific American. 6 August 2009. Retrieved 11 June 2020. Dawn, Karen (2008). Thanking the Monkey: Rethinking the Way we Treat Animals. New York: HarperCollins. pp. 239–40. ISBN 978-0-06-135185-3. Retrieved 12 March 2013. "Rabbit Housing Options". IndianaHRS.org. House Rabbit Society, Indiana Chapter. "Hopping versus Agility". (n.d.). The Rabbit Welfare Association and Fund The American Rabbit Breeders Association – the oldest and largest rabbit specialist organization in the United States The Livestock Conservancy – a registry of the rarest breeds of domestic rabbits World Rabbit Science Association – an international science organization dedicated to rabbit health research The British Rabbit Council – recognized breeds with photographs and more MediRabbit – a site dedicated to spreading the knowledge of rabbit medicine and safe medication in rabbits, for the owner and the vet professional Rabbit Breeds – directory of ARBA-recognized breeds of rabbit Complete Guide of Rabbit Breeds – List of rabbit breeds approved by American Rabbit Breeders Association RabbitPedia.com – Source for information about rabbit care. Rabbit.org Foundation – a US-based educational and advocacy organization for rabbit pet-keepers, founded in 2023 House Rabbit Society – a US-based rescue organization for rabbit pet-keepers, founded in 1988 Domestic rabbit at Curlie