John Felix Anthony Cena (/ˈsiːnə/ SEE-nə; born April 23, 1977) is an American professional wrestler, actor, and former rapper. As a wrestler, he has been signed to WWE since 2001[update], but has been performing part-time since 2018[update]. A record 16-time world champion as recognized by WWE, Cena is widely regarded as one of the greatest professional wrestlers of all time. Cena moved to California in 1998 to pursue a career as a bodybuilder and switched to professional wrestling in 1999, and made his debut for Ultimate Pro Wrestling (UPW). In 2001, he signed with the then-World Wrestling Federation (WWF; renamed WWE in 2002) and was assigned to its developmental territory, Ohio Valley Wrestling (OVW), winning the OVW Heavyweight Championship and OVW Southern Tag Team Championship. After moving up to WWE's main roster on SmackDown in 2002, Cena gained fame and success after adopting the character of a trash-talking rapper. After winning his first WWE Championship in 2005, Cena transitioned into a clean-cut, heroic character which he described as a "goody-two shoes Superman". He led the company as its franchise player and public face from the mid-2000s to the late 2010s. A 16-time world champion, Cena has held the WWE Championship a record 13-times and the World Heavyweight Championship (2002–2013 version) three times. He is also a five-time WWE United States Champion, a two-time WWE Tag Team Champion, a two-time World Tag Team Champion, a two-time Royal Rumble winner, and a one-time Money in the Bank winner. He has also headlined multiple major WWE pay-per-view events, including its flagship event, WrestleMania, five times. His professional wrestling career has been met with mixed critical and audience reception, with praise for his character work and promotional skills, but criticism for his perceived over-representation and on-screen dominance relative to other wrestlers. Cena's first starring film role was in The Marine (2006) and he subsequently gained praise for his performances in Trainwreck (2015), Ferdinand (2017), Blockers, and Bumblebee (both 2018). He starred in F9 (2021) as Jakob Toretto, reprising his role in Fast X (2023), and portrayed Peacemaker in The Suicide Squad (2021) and the eponymous television series (2022–present). He released a studio album, You Can't See Me, in 2005. Outside his work in entertainment, Cena is known for his involvement in numerous charitable causes, including the Make-A-Wish Foundation, where he has granted the most wishes, at over 650. Cena was born in West Newbury, Massachusetts on April 23, 1977, to Carol (née Lupien) and John Joseph Cena. His mother is of English and French-Canadian descent, while his father, a former ring announcer for Chaotic Wrestling, has Italian ancestry. He was raised Roman Catholic. His maternal grandfather was baseball player Tony Lupien, while his maternal great-grandfather was businessman Ulysses J. Lupien. He is the second oldest of five brothers: Dan, Matt, Steve, and Sean. A fan of wrestling growing up, he would create championship belts out of cardboard for himself and his brothers. He is a cousin of computer scientist Natalie Enright Jerger. Cena was teased and beaten up while in school, and asked for a weightlifting bench at the age of 12. Cena was educated in Massachusetts, attending Central Catholic High School in Lawrence, before transferring to Cushing Academy, a private prep boarding school in Ashburnham. He then attended Springfield College, where he was an NCAA Division III All-American center and football team captain. He graduated in 1999 with a degree in exercise physiology and body movement, after which he pursued a bodybuilding career and worked as a limousine driver. Cena worked in the store area of Gold's Gym for $6 an hour. Cena idolized Hulk Hogan growing up, moving to California in 1998 to begin training for a professional wrestling career the following year at Ultimate Pro Wrestling's (UPW) Ultimate University, operated by Rick Bassman. He started wrestling in local flea markets, and once he was placed into an in-ring role, Cena began using a semi-robotic character known as The Prototype. Some of this period of his career was documented in the Discovery Channel program Inside Pro Wrestling School. He held the UPW Heavyweight Championship for 27 days in April 2000, and wrestled for the UPW until March 2001. On October 10, 2000, while billed as The Prototype, Cena made his unofficial debut for then World Wrestling Federation (WWF) on a SmackDown! taping in a dark match against Mikey Richardson, which he lost. He received another tryout on January 9, 2001, at a SmackDown! taping in Oakland, California, defeating Aaron Aguilera before wrestling again in a dark match at a SmackDown! taping on March 13. In 2001, Cena signed a developmental contract with the WWF and was assigned to its developmental territory Ohio Valley Wrestling (OVW). During his time there, Cena wrestled under the ring name The Prototype and held the OVW Heavyweight Championship for three months and the OVW Southern Tag Team Championship (with Rico Constantino) for two months. Throughout the early months of 2002, Cena constantly found himself competing on house shows for the WWF, where he wrestled against the likes of Shelton Benjamin and Tommy Dreamer. After his main call up in June 2002, he continued to appear on OVW programming until September 25, when he lost to Kenny Brolin in a Loser Leaves OVW match. He would later appear in a one-off appearance for the developmental farm in November under the ring name Mr. P in a six-man tag team match, where he teamed with Hall of Famer Big Boss Man and Charlie Haas, in a winning effort against Lance Cade, Trevor Murdoch and Sean O'Haire. Cena's call-up to the main roster meant that he was part of OVW's now legendary Class of 2002, alongside Brock Lesnar, Randy Orton and Dave Bautista, a class which would eventually become known as the "OVW 4". Cena made his WWE television debut on the June 27 episode of SmackDown! by answering an open challenge by Kurt Angle. After declaring he possessed "ruthless aggression", he lost by a pinning combination, but put on a good showing. After the match, he was congratulated by Billy Kidman, Faarooq, Rikishi, and The Undertaker, becoming a fan favorite. He began feuding with Chris Jericho, whom Cena defeated on July 21 at Vengeance. In October, Cena and Billy Kidman failed to win a tag team tournament to crown the first WWE Tag Team Champions of the SmackDown! brand in the first round. The next week on SmackDown!, Cena turned on and attacked Kidman, blaming him for their loss and turning heel for the first and only time in his WWE career. On the October 17 episode of SmackDown!, Cena defeated Kidman, but lost in a rematch the next week. At Rebellion on October 26, Cena and Dawn Marie lost to Kidman and Torrie Wilson in a mixed tag team match. Shortly after, on a Halloween-themed episode of SmackDown!, Cena dressed as Vanilla Ice, performing a freestyle rap. The following week on SmackDown!, Cena received a new character: a rapper who cut promos while rhyming. He used the nickname "The Doctor of Thuganomics" and expanded his gimmick to include rapping before his matches, wearing hats and sports jerseys as part of his ring gear. While on a bus journey with other WWE superstars, Cena was involved in a freestyle rap session with Rikishi and Rey Mysterio, impressing Stephanie McMahon, leading to the gimmick's adoption. As the character evolved, Cena began adopting a variant of the 1980s WWF logo—dropping the "F"—as his "signature symbol", along with the slogan "Word Life". Moreover, he was joined by an enforcer, Bull Buchanan, who was rechristened to B-2 (also written B² and pronounced "B-Squared"). Buchanan was replaced with Red Dogg until he was sent to the Raw brand in February. Cena then sought the WWE Championship, held by Brock Lesnar. He entered a number one contender's tournament for the title, gaining upset wins over Eddie Guerrero, The Undertaker and Chris Benoit. At Backlash on April 27, Cena failed to win the title from Lesnar. On May 18 at Judgment Day, Cena and The F.B.I. (Chuck Palumbo and Johnny Stamboli) defeated Benoit, Rhyno and Spanky. At Vengeance on July 27, Cena lost to The Undertaker. After losing to Kurt Angle at No Mercy on October 19, Cena became a fan-favorite when he joined Angle as a member of his team on November 16 at Survivor Series. Cena participated in the Royal Rumble match at Royal Rumble on January 25, 2004, but was eliminated by Big Show. At No Way Out on February 15, Cena faced Big Show and Kurt Angle in a triple threat match for a WWE Championship match at WrestleMania XX, which Cena lost by submission to Angle. At WrestleMania on March 14, Cena defeated Big Show to win the United States Championship, his first singles championship in WWE. He retained the title against Rene Dupree on May 16 at Judgment Day, and in a fatal four-way match involving Dupree, Rob Van Dam and Booker T at The Great American Bash on June 27, until he was stripped of the title on the July 8 episode of SmackDown! by Kurt Angle (the SmackDown! General Manager) after accidentally attacking him in his wheelchair. Cena won the title back by defeating Booker T in a best of five series that started on August 15 at SummerSlam and culminated on October 3 at No Mercy, only to drop it to the débuting Carlito Caribbean Cool the following week on SmackDown!. The duo began a feud which resulted in Cena allegedly being stabbed in the kidney while at a Boston-area nightclub by Carlito's bodyguard, Jesús; this worked "injury" was used to keep Cena out of action for a month while he was filming The Marine. After returning on November 14 at Survivor Series, Cena won the United States Championship back from Carlito on the November 18 episode of SmackDown!. He retained the title against Jesús at Armageddon on December 12 in a street fight. On January 30, 2005, Cena took part in the Royal Rumble match, making it to the final two. He and Batista went over the top rope at the same time, at first ending the match but the match was restarted and won by Batista. At No Way Out on February 20, Cena defeated Kurt Angle to earn a spot in the SmackDown! brand's WrestleMania 21 main event match, beginning a feud with then WWE Champion John "Bradshaw" Layfield (JBL) and his Cabinet in the process. In the early stages of the feud, Cena lost the United States Championship to Cabinet member Orlando Jordan. At WrestleMania 21 on April 3, Cena defeated JBL to win the WWE Championship, his first world championship. Now with a spinner WWE Championship belt, JBL took the original title belt and claimed he was still the WWE Champion, until Cena defeated him in an "I Quit" match at Judgment Day on May 22 to retain the title. Cena was drafted to the Raw brand on the June 6 episode of Raw, becoming the first wrestler selected in the annual draft lottery. Cena immediately entered into a feud with Raw General Manager Eric Bischoff, after refusing to participate in the "war" against the Extreme Championship Wrestling (ECW) roster at the 2005 ECW One Night Stand. At Vengeance on June 26, Cena retained the title against Christian and Chris Jericho in a triple threat match. With Bischoff vowing to make Cena's stint on Raw difficult, he hand-picked Jericho to take Cena's championship from him. During their feud, even though Cena was portrayed as the "face" (hero) and Jericho as the "heel" (villain), a vocal section of the live crowds, nonetheless, were cheering Jericho and booing Cena during their matches, most notably on August 21 at SummerSlam, when Cena defeated Jericho to retain the title. Crowds booed Cena again during his next feud with Kurt Angle, who took over as Bischoff's hand-picked No. 1 contender after Cena defeated Jericho in a You're Fired match on the August 22 episode of Raw. Cena held on to the WWE Championship through his feud with Angle, losing to him by disqualification on September 18 at Unforgiven, pinning Shawn Michaels in a triple threat match involving Angle at Taboo Tuesday on November 1, and pinning Angle on November 27 at Survivor Series. The feud with Angle saw Cena add a secondary, submission based, finishing maneuver—the STFU (a stepover toehold sleeper, though named for a stepover toehold facelock)—when he was put into a triple threat submissions only match on the November 28 episode of Raw. At New Year's Revolution on January 8, 2006, Cena retained the WWE Championship in the Elimination Chamber match after last eliminating Carlito, but immediately afterwards, Mr. McMahon announced Edge was cashing in his Money in the Bank contract—a "guaranteed title match against the WWE Champion at a time and place of the owner's choosing". Two quick spears allowed Edge to pin Cena and win the championship. Cena won the title back on January 29 at Royal Rumble. After that, Cena began feuding with Triple H. The crowd, which had mostly cheered Cena over the previous few months, started booing him again and cheering the villain Triple H. Cena beat Triple H at WrestleMania 22 on April 2 to retain the title. The negative reaction towards him intensified when he faced Rob Van Dam at ECW One Night Stand on June 11 which took place in front of a boisterous crowd of mostly original ECW fans at the Hammerstein Ballroom. Cena was met with raucous jeering and chants of "Fuck you, Cena", "You can't wrestle", and "Same old shit". When he began performing different moves as the match progressed, the fans started chanting "You still suck". Cena lost the WWE Championship to Van Dam after interference from Edge. On the July 3 episode of Raw, Edge won the championship from Van Dam in a triple threat match that also involved Cena, re-igniting their feud. After Edge went about retaining the title by dubious means—getting himself disqualified (for which championships do not change hands)—and using brass knuckles on August 20 at SummerSlam he introduced his own version of Cena's "custom" title belt, this one with his logo placed on the spinner. Cena eventually regained the championship in a match and an arena of Edge's choice: a Tables, Ladders and Chairs match on September 17 at Unforgiven at the Air Canada Centre in Edge's hometown of Toronto, Ontario, Canada, after performing the FU on Edge through two tables off a ladder; the match had a stipulation that had Cena lost, he would have joined the SmackDown! brand. Cena returned with his version of the spinner title belt on the next night's Raw. On the heels of his feud with Edge, Cena was placed in an inter-brand angle to determine the "Champion of Champions"—or which was the most dominant champion in WWE's three brands. Cena, World Heavyweight Champion King Booker, and ECW World Champion Big Show were booked in a triple threat match at Cyber Sunday, with the viewers voting on which of the three championships would be placed on the line. At the same time, Cena was involved in a storyline with non-wrestler Kevin Federline, who appeared on Raw with Johnny Nitro and Melina. After getting into a worked physical altercation with Federline on Raw, he appeared on November 5 at Cyber Sunday to hit Cena with the World Heavyweight Championship during the match, helping Booker retain his title. On the January 1 episode of Raw, Cena was pinned by Federline with an assist from Umaga. At New Year's Revolution on January 7, 2007, Cena defeated Umaga to end his undefeated streak and retain the WWE Championship. At Royal Rumble on January 28, Cena retained the title against Umaga in a Last Man Standing match. One night after the Royal Rumble, an impromptu team of Cena and Shawn Michaels defeated Rated-RKO (Edge and Randy Orton) for the World Tag Team Championship, making Cena a double champion. At WrestleMania 23 on April 1, Cena retained the WWE Championship against Michaels. The next night on Raw, Michaels turned on Cena, costing them the tag titles in the second of two 10-team battle royals, by throwing Cena over the top rope and eliminating the team. The Hardys (Matt and Jeff) won the match and the titles. Cena retained the WWE Championship against Michaels, Orton, and Edge in a fatal four-way match on April 29 at Backlash. The Great Khali then declared his intentions to challenge for Cena's championship, attacking and "laying out" all three of the top contenders before assaulting Cena and stealing the title belt. On May 20 at Judgment Day, Cena became the first person to defeat Khali by submission and then by pinfall on June 3 at One Night Stand in a Falls Count Anywhere match. Cena retained the WWE Championship in a five-pack challenge on June 24 at Vengeance: Night of Champions, and against Bobby Lashley on July 22 at The Great American Bash. Later that summer, Randy Orton was named the #1 contender for Cena's championship. Leading up to SummerSlam on August 26, Orton delivered a number of sneak-attacks, performing three RKOs to Cena, who in the actual match at SummerSlam, retained the championship. A rematch took place at Unforgiven on September 16, which Orton won by disqualification after Cena ignored the referee's instructions and continued to beat on him in the corner. During a match with Mr. Kennedy on the October 1 episode of Raw, Cena suffered a legitimate torn pectoral muscle while executing a hip toss. Though finishing the match and taking part in the scripted attack by Orton after the match, surgery the following day found that his pectoralis major muscle was torn completely from the bone. At the time, it was estimated this would require six months to a year of rehabilitation. As a result, Cena was stripped of the title by Mr. McMahon on the next night's episode of ECW, ending the longest WWE Championship reign in over 19 years. Cena's surgery was performed by orthopedic surgeon James Andrews at St. Vincent's Hospital in Birmingham, Alabama. Two weeks later in a video update on WWE.com, Dr. Andrews and Cena's physical trainer both said that he was several weeks ahead of where he was expected to be in his rehabilitation at that time. On January 27, 2008, at Royal Rumble, Cena made a surprise return as the final participant of the eponymous match, winning it and the traditional WrestleMania XXIV title shot, last eliminating Triple H. Instead of waiting until WrestleMania, the shot was cashed in against WWE Champion Randy Orton at No Way Out on February 17, winning by disqualification, therefore not being awarded the title. The following night on Raw, Cena was placed back into WrestleMania's WWE Championship match on March 30, defeating Orton in a non-title match with Triple H as special guest referee, making it a triple threat match, during which he was pinned by Orton. On April 27 at Backlash, Cena failed to regain the title in a fatal four-way elimination match, in which he was eliminated by Orton. During the match, Cena eliminated JBL, renewing their feud from 2005. Cena defeated JBL on May 18 at Judgment Day and at One Night Stand on June 1 in a First Blood match. Cena failed to regain the WWE Championship from Triple H on June 29 at Night of Champions. JBL defeated Cena in a New York City Parking Lot Brawl at The Great American Bash on July 20 to end their feud. On the August 4 episode of Raw, Cena won his second World Tag Team Championship with Batista, defeating Cody Rhodes and Ted DiBiase but failed to retain the championship the following week against the former champions. At SummerSlam on August 17, Batista defeated Cena. Cena was named one of four contenders for CM Punk's World Heavyweight Championship in the Championship Scramble match at Unforgiven on September 7, but was replaced by Rey Mysterio after suffering a herniated disc in his neck in his SummerSlam match, which required surgery. Cena underwent successful surgery to repair the injury. Cena made his in-ring return at Survivor Series on November 23, defeating Chris Jericho for his first World Heavyweight Championship. He retained the title against Jericho at Armageddon on December 14. After defeating JBL at the Royal Rumble on January 25, 2009, Cena lost the championship at No Way Out on February 15 to Edge, who attacked Kofi Kingston and took his place in the Elimination Chamber match. Cena won his rematch for the title at WrestleMania 25 on April 5 in a triple threat match involving Big Show. He lost the championship back to Edge in a Last Man Standing match at Backlash on April 26 after interference from Big Show, who chokeslammed Cena through a spotlight. Cena defeated Big Show at Judgment Day on May 17 and Extreme Rules on June 7 in a submission match by applying the STF. During Cena's feud with Big Show, The Miz challenged him to a match on the April 27 episode of Raw, but as Cena was out due to injury, Miz claimed an unofficial win via forfeit and continued to do this over the following weeks, until Cena defeated him at The Bash on June 28. At Night of Champions on July 26, Cena challenged for the WWE Championship in a triple threat match against Triple H and defending champion Randy Orton (a rematch from WrestleMania XXIV), but was pinned by Orton after interference from Cody Rhodes and Ted DiBiase. The next night on Raw, Cena won a beat the clock challenge to earn another shot at the WWE Championship at SummerSlam on August 23, where Orton used underhanded tactics to retain. At Breaking Point on September 13, Cena defeated Orton in an "I Quit" match to win his fourth WWE Championship. He lost the title back to Orton in a Hell in a Cell match on October 4 at Hell in a Cell, but regained it at Bragging Rights on October 25 in a sixty-minute Anything Goes Iron Man match. Cena retained the title against both Triple H and Shawn Michaels in a triple threat match at Survivor Series on November 22 but lost it to Sheamus on December 13 at TLC: Tables, Ladders & Chairs in a tables match. The next night on Raw, Cena competed in a tournament to crown the 2009 Superstar of the Year, defeating CM Punk in the first round and Orton in the finals later that night to win the honor. He would get his rematch for the title against Sheamus on the December 28 episode of Raw, where he won by disqualification, but did not win the championship. At Royal Rumble on January 31, 2010, Cena competed in the titular match, making it to the final two where he was eliminated by the returning Edge. Cena regained the title at Elimination Chamber on February 21 in the eponymous match, but his reign was cut short after Mr. McMahon made him defend the title immediately against Batista, who emerged victorious. Cena defeated Batista at WrestleMania XXVI on March 28 for the title, and successfully defended it in a rematch at Extreme Rules on April 25 in a Last Man Standing match. Cena defeated Batista for a third time in an "I Quit" match at Over the Limit on May 23, ending their feud. On the June 7 episode of Raw, during a match against CM Punk, Cena was attacked by all eight former contestants of the first season of NXT, with Wade Barrett as their leader. This group later referred to itself as The Nexus. The stable's interferences made him lose the WWE Championship at Fatal 4-Way on June 20 to Sheamus and a steel cage match against Sheamus on July 18 at Money in the Bank. In response to The Nexus, Cena formed an alliance with Edge, Chris Jericho, John Morrison, R-Truth, The Great Khali and Bret Hart, defeating The Nexus at SummerSlam on August 15 with help from the returning Daniel Bryan, a former member of Nexus, who replaced Khali. Cena faced Barrett at Hell in a Cell on October 3 with the stipulations that if he were to lose, he would join The Nexus, and if he were to win, The Nexus would disband. After Barrett defeated Cena, he reluctantly joined The Nexus. Cena and fellow Nexus member David Otunga defeated Cody Rhodes and Drew McIntyre to win the WWE Tag Team Championship on October 24 at Bragging Rights. Later that night, he was forced to help Barrett defeat Orton in a WWE Championship match, giving Barrett the disqualification win, but not the title. The following night on Raw, Cena and Otunga lost the titles to fellow Nexus members Heath Slater and Justin Gabriel, when Barrett ordered Otunga to lay down and lose the titles. At Survivor Series on November 21, Cena officiated a match for the WWE Championship between Barrett and Orton. Per stipulation, if Barrett didn't win the championship, Cena would be "fired" from the WWE; Orton defeated Barrett to retain the title, and Cena was fired (kayfabe). The following night on Raw, Cena gave a farewell speech before costing Barrett the WWE Championship by interfering in his rematch with Orton. A week later, Cena invaded Raw, first as a spectator, but then attacked members of Nexus, explaining he would still take down Nexus one by one despite not being employed. On the December 13 episode of Raw, Cena was rehired by Barrett in exchange that he would face him on December 19 at TLC: Tables, Ladders & Chairs in a chairs match, which Cena won. On the January 17, 2011 episode of Raw, Cena returned and faced Punk in a match which ended in a no contest after Cena was attacked by the debuting Mason Ryan, who later joined The Nexus. Cena competed in the Royal Rumble match on January 30, which saw Cena eliminate most of the Nexus members, ending his feud with the stable. He made it to the final five before being eliminated by WWE Champion The Miz, who was not part of the match. Cena won the titular match at Elimination Chamber on February 20 to face Miz at WrestleMania XXVII for the WWE Championship. On the February 21 episode of Raw, Cena replied in rap form to comments made by The Rock the previous week, as he returned as the announced guest host of WrestleMania. That night, Cena was placed into a WWE Tag Team Championship match, teaming with The Miz to defeat Justin Gabriel and Heath Slater to become the new WWE Tag Team Champions. However, their rematch clause was immediately invoked, and Gabriel and Slater won the titles back after The Miz attacked Cena, making their reign the shortest in the title's history. After weeks of insults, Cena and The Rock finally met on the March 28 episode of Raw, where, after a verbal confrontation, and a brief attack by The Miz and Alex Riley, Cena attacked The Rock with the Attitude Adjustment. At WrestleMania on April 3, Cena and Miz fought to a double countout, but The Rock restarted the match and performed a Rock Bottom on Cena, allowing The Miz to retain the title. The next night on Raw, Cena, in response to The Rock "screwing" him out of the title, agreed to face him in the main event of WrestleMania XXVIII, the first WrestleMania match to be set up one year in advance. At Extreme Rules on May 1, Cena defeated The Miz and John Morrison in a triple threat steel cage match to become WWE Champion. Cena then successfully defended the title against The Miz on May 22 at Over the Limit in an "I Quit" match, and R-Truth on June 19 at Capitol Punishment. Cena began a feud with CM Punk, who was leaving the company due to his contract expiring after Money in the Bank. Punk defeated Cena to win the WWE Championship on July 17 at Money in the Bank and left the company with the title. Dave Meltzer of the Wrestling Observer Newsletter awarded the match five stars, Cena's first and only five star match. On the July 25 episode of Raw, after Rey Mysterio won the WWE Championship in a tournament, Cena challenged and defeated Mysterio later that night to become WWE Champion for a record-breaking 11th time, only to be interrupted by Punk, who also claimed to be champion. Punk again defeated Cena at SummerSlam on August 14 in a championship unification match, after special guest referee Triple H missed Cena's foot on the rope. After Alberto Del Rio became WWE Champion by cashing in his Money in the Bank briefcase to defeat Punk, Cena became the #1 contender and beat Del Rio at Night of Champions on September 18 for his tenth WWE Championship. He lost it back to Del Rio at Hell in a Cell on October 2 in a triple threat Hell in a Cell match also involving Punk. Cena lost his rematch to Del Rio at Vengeance on October 23 in a Last Man Standing match due to interference by The Miz and R-Truth. After weeks of Miz and Truth attacking Cena and employees, Cena was allowed to choose his partner to challenge Miz and Truth at Survivor Series on November 20; Cena chose The Rock as his partner, and they defeated Miz and Truth, though The Rock gave Cena a Rock Bottom in the ending. Cena then began a feud with Kane, who cited his disgust for Cena's "Rise Above Hate" slogan and claimed that Cena would need to embrace the hate to defeat The Rock at WrestleMania. Cena fought Kane to a double countout at Royal Rumble on January 29, 2012, and then defeated him in an Ambulance match on February 19 at Elimination Chamber. At WrestleMania XXVIII on April 1, Cena faced The Rock in the main event; the match ended when Cena attempted the People's Elbow on The Rock, and he countered with a Rock Bottom for the pinfall. The following night on Raw, Cena accepted his loss and invited The Rock to the ring so that he could congratulate him. However, his call was answered instead by the returning Brock Lesnar, who attacked Cena with an F-5. This led to Cena feuding with Raw and SmackDown General Manager John Laurinaitis, who revealed that he signed Lesnar to bring "legitimacy" to the WWE and for Lesnar to become its "new face". At Extreme Rules on April 29, Cena defeated Lesnar in an Extreme Rules match. He lost to Laurinaitis at Over the Limit on May 20 after interference from Big Show, but at No Way Out on June 17, Laurinaitis was fired after Cena defeated Big Show in a steel cage match with both their jobs on the line. The following night on Raw, Laurinatis was given one final opportunity to challenge Cena. However that night Cena defeated Laurinaitis and David Otunga in a handicap match to end his feud with Laurinaitis. Cena won the WWE Championship Money in the Bank ladder match on July 15 at Money in the Bank, earning a contract for a shot at the WWE Championship anytime within a year. On July 23, on Raw 1000, Cena cashed in his contract on CM Punk, and won by disqualification after Big Show interfered, becoming the first person to cash in a Money in the Bank contract and not win a title. Cena's feud with Punk continued into SummerSlam on August 19, where Punk retained the title against Cena and Big Show in a triple threat match, and at Night of Champions on September 16, where they fought to a draw. After being sidelined with a legitimate arm injury, Cena returned at Survivor Series on November 18, but was pinned by Punk in a triple threat match also involving Ryback. Cena then feuded with Dolph Ziggler over an alleged relationship with AJ Lee and at TLC: Tables, Ladders & Chairs on December 16, he lost to Ziggler in a ladder match for Ziggler's World Heavyweight Championship Money in the Bank contract, after AJ turned on Cena. The following night on Raw, Cena teamed with Vickie Guerrero to face Ziggler and AJ in a mixed tag team match which ended in a disqualification after Cena was attacked by the debuting Big E Langston. Cena defeated Ziggler on the January 7 episode of Raw, and again in a steel cage match the following week, despite interference from AJ and Langston in both matches, ending the feud. On January 27, 2013, Cena won his second Royal Rumble match, announcing that he would pursue the WWE Championship at WrestleMania 29. Cena, along with Ryback and Sheamus, began feuding with The Shield (Dean Ambrose, Roman Reigns, and Seth Rollins), culminating in a six-man tag team match on February 17 at Elimination Chamber, which The Shield won. On the February 25 episode of Raw, Cena defeated CM Punk to reaffirm his status as the #1 contender for the Rock's WWE Championship. At WrestleMania on April 7, Cena defeated Rock in their rematch to win his eleventh WWE Championship. Cena then began a rivalry with Ryback, during which he suffered a legitimate achilles tendon injury. Cena retained his championship against Ryback in a Last Man Standing match at Extreme Rules on May 19; the match ended in a no contest after both men were down for a 10 count. Cena then defeated Ryback in a Three Stages of Hell match on June 16 at Payback. He defeated Mark Henry via submission on July 14 at Money in the Bank. At SummerSlam on August 18, Cena lost the WWE Championship to Daniel Bryan, with Triple H as the special guest referee ending his reign at 133 days. The following night on Raw, Cena announced he would undergo surgery for a triceps tear and would be out for four to six months. Cena returned at Hell in a Cell on October 27, defeating Alberto Del Rio to win his third World Heavyweight Championship. He retained the title against Damien Sandow on the October 28 episode of Raw, and Alberto Del Rio in a rematch on November 24 at Survivor Series. Cena next challenged then-WWE Champion Randy Orton to unify their respective championships, with The Authority agreeing and arranging for a Tables, Ladders and Chairs title unification match at TLC: Tables, Ladders & Chairs on December 15, which Cena lost. A rematch occurred at the Royal Rumble for the now unified WWE World Heavyweight Championship on January 26, where Cena lost after being distracted by The Wyatt Family. At Elimination Chamber on February 23, their interference caused Cena's elimination in the Elimination Chamber match. I know how John Cena feuds tend to work. He loses one match, then wins the next two or three. Look at Rusev and Bray Wyatt as examples. These feuds don't really help talent. They're established... as definitively below Cena. This is a running theme in WWE booking. [Kevin] Owens is... worse off than he would have been if he had never had the second and third matches with Cena. — Pro Wrestling Dot Net analyst Will Pruett in July 2015 After Elimination Chamber, Bray Wyatt accepted Cena's challenge for a WrestleMania XXX match. Wyatt wanted to prove that Cena's heroic act was a facade characteristic of "this era of lies" and to turn Cena into a "monster". At WrestleMania on April 6, Cena defeated Wyatt despite interference from Luke Harper and Erick Rowan. The feud continued after WrestleMania based on the story that Wyatt was capturing Cena's fanbase, exemplified by Wyatt leading a children's choir to the ring on the April 28 episode of Raw, where they later donned sheep masks. At Extreme Rules on May 4, Wyatt defeated Cena in a steel cage match after repeated interference from the rest of the Wyatt Family members and a demonic child. At Payback on June 1, Cena defeated Wyatt in a well received Last Man Standing match to end their feud; Cena buried Wyatt under multiple equipment cases to win the match. On the June 16 episode of Raw, Cena defeated Kane in a stretcher match to qualify for the ladder match for the vacant WWE World Heavyweight Championship at Money in the Bank on June 29, where he won his 15th world championship. He retained the title at Battleground on July 20 in a fatal four-way match against Roman Reigns, Randy Orton and Kane. At SummerSlam on August 17, Cena lost the championship to Brock Lesnar in a squash match, during which Lesnar hit Cena with sixteen suplexes and two F-5s, ending his reign at 49 days. Cena invoked his title rematch clause against Lesnar for Night of Champions on September 21, nearly winning before Seth Rollins attacked him to cause a disqualification. Despite this, he became the first wrestler to defeat Lesnar in two WWE pay-per-view events. Cena then began feuding with Dean Ambrose for the right to face Rollins at Hell in a Cell on October 26, but Ambrose won the right by defeating Cena in a No Holds Barred Contract on a Pole match. Cena faced Randy Orton instead in a Hell in a Cell match to determine the #1 contender for the WWE World Heavyweight Championship, which Cena won. On the October 27 episode of Raw, Cena rejected The Authority's offer to join forces, resulting in a 5-on-5 Survivor Series elimination tag match between Team Cena and Team Authority at Survivor Series. His team consisted of Dolph Ziggler, Big Show, Erick Rowan and Ryback. At Survivor Series on November 23, Big Show turned on Cena, causing his elimination, but Ziggler eventually won the match for Team Cena with the interfering Sting's help. Per the match stipulation, The Authority were stripped from power and only Cena could bring them back. At TLC: Tables, Ladders & Chairs on December 14, Cena defeated Rollins in a tables match to retain his WWE World Heavyweight Championship #1 contender status. It was then announced that Cena would face Lesnar for the title at the Royal Rumble. On the December 29 episode of Raw, Rollins and Big Show held guest host Edge hostage, forcing Cena to reinstate The Authority. On the January 5 episode of Raw, The Authority added Rollins to the title match at Royal Rumble involving Cena and Lesnar. Ziggler, Ryback and Rowan were "fired" for joining Team Cena at Survivor Series. On the January 19 episode of Raw, Cena won a handicap match against Rollins, Big Show and Kane to retain his title shot at the Royal Rumble and win back the jobs of Ziggler, Ryback and Rowan. At the Royal Rumble on January 25, Cena was unsuccessful in capturing the title. Cena then began feuding with United States Champion Rusev, and at Fastlane on February 22, Cena failed to win the title from Rusev after passing out from his submission, the Accolade. Rusev had hit Cena with a low blow following a distraction by his manager Lana. Cena challenged Rusev to a rematch, which was declined, and Stephanie McMahon decreed that Cena would not compete at WrestleMania 31 unless Rusev agreed to a rematch. On the March 9 episode of Raw, Cena attacked Rusev, refusing to release the STF submission hold, causing Lana to grant Cena the match. Cena defeated Rusev at WrestleMania on March 29 to win his fourth United States Championship, marking Rusev's first pinfall loss in the main roster. Cena issued an open challenge each week on the program with his United States Championship on the line, successfully defending the title against the likes of Dean Ambrose, Stardust, Bad News Barrett, Kane, Sami Zayn, Neville, Zack Ryder and Cesaro. Cena retained his title against Rusev in a Russian Chain match on April 26 at Extreme Rules and an "I Quit" match on May 17 at Payback, ending their feud. The following night on Raw, Cena was attacked by then-NXT Champion Kevin Owens, setting up a Champion vs. Champion match at Elimination Chamber on May 31, which Owens won. Cena defeated Owens in a rematch at Money in the Bank on June 14. On July 4 at The Beast in the East, Cena and Dolph Ziggler defeated Kane and King Barrett. After defeating Owens again at Battleground on July 19 to retain the United States Championship and end their feud, Cena resumed his feud with then WWE World Heavyweight Champion Seth Rollins, with Rollins refusing Cena's challenges for the title. On the July 27 episode of Raw, The Authority forced Cena to defend the title against Rollins, which he did successfully despite suffering a legitimate broken nose during the match. Cena then faced Rollins in a "Winner Takes All" match at SummerSlam on August 23, for both the WWE World Heavyweight Championship and the United States Championship, which Cena lost after guest host Jon Stewart, appearing to side with Cena, attacked him with a steel chair, ending Cena's reign at 147 days. Cena defeated Rollins to win the title for the fifth time on September 20 at Night of Champions, a record in the WWE ownership era of the title. Cena retained his title against Rollins in a steel cage match on October 3 at WWE Live from Madison Square Garden, while also restarting his open challenges. At Hell in a Cell on October 25, Cena lost the title to the returning Alberto Del Rio in an open challenge. After a hiatus, Cena returned on the December 28 episode of Raw, defeating Del Rio by disqualification in a rematch for the title. On January 7, he underwent surgery on a shoulder injury, which would keep him out of action for an undisclosed length of time. Cena returned at WrestleMania 32 on April 3, 2016, helping The Rock fend off The Wyatt Family. Cena then made his full return on the Memorial Day edition of Raw on May 30, four months earlier than had been expected for his type of injury. He was confronted by AJ Styles, only to be betrayed by Styles, who joined his former Club teammates Luke Gallows and Karl Anderson in attacking Cena. On June 19 at Money in the Bank, Styles defeated Cena with interference from Gallows and Anderson. On the July 4 episode of Raw, Cena was again attacked by The Club, but was saved by Enzo Amore and Big Cass, setting up a six-man tag team match on July 24 at Battleground, which Cena, Amore, and Cass won after Cena pinned Styles. On the July 19 episode of SmackDown at the 2016 WWE draft, Cena was drafted to the SmackDown brand, while also defeating Club member Luke Gallows in a singles contest. At SummerSlam on August 21, Cena lost to Styles in a rematch. With Styles later winning the renamed WWE World Championship, Cena challenged him and Dean Ambrose in a triple threat match for the title on October 9 at No Mercy. He lost the match after being pinned by Styles, which came after Ambrose and Cena simultaneously made Styles submit, therefore restarting the match. Cena took a sabbatical from WWE to film American Grit season 2. On January 29, 2017, Cena defeated Styles at the Royal Rumble to win the WWE Championship and tie Ric Flair for the most recognized world title reigns at 16. However, Cena would lose the championship two weeks later in an Elimination Chamber match at Elimination Chamber on February 12 to Bray Wyatt. Two nights later on SmackDown, Cena lost a triple threat match against Wyatt for the championship in a match also featuring Styles. Cena then began a feud with The Miz, with Miz accusing Cena of being a hypocrite because of his movie commitments, while Cena accused Miz of stealing other wrestlers' moves and personalities. Miz's wife Maryse then slapped Cena before Cena and his girlfriend Nikki Bella sent Miz and Maryse retreating. SmackDown General Manager Daniel Bryan then set up a mixed tag team match for WrestleMania 33 on April 2, which Cena and Bella won. Cena proposed marriage to Bella after the match and she accepted. In July 2017, WWE dubbed Cena a "free agent" during the Superstar Shake-up, meaning he could work for both the Raw and SmackDown brands. Cena defeated Rusev in a flag match at Battleground on July 23, Baron Corbin at SummerSlam on August 20, and lost to Roman Reigns on September 24 at No Mercy. Cena returned to SmackDown the next month after Commissioner Shane McMahon named him the final member of Team SmackDown for the men's 5-on-5 elimination match against Team Raw at Survivor Series; at the event on November 19, Cena was eliminated by Kurt Angle and Team SmackDown was defeated. Cena failed to win the Royal Rumble on January 28, 2018, and the Elimination Chamber match to determine the No. 1 contender for the Universal Championship on February 25 at Elimination Chamber, as well as a six-pack challenge on March 11 at Fastlane for the WWE Championship. On April 8 at WrestleMania 34, Cena was quickly defeated by The Undertaker. After defeating Triple H on April 27 at the Greatest Royal Rumble, he thanked the crowd for sticking by him during a tough period, referencing his loss to Undertaker and his recent breakup with Nikki Bella. Cena competed in a tag team match with Bobby Lashley against Elias and Kevin Owens at Super Show-Down on October 6 in Melbourne, Australia, which he and Lashley won. He was also scheduled for a match at Crown Jewel in Saudi Arabia on November 2, but Cena refused to work the event following the murder of Saudi journalist Jamal Khashoggi. Cena returned to WWE television on the January 1, 2019 episode of SmackDown, where he and Becky Lynch defeated Andrade Cien Almas and Zelina Vega in a mixed tag team match. On the January 14 episode of Raw, Cena lost to Finn Bálor, Drew McIntyre, and Corbin in a fatal four-way match to determine the No. 1 contender for the Universal Championship at Royal Rumble. Cena was scheduled to compete in the Royal Rumble on January 27, but was taken out due to an in-storyline ankle injury supposedly suffered during the match. He appeared at WrestleMania 35 on April 7 in his "Doctor of Thuganomics" persona and interrupted Elias' concert, performing his finisher on Elias (calling it by its original name of the F-U) after insulting him. On the July 22 episode of Raw titled Raw Reunion, he engaged in a rap battle with The Usos. Cena returned to WWE again on the February 28, 2020 episode of SmackDown, seemingly announcing his retirement before he was confronted by "The Fiend" Bray Wyatt, who challenged him to a match at WrestleMania 36—a sequel to their WrestleMania XXX match in 2014—which Cena accepted. On the second night of the event on April 5, rather than a traditional wrestling match, the two squared off in a surreal cinematic-style match called a Firefly Fun House match, taking the competitors on a trip through history as moments from Cena's and Wyatt's history were played out, including Cena's debut against Kurt Angle, a moment featuring his Doctor of Thuganomics character, and the pair's match at WrestleMania XXX. Wyatt ultimately defeated Cena, and following his victory Cena's motionless body vanished from the middle of the ring. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, Cena was unable to appear at WrestleMania 37, marking the first time he missed a WrestleMania in nearly 20 years, as he had wrestled or at least appeared at the event every year since his first appearance at WrestleMania XIX in 2003. At the time, Cena was in Canada filming the HBO Max series Peacemaker, and the pandemic made it logistically impossible for him to travel to Tampa, Florida, for WrestleMania 37, as upon his return to Canada, he would have had to quarantine for two weeks, which would have shut down production on the series. Cena did, however, appear in a WWE advertisement to help announce the location of WrestleMania 38. He finally made his return to WWE programming at Money in the Bank on July 18, 2021, confronting Roman Reigns after the latter retained his Universal Championship against Edge in the main event. Following this, WWE announced the Summer of Cena tour, confirming Cena had signed a 25-appearance deal. After initially being scheduled to face Finn Bálor for the title, Cena ultimately highjacked a contract signing on the July 30 episode of SmackDown so he would challenge Reigns at SummerSlam. At the event on August 21, Reigns defeated Cena after a back-and-forth contest. On the June 6, 2022 episode of Raw, it was announced that Cena would return on the June 27 episode of Raw, which marked the 20th anniversary of his main roster in-ring debut. On that episode of Raw, Cena returned and cut a promo recalling all his memories and thanking the fans for their support. He also made appearances backstage with The Street Profits, Ezekiel, Theory, Seth "Freakin" Rollins, and Omos. On the December 30 episode of SmackDown, Cena wrestled for the first time in over a year, where he and Kevin Owens defeated The Bloodline's Roman Reigns and Sami Zayn. On January 27, 2023, Cena was announced as the cover star for the WWE 2K23 video game, the second time for him being a cover star of a WWE 2K game after WWE 2K15. Over the next two months, Austin Theory would call out Cena multiple times and challenge him to a match at WrestleMania 39 for Theory's United States Championship, which Cena accepted on the March 6 episode of Raw. On the first night of WrestleMania on April 1, Cena lost to Theory. At Money in the Bank on July 1, Cena made a surprise appearance and was confronted by Grayson Waller after Cena stated that WrestleMania should come to the United Kingdom. Waller then attacked Cena, who retaliated by hitting the Attitude Adjustment on Waller. Cena returned for a brief run on SmackDown starting on the September 1 episode, where he was interrupted by Jimmy Uso and attacked him. The next night, Cena served as the host of Payback, and was also a special guest referee for the match between LA Knight and The Miz, which Knight won and was embraced by Cena afterwards. At Superstar Spectacle on September 8, Cena and Seth "Freakin" Rollins defeated Imperium (Giovanni Vinci and Ludwig Kaiser). On the September 15 episode of SmackDown, Cena was attacked on Waller's talkshow "The Grayson Waller Effect" by Jimmy and his Bloodline partner Solo Sikoa, before AJ Styles saved Cena. The following week, Cena and Styles were to sign a contract for a tag team match against them at Fastlane, but Styles was left unable to compete after a backstage assault from the Bloodline. Cena was set to face Jimmy and Solo in a handicap match at the event until the September 29 episode of SmackDown, when LA Knight signed a contract to join Cena in the match. At Fastlane on October 8, Cena and Knight defeated Uso and Sikoa. On the October 20 episode of SmackDown, Cena teased retirement after mentioning he hadn't won a singles match since 2018, before calling out anyone to face him. Sikoa came out and brawled with Cena, setting up a match between the two at Crown Jewel. At the event on November 4, Cena was defeated by Sikoa after nine Samoan Spikes. Cena's original gimmick portrayed a white rapper who wore jerseys, backwards hats, a chain with a padlock around his neck, and was known as the "Doctor of Thuganomics". First as "The Prototype", and later under his real name, Cena sometimes used underhanded tactics to score victories, such as using his chain as a weapon behind the referee's back. He often rapped before his matches, insulting his opponents, events that happened in the media and even the crowd. He also regularly performed "rap battles", where he and his opponent took turns rapping on each other. In 2006, shortly after his debut film, The Marine, his wrestling character shifted from that of a rapper to a young military upstart, wearing dog tags and cargo shorts to the ring and also performing a salute to the crowd. Cena said in a 2011 interview with WWE.com that "every night when I do that salute, it's also a sign of respect to the men and women that don the uniform of the Armed Forces." During WWE's change from TV-14 to TV-PG in mid-2008, the name of Cena's finishing move, the "FU", was changed to the "Attitude Adjustment" and his finishing submission move, the "STFU", was renamed the "STF" to fit with the WWE's new policies. During his career, he has been known for ending his matches with a sequence of moves, dubbed the "Five Moves of Doom". The moves typically go in the following order: flying shoulder block, sit-out hip toss, protobomb, "Five Knuckle Shuffle", and "Attitude Adjustment". Cena has portrayed a heroic character throughout his WWE career, except for a villainous run in 2002–2003. His signature ring gear includes jean shorts, sneakers, wristbands, and armbands. He also wears a variety of T-shirts and baseball caps, which commonly include one of his catchphrases: "Never Give Up", "You Can't See Me", "Hustle, Loyalty, Respect", and "Respect. Earn it". He has a history of returning from both real and scripted injuries much sooner than expected. ESPN reporter David Shoemaker said in April 2016, "Never underestimate Cena's recuperative abilities. He's somewhere on the recovery scale between German platelet-rich plasma therapy and Deadpool." Fellow wrestler Big Show said he felt most stable being lifted by Cena, despite Cena being over 200 lbs lighter and almost a foot shorter—a testament to Cena's functional strength. During his WWE career, Cena's has used his attire in an attempt to reflect the most current fashions and styling within the hip hop culture that his character represents. Cena started out wearing "throwback jerseys" and Reebok pumps until WWE produced specific Cena merchandise which he began wearing. While Cena was a member of the SmackDown brand, one of his WWE-produced T-shirts bore the suggestive spoonerism "Ruck Fules". Whenever it appeared on television, the image was censored, not by the network, but by WWE to sell more shirts under the premise that it was "too hot for TV". He also wore a chain with a large padlock, occasionally using it as a weapon, until WrestleMania 21, when it was replaced with a chromed and diamond studded "Chain Gang" spinner medallion matching his spinner title belt. Around the time The Marine was released, Cena began wearing more military related attire, including camouflage shorts, dog tags, a Marine soldier cap, and a WWE produced shirt with the legend "Chain Gang Assault Battalion". Shortly after WrestleMania 23, when promotion for The Marine ended, the military attire diminished and was replaced with apparel bearing his new slogan "American Made Muscle" along with denim shorts, not seen since he was a member of the SmackDown roster. He then wore shirts that promoted Cenation and his trademark line "You Can't See Me". Cena has been called the greatest professional wrestler of all time by his peers Kurt Angle, John "Bradshaw" Layfield, and veteran industry personality Paul Heyman. When discussing Cena's legacy on his podcast, Jim Cornette (who was head booker of OVW while Cena was there) stated "I think [Cena is] the last big star in wrestling", praising his work ethic, athletic ability and microphone skills. WWE chairman Vince McMahon said he regarded John Cena as the WWE's Babe Ruth. Bleacher Report named Cena one of the 10 greatest WWE wrestlers of all time. In 2012, WrestleMania XXVIII, headlined by the John Cena vs. The Rock main event, became the highest drawing event in WWE history with 1,217,000 buys. The event held the record for the highest grossing live event in WWE history as of 2012; grossing $8.9 million. WWE Studios, a division of WWE which produces and finances motion pictures, produced Cena's first movie—The Marine, which was distributed theatrically by 20th Century Fox America beginning on October 13, 2006. In its first week, the film made approximately US$7 million at the United States box office. After ten weeks in theaters, the film grossed $18.7 million. Once the film was released on DVD, it fared better, making $30 million in rentals in the first twelve weeks. His second film, also produced by WWE Studios, was 12 Rounds. Filming began on February 25, 2008, in New Orleans; the film was released on March 27, 2009. Cena co-starred in his third film produced by WWE Studios, titled Legendary, which was played in selected theaters beginning on September 10, 2010, for a limited time. It was then released on DVD on September 28, 2010. That same year, Cena starred in the children's film Fred: The Movie, a film based on Lucas Cruikshank's YouTube videos of the same name, where he plays Fred's imaginary father. The movie was first aired on Nickelodeon in September 2010. In 2015, Cena made appearances in the comedy films Trainwreck, Sisters and a cameo in Daddy's Home. In 2017, Cena starred in the war drama The Wall and lent his voice for the animated films Surf's Up 2: WaveMania and Ferdinand. He also appeared in Daddy's Home 2, reprising his role in a larger capacity than the 2015 film. In 2018, Cena starred in the comedy Blockers, and had a leading role in the Transformers spin-off prequel, Bumblebee. In 2019, he starred in Playing with Fire, playing the role of smokejumper superintendent Jake Carson. In 2020, he voiced Yoshi, a polar bear, in the adventure comedy film Dolittle. In 2019, Cena was cast in Justin Lin's F9, playing Jakob Toretto, the brother of Vin Diesel's character Dominic Toretto. During the film's promotional tour in 2021, Cena referred to Taiwan as "a country". He subsequently posted an apology on social media as China considers Taiwan a part of China. Comedian and political commentator Bill Maher criticized Cena for his apology to China. Cena also was cast as Christopher Smith / Peacemaker in James Gunn's The Suicide Squad, a role originally intended for Dave Bautista. In 2023, he reprised his role as Jakob Toretto in Fast X, which premiered in theaters on May 19, 2023. He was also the voice of Rocksteady in Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles: Mutant Mayhem, which was released on August 2, 2023. Before his WWE debut, Cena made an appearance on the webcast Go Sick as Bruebaker, an angry, cursing wrestler in 2001. During his WWE career, Cena has appeared on ABC's Jimmy Kimmel Live! three times. He has also appeared on morning radio shows including the CBS and XM versions of Opie and Anthony as part of their "walkover" on October 10, 2006. Other appearances have included NBC's Late Night with Conan O'Brien, Fuse's Celebrity Playlist, Fox Sports Net's The Best Damn Sports Show Period, FOX's MADtv, G4's Training Camp (with Shelton Benjamin), and two appearances on MTV's Punk'd (August 2006 and May 2007), as the victim of a practical joke. He also served as a co-presenter, with Hulk Hogan, at the 2005 Teen Choice Awards, as a guest judge during the third week of the 2006 season of Nashville Star, and appeared at the 2007 Nickelodeon UK Kids Choice Awards. In January 2007, Cena, Batista, and Ashley Massaro appeared representing WWE on an episode of Extreme Makeover: Home Edition, giving the children of the family whose house was being renovated WWE merchandise and eight tickets to WrestleMania 23. Two months later, he and Bobby Lashley appeared on the NBC game show Deal or No Deal as "moral support" to longtime WWE fan and front row staple, Rick "Sign Guy" Achberger. Edge and Randy Orton also appeared, but as antagonists. On April 9, 2008, Cena, along with fellow wrestlers Triple H and Chris Jericho, appeared on the Idol Gives Back fund-raising special. In March 2009, Cena made an appearance on Saturday Night Live during the show's cold opening sequence. On March 7, 2009, he was a guest on NPR's quiz show Wait Wait... Don't Tell Me! in a Not My Job sequence titled "Sure, pro wrestling is a good gig, but when you win, do they throw teddy bears into the ring?". In 2001, between his training in Ultimate Pro Wrestling and Ohio Valley Wrestling, Cena was involved in the UPN produced reality show Manhunt, in which he portrayed Big Tim Kingman, leader of the group of bounty hunters who chased down the contestants who acted as fugitives. The show, however, was mired in controversy when it was alleged that the portions of the show were rigged to eliminate certain players, scenes were re-shot or staged to enhance drama and contestants read from scripts. Cena was featured on the ABC reality series Fast Cars and Superstars: The Gillette Young Guns Celebrity Race, which aired in June 2007, making it to the final round before being eliminated on June 24, placing third in the competition overall. In 2007, Cena was interviewed for the CNN Special Investigations Unit documentary Death Grip: Inside Pro Wrestling, which focused on steroid and drug use in professional wrestling. When asked if he had taken steroids he was heard to reply, "I can't tell you that I haven't, but you will never prove that I have". The day after the documentary aired, WWE accused CNN of taking Cena's comments out of context to present a biased point of view, backing up their claim by posting an unedited video of Cena answering the same question – filmed by WWE cameras from another angle – in which he is heard beginning the same statement with "absolutely not". A text interview on the website with Cena later had him saying the news outlet should apologize for misrepresenting him, which CNN refused, saying they felt the true answer to the question began with the phrase "my answer to that question". However, they did edit the documentary on subsequent airings to include the "absolutely not". Cena hosted the Australian Nickelodeon Kids Choice Awards with Natalie Bassingthwaighte on October 11, 2008, in Melbourne. Cena guest starred as Ewan O'Hara, brother of Juliet O'Hara, in an episode of the fourth season of the comedy drama Psych. He also guest starred as himself in the seventh episode of Disney Channel's Hannah Montana Forever. On August 17, 2015, Cena guest co-hosted Today on NBC. Cena appeared on Late Night with Seth Meyers on August 21, 2015. Cena co-hosted Today again on March 28–30 and May 9, 10, 13 and 30, 2016. Cena hosted two seasons of American Grit on Fox, a reality television series with 10 episodes. 16 men and women were split into four teams, where challenges were given. A US$1 million prize was given to the winning team. American Grit premiered on Fox on April 14, 2016, and the finale of season 1 aired on June 9. Cena hosted the ESPN ESPY Awards on July 13, 2016, in Los Angeles. On December 10, 2016, Cena was the guest host of Saturday Night Live (SNL) on NBC. On January 24, 2017, Nickelodeon announced that Cena would host the 2017 Nickelodeon Kids' Choice Awards ceremony on March 11. On January 11, 2018, it was announced that he would be hosting the awards ceremony again on March 24, 2018, becoming the third host behind Whitney Houston and Rosie O'Donnell to host the ceremony back to back years. Two days later, the game show Keep It Spotless premiered with him as an executive producer. In addition, he was cast on Rise of the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles as the voice of the villain Baron Draxum. The series premiered in July 2018. On February 14, 2019, it was announced that Cena would host a revival of Are You Smarter than a 5th Grader on the network, which premiered June 10, 2019. In 2021, Cena co-hosted the TV game show Wipeout. In 2024, an almost completely nude Cena appeared at the 96th Academy Awards to present the award for best costume design in reference to a streaker interrupting the ceremony in 1974. Cena largely received praise for his performance during the presentation. In addition to his wrestling career, Cena is a rapper. He performed his fifth WWE theme song, "Basic Thuganomics", and it was featured on the WWE soundtrack album WWE Originals. He also recorded a song, "Untouchables", for the company's next soundtrack album WWE ThemeAddict: The Music, Vol. 6. He collaborated on a remix for the song "H-U-S-T-L-E" along with Murs, E-40, and Chingo Bling. Cena's debut album, You Can't See Me, was recorded with his cousin Tha Trademarc. It features, among other songs, his entrance theme, "The Time is Now", and the single "Bad, Bad Man", for which a music video was made that parodied 1980s culture, including the television show The A-Team. A video was also made for the second single, "Right Now", that premiered on the August 8, 2005 episode of WWE Monday Night Raw. Cena and Tha Trademarc were later featured on a track by The Perceptionists called "Champion Scratch". Cena appeared on T-Boz's album, Still Cool. In October 2014, Cena was featured on two songs with rapper Wiz Khalifa for his two singles "All Day" and "Breaks" for the soundtrack to the WWE 2K15 video game. Cena is a self-taught pianist, starting to learn the instrument in 2016. In 2022, he performed a piano rendition of Mötley Crüe's "Home Sweet Home" for the Peacemaker soundtrack, playing it onscreen as his Peacemaker character in a poignant scene to close the episode "Murn After Reading". Studio albums You Can't See Me (2005) Soundtrack albums Peacemaker (2022) Before his professional wrestling career, Cena appeared in an advertisement for Gold's Gym. As a wrestler, he has endorsed the energy drink YJ Stinger, appearing in commercials beginning in October 2003, and Subway, for whom he filmed advertisements with their spokesperson Jared Fogle in November 2006 that began airing the following January. For a time in 2007, he also endorsed two "signature collections" of energy drinks and energy bars sold by American Body Builders. In 2008, Cena filmed a commercial as part of Gillette's "Young Guns" NASCAR campaign. In 2009, Cena expanded his relationship with Gillette by introducing a new online campaign called "Be A Superstar" featuring himself alongside fellow WWE wrestlers Chris Jericho and Cody Rhodes. The campaign features motivational videos. After Dwayne "The Rock" Johnson called Cena "Fruity Pebbles" during their feud (in reference to Cena's colorful merchandise) Cena appeared on the box of Fruity Pebbles cereal in 2013. He was the pace car driver for the 58th annual Daytona 500. On October 13, 2016, Cena made his debut as the voice of Ernie the Elephant in a new commercial campaign launched by Wonderful Pistachios. He was named to Adweek's "Creative 100" and received praise for his performance. In 2020, Cena and Honda announced a partnership, with Cena becoming the new voice of Honda. Cena has granted over 650 wishes for children with life-threatening illnesses through the Make-A-Wish Foundation—the most in Make-A-Wish history, with his first wish dating back to 2002. The Guinness Book of World Records confirmed that not only had Cena granted this many wishes by mid-2022, but that second place was fewer than 200. In 2009, Cena received the Chris Greicius Celebrity Award. From late 2011 until WrestleMania XXVIII, Cena wore a black "Rise Above Hate" T-shirt promoting WWE's "Be a Star" anti-bullying campaign. In September and October 2012, Cena wore pink and black with the phrase "Rise Above Cancer" in partnership with Susan G. Komen for the Cure as part of Breast Cancer Awareness Month. In November 2016, Cena appeared in a public service announcement, "We Are America", sponsored by the Ad Council as part of its "Love Has No Labels" campaign. Cena made a $1 million donation to Black Lives Matter in June 2020 as part of the #MatchAMillion initiative made popular by K-pop band BTS. His catchphrase "You Can't See Me" originates from his early days of wrestling in the WWE where he was dared by his little brother to do the yayo dance on TV, which consists of moving your head while looking into the palm of your hand. Cena accepted the dare, but waved his hand in front of his face instead to make it look more visible to his brother. Over time, this evolved into his signature catchphrase "You Can't See Me". In mid-2015, Cena was the subject of the Internet meme "Unexpected John Cena", also known as simply "Unexpected Cena" or "IT'S JOHN CENA". He has also been the subject of many memes due to his catchphrase, "You can't see me" such as being invisible in photos. On May 10, 2021, Cena posted a video on his Weibo account, in which he sat in a car and ate ice cream while promoting the upcoming film Fast & Furious 9. In the video, Cena speaks Mandarin and sings into the ice cream cone as if it were a microphone. The video was viewed by millions of users and inspired the creation of the meme "Bing Chilling", a mishearing of bīngqílín (冰淇淋), which means ice cream and is said repeatedly in the video. On May 24, 2021, a video of Cena apologizing to China was published on Twitter. While promoting Fast & Furious 9 in an interview, Cena stated Taiwan would be the first country to be able to view the film. This resulted in a backlash from Chinese social media users, prompting Cena to apologize in Mandarin in the video for the slip of the tongue. His apology received mixed reactions in China, and was the subject of further internet memes in the west. Cena resides in Land o' Lakes, Florida. He has said numerous times that he does not want to have children because he does not want to be an absentee parent while he is focused on his career. While promoting his 2009 film 12 Rounds, Cena announced his engagement to Elizabeth Huberdeau. They were married on July 11, 2009. On May 1, 2012, Cena filed for divorce, which was finalized on July 18. Later that year, he began dating fellow wrestler Nikki Bella. They became engaged when Cena proposed to her at WrestleMania 33 on April 2, 2017, but ended their relationship in April 2018; they had been scheduled to marry on May 5. On October 12, 2020, Cena married girlfriend Shay Shariatzadeh, whom he had been dating since early 2019, in a private ceremony in Tampa, Florida. The two met during the production of Cena's 2019 film Playing with Fire, which was filmed in Vancouver, where Shariatzadeh works. Cena started learning Mandarin Chinese in 2016 to help the WWE expand its reach, and he spoke in Mandarin at a press conference in China. He also revealed in April 2018 that he learned to play the piano. In December 2017, the Ford Motor Company filed a lawsuit against Cena for selling his 2017 Ford GT, therefore violating his purchase agreement. According to Ford, he signed a contract to keep the car for at least two years but breached the agreement by selling it to make a net profit shortly after receiving it. On June 19, 2018, the two sides reached an undisclosed settlement, with Cena apologizing to Ford and Ford promising to donate the settlement to charity. In July 2018, Cena briefly moved to China, where he settled in Yinchuan. He went on to create a YouTube show on WWE's channel, highlighting his trips to local stores and markets. He explained that he would be living there for five months while working on a film, Hidden Strike, with Jackie Chan. The shoot concluded in November 2018. The Baltimore Sun Best Feud of the Decade (2010) vs. Edge Match of the Year (2007) vs. Shawn Michaels on April 23 at Raw Wrestler of the Year (2007, 2010) Feud of the Year (2010) vs. The Nexus Ohio Valley Wrestling OVW Heavyweight Championship (1 time) OVW Southern Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Rico Constantino Pro Wrestling Illustrated Feud of the Year (2006) vs. Edge Feud of the Year (2011) vs. CM Punk Match of the Year (2007) vs. Shawn Michaels on Raw Match of the Year (2011) vs. CM Punk at Money in the Bank Match of the Year (2013) vs. Daniel Bryan at SummerSlam Match of the Year (2014) vs. Bray Wyatt in a Last Man Standing match at Payback Match of the Year (2016) vs. AJ Styles at SummerSlam Most Improved Wrestler of the Year (2003) Most Popular Wrestler of the Decade (2000–2009) Most Popular Wrestler of the Year (2004, 2005, 2007, 2012) Wrestler of the Year (2006, 2007) Ranked No. 1 of the top 500 singles wrestlers in the PWI 500 in 2006, 2007 and 2013 Rolling Stone Best Promos (2015) tied with Kevin Owens Best Storyline (2015) vs. Kevin Owens WWE Match of the Year (2015) vs. Kevin Owens at Money in the Bank Sports Illustrated Muhammad Ali Legacy Award (2018) Ranked No. 4 of the top 10 wrestlers in 2017 Ultimate Pro Wrestling UPW Heavyweight Championship (1 time) World Wrestling Entertainment / WWE WWE Championship (13 times) World Heavyweight Championship (3 times) WWE United States Championship (5 times) WWE Tag Team Championship (2 times) – with The Miz (1) and David Otunga (1) World Tag Team Championship (2 times) – with Batista (1) and Shawn Michaels (1) Money in the Bank (2012 – WWE Championship contract) Royal Rumble (2008, 2013) WWE Championship No. 1 Contender's Tournament (2003, 2005) Brisbane Cup (2009) Slammy Award (10 times) Game Changer of the Year (2011) – with The Rock Hero in All of Us (2015) Holy $#!+ Move of the Year (2010) – Sending Batista through the stage with an Attitude Adjustment Insult of the Year (2012) – To Dolph Ziggler and Vickie Guerrero: "You're the exact opposite. One enjoys eating a lot of nuts and the other is still trying to find his" Kiss of the Year (2012) – with AJ Lee Match of the Year (2013, 2014) – vs. The Rock for the WWE Championship at WrestleMania 29, Team Cena vs. Team Authority at Survivor Series Superstar of the Year (2009, 2010, 2012) Wrestling Observer Newsletter Best Box Office Draw (2007) Best Gimmick (2003) Best on Interviews (2007) Feud of the Year (2011) vs. CM Punk Match of the Year (2011) vs. CM Punk at Money in the Bank on July 17 Most Charismatic (2006–2010) Most Charismatic of the Decade (2000–2009) Wrestler of the Year (2007, 2010) Worst Feud of the Year (2012) vs. Kane Worst Worked Match of the Year (2012) vs. John Laurinaitis at Over the Limit Worst Worked Match of the Year (2014) vs. Bray Wyatt at Extreme Rules Wrestling Observer Newsletter Hall of Fame (Class of 2012) NCAA Division III All-American Springfield College Athletic Hall of Fame inductee (Class of 2015) Make-A-Wish Foundation Chris Greicius Celebrity Award Make-A-Wish Foundation Special Recognition Award (for being the first to grant 300 wishes) 2014 Sports Social TV Entertainer of the Year 2014 Rumble Royalty Hall of Game Award 2014 Susan G. Komen Race for the Cure Grand Marshal 2016 USO Legacy of Achievement Award 2018 Sports Illustrated Muhammad Ali Legacy Award 2024 NCAA Silver Anniversary Award Cena is tied with Ric Flair for the most recognized world championship reigns by WWE, with Flair having won an additional 14 world championships outside WWE Although Ric Flair has won more world championships, several of these reigns are unrecognized by WWE, with the number 16 having been called "WWE mythology". Both the WWE Championship and the now defunct World Heavyweight Championship were considered world titles in WWE. John Cena: My Life. WWE (DVD). 2007. "John Cena's WWE History". UPW. Archived from the original on July 30, 2007. Retrieved July 4, 2007. br/"John Cena on Wrestlingdata.com". Wrestlingdata. Archived from the original on March 31, 2019. Retrieved April 1, 2018. "WWE Profile - John Cena". ESPN. August 1, 2021. Archived from the original on June 12, 2022. Retrieved June 12, 2022. "UPW: John "Prototype" Cena". Ultimate Pro Wrestling. Archived from the original on April 17, 2008. Retrieved March 13, 2008. "John Cena". Cagematch. Archived from the original on July 11, 2020. Retrieved June 25, 2020. "WWE Legend Who Trained John Cena and Randy Orton Owns Conor McGregor in One Line". Essentially Sports. May 4, 2022. Archived from the original on December 25, 2023. Retrieved December 25, 2023. Winkie, Luke (July 26, 2016). "A definitive ranking of the top 101 wrestlers of all time". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on July 31, 2016. Retrieved January 21, 2023. Miller, Kerry (August 14, 2018). "Ranking the 10 Greatest WWE/WWF Wrestlers of All Time". Bleacher Report. Retrieved October 25, 2022. Miller, Rachel (March 4, 2011). "WWE: Why John Cena Is the Face of the WWE and Why He Shouldn't Turn Heel". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on March 9, 2011. Retrieved October 25, 2022. Baker, Will J. "Ranking the 25 Greatest Wrestlers of All Time". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on January 8, 2021. Retrieved February 13, 2023. Levin, David. "The 100 Greatest Wrestlers of All Time". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on June 7, 2023. Retrieved February 13, 2023. "The 25 Greatest Wrestlers Of All Time Have Been Named And Ranked". SPORTbible. September 29, 2020. Archived from the original on May 25, 2022. Retrieved February 13, 2023. "OVW Heavyweight Title". Wrestling-Titles. Archived from the original on January 18, 2012. Retrieved April 12, 2007. "OVW Southern Tag Team Title". Wrestling-Titles. Retrieved April 12, 2007. Truitt, Brian (March 10, 2015). "'Flintstones' adds to John Cena's kid appeal". USA Today. Archived from the original on October 25, 2022. Retrieved October 25, 2022. Powell, Jason (February 22, 2011). "WWE News: The story of John Cena's rap character creation recalled by a former WWE creative team member". Pro Wrestling Dot Net. Archived from the original on February 26, 2023. Retrieved October 25, 2022. Golianopoulos, Thomas (April 1, 2016). "A Candid Q&A With John Cena: WWE's Polarizing Company Man". Complex. Archived from the original on October 25, 2022. Retrieved October 25, 2022. Fowler, Matt (November 2, 2012). "Top 50 Wrestlers of All Time". IGN. Archived from the original on December 2, 2022. Retrieved October 25, 2022. "Editors' choice: Who will be the next John Cena?". WWE. July 31, 2015. Archived from the original on October 25, 2022. Retrieved October 25, 2022. Adams, Matt (September 27, 2022). "John Cena breaks Make A Wish Foundation record with 650 wishes granted". NPR. Archived from the original on January 23, 2023. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "John Cena bio". Slam! Sports. Canadian Online Explorer. February 6, 2005. Archived from the original on June 29, 2012. Retrieved May 5, 2007.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Albright, Bob (June 11, 2007). "Heavyweight homecoming: WWE champion John Cena reflects on road to stardom". The Daily News of Newburyport. Archived from the original on July 19, 2011. Retrieved September 9, 2010. "21 amazing facts about WWE superstar John Cena". MSN. April 23, 2017. Archived from the original on October 27, 2022. Retrieved October 26, 2022. John Cena at the SABR Baseball Biography Project , by Charlie Bevis, Retrieved July 15, 2013. Arce, Edgar (April 26, 2005). "John Cena: The Champ is Here". IGN. Archived from the original on February 4, 2012. Retrieved May 5, 2007. "1998 Football Roster". Springfield College. Archived from the original on February 3, 2014. Retrieved May 5, 2007. "John Cena: biography". Yahoo!. Archived from the original on May 10, 2007. Retrieved May 11, 2007. Sherman, Dale (July 10, 2002). "Whatever Happened to Manhunt's "Big Tim"?". Reality News Online. Archived from the original on January 18, 2006. Retrieved June 13, 2006. "John Cena star bio". Tribute.ca. Archived from the original on July 12, 2010. Retrieved May 5, 2007. "Inside WWE's New Magazine". WWE. Archived from the original on November 5, 2015. Retrieved May 5, 2007. Rovell, Darren (January 25, 2017). "John Cena a champion in the ring and in the sports business world". ESPN. Archived from the original on October 27, 2022. Retrieved October 26, 2022. Melok, Bobby (February 8, 2013). "The kids from OVW that changed WWE". WWE. Archived from the original on September 1, 2019. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "Ultimate University/UPW alumni". UPW. Archived from the original on April 1, 2007. Retrieved March 29, 2007. "UPW Heavyweight Title". Wrestling-Titles. Retrieved April 12, 2007. Kreikenbohm, Philip. "John Cena's Ultimate Pro Wrestling matches". Cagematch. Archived from the original on June 26, 2022. Retrieved January 16, 2016. "2000". The History of WWE. Archived from the original on September 11, 2015. Retrieved August 3, 2014. "John Cena's Profile". Online World of Wrestling. Archived from the original on October 25, 2022. Retrieved October 25, 2022. Hamilton, Ian. Wrestling's Sinking Ship (p. 67). "SmackDown! results – October 10, 2002". Online World of Wrestling. Archived from the original on October 25, 2022. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "SmackDown! results – October 17, 2002". Online World of Wrestling. Archived from the original on October 25, 2022. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "SmackDown! results – October 24, 2002". Online World of Wrestling. Archived from the original on October 25, 2022. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "Rebellion 2002". Pro Wrestling History. Archived from the original on August 31, 2021. Retrieved May 24, 2015. "John Cena's variant of the 80s WWF logo". WWEOzShop.com. Archived from the original on August 29, 2007. Retrieved November 6, 2022. "SmackDown! results – April 3, 2003". Online World of Wrestling. Archived from the original on October 25, 2022. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "SmackDown! results – April 10, 2003". Online World of Wrestling. Archived from the original on October 25, 2022. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "SmackDown! results – April 17, 2003". Online World of Wrestling. Archived from the original on October 25, 2022. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "Backlash 2003 results". Pro Wrestling History. Archived from the original on September 18, 2008. Retrieved May 9, 2007. "Judgment Day 2003 Results". WWE. Archived from the original on October 26, 2006. Retrieved February 8, 2017. Clevett, Jason (July 28, 2003). "Angle takes Vengeance on Lesnar". SLAM! Sports. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on August 22, 2016. Retrieved July 30, 2016. Powell, John (October 20, 2003). "No Mercy for WWE fans". Slam! Sports. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on December 8, 2015. Retrieved February 8, 2017. "Survivor Series 2003 results". Pro Wrestling History. Archived from the original on December 7, 2017. Retrieved December 29, 2007. "Royal Rumble 2004 results". Pro Wrestling History. Archived from the original on June 21, 2015. Retrieved May 10, 2007. Keller, Wade (February 15, 2004). "2/15 WWE No Way Out PPV review: Keller's ongoing "virtual time" analysis of live event". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on October 25, 2022. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Powell, John (March 15, 2004). "WrestleMania XX bombs". Slam! Sports. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on July 13, 2012. Retrieved October 24, 2022.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Kapur, Bob (May 17, 2004). "J-Day for Guerrero". Slam! Sports. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on June 23, 2007. Retrieved October 24, 2022.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Sokol, Chris (June 27, 2004). "Bash provides surprise endings". Slam! Sports. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on July 19, 2012. Retrieved October 24, 2022.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Plummer, Dale (July 8, 2004). "SmackDown: Cena stripped of US title belt". Slam! Sports. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on July 20, 2012. Retrieved October 24, 2022.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Clevett, Jason (August 15, 2004). "Orton-Benoit, Guerrero-Angle save SummerSlam". Slam! Sports. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on July 14, 2012. Retrieved October 24, 2022.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Clevett, Jason (October 4, 2004). "Fans won't remember No Mercy". Slam! Sports. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on June 30, 2012. Retrieved October 24, 2022.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Keller, Wade (October 7, 2004). "KELLER'S SMACKDOWN REPORT 10/7: Ongoing "virtual time" analysis of network broadcast". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on October 25, 2022. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "John Cena's Second Reign as US Champion". WWE. Archived from the original on June 24, 2005. Retrieved May 10, 2007. Plummer, Dale; Tylwalk, Nick (August 27, 2007). "WWE survives its own Armageddon". Slam! Sports. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on June 30, 2012. Retrieved October 24, 2022.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) "2007 Wrestling Almanac & Book of Facts". Wrestling's Historical Cards. 2007. p. 117. Sokol, Chris (February 21, 2005). "JBL finds another Way Out". Slam! Sports. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on June 30, 2012. Retrieved October 24, 2022.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) "SmackDown! results – March 3, 2005". Online World of Wrestling. Archived from the original on November 18, 2015. Retrieved November 6, 2022. "WrestleMania 21 results". Pro Wrestling History. Archived from the original on September 10, 2019. Retrieved May 10, 2007. Sokol, Chris (May 23, 2005). "Judgment Day: Good, bad, ugly". Slam! Sports. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on July 14, 2012. Retrieved October 24, 2022.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Evans, Ant. "What's going down...". Power Slam. SW Publishing LTD. p. 4. 132. "The Betrayal". World Wrestling Entertainment. May 16, 2005. Archived from the original on September 6, 2007. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Sokol, Chris (June 27, 2005). "Batista retains with a Vengeance". Slam! Sports. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on July 18, 2012. Retrieved October 24, 2022.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Plummer, Dale (August 22, 2005). "Hogan-HBK steal SummerSlam". Slam! Sports. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on July 18, 2012. Retrieved October 24, 2022.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) "Jericho Fired; Angle No. 1 Contender". WWE. Archived from the original on October 5, 2018. Retrieved October 25, 2022. Sokol, Chris (September 19, 2005). "Unforgiven marred by unfortunate ending". Slam! Sports. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on June 30, 2012. Retrieved October 24, 2022.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Sokol, Chris (November 2, 2005). "Taboo Tuesday delivers decently". Slam! Sports. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on July 14, 2012. Retrieved October 24, 2022.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) "WWE Champion John Cena def. Kurt Angle". WWE. Archived from the original on April 2, 2019. Retrieved October 25, 2022. Martin, Derek (November 28, 2005). "411's WWE Raw Report 11.28.05". 411Mania. Archived from the original on October 25, 2022. Retrieved October 25, 2022. "2007 Wrestling Almanac & Book of Facts". Wrestling's Historical Cards. Kappa Publishing. 2007. p. 119. Plummer, Dale; Tylwalk, Nick (April 3, 2006). "WrestleMania delivers big time on PPV". Slam! Sports. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on March 29, 2016. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "2007 Wrestling Almanac & Book of Facts". Wrestling's Historical Cards. Kappa Publishing. 2007. pp. 121–122. William III, Ed (July 3, 2006). "Stolen Championship". World Wrestling Entertainment. Archived from the original on November 3, 2012. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Elliott, Brian (September 18, 2006). "Unforgiven just averages out". Slam! Sports. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on May 30, 2015. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Zeigler, Zack (September 18, 2006). "Winning the war". WWE. Archived from the original on March 29, 2007. Retrieved December 28, 2007. Zeigler, Zack (October 9, 2006). "Cyber Sunday Blockbuster". WWE. Archived from the original on December 9, 2017. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Dee, Louie (January 1, 2006). "The Champ is ready". WWE. Archived from the original on December 3, 2007. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Plummer, Dale; Tylwalk, Nick (January 7, 2007). "Cena retains, Triple H injured at Revolution". Slam! Sports. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on July 13, 2012. Retrieved December 31, 2007.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Tello, Craig (January 7, 2007). "Champ ends the streak". WWE. Archived from the original on March 25, 2010. Retrieved December 31, 2007. McAvennie, Mike (January 28, 2007). "Cena: last man outstanding". WWE. Archived from the original on January 18, 2017. Retrieved December 31, 2007. "Pro Wrestling Illustrated, May 2007". Arena Reports. Kappa Publishing. May 2007. p. 134. McElvaney, Kevin (June 2007). "Pro Wrestling Illustrated, July 2007". Kappa Publishing. pp. 74–101. "Pro Wrestling Illustrated, July 2007". Arena Reports. Kappa Publishing. June 2007. p. 133. Elliot, Brian (April 29, 2007). "No filler makes for a consistent Backlash". Slam! Sports. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on April 19, 2015. Retrieved October 24, 2007.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Starr, Noah (April 30, 2007). "Khali's claim". WWE. Archived from the original on July 9, 2017. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Difino, Lennie (May 7, 2007). "Gold digging". WWE. Archived from the original on May 29, 2017. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Dee, Louie (May 20, 2007). "Judgment Day 2007 Results: Goliath goes down". WWE. Archived from the original on May 1, 2008. Retrieved July 6, 2007. Clayton, Coret (June 3, 2007). "One Night Stand 2007 Results: Crafty Cena conquers, pins Great Khali". WWE. Archived from the original on June 6, 2007. Retrieved July 6, 2007. Powell, John; Powell, Justin (June 25, 2007). "Vengeance banal and badly booked". Slam! Sports. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on July 14, 2012. Retrieved October 24, 2022.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Plummer, Dale; Tylwalk, Nick (July 27, 2007). "Cena still champ after busy Bash". Slam! Sports. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on June 29, 2012. Retrieved October 24, 2022.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) "John Cena's 10 greatest rivalries". WWE. Archived from the original on September 21, 2022. Retrieved August 31, 2021. "SummerSlam 2007 Results". WWE. August 26, 2007. Archived from the original on August 29, 2007. Retrieved August 26, 2007. "Unforgiven 2007 results". WWE. Archived from the original on September 24, 2020. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Dr. James Andrews (October 4, 2007). Exclusive footage: John Cena surgery. WWE. Archived from the original (WMV) on October 11, 2007. Retrieved October 4, 2007. Robinson, Bryan (December 31, 2010). "Cena out with pec tear, must surrender WWE title". WWE. Archived from the original on August 17, 2011. Retrieved January 29, 2008. "John Cena speaks out for the first time since his surgery". WWE. October 8, 2007. Archived from the original on October 28, 2007. Retrieved October 29, 2007. "Mr. McMahon vacates Cena's WWE Championship". WWE. October 2, 2007. Archived from the original on October 11, 2007. Retrieved October 3, 2007. John Cena begins road to recovery. WWE (WMV). October 10, 2007. Archived from the original on October 26, 2007. Retrieved October 24, 2007. Plummer, Dale; Tylwalk, Nick (January 28, 2008). "Cena wins Rumble in surprise return". Slam! Sports. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on June 29, 2012. Retrieved October 24, 2022.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) "John Cena def. WWE Champion Randy Orton (DQ, Orton retains)". WWE. Archived from the original on April 4, 2023. Retrieved December 2, 2019. Robinson, Bryan (February 18, 2008). "Triple the Threat, Double the Gauntlet". WWE. Archived from the original on October 20, 2012. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Plummer, Dale (March 30, 2008). "Mayweather, Orton survive Mania; Edge, Flair don't". Slam! Sports. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on October 18, 2015. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Hillhouse, Dave (April 28, 2008). "HHH reigns again after Backlash". Slam! Sports. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on June 26, 2015. Retrieved June 23, 2008. Kapur, Bob (May 18, 2008). "Judgment Day spoils streak of good shows". Slam! Sports. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on July 18, 2012. Retrieved May 1, 2009.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Sitterson, Aubrey (June 1, 2008). "Longhorn's Bloody Loudmouth". WWE. Archived from the original on September 21, 2016. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Keller, Wade (September 29, 2008). "Keller's WWE Night Of The Champions PPV Report 6/29". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved September 28, 2013. Hillhouse, Dave (July 20, 2008). "The Great American Soap Opera". Slam! Sports. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on October 18, 2015. Retrieved July 14, 2009. Sitterson, Aubrey (August 5, 2008). "Championship scramble". WWE. Archived from the original on June 16, 2015. Retrieved August 5, 2008. Sitterson, Aubrey (August 11, 2008). "Bracing for a SummerSlam". WWE. Archived from the original on May 14, 2008. Retrieved August 12, 2008. Plummer, Dale; Nick Tylwalk (August 17, 2008). "SummerSlam comes close to 'blockbuster' status". Slam! Sports. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on July 10, 2015. Retrieved August 12, 2009. Sitterson, Aubrey (May 28, 2008). "Championship scramble". WWE. Archived from the original on May 14, 2008. Retrieved August 25, 2008. "Cena out, vows to return". WWE. August 26, 2008. Archived from the original on November 5, 2015. Retrieved August 27, 2008. "John Cena: Post-surgery interview". WWE. August 26, 2008. Archived from the original on November 5, 2015. Retrieved August 27, 2008. "John Cena def. World Heavyweight Champion Chris Jericho". WWE. November 23, 2008. Archived from the original on October 29, 2011. Retrieved June 5, 2012. "World Heavyweight Champion John Cena def. Chris Jericho". WWE. December 14, 2008. Archived from the original on October 26, 2012. Retrieved June 5, 2012. Sitterson, Aubrey (January 25, 2009). "Results:Beating the odds". World Wrestling Entertainment. Archived from the original on May 31, 2016. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "Edge wins World Heavyweight Title Elimination Chamber Match". WWE. Archived from the original on November 6, 2015. Retrieved June 5, 2012. Passero, Mitch (April 5, 2009). "Cena reclaims his gold". WWE. Archived from the original on June 1, 2009. Retrieved April 6, 2009. "Edge def. John Cena in Last Man Standing Match (New World Heavyweight Champion)". WWE. April 26, 2009. Archived from the original on November 6, 2015. Retrieved June 5, 2012. "John Cena def. Big Show". WWE. May 17, 2009. Archived from the original on October 23, 2016. Retrieved June 6, 2012. "John Cena def. Big Show (Submission Match)". WWE. June 7, 2009. Archived from the original on November 6, 2015. Retrieved June 5, 2012. Plummer, Dale (April 28, 2009). "Raw: Batista next for the Orton Era". Slam! Sports. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on July 2, 2015. Retrieved April 29, 2009. Bishop, Matt (June 28, 2009). "The Bash disappointing live despite heat". Slam! Sports. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on March 10, 2016. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "WWE Champion Randy Orton def. Triple H & John Cena". WWE. July 26, 2009. Archived from the original on November 6, 2015. Retrieved October 21, 2011. Adkins, Greg (July 27, 2009). "Shaq clocks in". World Wrestling Entertainment. Archived from the original on October 25, 2022. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Adkins, Greg (August 23, 2009). "Results:The Viper's Hiss-trionics". World Wrestling Entertainment. Archived from the original on March 5, 2016. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "John Cena def. Randy Orton ("I Quit" Match – New WWE Champion)". WWE. September 13, 2009. Archived from the original on November 6, 2015. Retrieved June 5, 2012. Sokol, Chris; Sokol, Brian (October 7, 2009). "Title changes highlight Hell in a Cell". Slam! Sports. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on July 10, 2015. Retrieved October 6, 2009. Tello, Craig (October 25, 2009). "One Hour, Anything Goes WWE Iron Man Match scorecard". WWE. Archived from the original on October 11, 2010. Retrieved October 21, 2011. "WWE Champion John Cena def. Triple H & Shawn Michaels (Triple Threat Match)". World Wrestling Entertainment. November 22, 2009. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Cohen, Josh (December 13, 2009). "Results: Tables turn on Sheamus". WWE. Archived from the original on March 5, 2016. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Powell, Jason (December 9, 2013). "WWE Slammy Awards 2009 Flashback: Comedian Dennis Miller hosts, WWE Superstar of the Year tournament featuring Undertaker, C.M. Punk, John Cena, and Randy Orton". ProWrestling.net. Archived from the original on November 16, 2020. Retrieved October 25, 2022. Martin, Adam (December 29, 2009). "Raw Quick Results – 12/28/09". WrestleView. Archived from the original on October 25, 2022. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Murphy, Ryan (January 31, 2010). "Results: Opportunity shocks". World Wrestling Entertainment. Archived from the original on February 4, 2010. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Plummer, Dale; Nick Tylwalk (February 22, 2010). "Batista, Jericho and Michaels capitalize on Elimination Chamber opportunities". Slam! Sports. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on July 10, 2015. Retrieved February 22, 2010. Passero, Mitch (February 22, 2010). "John Cena def. Batista (New WWE Champion)". WWE. Archived from the original on February 4, 2010. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "WWE Champion John Cena def. Batista (Last Man Standing Match)". WWE. April 25, 2010. Archived from the original on November 6, 2015. Retrieved June 5, 2012. Bishop, Matt (May 23, 2010). "Batista quits to end disappointing Over The Limit". Slam! Sports. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on July 10, 2015. Retrieved May 26, 2010. "RAW: Vote early, vote often; NXT takes over". Slam! Wrestling. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on June 30, 2012. Retrieved March 28, 2011.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Eck, Kevin (June 21, 2010). "Fatal Fourway thoughts". The Baltimore Sun. Archived from the original on April 9, 2016. Retrieved June 21, 2010. Adkins, Greg (July 18, 2010). "WWE Champion Sheamus def. John Cena (Steel Cage Match)". WWE. Archived from the original on November 6, 2015. Retrieved June 5, 2012. "Team WWE def. The Nexus (Elimination Tag Team Match)". WWE. August 15, 2010. Archived from the original on November 6, 2015. Retrieved June 5, 2012. Hillhouse, Dave (October 4, 2010). "Hell in a Cell: Betrayal, fan interference, and flying shoes". Slam! Sports. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on July 1, 2015. Retrieved October 4, 2010. Sokol, Bryan (October 25, 2010). "Cena central to Bragging Rights; Smackdown wins again". Slam! Sports. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on July 14, 2012. Retrieved October 26, 2010.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Wilkenfeld, Daniel (October 25, 2010). "Caldwell's WWE Raw results 10/25". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on October 27, 2010. Retrieved October 26, 2010. Plummer, Dale; Tylwalk, Nick (November 22, 2010). "The fate of Cena is finally decided at so-so Survivor Series". Slam! Sports. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on July 15, 2012. Retrieved November 22, 2010.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Plummer, Dale (November 22, 2010). "RAW: The Miz cashes in as Nexus costs Orton WWE title". Slam! Sports. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on July 15, 2012. Retrieved November 23, 2010.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Plummer, Dale (December 7, 2010). "RAW: Cena pushes Nexus, Barrett to the breaking point". Slam! Sports. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on June 30, 2012. Retrieved December 7, 2010.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Plummer, Dale (December 13, 2010). "RAW: The Slammy Awards falls flat". Slam! Sports. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on July 10, 2015. Retrieved December 20, 2010. "Results: Man of steel". WWE. Archived from the original on February 19, 2011. Retrieved December 19, 2010. Caldwell, James (January 17, 2011). "Caldwell's WWE Raw Results 1/17: Complete "virtual time" coverage of live Raw – Cena vs. Punk, Royal Rumble hype continues". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved June 20, 2016. Plummer, Dale; Tylwalk, Nick (January 31, 2011). "Super-size Royal Rumble saves biggest surprise for last". Slam! Sports. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on January 17, 2016. Retrieved April 3, 2011. Adkins, Greg (January 31, 2011). "It's good to be "King"". WWE. Archived from the original on November 5, 2015. Retrieved February 22, 2011. Hillhouse, Dave (February 20, 2011). "Elimination Chamber mostly eliminates dramatic intrigue". Slam! Sports. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on July 16, 2012. Retrieved February 21, 2011.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Adkins, Greg (February 21, 2011). "Intermitten reign". WWE. Archived from the original on February 17, 2011. Retrieved February 22, 2011. Plummer, Dale (March 28, 2011). "RAW: One last push toward Wrestlemania". Slam! Sports. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on July 10, 2015. Retrieved April 4, 2011. "Results: WWE Champion The Miz def. John Cena". WWE. Archived from the original on October 17, 2015. Retrieved April 5, 2011. Caldwell, James (April 4, 2011). "Caldwell's WWE Raw results 4/4 – The Rock & Austin live, fall-out from WrestleMania 27, Sin Cara debut". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on April 8, 2011. Retrieved April 8, 2011. Caldwell, James (May 1, 2011). "Caldwell's WWE Extreme Rules PPV Results 5/1: Complete "virtual time" coverage of live PPV – three title changes and a host of gimmick matches". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved May 20, 2016. Wortman, James. "WWE Champion John Cena vs. The Miz & Alex Riley Handicap"I Quit" match". WWE. Archived from the original on November 6, 2015. Retrieved May 14, 2011. Wortman, James. "WWE Champion John Cena vs. R-Truth". WWE. Archived from the original on June 10, 2011. Retrieved June 9, 2011. Wonsover, Michael (June 11, 2018). "Coming full circle: CM Punk, Money in the Bank and Chicago". ESPN. Archived from the original on November 9, 2022. Retrieved June 12, 2022. Sitterson, Aubrey. "Straight Shoot: Was Taker Vs. HHH Better Than John Cena Vs. Punk?". UGO Networks. Archived from the original on February 1, 2014. Retrieved January 18, 2014. Coyle, James (July 26, 2011). "Title glory for Cena". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on June 12, 2022. Retrieved June 12, 2022. "John Cena vs. CM Punk – Undisputed WWE Championship Match". WWE. Archived from the original on November 6, 2015. Retrieved August 1, 2011. Murphy, Ryan. "John Cena def. Alberto Del Rio (New WWE Champion)". WWE. Archived from the original on August 3, 2012. Retrieved December 5, 2011. "WWE Championship Triple Threat Hell in a Cell Match". WWE. Archived from the original on November 6, 2015. Retrieved September 20, 2011. "WWE Championship Last Man Standing Match". WWE. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved October 11, 2011. "The Miz and R-Truth vs. John Cena and The Rock". WWE. Archived from the original on November 6, 2015. Retrieved October 31, 2011. Murphy, Ryan (December 26, 2011). "WWE Raw SuperShow results: Kane rises to hate". WWE. Archived from the original on September 17, 2015. Retrieved June 9, 2012. Mitch Passero (January 30, 2012). "John Cena vs. Kane (Double Count-Out)". WWE. Archived from the original on November 6, 2015. Retrieved January 30, 2012. Giannini, Alex (February 6, 2012). "John Cena vs. Kane (Ambulance Match)". WWE. Archived from the original on November 6, 2015. Retrieved February 13, 2012. Caldwell, James (April 1, 2012). "Caldwell's WWE WrestleMania 28 PPV report 4/1". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on June 17, 2015. Retrieved April 2, 2012. Caldwell, James (April 2, 2012). "Caldwell's WWE Raw results 4/2". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on October 18, 2015. Retrieved April 11, 2012. Shoemaker, David (July 16, 2015). "The Lesnar Effect: How Brock Has Led WWE to a New Era of Wrestling Legitimacy". Grantland. Archived from the original on February 4, 2021. Retrieved June 12, 2022. Caldwell, James (April 29, 2012). "Caldwell's WWE Extreme Rules PPV Report 4/29". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on November 6, 2015. Retrieved April 30, 2012. Slimmer, Scott (May 20, 2012). "411's WWE Over The Limit 2012 Report". 411 Mania. Archived from the original on June 12, 2022. Retrieved June 12, 2022. "No Way Out 2012 results". WWE. Archived from the original on April 16, 2020. Retrieved January 22, 2017. "Raw Results - 6/18/12". June 18, 2012. Archived from the original on April 27, 2023. Retrieved April 27, 2023. "John Cena won the Money in the Bank Ladder Match for a WWE Championship Contract". WWE. Archived from the original on February 11, 2013. Retrieved July 15, 2012. Martin, Todd (July 23, 2012). "Raw 1000th Episode Report". Wrestling Observer. Archived from the original on July 27, 2012. Retrieved July 23, 2012. "Raw results: Raw General Manager AJ Lee gets the last laugh on WWE Champion CM Punk". WWE. Archived from the original on October 1, 2015. Retrieved July 30, 2012. Caldwell, James (August 19, 2012). "CALDWELL'S WWE SUMMERSLAM PPV REPORT 8/19: Complete "virtual time" coverage of live PPV - Lesnar vs. Triple H, Punk vs. Cena vs. Show". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on March 29, 2019. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "WWE Champion CM Punk vs. John Cena ended in a draw". WWE. Archived from the original on November 6, 2015. Retrieved September 16, 2012. "John Cena undergoes arm surgery". WWE. September 18, 2012. Archived from the original on July 21, 2015. Retrieved September 13, 2012. Caldwell, James (November 18, 2012). "CALDWELL'S WWE SURVIVOR SERIES PPV REPORT 11/18: Complete "virtual time" coverage of live PPV - Punk-Cena-Ryback". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on March 29, 2019. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Styles, Irfan Nasir (December 16, 2012). "WWE.com: Dolph Ziggler def. John Cena (Ladder Match for the World Heavyweight Championship Money in the Bank contract)". WWE. Archived from the original on November 6, 2015. Retrieved December 16, 2012. Caldwell, James (December 17, 2012). "CALDWELL'S WWE RAW RESULTS 12/17 - The strangest show of the year concludes with the debut of a new monster heel; Ric Flair returns". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on May 13, 2019. Retrieved December 29, 2019. Caldwell, James (January 7, 2013). "Caldwell's WWE Raw Results 1/7 - WWE Title match, The Rock returns, Cena vs. Ziggler". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on April 4, 2023. Retrieved December 29, 2019. Caldwell, James (January 14, 2013). "Caldwell's WWE Raw Results 1/14: Live, in-person results from 20th Anniv. show - Rock Concert, off-air happenings, more". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on November 16, 2018. Retrieved December 29, 2019. "Full list of Royal Rumble Match participants and eliminations". WWE. January 28, 2012. Archived from the original on January 31, 2013. Retrieved January 28, 2012. Caldwell, James (January 28, 2013). "Caldwell's WWE Raw Results 1/28 - Lesnar returns, Rock's first night as champ, Heyman-McMahon". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on March 30, 2019. Retrieved December 29, 2019. Caldwell, James (February 4, 2013). "CALDWELL'S WWE RAW RESULTS 2/4 - WWE explains many things, Punk-Jericho main event, Bruno HOF Video". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on April 3, 2019. Retrieved December 29, 2019. Caldwell, James (February 17, 2013). "Caldwell's WWE Elimination Chamber PPV Results 2/17: Complete "virtual-time" coverage of Rock-Punk II, Elimination Chamber match, Shield beats Team Cena". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on March 29, 2019. Retrieved December 29, 2019. Caldwell, James (February 25, 2013). "CALDWELL'S WWE RAW RESULTS 2/25 - Cena vs. Punk Instant Classic, Heyman-McMahon "fight," big returns, but did Taker return?". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on April 5, 2023. Retrieved December 29, 2019. "CALDWELL'S WWE WRESTLEMANIA 29 PPV Results: Rock-Cena II, Taker-Punk, Lesnar-Hunter, more". PW Torch. Archived from the original on April 3, 2019. Retrieved December 29, 2019. Caldwell, James (April 28, 2013). "WWE NEWS: Update - John Cena injured according to WWE". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on April 5, 2023. Retrieved December 29, 2019. Caldwell, James (May 19, 2013). "Caldwell's WWE Extreme Rules PPV Results 5/19 (Hour 3): Cena vs. Ryback starts third hour, Lesnar-Hunter cage match". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on April 5, 2023. Retrieved December 29, 2019. Caldwell, James (June 16, 2013). "Caldwell's WWE Payback PPV Results 6/16 (Hour 3): Cena vs. Ryback main event, Tag Title match". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on September 15, 2018. Retrieved December 29, 2019. Caldwell, James (July 14, 2013). "Caldwell's WWE MITB PPV Results 7/14 (Hour 3) - Cena vs. Henry, MITB All-Stars". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on April 5, 2023. Retrieved December 29, 2019. Caldwell, James (August 18, 2013). "Caldwell's WWE Slam PPV Results 8/18 (Hour 3): Cena vs. Bryan WWE Title main event, did Orton cash in?". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on August 22, 2013. Retrieved December 29, 2019. Caldwell, James (August 19, 2013). "Raw News: Cena gone 4–6 months, Triple H explanation, WWE Title & World Title pictures, RVD, new tag team, more". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on July 9, 2015. Retrieved August 20, 2013. Caldwell, James (October 27, 2013). "Caldwell's WWE HIAC PPV Results (Hour 2): Cena returns in World Title match, Punk vs. Ryback HIAC match". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on April 6, 2023. Retrieved December 29, 2019. Caldwell, James (October 28, 2013). "Caldwell's WWE Raw Results 10/28 (Hour 1): Cena opens Raw, Sandow attempts MITB cash-in, Shield". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on April 5, 2023. Retrieved December 29, 2019. Plummer, Dale (November 25, 2013). "Dull Survivor Series proves it isn't what it used to be". Slam! Wrestling. Archived from the original on October 14, 2022. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Clapp, John (November 25, 2013). "World Heavyweight Champion John Cena vs. WWE Champion Randy Orton (Tables, Ladders & Chairs Match)". WWE. Archived from the original on June 20, 2015. Retrieved December 3, 2013. Anthony Benigno. "WWE World Heavyweight Champion Randy Orton def. John Cena". WWE. Archived from the original on July 24, 2015. Retrieved January 22, 2017. Caldwell, James (February 23, 2014). "WWE E. CHAMBER PPV RESULTS 2/23 (Hour 3): Elimination Chamber WWE Title main event". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on April 1, 2024. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Pruett, Will. "Pruett's Pause: WWE Battleground 2015". Pro Wrestling Dot Net. Archived from the original on April 5, 2023. Retrieved July 21, 2015. Caldwell, James (March 10, 2014). "Caldwell's WWE Raw results 3/10 – Bryan "hi-jacks" Raw, Taker & Hogan back on TV, Cena vs. Wyatts feud continues". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on April 14, 2014. Retrieved April 3, 2014. "John Cena vs. Bray Wyatt". WWE. Archived from the original on March 14, 2014. Retrieved April 3, 2014. Caldwell, James (April 6, 2014). "WrestleMania 30 PPV results (Hour 2): Complete "virtual-time" coverage of Cena vs. Bray, big moment for Cesaro in the Andre Battle Royal, Shield vs. Outlaws". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on April 10, 2014. Retrieved April 10, 2014. Caldwell, James (April 28, 2014). "Caldwell's WWE Raw result 4/28 – final PPV hype, Bryan returns from injury, Flair, Tag Title match, Tourney Finals, more". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on May 2, 2014. Retrieved May 6, 2014. Caldwell, James (May 4, 2014). "Caldwell's Extreme Rules PPV results 5/4 – Bryan vs. Kane, Evolution vs. Shield, Cena vs. Wyatt steel cage match". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on May 6, 2014. Retrieved May 6, 2014. Asher, Matthew. "Shield gets suicidal and Cena looks for some Payback against Wyatt". SLAM! Wrestling. Canadian Online Explorer. Archived from the original on June 2, 2014. Retrieved June 2, 2014.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Caldwell, James (June 29, 2014). "CALDWELL'S WWE MITB PPV RESULTS 6/29: Ongoing "virtual-time" coverage of WWE Title ladder match, MITB match, more". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on October 25, 2022. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "WWE Battleground 2014 results". WWE. July 18, 2014. Archived from the original on October 25, 2022. Retrieved October 25, 2022. Hooton, Christopher (August 19, 2014). "WWE SummerSlam 2014 results: Brock Lesnar destroys John Cena while Stephanie McMahon steals the show". The Independent. Archived from the original on November 20, 2014. Retrieved November 5, 2014. Caldwell, James (September 21, 2014). "Caldwell's WWE NoC PPV Report 9/21 – Lesnar vs. Cena". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on September 24, 2014. Retrieved September 21, 2014. Tedesco, Mike (October 14, 2014). "WWE RAW Results – 10/13/14 (John Cena vs. Dean Ambrose)". WrestleView. Archived from the original on December 5, 2022. Retrieved October 14, 2014. Burdick, Michael. "WWE Hell in a Cell 2014 results". WWE. Archived from the original on November 6, 2015. Retrieved October 26, 2014. Tedesco, Mike (October 28, 2014). "WWE RAW Results – 10/27/14 (John Cena vs. Seth Rollins)". WrestleView. Archived from the original on October 18, 2015. Retrieved October 28, 2014. Murphy, Ryan. "Team Cena def. Team Authority". WWE. Archived from the original on September 5, 2015. Retrieved November 23, 2014. Murphy, Ryan. "John Cena def. Seth Rollins (Tables Match)". WWE. Archived from the original on December 13, 2014. Retrieved December 14, 2014. Keller, Wade (December 29, 2014). "Keller's WWE Raw report 12/29: Lesnar and Heyman show up, Ziggler vs. Rusev in a champion vs. champion match, Edge & Christian host, Bryan's big announcement". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved December 31, 2014. Tedesco, Mike (January 6, 2015). "WWE Raw Results – 1/5/15 (The Authority resumes power)". WrestleView. Archived from the original on June 17, 2015. Retrieved January 6, 2015. Caldwell, James (January 19, 2015). "Caldwell's WWE Raw Results 1/19 – final Rumble hype, big "Legends Reunion" theme, Brock Lesnar, Bryan's Raw in-ring return, more". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved July 31, 2016. Caldwell, James (January 25, 2016). "Royal Rumble PPV Report 1/25: Complete "virtual-time" coverage of Lesnar vs. Cena vs. Rollins for WWE Title, Royal Rumble, post-PPV Network show". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on January 27, 2015. Retrieved January 26, 2015. Caldwell, James (February 22, 2015). "WWE Fast Lane PPV results 2/22: Complete "virtual-time" coverage of Bryan vs. Reigns, Cena vs. Rusev, Sting-Hunter confrontation, final PPV before WM31". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on March 30, 2019. Retrieved February 23, 2015. Caldwell, James (March 2, 2015). "WWE Raw results 3/2 – Heyman speaks for Lesnar, Rollins-Daily Show angle, WM31 build continues". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on June 15, 2015. Retrieved March 3, 2015. Tedesco, Mike (March 10, 2015). "WWE RAW Results – 3/9/15 (Orton gets revenge on Rollins)". WrestleView. Archived from the original on July 2, 2015. Retrieved March 10, 2015. "John Cena def. United States Champion Rusev". WWE. Archived from the original on April 16, 2020. Retrieved January 22, 2023. Nemer, Paul (March 31, 2015). "WWE RAW Results – 3/30/15 (Night after WrestleMania 31)". WrestleView. Archived from the original on December 4, 2020. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Nemer, Paul (April 7, 2015). "WWE RAW Results – 4/6/15 (New No. 1 Contender)". WrestleView. Archived from the original on October 25, 2022. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Martin, Adam (April 14, 2015). "WWE RAW Results – 4/13/15 (Extreme Rules PPV stipulation)". WrestleView. Archived from the original on April 15, 2015. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Nemer, Paul (April 21, 2015). "WWE RAW Results - 4/20/15 (Final hype for Extreme Rules)". WrestleView. Archived from the original on October 25, 2022. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Nemer, Paul (May 5, 2015). "WWE RAW Results – 5/4/15 (Changes to Payback main event)". WrestleView. Archived from the original on May 5, 2015. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Nemer, Paul (May 12, 2015). "WWE RAW Results – 5/11/15 (Final hype for WWE Payback)". WrestleView. Archived from the original on May 13, 2015. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Nemer, Paul (May 26, 2015). "WWE RAW Results – 5/25/15 (Title match is made official)". WrestleView. Archived from the original on May 26, 2015. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Nemer, Paul (July 7, 2015). "WWE RAW Results – 7/6/15 (Brock Lesnar runs wild)". WrestleView. Archived from the original on July 8, 2015. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Caldwell, James (April 26, 2015). "CALDWELL'S EXTREME RULES PPV REPORT 4/26: Complete "virtual-time" coverage of live PPV - Rollins vs. Orton steel cage, Cena vs. Rusev, Last Man Standing, more". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on October 25, 2022. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Caldwell, James (May 17, 2015). "CALDWELL'S PAYBACK PPV REPORT 5/17: Complete "virtual-time" coverage of four-way WWE Title match, I Quit War, more". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on October 25, 2022. Retrieved October 25, 2022. Melok, Bobby. "NXT Champion Kevin Owens def. United States Champion John Cena (Champion vs. Champion Match: Non-Title)". WWE. Archived from the original on October 22, 2015. Retrieved May 31, 2015. Laboon, Jeff. "John Cena def. Kevin Owens". WWE. Archived from the original on June 2, 2015. Retrieved June 14, 2015. Caldwell, James (July 4, 2015). "CALDWELL'S WWE NETWORK SPECIAL REPORT 7/4: Complete "virtual-time" coverage of "Beast in the East" - Lesnar's in-ring return, Owens vs. Balor for NXT Title, more". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on December 11, 2018. Retrieved October 25, 2022. Caldwell, James (July 19, 2015). "WWE PPVs CALDWELL'S WWE BATTLEGROUND PPV REPORT 7/19 – Rollins vs. Lesnar, Cena vs. Owens III, Orton returns home, more". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on July 22, 2015. Retrieved July 19, 2015. Orr, James (July 29, 2015). "John Cena nose: WWE star suffers horrific broken nose in RAW main event against Seth Rollins". The Independent. Archived from the original on February 2, 2019. Retrieved June 12, 2022. Artus, Matthew. "WWE World Heavyweight Champion Seth Rollins def. United States Champion John Cena in a Winner Takes All Match". WWE. Archived from the original on October 24, 2015. Retrieved August 23, 2015. Melok, Bobby. "John Cena def. Seth Rollins to win the United States Championship". WWE. Archived from the original on October 24, 2015. Retrieved September 20, 2015. "United States Champion John Cena def. Seth Rollins in a Steel Cage Match". WWE. Archived from the original on October 8, 2015. Retrieved October 3, 2015. Artus, Matthew. "Alberto Del Rio def. U.S. Champion John Cena in the U.S. Open Challenge". WWE. Archived from the original on November 17, 2015. Retrieved October 25, 2015. Martin, Adam (December 29, 2015). "WWE RAW Results – 12/28/15 (John Cena vs. Alberto Del Rio)". Wrestleview. Archived from the original on January 1, 2016. Retrieved December 29, 2015. Wortman, James (January 8, 2016). "John Cena undergoes shoulder surgery". WWE. Archived from the original on February 26, 2023. Retrieved January 13, 2016. Caldwell, James (April 3, 2016). "4/3 WrestleMania 32 PPV Results – CALDWELL'S Complete Live Report on Main PPV". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on April 3, 2019. Retrieved October 25, 2022. Pappolla, Ryan. "John Cena announces his return date on Twitter". WWE. Archived from the original on May 14, 2016. Retrieved April 27, 2016. Tedesco, Mike (May 30, 2016). "WWE RAW Results – 5/30/16 (Live results from Green Bay, AJ Styles and The Club attack John Cena, six man tag main event)". Wrestleview. Archived from the original on February 9, 2023. Retrieved May 30, 2016. Clapp, John. "John Cena vs. AJ Styles". WWE. Archived from the original on May 29, 2023. Retrieved June 3, 2016. Caldwell, James. "6/19 WWE MITB PPV Results – CALDWELL'S Complete Live Report". PW Torch. Archived from the original on June 25, 2016. Retrieved June 19, 2016. Caldwell, James (July 4, 2016). "7/4 WWE Raw Results – CALDWELL'S Complete Live TV Report". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on February 12, 2024. Retrieved July 4, 2016. Clapp, John. "John Cena, Enzo Amore & Big Cass vs. The Club". WWE. Archived from the original on July 9, 2016. Retrieved October 25, 2022. Powers, Kevin. "John Cena, Enzo Amore & Big Cass def. The Club". WWE. Archived from the original on August 6, 2016. Retrieved July 24, 2016. "2016 WWE Draft results: WWE officially ushers in New Era". WWE. Archived from the original on July 20, 2016. Retrieved July 19, 2016. Clapp, John. "John Cena vs. AJ Styles". WWE. Archived from the original on May 29, 2023. Retrieved August 2, 2016. Caldwell, James (August 21, 2016). "8/21 WWE Summerslam Results – CALDWELL'S Complete Live Report". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on August 23, 2016. Retrieved August 21, 2016. Benigno, Anthony. "WWE World Champion AJ Styles vs. Dean Ambrose vs. John Cena". WWE. Archived from the original on October 10, 2016. Retrieved September 13, 2016. Silverstein, Adam (October 10, 2016). "WWE No Mercy 2016 results: Ziggler wins intercontinental title, Styles retains". CBS Sports. Archived from the original on July 29, 2023. Retrieved October 13, 2016. Pritchard, Bill (August 5, 2016). "John Cena Taking Off More Time For American Grit Season 2?, Nikki Bella / Return Note, Lashley Wants To Make History (Video)". Wrestlezone. Archived from the original on October 25, 2022. Retrieved October 25, 2022. Powell, Jason (January 29, 2017). "1/29 Powell's WWE Royal Rumble 2017 live review: AJ Styles vs. John Cena for the WWE Championship, Kevin Owens vs. Roman Reigns in a No DQ match for the WWE Universal Championship with Chris Jericho in a shark cage". Pro Wrestling Dot Net. Archived from the original on July 28, 2017. Retrieved January 29, 2017. Meltzer, Dave (February 6, 2017). "February 6, 2017 Wrestling Observer Newsletter: Royal Rumble review, Ronda Rousey retired, more". Wrestling Observer Newsletter. Campbell, California. pp. 6–7. ISSN 1083-9593. Powell, Jason. "2/12 Powell's WWE Elimination Chamber 2017 live review: John Cena vs. AJ Styles vs. Dean Ambrose vs. The Miz vs. Baron Corbin vs. Bray Wyatt in an Elimination Chamber match for the WWE Championship". Pro Wrestling Dot Net. Archived from the original on February 13, 2017. Retrieved February 12, 2017. Keller, Wade (February 14, 2017). "KELLER'S WWE Smackdown Report 2/14: Ongoing coverage of Bray defending WWE Title against Cena, Elimination Chamber follow-up". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on February 15, 2017. Retrieved February 14, 2017. Keller, Wade (February 21, 2017). "Keller's WWE Smackdown Report 2/21: Results of Battle Royal to determine a new no. 1 contender for WWE Championship at WrestleMania". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on February 22, 2017. Retrieved February 21, 2017. Parks, Greg (February 28, 2017). "2/28 WWE Smackdown LIVE – Parks's Complete, Real-Time Report, including Luke Harper vs. A.J. Styles in a #1 contender's match, Mickie James vs. Becky Lynch in two-out-of-three falls". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on March 1, 2017. Retrieved February 28, 2017. Keller, Wade (March 14, 2017). "Keller's WWE Smackdown Report 3/14: Styles-Shane hype, Miz TV addresses Cena & Nikki, Orton addresses Bray Wyatt". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on March 15, 2017. Retrieved March 14, 2017. Powell, Jason (April 2, 2017). "Powell's WrestleMania 33 live review: Undertaker vs. Roman Reigns, Goldberg vs. Brock Lesnar for the WWE Universal Championship, AJ Styles vs. Shane McMahon, Seth Rollins vs. Triple H in an unsanctioned match". Pro Wrestling Dot Net. Archived from the original on April 3, 2017. Retrieved April 2, 2017. Melok, Bobby (June 14, 2017). "What does John Cena's Free Agent status mean?". WWE. Archived from the original on July 22, 2017. Retrieved June 15, 2017. "Cena and Rusev to go to war in a Flag Match". WWE. Archived from the original on July 8, 2017. Retrieved July 5, 2017. "John Cena def. Baron Corbin". WWE. August 20, 2017. Archived from the original on August 21, 2017. Retrieved August 21, 2017. Benigno, Anthony. "Roman Reigns def. John Cena". WWE. Archived from the original on October 7, 2017. Retrieved September 24, 2017. Wortman, James. "Team Raw def. Team SmackDown in a Men's 5-on-5 Traditional Survivor Series Elimination Tag Team Match". WWE. Archived from the original on December 22, 2017. Retrieved November 19, 2017. Powell, Jason (January 28, 2018). "WWE Royal Rumble 2018 live review: Men's and Women's Royal Rumble matches, Brock Lesnar vs. Braun Strowman vs. Kane for the WWE Universal Championship, AJ Styles vs. Kevin Owens and Sami Zayn in a handicap match for the WWE Championship". Pro Wrestling Dot Net. Archived from the original on January 29, 2018. Retrieved January 28, 2018. Powell, Jason (February 25, 2018). "WWE Elimination Chamber 2018 live review: Men's and Women's Elimination Chamber matches, Ronda Rousey contract signing, Asuka vs. Nia Jax, Matt Hardy vs. Bray Wyatt, Sheamus and Cesaro vs. Titus O'Neil and Apollo for the Raw Tag Titles". Pro Wrestling Dot Net. Archived from the original on February 26, 2018. Retrieved February 25, 2018. Benigno, Anthony. "WWE Champion AJ Styles def. John Cena, Kevin Owens, Sami Zayn, Dolph Ziggler and Baron Corbin (Six-Pack Challenge)". WWE. Archived from the original on March 22, 2023. Retrieved March 11, 2018. Benigno, Anthony. "The Undertaker def. John Cena". WWE. Archived from the original on April 10, 2018. Retrieved April 8, 2018. Benigno, Anthony. "John Cena def. Triple H". WWE. Archived from the original on April 28, 2018. Retrieved May 1, 2018. Wortman, James. "John Cena & Bobby Lashley def. Kevin Owens & Elias". WWE. Archived from the original on February 26, 2023. Retrieved October 6, 2018. Bonesteel, Matt (October 30, 2018). "John Cena won't appear at WWE Crown Jewel show in Saudi Arabia". Washington Post. Archived from the original on October 30, 2018. Retrieved January 21, 2019. Powell, Jason (January 2, 2019). "1/1 Powell's WWE Smackdown Live TV Review: Five-way match for a WWE Championship match at the Royal Rumble, John Cena returns, New Day's New Year's Celebration". Pro Wrestling Dot Net. Archived from the original on January 2, 2019. Retrieved October 25, 2022. Powell, Jason (January 14, 2019). "1/14 Powell's WWE Raw TV Review: Dean Ambrose vs. Bobby Lashley vs. Seth Rollins in a Triple Threat for the Intercontinental Championship, Ronda Rousey and Sasha Banks vs. Nia Jax and Tamina, the Royal Rumble build continues". Pro Wrestling Dot Net. Archived from the original on April 4, 2019. Retrieved January 15, 2019. "Braun Strowman to replace John Cena in Men's Royal Rumble Match due to injury". WWE. January 27, 2019. Archived from the original on April 4, 2023. Retrieved January 27, 2019. Powell, Jason (April 7, 2019). "WrestleMania 35 results: Powell's live review of Ronda Rousey vs. Becky Lynch vs. Charlotte Flair for the Raw and Smackdown Women's Titles, Daniel Bryan vs. Kofi Kingston for the WWE Championship, Brock Lesnar vs. Seth Rollins for the WWE Universal Championship, Batista vs. Triple H, AJ Styles vs. Randy Orton". Pro Wrestling Dot Net. Archived from the original on June 26, 2019. Retrieved November 6, 2022. Powell, Jason (July 22, 2019). "7/22 WWE Raw Results: Powell's review Raw Reunion featuring Steve Austin, Ric Flair, DX, Hulk Hogan, and many more, Alexa Bliss talkshow with Becky Lynch, the build to SummerSlam continues". Pro Wrestling Dot Net. Archived from the original on July 23, 2019. Retrieved July 23, 2019. Barnett, Jake (February 28, 2020). "2/28 WWE Friday Night Smackdown results: Barnett's review of John Cena's return, Goldberg's first appearance since winning the WWE Universal Championship at WWE Super ShowDown". Pro Wrestling Dot Net. Archived from the original on February 29, 2020. Retrieved February 29, 2020. Powell, Jason (April 5, 2020). "WrestleMania 36 results: Powell's live review of Night Two featuring Brock Lesnar vs. Drew McIntyre for the WWE Championship, John Cena vs. "The Fiend" Bray Wyatt in a Firefly Funhouse match, Edge vs. Randy Orton in a Last Man Standing match, Rhea Ripley vs. Charlotte Flair for the NXT Women's Championship". Pro Wrestling Dot Net. Archived from the original on April 6, 2020. Retrieved October 25, 2022. Oestriecher, Blake (February 1, 2021). "John Cena Says He Will Miss WWE WrestleMania 37". Forbes. Archived from the original on April 19, 2021. Retrieved April 19, 2021. Keller, Wade (July 18, 2021). "7/18 WWE Money in the Bank PPV Results: Keller's report and analysis of Reigns vs. Edge, Lashley vs. Kofi, Money in Bank matches". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on July 20, 2021. Retrieved October 25, 2022. "The Summer of Cena has officially arrived". WWE. July 19, 2021. Archived from the original on July 20, 2021. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Brookhouse, Brent (July 23, 2021). "WWE SmackDown results, recap, grades: Roman Reigns rejects John Cena's challenge before accepting Finn Balor's". CBSSports. Archived from the original on July 24, 2021. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Brookhouse, Brent (July 30, 2021). "WWE SmackDown results, recap, grades: John Cena steals contract to face Roman Reigns at SummerSlam". CBSSports. Archived from the original on July 31, 2021. Retrieved October 25, 2022. Burdick, Michael (July 31, 2021). "Universal Champion Roman Reigns vs. John Cena". WWE. Retrieved October 25, 2022. Powell, Jason (August 21, 2021). "WWE SummerSlam results: Powell's review of Roman Reigns vs. John Cena for the WWE Universal Championship, Bianca Belair vs. Sasha Banks for the Smackdown Women's Championship, Bobby Lashley vs. Goldberg for the WWE Championship, Edge vs. Seth Rollins, Nikki ASH vs. Charlotte Flair vs. Rhea Ripley for the Raw Women's Championship". Pro Wrestling Dot Net. Archived from the original on August 22, 2021. Retrieved October 25, 2022. Powell, Jason (June 6, 2022). "6/6 WWE Raw results: Powell's live review of the HIAC fallout edition with a Cody Rhodes promo, Judgment Day adding a new member, Alexa Bliss vs. Rhea Ripley vs. Liv Morgan vs. Doudrop to become No. 1 contender to the Raw Women's Championship, Miz TV with The Miz and Maryse". Pro Wrestling Dot Net. Archived from the original on June 14, 2022. Retrieved October 25, 2022. Powell, Jason (June 27, 2022). "6/27 WWE Raw results: Powell's live review of John Cena's 20th Anniversary celebration, AEW wrestlers submit Cena videos, a 20-man battle royal for a spot in the Money in the Bank ladder match, a six-woman elimination match for a spot in the MITB ladder match, Jey Uso vs. Montez Ford". Pro Wrestling Dot Net. Archived from the original on January 23, 2023. Retrieved October 25, 2022. Keller, Wade (December 30, 2022). "12/30 WWE SmackDown Results: Keller's report on Cena & Owens vs. Reigns & Sami, Rousey vs. Rodriguez, Sikoa vs. Sheamus". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on December 31, 2022. Retrieved January 22, 2023. Currier, Joseph (January 23, 2023). "John Cena revealed as WWE 2K23 cover star". Wrestling Observer Figure Four Online. Retrieved January 25, 2023. Sam, Doric (March 6, 2023). "John Cena vs. Austin Theory Set for U.S. Title Match at WWE WrestleMania 39". Bleacher Report. Retrieved March 19, 2023. Keller, Wade (April 1, 2023). "4/1 WWE WrestleMania 39 – Night 1: Keller's report on Cena vs. Austin Theory, Rollins vs. Logan Paul, Usos vs. Sami & KO, Charlotte vs. Ripley, more". Pro Wrestling Torch. Retrieved April 1, 2023. Powell, Jason (July 1, 2023). "WWE Money in the Bank results: Powell's review of Roman Reigns and Solo Sikoa vs. The Usos, two MITB ladder matches, Seth Rollins vs. Finn Balor for the World Heavyweight Championship, Cody Rhodes vs. Dominik Mysterio". Pro Wrestling Dot Net. Archived from the original on July 1, 2023. Retrieved July 1, 2023. Satin, Ryan (August 21, 2023). "John Cena returning to WWE next month on SmackDown". Fox Sports. Retrieved August 21, 2023. Mahjouri, Shakiel (September 1, 2023). "WWE SmackDown results, recap, grades: John Cena gives Jimmy Uso an Attitude Adjustment". CBSSports.com. Retrieved January 23, 2024. "John Cena is the host of WWE Payback". Fox Sports. September 1, 2023. Retrieved September 1, 2023. Powell, Jason (September 2, 2023). "WWE Payback results: Powell's review of Seth Rollins vs. Shinsuke Nakamura for the World Heavyweight Title, Rhea Ripley vs. Raquel Rodriguez for the Women's World Title, LA Knight vs. The Miz". Pro Wrestling Dot Net. Retrieved September 2, 2023. "WWE Superstar Spectacle results: John Cena teams with Seth Rollins". Wrestling Observer Figure Four Online. September 8, 2023. Retrieved September 8, 2023. Barnett, Jake (September 15, 2023). "WWE Friday Night Smackdown results (9/15): Barnett's review of John Cena on The Grayson Waller Effect talkshow, LA Knight vs. The Miz, Bayley vs. Asuka, Finn Balor vs. AJ Styles". Pro Wrestling Dot Net. Retrieved January 24, 2024. Barnett, Jake (September 22, 2023). "WWE Friday Night Smackdown results (9/22): Barnett's review of Iyo Sky vs. Asuka for the WWE Women's Title, John Cena's appearance, The Street Profits vs. Rey Mysterio and Santos Escobar". Pro Wrestling Dot Net. Retrieved January 24, 2024. Barnett, Jake (September 29, 2023). "WWE Friday Night Smackdown results (9/29): Barnett's review of Rey Mysterio vs. Santos Escobar for the U.S. Title, Charlotte Flair vs. Bayley, John Cena's appearance, Grayson Waller Effect with Bobby Lashley". Pro Wrestling Dot Net. Retrieved January 24, 2024. Powell, Jason (October 8, 2023). "WWE Fastlane results: Powell's review of Seth Rollins vs. Shinsuke Nakamura in a Last Man Standing match for the World Heavyweight Title, John Cena and LA Knight vs. Solo Sikoa and Jimmy Uso". Pro Wrestling Dot Net. Retrieved January 24, 2024. Barnett, Jake (October 20, 2023). "WWE Friday Night Smackdown results (10/20): Barnett's review of Iyo Sky vs. Charlotte Flair for the WWE Women's Championship, Santos Escobar vs. Montez Ford, U.S. Champion Rey Mysterio and Logan Paul". Pro Wrestling Dot Net. Retrieved January 24, 2024. Chiari, Mike (October 27, 2023). "John Cena vs. Solo Sikoa Match Announced for 2023 WWE Crown Jewel PPV". Bleacher Report. Retrieved January 24, 2024. Powell, Jason (November 4, 2023). "WWE Crown Jewel results: Powell's review of Roman Reigns vs. LA Knight for the WWE Universal Title, Seth Rollins vs. Drew McIntyre for the World Heavyweight Title, Rey Mysterio vs. Logan Paul for the U.S. Title". Pro Wrestling Dot Net. Retrieved January 24, 2024. Melok, Bobby (December 16, 2011). "The story behind John Cena's salute". WWE. Retrieved January 14, 2019. Powell, Jason (February 5, 2009). "John Cena says it was his call to change his finishing move name, predicts that three wrestlers will be WWE stars". Pro Wrestling Dot Net. Retrieved July 23, 2018. "Inside John Cena's 'Five Moves of Doom'". WWE. August 15, 2013. Retrieved October 25, 2022. "John Cena's new gear: photos". WWE. Retrieved August 29, 2018. Shoemaker, David (April 5, 2016). "The highs and lows of a record-breaking WrestleMania 32". ESPN. Retrieved April 18, 2017. WWE (September 26, 2016), Big Show reveals who WWE's strongest athletes are, on WWE Network's Table for 3, archived from the original on October 27, 2021, retrieved December 11, 2017 "The history of John Cena's T-shirts". WWE. "RAW/Rating, SD! is CANCELLED~!, Plus: ECW PPV, Importance of Maturity, and More!". Online Onslaught. Archived from the original on January 7, 2009. Retrieved February 12, 2007. "John Cena Studio Fathead". Shopzone.WWE.com. Archived from the original on November 13, 2007. Retrieved October 25, 2022. "John Cena Youth American Made Muscle Package". Shopzone.WWE.com. Retrieved October 26, 2022. Schwartz, Nick. "Kurt Angle on how WWE has changed, and why John Cena is the G.O.A.T. WWE Superstar". Fox Sports. Retrieved March 18, 2017. Santarossa, Adam (January 4, 2017). "Why John Cena is the best of all time". News.com.au. Retrieved February 8, 2017. Cornette, Jim (February 10, 2021). "Jim Cornette on John Cena's Legacy". Youtube. Archived from the original on October 27, 2021. Zucker, Joseph (April 23, 2017). "Vince McMahon Calls John Cena the 'Babe Ruth of WWE'". Bleacher Report. Retrieved October 25, 2022. "WWE Reports 2012 Second Quarter Results" (PDF) (Press release). WWE. August 2, 2012. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 18, 2013. Retrieved August 5, 2012. Mrosko, Geno (April 2, 2012). "WrestleMania 28 results: WWE breaks gate and attendance records in Miami". Cageside Seats. Retrieved May 27, 2012. "WrestleMania® 28 – Rock vs. Cena Special on NBC". "The Marine: Box Office Summary". Rotten Tomatoes. Archived from the original on June 29, 2007. Retrieved July 4, 2007. Millado, Nate (March 2009). "John Cena on Acting". Men's Fitness. Retrieved March 16, 2009. Carrow-Jackson, Roberta (December 7, 2007). "State Film Office announces 2007 statistics". NOLA.com. Archived from the original on January 28, 2008. Retrieved January 11, 2008. "Legendary (2010): Reviews". Metacritic. Retrieved September 13, 2010. "Legendary Blu-ray". Blu-ray.com. Retrieved March 28, 2011. "LucasCruikshank". Twitter. July 20, 2010. Retrieved July 20, 2010. Benet, Lorenzo (September 18, 2010). "5 Things to Know About Lucas Cruikshank". People. Archived from the original on September 21, 2010. Retrieved September 20, 2010. "Judd Apatow's 'Trainwreck' Casts Up: Tilda Swinton, Barkhad Abdi and John Cena Sign On - /Film". slashfilm.com. March 18, 2014. Retrieved December 30, 2016. Yamato, Jen (July 1, 2014). "WWE Star John Cena To Turn Heel In Universal Comedy 'The Nest'". Deadline. Retrieved December 30, 2016. Berkshire, Geoff (December 22, 2015). "Film Review: 'Daddy's Home'". Variety. Retrieved May 12, 2017. Lesnick, Silas (November 29, 2016). "The Wall Movie Set For Distribution". ComingSoon.net. Retrieved November 30, 2016. Randee Dawn (March 28, 2017). "Watch the trailer for John Cena's new animated movie Ferdinand". today.com. Retrieved March 28, 2017. "John Cena". tvguide.com. Retrieved May 18, 2020. D'Alessandro, Anthony (June 7, 2019). "John Cena Officially Joins Fast & Furious 9". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved June 11, 2019. Ni, Vincent (May 25, 2021). "John Cena 'very sorry' for saying Taiwan is a country". The Guardian. Retrieved June 5, 2021. Haring, Bruce (February 19, 2022). "Bill Maher Attacks John Cena, LeBron James, Tom Cruise, Eileen Gu For Siding With Totalitarian China". Deadline. Retrieved February 19, 2022. Kroll, Justin (April 17, 2019). "John Cena Eyed for Suicide Squad Sequel (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. Retrieved June 11, 2019. Galuppo, Mia (April 17, 2019). "John Cena Eyed for Role in Suicide Squad Sequel". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved June 11, 2019. Pearson, Ben (April 17, 2019). "John Cena in Talks to Suit Up For James Gunn's The Suicide Squad". Slash Film. Retrieved June 11, 2019. "Fast X: An Updated Cast List For Fast & Furious 10, Including Vin Diesel And Jason Momoa". CinemaBlend. February 21, 2023. Retrieved April 10, 2023. "Seth Rogen Unveils 'Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles' Movie Cast". The Hollywood Reporter. March 5, 2023. Retrieved March 5, 2023. Murphy, J. Kim (March 5, 2023). "'Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles: Mutant Mayhem' Unveils Full Voice Cast, Including Jackie Chan as Splinter". Variety. Retrieved March 5, 2023. "Go Sick: Psycho Auditions". AtomFilms. Archived from the original on April 10, 2007. Retrieved April 6, 2007. Medalis, Kara A. (October 26, 2007). "Cena on Nick U.K. Kids' Choice Awards". WWE. Retrieved October 30, 2007. Hunt, Jen; Mike McAvennie. "WWE Superstars aid family's "Extreme Makeover"". WWE. Archived from the original on January 15, 2007. Retrieved August 2, 2007. John Cena, Batista, and Ashley on Extreme Makeover: Home Edition. WWE (WMV). Archived from the original on June 26, 2007. Retrieved August 1, 2007. Zack Zeigler (March 1, 2007). "Sign-ing a Deal?". WWE. Archived from the original on March 3, 2007. Retrieved May 25, 2007. "Presidential hopefuls among 'Idol Gives Back' stars". CTV. Archived from the original on April 12, 2008. Retrieved April 10, 2008. "Tracy Morgan/Kelly Clarkson". Saturday Night Live. Season 34. Episode 654. March 14, 2009. 90–92 minutes in. NBC. "Wait Wait... Don't Tell Me!". National Public Radio. Retrieved June 25, 2009. "UPN's 'Manhunt' a Maggot For Real". Reality TV Hall of Shame. Archived from the original on August 22, 2006. Retrieved June 13, 2006. "Manhunt overview". Reality News Online. Archived from the original on May 7, 2006. Retrieved June 13, 2006. "Coming Up to Date on the Manhunt Scandal". Reality News Online. Archived from the original on May 2, 2006. Retrieved June 13, 2006. Medalis, Kara A. (March 12, 2007). "Cena gets revved up". WWE. Retrieved March 20, 2007. Medalis, Kara A. (June 25, 2007). "Cena races into third on 'Fast Cars' finale". WWE. Retrieved July 8, 2007. Atkinson, Dan (November 13, 2007). "WWE wrestles CNN over Cena interview response". The Daily News of Newburyport. Archived from the original on September 4, 2012. Retrieved March 24, 2009. "Cena: Steroids? Absolutely not". WWE. Archived from the original on November 16, 2007. Retrieved November 18, 2007. "Cena reacts to CNN". WWE. Retrieved November 18, 2007. "CNN to WWE: No Apology". WWE. Retrieved November 18, 2007. Ganska, Helen (October 12, 2008). "WWE champion John Cena to host Nickelodeon awards". The Sunday Times (Western Australia). Archived from the original on July 28, 2009. Retrieved March 2, 2009. Goldman, Eric (August 5, 2009). "WWE's John Cena Guests on Psych". IGN. Retrieved August 28, 2009. "John Cena guest co-hosts 'Today'". WWE. August 17, 2015. WWE.com Staff (August 17, 2015). "John Cena guest co-hosts 'Today'". WWE. "American Grit TV Show". TV Guide. Retrieved March 18, 2016. "John Cena's Best Hosting Moments at 2016 ESPYs". July 14, 2016. Retrieved July 14, 2016. Lawrence, Derek (January 13, 2017). "'Saturday Night Live' recap: John Cena". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved December 11, 2016. "John Cena Joins Rise of the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles". Newsarama. January 11, 2018. Retrieved January 11, 2018. "Breaking News – Nickelodeon Brings Back "Are You Smarter Than a 5th Grader" – John Cena to Host All-New Version of the Hit Family Game Show". www.thefutoncritic.com. Retrieved February 14, 2019. Are You Smarter Than A 5th Grader: Spring 2019 promo commercial – Nickelodeon (Video). April 22, 2019. Archived from the original on October 27, 2021. Retrieved April 24, 2019. Holbrook, Damian (April 15, 2021). "'Wipeout' Cohost John Cena on the TBS Reboot — and Whether He's Attempted the Course". TV Insider. Retrieved May 29, 2021. Rajagopalan, Rishikesh (March 11, 2024). "Nearly naked John Cena presents Oscar for best costume design at 2024 Academy Awards - CBS News". www.cbsnews.com. Retrieved March 11, 2024. "H-U-S-T-L-E, MP3 Album page". eMusic. Archived from the original on September 26, 2007. Retrieved May 17, 2007. "Perceptionists – 'Black Dialogue/ 5 O'Clock/ Champion Scratch'". UndergroundHiipHop.com. Archived from the original on July 30, 2009. Retrieved May 17, 2007. "John Cena & Wiz Khalifa Team Up on 'WWE 2K15' Video Game Soundtrack". Billboard. October 13, 2014. Retrieved December 29, 2019. Hall, Sophia Alexandra (February 7, 2022). "Can John Cena play the piano? Inside the former WWE star's melancholy 'Peacemaker' solo". Classic FM. Archived from the original on February 4, 2022. Retrieved January 17, 2024. James Gunn [@jamesgunn] (February 4, 2022). "John's piano version of "Home Sweet Home" was arranged by @John___Murphy, composer of The Suicide Squad & Guardians of the Galaxy Vol 3" (Tweet) – via Twitter. "November 23, 2003". WWE Confidential. USA Network. "Cena to 'Eat Fresh' with Jared Fogle". WWE. Archived from the original on December 7, 2006. Retrieved January 13, 2007. "Cena Pak product page". American Body Builders. Archived from the original on March 28, 2007. Retrieved November 28, 2007. "Cena gets in the ring with NASCAR's hottest drivers". WWE. February 12, 2008. Retrieved February 25, 2009. "WWE "Be A Superstar" featuring John Cena in "Stepping Up"". WWE. July 13, 2009. Archived from the original on June 25, 2009. Retrieved July 13, 2009. Stampler, Laura (January 7, 2013). "Fred Flintstone Will Be Replaced On The Fruity Pebbles Box By A Wrestler". Business Insider. Retrieved June 12, 2022. Hoppes, Lynn (January 11, 2013). "John Cena appearing on boxes of Fruity Pebbles". ESPN. Retrieved June 12, 2022. Jensen, Tom (February 21, 2016). "John Cena honorary pace car driver". Fox Sports. Retrieved February 21, 2016. David Gianastasio (October 10, 2016). "John Cena's not an Elephant, but now he's playing one on TV for Wonderful Pistachios". adweek.com. Retrieved January 14, 2017. Baar, Aaron (October 12, 2020). "Honda leans into 'rewilding' trend with John Cena as its voice". marketingdive.com. Retrieved October 31, 2020. Traina, Jimmy (May 4, 2020). "Pandemic Can't Stop John Cena From Continuing to Grant Wishes". Sports Illustrated. Retrieved February 12, 2021. Cohen, Sandy (March 19, 2018). "John Cena shares his love for kids and how they inspire him". AP NEWS. Retrieved April 8, 2019. Vargas, Ramon Antonio (September 27, 2022). "John Cena sets 'herculean' record for most wishes granted to children". The Guardian. Retrieved September 27, 2022. "Make-A-Wish Foundation: News & Events: News Release s". Wish.org. September 14, 2009. Archived from the original on February 19, 2011. Retrieved March 28, 2011. "John Cena talks about his involvement with Susan G. Komen for the Cure". WWE. Retrieved December 1, 2019. We Are America ft. John Cena - Love Has No Labels - Ad Council. YouTube. July 4, 2016. Archived from the original on October 27, 2021. Retrieved July 10, 2021. Hahn, Jason Duaine (June 10, 2020). "John Cena Donates $1 Million to Black Lives Matter: 'Be Brave and Open-Minded'". PEOPLE.com. Retrieved January 3, 2021. "The story behind John Cena's 'You Can't See Me' taunt". WWE. March 15, 2016. Retrieved October 25, 2022. Feldman, Brian (December 18, 2015). "A Famous Man Responded to a Meme Involving Him — IT'S JOHN CENA". New York. Archived from the original on January 22, 2016. Retrieved March 5, 2016. "John Cena's Hilarious "You Can't See Me" Meme Explained". ScreenRant. July 14, 2020. Retrieved December 9, 2021. Dahiwade, Shrey (December 28, 2022). "What Did John Cena Really Say in Chinese in His Viral Ice Cream Video?". Sportsmanor. Retrieved June 18, 2023. Lim, Lisa (July 8, 2023). "What John Cena did wrong in 'bing chilling' viral ice cream meme". South China Morning Post. Retrieved July 13, 2023. "John Cena Apologizes on Weibo for Calling Taiwan a Country". Yahoo News. May 26, 2021. Retrieved June 18, 2023. Talmazan, Yuliya (May 26, 2021). "Actor John Cena apologizes after Taiwan comment". NBC News. Retrieved July 13, 2023. Lonon, Sherri (April 9, 2013). "Cena Brings WWE Title Home to Land o' Lakes". Patch.com. Retrieved August 15, 2019. "Why John Cena Doesn't Want to Become a Dad — and How He Gave Nikki Bella 'False Hope,' Source Says". People. Retrieved December 29, 2019. "John Cena on Nikki Bella: "I don't want kids, I don't want marriage."". The Big Lead. April 22, 2016. Moore, Jim (February 16, 2009). "Cena works hard on his rags to riches story". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Retrieved February 16, 2009. Varsallone, Jim (March 23, 2009). "Cena, WWE score knockout in 12 Rounds". The Miami Herald. p. 3. "Petition for Dissolution of Marriage" (PDF). The Miami Herald. Retrieved June 20, 2012. Vultaggio, Maria (July 18, 2012). "John Cena And Elizabeth Huberdeau Settle Divorce War: WWE Wrestler Makes Peace With Estranged Wife". International Business Times. Retrieved December 1, 2012. Longeretta, Emily (April 15, 2018). "Nikki Bella and John Cena Break Up After 6 Years Together, End Engagement". Us Weekly. American Media, Inc. Retrieved April 18, 2018. Dawn, Randee (April 3, 2017). "John Cena pops the question to Nikki Bella at WrestleMania 33 — and she said yes!". Today. Retrieved April 8, 2018. Mizoguchi, Karen (May 5, 2018). "John Cena & Nikki Bella: Inside Their Canceled Nuptials on What Would Have Been Their Wedding Day". PEOPLE.com. Retrieved May 10, 2018. Jennifer Drysdale (October 14, 2020). "John Cena Quietly Marries Girlfriend Shay Shariatzadeh". etonline.com. Retrieved October 14, 2020. Mauch, Ally (October 15, 2020). "John Cena and Shay Shariatzadeh's Whirlwind Romance: From Meeting on Set to Marrying the Next Year". People. Retrieved November 4, 2020. "EXCLUSIVE: John Cena stars in hilarious new comedy 'Blockers'". Yahoo Sunrise. Archived from the original on March 22, 2018. Retrieved March 22, 2018. Vanity Fair (April 5, 2018). "Everything John Cena Does in a Day – Vanity Fair". Archived from the original on October 27, 2021 – via YouTube. Woodyard, Chris (December 2, 2017). "John Cena sued by Ford for selling GT supercar". USA Today. Retrieved December 4, 2017. Markovich, Tony (June 19, 2018). "The Flip That Flopped: John Cena and Ford Settle GT Resale Lawsuit". CarAndDriver.com. Car and Driver. Retrieved July 28, 2023. "John Cena Talks Filming 'Project X-Traction' with Living Legend Jackie Chan". Collider. January 15, 2020. Retrieved February 24, 2020. Davis, Clayton (February 22, 2022). "Critics Choice Super Awards: 'Spider-Man,' 'Justice League' Among Film Nominees; 'Evil,' 'Midnight Mass' Lead TV". Variety. Retrieved May 10, 2022. Haring, Bruce (April 9, 2022). "Nickelodeon's Kids' Choice Awards Sets Sliming Record — Winners List". Deadline. Archived from the original on April 10, 2022. Retrieved April 9, 2022. Hipes, Patrick (May 11, 2022). "MTV Movie & TV Awards Unveil Scripted And Unscripted Nominations: 'Spider-Man: No Way Home', 'Euphoria' Lead Way For Now-Combined Event". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved May 13, 2022. Vlessing, Etan (March 16, 2023). "Everything Everywhere All at Once Wins Big at 2023 Critics Choice Super Awards". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 16, 2023. Retrieved January 3, 2024. Eck, Kevin (January 11, 2010). "Best of the Decade awards". The Baltimore Sun. Archived from the original on February 4, 2021. Retrieved December 20, 2020. Eck, Kevin (December 30, 2007). "2007 Awards". The Baltimore Sun. Archived from the original on October 26, 2020. Retrieved September 25, 2020. Eck, Kevin (February 14, 2011). "2010 Awards". The Baltimore Sun. Archived from the original on June 5, 2022. Retrieved September 25, 2020. "Feud of the Year". Wrestling Information Archive. Archived from the original on April 3, 2007. Retrieved April 12, 2007. "PWI Awards: Feud of the year". Pro Wrestling Illustrated. Vol. 33, no. 3. 2012. pp. 74–75. "Match of the Year". Wrestling Information Archive. Archived from the original on April 15, 2008. Retrieved April 17, 2008. "PWI Awards: Match of the year". Pro Wrestling Illustrated. Vol. 33, no. 3. 2012. pp. 80–81. "PWI Awards: Match of the year1". Pro Wrestling Illustrated. Vol. 34, no. 2. 2014. pp. 40–4. "PWI Awards: Match of the year". Pro Wrestling Illustrated. Vol. 36, no. 2. 2015. pp. 30–31. "WWE: PWI declares Achievement Awards 2016 winners' names". Oneindia. January 13, 2017. Retrieved January 16, 2017. "Most Improved Wrestler of the Year". Wrestling Information Archive. Archived from the original on February 10, 2007. Retrieved April 12, 2007. "Triple H: Wrestler of the Decade". Pro Wrestling Illustrated. Vol. 31, no. 2. February 2010. "Most Popular Wrestler of the Year". Wrestling Information Archive. Archived from the original on February 10, 2007. Retrieved April 12, 2007. "Wrestler of the Year". Wrestling Information Archive. Archived from the original on February 10, 2007. Retrieved April 12, 2007. "Pro Wrestling Illustrated Top 500 – 2006". Wrestling Information Archive. Archived from the original on March 12, 2007. Retrieved April 12, 2007. "2007 PWI 500 edition of Pro Wrestling Illustrated – cover". Pro Wrestling Illustrated. Archived from the original on October 5, 2007. Retrieved September 3, 2007. "Pro Wrestling Illustrated (PWI) 500 for 2013". The Internet Wrestling Database. Retrieved August 22, 2013. Herzog, Kenny (July 1, 2015). "WWE Wrestler of the Year (So Far): Kevin Owens". Rolling Stone. Retrieved December 20, 2020. "WWE Wrestler(s) of the Year". Rolling Stone. December 14, 2015. Archived from the original on December 15, 2015. Retrieved December 14, 2015. "John Cena to receive prestigious Muhammad Ali Legacy Award". WWE. November 29, 2018. Archived from the original on January 15, 2019. Retrieved January 23, 2024. Barrasso, Justin (December 29, 2017). "Top 10 Wrestlers of the Year". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on December 29, 2017. Retrieved December 30, 2017. "History of WWE Championship". WWE. Retrieved April 3, 2005. "World Heavyweight Championship title history". WWE. Archived from the original on December 4, 2008. Retrieved December 12, 2008. "WWE Contender Tournaments". Pro Wrestling History. Retrieved December 30, 2016. "Brisbane Cup Tournament". Cagematch. "What is a Slammy?". WWE. February 23, 2008. Retrieved April 17, 2016. "2011 Slammy Award Winners". WWE. December 12, 2011. Retrieved April 17, 2016. "2015 Slammy Award winners". WWE. December 21, 2015. Retrieved April 17, 2016. "2010 Slammy Award Winners". WWE. December 14, 2010. Retrieved April 17, 2016. "2012 WWE Slammy Awards and WWE.com Slammy Awards winners". WWE. December 17, 2012. Retrieved April 17, 2016. "2013 Slammy Award winners". WWE. December 8, 2013. Retrieved April 17, 2016. "2014 Slammy Award winners". WWE. December 8, 2014. Retrieved April 17, 2016. Meltzer, Dave (January 26, 2011). "Biggest issue of the year: The 2011 Wrestling Observer Newsletter Awards Issue". Wrestling Observer Newsletter. Campbell, CA. pp. 1–40. ISSN 1083-9593. Meltzer, Dave (January 30, 2012). "January 30 Wrestling Observer Newsletter: Gigantic year-end awards issue, best and worst in all categories plus UFC on FX 1, death of Savannah Jack, ratings, tons and tons of news". Wrestling Observer Newsletter. Campbell, CA. ISSN 1083-9593. Beltrán, William (August 3, 2010). "Según el Wrestling Observer... ¿Quiénes son los mejores los mejores de la década?". SuperLuchas Magazine (in Spanish). Archived from the original on August 6, 2010. Retrieved August 5, 2010. Meltzer, Dave (January 23, 2013). "The 2012 Wrestling Observer Newsletter Annual Awards Issue". Wrestling Observer Newsletter. Campbell, California. ISSN 1083-9593. Archived from the original on April 25, 2020. Retrieved January 24, 2013. Meltzer, Dave (January 26, 2015). "Jan. 26, 2015 Wrestling Observer Newsletter: 2014 awards issue w/ results & Dave's commentary, Conor McGregor, and much more". Wrestling Observer Newsletter. Campbell, California. p. 30. ISSN 1083-9593. Archived from the original on February 15, 2015. Retrieved February 15, 2015. Meltzer, Dave (November 12, 2012). "Nov. 12, 2012 Wrestling Observer Newsletter: WON Hall of Fame 2012 double issue, six men inducted, all the news and info from around the world and more!". Wrestling Observer Newsletter. Campbell, California. p. 8. ISSN 1083-9593. "Cena inducted into Springfield College Athletic HOF". 411 Mania. Retrieved March 6, 2015. "Make-A-Wish Foundation names John Cena a recipient of its 20th annual Chris Greicius Celebrity Awards". WWE. September 14, 2009. "2012 Wish Granter Awards". Make A Wish Foundation. Archived from the original on September 23, 2015. Retrieved October 28, 2012. "2014 Sports Social TV Awards winners". Sports Social TV. Archived from the original on March 11, 2015. Retrieved July 16, 2014. "Cena named Grand Marshal". WWE. Archived from the original on April 3, 2015. Retrieved March 6, 2015. "Cena Receives USO Award". 411Mania. Retrieved April 20, 2016. Harris, Jeffery. "John Cena to Receive Silver Anniversary Award From NCAA". 411 Mania. Retrieved December 25, 2023. Wikimedia Commons has media related to John Cena. Wikiquote has quotations related to John Cena. John Cena on WWE.com John Cena at IMDb  John Cena on Twitter John Cena's profile at Cagematch.net , Wrestlingdata.com , Internet Wrestling Database Portals:  Biography  United States  Film  Television