This article contains Urdu text. Without proper rendering support, you may see unjoined letters running left to right or other symbols instead of Urdu script. Pervez Musharraf (11 August 1943 – 5 February 2023) was a Pakistani military officer and politician who served as the tenth president of Pakistan from 2001 to 2008. He also served as the 10th Chairman of the Joint Chiefs from 1998 to 2001 and the 7th Chief of Army Staff from 1998 to 2007. Born in Delhi, Musharraf was raised in Karachi and Istanbul. He studied at the Forman Christian College in Lahore and the Royal College of Defence Studies in the United Kingdom. Musharraf entered the Pakistan Military Academy, Kakul, in 1961 and was commissioned into the artillery regiment of the Pakistan Army in 1964. He saw action during the Indo-Pakistani War of 1965 as a second lieutenant. By the 1980s, he was commanding an artillery brigade. In the 1990s, Musharraf was promoted to major general and assigned an infantry division, and later commanded the Special Services Group. Soon after, he also served as deputy military secretary and director general of military operations. He played an active role in the Afghan Civil War, encouraging Pakistani support for the Taliban. Musharraf became the head of the armed forces in 1998 when he was promoted to four-star general by Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif. He led the Kargil infiltration that brought India and Pakistan to a war in 1999. After months of contentious relations between Sharif and Musharraf, Sharif unsuccessfully attempted to remove Musharraf as the army's leader. In retaliation, the army staged a coup d'état in 1999, which allowed Musharraf to take over Pakistan as president in 2001. He subsequently placed Sharif under strict house arrest before launching official criminal proceedings against him. Musharraf initially remained the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs and the Chief of Army Staff, relinquishing the former position upon confirmation of his presidency. However, he remained the Army Chief until retiring in 2007. The initial stages of his presidency featured controversial wins in a state referendum to grant him a five-year term limit, and a general election in 2002. During his presidency, he advocated for the Third Way, adopting a synthesis of conservatism and socialism. Musharraf reinstated the constitution in 2002, though it was heavily amended within the Legal Framework Order. He appointed Zafarullah Jamali and later Shaukat Aziz as prime minister, and oversaw directed policies against terrorism, becoming a key player in the American-led war on terror. Musharraf pushed for social liberalism under his enlightened moderation program and promoted economic liberalisation, while he also banned trade unions. Musharraf's presidency coincided with a rise of overall gross domestic product by around 50%; in the same period, domestic savings declined, and economic inequality rose at a rapid rate. Musharraf's government has also been accused of human rights abuses, and he survived a number of assassination attempts during his presidency. When Aziz departed as prime minister, and after approving the suspension of the judicature in 2007, Musharraf's position weakened dramatically. Musharraf resigned in 2008 to avoid impeachment and emigrated to London in a self-imposed exile. His legacy as leader is mixed; he saw the emergence of a more assertive middle class, but his open disregard for civilian institutions greatly weakened democracy in Pakistan. Musharraf returned to Pakistan in 2013 to participate in that year's general election, but was disqualified from participating after the country's high courts issued arrest warrants for him and Aziz for their alleged involvement in the assassinations of Nawab Akbar Bugti and Benazir Bhutto. Upon Sharif's re-election in 2013, he initiated high treason charges against Musharraf for implementing emergency rule and suspending the constitution in 2007. The case against Musharraf continued after Sharif's removal from office in 2017, the same year in which Musharraf was declared an "absconder" in the Bhutto assassination case by virtue of moving to Dubai. In 2019, Musharraf, in absentia, was sentenced to death for the treason charges, but the death sentence was later annulled by the Lahore High Court. Musharraf died in Dubai in 2023 after suffering from a prolonged case of amyloidosis. Musharraf was born on 11 August 1943 to an Urdu-speaking family in Delhi, British India, the son of Syed Musharrafuddin and his wife Begum Zarin Musharraf (c. 1920–2021). His family were Muslims who were also Sayyids, claiming descent from the Islamic prophet Muhammad. Syed Musharraf graduated from Aligarh Muslim University and entered the civil service, which was an extremely prestigious career under British rule. He came from a long line of government officials as his great-grandfather was a tax collector while his maternal grandfather was a qazi (judge). Musharraf's mother Zarin, born in the early 1920s, grew up in Lucknow and received her schooling there, after which she graduated from Indraprastha College at Delhi University, taking a bachelor's degree in English literature. She then married and devoted herself to raising a family. His father, Syed, was an accountant who worked at the foreign office in the British Indian government and eventually became an accounting director. Musharraf was the second of three children, all boys. His elder brother, Javed Musharraf, based in Rome, is an economist and one of the directors of the International Fund for Agricultural Development. His younger brother, Naved Musharraf, is an anaesthesiologist based in the state of Illinois, in the United States. At the time of his birth, Musharraf's family lived in a large home that belonged to his father's family for many years called Nehar Wali Haveli, which means "House Next to the Canal". Sir Syed Ahmed Khan's family lived next door. It is indicative of "the family's western education and social prominence" that the house's title deeds, although written entirely in Urdu, were signed by Musharraf's father in English. Musharraf was four years old when India achieved independence and Pakistan was created as the homeland for India's Muslims. His family left for Pakistan in August 1947, a few days before independence. His father joined the Pakistan Civil Services and began to work for the Pakistani government; later, his father joined the Foreign Ministry, taking up an assignment in Turkey. In his autobiography In the Line of Fire: A Memoir, Musharraf elaborates on his first experience with death, after falling off a mango tree. Musharraf's family moved to Ankara in 1949, when his father became part of a diplomatic deputation from Pakistan to Turkey. He learned to speak Turkish. He had a dog named Whiskey that gave him a "lifelong love for dogs". He played sports in his youth. In 1956, he left Turkey and returned to Pakistan in 1957 where he attended Saint Patrick's School in Karachi and was accepted at the Forman Christian College University in Lahore. At Forman, Musharraf chose mathematics as a major in which he excelled academically, but later developed an interest in economics. In 1961, at the age of 18, Musharraf entered the Pakistan Military Academy at Kakul. At the Academy, General Musharraf formed a deep friendship with General Srilal Weerasooriya, who went on to become the 15th Commander of the Sri Lankan Army. This enduring camaraderie between the two officers played a pivotal role in cultivating robust diplomatic and military ties between Pakistan and Sri Lanka in the years that followed. Also during his college years at PMA and initial joint military testings, Musharraf shared a room with PQ Mehdi of the Pakistan Air Force and Abdul Aziz Mirza of the Navy (both reached four-star assignments and served with Musharraf later on) and after giving the exams and entrance interviews, all three cadets went to watch a world-acclaimed Urdu film, Savera (lit. Dawn), with his inter-services and college friends, Musharraf recalls, In the Line of Fire, published in 2006. With his friends, Musharraf passed the standardised, physical, psychological, and officer-training exams, he also took discussions involving socioeconomics issues; all three were interviewed by joint military officers who were designated as Commandants. The next day, Musharraf along with PQ Mehdi and Mirza, reported to PMA and they were selected for their respective training in their arms of commission. Finally, in 1964, Musharraf graduated with a Bachelor's degree in his class of 29th PMA Long Course together with Ali Kuli Khan and his lifelong friend Abdul Aziz Mirza. He was commissioned in the artillery regiment as second lieutenant and posted near the Indo-Pakistan border. During this time in the artillery regiment, Musharraf maintained his close friendship and contact with Mirza through letters and telephones even in difficult times when Mirza, after joining the Navy Special Service Group, was stationed in East-Pakistan as a military adviser to Eastern Corps. His first battlefield experience was with an artillery regiment during the intense fighting for the Khemkaran sector in the Second Kashmir War. He also participated in the Lahore and Sialkot war zones during the conflict. During the war, Musharraf developed a reputation for sticking to his post under shellfire. He received the Imtiazi Sanad medal for gallantry. Shortly after the end of the War of 1965, he joined the elite Special Service Group (SSG). He served in the SSG from 1966 to 1972. He was promoted to captain and to major during this period. During the 1971 war with India, he was a company commander of an SSG commando battalion. During the 1971 war he was scheduled to depart to East Pakistan to join the army-navy joint military operations, but the deployment was cancelled after Indian Army advances towards Southern Pakistan. Musharraf was promoted to lieutenant colonel in 1974; and to colonel in 1978. As staff officer in the 1980s, he studied political science at the National Defence University (NDU), and then briefly tenured as assistant professor of war studies at the Command and Staff College and then assistant professor of political science also at NDU. One of his professors at NDU was general Jehangir Karamat who served as Musharraf's guidance counsellor and instructor who had significant influence on Musharraf's philosophy and critical thinking. He did not play any significant role in Pakistan's proxy war in the 1979–1989 Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. In 1987, he became a brigade commander of a new brigade of the SSG near Siachen Glacier. He was personally chosen by then-President and Chief of Army Staff general Zia-ul-Haq for this assignment due to Musharraf's wide experience in mountain and arctic warfare. In September 1987, Musharraf commanded an assault at Bilafond La before being pushed back. He studied at the Royal College of Defence Studies (RCDS) in Britain during 1990–91. His course-mates included Major-generals B. S. Malik and Ashok Mehta of the Indian Army, and Ali Kuli Khan of Pakistan Army. In his course studies, Musharraf performed extremely in relation to his classmates, submitted his master's degree thesis, titled "Impact of Arm Race in the Indo-Pakistan subcontinent", and earned good remarks. He submitted his thesis to Commandant General Antony Walker who regarded Musharraf as one of his finest students he had seen in his entire career. At one point, Walker described Musharraf: "A capable, articulate and extremely personable officer, who made a valuable impact at RCDS. His country is fortunate to have the services of a man of his undeniable quality." He graduated with a master's degree from RCDS and returned to Pakistan soon after. Upon returning in the 1980s, Musharraf took an interest in the emerging Pakistani rock music genre, and often listened to rock music after leaving duty. During that decade, regarded as the time when rock music in Pakistan began, Musharraf was reportedly keen on the popular Western fashions of the time, which were then very popular in government and public circles. While in the Army he earned the nickname "Cowboy" for his westernised ways and his fashion interest in Western clothing. Earlier in 1988–89, as Brigadier, Musharraf proposed the Kargil infiltration to Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto but she rebuffed the plan. In 1991–93, he secured a two-star promotion, elevating him to the rank of major general and held the command of 40th Division as its GOC, stationed in Okara Military District in Punjab Province. In 1993–95, Major-General Musharraf worked closely with the Chief of Army Staff as Director-General of Pakistan Army's Directorate General for the Military Operations (DGMO). During this time, Musharraf became close to engineering officer and director-general of ISI lieutenant-general Javed Nasir and had worked with him while directing operations in Bosnian war. His political philosophy was influenced by Benazir Bhutto who mentored him on various occasions, and Musharraf generally was close to Benazir Bhutto on military policy issues on India. From 1993 to 1995, Musharraf repeatedly visited the United States as part of the delegation of Benazir Bhutto. It was Maulana Fazal-ur-Rehman who lobbied for his promotion to Benazir Bhutto, and subsequently getting Musharraf's promotion papers approved by Benazir Bhutto, which eventually led to his appointment in Benazir Bhutto's key staff. In 1993, Musharraf personally assisted Benazir Bhutto to have a secret meeting at the Pakistani embassy in Washington, D.C., with officials from the Mossad and a special envoy of Israeli premier Yitzhak Rabin. It was during this time Musharraf built an extremely cordial relationship with Shaukat Aziz who, at that time, was serving as the executive president of global financial services of the Citibank. After the collapse of the fractious Afghan government, Musharraf assisted General Babar and the Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) in devising a policy of supporting the newly formed Taliban in the Afghan civil war against the Northern Alliance government. On policy issues, Musharraf befriended senior justice of the Supreme Court of Pakistan Justice Rafiq Tarar (later president) and held common beliefs with the latter. His last military field operations posting was in the Mangla region of the Kashmir Province in 1995 when Benazir Bhutto approved the promotion of Musharraf to three-star rank, Lieutenant-General. Between 1995 and 1998, Lieutenant-General Musharraf was the corps commander of I Strike Corps (CC-1) stationed in Mangla, Mangla Military District. Although both Nawaz Sharif and General Jehangir Karamat were educated, and held common beliefs concerning national security, problems arose with Chairman of the Joint Chiefs and Chief of Army Staff General Karamat in October 1998. While addressing the officers and cadets at the Naval War College, General Karamat promoted the creation of the National Security Council, which would be backed by a "team of civil-military experts" for devising policies to seek resolution ongoing problems relating the civil-military issues; also recommended a "neutral but competent bureaucracy and administration of at federal level and the establishment of Local governments in four provinces." This proposal was met with hostility, and led to Nawaz Sharif's dismissal of General Karamat. In turn, this reduced Nawaz's mandate in public circles, and led to much criticism from Leader of the Opposition Benazir Bhutto. There were three lieutenant-generals potentially in line to succeed General Karamat as chief of army staff. Lieutenant-general Ali Kuli Khan, a graduate of PMA and RMA, Sandhurst, was an extremely capable staff officer and well-liked in public circles, but was seen as close to the former chief of army staff General (retired) Abdul Waheed Kakar; and was not promoted. Second in line was lieutenant-general Khalid Nawaz Khan who was popularly known for his ruthless leadership in the army; particularly for his unforgiving attitude to his junior officers. Lieutenant-general Nawaz Khan was known for his opposition and anti-muhajir sentiment, and was particularly hard line against the MQM. Musharraf was third-in-line and was well regarded by the general public and the armed forces. He also had an excellent academic standing from his college and university studies. Musharraf was strongly favoured by the Prime Minister's colleagues: a straight officer with democratic views. Nisar Ali Khan and Shahbaz Sharif recommended Musharraf and Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif personally promoted Musharraf to the rank of four-star general to replace Karamat. After the Kargil incident, Musharraf did not wish to be the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs: Musharraf favoured the chief of naval staff Admiral Bokhari to take on this role, and claimed that: "he did not care" Prime minister Sharif was displeased by this suggestion, due to the hostile nature of his relationship with the Admiral. Musharraf further exacerbated his divide with Nawaz Sharif after recommending the forced retirement of senior officers close to the Prime minister, including Lieutenant-General Tariq Pervez (also known by his name's initials as TP), commander of XII Corps, who was a brother-in-law of a high profile cabinet minister. According to Musharraf, lieutenant-general TP was an ill-mannered, foul-mouthed, ill-disciplined officer who caused a great deal of dissent within the armed forces. Nawaz Sharif's announcement of the promotion of General Musharraf to Chairman Joint Chiefs caused an escalation of the tensions with Admiral Bokhari: upon hearing the news, he launched a strong protest against the Prime minister. The next morning, the Prime minister relieved Admiral Bokhari of his duties. It was during his time as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs that Musharraf began to build friendly relations with the United States Army establishment, including General Anthony Zinni, USMC, General Tommy Franks, General John Abizaid, and General Colin Powell of the US Army, all of whom were premier four-star generals. The Pakistan Army originally conceived the Kargil plan after the Siachen conflict but the plan was rebuffed repeatedly by senior civilian and military officials. Musharraf was a leading strategist behind the Kargil Conflict. From March to May 1999, he ordered secret infiltration of forces into the Kargil district. After India discovered the infiltration, a fierce Indian offensive nearly led to a full-scale war. However, Sharif withdrew support for the insurgents in July because of heightened international pressure. Sharif's decision antagonised the Pakistan Army and rumours of a possible coup began emerging soon afterward. Sharif and Musharraf dispute on who was responsible for the Kargil conflict and Pakistan's withdrawal. This strategic operation met with great hostility in the public circles and wide scale disapproval in the media who roundly criticised this operation. Musharraf had severe confrontation and became involved in serious altercations with his senior officers, chief of naval staff Admiral Fasih Bokhari, chief of air staff, Air Chief Marshal PQ Mehdi and senior lieutenant-general Ali Kuli Khan. Admiral Bokhari ultimately demanded a full-fledged joint-service court martial against General Musharraf, while on the other hand General Kuli Khan lambasted the war as "a disaster bigger than the East-Pakistan tragedy", adding that the plan was "flawed in terms of its conception, tactical planning and execution" that ended in "sacrificing so many soldiers." Problems with his lifelong friend, chief of air staff air chief marshal Pervez Mehdi also arose when air chief refrained to participate or authorise any air strike to support the elements of army operations in the Kargil region. During the last meeting with the Prime minister, Musharraf faced grave criticism on results produced by Kargil infiltration by the principal military intelligence (MI) director lieutenant-general Jamshed Gulzar Kiani who maintained in the meeting: "(...) whatever has been written there is against logic. If you catch your enemy by the jugular vein he would react with full force... If you cut enemy supply lines, the only option for him will be to ensure supplies by air... (sic).. at that situation the Indian Army was unlikely to confront and it had to come up to the occasion. It is against wisdom that you dictate to the enemy to keep the war limited to a certain front...." Nawaz Sharif has maintained that the Operation was conducted without his knowledge. However, details of the briefing he got from the military before and after the Kargil operation have become public. Before the operation, between January and March, Sharif was briefed about the operation in three separate meetings. In January, the army briefed him about the Indian troop movement along the LOC in Skardu on 29 January 1999, on 5 February at Kel, on 12 March at the GHQ, and finally on 17 May at the ISI headquarters. During the end of the June DCC meeting, a tense Sharif turned to the army chief and said "you should have told me earlier", Musharraf pulled out his notebook and repeated the dates and contents of around seven briefings he had given him since the beginning of January. Military officials from Musharraf's Joint Staff Headquarters (JS HQ) met with regional corps commanders three times in late September in anticipation of a possible coup. To quieten rumours of a fallout between Musharraf and Sharif, Sharif officially certified Musharraf's remaining two years of his term on 30 September. Musharraf left for a weekend trip to take part in Sri Lanka's Army's 50th-anniversary celebrations. When Pervez Musharraf was returning from his visit to Colombo his flight was denied landing permissions at Karachi International Airport on orders from the Prime Minister's office. Upon hearing the announcement of Nawaz Sharif replacing Pervez Musharraf with Khwaja Ziauddin, the third replacement of the top military commander of the country in less than two years, local military commanders began to mobilise troops towards Islamabad from nearby Rawalpindi. The military placed Sharif under house arrest, but in a last-ditch effort Sharif privately ordered Karachi air traffic controllers to redirect Musharraf's flight to India. The plan failed after soldiers in Karachi surrounded the airport control tower. At 2:50 am on 13 October, Musharraf addressed the nation with a recorded message. Musharraf met with President Rafiq Tarar on 13 October to deliberate on legitimising the coup. On 15 October, Musharraf ended emerging hopes of a quick transition to democracy after he declared a state of emergency, suspended the Constitution and assumed power as Chief Executive. He also quickly purged the government of political enemies, notably Ziauddin and national airline chief Shahid Khaqan Abbassi. On 17 October, he gave his second national address and established a seven-member military-civilian council to govern the country. He named three retired military officers and a judge as provincial administrators on 21 October. Ultimately, Musharraf assumed executive powers but did not obtain the office of the Prime minister. The Prime minister's secretariat (official residence of Prime minister of Pakistan) was closed by the military police and its staff was fired by Musharraf immediately. There were no organised protests within the country to the coup, that was widely criticised by the international community. Consequently, Pakistan was suspended from the Commonwealth of Nations. Sharif was put under house arrest and later exiled to Saudi Arabia on his personal request and under a contract. The senior military appointments in the inter-services were extremely important and crucial for Musharraf to keep the legitimacy and the support for his coup in the joint inter-services. Starting with the PAF, Musharraf pressured President Tarar to appoint most-junior air marshal to four-star rank, particularly someone with Musharraf had experienced working during the inter-services operations. Once Air-chief Marshal Pervez Kureshi was retired, the most junior air marshal Muschaf Mir (who worked with Musharraf in 1996 to assist ISI in Taliban matters) was appointed to four-star rank as well as elevated as Chief of Air Staff. There were two extremely important military appointments made by Musharraf in the Navy. Although Admiral Aziz Mirza (a lifelong friend of Musharraf, he shared a dorm with the admiral in the 1960s and they graduated together from the academy) was appointed by Prime minister Nawaz Sharif, Mirza remained extremely supportive of Musharraf's coup and was also a close friend of Musharraf since 1971 when both participated in a joint operation against the Indian Army. After Mirza's retirement, Musharraf appointed Admiral Shahid Karimullah, with whom Musharraf had trained together in special forces schools during the 1960s, to four-star rank and chief of naval staff. Musharraf's first foreign visit was to Saudi Arabia on 26 October where he met with King Fahd. After meeting senior Saudi royals, the next day he went to Medina and performed Umrah in Mecca. On 28 October, he went to the United Arab Emirates before returning home. By the end of October, Musharraf appointed many technocrats and bureaucrats in his Cabinet, including former Citibank executive Shaukat Aziz as Finance Minister and Abdul Sattar as Foreign Minister. In early November, he released details of his assets to the public. In late December 1999, Musharraf dealt with his first international crisis when India accused Pakistan's involvement in the Indian Airlines Flight 814 hijacking. Though United States president Bill Clinton pressured Musharraf to ban the alleged group behind the hijacking — Harkat-ul-Mujahideen, Pakistani officials refused because of fears of reprisal from political parties such as Jamaat-e-Islami. In March 2000, Musharraf banned political rallies. In a television interview given in 2001, Musharraf openly spoke about the negative role of a few high-ranking officers in the Pakistan Armed Forces in state's affairs. Musharraf labelled many of his senior professors at NDU as "pseudo-intellectuals", including the NDU's notable professors, General Aslam Beg and Jehangir Karamat under whom Musharraf studied and served well. The Military Police held former prime minister Sharif under house arrest at a government guesthouse and opened his Lahore home to the public in late October 1999. He was formally indicted in November on charges of hijacking, kidnapping, attempted murder, and treason for preventing Musharraf's flight from landing at Karachi airport on the day of the coup. His trial began in early March 2000 in an anti-terrorism court, which is designed for speedy trials. He testified Musharraf began preparations of a coup after the Kargil conflict. Sharif was placed in Adiala Jail, infamous for hosting Zulfikar Ali Bhutto's trial, and his leading defence lawyer, Iqbal Raad, was shot dead in Karachi in mid-March. Sharif's defence team blamed the military for intentionally providing their lawyers with inadequate protection. The court proceedings were widely accused of being a show trial. Sources from Pakistan claimed that Musharraf and his military government's officers were in full mood to exercise tough conditions on Sharif, and intended to send Nawaz Sharif to the gallows to face a similar fate to that of Zulfikar Ali Bhutto in 1979. It was the pressure on Musharraf exerted by Saudi Arabia and the United States to exile Sharif after it was confirmed that the court is about to give its verdict on Nawaz Sharif over treason charges, and the court would sentence Sharif to death. Sharif signed an agreement with Musharraf and his military government and his family was exiled to Saudi Arabia in December 2000. Shortly after Musharraf's takeover, Musharraf issued Oath of Judges Order No. 2000, which required judges to take a fresh oath of office. On 12 May 2000, the Supreme Court asked Musharraf to hold national elections by 12 October 2002. After President Rafiq Tarar's resignation, Musharraf formally appointed himself as President on 20 June 2001. In August 2002, he issued the Legal Framework Order No. 2002, which added numerous amendments to the Constitution. Musharraf called for nationwide political elections in the country after accepting the ruling of the Supreme Court of Pakistan. Musharraf was the first military president to accept the rulings of the Supreme Court and holding free and fair elections in 2002, part of his vision to return democratic rule to the country. In October 2002, Pakistan held general elections, which the pro-Musharraf PML-Q won wide margins, although it had failed to gain an absolute majority. The PML-Q formed a government with far-right religious parties coalition, the MMA and the liberals MQM; the coalition legitimised Musharraf's rule. After the elections, the PML-Q nominated Zafarullah Khan Jamali for the office of prime minister, which Musharraf also approved. After first session at the Parliament, Musharraf voluntarily transferred the powers of chief executive to Prime Minister Zafarullah Khan Jamali. Musharraf succeeded to pass the XVII amendment, which grants powers to dissolve the parliament, with approval required from the Supreme Court. Within two years, Jamali proved to be an ineffective prime minister as he forcefully implemented his policies in the country and caused problems with the business class elites. Musharraf accepted the resignation of Jamali and asked his close colleague Chaudhry Shujaat Hussain to appoint a new prime minister in place. Hussain nominated Finance minister Shaukat Aziz, who had been impressive due to his performance as finance minister in 1999. Musharraf regarded Aziz as his right hand and preferable choice for the office of Prime minister. With Aziz appointed as Prime minister, Musharraf transferred all executive powers to Aziz as he trusted Shaukat Aziz. Aziz proved to be extremely capable in running the government; under his leadership economic growth reached to a maximum level, which further stabilised Musharraf's presidency. Aziz swiftly, quietly and quickly undermined the elements seeking to undermine Musharraf, which became a factor in Musharraf's trust in him. Between 2004 and 2007, Aziz approved many projects that did not require Musharraf's permission. In 2010, all constitutional changes carried out by Musharraf and Aziz's policies were reverted by the 18th Amendment, which restored the powers of the Prime Minister and reduced the role of the President to levels below that of even the pre-Musharraf era. He suspended the country's democratic process and imposed two states of emergency, leading to his conviction for treason. During his rule, he implemented both liberal reforms and authoritarian measures, while also forming alliances and impacting the situation in Balochistan. The legacy of Musharraf's era serves as a cautionary tale for future leaders in Pakistan. The President [Musharraf] stood clapping his hands right next to us as we sang Azadi and Jazba, and moved to the beat with us. It was such a relief to "have a coolest leader" in the office... — Junoon, 2001, The presidency of Pervez Musharraf helped bring the liberal forces to the national level and into prominence, for the first time in the history of Pakistan. He granted national amnesty to the political workers of the liberal parties like Muttahida Qaumi Movement and Pakistan Muslim League (Q), and supported MQM in becoming a central player in the government. Musharraf disbanded the cultural policies of the previous Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif, and quickly adopted Benazir Bhutto's cultural policies after disbanding Indian channels in the country. His cultural policies liberalised Pakistan's media, and he issued many television licences to the private-sector to open television centres and media houses. The television dramas, film industry, theatre, music and literature activities, were personally encouraged by Pervez Musharraf. Under his policies, the rock music bands gained a following in the country and many concerts were held each week. His cultural policies, the film, theatre, rock and folk music, and television programs were extremely devoted to and promoted the national spirit of the country. In 2001, Musharraf got on stage with the rock music band, Junoon, and sang the national song with the band. On political fronts, Musharraf faced fierce opposition from the ultra-conservative alliance, the MMA, led by clergyman Maulana Noorani. In Pakistan, Maulana Noorani was remembered as a mystic religious leader and had preached spiritual aspects of Islam all over the world as part of the World Islamic Mission. Although the political deadlock posed by Maulana Noorani was neutralised after Noorani's death, Musharraf yet had to face the opposition from ARD led by Benazir Bhutto of the PPP. On 18 September 2005, Musharraf made a speech before a broad based audience of Jewish leadership, sponsored by the American Jewish Congress's Council for World Jewry, in New York City. He was widely criticised by Middle Eastern leaders, but was met with some praise among Jewish leadership. Musharraf allied with the United States against the Taliban in Afghanistan after the September 11 attacks. As the closest state to the Taliban government, Musharraf was in negotiations with them in the aftermath of the attacks regarding the severity of the situation before allying with the U.S. and declaring to stamp out extremism. He was, however criticised by NATO and the Afghan government of not doing enough to prevent pro Taliban or al-Qaeda militants in the Pakistan-Afghanistan border region. Tensions with Afghanistan increased in 2006, with Hamid Karzai, then president of Afghanistan, accusing Musharraf of failing to act against Afghan Taliban leaders in Pakistan, claiming that the Taliban leader Mullah Omar was based in Quetta, Pakistan. In response, Musharraf hit back saying "None of this is true and Karzai knows it." George W. Bush encouraged the two leaders to unite in the war on terror during a trio meeting. Violence in the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa escalated in the late 2000s amid fighting between militants and Pakistani soldiers backed by the U.S. After the 2001 Gujarat earthquake, Musharraf expressed his sympathies to Indian prime minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee and sent a plane load of relief supplies to India. In 2004, Musharraf began a series of talks with India to resolve the Kashmir dispute. In 2004 a cease-fire was agreed upon along the Line of Control. Many troops still patrol the border. In 2006, King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia visited Pakistan for the first time as King. Musharraf honoured King Abdullah with the Nishan-e-Pakistan. Musharraf received the King Abdul-Aziz Medallion in 2007. From September 2001 until his resignation in 2007 from the military, Musharraf's presidency was affected by scandals relating to nuclear weapons, which were detrimental to his authoritative legitimacy in the country and in the international community. In October 2001, Musharraf authorised a sting operation led by FIA to arrest two physicists Sultan Bashiruddin Mahmood and Chaudhry Abdul Majeed, because of their supposed connection with the Taliban after they secretly visited Taliban-controlled Afghanistan in 2000. The local Pakistani media widely circulated the reports that "Mahmood had a meeting with Osama bin Laden where Bin Laden had shown interest in building a radiological weapon;" it was later discovered that neither scientist had any in-depth knowledge of the technology. In December 2001, Musharraf authorised security hearings and the two scientists were taken into the custody by the JAG Branch (JAG); security hearings continued until early 2002. Another scandal arose as a consequence of disclosure by Pakistani nuclear physicist Abdul Qadeer Khan. On 27 February 2001, Musharraf spoke highly of Khan at a state dinner in Islamabad, and he personally approved Khan's appointment as Science Advisor to the Government. In 2004, Musharraf relieved Abdul Qadeer Khan from his post and initially denied knowledge of the government's involvement in nuclear proliferation, despite Khan's claim that Musharraf was the "Big Boss" of the proliferation ring. Following this, Musharraf authorised a national security hearing, which continued until his resignation from the army in 2007. According to Zahid Malik, Musharraf and the military establishment at that time acted against Abdul Qadeer Khan in an attempt to prove the loyalty of Pakistan to the United States and Western world. The investigations backfired on Musharraf and public opinion turned against him. The populist ARD movement, which included the major political parties such as the PML and the PPP, used the issue to bring down Musharraf's presidency. The debriefing of Abdul Qadeer Khan severely damaged Musharraf's own public image and his political prestige in the country. He faced bitter domestic criticism for attempting to vilify Khan, specifically from opposition leader Benazir Bhutto. In an interview to Daily Times, Bhutto maintained that Khan had been a "scapegoat" in the nuclear proliferation scandal and said that she did not "believe that such a big scandal could have taken place under the nose of General Musharraf". Musharraf's long-standing ally, the MQM, published criticism of Musharraf over his handling of Abdul Qadeer Khan. The ARD movement and the political parties further tapped into the public anger and mass demonstrations against Musharraf. The credibility of the United States was also badly damaged; the US itself refrained from pressuring Musharraf to take further action against Khan. While Abdul Qadeer Khan remained popular in the country, Musharraf could not withstand the political pressure and his presidency was further weakened. Musharraf quickly pardoned Abdul Qadeer Khan in exchange for cooperation and issued confinement orders against Khan that limited Khan's movement. He handed over the case of Abdul Qadeer Khan to Prime minister Aziz who had been supportive towards Khan, personally "thanking" him: "The services of Dr. Qadeer Khan are unforgettable for the country." On 4 July 2008, in an interview, Abdul Qadeer Khan laid the blame on President Musharraf and later on Benazir Bhutto for transferring the technology, claiming that Musharraf was aware of all the deals and he was the "Big Boss" for those deals. Khan said that "Musharraf gave centrifuges to North Korea in a 2000 shipment supervised by the armed forces. The equipment was sent in a North Korean plane loaded under the supervision of Pakistan security officials." Nuclear weapons expert David Albright of the Institute for Science and International Security agreed that Khan's activities were government-sanctioned. After Musharraf's resignation, Abdul Qadeer Khan was released from house arrest by the executive order of the Supreme Court of Pakistan. After Musharraf left the country, the new Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Committee General Tärik Majid terminated all further debriefings of Abdul Qadeer Khan. Few believed that Abdul Qadeer Khan acted alone and the affair risked gravely damaging the Armed Forces, which oversaw and controlled the nuclear weapons development and of which Musharraf was Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff until his resignation from military service on 28 November 2007. When Musharraf came to power in 1999, he promised that the corruption in the government bureaucracy would be cleaned up. However, some claimed that the level of corruption did not diminish throughout Musharraf's time. Musharraf instituted prohibitions on foreign students' access to studying Islam within Pakistan, an effort that began as an outright ban but was later reduced to restrictions on obtaining visas. In December 2003, Musharraf made a deal with MMA, a six-member coalition of hardline Islamist parties, agreeing to leave the army by 31 December 2004. With that party's support, pro-Musharraf legislators were able to muster the two-thirds supermajority required to pass the Seventeenth Amendment, which retroactively legalised Musharraf's 1999 coup and many of his decrees. Musharraf reneged on his agreement with the MMA and pro-Musharraf legislators in the Parliament passed a bill allowing Musharraf to keep both offices. On 1 January 2004, Musharraf had won a confidence vote in the Electoral College of Pakistan, consisting of both houses of Parliament and the four provincial assemblies. Musharraf received 658 out of 1170 votes, a 56% majority, but many opposition and Islamic members of parliament walked out to protest the vote. As a result of this vote, his term was extended to 2007. Prime Minister Zafarullah Khan Jamali resigned on 26 June 2004, after losing the support of Musharraf's party, PML(Q). His resignation was at least partially due to his public differences with the party chairman, Chaudhry Shujaat Hussain. This was rumoured to have happened at Musharraf's command. Jamali had been appointed with the support of Musharraf's and the pro-Musharraf PML(Q). Most PML(Q) parliamentarians formerly belonged to the Pakistan Muslim League party led by Sharif, and most ministers of the cabinet were formerly senior members of other parties, joining the PML(Q) after the elections upon being offered positions. Musharraf nominated Shaukat Aziz, the minister for finance and a former employee of Citibank and head of Citibank Private Banking as the new prime minister. In 2005, the Bugti clan attacked a gas field in Balochistan, after Dr. Shazia was raped at that location. Musharraf responded by dispatching 4,500 soldiers, supported by tanks and helicopters, to guard the gas field. The National Assembly voted in favour of the "Women's Protection Bill" on 15 November 2006 and the Senate approved it on 23 November 2006. President General Pervez Musharraf signed into law the "Women's Protection Bill", on 1 December 2006. The bill places rape laws under the penal code and allegedly does away with harsh conditions that previously required victims to produce four male witnesses and exposed the victims to prosecution for adultery if they were unable to prove the crime. However, the Women's Protection bill has been criticised heavily by many for paying continued lip service and failing to address the actual problem by its roots: repealing the Hudood Ordinance. In this context, Musharraf has also been criticised by women and human rights activists for not following up his words by action. The Human Rights Commission of Pakistan (HRCP) said that "The so-called Women's Protection Bill is a farcical attempt at making Hudood Ordinances palatable" outlining the issues of the bill and the continued impact on women. His government increased reserved seats for women in assemblies, to increase women's representation and make their presence more effective. The number of reserved seats in the National Assembly was increased from 20 to 60. In provincial assemblies, 128 seats were reserved for women. This situation has brought out increase participation of women in the 1988 and 2008 elections. In March 2005, a couple of months after the rape of a Pakistani physician, Dr. Shazia Khalid, working on a government gas plant in the remote Balochistan province, Musharraf was criticised for pronouncing Captain Hammad, a fellow military man and the accused in the case, innocent before the judicial inquiry was complete. Shazia alleged that she was forced by the government to leave the country. In an interview given to The Washington Post in September 2005, Musharraf said that Pakistani women who had been the victims of rape treated rape as a "moneymaking concern", and were only interested in the publicity to make money and get a Canadian visa. He subsequently denied making these comments, but the Post made available an audio recording of the interview, in which Musharraf could be heard making the quoted remarks. Musharraf also denied Mukhtaran Mai, a Pakistani rape victim, the right to travel abroad, until pressured by US State Department. The remarks made by Musharraf sparked outrage and protests both internationally and in Pakistan by various groups i.e. women groups, activists. In a rally, held close to the presidential palace and Pakistan's parliament, hundreds of women demonstrated in Pakistan demanding Musharraf apologise for the controversial remarks about female rape victims. Musharraf survived multiple assassination attempts and alleged plots. In 2000 Kamran Atif, an alleged member of Harkat-ul Mujahideen al-Alami, tried to assassinate Musharraf. Atif was sentenced to death in 2006 by an Anti Terrorism Court. On 14 December 2003, Musharraf survived an assassination attempt when a powerful bomb went off minutes after his highly guarded convoy crossed a bridge in Rawalpindi; it was the third such attempt during his four-year rule. On 25 December 2003, two suicide bombers tried to assassinate Musharraf, but their car bombs failed to kill him; 16 others died instead. Musharraf escaped with only a cracked windshield on his car. Amjad Farooqi was an alleged mastermind behind these attempts, and was killed by Pakistani forces in 2004 after an extensive manhunt. On 6 July 2007, there was another attempted assassination, when an unknown group fired a 7.62 submachine gun at Musharraf's plane as it took off from a runway in Rawalpindi. Security also recovered two anti-aircraft guns, from which no shots had been fired. On 17 July 2007, Pakistani police detained 39 people in relation to the attempted assassination of Musharraf. The suspects were detained at an undisclosed location by a joint team of Punjab Police, the Federal Investigation Agency and other Pakistani intelligence agencies. By August 2007, polls showed 64 per cent of Pakistanis did not want another Musharraf term. Controversies involving the atomic issues, Lal Masjid incident, the unpopular War in North-West Pakistan, the suspension of Chief Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, and widely circulated criticisms from rivals Benazir Bhutto and Nawaz Sharif, had brutalised the personal image of Musharraf in public and political circles. More importantly, with Shaukat Aziz departing from the office of Prime Minister, Musharraf could not have sustained his presidency any longer and dramatically fell from the presidency within a matter of eight months, after popular and mass public movements called for his impeachment for the actions taken during his presidency. On 9 March 2007, Musharraf suspended Chief Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry and pressed corruption charges against him. He replaced him with Acting Chief Justice Javed Iqbal. Musharraf's moves sparked protests among Pakistani lawyers. On 12 March 2007, lawyers started a campaign called Judicial Activism across Pakistan and began boycotting all court procedures in protest against the suspension. In Islamabad, as well as other cities such as Lahore, Karachi, and Quetta hundreds of lawyers dressed in black suits attended rallies, condemning the suspension as unconstitutional. Slowly the expressions of support for the ousted Chief Justice gathered momentum and by May, protesters and opposition parties took out huge rallies against Musharraf, and his tenure as army chief was also challenged in the courts. The Lal Masjid mosque in Islamabad had a religious school for women and the Jamia Hafsa madrassa, which was attached to the mosque. A male madrassa was only a few minutes drive away. In April 2007, the mosque administration started to encourage attacks on local video shops, alleging that they were selling porn films; and massage parlours, which were alleged to be used as brothels. These attacks were often carried out by the mosque's female students. In July 2007, a confrontation occurred when government authorities made a decision to stop the student violence and send police officers to arrest the responsible individuals and the madrassa administration. This development led to a standoff between police forces and armed students. Mosque leaders and students refused to surrender and fired at police from inside the mosque building. Both sides suffered casualties. On 27 July, Bhutto met for the first time with Musharraf in the UAE to discuss her return to Pakistan. On 14 September 2007, Deputy Information Minister Tariq Azim stated that Bhutto will not be deported, but must face corruption charges against her. He clarified Sharif's and Bhutto's right to return to Pakistan. On 17 September 2007, Bhutto accused Musharraf's allies of pushing Pakistan to crisis by refusal to restore democracy and share power. Bhutto returned from eight years exile on 18 October. Musharraf called for a three-day mourning period after Bhutto's assassination on 27 December 2007. Sharif returned to Pakistan in September 2007 and was immediately arrested and taken into custody at the airport. He was sent back to Saudi Arabia. Saudi intelligence chief Muqrin bin Abdul-Aziz Al Saud and Lebanese politician Saad Hariri arrived separately in Islamabad on 8 September 2007, the former with a message from Saudi King Abdullah and the latter after a meeting with Nawaz Sharif in London. After meeting President General Pervez Musharraf for two-and-a-half hours discussing Nawaz Sharif's possible return. On arrival in Saudi Arabia, Nawaz Sharif was received by Prince Muqrin bin Abdul-Aziz, the Saudi intelligence chief, who had met Musharraf in Islamabad the previous day. That meeting had been followed by a rare press conference, at which he had warned that Sharif should not violate the terms of King Abdullah's agreement of staying out of politics for 10 years. On 2 October 2007, Musharraf appointed General Tariq Majid as Chairman Joint Chiefs Committee and approved General Ashfaq Kayani as vice chief of the army starting 8 October. When Musharraf resigned from military on 28 November 2007, Kayani became Chief of Army Staff. In a March 2007 interview, Musharraf said that he intended to stay in office for another five years. A nine-member panel of Supreme Court judges deliberated on six petitions (including Jamaat-e-Islami's, Pakistan's largest Islamic group) for disqualification of Musharraf as a presidential candidate. Bhutto stated that her party may join other opposition groups, including Sharif's. On 28 September 2007, in a 6–3 vote, Judge Rana Bhagwandas's court removed obstacles to Musharraf's election bid. On 3 November 2007, Musharraf declared emergency rule across Pakistan. He suspended the Constitution, imposed a state of emergency, and fired the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court again. In Islamabad, troops entered the Supreme Court building, arrested the judges and kept them detained in their homes. Independent and international television channels went off air. Public protests were mounted against Musharraf. General elections were held on 18 February 2008, in which the Pakistan Peoples Party (PPP) polled the highest votes and won the most seats. On 23 March 2008, President Musharraf said an "era of democracy" had begun in Pakistan and that he had put the country "on the track of development and progress". On 22 March, the PPP named former parliament speaker Yusuf Raza Gilani as its candidate for the country's next prime minister, to lead a coalition government united against him. On 7 August 2008, the Pakistan Peoples Party and the Pakistan Muslim League (N) agreed to force Musharraf to step down and begin his impeachment. Asif Ali Zardari and Nawaz Sharif announced sending a formal request or joint charge sheet that he step down, and impeach him through parliamentary process upon refusal. Musharraf refused to step down. A charge-sheet had been drafted and was to be presented to parliament. It included Mr. Musharraf's first seizure of power in 1999—at the expense of Nawaz Sharif, the PML(N)'s leader, whom Mr. Musharraf imprisoned and exiled—and his second in November 2007, when he declared an emergency as a means to get re-elected as president. The charge-sheet also listed some of Mr. Musharraf's contributions to the "war on terror". Musharraf delayed his departure for the Beijing Olympics, by a day. On 11 August, the government summoned the national assembly. On 18 August 2008, Musharraf announced his resignation. On the following day, he defended his nine-year rule in an hour-long televised speech. However, public opinion was largely against him by this time. A poll conducted a day after his resignation showed that 63% of Pakistanis welcomed Musharraf's decision to step down while only 15% were unhappy with it. On 23 November 2008 he left for exile in London where he arrived the following day. After his resignation, Musharraf went to perform a holy pilgrimage to Mecca. He then went on a speaking and lectureship tour through the Middle East, Europe, and the United States. Chicago-based Embark LLC was one of the international public-relations firms trying to land Musharraf as a highly paid keynote speaker. According to Embark President David B. Wheeler, the speaking fee for Musharraf would be US$150,000–200,000 for a day plus jet and other V.I.P. arrangements on the ground. In 2011, he also lectured at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace on politics and racism where he also authored and published a paper with George Perkvich. Musharraf launched his own political party, the All Pakistan Muslim League, in June 2010. The PML-N tried to get Pervez Musharraf to stand trial under Article 6 of the Constitution for treason in relation to the emergency on 3 November 2007. The Prime Minister of Pakistan Yousaf Raza Gilani has said a consensus resolution is required in national assembly for an article 6 trial of Pervez Musharraf"I have no love lost for Musharraf ... if parliament decides to try him, I will be with parliament. Article 6 cannot be applied to one individual ... those who supported him are today in my cabinet and some of them have also joined the PML-N ... the MMA, the MQM and the PML-Q supported him ... this is why I have said that it is not doable," said the Prime Minister while informally talking to editors and also replying to questions by journalists at an Iftar-dinner he had hosted for them. Although the constitution of Pakistan, Article 232 and Article 236, provides for emergencies, and on 15 February 2008, the interim Pakistan Supreme Court attempted to validated the Proclamation of Emergency on 3 November 2007, the Provisional Constitution Order No 1 of 2007 and the Oath of Office (Judges) Order, 2007, after the Supreme Court judges were restored to the bench, on 31 July 2009, they ruled that Musharraf had violated the constitution when he declared emergency rule in 2007. Saudi Arabia exerted its influence to attempt to prevent treason charges, under Article 6 of the constitution, from being brought against Musharraf, citing existing agreements between the states, as well as pressuring Sharif directly. As it turned out, it was not Sharif's decision to make. Abbottabad's district and sessions judge in a missing person's case passed judgment asking the authorities to declare Pervez Musharraf a proclaimed offender. On 11 February 2011 the Anti Terrorism Court, issued an arrest warrant for Musharraf and charged him with conspiracy to commit murder of Benazir Bhutto. On 8 March 2011, the Sindh High Court registered treason charges against him. Regarding the Lahore attack on Sri Lankan cricket players, Musharraf criticised the police commandos' inability to kill any of the gunmen, saying "If this was the elite force I would expect them to have shot down those people who attacked them, the reaction, their training should be on a level that if anyone shoots toward the company they are guarding, in less than three seconds they should shoot the man down." Regarding the blasphemy laws, Musharraf said that Pakistan is sensitive to religious issues and that the blasphemy law should stay. Since the start of 2011, news had circulated that Musharraf would return to Pakistan before the 2013 general election. He himself vowed this in several interviews. On Piers Morgan Tonight, Musharraf announced his plans to return to Pakistan on 23 March 2012 to seek the Presidency in 2013. The Pakistani Taliban and Talal Bugti threatened to kill him should he return. On 24 March 2013, after a four-year self-imposed exile, he returned to Pakistan. He landed at Jinnah International Airport, Karachi, via a chartered Emirates flight with Pakistani journalists and foreign news correspondents. Hundreds of his supporters and workers of APML greeted Musharraf upon his arrival at Karachi airport, and he delivered a short public speech. On 16 April 2013, three weeks after he returned to Pakistan, an electoral tribunal in Chitral declared Musharraf disqualified from contesting elections, effectively quashing his political ambitions (several other constituencies had previously rejected Musharraf's nominations). A spokesperson for Musharraf's party said the ruling was "biased" and they would appeal the decision. Two days later, on 18 April 2013, the Islamabad High Court ordered the arrest of Musharraf on charges relating to the 2007 arrests of judges. Musharraf had technically been on bail since his return to the country, and the court now declared his bail ended. Musharraf escaped from court with the aid of his security personnel, and went to his farm-house mansion. The following day, Musharraf was placed under house arrest but was later transferred to police headquarters in Islamabad. Musharraf characterised his arrest as "politically motivated" and his legal team has declared their intention to fight the charges in the Supreme Court. Further to the charges of this arrest, the Senate also passed a resolution petitioning that Musharraf be charged with high treason in relation to the events of 2007. On Friday, 26 April 2013, a week after one court had voided his bail and caused his arrest in the "arrest of judges" case, another court ordered house arrest for Musharraf in connection with the death of Benazir Bhutto. On 20 May, a Pakistani court granted bail to Musharraf. On 12 June 2014 Sindh High Court allowed him to travel to seek medical attention abroad. On 3 April 2014, Musharraf escaped the fourth assassination attempt, resulting in an injury of a woman, according to Pakistani news. On 25 June 2013, Musharraf was named as prime suspect in two separate cases. The first case was subverting and suspending the constitution, and the second was a Federal Investigation Agency probe into the conspiracy to assassinate Bhutto. Musharraf was indicted on 20 August 2013 for Bhutto's assassination in 2007. On 2 September 2013, a first information report (FIR) was registered against him for his role in the Lal Masjid Operation in 2007. The FIR was lodged after the son of slain hard line cleric Abdul Rahid Ghazi (who was killed during the operation) asked authorities to bring charges against Musharraf. On 18 March 2016, Musharraf's name was removed from the Exit Control List and he was allowed to travel abroad, citing medical treatment. He subsequently lived in Dubai in self-imposed exile. Musharraf vowed to return to Pakistan, but he never did. It was first disclosed in October 2018 that Musharraf was suffering from amyloidosis, a rare and serious illness for which he has undergone treatment in hospitals in London and Dubai; an official with Musharraf's political party said that Musharraf would return to Pakistan after he made a full recovery. In 2017, Musharraf appeared as a political analyst on his weekly television show Sab Se Pehle Pakistan with President Musharraf, hosted by BOL News. On 31 August 2017, the anti-terrorism court in Rawalpindi declared him an "absconder" in Bhutto's murder case. The court also ordered that his property and bank account in Pakistan be seized. On 17 December 2019, a special court declared him a traitor and sentenced him in absentia to death for abrogating and suspending the constitution in November 2007. The three-member panel of the special court which issued the order was spearheaded by Chief Justice of the Peshawar High Court Waqar Ahmed Seth. He was the first Pakistani Army General to be sentenced to death. Analysts did not expect Musharraf to face the sentence given his illness and the fact that Dubai has no extradition treaty with Pakistan; the verdict was also viewed as largely symbolic given that Musharraf retained support within the current Pakistani government and military. Musharraf challenged the verdict, and on 13 January 2020, the Lahore High Court annulled the death sentence against Musharraf, ruling that the special court that held the trial was unconstitutional. The unanimous verdict was delivered by a three-member bench of the Lahore High Court, consisting of Justice Sayyed Muhammad Mazahar Ali Akbar Naqvi, Justice Muhammad Ameer Bhatti, and Justice Chaudhry Masood Jahangir. The court ruled that the prosecution of Musharraf was politically motivated and that the crimes of high treason and subverting the Constitution were "a joint offence" that "cannot be undertaken by a single person." Musharraf was the second son of his parents and had two brothers—Javed and Naved. Javed retired as a high-level official in Pakistan's civil service. Naved is an anaesthetist who has lived in Chicago since completing his residency training at Loyola University Medical Center in 1979. Musharraf married Sehba, who is from Karachi, on 28 December 1968. They had a daughter, Ayla, an architect married to film director Asim Raza, and a son, Bilal. He also had close family ties to the prominent Kheshgi family. On 5 February 2023, Musharraf died at age 79 due to amyloidosis. He had been hospitalised a year prior due to the disease. His body was returned to Karachi, Pakistan, from Dubai on 6 February. His funeral prayers were offered at a mosque in Karachi's Gulmohar Polo Ground in Malir Cantonment on 7 February. He was laid to rest with military honours in an army graveyard. Musharraf published his autobiography—In the Line of Fire: A Memoir—in 2006. His book has also been translated into Urdu, Hindi, Tamil and Bangali. In Urdu the title is Sab Se Pehle Pakistan (Pakistan Comes First). Enlightened moderation Politics of Pakistan Urdu: پرویز مشرف Wilson, John (2007). "General Pervez Musharraf— A Profile". The General and Jihad. Washington D.C.: Pentagon Press, 2007. ISBN 978-0-520-24448-1. "Profile: Pervez Musharraf". BBC News. 16 June 2009. Archived from the original on 21 July 2009. "India Remembers 'Baby Musharraf'". BBC News. 15 April 2005. Archived from the original on 11 May 2013. Retrieved 15 June 2011. Dixit, Jyotindra Nath (2002). "Implications of the Kargil War". India-Pakistan in War & Peace (2nd ed.). London: Routledge. pp. 28–35. ISBN 978-0-415-30472-6. Harmon, Daniel E. (13 October 2008). Pervez Musharraf: President of Pakistan (Easyread Super Large 20pt ed.). ReadHowYouWant.com. p. 1. ISBN 978-1-4270-9203-8. Archived from the original on 5 February 2023. Retrieved 2 November 2020. Kashif, Imran (28 October 2014). "Musharraf's mother reaches Karachi". Karachi: Arynews. Archived from the original on 19 August 2018. Retrieved 17 December 2017. Dugger, Celia W. (26 October 1999). "Pakistan Ruler Seen as 'Secular-Minded' Muslim". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 11 September 2017. Retrieved 11 February 2017. "Musharraf Mother Meets Indian PM" Archived 29 January 2009 at the Wayback Machine. BBC News (21 March 2005). "Gen Pervez Musharraf's mother dies in Dubai". 15 January 2021. Archived from the original on 17 August 2021. Retrieved 15 January 2021. Worth, Richard; Kras, Sara Louise (2007). Pervez Musharraf. Infobase. ISBN 9781438104720. Archived from the original on 5 February 2023. Retrieved 5 February 2023. Musharraf, Pervez (25 September 2006). In the Line of Fire: A Memoir (1 ed.). Pakistan: Free Press. pp. 40–60. ISBN 074-3283449. Retrieved 17 May 2012. Ajami, Fouad (15 June 2011). "Review: In the Line of Fire: A Memoir by Pervez Musharraf". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 2 August 2017. Retrieved 11 February 2017. "Rediff On The NeT: My brother, the general". Rediff.com. Archived from the original on 11 October 2017. Retrieved 17 December 2019. Jacob, Satish (13 July 2001). "Musharraf's Family Links to Delhi". BBC News. Archived from the original on 25 March 2013. Retrieved 15 June 2011. "Profile – Pervez Musharraf". BBC 4. 12 August 2003. Archived from the original on 12 April 2010. Musharraf, Pervez (2006). In the Line of Fire: A Memoir. Simon & Schuster. p. 34. ISBN 9780743298438. Archived from the original on 1 January 2016. Retrieved 15 November 2015. "Pakistan's Self-appointed Democratic Leader". CNN. 4 May 2003. Archived from the original on 3 April 2012. Worth, Richard. "Time of Trials". Pervez Musharraf. New York: Chelsea House, 2007. pp. 32–39 Archived 1 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine ISBN 1438104723 Chitkara, M. G. "Pervez Bonaparte Musharraf Archived 1 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine". Indo-Pak Relations: Challenges before New Millennium. New Delhi: A.P.H. Pub., 2001. pp. 135–36 ISBN 8176482722 "FACTBOX – Facts about Pakistani Leader Pervez Musharraf" Archived 18 October 2012 at the Wayback Machine. Reuters (18 August 2008). "CNN.com - General Pervez Musharraf, President and Chief Executive of Pakistan - June 28, 2001". CNN. Retrieved 10 January 2024. Adil, Adnan. "Profile: Chaudhry Shujaat Hussain" Archived 12 November 2012 at the Wayback Machine. BBC News (29 June 2004). Musharraf Regime and Governance Crises. United States: Nova Science Publishers. p. 275. ISBN 1-59033-135-4. Retrieved 6 June 2012 "Q&A on What's Happening in Pakistan". MSNBC. 5 November 2007. Archived from the original on 24 December 2013. "Tricks of the trade from a Sri Lankan general, and some secrets". 3 March 2013. "The Sunday Times Front Section". sundaytimes.lk. "Profile: Pervez Musharraf the cowboy who saved us". 25 February 2023. "Meeting Sri Lanka's ex-army chief". The Express Tribune. 19 February 2013. "Pervez Musharraf, an Adversary of the Eelam State – Ilankai Tamil Sangam". sangam.org. "IF INDIA CAN'T, PAKISTAN MIGHT". Himal Southasian. 1 September 2000. Crossette, Barbara. "Coup in Pakistan – Man in the News; A Soldier's Soldier, Not a Political General" Archived 28 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine. The New York Times (13 October 1999). "Pakistan's Chief Executive a Former Commando" Archived 17 November 2015 at the Wayback Machine. New Straits Times (16 October 1999). Schmetzer, Uli. "Coup Leader Is Hawkish Toward India" Archived 25 January 2012 at the Wayback Machine. Chicago Tribune. Battle of Asal Uttar (13 October 1999). Weaver, Mary Anne. "General On Tightrope Archived 1 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine". Pakistan: in the Shadow of Jihad and Afghanistan. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2003. pp. 25–31 ISBN 0374528861 Harmon, Daniel E. "A Nation Under Military Rule". Pervez Musharraf: President of Pakistan. New York: Rosen Pub., 2008. pp. 44–47 Archived 1 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine ISBN 1404219056 Musharraf, Pervez (2006). In the Line of Fire. Islamabad, Pakistan: Free Press. p. 79. ISBN 0-7432-8344-9. Retrieved 15 November 2015. John, Wilson (2002). The General and Jihad (1 ed.). Washington D.C.: Pentagon Press. p. 45. ISBN 81-8274-158-0. Archived from the original on 1 January 2016. Retrieved 15 November 2015. Kapur, S. Paul. "The Covert Nuclear Period". Dangerous Deterrent: Nuclear Weapons Proliferation and Conflict in South Asia. Singapore: NUS, 2009. pp. 117–18 Archived 1 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine ISBN 9971694433 Wilson John, pp209 Journalist and author George Crile's book, Charlie Wilson's War: The Extraordinary Story of the Largest Covert Operation in History (Grove Press, New York, 2003) Hiro, Dilip (17 April 2012). Apocalyptic realm: jihadists in South Asia. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. pp. 200–210. ISBN 978-0300173789. Archived from the original on 1 January 2016. Retrieved 15 November 2015. Morris, Chris (18 August 2008). "Pervez Musharraf's mixed legacy". Special report published by Chris Morris BBC News, Islamabad. BBC News, Islamabad. BBC News, Islamabad. Archived from the original on 5 January 2015. Retrieved 5 January 2015. Abbas, Hassan (2002). Pakistan's Drift to Extremism. United States: Yale University Press. p. 66. ISBN 9780765614964. Archived from the original on 1 January 2016. Retrieved 15 November 2015. Constable, Pamela (28 November 2007). "Musharraf Steps Down as Head of Pakistani Army". The Washington Post. ISSN 0190-8286. Archived from the original on 27 September 2016. Retrieved 24 September 2016. "Pakistan's Dubious Referendum". The New York Times. 1 May 2002. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 19 August 2017. Retrieved 21 September 2016. Tony Zinni; Tom Clancy; Tony Koltz (2004). Battle ready (Berkley trade pbk. ed.). New York: Putnam. ISBN 0-399-15176-1. "A Bleak Day for Pakistan". The Guardian. 13 October 1999. Archived from the original on 24 August 2013. "Musharraf Vs. Sharif: Who's Lying?". The Weekly Voice. 2 October 2006. Archived from the original on 11 October 2007. Amir, Ayaz (9 July 1999). "Victory in reverse: the great climbdown". Dawn. Archived from the original on 17 February 2007. Retrieved 17 February 2007. Amir, Ayaz (23 July 1999). "For this submission what gain?". Dawn. Archived from the original on 4 February 2007. Retrieved 20 April 2013. "Musharraf planned coup much before Oct 12: Fasih Bokhari". Daily Times. Pakistan. 9 October 2002. Archived from the original on 15 March 2012. Retrieved 16 May 2012. Former Navy chief says the general feared court martial for masterminding Kargil Kargil was a bigger disaster than 1971 Archived 6 April 2008 at the Wayback Machine – Interview of Lt Gen Ali Kuli Khan Khattak. Haleem, S. A. (19 October 2006). "Sweet and bitter memories (Review of In the Line of Fire by Pervez Musharraf)". Jang. Archived from the original on 24 November 2006. "Air Chief Marshal Parvaiz Mehdi Qureshi, NI(M), S Bt". PAF Directorate for Public Relations. PAF Gallery and Press Release. Archived from the original on 16 November 2011. Retrieved 16 May 2012. Masood, Shahid (3 June 2008). "Former general for making an example of Musharraf". GEO News Network. Archived from the original on 6 June 2008. Zehra, Nasim (29 July 2004). "Nawaz Sharif Not A Kargil Victim". Media Monitors Network. Archived from the original on 11 May 2015. Retrieved 3 December 2014. Weiner, Tim. "Countdown to Pakistan's Coup: A Duel of Nerves in the Air", The New York Times Archived 6 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine (17 October 1999). Neilan, Terence (1 October 1999). "World Briefing". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 23 April 2014. Retrieved 21 April 2014. Dummett, Mark (18 August 2008). "Pakistan's Musharraf steps down". Work and report completed by BBC correspondent for Pakistan Mark Dummett. BBC Pakistan, 2008. Archived from the original on 29 September 2009. Retrieved 5 January 2015. Rashid, Ahmed (2012). Pakistan in the Brink. Allen Lane. pp. 6, 21, 31, 35–38, 42, 52, 147, 165, 172, 185, 199, 205. ISBN 978-1-84614-585-8. "Syed Pervez Musharraf kon hain ? | Daily Jang". jang.com.pk. Archived from the original on 26 August 2019. Retrieved 26 August 2019. "Pervez Musharraf Biography President (non-U.S.), General (1943–)". Archived from the original on 10 October 2018. "Pervez Musharraf: president of Pakistan". Archived from the original on 10 November 2017. Retrieved 21 September 2016. "Under the Gun" Archived 18 October 2011 at the Wayback Machine Time (25 October 1999). "How the 1999 Pakistan Coup Unfolded" Archived 29 January 2012 at the Wayback Machine. BBC News (23 August 2007). Dugger, Celia W. "Coup in Pakistan: The Overview" Archived 6 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine. The New York Times (13 October 1999) Dugger, Celia W., and Raja Zulfikar. "Pakistan Military Completes Seizure of All Authority" Archived 12 August 2017 at the Wayback Machine. The New York Times (15 October 1999) Dugger, Celia W. "Pakistan Calm After Coup; Leading General Gives No Clue About How He Will Rule". The New York Times Archived 6 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine (14 October 1999). Goldenberg, Suzanne (16 October 1999). "Musharraf strives to soften coup image". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 10 January 2024. Weiner, Tim, and Steve Levine. "Pakistani General Forms New Panel to Govern the Nation" Archived 12 August 2017 at the Wayback Machine. The New York Times (18 October 1999). Dugger, Celia W. "Pakistan's New Leader Is Struggling to Assemble His Cabinet" Archived 6 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine. The New York Times (23 October 1999). Kershner, Isabel, and Mark Landler. "Pakistan's Leaders Appoint Regional Governors" Archived 6 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine. The New York Times (22 October 1999). McCarthy, Rory (1 April 2000). "Sharif family alone against the military". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 10 January 2024. "Pakistan profile – Timeline". BBC News. 28 November 2011. Archived from the original on 25 May 2018. Retrieved 21 June 2018. "Pakistan 'disappoints' Commonwealth" Archived 18 October 2012 at the Wayback Machine. BBC News (29 October 1999). Tran, Mark (2 May 2000). "Hold elections or face sanctions, Cook tells Zimbabwe". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 10 January 2024. SOUTH ASIA | Profile: General Pervez Musharraf Archived 20 August 2006 at the Wayback Machine. BBC News (24 September 2001). Retrieved 23 January 2011. Anwar, Muhammad (2008). Stolen Stripes and Broke Medals (1 ed.). Bloomington, Indiana (state), United States: AuthorHouse TradeMark. pp. 252–253, 260/273. ISBN 978-1-4259-0020-5. Archived from the original on 1 January 2016. Retrieved 15 November 2015. "Former Admirals wants Musharraf to come back home". CNN. 22 January 2012. Archived from the original on 23 June 2012. Retrieved 16 May 2012. "Musharraf Holds Talks with the Saudis" Archived 17 November 2015 at the Wayback Machine. New Straits Times Malaysia (26 October 1999). Dugger, Celia W. "Pakistan Military Says 7 Civilians Will Join New Government" Archived 5 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine. The New York Times (26 October 1999). Burke, Jason (29 October 1999). "Army throws open first family's palace". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 10 January 2024. Dugger, Celia W. (6 March 2000). "Pakistanis, Eager for Change, Are Left Frustrated After Coup". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 14 September 2013. Retrieved 11 February 2017. Kershner, Isabel, and Mark Ländler. "Pakistan's Ruler Rejects Calls for Referendum" Archived 6 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine The New York Times (4 November 1999). Perlez, Jane (26 January 2000). "Pakistanis Lost Control Of Militants, U.S. Hints". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 14 September 2013. Retrieved 11 February 2017. "Fallout from Flight 814". Time. 1 January 2000. Archived from the original on 18 October 2011. Perlez, Jane (25 January 2000). "U.S. Asserts Pakistan Backed Hijacking of Air India Jetliner". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 6 March 2016. Retrieved 11 February 2017. Pakistanis Lost Control Of Militants, U.S. Hints Archived 14 September 2013 at the Wayback Machine. NYTimes (26 January 2000) "Profile: Gen. (R) Mirza Aslam Beg". Pakistan Herald. 2009. Archived from the original on 2 January 2010. Dugger, Celia W. (11 November 1999) "Treason Charge For Pakistan's Ousted Premier" Archived 6 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine. The New York Times. Kershner, Isabel, and Mark Landler. "Pakistan on Trial" Archived 7 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine. The New York Times (12 November 1999). Kershner, Isabel, and Mark Landler. "Justice on Trial in Pakistan". The New York Times (24 December 1999). Kershner, Isabel, and Mark Landler. "Clash Over India Led to Coup, Pakistan's Ex-Premier Testifies" Archived 5 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine. The New York Times (9 March 2000) Bearak, Barry (20 November 1999). "Ousted Leader in Pakistan Appears in Public for Trial" Archived 6 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine. The New York Times. McCarthy, Rory (11 March 2000). "Gunmen shoot dead lawyer of deposed Pakistani leader Sharif". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 10 January 2024. Smith, Alex Duval. "Cook Warning over Show Trial for Sharif Asia, World – The Independent" Archived 10 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine. (12 November 1999). "Cook warns against Pakistan 'show trial'". The Guardian. 12 November 1999. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 10 January 2024. "Show Trial in Pakistan". The Guardian (22 November 1999). Ahmed Rashid. "Pakistani fury as army lets Sharif fly into exile" Archived 2 November 2019 at the Wayback Machine. The Telegraph (11 December 2000). Azeem, Muhammad (2 July 2017). Law, State and Inequality in Pakistan: Explaining the Rise of the Judiciary. Springer. p. 220. ISBN 978-981-10-3845-7. Archived from the original on 5 February 2023. Retrieved 17 December 2019. Mumtaz, Khawar; Mitha, Yameema; Tahira, Bilquis (2003). Pakistan: Tradition and Change. Oxfam. pp. 61. ISBN 978-0-85598-496-0. Rieck, Andreas (15 January 2016). The Shias of Pakistan: An Assertive and Beleaguered Minority. Oxford University Press. p. 275. ISBN 978-0-19-061348-8. Archived from the original on 5 February 2023. Retrieved 17 December 2019. Neudorf, Lorne (22 February 2017). The Dynamics of Judicial Independence: A Comparative Study of Courts in Malaysia and Pakistan. Springer. p. 181. ISBN 978-3-319-49884-3. Archived from the original on 5 February 2023. Retrieved 17 December 2019. Musharraf, Pervez (2006). In the Line of Fire: A Memoir (1 ed.). Pakistan: Free Press. pp. 145–146, 179, 234–235, 277, 368. ISBN 074-3283449. Retrieved 15 November 2015. "Profile: Shaukat Aziz" (STM). BBC South Asia Directorate. 19 August 2004. Archived from the original on 10 August 2011. Retrieved 8 August 2011. Pakistan's Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz is a former private banker credited with recent reforms of his country's economy... British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) remarks Farzand, Ahmed (9 April 2010). "Pak deletes dictators from Constitution". India Today. Archived from the original on 17 December 2019. Retrieved 17 December 2019. Khalid, Kiran (9 April 2010). "Pakistan lawmakers approve weakening of presidential powers". CNN. Archived from the original on 10 December 2019. Retrieved 17 December 2019. "The Musharraf enigma". Dawn. Pakistan. 6 February 2023. Archived from the original on 6 February 2023. Retrieved 6 February 2023. Schroeder, Salman Ahmad with Robert (2010). Rock & roll jihad: a Muslim rock star's revolution (1st Free Press hardcover ed.). New York: Free Press. p. 184. ISBN 978-1-4165-9767-4. Ahmad, Salman (19 November 2007). "A False Choice for Pakistan". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 4 September 2015. Barbara Ferguson Musharraf Talks to Jewish Leaders, Arab News (19 September 2005)[dead link] "Text: Pakistan President Musharraf". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 6 March 2022. Retrieved 6 February 2023. "Musharraf vows to root out Islamism: Banned outfits won't be allowed to resurface". Dawn. 5 December 2003. Archived from the original on 22 April 2014. "Pervez Musharraf: Pakistan's military leader who was found guilty of treason". BBC News. 22 March 2013. Archived from the original on 25 December 2022. Retrieved 6 February 2023. "The economy under Pervez Musharraf". 17 October 2007. Archived from the original on 25 September 2016. Retrieved 21 September 2016. "The myth of Musharraf's 'economic boom' needs to die". 16 January 2014. Archived from the original on 18 February 2018. Retrieved 21 September 2016. "Pakistan: Hold Musharraf Accountable for Abuses". 23 March 2013. Archived from the original on 21 October 2016. Retrieved 3 October 2016. "Labour leaders urge Musharraf to quit". 10 March 2008. Archived from the original on 27 September 2016. Retrieved 24 September 2016. Pilkington, Ed; Walsh, Declan (28 September 2006). "Bush referees as Karzai and Musharraf meet for dinner". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 27 November 2022. Retrieved 6 February 2023. "Bush Urges Musharraf, Karzai to Unite in War on Terror". VOA. 31 October 2009. Archived from the original on 6 February 2023. Retrieved 6 February 2023. "In the Line of Fire: Are Things Getting too Hot for Musharraf?". rusi.orghttps. Retrieved 6 February 2023.[permanent dead link] "Quake may improve India Pakistan ties". CNN. 2 February 2001. Archived from the original on 21 August 2010. "Rival Pakistan offers India help". BBC News. 30 January 2001. Archived from the original on 15 December 2013. Retrieved 22 April 2014. Gujarat gets Musharraf to dial PM in New Delhi Archived 4 October 2012 at the Wayback Machine. Expressindia.com. Retrieved 23 January 2011. Indurthy, Rathnam; Haque, Muhammad (2010). "The Kashmir Conflict: Why It Defies Solution". International Journal on World Peace. 27 (1): 17–18. ISSN 0742-3640. JSTOR 20752914. Rashid, Ahmed (2012). Pakistan in the Brink. Allen Lane. p. 52. ISBN 9781846145858. "King Abdullah ends Asian tour with state visit to Pakistan". Saudiembassy.net. 1 February 2006. Archived from the original on 22 March 2012. Retrieved 30 November 2012. Rasooldeen, Mohammed (22 January 2007). "Saudi-Pak Talks Focus on ME". Archived from the original on 11 August 2011. Retrieved 11 August 2011.. arabnews.com Ron Moreau and Zahid Hussain, "Chain of Command; The Military: Musharraf dodged a bullet, but could be heading for a showdown with his Army Archived 17 December 2019 at the Wayback Machine", Newsweek, 16 February 2004, p. 20. Pakistani Atomic Expert, Arrested Last Week, Had Strong Pro-Taliban Views Archived 28 July 2020 at the Wayback Machine, The New York Times, 2 November 2001. Overbye, Dennis; Glanz, James (2 November 2001). "A Nation Challenged: Nuclear Fears; Pakistani Atomic Expert, Arrested Last Week, Had Strong Pro-Taliban Views". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 8 May 2011. Retrieved 24 May 2010. Khan, Abdul Qadeer. "Text of Musharraf's speech honoring A.Q. Khan". AQ Khan, Archives. Archived from the original on 18 December 2012. Retrieved 18 December 2012. William Langewiesche (November 2005). "The Wrath of Khan". The Atlantic. pp. 1–10. Archived from the original on 5 January 2013. Retrieved 18 December 2012. Rashid, Ahmed (2012). Pakistan in the Brink. Allen Lane. p. 60. ISBN 9781846145858. "ARD condemns scientists' debriefing". Daily Times. 30 January 2004. Archived from the original on 22 April 2007. "ARD urged to cooperate with MMA: Requisitioning of NA session". Dawn Archives, 2004. Dawn Media Group. 20 February 2004. p. 1. Archived from the original on 28 July 2020. Retrieved 18 December 2012. "Benazir points finger at MQM for Suharwardy's murder". Daily Times, Benazir. 18 June 2004. Archived from the original on 7 January 2005. Quraishi, Ash-har (5 February 2004). "U.S. supports nuclear pardon". CNN Archives 2005. CNN. Archived from the original on 17 April 2014. Retrieved 18 December 2012. Nirupama Subramanian (25 August 2006). "The undiminished popularity of A.Q. Khan". The Hindu. Chennai, India. Archived from the original on 14 October 2008. Retrieved 18 December 2012. For the belief that he single-handedly made the bomb is widespread. Gautam, B. (7 September 2006). "A.Q. Khan remains a hero in Pakistan". The Japan Times. Retrieved 18 December 2012. Abbas, Zaffar (2 May 2006). "Pakistan nuclear case 'is closed'". BBC News. Archived from the original on 23 October 2006. Retrieved 5 October 2006. "Dr. Qadeer's services unforgettable, says PM Shaukat Aziz". Pakistan Times. 26 October 2007. Archived from the original on 17 May 2013. Retrieved 18 December 2012. "Pakistani Says Army Knew Atomic Parts Were Shipped". The New York Times. Associated Press. 5 July 2008. Archived from the original on 5 November 2016. Retrieved 11 February 2017. The transfer of centrifuges for uranium enrichment to North Korea was almost certainly sanctioned by the government, according to Albright. Kitfield, James (12 March 2010). "Nuclear Smugglers Still at Work, Expert Says". National Journal, Global Security Newswire. Archived from the original on 16 April 2010. the BBC's Owen Bennett Jones (23 January 2002). "SOUTH ASIA | Musharraf's corruption crackdown 'failing'". BBC News. Archived from the original on 6 August 2012. Retrieved 30 November 2012. Sappenfield, Mark & Montero, David (19 June 2007). "Could Pakistan fall to extremists?". The Christian Science Monitor. Archived from the original on 21 June 2007. "Musharraf's rule in Pakistan: Consolidation and controversy". Strategic Comments. 10 (10): 1–2. December 2004. doi:10.1080/1356788041004. ISSN 1356-7888. S2CID 219693530. Strategic Digest. Vol. 35. Institute for Defence Studies and Analyses. 2005. p. 130. Archived from the original on 5 February 2023. Retrieved 17 December 2019. "Pakistan's Musharraf wins vote of confidence". The Irish Times. Archived from the original on 28 July 2020. Retrieved 17 December 2019. Chhabra, Hari Sharan (2006). World Focus. Vol. 27. p. 29. Archived from the original on 5 February 2023. Retrieved 17 December 2019. Abbas, Zaffar (1 November 2004). "Musharraf dual role bill passed". BBC News. Archived from the original on 17 December 2019. Retrieved 17 December 2019. "Musharraf's choice elected as new PM". The Independent. 28 August 2004. Archived from the original on 17 December 2019. Retrieved 17 December 2019. Walsh, Declan (20 February 2005). "Pakistan's gas fields blaze as rape sparks threat of civil war". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 29 May 2010. "Musharraf signs women's bill". Dawn. 2 December 2006. Archived from the original on 14 September 2013. Retrieved 30 November 2012. Zakaria, Rafia (2009). "Terror, tribes, and the war on women in Pakistan" (PDF). Asian Conflicts Reports. 2009 (8). Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 July 2011. "'Protecting' women for political gain in Pakistan". Zurich, Switzerland: International Relations and Security Network (ISN). Archived from the original on 16 January 2014. "State of Human Rights in 2006" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 March 2010. Retrieved 30 November 2012. "More women in Pakistan polls signals 'political freedom'". Thaindian News. 23 February 2008. Archived from the original on 17 October 2012. Retrieved 30 November 2012. "Sherry points out loopholes in Dr Shazia's rape probe". Daily Times. 4 March 2005. Archived from the original on 30 April 2005. Maher. "دعویٰ ہے کیپٹن حماد ملوث نہیں" [Captain Hammad claims involved]. BBC Urdu (in Urdu). News. Archived from the original on 17 June 2013. Retrieved 30 November 2012. Khalid, Shazia; Mahmood, Zainab & Maruf, Maryam (25 September 2005). "Shazia Khalid and the fight for justice in Pakistan". Open Democracy Ltd. Archived from the original on 24 November 2005. Retrieved 1 October 2010. "Interview with Pakistan president Musharraf". The Washington Post. 23 September 2005. Archived from the original on 24 October 2012. Retrieved 30 November 2012. Moore, Kathleen (27 June 2005). "Pakistan: Rape Case Spotlights Women's Rights". Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. Retrieved 10 January 2024. "South Asia: Outrage at Musharraf rape remarks". BBC News. 16 September 2005. Archived from the original on 21 October 2012. Retrieved 30 November 2012. "South Asia | Pakistani women march in rape row". BBC News. 29 September 2005. Archived from the original on 11 May 2013. Retrieved 30 November 2012. Masood, Salman (26 December 2003). "Pakistani Leader Escapes Attempt at Assassination". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 17 December 2019. Retrieved 17 December 2019. "Musharraf Survives Assassination Attempt in Pakistan". Time. 3 April 2014. Archived from the original on 9 August 2020. Retrieved 4 July 2020. "KARACHI: Harkat man gets death sentence in murder case". Dawn. 30 April 2006. Archived from the original on 17 December 2019. Retrieved 17 December 2019. "South Asia | Arrests follow Musharraf attack". BBC News. 27 December 2003. Archived from the original on 13 July 2004. Retrieved 30 November 2012. Masood, Salman; Hussain, Talat (29 May 2004). "Suspect in Reporter's Death Is Wanted in Attacks on Musharraf". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 17 December 2019. Retrieved 17 December 2019. "Profile: Amjad Farooqi". 27 September 2004. Archived from the original on 17 December 2019. Retrieved 17 December 2019. Masood, Salman and Nizza, Mike "Gunmen Fire on Musharraf's Plane" Archived 12 March 2018 at the Wayback Machine The New York Times 6 July 2007 Attack on Musharraf: 39 detained Archived 7 March 2008 at the Wayback Machine rediff.com 17 July 2007 "39 arrested for links to attack on Musharraf". Daily Times. 17 July 2007. Archived from the original on 15 September 2013. Pakistan: A mess in Pakistan Archived 11 October 2007 at the Wayback Machine. The Economist. Retrieved 23 January 2011. "Musharraf most popular leader: US survey". Gulf News. 17 December 2006. Retrieved 10 January 2024. Gall, Carlotta (6 October 2007). "Musharraf Wins Vote, but Court Will Have Final Say". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 20 August 2017. Retrieved 21 September 2016. "Thousands Fill Streets for Protest in Pakistan". The New York Times. 14 June 2008. Archived from the original on 17 December 2019. Retrieved 17 December 2019. "Musharraf quits under impeachment threat". Reuters. 18 August 2008. Archived from the original on 17 December 2019. Retrieved 17 December 2019. Iqbal, Nasir (10 March 2007). "CJ suspended, escorted home: • Justice Iftikhar summoned by SJC on 13th for reference hearing • Ex-judges call it a blow to judiciary's independence; minister defends decision • Whither judicial activism?". Dawn. Pakistan. Archived from the original on 17 December 2019. Retrieved 17 December 2019. "Musharraf's tenure as army chief challenged". Dawn. 15 May 2007. Archived from the original on 22 April 2014. "Editorial: Musharraf's political options are closing". Daily Times. 14 May 2007. Archived from the original on 30 September 2007. "Profile: Islamabad's Red Mosque". BBC News. 27 July 2007. Archived from the original on 22 April 2017. Retrieved 17 December 2019. "FACTBOX: Pakistan's Red Mosque's standoff with government". Reuters. 5 July 2007. Archived from the original on 17 December 2019. Retrieved 17 December 2019. "Profile: Islamabad's Red Mosque". BBC News. 27 July 2007. Archived from the original on 12 May 2011. Retrieved 25 January 2011. "Siege of Pakistan's Lal Masjid ends". Al Jazeera. 11 July 2007. Archived from the original on 17 December 2019. Retrieved 17 December 2019. Jaffrelot, Christophe (16 June 2016). The Pakistan Paradox: Instability And Resilience. Random House India. ISBN 978-81-8400-707-7. Archived from the original on 5 February 2023. Retrieved 17 December 2019. "AFP: Bhutto set to announce return date to Pakistan". Agence France-Presse. 14 September 2007. Archived from the original on 14 November 2007. Retrieved 23 January 2011. Gall, Carlotta; Masood, Salman (19 October 2007). "Bomb Attack Kills Scores in Pakistan as Crowds Celebrate Bhutto's Return". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 11 December 2008. Retrieved 17 December 2019. Masood, Salman; Gall, Carlotta (28 December 2007). "Bhutto Assassination Ignites Disarray". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on 17 December 2019. Retrieved 17 December 2019. Walker, Sophie. (10 September 2007) Nawaz Sharif arrested after return to Pakistan | Reuters Archived 31 December 2007 at the Wayback Machine. In.reuters.com. Retrieved 23 January 2011. "Muqrin, Hariri urge Nawaz to honor agreement". Daily Times. 9 September 2007. Archived from the original on 22 September 2007. Nawaz Sharif vows to return home again Archived 27 July 2008 at the Wayback Machine, The Sunday Times, 23 September 2007 Maneuvering Before Vote in Pakistan Archived 12 March 2018 at the Wayback Machine, The New York Times, 3 October 2007 Hasan, Khalid (11 March 2007). "Musharraf tells why he wants another five years". Daily Times. Archived from the original on 22 March 2007. "Pakistan's Musharraf nominated for presidential vote". Reuters.com. Reuters. 27 September 2007. Archived from the original on 17 December 2019. Retrieved 17 December 2019. "Bhutto hears the call to save Pakistan". The Irish Times. Archived from the original on 28 July 2020. Retrieved 17 December 2019. "Musharraf wins ruling on army role". Islamabad, Pakistan: CNN. 28 September 2007. Archived from the original on 23 May 2008. Retrieved 23 May 2008. "Musharraf imposes emergency rule". Dawn. 3 November 2007. Archived from the original on 6 November 2007. Retrieved 17 December 2019. "Martial law declared in Pakistan". CNN. 3 November 2007. Archived from the original on 4 November 2007. Retrieved 3 November 2007. Rohde, David (4 November 2007). "Musharraf Declares Emergency Rule". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 12 May 2011. Retrieved 3 November 2007. "Civil society, students hold protest rallies : Emergency condemned". Dawn. Pakistan. 7 November 2007. Archived from the original on 17 December 2019. Retrieved 17 December 2019. "APP Online Election Results". Archived from the original on 19 June 2013. Retrieved 3 April 2013. "GeoTV Geo News Latest News Breaking News Pakistan Live Videos". Archived from the original on 3 April 2013. Haider, Syed Karim; Ali, Sheikh Shaukat. "Impact of Benazir Bhutto Death on Performance of PPP and Electoral Politics of Pakistan 2008–2013" (PDF). Pakistan Vision. 19 (1): 146. Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 December 2019. Retrieved 17 December 2019. President Musharraf of Pakistan to be impeached Archived 28 July 2020 at the Wayback Machine, The Times, 8 August 2008 Pakistan coalition to move for Musharraf impeachment Archived 11 January 2009 at the Wayback Machine. Reuters. Retrieved 23 January 2011. Shah, Saeed (7 August 2008). "Pakistan coalition to impeach Musharraf". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 10 January 2024. Draft of ruling coalition's joint statement finalized Archived 24 September 2013 at the Wayback Machine. PakTribune (7 August 2008) "AFP: Pakistan coalition agrees to impeach Musharraf: officials". Agence France-Presse. 7 August 2008. Archived from the original on 25 October 2011. Retrieved 23 January 2011.. "Pakistan's Musharraf will resign" Archived 29 September 2009 at the Wayback Machine. BBC News (18 August 2008). Retrieved 9 May 2012. Video of Resignation Speech Archived 16 September 2008 at the Wayback Machine. Paktribune.com (5 April 2011). Retrieved 9 May 2012. "Musharraf's Resignation". Gallup Pakistan. 19 August 2008. Archived from the original on 3 April 2018. Retrieved 2 April 2018. "Musharraf in London on week-long tour". Daily Times. 24 November 2008. Archived from the original on 15 September 2013. "Musharraf disqualified from Pakistan election". 3 News. New Zealand. 17 April 2013. Archived from the original on 17 April 2014. Retrieved 17 April 2013. "Pervez Musharraf, former Pakistani president, dies at 79: Reports". Hindustan Times. 5 February 2023. Archived from the original on 5 February 2023. Retrieved 5 February 2023. Sahim Salim; Waheed Abbas. "Dubai: Former Pakistani president Pervez Musharraf passes away". Khaleej Times. Retrieved 5 February 2023. Madiha Afzal (19 December 2019). "Why Pakistan's former ruler Musharraf was sentenced to death, and what it means". Order From Chaos: Foreign Policy in a Troubled World. Brookings Institution. Archived from the original on 4 April 2022. Retrieved 12 May 2020. Sharif had signaled his intent to bring high treason charges against Musharraf in June 2013, right after he came into power...and in 2013, Sharif's government brought charges of high treason against him for imposing the 2007 emergency. "Pakistan's Musharraf: Lucrative Speaking Fees?". Newsweek. 22 August 2008. Retrieved 10 January 2024. Musharraf, Pervez (26 October 2011). "Pervez Musharraf on U.S.-Pakistan Relations (Transcript)" (PDF). Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 July 2013. Ghori, Habib Khan (9 June 2010). "Musharraf's political party launched". Dawn. Karachi. Archived from the original on 30 October 2010. "Musharraf's All Pakistan Muslim League formally launched in Sindh". Daily Times. 9 June 2010. Archived from the original on 13 June 2010. "Musharraf will be asked to come back: Rashid". The Nation. 9 June 2010. Archived from the original on 10 June 2010. Retrieved 11 June 2010. Gardham, Duncan (1 October 2010). "Musharraf launches movement to regain control of Pakistan". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 30 June 2019. Retrieved 23 January 2011. Musharraf's trial under Article 6 'Indispensable': Nawaz Archived 26 August 2009 at the Wayback Machine. GEO.tv. Retrieved 23 January 2011. "Musharraf's trial only after consensus resolution: PM". Daily Times. Karachi. 20 August 2009. Archived from the original on 13 January 2012. "Article 6 can't just apply to one man: Gilani". Daily Times. Karachi. 17 September 2009. Archived from the original on 13 January 2012. "Part X: "Emergency Provisions"". pakistani.org. Retrieved 10 January 2024. Goraya, M. Rafique (18 February 2008). "Supreme Court validates proclamation of emergency, PCO, follow-up actions: detailed judgement delivered". Business Recorder. Karachi. Archived from the original on 30 December 2009. Kalhan, Anil (2010). "Constitution and 'Extraconstitution': Colonial Emergency Regimes in Postcolonial India and Pakistan". Emergency Powers in Asia (Victor Ramraj & Arun Thiruvengadam, Eds.). SSRN 1398545. Archived from the original on 28 July 2020. Retrieved 17 December 2019. Partlow, Joshua (1 August 2009). "Former Pakistani President's 2007 Emergency Rule Declared Unconstitutional". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 22 April 2014. "Important Cases Decided by the Supreme Court (April 2009 – March 2010): Sindh High Court Bar Association vs. Federation of Pakistan (PLD 2009 SC 879) – [Proclamation of Emergency of 3rd November, 2007]" (PDF). Supreme Court of Pakistan. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 June 2013. Retrieved 16 April 2014. "Saudis come to Musharraf's rescue". Daily Times. 2 September 2009. Archived from the original on 5 September 2009. "No trial, Saudis assure Musharraf". Daily Times. 14 September 2009. Archived from the original on 13 January 2012. Saudi Arabia's 'love' for Nawaz Sharif lost? Archived 16 April 2010 at the Wayback Machine. Thaindian.com. Retrieved 27 September 2010. "Court orders registration of treason charges against Musharraf". Hindustan Times. 8 March 2011. Archived from the original on 20 October 2011. Javed, Rashid (31 October 2009). "Abbottabad court rules against Musharraf". Dawn. Archived from the original on 27 October 2010. Retrieved 31 October 2009. Walsh, Declan (12 February 2011). "Pakistan court issues arrest warrant against Musharraf". The Observer. ISSN 0029-7712. Retrieved 10 January 2024. "Lahore High Court annuls Musharraf's death sentence". The Hindu. 13 January 2020. Archived from the original on 7 April 2022. Retrieved 13 January 2020. "Pakistan court sentences Pervez Musharraf to death for treason". The Economic Times. 17 December 2019. Archived from the original on 19 December 2019. Retrieved 17 December 2019. "Benazir Bhutto assassination case: Two senior cops sentenced to 17 years in jail, five acquitted; Pervez Musharraf declared absconder". The Indian Express. 31 August 2017. Archived from the original on 1 September 2017. Retrieved 1 September 2017. "Pervez Musharraf Sentenced To Death In High Treason Case: Pak Media". NDTV.com. Archived from the original on 17 December 2019. Retrieved 17 December 2019. "Pervez Musharraf, Pakistan's fugitive ex-leader: Profile". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 17 December 2019. Retrieved 17 December 2019. Newhouse, Barry (5 March 2009) "Pakistan Cricket Ambush Controversy Focuses on Security". Archived from the original on 7 March 2009. Retrieved 6 March 2009., Voice of America. Rehman Khan, Fasihur (5 March 2009). "Elite force should have killed terrorists". Gulf News. Archived from the original on 9 May 2012. Retrieved 7 March 2009. "Musharraf: Blasphemy law cannot be an excuse for murder". Archived from the original on 26 October 2014. Retrieved 23 January 2011. "Musharraf ends exile, announces return to Pakistan". First Post World. Archived from the original on 7 March 2013. Retrieved 23 March 2013. "Musharraf arrives back in Pakistan despite threats". BBC News. 24 March 2013. Archived from the original on 24 March 2013. Retrieved 24 March 2013. "Talal Bugti announces bounty on Musharraf's head". Daily Times. Archived from the original on 16 October 2010. Santana, Rebecca & Khan, Jamil (23 March 2013). "Ex-Pakistani strongman vows return ahead of vote". Associated Press. Archived from the original on 24 March 2013. "Taliban threaten to assassinate Musharraf". Eye Witness News. Johannesburg, South Africa. 23 March 2013. Archived from the original on 12 May 2013. "Musharraf returns to Pakistan amid death threats". Yahoo News. Archived from the original on 27 March 2013. Retrieved 24 March 2013. "Pervez Musharraf out of Pakistan election race". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 22 April 2013. Retrieved 16 April 2013. "Pakistan's Pervez Musharraf: Court orders ex-ruler's arrest". BBC. 18 April 2013. Archived from the original on 17 June 2019. Retrieved 21 June 2018. "Pakistan police arrest ex-President Musharraf". Al Jazeera. 19 April 2013. Archived from the original on 19 April 2013. Retrieved 19 April 2013. "Musharraf on the run after bail cancellation". DAWN. 18 April 2013. Archived from the original on 22 February 2014. Retrieved 18 February 2014. Mullen, Jethro; Robertson, Nic & Smith-Spark, Laura (18 April 2013). "In Pakistan, Musharraf placed under house arrest". CNN. Archived from the original on 18 April 2013. "Pakistani police arrest Pervez Musharraf in Islamabad". BBC News. 19 April 2013. Archived from the original on 19 April 2013. Retrieved 19 April 2013. "Former Pakistan president Pervez Musharraf arrested". NDTV.com. Press Trust of India. 19 April 2013. Archived from the original on 19 April 2013. Retrieved 19 April 2013. Leiby, Richard (19 April 2013). "Musharraf arrest tempts clash of powers". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 5 August 2014. "Musharraf remanded over Benazir Bhutto case". BBC News Asia. 26 April 2013. Archived from the original on 28 April 2013. Retrieved 28 April 2013. "Former Pakistani dictator Musharraf granted bail". Reuters. 20 May 2013. Archived from the original on 21 May 2013. "Pakistan court allows Pervez Musharraf to leave the country". news.biharprabha.com. Indo-Asian News Service. Archived from the original on 16 June 2014. Retrieved 12 June 2014. "Pakistan sentences Musharraf to death for treason". MarketWatch. Associated Press. Archived from the original on 17 December 2019. Retrieved 17 December 2019. Fiaz, Faizan (3 April 2014). "Pervez Musharraf escapes 'assassination' bomb attempt". The Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 4 April 2014. Retrieved 8 April 2014. Ahmed, Israr; Sigamony, Terence J. (26 June 2013). "Musharraf 'conspired' to kill Benazir". The Nation. Archived from the original on 27 June 2013. Retrieved 3 August 2013. "Pakistan's Pervez Musharraf charged in Benazir Bhutto's death". Fox News. 20 August 2013. Archived from the original on 2 April 2014. "Pakistani police investigate Musharraf in mosque raid". The Boston Globe. 2 September 2013. Archived from the original on 17 December 2014. "Ghazi murder case: Musharraf submits surety for bail". The Nation. Karachi. 6 November 2013. Archived from the original on 20 December 2013. Ayub, Imran (19 March 2016). "Musharraf meets well-wishers at his Dubai residence". Dawn. Archived from the original on 1 March 2017. Retrieved 28 February 2017. "Musharraf departs for Dubai after travel ban lifted". The Express Tribune. 18 March 2016. Archived from the original on 1 March 2017. Retrieved 28 February 2017. Salman Masood, Death Sentence Overturned for Pervez Musharraf, Ex-Leader of Pakistan Archived 13 January 2020 at the Wayback Machine, New York Times (13 January 2020). Hussain, Javed (17 March 2019). "Musharraf shifted to Dubai hospital after 'reaction' from rare disease". Dawn. Archived from the original on 17 March 2019. Retrieved 17 March 2019. "Pervez Musharraf launches career as TV analyst". Dawn. 27 February 2017. Archived from the original on 20 March 2017. Retrieved 20 March 2017. (in Vietnamese) Pakistan truy lùng cựu thủ tướng ám sát đối thủ chính trị Archived 7 September 2017 at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved 7 September 2017 Former Pakistan leader Musharraf declared fugitive in Bhutto murder case Archived 2 September 2017 at the Wayback Machine, CNN Ellis-Petersen, Hannah (17 December 2019). "Pervez Musharraf: Pakistan sentences former ruler to death for high treason". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 17 December 2019. Retrieved 17 December 2019. "Former Pakistan military ruler sentenced to death for high treason". CNN. 17 December 2019. Archived from the original on 17 December 2019. Retrieved 17 December 2019. Shahzad, Asif; Jain, Rupam (17 December 2019). Birsel, Robert (ed.). "Pakistan court sentences former military ruler Musharraf to death for treason". Reuters. Archived from the original on 17 December 2019. Retrieved 17 December 2019. "Pakistan ex-leader Musharraf sentenced to death". 17 December 2019. Archived from the original on 17 December 2019. Retrieved 17 December 2019. "Pakistan's Pervez Musharraf handed death penalty in treason case". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 17 December 2019. Retrieved 17 December 2019. "Pervez Musharraf gets death penalty for imposing emergency in Pakistan". India Today. Archived from the original on 17 December 2019. Retrieved 17 December 2019. "After conviction, what next for Pakistan's Pervez Musharraf?". Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 17 December 2019. Retrieved 17 December 2019. Sriram, Jayant (17 December 2019). "The implications of Pervez Musharraf's death sentence for civil-military relations in Pakistan". The Hindu. ISSN 0971-751X. Archived from the original on 17 December 2019. Retrieved 17 December 2019. Hussain, Shaiq (17 December 2019). "Pakistan's former military ruler Pervez Musharraf is sentenced to death for treason". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on 17 December 2019. Retrieved 17 December 2019. Bilal, Rana (13 January 2020). "Special court formed for Musharraf treason trial 'unconstitutional', rules LHC". Dawn. Pakistan. Archived from the original on 13 January 2020. Retrieved 13 January 2020. "Musharraf lawyer in UK calls for retrial in high treason case". Geo TV. 18 December 2019. Archived from the original on 18 December 2019. Retrieved 18 December 2019. "Musharraf's daughter target for terrorists: Intelligence agencies". The Times of India. Mumbai. 18 July 2013. Archived from the original on 16 October 2015. Retrieved 7 October 2015. "General Pervez Musharraf". Office of the Press Secretary to the President of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan. 2006. Archived from the original on 5 July 2008. Retrieved 30 August 2006. Musharraf, Pervez (4 September 2008). In the Line of Fire. Simon and Schuster. ISBN 978-1-84739-596-2. Archived from the original on 5 February 2023. Retrieved 2 August 2020. Asad, Malik (9 March 2018). "Govt told to take steps for Musharraf's arrest, extradition". Dawn. Pakistan. Archived from the original on 19 October 2020. Retrieved 1 August 2020. "Mush wife, daughter move court against attaching properties". The Nation. 2 March 2017. Archived from the original on 5 October 2022. Retrieved 2 August 2020. "Govt Ordered to Take Steps for Musharraf Extradition – Abb Takk News". Archived from the original on 16 April 2021. Retrieved 2 August 2020. Musharraf, Pervez (4 September 2008). In the Line of Fire. Simon and Schuster. ISBN 978-1-84739-596-2. Archived from the original on 5 February 2023. Retrieved 2 November 2020. "Pervez Musharraf, former Pakistani president and army general, dies at 79". Hindustan Times. 5 February 2023. Archived from the original on 5 February 2023. Retrieved 5 February 2023. Ellis-Petersen, Hannah (5 February 2023). "Former Pakistan president Pervez Musharraf dies in Dubai after long illness". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 5 February 2023. Retrieved 5 February 2023. Ali, Imtiaz (7 February 2023). "Former military ruler Pervez Musharraf's funeral prayers offered in Karachi". Dawn. Pakistan. Archived from the original on 7 February 2023. Retrieved 7 February 2023. "Pervez Musharraf laid to rest; Several retired and serving military officers attend funeral prayers". ThePrint. 7 February 2023. Archived from the original on 7 February 2023. Retrieved 7 February 2023. Plett, Barbara (2 October 2006). "Musharraf book draws mixed response". BBC News. Archived from the original on 17 December 2019. Retrieved 17 December 2019. "Khalifa and Musharraf meet in bid to revive peace process". Gulf News. 25 January 2007. Archived from the original on 3 July 2022. Retrieved 3 July 2022. Pervez Musharraf at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata General Pervez Musharraf, official Pakistan Army profile Pervez Musharraf Foundation Archived 2 November 2020 at the Wayback Machine Appearances on C-SPAN Pervez Musharraf on Charlie Rose Pervez Musharraf at IMDb  Address by Pervez Musharraf to U.S. Institute of Peace (text, audio & video available) June 2003 "Plea for Enlightened Moderation", Pervez Musharraf, The Washington Post, 13 May 2004 Pervez Musharraf collected news and commentary at Dawn Pervez Musharraf collected news and commentary at The Guardian Pervez Musharraf collected news and commentary at The New York Times "Was Kargil a Conspiracy Against Pakistan?", e-zine.pk, 14 May 2011, conspiracy theory involving Musharraf, the U.S. and India "Terror and Musharraf's hubris mark Pakistan election campaign", Radio France Internationale (in English) Portals:  Pakistan  Politics  Biography