The women's handball tournament at the 2008 Summer Olympics is being held from August 9 to August 23, at the Olympic Sports Centre Gymnasium and National Indoor Stadium in Beijing. Twelve nations are represented in the women's tournament. The four best teams from each group will advance to the quarterfinal round, 5th and 6th teams in each group are classified 9th-12th by the results of their group matches. The losers of quarterfinal matches will compete in the 5th-8th classification matches by the same elimination system as the winners of the quarterfinals. Three time consecutive defending Champion Denmark were not part of the 2008 Olympics Handball Tournament, as they did not qualify from the 2007 World Women's Handball Championship. Olympic Qualifying Tournaments: Tournament I: Worlds 3rd:  Germany Worlds 9th:  Croatia Europe:  Sweden Pan-America:  Cuba Tournament II: Worlds 4th:  Romania Worlds 8th:  Hungary Asia:  Japan Top continent at the Worlds (Europe):  Poland Tournament III: Worlds 5th:  France Worlds 6th:  South Korea Africa:  Ivory Coast 2nd continent at the Worlds (Asia):  Congo The draw for the groups was held 16 June 2008. Source:[citation needed] Source:[citation needed] All times are China Standard Time (UTC+8) Goalkeeper: Katrine Lunde Haraldsen Left wing: Orsolya Vérten Left back: Liudmila Postnova Centre back: Oh Seong-Ok Right back: Irina Bliznova Right wing: Ramona Maier Line player/pivot: Else-Marthe Sørlie Lybekk Chosen by team officials and IHF experts: IHF.info instead of  Qatar The replays of the Asian Olympic Qualification that were ordered after the manipiulations in the first tournaments of the women and the men were now both won by Korea. In the original tournaments Kuwait (men) and Kazakhstan (women) had won. The Asian Federation (AHF) still does not recognize the order from the IHF and insists on an original decision in the first tournaments. IHF and AHF have agreed to refer this issue to the Court of Arbitration for Sport (CAS) to assure a speedy resolution to this conflict prior the Olympic Qualification Tournaments as the final ruling will be binding for all parties. the CAS Panel ruled that the resolutions adopted by the IHF Council in Paris were invalid, being in breach with their own rules and without the AHF having been in proper opportunity to be heard. As required by the terms of the arbitration agreement, the CAS Panel considered the issues de novo in order to settle the dispute definitively. On the basis of the evidence submitted, the arbitrators unanimously held that the results of the Men's Olympic Qualification Tournament held in September 2007 should be annulled and that the results of the replayed tournament held on 30 January 2008 were valid. Furthermore the CAS Panel confirmed the results of the Women's Tournament held in August 2007. Beijing 2008 Olympic Games International Handball Federation European Handball Federation Team Handball News 2008 Women's Olympic Qualification Summary