Floyd Joy Mayweather Jr. (né Sinclair; born February 24, 1977) is an American boxing promoter and former professional boxer who competed between 1996 and 2017. He retired with an undefeated record and won 15 major world championships from super featherweight to light middleweight. This includes the Ring magazine title in three weight classes and the lineal championship in four weight classes (twice at welterweight). As an amateur, he won a bronze medal in the featherweight division at the 1996 Olympics, three U.S. Golden Gloves championships (at light flyweight, flyweight, and featherweight), and the U.S. national championship at featherweight. Mayweather was named "Fighter of the Decade" for the 2010s by the Boxing Writers Association of America (BWAA), a two-time winner of The Ring magazine's Fighter of the Year award (1998 and 2007), a three-time winner of the BWAA Fighter of the Year award (2007, 2013, and 2015), and a six-time winner of the Best Fighter ESPY Award (2007–2010, 2012–2014). In 2016, ESPN ranked him the greatest boxer, pound for pound, of the last 25 years. As of May 2023, BoxRec ranks him the second greatest boxer of all time, pound for pound. Many sporting news and boxing websites, including The Ring, Sports Illustrated, ESPN, BoxRec, Fox Sports, and Yahoo! Sports, ranked Mayweather as the best pound-for-pound boxer in the world twice in a span of ten years. He is often referred to as the best defensive boxer in history: since the existence of CompuBox, Mayweather is the most accurate puncher among professional boxers, having the highest plus–minus ratio in recorded boxing history. He has a record of 26 consecutive wins in world title fights (10 by KO), 23 wins (9 KOs) in lineal title fights, 24 wins (7 KOs) against former or current world titlists, 12 wins (3 KOs) against former or current lineal champions, and 5 wins (1 KO) against International Boxing Hall of Fame inductees. He was inducted into the International Boxing Hall of Fame in the class of 2021. Mayweather is one of the most lucrative pay-per-view attractions of all time, in any sport. He topped the Forbes and Sports Illustrated lists of the 50 highest-paid athletes of 2012 and 2013, and the Forbes list again in both 2014 and 2015, as the highest-paid athlete in the world. In 2006, he founded his own boxing promotional firm, Mayweather Promotions, after leaving Bob Arum's Top Rank. He has generated approximately 24 million PPV buys and $1.67 billion in revenue throughout his career, surpassing the likes of former top PPV attractions including Mike Tyson, Evander Holyfield, Lennox Lewis and Oscar De La Hoya. In 2018, he was the highest-paid athlete in the world, with total earnings, including endorsements, of $285 million, according to Forbes. In November, 2021, Sportico released an all-time athlete earnings list, in which Mayweather ranked no. 6 of all time, totaling an inflation-adjusted $1.2 billion in his career. Mayweather was born Floyd Joy Sinclair on February 24, 1977, in Grand Rapids, Michigan, into a family of boxers. His father, Floyd Mayweather Sr., is a former welterweight contender who fought Hall of Famer Sugar Ray Leonard. His uncles Jeff and the late Roger Mayweather were professional boxers, with the latter—Floyd's former trainer—winning two world championships, as well as fighting Hall of Famers Julio César Chávez, Pernell Whitaker, and Kostya Tszyu. Mayweather was born with his mother's last name, but his last name would change to Mayweather shortly thereafter. His maternal grandfather was born in Kingston, Jamaica. He attended Ottawa Hills High School before dropping out. Boxing has been a part of Mayweather's life since his childhood and he never seriously considered any other profession. "I think my grandmother saw my potential first," he said. "When I was young, I told her, 'I think I should get a job.' She said, 'No, just keep boxing.'" During the 1980s, Mayweather lived in the Hiram Square neighborhood of New Brunswick, New Jersey, where his mother had relatives. He later said, "When I was about eight or nine, I lived in New Jersey with my mother and we were seven deep in one bedroom and sometimes we didn't have electricity. When people see what I have now, they have no idea of where I came from and how I didn't have anything growing up." It was common for the young Mayweather to come home from school and find used heroin needles in his front yard. His mother was addicted to drugs, and he had an aunt who died from AIDS because of her drug use. "People don't know the hell I've been through," he says. The most time that his father spent with him was taking him to the gym to train and work on his boxing, according to Mayweather. "I don't remember him ever taking me anywhere or doing anything that a father would do with a son, going to the park or to the movies or to get ice cream," he says. "I always thought that he liked his daughter [Floyd's older sister] better than he liked me because she never got whippings and I got whippings all the time." Mayweather's father contends that Floyd is not telling the truth about their early relationship. "Even though his daddy did sell drugs, I didn't deprive my son," the elder Mayweather says. "The drugs I sold, he was a part of it. He had plenty of food. He had the best clothes and I gave him money. He didn't want for anything. Anybody in Grand Rapids can tell you that I took care of my kids". Floyd Sr. says he did all of his hustling at night and spent his days with his son, taking him to the gym and training him to be a boxer. "If it wasn't for me he wouldn't be where he is today," he maintains. "I basically raised myself," Mayweather says. "My grandmother did what she could. When she got mad at me I'd go to my mom's house. My life was ups and downs." His father says he knows how much pain his incarceration caused his son, but insists he did the best he could. "I sent him to live with his grandmother," he says. "It wasn't like I left him with strangers." In the absence of his father, boxing became an outlet for Mayweather. As the elder Mayweather served his time, his son put all of his energy into boxing and dropped out of high school. "I knew that I was going to have to try to take care of my mom and I made the decision that school wasn't that important at the time and I was going to have to box to earn a living," he said. Mayweather had an amateur record of 84 wins and 8 losses, and won national Golden Gloves championships in 1993 (at 106 lb), 1994 (at 114 lb), and 1996 (at 125 lb). He was nicknamed "Pretty Boy" by his amateur teammates because he had relatively few scars, a result of the defensive techniques that his father and uncle (Roger Mayweather) had taught him. In his orthodox defensive stance Mayweather often utilizes the shoulder roll, an old-school boxing technique in which the right hand is held normally (or slightly higher than normal), the left hand is down around the midsection and the lead shoulder is raised high on the cheek in order to cover the chin and block punches. The right hand (as in the orthodox stance) is used as it normally would be: to block punches coming from the other side, such as left hooks. From this stance Mayweather blocks, slips and deflects most of his opponents' punches (even when cornered) by twisting left and right to the rhythm of their punches. At the 1996 Olympics in Atlanta, Mayweather won a bronze medal by reaching the semi-finals of the featherweight (57-kg) division. In the first fight, Mayweather led 10–1 on points over Bakhtiyar Tileganov of Kazakhstan, before winning when the fight was stopped. In the second fight, Mayweather outpointed Artur Gevorgyan of Armenia 16–3. In the quarterfinals, the 19-year-old Mayweather narrowly defeated 22-year-old Lorenzo Aragon of Cuba in an all-action bout to win 12–11, becoming the first U.S boxer to defeat a Cuban in 20 years. The last time this occurred was the 1976 Summer Olympics, when the U.S Olympic boxing team captured five gold medals; among the recipients was Sugar Ray Leonard. In his semifinal bout against eventual silver medalist Serafim Todorov of Bulgaria, Mayweather lost by a controversial decision (similar to Roy Jones Jr.'s highly controversial decision loss to Park Si-hun at the 1988 Summer Olympics). Referee Hamad Hafaz Shouman of Egypt mistakenly raised Mayweather's hand (thinking he had won), while the decision was announced giving the bout to the Bulgarian. The U.S. team filed a protest over the Mayweather bout, claiming the judges were intimidated by Bulgaria's Emil Jetchev (head of the boxing officials) into favoring the Bulgarian Todorov by a 10–9 decision in the 125-pound semifinal bout. Three of Jetchev's countrymen were in gold medal bouts. Judge Bill Waeckerle (one of the four U.S. judges working the games for the International Amateur Boxing Federation) resigned as Olympic Games and federation judge after Mayweather lost the decision, which was loudly booed by the crowd at the Alexander Memorial Coliseum. "I refuse to be part of an organization that continues to conduct its officiating in this manner", Waeckerle wrote in his letter of resignation to federation president Anwar Chowdhry. In the official protest U.S. team manager Gerald Smith said Mayweather landed punches that were not counted, while Todorov was awarded points without landing a punch. "The judging was totally incompetent," Waeckerle said. The judges failed to impose a mandatory two-point deduction against Todorov after he was warned five times by the referee for slapping. "Everybody knows Floyd Mayweather is the gold-medal favorite at 57 kilograms," Mayweather said afterward. "In America, it's known as 125 pounds. You know and I know I wasn't getting hit. They say he's the world champion. Now you all know who the real world champion is." Featherweight Olympic qualification Defeated William Jenkins RSC/TKO-3 Defeated James Baker RSCH/TKO-1 Lost to Augie Sanchez PTS (11–12) Defeated Carlos Navarro PTS (31–11) Defeated Augie Sanchez PTS (12–8) in the box-offs Defeated Augie Sanchez PTS (20–10) in the box-offs Olympic results Defeated Bakhtiyar Tileganov (Kazakhstan) RSCI/TKO-2 Defeated Artur Gevorgyan (Armenia) PTS (16–3) Defeated Lorenzo Aragon (Cuba) PTS (12–11) Lost to Serafim Todorov (Bulgaria) PTS (9–10)* *Decision was protested unsuccessfully by the U.S. team Mayweather won his first professional bout on October 11, 1996, when he knocked out fellow newcomer Roberto Apodaca in Round 2. Mayweather's trainer at the time was his uncle, Roger Mayweather; his father was still imprisoned after his conviction for illegal drug trafficking in 1993. The latter took over as his son's trainer when he was released from prison (after Mayweather Jr.'s 14th fight—a second-round knockout of Sam Girard). From 1996 to early 1998, Mayweather won most of his fights by knockout or TKO. Early in his pro career, Mayweather received praise from all corners of the boxing world and was touted as a pugilistic prodigy. During his fight with Tony Duran the ESPN commentator remarked, "Emmanuel Steward was quoted as saying there have been very few who have been more talented than this kid. He will probably win two or three world championships; I think he will go on to be the best ever". IBHOF trainer and commentator Gil Clancy commented before Mayweather's ninth professional fight (against Jesus Chavez), "I thought that Floyd Mayweather was the outstanding pro prospect in the entire Olympic games". In 1998, within two years of entering professional boxing, Mayweather decisively won his first world title (the WBC super featherweight (130 lb) championship) with an eighth-round technical knockout of The Ring world #1-ranked super featherweight Genaro Hernández after his opponent's cornerman stopped the fight. It was Hernández' first defeat in that weight class; he said after the fight, "He defeated me, he is quick, smart and I always knew he had the speed. I give him respect. He is a true champ". With Mayweather's win he became lineal champion of the division; Genaro Hernández had previously beaten Azumah Nelson, whose dominance of the super-featherweight division had prompted boxing publications to give him the vacant lineal championship. Mayweather became the first 1996 U.S. Olympian to win a world title. Following his victory Mayweather's promoter Bob Arum said, "We believe in our heart of hearts that Floyd Mayweather is the successor in a line that starts with Ray Robinson, goes to Muhammad Ali, then Sugar Ray Leonard...We believe that he epitomizes that style of fighting". After capturing the title Mayweather defended it against contender Angel Manfredy with a TKO in round two, giving Manfredy his first defeat in four years. By the end of 1998 Mayweather was ranked by The Ring as the #8-ranked pound-for-pound best boxer in the world, and became one of the youngest recipients of The Ring's Fighter of the Year award (21, the same age Sugar Ray Robinson and Muhammad Ali were when winning their first awards). In 1999, Mayweather continued his domination of the super featherweight division by defending his title three more times. The second defense of his title was against the Argentine Carlos Rios, which he won in a unanimous decision. Mayweather, fighting past the eighth round for only the third time in his career, won on the judges' scoring 120–110, 119–108, and 120–109. Mayweather's third title defense was against Justin Juuko, which he won via knockout in the ninth round. Juuko could not beat the count of 10 by referee Mitch Halpern, and the fight ended in Mayweather's favor 80 seconds into that (the ninth) round. His final title defense in 1999 was against Carlos Gerena, with Mayweather winning in a seventh-round referee technical decision (RTD). Mayweather said after the fight, "I want to show the world that along with Oscar De La Hoya and Roy Jones Jr., I'm the best fighter in the world". This dominance did not go unnoticed in the boxing world; by the end of the year, the 22-year-old Mayweather was ranked The Ring's #2 pound-for-pound best boxer in the world (behind Roy Jones Jr.). Before making the fifth successful defense of his title against former WBC Featherweight Champion Gregorio Vargas in early 2000, Mayweather fired his father as his manager and replaced him with James Prince. A few months after the fight, the rift between father and son grew when Mayweather also fired the elder Mayweather as his trainer. In a 2004 interview Mayweather said that although he loves his father, he had a better chemistry with Roger because his father had put too much pressure on him to be perfect. Mayweather, in his fifth title defense, won a near-shutout over "Goyo" Vargas in Las Vegas. During the 10th round, when Mayweather overheard HBO announcer Jim Lampley say that the champ had switched to a southpaw stance for the second time in the bout he leaned ringside and said "It was the third time". After a six-month layoff, Mayweather was still elusive. During the sixth round, Mayweather dropped Vargas with a hook to the ribs and cruised to a unanimous decision. Roger Mayweather returned to his role as his nephew's trainer for his next bout; a non-title lightweight fight against Emanuel Augustus (then known as Emanuel Burton), which Mayweather won by ninth-round technical knockout. Years later, in an interview in 2012, Mayweather would name his fight against Augustus as the toughest of his career, and said, "If I was rating certain fighters out of every guy that I fought, I'm going to rate Emanuel Augustus first compared to all the guys that I've faced." In one of the more definitive and memorable fights of his career Mayweather fought the hard-hitting, former IBF super-featherweight champion Diego Corrales (33–0, with 27 KOs). Coming into the bout Mayweather and Corrales were undefeated, and neither fighter had touched the canvas. Mayweather was The Ring's #2-ranked super featherweight in the world (and #7 pound-for-pound), while Corrales was the #1-ranked super featherweight in the world and #5 pound-for-pound. Before the fight was announced Mayweather had stated he wanted to fight Corrales, who was facing jail time for allegedly beating his pregnant wife. "I want Diego because I'm doing it for all the battered women across America", Mayweather said. "Just like he beat that woman, I'm going to beat him". While both fighters were the same age (23), Corrales had several physical advantages over Mayweather: two inches in height, an inch in reach and (despite both arriving at the official weight-in at the 130-lb super-featherweight limit) unofficially 146 lbs, versus Mayweather's 1361/2 lbs. In the bout, Mayweather won every round and knocked down Corrales five times (three times in round 7 and twice in round 10). After the fifth knockdown, Corrales' cornermen climbed onto the apron and stopped the fight, thereby establishing Mayweather as a claimant to boxing's mythical pound-for-pound title. At the time of the stoppage, Mayweather was ahead on the scorecards, leading by 89–79, 90–79, and 90–78. Throughout the fight, HBO commentators analyzed Mayweather. Larry Merchant stated, "Mayweather fights in a tradition of boxing and quick handedness that goes back in Michigan, all the way to fighters like Sugar Ray Robinson". Harold Lederman remarked, Jim (Lampley), I gotta tell ya, I'm terribly impressed, I don't think I've seen an exhibition of boxing like this since Willie Pep, this kid is unbelievable, great legs, great speed, unbelievable ring-generalship. I mean he's got tremendous presence in that ring, Floyd Mayweather knows where he is, every minute of this fight... Corrales landed 60 of 205 punches, and landed no more than nine punches in a single round. Mayweather landed 220 of 414 punches. Corrales was unable to land any clean shots, as he stalked Mayweather through the early rounds. He landed an average of six punches a round, according to CompuBox stats – the only time that a fighter has registered single digits in the 20 years CompuBox has been tracking punch statistics. After the fight, Mayweather remarked, "I would like to fight Prince Naseem (Hamed), hopefully we can meet at 128 (lbs) or he can come up to 130 (lbs), we can fight or I can fight the winner of Casamayor..." "Prince Naseem isn't going to fight you," intervened HBO commentator Larry Merchant; who then chuckled and added: "after he saw this, it ain't gonna happen". "I really want to fight Prince Naseem..." Mayweather continued, "but hopefully I can face the winner of Casamayor (vs.) Freitas". Although neither fight materialized, Mayweather's opponent Diego Corrales would later hand Freitas (the winner of the Casamayor vs. Freitas fight) his first professional defeat and defeat Casamayor via controversial decision in a rematch of their first bout. Afterwards, Bob Arum was ecstatic about his new star. "Better than Sugar Ray Leonard", he asserted. "And did you see him at those press conferences...?" The fight was met with acclaim in the boxing world and sports in general. CBS said, "Floyd Mayweather Jr.'s speed was dazzling. His power was unexpected" and the BBC reported on "... a near flawless performance...". The New York Daily News reported that "Floyd Mayweather Jr., displaying blazing speed and punishing power..." and Sports Illustrated reported "... a fistic masterpiece". On October 10, 2001, boxing trainer Eddie Futch died at age 90. Tim Smith of the New York Daily News remembered an encounter with the trainer in an article. One of the last times I saw Futch was before the Floyd Mayweather Jr.–Diego Corrales junior lightweight title bout in Vegas. Futch was talking about how much he admired Mayweather's style, how Mayweather was such a beautiful boxer, able to slip along the ropes and avoid punches. Corrales said he was going to neutralize Mayweather's hand speed by hitting Mayweather on the arms. "I guess he thinks he's going to stand there and let him hit him on the arms all night," said Futch, who correctly predicted that Mayweather would completely dismantle Corrales in a defensive masterpiece. Futch had a way of cutting to the heart of a matter. I don't know anyone in boxing who won't miss him. I don't know anyone in boxing that can take his place. On May 26, 2001, Mayweather, fighting in his hometown of Grand Rapids, pounded out a 12-round unanimous decision over future IBF super featherweight titleholder Carlos Hernández to retain his WBC super-featherweight title. Calling it "one of the toughest nights of my career", the 130-pound champion overcame injuries in both hands to improve his record to 26–0. "He is a very, very tough fighter," Mayweather said of the challenger, whose record fell to 33–3–1. "I'm disappointed in my performance." Mayweather suffered the first knockdown of his career when he hit Hernández with a left hook in round six, which caused him sufficient pain that he dropped his injured left hand to the canvas. He wasn't hit, but was given a standing eight-count by the referee. Mayweather's last fight in the super-featherweight division was against future super featherweight and lightweight titleholder Jesús Chávez. Chávez was the WBC's top-ranked contender and came into the fight with a 31-bout winning streak. This was Mayweather's eighth defense of the WBC super-featherweight title, which he had held for more than three years. He won when Chávez's corner stopped the fight after round nine. Mayweather had such difficulty making weight for this fight that he did not eat for four days before the weigh-in. Chávez stated after the fight, "He's [Mayweather] the champ! And now I become his number-one fan". Mayweather commented after the fight, "Although it will take some time to make the match, I want to fight Kostya Tszyu". Tszyu, an Australian-based Russian, by then had established himself as the best light welterweight in the world. Mayweather did not get a chance to fight Tszyu, but went on to fight Ricky Hatton (who defeated Tszyu and won his Ring light welterweight championship). By the end of 2001, Mayweather was still ranked The Ring #1 super featherweight and #5 best pound-for-pound boxer in the world. In his first fight as a lightweight, Mayweather took on World Boxing Council (WBC) champion and The Ring #1-ranked lightweight José Luis Castillo. Despite both fighters officially meeting the 135-lb lightweight limit, Mayweather came to the ring weighing unofficially 1381/2 lbs to Castillo's 1471/2 lbs. He defeated Castillo, winning the WBC and vacant The Ring and lineal lightweight titles with a 12-round unanimous decision at the MGM Grand Garden Arena before a crowd of 6,920. With Mayweather's win, he became the first lineal lightweight champion since Pernell Whitaker. Judges Jerry Roth and John Keane scored it 115–111 and judge Anek Hongtongkam scored it 116–111, a decision that was loudly booed by the pro-Castillo crowd. The Associated Press had Mayweather winning, 115–111; the New York Daily News scorecard also had Mayweather winning, 116–112. Castillo (45–5–1, 41 KOs) could not touch Mayweather in the first round, with Castillo throwing 27 punches and landing only three. After round one Larry Merchant pointed out, "Mayweather made a comment in the corner about his left shoulder. We'll see if something's wrong with it, he seems to be rotating it, trying to keep it loose". George Foreman noted likewise, adding "'Massage my left shoulder', he (Mayweather) said, that's not a good sign". In the first minute of the second round, Castillo went down on a shot by Mayweather, which was ruled a slip by the referee. Later in the fight Harold Lederman alluded to it, saying "By the way, that knockdown in the second round [is] extremely questionable, I thought Floyd did throw a left hook and this guy [Castillo] went down at the end of the hook but what you going to do, it's a judgement call by the referee, so it doesn't go as a 10–8 round..." Drakulich took a point from Castillo for hitting on the break in the eighth round after several warnings throughout the fight. With Castillo repeatedly hitting on the break, this led to a large number of his punches landing. George Foreman agreed with the decision ("That's what you want a referee to do"), although his counterpart Larry Merchant had an alternative view: "I think this referee has been altogether too involved in the fight. Too officious". Drakulich struck again in the ninth round, this time taking a point away from Mayweather for using his elbows. Mayweather won the fight by using his jab effectively and staying away from Castillo for much of the fight. Having injured his left shoulder on the last day of training, he changed to a southpaw stance on several occasions to throw more right-handed punches. At the end of the fight, Harold Lederman had Castillo winning 115–111. ESPN's Max Kellerman disputed Lederman's scoring, writing in his boxing column: "Harold Lederman, the (HBO) unofficial ringside television judge, gave the third round to Castillo, which I think demonstrates that Mayweather suffers from the same scoring syndrome that afflicted Pernell Whitaker. Mayweather is so seldom hit cleanly in his face, that when a clean shot is landed against him it registers all out of proportion in the observer's mind. Meanwhile, the three clean shots Mayweather just landed against his opponent do not make the same kind of impression". CompuBox statistics indicated that Castillo landed more overall punches and significantly more power shots over the course of the fight. Mayweather outscored Castillo in jabs thrown and landed. Lederman's scoring for this fight may be seen as inconsistent[by whom? – Discuss]; in both Bernard Hopkins vs. Jermain Taylor fights Lederman had Taylor winning 115–113, despite Hopkins landing more overall punches and significantly more power shots during both fights. Taylor threw and landed more jabs, however. In the post-fight interview, Mayweather said, "My last training day, I hurt my rotator cuff in my left shoulder, so I couldn't use my jab the way I want to. My left wasn't as strong as I wanted it to be, but I didn't want to have no excuses, you know, like other champions, you know, when they get hurt they won't even show up to the fight. I get hurt I keep fighting, you know, I want to bring the fans a victory". Due to the closeness of their first bout, Mayweather accepted an immediate rematch with José Luis Castillo which took place on December 7, 2002. Before the rematch, Mayweather reiterated that he had torn his left rotator cuff two days before the first fight and could not throw a jab or a left hook. He had surgery following the controversial decision over Castillo, and said his shoulder had fully healed. The smaller Mayweather was again outweighed by Castillo on the night of the fight; Castillo weighed 147 lbs, to Mayweather's 138. In the rematch Mayweather used his footwork, combinations and jab to earn another unanimous decision. There were no knockdowns or notable exchanges in the fight; the judgment was close, with Mayweather winning 115–113 on two scorecards and 116–113 on a third. The Associated Press had Mayweather winning 116–112; HBO unofficial scorer Harold Lederman and fellow analyst Larry Merchant both scored it 115–113 for Mayweather. On April 19, 2003, Mayweather defended his WBC lightweight title in a unanimous decision over Dominican Victoriano Sosa. Mayweather (30–0) fought a tactically-sound 12-round bout against an aggressive Sosa (35–3–2). His next fight (on November 1 of the same year) was in his hometown of Grand Rapids against WBC #1-ranked contender Phillip N'dou, whose record was 31–1 with 30 KOs. During the run-up to the fight Nelson Mandela invited N'dou to his office for a pep talk before his departure for the U.S., advising him to "keep Mayweather on the outside with the jab, work the body and the head will become available". South African president Thabo Mbeki, in a note, said he had "full confidence" N'dou would put on a performance to make all South Africans proud and would return home with the WBC belt. When told of his opponent's high-level support Mayweather responded, "Nelson Mandela's a great man, he's big in America, but Mandela can't get in there and fight for him". In the fifth round, Mayweather connected with a series of straight rights and lefts; when N'dou would not go down, Mayweather gave a little smile and continued the barrage. He dominated his opponent, before flooring him with a series of rights in the seventh round. N'dou got up on shaky legs, forcing a stoppage at 1:50. At times during the fight, Mayweather (in black trunks outlined with fur) seemed to toy with N'dou. By the end of 2003, Mayweather was still The Ring's lightweight champion and the #5-ranked best pound-for-pound boxer in the world. Mayweather, at 27, made his 140-pound debut by defeating former titlist DeMarcus "Chop Chop" Corley, knocking him down twice officially in rounds eight and ten, and scoring a unanimous decision of 119–107, 119–108, and 118–108. The fight was billed as a WBC elimination bout, with the winner earning a shot at 140-pound champion Arturo Gatti. "Mayweather can flat-out fight", Corley's trainer Don Turner said. "He's like magic. He makes you move into the punches." Shortly after this fight Mayweather would reach #1 on the USA Today pound-for-pound rankings, with middleweight champion Bernard Hopkins at #2. On January 22, 2005, Mayweather fought Henry Bruseles in another WBC elimination bout, outclassing Bruseles throughout the first seven rounds. In round eight, Mayweather knocked Bruseles down twice and the fight was stopped. Mayweather's victory made him the mandatory challenger for Gatti's WBC light welterweight championship. The pay-per-view fight between Mayweather and The Ring #1-ranked contender Arturo Gatti took place June 25, 2005, in Atlantic City, New Jersey, where fans heavily supported Gatti. Before the fight Mayweather was confident, describing Gatti as "a C+ fighter," "a fake" and "a blown-up club fighter". Mayweather entered the ring being carried on a chariot to the song "Another One Bites the Dust". Gatti entered the ring accompanied by the song "Thunderstruck" and was momentarily frightened by the pyrotechnics exploding. Near the end of round one, Mayweather pushed Gatti's head down in close; Gatti broke, leaving himself vulnerable while Mayweather continued landing punches. Gatti turned to the referee to complain; Mayweather capitalised, sending Gatti to the canvas with more shots for what was scored a knockdown. Throughout the next five rounds, the quicker Mayweather landed nearly every shot against Gatti, who had no offense with which to return fire. Gatti's corner stopped the fight after round six, giving Mayweather his third world title. In the post-fight interview, Mayweather praised Gatti, claiming that his pre-fight comments "were just to sell tickets". To many boxing experts, Mayweather's dominance of Gatti solidified his position as one of the best pound-for-pound fighters in the world. CompuBox had Mayweather out-landing Gatti 168–41, with Gatti landing only 10 power punches (anything other than a jab). Mayweather's fight with Gatti would be his last in the light-welterweight division; he would leave as The Ring #1-ranked contender, with Ricky Hatton as light-welterweight champion. After his fight with Gatti, Mayweather moved up to the welterweight division. On November 19, 2005, Mayweather fought a non-title bout at 147 lb (67 kg) against welterweight Sharmba Mitchell. In round three, Mayweather knocked Mitchell down with a straight right hand to the head. In round six another straight right hand—this one to Mitchell's body—dropped Mitchell again, ending the fight. On April 8, 2006, Mayweather defeated Zab Judah for the IBF welterweight title in a unanimous decision. Plans for the fight had been jeopardized after Judah lost the WBA, WBC and The Ring Welterweight titles to Carlos Baldomir on January 7, 2006; however, Mayweather's and Judah's camps reworked the contract and decided that the fight would go on. During the bout, Mayweather stayed calm during Judah's aggressive early rounds. He began to dominate Judah in round five, and the latter eventually bled. Late in the tenth round, Judah hit Mayweather with a left hand that was clearly below the belt, following with a right-handed rabbit punch. Referee Richard Steele called time out with five seconds remaining in the round. Roger Mayweather entered the ring and approached Judah, but Steele restrained him; Judah's father (and trainer), Yoel Judah, entered the ring as well. Mayweather remained in the neutral corner while the Judahs scuffled with Roger (and others who had entered the ring), until police and security restored order. Roger was ejected, and the fight continued for the scheduled 12 rounds. Mayweather won a unanimous decision by official scores of 116–112, 117–111, and 119–109. CompuBox statistics showed him landing 188 punches, compared with 82 for Judah. Five days after the fight, the Nevada State Athletic Commission (NSAC) decided not to overturn the result of the bout; however, Roger Mayweather was fined $200,000 and suspended for one year. The suspension stipulated that Roger could train Mayweather in the gym, but could not work the corner during fights. On April 17, 2006, the IBF ordered a rematch between Mayweather and Judah; however, the NSAC suspended Judah for one year on May 8 and Mayweather vacated the IBF title on June 20. After his fight with Judah, it was reported that Mayweather rejected an $8 million offer to fight Antonio Margarito, citing his split with promoter Bob Arum as the reason. However, Oscar De la Hoya postponed his decision until 2007, leaving Mayweather to obtain Mayweather Promotions and choose his next opponent. Mayweather considered moving up in weight again to fight light middleweight champion Cory Spinks, but because of negative publicity and Spinks' impending mandatory defense of his title, he decided to face WBC and The Ring welterweight champion Carlos Baldomir on November 4, 2006, in Las Vegas. Despite having not lost in over eight years, Baldomir was an underdog in the fight. Mayweather defeated him for both titles in a unanimous decision. Ringside punch statistics showed Mayweather landing 199 of 458 punches, while Baldomir landed 79 of 670. Mayweather earned $8 million for the fight; Baldomir was paid $1.6 million, career earnings highs for each fighter at the time. During the fight Baldomir chased Mayweather, unable to land any meaningful shots but trying to be the busier fighter; Mayweather picked away with sharp jabs and hooks, cutting Baldomir over his left eye in the first round. This pattern continued throughout the fight; the defensive-minded Mayweather put on what many witnesses (and Mayweather himself) called a "boxing clinic" to take Baldomir's WBC, The Ring and lineal welterweight titles in a lopsided 12-round decision by scores of 120–108, 120–108, and 118–110. After the fight, Mayweather proposed a match with Oscar De La Hoya. With Mayweather's win, he became the first fighter since Roberto Durán to have captured The Ring titles in both the lightweight and welterweight divisions.[citation needed] He also captured his third lineal championship in as many weight classes (super featherweight, lightweight and welterweight), following in the footsteps of Henry Armstrong and Sugar Ray Leonard. Mayweather's next match was the long-anticipated fight against six-division champion and WBC light-middleweight titleholder Oscar De La Hoya on May 5, 2007. De La Hoya's belt was on the line, which required Mayweather to move up in weight from 147 pounds to 154. However, Mayweather was outweighed by more than 10 pounds the night of the fight, coming in at only 150 pounds. Despite De La Hoya's insistence that money was not a factor, the Mayweather-De La Hoya bout set the record for most PPV buys for a boxing match with 2.4 million households, breaking the previous record of 1.95 million for Evander Holyfield-Mike Tyson II. About $120 million in revenue was generated by the PPV, another record. Including percentages De La Hoya earned $58 million for the bout, the highest purse ever for a fighter; the previous record was $35 million, held by Tyson and Holyfield. Mayweather earned about $25 million for the fight. At one time, Floyd Mayweather Sr. negotiated to train Oscar De La Hoya and be in his corner during the fight, but De La Hoya decided to train with Freddie Roach. Mayweather won the fight by a split decision in 12 rounds, capturing the WBC title. However, many analysts and ringside observers felt Mayweather should have received a unanimous decision. During the early rounds De La Hoya had some success cutting off the ring, attempting to pound Mayweather on the inside. Despite his activity on the inside, however, many of De La Hoya's punches were ineffective and landed on Mayweather's arms or shoulders. By the middle of the fight, it was seen as an even bout by the announcers. Mayweather turned the tide in the middle and late rounds, often hitting De La Hoya at will. Official scorecards read 116–112 (Mayweather), 115–113 (Mayweather), and 115–113 (De La Hoya). CompuBox had Mayweather out-landing De La Hoya 207–122 in total punches and 134–82 in power punches, with better accuracy throughout the fight. After the bout Mayweather contemplated retirement, saying he had nothing left to prove in the boxing world. After his fight with De La Hoya, Mayweather decided to relinquish his WBC light-middleweight championship, retaining his welterweight title. On July 28, 2007, it was announced that Mayweather would come out of his brief retirement to fight The Ring light welterweight champion Ricky Hatton; the bout was promoted by De La Hoya's promotion company (Golden Boy Promotions) and Mayweather's Mayweather Promotions. The fight was entitled "Undefeated"; it took place December 8, 2007, at the MGM Grand Garden Arena, Las Vegas, Nevada, the biggest welterweight showdown between two undefeated fighters since De La Hoya met Félix Trinidad in 1999. During the run-up to their fight Mayweather claimed he was the greatest boxer ever: "I respect what Robinson and Ali did for the sport. But I am the greatest and this is my time." Mayweather controlled the fight from the beginning, knocking Hatton out in the 10th round to retain the welterweight championship. Hatton suffered a cut over his right eye in round three; from that point, his pace and movement began to slow. In round six, Hatton lost a point for punching the back of Mayweather's head as he was draped over the ropes. During the tenth round, Hatton was caught by a checked left hook thrown from Mayweather's hip; after falling headfirst into the turnbuckle, he hit the floor. Hatton made it to his feet, but was dazed. Two more lefts in quick succession knocked Hatton down again, and referee Cortez stopped the fight at 1:35 of round ten. Official scorecards read 88–82, 89–81, and 89–81 at the time of stoppage, all in favor of Mayweather. After the fight, Mayweather said that Hatton was one of his toughest, most tenacious opponents. Mayweather announced his retirement from boxing to concentrate on his promotional company, saying he wanted Hatton to be his first client. On May 2, 2009, it was confirmed that Mayweather was coming out of a 21-month retirement to fight The Ring lightweight champion and #2 pound-for-pound Juan Manuel Márquez, at a catch weight of 144 lb on July 18 at the MGM Grand in Las Vegas on HBO PPV. The fight was postponed due to a rib injury Mayweather received during training. HBO's sports series 24/7 was also rescheduled for August 29. The fight took place on September 19 in conjunction with Mexican Independence Day, traditionally a big boxing weekend. During the official weigh-in for their 144 lb bout, Mayweather failed to meet the weight limit at 146 lb and was fined as a result. However, it was later revealed that the contract was changed so that Mayweather could make weight within the welterweight limit of 140–147 lb as long as Marquez received a large guarantee. Mayweather won a unanimous decision after 12 rounds in a lopsided fight; scorecards read 120–107, 119–108, and 118–109. Marquez landed 12 percent of his total 583 punches, while Mayweather landed 59 percent of his 490 total punches. This fight marked only the fifth time in boxing history that a non-heavyweight fight sold more than 1 million pay-per-view households, with HBO generating a revenue of approximately $52 million. Four of the other fights featured Oscar De La Hoya as the main event, making this fight the one of two events where a non-heavyweight fight sold over 1 million PPVs without Oscar De La Hoya. The other fight was Manny Pacquiao versus Miguel Cotto, which sold 1.25 million PPVs. Negotiations for a proposed match between Mayweather and The Ring #3 pound-for-pound Shane Mosley began right after Andre Berto pulled out of his scheduled January 30 unification bout with Mosley due to the 2010 Haiti earthquake. Both sides eventually agreed to fight on May 1, 2010, for Mosley's WBA super-welterweight title. It was later revealed that Mayweather refused to pay sanctioning fees required by the WBA, saying "All belts do is collect dust". However, the belt was only on the line for Mosley to defend against Mayweather. Both Mayweather and Mosley agreed to Olympic-style testing for this bout. Mosley started the fight well, landing two solid right hands in round two which caused Mayweather's knees to buckle. Mayweather recovered well and went on to dominate the remainder of the fight, out-boxing Mosley and showing more aggression than in his previous recent fights. Mayweather eventually won a unanimous decision, with the judges scoring the fight 119–109, 119–109, and 118–110. In round four CompuBox found Mosley throwing seven power punches without landing any, making Mayweather the second boxer (after Roy Jones Jr.) to go an entire round without being hit by a power punch. After the fight, president of Golden Boy Promotions Oscar De La Hoya stated that he believed Mayweather was the best in the game. The fight was the second-bestselling non-heavyweight pay-per-view bout in boxing history, with 1.4 million purchases. HBO reported that the fight generated $78.3 million in revenue. After the bout Mayweather expressed interest in moving up in weight to capture a world title in six different weight classes, and to challenge newly crowned middleweight champion Sergio Martínez. On December 5, 2009, ESPN reported that eight-division world champion Manny Pacquiao signed a contract to fight Mayweather on March 13, 2010. Shortly afterward, Pacquiao denied ever signing a contract to fight Mayweather, telling FanHouse, "There are still some things that need to be negotiated." According to Yahoo! Sports, an eight-page contract was sent on December 11, 2009, by Golden Boy Promotions on behalf of Mayweather to Top Rank, representing Pacquiao, that proposed a 50–50 financial split between the sides for a fight to take place on March 13, 2010. The eight-page agreement was so detailed that it indicated which of the two fighters would step onto the scale first at the weigh-in (Pacquiao), who would walk to the ring first (Pacquiao), who would be introduced first (Mayweather) and who had first choice of the locker room (Mayweather). It detailed that the bout would have been on HBO Pay-Per-View at a cost of $59.95. Billing was to be "Mayweather vs. Pacquiao, presented by Top Rank, Golden Boy Promotions, Mayweather Promotions and M-P Promotions in association with [approved sponsors and the site]." The contract also called for both fighters to submit to Olympic-style drug testing. A Mayweather-Pacquiao bout at that time was expected to be the largest-grossing fight in history, in which total revenues could reach $300 million. Experts predicted the fight would sell between 2.5 million and 3 million pay-per-views in the U.S. In a video titled "Boxing Legend Freddie Roach Updates Us On Pacquiao" uploaded to YouTube on December 11, 2009, Pacquiao's trainer, Freddie Roach, revealed the first hint about Mayweather's request for Olympic-style drug testing, telling roving reporter Elie Seckbach, "I hear negotiations are a little shady. Schaefer and them are unhappy about something. They want Olympic-style drug testing. I said, 'Yeah, no problem.' I said, 'Whatever you want.' Since we accepted that, now they're running scared again." On December 13, 2009, Pacquiao's adviser, Michael Koncz, said Mayweather's request for Olympic-style drug testing was a laughing matter and they had no concerns whatsoever about it. "Our reaction is, 'So what?' We know Manny doesn't take any illegal drugs or anything. And none of this is getting under Manny's skin or anything. I'm here with Manny, and to him, it's like a joke. It's a laughing matter," said Koncz. After reports had surfaced that both parties had agreed to all terms, Golden Boy Promotions released a press release on December 22, 2009, revealing that Pacquiao was unwilling to comply with the Olympic-style drug testing requested by Team Mayweather. The following day, Bob Arum, Top Rank founder and CEO, declared the fight was off and Pacquiao would be facing a different opponent: We appeased Mayweather by agreeing to a urine analysis at any time, and blood testing before the press conference and after the fight. Mayweather pressed for blood testing even up to the weigh-in. He knew that Manny gets freaked out when his blood gets taken and feels that it weakens him. This is just harassment and, to me, just signaled that he didn't want the fight. Arum told David Mayo of the Grand Rapids Press. Not long after declaring that the fight was off, Arum had a change of heart and offered Mayweather a 24-hour take-it-or-leave-it deadline to accept Team Pacquiao's terms for drug testing. Top Rank sent out a press release explaining their position on Mayweather's request for random Olympic-style drug testing. In it, Arum said Pacquiao was willing to submit to as many random urine tests requested, but as far as random blood tests were concerned, he was only willing to subject himself to 3 tests—one in January, one 30 days from the bout (no later than February 13) and one immediately after the fight: Let's be very clear on the real issues we differ on. It's not about being tested....It's about who does the testing and the scheduling of the procedures....The major issue related to the testing rests with which independent agency will administer these tests. The United States Anti-Doping Agency (USADA) cannot do it because they will not amend its procedures to accommodate the blood testing schedule we have outlined. USADA, under its guidelines, would have the right to administer random blood tests as many times as they want up to weigh-in day and that is ludicrous. Freddie Roach told Lance Pugmire of the Los Angeles Times on December 22 that he would prefer for Pacquiao to give his final blood sample a week before the bout and no later than 72 hours before. On December 28, 2009, a video from an episode of HBO's Pacquiao-Hatton: 24/7 surfaced on the internet showing Pacquiao giving blood in the weeks leading up to his May 2, 2009, bout with Ricky Hatton. Documents confirmed that the video was recorded on April 8, 2009, 24 days prior to the fight and past the 30-day cut-off date that Pacquiao had demanded for a Mayweather fight. Both sides agreed to enter into mediation on January 7, 2010, in hopes of coming to an agreement on the blood testing issue. Retired federal judge Daniel Weinstein, who successfully resolved a prior dispute between Top Rank and Golden Boy Promotions, would again act as mediator. Two days later, after hours of negotiating during mediation, Arum declared that the fight was officially off after Mayweather refused to agree to a 24-day cut-off date. Mayweather revealed that he offered a 14-day cut-off date to Team Pacquiao, but it was rejected. Mayweather Promotions CEO Leonard Ellerbe declared on January 18, 2010, that random blood and urine testing will be implemented in all of Mayweather's future fights, regardless of the opponent. On February 13, 2010, in an exclusive interview with David Mayo of The Grand Rapids Press, Mayweather said, "I gave him [Pacquiao] a chance, up to 14 days out. But my new terms are all the way up to the fight. They can come get us whenever, all the way up to the fight, random drug test. That's what it is." After the failed negotiations, both fighters moved on to instead face other opponents. On March 13, 2010, Pacquiao defeated Joshua Clottey via unanimous decision, and on May 1, 2010, Mayweather beat Shane Mosley by a unanimous decision. Pacquiao was quoted by the Manila Bulletin on May 20, 2010, as saying, "As long as they're not getting a large amount of blood, I am willing to give out blood as close to two weeks before the fight." On the same day, Mayweather revealed that he would be taking the rest of 2010, and possibly 2011, off. On June 10, 2010, Oscar De La Hoya said negotiations for a Mayweather-Pacquiao fight were close to being finalized. Speaking to Spanish-language sport show República Deportiva, De La Hoya briefly talked about the current status of negotiations and, with a grin on his face, said that the two sides were extremely close to making the biggest fight in boxing a reality. "These negotiations have been real difficult for various reasons, but we're really close to finalizing the contracts, even though they've been complicated," he commented. "Today, I can't really talk about the negotiations, but we're really close." A week later, Golden Boy Promotions CEO Richard Schaefer refuted De La Hoya's comments. "I saw those quotes as well, and I had no idea what Oscar was talking about. And I called him up and asked him about them, and he said that he was misquoted," Schaefer explained to Lem Satterfield of FanHouse. Arum declared on June 30, 2010, that there were no longer any issues and the decision was up to Mayweather. "That's all been resolved," Arum stated to Kevin Iole of Yahoo! Sports regarding the dispute over random blood and urine drug testing. Arum would also tell the Las Vegas Review-Journal, "There's no longer any issues....The question is whether Mayweather is willing to fight this year." He would reiterate that comment to the Manila Bulletin, stating, "It's now up to Mayweather if he wants to fight." On July 13, 2010, Arum issued a July 16 midnight deadline for Mayweather. "Mayweather has until the end of the week. He could wait until the last minute. If it's Friday [July 16] and it's 11 p.m., and he says we have a deal, we have a deal," Arum would explain to Dan Rafael of ESPN. On July 15, 2010, Top Rank's website unveiled an official countdown to the deadline entitled "Money" Time: Mayweather's Decision. As soon as the deadline for Mayweather's response expired, Arum held a conference call. Arum revealed to the media that the negotiations he had been referring to consisted of a series of conversations with HBO Sports President Ross Greenburg. He also revealed that there was no actual direct communication with any representative from Team Mayweather or Golden Boy Promotions: I had a couple of conversations with Ross [Greenburg] and I laid out all the terms that would be acceptable to our side and I also informed him about the concession that Manny had made regarding drug testing. He got back to me in a couple of weeks and told me that he had had discussions with Al Haymon, representing Floyd Mayweather, and that everything looked good and we were nearing a resolution...The subsequent conversations with Ross detailed to me conversations he had with Al Haymon. Nowhere was the name Richard Schaefer or Golden Boy mentioned, although I read, as you all did, Oscar's statement that a deal was close, so I assumed from that Haymon was keeping Schaefer and Golden Boy abreast of the situation. During a Q & A session following his opening statement, Arum further explained, "We have never talked to anybody on the Mayweather side and all conversations on our part were through Ross Greenburg and he reported on all conversations on the Mayweather side from Al Haymon." On July 19, 2010, Ellerbe denied that negotiations ever took place and nothing was ever agreed on. Ellerbe stated: Here are the facts: Al Haymon, Richard Schaefer and myself speak to each other on a regular basis and the truth is no negotiations have ever taken place nor was there ever a deal agreed upon by Team Mayweather or Floyd Mayweather to fight Manny Pacquiao on November 13. Either Ross Greenburg or Bob Arum is not telling the truth, but history tells us who is lying. Three days later, Schaefer backed Ellerbe's statement that negotiations never took place. When asked via e-mail for his response to Ellerbe's denial that negotiations ever took place, Greenburg would respond to ESPN's Dan Rafael with the following reply: "As always we have no comment." Regarding comments he made suggesting that contracts for the mega-fight were close to being finalized, De La Hoya told BoxingScene.com on July 26, 2010: I think I said it because I get the question asked so many times that, obviously, I was fed up and tired of it and I just said like, yeah, yeah, it's gonna get made. So it was a quick answer that I should have obviously thought about. But, obviously, negotiations weren't going on. Nothing was going on. Also on July 26, Greenburg released a statement saying that he had been negotiating with a representative from each side since May 2, 2010. "I had been negotiating with a representative from each side since May 2, carefully trying to put the fight together. Hopefully, someday this fight will happen. Sports fans deserve it," Greenburg revealed in a prepared statement sent out to select members of the media. Schaefer again supported Ellerbe's denial of negotiations, and challenged both Greenburg and Arum to take lie detector tests. "I think it's unfortunate that Ross made that statement. I fully stand behind the statement I made. I have not negotiated with Ross and I am not aware of any negotiations that have taken place," Schaefer told ESPN. On July 8, 2011, ESPN reported that Pacquiao was willing to agree to random drug testing—but not by the United States Anti-Doping Agency (USADA). "We have agreed in the Pacquiao camp to unlimited random testing done by a responsible, neutral organization," Arum told Yahoo. We don't believe USADA is a neutral organization. I don't think anybody's test is as vigorous as the test administered by the Olympic Organization. And we can arrange for the Olympic Organization to handle the test under the supervision of the Athletic commission respective of the state where the fight is going to be held. However, the following day, Pacquiao's top adviser, Michael Koncz, stated that Pacquiao had never agreed to testing until fight day. "Will we give blood five days, seven days before the fight? You know, that's something I have to talk to Manny about, but we have nothing to hide," Koncz said. ESPN reported on January 20, 2012, that Mayweather called Pacquiao on the telephone and spoke directly with him in the Philippines. "He ask about a 50/50 split and I told him no that can't happen, but what can happen is you can make more money fighting me then [sic] you have made in your career," Mayweather said. Mayweather offered to pay him a flat fee of $40 million for a proposed fight but would not allow him to share in the revenue. Pacquiao said, "I spoke to Floyd...and he offered me an amount," Pacquiao said. "He didn't talk about the pay-per-views here and that's it. I can't agree with that. I told him I agree with 55 and 45 (split)." Pacquiao appeared on the ESPN program First Take on September 20, 2012, and said he had no problem with the drug-testing issue. "No problem," Pacquiao said. "Whatever he wants to do." Pacquiao said he was willing to be tested even on the night of the fight. "No problem," he said. "Even the night of the fight. No problem." On December 20, 2013, The Daily Telegraph reported that Mayweather said Pacquiao's association with promoter Bob Arum is the reason why the bout will not happen. "We all know the Pacquiao fight, at this particular time, will never happen, and the reason why the fight won't happen is because I will never do business with Bob Arum again in life, and Pacquiao is Bob Arum's fighter," Mayweather said. On June 7, 2011, Mayweather announced via Twitter that he was set to fight WBC welterweight champion and The Ring #2-ranked welterweight Victor Ortiz on September 17. Ortiz was Mayweather's first challenger in 16 months. The fight took place at the MGM Grand Garden Arena. From round one, Mayweather used his speed, skills and accurate right hand to tag Ortiz repeatedly. Mayweather seemed in control through the first three rounds, judges' scores were 30–27, 30–27, and 29–28 for Mayweather, in the fourth round Ortiz had some success, landing a few shots and stinging Mayweather before bulling him into the corner. He then rammed Mayweather in the face with an intentional headbutt, opening a cut on the inside and outside of Mayweather's mouth. Referee Joe Cortez immediately called time out and docked Ortiz a point for the blatant foul. Ortiz, apparently acknowledging his wrongdoing, hugged Mayweather in the corner and even appeared to kiss him. Cortez motioned the fighters back together to resume the fight, without putting them in a neutral corner. Both fighters touched gloves, and Ortiz gave Mayweather another hug. At that moment, Cortez was not looking at the fighters. As Ortiz let go, Mayweather took advantage of Ortiz not having his hands up and unloaded a left hook which wobbled Ortiz. Ortiz then looked at the referee, and Mayweather connected with a flush right hand to Ortiz's face. Ortiz fell to the canvas, and was unable to beat Cortez's count as the crowd of 14,687 jeered Mayweather. After the fight Ortiz claimed that he was merely obeying the referee's instructions when he was "blindsided" by Mayweather, who defended his actions by saying that "In the ring, you have to protect yourself at all times". Mayweather vs. Ortiz was purchased by 1.25 million homes with a value of $78,440,000 in pay-per-view revenue. These numbers make the event the second-highest-grossing non-heavyweight pay-per-view event of all time. Mayweather has appeared in the three biggest non-heavyweight pay-per-view events in the sport's history: Mayweather vs. Oscar De La Hoya ($136,853,700), Mayweather vs. Ortiz ($78,440,000), and Mayweather vs. Shane Mosley ($78,330,000). Mayweather's adviser, Leonard Ellerbe, announced on November 2, 2011, that Mayweather would return to the ring on May 5, 2012, at the MGM Grand Garden Arena in Las Vegas. After negotiations with Manny Pacquiao failed again, on February 1, 2012, it was confirmed that Mayweather would be moving up in weight to fight WBA super welterweight champion and The Ring #1-ranked light middleweight Miguel Cotto. The WBC put their super welterweight diamond belt at stake. On the evening of Saturday, May 5, Mayweather defeated Cotto in 12 rounds by a unanimous decision, improving his record to 43–0. Mayweather used movement and outboxed Cotto in the middle of the ring for the first few rounds. Beginning in rounds three and four Cotto cut the ring off from Mayweather, forcing the latter to fight from the ropes. However, Mayweather seemed to outfight Cotto from the ropes with his combinations and by rolling with most of Cotto's punches. Cotto had more success in the middle rounds, landing his jab and body shots on Mayweather and effectively trapping him on the ropes. The later rounds were controlled by Mayweather, who boxed more in the center of the ring late in the fight. In the 12th round Mayweather's uppercut stunned and hurt Cotto, but Cotto was able to fight until the end. The judges scored the fight a unanimous decision for Mayweather by scores of 118–110, 117–111, and 117–111. After the fight, Mayweather said Cotto was the toughest fighter he ever faced. CompuBox had Mayweather outlanding and outworking Cotto in the fight by a significant margin. Mayweather landed 26 percent of his total punches (179 out of 687), compared with 21 percent (105 out of 506) for Cotto. In power punches, Mayweather landed 128 of 382 (34 percent), compared with 75 of 329 (23 percent) for Cotto. Mayweather earned the biggest guaranteed purse in boxing history ($32 million) when he fought Cotto, according to contracts filed with the Nevada State Athletic Commission. The Mayweather-Cotto fight generated $94 million in PPV revenue from 1.5 million purchases, making it the second-biggest non-heavyweight fight in history (after Mayweather's fight with Oscar De La Hoya). On June 1, 2012, Mayweather reported to the Clark County Detention Center in Las Vegas to serve his jail term for domestic abuse. After serving two months, he was released from prison on August 3, 2012. On February 4, 2015, Mayweather, who was planning to do a tour in Australia, was denied a visa on the basis of his criminal record and jail term. Mayweather returned to the ring on May 4, 2013, at the MGM Grand Garden Arena to face the WBC interim welterweight champion, Ring No. 3 ranked welterweight, and the WBC's mandatory challenger Robert Guerrero. This was Mayweather's first fight since being released from jail, and was the first time Mayweather has fought on Showtime PPV after a long relationship with HBO. Mayweather was guaranteed $32 million for the fight. The fight took place in front of 15,880 at the MGM Grand Garden Arena. Prior to the fight, Guerrero had not lost in 8 years. The first couple rounds were fairly even, with Mayweather attempting to counter and time Guerrero, while Guerrero was attempting to drive Mayweather to the ropes and make it a rough fight. After the first couple rounds, Mayweather was in complete control, almost hitting Guerrero at will with right hand leads, counters, hooks, and effectively timing Guerrero the rest of the fight. Mayweather won the fight on all three scorecards 117–111. Mayweather outlanded Guerrero 195 punches to 113, which included a rare 60% connect on his power shots. Although no official tallies are reported, according to Showtime Sports executive Stephen Espinoza, the fight had exceeded 1 million purchases in PPV. Mayweather confirmed via Twitter that a deal was reached to face Ring No. 10 ranked pound for pound, WBC and WBA Super welterweight champion Saúl "Canelo" Álvarez in a championship bout on September 14, 2013, at the MGM Grand Garden Arena. A catchweight of 152 pounds was established for the fight. Mayweather received a boxing record $41.5 million for the Alvarez fight, according to Leonard Ellerbe, Mayweather's confidant. In front of a sold-out crowd of 16,746 at the MGM Garden, Mayweather defeated Álvarez by majority twelve-round decision. In a fight that many thought was going to be Mayweather's toughest, he outclassed the younger Álvarez. Many observers at ringside thought Mayweather won all twelve rounds. Judge C. J. Ross scored the fight 114–114, a draw. Judge Dave Moretti had it 116–112, and Craig Metcalfe scored it 117–111. Judge Ross retired after this fight. Speaking of the controversial scorecard, Mayweather said, "I can't control what the judges do." Compubox stats showed Mayweather's dominance in the fight, landed 232 of 505 punches (46%) and 117 connected of 526 thrown (22%) for Álvarez, who earned a base purse of $5 million. Despite interest in a bout with Amir Khan, Mayweather announced that he would fight 30-year-old Marcos Maidana (35–3, 31 KOs) on May 3, 2014, in a unification bout at MGM Grand Garden Arena, with Mayweather's WBC and The Ring welterweight titles at stake, as well as Maidana's WBA (Super) welterweight title. Maidana won the WBA title in December 2013 against Mayweather's friend, Adrien Broner. Mayweather tweeted the news the day after his 37th birthday. The Barclays Center in Brooklyn also made a case to showcase the fight. Mayweather explained why he chose Maidana, "Marcos Maidana's last performance immediately brought him to my attention. He is an extremely skilled fighter who brings knockout danger to the ring. I think this is a great fight for me and he deserves the opportunity to see if he can do what 45 others have tried to do before him – beat me." Maidana was a 12-to-1 underdog going into the fight. In front of a sold-out crowd of 16,268, in what was one of his toughest fights, Mayweather won the bout via majority decision, with scores of 114–114, 117–111, and 116–112. Maidana came out aggressive and maintained that stance throughout the fight forcing Mayweather to engage. CompuBox revealed that Mayweather was hit more times than any of his previous 38 bouts that have been covered by them. Mayweather landed 230 of his 426 punches thrown (54%) while Maidana landed 221 of 858 (26%). Many times in the fight Maidana threw shots at different angles, forcing Mayweather against the ropes. According to Mayweather in the post-fight interview, Maidana's aggressive approach made him change his style of fighting. Maidana was guaranteed a purse of $1.5 million, which would also include TV revenue from his native Argentina and PPV share. Mayweather earned a minimum $32 million. There were calls for an immediate rematch. Mayweather said, "He put pressure on me and that's when I decided to fight differently," Mayweather said. "I stood there and fought him. He's a good fighter, I take nothing away from him [...] This was a tough, competitive fight. This is what fans want to see. "I want to give fans an exciting fight. Normally, I box and move. Tonight, I gave fans an exciting fight." Maidana felt he won the fight, believing he gave Mayweather his toughest fight ever. Speaking through a translator, he said, "I definitely think I won. Floyd had never been hit by a man before. I had to change the gloves [after a last-minute problem with his original gloves on Friday] and I still gave him a great fight. He did dominate some rounds but the majority, I dominated them." The fight generated around 900,000 PPV buys, although exact figures were not released by Showtime. The revenue of PPV sale amounted to $58 million. On July 10, 2014, Mayweather made the announcement that a rematch with Maidana (35–4, 31 KOs) was confirmed. The fight was to take place on September 13, 2014, at the MGM Grand Garden Arena, with Mayweather's WBA (Super), WBC and The Ring welterweight titles at stake, as well as Mayweather's WBC light middleweight title. The fight was billed as "Mayhem". In front of 16,144 at the MGM Grand, Mayweather defeated Maidana via unanimous decision. Unlike the first fight, Mayweather came out better prepared for Maidana's style. The final judges' scores were 115–112, 116–111, and 116–111. ESPN scored it wider for Mayweather at 119–108. Mayweather did not allow Maidana to land any overhand right, with the punch stats showing Maidana connecting 128 of 572 shots (22%). Mayweather had 51% connect rate landing 166 of 326. A bizarre moment occurred in round 8, whilst in a headlock, Maidana appeared to have bitten Mayweather's left hand. Mayweather explained this in the post fight, "I didn't know what it was. Something happened and then my fingers were numb. After the eighth round my fingers were numb. I could only use my other hand. He bit me. I realized he bit me. We were tangled in the middle of the ring and all of a sudden I felt something on my left hand." Maidana denied the bite, "Maybe he thinks I'm a dog, but I never bit him. He was rubbing my eyes that round. He may have had his glove in my mouth, but I never bit him." After round 9, Maidana appeared to be confused as he started walking towards the wrong corner. Mayweather immediately ran towards him to point to his corner, much to the amusement of the crowd. Maidana was unhappy with the final verdict and thought he won the fight, "If the judges want to give the fight to fighters that run, they can give it to him. I was attacking all the time. Maybe I'm wrong, but I thought that I was the aggressor. I kept my plan to be aggressive but he kept holding and pushing. I don't want to waste my time with a third fight. I trained with all my heart to get this type of result. This is not fair. There's not reason for another fight." For the sequel, Mayweather earned a minimum of $32 million and Maidana earned a career high $3 million. The fight did well on PPV, a reported 925,000 households bought the fight, generating $60 million. The live gate grossed nearly $15 million, putting it at number 5 in the top 35 boxing gates. Mayweather fought Manny Pacquiao on May 2, 2015, at MGM Grand Garden Arena in Las Vegas, after several negotiations spread over years. Mayweather dictated the pace early, controlling range with the jab. His deft movement and pivoting made Pacquiao consistently miss, landing only 19% of his punches. Mayweather was able to counter Pacquiao with his right hand throughout the fight and won via unanimous decision with the scorecards reading 118–110, 116–112, and 116–112. The vast majority of media outlets (16/18) scored the bout in his favor. In the days following the fight, many observers felt the match failed to live up to expectations. Pacquiao told the media after the match that he was limited in the fight due to an injured right arm. Sports Illustrated reported that Pacquiao fought through a torn rotator cuff in his right shoulder, which will require surgery. Bob Arum revealed Pacquiao's injury to have been a persistent one dating back to 2008. Additionally Pacquiao's camp had not requested a cortisone injection, which is allowed by the US Anti-Doping Agency, but rather a last-minute toradol injection, which was declined by the Nevada State Athletic Commission. Mayweather, who originally had no plans for a rematch with Pacquiao, told ESPN's Stephen A. Smith in a text that he would be open to a rematch after Pacquiao recovers from shoulder surgery, however as of May 9, 2015[update], Mayweather stated "Did I text Stephen A. Smith and say I will fight him again? Yeah, but I change my mind. At this particular time, no, because he's a sore loser and he's a coward." On July 6, 2015, the World Boxing Organization (WBO) stripped Mayweather of his welterweight championship because he was not permitted to hold titles in multiple weight classes, and because he failed to pay a sanctioning fee. Mayweather confirmed through Instagram that he would defend the WBC, WBA (Super), and The Ring welterweight titles against WBA interim champion Andre Berto on September 12, 2015, at the MGM Grand Garden Arena. The announcement received some backlash due to Berto being (3–3) in his last 6 fights. Many felt he wasn't a credible opponent. Welterweight contender Amir Khan was said to be disappointed with the selection. Berto believed Mayweather chose him as his final opponent due to personal reasons, which could date back to when he won the National Golden Gloves tournament. Showtimes, Stephen Espinoza revealed the reason why Mayweather never chose Amir Khan, was because Khan would have been observing Ramadan before the fight and therefore wouldn't be "at the top of his game". The reason to why he decided not to fight then IBF titleholder Kell Brook was a business decision, with Brook not being known in the US compared to Berto. Mayweather was able to pinpoint holes in Berto's guard and find a home for the jab early. He landed sharp counters and feint hooks while controlling range for the vast majority of the bout. Berto pushed the pace, but his aggressiveness fell short as Mayweather was highly mobile and closed the distance consistently. Mayweather hurt his left hand at the end of the ninth round but remained comfortable throughout the rest of the fight, winning via unanimous decision 117–111, 118–110, and 120–108. Mayweather dominated the fight, landing an impressive 56% [232/410] punches thrown, compared to Berto's underwhelming number of 17% [83/495] punches landed. Mayweather earned a purse of $32 million and Berto earned a career-high $4 million. Early industry sources reported the fight drew 550,000 buys. Later sources indicated the number could have been as low as 400,000 buys, generating $28 million. This was the lowest number of buys Floyd had generated in over 10 years. The fight also gathered a crowd of 13,395, also a decreased figure compared to Mayweather previous fights. Keith Thurman noted, "Amazing speed ... he showed tremendous skill and talent." Mayweather announced his retirement in the ring after defeating Berto, walking away from the sport with an undefeated record of 49–0. The WBC declared his welterweight and super welterweight titles vacant in November 2015. The idea of a Mayweather comeback floated around April 2016, as rumors of Mayweather Promotions filing for trademarks of "TBE 50" and "TMT 50" hinted that Mayweather might have been targeting that 50th win. This was confirmed by posts from the U.S. Patent and Trademark website. Around May 2016, another rumor started that a crossover fight between Mayweather and MMA star Conor McGregor was in the works. On May 7, 2016, Mayweather confirmed that he was the one who started the rumors regarding the potential clash. Mayweather followed it through with an Instagram post of an unofficial teaser poster showcasing both fighters. Dana White dismissed all the rumors and stated that Mayweather had yet to contact him in case he wanted the fight to push through, since McGregor was in contract with the UFC. On January 13, 2017, White continued his stance against a Mayweather-McGregor boxing matchup and insisted that, because of McGregor's contract, it would never happen and even went as far as offering Mayweather to box McGregor in the UFC for $25 million. On March 7, 2017, Mayweather urged McGregor to sign the contract, hinting that a fight was really in the works. On March 10, 2017, Mayweather stated that only a fight with McGregor would make him come out of retirement. On March 16, 2017, Dana White backpedaled on his stance against Mayweather fighting McGregor and said that he would not deprive McGregor of making a massive payday. On May 18, 2017, McGregor reportedly agreed to all of Mayweather's updated terms and signed the contract. On June 14, 2017, after months of negotiations, both fighters announced via their Twitter accounts that they would fight on August 26, 2017, at the T-Mobile Arena in Las Vegas, Nevada. On August 24, 2017, it was announced that Mayweather and McGregor would be facing off for the WBC Money Belt, specifically made for the fight. According to the Nevada State Athletic Commission, Mayweather would earn a guaranteed purse of $100 million and McGregor was guaranteed $30 million. In front of a crowd of 14,623, Mayweather won via TKO in the 10th round, surpassing Rocky Marciano and setting the record for the longest active unbeaten streak in a professional career at 50–0. In the opening round, Mayweather, as per previous fights, started slow to work out McGregor's tactics. In his post-fight interview, he revealed it was part of the game plan to let McGregor punch himself out in the early rounds. McGregor won the first round on all three judges' scorecards; the same case could have been made for the opening three rounds. McGregor was warned a few times through the fight for hitting behind the head, but no points were deducted by referee Robert Byrd. By the fourth round, McGregor began to tire and breathe heavily with his mouth open. Mayweather started to take control and landed with his right hands. For the next few rounds, McGregor came out throwing shots in the opening 30 seconds, but immediately tired, giving Mayweather enough time to carry on landing clean shots and winning the rounds. By round 9, McGregor had almost nothing left. Although he didn't look hurt, he was very fatigued and his face started showing redness. Two of the judges scored the round 10–8 for Mayweather. In round 10, McGregor staggered across the ring and was in a bad way against the ropes as Mayweather landed some hard shots. With McGregor barely on his feet after a few unanswered punches, the referee waved the fight off. The time of stoppage was 1 minute and 5 seconds of round 10. At the time of stoppage, the scorecards read 87–83, 89–82, and 89–81, all in favor of Mayweather. McGregor was praised by Dana White at the post-fight press conference for landing 111 punches of 430 thrown (26%) on Mayweather, more than what Pacquiao or any of Mayweather's previous nine opponents had landed. Mayweather was more than twice as accurate, however, landing 170 of 320 punches thrown (53%). Mayweather said of the fight, "This was my last fight. Tonight, ladies and gentlemen, for sure I chose the right dance partner to dance with. Conor McGregor, you are a hell of a champion." He added, "He's a tough competitor and I think we gave the fans what they wanted to see. I owed them for the Pacquiao fight. I must come straight ahead and give the fans a show, and that's what I gave them." McGregor felt the fight was stopped prematurely, but nevertheless respected the decision and admitted he was tired. Mayweather agreed with the stoppage, and explained that he avoided inflicting more damage on McGregor to protect him from brain damage, saying "He has a career. You know, he still has a career. ...(It could've been) very damaging." Nevada State Athletic Commission announced the live gate for the event was $55,414,865.79 from 13,094 tickets sold and 137 complimentary tickets given out. It was the second-largest gate ever for a combat sporting event, behind only the Mayweather vs. Pacquiao fight, which grossed just over $72 million from a paid attendance of 16,219 in 2015. Sky Sports announced the fight garnered over a million PPV buys in the UK and grossed in excess of £20 million, surpassing the record set in April 2017 when Anthony Joshua defeated Wladimir Klitschko in front of 90,000 at the Wembley Stadium. This also meant the fight generated more buys in the UK than Mayweather-Pacquiao which took place in 2015. Mayweather reportedly earned over $300 million from the fight, while McGregor earned around $100 million. In September 2018, during the electronic music festival Ultra Japan, both Mayweather and Pacquiao posted videos of encounters at the festival, which implicated the possibility of a rematch. It is unknown if any formal negotiations occurred. On September 19, 2018, Mayweather stated in an interview that, despite references to "this year" in the videos, he planned to hold a fight in Japan before any possible rematch with Pacquiao. On October 18, 2018, Pacquiao told the Daily Mirror that a rumoured rematch with Mayweather would occur in 2019, as Mayweather was planning to fight an unnamed opponent on December 31, 2018. On November 5, 2018, the Japanese MMA promotion Rizin Fighting Federation announced that Mayweather would face undefeated kickboxer Tenshin Nasukawa at Rizin 14 on December 31, 2018, under unspecified rules. Of the bout, Mayweather stated in a press conference that "it wasn't easy to make this happen, but we told the people anything is possible, so now we're here and we wanna make sure that we give the people in Tokyo what they wanna see — blood, sweat and tears." However, two days later, Mayweather denied that he would be fighting Nasukawa. He explained that he had been booked for a non-televised exhibition for "a small group of wealthy spectators" during the event, but that he was caught off-guard by the announcement that he would face Nasukawa—claiming that he was unaware of the fighter until the press conference, and stating that "for the sake of the several fans and attendees that flew in from all parts of the world to attend this past press conference, I was hesitant to create a huge disturbance by combating what was being said and for that I am truly sorry." On November 16, 2018, Mayweather confirmed that a three-round exhibition boxing match against Nasukawa would indeed happen after the initial misunderstanding had been resolved. The fight took place at the Saitama Super Arena in Japan on December 31 and ended on a TKO in the first round, when Nasukawa's corner waved off the fight after he had been knocked down three times. After the fight, Mayweather clarified that he is still retired and only did the fight to entertain fans. The match and its ending, however, were controversial, and drew condemnation and accusations of match-fixing. Mayweather reportedly earned $9 million for the fight. On December 6, 2020, it was announced that Mayweather would face internet personality Logan Paul in an exhibition bout on February 20, 2021. The fight was postponed, and took place on June 6, 2021, at Hard Rock Stadium in Miami Gardens, Florida. On May 6, 2021, Mayweather and Paul met for the first time at a press conference at Hard Rock Stadium, where the latter's brother, Jake Paul, became involved in an angry brawl with Mayweather when he removed Mayweather's hat from his head. A visibly irate Mayweather was captured on video saying, "I'll kill you motherfucker! Are you crazy? I'll fuck you up, motherfucker. I don't play motherfucking games. I'll fuck you up." The bout consisted of constant clinching initiated by Paul and went the full distance to the sound of boos from the crowd, with no winner being announced. Mayweather had started tentatively and defensively, reluctant to throw often and avoiding most of Paul's shots. Toward the end of the first round, Paul unleashed a wild flurry, but most of his punches were blocked by Mayweather's guard. The second round was similar to the first, with Mayweather content with the slow pace of the fight. He finally turned up the offense in the third, opening up with some clean left hooks that rocked Paul's head back, as well as mixing in his trademark pull counter with the right hand. From the fourth round onward, Paul was visibly fatigued and took every opportunity to utilize his weight advantage by tying the smaller Mayweather up in the clinch after every exchange. Despite Paul's constant attempts at neutering Mayweather's offense, the latter continued to dictate the pace of the fight and land the cleaner, more effective punches. Toward the end of the eighth and final round, Paul showboated when it became clear that he had done enough to avoid being stopped as most had predicted would be the case, and that he would survive to hear the final bell. Mayweather's superior boxing was reflected by the CompuBox punch stats, with Mayweather having landed 43 punches of 107 thrown (40.2%), compared to Paul's 28 landed of 217 thrown (12.9%). In his post-fight interview, Mayweather praised his opponent, saying "He's better than I thought he was... he's a tough, rough competitor." Paul appeared to harbor some doubt about how seriously Mayweather had taken the fight, saying "I'm going to go home thinking, 'Did Floyd let me survive?'" When asked about the prospect of making a return to professional boxing, Mayweather replied, "I'm not coming back to the sport of boxing, absolutely not." He did not completely rule out participating in exhibition bouts in the future, saying "As far as me doing another exhibition, probably not". On May 21, 2022, Mayweather fought an eight round exhibition boxing bout with one of his former sparring partners, Don Moore, in Abu Dhabi. Mayweather was in full control of the fight including scoring a knockdown to Moore with a punch to the body in the eighth round. Moore survived the knockdown and would go the full distance, there was no scoring and it ended without an official verdict. On June 13, 2022, Mayweather announced he would be returning for another exhibition bout. The fight would be at the Rizin event scheduled on September 25, 2022, at the Saitama Super Arena. His opponent was confirmed to be Japanese mixed martial artist and YouTuber, Mikuru Asakura. Mayweather won by TKO in the 2nd round. On September 25, 2022, Mayweather announced he would be facing YouTuber Deji Olatunji, the younger brother of KSI. The fight being scheduled for November 13, 2022, at the Coca-Cola Arena in Dubai. Mayweather defeated Deji via technical knockout in the 6th round. In January 2023, it was announced that Mayweather would be fighting another exhibition bout against former Bellator MMA fighter and television personality, Aaron Chalmers, after his original opponent for the fight, ONE Championship Muay Thai fighter Liam Harrison, pulled out due to a knee injury. The bout took place on February 25, 2023, at The O2 Arena in London, England, marking it as Mayweather's first exhibition bout in the United Kingdom. The bout went the full 8 rounds, there was no scoring and it ended without an official verdict. On April 26, 2023, it was announced that Mayweather would be facing professional mixed martial artist and boxer John Gotti III – the grandson and son of mafiosi John Gotti and John A. Gotti, respectively – in an exhibition boxing match on June 11, 2023. The bout – held at the FLA Live Arena in Sunrise, Florida – was stopped by referee Kenny Bayless in the sixth round, prompting a ring invasion by members of each boxer's teams. A number of fights subsequently broke out in the crowd and backstage. Mayweather appeared at WWE's No Way Out pay-per-view event on February 17, 2008, in Las Vegas, Nevada. He was involved in a storyline altercation with Big Show when Mayweather jumped a security barricade and attacked Big Show to help Rey Mysterio, whom Show had threatened to chokeslam. Mayweather originally assumed a babyface role in the storylines, which met with some resistance from fans. The attack resulted in Big Show receiving a broken nose. The following night on Raw, Big Show challenged Mayweather to a one-on-one No Disqualification match at WrestleMania XXIV, which Mayweather accepted. At WrestleMania, Mayweather defeated Big Show in a knockout with brass knuckles to maintain his unbeaten record. Mayweather was reportedly paid $20 million for the fight. 1 million PPV buys were reported for WrestleMania XXIV, grossing $23.8 million in revenue. Mayweather was guest host for Raw in Las Vegas on August 24, 2009. He interfered with a tag-team match, which resulted in a loss for the Big Show (again a heel) and his partner Chris Jericho as Mayweather gave MVP brass knuckles to knock Jericho out, giving MVP and his new tag-team partner Mark Henry the win and a shot at the Unified WWE Tag Team Titles at WWE Breaking Point against Jeri-Show. He then celebrated with Henry and MVP, turning face. Later that night, he was involved in a backstage segment with Vince McMahon, D-Generation X, and Carlito, helping McMahon prepare for his six-man tag team match against The Legacy and DX. During the segment, McMahon knocked out Carlito. Mayweather appeared on the fifth season of Dancing with the Stars; his partner was Ukrainian-American professional ballroom dancer Karina Smirnoff. On October 16, 2007, Smirnoff and Mayweather were the fourth couple to be eliminated from the competition, finishing in ninth place. Mayweather resides in a 22,000-square-foot (2,000 m2), five-bedroom, seven-bath, custom-built mansion in Las Vegas, Nevada. In 2008, he recorded a rap song titled "Yep" that he used for his entrance on WrestleMania XXIV in his match against Big Show. He owns the Mayweather Boxing Club, a boxing gym in Chinatown Plaza in Las Vegas, Nevada. In 2011, he paid for the funeral of former super lightweight world champion and former opponent Genaro Hernandez, who died of cancer after a three-year battle. He currently[when?] owns a team in the NASCAR Cup Series named The Money Team Racing.[citation needed] Mayweather has been convicted on multiple occasions of domestic violence and battery. In 2002, Mayweather was charged with two counts of domestic violence and one count of misdemeanor battery. He received a six-month suspended sentence and two days of house arrest and was ordered to perform 48 hours of community service. In 2004, Mayweather was given a one-year suspended jail sentence, ordered to undergo counseling for "impulse control" and pay a $1,000 fine (or perform 100 hours of community service) after being convicted of two counts of misdemeanor battery against two women. In 2005, Mayweather pleaded no contest to a misdemeanor battery charge after hitting and kicking a bouncer, receiving a 90-day suspended jail sentence. On September 9, 2010, it was reported that Mayweather was being sought by police for questioning after his former girlfriend, Josie Harris, filed a domestic battery report against him. Harris accused Mayweather of battery in the past, but those charges were dropped in July 2005 after Harris testified that she had lied and that Mayweather had not battered her. Mayweather was taken into custody September 10, 2010, but was released after posting $3,000 bail. Mayweather was initially charged with felony theft (stemming from the disappearance of Harris's mobile phone); on September 16 two felony coercion charges, one felony robbery charge, one misdemeanor domestic-battery charge and three misdemeanor harassment charges were added. On December 21, 2011, a judge sentenced Mayweather to serve 90 days in the county jail for battery upon Harris in September 2010. Mayweather reached a deal with prosecutors in which he pleaded guilty to misdemeanor battery in exchange for prosecutors dropping the felony battery charge. Mayweather also pleaded no contest to two counts of misdemeanor harassment, stemming from threats to his children. In addition to the 90-day sentence, Mayweather was ordered to complete 100 hours of community service, a 12-month domestic-violence program and to pay a fine of $2,500. On June 1, Mayweather began serving his county jail sentence, and was released on August 3, 2012. In May 2015, following his bout against Pacquiao, Josie Harris sued Mayweather for $20 million for defamation, claiming that Mayweather lied during an interview with Katie Couric in April. During that interview, he called her a drug abuser while discussing the 2010 domestic-violence incident which ended up with Mayweather going to jail for two months. The case was struck out prior to being heard, by reason of her death in 2020. In November 2018, together with DJ Khaled, Mayweather agreed to a total settlement of $750,000 with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) for failing to disclose payments accepted from issuers of initial coin offerings, including a personal $100,000 promotional payment from beleaguered cryptocurrency firm Centra Tech Inc., whose co-founders were indicted for fraud in May 2018. According to the SEC, "they are its first cases involving charges for violating rules on touting investments in so-called initial coin offerings, or ICOs." As part of the settlement, Mayweather undertook to forgo any endorsement or promotional agreement with a securities participant for three years. In January 2022, in a class-action lawsuit filed against the cryptocurrency company EthereumMax that alleged the company is a pump and dump scheme, Mayweather was named as a defendant along with media personality Kim Kardashian, former NBA player Paul Pierce, and other celebrities for promoting the EthereumMax token on their social media accounts. In December 2022, Central California U.S. District Court Judge Michael W. Fitzgerald dismissed the lawsuit on the basis that the claims were insufficiently supported given heightened pleading standards for fraud. WBC super featherweight champion (130 lbs) WBC lightweight champion (135 lbs) WBC super lightweight champion (140 lbs) IBF welterweight champion (147 lbs) WBC welterweight champion (147 lbs) (2×) WBA (Super) welterweight champion (147 lbs) WBO welterweight champion (147 lbs) WBC light middleweight champion (154 lbs) (2×) WBA (Super) light middleweight champion (154 lbs) IBO welterweight champion (147 lbs) IBA welterweight champion (147 lbs) The Ring lightweight champion (135 lbs) The Ring welterweight champion (147 lbs) (2×) The Ring light middleweight champion (154 lbs) WBC Emeritus light middleweight champion WBC Diamond light middleweight champion WBC 24K Gold champion WBC Supreme champion WBC Emerald champion WBA Man of Triumph Gold champion WBC Money champion 1993 Michigan State Golden Gloves Champion, 106 Lbs 1993 National Golden Gloves Champion, 106 Lbs 1994 Michigan State Golden Gloves Champion, 112 Lbs 1994 National Golden Gloves Champion, 112 Lbs; Outstanding Boxer Award 1995 National PAL Champion, 125 Lbs; Outstanding Boxer Award 1995 United States national amateur boxing featherweight champions, 125 Lbs 1995 Competed at Featherweight at the World Amateur Boxing Championships 1996 Michigan State Golden Gloves Champion, 125 Lbs 1996 National Golden Gloves Champion, 125 Lbs 1996 Qualified as a Featherweight for the United States Olympic Team 1996 Atlanta Olympics Featherweight Bronze medalist 1998 and 2007 International Boxing Award Fighter of the Year 1998 and 2007 The Ring Magazine Fighter of the Year 2002 World Boxing Hall of Fame Fighter of the Year 2005 and 2007 World Boxing Council Boxer of the Year 2005–08 The Ring 'number one' pound for pound 2007 Boxing Writers Association of America Fighter of the Year 2007 ESPN Fighter of the Year 2007 Forbes Magazine, Ranked "Number 14" Richest Celebrity Paydays 2007 New York Daily News Fighter of the Year 2007 World Boxing Council Event of the Year (The World Awaits) 2007 World Boxing Council Knockout of the Year (against Ricky Hatton) 2007, 2008, 2010, 2012 and 2013 Best Fighter ESPY Award 2007, 2008 and 2010 The Ring Magazine Event of the Year 2008 Sports Illustrated, The 50 Highest-Earning American Athletes (ranked 4th) 2008 Yahoo Sports, Ranked "Number 6" Most Powerful People in Boxing 2009 The Ring Magazine Comeback of the Year 2009–10 BoxRec, BBC Sport and Yahoo! Sports 'number one' pound for pound 2010 Yahoo! Sports Boxing's Most Influential (ranked 70th) 2010 Forbes magazine Celebrity 100 (ranked 31st) 2010 Forbes Magazine, The World's 50 Top-Earning Athletes (ranked 2nd) 2010 Sports Illustrated, The 50 Highest-Earning American Athletes (ranked 3rd) 2012 Forbes Magazine #1 of the world's 100 highest paid athletes. 2012 Sports Illustrated #1 fortunes 50. 2013 The Ring 'number one' pound for pound. 2013 Boxing Writers Association of America Fighter of the Year 2015 Spike TV The Best Ever Award 2015 Forbes, Ranked "Number One" as The World's Highest-Paid Celebrities. 2015 Boxing Writers Association of America Fighter of the Year 2016 Guinness World Records Most bouts undefeated by a world champion boxer in a career (49) 2016 Guinness World Records Highest career pay-per-view sales for a boxer ($1.3 billion) 2016 Guinness World Records Most expensive boxing championship belt ($1 Million) 2018 Forbes magazine #1 of the world's 100 highest paid entertainers 2019 Forbes magazine highest paid athlete of the decade 2010 - 2019 Boxing Writers Association of America Fighter of the Decade 2010 - 2019 World Boxing Association Boxer of the Decade 2010 - 2019 Yahoo Sports Fighter of the Decade 2010 - 2019 World Boxing News Fighter of the Decade Biography portal Martial arts portal Michigan portal List of super featherweight boxing champions List of lightweight boxing champions List of light welterweight boxing champions List of welterweight boxing champions List of light middleweight boxing champions List of WBA world champions List of WBC world champions List of IBF world champions List of WBO world champions List of IBO world champions List of The Ring world champions List of boxing quintuple champions Showtime Championship Boxing tale of the tape prior to the Conor McGregor fight. "Floyd Mayweather wins ESPY Award beating out Manny Pacquiao & Georges St-Pierre". nowboxing.com. Archived from the original on October 24, 2014. Retrieved October 24, 2014. "Mayweather wins fifth ESPY award". The Ring. Archived from the original on October 29, 2013. Retrieved January 1, 2022. "#P4Prank: Ranking top 25 pound-for-pound boxers of past 25 years". ESPN. April 8, 2016. Archived from the original on December 25, 2016. Retrieved December 27, 2016. "BoxRec ratings: world, pound-for-pound, active and inactive". BoxRec. Archived from the original on January 29, 2021. Retrieved July 13, 2020. "BoxRec Ratings". Boxrec.com. Archived from the original on January 4, 2017. Retrieved December 27, 2016. "BoxRec Rank Mayweather the Greatest Boxer of All Time". Archived from the original on August 15, 2016. Retrieved July 1, 2016. "Ring Ratings, Pound for Pound". The Ring. Archived from the original on May 3, 2015. Retrieved October 24, 2014. "Pound-For-Pound Top 15". Sports Illustrated. November 14, 2011. Archived from the original on May 13, 2011. Retrieved November 17, 2011. "Boxing pound-for-pound top 10". Fox Sports. November 11, 2011. Archived from the original on July 3, 2014. Retrieved November 18, 2011. "Top three pound-for-pound fighters". ESPN. November 16, 2011. Archived from the original on October 20, 2016. Retrieved January 1, 2011. "Boxing Records, Lb for Lb". boxrec.com. Archived from the original on May 18, 2012. Retrieved October 24, 2014. "Rankings: Mayweather takes over top spot". Yahoo! Sports. November 18, 2011. Archived from the original on June 3, 2012. Retrieved January 1, 2022. Guryashkin, Igor, "Mayweather measures up with greats" Archived February 2, 2017, at the Wayback Machine, ESPN, May 3, 2012. Manfred, Tony, "The fighters who've lost to Floyd Mayweather explain why he's so impossible to beat" Archived January 10, 2017, at the Wayback Machine, Business Insider, April 30, 2015. Iole, Kevin (September 10, 2015). "Floyd Mayweather's flawed perfect record and how he would have fared against all-time greats". Yahoo! Sports. Archived from the original on August 27, 2016. Retrieved June 30, 2016. Seto, J.L. (January 1, 2021). "Floyd Mayweather Is Finally Heading to the Hall of Fame". Sportscasting.com. Archived from the original on July 6, 2022. Retrieved July 22, 2021. "Sport's richest athletes named". The New Zealand Herald. June 11, 2014. Archived from the original on January 1, 2022. Retrieved January 1, 2022. "2015 Ranking The World's Highest Paid Athletes List". Archived from the original on September 20, 2012. Retrieved August 28, 2017. "Floyd Mayweather knocks Tiger Woods off the top of Forbes list". June 19, 2012. Archived from the original on February 23, 2015. Retrieved February 11, 2018. Bishop, Greg (December 17, 2011). "Al Haymon Quietly Shakes Up Boxing". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 12, 2020. Retrieved February 16, 2017. "Mayweather turns down $8M to fight Margarito". Espn.com. April 25, 2006. Archived from the original on January 1, 2022. Retrieved January 1, 2022. "Floyd Mayweather Jr". BoxRec.com. Archived from the original on January 17, 2013. Retrieved December 27, 2016. Spector, Jess and Bowen, Fred (March 11, 2019). "Are Pro Athletes Overpaid?". Junior Scholastic. Archived from the original on January 1, 2022. Retrieved January 1, 2022. Akopyan, Manouk (November 5, 2021). "Floyd Mayweather Jr. No. 6 On All-Time Athlete Earnings List With $1.2B". BoxingScene.com. Archived from the original on October 31, 2023. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Floyd Mayweather". Biography. Archived from the original on January 4, 2020. Retrieved January 4, 2020. Johnson, Chuck (December 6, 2007). "Mayweather dancing with success in and out of ring". USA Today. Archived from the original on December 19, 2013. Retrieved April 15, 2014. Floyd Mayweather is a Jamaican Yardie (big tings) on YouTube Shelton, Cole (January 5, 2021). "Did Floyd Mayweather graduate high school?". sportskeeda.com. Archived from the original on April 16, 2021. Retrieved April 16, 2021. Brown, Clifton (April 8, 2006). "Mayweather Tries to Win Fourth Title". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 10, 2016. Retrieved November 7, 2011. Politi, Steve. "Is Floyd Mayweather a Jersey guy? Tracing his roots to a New Brunswick block" Archived August 19, 2017, at the Wayback Machine, NJ Advance Media for NJ.com, May 1, 2015. Accessed August 29, 2017. "Hiram Square in New Brunswick as it looked in the mid 1970s. Floyd Mayweather lived on the street with his mother in the mid 1980s." "Floyd Mayweather Jr.'s dad won't be in corner of title fight". mercurynews.com. May 4, 2007. Archived from the original on April 16, 2021. Retrieved April 16, 2021. "Floyd Mayweather Jr. – Biography". HERDsay.com. Archived from the original on May 23, 2015. Retrieved October 24, 2014. Sportal. "Floyd 'Money' Mayweather: Biggest rags to riches story of all time?". sportingnews.com. Archived from the original on April 16, 2021. Retrieved April 16, 2021. Smith, Tim (April 30, 2007). "Stormy Mayweather". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on January 1, 2022. Retrieved January 1, 2022. [1] Archived May 10, 2021, at the Wayback Machine GFAX. Retrieved April 16, 2006. HBO: Boxing – Floyd Mayweather Jr. Archived April 10, 2006, at the Wayback Machine HBO. Retrieved January 7, 2006. Schulberg, Benn. "Floyd Mayweather Jr. Born to be a Pretty Boy." Archived May 6, 2006, at the Wayback Machine November 19, 2005. The Sweet Science. Retrieved January 1, 2022. Coleman, Steve. "The Sweet Science: Floyd Mayweather and Improvised Modalities of Rhythm." Archived July 5, 2008, at the Wayback Machine December 1, 2003. Sudden Thoughts. Retrieved April 22, 2006. Olympic weight classes use kilograms instead of pounds. 57 kg ≈ 125.66 lb "Floyd Mayweather: Profile and Bio". Canadastar Boxing. Archived from the original on October 28, 2011. Retrieved November 7, 2011. Dahlberg, Tim (August 2, 1996). "Judge Quits In Protest of "Totally Incompetent" Scoring". Associated Press. Archived from the original on March 24, 2022. Retrieved January 1, 2022. "Robbed? Mayweather goes home with controversial loss". August 4, 1996. Archived from the original on May 10, 2021. Retrieved November 10, 2011. "Judge quits in protest of 'incompetent' scoring; Mayweather loses controversial decision". August 3, 1996. Archived from the original on May 10, 2021. Retrieved November 10, 2011. "US boxing judge resigns; hits corruption in AIBA". August 4, 1996. Archived from the original on May 10, 2021. Retrieved November 10, 2011. "Milwaukee Journal Sentinel". August 2, 1996. Retrieved November 10, 2011.[permanent dead link] Wise, Mike (August 3, 1996). "One U.S. Boxer Left Standing For the Finals". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 20, 2016. Retrieved February 16, 2017. Pierce, Ben. "Floyd Mayweather Sr.: Father, son and holy cow!" Archived April 14, 2008, at the Wayback Machine August 22, 2002. East Side Boxing. Retrieved April 17, 2006. Smith, Tim (August 23, 2000). "Hbo Reaches Out To Mayweather". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on July 24, 2012. Retrieved November 7, 2011. "Floyd Mayweather Jr. vs. Tony Duran". Boxrec Boxing Encyclopaedia. Boxrec.com. Archived from the original on January 17, 2013. Retrieved November 7, 2011. "Floyd Mayweather Jr. vs. Tony Duran". YouTube. Archived from the original on October 28, 2021. Retrieved November 7, 2011. "Floyd Mayweather Jr. vs. Jesus Chavez Pt.1 (1997)". YouTube. Archived from the original on October 28, 2021. Retrieved November 7, 2011. "Floyd takes junior title in style". October 5, 1998. Archived from the original on May 10, 2021. Retrieved November 10, 2011. "The Lineal Junior Lightweight Champions". The Cyber Boxing Zone Encyclopedia. Archived from the original on August 9, 2018. Retrieved September 19, 2011. Rold, Cliff. "BoxingScene's Pound for Pound Top Ten". BoxingScene. Archived from the original on October 31, 2023. Retrieved September 5, 2011. Floyd Mayweather (41–0, 25 KO) Age: 34 Lineal World Championships: World Jr. Lightweight (1998–2002, 8 Defenses); World Lightweight (2002–2004, 3 Defenses); World Welterweight (2006–08, 1 Defense) "Genaro Hernandez vs. Floyd Mayweather Jr. – Boxrec Boxing Encyclopaedia". Boxrec.com. Archived from the original on January 17, 2013. Retrieved November 10, 2011. Smith, Timothy W. (December 18, 1998). "BOXING; Mayweather's Father Is His Biggest Booster – Page 2 – New York Times". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 16, 2013. Retrieved November 10, 2011. "Mayweather stops Manfredy to retain title". December 21, 1998. Archived from the original on May 11, 2021. Retrieved November 10, 2011. RingLive Sports. "Pound for Pound History". Ringlivesports.info. Archived from the original on February 18, 2013. Retrieved November 10, 2011. "Sugar Tops Poll". December 26, 1942. Archived from the original on May 10, 2021. Retrieved November 10, 2011. "Clay Is Named Fighter Of The Year". December 28, 1993. Archived from the original on May 10, 2021. Retrieved November 10, 2011. "WBC 130-pound champ Mayweather defeats Rios". February 18, 1999. Archived from the original on May 10, 2021. Retrieved November 10, 2011. Smith, Timothy W. (May 23, 1999). "BOXING; De La Hoya Knocks Out Carr in 11th". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 12, 2013. Retrieved November 10, 2011. "Mayweather dominates Gerena". September 13, 1999. Archived from the original on May 10, 2021. Retrieved November 10, 2011. Iole, Kevin. "Dinner spat widens Mayweather family rift." Archived June 26, 2012, at the Wayback Machine May 17, 2000. Las Vegas Review-Journal. Retrieved April 17, 2006. "Archived copy". Archived from the original on December 16, 2006. Retrieved April 15, 2008.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) Hoffer, Richard (March 27, 2000). "Boxing – 03.27.00 – SI Vault". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on December 11, 2011. Retrieved November 10, 2011. Vinod, Pankaj (August 27, 2020). ""I'm Going to Rate Emanuel Augustus First"- Floyd Mayweather Has a Bizarre Choice for Toughest Opponent He Has Ever Faced". essentiallysports.com. Archived from the original on April 16, 2021. Retrieved April 16, 2021. Floyd Mayweather Jr. "Emanuel Augustus was my toughest fight" -Original video, archived from the original on October 28, 2021, retrieved June 2, 2021 "How A Journeyman Bloodied Floyd Mayweather's Nose In His 'Toughest' Ever Fight". sportbible.com. May 26, 2020. Archived from the original on June 2, 2021. Retrieved June 2, 2021. "The Ring Magazine's Annual Ratings: Junior Lightweight-2000s – Boxrec Boxing Encyclopaedia". Boxrec.com. February 13, 2009. Archived from the original on August 12, 2013. Retrieved November 10, 2011. Smith, Tim (October 21, 2000). "Floyd No Longer Fighting Mad – New York Daily News". Articles.nydailynews.com. Archived from the original on July 24, 2012. Retrieved November 10, 2011. "Floyd Mayweather Jr. vs. Diego Corrales Pt.1". YouTube. Archived from the original on October 28, 2021. Retrieved November 10, 2011. "Floyd Mayweather Jr". Archived from the original on April 24, 2006. Retrieved April 15, 2008. "Mayweather Mauls Corrales". CBS News. February 11, 2009. Archived from the original on December 16, 2011. Retrieved November 10, 2011. Smith, Tim (January 21, 2001). "Mayweather Storms Foe – New York Daily News". Articles.nydailynews.com. Archived from the original on July 24, 2012. Retrieved November 10, 2011. "Floyd Mayweather Jr. vs. Diego Corrales Pt.7". YouTube. Archived from the original on October 28, 2021. Retrieved November 10, 2011. Hoffer, Richard (January 29, 2001). "Boxing – 01.29.01 – SI Vault". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on December 11, 2011. Retrieved November 10, 2011. "BBC Sport| Other Sports | Mayweather impresses with Corrales win". BBC News. January 21, 2001. Archived from the original on August 21, 2007. Retrieved November 10, 2011. Hoffer, Richard (January 29, 2001). "Boxing – 01.29.01 – SI Vault". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on December 11, 2011. Retrieved November 10, 2011. Smith, Tim (October 11, 2001). "Famed Trainer Futch Dies At 90". Daily News. New York. Archived from the original on July 24, 2012. Retrieved November 10, 2011. "Mayweather Wins With Hands Hurt". The New York Times. May 28, 2001. Archived from the original on August 12, 2013. Retrieved November 10, 2011. "Mayweather stops Chavez after nine". November 13, 2001. Archived from the original on May 10, 2021. Retrieved November 10, 2011. Curry, Chris. "Floyd Mayweather Shows Chavez Boxing's Not So Pretty." Archived April 9, 2008, at the Wayback Machine November 11, 2001. East Side Boxing. Retrieved April 17, 2006. "Floyd Mayweather Jr. vs. Jesus Chavez Pt.5 (2001)". YouTube. Archived from the original on August 21, 2013. Retrieved November 10, 2011. Mee, Bob (November 11, 2001). "Boxing: Mayweather to move onwards and upwards". London: Telegraph. Archived from the original on May 5, 2013. Retrieved November 10, 2011. RingLive Sports. "Pound for Pound History". Ringlivesports.info. Archived from the original on February 18, 2013. Retrieved November 10, 2011. "The Lineal Lightweight Champions". The Cyber Boxing Zone Encyclopedia. Archived from the original on December 25, 2016. Retrieved November 2, 2016. "Mayweather wins WBC title". Peninsula Clarion. April 21, 2002. Archived from the original on September 30, 2011. Retrieved November 10, 2011. Smith, Tim (April 21, 2002). "It's Unanimous: Mayweather Wins – New York Daily News". Articles.nydailynews.com. Archived from the original on June 3, 2012. Retrieved November 10, 2011. "Floyd Mayweather Jr. vs. Jose Luis Castillo I Pt.2". YouTube. Archived from the original on October 28, 2021. Retrieved November 10, 2011. "Floyd Mayweather Jr. vs. Jose Luis Castillo I Pt.4". YouTube. Archived from the original on October 28, 2021. Retrieved November 10, 2011. "Plus: Boxing – Mayweather Wins Lightweight Title – New York Times". The New York Times. April 21, 2002. Archived from the original on May 7, 2013. Retrieved November 10, 2011. "ESPN.com: Boxing – Mayweather prevails among controversy". A.espncdn.com. Archived from the original on November 23, 2011. Retrieved November 10, 2011. "Bernard Hopkins vs. Jermain Taylor (1st meeting) – Boxrec Boxing Encyclopaedia". Boxrec.com. Archived from the original on August 12, 2013. Retrieved November 10, 2011. "Jermain Taylor vs. Bernard Hopkins (2nd meeting) – Boxrec Boxing Encyclopaedia". Boxrec.com. Archived from the original on August 12, 2013. Retrieved November 10, 2011. Smith, Tim (December 7, 2002). "Mayweather Picks Fight With Press – New York Daily News". Articles.nydailynews.com. Archived from the original on July 24, 2012. Retrieved November 10, 2011. "Mayweather outpoints Castillo to keep title belt". CNN. Archived from the original on February 14, 2009. Retrieved May 2, 2010. "Floyd Mayweather Jr. vs. Jose Luis Castillo (2nd meeting) – Boxrec Boxing Encyclopaedia". Boxrec.com. Archived from the original on August 12, 2013. Retrieved November 10, 2011. Independent Newspapers Online (October 31, 2003). "Ndou or die – high hopes to become new champ – IOL Sport". IOL.co.za. Archived from the original on October 24, 2012. Retrieved November 10, 2011. Rafael, Dan (November 2, 2003). "WBC lightweight champ Mayweather KOs Ndou". USA Today. Retrieved November 10, 2011. "Mayweather's Debut At 140 Is Persuasive". The Washington Post. May 23, 2004. Archived from the original on November 13, 2012. Retrieved November 10, 2011. Rafael, Dan (May 24, 2004). "Mayweather pounds Corley in win". USA Today. Retrieved November 10, 2011. "Floyd Mayweather Conference Call Transcript." Archived February 13, 2006, at the Wayback Machine May 16, 2005. East Side Boxing. Retrieved April 23, 2006. Rafael, Dan (June 25, 2005). "Mayweather's speed overwhelms Gatti". ESPN. Archived from the original on January 1, 2022. Retrieved January 1, 2022. Steinberg, Don (April 11, 2007). "Five key fights: Floyd Mayweather Jr". ESPN. Archived from the original on January 1, 2022. Retrieved January 1, 2022. Upham, Paul. "The Boxing Experts on Floyd Mayweather Jr." Archived September 27, 2007, at the Wayback Machine SecondsOut.com. Retrieved January 28, 2006. "Mayweather Never Let Gatti Get Started". Thesweetscience.com. June 26, 2005. Archived from the original on September 1, 2009. Retrieved May 2, 2010. Boxrec Boxing Encyclopaedia (December 10, 2011). "Arturo Gatti vs. Floyd Mayweather Jr.". Boxrec Boxing Encyclopaedia. Archived from the original on February 15, 2014. Retrieved August 2, 2012. Rafael, Dan. "Judah, Mayweather to fight in Vegas on April 8." Archived January 1, 2022, at the Wayback Machine January 24, 2006. ESPN. Retrieved January 1, 2022. "Strong finish helps push Mayweather to victory – Boxing". ESPN. April 8, 2006. Archived from the original on April 2, 2017. Retrieved May 2, 2010. Vester, Mark. "Mayweather Still Champ, Roger Not So Lucky." Archived October 31, 2023, at the Wayback Machine April 13, 2006. BoxingScene.com. Retrieved January 1, 2022. Frauenheim, Norm. "Nevada deals big blow to Mayweather's uncle." April 17, 2006. The Arizona Republic. Accessed May 3, 2006. Rafael, Dan. "Judah and father fined, both lose license for year." Archived January 1, 2022, at the Wayback Machine May 8, 2006. ESPN.com. Accessed January 1, 2022. Rafael, Dan. "Mayweather turns down $8 million to fight Margarito." Archived January 1, 2022, at the Wayback Machine April 25, 2006. ESPN.com. Accessed January 1, 2022. Rafael, Dan. "De La Hoya won't fight Mayweather in fall, may retire." Archived January 1, 2022, at the Wayback Machine June 19, 2006. ESPN. Retrieved January 1, 2022. Rafael, Dan. "Mayweather, Baldomir to square off with title on line" Archived January 1, 2022, at the Wayback Machine August 14, 2006. ESPN. Retrieved January 1, 2022. "The Lineal Welterweight Champs". The Cyber Boxing Zone Encyclopedia. Archived from the original on June 14, 2009. Retrieved November 2, 2016. Burt, Jason. "Other glittering showdowns: Oscar de la Hoya v Floyd Mayweather" May 29, 2007. independent.co.uk. Retrieved March 6, 2008. Floyd Mayweather WBC Emeritus Champion Archived December 8, 2008, at the Wayback Machine. World Boxing Council (July 4, 2007). Retrieved May 17, 2009. "Unbeaten Mayweather knocks out Hatton, retains title". ESPN. December 9, 2007. Archived from the original on February 19, 2017. Retrieved May 2, 2010. Swann, Michael (December 11, 2007). "Mayweather becomes hero as Hatton loses his zero – Boxing". Sportsline.com. Archived from the original on December 8, 2008. Retrieved May 2, 2010. Rozenberg, Sammy. "Mayweather Shocks, Knocks Hatton Out in Ten." December 8, 2007. BoxingScene.com. Retrieved January 1, 2022. "Mayweather Jr. ends retirement, will fight in July". ESPN.com. May 2, 2009. Archived from the original on April 28, 2021. Retrieved April 28, 2021. CBC Sports (September 18, 2009). "Mayweather in weight flap for Marquez bout". Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original on September 23, 2009. Retrieved May 2, 2010. "Floyd Mayweather Jr. owes Juan Manual Marquez $600K after weighing two pounds overweight – ESPN". ESPN. September 18, 2009. Archived from the original on January 1, 2022. Retrieved January 1, 2022. "CompuBox Stats: Mayweather–Marquez Stats". Compuboxonline.com. Archived from the original on July 25, 2011. Retrieved May 2, 2010. Satterfield, Lem. "Pacquiao-Cotto PPV Numbers Rolling in, Nearing 1.5M Buys". Boxing FanHouse. Archived from the original on December 21, 2010. Retrieved May 2, 2010. "In mourning from Haiti earthquake, Andre Berto withdraws from Shane Mosley bout". ESPN. January 20, 2010. Archived from the original on January 1, 2022. Retrieved January 1, 2022. Boxing, The. (April 23, 2010) WBA belt not on the line for Mosley-Mayweather Archived April 29, 2010, at the Wayback Machine. Badlefthook.com. Retrieved June 20, 2011. Mayweather vs. Mosley clash a strong possibility now » FightFan.com Boxing News Archived January 22, 2010, at the Wayback Machine. Fightfan.com (January 18, 2010). Retrieved June 20, 2011. Mosley and Mayweather agree to terms for May 1 clash! » FightFan.com Boxing News Archived April 12, 2010, at the Wayback Machine. Fightfan.com (January 31, 2010). Retrieved June 20, 2011. de la hoya says 'money' calls the shots for a Pacquiao fight Archived March 4, 2016, at the Wayback Machine. Sports.yahoo.com. Retrieved June 20, 2011. Sergio Martinez on Floyd Mayweather: Fight Would Be Action-Packed Archived June 12, 2010, at the Wayback Machine. Boxing.fanhouse.com (May 6, 2010). Retrieved June 20, 2011. "Source:Mayweather-Pacquiao Negotiations Timeline Part 1". Fighthype.com. Archived from the original on February 19, 2014. Retrieved March 23, 2014. "Floyd Mayweather and Manny Pacquiao nearly agreed to a 2010 fight, documents show". Yahoo!Sports. June 2012. Archived from the original on May 11, 2014. Retrieved March 23, 2014. "Boxing Legend Freddie Roach Updates Us On Pacquiao". YouTube. Archived from the original on October 28, 2021. Retrieved November 27, 2014. "Source:Mayweather-Pacquiao Negotiations Timeline Part 2". Fighthype.com. Archived from the original on February 20, 2012. Retrieved March 23, 2014. "Pacquiao 'agrees to Mayweather's demands'". ESPN. July 8, 2011. Archived from the original on May 31, 2012. Retrieved May 11, 2012. "Floyd Mayweather, Manny Pacquiao talk". ESPN. January 20, 2012. Archived from the original on January 1, 2022. Retrieved January 1, 2022. "Manny Pacquiao waiting for fight". ESPN. September 21, 2012. Archived from the original on November 30, 2018. Retrieved March 24, 2014. "Floyd Mayweather says fight with Manny Pacquiao will 'never happen'". The Daily Telegraph. London. December 20, 2013. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved March 24, 2014. "Floyd Mayweather to fight Victor Ortiz". ESPN. June 7, 2011. Archived from the original on January 1, 2022. Retrieved January 1, 2022. "Mayweather won fair and square". ESPN. September 19, 2011. Archived from the original on January 1, 2022. Retrieved January 1, 2022. "Floyd Mayweather Jr.'s Legal Sucker Punch". The Atlantic. September 18, 2011. Archived from the original on December 31, 2011. Retrieved December 22, 2011. Davies, Gareth (September 18, 2011). "Floyd Mayweather accused of blindsiding Victor Ortiz with controversial 'sucker punch' in 4th round KO". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on September 23, 2011. Retrieved December 22, 2011. "Mayweather scores controversial KO". ESPN. September 18, 2011. Archived from the original on January 1, 2022. Retrieved January 1, 2022. "The Numbers Are In! Mayweather-Ortiz Is Second Highest Grossing Non-Heavyweight Fight". Fighthype. October 28, 2011. Archived from the original on September 26, 2019. Retrieved November 10, 2011. "Diamond belt at stake for Mayweather and Cotto". doghouseboxing.com. Archived from the original on December 28, 2016. Retrieved October 24, 2014. Pugmire, Lance (May 5, 2012). "Floyd Mayweather wins unanimous decision over Miguel Cotto". Los Angeles Times. Las Vegas. Archived from the original on October 31, 2023. Retrieved May 6, 2012. Slagter, Josh (May 6, 2012). "Floyd Mayweather not as dominant as usual in CompuBox stats in win over Miguel Cotto". MLive.com. Archived from the original on June 24, 2012. Retrieved July 5, 2012. Rafael, Dan (May 5, 2012). "Floyd Mayweather Jr. to make history with $32 million take". ESPN. Archived from the original on September 30, 2020. Retrieved January 1, 2021. Rafael, Dan (May 11, 2012). "Floyd Mayweather-Miguel Cotto rakes in $94M in PPV sales". ESPN. Archived from the original on January 1, 2022. Retrieved January 1, 2022. "Boxer Floyd Mayweather jailed in Las Vegas". CNN. June 1, 2012. Archived from the original on August 12, 2019. Retrieved August 12, 2019. "Mayweather released from jail after 2 months". ESPN.com. August 3, 2012. Archived from the original on August 12, 2019. Retrieved August 12, 2019. "Floyd Mayweather denied visa over family violence convictions". The Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on August 10, 2020. Retrieved April 16, 2020. "Floyd Mayweather Jr. ties purse mark". ESPN. May 4, 2013. Archived from the original on January 1, 2022. Retrieved January 1, 2022. "Mayweather masterful, dominates Guerrero". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on September 13, 2017. Retrieved September 13, 2017. "Mayweather vs. Guerrero exceeds 1 million PPV buys". Boxingnews24.com. May 10, 2013. Archived from the original on May 4, 2014. Retrieved May 4, 2014. "Mayweather Says Canelo Fight is Done For Sept. 14". Boxingscene.com. May 29, 2013. Archived from the original on October 31, 2023. Retrieved December 27, 2016. "Floyd Mayweather Jr. to fight Canelo Alvarez on Sept. 14". ESPN. June 5, 2013. Archived from the original on October 28, 2021. Retrieved January 1, 2022. Floyd Mayweather To Get Record $41.5 Million Guarantee For Canelo Alvarez Fight Archived August 26, 2017, at the Wayback Machine. Forbes (April 9, 2013). Retrieved September 5, 2013. "Mayweather gets easy decision over Alvarez". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on September 13, 2017. Retrieved September 13, 2017. Eligon, John (September 15, 2013). "With Easy Victory, Mayweather Ensures Hype Is Just That". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 27, 2017. Retrieved September 13, 2017. "As it happened". BBC Sport. September 15, 2013. Archived from the original on September 17, 2013. Retrieved September 17, 2013. "Judge CJ Ross retires". Huffington Post. Archived from the original on September 20, 2013. Retrieved September 13, 2017. "Floyd Mayweather Jr. picks Marcos Maidana over Amir Khan". Ring TV. February 25, 2014. Archived from the original on March 1, 2014. Retrieved January 1, 2022. "Mayweather lines up Maidana for next fight". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on August 29, 2017. Retrieved August 29, 2017. "Floyd Mayweather beats Marcos Maidana, but crowd unhappy". USA Today. Archived from the original on August 30, 2017. Retrieved August 29, 2017. "Mayweather decisions Maidana in thriller". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on August 29, 2017. Retrieved August 29, 2017. "Mayweather-Maidana fight generates less than 1 million pay per view buys". SI.com. Archived from the original on August 29, 2017. Retrieved August 29, 2017. Badenhausen, Kurt. "Floyd Mayweather Announces Rematch Versus Marcos Maidana". Forbes. Retrieved August 29, 2017.[dead link] "Floyd Mayweather confirms Marcos Maidana rematch on September 13". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on July 14, 2014. Retrieved July 14, 2014. "Mayweather and Maidana to fight for two-weight WBC titles". World Boxing News. Archived from the original on August 2, 2014. Retrieved July 30, 2014. Chen, Brian (September 13, 2014). "Mayweather vs. Maidana 2: Live Round-by-Round Results and Highlights". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on December 27, 2016. Retrieved December 27, 2016. "Mayweather decisions Maidana in rematch". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on August 29, 2017. Retrieved August 29, 2017. "Mayweather wins easier in rematch with Maidana". Bad Left Hook. Archived from the original on August 29, 2017. Retrieved August 29, 2017. Brookhouse, Brent (September 14, 2014). "Mayweather takes decision win over Maidana". SBNation.com. Archived from the original on August 29, 2017. Retrieved August 29, 2017. "Mayweather-Maidana II performs well on PPV". Bad Left Hook. Archived from the original on October 31, 2023. Retrieved August 29, 2017. Rafael, Dan (January 1, 2022). "Mayweather-Pacquiao set for May 2". ESPN. Archived from the original on January 28, 2017. Retrieved February 21, 2015. "Floyd Mayweather beats Manny Pacquiao in unanimous decision". ESPN. May 3, 2015. Archived from the original on November 8, 2020. Retrieved January 1, 2021. "Floyd Mayweather def. Manny Pacquiao". mmadecisions.com. May 3, 2015. Archived from the original on January 8, 2016. Retrieved May 3, 2015. "Floyd Mayweather beats Manny Pacquiao in Las Vegas". BBC Sport. May 3, 2015. Archived from the original on May 6, 2015. Retrieved May 5, 2015. "Dr. Surena Namdari on Manny Pacquiao's injury, surgery and rehab". May 5, 2015. Archived from the original on May 18, 2015. Retrieved May 6, 2015. "Bob Arum says Manny Pacquiao's shoulder has been injured since 2008". USA Today. Archived from the original on May 27, 2015. Retrieved August 11, 2015. "paulie malignaggi goes off on manny pacquiao shot request before floyd fight – EsNews". YouTube. June 20, 2015. Archived from the original on October 28, 2021. Retrieved December 27, 2016. "Floyd Mayweather declares no rematch for 'sore loser' Manny Pacquiao". ESPN. May 7, 2015. Archived from the original on January 1, 2022. Retrieved January 1, 2022. "Floyd Mayweather says he'd be willing to fight Manny Pacquiao again". May 5, 2015. Archived from the original on January 1, 2022. Retrieved January 1, 2022. "Floyd Mayweather Officially Stripped of WBO 147-Pound Welterweight Title". Bleacher Report. July 6, 2015. Archived from the original on July 7, 2015. Retrieved July 6, 2015. "Amir Khan 'disappointed' Floyd Mayweather chose Berto". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on August 29, 2017. Retrieved August 29, 2017. "Berto: Floyd chose me because of personal beef". Bad Left Hook. Archived from the original on October 31, 2023. Retrieved August 29, 2017. "Floyd Mayweather: Amir Khan and Kell Brook not suitable opponents". BBC Sport. September 10, 2015. Archived from the original on August 19, 2016. Retrieved August 29, 2017. "Floyd Mayweather Jr. Confirms Fight Against Andre Berto". Newsweek. August 4, 2015. Archived from the original on March 28, 2017. Retrieved December 23, 2016. "Floyd Mayweather Jr. vs. Andre Berto: It's official – The Ring". The Ring. August 4, 2015. Archived from the original on August 29, 2017. Retrieved August 29, 2017. "[Video] Keith Thurman Reacts To Mayweather'S Final Fight Victory: "Beautiful...Better Than Pacquiao Night"". Fighthype.Com. September 13, 2015. Archived from the original on March 27, 2017. Retrieved December 27, 2016. "Mayweather dominates Berto, caps 49–0 career". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on August 28, 2017. Retrieved August 28, 2017. Christ, Scott (September 12, 2015). "Mayweather vs Berto: Live streaming results and round by round coverage". Bad Left Hook. Archived from the original on August 28, 2017. Retrieved December 27, 2016. Pugmire, Lance (September 16, 2015). "Floyd Mayweather's worst Showtime pay-per-view haul, in perspective". Los Angeles Times. ISSN 0458-3035. Archived from the original on August 28, 2017. Retrieved August 28, 2017. "Source: Mayweather-Berto PPV as low as 400K". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on August 28, 2017. Retrieved August 28, 2017. Graham, Bryan Armen (September 13, 2015). "Floyd Mayweather 'ends career' undefeated after one-sided victory over Andre Berto". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on December 23, 2016. Retrieved December 23, 2016. Newman, Bob. "WBC 53rd convention report: Day 3 – Mandatory Defenses and More". Fightnews.com. Archived from the original on November 8, 2015. Retrieved November 10, 2015. "Mayweather's company files for '50' trademarks". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on February 1, 2017. Retrieved December 23, 2016. MMA Hot Sauce (May 8, 2016). "Floyd Mayweather Confirms Conor McGregor Rumors... That He Started!". Mmaweekly.com | Ufc and Mma News, Results, Rumors, and Videos. Archived from the original on September 10, 2016. Retrieved December 27, 2016. Guillen, Adam (May 12, 2016). "Dana White to Floyd Mayweather: If you want to fight Conor McGregor, call me!". MMAmania.com. Archived from the original on December 20, 2016. Retrieved December 27, 2016. Mckeever, Lewis (January 13, 2017). "White offers Mayweather $25 million to fight McGregor in boxing". Bloody Elbow. Archived from the original on July 29, 2017. Retrieved June 15, 2017. Doyle, Dave (March 7, 2017). "Floyd Mayweather's message to Conor McGregor: 'Sign the paper'". MMA Fighting. Archived from the original on May 30, 2017. Retrieved June 15, 2017. "Floyd Mayweather: 'I'm officially out of retirement for Conor McGregor'". MMA Fighting. March 11, 2017. Archived from the original on May 30, 2017. Retrieved June 14, 2017. Gray, James (March 16, 2017). "Conor McGregor v Floyd Mayweather: UFC president makes U-turn on fight". Express.co.uk. Archived from the original on July 28, 2017. Retrieved June 15, 2017. "Dana White Gives Conan A Positive Update On McGregor Vs. Mayweather". UPROXX. March 16, 2017. Archived from the original on July 20, 2017. Retrieved June 15, 2017. "Conor McGregor Signs 'Record-Breaking Deal' to Fight Floyd Mayweather". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on June 15, 2017. Retrieved June 14, 2017. "Floyd Mayweather-Conor McGregor fight finalized for Aug. 26". Archived from the original on August 9, 2017. Retrieved June 14, 2017. "Mayweather and McGregor to fight for the new WBC "Money Belt"". Archived from the original on August 24, 2017. "Mayweather, McGregor Have Huge Guarantees For PPV Clash". Boxing Scene. Archived from the original on January 22, 2023. Retrieved August 26, 2017. "Floyd Mayweather Stops Conor McGregor in 10th Round". Boxing Scene. August 27, 2017. Archived from the original on October 31, 2023. Retrieved August 28, 2017. "Mayweather stops fading McGregor in Round 10". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on August 28, 2017. Retrieved August 28, 2017. Emons, Michael (August 22, 2017). "Mayweather beats McGregor with 10th-round stoppage – reaction". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on June 25, 2018. Retrieved August 27, 2017. "Floyd Mayweather says he didn't knock out Conor McGregor to protect him from brain damage". mmajunkie.com. September 24, 2017. Archived from the original on September 26, 2017. Retrieved September 27, 2017. Rafael, Dan (September 6, 2017). "Mayweather-McGregor live gate makes $55.4 million". espn.com. Las Vegas, Nevada: ESPN. Archived from the original on April 19, 2020. Retrieved May 26, 2020. "Sky Sports confirm Mayweather-McGregor breaks UK record for PPV buys - Boxing News". Boxing News. September 7, 2017. Archived from the original on September 8, 2017. Retrieved September 7, 2017. Peter, John. "Conor McGregor has auditors 'like (expletive) sharks' for Floyd Mayweather fight purse". usatoday.com. Archived from the original on September 28, 2017. Retrieved September 27, 2017. "You'll never guess how much money Floyd Mayweather made in his fight against Conor McGregor". AOL.com. Archived from the original on August 30, 2017. Retrieved August 30, 2017. Fifty and out as Mayweather stops brave McGregor Archived August 30, 2017, at the Wayback Machine, August 27, 2017, Yahoo. What is the Mayweather vs McGregor prize money and how much did Floyd Mayweather Jnr. take home? Archived April 8, 2018, at the Wayback Machine, The Telegraph, August 30, 2017. "Mayweather: Pacquiao rematch coming this year". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on September 15, 2018. Retrieved September 15, 2018. Rathborn, Jack (September 15, 2018). "Manny Pacquiao responds to Floyd Mayweather claim superstars are set for rematch". irishmirror. Archived from the original on September 19, 2018. Retrieved September 19, 2018. Pugmire, Lance (September 18, 2018). "The Fight Corner: Smooth sailing toward a Floyd Mayweather Jr.-Manny Pacquiao rematch". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on September 18, 2018. Retrieved September 19, 2018. "Promotional king Floyd Mayweather steals the Canelo vs. GGG 2 spotlight from across the globe". CBSSports.com. Archived from the original on September 19, 2018. Retrieved September 19, 2018. "Floyd Mayweather claims he's coming out of retirement to rematch Manny Pacquiao in December". Bloody Elbow. Archived from the original on September 19, 2018. Retrieved September 19, 2018. "Mayweather plans tuneup before Pacquiao bout". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on October 11, 2018. Retrieved October 11, 2018. Domin, Martin (October 18, 2018). "Floyd Mayweather's return date revealed by Manny Pacquiao". Daily Mirror. Archived from the original on November 6, 2018. Retrieved November 5, 2018. "Manny Pacquiao Claims Floyd Mayweather's Next Fight Will Happen On This Date". NESN.com. October 18, 2018. Archived from the original on November 6, 2018. Retrieved November 6, 2018. "Floyd Mayweather Jr. to face undefeated kickboxer Tenshin Nasukawa on New Year's Eve". SBNation.com. Archived from the original on November 5, 2018. Retrieved November 5, 2018. "Mayweather pulls back on announced Japan fight". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on November 8, 2018. Retrieved November 7, 2018. "Floyd Mayweather: Retired boxer agrees to face kickboxer Tenshin Nasukawa". BBCSport.com. November 16, 2018. Archived from the original on November 20, 2018. Retrieved November 19, 2018. "Floyd Mayweather vs Tenshin Nasukawa fight 'back on'". SkySports.com. Archived from the original on November 20, 2018. Retrieved November 19, 2018. Jack Watson (December 31, 2018). "American wins farcical Tokyo fight over distraught kickboxer". The Independent. Archived from the original on June 7, 2021. Retrieved January 1, 2019. "Mayweather: "I'm still retired"". BoxingNews24.com. January 1, 2019. Archived from the original on January 5, 2019. Retrieved January 4, 2019. Nicolas Atkin (January 2, 2019). "Floyd Mayweather v Tenshin Nasukawa 'fake'? Rigged or not, farcical fight spits in face of fans". Archived from the original on April 23, 2019. Retrieved April 23, 2019. "Twitter accuses Floyd Mayweather of fixing fight against Tenshin Nasukawa". Fox Sports Asia. January 1, 2019. Archived from the original on April 23, 2019. Retrieved April 23, 2019. Mazique, Brian. "Floyd Mayweather Jr. Makes The Easiest $9 Million Of His Career At Rizin 14". Forbes.com. Archived from the original on January 4, 2019. Retrieved January 4, 2019. "Mayweather back to face Logan Paul in exhibition". ESPN.com. December 6, 2020. Archived from the original on December 6, 2020. Retrieved December 6, 2020. Brookhouse, Brent (February 3, 2021). "Floyd Mayweather vs. Logan Paul exhibition boxing match postponed to unspecified date". CBSSports. Archived from the original on February 16, 2021. Retrieved February 3, 2021. Wagenheim, Jeff (April 28, 2021). "Floyd Mayweather Jr. vs. Logan Paul: What you need to know about their exhibition bout". ESPN. Archived from the original on August 3, 2022. Retrieved May 6, 2021. "Floyd Mayweather and Jake Paul get into furious BRAWL at press conference". talkSPORT. May 7, 2021. Archived from the original on June 2, 2021. Retrieved June 2, 2021. "Floyd Mayweather gives Jake Paul a 'black eye' after pair come to blows". JOE.co.uk. May 7, 2021. Archived from the original on June 8, 2021. Retrieved June 8, 2021. "Logan Paul v Floyd Mayweather ends in boos as each fighter makes millions". the Guardian. June 7, 2021. Archived from the original on July 3, 2022. Retrieved June 8, 2021. "Floyd Mayweather vs. Logan Paul fight results, highlights: 'Money' impresses as exhibition goes the distance". CBSSports.com. June 7, 2021. Archived from the original on June 11, 2021. Retrieved June 8, 2021. Jones, Zack. "Floyd Mayweather Vs. Logan Paul Betting Odds, Props & Fight Predictions". Forbes. Archived from the original on June 7, 2021. Retrieved June 8, 2021. "Floyd Mayweather vs. Logan Paul - CompuBox Punch Stats". BoxingScene.com. Archived from the original on October 31, 2023. Retrieved June 8, 2021. "Mayweather says he "probably" won't do anymore exhibitions ⋆ Boxing News 24". Boxing News 24. June 7, 2021. Archived from the original on June 11, 2021. Retrieved June 11, 2021. Doric Sam (June 21, 2022). "Floyd Mayweather Has Strong Display vs. Don Moore in Abu Dhabi Boxing Exhibition". bleacherreport.com. Archived from the original on September 20, 2022. Retrieved September 20, 2022. Andrew Karlov (August 3, 2022). "Mayweather-Asakura September 25 in Japan". ringside24.com. Archived from the original on September 2, 2022. Retrieved September 2, 2022. "Mayweather cops heavy hits, then turns up the heat in huge KO of Japanese street fighter". Fox Sports. September 25, 2022. Archived from the original on September 25, 2022. Retrieved September 25, 2022. ESPN, 27 September 2022 (September 26, 2022). "Floyd Mayweather will fight internet phenomenon in new boxing match in November". ESPN. Archived from the original on September 27, 2022. Retrieved September 27, 2022.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) Domin, Martin (November 13, 2022). "Floyd Mayweather vs Deji winner and result: Who won Mayweather vs Deji fight?". mirror. Archived from the original on November 23, 2022. Retrieved November 23, 2022. "Mayweather to take on Geordie Shore star on same day as Fury vs Paul". talkSPORT. January 25, 2023. Archived from the original on February 1, 2023. Retrieved January 26, 2023. Rapp, Timothy. "Floyd Mayweather Jr. to Fight Aaron Chalmers in Exhibition Bout on Feb. 25". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on February 7, 2023. Retrieved January 26, 2023. Alexander K. Lee (April 26, 2023). "Floyd Mayweather to fight John Gotti III in boxing exhibition bout on June 11". mmafighting.com. Archived from the original on May 25, 2023. Retrieved May 23, 2023. Floyd Mayweather and John Gotti III exhibition fight ends in mass brawl BBC Sport (June 12, 2023) Archived June 12, 2023, at the Wayback Machine Difino, Lennie (February 17, 2008). "Showtime in Vegas". World Wrestling Entertainment. Archived from the original on February 25, 2008. Retrieved February 19, 2008. "Mayweather defeats Big Show". WWE. Archived from the original on April 2, 2008. Retrieved March 30, 2008. "Mayweather to make $20 million as part of WrestleMania XXIV" Archived January 1, 2022, at the Wayback Machine. (February 26, 2008). ESPN. Retrieved January 1, 2022. Gonzalez, Edgar (August 25, 2009). "Floyd Mayweather hosting WWE RAW". myboxingfans.com. Archived from the original on April 16, 2021. Retrieved April 16, 2021. Benson, Michael (October 5, 2019). "DRAMA Tyson Fury in WWE: When Mike Tyson and Floyd Mayweather crashed the wrestling world before the 'Gypsy King'". talksport.com. Archived from the original on April 16, 2021. Retrieved April 16, 2021. Rocchio, Christopher (October 17, 2007). "Floyd Mayweather Jr., Karina Smirnoff cut from 'Dancing with the Stars'". Realitytvworld.com. Archived from the original on April 2, 2019. Retrieved May 20, 2020. What I like about you Floyd, you come out 100% and give it your all," Dancing with the Stars judge Len Goodman said following Floyd and Karina's Paso Doble routine. "Because you do that, you lose a bit of control. I'm not going to go on about technique and all that, but you lose it... But you're great entertainment. That had the most content of any routine you've done. Bloody good job. Karp, Hannah (July 17, 2009). "Floyd Mayweather's Hideout". Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on March 12, 2018. Retrieved August 3, 2017. Blanchette, Rob. "Floyd Mayweather Beats Big Show and More Iconic Outcomes from WrestleMania". bleacherreport.com. Archived from the original on April 16, 2021. Retrieved April 16, 2021. Thomas, Rick (April 6, 2020). "Training at Floyd Mayweather's Gym Is Ridiculously Expensive". sportscasting.com. Archived from the original on August 17, 2022. Retrieved April 16, 2021. Rafael, Dan (June 15, 2011). "Mayweather quietly shows generous side – Dan Rafael Blog". ESPN. Archived from the original on April 18, 2019. Retrieved December 27, 2016. "Floyd Mayweather, Jr". Encyclopedia Britannica. March 9, 2024. Retrieved March 14, 2024. Mandell, Nina (January 11, 2017). "Floyd Mayweather on accusations of domestic violence: 'I'm still waiting to see photos'". For The Win. USA Today. Retrieved March 14, 2024. "Suspended Sentence For Mayweather". The New York Times. March 30, 2002. Archived from the original on November 24, 2011. Retrieved November 10, 2011. "Mayweather gets suspended sentence". ESPN. June 12, 2004. Archived from the original on January 1, 2022. Retrieved January 1, 2022. Hoffer, Richard (June 27, 2005). "Undefeated, Unafraid, Unpopular". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on January 1, 2022. Retrieved January 1, 2022. Floyd Mayweather Jr. sought in case Archived January 1, 2022, at the Wayback Machine. ESPN (September 9, 2010). Retrieved January 1, 2022. "Boxer Mayweather Faces 4 Felony Charges". voanews.com. Archived from the original on April 16, 2021. Retrieved April 16, 2021. "Jail time for Mayweather after guilty plea". NY Daily News. New York. December 21, 2011. Ritter, Ken (June 1, 2012). "Boxer Mayweather due to begin Vegas jail sentence". Yahoo. Archived from the original on June 3, 2012. Retrieved June 1, 2012. "Floyd Mayweather released from jail". espn.com. Associated Press. August 3, 2012. Archived from the original on May 10, 2021. Retrieved April 16, 2021. "After 'Fight of the Century,' Mayweather, Pacquiao both sued". BusinessMirror.com. May 6, 2015. Archived from the original on April 14, 2017. Retrieved December 27, 2016. "Floyd Mayweather's Ex Josie Harris Was Set to Face off with Fighter in $20 Million Trial Before Death". March 11, 2020. Archived from the original on August 20, 2023. Retrieved August 20, 2023. Gordon, Marcy (November 29, 2018). "Mayweather, DJ Khaled settle over digital coin promotions". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on November 30, 2018. Retrieved December 1, 2018. Fields, Brent. "In the Matter of Floyd Mayweather Jr., Order Instituting Cease-and-Desist Proceedings Pursuant to Section 8A of the Securities Act of 1933, Making Findings, and Improsing a Cease-and-Desist Order" (PDF). SEC.gov. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). Archived (PDF) from the original on March 22, 2021. Retrieved March 11, 2021. Ansari, Talal (January 11, 2022). "Kim Kardashian, Floyd Mayweather Jr., Others Sued Over Cryptocurrency Promotion". The Wall Street Journal. News Corp. Archived from the original on July 13, 2022. Retrieved July 13, 2022. Gonzalez, Oscar (January 11, 2022). "Kim Kardashian, Floyd Mayweather Jr. sued for alleged crypto pump and dump". CNET. Red Ventures. Archived from the original on July 13, 2022. Retrieved July 13, 2022. Picciotto, Rebecca (December 7, 2022). "Federal judge dismisses crypto scam lawsuit against Kim Kardashian, Floyd Mayweather Jr". CNBC. Archived from the original on December 7, 2022. Retrieved December 7, 2022. Rivera, Miguel (November 2015). "WBC: Floyd Mayweather Jr. is Now Champion Emeritus". boxingscene.com. Retrieved April 16, 2021. "Mayweather-Canelo winner will get WBC 24K Gold World Championship strap". Boxingnews24.com. July 14, 2013. Archived from the original on March 11, 2014. Retrieved May 4, 2014. Hanstock, Bill (April 21, 2015). "Here is the $1MM belt for Pacquiao vs. Mayweather". SBNation.com. Archived from the original on November 8, 2020. Retrieved November 14, 2020. Sáenz, Ludo (April 30, 2015). "WBA 'Man of Triumph' Trophy – Asociación Mundial de Boxeo". Wbanews.com. Archived from the original on March 26, 2016. Retrieved December 27, 2016. "Wba Has Its Own Trophy For Winner Of 'Fight Of The Century'". Philboxing.com. April 30, 2015. Archived from the original on May 6, 2017. Retrieved December 27, 2016. Raimondi, Marc (August 24, 2017). "WBC president explains origin of over-the-top, 'priceless' Money Belt for Mayweather vs. McGregor". mmafighting.com. Archived from the original on April 16, 2021. Retrieved April 16, 2021. "Media Notes: Gatti-Mayweather Match Produces PPV Knockout". sportsbusinessjournal.com. June 30, 2005. Archived from the original on April 16, 2021. Retrieved April 16, 2021. Rafael, Dan (November 11, 2006). "Pretty Boy's latest PPV draws least of his three cards". espn.com. Archived from the original on April 16, 2021. Retrieved April 16, 2021. Emen, Jake (October 30, 2011). "Biggest boxing PPVs of all time – UFC". Sports.yahoo.com. Archived from the original on November 24, 2011. Retrieved November 3, 2011. Rafael, Dan (December 17, 2007). "Mayweather-Hatton pay-per-view a smashing success". espn.com. Archived from the original on April 16, 2021. Retrieved April 16, 2021. "Mayweather fight yields 1 million buys". ESPN. September 25, 2009. Archived from the original on January 1, 2022. Retrieved January 1, 2022. "Mayweather win draws 1.4 million buys". ESPN. May 11, 2010. Archived from the original on January 1, 2022. Retrieved January 1, 2022. "The Numbers Are In! Mayweather-Ortiz Is Second Highest Grossing Non-Heavyweight Fight". Fighthype.com. October 28, 2011. Archived from the original on September 26, 2019. Retrieved October 28, 2011. "Floyd Mayweather-Miguel Cotto rakes in $94M in PPV sales". ESPN. May 11, 2012. Archived from the original on January 1, 2022. Retrieved January 1, 2022. "Mayweather-Guerrero exceeds 1M PPV buys". ESPN. May 10, 2013. Archived from the original on January 1, 2022. Retrieved January 1, 2022. Smith, Rob (September 20, 2013). "Floyd Mayweather-Canelo Alvarez top grossing PPV fight". ESPN. Archived from the original on January 1, 2022. Retrieved January 1, 2022. "Mayweather-Maidana generates less than 1M PPV buys". sportsillustrated.com. May 29, 2014. Archived from the original on August 29, 2017. Retrieved August 29, 2017. "Mayweather-Maidana II does 925,000 pay-per-view buys". sports.yahoo.com. September 18, 2014. "HBO's Taffet Still Stunned By 4.6M Buys For May-Pac". Boxingscene.com. November 10, 2015. Retrieved December 27, 2016. "Bob Arum: Pacquiao-Bradley III lost money, had 'terrible' PPV numbers". ESPN. April 21, 2016. Polacek, Scott (December 14, 2017). "Floyd Mayweather vs. Conor McGregor Final Showtime PPV Buys Rank 2nd All Time". BleacherReport.com. Retrieved December 14, 2017. Martin, Damon (June 10, 2021). "Floyd Mayweather vs. Logan Paul generates more than 1 million pay-per-view buys". MMA Fighting. Vox Media. Retrieved June 22, 2021. Welch, Ben (October 18, 2017). "Joshua vs Klitschko set for record pay-per-view sales". Daily Mirror. "UK broadcasters are in a bidding war to show Mayweather v McGregor — and it could break box office records". Business Insider. July 26, 2017. "Weekly viewing summary (Sky Box Office Events buys between 20 April–May 10, 2015)". Broadcasters' Audience Research Board. Retrieved March 3, 2020. "Weekly viewing summary (Sky Box Office Events buys between 21–August 27, 2017)". Broadcasters' Audience Research Board. Retrieved May 4, 2018. "Weekly viewing summary (Sky Box Office Events buys between 14–August 20, 2017)". Broadcasters' Audience Research Board. Retrieved September 8, 2019. "WWE Reports 2008 First Quarter Results" (PDF). World Wrestling Entertainment. May 6, 2008. p. 3. Archived from the original (PDF) on February 25, 2009. Retrieved May 6, 2008. Staff, Noisey Canada (November 21, 2017). "Watch '6IX RISING,' Our Definitive Look at Toronto's Rap Scene". "Friyie Is Envisioning Greatness for Himself and For His Neighbourhood". vice.com. November 20, 2017. "Honor Roll". Michigan Golden Gloves. Archived from the original on May 20, 2011. Retrieved July 6, 2011. "History". National Golden Gloves. Archived from the original on August 2, 2017. Retrieved July 6, 2011. "Boxing Profile of Floyd Mayweather Jr. – Latest Boxing News: P4P and Division Rankings, Boxers Profile, Fight Schedule". Boxingnewsflash.com. Retrieved November 10, 2011. "Floyd Mayweather Jr. – Amateur Highlights". Boxing.about.com. June 11, 2010. Retrieved November 10, 2011. International Boxing Awards Archived December 11, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. Muhammad-ali-boxing.org.uk. Retrieved June 20, 2011. Wbc Awards Floyd Mayweather Boxer Of The Year Award Archived September 28, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. BraggingRightsCorner.com (January 3, 2006). Retrieved June 20, 2011. "Floyd Mayweather: WBC Fighter Of The Year". Eastsideboxing.com. September 29, 2007. Archived from the original on March 5, 2008. Retrieved November 10, 2011. Mayweather is ESPN.com's Fighter of the Year. ESPN (December 27, 2007). Retrieved January 1, 2022. Kneale, Klaus (December 17, 2007). "The Biggest Celebrity Paydays Of 2007". Forbes. Archived from the original on November 2, 2012. Retrieved November 10, 2011. "Floyd Mayweather: Fighter of the Year". Daily News. New York. December 26, 2007. Retrieved January 1, 2022. Satterfield, Lem (July 18, 2013). "Mayweather wins fifth ESPY Award". ringtv.com. Retrieved April 16, 2021. "Ring Magazine Event of the Year". Boxing.about.com. April 27, 2011. Retrieved November 10, 2011. "SI.com – The Fortunate 50". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on August 9, 2011. Retrieved November 10, 2011. "sports.yahoo.com". sports.yahoo.com. January 23, 2008. Retrieved November 10, 2011. "2009 Ring Fan Poll: Mayweather makes Comeback of the Year". ringtv.com. December 22, 2009. Retrieved April 16, 2021. "BBC Sport – BBC pound-for-pound world rankings". BBC News. August 31, 2010. Retrieved November 10, 2011. Iole, Kevin (September 3, 2010). "Boxing's most influential: Nos. 51–100 – Boxing – Yahoo! Sports". Sports.yahoo.com. Retrieved November 10, 2011. "#31 Floyd Mayweather". Forbes. June 28, 2010. Ozanian, Michael K.; Badenhausen, Kurt. "Slide Show: The World's 50 Top-Earning Athletes". Forbes. "The 50 highest-earning American athletes". CNN. Badenhausen, Kurt (June 18, 2012). "Mayweather Tops List Of The World's 100 Highest-Paid Athletes". Forbes. Retrieved August 2, 2012. "Ratings by Ring Magazine". The Ring. February 23, 2015. Archived from the original on May 3, 2015. Retrieved March 14, 2015. "BWAA Honors Floyd Mayweather Jr. as Fighter of the Year". January 28, 2014. Archived from the original on September 8, 2015. Retrieved January 1, 2022. Yuscavage, Chris. "Spike TV Is Honoring Floyd Mayweather With Their "The Best Ever" Award and…Wait, What?!". complex.com. Retrieved April 16, 2021. "Floyd Mayweather, Manny Pacquiao, Katy Perry and One Direction top this year's Celebrity 100 list—the first truly global ranking of the highest paid entertainers on the planet". Forbes. Archived from the original on April 5, 2013. Retrieved October 22, 2015. "Floyd Mayweather wins Sugar Ray Robinson Fighter of the Year award for third time". ESPN. February 8, 2016. Retrieved December 27, 2016. Rocher, Sofia (December 13, 2016). "GWR honors Floyd Mayweather Jr. and other boxing greats at the 54th World Boxing Council Convention". guinnessworldrecords.com. Retrieved April 16, 2021. "Photos: Mayweather, Golovkin, Klitschko at WBC Convention". Boxingscene.com. December 13, 2016. Retrieved December 27, 2016. "Forbes Releases 2018 Celebrity 100 List Of The World's Highest-Paid Entertainers". Forbes. Retrieved July 17, 2018. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Floyd Mayweather, Jr.. Wikiquote has quotations related to Floyd Mayweather Jr.. Official website Boxing record for Floyd Mayweather Jr. from BoxRec (registration required) Estrangement of Mayweather Jr. and Sr. by Jon Saraceno, June 26, 2005, USA Today. Floyd Mayweather Jr. wants a win for his dad by Andy Johnston, July 6, 1996, Augusta Chronicle. A new chapter begins for Floyd Mayweather by Jeff Mayweather, November 1, 2005, BraggingRightsCorner.com. The Stage Is Almost Set: Can Mayweather Become the Golden Boy by Beating Him by Brent Matteo Alderson, May 1, 2006, BoxingScene.com.