.st is the Internet country code top-level domain (ccTLD) for São Tomé and Príncipe. The code is marketed worldwide as an abbreviation for various entities. Registrations are taken directly at the second level, but some names have been reserved for use in specialized third-level registrations (though not all of these are actually in use at present):[additional citation(s) needed] nic.st: Official ST domain registry (older: registry.st) gov.st: Government of São Tomé and Príncipe saotome.st: Island of São Tomé principe.st: Island of Príncipe consulado.st: São Tomé and Príncipe consulates embaixada.st: São Tomé and Príncipe embassies org.st: non-profit organisations edu.st: educational institutions net.st: network providers/operators, ISPs com.st: commercial entities store.st mil.st: Armed Forces of São Tomé and Príncipe co.st The .st domain is being marketed as a general-use domain, with a number of meanings suggested, including the abbreviation of "street", "state", short for "Star Trek" and more. The .st domain is also commonly used to create domain names that spell words ending in st, such as bur.st or ho.st. It is used for URL shortening domains like The Washington Post's wapo.st, and PlayStation's play.st. The Smalltalk programming language uses the .st extension, and several websites about it use the .st domain. The state of Styria, in Austria, has ST as its official abbreviation on Austrian vehicle registration plates. Therefore, the .st extension is used by some small businesses located in Styria. Also some registrations in South Tyrol, an autonomous, chiefly German-speaking Italian province, use the .st extension to abbreviate Südtirol, its German name. There is limited usage of .st in Stockholm, Sweden, by smaller businesses and private people. Falck Emergency in Stockholm uses[when?] .st for all their employees in the ambulance service of the Swedish capital Stockholm. Since 2018 the city has its own top level domain, .stockholm. Australia's Telstra, uses tel.st as a shortcut to its main website. The shortcut is occasionally used for marketing purposes. Australia Post uses mypo.st as a shortcut to its site when sending SMS alerts. The U.S. newspaper The Washington Post uses wapo.st (along with wapo.com) as a shortcut redirect to their main URL washingtonpost.com Meta leverages the domain metaque.st as a shortcut to their online store, which features their "Quest" line of virtual reality products. "Terms and Conditions". .ST registry. Retrieved 2022-08-15. "Servus company in Styria using .st TLD". Retrieved 2022-08-15. "nic.stockholm" (in Swedish). Retrieved 28 January 2020. IANA .st whois information