The 44th Biathlon World Championships was held in Khanty-Mansiysk, Russia from March 3–13, 2011. There was a total of 11 competitions: sprint, pursuit, individual, mass start, and relay races for men and women, and mixed relay. All the events during this championships also counted for the 2010–11 Biathlon World Cup season. The Championships kicked off with the Mixed relay event which is seeking to make its way onto the Olympic programme for the 2014 games in Sochi. As the first event of the programme, it was finally given importance by the different teams, with all nations fielding their best teams, in difference to earlier world cup events. The Norwegians won it, overtaking Germany on the last leg. The veteran Ole Einar Bjørndalen won his fifteenth world championship gold medal in the process and his first in the mixed relay, giving him a full set of gold medals in the six events that are currently contested. Tarjei Bø, Martin Fourcade, Kaisa Mäkäräinen and Arnd Peiffer won their first champion titles in career. Martin Fourcade also won a full scope of medals, gold, silver and bronze at these championships. The surprise medalists included Maxim Maximov of Russia, Tina Bachmann of Germany and Vita Semerenko of Ukraine. Helena Ekholm literally swept the field in the individual with zero shooting and fast skiing, winning more than 2 minutes over the runner-up Bachmann and making one of the greatest 1–2 place margins in biathlon history. The provisional schedule of the event is below. All times in UTC+5. All athletes with two or more medals. 40 nations competed.  Andorra  Armenia  Australia  Austria  Belarus  Bosnia and Herzegovina  Bulgaria  Canada  China  Croatia  Czech Republic  Estonia  Finland  France  Germany  Great Britain  Greenland  Hungary  Italy  Japan  Kazakhstan  Latvia  Lithuania  Macedonia  Moldova  New Zealand  Norway  Poland  Romania  Russia  Serbia  Slovakia  Slovenia  South Korea  Spain  Sweden   Switzerland  Turkey  Ukraine  United States 2011 IPC Biathlon and Cross-Country Skiing World Championships "Boe the hero, 15th gold for Bjoerndalen as Norway win". monstersandcritics.com. March 3, 2011. Archived from the original on October 12, 2012. Retrieved March 3, 2011. Men's sprint results Men's pursuit results Men's individual results Men's relay results Men's mass start results Women's sprint results Women's pursuit results Women's individual results Women's relay results Women's mass start results Mixed relay results "Archive for the 'Participating countries' Category". Archived from the original on July 17, 2011. Retrieved March 3, 2011. Media related to 2011 Biathlon World Championships at Wikimedia Commons Biathlon World Championships 2011 official site Archived January 16, 2011, at the Wayback Machine (in English)