The 1995 Men's Ice Hockey World Championships was the 59th such event sanctioned by the International Ice Hockey Federation (IIHF). Teams representing 39 countries participated in several levels of competition. The competition also served as qualifications for group placements in the 1996 competition. The top Championship Group tournament took place in Sweden from 23 April to 7 May 1995, with games played in Stockholm and Gävle. In the tournament final, Finland won the gold medal by defeating Sweden 4–1 at the Globen arena in Stockholm. The Finnish goals were scored by Timo Jutila and Ville Peltonen, who scored a hat trick. The gold medal was the first in Finland's history. Sweden had written a fight song, "Den glider in", which also was intended to be the official song of the championships. After the finals, the song became very popular in Finland. The final still has an important place in Finnish hockey culture today, a common exclamation being "95: Never forget!" Because of the 1994–95 NHL lockout, it originally created a dream scenario for the tournament hosts. With a cancelled NHL season, all NHL players free from injuries would have been available. But when the NHL season began in late January 1995, it instead created a scenario where fewer NHL players than usual became available. The Canadian and American teams would logically be hit the hardest, but the Americans found a way to lead their group in the first round. The Canadians, who struggled in the early tournament, beat the Americans in the quarter-finals, lasted until overtime against Sweden in the semifinal, and then beat the Czechs for the bronze. Andrew McKim, playing in the minors for the Adirondack Red Wings, ended up being the tournament scoring leader. Source:[citation needed] Source:[citation needed] Switzerland was relegated to Group B. Time is local (UTC+2). Played in Bratislava, 12–21 April. The hosts bettered their Group C record of the previous year, this time winning all their games. Thirty-eight-year-old Peter Stastny led the tournament in scoring. Source:[citation needed] Slovakia was promoted to Group A while Romania was relegated to Group C. Played in Sofia 20–26 March. Nine teams took part this year because Yugoslavia was given the right to return to the group that they had last played in as the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. The consequence was that two teams were relegated. They played in three groups of three where the first place teams contested promotion and the third place teams contested relegation. Two years after failing to qualify for Group C, Belarus got a rematch against Ukraine and Kazakhstan, this time coming out on top. Source:[citation needed] Source:[citation needed] Source:[citation needed] Source:[citation needed] Belarus was promoted to Group B. Source:[citation needed] Source:[citation needed] Both Yugoslavia and Bulgaria were relegated to group C2. Played in Johannesburg and Krugersdorp in South Africa from 21 to 30 March. Two groups of five played round robins where the top two from each contested promotion. The bottom five teams were relegated to qualification tournaments for 1996 Group D. Belgian player Joris Peusens was only fifteen years old. Source:[citation needed] Greece was relegated to Group D qualification. Source:[citation needed] New Zealand was relegated to Group D qualification. Source:[citation needed] Croatia only needed to tie Lithuania in their final game to earn promotion to Group C1, and they did so. Source:[citation needed] Israel, Australia, and South Africa, all were relegated to Group D qualification. Source:[citation needed] Best players selected by the directorate: Best Goaltender: Jarmo Myllys Best Defenceman: Christer Olsson Best Forward: Saku Koivu Media All-Star Team: Goaltender: Roman Turek Defence: Timo Jutila, Tommy Sjodin Forwards: Saku Koivu, Jere Lehtinen, Ville Peltonen The final standings of the tournament according to IIHF: List shows the top skaters sorted by points, then goals. Source: [1] Only the top five goaltenders, based on save percentage, who have played 50% of their team's minutes are included in this list. Source: [2] 1995 World Junior Ice Hockey Championships "Den glider in" performed with Swedish national team on stage "Sportåret 1995" (in Swedish). Dagens nyheter. 2 January 1995. Retrieved 2 March 2015. Summary at Passionhockey.com Duplacey page 508 Complete results Duplacey, James (1998). Total Hockey: The official encyclopedia of the National Hockey League. Total Sports. pp. 498–528. ISBN 0-8362-7114-9. Podnieks, Andrew (2010). IIHF Media Guide & Record Book 2011. Moydart Press. pp. 158–9.