The 1999 Men's Ice Hockey World Championships was the 63rd such event sanctioned by the International Ice Hockey Federation (IIHF). Teams representing 41 countries participated in several levels of competition. The competition also served as qualifications for group placements in the 2000 competition. The Championship took place between sixteen teams in Norway.  Austria (2nd, Group 1 Qualifier)  Belarus  Canada  Czech Republic  France (2nd, Group 2 Qualifier)  Finland  Italy  Japan (Far East Qualifier)  Latvia  Norway (Host)  Russia  Slovakia  Sweden   Switzerland  Ukraine (1st, Group 2 Qualifier)  United States (1st, Group 1 Qualifier) Played at Odense and Rodovre, Denmark 8–17 April. The top three teams at the end of the tournament advanced to the qualifying round for the 2000 IIHF World Championship. The Germans, after failing to qualify for Group A, lost their final game to Kazakhstan and finished fourth. The twentieth place overall was by far the worst finish in their history. Source:[citation needed] Denmark, Great Britain, and Kazakhstan all advanced to the qualifiers for the 2000 IIHF World Championship. Hungary was relegated to Group C. Played at Eindhoven and Tilburg, Netherlands 5–11 April. While eight teams had qualified for the Group C tournament, the host Dutch government had suspended diplomatic relations with Yugoslavia, due to the Kosovo War, and did not allow the Yugoslavian team to participate in the tournament. Source:[citation needed] Source:[citation needed] Source:[citation needed] The Netherlands was promoted to Group B. Because Yugoslavia was unable to participate for political reasons, the IIHF officially maintained their 30th place from the previous World Championship. Source:[citation needed] No team was relegated, with Yugoslavia resuming their place in 2000 the tournament was played with nine teams. Played at Krugersdorp, South Africa 14–20 April Source:[citation needed] Source:[citation needed] Source:[citation needed] Source:[citation needed] Spain was promoted to Group C. Source:[citation needed] Source:[citation needed] World Juniors Women's Championships Tournament summary at Passionhockey.com Chart showing Yugoslavia's rank after 1999 Complete results Podnieks, Andrew (2010). IIHF Media Guide & Record Book 2011. Moydart Press. pp. 163–4.