Michael Gerard Tyson (born June 30, 1966) is an American former professional boxer who competed from 1985 to 2005. Nicknamed "Iron Mike" and "Kid Dynamite" in his early career, and later known as "The Baddest Man on the Planet", Tyson is regarded as one of the greatest heavyweight boxers of all time. He reigned as the undisputed world heavyweight champion from 1987 to 1990. Tyson won his first 19 professional fights by knockout, 12 of them in the first round. Claiming his first belt at 20 years, 4 months, and 22 days old, Tyson holds the record as the youngest boxer ever to win a heavyweight title. He was the first heavyweight boxer to simultaneously hold the WBA, WBC and IBF titles, as well as the only heavyweight to unify them in succession. The following year, Tyson became the lineal champion when he knocked out Michael Spinks in 91 seconds of the first round. In 1990, Tyson was knocked out by underdog Buster Douglas in one of the biggest upsets in boxing history. In 1992, Tyson was convicted of rape and sentenced to six years in prison, although he was released on parole after three years. After his release in 1995, he engaged in a series of comeback fights, regaining the WBA and WBC titles in 1996 to join Floyd Patterson, Muhammad Ali, Tim Witherspoon, Evander Holyfield and George Foreman as the only men in boxing history to have regained a heavyweight championship after losing it. After being stripped of the WBC title in the same year, Tyson lost the WBA title to Evander Holyfield by an eleventh round stoppage. Their 1997 rematch ended when Tyson was disqualified for biting Holyfield's ears, one bite notoriously being strong enough to remove a portion of his right ear. In 2002, Tyson fought for the world heavyweight title, losing by knockout to Lennox Lewis. Tyson was known for his ferocious and intimidating boxing style as well as his controversial behavior inside and outside the ring, which he explained was inspired by Sonny Liston, a boxer who is widely regarded as the most intimidating man in the history of boxing. With a knockout-to-win percentage of 88%, he was ranked 16th on The Ring magazine's list of 100 greatest punchers of all time, and first on ESPN's list of "The Hardest Hitters in Heavyweight History". Sky Sports described him as "perhaps the most ferocious fighter to step into a professional ring". He has been inducted into the International Boxing Hall of Fame and the World Boxing Hall of Fame. Michael Gerard Tyson was born in Fort Greene, Brooklyn, New York City, on June 30, 1966. He has an older brother named Rodney (born c. 1961) and had an older sister named Denise, who died of a heart attack at age 24 in February 1990. Tyson's mother, born in Charlottesville, Virginia, was described as a promiscuous woman who might have been a prostitute. Tyson's biological father is listed as "Purcell Tyson", a "humble cab driver" (who was from Jamaica) on his birth certificate, but the man Tyson had known as his father was a pimp named Jimmy Kirkpatrick. Kirkpatrick was from Grier Town, North Carolina (a predominantly black neighborhood that was annexed by the city of Charlotte), where he was one of the neighborhood's top baseball players. Kirkpatrick married and had a son, Tyson's half-brother Jimmie Lee Kirkpatrick, who would help to integrate Charlotte high school football in 1965. In 1959, Jimmy Kirkpatrick left his family and moved to Brooklyn, where he met Tyson's mother, Lorna Mae (Smith) Tyson. Kirkpatrick frequented pool halls, gambled and hung out on the streets. "My father was just a regular street guy caught up in the street world," Tyson said. Kirkpatrick abandoned the Tyson family around the time Mike was born, leaving Tyson's mother to care for the children on her own. Kirkpatrick died in 1992. The family lived in Bedford-Stuyvesant until their financial burdens necessitated a move to Brownsville when Tyson was 10 years old. Throughout his childhood, Tyson lived in and around neighborhoods with a high rate of crime. According to an interview in Details, his first fight was with a bigger youth who had pulled the head off one of Tyson's pigeons. Tyson was repeatedly caught committing petty crimes and fighting those who ridiculed his high-pitched voice and lisp. By the age of 13, he had been arrested 38 times. He ended up at the Tryon School for Boys in Johnstown, New York. Tyson's emerging boxing ability was discovered there by Bobby Stewart, a juvenile detention center counselor and former boxer. Stewart considered Tyson to be an outstanding fighter and trained him for a few months before introducing him to boxing manager and trainer Cus D'Amato. Tyson dropped out of high school as a junior. He was later awarded an honorary Doctorate in Humane Letters from Central State University in 1989. Kevin Rooney also trained Tyson, and he was occasionally assisted by Teddy Atlas, although Atlas was dismissed by D'Amato when Tyson was 15. Rooney eventually took over all training duties for the young fighter. Tyson's mother died when he was 16, leaving him in the care of D'Amato, who would become his legal guardian. Tyson later said, "I never saw my mother happy with me and proud of me for doing something: she only knew me as being a wild kid running the streets, coming home with new clothes that she knew I didn't pay for. I never got a chance to talk to her or know about her. Professionally, it has no effect, but it's crushing emotionally and personally." As an amateur, Tyson won gold medals at the 1981 and 1982 Junior Olympic Games, defeating Joe Cortez in 1981 and beating Kelton Brown in 1982. Brown's corner threw in the towel in the first round. In 1984 Tyson won the gold medal at the Nation Golden Gloves held in New York, beating Jonathan Littles. He fought Henry Tillman twice as an amateur, losing both bouts by decision. Tillman went on to win heavyweight gold at the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles. Tyson made his professional debut as an 18-year-old on March 6, 1985, in Albany, New York. He defeated Hector Mercedes via first-round TKO. He had 15 bouts in his first year as a professional. Fighting frequently, Tyson won 26 of his first 28 fights by KO or TKO; 16 of those came in the first round. The quality of his opponents gradually increased to journeyman fighters and borderline contenders, like James Tillis, David Jaco, Jesse Ferguson, Mitch Green, and Marvis Frazier. His win streak attracted media attention and Tyson was billed as the next great heavyweight champion. D'Amato died in November 1985, relatively early into Tyson's professional career, and some speculate that his death was the catalyst to many of the troubles Tyson was to experience as his life and career progressed. Tyson's first nationally televised bout took place on February 16, 1986, at Houston Field House in Troy, New York, against journeyman heavyweight Jesse Ferguson, and was carried by ABC Sports. Tyson knocked down Ferguson with an uppercut in the fifth round that broke Ferguson's nose. During the sixth round, Ferguson began to hold and clinch Tyson in an apparent attempt to avoid further punishment. After admonishing Ferguson several times to obey his commands to box, the referee finally stopped the fight near the middle of the sixth round. The fight was initially ruled a win for Tyson by disqualification (DQ) of his opponent. The ruling was "adjusted" to a win by technical knockout (TKO) after Tyson's corner protested that a DQ win would end Tyson's string of knockout victories, and that a knockout would have been the inevitable result. In July, after recording six more knockout victories, Tyson fought former world title challenger Marvis Frazier in Glens Falls, New York, on another ABC Sports broadcast. Tyson won easily, charging at Frazier at the opening bell and hitting him with two consecutive uppercuts, the second of which knocked Frazier unconscious thirty seconds into the fight. After his win over Frazier, Tyson was booked to fight José Ribalta at the Trump Plaza Hotel and Casino in Atlantic City, New Jersey in 1986. Ribalta would hit Tyson in the body throughout the fight. Tyson knocked down Ribalta three times in the 2nd, 8th, and 10th round when the referee called the fight off. Tyson would go on to say that Ribalta was his toughest fight commenting, "I hit Jose Ribalta with everything, and he took everything and kept coming back for more. Jose Ribalta stood toe to toe with me. He was very strong in the clinches," and "Ribalta was a game fighter who actually engaged me. I felt nauseous from all Ribalta’s body blows, even hours after the fight. I never felt that much general pain again." On November 22, 1986, Tyson was given his first title fight against Trevor Berbick for the World Boxing Council (WBC) heavyweight championship. Tyson won the title by TKO in the second round, and at the age of 20 years and 4 months became the youngest heavyweight champion in history. He added the WBA and IBF titles after defeating James Smith and Tony Tucker in 1987. Tyson's dominant performance brought many accolades. Donald Saunders wrote: "The noble and manly art of boxing can at least cease worrying about its immediate future, now [that] it has discovered a heavyweight champion fit to stand alongside Dempsey, Tunney, Louis, Marciano, and Ali." Tyson intimidated fighters with his strength, combined with outstanding hand speed, accuracy, coordination and timing. Tyson also possessed notable defensive abilities, holding his hands high in the peek-a-boo style taught by his mentor Cus D'Amato to slip under and weave around his opponent's punches while timing his own. Tyson's explosive punching technique was due in large part to crouching immediately prior to throwing a hook or an uppercut: this allowed the "spring" of his legs to add power to the punch. Among his signature moves was a right hook to his opponent's body followed by a right uppercut to his opponent's chin. Lorenzo Boyd, Jesse Ferguson and José Ribalta were each knocked down by this combination. Expectations for Tyson were extremely high, and he was the favorite to win the heavyweight unification series, a tournament designed to establish an undisputed heavyweight champion. Tyson defended his title against James Smith on March 7, 1987, in Las Vegas, Nevada. He won by unanimous decision and added Smith's World Boxing Association (WBA) title to his existing belt. "Tyson-mania" in the media was becoming rampant. He beat Pinklon Thomas in May by TKO in the sixth round. On August 1 he took the International Boxing Federation (IBF) title from Tony Tucker in a twelve-round unanimous decision 119–111, 118–113, and 116–112. He became the first heavyweight to own all three major belts – WBA, WBC, and IBF – at the same time. Another fight, in October of that year, ended with a victory for Tyson over 1984 Olympic super heavyweight gold medalist Tyrell Biggs by TKO in the seventh round. During this time, Tyson came to the attention of gaming company Nintendo. After witnessing one of Tyson's fights, Nintendo of America president Minoru Arakawa was impressed by the fighter's "power and skill", prompting him to suggest Tyson be included in the upcoming Nintendo Entertainment System port of the Punch-Out!! arcade game. In 1987, Nintendo released Mike Tyson's Punch-Out!!, which was well received and sold more than a million copies. Tyson had three fights in 1988. He faced Larry Holmes on January 22, 1988, and defeated the legendary former champion by KO in the fourth round. This was the only knockout loss Holmes had in 75 professional bouts. In March, Tyson then fought contender Tony Tubbs in Tokyo, Japan, fitting in an easy second-round TKO victory amid promotional and marketing work. On June 27, 1988, Tyson faced Michael Spinks. Spinks, who had taken the heavyweight championship from Larry Holmes via fifteen-round decision in 1985, had not lost his title in the ring but was not recognized as champion by the major boxing organizations. Holmes had previously given up all but the IBF title, and that was eventually stripped from Spinks after he elected to fight Gerry Cooney (winning by TKO in the fifth round) rather than IBF Number 1 Contender Tony Tucker, as the Cooney fight provided him a larger purse. However, Spinks did become the lineal champion by beating Holmes and many (including Ring magazine) considered him to have a legitimate claim to being the true heavyweight champion. The bout was, at the time, the richest fight in history and expectations were very high. Boxing pundits were predicting a titanic battle of styles, with Tyson's aggressive infighting conflicting with Spinks's skillful out-boxing and footwork. The fight ended after 91 seconds when Tyson knocked Spinks out in the first round; many consider this to be the pinnacle of Tyson's fame and boxing ability. During this period, Tyson's problems outside the ring were also beginning to emerge. His marriage to Robin Givens was heading for divorce, and his future contract was being fought over by Don King and Bill Cayton. In late 1988, Tyson parted with manager Bill Cayton and fired longtime trainer Kevin Rooney, the man many credit for honing Tyson's craft after the death of D'Amato. Following Rooney's departure, critics alleged that Tyson began to show less head movement and combination punching. In 1989, Tyson had only two fights amid personal turmoil. He faced the British boxer Frank Bruno in February. Bruno managed to stun Tyson at the end of the first round, although Tyson went on to knock Bruno out in the fifth round. Tyson then knocked out Carl "The Truth" Williams in the first round in July. By 1990, Tyson seemed to have lost direction, and his personal life was in disarray amidst reports of less vigorous training prior to the Buster Douglas match. In a fight on February 11, 1990, he lost the undisputed championship to Douglas in Tokyo. Tyson was a huge betting favorite; indeed, the Mirage, the only casino to put out odds for the fight, made Tyson a 42/1 favorite. Tyson failed to find a way past Douglas's quick jab that had a 12-inch (30 cm) reach advantage over his own. Tyson did catch Douglas with an uppercut in the eighth round and knocked him to the floor, but Douglas recovered sufficiently to hand Tyson a heavy beating in the subsequent two rounds. After the fight, the Tyson camp would complain that the count was slow and that Douglas had taken longer than ten seconds to get back on his feet. Just 35 seconds into the tenth round, Douglas unleashed a brutal uppercut, followed by a four-punch combination of hooks that knocked Tyson down for the first time in his career. He was counted out by referee Octavio Meyran. The knockout victory by Douglas over Tyson, the previously undefeated "baddest man on the planet" and arguably the most feared boxer in professional boxing at that time, has been described as one of the most shocking upsets in modern sports history. Despite the shocking loss, Tyson has said that losing to Douglas was the greatest moment of his career: "I needed that fight to make me a better person and fighter. I have a broader perspective of myself and boxing." After the loss, Tyson recovered with first-round knockouts of Henry Tillman and Alex Stewart in his next two fights. Tyson's victory over Tillman, the 1984 Olympic heavyweight gold medalist, enabled Tyson to avenge his amateur losses at Tillman's hands. These bouts set up an elimination match for another shot at the undisputed world heavyweight championship, which Evander Holyfield had taken from Douglas in his first defense of the title. Tyson, who was the number one contender, faced number two contender Donovan "Razor" Ruddock on March 18, 1991, in Las Vegas. Ruddock was seen as the most dangerous heavyweight around and was thought of as one of the hardest punching heavyweights. Tyson and Ruddock went back and forth for most of the fight, until referee Richard Steele controversially stopped the fight during the seventh round in favor of Tyson. This decision infuriated the fans in attendance, sparking a post-fight melee in the audience. The referee had to be escorted from the ring. Tyson and Ruddock met again on June 28 that year, with Tyson knocking down Ruddock twice and winning a twelve-round unanimous decision 113–109, 114–108, and 114–108. A fight between Tyson and Holyfield for the undisputed championship was scheduled for November 8, 1991, at Caesars Palace in Las Vegas, but Tyson pulled out after sustaining a rib cartilage injury during training. Tyson was arrested in July 1991 for the rape of 18-year-old Desiree Washington in an Indianapolis hotel room. Tyson's rape trial at the Marion County superior court lasted from January 26 to February 10, 1992. Partial corroboration of Washington's story came via testimony from Tyson's chauffeur who confirmed Desiree Washington's state of shock after the incident. Further testimony came from the emergency room physician who examined Washington more than 24 hours after the incident and confirmed that Washington's physical condition was consistent with rape. Under lead defense lawyer Vincent J. Fuller's direct examination, Tyson claimed that everything had taken place with Washington's full consent and he claimed not to have forced himself upon her. When he was cross-examined by lead prosecutor Gregory Garrison, Tyson denied claims that he had misled Washington and insisted that she wanted to have sex with him. Tyson was convicted on the rape charge on February 10, 1992, after the jury deliberated for nearly 10 hours. Alan Dershowitz, acting as Tyson's counsel, filed an appeal urging error of law in the Court's exclusion of evidence of the victim's past sexual conduct (known as the Rape Shield Law), the exclusion of three potential defense witnesses, and the lack of a jury instruction on honest and reasonable mistake of fact. The Indiana Court of Appeals ruled against Tyson in a 2–1 vote. The Indiana Supreme Court let the lower court opinion stand due to a 2–2 split in its review. The tie vote was due to the fact that the Chief Justice, Randall T. Shepard, recused himself from the case. The Chief Justice later revealed he did so because of a heated argument between his wife and Dershowitz at a Yale Law School reunion concerning the case. On March 26, 1992, Tyson was sentenced to six years in prison along with four years of probation. He was assigned to the Indiana Youth Center (now the Plainfield Correctional Facility) in April 1992, and he was released in March 1995 after serving less than three years of the sentence. He left with prison tattoos of tennis player Arthur Ashe and Chinese communist leader Mao Zedong; Tyson also dates his tattoo of Marxist revolutionary Che Guevara to this time. Due to his conviction, Tyson required to register as a Tier II sex offender under federal law. After being paroled from prison, Tyson easily won his comeback bouts against Peter McNeeley and Buster Mathis Jr. Tyson's first comeback fight was marketed as "He's back!" and grossed more than US$96 million worldwide, including a United States record $63 million for PPV television. The viewing of the fight was purchased by 1.52 million homes, setting both PPV viewership and revenue records. The 89-second fight elicited criticism that Tyson's management lined up "tomato cans" to ensure easy victories for his return. TV Guide included the Tyson–McNeeley fight in their list of the 50 Greatest TV Sports Moments of All Time in 1998. Tyson regained one belt by easily winning the WBC title against Frank Bruno in March 1996. It was the second fight between the two, and Tyson knocked out Bruno in the third round. In 1996, Lennox Lewis turned down a $13.5 million guarantee to fight Tyson. This would've been Lewis's highest fight purse to date. Lewis then accepted $4 million from Don King to step aside and allow Tyson to fight Bruce Seldon for an expected $30 million instead with the intention that if Tyson defeated Seldon, he would fight Lewis next. Tyson added the WBA belt by defeating champion Seldon in the first round in September that year. Seldon was severely criticized and mocked in the popular press for seemingly collapsing to innocuous punches from Tyson. Tyson attempted to defend the WBA title against Evander Holyfield, who was in the fourth fight of his own comeback. Holyfield had retired in 1994 following the loss of his championship to Michael Moorer. It was said that Don King and others saw former champion Holyfield, who was 34 at the time of the fight and a huge underdog, as a washed-up fighter. On November 9, 1996, in Las Vegas, Nevada, Tyson faced Holyfield in a title bout dubbed "Finally". In a surprising turn of events, Holyfield, who was given virtually no chance to win by numerous commentators, defeated Tyson by TKO when referee Mitch Halpern stopped the bout in round eleven. Holyfield became the second boxer to win a heavyweight championship belt three times. Holyfield's victory was marred by allegations from Tyson's camp of Holyfield's frequent headbutts during the bout. Although the headbutts were ruled accidental by the referee, they would become a point of contention in the rematch. Tyson and Holyfield fought again on June 28, 1997. Originally, Halpern was supposed to be the referee, but after Tyson's camp protested, Halpern stepped aside in favor of Mills Lane. The highly anticipated rematch was dubbed The Sound and the Fury, and it was held at the Las Vegas MGM Grand Garden Arena, site of the first bout. It was a lucrative event, drawing even more attention than the first bout and grossing $100 million. Tyson received $30 million and Holyfield $35 million, the highest paid professional boxing purses until 2007. The fight was purchased by 1.99 million households, setting a pay-per-view buy rate record that stood until May 5, 2007, being surpassed by Oscar De La Hoya vs. Floyd Mayweather Jr. Soon to become one of the most controversial events in modern sports, the fight was stopped at the end of the third round, with Tyson disqualified for biting Holyfield on both ears. The first time Tyson bit him, the match was temporarily stopped. Referee Mills Lane deducted two points from Tyson and the fight resumed. However, after the match resumed, Tyson bit him again, resulting in his disqualification, and Holyfield won the match. The first bite was severe enough to remove a piece of Holyfield's right ear, which was found on the ring floor after the fight. Tyson later stated that his actions were retaliation for Holyfield repeatedly headbutting him without penalty. In the confusion that followed the ending of the bout and announcement of the decision, a near riot occurred in the arena and several people were injured. Tyson Holyfield II was the first heavyweight title fight in over 50 years to end in a disqualification. As a fallout from the incident, US$3 million was immediately withheld from Tyson's $30-million purse by the Nevada state boxing commission (the most it could legally hold back at the time). Two days after the fight, Tyson issued a statement, apologizing to Holyfield for his actions and asked not to be banned for life over the incident. Tyson was roundly condemned in the news media but was not without defenders. Novelist and commentator Katherine Dunn wrote a column that criticized Holyfield's sportsmanship in the controversial bout and charged the news media with being biased against Tyson. On July 9, 1997, Tyson's boxing license was rescinded by the Nevada State Athletic Commission in a unanimous voice vote; he was also fined US$3 million and ordered to pay the legal costs of the hearing. As most state athletic commissions honor sanctions imposed by other states, this effectively made Tyson unable to box in the United States. The revocation was not permanent, as the commission voted 4–1 to restore Tyson's boxing license on October 18, 1998. During his time away from boxing in 1998, Tyson made a guest appearance at WrestleMania XIV as an enforcer for the main event match between Shawn Michaels and Steve Austin. During this time, Tyson was also an unofficial member of Michaels's stable, D-Generation X. Tyson was paid $3 million for being guest enforcer of the match at WrestleMania XIV. "I'm the best ever. I'm the most brutal and vicious, the most ruthless champion there has ever been. There's no one can stop me. Lennox is a conqueror? No! I'm Alexander! He's no Alexander! I'm the best ever. There's never been anyone as ruthless. I'm Sonny Liston. I'm Jack Dempsey. There's no one like me. I'm from their cloth. There is no one who can match me. My style is impetuous, my defense is impregnable, and I'm just ferocious. I want your heart! I want to eat his children! Praise be to Allah!"  —Tyson's post-fight interview after knocking out Lou Savarese 38 seconds into the bout in June 2000. In January 1999, Tyson returned to the ring for a match against the South African Francois Botha. This match also ended in controversy. While Botha initially controlled the fight, Tyson allegedly attempted to break Botha's arms during a tie-up and both boxers were cautioned by the referee in the ill-tempered bout. Botha was ahead on points on all scorecards and was confident enough to mock Tyson as the fight continued. Nonetheless, Tyson landed a straight right hand in the fifth round that knocked out Botha. Critics noticed Tyson stopped using the bob and weave defense altogether following this return. Promoting the fight on Secaucus, New Jersey television station WWOR-TV, Tyson launched into an expletive-laden tirade that forced sports anchor Russ Salzberg to cut the interview short. Legal problems arose with Tyson once again. On February 5, 1999, Tyson was sentenced to a year's imprisonment, fined $5,000, and ordered to serve two years probation along with undergoing 200 hours of community service for assaulting two motorists after a traffic accident on August 31, 1998. He served nine months of that sentence. After his release, he fought Orlin Norris on October 23, 1999. Tyson knocked down Norris with a left hook thrown after the bell sounded to end the first round. Norris injured his knee when he went down and said that he was unable to continue. Consequently, the bout was ruled a no contest. In 2000, Tyson had three fights. The first match in January was staged at the MEN Arena in Manchester, England against Julius Francis. Following controversy as to whether Tyson was allowed into the country, he took four minutes to knock out Francis, ending the bout in the second round. He also fought Lou Savarese in June 2000 in Glasgow, winning in the first round; the fight lasted only 38 seconds. Tyson continued punching after the referee had stopped the fight, knocking the referee to the floor as he tried to separate the boxers. It was after this fight that Tyson called out Lennox Lewis with his post fight speech proclaiming that he was the "best ever" and he was "Sonny Listion and Jack Dempsey, cut from their cloth." In October, Tyson fought the similarly controversial Andrew Golota, winning in round three after Gołota was unable to continue due to a broken cheekbone, concussion, and neck injury. The result was later changed to no contest after Tyson refused to take a pre-fight drug test and then tested positive for marijuana in a post-fight urine test. Tyson fought only once in 2001, beating Brian Nielsen in Copenhagen by TKO in the seventh round. Tyson once again had the opportunity to fight for a heavyweight championship in 2002. Lennox Lewis held the WBC, IBF, IBO and Lineal titles at the time. As promising fighters, Tyson and Lewis had sparred at a training camp in a meeting arranged by Cus D'Amato in 1984. Tyson sought to fight Lewis in Nevada for a more lucrative box-office venue, but the Nevada Boxing Commission refused him a license to box as he was facing possible sexual assault charges at the time. Two years prior to the bout, Tyson had made several inflammatory remarks to Lewis in an interview following the Savarese fight. The remarks included the statement "I want your heart, I want to eat your children." On January 22, 2002, the two boxers and their entourages were involved in a brawl at a New York press conference to publicize the planned event. A few weeks later, the Nevada State Athletic Commission refused to grant Tyson a license for the fight, and the promoters had to make alternative arrangements. After multiple states balked at granting Tyson a license, the fight eventually occurred on June 8 at the Pyramid Arena in Memphis, Tennessee. Lewis dominated the fight and knocked out Tyson with a right hand in the eighth round. Tyson was respectful after the fight and praised Lewis on his victory. This fight was the highest-grossing event in pay-per-view history at that time, generating $106.9 million from 1.95 million buys in the US. In another Memphis fight on February 22, 2003, Tyson beat fringe contender Clifford Etienne 49 seconds into round one. The pre-fight was marred by rumors of Tyson's lack of fitness. Some said that he took time out from training to party in Las Vegas and get a new facial tattoo. This eventually proved to be Tyson's final professional victory in the ring. In August 2003, after years of financial struggles, Tyson finally filed for bankruptcy. Tyson earned over $30 million for several of his fights and $300 million during his career. At the time, the media reported that he had approximately $23 million in debt. On August 13, 2003, Tyson entered the ring for a face-to-face confrontation against K-1 fighter Bob Sapp immediately after Sapp's win against Kimo Leopoldo in Las Vegas. K-1 signed Tyson to a contract with the hopes of making a fight happen between the two, but Tyson's felony history made it impossible for him to obtain a visa to enter Japan, where the fight would have been most profitable. Alternative locations were discussed, but the fight ultimately did not take place. On July 30, 2004, Tyson had a match against British boxer Danny Williams in another comeback fight, and this time, staged in Louisville, Kentucky. Tyson dominated the opening two rounds. The third round was even, with Williams getting in some clean blows and also a few illegal ones, for which he was penalized. In the fourth round, Tyson was unexpectedly knocked out. After the fight, it was revealed that Tyson was trying to fight on one leg, having torn a ligament in his other knee in the first round. This was Tyson's fifth career defeat. He underwent surgery for the ligament four days after the fight. His manager, Shelly Finkel, claimed that Tyson was unable to throw significant right-hand punches since he had a knee injury. On June 11, 2005, Tyson quit before the start of the seventh round in a close bout against journeyman Kevin McBride. In the 2008 documentary Tyson, he stated that he fought McBride for a payday, that he did not anticipate winning, that he was in poor physical condition and fed up with taking boxing seriously. After losing three of his last four fights, Tyson said he would quit boxing because he felt he had lost his passion for the sport. In 2000 Tyson dismissed everyone who was working for him and enlisted new accountants, who prepared a statement showing he started the year $3.3 million in debt but earned $65.7 million. In August 2007, Tyson pleaded guilty to drug possession and driving under the influence in an Arizona court, which stemmed from an arrest in December where authorities said Tyson, who has a long history of legal contentions, admitted to using cocaine that day and to being addicted to the drug. In his 2013 autobiography Undisputed Truth, Tyson admitted to using the urine of his then wife Monica Turner to pass doping tests. He was married to Turner from 1997 to 2003. He also used his infant's urine for the same purpose. In March 2024, it was announced that Tyson would be making his ring return against Jake Paul in a heavyweight bout on July 20, 2024, at AT&T Stadium in Arlington, Texas. To help pay off his debts, Tyson announced he would be doing a series of exhibition bouts, calling it Tyson's World Tour. For his first bout, Tyson returned to the ring in 2006 for a four-round exhibition against journeyman heavyweight Corey Sanders in Youngstown, Ohio. Tyson, without headgear at 5 ft 10 in and 216 pounds, was in quality shape, but far from his prime against Sanders, at 6 ft 6 in who wore headgear. Tyson appeared to be "holding back" in the exhibition to prevent an early end to the "show". "If I don't get out of this financial quagmire there's a possibility I may have to be a punching bag for somebody. The money I make isn't going to help my bills from a tremendous standpoint, but I'm going to feel better about myself. I'm not going to be depressed", explained Tyson about the reasons for his "comeback". After the bout was poorly received by fans the remainder of the tour was canceled. It was announced in July 2020 that Tyson had signed a contract to face former four-division world champion, Roy Jones Jr., in an eight-round exhibition fight. Mixed martial arts coach Rafael Cordeiro was selected to be Tyson's trainer and cornerman. The bout—officially sanctioned by the California State Athletic Commission (CSAC)—was initially scheduled to take place on September 12 at the Dignity Health Sports Park in Carson, California, however, the date was pushed back to November 28 in order to maximize revenue for the event. The fight went the full 8 rounds, and was declared a draw. The fight was a split draw and the three judges scored the fight as follows: Chad Dawson (76–76 draw), Christy Martin (79–73 for Tyson), and Vinny Pazienza (76–80 for Jones). In July 2020, Mike Tyson announced the creation of Mike Tyson's Legends Only League. Tyson formed the league in partnership with Sophie Watts and her company, Eros Innovations. The league provides retired professional athletes the opportunity to compete in their respective sport. On November 28, 2020, Mike Tyson fought Roy Jones Jr. at the Staples Center in the first event produced under Legends Only League. The event received largely positive reviews and was the highest selling PPV event of 2020, which ranks in the Top-10 for PPV purchased events all-time. Tyson was The Ring magazine's Fighter of the Year in 1986 and 1988. A 1998 ranking of "The Greatest Heavyweights of All-Time" by The Ring magazine placed Tyson at number 14 on the list. Despite criticism of facing underwhelming competition during his run as champion, Tyson's knockout power and intimidation factor made him the sport's most dynamic box-office draw. According to Douglas Quenqua of The New York Times, "The [1990s] began with Mike Tyson, considered by many to be the last great heavyweight champion, losing his title to the little-known Buster Douglas. Seven years later, Mr. Tyson bit Evander Holyfield's ear in a heavyweight champion bout—hardly a proud moment for the sport." He is remembered for his attire of black trunks, black shoes with no socks, and a plain white towel fit around his neck in place of a traditional robe, as well as his habit of rapidly pacing the ring before the start of a fight. In his prime, Tyson rarely took a step back and had never been knocked down or seriously challenged. According to Martial Arts World Report, it gave Tyson an Honorable Mention in its Ten Greatest Heavyweights of All Time rather than a ranking because longevity is a factor and the peak period of Tyson's career lasted only about 5 years. BoxRec currently ranks Tyson at number 20 among the greatest boxers that had their last fight at heavyweight. In The Ring magazine's list of the 80 Best Fighters of the Last 80 Years, released in 2002, Tyson was ranked at number 72. He is ranked number 16 on The Ring magazine's 2003 list of 100 greatest punchers of all time. Tyson has defeated 11 boxers for the world heavyweight title, the seventh-most in history. On June 12, 2011, Tyson was inducted to the International Boxing Hall of Fame alongside legendary Mexican champion Julio César Chávez, light welterweight champion Kostya Tszyu, and actor/screenwriter Sylvester Stallone. In 2011, Bleacher Report omitted Tyson from its list of top 10 heavyweights, saying that "Mike Tyson is not a top 10 heavyweight. He killed the fighters he was supposed to beat, but when he fought another elite fighter, he always lost. I'm not talking about some of those B-level fighters he took a belt from. I'm talking about the handful of good boxers he fought throughout his career." In 2013, Tyson was inducted into the Nevada Boxing Hall of Fame and headlined the induction ceremony. Tyson was inducted into the Southern Nevada Hall of Fame in 2015 along with four other inductees with ties to Southern Nevada. Tyson reflected on his strongest opponents in ten categories for a 2014 interview with The Ring magazine, including best jab, best defense, fastest hands, fastest feet, best chin, smartest, strongest, best puncher, best boxer, and best overall. In 2017, The Ring magazine ranked Tyson as number 9 of 20 heavyweight champions based on a poll of panelists that included trainers, matchmakers, media, historians, and boxers, including: Trainers: Teddy Atlas, Pat Burns, Virgil Hunter, and Don Turner Matchmakers: Eric Bottjer, Don Chargin, Don Elbaum, Bobby Goodman, Ron Katz, Mike Marchionte, Russell Peltz, and Bruce Trampler. Media: Al Bernstein, Ron Borges, Gareth A Davies, Norm Frauenheim, Jerry Izenberg, Harold Lederman, Paulie Malignaggi, Dan Rafael, and Michael Rosenthal Historians: Craig Hamilton, Steve Lott, Don McRae, Bob Mee, Clay Moyle, Adam Pollack, and Randy Roberts Boxers: Lennox Lewis and Mike Tyson participated in the poll, but neither fighter ranked himself. Instead, a weighted average from the other panelists was assigned to their respective slots on their ballots. In 2020, Bill Caplan of The Ring magazine listed Tyson as number 17 of the 20 greatest heavyweights of all time. Tyson spoke with The Ring magazine in 2020 about his six greatest victories, those over Trevor Berbick, Pinklon Thomas, Tony Tucker, Tyrell Biggs, Larry Holmes, and Michael Spinks. In 2020, CBS Sports boxing experts Brian Campbell and Brent Brookhouse ranked the top 10 heavyweights of the last 50 years and Tyson was ranked number 7. In an interview with USA Today published on June 3, 2005, Tyson said, "My whole life has been a waste – I've been a failure." He continued: "I just want to escape. I'm really embarrassed with myself and my life. I want to be a missionary. I think I could do that while keeping my dignity without letting people know they chased me out of the country. I want to get this part of my life over as soon as possible. In this country nothing good is going to come of me. People put me so high; I wanted to tear that image down." Tyson began to spend much of his time tending to his 350 pigeons in Paradise Valley, an upscale enclave near Phoenix, Arizona. Tyson has stayed in the limelight by promoting various websites and companies. In the past Tyson had shunned endorsements, accusing other athletes of putting on a false front to obtain them. Tyson has held entertainment boxing shows at a casino in Las Vegas and started a tour of exhibition bouts to pay off his numerous debts. In October 2012, Tyson launched the Mike Tyson Cares Foundation. The mission of the Mike Tyson Cares Foundation is to "give kids a fighting chance" with innovative centers that provide for the comprehensive needs of kids from broken homes. In August 2013, Tyson teamed up with Acquinity Sports to form Iron Mike Productions, a boxing promotions company. In September 2013, Tyson was featured on a six-episode television series on Fox Sports 1 that documented his personal and private life entitled Being: Mike Tyson. In November 2013, Tyson's Undisputed Truth was published, which appeared on The New York Times Best Seller list. At the Golden Podium Awards Ceremony, Tyson received the Sportel Special Prize for the best autobiography. In May 2017, Tyson published his second book, Iron Ambition, which details his time with trainer and surrogate father Cus D'Amato. In February 2018, Tyson attended the international mixed martial arts (MMA) tournament in the Russian city of Chelyabinsk. Tyson said: "As I have travelled all over the country of Russia I have realised that the people are very sensitive and kind. But most Americans do not have any experience of that." On May 12, 2020, Tyson posted a video on his Instagram of him training again. At the end of the video, Tyson hinted at a return to boxing by saying, "I'm back". On May 23, 2020, at All Elite Wrestling's Double or Nothing, Tyson helped Cody defeat Lance Archer alongside Jake Roberts and presented him the inaugural AEW TNT Championship. Tyson alongside Henry Cejudo, Rashad Evans, and Vitor Belfort appeared on the May 27 episode of AEW Dynamite facing off against Chris Jericho and his stable The Inner Circle. Tyson returned to AEW on the April 7, 2021, episode of Dynamite and helped Jericho from being attacked by The Pinnacle, beating down Shawn Spears in the process. He was the special guest enforcer on the April 14 episode of Dynamite for a match between Jericho and Dax Harwood of The Pinnacle, a preview of the upcoming Inner Circle vs. Pinnacle match at Blood and Guts. Tyson made an extended cameo appearance in the Telugu-Hindi movie Liger, which released on August 25, 2022. Tyson resides in Seven Hills, Nevada. He has been married three times, and has seven children, one deceased, with three women; in addition to his biological children, Tyson includes his second wife's oldest daughter as one of his own. Tyson married actress Robin Givens on February 7, 1988, at Holy Angels Catholic Church during a traditional ceremony in Chicago. Givens was known at the time for her role on the sitcom Head of the Class. Tyson's marriage to Givens was especially tumultuous, with allegations of violence, spousal abuse, and mental instability on Tyson's part. Matters came to a head when Tyson and Givens gave a joint interview with Barbara Walters on the ABC TV newsmagazine show 20/20 in September 1988, in which Givens described life with Tyson as "torture, pure hell, worse than anything I could possibly imagine." Givens also described Tyson as "manic depressive" – which was later confirmed by doctors – on national television while Tyson looked on with an intent and calm expression. A month later, Givens announced that she was seeking a divorce from the allegedly abusive Tyson, with the two officially separating on February 14, 1989. According to the book Fire and Fear: The Inside Story of Mike Tyson, Tyson admitted that he punched Givens and stated, "that was the best punch I've ever thrown in my entire life." Tyson claimed that the book was "filled with inaccuracies." Tyson and Givens had no children, but she reported having had a miscarriage; Tyson claimed that she was never pregnant and only used that to get him to marry her. During their marriage, the couple lived in a mansion in Bernardsville, New Jersey. Tyson's second marriage was to Monica Turner from April 19, 1997, to January 14, 2003. At the time of the divorce filing, Turner worked as a pediatric resident at Georgetown University Medical Center in Washington, D.C. She is the sister of Michael Steele, the former Lieutenant Governor of Maryland and former Republican National Committee chairman. Turner filed for divorce from Tyson in January 2002, claiming that he committed adultery during their five-year marriage, an act that "has neither been forgiven nor condoned." The couple had two children; son Amir and Ramsey who self-identifies as non-binary. On May 25, 2009, Tyson's four-year-old daughter Exodus was found by her seven-year-old brother Miguel unconscious and tangled in a cord, dangling from an exercise treadmill. The child's mother, Sol Xochitl, untangled her, administered CPR and called for medical attention. Tyson, who was in Las Vegas at the time of the incident, traveled back to Phoenix to be with her. She died of her injuries on May 26, 2009. Eleven days after his daughter's death, Tyson wed for the third time, to longtime girlfriend Lakiha "Kiki" Spicer, age 32, exchanging vows on Saturday, June 6, 2009, in a short, private ceremony at the La Bella Wedding Chapel at the Las Vegas Hilton. They have two children; daughter Milan and son Morocco. Raised as a Catholic, Tyson has stated that he converted to Islam before entering prison and that he made no efforts to correct what was reported in the media, although it was falsely reported that he converted to Islam during his time in prison and adopted the Muslim name Malik Abdul Aziz; some sources report it as Malik Shabazz. Tyson never changed his given name to an Islamic one, despite the rumors. In November 2013, Tyson stated "the more I look into the churches and mosques for god, the more I start seeing the devil". But, just a month later, in a December 2013 interview with Fox News, Tyson said that he is very grateful to be a Muslim and that he needs Allah in his life. In the same interview Tyson talked about his progress with sobriety and how being in the company of good people has made him want to be a better and more humble person. He first completed the Islamic pilgrimage Umrah in July 2010 and more recently in December 2022 accompanied by DJ Khaled, a Palestinian American Muslim. In March 2011, Tyson appeared on The Ellen DeGeneres Show to discuss his new Animal Planet reality series Taking On Tyson. In the interview with DeGeneres, Tyson discussed some of the ways he had improved his life in the past two years, including sober living and a vegan diet. However, in August 2013 he admitted publicly that he had lied about his sobriety and was on the verge of death from alcoholism. Tyson also revealed that he is no longer vegan, stating, "I was a vegan for four years but not anymore. I eat chicken every now and then. I should be a vegan. [No red meat] at all, no way! I would be very sick if I ate red meat. That's probably why I was so crazy before." In 2015, Tyson announced that he was supporting Donald Trump's presidential candidacy. On December 29, 2006, Tyson was arrested in Scottsdale, Arizona, on suspicion of DUI and felony drug possession; he nearly crashed into a police SUV shortly after leaving a nightclub. According to a police probable-cause statement, filed in Maricopa County Superior Court, "[Tyson] admitted to using [drugs] today and stated he is an addict and has a problem." Tyson pleaded not guilty on January 22, 2007, in Maricopa County Superior Court to felony drug possession and paraphernalia possession counts and two misdemeanor counts of driving under the influence of drugs. On February 8 he checked himself into an inpatient treatment program for "various addictions" while awaiting trial on the drug charges. On September 24, 2007, Tyson pleaded guilty to possession of cocaine and driving under the influence. He was convicted of these charges in November 2007 and sentenced to 24 hours in jail. After his release, he was ordered to serve three years' probation and complete 360 hours of community service. Prosecutors had requested a year-long jail sentence, but the judge praised Tyson for seeking help with his drug problems. On November 11, 2009, Tyson was arrested after getting into a scuffle at Los Angeles International airport with a photographer. No charges were filed. In September 2011, Tyson gave an interview in which he made comments about former Alaska governor Sarah Palin including crude and violent descriptions of interracial sex. These comments were reprinted on The Daily Caller website. Journalist Greta van Susteren criticized Tyson and The Daily Caller over the comments, which she described as "smut" and "violence against women". On April 20, 2022, on a JetBlue flight from San Francisco to Florida, Tyson repeatedly punched a male passenger who was harassing him, including throwing water on Tyson; he did not face criminal charges. In 2023, an unnamed woman filed a $5 million lawsuit against Tyson, accusing him of raping her in his limousine in the early 90s. She accused Tyson of kissing her several times before pulling off her pants and raping her, despite repeatedly telling him to stop. The woman claims to have experienced "guilt, loss of self-esteem, shame, embarrassment, sadness, anger, depression, anxiety, violent tendencies, drug and alcohol addiction and confusion", as well as inability "to maintain and/or develop healthy relationships with men or other people in general". In November 2023, Tyson found himself amidst criticism and rumors regarding his alleged donation to the Israeli Defense Forces after he was photographed attending a November 13 event sponsored by Friends of the IDF (FIDF) to fundraise for the Israel–Hamas war, which seemed to clash with his previous statements about Palestinians. This led to a social media backlash, prompting Tyson to release the following statement on Instagram: "I want to clarify the recent portrayal of an event I attended," he wrote on Thursday. "Invited for a casual evening out by a friend, I was unaware of the arranged fundraiser and no donations were made by me or on my behalf. As a Muslim and human, I support peace. My prayers have been and continue to be with my brothers and sisters." At the height of his fame and career in the late 1980s and throughout the 1990s, Tyson was among the most recognized sports personalities in the world. In addition to his many sporting accomplishments, his outrageous and controversial behavior in the ring and in his private life has kept him in the public eye and in the courtroom. As such, Tyson has been the subject of myriad popular media including movies, television, books and music. He has also been featured in video games and as a subject of parody or satire. Tyson became involved in professional wrestling and has made many cameo appearances in film and television. The film Tyson was released in 1995 and was directed by Uli Edel. It explores the life of Mike Tyson, from the death of his guardian and trainer Cus D'Amato to his rape conviction. Tyson is played by Michael Jai White. In 2006, Tyson appeared as himself in a cameo role in the film Rocky Balboa. Published in 2007, author Joe Layden's book The Last Great Fight: The Extraordinary Tale of Two Men and How One Fight Changed Their Lives Forever, chronicled the lives of Tyson and Douglas before and after their heavyweight championship fight. In 2008, the documentary Tyson premiered at the annual Cannes Film Festival in France. Tyson played a fictionalized version of himself in the 2009 film The Hangover. After debuting a one-man show in Las Vegas, Tyson collaborated with film director Spike Lee and brought the show to Broadway in August 2012. In February 2013, Tyson took his one-man show Mike Tyson: Undisputed Truth on a 36-city, three-month national tour. Tyson talks about his personal and professional life on stage. The one-man show was aired on HBO on November 16, 2013. In 2013, he appeared in an episode of Law and Order: SVU as a survivor of child-abuse awaiting execution for murder. He is the titular character in Mike Tyson Mysteries, which started airing on October 27, 2014, on Adult Swim. In the animated series, Tyson voices a fictionalized version of himself, solving mysteries in the style of Scooby-Doo. In early March 2015, Tyson appeared on the track "Iconic" on Madonna's album Rebel Heart. Tyson says some lines at the beginning of the song. In late March 2015, Ip Man 3 was announced. With Donnie Yen reprising his role as the titular character, Bruce Lee's martial arts master, Ip Man, while Mike Tyson has been confirmed to join the cast. Principal photography began on March 25, 2015, and was premiered in Hong Kong on December 16, 2015. In January 2017, Tyson launched his YouTube channel with Shots Studios, a comedy video and comedy music production company with young digital stars like Lele Pons and Rudy Mancuso. Tyson's channel includes parody music videos and comedy sketches. He hosts the podcast Hotboxin' with Mike Tyson. In October 2017, Tyson was announced as the new face of Australian car servicing franchise Ultra Tune. He took over from Jean-Claude van Damme in fronting television commercials for the brand, and the first advert aired in January 2018 during the Australian Open. However, the ad was quickly attacked, even leading Tyson himself to describe it as "a little sexist." A joint Mainland China-Hong Kong-directed film on female friendship titled Girls 2: Girls vs Gangsters (Vietnamese: Girls 2: Những Cô Gái và Găng Tơ) that was shot earlier from July–August 2016 at several locations around Vietnam was released in March 2018, featuring Tyson as "Dragon". Tiki Lau released a dance music single, "Mike Tyson", in October 2020, which includes vocals from Tyson. In 2021, Mike's Hard Lemonade Seltzer featured ads with Tyson. In March 2021, it was announced that Jamie Foxx will star in, and also executive produce the official scripted series Tyson. The limited series will be directed by Antoine Fuqua and executive produced by Martin Scorsese. A two-part documentary series titled Mike Tyson: The Knockout premiered on May 25, 2021, on ABC. Tyson and his family appeared in the 300th episode of Hell's Kitchen as VIP guests in the Blue Team's kitchen during Season 20's opening dinner service that aired on June 7, 2021. On August 25, 2022, Hulu released a biographical drama limited series about Tyson, entitled Mike, depicting his life and career. On August 6, 2022, Tyson spoke out about the series, saying, "Hulu stole my story" and telling the service that "I'm not a n****r you can sell on the auction block." Select pay-per-view boxing buy rates at American closed-circuit theater television venues: The Central State University in Wilberforce, Ohio, in 1989 awarded Tyson an honorary Doctorate in Humane Letters: "Mike demonstrates that hard work, determination and perseverance can enable one to overcome any obstacles." Ring magazine Prospect of the Year (1985) 2× Ring magazine Fighter of the Year (1986, 1988) 2× Sugar Ray Robinson Award winner (1987, 1989) BBC Sports Personality of the Year Overseas Personality (1989) International Boxing Hall of Fame inductee (Class of 2011) "Guirlande d'Honneur" by the FICTS (Milan, 2010) WWE Hall of Fame (Class of 2012) Pro Wrestling Illustrated Faction of the Year (2021) – with The Inner Circle List of celebrities who own cannabis businesses List of undisputed boxing champions List of heavyweight boxing champions World heavyweight boxing championship records and statistics Sources vary on his height, with some listing him as 5 ft 11+1⁄2 in (182 cm). Lewis, Darren (November 15, 2005). "Mike Tyson Exclusive: No More Mr Bad Ass". The Daily Mirror. Archived from the original on May 27, 2014. Retrieved April 25, 2014. J, Jenna (August 22, 2013). "Mike Tyson: 'I always thought of myself as a big guy, as a giant, I never thought I was five foot ten'". Doghouse Boxing. Archived from the original on August 26, 2013. Retrieved April 25, 2014. HBO Sports tale of the tape prior to the Lennox Lewis fight. McIntyre, Jay (September 1, 2014). ""Iron," Mike Tyson – At His Sharpest". Boxingnews24.com. Archived from the original on October 6, 2014. Retrieved September 26, 2014. Boyd, Todd (2008). African Americans and Popular Culture. Santa Barbara, California: ABC-CLIO. p. 235. ISBN 9780313064081. Archived from the original on June 18, 2013. Retrieved September 12, 2012. Eisele, Andrew (2007). "50 Greatest Boxers of All-Time". About.com. Archived from the original on July 7, 2011. Retrieved June 17, 2010. "At only 20 years of age, Mike Tyson became the youngest heavyweight boxing champion of the world". Archived from the original on February 17, 2015. Retrieved March 18, 2016. ""Iron" Mike Tyson". Cyber Boxing Zone. Archived from the original on February 19, 2010. Retrieved November 20, 2016. Mike Tyson vs Buster Douglas, 1990, archived from the original on May 25, 2021, retrieved May 25, 2021 Holley, David (September 16, 2005). "Tyson a Heavyweight in Chechnya". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on September 2, 2017. Retrieved July 21, 2017. "Майк Тайсон в гостях у Рамзана Кадырова (видео)" Archived August 28, 2017, at the Wayback Machine (in Russian). NTV. Gazprom-Media. Retrieved July 21, 2017 "Mike Tyson". biography.com. Archived from the original on August 10, 2016. Retrieved August 8, 2016. Sonny Liston, The Champion That Nobody Wanted. A&E Biography. July 25, 2001. Event occurs at 12:38. Retrieved November 1, 2023 – via Boxing Royalty (YouTube). (former boxer Chuck Wepner speaking) Nobody ever hit me like that guy. Every time he hit you, he broke something. I went through ten rounds with him, and broke my nose, my left cheekbone, and gave me 72 stitches. I was an intimidator until I fought Sonny Liston. "The Top 12 All-Time Most Intimidating Fighters In Boxing History". The Fight City. March 29, 2018. Retrieved July 18, 2023. "BoxRec: Mike Tyson". boxrec.com. Archived from the original on May 21, 2021. Retrieved June 12, 2021. Eisele, Andrew (2003). "Ring Magazine's 100 Greatest Punchers". About.com. Archived from the original on July 7, 2011. Retrieved March 10, 2010. Houston, Graham (2007). "The hardest hitters in heavyweight history". ESPN. Bristol, Connecticut. Archived from the original on May 1, 2009. Retrieved March 10, 2010. "Mike Tyson? Sonny Liston? Who is the scariest boxer ever?". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on October 31, 2015. Retrieved October 31, 2015. "Local Black History Spotlight: Cumberland Hosptial [sic]". myrtleavenue.org. February 20, 2014. Archived from the original on July 17, 2021. Retrieved July 17, 2021. McNeil, William F. (2014). The Rise of Mike Tyson, Heavyweight. Jefferson: McFarland & Company, Inc., Publishers. ISBN 978-1-4766-1802-9. OCLC 890981745. Berkow, Ira (May 21, 2002). "Boxing: Tyson Remains an Object of Fascination". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 3, 2010. Retrieved January 18, 2009. "Tyson's Sister Is Dead at 24". The New York Times. February 22, 1990. Archived from the original on August 28, 2013. Retrieved August 1, 2013. "Mike Tyson Pens Heartbreaking Tribute To His Late Mother: "I Know Nothing About Her"". fromthestage.net. June 7, 2020. Archived from the original on March 12, 2022. Retrieved April 26, 2022. "Mike Tyson: 'I'm ashamed of so many things I've done'". The Guardian. March 21, 2009. Archived from the original on April 22, 2022. Retrieved April 26, 2022. Costello, Mike (December 18, 2013). "Mike Tyson staying clean but still sparring with temptation". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on December 23, 2013. Retrieved December 23, 2013. "Mike Tyson on his one-man Las Vegas act: Raw, revealing, poignant". USA Today. Archived from the original on September 13, 2014. Retrieved September 12, 2014. "Charlotte, North Carolina, Annexation history" (PDF), Charlotte-Mecklenburg Planning Department, archived (PDF) from the original on May 21, 2013, retrieved September 4, 2013 Puma, Mike., Sportscenter Biography: 'Iron Mike' explosive in and out of ring Archived April 7, 2010, at the Wayback Machine, ESPN.com, October 10, 2005. Retrieved March 27, 2007 "Where are they now?". The Charlotte Observer. Archived from the original on November 3, 2014. Retrieved March 3, 2013. Mike Tyson Biography. BookRags. Archived from the original on May 18, 2011. Retrieved May 24, 2008. "Mike Tyson Interview, Details magazine". Archived from the original on July 9, 2010. Retrieved July 6, 2010. Tannenbaum, Rob (December 4, 2013). "Mike Tyson on Ditching Club Life and Getting Sober". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on September 24, 2014. Retrieved September 18, 2014. Jet Magazine. Johnson Publishing Company. 1989. p. 28. Archived from the original on December 8, 2020. Retrieved October 20, 2020. "Sports People: Boxing; A Doctorate for Tyson". The New York Times. April 25, 1989. Archived from the original on December 27, 2007. Retrieved December 15, 2008. Mike Tyson Net Worth Archived June 7, 2014, at the Wayback Machine, NetWorthCity.com. Retrieved May 30, 2014. Mike Tyson Quotes Archived April 4, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. Kjkolb.tripod.com. Retrieved on November 25, 2011. "Mike Tyson". www.ibhof.com. Archived from the original on March 15, 2022. Retrieved January 25, 2022. Foreman and Tyson Book a Doubleheader Archived March 6, 2016, at the Wayback Machine, N.Y. Times article, 1990-05-01, Retrieved on August 10, 2013 "Iron" Mike Tyson Archived February 19, 2010, at the Wayback Machine, Cyberboxingzone.com Boxing record. Retrieved April 27, 2007. Hornfinger, Cus D'Amato Archived September 14, 2010, at the Wayback Machine, SaddoBoxing.com. Retrieved March 27, 2007. Oates, Joyce C., Mike Tyson Archived June 21, 2009, at the Wayback Machine, Life Magazine via author's website, November 22, 1986. Retrieved March 11, 2007. Archives, L. A. Times (July 27, 1986). "Tyson Says Hello, Goodby to Frazier in Round 1". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on September 28, 2023. Retrieved September 22, 2023. "Mike Tyson: Facing a Giant". The Fight Library. March 14, 2024. Pinnington, Samuel., Trevor Berbick – The Soldier of the Cross Archived February 4, 2007, at the Wayback Machine, Britishboxing.net, January 31, 2007. Retrieved March 11, 2007. Houston, Graham. "Which fights will Tyson be remembered for?". ESPN. Archived from the original on October 23, 2008. Retrieved May 17, 2010. Para, Murali., "Iron" Mike Tyson – His Place in History Archived April 18, 2012, at the Wayback Machine, Eastsideboxing.com, September 25. Retrieved April 17, 2007. "The Science of Mike Tyson and Elements of Peek-A-Boo: part II". SugarBoxing.com. February 1, 2014. Archived from the original on September 25, 2015. Retrieved August 14, 2014. Richmann What If Mike Tyson And Kevin Rooney Reunited? Archived March 21, 2011, at the Wayback Machine, Saddoboxing.com, February 24, 2006. Retrieved April 17, 2007. "Mike Tyson's Arching Uppercuts & Leaping Left Hooks Explained". themodernmartialartist.com. Archived from the original on February 18, 2020. Retrieved February 18, 2020. "Boxing's Greatest Weapons Vol.2: Mike Tyson's Uppercut". RingSide Report. Archived from the original on March 14, 2023. Retrieved March 14, 2023. Berger, Phil (1987), "Tyson Unifies W.B.C.-W.B.A. Titles", The New York Times, Sports Desk, Late City Final Edition, Section 5, Page 1, Column 4, March 8, 1987. Bamonte, Bryan (June 10, 2005). "Bad man rising" (PDF). The Daily Iowan. pp. 12, 9. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 24, 2015. Retrieved July 30, 2017. Berger, Phil (1987), "Tyson Retains Title On Knockout In Sixth", The New York Times, Sports Desk, Late City Final Edition, Section 5, Page 1, Column 2, May 31, 1987. Berger, Phil (1987), "Boxing — Tyson Undisputed And Unanimous Titlist", The New York Times, Sports Desk, Late City Final Edition, Section 1, Page 51, Column 1, August 2, 1987. Berger, Phil (1987), "Tyson Retains Title In 7 Rounds", The New York Times, Sports Desk, Late City Final Edition, Section 1, Page 51, Column 1, October 17, 1987. "Profile: Minoru Arakawa". N-Sider. Archived from the original on June 11, 2011. Retrieved October 11, 2011. Berger, Phil (1988), "Tyson Keeps Title With 3 Knockdowns in Fourth", The New York Times, Sports Desk, Late City Final Edition, Section 1, Page 47, Column 5, January 23, 1988. Shapiro, Michael. (1988), "Tubbs's Challenge Was Brief and Sad", The New York Times, Sports Desk, Late City Final Edition, Section A, Page 29, Column 1, March 22, 1988. Jake Donovan (February 16, 2009). "Crowning and Recognizing A Lineal Champion". BoxingScene. Archived from the original on January 18, 2013. Retrieved November 20, 2016. Berger, Phil. (1988), "Tyson Knocks Out Spinks at 1:31 of Round 1", The New York Times, Sports Desk, Late City Final Edition, Section B, Page 7, Column 5, June 28, 1988. Simmons, Bill (June 11, 2002). "Say 'goodbye' to our little friend". ESPN. Archived from the original on July 19, 2016. Retrieved May 21, 2012. Sports People: Boxing; Tyson and Givens: Divorce Is Official Archived April 11, 2008, at the Wayback Machine, AP via New York Times, June 2, 1989. Retrieved April 17, 2007. Sports People: Boxing; King Accuses Cayton Archived April 11, 2008, at the Wayback Machine, The New York Times, January 20, 1989. Retrieved April 17, 2007. Berger, Phil (June 24, 1991). "Tyson Failed to Make Adjustments". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 23, 2015. Retrieved September 4, 2015. Hoffer, Richard (June 24, 1991). "Where's the fire?". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on April 15, 2021. Retrieved April 15, 2021. Bruno vs Tyson Archived August 16, 2014, at the Wayback Machine, BBC TV. Retrieved March 26, 2007. Berger, Phil (1989), "Tyson Stuns Williams With Knockout in 1:33", The New York Times, Sports Desk, Late Edition-Final, Section 1, Page 45, Column 2, July 22, 1989. "The Upset: Buster melts Iron Mike". ESPN. Archived from the original on October 19, 2013. Retrieved February 1, 2013. Kincade, Kevin., "The Moments": Mike Tyson vs Buster Douglas Archived November 30, 2010, at the Wayback Machine, Eastsideboxing.com, July 12, 2005. Retrieved March 26, 2007. Phil, Berger (February 13, 1990). "Tyson Failed to Make Adjustments". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 24, 2013. Retrieved October 22, 2012. Bellfield, Lee., Buster Douglas – Mike Tyson 1990 Archived May 22, 2010, at the Wayback Machine, Saddoboxing.com, February 16, 2006. Retrieved April 25, 2007. Staff, Page 2's List for top upset in sports history Archived June 9, 2009, at the Wayback Machine, ESPN.com, May 23, 2001. Retrieved March 26, 2007. "The top 10 sporting upsets". Herald Sun. Archived from the original on June 2, 2014. Retrieved November 12, 2013. "Tyson's thoughts on loss to Douglas". Thefightcity. February 10, 2020. Archived from the original on September 23, 2020. Retrieved September 15, 2020. Berger, Phil (1990), "Tyson Wins in 1st Round", The New York Times, Sports Desk, Late Edition-Final, Section 8, Page 7, Column 4, June 17, 1990. Berger, Phil (1990), "BOXING; Tyson Scores Round 1 Victory", The New York Times, Sports Desk, Late Edition-Final, Section 8, Page 1, Column 5, December 9, 1990. "Douglas vs Holyfield was the last great heavyweight title fight". The Independent. October 28, 2015. Archived from the original on August 28, 2017. Retrieved September 5, 2017. Bellfield, Lee., March 1991-Mike Tyson vs. Razor Ruddock Archived November 22, 2008, at the Wayback Machine, Saddoboxing.com, March 13, 2005. Retrieved March 15, 2007. Berger, Phil (1991), "Tyson Floors Ruddock Twice and Wins Rematch", The New York Times, Sports Desk, Late Edition-Final, Section 1, Page 29, Column 5, June 29, 1991. "Pasticciaccio Tyson". la Repubblica (in Italian). March 20, 1991. p. 43. Archived from the original on April 9, 2017. Retrieved April 8, 2017. Shipp, E. R. (March 27, 1992). "Tyson Gets 6-Year Prison Term For Rape Conviction in Indiana". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 29, 2017. Retrieved January 26, 2017. Heller, Peter (August 21, 1995). Bad Intentions: The Mike Tyson Story. Da Capo Press. pp. 414–. ISBN 978-0-306-80669-8. Archived from the original on December 8, 2020. Retrieved January 29, 2013. Knappman, Edward W. (1992). Great American Trials: The Mike Tyson Trial. Higganum, Connecticut: New England Publishing Associates Inc. ISBN 1-57859-199-6. Muscatine, Alison (February 11, 1992). "Tyson Found Guilty of Rape, Two Other Charges". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on May 5, 2010. Retrieved March 11, 2007 – via MIT-The Tech. "Tyson v. State — Leagle.com". leagle.com. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved January 27, 2015. "Tyson v. State". Archived from the original on June 11, 2020. Retrieved June 11, 2020. Shipp, E. R. (March 27, 1992). "Tyson Gets 6-Year Prison Term For Rape Conviction in Indiana". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 20, 2010. Retrieved May 12, 2010. "Mike Tyson Assigned To Indiana Youth Center". Orlando Sentinel. April 16, 1992. Archived from the original on October 20, 2011. Retrieved August 27, 2010. Berkow, Ira, Ira (March 26, 1995). "After Three Years in Prison, Tyson Gains His Freedom". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 28, 2017. Retrieved February 11, 2017. Hoffer, Richard (1998). A Savage Business: The Comeback and Comedown of Mike Tyson. New York City: Simon & Schuster. pp. 36, 266. ISBN 9780684809083. OL 689533M. Toback, James (director) (2008). Tyson (Documentary film). Sony Classics. Event occurs at 58:51. "Tyson to register as sex offender". The Daily Telegraph. London, England. April 3, 2002. Archived from the original on August 17, 2018. Retrieved April 4, 2018. "Mike Tyson receives 1 day in jail, 3 years probation". The Arizona Republic. November 19, 2007. Retrieved October 6, 2015. Friess, Steve (April 17, 2015). "One Survivor's Crusade Reveals a Plague of Errors in Nation's Sex Offender Registries". TakePart. Archived from the original on October 7, 2015. Retrieved October 6, 2015. Sports People: Boxing; Record Numbers for Fight Archived April 11, 2008, at the Wayback Machine, AP via New York Times, September 1, 2005. Retrieved March 31, 2007. Sandomir, Richard (1995), "TV Sports; Who Must Tyson Face Next? A Finer Brand of Tomato Can", The New York Times, Sports Desk, Late Edition – Final, Section B, Page 8, Column 1, August 22, 1995. "50 Greatest TV Sports Moments of All Time", TV Guide, July 11, 1998 Bellfield, Lee., March 1996 – Frank Bruno vs. Mike Tyson II Archived February 12, 2008, at the Wayback Machine, Saddoboxing.com, March 18, 2005. Retrieved March 26, 2007. "BOXING;Bronchitis Stops Tyson: Seldon Fight Is Off". The New York Times. July 4, 1996. Archived from the original on August 28, 2017. Retrieved May 3, 2017. Gordon, Randy., Tyson-Seldon 1–1–1–1–1 Archived January 12, 2010, at the Wayback Machine, Cyberboxingzone.com, September 4, 1996. Retrieved March 26, 2007. Cohen, Andrew., Evander Holyfield: God Helps Those Who Help Themselves, What is Enlightenment Magazine, Issue No. 15, 1999. Retrieved March 25, 2007. Archived May 12, 2008, at the Wayback Machine Shetty, Sanjeev., Holyfield makes history Archived April 27, 2010, at the Wayback Machine, BBC Sports, December 26, 2001. Retrieved April 17, 2007. Katsilometes, John., Holyfield knocks fight out of Tyson Archived December 6, 2010, at the Wayback Machine, Las Vegas Review-Journal, November 10, 1996. Retrieved April 18, 2007. Tyson camp objects to Halpern as referee[usurped], AP via Canoe.ca, June 26, 1997. Retrieved April 18, 2007. Tyson: 'I'd bite again' Archived October 12, 2009, at the Wayback Machine, BBC Sports, October 4, 1999. Retrieved April 18, 2007. Lane late replacement, center of action[usurped], AP via Slam! Boxing, June 29, 1997. Retrieved March 9, 2007. Holyfield vs. Tyson – 'fight of the times'[usurped], AP via Slam! Boxing, June 25, 1997. Retrieved March 9, 2007. Dahlberg, Tim. De La Hoya-Mayweather becomes richest fight in boxing history Archived May 12, 2007, at the Wayback Machine, AP via International Herald Tribune, May 9, 2007. Retrieved November 2, 2007. Umstead, R. Thomas (February 26, 2007). "De La Hoya Bout Could Set a PPV Record". Multichannel News. Archived from the original on December 15, 2007. Retrieved March 25, 2007. ESPN25: Sports Biggest Controversies Archived May 27, 2006, at the Wayback Machine, ESPN.com. Retrieved March 9, 2007. Tyson DQd for biting Holyfield[usurped], AP via Slam! Boxing, June 29, 1997. Retrieved March 9, 2007. Buffery, Steve., Champ chomped by crazed Tyson[usurped], The Toronto Sun via Slam! Boxing, June 29, 1997. Retrieved March 9, 2007. Dozens injured in mayhem following bout[usurped], AP via Slam! Boxing, June 29, 1997. Retrieved March 9, 2007. YouTube "Tyson vs Holyfield 2 full fight 18 min. 49 sec" Archived March 12, 2017, at the Wayback Machine Buffery, Steve., Officials may withhold Tyson's money[usurped], The Toronto Sun via Slam! Boxing, June 29, 1997. Retrieved March 9, 2007. The text of Mike Tyson's statement[usurped], AP via Slam! Boxing, July 30, 1997. Retrieved March 9, 2007. Tyson: "I am sorry"[usurped], AP via Slam! Boxing, July 30, 1997. Retrieved March 9, 2007. Dunn, Katherine. Defending Tyson Archived September 16, 2018, at the Wayback Machine, PDXS via cyberboxingzone.com, July 9, 1997. Retrieved April 18, 2007. Tyson banned for life[usurped], AP via Slam! Boxing, July 9, 1997. Retrieved March 10, 2007. Mike Tyson timeline Archived July 16, 2009, at the Wayback Machine, ESPN, January 29, 2002. Retrieved March 9, 2007. Biography for Mike Tyson at IMDb Mike Tyson Archived October 16, 2015, at the Wayback Machine. YouTube (February 4, 2006). Retrieved on November 25, 2011. Rusty Tyson finds the perfect punch Archived March 4, 2006, at the Wayback Machine, BBC News, January 17, 1999. Retrieved March 26, 2007. "Profiles of Mike Tyson". CNN. June 1, 2002. Archived from the original on October 20, 2013. Retrieved September 9, 2013. Tyson Blows His Top At Interview Archived January 10, 2022, at the Wayback Machine, CBS News, January 13, 1999. Retrieved March 23, 2021. Tyson jailed over road rage Archived November 29, 2010, at the Wayback Machine, BBC News, February 6, 1999. Retrieved March 27, 2007. Feour, Royce., No-contest; more trouble Archived December 5, 2010, at the Wayback Machine, Las Vegas Review-Journal, October 24, 1999. Retrieved March 15, 2007. Tyson wastes little time Archived April 17, 2006, at the Wayback Machine, BBC Sport, January 30, 2000. Retrieved March 14, 2007. Tyson fight ends in farce Archived January 27, 2011, at the Wayback Machine, BBC Sport, June 25, 2000. Retrieved March 14, 2007. Gregg, John., Iron Mike Makes Golota Quit Archived October 11, 2007, at the Wayback Machine, BoxingTimes.com, October 20, 2000. Retrieved March 14, 2007. "Golota has multiple injuries after Tyson fight". October 22, 2000. Archived from the original on December 15, 2017. Retrieved December 13, 2017. Associated Press. (2001), "PLUS: BOXING; Tyson Tests Positive For Marijuana", The New York Times, Sports Desk, Late City Final Edition, Section D, Page 5, Column 4, January 19, 2001. Brutal Tyson wins in seven Archived March 23, 2012, at the Wayback Machine, BBC Sport, October 14, 2001. Retrieved March 25, 2007. Rafael, Dan., Lewis vs. Tyson: The prequel Archived December 6, 2011, at the Wayback Machine, USA Today, June 3, 2002. Retrieved April 25, 2007. Mike Tyson rap sheet Archived April 18, 2009, at the Wayback Machine, CBC.ca, January 12, 2007. Retrieved April 25, 2007. York, Anthony., "I want to eat your children, ... Archived May 13, 2008, at the Wayback Machine, Salon.com, June 28, 2000. Retrieved March 26, 2007. AP, Tyson media circus takes center stage Archived September 15, 2012, at the Wayback Machine, ESPN.com, January 22, 2002. Retrieved March 14, 2007. Lewis stuns Tyson for famous win Archived September 30, 2008, at the Wayback Machine, BBC Sport, June 9, 2002. Retrieved March 14, 2007. Etienne's night ends 49 seconds into first round Archived September 15, 2012, at the Wayback Machine, AP via ESPN.com, February 22, 2003. Retrieved March 15, 2007. Tyson files for bankruptcy Archived December 20, 2010, at the Wayback Machine, BBC Sport, August 3, 2002. Retrieved March 15, 2007. In re Michael G. Tyson, Chapter 11 petition, August 1, 2003, case no. 03-41900-alg, U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of New York. "Mike Tyson, Rags to Riches and Back to Rags". The Boxing Hype. Archived from the original on August 3, 2017. Sandomir, Richard (August 5, 2003). "Tyson's Bankruptcy Is a Lesson In Ways to Squander a Fortune". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 21, 2015. Retrieved December 7, 2015. K-1 Reports Official Mike Tyson Fight Archived November 18, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. Tysontalk.com (April 15, 2004). Retrieved on November 25, 2011. Williams shocks Tyson Archived January 26, 2010, at the Wayback Machine, BBC Sports, July 31, 2004. Retrieved March 15, 2007. Tyson camp blames injury Archived April 20, 2009, at the Wayback Machine, BBC Sports, July 31, 2004. Retrieved March 15, 2007. Tyson quits boxing after defeat Archived July 20, 2010, at the Wayback Machine, BBC Sport, June 12, 2005. Retrieved March 14, 2007. Tyson, Mike; Sloman, Larry (November 12, 2013). Undisputed Truth. Blue Rider Press. ISBN 978-0399161285. "Mike Tyson pleads guilty to drug possession". Reuters. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved July 1, 2017. Ostlere, Lawrence (November 9, 2020). "Mike Tyson reveals how he used family's urine through fake penis to avoid failing drugs tests". Independent. Archived from the original on April 8, 2023. Retrieved April 5, 2023. Iskenderov, Parviz (March 7, 2024). "Jake Paul vs Mike Tyson boxing fight set for July in Arlington, TX". FIGHTMAG. Heck, Mike (March 7, 2024). "Jake Paul vs. Mike Tyson set for July 20 at AT&T Stadium, will stream live on Netflix". MMA Fighting. "Mike Tyson World Tour: Mike Tyson versus Corey Sanders pictures". Tyson Talk. Archived from the original on April 4, 2017. Retrieved December 13, 2018. "boxrec stats for Corey Sanders". Archived from the original on November 22, 2018. Retrieved June 10, 2019. Rozenberg, Sammy (October 21, 2006). "Tyson Happy With Exhibition, Fans Are Not". Boxing Scene. Archived from the original on January 2, 2013. Retrieved May 16, 2009. Campbell, Brian (November 25, 2020). "Mike Tyson vs. Roy Jones Jr. fight: Five biggest storylines to watch during the exhibition event". www.cbssports.com. Archived from the original on November 25, 2020. Retrieved November 30, 2020. "Who is Mike Tyson's trainer Rafael Cordeiro?". Sporting Excitement. November 25, 2020. Archived from the original on November 25, 2020. Retrieved December 26, 2020. Cruz, Guilherme (November 25, 2020). "Coach says Mike Tyson aiming to knock out Roy Jones Jr. despite rules: 'No one spars a full month for an exhibition'". MMA Fighting. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved December 26, 2020. Kim, Steve (July 23, 2020). "Tyson-Jones Jr. exhibition match set for Sept. 12". ESPN. Archived from the original on August 18, 2020. Retrieved August 12, 2020. Brookhouse, Brent (August 11, 2020). "Mike Tyson vs. Roy Jones Jr. exhibition fight delayed to Nov. 28, new undercard bouts announced". CBS Sports. Archived from the original on December 7, 2020. Retrieved August 12, 2020. Greer, Jordan (November 28, 2020). "Mike Tyson vs. Roy Jones Jr. fight results: Boxing exhibition ends in unofficial draw". Sporting News. Archived from the original on November 29, 2020. Retrieved November 29, 2020. Tapp, Tom (July 23, 2020). "Mike Tyson Announces Return To Ring In PPV Exhibition Fight Against Roy Jones, Jr. For His Legends Only League". Deadline. Archived from the original on May 9, 2021. Retrieved March 26, 2021. "Mike Tyson and Eros Innovations Launch New Sports League". kingsmenmedia.com. July 23, 2020. Archived from the original on August 5, 2020. Retrieved March 26, 2021. Connolly, Eoin (August 6, 2020). "At Large | Mike Tyson, the Legends Only League and old stars in a world of new content". www.sportspromedia.com. Archived from the original on January 15, 2021. Retrieved March 26, 2021. Barrasso, Justin (November 29, 2020). "Mike Tyson vs. Roy Jones Jr. Leaves Viewers Wanting More". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on March 31, 2021. Retrieved March 26, 2021. Mirzabegian, Sacha (December 9, 2020). "Astonishing numbers confirmed for Tyson fight". wwos.nine.com.au. Archived from the original on January 16, 2021. Retrieved March 26, 2021. McCarson, Kelsey (November 28, 2020). "Mike Tyson vs. Roy Jones Jr. Was Badly Needed Nostalgia in 2020". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on January 22, 2021. Retrieved March 26, 2021. "Past winners of THE RING year-end awards". The Ring. January 1, 2013. Archived from the original on December 30, 2017. Retrieved October 17, 2020. The 1999 Boxing Almanac and Book of Facts. Ft. Washington, Pennsylvania: London Publishing Co. 1999. p. 132. Campbell, Brian (June 8, 2011). "Taking a true measure of Tyson's legacy". ESPN. Archived from the original on September 6, 2011. Retrieved May 14, 2012. Quenqua, Douglas (March 14, 2012). "The Fight Club Generation". The New York Times. Archived from the original on July 22, 2014. Retrieved October 21, 2014. Dyck, Henry. "Mike Tyson Ruined Boxing For The Casual Fan". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on June 24, 2020. Retrieved October 11, 2020. "The Ten Greatest Heavyweight Boxing Champions of all Time: #10 – #6 – Martial Arts World Report". Martial Arts World Report. February 20, 2020. Archived from the original on November 16, 2020. Retrieved November 14, 2020. "BoxRec ratings: world, heavyweight, active and inactive". BoxRec. Archived from the original on January 11, 2021. Retrieved January 9, 2021. "Ring Magazine's 80 Best Fighters of the Last 80 Years". Boxing.about.com. April 9, 2012. Archived from the original on January 8, 2017. Retrieved October 14, 2012. "Ring Magazine's 100 Greatest Punchers". Boxing.about.com. April 9, 2012. Archived from the original on July 7, 2011. Retrieved October 14, 2012. "The 100 Greatest Punchers of All Time". Archived from the original on March 22, 2019. Retrieved June 5, 2017. Boxers Chavez, Tszyu and Tyson Elected to Int'l Boxing Hall of Fame – Archived January 26, 2011, at the Wayback Machine. Ibhof.com (December 7, 2010). Retrieved on November 25, 2011. Reeves, John. "Mike Tyson Is No Ali: Why Tyson Is Not a Top 10 Heavyweight of All Time". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on November 11, 2020. Retrieved October 13, 2020. "Class of 2013". NVBHOF. Archived from the original on October 17, 2020. Retrieved October 17, 2020. Dahlberg, Tim. "Tyson headlines Nevada Boxing Hall of Fame ceremony". USA Today. Archived from the original on October 21, 2020. Retrieved October 17, 2020. "Mike Tyson | Hall of Famers | Southern Nevada Sports Hall of Fame". www.snshf.com. Archived from the original on October 20, 2020. Retrieved October 17, 2020. "Southern Nevada Sports Hall of Fame grows by five — Photos". Las Vegas Review-Journal. June 20, 2015. Archived from the original on December 8, 2020. Retrieved October 17, 2020. "Best I Faced: Mike Tyson". The Ring. April 28, 2020. Archived from the original on October 12, 2020. Retrieved October 11, 2020. "From THE RING: The greatest heavyweight of all time". The Ring. April 19, 2017. Archived from the original on September 28, 2020. Retrieved October 11, 2020. "Bill Caplan's 20 greatest heavyweights". The Ring. February 9, 2016. Archived from the original on October 1, 2020. Retrieved October 11, 2020. "Mike Tyson: The Greatest Hits". The Ring. July 11, 2020. Archived from the original on August 9, 2020. Retrieved October 11, 2020. "The greatest heavyweight boxers of the past 50 years: Where do Muhammad Ali and Mike Tyson rank?". CBS Sports. April 28, 2020. Archived from the original on October 17, 2020. Retrieved October 11, 2020. Saraceno, Jon., Tyson: 'My whole life has been a waste' Archived July 2, 2012, at the Wayback Machine, USAToday.com, June 2, 2005. Retrieved March 11, 2007. Tyson has flown coop in new home, AP via MSNBC.com, June 22, 2005. Retrieved March 27, 2007. Henderson, Kenneth. A Look at Mike Tyson's Life after Boxing Archived February 12, 2008, at the Wayback Machine, ringsidereport.com, June 20, 2002. Retrieved April 28, 2007. Saraceno, Jon., Tyson shows good-guy side with kids Archived October 20, 2011, at the Wayback Machine, USA Today, June 6, 2002. Retrieved April 27, 2007. Birch, Paul., Tyson reduced to Vegas turn Archived January 30, 2010, at the Wayback Machine, BBC Sports, September 13, 2002. Retrieved April 27, 2007. Debt-ridden Tyson returns to ring Archived January 13, 2009, at the Wayback Machine, BBC Sports, September 29, 2006. Retrieved March 27, 2007. "Mike Tyson Cares Foundation". Archived from the original on October 20, 2011. Rafael, Dan (July 20, 2013). "Tyson excited about promoting". ESPN.co.uk. Archived from the original on November 21, 2022. Retrieved November 21, 2022. Iole, Kevin (September 17, 2013). "'Being: Mike Tyson' provides keen insight into former champion's battle for redemption and normalcy". Yahoo! Sports. Archived from the original on August 13, 2014. Retrieved July 18, 2014. Ecksel, Robert (September 21, 2013). "On FOX Sports' "Being: Mike Tyson"". Boxing.com. Archived from the original on July 26, 2014. Retrieved July 18, 2014. Cowles, Gregory (November 22, 2013). "Inside the List". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 28, 2013. Retrieved March 1, 2014. Ivan (June 23, 2015). "Mike Tyson". Sportel Awards (in French). Archived from the original on November 29, 2020. Retrieved October 17, 2020. Iron Ambition by Mike Tyson Archived June 17, 2017, at the Wayback Machine, Blue Rider Press "Surprised by Russia: Why did Tyson think the country 'too perfect' for him and his demons?". Russia Beyond. March 2018. Archived from the original on August 7, 2020. Retrieved November 29, 2020. "'I'm back': Mike Tyson again hints at comeback in latest training video". The Guardian. Reuters. May 12, 2020. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on May 12, 2020. Retrieved May 12, 2020. Raimondi, Marc (May 27, 2020). "Mike Tyson and Henry Cejudo mix it up in AEW pro wrestling brawl with Chris Jericho". ESPN. Archived from the original on May 28, 2020. Retrieved May 27, 2020. "Mike Tyson 'Bludgeons' AEW's Shawn Spears on 'Dynamite' In Wild In-Ring Brawl". TMZ. April 8, 2021. Archived from the original on April 15, 2021. Retrieved April 14, 2021. Rose, Bryan (April 7, 2021). "Mike Tyson aligns with The Inner Circle on AEW Dynamite". Figure Four Online. Archived from the original on April 15, 2021. Retrieved April 14, 2021. "Legendary boxer Mike Tyson joins the cast of Vijay Deverakonda's pan-India film Liger". Bollywood Hungama. September 27, 2021. Archived from the original on September 27, 2021. Retrieved September 27, 2021. "Mike Tyson Mansion". American Urbex. August 11, 2011. Archived from the original on November 6, 2014. Retrieved November 6, 2014. Doug Elfman (March 11, 2016). "Mike Tyson spent $2.5M to move down the street". Las Vegas Review-Journal. Archived from the original on April 14, 2016. Retrieved April 12, 2016. Merkin, Daphne (March 15, 2011). "The Suburbanization of Mike Tyson". The New York Times Magazine. Archived from the original on April 7, 2015. Retrieved April 7, 2015. "Mike Tyson Weds Robin Givens In Chicago Church". Jet. 73 (21): 54–55. February 22, 1988. "Mike Tyson vs. Robin Givens: the champ's biggest fight". Ebony. 1989. Archived from the original on May 15, 2007. Retrieved April 24, 2007. Wife Discusses Tyson Archived April 11, 2008, at the Wayback Machine, AP via New York Times, September 30, 1988. Retrieved April 24, 2007. Schaap, Jeremy (September 13, 2006). "Who is the new Mike Tyson?". ABC News. Archived from the original on March 15, 2013. Retrieved October 14, 2012. "Robin Took Best Punch, Tyson Says in Biography". Los Angeles Times. June 23, 1989. Archived from the original on January 28, 2018. Retrieved February 8, 2019. Tyson, Mike (2013). Undisputed Truth, My Autobiography. Plume. p. 209. ISBN 978-0-14-218121-8. Archived from the original on December 8, 2020. Retrieved October 20, 2020. Berger, Phil (October 26, 1988). "Boxing Notebook; Lalonde-Leonard: It's Same Old Hype". The New York Times. Archived from the original on December 8, 2020. Retrieved December 18, 2008. Gross, Ken. "As Wife Robin Givens Splits for the Coast, Mike Tyson Rearranges the Furniture" Archived March 23, 2011, at the Wayback Machine, People, October 17, 1988. Retrieved March 21, 2011. "The food lies untouched. The only sounds across the breakfast table in the Bernardsville, N.J., mansion are the loud silences of words being swallowed. Finally, Robin Givens, 24, star of the ABC-TV sitcom Head of the Class, pushes herself away from the table and announces, 'I have to pack.' 'Me, too,' says her husband, Mike Tyson, 22, the world heavyweight boxing champion. Suddenly the Sunday morning atmosphere is tense and full of menace." via Associated Press. Mike Tyson Chronology Archived April 27, 2012, at the Wayback Machine, USA Today, June 12, 2005. Retrieved March 21, 2011. "Oct. 2, 1988 – Police go to Tyson's Bernardsville, N.J., home after he hurls furniture out the window and forces Givens and her mother to flee the house." "Tyson finalizes divorce, could pay ex $9 million". Jet. 2003. Archived from the original on January 13, 2008. Retrieved April 24, 2007. The Smoking Gun: Archive Archived June 30, 2009, at the Wayback Machine, The Smoking Gun. Retrieved March 30, 2007. Zeleny, Jeff; Lorber, Janie. "Profile of Michael Steele". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 4, 2010. Retrieved May 5, 2010. "Ramsey Tyson Wants You to Stop Making Assumptions About Trans Kids". them. November 19, 2020. Archived from the original on October 7, 2021. Retrieved October 7, 2021. "Police: Tyson's daughter on life support". CNN. May 26, 2009. Archived from the original on September 30, 2009. Retrieved May 12, 2010. "Tyson's daughter dies after accident, police say". CNN. May 27, 2009. Archived from the original on January 27, 2010. Retrieved May 12, 2010. Corky Siemaszko (October 12, 2009). "Mike Tyson says he doesn't want to know how daughter Exodus was killed". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on June 1, 2022. Retrieved January 10, 2022. "Mike Tyson Marries Two Weeks After Daughter's Death". TV Guide. Archived from the original on January 11, 2010. Retrieved June 10, 2009. ""I Wanted Revenge...i Didn't Violate That Woman" - Mike Tyson Candid on Life After Prison for Rape". YouTube. Archived from the original on December 8, 2020. Retrieved November 26, 2020. Anderson, Dave (November 13, 1994). "The Tyson, Olajuwon Connection". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 27, 2011. Retrieved March 14, 2008. Usborne, David (March 27, 1995). "Tyson gets a hero's welcome" Archived August 25, 2018, at the Wayback Machine. The Independent. Independent Print Ltd. Retrieved August 25, 2018. Baker, William J. (2009). Playing with God: Religion and Modern Sport. Harvard University Press. p. 234. ISBN 978-0-674-02044-3. Archived from the original on April 8, 2023. Retrieved March 19, 2023. "Mike Tyson: "More I Look into Churches & Mosques for God, the More I See the Devil" | SiriusXM". YouTube. Archived from the original on May 2, 2020. Retrieved March 4, 2020. "Mike Tyson talks religion: 'I need Allah'". Fox News. Archived from the original on April 20, 2014. Retrieved April 19, 2014. Tyson, Mike (2010). "I just left the Holy City of Mecca where I was blessed to have been able to make Umrah". Arab News (2022). "DJ Khaled, Mike Tyson perform Umrah in Saudi Arabia's Makkah". Sukheja, Bhavya (2022). "Video: DJ Khaled Gets Emotional While Performing Umrah In Mecca With Mike Tyson". "Mike Tyson Talks Sobriety and Vegan Life with Ellen DeGeneres". UrbLife.com. March 8, 2011. Archived from the original on March 11, 2011. Retrieved March 8, 2011. Iole, Kevin (August 25, 2013). "Former heavyweight champion Mike Tyson: 'I'm on the verge of dying because I'm a vicious alcoholic.'". Yahoo! Sports. Archived from the original on August 25, 2013. Retrieved August 25, 2013. "Boxer hat schweres AlkoholproblemMike Tyson: "Ich stehe an der Schwelle des Todes"" (in German). Focus Online. Archived from the original on August 26, 2023. Retrieved September 3, 2023. "Mike Tyson just endorsed Donald Trump for president". USA Today. October 27, 2015. Archived from the original on October 29, 2015. Retrieved October 29, 2015. Gaynor, Tim (January 21, 2007). "Former boxer Tyson arrested on DUI, cocaine charges". Reuters. Archived from the original on March 7, 2023. Retrieved March 15, 2007. Khan, Chris., Boxing: Tyson enters rehab facility Archived September 29, 2007, at the Wayback Machine, AP via The Albuquerque Tribune, February 8, 2007. Retrieved March 6, 2007. BBC NEWS, Tyson Jailed on Drugs Charges Archived May 29, 2009, at the Wayback Machine, news.bbc.com, November 19, 2007. Retrieved November 19, 2007. Eng, Joyce. "Mike Tyson Arrested in Airport Scuffle". TV Guide. Archived from the original on February 14, 2010. Retrieved November 12, 2009. "Greta Van Susteren: Tucker Carlson's a 'pig' for Palin story". Archived from the original on September 23, 2011. Retrieved September 19, 2011. "Video shows Mike Tyson in physical altercation aboard JetBlue flight". NBC News. April 21, 2022. Archived from the original on May 30, 2022. Retrieved June 17, 2022. Bengel, Chris (May 12, 2022). "Mike Tyson won't face criminal charges for punching airline passenger who harassed him". CBS Sports. Archived from the original on October 14, 2022. Retrieved October 14, 2022. "Woman files suit accusing Mike Tyson of rape in early '90s". AP NEWS. January 24, 2023. Archived from the original on January 25, 2023. Retrieved January 25, 2023. "Mike Tyson wegen Vergewaltigung angeklagt: Soll Opfer in Limousine gelockt haben" (in German). Focus Online. Archived from the original on August 26, 2023. Retrieved September 3, 2023. Jain, Ujwal (November 17, 2023). ""I support peace" - Mike Tyson addresses controversy surrounding recent appearance at fundraiser held for Israeli forces". www.sportskeeda.com. Smith, Ryan (2023). "Mike Tyson Denies Link to Israel Military Fundraising". Newsweek. World Red Eye (2023). "The 2023 Miami International FIDF Night of Solidarity at The Faena Forum". ESPN25: The 25 Most Outrageous Characters Archived August 27, 2006, at the Wayback Machine, ESPN25.com. Retrieved April 1, 2007. Harrison, Ellie (July 3, 2020). "Mike Tyson didn't know about his Hangover cameo because he was 'doing drugs' at the time". The Independent. Archived from the original on July 4, 2023. Retrieved July 4, 2023. Weiner, Jonah (August 30, 2012). "Mike Tyson speaks out". Rolling Stone. p. 28. Scheck, Frank (August 2, 2012). "Mike Tyson:Undisputed Truth:Theater Review". Archived from the original on August 8, 2012. Retrieved August 29, 2012. "Official Site for Mike Tyson – Undisputed Truth on Broadway". tysonontour.com. Archived from the original on March 28, 2013. Retrieved March 26, 2013. "Mike Tyson Mysteries". IMDb. January 1, 2000. Archived from the original on September 16, 2018. Retrieved July 1, 2018. "Mike Tyson Mysteries: Coming This Fall – Mike Tyson Mysteries". Adult Swim. Archived from the original on September 7, 2015. Retrieved September 14, 2015. Mallenbaum, Carly (October 26, 2014). "Mike Tyson takes swing at TV in 'Mysteries'". USA Today. p. U1. Archived from the original on November 2, 2014. Retrieved March 16, 2015. "Mike Tyson Talks 'Intense, Crazy' Cameo on Madonna's 'Rebel Heart'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on January 25, 2015. Retrieved September 5, 2017. "Mike Tyson, CGI Bruce Lee to Feature in IP Man 3". IGN. March 24, 2013. Archived from the original on October 22, 2018. Retrieved April 13, 2015. Sam Gutelle (February 24, 2017). "Mike Tyson Is Getting His Own Web Series On YouTube". tubefilter.com. Archived from the original on April 30, 2017. Retrieved May 1, 2017. Todd Spangler (February 24, 2017). "Mike Tyson, YouTube Comedy Star? Ex-Boxer Joins Shots Studios' Creator Network". Variety. Archived from the original on May 7, 2017. Retrieved May 1, 2017. "Eminem to appear on the "Hotboxin' With Mike Tyson" podcast". Revolt TV. March 19, 2020. Archived from the original on December 8, 2020. Retrieved November 29, 2020. Moran, Jonathon (October 27, 2017). "Former boxer Mike Tyson steers towards new controversy". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on November 1, 2017. Retrieved January 10, 2018. Kelly, Vivienne (January 4, 2018). "Ultra Tune begins promoting its Mike Tyson campaign with teaser trailer". www.mumbrella.com.au. Archived from the original on January 11, 2018. Retrieved January 10, 2018. Bennett, Lindsay (2018). "Watchdog clears 'sexist' Mike Tyson Ultra Tune ad". Khatwani, Shivam (2022). "VIDEO: When Mike Tyson admitted his commercial to be a bit "sexist"". "Mike Tyson joins cast of Vietnamese film 'Girls 2'". VEN.vn. August 5, 2016. Archived from the original on December 8, 2020. Retrieved September 19, 2019. "Mike Tyson Stars in Hong Kong Comedy About Female Friendship Set in Vietnam". Saigoneer. March 2, 2018. Archived from the original on December 8, 2020. Retrieved September 19, 2019. Sunkel, Cameron (October 21, 2020). "Listen to Mike Tyson's Dance Music Debut in Tiki Lau's New Single, "Mike Tyson" [Premiere]". EDM.com – The Latest Electronic Dance Music News, Reviews & Artists. Archived from the original on November 17, 2020. Retrieved November 13, 2020. "Mike Tyson pitches Mike's Hard seltzer and Buffalo Wild Wings brings betting to restaurants: Trending | Ad Age". adage.com. March 12, 2021. Archived from the original on March 18, 2021. Retrieved March 20, 2021. Otterson, Joe (March 22, 2021). "Jamie Foxx to Play Mike Tyson in Limited Series With Antoine Fuqua, Martin Scorsese Onboard". Variety. Archived from the original on March 25, 2021. Retrieved March 26, 2021. White, Peter (March 22, 2021). "Jamie Foxx's Mike Tyson Biopic To Become Limited TV Series Exec Produced By Antoine Fuqua & Martin Scorsese". Deadline. Archived from the original on March 25, 2021. Retrieved March 26, 2021. "ABC News Enters the Ring with Special Four-Hour Documentary Series "Mike Tyson: The Knockout," Detailing the Life of the Boxing Legend" (Press release). ABC. May 3, 2021. Archived from the original on October 31, 2023. Retrieved May 22, 2021 – via The Futon Critic. Jennifer Mass (June 7, 2021). "'Hell's Kitchen' 300th Episode Sneak Peek: Watch Mike Tyson Scream at Everyone During First Dinner Service (Exclusive Video)". The Wrap. Archived from the original on February 1, 2023. Retrieved February 1, 2023. Blaine Henry (August 6, 2022). "Mike Tyson: "Hulu stole my story."". doublehammerfist.com. Archived from the original on October 2, 2022. Retrieved August 7, 2022. Boxing record for Mike Tyson from BoxRec (registration required) Douglas-Holyfield Draws Record Pay-per-view Fans Archived March 16, 2014, at the Wayback Machine, Orlando Sentinel article, 1990-10-12, Retrieved on March 15, 2014 "Iron Mike Is Undisputed Pay-Per-View World Champ". New York Daily News. January 21, 1998. Archived from the original on September 18, 2018. Retrieved September 18, 2018. Tyson's lowest buy rate was in his first fight with Donovan (Razor) Ruddock, which registered 960,000 buys. Van Riper, Tom (November 24, 2008). "In Pictures: The 10 Biggest Pay-Per-View Fights". Forbes. Archived from the original on September 22, 2017. Retrieved September 21, 2017. "Tyson's millions vanish with nothing to show". The Montgomery Advertiser. April 5, 1998. Archived from the original on September 18, 2018. Retrieved September 18, 2018. Emen, Jake (October 30, 2011). "Biggest boxing PPVs of all time – UFC". Yahoo! Sports. Archived from the original on November 24, 2011. Retrieved November 3, 2011. "525,000 Buys for Jones Bout". N.Y. Times article. March 5, 2003. Archived from the original on November 14, 2013. Retrieved January 4, 2014. "Tyson Delivers (For PPV)". Multichannel News. June 17, 2005. Archived from the original on September 18, 2018. Retrieved September 18, 2018. Tyson-McBride 250,000 PPV Buys Archived January 8, 2014, at archive.today, BoxingScene, Retrieved on January 8, 2014 Peter, Josh (December 8, 2020). "Mike Tyson's return to boxing against Roy Jones Jr. generated more than $80 million in revenue". USA Today. Archived from the original on December 9, 2020. Retrieved December 9, 2020. Screen Digest. Screen Digest Limited. 1997. p. 66. Archived from the original on June 26, 2019. Retrieved September 2, 2018. BSkyB's third pay-per-view sports event — evening of boxing including world title fight involving 'Prince' Naseem Hamed — pulled in 650,000 subscribers (more than 600,000 who bought Tyson/Bruno fight, BSkyB's first). Davies, Gareth A. (December 20, 2007). "Ricky Hatton shatters viewing record". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on June 27, 2018. Retrieved September 2, 2018. Lalani, Zahid (June 29, 2011). "Haye looks for heavyweight payday". BBC News. Archived from the original on August 19, 2018. Retrieved May 12, 2018. "Pay-Per-View Can Drive Closed-Circuit Off Screen". Washington Post. July 2, 1988. Archived from the original on August 30, 2018. Retrieved August 30, 2018. Asher, Mark (July 5, 1997). "Tyson-Holyfield Packed a Big Financial Wallop". Washington Post. Archived from the original on June 30, 2018. Retrieved August 30, 2018. "History of Prizefighting's Biggest Money Fights". Bloody Elbow. SB Nation. August 24, 2017. Archived from the original on October 23, 2018. Retrieved August 30, 2018. "WWE PPV Pay-Per-View Buyrates". 2xzone.com. Archived from the original on October 20, 2018. Retrieved October 20, 2018. Meltzer, Dave (May 28, 2020). "June 1, 2020 Observer Newsletter: Death of Hana Kimura". Wrestling Observer Newsletter. Archived from the original on December 8, 2020. Retrieved May 28, 2020. Lambert, Jeremy (May 13, 2020). "Mike Tyson To Present AEW TNT Title At AEW Double Or Nothing". Fightful. Archived from the original on May 18, 2020. Retrieved May 13, 2020. ""Guirlande D'honneur FICTS" a Mike Tyson" (in Italian). International Sport Movies TV Federation. July 6, 2010. Archived from the original on August 28, 2017. Retrieved May 25, 2017. "WWE Hall of Fame 2012 – Mike Tyson induction: photos". WWE. Archived from the original on December 20, 2012. Retrieved January 8, 2013. Grifol, Ignacio (January 14, 2022). "Pro Wrestling Illustrated anuncia los ganadores de sus PWI Awards 2021". Solowrestling.com. Archived from the original on January 14, 2022. Retrieved January 15, 2022. Mike Tyson at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Official website Boxing record for Mike Tyson from BoxRec (registration required) Boxing Hall of Fame ESPN.com ESPN.com – additional information ESPN.com – Boxing Topics: Mike Tyson Mike Tyson amateur boxing record Mike Tyson at IMDb "Mike Tyson Film Takes a Swing at His Old Image", 2008 article at The New York Times "Mike Tyson Moves to the Suburbs", 2011 article at The New York Times