.hk is the designated Internet country code top-level domain (ccTLD) for Hong Kong. It is administered by the Hong Kong Internet Registration Corporation (HKIRC), the only organization endorsed by the Hong Kong Government to undertake the administration of 'hk' domain names. Hong Kong Internet Registration Corporation (HKIRC) is a non-profit making, non-statutory, member-based corporation established in 2001. From its inception in 1990 until 2002, the domain was administered by the Joint University Computer Centre. In 2002, through a "Memorandum of Understanding" with the Hong Kong government, HKIRC took over the administration of '.hk', while the Hong Kong Domain Name Registration Corporation Limited (HKDNR), its wholly owned subsidiary of HKIRC, is responsible for the day-to-day management of the registration service for Specific '.hk' Domain Names and Generic '.hk' Domain Name (e.g., www.myname.hk). '.hk' domain names can be registered at both the second and third level. On June 25, 2010, ICANN approved the use of the internationalized country code top-level domain .香港 (hongkong in simplified Chinese characters and traditional Chinese characters; DNS name: .xn--j6w193g) by HKIRC. This TLD was added to the DNS in July 2010. The Pre Launch Priority Registration for .香港 was started on February 22, 2011. The first .香港 domain was activated on March 23, 2011. 香港 domain categories were opened for public registration since May 31, 2011. Some Russian 2ch style imageboards use .hk webnames, such as iichan.hk and 2ch.hk. A Chinese domain name must contain at least one Chinese character but can contain English letters as long as there is at least 1 Chinese character while English domain names must not contain any Chinese characters. All domain names could contain alphanumeric characters and hyphens. Chinese domain names ending in .hk but not in .香港 are not available for registration since mid January 2011. However, the registered domains in these categories can still be used and renewed. As of July 1, 2018. HKDNR (wholly owned subsidiary of HKIRC) UDomain Web Hosting Company Limited Eranet International HKT Speedy Group Hu Yi Global Instra Corporation Atak Domain Alibaba Cloud Foshan Yidong Chengdu West Dimension Shenzhen Internet Works Shanghai Meicheng TopNets Technology Bizcn.com Ascio Technologies SafeBrands united-domains 1API InterNetX EuroDNS Web Commerce Communications (Singapore) Hosting Concepts IP Mirror AB Name ISP Net-Chinese Crazy Domains Safenames 101 Domain MarkMonitor Marcaria.com CSC Corporate Domains .mo (ccTLD for Macau) .cn (Mainland China) Communications in Hong Kong Internationalized domain name Telecommunications industry in Hong Kong "Joint University Computer Centre". Jucc.edu.hk. Retrieved 15 January 2012. "Hong Kong Internet Registration Corporation Ltd". Hkirc.hk. Retrieved 15 January 2012. "Hong Kong Domain Name Registration Corporation Limited". Hkdnr.hk. Retrieved 15 January 2012. "ICANN.org". ICANN.org. Retrieved 15 January 2012. "Pre Launch Priority Registration Period Rules for .香港 Domain Names" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 March 2012. Retrieved 15 January 2012. "Pre-Launch Priority Registration of .香港 for Existing .hk Customers" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 July 2011. Retrieved 15 January 2012. "Hong Kong Internet Registration Corporation Limited". "Domain Name Registration Policies, Procedures and Guidelines for .hk and .香港 domain names (V1.0)" (PDF). Retrieved 15 January 2012. "Launch of .香港" (PDF). HKDNR. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 October 2011. Retrieved 23 August 2023. "Accredited Registrars". Hong Kong Internet Registration Corporation. Joint University Computer Centre Hong Kong Domain Name Registration Company Limited root-zone whois information for .hk .HK Domain Registration and Information Service