.th is the Internet country code top-level domain (ccTLD) for Thailand. It is administered by T.H.NIC Co., Ltd. (THNIC), the corporate entity of Thai Network Information Center Foundation. Registration of a .co.th domain name is a complicated procedure; for this reason most Thai websites prefer to use a .com name. In order to register a .co.th domain name the registrar in Thailand requires copies of company documents in the same name as the required domain name, so for example if an entity required acme.co.th the entity would need to have a registered company called Acme Co., Ltd. A company can only register a single .co.th domain with the company name or initial name of company, and/or one .co.th domain name per trademark. In 2018, the foundation advance to the registration for authentic using of persons (natural persons and juristic persons); therefore, the foundation reserves the right to consider and decide the number of domain names of each person on a case-by-case basis. The person who registered more than one domain name from all categories must comply with the following conditions: All domain name registrations must comply with the criteria of domain naming and conditions as provided specified policy by categories of domain name. The registration of domain names shall be effected in good faith by a holder of the domain name and a contact person who having a residential address or an office address in Thailand which can be contacted by THNIC. In the case THNIC detects any unusual act in domain name registration, specifically, registration of more than one domain name, THNIC reserves the right to refuse the request or revoke the domain name immediately. THNIC admits .th registration only third-level domain under seven groups of predefined second-level domains: In 2010 a new top domain was registered and introduced for Thailand, intended for domain names in the local language. This top domain is .ไทย. As of 2011, thousands of sites with this domain are active. It appears that the Thai second-level .ไทย domains are assigned directly to sites with English .in.th domain names. Other groups of .th domains must use third-level .ไทย domains, as in the table above. "เผยโดเมน '.th' ทะลุ 6 หมื่นชื่อ-ภาคธุรกิจใช้กว่าครึ่ง". Thai Rath (in Thai). 6 June 2013. Archived from the original on 2013-10-19. Retrieved 19 October 2013. "นโยบายการให้บริการชื่อโดเมน .th และ .ไทย (ฉบับปรับปรุงปี 2556)". THNIC. 2013-03-01. Archived from the original on 2014-10-18. Retrieved 2014-10-14. "Policy of .th and .ไทย service" (PDF). THNIC Foundation. Thai Network Information Center Foundation. 1 April 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 December 2018. Retrieved 21 December 2013. ""ดอทไทย" โดเมนเลือดไทย กรรมสิทธิ์เฉพาะคนไทย" "ดอทไทย" โดเมนเลือดไทย กรรมสิทธิ์เฉพาะคนไทย. Thai Rath (in Thai). 18 January 2011. Archived from the original on 2018-10-01. Retrieved 21 December 2013. "site:.ไทย". Google. Retrieved 27 May 2012. IANA .th whois information THNIC website Thai Network Information Center Foundation website ALL Statistic Domain .TH v t e