Apple Inc. (formerly Apple Computer, Inc.) is an American multinational corporation and technology company headquartered in Cupertino, California, in Silicon Valley. It designs, develops, and sells consumer electronics, computer software, and online services. Devices include the iPhone, iPad, Mac, Apple Watch, Vision Pro, and Apple TV; operating systems include iOS, iPadOS, and macOS; and software applications and services include iTunes, iCloud, Apple Music, and Apple TV+. For most of 2011 to 2024, Apple became the world's largest company by market capitalization until Microsoft assumed the position in January 2024. In 2022, Apple was the largest technology company by revenue, with US$394.3 billion.[failed verification] As of 2023[update], Apple was the fourth-largest personal computer vendor by unit sales, the largest manufacturing company by revenue, and the largest vendor of mobile phones in the world. It is one of the Big Five American information technology companies, alongside Alphabet (the parent company of Google), Amazon, Meta (the parent company of Facebook), and Microsoft. Apple was founded as Apple Computer Company on April 1, 1976, to produce and market Steve Wozniak's Apple I personal computer. The company was incorporated by Wozniak and Steve Jobs in 1977. Its second computer, the Apple II, became a best seller as one of the first mass-produced microcomputers. Apple introduced the Lisa in 1983 and the Macintosh in 1984, as some of the first computers to use a graphical user interface and a mouse. By 1985, the company's internal problems included the high cost of its products and power struggles between executives. That year Jobs left Apple to form NeXT, Inc., and Wozniak withdrew to other ventures. The market for personal computers expanded and evolved throughout the 1990s, and Apple lost considerable market share to the lower-priced Wintel duopoly of the Microsoft Windows operating system on Intel-powered PC clones. In 1997, Apple was weeks away from bankruptcy. To resolve its failed operating system strategy and entice Jobs's return, it bought NeXT. Over the next decade, Jobs guided Apple back to profitability through several tactics including introducing the iMac, iPod, iPhone, and iPad to critical acclaim, launching the "Think different" campaign and other memorable advertising campaigns, opening the Apple Store retail chain, and acquiring numerous companies to broaden its product portfolio. Jobs resigned in 2011 for health reasons, and died two months later. He was succeeded as CEO by Tim Cook. Apple has received criticism regarding its contractors' labor practices, its environmental practices, and its business ethics, including anti-competitive practices and materials sourcing. Nevertheless, it has a large following and a high level of brand loyalty. It has been consistently ranked as one of the world's most valuable brands. Apple became the first publicly traded U.S. company to be valued at over $1 trillion in August 2018, then at $2 trillion in August 2020, and at $3 trillion in January 2022. In June 2023, it was valued at just over $3 trillion. Apple Computer Company was founded on April 1, 1976, by Steve Jobs, Steve Wozniak, and Ronald Wayne as a partnership. The company's first product is the Apple I, a computer designed and hand-built entirely by Wozniak. To finance its creation, Jobs sold his Volkswagen Bus, and Wozniak sold his HP-65 calculator.: 57  Neither received the full selling price but in total earned $1,300 (equivalent to $7,000 in 2023). Wozniak debuted the first prototype Apple I at the Homebrew Computer Club in July 1976. The Apple I was sold as a motherboard with CPU, RAM, and basic textual-video chips—a base kit concept which was not yet marketed as a complete personal computer. It was priced soon after debut for $666.66 (equivalent to $3,600 in 2023).: 180  Wozniak later said he was unaware of the coincidental mark of the beast in the number 666, and that he came up with the price because he liked "repeating digits". Apple Computer, Inc. was incorporated on January 3, 1977, without Wayne, who had left and sold his share of the company back to Jobs and Wozniak for $800 only twelve days after having co-founded it. Multimillionaire Mike Markkula provided essential business expertise and funding of $250,000 (equivalent to $1,257,000 in 2023) to Jobs and Wozniak during the incorporation of Apple. During the first five years of operations, revenues grew exponentially, doubling about every four months. Between September 1977 and September 1980, yearly sales grew from $775,000 to $118 million, an average annual growth rate of 533%. The Apple II, also designed by Wozniak, was introduced on April 16, 1977, at the first West Coast Computer Faire. It differs from its major rivals, the TRS-80 and Commodore PET, because of its character cell-based color graphics and open architecture. The Apple I and early Apple II models use ordinary audio cassette tapes as storage devices, which were superseded by the 5+1⁄4-inch floppy disk drive and interface called the Disk II in 1978. The Apple II was chosen to be the desktop platform for the first "killer application" of the business world: VisiCalc, a spreadsheet program released in 1979. VisiCalc created a business market for the Apple II and gave home users an additional reason to buy an Apple II: compatibility with the office, but Apple II market share remained behind home computers made by competitors such as Atari, Commodore, and Tandy. On December 12, 1980, Apple (ticker symbol "AAPL") went public selling 4.6 million shares at $22 per share ($.10 per share when adjusting for stock splits as of September 3, 2022[update]), generating over $100 million, which was more capital than any IPO since Ford Motor Company in 1956. By the end of the day, 300 millionaires were created, including Jobs and Wozniak, from a stock price of $29 per share and a market cap of $1.778 billion. In December 1979, Steve Jobs and Apple employees, including Jef Raskin, visited Xerox PARC, where they observed the Xerox Alto, featuring a graphical user interface (GUI). Apple subsequently negotiated access to PARC's technology, leading to Apple's option to buy shares at a preferential rate. This visit influenced Jobs to implement a GUI in Apple's products, starting with the Apple Lisa. Despite being pioneering as a mass-marketed GUI computer, the Lisa suffered from high costs and limited software options, leading to commercial failure. Jobs, angered by being pushed off the Lisa team, took over the company's Macintosh division. Wozniak and Raskin had envisioned the Macintosh as a low-cost computer with a text-based interface like the Apple II, but a plane crash in 1981 forced Wozniak to step back from the project. Jobs quickly redefined the Macintosh as a graphical system that would be cheaper than the Lisa, undercutting his former division. Jobs was also hostile to the Apple II division, which at the time, generated most of the company's revenue. In 1984, Apple launched the Macintosh, the first personal computer without a bundled programming language. Its debut was signified by "1984", a $1.5 million television advertisement directed by Ridley Scott that aired during the third quarter of Super Bowl XVIII on January 22, 1984. This was hailed as a watershed event for Apple's success and was called a "masterpiece" by CNN and one of the greatest TV advertisements of all time by TV Guide. The advertisement created great interest in Macintosh, and sales were initially good, but began to taper off dramatically after the first three months as reviews started to come in. Jobs had required 128 kilobytes of RAM, which limited its speed and software in favor of aspiring for a projected price point of $1,000 (equivalent to $2,900 in 2023). The Macintosh shipped for $2,495 (equivalent to $7,300 in 2023), a price panned by critics due to its slow performance.: 195  In early 1985, this sales slump triggered a power struggle between Steve Jobs and CEO John Sculley, who had been hired away from Pepsi two years earlier by Jobs saying, "Do you want to sell sugar water for the rest of your life or come with me and change the world?" Sculley removed Jobs as the head of the Macintosh division, with unanimous support from the Apple board of directors. The board of directors instructed Sculley to contain Jobs and his ability to launch expensive forays into untested products. Rather than submit to Sculley's direction, Jobs attempted to oust him from leadership. Jean-Louis Gassée informed Sculley that Jobs had been attempting to organize a boardroom coup and called an emergency meeting at which Apple's executive staff sided with Sculley and stripped Jobs of all operational duties. Jobs resigned from Apple in September 1985 and took several Apple employees with him to found NeXT. Wozniak had also quit his active employment at Apple earlier in 1985 to pursue other ventures, expressing his frustration with Apple's treatment of the Apple II division and stating that the company had "been going in the wrong direction for the last five years". Wozniak remained employed by Apple as a representative, receiving a stipend estimated to be $120,000 per year. Jobs and Wozniak remained Apple shareholders following their departures. After the departures of Jobs and Wozniak in 1985, Sculley launched the Macintosh 512K that year with quadruple the RAM, and introduced the LaserWriter, the first reasonably priced PostScript laser printer. PageMaker, an early desktop publishing application taking advantage of the PostScript language, was also released by Aldus Corporation in July 1985. It has been suggested that the combination of Macintosh, LaserWriter, and PageMaker was responsible for the creation of the desktop publishing market. This dominant position in the desktop publishing market allowed the company to focus on higher price points, the so-called "high-right policy" named for the position on a chart of price vs. profits. Newer models selling at higher price points offered higher profit margin, and appeared to have no effect on total sales as power users snapped up every increase in speed. Although some worried about pricing themselves out of the market, the high-right policy was in full force by the mid-1980s, due to Jean-Louis Gassée's slogan of "fifty-five or die", referring to the 55% profit margins of the Macintosh II.: 79–80  This policy began to backfire late in the decade as desktop publishing programs appeared on IBM PC compatibles with some of the same functionality of the Macintosh at far lower price points. The company lost its dominant position in the desktop publishing market and estranged many of its original consumer customer base who could no longer afford Apple products. The Christmas season of 1989 was the first in the company's history to have declining sales, which led to a 20% drop in Apple's stock price.: 117–129  During this period, the relationship between Sculley and Gassée deteriorated, leading Sculley to effectively demote Gassée in January 1990 by appointing Michael Spindler as the chief operating officer. Gassée left the company later that year. The company pivoted strategy and in October 1990 introduced three lower-cost models, the Macintosh Classic, the Macintosh LC, and the Macintosh IIsi, all of which saw significant sales due to pent-up demand. In 1991, Apple introduced the hugely successful PowerBook with a design that set the current shape for almost all modern laptops. The same year, Apple introduced System 7, a major upgrade to the Macintosh operating system, adding color to the interface and introducing new networking capabilities. The success of the lower-cost Macs and PowerBook brought increasing revenue. For some time, Apple was doing very well, introducing fresh new products at increasing profits. The magazine MacAddict named the period between 1989 and 1991 as the "first golden age" of the Macintosh. The success of lower-cost consumer Macs, especially the LC, cannibalized higher-priced machines. To address this, management introduced several new brands, selling largely identical machines at different price points, for different markets: the high-end Quadra series, the mid-range Centris series, and the consumer-marketed Performa series. This led to significant consumer confusion between so many models. In the early 1990s, the Apple II series was discontinued. It was expensive to produce, and the company decided it was still absorbing sales from lower-cost Macintosh models. After the launch of the LC, Apple encouraged developers to create applications for Macintosh rather than Apple II, and authorized salespersons to redirect consumers from Apple II and toward Macintosh. The Apple IIe was discontinued in 1993. Apple experimented with several other unsuccessful consumer targeted products during the 1990s, including QuickTake digital cameras, PowerCD portable CD audio players, speakers, the Pippin video game console, the eWorld online service, and Apple Interactive Television Box. Enormous resources were invested in the problematic Newton tablet division, based on John Sculley's unrealistic market forecasts. Throughout this period, Microsoft continued to gain market share with Windows by focusing on delivering software to inexpensive personal computers, while Apple was delivering a richly engineered but expensive experience. Apple relied on high profit margins and never developed a clear response; it sued Microsoft for making a GUI similar to the Lisa in Apple Computer, Inc. v. Microsoft Corp. The lawsuit dragged on for years and was finally dismissed. The major product flops and the rapid loss of market share to Windows sullied Apple's reputation, and in 1993 Sculley was replaced as CEO by Michael Spindler. Under Spindler, Apple, IBM, and Motorola formed the AIM alliance in 1994 to create a new computing platform (the PowerPC Reference Platform or PReP), with IBM and Motorola hardware coupled with Apple software. The AIM alliance hoped that PReP's performance and Apple's software would leave the PC far behind and thus counter the dominance of Windows. That year, Apple introduced the Power Macintosh, the first of many computers with Motorola's PowerPC processor. In the wake of the alliance, Apple opened up to the idea of allowing Motorola and other companies to build Macintosh clones. Over the next two years, 75 distinct Macintosh clone models were introduced. However, by 1996, Apple executives were worried that the clones were cannibalizing sales of its own high-end computers, where profit margins were highest. In 1996, Spindler was replaced by Gil Amelio as CEO, who was hired for his reputation as a corporate rehabilitator. Amelio made deep changes, including extensive layoffs and cost-cutting. This period was also marked by numerous failed attempts to modernize the Macintosh operating system (MacOS). The original Macintosh operating system (System 1) was not built for multitasking (running several applications at once). The company attempted to correct this by introducing cooperative multitasking in System 5, but still decided it needed a more modern approach. This led to the Pink project in 1988, A/UX that year, Copland in 1994, and evaluated the purchase of BeOS in 1996. Talks with Be stalled when the CEO, former Apple executive Jean-Louis Gassée, demanded $300 million instead of Apple's $125 million offer. Only weeks away from bankruptcy, Apple's board preferred NeXTSTEP and purchased NeXT in late 1996 for $400 million, and retained Steve Jobs. The NeXT acquisition was finalized on February 9, 1997, and the board brought Jobs back to Apple as an advisor. On July 9, 1997, Jobs staged a boardroom coup that resulted in Amelio's resignation after overseeing a three-year record-low stock price and crippling financial losses. The board named Jobs as interim CEO and he immediately reviewed the product lineup. Jobs canceled 70% of models, ending 3,000 jobs and paring to the core of its computer offerings. The next month, in August 1997, Steve Jobs convinced Microsoft to make a $150 million investment in Apple and a commitment to continue developing Mac software. This was seen as an "antitrust insurance policy" for Microsoft which had recently settled with the Department of Justice over anti-competitive practices in the United States v. Microsoft Corp. case. Around then, Jobs donated Apple's internal library and archives to Stanford University, to focus more on the present and the future rather than the past. He ended the Mac clone deals and in September 1997, purchased the largest clone maker, Power Computing. On November 10, 1997, the Apple Store website launched, which was tied to a new build-to-order manufacturing model similar to PC manufacturer Dell's success. The moves paid off for Jobs; at the end of his first year as CEO, the company had a $309 million profit. On May 6, 1998, Apple introduced a new all-in-one computer reminiscent of the original Macintosh: the iMac. The iMac was a huge success with 800,000 units sold in its first five months and ushered in major shifts in the industry by abandoning legacy technologies like the 3+1⁄2-inch diskette, being an early adopter of the USB connector, and coming pre-installed with Internet connectivity (the "i" in iMac) via Ethernet and a dial-up modem. Its striking teardrop shape and translucent materials were designed by Jonathan Ive, who had been hired by Amelio, and who collaborated with Jobs for more than a decade to reshape Apple's product design. A little more than a year later on July 21, 1999, Apple introduced the iBook consumer laptop. It culminated Jobs's strategy to produce only four products: refined versions of the Power Macintosh G3 desktop and PowerBook G3 laptop for professionals, and the iMac desktop and iBook laptop for consumers. Jobs said the small product line allowed for a greater focus on quality and innovation. Around then, Apple also completed numerous acquisitions to create a portfolio of digital media production software for both professionals and consumers. Apple acquired Macromedia's Key Grip digital video editing software project which was launched as Final Cut Pro in April 1999. Key Grip's development also led to Apple's release of the consumer video-editing product iMovie in October 1999. Apple acquired the German company Astarte in April 2000, which had developed the DVD authoring software DVDirector, which Apple repackaged as the professional-oriented DVD Studio Pro, and reused its technology to create iDVD for the consumer market. In 2000, Apple purchased the SoundJam MP audio player software from Casady & Greene. Apple renamed the program iTunes, and simplified the user interface and added CD burning. In 2001, Apple changed course with three announcements. First, on March 24, 2001, Apple announced the release of a new modern operating system, Mac OS X. This was after numerous failed attempts in the early 1990s, and several years of development. Mac OS X is based on NeXTSTEP, OPENSTEP, and BSD Unix, to combine the stability, reliability, and security of Unix with the ease of use of an overhauled user interface. To aid migration from Mac OS 9, the new operating system ran legacy applications within Mac OS X via the Classic Environment. In May 2001, the first two Apple Store retail locations opened in Virginia and California, offering an improved presentation of the company's products. At the time, many speculated that the stores would fail, but they became highly successful, and the first of more than 500 stores around the world. On October 23, 2001, the iPod portable digital audio player debuted. The product was first sold on November 10, 2001, and was phenomenally successful with over 100 million units sold within six years. In 2003, the iTunes Store was introduced with music downloads for 99¢ a song and iPod integration. It quickly became the market leader in online music services, with over five billion downloads by June 19, 2008. Two years later, the iTunes Store was the world's largest music retailer. In 2002, Apple purchased Nothing Real for its advanced digital compositing application Shake, and Emagic for the music productivity application Logic. The purchase of Emagic made Apple the first computer manufacturer to own a music software company. The acquisition was followed by the development of Apple's consumer-level GarageBand application. The release of iPhoto that year completed the iLife suite. At the Worldwide Developers Conference keynote address on June 6, 2005, Jobs announced that Apple would move away from PowerPC processors, and the Mac would transition to Intel processors in 2006. On January 10, 2006, the new MacBook Pro and iMac became the first Apple computers to use Intel's Core Duo CPU. By August 7, 2006, Apple made the transition to Intel chips for the entire Mac product line—over one year sooner than announced. The Power Mac, iBook, and PowerBook brands were retired during the transition; the Mac Pro, MacBook, and MacBook Pro became their respective successors. Apple also introduced Boot Camp in 2006 to help users install Windows XP or Windows Vista on their Intel Macs alongside Mac OS X. Apple's success during this period was evident in its stock price. Between early 2003 and 2006, the price of Apple's stock increased more than tenfold, from around $6 per share (split-adjusted) to over $80. When Apple surpassed Dell's market cap in January 2006, Jobs sent an email to Apple employees saying Dell's CEO Michael Dell should eat his words. Nine years prior, Dell had said that if he ran Apple he would "shut it down and give the money back to the shareholders". During his keynote speech at the Macworld Expo on January 9, 2007, Jobs announced the renaming of Apple Computer, Inc. to Apple Inc., because the company had shifted its emphasis from computers to consumer electronics. This event also saw the announcement of the iPhone and the Apple TV. The company sold 270,000 iPhone units during the first 30 hours of sales, and the device was called "a game changer for the industry". In an article posted on Apple's website on February 6, 2007, Jobs wrote that Apple would be willing to sell music on the iTunes Store without digital rights management, thereby allowing tracks to be played on third-party players if record labels would agree to drop the technology. On April 2, 2007, Apple and EMI jointly announced the removal of DRM technology from EMI's catalog in the iTunes Store, effective in May 2007. Other record labels eventually followed suit and Apple published a press release in January 2009 to announce that all songs on the iTunes Store are available without their FairPlay DRM. In July 2008, Apple launched the App Store to sell third-party applications for the iPhone and iPod Touch. Within a month, the store sold 60 million applications and registered an average daily revenue of $1 million, with Jobs speculating in August 2008 that the App Store could become a billion-dollar business for Apple. By October 2008, Apple was the third-largest mobile handset supplier in the world due to the popularity of the iPhone. On January 14, 2009, Jobs announced in an internal memo that he would be taking a six-month medical leave of absence from Apple until the end of June 2009 and would spend the time focusing on his health. In the email, Jobs stated that "the curiosity over my personal health continues to be a distraction not only for me and my family, but everyone else at Apple as well", and explained that the break would allow the company "to focus on delivering extraordinary products". Though Jobs was absent, Apple recorded its best non-holiday quarter (Q1 FY 2009) during the recession with revenue of $8.16 billion and profit of $1.21 billion. After years of speculation and multiple rumored "leaks", Apple unveiled a large screen, tablet-like media device known as the iPad on January 27, 2010. The iPad ran the same touch-based operating system as the iPhone, and all iPhone apps were compatible with the iPad. This gave the iPad a large app catalog on launch, though having very little development time before the release. Later that year on April 3, 2010, the iPad was launched in the U.S. It sold more than 300,000 units on its first day, and 500,000 by the end of the first week. In May 2010, Apple's market cap exceeded that of competitor Microsoft for the first time since 1989. In June 2010, Apple released the iPhone 4, which introduced video calling using FaceTime, multitasking, and a new design with an exposed stainless steel frame as the phone's antenna system. Later that year, Apple again refreshed the iPod line by introducing a multi-touch iPod Nano, an iPod Touch with FaceTime, and an iPod Shuffle that brought back the clickwheel buttons of earlier generations. It also introduced the smaller, cheaper second generation Apple TV which allowed renting of movies and shows. On January 17, 2011, Jobs announced in an internal Apple memo that he would take another medical leave of absence for an indefinite period to allow him to focus on his health. Chief operating officer Tim Cook assumed Jobs's day-to-day operations at Apple, although Jobs would still remain "involved in major strategic decisions". Apple became the most valuable consumer-facing brand in the world. In June 2011, Jobs surprisingly took the stage and unveiled iCloud, an online storage and syncing service for music, photos, files, and software which replaced MobileMe, Apple's previous attempt at content syncing. This would be the last product launch Jobs would attend before his death. On August 24, 2011, Jobs resigned his position as CEO of Apple. He was replaced by Cook and Jobs became Apple's chairman. Apple did not have a chairman at the time and instead had two co-lead directors, Andrea Jung and Arthur D. Levinson, who continued with those titles until Levinson replaced Jobs as chairman of the board in November after Jobs's death. On October 5, 2011, Steve Jobs died, marking the end of an era for Apple. The next major product announcement by Apple was on January 19, 2012, when Apple's Phil Schiller introduced iBook's Textbooks for iOS and iBook Author for Mac OS X in New York City. Jobs stated in the biography "Steve Jobs" that he wanted to reinvent the textbook industry and education. From 2011 to 2012, Apple released the iPhone 4S and iPhone 5, which featured improved cameras, an intelligent software assistant named Siri, and cloud-synced data with iCloud; the third- and fourth-generation iPads, which featured Retina displays; and the iPad Mini, which featured a 7.9-inch screen in contrast to the iPad's 9.7-inch screen. These launches were successful, with the iPhone 5 (released September 21, 2012) becoming Apple's biggest iPhone launch with over two million pre-orders and sales of three million iPads in three days following the launch of the iPad Mini and fourth-generation iPad (released November 3, 2012). Apple also released a third-generation 13-inch MacBook Pro with a Retina display and new iMac and Mac Mini computers. On August 20, 2012, Apple's rising stock price increased the company's market capitalization to a then-record $624 billion. This beat the non-inflation-adjusted record for market capitalization previously set by Microsoft in 1999. On August 24, 2012, a US jury ruled that Samsung should pay Apple $1.05 billion (£665m) in damages in an intellectual property lawsuit. Samsung appealed the damages award, which was reduced by $450 million and further granted Samsung's request for a new trial. On November 10, 2012, Apple confirmed a global settlement that dismissed all existing lawsuits between Apple and HTC up to that date, in favor of a ten-year license agreement for current and future patents between the two companies. It is predicted that Apple will make $280 million per year from this deal with HTC. In May 2014, Apple confirmed its intent to acquire Dr. Dre and Jimmy Iovine's audio company Beats Electronics—producer of the "Beats by Dr. Dre" line of headphones and speaker products, and operator of the music streaming service Beats Music—for $3 billion, and to sell their products through Apple's retail outlets and resellers. Iovine believed that Beats had always "belonged" with Apple, as the company modeled itself after Apple's "unmatched ability to marry culture and technology." The acquisition was the largest purchase in Apple's history. During a press event on September 9, 2014, Apple introduced a smartwatch called the Apple Watch. Initially, Apple marketed the device as a fashion accessory and a complement to the iPhone, that would allow people to look at their smartphones less. Over time, the company has focused on developing health and fitness-oriented features on the watch, in an effort to compete with dedicated activity trackers. In January 2016, Apple announced that over one billion Apple devices were in active use worldwide. On June 6, 2016, Fortune released Fortune 500, its list of companies ranked on revenue generation. In the trailing fiscal year of 2015, Apple was listed as the top tech company. It ranked third, overall, with $233 billion in revenue. This represents a movement upward of two spots from the previous year's list. In June 2017, Apple announced the HomePod, its smart speaker aimed to compete against Sonos, Google Home, and Amazon Echo. Toward the end of the year, TechCrunch reported that Apple was acquiring Shazam, a company that introduced its products at WWDC and specializing in music, TV, film and advertising recognition. The acquisition was confirmed a few days later, reportedly costing Apple $400 million, with media reports that the purchase looked like a move to acquire data and tools bolstering the Apple Music streaming service. The purchase was approved by the European Union in September 2018. Also in June 2017, Apple appointed Jamie Erlicht and Zack Van Amburg to head the newly formed worldwide video unit. In November 2017, Apple announced it was branching out into original scripted programming: a drama series starring Jennifer Aniston and Reese Witherspoon, and a reboot of the anthology series Amazing Stories with Steven Spielberg. In June 2018, Apple signed the Writers Guild of America's minimum basic agreement and Oprah Winfrey to a multi-year content partnership. Additional partnerships for original series include Sesame Workshop and DHX Media and its subsidiary Peanuts Worldwide, and a partnership with A24 to create original films. During the Apple Special Event in September 2017, the AirPower wireless charger was announced alongside the iPhone X, iPhone 8, and Watch Series 3. The AirPower was intended to wirelessly charge multiple devices, simultaneously. Though initially set to release in early 2018, the AirPower would be canceled in March 2019, marking the first cancellation of a device under Cook's leadership. On August 19, 2020, Apple's share price briefly topped $467.77, making it the first US company with a market capitalization of $2 trillion. During its annual WWDC keynote speech on June 22, 2020, Apple announced it would move away from Intel processors, and the Mac would transition to processors developed in-house. The announcement was expected by industry analysts, and it has been noted that Macs featuring Apple's processors would allow for big increases in performance over current Intel-based models. On November 10, 2020, the MacBook Air, MacBook Pro, and the Mac Mini became the first Mac devices powered by an Apple-designed processor, the Apple M1. In April 2022, it was reported that Samsung Electro-Mechanics would be collaborating with Apple on its M2 chip instead of LG Innotek. Developer logs showed that at least nine Mac models with four different M2 chips were being tested. The Wall Street Journal reported that Apple's effort to develop its own chips left it better prepared to deal with the semiconductor shortage that emerged during the COVID-19 pandemic, which led to increased profitability, with sales of M1-based Mac computers rising sharply in 2020 and 2021. It also inspired other companies like Tesla, Amazon, and Meta Platforms to pursue a similar path. In April 2022, Apple opened an online store that allowed anyone in the US to view repair manuals and order replacement parts for specific recent iPhones, although the difference in cost between this method and official repair is anticipated to be minimal. In May 2022, a trademark was filed for RealityOS, an operating system reportedly intended for virtual and augmented reality headsets, first mentioned in 2017. According to Bloomberg, the headset may come out in 2023. Further insider reports state that the device uses iris scanning for payment confirmation and signing into accounts. On June 18, 2022, the Apple Store in Towson, Maryland became the first to unionize in the U.S., with the employees voting to join the International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers. On July 7, 2022, Apple added Lockdown Mode to macOS 13 and iOS 16, as a response to the earlier Pegasus revelations; the mode increases security protections for high-risk users against targeted zero-day malware. Apple launched a buy now, pay later service called 'Apple Pay Later' for its Apple Wallet users in March 2023. The program allows its users to apply for loans between $50 and $1,000 to make online or in-app purchases and then repaying them through four installments spread over six weeks without any interest or fees. In November 2023, Apple agreed to a $25 million settlement in a U.S. Department of Justice case that alleged Apple was discriminating against U.S. citizens in hiring. Apple created jobs that were not listed online and required paper submission to apply for, while advertising these jobs to foreign workers as part of recruitment for PERM. In January 2024, Apple announced compliance with the European Union's competition law, with major changes to the App Store and other services, effective March 7. This enables iOS users in the 27-nation bloc to use alternative app stores, and alternative payment methods within apps. This adds a menu in Safari for downloading alternative browsers, such as Chrome or Firefox. Macintosh, commonly known as Mac, is Apple's line of personal computers that use the company's proprietary macOS operating system. Personal computers were Apple's original business line, but as of the end of 2023[update] they account for only about eight percent of the company's revenue. There are six Macintosh computer families in production: iMac: Consumer all-in-one desktop computer, introduced in 1998. Mac Mini: Consumer sub-desktop computer, introduced in 2005. MacBook Pro: Professional notebook, introduced in 2006. Mac Pro: Professional workstation, introduced in 2006. MacBook Air: Consumer ultra-thin notebook, introduced in 2008. Mac Studio: Professional small form-factor workstation, introduced in 2022. Often described as a walled garden, Macs use Apple silicon chips, run the macOS operating system, and include Apple software like the Safari web browser, iMovie for home movie editing, GarageBand for music creation, and the iWork productivity suite. Apple also sells pro apps: Final Cut Pro for video production, Logic Pro for musicians and producers, and Xcode for software developers. Apple also sells a variety of accessories for Macs, including the Pro Display XDR, Apple Studio Display, Magic Mouse, Magic Trackpad, and Magic Keyboard. The iPhone is Apple's line of smartphones, which run the iOS operating system. The first iPhone was unveiled by Steve Jobs on January 9, 2007. Since then, new models have been released every year. When it was introduced, its multi-touch screen was described as "revolutionary" and a "game-changer" for the mobile phone industry. The device has been credited with creating the app economy. iOS is one of the two largest smartphone platforms in the world alongside Android. The iPhone has generated large profits for the company, and is credited with helping to make Apple one of the world's most valuable publicly traded companies. As of the end of 2023[update], the iPhone accounts for more than half of the company's revenue. The iPad is Apple's line of tablets which run iPadOS. The first-generation iPad was announced on January 27, 2010. The iPad is mainly marketed for consuming multimedia, creating art, working on documents, videoconferencing, and playing games. The iPad lineup consists of several base iPad models, and the smaller iPad Mini, upgraded iPad Air, and high-end iPad Pro. Apple has consistently improved the iPad's performance, with the iPad Pro adopting the same M1 and M2 chips as the Mac; but the iPad still receives criticism for its limited OS. As of September 2020,[update] Apple has sold more than 500 million iPads, though sales peaked in 2013. The iPad still remains the most popular tablet computer by sales as of the second quarter of 2020[update], and accounted for seven percent of the company's revenue as of the end of 2023[update]. Apple sells several iPad accessories, including the Apple Pencil, Smart Keyboard, Smart Keyboard Folio, Magic Keyboard, and several adapters. Apple makes several other products that it categorizes as "Wearables, Home and Accessories". These products include the AirPods line of wireless headphones, Apple TV digital media players, Apple Watch smartwatches, Beats headphones, HomePod smart speakers, and the Vision Pro mixed reality headset. As of the end of 2023[update], this broad line of products comprises about ten percent of the company's revenues. Apple offers a broad line of services, including advertising in the App Store and Apple News app, the AppleCare+ extended warranty plan, the iCloud+ cloud-based data storage service, payment services through the Apple Card credit card and the Apple Pay processing platform, digital content services including Apple Books, Apple Fitness+, Apple Music, Apple News+, Apple TV+, and the iTunes Store. As of the end of 2023[update], services comprise about 22% of the company's revenue. In 2019, Apple announced it would be making a concerted effort to expand its service revenues. According to Steve Jobs, the company's name was inspired by his visit to an apple farm while on a fruitarian diet. Jobs thought the name "Apple" was "fun, spirited and not intimidating". Steve Jobs and Steve Wozniak were fans of the Beatles, but Apple Inc. had name and logo trademark issues with Apple Corps Ltd., a multimedia company started by the Beatles in 1968. This resulted in a series of lawsuits and tension between the two companies. These issues ended when they settled their lawsuit in 2007. Apple's first logo, designed by Ron Wayne, depicts Sir Isaac Newton sitting under an apple tree. It was almost immediately replaced by Rob Janoff's "rainbow Apple", the now-familiar rainbow-colored silhouette of an apple with a bite taken out of it. On August 27, 1999, Apple officially dropped the rainbow scheme and began to use monochromatic logos nearly identical in shape to the previous rainbow incarnation. Apple evangelists were actively engaged by the company at one time, but this was after the phenomenon had already been firmly established. Apple evangelist Guy Kawasaki has called the brand fanaticism "something that was stumbled upon," while Ive claimed in 2014 that "people have an incredibly personal relationship" with Apple's products. Fortune magazine named Apple the most admired company in the United States in 2008, and in the world from 2008 to 2012. On September 30, 2013, Apple surpassed Coca-Cola to become the world's most valuable brand in the Omnicom Group's "Best Global Brands" report. Boston Consulting Group has ranked Apple as the world's most innovative brand every year as of 2005[update]. As of January 2021,[update] 1.65 billion Apple products were in active use. In February 2023, that number exceeded 2 billion devices. Apple's first slogan, "Byte into an Apple", was coined in the late 1970s. From 1997 to 2002, the slogan "Think different" was used in advertising campaigns, and is still closely associated with Apple. Apple also has slogans for specific product lines—for example, "iThink, therefore iMac" was used in 1998 to promote the iMac, and "Say hello to iPhone" has been used in iPhone advertisements. "Hello" was also used to introduce the original Macintosh, Newton, iMac ("hello (again)"), and iPod. From the introduction of the Macintosh in 1984, with the 1984 Super Bowl advertisement to the more modern Get a Mac adverts, Apple has been recognized for its efforts toward effective advertising and marketing for its products. However, claims made by later campaigns were criticized, particularly the 2005 Power Mac ads. Apple's product advertisements gained significant attention as a result of their eye-popping graphics and catchy tunes. Musicians who benefited from an improved profile as a result of their songs being included on Apple advertisements include Canadian singer Feist with the song "1234" and Yael Naïm with the song "New Soul". The first Apple Stores were originally opened as two locations in May 2001 by then-CEO Steve Jobs, after years of attempting but failing store-within-a-store concepts. Seeing a need for improved retail presentation of the company's products, he began an effort in 1997 to revamp the retail program to get an improved relationship to consumers, and hired Ron Johnson in 2000. Jobs relaunched Apple's online store in 1997, and opened the first two physical stores in 2001. The media initially speculated that Apple would fail, but its stores were highly successful, bypassing the sales numbers of competing nearby stores and within three years reached US$1 billion in annual sales, becoming the fastest retailer in history to do so. Over the years, Apple has expanded the number of retail locations and its geographical coverage, with 499 stores across 22 countries worldwide as of December 2017[update]. Strong product sales have placed Apple among the top-tier retail stores, with sales over $16 billion globally in 2011. Apple Stores underwent a period of significant redesign, beginning in May 2016. This redesign included physical changes to the Apple Stores, such as open spaces and re-branded rooms, and changes in function to facilitate interaction between consumers and professionals. Many Apple Stores are located inside shopping malls, but Apple has built several stand-alone "flagship" stores in high-profile locations. It has been granted design patents and received architectural awards for its stores' designs and construction, specifically for its use of glass staircases and cubes. The success of Apple Stores have had significant influence over other consumer electronics retailers, who have lost traffic, control and profits due to a perceived higher quality of service and products at Apple Stores. Due to the popularity of the brand, Apple receives a large number of job applications, many of which come from young workers. Although Apple Store employees receive above-average pay, are offered money toward education and health care, and receive product discounts, there are limited or no paths of career advancement. On March 16, 2020, France fined Apple €1.1 billion for colluding with two wholesalers to stifle competition and keep prices high by handicapping independent resellers. The arrangement created aligned prices for Apple products such as iPads and personal computers for about half the French retail market. According to the French regulators, the abuses occurred between 2005 and 2017 but were first discovered after a complaint by an independent reseller, eBizcuss, in 2012. On August 13, 2020, Epic Games, the maker of the popular game Fortnite, sued both Apple and Google after Fortnite was removed from Apple's and Google's App stores. The lawsuits came after Apple and Google blocked the game after it introduced a direct payment system that bypassed the fees that Apple and Google had imposed. In September 2020, Epic Games founded the Coalition for App Fairness together with thirteen other companies, which aims for better conditions for the inclusion of apps in the app stores. Later, in December 2020, Facebook agreed to assist Epic in their legal game against Apple, planning to support the company by providing materials and documents to Epic. Facebook had, however, stated that the company would not participate directly with the lawsuit, although did commit to helping with the discovery of evidence relating to the trial of 2021. In the months prior to their agreement, Facebook had been dealing with feuds against Apple relating to the prices of paid apps and privacy rule changes. Head of ad products for Facebook Dan Levy commented, saying that "this is not really about privacy for them, this is about an attack on personalized ads and the consequences it's going to have on small-business owners," commenting on the full-page ads placed by Facebook in various newspapers in December 2020. Apple has publicly taken a pro-privacy stance, actively making privacy-conscious features and settings part of its conferences, promotional campaigns, and public image. With its iOS 8 mobile operating system in 2014, the company started encrypting all contents of iOS devices through users' passcodes, making it impossible at the time for the company to provide customer data to law enforcement requests seeking such information. With the popularity rise of cloud storage solutions, Apple began a technique in 2016 to do deep learning scans for facial data in photos on the user's local device and encrypting the content before uploading it to Apple's iCloud storage system. It also introduced "differential privacy", a way to collect crowdsourced data from many users, while keeping individual users anonymous, in a system that Wired described as "trying to learn as much as possible about a group while learning as little as possible about any individual in it". Users are explicitly asked if they want to participate, and can actively opt-in or opt-out. However, Apple has aided law enforcement in criminal investigations by providing iCloud backups of users' devices, and the company's commitment to privacy has been questioned by its efforts to promote biometric authentication technology in its newer iPhone models, which do not have the same level of constitutional privacy as a passcode in the United States. With Apple's release of an update to iOS 14, Apple required all developers of iPhone, iPad, and iPod Touch applications to directly ask iPhone users permission to track them. The feature, called "App Tracking Transparency", received heavy criticism from Facebook, whose primary business model revolves around the tracking of users' data and sharing such data with advertisers so users can see more relevant ads, a technique commonly known as targeted advertising. After Facebook's measures, including purchasing full-page newspaper advertisements protesting App Tracking Transparency, Apple released the update in early 2021. A study by Verizon subsidiary Flurry Analytics reported only 4% of iOS users in the United States and 12% worldwide have opted into tracking. Prior to the release of iOS 15, Apple announced new efforts at combating child sexual abuse material on iOS and Mac platforms. Parents of minor iMessage users can now be alerted if their child sends or receives nude photographs. Additionally, on-device hashing would take place on media destined for upload to iCloud, and hashes would be compared to a list of known abusive images provided by law enforcement; if enough matches were found, Apple would be alerted and authorities informed. The new features received praise from law enforcement and victims rights advocates, however privacy advocates, including the Electronic Frontier Foundation, condemned the new features as invasive and highly prone to abuse by authoritarian governments. Ireland's Data Protection Commission launched a privacy investigation to examine whether Apple complied with the EU's GDPR law following an investigation into how the company processes personal data with targeted ads on its platform. In December 2019, security researcher Brian Krebs discovered that the iPhone 11 Pro would still show the arrow indicator –signifying location services are being used– at the top of the screen while the main location services toggle is enabled, despite all individual location services being disabled. Krebs was unable to replicate this behavior on older models and when asking Apple for comment, he was told by Apple that "It is expected behavior that the Location Services icon appears in the status bar when Location Services is enabled. The icon appears for system services that do not have a switch in Settings." Apple later further clarified that this behavior was to ensure compliance with ultra-wideband regulations in specific countries, a technology Apple started implementing in iPhones starting with iPhone 11 Pro, and emphasized that "the management of ultra wideband compliance and its use of location data is done entirely on the device and Apple is not collecting user location data." Will Strafach, an executive at security firm Guardian Firewall, confirmed the lack of evidence that location data was sent off to a remote server. Apple promised to add a new toggle for this feature and in later iOS revisions Apple provided users with the option to tap on the location services indicator in Control Center to see which specific service is using the device's location. According to published reports by Bloomberg News on March 30, 2022, Apple turned over data such as phone numbers, physical addresses, and IP addresses to hackers posing as law enforcement officials using forged documents. The law enforcement requests sometimes included forged signatures of real or fictional officials. When asked about the allegations, an Apple representative referred the reporter to a section of the company policy for law enforcement guidelines, which stated, "We review every data request for legal sufficiency and use advanced systems and processes to validate law enforcement requests and detect abuse." The key trends for Apple are, as of each financial year ending September 24: As of March 16, 2021[update], the management of Apple Inc. includes: Tim Cook (chief executive officer) Jeff Williams (chief operating officer) Luca Maestri (senior vice president and chief financial officer) Katherine L. Adams (senior vice president and general counsel) Eddy Cue (senior vice president – Internet Software and Services) Craig Federighi (senior vice president – Software Engineering) John Giannandrea (senior vice president – Machine Learning and AI Strategy) Deirdre O'Brien (senior vice president – Retail + People) John Ternus (senior vice president – Hardware Engineering) Greg Josiwak (senior vice president – Worldwide Marketing) Johny Srouji (senior vice president – Hardware Technologies) Sabih Khan (senior vice president – Operations) As of January 20, 2023[update], the board of directors of Apple Inc. includes: Arthur D. Levinson (chairman) Tim Cook (executive director and CEO) James A. Bell Al Gore Alex Gorsky Andrea Jung Monica Lozano Ronald Sugar Susan Wagner Michael Scott (1977–1981) Mike Markkula (1981–1983) John Sculley (1983–1993) Michael Spindler (1993–1996) Gil Amelio (1996–1997) Steve Jobs (1997–2011) As of December 30, 2023[update], the largest shareholder of Apple were: The Vanguard Group (1,317,966,471 shares, 8.54%) BlackRock (1,042,391,808 shares, 6.75%) Berkshire Hathaway (905,560,000 shares, 5.86%) State Street Corporation (586,052,057 shares, 3.80%) Geode Capital Management (300,822,623 shares, 1.95%) Fidelity Investments (299,871,352 shares, 1.94%) Morgan Stanley (217,961,227 shares, 1.41%) T. Rowe Price (210,827,097 shares, 1.37%) Norges Bank (176,141,203 shares, 1.14%) Northern Trust (162,115,200 shares, 1.05%) Apple is one of several highly successful companies founded in the 1970s that bucked the traditional notions of corporate culture. Jobs often walked around the office barefoot even after Apple became a Fortune 500 company. By the time of the "1984" television advertisement, Apple's informal culture had become a key trait that differentiated it from its competitors. According to a 2011 report in Fortune, this has resulted in a corporate culture more akin to a startup rather than a multinational corporation. In a 2017 interview, Wozniak credited watching Star Trek and attending Star Trek conventions in his youth as inspiration for co-founding Apple. As the company has grown and been led by a series of differently opinionated chief executives, it has arguably lost some of its original character. Nonetheless, it has maintained a reputation for fostering individuality and excellence that reliably attracts talented workers, particularly after Jobs returned. Numerous Apple employees have stated that projects without Jobs's involvement often took longer than others. The Apple Fellows program awards employees for extraordinary technical or leadership contributions to personal computing. Recipients include Bill Atkinson, Steve Capps, Rod Holt, Alan Kay, Guy Kawasaki, Al Alcorn, Don Norman, Rich Page, Steve Wozniak, and Phil Schiller. At Apple, employees are intended to be specialists who are not exposed to functions outside their area of expertise.[needs update] Jobs saw this as a means of having "best-in-class" employees in every role. For instance, Ron Johnson—Senior Vice President of Retail Operations until November 1, 2011—was responsible for site selection, in-store service, and store layout, yet had no control of the inventory in his stores. This was done by Tim Cook, who had a background in supply-chain management. Apple is known for strictly enforcing accountability. Each project has a "directly responsible individual" or "DRI" in Apple jargon. As an example, when iOS senior vice president Scott Forstall refused to sign Apple's official apology for numerous errors in the redesigned Maps app, he was forced to resign. Unlike other major U.S. companies, Apple provides a relatively simple compensation policy for executives that does not include perks enjoyed by other CEOs like country club fees or private use of company aircraft. The company typically grants stock options to executives every other year. In 2015, Apple had 110,000 full-time employees. This increased to 116,000 full-time employees the next year, a notable hiring decrease, largely due to its first revenue decline. Apple does not specify how many of its employees work in retail, though its 2014 SEC filing put the number at approximately half of its employee base. In September 2017, Apple announced that it had over 123,000 full-time employees. Apple has a strong culture of corporate secrecy, and has an anti-leak Global Security team that recruits from the National Security Agency, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and the United States Secret Service. In December 2017, Glassdoor said Apple was the 48th best place to work, having originally entered at rank 19 in 2009, peaking at rank 10 in 2012, and falling down the ranks in subsequent years. In 2023, Bloomberg's Mark Gurman revealed the existence of Apple's Exploratory Design Group (XDG), which was working to add glucose monitoring to the Apple Watch. Gurman compared XDG to Alphabet's X "moonshot factory". Apple Inc.'s world corporate headquarters are located in Cupertino, in the middle of California's Silicon Valley, at Apple Park, a massive circular groundscraper building with a circumference of one mile (1.6 km). The building opened in April 2017 and houses more than 12,000 employees. Apple co-founder Steve Jobs wanted Apple Park to look less like a business park and more like a nature refuge, and personally appeared before the Cupertino City Council in June 2011 to make the proposal, in his final public appearance before his death. Apple also operates from the Apple Campus (also known by its address, 1 Infinite Loop), a grouping of six buildings in Cupertino that total 850,000 square feet (79,000 m2) located about 1 mile (1.6 km) to the west of Apple Park. The Apple Campus was the company's headquarters from its opening in 1993, until the opening of Apple Park in 2017. The buildings, located at 1–6 Infinite Loop, are arranged in a circular pattern around a central green space, in a design that has been compared to that of a university. In addition to Apple Park and the Apple Campus, Apple occupies an additional thirty office buildings scattered throughout the city of Cupertino, including three buildings as prior headquarters: Stephens Creek Three from 1977 to 1978, Bandley One from 1978 to 1982, and Mariani One from 1982 to 1993. In total, Apple occupies almost 40% of the available office space in the city. Apple's headquarters for Europe, the Middle East and Africa (EMEA) are located in Cork in the south of Ireland, called the Hollyhill campus. The facility, which opened in 1980, houses 5,500 people and was Apple's first location outside of the United States. Apple's international sales and distribution arms operate out of the campus in Cork. Apple has two campuses near Austin, Texas: a 216,000-square-foot (20,100 m2) campus opened in 2014 houses 500 engineers who work on Apple silicon and a 1.1-million-square-foot (100,000 m2) campus opened in 2021 where 6,000 people work in technical support, supply chain management, online store curation, and Apple Maps data management. The company also has several other locations in Boulder, Colorado, Culver City, California, Herzliya (Israel), London, New York, Pittsburgh, San Diego, and Seattle that each employ hundreds of people. Apple has been a participant in various legal proceedings and claims since it began operation. In particular, Apple is known for and promotes itself as actively and aggressively enforcing its intellectual property interests. Some litigation examples include Apple v. Samsung, Apple v. Microsoft, Motorola Mobility v. Apple Inc., and Apple Corps v. Apple Computer. Apple has also had to defend itself against charges on numerous occasions of violating intellectual property rights. Most have been dismissed in the courts as shell companies known as patent trolls, with no evidence of actual use of patents in question. On December 21, 2016, Nokia announced that in the U.S. and Germany, it has filed a suit against Apple, claiming that the latter's products infringe on Nokia's patents. Most recently, in November 2017, the United States International Trade Commission announced an investigation into allegations of patent infringement in regards to Apple's remote desktop technology; Aqua Connect, a company that builds remote desktop software, has claimed that Apple infringed on two of its patents. In January 2022, Ericsson sued Apple over payment of royalty of 5G technology. Apple is the world's largest technology company by revenue, the world's largest technology company by total assets, and the world's second-largest mobile phone manufacturer after Samsung. In its fiscal year ending in September 2011, Apple Inc. reported a total of $108 billion in annual revenues—a significant increase from its 2010 revenues of $65 billion—and nearly $82 billion in cash reserves. On March 19, 2012, Apple announced plans for a $2.65-per-share dividend beginning in fourth quarter of 2012, per approval by their board of directors. The company's worldwide annual revenue in 2013 totaled $170 billion. In May 2013, Apple entered the top ten of the Fortune 500 list of companies for the first time, rising 11 places above its 2012 ranking to take the sixth position. As of 2016[update], Apple has around US$234 billion of cash and marketable securities, of which 90% is located outside the United States for tax purposes. Apple amassed 65% of all profits made by the eight largest worldwide smartphone manufacturers in quarter one of 2014, according to a report by Canaccord Genuity. In the first quarter of 2015, the company garnered 92% of all earnings. On April 30, 2017, The Wall Street Journal reported that Apple had cash reserves of $250 billion, officially confirmed by Apple as specifically $256.8 billion a few days later. As of August 3, 2018[update], Apple was the largest publicly traded corporation in the world by market capitalization. On August 2, 2018, Apple became the first publicly traded U.S. company to reach a $1 trillion market value. Apple was ranked No. 4 on the 2018 Fortune 500 rankings of the largest United States corporations by total revenue. In July 2022, Apple reported an 11% decline in Q3 profits compared to 2021. Its revenue in the same period rose 2% year-on-year to $83 billion, though this figure was also lower than in 2021, where the increase was at 36%. The general downturn is reportedly caused by the slowing global economy and supply chain disruptions in China. In May 2023, Apple reported a decline in its sales for the first quarter of 2023. Compared to that of 2022, revenue for 2023 fell by 3%. This is Apple's second consecutive quarter of sales decline. This fall is attributed to the slowing economy and consumers putting off purchases of iPads and computers due to increased pricing. However, iPhone sales held up with a year-on-year increase of 1.5%. According to Apple, demands for such devices were strong, particularly in Latin America and South Asia. Apple has created subsidiaries in low-tax places such as Ireland, the Netherlands, Luxembourg, and the British Virgin Islands to cut the taxes it pays around the world. According to The New York Times, in the 1980s Apple was among the first tech companies to designate overseas salespeople in high-tax countries in a manner that allowed the company to sell on behalf of low-tax subsidiaries on other continents, sidestepping income taxes. In the late 1980s, Apple was a pioneer of an accounting technique known as the "Double Irish with a Dutch sandwich", which reduces taxes by routing profits through Irish subsidiaries and the Netherlands and then to the Caribbean. British Conservative Party Member of Parliament Charlie Elphicke published research on October 30, 2012, which showed that some multinational companies, including Apple Inc., were making billions of pounds of profit in the UK, but were paying an effective tax rate to the UK Treasury of only 3 percent, well below standard corporate tax rates. He followed this research by calling on the Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne to force these multinationals, which also included Google and The Coca-Cola Company, to state the effective rate of tax they pay on their UK revenues. Elphicke also said that government contracts should be withheld from multinationals who do not pay their fair share of UK tax. According to a US Senate report on the company's offshore tax structure concluded in May 2013, Apple has held billions of dollars in profits in Irish subsidiaries to pay little or no taxes to any government by using an unusual global tax structure. The main subsidiary, a holding company that includes Apple's retail stores throughout Europe, has not paid any corporate income tax in the last five years. "Apple has exploited a difference between Irish and U.S. tax residency rules", the report said. On May 21, 2013, Apple CEO Tim Cook defended his company's tax tactics at a Senate hearing. Apple says that it is the single largest taxpayer in the U.S., with an effective tax rate of approximately of 26% as of Q2 FY2016. In an interview with the German newspaper FAZ in October 2017, Tim Cook stated that Apple was the biggest taxpayer worldwide. In 2016, after a two-year investigation, the European Commission claimed that Apple's use of a hybrid Double Irish tax arrangement constituted "illegal state aid" from Ireland, and ordered Apple to pay 13 billion euros ($14.5 billion) in unpaid taxes, the largest corporate tax fine in history. This was later annulled, after the European General Court ruled that the commission had provided insufficient evidence. In 2018, Apple repatriated $285 billion to America, resulting in a $38 billion tax payment spread over the following eight years. Apple is a partner of Product Red, a fundraising campaign for AIDS charity. In November 2014, Apple arranged for all App Store revenue in a two-week period to go to the fundraiser, generating more than US$20 million, and in March 2017, it released an iPhone 7 with a red color finish. Apple contributes financially to fundraisers in times of natural disasters. In November 2012, it donated $2.5 million to the American Red Cross to aid relief efforts after Hurricane Sandy, and in 2017 it donated $5 million to relief efforts for both Hurricane Irma and Hurricane Harvey, and for the 2017 Central Mexico earthquake. The company has used its iTunes platform to encourage donations in the wake of environmental disasters and humanitarian crises, such as the 2010 Haiti earthquake, the 2011 Japan earthquake, Typhoon Haiyan in the Philippines in November 2013, and the 2015 European migrant crisis. Apple emphasizes that it does not incur any processing or other fees for iTunes donations, sending 100% of the payments directly to relief efforts, though it also acknowledges that the Red Cross does not receive any personal information on the users donating and that the payments may not be tax deductible. On April 14, 2016, Apple and the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) announced that they have engaged in a partnership to, "help protect life on our planet." Apple released a special page in the iTunes App Store, Apps for Earth. In the arrangement, Apple has committed that through April 24, WWF will receive 100% of the proceeds from the applications participating in the App Store via both the purchases of any paid apps and the In-App Purchases. Apple and WWF's Apps for Earth campaign raised more than $8 million in total proceeds to support WWF's conservation work. WWF announced the results at WWDC 2016 in San Francisco. During the COVID-19 pandemic, Apple's CEO Cook announced that the company will be donating "millions" of masks to health workers in the United States and Europe. On January 13, 2021, Apple announced a $100 million Racial Equity and Justice Initiative to help combat institutional racism worldwide after the 2020 murder of George Floyd. In June 2023, Apple announced doubling this and then distributed more than $200 million to support organizations focused on education, economic growth, and criminal justice. Half is philanthropic grants and half is centered on equity. Apple Energy, LLC is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Apple Inc. that sells solar energy. As of June 6, 2016[update], Apple's solar farms in California and Nevada have been declared to provide 217.9 megawatts of solar generation capacity. Apple has received regulatory approval to construct a landfill gas energy plant in North Carolina to use the methane emissions to generate electricity. Apple's North Carolina data center is already powered entirely by renewable sources. In 2010, Climate Counts, a nonprofit organization dedicated to directing consumers toward the greenest companies, gave Apple a score of 52 points out of a possible 100, which puts Apple in their top category "Striding". This was an increase from May 2008, when Climate Counts only gave Apple 11 points out of 100, which placed the company last among electronics companies, at which time Climate Counts also labeled Apple with a "stuck icon", adding that Apple at the time was "a choice to avoid for the climate-conscious consumer". Following a Greenpeace protest, Apple released a statement on April 17, 2012, committing to ending its use of coal and shifting to 100% renewable clean energy. By 2013, Apple was using 100% renewable energy to power their data centers. Overall, 75% of the company's power came from clean renewable sources. In May 2015, Greenpeace evaluated the state of the Green Internet and commended Apple on their environmental practices saying, "Apple's commitment to renewable energy has helped set a new bar for the industry, illustrating in very concrete terms that a 100% renewable Internet is within its reach, and providing several models of intervention for other companies that want to build a sustainable Internet." As of 2016[update], Apple states that 100% of its U.S. operations run on renewable energy, 100% of Apple's data centers run on renewable energy and 93% of Apple's global operations run on renewable energy. However, the facilities are connected to the local grid which usually contains a mix of fossil and renewable sources, so Apple carbon offsets its electricity use. The Electronic Product Environmental Assessment Tool (EPEAT) allows consumers to see the effect a product has on the environment. Each product receives a Gold, Silver, or Bronze rank depending on its efficiency and sustainability. Every Apple tablet, notebook, desktop computer, and display that EPEAT ranks achieves a Gold rating, the highest possible. Although Apple's data centers recycle water 35 times, the increased activity in retail, corporate and data centers also increase the amount of water use to 573 million US gal (2.2 million m3) in 2015. During an event on March 21, 2016, Apple provided a status update on its environmental initiative to be 100% renewable in all of its worldwide operations. Lisa P. Jackson, Apple's vice president of Environment, Policy and Social Initiatives who reports directly to CEO, Tim Cook, announced that as of March 2016[update], 93% of Apple's worldwide operations are powered with renewable energy. Also featured was the company's efforts to use sustainable paper in their product packaging; 99% of all paper used by Apple in the product packaging comes from post-consumer recycled paper or sustainably managed forests, as the company continues its move to all paper packaging for all of its products. Apple working in partnership with Conservation Fund, have preserved 36,000 acres of working forests in Maine and North Carolina. Another partnership announced is with the World Wildlife Fund to preserve up to 1,000,000 acres (4,000 km2) of forests in China. Featured was the company's installation of a 40 MW solar power plant in the Sichuan province of China that was tailor-made to coexist with the indigenous yaks that eat hay produced on the land, by raising the panels to be several feet off of the ground so the yaks and their feed would be unharmed grazing beneath the array. This installation alone compensates for more than all of the energy used in Apple's Stores and Offices in the whole of China, negating the company's energy carbon footprint in the country. In Singapore, Apple has worked with the Singaporean government to cover the rooftops of 800 buildings in the city-state with solar panels allowing Apple's Singapore operations to be run on 100% renewable energy. Liam was introduced to the world, an advanced robotic disassembler and sorter designed by Apple Engineers in California specifically for recycling outdated or broken iPhones. Reuses and recycles parts from traded in products. Apple announced on August 16, 2016, that Lens Technology, one of its major suppliers in China, has committed to power all its glass production for Apple with 100 percent renewable energy by 2018. The commitment is a large step in Apple's efforts to help manufacturers lower their carbon footprint in China. Apple also announced that all 14 of its final assembly sites in China are now compliant with UL's Zero Waste to Landfill validation. The standard, which started in January 2015, certifies that all manufacturing waste is reused, recycled, composted, or converted into energy (when necessary). Since the program began, nearly 140,000 metric tons of waste have been diverted from landfills. On July 21, 2020, Apple announced its plan to become carbon neutral across its entire business, manufacturing supply chain, and product life cycle by 2030. In the next 10 years, Apple will try to lower emissions with a series of innovative actions, including: low carbon product design, expanding energy efficiency, renewable energy, process and material innovations, and carbon removal. In April 2021, Apple said that it had started a $200 million fund in order to combat climate change by removing 1 million metric tons of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere each year. In February 2022, the NewClimate Institute, a German environmental policy think tank, published a survey evaluating the transparency and progress of the climate strategies and carbon neutrality pledges announced by 25 major companies in the United States that found that Apple's carbon neutrality pledge and climate strategy was unsubstantiated and misleading. In Russia, in 2022, the company's revenue amounted to 85 billion rubles. In 2023, Apple announced it was dropping leather from its product lines, citing the material's "significant carbon footprint". The move earned Apple a 2023 Company of the Year award from PETA. Following further campaigns by Greenpeace, in 2008, Apple became the first electronics manufacturer to eliminate all polyvinyl chloride (PVC) and brominated flame retardants (BFRs) in its complete product line. In June 2007, Apple began replacing the cold cathode fluorescent lamp (CCFL) backlit LCD displays in its computers with mercury-free LED-backlit LCD displays and arsenic-free glass, starting with the upgraded MacBook Pro. Apple offers comprehensive and transparent information about the CO2e, emissions, materials, and electrical usage concerning every product they currently produce or have sold in the past (and which they have enough data needed to produce the report), in their portfolio on their homepage. Allowing consumers to make informed purchasing decisions on the products they offer for sale. In June 2009, Apple's iPhone 3GS was free of PVC, arsenic, and BFRs. All Apple products now have mercury-free LED-backlit LCD displays, arsenic-free glass, and non-PVC cables. All Apple products have EPEAT Gold status and beat the latest Energy Star guidelines in each product's respective regulatory category. In November 2011, Apple was featured in Greenpeace's Guide to Greener Electronics, which ranks electronics manufacturers on sustainability, climate and energy policy, and how "green" their products are. The company ranked fourth of fifteen electronics companies (moving up five places from the previous year) with a score of 4.6/10. Greenpeace praised Apple's sustainability, noting that the company exceeded its 70% global recycling goal in 2010. Apple continues to score well on product ratings, with all of their products now being free of PVC plastic and BFRs. However, the guide criticized Apple on the Energy criteria for not seeking external verification of its greenhouse gas emissions data, and for not setting any targets to reduce emissions. In January 2012, Apple requested that its cable maker, Volex, begin producing halogen-free USB and power cables. In February 2016, Apple issued a $1.5 billion green bond (climate bond), the first ever of its kind by a U.S. tech company. The green bond proceeds are dedicated to the financing of environmental projects. Apple products were made in America in Apple-owned factories until the late 1990s; however, as a result of outsourcing initiatives in the 2000s, almost all of its manufacturing is now handled abroad. According to a report by The New York Times, Apple insiders "believe the vast scale of overseas factories, as well as the flexibility, diligence and industrial skills of foreign workers, have so outpaced their American counterparts that 'Made in the USA' is no longer a viable option for most Apple products". The company's manufacturing, procurement, and logistics enable it to execute massive product launches without having to maintain large, profit-sapping inventories. In 2011, Apple's profit margins were 40 percent, compared with between 10 and 20 percent for most other hardware companies. Cook's catchphrase to describe his focus on the company's operational arm is: "Nobody wants to buy sour milk." In May 2017, the company announced a $1 billion funding project for "advanced manufacturing" in the United States, and subsequently invested $200 million in Corning Inc., a manufacturer of toughened Gorilla Glass technology used in its iPhone devices. The following December, Apple's chief operating officer, Jeff Williams, told CNBC that the "$1 billion" amount was "absolutely not" the final limit on its spending, elaborating that "We're not thinking in terms of a fund limit... We're thinking about, where are the opportunities across the U.S. to help nurture companies that are making the advanced technology— and the advanced manufacturing that goes with that— that quite frankly is essential to our innovation." As of 2021[update], Apple uses components from 43 countries. The majority of assembling is done by Taiwanese original design manufacturer firms Foxconn, Pegatron, Wistron and Compal Electronics with factories mostly located inside China, but also Brazil, and India. Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co., (TSMC) is a pure-play semiconductor manufacturing company. They make the majority of Apple's smartphone SoCs, with Samsung Semiconductor, playing a minority role. Apple, alone accounted for over 25% of TSMC's total income in 2021. Apple's Bionic lineup of smartphone SoCs, are currently made exclusively by TSMC from the A11 bionic onward, previously manufacturing was shared with Samsung. The M series of Apple SoC for consumer computers and tablets is made by TSMC. During the Mac's early history Apple generally refused to adopt prevailing industry standards for hardware, instead creating their own. This trend was largely reversed in the late 1990s, beginning with Apple's adoption of the PCI bus in the 7500/8500/9500 Power Macs. Apple has since joined the industry standards groups to influence the future direction of technology standards such as USB, AGP, HyperTransport, Wi-Fi, NVMe, PCIe and others in its products. FireWire is an Apple-originated standard that was widely adopted across the industry after it was standardized as IEEE 1394 and is a legally mandated port in all Cable TV boxes in the United States. Apple has gradually expanded its efforts in getting its products into the Indian market. In July 2012, during a conference call with investors, CEO Tim Cook said that he "[loves] India", but that Apple saw larger opportunities outside the region. India's requirement that 30% of products sold be manufactured in the country was described as "really adds cost to getting product to market". In May 2016, Apple opened an iOS app development center in Bangalore and a maps development office for 4,000 staff in Hyderabad. In March, The Wall Street Journal reported that Apple would begin manufacturing iPhone models in India "over the next two months", and in May, the Journal wrote that an Apple manufacturer had begun production of iPhone SE in the country, while Apple told CNBC that the manufacturing was for a "small number" of units. In April 2019, Apple initiated manufacturing of iPhone 7 at its Bengaluru facility, keeping in mind demand from local customers even as they seek more incentives from the government of India. At the beginning of 2020, Tim Cook announced that Apple schedules the opening of its first physical outlet in India for 2021, while an online store is to be launched by the end of the year. During the 2022 COVID-19 protests in China, Chinese state-owned company Wingtech was reported by The Wall Street Journal to gain an additional foothold in Apple's supply chain following protests at a Foxconn factory in the Zhengzhou Airport Economy Zone. In 2006, one complex of factories in Shenzhen, China that assembled the iPod and other items had over 200,000 workers living and working within it. Employees regularly worked more than 60 hours per week and made around $100 per month. A little over half of the workers' earnings was required to pay for rent and food from the company. Apple immediately launched an investigation after the 2006 media report, and worked with their manufacturers to ensure acceptable working conditions. In 2007, Apple started yearly audits of all its suppliers regarding worker's rights, slowly raising standards and pruning suppliers that did not comply. Yearly progress reports have been published as of 2008[update]. In 2011, Apple admitted that its suppliers' child labor practices in China had worsened. The Foxconn suicides occurred between January and November 2010, when 18 Foxconn (Chinese: 富士康) employees attempted suicide, resulting in 14 deaths—the company was the world's largest contract electronics manufacturer, for clients including Apple, at the time. The suicides drew media attention, and employment practices at Foxconn were investigated by Apple. Apple issued a public statement about the suicides, and company spokesperson Steven Dowling said: [Apple is] saddened and upset by the recent suicides at Foxconn ... A team from Apple is independently evaluating the steps they are taking to address these tragic events and we will continue our ongoing inspections of the facilities where our products are made. The statement was released after the results from the company's probe into its suppliers' labor practices were published in early 2010. Foxconn was not specifically named in the report, but Apple identified a series of serious labor violations of labor laws, including Apple's own rules, and some child labor existed in a number of factories. Apple committed to the implementation of changes following the suicides. Also in 2010, workers in China planned to sue iPhone contractors over poisoning by a cleaner used to clean LCD screens. One worker claimed that he and his coworkers had not been informed of possible occupational illnesses. After a high suicide rate in a Foxconn facility in China making iPads and iPhones, albeit a lower rate than that of China as a whole, workers were forced to sign a legally binding document guaranteeing that they would not kill themselves. Workers in factories producing Apple products have also been exposed to hexane, a neurotoxin that is a cheaper alternative than alcohol for cleaning the products. A 2014 BBC investigation found excessive hours and other problems persisted, after Apple's promise to reform factory practice after the 2010 Foxconn suicides. The Pegatron factory was again the subject of review, as reporters gained access to the working conditions inside through recruitment as employees. The BBC maintained that the experiences of its reporters showed that labor violations were continuing as of 2010[update], but Apple publicly disagreed with the BBC and stated: "We are aware of no other company doing as much as Apple to ensure fair and safe working conditions". In December 2014, the Institute for Global Labour and Human Rights published a report which documented inhumane conditions for the 15,000 workers at a Zhen Ding Technology factory in Shenzhen, China, which serves as a major supplier of circuit boards for Apple's iPhone and iPad. According to the report, workers are pressured into 65-hour work weeks which leaves them so exhausted that they often sleep during lunch breaks. They are also made to reside in "primitive, dark and filthy dorms" where they sleep "on plywood, with six to ten workers in each crowded room." Omnipresent security personnel also routinely harass and beat the workers. In 2019, there were reports stating that some of Foxconn's managers had used rejected parts to build iPhones and that Apple was investigating the issue. List of Apple Inc. media events Pixar "Net sales" "Net income" "Apple 10-K Report FY2023". November 2, 2023. Archived from the original on February 6, 2024. Retrieved February 5, 2024. "Apple Inc. Fiscal 2023 Annual Report (Form 10-K)". U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. November 3, 2023. Archived from the original on November 7, 2023. Retrieved November 7, 2023. "Apple Retail Store – Store List". Apple. Archived from the original on June 2, 2020. Retrieved June 3, 2020. Certificate of Amendment of Articles of Incorporation Archived September 26, 2020, at the Wayback Machine, November 17, 1977. California Secretary of State Certificate of Ownership Archived February 17, 2021, at the Wayback Machine, January 9, 2007. California Secretary of State. "Microsoft Tops Apple to Become Most Valuable Public Company - The New York Times". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 31, 2024. Retrieved February 21, 2024. "Largest Companies by Market Cap". CompaniesMarketcap.com. Archived from the original on April 14, 2021. Retrieved March 17, 2024. "Apple Reports Fourth Quarter Results". Apple Newsroom. Archived from the original on October 27, 2022. Retrieved March 22, 2023. "Gartner Says Worldwide PC Shipments Increased 0.3% in Fourth Quarter of 2023 but Declined 14.8% for the Year". Gartner. January 11, 2024. Archived from the original on January 11, 2024. Retrieved January 11, 2024. Porter, Jon (January 16, 2024). "Apple tops Samsung for first time in global smartphone shipments". The Verge. Archived from the original on January 17, 2024. Retrieved January 17, 2024. "Apple's market value ends above $3 trillion for first time". Reuters. Archived from the original on July 4, 2023. Retrieved June 30, 2023. Linzmayer 2004, pp. 6–8. Gibbs, Samuel (December 5, 2014). "Steve Wozniak: Apple starting in a garage is a myth". The Guardian. Archived from the original on April 25, 2015. Retrieved November 12, 2019. Linzmayer, Owen W. "Apple Confidential: The Real Story of Apple Computer, Inc". The Denver Post. Archived from the original on April 14, 2012. Williams, Rhiannon (April 1, 2015). "Apple celebrates 39th year on April 1". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved July 9, 2017. "Apple co-founder tells his side of the story". The Sydney Morning Herald. September 28, 2006. Archived from the original on July 3, 2017. Retrieved July 9, 2017.; "A Chat with Computing Pioneer Steve Wozniak". NPR. September 29, 2006. Archived from the original on March 27, 2019. Retrieved July 9, 2017. Isaacson, Walter (October 24, 2011). Steve Jobs: The Exclusive Biography. Little, Brown Book Group. ISBN 978-0-7481-3132-7. O'Grady 2009, pp. 2–3; "The Homebrew Computer Club". Computer History Museum. Archived from the original on March 27, 2019. Retrieved July 9, 2017. Kahney, Leander (November 19, 2002). "Rebuilding an Apple From the Past". Wired. ISSN 1059-1028. Archived from the original on November 7, 2022. Retrieved November 7, 2022. "Building the digital age". BBC News. November 15, 2007. Archived from the original on November 28, 2017. Retrieved January 19, 2008.; "Apple I". Computer History Museum. Archived from the original on March 26, 2007. Retrieved January 19, 2008.; Game Makers (TV Show): Apple II. Originally aired January 6, 2005; "Picture of original ad featuring US666.66 price". Archived from the original on January 15, 2020. Retrieved January 21, 2008. Wozniak, Steve; Smith, Gina (2006). iWoz: Computer Geek to Cult Icon: How I Invented the Personal Computer, Co-Founded Apple, and Had Fun Doing It. W. W. Norton & Company. ISBN 978-0-393-06143-7. OCLC 502898652. Blazeski, Goran (November 25, 2017). "Apple-1, Steve Wozniak's hand-built creation, was Apple's first official product, priced at $666.66". The Vintage News. Archived from the original on July 26, 2020. Retrieved November 24, 2019. Linzmayer 2004, p. 10. "Frequently Asked Questions". Apple Inc. Archived from the original on March 12, 2020. Retrieved January 19, 2020. Luo, Benny (September 12, 2013). "Ronald Wayne: On Co-founding Apple and Working With Steve Jobs". Next Shark. Archived from the original on March 30, 2019. Retrieved July 9, 2017.; Simon, Dan (June 24, 2010). "The gambling man who co-founded Apple and left for $800". CNN. Archived from the original on April 10, 2014. Retrieved July 9, 2017. "Apple chronology". CNNMoney. January 6, 1998. Archived from the original on May 25, 2017. Retrieved May 2, 2017.; Gilbert, Ben (December 26, 2016). "Where are the first 10 Apple employees today?". Business Insider. Archived from the original on March 30, 2019. Retrieved May 2, 2017. Infinite Loop Malone, Michael S. (1999). Infinite loop: how the world's most insanely great computer company went insane. New York: Currency/Doubleday. p. 157. ISBN 978-0-385-48684-2. OCLC 971131326.; McCracken, Harry (April 1, 2016). "Apple's sales grew 150x between 1977–1980". Fast Company. Archived from the original on May 25, 2017. Retrieved May 2, 2017. Linzmayer 2004, p. 12. Linzmayer 2004, pp. 13–15. Weyhrich, Steven (April 21, 2002). "Apple II History Chapter 4". Archived from the original on August 1, 2010. Retrieved August 18, 2008. Bagnall, Brian (2005). On the Edge: The Spectacular Rise and Fall of Commodore. Variant Press. pp. 109–112. ISBN 978-0-9738649-0-8.; Personal Computer Market Share: 1975–2004 Archived June 6, 2012, at the Wayback Machine The figures show Mac higher, but that is not a single model. Reimer, Jeremy (December 15, 2005). "Total share: 30 years of personal computer market share figures". Ars Technica. Archived from the original on June 7, 2012. Retrieved September 1, 2023. Deffree, Suzanne (December 12, 2018). "Apple IPO makes instant millionaires, December 12, 1980". Archived from the original on June 10, 2019. Retrieved May 16, 2019. Dilger, Daniel Eran (December 12, 2013). "Apple, Inc. stock IPO created 300 millionaires 33 years ago today". AppleInsider. Archived from the original on March 30, 2019. Retrieved April 18, 2017. "Steve Wozniak on Newton, Tesla, and why the original Macintosh was a 'lousy' product". June 27, 2013. Archived from the original on March 12, 2016. Retrieved June 25, 2018. Rice, Valerie (April 15, 1985). "Unrecognized Apple II Employees Exit". InfoWorld. p. 35. Archived from the original on March 1, 2023. Retrieved November 6, 2017. Harvey, Brian (1994). "Is Programing Obsolete?". Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley. Archived from the original on October 5, 2013. Retrieved June 14, 2013. Friedman, Ted. "Apple's 1984: The Introduction of the Macintosh in the Cultural History of Personal Computers". Archived from the original on October 14, 2012. Maney, Kevin (January 28, 2004). "Apple's '1984' Super Bowl commercial still stands as watershed event". USA Today. Archived from the original on March 13, 2018. Retrieved April 18, 2017. Leopold, Todd (February 3, 2006). "Why 2006 isn't like '1984'". CNN. Archived from the original on April 5, 2014. Retrieved April 18, 2017. "The greatest commercials of all time". TV Guide. October 12, 1999. Archived from the original on October 12, 1999. Retrieved April 18, 2017.; Taube, Aaron (January 22, 2014). "How The Greatest Super Bowl Ad Ever – Apple's '1984' – Almost Didn't Make It To Air". Business Insider. Archived from the original on March 30, 2019. Retrieved April 18, 2017. Linzmayer 2004, p. 98; Swaine 2014, pp. 441–443; Isaacson, Walter (2015). Steve Jobs. Simon and Schuster. ISBN 978-1-5011-2762-5. pp. 186–187; Hertzfeld, Andy (2005). Revolution in The Valley: The Insanely Great Story of How the Mac Was Made. O'Reilly Media. ISBN 978-0-596-00719-5. Linzmayer 2004, p. 156; Isaacson 2015, pp. 153–154 Gallo, Carmine (January 22, 2014). "How Steve Jobs And Bill Gates Inspired John Sculley To Pursue The 'Noble Cause". Forbes. Archived from the original on March 31, 2019. Retrieved March 31, 2019. Schlender, Brent; Tetzeli, Rick (2016). Becoming Steve Jobs: The Evolution of a Reckless Upstart into a Visionary Leader. Crown Business; Reprint edition. pp. 87–92. ISBN 978-0-385-34742-6.; Linzmayer 2004, p. 156 Linzmayer 2004, pp. 156–157. Spector, G (September 24, 1985). "Apple's Jobs Starts New Firm, Targets Education Market". PC Week. p. 109. "I Never Left Apple". Offally Woz. January 3, 2018. Archived from the original on October 2, 2018. Retrieved October 2, 2018. "CNN.com Video". CNN. Archived from the original on February 3, 2014. Retrieved March 27, 2019. Apple's Other Steve (Stock Research) Archived October 19, 2006, at the Wayback Machine March 2, 2000, The Motley Fool. Linzmayer 2004, pp. 158–159. "The History of Desktop Publishing". Lifewire. Archived from the original on February 27, 2021. Retrieved April 30, 2007. Swaine, Michael (2014). Fire in the Valley: The Birth and Death of the Personal Computer. Pragmatic Bookshelf. ISBN 978-1-68050-352-4. pp. 359–363 Carlton, Jim (1997). Apple: The inside story of intrigue, egomania, and business blunders. New York: Random House. ISBN 978-0-8129-2851-8. Linzmayer 2004, p. 184–185. Linzmayer 2004, p. 160. Linzmayer 2004, p. 128. Hormby, Thomas (February 22, 2006). "Growing Apple with the Macintosh: The Sculley years". Low End Mac. Archived from the original on March 25, 2014. Retrieved March 2, 2007. "MacAddict". MacAddict. No. 89. January 2004. Retrieved April 1, 2017. "Exclusive: New pics of Apple's unreleased tablet prototype from 1992 – and the Mac that flew on the Space Shuttle". stuff.tv. Archived from the original on March 31, 2019. Retrieved April 14, 2016. "Macintosh Performa". Vectronics Apple World. Archived from the original on April 19, 2013. Retrieved November 29, 2010. "The Apple IIGS, Cont". Apple II History. July 10, 2002. Archived from the original on September 12, 2008. Retrieved July 8, 2017. Edwards, Benj (January 18, 2013). "30 years of the Apple Lisa and the Apple IIe". Macworld. International Data Group. Archived from the original on August 19, 2020. Retrieved July 8, 2017. Huddleston, Tom Jr. (January 12, 2021). "From Atari's 'Pong' console to the first CD player and Xbox: 10 of the biggest tech products to debut at Las Vegas' famous Consumer Electronics Show". CNBC. Archived from the original on February 18, 2021. Retrieved May 10, 2021. "1990–1995: Why the World Went Windows". Roughly Drafted. Archived from the original on January 4, 2012. Retrieved August 12, 2008. Hormby, Thomas. The Apple vs. Microsoft GUI lawsuit Archived March 4, 2008, at the Wayback Machine, Low End Mac, August 25, 2006. Retrieved March 2, 2007. "Michael Spindler: The Peter Principle at Apple". Archived from the original on September 8, 2008. Retrieved August 12, 2008. "Power Macintosh 6100". Archived from the original on September 11, 2007. Retrieved August 12, 2008. Linzmayer 2004, pp. 254–256. Chaffin, Bryan. "Former Apple CEO Gil Amelio Lands A New CEO Job | The Mac Observer" Archived November 28, 2017, at the Wayback Machine, The Mac Observer, February 6, 2001. Retrieved August 15, 2008. "1990–1995: Hitting the Wall". Roughly Drafted. Archived from the original on September 24, 2008. Retrieved August 14, 2008. Tom, Hormby (August 10, 2013). "The Rise and Fall of Apple's Gil Amelio". Low End Mac. Cobweb Publishing, Inc. Archived from the original on March 29, 2015. Retrieved March 28, 2015. Thompson, Ben (February 5, 2018). "Apple's Middle Age". Stratechery. Archived from the original on March 31, 2019. Retrieved March 31, 2019. Kawamoto, Dawn (December 20, 1996). "Apple acquires Next, Jobs". CNET. Archived from the original on June 6, 2022. Retrieved October 26, 2022. Apple Computer, Inc. Finalizes Acquisition of NeXT Software Inc. at the Wayback Machine (archive index), Apple Inc., February 7, 1997. Retrieved June 25, 2006. Fell, Jason (October 27, 2011). "How Steve Jobs Saved Apple". Entrepreneur. Archived from the original on January 24, 2022. Retrieved January 24, 2022. Chrasekaran, Rajiv; Shannon, Victoria (August 7, 1997). "Struggling Apple gets boost from Microsoft". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on January 19, 2023. Retrieved January 24, 2022. Young, Steve (August 8, 1997). "Apple bailout questioned". CNN Money. Archived from the original on January 24, 2022. Retrieved January 24, 2022. "Stanford archives offer look into Apple history". Yahoo Finance. December 29, 2011. Archived from the original on January 18, 2024. Retrieved January 18, 2024. "Apple's origins stored in secret Stanford archive". The Seattle Times. December 29, 2011. Archived from the original on January 18, 2024. Retrieved January 18, 2024. "Power Computing Corporation". Official Apple Support. Apple Inc. February 18, 2012. Archived from the original on March 25, 2021. Retrieved May 10, 2017. Harreld, Heather (January 5, 1997). "Apple gains tech, agency customers in Next deal". Federal Computer Week. Archived from the original on December 6, 2008. Retrieved August 15, 2008.; "Apple unveils new marketing strategy". Knight Ridder/Tribune News Service. November 10, 1997. Archived from the original on November 13, 2008. Retrieved August 15, 2008. Apple Canada Inc (January 5, 1999). "800,000 iMacs Sold in First 139 Days". Archived from the original on November 8, 2014. Retrieved January 26, 2008. Raletz, Alyson (June 7, 2012). "Man who came up with iMac name tells what the 'i' stands for". Kansas City Business Journal. Archived from the original on November 6, 2012. Retrieved March 30, 2013. John Arlidge (March 17, 2014). "Jonathan Ive Designs Tomorrow". Time. Archived from the original on March 21, 2014. Retrieved March 22, 2014. Grossman, Lev. The Apple Of Your Ear, Time, January 12, 2007. Retrieved February 1, 2007; Wilson, Greg. Private iCreator is genius behind Apple's polish, New York Daily News, January 14, 2007. Retrieved February 1, 2007. "The one thing Steve Jobs did that turned around Apple". Launch Tomorrow. July 26, 2019. Archived from the original on March 30, 2022. Retrieved January 24, 2022. "Why Apple Bounced Back". Roughly Drafted. October 25, 2006. Archived from the original on August 15, 2018. Retrieved November 8, 2014.; "A new beginning or swan song for Final Cut Pro X". GR Reporter. GRRreporter Ltd. June 7, 2013. Archived from the original on April 2, 2019. Retrieved November 8, 2014. Matt Bell, Mark Wherry (September 2002). "APPLE/EMAGIC TAKEOVER The Inside Story Of The Deal That Changed The Music World". Sound on Sound. SOS Publications Group. Archived from the original on November 8, 2014. Retrieved November 8, 2014. Seff, Jonathan (May 1, 2001). "The Song Is Over for SoundJam". Macworld. International Data Group. Archived from the original on April 2, 2019. Retrieved December 16, 2017. "An Exclusive Look at Mac OS 9". Egg Freckles. February 24, 2014. Archived from the original on February 29, 2012. Retrieved March 23, 2014. "Apple to Open 25 Retail Stores in 2001" (Press release). Apple. May 15, 2001. Archived from the original on July 2, 2017. Retrieved May 27, 2017. "Apple Stores 2001–2003". IFO Apple Store. Archived from the original on September 27, 2011. Retrieved October 7, 2011. "Apple Stores". MacRumors. Archived from the original on May 27, 2017. Retrieved May 27, 2017. Useem, Jerry (March 8, 2007). "Apple: America's best retailer". Fortune. Retrieved May 27, 2017. "Store List". Apple Retail. Apple Inc. Archived from the original on November 28, 2017. Retrieved December 5, 2017. Apple enjoys ongoing iPod demand Archived November 28, 2017, at the Wayback Machine, BBC News, January 18, 2006. Retrieved April 27, 2007; Cantrell, Amanda. Apple's remarkable comeback story Archived September 15, 2020, at the Wayback Machine, CNN, March 29, 2006. Retrieved March 2, 2007. Chacksfield, Marc (June 19, 2008). "iTunes hits 5 billion downloads". TechRadar. Future plc. Archived from the original on April 3, 2019. Retrieved May 24, 2017.; Skillings, Jon (June 19, 2008). "Apple's iTunes hits 5 billion mark". CNET. Archived from the original on May 25, 2017. Retrieved May 24, 2017. Griggs, Brandon; Leopold, Todd (April 26, 2013). "How iTunes changed music, and the world". CNN. Archived from the original on December 3, 2013. Retrieved May 24, 2017.; Arthur, Charles (April 28, 2013). "iTunes is 10 years old today. Was it the best idea Apple ever had?". The Guardian. Archived from the original on April 3, 2019. Retrieved May 24, 2017. Chaffin, Bryan. "Apple Shake: Apple Buys Nothing Real, A High End Compositing Software Maker" Archived November 28, 2017, at the Wayback Machine, The Mac Observer, February 7, 2002. Retrieved August 15, 2008. Deitrich, Andy (February 2, 2004). "Garage Band". Ars Technica. Archived from the original on March 24, 2017. Retrieved March 23, 2017. Apple Introduces iPhoto, Apple Inc., January 7, 2002. Retrieved October 30, 2015. Apple to Use Intel Microprocessors Beginning in 2006 Archived January 30, 2018, at the Wayback Machine, Apple Inc., June 6, 2005. Retrieved March 2, 2007. Johnson, Bobbie (August 10, 2006). "Bye-bye Power Mac... hello Mac Pro". The Guardian. Archived from the original on April 3, 2019. Retrieved March 23, 2017.; "Apple Unveils New MacBook Featuring Intel Core Duo Processors". Apple Inc. May 16, 2006. Archived from the original on November 7, 2017. Retrieved November 6, 2017. Hesseldahl, Arik (April 5, 2006). "News Flash: Apple Introduces 'Boot Camp' To Run Windows XP on Macs". BusinessWeek. Bloomberg L.P. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved August 18, 2008. Carter, Shawn M.; Martin, Emmie (August 2, 2018). "If you invested $1,000 in Apple 10 years ago, here's how much you'd have now". CNBC. Archived from the original on April 3, 2020. Retrieved April 5, 2020. Gamet, Jeff (January 16, 2006). Apple Passes Dell's Market Cap Archived November 28, 2017, at the Wayback Machine, The MacObserver. Retrieved March 2, 2007. Markoff, John (January 16, 2006). "Michael Dell Should Eat His Words, Apple Chief Suggests". The New York Times. Archived from the original on March 18, 2017. Retrieved April 3, 2019. Singh, Jai (October 6, 1997). "Dell: Apple should close shop". CNET. Archived from the original on March 24, 2017. Retrieved March 23, 2017. "Drop the Computer". The Economist. Economist Group. January 11, 2007. Archived from the original on May 25, 2017. Retrieved May 24, 2017.; "What's In A Name Change? Look At Apple". Forbes. January 25, 2007. Archived from the original on April 3, 2019. Retrieved May 24, 2017. "Apple Announces The iPhone". MacRumors. January 9, 2007. Archived from the original on May 25, 2017. Retrieved May 24, 2017.; Arrington, Michael (January 9, 2007). "Apple Announces iPhone, Stock Soars". TechCrunch. AOL. Archived from the original on May 25, 2017. Retrieved May 24, 2017. "Apple Announces Apple TV (Formerly 'iTV')". MacRumors. January 9, 2007. Archived from the original on May 25, 2017. Retrieved May 24, 2017.; "Apple TV Coming to Your Living Room". Apple Inc. January 9, 2007. Archived from the original on May 25, 2017. Retrieved May 24, 2017. Miller, Paul (July 25, 2007). "Apple sold 270,000 iPhones in the first 30 hours". Engadget. Archived from the original on May 25, 2017. Retrieved May 24, 2017. Oyedele, Akin (March 21, 2016). "Here's how Apple shares do right after the new iPhone launches". Business Insider. Archived from the original on April 3, 2019. Retrieved May 24, 2017. Block, Ryan (February 6, 2007). "A letter from Steve Jobs on DRM: let's get rid of it". Engadget. AOL. Archived from the original on March 24, 2017. Retrieved March 23, 2017. Dalrymple, Jim (April 2, 2007). "Apple, EMI offer higher-quality DRM free downloads". Macworld. Archived from the original on January 4, 2012. Retrieved November 29, 2010. "Changes Coming to the iTunes Store". Apple Inc. January 6, 2009. Archived from the original on May 25, 2017. Retrieved March 23, 2014. Flandez, Raymund (August 5, 2008). "Programmers Jockey for iPhone Users at Apple Site". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on April 3, 2019. Retrieved August 16, 2008. McLaughlin, Kevin (August 11, 2008). "Apple's Jobs Gushes Over App Store Success". The Channel Wire. Archived from the original on March 1, 2010. Retrieved August 16, 2008. Chen, Brian (October 21, 2008). "Jobs: Apple Is Third Largest Handset Supplier". Wired. Archived from the original on November 11, 2011. Retrieved March 23, 2014. Jobs, Steve (January 14, 2009). "Apple Media Advisory" (Press release). Apple Inc. Archived from the original on May 25, 2017. Retrieved March 23, 2014. "Apple Inc, Form 10-Q, Quarterly Report, Filing Date Apr 23, 2009". secdatabase.com. Archived from the original on May 2, 2013. Retrieved March 8, 2013.; "Apple reports the best non-holiday quarter in its history". Betanews. April 22, 2009. Archived from the original on April 25, 2009. Retrieved November 22, 2010. "Apple iPad reaches 1 million sales faster than iPhone". Reuters. Archived from the original on April 3, 2019. Retrieved September 10, 2018. "Apple passes Microsoft to be biggest tech company". BBC News. May 27, 2010. Archived from the original on May 29, 2010. Retrieved May 29, 2010. "Apple Presents iPhone 4" (Press release). Apple Inc. Archived from the original on September 3, 2011.; Beaumont, Claudine (June 24, 2010). "Apple iPhone 4: Full review". The Telegraph. ISSN 0307-1235. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved September 10, 2018. Topolsky, Joshua (September 7, 2010). "iPod touch review (2010)". Engadget. AOL. Archived from the original on March 24, 2017. Retrieved March 23, 2017.; "Apple Reinvents iPod nano With Multi-Touch Interface" (Press release). Apple Inc. September 1, 2010. Archived from the original on November 15, 2010. Retrieved November 11, 2010.; Bell, Donald (September 7, 2010). "Apple iPod Shuffle 2010 (2 GB) review". CNet. Archived from the original on April 4, 2019. Retrieved April 4, 2019. Mintz, Jessica; Robertson, Jordan. "Apple unveils new TV box for renting movies, shows". Yahoo! News. Yahoo!. Archived from the original on September 2, 2010. Retrieved September 2, 2010. "Apple boss Steve Jobs takes 'medical leave'". BBC News. January 17, 2011. Archived from the original on January 19, 2011. Retrieved January 17, 2011. Indvik, Lauren (May 9, 2011). "Apple Now World's Most Valuable Brand". Mashable. Archived from the original on April 3, 2019. Retrieved October 7, 2011. Helft, Miguel (June 6, 2011). "Apple Unveils a 'Cloud' Music and Storage Service". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 1, 2022. Retrieved June 7, 2011. Primack, Doug. "Fallen Apple: Steve Jobs resigns". Fortune. CNN. Archived from the original on September 26, 2011. Retrieved August 24, 2011. Olivarez-Giles, Nathan; Suh Lauder, Thomas (August 24, 2011). "What does Steve Jobs' chairman role mean for Apple?". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 11, 2020. Retrieved April 11, 2020. Foresman, Chris (November 15, 2011). "Genentech's Levinson replaces Steve Jobs as Apple chairman". ars technica. Archived from the original on April 11, 2020. Retrieved April 11, 2020. "Meet Apple's Board of Directors". Ethiopian Review. August 25, 2011. Archived from the original on September 28, 2012. Retrieved October 7, 2011. Griggs, Brandon (October 6, 2011). "Steve Jobs, Apple founder, dies". CNN. Archived from the original on April 4, 2019. Retrieved March 27, 2017.; Hess, Ken (October 5, 2011). "October 5th, 2011. The day Apple died". ZDNet. Archived from the original on March 28, 2017. Retrieved March 27, 2017. "Apple Reinvents Textbooks with iBooks 2 for iPad – New iBooks Author Lets Anyone Create Stunning iBooks Textbooks" (Press release). Apple Inc. January 19, 2012. Archived from the original on May 25, 2017. Retrieved February 22, 2012. "Steve Jobs' Plans to Disrupt the Textbook Industry. How Disruptive Were They? | Inside Higher Ed". www.insidehighered.com. Archived from the original on April 4, 2019. Retrieved November 10, 2017. Ziegler, Chris (October 4, 2011). "iPhone 4S announced, available October 14th starting at $199". The Verge. Archived from the original on April 4, 2019. Retrieved March 23, 2017.; Parr, Ben (October 4, 2011). "Apple Announces iPhone 4S". Mashable. Archived from the original on March 24, 2017. Retrieved March 23, 2017. Savov, Vlad (September 12, 2012). "Apple announces 4-inch iPhone 5 with LTE, Lightning connector, September 21st release date". The Verge. Archived from the original on April 4, 2019. Retrieved March 23, 2017.; Shimpi, Anand Lal (September 12, 2012). "Apple iPhone 5: Announced". AnandTech. Purch Group. Archived from the original on April 4, 2019. Retrieved March 23, 2017. Mossberg, Walter (March 15, 2012). "New iPad: a Million More Pixels Than HDTV". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on April 4, 2019. Retrieved March 15, 2012.; Lowensohn, Josh (March 7, 2012). "Apple iPad live blog (Wednesday, March 7)". CNET. Archived from the original on March 24, 2017. Retrieved March 23, 2017. Wood, Molly (October 23, 2012). "The new 'new iPad': Lightning strikes again". CNET. Archived from the original on March 24, 2017. Retrieved March 23, 2017. Dudley-Nicholson, Jennifer (October 24, 2012). "Apple unveils new iPad Mini, updated iPad and new Macs". Herald Sun. Archived from the original on February 17, 2013. Retrieved November 11, 2012. Stein, Scott (October 5, 2012). "Apple iPhone 5 review". CNET. Archived from the original on March 24, 2017. Retrieved March 23, 2017. "Apple Sells Three Million iPads in Three Days" (Press release). Apple Inc. November 5, 2012. Archived from the original on May 25, 2017. Retrieved February 22, 2013. Brown, Rich (November 11, 2013). "Apple Mac Mini with Fusion Drive review". CNET. Archived from the original on March 24, 2017. Retrieved March 23, 2017. Svensson, Peter. "Apple Sets Record for Company Value at $624B". Associated Press. Archived from the original on August 22, 2012. Retrieved August 20, 2012. "Apple awarded $1bn in damages from Samsung in US court". BBC News. August 25, 2012. Archived from the original on April 5, 2019. Retrieved August 25, 2012. "Judge strikes $450 million from $1 billion damages award in Apple v. Samsung: second trial needed". FOSS Patents. Archived from the original on April 4, 2019. Retrieved March 1, 2013. "HTC and Apple Settle Patent Dispute" (Press release). Apple Inc. November 10, 2012. Archived from the original on May 25, 2017. Retrieved February 22, 2013. Reisinger, Don (November 12, 2012). "Apple predicted to generate up to $280 million a year in HTC deal". CNET. Archived from the original on March 24, 2017. Retrieved March 23, 2017. Steele, Billy (May 28, 2014). "Apple acquires Beats Electronics for $3 billion". Engadget. AOL. Archived from the original on March 24, 2017. Retrieved March 23, 2017.; Welch, Chris (May 28, 2014). "Apple confirms it's buying Beats for $3 billion". The Verge. Archived from the original on May 29, 2014. Retrieved March 23, 2017. "Apple Watch announced: available for $349 early next year". The Verge. September 9, 2014. Archived from the original on September 9, 2014. Retrieved July 15, 2015.; "The Apple Watch is poised to dominate the market for digital fitness trackers". The Verge. September 9, 2014. Archived from the original on May 25, 2022. Retrieved July 15, 2015. "Apple Watch is competing as a fashion accessory, and that's a risky move". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on July 16, 2015. Retrieved July 15, 2015. "iPhone Killer: The Secret History of the Apple Watch". Wired. Archived from the original on June 18, 2022. Retrieved January 31, 2022. Statt, Nick (January 26, 2016). "1 billion Apple devices are in active use around the world". The Verge. Archived from the original on April 4, 2019. Retrieved May 24, 2017.; Rossignol, Joe (January 26, 2016). "Apple Now Has Over 1 Billion Active Devices Worldwide". MacRumors. Archived from the original on May 25, 2017. Retrieved May 24, 2017. McBride, Sarah (June 6, 2016). "Apple leads Tech Industry in Fortune 500". Yahoo Tech. Archived from the original on May 25, 2017. Retrieved June 6, 2016. Gartenberg, Chaim (June 5, 2017). "Apple announces HomePod speaker to take on Sonos". The Verge. Vox Media. Archived from the original on June 5, 2017. Retrieved December 14, 2017. Lunden, Ingrid; Roof, Katie (December 8, 2017). "Sources: Apple is acquiring music recognition app Shazam". TechCrunch. Oath Inc. Archived from the original on December 14, 2017. Retrieved December 14, 2017. Singleton, Micah (December 11, 2017). "Apple confirms it has acquired Shazam". The Verge. Vox Media. Archived from the original on April 4, 2019. Retrieved December 14, 2017. "EU clears Apple's purchase of song-recognition app Shazam". CNBC. September 6, 2018. Archived from the original on September 7, 2018. Retrieved September 7, 2018.; Welch, Chris (September 24, 2018). "Apple completes Shazam acquisition, will make app ad-free for everyone". The Verge. Archived from the original on April 4, 2019. Retrieved September 24, 2018. Andreeva, Nellie (November 8, 2017). "Apple Gives Reese Witherspoon-Jennifer Aniston Morning Show Series 2-Season Order, Confirms 'Amazing Stories' Reboot". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on January 20, 2019. Retrieved January 18, 2019. Robb, David (June 7, 2018). "Apple Signs WGA Contract As It Ramps Up Scripted Shows". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 27, 2019. Retrieved January 18, 2019.; Andreeva, Nellie (June 15, 2018). "Oprah Winfrey Partners With Apple For Original Content". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 26, 2019. Retrieved January 18, 2019. Andreeva, Nellie; Petski, Denise (June 20, 2018). "Apple Teams With Sesame Workshop On Children's Programming Slate". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on March 27, 2019. Retrieved January 18, 2019.; Andreeva, Nellie; Petski, Denise (December 14, 2018). "Apple Makes 'Peanuts' Deal; DHX Media To Produce New Series, Specials & Shorts With Classic Characters For Streamer". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on February 1, 2019. Retrieved January 18, 2019.; Hipes, Patrick; Andreeva, Nellie (November 15, 2018). "Apple Inks Deal With A24 For Multiple Films As Part Of Push Into Movies". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on November 17, 2018. Retrieved January 18, 2019. Gurman, Mark (March 29, 2019). "Apple Cancels Plan for AirPower Wireless Charger". Bloomberg.com. Archived from the original on August 5, 2021. Retrieved August 25, 2022.; Panzarino, Matthew (March 29, 2019). "Apple cancels AirPower product, citing inability to meet its high standards for hardware". TechCrunch. Archived from the original on March 29, 2019. Retrieved August 25, 2022.; Goode, Lauren (March 29, 2019). "RIP AirPower: Apple Kills Its Elusive Wireless Charging Pad". Wired. ISSN 1059-1028. Archived from the original on August 25, 2022. Retrieved August 25, 2022. Bursztynsky, Jessica (August 19, 2020). "Apple becomes first U.S. company to reach a $2 trillion market cap". CNBC. Archived from the original on July 21, 2022. Retrieved August 19, 2020. Warren, Tom (June 22, 2020). "Apple announces it will switch to its own processors for future Macs". The Verge. Archived from the original on June 22, 2020. Retrieved June 22, 2020. Haselton, Todd (June 22, 2020). "Apple will stop using Intel chips in all Macs by 2021, top analyst says". CNBC. Archived from the original on June 1, 2022. Retrieved June 22, 2020. "Apple announces 'One More Thing' event for November 10th". The Verge. November 2, 2020. Archived from the original on June 2, 2022. Retrieved November 2, 2020. McDaniel, Allison (April 21, 2022). "Apple's M2 chip nears as Samsung beats LG as processor packaging partner". 9to5Mac. Archived from the original on April 22, 2022. Retrieved April 27, 2022. "Apple tests several new Macs with next-generation M2 chips – Bloomberg News". Reuters. April 14, 2022. Archived from the original on April 27, 2022. Retrieved April 27, 2022.; Clark, Mitchell (April 14, 2022). "Apple's M2 chips and the computers they'll power detailed in new leak". The Verge. Archived from the original on June 2, 2022. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Higgins, Tim (April 16, 2022). "The Chips That Rebooted the Mac". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Archived from the original on July 29, 2022. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Brown, Dalvin (April 27, 2022). "Apple Opens Self-Repair Store With $300 iPhone Screens, 19-Cent Screws". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Archived from the original on August 1, 2022. Retrieved April 27, 2022.; Feiner, Lauren (April 27, 2022). "Apple now lets you buy parts so you can fix your iPhone yourself". CNBC. Archived from the original on June 25, 2022. Retrieved April 27, 2022.; Porter, Jon (April 27, 2022). "Apple's DIY repair service is now available in the US". The Verge. Archived from the original on June 29, 2022. Retrieved April 27, 2022.; "Apple's Self Service Repair program is now open to iPhone owners in the US". Engadget. April 27, 2022. Archived from the original on August 2, 2022. Retrieved April 27, 2022.; "Apple opens Self Service Repair to US iPhone users". TechCrunch. April 27, 2022. Archived from the original on April 27, 2022. Retrieved April 27, 2022.; Sherr, Ian. "Apple Launches Do-It-Yourself Repairs For iPhone 13, iPhone 12 and iPhone SE". CNET. Archived from the original on April 27, 2022. Retrieved April 27, 2022.; "Apple's Self-Service Repair Store Finally Launches". PCMAG. Archived from the original on June 13, 2022. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Porter, Jon (May 30, 2022). "Apple's RealityOS for rumored headset appears in trademark application". The Verge. Archived from the original on July 8, 2022. Retrieved May 30, 2022.; Gurman, Mark; Mochizuki, Takashi; Wu, Debby (January 14, 2022). "Apple's New VR/AR Headset Risks Being Delayed Until 2023". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on April 19, 2022. Retrieved May 30, 2022. Fingas, Jon (October 14, 2022). "Apple's mixed reality headset reportedly uses iris scanning for payments and sign-ins". Engadget. Archived from the original on October 19, 2022. Retrieved October 19, 2022. Lerman, Rachel; Gregg, Aaron; Somasundaram, Praveena (June 19, 2022). "Apple Store workers approve union, the first in the U.S." The Washington Post. Archived from the original on June 19, 2022. Retrieved June 19, 2022. "Apple launches Lockdown Mode to block spyware attacks on at-risk users". BBC News. July 6, 2022. Archived from the original on July 28, 2022. Retrieved July 7, 2022. Hunter, Tatum; Velazco, Chris (March 28, 2023). "Now you can 'buy now, pay later' with Apple Wallet". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on March 29, 2023. Retrieved March 29, 2023. De Avila, Joseph (March 28, 2023). "Apple Rolls Out Buy Now, Pay Later Plan". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on March 29, 2023. Retrieved March 29, 2023. Gurman, Mark (November 9, 2023). "Apple Settles DOJ Case That It Discriminated Against US Workers". Bloomberg News. Archived from the original on November 27, 2023. Retrieved November 27, 2023. "Apple Overhauls App Store in Europe, in Response to New Digital Law". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 26, 2024. Retrieved January 29, 2024. Satariano, Adam (August 10, 2011). "Apple Surpasses Exxon as World's Most Valuable Company Before Retreating". Bloomberg News. Archived from the original on August 10, 2011. Retrieved May 28, 2017. Bohn, Dieter (May 19, 2021). "iPad Pro (2021) review: the best screen, but is that enough?". The Verge. Archived from the original on November 5, 2021. Retrieved November 7, 2022. Ivanov, Dzhoro (September 18, 2022). "The M1 iPad Pro can run a desktop OS - Apple just won't let it". Phone Arena. Archived from the original on November 7, 2022. Retrieved November 7, 2022. "Apple has sold a total of 500 million iPads in the last 10 years". AppleInsider. September 15, 2020. Archived from the original on January 30, 2022. Retrieved September 21, 2020.; Fried, Ina (January 31, 2017). "iPad sales keep shrinking – down another 20 percent". Recode. Archived from the original on April 29, 2019. Retrieved March 20, 2019.; "'Clearance sale' shows Apple's iPad is over. It's done". The Register. March 23, 2017. Archived from the original on December 3, 2018. Retrieved March 20, 2019. Potuck, Michael (August 5, 2020). "Latest data suggests iPad sales hit highest growth rate in 6 years during Q2". 9to5Mac. Archived from the original on January 18, 2021. Retrieved September 21, 2020. Leswing, Kif (January 28, 2020). "Apple's fastest-growing business segment, which includes AirPods and Watch, is now bigger than Mac". CNBC. Archived from the original on October 19, 2022. Retrieved October 19, 2022. Pullen, John Patrick (March 24, 2019). "Apple's Two-Word Plan for the Future of the Internet: Subscribe Now". Forbes. Archived from the original on March 25, 2019. Retrieved March 25, 2019. "Logo Evolution: How Top Brands Redesigned Logos and Boosted Conversion". Vardot. Archived from the original on March 29, 2022. Retrieved April 9, 2017. "Steve Jobs bio says Apple CEO abhorred 'corrupt' execs". CBC News. October 20, 2011. Archived from the original on September 9, 2013. Retrieved October 21, 2011. Moses, Asher (October 7, 2011). "Who was Steve Jobs the man?". The Age. Melbourne. Archived from the original on August 23, 2017. Retrieved October 7, 2011.; "Tearful memories for Apple co-founder". The Age. Melbourne. Archived from the original on October 8, 2011. Retrieved October 7, 2011. Flynn, Laurie J. (February 6, 2007). "After Long Dispute, Two Apples Work It Out". The New York Times. Archived from the original on February 7, 2007. Retrieved October 21, 2016. "Wired News: Apple Doin' the Logo-Motion". September 26, 2003. Archived from the original on December 3, 2023. Retrieved December 3, 2023. "Apple Computer". August 27, 1999. Archived from the original on August 27, 1999. Retrieved January 1, 2014. "The Lost Apple Logos You've Never Seen". thebrainfever. Archived from the original on March 25, 2023. Retrieved September 20, 2015. McConnell, Ben; Huba, Jackie. "The father of evangelism marketing". Creating Customer Evangelists. Archived from the original on July 25, 2003. Retrieved April 18, 2017. Fisher, Anne (March 17, 2008). "America's Most Admired Companies". Fortune. Vol. 157, no. 5. CNN. pp. 65–67. Archived from the original on May 23, 2022. Retrieved August 2, 2020.; Colvin, Geoff (March 16, 2009). "The World's Most Admired Companies 2009". Fortune. Vol. 159, no. 5. CNN. p. 76. Archived from the original on August 14, 2020. Retrieved August 2, 2020.; "World's Most Admired Companies". Fortune. CNN. March 2010. Archived from the original on March 7, 2010. Retrieved March 7, 2010.; "World's Most Admired Companies". Fortune. CNN. November 2011. Archived from the original on June 27, 2022. Retrieved November 10, 2011.; "The World's Most Admired Companies". Fortune. Vol. 165, no. 4. March 19, 2012. pp. 139–140. Archived from the original on June 23, 2022. Retrieved August 2, 2020. Elliot, Stuart (September 29, 2013). "Apple Passes Coca-Cola as Most Valuable Brand". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 1, 2022. Retrieved October 21, 2013. Is Apple The World's Most Innovative Company (Still)? Archived September 10, 2017, at the Wayback Machine, Forbes, September 27, 2013. "Apple sees revenue growth accelerating after setting record for iPhone sales, China strength". Reuters. January 27, 2021. Archived from the original on July 18, 2023. Retrieved July 18, 2023. "Apple Now Has 1.65 Billion Active Devices Worldwide". Archived from the original on January 27, 2021. Retrieved January 27, 2021. "Apple Now Has More Than Two Billion Active Devices Worldwide". MacRumors. February 2, 2023. Archived from the original on July 18, 2023. Retrieved July 18, 2023. Shakir, Umar (February 2, 2023). "Apple surpasses 2 billion active devices". The Verge. Archived from the original on July 18, 2023. Retrieved July 18, 2023. "Apple Company". Operating System Documentation Project. December 10, 2007. Archived from the original on September 21, 2008. Retrieved August 18, 2008. "Apple Think Different Campaign". The Inspiration Room Daily. October 6, 2005. Archived from the original on August 19, 2010. Retrieved August 12, 2008. "MacWorld New York: I think, therefore iMac". Archived from the original on May 21, 2011. Retrieved August 13, 2008. "Say hello to iPhone". BillDay.com. June 29, 2007. Archived from the original on September 7, 2008. Retrieved August 13, 2008. Manjoo, Farhad (January 11, 2002). "IMac: What's in a Design, Anyway?". Wired. Archived from the original on March 4, 2014. Retrieved February 15, 2010. Williams, Ian (June 13, 2007). "UK watchdog clears Apple ads". Computing. Incisive Media Ltd. Archived from the original on January 10, 2008. Retrieved April 18, 2017. "Apple Power Mac ads 'misleading'". BBC News. June 11, 2004. Archived from the original on June 1, 2013. Retrieved April 18, 2017. Farber, Jim. Apple ad creates recognition for Yael Naim Archived October 11, 2011, at the Wayback Machine, New York Daily News, March 11, 2008. Fiegerman, Seth (May 16, 2014). "The Slow Evolution of Apple's Online Store". Mashable. Archived from the original on July 1, 2017. Retrieved May 27, 2017. Segal, David (June 23, 2012). "Apple's Retail Army, Long on Loyalty but Short on Pay". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 1, 2022. Retrieved May 27, 2017. Webb, Alex (May 19, 2016). "Inside the New Apple Retail Store Design". Bloomberg L.P. Archived from the original on April 27, 2017. Retrieved April 26, 2017.; Statt, Nick (May 19, 2016). "Apple just revealed the future of its retail stores". The Verge. Archived from the original on April 27, 2017. Retrieved May 27, 2017. Panzarino, Matthew (April 19, 2012). "Apple out to patent curved glass panels used in Shanghai Retail Store". The Next Web. Archived from the original on October 26, 2017. Retrieved May 27, 2017. Simpson, Stephen D. (October 8, 2012). "How Apple's fortunes affect other stocks". The Globe and Mail. The Woodbridge Company. Archived from the original on April 15, 2016. Retrieved May 27, 2017.; Crothers, Brooke (March 29, 2012). "Is Best Buy following CompUSA, Circuit City to certain doom?". CNET. Archived from the original on July 9, 2016. Retrieved May 27, 2017. Abboud, Leila (March 16, 2020). "France hits Apple with €1.1bn antitrust fine". Financial Times. Archived from the original on December 10, 2022. Retrieved March 16, 2020. Nicas, Jack; Browning, Kellen; Griffith, Erin (August 13, 2020). "Fortnite Creator Sues Apple and Google After Ban From App Stores". The New York Times. Archived from the original on August 13, 2020. Retrieved August 13, 2020. Amadeo, Ron (September 24, 2020). "Epic, Spotify, and others take on Apple with "Coalition for App Fairness"". Ars Technica. Archived from the original on September 26, 2020. Retrieved September 26, 2020. Horwitz, Patience Haggin and Jeff (August 26, 2020). "Facebook Says Apple's New iPhone Update Will Disrupt Online Advertising". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Archived from the original on December 20, 2020. Retrieved December 25, 2020. "How Convincing is Facebook's Case Against Apple?". Bloomberg.com. December 17, 2020. Archived from the original on December 17, 2020. Retrieved December 25, 2020.; Horwitz, Sarah E. Needleman and Jeff (December 16, 2020). "Facebook Wades Into 'Fortnite' Maker's Dispute With Apple". The Wall Street Journal. ISSN 0099-9660. Archived from the original on March 28, 2021. Retrieved December 25, 2020. Tsotsis, Alexia (June 18, 2013). "Why Was Apple Late To The PRISM Party?". TechCrunch. Archived from the original on January 18, 2024. Retrieved January 17, 2024. Vincent, James (June 13, 2016). "Apple promises to deliver AI smarts without sacrificing your privacy". The Verge. Vox Media. Archived from the original on July 13, 2023. Retrieved December 9, 2017.; Heisler, Yoni (May 22, 2017). "Apple is expertly trolling Android users with its new iPhone ads". BGR. Archived from the original on December 14, 2017. Retrieved December 9, 2017.; Greenberg, Andy (June 8, 2015). "Apple's latest selling point: how little it knows about you". Wired. Archived from the original on March 28, 2018. Retrieved December 9, 2017. Farivar, Cyrus (September 18, 2014). "Apple expands data encryption under iOS 8, making handover to cops moot". Ars Technica. Archived from the original on December 13, 2017. Retrieved December 9, 2017. Hall, Zac (November 16, 2017). "Apple details how it performs on-device facial detection in latest machine learning journal entry". 9to5Mac. Archived from the original on December 13, 2017. Retrieved December 9, 2017. Greenberg, Andy (June 13, 2016). "Apple's 'differential privacy' is about collecting your data – but not your data". Wired. Archived from the original on December 13, 2017. Retrieved December 9, 2017. Rossignol, Joe (December 6, 2017). "Here's How Apple Improves the iOS and Mac User Experience While Protecting Your Privacy". MacRumors. Archived from the original on December 10, 2017. Retrieved December 9, 2017. Menn, Joseph (January 21, 2020). "Exclusive: Apple dropped plan for encrypting backups after FBI complained – sources". Reuters. Archived from the original on April 23, 2020. Retrieved April 15, 2020.; Pagliery, Jose (February 22, 2016). "Apple promises privacy – but not on iCloud". CNN. Archived from the original on December 10, 2017. Retrieved December 13, 2017.; Cunningham, Andrew (February 24, 2016). "The case for using iTunes, not iCloud, to back up your iPhone". Ars Technica. Archived from the original on December 14, 2017. Retrieved December 13, 2017. Robertson, Adi (September 12, 2017). "Why Face ID won't give you the legal protection of a passcode". The Verge. Vox Media. Archived from the original on May 7, 2018. Retrieved December 13, 2017. Aten, Jason (May 12, 2021). "Apple's App Tracking Transparency Update Is Turning Out to Be the Worst-Case Scenario for Facebook". Inc.com. Archived from the original on May 12, 2021. Retrieved May 12, 2021.; "New data shows how devastating Apple's new anti-tracking feature is for Facebook". www.msn.com. Archived from the original on May 12, 2021. Retrieved May 12, 2021.; "Just 4% of U.S. iPhone Users Let Apps Track Them With New iOS Update". Gizmodo. May 8, 2021. Archived from the original on May 12, 2021. Retrieved May 12, 2021.; Datti, Sharmishte (May 12, 2021). "Apple's App Tracking Transparency Becomes Facebook's Nightmare: Only 4% Allow Tracking". www.gizbot.com. Archived from the original on June 4, 2021. Retrieved May 12, 2021. "Apple to scan U.S. iPhones for images of child sexual abuse". AP NEWS. August 5, 2021. Archived from the original on August 5, 2021. Retrieved August 6, 2021.; Portnoy, India McKinney and Erica (August 5, 2021). "Apple's Plan to "Think Different" About Encryption Opens a Backdoor to Your Private Life". Electronic Frontier Foundation. Archived from the original on October 18, 2022. Retrieved August 6, 2021. "Irish Regulator Opens Third Privacy Probe Into Apple". Gadgets360. July 3, 2019. Archived from the original on July 24, 2019. Retrieved July 24, 2019.; "Data Protection Commission opens privacy investigation into Apple". RTE. July 2, 2019. Archived from the original on July 24, 2019. Retrieved July 24, 2019. Krebs, Brian (December 3, 2019). "The iPhone 11 Pro's Location Data Puzzler". KrebsonSecurity. Archived from the original on March 2, 2024. Retrieved March 2, 2024. Whittaker, Zack (December 5, 2019). "Apple says its ultra wideband technology is why newer iPhones appear to share location data, even when the setting is disabled". TechCrunch. Archived from the original on March 2, 2024. Retrieved March 2, 2024. "Learn the meaning of the iPhone status icons". iPhone User Guide. Archived from the original on March 2, 2024. Retrieved March 2, 2024. Turton, William (March 30, 2022). "Apple and Meta Gave User Data to Hackers Who Used Forged Legal Requests". Yahoo! Finance. Archived from the original on May 30, 2022. Retrieved March 30, 2022. "Investor Relations - Apple". investor.apple.com. Archived from the original on May 4, 2020. Retrieved November 13, 2023. "SEC Filings - Apple". investor.apple.com. Archived from the original on November 11, 2021. Retrieved November 13, 2023. "2011 10-K" (PDF). Apple. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 13, 2023. Retrieved November 13, 2023. "2012 10-K" (PDF). Apple. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 13, 2023. Retrieved November 13, 2023. "2013 10-K" (PDF). Apple. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 9, 2023. Retrieved November 13, 2023. "2014 10-K" (PDF). Apple. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 13, 2023. Retrieved November 13, 2023. "2015 10-K" (PDF). Apple. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 13, 2023. Retrieved November 13, 2023. "2016 10-K" (PDF). Apple. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 13, 2023. Retrieved November 13, 2023. "2017 10-K" (PDF). Apple. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 13, 2023. Retrieved November 13, 2023. "2018 10-K" (PDF). Apple. Archived (PDF) from the original on April 12, 2019. Retrieved November 13, 2023. "2019 10-K" (PDF). Apple. Archived (PDF) from the original on May 5, 2020. Retrieved November 13, 2023. "2020 10-K" (PDF). Apple. Archived (PDF) from the original on December 4, 2023. Retrieved November 13, 2023. "2021 10-K" (PDF). Apple. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 27, 2023. Retrieved November 13, 2023. "2022 10-K" (PDF). Apple. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 27, 2023. Retrieved November 13, 2023. "2023 10-K" (PDF). Apple. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 27, 2023. Retrieved November 13, 2023. "Apple Leadership". Apple Inc. Archived from the original on March 29, 2019. Retrieved March 29, 2019. "Apple Inc. (AAPL) Stock Major Holders - Yahoo Finance". finance.yahoo.com. Archived from the original on June 3, 2020. Retrieved March 6, 2024. Deutschman, Alan (October 11, 2000). "The once and future Steve Jobs". Salon.com. Archived from the original on December 2, 2010. Retrieved November 22, 2010. Lashinsky, Adam (August 25, 2011). "How Apple works: inside the world's largest startup". Fortune. CNN. Archived from the original on November 13, 2011. Retrieved November 14, 2011. Huffingtonpost Interview: Steve Wozniak on Sci-Fi, Comic Books, and How Star Trek Shaped the Future Archived September 18, 2017, at the Wayback Machine. April 19, 2017. Brownlee, John (July 7, 2010). "What It's Like To Work At Apple". Cult of Mac. Archived from the original on July 25, 2011. Retrieved November 10, 2010. Hertzfeld, Andy. Credit Where Due Archived March 26, 2014, at the Wayback Machine, Folklore.org, January 1983. Retrieved May 26, 2006. "Newton Hall of Fame!". Technology at Msu. August 7, 2015. Archived from the original on March 26, 2019. Retrieved March 26, 2019. Eisenhart, Mary. Fighting Back For Mac Archived May 25, 2017, at the Wayback Machine, MicroTimes, 1997. Retrieved May 26, 2006. Hertzfeld, Andy. Leave of Absence Archived March 26, 2014, at the Wayback Machine, Folklore.org, March 1984. Retrieved May 26, 2006. Kawakami, John. Apple Taps Guy Kawasaki For Apple Fellows Program Archived September 3, 2017, at the Wayback Machine, MacTech, September 1995. Retrieved May 26, 2006. Montfort, Nick. "Wired 4.10: Spawn of Atari". Archived from the original on November 3, 2012. Retrieved March 5, 2017. "Phil Schiller advances to Apple Fellow". Apple Newsroom. Archived from the original on August 8, 2020. Retrieved August 9, 2020. Lashinsky, Adam. "How Apple works: Inside the world's biggest startup – Fortune Tech". Tech.fortune.cnn.com. Archived from the original on January 2, 2012. Retrieved December 24, 2011. Lichty, Ron; Mantle, Mickey. Managing the Unmanageable: Rules, Tools, and Insights for Managing Software. p. 207. Lashinsky, Adam (October 29, 2012). "Inside Apple's major shakeup". Fortune. Archived from the original on December 11, 2012. Retrieved December 10, 2012. "Apple CEO gets modest 2012 pay after huge 2011". December 27, 2012. Archived from the original on June 27, 2023. Retrieved December 27, 2012. Leswing, Kif (October 27, 2016). "Apple added only 6,000 people last year – its slowest growth since 2009". Business Insider. Archived from the original on September 26, 2018. Retrieved May 29, 2017. "BRIEF-Apple says had 123,000 full-time employees as of Sept. 30". Reuters. November 3, 2017. Archived from the original on July 13, 2023. Retrieved November 9, 2017. Turton, William (June 20, 2017). "Leaked recording: Inside Apple's global war on leakers". The Outline. Archived from the original on September 20, 2023. Retrieved June 20, 2017.; Deahl, Dani (June 20, 2017). "Internal Apple presentation on how to handle leaks gets leaked". The Verge. Archived from the original on July 13, 2023. Retrieved June 20, 2017.; Mayo, Benjamin (June 20, 2017). "Report details Apple's efforts to increase product secrecy, more leaks from Apple campus than supply chain in 2016". 9to5Mac. Archived from the original on June 20, 2017. Retrieved June 20, 2017. Lovejoy, Ben (December 6, 2017). "Facebook named Glassdoor's 'best place to work' as Apple falls 48 places to No. 84". 9to5Mac. Archived from the original on December 15, 2017. Retrieved December 14, 2017.; Rossignol, Joe (December 6, 2017). "Apple Plummets to Lowest Ranking Ever in Glassdoor's Annual List of Best Places to Work". MacRumors. Archived from the original on December 15, 2017. Retrieved December 14, 2017. Gurman, Mark (February 26, 2023). "Apple's Secret 'XDG' Team Is Working on More Than Just a Glucose Monitor". Bloomberg.com. Archived from the original on February 28, 2023. Retrieved February 28, 2023. Simonson, Sharon (October 2, 2005). "Apple gobbles up Cupertino office space". Archived from the original on August 11, 2010. Retrieved July 31, 2006. Steeber, Michael (November 13, 2017). "Before the spaceship: A look back at the previous campuses that Apple called home". 9to5Mac. Archived from the original on January 8, 2022. Retrieved January 7, 2022. Simonson, Sharon (September 30, 2005). "Apple gobbles up Cupertino office space". San Jose Business Journal. Archived from the original on March 20, 2006. Retrieved May 11, 2010. Shead, Sam. "We went to see Apple's European HQ in Ireland — here's what we found". Business Insider. Archived from the original on January 7, 2022. Retrieved January 7, 2022. "Irish Examiner Article". Irish Examiner. October 6, 2011. Archived from the original on July 11, 2012. Retrieved April 21, 2012. "Bloomberg Businessweek Profile of Apple Sales International". Bloomberg Businessweek. Archived from the original on May 1, 2013. Retrieved April 18, 2012.[verification needed]; "Apple's Irish website with contact information for Apple Distribution International at Cork". Apple.com. Archived from the original on April 14, 2012. Retrieved April 18, 2012. Goel, Vindu (November 20, 2016). "How Apple Empowers, and Employs, the American Working Class". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 1, 2022. Retrieved July 14, 2017. Tsang, Amie; Satariano, Adam (December 13, 2018). "Apple to Add $1 Billion Campus in Austin, Tex., in Broad U.S. Hiring Push". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on December 13, 2018. Retrieved January 7, 2022.; "Apple CEO Tim Cook to inaugurate new Israeli headquarters next week". The Jerusalem Post. Archived from the original on June 27, 2023. Retrieved February 12, 2015. "Federal Court Cases Involving Apple, Inc". Docket Alarm, Inc. Archived from the original on July 6, 2014. Retrieved May 10, 2014. Mullin, Joe (January 26, 2016). "Patent troll VirnetX wants jury to give it a half-billion dollars of Apple's cash". Ars Technica. Archived from the original on March 24, 2017. Retrieved March 23, 2017. Novet, Jordan (December 21, 2016). "Nokia sues Apple for patent infringement in the U.S. and Germany". VentureBeat. Archived from the original on May 11, 2017. Retrieved March 23, 2017.; Swartz, Jon (December 21, 2016). "Nokia sues Apple for patent infringement". USA Today. Archived from the original on May 25, 2017. Retrieved March 23, 2017. Orlowski, Andrew (November 15, 2017). "US trade cops agree to investigate Apple's 'embrace and extend". The Register. Archived from the original on November 15, 2017. Retrieved November 16, 2017. Mukherjee, Supantha (January 18, 2022). "Ericsson sues Apple again over 5G patent licensing". Reuters. Archived from the original on January 18, 2022. Retrieved January 18, 2022. Chen, Liyan (May 11, 2015). "The World's Largest Tech Companies: Apple Beats Samsung, Microsoft, Google". Forbes. Archived from the original on May 25, 2017. Retrieved May 24, 2017. "IDC: Smartphone shipments down 6.3% in Q4 2017, Apple overtakes Samsung for top spot". VentureBeat. February 2, 2018. Archived from the original on March 10, 2018. Retrieved March 10, 2018.; "Apple Passes Samsung to Capture the Top Position in the Worldwide Smartphone Market While Overall Shipments Decline 6.3% in the Fourth Quarter, According to IDC". IDC. Archived from the original on September 20, 2018. Retrieved March 10, 2018. Nuttall, Chris (December 29, 2011). "Apple in race to keep ahead in 2012". Financial Times. Archived from the original on December 10, 2022. Tsukayama, Hayley (March 20, 2012). "FAQ: Apple's Dividend". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on January 19, 2023. Retrieved March 21, 2012. "Annual Financials for Apple". Marketwatch. Archived from the original on July 8, 2023. Retrieved February 2, 2014. Rodriguez, Salvador (May 6, 2013). "Apple makes Fortune 500's top 10 for first time; Facebook makes list". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on May 27, 2013. Retrieved June 10, 2013. La Monica, Paul R. (July 22, 2015). "Apple has $203 billion in cash. Why?". CNNMoney. Archived from the original on August 18, 2015. Retrieved September 28, 2015. Farivar, Cyrus (July 13, 2015). "Apple makes 92 percent of all smartphone profits". Ars Technica. Archived from the original on March 22, 2017. Retrieved March 23, 2017. Mickle, Tripp (April 30, 2017). "Apple's Cash Hoard Set to Top $250 Billion". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on July 13, 2023. Retrieved May 24, 2017. Wang, Christine (May 2, 2017). "Apple's cash hoard swells to record $256.8 billion". CNBC. Archived from the original on June 2, 2023. Retrieved May 24, 2017. Salinas, Sara (August 2, 2018). "Apple just hit a $1 trillion market cap". CNBC. Archived from the original on May 28, 2020. Retrieved August 2, 2018. Davies, Rob (August 2, 2018). "Apple becomes world's first trillion dollar company". The Guardian. Archived from the original on April 28, 2020. Retrieved August 2, 2018. "Fortune 500 Companies 2018: Who Made the List". Fortune. Archived from the original on November 10, 2018. Retrieved November 9, 2018. Duffy, Clare (July 28, 2022). "Apple's profit declines nearly 11%". CNN Business. CNN. Archived from the original on August 1, 2022. Retrieved August 2, 2022. "Apple sales falter again but iPhone demand persists". BBC. Archived from the original on May 5, 2023. Retrieved May 5, 2023. Duhigg, Charles; Kocieniewski, David (April 28, 2012). "How Apple Sidesteps Billions in Taxes". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 1, 2022. Retrieved April 29, 2012. Drawbaugh, Kevin; Temple-West, Patrick. "Untaxed U.S. corporate profits held overseas top $2.1 trillion: study". Reuters. Archived from the original on November 14, 2015. Retrieved February 11, 2015.; "Apple Earnings Call". Apple Inc. Archived from the original on May 1, 2016. Retrieved April 28, 2016. Watson, Roland (October 30, 2012). "Foreign companies 'avoid billions in corporation tax'". The Times. Archived from the original on February 23, 2017. Retrieved November 4, 2012. Ebrahimi, Helia (November 2, 2012). "Foreign firms could owe UK £11bn in unpaid taxes". The Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on November 2, 2012. Levin, Carl; McCain, John (May 2013), Memorandum: Offshore profit shifting and the U.S. tax code - Part 2 (Apple Inc.) (memorandum of the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations), archived from the original (PDF) on June 29, 2013, retrieved June 27, 2013 "Senate Probe Finds Apple Used Unusual Tax Structure to Avoid Taxes". CNBC. Reuters. May 20, 2013. Archived from the original on November 11, 2013. Retrieved May 20, 2013. McCoy, Kevin (May 21, 2013). "Apple CEO defends tax tactics at Senate hearing". USA Today. Archived from the original on May 22, 2013. Retrieved May 21, 2013. "Investor Relations". Apple Inc. Archived from the original on August 30, 2018. Retrieved April 28, 2016. Knop, Carsten (November 14, 2017). "Tim Cook im Interview: "Hoffentlich seid ihr Deutschen richtig stolz auf euch"". Faz.net (in German). Archived from the original on March 5, 2024. Retrieved March 26, 2019. "Apple ne devra pas rembourser 13 milliards d'euros à l'Irlande, a conclu la justice européenne". Le Monde (in French). July 15, 2020. Archived from the original on August 16, 2021. Retrieved June 22, 2021. Brennan, Joe (July 15, 2020). "Ireland wins appeal in €13bn Apple tax case". Irish Times. Archived from the original on July 15, 2020. Retrieved July 15, 2020. Wakabayashi, Daisuke; Chen, Brian X. (January 17, 2018). "Apple, Capitalizing on New Tax Law, Plans to Bring Billions in Cash Back to U.S." The New York Times. D'Orazio, Dante (November 23, 2014). "Apple partners with app developers for major Product RED fundraising effort". The Verge. Retrieved April 18, 2017. Chmielewski, Dawn (December 17, 2014). "Apple's Holiday Product Red Campaign Raises $20 Million for AIDS Research". Recode. Retrieved April 18, 2017.; Clover, Juli (December 17, 2014). "Apple's (Product) RED Holiday Campaign Raised $20 Million to Fight AIDS". MacRumors. Retrieved April 18, 2017. Miller, Chance (March 21, 2017). "Apple officially announces (RED) iPhone 7 & 7 Plus, updated iPhone SE with double the storage". 9to5Mac. Retrieved April 18, 2017.; Warren, Tom (March 21, 2017). "Apple launches red iPhone 7". The Verge. Retrieved April 18, 2017. Weintraub, Seth (November 9, 2011). "Apple donates $2.5M to Hurricane Sandy relief". 9to5Mac. Retrieved November 18, 2012. "Apple donates $5M to Hand in Hand Hurricane Irma/Harvey relief, sets up iTunes donations". 9to5Mac. September 8, 2017. Retrieved December 13, 2017. Miller, Chance (September 21, 2017). "Tim Cook says Apple is donating $1 million to earthquake recovery efforts in Mexico". 9to5Mac. Retrieved December 13, 2017. Weintraub, Seth (January 14, 2010). "Apple sets up Haiti donation page in iTunes". 9to5Mac. Retrieved December 13, 2017. Gurman, Mark (March 12, 2011). "Apple now taking Red Cross donations through iTunes for Japan relief fund". 9to5Mac. Retrieved December 13, 2017. Lovejoy, Ben (November 12, 2013). "Apple invites donations to American Red Cross to support Philippine typhoon relief". 9to5Mac. Retrieved December 13, 2017. Lovejoy, Ben (September 18, 2015). "Apple invites Red Cross donations through iTunes to help the Mediterranean refugee crisis [Updated]". 9to5Mac. Retrieved December 13, 2017. Miller, Chance (August 27, 2017). "Apple now accepting donations via iTunes for Hurricane Harvey relief efforts". 9to5Mac. Retrieved December 13, 2017. "Help the planet. One app at a time". World Wildlife Fund. Retrieved April 14, 2016.; "Environment". Apple Inc. Retrieved April 14, 2016.; "Global Apps for Earth campaign with WWF raises more than $8M" (Press release). Apple Inc. Retrieved June 18, 2016. "Tech billionaires including Tim Cook, Elon Musk, and Mark Zuckerberg promised 18 million masks to fight COVID-19". Business Insider. Retrieved March 23, 2020. "Apple Doubles to $200 Million Its Support for Racial Equity". Philanthropy. Archived from the original on June 21, 2023. Retrieved January 29, 2024. "Apple launches major new Racial Equity and Justice Initiative projects to challenge systemic racism, advance racial equity nationwide". Apple Newsroom. Retrieved January 13, 2021. "Apple commits $100M to its new Racial Equity and Justice Initiative". TechCrunch. June 11, 2020. Retrieved August 20, 2021.; "Apple announces new projects related to its $100 million pledge for racial equity and justice". TechCrunch. January 13, 2021. Retrieved August 20, 2021. Weaver, John Fitzgerald (June 10, 2016). "Apple Energy deeper dive: Is this Apple running its own microgrids or more?". Electrek. Retrieved June 12, 2016.; Weintraub, Seth (June 9, 2016). "Apple has just become an energy company, looks to sell excess electricity into the grid and maybe more". 9to5Mac. Retrieved June 12, 2016. "Catawba County approves lease for Apple's renewable energy center". HDR | Hickory Daily Record. June 9, 2016. Retrieved June 12, 2016. Lovejoy, Ben (June 10, 2016). "As Apple moves into the energy business, it gets approval to turn landfill gas into power". 9to5Mac. Retrieved June 14, 2016. "Climate Counts scorecard". Climatecounts.org. Archived from the original on January 4, 2009. Retrieved October 7, 2011. "Environmental Group Hits Apple". Information Week. McMillan, Robert (May 17, 2012). "After Greenpeace Protests, Apple Promises to Dump Coal Power". Wired. Retrieved August 22, 2013. "Powering Our Facilities with Clean, Renewable Energy". Wired Magazine. Archived from the original on April 22, 2014. Retrieved August 22, 2013.[verification needed] Burrows, Peter (March 21, 2013). "Apple Says Data Centers Now Use 100% Renewable Energy". Business Week. Archived from the original on December 2, 2013. Retrieved August 30, 2013. "ClickClean". Click Clean. Greenpeace. Retrieved April 28, 2016. "Environment". Apple. Retrieved May 26, 2016. Cardwell, Diane (August 23, 2016). "Apple Becomes a Green Energy Supplier, With Itself as Customer". The New York Times. Archived from the original on November 29, 2016. Retrieved December 30, 2016. clean power often does not flow directly to their facilities. They typically buy the renewable energy in amounts to match what they draw from the grid. They're actually getting power from their local utility, which may be coal; Cole, Nicki Lisa (August 5, 2015). "Why Is Apple Lying About Powering Its Data Centers With Renewable Energy?". Truthout. Archived from the original on June 30, 2016. Retrieved December 30, 2016. Apple buys renewable energy certificates to offset its reliance on Duke's dirty energy. ..purchasing offsets is not the same as actually powering something with renewable energy "Environment – Climate Change". Why we measure our carbon footprint so rigorously. Apple Inc. March 2016. Retrieved March 27, 2016. "How Much Water Do Apple Data Centers Use?". Data Center Knowledge. June 15, 2016. Retrieved November 5, 2016. "Apple Environmental Responsibility Report (2015)" (PDF). Apple Inc. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2022. Retrieved March 30, 2016.; "Apple Environmental Responsibility Report 2016 Progress Report, Covering Fiscal Year 2015" (PDF). Apple Inc. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2022. "Watch the Apple Special Event". Apple. Retrieved March 30, 2016. Sumra, Husain (August 16, 2016). "Supplier Lens Technology Commits to 100 Percent Renewable Energy for Apple Manufacturing". MacRumors. Retrieved August 17, 2016. Ochs, Susie (August 17, 2016). "Apple steps up environmental efforts in China". Macworld. Retrieved September 20, 2022. "Apple commits to be 100 percent carbon neutral for its supply chain and products by 2030". Apple Newsroom. Retrieved October 16, 2020. Clare Duffy (April 16, 2021). "Apple's $200 million fund aims to fight climate change and boost business". CNN. Retrieved April 17, 2021. Bussewitz, Cathy (February 7, 2022). "Report: Climate pledges from Amazon, others weaker than they seem". The Seattle Times. The Seattle Times Company. Retrieved July 14, 2022. Corporate Climate Responsibility Monitor 2022: Assessing the Transparency and Integrity of Companies' Emission Reduction and Net-Zero Targets (PDF) (Report). NewClimate Institute. 2022. pp. 56–58, 76–78. Retrieved July 14, 2022. Gael Fashingbauer Cooper,"Apple Ditches Leather for Environmentally Friendly Materials, Reveals FineWoven," CNET, September 13, 2023 Mark Gurman, "Apple Is Working on Cleaning Up Its Confusing iPad Lineup," Bloomberg, December 10, 2023. "Greenpeace | iPoison + iWaste". November 28, 2008. Archived from the original on November 28, 2008. Retrieved July 11, 2023. "Apple – Environment – Update". Apple Inc. Archived from the original on November 15, 2010. Retrieved November 22, 2010.; "Which companies are phasing out PVC and BFRs". Greenpeace International. Archived from the original on November 10, 2010. Retrieved January 13, 2011. "Apple – Environment – Environmental Progress". Archived from the original on November 24, 2010. Retrieved November 22, 2010. "Apple – A Greener Apple". Archived from the original on July 25, 2008. Retrieved August 12, 2008. "Apple – Mac – Green Notebooks". Apple Inc. 2008. Archived from the original on December 22, 2008. Retrieved December 24, 2008. "Apple: MacBook Pro Graphics". Archived from the original on June 2, 2007. Retrieved June 8, 2007.; "First Look: LED-Backlit displays: What you need to know". Macworld. May 4, 2007. Retrieved February 16, 2021. "Apple – Environment – Reports". Apple Inc. "iMac and the Environment". Apple Inc. Archived from the original on November 29, 2010. Retrieved November 29, 2010.; Michaels, Philip; Snell, Jason; Macworld | (June 8, 2009). "iPhone 3G S offers speed boost, video capture". Macworld. Retrieved February 16, 2021. "Energy Star Computers Final Program Requirements" (PDF). Energy Star. EPA. March 2016. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2022. Retrieved March 30, 2016. Slivka, Eric (November 9, 2011). "Apple Jumps to Fourth in Greenpeace's Environmental Rankings of Electronics Companies". MacRumors. Retrieved April 18, 2017.; "Apple ranks fourth on Greenpeace's 'Guide to Greener Electronics'". AppleInsider. November 9, 2011. Retrieved April 18, 2017. "Apple, 4th position, 4.6/10" (PDF). Greenpeace. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2022. Retrieved April 18, 2017. Anderson, Ash. "Apple Power Cables to Become Even More Environmentally Friendly". KeyNoodle. Archived from the original on January 17, 2012. Retrieved January 14, 2012.; "Fire Resistant yet Environment Friendly Power Cables From Apple". AppleToolBox. March 20, 2018. Archived from the original on October 14, 2022. Retrieved February 16, 2021. "Environment – Reports". Apple Inc. Retrieved May 28, 2016.; "Apple launches $1.5bn green bond". Climate Home News. February 17, 2016. Retrieved February 16, 2021. Duhigg, Charles; Bradsher, Keith (January 21, 2012). "Apple, America and a Squeezed Middle Class". The New York Times. Archived from the original on January 1, 2022. "Apple's Supply-Chain Secret? Hoard Lasers". BusinessWeek. Bloomberg L.P. Archived from the original on November 4, 2011. Retrieved November 4, 2011. The iPhone maker spends lavishly on all stages of the manufacturing process, giving it a huge operations advantage "Ruthlessness and lasers: Apple's supply chain revealed". Financial Post. Business.financialpost.com. November 9, 2011. Retrieved December 24, 2011. Statt, Nick (May 3, 2017). "Tim Cook says Apple is investing $1 billion in US manufacturing". The Verge. Vox Media. Retrieved December 14, 2017.; Ochs, Susie (May 3, 2017). "Apple joins 'Made in America' trend with $1 billion fund to promote U.S. manufacturing". Macworld. International Data Group. Retrieved December 14, 2017. Gartenberg, Chaim (May 12, 2017). "Apple's first target for its $1 billion US manufacturing fund is glass supplier Corning". The Verge. Vox Media. Retrieved December 14, 2017.; Heater, Brian (May 12, 2017). "Gorilla Glass maker Corning gets $200 million from Apple's US manufacturing investment fund". TechCrunch. Oath Inc. Retrieved December 14, 2017. Salinas, Sara (December 13, 2017). "Apple has a $1 billion fund for US manufacturers, but it's ready to spend more, says COO Jeff Williams". CNBC. NBCUniversal News Group. Retrieved December 14, 2017.; Miller, Chance (December 13, 2017). "Jeff Williams says Apple is prepared to invest more than $1B in US manufacturers". 9to5Mac. Retrieved December 14, 2017. Petrova, Magdalena (December 14, 2018). "We traced what it takes to make an iPhone, from its initial design to the components and raw materials needed to make it a reality". CNBC. Retrieved July 15, 2021. Moorhead, Patrick. "Who Are Apple's iPhone Contract Manufacturers?". Forbes. Retrieved July 15, 2021. "Apple's India and Brazil iPhone plants haven't reduced its dependence on China: Report". Tech2. August 29, 2019. Retrieved July 15, 2021. Blanchard, Ben; Phartiyal, Sankalp; Ahmed, Aftab (February 9, 2021). "Apple supplier Wistron to restart India factory, still on probation". Reuters. Retrieved July 15, 2021. Oliver, Sam (November 28, 2012). "Apple's rumored chip switch from Samsung to TSMC may send shockwaves through industry". AppleInsider. Retrieved May 24, 2022. Friedman, Alan (December 18, 2021). "New report explains why TSMC favors Apple; Intel seeks to recapture process node leadership". Phone Arena. Retrieved May 24, 2022. Zibreg, Christian (October 12, 2018). "TSMC will exclusively build Apple A13 chips for 2019 iPhone and iPad models". iDownloadBlog.com. Retrieved May 24, 2022. "Apple M1 Chip: Everything You Need to Know". MacRumors. Retrieved May 24, 2022. "Mac Ports". Lawlor.cs.uaf.edu. March 17, 2001. Retrieved October 7, 2011. "1394 Trade Association: What is 1394?". Archived from the original on April 4, 2014. Lunden, Ingrid (July 24, 2012). "Apple's Feeling Europe's Economic Crisis: 'Essentially Flat' Sales And A 'Slowdown' In Business, Says Cook". TechCrunch. AOL. Retrieved May 24, 2017. "Apple CEO Tim Cook: 'I love India, but...'". Gadgets360. NDTV. July 25, 2012. Retrieved May 24, 2017. "Apple Opens Development Office in Hyderabad" (Press release). Apple Inc. Retrieved October 18, 2017.; Rai, Saritha (May 17, 2016). "Apple CEO Makes First India Trip With Billion Phone Sales at Stake". Bloomberg Technology. Bloomberg L.P. Retrieved May 24, 2017.; Byford, Sam (May 18, 2016). "Apple announces app development accelerator in Bangalore, India". The Verge. Retrieved May 24, 2017.; Russell, Jon (May 17, 2016). "Apple is opening an app design and development accelerator in India". TechCrunch. AOL. Retrieved May 24, 2017. Roy, Rajesh; Purnell, Newley (March 23, 2017). "Apple to Start Making iPhones in India Over Next Two Months". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved May 24, 2017.; Gartenberg, Chaim (March 23, 2017). "Apple reportedly to start manufacturing iPhones in India". The Verge. Retrieved May 24, 2017. Roy, Rajesh; Purnell, Newley; Mickle, Tripp (May 17, 2017). "Apple Assembles First iPhones in India". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved May 24, 2017.; Mayo, Benjamin (May 17, 2017). "Apple has started production of iPhone SE in India, shipping to customers later in May". 9to5Mac. Retrieved May 24, 2017. Haselton, Todd (May 17, 2017). "Apple begins manufacturing iPhone SE in India". CNBC. NBCUniversal News Group. Retrieved May 24, 2017. "Apple starts iPhone 7 production in Bengaluru". livemint.com. April 2, 2019. Retrieved April 2, 2019. "Apple to open first Indian store in 2021". BBC News. February 27, 2020. Retrieved February 27, 2020. Yang, Jie; Tilley, Aaron (December 3, 2022). "Apple Makes Plans to Move Production Out of China". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved December 4, 2022. Musgrove, Mike (June 16, 2006). "Sweatshop Conditions at IPod Factory Reported". The Washington Post. Kahney, Leander (June 13, 2006). "Judging Apple Sweatshop Charge". Wired. Archived from the original on June 16, 2008.; Dean, Jason (August 11, 2007). "The Forbidden City of Terry Gou". The Wall Street Journal.; Johnson, Joel (November 2, 2010). "Where the Workers Who Made Your iPhone Sleep at Night". Wired. Archived from the original on November 4, 2010. Retrieved November 13, 2010. Morphy, Ericka (January 31, 2008). "Apple, IT and the Specter of Sweatshop Labor". Mac News World. Archived from the original on May 8, 2013. Retrieved April 10, 2008. "Apple 2010 Supplier Responsibility Report" (PDF). Apple Inc. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2022. Retrieved March 26, 2019. "Apple's child labour issues worsen". The Telegraph. London. February 15, 2011. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved October 7, 2011. Lau, Mimi (December 15, 2010). "Struggle for Foxconn girl who wanted to die". South China Morning Post. Wuhan, Hubei. Tam, Fiona (October 11, 2010). "Foxconn factories are labour camps: report". South China Morning Post. "Foxconn worker plunges to death at China plant: report". Reuters. November 5, 2010. Dean, Jason (May 27, 2010). "Suicides Spark Inquiries". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved May 29, 2010. Foreman, William (May 26, 2010). "Tech: Apple Supplier Foxconn Suffers 10th Death This Year, Asks Workers To Sign Anti-Suicide Pledge". HuffPost. "Apple under fire again for working conditions at Chinese factories". The Guardian. December 19, 2014. Retrieved March 23, 2017. Chen, Brian X. (May 14, 2010). "Workers Plan to Sue iPhone Contractor Over Poisoning". Wired. "Suicides at Foxconn: Light and death". The Economist. May 27, 2010. Retrieved April 24, 2012. Žižek, Slavoj; Horvat, Srećko (2014). What Does Europe Want?: The Union and Its Discontents. Columbia University Press. p. xxi. ISBN 978-0-231-17107-6. Workers poisoned while making iPhones ABC News, October 25, 2010; Dirty Secrets Archived May 25, 2017, at the Wayback Machine ABC News Foreign Correspondent, October 26, 2010; Occupational Safety and Health Guideline for n-Hexane Archived May 4, 2013, at the Wayback Machine, Occupational Safety and Health Administration. Jamieson, Dave (December 23, 2014). "The Factory Workers Behind Your iPhone Are Too Tired To Eat, Report Says". HuffPost.; Exhaustion Has No Limit at Apple Supplier in China Archived December 24, 2014, at the Wayback Machine. Institute for Global Labour and Human Rights. December 22, 2014. Lovejoy, Ben (December 18, 2019). "$43M fraud by Foxconn managers selling iPhones made from rejected parts". 9to5Mac. Price, Rob (1987). So Far: The First Ten Years of a Vision. Apple Computer. ISBN 978-1-55693-974-7. Polsson, Ken. "Chronology of Events in the History of Microcomputers". Archived from the original on June 2, 2008. Retrieved August 18, 2008. Amelio, Gil; Simon, William L. (1999). On the Firing Line: My 500 Days at Apple. New York: Harper Business. ISBN 978-0-88730-919-9. OCLC 41424094. Carlton, Jim (1998). Apple: The Inside Story of Intrigue, Egomania and Business Blunders (Revised ed.). Random House Business Books. ISBN 978-0-88730-965-6. OCLC 1068545200. Deutschman, Alan (2000). The Second Coming of Steve Jobs. Broadway Books. ISBN 978-0-7679-0432-2. OCLC 59470055. Hertzfeld, Andy (2004). Revolution in the Valley: The Insanely Great Story of How the Mac Was Made. O'Reilly Books. ISBN 978-0-596-00719-5. OCLC 774133318. Kunkel, Paul (1997). AppleDesign: The Work of the Apple Industrial Design Group. Graphis Incorporated. ISBN 978-1-888001-25-9. OCLC 450559301. Lashinsky, Adam (2013). Inside Apple: How America's Most Admired—and Secretive—Company Really Works. Grand Central. ISBN 978-1-4555-1216-4. OCLC 984131988. O'Grady, Jason D. (2009). Apple Inc. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-0-313-36244-6. Levy, Steven (2000) [1994]. Insanely Great: The Life and Times of Macintosh, the Computer That Changed Everything. New York: Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-14-029177-3. OCLC 474924791. Linzmayer, Owen (2004). Apple Confidential 2.0. No Starch Press. ISBN 978-1-59327-010-0. OCLC 921280642. Rose, Frank (1990). West of Eden: The End of Innocence at Apple Computer. Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-14-009372-8. OCLC 924684399. Sculley, John; Byrne, John A. (1990) [October 1, 1987]. Odyssey: Pepsi to Apple ... A Journey of Adventure, Ideas and the Future. Diane Pub Co. ISBN 978-0-7881-6949-6. OCLC 947796756. Wozniak, Steve; Smith, Gina (2006). iWoz: From Computer Geek to Cult Icon: How I Invented the Personal Computer, Co-Founded Apple, and Had Fun Doing It. W. W. Norton & Company. ISBN 978-0-393-06143-7. OCLC 502898652. Young, Jeffrey S. (1988). Steve Jobs: The Journey Is the Reward. Lynx Books. ISBN 978-1-55802-378-9. OCLC 502695173. Young, Jeffrey S.; Simon, William L. (2005). iCon Steve Jobs: The Greatest Second Act in the History of Business. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-0-471-72083-6. OCLC 487439489. Official website Business data for Apple Inc.: Bloomberg Google Reuters SEC filings Yahoo! Apple Inc. companies grouped at OpenCorporates Apple Inc. at Wikipedia's sister projects: Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Travel guides from Wikivoyage Portals:  Companies  San Francisco Bay Area  United States  1980s  1990s