This is a list of Belgian monarchs from 1831 when the first Belgian king, Leopold I, ascended the throne, after Belgium seceded from the Kingdom of the Netherlands during the Belgian Revolution of 1830. Under the Belgian Constitution, the Belgian monarch is styled "King of the Belgians" (French: Roi des Belges, Dutch: Koning der Belgen, German: König der Belgier) rather than "King of Belgium" in order to reflect the monarchy's constitutional and popular function. Since 1831, there have been seven Kings of the Belgians and two regents. Belgium portal Monarchy of Belgium Family tree of Belgian monarchs List of Belgian consorts Line of succession to the Belgian throne Crown Council of Belgium Under Article 90 of the Belgian Constitution, from the death of a monarch until the swearing in of their successor or a regent, the monarch's constitutional powers are in the hands of the Council of Ministers (interregnum); this accounts for the difference of dates between the end of one reign and the beginning of the following one. The constitutional powers of the king were exercised by the Council of Ministers from 28 May 1940 until 21 September 1944, followed by Prince Charles as a regent until 20 July 1950, and then from 11 August 1950 until 17 July 1951 by his successor under the title of Royal Prince. See Christian Behrendt and Martin Vrancken, "L'article 93 de la Constitution belge et l'impossibilité de régner du roi : une disposition dépassée par son histoire", in L'Europe au présent ! Liber amicorum Melchior Wathelet. From 3 until 5 April 1990, the constitutional powers of the king were exercised by the Council of Ministers during the constitutional crisis around the Belgian Abortion Act (see the external source in the previous footnote). Wikimedia Commons has media related to Monarchs of Belgium. Vanthemsche, Guy; De Peuter, Roger, eds. (2023), "Appendix: List of Rulers, Sovereigns and Heads of State (1419–Present) and of Governors General (1507–1794) of the Southern Low Countries and Belgium", A Concise History of Belgium, Cambridge Concise Histories, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 357–360. Rulers of Belgium History of the Belgian Monarchy at Monarchie.be