Ded Moroz, or Morozko (Russian: Морозко, romanized: Morozko), is a legendary figure similar to Saint Nicholas, Father Christmas, and Santa Claus who has his roots in Slavic mythology. The tradition of Ded Moroz is mostly spread in East Slavic countries and is a significant part of Russian culture. At the beginning of the Soviet era, communist authorities banned Ded Moroz. However, the ban was lifted and he soon became a significant part of Soviet culture. The literal translation of Ded Moroz is Old Man Frost, but traditionally the name is translated as Father Frost. Ded Moroz wears a heel-length fur coat, in red or blue, a semi-round fur hat, and valenki on his feet. He has a long white beard. He walks with a long magic stick and often rides a troika. He is often depicted bringing presents to well-mannered children, often delivering them in person in the days of December and secretly under the New Year Tree[clarification needed] over night on New Year's Eve. The residence of Ded Moroz in Russia is considered to be the town of Veliky Ustyug, Vologda Oblast. The residence of the Belarusian Dzyed Maroz is said to be in Belavezhskaya Pushcha. In East Slavic cultures, Ded Moroz is accompanied by Snegurochka (Russian: Снегурочка, Snegurochka; Belarusian: Снягурка, Sniahurka; Ukrainian: Снігуронька, Snihurońka; "Snow Maiden"), his granddaughter and helper. The origins of the character of Ded Moroz predates Christianity as a Slavic spirit of winter [ru]. Since the 19th century the attributes and legend of Ded Moroz have been shaped by literary influences, which were also influenced by the Western tradition of Santa Claus. The play The Snow Maiden (named Snegurochka in Russian) by Aleksandr Ostrovsky was influential in this respect, as was Rimsky-Korsakov's The Snow Maiden with libretto based on the play. By the end of the 19th century Ded Moroz became a popular character.[citation needed] The children's tradition of writing letters to Ded Moroz has been known since the end of the XIX century. Following the Russian Revolution, Christmas traditions were actively discouraged because they were considered to be "bourgeois and religious". Similarly, in 1928 Ded Moroz was declared "an ally of the priest and kulak". Nevertheless, the image of Ded Moroz took its current form during Soviet times, becoming the main symbol of the New Year's holiday (Novy God) that replaced Christmas. Some Christmas traditions were revived following the famous letter by Pavel Postyshev, published in Pravda on 28 December 1935. Postyshev believed that the origins of the holiday, which were pre-Christian, were less important than the benefits it could bring to Soviet children. Ded Moroz is very popular in modern Russia. In 1998, the town of Veliky Ustyug in Vologda Oblast, Russia was declared the home of the Russian Ded Moroz by Yury Luzhkov, then Mayor of Moscow. Between 2003 and 2010, the post office in Veliky Ustyug received approximately 2,000,000 letters from within Russia and from all over the world for Ded Moroz. On 7 January 2008, then President Putin of the Russian Federation visited Ded Moroz' residence in the town of Veliky Ustyug as part of the Russian Orthodox Christmas Eve celebration. The western Santa Claus made inroads in the Russian Federation during the "turbulent" 1990s when Western culture increased its penetration into the post-Soviet Russia. The resurgence of Russia in the early 21st century brought about a renewed emphasis on the basic Slavic character of Ded Moroz. This included the Russian Federation and subordinate governments sponsoring courses about Ded Moroz every December, with the aim of establishing appropriate Slavic norms for Ded Moroz and Snegurochka ("Snow Maiden" - Ded Moroz' granddaughter) roles for the New Year holiday. People playing Ded Moroz and Snegurochka now typically make appearances at children's parties during the winter holiday season, distributing presents and fighting off the wicked witch, Baba Yaga, who children are told wants to steal the gifts. In November and December 2010, Ded Moroz was one of the candidates in the running for consideration as a mascot for the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi, Russia. Many ethnic minorities have for linguistic reasons other names for Ded Moroz or even have their own culture-equivalent counterparts to Ded Moroz. For example, in Bashkir Ded Moroz is known as Ҡыш бабай (Qïš babay, literally: "Winter Old Man"), in Tatar it has the similar spelling Qış Babay (Кыш бабай) with the same meaning. In Nenets he is known as Yamal Iri ("Grandfather of Yamal"). The Yakut indigenous people have their own counterpart to Ded Moroz, which is called Chys Khaan ("Master of Cold"). Ded Moroz, and on occasion the Belarus Dzied Maroz, are presented in the media as being in on-going détente with various counterparts from other cultures, such as the Estonian Santa Claus (Jõuluvana or "Old man of Yule"), the Finnish Santa Claus (Joulupukki or "Yule Goat"), and other Santa Claus, Father Christmas, and Saint Nicholas figures. The détente efforts portrayed have included one-on-one meetings, group meetings and friendly competitions, such as the annual November Santa Claus championships of Celle, Germany. In November 2009, for the first time, the Russian Federation offered competition to NORAD Tracks Santa with GLONASS Tracks Ded Moroz, which purports to use GLONASS (GLObal NAvigation Satellite System or "the Russian GPS") to track Ded Moroz on New Year's Eve (according to the Gregorian Calendar). The Russian-language website provides "real-time tracking" of Ded Moroz, "news" of Ded Moroz throughout the year, a form to send e-mail to Ded Moroz, photos, videos, streaming audio of Russian songs, poems and verses from children's letters to Ded Moroz, information on Veliky Ustyug in Vologda Oblast (considered to be Ded Moroz's hometown) and opportunities to enter competitions and win prizes. There are equivalents of Ded Moroz and Snegurochka all over the former USSR, as well as the countries once in the Eastern bloc and in the former Yugoslavia. After the Dissolution of the Soviet Union, some of these countries made efforts to move away from Soviet and Russian heritage toward their own ancient traditions. The Armenian name for Ded Moroz is Dzmer Pap (Armenian: Ձմեռ Պապ), literally Grandfather Winter. His loyal granddaughter Dzyunanushik (Armenian: Ձյունանուշիկ), whose name means Snow Sweetie, or Snow Anush (a popular Armenian female name), is another counterpart of Snegurochka. The tradition was set throughout the times of the Russian Empire after the Russo-Persian War (1826-1828), when Eastern Armenia was joined to Russia according to the 1828 Treaty of Turkmenchay. For almost 160 years of influence Dzmer Pap and Dzyunanushik have hardly changed their appearance or behavior: they come in red, blue or white winter fur coats and, bringing presents to children, expect them to sing songs or recite poems. They are parts of New Year and Christmas matinées and shows in Armenia. In the recent decades well-off parents have developed a tradition to invite Dzmer Pap and Dzyunanushik to their children. In Azerbaijani, Ded Moroz is known as Şaxta Baba ("Grandfather Frost") and his companion Snegurochka is known as Qar Qızı ("Snow Girl"). In the predominantly Muslim but secular country, where Christians are a small minority, this tradition remains very popular. Şaxta Baba brings gifts to children at New Year celebrations, however Qar Qızı is rarely present at the festivities. Ded Moroz is Dzied Maroz (Belarusian: Дзед Мароз) in the Belarusian language. He is not a historical folkloric Belarusian character, but was a replacement for Saint Nicholas, known locally as Śviaty Mikałaj, whom Soviet authorities disapproved of because of his Christian origin. The official residence of Dzied Maroz in Belarus is declared to be in the Białowieża Forest. The Bulgarian name of Santa Claus is Дядо Коледа (Dyado Koleda, Grandfather Koleda), with Dyado Mraz (Дядо Мраз, "Grandfather Frost") being a similar Russian-imported character lacking the Christian connotations and thus popular during Communist rule. However, he has been largely forgotten since 1989, when Dyado Koleda again returned as the more popular figure. In socialist Yugoslavia (i.e. Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Montenegro, Macedonia, Serbia, and Slovenia) the character who was said to bring gifts to children was called "Grandfather Frost" (Bosnian: Djeda Mraz; Croatian: Djed Mraz; Macedonian: Дедо Мраз, romanized: Dedo Mraz; Serbian: Деда Мраз, romanized: Deda Mraz; Slovene: Dedek Mraz). He was said to bring gifts for the New Year because public celebration of Christmas was frowned upon during communism. In Croatia after the breakup of Yugoslavia, Djed Mraz was labeled a communist creation and Djed Božićnjak (literally: "Grandfather Christmas") was introduced. Attempts were made in the mass media and advertising to replace Djed Mraz with Djed Božićnjak. After 1999 the names of Djed Mraz and Djed Božićnjak became more or less synonymous, including in their use on public television. In some families Djed Mraz is still said to brings gifts at New Year. In Croatia, children also get presents on 6 December. Due to the historical influence of Austrian culture in parts of Croatia, presents are also said to be brought by a traditional figure called Sveti Nikola (Saint Nicholas) who closely resembles Djed Mraz or Djed Božićnjak, except for the fact that he is accompanied by Krampus who takes misbehaving children away, another character from Central European folklore. In some religious families, little Jesus (Isusek, Mali Isus, Kriskindl) is said to brings gifts at Christmas instead of Djed Božićnjak. Also, in some parts of Dalmatia the gifts are brought by Saint Lucy (Sveta Lucija). In Slovenia, the name Ded Moroz was translated from Russian as Dedek Mraz (literally, "Grandpa Frost"). Dedek Mraz is depicted as a slim man wearing a grey leather coat, which has fur inside and is decorated outside, and a round dormouse fur cap. This version of the character is based on traditional imagery, especially as depicted by Maksim Gaspari in images commissioned in 1952. Although the name was translated literally from the Soviet figure, other names for the character were also considered: Sneženi mož ("the Snow Man") and oca Triglav ("Daddy Triglav"). A female figure named babica Zima (Grandma Winter) was also proposed. Initially he was said to live in Siberia, but with the Informbiro crisis and the schism between Yugoslavia and the Soviet Union his home was relocated to Mt. Triglav, Slovenia's (and also Yugoslavia's) highest peak. Public processions featuring the character began in Ljubljana in 1953. The notion of Grandpa Frost was ideologically useful because it served to reorient the December/January holidays away from religion (Saint Nicholas Day and Christmas) and towards the secular New Year. After the ousting of Communism at the beginning of the 1990s, two other "good old men" (as they are currently styled in Slovenian) reappeared in public: Miklavž ("Saint Nicholas") is said to bring presents on 6 December, and Božiček ("Christmas man"; usually depicted as Santa Claus) on Christmas Eve. St. Nicholas has had a strong traditional presence in Slovenian ethnic territory and his feast day remained celebrated in family circles throughout the Communist period. Until the late 1940s it was also said in some areas of Slovenia that Christkind (called Jezušček ("little Jesus") or Božiček) brought gifts on Christmas Eve. Slovenian families have different preferences regarding their gift-giver of choice, according to political or religious persuasion. Slovenian popular culture depicts Grandpa Frost, Saint Nicholas and Santa Claus as friends and has also started blending attributes of the characters, for example, mention of Santa's reindeer is sometimes mingled into the Grandpa Frost narrative at public appearances. Due to his non-religious character and strong institutionalization, Grandpa Frost continues to retain a public presence. Ayaz Ata is the Kazakh and Kyrgyz name for Ded Moroz. Since the introduction and familiarization of Russian culture during the socialist era, Mongolia has been celebrating the New Year's festivities as a formal holiday. "Өвлийн өвгөн" (Övliin Övgön, Grandfather Winter) is the Mongolian equivalent of Ded Moroz, who brings children and adult alike gifts on New Year's Eve. In 1948, after the Communists gained power in Romania, it was decided that Christmas should not be celebrated. 25 and 26 December became working days and no official celebrations were to be held. As a replacement for Moş Crăciun (Father Christmas), a new character was introduced, Moş Gerilă (literally "Old Man Frosty", a Romanian language adaptation of the Russian Ded Moroz). He was said to bring gifts to children on 31 December. Officially, the New Year's Day celebrations began on 30 December, which was named the Day of the Republic, since it was the day when King Mihai I of Romania abdicated in 1947. After the Romanian Revolution of 1989, Moş Gerilă lost his influence, being replaced by Moş Crăciun. Chys Khan is known as the master of cold, accompanied by the snow maiden Khaarchana. In Tajikistan the tradition of Ded Moroz has continued. In Tajik, Ded Moroz is known as Boboi Barfi ("Grandfather Snow"), and Snegurochka is called Barfak ("Snowball"). In 2012, a young man dressed as Ded Moroz was stabbed to death in Dushanbe by a crowd shouting "You infidel!". The murder was motivated by religious hatred, according to the Tajik police. On 11 December 2013, Saidali Siddiqov, the first deputy head of the Committee for TV and Radio-broadcasting under the Government of Tajikistan, announced in an interview that "Father Frost, his maiden sidekick Snegurochka (Maiden Snow), and New Year's tree will not appear on the state television this year, because these personages and attributes bear no direct relation to our national traditions, though there is no harm in them". However next day this was denounced, and planned celebrations did include these despite objections of some religious figures. Since the breakup of the Soviet Union, and especially in recent years, there has been a shift from Ded Moroz (Ukrainian: Дід Мороз), who came to be associated with the Soviet-era heritage, to Saint Nicholas (Святий Миколай, Sviatyi Mykolai), who is more popular in Western Ukraine. With the onset of the Russian invasion there were rumors that Ded Moroz imagery was being discouraged by the authorities; however, the Ukrainian Ministry of Culture had denied this. In 2012 it was reported that Uzbekistan, a largely Muslim nation, moved away from celebrating Christmas. While the celebration of the New Year still remains a notable family event, it is no longer celebrated on a wide national scale, as it was during the times of the Soviet Union, and Ded Moroz, while not being banned, was removed from Uzbek TV channels. This decision was met with mixed reception. Some say that traditions are not for government to decide upon, whereas more orthodox Muslims want the New Year and Ded Moroz banned altogether, as was done with Valentine Day. (Russian: Дед Мороз, romanized: Ded Moroz, [dʲet mɐˈros]; Russian diminutive: Russian: Дедушка Мороз, romanized: Dedushka Moroz; Slovak: Dedo Mráz; Polish: Dziadek Mróz; Belarusian: Дзед Мароз, romanized: Dzied Maroz; Ukrainian: Дід Мороз, romanized: Did Moroz; Serbian: Деда Мраз/Deda Mraz; Macedonian: Дедо Мраз; Bulgarian: Дядо Мраз, romanized: Djado Mraz List of Christmas and winter gift-bringers by country Christmas in Eastern Europe – Overview of the various traditions practised at Christmas Father Christmas – Folkloric figure originating in England Sinterklaas – Legendary figure based on Saint Nicholas Jack Frost – Personification of frost and cold weather Old Man Winter – Personification of winter Moș Gerilă – Romanian Christmas folkloric character Noel Baba – Turkish new year celebration Snegurochka – Character in Russian fairy tales Deirdre, Holding (September 2014). Armenia with Nagorno Karabagh : the Bradt travel guide (Fourth ed.). Chalfont St. Peter. p. 96. ISBN 9781841625553. OCLC 883465141.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: location missing publisher (link) "Ded Moroz, the Russian Santa: Ded Moroz, or 'Grandfather Frost' is Russia's Santa Claus by Kerry Kubilius". About.com. Archived from the original on 7 July 2011. Retrieved 26 November 2010. Dixon-Kennedy, Mike (2 April 1998). Encyclopedia of Russian & Slavic Myth and Legend. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 9781576070635. Retrieved 2 April 2018 – via Google Books. Vyacheslav Ivanov, Vladimir Toporov, Мороз, an article from the Russian encyclopedia Myths of the Peoples of the World [ru] "Christmas Customs in Eastern Europe: Eastern Europe's Traditional Christmas Celebrations by Kerry Kubilius". About.com. Archived from the original on 31 December 2010. Retrieved 26 November 2010. 4 декабря – День написания писем Деду Морозу. In Russian (in Russian)Fir Markets Karen Petrone, Life Has Become More Joyous, Comrades: Celebrations in the Time of Stalin, Indiana University Press, 200, ISBN 0-253-33768-2, Google Print, p.85 "Father Frost and the Snow Maiden deliver Russia's winter warmer, by Helen Womack, 31 December 1996". The Independent. London. 31 December 1996. Retrieved 12 December 2010. "Reveling in Russian Santa's fairytale home, by Phoebe Taplin, 15 Dec 2010". Russia: Beyond the Headlines. 15 December 2010. Archived from the original on 12 July 2012. Retrieved 15 December 2010. Veliky Ustyug page on the site "Small Towns of Russia" (in Russian) http://www.christmasdivision.ru/stati/velikij-ustjug-rodina-deda-moroza Archived 17 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine Veliky Ustyg is the birthplace of Ded Moroz (in Russian) "Veliky Ustyug, the Russian Santa's Home by Kerry Kubilius". About.com. Archived from the original on 7 July 2011. Retrieved 27 November 2010. "Veliky Ustyug - Homeland of Father Frost". Vologda Oblast. Archived from the original on 3 July 2010. Retrieved 27 November 2010. "Putin and his deputy show off Russian Christmas traditions, 7 Jan 2008". Deutsche Presse-Agentur. Archived from the original on 28 January 2013. Retrieved 27 November 2010. "Russia's Grandfather Frost fights the invading Santas, Dec 24, 2000 by Fred Weir". The Independent. London. 24 December 2000. Archived from the original on 10 September 2011. Retrieved 27 November 2010. "Meet Russia's Antidote To Santa, Dec 25, 2007 by Dave Grout, CBS News". CBS News. 24 December 2007. Retrieved 25 November 2010. "Video - Meet Russia's Antidote To Santa, Dec 25, 2007 by Dave Grout, CBS News". CBS News. Archived from the original on 16 July 2011. Retrieved 25 November 2010. "Father Frost: History". Russian Santas. Archived from the original on 15 July 2011. Retrieved 25 November 2010. "Photo Archive". gov.karelia.ru. Archived from the original on 7 January 2018. Retrieved 2 April 2018. "A winter bull". Russia Beyond. 2 January 2013. Retrieved 25 February 2018. "Estonia/Russia: Santa Claus Shakes Hands With Father Frost, Jan 1, 2006". Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty. Retrieved 25 November 2010. "Russian Father Frost expects to celebrate Christmas in London, Nov 24, 2010". Interfax. Retrieved 25 November 2010. "Finnish Santa Claus and Belarusian Father Frost, Nov 22, 2010". Official Website of the Republic of Belarus. Retrieved 25 November 2010. "Ded Maroz ('Father Frost') meets Santa Claus in Turku, Finland, Dec 31, 2008". YouTube. Archived from the original on 12 December 2021. Retrieved 25 November 2010. "Vologda Oblast Press Release: Ded Moroz Presides Over the Annual International Santa Claus Championships of 28–29 November 2009 in Celle, Germany – Nov 27, 2009". Vologda Oblast. Archived from the original on 22 July 2011. Retrieved 27 November 2010. "Vologda Oblast Press Release: Ded Moroz Participates in Annual International Santa Claus Championships of 28–29 November 2008 in Celle, Germany – Nov 27, 2008". Vologda Oblast. Archived from the original on 22 July 2011. Retrieved 27 November 2010. "What on earth is happening with "Russia's GPS"?, Dec 1, 2009 by Julia Ioffe". Fortune. Archived from the original on 13 September 2010. Retrieved 20 November 2010. "Official GLONASS Tracks Ded Moroz website" (in Russian). Official GLONASS Tracks Father Frost. Retrieved 27 November 2010. Dowling, Timothy C. (2014). Russia at War: From the Mongol Conquest to Afghanistan, Chechnya, and Beyond [2 volumes]. ABC-CLIO. pp. 728–. ISBN 978-1-59884-948-6. "Global Christianity – A Report on the Size and Distribution of the World's Christian Population" (PDF). Pew Research Center. "Dzied Maroz". On-Line Reference and Information. Archived from the original on 17 July 2011. Retrieved 26 November 2010. "Christmas and New Year in Belarus, 13 Dec 2007". Office for a Democratic Belarus. Archived from the original on 23 November 2010. Retrieved 26 November 2010. Маёнтак Беларускага Дзеда Мароза "Traditions old and new: From Father Frost to Father Christmas, Dec 26, 2005 by Petar Kostadinov". The Sofia Echo. Archived from the original on 21 April 2010. Retrieved 26 November 2010. "BALKANS: Religion Makes a Worrying Call, 11 May 2009". Global Geopoltics Net. Archived from the original on 23 July 2011. Retrieved 26 November 2010. Klobčar, Marija. 2009. Christmas Songs and Constructing Identities. Traditiones 38(1): 173–188, p. 173. Tivodar, Blanka, & Andreja Vezovnik. 2010. Cooking in Socialist Slovenia: Housewives on the Road from a Bright Future to an Idyllic Past. In: Breda Luthar & Maruša Pušnik (eds.), Remembering Utopia: The Culture of Everyday Life in Socialist Yugoslavia, pp. 379–406. Washington, DC: New Academia Publishing, p. 396. "Santa Claus in Croatia: The Croatian Santa Clause Tradition by Kerry Kubilius". About.com. Archived from the original on 26 December 2010. Retrieved 26 November 2010. "Croatia Christmas Traditions: Christmas in Croatia by Kerry Kubilius". About.com. Archived from the original on 7 July 2011. Retrieved 26 November 2010. "Kot zadnji od decembrskih obdarovalcev je tu dedek Mraz." 2014. 24ur.com (28 December). (in Slovene) "Dobri možje". dedekmraz.talija.com. Archived from the original on 6 February 2012. Retrieved 2 April 2018. "Archived copy". Archived from the original on 24 November 2011. Retrieved 4 January 2011.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: archived copy as title (link) "Slovenia's Christmas Traditions: Christmas in Slovenia by Kerry Kubilius". About.com. Archived from the original on 3 December 2011. Retrieved 26 November 2010. MongolNews.mn. "Нэр нэгтийн чих нэг: ӨВЛИЙН ӨВГӨН (Цан хүүрэгтэй зочид )". mongolnews.mn. Archived from the original on 11 December 2019. Retrieved 11 December 2019. "Povestea impostorului Moş Gerilă | Romania Libera". Archived from the original on 7 January 2012. Retrieved 1 January 2012. (in Romanian) Amintiri cu Moş Gerilă[permanent dead link] ("Memories with Moş Gerilă"), Evenimentul Zilei, 24 December 2005 "The Scent of Christmas in Romania, Dec 2006 by Magdalena Chitic". European Youth Voice. Archived from the original on 15 March 2012. Retrieved 26 November 2010. Roman Kozhevnikov (3 January 2012). "'Father Christmas' stabbed to death in Tajikistan". Reuters. Asia-Plus (11 December 2013). "'Tajik official confirms information about banning Father Frost from New Year's broadcasts". Asia-Plus. Archived from the original on 13 December 2013. Retrieved 12 December 2013. "В Таджикистане решили не запрещать Деда Мороза и Снегурочку" (retrieved 3 January 2016) "Kiev Brings Back Orthodox Santa Claus Instead of Soviet-Era Father Frost". The Moscow Times. 20 November 2014. "Деда Мороза и Снегурочку в Украине никто не запрещал - Минкульт" "Father Christmas off air in Uzbekistan". BBCNews. 24 December 2012. Look up ded moroz in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ded Moroz. "Just Don't Call Me Santa!"—A history of Ded Maroz in English Archived 29 December 2014 at the Wayback Machine "Father Frost, the Red Nose" on Russia Info-Centre Reveling in Russian Santa’s fairytale home Archived 12 July 2012 at the Wayback Machine Home page all of the Ded's Moroz (in Russian) GLONASS Tracks Ded Moroz (in Russian) Coat of arms of Ded Moroz (in Russian)