Bangalore (/ˈbæŋɡəlɔːr, ˌbæŋɡəˈlɔːr/ BANG-gə-lor, -⁠LOR), officially Bengaluru (Kannada pronunciation: [ˈbeŋgɐɭuːɾu] ), is the capital and largest city of the southern Indian state of Karnataka. It has a population of more than 8 million and a metropolitan population of around 15 million, making it India's third most populous city and fourth most populous urban agglomeration. It is the most populous city and largest urban agglomeration in South India, and is the 27th largest city in the world. Located on the Deccan Plateau, at a height of over 900 m (3,000 ft) above sea level, Bangalore has a pleasant climate throughout the year, with its parks and green spaces earning it the reputation of India's "Garden City". Its elevation is the highest of India's major cities. The city's history dates back to around 890, as per the old Kannada stone inscription found at the Nageshwara Temple in Begur, Bangalore. In 1537, Kempé Gowdā, a feudal ruler under the Vijayanagara Empire, established a mud fort, considered the foundation of modern Bangalore and its oldest areas, or pétés, which still exist. After the fall of the Vijayanagara Empire, Kempe Gowda declared independence; in 1638, a large Adil Shahi Bijapur army defeated Kempe Gowda III, and Bangalore came under Shahaji Bhonsle as a jagir, which later became his capital. The Mughals later captured Bangalore and sold it to Maharaja Devaraja Wodeyar II of the Kingdom of Mysore. When Haider Ali seized control of the kingdom, Bangalore's administration passed into his hands. The city was captured by the British East India Company after victory in the Fourth Anglo-Mysore War (1799), which then returned administrative control of the city, along with the kingdom, to Maharaja Krishnaraja Wadiyar III. The old city developed under the dominions of the maharaja. In 1809, the British shifted their cantonment to Bangalore, outside the old city, and a town grew up around it. Following India's independence in 1947, Bangalore became the capital of Mysore State, and remained the capital when the state was enlarged and unified in 1956 and renamed Karnataka in 1973. The two urban settlements of Bangalore, the town and the cantonment, which had developed as independent entities, merged into a single urban centre in 1949. The existing Kannada name, Bengalūru, was declared the city's official name in 2006. Bangalore is considered to be one of the fastest-growing global major metropolises. Recent estimates of the metro economy of its urban area has ranked Bangalore as one of the most productive metro areas of India. The city is considered the pivot for high-technology-based heavy manufacturing industry, with numerous large multinational technology corporations setting up their headquarters there. It is home to many top-tier engineering and research institutions. Bangalore is known as the "Silicon Valley of India" because it is the nation's leading software exporter as well as a major semiconductor hub. Several state-owned aerospace and defence organisations are in the city. The presence of numerous notable sporting arenas in Bangalore makes it one of the country's sporting hubs. Bangalore is an anglicised version of the city's Kannada name Bengalūru. It was the name of a village near Kodigehalli in Bangalore city today and was used by Kempe Gowda to name the city as Bangalore at the time of its foundation in 1537. The earliest reference to the name "Bengalūru" was found in a ninth-century Western Ganga dynasty stone inscription on a vīra gallu (Kannada: ವೀರಗಲ್ಲು; lit. 'hero stone', a rock edict extolling the virtues of a warrior). According to an Old Kannada inscription found in Begur, "Bengalūrū" was the place of a battle in 890 CE. It was also referred to as "Kalyānapura" or "Kalyānapuri" ("Auspicious City") and "Dēvarāyanagara" during the Vijayanagara times. An apocryphal story states that the twelfth-century Hoysala king Veera Ballala II, while on a hunting expedition, lost his way in the forest. Tired and hungry, he came across a poor old woman who served him boiled beans. The grateful king named the place "Benda-Kaal-uru" (literally, "town of boiled beans"), which eventually evolved into "Bengalūru". Suryanath Kamath has put forward an explanation of a possible floral origin of the name as derived from benga, the Kannada term for Pterocarpus marsupium (also known as the Indian Kino Tree), a species of dry and moist deciduous trees that grows abundantly in the region. On 11 December 2005, the Government of Karnataka accepted a proposal by Jnanpith Award winner U. R. Ananthamurthy to rename Bangalore to Bengalūru. On 27 September 2006, the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) passed a resolution to implement the name change. The government of Karnataka accepted the proposal and it was decided to officially implement the name change from 1 November 2006. The Union government approved this request, along with name changes for 11 other Karnataka cities, in October 2014. Hence, Bangalore was renamed to "Bengaluru" on 1 November 2014. A discovery of Stone Age artefacts during the 2001 Census of India at Jalahalli, Sidhapura and Jadigenahalli, all of which are located on Bangalore's outskirts today, suggest human settlement around 4000 BCE. Around 1,000 BCE (during the Iron Age), burial grounds were established at Koramangala and Chikkajala on the outskirts of Bangalore. Coins of the Roman emperors Augustus, Tiberius, and Claudius found at Yeswanthpur and HAL Airport indicate that the region was involved in trans-oceanic trade with the Romans and other civilisations in 27 BCE. The region of modern-day Bangalore was part of several successive South Indian kingdoms. Between the fourth and tenth centuries, the region was ruled by the Western Ganga dynasty of Karnataka, the first dynasty to set up effective control over the region. According to Edgar Thurston, there were twenty-eight kings who ruled Gangavadi from the start of the Christian era until its conquest by the Cholas. The Western Gangas ruled the region initially as a sovereign power (350–550 CE), and later as feudatories of the Chalukyas of Badami, followed by the Rashtrakutas until the tenth century. The Begur Nageshwara Temple was commissioned around 860, during the reign of the Western Ganga King Ereganga Nitimarga I, and extended by his successor Nitimarga II. Around 1004, during the reign of Raja Raja Chola I, the Cholas defeated the Western Gangas under the command of the crown prince Rajendra Chola I, and captured Bangalore. During this period, the Bangalore region witnessed the migration of many groups—warriors, administrators, traders, artisans, pastorals, cultivators, and religious personnel from Tamil Nadu and other Kannada-speaking regions. The Chokkanathaswamy temple at Domlur, the Aigandapura complex near Hesaraghatta, Mukthi Natheshwara Temple at Binnamangala, Choleshwara Temple at Begur, Someshwara Temple at Ulsoor, date from the Chola era. In 1117, the Hoysala king Vishnuvardhana defeated the Cholas in the Battle of Talakad in south Karnataka, and extended its rule over the region. Vishnuvardhana expelled the Cholas from all parts of the Mysore state. By the end of the 13th century, Bangalore became a source of contention between two warring cousins, the Hoysala ruler Veera Ballala III of Halebidu and Ramanatha, who administered from the Hoysala held territory in Tamil Nadu. Veera Ballala III had appointed a civic head at Hudi (now within Bangalore Municipal Corporation limits), thus promoting the village to the status of a town. After Veera Ballala III's death in 1343, the next empire to rule the region was the Vijayanagara Empire, which itself saw the rise of four dynasties, the Sangamas (1336–1485), the Saluvas (1485–1491), the Tuluvas (1491–1565), and the Aravidu (1565–1646). During the reign of the Vijayanagara Empire, Achyuta Deva Raya of the Tuluva dynasty raised the Shivasamudra Dam across the Arkavati river at Hesaraghatta, whose reservoir is the present city's supply of regular piped water. Modern Bangalore was begun in 1537 by the chieftain Kempe Gowda I, who aligned with the Vijayanagara Empire under Emperor Achyuta Deva Raya to campaign against Gangaraja (whom he defeated and expelled to Kanchi), and who built a mud-brick fort for the people at the site that would become the central part of modern Bangalore. Kempe Gowda was restricted by rules made by the Emperor, who feared the potential power of Kempe Gowda and did not allow a stone fort. Kempe Gowda referred to the new town as his "gandubhūmi" or "Land of Heroes". Within the fort, the town was divided into smaller divisions, each called a pētē (Kannada pronunciation: [peːteː]). The town had two main streets—Chikkapētē Street and Doddapētē Street. Their intersection formed the Doddapētē Square—the heart of Bangalore. Kempe Gowda I's During the Vijayanagara rule, many saints and poets referred to Bangalore as "Devarāyanagara" and "Kalyānapura" or "Kalyānapuri" ("Auspicious City"). After the fall of the Vijayanagara Empire in 1565 in the Battle of Talikota, Kempe Gowda I declared independence. His successor, Kempe Gowda II, built four towers that marked Bangalore's boundary. Then in 1638, a large Adil Shahi Bijapur army led by Ranadulla Khan and accompanied by his second in command Shāhji Bhōnslē defeated Kempe Gowda III, and Bangalore was given to Shāhji as a jagir (feudal estate). Around 1639, he ordered the reconstruction of the destroyed city and the building of new lakes to solve the water shortage in the region. In 1687, the Mughal general Kasim Khan, under orders from Aurangzeb, defeated Ekoji I, son of Shāhji, and sold Bangalore to Chikkadevaraja Wodeyar (1673–1704), the then ruler of the Kingdom of Mysore for three lakh rupees. After the death of Krishnaraja Wodeyar II in 1759, Hyder Ali, Commander-in-Chief of the Mysore Army, proclaimed himself the de facto ruler of the Kingdom of Mysore. Hyder Ali is credited with building the Delhi and Mysore gates at the northern and southern ends of the city in 1760. The kingdom later passed to Hyder Ali's son Tipu Sultan. Hyder and Tipu directed the building of the Lal Bagh Botanical Gardens in 1760. Under them, Bangalore developed into a commercial and military centre of strategic importance. The Bangalore fort was captured by British forces under Lord Cornwallis on 21 March 1791 during the Third Anglo-Mysore War and formed a centre for British resistance against Tipu Sultan. Following Tipu's death in the Fourth Anglo-Mysore War (1799), the British returned administrative control of the Bangalore pētē to the Maharaja of Mysore and was incorporated into the Princely State of Mysore, which existed as a nominally sovereign entity of the British Raj. The old pētē developed in the dominions of the Maharaja of Mysore. The Residency of Mysore State was first established in Mysore City in 1799 and later shifted to Bangalore in 1804. It was abolished in 1843, only to be revived in 1881 at Bangalore and closed down permanently in 1947, with Indian independence. The British found Bangalore to be a pleasant and appropriate place to station their garrison and therefore moved their cantonment to Bangalore from Seringapatam in 1809 near Ulsoor, about 6 km (4 mi) northeast of the city. A town grew up around the cantonment, by absorbing several villages in the area. The new centre had its own municipal and administrative apparatus, though technically it was a British enclave within the territory of the Wodeyar Kings of the Princely State of Mysore. Two important developments which contributed to the rapid growth of the city, include the introduction of telegraph connections to all major Indian cities in 1853 and a rail connection to Madras (now Chennai), in 1864. In the 19th century, Bangalore essentially became a twin city, with the "pētē", whose residents were predominantly Kannadigas and the cantonment created by the British. Throughout the 19th century, the Cantonment gradually expanded and acquired a distinct cultural and political salience as it was governed directly by the British and was known as the Civil and Military Station of Bangalore. While it remained in the princely territory of Mysore, Cantonment had a large military presence and a cosmopolitan civilian population that came from outside the princely state of Mysore, including British and Anglo-Indians army officers. Bangalore was hit by a plague epidemic in 1898 that claimed nearly 3,500 lives. The crisis caused by the outbreak catalysed the city's sanitation process. Telephone lines were laid to help co-ordinate anti-plague operations. Regulations for building new houses with proper sanitation facilities came into effect. A health officer was appointed and the city divided into four wards for better co-ordination. Victoria Hospital was inaugurated in 1900 by Lord Curzon, the then Governor-General of British India. New extensions in Malleswaram and Basavanagudi were developed in the north and south of the pētē. In 1903, motor vehicles came to be introduced in Bangalore. In 1906, Bangalore became one of the first cities in India to have electricity from hydro power, powered by the hydroelectric plant situated in Shivanasamudra. The Indian Institute of Science was established in 1909, which subsequently played a major role in developing the city as a science research hub. In 1912, the Bangalore torpedo, an offensive explosive weapon widely used in World War I and World War II, was devised in Bangalore by British army officer Captain McClintock of the Madras Sappers and Miners. Bangalore's reputation as the "Garden City of India" began in 1927 with the silver jubilee celebrations of the rule of Krishnaraja Wodeyar IV. Several projects such as the construction of parks, public buildings and hospitals were instituted to improve the city. Bangalore played an important role during the Indian independence movement. Mahatma Gandhi visited the city in 1927 and 1934 and addressed public meetings here. In 1926, the labour unrest in Binny Mills due to demand by textile workers for payment of bonus resulted in lathi charging and police firing, resulting in the death of four workers, and several injuries. In July 1928, there were notable communal disturbances in Bangalore, like when a Ganesh idol was removed from a school compound in the Sultanpet area of Bangalore. In 1940, the first flight between Bangalore and Bombay took off, which placed the city on India's urban map. After India's independence in August 1947, Bangalore remained in the newly carved Mysore State of which the Maharaja of Mysore was the Rajapramukh (appointed governor). The "City Improvement Trust" was formed in 1945, and in 1949, the "City" and the "Cantonment" merged to form the Bangalore City Corporation. The Government of Karnataka later constituted the Bangalore Development Authority in 1976 to coordinate the activities of these two bodies. Public sector employment and education provided opportunities for Kannadigas from the rest of the state to migrate to the city. Bangalore experienced rapid growth in the decades 1941–51 and 1971–81, which saw the arrival of many immigrants from northern Karnataka. The Government of India set up the All India Institute of Mental Health (AIIMH) in 1956. By 1961, Bangalore had become the sixth-largest city in India, with a population of 1,207,000. In the following decades, Bangalore's manufacturing base continued to expand with the establishment of private companies such as MICO (Motor Industries Company), which set up its manufacturing plant in the city. By the 1980s, urbanisation had spilled over the current boundaries, and in 1986, the Bangalore Metropolitan Region Development Authority, was established to co-ordinate the development of the entire region as a single unit. On 8 February 1981, a major fire broke out at Venus Circus in Bangalore, where more than 92 people died, the majority of them children. Bangalore experienced a growth in its real estate market in the 1980s and 1990s, spurred by capital investors from other parts of the country who converted Bangalore's large plots and colonial bungalows into multi-storied apartments. In 1985, Texas Instruments became the first multinational corporation to set up base in Bangalore. Other information technology companies followed suit and by the end of the 20th century, Bangalore had established itself as the Silicon Valley of India. Today, Bangalore is India's third most populous city. During the 21st century, Bangalore has had major terrorist attacks in 2008, 2010, and 2013. Bangalore lies in the southeast of the South Indian state of Karnataka. It is in the heart of the Mysore Plateau (a region of the larger Cretaceous Deccan Plateau) at an average elevation of 900 m (2,953 ft).: 8  It covers an area of 741 km2 (286 sq mi). The majority of the city of Bangalore lies in the Bangalore Urban district of Karnataka and the surrounding rural areas are a part of the Bangalore Rural district. The Government of Karnataka has carved out the new district of Ramanagara from the old Bangalore Rural district. Bangalore's topography is generally flat, although the western parts of the city are hilly. The highest point is Vidyaranyapura Doddabettahalli, 962 m (3,156 ft) above sea level, situated to the northwest of the city. No major rivers run through the city, although the Arkavathi and South Pennar cross paths at the Nandi Hills, 60 km (37 mi) to the north. River Vrishabhavathi, a minor tributary of the Arkavathi, arises within the city at Basavanagudi and flows through the city. The rivers Arkavathi and Vrishabhavathi together carry much of Bangalore's sewage. A sewerage system, constructed in 1922, covers 215 km2 (83 sq mi) of the city and connects with five sewage treatment centres located in the city's periphery. In the 16th century, Kempe Gowda I constructed many lakes to meet the town's water requirements. The Kempambudhi Kere, since overrun by modern development, was prominent among those lakes. In the first half of the 20th century, the Nandi Hills waterworks were commissioned by Sir Mirza Ismail (Diwan of Mysore, 1926–41 CE) to provide a water supply to the city. Kaveri River flows about 60 miles (100 km) from the city of Bengaluru, and the river Kaveri provides around 80% of the city's water supply and the remaining 20% is obtained from the Thippagondanahalli and Hesaraghatta reservoirs of the Arkavathi river. Bangalore receives 800 million litres (210 million US gallons) of water a day, more than any other Indian city, but Bangalore does face occasional water shortages, especially during summer and in years with low rainfall. A random sampling of the air quality index (AQI) of twenty stations within the city ranged from 76 to 314, suggesting heavy to severe air pollution around areas of high traffic. Bangalore has a handful of freshwater lakes and water tanks, the largest of which are Madivala tank, Hebbal Lake, Ulsoor Lake, Yediyur Lake and Sankey Tank. However, about 90% of Bangalore's lakes are polluted; the city government began revival and conservation efforts in December 2020. Groundwater occurs in silty to sandy layers of the alluvial sediments. The Peninsular Gneissic Complex (PGC) is the most dominant rock unit in the area and includes granites, gneisses and migmatites, while the soils of Bangalore consist of red laterite and red, fine loamy to clayey soils. The city's vegetation is mostly large deciduous canopy and some coconut trees. Many trees are frequently felled to pave way for infrastructure development. Though Bangalore has been classified as a part of the seismic zone II (a stable zone), it has experienced earthquakes of magnitude as high as 4.5 on the Richter scale. Bangalore has a tropical savanna climate (Köppen climate classification Aw) with distinct wet and dry seasons. Due to its high elevation, Bangalore usually enjoys a more moderate climate throughout the year, although occasional heat waves can make summer somewhat uncomfortable. The coolest month is January with an average low temperature of 15.1 °C (59.2 °F) and the hottest month is April with an average high of 34.1 °C (93.4 °F). The highest temperature ever recorded in Bangalore is 39.2 °C (103 °F), recorded 24 April 2016, corresponding with the strong El Niño in that year. The lowest ever recorded is 7.8 °C (46 °F) in January 1884. Winter temperatures rarely drop below 14 °C (57 °F), and summer temperatures seldom exceed 36 °C (97 °F). Bangalore receives rainfall from both the northeast and the southwest monsoons, and the wettest months is September, followed by October and August. The summer heat is moderated by fairly frequent thunderstorms, which occasionally cause power outages and local flooding. Most of the rainfall occurs during the late afternoon or evening and rain before noon is infrequent. November 2015 (290.4 mm) was recorded as one of the wettest months in Bangalore with heavy rains causing severe flooding in some areas, and closure of a number of organisations for over a couple of days. The heaviest rainfall recorded in a 24-hour period is 179 mm (7 in) recorded on 1 October 1997. In 2022, Bangalore faced a large amount of rainfall, which was 368% more than the yearly average. Several areas were flooded, and power supply was also cut off. Bangalore is a megacity with a population of 8,443,675 in the city and 10,456,000 in the urban agglomeration, up from 8.5 million at the 2011 census. It is the third most populous city in India, the 18th most populous city in the world and the fifth most populous urban agglomeration in India. With a growth rate of 38% during the decade, Bangalore was the fastest-growing Indian metropolis after New Delhi between 1991 and 2001. Residents of Bangalore are referred to as "Bangaloreans" in English, Bengaloorinavaru or Bengaloorigaru in Kannada and Banglori in Hindi or Urdu. People from other states have migrated to Bangalore, study, or work there as well. According to the 2011[update] census of India, 79% of Bangalore's population is Hindu, a little less than the national average. Muslims comprise 13.9% of the population, roughly the same as their national average. Christians and Jains account for 5.4% and 1.0% of the population, respectively, double that of their national averages. The city has a literacy rate of 90%. Roughly 10% of Bangalore's population lives in slums—a relatively low proportion when compared to other cities in the developing world such as Mumbai (50%) and Nairobi (60%). The 2008 National Crime Records Bureau statistics indicate that Bangalore accounts for 8.5% of the total crimes reported from 35 major cities in India which is an increase in the crime rate when compared to the number of crimes fifteen years ago. In the Ease of Living Index 2020 (published by the Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs), it was ranked the most livable Indian city with a population of over a million. Bangalore has the same major urbanisation problems seen in many fast-growing cities in developing countries: rapidly escalating social inequality, mass displacement and dispossession, the proliferation of slum settlements, and epidemic public health crisis due to severe water shortage and sewage problems in poor and working-class neighbourhoods. The official language of Bangalore is Kannada, spoken by 42.05% of the population. The second-largest language is Tamil, spoken by 16.34% of the population. 13.73% speak Telugu, 13.00% Urdu, 4.64% Hindi, 3.16% Malayalam and 2.05% have Marathi as their first language. Other major languages in the city include Konkani, Marwari, Tulu, Odia and Gujarati. The Kannada language spoken in Bangalore is a form called as 'Old Mysuru Kannada' which is also used in most of the southern part of Karnataka. A vernacular dialect of this, known as Bangalore Kannada, is spoken among the youth in Bangalore and the adjoining Mysore regions. English is extensively spoken and is the principal language of the professional and business class. The major communities of Bangalore who share a long history in the city, other than the Kannadigas, are the Telugus and Tamilians, who both migrated to Bangalore in search of a better livelihood, and the Dakhanis. Already in the 16th century, Bangalore had few Tamil or Telugu or speakers, who spoke Kannada for business. Telugu-speaking people initially came to Bangalore on invitation by the Mysore royalty. Other native communities are the Tuluvas and the Konkanis of coastal Karnataka, and the Kodavas of the state's Kodagu district. The migrant communities include Maharashtrians, Punjabis, Rajasthanis, Gujaratis, Tamilians, Telugus, Malayalis, Odias, Sindhis, Biharis, Jharkhandis, and Bengalis. Bangalore once had a large Anglo-Indian population, the second-largest after Calcutta. Today, there are around 10,000 Anglo-Indians in Bangalore. Bangalorean Christians include Tamil Christians, Mangalorean Catholics, Kannadiga Christians, Malayali Syrian Christians and Northeast Indian Christians. Muslims form a very diverse population, consisting of Dakhini and Urdu-speaking Muslims, Kutchi Memons, Labbay and Mappilas. Other languages with sizeable numbers of speakers include Konkani, Bengali, Marwari, Tulu, Odia, Gujarati, Kodagu, Punjabi, Lambadi, Sindhi and Nepali. The Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP, Greater Bangalore Municipal Corporation) is in charge of civic administration of the city. It was formed in 2007 by merging 100 wards of the erstwhile Bangalore Mahanagara Palike, with seven neighbouring City Municipal Councils, one Town Municipal Council and 110 villages around Bangalore. The number of wards increased to 243 in 2022. The BBMP is run by a city council of 250 members, including 198 corporators representing each of the wards of the city and 52 other elected representatives, consisting of members of Parliament and the state legislature. Elections to the council are held once every five years and are decided by popular vote. Members contesting elections to the council usually represent one or more of the state's political parties. A mayor and deputy mayor are also elected from the elected members of the council. Elections to the BBMP were held on 28 March 2010, after a gap of three and a half years since the expiry of the previous elected body's term, and the Bharatiya Janata Party was voted into power – the first time it had ever won a civic poll in the city. Indian National Congress councillor Sampath Raj became the city's mayor in September 2017; the vote was boycotted by the BJP. In September 2018, Indian National Congress councillor Gangambike Mallikarjun was elected as mayor, replacing Sampath Raj. In 2019 BJP's M Goutham Kumar took charge as mayor. On 10 September 2020, the term of the BBMP council ended and Gaurav Gupta was appointed as the administrator of BBMP. The municipal commissioner of Bangalore is Tushar Giri Nath, and the police commissioner is Pratap Reddy. Bangalore's rapid growth has created several administrative problems relating to traffic congestion and degrading infrastructure. The unplanned nature of growth in the city resulted in massive traffic gridlocks; a flyover system and one-way traffic systems were introduced, which were only moderately successful. A 2003 Battelle Environmental Evaluation System (BEES) evaluation of Bangalore's physical, biological and socioeconomic parameters indicated that Bangalore's water quality and terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems were close to ideal, while the city's socioeconomic parameters (traffic, quality of life) air quality and noise pollution were poor. The BBMP works in conjunction with the Bangalore Development Authority (BDA) and the Agenda for Bangalore's Infrastructure and Development Task Force (ABIDe) to design and implement civic and infrastructural projects. The Bangalore City Police (BCP) has seven geographic zones, includes the Traffic Police, the City Armed Reserve, the Central Crime Branch and the City Crime Record Bureau and runs 86 police stations, including two all-women police stations. Other units within the BCP include Traffic Police, City Armed Reserve (CAR), City Special Branch (CSB), City Crime Branch (CCB) and City Crime Records Bureau (CCRB). As capital of the state of Karnataka, Bangalore houses important state government facilities such as the Karnataka High Court, the Vidhana Soudha (the home of the Karnataka state legislature) and Raj Bhavan (the residence of the governor of Karnataka). Bangalore contributes four members to the lower house of the Indian Parliament, the Lok Sabha, from its four constituencies: Bangalore Rural, Bangalore Central, Bangalore North, and Bangalore South, and 28 members to the Karnataka Legislative Assembly. Electricity in Bangalore is regulated through the Bangalore Electricity Supply Company (BESCOM), while water supply and sanitation facilities are provided by the Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board (BWSSB). The city has offices of the Consulate General of Germany, France, Japan, Israel, British Deputy High Commission, along with honorary consulates of Ireland, Finland, Switzerland, Maldives, Mongolia, Sri Lanka and Peru. It also has a trade office of Canada and a virtual Consulate of the United States. As of 2022, Bangalore produces around 6000 metric tonnes of solid waste per day. This waste is transported from collection units located near Hesaraghatta Lake, to the garbage dumping sites. The city has considerable dust pollution, hazardous waste disposal, and disorganised, unscientific waste retrievals. The IT hub, the Whitefield region, is the most polluted area in Bangalore. In 2016, a study found that over 36% of diesel vehicles in the city exceed the national limit for emissions. Anil Kumar, Commissioner of the BBMP, said: "The deteriorating air quality in cities and its impact on public health is an area of growing concern for city authorities. While much is already being done about collecting and monitoring air quality data, little focus has been given on managing the impacts that bad air quality is having on the health of citizens." According to a 2012[update] report submitted to the World Bank by Karnataka Slum Clearance Board, Bangalore had 862 slums out of around 2000 slums in all of Karnataka. 42% of the households migrated from different parts of India like Chennai, Hyderabad and most of North India, and 43% of the households had remained in the slums for over 10 years. The Karnataka Municipality works to shift 300 families annually to newly constructed buildings. One-third of these slum clearance projects lacked basic service connections, 60% of slum dwellers lacked complete water supply lines and shared BWSSB water supply. Ιn 2012, Bangalore generated 2.1 million tonnes of Municipal Solid Waste, or 194.3 kilograms per person. Waste management in Karnataka is regulated by the Karnataka State Pollution Control Board (KSPCB) under the aegis of the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB), a Central Government entity. As part of the Waste Management Guidelines, the government of Karnataka through the KSPCB has authorised a few well-established companies to manage biomedical and other hazardous waste in Karnataka. Bangalore is one of the fastest-growing metropolises in India. Bangalore contributes 38% of India's total IT exports. Its economy is primarily service oriented and industrial, dominated by information technology, telecommunication, biotechnology, and manufacturing of electronics, machinery, automobiles, food, etc. Major industrial areas around Bangalore are Adugodi, Bidadi, Bommanahalli, Bommasandra, Domlur, Hoodi, Whitefield, Doddaballapura, Hoskote, Bashettihalli, Yelahanka, Electronic City, Peenya, Krishnarajapuram, Bellandur, Narasapura, Rajajinagar, Mahadevapura etc. It is the fifth Indian city to host maximum numbers of Fortune Companies, after Mumbai, Delhi, Kolkata and Chennai. The growth of IT has presented the city with unique challenges. Ideological clashes sometimes occur between the city's IT moguls, who demand an improvement in the city's infrastructure, and the state government, whose electorate is primarily from rural Karnataka. The encouragement of high-tech industry in Bangalore, for example, has not favoured local employment development, but instead increased land values and forced out small enterprises. The state has also resisted the massive investments required to reverse the rapid decline in city transport, driving new and expanding businesses elsewhere in India. Bangalore is a hub for Indian biotechnology-related industry and in 2005 was home to around 47% of the 265 biotechnology companies in India, including Biocon, India's largest biotechnology company, giving Bangalore the nickname of the "Biotech Capital of India". Bangalore is also the country's fourth largest fast-moving consumer goods (FMCG) market. Forbes considers Bangalore one of "The Next Decade's Fastest-Growing Cities". The city is the third largest hub for high-net-worth individuals. There were a large number of high-net-worth individuals with a ₹4.5 crore investment surplus in 2007. In the Ease of Living Index 2020, it was ranked the most livable Indian city with a population of over a million. The city is widely regarded as the "Silicon Valley of India", as the largest IT hub of the country. Infosys, Wipro, Mindtree, Mphasis, Flipkart, and Myntra are headquartered in Bangalore. IT companies located in the city contributed 33% of India's ₹1,442 billion (US$20 billion) IT exports in 2006–07. Bangalore's IT industry is divided into three main clusters: Software Technology Parks of India (STPI); International Tech Park, Bangalore (ITPB); and Electronic City. Most of the IT companies are located in Bommanahalli, Domlur, Whitefield, Electronic City, Krishnarajapuram, Bellandur, and Mahadevapura. Bangalore is served by Kempegowda International Airport, located at Devanahalli, about 40 km (25 mi) from the city centre. Formerly Bangalore International Airport, the airport started operations from 24 May 2008 and is privately managed by a consortium led by the GVK Group. The city was earlier served by the HAL Airport at Vimanapura, a residential locality in the eastern part of the city. The airport is the third-busiest in India after Delhi and Mumbai in terms of passenger and airplane traffic. Taxis and air-conditioned Volvo buses operated by BMTC connect the airport with the city. As of 2022, a rapid transit system called the Namma Metro is being built in stages. Initially opened with the 7 km (4.3 mi) stretch from Baiyappanahalli to MG Road in 2011, metro lines totaling 42.30 km (26.28 mi) for the north–south and east–west lines were made operational in June 2017. Phase 2 of the metro covering 72.1 km (44.8 mi) is under construction and includes two new lines along with the extension of the existing north–south and east–west lines. There are also plans to extend the north–south line to the airport, covering a distance of 29.6 km (18.4 mi). Bangalore is a divisional headquarters in the South Western Railway zone of the Indian Railways. There are four major railway stations in the city: Krantiveera Sangolli Rayanna Railway Station; Bangalore Cantonment railway station; Yeshwantapur Junction, Krishnarajapuram railway station and newly inaugurated Sir M. Visvesvaraya Terminus, with railway lines towards Jolarpettai in the east; Guntakal in the north; Kadapa (only operational until Kolar) in the northeast; Tumkur in the northwest; Hassan and Mangalore in the west; Mysore in the southwest; and Salem in the south. There is also a railway line from Baiyappanahalli to Vimanapura, no longer in use. Though Bangalore has no commuter rail as of 2022, there have been demands for a suburban rail service because of the large number of employees working in the IT corridor areas of Whitefield, Outer Ring Road and Electronic City. The Rail Wheel Factory is Asia's second-largest manufacturer of wheel and axle for railways and is headquartered in Yelahanka, Bangalore. Buses operated by Bangalore Metropolitan Transport Corporation (BMTC) are a staple of city public transport. While commuters can buy tickets on boarding these buses, BMTC also provides an option of a bus pass to frequent users. BMTC runs air-conditioned luxury buses on major routes and operates shuttle services from various parts of the city to Kempegowda International Airport. The Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation operates 6,918 buses on 6,352 schedules, connecting Bangalore with other parts of Karnataka and with neighbouring states. The main bus depots that KSRTC maintains are the Kempegowda Bus Station, locally known as "Majestic bus stand", where most of the buses going out of the city ply from. Some of the KSRTC buses to Tamil Nadu, Telangana and Andhra Pradesh ply from Shantinagar Bus Station, Satellite Bus Station at Mysore Road and Baiyappanahalli satellite bus station. BMTC and KSRTC were the first operators in India to introduce Volvo city buses and intra-city coaches in India. Three-wheeled, yellow and black or yellow and green auto-rickshaws, referred to as autos, are popular for transport. They are metered and can accommodate up to three passengers. Taxis are usually available via phone calls or online services; they are metered and generally more expensive than auto-rickshaws. Bangalore is well-connected with national highways with the rest of the country. The highways are National Highway 44 (NH-44), National Highway 48 (NH-48) (also Asian Highway 47 (AH-47)), National Highway 275 (NH-275), National Highway 75 (NH-75), National Highway 648 (NH-648) and National Highway 948 (NH-948), along with state highways. An average of 1,750 vehicles are registered daily in Bangalore Regional Transport Offices (RTOs). The total number of vehicles, as of 2020, are around 8,500,000 vehicles, and the city's roads total 11,000 km (6,835 mi). Bangalore currently has one expressway, the Bangalore–Mysore Expressway, operational since March 2023, which is part of NH-275. In the coming years, the city will get more expressways, resulting in enhanced connectivity and commute with the rest of the country. They are as follows: Bangalore–Chennai Expressway: Under construction since August 2019, to be completed by March 2024. Pune–Bangalore Expressway: Proposed, to be completed by 2028. Nagpur–Hyderabad–Bengaluru Expressway: Proposed, expected to be completed by before 2030. Bangalore is known as the "Garden City of India" because of its greenery, broad streets, and presence of many public parks, such as Lal Bagh and Cubbon Park. In May 2012, guidebook publisher Lonely Planet ranked Bangalore third among the world's top ten cities to visit. Biannual flower shows are held at the Lal Bagh Botanical Gardens during the weeks of India's Republic Day and Independence Day. Bangalore Karaga or "Karaga Shaktyotsava" is one of Bangalore's oldest festivals and is dedicated to the Hindu goddess Draupadi. It is celebrated annually by the Thigala community over a period of nine days in March or April. The Someshwara Car festival, held annually in April, is a procession of the idol of the Halasuru Someshwara Temple (Ulsoor) led by the Vokkaligas, a major landholding community in southern Karnataka. Karnataka Rajyotsava is widely celebrated on 1 November and is a public holiday in the city, to mark the formation of Karnataka state on 1 November 1956. Other popular festivals in Bangalore are Ugadi, Ram Navami, Eid ul-Fitr, Ganesh Chaturthi, St. Mary's feast, Dasara, Deepawali and Christmas. Bangalore's social and economic diversity is reflected in its cuisine. Roadside vendors, tea stalls, and South Indian, North Indian, Chinese and Western fast food are all popular. Udupi restaurants are popular and serve predominantly vegetarian, regional cuisine. Bangalore is also home to many vegan restaurants and vegan activism groups, and has been named as India's most vegan-friendly city by PETA's Indian branch. Compared to Delhi and Mumbai, Bangalore lacked a contemporary art scene until the 1990s, when several art galleries emerged, including the government-established National Gallery of Modern Art. Bangalore's international art festival, Art Bangalore, was established in 2010. Kannada literature flourished in Bangalore even before Kempe Gowda laid the city's foundations. During the 18th and 19th centuries, Kannada literature was enriched by the Vachanas (a form of rhythmic writing) composed by the heads of the Veerashaiva Mathas (monastery) in Bangalore. The headquarters of the Kannada Sahitya Parishat, a nonprofit organisation that promotes the Kannada language, is located in Bangalore. The city has its own literary festival, known as the "Bangalore Literature Festival", inaugurated in 2012. The Karnataka Chitrakala Parishath is an art gallery that showcases a collection of painting, sculptures, and various other forms of art. The Indian Cartoon Gallery is located in the heart of Bangalore, dedicated to the art of cartooning, and is the first of its kind in India. The gallery conducts fresh cartoon exhibitions of various professional as well as amateur cartoonists every month. The gallery has been organised by the Indian Institute of Cartoonists based in Bangalore that serves to promote and preserve the work of eminent cartoonists in India. The institute has organised more than one hundred exhibitions of cartoons. Bangalore is home to the Kannada film industry, which produces about 200 Kannada feature films each year. Bangalore also has an active theatre culture; popular theatres include Ravindra Kalakshetra and the Ranga Shankara. The city has an active English- and foreign-language theatre scene; popular theatres include Ranga Shankara and Chowdiah Memorial Hall. Kannada theatre is popular in Bangalore and consists mostly of political satire and light comedy. Plays are organised mostly by community organisations, but some by amateur groups. Drama companies touring India under the auspices of the British Council and Max Müller Bhavan also stage performances in the city frequently. The Alliance Française de Bangalore also hosts numerous plays throughout the year. Bangalore is also a major centre of Indian classical music and dance. The cultural scene features a diverse set of music concerts, dance performances and plays. Performances of Carnatic (South Indian) and Hindustani (North Indian) classical music, and dance forms like Bharat Natyam, Kuchipudi, Kathakali, Kathak, and Odissi are very popular. Yakshagana, a theatre art indigenous to coastal Karnataka is often played in town halls. The two main music seasons in Bangalore are April–May during the Ram Navami festival, and September–October during the Dusshera festival, when music activities by cultural organisations are at their peak. Though both classical and contemporary music are played in Bangalore, rock music dominates the music of urban Bangalore; Bangalore has its own subgenre of rock, "Bangalore Rock", an amalgamation of classic rock, hard rock and heavy metal, and some jazz and blues. Notable bands from Bangalore include Raghu Dixit Project, Kryptos, Inner Sanctum, Agam, All the fat children, and Swaratma. Bangalore is sometimes called as the "Pub Capital of India" and the "Rock/Metal Capital of India" because of its underground music scene. Bangalore has a literacy rate of around 88%, according to the 2011 national census. Until the early 19th century, education in Bangalore was mainly run by religious leaders and restricted to students of that religion. The western system of education was introduced during the rule of Mummadi Krishnaraja Wodeyar. In 1832, the British Wesleyan Mission established the first English school, the Wesleyan Canarese School. The fathers of the Paris Foreign Missions established the St. Joseph's European School in 1858. The Bangalore High School was started by the Mysore government in 1858 and the Bishop Cotton Boys' School was started in 1865. In 1945 when World War II came to an end, King George Royal Indian Military Colleges was started at Bangalore by King George VI; the school is popularly known as Bangalore Military School. Primary, middle school and secondary education in Bangalore is offered by various schools which are affiliated to one of the government or government recognised private boards of education, such as the Secondary School Leaving Certificate (SSLC), Central Board of Secondary Education (CBSE), Council for the Indian School Certificate Examinations (CISCE), International Baccalaureate (IB), International General Certificate of Secondary Education (IGCSE) and National Institute of Open Schooling (NIOS). Schools in Bangalore are either government run or are private (both aided and un-aided by the government). Bangalore has a significant number of international schools due to large number of expats and people employed in the IT sector. After completing their secondary education, students either attend a pre-university course or continue an equivalent high school course in one of three streams – arts, commerce or science – in various combinations. Alternatively, students may enroll in diploma courses. Upon completing the required coursework, students enroll in general or professional degrees in universities through lateral entry. Established in 1858, the Central College of Bangalore is the city's oldest college. It was affiliated originally with University of Mysore and subsequently with Bangalore University. In 1882 priests from the Paris Foreign Missions Society established St. Joseph's College. Bangalore University was established in 1886; it is affiliated with over 500 colleges and has a total student enrolment of over 300,000. The university has two campuses within Bangalore – Jnanabharathi and Central College. University Visvesvaraya College of Engineering was established in 1917 by M. Visvesvaraya and is affiliated with many private engineering colleges. Among the prominent research institutes in Bangalore are the Indian Institute of Science, Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research, National Centre for Biological Sciences, National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences and the National Institute of Advanced Studies. Some private institutions in Bangalore include Symbiosis International University, SVKM's NMIMS, CMR University, Christ University, Jain University, PES University, RV University, Dayananda Sagar University and Ramaiah University of Applied Sciences. Private medical colleges include St. John's Medical College, M. S. Ramaiah Medical College, Kempegowda Institute of Medical Sciences, and Vydehi Institute of Medical Sciences and Research Centre. The first printing press in Bangalore was established in 1840 in Kannada by the Wesleyan Christian Mission. In 1859, the bi-weekly Bangalore Herald became the first English newspaper to be published in Bangalore, and in 1860, the Mysore Vrittanta Bodhini became the first Kannada newspaper to be circulated in Bangalore. Vijaya Karnataka and The Times of India are the most widely circulated newspapers in Kannada and English, respectively, closely followed by the Prajavani and Deccan Herald – both owned by the Printers (Mysore) Limited, the largest print media house in Karnataka. Other circulated newspapers include Vijayvani, Vishwavani, Kannadaprabha, Sanjevani, Bangalore Mirror, Udayavani, and local sites like Explocity that provide localised news updates. All India Radio, the Indian national state radio service, started broadcasting from its Bangalore station on 2 November 1955. All broadcasts were AM until 2001, when Radio City became the first private channel in India to start transmitting FM radio from Bangalore; a number of other FM channels have been initiated since. The city probably has India's oldest amateur (ham) radio club – the Bangalore Amateur Radio Club (VU2ARC), established in 1959. Bangalore got its first television network when Doordarshan established a relay centre on 1 November 1981. A production centre was established in the Doordarshan's Bangalore office in 1983, thereby allowing the introduction of a news program in Kannada on 19 November 1983. Doordarshan also launched a Kannada satellite channel on 15 August 1991, now named DD Chandana. Star TV was the first Bangalorean private satellite channel, starting in September 1991. Direct To Home (DTH) services also became available in Bangalore from around 2007. The first Internet service provider in Bangalore was STPI, which started offering internet services in early 1990s. This Internet service was, however, restricted to corporates until VSNL started offering dial-up internet services to the general public at the end of 1995. Bangalore has the largest number of broadband Internet connections in India. Namma Wifi is a free municipal wireless network in Bangalore, the first free WiFi in India. It began operations on 24 January 2014. Service is available at M.G. Road, Brigade Road, and other locations. The service is operated by D-VoiS and is paid for by the Karnataka state government. Bangalore was the first city in India to have access to 4G mobile internet services. Cricket is the most popular sport in the city. Bangalore's many parks and gardens allow for impromptu games. Many national cricketers have come from Bangalore, including former captains Rahul Dravid and Anil Kumble. Some other notable Bangaloreans who have represented India include Gundappa Viswanath, Syed Kirmani, E. A. S. Prasanna, B. S. Chandrasekhar, Roger Binny, Venkatesh Prasad, Sunil Joshi, Robin Uthappa, Vinay Kumar, KL Rahul, Karun Nair, Mayank Agarwal, Brijesh Patel and Stuart Binny. Bangalore's international cricket stadium is the M. Chinnaswamy Stadium, which has a seating capacity of 40,000 and has hosted matches during the 1987 Cricket World Cup, 1996 Cricket World Cup and the 2011 Cricket World Cup. The Chinnaswamy Stadium is the home of India's National Cricket Academy, Karnataka State Cricket Association and the Indian Premier League (IPL) franchise Royal Challengers Bangalore. Association football also has a significant following in Bangalore and has produced several notable players. The city is home to Indian Super League (ISL)'s Bengaluru FC. The other clubs of the city include FC Bengaluru United, Ozone FC and South United FC of I-League 2nd Division. It hosted some games of the 2014 Unity World Cup. The city hosts the Women's Tennis Association (WTA) Bangalore Open tournament annually. Beginning September 2008, Bangalore has also been hosting the Kingfisher Airlines Tennis Open ATP tournament annually. Bangalore is home to the Bangalore rugby football club (BRFC). The city also has a number of elite clubs, like Century Club, The Bangalore Golf Club, the Bowring Institute and the exclusive Bangalore Club, whose previous members include Winston Churchill and the Maharaja of Mysore. India's Davis Cup team members Mahesh Bhupathi and Rohan Bopanna reside in Bangalore. Other sportspeople from Bangalore include national swimming champion Nisha Millet, world snooker champion Pankaj Advani and former All England Open badminton champion Prakash Padukone. Bangalore's Kanteerava Indoor Stadium hosted the SABA Championship in 2015 and 2016. India's national basketball team won the gold medal on both occasions. Bangalore is home to the Bengaluru Beast—the 2017 vice-champion of India's top professional basketball division, the UBA Pro Basketball League. The Kanteerava Indoor Stadium and Sheraton Grand have hosted various kabaddi matches, including the entire Pro Kabaddi League Season 8. The Bengaluru Bulls is one of the teams in this league. Minsk, Belarus (1973) Cleveland, United States (1992) San Francisco, United States (2008) Chengdu, China (2013) List of people from Bangalore List of neighbourhoods in Bangalore List of tallest buildings in Bangalore List of tourist attractions in Bangalore List of Chola temples in Bangalore Taluks of Bangalore Tourism in Karnataka History of Bengaluru "New BBMP Chief Commissioner inspects infrastructure projects". Deccan Herald. "History of BBMP". Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP). Archived from the original on 2 November 2020. Retrieved 20 May 2021. "Introduction - BMRDA". Bangalore Metropolitan Region Development Authority. Retrieved 20 May 2021. H.S. Sudhira; T.V. Ramachandra; M.H. Bala Subrahmanya (2007). "City Profile — Bangalore" (PDF). Cities. 24 (5). Bangalore: 382. doi:10.1016/j.cities.2007.04.003. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 December 2012. Retrieved 13 October 2013. Bangalore Metropolitan/City Population section of "Bangalore Population Sex Ratio in Bangalore Literacy rate Bangalore". 2011 Census of India. Archived from the original on 26 January 2017. "The World's Cities in 2016" (PDF). United Nations. October 2016. p. 4. Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 January 2017. Retrieved 4 March 2017. "INDIA STATS : Million plus cities in India as per Census 2011". Press Information Bureau, Mumbai. National Informatics Centre. Archived from the original on 30 June 2015. Retrieved 20 August 2015. "Deep Dive City Bangalore, India" (PDF). Transformative Urban Mobility Initiative. Retrieved 12 January 2024. "Bengaluru, India - C40 Cities". C40 Cities. Retrieved 9 January 2024. "50th Report of the Commissioner for Linguistic Minorities in India (July 2012 to June 2013)" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 July 2016. Retrieved 14 January 2015. "Karnataka (India): Districts, Cities, Towns and Outgrowth Wards – Population Statistics in Maps and Charts". Lakshmin, Deepa (23 February 2021). "Bengaluru: The Indian "Garden City" That's a High-Tech Hub". Scott's Cheap Flights. Swaminathan, Jayashankar M. (2009). Indian Economic Superpower: Fiction Or Future?. Vol. 2 of World Scientific series on 21st century business, ISSN 1793-5660. World Scientific. p. 20. ISBN 9789812814661. Srinivas, S (22 February 2005). "The bean city". The Hindu. Chennai, India. Archived from the original on 13 February 2012. Retrieved 2 July 2007. "India's 10 fastest growing cities". Rediff News. 6 February 2008. Archived from the original on 24 March 2009. Retrieved 7 April 2009. "What makes Bengaluru India's science capital?". Deccan Herald. 6 January 2021. Retrieved 23 January 2021. —"Global city GDP 2014". Brookings Institution. 22 January 2015. Archived from the original on 25 May 2017. Retrieved 4 March 2017. —"Global city GDP rankings 2008–2025". PwC. Archived from the original on 4 May 2011. Retrieved 16 December 2009. —"India's top 15 cities with the highest GDP Photos Yahoo! India Finance". Yahoo! Finance. 28 September 2012. Archived from the original on 9 October 2014. Retrieved 27 March 2017. Broder, Jonathan (5 October 2018). "Can it maintain strong economic growth?". India Today:CQR. Sage Publications. doi:10.4135/cqresrre20181005. S2CID 267331042. cqresrre2018100500. Archived from the original on 5 October 2018. Retrieved 4 October 2018. —Canton, Naomi (6 December 2012). "How the 'Silicon Valley of India' is bridging the digital divide". CNN. Archived from the original on 18 December 2012. Retrieved 6 December 2012. —Rai, Saritha (20 March 2006). "Is the Next Silicon Valley Taking Root in Bangalore?". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 13 October 2011. Retrieved 20 March 2006. —Vaidyanathan, Rajini (5 November 2012). "Can the 'American Dream' be reversed in India?". BBC World News. Archived from the original on 5 November 2012. Retrieved 5 November 2012. Chandramouli, K (25 July 2002). "The city of boiled beans". The Hindu. Chennai, India. Archived from the original on 5 May 2012. Retrieved 10 June 2012. "Inscription reveals Bengaluru is over 1,000 years old". The Hindu. Chennai, India. 20 August 2004. Archived from the original on 13 February 2012. Retrieved 10 June 2012. Vagale, Uday Kumar (6 May 2004). Bangalore-Future Trends In Public Open Space Usage. Case Study: Mahatma Gandhi Road, Bangalore (Thesis thesis). Virginia Tech. Vijesh Kamath (30 October 2006). "Many miles to go from Bangalore to Bengalūru". Deccan Herald. Archived from the original on 16 September 2012. Retrieved 10 June 2012. Misra, Hemant; Jayaraman, Pavitra (22 May 2010). "Bangalore bhath: first city edifices". Mint. Retrieved 11 June 2012. Aditi 2008, p. 6 "Bangalore to be renamed Bengaluru". The Times of India. 11 December 2005. Archived from the original on 29 September 2012. Retrieved 19 April 2009. "It will be 'Bengaluru', resolves BMP". The Hindu. Chennai, India. 28 September 2006. Archived from the original on 1 October 2007. Retrieved 16 May 2007. "It'll be 'Bengaluru' from November 1". Deccan Herald. 8 October 2006. Archived from the original on 6 April 2012. Retrieved 10 June 2012. "From today, Bangalore becomes Bengalooru". The Times of India. 1 November 2006. Archived from the original on 24 October 2012. Retrieved 19 April 2009. "Bangalore, Mysore, Other Karnataka Cities to be Renamed on 1 November". No. ibtimes.co.in. ibtimes.co.in. 18 October 2014. Archived from the original on 25 October 2015. Retrieved 18 October 2014. "Centre nod for Karnataka's proposal on renaming cities". The Hindu. 18 October 2014. Archived from the original on 18 October 2014. Retrieved 18 October 2014. "Bangalore dates from 4,000 BC". The Times of India. 11 October 2001. Archived from the original on 21 September 2013. Retrieved 7 September 2013. Ranganna, T.S. (27 October 2001). "Bangalore had human habitation in 4000 B.C." The Hindu. Archived from the original on 21 September 2013. Retrieved 7 September 2013. Srinivas 2004, p. 69 Aditi 2008, p. 7 Sarma 1992, p. 78 Mysore: A Gazetteer Compiled for Government by B. L. Rice p.224 "The Digital South Asia Library-Imperial gazetteer of India". uchicago.edu. 1908–1931. Archived from the original on 16 December 2008. Retrieved 16 February 2006. Aditi 2008, p. 8 Aditi 2008, p. 9 Pinto & Srivastava 2008, p. 8 Aruni, S. K. (2 January 2013). "A city that fell to the lure of trade". The Hindu. ISSN 0971-751X. Retrieved 27 June 2022. "Earlier known as Doddapete, Avenue Road could be as old as Bengaluru". The Economic Times. Retrieved 30 May 2022. Vagale, Uday Kumar (2004). "5: Bangalore: mud fort to sprawling metropolis". Bangalore—future trends in public open space usage. Case study: Mahatma Gandhi Road, Bangalore (Thesis). Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University. pp. 34–35. hdl:10919/9941. Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 June 2012. Retrieved 26 September 2020. Shekhar, Divya. "To secure a budding Bengaluru, Kempe Gowda built 4 towers". The Economic Times. Retrieved 30 May 2022. Pinto & Srivastava 2008, p. 6 Shekhar, Divya. "Date with history: All you need to know about the iconic Lalbagh's Glass House built in 1889". The Economic Times. Retrieved 23 May 2022. Sandes, E.W.C. (1933). The military engineer in India, vol I. Chatham: The Institution of Royal Engineers. pp. 163–165. ISBN 978-1-84734-071-9. "The Resident arose with Tipu's fall". The Times of India. 26 March 2011. Retrieved 24 May 2022. "Raj Bhavan, Karnataka". The Homepage of Raj Bhavan, Government of Karnataka. Archived from the original on 6 February 2012. Retrieved 24 August 2012. Srinivas 2004, p. 3 Ghosh, Jyotirmoy (2012). Entrepreneurship in tourism and allied activities: a study of Bangalore city in the post-liberalization period (PDF). Pondicherry University. p. 86. Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 September 2013. Retrieved 8 September 2013. Vagale, Uday Kumar (2004). "8: Public domain—contested spaces and lack of imageability". Bangalore—future trends in public open space usage. Case study: Mahatma Gandhi Road, Bangalore (Thesis). Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University. p. 49. hdl:10919/9941. Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 June 2012. Retrieved 26 September 2020. "Sharp Private Investigation Detective Agency In Benguluru". bangaloredetectives.in. Retrieved 17 January 2022. "1898 plague revisited". The Times of India. 17 November 2012. Archived from the original on 21 September 2013. Retrieved 8 September 2013. Jaypal, Maya (26 March 2012). "Malleswaram, Basavanagudi, the new extensions". Deccan Herald. Archived from the original on 8 September 2013. Retrieved 8 September 2013. Karnataka State Gazetteer: Bangalore District, p. 91 Srinivasaraju, Sugata (10 April 2006). "ElectriCity". Outlook India. Archived from the original on 21 January 2011. Retrieved 15 November 2011. Pinto & Srivastava 2008, p. 10 Mudur, Nirad; Hemanth CS (7 June 2013). "Bangalore torpedo gave them their D-Day, 69 years ago". Daily News and Analysis. Archived from the original on 4 October 2013. Retrieved 1 October 2013. Basavaraja, Kadati Reddera (1984). History and Culture of Karnataka: Early Times to Unification. Chalukya Publications. p. 332. Archived from the original on 27 December 2017. Retrieved 27 December 2017. Nair 2005, p. 70 S., Chandrasekhar (1985). Dimensions of Socio-Political Change in Mysore, 1918–40. APH Publishing. p. 135. ISBN 978-0-8364-1471-4. Boland-Crewe, Tara; Lea, David (2004). The Territories and States of India. Psychology Press. p. 135. ISBN 978-0-203-40290-0. When the new, extended Mysore was created on 1 November 1956 (by the addition of coastal, central and northern territories), Wodeyar became Governor of the whole state, which was renamed Karnataka in 1973. "Civic bodies of yore didn't digress from progress". Deccan Herald. 28 March 2012. Retrieved 26 May 2022. Srinivas 2004, p. 4 "Mico Bangalore Plant To Go Five-Day Week". Business Standard India. 10 September 2002. Retrieved 18 January 2022. "MICO is now Bosch – Motorindia". Motor India. Retrieved 18 January 2022. "Death Toll Raised to 66 in Fire at Circus in India". The New York Times. 9 February 1981. Archived from the original on 18 November 2016. Retrieved 31 January 2017. Benjamin, Solomon (April 2000). "Governance, economic settings and poverty in Bangalore" (PDF). Environment & Urbanization. 12 (1): 35–36. Bibcode:2000EnUrb..12...35B. doi:10.1177/095624780001200104. S2CID 14335580. Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 July 2012. Retrieved 11 June 2012. "Most Populated Cities in India- Top 50 Indian Cities by Population". www.indiaonlinepages.com. Retrieved 18 January 2022. "8 blasts rock Bangalore". The Times of India. 25 July 2008. Retrieved 18 July 2022. "Ten wounded in Bangalore cricket stadium blast". Reuters. 17 April 2010. Retrieved 18 July 2022. "Bangalore blast a terror attack, confirms Home Ministry". India Today. Retrieved 18 July 2022. "Ground water information booklet" (PDF). Central Ground Water Board, Ministry of Water Resources, Government of India. December 2008. Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 May 2012. Retrieved 16 June 2012. "Finance budget for 2007–08" (PDF). Government of Karnataka. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 June 2007. Retrieved 28 June 2007. "District census handbook- Bangalore rural" (PDF). Directorate of census operations Karnataka. Archived (PDF) from the original on 14 November 2016. Retrieved 26 October 2017. "Study area: Bangalore". Centre for Ecological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science. Archived from the original on 16 July 2012. Retrieved 11 June 2012. Chethan Kumar (15 December 2021). "K'taka Dumps 1,746m Litres Sewage Into Rivers Each Day | Bengaluru News - Times of India". The Times of India. Retrieved 31 May 2022. "Can Vrishabhavathi be Bengaluru's Thames?". Deccan Herald. 11 March 2022. Retrieved 31 May 2022. Tekur, Suma (11 March 2004). "Each drop of water counts". Deccan Herald. Archived from the original on 11 March 2007. "Bengaluru is fast running out of water, and a long, scorching summer still looms". 17 March 2024. "Help/FAQ". Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage Board. Archived from the original on 6 February 2006. Retrieved 2 July 2007. "Thirsty Bangalore invokes god". Hindustan Times. 9 June 2003. Archived from the original on 3 March 2012. Retrieved 11 June 2012. "water shortage: Water crisis: Is Bengaluru heading for Day Zero?". The Times of India. 13 February 2018. Retrieved 27 May 2022. "Environmental impact analysis" (PDF). Bangalore Metropolitan Rapid Transport Corporation Limited, Government of Karnataka. 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 March 2006. Retrieved 11 June 2012. "More than 90% of Bengaluru's lakes are polluted or encroached". Scroll.in. 14 March 2016. Retrieved 17 June 2022. Menezes, Naveen (10 April 2021). "Bengaluru's lakes: The good, the bad, the very dirty". Bangalore Mirror. Retrieved 24 January 2022. "Lakes of Bengaluru: Industrial effluents, raw sewage; stinky tale of Chandapura lake". The Indian Express. 17 December 2021. Retrieved 24 January 2022. "Bengaluru plans revival of its old charm, to revive 25 lakes". OnManorama. Retrieved 24 January 2022. Nagendra, Suri Venkatachalam & Harini (13 July 2018). "Photo essay: If you look closely, you can still find the 'Garden City' in Bengaluru". Scroll.in. Retrieved 7 June 2022. "Over 1 lakh trees cut to build roads in Karnataka in 4 years | Bengaluru News - Times of India". The Times of India. April 2022. Retrieved 8 June 2022. "3,559 trees to be cut down in city for road, metro". Deccan Herald. 28 December 2019. Retrieved 8 June 2022. Singh, Onkar (30 January 2000). "The Rediff interview. Dr S K Srivastav, additional director general, Indian Meteorological Department". Rediff.com. Archived from the original on 14 February 2012. Retrieved 2 July 2007. "Rise in temperature 'unusual' for Bangalore". The Hindu. Chennai, India. 18 May 2005. Archived from the original on 8 February 2012. Retrieved 2 July 2007. "Bangalore". India Meteorological Department, Government of India. Archived from the original on 8 July 2007. Retrieved 7 February 2007. "Bengaluru records highest temperature since 1931". The Hindu. 24 April 2016. Retrieved 5 September 2017. Amaresh, Vidyashree (10 May 2006). "Set up rain gauges in areas prone to flooding". The Hindu. Chennai, India. Archived from the original on 16 December 2007. Retrieved 22 December 2007. Ashwini Y.S. (17 December 2006). "Bangalore weather back again". Deccan Herald. Archived from the original on 4 December 2007. Retrieved 22 December 2007. "Global monitoring precipitation". cpc.ncep.noaa.gov. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 17 May 2016. Sharma, Ravi (5 November 2005). "Bangalore's woes". The Frontline. Archived from the original on 20 February 2008. Retrieved 5 February 2008. Bhattacharjee, Nivedita; Mandayam, Nandan (6 September 2022). "India's Bengaluru hit by flooding, traffic snarls after heavy rain". Reuters. Retrieved 12 September 2022. "Bengaluru floods: How families struggled to find help as India's IT capital drowned". BBC News. 12 September 2022. Retrieved 12 September 2022. Bureau, Bengaluru (5 September 2022). "Heavy rain brings Bengaluru to its knees". The Hindu. ISSN 0971-751X. Retrieved 12 September 2022. "Station: Bangalore/Bangaluru Climatological Table 1981–2010" (PDF). Climatological Normals 1981–2010. India Meteorological Department. January 2015. pp. 81–82. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 February 2020. Retrieved 10 April 2020. "Extremes of Temperature & Rainfall for Indian Stations (Up to 2012)" (PDF). India Meteorological Department. December 2016. p. M88. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 February 2020. Retrieved 10 April 2020. "Climatological Information - Bengaluru (43295)". India Meteorological Department. Retrieved 27 September 2022. "Climate & Weather Averages in Bengaluru, India". Time and Date. Retrieved 19 July 2022. "Bangalore Climate Normals 1971–1990". National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Retrieved 24 December 2012. "Normals Data: Bangalore - India Latitude: 12.97°N Longitude: 77.58°E Height: 917 (m)". Japan Meteorological Agency. Archived from the original on 1 December 2022. Retrieved 1 December 2022. "Climate and monthly weather forecast Bengaluru, India". Weather Atlas. Retrieved 13 June 2022. "Bengaluru Records Highest March Temperature in Seven Years". News Karnataka. 29 March 2024. Retrieved 31 March 2024. "Climatological Information - Bengaluru (43296)". India Meteorological Department. Retrieved 27 September 2022. "Census population" (PDF). Census of India. p. 21. Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 May 2012. Retrieved 7 June 2008. "Provisional population totals, Census of India 2011" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 May 2012. Retrieved 29 November 2011. "Urban Agglomerations/Cities having population 1 lakh and above" (PDF). Censusindia. The Registrar General & Census Commissioner, India. Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 November 2011. Retrieved 17 October 2011. "Cities having population 1 lakh and above" (PDF). censusindia.gov.in. Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 May 2012. Retrieved 24 July 2012. "Banglori Dakhni: How a language associated with Hyderabad thrives in Bengaluru too". The News Minute. 13 September 2019. Retrieved 25 July 2021. "Kannadigas assured of all support". The Hindu. Chennai, India. 23 July 2004. Archived from the original on 30 June 2011. Retrieved 10 May 2010. "Table C-01 Population By Religion - Karnataka". census.gov.in. Registrar General and Census Commissioner of India. Scroll down to BBMP (M. Corp. + OG) in the document at row no. 596. "Provisional Population Totals, Census of India 2011" (PDF). Government of India. Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 November 2011. Retrieved 28 December 2011. "Total Population, Slum Population ..." Archived from the original on 6 August 2007. Census of India, 2001. 2006. Government of India Warah, Rasna. "Slums Are the Heartbeat of Cities" Archived 17 February 2006 at the Wayback Machine. The EastAfrican. 2006. National Media Group Ltd. 6 October 2003 "Snaphhots – 2008" (PDF). National Crime Records Bureau. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 June 2011. Retrieved 21 October 2010. Sen, Meghna (4 March 2021). "Ease of Living Index: Bengaluru is the best city to live in India, Pune next". mint. Archived from the original on 4 March 2021. Retrieved 15 March 2021. Roy, Ananya; Ong, Aihwa (2011). "Speculating on the Next World City". Worlding Cities: Asian Experiments and the Art of Being Global. Vol. 42 (illustrated ed.). John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-1-4443-4678-7. "Table C-16 Population by Mother Tongue (Urban): Karnataka". censusindia.gov.in. Registrar General and Census Commissioner of India. See BBMP (M Corp. +OG) (Part) Kaminsky, Arnold P.; Long, Roger D. (2011). India Today: An Encyclopedia of Life in the Republic: An Encyclopedia of Life in the Republic. Vol. 1 (reprint ed.). ABC-CLIO. p. 75. ISBN 978-0-313-37463-0. "How Many Languages are Spoken in Bangalore? - Milestone Localization". 9 February 2022. Brown, Keith; Ogilvie, Sarah (2010). Concise Encyclopedia of Languages of the World (revised ed.). Elsevier. p. 577. ISBN 978-0-08-087775-4. Lindsay, Jennifer (2006). Between Tongues: Translation And/of/in Performance in Asia (illustrated, reprint, annotated ed.). NUS Press. p. 52. ISBN 9789971693398. Prashanth, G N. "A melting pot that welcomes all". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 2 May 2014. Retrieved 9 September 2013. Sarma, Deepika (4 October 2012). "Building blocks of one of the city's largest communities". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 21 September 2013. Retrieved 9 September 2013. Srinivas 2004, pp. 100–102, The Settlement of Tamil-Speaking Groups in Bangalore Srinivas 2004, p. 5 Srivatsa, Sharath S. (31 October 2007). "Bangalore calling: it all goes way back..." The Hindu. Archived from the original on 21 September 2013. Retrieved 9 September 2013. M. V. Chandrasekhar; Sahana Charan (23 December 2006). "They are now part of city's unique social mix". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 21 September 2013. Retrieved 9 September 2013. Crossette, Barbara (20 January 1990). "Bangalore Journal; Christians Revel in Conversion Back to Indianness". The New York Times. Hefner, Robert W. (2013). Global Pentecostalism in the 21st Century. Indiana University Press. pp. 194–222. ISBN 978-0-253-01094-0. Christopher, Joseph (31 March 2014). "In the Indian rector's murder, the 'why' matters as much as the 'who'". UCA News. Archived from the original on 9 April 2014. Retrieved 1 May 2014. Gayer, Laurent; Jaffrelot, Christophe (2012). Muslims in Indian Cities: Trajectories of Marginalisation (illustrated ed.). Hurst Publishers. p. 290. ISBN 978-1-84904-176-8. 2011 census "Government notifies draft of newly delimited 243 wards in Bengaluru". The Hindu. 23 June 2022. "BBMP election result by 2 pm". Deccan Herald. India. 4 April 2010. Archived from the original on 9 April 2010. Retrieved 5 May 2010. "BJP wins Bangalore municipal elections for the first time". Daily News and Analysis. India. 5 April 2010. Archived from the original on 8 April 2010. Retrieved 5 May 2010. Staff Reporter (28 September 2017). "Sampath Raj is city's new Mayor". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 29 September 2017. Retrieved 25 December 2017. "Gangambike elected as Bengaluru's new Mayor". The Economic Times. 28 September 2018. Archived from the original on 25 January 2019. Retrieved 2 October 2018. "Term of BBMP council ends; govt appoints Gaurav Gupta as administrator". The Economic Times. "New BBMP chief commissioner inspects infrastructure projects". Deccan Herald. 9 May 2022. Retrieved 20 June 2022. "Karnataka: Pratap Reddy appointed new Bengaluru city police commissioner, replaces Kamal Pant". The Indian Express. 16 May 2022. Retrieved 20 June 2022. Ramachandra, T. V.; Pradeep P. Mujumdar. "Urban Floods: Case Study of Bangalore". Indian Institute of Science. Archived from the original on 8 September 2013. Retrieved 14 September 2013. "Environmental Impact Analysis" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 March 2006. Retrieved 20 March 2006. (372 kB). Bangalore Metropolitan Rapid Transport Corporation Limited. 2006. Government of Karnataka. 2005. (pp. 30–32) "The Bruhat Journey". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 21 September 2013. Retrieved 14 September 2013. "Bangalore City Police" Archived 20 February 2006 at the Wayback Machine. Bangalore City Police. 2006. Karnataka State Police. "Constituency Wise Detailed Results" (PDF). Election Commission of India. Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 August 2014. Retrieved 14 September 2013. Rajendran, S. (19 April 2013). "Power of the city". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 21 September 2013. Retrieved 14 September 2013. "About Us". Official webpage of BESCOM. Archived from the original on 31 July 2008. Retrieved 5 May 2010. "BESCOM Mission Statement". Archived from the original on 20 October 2012. Retrieved 13 October 2012. "German consulate in Bangalore formally inaugurated". Deccan Herald. 21 November 2008. Archived from the original on 11 December 2013. Retrieved 25 June 2012. "Nos coordonnées". Consulat général de France à Bangalore. Archived from the original on 28 June 2012. Retrieved 25 June 2012. "Consulate of Japan, Bangalore". Embassy of Japan, New Delhi. Archived from the original on 8 July 2012. Retrieved 25 June 2012. Bose, Praveen (27 June 2012). "Israel to open consulate in Bangalore". Business Standard. Retrieved 27 June 2012. "Bangalore Location and Access". Archived from the original on 13 April 2013. Retrieved 7 May 2013. "Department of Foreign Affairs". Embassy of Ireland, New Delhi. Archived from the original on 26 June 2012. Retrieved 25 June 2012. "Contact Information: Finland's Honorary Consulate, Bangalore (India) – Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Finland: Diplomatic missions: Bangalore (Honorary Consulate)". Formin.fi. 3 March 2010. Archived from the original on 17 July 2011. Retrieved 25 November 2010. "Missions List". Meaprotocol.nic.in. Archived from the original on 15 November 2010. Retrieved 25 November 2010. "Maldives Honorary Consuls in India". Maldives High Commission, New Delhi. Archived from the original on 1 October 2011. Retrieved 25 June 2012. "Embassy of Peru in India and Honorary Consulates". Government of Peru. Archived from the original on 20 October 2012. Retrieved 22 August 2012. "Trade Office of Canada in Bangalore". Government of Canada. Archived from the original on 30 July 2012. Retrieved 25 June 2012. "United States Virtual Consulate Bangalore, India". Consulate General of the United States, Chennai. Archived from the original on 25 November 2011. Retrieved 25 June 2012. "Bengaluru: BBMP chief commissioner calls for decentralised waste management system". The Indian Express. 6 April 2022. Retrieved 20 June 2022. "Bangalore: Pollution levels at all time high". Rediff.com. Archived from the original on 19 October 2012. Retrieved 6 September 2012. "Exclusive! 50% of Bangalore's air pollution caused due to dust – Bangalore". Daily News and Analysis. 28 November 2011. Archived from the original on 31 October 2012. Retrieved 6 September 2012. "Whitefield is most polluted area in Bangalore". The Times of India. 23 February 2012. Archived from the original on 10 May 2013. Retrieved 28 June 2012. "36% diesel vehicles exceed national limit for emissions: Study". The Times of India. 25 August 2016. Archived from the original on 25 August 2016. Retrieved 30 August 2016. "C40: 35 Cities Unite to Clean the Air Their Citizens Breathe, Protecting the Health of Millions". C40. Retrieved 15 December 2019. "By 2020, Bangalore will be a full-fledged concrete jungle". Udupi News, Manipal News, Mangalore News. Archived from the original on 6 November 2014. "60 per cent of water sources go dry in Ch'nagar". Deccan Herald. 31 March 2015. Retrieved 27 June 2022. Waste Atlas Archived 7 October 2014 at the Wayback Machine(2012). City-Data: LAHORE "Biomedical Waste Management | Karnataka State Pollution Control Board". kspcb.karnataka.gov.in. Retrieved 17 January 2022. "Bengaluru: Economy, Industries, and Infrastructure". India Briefing News. 22 March 2019. Retrieved 24 August 2021. "'Bangalore will become the world's largest IT cluster by 2020'". @businessline. 12 November 2014. Retrieved 16 August 2021. "Manufacturing cities: the planning, building, and governing of industrial infrastructure in the Bangalore metropolitan region". www.peak-urban.org. Retrieved 27 January 2022. "Bengaluru: Economy, Industries, and Infrastructure". India Briefing News. 22 March 2019. Retrieved 16 August 2021.-"Karnataka hopes to double its bio-economy to $50-bn in 5 yrs". Bangalore Mirror. Retrieved 27 June 2022.-"Bengaluru to be world's fastest growing city: Report". Deccan Herald. 23 January 2020. Retrieved 27 June 2022.-Husain, Mudassir (12 May 2019). "Bengaluru's growth story". The Hindu. ISSN 0971-751X. Retrieved 27 June 2022.-Pulakkat, Hari. "How Bengaluru became the biotech capital of India". The Economic Times. Retrieved 27 June 2022.-"Bengaluru world's fastest growing tech hub, London second". Economic Times - Telecom.com. Retrieved 27 June 2022.-"Bangalore keeps its crown as India's high-growth tech hub". Financial Times. 7 April 2022. Retrieved 27 June 2022. "Brief Industrial Profile of Bangalor Rural District" (PDF). "Brief Industrial Profile of Bangalor District" (PDF). "Bengaluru has become the hotspot for Fortune 500 giants, global companies to set up innovation centres". Business Insider. Retrieved 16 August 2021. Shrinag (20 August 2019). "Top Reasons Why Bengaluru Is A Bustling IT Hub". MetroSaga. Archived from the original on 16 August 2021. Retrieved 16 August 2021. "Bengaluru world's fastest growing tech hub, London second: Report". The Economic Times. Retrieved 16 August 2021. "Opportunity and exploitation in urban labour markets" (PDF). Overseas Development Institute. November 2008. Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 March 2009. Retrieved 10 May 2010. "India's Tech Hubs: Bengaluru vs Hyderabad". India Briefing News. 19 July 2019. Retrieved 16 August 2021. "Bangalore Helix to be a reality soon". The Hindu. Chennai, India. 23 April 2005. Archived from the original on 12 October 2007. Retrieved 4 October 2007. Chatterjee, Sumeet (4 October 2007). "Biocon in drug development talks with Bayer". Reuters. Archived from the original on 22 December 2007. Retrieved 4 October 2007. "Bangalore most affluent market" Archived 7 March 2008 at the Wayback Machine. 2006. Rediff.com. 23 August 2006. Kotkin, Joel (10 July 2010). "The World's Fastest-Growing Cities". Forbes. Archived from the original on 9 March 2012. Retrieved 21 February 2012. "Bangalore third richest city in country" Archived 30 April 2007 at the Wayback Machine.2007. The Times of India 1 April 2007 Shubham (9 March 2021). "Top 10 IT Companies in Bangalore in 2021 - StartUpCrow". Retrieved 16 August 2021. Jairam Ramesh (30 September 2007). "IT in India: Big successes, large gaps to be filled". Business Standard. Archived from the original on 4 December 2007. Retrieved 4 October 2007. "10 Amazing Software Technological Parks in Bengaluru". 4 August 2017. Retrieved 16 August 2021. "Bengaluru world's fastest growing tech hub, London second: Report". The Times of India. 14 January 2021. Retrieved 16 August 2021. "Bengaluru could get a second airport in no time. But after these hurdles are removed". ThePrint. 6 October 2020. Retrieved 9 June 2022. "Airports Authority of India: Traffic statistics – Passengers (Intl+Domestic), Annexure IIIC". April 2006. Archived from the original on 20 January 2013. Retrieved 25 January 2012. "Airports Authority of India: Traffic statistics – Aircraft movements (Intl+Domestic), Annexure IIC". April 2006. Archived from the original on 18 May 2013. Retrieved 25 January 2012. R. Krishnakumar. "Expressway for airport drive". Deccan Herald. India. Archived from the original on 29 September 2007. Retrieved 2 July 2007. "Passenger traffic tops 9.3m at Bangalore airport". The Times of India. India. 14 December 2009. Archived from the original on 12 June 2013. Retrieved 29 June 2013. "BMTC Announces Additional Volvo AC Bus Service Connecting Bengaluru Airport and City". News18. 27 April 2021. Retrieved 20 January 2022. Sastry, Anil Kumar (20 October 2011). "South India's first metro flagged off". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 24 January 2018. Retrieved 24 January 2018. S Lalitha (8 June 2017). "All of Bangalore Metro Phase-1 will be up and running from June 18". The New Indian Express. Archived from the original on 31 January 2018. Retrieved 24 January 2018. "Bangalore Metro Rail Project Phase 2" (PDF). Bangalore Metro Rail Corporation Limited. Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 January 2018. Retrieved 24 January 2018. "Cabinet clears 29.62-km Nagawara–Kempegowda International Airport line". The Hindu. 12 December 2017. "New train between Bengaluru and Mangaluru". Deccan Herald. 1 February 2019. Retrieved 16 December 2019. "Rail Wheel Factory". Archived from the original on 29 November 2014. Sharmada Shastry (28 April 2010). "Bangaloreans begin to bond with the sleek Swedish behemoths". Deccan Herald. India. Archived from the original on 2 May 2010. Retrieved 30 April 2010. S Praveen Dhaneshkar (20 June 2007). "Loyalty may pay for Volvo commuters!". Deccan Herald. Archived from the original on 19 August 2007. Retrieved 10 April 2007. "Bangalore-city.com, Bangalore Bus Information, City Buses, Volvo Buses, Tata Marcopolo Buses, Long Distance Buses". Bangalore-city.com. Archived from the original on 25 January 2010. Retrieved 29 March 2010. "KSRTC's Tamil Nadu-bound buses to ply from Shantinagar". Jagran. 17 March 2011. Archived from the original on 2 October 2013. Retrieved 10 June 2013. "Stir leaves hundreds stranded". The Hindu. Chennai, India. 15 December 2006. Archived from the original on 13 August 2011. Retrieved 17 June 2012. "Bengaluru's vehicle population crosses 80 lakh". The Hindu. 1 April 2019. ISSN 0971-751X. Retrieved 7 June 2022. "Vehicles in Bangalore". Archived from the original on 14 November 2014. Retrieved 20 November 2014. Philip, Christin Mathew (14 August 2020). "How many vehicles ply in Bengaluru? Transport department in dark". The Times of India. Retrieved 20 February 2022. "Prime Minister Narendra Modi inaugurates 118-km Bangalore-Mysore Expressway". The Telegraph. 12 March 2023. Retrieved 13 March 2023. Shivakumar, C. (2 February 2020). "Chennai-Bangalore Expressway work to start in six months: Nirmala Sitharaman". The New Indian Express. Retrieved 16 March 2023. Shivakumar, C. (26 January 2023). "Chennai-Bengaluru expressway: 14km road work complete". The New Indian Express. Retrieved 26 January 2023. "Bharatmala 2.0 to focus on expressways, add 4000 km greenfield roads". TOI. Retrieved 5 November 2022. Anparthi, Anjaya (28 August 2017). "Now, drive from Nagpur to Bengaluru in just 12 hrs". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 31 May 2018. Retrieved 31 May 2018. "Evolution of Bangalore: From Garden City to Silicon Valley, how immigrants made the city their own". 26 July 2019. Abram, David; Edwards, Nick (2003). South India (illustrated ed.). Rough Guides. p. 204. ISBN 978-1-84353-103-6. Richard I'Anson. "Lonely Planet's Best in Travel: top 10 cities for 2012 – travel tips and articles". Lonely Planet. Archived from the original on 12 September 2012. Retrieved 6 September 2012. "Bengaluru's Lalbagh Republic day flower show postponed due to pandemic". The Indian Express. 22 January 2021. Retrieved 9 June 2022. Raman 1994, pp. 42–45 "Bangalore Karaga". The Hindu, dated Monday, 2 April 2007. Chennai, India. 2 April 2007. Archived from the original on 27 October 2008. Retrieved 1 May 2009. "Explore the continent". The Hindu. Chennai, India. 11 June 2007. Archived from the original on 26 February 2013. Retrieved 16 June 2012. Anand, Swati (8 January 2008). "International cuisine pushes retailers' margins". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 17 May 2013. Retrieved 16 June 2012. Malhotra, Samil (16 June 2012). "Breakfast in Bangalore". Business Standard. Archived from the original on 17 June 2012. Retrieved 16 June 2012. Staff Reporter (29 September 2014). "Bangalore most 'vegan-friendly' city". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 5 February 2016. Retrieved 30 September 2014. "Bangalore most vegan-friendly city in India". The Times of India. 30 September 2014. Archived from the original on 20 August 2015. Retrieved 30 September 2014. Narayan, Shobha (14 May 2012). "Bangalore rebooted". The Economic Times. Archived from the original on 1 October 2013. Retrieved 12 September 2013. "Bangalore has a heart for art". The Times of India. 17 August 2013. Archived from the original on 21 September 2013. Retrieved 12 September 2013. "The value of vachanas". Deccan Herald. 2 June 2022. Retrieved 27 June 2022. "'Vachana literature encourages people to live in harmony'". Deccan Herald. 10 August 2021. Retrieved 27 June 2022. Chandramouli, K. (26 September 2002). "Lyrical land". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 8 November 2012. Retrieved 13 September 2013. "History, they wrote at Bangalore Literature fest". Deccan Chronicle. 12 August 2012. Archived from the original on 21 September 2013. Retrieved 7 September 2013. Nathan, Archana (12 May 2016). "Chitrakala Parishath: An art haven like no other". The Hindu. ISSN 0971-751X. Retrieved 22 March 2022. "Covid threat gone, Crowds return to Bengaluru's Chitrakala Parishath". Deccan Herald. 22 September 2021. Retrieved 22 March 2022. Doodle-Do (Listing) Archived 2 February 2017 at the Wayback Machine Bangalore Mirror, Bangalore, 31 December 2016. Khajane, Muralidhara (9 December 2018). "Kannada films set new record with 224 releases, but that's where the good news ends". The Hindu. ISSN 0971-751X. Retrieved 1 July 2022. "Ravindra Kalakshetra". Bangalore Orbit. Archived from the original on 13 March 2012. Retrieved 16 June 2012. Murali, Janaki (10 September 2007). "An experience called 'Ranga Shankara'". Deccan Herald. Archived from the original on 29 October 2013. Retrieved 16 June 2012. Raman 1994, p. 37 "Our Mission – Alliance française de Bangalore". Retrieved 17 January 2022. Ravindran, Nirmala (27 August 2008). "Dance and Music is part of our culture". India Today. Archived from the original on 29 May 2012. Retrieved 17 June 2012. Raman 1994, pp. 34–35 Sharma, Sharath M. (22 August 2010). "It's Yakshagana season". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 21 September 2013. Retrieved 13 September 2013. "You know music is in Bangalore's DNA, bands tell why". DNA. 24 December 2011. Archived from the original on 25 September 2013. Retrieved 21 September 2013. Plunkett 2001, p. 124. "State's literacy rate lagging". Deccan Herald. 8 April 2011. Retrieved 3 July 2022. Rao 1929, p. 494 "History". stjosephsindianinstitutions.com. Archived from the original on 24 March 2014. Rao 1929, p. 497 Punekar, Vijaya Bhaskar (1974). Assimilation: A Study of North Indians in Bangalore. Popular Prakashan. p. 54. ISBN 9788171540129. "Broad choice of Class X boards". Deccan Herald. 1 July 2004. Archived from the original on 6 November 2007. Retrieved 16 October 2007. "Trimester system in all Karnataka schools from 1 June". The Times of India. 18 May 2004. Archived from the original on 11 August 2011. Retrieved 16 October 2007. Bageshree, S. (9 May 2012). "What will happen to government schools now?". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 21 September 2013. Retrieved 14 September 2013. Ullas, Sruthy Susan (2 July 2013). "IT crowd, elite prefer international schools". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 20 June 2015. Retrieved 1 December 2015. "Students, parents throng PU colleges in city". The Hindu. Chennai, India. 16 May 2006. Archived from the original on 21 September 2007. Retrieved 16 October 2007. "Diploma students have a chance in government engineering colleges". The Indian Express. 29 August 2013. Archived from the original on 21 September 2013. Retrieved 14 September 2013. Khongwir, Darinia (6 May 2009). "PUC is not the only option". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 2 December 2013. Retrieved 14 September 2013. "BU overloaded, wants to split". The Times of India. 9 January 2007. Archived from the original on 11 August 2011. Retrieved 16 October 2007. "Bangalore, the education hub". The Times of India. 27 June 2011. Archived from the original on 21 September 2013. Retrieved 14 September 2013. "Wesleyan methodists promoted language, education". The New Indian Express. 16 May 2012. Retrieved 28 May 2022. M. Fazlul Hasan (1970). Bangalore Through the Centuries. Historical Publications. pp. 165–166. Vijaya B. Punekar (1974). Assimilation: A Study of North Indians in Bangalore. Popular Prakashan. ISBN 978-81-7154-012-9. Retrieved 4 October 2007. Preiti Sharma (18 October 2006). "Double dhamaka". The Economic Times. Archived from the original on 12 October 2007. Retrieved 7 October 2007. Shuma Raha (19 November 2006). "Battleground Bangalore". The Telegraph. Calcutta, India. Archived from the original on 11 October 2007. Retrieved 7 October 2007. Satyamurty, K. (22 November 2000). "Exploring Bangalore, a mouse click away". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 21 September 2013. Retrieved 17 September 2013. "Idhu Akashvani, Bengalooru!". Deccan Herald. 23 January 2006. Archived from the original on 4 December 2007. Retrieved 7 October 2007. "Radio City goes on air in Mumbai". Business Line. 23 May 2002. Archived from the original on 11 October 2007. Retrieved 7 October 2007. "Radio gaga: 6 more FM stations". Deccan Herald. 8 January 2006. Archived from the original on 4 December 2007. Retrieved 7 October 2007. "Bangalore Amateur Radio Club | Fifty Golden Years 1959–2009". Barc.in. Archived from the original on 8 January 2010. Retrieved 29 March 2010. "How DD brought Indian homes entertainment". The New Indian Express. 15 May 2012. Retrieved 24 May 2022. "Doordarshan, Bangalore". the Press Information Bureau. Archived from the original on 11 October 2007. Retrieved 7 October 2007. Sevanti Ninan (29 July 2001). "Tune in to quality". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 12 October 2007. Retrieved 8 October 2007. "Going for the action". Business Line. 8 May 2007. Retrieved 25 January 2012. Rakesh Basant. "Bangalore Cluster: Evolution, Growth and Challengers" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 October 2007. Retrieved 8 October 2007. "A short recap on Internet developments in India". Archived from the original on 16 October 2007. Retrieved 8 October 2007. "A highly net-savvy city". The Hindu. Chennai, India. 29 December 2006. Archived from the original on 12 October 2007. Retrieved 8 October 2007. "Free wifi on M.G. Road and Brigade Road from Friday". The Hindu. 23 January 2014. Archived from the original on 3 July 2014. Retrieved 6 October 2014. Julka, Harsimran. "Bharti Airtel offers 4G services on mobiles in Bangalore". The Economic Times. Retrieved 25 May 2022. "The Hindu : Karnataka / Bangalore News : Price is no problem for these cricket enthusiasts". 13 June 2007. Archived from the original on 13 June 2007. Retrieved 21 March 2022. "Various popular sports played in the state of Karnataka". www.karnatakaonline.in. Retrieved 21 March 2022. Bangalore — Mysore, pp. 29 "Cricinfo Page on Chinnaswamy Stadium". Content-usa.cricinfo.com. Archived from the original on 8 February 2009. Retrieved 29 March 2010. "Address from NCA Website". ncabcci.com. Archived from the original on 17 March 2013. Retrieved 9 October 2012. "Royal Challengers Bangalore Cricket Team Scores, RCB team Matches, Schedule, News, Players". ESPNcricinfo. Retrieved 18 July 2022. K, Navya P. (29 June 2010). "Bangaloreans gearing up to make it big in football". Citizen Matters, Bengaluru. Retrieved 21 March 2022. "Bengaluru home to great football heroes". Deccan Herald. 17 June 2018. Retrieved 21 March 2022. "Bengaluru Football Club". the-aiff.com. Retrieved 13 May 2023. "Primus, Opoku to lead FCBU's challenge | Football News - Times of India". The Times of India. 5 September 2020. Retrieved 18 July 2022. "Ozone releases just one player for Santosh Trophy". Deccan Herald. 8 March 2018. Retrieved 18 July 2022. "Bangalore gets new pro football club". The Times Of India. 3 January 2013. Archived from the original on 3 January 2013. Retrieved 18 July 2022. "Expo 2014 Unity World Cup in Goa". Pontificial Council for the Laity. 15 September 2014. Retrieved 15 November 2021. Bangalore replaces Mumbai on ATP Tour circuit Archived 2 February 2013 at archive.today. CBSSportsline.com. "Kicking up a storm". The Hindu. Chennai, India. 25 May 2009. Archived from the original on 29 June 2009. Retrieved 8 October 2012. Shekhar, Divya. "Bangalore Club: How Bangalore Club wrote off the Rs 13 Winston Churchill owed it as 'irrecoverable debt'". The Economic Times. Retrieved 11 July 2022. Profile Archived 16 November 2007 at the Wayback Machine. CBSSports.com. CBS Interactive "Davis Cup – Player profile – Rohan BOPANNA (IND)". daviscup.com. International Tennis Federation. Archived from the original on 2 March 2011. Retrieved 7 December 2010. "Touch Play: The Prakash Padukone Story | Badminton Mania". Badmintonmania.wordpress.com. 28 February 2011. Archived from the original on 18 March 2013. Retrieved 10 June 2013. "Bengaluru and Punjab in semifinals". The Hindu. 1 March 2017. ISSN 0971-751X. Retrieved 11 July 2022. "PKL Season 8 to start on December 22 in Bengaluru". Sportstar. December 2021. Retrieved 17 January 2022. "Bengaluru Bulls gear up for Pro Kabbadi League". The New Indian Express. 21 July 2014. Retrieved 18 July 2022. "No lessons learnt from 'Sister City'". Deccan Herald. 8 August 2013. Retrieved 10 July 2022. "Cleveland's Sister Cities | City of Cleveland". www.clevelandohio.gov. Archived from the original on 29 March 2023. Retrieved 20 January 2022. "San Francisco chooses Bangalore as its Indian sister". The Times of India. 1 December 2009. Retrieved 20 January 2022. "Bangalore's Chinese twin comes calling". The Hindu. 3 December 2013. Archived from the original on 30 August 2014. Retrieved 25 February 2016. De, Aditi (2008). Multiple city: writings on Bangalore. Penguin Books India. ISBN 978-0-14-310025-6. Government of Karnataka (1990). Karnataka State Gazetteer: Bangalore District. Nair, Janaki (2005). The Promise of the Metropolis: Bangalore's Twentieth Century (illustrated ed.). Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-566725-7. Pinto, Jerry; Srivastava, Rahul (2008). Talk of the Town. Penguin Books India. ISBN 978-0-14-333013-4. Plunkett, Richard (2001). South India. Lonely Planet. ISBN 1-86450-161-8. Raman, A. (1994). Bangalore — Mysore (illustrated ed.). Orient Blackswan. ISBN 978-0-86311-431-1. Rao, C. Hayavadana (1929). The Mysore State Gazetteer. Sarma, I.K. (1992). Temples of the Gangas of Karnataka. Archaeological Survey of India. ISBN 978-0-19-560686-7. Srinivas, Smriti (2004). Landscapes of Urban Memory: The Sacred and the Civic in India's High-tech City (revised ed.). Orient Blackswan. ISBN 9788125022541. Archaeological Survey of India. "Annual Report of the Archaeological researches in Mysore during the year 1914–15". New Delhi: Central Archaeological Library. Thurston, Edgar; Rangachari, K. (1993). Castes and tribes of southern India. New Delhi: Asian Educational Services. ISBN 9788120602885. Rice, B. Lewis (2001). Mysore : a gazetteer compiled for government. New Delhi: Asian Educational Services. ISBN 978-8120609778. Stein, Burton (1989). The New Cambridge History of India. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press. ISBN 978-0-521-26693-2. Hasan, Fazlul (1970). Bangalore Through The Centuries. Bangalore: Historical Publications. Vagale, Uday Kumar (6 May 2004). Public Space in Bangalore: Present and Future Projections (Thesis). Virginia Tech. hdl:10919/9941. Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 June 2012. Retrieved 26 September 2020. (792 kB). Digital Libraries and Archives. 2006. Virginia Tech. 27 April 2004. Meyer, William Stevenson; Burn, Richard; Cotton, James Sutherland; Risley, Herbert Hope (2006) [1909]. The Imperial Gazetteer of India. Oxford: Clarendon Press. "Bangalore" . Encyclopædia Britannica. Vol. 3 (11th ed.). 1911. p. 315. Official website of Bangalore Development Authority Bangalore at the Encyclopædia Britannica Bangalore web resources provided by GovPubs at the University of Colorado Boulder Libraries Bangalore at Curlie Geographic data related to Bangalore at OpenStreetMap Portals:  India  Bangalore  Geography Bangalore at Wikipedia's sister projects: Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Travel guides from Wikivoyage Data from Wikidata