Mariano Rivera (born November 29, 1969) is a Panamanian-American former professional baseball pitcher who played 19 seasons in Major League Baseball (MLB) for the New York Yankees, from 1995 to 2013. Nicknamed "Mo" and "Sandman", he spent most of his career as a relief pitcher and served as the Yankees' closer for 17 seasons. A thirteen-time All-Star and five-time World Series champion, he is MLB's career leader in saves (652) and games finished (952). Rivera won five American League (AL) Rolaids Relief Man Awards and three Delivery Man of the Year Awards, and he finished in the top three in voting for the AL Cy Young Award four times. He was inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame as part of its class of 2019 in his first year of eligibility, and is to date the only player ever to be elected unanimously by the Baseball Writers' Association of America (BBWAA). Raised in the modest Panamanian fishing village of Puerto Caimito, Rivera was an amateur player until he was signed by the Yankees organization in 1990. He debuted in the major leagues in 1995 as a starting pitcher, before permanently converting to a relief pitcher late in his rookie year. After a breakthrough season in 1996 as a setup man, he became the Yankees' closer in 1997. In the following seasons, he established himself as one of baseball's top relievers, leading the major leagues in saves in 1999, 2001, and 2004. Rivera primarily threw a sharp-moving, mid-90s mile-per-hour cut fastball that frequently broke hitters' bats and earned a reputation as one of the league's toughest pitches to hit. With his presence at the end of games, signaled by his foreboding entrance song "Enter Sandman", Rivera was a key contributor to the Yankees' success in the late 1990s and early 2000s. An accomplished postseason performer, he was named the 1999 World Series Most Valuable Player (MVP) and the 2003 AL Championship Series MVP, and he holds several postseason records, including lowest earned run average (ERA) (0.70) and most saves (42). Rivera is regarded as one of the most dominant relievers in major league history. Pitching with a longevity and consistency uncommon to the closer role, he saved at least 25 games in 15 consecutive seasons and posted an ERA under 2.00 in 11 seasons, both of which are records. When he retired, his career 2.21 ERA and 1.00 WHIP were the lowest in the live-ball era among qualified pitchers. Fellow players credit him with popularizing the cut fastball across the major leagues. Along with his signature pitch, Rivera was known for his precise control, smooth pitching motion, and composure on the field. In 2013, the Yankees retired his uniform number 42; he was the last major league player to wear the number full-time, following its league-wide retirement in 1997 in honor of Jackie Robinson. In 2014, MLB named its AL Reliever of the Year Award in Rivera's honor. A devout Christian, he has been involved in charitable causes and the religious community through the Mariano Rivera Foundation. For his philanthropy, Rivera received the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the highest civilian award in the United States, in September 2019. Mariano Rivera was born in Panama City, Panama, on November 29, 1969, to Mariano Rivera Palacios and Delia Jiron. Rivera has one older sister, Delia, and two younger brothers, Alvaro and Giraldo. Supported by Mariano Sr.'s job as captain of a fishing boat, the family lived in Puerto Caimito, a Panamanian fishing village that Rivera described as "poor". As a young man, Rivera played soccer and baseball with his friends on the beach during low tide. Soccer was his favorite sport, and Pelé his favorite athlete. For baseball games, they substituted cardboard milk cartons for gloves and tree branches for bats, and they fashioned balls by taping wads of shredded fishing nets. Rivera used this makeshift equipment until his father bought him his first leather glove when he was 12 years old. Speaking about his youth, Rivera said that although he stayed out of trouble, he "was hanging with the wrong people". Rivera attended Escuela Victoriano Chacón for elementary school and La Escuela Secundaria Pedro Pablo Sanchez for his secondary education, but he dropped out in ninth grade. At age 16, he began to learn the fishing trade by working on a commercial boat captained by his father, catching sardines. Rivera, who worked six-day weeks, year round, called the job "extremely hard" and was more interested in becoming a mechanic. He spent three years learning the fishing trade, saving the money he earned in hopes of opening an automobile repair shop. Two incidents on his father's boat validated his doubts about fishing as a career. In 1988, Rivera's uncle Miguel was lashed by an unsecured rope that shot off a hydraulic mechanism, and a month later he died from his injuries. About a year later, at age 19, Rivera was forced to abandon his father's ship after it began capsizing due to a malfunctioning water pump and an overweight load of fish. Rivera continued to play sports during his teenage years but eventually quit soccer around age 17 after a series of ankle and knee injuries. Consequently, he shifted his attention to baseball, though he considered it a hobby rather than a potential profession. At age 18, Rivera joined the Panamá Oeste Vaqueros, a local amateur baseball team, as a utility player. Scout Herb Raybourn watched him play shortstop in a 1988 baseball tournament but did not project him to be a major leaguer. A year later, Panamá Oeste's pitcher performed so poorly in a playoff game that Rivera was asked to replace him, and despite no experience at the position, he pitched well. Teammates Claudino Hernández and Emilio Gáez consequently contacted Chico Heron, a scout for the New York Yankees. Two weeks after his pitching debut, Rivera was invited to a Yankees tryout camp run by Heron in Panama City. Raybourn, who had returned to Panama to scout as the Yankees' director of Latin American operations, received a tip about Rivera. Raybourn was surprised to hear he had switched positions but decided to watch him throw. Although Rivera had no formal pitching training, weighed just 155 pounds (70 kg), and threw only 85–87 miles per hour (137–140 kilometers per hour), Raybourn was impressed by his athleticism and smooth, effortless pitching motion. Viewing Rivera as a raw talent, Raybourn signed the amateur free agent to a contract with the Yankees organization on February 17, 1990; the contract included a signing bonus of US$2,500 ($5,830 today), according to Major League Baseball (MLB) records. After signing his contract, Rivera—who spoke no English and had never left home before—flew to the United States and reported to the Gulf Coast League (GCL) Yankees, a Rookie level minor-league affiliate of the New York Yankees. Feeling lonely and homesick, he wrote home to his parents often, as they did not have access to telephones in Puerto Caimito. At that point in his career, scouts considered Rivera to be a "fringe prospect" at best, but he made progress with a strong 1990 season for the GCL Yankees. Pitching mostly in relief, he allowed only 24 baserunners and one earned run in 52 innings pitched—a 0.17 earned run average (ERA). The team permitted Rivera to start the season's final game in order for him to accumulate enough innings pitched to qualify for the league's ERA title (which carried a $500 bonus); his subsequent seven-inning no-hitter "put him on the map with the organization", according to manager Glenn Sherlock. In the offseason, Rivera returned to Panama and tipped Raybourn off about a promising local player, Rivera's 16-year-old cousin Rubén, whom the Yankees consequently signed. In 1991, Mariano was promoted to the Class A level Greensboro Hornets of the South Atlantic League, where he started 15 of the 29 games in which he pitched. Despite a 4–9 win–loss record, he recorded a 2.75 ERA in 114+2⁄3 innings pitched and struck out 123 batters while walking 36 batters. New York Yankees manager Buck Showalter took notice of Rivera's strong strikeout-to-walk ratio, calling it "impressive in any league" and saying, "This guy is going to make it." A minor-league scout for the Cincinnati Reds filed a report that season about Rivera that said: "long arms w/ slender strong body, loose actions...will challenge in velocity...maturity is a question, consistency is a question...consistency will need to be maintained to improve and advance." In 1992, Rivera was promoted to the Class A-Advanced level Fort Lauderdale Yankees of the Florida State League (FSL), but he missed the first third of the season with elbow stiffness. He started ten games for Fort Lauderdale, compiling a 5–3 win–loss record and a 2.28 ERA, while walking only five batters in 59+1⁄3 innings pitched. Ultimately, Rivera was sidelined again after suffering damage to the ulnar collateral ligament (UCL) in his right elbow. The injury was attributed to him snapping his wrist during his throwing motion in an attempt to improve the movement of his slider. Rivera underwent elbow surgery on August 27, 1992, leading to concerns that he would be out through the 1993 season. Contrary to popular belief, the operation was not Tommy John surgery; Rivera's surgeon, Frank Jobe, determined that ligament replacement was not necessary and instead repaired the frayed UCL. Rivera was left unprotected by the Yankees in MLB's 1992 expansion draft, which filled the rosters for two expansion teams, the Florida Marlins and Colorado Rockies. At one point in the draft, Marlins general manager Dave Dombrowski was planning to select Rivera with his next pick, but after the Rockies chose Yankee Brad Ausmus, the Yankees were shielded from losing any more players; Rivera went undrafted. During Rivera's rehabilitation, he played catch with former Yankees pitchers Whitey Ford and Ron Guidry, and faced batting practice from his first minor-league pitching coach, former pitcher Hoyt Wilhelm. After recuperating, Rivera pitched an abbreviated 1993 season for the Rookie-level Yankees and Class A Greensboro, during which he was kept on a limited pitch count. Hornets shortstop Derek Jeter, who would later be Rivera's teammate in the major leagues, tracked his pitch count during games. In 12 starts, Rivera recorded a 2.08 ERA, walking 16 batters in 43+1⁄3 innings pitched. Watching him recover, the Hornets' official scorer Ogi Overman was not optimistic about Rivera's future, saying, "I thought [he] was on a one-way trip to nowhere." Rivera began the 1994 season with the Class A-Advanced level Tampa Yankees of the FSL. In June, he was promoted to the Double-A level Albany-Colonie Yankees of the Eastern League, followed by a promotion to the Triple-A level Columbus Clippers of the International League in July. Rivera finished his season with a 10–2 record and a 3.09 ERA overall, but he struggled in Columbus, recording a 5.81 ERA in six starts. At the start of the 1995 season, he was ranked the ninth-best prospect in the Yankees organization by sports magazine Baseball America; by contrast, Rivera's highly touted cousin Rubén was ranked the second-best prospect in the entire sport. Mariano's pitching repertoire primarily consisted of fastballs at the time, with a slider and changeup as secondary pitches. He began the 1995 season with Columbus, pitching to a 1–1 record and a 1.50 ERA in four starts. After being called up to the major leagues on May 16, 1995, Rivera made his debut for the New York Yankees on May 23 against the California Angels. Starting in place of injured pitcher Jimmy Key, Rivera allowed five earned runs in 3+1⁄3 innings pitched in a 10–0 loss. He struggled through his first four major-league starts, posting a 10.20 ERA, and as a result, he was demoted to Columbus on June 11. As a 25-year-old rookie just three years removed from major arm surgery, Rivera did not have a guaranteed spot in the Yankee organization. Management considered trading him to the Detroit Tigers for starter David Wells. While recovering from a sore shoulder in the minor leagues, Rivera pitched a no-hit shutout in a rain-shortened five-inning start on June 26. Reports from the game indicated that his pitches had reached 95–96 mph (153–154 km/h), about 6 mph (9.7 km/h) faster than his previous average velocity; Rivera attributes his inexplicable improvement to God. Yankees general manager Gene Michael was skeptical of the reports until verifying that Columbus' radar gun was not faulty and that another team's scout had taken the same measurements. Afterwards, he ended any trade negotiations involving Rivera. On July 4, in his first start back in the major leagues, Rivera pitched eight scoreless innings against the Chicago White Sox, allowing just two hits while striking out 11 batters. In five subsequent starts, he was unable to match his success from that game. After a brief demotion to Columbus in August, Rivera made one last start in the major leagues in September before he was moved to the Yankees' bullpen. Overall, he finished his first major-league season with a 5–3 record and a 5.51 ERA in ten starts and nine relief outings. His performance in the American League Division Series against the Seattle Mariners, in which he pitched 5+1⁄3 scoreless innings of relief, convinced Yankees management to keep him and convert him to a relief pitcher the following season. "He needs to pitch in a higher league, if there is one. Ban him from baseball. He should be illegal." —Tom Kelly, manager of the Minnesota Twins, after his team faced Rivera in April 1996 Rivera was nearly traded prior to the 1996 season to address the Yankees' depleted depth at the shortstop position. Owner George Steinbrenner considered an offer to send Rivera to the Mariners in exchange for shortstop Félix Fermín, but Yankees management convinced Steinbrenner to instead entrust the position to rookie Derek Jeter. In 1996, Rivera served primarily as a setup pitcher, typically pitching in the seventh and eighth innings of games before closer John Wetteland pitched in the ninth. Their effectiveness as a tandem helped the Yankees win 70 of 73 games that season when leading after six innings. Over a stretch of games between April 19 and May 21, Rivera pitched 26 consecutive scoreless innings, including 15 consecutive hitless innings. During the streak, he recorded his first career save in a May 17 game against the Angels. Rivera finished the regular season with a 2.09 ERA in 107+2⁄3 innings pitched and set a Yankees single-season record for strikeouts by a reliever (130). Baseball-Reference.com calculated his value to the Yankees that year to be 5.0 wins above replacement (WAR), a figure no reliever has surpassed in a single season since. In the postseason, he allowed just one earned run in 14+1⁄3 innings pitched, helping the Yankees advance to and win the 1996 World Series against the Atlanta Braves. It was the franchise's first World Series championship since 1978. In MLB's annual awards voting by the Baseball Writers' Association of America (BBWAA), Rivera finished in twelfth place for the American League (AL) Most Valuable Player (MVP) Award and third for the AL Cy Young Award, which is given to the league's best pitcher. Commentator and former player Tim McCarver wrote that the Yankees "revolutionized baseball" that year with Rivera, "a middle reliever who should have been on the All-Star team and who was a legitimate MVP candidate". Yankees management decided not to re-sign Wetteland in the offseason, opting instead to replace him with Rivera as the team's closer. In April 1997, MLB retired the uniform number 42 league-wide to honor the 50th anniversary of Jackie Robinson breaking the baseball color line, although Rivera was among 13 players allowed to keep the number per a grandfather clause. Rivera's transition from setup man to closer in 1997 was not seamless; he blew three of his first six save opportunities and indicated that he was initially uncomfortable in the role. With reassurance from manager Joe Torre, Rivera settled into the ninth-inning role, and he earned his first All-Star selection with 27 saves and a 1.96 ERA at the midseason break. In the 1997 All-Star Game, he pitched a perfect ninth inning to collect his first save in an All-Star Game. That summer, he added a cut fastball to his pitching repertoire after accidentally discovering how to throw the pitch. Rivera finished the regular season with 43 saves in 52 opportunities and a 1.88 ERA. His first year as closer ended with a blown save in Game 4 of the AL Division Series against the Cleveland Indians; with the Yankees four outs from advancing to the next round of the postseason, Rivera allowed a game-tying home run to Sandy Alomar Jr. The Yankees eventually lost the game as well as the next one, eliminating them from the postseason. Rivera spent two weeks on the disabled list with a groin strain during the opening month of the 1998 season, but following his return, he continued to establish himself as one of the major leagues' best closers. Moreover, he became the central figure of a Yankees bullpen that, supported by middle relievers Jeff Nelson and Mike Stanton, contributed to the team's late-1990s dynasty. That year, Rivera made the cutter one of his primary pitches, and it quickly became his signature, earning a reputation for breaking hitters' bats with its sharp lateral movement. He saved 36 games in 41 opportunities and had a 1.91 ERA in the regular season. In the 1998 postseason, he pitched 13+1⁄3 scoreless innings and saved six games, three of which came in the 1998 World Series against the San Diego Padres. Rivera's save in Game 4 of the series clinched the Yankees' championship, capping off a season in which they won an MLB-record 125 games combined in the regular season and the postseason. By season's end, Rivera had allowed only two earned runs in 35 career postseason innings pitched—a 0.51 ERA—and by surpassing 30 innings pitched, he qualified for the major-league record for lowest postseason career ERA; it is a record he still holds after 141 innings pitched. In his salary arbitration case during the offseason, Rivera was awarded a $4.25 million salary, a raise from the $750,000 he was previously earning. In 1999, Rivera was selected for the All-Star team for a second time with 23 saves and a 2.29 ERA in the first half of the season. That summer, the Yankee Stadium scoreboard production staff began playing the song "Enter Sandman" by heavy metal band Metallica as Rivera's entrance music. Staff members selected the song after witnessing in the previous year's World Series how enthusiastically San Diego fans reacted to closer Trevor Hoffman entering games accompanied by AC/DC's "Hells Bells". Although Rivera was indifferent to his entrance song and personally listened to Christian music, "Enter Sandman" soon became as much a part of his closer identity as his cutter. After recording three blown saves and a 7.84 ERA in July, he allowed just one earned run over his last 30 appearances. He ended the season with a 1.83 ERA and 45 saves in 49 opportunities, his first time leading the major leagues in saves. He received his first AL Rolaids Relief Man Award, which was given annually to the league's best closer based on their statistics. In the 1999 World Series against the Braves, Rivera recorded a win and two saves, the second of which clinched the Yankees' championship title, his third overall. For his performance against Atlanta, he received the World Series MVP Award. Rivera finished 1999 by pitching 43 consecutive scoreless innings in the regular season and postseason combined, and he placed third in voting for the AL Cy Young Award. After the season, he revealed tentative plans to retire and become a minister after playing four more seasons, though he backed off those plans the following year. In the offseason, Rivera was denied a $9.25 million salary in arbitration but was awarded $7.25 million per year instead, which was at the time the highest arbitration award in baseball history. In the 2000 season, Rivera was selected as an All-Star with 21 saves and a 2.95 ERA in the first half. On July 8, he saved both games of a day-night doubleheader against the New York Mets, one at Shea Stadium and the other at Yankee Stadium. He ended the season with 36 saves in 41 opportunities and a 2.85 ERA. In the postseason, Rivera saved six games, allowed three earned runs in 15+2⁄3 innings pitched, and broke two major-league records: he eclipsed Dennis Eckersley's record for most postseason saves with the 16th of his career; he also broke Whitey Ford's record for most consecutive scoreless innings pitched in postseason play, a streak that ended shortly thereafter at 33+1⁄3 innings. In the 2000 World Series against the Mets, Rivera clinched a championship for the Yankees for the third consecutive year, his fourth championship overall. His save in the decisive Game 6 was the seventh World Series save of his career, setting a new record. By that point in his career, Rivera had established a reputation as an exceptional postseason performer—journalist Jack Curry called him the "infallible weapon" and "the greatest reason the Yankees [were] three-time champions". With Rivera's contract set to expire after 2001, the Yankees signed him to a four-year, $39.99 million deal prior to the season, marking the first long-term contract of his career. In 2001, he was selected for the All-Star team for a third consecutive year. His final numbers included a 2.34 ERA, a closer career-high 80+2⁄3 innings pitched, and an MLB-leading 50 saves in 57 opportunities—his second time leading the league. His saves total that year surpassed Dave Righetti's 46 saves in 1986 for the most by a Yankee pitcher in a single season, and made him just the sixth MLB pitcher to reach 50 saves in a single season. For his performance, Rivera earned his second AL Rolaids Relief Man Award and finished eleventh in voting for the AL MVP Award. Despite having what sportswriters deemed an "aura of invincibility" in the postseason, Rivera failed to close out the decisive Game 7 of the 2001 World Series against the Arizona Diamondbacks. In one of his most infamous moments, he blew the save in the ninth inning, in part due to his own throwing error, and later lost the series for the Yankees by allowing a bloop single to Luis Gonzalez with the bases loaded to score the winning run. It was the first and only loss of Rivera's postseason career, and it snapped his record streak of 23 consecutive postseason saves converted. On May 9, 2002, Rivera recorded his 225th career save, surpassing Dave Righetti as the Yankees' franchise leader in saves. Over the next few months of the season, injuries limited his playing time. He was first placed on the disabled list in June due to a groin strain, though his first-half numbers, which included a 1.47 ERA and 21 saves, earned him an All-Star selection. In a game on July 14, Rivera endured one of his worst outings, allowing six earned runs, including a walk-off grand slam. One week later, he was placed on the disabled list with a shoulder strain. Rivera was activated on August 8 after receiving a cortisone shot but returned to the disabled list after a recurrence of shoulder tightness. For the season, Rivera recorded a 2.74 ERA and 28 saves in 32 opportunities in just 46 innings pitched. To placate the Yankees' concerns about his durability, Rivera followed a strength and conditioning program in the offseason, instead of throwing. Torre said that he intended to reduce Rivera's workload during the 2003 season to minimize injury risks, but Rivera suffered a groin injury before the season began, causing him to miss the first month. After returning on April 30, he pitched well in the season's first half, saving 16 games in 17 opportunities. His save on June 13 against the St. Louis Cardinals secured the 300th career win for starter Roger Clemens. Rivera slumped early in the second half; over one stretch, he blew five of eleven save opportunities, but he rebounded to convert his final 15 opportunities of the season. He finished the 2003 regular season with a new career best in ERA (1.66), along with 40 saves in 46 opportunities. In the AL Championship Series against the arch-rival Boston Red Sox, Rivera had one of the most memorable postseason performances of his career; in the decisive Game 7, he entered in the ninth inning with the score tied 5–5 and pitched three scoreless innings, his longest outing since 1996. He became the winning pitcher after Aaron Boone hit an eleventh-inning walk-off home run that clinched the Yankees' series victory and advanced them to the 2003 World Series. Rivera celebrated by running to the pitcher's mound and collapsing in joy to thank God, as Boone rounded the bases and was met by his teammates at home plate. Rivera was named the AL Championship Series MVP for recording two saves and a win in the series. The Yankees lost the World Series to the Florida Marlins; Rivera saved five games and allowed only one earned run in 16 innings pitched that postseason. With a year remaining on his contract, Rivera signed a two-year extension in March 2004 worth $21 million, with an option for a third year. On May 28, he reached 300 career saves, making him the 18th player to do so. He was selected to his sixth All-Star team with a 0.99 ERA and an AL record-setting 32 saves at the midseason break. Rivera's final numbers for the year included a 1.94 ERA and a career-high 53 saves in 57 opportunities; it was his third time leading the major leagues in saves. Along with winning a third AL Rolaids Relief Man Award, he placed third in the AL Cy Young Award voting. Following the Yankees' victory in the AL Division Series against the Minnesota Twins, Rivera returned home to Panama to mourn two relatives who had died in an accident in his swimming pool. Despite his status being in doubt for the AL Championship Series against the Red Sox, he returned to New York for Game 1 after attending the funeral in Panama earlier in the day. He recorded a save that night, as well as in Game 2. Although the Yankees led three-games-to-none in the series, Rivera blew saves in Games 4 and 5, and the Red Sox won both games in extra innings to avoid elimination. In Game 4, Boston's Dave Roberts pinch ran and stole second base against Rivera, eventually scoring on a single to tie the game. In Game 5, Rivera entered with a one-run lead with runners on base and allowed a sacrifice fly to tie the score. Boston's comeback victories helped them become the first (and, as of 2022, the only) team in MLB history to win a best-of-seven series in which they trailed three-games-to-none. Although he allowed just one earned run in the 2004 postseason, he blew three of five save opportunities in the two series. Following a career high in appearances in 2004, Rivera did not throw during the offseason, unlike previous years. His 2005 season began on a low note. After missing time in spring training with elbow bursitis, he blew his first two save opportunities of the season against the Red Sox, marking four consecutive blown opportunities against Boston dating back to the previous postseason. Fans at Yankee Stadium booed Rivera, and baseball journalists speculated if his days as a dominant pitcher were over. He was subsequently cheered by Red Sox fans during pre-game introductions at Fenway Park the following week, in recognition of his struggles against the Red Sox. He responded to the ovation with a sense of humor by tipping his cap to the crowd. Rivera rebounded in dominating fashion. He pitched 23 consecutive scoreless innings, set a new career high by converting 31 consecutive save opportunities, and was selected to the All-Star team. Over the course of the season, he passed Rollie Fingers, Randy Myers, and Jeff Reardon on MLB's all-time saves list, moving into fifth place. Rivera finished 2005 with 43 saves in 47 opportunities, and set new career bests in many statistical categories, including ERA (1.38) and walks plus hits per inning pitched, or WHIP (0.87). Rivera limited opposing hitters to a batting average against of .177, then the best mark of his closer career. In addition to winning a fourth AL Rolaids Relief Man Award, he was voted by fans as the inaugural winner of the Delivery Man of the Year Award. In the BBWAA's awards voting, Rivera placed second for the AL Cy Young Award behind starter Bartolo Colón, and ninth for the AL MVP Award—his best finishes for both awards. During the postseason, MLB announced the Latino Legends Team, an all-time roster of Latino players voted the greatest by fans; Rivera was named the team's relief pitcher. Rivera began 2006 with a 3.72 ERA and two losses in April, but his numbers improved in subsequent months. On June 6, he saved his 391st career game, passing Dennis Eckersley for the fourth-most saves in major-league history. Rivera was selected to his third consecutive All-Star team with a 1.76 ERA and 19 saves entering the midseason break. He saved the AL's comeback victory in the All-Star Game for his third career All-Star save, tying him with Eckersley for the most ever. On July 16, Rivera achieved another milestone by becoming the fourth MLB pitcher to reach 400 saves. In August, he guaranteed his $10.5 million contract option for 2007 by reaching 114 games finished over two years. Although a throwing elbow strain sidelined Rivera for most of September, he finished the 2006 season with 34 saves in 37 opportunities and an ERA of 1.80—his fourth consecutive season with a sub-2.00 ERA. For a second consecutive year, fans voted him the Delivery Man of the Year. With his contract set to expire after the 2007 season, Rivera sought an extension with the Yankees during spring training. Team management declined to negotiate near the start of the season, prompting him to respond that he would consider free agency at the end of the year. In April, Rivera blew his first two save opportunities, compiled two losses, and surrendered nine earned runs in 7+2⁄3 innings pitched. Concerned sportswriters attributed his struggles to infrequent use, as the Yankees presented him with few situations to enter a game. Rivera saved 30 of his next 32 opportunities and posted a 2.26 ERA over the final five months of the season. On July 14, he passed John Franco for third place on the all-time saves list with his 425th career save. Still, Rivera finished 2007 with closer career worsts in earned runs (25), hits (68), and ERA (3.15), and his 30 saves in 34 opportunities were his second-lowest total since 1997. After the Yankees were eliminated from the playoffs in the opening round, Rivera stated his intentions to test the free agent market. He initially indicated that his decision of where to sign would be influenced by whether long-time manager Joe Torre was re-signed. Although Torre did not return, Rivera remained with the Yankees by agreeing to a three-year, $45 million contract, making him the highest-paid reliever in baseball history. Rivera rebounded in 2008 and began the year with 16 consecutive scoreless innings pitched and 28 consecutive save opportunities converted, both personal bests to start a season. His first-half performance, highlighted by a 1.06 ERA and 23 saves in as many opportunities, garnered him his ninth All-Star selection. Leading up to the 2008 MLB All-Star Game, which was held at Yankee Stadium in the venue's final year of existence, a few sportswriters proposed making Rivera the AL's starting pitcher as a tribute to him and his home ballpark. He instead was used as a reliever in the AL's extra-inning win. In the final month of the season, he recorded two milestones: on September 15, he recorded his 479th save to pass Lee Smith for second all-time in regular season saves; on September 21, in the final game at Yankee Stadium, Rivera threw the final pitch in the venue's history, retiring Brian Roberts of the Baltimore Orioles on a ground-out. After the Yankees missed the postseason for the first time in his career, Rivera disclosed that he had suffered from shoulder pain throughout the year. Tests revealed calcification of the acromioclavicular joint in his throwing shoulder, for which he underwent minor arthroscopic surgery in the offseason. Rivera's 2008 season was one of his best individual years. Along with a 1.40 ERA and 39 saves in 40 opportunities, he set career bests in multiple statistical categories, including WHIP (0.67), on-base plus slugging (OPS)-against (.422), batting average against (.165), save percentage (97.5%), walks (6), earned runs (11), and blown saves (1). He averaged 9.81 strikeouts per 9 innings pitched, his best mark as a closer. He pitched with such control that his 12.83 strikeout-to-walk ratio made him the second MLB pitcher ever to record a figure that high in a season (minimum 50 innings pitched). He placed fifth in the AL Cy Young Award voting. In his first 12 appearances of 2009, Rivera surrendered four home runs and had a 3.97 ERA, leading to speculation about his cutter's effectiveness and his shoulder's health at age 39. As the season progressed, his numbers improved, and he reached a milestone on June 28 by becoming the second pitcher with 500 regular season saves. In the same game, while batting against fellow closer Francisco Rodríguez, he collected his first career run batted in by walking with the bases loaded. With 23 saves in 24 opportunities and a 2.43 ERA in the season's first half, Rivera was named an All-Star for the tenth time. His save in the All-Star Game was his fourth career All-Star save, setting a new record. In the season's second half, Rivera allowed earned runs in only two of his final 40 appearances, while he set a new personal best for consecutive save opportunities converted with 36. He finished the regular season with a 1.76 ERA, 44 saves in 46 opportunities, and a 0.90 WHIP. In the postseason, he pitched 16 innings, allowing one earned run and saving five games, and he clinched the Yankees' victory in the 2009 World Series against the Philadelphia Phillies—his fifth championship. He was the only closer who did not record a loss or blown save that postseason. Rivera collected several awards at season's end, including his third Delivery Man of the Year Award, his fifth AL Rolaids Relief Man Award, and the 2009 Sporting News Pro Athlete of the Year Award. Reflecting on the decade's end, ESPN.com's Jerry Crasnick called Rivera the most valuable major league pitcher of the previous 10 years. In 2010, Rivera and two of his "Core Four" teammates, Derek Jeter and Jorge Posada, became the first trio in any of the four major sports leagues in North America (MLB, NFL, NBA, or NHL) to play together on the same team for 16 consecutive seasons. In May, Rivera blew a save to snap a personal streak of 51 consecutive save opportunities converted at home, tying him with Éric Gagné for the MLB record at the time. Rivera had one of his best first halves, compiling a 1.05 ERA, 20 saves in 22 opportunities, and 0.64 WHIP before the All-Star break, and in June, he set a personal best streak with 24 consecutive batters retired. He earned an 11th All-Star selection but withdrew from the game due to lingering oblique and knee injuries. In the second half, he was less effective—he struck out batters half as often, and in September, he compiled three blown saves and a 4.76 ERA. Rivera ended 2010 with a 1.80 ERA and 0.83 WHIP, numbers that were among his career bests, though his 33 saves in 38 opportunities and 6.75 strikeouts per 9 innings ratio were below his career averages. In the postseason, he pitched 6+1⁄3 scoreless innings while saving three games. After becoming a free agent in the offseason, he agreed to a two-year, $30 million contract to remain with the Yankees. That same offseason, Trevor Hoffman retired as the all-time regular season saves leader with a final tally of 601, leaving Rivera as the active leader in saves and 42 behind Hoffman's record to start 2011. Rivera's season was marked by several milestones. He broke the all-time record for games finished, and in May, he became the 15th pitcher to make 1,000 appearances and the first to do so with a single team. He was named an All-Star for the 12th time with a 1.85 ERA and 22 saves in 26 opportunities at the midseason break, but for the second consecutive year, he skipped the game to rest injuries. His pursuit of the saves record reached a climax in the final month of the season. On September 13, he collected his 600th save, making him just the second pitcher to accomplish the feat. Four days later, he saved his 601st game, tying him with Hoffman for the most in MLB history. Rivera broke the record on September 19 at Yankee Stadium by closing out a 6–4 win against the Twins, the final out a strikeout of Chris Parmelee. After the game, Panamanian President Ricardo Martinelli called him to offer his congratulations. Rivera finished the season with a 1.91 ERA, a 0.90 WHIP, and 44 saves in 49 opportunities, making him the first pitcher over the age of 40 to save at least 40 games in a season. In the offseason, he underwent throat surgery to remove polyps from his vocal cords. Rivera began the 2012 season by blowing a save on Opening Day but followed it with eight scoreless innings and five saves for the remainder of April. After just nine appearances, his season was prematurely ended by a freak injury; prior to a May 3 game against the Kansas City Royals, Rivera was shagging balls during batting practice but his right knee buckled on the field's warning track, causing him to tear his right anterior cruciate ligament (ACL). Speculation grew that the injury would end his career, as he had hinted at retirement during spring training. Rivera put those concerns to rest the following day when he announced his intentions to return, saying: "Write it down in big letters. I'm not going down like this." He successfully underwent ACL reconstructive surgery on June 12, while his meniscus, previously thought to have been damaged, did not need to be repaired. Rafael Soriano filled in as closer in Rivera's absence and saved 42 games in 46 opportunities. Rivera signed a one-year, $10 million contract in the offseason to remain with the team. After successfully rehabilitating his knee in the offseason, the 43-year-old Rivera announced on March 9, 2013, that he would retire after the 2013 season, his 19th in the major leagues. Throughout his final year, Rivera spent time during visits to each ballpark meeting privately with fans and unsung team employees to hear their stories and thank them for supporting baseball. He explained: "It was important for me to meet the people who make baseball what it is, the people who work in the game every day. They have given me far more than I have given them." Each opposing team returned the favor by honoring Rivera with a gift during his final visit to their city. In Cleveland, the Indians teamed up with the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame to present Rivera with a gold record of his entrance song "Enter Sandman". The Minnesota Twins commissioned a rocking chair made of broken bats, many broken personally by Rivera's cutter, called the "Chair of Broken Dreams". The rival Boston Red Sox gave him a painting and several artifacts from Fenway Park. Many teams made donations to the Mariano Rivera Foundation, the pitcher's charitable organization. Corporate sponsors of the Yankees paid tribute as well. Delta Air Lines dedicated a Boeing 757 airplane with Rivera's signature and uniform number 42 on the exterior, while Hard Rock Cafe retired "Enter Sandman" from its song system at all locations except for its Yankee Stadium restaurant. Rivera's 10 saves in 10 opportunities in April were his highest total for the opening month of a season. He converted his first 18 save attempts of the season until blowing a save against the Mets on May 28; it was the first time that he blew a save and lost a game without recording an out. Rivera entered the midseason break with 30 saves in 32 opportunities and a 1.83 ERA, and he was named an All-Star for the 13th time in his career, the second-most All-Star selections for a pitcher behind Warren Spahn's 17. During the All-Star Game, held at Citi Field in New York, Rivera was called upon to pitch in the eighth inning for his final All-Star appearance. As he trotted onto the field, players from both teams remained near their dugouts and joined fans in giving Rivera a standing ovation as he stood alone on the field. Rivera retired all three batters he faced, preserving his 0.00 career ERA in All-Star Games. He was named the All-Star Game MVP, making him the first reliever selected to an All-Star team to ever receive the award, as well as the first pitcher since Pedro Martínez in 1999 and the second Yankee ever after Derek Jeter in 2000. He became the first MLB player to be named the MVP of a World Series, League Championship Series, and All-Star Game. Rivera's performance dipped in the second half of the season, as he blew five save opportunities in the last two months, including three consecutive chances for the first time in his career. In a Fox Sports documentary chronicling his final year entitled Being: Mariano, Rivera said that the season-long process of bidding farewell to baseball had mentally and physically drained him and that by September, he had "no desire" left for the sport. On September 22, 2013, a day that Mayor of New York City Michael Bloomberg declared "Mariano Rivera Day", the Yankees held a 50-minute pre-game tribute to Rivera at Yankee Stadium. In a ceremony attended by former teammates, Yankees staff, and members of Jackie Robinson's family, Rivera's uniform number 42 was retired by the team, making him the first active Yankee to receive that honor. Metallica performed "Enter Sandman" live as he walked onto the field during the festivities. The team presented a video montage and several gifts to Rivera before he addressed the crowd to offer his thanks. Four days later against the Tampa Bay Rays, he pitched in the final game of his career before a home crowd at Yankee Stadium. Entering in the eighth inning to a pre-recorded introduction by late Yankees public address announcer Bob Sheppard, Rivera pitched 1+1⁄3 innings without allowing a baserunner. In the ninth inning, after retiring Yunel Escobar on a pop fly for the second out, Rivera was removed from the game; with permission from the umpires, Yankees manager Joe Girardi ceremonially delegated the substitution duty to Rivera's long-time teammates Andy Pettitte and Derek Jeter. After they reached the mound to make the pitching change, the normally reserved Rivera tearfully embraced his teammates for nearly a minute. Walking off the field to a standing ovation from fans and players, he saluted the crowd and then took a curtain call. After the game, he visited the mound for a final time and grabbed a handful of dirt as a memento. Rivera finished his final season with a 2.11 ERA, 1.05 WHIP, and 44 saves in 51 opportunities, earning him the AL Comeback Player of the Year Award, among several awards. During the World Series, he was honored as the 13th recipient of the Commissioner's Historic Achievement Award for his accomplished career and for being "a great ambassador of the game". Rivera's signature pitch was a cut fastball or "cutter", which exhibited lateral movement towards left-handed hitters similar to that of a slider but with the velocity of a fastball. The sharp, late movement of Rivera's cutter prevented hitters from making contact with the ball on the sweet spot of their bats, leading to them not only making weak contact on batted balls but also frequently breaking their bats. According to a tally by columnist Buster Olney, Rivera broke 44 bats during the 2001 regular season. Chipper Jones, who once witnessed teammate Ryan Klesko break three bats in one plate appearance against Rivera in the 1999 World Series, called the pitch a "buzz saw". Rivera's long fingers and loose wrist allowed him to impart more spin on the ball, contributing to the pitch's movement. Describing his grip of the cutter, he said, "it's really a four-seam fastball with pressure on the middle finger". By adjusting the pressure that he applied to the ball with his fingertips, he could vary the pitch's movement. One of the keys to his cutter grip was bending his thumb at the knuckle and tucking it under the ball so the nail aligned with his middle finger; this position prevented his thumb pad from impeding the spin of the ball as it left his hand. Rivera threw four-seam and two-seam fastballs as complementary pitches but primarily used his cutter; according to baseball statistics website Fangraphs, Rivera threw at least 82% cutters each season from 2008 to 2013. All three pitches typically reached a velocity in the low-to-mid 90s mph. Early in his major-league career, Rivera was a "power pitcher" who relied on an overpowering four-seam fastball that topped out at 96 mph (154 km/h) to retire hitters. By enticing them to swing and miss at pitches high in the strike zone, he accumulated strikeouts at a high rate. Rivera altered his pitching style after accidentally discovering the cutter. One day in June 1997 during one of his daily warm-up tosses with teammate Ramiro Mendoza, Rivera noticed that his fastballs were moving sharply and unpredictably, a problem that began to occur in games as well. After unsuccessfully spending a month trying to eliminate the movement, Rivera relented and incorporated the cutter into his pitching repertoire, making it one of his primary pitches in 1998. When asked about the pitch's origin, he explained: "It was just from God. I didn't do anything. It was natural." As he came to rely on the cutter, Rivera began to record more outs on batted balls. This change resulted in his strikeouts per 9 innings rate decreasing from 10.87 in 1996 to 5.3 in 1998, but it also decreased his pitches per inning rate from 18.7 in 1995 to 14.9 in 1998. Rivera credited his improved efficiency and consequent longevity in baseball to his long-time pitching coach Mel Stottlemyre. Rivera had an impeccable ability to accurately locate pitches and consistently throw strikes, particularly on the inside and outside edges of the strike zone. This strength offset his reliance on one pitch and hitters' anticipation of it. His former catcher Joe Girardi said: "He was so easy to catch because he always put the ball right there. I don't think there's ever been a pitcher that great who was so easy to catch." Rivera's 4.10 career strikeout-to-walk ratio in the regular season ranks 15th-best in MLB history. His control was a byproduct of his smooth, easily repeated pitching motion, one that Darrin Fletcher found deceptive as an opposing hitter. He said in 1999 that Rivera "almost kind of lulls you to sleep with his delivery. It gives you a false sense of security, and then the ball is on you and it's exploding." "You know what's coming, but you know what's coming in horror movies too. It still gets you." —Mike Sweeney, on the difficulty of hitting Rivera's cutter despite expecting it Defying conventional wisdom of lefty-righty matchups, switch hitters occasionally batted right-handed when facing the right-handed Rivera, believing that his cutter would jam a batter hitting left-handed. Similarly, some managers, such as Bruce Bochy in the 1998 World Series, sent right-handed batters to pinch hit for left-handers against Rivera, thinking that the cutter would be more difficult for lefties to hit. Opposing hitters occasionally chose to face Rivera with backup or batting practice bats, rather than risk breaking their best ones against his cutter. Rivera was considered an exceptional athlete, distinguished by his slender physique and durability. His propensity to shag balls during batting practice convinced scouts he could be a top AL center fielder. Olney compared Rivera's regimen of physical preparation and guidelines for staying healthy to Satchel Paige's "Rules for Staying Young". Former teammate Alex Rodriguez expressed amazement at Rivera's athleticism and claimed that the pitcher completed a 35-inch (890 mm) vertical jump in Yankees training camp at age 41. Rivera exhibited a reserved demeanor on the field that contrasted with the emotional, demonstrative temperament of many of his peers. Hall of Fame closer Goose Gossage said that Rivera's composure under stress gave him the appearance of having "ice water in his veins". Commenting on his ability to remain focused in pressure situations, Rivera said, "When you start thinking, a lot of things will happen... If you don't control your emotions, your emotions will control your acts, and that's not good." His ability to compartmentalize his successes and failures impressed fellow reliever Joba Chamberlain, who said, "He's won and lost some of the biggest games in the history of baseball, and he's no worse for the wear when he gives up a home run." Rivera explained the need to quickly forget bad performances, saying, "the game that you're going to play tomorrow is not going to be the same game that you just played." Derek Jeter called him the "most mentally tough" teammate with whom he had ever played. During his playing career, Rivera was regarded as a team leader within the Yankees organization, often mentoring younger pitchers and counseling teammates. He had a team-first mindset and deferred most discussions about individual accolades to team goals and his teammates, praising them for making his presence in games possible. When asked to describe his job, Rivera once put it simply, "I get the ball, I throw the ball, and then I take a shower." "When you go back and look at his career and what he's done with that one pitch, I don't think there's a greater achievement in this game than that. To go through major league hitters and dominate for all those years, it's one of the greatest feats I'll ever look back on... I don't think people realize how incredible it really is. It will never be duplicated, ever." —Eric Chavez Rivera was a dominant reliever throughout his career, pitching with a consistency and longevity uncharacteristic of a role commonly marked by volatility and high turnover. In his 17-year tenure as the Yankees' closer, Rivera compiled considerable career numbers. A 13-time All-Star, he is MLB's all-time regular season leader in saves (652) and games finished (952). He pitched in 1,115 regular season games, which is fourth-most in MLB history, the most in AL history, and the most by a right-handed pitcher. Rivera holds or shares several records for the most seasons of reaching various save milestones, including seasons with at least: 20 saves (sixteen); 25 saves (fifteen consecutive, sixteen non-consecutive); 30 saves (nine consecutive, fifteen non-consecutive); 35 saves (twelve); 40 saves (nine); and 50 saves (two). At the time of his retirement, Rivera's career ERA (2.21) and WHIP (1.00) were the lowest of any MLB pitcher in the live-ball era (minimum 1,000 innings pitched), making him one of the top pitchers since 1920 at preventing hitters from reaching base and scoring. He recorded an ERA under 2.00 in 11 seasons, tying him with Walter Johnson for the most such seasons (minimum 60 innings pitched each). Rivera also ranks first in career adjusted ERA+ (205), a statistic that adjusts ERA for league and ballpark to allow comparisons of pitchers on the same baseline. In addition to his strong regular season numbers, Rivera excelled in the postseason, recording an 8–1 win–loss record and a 0.76 WHIP. He holds numerous postseason records, including lowest career ERA (minimum 30 innings pitched) (0.70), most saves (42), most consecutive scoreless innings pitched (33+1⁄3), most consecutive save opportunities converted (23), and most games pitched (96). He saved more than twice as many postseason games as any other pitcher; Kenley Jansen, with 20, has the next-highest total. In an oft-cited statistic, more people have walked on the Moon (12) than have scored an earned run against Rivera in the postseason (11). Joe Torre, who was the Yankees' manager for most of Rivera's career, said: "Let's face it. The regular season for Mo is great, but that's the cupcakes and the ice cream. What separates him from everybody else is what he's done in the postseason." Rivera's dominance in the postseason often led to him being utilized for two-inning appearances, as he saved a record 14 postseason games in this manner—more than all other relievers combined during his career. He ranks first all time in win probability added in the postseason with 11.7, nearly three times the total of the next-closest player. In a 2009 ESPN.com poll, Rivera was voted one of the top five postseason players in MLB history. Neil Greenberg of The Washington Post ranked him the most "clutch" player in MLB postseason history. Rivera achieved a reputation as an all-time great reliever among baseball experts and his peers. Hall of Fame starter-turned-closer Dennis Eckersley called him "the best ever, no doubt", while Trevor Hoffman said he "will go down as the best reliever in the game in history". Torre said, "He's the best I've ever been around. Not only the ability to pitch and perform under pressure, but the calm he puts over the clubhouse." Writer Tom Verducci said, "Rivera is definitively the best at his position by a wider margin than any player at any position in the history of baseball. There is Rivera, a gulf, and then every other closer." He compared Rivera's reputation for being the best at his sport's position to those of Michael Jordan in basketball and Wayne Gretzky in ice hockey. MLB Commissioner Bud Selig said, "Clearly unequivocally, he's the greatest relief pitcher of all time, and did it in a way that was remarkable." Speaking about Rivera's looming presence at the end of games, Alex Rodriguez said: "He's the only guy in baseball who can change the game from a seat in the clubhouse or the bullpen. He would start affecting teams as early as the fifth inning, because they knew he was out there. I've never seen anyone who could affect a game like that." Gossage said that Rivera "might be the greatest closer of all-time" but suggested that the modern closer's job has become too specialized and easy compared to multiple-inning "firemen" from Gossage's era; Rivera had only one regular season save of seven-plus outs in his career, whereas Gossage logged 53. In 2019, The Athletic ranked Rivera 91st on its list of the greatest baseball players, and in 2022, ESPN.com ranked him the 31st-greatest MLB player. Rivera is well respected throughout baseball for his professionalism. Fellow closer Joe Nathan said: "I look up to how he's handled himself on and off the field... You never see him show up anyone and he respects the game. I've always looked up to him and it's always a compliment to be just mentioned in the same sentence as him." Michael Young said of Rivera: "I respect Mo more than anybody in the game. The guy goes out there, gets three outs and shakes [Jorge] Posada's hand. You appreciate someone who respects the game like he does, respects the people he plays with and against, and obviously his results speak for themselves." In a Sports Illustrated cover story about Rivera that was published in the final week of his career, Verducci said of the pitcher, "Few players in any sport have retired with more reverence from his peers." Rivera was the last MLB player to wear the uniform number 42 on a regular basis; at the time of his retirement, he was the only active player still grandfathered by the league to wear Jackie Robinson's retired number. Speaking about Rivera's connection to her husband, Robinson's widow Rachel said: "[Rivera] carried himself with dignity and grace, and that made carrying the number a tribute to Jack... I've always been proud and pleased that Mariano was the one chosen to wear that number because I think he brought something special to it." Presenting him with the Commissioner's Historic Achievement Award, Selig said: "Throughout his illustrious career, he has represented his family, his country, the Yankees and all of Major League Baseball with the utmost class and dignity. It is wholly appropriate that Mariano was the last Major League player to wear Jackie Robinson's sacred number 42." Rivera's cut fastball was a respected pitch among major-league players. Jim Thome called it "the single best pitch ever in the game". David Ortiz echoed his sentiment, saying: "[Rivera's] cutter was the single best pitch I've ever seen, but the really amazing thing is how he was able to do it for so many years. Are there guys now who have stuff as nasty as Mariano? Maybe for one year, two years. But nobody could maintain it like he did." In 2004, ESPN.com ranked his cutter as the best "out pitch" in baseball. Olney described his cut fastball as "the most dominant pitch of a generation". Several of Rivera's colleagues credit him with popularizing the cutter among major-league pitchers. Fellow closer Jason Isringhausen, who adopted the pitch later in his career, said: "I think he's been an influence on everybody that throws it. Everybody saw what [Rivera] could do, basically with one pitch. Nobody could throw it like he did, but now, you talk about the evolution of the cutter—just ask hitters about it and they tell you everybody's throwing one. And they hate it." Al Leiter, whose signature pitch was a cutter, echoed Isringhausen's sentiments: "Now, everybody throws it and Mo has had a huge influence on that. Pitchers watched him and marveled at what he did with one pitch." During the 2008 All-Star break, Roy Halladay consulted Rivera for help with his own cutter and traced the reliever's suggested grip onto a baseball as a visual reference; Rivera's willingness to help an opponent drew a playful fine from his teammates in the Yankees' kangaroo court. Rivera and his wife Clara have known each other since elementary school, and they were married on November 9, 1991. They have three sons: Mariano III, Jafet, and Jaziel. The family lived in Panama until 2000, when they relocated to Westchester County, New York. In 2006, the Riveras purchased a 13,000-square-foot (1,200 m2) home in Rye, New York, for $5.7 million. They listed it for sale for $3.995 million in 2020 and planned to move to a newly built house in White Plains. The couple also sold a lakefront home in Tampa, Florida, for $3.2 million in December 2019. Mariano III pitched for Iona College in New Rochelle, not far from his home. He was drafted by the Yankees with the 872nd pick in the 2014 MLB draft, but decided to return to Iona for his junior year. In the following year's draft, Mariano III was selected by the Washington Nationals in the fourth round with the 134th overall pick. Over the course of his professional career, Rivera learned English, beginning in 1991 with the Greensboro Hornets, when he realized none of his teammates spoke his native Spanish. He is now a proponent of Latino players learning English and of American press members learning Spanish to bridge the cultural gap. He encouraged immigrants to the United States to make learning English their top priority. Rivera became a naturalized citizen of the United States in October 2015 and was recognized as an Outstanding American by Choice during the ceremony. In February 2019, a Panamanian woman accused Rivera of failing to financially support her two children, a boy and a girl then aged 11 and 15, that Rivera had allegedly fathered out of wedlock. Five lawsuits were filed in his native country, demanding child support that he allegedly stopped paying two years earlier. He called the demands "unfounded". Rivera is a devout Christian. During his childhood, neither he nor his family attended church, but after a born-again experience around the age of 21, Rivera became religious and converted from Catholicism to a Pentecostal faith. His parents followed his lead after seeing the difference it made in him. Rivera believes that God has a reason for everything that happens. For example, he found his failure in Game 7 of the 2001 World Series easier to deal with when he learned of the consequences it had for teammate Enrique Wilson. Had the Yankees won the series, Wilson would have remained in New York for the championship parade and would have departed for his native Dominican Republic on American Airlines Flight 587, which crashed shortly after takeoff and killed all 260 people aboard. Rivera told Wilson, "I am glad we lost the World Series, because it means that I still have a friend." Rivera's pitching glove was inscribed "Phil. 4:13", in reference to the Bible verse Philippians 4:13 ("I can do all things through Christ, who strengthens me"). Rivera is involved with philanthropic efforts in several countries. The Mariano Rivera Foundation, a 501(c)(3) organization established in July 1998, helps provide underprivileged children with an education, distributing more than $500,000 annually in the US and Rivera's native Panama through church-based institutions. His contributions in Panama include building an elementary school, providing Christmas gifts to children, and developing a program that provides computer access and adult mentors to youths. In addition to funding church start-ups in Panama, Mexico, the Dominican Republic, California, and Florida, Rivera opened a church in New Rochelle in March 2014 that his foundation renovated at a cost of $3 million. The church, named Refugio de Esperanza ("Refuge of Hope"), has his wife Clara as its pastor and hosts a Pentecostal congregation that previously met at the Rivera home. For years, the Mariano Rivera Foundation was a private institution, but during his final baseball season in 2013, many teams wanted to commemorate the pitcher by donating to his foundation. As a result, he formed a public version of it; Naomi Gandia was appointed its executive director, working from its headquarters in Stanton, Delaware. Since retiring from baseball, Rivera has dedicated himself to philanthropy and his churches. In 2014, he and Clara created a scholarship in their names that they have awarded to students at the local College of New Rochelle. Recently, Rivera has organized an annual charity golf tournament that benefits White Plains Hospital and his foundation. He also holds multiple events annually in Delaware, including giveaways of backpacks with school supplies to children, distribution of turkey dinners during the holiday season, and the "Mariano Rivera Foundation 5K & Kids Run". In 2021, his foundation launched the Mariano Rivera Mentorship Program, a faith-based initiative aimed at serving underprivileged males in Gainesville, Florida; New Rochelle; and Houston. In 2012, the Giving Back Fund estimated that Rivera donated $627,500 to charity in 2010, ranking him as the 25th-most generous celebrity on a list that the fund compiled. He won the 2013 Marvin Miller Man of the Year Award, which is given to the MLB player "who inspires others through his on-field performances and contributions to his community". Rivera was an investor in two New York area restaurants: "Clubhouse Grill", which opened in New Rochelle in 2006 as "Mo's New York Grill"; and Siro's, which opened in Manhattan in 2012. Both restaurants have since closed. In 2015, he opened a Toyota and Scion car dealership in Mount Kisco, New York, and in 2022, he opened a Honda dealership in Port Jefferson Station, New York. Rivera has been a celebrity spokesman for several companies, including: Nike sports apparel; Canali, a premium men's clothing company, as their first athlete spokesperson; the New York Acura Dealers; Skechers footwear; and The Hartford Financial Services Group. Rivera donated all his earnings from endorsement deals to his foundation. In June 2019, a partnership between Rivera and e-commerce website eBay was announced. According to eBay, the company created a collection of Rivera-centric sports memorabilia that included 42 game-used and personal items donated by him for auction to benefit his foundation. A 2011 list by the marketing firm Nielsen ranked him as the second-most marketable player in baseball behind only Derek Jeter; the list accounted for personal attributes such as sincerity, approachability, experience, and influence. Based on sales figures from Majestic Athletic, Rivera had the 18th-best-selling MLB jersey in 2011, and the top-selling jersey in the second half of 2013. He earned approximately $169.6 million in salary during his baseball career, ten percent of which he donated to his foundation. After baseball, Rivera joined the Washington Speakers Bureau in July 2019 as a paid public speaker. Rivera is a founder and part-owner of Cherri Cafe, a coffee company focused on Central American coffee, especially Panamanian beans. Rivera is a supporter of Israel as a Jewish state. In 2013, the New York Board of Rabbis (NYBR) named him their "Man of the Year". The organization helped facilitate trips to Israel in 2015 and 2018 in which Rivera participated. The latter trip included a visit to Michve Alon, an Israel Defense Forces base, that was arranged by Friends of the Israel Defense Forces. Rivera attended the Christians United for Israel conference in July 2019. Rivera served on the Opioid and Drug Abuse Commission formed by US President Donald Trump in March 2017. The following May, Rivera was nominated to co-chair the President's Council on Sports, Fitness, and Nutrition. He was appointed to a second two-year term on the council in December 2020. He was removed from the co-chair position in April 2022, but continued to serve as member of the council. In August 2018, he co-hosted a fundraiser dinner for the America First Action PAC with Donald Trump Jr. and Kimberly Guilfoyle. In response to a Daily Beast article that labeled his politics "far-right", Rivera defended himself and affirmed his support for President Trump, saying: "I respect him, I respect what he does. I believe that he's doing the best for the United States of America." Rivera said that their friendship predated Trump's presidency and that he would not "turn [his] back on [Trump]". In March 2014, Rivera was twice recognized for his philanthropic efforts, receiving the ROBIE Humanitarian Award from the Jackie Robinson Foundation, as well as a Jefferson Award for Public Service. Later that month, the "Legends Series", comprising two MLB exhibition games between the Yankees and Miami Marlins, was played in Rivera's native Panama to "honor [his] legacy". He helped promote the games, which were accompanied by charitable events and a gala benefiting his foundation. On April 9, 2014, MLB announced that a new annual award for relief pitchers, the Reliever of the Year Award, would replace the existing Delivery Man of the Year Award, and that the AL honor would be named after Rivera. The following month, a section of River Avenue bordering Yankee Stadium at 161st Street was renamed "Rivera Avenue" in the pitcher's honor. This coincided with the release of his autobiography, The Closer: My Story, co-authored with Wayne Coffey. New York University bestowed an honorary Doctor of Humane Letters degree upon Rivera during its commencement ceremony at Yankee Stadium on May 21, 2014. During the 2015 Little League World Series, he was inducted into the Little League Hall of Excellence. The Yankees dedicated a plaque to Rivera in Yankee Stadium's Monument Park on August 14, 2016. Rivera was elected to the National Baseball Hall of Fame on January 22, 2019, in his first year of eligibility. He became the first player in history to be elected unanimously by the BBWAA, appearing on all 425 ballots; the previous record for election percentage was held by Ken Griffey Jr., who received 99.3% of votes in 2016. Rivera was the second Panamanian player to be elected to the Hall of Fame after Rod Carew, and the eighth relief pitcher. He was officially inducted into the Hall of Fame on July 21, 2019, in Cooperstown, New York. The ceremony was attended by 55,000 people, the second-largest crowd for a Hall of Fame induction. Among those in attendance were Panamanian president Laurentino Cortizo and Rivera's former teammates, including Bernie Williams, who performed "The Star-Spangled Banner" and "Take Me Out to the Ballgame" on guitar. Rivera's speech concluded the ceremony and lasted nearly 25 minutes, four of which he spoke in Spanish. Leading up to and following his induction into the National Baseball Hall of Fame, Rivera was recognized by several institutions. The New York Racing Association hosted him at Saratoga Race Course as their guest of honor on July 12, 2019, and held a fundraising luncheon to benefit his foundation. At John F. Kennedy International Airport in New York City, Gate 42B at Terminal 4 was renamed for Rivera in a ceremony with Delta Air Lines, which also placed a sticker bearing his signature and uniform number on one of their airplanes. On July 27, the City of New Rochelle held a parade in his honor and awarded him a key to the city. The Yankees held a pregame celebration for him at Yankee Stadium on August 17 and made a $250,000 donation to his foundation. On September 16, 2019, President Trump, a long-time Yankees fan, presented Rivera with the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the highest civilian award that can be bestowed upon a person by the United States government. A statement on whitehouse.gov said: "Off the field, through the Mariano Rivera Foundation, he has helped provide children in need with an education, empowering them to achieve a better future. The United States proudly honors Mariano Rivera for being a legend of the game of baseball and for his commitment to strengthening America's communities." Only reliever to win both a League Championship Series MVP Award and World Series MVP Award Tied for most times won Most times won Tied with John Franco Tied with Trevor Hoffman Tied with Éric Gagné and Jim Johnson Tied with Walter Johnson List of Major League Baseball players who spent their entire career with one franchise Portals:  Biography  Baseball  Panama Footnotes Ziegel, Vic (July 14, 2006). "Mo gets more on his plate". New York Daily News. p. 84. Archived from the original on November 12, 2017. Retrieved November 3, 2019. Waldstein, David (September 26, 2013). "First Steps Made on Beach". The New York Times (New York ed.). p. B12. Archived from the original on September 26, 2013. Retrieved September 27, 2013. Schoenfield, David (January 22, 2019). "Mariano Rivera, Edgar Martinez, Roy Halladay and Mike Mussina joining Hall of Fame". ESPN.com. Retrieved November 3, 2019. Corcoran, Cliff (September 20, 2013). "42 things you need to know about Mariano Rivera". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on March 8, 2021. Retrieved March 17, 2021. Zamorano, Juan (September 20, 2013). "Rivera's long ride from a Pacific fishing village". Omaha World-Herald. Archived from the original on July 15, 2021. Retrieved October 31, 2019. Levin (2008), p. 12 Sherman (2006), pp. 4–5 Reported by Tom Rinaldi (May 11, 2010). "Coming Home". E:60. ESPN. Red, Christian (April 11, 2013). "Yankees closer Mariano Rivera reveals his passions outside of baseball, his favorite player growing up and the toughest batter he's ever faced". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on June 11, 2019. Retrieved November 2, 2019. Antonen, Mel (October 9, 2006). "Yanks' Rivera continues to learn". USA Today. Archived from the original on November 2, 2012. Retrieved March 4, 2013. Bamberger, Michael (March 24, 1997). "Strikeouts by the Boatload". Sports Illustrated. Vol. 86, no. 12. pp. 50–53. Archived from the original on March 8, 2021. Retrieved March 17, 2021. Red, Christian (March 14, 2010). "Yankees' Humble Hero". New York Daily News. Insert magazine, pp. 2–5, 12–15. Archived from the original on June 3, 2019. Retrieved November 2, 2019. Hermoso, Rafael (August 31, 1998). "Where Rivera goes for relief". New York Daily News. p. 64. Archived from the original on June 3, 2019. Retrieved November 2, 2019. O'Connor, Ian (September 17, 2013). "Mariano Rivera saves his best for last". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on October 10, 2019. Retrieved November 2, 2019. Castillo, Jorge (March 17, 2014). "Rivera out to revive thirst for baseball in Panama". The Star-Ledger. p. 29. Archived from the original on June 3, 2019. Retrieved October 31, 2019. Frezza, Harry (June 14, 2014). "'The Closer' lacks insight into Yankees". Asbury Park Press. p. C6. Archived from the original on January 27, 2024. Retrieved April 6, 2018. Red, Christian (January 19, 2019). "Mariano Rivera, the humble son of a fisherman and the greatest closer in baseball history, set to join other Yankee legends in Cooperstown". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on February 4, 2019. Retrieved January 21, 2019. Block, Melissa (May 6, 2014). "With Faith And Focus, Mariano Rivera Became Baseball's 'Closer'". NPR. Archived from the original on June 25, 2023. Retrieved June 25, 2023. Bella, Timothy (January 23, 2019). "'Help! Miguel is hurt!': Baseball's first unanimous Hall of Famer overcame a sardine-boat tragedy". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on February 5, 2019. Retrieved February 5, 2019. Gere, Richard (May 3, 2012). "Here's the Pitch". Gotham. pp. 96–101. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved August 15, 2015. Miller, Randy (January 23, 2019). "Yankees' Mariano Rivera's road to Hall of Fame: From commercial fisherman to Cooperstown". The Star-Ledger. p. A1, A5. Archived from the original on February 7, 2019. Retrieved February 4, 2019. Rivera, Mariano; Coffey, Wayne (May 7, 2014). "The Sandman Enters". New York Daily News. pp. 50–51. Archived from the original on February 7, 2019. Retrieved February 4, 2019. "From humble start, Rivera closes as baseball great". ESPN.com. Associated Press. September 27, 2013. Archived from the original on November 12, 2017. Retrieved May 14, 2017. Teitelbaum, Ben (May 15, 2014). "Speed Read: Highlights From Mariano Rivera's Memoir, 'The Closer'". The Daily Beast. Archived from the original on March 8, 2021. Retrieved April 6, 2018. Sherman (2006), p. 7 "Mariano Rivera Minor League Statistics & History". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on March 12, 2017. Retrieved March 10, 2017. Sherman (2006), pp. 68–69 Sherman (2006), pp. 13–14 Lindbergh, Ben; Arthur, Rob (March 4, 2019). "We Got Our Hands on 73,000 Never-Before-Seen MLB Scouting Reports. Here's What We Learned". The Ringer. Archived from the original on August 17, 2019. Retrieved August 18, 2019. BA Staff (January 21, 2019). "Mariano Rivera: Before He Was A Hall Of Famer". Baseball America. Archived from the original on April 6, 2019. Retrieved April 6, 2019. O'Connell, Jack (September 6, 1992). "Yankees develop some arm muscle". Hartford Courant. p. D7. Archived from the original on June 20, 2023. Retrieved June 7, 2023. Corcoran, Cliff (March 7, 2014). "Thanks, Frank Jobe: The five best post-Tommy John surgery careers for pitchers". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on March 8, 2021. Retrieved March 17, 2021. Sherman (2006), pp. 17–18 Harper, John (June 30, 2009). "Rich History Behind Mo's 500". New York Daily News. pp. 42–43. Archived from the original on September 30, 2020. Retrieved November 2, 2019. Laurila, David (August 14, 2016). "Sunday Notes: Saber Seminar, Yelich, Shipley, Hooton, Aardsma, more". Fangraphs. Archived from the original on August 31, 2019. Retrieved August 31, 2019. Corbett, Jim (February 22, 1994). "Showalter says Howe must pitch". The Journal News. p. D7. Sherman, Joel (April 1, 2012). "From Nowhere to Immortality: Mariano Rivera's Unbelievable Journey". New York Post. p. 5. Archived from the original on April 6, 2019. Retrieved April 6, 2019. O'Connor, Ian (September 14, 2011). "From obscurity to history, only one Mo". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on November 27, 2018. Retrieved November 2, 2019. Kaspriske, Ron (June 14, 1994). "Yankees lead league in all-star picks". The Tampa Tribune. sec. Brandon/South Bay, p. 6. Levin (2008), pp. 23–26 O'Connell, Jack (April 11, 1995). "Making a pitch for Johnson". Hartford Courant. pp. C1–C2. Archived from the original on June 20, 2023. Retrieved June 7, 2023. Sherman (2006), pp. 18–19 Heyman, Jon (March 7, 2013). "Mariano: Great stats, greater story add up to the greatest ever". CBS Sports. Archived from the original on April 7, 2018. Retrieved April 6, 2018. O'Connell, Jack (May 21, 1995). "Key's shoulder needs a break". Hartford Courant. p. B5. Archived from the original on June 20, 2023. Retrieved June 7, 2023. "Rivera Comes Up Big As Yankees Drop Sox". The Washington Post. Associated Press. July 5, 1995. p. D4. Archived from the original on April 19, 2019. Retrieved July 15, 2021. "A decade later, Rivera still dominates; 'Best ever,' Eckersley says". ESPN.com. Associated Press. July 17, 2006. Archived from the original on November 12, 2017. Retrieved May 14, 2017. Olney, Buster (June 18, 2004). "The Confidence Man: Inside the mind of baseball's greatest closer, Mariano Rivera". New York. Vol. 37, no. 23. pp. 46–50+. Archived from the original on February 25, 2021. Retrieved May 18, 2008. Hertzel, Bob (July 5, 1995). "Start of Something Big? A major boost". The Record. pp. S-1, S-5. Vitale, Josh (August 21, 2013). "With all of Mo's saves, one start stands out". MLB.com. Archived from the original on April 6, 2018. Retrieved April 6, 2018. "Mariano Rivera Stats". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on November 12, 2017. Retrieved May 14, 2017. Traub, James (July 4, 2010). "The Closer". The New York Times Magazine. pp. 28+. Archived from the original on January 22, 2020. Retrieved February 4, 2020. Smith, Claire (April 29, 1996). "Rivera Completes 'No-Hitter' In Victory". The New York Times (National ed.). sec. C, p. 1. Archived from the original on November 13, 2013. Retrieved June 29, 2009. Boland, Erik (March 9, 2013). "Derek Jeter's struggles in 1996 spring training almost cost the Yankees Mariano Rivera". Newsday. Archived from the original on September 5, 2019. Retrieved September 5, 2019. Zimniuch (2010), pp. 219, 221 Dottino, Paul (October 19, 1996). "Yankee Dates to Remember". The Record. p. WS-16. Goddard, Joe (May 6, 1996). "Guillen's Presence Still Means a Lot to Bevington". Chicago Sun-Times. p. 85. Ehalt, Matt (September 17, 2011). "Rivera's first save a mystery". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on April 17, 2019. Retrieved November 2, 2019. Jaffe, Jay (November 26, 2018). "JAWS and the 2019 Hall of Fame Ballot: Mariano Rivera". Fangraphs. Archived from the original on January 19, 2019. Retrieved January 18, 2019. "Mariano Rivera Stats, Fantasy, and News: Stats – MLB Postseason Cumulative". MLB.com. Archived from the original on October 29, 2020. Retrieved October 31, 2019. Curry, Jack (October 27, 1996). "A Return to Glory". The New York Times (National ed.). sec. 8, p. 1. Archived from the original on October 5, 2013. Retrieved June 26, 2013. "1996 Awards Voting". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on April 24, 2011. Retrieved March 28, 2011. Zimniuch (2010), p. 221 Belson, Ken (March 14, 2013). "Rivera Is Taking Robinson's 42 To Its Last Stop". The New York Times (New York ed.). sec. B, p. 13. Archived from the original on October 9, 2019. Retrieved October 9, 2019. Marantz, Steve (May 19, 1997). "Wette 'n' Wild". The Sporting News. Vol. 221, no. 20. pp. 24+. Michaux, Scott (October 10, 2008). "Waynesboro native steps into spotlight". Augusta Chronicle. Archived from the original on October 6, 2018. Retrieved April 6, 2018. Kruth, Cash (August 28, 2013). "First All-Star save was easy as 1–2–3 for Mariano". MLB.com. Archived from the original on April 7, 2018. Retrieved April 6, 2018. Verducci, Tom (October 5, 2009). "Mariano Saves". Sports Illustrated. Vol. 111, no. 13. pp. 44–50. Archived from the original on March 8, 2021. Retrieved March 17, 2021. "Mariano Rivera Pitching Statistics and History". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on September 3, 2011. Retrieved September 7, 2011. Olney, Buster (April 24, 1998). "All Seems Normal, For Now, In Bronx". The New York Times (National ed.). p. C1. Archived from the original on October 2, 2013. Retrieved July 11, 2013. Sherman, Joel (October 23, 2000). "Bullpens Hold Key to Series Success – Solid Relief Corps Make Bombers Tough to Beat". New York Post. Archived from the original on December 2, 2013. Retrieved October 23, 2013. Olney, Buster (October 20, 2001). "Rivera Makes Finishing A Formality". The New York Times (National ed.). pp. S1, S4. Archived from the original on October 2, 2013. Retrieved April 12, 2012. Olney, Buster (February 18, 2001). "Rivera Aiming to Be Unpredictable". The New York Times (National ed.). sec. 8, p. 7. Archived from the original on October 2, 2013. Retrieved July 2, 2013. Van Dyck, Dave (October 22, 1998). "A Bronx cheer: Yanks sweep Padres, win record 24th World Series". Chicago Sun-Times. p. 128. Botte, Peter (March 21, 1999). "Spring in Mariano's step". New York Daily News. p. 88. Archived from the original on November 12, 2017. Retrieved November 2, 2019. "All-time and Single-Season Postseason Pitching Leaders". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on July 8, 2019. Retrieved September 6, 2011. Heyman, Jon (March 1, 1999). "American League". The Sporting News. Vol. 223, no. 9. pp. 52+. Schmuck, Peter (March 16, 1998). "Indians' G.M. has to make one of his trademark trades". The Sporting News. Vol. 222, no. 11. pp. 20+. "Mariano Rivera 1999 Pitching Splits". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on March 12, 2017. Retrieved March 10, 2017. Hoch, Bryan (September 15, 2011). "Cue the 'Sandman': Mariano, song synonymous". MLB.com. Archived from the original on November 12, 2014. Retrieved September 21, 2019. "Mariano Rivera 1999 Pitching Gamelogs". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on March 12, 2017. Retrieved March 10, 2017. Olney, Buster (October 29, 1999). "Movement on Rivera's Pitches Is Tough on Bats". The New York Times (National ed.). sec. D, p. 4. Archived from the original on December 19, 2013. Retrieved April 12, 2010. "1999 Awards Voting". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on April 24, 2011. Retrieved March 10, 2017. Curry, Jack (October 29, 2000). "Closing Thoughts: Rivera Remains the Infallible One". The New York Times (National ed.). sec. A, p. 8. Archived from the original on December 19, 2013. Retrieved September 6, 2011. Olney, Buster (February 20, 2000). "Rivera Loses Ruling on Salary, but Takes It in Stride". The New York Times (National ed.). sec. 8, p. 1. Archived from the original on October 5, 2013. Retrieved May 12, 2009. "Around the Majors". Herald and Review. Associated Press. July 10, 2000. p. B2. "Long Day Benefits Yankees". Los Angeles Times. Associated Press. July 9, 2000. sec. Sports, p. 7. Archived from the original on October 23, 2020. Retrieved November 2, 2019. Gloster, Rob (October 9, 2000). "Not over the hill yet". Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. p. C4. Archived from the original on February 25, 2021. Retrieved August 1, 2013. Tan (2005), p. 112 Feinsand, Mark (October 15, 2023). "13 moments that made Mo a legend in NYC". MLB.com. Archived from the original on December 1, 2023. Retrieved October 15, 2023. Edes, Gordon (February 16, 2010). "Jonathan Papelbon learns from best". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on July 29, 2017. Retrieved October 20, 2017. Klapisch, Bob (September 27, 2001). "Yankees' Achilles' Heel". The Record. pp. S-1, S-5. Edes, Gordon (November 11, 2001). "Rudy: A hero for this game's little guys? Closing remarks". The Boston Globe. p. D13. "2001 Awards Voting". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on February 10, 2009. Retrieved February 5, 2020. Schmuck, Peter (October 27, 2001). "Carried By Their Arms". The Baltimore Sun. p. C1. Archived from the original on April 19, 2019. Retrieved November 2, 2019. "Mariano Rivera Postseason Pitching Gamelogs". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on March 12, 2017. Retrieved March 10, 2017. Vass, George (October 2002). "Last At-Bat Heroics: Every Hitter's Post-Season Dream". Baseball Digest. Vol. 61, no. 10. pp. 31–38. Kepner, Tyler (May 10, 2002). "Rivera Sets a Yankee Record With His 225th Save, but Not Without a Scare". The New York Times (National ed.). sec. D, p. 8. Archived from the original on October 4, 2013. Retrieved October 2, 2013. Kepner, Tyler (August 20, 2002). "Rivera Is Out With Injury For 3rd Time". The New York Times (National ed.). sec. D, p. 3. Archived from the original on October 4, 2013. Retrieved May 25, 2008. "Mariano Rivera 2002 Pitching Splits". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on March 12, 2017. Retrieved March 10, 2017. Bryant, Howard (August 20, 2002). "Sore shoulder shelves Rivera again". The Record. pp. S-1, S-4. Haudricourt, Tom (February 9, 2003). "Yankees Spring Training Preview". The Record. p. S-7. Habib, Daniel G. (March 31, 2003). "2003 Baseball – Scouting Reports: New York Yankees". Sports Illustrated. Vol. 98, no. 13. pp. 84–85. Archived from the original on March 8, 2021. Retrieved March 17, 2021. Kepner, Tyler (May 1, 2003). "Mondesi's Slam and Rivera's Debut Frame Victory". The New York Times (National ed.). sec. D, p. 1. Archived from the original on December 19, 2013. Retrieved May 31, 2008. Blum, Ronald (July 16, 2003). "Yanks may acquire Benitez from Mets". Star-Gazette. p. 4B. Nowak, Joey (September 9, 2013). "Mo puts finishing touch on Rocket's 300th". MLB.com. Archived from the original on June 23, 2021. Retrieved August 18, 2020. Sheinin, Dave (August 17, 2003). "Giambi's Homer in 12th Sinks O's; With Mixed-Up Lineup, Baltimore Misses Chance to Tie in Bottom of Inning". The Washington Post. p. E7. Kepner, Tyler (September 30, 2003). "Rivera on the Mound, Money in the Bank". The New York Times (National ed.). p. D3. Archived from the original on August 21, 2014. Retrieved June 15, 2014. "Yankees reliever named MVP after 3 innings". ESPN.com. Associated Press. October 17, 2003. Archived from the original on September 11, 2018. Retrieved November 2, 2019. Silverman, Michael (October 17, 2003). "Rivera goes extra mile; Series MVP pitches three clutch frames". Boston Herald. p. 130. Klapisch, Bob (October 26, 2003). "October magic runs out on Yanks". The Record. pp. S-1–S-2. "Yanks, Rivera agree to deal". Democrat and Chronicle. Associated Press. March 24, 2004. p. 3D. Goodall, Fred (May 29, 2004). "Rivera's 300th save lifts Yanks". Daily Record. pp. C1–C2. Kelly, Kevin (July 13, 2004). "Closers may determine home field". The Cincinnati Enquirer. pp. B1, B4. Yankees Media Relations Department (February 15, 2011). 2011 New York Yankees Media Guide and Record Book. New York Yankees. p. 173. Archived from the original on March 8, 2021. Retrieved October 10, 2019. "2004 Awards Voting". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on January 9, 2010. Retrieved March 10, 2017. Klapisch, Bob (October 17, 2004). "Mariano is why the Yanks can dream of another title". The Record. pp. S-1, S-5. Blum, Ronald (October 21, 2004). "Red Sox reverse curse, rout Yankees in Game 7". Courier News. pp. E-1–E-2. Gee, Michael (March 30, 2005). "Sox have Rivera's number". Boston Herald. p. 96. Kepner, Tyler (April 8, 2005). "Fellow Pitchers Feel Rivera's Red Sox Pain". The New York Times (National ed.). sec. D, p. 3. Archived from the original on February 26, 2018. Retrieved April 6, 2018. Cristodero, Damian (April 10, 2005). "Boo birds lose perspective with closer Rivera". St. Petersburg Times. p. C4. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved June 18, 2014. Klapisch, Bob (April 7, 2005). "Red Sox show Rivera who's boss". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on June 20, 2023. Retrieved June 7, 2023. Borden, Sam (April 12, 2005). "Sox Run Rings Around Yanks: Boss tells 'em to stand, champs make 'em sit". New York Daily News. pp. 58–59. O'Connor, Ian (November 8, 2005). "Rivera's season stellar despite Cy Young results". USA Today. Archived from the original on November 2, 2012. Retrieved February 26, 2013. Deicos, John (July 10, 2005). "Yankees Week Ahead". The Journal News. p. 3C. "Bernie's blast in 11th inning powers Yankees". Courier News. Associated Press. August 14, 2005. p. C-3. Amore, Don (May 16, 2005). "Homers Have Become Rou-Tino". Hartford Courant. pp. C1, C5. Archived from the original on June 20, 2023. Retrieved June 7, 2023. Everson, Darren (May 28, 2005). "Joe catches Mo off guard". New York Daily News. p. 58. Amore, Dom (August 16, 2005). "Pavano Feeling It". Hartford Courant. p. C5. Archived from the original on June 20, 2023. Retrieved June 7, 2023. "Yankees' Rivera wins relief pitcher award". Poughkeepsie Journal. Associated Press. October 14, 2005. p. 4F. "2005 Awards Voting". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on January 4, 2010. Retrieved August 10, 2006. "Chevrolet Presents the Major League Baseball Latino Legends Team Unveiled Today; Twelve Players Selected by Fans Honored Prior to Game Four of the 2005 World Series". Business Wire. Major League Baseball. October 26, 2005. Archived from the original on February 19, 2018. Retrieved February 18, 2018. "Mariano Rivera Splits – 2006". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on November 12, 2017. Retrieved April 6, 2018. "Yanks keep down Red Sox". Orlando Sentinel. Associated Press. June 7, 2006. p. C4. Feinsand, Mark (July 10, 2006). "Guillen tabs Rivera as AL stopper". MLB.com. Archived from the original on November 12, 2014. Retrieved September 21, 2019. "Young's two-run triple in ninth lifts AL All-Stars". ESPN.com. Associated Press. July 11, 2006. Archived from the original on April 2, 2019. Retrieved November 2, 2019. Fitzpatrick, Mike (July 17, 2006). "Rivera's 400th save closes out champs". Courier News. pp. B-1, B-3. Ginsburg, David (August 5, 2006). "Posada homer pushes Yankee streak to 5". Courier News. p. B-3. "Yankees' Rivera to rest one more day, throw Friday". ESPN.com. Associated Press. September 8, 2006. Archived from the original on March 8, 2021. Retrieved November 2, 2019. Borden, Sam (October 25, 2006). "A-Rod, Yanks Stand United". New York Daily News. pp. 62–63. "Rivera says he'll consider offers from other teams". ESPN.com. Associated Press. February 14, 2007. Archived from the original on November 26, 2020. Retrieved November 2, 2019. "Mariano Rivera Splits – 2007". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on November 12, 2017. Retrieved May 14, 2017. White, Paul (May 30, 2007). "Confidence game as closer has few winners". USA Today. Archived from the original on November 3, 2012. Retrieved February 26, 2013. "Abreu powers Yanks back to .500". Asbury Park Press. Associated Press. July 15, 2007. p. H3. "Rivera: Torre's return a factor in whether he stays in N.Y." ESPN.com. Associated Press. October 10, 2007. Archived from the original on October 26, 2020. Retrieved November 2, 2019. Hoch, Bryan (October 18, 2007). "Torre declines Yankees' contract offer". MLB.com. Archived from the original on November 12, 2014. Retrieved September 21, 2019. "Rivera becomes highest paid closer with Yankees' deal". ESPN.com. November 20, 2007. Archived from the original on September 10, 2019. Retrieved November 2, 2019. "A-Rod, Nady blast off in 12th, lift Yanks over Twins". USA Today. Associated Press. August 13, 2008. Archived from the original on October 30, 2014. Retrieved June 19, 2014. "Bio – 2008 Highlights", MLB.com "Mariano Rivera Splits – 2008". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on November 12, 2017. Retrieved May 14, 2017. Klapisch, Bob (July 8, 2008). "Starting Rivera in Midsummer Classic would be ultimate tribute". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on August 11, 2020. Retrieved November 2, 2019. Benjamin, Amalie (July 11, 2008). "For starters, Rivera?". Boston.com. Archived from the original on June 3, 2016. Retrieved May 4, 2016. "New York begins probable final week at Yankee Stadium with win over ChiSox". ESPN.com. Associated Press. September 15, 2008. Archived from the original on November 30, 2020. Retrieved November 2, 2019. "For final game at Yankee Stadium, Yanks win to prevent playoff elimination". ESPN.com. Associated Press. September 21, 2008. Archived from the original on March 8, 2021. Retrieved November 2, 2019. "Yanks' Rivera to undergo offseason surgery, should be ready for spring". ESPN.com. Associated Press. September 29, 2008. Archived from the original on March 8, 2021. Retrieved November 2, 2019. Kepner, Tyler (February 15, 2009). "Rivera Takes His Time Recovering From Surgery". The New York Times (New York ed.). p. SP3. Archived from the original on February 3, 2015. Retrieved June 19, 2014. "2008 Awards Voting". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on January 5, 2010. Retrieved March 10, 2017. "Mariano Rivera Pitching Gamelogs for Career Games 852 to 863". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on March 12, 2017. Retrieved March 10, 2017. DiComo, Anthony (May 8, 2009). "Limited Rivera allows historic homers". MLB.com. Archived from the original on November 12, 2014. Retrieved November 12, 2014. "Rivera's 500th save punctuates Yankees' Subway Series sweep of Mets". ESPN.com. Associated Press. June 28, 2009. Archived from the original on March 9, 2021. Retrieved November 2, 2019. "Mariano Rivera Splits – 2009". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on July 29, 2017. Retrieved May 14, 2017. Blum, Ronald (July 15, 2009). "Crawford's catch lets AL's streak survive". National Post. p. S4. "Mariano Rivera Stats – 2009 Game Log". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on July 29, 2017. Retrieved May 14, 2017. Kepner, Tyler (September 19, 2009). "Suzuki Beats Rivera With 2 Outs In the Ninth". The New York Times (New York ed.). p. D1. Archived from the original on March 8, 2021. Retrieved October 3, 2019. Curry, Jack (November 6, 2009). "Nearing 40, Hoping to Pitch Five More Years". The New York Times (National ed.). p. B14. Archived from the original on October 12, 2013. Retrieved November 5, 2009. Gagne, Matt (October 25, 2009). "Game Six Is Washed Out". New York Daily News. pp. 50–51. Boland, Erik; Davidoff, Ken (December 19, 2009). "YANKEES: Attention turns to starting pitcher". Newsday. p. A48. Archived from the original on March 8, 2021. Retrieved October 3, 2019. Crasnick, Jerry (December 16, 2009). "Most valuable pitcher of the 2000s". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on March 5, 2021. Retrieved November 2, 2019. "Red Sox error helps Yanks, 6–4". Detroit Free Press. Free Press News Services. April 7, 2010. p. 4B. "Twins slam Mariano, Yankees". Philadelphia Daily News. Daily News Wire Services. May 17, 2010. p. 83. Archived from the original on October 18, 2019. Retrieved October 18, 2019. "Mariano Rivera Splits – 2010". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on October 21, 2017. Retrieved May 14, 2017. Shpigel, Ben (June 24, 2010). "Yankees Win, but It Isn't Pretty". The New York Times. Archived from the original on June 28, 2010. Retrieved June 25, 2010. Feinsand, Mark (July 7, 2010). "Injuries mean Mo no longer in Stars". New York Daily News. p. 58. Archived from the original on October 18, 2019. Retrieved October 18, 2019. "Rivera close to $30M deal". Atlanta Journal-Constitution. News services. December 4, 2010. p. C2. "Yanks, Rivera Finalize Deal". Daily Record. Associated Press. December 15, 2010. p. B2. Kepner, Tyler (January 13, 2011). "Hoffman's Talent Was Not Limited To Pitching". The New York Times (New York ed.). p. B13. Archived from the original on October 9, 2019. Retrieved October 9, 2019. "Progressive Leaders & Records for Games Finished". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on August 17, 2011. Retrieved September 14, 2011. Begley, Ian (May 25, 2011). "Mariano Rivera in 1,000th game". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on April 19, 2019. Retrieved November 2, 2019. "Mariano Rivera Splits – 2011". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on October 27, 2017. Retrieved May 14, 2017. Borden, Sam (July 7, 2011). "Rivera Withdraws From All-Star Game". The New York Times (New York ed.). p. B13. Archived from the original on July 11, 2011. Retrieved July 11, 2011. Waldstein, David (September 14, 2011). "Rivera Notches Save No. 600 in Seattle as Yankees Win". The New York Times. Archived from the original on September 15, 2011. Retrieved September 26, 2011. "Rivera puts share of career record in savings account". Los Angeles Times. Associated Press. September 18, 2011. p. C4. Begley, Ian (September 19, 2011). "Mariano Rivera sets new saves record". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on April 19, 2019. Retrieved November 3, 2019. Fitzpatrick, Mike (September 20, 2011). "Rivera congratulated by President of Panama". USA Today. Archived from the original on August 21, 2014. Retrieved August 21, 2014. "Mariano Rivera of the New York Yankees named the American League Player of the Week". MLB.com. September 26, 2011. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved September 26, 2011. Marchand, Andrew (December 1, 2011). "Mariano Rivera to have throat surgery". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on November 3, 2019. Retrieved November 2, 2019. Feinsand, Mark (May 4, 2012). "Mo Is Down and Out". New York Daily News. pp. 70–71. Archived from the original on April 19, 2019. Retrieved November 3, 2019. Didtler, Mark (March 9, 2013). "Yankees Closer Rivera Says This Is Final Season". Associated Press. Archived from the original on January 23, 2019. Retrieved November 3, 2019. Verducci, Tom (May 4, 2012). "Rivera's storied career may be over after suffering torn ACL in BP". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on August 22, 2014. Retrieved August 21, 2014. "Mariano Rivera hints 2012 could be final season". CBS News. Associated Press. February 21, 2012. Archived from the original on October 9, 2019. Retrieved October 9, 2019. Matthews, Wallace (May 4, 2012). "Mariano Rivera says he'll be back". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on January 22, 2019. Retrieved November 3, 2019. Bloom, Barry M. (June 12, 2012). "Mo pleased after undergoing surgery". MLB.com. Archived from the original on April 6, 2018. Retrieved April 6, 2018. Bradley, Jeff (November 3, 2012). "Mariano Rivera tells Yankees he will return for 2013 season". NJ.com. Archived from the original on October 31, 2019. Retrieved October 31, 2019. Arangure, Jorge Jr. (December 1, 2012). "Rivera Deal Is Finalized; Now Catcher Is Priority". The New York Times (New York ed.). p. D4. Archived from the original on December 5, 2012. Retrieved February 26, 2013. Barbarisi, Daniel (April 11, 2013). "No, Really: Tell Me About You". The Wall Street Journal (Eastern ed.). p. A25. Archived from the original on February 3, 2015. Retrieved December 26, 2018. Souhan, Jim (July 2, 2013). "Rivera, one of baseball's greats, shows common touch". Star Tribune. Archived from the original on September 24, 2015. Retrieved August 15, 2015. Sargent, Scott (May 13, 2013). "Mo gets the gold". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on February 28, 2021. Retrieved November 3, 2019. Feinsand, Mark (July 3, 2013). "Wells lowers the boom". New York Daily News. p. 55. Archived from the original on October 31, 2020. Retrieved September 19, 2019. Gilbert, Erika; Spurrier, Guy (September 20, 2013). "Summer of love". National Post. p. B10. Archived from the original on January 27, 2024. Retrieved April 6, 2018. Musarra, Casey (July 12, 2013). "Mariano Rivera throws 'last pitch' to Joe Girardi at Delta plane dedication". Newsday. Archived from the original on October 2, 2013. Retrieved September 30, 2013. Rovell, Darren (September 26, 2013). "Hard Rock boots Metallica for Mo". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on December 26, 2018. Retrieved November 3, 2019. Marchand, Andrew (April 30, 2013). "Postgame Notes: No April Fools". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on March 8, 2021. Retrieved November 3, 2019. Knobler, Danny (May 28, 2013). "In his last regular-season game at Citi Field, a first for Mariano Rivera". CBS Sports. Archived from the original on September 22, 2013. Retrieved September 21, 2019. "Mariano Rivera 2013 Pitching Splits". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on June 20, 2023. Retrieved June 7, 2023. Simon, Mark (July 16, 2013). "W2W4: Yankees in the All-Star Game". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on March 8, 2021. Retrieved November 3, 2019. Berry, Adam (September 29, 2013). "Final ASG appearance fit for Mo's legend". MLB.com. Archived from the original on April 7, 2018. Retrieved April 6, 2018. "Pitching riches overwhelm in All-Star Game". ESPN.com. July 17, 2013. Archived from the original on September 6, 2020. Retrieved November 3, 2019. Spaulding, Jeff (October 20, 2013). "Being: Mariano". Being. Fox. Begley, Ian (September 22, 2013). "Yankees honor Mariano Rivera". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on October 19, 2020. Retrieved November 3, 2019. Waldstein, David (September 27, 2013). "Closing Scene: Hugs and Tears in Rivera's Last Home Game". The New York Times (New York ed.). p. B11. Archived from the original on September 28, 2013. Retrieved September 27, 2013. Casella, Paul (November 4, 2013). "Mo' haul: Man of Year, two Comeback honors". MLB.com. Archived from the original on April 7, 2018. Retrieved April 6, 2018. "Mariano Rivera Receives Commissioner's Historic Achievement Award". MLB.com. October 24, 2013. Archived from the original on October 31, 2017. Retrieved September 21, 2019. Harper, John (September 21, 2011). "Mariano's Gift 'From God'". New York Daily News. Commemorative section, pp. 16–17. Archived from the original on August 18, 2019. Retrieved November 3, 2019. Olney, Buster (April 2, 2000). "Rivera Tops in Broken Bats and Broken Hearts". The New York Times (National ed.). p. SP1. Archived from the original on December 29, 2013. Retrieved October 18, 2013. Klapisch, Bob (September 13, 2011). "Mo than amazing". The Record. pp. S-1, S-4. Archived from the original on October 12, 2013. Retrieved September 17, 2011. Kepner, Tyler (January 21, 2019). "How Rivera Helped Steer Halladay Toward the Hall". The New York Times (New York ed.). p. D6. Archived from the original on February 2, 2019. Retrieved February 2, 2019. Carig, Marc (September 20, 2011). "One Man. One Pitch". The Star-Ledger. pp. 40–41. Archived from the original on October 31, 2019. Retrieved October 19, 2019. Lennon, David (August 13, 2013). "After Stalling, Mo Goes Over His Mechanics". Newsday. p. A55. Archived from the original on October 24, 2013. Retrieved March 17, 2021. "Mariano Rivera – Stats – Pitching". Fangraphs. Archived from the original on January 27, 2024. Retrieved March 17, 2021. Klapisch, Bob (June 26, 1996). "Rivera uncorks the heat". The Record. pp. S-1, S-5. Olney, Buster (February 28, 1999). "Rivera Now Delivers A More Subtle Sting". The New York Times (National ed.). sec. 8, p. 3. Archived from the original on February 4, 2015. Retrieved October 18, 2013. Verducci, Tom (October 25, 1999). "Out at Home". Sports Illustrated. Vol. 91, no. 16. pp. 42–47. Archived from the original on March 8, 2021. Retrieved March 17, 2021. Kuty, Brendan (January 23, 2019). "Why Yankees great Mariano Rivera isn't thrilled about state of baseball | 9 takeaways from Hall of Fame press conference". NJ.com. Archived from the original on June 20, 2023. Retrieved June 7, 2023. Sheppard, Drew (May 16, 2013). "Mariano Rivera Breaking Bats". Fangraphs. Archived from the original on October 31, 2019. Retrieved October 31, 2019. Verducci, Tom (September 23, 2013). "Exit Sandman". Sports Illustrated. Vol. 119, no. 12. pp. 36–43. Archived from the original on March 8, 2021. Retrieved March 17, 2021. "Career Leaders & Records for Strikeouts/Base on Balls". Baseball-Reference.com. Archived from the original on June 20, 2018. Retrieved September 14, 2021. Kepner, Tyler (March 23, 2004). "For Yankees and Rivera, It's Case Closed". The New York Times (National ed.). p. D1. Archived from the original on May 21, 2011. Retrieved July 25, 2007. Berardino, Mike (October 22, 1998). "Bochy Defends His Game 3 Decisions". South Florida Sun-Sentinel. p. C6. Archived from the original on June 20, 2023. Retrieved June 7, 2023. Olney, Buster (February 20, 2010). "Taking a Paige from Rivera's book". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on November 12, 2017. Retrieved May 14, 2017. Rodriguez, Alex (January 23, 2019). "A-Rod: PED usage shouldn't ban players from Hall of Fame". First Take (Television broadcast). ESPN. Archived from the original on November 14, 2021. Retrieved January 23, 2019. Levin (2008), p. 28 Kepner, Tyler (March 9, 2008). "A Closer With an Open Heart". The New York Times (New York ed.). p. SP1. Archived from the original on October 2, 2013. Retrieved September 8, 2011. Canseco, Mario (October 1, 2013). "The Enduring Example of Mariano Rivera". Vancouver Sun. Archived from the original on May 3, 2016. Retrieved May 4, 2016. Waldstein, David (September 15, 2011). "Yanks' Closer Also Serves as Mentor and Counselor". The New York Times (New York ed.). p. B12. Archived from the original on September 16, 2011. Retrieved September 23, 2011. Kakutani, Michiko (September 29, 2013). "A Zen Master With a Mean Cutter". The New York Times (New York ed.). sec. SP, p. 1. Archived from the original on September 21, 2019. Retrieved September 21, 2019. Waldstein, David (September 11, 2011). "Quietly, Rivera Nears an Underrated Record". The New York Times (New York ed.). p. SP2. Archived from the original on September 13, 2011. Retrieved September 19, 2011. Gross, Brian; Lindeman, Todd (March 29, 2011). "There's Mariano... and everyone else". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on November 12, 2012. Retrieved April 5, 2011. "Panama's Mariano Rivera, the best closer in baseball history, ends his 19-year career". The Tico Times. September 20, 2013. Archived from the original on August 19, 2016. Retrieved August 3, 2016. "MLB Stats | Baseball Stats – Player: Pitching: All Time Totals: American Leaguey". MLB.com. Retrieved March 17, 2021. "Big Savings". Boston Herald. June 9, 2013. Archived from the original on February 3, 2015. Retrieved September 21, 2019. Fitzpatrick, Mike (July 25, 2011). "Colon, Rivera lift Yankees". The Boston Globe. p. C5. Retrieved October 18, 2019. "New York Yankees Official Game Information" (PDF). MLB.com. New York Yankees. August 4, 2013. Archived (PDF) from the original on July 18, 2019. Retrieved July 18, 2019. Carig, Marc (August 14, 2011). "Clubhouse: Yankees – A Look Around the Majors, Including the Yankees and Mets". The Star-Ledger. p. 5. Archived from the original on March 9, 2012. Ehalt, Matt (July 13, 2013). "Mariano Rivera hits 30 saves again". ESPN.com. Retrieved November 3, 2019. "New York Yankees at Boston Red Sox". Sunday Night Baseball. August 18, 2013. ESPN. Pouliot, Matthew (September 3, 2013). "Mariano Rivera notches ninth 40-save season". NBC Sports. Retrieved January 10, 2016. Cohen, Will (September 28, 2013). "Mo: Most dominant athlete ever?". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on September 14, 2021. Retrieved September 14, 2021. Verducci, Tom (November 21, 2011). "My Sportsman: Mariano Rivera". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on March 8, 2021. Retrieved March 17, 2021. "Career Leaders & Records for Adjusted ERA+". Baseball-Reference.com. Retrieved September 23, 2013. "Farewell by the numbers for Mariano Rivera". ESPN.com. March 7, 2013. Archived from the original on November 12, 2020. Retrieved November 3, 2019. Verducci, Tom (January 20, 2005). "Gotta get to Mo". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on October 28, 2020. Retrieved August 21, 2014. Gonzalez, Alden (September 14, 2011). "Postmaster general: In playoffs, Rivera is tops". MLB.com. Archived from the original on November 12, 2014. Retrieved November 12, 2014. Hoch, Bryan (January 23, 2019). "Mo is 1st in history with unanimous Hall election". MLB.com. Archived from the original on January 23, 2019. Retrieved January 23, 2019. Axisa, Mike (January 17, 2019). "2019 Baseball Hall of Fame: Putting Mariano Rivera's historic career with Yankees into context as he readies for induction". CBS Sports. Archived from the original on January 19, 2019. Retrieved January 17, 2019. "MLB Hall of Fall (2009)". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on November 12, 2017. Retrieved May 14, 2017. Greenberg, Neil (March 31, 2020). "The five most clutch MLB players in postseason history". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on April 1, 2020. Retrieved March 31, 2020. DiComo, Anthony (June 29, 2009). "Friends, foes respect Rivera's dominance". MLB.com. Archived from the original on November 12, 2014. Retrieved November 12, 2014. Verducci, Tom (September 13, 2011). "As he nears record, Rivera's career a study of poetry in motion". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on August 22, 2014. Retrieved August 21, 2014. Gardner, Steve (October 25, 2013). "Kelly will square off vs. Buchholz in Game 3". USA Today. p. 5C. Archived from the original on October 31, 2013. Retrieved November 13, 2013. Matthews, Wallace (September 19, 2011). "Save No. 602 cements Mo as No. 1". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on December 15, 2018. Retrieved November 3, 2019. Feinsand, Mark (June 30, 2009). "Gossage slams door on debate". New York Daily News. p. 44. Archived from the original on April 2, 2019. Retrieved November 3, 2019. Zimniuch (2010), p. 97 Rosen (2011), p. 213 Posnanski, Joe (December 27, 2019). "The Baseball 100: No. 91, Mariano Rivera". The Athletic. Archived from the original on December 30, 2019. Retrieved December 29, 2019. "Top 100 MLB players of all time: Nos. 50–26". ESPN.com. February 2, 2022. Archived from the original on February 2, 2022. Retrieved February 3, 2022. Rodriguez, Justin (July 14, 2009). "All-Starry-eyed Nathan". Times Herald-Record. Archived from the original on June 16, 2011. Retrieved May 19, 2010. Feinsand, Mark (July 14, 2009). "Jeter & Mo Show". New York Daily News. p. 45. Archived from the original on April 19, 2019. Retrieved November 4, 2019. O'Connor, Ian (March 6, 2013). "Jackie's widow: Mo worthy of No. 42". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on April 19, 2019. Retrieved November 3, 2019. Stark, Jayson. "The pitches that scare major leaguers". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on September 15, 2012. Retrieved March 5, 2009. Curry, Jack (July 17, 2006). "End in Sight, Guillén Shows Respect With a Rare Retreat". The New York Times (New York ed.). p. D2. Archived from the original on October 16, 2013. Retrieved August 10, 2006. Ortiz, David (September 23, 2015). "The Five Toughest Pitchers I've Ever Faced". The Players' Tribune. Archived from the original on March 8, 2021. Retrieved March 17, 2021. McAdam, Sean (April 20, 2004). "Knockout pitches". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on April 20, 2019. Retrieved November 3, 2019. Levin (2008), p. 59 Levin (2008), p. 22 Curry, Jack (March 10, 2005). "Fear Drove Rivera to Relocate His Family Here". The New York Times (National ed.). p. D1. Archived from the original on November 12, 2017. Retrieved April 6, 2018. Clarke, Katherine (November 6, 2020). "Private Properties: Former Yankee Mariano Rivera Lists His N.Y. Home". The Wall Street Journal (Eastern ed.). p. M2. Archived from the original on January 6, 2021. Retrieved February 17, 2021. Croke, Karen (December 26, 2020). "The best houses of 2020". The Journal News. pp. 1C–2C. Archived from the original on January 22, 2021. Retrieved February 17, 2021. Tucker, Douglas (June 8, 2014). "Yanks draft Mariano Rivera's son". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on October 5, 2018. Retrieved November 3, 2019. "Nats take Mariano Rivera Jr. in 4th round; other notable names off board". ESPN.com. News services. June 9, 2015. Archived from the original on October 5, 2018. Retrieved November 3, 2019. Levin (2008), p. 20 Bryant, Howard (June 12, 2009). "At 39, the great Rivera fighting mortality". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on March 8, 2021. Retrieved November 3, 2019. Crowley, Michael; Kepner, Tyler (September 17, 2019). "After Baseball Hall of Fame Comes a Medal of Freedom". The New York Times (New York ed.). p. B13. Archived from the original on September 20, 2019. Retrieved September 21, 2019. "150 Become Citizens During Two Ceremonies in New York". DHS.gov. October 26, 2015. Archived from the original on February 2, 2017. Retrieved January 25, 2017. "Mariano Rivera calls child support allegations 'unfounded'". ESPN.com. Associated Press. February 19, 2019. Archived from the original on February 24, 2019. Retrieved November 3, 2019. Olney, Buster (May 2, 2005). "Excerpt from the "Epilogue" for The Last Night of the Yankee Dynasty: The Game, the Team, and the Cost of Greatness". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on November 12, 2017. Retrieved May 14, 2017. Hollander (2005), pp. 55–59 "Mariano Rivera Foundation – Nonprofit Explorer". ProPublica. May 9, 2013. Archived from the original on October 3, 2019. Retrieved October 3, 2019. "Legendary Pitcher Mariano Rivera Hits Home Run by Donating New Instruments and Uniforms to High School Band" (Press release). Giles Communications. PRWeb. November 20, 2014. Archived from the original on March 8, 2021. Retrieved March 15, 2019. "Bio – 2012 Highlights", MLB.com Miller, Lisa (June 7, 2013). "Saved". New York. Archived from the original on June 13, 2013. Retrieved June 11, 2013. Fitzgerald, Jim (March 6, 2014). "Baseball Star Rivera Rescues, Renovates NY Church". The Big Story. Associated Press. Archived from the original on March 8, 2014. Retrieved August 21, 2014. Cormier, Ryan (April 15, 2018). "Rivera picks charity base". The News Journal. p. 2S. Archived from the original on November 17, 2018. Retrieved March 15, 2019. Kramer, Peter D. (October 5, 2015). "The (new) fall of Mariano Rivera". The Journal News. Archived from the original on October 27, 2020. Retrieved April 6, 2018. Reiner, Dan (September 23, 2016). "Mariano Rivera, wife present CNR scholarships". The Journal News. Archived from the original on January 19, 2019. Retrieved January 18, 2019. Johnson, Seth (August 24, 2021). "Mariano Rivera Foundation finds early success in Gainesville". Mainstreet Daily News. Archived from the original on April 27, 2022. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Antunes, Anderson (January 11, 2012). "The 30 Most Generous Celebrities". Forbes. Archived from the original on October 31, 2019. Retrieved October 31, 2019. Wade, Christian (May 24, 2013). "Yankee Mariano Rivera's ultimate 'save': New Rochelle church". Newsday. Archived from the original on March 8, 2021. Retrieved November 29, 2013. "Yankees closer Rivera to open Saratoga eatery in NYC". Times Union. Associated Press. April 24, 2012. Archived from the original on April 29, 2012. Retrieved May 3, 2012. Ross, Barbara; Gregorian, Dareh (November 28, 2013). "Shocking order to Mo's eatery: 'Can't use Mariano, he'll attract ghetto people'". New York Daily News. p. 6. Archived from the original on June 20, 2023. Retrieved June 8, 2023. Stock, Justin (April 13, 2012). "Yankees Pitcher Mariano Rivera Puts Westchester Restaurant on DL". The Daily Voice. Archived from the original on October 31, 2019. Retrieved October 31, 2019. Mikulak, Robert (July 30, 2015). "Yankee Great Mariano Rivera Opens Car Dealership In Mount Kisco". The Daily Voice. Archived from the original on October 31, 2019. Retrieved October 31, 2019. MacGowan, Carl (August 20, 2022). "Ex-Yankee Mariano Rivera to open Port Jeff Station car dealership". Newsday. Archived from the original on August 28, 2022. Retrieved August 28, 2022. Fish, Mike (February 22, 2006). "Advertisers are riding the Hispanic wave". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on April 20, 2019. Retrieved November 3, 2019. Araton, Harvey (April 26, 2010). "The Understated Elegance of the Yankees' Rivera". The New York Times (New York ed.). p. D1. Archived from the original on November 12, 2014. Retrieved September 20, 2011. "Mariano Rivera Anchors New 'Legends' Campaign for New York Acura Dealers" (Press release). New York Acura Dealers Association. PR Newswire. September 23, 2013. Archived from the original on October 18, 2019. Retrieved October 18, 2019. "Mariano Rivera to Pitch for Skechers" (Press release). Skechers. Business Wire. September 9, 2014. Archived from the original on August 8, 2015. Retrieved August 4, 2015. Levinson, Mason (June 2, 2015). "Mariano Rivera to Promote Hartford Insurance in Deal With MLB". Bloomberg.com. Archived from the original on March 9, 2021. Retrieved June 7, 2023. "eBay Announces the Inaugural Class of the eBay Baseball Card Hall of Fame" (Press release). eBay. PR Newswire. June 13, 2019. Archived from the original on July 17, 2019. Retrieved June 14, 2019. Best, Neil (June 11, 2019). "Charitable endeavors delay Mariano Rivera's Baseball Hall of Fame speech writing". Newsday. Archived from the original on June 12, 2019. Retrieved June 14, 2019. "Pinstripe Power: Jeter, Rivera Top List of 10 Most Marketable Players in Baseball". Nielsen Company. March 24, 2011. Archived from the original on June 10, 2023. Retrieved June 7, 2023. Newman, Mark (April 5, 2012). "Jeter has top-selling MLB jersey again in 2011". MLB.com. Archived from the original on April 6, 2018. Retrieved April 6, 2018. Newman, Mark (September 26, 2013). "Rivera's No. 42 jersey is MLB's most popular". MLB.com. Archived from the original on April 7, 2018. Retrieved April 6, 2018. Gaines, Cork (September 27, 2013). "Chart: Mariano Rivera Made More Than $160 Million In His Career". Business Insider. Archived from the original on April 6, 2016. Retrieved March 26, 2016. "Baseball Hall-of-Famer Mariano Rivera is WSB's Newest Exclusive Speaker" (Press release). Washington Speakers Bureau. PR Newswire. July 24, 2019. Archived from the original on October 18, 2019. Retrieved October 18, 2019. "Cherri Cafe". coffeeroast.com. Archived from the original on January 19, 2024. Retrieved January 19, 2024. Klein, Philip (July 9, 2019). "Interview: Yankees legend Mariano Rivera explains why he's a strong supporter of Israel". Washington Examiner. Archived from the original on August 4, 2019. Retrieved August 4, 2019. Lieber, Chavie (February 6, 2013). "Rabbis elect Yankees pitcher Mariano Rivera as Man of the Year". Jewish Telegraphic Agency. Retrieved June 25, 2023. Reback, Gedalyah (June 18, 2015). "Yankees baseball legend Rivera in Israel". The Times of Israel. Retrieved August 4, 2019. "Yankees Baseball Legend Mariano Rivera Visits Israeli Army Base to Show Solidarity". The Algemeiner. August 3, 2018. Retrieved August 4, 2019. "Former Yankees closer Mariano Rivera joins Trump's opioid listening group". USA Today. March 30, 2017. Retrieved August 12, 2019. "Mariano Rivera, Bill Belichick among nominees for president's sports council". ESPN.com. May 4, 2018. Retrieved November 3, 2019. Salant, Jonathan D. (December 11, 2020). "On his way out of office, Trump gives Yankees' Mariano Rivera one more honor". NJ.com. Retrieved December 11, 2020. Salant, Jonathan D. (April 22, 2022). "President Biden has relieved Yankees Hall of Famer Mariano Rivera". NJ.com. Retrieved April 29, 2022. Silverman, Robert (July 21, 2019). "Inside Baseball Hall of Famer Mariano Rivera's Far-Right Politics". The Daily Beast. Retrieved June 25, 2023. Davis, Bradford William (July 25, 2019). "Mariano defends support of Trump". New York Daily News. p. 48. Archived from the original on July 24, 2019. Retrieved August 4, 2019. Red, Christian (March 4, 2014). "Mo honored to live up to 42's legacy". New York Daily News. p. 53. Retrieved November 3, 2019. "Tom Brokaw, Mariano Rivera & Andrew Shue Receive a Jefferson Award for Public Service" (Press release). Jefferson Awards. PRWeb. March 3, 2014. Retrieved March 31, 2014. Nowak, Joey (February 13, 2014). "Yanks, Marlins to play in Panama, with Mo on hand". MLB.com. Archived from the original on April 6, 2018. Retrieved April 6, 2018. Sanders, Jeff (April 9, 2014). "Relief awards named for Hoffman, Rivera". San Diego Union-Tribune. Retrieved November 3, 2019. Davidson, Kavitha A. (May 6, 2014). "Mo's Road to the Hall Starts At Rivera Avenue". Bloomberg View. Retrieved June 7, 2023. "Cano: Mo Rivera still 'the best closer". ESPN.com. News services. May 7, 2014. Retrieved November 3, 2019. Feinsand, Mark (May 21, 2014). "Mariano Rivera receives honorary Doctorate from NYU at Yankee Stadium". New York Daily News. Retrieved November 3, 2019. Beauge, John (August 25, 2015). "Mariano Rivera puts Little League Hall of Excellence up there with other honors". The Patriot-News. Retrieved November 3, 2019. Caldera, Pete (August 15, 2016). "Monumental Mo". The Record. pp. S-1, S-5. Retrieved November 3, 2019. Sawchik, Travis; Rakich, Nathaniel (January 23, 2019). "Mariano Rivera's Unanimous Induction Shows An Evolving Cooperstown". FiveThirtyEight. Retrieved January 23, 2019. Santasiere III, Alfred (August 17, 2019). "Yankees Magazine: The G.O.A.T." MLB.com. Retrieved September 1, 2019. Kekis, John (July 22, 2019). "'I'm so humbled'". Hartford Courant. pp. C1, C5. Retrieved June 7, 2023. Nightengale, Bob (July 22, 2019). "Halladay widow's words touching". USA Today. p. 1C. Retrieved September 1, 2019. "Mariano Rivera honored at Saratoga Race Course". USA Today. Associated Press. July 12, 2019. Retrieved July 28, 2019. O'Connell, James (July 16, 2019). "Mariano Rivera reflects on his path to Cooperstown during gate renaming ceremony at JFK". New York Daily News. Retrieved July 16, 2019. McKinney, Michael P. (July 27, 2019). "Yankees legend Mariano Rivera accepts key to the city of New Rochelle, parades through it". The Journal News. Retrieved July 28, 2019. Johnson, Marty (August 17, 2019). "Yanks honor new HOFer Mo with celebration". MLB.com. Retrieved August 18, 2019. Tillett, Emily (September 16, 2019). "Trump honors Yankees great Mariano Rivera with Medal of Freedom". CBS News. Retrieved September 16, 2019. Haynes, Danielle (September 16, 2019). "Trump presents Medal of Freedom to Mariano Rivera". UPI. Retrieved October 31, 2019. Britton, Tim (July 7, 2010). "Mariano Rivera named winner of the 'Major League Baseball Clutch Performer of the Month Award Presented by Pepsi' for June". MLB.com. Archived from the original on November 12, 2014. Retrieved September 21, 2019. "All-time winners: DHL Delivery Man of the Month – 2008". MLB.com. Archived from the original on February 25, 2021. Retrieved October 3, 2019. "All-time winners: DHL Delivery Man of the Month – 2009". MLB.com. Archived from the original on February 24, 2021. Retrieved October 3, 2019. McGuire, Justin (October 21, 2013). "Sporting News MLB awards: Mariano Rivera, Francisco Liriano voted top comebackers". Sporting News. Retrieved May 4, 2016. "Fireman of the Year / Reliever of the Year Award by The Sporting News". Baseball Almanac. Retrieved June 19, 2009. "2009 This Year in Baseball Awards". MLB.com. Archived from the original on November 22, 2009. Retrieved December 17, 2009. Haudricourt, Tom (January 17, 2003). "Yankees still looking to deal". The Record. p. S-3. "Career Leaders & Records for Games Finished". Baseball-Reference.com. Retrieved June 29, 2011. Boland, Erik (November 5, 2013). "AL's Comeback Player of Year: Mo". Newsday. p. A47. Retrieved March 8, 2016. Stark, Jayson (September 25, 2013). "Mariano Rivera: A 21-stat salute". ESPN.com. Retrieved November 3, 2019. "Most seasons with 20+ saves, sub-2.00 ERA, sub-1.00 WHIP (min. 60 IP, 80% games in relief)". Baseball-Reference.com. Retrieved March 10, 2017. Reference not updated to include 2010 or 2011. Botte, Peter (July 7, 2013). "Yanks hotter than July". New York Daily News. p. 42. Retrieved November 3, 2019. Kernan, Kevin (September 22, 2008). "Save Best for Last: Rivera Closes Ol' Park in Style". New York Post. p. 78. Retrieved June 19, 2014. Casella, Paul (October 26, 2014). "Game 4 Did you know: Petit makes mark at bat, on mound". San Francisco Giants. MLB.com. Retrieved April 6, 2018. "All-time and Single-Season LDS Pitching Leaders". Baseball-Reference.com. Retrieved October 11, 2009. "All-time and Single-Season LCS Pitching Leaders". Baseball-Reference.com. Retrieved October 26, 2009. "All-time and Single-Season World Series Pitching Leaders". Baseball-Reference.com. Retrieved October 11, 2009. Sharp, Katie; Simon, Mark (August 2, 2013). "One Mo Time: Rivera vs. Padres". ESPN. Retrieved November 3, 2019. Kram, Zach (March 17, 2021). "The Relief Pitcher Championship Belt". The Ringer. Retrieved January 7, 2024. "New York Yankees Top 10 Career Pitching Leaders". Baseball-Reference.com. Retrieved April 13, 2018. "New York Yankees Top 10 Single-Season Pitching Leaders". Baseball-Reference.com. Retrieved April 13, 2018. "Longest streak of consecutive saves converted in Yankee history". Baseball-Reference.com. Retrieved March 10, 2017. Bibliography Hollander, Dave (2005). 52 Weeks: Interviews with Champions!. Guilford, Connecticut: The Lyons Press. ISBN 1-59921-008-8. Levin, Judith (2008). Mariano Rivera. New York: Checkmark Books. ISBN 978-0-7910-9599-7. "Mariano Rivera 42 | P: Player Bio Information". MLB.com. Archived from the original on October 19, 2020. Retrieved March 17, 2021. Rosen, Charley (2011). Bullpen Diaries: Mariano Rivera, Bronx Dreams, Pinstripe Legends, and the Future of the New York Yankees. New York: HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-200598-4. Sherman, Joel (2006). Birth of a Dynasty: Behind the Pinstripes with the 1996 Yankees. Emmaus, Pennsylvania: Rodale. ISBN 978-1-59486-244-1. Retrieved April 28, 2009. Tan, Cecilia (2005). The 50 Greatest Yankee Games. Hoboken: John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 978-0-471-65938-9. Zimniuch, Fran (2010). Fireman: The Evolution of the Closer in Baseball. Chicago: Triumph Books. ISBN 978-1-60078-312-8. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Mariano Rivera. Mariano Rivera at the Baseball Hall of Fame Career statistics and player information from MLB, or ESPN, or Baseball Reference, or Fangraphs, or Baseball Reference (Minors), or Retrosheet Mariano Rivera at the SABR Baseball Biography Project