Alternative tourism combines tourist products or individual tourist services, different from mass tourism by means of supply, organization and the human resources involved.[citation needed] Other examples of different terms include "intelligent" or "motivated tourism." In addition, "anti-tourism" or "participative tourism" are some others. That was just to name few of them. Natural, social, and community value in which allow both host and guest to enjoy positive, worthwhile and shared experience. The term "alternative tourism" tries to include the concepts of active tourism as well as explorer and encounter travel even with the concept of committed tourism. The following lists try to enumerate some of the styles of alternative tourism. Sources that state a number of different styles are and hiking trekking biking adventure tourism snowshoeing ski mountaineering rafting diving caving climbing horseback riding historical places archeological sites foreign communities foreign cultures rural tourism ecotourism cultural and historical heritage wine traditional cuisine ethnography traditional music handicrafts voluntary service overseas aid and assistance archeological digs international work camps justice solidarity tourism religion Since the term alternative is ambiguous, there are numerous critical remarks stating that the concept is only " (...) a fashionable idea among those who are dissatisfied with the nature of mass tourism (...)". The critics state, that alternative tourism lacks a clear definition of what is the tourism style alternative to. The origins of the term can be found in two alternating concepts: Rejection of modern mass consumerism Concern about the social impact in third-world countries Others express their critical opinions regarding the term as fetish-adjective, miracle-word, mythical-term. Alternative Tourism Group (in Palestine) Vagionis, N.: Alternative tourism in Bulgaria: diversification and sustainability, Cazes, G. H..: "ALTERNATIVE TOURISM" - REFLECTIONS ON AN AMBIGUOUS CONCEPT, in: Singh, T. V., Theuns, H. L., Go, F. M.: Towards Appropriate Tourism: The Case of Developing Countries, Frankfurt am Main, 1989, ISBN 3-631-40794-7, p. 117-126 Cohen, E.: "ALTERNATIVE TOURISM" - A CRITIQUE, in: Singh, T. V., Theuns, H. L., Go, F. M.: Towards Appropriate Tourism: The Case of Developing Countries, Frankfurt am Main, 1989, ISBN 3-631-40794-7, p. 127-142 Bulgarian Association for Alternative Tourism Green Olive Tours - Travel Agency for Alternative Tourism in Palestine/Israel Arttours - Artists exploring alternative tourism in Stuttgart v t e