Charlotte (/ˈʃɑːrlət/ SHAR-lət) is the most populous city in the U.S. state of North Carolina. Located in the Piedmont region, it is the county seat of Mecklenburg County. The population was 874,579 at the 2020 census, making Charlotte the 15th-most populous city in the United States, the seventh-most populous city in the South, and the second-most populous city in the Southeast behind Jacksonville, Florida. The city is the cultural, economic, and transportation center of the Charlotte metropolitan area, whose estimated 2023 population of 2,805,115 ranked 22nd in the United States. Metrolina is part of an eighteenth-county market region or combined statistical area with an estimated 2023 population of 3,387,115. Between 2004 and 2014, Charlotte was ranked as the country's fastest-growing metro area, with 888,000 new residents. Based on U.S. census data from 2005 to 2015, Charlotte tops the U.S. in millennial population growth. It is the third-fastest-growing major city in the United States. Residents are referred to as "Charlotteans". Charlotte is home to the corporate headquarters of Bank of America, Truist Financial, and the East Coast headquarters of Wells Fargo, which along with other financial institutions has made it the second-largest banking center in the United States. Charlotte's notable attractions include three professional sports teams, the Carolina Panthers of the NFL, the Charlotte Hornets of the NBA, and Charlotte FC of MLS. The city is also home to the NASCAR Hall of Fame, Opera Carolina, the Charlotte Symphony, the Charlotte Ballet, Children's Theatre of Charlotte, Mint Museum, Harvey B. Gantt Center, Bechtler Museum of Modern Art, the Billy Graham Library, Levine Museum of the New South, Charlotte Museum of History, Carowinds amusement park, and the U.S. National Whitewater Center. Charlotte has a humid subtropical climate. It is located several miles east of the Catawba River and southeast of Lake Norman, the largest human-made lake in North Carolina. Lake Wylie and Mountain Island Lake are two smaller human-made lakes located near the city. The Catawba Indians were the first known historic tribe to settle Mecklenburg County (in the Charlotte area) and were first recorded around 1567 in Spanish records. By 1759 half the Catawba tribe had died from smallpox, which was endemic among European colonists because the Catawba had not acquired immunity to the new disease. At the time of their largest population, Catawba people numbered 10,000, but by 1826 their total population had dropped to 110. The city of Charlotte was developed first by a wave of migration of Scots-Irish Presbyterians, or Ulster-Scot settlers from Northern Ireland, who dominated the culture of the Southern Piedmont Region. They made up the principal founding population in the backcountry. German immigrants also settled in the area before the American Revolutionary War, but in much smaller numbers. They still contributed greatly to the early foundations of the region. Mecklenburg County was initially part of Bath County (1696 to 1729) of the New Hanover Precinct, which became New Hanover County in 1729. The western portion of New Hanover split into Bladen County in 1734, and its western portion split into Anson County in 1750. Mecklenburg County was formed from Anson County in 1762. Further apportionment was made in 1792, after the American Revolutionary War, with Cabarrus County formed from Mecklenburg. In 1842, Union County formed from Mecklenburg's southeastern portion and a western portion of Anson County. These areas were all part of one of the original six judicial/military districts of North Carolina known as the Salisbury District. The area that is now Charlotte was first settled by European colonists around 1755 when Thomas Spratt and his family settled near what is now the Elizabeth neighborhood. Thomas Polk (great-uncle of President James K. Polk), who later married Thomas Spratt's daughter, built his house by the intersection of two Native American trading paths between the Yadkin and Catawba rivers. One path ran north–south and was part of the Great Wagon Road; the second path ran east–west along what is now Trade Street. Nicknamed the "Queen City", like its county a few years earlier, Charlotte was named in honor of Charlotte of Mecklenburg-Strelitz, who had become the queen consort of Great Britain and Ireland in 1761, seven years before the town's incorporation. A second nickname derives from the American Revolutionary War, when British commander General Charles Cornwallis, 1st Marquess Cornwallis occupied the city but was driven out by hostile residents. He wrote that Charlotte was "a hornet's nest of rebellion", leading to the nickname "The Hornet's Nest". Within decades of Polk's settling, the area grew to become the Town of Charlotte, incorporated in 1768. Though chartered as Charlotte, the name appears as a form of "Charlottesburgh" on many maps until around 1800. A form of "Charlottetown" also appears on maps of British origin depicting General Cornwallis' route of invasion. The crossroads in Piedmont became the heart of Uptown Charlotte. In 1770, surveyors marked the streets in a grid pattern for future development. The east–west trading path became Trade Street, and the Great Wagon Road became Tryon Street, in honor of William Tryon, a royal governor of colonial North Carolina. The intersection of Trade and Tryon—commonly known today as "Trade & Tryon", or simply "The Square"—is more properly called "Independence Square". While surveying the boundary between the Carolinas in 1772, William Moultrie stopped in Charlotte, whose five or six houses were "very ordinary built of logs". Local leaders came together in 1775 and signed the Mecklenburg Resolves, more popularly known as the Mecklenburg Declaration of Independence. While not a true declaration of independence from British rule, it is among the first such declarations that eventually led to the American Revolution. May 20, the traditional date of the signing of the declaration, is celebrated annually in Charlotte as "MecDec", with musket and cannon fire by reenactors in Independence Square. North Carolina's state flag and state seal also bear the date. Charlotte is traditionally considered the home of Southern Presbyterianism, but in the 19th century, numerous churches, including Presbyterian, Baptist, Methodist, Episcopal, Lutheran, and Roman Catholic formed, eventually giving Charlotte the nickname, "The City of Churches". In 1799, in nearby Cabarrus County, 12-year-old Conrad Reed found a 17- pound rock, which his family used as a doorstop. Three years later, a jeweler determined it was nearly solid gold, paying the family a paltry $3.50. The first documented gold find in the United States of any consequence set off the nation's first gold rush. Many veins of gold were found in the area throughout the 19th and early 20th centuries, leading to the 1837 founding of the Charlotte Mint. North Carolina was the chief producer of gold in the United States, until the Sierra Nevada found in 1848, although the volume mined in the Charlotte area was dwarfed by subsequent rushes. Some groups still pan for gold occasionally in local streams and creeks. The Reed Gold Mine operated until 1912. The Charlotte Mint was active until 1861 when Confederate forces seized it at the outbreak of the Civil War. The mint was not reopened at the war's end, but the building, albeit in a different location, now houses the Mint Museum of Art. The city's first boom came after the Civil War, as Charlotte became a cotton processing center and railroad hub. By the 1880s, Charlotte sat astride the Southern Railway mainline from Atlanta to Washington, D.C. Farmers from miles around would bring cotton to the railroad platform in Uptown. Local promotors began building textile factories, starting with the 1881 Charlotte Cotton Mill that still stands at Graham and 5th streets. Charlotte's city population at the 1890 census grew to 11,557. In 1910, Charlotte surpassed Wilmington to become North Carolina's largest city with 34,014 residents. The population grew again during World War I, when the U.S. government established Camp Greene, north of present-day Wilkinson Boulevard. The camp supported 40,000 soldiers, with many troops and suppliers staying after the war, launching urbanization that eventually overtook older cities along the Piedmont Crescent. In the 1920 census, Charlotte fell to being the state's second largest city, Winston-Salem with 48,395 people, had two thousand more people than Charlotte. Charlotte would pass Winston-Salem in population by the 1930 census, and has remained North Carolina's largest city since. Until 1958, the Seaboard Air Line Railroad operated a daily passenger train from its own station (which had opened in 1896) to Wilmington. The city's modern-day banking industry achieved prominence in the 1970s and 1980s, largely under the leadership of financier Hugh McColl. McColl transformed North Carolina National Bank (NCNB) into a formidable national bank that through aggressive acquisitions eventually merged with BankAmerica to become Bank of America. First Union, later Wachovia in 2001, experienced similar growth before it was acquired by San Francisco-based Wells Fargo in 2008. Measured by control of assets, Charlotte became the second largest banking headquarters in the United States after New York City. On September 22, 1989, the city was hit by Hurricane Hugo. With sustained winds of 69 mph (111 km/h) and gusts of 87 mph (140 km/h), Hugo caused massive property damage, destroyed 80,000 trees, and knocked out electrical power to most of the population. Residents were without power for weeks, schools were closed for a week or more, and the cleanup took months. The city was caught unprepared; Charlotte is 200 miles (320 km) inland, and residents from coastal areas in both Carolinas often wait out hurricanes in Charlotte. In December 2002, Charlotte and much of central North Carolina were hit by an ice storm that resulted in more than 1.3 million people losing power. During an abnormally cold December, many were without power for weeks. Many of the city's Bradford pear trees split apart under the weight of the ice. In August 2015 and September 2016, the city experienced several days of protests related to the police shootings of Jonathan Ferrell and Keith Scott. According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of 312.00 square miles (808.1 km2), of which 310.02 square miles (802.9 km2) is land and 1.98 square miles (5.1 km2) (0.63%) is water. Charlotte is the twenty-sixth-most expansive city in the United States and lies at an elevation of 751 feet (229 m). Charlotte constitutes most of Mecklenburg County in the Carolina Piedmont. Uptown Charlotte sits atop a long rise between two creeks, Sugar Creek and Irwin Creek, and was built on the gunnies of the St. Catherine's and Rudisill gold mines. Charlotte is 25 miles (40 km) southwest of Concord, 26 miles (42 km) northeast of Rock Hill, South Carolina, 83 miles (134 km) southwest of Greensboro, 135 miles (217 km) west of Fayetteville, and 165 miles (266 km) southwest of Raleigh, the state capital. Though the Catawba River and its lakes lie several miles west, there are no significant bodies of water or other geological features near the city center. Consequently, development has neither been constrained nor helped by waterways or ports that have contributed to many cities of similar size. The lack of these obstructions has contributed to Charlotte's growth as a highway, rail, and air transportation hub. Charlotte has 199 neighborhoods radiating in all directions from Uptown. Biddleville, the primary historic center of Charlotte's African American community, is west of Uptown, starting at the Johnson C. Smith University campus and extending to the airport. East of The Plaza and north of Central Avenue, Plaza-Midwood is known for its international population, including Eastern Europeans, Greeks, Middle-Easterners, and Hispanics. North Tryon and the Sugar Creek area include several Asian American communities. NoDa (North Davidson), north of Uptown, is an emerging center for arts and entertainment. Myers Park, Dilworth, and Eastover are home to some of Charlotte's most affluent, oldest and largest houses, on tree-lined boulevards, with Freedom Park nearby. The SouthPark area offers shopping, dining, and multifamily housing. Far South Boulevard is home to a large Hispanic community. Many students, researchers, and affiliated professionals live near UNC Charlotte in the northeast area known as University City. The large area known as Southeast Charlotte is home to many golf communities, luxury developments, churches, the Jewish community center, and private schools. As undeveloped land within Mecklenburg has become scarce, many of these communities have expanded into Weddington and Waxhaw in Union County. Ballantyne, in the south of Charlotte, and nearly every area on the I‑485 perimeter, has experienced rapid growth over the past ten years. The Steele Creek neighborhood which is primarily in Mecklenburg county is located within minutes near Uptown Charlotte. Since the 1980s in particular, Uptown Charlotte has undergone massive construction of buildings, housing Bank of America, Wells Fargo, Hearst Corporation, and Duke Energy, several hotels, and multiple condominium developments. Latta Park was created in 1891 as an amusement park. Bryant Park was established in the 1930s and is one of the earliest small-scale public parks in Charlotte. It is the only green space remaining in West Morehead Street's industrial sector. The 120-acre (49 ha) Park Road Park is a prominent landmark near the SouthPark area. Park Road Park features eight basketball courts, two horseshoe pits, six baseball fields, five picnic shelters, volleyball courts, playgrounds, trails, tennis courts, and an 11-acre (4.5 ha) lake. The Charlotte-Mecklenburg Parks & Recreation Department operates 36 tennis facilities and the 12 lighted tennis courts at the park. In September 2013, the 5.4-acre (2.2 ha) Romare Bearden Park opened to the public. The urban section of Little Sugar Creek Greenway was completed in 2012. Inspired in part by the San Antonio River Walk, and integral to Charlotte's extensive urban park system, it is "a huge milestone" according to Gwen Cook, greenway planner for Mecklenburg County Park and Recreation. However, the Little Sugar Creek Greenway bears no relation to the San Antonio River Walk. The Little Sugar Creek Greenway is prone to flooding during thunderstorms and periods of heavy rain. Creation of Little Sugar Creek Greenway cost $43 million and was controversial because it required the forced acquisition of several established local businesses. The city of Charlotte and Mecklenburg County began purchasing flood-prone homes in the 1990s. Voluntary buyouts of 700 households have created around 200 acres (81 ha)s of open land that can flood safely, thereby saving an estimated $28 million in flood damage and emergency rescues. McAlpine Creek Park and integrated McAlpine Creek Greenway constructed in 1978 was the first greenway built in the western piedmont of North Carolina. Like much of the Piedmont region of the southeastern United States, Charlotte has a humid subtropical climate (Köppen Cfa), with four distinct seasons; the city itself is part of USDA hardiness zone 8a, transitioning to 7b in the suburbs in all directions except the south. The following narrative reflects 1991–2020 climate data. Winters are short and fairly mild, with a normal January daily mean temperature of 42.1 °F (5.6 °C). On occasion the temperature can fall below 20 °F (−6.7 °C) but Charlotte also enjoys multiple warm winter days in excess of 65 °F (18.3 °C). On average, there are 59 nights per year that drop to or below freezing, and only 1.5 days that fail to rise above freezing. Precipitation is evenly distributed through the year; only August stands out as a slightly wetter month, averaging 4.35 inches of rainfall. Summers are hot and humid, with a normal July daily mean temperature of 80.1 °F (26.7 °C). Hot and humid days can arrive as early as May and last through the end of September. There is an average of 44 days per year with highs at or above 90 °F (32 °C). Official record temperatures range from 104 °F (40 °C) recorded six times, most recently from June 29 to July 1, 2012, down to −5 °F (−21 °C) recorded on January 21, 1985, the most recent of three occasions. The record cold daily maximum is 14 °F (−10 °C) on February 12 and 13, 1899, and the record warm daily minimum is 82 °F (28 °C) on August 13, 1881. The average window for freezing temperatures is November 5 through March 30, allowing a growing season of 220 days. Charlotte is directly in the path of subtropical moisture from the Gulf of Mexico as it heads up the eastern seaboard, thus the city receives ample precipitation throughout the year but also many clear, sunny days; precipitation is generally less frequent in autumn than in spring. On average, Charlotte receives 43.60 inches (1,110 mm) of precipitation annually, evenly distributed throughout the year. Annual precipitation has historically ranged from 26.23 in (666 mm) in 2001 to 68.44 in (1,738 mm) in 1884. There is an average of 3.5 inches (8.9 cm) of snow, mainly in January and February and rarely December or March, with more frequent ice storms and sleet mixed in with rain; seasonal snowfall has historically ranged from trace amounts in 2011–12 to 22.6 in (57 cm) in 1959–60. Snow and ice storms can have a major impact on the area, as they often pull tree limbs down onto power lines and make driving hazardous. Snow has been recorded a small number of times in April, most recently, April 2, 2019. As of 2020[update], the Charlotte metropolitan area as a whole is noted for having one of the worst weather radar gaps among any major U.S. East Coast city, with little to no coverage in a roughly quadrilateral area spanning Concord, Salisbury and much of Statesville. As the nearest NWS-owned NEXRAD is located in Greer, South Carolina, more than 80 mi (130 km) to the west-southwest of Charlotte, this deficit is particularly problematic during severe thunderstorm or tornado episodes. The current lowest angle of the radar, based in Greer, is quite far above the surface over Charlotte, so the velocities measurement for detecting rotations cannot be below mid-level in potential tornado-forming storms and thus cannot indicate whether said rotation extends closer to the ground (below 5,000 ft (1,500 m)). As of the 2020 census, there were 874,579 people, 342,448 households, and 195,614 families residing in the city. In 2019, the U.S. Census Bureau estimates showed 885,708 residents living within Charlotte's city limits and 1,093,901 in Mecklenburg County. The combined statistical area, or trade area, of Charlotte–Concord–Gastonia, NC–SC had an estimated population of 3,387,115 in 2023. Figures from the more comprehensive 2010 census show Charlotte's population density to be 2,457 per square mile (949/km2). There were 319,918 housing units at an average density of 1,074.6 per square mile (414.9/km2). In 1970, the U.S. Census Bureau reported Charlotte's population as 30.2% Black and 68.9% White. In 2020, 39.72% of the population was non-Hispanic white, 32.5% Black or African American, 0.25% Native American, 7.02% Asian, 0.05% Pacific Islander, 4.15% other or mixed, and 16.32% Hispanic or Latin American of any race. This reflected the national demographic shift as Hispanic or Latinos and Asians increased in population. The median income for a household in the city was $48,670, and the median income for a family was $59,452. Males had a median income of $38,767 versus $29,218 for females. The per capita income for the city was $29,825. The percentage of the population living at or below the poverty line was 10.6%, with 7.8% of families living at or below the poverty line. Out of the total population, 13.8% of those under the age of 18 and 9.7% of those 65 and older were living below the poverty line. Charlotte has been historically Protestant and remains predominantly Protestant today. It is the birthplace of Billy Graham, and is also the historic seat of Southern Presbyterianism. The changing demographics of the city's increasing population have brought scores of new denominations and faiths. The Billy Graham Evangelistic Association, Wycliffe Bible Translators' JAARS Center, SIM Missions Organization, and The Christian Research Institute make their homes in the Charlotte general area. In total, Charlotte proper has over 700 places of worship. The Presbyterian Church (USA) is now the fourth largest denomination in Charlotte, with 68,000 members and 206 congregations. The second largest Presbyterian denomination, the Presbyterian Church in America has 43 churches and 12,000 members, followed by the Associate Reformed Presbyterian Church with 63 churches and 9,500 members. The Baptist Peace Fellowship of North America is headquartered in Charlotte, and both Reformed Theological Seminary and Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary have campuses there; more recently, the religious studies academic departments of Charlotte's local colleges and universities have also grown considerably. The Advent Christian Church is headquartered in Charlotte. The Western North Carolina Annual Conference of the United Methodist Church is also headquartered in Charlotte. The largest Protestant church in Charlotte, by attendance, is Elevation Church, a Southern Baptist church founded by lead pastor Steven Furtick. The church has over 15,000 congregants at nine Charlotte locations. Charlotte's Cathedral of Saint Patrick is the seat of the bishop of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Charlotte, the head of which is Rev. Peter Joseph Jugis. St. Matthew Parish, located in the Ballantyne neighborhood, is the largest Catholic parish with over 30,000 parishioners. Charlotte is home to ~28,000 Catholics. The Greek Orthodox Church's cathedral for North Carolina, Holy Trinity Cathedral, is located in Charlotte. Charlotte has the largest Jewish population in the Carolinas. Shalom Park in south Charlotte is the hub of the Jewish community, featuring two synagogues, Temple Israel and Temple Beth El, as well as a community center, the Charlotte Jewish Day School for grades K–5, and the headquarters of the Charlotte Jewish News. Most African Americans in Charlotte are Baptists affiliated with the National Baptist Convention, the largest predominantly African American denomination in the United States. African American Methodists are largely affiliated with either the African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church, headquartered in Charlotte, or the African Methodist Episcopal Church. African American Pentecostals are represented by several organizations such as the United House of Prayer for All People, Church of God in Christ, and the United Holy Church of America. As of 2013[update], 51.91% of people in Charlotte practice religion on a regular basis, making it the second most religious city in North Carolina after Winston-Salem. The largest religion in Charlotte is Christianity, with Baptists (13.26%) having the largest number of adherents. The second largest Christian group are the Roman Catholics (9.43%), followed by Methodists (8.02%) and Presbyterians (5.25%). Other Christian affiliates include Pentecostals (2.50%), Lutherans (1.30%), Episcopalians (1.20%), Latter-Day Saints (0.84%), and other Christian (8.87%) churches, including the Eastern Orthodox and non-denominational congregations. Judaism (0.57%) is the second largest religion after Christianity, followed by Eastern religions (0.34%) and Islam (0.32%). Charlotte is the second-largest banking center in the United States, after New York City. The second largest financial institution by total assets in the United States, Bank of America, is based in Charlotte. It is also home to the nation's sixth largest financial institution, Truist. Charlotte also has become a large employment center for major banks not headquartered in Charlotte: Charlotte is the regional headquarters for East Coast operations of Wells Fargo, which is headquartered in San Francisco, California. Charlotte also serves as the headquarters for Wells Fargo's capital markets activities. Bank of America's headquarters, along with other regional banking and financial services companies, are located primarily in the Uptown central business district. In May 2021, Ally Financial moved into Ally Charlotte Center which houses all 2,100 Charlotte-based employees and contractors across 725,000 square feet (67,400 m2) of the building. U.S. Bancorp leases 81,424 square feet (7,564.5 m2) in Truist Center to house 850 employees USAA occupies 90,000 square feet (8,400 m2) in The Square which is located in South End to house 500 employees. In September 2022, TD Bank announced its plan to expand its retail in Charlotte with 15 new branches. In August 2022 UK based The Bank of London announced it will be leasing 40,000 square feet (3,716 m2) in 101 Independence Center to house the 350 jobs they are creating in Charlotte by 2026. Other large companies, such as Microsoft and Centene Corporation, operate their East Coast headquarters in Charlotte. In November 2018, Honeywell moved its corporate headquarters to Charlotte. In June 2019, Lowe's announced it will be building its Lowe's Global Technology Center worth $153 million, which is set to be complete in 2021 and will be headquartered in South End neighborhood in Charlotte. In 2019, Dole Food Company relocated its headquarters to Charlotte from California, and expanded its presence in Charlotte with its merger with Ireland-based Total Produce in February 2021. On May 25, 2021, it was announced that Charlotte would become the East Coast headquarters of Credit Karma. Cedar Fair's corporate office is located in southwest Charlotte. On September 20, 2022, the Atlantic Coast Conference (ACC) announced it will be relocating its headquarters from nearby Greensboro to Charlotte in 2023. On July 12, 2023, railcar company TTX announced it will move its corporate headquarters to Charlotte. As of 2019, Charlotte has seven Fortune 500 companies in its metropolitan area. Listed in order of their rank, they are: Bank of America, Honeywell, Nucor, Lowe's, Duke Energy, Sonic Automotive and Brighthouse Financial. The Charlotte area includes a diverse range of businesses, including foodstuffs such as Harris Teeter, Snyder's-Lance, Dentsply Sirona, Carolina Foods Inc., Bojangles, Food Lion, Salsarita's Fresh Mexican Grill, Compass Group USA, Krispy Kreme, Inc., and Coca-Cola Consolidated Inc. (Charlotte being the nation's second largest Coca-Cola bottler); packaging company Sealed Air, financial services company Dixon Hughes Goodman, online leading marketplace LendingTree, chemical company Albemarle Corporation, Lawn and garden equipment maker WORX, door and window maker JELD-WEN, motor and transportation companies such as RSC Brands, Continental Tire the Americas, LLC., Meineke Car Care Centers, retail companies Belk, Cato Corporation and Rack Room Shoes, along with a wide array of other businesses. Charlotte is the major center of the U.S. motorsports industry, housing the US's only Formula One team, Haas F1, multiple teams and offices of NASCAR, the NASCAR Hall of Fame, and Charlotte Motor Speedway in Concord. Approximately 75% of the NASCAR industry's race teams, employees and drivers are based nearby. The large presence of the racing technology industry and the newly built NHRA dragstrip, zMAX Dragway at Concord, are influencing other top professional drag racers to move their shops to Charlotte as well. Located in the western part of Mecklenburg County is the U.S. National Whitewater Center, which consists of human-made rapids of varying degrees, and is open to the public year-round. The Charlotte Region has a major base of energy-oriented organizations and has become known as "Charlotte USA – The New Energy Capital". In the region there are more than 240 companies directly tied to the energy sector, collectively employing more than 26,400. Since 2007 more than 4,000 energy sector jobs have been announced. Major energy players in Charlotte include AREVA, Duke Energy, Electric Power Research Institute, Fluor, Metso Power, Piedmont Natural Gas, Albemarle Corp, Siemens Energy, Shaw Group, Toshiba, URS Corp., and Westinghouse. The University of North Carolina at Charlotte has a reputation in energy education and research, and its Energy Production and Infrastructure Center (EPIC) trains energy engineers and conducts research. Over the last couple of years, Charlotte has become a hub in the Information technology industry. The area is an increasingly growing trucking and freight transportation hub for the East Coast. There are a couple of reasons for this growth. First, Charlotte's close proximity to major Interstates 40, 85, 77 or 95. Second, geographically it is also positioned within a 650-mile drive to 53% of the US population. A number of Charlotte-based logistics companies have experienced a lot of recent growth. There are few notable expansions in the last ten years that have helped to create Charlotte as a logistics hub. In December 2015 FedEx announced plans to build a number of warehouse buildings in a Concord, North Carolina business park to locate 800 jobs there. In August 2016 Red Classic, Coke Consolidated transportation subsidiary, announced they would be hiring for an additional 300 jobs between August 2016 and the end of 2017. The company as of August 2022 has 357 local employees. In October 2022 XPO Logistics has spun off RXO into a separate company that is a truckload brokerage. The new company has 750 local employees and $4.7 billion in annual revenue Also in October 2022 Armstrong Transport Group formerly located in the University area after relocating to South End would be adding 100 jobs to its current local headcount of 125. Others logistics companies that have are large Charlotte presence are Maersk North America with 800 employees, Zenith Global Logisitics with 720 employees, Cargo Transporters with 650 employees, Southeastern Freight Lines Inc. with 517 employees, Distribution Technology with 400 employees, and Transportation Insight LLC with 375 local employees. Charlotte has seen a major construction boom in recent years. Zillow identified the city as the "hottest housing market" in 2023. Numerous residential units continue to be built uptown, including over 20 skyscrapers under construction, recently completed, or in the planning stage. Many new restaurants, bars and clubs now operate in the Uptown area. Several projects are transforming the Midtown Charlotte/Elizabeth area. Population increases has also brought about gentrification in the city, particularly in predominantly African-American neighborhoods such as Biddleville and Cherry. In 2013, Forbes named Charlotte among its list of Best Places for Business and Careers. Charlotte was listed as the 20th largest city in the US, and the 60th fastest growing city in the US between 2000 and 2008. Bechtler Museum of Modern Art Billy Graham Library Carolinas Aviation Museum Charlotte-Mecklenburg Fire Education Center and Museum Charlotte Nature Museum in Freedom Park Charlotte Trolley Museum in Historic South End Discovery Place Harvey B. Gantt Center for African-American Arts + Culture Historic Rosedale Plantation Levine Museum of the New South The Light Factory McColl Center for Art + Innovation Mint Museum NASCAR Hall of Fame Museum of Illusions Charlotte Second Ward Alumni House Museum Charlotte Museum of History Amos' Southend Music Hall Comedy Arts Theater of Charlotte Blumenthal Performing Arts Center Charlotte Ballet Charlotte Symphony Orchestra Carolina Theatre ConCarolinas ImaginOn AvidxChange Music Factory PNC Music Pavilion Opera Carolina The Robot Johnson Show Citizens of the Universe Children's Theatre of Charlotte Theatre Charlotte JazzArts Charlotte The Charlotte region is home to many annual festivals and special events. The Carolina Renaissance Festival operates on Saturdays and Sundays each October and November. Located near the intersection of NC 73 and Poplar Tent Road, the Carolina Renaissance Festival is one of the largest renaissance themed events in the country. It features 11 stages of outdoor variety entertainment, a 22-acre village marketplace, an interactive circus, an arts and crafts fair, a jousting tournament, and a feast, all rolled into one non-stop, day-long family adventure. The Yiasou Greek Festival is a Greek Festival. It began in 1978 and since then has become one of Charlotte's largest cultural events. The Yiasou (the Greek word for Hello, Goodbye and Cheers) Greek Festival features Hellenic cultural exhibits, authentic Greek cuisine and homemade pastries, entertainment, live music and dancing, wine tastings, art, shopping and more. Taste of Charlotte is a three-day festival offering samples from area restaurants, live entertainment and children's activities. Located on Tryon Street, Taste of Charlotte spans six city blocks from Stonewall to 5th Street. Moo and Brew Fest is an annual craft beer and burger festival that is the largest in North Carolina, held each April and includes various national musical acts. Breakaway Music Festival is a music festival which takes place at the NC Music Factory and consists of hip hop and electronic music artists and DJs. Heroes Convention is an annual comic book convention held in June at the Charlotte Convention Center. Founded in 1982, it is one of the oldest and largest independent comic book conventions in the United States. Charlotte Pride is an annual LGBT event held in August. In 2019, the event attracted 200,000 people to Uptown Charlotte. The event's parade became Charlotte's largest annual parade in 2017. Charlotte Turkey Trot is an annual 5k & 8k running marathon hosted every Thanksgiving, it is also the largest running event in the state of North Carolina. Charlotte also has the Charlotte Regional Farmers Market where local farmers sell their produce. Charlotte is "... the largest metropolitan area in the United States without a zoo". The Charlotte Zoo initiative is a proposal to allocate 250 acres (101 ha) of natural North Carolina land to be dedicated to the zoological foundation, which was incorporated in 2008. On August 18, 2012, Channel 14 News says that the initiative is "... still a few years away" and the plot of land is "... just seven miles from the center of uptown". According to the news channel, "... the zoo will cost roughly $300 million, and will be completely privately-funded." The Charlotte Observer references two other zoos, the Riverbanks Zoo and Garden and the North Carolina Zoological Park as two "great zoos" that are accessible from the Charlotte-Mecklenburg area, both roughly more than 70 miles away. Charlotte is also served by the Sea Life Charlotte-Concord Aquarium in the nearby city of Concord. The aquarium is 30,000 square feet in size, and is part of the Concord Mills mall. The aquarium opened on February 20, 2014. The Charlotte Mecklenburg Library serves the Charlotte area with a large collection (more than 1.5 million) of books, CDs and DVDs at 15 locations in the city of Charlotte, with branches in the surrounding towns of Matthews, Mint Hill, Huntersville, Cornelius and Davidson. All locations provide free access to Internet-enabled computers and WiFi, and a library card from one location is accepted at all 20 locations. Although the library's roots go back to the Charlotte Literary and Library Association, founded on January 16, 1891, the state-chartered Carnegie Library, which opened on the current North Tryon site of the Main Library, was the first non-subscription library opened to members of the public in the city of Charlotte. The philanthropist Andrew Carnegie donated $25,000 for a library building, on the condition that the city of Charlotte donate a site and $2,500 per year for books and salaries, and that the state grant a charter for the library. All conditions were met, and the Charlotte Carnegie Library opened in an imposing classical building on July 2, 1903. The 1903 state charter also required that a library be opened for the disenfranchised African-American population of Charlotte. This was completed in 1905 with the opening of the Brevard Street Library for Negroes, an independent library in Brooklyn, a historically black area of Charlotte, on the corner of Brevard and East Second Streets (now Martin Luther King Boulevard). The Brevard Street Library was the first library for African Americans in the state of North Carolina, and some sources say in the southeast. The library was closed in 1961 when the Brooklyn neighborhood in Second Ward was redeveloped, but its role as a cultural center for African-Americans in Charlotte is continued by the Beatties Ford and West Boulevard branches of the library system, as well as by Charlotte's African-American Cultural Center. Charlotte is home to three major professional sports franchises: the Carolina Panthers of the National Football League (NFL), the Charlotte Hornets of the National Basketball Association (NBA), and Charlotte FC of Major League Soccer (MLS). The Panthers have been located in Charlotte since the team's creation in 1995, and the current Hornets franchise has been located in Charlotte since its creation in 1988 (with the exception of the 2002-03 and 2003-04 seasons). The Panthers and Charlotte FC play their home games in Bank of America Stadium, while the Hornets play in the Spectrum Center. The Panthers have won six division titles from (1996, 2003, 2008, 2013, 2014, 2015) and two NFC championships in 2003 and 2015. Carolina has reached the Super Bowl twice but has been unsuccessful in both losing to the New England Patriots in Super Bowl XXXVIII in 2004 and against the Denver Broncos in Super Bowl 50 in 2016. The original Hornets NBA franchise was established in 1988 as an expansion team, but it relocated to New Orleans, Louisiana in 2002 after animosity grew between the team's fans and principal owner George Shinn. The NBA quickly granted Charlotte an expansion franchise following the departure of the Hornets and the new franchise, the Charlotte Bobcats, began to play in 2004. The team retook the Hornets name when the New Orleans-based team renamed itself the New Orleans Pelicans in 2013. The name change became official on May 20, 2014. On the same day, the franchise reclaimed the history and records of the original 1988–2002 Hornets. MLS awarded its expansion team to Charlotte in 2019, which began play as Charlotte FC in 2022. Charlotte is represented in professional ice hockey by the Charlotte Checkers and in professional baseball at the Triple-A level by the Charlotte Knights. Since 1999, the Knights has been the Triple-A Affiliate of the Chicago White Sox. The Charlotte Independence are a minor professional soccer club who play in USL League One the third tier of US professional soccer. The Independence play their home matches at American Legion Memorial Stadium The city is also the home of the National Junior College Athletic Association (NJCAA) headquarters. The NJCAA is the second-largest national intercollegiate athletic organization in the United States with over 500 member schools in 43 states. The Big South Conference is also headquartered in Charlotte. Founded in 1983, the Big South Conference has 11 member institutions with over 19 different sports and completes in the NCAA's Division I. The Atlantic Coast Conference (ACC) also has its headquarters in Charlotte. Founded in 1954, the ACC has 15 member institutions 4 of whom are located in the state of North Carolina with over 28 different sports and competes in NCAA's Division I. Over the years, Charlotte has hosted many international, collegiate, and professional sporting events. In professional basketball, the city hosted the NBA All-Star Game twice in 1991 at the old Charlotte Coliseum and most recently in 2019 at Spectrum Center. In collegiate sports, Charlotte hosts the ACC Championship Game and Duke's Mayo Bowl. The city has also been the host many ACC men's basketball tournaments most recently in 2019. In 2021, Charlotte hosted the ACC baseball tournament. In 2017, Charlotte hosted the PGA Championship at the Quail Hollow Club and is set to host again by 2025. Charlotte will also host the 2022 Presidents Cup. In 1994, Charlotte hosted the Final Four. Since 1931, Jim Crockett Promotions has been a full-fledged professional wrestling performer, based in the North Carolina, South Carolina, and Virginia states, and has been called Mid-Atlantic Wrestling. National Wrestling Alliance, World Championship Wrestling, WWE has big matches, and many pay-per-view event. Many professional wrestlers living. Currently, the city is home to two universities that participate in NCAA Division I Athletics: the Charlotte 49ers of the University of North Carolina at Charlotte, as well as the Queens Royals of Queens University of Charlotte, who announced their transition from NCAA Division II to Division I on May 7, 2022. Charlotte has participated in 11 NCAA men's basketball tournaments, 14 NCAA men's soccer tournaments, and the football team participated in their first bowl game in 2019 just six years after starting their program. Johnson C. Smith University participates at the NCAA Division II level. Johnson and Wales University participate in the USCAA. Charlotte has a council–manager form of government. The mayor and Charlotte City Council are elected every two years, with no term limits. The mayor is ex officio chair of the City Council, and only votes in case of a tie. Unlike other mayors in council–manager systems, Charlotte's mayor has the power to veto ordinances passed by the council; the council can override a mayoral veto by a vote of seven of its ten members. The Council appoints a city manager to serve as chief administrative officer. Unlike some other cities and towns in North Carolina, elections are held on a partisan basis. Vi Lyles, a Democrat elected in 2017, became the 59th mayor of Charlotte, North Carolina. She is in her second term. Patrick Cannon, a Democrat, was sworn in as mayor on December 2, 2013. On March 26, 2014, Cannon was arrested on public corruption charges. Later the same day, he resigned as mayor. Mayor Pro Tem Michael Barnes served as Acting Mayor until April 7, when the City Council selected State Senator Dan Clodfelter, also a Democrat, to serve the remainder of Cannon's term. Former Mecklenburg County Commission chairwoman Jennifer Roberts defeated Clodfelter in the 2015 Democratic primary and went on to win the general election, becoming the first Democratic woman to be elected to the post. She was ousted in the 2017 Democratic primary by Mayor Pro Tem Vi Lyles, who later defeated Republican City Councilman Kenny Smith in the general election to become Mayor of Charlotte. Historically, voters have been friendly to moderates of both parties. However, in recent years, Charlotte has swung heavily to the Democrats. Republican strength is concentrated in the southeastern portion of the city, while Democratic strength is concentrated in the south-central, eastern, and northern areas. The city had a Republican mayor from 1987 to 2009. The Charlotte City Council has 11 members (7 from districts and 4 at-large). Democrats control the council with a 9-to-2 advantage, winning all 4 of the at-large seats in the November 2013, 2015, and 2017 municipal elections. While the City Council is responsible for passing ordinances, the city's budget, and other policies, all decisions can be overridden by the North Carolina General Assembly, since North Carolina municipalities do not have home rule. While municipal powers have been broadly construed since the 1960s, the General Assembly still retains considerable authority over local matters. Charlotte is split between two congressional districts on the federal level. The northern half of the city is in the 12th district, represented by Democrat Alma Adams. The southern half is in the 14th district, represented by Democrat Jeff Jackson. Charlotte is represented by ten members of the North Carolina House of Representatives, Mary Gardner Belk (D-88th), Terry M. Brown Jr. (D-92nd), Nasif Majeed (D-99th), John Autry (D-100th), Carolyn Logan (D-101st), Becky Carney (D-102nd), Brandon Lofton (D-104th), Wesley Harris (D-105th), Carla Cunningham (D-106th), and Kelly Alexander (D-107th), and six members of the North Carolina Senate, Mujtaba A. Mohammed (D-38th), DeAndrea Salvador (D-39th), Joyce Waddell (D-40th), Rachel Hunt (D-42nd), Vickie Sawyer (R-37th), and Natasha Marcus (D-41st). Charlotte was selected in 2011 to host the 2012 Democratic National Convention, which was held at the Spectrum Center. It began September 4, 2012, and ended on September 6, 2012. [1] In 2018, Charlotte was chosen to host the Republican National Convention in August 2020. The city's public school system, Charlotte-Mecklenburg Schools, is the second largest in North Carolina and 17th largest in the nation. In 2009, it won the NAEP Awards, the Nation's Report Card for urban school systems with top honors among 18 city systems for fourth grade math, second place among eighth graders. An estimated 144,000 students are taught in 164 separate elementary, middle, and high schools. Charlotte is also home to many private and independent schools, including British School of Charlotte, Charlotte Catholic High School, Charlotte Christian School, Charlotte Country Day School, Charlotte Islamic Academy, Charlotte Latin School, Grace Academy, Providence Day School, Hickory Grove Christian School, Northside Christian Academy, Southlake Christian Academy, and United Faith Christian Academy. Charlotte is home to a number of universities and colleges such as Central Piedmont Community College, Johnson C. Smith University, Johnson & Wales University, Queens University of Charlotte, and the University of North Carolina at Charlotte. Several notable colleges are located in the metropolitan suburbs. Located in nearby Davidson, North Carolina is Davidson College. Additional colleges in the area include Belmont Abbey College in the suburb of Belmont, North Carolina, Gaston College with its main campus in the suburb of Dallas, North Carolina and Wingate University in the suburb of Wingate, North Carolina. Also nearby are Winthrop University, Clinton Junior College, York Technical College in Rock Hill, South Carolina, and Gardner-Webb University in Boiling Springs, North Carolina in the westernmost part of the Charlotte area. UNC Charlotte is the city's largest university. It is located in University City, the northeastern portion of Charlotte, which is also home to University Research Park, a 3,200 acres (13 km2) research and corporate park. With more than 30,000 students, UNC Charlotte is the second largest university in the state system. Central Piedmont Community College is the largest community college in the Carolinas, with more than 70,000 students each year and 6 campuses throughout the Charlotte-Mecklenburg region. CPCC is part of the statewide North Carolina Community College System. The Charlotte School of Law opened its doors in Charlotte in 2006 and was fully accredited by the American Bar Association in 2011. The law school offered the Juris Doctor degree but the Bar association rescinded the accreditation in 2017. Charlotte School of Law, once the largest law school in the Carolinas, has ceased to operate. Pfeiffer University has a satellite campus in Charlotte. Wake Forest University, with its main campus in Winston-Salem, North Carolina, also operates a satellite campus of its Babcock Graduate School of Management in the Uptown area. On March 24, 2021, it was announced Wake Forest School of Medicine would expand a 20-acre campus in Charlotte by 2024. The Connecticut School of Broadcasting, DeVry University, and ECPI University all have branches in Charlotte. The Universal Technical Institute has the NASCAR Technical Institute in nearby Mooresville, serving the Charlotte area. Montreat College (Charlotte) maintains a School of Professional and Adult Studies in the city. Additionally, Union Presbyterian Seminary has a non-residential campus offering the Master of Arts in Christian Education, and the Master of Divinity in Charlotte near the Beverley Woods area. The North Carolina Research Campus, a 350-acre biotechnology hub located northeast of Charlotte in the city of Kannapolis, is a public-private venture including eight universities, one community college, the David H. Murdock Research Institute (DHMRI), the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) and corporate entities that collaborate to advance the fields of human health, nutrition and agriculture. Partnering educational organizations include UNC Charlotte and Rowan-Cabarrus Community College, from the Charlotte region, as well as Appalachian State University, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Duke University, University of North Carolina at Greensboro, North Carolina A&T State University, Shaw University, North Carolina Central University and North Carolina State University. The research campus is part of a larger effort by leaders in the Charlotte area to attract energy, health, and other knowledge-based industries that contribute to North Carolina's strength in biotechnology. Charlotte has one major daily newspaper, The Charlotte Observer. It boasts the largest circulation in North Carolina and South Carolina. Charlotte is the 24th largest radio market in the nation, according to Nielsen Audio. While major groups like iHeartMedia and Urban One have stations serving Charlotte, several smaller groups also own and operate stations in the area. The local National Public Radio news affiliate is WFAE News, which sponsors a number of podcasts and radio shows. According to Nielsen Media Research, Charlotte is the 22nd largest television market in the nation (as of the 2016–2017 season) and the largest in the state of North Carolina. Major television stations located in Charlotte include CBS affiliate WBTV 3 (the oldest television station in the Carolinas),ABC affiliate WSOC-TV 9,NBC affiliate WCNC-TV 36, CW affiliate WCCB 18, and PBS member station WTVI 42. One cable sports network is headquartered in Charlotte: the ESPN-controlled SEC Network. Raycom Sports is also headquartered in Charlotte. Other stations serving the Charlotte market include Fox affiliate WJZY 46 in Belmont, UNC-TV/PBS member station WUNG-TV 58 in Concord, independent station WAXN-TV 64 (a sister to WSOC-TV) in Kannapolis, and two stations in Rock Hill, South Carolina: MyNetworkTV affiliate WMYT-TV 55 (a sister to WJZY) and PBS member station WNSC-TV 30. Additionally, INSP is headquartered in nearby Indian Land, South Carolina. In 2020, CNN established a Charlotte bureau spearheaded by national correspondent Dianne Gallagher. Cable television customers are served by Spectrum, which offers a localized feed of Raleigh-based Spectrum News North Carolina. Emergency medical services for the city of Charlotte are provided by Mecklenburg EMS Agency (MEDIC). MEDIC received over 160,000 calls in 2022 and transported over 107,000 patients in Mecklenburg County. The agency employs over 600 paramedics, EMTs, EMDs and admin staff. In addition to dispatching MEDIC's EMS calls, the agency also dispatches all county fire calls outside of the city of Charlotte. Hospitals in Charlotte include Atrium Health Mercy, Atrium Health Pineville, Atrium Health University City, Carolinas ContinueCare Pineville, Atrium Health Carolinas Medical Center / Levine Children's, Novant Health Charlotte Orthopedic Hospital, Novant Health Hemby Children's Hospital, and Novant Health Presbyterian Medical Center. Charlotte-Mecklenburg Hospital Authority is the public hospital authority of Mecklenburg County. The Charlotte Fire Department provides fire suppression, emergency medical services, public education, hazardous materials (HAZMAT) mitigation, technical rescues, and fire prevention and inspection with 1,164 personnel. Forty-three fire stations are strategically scattered throughout Charlotte to provide a reasonable response time to emergencies in the city limits. The Charlotte-Mecklenburg Police Department (CMPD) is a combined jurisdiction agency. The CMPD has law enforcement jurisdiction in both the city of Charlotte and the few unincorporated areas left in Mecklenburg County. The other small towns maintain their own law enforcement agencies for their own jurisdictions. The department consists of approximately 1,700 sworn law enforcement officers, 550 civilian personnel, and more than 400 volunteers. An average of 4,939 vehicles are stolen every year in Charlotte. According to the Congressional Quarterly Press; '2008 City Crime Rankings: Crime in Metropolitan America,' Charlotte, North Carolina ranks as the 62nd most dangerous city larger than 75,000 inhabitants. However, the entire Charlotte-Gastonia Metropolitan Statistical Area ranked as 27th most dangerous out of 338 metro areas. Charlotte has a municipal waste system consisting of trash pickup, water distribution, and waste treatment. There are five waste water treatment plants operated by Charlotte Water (previously Charlotte-Mecklenburg Utility Department). Charlotte has a biosolids program. Some Chester residents spoke out against the program on February 26, 2013. Charlotte's sludge is handled, transported, and spread on farm fields in Chester by a company called Synagro, a wholly owned subsidiary of the Carlyle Group Charlotte's sludge is of the "CLASS B" variety, which means it still contains detectable levels of pathogens. The city of Charlotte has a lower than average percentage of households without a car. In 2015, 7.4 percent of Charlotte households lacked a car, and decreased to 6 percent in 2016. The national average was 8.7 percent in 2016. Charlotte averaged 1.65 cars per household in 2016, compared to a national average of 1.8. The Charlotte Area Transit System (CATS) is the agency responsible for operating mass transit in the Charlotte metropolitan area, carrying over 16 million riders annually. Established in 1999 and administered as a department of the city of Charlotte, CATS operates light rail transit, streetcar, express buses, local buses, and special bus services serving Charlotte and the surrounding area in addition to other programs such as vanpool. CATS' rail arm, LYNX Rapid Transit Services, comprises two lines as of fall 2020. The Blue Line is an 18.9‑mile line north–south light rail line running through South End, Center City, NoDa, and University City. The CityLYNX Gold Line streetcar, Phase 1 of which opened in 2015, is under Phase 2 construction as of fall 2020. When completed, the Gold Line will link the Beatties Ford neighborhood through Uptown and then south and east to the Elizabeth neighborhood. The LYNX Silver Line, a light rail line in the pre-project development phase as of fall 2020, will link the southeastern suburbs of Matthews, Stallings, and Indian Trail with Uptown Charlotte and the future Charlotte Gateway Station before extending west to Charlotte Douglas International Airport and across the Catawba River to Belmont in Gaston County. The bulk of CATS ridership is derived from its extensive bus network, which has its main hub at the Charlotte Transportation Center in Uptown, which also connects to the Blue and Gold lines. Other bus hubs are located at community transit centers in SouthPark, Eastland, and at Rosa Parks Place. CATS operates express buses to outlying parts of the city and some commuter bus to the northern suburbs in the Lake Norman area under the MetroRAPID umbrella. A 2011 study by Walk Score ranked Charlotte the 49th most walkable of the 50 largest cities in the United States. Charlotte's central location between the population centers of the northeast and southeast has made it a transportation focal point and primary distribution center, with two major interstate highways, I-85 and I-77, intersecting near the city's center. The latter highway also connects to the population centers of the Rust Belt. Charlotte's beltway, designated I-485 and simply called "485" by local residents, was under construction for over 20 years, but funding problems slowed its progress. The final segment was finished in mid-2015. I-485 has a total circumference of approximately 67 mi (108 km). Within the city, the I-277 loop freeway encircles Charlotte's uptown (usually referred to by its two separate sections, the John Belk Freeway and the Brookshire Freeway) while Charlotte Route 4 links major roads in a loop between I-277 and I-485. Independence Freeway, which carries U.S. 74 and links downtown with the Matthews area, is undergoing an expansion and widening in the eastern part of the city. In 2011, Charlotte Douglas International Airport was the sixth-busiest airport in both the U.S. and the world overall as measured by traffic (aircraft movements). The airport handled just over 50 million travellers in 2019, as well as many domestic and international carriers including Air Canada, Lufthansa, and Volaris. It is a major hub for American Airlines, having historically been a hub for its predecessors US Airways and Piedmont Airlines. Nonstop flights are available to many destinations across the United States, Canada, Central America, the Caribbean, Europe, Mexico, and South America. The 145th Airlift Wing of North Carolina Air National Guard is also located east of the airport. Charlotte is served daily by three Amtrak routes with ten daily trips from a station on North Tryon Street, just outside downtown. The Crescent connects Charlotte with New York, Philadelphia, Baltimore, Washington, D.C.; Charlottesville, and Greensboro to the north, and Greenville, Atlanta, Birmingham, Meridian and New Orleans to the south. It arrives overnight once in each direction. The Carolinian connects Charlotte with New York; Philadelphia; Baltimore; Washington, D.C.; Richmond; Raleigh; Durham; and Greensboro. Charlotte is the southern terminus, with the northbound train leaving just before the morning rush and the southbound train arriving in the evening. The Piedmont, a regional companion of the Carolinian, connects Charlotte with Greensboro, Durham and Raleigh with three daily round trips. Charlotte is the southern terminus. Charlotte is also served by both Greyhound and low-cost curbside carrier Megabus. Charlotte is a service stop for Greyhound routes running to Atlanta, Detroit, Jacksonville, New York and Philadelphia. It is also a stop for buses running out of Megabus' hub in Atlanta, with connections to Megabus' northeastern routes out of New York. The city is planning a new centralized downtown multimodal station called Gateway Station. It is expected to house Amtrak, Greyhound and the future LYNX Red Line. It is under construction at the former site of the Greyhound station; Greyhound is currently operating from a temporary station nearby. Charlotte's sister cities are: Arequipa, Peru (1962) Krefeld, Germany (1985) Baoding, China (1987) Limoges, France (1992) Wrocław, Poland (1993) Kumasi, Ghana (1995) Voronezh, Russia (1991–2022) United States portal North Carolina portal Cities portal List of municipalities in North Carolina List of Charlotte neighborhoods List of tourist attractions in Charlotte, North Carolina Urban League of Central Carolinas USS Charlotte, 4 ships The corresponding record since the observation site was moved to Charlotte/Douglas International Airport in 1948 is 79 °F (26 °C), last recorded on July 25, 2010. Mean monthly maxima and minima (i.e. the expected highest and lowest temperature readings at any point during the year or given month) calculated based on data at said location from 1991 to 2020. Official records for Charlotte kept October 1878 to August 1948 at downtown and at Charlotte Douglas Int'l since September 1948. For more information, see Threadex Wilson, Jen (October 13, 2014). "So is Charlotte the real Queen City?". Bizjournals.com. Charlotte Business Journal. Retrieved June 6, 2022. "The Mecklenburg Historical Association, Charlotte, NC". meckdec.org. Archived from the original on June 10, 2020. Retrieved June 22, 2020. Washburn, Mark (March 30, 2018). "Charlotte's got a lot, but it needs a new slogan". The Charlotte Observer. Retrieved June 7, 2023. U.S. Geological Survey Geographic Names Information System: Charlotte, North Carolina Dixon, Chris (August 27, 2014). "36 Hours in Charlotte, N.C." The New York Times. Retrieved November 11, 2022. Toussaint, Katie (October 13, 2019). "How to join Charlotte's year-long birthday celebration". The Charlotte Observer. Retrieved October 1, 2022. "ArcGIS REST Services Directory". United States Census Bureau. Retrieved September 20, 2022. "Metropolitan and Micropolitan Statistical Areas Population Totals: 2020-2023". United States Census Bureau, Population Division. March 14, 2024. Retrieved March 15, 2024. "Total Gross Domestic Product for Charlotte-Concord-Gastonia, NC-SC (MSA)". fred.stlouisfed.org. "QuickFacts: Charlotte city, North Carolina". United States Census Bureau. Retrieved August 20, 2021. "OMB Bulletin No. 23-01: Revised Delineations of Metropolitan Statistical Areas, Micropolitan Statistical Areas, and Combined Statistical Areas, and Guidance on Uses of the Delineations of These Areas" (PDF). United States Office of Management and Budget. July 21, 2023. Retrieved August 10, 2023. "Here's Why Charlotte Became The Fastest Growing City in The Country Over The Past Decade". Charlotte Stories. May 2017. "Carolinas well represented on list of fastest growing U.S. Cities". WCNC.com. July 14, 2021. Retrieved July 14, 2021. Ramsey, Mary (December 15, 2022). "Charlotte metro area's population among the fastest growing in the U.S., new study finds". The Charlotte Observer. Retrieved August 9, 2023. Martin, Jenna (May 18, 2023). "Charlotte post nation's fifth-largest population increase in 2022, Census Bureau estimates show". BizJournals.com. Retrieved August 9, 2023. "Number of people moving to Charlotte region climbs to highest level in more than a decade". Charlotte Regional Business Alliance. July 11, 2023. Retrieved August 9, 2023. "Millennial mecca: Which Charlotte neighborhoods, suburbs rank tops for young professionals". Bizjournals.com. Charlotte Business Journal. Retrieved October 31, 2021. "Where are millennials moving? This North Carolina city ranks top 10 study finds". The Charlotte Observer. Retrieved June 15, 2020. Blackmon, Chyna (April 14, 2023). "Home purchases among millennials have surged in Charlotte, This chart tracks growth". The Charlotte Observer. Retrieved August 26, 2023. Marshall, Kendrick (August 22, 2023). "Charlotte is a vibe for young transplants, Why is it so popular among millennials". The Charlotte Observer. Retrieved August 26, 2023. "Study: Charlotte among fastest-growing cities, New Yorkers top list of new residents coming in". Fox46.com. Retrieved October 20, 2021. Lee, Hank (October 18, 2022). "Report: Charlotte is the 8th fastest-growing city in U.S." WCNC.com. Retrieved November 24, 2022. Hill, Jalon (May 19, 2023). "Charlotte is one of the fastest growing cities in the U.S. What's leading the growth?". QCityMetro.com. Retrieved August 9, 2023. "Large Southern Cities Lead Nation in Population Growth". census.gov. May 18, 2023. Retrieved August 26, 2023. "31 signs you're a native Charlottean". The Charlotte Observer. March 21, 2018. Archived from the original on June 25, 2020. Retrieved June 22, 2020. Mulvihill, Carolyn (November 14, 2017). "15 Phrases That Will Make You Swear Charlotteans Have Their Own Language". Only In Your State. Retrieved December 7, 2022. Solt, Katy (April 5, 2021). "Changing Face of NC: The Wall Street of the South". spectrumlocalnews.com. Spectrum News. Retrieved April 5, 2021. "Charlotte, NC – Forbes". Forbes. Retrieved June 17, 2022. Cheung, Brian (June 12, 2019). "The battle of U.S. banking giants could be won in Charlotte". Yahoo! Finance. Retrieved August 11, 2023. "Charlotte is a hot spot in the financial services industry". Charlotte Regional Business Alliance. July 11, 2022. Retrieved August 26, 2023. "Welcome to Carowinds, The Carolinas Premier Entertainment Destination". Carowinds.com. Retrieved June 4, 2022. "Welcome to the Billy Graham Library". billygrahamlibrary.org. Retrieved June 7, 2022. "NASCAR Hall of Fame Official website". nascarhall.com. Retrieved June 7, 2022. "The Mint Museum: North Carolina's First Art Museum". Mintmuseum.org. Retrieved June 7, 2022. "Harvey B. Gantt Center for African American Arts + Culture at Levine Center for the Arts homepage". ganttcenter.org. Retrieved June 7, 2022. "The Charlotte Museum of History: Saving and Sharing Charlotte's History". charlottemuseum.org. Retrieved June 7, 2022. Levans, Katie (May 29, 2019). "The ultimate guide to beaches, water activities and lakeside restaurants on Lake Norman and Lake Wylie". charlotte.axios.com. Retrieved June 4, 2022. "Developer plans big residential project on Lake Norman". WSOCTV.com. May 14, 2022. Retrieved December 6, 2022. Formato, Brian (August 17, 2021). "Mountain Island Lake: The Hidden Gem in Charlotte's Crown". Charlottestories.com. Retrieved June 5, 2022. "Measuring the impacts of major development on Lake Wylie". Spectrum News 1. April 5, 2023. Retrieved August 26, 2023. "Question the Queen City: Who were the Native Americans that lived here before Charlotte was colonized?". Creative Loafing Charlotte. Retrieved April 11, 2016. "Mecklenburg County (1762)". North Carolina History Project. Archived from the original on June 26, 2020. Retrieved June 23, 2020. "The American Revolution in North Carolina". Archived from the original on July 13, 2007. Retrieved June 25, 2011. "The Charlotte-Mecklenburg Story: History Timeline: Founding a New City". cmstory.org Web Site. Public Library of Charlotte and Mecklenburg County. Archived from the original on May 18, 2015. Retrieved September 25, 2015. Bernstein, Viv (September 3, 2012). "Welcome to Charlotte, a City of Quirks". The New York Times Caucus Blog. Retrieved July 29, 2014. "Queen Charlotte (19 May 1744 - 17 November 1818)". royal.uk. Retrieved May 17, 2016. Charlotte Mecklenburg Library: A Welcome for Cornwallis (Retrieved on 07–25–19) "1768- Charlotte Chartered". cmstory.org. Archived from the original on June 22, 2020. Retrieved May 31, 2020. "A Compleat map of North-Carolina from an actual survey". library.unc.edu. 1770. Retrieved May 31, 2020. "The marches of Lord Cornwallis in the Southern Provinces, now States of North America; comprehending the two Carolinas, with Virginia and Maryland, and the Delaware counties". loc.gov. 1787. Retrieved August 18, 2020. "The Charlotte-Mecklenburg Story: History Timeline: Designing a New City". cmstory.org Web Site. Public Library of Charlotte and Mecklenburg County. Archived from the original on May 18, 2015. Retrieved September 25, 2015. "101 Independence Center". Archived from the original on June 5, 2008. Retrieved September 25, 2015. Beam, Adam (February 12, 2012). "N.C.-S.C. border may move". The State. Archived from the original on February 12, 2012. Retrieved February 29, 2012. "The Charlotte-Mecklenburg Story: History Timeline: The City of Churches". cmstory.org Web Site. Public Library of Charlotte and Mecklenburg County. Archived from the original on May 18, 2015. Retrieved September 25, 2015. Blanchard Online: American Rarities (Retrieved on 05–22–07) "History of the Charlotte Mint". Charlottegold.net. Retrieved December 12, 2021. "The Charlotte Branch Mint". Blanchardonline.com. Archived from the original on April 19, 2004. Retrieved July 2, 2010. "Reed Gold Mine – NC Historic Sites". Retrieved December 12, 2021. The History of Charlotte, NC. Retrieved May 2, 2022. "The Charlotte-Mecklenburg Story". cmstory.org Web Site. Public Library of Charlotte and Mecklenburg County. Archived from the original on September 25, 2015. Retrieved September 25, 2015. "Survey and Research Report on the Mecklenburg County Courthouse". Charlotte-Mecklenburg Historic Landmarks Commission. Retrieved February 1, 2018. "Northwest Almanac: When Winston-Salem was the state's largest city". Winston-Salem Journal. January 8, 2018. Retrieved February 1, 2018. Gubbins, Pat Borden (August 7, 1988). "ALL ABOARD! TENANT SOUGHT TO RENOVATE SEABOARD DEPOT". Charlotte Observer. "Seaboard Air Line, Table 38". Official Guide of the Railways. 91 (3). National Railway Publication Company. August 1958. "The Charlotte-Mecklenburg Story: History Timeline: NationsBank Soars". cmstory.org Web Site. Public Library of Charlotte and Mecklenburg County. Archived from the original on May 18, 2015. Retrieved September 25, 2015. Hurricanedisasterslive.com Archived August 24, 2009, at the Wayback Machine, Retrieved on July 30, 2009 Henderson, Bruce (September 20, 2019). "Hurricane Hugo left Charlotte in the dark; the electric grid is smarter now". Charlotte Observer. Retrieved September 20, 2019. "Ice Storm Knocks Out Power Across North Carolina". Raleigh, NC: WRAL-TV. December 5, 2002. Retrieved May 18, 2015. "Two arrested during Kerrick trial protests in Charlotte". Durham, NC: WTVD. August 22, 2015. Retrieved September 25, 2016. Rothacker, Rick; Washburn, Mark; Bell, Adam (September 23, 2016). "Staggered by protests, city regains its footing". The Charlotte Observer. Retrieved September 25, 2016. Williams, James. "The Formation of Mecklenburg County – The Charlotte Museum of History". charlottemuseum.org. Archived from the original on August 24, 2017. Retrieved June 7, 2018. "Why it's called Uptown & Why Charlotte's Uptown streets go Northeast". October 2, 2013. Retrieved October 2, 2013. "Distance between Concord, NC and Charlotte, NC". distance-cities.com. Distance Cities. Retrieved July 31, 2021. "Distance between Rock Hill, SC and Charlotte, NC". distance-cities.com. Distance Cities. Retrieved July 31, 2021. "Distance between Greensboro, NC and Charlotte, NC". distance-cities.com. Distance Cities. Retrieved July 31, 2021. "Distance between Fayetteville, NC and Charlotte, NC". distance-cities.com. Distance Cities. Retrieved July 31, 2021. "Distance between Raleigh, NC and Charlotte, NC". distance-cities.com. Distance Cities. Retrieved July 31, 2021. "About the River". Catawbariverkeeper.org. Catawba River Keeper. Archived from the original on May 21, 2021. Retrieved May 21, 2021. Portillo, Ely (July 29, 2019). "Why Isn't Charlotte built on the Water". plancharlotte.org. Plan Charlotte. Archived from the original on May 21, 2021. Retrieved May 21, 2021. "Archive version of neighborhood listing – waybackmachine October 2007". October 29, 2007. Archived from the original on October 29, 2007. Retrieved October 2, 2013. "Uptown History". uptowncharlotte.com. Retrieved September 3, 2022. "Biddleville Five Points Neighborhood". Charlotte-Mecklenburg Historic Landmarks Commission. Archived from the original on September 13, 2012. Retrieved September 12, 2012. "A walk through Black History in Biddleville – Spectrum News". spectrumlocalnews.com. Spectrum News. Retrieved June 4, 2022. Kelley, Pam (March 22, 2016). "White people in Biddleville: The story of a changing neighborhood". The Charlotte Observer. Retrieved June 8, 2022. "History – Plaza Midwood Neighborhood Association". Plaza Midwood Neighborhood Association. Archived from the original on November 4, 2012. Retrieved September 12, 2012. Ciuntu, Alexandra (November 24, 2020). "Keep it Cool and Quirky in Charlotte's Plaza Midwood". rentcafe.com. Retrieved June 4, 2022. Mormon, Ebony (October 5, 2021). "The changing look of Charlotte's Plaza Midwood neighborhood". Business North Carolina. Retrieved March 13, 2023. Bruno, Joe (November 14, 2020). "City of Charlotte to focus on Sugar Creek neighborhood improvements". wsoctv.com. Retrieved November 14, 2020. Price, Mark (February 26, 2018). "Charlotte's Southeast Asian immigrants open a community center". The Charlotte Observer. Retrieved November 27, 2022. "NoDa – Urban Explorers Handbook". Creative Loafing Charlotte. Retrieved September 12, 2012. "Welcome to NoDa – Charlotte's Historic Arts and Entertainment District". NoDa.org. Retrieved April 4, 2018. Markovich, Jeremy (February 17, 2015). "NoDa Is Charlotte's Island of Interesting". ourstate.com. Retrieved June 5, 2022. Cutchin, A.M. (October 13, 2018). "Myers Park: Tradition and Beauty, Minutes from Downtown Charlotte". mansionglobal.com. Archived from the original on October 13, 2018. Retrieved October 13, 2018. Primis, Avery (July 6, 2020). "21 things to do, see, and eat in Dilworth". Charlotte.axios.com. Retrieved July 6, 2020. Martin, Jenna (July 7, 2016). "Charlotte neighborhood among 'most beautiful' in the South, says Thrillist". Bizjournals.com. Retrieved June 5, 2022. "Zip codes with the most expensive homes in Charlotte metro area". WBTV.com. March 7, 2022. Retrieved November 24, 2022. Shapiro, Amy (October 14, 2022). "Charlotte area's wealthiest zip codes, led by 28207, mapped out". BizJournals.com. Charlotte Business Journals. Retrieved July 22, 2023. Soloff Peralta, Katie (January 22, 2022). "Major SouthPark development moves ahead despite COVID setbacks". Charlotte Axios. Retrieved November 27, 2022. Rago, Gordon (August 1, 2022). "Apartments and retail could come to SouthPark Towers office site after $129M sale". The Charlotte Observer. Retrieved November 27, 2022. Chemtob, Danielle (August 23, 2021). "The Charlotte area is becoming more diverse". Charlotte Axios. Retrieved November 27, 2022. MacLaughlin, Courtney (April 25, 2018). "Not a one-trick pony: the 5 best things about living in SouthPark". charlottefive.com. Archived from the original on June 25, 2020. Retrieved April 25, 2018. "How UNC Charlotte is powering University City's dramatic growth". features.charlotte.edu. University of North Carolina at Charlotte. March 9, 2021. Retrieved November 24, 2022. Braden, Allison (December 13, 2021). "Inside University City's Reboot". Charlotte Magazine. Retrieved November 24, 2022. "Forecasting Urbanization in the Carolina Piedmont Region". UNC Charlotte Urban Institute. Archived from the original on June 30, 2010. Retrieved September 12, 2012. "Fun Things to do in Ballantyne". charlottesgotalot.com. Retrieved April 9, 2012. Ciuntu, Aleksandra (December 9, 2020). "Ballentyne Neighborhood: Upscale Style on Charlotte's South Side". rentcafe.com. Retrieved December 9, 2020. "Ballentyne may be more racially diverse than you think". The Charlotte Ledger. August 16, 2021. Retrieved August 16, 2021. Ciuntu, Alexandra (December 23, 2020). "Charlotte's Steele Creek: From Sleepy Corner to Bustling Neighborhood". rentcafe.com. Retrieved October 8, 2021. Dunn, Andrew (May 19, 2019). "Steele Creek is the next hot neighborhood in Charlotte". Charlotte.axios.com. Retrieved May 19, 2019. Forum, New (August 24, 2018). "Steele Creek's growth and location attracts businesses and residents". BizJournals.com. Charlotte Business Journal. Retrieved November 23, 2022. Allen, Tess (December 14, 2022). "From Countryside to Bustling Suburb: Steele Creek's Rapid Evolution". Charlotte Magazine. Retrieved February 25, 2023. Burkins, Glenn (February 25, 2022). "New report says Uptown Charlotte is poised for more growth". Q City Metro. Retrieved November 23, 2022. Rago, Gordon (July 12, 2022). "First look at latest addition to Charlotte skyline, a 24-story uptown office tower". The Charlotte Observer. Retrieved November 23, 2022. Tompkins, Meilin (October 11, 2022). "Popular part of Uptown Charlotte set to receive major makeover". WCNC.com. Retrieved November 23, 2022. Soloff, Katie (February 24, 2022). "New report on Charlotte's growth: We're really fortunate we're not Atlanta". Charlotte Axios. Retrieved November 23, 2022. Rago, Gordon (October 27, 2022). "Here are 6 facts about uptown's newest tower, $170 million apartment project". The Charlotte Observer. Retrieved November 23, 2022. "Latta Park | Charlotte Mecklenburg Story". www.cmstory.org. Retrieved March 11, 2024. "Bryant Park | Charlotte-Mecklenburg Historic Landmarks Commission". October 14, 2016. Retrieved March 11, 2024. Rising, Addie (September 12, 2012). "Getting to Know Charlotte's SouthPark Neighborhood". Archived from the original on May 23, 2012. Retrieved September 12, 2012. "Park Road Park". Charmeck.org. Archived from the original on December 13, 2011. Retrieved July 12, 2018. "That page does not exist - LatinoYP". Hellocharlotte.com. Archived from the original on October 16, 2017. Retrieved February 22, 2017. "Romare Bearden Park is now Open!". Romare Bearden Foundation. September 30, 2013. Retrieved February 5, 2023. September 28, 2013 (August 30, 2013). "Romare Bearden Park opens to public on Friday". WBTV.com. Retrieved February 5, 2023.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) "Little Sugar Creek Greenway section is done". CharlotteObserver.com. July 22, 2012. Archived from the original on July 22, 2012. Retrieved May 15, 2012. "Little Sugar Greenway – Mecklenburg County Government". mecknc.gov. Archived from the original on September 24, 2020. Retrieved October 8, 2018. Sellers, Frances Stead (November 26, 2019). "One city's plan to combat climate change: Bulldoze homes, rebuild paradise". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on November 27, 2019. Retrieved December 20, 2019. "Upper McAlpine Creek Greenway". MeckNC.gov. Mecklenburg County Government. Archived from the original on June 12, 2021. Retrieved June 12, 2021. "The complete guide to Charlotte's greenways". Axios Charlotte. June 6, 2017. Retrieved December 8, 2022. "USDA Plant Hardiness Zone Map". United States Department of Agriculture. Archived from the original on February 27, 2014. Retrieved June 1, 2014. "NowData – NOAA Online Weather Data". National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Retrieved May 4, 2021. "Summary of Monthly Normals 1991–2020". National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Archived from the original on May 5, 2021. Retrieved May 4, 2021. Tompkins, Meilins (April 2, 2019). "Charlotte sees first measurable April snow in 37 years". WCNC.com. Retrieved July 18, 2021. Lyttle, Steve (January 6, 2017). "What is Charlotte's record snowfall? Here's the answer". The Charlotte Observer. Retrieved February 25, 2023. Cappucci, Matthew; Freedman, Andrew (April 27, 2020). "Meteorologists have warned about North Carolina's 'radar gap' for years. It's taking a toll on forecasts". The Washington Post. Retrieved August 26, 2020. "WMO Climate Normals for CHARLOTTE/DOUGLAS INT'L ARPT NC 1961–1990". National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Retrieved July 18, 2020. "Charlotte, North Carolina, USA - Monthly weather forecast and Climate data". Weather Atlas. Retrieved June 14, 2019. "Census of Population and Housing". Census.gov. Retrieved June 4, 2016. "North Carolina Cities Population Changes in the 1800s". www.historync.org. Retrieved June 3, 2023. "P004 HISPANIC OR LATINO, AND NOT HISPANIC OR LATINO BY RACE – 2000: DEC Summary File 1 – Charlotte city, North Carolina". United States Census Bureau. "P2 HISPANIC OR LATINO, AND NOT HISPANIC OR LATINO BY RACE - 2010: DEC Redistricting Data (PL 94-171) - Charlotte city, North Carolina". United States Census Bureau. "P2 HISPANIC OR LATINO, AND NOT HISPANIC OR LATINO BY RACE - 2020: DEC Redistricting Data (PL 94-171) - Charlotte city, North Carolina". United States Census Bureau. "Annual Estimates of the Resident Population for Incorporated Places of 50,000 or More, Ranked by July 1, 2019 Population: April 1, 2010 to July 1, 2019". United States Census Bureau, Population Division. Retrieved May 21, 2020. Bureau, U. S. Census. "U.S. Census website". United States Census Bureau. Retrieved June 30, 2019. "US Census Bureau Quick Facts". US Census Bureau. Retrieved July 2, 2015. "North Carolina – Race and Hispanic Origin for Selected Cities and Other Places: Earliest Census to 1990". U.S. Census Bureau. Archived from the original on August 12, 2012. Retrieved April 16, 2012. "US census: Hispanic and Asian-American driving US population growth". BBC News. August 12, 2021. Retrieved February 6, 2022. Frey, William H. (August 13, 2021). "New 2020 census results show increased diversity countering decade-long declines in America's white and youth populations". Brookings. Retrieved February 6, 2022. Price, Mark (February 26, 2018). "Charlotte's growing Asian population opens community center". The Charlotte Observer. Retrieved November 25, 2022. Hundall, David (March 11, 2016). "Asian-Americans Now the Fastest-Growing Demographic in North Carolina: Report". Indy Week. Retrieved November 25, 2022. Drew, Jonathan (February 23, 2018). "Billy Graham and North Carolina: The Affection was mutual". Associated Press. Retrieved August 2, 2021. McCausland, Phil (March 1, 2018). "A diverse community of believers thrives in Billy Graham's Charlotte". NBC News. Retrieved January 14, 2023. Spanberg, Erik (February 21, 2018). "Hometown preacher Billy Graham influenced leaders across the world and the Carolinas". BizJournals.com. Retrieved January 14, 2023. "Connect with the Christian Research Institute". equip.org. Retrieved February 28, 2023. "Become a Missionary – Christian Missions – Sims USA". simusa.org. Retrieved February 28, 2023. "Experience JAARS". jaars.org. Retrieved February 28, 2023. "10 things you need to know to navigate Charlotte's faith scene". Charlotte Observer. July 30, 2018. Retrieved August 2, 2021. "The Association of Religion Data Archives – Maps & Reports". Thearda.com. Archived from the original on June 2, 2016. Retrieved June 13, 2016. "Baptist Peace Fellowship of North America website". bpfna.org. Retrieved August 19, 2021. "Conference History". wnccumc.org. Retrieved August 2, 2021. Marusak, Joe (2013). "Elevation Church eyes old Palace Theater in Cornelius for another location". Retrieved May 16, 2013.[dead link] "Welcome to the Cathedral of Saint patrick". Retrieved September 24, 2021. Gordon, Michael (2012). "Two Charlotte churches are expanding, defying decline of religion". Archived from the original on November 9, 2013. Retrieved July 15, 2013. Diocese of Charlotte (2010). "Pastoral Report - The Diocese of Charlotte" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on March 31, 2022. Retrieved March 31, 2022. "About us – Holy Trinity Cathedral". htgo.org. Archived from the original on June 27, 2020. Retrieved June 23, 2020. "Jewish Life in Charlotte NC". Jewishnc.org. Retrieved March 13, 2017. "The Jewish Traveler: Charlotte". Hadassah Magazine. April 30, 2009. Retrieved July 30, 2022. "Temple Israel NC Homepage". templeisarelnc.com. Retrieved November 19, 2022. Foundation of Shalom Park – Charlotte. Shalomcharlotte.org. Retrieved on August 25, 2013. "Charlotte, North Carolina Religion". Bestplaces.net. Retrieved June 13, 2016. Roberts, Deon (November 16, 2018). "Charlotte regains its place as No. 2 U.S. banking center. Will it keep it?". The Charlotte Observer. Retrieved August 11, 2021. Carrizales, Jennifer. "Charlotte Soars to Become the Nation's Second Largest Financial Center". North Carolina History Projects. Archived from the original on August 29, 2015. Retrieved July 13, 2018. the 1998 merger and,a title it maintains today. "Industry insights: Financial Services in the Charlotte Region". Charlotte Regional Business Alliance. February 25, 2021. Retrieved November 2, 2023. {{cite web}}: Check |url= value (help) Vrana, Debora (May 28, 1998). "Charlotte: A New U.S. Bethemoth of Banking". The Los Angeles Times. Retrieved November 2, 2023. "Bank of America Financial Centers and ATMs in Charlotte, NC". Bank of America. Archived from the original on June 26, 2020. Retrieved June 23, 2020. Craver, Richard (April 1, 2020). "Truist completes $455.5M purchase of Charlotte HQ; bank delays new branding unveilings". Winston-Salem Journal. Retrieved June 23, 2020. Fahey, Ashley (December 11, 2019). "Truist to purchase Hearst Tower for $455.5M, rename uptown building". BizJournals.com. Retrieved December 11, 2019. Weinstein, Austin (December 29, 2019). "Will Wells Fargo ever move its headquarters to Charlotte? Its CEO has options". Charlotte Observer. Retrieved December 29, 2019. "Historical Overview Part 3: The Rise Of Banking Builds A Globally Connected Region". ui.charlotte.edu. University of North Carolina at Charlotte. August 28, 2019. Retrieved December 7, 2022. Duren, Carolyn (May 16, 2019). "Charlotte, NC, outpacing nationwide growth in banking, set for further expansion". S&P Global. "Charlotte is a hot spot in the financial services industry". Charlotte Regional Business Alliance. August 11, 2022. Chemtob, Danielle (May 3, 2021). "Construction on the latest bank tower in the Charlotte skyline is now complete". Charlotte Observer. Retrieved May 5, 2021. Hudson, Caroline (April 22, 2021). "ALLY'S BIG MOVE Fast-growing online bank joins major rivals on Tryon Street with opening of new hub". Charlotte Business Journal. Hudson, Caroline (June 29, 2020). "Charlotte-based executive Jim Kelligrew leading changes in US Bancorp's corporate, commercial banking division". Charlotte Business Journal. Retrieved May 21, 2021. Boye, Will (November 21, 2014). "U.S. Bank expands at Hearst Tower, leasing 35th floor". Charlotte Business Journal. Retrieved May 21, 2021. Fahey, Ashley (May 27, 2021). "USAA confirms Charlotte office, will lease six floors at South End building". Charlotte Business Journal. Retrieved May 28, 2021. Thomas, Jennifer (June 3, 2022). "USAA buys The Square at South End from Charlotte developer Beacon Partners for nearly $97M". Charlotte Business Journal. Retrieved October 19, 2022. "TD Bank to Expand in Charlotte, North Carolina, With New Stores". stories.td.com. September 15, 2022. Retrieved January 14, 2023. Graham, Symone (January 19, 2023). "Cherry Hill-based TD Bank continues its retail expansion in Charlotte". BizJournals.com. Retrieved March 12, 2023. Lang, Hannah (August 8, 2022). "A new British bank is bringing 350 jobs to Charlotte. Its already actively hiring". Charlotte Observer. Retrieved September 15, 2022. France, Elise (August 8, 2022). "Bank of London to establish tech hub in uptown Charlotte, pledging 350 jobs". Charlotte Business Journal. Retrieved October 17, 2022. "Microsoft East Coast Headquarters - Safway Services". safway.com. Archived from the original on March 29, 2017. Retrieved March 28, 2017. Smoot, Hannah (October 25, 2019). "Microsoft investing $24 million in Charlotte campus, creating over 400 high-paying jobs". charlotteobserver.com. Retrieved November 23, 2019. Muccigrosso, Catherine; Chemtob, Danielle; Eanes, Zachary (July 1, 2020). "Insurance giant to bring over 3,200 jobs to Charlotte, with up to $450M in incentives". The Charlotte Observer. Retrieved August 11, 2021. Lucas, Ameila (November 30, 2018). "Honeywell moves HQ to Charlotte, North Carolina from New Jersey". CNBC.com. Retrieved September 15, 2021. "Tech Transformation: Lowe's Chooses Charlotte For Global Technology Center". corporate.lowes.com. Lowe's. June 25, 2019. Retrieved June 25, 2019. Peralta, Katherine (June 27, 2019). "Lowe's picks South End for tech hub, 2,000 high-paying jobs and a new 23-story tower". Charlotte Observer. Retrieved May 21, 2022. "Dole Food Company announced a merger with Ireland-based Total Produce Wednesday. The combined business will be the world's largest fresh produce company, and it'll have its American headquarters in Charlotte". Axios Charlotte. February 17, 2021. "Credit Karma bringing 600 new jobs to Charlotte with new east coast hub". WBTV.com. May 25, 2021. Retrieved May 27, 2021. "Credit Karma to put east coast headquarters in North Carolina". ABC11.com. Associated Press. May 25, 2021. Archived from the original on May 27, 2021. Retrieved May 27, 2021. "Corporate Fun Jobs". Jobs.cedarfair.com. Retrieved May 13, 2022. Fowler, Scott (September 20, 2022). "ACC does the right thing, relocating its headquarters from Greensboro to Charlotte". The Charlotte Observer. Retrieved September 20, 2022. Soloff Peralta, Katie (September 20, 2022). "ACC is moving its headquarters to Charlotte". Charlotte Axios. Retrieved September 20, 2022. "ACC Board of Directors Announces Relocation of League Office to Charlotte". Atlantic Coast Conference. September 20, 2022. Retrieved September 21, 2022. Rago, Gordon (July 12, 2023). "One of North Americas largest rail fleets plans to move HQ to Charlotte". The Charlotte Observer. Retrieved July 13, 2023. Huguley, Collin (July 11, 2023). "Railcar company TTX to relocate HQ to Charlotte from Chicago". BizJournals.com. Charlotte Business Journal. Retrieved July 13, 2023. "Fortune 500 (2019)". Retrieved August 25, 2019. "About us – Harris Teeter". harristeeter.com. Harris Teeter. Retrieved December 12, 2021. "Snyders-Lance Inc". Bloomberg. Retrieved December 12, 2021. "About Us". carolinafoodsinc.com. Carolina Foods. Retrieved December 12, 2021. "About Tri-Arc Food Systems – Our History". Bojanglesrdu.com. Bojangles'. Retrieved December 12, 2021. "About us – Food lion Supermarket & Pharmacy". Food Lion. Retrieved December 12, 2021. "Our Story". Salsarita's Fresh Mexican Grill. Retrieved December 12, 2021. "Contact Compass Group". compass-usa.com. Retrieved September 7, 2022. Martin, Jenna (March 15, 2023). "Krispy Kreme closing Concord facility, scraps Winston-Salem expansion as it exits snack-aisle business". Charlotte Business Journal. Retrieved May 29, 2023. "About us – Coca-Cola Consolidated". Archived from the original on November 23, 2021. Retrieved December 12, 2021. "Contact Sealed Air's Customer Service Representatives". sealedair.com. Retrieved September 7, 2022. "Charlotte, NC - SouthPark – CPA Firm". forvis.com. Retrieved September 7, 2022. Georgacopoulos, Christina (April 27, 2022). "One of Charlotte's leading accounting firms has new post merger name". bizjournals.com. Charlotte Business Journal. Retrieved September 7, 2022. "Albemarle To Relocate Its Corporate Headquarters To Charlotte, N.C." albemarle.com. Albemarle Corporation. August 25, 2015. Retrieved September 14, 2022. "Our Company & History". jeld-wen.com. JELD-WEN. Retrieved December 12, 2021. "Fort Mill, SC – Continental Corporation USA". continental.com. Retrieved September 14, 2022. "Belk Inc – History Outline". Retrieved December 12, 2021. Charlotte Chamber of Commerce. "270 Fortune 500 Companies Represented in Charlotte-Mecklenburg" (PDF). Retrieved August 25, 2014. "Leading Tree Locations". "Haas F1 Team". HaasF1team.com. Retrieved May 20, 2021. Utter, Jim (October 8, 2014). "Gene Haas' Formula One team to be based in Kannapolis, NC". Charlotte Observer. Retrieved February 22, 2015. "Charlotte Motor Speedway – Track History". Retrieved May 21, 2022. Norwood, Allen. "Charlotte: The Hub of Racing Culture". greatamericancountry.com. Archived from the original on October 17, 2016. Retrieved September 3, 2016. "U.S. National Whitewater Center :: Whitewater Rafting, Biking, Climbing, Kayaking, Zip lines, Food, and Fun. – Come Play!". Usnwc.org. Retrieved July 2, 2010. Soloff Peralta, Katie (September 30, 2021). "The Whitewater Center is having a huge 2021". Axios Charlotte. Retrieved February 5, 2023. Markovitch, Jeremy (July 21, 2014). "Riding the Waves at U.S. National Whitewater Center". Charlotte Magazine. Retrieved November 13, 2023. James, Andrew (June 2, 2022). "U.S. National Whitewater Center eyes expansion in Western North Carolina". WLOS.com. Retrieved November 13, 2023. Lee, Hank (August 24, 2023). "Whitewater Center expected to open new 70-acre dog park this fall". WCNC.com. Retrieved November 13, 2023. Glader, Paul (September 10, 2010). "Charlotte looks beyond financial sector in effort to become 'energy capital'". The Washington Post. Retrieved December 12, 2013. "How Charlotte became a power player". BizJournals.com. August 31, 2012. Retrieved February 5, 2023. "New plaza in Uptown Charlotte to become Duke energy's corporate headquarters". Duke Energy. May 17, 2021. Retrieved May 2, 2018. "Charlotte – Siemens Energy". Siemens Energy. Archived from the original on October 23, 2020. Retrieved July 4, 2014. "Overview – Energy Production & Infrastructure Center". epic.uncc.edu. Archived from the original on June 26, 2020. Retrieved June 23, 2020. Thompson, Ben (May 26, 2021). "Why Charlotte is such a popular destination for tech companies". wcnc.com. Retrieved October 8, 2021. Soloff, Katie (April 3, 2021). "Words out, How Charlotte is becoming a hot tech town". Charlotte.axios.com. Retrieved April 3, 2021. Jensen, Scott (June 4, 2020). "Charlotte ranked as the No. 1 tech town in America". Charlottestories.com. Retrieved June 4, 2020. "Is Charlotte The Next Silicon Valley?". WCCBCharlotte.com. March 13, 2018. Retrieved January 14, 2023. "Charlotte's Tech Job Growth Puts City's Office Market Among The Hottest Of North America's 30 Leading Tech Hubs". CBRE.com. October 31, 2022. Retrieved August 26, 2023. Sweeney, Matthew (January 19, 2022). "Tech Jobs in Charlotte, the South's growing technology hub". ZDNET.com. Retrieved August 26, 2023. Cosgrove, Elly (June 28, 2018). "Where the rubber meets the road for Charlotte's trucking industry". BizJournals.com. Retrieved May 23, 2021. Elkins, Ken (December 7, 2015). "FedEx eyes Concord for 800-employee distribution hub". Charlotte Business Journal. Retrieved October 23, 2022. Roberts, Deon (August 26, 2016). "Coke Consolidated unit to add nearly 300 jobs in Charlotte". Charlotte Observer. Retrieved October 23, 2022. Sharpio, Amy (August 26, 2022). "Largest Charlotte-area logistics companies". Charlotte Business Journal. Retrieved October 22, 2022. Downey, Downey (October 14, 2022). "XPO Logistics spinoff to create new Charlotte publicly traded company". Charlotte Business Journal. Retrieved October 22, 2022. Holland, Frank (March 8, 2022). "XPO Logistics will now focus just on trucking, as it spins off and sell other businesses". CNBC. Retrieved April 2, 2023. Franco, Elise (October 20, 2022). "Charlotte logistics company Armstrong Transport Group moves into new HQ at Vantage South End". Charlotte Business Journal. Retrieved October 23, 2022. Elkins, Ken (December 2, 2013). "Cargo Transporters to open Charlotte location next month". BizJournals.com. Retrieved April 1, 2023. "Service Centers & Transit Maps". Southeastern Freight Lines. Retrieved April 1, 2023. Rapp, Jessica (February 24, 2023). "10 Hottest Housing Markets of 2023, and What to Know if You're Shopping in One". Zillow. Retrieved July 14, 2023. Blackmon, Chyna (August 25, 2023). "Charlotte is one of the best places to buy a house, why the city ranks so high". The Charlotte Observer. Retrieved August 26, 2023. Richardson, Brenda (January 12, 2023). "Charlotte, North Carolina Is 2023's Hottest Housing Market, Analyst finds". Forbes. Retrieved August 27, 2023. Fahey, Ashley (February 11, 2021). "State of the Center City 2021: $3B in development planned in uptown, midtown, South End". BizJournals.com. Charlotte Business Journal. Retrieved May 23, 2021. Fahey, Ashley (April 23, 2021). "South End's meteoric rise into a bustling submarket chronicled in CBRE report, is more growth to follow?". Bizjournals.com. Charlotte Business Journal. Retrieved November 27, 2022. Sealey, Clay (October 4, 2018). "16 projects under construction now in Uptown and South End – And 10 more on the way". Axios Charlotte. Retrieved November 27, 2022. Rago, Gordon (February 3, 2023). "Growth in uptown and South End sees 'mic drop' numbers as skyline keeps changing". The Charlotte Observer. Retrieved February 28, 2023. "Metropolitan Charlotte North Carolina | MetTerrace Townhomes | MetLoft Condos | MetClub Resort | Residential Urban Living North Carolina". Metmidtown.com. Retrieved July 2, 2010. Rago, Gordon (May 11, 2022). "Tower proposed for Midtown Charlotte with apartments, shops and hotel". The Charlotte Observer. Retrieved November 27, 2022. "Northwood Investors Adds Two New Concepts to Metropolitan Shopping Center in Midtown Charlotte". Shopping Center Business. October 20, 2022. Retrieved November 27, 2022. Kelly, Pam (March 22, 2016). "White people in Biddleville: The story of a changing neighborhood". The Charlotte Observer. Archived from the original on July 14, 2023. Retrieved July 13, 2023. Glenn, Gwendolyn (January 21, 2019). "Finding Home: Cherry Residents Struggle With The Effects Of Gentrification". WFAE 90.7 - Charlotte's NPR News Source. Retrieved July 14, 2023. "Addressing Gentrification In Charlotte". WFAE 90.7 - Charlotte's NPR News Source. Retrieved July 14, 2023. Chemtob, Danielle (January 3, 2023). "Charlotte considers property tax relief to combat gentrification". Axios Charlotte. Retrieved July 14, 2023. Sparks Vernon, Lisa (June 21, 2023). "Gentrification vs growth in Charlotte Black neighborhood's: Do we stop it or embrace it?". The Charlotte Observer. Retrieved July 14, 2023. "Best Places For Business and Careers — Forbes". Forbes. Retrieved January 16, 2014. "Charlotte vs. Raleigh Statistics — Carolina Ad Group". Carolinaadgroup.com. Archived from the original on June 13, 2014. Retrieved June 6, 2014. "Major Employers in Charlotte Region - Charlotte Area Major Employers (Q2 2018)" (PDF). Charlotte Regional Business Alliance. Retrieved August 24, 2019. "About The Bechtler Museum of Modern Art". m.bechtler.org. Archived from the original on June 13, 2020. Retrieved November 24, 2019. "What is the Library – The Billy Graham Library". billygrahamlibrary.org. November 23, 2019. Retrieved November 23, 2019. "About the Carolinas Aviation Museum". carolinasaviation.org. November 22, 2019. Retrieved November 23, 2019. "Fire and life safety Education". Charlottenc.gov. Archived from the original on August 19, 2021. Retrieved August 19, 2021. "Discovery Place Nature". nature.discoveryplace.org. Retrieved August 19, 2021. "Charlotte Trolley Powerhouse studio". Charlottesgotalot.com. Archived from the original on August 21, 2021. Retrieved August 17, 2017. "Official website of Discovery Place Charlotte". Discoveryplace.org. Retrieved September 14, 2021. "About the Gantt". ganttcenter.org. November 23, 2019. Retrieved November 24, 2019. "History of Rosedale". historicRosedale.org. Retrieved September 14, 2021. "The Levine Museum of the New South – Our History". museumofthenewsouth.org. November 23, 2019. Archived from the original on May 28, 2020. Retrieved November 24, 2019. "Our 40–Year History". lightfactory.org. November 23, 2019. Retrieved November 24, 2019. "About McColl". mccollcenter.org. November 23, 2019. Retrieved November 24, 2019. "About the Mint Museum". mintmuseum.org. November 23, 2019. Archived from the original on December 30, 2019. Retrieved November 23, 2019. "About the Hall – NASCAR Hall of Fame". nascarhall.com. November 23, 2019. Retrieved November 23, 2019. "Museum of Illusions Charlotte Homepage". moicharlotte.com. Retrieved December 8, 2022. "Second Ward High School National Alumni Foundation". secondwardfoundation.org. November 23, 2019. Retrieved November 24, 2019. "About – Charlotte museum". charlottemuseum.org. November 23, 2019. Retrieved November 24, 2019. "History of Southend". AmosSouthend.com. Retrieved November 25, 2019. "Comedy Arts Theater of Charlotte Official homepage". catch.theater. Retrieved June 17, 2022. "History of Blumenthal Performing Arts". Blumenthalarts.org. Archived from the original on October 31, 2017. Retrieved November 7, 2017. "Charlotte Ballet: History". charlotteballet.org. November 23, 2019. Retrieved November 24, 2019. "Charlotte Symphony Orchestra". charlottesymphony.org. Retrieved November 7, 2017. "Carolina Theatre – A Theatre for You". CarolinaTheatreCLT.com. Retrieved November 25, 2022. "ConCarolinas 2022 homepage – Carolina's Longest Running Multi-Fandom Con". concarolinas.org. Retrieved June 17, 2022. "About imaginon". imaginon.org. November 23, 2019. Retrieved November 25, 2019. "AdvidxChange Music Factory: Charlotte's Premier hub for Music, Entertainment, & Nightlife". Avidxchangemusicfactory.com. Retrieved March 12, 2015. "PNC Music Pavilion Official homepage". charlottemusicpavilon.com. Retrieved June 26, 2022. "The History of Opera Carolina". operacarolina.org. November 23, 2019. Archived from the original on June 8, 2020. Retrieved November 24, 2019. "Robot Johnson". Charlotte Magazine. June 3, 2013. Retrieved September 15, 2021. "Citizens of the Universe". citizensoftheuniverse.org. Retrieved November 25, 2019. "Children's Theatre of Charlotte Homepage". Children's Theatre of Charlotte. Retrieved November 25, 2022. "Official website of Theatre Charlotte". theatrecharlotte.org. Retrieved November 7, 2017. "JazzArts Charlotte – Jazz Education and Live Jazz Performances". thejazzarts.org. Retrieved November 25, 2022. "Quick Facts – Carolina Renaissance festival". carolina.renfestinfo.com. November 25, 2019. Archived from the original on June 13, 2020. Retrieved November 25, 2019. "Opa! it's time for the Yiasou Greek Festival". wsoctv.com. August 29, 2014. Retrieved November 25, 2019. "41st Yiasou Greek Festival kicks off in Charlotte". spectrumlocalnews.com. September 6, 2018. Retrieved November 25, 2019. Giles, Alex (June 7, 2019). "Night one of Taste of Charlotte draws big crowds despite earlier rainy weather". wbtv.com. Retrieved November 25, 2019. "City's biggest food festival, Taste of Charlotte, sets fall date at new location". WSOCTV.com. May 19, 2021. Retrieved May 19, 2021. "Moo and Brew Festival". mooandbrewfest.com. November 24, 2019. Retrieved November 25, 2019. Ruane, Alyssa (August 2, 2016). "Moo & Brew: Two dudes and a Burger Joint". Charlotte Magazine. Retrieved August 2, 2016. "Breakaway Music Festival Returns to Charlotte". Charlotte Concert Guide. June 3, 2019. "Heroescon: History". heroesonline.com. "Thousands come out for Charlotte Pride Festival in uptown". wcnc.com. August 18, 2019. Retrieved November 5, 2021. Price, Mark (August 25, 2017). "Charlotte's largest annual parade is now the gay-themed Charlotte Pride". Charlotte Observer. Retrieved November 5, 2021. Bragg, Meghan (November 24, 2022). "34th annual CPI Security Charlotte Turkey Trot held Thursday morning". WCNC.com. Retrieved November 24, 2022. "Charlotte Turkey Trot Homepage". cltturkeytrot.com. Retrieved November 24, 2022. Soloff, Katie (November 22, 2022). "6 turkey trot runs in the Charlotte area on Thanksgiving day". Charlotte Axios. Retrieved November 24, 2022. Daniel, D. (2011). Farm Fresh North Carolina: The Go-To Guide to Great Farmers' Markets, Farm Stands, Farms, Apple Orchards, U-Picks, Kids' Activities, Lodging, Dining, Choose-and-Cut Christmas Trees, Vineyards and Wineries, and More. Southern Gateways Guides. University of North Carolina Press. p. 101. ISBN 978-0-8078-7782-1. Retrieved September 25, 2023. "About the Charlotte Zoological Park Initiative | Bringing Animal Conservation & Research to the Carolinas". Charlottezoologicalpark.org. Archived from the original on January 31, 2011. Retrieved October 2, 2013. "Charlotte Zoological Park Initiative ready to move forward — News 14". Charlotte.news14.com. Archived from the original on June 29, 2013. Retrieved October 2, 2013. "Great zoos". CharlotteObserver.com. May 16, 2013. Archived from the original on April 16, 2014. Retrieved October 2, 2013. "Sea Life Aquarium opens at Concord Mills". CharlotteObserver.com. February 20, 2014. Archived from the original on February 22, 2014. Retrieved February 20, 2014. "History of Sea life Aquarium". Retrieved December 5, 2018. "Charlotte Mecklenburg Library Info". cmlibrary.org. November 23, 2019. Retrieved November 24, 2019. "Public Library of Charlotte and Mecklenburg County: A century of service". cmstory.org Web Site. Public Library of Charlotte and Mecklenburg County. Archived from the original on September 25, 2015. Retrieved September 25, 2015. "Public Library of Charlotte and Mecklenburg County: A century of service". cmstory.org Web Site. Public Library of Charlotte and Mecklenburg County. Archived from the original on September 25, 2015. Retrieved September 25, 2015. "Public Library of Charlotte and Mecklenburg County: A century of service". cmstory.org Web Site. Public Library of Charlotte and Mecklenburg County. Archived from the original on September 25, 2015. Retrieved September 25, 2015. "charmeck.org Web Site". Archived from the original on October 6, 2007. Retrieved September 25, 2015. "The Official website of the Carolina Panthers". Carolina Panthers. Retrieved November 26, 2019. "The Official Website of The Charlotte Hornets". Hornets.com. NBA Media Ventures, LLC. May 20, 2014. Retrieved November 23, 2019. "The Official website of Charlotte FC". Charlottefootballclub.com. Retrieved October 11, 2021. David, Maria (September 19, 2015). "1995: When NFL came to the Carolinas". The Charlotte Observer. Retrieved February 16, 2023. "About Spectrum Center". spectrumcentercharlotte.com. November 25, 2019. Archived from the original on December 26, 2019. Retrieved November 26, 2019. "Carolina Panthers Franchise Encyclopedia". Pro-Football Reference.Com. Retrieved June 23, 2020. "This Day In Panthers History". Carolina Panthers. Retrieved September 25, 2021. Archives, Times L.A. (April 23, 1987). "NBA Gives Florida Two Franchises – Miami, Orlando: League Also Grants Expansion Teams to Minneapolis and Charlotte for $32.5 Million". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved May 21, 2022. Spanberg, Erik. "George Shinn says co-owner 'hell-bent' on Charlotte exit". Bizjournals.com. Charlotte Business Journal. Retrieved May 14, 2015. "Charlotte Hornets – 30th Anniversary Season". hornets30.com. Charlotte Hornets. Archived from the original on June 13, 2020. Retrieved February 16, 2019. "Michael Jordan Bought the Charlotte Bobcats for $175 Million, Now the Charlotte Hornets Are Worth $1.5 Billion". sportscasting.com. May 8, 2022. Archived from the original on September 20, 2022. Retrieved September 17, 2022. NBA owners give Bobcats OK to change name to Charlotte Hornets, The Charlotte Observer, July 19, 2013 "Hornets all the buzz in Charlotte". ESPN. Associated Press. May 20, 2014. Retrieved June 23, 2020. "Charlotte Hornets on Twitter". Twitter. Retrieved June 13, 2016. Newton, David (December 17, 2019). "Charlotte gets MLS' 30th franchise for record $325 million". ESPN. Retrieved December 17, 2019. "Charlotte officially named 30th Major League Soccer team". WCNC.com. December 17, 2019. Retrieved December 17, 2019. Huber, Jason (March 5, 2022). "Charlotte FC begins soccer era in the Queen City, drawing nearly 74,500 fans". WBTV.com. Retrieved March 6, 2022. Papsupula, Pooja (August 23, 2018). "Baseball has a storied history in Charlotte, and it's been quite a journey for the Knights". CLTure.org. Retrieved July 31, 2021. "The Official site of the Charlotte Checkers". Retrieved December 31, 2021. Pryor, Justin (February 11, 2021). "Charlotte Knights Announce 10-Year Deal to Remain White Sox Affiliate". Spectrum News 1. Retrieved September 17, 2022. "The Official website of the Charlotte Knights". Minor League Baseball. Retrieved December 6, 2022. "Charlotte Independence Soccer Club Homepage". Charlotteindependence.com. Retrieved April 2, 2023. "NJCAA National Office". NJCAA.com. Retrieved August 22, 2019. "Big South Conference Quick Facts". bigsouthsports.com. November 26, 2019. Archived from the original on June 13, 2020. Retrieved November 26, 2019. "The Official athletics website of the Atlantic Coast Conference". TheACC.com. Retrieved September 2, 2023. Bonnell, Rick (May 24, 2017). "Charlotte to host 2019 NBA All-Star Game". Charlotte Observer. Retrieved November 24, 2019. Powell, Shaun (February 14, 2019). "Charlotte no stranger to NBA All-Star Spotlight". NBA.com. Retrieved September 14, 2021. Carter, Andrew (December 29, 2021). "As Gamecocks and UNC fight for mayonnaise, Duke's Mayo Bowl found a way to still matter". The Charlotte Observer. Retrieved June 5, 2022. "ACC Announces 10-Year Extension With Charlotte as Football Championship Game Host Site". TheACC.com. Atlantic Coast Conference. April 5, 2018. Retrieved April 5, 2018. "ACC Men's Basketball Tournament set for Charlotte this week". fox46charlotte.com. March 12, 2019. Retrieved November 24, 2019. Pryor, Justin (May 18, 2021). "Play Ball! 2021 ACC Baseball Championship to host fans at full capacity". Spectrum News. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Scott, David (July 30, 2016). "1 year away, Quail Hollow Club, Charlotte poised to host PGA Championship". newsobserver.com. Retrieved November 25, 2019. Fowler, Scott (May 14, 2020). "'The Kind of thing you dream about; PGA Championship will return to Charlotte in 2025". The Charlotte Observer. Retrieved June 10, 2022. Carboni, Nick (May 6, 2022). "Preparations underway for 2022 Presidents Cup in Charlotte". WCNC.com. WCNC-TV. Retrieved June 19, 2022. "'A premier host city': Presidents Cup mural unveiled as Charlotte prepares for major international golf tournament". WBTV.com. WBTV. September 29, 2021. Retrieved June 19, 2022. Applebome, Peter (April 2, 1994). "Charlotte's Downtown Manages To Stay Up Late For Tournament". The New York Times. Retrieved June 13, 2022. Soloff, Katie (April 5, 2022). "Charlotte was an eager-to-please town back when we last hosted the Final Four". charlotte.axios.com. Retrieved June 12, 2022. Devores, Courtney (July 30, 2010). "Rasslin's long Charlotte History". CharlotteMagazine.com. Retrieved October 7, 2017. Marusak, Joe (March 8, 2021). "He made Ric Flair famous: Charlotte wrestling promoter Jim Crockett Jr. dies at 76". Charlotte Observer. Retrieved May 21, 2022. Sorenson, Tom (November 16, 2017). "Remembering the age when Charlotte was ruled by wrestlers at Bennigan's". The Charlotte Observer. Retrieved April 2, 2023. Devores, Courtney (July 29, 2015). "Documentary explores Charlotte's wrestling history". archive.independentmail.com. Retrieved April 2, 2023. Bourne, Dick (March 24, 2021). "A Brief History of Wrestling in the Mid-Atlantic Area". The Mid-Atlantic Gateway. Retrieved April 2, 2023. "Charlotte 49ers Athletics Almanac: Facts and History" (PDF). Charlotte 49ers. Retrieved May 21, 2022. Limehouse, Jonathan (May 7, 2022). "Queens University of Charlotte accepts invitation to NCAA Division I conference". The Charlotte Observer. Retrieved May 8, 2022. Giles, Alex (December 19, 2019). "Charlotte 49ers fans flock to Bahamas for first bowl game in football team's history". WBTV.com. Retrieved December 19, 2019. "JWU Charlotte Athletics". JWU.edu. Retrieved May 21, 2022. "Sec. 3.23. - Quorum; procedure; voting". Code of Ordinances City of Charlotte, North Carolina - Part I: Charter. Municode. Retrieved June 26, 2022. "About Charlotte City Council". CharlotteNC.gov. Retrieved October 11, 2021. "Mayor". City of Charlotte Government. Retrieved April 13, 2020.[permanent dead link] "Cannon sworn in as Mayor". WBTV. December 2, 2013. Retrieved December 2, 2013. Washburn, Mark; Morrill, Jim. "Charlotte mayor resigns after arrest on corruption charges". Charlotteobserver.com. Retrieved June 13, 2016. WBTV. "Dan Clodfelter selected as mayor of Charlotte". WBTV. Retrieved April 7, 2014. Morrill, Jim (November 4, 2015). "Jennifer Roberts defeats Edwin Peacock for Charlotte mayor". Charlotte Observer. Retrieved November 4, 2015. Berky, Rad (November 8, 2017). "Vi Lyles wins Charlotte mayoral race". wcnc.com. Retrieved November 25, 2019.[dead link] Weigel, David (August 23, 2020). "The six political states of North Carolina". The Washington Post. Retrieved July 28, 2021. Weiner, Rachael (February 7, 2012). "N.C. Republican Rep. Sue Myrick retiring". The Washington Post. Retrieved March 1, 2023. Lacour, Greg (July 1, 2020). "Outmanned Old Party: The GOP in Charlotte, Past and Present". Charlotte Magazine. Retrieved March 1, 2023. Blinder, Alan (May 14, 2016). "Reeling Over Bias Rules, Charlotte Fights North Carolina Governor It Once Called Mayor". The New York Times. Retrieved March 2, 2023. "City Government in Charlotte". cmstory.org. Retrieved October 5, 2017. Duncan, Charles (November 8, 2022). "Adams, Jackson projected winners in Charlotte-area House Races". Spectrumlocalnews.com. Retrieved July 14, 2023. "Mecklenburg County Representation". ncleg.gov. North Carolina General Assembly. Retrieved October 19, 2023. Burlij, Terence (February 1, 2011). "Democrats Select Charlotte to Host 2012 Convention". PBS. Retrieved June 9, 2016. Mueller, Eleanor (July 20, 2018). "Charlotte to host 2020 Republican National Convention". Politico. Retrieved November 24, 2019. "Largest 100 School Districts". Proximityzone.com. Retrieved June 13, 2016. "Official website of Charlotte–Mecklenburg Schools". cms.k12.nc.us. Retrieved October 11, 2021. "Charlotte NC- Three Big Wins for the City". Charlotte Communities Online. December 10, 2009. Archived from the original on August 6, 2016. Retrieved August 5, 2016. "Top 20 School Systems". Media.newsobserver.com. Archived from the original on October 31, 2007. "Background, Facts and History". Cms.kj12.nc.us. Archived from the original on June 2, 2016. Retrieved June 13, 2016. "The British School of Charlotte – Nord Anglia Education". nordangliaeducation.com. Retrieved August 17, 2022. "Charlotte Catholic Homepage". Charlottecatholic.org. Archived from the original on July 2, 2022. Retrieved August 17, 2022. "Charlotte Christian School website". Charlotte Christian School. Retrieved August 17, 2022. "Charlotte County Day School official website". charlottecountryday.org. Retrieved August 17, 2022. "Charlotte Islamic Academy: Vision & Mission". ciacademy.us. May 9, 2010. Retrieved August 17, 2022. "About Us – Charlotte Latin School". charlottelatin.org. Retrieved August 17, 2022. "Grace Academy: Home". graceacademync.com. Retrieved August 17, 2022. "Providence Day School Homepage". Providenceday.org. Retrieved August 17, 2022. "Home – Hickory Grove Christian School". hgchristian.org. Retrieved August 18, 2022. "About Us – Northside Christian Academy". ncaknights.com. Retrieved August 18, 2022. "Southlake Christian Academy: Quick Facts". southlakechristian.org. Archived from the original on August 19, 2022. Retrieved August 18, 2022. Hopkins, Paige (November 11, 2020). "19 biggest private schools in Charlotte, ranked by the cost of tuition". Charlotte.axios.com. Retrieved December 9, 2020. Martin, Jenna (September 29, 2021). "Ranked: These are the Charlotte area's best private K–12 schools for 2022, Niche says". Bizjournals.com. Retrieved September 29, 2021. "Johnson C. Smith University Homepage". jcsu.edu. Archived from the original on September 8, 2019. Retrieved November 3, 2019. "Queens University of Charlotte official website". queens.edu. Retrieved November 3, 2019. "Charlotte Campus – Johnson & Wales University". jwu.edu. Johnson & Wales University. Retrieved September 8, 2022. "Central Piedmont Community College Homepage". cpcc.edu. Retrieved April 2, 2023. "Distinctly Davidson". davidson.edu. Davidson College. Archived from the original on June 13, 2020. Retrieved June 22, 2020. "About us – Belmont Abbey College". belmontabbeycollege.edu. Belmont Abbey College. Retrieved November 3, 2019. "About – Wingate University". Wingate.edu. Wingate University. Retrieved November 3, 2019. "About Winthrop". Winthrop.edu. Retrieved November 3, 2019. "Garner Webb University". Garner-Webb.edu. Retrieved November 3, 2019. "Clinton Junior College". Clintoncollege.edu. Retrieved November 3, 2019. "About us – UNC Charlotte". uncc.edu. UNC Charlotte. November 23, 2019. Retrieved November 23, 2019. "About CPCC — CPCC". Cpcc.edu. Retrieved June 13, 2016. Olson, Elizabeth (August 15, 2017). "For–Profit Charlotte School of Law Closes". The New York Times. Retrieved November 23, 2019. "Pfeiffer University – Charlotte". pfeiffer.edu. Pfeiffer University. Retrieved November 3, 2019. "Pfeiffer's new Charlotte campus offers convenient and affordable space for events and meetings". pfeiffer.edu. Pfeiffer University. Archived from the original on August 5, 2017. Retrieved March 9, 2017. "Wake Forest University plans for growth and increases commitment in Charlotte". Wake Forest University. May 22, 2009. Archived from the original on June 10, 2009. Retrieved May 22, 2009. Ablon, Matthew (March 24, 2021). "There's a new medical school coming to Charlotte soon, here's a first look at the campus". WCNC.com. Retrieved August 19, 2021. "DeVry University – Charlotte campus". DeVry.edu. Retrieved September 15, 2021. "Our campus in Charlotte". ECPI.edu. ECPI University. Retrieved September 15, 2021. "CSB Media Arts Center is located in Charlotte, NC". gocsb.com. Retrieved September 15, 2021. "CNC, welding, and automotive Mechanic School". UTI.edu. Retrieved September 15, 2021. "Charlotte Campus". upsem.edu. Retrieved September 15, 2021. "N.C. Research Campus Partners and Research". Archived from the original on March 4, 2014. Retrieved May 20, 2013. "About NCRC". NCresearchcampus.net. Retrieved September 16, 2021. "About us". The Charlotte Observer. Archived from the original on June 27, 2020. Retrieved February 6, 2015. "Biggest North Carolina Newspapers". Mondotimes.com. Retrieved March 26, 2018. "Charlotte Stations – iHeartMedia". iHeartMedia.com. Retrieved September 15, 2016. "Charlotte Archives – Urban One". Retrieved January 29, 2022. "About WFAE". wfae.org. Archived from the original on June 26, 2020. Retrieved June 23, 2020. "Local Television Market Universe Estimates" (PDF). Nielsen. January 1, 2017. "WBTV: The First 60 Years". WBTV.com. WBTV. March 4, 2009. Retrieved June 2, 2022. "WSOC-TV: Past and Future". wsoctv.com. January 20, 2016. Retrieved June 2, 2022. "About WCNC: The WCNC Charlotte Difference". WCNC.com. Retrieved June 2, 2022. "About WCCB – WCCB Charlotte's CW". wccbcharlotte.com. Retrieved June 2, 2022. "About PBS Charlotte". WTVI.org. WTVI. Retrieved June 5, 2022. Hallmark, Gi (June 29, 2015). "The ESPN offices in Charlotte are like yours, but not". Charlotte.axios.com. Archived from the original on April 12, 2021. Retrieved March 6, 2016. "Raycom Sports". Raycomsports.com. Retrieved July 18, 2021. Spanberg, Erik (August 3, 2021). "Monster trucks, MLS and more: CEO talks revamped business focus for Raycom Sports". Bizjournals.com. Charlotte Business Journal. Retrieved September 14, 2022. "About us – Queen City News – Fox 46". Fox46.com. August 21, 2019. Retrieved June 4, 2022. "WMYT-TV 12 – Charlotte". qcnews.com. June 10, 2022. Retrieved August 11, 2023. "INSP TV Homepage: Western TV & Movies". INSP.com. Retrieved August 11, 2023. Janes, Théoden. "Dianne Gallagher to be first CNN correspondent in Charlotte". The Charlotte Observer. McClatchy. Retrieved October 1, 2020. "Charlotte – Spectrum News 1". Spectrumlocalnews.com. Retrieved July 18, 2021. Flipsnack. "AR22 web". Flipsnack. Retrieved February 15, 2023. "About us – Mecklenburg EMS Agency". medic911.com. March 26, 2021. Retrieved October 24, 2021. "2017 Annual Report" (PDF). Medic911.com. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 15, 2018. Retrieved July 12, 2018. "Atrium Health Mercy, a facility of Carolinas Medical Center". atriumhealth.org. Retrieved June 4, 2022. "Atrium Health Pineville". atriumhealth.org. Retrieved June 4, 2022. "Atrium Health University City". atriumhealth.org. Retrieved June 4, 2022. "Carolinas ContinueCare Hospital at Pineville". pineville.continuecare.org. Retrieved June 4, 2022. "Carolinas Medical Center". atriumhealth.org. Retrieved June 4, 2022. "Charlotte Orthopedic Hospital homepage – Novant Health". novanthealth.org. Archived from the original on September 15, 2022. Retrieved June 4, 2022. "Hemby Children's Hospital homepage – Novant Health". novanthealth.org. Archived from the original on September 15, 2022. Retrieved June 4, 2022. "Presbyterian Medical Center homepage – Novant Health". novanthealth.org. Archived from the original on July 2, 2022. Retrieved June 4, 2022. "Atrium Health Financial Information". Atrium Health. Retrieved November 19, 2021. "Charlotte Fire Department – City of Charlotte". charlottenc.gov. Retrieved February 16, 2020. "Home". Charmeck.org. Archived from the original on June 5, 2008. Retrieved July 2, 2010. Charlotte, NC Auto Theft Statistics, archived from the original on June 6, 2014, retrieved June 6, 2014 "CMPD: 238 vehicles stolen since beginning of year". WBTV.com. January 24, 2018. Retrieved January 24, 2018. Staff News, Spectrum (July 25, 2022). "Charlotte police report increasing number of car thefts". Spectrum News 1 North Carolina. Retrieved December 6, 2022. Harper, Briana (January 16, 2020). "Carjackers striking across Charlotte". WCNC.com. Retrieved December 6, 2022. Hill, Jalon (August 10, 2022). "Police: Tik-Tok videos are adding fuel to Charlotte's car-theft problem". Q City Metro. Retrieved December 6, 2022. "CQ Press: City Crime Rankings 2008". Os.cqpress.com. Archived from the original on June 7, 2010. Retrieved July 2, 2010. "AMSAFM2.WK4" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on March 26, 2009. Retrieved July 2, 2010. Wilson, Jen (May 21, 2014). "Charlotte among nation's most dangerous cities for pedestrians, report says". BizJournals.com. Charlotte Business Journal. Retrieved May 22, 2014. "Charlotte Utilities — Home". Charmeck.org. Retrieved October 2, 2013. "Charlotte Water". City of Charlotte Government. Retrieved March 26, 2018. "Controversial 'sludge' disposal draws friends, foes in four S.C. counties". Wrhi.com. February 26, 2013. Retrieved October 2, 2013. "News Release Archive | The Carlyle Group". Carlyle.com. Retrieved March 26, 2018. "Biosolids: Targeted National Sewage Sludge Survey Report - Overview". US EPA. April 23, 2014. Archived from the original on June 29, 2014. Retrieved March 26, 2018. "Car Ownership in U.S. Cities Data and Map". Governing. December 9, 2014. Retrieved May 4, 2018. "Car-Free in Charlotte? It isn't easy". ui.charlotte.edu. University of North Carolina at Charlotte. April 2, 2014. Retrieved November 23, 2022. McGraw, Daniel (July 30, 2018). "Charlotte Moves toward a Car-Free City Center". nextcity.org. Retrieved November 23, 2022. "Charlotte Area Transit System". Charlottenc.gov. Retrieved May 21, 2021. Pierre, Jesse (November 7, 2022). "CATS finalizing design for new transportation system". WCNC.com. Retrieved August 9, 2023. "Lynx Blue Line – City of Charlotte City Council". Charlottenc.gov. Archived from the original on September 1, 2019. Retrieved June 11, 2022. Spanberg, Erik (March 25, 2021). "City seeking firms to oversee final portion of CityLynx Goldline". BizJourals.com. Charlotte Business Journal. Retrieved March 25, 2021. "Lynx Silver Line Project Entering New Phase of Development". Spectrum News. Retrieved September 18, 2020. Helmer, Jodi (December 11, 2019). "Charlotte is on its way to becoming a modern transit hub". NRDC.org. Retrieved December 11, 2019. Contino, Genna (September 27, 2022). "Underground? Above ground? Charlotte assesses new uptown bus hub design". The Charlotte Observer. Retrieved December 6, 2022. "2011 City and Neighborhood Rankings". Walk Score. 2011. Retrieved August 28, 2011. Moore, Evan (February 22, 2022). "How walkable is Charlotte? It depends on which neighborhood you're in". The Charlotte Observer. Retrieved December 6, 2022. Boudin, Michelle (October 19, 2021). "Nonprofit working to make Charlotte a more bike-friendly, pedestrian-friendly city". WCNC.com. Retrieved December 6, 2022. Newsom, Mary (November 15, 2013). "Charlotte trails nation in Walkability rankings". Plan Charlotte. Archived from the original on December 7, 2022. Retrieved December 7, 2022. Markovich, Jeremy (August 26, 2014). "From Rust Belt to Bible Belt". Charlotte Magazine. Retrieved February 14, 2022. Baldwin, Amy (September 28, 2008). "Rust Belt folks take liking to the area". Charlotte Observer. Retrieved February 14, 2022. "Historical Perspective: I-485 opens 40 years after planning began". wsoctv.com. June 5, 2015. Retrieved June 11, 2022. "NCDOT: I-485 Charlotte Outer Loop". Ncdot.gov. Archived from the original on June 21, 2016. Retrieved June 13, 2016. WCNC Staff (January 29, 2019). "Toll lanes being considered for Independence Blvd". WCNC.com. Retrieved January 29, 2019. "Release ACI World Airport Traffic" (PDF). Charmeck.org. Archived from the original (PDF) on August 16, 2013. Smoot, Hannah (August 20, 2021). "Its not your imagination; Charlotte's airport is the world's busiest this summer". Charlotte Observer. Retrieved August 21, 2021. Smoot, Hannah (October 22, 2020). "American Airlines faces billions in net loss, but CLT remains a top performing hub". Charlotte Observer. Retrieved October 22, 2020. Reed, Ted (May 26, 2021). "Can American Airline's Only Growth Hub, In Charlotte Remain the Sixth Busiest U.S. Airport?". Forbes. Retrieved April 23, 2022. Jordan, Chase (November 10, 2023). "American Airlines adds new destination from Charlotte to Mexico, expands Caribbean routes". The Charlotte Observer. Retrieved November 13, 2023. "About CLT". cltairport.com. Charlotte Douglas International Airport. Retrieved June 21, 2020. Martin, Jenna (November 10, 2023). "American Airlines picks Charlotte, Dallas-Fort Worth and Miami to serve new airport in Tulum, Mexico". BizJournals.com. Charlotte Business Journal. Retrieved November 13, 2023. "About us – 145th Airlift Wing". North Carolina Air National Guard. Retrieved October 11, 2021. "Charlotte Air National Guard Base". Air National Guard. Retrieved June 5, 2022. "Crescent Train – Amtrak Guide". amtrakguide.com. October 14, 2017. Retrieved June 11, 2022. "Carolinian Train". Amtrakguide.com. October 25, 2017. Retrieved September 15, 2021. "Piedmont Train: Schedule and Stations". Amtrakguide.com. October 25, 2017. Retrieved September 15, 2021. "Charlotte Bus Station – Greyhound". greyhound.com. Retrieved February 14, 2022. Pauroso, Paige (March 17, 2021). "Group petitions Norfolk Southern to change policy to get Lynx Red Line project back on track". WBTV.com. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Baldeck, Brett (April 6, 2021). "Charlotte Gateway Station makes progress; development underway surrounding project". Fox46.com. Retrieved April 6, 2021. "International Government Relations". charlottenc.gov. City of Charlotte. Archived from the original on September 27, 2022. Retrieved December 6, 2022. "City of Charlotte suspends ties with its Russian sister city". WSOC-TV. March 29, 2022. Retrieved September 24, 2023. Graves, William, and Heather A. Smith, eds. Charlotte, NC: The Global Evolution of a New South City (University of Georgia Press; 2010) 320 pages. Essays that use Charlotte to explore how globalization and local forces combine to transform Southern cities. ISBN 0-8203-3561-4 Hanchett, Thomas W. Sorting Out the New South City: Race, Class, and Urban Development in Charlotte, 1875–1975. 380 pages. University of North Carolina Press. August 1, 1998. ISBN 0-8078-2376-7. Kratt, Mary Norton. Charlotte: Spirit of the New South. 293 pages. John F. Blair, Publisher. September 1, 1992. ISBN 0-89587-095-9. Kratt, Mary Norton and Mary Manning Boyer. Remembering Charlotte: Postcards from a New South City, 1905–1950. 176 pages. University of North Carolina Press. October 1, 2000. ISBN 0-8078-4871-9. Kratt, Mary Norton. New South Women: Twentieth Century Women of Charlotte, North Carolina. Public Library of Charlotte and Mecklenburg County in Association with John F. Blair, Publisher. August 1, 2001. ISBN 0-89587-250-1. Sanford, Ken. Charlotte and UNC Charlotte: Growing Up Together (2021) summary Charlotte, North Carolina at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Travel information from Wikivoyage Geographic data related to Charlotte, North Carolina at OpenStreetMap Official website