The 2011 NBA playoffs was the postseason tournament of the National Basketball Association's 2010–11 season. The tournament concluded with the Western Conference champion Dallas Mavericks defeating the Eastern Conference champion Miami Heat 4 games to 2 in the NBA Finals. Dirk Nowitzki was named NBA Finals MVP. The San Antonio Spurs entered their fourteenth consecutive postseason. They also entered as the top seed in the Western Conference for the first time since 2006, in addition to entering the postseason with 50+ regular season wins for the twelfth consecutive season. The two-time defending champions, the Los Angeles Lakers entered their sixth consecutive postseason. However, this would be their first since 2007 without posting the top seed in the Western Conference. The Dallas Mavericks entered their eleventh consecutive postseason, and their eleventh straight appearance having won 50+ games in the regular season. The Oklahoma City Thunder entered the playoffs with their first Northwest Division title under this incarnation. The Portland Trail Blazers entered their third consecutive postseason. The New Orleans Hornets also returned to the playoffs for the third time in four seasons. However, this was also their final postseason appearance before the franchise was renamed the Pelicans before the 2013–14 season. They lost in the first round to the Los Angeles Lakers in six games, and would not return to the playoffs until 2015. The Memphis Grizzlies also made the playoffs for the first time since 2006. Unlike their previous three appearances, in which they were swept in the first round, The Grizzlies broke their trend by winning Game 1 of their series against the Spurs, their first playoff win in franchise history. The Phoenix Suns, despite a run to the Western Conference finals last postseason, missed the playoffs for the second time in three seasons. This would also mark the start of a ten-season postseason drought for the Suns. The Utah Jazz missed the playoffs for the first time since 2006. The Denver Nuggets entered their eighth consecutive postseason and their first since 1995 without Carmelo Anthony on the roster. The Chicago Bulls achieved several "firsts" since 1998: the East's best record, a Central Division title, and over 60 victories. They also clinched the NBA's best record for the first time since 1997, guaranteeing home-court advantage throughout the playoffs. The Miami Heat entered their third consecutive postseason, and their first in the Big 3 era of Dwyane Wade, LeBron James, and Chris Bosh. They would also open the playoffs at home for the first time since 2006. Their in–state rivals, the Orlando Magic, entered their fifth consecutive postseason. In addition, for the first time, both franchises would open their playoff runs at home. The New York Knicks made the playoffs for the first time since 2004, but this was their first playoff appearance as an above-.500 team since 2001. However, they were swept by the Boston Celtics in the first round. The Philadelphia 76ers appeared for the third time in four seasons. However, they lost in the first round to the Miami Heat. The Indiana Pacers made the playoffs for the first time since 2006, despite posting a sub .500 record. However, they lost to the Chicago Bulls in the first round. By losing Game 1 of their series against the New Orleans Hornets, the Los Angeles Lakers joined the San Antonio Spurs as the first top seeds to lose an opening game of the playoffs since the 16–team playoff format was introduced. In Game 1 of the first round series between the Orlando Magic and Atlanta Hawks Dwight Howard of the Orlando Magic tied a franchise record with 46 points (31 in the first half), tying Tracy McGrady's total in Game 2 of the 2003 First Round against the Detroit Pistons. In Game 4 of their first round series against the Dallas Mavericks, the Portland Trail Blazers overcame a 23-point deficit to tie the series at 2. However, the Mavericks would go on to win the series in six games, giving the Trail Blazers their sixth consecutive first round series loss. They would not return to the playoffs until 2014. With their first round win over the Denver Nuggets, the Oklahoma City Thunder won their first playoff series since relocating from Seattle. This also marked the first playoff series win for Kevin Durant. With their first round sweep of the New York Knicks, the Boston Celtics swept a best–of–7 playoff series for the first time since winning the 1986 Eastern Conference finals with a 4–game sweep of the Bucks; prior to the series win they had not swept a series overall since 1992, in Larry Bird's final season. However, they lost to the Miami Heat in the conference semifinals. With their first round series victory over the Philadelphia 76ers, the Miami Heat won their first playoff series since 2006, when they last won the NBA Championship. It also marked the first playoff series win for Erik Spoelstra as a head coach. With their first round series win over the Indians Pacers, the Chicago Bulls won their first playoff series since 2007. In Game 6 of their first round series against the San Antonio Spurs, the Memphis Grizzlies followed up their first playoff win by winning their first playoff series. They became the fourth eighth seeded team to beat a top seeded team in the first round, and the second team to do so since the first round expanded to a best–of–seven format in 2003. The Golden State Warriors were the most recent team to accomplish this feat. With their series loss to the Atlanta Hawks, the Orlando Magic became the first team coached by Stan Van Gundy to lose a first round playoff series. For the first time since the current NBA Playoff format was introduced in 2003, no first-round series was pushed to a Game 7. The Los Angeles Lakers and the Dallas Mavericks met in the playoffs for the first time since 1988. It also marked the lone postseason meeting that Kobe Bryant and Dirk Nowitzki would ever have. The series was extremely notable for the following reasons. Game 1: The Dallas Mavericks overcame a 16-point fourth quarter deficit to win the game. Game 2: The Los Angeles Lakers lost the first two games of a playoff series at home. Game 3: The Los Angeles Lakers blew a 7-point fourth quarter lead to lose 92–98. Game 4 The Dallas Mavericks set an NBA record with 20 three pointers (with Jason Terry shooting nine of them). Andrew Bynum and Lamar Odom getting ejected 45 seconds apart With a 122–86 victory, the Dallas Mavericks not only swept the Los Angeles Lakers, but they also made the conference finals for the first time since 2006 (and fourth overall), and vindicated themselves following their shocking first round exit four years earlier. This would also prove to be Phil Jackson's final game as an NBA head coach. Their series loss to the Dallas Mavericks marked the Los Angeles Lakers' first series loss despite having home court advantage since 1996. It also marked Phil Jackson's first time being swept in a playoff series. Game 4 of the Heat–Celtics series was Shaquille O'Neal's final NBA game; he would announce his retirement three weeks later. It also marked the second time (the first being 2007) that his and Kobe Bryant's teams were eliminated in the same playoff series since the duo broke up in 2004. With their conference semifinals win over the Atlanta Hawks, the Chicago Bulls returned to the conference finals for the first time since 1998, when they last made the NBA Finals. Game 7 of the Grizzlies–Thunder series also ensured a 12th straight postseason with at least one Game 7 played. The last without one was the 1999 NBA playoffs. The 2011 Playoffs also marked the first time since 2007 that only one series went to a Game 7. That would not happen again until 2022. By winning this game, the Oklahoma City Thunder made their first Western Conference finals appearance since 1996 (when they were known as the Seattle SuperSonics), and their first under the current incarnation. For the first time since 2007, no #1 or #2 seed participated in the Western Conference finals. With their Western Conference finals series win over the Oklahoma City Thunder, the Dallas Mavericks returned to the NBA Finals for the first time since 2006. With their Eastern Conference finals series win over the Chicago Bulls, the Miami Heat returned to the NBA Finals for the first time since 2006, guaranteeing an NBA Finals rematch with the Dallas Mavericks. It also marked the first time since 1990 that the Chicago Bulls lost an Eastern Conference finals series, and the first time since 1989 that the Bulls lost the ECF at home. As of 2023, this was the Bulls' most recent Eastern Conference finals appearance. In a rematch of the 2006 NBA Finals, there were some extremely notable moments. Game 2: The Dallas Mavericks came back from a fifteen-point deficit to win the game, 95–93. Ironically enough, they held a nine-point lead in the first half before falling behind in the second half. LeBron James only scored two points in the final quarter. Game 4: LeBron James did not score any points in the fourth quarter as the Dallas Mavericks won, 86–83. Dirk Nowitzki, on the other hand, played despite having a fever. Game 5: LeBron James scored only two points in the fourth quarter for the third time in four games, allowing the Dallas Mavericks to take a 3–2 series lead back to Miami. Game 6: With the win, the Dallas Mavericks defeated the Miami Heat in six games to win the championship. The Dallas Mavericks also became the first team in NBA History to win the NBA Finals despite trailing 1–0 and 2–1 in the same finals series. Dirk Nowitzki, despite shooting 1 for 12 in the first half of the game, was Finals MVP. The Mavericks would not win another playoff series until 2022. The 3 division winners and 5 other teams with the most wins from each conference qualified for the playoffs. The seedings are based on each team's record. However, a division champion is guaranteed to be ranked at least fourth, regardless of their record and their winnings. The tiebreakers that determined seedings were: Division leader wins tie against team not leading a division Head-to-head record Division record (if all tied teams are in the same division) Conference record Record vs. playoff teams, own conference (top 8 of the conference east/west) (including tied teams) Record vs. playoff teams, other conference (top 8 of the conference east/west) (including tied teams) (this tiebreaker does not apply if 3 or more tied teams) Point differential, all games — = Did not achieve Notes Los Angeles Lakers clinched #2 seed over Dallas Mavericks based on winning Pacific Division. New Orleans Hornets clinched #7 seed over Memphis Grizzlies based on Southwest Division winning percentage. (.563 vs .500) Teams in bold advanced to the next round. The numbers to the left of each team indicate the team's seeding in its conference, and the numbers to the right indicate the number of games the team won in that round. The division champions are marked by an asterisk. Home court advantage for the playoffs does not necessarily belong to the higher-seeded team, but instead the team with the better regular season record; teams with home court advantage are shown in italics. If two teams with same record met in a round use normal tiebreakers. Tiebreakers in NBA Finals are head-to-head and record vs opposite conference. * Division winner Bold Series winner Italic Team with home-court advantage All times are in Eastern Daylight Time (UTC−4) Regular-season series This was the second playoff meeting between these two teams, with the Bulls winning the first meeting. This series pitted the team with the best record in the regular season against the team with the worst record in the playoffs. As such, this series was expected to be a very easy one for the Bulls. However, despite the Bulls winning 4–1, the series was more competitive than the outcome would indicate. Every game but the last was tightly contested; the first four games were each decided by six points or fewer. The series could easily have gone six or seven games had the Pacers been more successful in the closing moments of each of the first three games. However, the Bulls advanced to the Eastern Conference semifinals for just the second time since the Michael Jordan era (the first being 2007). Regular-season series This was the first playoff meeting between the Heat and the 76ers. The newly revamped Heat, with the much-publicized off-season acquisitions of All-Stars and franchise players LeBron James and Chris Bosh, were heavy favorites going into this series against the Philadelphia 76ers. Along with Dwyane Wade, James and Bosh comprised the "Big 3" and were eager to show critics that they could compete in the playoffs after some slip-ups during the regular season (a 9–8 start, a five-game losing streak and a somewhat suspect record against the best teams in the league). However, many pundits believed that the end of the season showed the Heat playing the best they had all season. Although the Sixers offered some resistance, including some close losses and a come-from-behind victory in Game 4, the Heat were able to take it in five games and advance out of the first round for the first time since their NBA Championship in 2006. Regular-season series This was the 14th playoff meeting between these two teams, with the Celtics winning seven of the first 13 meetings. Due to the Celtics' struggles at the end of the regular season and the star power of the Knicks' Amar'e Stoudemire and Carmelo Anthony, many observers predicted a first-round upset victory for New York. In the first two games, the Knicks were indeed able to show they could contend with the defending Eastern Conference champions. In Game 1, Ray Allen made a game-winning three-pointer after being freed up by a controversial screen. The Celtics captured Games 3 and 4 fairly easily as injuries to both Stoudemire and Chauncey Billups took their toll on the Knicks. This was the only sweep of the first round. Regular-season series This was the third playoff meeting between these two teams, with the Magic winning the first two meetings. Despite defeating Orlando in three of their four regular-season meetings, the Atlanta Hawks were considered underdogs entering this series against the Magic, led by Defensive Player of the Year Dwight Howard. The Hawks were utterly unable to contain Howard in the first game; he scored 46 points and grabbed 19 rebounds. However, by limiting the contributions of the Magic's role players, Atlanta garnered a victory and stole the home-court advantage from the Magic. Although Orlando won the next game, better play by the Hawks down the stretch and the inability of the Magic to convert three-point shots gave the Hawks a 3–1 lead (the Magic shot 2-of–23 from beyond the arc in Game 4). The teams split the next two games and the Hawks advanced to the Eastern Conference semifinals for the third straight year. Regular-season series This was the second playoff meeting between these two teams, with the Spurs winning the first meeting. The eighth-seeded Grizzlies won their first playoff game in franchise history by defeating the top-seeded Spurs 101–98 in Game 1. The Spurs evened the series in Game 2, but the Grizzlies won Games 3 and 4 to take a 3–1 lead. With San Antonio 1.7 seconds away from elimination in Game 5, Gary Neal connected on a three-point buzzer beater to force overtime. The Spurs would win in OT, 110–103. However, the Grizzlies defeated the Spurs in Game 6, 99–91, to win a playoff series for the first time. In so doing, Memphis became just the second eighth-seeded team to knock off a top-seeded team since the NBA began using a best-of-seven format in the first round. Regular-season series This was the first playoff meeting between the Lakers and the New Orleans Pelicans/Hornets franchise. Regular-season series This was the fourth playoff meeting between these two teams, with the Trail Blazers winning two of the first three meetings. The Mavericks won the first two games, but the Trail Blazers won Games 3 and 4 to tie the series. Portland played most of Game 4 from behind, including trailing Dallas by 23 points late in the third quarter. Although the Mavericks held a 67–49 lead after three quarters, the Trail Blazers pulled off their biggest fourth-quarter comeback in franchise history and won, 84–82, behind 18 points from Brandon Roy in the final quarter. Dallas recovered quickly from their Game 4 collapse, however, winning Games 5 and 6 to eliminate Portland. Regular-season series This was the fourth playoff meeting between these two teams, with the Nuggets winning two of the first three meetings. All previous meetings took place while the Thunder franchise were still known as the Seattle SuperSonics. Regular-season series This was the fifth playoff meeting between these two teams, with the each team winning two series apiece. Game 4 is Shaquille O'Neal's final NBA game. Regular-season series This was the second playoff meeting between these two teams, with the Celtics winning the first meeting. The series was seen as an opportunity for Heat small forward LeBron James to exact revenge on the Celtics after Boston eliminated James' former team, the Cleveland Cavaliers, in 2008 and 2010. James called the series "personal", saying "...You don't want to keeping getting beat by the same team, the same team keep sending you home to plan a vacation..." The Heat won the first two games, but the Celtics won Game 3, 97–81. In that game, Boston point guard Rajon Rondo dislocated his left elbow on a bizarre play in the third quarter where he became tangled up with Dwyane Wade. Rondo still contributed to the Celtics' victory, scoring four points in the fourth quarter after the injury and finishing with 11 assists. However, his left arm was visibly limp for the remainder of the series and he was unable to play at his usual level of ability. Miami bounced back after the Game 3 loss to win the series, 4–1, returning to their first Eastern Conference finals since the 2006 NBA playoffs. Regular-season series This was the fourth playoff meeting between these two teams, with the Lakers winning the first three meetings. The Mavericks won the first two games in Los Angeles, including overcoming a 16-point deficit late in the third quarter of Game 1. Dallas overcame another second-half deficit to win Game 3, 98–92. In Game 4, the Mavericks blew out the Lakers, 122–86, sweeping the two-time defending NBA champions. Dallas equaled an NBA record in that game by sinking 20 three-pointers. Mavericks sixth man Jason Terry led the team in scoring with 32 points while making nine of his ten long-range attempts, tying another NBA playoff record that would go unequaled for nearly five years. Also in the same game, Andrew Bynum was ejected—and eventually fined and suspended for five games of the next season—after committing a flagrant foul on J. J. Barea. This series was the one and only time a team coached by Phil Jackson was swept out of the NBA Playoffs. Regular-season series This was the first playoff meeting between the Grizzlies and the Thunder. The Grizzlies and Thunder split the first two games. Memphis took a 2–1 series lead after overcoming a 16-point deficit late in the third quarter of Game 3. The Thunder tied the series back up in Game 4 with a 133–123 victory in triple overtime. Oklahoma City blew out the Grizzlies in Game 5, 99–72, but Memphis tied the series again in Game 6. The Thunder finally advanced to their first conference finals since they moved from Seattle by eliminating the Grizzlies in seven games. In the finale, Russell Westbrook became the fifth player to record a triple double in a Game 7. Regular-season series This was the sixth playoff meeting between these two teams, with the Bulls winning four of the first five meetings. Chicago swept Miami in the regular season en route to the league's best record and also blew out the Heat in Game 1 of the conference finals, 103–82. However, Miami advanced to the NBA Finals by capturing the next four games. In Game 5, the Heat erased a 12-point deficit with three minutes remaining to eliminate the Bulls, 83–80. This series marked the only time all season that the Bulls lost more than two consecutive games. Regular-season series This was the third playoff series between these two teams, with each team having won one of the prior series. Both previous meetings took place when the Thunder franchise was still known as the Seattle SuperSonics. In Game 1 of the Western Conference Finals, Dirk Nowitzki of Dallas set a playoff record for most free throws made without a miss with 24, previously held by Paul Pierce (21) in 2003. The Mavericks won, 121–112. The Thunder and Mavericks then split the next two games. In Game 4, Dallas rallied from a 15-point deficit with five minutes left in regulation to win in overtime for a 3–1 series lead. The Mavericks then wiped out another deficit late in Game 5 to win the game, 100–96, and reach their first NBA Finals since 2006. It would be the last time that neither a #1 seed nor a #2 seed reached a Conference finals until 2020. Regular-season series This was the second playoff meeting between these two teams, with the Heat winning the first meeting. NBA records "Team Rivalry Finder — Chicago Bulls versus Indiana Pacers (Playoffs)". basketball-reference.com. Retrieved March 6, 2016. "Team Rivalry Finder — Miami Heat versus Philadelphia 76ers (Playoffs)". basketball-reference.com. Retrieved March 6, 2016. "Team Rivalry Finder — Boston Celtics versus New York Knicks (Playoffs)". basketball-reference.com. Retrieved March 6, 2016. "Team Rivalry Finder — Atlanta Hawks versus Orlando Magic (Playoffs)". basketball-reference.com. Retrieved March 6, 2016. "Team Rivalry Finder — Memphis Grizzlies versus San Antonio Spurs (Playoffs)". basketball-reference.com. Retrieved March 6, 2016. Grizzlies vs. Spurs | Western Conference First Round | 2011 NBA Playoffs. NBA.com. Retrieved 14 June 2011 "Team Rivalry Finder — Los Angeles Lakers versus New Orleans Pelicans (Playoffs)". basketball-reference.com. Retrieved March 6, 2016. "Team Rivalry Finder — Dallas Mavericks versus Portland Trail Blazers (Playoffs)". basketball-reference.com. Retrieved March 6, 2016. Trail Blazers vs. Mavericks | Western Conference First Round | 2011 NBA Playoffs. NBA.com. Retrieved 14 June 2011 "Team Rivalry Finder — Denver Nuggets versus Oklahoma City Thunder (Playoffs)". basketball-reference.com. Retrieved March 6, 2016. "Team Rivalry Finder — Atlanta Hawks versus Chicago Bulls (Playoffs)". basketball-reference.com. Retrieved March 6, 2016. "Team Rivalry Finder — Boston Celtics versus Miami Heat (Playoffs)". basketball-reference.com. Retrieved March 6, 2016. Celtics vs. Heat | Easter Conference Semi-Finals | 2011 Playoffs. NBA.com. Retrieved 19 June 2011 "Team Rivalry Finder — Dallas Mavericks versus Los Angeles Lakers (Playoffs)". basketball-reference.com. Retrieved March 6, 2016. Mavericks vs. Lakers | Western Conference Semi-Finals | 2011 NBA Playoffs. NBA.com. Retrieved 14 June 2011 Andrew Bynum suspended, fined. ESPN. Retrieved 14 June 2011 "Team Rivalry Finder — Memphis Grizzlies versus Oklahoma City Thunder (Playoffs)". basketball-reference.com. Retrieved March 6, 2016. Grizzlies vs. Thunder | Western Conference Semi-Finals | 2011 NBA Playoffs. NBA.com. Retrieved 14 June 2011 "Team Rivalry Finder — Chicago Bulls versus Miami Heat (Playoffs)". basketball-reference.com. Retrieved March 6, 2016. Heat vs. Bulls | Eastern Conference finals | 2011 NBA Finals. NBA.com. Retrieved 19 June 2011 "Team Rivalry Finder — Dallas Mavericks versus Oklahoma City Thunder (Playoffs)". basketball-reference.com. Retrieved March 6, 2016. Thunder vs. Mavericks | Western Conference finals | 2011 NBA Playoffs Archived 2016-05-18 at the Wayback Machine. NBA.com. Retrieved 14 June 2011. "Team Rivalry Finder — Dallas Mavericks versus Miami Heat (Playoffs)". basketball-reference.com. Retrieved March 6, 2016. Wikimedia Commons has media related to 2011 NBA Playoffs. 2011 playoffs at NBA.com 2011 NBA Playoffs at ESPN 2011 NBA Playoffs at Basketball Reference