Selena Marie Gomez (/səˈliːnə ˈɡoʊmɛz/ sə-LEE-nə GOH-mez; born July 22, 1992) is an American singer, songwriter, actress, producer, and businesswoman. She began her career as a child actress, starring on the children's television series Barney & Friends (2002–2004). Gomez rose to prominence and emerged as a teen idol, for her leading role as Alex Russo on the Disney Channel sitcom Wizards of Waverly Place (2007–2012). As a recording artist, she signed with Hollywood Records in 2008 and formed the pop rock band Selena Gomez & the Scene, for which she served as lead vocalist. With three studio albums and seven singles, each of the band's releases have received gold certifications or higher by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). Further pursuing a career as a soloist, Gomez found continued success with her solo studio albums, as each have debuted atop the US Billboard 200. Her EDM-inspired debut, Stars Dance (2013) yielded the international top-ten single "Come & Get It". Desiring more artistic control, Gomez signed with Interscope Records to release the electropop set Revival (2015), supported by the top-ten singles "Good for You", "Same Old Love", and "Hands to Myself". Its follow-up, Rare (2020), topped the charts in 11 countries, and was led by the single "Lose You to Love Me", which marked Gomez's first number-one song on both the US Billboard Hot 100 and the Canadian Hot 100. She forayed into Spanish-language music with the extended play Revelación (2021), which earned her first Grammy and Latin Grammy Award nominations. Gomez has also released various collaborative singles, including "We Don't Talk Anymore", "It Ain't Me", "Wolves", "Taki Taki", and "Calm Down (Remix)"; the latter became the most commercially successful Afrobeats song of all time and became the best-selling collaboration of 2023 globally. Gomez has starred in numerous films, including voicing Mavis in the Hotel Transylvania film franchise (2012–2022). On television, she produced the teen drama series 13 Reasons Why (2017–2020), the documentary Living Undocumented (2019), her cooking show Selena + Chef (2020–present), and the mystery comedy series Only Murders in the Building (2021–present), in which she plays a lead acting role. Gomez has received numerous accolades, including an American Music Award, a Billboard Music Award, two MTV Video Music Awards, and 16 Guinness World Records; and received nominations for four Emmy Awards, two Grammy Awards, and two Golden Globe Awards. Outside of music and acting, Gomez has worked with various charitable organizations, and advocates for mental health, and gender, racial, and LGBT equality; she has been a UNICEF goodwill ambassador since 2009. She launched the cosmetics company Rare Beauty in 2020, which was valued at $2 billion in 2024, and founded the Rare Impact Fund, a non-profit committed to raising $100 million this decade for mental health awareness. Gomez has been featured in listicles such as the Time 100 (2020) and Forbes 30 Under 30 (2016 and 2020), and was named the Billboard Woman of the Year in 2017. Billboard ranked her as one of the most successful artists of the 2010s decade. With over 430 million followers, she is the most-followed woman on Instagram, as of 2024. Selena Marie Gomez was born on July 22, 1992, in Grand Prairie, Texas, to Ricardo Joel Gomez and Texas-born former stage actress Mandy Teefey. She was named after Tejano singer Selena Quintanilla, who died in 1995. Her father is of Mexican descent, while her mother, who was adopted, has Italian ancestry. Gomez's paternal grandparents emigrated to Texas from Monterrey in the 1970s. Of her heritage, Gomez has said she is "a proud third-generation American-Mexican" and "My family does have quinceañeras, and we go to the communion church. We do everything that's Catholic, but we don't really have anything traditional except go to the park and have barbecues on Sundays after church." Gomez's Spanish fluency waned after age seven, when she began working in television. Her parents divorced when she was five years old, and she remained with her mother. Gomez has two younger half-sisters and a younger stepbrother: Gracie Elliot Teefey, through Mandy and her second husband, Brian Teefey, and Victoria "Tori" and Marcus Gomez, through Ricardo and his second wife, Sara. She earned her high-school diploma through homeschooling in May 2010. Gomez was born when her mother was 16 years old. The family had financial troubles throughout Gomez's childhood, her mother struggling to provide for the pair. At one point, Gomez recalls that they had to search for quarters just to get gas for their car. Her mother later recalled that the two would frequently walk to their local dollar store to buy spaghetti for dinner. Gomez has said, "I was frustrated that my parents weren't together, and never saw the light at the end of the tunnel where my mom was working hard to provide a better life for me. I'm terrified of what I would have become if I'd stayed [in Texas]." She later added that her mother "was really strong around me. Having me at 16 had to have been a big responsibility. She gave up everything for me, had three jobs, supported me, sacrificed her life for me." Gomez had a close relationship with her grandparents as a child and appeared in various pageants. Her grandparents often took care of her while her parents finished their schooling, and she has said they "raised her" until she found success in show business. Gomez first gained an interest in pursuing a career in entertainment watching her mother prepare for stage productions. In 2002, she began her acting career on the children's television series Barney & Friends, portraying the character Gianna. The show was her first acting gig. Gomez recalled of the experience, "I was very shy when I was little [...] I didn't know what 'camera right' was. I didn't know what blocking was. I learned everything from Barney." Gomez appeared in thirteen episodes of the show between 2002 and 2004; the show's producers released her as she was "too old" for the series. While working on Barney & Friends, Gomez had bit part roles in the film Spy Kids 3-D: Game Over (2003) and the made-for-television film Walker, Texas Ranger: Trial by Fire (2005). She guest starred in a 2006 episode of the Disney Channel series The Suite Life of Zack & Cody. Gomez was given a recurring role on the Disney Channel series Hannah Montana in 2007 as pop star Mikayla. During this time, Gomez filmed pilot episodes for two potential Disney Channel series; the first was a Suite Life spin-off titled Arwin!, and the second was a Lizzie McGuire spin-off titled What's Stevie Thinking?. She later auditioned for a role in the network's series Wizards of Waverly Place, ultimately winning the lead role of Alex Russo. Gomez and her mother subsequently moved to Los Angeles. Wizards of Waverly Place saw Gomez playing a teenage girl in a family of wizards who own a restaurant in New York City. It quickly became a success for the Disney Channel and represented Gomez's breakthrough into the mainstream. The role brought Gomez "teen idol" status. And she also became one of the ten highest-paid children's TV stars of all time, earning from US$25,000-30,000 per episode. The series received numerous awards and nominations, and won the Outstanding Children's Program at the 61st Primetime Emmy Awards. It garnered positive reviews, with Gomez's being particularly praised for her comic timing and sarcastic delivery. In 2008, while working on the second season of her series, Gomez voiced Helga along with Jim Carrey, Steve Carell and others in the animated film Horton Hears a Who!. The film became a commercial and critical success, grossing over US$300 million worldwide. In September of the same year, the teen musical comedy film Another Cinderella Story was released, where Gomez played the main role of an aspiring dancer Mary Santiago, the film became the second installment of the A Cinderella Story series, released on direct-to-video. Gomez recorded three songs for the soundtrack album, including the single "Tell Me Something I Don't Know"-which became Gomez's first entry on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100, and the premiere of the music video was on MTV's Total Request Live. This role earned Gomez a Young Artist Award. She also recorded the original song "Fly to Your Heart" for the soundtrack album of the animated film Tinker Bell (2008). In 2008, at age 16, Gomez signed with Hollywood Records, and formed her own production company, July Moon Production. She partnered with XYZ Films for the project, allowing Gomez to option articles, hire writers and create talent packages to shop to studios. Gomez was slated to release two films under the company. The first, titled What Boys Want, would feature Gomez as a girl who could hear the thoughts of men. She later announced a film adaptation of the novel Thirteen Reasons Why, in which she was to play a young girl who commits suicide; ultimately, neither film was made, but later, Gomez will produce a television adaptation of this novel. Gomez continued to enjoy mainstream success throughout the following year, appearing as Alex Russo in a crossover episode of the Disney Channel series The Suite Life on Deck in 2009. She also guest starred as herself on the Disney Channel series Sonny with a Chance. Gomez, along with Demi Lovato, starred in the Disney Channel film Princess Protection Program, which aired in June 2009. The film had a total of 8.5 million viewers during its premiere. For the film's soundtrack, the pair recorded the song "One and the Same", which charted at number eighty-second in the U.S. She next starred in Wizards of Waverly Place: The Movie, a television film based on the series. The film premiered in August to an audience of 11.4 million viewers, becoming cable's number-one scripted telecast of the year and was the second-most watched TV movie on cable, behind High School Musical 2. Roxana Hadadi of The Washington Post credited all three performers—Gomez, David Henrie and Jake T. Austin—for their "acting skills that carry the film". The film won the series its second consecutive Emmy for Outstanding Children's Program at the 62nd Primetime Emmy Awards. Gomez recorded three songs on the television series and film's soundtrack, including the single "Magic", which reached number sixty-one in the U.S. She then voiced Princess Selenia in the English-language French animated/live-action film Arthur and the Revenge of Maltazard (2009). Hoping to cross over into the music industry, Gomez formed the pop rock band Selena Gomez & the Scene through her record deal with Hollywood Records. The name of the band is an "ironic jab" at the people who called Gomez a "wannabe scene". The band's debut studio album, Kiss & Tell, influenced by pop rock and electronic rock was released in September 2009. The album received mixed reviews from critics, BBC News described the album as "[...] fast and full of energy [...]", and Mikael Wood from Billboard wrote: "[...] her music could use more of her in it". Kiss & Tell debuted at number nine on the U.S. Billboard 200, with first-week sales of 66,000 album-equivalent units, and spent a non-consecutive 59 weeks there. Although its lead single was not commercially and critically successful, the second single, "Naturally", became a breakthrough and the first highly successful single in Gomez's career, reaching number twenty-nine in the U.S., and top-ten in many European countries, including number seven in the U.K.. In a 2021 Grammy interview, Gomez credited the LGBT community for kickstarting her music career and supporting her before anyone else, stating "I remember when it was released, it truly started getting played in gay bars before anywhere else", and expressed her gratitude for the community. "I hope they hear in my music the importance of self-love and the strength that comes through vulnerability"-Gomez said, adding that she has always truly loved and supported gays since childhood. All studio albums and singles of the band were certified gold or higher by the RIAA. In July 2010, Gomez starred alongside Joey King in Ramona and Beezus, a film adaptation of the children's novel series by Beverly Cleary, in which she portrayed Beezus Quimby. The film was well received by critics; Roger Ebert described it as "a sweet salute", and found both actresses "appealing". Gomez later reprised the voice role of Princess Selenia in Arthur 3: The War of the Two Worlds (2010). The band's second studio album, A Year Without Rain, inspired by dance-pop and synth-pop, was released in September 2010. Basically, the album was not poorly appreciated by critics, many of whom called it the effort was an improvement over 2009's Kiss & Tell. The album debuted at number four on the U.S., with first-week sales of over 66,000 album-equivalent units, and also debuted at number six in Canada. Both of the record's singles, "Round & Round" and "A Year Without Rain", achieved moderate success. The band was awarded Favorite Breakout Artist at the 37th People's Choice Awards. Selena Gomez & the Scene released their third and final, as well as most successful studio album, When the Sun Goes Down, in June 2011. The album received mixed reviews from critics, who praised the album's production and described it as "[...] is a very professional affair", the album also was co-written by Britney Spears and Katy Perry. It debuted at number four on the U.S. with first-week sales of 78,000 album-equivalent units, reaching number three the following week, as well as reaching number two in Canada and Spain. Its lead single, "Who Says", was the band's highest charting effort, peaking at number twenty-one in the U.S. Its second single, "Love You like a Love Song", although it did not reach great heights in the charts, reaching only number twenty-two in the U.S. and spending 38 consecutive weeks there, as well as reaching the top-ten in Canada, and topping the chart in Russia, but became a worldwide hit and one of the most successful, best-selling and popular songs in Gomez's career. Alex Frank from Pitchfork called the song "a cult karaoke classic". In 2022, Billboard ranked the song as the biggest song that peaked at number twenty-two of all time. For two years in a row (2010–2011), Billboard magazine ranked Gomez third in their list of 21 Under 21: Music's Hottest Minors, an annual ranking of the most popular musicians under the age of 21. Gomez starred in the comedy film Monte Carlo (2011), with Leighton Meester and Katie Cassidy; she played the lead role of Grace, a teenager "mistaken for a socialite", Cordelia (also Gomez), "while on a trip to Paris". In preparation for the role, she learned to play polo and received dialect coaching to speak in two different British accents; Gomez's accent was described as "unconvincing". The film received mixed reviews from critic. Nick Schager from Slant Magazine found Gomez "cute, but too bland to lend the proceedings any vivid character, except for the few scenes that allow her to indulge her cold, sarcastic, nasty side as Cordelia". That year, Gomez appeared in a cameo role in the film The Muppets. Gomez hosted in June the MuchMusic Video Awards in Toronto, Canada, and in November the MTV Europe Music Awards in Belfast, Northern Ireland. Gomez confirmed in January 2012 that she would be taking a break from music, placing Selena Gomez & the Scene on hiatus. That year, Wizards of Waverly Place officially ended its run on the Disney Channel after four seasons. For five years in a row (2009-2013), Gomez won the Kids' Choice Award for Favorite TV Actress. She currently holds the record for the most Kids' Choice Awards wins (12) for an individual. In 2012, Gomez starred in the controversial comedy-crime film from director Harmony Korine Spring Breakers together with James Franco, Vanessa Hudgens, Ashley Benson and Rachel Korine. The film premiered at the 69th Venice International Film Festival, and was released the following year. The story followed four college-aged girls who decide to rob a fast food restaurant in order to pay for their spring break. It saw Gomez playing a more mature character than she did previously and reportedly led to her having a "bit of a meltdown on set". Spring Breakers received positive reviews from critics, some called it a potential cult classic. The film entered many prestigious ratings, including the BBC's 100 Greatest Films of the 21st Century and Rolling Stone's The 50 Best Movies of the 2010s and many others. Many critics and tabloids were shocked to see the "teen idol" Miss Gomez in such a provocative film, in particular Manohla Dargis from The New York Times wrote: it is not surprising that Miss Gomez quit Disney. "In "Spring Breakers" [she] have the chance to simulate the behavior that feeds the tabloids without the humiliations and career-crushing price paid [...]". In February 2012, Gomez received the voice role of Mavis Dracula in the animated film Hotel Transylvania. In September of the same year, the film premiered at the 37th annual Toronto International Film Festival, and was released in theaters the same month. The film received mixed reviews from critics, some calling it "buoyant" and some "[...] a little too loud and thinly-scripted for older audiences". Hotel Transylvania was commercially successful, grossing US$358 million worldwide. In 2013, Gomez starred alongside Ethan Hawke in the action thriller film Getaway, in which she played a young hacker. The film was a critical and commercial failure. This role earned her the first and only nomination for the Worst Actress at the 34th Golden Raspberry Awards. Christopher Orr of The Atlantic described her as "a kid trying desperately to act like a grownup, but with no real idea what that might entail". In 2013, she was executive producer and star in a special The Wizards Return: Alex vs. Alex on the Disney Channel. Despite earlier claims that she would be taking a break from music, Gomez announced in March 2013 the release of her solo debut album. In April 2013, Gomez released "Come & Get It" as the lead single for her upcoming album. This song became Gomez's first top-ten entry on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100, reaching number six, and also reached the top-ten on the charts in Canada and the U.K. The album's second single, "Slow Down", peaked at number twenty-seven in the U.S. Gomez released her debut solo studio album, Stars Dance, in July 2013. The style of the record was rooted musically on EDM and electropop. It received mixed reviews from music critics. Writing for Los Angeles Times, August Brown found that the album was "the kind of album one makes in 2013 if you want to keep the pop sugar of the Disney tween cabal but mix in some broken glass and a club bathroom nosebleed. Its productions are rooted in today's pop-EDM default mode [...]". Andrew Hampp of Billboard wrote: "[...] is a collection of 11 shinily produced pop songs that find Gomez trying on a series of different personalities with her slight-yet-capable vocals [...]". Stars Dance became her first album to debut at number one on the U.S. Billboard 200, with first-week sales of 97,000 album-equivalent units. At that time, Gomez, who turned 21, became the youngest solo artist to take first place since Speak Now from Taylor Swift in 2010. The album also reached number one in Canada. Gomez incorporated choreographed dance routines into the album's music videos and her promotional live performances, having been inspired by artists such as Janet Jackson and Britney Spears. The music video of "Come & Get It" won the Best Pop Video at the 2013 MTV Video Music Awards. In August 2013, Gomez embarked on her first solo worldwide concert tour, Stars Dance Tour, to further promote Stars Dance, with shows in North America, Europe, Australia and Asia. In December 2013, Gomez canceled the Australian and Asian legs of the tour, claiming that she would be taking a hiatus to spend time with her family. In January 2014, it was reported that Gomez had spent two weeks at Dawn at The Meadows, which is a treatment center in Wickenburg, Arizona, that specializes in treating addiction and trauma in young people. Her representative stated that she had spent time there "voluntarily [...] but not for substance abuse". Gomez confirmed in 2015 that she had been diagnosed with lupus and that after canceling the tour she entered rehab to undergo chemotherapy. Gomez played Nina Pennington, an innocent straight-A student, in Behaving Badly (2014). The project, filmed prior to Gomez's stint in rehab, was released in August to a generally negative critical and commercial reception. However, critics deemed Gomez's performance superior to the film. Gomez also had a supporting role in the drama Rudderless (2014), the directorial debut of William H. Macy. The independent film premiered at the 2014 Sundance Film Festival, and received a mixed reception from critics. At the 2014 Teen Choice Awards, Gomez was honored with the Ultimate Choice Award for her "contributions to the entertainment world". Currently, with 18 wins, she is the fourth-most awarded solo artist at the Teen Choice Awards. Seventeen also named her "the most powerful girl under 21" in 2014. In April 2014, Gomez had fired her mother and stepfather as her managers, who had served in those roles since her career at Disney. Gomez later signed with two new talent agencies, WMA and Brillstein, to manage her career. The Hollywood Reporter informed: "Selena's desire to find fresh handlers is part of a strategy to "move on into more adult-oriented fare in film and music"", and finally get rid of the image of the "Disney's Teen Idol". The news about Gomez's new management fueled rumors that her contract with Hollywood Records was coming to an end. In November 2014, Gomez surprise-released her new single "The Heart Wants What It Wants", and confirmed after months of speculation that she would be releasing a compilation album to complete her contract with her label. The single became her second top-ten hit in the U.S., and reached the top-ten in Canada. In the same month, Gomez released her first solo compilation album of her greatest hits, For You, which also includes three brand new songs. The album debuted at number twenty-four on the U.S. Billboard 200, earning 35,506 album-equivalent units in its first week. Gomez officially parted ways with Hollywood Records and later signed with Interscope Records in December 2014. While working on her second studio album, Gomez collaborated with German DJ Zedd on "I Want You to Know", released in February 2015, and debuted at number-seventeen in the U.S. In May, she appeared in Taylor Swift's music video for "Bad Blood". Gomez released "Good for You" featuring rapper ASAP Rocky as the lead single from her second studio album, in June. The song debuted at number-one on the Digital Songs chart with first-week sales of 179,000 copies—the best sales week in Gomez's career for a single. It was the chart's first number-one debut since Swift's "Blank Space" (2014). "Good for You" became Gomez's first top-five single on the Billboard Hot 100, and her first single to top the Mainstream Top 40 chart. It also reached the top-ten on charts in Australia and Canada. Gomez later reprised the voice role of Mavis in Hotel Transylvania 2 (2015); the film was met with a positive critical reception and commercial success upon release, grossing US$474 million worldwide. She was awarded Favorite Animated Movie Voice at the 42nd People's Choice Awards. Gomez released her second studio album, Revival, in October 2015. It is primarily a dance-pop and electropop record with R&B vibes. The album was reviewed positively by critics, who praised its production and lyrical content. Writing for Rolling Stone, Brittany Spanos stated that "Revival is an audacious name for a 23-year-old singer's second album, but from start to finish, Gomez earns it," noting that "[t]his is the sound of a newly empowered pop artist growing into her strengths like never before." Kristen S.Hé of Billboard called it "one of the most influential pop albums of the late 2010s." The album debuted at number-one on the U.S. Billboard 200 with first-week sales of 117,000 album units, and was certified platinum by the RIAA. It remains Gomez's highest first-week sales to date. "Same Old Love" was released as the album's second single and topped the Mainstream Top 40 chart. It also peaked at number-five in the U.S., tying with "Good for You" as Gomez's highest-charting single at the time, and reached the top-ten in Canada. "Hands to Myself" served as the album's third single and became her third consecutive number-one on the Mainstream Top 40, making Gomez one of only six female artists to have three singles from the same album top the chart. The single also peaked within the top-ten in the U.S., and the top-five in Canada. For her performance on Billboard's music charts, Gomez received the Chart-Topper Award at the 2015 Billboard Women in Music event. Gomez was a key advisor during the ninth season of the reality singing competition The Voice. She made a cameo appearance in Adam McKay's film The Big Short (2015). She then starred as Dot, a young runaway hitchhiker, in the comedy-drama The Fundamentals of Caring with Paul Rudd, which premiered at the 2016 Sundance Film Festival in January, and was released on Netflix five months later. The film received a positive critical response; Tristram Fane Saunders of The Daily Telegraph described Gomez's performance as "impressive" and "mature". Gomez performed as the musical guest on an episode of the NBC late-night sketch comedy Saturday Night Live in January 2016. "Kill Em with Kindness" was released as the Revival's fourth and final single four months later. Gomez played the president of a sorority in the comedy Neighbors 2: Sorority Rising (2016); the film grossed US$108 million worldwide, and received mixed to positive reviews. Gomez embarked on her worldwide Revival Tour in May 2016. She claimed that the tour would focus solely on her as an artist and would feature less choreography and fewer effects than her previous tour. Gomez began working on her third studio album while touring and added a new song titled "Feel Me" to the setlist of her Revival Tour. The song was later released in February 2020, due to high demand from fans. After touring in North America, Asia and Oceania, she canceled the European and South America legs in August 2016 due to anxiety, panic attacks and depression caused by her lupus. Gomez featured on Charlie Puth's single, "We Don't Talk Anymore". The song was an international success, and reached the top-ten in the U.S., Australia, France, Spain, and topped the charts in Italy; and was certified 5× platinum by the RIAA. The music video became the most-viewed music video published in 2016 on YouTube, with over 3 billion views. Gomez had a supporting role in In Dubious Battle (2016) starring and directed by James Franco. The film had its world premiere at the 73rd Venice International Film Festival, and was met with underwhelming reviews. She also guest starred in the Comedy Central variety sketch series Inside Amy Schumer. Gomez and Canadian singer Tory Lanez were featured on Norwegian DJ Cashmere Cat's single, "Trust Nobody". Following the cancelation of her tour, Gomez rechecked into rehab to focus on her mental health and was noticeably absent from social media. At that time, she was the most followed person on Instagram, and became the first person to reach 100 million followers on it. In February 2023, she regained her status as the most-followed woman on the platform, and became the first woman to reach 400 million followers on it the following month. From 2015 to 2016, Gomez broke 9 Guinness World Records, and she had the most-liked Instagram image of all time at that time. After being absent from the public eye for four months, Gomez triumphantly returned to the media making her highly anticipated return since entering rehab at the 2016 American Music Awards, where she owned all the attention and became the most-talked about and hight-profile person of the evening. Where she was nominated for Favorite Pop/Rock Female Artist and Artist of the Year, the first of which she won. And her spirited speech became one of the most-powerful awards show speeches in recent history. At the 2016 iHeartRadio Music Awards, Gomez won Biggest Triple Threat, and at the 2016 Billboard Music Awards, she was nominated for two awards including Top Female Artist. In the same year, she was named to Forbes' 30 Under 30 list in the music category, and again in 2020 in its "All-Star Alumni" category. Billboard named Gomez one of the Top 50 Money Markers of 2016, an annual ranking of the most profitable musicians of the year, having earned US$8.8 million only from her music career in 2016. Gomez and the Norwegian DJ Kygo released a single together, "It Ain't Me", in February 2017. The collaboration reached top ten of most major music charts worldwide, including the U.S. and the U.K., and attained top five peaks in Australia, Canada, Germany and many European countries. The song received nominations at major awards around the world, including Top Dance/Electronic Song at the 2018 Billboard Music Awards, and it also her best-selling song in the UK, selling over 1.4 million chart units. Gomez served as executive producer for the series adaptation of the novel Thirteen Reasons Why. The show premiered on Netflix in March 2017. The series drew backlash from various mental health charities and suicide prevention communities over "dangerous content", with some people feeling the show glamorized suicide. Gomez addressed the controversy, saying that "We stayed very true to the book and that's initially what [author] Jay Asher created was a beautifully tragic, complicated yet suspenseful story and I think that's what we wanted to do. We wanted to do it justice and, yeah, [the backlash is] gonna come no matter what. It's not an easy subject to talk about, but I'm very fortunate with how it's doing. Despite the controversy, the first season was a critical success. However, the other three seasons received generally negative reviews. 13 Reasons Why was the most tweeted about show of 2017, and the most-watched original streaming series of 2018. In 2022, its second season ranks as the ninth most watched English-language television series on Netflix, with 496.1 million hours viewed within 28 days of release. The series ended after four seasons in June 2020. Gomez recorded a cover version of the song "Only You" for the series' first season soundtrack. In May 2017, Gomez released the single "Bad Liar", alongside a vertical music video which was available for streaming only through Spotify; it was the first-ever music video to premiere on Spotify. The song received universal acclaim from music critics, with some deeming it Gomez's best song to date; Billboard ranked it as the best song of 2017. Rolling Stone ranked "Bad Liar" at number 39 on its 2019 list of best songs of the 2010s. Winston Cook-Wilson of Spin magazine found Gomez's vocals pristine and the track "charmingly weird", calling its lyrics and sample usage "harebrained but ultimately brilliant". He appreciated "Bad Liar" for eschewing contemporary radio trends, concluding that it "mostly just sounds like itself, and there's no higher compliment to pay it. Gomez released the single "Fetish" featuring rapper Gucci Mane two month later. In October 2017, Gomez and EDM producer Marshmello released the single "Wolves". The song was a commercial success, and reached the top ten on charts in Australia, Canada, the U.K, and several European countries, peaking at number twenty in the U.S. Later that year, Gomez was named Billboard's Woman of the Year, in recognition of her influence and commercial success. In May 2018, Gomez released the single "Back to You", from the 13 Reasons Why Season 2 Soundtrack. It reached the top-ten in a variety of charts in European countries, top-five in Australia and Canada, and reached top-twenty in the U.S. and the U.K. Gomez voiced Mavis again in Hotel Transylvania 3: Summer Vacation, which was released in July. The film was a commercial success, and received mixed to positive reviews. With box office earnings of US$528 million worldwide, it becoming Sony Pictures Animation's highest-grossing film worldwide to be completely animated and second-highest overall. (Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse in 2023 surpassed this record). Gomez featured on DJ Snake's song "Taki Taki" alongside Ozuna and Cardi B, released in September. The single achieved global success, reaching the top-ten in Canada, France, Germany, Italy, topped the charts in Spain and several Latin American countries, and peaked at number eleven in the U.S. The song has received numerous awards and nominations including, nominations for the two Billboard Music Awards and, but ultimately won Song of the Year at the 2019 Latin American Music Awards. From 2011 to 2018, Gomez had a streak of 16 consecutive top 40 hits on the Billboard Hot 100, which is the longest active run of any artist according to Billboard. In November 2018, Gomez surpassed Drake and became Spotify's most-streamed artist with 46 million monthly listeners while not releasing new album since 2015 (Ariana Grande later surpassed this record). Gomez also featured on Julia Michaels's single "Anxiety", released in January 2019, and the following month, her collaboration titled "I Can't Get Enough" with Benny Blanco, Tainy and J Balvin, was released. Gomez appeared in Jim Jarmusch's comedy horror The Dead Don't Die (2019). The film had its world premiere at the 2019 Cannes Film Festival, where it generated mixed reviews. That year, she starred in Woody Allen's romantic comedy A Rainy Day in New York, with Timothée Chalamet and Elle Fanning. Due to a resurgence of the 1992 sexual abuse allegation against Allen prompted by the MeToo movement, Gomez made a donation of over $1 million, exceeding her salary from the film, to the Time's Up initiative. The film received mixed reviews from critics, but Gomez's performance was praised; Variety's Jessica Kiang wrote: "Gomez comes out the best of the younger cast, husking her way through some of the films better lines." Gomez served as an executive producer for the Netflix docuseries Living Undocumented, released in October 2019, which follows eight undocumented families in America. The docuseries was a critical success. According to an op-ed written by Gomez for Time on October 1, 2019, Gomez said she was approached about the project in 2017 and decided to become involved after watching footage that captured "the shame, uncertainty, and fear I saw my own family struggle with. But it also captured the hope, optimism, and patriotism so many undocumented immigrants still hold in their hearts despite the hell they go through." In October 2019, Gomez released "Lose You to Love Me" as the lead single from her third studio album. The next day, she surprise-released the album's second single, "Look at Her Now". "Lose You to Love Me" became her first number-one song in the U.S. and Canada, and reached the top five of various national charts worldwide, including Australia and the U.K. Rare was released in January 2020, and debuted atop in the U.S., earning 112,000 album-equivalent units in its first week. It became her third consecutive number-one album in the U.S., and topped the charts in Australia, Canada, and several other territories, peaking at number two in the UK. The album received positive reviews from music critics, who praised its production and cohesiveness, with many calling it Gomez's best album to date; Jem Aswad of Variety labeled Rare "one of the best pop albums to be released in recent memory" and described it as "sophisticated, precisely written and expertly produced music". Other singles released from the album include "Rare" and "Boyfriend". In January 2020, Gomez voiced a giraffe in the adventure film Dolittle, directed by Stephen Gaghan. The film, starring Robert Downey Jr., was a box office disappointment, and received negative reviews from critics, who called it "too long [and] lifeless." Gomez hosted and executive produced the HBO Max cooking show Selena + Chef, which features Gomez joined by a different chef each episode; this was initially implemented remotely due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Each episode highlights a food-related charity. The show premiered in August 2020, and was well received by critics. It ran for four seasons till September 2022, and was nominated for Outstanding Culinary Series at the 50th Daytime Emmy Awards. Gomez won a Critics' Choice Real TV Award for her work on the program. In May 2023, it was announced that Food Network had ordered two projects to be hosted by Gomez. The first—Selena + Chef: Home for the Holidays, a four-part holiday special off the heels of Selena + Chef; is also produced by Gomez, and premiered on November 30, and concluded on December 21, 2023. An interactive cooking series will premiere in 2024. In June, Gomez featured in a remix of Trevor Daniel's song, "Past Life". She executive produced two films that year; the romantic comedy The Broken Hearts Gallery, released in September 2020, to positive reviews, and the teen comedy-drama This Is the Year. In August, Gomez collaborated with South Korean girl group Blackpink for "Ice Cream". The song peaked at number thirteen in the U.S., and achieved the third-highest 24-hour debut for a music video on YouTube at the time, with over 79 million views. That year, Gomez was honored by The Latin Recording Academy as one of the Leading Ladies of Entertainment. She was also named by Time as one of the 100 most influential people in the world. Gomez released her first Spanish-language project, an EP titled Revelación, in March 2021. The record blends reggaeton, Latin pop, R&B genres with urbano elements, marking a departure from the dance-pop sound of its predecessor, Rare. It debuted at number twenty-two in the U.S., shifting 23,000 equivalent album units in its first week of release, marking the largest sales week for a Latin album by a woman since Shakira's El Dorado in 2017. It also debuted atop the Billboard Top Latin Albums chart, becoming the first album by a woman to do so, also since 2017's El Dorado. Revelación debuted with over 8.57 million streams on Spotify in its first 24 hours, becoming the biggest debut of a female EP on the platform. The EP received universal acclaim and became Gomez's best-reviewed project, with a weighted mean score of 83, on Metacritic, a website collecting reviews from professional music critics; it was nominated for Best Latin Pop Album at the 64th Annual Grammy Awards. It also received Latin Pop Album of the Year nominations from the Billboard Latin Music, Latin American Music and Lo Nuestro award ceremonies. Gomez's expansion of her artistry was praised; AllMusic's Matt Collar found her remaining "artistically fearless". Entertainment Weekly's Marcus Jones called her "a far more versatile musician than she's been given credit for". It spawned three singles: "De Una Vez", "Baila Conmigo" with Rauw Alejandro, and "Selfish Love" with DJ Snake. With this EP and the single "Baila Conmigo", she became the first female act to top the US Latin Albums and Latin Airplay charts simultaneously in over a decade. The music video for "De Una Vez" was nominated for Best Short Form Music Video at the 22nd Annual Latin Grammy Awards. Gomez performed at the 2021 UEFA Champions League final opening ceremony in May. She later collaborated with Colombian singer Camilo in a song titled "999". Gomez starred in and executive produced the Hulu mystery-comedy series Only Murders in the Building alongside Steve Martin and Martin Short, which premiered on Hulu in August 2021, and set the record for the most-watched comedy premiere in Hulu history. The program was renewed for a fourth season in October 2023. Ahead of the official premiere of the series, Gomez revealed that she was happy to have played a character that matched her current actual age, saying that she "signed [her] life away" to The Walt Disney Company at the start of her career and that she "did not know what she was doing." The series has received critical acclaim, and numerous accolades. The performances and chemistry among the main trio were praised by critics; Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun-Times wrote: "Gomez is a true co-star in the series and does a superb job of meshing with Martin and Short to form one of the more entertaining albeit unlikely friendship trios in recent memory." Gomez won the Satellite Award for Best Actress – Television Series Musical or Comedy, while she was nominated for a Critics' Choice Television Award, and twice for a Golden Globe Award and a Screen Actors Guild Award. She won two times the People's Choice Award for Comedy TV Star of the Year. At the 74th Primetime Emmy Awards, she was nominated as producer for Outstanding Comedy Series, marking only the third time a Latina has ever been among the producing nominees for comedy series in the awards' history. Several journalists expressed disappointment over her failure to receive an Emmy nomination for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series. Her co-stars, Steve Martin and Martin Short, released a statement saying, "We're a little dismayed that Selena didn't get nominated because she's so crucial to the trio, to the show. She kind of balances us." She was again nominated for this award the following ceremony. Gomez reprised the voice role of Mavis, and also served as an executive producer, for the fourth and final installment in the Hotel Transylvania franchise, Hotel Transylvania: Transformania (2022). In response to the rising cases of the SARS-CoV-2 Delta variant in the United States, Sony Pictures cancelled the film's theatrical plans. The film was released on Amazon Prime Video in January to mixed reviews. Gomez was nominated as executive producer for a Children's and Family Emmy Award. She collaborated with British band Coldplay on "Let Somebody Go", released as a single in February. For her work as a featured artist on Coldplay's ninth studio album, Music of the Spheres, she was nominated for Album of the Year at the 65th Annual Grammy Awards. In May, Gomez hosted an episode of the NBC late-night sketch comedy Saturday Night Live. She later made a cameo appearance on the show in December. In July, Gomez executive produced the ViX+ docuseries Mi Vecino, El Cartel. In August, she was featured on the remix of Nigerian artist Rema's song, "Calm Down". An international success, it peaked at number three on the Billboard Global 200. The single became Gomez's ninth top-ten in the U.S., peaking at number three; and her second number-one in Canada, spending nine weeks atop the Canadian Hot 100. It topped Global Excl. U.S. and Radio Songs for 2 and 10 weeks, respectively, becoming Gomez's first leader on both charts. "Calm Down" became the longest-running number-one of all time on the Billboard U.S. Afrobeats Songs chart, with 58 weeks at the summit. The remix reached number one on the Billboard U.S. Pop Airplay. Billboard called it "Afrobeats' biggest crossover hit". At the 2023 MTV Video Music Awards, the song was nominated for Song of the Year, and won Best Afrobeats; while it won Top Afrobeats Song at the 2023 Billboard Music Awards. It is the most-streamed Afrobeats song on Spotify (over 1 billion plays) and the most-viewed music video of an Afrobeats song (over 700 million views) on YouTube, as of 2023. According to the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry (IFPI), "Calm Down" was the second best-selling song of 2023 globally. Gomez was the focus of the Alek Keshishian-directed "raw and intimate" documentary film, Selena Gomez: My Mind & Me. The film premiered at the AFI Fest in November 2022, and was released two days after on Apple TV+ and in select movie theaters. It was met with a positive critical reception upon release; the documentary was praised for mental health transparency. Chris Azzopardi from The New York Times described it as an "honest portrait study of stardom and mental illness". The film was nominated for Outstanding Writing for a Nonfiction Programming at the Primetime Creative Arts Emmy Awards, and received the Seal of Female Empowerment in Entertainment honor by the Critics Choice Association, and also won the MTV Movie & TV Award for Best Music Documentary. Gomez released the song "My Mind & Me" to coincide with the release of the documentary. The song received Variety's "Film Song of the Year" honor. "My Mind & Me" was shortlisted for the Best Original Song category for the 95th Academy Awards but didn't make the final nominations. In March 2023, Gomez appeared in the second-season finale of the Apple TV+ documentary television series Dear.... She released the standalone single "Single Soon" on August 25, 2023. Gomez stated it is a "fun little song [she] wrote a while back that's perfect for the end of summer" since she is "not quite done with" her upcoming fourth studio album. It debuted in the top-twenty on the Billboard Global 200, in Canada, and in the U.S. On October 1, the singer made a surprise appearance on stage at Coldplay's concert of their Music of the Spheres World Tour at the Rose Bowl in Pasadena to perform "Let Somebody Go". Gomez revealed in 2022 that her next album was in the works, and alluded to a potential tour. She said the record would be "really powerful, strong, very pop" with themes revolving around "freedom from relationships [and] the darkness". In January 2024, the artist stated that she prefers acting over music, and only has "one more album in [her]". She revealed that she "never really intended on being a singer full-time" but "that hobby" evolved into a career when she was working with Disney. Gomez released the single "Love On" on February 22, 2024. Gomez will next star opposite Zoe Saldaña in the musical crime comedy Emilia Perez, which she filmed from April to June 2023 in Paris, directed by Jacques Audiard. The film is slated for a 2024 release. In October 2020, it was announced that Gomez is set to produce, and possibly star in, the horror thriller film Dollhouse. In November 2020, Gomez was announced as executive producer and star of the Elgin James-directed biographical film In the Shadow of the Mountain, based on the memoir of Silvia Vasquez-Lavado, the first openly gay woman to complete the Seven Summits. In April 2021, Gomez was also set to star in the psychological thriller Spiral. In March 2022, a project inspired by Sixteen Candles titled 15 Candles entered development for Peacock, with Gomez serving as executive producer. In August 2022, it was announced that Gomez was in talks to produce a reboot of Working Girl on Hulu. In December, Gomez was announced as producer of the music documentary Won't Be Silent. In December 2023, Gomez revealed through Instagram that her upcoming studio album will be released before March 2024. Gomez is set to portray Linda Ronstadt in an upcoming biopic based on her life. Gomez is described as a pop artist. Her work is primarily characterized as dance-pop and EDM; however, she has experimented with different music genres. Her debut album with the Scene was influenced by electronic rock and pop rock, while her subsequent records with the band opted for a dance-pop sound. A Year Without Rain noted synth-pop characteristics, and When the Sun Goes Down featured a more electropop and electro-disco musical direction. Her debut solo album Stars Dance was rooted in the EDM-pop genre—Gomez herself described it as "baby dubstep"—drawing elements from electronic, disco, techno, and dancehall. Her songs "The Heart Wants What It Wants" and "Good for You" have been described as "minimalistic" and "grown-up", introducing a more adult pop sound into her repertoire. Early in her career, Gomez cited Bruno Mars as an influence for "his style of music, his style in general, the way he performs, the way he carries himself". Gomez has also cited Christina Aguilera, Britney Spears, Beyoncé, Rihanna, and Taylor Swift as influences. Gomez's debut solo album Stars Dance (2013) was prominently influenced by Spears, Swift, and EDM producer Skrillex; her second album, Revival, was mainly inspired by Aguilera's album Stripped (2002), as well as Janet Jackson and Spears. In 2009, Gomez was part of Sears's back-to-school fashion campaign and featured in television commercials. She hosted the "Sears Arrive Air Band Casting Call" to select five winners for the first-ever "Sears Air Band" to perform at the 2009 MTV Video Music Awards. She also became the spokesperson for Borden Milk and starred in campaign's print ads and television commercials for the brand. Having previously announced plans to launch a fashion line, Gomez released the Dream Out Loud collection in 2010. It consisted of bohemian dresses, floral tops, jeans, skirts, jackets, scarves and hats, all of which were made from recycled or eco-friendly materials. Gomez stated, "With my line, I really want to give the customer options on how they can put their own looks together [...] I want the pieces that can be easy to dress up or down, and the fabrics being eco-friendly and organic is super important [...] Also, the tags will all have some of my inspirational quotes on them. I'm just looking to send a good message." Gomez teamed up with designers Tony Melillo and Sandra Campos for the project, both of whom had previously worked with big-name fashion houses. Melillo and Campos teamed with New York-based Adjmi Apparel to manufacture the brand, which was formed by Adjmi CH Brands LLC, the holding company for the brand. From 2010 to 2014, Gomez worked with retailer Kmart to release the clothing line. It was announced on July 14, 2011, that Gomez had signed a license agreement with Adrenalina, an extreme sports and adventure-themed lifestyle brand, to develop, manufacture, and distribute her own fragrance. Chairman and CEO of Adrenalina, Ilia Lekach, said, "We are incredibly enthused to be working with Ms. Gomez and will reveal more details pertaining to the fragrance as we get closer to the launch date." The perfume was released in May 2012. In 2013, she released her second fragrance, Vivamore by Selena Gomez. She also created her own collection of nail polish colors for Nicole by OPI. From 2013 to 2015, Gomez was a spokesperson and partner for Neo by Adidas. In 2015, Gomez signed $3 million endorsement deal with Pantene. In 2016, Gomez appeared in a fashion campaign for luxury brand Louis Vuitton. She also appeared in ads for Coca-Cola's "Share a Coke" campaign, and advertisements for the campaign and lyrics from two of her songs were featured on Coca-Cola packaging nationwide. In 2017, Gomez confirmed her collaboration with Coach, beginning with their fall line, thereby becoming the new face of the brand and earning $10 million. The limited-edition collection of handbags was called the "Selena Grace" line. Gomez's second collection and "first ever ready-to-wear collection for Coach", named Coach X Selena Gomez, included clothing, outerwear, and bags. That year, Gomez signed a $30 million contract with the athletic brand Puma as brand ambassador, appearing in campaigns such as those for the Phenom Lux sneakers released in March. Her collection with Puma, called SG x PUMA Strong Girl collection, launched on December 12 of that year and contained products from sneakers to athleisure attire. Since 2017, Gomez has been one of the top five highest paid people on Instagram, becoming the highest paid person on the platform of 2017. As of July 2023, Gomez earns $1.7 million per sponsored Instagram post. In April 2020, Gomez became an owner and investor of the ice cream brand Serendipity. Gomez announced that the Serendipity brands donated $1 from every ice cream pint and product sold in May to the Rare Impact Fund. In September, she launched her own makeup line, "Rare Beauty". The makeup line was named Startup of the Year at the 2020 WWD Beauty Inc Awards. In July 2021, Gomez released a swimwear line with La'Mariette. In November, Gomez co-founded the mental health media platform Wondermind. The following month, she became an investor in the food delivery company Gopuff. In May 2022, Gomez collaborated with Our Place on a cookware line, the Summer Collection. A second edition of the range was released in June 2023. In October 2008, Gomez participated in St. Jude's Children's Hospital's "Runway For Life" benefit in strutting her stuff down the runway in Beverly Hills, where over $1 million was raised for the cause. That same month, Gomez was named UNICEF's spokesperson for the Trick-or-Treat for UNICEF campaign, which encouraged children to raise money on Halloween to help children around the world. In August 2009, Gomez, then 17 years old, became the youngest UNICEF ambassador (Millie Bobby Brown later surpassed this record). In her first official field mission, Gomez traveled to Ghana in September 2009 for one week to witness first-hand the stark conditions of vulnerable children that lack vital necessities such as clean water, nourishment, education and healthcare. Gomez explained in an interview with Associated Press correspondents that she wanted to use her star power to bring awareness to Ghana: "That's why I feel very honored to have a voice that kids listen to and take into consideration [...] I had people on my tour asking me where IS Ghana, and they Googled it [...] and because I went there, they now know where Ghana is. So it's pretty incredible." Gomez said, of her role as ambassador, that "Every day 25,000 children die from preventable causes. I stand with UNICEF in the belief that we can change that number from 25,000 to zero. I know we can achieve this because every moment, UNICEF is on the ground providing children with the lifesaving assistance needed to ensure zero becomes a reality." Gomez was named spokesperson for UNICEF's 2009 Trick-or-Treat campaign for the second year in a row. She raised over $700,000 for the charity in 2008 and stated that she hopes to be able to raise US$1 million in 2009. Gomez participated in a celebrity auction and hosted a live web cast series on Facebook in support of the Trick-or-Treat campaign. She returned as the UNICEF spokesperson for the 60th anniversary of Trick-or-Treat for UNICEF campaign in 2010. In celebration of the organization's 60th anniversary, Gomez and the Scene held a benefit concert, donating all proceeds to the campaign. Gomez also encouraged teenagers to donate via social media. She also auctioned personal items to CharityBuzz.com, designed a Trick-or-Treat for UNICEF t-shirt and participated in a small concert in Los Angeles. With Gomez's help, UNICEF raised $4 million. In February 2011, Gomez traveled to Chile to meet with the families of the UNICEF-supported "Programa Puente", which helped families better understand and develop skills to deal with early childhood education, development, and other issues related to raising children. Gomez remarked that "UNICEF is helping Chilean families get out of poverty, prevent violence within the home and promote education. To witness first hand these families' struggles, and also their hope and perseverance, was truly inspiring". In March, Gomez participated in the UNICEF Tap Project's "Celebrity Tap Pack" which featured limited-edition, custom-made water bottles with tap water from the homes of each celebrity advocate to raise funds and increase profile for the clean water and sanitation programs. All the funds raised (the campaign raised $900,000) made it possible to provide clean, safe drinking water to children in Vietnam, Togo, Mauritania, and Cameroon- countries where it's desperately needed. She was also featured in videos that promoted the campaign. In April 2012, she advocated for the global "Sound the Alarm" campaign on Facebook and Twitter, and recorded a public announcement encouraging young people to donate $10 via text message to prevent the death of a million children from malnutrition in the Sahel Region of West and Central Africa. Gomez has conducted and organized three charity concerts (2010-2013) to help UNICEF provide children around the world with life-saving therapeutic foods, medicines, clean water, education, and immunization. In total, Gomez's three charity concerts for UNICEF have raised nearly $400,000 for UNICEF programs worldwide. In 2014, Gomez visited Nepal to raise awareness for children in need. A UNICEF ambassador since 2009, Gomez has played an active role in advocating for the world's "most vulnerable children" by participating in several campaigns, events, and initiatives on behalf of the organization. In June 2021, Gomez signed a UNICEF open letter urging the G7 "to donate more coronavirus vaccines to the international COVAX initiative." Gomez was involved in the UR Votes Count campaign, which encouraged teenagers to learn more about 2008 presidential candidates Barack Obama and John McCain. The following year, Gomez became the ambassador of DoSomething after being involved with the charity Island Dog, which helped dogs in Puerto Rico. Gomez updated fans on her blog at MySpace: "We are spending the day feeding puppies, washing them and hanging out with them. After we spend the day with them we are sending these dogs to different places in the U.S the no-kill dog shelters so they can find a home [...]." She joined while filming Wizards of Waverly Place: The Movie in Puerto Rico. In 2009, Gomez has been involved with the charity RAISE Hope For Congo, an initiative of the Enough Project, raising funds for war-torn African country, in order to raise awareness of conflict minerals and sexual crimes and violence committed against women and girls in the Congo, as well as to eliminate sexual violence, torture and other atrocities through the 4P method; Peace, Protection, Punishment and Prevention. From 2009 to 2012, Gomez was involved in "Disney's Friends for Change", an organization which promoted "environmentally-friendly behavior", and appeared in its public service announcements. Gomez, Demi Lovato, Miley Cyrus, and the Jonas Brothers recorded the charity single "Send It On" as the ad hoc musical team "Disney's Friends For Change", all of whose proceeds were donated into the Disney Worldwide Conservation Fund. The song debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 at number 20. Billboard included this song in their list of The 100 Greatest Disneyverse Songs of All Time (2023). In April 2012, Gomez was named ambassador to the Ryan Seacrest Foundation. The year before, Gomez made an appearance at The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia during a Ryan Seacrest Foundation broadcast from the hospital's multimedia center. She was also a spokesperson for State Farm Insurance and appeared in numerous television commercials, which aired on the Disney Channel, to raise awareness of being a safe driver. Gomez provided the narration for Girl Rising (2013), a CNN documentary film, which focused on the power of female education as it followed seven girls around the world who sought to overcome obstacles and follow their dreams. In 2017, during her partnership with the Coach brand, Gomez participated in their charity work Step Up, an organization that supports girls in under-resourced communities to pursue an education. Gomez attended Step Up events at two Los Angeles high schools. She talked to the girls about many things, including their goals, and gifted them with new Coach bags. Gomez posted photos from this event on her social medias with the caption: “@instagram is celebrating world kindness day and I got to spend it with people who fully will change our world one day. @coach introduced me to @stepupwomensnetwork which is an after-school organization that encourages girls to believe that they have the capability to do anything they set their mind to. It’s crazy to me how much they are willing put others before themselves.” Gomez attended the We Day California youth empowerment event in Los Angeles in 2018 and 2019. During the 2018 event, Gomez introduced Nellie Mainor, a young fan who had a rare kidney disease. Her participation in We Day 2019 was her first appearance after an extended break from the spotlight. Gomez continued her partnership with WE Charity when she traveled to Kenya in December 2019 to meet the local community and visit schools built by the organization. During the 2019–20 Australian bushfire season, Gomez donated US$3 million to fight Australia wildfires and urged followers to do the same. In 2020, she created the Rare Impact Fund by Rare Beauty to help "young people gain access to mental health resources", and is committed to raise US$100 million over the next ten years. To achieve that goal, one percent of all sales of her brand of Rare Beauty products (yes, that's gross, not net) will go toward the fund. In its first year, the Rare Impact Fund distributed $1.2 million in grants to support 8 organizations that work to expand mental health services in educational settings. For each episode of her HBO Max cooking show Selena + Chef, the show donates $10,000 to the charity of the Chef's choice, often food related. In 2021, over two seasons of the show, $360,000 was raised for nonprofit organizations. In October 2022, Gomez co-founded the Wondermind, a mental health-focused digital platform. In December 2022, Gomez donated exclusive items to the 2nd Annual ASCAP Foundation, which supports music education and talent development programs across the U.S. Gomez donated 10 percent of the net proceeds from her cookware line with Our Place to the Rare Impact Fund, which focuses on mental health awareness. In honor of World Mental Health Day, Sephora donated all proceeds of the October 10, 2023 sales of Rare Beauty products to the Rare Impact Fund. In response to the 2023 Israel–Hamas war, Gomez and her cosmetics brand Rare Beauty issued a statement about the humanitarian crisis in Gaza, and donated funds to Magen David Adom in Israel and Palestinian Red Crescent Society in Gaza and the West Bank, and also donated to UNICEF to help get urgent medical relief and resources to the children of Gaza. Both Gomez and Rare Beauty were heavily criticized for their misleading statement which implied solidarity with the people of Gaza, whilst they donated funds to Magen David Adom, which is an auxiliary service to the Israel Defense Forces who are implicated in war crimes against the people of Gaza. Gomez signed an Artist4Ceasefire letter in October 2023 calling on President Joe Biden and Congress to call for an immediate cease-fire in Gaza. The letter says: "We believe that all life is sacred, regardless of faith or ethnicity, and we condemn the killing of Palestinian and Israeli civilians. In December 2023, Gomez attended Ramy Youssef's fundraiser for Gaza. Gomez has been referred to as "Pop Princess" by several media outlets, and various journalists regard her as a "triple threat", owing to her successful singing, performing, and acting careers. The Guardian credits her with popularizing "whisper pop", a style of pop music characterized by soft, hushed and breathy vocals. Rolling Stone India regards her as one of the most influential pop culture icons of her time. In 2017, Time honored her as one of the "women who are changing the world" on its First Women Leaders list. In 2020, Gomez received the Art Award from Hispanic Heritage Foundation for her impact on global culture via her music, filmography and advocacy. In 2022, People named Gomez as one of 15 women who are "changing the music industry today". Variety considers her a key personality in global media, owing to her "multi-hyphenate" presence incorporating music, films, television, cosmetics, and social activism. Gomez was also included in The Hollywood Reporter's Power 100 list as one of the most powerful women in entertainment. Gomez advocates for various causes. She is known for frequently raising awareness on mental health. In 2019, she received the McLean Award for mental health advocacy. The Stanford Healthcare Innovation Lab honored her with the first ever Mental Health Innovations Award for Excellence in Mental Health Advocacy in 2022. That year, she also received the Morton E. Ruderman Award in Inclusion by the Ruderman Family Foundation. Gomez has shown support for the LGBT community. She joined numerous celebrities to write a "love letter" during pride month, as a part of Billboard's 30 Days of Pride during the month of June 2016. She also collaborated with 23 other artists for the charity single "Hands", a tribute for the victims of the Pulse nightclub shooting, to raise funds for Equality Florida's Pulse Victims Fund, GLAAD, and the GLBT Community Center of Central Florida. That year, she donated proceeds of her Revival Tour concert in North Carolina to fight the state's recent legislation known as the "bathroom law;" The law, repealed in 2017, required people to use public restrooms in line with their birth gender unless they had fully transitioned. In 2023, Gomez and her cosmetics brand Rare Beauty, participated in the 53rd annual Los Angeles Pride Parade, as well as her Rare Impact Fund has been donating funds since the foundation for The Trevor Project and in 2023 for Trans Lifeline who focus on LGBTQ+ youth. In 2014, Gomez spoke out about the 2014 Israeli-Palestinian Gaza War, posting a message on her social media in which she asked for help and prays for Gaza, the message read: “It’s About Humanity. Pray for Gaza.”, “Please pray for those families and babies today. Please always remember what’s important in life. It’s not any of this. We are here to help, inspire and love. Be that change. #wearethenextgeneration,” Gomez wrote in the caption. A few hours later, she added that: “And of course to be clear, I am not picking any sides. I am praying for peace and humanity for all!” Gomez wrote in her message. In the wake of the Alabama abortion ban in May 2019, Gomez spoke out on Instagram in favor of abortion rights in the United States. Amidst Roe v. Wade being overturned in June 2022, Gomez stated she is "not happy" and that "men need to stand up and also speak against this issue. It's also the amount of women that are hurting." Gomez is a critic of racism and supported the Black Lives Matter movement, lending her Instagram account to Alicia Garza, co-creator of Black Lives Matter and one of the founders of Black Futures Lab, in June 2020. In May 2021, Gomez participated in the VAX Live: The Concert to Reunite the World concert organized by Global Citizen to promote the distribution of COVID-19 vaccines worldwide through the COVAX program. The event urged people to ask their governments to pledge $22.1 billion in aid to the vaccine distribution. In May 2022, MTV partnered with Gomez and the Rare Impact Fund by Rare Beauty to host the Mental Health Youth Action Forum at the White House in coordination with the Biden-Harris Administration. Gomez owned a $6.6 million home in Calabasas, Los Angeles. In 2014, she sold her mansion in Tarzana, Los Angeles for $3.5 million. In 2015, she purchased a mansion in Fort Worth, Texas, for $3.5 million, and in October 2018 the house was sold. In 2020, Gomez moved to a $5 million mansion in the Los Angeles neighborhood of Encino. In the same year, she sold her house in Studio City, Los Angeles for $2.3 million. Gomez was raised Catholic. At age 13, she wanted a purity ring, and her father went to the church and had it blessed. She has said, "He actually used me as an example for other kids: I'm going to keep my promise to myself, to my family and to God." Gomez stopped wearing the ring in 2010. In 2017, she said she did not like the term "religion" and that sometimes it "freaks me out," adding, "I don't know if it's necessarily that I believe in religion as much as I believe in faith and a relationship with God." In 2014, Gomez said that she listened to "Oceans (Where Feet May Fail)" by Hillsong United before performing at the 2014 American Music Awards. In 2016, she appeared at a Hillsong Young & Free concert in Los Angeles, leading worship by singing her song "Nobody". When a fan on Twitter asked her who the lyrics to "Nobody" refer to, Gomez replied that they refer to God. She also covered Hillsong Worship's song "Transfiguration" during her Revival Tour. As of 2020[update], she attends a different congregation in California, the Hillsong Church, and has said that she does not consider herself religious, but is more concerned with her faith and connection to God. Gomez was diagnosed with lupus sometime between 2012 and early 2014. In September 2017, she revealed on Instagram that she had withdrawn from public events during the previous few months because she had received a kidney transplant from actress and friend Francia Raisa. During the transplant, an artery broke and emergency surgery was conducted to build a new artery using a vein from her leg. Gomez has been open about her struggles with both anxiety and depression. She began pursuing therapy in her early twenties and also spent time in treatment facilities. When she reached 100 million Instagram followers, Gomez said she "sort of freaked out" and has since taken several extended breaks from social media, due in part to negative comments. In April 2020, she revealed she has bipolar disorder. In October 2022, Gomez canceled an appearance on The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon after testing positive for COVID-19. In November 2022, she revealed that she had an episode of psychosis in 2018. Gomez dated singer Nick Jonas in 2008. She appeared in the music video for his band's song "Burnin' Up". From December 2010 to March 2018, Gomez was in an on-again, off-again relationship with Canadian singer Justin Bieber. In 2015, she began dating Russian-German DJ Zedd shortly after recording their song "I Want You to Know". They broke up later that year. In January 2017, Gomez began dating Canadian singer-songwriter the Weeknd. They moved in together temporarily later on in September, but broke up a month later. In December 2023, Gomez confirmed she is in a relationship with American record producer Benny Blanco. Gomez has won various awards including: an American Music Award, a Billboard Music Award, 16 Guinness World Records, two iHeartRadio Music Awards, six Latin American Music Awards (she is the third most-awarded female artist), two MTV Video Music Awards, three MTV Movie & TV Awards, and five People's Choice Awards. For her music work, she was nominated for two Grammy Awards (including Album of the Year as featuring artist) and a Latin Grammy Award. For her acting work, she won a Satellite Award, and was nominated for a Critics' Choice Television Award, two Golden Globe Awards, three NAACP Image Awards, and three Screen Actors Guild Awards. As a producer, she was nominated for four Emmy Awards including: at the 74th Primetime Emmy Awards, Gomez was nominated for Outstanding Comedy Series, marking only the third time a Latina has ever been among the producing nominees for comedy series in the awards' history, and she was nominated for this award again at the succeeding ceremony, and for a Daytime Emmy Award. With 18 wins, Gomez is the fourth-most awarded solo artist at the Teen Choice Awards. She currently holds the record for the most Kids' Choice Awards wins (12) for an individual. In addition, she has also won numerous awards for her philanthropic, charity work and mental health advocacy, including the McLean Award, the Stanford Healthcare Innovation Lab Award, the Morton E. Ruderman Award in Inclusion from the Ruderman Family Foundation, and the Art Award from Hispanic Heritage Foundation for her impact on global culture via her music, filmography and advocacy. Gomez has been included in many prestigious lists and has been awarded by prestigious publications and magazines. In 2015, Gomez was honored with the Chart-Topper Award at the Billboard Women in Music event. The following year, she was named to Forbes' 30 Under 30 list in the music category, and again in 2020 in its "All-Star Alumni" category. Billboard named Gomez the Woman of the Year in 2017, included her in its list of Greatest of All Time Pop Songs Artists in 2018, and named her one of the 100 most successful artist of the 2010s in 2019. Time included her on its annual list of the 100 most influential people in 2020. In the same year, she was also honored as one of the Leading Ladies of Entertainment by The Latin Recording Academy. From 2022-2023, The Hollywood Reporter included her on its annual list of the 100 most powerful women in entertainment. Gomez has broken many variety of world records. In 2016, she was the most-followed person on Instagram, and became the first person to reach 100 million followers on it. In February 2023, she regained her status as the most-followed woman on Instagram, and became the first woman to reach 400 million followers on it the following month. She is one of the most-followed people on Twitter, Spotify, Facebook, and TikTok. Gomez has topped three three consecutive times the Billboard 200, and one time the Billboard Hot 100, and Billboard Artist 100. As of May 2017, she has sold 24.3 million songs in the United States, and as of August 2023, she has sold 3.6 million albums in the U.S., and shifted more than 11.5 million album equivalent units. According to the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), she has achieved 63 million certified units in the U.S. She is one of the most-streamed artist on Spotify Globally. Six of Gomez's songs have reached over one billion streams on Spotify, and two of her music videos have reached over two billion views on YouTube ("We Don't Talk Anymore" is the most-viewed music video published in 2016 on it). According to the review aggregator site Rotten Tomatoes, Gomez's most critically acclaimed television and film projects include The Suite Life of Zack & Cody (2006), Hannah Montana (2007), Wizards of Waverly Place (2007–2012), Another Cinderella Story (2008), Princess Protection Program (2009), Ramona and Beezus (2010), The Muppets (2011), Spring Breakers (2012), Hotel Transylvania (2012–2022), Girl Rising (2013), The Wizards Return: Alex vs. Alex (2013), Rudderless (2014), The Fundamentals of Caring (2016), Neighbors 2: Sorority Rising (2016), The Dead Don't Die (2019), A Rainy Day in New York (2019), Selena + Chef (2020–2022), Only Murders in the Building (2021–present), and Selena Gomez: My Mind & Me (2022). Gomez also executive produced the television series 13 Reasons Why (2017–2020) and Living Undocumented (2019). Selena Gomez & the Scene albums Kiss & Tell (2009) A Year Without Rain (2010) When the Sun Goes Down (2011) Solo albums Stars Dance (2013) Revival (2015) Rare (2020) Selena Gomez & the Scene tours Live in Concert (2009–2010) A Year Without Rain Tour (2010–2011) We Own the Night Tour (2011–2012) Solo tours Stars Dance Tour (2013–2014) Revival Tour (2016) List of artists who reached number one in the United States List of artists who reached number one on the Billboard Mainstream Top 40 chart List of most-followed Instagram accounts List of artists who reached number one on the U.S. Dance Club Songs chart List of Billboard Social 50 number-one artists History of Mexican Americans in Dallas–Fort Worth For her discography as Selena Gomez & the Scene, see Selena Gomez & the Scene discography. Adapted from List of awards and nominations received by Selena Gomez. including her releases with The Scene. Rao, Priya (January 16, 2024). "Beauty's Most Sought-After M&A Targets in 2024". The Business of Fashion. Archived from the original on January 17, 2024. Retrieved January 28, 2024. Shaw, Lucas; Tse, Crystal; Ceron, Ella (March 18, 2024). "Selena Gomez Weighs Sale of Cosmetics Brand Valued at $2 Billion". Bloomberg. Archived from the original on March 19, 2024. Retrieved March 19, 2024. "Selena Gomez Biography". The Biography Channel. Archived from the original on August 19, 2017. Retrieved April 12, 2013. Bonner, Mehera (May 10, 2018). "Everything You Need to Know About Selena Gomez's Mom, Mandy Teefey". Cosmopolitan. Archived from the original on May 10, 2020. Retrieved May 24, 2020. Mandy was born in Texas, and gave birth to Selena when she was just 16. She married Selena's dad, Ricardo Joel Gomez, and after their relationship ended in divorce, married talent manager Brian Teefey. Barney, Chuck (February 7, 2008). "Selena Gomez could be next Disney 'it' girl". Oakland Tribune. Archived from the original on March 10, 2008. Retrieved May 14, 2013. Mandy Teefey, a former stage actress, gave birth to Selena at the age of 16. "Selena Gomez's Famous Name". E!. August 22, 2008. Archived from the original on December 1, 2009. Retrieved November 5, 2009. Roiz, Jessica Lucia (May 3, 2016). "Selena Gomez Talks Selena Quintanilla; Reveals Why She Was Named After 'Queen of Tejano'". Latin Times. Archived from the original on July 10, 2016. Retrieved July 7, 2016. "Selena Gomez and Jake T. Austin on being latin". Showbizcafe.com. September 13, 2008. Archived from the original on April 4, 2023. Retrieved July 4, 2011. Curiel, Kamren (June 14, 2012). "Selena Gomez Supports Her Mom at Foster Care Fundraiser". Latina. Archived from the original on February 1, 2020. ...her mother Mandy Teefey. 'I was adopted, I was a teen mother,' Gomez's mom said. "TV: Life is magical for 'Wizards' star". The Fresno Bee. Archived from the original on August 8, 2008. Retrieved April 8, 2013. Because Gomez's father is from Mexico, she has been able to attend many family quinceñeras. But the actress, whose mother is half-Italian, did not have her own. Exposito, Suzy (March 11, 2021). "How Selena Gomez embraced her Mexican heritage as 'a source of healing'". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on March 28, 2021. Retrieved March 11, 2021. Selena Gomez has a message for immigrant graduates during COVID-19. Define American. May 23, 2020. Archived from the original on August 6, 2020. Retrieved May 24, 2020 – via YouTube. "Star Spotlight: Selena Gomez". Scholastic. September 26, 2008. Archived from the original on February 15, 2018. Retrieved June 20, 2010. Richards, Olly (July 14, 2013). "The wonderful world of Selena Gomez". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on February 10, 2014. Retrieved July 23, 2013. Finn, Natalie (June 13, 2013). "Selena Gomez Has a Baby Sister! Demi Lovato Congratulates Singer and Mom Mandy on New Arrival". E! News. Archived from the original on May 29, 2023. Retrieved June 14, 2013. Gomez, Selena [@selenagomez] (June 14, 2013). "Momma, Brian, and me are all so grateful for all your well wishes. My lil sissy Gracie Elliot Teefey was born on June 12th. Luv you all XO" (Tweet) – via Twitter. "Selena Gomez Has Another Baby Sister". Disneydreaming.com. Archived from the original on September 23, 2015. Retrieved October 18, 2014. Selena Gomez Graduates High School – On Screen & Off | Access Hollywood – Celebrity News, Photos & Videos. Access Hollywood (May 12, 2010). Retrieved November 17, 2010. Archived May 15, 2010, at the Wayback Machine "Selena Gomez Biography". biography.com. Archived from the original on August 19, 2017. Retrieved November 7, 2014. Melas, Chloe (June 30, 2011). "Selena Gomez Reveals: My Mom's Car Would Break Down & We'd Have To Search For Quarters To Buy Gas!". Hollywood Life. Archived from the original on July 12, 2018. Retrieved June 15, 2013. Gardner, Chris (June 7, 2013). "Selena Gomez: I would have two children by now If I lived in Texas". MSN. Archived from the original on September 26, 2015. Retrieved June 15, 2013. "Selena Gomez Talks Parents' Divorce: 'I Blamed My Mom A Lot' (VIDEO)". HuffPost. June 30, 2011. Archived from the original on October 2, 2015. Retrieved October 16, 2015. "Selena Gomez Biography". BuddyTV. Archived from the original on June 28, 2017. Retrieved October 22, 2022. Takeda, Allison (May 16, 2013). "Demi Lovato, Selena Gomez Will Always Be Friends". US Weekly. Archived from the original on April 7, 2023. Retrieved October 22, 2022. "From Texas to Hollywood!". People. July 22, 2009. Archived from the original on September 13, 2009. Retrieved June 15, 2013. Bryson, Carey. "Selena Gomez – Bio and Facts for Kids". About.com. Archived from the original on May 14, 2013. Retrieved June 15, 2013. "Selena Gomez Biography". People. Archived from the original on August 29, 2016. Retrieved October 22, 2022. Nessif, Bruna (July 29, 2011). "Time Warp: Spy Selena Gomez in Her First Film Role". E! News. Archived from the original on April 4, 2023. Retrieved October 22, 2022. Angiolillo, Vincent; Rodriguez, Javy (March 17, 2013). "30 Things You Didn't Know About Selena Gomez". Complex. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved October 22, 2022. "A Midsummer's Nightmare". The Suite Life of Zack & Cody. Season 2. Episode 22. August 11, 2006. 08:04, 22:04 minutes in. Disney Channel. Orenstein, Hannah (April 22, 2016). "Did You Know There Was a "Suite Life" Spin-Off That Starred Selena Gomez?". Seventeen. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved October 22, 2022. Martin, Denise (November 3, 2004). "In search of tweens". Variety. Archived from the original on March 19, 2021. Retrieved November 4, 2022. Addams Rosa, Jelani (April 10, 2015). "6 Things You Never Knew About "Lizzie McGuire"". Seventeen. Archived from the original on June 26, 2022. Retrieved August 22, 2022. "The 25 best Disney Channel Original Series of all time". Entertainment Weekly. June 15, 2022. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved October 22, 2022. Seidman, Robert (September 27, 2012). "Selena Gomez to Executive-Produce and Star in New 'Wizards of Waverly Place' Television Event on Disney Channel". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on October 1, 2012. Retrieved June 15, 2013. Gomez, Shirley (July 22, 2021). "Happy Birthday Selena Gomez: wise quotes from the singer that should be our motto". ¡Hola!. Archived from the original on March 18, 2023. Retrieved March 18, 2023. He, Richard S. (January 9, 2020). "Selena Gomez's Road to 'Rare': How Pop's Quietest Singer Began to Raise Her Voice". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 6, 2023. Retrieved March 26, 2023. Greenwood, Chelsea (July 30, 2018). "9 of the highest paid child TV stars of all time — and their reported salaries". Insider. Archived from the original on October 27, 2023. Retrieved July 16, 2023. "TV's Highest-Paid Kid Actors (Surprise! Miley Cyrus Isn't No. 1)". Pop Eater. May 10, 2010. Archived from the original on May 12, 2010. Retrieved July 16, 2023. "29th Annual Young Artist Awards - Nominations / Special Awards". Young Artist Awards. Archived from the original on July 5, 2008. Retrieved October 26, 2016. Finke, Nikki (January 6, 2010). "41st NAACP Image Award Nominations". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on October 7, 2018. Retrieved October 22, 2022. "Nominees/Winners | Television Academy". Academy of Television Arts & Sciences. Archived from the original on October 23, 2022. Retrieved October 22, 2022. McNamara, Mary (November 12, 2010). "TV review: Wizards of Waverly Place". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on January 5, 2021. Retrieved October 22, 2022. Eakin, Marah (February 18, 2011). "Wizards Of Waverly Place". The A.V. Club. G/O Media. Archived from the original on November 15, 2019. Retrieved December 31, 2020. Robinson, Mark (February 27, 2017). "The Decline of the Disney Sitcom". Mark Robinson Writes. Archived from the original on January 5, 2021. Retrieved October 22, 2022. Bernard, Emily (May 15, 2022). "'Saturday Night Live': Selena Gomez's Best Sketches, Ranked". Collider. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved October 22, 2022. Whitney, Alyse (July 13, 2015). "Did You Know These Stars Are the Voices Behind Your Favorite Animated Characters?". Teen Vogue. Archived from the original on August 9, 2021. Retrieved June 18, 2013. "Dr. Seuss' Horton Hears a Who! (2008)". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango. Archived from the original on November 17, 2020. Retrieved October 21, 2022. "Dr. Seuss' Horton Hears a Who! (2008)". Box Office Mojo. Archived from the original on October 26, 2012. Retrieved June 18, 2013. Whitney, Alyse (January 8, 2018). "Selena Gomez's Bae from "Another Cinderella Story" Celebrates the Movie's 10th Anniversary". Seventeen. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved October 25, 2022. "Selena Gomez – Chart History: The Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 21, 2021. Retrieved May 12, 2017. Links: "Another Cinderella Story (Original Motion Picture Soundtrack)". Apple Music. Archived from the original on July 6, 2021. Retrieved October 21, 2012. "Tell Me Something I Don't Know - Single". Apple Music. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved October 21, 2012. Links: "Production Begins On "Another Cinderella Story" For Warner Premiere". Warner Bros. November 1, 2007. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved October 22, 2022. "30th Annual Young Artist Awards - Nominations / Special Awards". Young Artist Awards. Archived from the original on July 19, 2011. Retrieved October 21, 2022. "Fly to Your Heart – Selena Gomez". AllMusic. Archived from the original on January 29, 2020. Retrieved October 22, 2022. "Selena Gomez's Supersweet 16". E! News. July 22, 2008. Archived from the original on October 22, 2019. Retrieved October 22, 2022. "Selena Gomez Celebrates Sweet 16 With Record Deal". Celebuzz. July 23, 2008. Archived from the original on October 29, 2014. Retrieved June 18, 2013. Siegel, Tatianna (October 29, 2008). "Selena Gomez forms production co". Variety. Archived from the original on August 9, 2021. Retrieved October 21, 2009. Eng, Joyce (October 30, 2008). "Wizards' Selena Gomez Conjures Own Production Company". TV Guide. Archived from the original on August 2, 2014. Retrieved October 22, 2022. "Selena Gomez to Star in 'What Boys Want'". Parade. October 20, 2009. Archived from the original on December 30, 2012. Retrieved June 18, 2013. "July Moon Productions – July Moon Productions". companypond.com. Archived from the original on October 26, 2014. Retrieved November 7, 2014. Elizabeth, Wagmeister (October 29, 2015). "Netflix Adapting '13 Reasons Why' Into Selena Gomez Series (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. Archived from the original on May 1, 2017. Retrieved October 22, 2022. "Watch Wizards on Deck with Hannah Montana!". Seventeen. June 10, 2009. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved October 22, 2022. Amber, Ashley (April 10, 2022). "10 Disney Channel Stars Who Had Cameos Before Leading Roles". Collider. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved October 22, 2022. "Selena Gomez and Demi Lovato Team Up". Yahoo!. June 25, 2009. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved October 22, 2022. "Princess Protection Program is TV's No. 1 Entertainment Telecast of 2009 in Kids 6–11 and Tweens 9–14". TV by the Numbers. Archived from the original on July 31, 2013. Retrieved June 18, 2013. "Wizards of Waverly Place Movie". Disney Channel. Archived from the original on January 13, 2010. Retrieved July 12, 2009. Top 100 Most-Watched Telecasts On Basic Cable For 2009. TV by the Numbers. Retrieved February 4, 2011. Andreeva, Nellie (March 16, 2013). "Disney Channel's New 'Wizards Of Waverly Place' TV Movie Draws 5.9 Million Viewers". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on October 29, 2020. Retrieved October 23, 2022. Hibberd, James (August 29, 2013). "Disney's 'Wizards' top cable telecast of the year". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved October 23, 2022. Hadadi, Roxana (December 16, 2009). "Tween Time: 'Wizards of Waverly Place: The Movie'". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on March 6, 2023. Retrieved October 23, 2022. "Nominees/Winners | Television Academy". Academy of Television Arts & Sciences. Archived from the original on October 23, 2022. Retrieved October 22, 2022. Thomas Erlewine, Stephen (August 3, 2009). "Wizards of Waverly Place: Songs from and Inspired by the Hit TV Series > Review". AllMusic. Archived from the original on October 27, 2023. Retrieved October 21, 2022. Kelly Grant, Brenda (July 23, 2009). "Selena Gomez's "Magic" Music Video Premieres Friday, July 24 On Disney Channel". Disney Channel. Archived from the original on September 2, 2009. Retrieved October 21, 2022. "Arthur and the Invisibles 2: Arthur and the Revenge of Maltazard: Freddie Highmore, Mia Farrow, Selena Gomez, Snoop Dogg". Amazon. Archived from the original on July 20, 2013. Retrieved June 18, 2013. "ep 4 band tryouts". YouTube. September 28, 2009. Archived from the original on December 17, 2021. Retrieved June 18, 2013. "Selena Gomez's the Scene And Six More of the Most Boring Band Names of All Time " MTV Newsroom". MTV. August 13, 2009. Archived from the original on September 8, 2011. Retrieved March 14, 2010. "Selena Gomez & the Scene, "Kiss & Tell"". Billboard. September 25, 2009. Archived from the original on August 9, 2021. Retrieved May 7, 2014. Copsey, Robert (April 19, 2010). "Music – Album Review – Selena Gomez & The Scene: 'Kiss & Tell'". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on October 20, 2012. Retrieved June 19, 2010. "Album Review: Selena Gomez – Kiss & Tell". BBC News. Archived from the original on September 17, 2016. Retrieved November 12, 2014. Caulfield, Keith; Herrera, Monica (October 7, 2009). "Barbra Streisand Surprises With Ninth No. 1 on Billboard 200". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 4, 2021. Retrieved October 7, 2009. "Selena Gomez – Chart History: Billboard 200". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 17, 2021. Retrieved July 11, 2016. Chart positions: ""Selena Gomez & The Scene – Naturally"". Ultratop 50. Archived from the original on October 17, 2013. Retrieved January 1, 2024. ""Selena Gomez & The Scene – Naturally"". Ultratop 50. Archived from the original on October 17, 2013. Retrieved January 1, 2024. ""The Irish Charts – Search Results – Naturally"". Irish Singles Chart. Archived from the original on January 1, 2024. Retrieved January 1, 2024. "Selena Gomez" (select "Albums" or "Singles"). Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on December 16, 2019. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Villa, Lucas (March 24, 2021). "Selena Gomez Talks Embracing Her Mexican Heritage on 'Revelación', Greatest Hits & Using Her Social Media Platform for Good". Grammy. Archived from the original on September 20, 2023. Retrieved January 1, 2024. "American single certifications – Selena Gomez". Recording Industry Association of America. Retrieved April 4, 2023. Vena, Jocelyn (February 6, 2009). "Selena Gomez To Star In 'Ramona and Beezus' Movie". MTV. Archived from the original on November 5, 2012. Retrieved October 21, 2009. Alphonse, Lylah M. (February 23, 2011). "The stars of 'Ramona and Beezus' on family, fun, and facing down fear". The Boston Globe. Archived from the original on July 20, 2010. Retrieved July 16, 2010. "Ramona and Beezus (2010)". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango. Archived from the original on July 25, 2010. Retrieved August 2, 2010. Ebert, Roger (July 21, 2010). "It wasn't my fault! I was just standing here!". Rogerebert.com. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved October 26, 2022. "Arthur and the Invisibles 3: Arthur and the War of Two Worlds". Amazon Prime. Archived from the original on January 31, 2016. Retrieved October 21, 2022. "Zac Brown Band Bows at No. 1 on Billboard 200". Billboard. September 29, 2010. Archived from the original on June 5, 2021. Retrieved February 19, 2015. Stewart, Allison. "Album review: Selena Gomez, "A Year Without Rain"". The Washington Post. Archived from the original on May 11, 2012. Retrieved September 21, 2009. Wood, Mikael (September 10, 2010). "Selena Gomez and the Scene, "A Year Without Rain"". Billboard. Nielsen Business Media, Inc. Archived from the original on October 28, 2020. Retrieved September 15, 2010. "Selena Gomez – Chart History: Canadian Albums". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 25, 2022. Retrieved October 10, 2022. Derschowitz, Jessica (January 6, 2011). "People's Choice Awards 2011: List of Winners". CBS News. Archived from the original on June 1, 2021. Retrieved March 5, 2023. "When the Sun Goes Down Reviews, Ratings, Credits, and More at Metacritic". Metacritic. Archived from the original on August 9, 2021. Retrieved December 1, 2011. "Selena Gomez & The Scene "When The Sun Goes Down"". Rolling Stone. August 2, 2011. Archived from the original on November 19, 2011. Retrieved August 2, 2011. Caulfield, Keith (July 31, 2013). "Selena Gomez Knocks Jay Z From Top of Billboard 200 With First No. 1 Album". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 7, 2020. Retrieved November 7, 2014. Chart positions: "Selena Gomez – Chart History: Canadian Albums". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 25, 2022. Retrieved October 10, 2022. "Spanishcart.com - Selena Gomez & the Scene - When the Sun Goes Down". Archived from the original on October 27, 2023. Retrieved July 17, 2023. "Selena Gomez – Chart History: Billboard Canadian Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 17, 2021. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "Top City & Country Radio Hits (от 26 сентября 2011)" (in Russian). TopHit. Archived from the original on June 10, 2021. Retrieved June 20, 2023. "Selena Gomez's Biggest Music Moments: A Timeline". Billboard. June 26, 2015. Archived from the original on October 28, 2022. Retrieved October 28, 2022. Frank, Alex (May 18, 2017). "Selena Gomez: "Bad Liar" Track Review". Pitchfork. Archived from the original on April 7, 2023. Retrieved October 8, 2023. Trust, Gary (January 1, 2022). "22 No. 22 Hot 100 Hits for '22: Selena Gomez's 'Love You Like a Love Song' & More". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 28, 2022. Retrieved October 28, 2022. "21 Under 21: Selena Gomez". Billboard. September 23, 2010. Archived from the original on September 15, 2022. Retrieved October 7, 2022. "21 Under 21: Selena Gomez (2011)". Billboard. September 27, 2011. Archived from the original on September 15, 2022. Retrieved October 7, 2022. Garibaldi, Christina (June 30, 2011). "Selena Gomez, Leighton Meester Recall 'Monte Carlo' Perks". MTV. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved October 23, 2022. Murray, Rebecca (April 22, 2011). "'Monte Carlo' First Photo". Movie.about.com. Archived from the original on August 17, 2017. cmania (April 22, 2011). "Selena Gomez Practices to Play Polo in Budapest for 'Monte Carlo' Role". Zimbio. Archived from the original on May 9, 2010. Retrieved May 7, 2010. Deerwester, Jayme (April 22, 2011). "First look: Selena Gomez stretches out in 'Monte Carlo'". USA Today. Archived from the original on December 30, 2021. Retrieved May 7, 2010. Hill, Logan (July 1, 2011). "Movie Review: Monte Carlo and the Problem With the Princess-for-a-Day Flick". Vulture. Archived from the original on November 2, 2022. Retrieved November 3, 2022. "Monte Carlo (2011)". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango. Archived from the original on March 30, 2017. Retrieved October 21, 2022. Schager, Nick (June 30, 2011). "Review: Monte Carlo". Slant Magazine. Archived from the original on November 2, 2022. Retrieved November 3, 2022. Gonzalez, Sandra (November 29, 2011). "'The Muppets': Your favorite celebrity cameo?". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved October 22, 2022. Still, Jennifer (May 2, 2011). "Selena Gomez to host MuchMusic Video Awards". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on February 23, 2023. Retrieved February 23, 2023. Henry, Katie (September 27, 2011). "Selena Gomez to host MTV Europe music awards in Belfast". BBC News. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved October 22, 2022. Johnson, Zach (February 13, 2012). "Selena Gomez takes 'a break' from music". US Magazine. Archived from the original on April 17, 2012. Retrieved August 27, 2012. John, Christopher (March 11, 2013). "Selena Gomez Says She's Finally Done With 'Wizards of Waverly Place'-and Breaks Away From Her Band The Scene". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on June 5, 2013. Retrieved June 15, 2013. Banov, Jessica (January 6, 2012). "TV Diva: Selena Gomez's "Wizards of Waverly Place" ends after four seasons". The Fayetteville Observer. Archived from the original on January 8, 2012. Retrieved June 15, 2013. "Most Nickelodeon Kids' Choice Awards blimps won by an individual". Guinness World Records. April 9, 2022. Archived from the original on April 27, 2022. Retrieved April 27, 2022. Atkinson, Katie (March 4, 2023). "Here Are the Winners of the 2023 Nickelodeon Kids' Choice Awards: Complete List". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 5, 2023. Retrieved March 5, 2023. Finke, Nikki (January 30, 2012). "'Pretty Little Liars' Ashley Benson Cast In 'Spring Breakers'". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 25, 2013. Retrieved August 18, 2013. Rosen, Christopher (September 5, 2012). "'Spring Breakers': James Franco Sings Ariana Grande songs In New Film According To Early Reviews". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on February 7, 2017. Retrieved October 21, 2022. Cruz, Niki (February 14, 2013). "'Spring Breakers' Gets An Early Release Date". Inquisitr.com. Archived from the original on September 28, 2015. Retrieved October 22, 2022. "Rachel Korine (Yes, Harmony's Wife) Joins 'Spring Breakers'". Indiewire. November 4, 2011. Archived from the original on July 2, 2016. Retrieved October 22, 2022. Sources of Positive Reviews from Critics: Sharf, Zach; Zilko, Christian (June 27, 2022). "25 Movies That Divided Film Critics and Moviegoers". IndieWire. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved October 22, 2022. "Spring Breakers (2013)". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango. Archived from the original on November 17, 2020. Retrieved October 21, 2022. Sources on "Cult Classic" status: Lyttlelton, Oliver (September 4, 2012). "Venice Review: Harmony Korine's 'Spring Breakers' Is A Semi-Conventional Genre Flick & Future Cult Favorite". IndieWire. Archived from the original on May 4, 2013. Retrieved May 20, 2023. "Spring Breakers: The newest cult classic". WEEKEND. IDS News. March 27, 2013. Archived from the original on September 5, 2013. Retrieved May 20, 2023. "Is Record Breaking 'Spring Breakers' A Cult Movie In The Making?". Contactmusic.com. March 18, 2013. Archived from the original on January 21, 2015. Retrieved May 20, 2023. "Spring Breakers - Year-End Lists". Year-End Lists. Archived from the original on September 1, 2023. Retrieved September 1, 2023. Ratings Sources: "BBC - Culture - The 21st Century's 100 greatest films". BBC Magazine. August 23, 2016. Archived from the original on November 24, 2016. Retrieved October 21, 2022. Fear, David; Travers, Peter; Walsh, Katie; Nicholson, Amy; Grierson, Tim; Kiang, Jessica (December 18, 2019). "The 50 Best Movies of the 2010s". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on September 1, 2023. Retrieved September 1, 2023. Dargis, Manohla (March 14, 2013). "Debauchery and the American Experience (Woo-Hoo!)". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 22, 2021. Retrieved September 1, 2023. Laing, Greg (February 10, 2012). "Miley Cyrus drops out of 'Hotel Transylvania', Selena Gomez steps in". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved October 22, 2022. "Hotel Transylvania: Toronto Review". The Hollywood Reporter. September 7, 2012. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved October 22, 2022. Finke, Nikki (June 16, 2012). "Changing Release Dates: Sony Pics Sked". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on February 11, 2014. Retrieved October 23, 2022. "Hotel Transylvania". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango. Archived from the original on November 17, 2020. Retrieved October 21, 2022. "Hotel Transylvania". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved October 21, 2022. Lewis, Hilary (August 28, 2013). "Selena Gomez Learns From Ethan Hawke on 'Getaway,' Gets Into Producing (Video)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on September 9, 2022. Retrieved September 9, 2022. Sources of Critical and Commercial Failure: "Hollywood's Biggest Box Office Bombs of 2013". Variety. December 26, 2013. Archived from the original on December 31, 2013. Retrieved October 22, 2022. "Getaway Reviews". Metacritic. Archived from the original on January 22, 2014. Retrieved August 29, 2013. Rutherford, Kevin (January 15, 2014). "Selena Gomez, Lady Gaga Nominated for Worst Film Performances at Razzies". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 28, 2015. Retrieved July 31, 2016. Orr, Christopher (August 30, 2013). "Getaway: A Never-Ending Car Wreck". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved October 23, 2022. Ng, Philiana (January 24, 2013). "Selena Gomez's 'Wizards of Waverly Place' TV Movie Gets Premiere Date". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 27, 2022. Retrieved October 27, 2022. Lipshutz, Jason (March 27, 2013). "Selena Gomez Announces New Single, 'Come & Get It'". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved October 23, 2022. Trush, Gary (May 15, 2013). "Macklemore & Ryan Lewis 'Hold' Atop Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 5, 2021. Retrieved October 21, 2022. Chart positions: "Selena Gomez" (select "Albums" or "Singles"). Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on December 16, 2019. Retrieved October 23, 2022. "Selena Gomez – Chart History: Billboard Canadian Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 17, 2021. Retrieved October 23, 2022. Gruger, William (July 15, 2013). "Selena Gomez Previews 'Stars Dance' Album Through Twitter Campaign". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved October 23, 2022. Brown, August (July 22, 2013). "Review: Selena Gomez's 'Stars Dance' a sassy pop-EDM mix". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on November 5, 2022. Retrieved November 5, 2022. Hampp, Andrew (July 23, 2013). "Selena Gomez, 'Stars Dance': Track-By-Track Review". Billboard. Archived from the original on September 4, 2021. Retrieved August 13, 2021. Sieczkowski, Cavan (April 15, 2013). "Selena Gomez World Tour: Singer Announces Dates For 2013 'Stars Dance' Tour". HuffPost. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved October 23, 2022. Garibaldi, Christina (May 9, 2013). "Selena Gomez Says Skrillex Inspired Her 'Baby Dubstep' Sound". MTV. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved October 23, 2022. McGovern, Kyle (August 26, 2013). "MTV VMA 2013 Winners List: Justin Timberlake, Taylor Swift, Pink, and More". Spin. Archived from the original on August 13, 2023. Retrieved October 23, 2022. Garibaldi, Christina (August 9, 2013). "Selena Gomez's Stars Dance Tour: Go Behind The Scenes!". MTV. Archived from the original on June 2, 2021. Retrieved October 22, 2022. Brandle, Lars (December 20, 2013). "Selena Gomez Cancels Tour of Asia and Australia to 'Spend Some Time on Myself'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 19, 2021. Retrieved October 22, 2022. Corriston, Michele; Jordan, Julie (February 5, 2014). "Selena Gomez Secretly Spent 2 Weeks in Rehab – Rehab, Health, Selena Gomez: People.com". People. Archived from the original on September 16, 2018. Retrieved October 22, 2022. Stampler, Laura (February 5, 2014). "Selena Gomez Secretly Went to Rehab for Two Weeks". Time. Archived from the original on March 8, 2014. Retrieved February 5, 2014. Corriston, Michelle; Jordan, Julie (February 5, 2014). "Selena Gomez Secretly Spent 2 Weeks in Rehab". People. Archived from the original on September 16, 2018. Retrieved February 5, 2014. Caulfield, Keith (May 4, 2016). "Selena Gomez Donating Proceeds From Revival Tour to Lupus Research". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved October 22, 2022. Kounang, Nadia (August 31, 2016). "Selena Gomez's disease: What is lupus?". Archived from the original on August 17, 2017. Retrieved October 22, 2022. Siegel, Tatiana (July 31, 2012). "Selena Gomez to Star in 'Parental Guidance Suggested' (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on March 24, 2021. Retrieved October 23, 2022. Cruz, Gilbert (August 4, 2014). "We Watched the Selena Gomez Movie That Has a 0 Percent Rotten Tomatoes Rating". Vulture. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved October 23, 2022. "Behaving Badly – Rotten Tomatoes". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango. Archived from the original on November 6, 2014. Retrieved November 7, 2014. Reilly, Travis (August 1, 2014). "Selena Gomez Breaks Her Own Rotten Tomatoes Record With a Zero for 'Behaving Badly'". The Wrap. Archived from the original on November 28, 2022. Retrieved October 22, 2022. Barker, Andrew (August 1, 2014). "Film Review: 'Behaving Badly'". Variety. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved October 23, 2022. Dalton, Stephen (July 19, 2014). "'Behaving Badly': Film Review". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved October 23, 2022. Ford, Rebecca (April 1, 2013). "Billy Crudup, Anton Yelchin, Selena Gomez, Laurence Fishburne Join 'Rudderless'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 9, 2013. Retrieved April 18, 2013. Tisdale, Jerrica (February 8, 2018). "Selena Gomez: What To Watch If you Like The Singer And Actress". Cinemablend. Archived from the original on September 9, 2022. Retrieved September 9, 2022. "Rudderless – Rotten Tomatoes". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango. Archived from the original on November 8, 2014. Retrieved November 7, 2014. Harvey, Dennis (January 23, 2014). "Sundance Film Review: 'Rudderless'". Variety. Penske Media Corporation. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved October 22, 2022. "Selena Gomez Is The Ultimate Choice For The 2014 Teen Choice Awards". MTV. August 9, 2014. Archived from the original on November 3, 2022. Retrieved November 3, 2022. Warner, Denise (March 9, 2021). "Selena Gomez Hints At Possibly Retiring From Music: 'Why Do I Keep Doing This?'". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 21, 2022. Retrieved November 3, 2022. Koch, Kristin (January 28, 2014). "Girl Power! 17 Celebs Taking Over The World". Seventeen. Archived from the original on January 27, 2023. Retrieved January 27, 2023. Maresca, Rachel (April 11, 2014). "Selena Gomez fires parents as managers: report". New York Daily News. Archived from the original on April 4, 2023. Retrieved October 22, 2022. Kitchener, Shaun. "Selena Gomez Signs With New Management After 'Firing Parents'". entertainmentwise.com. Archived from the original on November 17, 2014. Retrieved November 7, 2014. "Selena Gomez 'signs with new managers'". The Belfast Telegraph. April 18, 2014. Archived from the original on March 5, 2016. Retrieved November 7, 2014. Lipshutz, Jason (October 24, 2014). "After Selena Gomez's Exit and a Thawing 'Frozen,' Is Disney Headed for a Cold Spell?". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 9, 2021. Retrieved July 22, 2015. Stutz, Colin (November 22, 2014). "Listen to Three Leaked Songs From Selena Gomez's New Album 'For You'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 27, 2015. Retrieved July 22, 2015. "Selena Gomez's "For You" sells 17,139 copies and debuts at #24 on Billboard 200". Oh No They Didn't. December 4, 2014. Archived from the original on May 16, 2021. Retrieved August 28, 2023. Peters, Mitchell (December 14, 2014). "Selena Gomez Officially Signs With Interscope". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 19, 2021. Retrieved June 22, 2015. "Zedd & Selena Gomez Song Gets Release Date & Artwork". Billboard. February 13, 2015. Archived from the original on August 9, 2021. Retrieved July 22, 2015. "Watch Taylor Swift's Futuristic, Neo-Noir 'Bad Blood' Video". Rolling Stone. May 17, 2015. Archived from the original on May 18, 2015. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "Selena Gomez's Brand-New Single, 'Good For You,' Featuring A$AP Rocky, Available Now From All Digital Retailers" (Press release). Interscope Records. PR Newswire. Archived from the original on June 23, 2015. Retrieved June 27, 2015. Trust, Gary (July 1, 2015). "Wiz Khalifa No. 1 on Hot 100 'Again', Selena Gomez Debuts at No. 9". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 12, 2015. Retrieved February 23, 2023. Trust, Gary (September 14, 2015). "Selena Gomez Scores First Pop Songs No. 1 With 'Good for You'". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 9, 2021. Retrieved September 14, 2015. Chart positions: "Discography Selena Gomez". ARIA Charts Portal. Hung Medien. Archived from the original on November 30, 2018. Retrieved October 23, 2022. "Selena Gomez – Chart History: Billboard Canadian Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 17, 2021. Retrieved October 23, 2022. Gallagher, Brian Gallagher (November 9, 2012). "'Hotel Transylvania 2' Confirmed for September 2015". Movieweb. Archived from the original on January 17, 2016. Retrieved July 22, 2015. "Hotel Transylvania 2". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved October 21, 2022. "Nominees & Winners". People's Choice Awards. Archived from the original on April 12, 2016. Retrieved October 30, 2022. Frere, Jackie (July 21, 2015). "Selena Gomez Reveals New Album Title & Release Date". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 19, 2021. Retrieved July 23, 2015. Bein, Kat (February 21, 2017). "The 10 Best Selena Gomez Songs: Critic's Picks". Billboard. Archived from the original on May 7, 2017. Retrieved November 5, 2022. Jaleru, Christina (October 9, 2015). "Music Review: Selena Gomez Brings Her A-Game to 'Revival'". The Washington Times. Archived from the original on December 25, 2015. Retrieved November 5, 2022. Positive reviews from critics: Gardner, Elysa (October 9, 2015). "Album of the week: A cooler, groovier, Selena Gomez emerges on 'Revival.'". USA Today. Archived from the original on November 13, 2015. Retrieved October 9, 2015. Sendra, Tim. "Selena Gomez: "Revival"". AllMusic. Archived from the original on August 9, 2021. Retrieved October 9, 2015. Cinquemani, Sal (October 17, 2015). "Review: Selena Gomez, Revival". Slant Magazine. Archived from the original on June 27, 2018. Retrieved October 23, 2022. Spanos, Brittany (October 15, 2015). "Album Review: Revival". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on August 9, 2021. Retrieved November 5, 2022. Kristen S.Hé (January 9, 2020). "Selena Gomez's Road to 'Rare': How Pop's Quietest Singer Began to Raise Her Voice". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 14, 2022. Retrieved January 9, 2020. Caulfield, Keith (October 18, 2015). "Selena Gomez Scores Her Second No. 1 Album on Billboard 200 Chart". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 9, 2021. Retrieved October 18, 2015. "American album certifications – Selena Gomez – Revival". Recording Industry Association of America. Retrieved June 6, 2022. Trust, Gary (November 12, 2015). "Hot 100 Chart Moves: Michael Jackson's 'Thriller' Rises After Halloween". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 9, 2021. Retrieved December 19, 2015. Trust, Gary (January 11, 2016). "Selena Gomez Scores Second Pop Songs No. 1 With 'Same Old Love'". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 9, 2021. Retrieved January 11, 2016. Trust, Gary (April 3, 2016). ""Hands To Myself" Becomes Selena Gomez' Third Straight Pop Radio #1; Dance Top 5". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 4, 2023. Retrieved June 1, 2016. Trust, Gary (April 4, 2016). "Selena Gomez Scores Third Pop Songs No. 1 With 'Hands to Myself' & Releases New Single From 'Revival'". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 1, 2016. Retrieved June 1, 2016. "Selena Gomez to Be Honored as Chart Topper at Billboard's Women in Music 2015". Billboard. October 28, 2015. Archived from the original on November 9, 2021. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Weiner, Natalie (August 17, 2015). "Selena Gomez Teams Up With Gwen Stefani as 'The Voice' Advisor". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 24, 2023. Retrieved February 24, 2023. Blistein, Jon (September 22, 2015). "Watch Brad Pitt, Steve Carell Battle the Banks in 'Big Short' Trailer". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on October 15, 2015. Retrieved October 7, 2015. Greenblatt, Leah (June 23, 2016). "'The Fundamentals of Caring': EW review". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved October 23, 2022. Ge, Linda (January 13, 2015). "Selena Gomez Joins Paul Rudd for 'The Revised Fundamentals of Caregiving'". The Wrap. Archived from the original on August 5, 2021. Retrieved July 22, 2015. Robinson, Will (April 1, 2016). "Netflix sets June premiere date for The Fundamentals of Caring". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on April 3, 2016. Retrieved April 1, 2016. "The Fundamentals of Caring (2016)". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Archived from the original on April 15, 2021. Retrieved October 22, 2022. Saunders, Tristram Fane (June 25, 2016). "The Fundamentals of Caring, review: one of this summer's most enjoyable lightweight comedies". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on November 27, 2017. Retrieved December 3, 2022. Friedlander, Whitney; Kissell, Rick (January 5, 2016). "TV News Roundup: 'SNL' Taps Ronda Rousey as Host, Selena Gomez as Musical Guest". Variety. Archived from the original on March 10, 2023. Retrieved October 23, 2022. Kroll, Justin (September 3, 2015). "Selena Gomez Joins Zac Efron in 'Neighbors 2' – Variety". Variety. Archived from the original on December 30, 2017. Retrieved October 23, 2022. "Neighbors 2: Sorority Rising (2016)". The Numbers. Archived from the original on January 22, 2021. Retrieved February 18, 2021. Positive reviews from critics: "Neighbors 2: Sorority Rising (2016)". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Archived from the original on March 1, 2021. Retrieved October 22, 2022. Rankin, Seija (September 3, 2015). "Selena Gomez Joined the Cast of Neighbors 2: Sorority Rising and We've Got Her Part All Figured Out". E!. Archived from the original on January 13, 2016. Retrieved October 22, 2022. Vulpo, Mike (February 23, 2016). "Selena Gomez's Revival Tour Just Turned Into an Even Bigger Party With the Addition of DNCE". E! News. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved October 22, 2022. Ashagre, Aggi (October 5, 2015). "Selena Gomez Announces Revival Tour Dates". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 5, 2021. Retrieved November 17, 2015. Renner, Eric (May 9, 2016). "Selena Gomez: Feel Me debuts new song on opening night of tour". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on September 12, 2018. Retrieved October 23, 2022. Roth, Madeline (February 21, 2020). "Selena Gomez Releases Fan-Favorite Track 'Feel Me': 'You Asked And I Listened'". MTV. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved October 23, 2022. "Selena Gomez has cancelled her Revival tour due to her mental health". Vogue Australia. August 31, 2016. Archived from the original on September 1, 2016. Retrieved August 31, 2016. Feeney, Nolan (January 25, 2016). "Hear Selena Gomez and Charlie Puth Team Up for 'We Don't Talk Anymore'". Time. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Denis, Kyle (July 3, 2023). "Charlie Puth & Selena Gomez's 'We Don't Talk Anymore' Hits 3 Billion YouTube Views". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 7, 2023. Retrieved July 7, 2023. Chart positions: Trust, Gary (September 12, 2016). "The Chainsmokers & Halsey Lead Hot 100 as Charlie Puth & Selena Gomez Hit Top 10". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "Discography Selena Gomez". ARIA Charts Portal. Hung Medien. Archived from the original on November 30, 2018. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "Charlie Puth feat. Selena Gomez - We Don't Talk Anymore" (in Spanish). Spanish Charts Portal. Hung Medien. Archived from the original on October 27, 2023. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "Discographie Selena Gomez" (in French). French Charts Portal. Hung Medien. Archived from the original on November 30, 2018. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "Discography Selena Gomez". Italian Charts Portal. Hung Medien. Archived from the original on February 7, 2020. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "Most viewed music videos published in 2016". kworb.net. Archived from the original on December 3, 2022. Retrieved December 3, 2022. Kroll, Justin (January 30, 2015). "James Franco Assembles Cast for Adaptation of 'In Dubious Battle'". Variety. Archived from the original on August 5, 2021. Retrieved September 9, 2022. "Venice Film Festival 2016". Deadline Hollywood. July 28, 2016. Archived from the original on December 13, 2021. Retrieved October 21, 2022. "In Dubious Battle". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved October 22, 2022. Roth, Madeline (May 27, 2016). "Selena Gomez Won't Take Any Shit From Amy Schumer In This Hilarious Skit". MTV. Archived from the original on February 24, 2023. Retrieved February 24, 2023. Bein, Kat (September 30, 2016). "Cashmere Cat, Selena Gomez & Tory Lanez Are Positively Perfect on 'Trust Nobody:' Listen". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved October 22, 2022. Falcone, Dana Rose (October 12, 2016). "Selena Gomez Returns to Rehab During Tour Break to 'Focus on Her Mental Health'". Us Weekly. Archived from the original on December 3, 2016. Retrieved December 29, 2016. "Selena Gomez Tops Taylor Swift to Become Instagram's Most-Followed Person". Billboard. March 14, 2016. Archived from the original on October 30, 2022. Retrieved October 30, 2022. "Selena Gomez First to Reach 100 Million Instagram Followers". Billboard. September 27, 2016. Archived from the original on October 30, 2022. Retrieved October 30, 2022. Aniftos, Rania (February 23, 2023). "Selena Gomez Is Now the Most-Followed Woman on Instagram". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 24, 2023. Retrieved February 24, 2023. Tannenbaum, Emily (March 19, 2023). "Selena Gomez Just Became the First Woman to Reach 400 Million Followers on Instagram". Glamour. Archived from the original on March 22, 2023. Retrieved March 22, 2023. Guinness World Records: Stephenson, Kristen (February 10, 2017). "Nickelodeon Kid Choice Awards Nominees: Find out who holds a record". Guinness World Records. Archived from the original on April 7, 2023. Retrieved April 8, 2017. "Most followers on Instagram". Guinness World Records. Archived from the original on July 2, 2018. Retrieved September 19, 2021. "Most followers on Instagram for a female". Guinness World Records. Archived from the original on October 7, 2018. Retrieved September 19, 2021. "Most followers on Instagram for a musician". Guinness World Records. Archived from the original on October 7, 2018. Retrieved September 19, 2021. "Most followers". Guinness World Records. Archived from the original on October 7, 2018. Retrieved September 19, 2021. Stephenson, Kristen (December 29, 2017). "7 huge records which took social media to new heights in 2017". Guinness World Records. Archived from the original on April 5, 2023. Retrieved September 18, 2021. "Most likes for an actor on Facebook (female)". Guinness World Records. August 23, 2016. Archived from the original on February 19, 2023. Retrieved February 19, 2023. "First person with 100 million followers on Instagram". Guinness World Records. September 25, 2016. Archived from the original on February 19, 2023. Retrieved February 19, 2023. Craddock, Lauren (July 12, 2016). "Selena Gomez Tops Justin Bieber for Most-Liked Instagram Photo Ever". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 13, 2018. Retrieved January 12, 2019. Prakashat, Neha (November 20, 2016). "Selena Gomez Calls Herself "Absolutely Broken" During Emotional Acceptance Speech [Updated]". Vanity Fair. Archived from the original on November 23, 2016. Retrieved December 29, 2016. Aiello, Mckenna (November 21, 2016). "5 Biggest Jaw-Droppers at the 2016 American Music Awards". E! News. Archived from the original on February 11, 2021. Retrieved January 14, 2024. "AMAs 2016: See the Full List of Winners". Billboard. November 20, 2016. Archived from the original on October 27, 2021. Retrieved October 22, 2022. Muller, Marissa G. (November 21, 2016). "Here's How Celebrities Reacted to Selena Gomez After Her Powerful American Music Awards 2016 Speech". Allure. Archived from the original on June 10, 2023. Retrieved January 14, 2024. "iHeartRadio Music Awards 2016: See the Full Winners List". Billboard. April 3, 2016. Archived from the original on April 4, 2016. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "Billboard Music Awards 2016: See the Finalists". Billboard. April 11, 2016. Archived from the original on April 11, 2016. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "Selena Gomez - Musician". Forbes. Archived from the original on October 20, 2022. Retrieved November 3, 2022. "30 Under 30 2017: All-Star Alumni". Forbes. Archived from the original on May 7, 2021. Retrieved March 7, 2023. "Billboard's Top 50 Money Makers of 2016". Billboard. July 13, 2017. Archived from the original on December 26, 2023. Retrieved December 27, 2023. Bacardi, Francesca (February 16, 2017). "Selena Gomez and Kygo Release New Single "It Ain't Me"". E! News. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Trust, Gary (March 1, 2017). "Hot 100 Chart Moves: Selena Gomez & Kygo Soar With 'It Ain't Me'". Billboard. Archived from the original on August 5, 2018. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Chart positions: "Discography Selena Gomez". ARIA Charts Portal. Hung Medien. Archived from the original on November 30, 2018. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "Selena Gomez – Chart History: Billboard Canadian Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 17, 2021. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "Discographie von Selena Gomez" (in German). GfK Entertainment Charts. Archived from the original on December 14, 2018. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "Discographie Selena Gomez" (in German). Hung Medien. Archived from the original on March 22, 2023. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Nominations: "Nominerte Spellemann 2017" [Nominees for Spellemann 2017] (in Swedish). Spellemannprisen. January 9, 2018. Archived from the original on March 31, 2019. Retrieved November 3, 2022. "Jelöltek 2018". Fonogram Awards. Archived from the original on October 30, 2018. Retrieved November 3, 2022. "Ganadores de LOS40 Music Awards 2017" [Winners of the 2017 LOS40 Music Awards] (in Spanish). Los 40. Archived from the original on August 19, 2018. Retrieved November 3, 2022. "Billboard Music Awards 2018 Nominations: See the Full List". Billboard. April 17, 2018. Archived from the original on January 18, 2019. Retrieved October 22, 2022. Griffiths, George (August 22, 2023). "Selena Gomez's Official Top 20 biggest songs in the UK". Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on August 29, 2023. Retrieved August 26, 2023. Petski, Denise (January 25, 2017). "'13 Reasons Why' Gets Netflix Premiere Date". Deadline. Archived from the original on November 12, 2022. Retrieved October 26, 2022. Britton, Luke (April 28, 2017). "Selena Gomez responds to '13 Reasons Why' backlash". NME. Archived from the original on July 15, 2022. Retrieved October 22, 2022. "13 Reasons Why: Season 1". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved October 26, 2022. "13 Reasons Why: Season 2". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved October 26, 2022. "13 Reasons Why: Season 3". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved October 26, 2022. "13 Reasons Why: Season 4". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved October 26, 2022. Wagmeister, Elizabeth (April 21, 2017). "Netflix's '13 Reasons Why' Is Most Tweeted About Show of 2017 (EXCLUSIVE)". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on February 27, 2023. Retrieved February 27, 2023. Feldman, Dana (December 11, 2018). "The Top 20 TV Shows Streamed In 2018: Only One Isn't On Netflix". Forbes. Archived from the original on November 2, 2022. Retrieved November 2, 2022. Solsman, Joan E. (January 25, 2022). "Netflix's most popular shows and movies ever, ranked (according to Netflix)". CNET. Archived from the original on January 26, 2022. Retrieved October 26, 2022. White, Peter (October 4, 2022). "'Dahmer' Becomes One Of Netflix's Biggest Ever Hits With 300M Hours Racked Up In Second Week". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved October 26, 2022. Petski, Denise (May 11, 2020). "13 Reasons Why: Netflix Sets Premiere Date For Fourth & Final Season, Cast Says Goodbye – Watch". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on May 11, 2020. Retrieved October 22, 2022. Kendall Fisher (March 31, 2017). "Selena Gomez releases Emotional Cover of "Only You"". E! Online. Archived from the original on March 31, 2017. Retrieved April 1, 2017. Harrison, Lily (May 18, 2017). "Selena Gomez Releases New Single "Bad Liar"". E! News. Archived from the original on May 22, 2017. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Bereznak, Alyssa (September 10, 2019). "This Music Video Has Been Modified From Its Original Version (and Now It's Vertical)". The Ringer. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Leight, Elias (May 18, 2017). "Hear Selena Gomez Sample Talking Heads in 'Bad Liar'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on May 18, 2017. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Renner Brown, Eric; O'Donnell, Kevin; Bacle, Ariana; Feeney, Nolan (May 19, 2017). "New music by Katy Perry, Selena Gomez: New Music Fridays". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on May 22, 2017. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Cook-Wilson, Winston (May 19, 2017). "Selena Gomez's 'Bad Liar' Review". Spin. Archived from the original on May 19, 2017. Retrieved October 22, 2022. Lipshutz, Jason (June 15, 2017). "Selena Gomez's 'Bad Liar' Is Her Most Acclaimed Single Ever: Will It Become a Hit?". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 16, 2017. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Billboard Staff (December 13, 2017). "Billboard's 100 Best Songs of 2017: Critics' Picks". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 13, 2017. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "100 Best Songs of the 2010s". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on December 4, 2019. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Cook-Wilson, Winston (May 19, 2017). "Selena Gomez's 'Bad Liar' Review". Spin. Archived from the original on May 19, 2017. Retrieved October 30, 2022. Cirisano, Tatiana (July 7, 2017). "Selena Gomez Reveals 'Fetish' Release Date & Gucci Mane Feature". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 16, 2017. Retrieved July 8, 2017. Grant, Sarah (October 25, 2017). "Hear Selena Gomez's Propulsive New EDM Song, 'Wolves'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on October 25, 2017. Retrieved October 25, 2017. Chart positions: "Discography Selena Gomez". ARIA Charts Portal. Hung Medien. Archived from the original on November 30, 2018. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "Selena Gomez – Chart History: Billboard Canadian Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 17, 2021. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "Selena Gomez" (select "Albums" or "Singles"). Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on December 16, 2019. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "Discography Selena Gomez". Norwegian Charts Portal. Hung Medien. Archived from the original on November 30, 2018. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "Selena Gomez Named Billboard's 2017 Woman of the Year". Billboard. October 31, 2017. Archived from the original on November 9, 2021. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "Selena Gomez's New Song 'Back To You': Listen". Billboard. May 10, 2018. Archived from the original on August 12, 2020. Retrieved May 4, 2020. Chart positions: "Discographie Selena Gomez" (in German). Austrian Charts Portal. Hung Medien. Archived from the original on November 4, 2012. Retrieved July 2, 2016. "Discografie Selena Gomez". dutchcharts.nl. Archived from the original on February 28, 2020. Retrieved February 26, 2024. "Discography Selena Gomez". New Zealand Charts Portal. Hung Medien. Archived from the original on November 30, 2018. Retrieved October 9, 2022. Chart positions: "Discography Selena Gomez". ARIA Charts Portal. Hung Medien. Archived from the original on November 30, 2018. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "Selena Gomez – Chart History: Billboard Canadian Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 17, 2021. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Chart positions: "Selena Gomez – Chart History: The Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 21, 2021. Retrieved May 12, 2017. "Selena Gomez" (select "Albums" or "Singles"). Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on December 16, 2019. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Ramos, Dino-Ray (April 11, 2018). "'Hotel Transylvania 3: Summer Vacation' Inspired By Director's Family Cruise; Chrissy Teigen, Joe Jonas Join Cast". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 4, 2020. Retrieved April 17, 2020. Truitt, Brian (March 21, 2018). "'Hotel Transylvania 3': Meet the Van Helsings who mess up Drac's 'Summer Vacation'". USA Today. Archived from the original on December 25, 2020. Retrieved May 10, 2018. Tartaglione, Nancy (September 1, 2018). "'Hotel Transylvania 3' Now Sony's Biggest Animated Pic WW; Franchise Tops $1.3B". Deadline. Archived from the original on November 29, 2020. Retrieved October 21, 2022. "Hotel Transylvania 3: Summer Vacation". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Archived from the original on November 5, 2018. Retrieved October 21, 2022. "Hotel Transylvania 3: Summer Vacation". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved October 21, 2021. Box Office: Tartaglione, Nancy (September 1, 2018). "'Hotel Transylvania 3' Now Sony's Biggest Animated Pic WW; Franchise Tops $1.3B". Deadline. Archived from the original on November 29, 2020. Retrieved September 2, 2018. Mendelson, Scott (September 16, 2018). "Box Office: 'Mission: Impossible 6' Passes $760M, 'Hotel Transylvania 3' Tops $500M". Forbes. Archived from the original on November 9, 2020. Retrieved September 16, 2018. Rubin, Rebecca (June 25, 2023). "'Spider-Verse' Returns to No. 1 as 'The Flash' Collapses by 73% and Jennifer Lawrence's 'No Hard Feelings' Opens to $15 Million". Variety. Archived from the original on June 25, 2023. Retrieved June 25, 2023. Bein, Kat (September 27, 2018). "DJ Snake, Cardi B, Selena Gomez and Ozuna Talk the Making Of 'Taki Taki': Exclusive". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Bain, Katie (September 29, 2020). "This DJ Snake Hit Is Celebrating a Major Milestone". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Chart positions: "Selena Gomez – Chart History: Argentina Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 14, 2022. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "Selena Gomez – Chart History: Billboard Canadian Hot 100". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 17, 2021. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "Discographie Selena Gomez" (in French). French Charts Portal. Hung Medien. Archived from the original on November 30, 2018. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "Discographie von Selena Gomez" (in German). GfK Entertainment Charts. Archived from the original on December 14, 2018. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "Discography Selena Gomez". Italian Charts Portal. Hung Medien. Archived from the original on February 7, 2020. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "Discography Selena Gomez". Spanish Charts Portal. Hung Medien. Archived from the original on November 17, 2018. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Warner, Denise (April 4, 2019). "Cardi B Leads 2019 Billboard Music Awards Nominations With 21". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 27, 2019. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Roiz, Jessica (October 17, 2019). "Anuel AA Leads 2019 Latin American Music Awards: Complete Winners List". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 18, 2019. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Trust, Gary (June 5, 2018). "Hot 100 Chart Moves: Selena Gomez's 'Back to You' Hits Top 40, Maroon 5's 'Girls Like You' Debuts". Billboard. Archived from the original on October 24, 2019. Retrieved October 30, 2022. Sanchez, Daniel (November 13, 2018). "Drake Fans Allege Selena Gomez Hacked Her Way to the Top of Spotify's Charts". Digital Music News. Archived from the original on June 19, 2023. Retrieved June 19, 2023. Lukarcanin, Emina (November 30, 2018). "Ariana Grande Is the Most Streamed Artist Worldwide On Spotify, Replacing Selena Gomez". Billboard. Archived from the original on July 4, 2019. Retrieved October 28, 2019. Iasimone, Ashley (January 24, 2019). "Julia Michaels' New EP Features Songs With Selena Gomez, Niall Horan: Listen". Billboard. Archived from the original on April 25, 2021. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Cohen, Jess (February 28, 2019). "Selena Gomez Releases New Music: Listen to "I Can't Get Enough" Here". E! News. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Galuppo, Mia (July 13, 2018). "Bill Murray, Tilda Swinton to Star in Jim Jarmusch's Zombie Comedy 'The Dead Don't Die'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on July 13, 2018. Retrieved July 19, 2018. Keslassy, Elsa; Lang, Brent (April 10, 2019). "Jim Jarmusch's Zombie Movie 'The Dead Don't Die' to Open Cannes (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. Archived from the original on September 29, 2019. Retrieved April 10, 2019. Zacharek, Stephanie (May 15, 2019). "Cannes Review: The Dead Don't Die Brings Jim Jarmusch's Intimate Touch to the World of Zombies". Time. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved October 21, 2022. Gleiberman, Owen (May 14, 2019). "Film Review: 'The Dead Don't Die'". Variety. Archived from the original on September 29, 2019. Retrieved October 21, 2022. Lang, Brent (August 8, 2017). "Elle Fanning, Selena Gomez, Timothée Chalamet to Star in Woody Allen Film". Variety. Archived from the original on September 19, 2018. Retrieved September 11, 2017. Vivarelli, Nick (May 5, 2019). "Woody Allen's 'A Rainy Day in New York' to be Released in Italy (EXCLUSIVE)". Variety. Archived from the original on May 5, 2019. Retrieved October 21, 2022. Tracy, Brianne (January 16, 2018). "Selena Gomez Made Significant Donation to Time's Up That 'Far Exceeded' Woody Allen Film Salary". People. Archived from the original on January 17, 2018. Retrieved October 21, 2022. "A Rainy Day in New York". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Archived from the original on January 4, 2020. Retrieved October 21, 2022. Nesselson, Lisa (August 27, 2019). "'A Rainy Day in New York': Review". Screen Daily. Archived from the original on August 28, 2019. Retrieved October 21, 2012. Bowen, Chuck (January 2, 2020). "A Rainy Day in New York Review: In Which Woody Allen Surrenders to His Demons". Slant Magazine. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved October 21, 2022. Kiang, Jessica (August 26, 2019). "Film Review: Woody Allen's 'A Rainy Day In New York'". Variety. Archived from the original on August 27, 2019. Retrieved October 21, 2022. Petski, Denise (September 17, 2019). "Selena Gomez-Produced 'Living Undocumented' Docuseries Set On Netflix; First-Look Trailer". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on September 25, 2019. Retrieved September 17, 2019. Thorne, Will (September 17, 2019). "Selena Gomez-Produced Docuseries 'Living Undocumented' Ordered at Netflix". Variety. Archived from the original on March 6, 2023. Retrieved September 17, 2019. Ramaswamy, Chitra (October 3, 2019). "Living Undocumented review – the families ripped apart by zero-tolerance Trump". The Guardian. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved October 23, 2022. Lowry, Brian (October 3, 2019). "'Living Undocumented' puts faces on families grappling with immigration system". CNN. Archived from the original on October 26, 2022. Retrieved October 23, 2022. "'I Feel Afraid for My Country.' Selena Gomez on America's Immigration Crisis". Time. October 1, 2019. Archived from the original on November 10, 2021. Retrieved February 22, 2023. Kaufman, Gil (October 18, 2019). "We Finally Know When We'll Hear New Selena Gomez Music". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 11, 2020. Retrieved October 18, 2019. "Selena Gomez Drops Futuristic Music Video for Surprise Track 'Look At Her Now'". Billboard. October 24, 2019. Retrieved October 24, 2019. "Selena Gomez Scores First No. 1 on Billboard Hot 100 With 'Lose You to Love Me'". Billboard. Retrieved November 4, 2019. Chart positions: "Selena Gomez – Chart History: Billboard Canadian Hot 100". Billboard. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "Discography Selena Gomez". ARIA Charts Portal. Hung Medien. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "Discography Selena Gomez". Irish Charts Portal. Hung Medien. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "Selena Gomez" (select "Albums" or "Singles"). Official Charts Company. Retrieved October 23, 2022. "Selena Gomez Earns Third No. 1 Album on Billboard 200 Chart With 'Rare'". Billboard. Retrieved January 22, 2020. Chart positions: "Discography Selena Gomez". ARIA Charts Portal. Hung Medien. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "Selena Gomez – Chart History: Billboard Canadian Hot 100". Billboard. Retrieved October 23, 2022. "Discography Selena Gomez". Norwegian Charts Portal. Hung Medien. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "Selena Gomez" (select "Albums" or "Singles"). Official Charts Company. Retrieved October 23, 2022. Spanos, Brittany (January 10, 2020). "Selena Gomez Moves Past Her Pain on the Resiliently Upbeat 'Rare'". Rolling Stone. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Curto, Justin (November 21, 2019). "Selena Gomez Will Start 2020 Off Right by Releasing Her New Album". Vulture. Retrieved November 21, 2019. "Rare by Selena Gomez Reviews and Tracks". Metacritic. Retrieved January 11, 2020. Aswad, Jem (January 10, 2020). "Selena Gomez's 'Rare': Album Review". Variety. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "Selena Gomez Is Right at Home Among Rainbows and Butterflies in Delightful 'Rare' Video: Watch". Billboard. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Rowley, Glenn (April 10, 2020). "Selena Gomez's New Song 'Boyfriend' Was Born From a Text Message". Billboard. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Galuppo, Mia (February 6, 2018). "Selena Gomez Joins Robert Downey Jr.'s 'Doctor Dolittle' Movie (Exclusive)". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved February 7, 2018. McNary, Dave (February 6, 2018). "Selena Gomez Joins Robert Downey Jr. in 'The Voyage of Doctor Dolittle'". Variety. Retrieved October 23, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony (January 18, 2020). "'Bad Boys For Life' So Good With $68M+; 'Dolittle' Still A Dud With $30M+ – Box Office Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on January 20, 2020. Retrieved October 21, 2022. Petski, Denise (May 5, 2020). "Selena Gomez To Host & Executive Produce Quarantine Cooking Series For HBO Max". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved May 6, 2020. Porter, Rick (May 5, 2020). "Selena Gomez Quarantine Cooking Show a Go at HBO Max". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved May 6, 2020. Gonzalez, Sandra (August 5, 2020). "Selena Gomez + chef = good times". CNN. Retrieved October 23, 2022. D'Addario, Daniel (August 12, 2020). "'Selena + Chef' Is an Intriguing Document of Celebrity at Human Scale: TV Review". Variety. Retrieved October 23, 2022. McFarland, Melanie (August 22, 2020). ""Love in the Time of Corona" is not a drama worth catching". Salon.com. Retrieved October 23, 2022. Oganesyan, Natalie (August 3, 2022). "Selena Gomez Takes on Malibu (and Torching Desserts) in 'Selena + Chef' Season 4 Trailer". The Wrap. Retrieved March 29, 2023. Schneider, Michael (April 26, 2023). "Daytime Emmys: 'General Hospital' Leads 2023 Nominations; Variety Lands Two Nods". Variety. Retrieved April 27, 2023. Verhoeven, Beatrice (June 12, 2022). "'Top Chef,' 'RuPaul's Drag Race' Top Critics Choice Real TV Awards". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved January 8, 2024. Maas, Jennifer (May 17, 2023). "Selena Gomez to Host Two New Food Network Series, Including a Show Set in Chefs' Own Kitchens". Variety. Retrieved May 17, 2023. Thompson, Jaden (October 2, 2023). "Selena Gomez Sets Selena + Chef Holiday Special at Food Network". Variety. Retrieved October 10, 2023. Anderson, Katrina (December 20, 2023). "'Selena + Chef: Home For The Holidays' Is a Festive Must-Watch". Collider. Retrieved January 8, 2024. Mamo, Heran (June 23, 2020). "You Guessed It, Selena Gomez & Trevor Daniel Have a New Collab Coming Out This Week". Billboard. Retrieved October 18, 2020. Roxborough, Scott (May 8, 2019). "Geraldine Viswanathan, Dacre Montgomery and Utkarsh Ambudkar Cast in 'Broken Heart Gallery'". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved October 24, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony (August 24, 2020). "'The Broken Hearts Gallery' Now Set For Early Fall Release – Update". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "The Broken Hearts Gallery (2020)". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Huff, Lauren (August 27, 2020). "David Henrie talks flipping '80s rom-com tropes and teaming with Selena Gomez on This Is the Year". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved December 5, 2022. "Blackpink & Selena Gomez Just Confirmed the Title of Their Collaboration & It's a Treat". Billboard. August 21, 2020. Retrieved August 21, 2020. Trust, Gary (September 8, 2020). "Blackpink Hits New Hot 100 High With Debut of Selena Gomez Collab 'Ice Cream'". Billboard. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Hicap, Jonathan (September 1, 2020). "YouTube reveals official first 24-hour views for Blackpink's 'Ice Cream' music video". Manila Bulletin. Archived from the original on September 2, 2020. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Cobo, Leila (October 23, 2020). "The Latin Recording Academy® Announces the 2020 Leading Ladies of Entertainment Honorees". The Latin Recording Academy. Archived from the original on November 10, 2021. Retrieved October 24, 2022. "Selenna Gomez: The 100 Most Influential People of 2020". Time. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Bloom, Madison (January 29, 2021). "Selena Gomez Announces Spanish-Language EP, Shares Video for New Song: Watch". Pitchfork. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Mylrea, Hannah (March 12, 2021). "Selena Gomez – 'Revelación' EP review: love and self-confidence abound". NME. Archived from the original on March 12, 2021. Retrieved November 5, 2022. Jones, Marcus (March 10, 2021). "Selena Gomez takes a risk that pays off on 'Revelación'". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on March 12, 2021. Retrieved November 5, 2022. Bustios, Pamela (March 22, 2021). "Selena Gomez 'Thrilled' to Land First No. 1 on Top Latin Albums Chart With 'Revelación'". Billboard. Retrieved October 24, 2022. M., Talia (March 13, 2021). "Selena Gomez and The Weeknd Hold The Record For The Biggest Debut of a Male and Female EP on Spotify". Where Is The Buzz. Retrieved June 19, 2023. "Revelación [EP] by Selena Gomez". Metacritic. Metacritic. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Melendez, Miguel A. (November 23, 2021). "Selena Gomez Lands First-Ever GRAMMY Nomination With 'Revelación'". Entertainment Tonight. Archived from the original on November 23, 2021. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Cobo, Leila (August 12, 2021). "Bad Bunny Tops 2021 Billboard Latin Music Awards Finalists: Complete List". Billboard. Retrieved November 23, 2022. Segarra, Edward (April 22, 2022). "Latin American Music Awards: Karol G wins artist of the year, Black Eyed Peas pay tribute to Ukraine". USA Today. Retrieved November 23, 2022. Roiz, Jessica (January 25, 2022). "Christian Nodal, Camilo & J Balvin Lead 2022 Premio Lo Nuestro Nominations: Complete List". Billboard. Retrieved November 23, 2022. Collar, Matt. "Revelación – Selena Gomez". AllMusic. Archived from the original on April 2, 2021. Retrieved April 2, 2021. "Selena Gomez's Second Spanish-Language Single 'De Una Vez' Is Coming Incredibly Soon". Billboard. January 14, 2020. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Shaffer, Claire (March 4, 2021). "DJ Snake, Selena Gomez Share Surreal Video for 'Selfish Love'". Rolling Stone. Retrieved March 12, 2021. Cobo, Leila; Flores, Griselda (November 18, 2021). "Camilo Is Top Winner, Cuban Anthem 'Patria y Vida' Wins Song of the Year at 2021 Latin Grammys: Winners List". Billboard. Retrieved October 24, 2022. Cobo, Leila; Flores, Griselda (May 25, 2021). "Selena Gomez, Khalid, Marshmello to Perform at UEFA Champions League Final Opening Ceremony". Billboard. Retrieved November 5, 2022. Tate, Sarah (August 26, 202). "Selena Gomez Teases Collab With Camilo For New Song '999'". iHeartRadio. Andreeva, Nellie (August 7, 2020). "Selena Gomez To Star With Steve Martin & Martin Short In Hulu Comedy Series 'Only Murders In the Building'". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved August 8, 2020. Petski, Denise (May 18, 2021). "'Only Murders In The Building': Hulu Comedy Series Starring Steve Martin, Martin Short & Selena Gomez Unveils Trailer, Premiere Date". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved October 21, 2022. Maglio, Tony (September 3, 2021). "'Only Murders in the Building' Is the Most-Watched Comedy Premiere in Hulu History". The Wrap. Retrieved October 31, 2021. Rice, Lynette (October 3, 2023). "Only Murders In The Building Renewed For Season 4 By Hulu". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved October 11, 2023. "Selena Gomez 'signed life away' to Disney". Yahoo! News. August 10, 2021. Retrieved August 10, 2021. "Only Murders in the Building: Season 1". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved October 21, 2022. "Only Murders in the Building: Season 2". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved October 9, 2022. "Only Murders in the Building". Emmys.com. Academy of Television Arts & Sciences. Retrieved October 21, 2022. Bergeson, Samantha (April 13, 2022). "'Yellowjackets,' 'Only Murders in the Building,' 'Hacks' Among Peabody Award Nominees". IndieWire. Retrieved April 13, 2022. Lowry, Brian (August 30, 2021). "'Only Murders in the Building' is Steve Martin's take on a Manhattan murder mystery". CNN. Retrieved October 23, 2022. Goodykoontz, Bill. "Selena Gomez, Steve Martin and Martin Short kill it in 'Only Murders in the Building'". The Arizona Republic. Retrieved October 23, 2022. Baldwin, Kristen (August 23, 2021). "Only Murders in the Building review: A starry caper that settles for broad comedy". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved October 23, 2022. Roeper, Richard (August 30, 2021). "'Only Murders in the Building' stars an unlikely but appealing true-crime trio". Chicago Sun-Times. Retrieved October 23, 2022. "The International Press Academy Announces Winners for the 27th Annual SATELLITE Awards". International Press Academy. March 3, 2023. Retrieved March 4, 2023. Jackson, Angelique; Shanfeld, Ethan (March 13, 2022). "Critics Choice Awards 2022: 'The Power of the Dog', 'Ted Lasso', 'Succession' Win Big (Full Winners List)". Variety. Retrieved January 8, 2024. Snierson, Dan (January 11, 2023). "Golden Globes 2023: See the complete list of winners". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved January 8, 2024. Lang, Brent; Moreau, Jordan (January 7, 2024). "Golden Globes: 'Oppenheimer' Leads With Five Wins, 'Succession' Tops TV With Four (Complete Winners List)". Variety. Retrieved January 8, 2024. Earl, William; Chapman, Wilson (February 27, 2022). "SAG Awards 2022: The Complete Winners List". Variety. Retrieved January 8, 2024. Phillips, Jevon (February 26, 2023). "All the 2023 SAG Awards winners". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved January 8, 2024. Huff, Lauren (December 7, 2021). "2021 People's Choice Awards: See the full list of winners". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved December 25, 2022. Grein, Paul (December 6, 2022). "Taylor Swift, BTS & Lizzo Among Top Winners at 2022 People's Choice Awards: Full List". Billboard. Retrieved December 25, 2022. Davis, Clayton (July 12, 2022). "Despite Emmys Snub for Acting, Selena Gomez Still Lands in the History Books for 'Only Murders in the Building'". Variety. Retrieved October 21, 2022. "Emmy Snubs: 'Reservation Dogs,' Selena Gomez, 'Yellowstone' & 'This Is Us' Shunned In Nominations". Deadline Hollywood. July 12, 2022. Retrieved July 13, 2022. Lopez, Kristen (August 10, 2022). "'Only Murders in the Building' S2: 5 Reasons Selena Gomez's Performance Works So Well". IndieWire. Retrieved October 23, 2022. "Sydney Sweeney, Melanie Lynskey, Steve Martin and Bill Hader Talk Emmy Nominations". Variety. July 12, 2022. Retrieved July 13, 2022. Moreau, Jordan; Otterson, Joe (January 15, 2024). "Emmy Awards 2023: 'Succession' and 'The Bear' Tie With Six Wins, 'Beef' Follows With Five (Winners List)". Variety. Retrieved January 16, 2024. Donnelly, Matt (September 17, 2020). "Selena Gomez Upped to Executive Producer for 'Hotel Transylvania 4', Returns as Female Lead (Exclusive)". Variety. Archived from the original on September 19, 2020. Retrieved September 17, 2020. "'Spring Breakers' Gets An Early Release Date". The Inquisitr. February 14, 2013. Retrieved October 22, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony (August 12, 2021). "'Venom: Let There Be Carnage' Delayed Until October; Exhibition Buzzes That 'Hotel Transylvania 4' Also On The Move – Update". Deadline Hollywood. Archived from the original on August 15, 2021. Retrieved October 21, 2022. Perine, Aaron (August 12, 2021). "Hotel Transylvania: Transformania Possibly Headed to Streaming". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on August 12, 2021. Retrieved October 21, 2022. Aurthur, Kate (October 6, 2021). "'Hotel Transylvania 4' Heads To Amazon, Sets January Release Date". Variety. Archived from the original on October 6, 2021. Retrieved October 6, 2021. "Hotel Transylvania: Transformania". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved October 21, 2022. "NATAS Announces Noominations for First Annual Children's & Family Emmys as of November 10, 2022" (PDF). National Academy of Television Arts and Sciences. Retrieved November 16, 2022. Bowenbank, Starr (February 7, 2022). "Chris Martin & Selena Gomez Are Caught in a Warped City in Coldplay's 'Let Somebody Go' Video: Watch". Billboard. Retrieved October 26, 2022. Lee, Taila (November 16, 2022). "2023 GRAMMY Nominations: See The Complete Nominees List". Grammy Awards. Retrieved November 16, 2022. Ferguson, LaToya (May 15, 2022). "'Saturday Night Live' Review: The Best and Worst of Selena Gomez's Hosting Debut". IndieWire. Retrieved October 23, 2022. Hoglund, Andy (August 27, 2020). "Saturday Night Live recap: Steve Martin and Martin Short make their triumphant return as hosts". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved December 11, 2022. Hoglund, Andy (July 18, 2022). "ViX+ Releases First Trailer and Key Art for "Mi Vecino, El Cartel," Executively Produced by Selena Gomez". TelevisaUnivision. Retrieved May 16, 2023. "'Calm Down'! Selena Gomez & Rema's Remix Is Coming Really Soon". Billboard. August 22, 2022. Retrieved August 22, 2022. Trust, Gary (January 17, 2023). "SZA, Rema & Selena Gomez Rule Billboard Global Charts, NewJeans, Bizarrap & Shakira Go Top 10". Billboard. Retrieved August 14, 2023. Trust, Gary (June 12, 2023). "Morgan Wallen's 'Last Night' Leads Hot 100 for 10th Week, Luke Combs' 'Fast Car' Hits Top Five". Billboard. Retrieved June 13, 2023. Trust, Gary (August 28, 2023). "Oliver Anthony Music's 'Rich Men North of Richmond' Notches Second Week at No. 1 on Billboard Hot 100". Billboard. Retrieved January 15, 2024. Trust, Gary (January 9, 2023). "Rema & Selena Gomez's 'Calm Down' Climbs to No. 1 on Billboard Global Excl. U.S. Chart". Billboard. Retrieved January 15, 2024. Trust, Gary (June 26, 2023). "Morgan Wallen & Luke Combs Make for Country Hits at Nos. 1 & 2 on Hot 100 for First Time in 42 Years". Billboard. Retrieved June 27, 2023. "Selena Gomez (Chart History): Billboard U.S. Afrobeats Songs". Billboard. Retrieved September 14, 2023. Trust, Gary (May 8, 2023). "Morgan Wallen's 'Last Night' Leads Billboard Hot 100, Rema & Selena Gomez's 'Calm Down' Goes Top Five". Billboard. Retrieved May 9, 2023. Denis, Kyle; Havens, Lyndsey; Lipshutz, Jason; Mamo, Heran; Unterberger, Andrew (June 13, 2023). "How Did Rema & Selena Gomez's 'Calm Down' Become Afrobeats' Biggest Crossover Hit Yet?". Billboard. Retrieved June 19, 2023. Woerner, Meredith (September 12, 2023). "Taylor Swift Wins Big at MTV VMAs, Plus Full List of Winners". Variety. Retrieved September 14, 2023. Atkinson, Katie (November 19, 2023). "Billboard Music Awards 2023 Winners: Full List". Billboard. Archived from the original on November 20, 2023. Retrieved January 8, 2024. Aniftos, Rania (September 11, 2023). "Selena Gomez Is 'Grateful' After Rema Collaboration Hits 1 Billion Spotify Streams". Billboard. Retrieved January 8, 2024. "Rema's Calm Down hits 700m views on Youtube". The Guardian. November 11, 2023. Retrieved January 8, 2024. Brandle, Lars (February 26, 2024). "Miley Cyrus' 'Flowers' Wins IFPI Global Single Award For 2023". Billboard. Retrieved February 26, 2024. "Apple Original Films lands documentary feature "Selena Gomez: My Mind and Me" directed by Alek Keshishian". Apple Inc. September 8, 2022. Retrieved October 26, 2022. Zee, Michaela (September 15, 2022). "'Selena Gomez: My Mind and Me' World Premiere to Open AFI Fest". Variety. Retrieved October 26, 2022. Curto, Justin (September 15, 2022). "The Trailer for Selena Gomez's Documentary, My Mind & Me, Is Here". Vulture. Retrieved October 26, 2022. Reul, Katie (November 4, 2022). "How to Watch Selena Gomez Documentary 'My Mind & Me'". Variety. Retrieved November 6, 2022. "Selena Gomez: My Mind and Me". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved November 7, 2022. Azzopardi, Chris (November 2, 2022). "'Selena Gomez: My Mind and Me' Review: An Honest Portrait of Stardom". The New York Times. Retrieved November 7, 2022. Ehrlich, David (November 3, 2022). "'Selena Gomez: My Mind & Me' Review: This Raw and Messy Pop Doc Tackles Mental Illness Head-On". IndieWire. Retrieved November 7, 2022. "75th Emmy Awards Complete Nominations List" (PDF). National Academy of Television Arts and Sciences. Retrieved July 12, 2023. "Critics Choice Association selects "CAUSEWAY" and "SHE SAID" to receive the Seal of Female Empowerment in Entertainment". Critics Choice Association. November 16, 2022. Retrieved November 23, 2022. VanHoose, Benjamin (May 7, 2023). "MTV Movie & TV Awards 2023 Winners: Drew Barrymore, Tom Cruise, Taylor Swift, More Among Honorees". People. Retrieved May 8, 2023. Dailey, Hannah (November 3, 2022). "Selena Gomez Drops Vulnerable 'My Mind & Me' Song and Lyric Video: Listen Here". Billboard. Retrieved March 29, 2023. Earl, William (November 21, 2022). "Dua Lipa and Elton John, Future, Lizzo, Selena Gomez Among Variety's 2022 Hitmakers; Annual Brunch to Honor Top Songs in Music". Variety. Retrieved November 21, 2022. Davis, Clayton (December 21, 2022). "Oscar Shortlists: Rihanna and Lady Gaga Advance, 'RRR' Snubbed for VFX and Sound, 'Good Night Oppy' Shut Out of Doc Race". Variety. Archived from the original on March 15, 2023. Retrieved January 25, 2023. Mier, Tomás (March 10, 2023). "Selena Gomez Says She's Forever 'in Debt' to 'Best Friend' Francia Raisa for Kidney Transplant". Rolling Stone. Retrieved March 10, 2023. Rovenstine, Rebecca (March 14, 2023). "How to Watch Selena Gomez's Emotional Episode of 'Dear…'". ET Online. Retrieved January 8, 2024. Garcia, Thania (August 17, 2023). "Selena Gomez to Release New 'Single Soon', Teases 'SG3' Album". Variety. Retrieved August 18, 2023. "Selena Gomez (Chart History): Global 200". Billboard. Retrieved September 14, 2023. Kaufman, Gil (October 2, 2023). "Selena Gomez Joins Coldplay for Surprise 'Let Somebody Go' Live Performance". Billboard. Retrieved January 8, 2024. Morris, Alex (November 3, 2022). "Selena Gomez Wasn't Sure She Was Ready To Tell This Story". Rolling Stone. Retrieved November 3, 2022. Dailey, Hannah (June 13, 2023). "Selena Gomez Teases New Music With Photos From the Studio: 'Don't Worry Guys, It's Coming'". Billboard. Retrieved February 23, 2024. Malkin, Marc; Murphy, J. Kim (November 3, 2022). "Selena Gomez Teases New Music, Gets Candid at 'My Mind & Me' Doc Premiere: 'I Am Who I Am and Everyone's About to See It'". Variety. Retrieved March 29, 2023. Bowenbank, Starr (February 15, 2023). "Selena Gomez Says the New Music She's Working on Is 'Powerful, Strong' & 'Very Pop'". Billboard. Retrieved February 23, 2024. Zemler, Emily (January 3, 2024). "Selena Gomez Says Her Next Album May Be Her Last: 'I'm Tired'". Rolling Stone. Retrieved February 22, 2024. Spanos, Brittany (February 22, 2024). "Selena Gomez Turns Her 'Love On' With Flirty New Single". Rolling Stone. Retrieved February 23, 2024. Humphrey, Julia (January 18, 2023). "Selena Gomez & Zoe Saldaña-Led 'Emilia Perez' to Begin Filming This Spring". Collider. Retrieved July 5, 2023. Bailey, Alyssa (June 23, 2023). "Selena Gomez's New Paris Photos Got Over 7 Million Likes on Instagram". Elle. Retrieved July 5, 2023. Belpêche, Stéphanie (May 2, 2023). "Zoe Saldaña, l'actrice qui valait 10 milliards". Le Journal du Dimanche (in French). Archived from the original on December 20, 2023. Retrieved January 8, 2024. Vlessing, Etan (October 13, 2020). "Selena Gomez to Produce 'Dollhouse' Horror Thriller". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved October 27, 2022. D'Alessandro, Anthony (October 13, 2020). "Selena Gomez STX Horror Thriller 'Dollhouse' Sets Emma Tammi As Director". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved October 27, 2022. "Selena Gomez to play lesbian mountaineer Silvia Vasquez-Lavado in new film". NBC News. November 12, 2020. Retrieved October 27, 2022. Kroll, Justin (April 29, 2021). "Selena Gomez To Star in Petra Collins' 'Spiral' For Picturestart; Drake Exec Producing; Package Being Shopped by Endeavor Content". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved October 27, 2022. Shanfeld, Ethan (March 15, 2022). "Selena Gomez Developing Comedy Spin on 'Sixteen Candles' With Tanya Saracho, Gabriela Revilla Lugo". Variety. Retrieved November 4, 2022. Kroll, Justin (May 12, 2022). "Selena Gomez And 20th Century Developing 'Working Girl' Reboot". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved November 3, 2022. Campione, Katie (December 14, 2022). "Selena Gomez & Stacey Abrams To Produce Music Documentary 'Won't Be Silent' For Discovery+". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved December 15, 2022. McIntyre, Hugh. "Selena Gomez Casually Announces A New Album". Forbes. Retrieved December 9, 2023. Shanfeld, Ethan (January 10, 2024). "Selena Gomez to Play Linda Ronstadt in New Biopic". Variety. Archived from the original on January 10, 2024. Retrieved January 10, 2024. Collar, Matt. "Selena Gomez". AllMusic. Rovi Corporation. Retrieved April 6, 2012. "Selena Gomez Strips Down (Musically) For New 'Hold On' Video". ET Canada. October 9, 2014. Archived from the original on October 14, 2014. Retrieved November 15, 2014. Gwee, Karen (October 23, 2019). "Selena Gomez releases video for new single 'Lose You To Love Me'". NME. Retrieved October 23, 2019. Sources: Melton, Lori. "'The Voice': 5 reasons why Selena Gomez is a great celebrity adviser pick". AXS. Archived from the original on December 8, 2015. Retrieved October 17, 2015. "Selena Gomez Made The Stars (And Everybody Else) Dance at Staples Center: Live Review". Idolator. November 7, 2013. "Selena Gomez Has Allegedly Signed With Interscope Records". Idolator. September 9, 2014. "Selena Gomez announces N.J. date for new tour". NJ.com. October 13, 2015. "'Revival' by Selena Gomez". Entertainment Weekly. "Selena Gomez's debut album 'Kiss & Tell' turns five: Her top five singles". AXS. Retrieved November 11, 2014. "Selena Gomez & the Scene, "Kiss & Tell"". Billboard. September 25, 2009. Retrieved May 7, 2014. "Selena Gomez & The Scene – A Year Without Rain | album reviews". musicOMH. Archived from the original on October 8, 2012. Retrieved October 15, 2012. Empire, Kitty (July 2, 2011). "Selena Gomez & the Scene: When the Sun Goes Down – review". The Guardian. Retrieved August 12, 2015. Gillespie, Kim (November 11, 2010). "Album Review: A Year Without Rain – Selena Gomez & The Scene". The New Zealand Herald. "Selena Gomez & The Scene "When The Sun Goes Down"". Rolling Stone. August 2, 2011. Archived from the original on November 19, 2011. Retrieved August 2, 2011. "When the Sun Goes Down". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved August 12, 2015. Munoz, Jonathan (July 22, 2013). "Selena Gomez's new album 'Stars Dance' goes EDM". Voxxi. Voxxi Ltd. Archived from the original on September 23, 2013. Retrieved July 22, 2013. Brown, August (July 22, 2013). "Review: Selena Gomez's 'Stars Dance' a sassy pop-EDM mix". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved November 5, 2022. "Selena Gomez inspired by Skrillex to record 'baby dubstep' for new album". Digital Spy. May 10, 2013. Retrieved August 12, 2015. Vena, Jocelyn (July 15, 2013). "Selena Gomez Throws Epic Dance Party With Stars Dance Teasers". MTV News. Retrieved July 15, 2013. Sendra, Tim. "Stars Dance – Selena Gomez | Songs, Reviews, Credits, Awards". AllMusic. Retrieved July 21, 2013. Sources: ""The Heart Wants What It Wants": Is Selena Gomez Singing, Crying About Justin 0Bieber in New Single?". Fuse. Retrieved June 26, 2015. Lukas, Erin (November 6, 2014). "Watch Now: Selena Gomez's New Video "The Heart Wants What It Wants"". Nylon. Retrieved August 27, 2015. Lindner, Emilee (June 26, 2015). "Watch Selena Gomez's Steamy 'Good For You' Music Video". MTV News. Retrieved June 27, 2015. Strecker, Erin (June 22, 2015). "Selena Gomez Shares Sexy New Song 'Good for You,' Featuring A$AP Rocky". Billboard. Retrieved June 22, 2015. Menyes, Carolyn (June 22, 2015). "Selena Gomez 'Good for You' Review: New Single Transitions Disney Star to Adult Pop Artist [LISTEN]". Music Times. Retrieved August 28, 2015. "Selena Gomez Talks About Being Inspired By Bruno Mars". Disney Dreaming. May 21, 2011. Archived from the original on January 13, 2014. Retrieved January 13, 2014. Juneau, Jen (October 29, 2019). "Selena Gomez Says Taylor Swift Is the Go-To Friend She Trusts to Run New Music by First". People. Retrieved February 11, 2020. "Selena Gomez Inspired By Taylor Swift On Her New "Grown-Up" Album 'Stars Dance'". July 25, 2013. Retrieved May 13, 2020. "Selena Gomez's New Album Was Inspired by Christina Aguilera's 'Stripped'". Idolator.com. September 2, 2015. Retrieved September 21, 2015. "Selena Gomez Looks Up To Rihanna". Disney Dreaming. Archived from the original on November 3, 2013. Retrieved February 23, 2013. "Selena Gomez Talks New Album, Bradley Cooper and Beyonce". Iconoclast Entertainment Group. Retrieved November 10, 2013. Adejobi, Alicia. "'I Died The First Time': Selena Gomez Admits Shock at Receiving Compliment From Idol Britney Spears". EntertainmentWise. Archived from the original on September 27, 2015. Retrieved August 12, 2015. Williott, Carl (May 8, 2013). "Selena Gomez Tells 'In Style' 'Stars Dance' May Be Her Last Album, And It Has A Song About Justin Bieber". Idolator.com. Retrieved June 4, 2013. "Selena Gomez Talks "Revival" Cover Art, Secret Event | On Air with Ryan Seacrest". YouTube. September 11, 2015. Archived from the original on December 17, 2021. Retrieved October 9, 2015. "Gomez set to star in Sears clothing ads". United Press International. July 30, 2009. Ransom, Diana (June 18, 2011). "Selena Gomez Photos: Hot Hollywood Celebrity Photo Gallery of the Week". Hollywood News. Archived from the original on October 16, 2020. Retrieved May 10, 2018. Anitai, Tamar (May 26, 2009). "Have You Seen Selena Gomez's Borden Milk Ads?". MTV. Joskowitz, Lauren (October 15, 2009). "Selena Gomez Introduces 'Dream Out Loud,' Her Own Line of Eco-Friendly, Bohemian Clothes". MTV News. Archived from the original on October 19, 2009. Retrieved October 22, 2009. Ngo, Ella (October 15, 2009). "Seelna Gomez Gets Her Own Fashion Line". E!. Retrieved October 22, 2009. "Selena Gomez to Launch Clothing Line". TransWorldNews.com. October 15, 2009. Archived from the original on June 11, 2010. Retrieved October 22, 2009. MacIntyre, April (October 15, 2009). "Selena Gomez launches fashion line in fall 2010". Monsters and Critics. Archived from the original on October 31, 2009. Retrieved October 22, 2009. Kaplan, Julee (October 15, 2009). "Disney Star Selena Gomez Launching Fashion Brand". Women's Wear Daily. Retrieved October 25, 2009. "Selena Gomez Introduces 'Dream Out Loud,' Her Own Line of Eco-Friendly, Bohemian Clothes". MTV. October 15, 2009. Retrieved December 8, 2016. Tran, Khanh T.L. (March 30, 2010). "Selena Gomez and Kmart Dream Out Loud". Women's Wear Daily. Retrieved November 3, 2022. "Adrenalina Inc. Signs Exclusive Global Fragrance Agreement with Selena Gomez". MarketWatch. July 18, 2011. Archived from the original on July 17, 2011. Retrieved July 14, 2011. Milano, Selene (June 11, 2012). "Selena Gomez's Signature Scent Launches at Macy's". InStyle. Archived from the original on February 14, 2017. Retrieved December 8, 2016. "Selena Gomez Perfume | Celebrity Perfumes". Celebrityperfumestore.com. Archived from the original on October 22, 2016. Retrieved December 8, 2016. "Nicole by OPI x Selena Gomez | Nails | Buy Online". Celebrityclothingline.com. July 22, 1992. Retrieved December 8, 2016. Hope, Kristine. "Selena Gomez Finishes Her Partnership with Adidas NEO". Twistmagazine.com. Archived from the original on December 20, 2015. Retrieved December 8, 2016. "Find Out How Much Selena Gomez Is Making With Her Pantene Deal! | E! News". Eonline.com. June 15, 2015. Retrieved December 8, 2016. Alexis, Lauren (June 22, 2016). "Selena Gomez in Louis Vuitton Series 5 Campaign – Selena Gomez Louis Vuitton Fashion Campaign Photos". Harpersbazaar.com. Retrieved December 8, 2016. Caulfield, Keith (April 29, 2016). "Selena Gomez Is 'Stoked' to Be Part of Coca-Cola's Share a Coke and a Song Campaign". Billboard. Retrieved December 8, 2016. Schneider, Matthew (December 16, 2016). "Coach Confirms Its Partnership With Selena Gomez". The New York Times. Retrieved January 12, 2017. Hardy, Alyssa (August 11, 2017). "Exclusive! See The Making Of Coach's Selena Grace Bag". Harper's Bazaar. Retrieved February 22, 2023. "See Every Piece From The Coach X Selena Gomez New Collection". Harper's Bazaar. August 14, 2018. Retrieved February 22, 2023. Gray, Yasmine (November 21, 2017). "Selena Gomez Debuts 'Phenom' Sneaker Collaboration With Puma". Billboard. Retrieved December 9, 2017. Stiefvater, Sarah (March 28, 2018). "Selena Gomez has a new Puma collaboration and we are already obsessed". AOL. "Selena Gomez tapped as the new face of Puma for $30 million". Vogue. September 19, 2017. Archived from the original on December 6, 2021. Retrieved February 3, 2023. "Selena Gomez wants women to look within for strength". ABCnews. Retrieved October 23, 2020. Bennett, Farai (July 1, 2017). "Selena Gomez is the highest-paid celebrity on Instagram". Insider. Retrieved July 22, 2023. Mejia, Zameena (August 1, 2018). "Kylie Jenner reportedly makes $1 million per paid Instagram post—here's how much other top influencers get". CNBC. Retrieved July 22, 2023. Lansat, Myelle. "The 75 celebrities and influencers who make the most money per Instagram post, ranked". Insider. Retrieved May 7, 2019. "Top Highest-earning Instagrammers in 2020". IZEA. March 12, 2020. Retrieved July 22, 2023. "Instagram's 2021 rich list: Cristiano Ronaldo is the highest earner, pushing Dwayne Johnson into second with Ariana Grande third". South China Morning Post. July 3, 2021. Retrieved July 22, 2023. "The Highest Paid Celebrities On Instagram In 2022". Mashable. Archived from the original on October 18, 2022. Retrieved October 18, 2022. Atad., Corey (July 19, 2023). "The Highest-Paid Celebrities For Instagram Sponsored Posts, Ranked". Entertainment Tonight Canada. Archived from the original on September 29, 2023. Retrieved July 22, 2023. "Serendipity Brands, Co-Owned by Selena Gomez, and Rare Impact Fund Kick off Partnership Ahead of Mental Health Awareness Month" (Press release). PR Newswire. April 28, 2022. Retrieved November 6, 2022. Vulpo, Mike (April 28, 2022). "Selena Gomez Shares Her New Initiative and Advice for Mental Health Awareness Month". E! News. Archived from the original on July 20, 2023. Retrieved October 30, 2023. "Selena Gomez Celebrates Rare Beauty's Virtual Launch: 'This is Just the Beginning!!!'". Billboard. Retrieved October 18, 2020. Manso, James (December 10, 2020). "Selena Gomez Wins Startup of the Year at Beauty Inc Awards". Women's Wear Daily. Retrieved November 3, 2022. Elizabeth, De (July 3, 2021). "Selena Gomez Partners With La'Mariette on Swim Collection". Teen Vogue. Retrieved June 30, 2023. Dolan, Kerry A. (October 3, 2022). "New Mental Health Wellness Site Cofounded By Selena Gomez And Backed By Serena Williams' VC Firm Launches". Forbes. Retrieved November 3, 2022. Mier, Tomás (December 14, 2021). "Selena Gomez Invests in $15 Billion Grocery Delivery Company Gopuff: 'I Was Blown Away'". People. Retrieved November 24, 2022. Directo-Meston, Danielle (May 22, 2022). "Selena Gomez's Colorful New Cookware with Our Place Is Fit For Stylish Chefs". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved November 24, 2022. Gruber, Lauren (June 21, 2023). "Selena Gomez and Our Place Launch New Summer Cookware Collection". Entertainment Tonight. Retrieved June 22, 2023. "Stars Hit The Catwalk For St. Judes". Looktothestars.org. October 14, 2008. Archived from the original on July 14, 2022. Retrieved August 6, 2009. "Celeb Do-Gooders: Young Hollywood Gives Back!". E! News. August 10, 2014. Archived from the original on October 23, 2022. Retrieved March 17, 2024. "Selena Gomez Trick-Or-Treats For UNICEF". Looktothestars.org. October 9, 2008. Archived from the original on July 14, 2022. Retrieved August 6, 2009. Caulfield, Keith (November 21, 2018). "Millie Bobby Brown Has Been Announced as UNICEF's Youngest-Ever Goodwill Ambassador". TeenVogue. Archived from the original on July 14, 2022. Retrieved December 12, 2018. "Charity, Action, Now! (C.A.N.)". UNICEF USA. Retrieved May 6, 2020. "Teen Sensation Selena Gomez Appointed UNICEF Ambassador". Reuters. September 3, 2009. Archived from the original on September 6, 2009. Retrieved October 22, 2009. "Selena Gomez: Trip to Africa was 'life-changing'". GoogleNews.com. Associated Press. October 2, 2009. Archived from the original on October 8, 2009. Retrieved November 1, 2012. "Selena Gomez: Trip to Africa Was 'Life-Changing'". YouTube. Associated Press. October 2, 2009. Archived from the original on December 17, 2021. Retrieved October 25, 2009. "Trick-or-Treat for UNICEF Spokesperson Selena Gomez :: Trick-or-Treat for UNICEF:: Youth Action :: U.S. Fund for UNICEF – UNICEF USA". Youth. UnicefUsa.org. 2009. Archived from the original on January 28, 2010. Retrieved November 1, 2012. "Meet Selena Gomez at the Concert of Your Choice". CharityBuzz.com. Archived from the original on July 14, 2022. Retrieved October 21, 2009. UNICEF (October 8, 2009). "UNICEF Ambassador Selena Gomez named spokesperson for Trick-or-Treat for UNICEF campaign". StamFordPlus.com. Archived from the original on July 14, 2022. Retrieved October 26, 2009. "Trick-or-Treat for UNICEF celebrates 60 years of America's youth making a difference throughout the world". May 26, 2009. Archived from the original on June 8, 2010. Retrieved May 30, 2010. "Selena Gomez & The Scene Announce a Charity Concert in Celebration of the 60th Anniversary of Trick-or-Treat for Unicef". October 6, 2011. Archived from the original on July 14, 2022. Retrieved August 21, 2011. "Selena Gomez and Her Charity Work". Borgen. January 13, 2023. Archived from the original on May 4, 2023. Retrieved June 20, 2023. "UNICEF Ambassador Selena Gomez visits Chile". February 2, 2011. Archived from the original on July 14, 2022. Retrieved August 21, 2011. "Celebrities Team Up with UNICEF Tap Project to Provide Safe, Clean Drinking Water to Children around the World". March 13, 2011. Archived from the original on July 14, 2022. Retrieved August 21, 2011. "Selena Gomez: UNICEF Tap Project 2012". Youth. UnicefUsa.org. March 16, 2012. Archived from the original on June 8, 2023. Retrieved July 8, 2023. "Selena's Support for UNICEF". Youth. UnicefUsa.org. Archived from the original on June 8, 2023. Retrieved February 24, 2023. "LOL: Selena Gomez is crazy... about UNICEF". CBS News. March 29, 2011. Archived from the original on December 31, 2014. Retrieved August 21, 2011. "Selena Gomez fills her Celebrity Tap bottle". April 20, 2011. Archived from the original on July 14, 2022. "Selena Gomez Encourages Youth To Help Children In Sahel Food Crisis". Youth. UnicefUsa.org. April 19, 2012. Archived from the original on June 26, 2023. Retrieved June 27, 2023. "Selena Gomez Performs Sold Out Concert to Benefit UNICEF". Youth. UnicefUsa.org. January 25, 2012. Archived from the original on March 2, 2023. Retrieved June 20, 2023. "Selena Gomez Concert Benefiting the U.S. Fund for UNICEF Raises More Than $150,000". Youth. UnicefUsa.org. January 24, 2013. Archived from the original on November 29, 2023. Retrieved June 27, 2023. Wilcox, Hailey (May 3, 2022). "How is Selena Gomez Impacting the World Right Now?". Hauppauge High School The Soaring Eagle. Archived from the original on June 9, 2023. Retrieved February 26, 2023. "Selena Gomez Concert Benefiting the U.S. Fund for UNICEF Raises More Than $150,000". Cision. June 27, 2023. Archived from the original on June 26, 2023. Retrieved June 27, 2023. "Selena Gomez Visits Nepal on Behalf of UNICEF—See the Pics!". May 29, 2014. Archived from the original on July 14, 2022. "Selena Gomez". UNICEF USA. Archived from the original on July 14, 2022. Retrieved March 18, 2022. Kaufman, Gil (June 8, 2021). "Billie Eilish, Selena Gomez, Katy Perry & More Sign UNICEF Letter Urging COVID-19 Vaccination Donations". Billboard. Retrieved February 22, 2023. Dagostino, Mark (October 27, 2008). "Selena Gomez: 'I'll be 30 Before I Get My License!'". People. Archived from the original on December 19, 2022. Retrieved August 6, 2009. "Selena Gomez Cares For Dogs in Puerto Rico". popdirt.com. March 8, 2009. Archived from the original on March 14, 2023. Retrieved August 6, 2009. Roth, Madeline (April 27, 2016). "7 Times Selena Gomez Killed 'Em With Kindness". MTV. Archived from the original on December 19, 2022. Retrieved August 21, 2023. "Late Night with Jimmy Fallon – Video Blogs – Tonight's Guest: Selena Gomez". Late Night With Jimmy Fallon. June 2009. Archived from the original on August 12, 2009. Retrieved August 5, 2009. "Celebrities Raise Hope For Congo". Looktothestars.org. July 10, 2009. Archived from the original on March 14, 2023. Retrieved August 6, 2009. Malkin, Marc (January 24, 2012). "Why Is Selena Gomez Going to the Congo?". E! News. Archived from the original on December 3, 2023. Retrieved March 17, 2024. Selena Gomez – Friends For Change, October 28, 2010, retrieved February 22, 2016 ""Send it on", an anthem by the world's biggest teen stars" (Press release). Disney Channel. August 6, 2009. Archived from the original (DOC) on May 11, 2011. Retrieved August 20, 2009. "The 100 Greatest Disneyverse Songs of All Time". Billboard. May 25, 2023. Retrieved May 27, 2023. Cunicelli, Ed (April 20, 2012). "Selena Gomez Named Ambassador to the Ryan Seacrest Foundation [VIDEOS] | Ryan Seacrest". Ryan Seacrest. Archived from the original on October 27, 2014. Rose, Lacey (April 20, 2012). "Selena Gomez Tapped as an Ambassador to The Ryan Seacrest Foundation". The Hollywood Reporter. Oh, Eunice (February 3, 2009). "First Look: Selena Gomez's Cell-Free Safety Pitch – Good Deeds, Selena Gomez". People. Retrieved August 6, 2009. Raftery, Liz (October 8, 2012). "Girl Rising to Help Launch CNN Films". TV Guide. Archived from the original on March 6, 2023. Retrieved October 22, 2022. Gonzales, Erica (March 24, 2017). "Selena Gomez Surprises High School Students in LA". Harper's Bazaar. Archived from the original on May 21, 2022. Retrieved March 30, 2024. Matera, Avery (March 24, 2017). "Selena Gomez Returns to School as a Mentor to Young Girls". W. Archived from the original on May 10, 2023. Retrieved March 30, 2024. O'Malley, Katie (April 20, 2018). "Selena Gomez Just Made A New BFF After Bonding Over Kidney Transplant". Elle. "Selena Gomez participating in annual WE Day California on April 25". ABC News Radio. Archived from the original on February 23, 2022. Retrieved June 24, 2019. "Why Selena Gomez's Philanthropic Trip to Kenya Is Unforgettable". E!. December 19, 2019. Archived from the original on April 27, 2023. Retrieved February 11, 2020. "Celebrities who donated their time and money to Australia fire relief efforts". Insider. January 17, 2020. Retrieved February 19, 2023. Haddrick, Milly (January 7, 2020). "All the celebrities that have donated to the Australian bushfires". Girlfriend. Archived from the original on May 23, 2022. Retrieved August 21, 2023. Gold, Jessica (July 22, 2020). "Selena Gomez's Rare Beauty Pledges To Raise $100 Million For Mental Health". Forbes. Archived from the original on December 28, 2022. Retrieved February 22, 2023. Stables, Paige (February 10, 2022). "Selena Gomez Has Rewritten the Script for Beauty Start-Ups". Allure. Archived from the original on March 29, 2023. Retrieved June 18, 2023. Mamo, Heran (January 11, 2021). "Selena Gomez Reveals Season 2 Trailer for 'Selena + Chef' With More Kitchen Fires & More Papa". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 6, 2023. Retrieved February 22, 2023. Mier, Tomás (February 1, 2021). "Selena Gomez's Cooking Show Raises $360,000 for Charity — See Her Remain Cool During Kitchen Fire". People. Archived from the original on March 6, 2023. Retrieved February 19, 2023. Dolan, Kerry A. (October 3, 2022). "New Mental Health Wellness Site Cofounded By Selena Gomez And Backed By Serena Williams' VC Firm Launches". Forbes. Archived from the original on November 15, 2023. Retrieved June 20, 2023. "2nd Annual ASCAP Foundation Silent Auction Kicks Off Online With Exclusive Items Donated by Olivia Rodrigo, Selena Gomez, Chris Stapleton, Kelsea Ballerini, Ashanti, The Chainsmokers, Kevin Durant, Quincy Jones, Diane Keaton, Stephen Schwartz, Paul Williams and More" (Press release). PR Newswire. Archived from the original on February 16, 2023. Retrieved February 16, 2023. Nicholson, Jessica (December 1, 2022). "Olivia Rodrigo, Chris Stapleton, Selena Gomez & More Donate Items for ASCAP Foundation Auction". Billboard. Archived from the original on February 16, 2023. Retrieved February 16, 2023. Muhammad, Latifah (July 3, 2023). "Selena Gomez's Our Place Cookware Is on Sale: Here's How to Save Up to 29% Off Her New Collection". Billboard. Archived from the original on June 29, 2023. Retrieved July 8, 2023. Tingley, Anna (June 21, 2023). "Selena Gomez and Our Place's Summer Collection Is Back in Stock for a Limited Time". Variety. Archived from the original on June 23, 2023. Retrieved June 22, 2023. "In Honor of World Mental Health Day, Sephora Commits to Donating 100 Percent* of Rare Beauty by Selena Gomez Product Sales to the Rare Impact Fund". Sephora Newsroom. October 4, 2023. Archived from the original on December 5, 2023. Retrieved October 30, 2023. Momenian, Donya (October 4, 2023). "Selena Gomez Announced Sephora Will Donate All Rare Beauty Sales to Mental Health Fund for One Day". Teen Vogue. Archived from the original on January 9, 2024. Retrieved October 30, 2023. Bowenbank, Starr (November 6, 2023). "Selena Gomez's Rare Beauty to Donate to Gaza Relief Effort: 'Palestinian Civilians Must Be Protected'". Billboard. Archived from the original on December 31, 2023. Retrieved December 31, 2023. "Selena Gomez's Rare Beauty Is Being Accused Of "Misleading" People With Its Latest Post On Gaza". Yahoo! News. November 7, 2023. Retrieved December 30, 2023. "Fans 'Boycotting' Selena Gomez's Rare Beauty Over Comments On Israel-Hamas War". Yahoo! Entertainment. November 3, 2023. Retrieved December 30, 2023. Dunn, Billie Schwab (November 7, 2023). "Selena Gomez's Rare Beauty faces fresh criticism over Israel-Gaza". Newsweek. Retrieved December 30, 2023. Smith, David (December 2, 2023). "'People are being penalised': Hollywood divided over Israel-Hamas conflict". The Guardian. Archived from the original on January 14, 2024. Retrieved December 2, 2023. "Taylor Swift and Selena Gomez among celebrities attending Gaza aid fundraiser". The Independent. December 14, 2023. Archived from the original on January 18, 2024. Sources on "Pop Princess" status: Caulfield, Keith (May 17, 2016). "Pop Shop Podcast: Billboard Music Awards Preview With Selena Gomez, Plus Justin Timberlake's No. 1 Debut". Billboard. Retrieved August 20, 2023. "The Best Pop Collaborations of 2020". Rolling Stone Australia. December 16, 2020. Retrieved August 20, 2023. Perier, Marie; Aller, Audrey (July 22, 2016). "6 things you need to know about Selena Gomez". Vogue France. Retrieved August 20, 2023. Pike, Naomi (August 12, 2020). "Confirmed: A Selena Gomez And Blackpink Collaboration Is Coming This Month". British Vogue. Retrieved August 20, 2023. "Megastar pop princess Selena Gomez performs her track 'Same Old Love' for BBC Children in Need". BBC. November 13, 2015. Retrieved August 20, 2023. Sources on "triple threat" status: Lustig, Hanna (July 22, 2018). "11 Selena Gomez Facts You Might Not Have Known". Teen Vogue. Retrieved February 21, 2022. Willis, Jackie (March 21, 2017). "Selena Gomez Reveals the One Thing People Would Be Surprised to Know About Her – and It's Sorta Sad". Yahoo! Finance. Retrieved February 21, 2022. Schnurr, Samantha (October 31, 2017). "Selena Gomez Honored as Billboard's 2017 Woman of the Year - E! Online". E!. Retrieved February 21, 2022. Catherine, Walthall. "Women's History Month: Triple Threat Female Artists Who Sing, Write, and Act". American Songwriter. Retrieved August 20, 2023. Robinson, Peter (November 11, 2017). "'Whisperpop': why stars are choosing breathy intensity over vocal paint-stripping". The Guardian. Retrieved February 21, 2022. Chakraborty, Riddhi (March 12, 2021). "COVER STORY: The Many Triumphs of Selena Gomez". Rolling Stone India. Retrieved September 6, 2023. "TIME Firsts Women Leaders: See the Full List". Time. Retrieved November 3, 2022. Grein, Paul (September 11, 2020). "Selena Gomez to Be Honored at Hispanic Heritage Awards". Billboard. Retrieved September 11, 2020. Henini, Janine (March 16, 2022). "Women Changing the Music Industry Today: 'I Deserve the Spotlight'". People. Retrieved March 18, 2022. "Selena Gomez – Principal/Artist". Variety. September 26, 2017. Retrieved June 20, 2020. O'Connell, Mikey (December 7, 2022). "The Hollywood Reporter's 2022 Women in Entertainment Power 100". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved December 7, 2022. Mamo, Heran (May 5, 2021). "10 Times Selena Gomez Has Stressed Mental Health Awareness". Billboard. Retrieved March 18, 2022. "Selena Gomez Receives 2019 McLean Award for Mental Health Advocacy". McLean Hospital. September 25, 2019. Retrieved November 3, 2022. "Selena Gomez Awarded "Mental Health Innovations" Award for Excellence in Mental Health Advocacy". Stanford University School of Medicine. November 10, 2022. Retrieved November 11, 2022. Etienne, Vanessa (November 14, 2022). "Selena Gomez Accepts Award for Mental Health Awareness in Exclusive Clip: 'Together We Can Bring Change'". People. Retrieved November 14, 2022. "Britney Spears, Pink, Selena Gomez Join 'Hands' for Orlando: How the All-Star Song Came to Life". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 28, 2019. Retrieved October 26, 2022. Diaz, Thatiana (June 5, 2017). "Selena Gomez Writes Letter to LGBTQ Community for Pride Month". People. Retrieved October 22, 2020. "Rare Beauty". Retrieved June 18, 2022 – via Instagram. "The Rare Impact Fund". Archived from the original on January 10, 2024. Retrieved June 18, 2022. Peters, Mitchell (July 19, 2014). "Selena Gomez on Controversial 'Pray for Gaza' Instagram Post: 'I Am Not Picking Any Sides'". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 20, 2024. Retrieved March 24, 2024. Hansen, Lena (May 20, 2019). "Selena Gómez Under Fire for Speaking Out Against Alabama Abortion Ban in Pro-Choice Instagram Post". People. Retrieved October 22, 2020. "Roe v. Wade overturn: Celebrities react to abortion ruling". USA Today. July 13, 2022. Retrieved July 31, 2022. Richards, Will (June 19, 2020). "Selena Gomez shares message of support for Black Lives Matter: "There is a deep pain that needs to be healed"". NME. Retrieved October 22, 2020. Mekkaoui, Meeran (June 9, 2020). "Selena Gomez, Lady Gaga and more hand over their Instagram accounts to leading black female figures". Buro. Retrieved October 22, 2020. Jacobs, Rebecah (April 13, 2021). "SELENA GOMEZ TO HOST AND J.LO TO PERFORM AT VAX LIVE CONCERT TO HELP RAISE $22M FOR GLOBAL VACCINATIONS". Hola!. Retrieved April 17, 2021 – via www.us.hola.com. Applefeld Olson, Cathy (May 18, 2022). "Selena Gomez Joins 'White House Conversation On Youth Mental Health' Hosted By MTV". Forbes. Retrieved November 4, 2022. Torres, Alejandra (March 26, 2020). "Step inside Selena Gomez's stunning $6,6 million Calabasas Mansion". ¡Hola!. Archived from the original on January 2, 2023. Retrieved January 2, 2023. Beale, Lauren (October 1, 2014). "Selena Gomez sells Tarzana house she expanded, remodeled". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on September 25, 2022. Retrieved January 2, 2023. Gilthorpe, Darla Guillen (October 11, 2018). "After two years on the market, Texas native Selena Gomez finally sells her Fort Worth mansion". Houston Chronicle. Archived from the original on March 6, 2023. Retrieved January 2, 2023. Davis, Dominic-Madori (November 27, 2019). "Selena Gomez just bought singer Tom Petty's Encino mansion for $5 million — here's a look inside the sprawling Encino property". Business Insider. Archived from the original on March 6, 2023. Retrieved July 22, 2023. David, Mark (September 29, 2020). "Inside Selena Gomez's Former Studio City Home". Dirt. Archived from the original on March 22, 2023. Retrieved January 2, 2023. Nunez, Alanna (August 25, 2015). "Selena Gomez Is Not Embarrassed That She Stopped Wearing a Purity Ring". Cosmopolitan. Retrieved December 22, 2017. Gibbs, Contance. "Selena Gomez Religion". New York Daily News. Retrieved December 22, 2017. Law, Jeannie (December 16, 2014). "Selena Gomez Revealed She Listened to Hillsong's 'Oceans' Before Hitting the Stage for Emotional AMA Performance [WATCH HERE]". Retrieved September 8, 2018. "Pop Star Selena Gomez Takes New Steps Toward God, Sings with Hillsong". CBN News. June 12, 2017. "Watch Selena Gomez Lead Worship at Hillsong and Talk About Her Relationship With God!". GodTV. August 13, 2018. Gomez, Selena (February 26, 2016). "Nobody w/Hillsong Young & Free". YouTube. Archived from the original on December 17, 2021. Retrieved September 7, 2018. "Watch Selena Gomez Lead Worship at Hillsong and Talk About Her Relationship With God!". GodTV. August 13, 2018. For one fan, the lyrics were a little too ambiguous. After the fan inquired who the lyrics referred to, Selena gave a straightforward answer on Twitter, "God." Brasted, Chelsea (June 14, 2016). "Selena Gomez dedicates song to Orlando shooting victims during N.O. tour stop: 'People should love people'". The Times-Picayune/The New Orleans Advocate. Archived from the original on June 29, 2016. Retrieved July 1, 2016. Petit, Stephanie (November 30, 2017). "Justin Bieber and Selena Gomez Head to Church (Again!) for Wednesday Worship". People. Retrieved September 5, 2020. Gibbs, Constance (June 14, 2017). "Selena Gomez says she doesn't 'believe in religion' but maintains her faith". New York Daily News. Retrieved September 8, 2020. Blasberg, Derek (January 8, 2020). "The Ballad of Selena Gomez". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved January 8, 2020. Respers France, Lisa (September 15, 2017). "Selena Gomez's best friend gave her a kidney this summer". CNN. Petti, Stephanie (September 14, 2017). "Selena Gomez Reveals She Is Recovering from a Kidney Transplant – and Her Best Friend Was the Donor!" People. McRady, Rachel. "Selena Gomez Shocking Kidney Transplant". MSN. Archived from the original on September 14, 2017. Retrieved September 14, 2017. Scott, Katie (March 9, 2018). "Selena Gomez's kidney transplant almost killed her, says donor friend". Global News. O'Malley, Katie (March 9, 2018). "Selena Gomez 'Could Have Died' Following Kidney Transplant, Says BFF Francia Raisa". Elle. Mizoguchi, Karen (March 14, 2018). "Selena Gomez's BFF Francia Raisa Says They 'Went Through a Depression' After Kidney Transplant". People. "Selena Gomez Reveals What Having Depression Feels Like: 'My Lows Would Take Me Out for Weeks at a Time'". Health. January 9, 2020. Retrieved October 23, 2020. Sanchez, Chelsey (April 3, 2020). "Selena Gomez Opens Up About Bipolar Diagnosis on Miley Cyrus's Instagram Live". Harper's Bazaar. Retrieved April 6, 2020. Mamo, Heran (April 3, 2020). "Selena Gomez Reveals Bipolar Diagnosis". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved April 6, 2020. Carras, Christi (October 26, 2022). "Selena Gomez cancels 'Tonight Show' appearance after contracting COVID-19". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved October 26, 2022. Morris, Alex (November 3, 2022). "Selena Gomez Wasn't Sure She Was Ready To Tell This Story". Rolling Stone. Retrieved November 3, 2022. "Nick Jonas & Selena Gomez: Are They Dating?". People. July 23, 2008. Retrieved October 22, 2022. Muller, Marissa G. (March 27, 2018). "Justin Bieber and Selena Gomez May Have Broken Up for Good This Time". W Magazine. Lewis, Anna; Baxter-Wright, Dusty (March 28, 2018). "Justin Bieber and Selena Gomez: a timeline of their relationship". Cosmopolitan. "Selena Gomez's Ex Zedd Reveals The One Annoying Thing About Dating The Singer". Elle. August 11, 2017. Retrieved October 22, 2020. Yagoda, Maria (May 25, 2017). "Everything We Know About Selena Gomez and The Weeknd's Whirlwind Romance". People. Retrieved September 12, 2017. Murphy, Desiree (September 11, 2017). "EXCLUSIVE: Selena Gomez and The Weeknd Temporarily Move Into an Apartment Together in New York City". Entertainment Tonight. Retrieved September 12, 2017. Chiu, Melody (October 30, 2017). "Selena Gomez and The Weeknd Split After 10 Months Together". People. Retrieved October 30, 2017. Khalil, Hafsa (December 8, 2023). "Selena Gomez confirms she's in a relationship with Benny Blanco". CNN. Retrieved December 8, 2023. Gibson, Kelsie (December 7, 2023). "Who Is Selena Gomez's New Boyfriend? All About Benny Blanco". People. Retrieved December 8, 2023. "Greatest of All Time Pop Songs Artists". Billboard. Retrieved June 9, 2023. "Top Artists - 2010s". Billboard. Archived from the original on March 26, 2023. Retrieved November 3, 2022. O'Connell, Mikey (December 7, 2023). "The Hollywood Reporter's 2023 Women in Entertainment Power 100". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved December 7, 2023. Zellner, Xander (December 27, 2023). "Selena Gomez Hits No. 1 on Artist 100 For First Time, Thanks to 'Rare' Album Debut". Billboard. Retrieved December 27, 2023. Trust, Gary (May 14, 2017). "Ask Billboard: Selena Gomez's Career Album & Song Sales". Billboard. Retrieved October 18, 2022. Denis, Kyle (August 24, 2023). "Miley Cyrus & Selena Gomez on the Charts: Ahead of 'Used to Be Young' & 'Single Soon,' How Do They Compare?". Billboard. Retrieved October 25, 2023. "American album certifications – Selena Gomez". Recording Industry Association of America. Retrieved October 25, 2023. "Spotify most streamed artists of all time". kworb.net. December 27, 2023. Retrieved December 27, 2023. "BILLIONS CLUB". Spotify. Retrieved March 23, 2023. Dailey, Hannah (March 23, 2023). "Selena Gomez Celebrates 'Lose You to Love Me' Reaching 1 Billion Spotify Streams". Billboard. Retrieved March 23, 2023. Roiz, Jessica (December 27, 2023). "Ozuna Ties J Balvin as Artist With Most Videos in YouTube's Billion Views Club". Billboard. Retrieved December 27, 2023. "Selena Gomez". Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved May 22, 2021. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Selena Gomez. Official website Selena Gomez at Amazon Music Selena Gomez at IMDb Portals:  Biography  Pop music  Television  Film  Texas  United States Selena Gomez at Wikipedia's sister projects: Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata