This article lists the presidents of Burundi since the formation of the post of President of Burundi in 1966 (following the November coup d'état), to the present day. A total of nine people have served in the office. Additionally, one person, Pierre Buyoya, served on two non-consecutive occasions. The current president of Burundi is Évariste Ndayishimiye, since 18 June 2020. Political parties   Union for National Progress (UPRONA)   Front for Democracy in Burundi (FRODEBU)   National Council for the Defense of Democracy – Forces for the Defense of Democracy (CNDD–FDD) Other factions   Military Status   Acting President   In rebellion Burundi portal Politics of Burundi List of kings of Burundi President of Burundi Vice-President of Burundi Prime Minister of Burundi List of colonial governors of Ruanda-Urundi List of colonial residents of Burundi However, Nkurunziza was elected for a third term, as the Constitutional Court considered that first, indirectly elected term, did not count towards the limit. Styled as Chairman of the Supreme Revolutionary Council until 10 November 1976. Styled as Chairman of the Military Committee of National Salvation until 9 September 1987. Styled as Chairman of the Committee of Public Salvation; in rebellion. On 8 November 1993 the Constitutional Court ruled that "the government acting collegially" assumed the responsibilities of the interim presidency until a new president could be elected. "Burundi's constitution amendment process going well before referendum: Minister - Xinhua | English.news.cn". Archived from the original on 19 January 2018. La Cour constitutionnelle de la République du Burundi siegeant en matiere de constatation de la vacance du poste de Président de la République a rendu l'arret suivant, Constitutional Court of Burundi, 8 November 1993, retrieved 22 September 2021 – via Great Lakes of Africa Centre "Outgoing Burundian president Pierre Nkurunziza dies". National Post. Reuters. 9 June 2020. Retrieved 9 June 2020. Burundi: la Cour constitutionnelle ordonne l'intronisation du président élu World Statesmen – Burundi