The French Football Federation (abbr. FFF and 3F; French: Fédération Française de Football) is the governing body of football in France. It was formed in 1919 and is based in the capital, Paris. The FFF was a founding member of FIFA and is responsible for overseeing all aspects of the game of football in France, both professional and amateur. The French Football Federation is a founding member of UEFA and joined FIFA in 1907 after replacing the USFSA, who were founding members. Before the FFF was established, football, rugby union and others sports in France were regulated by the Union des Sociétés Françaises de Sports Athlétiques (USFSA). Founded in November 1890, the USFSA was initially headquartered in Paris but its membership soon expanded to include sports clubs from throughout France. In 1894 the USFSA also organised the first recognised French football championship. The first competition featured just four Paris teams and was organised on a knockout basis. In 1900 the USFSA sent players from Parisian Club Français to represent France at the 1900 Summer Olympics. On 1 May 1904 the USFSA also selected the first official France national football team. The USFSA would be dissolved in 1919 after some disagreements with FIFA. The Fédération Française de Football was formed on 7 April 1919 following the transformation of the Comité Français Interfédéral (CFI) into the Fédération Française de Football Association (FFFA). The CFI were seen as a rival organization to the Union des Sociétés Françaises de Sports Athlétiques (USFSA) due to the organization's constantly disagreeing with each other, mainly due to the latter's opposition to professionalism in sport. Following the debacle at the 1908 Summer Olympics, in which France sent two teams, one controlled by the USFSA and another by FIFA, the CFI ruled that FIFA would now be responsible for the club's appearances in forthcoming Olympic Games and not the USFSA. Being a founding member of the International Olympic Committee (IOC), the USFSA disagreed with the ruling and, despite having three years to reach an agreement, the CFI and the USFSA failed to, which led to France not sending a football team to the 1912 Summer Olympics. The USFSA later developed friction with FIFA and the IOC, which led to disorganization and in 1913, became semi-affiliated with the CFI. On 7 April 1919 the CFI transformed themselves into the Fédération Française de Football with Jules Rimet being installed as the federation's first president. Its legal status is placed under the French Association loi de 1901 jurisdiction (Voluntary association). The FFF has been affiliated to FIFA since 1907, when the CFI succeeded the USFSA as France's representative. Two years later after the CFI's transformation, the USFSA officially merged with the federation. On 28 June 2010, the federation's current president, Jean-Pierre Escalettes, announced his resignation from his position effective 23 July. On 23 July, Fernand Duchaussoy was installed as the federation's interim president and, on 18 December, the title was removed making him the federation's 11th president in its history. On 18 June 2011, following as election, Nöel Le Graët was named as the federation's 12th president. The French Football Federation describes itself in these four roles: To organize, develop, and monitor the teachings and practices of football in all its forms on the mainland and in the overseas regions and territories. To create and maintain a link between its individual members, affiliated clubs, and their respective districts and regional leagues of the Ligue du Football Amateur (LFA) and the Ligue de Football Professionnel (LFP). To defend the moral and material interests of French football. To maintain all appropriate relations with foreign associations affiliated with FIFA, as well as their sporting organizations and national governments. The FFF sanctions all competitive football matches in France, either directly, beginning with the Championnat National on down, or indirectly through the Ligue de Football Professionnel, who manage Ligue 1 and Ligue 2, the first and second divisions of France, respectively, as well as the Coupe de la Ligue. The LFP, however, still operate under the authority of the federation. The federation is also responsible for appointing the management of the men's, women's and youth national football teams. In 2010, the FFF had 2,107,924 licenses, with over 1,800,000 registered players and 18,000 registered clubs. The federation unveiled its new crest (above right) in 2007. The French Football Federation runs numerous competitions, the most famous of which is the annual Coupe de France. The Coupe de France is managed under the authority of the Federal Commission of the Coupe de France, which is directly attached to the Federal Council of the FFF. The federation also organizes the championships of the semi-professional and amateur leagues, such as the Championnat National, the Championnat de France amateur and Championnat de France amateur 2, and the regional and departmental leagues, as well as the latter's cup competitions. The federation also governs youth leagues, such as the Championnat National of the under-19s and under-17s. The FFF also oversee the organization of the Coupe Gambardella and the Coupe Nationale for the under-15 and under-13 club teams. The federation organizes all three divisions of women's football in France and oversee the Challenge de France, the women's premier cup competition. The FFF is divided into 20 regional associations, corresponding to the 18 regions of France (13 mainland and 5 overseas), plus two overseas collectivities (Saint Martin and Saint Pierre and Miquelon). Another overseas collectivity, Saint Barthélemy, has its own territorial committee but is recognized as a district of the Guadeloupe regional association. French Polynesia and New Caledonia are members of FIFA in their own right and do not have regional bodies within the FFF. Wallis and Futuna is the only inhabited territory of France to not have organized football at any level. Regional associations are responsible for organizing all competitions below Level 5 in the French league system. The number of regional associations was reduced by nine after the 2016 redrawing of regions in France. The French Football Force operates 14 élite academies throughout the country of France, the most famous being the INF Clairefontaine, which was created by former FFF president Fernand Sastre in 1976. Located 50 km southwest of Paris in Clairefontaine-en-Yvelines, INF Clairefontaine is arguably the finest football academy in the world. It has a high reputation of producing some of the most gifted French players including Nicolas Anelka, Louis Saha, William Gallas and former national team top scorer Thierry Henry. Players selected to an academy must be at least 13 years of age, have French nationality (rule valid until 2010), and be living and playing within the region of the academy the player is registering for. Registration for new players at an academy normally begins in October the year before players enroll at the academy when prospective applicants are 12 years of age. Players have until December to register with their club for acceptance into the academy. The first set of trials are carried out by each district within its respective region. Each district selects a set number of players who will travel to the region's academy to attend a tryout, which is usually held over a three-day period. The dates of the tryouts vary depending on the academy. The Clairefontaine academy normally hold its tryouts during the Easter school holidays, however the academy in Châteauroux holds its tryouts in June. After the three days, the academy director and officials will convene to select a maximum of 22 players with three or four of the 22 being goalkeepers. The number of players selected also vary depending on the academy. Players who are selected to attend an academy stay and train at the facilities from Monday through Friday. Players are given the weekend off to go and visit family and, also, to train and play with their parent clubs. They are given school holidays off, as well. Players are also required to meet educational criteria. For example, players age 13–15 training at Clairefontaine attend the Collège Catherine de Vivonne de Rambouilet in Rambouillet. After departing Rambouilet, players enroll at the nearby high school Lycée Louis Bascan de Rambouillet with hopes that they will earn their Baccalauréat. All costs required to attend an academy are borne by the federation and the Ligue Nationale de Football. Nike, Inc. Crédit Agricole Électricité de France Volkswagen PMU KFC Accor Hotels Carrefour Union des Sociétés Françaises de Sports Athlétiques, FFF predecessor Noel Le Graet reconduit à la tête de la 3F. « On ne manque pas de respect à la légende », Mbappé reprend Le Graët de volée It also includes the overseas departments (Guadeloupe, French Guiana, Martinique, Mayotte and Réunion), and the overseas collectivities (New Caledonia, French Polynesia, Wallis and Futuna, Saint Pierre and Miquelon and Saint Barthélemy-Saint Martin) "De nouveaux logos pour la FFF". fff.fr. 25 July 2018. Archived from the original on 30 July 2018. Retrieved 30 July 2018. The Official History of the Olympic Games and the IOC- Athens to Beijing, 1894–2008: David Miller (2008) "rsssf.org". RSSSF. Retrieved 28 April 2011. "This Great Symbol" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 May 2008. Retrieved 18 March 2007. "www.uefa.com". Archived from the original on 11 January 2020. Retrieved 25 August 2019. Football in France, a statistical record 1894–2003: Alex Graham (2004) Games of the II. Olympiad – Football Tournament by Søren Elbech and Karel Stokkermans on the RSSSF The Complete Results & Line-ups of the Olympic Football Tournaments 1900–2004: Colin Jose (2004) "Escalettes démissionne!". France Football. 28 June 2010. Archived from the original on 29 June 2010. Retrieved 28 June 2010. "Fernand Duchaussoy élu". French Football Federation. 18 December 2010. Retrieved 19 December 2010. "Nöel Le Graët élu Président". French Football Federation. 18 June 2011. Archived from the original on 21 June 2011. Retrieved 18 June 2011. Licenses of the French Football Federation Archived 18 November 2006 at the Wayback Machine "Fédération Française de Football". Fédération Française de Football (in French). Retrieved 20 May 2023. "Bureau Executif de la Ligue du Football Amateur Proces-Verbal" [Amateur Football League Executive Board Minutes] (PDF). media.fff.fr. 5 December 2021. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 July 2022. Retrieved 20 May 2023. "Documents – LIGUE GUADELOUPEENNE DE FOOTBALL (Statuts)". LIGUE GUADELOUPEENNE DE FOOTBALL – Pasyonéman Tan Nou ! (in French). Retrieved 21 May 2023. "Fédération Calédonienne de Football". Oceania Football Confederation. 20 July 2022. Retrieved 21 May 2023. "Fédération Tahitienne de Football". Oceania Football Confederation. 12 March 2023. Retrieved 21 May 2023. Bleu (9 February 2016). "CARTES : découvrez les 13 nouvelles Ligues régionales décidées par la FFF" [MAPS: discover the 13 new regional leagues decided by the FFF]. France Bleu (in French). Retrieved 20 May 2023. "Les conditions d'inscription". French Football Federation. 6 November 2010. Archived from the original on 4 November 2010. Retrieved 20 November 2010. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Fédération française de football. Official site (in French) France at FIFA site France at UEFA site