Million Dollar Baby is a 2004 American sports drama film directed, co-produced, scored by and starring Clint Eastwood from a screenplay written by Paul Haggis, based on stories from the 2000 collection Rope Burns: Stories from the Corner by F.X. Toole, the pen name of fight manager and cutman Jerry Boyd. It also stars Hilary Swank and Morgan Freeman. The film follows Margaret "Maggie" Fitzgerald (Swank), an underdog amateur boxer who is helped by an underappreciated boxing trainer (Eastwood) to achieve her dream of becoming a professional. Million Dollar Baby was theatrically released on December 15, 2004, by Warner Bros. Pictures. It received critical acclaim and grossed $216.8 million worldwide. The film garnered seven nominations at the 77th Academy Awards and won four: Best Picture, Best Director, Best Actress (for Swank), and Best Supporting Actor (for Freeman). It has since been cited as one of the best films of the 2000s, the 21st century and of all-time. Margaret "Maggie" Fitzgerald, a waitress from the Ozarks, shows up at the Hit Pit, a rundown boxing gym in Los Angeles owned and operated by Frankie Dunn. Dunn is a cantankerous Irish-American trainer, revealed to be estranged from his own daughter. Maggie asks Frankie to train her, but he refuses as he does not train women and she is too old to begin a boxing career. Eddie "Scrap-Iron" Dupris, Frankie's friend and employee—the film's narrator—encourages and helps Maggie. Frankie's prize prospect, "Big Willie" Little, signs with successful manager Mickey Mack after becoming impatient with Frankie rejecting offers for a championship bout. Frankie then reluctantly agrees to train Maggie. Maggie fights her way up in the women's amateur boxing division with Frankie's coaching. Since she has earned a reputation for quick knockouts, Frankie must resort to bribery to get other managers to put their trainee fighters up against her. Scrap, concerned when Frankie rejects several offers for big fights, arranges a meeting for Maggie with Mickey Mack, but out of loyalty to Frankie, she declines. Frankie bestows Maggie a Gaelic nickname, embroidered on her boxing robe, Mo Chuisle (misspelled in the film as "mo cuishle"), but does not tell her its meaning. The two travel to Europe as she continues to win; Maggie eventually saves up enough of her winnings to buy her mother a house, but her mother berates Maggie for endangering her government aid, claiming that everyone back home is laughing at her. Frankie is finally willing to arrange a title fight. He secures Maggie a $1 million match in Las Vegas against the WBA women's welterweight champion, Billie "The Blue Bear" Osterman, a German ex-prostitute who has a reputation as a dirty fighter. Maggie begins to dominate the fight, but Billie knocks her out with an illegal sucker punch from behind after the bell rings to end the round. Maggie lands hard on her corner stool, placed there by Frankie’s assistant, breaking her neck and leaving her a ventilator-dependent quadriplegic. Frankie goes through the five stages of grief, seeking out multiple doctors' opinions in denial, lashing out in anger at Scrap, and trying to bargain with God through prayer. While in the hospital, Maggie looks forward to a visit from her family. They arrive only after first touring Disneyland and Universal Studios Hollywood. Accompanied by an attorney, their sole concern is to get Maggie's assets transferred to them. Disgusted, she orders them to leave and threatens to report their welfare fraud if they try to contact her again. Maggie soon develops bedsores and undergoes an amputation for an infected leg. She then asks Frankie to help her die, declaring that she got everything she wanted out of life. A horrified Frankie refuses, so Maggie later bites her own tongue in an attempt to bleed to death. Knowing the fatherly affection Frankie has developed for Maggie, Frankie's priest warns him that he would never find himself again if he were to go through with Maggie's request. Frankie then sneaks into the hospital one night, unaware that Scrap is watching from the shadows. Just before administering a fatal injection of adrenaline, he tells Maggie the meaning of "mo chuisle": "my darling, and my blood", then gives Maggie a final goodbye kiss. He never returns to the gym. Scrap's narration is revealed to be a letter to Frankie's daughter, informing her of her father's true character. Clint Eastwood as Frankie Dunn, a gruff but well-meaning elderly boxing trainer Hilary Swank as Mary Margaret "Maggie" Fitzgerald, a determined, aspiring boxer trained up by Frankie Dunn Morgan Freeman as Eddie "Scrap-Iron" Dupris, Dunn's gym assistant and former boxer Jay Baruchel as Dangerous Dillard Fighting Flippo Bam-Bam Barch or "Danger", a simpleton would-be boxer Mike Colter as Willie "Big Willie" Little, a boxer whom Dunn has trained for years Lucia Rijker as Billie "The Blue Bear" Osterman, a former prostitute and vicious boxer Brían F. O'Byrne as Father Horvak, the priest of the church which Dunn attends Anthony Mackie as Shawrelle Berry, an overzealous boxer and frequent tenant of Dunn's gym Margo Martindale as Earline Fitzgerald, Maggie's selfish mother Riki Lindhome as Mardell Fitzgerald, Maggie's welfare-cheating sister Michael Peña as Omar, a boxer and Shawrelle's best friend Bruce MacVittie as Mickey Mack Ned Eisenberg as Sally Mendoza Marcus Chait as J.D. Fitzgerald, Maggie's incarcerated brother Tom McCleister as Mr. Johnson, a lawyer Benito Martinez as Billie's Manager Grant L. Roberts as Billie's Cut Man After being fired from the television series Family Law, Haggis wrote the script on spec, and it took four years to sell it. The film was stuck in development hell for years before it was shot. Several studios rejected the project even when Eastwood signed on as actor and director. Even Warner Bros., Eastwood's longtime home base, would not agree to a $30 million budget. Eastwood persuaded Lakeshore Entertainment's Tom Rosenberg to put up half the budget (as well as handle foreign distribution), with Warner Bros. contributing the rest. Eastwood shot the film in less than 40 days between June and July 2004. Filming took place in Los Angeles and film sets at Warner Bros. Studios. The titular phrase 'million dollar baby' was used as an insult during pre-fight publicity by Sonny Liston to Muhammad Ali, the latter of whom was an underdog at the time. Eastwood had his daughter Morgan Colette appear in a cameo as a girl who waves to Swank's character at a gas station. Eastwood had confidence in Swank's acting, but upon seeing Swank's small physique, he had concerns, "I just thought, 'Yeah, this gal would be great. If we can get her trained up. If we can get a little bit more bulk on her, to make her look like a fighter'...She was like a feather. But what happened is, she had this great work ethic." Consequently, to prepare for her role, Swank underwent extensive training in the ring and weight room, gaining 19 pounds of muscle, aided by professional trainer Grant L. Roberts. She trained for nearly five hours every day, winding up with a potentially life-threatening staphylococcus infection out of blisters on her foot. She did not tell Eastwood about the infection because she thought it would be out of character for Maggie. Million Dollar Baby initially had a limited release, opening in eight theaters in December 2004. In its later wide release opening, the film earned $12,265,482 in North America and quickly became a box-office hit both domestically and internationally. It grossed $216,763,646 in theaters; $100,492,203 in the United States, and $116,271,443 in other territories. The film played in theaters for six and a half months. On Rotten Tomatoes, Million Dollar Baby has an approval rating of 90% based on 269 reviews, with an average rating of 8.40/10. The website's critical consensus reads, "Clint Eastwood's assured direction—combined with knockout performances from Hilary Swank and Morgan Freeman—help Million Dollar Baby to transcend its clichés, and the result is deeply heartfelt and moving." On Metacritic it has a weighted average score of 86 out of 100, based on reviews from 39 critics, indicating "universal acclaim". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film a grade "A" on an A+ to F scale. Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times gave the film four stars and stated that "Clint Eastwood's Million Dollar Baby is a masterpiece, pure and simple," listing it as the best film of 2004. Michael Medved stated: "My main objection to Million Dollar Baby always centered on its misleading marketing, and effort by Warner Brothers to sell it as a movie about a female Rocky, with barely a hint of the pitch-dark substance that led Andrew Sarris of the New York Observer...to declare that 'no movie in my memory has depressed me more than Million Dollar Baby.'" In early 2005, the film sparked controversy when some disability rights activists protested the ending. The Disability Rights Education Fund released a statement about the film in February 2005 that included the following: "Perhaps the most central stereotype fueling disability prejudice is the mistaken assumption inherent in the message of the movie that the quality of life of individuals with disabilities is unquestionably not worth living. This stereotype is contradicted by the personal experience of many thousands of people with significant disabilities in this country and around the world who view our own lives as ordinary and normal. It is further contradicted by plenty of hard data. Research overwhelmingly shows that people with disabilities find satisfaction in our lives to the same degree, or greater, than does the general public." The Chicago Tribune reported that protests against the film by disability activists occurred in Chicago, Berkeley, and other cities, and that Clint Eastwood had lobbied for weakening provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act. Wesley J. Smith in The Weekly Standard also criticized the film for its ending and for missed opportunities; Smith wrote "The movie could have ended with Maggie triumphing once again, perhaps having obtained an education and becoming a teacher; or, opening a business managing boxers; or perhaps, receiving a standing ovation as an inspirational speaker." Eastwood responded to the criticism by saying the film was about the American dream. In an interview with the Los Angeles Times, Eastwood distanced himself from the actions of characters in his films, noting, "I've gone around in movies blowing people away with a .44 Magnum. But that doesn't mean I think that's a proper thing to do". Roger Ebert stated that "a movie is not good or bad because of its content, but because of how it handles its content. Million Dollar Baby is classical in the clean, clear, strong lines of its story and characters, and had an enormous emotional impact". The Gaelic nickname for Swank's character comes from the original phrase a chuisle mo chroí, meaning "O pulse of my heart"; one critic noted that the use of Gaelic in the film led to some interest in the language and the phrase. Million Dollar Baby was listed on many critics' top 10 lists for films released in 2004. 1st – A.O. Scott and Manohla Dargis, The New York Times 1st – Roger Ebert, Chicago Sun-Time 2nd – Richard Schickel, Time 2nd – Lisa Schwarzbaum, Entertainment Weekly 2nd – Jonathan Rosenbaum, Chicago Reader 2nd – Claudia Puig, USA Today 2nd – Keith Phipps, The A.V. Club 2nd – Ty Burr and Wesley Morris, Boston Globe 3rd – Kevin Thomas and Kenneth Turan, Los Angeles Times 3rd – Jack Matthews, New York Daily News 3rd – Glenn Kenny, Premiere 3rd – Carla Meyer & Ruthie Stein, San Francisco Chronicle 3rd – Peter Travers, Rolling Stone 4th – Mike Clark, USA Today 4th – David Ansen, Newsweek 4th – Jami Bernard, New York Daily News 5th – Robert Koehler, Variety 5th – James Berardinelli, Reelviews 6th – Stephen Holden, The New York Times 6th – Scott Tobias, The A.V. Club 6th – Richard Roeper, Ebert & Roeper 9th – Desson Thompson, Washington Post 10th – Nathan Rabin, The A.V. Club Top 10 (listed alphabetically) – Ron Stringer, L.A. Weekly Top 10 (listed alphabetically) – David Sterritt, Christian Science Monitor Top 10 (listed alphabetically)– Shawn Levy, Portland Oregonian Top 10 (listed alphabetically) – Carrie Rickey and Steven Rea, Philadelphia Inquirer Million Dollar Baby received the award for Best Picture of 2004 at the 77th Academy Awards. Clint Eastwood was awarded his second Best Director Oscar for the film, and he received a Best Actor in a Leading Role nomination. Hilary Swank and Morgan Freeman received Best Actress in a Leading Role and Best Actor in a Supporting Role Oscars, respectively. Joel Cox, Eastwood's editor for many years, was nominated for Best Film Editing, and Paul Haggis was nominated for the Best Adapted Screenplay award. The film was named the third "Best Film of the 21st Century So Far" in 2017 by The New York Times. It also ranked number 63 on Parade's list of the "100 Best Movies of All Time" in 2023. The film was released on VHS and DVD on July 12, 2005, and all editions of the Region 1 DVD, except for the deluxe edition, came with a paperback copy of the book Rope Burns: Stories from the Corner. An HD DVD release was issued on April 18, 2006. The Blu-ray Disc version was released on November 14, 2006. It was the first Best Picture winner released on either high-definition optical disc format in the U.S.; it and Unforgiven (also starring Eastwood and Freeman) were the only ones released in the U.S. on HD DVD prior to the first one released in the U.S. on Blu-ray, Crash. The film is also available online through video on demand and most major streaming platforms. Film portal Cinema of the United States List of American films of 2004 List of boxing films Eliot 2009, p. 309. Hughes 2009, p. 156. "Million Dollar Baby (2004)". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved January 1, 2021. Dargis, Manohla; Scott, A.O. (June 9, 2017). "The 25 Best Films of the 21st Century...So Far". The New York Times. Retrieved July 8, 2017. "We Ranked the 100 Best Movies of All Time!". Parade. October 6, 2023. Leibowitz, Ed (February 1, 2008). "The Fabulist: Paul Haggis Reflects on His Career Los Angeles Magazine". Los Angeles Magazine. Clarke, Cath (January 6, 2011). "Paul Haggis: 'You have to question your beliefs'". The Guardian. Hughes 2009, p. 157. Fold 3 WWII Crew photos Leung, Rebecca (March 2, 2005). "Hilary Swank: Oscar Gold – 60 Minutes". CBS News. Archived from the original on January 20, 2013. Retrieved September 9, 2010. Hughes 2009, p. 160. "Million Dollar Baby (2004)". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved April 1, 2021. "Million Dollar Baby Reviews". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Retrieved February 27, 2019. "Million Dollar Baby (2005) A". CinemaScore. Archived from the original on December 20, 2018. Ebert, Roger (January 7, 2005). "Million Dollar Baby". Chicago Sun-Times. Archived from the original on July 25, 2020. Retrieved November 26, 2007 – via RogerEbert.com. Sarris, Andrew (January 17, 2005). "Why Clint Eastwood's Baby Knocked Me Down, Not Out". Observer. Retrieved February 22, 2024. Medved, Michael. "My 'Million Dollar' Answer," OpinionJournal/Dow Jones & Company, Inc. (17 February 2005). Archived at TownHall.com. "Million Dollar Baby Built on Prejudice about People with Disabilities". Disability Rights Education & Defense Fund. February 13, 2005. Retrieved February 15, 2021. "Why 'Million Dollar Baby' infuriates the disabled". chicagotribune.com. February 2, 2005. Retrieved February 15, 2021. Gaura, Maria Alicia; Gathright, Alan (September 30, 2000). "Eastwood Wins Suit Over ADA / But jury says resort needs improvements". San Francisco Chronicle. Retrieved February 15, 2021. Smith, Wesley J. (March 2, 2005). "A Million Dollar Miss". CBS News. Rich, Frank (February 13, 2005). "How Dirty Harry Turned Commie". The New York Times. Lee, Chris (January 27, 2005). "'Baby' plot twist angers activists". Los Angeles Times. Roger Ebert (January 29, 2005). "Critics have no right to play spoiler". Chicago Sun-Times. Retrieved January 1, 2021. Davis, Wes (February 26, 2005). "Opinion | Fighting Words (Published 2005)". The New York Times. Archived from the original on May 29, 2015. "Metacritic: 2004 Film Critic Top Ten Lists". Metacritic. January 3, 2007. Archived from the original on January 3, 2007. Murray, Noel (January 5, 2005). "The Year In Film: 2004". The A.V. Club. "Ebert and Roeper Top Ten Lists (2000-2005)". www.innermind.com. Retrieved April 30, 2018. "Million Dollar Baby Blu-ray Review". bluray.highdefdigest.com. November 15, 2006. Retrieved February 22, 2024. "Historical Blu-ray Disc Release Dates | High Def Digest". bluray.highdefdigest.com. Retrieved March 12, 2012. Bibliography Eliot, Marc (2009). American Rebel: The Life of Clint Eastwood. Harmony Books. ISBN 978-0-307-33688-0. Hughes, Howard (2009). Aim for the Heart. London: I.B. Tauris. ISBN 978-1-84511-902-7. Wikiquote has quotations related to Million Dollar Baby. Million Dollar Baby at IMDb Million Dollar Baby at the TCM Movie Database Million Dollar Baby at AllMovie Million Dollar Baby at Box Office Mojo Million Dollar Baby at Rotten Tomatoes Million Dollar Baby at Metacritic US News article: Million Dollar Maybe, A real-life version of Maggie Fitzgerald Another possible real-life Maggie Fitzgerald Million Dollar Baby at the Sports Movie Database