Phillip Jack Brooks (born October 26, 1978), better known by the ring name CM Punk, is an American professional wrestler, actor, and former mixed martial artist. As of November 2023[update], he is signed to WWE, where he performs on the Raw brand. Brooks' 434-day reign as WWE Champion stands recognized as the seventh longest overall. Brooks began his professional wrestling career in 1997 on the independent circuit, mainly with Ring of Honor (ROH), where he won the ROH World Championship once. He signed with WWE in 2005 and won the WWE Championship twice, the World Heavyweight Championship three times, and the WWE Intercontinental Championship, the ECW World Heavyweight Championship, and the World Tag Team Championship once each. He is the only back-to-back Money in the Bank ladder match winner, won Superstar of the Year at the 2011 Slammy Awards, and was voted PWI Wrestler of the Year in 2011 and 2012. After becoming disillusioned with WWE, Brooks acrimoniously departed the promotion in 2014, largely retiring from wrestling. From 2019 to 2020, he appeared as a pundit on WWE Backstage. He returned to the ring in 2021 by signing with All Elite Wrestling (AEW), where he won the AEW World Championship twice, but was terminated in September 2023 after backstage controversies. He returned to WWE two months later at Survivor Series. Brooks has used the CM Punk moniker for his entire career. His character has been consistently portrayed as outspoken, confrontational, sharp-tongued, anti-establishment, straight edge, and iconoclastic, most of which are inspired by his real-life self. Depending on his alignment as a hero or villain, he has emphasized different aspects to garner heat and discourse. After leaving WWE in 2014, Brooks pursued a career in mixed martial arts and signed with Ultimate Fighting Championship (UFC). A welterweight, he lost via submission to Mickey Gall in his professional debut at UFC 203 in 2016. He lost his second fight to Mike Jackson via unanimous decision at UFC 225 in 2018 (later overturned to a no-contest) and was released. Brooks currently appears as a part-time color commentator for Cage Fury Fighting Championships. Brooks has starred in the horror films Girl on the Third Floor, Rabid (both 2019), and Jakob's Wife (2021). He also had a recurring role in the wrestling drama series Heels (2021–2023). Phillip Jack Brooks was born in Chicago on October 26, 1978, the son of a housewife and an engineer. He grew up in nearby Lockport, Illinois, where he attended Lockport Township High School. He has five siblings. His father struggled with alcoholism, which inspired Brooks to follow a straight edge lifestyle from an early age; his mother had bipolar disorder, causing him to become estranged from her. He cites "Rowdy" Roddy Piper as an early influence and the reason he became a wrestler. Brooks' first venture into wrestling was a stint in a backyard wrestling federation called the Lunatic Wrestling Federation with his brother Mike and their friends in the mid-late 1990s. He had his debut match by October 25, 1997, on the eve of his 19th birthday. He first started using the ring name CM Punk when he was put into a tag team named the "Chick Magnets" with CM Venom after another performer skipped out on the card; the CM stood for "Chick Magnet". Unlike his friends, Punk genuinely wanted to be a wrestler and saw it as more than simple fun. When the promotion started taking off while doing shows out of a warehouse in Mokena, Illinois, Punk found out that his brother had embezzled thousands of dollars from the small company, causing them to become estranged. They have not spoken since. Punk soon left the Lunatic Wrestling Federation and enrolled as a student at the Steel Dominion wrestling school in Chicago, where he was trained by Ace Steel, Danny Dominion and Kevin Quinn to become a professional wrestler. As part of the training, he began wrestling at Steel Domain Wrestling in St. Paul, Minnesota, in 1999. It was in the Steel Domain that he met Scott Colton, who soon adopted the ring name Colt Cabana. Punk and Cabana became best friends and spent most of their early career together working in the same independent promotions, as both opponents and tag team partners. In the independents, along with fellow Steel Domain graduates Colt Cabana, Chucke E. Smooth, Adam Pearce, and manager Dave Prazak, Punk formed an alliance named the Gold Bond Mafia. In 2002, Punk became the International Wrestling Cartel (IWC) Heavyweight Champion, in Monroeville, PA. Punk would compete in the company's Super Indy tournament, but never won the championship. Punk's home promotion for his early career was considered to be the Independent Wrestling Association Mid-South (IWA Mid-South). During Punk's time in IWA Mid-South, he had high-profile feuds with Colt Cabana and Chris Hero while also rising to the top of the roster, winning the IWA Mid-South Light Heavyweight Championship twice and the IWA Mid-South Heavyweight Championship on five separate occasions, beating wrestlers like AJ Styles, Cabana, and Eddie Guerrero in matches for the heavyweight championship. Punk's feud with Hero included a 55-minute Tables, Ladders, and Chairs (TLC) match, a 93-minute two out of three falls match and several 60-minute time limit draws. From July 2003 until May 2004, Punk refused to wrestle for IWA Mid-South, explaining this as a protest to Ian Rotten's mistreatment of Chris Hero in the company. However, Hero has stated he believes there were other reasons and Rotten's treatment of him was just an excuse by Punk to stop working for the company. Punk eventually returned to IWA Mid-South and continued to perform as a wrestler and commentator for them until July 2005. Punk made his debut for NWA: Total Nonstop Action alongside his trainer Ace Steel on September 18, 2002, where Punk and Steel defeated Derek Wylde and Jimmy Rave and The Hot Shots (Cassidy O'Reilly and Chase Stevens) in a three-way match to qualify for the tag team Gauntlet for the Gold later in the night, with the winning team facing America's Most Wanted (Chris Harris and James Storm) in a match for the vacant NWA World Tag Team Championship. Punk would then return to TNA in the summer of 2003, while simultaneously wrestling for Ring of Honor. Upon his full-time signing with TNA, Punk was paired with Julio Dinero as members of Raven's stable The Gathering. Shortly before a NWA: TNA show on February 25, 2004, Punk had a physical scuffle with Teddy Hart outside of a restaurant that was broken up by Sabu. The altercation reportedly stemmed from an ROH show in which Hart performed three unplanned spots, putting several other wrestlers in danger of injury. Around the time of the scuffle, Punk and Dinero stopped appearing on TNA shows, leading to speculation that he was fired for the incident. However, Punk said the scuffle had no bearing on his TNA career. Brooks said the reason he and Dinero stopped appearing on TNA's pay-per-view events was that TNA officials believed he and Dinero had not connected with the fans as villains, having turned against the popular Raven and instead formed a villainous tag team managed by James Mitchell. The officials decided that since the team was not working as villains, the storyline would be put on hold indefinitely, and thus had no work for Punk or Dinero. Punk officially quit TNA in March 2004 during the Rob Feinstein controversy after having a dispute with the TNA offices over his ability to compete in ROH following a TNA order that their contracted wrestlers were to no longer wrestle in ROH. Punk's matches with Colt Cabana led him to being hired by ROH. CM Punk made his in-ring debut on ROH at All Star Extravaganza on November 9, 2002, in a gauntlet match involving five participants, that was won by Bryan Danielson. Initially, Punk joined ROH as a face, trading wins with Cabana at Night of the Butcher and Final Battle. but quickly turned heel in a feud with Raven that featured multiple variants of a no disqualification match. Their rivalry was rooted in Punk's straight-edge lifestyle, with him likening Raven to his alcoholic father; At Night of Champions, Punk and his trainer Ace Steel faced Raven and Cabana in a tag team match, during which Cabana turned on Raven, allowing Punk and Steel to win the match. Consequently, Punk, Steel and Cabana formed a trio called the Second City Saints. Punk and Raven's rivalry lasted most of 2003 and was considered one of ROH's top feuds of the year. It was settled at The Conclusion in November 2003, where Punk defeated Raven in a steel cage match. In late-2003, Punk was hired as the first head trainer of the Ring of Honor wrestling school, having previously been a trainer for the Steel Domain and Primetime Wrestling. After concluding the rivalry with Raven, Second City Saints turned faces by feuding with The Prophecy (Christopher Daniels, B.J. Whitmer and Dan Maff), suspecting them of attacking Punk's on-screen girlfriend Lucy Fer. Whitmer was revealed to be the assailant, which led to Saints facing Prophecy in a six-man tag team match at The Battle Lines Are Drawn, which ended in a no contest. The match concluded when Punk drove Daniels with a Pepsi Plunge off the top rope through a table, thus explaining Daniels' departure from ROH. Around this time, Punk began climbing the ranks of ROH, including coming in second at the Second Anniversary Show during the tournament to crown the first ROH Pure Champion, losing to AJ Styles in the finals. At Reborn: Stage Two, Punk and Cabana defeated the Briscoe Brothers to win their first ROH Tag Team Championship. At Round Robin Challenge III, the Second City Saints lost the Tag Team Championship to B.J. Whitmer and Dan Maff in a round robin challenge, but defeated the Briscoe Brothers later that night to win their second Tag Team Championship. Second City Saints would then avenge the loss to The Prophecy by defeating them to retain the titles at Generation Next. They held the titles throughout the summer before eventually losing them to The Havana Pitbulls at Testing The Limit. In the summer of 2004, Punk faced off against ROH World Champion Samoa Joe for the championship in a three-match series. On June 12 at World Title Classic, the first match resulted in a 60-minute time limit draw, when neither Punk nor Joe could pin or cause the other to submit within the allotted 60 minutes. On October 16 at Joe vs. Punk II, they wrestled to a second 60-minute draw. In addition to Joe vs. Punk II becoming Ring of Honor's bestselling DVD at the time, the match received a five-star rating by famed wrestling journalist Dave Meltzer of the Wrestling Observer Newsletter. It was the first match in North America to receive a five-star rating in seven years, the last one being the first-ever Hell in a Cell match between Shawn Michaels and The Undertaker at Badd Blood: In Your House in 1997. Joe ended the series by defeating Punk in the third and final match on December 4 at All-Star Extravaganza 2, in which there was a no-time-limit stipulation. After a try-out match on May 9, 2005, which aired May 15, where he lost to Val Venis on the Sunday Night Heat show, Punk accepted a deal offered by World Wrestling Entertainment (WWE) in June. Though he had accepted the deal, Punk defeated Austin Aries to win the ROH World Championship on June 18 at Death Before Dishonor III. Despite entering the match as a face, immediately after winning the match and the title, Punk proceeded to turn heel and started a storyline where he threatened to take the ROH World Championship to WWE with him. For weeks, Punk teased the ROH locker room and the ROH fans, mocking the championship he possessed, going so far as to sign his WWE contract on top of it. During the storyline, referred to by ROH as the "Summer of Punk", Mick Foley made several ROH appearances during this time, attempting to convince Punk to do the right thing and defend the title on his way out. On August 12, Punk lost the ROH World Championship to James Gibson in a four corner elimination match, which also involved Samoa Joe and Christopher Daniels. Punk's final scheduled match in ROH took place at Punk: The Final Chapter on August 13, 2005, against long-time friend Colt Cabana in a two out of three falls match, which he lost. Punk made a special appearance at the ROH show Unscripted II on February 11, 2006, when the original card had to be scrapped due to Low Ki leaving ROH the week prior. In addition, most of the ROH roster contracted to TNA were pulled from the show because of a snowstorm that TNA officials thought might prevent performers from reaching the TNA's Against All Odds event scheduled the next day. In the main event, Punk teamed with Bryan Danielson to defeat Adam Pearce and Jimmy Rave in a tag team match. Punk was inducted into the ROH Hall of Fame as part of the 2022 inaugural class. Upon being signed by World Wrestling Entertainment (WWE), CM Punk was assigned to its developmental territory, Ohio Valley Wrestling (OVW), where he was mentored by Paul Heyman. He debuted in September 2005 in a dark match. In his first appearance on OVW TV later that month, Punk suffered a broken nose and ruptured eardrum in a match with Danny Inferno. In November 2005, Punk defeated Ken Doane to win the OVW Television Championship. Immediately thereafter, Punk began to feud with Brent Albright, culminating in a three way dance between Punk, Doane, and Albright in January 2006; after Doane was injured during the match, he was replaced by Aaron "The Idol" Stevens, who won the match and became the new OVW Television Champion. In February 2006, Punk entered into a tournament to crown a new OVW Heavyweight Champion, losing to Albright in the finals. In May 2006, Punk defeated Albright in a strap match to win the OVW Heavyweight Championship. In July 2006, Punk and Seth Skyfire defeated Shad Gaspard and the Neighborhoodie to win the OVW Southern Tag Team Championship, making Punk a double champion. They lost the titles to Deuce Shade and "Domino" Cliff Compton in August 2006. Later that same month, Punk lost the OVW Heavyweight Championship to Chet the Jett. Following his defeat, Punk ceased appearing regularly with OVW, but continued to make sporadic appearances until WWE and OVW ended their developmental partnership on February 7, 2008. On June 24, 2006, Punk made his ECW debut during a house show at the former ECW Arena as a fan favorite, defeating Stevie Richards. He officially made his television debut on the July 4 episode of ECW, cutting a brief pre-taped promo about his straight edge lifestyle, emphasizing the disciplinary aspects of being drug and alcohol free. Although he had retained the straight edge gimmick, he now had a Muay Thai training background. Punk made his television wrestling debut on August 1 at the Hammerstein Ballroom, defeating Justin Credible. Punk quickly established himself in ECW by going undefeated, defeating opponents such as C. W. Anderson, Stevie Richards and Shannon Moore. Soon after, Punk began feuding with Mike Knox after Knox's on-screen girlfriend Kelly Kelly was seen to have romantic feelings for Punk. Punk defeated Knox in their first singles match on the November 7 episode of ECW as well as a rematch the following week, after which Kelly Kelly celebrated Punk's victory over Knox. At Survivor Series, Punk had his first pay-per-view match when he teamed with D-Generation X (Shawn Michaels and Triple H) (DX) and the Hardy Boyz (Jeff and Matt) in their Survivor Series match against Rated-RKO (Edge and Randy Orton), Knox, Johnny Nitro and Gregory Helms, a match in which all the participants on DX's side survived elimination. On December 3 at December to Dismember, Punk participated in the Extreme Elimination Chamber match for the ECW World Championship, but he was the first person eliminated by Rob Van Dam. On the January 9, 2007, episode of ECW, Punk suffered his first loss in ECW against Hardcore Holly, ending his six-month unbeaten streak in singles competition. He participated in the Money in the Bank ladder match at WrestleMania 23, where he lost. On the April 10 episode of ECW, Punk was involved in the feud between the New Breed, a group of young wrestlers and the ECW Originals, a group of veteran wrestlers from the original ECW. Punk joined the New Breed after several weeks in which both the New Breed and the ECW Originals had attempted to recruit him, seemingly turning heel. However, two weeks later, Punk betrayed the New Breed during a four-on-four tag team match between the New Breed and ECW Originals by kicking New Breed leader Elijah Burke in the back of the head and costing them the match, after which Punk proceeded to deliver his finisher, the "Go to Sleep", maintaining his status as a face in the process. On May 20 at Judgment Day, Punk defeated Burke in his first singles match on a WWE pay-per-view event. Punk then went on to One Night Stand on June 3, teaming up with Tommy Dreamer and The Sandman in a tables match to defeat the New Breed and end the storyline. When ECW World Champion Bobby Lashley was drafted to Raw and stripped of the championship, a tournament to declare a new champion was held. On June 24, Punk was scheduled to face Chris Benoit in the finals at Vengeance: Night of Champions, but Benoit was replaced by Johnny Nitro due to Benoit no showing because of the double murder and suicide he committed that same weekend. Nitro subsequently defeated Punk for the vacant ECW World Championship. During the following months, Punk faced Nitro (who later changed his ringname to John Morrison) for the title at The Great American Bash, and SummerSlam, where he lost to Morrison both times. On the September 4 episode of ECW, Punk defeated Morrison in a last chance title match to win the ECW Championship. In the following months, Punk went on to have successful title defenses against the likes of Elijah Burke at Unforgiven, Big Daddy V via disqualification at No Mercy, and The Miz at Cyber Sunday. On the November 6 episode of ECW, Punk retained the ECW Championship in a match against Morrison following Miz's interference. On November 18 at Survivor Series, Punk retained the title in a triple threat match against Miz and Morrison. On the January 22, 2008, episode of ECW, Punk lost the ECW Championship to Chavo Guerrero Jr. in a no disqualification match after Edge speared him, ending his reign at 143 days. On March 30 at WrestleMania XXIV, Punk won the Money in the Bank ladder match after defeating Carlito, Chris Jericho, John Morrison, Montel Vontavious Porter, Mr. Kennedy and Shelton Benjamin, earning him a shot at either the WWE, World Heavyweight, or ECW titles at any time. At Judgment Day on May 18, Punk teamed with Kane to unsuccessfully challenge John Morrison and The Miz for the WWE Tag Team Championship. On June 23, Punk was drafted to the Raw brand during the 2008 WWE draft. In his first night on Raw the following week, Punk cashed in his Money in the Bank contract after Batista beat down World Heavyweight Champion Edge and won the title, making his first defense later that same night against John "Bradshaw" Layfield (JBL), who had challenged him shortly after his win. Punk continued to hold and defend the title (against the likes of Batista at The Great American Bash and the July 21 episode of Raw, and JBL at SummerSlam) until Unforgiven, when he was attacked by The Legacy and Randy Orton, who punted Punk in the head before the Championship scramble match on September 7, ending his reign at 69 days. Punk could not participate in the match due to the attack and so was forced to forfeit the title, being replaced by Chris Jericho, who won the match and the title. On the September 15 episode of Raw, Punk received his title rematch, but failed to regain the title in a steel cage match against Jericho. On the October 27 episode of Raw, Punk and Kofi Kingston defeated Cody Rhodes and Ted DiBiase to win the World Tag Team Championship. The duo were members of Team Batista on November 23 at Survivor Series, where their team lost to Team Orton after Rhodes eliminated Punk. Punk then entered a number one contender Intercontinental Championship tournament, defeating Snitsky and John Morrison in the first two rounds. Punk and Kingston lost the World Tag Team Championship to John Morrison and The Miz on December 13 at a live event. The next day at Armageddon, Punk defeated Rey Mysterio in the tournament finals. On the January 5, 2009, episode of Raw, Punk received his title match against William Regal, which ended in a disqualification when Regal grabbed the referee's jersey. Due to this, Stephanie McMahon awarded Punk a rematch the following week on Raw, but this time Punk got disqualified. McMahon awarded him another rematch, a no disqualification match on the January 19 episode of Raw, where Punk defeated Regal to win the Intercontinental Championship. With this win, Punk became the 19th WWE Triple Crown Champion and the fastest ever to accomplish the feat, surpassing Kevin Nash's old record of 203 days. Punk lost the Intercontinental Championship on the March 9 episode of Raw to John "Bradshaw" Layfield (JBL). On April 5 at WrestleMania 25, Punk won the Money in the Bank ladder match and became the first person to win the match twice. On April 13 during the 2009 WWE draft, Punk was drafted to the SmackDown brand. In the period after the draft, Punk feuded with Umaga over Umaga's repeated surprise attacks while Punk was attempting to cash in his Money in the Bank contract, ultimately resulting in a Samoan strap match at Extreme Rules, which was won by Punk. Later that night, Punk cashed in his Money in the Bank contract to defeat Jeff Hardy for the World Heavyweight Championship immediately after Hardy won the title from Edge in a ladder match. Punk made his first successful title defense in a triple threat match against both Edge and Hardy on the June 15 episode of Raw. On June 28 at The Bash, Punk retained the title even though he lost to Hardy by disqualification (because titles do not change hands on a disqualification) after kicking the referee. As part of the storyline, Punk injured his eye and said that he could not see the referee, but Hardy called his eye injury into question, believing it to be feigned, with Punk turning heel and claiming to be the moral superior of those who support Hardy, due to his drug-free lifestyle. On July 26 at Night of Champions, Punk lost the World Heavyweight Championship to Hardy. Their feud continued through SummerSlam on August 23, when Punk regained the title in a TLC match only to be attacked by The Undertaker. On the August 28 episode of SmackDown, Punk concluded his feud with Hardy and achieved his booked goal of excising him from WWE, defeating Hardy in a steel cage match to retain the World Heavyweight Championship wherein the loser agreed to leave the company. On September 13 at Breaking Point, Punk defeated The Undertaker in a submission match to retain the World Heavyweight Championship. Undertaker originally won the match with his "Hell's Gate" submission hold, but SmackDown general manager Theodore Long restarted the match after stating that the ban that former SmackDown general manager Vickie Guerrero had placed on the move a year earlier was still in effect and Punk won the match with the anaconda vise when referee Scott Armstrong called for the bell despite Undertaker never submitting (eerily reminiscent to the Montreal Screwjob, which took place in the same venue in 1997). The feud between the two continued and on October 4 at Hell in a Cell, Punk lost the World Heavyweight Championship to The Undertaker in convincing fashion in a Hell in a Cell match. Punk would go on to lose two subsequent rematches for the World Heavyweight Championship against The Undertaker on the October 23 SmackDown and on October 25 at Bragging Rights in a fatal four-way match also involving Batista and Rey Mysterio. In late-2009, CM Punk's character began taking on on a more sinister direction. On the November 27 episode of SmackDown, Punk revealed that he had converted Luke Gallows, who had previously been portrayed as the mentally incompetent wrestler Festus, to the straight-edge lifestyle which had subsequently rid him of his mental troubles. Throughout January 2010, Punk began to convert planted members of the audience to a straight-edge lifestyle, making them take a pledge of allegiance to him and shaving their head as a sign of renewal and devotion. After converting many people who were not seen again, convert Serena began accompanying Punk and Gallows to form The Straight Edge Society. As well as leading this alliance, Punk was also the mentor of NXT rookie Darren Young, who flirted with the idea of becoming straight edge, before refusing just before his head was to be shaved. Punk would also give sermons, including during the annual Royal Rumble match in January 2010, as well as during an Elimination Chamber match in February 2010 at both of the eponymous pay-per-view events. During the first half of 2010, Punk feuded with Rey Mysterio, being eliminated by him during the Elimination Chamber match. After Mysterio prevented him from winning a Money in the Bank qualifying match, Punk interrupted Mysterio's celebration of his daughter Aaliyah's ninth birthday. Mysterio and Punk faced each other in a match at WrestleMania XXVI, where if Mysterio lost, he would join the Straight Edge Society, but Punk lost to Mysterio at WrestleMania. They had a rematch at Extreme Rules the following month where Punk would have to shave his head like his disciples if he lost, but he won this match after interference from Joey Mercury, a fourth member of the Straight Edge Society. On May 23 at Over The Limit, a third and final match between Punk and Mysterio was booked with both stipulations reactivated, but Punk lost and was subsequently shaved bald. After the match, Punk began wearing a black mask, since he considered himself always pure unlike his followers and was embarrassed by his baldness. On June 20, 2010, at WWE Fatal 4-Way, Punk challenged for the World Heavyweight Championship against Mysterio, Big Show and the champion Jack Swagger, but he was unsuccessful when he was attacked by Kane, who was accusing various people of attacking The Undertaker. Punk and his stable started a feud with Big Show when on the July 16 episode of SmackDown, Big Show unmasked Punk. Big Show faced the Straight Edge Society in a three-on-one handicap match on August 15 at SummerSlam, winning the match after Punk abandoned his teammates. The next month, at Night of Champions, Punk lost to Big Show in a singles match. The Straight Edge Society angle ended after Serena was released from WWE and Mercury became injured, and Punk defeated Gallows in a singles match on the September 24 SmackDown. In October 2010, Punk was traded back to the Raw brand after being swapped with Edge and took part in the interbrand tag team match on October 24 at Bragging Rights after defeating Evan Bourne to win a place, but Team Raw lost as Punk was eliminated by Rey Mysterio. It was reported later that Punk was suffering with a hip injury that would stop him from competing. To keep a presence on television, he began commentating on Raw beginning on November 22. At the end of December 2010, Punk left the commentary team after assaulting John Cena on Raw and SmackDown with a chair. Punk later revealed that his motives for the attacks were that he had joined and assumed control of The Nexus. Punk then made each member of the group prove themselves worthy of a spot, with some instead choosing to join The Corre, which had been started by former Nexus leader Wade Barrett on SmackDown. In January 2011, Punk and The Nexus cost Randy Orton his match with The Miz for the WWE Championship at the Royal Rumble as a revenge for Orton prematurely ending Punk's first World Heavyweight Championship reign in 2008. In turn, Orton responded by taking out all of the New Nexus members by punting them in the head, leaving Punk alone as the sole surviving member of the group. This led to a match at WrestleMania XXVII on April 3 and a Last Man Standing match on May 1 at Extreme Rules, both of which Punk lost. In June 2011, after pinning WWE Champion John Cena on the June 13 episode of Raw, Rey Mysterio at Capitol Punishment, and finally Alberto Del Rio in a number one contender's triple threat match (which also included Mysterio) all within one week, Punk revealed that his WWE contract was set to expire on July 17 at Money in the Bank and vowed to leave the company with the WWE Championship. On the June 27, 2011 edition of Raw, CM Punk made a scathing, yet highly acclaimed on-air speech, often referred to as the "Pipe Bomb", concerning the way in which WWE is run and its owner Vince McMahon, as well as referencing other promotions, such as Ring of Honor and New Japan Pro-Wrestling. Due to this, Punk was given a (in-storyline) suspension from televised WWE events. Punk would then be reinstated upon Cena's insistence. Upon his return, Punk ceased to appear with the remaining members of The Nexus and the group quietly dissolved that month, turning Punk face. At Money in the Bank, Punk defeated Cena to become the WWE Champion on his final night under contract with WWE. The match received a five-star rating from Dave Meltzer, marking Punk's second performance to attain a five-star rating, and the first WWE match to receive such a rating since 1997. On July 21, Punk made a surprise appearance at a joint WWE–Mattel panel at San Diego Comic-Con, where he mocked new chief operating officer Triple H, and offered WWE Championship tournament finalist Rey Mysterio a match for the WWE Championship as long as it was in Punk's hometown of Chicago. Punk appeared at July 23's All American Wrestling show, showing respect to Gregory Iron, a wrestler with cerebral palsy. Mysterio won the WWE Championship tournament on the July 25 episode of Raw only to lose it to Cena later that night. After Cena's victory, Punk returned and upstaged the new WWE Champion's celebration while also entering a title dispute. Triple H later upheld both Punk and Cena's claims to the WWE Championship as legitimate and scheduled the two to a match at SummerSlam to decide the undisputed WWE Champion, with Triple H to serve as the special guest referee. At SummerSlam on August 14, Punk defeated Cena, but he lost the title minutes later to Alberto Del Rio, who had cashed in his Money in the Bank contract after Kevin Nash attacked Punk. The following months, Punk lost at Night of Champions against Triple H, at Hell in a Cell in a WWE Championship triple threat Hell in a Cell match, and at Vengeance against The Miz and R-truth in a tag team match with Triple H as his partner. This helped transition Punk's anti-establishment voice from Triple H to John Laurinaitis, who, around this time, became the interim Raw general manager. Punk balked at Laurinaitis' promotion and verbally attacked him as a dull yes man. At Survivor Series, Punk defeated Del Rio, regaining the WWE Championship. Punk went on to defend the title through the end of the year, retaining in a rematch with Del Rio on the November 28 episode of Raw and against both Del Rio and The Miz in a triple threat TLC match on December 18 at TLC: Tables, Ladders & Chairs. At the Royal Rumble on January 29, 2012, Punk successfully defended his title against Ziggler despite Laurinaitis acting as the outside enforcer. On the January 30 episode of Raw, the returning Chris Jericho attacked Punk and Daniel Bryan during their Champion vs. Champion match, giving Bryan the win. The following week on Raw, Jericho explained his actions by dismissing the WWE roster as cheap imitations of himself and singling out Punk for calling himself "the best in the world", a moniker Jericho used the last time he was in WWE. Their rivalry continued through Elimination Chamber on February 19, when Punk retained the WWE Championship in the namesake structure, but while four competitors were eliminated, Jericho was unable to continue the match after being kicked out of the chamber by Punk, causing temporary injury. The next night on Raw, Jericho earned a match against Punk on April 1 at WrestleMania XXVIII and in a bid to psychologically unsettle him, revealed that Punk's father was an alcoholic and alleged that his sister was a drug addict, asserting that Punk's straight edge philosophy was paranoia to avoid the same vices and vowing to make Punk turn to alcohol by winning the title from him. John Laurinaitis added the stipulation that the WWE Championship could change hands via disqualification, which led to Jericho inciting Punk into using a weapon, but Punk resisted and retained the title. On the April 2 and 9 episodes of Raw, Punk retained the WWE Championship against Mark Henry after losing to him via countout and disqualification, being attacked by Jericho following both matches and doused with alcohol. On the April 16 episode of Raw, Punk pinned Henry in a no disqualification, no countout match to retain the title. After repeated altercations, the feud between Jericho and Punk culminated in a Chicago street fight on April 29 at Extreme Rules, where Punk defeated Jericho to retain the WWE Championship. On May 20 at Over the Limit, Punk retained the title against Daniel Bryan after reversing Bryan's submission hold the ""Yes!" Lock" into a pinning combination, as the pinfall saved Punk from his own submission only moments later. Shortly before Over the Limit, Bryan interfered in a non-title match between Punk and Kane to frame Punk for attacking Kane with a steel chair, starting a three-way rivalry. On the June 1 episode of SmackDown, a WWE Championship match between Punk and Kane ended in a double disqualification after Bryan attacked both men. Meanwhile, Bryan's jilted ex-girlfriend AJ Lee turned her affections to both Punk and Kane. This feud culminated in a triple threat match on June 17 at No Way Out, where Punk managed to retain the title after AJ distracted Kane. On July 15 at Money in the Bank, Punk defeated Bryan in a no disqualification match with AJ as special guest referee to retain the title and end the feud. On July 23 at Raw 1000, Punk defended the title against Money in the Bank winner John Cena and lost by disqualification after interference from Big Show. When the night's special guest The Rock – who had interrupted Punk earlier to announce he would wrestle for the WWE Championship at the Royal Rumble in January 2013 – intervened to save Cena from Big Show's assault, Punk attacked Rock, turning heel in the process. Punk justified his actions the following week on Raw, explaining he was tired of people like Cena and Rock overshadowing him when the WWE Champion should be the focus of the company, asserting himself further soon after by disrupting a number one contender's match between Cena and Big Show. As a result, both men were entered into the title match against Punk on August 19 at SummerSlam, where he successfully retained the title by pinning Big Show after both Punk and Cena submitted Big Show at the same time and Raw general manager AJ Lee restarted the match. In the following weeks on Raw, Punk demanded respect from people like AJ Lee, Jerry Lawler and Bret Hart and eventually aligned with Paul Heyman in his feud with Cena. On September 16 at Night of Champions, Punk retained the WWE Championship after he fought Cena to a draw. Punk continued to feud with Cena despite the latter's arm injury, rejecting the requests of Mick Foley and Jim Ross to pick him as his Hell in a Cell opponent and leading to a brawl with WWE chairman Vince McMahon. Cena was eventually pulled from the title match and replaced by Ryback, whom Punk would defeat at Hell in a Cell on October 28 in a Hell in a Cell match with help from referee Brad Maddox to retain the title and also ending Ryback's thirty-eight match undefeated streak. The next night on Raw, a furious Mick Foley confronted Punk for refusing to pick John Cena as his Hell in a Cell opponent, leading the two to agree to meet at Survivor Series in a Survivor Series match with Punk choosing Alberto Del Rio, Cody Rhodes, Damien Sandow and The Miz for his team. However, Punk was replaced as captain by Dolph Ziggler the following week on Raw and was instead booked in a triple threat WWE Championship match against John Cena and Ryback by Vince McMahon. At Survivor Series on November 18, Punk won the match by pinning Cena following interference from the debuting faction called The Shield (Dean Ambrose, Roman Reigns and Seth Rollins), allowing him to retain the WWE Championship and officially hold the championship for one full year. On December 4, Punk underwent surgery to repair a partially torn meniscus, removing him from his scheduled title match against Ryback on December 16 at TLC: Tables, Ladders & Chairs. Despite his injury, Punk became the longest-reigning WWE Champion in the past 25 years on December 5, when he hit 381 days, surpassing John Cena's 380-day reign. Punk returned to in-ring action on the January 7, 2013, episode of Raw, retaining the WWE Championship against Ryback in a TLC match following interference from The Shield. On January 27 at the Royal Rumble, Punk defended the WWE Championship against The Rock in a match that stipulated that Punk would be stripped of the title if The Shield interfered. Punk originally pinned The Rock to retain after The Shield put Rock through a table while the arena lights were out, leading Vince McMahon to come out and announce that Punk would be stripped of the title, but he instead restarted the match at The Rock's request. Punk lost, ending his reign at 434 days. WWE recognized this reign as the longest world championship reign in WWE of the "modern era" (after 1988) until Universal Champion Brock Lesnar broke that record in June 2018. Punk received a title rematch with Rock on February 17 at Elimination Chamber, stipulated that The Rock would lose the title if he was disqualified or counted out, but Punk was pinned by Rock after miscommunication with Heyman. On the February 25 episode of Raw, Punk faced Royal Rumble winner John Cena for his number one contendership to the WWE Championship, but he lost. On March 4 2013, Punk defeated Big Show, Randy Orton and Sheamus in a fatal four-way match on the March 4 episode of Raw to earn the right to face The Undertaker at WrestleMania. After the real-life death of Paul Bearer, Undertaker's former manager the next day, a somewhat controversial storyline involving Punk regularly spiting The Undertaker through displays of flippancy and disrespect towards Bearer's death began, including Punk stealing Bearer's trademark urn. On April 7 at WrestleMania 29, Punk was defeated by The Undertaker. Punk then took a two-month hiatus away from WWE television to recover from injuries. Punk returned at Payback in June 2013, defeating Chris Jericho. Punk started a storyline where he told Heyman to no longer accompany him to his matches and was later attacked by Heyman's other client Brock Lesnar, thus turning Punk face once again. Heyman also cost Punk a WWE Championship Money in the Bank ladder match at Money in the Bank when he attacked him. This led to a match between Punk and Lesnar at SummerSlam on August 18, when Punk lost to Lesnar in a No Disqualification match after Heyman interfered. His feud with Heyman continued during the following months, facing his other client, the Intercontinental Champion Curtis Axel. First, at Night of Champions, Punk faced Axel and Heyman in a no disqualification two-on-one handicap elimination match in which he made Axel submit, leaving only Heyman left, but Punk lost the match after Ryback interfered and put him through a table. Then in October, Punk defeated Ryback at Battleground and the feud ended at Hell in a Cell, where Punk faced Heyman and Ryback in a two-on-one handicap Hell in a Cell match, winning the match by pinning Ryback and after the match performing a "Go to Sleep" to Heyman on top of the cell. Punk would move on to a feud with The Wyatt Family (Bray Wyatt, Erick Rowan and Luke Harper), forming an alliance with Daniel Bryan, with the duo defeating Harper and Rowan in a tag team match on November 24 at Survivor Series. The next night on Raw, Punk was attacked by The Shield while attempting to save Bryan from being "taken hostage" by The Wyatt Family. Punk then insinuated that The Authority, a villainous group who controlled WWE led by Triple H and Stephanie McMahon, ordered the attack, which resulted in the Director of Operations Kane booking Punk in a three-on-one handicap match against The Shield at TLC: Tables, Ladders & Chairs. At TLC on December 15, Punk won the match after Reigns accidentally performed a spear on Ambrose. After further altercations between Punk and Kane, Kane made Punk the first entrant in the annual Royal Rumble match on January 26, 2014. At the Royal Rumble, near the end of the match, Kane, who was already eliminated earlier in the match by Punk, eliminated Punk from the outside and proceeded to perform a chokeslam on him through the announce table. "I was sick and hurt and burnt out, and I walked. And I can do that because I'm an independent contractor". — In a December 2014 interview, Punk explains why he left WWE earlier that year Punk did not appear on the January 27, 2014 episode of Raw, nor did he appear at the SmackDown taping on Tuesday despite being advertised for both events. By Wednesday, WWE.com stopped advertising Punk for future events. The Wrestling Observer reported that on Monday and prior to Raw, Punk had legitimately walked out after telling Vince McMahon and Triple H that he was "going home". On February 20 during a conference call to investors, McMahon said Punk was "taking a sabbatical". On the March 3 episode of Raw, which took place in Punk's hometown of Chicago, WWE acknowledged his absence on television for the first time when the show started with Punk's entrance music playing, only for former manager Paul Heyman to walk out to a loud chorus of boos. WWE then proceeded to remove Punk from footage of their promotional videos. This lasted until the first half of July, where WWE used footage of Punk to promote the WWE Network. In an interview published in late May, Punk was asked how it felt "to be retired at 35" and replied that "it feels good". On July 15, WWE.com officially moved Punk from the active roster to the alumni section of their page without releasing a statement. On the same day, Punk thanked his fans without mentioning WWE. In late July, Punk said that he was "never ever" going to return to wrestling. When Punk told [another] doctor that he wrestled with a staph infection for three months, Punk said [that] doctor told him: "You should be dead. You could have died". — The Pro Wrestling Torch documents the Punk interview released in November 2014 On an episode of Colt Cabana's Art of Wrestling podcast released in November 2014, Punk finally broke his silence regarding his exit from WWE. In a detailed interview, Punk said that he was suspended for two months after walking out on the company in January and that after the suspension ended, nobody from WWE contacted him. Punk also said company executives gave him a run-around when he reached out to them for unpaid royalties until he was ultimately handed his termination papers and was fired by WWE on his wedding day on June 13, 2014. The manner of firing was the last straw for Punk, stating that he would never return to WWE and that there would be no further working relationship between him and WWE following a legal settlement. The settlement included Punk giving WWE permission to sell his remaining merchandise. Punk cited his health as the main reason he left WWE, describing that during his final months in the company, he had been working through an untreated and potentially fatal MRSA infection (Punk later acknowledged on the witness stand that he was not diagnosed with an MRSA staph infection, but that a physician's assistant said he exhibited certain symptoms consistent with an ordinary staph infection), broken ribs, injured knees and multiple concussions, including one at the 2014 Royal Rumble, as well as having lost his appetite and ability to sleep well. Punk felt that WWE was pressuring and rushing him to wrestle before fully recovering. According to Punk, he found a lump on his back in November 2013, and it was diagnosed as a "fatty deposit" by Dr. Chris Amann, who refused to remove it despite Punk's repeated requests. The week after Punk left WWE, his wife April Mendez convinced him to get the lump checked by her doctor. The doctor told Punk that he could have died due to ignoring it for such a long time. Punk had the doctor evacuate the infection, describing it as the worst pain in his life, but said that once it was treated and he was on stronger medication, he was able to sleep better than he had in months. Other sources of unhappiness Punk had with WWE were his failure to main event a WrestleMania (deeming his entire career to be a failure as a result), being paid less than the other wrestlers in the three most significant matches of WrestleMania 29, doing favors for Vince McMahon and not being owed back, being "creatively stifled", feeling that there were no long-term plans for wrestlers other than John Cena, as well as receiving less pay and not getting answers as to how the advent of the WWE Network would affect wrestlers' salaries. Lastly, Punk described having left with "zero passion" for wrestling and described himself at the time of the interview to be the happiest he's ever been in many years. Less than one week later, while being interviewed on The Steve Austin Show on the WWE Network, Vince McMahon apologized to Punk for the manner of his termination, which he regarded as an unfortunate coincidence due to a lack of communication within the company. McMahon also said that he was open to working with Punk again. In a second Art of Wrestling podcast, Punk publicly rejected McMahon's apology, brushing it off as "insincere" and a "publicity stunt" as McMahon did not contact him directly to apologize and could have apologized much earlier. Punk's first known appearance at a professional wrestling event following his exit from WWE was at a Freelance Wrestling show on December 4, 2015, titled "Raw Power." Draped in a cloak and referred to by announcers as Kikutaro's "nameless mentor", Punk managed Kikutaro in a match against Darin Corbin and Dick Justice. He tossed around salt before the match but did not get involved in the match itself. On April 19, 2019, Punk appeared in a masked disguise at an event held by independent promotion MKE Wrestling, where he helped Ace Steel win a match by attacking his opponent with the GTS. While it was implied to be Punk by promotion owner Silas Young, nothing was confirmed by Punk. On November 12, 2019, Punk made a surprise appearance on the Fox Sports 1 series WWE Backstage. He subsequently joined the program as a special contributor and analyst. Punk accepted the job because he would be under contract with Fox instead of WWE directly, and hoped it would help him find his way back into the wrestling business. Regarding an in-ring return, he was not interested but not opposed to the idea, noting it was "a bridge that is gonna have to be built." Production of WWE Backstage was halted due to the COVID-19 pandemic and subsequently suspended by Fox in June 2020, later being cancelled as a series entirely by 2021. On August 20, 2021, Punk made his debut for All Elite Wrestling (AEW) at The First Dance event on Rampage, challenging Darby Allin to a match at the All Out pay-per-view event. This marked Punk's official return to professional wrestling after a seven-year retirement. Wrestling journalist Dave Meltzer said, "Punk's appearance in his home city drew one of the most amazing audience reactions to a pro wrestler in U.S. history. The reaction was compared to Montreal's reaction to Hulk Hogan in 2002 shortly after his WWE return, or the reaction to Triple H in Madison Square Garden a few months before that upon his return from a torn quad." Punk won the match against Allin in September. Following a brief feud with Eddie Kingston, whom Punk defeated at Full Gear, Punk experienced his first defeat in AEW in February 2022, losing to MJF in a singles match on Dynamite after months of feuding between the two. Punk defeated MJF at Revolution in a Dog Collar match. At Double or Nothing on May 29, 2022, Punk defeated Adam Page to win the AEW World Championship. Five days after winning the title, Punk announced on the June 3 episode of Rampage that he was taking a hiatus from competing to recover from a foot injury, but that he would remain champion. Jon Moxley was crowned as interim champion in Punk's place at AEW x NJPW: Forbidden Door on June 26. At the Quake by the Lake special episode of Dynamite on August 10, Punk made his return and confronted Moxley, igniting a title dispute. A match to determine the undisputed AEW World Champion took place on the August 24 episode of Dynamite, where Moxley quickly and soundly defeated Punk. After accepting Moxley's open challenge for anyone to face him in September 2022 at All Out, Punk defeated Moxley at the event to win the AEW World Championship for the second time. During the post-event media scrum, Punk addressed rumors that he had attempted to get Colt Cabana fired from AEW, accused the company's executive vice presidents and wrestlers Kenny Omega and The Young Bucks (Matt and Nick Jackson) of spreading those rumors and leaking them to wrestling media, and referenced a segment in which he says Page went off-script prior to their match in May. Omega and The Young Bucks, along with head of AEW legal, Megha Parekh, approached Punk about his comments backstage, which led to a legitimate altercation. Punk, Omega, and The Young Bucks all reportedly received consequent suspensions pending investigation. Later that week, the AEW World Championship was announced as having been vacated. Around the same time, Punk underwent surgery to repair his left triceps after tearing it during his match at All Out. On his conduct at the scrum, Punk later said he "didn't approach it in the right manner" and that he was "disappointed" and "hurt", as he had sensed that he had just suffered another injury. After a nine-month absence, Punk made his return to AEW on the premiere episode of Collision on June 17, 2023, teaming with FTR (Cash Wheeler and Dax Harwood) to defeat Samoa Joe, Jay White, and Juice Robinson in a six-man tag team match. That same month, he entered the men's Owen Hart Cup tournament, defeating Satoshi Kojima in the first round at Forbidden Door. Punk won over Joe in the semifinals and lost to Ricky Starks in the final round on July 15 after Starks grabbed the ropes for leverage to get the pin. On the July 29 edition of Collision, Punk unveiled the AEW World Championship belt that he had won in September 2022, declaring himself the real world champion and stated that he still rightfully held the title since he was never defeated for it. He then spray-painted his signature "X" symbol over the belt. At All In in August, he successfully defended the "Real World Championship" against Joe in what would be his final AEW match. After the event, it was widely reported that Punk had been involved in a backstage altercation with Jack Perry regarding comments Perry made during his match earlier in the show, itself a reference to Punk denying Perry's request to use real glass in his segments on Collision. After an investigation into the altercation was conducted by AEW, Punk was terminated from his AEW contract for just cause on September 2 under the unanimous recommendation of both the AEW discipline committee and outside legal counsel. Punk's termination was announced on X by AEW's official account, and was also announced during the opening of that night's episode of Collision, where AEW president and CEO Tony Khan stated that "the incident was regrettable and it endangered people backstage". He later stated, "Never in all [this] time have I ever felt until last Sunday that my security, my safety, my life was in danger at a wrestling show. I don't think anybody should feel that way at work, I don't think the people I work with should feel that way, and I had to make a very difficult choice today." At the conclusion of Survivor Series: WarGames in the Chicago metropolitan area on November 25, 2023, Punk made a surprise return to WWE in his first appearance in the company since 2014 (discounting his appearances on Fox's WWE Backstage in 2019). According to reporters present at the event, his return was greeted by "one of the loudest pops of all time". After making appearances on Raw, the "Tribute to the Troops" special episode of SmackDown, and at NXT Deadline, he signed with the Raw brand on the December 11 episode of Raw, where he was subsequently confronted by Seth "Freakin" Rollins, teasing a potential match, and officially announced his entry into the Royal Rumble match. Punk's first matches with WWE were against "Dirty" Dominik Mysterio, during the WWE Live Holiday Tour, first at Madison Square Garden in New York City on December 26, then at the Kia Forum in Inglewood, California on December 30, which were both won by Punk. On January 27, 2024, at the Royal Rumble, Punk wrestled his first televised WWE match since 2014, entering at number 27 during the Royal Rumble match, in which he was the runner-up after being eliminated by Cody Rhodes. During the match, Punk tore his right triceps, injuring him and rendering him unable to compete at WrestleMania XL. Punk would eventually return to WWE television on the March 25, 2024 edition of Raw to announce that he would guest commentate the World Heavyweight Championship match at the event. Punk adopted his real-life following of the straight edge movement as a major attribute of his professional wrestling character. The character utilizes different elements of Punk's personality and beliefs of the straight edge movement dependent on his alignment. While portraying a crowd favorite, Punk's character tends to be that of Punk's normal personality, largely indifferent to others who drink alcohol, smoke tobacco, partake in recreational drug use or have promiscuous sexual behavior, but emphasizing the social discipline involved with personally abstaining from these behaviors. Conversely, his villainous personality tends to be that of one who is hardline or militant straight edge, exemplifying the elitist attitudes and superiority complexes – defined by Punk's common mantra during villainous-themed promos that because he is straight edge, he is "better than you." Punk performs the straight edge symbol of crossing his arms in an X formation while having the letter X written on the back of his hands, usually drawn on his wrist tape. During his WWE career, Punk also incorporated a belligerently anti-establishment and anti-corporate attitude into his persona. Originally, the initials CM in his ring name represented the phrase "Chick Magnet", the name of the tag team he was in as a backyard wrestler. However, Punk later changed CM into a pseudo-acronym, declaring that it has no meaning, though when asked since he has taken to making up meanings that fit the initials, going so far as to make up long stories to explain the origins that do not match the actual origin story at all. Since beginning this practice, Punk has stated CM stands among others for "Cookie Monster", "Crooked Moonsault", "Chuck Mosley", "Charles Montgomery", "Charles Manson", "Charlie Murphy", and "Chicago Made". During his entrance, Punk yells "It's clobberin' time!", a reference to New York City hardcore punk band Sick of It All who wrote a song with the same name and Marvel's fictional character The Thing. As his entrance theme, Punk uses the song "Cult of Personality" by Living Colour, with which he is often associated. An integral part of Punk is the numerous tattoos that adorn his body, some of which have become symbols associated with Punk and mantras and declarations that have been integrated into his gimmick. The tattoos as a whole, due to their large quantity and variety, have also become an attribute identifiable to Punk. The most important of the individual tattoos in Punk's character – whether through association, symbol, or mantra – are the following: A Pepsi Globe logo on his left shoulder that inspired the names of two of his signature moves. It also became a symbol of Punk himself, who wore the logo on his ring gear in the independent circuit as well as a slightly modified Pepsi logo being used as part of his TitanTron entrance video. Punk, a keen Pepsi drinker, chose to receive a Pepsi tattoo to emphasize his straight edge beliefs. The tattoo is also a reference to former Minor Threat guitarist Brian Baker, who had a Coca-Cola tattoo and explained this by saying "I like Coca-Cola". When people inquire about Punk's Pepsi tattoo, he often replies "I like Pepsi" in a similar fashion. The words "Straight Edge" are spelled out on Punk's stomach. This is one of his oldest tattoos and he has referred to it as his identity. A sleeve tattoo on his left arm that reads "luck is for losers" and features numerous good luck symbols, including a rabbit's foot, four-leaf clover and a horseshoe. The tattoo also features four ace playing cards as a tribute to trainer Ace Steel. The phrase "No gimmicks needed" on the back of his left hand, a tribute to deceased wrestler Chris Candido. The words "Drug Free" across his knuckles ("Drug" on his right knuckles and "Free" on his left). His younger sister's jersey number (31) behind his left ear, surrounded by stars, each of which represents his siblings as a way to bond away from home. The Cobra Command logo (G.I. Joe's enemy) on his right shoulder. Punk is known for his love of comic books, considering them along with jazz and professional wrestling as three of the original arts that America has given to the world. Several wrestlers have publicly cited Punk as an inspiration or influence on their careers. Seth Rollins said in December 2018 that Punk's influence on the Chicago wrestling scene was responsible for him becoming a wrestler in the first place, while Rhea Ripley said in September 2019 that Punk's verbal skills were something she aspired to because "when he spoke, everyone listened", and Adam Cole told Sports Illustrated in November 2019 that Punk's work on the independent circuit was a "huge influence" on him. Reporters, wrestlers, and fans alike have praised Punk's speaking skills, especially his in-ring promos. His June 2011 "Pipebomb" promo has been called "historic" and is regarded as one of the most important promos in professional wrestling history. Punk is credited with being one of the first independent wrestlers to have success in WWE, which in turn opened the door for other independent wrestlers to both join and succeed in WWE. Although much of his time as a top star in WWE was during its heavily watered-down PG Era, Erik Beaston of Bleacher Report wrote that "Punk turned the company on its head for a few short years and gave fans a taste of what an alternative to the advertiser-obsessed promotion could look like." After his 2014 departure from WWE until his return to AEW in 2021, the chanting of Punk's name was prominent during WWE events. Initially starting because fans expected his return as part of a storyline, the chants continued well after it was clear that his retirement was legitimate. Through the 2010s, CM Punk chants became a way for WWE fans to voice displeasure at a particular match or storyline, particularly during events in the Chicago area. The continual chanting for Punk, in spite of the fact his return was unlikely, polarized fans and journalists with some saying it was disrespectful to the wrestlers in the ring while others including Punk himself have viewed the chants as a legitimate way for fans to convey their feelings and that paying fans should not have their behavior policed by others. On numerous occasions, performers in the ring have addressed the chants directly. At UFC 181, on December 6, 2014, Punk announced that he had signed a multi-fight contract with Ultimate Fighting Championship (UFC). When asked if he would compete under his ring name or birth name, he told the Las Vegas Sun: "I've come this far with CM Punk. That's what people know. I'm trying to stick with that. I'm not shying away from it. I'm not ashamed of it." His UFC profile listed him as CM Punk. In January 2015, Punk began training under Duke Roufus at Roufusport MMA Academy. In June 2015, Punk moved to Milwaukee to be closer to the Roufusport gym while still retaining his home in Chicago. Later, it was announced that Punk would compete in the welterweight division. In October 2015, Roufus announced that Punk had suffered a shoulder injury, delaying his UFC debut until the next calendar year. On February 6, 2016, it was announced that Punk would face Mickey Gall in his first professional mixed martial arts (MMA) contest, but he was diagnosed with a herniated disc and underwent surgery days later. Punk's UFC and MMA debut against Mickey Gall took place on September 10, 2016, at UFC 203. The event was held at the Quicken Loans Arena, the same venue where Punk left WWE and retired from professional wrestling. Punk was taken down immediately and lost via rear naked choke submission early in the first round. He was paid a disclosed $500,000 (equivalent to $634,775 in 2023). Punk's second professional bout took place at UFC 225 on June 9, 2018, against Mike Jackson, in his hometown of Chicago. Punk lost the one-sided fight via unanimous decision. After the bout, UFC president Dana White said that both Punk and Jackson would probably not fight for the UFC again, and urged Punk to "call it a wrap". Three years after the bout, it was made public that the result was overturned to a no contest after Jackson tested positive for marijuana. In August 2021, Punk notified the UFC he would be retiring from MMA after he returned to professional wrestling earlier that month. Punk's MMA career has been widely panned by MMA fans and personalities. On November 8, 2018, Punk signed with the Cage Fury Fighting Championships (CFFC) promotion (a UFC affiliate) as a commentator. His first event was CFFC 71 on December 14 and it was streamed live on UFC Fight Pass. Brooks married wrestler April Mendez, also known as AJ Lee, on June 13, 2014. He is an atheist, and has been outspoken in his support for LGBT rights and same-sex marriage. Like his wrestling persona, he follows a straight edge lifestyle. Brooks once worked for a shop named All American Comics in Evergreen Park, which closed in January 2022. In February 2015, WWE doctor Christopher Amann filed a defamation lawsuit against Brooks and Scott Colton over Brooks's allegations of medical malpractice on an episode of Colton's podcast. Amann sought roughly $4,000,000 (equivalent to $5,142,000 in 2023) in compensation and an undisclosed amount in punitive damages. WWE issued a statement and video in support of Amann. The case went to trial in 2018, where a jury ruled in favor of Brooks and Colton. In August 2018, Colton filed a lawsuit against Brooks, alleging breach of contract and fraud due to Brooks's alleged agreement and later refusal to pay Colton's legal fees for the Amann suit. Colton sought $200,000 (equivalent to $242,672 in 2023) in damages and an additional $1,000,000 (equivalent to $1,213,000 in 2023) in punitive damages. Brooks filed a counterclaim against Colton in June 2019, for $600,000 (equivalent to $715,033 in 2023) and additional fees. Both lawsuits were settled and dismissed in September 2019. According to PWInsider, the settlement involved no financial compensation. In 2008, Brooks appeared as the Sports Grand Marshal of the nationally televised McDonald's Thanksgiving Parade in downtown Chicago. He reprised this role in 2012. Brooks has appeared alongside his friend and Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu coach Rener Gracie in several episodes of the YouTube series Gracie Breakdown. He has also worked with Nerdist Industries, including hosting an ongoing series titled Grammar Slam, explaining grammatical mistakes in messages from professional wrestling fans and berating them. Brooks was the cover athlete for the video game WWE '13. In 2015, he was featured in Frank Turner's "The Next Storm" music video. As an actor, Brooks starred in the 2019 horror film Girl on the Third Floor. Dennis Harvey of Variety and Michael Phillips of the Chicago Tribune respectively described his performance as "a fun star turn that easily carries most of the film" and "solid if a little unvarying". Brooks portrayed wrestler Ricky Rabies in the professional wrestling drama series Heels (2021–2023). Brooks wrote the introduction for the hardcover edition of Marvel Comics' 2012 crossover event Avengers vs. X-Men and described the opportunity as a "geek dream come true". In 2013, Brooks wrote a foreword for his friend and ex-girlfriend Natalie Slater's cookbook Bake and Destroy: Good Food for Bad Vegans. In February 2015, Marvel Comics' Thor Annual No. 1, partly written by Brooks, was released. He cowrote "The Most Cursed", which appeared in Vertigo Comics' Strange Sports Stories No. 3 in May 2015. Brooks also cowrote Marvel Comics' Drax ongoing series. Brooks wrote a one-shot of Marvel's Master of Kung Fu, which was published in November 2017. All Elite Wrestling AEW World Championship (2 times) Real World Championship (1 time, unrecognized) AEW Dynamite Awards (2 times) Best Moment on the Mic (2022) – CM Punk returns Best Mic Duel (2022) – MJF and CM Punk on Thanksgiving Eve The Baltimore Sun Feud of the Year (2009) vs. Jeff Hardy Cauliflower Alley Club Iron Mike Mazurki Award (2023) ESPN Debut of the Year (2023) Independent Wrestling Association Mid-South IWA Mid-South Heavyweight Championship (5 times) IWA Mid-South Light Heavyweight Championship (2 times) International Wrestling Cartel IWC World Heavyweight Championship (1 time) Lunatic Wrestling Federation LWF Intercontinental Championship (2 times) Mid-American Wrestling Mid-American Wrestling Heavyweight Championship (1 time) Mid-American Heavyweight Championship Tournament (2001) New York Post Best Return/Debut of the Year (2023) NWA Cyberspace NWA Cyberspace Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Julio Dinero Ohio Valley Wrestling OVW Heavyweight Championship (1 time) OVW Southern Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Seth Skyfire OVW Television Championship (1 time) Pro Wrestling Illustrated Comeback of the Year (2021) Feud of the Year (2011) vs. John Cena Feud of the Year (2022) vs. Maxwell Jacob Friedman Match of the Year (2011) vs. John Cena at Money in the Bank Most Hated Wrestler of the Year (2012) Most Popular Wrestler of the Year (2011, 2021) Wrestler of the Year (2011, 2012) Ranked No. 1 of the top 500 singles wrestlers in the PWI 500 in 2012 Revolution Championship Wrestling RCW Championship (1 time) Revolver Golden Gods Award for Most Metal Athlete (2012) Ring of Honor ROH World Championship (1 time) ROH Tag Team Championship (2 times) – with Colt Cabana ROH Hall of Fame (class of 2022) St. Paul Championship Wrestling/Steel Domain Wrestling SPCW Northern States Light Heavyweight Championship (2 times) SPCE Northern States Light Heavyweight Championship Tournament (2000) World Wrestling Entertainment / WWE WWE Championship (2 times) World Heavyweight Championship (3 times) ECW Championship (1 time) WWE Intercontinental Championship (1 time) World Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Kofi Kingston Money in the Bank (2008, 2009) WWE Intercontinental Championship #1 Contender's Tournament (2008) Brisbane Cup (2011) 19th Triple Crown Champion Slammy Award (7 times) "OMG" Moment of the Year (2008) – Cashing in Money in the Bank to win the World Heavyweight Championship Shocker of the Year (2009) – Forcing Jeff Hardy out of the WWE after steel cage match victory Despicable Me (2010) – Harassing Rey Mysterio and his family Superstar of the Year (2011) "Pipe Bomb" of the Year (2011) T-shirt of the Year (2011) – "Best in the World" Extreme Moment of the Year (2013) – For exacting revenge on Paul Heyman at Hell in a Cell WrestleCrap Gooker Award (2023) – CM Punk on AEW (tied with Father James Mitchell doing drugs on PPV) Wrestling Observer Newsletter Best Box Office Draw (2021) Best Gimmick (2009, 2011) Best on Interviews (2011, 2012) Feud of the Year (2009) vs. Jeff Hardy Feud of the Year (2011) vs. John Cena Most Charismatic (2021) Most Disgusting Promotional Tactic (2012) Exploiting Jerry Lawler's legitimate heart attack Most Disgusting Promotional Tactic (2013) Exploiting the death of Paul Bearer Pro Wrestling Match of the Year (2011) vs. John Cena at Money in the Bank Bob Backlund lost the WWF Heavyweight Championship to Antonio Inoki after 648 days, but WWE does not officially acknowledge the title change and recognizes Backlund's reign as uninterrupted at 2,135 days. Punk held the title concurrently with Rey Mysterio and John Cena during his first reign. After defeating Cena, Punk became the undisputed champion, but he was not recognized by WWE as having won the title a second time. "CM Punk". WWE.com. WWE. Archived from the original on June 8, 2023. Retrieved June 30, 2018. Punk, CM (January 23, 2007). "Congratulations to Ace". WWE. Archived from the original on July 4, 2008. Retrieved April 6, 2016. Wojick, Alan (June 21, 2003). "Wojick Interview". The Wrestling Clothesline. Archived from the original on July 18, 2011. Retrieved September 26, 2006. "CM Punk – official UFC fighter profile". Ultimate Fighting Championship. Archived from the original on March 26, 2015. Retrieved April 24, 2015. Cruz, Guilherme (September 10, 2016). "Coach: CM Punk's MMA improvements have been 'impressive,' he'll beat Mickey Gall". MMAFighting.com. Retrieved May 28, 2017. Holland, Jesse (December 6, 2017). "Pic: CM Punk earns BJJ blue belt ahead of UFC return". MMAmania.com. Retrieved June 9, 2018. CM Punk (November 2003). Shoot with CM Punk (DVD). RF Video. Archived from the original on January 30, 2007. Retrieved April 14, 2007. Lindner, Matt (May 10, 2012). "CM Punk lives dream, sings at Cubs game". ESPN.com. ESPN. Retrieved May 25, 2017. Arroyave, Luis (April 5, 2009). "Local guy makes it big on World Wrestling Entertainment". Chicago Tribune. Retrieved August 12, 2015. Pratt, Gregory (June 15, 2013). "WWE star CM Punk has Tinley Park ties". Chicago Tribune. Retrieved May 28, 2017. Eck, Kevin (July 19, 2007). "Q&A with CM Punk". The Baltimore Sun. Archived from the original on February 18, 2022. Retrieved May 28, 2017. TMZ, TMZ (June 26, 2013). "WWE Star CM Punk Hits Mom with Restraining Order 'Threats to Commit Suicide'". TMZ. Retrieved June 26, 2019. CM Punk Accepts CAC Iron Mike Mazurki Award Aug 30 2023, archived from the original on November 21, 2023, retrieved November 21, 2023 "CM Punk". WWE. Archived from the original on May 3, 2020. Retrieved November 21, 2023. "CM Punk Has A Surprise Pick For His Favorite Wrestler Growing Up". EssentiallySports. November 26, 2020. Archived from the original on November 21, 2023. Retrieved November 21, 2023. "CM Punk : Matches per Promotion and Year". Cagematch.net. Archived from the original on February 6, 2022. Retrieved February 27, 2022. Lagattolla, Al (December 17, 2001). "CM Venom Interview". Chicago Wrestling. Archived from the original on February 22, 2004. Retrieved September 26, 2006. Robinson, Jon (December 1, 2006). "CM Punk Interview". IGN. Archived from the original on February 19, 2014. Retrieved June 21, 2014. Gomez, Luis (March 26, 2012). "Pipe bomb! More from my interview with WWE Champ CM Punk". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on April 2, 2012. Retrieved April 5, 2012. Milner, John M.; Kamchen, Richard (April 3, 2016). "CM Punk". Slam! Sports. Canoe.com. Archived from the original on September 30, 2017. Retrieved February 22, 2018. CM Punk; Colt Cabana (July 1, 2005). Straight Shootin' with CM Punk & Colt Cabana (DVD). Ring of Honor. Archived from the original on September 27, 2007. Retrieved April 14, 2007. CM Punk; Samoa Joe (March 10, 2005). Straight Shootin' with Samoa Joe & CM Punk (DVD). Ring of Honor. Archived from the original on July 18, 2011. Retrieved June 21, 2014. "IWC World Heavyweight Title History – IWCwrestling.com". Archived from the original on June 25, 2021. Retrieved September 21, 2020. "IWC – International Wrestling Cartel". WWF Old School. Archived from the original on October 24, 2020. Retrieved September 21, 2020. "The Lapsed Indy Cartel: Best of IWC March 2002". Voices of Wrestling. September 2, 2020. Archived from the original on August 21, 2021. Retrieved September 21, 2020. LaMotta, Jim (June 8, 2018). "Super Indy Tournament Set For Pittsburgh This Weekend". PWMania. Archived from the original on February 18, 2022. Retrieved September 21, 2020. Chris Hero (2005). Shoot with Chris Hero (DVD). RF Video. Archived from the original on March 11, 2012. Retrieved April 14, 2007. "Matches – CM Punk (IWA Mid-South)". Cagematch.net. Archived from the original on February 18, 2022. Retrieved February 22, 2018. Punk, CM (November 12, 2003). "My turn." LiveJournal. Archived from the original on July 7, 2012. Retrieved July 13, 2007. Burgan, Derek (January 28, 2006). "Derek Burgan reviews Best of Teddy Hart & Jack Evans". Wrestling Observer Newsletter. Archived from the original (asp) on December 30, 2007. Retrieved June 13, 2007. Lagattolla, Al (May 29, 2004). "CM Punk Talks". Chicago Wrestling. Archived from the original on June 8, 2004. Retrieved September 26, 2006. "ROH All Star Extravaganza at Murphy Recreation Center wrestling results". Internet Wrestling Database. Archived from the original on February 18, 2022. Retrieved September 12, 2021. "Ring of Honor event results". Ring of Honor. Archived from the original on August 22, 2008. Retrieved April 22, 2009. Dunn, JD (May 30, 2006). "Dark Pegasus Video Review: Ring of Honor – One Year Anniversary Show". 411mania. Archived from the original on February 22, 2014. Retrieved November 27, 2010. Dunn, JD (June 16, 2006). "Dark Pegasus Video Review: Ring of Honor – Death Before Dishonor". 411mania.com. Archived from the original on December 14, 2009. Retrieved November 27, 2010. Hillhouse, Dave (June 6, 2005). "CM Punk mulls over his future". Slam! Sports. Canoe.com. Archived from the original on May 30, 2012. Retrieved April 17, 2007.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Lagattolla, Al (April 5, 2003). "CM Punk, the trainer". Chicago Wrestling. Archived from the original on April 22, 2003. Retrieved April 17, 2007. "Ring of Honor official title histories". Ring of Honor. Archived from the original on June 10, 2008. Retrieved June 14, 2008. "WWE Sunday Night Heat #349". Cagematch.net. Archived from the original on February 18, 2022. Retrieved February 22, 2018. Alvarez, Bryan (June 2011). "Tues Update: HBK returns, Raw voting screw-ups last night, CM Punk's future, Scott Hall arrest, Strikeforce ratings, Impact replay, DGUSA surgery, tons more". Wrestling Observer. Archived from the original on February 27, 2014. Retrieved February 1, 2014. Ziegler, Jacob (May 6, 2006). "ROH – Unscripted II DVD Review". 411mania. Archived from the original on February 22, 2014. Retrieved June 13, 2007. Vetter, Chris (April 12, 2006). "DVD Review: ROH, "Unscripted II," Feb. 11, 2006, with Punk & Dragon vs. Rave & Pearce, Aries-Nigel". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on June 17, 2007. Retrieved June 13, 2007. "CM Punk Inducted Into Inaugural ROH Hall Of Fame Class". Rohwrestling.com. February 21, 2022. Archived from the original on August 3, 2022. Retrieved February 27, 2022. Parker, Tony (December 2023). "CM Punk's history with Paul Heyman in WWE, explained". TheSportster.com. Retrieved December 15, 2023. Bauer, Ben (September 8, 2005). "CM Punk debuts in OVW + Shane Helms meets Hurricane Victims & More". Wrestleview.com. Archived from the original on February 18, 2022. Retrieved August 23, 2010. Kreikenbohm, Philip. "Events " Ohio Valley Wrestling (OVW) " Promotions Database " CAGEMATCH – The Internet Wrestling Database". cagematch.net. Archived from the original on February 18, 2022. Retrieved February 18, 2019. Martin, Adam (September 15, 2005). "OVW Notes: Puder finishes up, Kennedy heads home & CM Punk debuts". Wrestleview.com. Archived from the original on February 24, 2008. Retrieved May 22, 2009. "Title Histories". Ohio Valley Wrestling. Archived from the original on July 26, 2011. Retrieved March 1, 2020. Hoops, Brian (May 3, 2015). "On this day in pro wrestling history: Low Ki vs. Dewitt, Punk wins OVW title, Mutoh wins IWGP belt, Bret wins NA title, Dibiase & Dr. Death, Sheik, Watts, Fargos". Wrestling Observer Figure Four Online. Archived from the original on April 10, 2023. Retrieved February 14, 2020. "Six Flags Kentucky Kingdom drawing 500". Ohio Valley Wrestling Six Flag Shows. July 28, 2006. Archived from the original on October 9, 2007. Retrieved June 21, 2014. Kreikenbohm, Philip. "CM Punk - matches - Ohio Valley Wrestling". Cagematch.net. Retrieved December 15, 2023. "WWE to cease affiliation with Ohio Valley Wrestling". WWE. February 7, 2008. Archived from the original on March 9, 2008. Retrieved May 15, 2009. Magee, Bob (June 25, 2006). "6/24 WWE at ECW Arena". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on July 3, 2006. Retrieved September 26, 2006. "South Philly Screwjob". WWE. July 4, 2006. Archived from the original on April 26, 2023. Retrieved September 26, 2006. Hunt, Jen (August 1, 2006). "Sabu strikes again". WWE. Archived from the original on June 3, 2023. Retrieved September 26, 2006. Hunt, Jen (August 22, 2006). "Sabu snaps". WWE. Archived from the original on November 4, 2012. Retrieved September 26, 2006. Hunt, Jen (August 29, 2006). "Dr. Frankenstein prevails". WWE. Archived from the original on July 26, 2013. Retrieved September 26, 2006. Hoffman, Brett (September 12, 2006). "Garden Showstopper". WWE. Archived from the original on April 27, 2023. Retrieved October 2, 2006. Tello, Craig (November 7, 2006). "Messiah's revelations". WWE. Archived from the original on November 3, 2012. Retrieved April 10, 2007. Tello, Craig (November 14, 2006). "Lashley unleashed on ECW". WWE. Archived from the original on November 3, 2012. Retrieved April 10, 2007. Dee, Louis (November 26, 2006). "D-Xtreme dominance". WWE. Archived from the original on March 18, 2016. Retrieved April 10, 2007. Tello, Craig (December 3, 2006). "Mission accomplished". WWE. Archived from the original on October 10, 2016. Retrieved April 10, 2007. Tello, Craig (January 9, 2007). "No con-Test". WWE. Archived from the original on November 14, 2012. Retrieved April 10, 2007. Caldwell, James (April 1, 2007). "Caldwell's WrestleMania 23 Report". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on February 24, 2018. Retrieved May 28, 2017. Robinson, Bryan (April 10, 2007). "New Breed gets the straight edge". WWE. Archived from the original on July 26, 2013. Retrieved April 11, 2007. Tello, Craig (March 6, 2007). "Rattlesnake's venomous visit". WWE. Archived from the original on July 26, 2013. Retrieved March 10, 2007. Robinson, Bryan (March 21, 2007). "Masterpiece theater, Lashley-style". WWE. Archived from the original on July 26, 2013. Retrieved April 10, 2007. Robinson, Bryan (April 24, 2007). "Making painful statements". WWE. Archived from the original on July 26, 2013. Retrieved May 1, 2007. Rote, Andrew (May 20, 2007). "On his own". WWE. Archived from the original on October 25, 2014. Retrieved July 19, 2012. Rote, Andrew (June 3, 2007). "CM Punk splinters the New Breed". WWE. Archived from the original on January 6, 2013. Retrieved September 8, 2008. McAvennie, Mike (June 11, 2007). "One wild night". WWE. Archived from the original on June 21, 2007. Retrieved December 26, 2007. Robinson, Bryan (June 19, 2007). "The beginning of a new ECW dawn". WWE. Archived from the original on November 3, 2012. Retrieved June 24, 2007. Robinson, Bryan (June 24, 2007). "ECW World Title goes A-list". WWE. Archived from the original on September 2, 2012. Retrieved July 19, 2012. Rote, Andrew (July 22, 2007). "Morrison enlightens the Straightedge Superstar". WWE. Archived from the original on October 25, 2014. Retrieved July 19, 2012. Difino, Lennie (August 26, 2007). "Enlightened robbery". WWE. Archived from the original on July 20, 2011. Retrieved August 26, 2007. Rote, Andrew (September 4, 2007). "Golden grin". WWE. Archived from the original on July 26, 2013. Retrieved April 23, 2009. Sokol, Chris. "Undertaker's return highlight of underwhelming Unforgiven". Slam! Sports. Canoe.com. Archived from the original on June 29, 2012. Retrieved July 31, 2009.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) "ECW Champion CM Punk def. Big Daddy V (DQ)". WWE. Archived from the original on May 27, 2014. Retrieved October 7, 2007. "ECW Champion CM Punk def. The Miz". WWE. Archived from the original on December 16, 2013. Retrieved October 28, 2007. Bishop, Matt (November 7, 2007). "ECW: Dreaded hat does in Morrison's title hopes". Slam! Sports. Canoe.com. Archived from the original on June 29, 2012. Retrieved March 7, 2012.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) "Champ trumps champs". WWE. Archived from the original on June 23, 2013. Retrieved November 19, 2007. Tello, Craig (January 22, 2008). "Chavo's Night". WWE. Archived from the original on November 2, 2012. Retrieved March 7, 2012. Clayton, Corey (March 30, 2008). "Perseverance makes Punk 'Mr. Money' in Orlando". WWE. Archived from the original on April 5, 2008. Retrieved March 12, 2012. Kapur, Bob (May 18, 2008). "Judgment Day spoils streak of good shows". Slam! Sports. Canoe.com. Archived from the original on June 30, 2015. Retrieved August 27, 2008. Sitterson, Aubrey (June 23, 2008). "A Draft Disaster". WWE. Archived from the original on July 26, 2013. Retrieved June 25, 2008. Adkins, Greg (June 30, 2008). "Opportunity Knocked, Punk Answered". WWE. Archived from the original on August 22, 2008. Retrieved September 8, 2008. Tello, Craig (July 20, 2008). "Big Red invasion". World Wrestling Entertainment. Archived from the original on July 23, 2008. Retrieved July 21, 2008. Caldwell, James (July 21, 2008). "Caldwell's WWE Raw Report 7/21: Ongoing "virtual time" coverage of live USA Network broadcast". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on April 14, 2018. Retrieved April 14, 2018. Plummer, Dale; Tylwalk, Nick (August 17, 2008). "SummerSlam comes close to 'blockbuster' status". Slam! Sports. Canoe.com. Archived from the original on January 8, 2020. Retrieved February 27, 2009. Tello, Craig (September 7, 2008). "Punk possibly unable to compete?". WWE. Archived from the original on April 7, 2012. Retrieved September 8, 2008. "Chris Jericho wins World Heavyweight Championship Scramble". WWE. Archived from the original on July 19, 2013. Retrieved December 23, 2012. Sitterson, Aubrey (September 15, 2008). "Snakes and ladders". WWE. Archived from the original on September 27, 2008. Retrieved September 26, 2008. Sitterson, Aubrey (October 27, 2008). "Just Desserts". WWE. Archived from the original on November 3, 2012. Retrieved January 4, 2009. "Team Orton def. Team Batista (Traditional Survivor Series Elimination Match)". WWE. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved December 23, 2012. "Intercontinental Championship Tournament". WWE. Archived from the original on December 17, 2008. Retrieved February 26, 2009. "Miz and Morrison's first reign". WWE. Archived from the original on October 23, 2012. Retrieved January 4, 2009. Sitterson, Aubrey (January 5, 2009). "Big Night in the Big Easy". WWE. Archived from the original on November 3, 2012. Retrieved February 26, 2009. Sitterson, Aubrey (January 12, 2009). "Sioux City Showstopper". WWE. Archived from the original on November 3, 2012. Retrieved October 1, 2016. Sitterson, Aubrey (January 19, 2009). "Disastrous return". WWE. Archived from the original on November 3, 2012. Retrieved April 20, 2009. Tylwalk, Nick. "Raw: CM Punk rises, Vince falls in Chicago". Slam! Sports. Canoe.com. Archived from the original on July 22, 2012. Retrieved May 1, 2009.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Woodward, Buck (January 19, 2009). "CM Punk makes WWE history with title win". PWInsider. Archived from the original on November 3, 2012. Retrieved March 7, 2012. Sitterson, Aubrey (March 9, 2009). "In your house". WWE. Archived from the original on November 1, 2022. Retrieved April 5, 2009. Keller, Wade (April 5, 2009). "Keller's WrestleMania 25 Results 4/5: Ongoing "virtual time" coverage of biggest PPV of the year". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on May 26, 2017. Retrieved June 14, 2017. Sitterson, Aubrey (April 13, 2009). "Rough Draft". WWE. Archived from the original on August 21, 2016. Retrieved April 20, 2009. "CM Punk def. Umaga (Samoan Strap Match)". WWE. Archived from the original on May 10, 2016. Retrieved December 23, 2012. Passero, Mitch (June 7, 2009). "Punk cashes in for gold". WWE. Archived from the original on April 9, 2011. Retrieved January 30, 2011. Sitterson, Aubrey (June 15, 2009). "Trumping the competition". WWE. Archived from the original on November 3, 2012. Retrieved June 25, 2009. Elliott, Brian (June 29, 2009). "Mysterio & Jericho save The Bash from wash-out". Slam! Sports. Canoe.com. Archived from the original on January 3, 2018. Retrieved June 30, 2009. Passero, Mitch (June 26, 2009). "Results: Punk crushes Hardy's dreams ... again". Archived from the original on November 11, 2011. Retrieved March 27, 2011. "Jeff Hardy def. CM Punk (New World Heavyweight Champion)". WWE. Archived from the original on June 16, 2013. Retrieved December 23, 2012. Murphy, Ryan (August 23, 2009). "CM Punk comes out on top". WWE. Archived from the original on July 21, 2011. Retrieved January 30, 2011. Burdick, Michael (August 28, 2009). "Extreme exodus". WWE. Archived from the original on November 3, 2012. Retrieved August 28, 2009. Tello, Craig (September 13, 2009). "Results: Hell's Gate-crasher". WWE. Archived from the original on November 1, 2016. Retrieved September 13, 2009. "World Heavyweight Champion CM Punk def. The Undertaker (Submission Match)". WWE. Archived from the original on April 7, 2013. Retrieved December 23, 2012. Sokol, Chris; Sokol, Brian. "Title changes highlight Hell in a Cell". Slam! Sports. Canoe.com. Archived from the original on July 14, 2012. Retrieved October 5, 2009.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Waldman, Jon (October 24, 2009). "Smackdown: The SD! seven switch". Slam! Sports. Canoe.com. Archived from the original on July 14, 2012. Retrieved November 27, 2010.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Keller, Wade (October 24, 2010). "WWE Bragging Rights Flashback – 2009 PPV debut: Cena vs. Orton Iron Man match, Is anyone from Team Raw or Team Smackdown on this year's teams?, WWE repeating PPV line-up". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on November 29, 2010. Retrieved November 27, 2010. Burdick, Michael (November 27, 2009). "Hungry Animal heading to WWE TLC". WWE. Archived from the original on July 26, 2013. Retrieved January 30, 2011. Passero, Mitch (January 8, 2010). "Stunned contenders". WWE. Archived from the original on July 26, 2013. Retrieved January 22, 2010. Burdick, Michael (January 15, 2010). "Locked in the cage with a wild Animal". WWE. Archived from the original on April 17, 2013. Retrieved January 22, 2010. Passero, Mitch (January 12, 2010). "No fear". WWE. Archived from the original on April 17, 2013. Retrieved January 22, 2010. Burdick, Michael (January 29, 2010). "Whirlwind before the Rumble". WWE. Archived from the original on April 17, 2013. Retrieved January 30, 2011. Caldwell, James (February 16, 2010). "WWE News: Complete cast of the NXT show revealed including The Miz mentoring Bryan Danielson". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on September 27, 2013. Retrieved February 17, 2010. Bauer, Michael (February 23, 2010). "411's WWE NXT Report 2.23.10". 411Mania. Archived from the original on February 27, 2010. Retrieved March 4, 2010. Keller, Wade (March 2, 2010). "Keller's WWE NXT Report 3/2: Competition explained, Cornfed Meathead debuts, Punk, Hardy, Regal, Jericho, Miz appear with Rookies". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on March 5, 2010. Retrieved March 4, 2010. Tedesco, Mike (May 12, 2010). "WWE NXT Results – 5/11/10". WrestleView. Archived from the original on May 14, 2010. Retrieved May 12, 2010. Caldwell, James (May 18, 2010). "Caldwell's WWE NXT TV Report 5/18: Ongoing "virtual time" coverage of NXT on Syfy Week 13". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on May 21, 2010. Retrieved May 19, 2010. Keller, Wade (January 31, 2010). "WWE Royal Rumble Results: Keller's in-depth report including Rumble results, Taker vs. Rey, Orton vs. Sheamus". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on December 22, 2010. Retrieved November 27, 2010. Caldwell, James (February 21, 2010). "WWE Elimination Chamber PPV Report 2/21: Complete coverage of Raw & Smackdown Elimination Chamber matches – Sheamus and Undertaker defend titles". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved November 27, 2010. Bishop, Matt (March 13, 2010). "Smackdown: Highlight Reel return successful for Jericho". Slam! Sports. Canoe.com. Archived from the original on May 30, 2012. Retrieved November 27, 2010.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Eck, Kevin (March 29, 2010). "WrestleMania XXVI thoughts". The Baltimore Sun. Archived from the original on April 4, 2019. Retrieved February 16, 2019. Keller, Wade (April 25, 2010). "WWE Extreme Rules Results: Keller's complete PPV report – Cena vs. Batista, Mysterio vs. Punk, Edge vs. Jericho". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on November 29, 2010. Retrieved November 27, 2010. "Rey Mysterio shaves CM Punk's head". WWE. Archived from the original on May 10, 2011. Retrieved May 23, 2010. Hillhouse, Dave (May 29, 2010). "Smackdown: The Dead Man Cometh". Slam! Sports. Canoe.com. Archived from the original on January 10, 2016. Retrieved November 27, 2010. Caldwell, James (June 20, 2010). "WWE Fatal Four-Way PPV Results 6/20: Ongoing "virtual time" coverage of live PPV". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on November 29, 2010. Retrieved November 27, 2010. Bishop, Matt (July 16, 2010). "Smackdown: Kane strikes again, Punk unmasked". Slam! Sports. Canoe.com. Archived from the original on July 14, 2012. Retrieved November 27, 2010.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Eck, Kevin (February 16, 2019). "SummerSlam thoughts". The Baltimore Sun. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved August 16, 2010. Tylwalk, Nick (September 20, 2010). "Few gimmicks, more title changes at Night of Champions". Slam! Sports. Canoe.com. Archived from the original on July 22, 2012. Retrieved November 27, 2010.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) "Serena released". WWE. August 27, 2010. Archived from the original on August 31, 2010. Retrieved August 28, 2010. Gerweck, Steve (September 1, 2010). "Smackdown star likely out six months". Wrestleview. Archived from the original on October 19, 2014. Retrieved June 21, 2014. Hillhouse, Dave (September 25, 2010). "Smackdown: Kickin' it old school". Slam! Sports. Canoe.com. Archived from the original on May 30, 2012. Retrieved November 27, 2010.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Tylwalk, Nick (October 12, 2010). "Raw: Team Raw assembles while Cena stews". Slam! Sports. Canoe.com. Archived from the original on July 14, 2012. Retrieved November 27, 2010.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Caldwell, James (October 24, 2010). "Caldwell's WWE Bragging Rights PPV Results 10/24: Ongoing "virtual time" coverage of live PPV – Orton vs. Barrett, Kane vs. Taker, Raw vs. Smackdown". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on April 4, 2019. Retrieved October 26, 2010. Eck, Kevin (November 2, 2010). "What's next for injured CM Punk?". The Baltimore Sun. Archived from the original on February 17, 2019. Retrieved February 16, 2019. Nemer, Paul (November 22, 2010). "Raw Results – 11/22/10". WrestleView. Archived from the original on April 4, 2019. Retrieved February 16, 2019. Bishop, Matt (December 21, 2010). "Smackdown: Ziggler takes Cena to the limit again, CM Punk makes impact". Slam! Sports. Canoe.com. Archived from the original on June 30, 2012. Retrieved January 5, 2011.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Plummer, Dale (December 21, 2010). "RAW: No Nexus, no problem". Slam! Sports. Canoe.com. Archived from the original on June 30, 2012. Retrieved January 5, 2011.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Adkins, Greg (January 3, 2011). "Steel resolve". WWE. Archived from the original on April 15, 2023. Retrieved January 30, 2011. Plummer, Dale (January 10, 2011). "RAW: CM Punk thins out the ranks". Slam! Sports. Canoe.com. Archived from the original on July 15, 2012. Retrieved January 12, 2011.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Keller, Wade (January 30, 2011). "Keller's WWE Royal Rumble results 1/30: Ongoing coverage of Biggest Royal Rumble Ever and Three Title Matches". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on September 7, 2011. Retrieved January 30, 2011. "WWE: TV Shows > Raw > Archive > 01/31/2011". WWE. January 31, 2011. Archived from the original on November 5, 2015. Retrieved February 11, 2011. Plummer, Dale (February 28, 2011). "Raw: Triple H talks Wrestlemania; The Miz loses an ally". Slam! Sports. Canoe.com. Archived from the original on July 5, 2015. Retrieved September 12, 2011. Plummer, Dale (March 7, 2011). "Raw: Stone Cold stuns Cole's Wrestlemania plans". Slam! Sports. Canoe.com. Archived from the original on March 29, 2020. Retrieved September 12, 2011. Plummer, Dale (March 14, 2011). "Raw: Cena wrecked on the Road to Wrestlemania". Slam! Sports. Canoe.com. Archived from the original on September 27, 2015. Retrieved September 12, 2011. "Randy Orton def. CM Punk". WWE. Archived from the original on October 25, 2014. Retrieved December 9, 2014. Caldwell, James (May 1, 2011). "Caldwell's WWE Extreme Rules PPV Results 5/1: Complete "virtual time" coverage of live PPV – three title changes and a host of gimmick matches". Pro Wrestling Torch. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved May 20, 2016. Bishop, Matt (June 14, 2011). "Raw: Austin, Piper headline 'All Star' night". Slam! Sports. Canoe.com. Archived from the original on May 30, 2012. Retrieved June 21, 2011.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Caldwell, James. "Caldwell's WWE Capitol Punishment PPV Results 6/19". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on June 22, 2011. Retrieved December 9, 2014. Stephens, David (June 20, 2011). "Raw Results – 6/20/11". WrestleView.com. Archived from the original on December 3, 2013. Retrieved November 15, 2013. "WWE chairman Vince McMahon suspends CM Punk". WWE. June 28, 2011. Archived from the original on November 5, 2015. Retrieved June 28, 2011. Wortman, James (July 4, 2011). "Raw results: Stars and gripes". WWE. Archived from the original on November 5, 2015. Retrieved July 5, 2011. Caldwell, James (August 1, 2011). "Caldwell's WWE Raw Results 8/1: Complete "virtual-time" coverage of live Raw – Triple H resolves WWE Title situation, battle royal, Ace speaks". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on August 4, 2011. Retrieved August 29, 2011. Tello, Craig (July 17, 2011). "CM Punk def. John Cena (New WWE Champion)". WWE. Archived from the original on November 6, 2015. Retrieved September 4, 2011. Johnson, Kyle (September 10, 2016). "#PunkWeek: The 'pipe bomb' set the table for CM Punk's UFC debut". Wrestling Observer Newsletter. Archived from the original on February 17, 2019. Retrieved February 17, 2019. Fowler, Matt (July 21, 2011). "Comic-Con: CM Punk crashes WWE panel, confronts Triple H!". IGN. Archived from the original on February 22, 2014. Retrieved July 12, 2017. "CM Punk invaded Comic-Con, mocking Triple H and WWE". WWE. July 22, 2011. Archived from the original on June 27, 2013. Retrieved July 23, 2011. Caldwell, James (July 23, 2011). "Punk News: C.M. Punk makes unannounced appearance at independent show Saturday with Colt Cabana (w/Video)". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved July 12, 2017. Coyle, James (July 26, 2011). "Title glory for Cena". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on August 16, 2011. Retrieved September 4, 2011. "SmackDown results: Truth and Consequences". WWE. Archived from the original on November 4, 2012. Retrieved July 30, 2011. "CM Punk def. John Cena; Alberto Del Rio cashed in Raw Money in the Bank briefcase (New Undisputed WWE Champion)". WWE. Archived from the original on November 6, 2015. Retrieved September 1, 2011. "WWE Championship Triple Threat Hell in a Cell Match". WWE. Archived from the original on November 6, 2015. Retrieved September 20, 2011. Tello, Craig. "Awesome Truth Prevail;Nash attacks". Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved December 9, 2014. Murphy, Ryan. "WWE Raw SuperShow results: The "Laurinaitis Era" begins". Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved December 9, 2014. "Transcript of CM Punk's Promo on WWE Monday Night Raw!". Heyman Hustle. June 28, 2011. Archived from the original on August 27, 2014. Retrieved January 12, 2012. Murphy, Ryan (October 24, 2011). "WWE Raw SuperShow results: Kevin Nash brings the hammer down". Archived from the original on January 22, 2012. Retrieved January 12, 2012. Murphy, Ryan. "Entertainment era begins". WWE. Archived from the original on November 22, 2011. Retrieved December 9, 2014. Tylwalk, Nick (November 29, 2011). "Raw: Rematch time for Punk and Del Rio while Cena gets a reality check". Slam! Sports. Canoe.com. Archived from the original on July 20, 2012. Retrieved December 2, 2011.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Murphy, Ryan (December 18, 2011). "CM Punk def. The Miz and Alberto Del Rio in a Triple Threat TLC Match". WWE. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved December 19, 2011. Caldwell, James (January 29, 2012). "Caldwell's WWE Royal Rumble report 1/29: Ongoing "virtual time" coverage of live PPV – Rumble match, Punk-Ziggler, Cena-Kane, steel cage". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on December 11, 2018. Retrieved June 14, 2017. Caldwell, James (January 30, 2012). "Caldwell's WWE Raw Results 1/30: Complete "virtual-time" coverage of live Raw – Huge Return, Champion vs. Champion, Rumble PPV fall-out". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved July 12, 2017. Caldwell, James (February 6, 2012). "Caldwell's WWE Raw Results 2/6: Jericho-Punk follow-up". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved June 21, 2012. "Chris Jericho profile". WWE. Archived from the original on June 4, 2016. Retrieved April 2, 2012. Herrera, Tom (February 19, 2012). "WWE Champion CM Punk won the Raw Elimination Chamber Match". WWE. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved February 19, 2012. Passero, Mitch. "Raw SuperShow results: Triple H accepts Undertaker's WrestleMania challenge". WWE. Archived from the original on December 1, 2017. Retrieved February 26, 2012. Caldwell, James (March 19, 2012). "Caldwell's WWE Raw Results 3/19: Ongoing "virtual-time" coverage of live Raw – Two weeks 'til Mania, Rock-Cena latest, Hunter-HBK-Taker share the ring". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved March 25, 2012. Caldwell, James (April 1, 2012). "Caldwell's WWE WrestleMania 28 PPV report 4/1: Ongoing "virtual time" coverage of live PPV – Rock-Cena, Taker-Hunter, Punk-Jericho". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on June 17, 2015. Retrieved April 2, 2012. Caldwell, James (April 2, 2012). "Caldwell's WWE Raw Results 4/2: Ongoing "virtual-time" coverage of live Raw – WM28 fall-out, how will Cena respond to Rock loss?, two big title matches". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on October 18, 2015. Retrieved July 12, 2017. Caldwell, James (April 9, 2012). "Caldwell's WWE Raw Results 4/9: Ongoing "virtual-time" coverage of live Raw – Lesnar officially returns & Cena responds, Stooges". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on October 19, 2015. Retrieved July 12, 2017. Caldwell, James (April 16, 2012). "Caldwell's WWE Raw Results 4/16: Ongoing "virtual-time" coverage of Raw from London – WWE Title match, Extreme Rules hype". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on March 25, 2013. Retrieved July 12, 2017. Meltzer, Dave. "WWE Extreme Rules live coverage from Chicago". Wrestling Observer. Archived from the original on May 2, 2012. Retrieved April 29, 2012. "WWE Champion CM Punk def. Daniel Bryan". WWE. May 20, 2012. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved May 21, 2012. Parks, Greg (May 18, 2012). "Parks' WWE SmackDown Report 5/18: Ongoing "virtual time" coverage of the show, including Sheamus vs. Orton". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved July 12, 2017. Caldwell, James (May 21, 2012). "Caldwell's WWE Raw Results 5/21: Ongoing "virtual-time" coverage of live Raw No. 990 – Over the Limit PPV fall-out". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved July 12, 2017. Parks, Greg (May 25, 2012). "Parks' WWE SmackDown report 5/25: Ongoing "virtual time" coverage of the show, including Triple-Threat No. 1 Contender Match". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on March 25, 2013. Retrieved July 12, 2017. Caldwell, James (May 28, 2012). "Caldwell's WWE Raw Results 5/28: Ongoing "virtual-time" coverage of live Raw No. 991 – Show vs. Brodus teased main event, Punk-Bryan, no Cena". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved July 12, 2017. Parks, Greg (June 1, 2012). "Parks' WWE SmackDown report 6/1: Ongoing "virtual time" coverage of the show, including C.M. Punk vs. Kane for the WWE Title". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on August 27, 2016. Retrieved July 12, 2017. Giannini, Alex. "Monster and the Madwoman?". WWE. Archived from the original on June 10, 2012. Retrieved June 10, 2012. "WWE Champion CM Punk vs. Daniel Bryan vs. Kane – Triple Threat Match". WWE. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved June 1, 2012. WWE Champion CM Punk vs. Daniel Bryan, WWE, archived from the original on December 11, 2019, retrieved June 25, 2012 Martin, Todd (July 23, 2012). "Raw 1000th Episode Report". Wrestling Observer. Archived from the original on July 27, 2012. Retrieved July 23, 2012. Herrera, Tom (July 23, 2012). "Raw 1,000 results: John Cena failed to win the WWE Title; The Rock floored by CM Punk". WWE. Archived from the original on October 5, 2015. Retrieved July 23, 2012. Caldwell, James (July 23, 2012). "Caldwell's WWE Raw Results 7/23". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on March 6, 2016. Retrieved November 30, 2015. "Raw results: Raw General Manager AJ Lee gets the last laugh on WWE Champion CM Punk". WWE. Archived from the original on October 1, 2015. Retrieved July 30, 2012. Tylwalk, Nick (July 30, 2012). "Raw: The show starts out on fire and stays hot in Cincy". Slam! Sports. Canoe.com. Archived from the original on December 8, 2015. Retrieved August 21, 2012. Meltzer, Dave (August 19, 2012). "It's SummerSlam day live from Staples Center, HHH vs Brock". Wrestling Observer Newsletter. Archived from the original on August 22, 2012. Retrieved August 21, 2012. Caldwell, James (September 3, 2012). "Caldwell's WWE Raw Results 9/3: Ongoing "virtual-time" coverage of live Raw – Punk returns home, Anger Management". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved July 12, 2017. "WWE Champion CM Punk vs. John Cena ended in a draw". WWE. Archived from the original on November 6, 2015. Retrieved September 16, 2012. "John Cena undergoes arm surgery?". WWE. September 18, 2012. Archived from the original on July 21, 2015. Retrieved September 13, 2012. Caldwell, James (September 24, 2012). "Caldwell's WWE Raw Results 9/24: Complete "virtual-time" coverage of live Raw – Cena announcement, Lawler interview, latest on WWE Title picture". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on March 25, 2013. Retrieved June 14, 2017. Caldwell, James (October 1, 2012). "Caldwell's WWE Raw Results 10/1: Complete "virtual-time" coverage of live Raw – Ross Appreciation Night, Punk-Ryback feud, World Title debate". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on March 25, 2013. Retrieved June 14, 2017. Caldwell, James (October 8, 2012). "Caldwell's WWE Raw Results 10/8: Complete coverage of live Raw – Cena returns, but McMahon dominates show". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on March 25, 2013. Retrieved June 14, 2017. Caldwell, James (October 15, 2012). "Caldwell's WWE Raw Results 10/15: Complete "virtual-time" coverage of live Raw – what was McMahon's "decision?," ten matches". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on September 25, 2013. Retrieved July 12, 2017. Caldwell, James (October 28, 2012). "Caldwell's WWE Hell in a Cell PPV Report 10/28: Complete "virtual time" coverage of live PPV – Punk vs. Ryback". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved June 14, 2017. "Team Mick Foley to face team Punk at Survivor Series". WWE. Archived from the original on April 4, 2019. Retrieved October 29, 2012. "WWE Championship Triple Threat Match". WWE. Archived from the original on November 9, 2012. Retrieved November 5, 2012. Caldwell, James (November 19, 2012). "Caldwell's WWE Survivor Series PPV Report 11/18: Punk-Cena-Ryback". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on September 21, 2013. Retrieved June 21, 2014. "Mr. McMahon issues statement regarding injured Punk, WWE TLC". WWE. December 4, 2012. Archived from the original on December 8, 2012. Retrieved December 5, 2012. "CM Punk surpasses John Cena's 380-day WWE Title reign". WWE. Archived from the original on April 25, 2017. Retrieved April 26, 2017. Caldwell, James (January 7, 2013). "Caldwell's WWE Raw Results 1/7: Complete "virtual-time" coverage of live Raw – WWE Title match, The Rock returns, Cena vs. Ziggler (updated w/Box Score)". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on April 3, 2019. Retrieved June 14, 2017. Clapp, John (January 27, 2013). "The Rock def. WWE Champion CM Punk". WWE. Archived from the original on March 5, 2016. Retrieved April 14, 2018. Caldwell, James (January 27, 2013). "Caldwell's WWE Royal Rumble PPV Results 1/27: Complete "virtual-time" coverage of Punk vs. Rock, 30-man Rumble". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on March 29, 2019. Retrieved July 12, 2017. Benigno, Anthony (June 11, 2018). "Brock Lesnar earns longest World Championship reign of the modern era". WWE. Archived from the original on June 18, 2018. Retrieved June 18, 2018. Caldwell, James. "WWE NEWS: Chamber PPV results & notes – WM29 main event set, World Title match set, Shield big win, more". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on June 23, 2017. Retrieved February 18, 2013. Caldwell, James (February 25, 2013). "Caldwell's WWE Raw Results 2/25: Complete "virtual-time" coverage of live & loaded Raw – Cena vs. Punk Instant Classic, Heyman-McMahon "fight," big returns, but did Taker return?". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on July 7, 2015. Retrieved June 14, 2017. Tylwalk, Nick (March 5, 2013). "Raw: Four men enter, one man leaves as Undertaker's WrestleMania opponent". Slam! Sports. Canoe.com. Archived from the original on April 10, 2013. Retrieved March 8, 2013.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) "WWE goes into overtime: Raw, March 11, 2013". WWE. March 11, 2013. Archived from the original on March 15, 2013. Retrieved March 20, 2013. "CM Punk interrupts Undertaker's tribute to Paul Bearer: Raw, March 11, 2013". WWE. March 11, 2012. Archived from the original on March 15, 2013. Retrieved March 20, 2013. "CM Punk taunts The Undertaker with Paul Bearer's urn: RAW, March 18, 2013". WWE. March 18, 2012. Archived from the original on March 20, 2013. Retrieved March 20, 2013. Murphy, Ryan (April 7, 2013). "The Undertaker def. CM Punk". WWE. Archived from the original on April 14, 2018. Retrieved April 14, 2018. Caldwell, James (June 16, 2013). "Caldwell's WWE Payback PPV Results 6/16 (Hour 2): Punk vs. Jericho, New World Hvt. champion & double-turn". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved July 12, 2017. Powell, Jason (June 17, 2013). "6/17 Powell's WWE Raw Live Coverage: Brock Lesnar and C.M. Punk, Mark Henry returns in a big way, Payback fallout with new champions Del Rio, Axel, and A.J. Lee". Pro Wrestling Dot Net. Archived from the original on August 31, 2013. Retrieved June 18, 2013. Caldwell, James (July 14, 2013). "Caldwell's WWE MITB PPV Results 7/14 (Hour 3): Ongoing "virtual-time" coverage of live PPV – Cena vs. Henry, MITB All-Stars". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on November 6, 2015. Retrieved May 31, 2017. Caldwell, James (August 5, 2013). "Caldwell's WWE Raw Results 8/5 (Hour 2): Cena responds to Bryan, Shield appears, Punk vs. Axel match". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on August 9, 2013. Retrieved May 31, 2017. Caldwell, James (August 12, 2013). "Caldwell's WWE Raw results 8/12 (Hour 3): Miz TV with Cena & Bryan final Summerslam sales pitch, No. 1 contender Battle Royal, Punk vs. Heyman show-closer". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on August 17, 2013. Retrieved July 12, 2017. Caldwell, James (August 18, 2013). "Caldwell's WWE SSlam PPV Results 8/18 (Hour 2): Lesnar vs. Punk brutal fight". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on December 25, 2013. Retrieved May 31, 2017. Caldwell, James (August 19, 2013). "Raw News: Cena gone 4–6 months, Triple H explanation, WWE Title & World Title pictures, RVD, new tag team, more". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on July 9, 2015. Retrieved August 20, 2013. Caldwell, James (September 15, 2013). "WWE News: New WWE champion at Night of Champions, but for how long?, plus Heyman's new associate, title match results, TNA stars spotlighted, more". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved September 17, 2013. Caldwell, James (October 6, 2013). "Battleground PPV Results 10/6 (Hour 3): WWE Title match, power outage situation, Punk vs. Ryback". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on October 26, 2014. Retrieved May 31, 2017. Caldwell, James (October 27, 2013). "Caldwell's WWE HIAC PPV Results (Hour 2): Cena returns in World Title match, Punk vs. Ryback HIAC match". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on November 6, 2015. Retrieved May 31, 2017. Caldwell, James (November 24, 2013). "WWE S. Series PPV results 11/24 (Hour 3): Orton vs. Big Show main event, Bryan & Punk, PPV-closing face-off". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on December 3, 2013. Retrieved May 30, 2017. Caldwell, James (November 25, 2013). "Caldwell's WWE Raw Results 11/25 (Hour 2): Punk & Bryan vs. Wyatts, Divas S. Series match, Sandow vs. Ziggler". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on October 12, 2017. Retrieved May 31, 2017. Caldwell, James (December 2, 2013). "Caldwell's WWE Raw Results 12/2 (Hour 1): Punk-Stephanie confrontation starts Raw, Bryan vs. Wyatts, TLC, more". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on February 24, 2018. Retrieved May 31, 2017. Howell, Nolan. "TLC: Randy Orton crowned new WWE World Heavyweight Champion". Slam! Sports. Canoe.com. Archived from the original on July 1, 2015. Retrieved December 18, 2013. Caldwell, James (January 20, 2014). "Caldwell's WWE Raw Results 1/20: Complete "virtual-time" coverage of live Raw – Batista returns, Lesnar, final Rumble PPV hype, Bryan explains his plot, more". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on January 24, 2014. Retrieved May 31, 2017. Martin, Adam (January 27, 2014). "WWE Royal Rumble PPV Results – 1/26/14 (30 Man Rumble)". Wrestleview. Archived from the original on August 9, 2017. Retrieved May 31, 2017. Caldwell, James (December 4, 2014). "WWE News: C.M. Punk rejects Vince McMahon's apology in Cabana Podcast Part 2, calls it "publicity stunt," more". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on December 7, 2014. Retrieved December 5, 2014. Caldwell, James (January 29, 2014). "WWE news: Report – C.M. Punk leaves WWE". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on February 2, 2014. Retrieved January 30, 2014. Hooton, Christopher (January 29, 2014). "CM Punk 'quits the WWE' only weeks before Wrestlemania 30". The Independent. Archived from the original on February 21, 2014. Retrieved January 29, 2014. Caldwell, James (February 20, 2014). "WWE news: McMahon addresses Punk's departure from WWE". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on February 14, 2022. Retrieved February 26, 2014. Caldwell, James (March 3, 2014). "Raw news: C.M. Punk, Hogan next week, new tag champs, Bryan-Batista, WM30 teasers, Cena injury follow-up, two factions in trouble, Taker, guest star, Big Show, more". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on February 18, 2022. Retrieved March 6, 2014. Johnson, Mike (March 21, 2014). "CM Punk – WWE update". PWInsider. Archived from the original on February 18, 2022. Retrieved April 16, 2014. Caldwell, James (July 7, 2014). "WWE News: WWE offering free Network access this week to entice subs, announces C.M. Punk program". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on August 21, 2021. Retrieved July 19, 2014. Caldwell, James (July 14, 2014). "Caldwell's WWE Raw Results 7/14: Complete "virtual-time" coverage of live "WCW Night" Raw – Flair returns, Sting, final PPV hype, Cena & Reigns vs. The Authority, more". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved July 19, 2014. Caldwell, James (May 29, 2014). "WWE news: Is C.M. Punk retired?, Punk addresses status". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on August 21, 2021. Retrieved June 4, 2014. Caldwell, James (July 15, 2014). "WWE News: C.M. Punk no longer on the roster; Punk speaks". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on August 21, 2021. Retrieved July 17, 2014. Hooton, Christopher (July 22, 2014). "CM Punk 'never ever ever' making WWE return (so that means he probably will)". The Independent. Archived from the original on July 26, 2014. Retrieved July 24, 2014. Caldwell, James (December 4, 2014). "WWE news: The C.M. Punk Interview Part 1 – Punk says he was fired on his wedding day & will never work for WWE again, plus why he left WWE, legal battle that followed, Final Meeting with McMahon & Hunter, independent contractor, more". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Archived from the original on May 20, 2017. Retrieved June 14, 2017. Namako, Jason (November 27, 2014). "CM Punk breaks silence on WWE exit in new podcast". Wrestleview. Archived from the original on November 29, 2014. Retrieved November 28, 2014. Johnson, Mike (November 27, 2014). "WWE Fired CM Punk on His Wedding Day, The Health Issue That Should Have Killed Him and More: Quick Highlights of Punk Interview on Cabana Podcast". PWInsider. Archived from the original on May 1, 2015. Retrieved November 27, 2014. Wertheim, Jon (June 5, 2018). "What were the reasons behind CM Punk winning his defamation trial?". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on July 2, 2019. Retrieved July 2, 2019. Traina, Jimmy (December 2, 2014). "Vince McMahon apologizes to C.M. Punk, says he'd work with him again". Fox Sports. Archived from the original on January 1, 2015. Retrieved December 2, 2014. Sapp, Sean (April 21, 2019). "Exclusive Info On A Previous CM Punk Wrestling Appearance Under A Hood". Fightful. Archived from the original on May 6, 2019. Retrieved May 15, 2019. Thompson, Andrew (April 21, 2019). "Silas Young Implies That CM Punk Returned To Wrestling Under A Mask At An MKE Wrestling Show". Fightful.com. Archived from the original on April 21, 2019. Retrieved April 21, 2019. Lambert, Jeremy (November 13, 2019). "CM Punk Makes Surprise Appearance On WWE Backstage, Joins Show In Return". Fightful. Archived from the original on August 21, 2021. Retrieved November 20, 2019. Satin, Ryan (November 19, 2019). "CM Punk Says He Isn't Actively Pursuing Or Interested In Wrestling Again, But..." Pro Wrestling Sheet. Archived from the original on January 3, 2020. Retrieved November 20, 2019. "FS1 SUSPENDS WEEKLY PRODUCTION OF WWE BACKSTAGE". Wrestling Observer Newsletter. June 22, 2020. Archived from the original on August 21, 2021. Retrieved June 24, 2020. Raimondi, Marc (August 20, 2021). "CM Punk makes pro-wrestling return, signs with All Elite Wrestling". ESPN.com. ESPN. Archived from the original on August 21, 2021. Retrieved August 20, 2021. Meltzer, Dave (August 22, 2021). "Stars Shine As WWE and AEW Ramp Up Competition". Sports Illustrated. Retrieved August 23, 2021. Barrasso, Justin (September 5, 2021). "Daniel Bryan becomes All Elite at 'All Out'". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on September 6, 2021. Retrieved September 6, 2021. Guzzo, Gisberto (November 5, 2021). "CM Punk To Face Eddie Kingston At AEW Full Gear 2021". Fightful.com. Retrieved November 7, 2021. Barrasso, Justin (November 14, 2021). "Hangman Page Era Begins at 'Full Gear'". Sports Illustrated. Retrieved November 16, 2021. Casey, Connor (February 2, 2022). "MJF Gives CM Punk His First Loss in AEW". ComicBook.com. Archived from the original on February 3, 2022. Retrieved February 3, 2022. Guzzo, Gisberto (February 2, 2022). "CM Punk Loses First Wrestling Match Since January 2014 On 2/2 AEW Dynamite". Fightful.com. Archived from the original on February 3, 2022. Retrieved February 3, 2022. Casey, Connor (March 6, 2022). "CM Punk Beats MJF in a Wildly Bloody Dog Collar Match at AEW Revolution". ComicBook.com. Retrieved May 30, 2022. Brookhouse, Brent (May 29, 2022). "2022 AEW Double or Nothing results, recap, grades: CM Punk wins first world title in more than nine years". CBSSports.com. Currier, Joseph. "AEW World Champion CM Punk to Undergo Surgery After Injury". Sports Illustrated. Retrieved June 4, 2022. Mahjouri, Shakiel (June 4, 2022). "AEW world champion CM Punk to undergo surgery, interim titleholder to be crowned at Forbidden Door PPV". CBSSports.com. Retrieved June 4, 2022. Powell, Jason (August 10, 2022). "8/10 AEW Dynamite results: Powell's live review of Jon Moxley vs. Chris Jericho for the Interim AEW World Championship, Darby Allin vs. Brody King in a Coffin Match, Penta Oscuro and Rey Fenix vs. Andrade El Idolo and Rush in a tornado tag match, Jade Cargill vs. Madison Rayne for the TBS Title, Ricky Starks vs. Aaron Solo". ProWrestling.net. Retrieved August 11, 2022. Barnett, Jake (August 24, 2022). "8/24 AEW Dynamite results: Barnett's live review of CM Punk vs. Jon Moxley for the unified AEW World Championship, Death Triangle vs. Will Ospreay and Aussie Open in an AEW Trios Title tournament match, Dax Harwood vs. Jay Lethal, Billy Gunn vs. Colten Gunn, Britt Baker vs. KiLynn King, Chris Jericho and Daniel Garcia meeting". ProWrestling.net. Retrieved August 25, 2022. Barnett, Jake (August 31, 2022). "8/31 AEW Dynamite results: Barnett's live review of Kenny Omega and The Young Bucks vs. Will Ospreay and Aussie Open in an AEW Trios Titles tournament semifinal match, Bryan Danielson vs. Jake Hager, Britt Baker and Jamie Hayter vs. Hikaru Shida and Toni Storm, AEW World Champion Jon Moxley promo". ProWrestling.net. Retrieved August 31, 2022. Powell, Jason (September 4, 2022). "AEW All Out results: Powell's live review of Jon Moxley vs. CM Punk for the AEW World Championship, Toni Storm vs. Britt Baker vs. Jamie Hayter vs. Hikaru Shida for the Interim AEW Women's Title, Chris Jericho vs. Bryan Danielson, Ricky Starks vs. Powerhouse Hobbs, "Jungle Boy" Jack Perry vs. Christian Cage, Casino Ladder Match". ProWrestling.net. Retrieved September 4, 2022. DeFelice, Robert; Lambert, Jeremy (September 5, 2022). "CM Punk Details Issues With Colt Cabana, EVPs, And Hangman Page". Fightful.com. Retrieved September 6, 2022. Radican, Sean (September 5, 2022). "CM Punk sounds off on Young Bucks and others at All Out media scrum, talks Cabana, more". Pro Wrestling Torch. Retrieved September 6, 2022. Clark, Anne Victoria (June 16, 2023). "CM Punk's Return Could Be the Best or Worst Thing on TV This Weekend". Vulture. Archived from the original on June 23, 2023. Retrieved August 25, 2023. Johnson, Mike (September 5, 2022). "Lots of stories of backstage fight at AEW PPV, here is what we know". PWInsider.com. Retrieved September 6, 2022. Russell, Skylar (September 7, 2022). "AEW World Championship Vacated, New Champion Set To Be Crowned At 9/21 AEW Dynamite Grand Slam". Fightful.com. Retrieved September 8, 2022. Van Boom, Daniel. "Why CM Punk Isn't AEW Champion: Injury and Backstage Fight Explained". CNET. Retrieved August 26, 2023. Renner, Ethan (September 9, 2022). "CM Punk undergoes surgery to repair torn triceps suffered at AEW All Out". F4Wonline.com. Archived from the original on May 21, 2023. Retrieved August 25, 2023. Jason, Powell (June 17, 2023). "AEW Collision results (6/17): Powell's live review of CM Punk and FTR vs. Samoa Joe, Jay White, and Juice Robinson, Wardlow vs. Luchasaurus for the TNT Title, Toni Storm and Ruby Soho vs. Willow Nightingale and Skye Blue, Andrade El Idolo vs. Buddy Matthews, Miro in action". ProWrestling.net. Retrieved June 17, 2023. Powell, Jason (June 21, 2023). "AEW Dynamite results (6/21): Powell's live review of Chris Jericho, Minoru Suzuki, and Sammy Guevara vs. Darius Martin, Action Andretti, and AR Fox, Jeff Jarrett vs. Mark Briscoe in a Concession Stand Brawl, Kris Statlander vs. Taya Valkyrie for the TBS Title". ProWrestling.net. Retrieved June 21, 2023. Powell, Jason (June 25, 2023). "AEW-NJPW Forbidden Door results: Powell's live review of Bryan Danielson vs. Kazuchika Okada, Kenny Omega vs. Will Ospreay for the IWGP U.S. Championship, MJF vs. Hiroshi Tanahashi for the AEW World Championship". ProWrestling.net. Retrieved June 25, 2023. Barrasso, Justin (July 12, 2023). "CM Punk's AEW Collision match vs. Samoa Joe a brilliant throwback". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on July 13, 2023. Retrieved August 26, 2023. Mueller, Chris. "AEW Collision, Battle of the Belts VII Results: Winners, Grades, Reaction, Highlights". BleacherReport.com. Retrieved July 30, 2023. Barrasso, Justin (August 5, 2023). "CM Punk on AEW Collision: 'It's a Team Effort'". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on August 7, 2023. Retrieved August 25, 2023. DeFelice, Robert (July 29, 2023). "CM Punk Takes His 'Real' AEW World Championship Out Of The Bag, Spray Paints It With An 'X'". Fightful.com. Retrieved July 30, 2023. Lambert, Jeremy (August 27, 2023). "CM Punk Defeats Samoa Joe, Retains 'Real' AEW World Title At AEW All In". Fightful.com. Archived from the original on August 28, 2023. Retrieved August 28, 2023. AEW staff (August 27, 2023). "AEW All In: London Results". AllEliteWrestling.com. All Elite Wrestling. Archived from the original on August 29, 2023. Retrieved September 1, 2023. "Real World Championship" Match! CM Punk (c.) vs. Samoa Joe! AEW staff (August 19, 2023). "AEW Collision: Fight for the Fallen 2023 Results". AllEliteWrestling.com. All Elite Wrestling. Archived from the original on September 1, 2023. Retrieved September 1, 2023. "And Tony Khan has just made it official. Next Sunday at All In: London, for the "Real World Championship", CM Punk against Samoa Joe," added Kevin Kelly. Barrasso, Justin (September 2, 2023). "Breaking: CM Punk Finished In AEW". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on September 6, 2023. Retrieved September 2, 2023. Rose, Bryan (September 2, 2023). "Tony Khan addresses CM Punk firing on AEW Collision". WON/F4W - WWE news, Pro Wrestling News, WWE Results, AEW News, AEW results. Archived from the original on September 3, 2023. Retrieved September 3, 2023. Lambert, Jeremy (November 25, 2023). "CM Punk Returns To WWE At WWE Survivor Series 2023". Fightful. Archived from the original on November 26, 2023. Retrieved November 25, 2023. Smart, Ryan (November 25, 2023). "CM Punk makes stunning return to WWE at Survivor Series, he got one of the loudest pops of all time". Sport Bible. Archived from the original on November 26, 2023. Retrieved November 25, 2023. Miller, Haley (December 11, 2023). "CM Punk Chooses WWE Raw, Gets Confronted by Seth Rollins". ComicBook.com. Retrieved December 11, 2023. Boone, Matt (December 12, 2023). "CM Punk To Work WWE Holiday Live Tour Match At Madison Square Garden". PWMania. Retrieved December 12, 2023. Tessier, Colin (December 12, 2023). "CM Punk's First Match Since WWE Return Announced For 12/30 WWE Live Event". Fightful. Retrieved December 12, 2023. "Cody Rhodes and Bayley win the Royal Rumble Matches to earn the right to headline WrestleMania". WWE. January 27, 2024. Archived from the original on January 27, 2024. Retrieved January 28, 2024. Barrasso, Justin (January 29, 2024). "CM Punk Injured at Royal Rumble, Announces He Will Miss WrestleMania". Sports Illustrated. Retrieved January 30, 2024. Eck, Kevin (July 26, 2011). "WWE Raw: CM Punk returns, and a new WWE champion is crowned twice". The Baltimore Sun. Archived from the original on April 14, 2018. Retrieved May 28, 2017. "WWE UnCut: CM Punk". WWE. May 29, 2007. Archived from the original on June 2, 2007. Retrieved June 12, 2007. Wikipedia Fact or Fiction from Loudwire on YouTube Robinson, Jon (November 4, 2008). "WWE Smackdown vs. Raw 2009: CM Punk". ESPN. Archived from the original on July 26, 2013. Retrieved January 30, 2011. "CM Punk pens intro for 'Avengers vs. X-Men' collection". USA Today. October 15, 2012. Retrieved June 5, 2013. Singh, Arune (March 26, 2010). "Fightin' Fanboys: WWE's CM Punk". Marvel Entertainment. Archived from the original on February 3, 2015. Retrieved July 12, 2017. Barrasso, Justin (August 20, 2021). "CM Punk makes his AEW debut seven years after leaving WWE". Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on August 21, 2021. Retrieved August 21, 2021. Punk, CM (October 2006). "The Illustrated Man". WWE Magazine: 13. CM Punk (2006). Entrance video. WWE. Archived from the original on September 29, 2008. Gomez, Luis (February 22, 2012). "Chicago's CM Punk takes Twitter war with Chris Brown to video". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on August 26, 2023. Retrieved August 26, 2023. CM Punk (April 2, 2005). Best of American Super Juniors Tournament (DVD). Ring of Honor. "Punk's got a lucky arm". WWE. October 18, 2007. Archived from the original on October 20, 2007. Retrieved October 18, 2007. Martin, Fin (June 2007). "What's Going Down". Power Slam. No. 155. p. 4. Connell, Charlie (March 23, 2012). "Q+A: CM Punk". Inked. Archived from the original on December 20, 2014. Retrieved June 21, 2014. Ferraro, Gina. "Interview with professional wrestler CM Punk and his family". Tattoo Factory TV. Archived from the original on July 26, 2013. Retrieved April 2, 2012. Krex, Azxa (December 30, 2018). "Seth Rollins llama a CM Punk una inspiración para él" [Seth Rollins calls CM Punk an inspiration to him]. Súper Luchas (in Spanish). Archived from the original on August 21, 2021. Retrieved May 11, 2020. Lucha, Jonie (September 9, 2019). "CM Punk y The Miz tienen una nueva fan: Rhea Ripley" [CM Punk and The Miz have a new fan: Rhea Ripley]. Súper Luchas (in Spanish). Retrieved May 11, 2020. Lucha, Jonie (November 29, 2019). "¿CM Punk en The Undisputed Era? Portazo de Adam Cole" [CM Punk in The Undisputed Era? Adam Cole slams the door]. Súper Luchas (in Spanish). Retrieved May 11, 2020. Martin, Adam (July 17, 2011). "Reader feature: "CM Punk: King of the Indies"". WrestleView. Archived from the original on August 21, 2021. Retrieved May 11, 2020. Salgado, Sebastian (January 21, 2013). "Analyzing WWE: CM Punk vs. The Rock – The Road to Royal Rumble". Súper Luchas. Archived from the original on February 13, 2023. Retrieved May 11, 2020. Lagreca, Dave; Mortman, Doug; Riker, Mike (April 7, 2013). "WWE star C.M. Punk on The Rock returning, why he's not happy with the matches they had, dream matches, the Pipe Bomb promo, working with Paul Heyman". Pro Wrestling dot net. Archived from the original on August 21, 2021. Retrieved May 11, 2020. "Cody Rhodes comments on the importance of CM Punk's "Pipe Bomb"". Súper Luchas. August 7, 2017. Archived from the original on August 21, 2021. Retrieved May 11, 2020. Johnson, Kyle (January 6, 2016). "Dear WWE: Stop telling us your stars are not important". Wrestling Observer Figure Four Online. Archived from the original on November 8, 2020. Retrieved May 11, 2020. Cook, Steve. "Ricochet: Flipping or Getting Flipped?". 411Mania. Archived from the original on August 21, 2021. Retrieved March 9, 2020. Keller, Wade (August 31, 2019). "Interview Highlights: C.M. Punk talks live at Starrcast III about WWE departure, any wrestlers today he'd like to wrestle, says it'll be taken out of context but he is open to taking offer from WWE". PW Torch. Archived from the original on December 4, 2019. Retrieved March 9, 2020. Clingma, Ryan (September 20, 2015). "Hall of Fame: The role of historical influence with the Sharpe Brothers and C.M. Punk". Wrestling Observer Figure Four Online. Archived from the original on August 21, 2021. Retrieved March 9, 2020. Beaston, Erik. "The Legacy of WWE's 'PG Era' and What Comes Next 12 Years Later". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on January 10, 2021. Retrieved January 11, 2021. Kesarwani, Snehil (March 24, 2019). "3 Reasons why WWE fans still chant for CM Punk". www.sportskeeda.com. Cotton, Simon (April 11, 2018). "WWE News: CM Punk responds to chants from WrestleMania 34". www.sportskeeda.com. Smith, Ryan (March 26, 2017). "Fans Need to Stop Chanting CM Punk". Kundu, Sagnik (March 7, 2017). "WWE News: Stephanie McMahon responds to CM Punk chants by calling him a loser". www.sportskeeda.com. Okamoto, Brett (December 8, 2014). "CM Punk joins UFC, will fight in 2015". ESPN. Archived from the original on June 4, 2016. Retrieved December 8, 2014. Beacham, Greg (December 7, 2014). "UFC signs pro wrestler CM Punk for 2015 MMA debut". Associated Press. Archived from the original on December 9, 2014. Retrieved December 7, 2014. "CM Punk set for real fight game with UFC debut". Las Vegas Sun. December 22, 2014. Archived from the original on May 28, 2015. Retrieved April 24, 2015. Raimondi, Marc (December 31, 2014). "Dana White: CM Punk will train at Roufusport with Anthony Pettis". MMAFighting.com. Archived from the original on August 16, 2016. Retrieved June 4, 2016. Cepeda, Elias (January 5, 2015). "Ben Askren: CM Punk will be a part of the team". Fox Sports. Archived from the original on October 5, 2016. Retrieved June 4, 2016. Raimondi, Marc (June 24, 2015). "CM Punk moves to Milwaukee to be closer to Roufusport gym". MMAFighting.com. Archived from the original on June 27, 2015. Retrieved June 28, 2015. Boone, Matt (March 9, 2015). "CM Punk Expected To Fight at Welterweight, Meeting With UFC Officials in July • MMA News". Mma News | Ufc News, Results & Interviews. Archived from the original on April 4, 2019. Retrieved February 16, 2019. Okamoto, Brett (October 8, 2015). "CM Punk's UFC debut postponed by shoulder injury". ESPN. Archived from the original on January 26, 2016. Retrieved June 4, 2016. Helwani, Ariel (February 10, 2016). "CM Punk to undergo back surgery on Wednesday; UFC debut delayed". Mma Fighting. MMAFighting.com. Archived from the original on January 9, 2017. Retrieved May 28, 2017. UFC Unfiltered: The Rock and CM Punk. Ultimate Fighting Championship. June 22, 2016. Event occurs at 10:33. Archived from the original on June 23, 2016. Retrieved June 23, 2016. Martin, Damon (November 15, 2016). "CM Punk on 'poetic' debut in the same building where he quit WWE for good". Fox Sports. Archived from the original on November 13, 2016. Retrieved May 29, 2017. "Stats – UFC". ufcstats.com. Archived from the original on February 18, 2022. Retrieved February 16, 2019. Sherdog.com. "After Rough UFC Debut, CM Punk Says 'I Will Be Back, Believe It Or Not'". Sherdog. Retrieved February 16, 2019. Al-Shatti, Shaun (September 12, 2016). "UFC 203 salaries: CM Punk banks $500,000 in MMA debut". MMAFighting.com. Retrieved June 14, 2017. Doyle, Dave (June 9, 2018). "UFC 225 results: Mike Jackson cruises to one-sided win over CM Punk". MMAFighting.com. Retrieved June 9, 2018. "Dana White: CM Punk should 'call it a wrap' after lopsided UFC 225 loss to Mike Jackson". CBSSports.com. Retrieved June 18, 2018. "CM Punk's UFC 225 loss overturned due to Mike Jackson's positive marijuana test". mmajunkie.com. Retrieved July 7, 2021. Martin, Damon; Cruz, Guilherme (August 31, 2021). "CM Punk retired from UFC competition as he returns to professional wrestling". MMA Fighting. Retrieved September 1, 2021. Joe Rogan on CM Punk Losing Again "He's Untalented!", retrieved November 21, 2023 Ray (November 3, 2023). "CM Punk's Huge Payday For His Disastrous UFC Debut Revealed". SE Scoops | Wrestling News, Results & Interviews. Retrieved November 21, 2023. Ojha, Adarsh (April 22, 2023). "UFC Worst Fighters: Ben Askren, Kimbo Slice, CM Punk and other MMA Fighters With Below Average MMA Records in Ultimate Fighting Championship". Inside Sport India. Retrieved November 21, 2023. "Dana White: CM Punk's UFC career over after loss to 'complete f-cking idiot' Mike Jackson". MMA Junkie. June 10, 2018. Retrieved November 21, 2023. Morgan, John (November 8, 2018). "CM Punk joins Cage Fury Fighting Championships broadcast team ahead of UFC Fight Pass debut". MMAjunkie.com. Retrieved February 16, 2019. Markazi, Arash (September 11, 2016). "CM Punk should be an inspiration despite loss at UFC 203". ESPN.com. ESPN. Retrieved April 15, 2017. Bryant, Karyn; Guillen, Adam Jr. (July 9, 2015). "CM Punk talks UFC debut, criticism, religion in MMA and new writing career with Marvel Comics" (video). MMAMania.com (published July 10, 2015). Event occurs at 10:07. Retrieved August 15, 2015. Punk, CM (2020), "CM Punk: I'm an atheist", Coub, retrieved August 24, 2021 "WWE News: C.M. Punk takes a stand for gay marriage, tells homophobic fan to kill himself, later apologizes". ProWrestling.net. May 7, 2012. Williamson, Harriet (June 18, 2023). "AEW's CM Punk returns with show of LGBTQ solidarity". PinkNews. Archived from the original on July 3, 2023. Retrieved August 25, 2023. Punk, CM (May 16, 2015). "My Town, My Team: Blackhawks fan CM Punk recalls Chicago Stadium". Sports Illustrated. Retrieved August 15, 2015. Payne, Marissa (February 20, 2015). "WWE's ringside doctor is suing CM Punk and Colt Cabana for $1 million". The Washington Post. Retrieved February 22, 2015. "Report: WWE doctor suing CM Punk for $1 million for defamation". Fox Sports. February 21, 2015. Retrieved July 12, 2017. Meltzer, Dave (June 5, 2018). "Amann seeking over $4 million in damages from Punk & Cabana". Wrestling Observer Newsletter. Retrieved June 5, 2018. Vangerburg, Marcus (February 20, 2015). "WWE physician slaps CM Punk with defamation lawsuit for podcast". Yahoo Sports. Retrieved May 27, 2017. "WWE addresses CM Punk's allegations". WWE.com. WWE. February 20, 2015. Retrieved April 6, 2016. Kolur, Nihal (June 5, 2018). "CM Punk Wins Civil Lawsuit Against WWE Dr. Chris Amann". Sports Illustrated. Meredith Corporation. Retrieved June 5, 2018. Moore, Evan F. (August 9, 2018). "Colt Cabana sues CM Punk over legal fees". Chicago Sun-Times. Retrieved August 11, 2018. Nason, Josh (June 26, 2019). "CM Punk files countersuit against Colt Cabana in legal fees battle". Wrestling Observer Newsletter. Retrieved September 30, 2019. Johnson, Mike (September 29, 2019). "The Colt Cabana vs. CM Punk lawsuit is over, full details". PWInsider.com. Retrieved September 30, 2019. Johnson, Mike (November 26, 2008). "Cm Punk's Thanksgiving Homecoming in Chicago, Ric Flair in Philly Friday, Dh Smith Discusses WWE Developmental And More". PW Insider. Retrieved June 14, 2017. "CM Punk to serve as McDonald's Thanksgiving Parade Grand Marshal in Chicago". WWE. November 18, 2012. Archived from the original on November 20, 2012. Retrieved November 24, 2012. "Royce Gracie vs. Dan Severn (Gracie Breakdown w/ CM Punk)". February 13, 2012. Archived from the original on November 14, 2021. Retrieved March 9, 2013 – via YouTube. Goldman, Eric (December 20, 2013). "Chris Hardwick and the Nerdist team takes on WWE's CM Punk, AJ Lee, Fandango and Kofi Kingston... in bowling". IGN. Retrieved August 12, 2015. Rossignol, Derrick (November 2, 2015). "Grammar Slam season 2 premiere: 'Here vs. Hear'". Nerdist Industries. Retrieved June 14, 2017. "WWE 13 cover star CM Punk thinks the best thing about WWE 13 is the cover". GamesRadar. November 16, 2012. Archived from the original on May 11, 2013. Retrieved June 14, 2017. Martin, Adam (June 15, 2015). "CM Punk featured in the ring in a new music video". Wrestleview. Retrieved June 14, 2017. Wiseman, Andreas (February 6, 2019). "'The Girl on the Third Floor': First Teaser For SXSW Midnighters Horror Starring Phil 'CM Punk' Brooks". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved February 6, 2019. Harvey, Dennis (March 14, 2019). "'Girl on the Third Floor' Review: SXSW". Variety. Archived from the original on May 23, 2022. Retrieved August 26, 2023. Phillips, Michael (December 4, 2019). "'Girl on the Third Floor' review: Longtime horror producer Travis Stevens makes his directing debut that stars CM Punk and was filmed in Frankfort". Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on August 14, 2022. Retrieved August 26, 2023. Otterson, Joe (August 25, 2021). "CM Punk Says He Has 'Shared a Locker Room' With People Just Like His 'Heels' Character". Variety. Archived from the original on November 20, 2021. Retrieved August 26, 2023. Giannini, Alex (October 15, 2012). "CM Punk writes introduction to Marvel Comics' 'Avengers vs. X-Men'". WWE. Archived from the original on May 8, 2013. Retrieved June 5, 2013. Viscardi, James (October 16, 2012). "CM Punk Introduces Avengers Vs. X-Men". Marvel Entertainment. Archived from the original on January 11, 2014. Retrieved June 5, 2013. "Bake and Destroy: The Cookbook". Retrieved June 5, 2013. "CM Punk Makes his Marvel Writing Debut on 'Thor Annual' #1". CBR. November 10, 2014. Retrieved February 16, 2019. Hanstock, Bill (May 13, 2015). "Talking to CM Punk about the Cubs and comic books". SB Nation. Retrieved May 13, 2015. Kaye, Ben (April 26, 2015). "C2E2: Marvel gives CM Punk his first ongoing series with "Drax"". Comic Book Resources. Retrieved May 28, 2017. Avila, Mike (August 16, 2017). "Exclusive: Meet the creative team behind the new Master of Kung Fu Marvel Legacy title". Syfy. Archived from the original on October 5, 2017. Retrieved October 5, 2017. "WWE Studios joins 'Queens of the Ring'". WWE. April 30, 2012. Archived from the original on May 5, 2012. Retrieved June 14, 2017. "Yabba Dabba WWE! Cena, McMahon Set For Flintstones Movie". Variety. Retrieved June 6, 2013. Pollard, Andrew (July 18, 2018). "Shooting Now Under Way on the Soska Sisters' Rabid Remake". Starburst. Archived from the original on July 18, 2018. Retrieved July 18, 2018. Milner, Kyle (April 13, 2021). "Interview : Jakob's Wife director Travis Stevens on the cultural rebirth of the vampire". Moviehole. Retrieved April 14, 2021. "Interview Highlights: Samoa Joe talks about his decision to sign with TNA, his future". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. August 1, 2005. Archived from the original on July 3, 2007. Retrieved November 8, 2006. Medalis, Kara A. (October 30, 2006). "CM Punk goes ghost hunting". WWE. Retrieved November 4, 2006. Caldwell, James (July 26, 2011). "WWE News: C.M. Punk appears on Jimmy Kimmel Live Monday night – 6-year-old kid books entire Raw episode". Pro Wrestling Torch. TDH Communications Inc. Retrieved August 12, 2015. "CM Punk discusses Raw's 1000th episode on "Late Night with Jimmy Fallon"". WWE. June 19, 2012. Archived from the original on July 9, 2013. Retrieved June 6, 2013. First appearance: "CM Punk guest stars on AMC's "Talking Dead"". WWE. November 21, 2012. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved November 26, 2012. Second appearance: Caldwell, James. "Punk News: C.M. Punk returning to TV, but not for WWE". Retrieved March 10, 2014. Al-Ghamdi, Abdullah (August 30, 2021). "Every CM Punk Movie & TV Show Ranked". Screen Rant. Archived from the original on May 4, 2022. Retrieved August 26, 2023. Currier, Joseph (August 9, 2016). "Video: 'The Evolution of Punk' Trailer". Wrestling Observer Newsletter. Retrieved August 10, 2016. Ossad, Jordana (April 24, 2017). "Champs vs. Pros: Beloved Challenge Victors Set To Battle Top Athletes". MTV. Retrieved April 24, 2017. Sandberg, Bryn Elise (February 27, 2018). "'Ultimate Beastmaster' Renewed for Season 3 by Netflix". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved February 27, 2018. Hartmann, Graham (November 13, 2019). "CM Punk Returns to WWE Television After Nearly Six Years Away". Loudwire. Retrieved July 12, 2020. Thomas, Jeremy (May 4, 2022). "CM Punk Cameos On This Week's Mayans M.C." 411Mania. Retrieved May 4, 2022. "Rey Mysterio def. CM Punk (S.E.S. Pledge vs. Hair Match)". WWE. May 23, 2010. Retrieved June 22, 2012. "Official AEW World Championship Title History". All Elite Wrestling. Knight, Cain A. (August 5, 2023). "CM Punk's real world championship doesn't change hands opposite SummerSlam". Cageside Seats. Archived from the original on August 6, 2023. Retrieved August 6, 2023. Defelice, Robert (August 19, 2023). "CM Punk To Defend 'Real' World Title Against Samoa Joe At AEW All In". Fightful. Archived from the original on August 20, 2023. Retrieved August 19, 2023. Woodward, Hamish (August 22, 2023). "CM Punk's Real World Championship Defenses, Ranked - Atletifo". Atletifo. Archived from the original on November 4, 2023. Retrieved December 1, 2023. Eck, Kevin (January 27, 2010). "2009 Awards". The Baltimore Sun. Archived from the original on October 26, 2020. Retrieved September 25, 2020. "CM Punk Honored with Coveted 2023 Iron Mike Mazurki Award by Cauliflower Alley Club". Cauliflower Alley Club. May 28, 2023. Retrieved September 1, 2023. ESPN.com (December 26, 2023). "Pro Wrestling 2023 awards: The best male and female wrestler, feud, faction, promo and more". ESPN. Archived from the original on December 28, 2023. Retrieved December 29, 2023. "Independent Wrestling Association Mid-South Heavyweight Title". wrestling-titles.com. Retrieved June 14, 2008. Kreikenbohm, Philip (December 5, 2001). "IWA Mid-South Heavyweight Championship". Cagematch – The Internet Wrestling Database. Retrieved October 9, 2020. "Independent Wrestling Association Mid-South Light Heavyweight Title". Wrestling-titles.com. Retrieved June 14, 2008. Kreikenbohm, Philip (June 9, 2001). "IWA Mid-South Light Heavyweight Championship". Cagematch – The Internet Wrestling Database. Retrieved October 9, 2020. Roelfsema, Eric. "IWC – International Wrestling Cartel World Heavyweight Title history". Solie. Retrieved June 14, 2008. Kreikenbohm, Philip (April 13, 2002). "IWC World Heavyweight Championship". Cagematch – The Internet Wrestling Database. Retrieved October 9, 2020. cite web|url= https://www.cagematch.net/?id=5&nr=6174 Westcott, Brian. "MAW – Mid-American Wrestling MAW Heavyweight Title history". Solie. Retrieved June 14, 2008. Kreikenbohm, Philip (December 15, 2001). "MAW Heavyweight Championship". Cagematch – The Internet Wrestling Database. Retrieved October 9, 2020. cite web|url= https://www.cagematch.net/?id=1&nr=13571 Staszewski, Joseph (December 26, 2023). "The Post's 2023 pro wrestling awards". New York Post. Archived from the original on December 27, 2023. Retrieved December 29, 2023. Westcott, Brian. "NWA National Wrestling Alliance/Cyberspace Wrestling Federation CSWF/NWA Cyberspace Tag Team Title history". Solie. Retrieved June 14, 2008. Kreikenbohm, Philip (May 21, 2005). "NWA Cyberspace Tag Team Championship". Cagematch – The Internet Wrestling Database. Retrieved October 9, 2020. Westcott, Brian. "NWA – National Wrestling Alliance NWA Ohio Valley Wrestling Heavyweight/Ohio Valley Wrestling Heavyweight Title history". Solie. Retrieved June 14, 2008. Kreikenbohm, Philip (May 3, 2006). "OVW Heavyweight Championship". Cagematch – The Internet Wrestling Database. Retrieved October 9, 2020. Westcott, Brian. "NWA – National Wrestling Alliance NWA Ohio Valley Wrestling Southern Tag Team Title history". Solie. Retrieved June 14, 2008. Kreikenbohm, Philip (July 28, 2007). "OVW Southern Tag Team Championship". Cagematch – The Internet Wrestling Database. Retrieved October 9, 2020. "NWA – National Wrestling Alliance NWA Ohio Valley Wrestling Hardcore/Ohio Valley Wrestling Television history". Solie. Retrieved June 14, 2008. Kreikenbohm, Philip (November 9, 2005). "OVW Television Championship". Cagematch – The Internet Wrestling Database. Retrieved October 9, 2020. Grifol, Ignacio (January 14, 2022). "Pro Wrestling Illustrated anuncia los ganadores de sus PWI Awards 2021". Solowrestling.com. Retrieved January 15, 2022. "PWI Awards". Pro Wrestling Illustrated. Kappa Publishing Group. Archived from the original on January 21, 2016. Retrieved November 28, 2016. Lambert, Jeremy (January 12, 2023). "MJF Tapes Over CM Punk's Name On PWI Award, Punk Replies, 'Maybe Find Tape For The Ratings'". Fightful. Retrieved January 29, 2023. "2011 Match of the Year". Pro Wrestling Illustrated. 33 (3): 80–81. 2012. "2012 PWI 500". Pro Wrestling Illustrated. 33 (7): 12–18. 2012. ISSN 1043-7576. "Pro Wrestling Illustrated (PWI) 500 for 2012". Pro Wrestling Illustrated. Internet Wrestling Database. Retrieved December 28, 2014. Kreikenbohm, Philip (March 1, 2003). "NWA Revolution Championship". Cagematch – The Internet Wrestling Database. Retrieved October 9, 2020. Passero, Mitch (April 12, 2012). "Chris Jericho ruins CM Punk's "metal" moment". WWE. Retrieved April 12, 2012. Kreikenbohm, Philip (June 18, 2005). "ROH World Championship". Cagematch – The Internet Wrestling Database. Retrieved October 9, 2020. Kreikenbohm, Philip (April 24, 2004). "ROH Tag Team Championship". Cagematch – The Internet Wrestling Database. Retrieved October 9, 2020. Kreikenbohm, Philip (January 28, 2000). "SPCW Northern States Light Heavyweight Championship/SDW Television Championship". Cagematch – The Internet Wrestling Database. Retrieved October 9, 2020. cite web|url= https://www.cagematch.net/?id=1&nr=265466 "CM Punk's first WWE Championship reign". WWE. Archived from the original on May 9, 2012. Retrieved April 6, 2016. "CM Punk's second WWE Championship reign". WWE. Archived from the original on March 19, 2012. Retrieved April 6, 2016. "WWE Championship title history". WWE. Retrieved February 5, 2012. Kreikenbohm, Philip (July 17, 2011). "WWE Championship". Cagematch – The Internet Wrestling Database. Retrieved October 9, 2020. "CM Punk's first World Heavyweight Championship reign". WWE. Archived from the original on June 3, 2012. Retrieved April 6, 2016. "CM Punk's second World Heavyweight Championship reign". WWE. Archived from the original on June 2, 2012. Retrieved April 6, 2016. "CM Punk's third World Heavyweight Championship reign". WWE. Archived from the original on June 3, 2012. Retrieved April 6, 2016. Kreikenbohm, Philip (June 30, 2008). "World Heavyweight Championship". Cagematch – The Internet Wrestling Database. Retrieved October 9, 2020. "CM Punk's first ECW Championship reign". WWE. Archived from the original on June 1, 2012. Retrieved April 6, 2016. Kreikenbohm, Philip (September 1, 2007). "ECW Championship". Cagematch – The Internet Wrestling Database. Retrieved October 9, 2020. "CM Punk's first Intercontinental Championship reign". WWE. Archived from the original on April 1, 2012. Retrieved April 6, 2016. Kreikenbohm, Philip (January 19, 2009). "WWE Intercontinental Championship". Cagematch – The Internet Wrestling Database. Retrieved October 9, 2020. "Punk and Kingston's first World Tag Team Championship reign". WWE. Archived from the original on August 31, 2012. Retrieved April 6, 2016. Kreikenbohm, Philip (October 27, 2008). "World Tag Team Championship". Cagematch – The Internet Wrestling Database. Retrieved October 9, 2020. Kreikenbohm, Philip (April 5, 2009). "WWE WrestleMania 25 – "The 25th Anniversary Of WrestleMania"". Cagematch – The Internet Wrestling Database. Retrieved October 9, 2020. Kreikenbohm, Philip (March 30, 2008). "WWE WrestleMania 24 – "The Biggest WrestleMania Under The Sun"". Cagematch – The Internet Wrestling Database. Retrieved October 9, 2020. Kreikenbohm, Philip (December 14, 2008). "WWE Intercontinental Championship #1 Contender's Tournament (2008)". Cagematch – The Internet Wrestling Database. Retrieved May 29, 2021. "411MANIA". WWE House Show Results 07.05.11 – Brisbane, Australia. Paglino, Nick (July 5, 2011). "WWE House Show Results (7/5): Brisbane, Australia". "What is a Slammy?". WWE. February 23, 2008. Retrieved April 14, 2018. "2008 Slammy Awards". WWE. December 8, 2008. Retrieved January 28, 2009. "2009 Slammy Awards". WWE. December 14, 2009. Retrieved January 2, 2010. Adkins, Greg (December 13, 2010). "Saluting the Slammys". WWE. Retrieved January 30, 2011. "2011 Slammy Award Winners". WWE. December 12, 2011. Retrieved July 19, 2012. "WWE.com Exclusive Slammy Awards 2011". WWE. Retrieved December 12, 2012. "2013 Slammy Award winners". WWE. December 8, 2013. Retrieved April 6, 2016. "And the Winner of the 2023 Gooker Award Is... | the Worst of Misc". Meltzer, Dave (February 18, 2022). "February 21, 2022 Observer Newsletter: 2021 Awards issue, Cody and Brandi Rhodes leave AEW". Wrestling Observer Newsletter. Retrieved February 18, 2022. Meltzer, Dave (January 27, 2010). "2009 Awards Issue, Possible biggest wrestling news story of 2010". Wrestling Observer Newsletter. Campbell, California. ISSN 1083-9593. Meltzer, Dave (January 30, 2012). "Gigantic year-end awards issue, best and worst in all categories plus UFC on FX 1, death of Savannah Jack, ratings, tons and tons of news". Wrestling Observer Newsletter. Campbell, California. ISSN 1083-9593. Meltzer, Dave (January 23, 2013). "The 2012 Wrestling Observer Newsletter Annual Awards Issue". Wrestling Observer Newsletter. Campbell, California. ISSN 1083-9593. Morris, Dan (October 12, 2022). "Wrestling Observer Newsletter's Last 10 "Most Disgusting Promotional Tactics", Explained". TheSportster.com. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Phil Brooks. CM Punk on WWE.com CM Punk's Ring of Honor profile CM Punk's profile at Cagematch.net , Wrestlingdata.com , Internet Wrestling Database Professional MMA record for CM Punk from Sherdog Phil Brooks at IMDb