Sarah Louise Palin (/ˈpeɪlɪn/ ; née Heath; born February 11, 1964) is an American politician, commentator, author, and reality television personality who served as the ninth governor of Alaska from 2006 until her resignation in 2009. She was the 2008 Republican vice presidential nominee alongside U.S. Senator John McCain. Palin was elected to the Wasilla city council in 1992 and became mayor of Wasilla in 1996. In 2003, after an unsuccessful run for lieutenant governor, she was appointed chair of the Alaska Oil and Gas Conservation Commission, responsible for overseeing the state's oil and gas fields for safety and efficiency. In 2006, at age 42, she became the youngest person and the first woman to be elected governor of Alaska. Immense legal fees incurred by both Palin and the state of Alaska from her fights against ethics investigations led to her resignation in 2009. Palin was nominated as John McCain's vice presidential running mate at the 2008 Republican National Convention. She was the first Republican female vice presidential nominee and the second female vice presidential nominee of a major party, after Geraldine Ferraro in 1984. The McCain-Palin ticket subsequently lost the 2008 election to the Democratic Party's then-U.S. Senators Barack Obama and Joe Biden. Throughout the race, her public image and experience came under media attention. Although her vice presidential bid alongside McCain was unsuccessful, the 2008 presidential election significantly raised Palin's national profile. Since her resignation as governor in 2009, she has campaigned for the fiscally conservative Tea Party movement. In addition, she has publicly endorsed several candidates in multiple election cycles, including Donald Trump in his 2016 run for president. She has also led a career as a television personality. From 2010 to 2015, she provided political commentary for Fox News. She hosted TLC's Sarah Palin's Alaska in 2010–11 and Amazing America with Sarah Palin on the Sportsman Channel in 2014–15. From 2014 to 2015, she oversaw a short-lived subscriber-based online TV channel, the Sarah Palin Channel, via TAPP TV. Her personal memoir Going Rogue, written following the 2008 election, has sold more than one million copies. In the summer of 2022, Palin ran in the special election for Alaska's at-large congressional seat that was vacated after the death of Representative Don Young, but lost to Democrat Mary Peltola, who completed Young's unfinished term. Palin faced Peltola and others again in the November general election for the same seat, and again lost to Peltola, who won re-election to serve a full two-year term. Palin was born in Sandpoint, Idaho, the third of four children (three daughters and one son) of Sarah "Sally" Heath (née Sheeran; 1940–2021), a school secretary, and Charles R. "Chuck" Heath (born 1938), a science teacher and track-and-field coach. Palin's siblings are Chuck Jr., Heather, and Molly. Palin is of English, Irish, and German ancestry. When Palin was a few months old, the family moved to Skagway, Alaska, where her father had been hired to teach. They relocated to Eagle River, Anchorage in 1969, and settled in Wasilla, Alaska in 1972. Palin played flute in the junior high band. She attended Wasilla High School, where she was head of the Fellowship of Christian Athletes and a member of the girls' basketball and cross-country running teams. During her senior year, she was co-captain and point guard of the basketball team that won the 1982 Alaska state championship, earning the nickname "Sarah Barracuda" for her competitive streak. In 1984, Palin won the Miss Wasilla beauty pageant; she finished third (as second runner-up) in the Miss Alaska pageant, where she won the title of "Miss Congeniality". She played the flute in the talent portion of the contest. One author reports that she received the Miss Congeniality award in the Miss Wasilla contest (but this is disputed by another contestant and classmate of Palin's), and a college scholarship. After graduating from high school in 1982, Palin enrolled at the University of Hawaii at Hilo. Shortly after arriving in Hawaii, Palin transferred to Hawaii Pacific University in Honolulu for a semester in the fall of 1982. She returned to the mainland, enrolling at North Idaho College, a community college in Coeur d'Alene, for the spring and fall semesters of 1983. She transferred and enrolled at the University of Idaho in Moscow, Idaho for an academic year starting in August 1984. Beginning in the fall of 1985, she attended Matanuska-Susitna College in Alaska. Palin returned to the University of Idaho in January 1986 and received her bachelor's degree in communications with an emphasis in journalism in May 1987. After graduation, Palin worked as a sportscaster for KTUU-TV and KTVA-TV in Anchorage and as a sports reporter for the Mat-Su Valley Frontiersman, fulfilling an early ambition. Palin was elected to the Wasilla City Council in 1992, winning 530 votes to 310. Throughout her tenure on the city council and the rest of her political career, Palin has been a Republican since registering in 1982. Concerned that revenue from a new Wasilla sales tax would not be spent wisely, Palin ran for mayor of Wasilla in 1996, defeating incumbent mayor John Stein 651 to 440 votes. Her biographer described her campaign as targeting wasteful spending and high taxes; her opponent, Stein, said that Palin introduced abortion, gun rights, and term limits as campaign issues. The election was nonpartisan, though the state Republican Party ran advertisements for Palin. She ran for reelection against Stein in 1999 and won, 909 votes to 292. In 2002, she completed the second of the two consecutive three-year terms allowed by the city charter. She was elected president of the Alaska Conference of Mayors in 1999. Using revenue generated by a 2% sales tax, which had been approved by Wasilla voters in October 1992, Palin cut property taxes by 75% and eliminated personal property and business inventory taxes. Using municipal bonds, she made improvements to the roads and sewers and increased funding to the police department. She oversaw creation of new bike paths and procured funding for storm-water treatment to protect freshwater resources. At the same time, she reduced the budget of the local museum and postponed discussions about a new library and city hall, which some of the council believed was needed. Soon after taking office in October 1996, Palin eliminated the position of museum director. She asked for updated resumes and resignation letters from "city department heads who had been loyal to Stein", although the mayor's office was considered a non-partisan position. These included the city police chief, public works director, finance director, and librarian. Palin stated this request was to find out their intentions and whether they supported her. She temporarily required department heads to get her approval before talking to reporters, saying they needed to learn her administration's policies. She created the position of city administrator and reduced her own $68,000 salary by 10%. By mid 1998 this action was reversed by the city council. In October 1996, Palin asked library director Mary Ellen Emmons if she would object to the removal of a book from the library if people were picketing to have the book removed. Emmons responded that she would, and others as well. Palin stated that she had not been proposing censorship but had been discussing many issues with her staff that were "both rhetorical and realistic in nature." No attempt was made to remove books from the library during Palin's tenure as mayor. Palin said she fired Police Chief Irl Stambaugh because he did not fully support her efforts to govern the city. Stambaugh filed a lawsuit alleging wrongful termination and violation of his free speech rights. The judge dismissed Stambaugh's lawsuit, holding that the police chief served at the discretion of the mayor and could be terminated for nearly any reason, even a political one, and ordered Stambaugh to pay Palin's legal fees. During her second term as mayor, Palin proposed and promoted the construction of a municipal sports center to be financed by a 0.5% sales tax increase and a $14.7 million bond issue. Voters approved the measure by a 20-vote margin, and the Wasilla Multi-Use Sports Complex (later named the Curtis D. Menard Memorial Sports Center) was built on time and under budget. However, the city spent an additional $1.3 million because of an eminent domain lawsuit caused by the city's failure to obtain clear title to the property before beginning construction. The city's long-term debt grew from about $1 million to $25 million because of expenditures of $15 million for the sports complex, $5.5 million for street projects, and $3 million for water improvement projects. The Wall Street Journal characterized the project as a "financial mess." A city council member defended the spending increases as being necessitated by the city's growth during that time. Palin also joined with nearby communities in hiring the Anchorage-based lobbying firm of Robertson, Monagle & Eastaugh to lobby for federal funds. The firm secured nearly $8 million in earmarks for the Wasilla city government, including $500,000 for a youth shelter, $1.9 million for a transportation hub, and $900,000 for sewer repairs. In 2008, Wasilla's current mayor credited Palin's 75 percent property tax cuts and infrastructure improvements with bringing "big-box stores" and 50,000 shoppers per day to Wasilla. In 2002, Palin ran for the Republican nomination for lieutenant governor, coming in second to Loren Leman in a five-way Republican primary. Following her defeat, she campaigned throughout the state for the nominated Republican governor-lieutenant governor ticket of Frank Murkowski and Leman. Murkowski and Leman won and Murkowski resigned from his long-held U.S. Senate seat in December 2002 to assume the governorship. Palin was said to be on the "short list" of possible appointees to Murkowski's U.S. Senate seat, but Murkowski ultimately appointed his daughter, State Representative Lisa Murkowski, as his successor in the Senate. Governor Murkowski offered other jobs to Palin and, in February 2003, she accepted an appointment to the Alaska Oil and Gas Conservation Commission, which oversees Alaska's oil and gas fields for safety and efficiency. While she had little background in the area, she said she wanted to learn more about the oil industry and was named chair of the commission and ethics supervisor. By November 2003, she was filing nonpublic ethics complaints with the state attorney general and the governor against a fellow commission member, Randy Ruedrich, a former petroleum engineer and at the time the chair of the state Republican Party. He was forced to resign in November 2003. Palin resigned in January 2004 and put her protests against Ruedrich's "lack of ethics" into the public arena by filing a public complaint against Ruedrich, who was then fined $12,000. She joined with Democratic legislator Eric Croft in complaining that Gregg Renkes, then the attorney general of Alaska, had a financial conflict of interest in negotiating a coal exporting trade agreement. Renkes also resigned his post. From 2003 to June 2005, Palin served as one of three directors of "Ted Stevens Excellence in Public Service, Inc.," a 527 group designed to provide political training for Republican women in Alaska. In 2004, Palin told the Anchorage Daily News that she had decided not to run for the U.S. Senate that year against the Republican incumbent, Lisa Murkowski, because her teenage son opposed it. Palin said, "How could I be the team mom if I was a U.S. Senator?" In 2006, running on a clean-government platform, Palin defeated incumbent Governor Frank Murkowski in the Republican gubernatorial primary. Her running mate was State Senator Sean Parnell. In the November election, Palin was outspent but victorious, defeating former Democratic governor Tony Knowles 48.3% to 41.0%. She became Alaska's first female governor and, at the age of 42, the youngest governor in Alaskan history. She was the state's first governor to have been born after Alaska achieved U.S. statehood, and the first who was not inaugurated in the capital, Juneau (she chose to have the ceremony in Fairbanks instead). She took office on December 4, 2006. For most of her term, she was very popular with Alaska voters. Polls taken in 2007 showed her with 93% and 89% popularity among all voters. The Anchorage Daily News and The Weekly Standard called her "the most popular governor in America." A poll taken in late September 2008, after Palin was named to the national Republican ticket, showed her popularity in Alaska at 68%. A poll taken in May 2009 indicated Palin's popularity among Alaskans had declined to 54% positive and 41.6% negative. Palin declared that top priorities of her administration would be resource development, education and workforce development, public health and safety, and transportation and infrastructure development. She had championed ethics reform throughout her election campaign. Her first legislative action after taking office was to push for a bipartisan ethics reform bill. She signed the resulting legislation in July 2007, calling it a "first step" and declaring that she remained determined to clean up Alaska politics. Palin frequently broke with the Alaskan Republican establishment. For example, she endorsed Parnell's bid to unseat Don Young, the state's longtime at-large U.S. Representative. She publicly challenged then-U.S. Senator Ted Stevens to "come clean" about the federal investigation into his financial dealings. She promoted the development of oil and natural-gas resources in Alaska, including drilling in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge (ANWR). Proposals to drill for oil in ANWR have catalyzed national debate. In 2006, Palin obtained a passport and in 2007 traveled for the first time outside North America, on a trip to Kuwait. There she visited the Khabari Alawazem Crossing at the Kuwait–Iraq border, and met with members of the Alaska National Guard at several bases. On her return journey she visited injured soldiers in Germany. In June 2007, Palin signed a record $6.6 billion operating budget into law. At the same time, she used her veto power to make the second-largest cuts of the capital budget in state history. The $237 million in cuts represented over 300 local projects and reduced the capital budget to $1.6 billion. In 2008, Palin vetoed $286 million, cutting or reducing funding for 350 projects from the FY09 capital budget. Palin followed through on a campaign promise to sell the Westwind II jet, a purchase made by the Murkowski administration for $2.7 million in 2005 against the wishes of the legislature. In August 2007, the jet was listed on eBay, but the sale fell through, and the plane later sold for $2.1 million through a private brokerage firm. Palin lived in Juneau during the legislative session, and lived in Wasilla and worked out of offices in Anchorage the rest of the year. Since the office in Anchorage was 565 miles from Juneau, while she worked there, state officials said she was permitted to claim a $58 per diem travel allowance and reimbursement for hotel. She filed for per diem, claiming a total of $16,951, but rather than stay at a hotel overnight, regularly commuted the 50 miles one way to her home in Wasilla. She did not use the former governor's private chef. Both Republicans and Democrats criticized Palin for taking the per diem, as well as an additional $43,490 in travel expenses on occasions when her family accompanied her on state business. Palin's staffers responded that these practices were in line with state policy, that her gubernatorial expenses were 80% below those of her predecessor Murkowski, and that "many of the hundreds of invitations Palin receives include requests for her to bring her family, placing the definition of 'state business' with the party extending the invitation." In February 2009, the State of Alaska, reversing a policy that had treated the payments as legitimate business expenses under the Internal Revenue Code, decided that per diems paid to state employees for stays in their own homes would be treated as taxable income and will be included in employees' gross income on their W-2 forms. Palin had ordered the review of the tax policy. In December 2008, an Alaska state commission recommended increasing the governor's annual salary from $125,000 to $150,000. Palin said that she would not accept the pay raise. In response, the commission dropped the recommendation. In her State of the State address on January 17, 2008, Palin declared that the people of Alaska "can and must continue to develop our economy, because we cannot and must not rely so heavily on federal government [funding]." Alaska's federal congressional representatives cut back on pork-barrel project requests during Palin's time as governor. While the state has no sales tax or income tax, royalty revenues from the Prudhoe Bay Oil Field (consisting mostly of state-owned lands) have supported large state budgets since 1980. The exact amounts have depended on the prevailing price of petroleum. As a result, state revenues doubled to $10 billion in 2008. Despite this, for the 2009 state budget, Palin gave a list of 31 proposed federal earmarks or requests for funding, totaling $197 million, to Alaska's senior U.S. Senator Ted Stevens. This was a major decrease from earlier years. Palin has said that her decreasing support for federal funding was a source of friction between her and the state's congressional delegation; Palin requested less in federal funding each year than her predecessor Frank Murkowski requested in his last year. In 2002, it was proposed that a for-profit prison corporation, Cornell Corrections, build a prison on Gravina Island. To connect Gravina with nearby Ketchikan, on Revillagigedo Island, it was originally planned that the federal government spend $175 million on building a bridge and another $75 million to connect it to the power grid with an electrical intertie. The Ketchikan Borough Assembly turned the proposal down when the administration of Governor Tony Knowles also expressed its disfavor with the idea. Eventually, the corporation's prison plans led to the exposure of the wide-ranging Alaska political corruption probe, which eventually ensnared Alaska's U.S. Senator Ted Stevens. The bridge idea persisted through the administration of former U.S. senator and then-governor Frank Murkowski. The 2005 Highway Bill provided for $223m to build the Gravina Island Bridge. The provisions and earmarks were negotiated by Alaska's Rep. Don Young, who chaired the House Transportation Committee, and were supported by the chair of the Senate Appropriations Committee, Ted Stevens. This bridge, nicknamed "The Bridge to Nowhere" by critics, was intended to replace the auto ferry that is currently the only connection between Ketchikan and its airport. While the federal earmark was withdrawn after meeting opposition from Oklahoma Senator Tom Coburn, the state of Alaska still received $300 million in transportation funding, with which the state of Alaska continued to study improvements in access to the airport, which conceivably could include improvements to the ferry service. In 2006, Palin had run for governor with a "build-the-bridge" plank in her platform, saying she would "not allow the spinmeisters to turn this project ... into something that's so negative." Palin criticized the use of the word "nowhere" as insulting to local residents and urged speedy work on building the infrastructure "while our congressional delegation is in a strong position to assist." Despite the demise of the bridge proposal, Palin spent $26 million in transportation funding for the planned 3-mile access road on Gravina island that ultimately had little use. A spokesman for Alaska's Department of Transportation said that it had been within Palin's power to cancel the road project but noted the state was considering cheaper designs to complete the bridge project, and that in any case the road would open up the surrounding lands for development. As governor, Palin canceled the Gravina Island Bridge in September 2007, saying that Congress had "little interest in spending any more money" due to "inaccurate portrayals of the projects." Alaska did not return the $442 million in federal transportation funds. In 2008, as a vice-presidential candidate, Palin characterized her position as having told Congress "thanks, but no thanks, on that bridge to nowhere." A number of Ketchikan residents said that the claim was false and a betrayal of Palin's previous support for their community. Some critics said that her statement was misleading, as she had expressed support for the spending project and kept the federal money after the project was canceled. In August 2008, Palin signed a bill authorizing the State of Alaska to award TransCanada Pipelines—the sole bidder to meet the state's requirements—a license to build and operate a pipeline to transport natural gas from the Alaska North Slope to the continental United States through Canada. The governor also pledged $500 million in seed money to support the project. It was estimated that the project would cost $26 billion. Newsweek described the project as "the principal achievement of Sarah Palin's term as Alaska's governor." The pipeline also faces legal challenges from Canadian First Nations. In 2007, Palin supported a 2003 Alaska Department of Fish and Game policy allowing the hunting of wolves from the air as part of a predator control program intended to increase moose and caribou populations for subsistence-food gatherers and other hunters. In March 2007, the department offered a bounty of $150 per wolf would be paid to the 180 volunteer pilots and gunners in five areas of Alaska to offset fuel costs. In the preceding four years, 607 wolves had been killed. State biologists wanted 382 to 664 wolves to be killed by the end of the predator-control season in April 2007. Wildlife activists sued the state- A state judge declared the bounty illegal on the basis that a bounty would have to be offered by the Board of Game and not by the Department of Fish and Game. On August 26, 2008, Alaskans voted against ending the state's predator control program. Palin dismissed Public Safety Commissioner Walt Monegan on July 11, 2008, citing performance-related issues, such as not being "a team player on budgeting issues" and "egregious rogue behavior." Palin attorney Thomas Van Flein said that the "last straw" was Monegan's planned trip to Washington, D.C., to seek funding for a new, multimillion-dollar sexual assault initiative the governor hadn't yet approved. Monegan said that he had resisted persistent pressure from Palin, her husband, and her staff, including state Attorney General Talis J. Colberg, to fire Palin's ex-brother-in-law, Alaska State Trooper Mike Wooten; Wooten was involved in a child custody battle with Palin's sister after a bitter divorce that included an alleged death threat against Palin's father. At one point Sarah and Todd Palin hired a private investigator to gather information, seeking to have Wooten officially disciplined. Monegan stated that he learned an internal investigation had found all but two of the allegations to be unsubstantiated, and Wooten had been disciplined for the others – an illegal moose killing and the tasering of his 11-year-old stepson, who had reportedly asked to be tasered. He told the Palins that there was nothing he could do because the matter was closed. When contacted by the press for comment, Monegan first acknowledged pressure to fire Wooten but said that he could not be certain that his own firing was connected to that issue; he later asserted that the dispute over Wooten was a major reason for his firing. Palin stated on July 17 that Monegan was not pressured to fire Wooten, nor dismissed for not doing so. Monegan said the subject of Wooten came up when he invited Palin to a birthday party for his cousin, state senator Lyman Hoffman, in February 2007 during the legislative session in Juneau. "As we were walking down the stairs in the capitol building she wanted to talk to me about her former brother-in-law," Monegan said. "I said, 'Ma'am, I need to keep you at arm's length with this. I can't deal about him with you. She said, 'OK, that's a good idea.'" Palin said there was "absolutely no pressure ever put on Commissioner Monegan to hire or fire anybody, at any time. I did not abuse my office powers. And I don't know how to be more blunt and candid and honest, but to tell you that truth. To tell you that no pressure was ever put on anybody to fire anybody." Todd Palin gave a similar account. On August 13, she acknowledged that a half dozen members of her administration had made more than two dozen calls on the matter to various state officials. "I do now have to tell Alaskans that such pressure could have been perceived to exist, although I have only now become aware of it", she said. Palin said, "Many of these inquiries were completely appropriate. However, the serial nature of the contacts could be perceived as some kind of pressure, presumably at my direction." Chuck Kopp, whom Palin had appointed to replace Monegan as public safety commissioner, received a $10,000 state severance package after he resigned following just two weeks on the job. Kopp, the former Kenai chief of police, resigned July 25 following disclosure of a 2005 sexual harassment complaint and letter of reprimand against him. Monegan said that he did not receive a severance package from the state. On August 1, 2008, the Alaska Legislature hired an investigator, Stephen Branchflower, to review the Monegan dismissal. Legislators stated that Palin had the legal authority to fire Monegan, but they wanted to know whether her action had been motivated by anger at Monegan for not firing Wooten. The atmosphere was bipartisan and Palin pledged to cooperate. Wooten remained employed as a state trooper. She placed an aide on paid leave due to a tape-recorded phone conversation that she deemed improper, in which the aide, appearing to act on her behalf, complained to a trooper that Wooten had not been fired. Several weeks after the start of what the media referred to as "troopergate", Palin was chosen as John McCain's running mate. On September 1, Palin asked the legislature to drop its investigation, saying that the state Personnel Board had jurisdiction over ethics issues. The Personnel Board's three members were first appointed by Palin's predecessor, and Palin reappointed one member in 2008. On September 19, Todd Palin and several state employees refused to honor subpoenas, the validity of which were disputed by Talis Colberg, Palin's appointee as Alaska's attorney general. On October 2, a court rejected Colberg's challenge to the subpoenas, and seven of the witnesses, not including Todd Palin, eventually testified. On October 10, 2008, the Alaska Legislative Council unanimously voted to release, without endorsing, the Branchflower Report, in which investigator Stephen Branchflower found that firing Monegan "was a proper and lawful exercise of her constitutional and statutory authority," but that Palin abused her power as governor and violated the state's Executive Branch Ethics Act when her office pressured Monegan to fire Wooten. The report stated that "Governor Palin knowingly permitted a situation to continue where impermissible pressure was placed on several subordinates to advance a personal agenda, to wit: to get Trooper Michael Wooten fired." The report also said that Palin "permitted Todd Palin to use the Governor's office [...] to continue to contact subordinate state employees in an effort to find some way to get Trooper Wooten fired." Palin's attorneys condemned the Branchflower Report as "misleading and wrong on the law" and an attempt to "smear the governor by innuendo." The day after the report was released, Palin said she was "very, very pleased to be cleared of any legal wrongdoing" or "any kind of unethical activity." The bipartisan State of Alaska Personnel Board reviewed the matter at Palin's request. On September 15, the Anchorage law firm of Clapp, Peterson, Van Flein, Tiemessen & Thorsness filed arguments of "no probable cause" with the Personnel Board on behalf of Palin. The Personnel Board retained independent counsel Timothy Petumenos as an investigator. On October 24, Palin gave three hours of depositions with the Personnel Board in St. Louis, Missouri. On November 3, 2008, the State of Alaska Personnel Board reported that there was no probable cause to believe that Palin or any other state official had violated state ethical standards. The report further stated that the Branchflower Report used the wrong statute in reaching its conclusions, misconstrued the available evidence and did not consider or obtain all of the material evidence required to properly reach findings in the matter. As governor of Alaska, Palin's job approval rating ranged from a high of 93% in May 2007 to a low of 54% in May 2009. On July 3, 2009, Palin announced that she would not run for reelection in the 2010 Alaska gubernatorial election and would resign before the end of the month. Palin stated that since August 2008, both she and the state had been spending an "insane" amount of time and money ($2.5 million) responding to "opposition research", 150 FOIA requests and 15 "frivolous" legal ethics complaints filed by "political operatives" against her. She said her resignation was also influenced by her desire not to be a lame duck. Lieutenant Governor Sean Parnell said that Palin's decision to resign was driven by the high cost of legal fees against ethics investigations; Palin and her husband Todd personally incurred more than $500,000 in legal expenses. Parnell became governor on July 26, 2009, in an inaugural ceremony in Fairbanks, upon Palin's resignation taking effect. In December 2010, new rules governing Alaska executive branch ethics, stemming from Palin's tenure as governor, took effect. "These include allowing for the state to pay legal costs for officials cleared of ethics violations; (and) allowing for a family member of the governor or lieutenant governor to travel at state cost in certain circumstances ..." Several conservative commentators met Palin in the summer of 2007. Some of them, such as Bill Kristol, later urged McCain to pick Palin as his vice presidential running mate, arguing that her presence on the ticket would provide a boost in enthusiasm among the Religious Right wing of the Republican party, while her status as an unknown on the national scene would also be a positive factor. On August 24, 2008, Steve Schmidt and a few other senior McCain campaign advisers discussed potential vice presidential picks with the consensus settling around Palin. The following day, the strategists advised McCain of their conclusions and McCain personally called Palin, who was at the Alaska State Fair. In retrospect, Schmidt acknowledged her selection was an immense mistake. On August 27, Palin visited McCain's vacation home near Sedona, Arizona, where she was offered the position of vice-presidential candidate. According to Jill Hazelbaker, a spokeswoman for McCain, he had previously met Palin at the National Governors Association meeting in Washington in February 2008 and had come away "extraordinarily impressed." Palin was the only prospective running mate who had a face-to-face interview with McCain to discuss joining the ticket that week. Nonetheless, Palin's selection was a surprise to many because a main criticism he had of Obama was his lack of experience, and speculation had centered on other candidates, such as Minnesota Governor Tim Pawlenty, Louisiana Governor Bobby Jindal, former Massachusetts Governor Mitt Romney, U.S. Senator Joe Lieberman of Connecticut, and former Pennsylvania Governor Tom Ridge. On August 29, in Dayton, Ohio, McCain introduced Palin as his running mate, making her the first Alaskan and the second woman to run on a major U.S. party ticket. Palin was largely unknown outside Alaska before her selection by McCain. On September 1, 2008, Palin revealed that her daughter Bristol was pregnant and that she would marry the child's father, Levi Johnston. During this period, some Republicans felt that Palin was being unfairly attacked by the media. Timothy Noah of Slate magazine predicted that Palin's acceptance speech would be "wildly overpraised" and might end speculation that she was unqualified for the job of vice president because the press had been beating her up for "various trivial shortcomings" and had lowered the expectations for her speech. On September 3, 2008, Palin delivered a 40-minute acceptance speech at the Republican National Convention that was well received and watched by more than 40 million people. Wall Street Journal writer Thomas Frank noted the irony in her unattributed quoting of right-wing faux populist Westbrook Pegler's treacly, "We grow good people in our small towns, with honesty and sincerity and dignity." During the campaign, controversy erupted over alleged differences between Palin's positions as a gubernatorial candidate and her position as a vice-presidential candidate. After McCain introduced Palin as his running mate, Newsweek and Time put Palin on their magazine covers, as some of the media alleged that McCain's campaign was restricting press access to Palin by allowing only three one-on-one interviews and no press conferences with her. Palin's first major interview, with Charles Gibson of ABC News, met with mixed reviews. Her interview five days later with Fox News Channel's Sean Hannity went more smoothly and focused on many of the same questions from Gibson's interview. Palin's performance in her third interview with Katie Couric, of CBS News, was widely criticized; her poll numbers declined, Republicans expressed concern that she was becoming a political liability, and some conservative commentators called for Palin to resign from the Presidential ticket. Other conservatives remained ardent in their support for Palin, accusing the columnists of elitism. Following this interview, some Republicans, including Mitt Romney and Bill Kristol, questioned the McCain campaign's strategy of sheltering Palin from unscripted encounters with the press. Palin reportedly prepared intensively for the October 2 vice-presidential debate with Democratic vice-presidential nominee Joe Biden at Washington University in St. Louis. Some Republicans suggested that Palin's performance in the interviews would improve public perceptions of her debate performance by lowering expectations. Polling from CNN, Fox and CBS found that while Palin exceeded most voters' expectations, they felt that Biden had won the debate. Upon returning to the campaign trail after her debate preparation, Palin stepped up her attacks on the Democratic candidate for president, Illinois Senator Barack Obama. At a fundraising event, Palin explained her new aggressiveness, saying, "There does come a time when you have to take the gloves off and that time is right now." Palin said that her first amendment right to "call Obama out on his associations" was threatened by "attacks by the mainstream media." Palin appeared on Saturday Night Live's "Weekend Update" segment on October 18. Prior to her appearance, she had been memorably parodied several times by SNL cast member Tina Fey, who was noted for her physical resemblance to the candidate. In the weeks leading up to the election, Palin was also the subject of amateur parodies posted on YouTube. Controversy arose after it was reported that the Republican National Committee (RNC) spent $150,000 of campaign contributions on clothing, hair styling, and makeup for Palin and her family in September 2008. Campaign spokespersons stated the clothing would be going to charity after the election. Palin and some media outlets blamed gender bias for the controversy. At the end of the campaign, Palin returned the clothes to the RNC. The election took place on November 4, and Obama was projected as the winner at 11:00 PM EST. In his concession speech McCain thanked Palin, calling her "one of the best campaigners I've ever seen, and an impressive new voice in our party for reform and the principles that have always been our greatest strength." While aides were preparing the teleprompter for McCain's speech, they found a concession speech written for Palin by George W. Bush speechwriter Matthew Scully. Two members of McCain's staff, Steve Schmidt and Mark Salter, told Palin that there was no tradition of Election Night speeches by running mates, and that she would not be speaking. Palin appealed to McCain, who agreed with his staff. Political scientists have debated the impact that Palin had on the outcome of the 2008 presidential election. A 2010 study in the journal Electoral Studies found that "her campaign performance cost McCain just under 2% of the final vote share." However, a 2013 study in the journal Political Research Quarterly failed to find an adverse impact. Palin was the first guest on commentator Glenn Beck's Fox News television show on January 19, 2009, commenting on Barack Obama that he would be her president and that she would assist in any way to bring progress to the nation without abandoning her conservative views. In August 2009, she coined the phrase "death panel", to describe rationing of care as part of the proposed health care reform. She stated that it would require Americans such as her parents or her child with Down syndrome, "to stand in front of Obama's 'death panel' so his bureaucrats can decide, based on a subjective judgment of their 'level of productivity in society,' whether they are worthy of health care." The phrase was criticized by many Democrats and Politifact named it the "Lie of the Year of 2009." However, conservatives disputed this and defended her use of the term. In March 2010, Palin started a show to be aired on TLC called Sarah Palin's Alaska. The show was produced by Mark Burnett. Five million viewers tuned in for the premiere episode, a record for TLC. Palin also secured a segment on Fox News. Two guests that she was shown to have interviewed claimed to have never met her. Guests LL Cool J and Toby Keith stated that footage shown on the segment was actually taken from another interview with someone else, but was used in Palin's segment. Fox News and Palin ended this relationship in January 2013. But on June 13, 2013, Palin rejoined Fox News Channel as an analyst. On December 8, 2010, it was reported that SarahPAC and Palin's personal credit card information were compromised through cyber attacks. Palin's team believed the attack was executed by Anonymous during Operation Payback. The report was met with skepticism in the blogosphere. Palin's email had been hacked once before in 2008. On January 27, 2009, Palin formed the political action committee, SarahPAC. Michael Glassner, a former aide to Palin, was appointed as the chief of staff of SarahPAC. The organization, which describes itself as an advocate of energy independence, supports candidates for federal and state office. Following her resignation as governor, Palin stated her intention to campaign "on behalf of candidates who believe in the right things, regardless of their party label or affiliation." It was reported that SarahPAC had raised nearly $1,000,000. A legal defense fund was set up to help Palin challenge ethics complaints, and it had collected approximately $250,000 by mid July 2009. In June 2010, Palin's defense fund was ruled illegal and was required to pay back $386,856 it collected in donations because it used Palin's position as governor to raise money for her personal gain. Palin subsequently set up a new defense fund. Sarah PAC was terminated as of December 31, 2016. In the wake of the January 8, 2011, shooting of Rep. Gabrielle Giffords, Palin faced criticism for her SarahPAC website's inclusion of a political graphic that included a crosshair over Giffords's district. Palin responded on her Facebook page to the criticism, saying, "Acts of monstrous criminality stand on their own. They begin and end with the criminals who commit them", equating the accusations of her role in the shooting to a "blood libel". In November 2009, Palin released her memoir, Going Rogue: An American Life, in which she details her private and political career, including her resignation as Governor of Alaska. Palin said she took the title from the phrase 'gone rogue' used by McCain staffers to describe her behavior when she spoke her mind on the issues during the campaign. The subtitle, "An American Life," mirrors the title of President Ronald Reagan's 1990 autobiography. Less than two weeks after its release, sales of the book exceeded the one million mark, with 300,000 copies sold the first day. Its bestseller rankings were comparable to memoirs by Bill Clinton, Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama. Palin traveled to 11 states in a bus, with her family accompanying her, to promote the book. She made a number of media appearances as well, including a widely publicized interview on November 16, 2009, with Oprah Winfrey. In November 2010 HarperCollins released Palin's second book, titled America by Heart. The book contains excerpts from Palin's favorite speeches, sermons and literature as well as portraits of people Palin admires, including some she met in rural America on her first book tour. On February 6, 2010, Palin was the keynote speaker at the first Tea Party convention in Nashville, Tennessee. Palin said the Tea Party movement is "the future of politics in America." She criticized Obama for rising deficits, and for "apologizing for America" in speeches in other countries. Palin said Obama was weak on the War on Terror for allowing the so-called Christmas bomber to board a plane headed for the United States. In 2011, Palin was the keynote speaker at an annual tax day tea party rally at the Wisconsin State Capitol in Madison sponsored by Americans for Prosperity, a conservative political advocacy group headquartered in Arlington, Virginia, and a featured speaker at a Tea Party Express rally in Manchester, New Hampshire, at which Palin urged members of the Tea Party movement to avoid internal bickering with establishment Republicans. In mid-2010, Palin positioned herself as a champion of conservative Republican women, calling for a "whole stampede of pink elephants" in the 2010 midterm elections. She endorsed a number of female Republican candidates in primary elections, including Karen Handel, who unsuccessfully sought the Republican nomination for governor of Georgia in the 2010 election. Ryan Rudominer, a spokesman for the House Democratic campaign operation, called her involvement in various U.S. House campaigns a "great thing across the board". She spoke at a May 2010 fundraiser for the Susan B. Anthony List, an anti-abortion political advocacy group and political action committee that supports pro-life women in politics, in which she coined the term "mama grizzly". Palin endorsed Nikki Haley for the Republican nomination for Governor of South Carolina three weeks before the election. At the time of the endorsement, Haley was polling behind three other Republicans; she ended up winning the nomination and the general election. According to ABC News, "pundits credited the notable endorsements of tea party groups, former state first lady Jenny Sanford, and former Alaska Gov. Sarah Palin with legitimizing" Haley's candidacy "in the face of the state's male-dominated political establishment". In the months ahead of the November 2010 elections, Palin endorsed 64 Republican candidates, and was a significant fundraising asset to those she campaigned for during the primary season. According to Politico, Palin's criteria for endorsing candidates was whether they had the support of the Tea Party movement and the support of the Susan B. Anthony List. In terms of success, Palin was 7–2 for Senate endorsements; 7–6 for House endorsements; and 6–3 in endorsements of gubernatorial candidates in races that were considered 'competitive'. Palin's endorsement of Joe Miller in the August 24 Alaska primary election for U.S. Senator was identified as a pivotal moment in Miller's upset of the incumbent Republican Senator Lisa Murkowski. After losing the Republican Party primary to Miller, Murkowski ran as a write-in candidate, defeating both Miller and Democrat Scott McAdams in the general election, winning with a plurality. According to The Daily Beast reporter Shushannah Walshe, Christine O'Donnell's unlikely prospects of upsetting establishment Republican candidate Mike Castle "changed overnight" due to Palin's endorsement. O'Donnell defeated Castle in the September 14 primary for Joe Biden's former Senate seat in Delaware. Her O'Donnell endorsement further increased tensions between Palin and the Republican establishment: leading conservative commentator Charles Krauthammer described the endorsement as "reckless and irresponsible". In 2010, former congressman and influential TV host Joe Scarborough urged his party to dissociate itself from her. Party strategist Karl Rove argued that Palin's endorsement of O'Donnell may have cost the GOP the Delaware Senate seat, and Politico's Ben Smith posited that Palin's support of O'Donnell helped dash Republican hopes of regaining control of the U.S. Senate. Another Palin endorsement carried Nevada's Sharron Angle to a 40.1% primary win, in the race to beat highly endangered incumbent Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid. Reid prevailed 50.3% to 44.6% in the 2010 election despite losing 14 of Nevada's 17 counties. Angle had led by as much as 11% in March and June Rasmussen polling. Palin's influence over the primaries increased speculation that she would seek to be the party's nominee for president in 2012, with political pundits such as David Frum and Jonathan Chait identifying Palin as the front-runner. Beginning in November 2008, following Palin's high profile in the presidential campaign, an active "Draft Palin" movement started. On February 6, 2010, when asked on Fox News whether she would run for president in 2012, she replied, "I would be willing to if I believe that it's right for the country." In November 2010, Palin confirmed that she was considering running for the White House, but realized that her level of experience could make it difficult to win the nomination and criticized the "lamestream media" for focusing attention on her personal life. In March 2011, Palin said, "It's time that a woman is president of the United States of America." On October 5, 2011, Palin said she had decided not to seek the Republican nomination for president. In October 2014, Palin endorsed the "unity ticket" of Independent Bill Walker and Democrat Byron Mallott in the 2014 Alaska gubernatorial election, which ran against her successor and former lieutenant governor, Sean Parnell. The endorsement was prompted by Parnell's oil-and-gas industry tax-cuts, which dismantled her administration's "Alaska's Clear and Equitable Share" (ACES) plan. She had previously supported a referendum to repeal the tax cuts, which was narrowly defeated in August 2014. Walker and Mallott made the repeal of the tax cuts a centerpiece of their campaign. Walker and Mallott won the governorship in the November 2014 election with 48.1 percent of the vote, versus 45.9 percent for the Republican ticket. In January 2016, Palin endorsed Donald Trump for president of the United States. In a May 2016 interview with CNN's Jake Tapper, Palin said she would work to defeat Republican Speaker of the House Paul Ryan. Palin cited Ryan's reluctance to support Trump for president. In early August, Palin said again that she supported Paul Nehlen, a little-known Republican challenger to Ryan, despite Trump's support of Ryan. A few days later, Ryan overwhelmingly defeated Nehlen in the Republican primary, taking over 84 percent of the vote. In June 2017, Palin filed a defamation lawsuit against The New York Times for an editorial accusing Palin of "political incitement" in the run-up to the 2011 shooting of Democratic congresswoman Gabrielle Giffords. The Times pointed out that a link to an advertisement from Palin's political action committee showed stylized crosshairs over the congressional districts held by 20 Democrats, including Giffords. The Times later issued a correction, stating that no connection between the Palin advertisement and the Giffords shooting had been established and clarifying that what was depicted in the crosshairs in the ad were "electoral districts, not individual Democratic lawmakers." The Times wrote that the error did not "undercut or weaken the argument of the piece". In subsequent testimony at an evidentiary hearing, Times editorial page editor James Bennet stated that the editorial sought to make a point about heated political rhetoric and was not intended to blame Palin for the attack on Giffords. Palin's lawsuit was dismissed by the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of New York in August 2017. Judge Jed S. Rakoff ruled that Palin had failed to show actual malice on the part of the Times. In August 2019, the U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit reinstated Palin's suit, ruling that the district court erred when it held an evidentiary hearing on the newspaper's motion to dismiss rather than deciding the newspaper's motion to dismiss on the pleadings. In August 2020, Rakoff denied both sides' motions for summary judgment and ordered a jury trial. As the first libel case against the Times to go to trial in the U.S. in 18 years, the suit was closely watched among First Amendment scholars. On February 15, 2022, the jury reached a unanimous verdict in favor of The New York Times, finding that Palin had not proven actual malice. Jurors were aware that the previous day Rakoff said he would dismiss the case regardless of their verdict after some jurors had received push notifications on their smart phones, though jurors said it did not affect their deliberations. After the death of Alaska's at-large congressman Don Young, Palin ran in the 2022 special election for the vacated congressional seat. In August 2021, Palin had hinted at a possible Senate bid, challenging incumbent Republican Lisa Murkowski. On April 3, 2022, former president Donald Trump endorsed her run for the House of Representatives. Palin was one of the three remaining of 50 initial candidates in the 2022 Alaska's at-large congressional district special election. Al Gross, an independent, dropped out of the "top four" runoff, leaving two Republicans remaining, Palin and Nick Begich III, along with Democratic ex-state house member Mary Peltola. Palin lost the special election to Mary Peltola following counting on August 31. She received 58,328 votes (30.9%) in the first round, and 85,987 votes (48.5%) once Nick Begich's second preferences had been transferred. After she lost the race to fill the remainder of Young's term, Palin urged Nick Begich to drop out of the November election for the two-year term, but he refused to do so. She later lost the general election in November by an even larger margin, receiving 25.7% of the vote in the first round to Peltola's 48.8%, then 45% in the second round, to Peltola's 55%. Palin has been a registered Republican since 1982. Palin opposed the 2010 health care reform package, saying it would lead to rationing of health care by a bureaucracy, which she described using the term "death panels". This legislation is the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, as modified by the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010. She also opposes abortion, including in cases of rape, incest, and embryonic stem cell research, but supports it if the mother's life is in jeopardy. She supports parental consent as a requirement for female minors seeking an abortion. Palin opposes same-sex marriage and supports capital punishment. She has also called marijuana use a "minimal issue" and suggested that arresting cannabis users should be a low priority for local police. Although she opposes full legalization, she admits to smoking marijuana recreationally when it was legal in Alaska. Palin supports sex education in public schools that encourages sexual abstinence along with teaching about contraception. She also supports discussion of creationism during lessons on evolution in public schools. Palin believes evolution "should be taught as an accepted principle" and said that her belief in God's role in Earth's creation "is not part of the state policy or a local curriculum in a school district. Science should be taught in science class." (See Creation–evolution controversy.) A Life Member of the National Rifle Association of America (NRA), Palin interprets the Second Amendment as including the right to handgun possession and opposes bans on semi-automatic assault weapons. She supports gun safety education for youth. Palin supports off-shore drilling, and land-based drilling in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge. When commenting on the Gulf Coast oil disaster Palin said, "I repeat the slogan 'drill here, drill now.'" She said, "I want our country to be able to trust the oil industry." Palin asked supporters to read an article by Thomas Sowell that criticized Obama for having BP pay to an escrow fund. Palin considers herself a conservationist and during the 2008 campaign said "of global warming, climate change, whether it's entirely, wholly caused by man's activities or is part of the cyclical nature of our planet...John McCain and I agree that we have to make sure that we're doing all we can to cut down on pollution." She opposed cap-and-trade proposals contained in the yet to be defeated ACES energy bill. Speaking at a 2009 Department of Interior hearing, Palin acknowledged that "many believe" a global effort to reduce greenhouse gases is needed. She stated, "[S]topping domestic energy production of preferred fuels does not solve the issues associated with global warming and threatened or endangered species, but it can make them worse... These available fuels are required to supply the nation's energy needs during the transition to green energy alternatives." After the election and the Climatic Research Unit email controversy, Palin spoke at a 2010 California logging conference calling studies supporting the scientific consensus on climate change "snake oil science". She attacked what she called "heavy-handed" environmental laws and cited her 2008 suit, as Alaska's governor, against the federal government to overturn the listing of polar bears as a threatened species. She considered environmental regulations as an economic burden to businesses trying to recover from the recession and environmental activists as wanting to "lock up the land". Palin is a strong supporter of Israel. Referring to Iran's threat to Israel, Palin said Obama would be reelected if "he played the war card. Say he decided to declare war on Iran or decided really come out and do whatever he could to support Israel, which I would like him to do." On foreign policy, Palin supported the George W. Bush administration's policies in Iraq, but was concerned that "dependence on foreign energy" may be obstructing efforts to "have an exit plan in place". Palin supports preemptive military action in the face of an imminent threat, and supports U.S. military operations in Pakistan. She also supported the surge strategy in Iraq, the use of additional ground forces in Afghanistan, and, in general, maintaining a strong defensive posture by increasing the defense budget. Palin opposed the Obama administration's proposed 2013 military intervention in Syrian Civil War, suggesting to let "Allah sort it out" in the Syrian Civil War. In 2008, Palin supported NATO membership for Ukraine and Georgia, and affirms that if Russia invaded a NATO member, the United States should meet its treaty obligations. However, during the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, Palin advocated for a reduction in U.S. military aid to Ukraine and criticized U.S. involvement in the conflict. Palin opposed the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action which placed limits on Iran's nuclear program, on the grounds that the treaty was not strict enough. In a September 9, 2015, speech, she said, "Only in an Orwellian Obama world full of sparkly fairy dust blown from atop his unicorn as he's peeking through a pretty pink kaleidoscope would he ever see victory or safety for America or Israel in this treaty." In August 1988, Palin eloped with Todd Palin, her high-school sweetheart, and together they have five children: sons Track Charles James (born 1989) and Trig Paxson Van (born 2008), and daughters Bristol Sheeran Marie (born 1990), Willow Bianca Faye (born 1994), and Piper Indy Grace (born 2001). Palin's youngest child, Trig, born 2008, was prenatally diagnosed with Down syndrome. Palin has eight grandchildren, three by Bristol, two by Track and three by Willow. Todd Palin worked for oil company BP as an oil-field production operator, retiring in 2009. He owns a commercial fishing business. Palin was "baptized Catholic as a newborn", as her mother, Sally, had been raised Catholic. However, the Heath family "started going to non-denominational churches" thereafter. Later, her family joined the Wasilla Assembly of God, a Pentecostal church, which she attended until 2002. Palin then switched to the Wasilla Bible Church. Several news reports posted immediately after McCain named her his running mate called her the first Pentecostal/charismatic believer to appear on a major-party ticket. However, Palin herself eschews the "Pentecostal" or "charismatic" label, describing herself as a "Bible-believing Christian". Todd filed for divorce from Sarah on August 29, 2019, citing "incompatibility of temperament". He requested an equal division of debts and assets, and to have joint custody of their son, Trig. The divorce was finalized on March 23, 2020. In June 2008, the Alumni Association of North Idaho College gave Palin its Distinguished Alumni Achievement Award. Prior to the 2008 Republican National Convention, a Gallup poll found that a majority of voters were unfamiliar with Sarah Palin. During her campaign to become vice president, 39% said Palin was ready to serve as president if needed, 33% said Palin was not, and 29% had no opinion. This was "the lowest vote of confidence in a running mate since the elder George Bush chose then-Indiana senator Dan Quayle to join his ticket in 1988." Following the convention, her image came under close media scrutiny, particularly with regard to her religious perspective on public life, her socially conservative views, and her perceived lack of experience or intelligence. Palin's lack of experience in foreign and domestic politics was criticized by conservatives as well as liberals following her nomination. At the same time, Palin became more popular than John McCain among Republicans. One month after being introduced as McCain's running mate, she was viewed both more favorably and unfavorably among voters than her Democratic opponent, Delaware Senator Joe Biden. A plurality of the television audience rated Biden's performance higher at the 2008 vice-presidential debate. Media outlets repeated Palin's statement that she "stood up to Big Oil" when she resigned after 11 months as the head of the Alaska Oil and Gas Conservation Commission. She said it was because of abuses she witnessed involving other Republican commissioners and their ties to energy companies and energy lobbyists; she claimed to have confronted the industry when she raised taxes on oil companies as governor. In turn, others have said that Palin is a "friend of Big Oil" due to her advocacy for oil exploration and development including for drilling in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge and for the de-listing of the polar bear as an endangered species. Since 2017, Palin has spoken out in support of Julian Assange and in 2020 she called for him to be pardoned saying "I am the first one to admit when I make a mistake and I admit that I made a mistake some years ago, not supporting Julian Assange, thinking that he was a bad guy”. Palin was named one of America's "10 Most Fascinating People of 2008" by Barbara Walters for an ABC special on December 4, 2008. In April 2010, she was selected as one of the world's 100 most influential people by Time magazine. Going Rogue: An American Life, HarperCollins, 2009 America by Heart: Reflections on Family, Faith, and Flag, HarperCollins, 2010 Good Tidings and Great Joy: Protecting the Heart of Christmas, HarperCollins, 2013 Sweet Freedom: A Devotional, Regnery Publishing, 2015 List of female governors in the United States Alaska portal Biography portal "BBC News – Profile: Sarah Palin". BBC News. October 5, 2011. Retrieved February 11, 2014. Snow, Kate (July 6, 2009). "Sarah Palin: Why She Resigned". ABC News. Retrieved April 2, 2022. Allen, Mike (June 24, 2015). "Fox drops Sarah Palin". Politico. Retrieved July 7, 2015. "Amazing America with Sarah Palin Episodes". TV Guide. Retrieved May 15, 2014. "Former Reality Star Sarah Palin Returns to Television". The Daily Beast. February 21, 2014. Retrieved May 15, 2014. Grove, Lloyd (July 28, 2014). "'Lamestream Media' Execs Are Running Palin TV". The Daily Beast. Retrieved April 7, 2020. "Sarah Palin's subscription web channel going offline". USA Today. Associated Press. July 8, 2015. Ulloa, Jazmine; Peters, Jeremy W. (April 2, 2022). "Sarah Palin Announces She's Running for Congress in Alaska". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved April 2, 2022. Bohrer, Becky (August 31, 2022). "Peltola beats Palin, wins Alaska House special election". Associated Press. Retrieved August 31, 2022. "Sarah Palin's Mom Sally Heath — 'the Rock of the Family' — Dies at 80". People. Retrieved January 15, 2021. Benet, Lorenzo (February 17, 2009). Trailblazer: An Intimate Biography of Sarah Palin. Books.simonandschuster.com. ISBN 978-1-4391-5555-4. Retrieved August 7, 2012. "How I Got to Know Sarah Palin" WSB TV 2. September 3, 2008. Retrieved August 7, 2012. "'I Never Thought I'd Say, 'My Sister, the Vice President'", glamour.com, October 1, 2008; retrieved October 9, 2010. "Palin's Big Brother 'Excited for Her'". ABC News. October 18, 2010; retrieved October 9, 2010. Harnden, Toby (August 29, 2008). "Sarah Palin profile: Former beauty queen was an unlikely choice". The Daily Telegraph. London, UK. Archived from the original on August 30, 2008. Retrieved April 25, 2009. Palin, Sarah. (2009) Going Rogue. HarperCollins Publishers, New York. Ch. 2, pp. 7, 10. Hilley, Joe (February 17, 2009). Trailblazer: An Intimate Biography of Sarah Palin. Threshold Editions. Retrieved October 5, 2011. Palin, Sarah. (2009) Going Rogue. pp. 14, 17. "Palin's Alaskan town proud, wary". Boston Globe. September 3, 2008; retrieved October 8, 2010. "Palin, whose family moved to Wasilla from nearby Eagle River when she was 8, stood out from an early age." (requires subscription or fee) Gorski, Eric (August 30, 2008). "Evangelicals energized by McCain-Palin ticket". USA Today. Retrieved February 7, 2010. Palin, Sarah. (2009) Going Rogue. pp. 30, 33. Johnson, Kaylene (April 1, 2008). Sarah: How a Hockey Mom Turned Alaska's Political Establishment Upside Down. Epicenter Press. p. 80. ISBN 978-0-9790470-8-4. "Palin was no pushover on basketball court". MSNBC. Associated Press. October 8, 2008. Archived from the original on October 9, 2008. Retrieved November 5, 2008. Suddath, Claire (August 29, 2008). "A Jock and a Beauty Queen". Time. Archived from the original on August 31, 2008. Peterson, Deb (August 30, 2008). "Palin was a high school star, says schoolmate". St. Louis Post-Dispatch. Archived from the original on September 2, 2008. Nick Allen (May 1, 2010). "Beauty queen who beat Sarah Palin in Miss Alaska aims for political career". The Telegraph. Retrieved December 26, 2017. Argetsinger, Amy; Roberts, Roxanne M. (September 8, 2008). "Miss Alaska '84 Recalls Rival's Winning Ways". The Washington Post. p. C1. Retrieved April 4, 2009. Davey, Monica (October 24, 2008). "Little-Noticed College Student to Star Politician". The New York Times. Thomson, Katherine (October 1, 2008). "Sarah Palin On Flute: Watch Her Beauty Pageant Talent". Huffington Post (VIDEO). Retrieved February 9, 2010. "Palin, 'Average' Student at 5 Schools, Prayed, Planned for TV" Bloomberg L.P., September 7, 2008; retrieved November 30, 2010. "Sarah Palin's Extensive College Career". USNews.com. September 5, 2008. Archived from the original on October 5, 2009. Retrieved October 24, 2009. Geranios, Nicholas K. (September 5, 2008). "Palin switched colleges as many as 6 times". The Seattle Times. Associated Press. Archived from the original on September 19, 2008. Retrieved June 11, 2011. Noah, Timothy (October 1, 2008). "Sarah Palin's college daze". Slate. Retrieved October 24, 2009. "Palin, 'Average' Student at 5 Schools, Prayed, Planned for TV". Bloomberg L.P. September 7, 2008. Archived from the original on March 21, 2010. Retrieved October 24, 2009. "Sarah Palin Biography". The Biography Channel. Archived from the original on August 17, 2010. Retrieved July 19, 2009. Shea, Danny (August 30, 2008). "Sarah Palin: From TV Sports Anchor To Vice Presidential Candidate". Huffington Post (VIDEO). Retrieved February 9, 2010. Lede, Naomi (July 15, 2009). "Palin: Point guard for the GOP". The Huntsville Item. Archived from the original on January 3, 2013. Retrieved July 19, 2009. "We know Sarah Palin". Opinion. Mat-Su Valley Frontiersman. August 30, 2008. Archived from the original on July 11, 2011. Retrieved November 9, 2008. D'Agostino, Ryan (November 16, 2009). "Sarah Palin: What I've Learned". Esquire. Retrieved February 12, 2010. Levenson, Michael (September 3, 2008). "Palin's Alaskan town proud, wary". The Boston Globe. Retrieved June 21, 2009. "1992 Vote Results". City of Wasilla. Archived from the original on July 31, 2013. Retrieved September 12, 2008. Tapper, Jake (September 1, 2008). "Members of 'Fringe' Alaskan Independence Party Incorrectly Say Palin Was a Member in 90s; McCain Camp and Alaska Division of Elections Deny Charge". Political Punch. ABC News. Yardley, William (August 29, 2008). "Sarah Heath Palin, an Outsider Who Charms". The New York Times. Retrieved August 30, 2008. Kizza, Tom (October 23, 2006). "Part 1: 'Fresh face' launched, carries Palin's career: Wasilla mayor was groomed from an early political age". Anchorage Daily News. Archived from the original on June 23, 2011. Retrieved January 23, 2016. "1996 Regular election". City of Wasilla. Archived from the original on July 31, 2013. Retrieved February 8, 2010. Yardley, William (September 2, 2008). "Palin's Start in Alaska: Not Politics as Usual". The New York Times. Retrieved September 2, 2008. "October 5, 1999 Regular Election; Official Results". City of Wasilla. October 11, 2005. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 31, 2013. Retrieved September 1, 2008. "Wasilla Municipal Code". City of Wasilla. Archived from the original on September 1, 2008. Retrieved December 24, 2008. "From Wasilla's basketball court to the national stage: Sarah Palin timeline". Anchorage Daily News. August 29, 2008. Archived from the original on September 2, 2008. Retrieved February 14, 2010. "Fiscal Year Budget 1993 part 1". 1992 to 2002 Budgets. City of Wasilla. June 30, 1994. p. A1. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 31, 2013. Retrieved October 21, 2014. Armstrong, Ken; Bernton, Hal (September 7, 2008). "Sarah Palin had turbulent first year as mayor of Alaska town". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on October 12, 2012. Retrieved May 26, 2013. Kizzia, Tom (October 23, 2006). "Part 1: 'Fresh face' launched Palin: Wasilla mayor was groomed from an early political age". Anchorage Daily News. Archived from the original on June 23, 2011. Retrieved February 14, 2010. MacGillis, Alec (September 14, 2008). "As Mayor of Wasilla, Palin Cut Own Duties, Left Trail of Bad Blood". The Washington Post. Retrieved September 16, 2009. White, Rindi (September 4, 2008). "Palin pressured Wasilla librarian". Anchorage Daily News. p. 1B. Archived from the original on September 5, 2008. Retrieved September 5, 2008. Thornburgh, Nathan (September 2, 2008). "Mayor Palin: A Rough Record". Time. Archived from the original on September 2, 2008. Retrieved October 24, 2009. Komarnitsky, S.J. (October 26, 1996). "New Wasilla mayor asks city's managers to resign in loyalty test". Alaska Daily News. p. D4. Komarnitsky, S.J. (October 2, 1996). "Palin wins Wasilla mayor's job". Anchorage Daily News. p. B1. Stuart, Paul (December 18, 1996). "Palin: Library censorship inquiries 'Rhetorical'". Mat-Su Valley Frontiersman. Archived from the original on September 19, 2008. Retrieved September 6, 2008. Fritze, John (September 9, 2008). "Palin did not ban books in Wasilla as mayor". USA Today. Retrieved December 5, 2008. Komarnitsky, S.J. (February 1, 1997). "Wasilla keeps librarian, but police chief is out". Anchorage Daily News. pp. 1B. Archived from the original on September 2, 2008. Retrieved August 31, 2008. Bernton, Hal (September 1, 2008). "Palin's swift rise wins both admirers, enemies". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on September 2, 2008. Retrieved March 27, 2010. Isikoff, Michael; Mark Hosenball (September 13, 2008). "A Police Chief, A Lawsuit And A Small-Town Mayor". Campaign 2008. Retrieved March 26, 2010. Komarnitsky, S.J. (March 1, 2000). "Judge Backs Chief's Firing" (archive, fee required). Anchorage Daily News. Retrieved September 1, 2008.ADN summary of the decision Phillips, Michael M. (September 6, 2008). "Palin's Hockey Rink Leads To Legal Trouble in Town She Led". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved September 8, 2008. Truth-O-Meter (August 31, 2008). "Palin "inherited a city with zero debt, but left it with indebtedness of over $22-million: Numbers right, context missing". St. Petersburg Times. Politifact.com. Schwartz, Emma (September 10, 2008). "Palin's Record on Pork: Less Sizzle than Reported". ABC News. Retrieved September 24, 2008. Kane, Paul (September 2, 2008). "Palin's Small Alaska Town Secured Big Federal Funds". The Washington Post. p. A1. Retrieved April 3, 2009. "State of Alaska Primary Election – August 27, 2002 Official Results" (PDF). Alaska Division of Elections. September 18, 2002. Retrieved June 11, 2011. Kizzia, Tom (October 24, 2006). "Part 2: Rebel status has fueled front-runner's success". Anchorage Daily News. Archived from the original on August 7, 2011. Retrieved September 1, 2008. Walshe, Shushannah (June 2, 2010). "The Palin-Murkowski rivalry, explained". Salon. Retrieved July 1, 2011. "Commissioners – Terms in Office". Alaska Oil & Gas Conservation Commission. Alaska Department of Administration. Archived from the original on September 24, 2011. Retrieved February 8, 2010. Mauer, Richard (September 19, 2004). "Palin explains her actions in Ruedrich case". Anchorage Daily News. Archived from the original on September 17, 2008. Retrieved September 17, 2008. The Daily News dates this story as November 19, 2004, but the story "actually was published on September 19, 2004". Archived from the original on October 10, 2004. Retrieved March 29, 2014.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) Zaki, Taufen; Dennis, Stephen (March 14, 2008). "Randy Ruedrich defiant, still employed". Alaska Report. Retrieved September 3, 2008. Barnes, Fred (July 16, 2007). "The Most Popular Governor". The Weekly Standard. Archived from the original on November 12, 2010. Retrieved October 7, 2008. "Attorney General Gregg Renkes Resigns". Stories in the News. SitNews.US. February 6, 2005. Retrieved September 3, 2008. "Personnel board drops complaint against Renkes". Juneau Daily News. Associated Press. March 8, 2005. Archived from the original on September 12, 2008. Retrieved February 14, 2010. Dobbyn, Paula (December 5, 2004). "Renkes Mixed Personal, State Business". Anchorage Daily News. Archived from the original on January 6, 2009. Retrieved June 12, 2011. Mosk, Matthew (September 1, 2008). "Palin Was a Director of Embattled Sen. Stevens's 527 Group". The Trail. The Washington Post. Retrieved September 1, 2008. Abcarian, Robin (September 4, 2008). "Insiders see 'new feminism' Outside the GOP convention, however, questions are raised about Palin's family responsibilities". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved February 14, 2010. Sands, David R. (August 30, 2008). "Palin's rise a model for maverick politicians". The Washington Times. Retrieved September 3, 2008. Yardley, William (August 23, 2006). "Alaska Governor Concedes Defeat in Primary". The New York Times. Retrieved September 3, 2008. "Gov. Sarah Palin (R)". Almanac of American Politics 2010. National Journal. Ayres, Sabra (May 30, 2007). "Alaska's governor tops the approval rating charts" (Archives, fee required). Anchorage Daily News. Retrieved September 16, 2008. an Ivan Moore press release (September 24, 2008). "Palin approval rating takes huge dive". Alaska Report. Retrieved June 21, 2009. Cockerham, Sean (May 6, 2009). "New poll shows slump in Palin's popularity among Alaskans". Anchorage Daily News. Archived from the original on September 15, 2012. Retrieved May 7, 2009. Halpin, James (July 10, 2007). "Palin signs ethics reforms". Anchorage Daily News. Archived from the original on July 18, 2012. Retrieved September 12, 2008. "How Palin turned on her own party and became governor". Alaska Dispatch. August 29, 2006. Archived from the original on August 24, 2010. Retrieved February 10, 2010. Berman, Russell (August 29, 2008). "McCain Picks Alaska Governor Sarah Palin as Running Mate". The New York Sun. Retrieved October 24, 2009. Carlton, Jim (July 31, 2008). "Alaska's Palin Faces Probe". The Wall Street Journal. p. A4. Retrieved September 4, 2008. "Alaska State of the State Address 2007". January 17, 2007. Retrieved February 14, 2010. Bender, Bryan; Issenberg, Sasha (September 3, 2008). "Palin not well traveled outside US". The Boston Globe. Retrieved September 3, 2008. Bender, Bryan (September 13, 2008). "Palin camp clarifies extent of Iraq trip: Says she never ventured beyond Kuwait border". The Boston Globe. Retrieved September 13, 2008. "Excerpts: Charlie Gibson Interviews Sarah Palin". ABC News. September 11, 2008. Retrieved October 26, 2008. Shinohara, Rosemary (July 16, 2007). "No vetoes here". Anchorage Daily News. Bradner, Tim (July 8, 2007). "Lawmakers cringe over governor's deep budget cuts". Alaska Journal of Commerce. Archived from the original on September 1, 2008. Retrieved September 1, 2008. Cockerham, Sean (May 24, 2008). "Palin's veto ax lops $268 million from budget". Anchorage Daily News. Archived from the original on May 27, 2008. Retrieved September 15, 2008. Yardley, William (August 25, 2007). "Jet that Helped Defeat an Alaska Governor is Sold". The New York Times. Retrieved September 18, 2008. Kornblut, Anne Elise (September 6, 2008). "Governor's Plane Wasn't Sold on Ebay". The Washington Post. p. A7. Retrieved April 4, 2009. Grimaldi, James V.; Vick, Karl (September 9, 2008). "Palin Billed State for Nights Spent at Home – Taxpayers Also Funded Family's Travel". The Washington Post. p. A1. Retrieved April 4, 2009. "Palin does not use the governor's private chef, whom Palin transferred to the Lounge of the State Legislature", The Anchorage Daily News, January 20, 2008. Luo, Michael; Wayne, Leslie (September 9, 2008). "Palin Aides Defend Billing State for Time at Home". The New York Times. Walsh, Joan (July 9, 2009). "Why is Palin lying about state ethics probes?". Salon. Retrieved October 24, 2009. Grimaldi, James V. (February 19, 2009). "Palin Now Owes Taxes on Payments for Nights at Home, State Rules". The Washington Post. p. A04. Retrieved June 21, 2009. Demer, Lisa (February 17, 2008). "Palin owes tax on per diem, state says". Anchorage Daily News. Archived from the original on February 19, 2009. Retrieved February 19, 2009. 'At the Governor's request, we reviewed the situation to determine whether we were in full compliance with the pertinent Internal Revenue Service regulations,' Kreitzer wrote. Hopkins, Kyle (December 17, 2008). "Palin won't accept raise". Anchorage Daily News. Archived from the original on February 1, 2009. Retrieved January 12, 2009. But if the commission pushes ahead with a pay raise, Palin won't accept the money, said spokesman Bill McAllister. "State commission nixes Palin pay increase". Anchorage Daily News. Associated Press staff. January 11, 2009. Archived from the original on January 19, 2009. Retrieved January 12, 2009. Paige, Leslie K. (January 29, 2008). "Alaska Begins to Grow Up". Wastewatcher, January 2008. Citizens Against Government Waste. Archived from the original on January 13, 2009. Retrieved June 12, 2011. "McCain, Palin criticize Obama on earmarks". Decision 2008 archive – John McCain News. NBC News. September 8, 2008. Retrieved September 16, 2008. Bernton, Hal; Heath, David (September 2, 2008). "Palin's earmark requests: more per person than any other state". The Seattle Times. Archived from the original on July 7, 2009. Retrieved June 21, 2009. Taylor, Andrew (September 2, 2008). "Palin's pork requests confound reformer image". Associated Press. Retrieved October 23, 2008. Bolstad, Erika (September 8, 2008). "Palin's Take On Earmarks Evolving". Anchorage Daily News. Archived from the original on October 20, 2008. The Politics of the 'Bridge to Nowhere' Archived September 10, 2008, at the Wayback Machine. Newsweek (September 8, 2008). Retrieved May 8, 2019. Alaska kills infamous 'bridge to nowhere' that helped put end to earmarks, Washington Times, Stephen Dinan, November 8, 2015. Retrieved May 8, 2019. State studying ways to link Ketchikan, Gravina Island Archived October 25, 2015, at the Wayback Machine. Bohrer, Becky. Juneau Empire, July 1, 2013 Kizzia, Tom (August 31, 2008). "Palin touts stance on 'Bridge to Nowhere,' doesn't note flip-flop". Anchorage Daily News. Archived from the original on March 29, 2010. Dilanian, Ken (August 31, 2008). "Palin backed 'bridge to nowhere' in 2006". USA Today. Retrieved February 14, 2010. 'We need to come to the defense of Southeast Alaska when proposals are on the table like the bridge, and not allow the spinmeisters to turn this project or any other into something that's so negative,' Palin said in August 2006, according to the Ketchikan (Alaska) Daily News. "Where they stand". Anchorage Daily News. October 22, 2006. p. A12. 5. Would you continue state funding for the proposed Knik Arm and Gravina Island bridges? Yes. I would like to see Alaska's infrastructure projects built sooner rather than later. The window is now – while our congressional delegation is in a strong position to assist. The bridge failed, but the 'Road to Nowhere' was built, CNN, Abbie Boudreau and Scott Bronstein, September 24, 2008. Retrieved May 8, 2019. "Alaska Seeks Alternative to Bridge Plan". The New York Times. Associated Press. September 23, 2007. Retrieved April 3, 2009. Quinn, Steve (September 20, 2008). "Alaska town opens 'road to nowhere'". USA Today. Associated Press. Retrieved April 28, 2009. Roger Wetherell, speaking for the state Transportation Department, said the road opened several days ago might someday get people to and from Gravina Island after all, if cheaper designs for a bridge become a reality. Meantime, it opens access to land development, he said. Governor's Office (September 21, 2007). "Gravina Access Project Redirected" (PDF). Press release 0921 (Press release). Governor's Office–State of Alaska. Archived from the original (PDF) on April 29, 2009. Retrieved February 9, 2010. Governor Sarah Palin today directed the Department of Transportation and Public Facilities to look for the most fiscally responsible alternative for access to the Ketchikan airport and Gravina Island rather than the proposed $398 million bridge. Rosen, Yereth (September 1, 2008). "Palin 'bridge to nowhere' line angers many Alaskans". Reuters. Retrieved September 1, 2008. In the city [of] Ketchikan, the planned site of the so-called 'Bridge to Nowhere,' political leaders of both parties said the claim was false and a betrayal of their community.... "Fact Check: Did Palin say 'no thanks' to the Bridge to Nowhere?". CNN Politics, Political Ticker. CNN. September 18, 2008. Retrieved June 21, 2009. The Facts: Palin voiced support for the plan while running for governor...She rejected the bridge after she was elected and the project became a famous symbol of government waste. Rosen, Yereth (August 27, 2008). "Alaska governor signs natgas pipeline license bill". Calgary Herald. Archived from the original on September 3, 2008. Retrieved September 5, 2008. "Governor Palin Unveils the AGIA". News & Announcements. State of Alaska. March 2, 2007. Archived from the original on July 26, 2009. Retrieved May 27, 2010.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) Hosenball, Mark (September 20, 2008). "Periscope: Palin's Pipeline to Nowhere" (From the magazine issue dated September 29, 2008). Newsweek. Retrieved September 23, 2008. "State puts bounty on wolves to boost predator control". Juneau Empire Story Archive. Associated Press. March 22, 2007. Archived from the original on October 16, 2011. Retrieved February 14, 2010. "Governor Palin Introduces Bill to Streamline Predator Management Laws" (Press release). Alaska Department of Game and Fish. May 11, 2007. Retrieved June 21, 2009. deMarban, Alex (March 31, 2007). "Judge orders state to stop wolf bounties: Option: The ruling says Game Board has authority to offer cash incentives". Anchorage Daily News. Archived from the original on February 11, 2010. Retrieved February 14, 2010. "Alaska voters shoot down predator control initiative". newsminer.com. August 27, 2008. Archived from the original on September 14, 2008. Retrieved September 1, 2008. Cockerham, Sean (August 14, 2008). "Palin staff pushed to have trooper fired". Anchorage Daily News. Archived from the original on August 26, 2008. Retrieved September 1, 2008. Fagan, Dan (September 16, 2008). "No one is above the truth, even Palin". Opinion. Anchorage Daily News. Archived from the original on December 4, 2009. Retrieved October 1, 2009. Loy, Wesley (September 16, 2008). "Palin accuses Monegan of insubordination, Troopergate: Governor's lawyer attempts to clear her of misconduct in the firing". Anchorage Daily News. Archived from the original on July 24, 2009. Demer, Lisa (August 30, 2008). "'Troopergate' inquiry hangs over campaign". Anchorage Daily News. Archived from the original on September 5, 2008. Retrieved September 5, 2008. For the record, no one ever said fire Wooten. Not the governor. Not Todd. Not any of the other staff. What they said directly was more along the lines of 'This isn't a person that we would want to be representing our state troopers.' Holland, Megan (July 19, 2008). "Monegan says he was pressured to fire cop". Anchorage Daily News. p. A1. Demer, Lisa (July 27, 2008). "Is Wooten a good trooper?". Anchorage Daily News. p. A1. Grimaldi, James V.; Kindy, Kimberly (August 31, 2008). "Long-Standing Feud in Alaska Embroils Palin". The Washington Post. Retrieved August 31, 2008. Demer, Lisa (August 30, 2008). "'Troopergate' inquiry hangs over campaign". Anchorage Daily News. Archived from the original on September 5, 2008. Retrieved September 5, 2008. Monegan said he believes his firing was directly related to the fact Wooten stayed on the job. "Monegan to Palin: 'Ma'am, I Need to Keep You at Arm's Length'". The Washington Post Investigations. August 30, 2008. Retrieved September 5, 2008. Simon, Matt (November 7, 2008). "Monegan Says Palin Administration, Husband Used Governor's Office to Pressure Firing First Family's Former Brother-in-Law". KTVA, CBS News 11. Archived from the original on September 28, 2011. Retrieved July 1, 2011. Grimaldi, James V.; Vick, Karl (September 4, 2008). "Palin E-Mails Show Intense Interest in Trooper's Penalty". The Washington Post. Retrieved August 3, 2008. Cockerham, Sean (August 14, 2008). "Alaska's governor admits her staff tried to have trooper fired". Anchorage Daily News. Archived from the original on September 1, 2008. Retrieved August 29, 2008. Espo, David (September 19, 2008). "Palin probe has parallels to 2000 recount fight". The Boston Globe. Archived from the original on January 4, 2009. Retrieved June 21, 2009. Loy, Wesley (July 29, 2008). "Hired help will probe Monegan dismissal". Anchorage Daily News. Archived from the original on August 31, 2008. Retrieved August 29, 2008. Hulen, David (August 13, 2008). "Namely, specifically, most disturbing, is a telephone recording apparently made and preserved by the troopers..." Anchorage Daily News. Archived from the original on July 26, 2009. Retrieved June 21, 2009. Demer, Lisa (September 3, 2008). "Palin seeks review of Monegan firing case: Board: Governor makes ethics complaint against herself to force action". Anchorage Daily News. Archived from the original on September 5, 2008. Retrieved September 5, 2008. "Palin wants quick state board ruling in trooper probe". ElectionCenter2008. CNN. September 3, 2008. "Alaska AG: Palin subpoenas won't be honored and five Alaska lawmakers file suit to end 'Troopergate' probe". NBC News. Associated Press. September 16, 2008. Retrieved February 10, 2010. Cockerham, Sean (October 2, 2008). "Judge refuses to halt Troopergate probe". Anchorage Daily News. Archived from the original on July 13, 2009. Retrieved June 21, 2009. Apuzzo, Matt (October 5, 2008). "7 Palin aides to testify in abuse-of-power probe". USA Today. Associated Press. Retrieved November 16, 2008. Spence, Hal (October 12, 2008). "Branchflower report draws mixed reactions". Peninsula Clarion. Kenai, Alaska. The council voted unanimously to make the report public, but did not vote to endorse its findings. Branchflower, Stephen (October 10, 2008). Report to the Legislative Council, Public Report (PDF) (Report). State of Alaska Legislature. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 11, 2008. Retrieved October 10, 2008. Report consists of 268 pages, see page 8 for the findings. Branchflower 2008, p. 66 Rood, Justin; Rutherford, Jessica; Delawala, Imtiyaz (October 10, 2008). "Troopergate Report: Palin Abused Power: Palin Says She Did 'Nothing Unlawful or Unethical' in Firing of Safety Commissioner". ABC News. Retrieved October 10, 2008. The report further found that Colberg had failed to cooperate fully with the investigation. The Governor's Attorney Condemns the Branchflower Report as Misleading and Wrong on the Law scribd.com, statement from Clapp, Peterson, Van Flein, Tiemessen, Thorsness LLC, October 11, 2008. Retrieved November 24, 2010. Dobbs, Michael (October 13, 2008). "Four Pinocchios for Palin". The Fact Checker, Candidate Watch. Demer, Lisa (October 11, 2008). "Palin: 'Very much appreciating being cleared of any legal wrongdoing or unethical activity at all' (Updated with audio)". Alaska Politics Blog. Anchorage Daily News. Archived from the original on October 3, 2009. Retrieved October 24, 2009. Demer, Lisa (September 2, 2008). "Attorney challenges Monegan firing inquiry". Anchorage Daily News. Archived from the original on September 3, 2008. Retrieved September 2, 2008. Van Flein, Thomas (September 15, 2008). "Before The State Of Alaska Personnel Board, In The Matter of Sarah Palin, Governor, Motion For Determination Of No Probable Cause" (PDF). p. 54. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 2, 2008. Loy, Wesley (September 16, 2008). "'Rogue' Monegan accused of insubordination". Anchorage Daily News. p. A1. "Palin gives deposition in trooper case". ElectionCenter200. CNN. October 25, 2008. Retrieved October 26, 2008. State of Alaska Personnel Board Report of Findings and Recommendations November 3, 2008. pdf file of Independent Counsel Timothy Petumenos' report. Retrieved November 24, 2010. Grimaldi, James V. (November 3, 2008). "2nd Alaska Probe Finds Palin Did Not Violate Ethics Rules". The Trail. "Palin didn't violate ethics law, 2nd probe finds". CNN. November 3, 2008. Archived from the original on March 25, 2012. Retrieved January 18, 2022. Yardley, William; Serge F. Kovaleski (November 3, 2008). "Report Backs Palin in Firing of Commissioner". The New York Times. D'Oro, Rachel (November 3, 2008). "Report clears Palin in Troopergate probe". The Seattle Times. Associated Press. Archived from the original on June 29, 2011. Retrieved November 4, 2008. SurveyUSA website, "APPROVAL RATINGS FOR ALL 50 GOVERNORS (Released 11/20/06)"; retrieved December 15, 2010. Cauchon, Dennis (June 21, 2007). "At state level, GOP, Dems learn to get along". USA Today. Retrieved October 24, 2009. Horton, Carly (November 4, 2007). "Palin ranks among nation's most popular governors". The Alaska Journal of Commerce. Archived from the original on December 25, 2007. Retrieved February 13, 2010. "Alaska: McCain 48% Obama 43%". Rasmussen Reports. April 10, 2008. Archived from the original on July 4, 2008. Retrieved October 24, 2009. "Alaska: McCain 50% Obama 41%". Rasmussen Reports. May 17, 2008. Archived from the original on December 1, 2008. Retrieved October 24, 2009. Farley, Robert (September 3, 2008). "She wins popularity contest". PolitiFact. Retrieved January 23, 2016. "Palin approval rating drops in Alaska". Anchorage Daily News. October 1, 2008. Archived from the original on November 20, 2010. Retrieved December 1, 2010. "McCain Leads By 15 in Alaska". Rasmussen Reports. October 7, 2008. Retrieved October 24, 2009.[dead link] Cockerham, Sean (May 7, 2009). "New poll shows slump in Palin's popularity among Alaskans". The Miami Herald. Archived from the original on September 15, 2012. Retrieved July 5, 2009. Cillizza, Chris (July 17, 2009). "Morning Fix: Winners and Losers, Sotomayor Day 4". The Fix. Retrieved October 24, 2009. "Legal Bills Swayed Palin, Official Says". The New York Times. July 5, 2009. Carlton, Jim (July 7, 2009). "Palin Confidante Says Governor Felt Hampered by Probes". The Wall Street Journal. "Palin's Reasons for Stepping Down" (Transcript and Video). The Washington Post. July 3, 2009. Video of Alaska Governor Transfer of Power Ceremony (Outgoing Governor Sarah Palin "farewell speech" at 6:00min). C-SPAN. July 26, 2009. Retrieved December 16, 2010. "New ethics rules in Alaska to take effect Dec. 22", Fairbanks Daily News-Miner, December 7, 2010; retrieved January 30, 2011. Mayer, Jane (October 27, 2008). "The Insiders: How John McCain came to pick Sarah Palin". The New Yorker. Retrieved June 21, 2009. Horton, Scott (October 15, 2008). "Salon Radio: Scott Horton" (Transcript and link to Audio). Interviewed by Glenn Greenwald. Retrieved June 21, 2009. Draper, Robert (October 26, 2008). "The Making (and Remaking and Remaking) of McCain". The New York Times Magazine. pp. 52–59, 74, 112. Retrieved September 6, 2009. Steve Schmidt's brutally honest assessment of Sarah Palin, Washington Post, Jonathan Capehart, March 12, 2012. Retrieved December 18, 2021. Balz, Dan; Barnes, Robert (August 31, 2008). "Palin Made an Impression From the Start". The Making Of A Running Mate. The Washington Post. p. A1. Retrieved September 6, 2009. Davis, Susan (August 29, 2008). "When John Met Sarah: How McCain Picked Palin". Washington Wire. The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved October 21, 2008. Bumiller, Elizabeth; Cooper, Michael (August 31, 2008). "Conservative Ire Pushed McCain From Lieberman". The New York Times. p. A26. Retrieved September 6, 2009. The first woman was Geraldine Ferraro, the Democratic vice-presidential nominee in 1984, who ran with former vice-president Walter Mondale."McCain taps Alaska Gov. Palin as vice president pick". ElectionCenter2008. CNN. August 29, 2008. Retrieved August 29, 2008. Frank Newport, Palin Unknown to Most Americans: Immediate reaction on par with reaction to Biden, Gallup (August 30, 2008). Shear, Michael D.; Vick, Karl (September 2, 2008). "No Surprises From Palin, McCain Team Says". The Washington Post. p. A17. Retrieved September 6, 2009. Wangsness, Lisa (September 5, 2008). "Republicans point fingers at media over Palin coverage". Boston Globe. Retrieved September 8, 2008. Noah, Timothy (September 3, 2008). "Sarah Palin Wows Convention! Why success is foreordained . . . ". Slate. Retrieved May 20, 2010. Bauder, David (September 4, 2008). "More than 40 million people see Palin speech". USA Today. Associated Press. Retrieved August 7, 2012. Frank, Thomas (September 10, 2008). "The GOP Loves the Heartland To Death". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved December 18, 2021. Calderone, Michael (September 6, 2008). "Sarah Palin has yet to meet the press". Politico. Retrieved January 18, 2022. Garofoli, Joe (September 30, 2008). "Palin: McCain campaign's end-run around media". San Francisco Chronicle. Retrieved September 30, 2008. Besides the perceived motive of protecting the Vice Presidential nominee from media questions, the McCain campaign sought to have her constantly at McCain's side because she drew crowds. Swaine, Jon (September 12, 2008). "Sarah Palin interview: pundits give mixed reviews". Telegraph (UK). London, UK. Archived from the original on January 10, 2022. Retrieved September 30, 2008. Stanley, Alessandra (September 26, 2008). "A Question Reprised, but the Words Come None Too Easily for Palin". The New York Times. p. A20. Retrieved September 6, 2009. Nagourney, Adam (September 30, 2008). "Concerns About Palin's Readiness as Big Test Nears". The New York Times. p. A16. Archived from the original on May 7, 2011. Retrieved September 6, 2009. Alberts, Sheldon (September 29, 2008). "Palin raising fears among Republican conservatives". Canada.com. Canwest News Service. Archived from the original on October 2, 2008. Retrieved September 30, 2008. Bumiller, Elizabeth; Julie Bosman; Michael Cooper (November 6, 2008). "Internal Battles Divided McCain and Palin Camps". The New York Times. p. 9. Retrieved May 30, 2010. Costello, Carol; Dana Bash; Scott J. Anderson (September 29, 2008). "Conservatives to McCain camp: Let Palin be Palin". CNN. Retrieved May 30, 2010. UPI staff (September 30, 2008). "Palin prepping for debate in seclusion". United Press International. Sedona, AZ. Retrieved May 30, 2010. Daniel K., Douglass (August 2, 2008). "Obama backs away from McCain's debate challenge". Houston Chronicle. Associated Press. Retrieved May 30, 2010. "Debate poll says Biden won, Palin beat expectations". ElectionCenter2008. CNN. October 3, 2008. Retrieved May 30, 2010. Fouhy, Beth (October 3, 2008). "Palin says debate went well as polls favor Biden". Fox News Channel. Associated Press. Archived from the original on May 11, 2011. Retrieved May 30, 2010. Johnston, Nicholas (October 6, 2008). "Palin Takes 'Gloves Off,' Filling Attack-Dog Role (Update 2)". Bloomberg L.P. Archived from the original on June 13, 2010. Retrieved May 30, 2010. ABC News, October 31, 2008, Palin Fears Media Threaten Her First Amendment Rights Michaud, Chris (October 19, 2008). "Palin drops in on 'Saturday Night Live'". Reuters. Retrieved May 30, 2010. Chapman, Glenn (September 18, 2008). "Palin parodies flood the Web". The Washington Times. Agence France-Presse. Retrieved May 30, 2010. AP staff (October 22, 2008). "GOP spent $150,000 in donations on Palin's look". The Arizona Republic. Associated Press. Retrieved May 30, 2010. AP staff (October 23, 2008). "Palin blames gender bias for clothing controversy". Toronto Star. Associated Press. Retrieved May 30, 2010. Huffington Post staff (October 23, 2008). "Campbell Brown Calls Out Double Standard On Palin Clothes Controversy". Huffington Post. Retrieved May 30, 2010. Johnson, Gene (November 10, 2008). "Palin Sorts Clothes To See What Belongs To The RNC". Huffington Post. Archived from the original on November 13, 2008. Retrieved May 30, 2010. "Transcript: McCain concedes presidency". ElectionCenter2008. Phoenix, Arizona: CNN. November 4, 2008. Retrieved May 30, 2010. Purdum, Todd S. (August 2009). "It Came from Wasilla". Vanity Fair. No. 588. pp. 60–65, 107–112. Retrieved May 30, 2010. Elis, Roy; Hillygus, D. Sunshine; Nie, Norman (December 1, 2010). "The dynamics of candidate evaluations and vote choice in 2008: looking to the past or future?". Electoral Studies. 29 (4): 582–593. doi:10.1016/j.electstud.2010.04.005. ISSN 0261-3794. Burmila, Edward M.; Ryan, Josh M. (2013). "Reconsidering the "Palin Effect" in the 2008 U.S. Presidential Election". Political Research Quarterly. 66 (4): 952–959. doi:10.1177/1065912913508011. JSTOR 23612070. S2CID 143578249. Knuckey, Jonathan (2013). "Comments on "Reconsidering the 'Palin Effect'"". Political Research Quarterly. 66 (4): 960–963. doi:10.1177/1065912913508342. S2CID 145595500. Rhee, Foon (January 19, 2009). "Palin hopeful about Obama presidency". Political Intelligence. Archived from the original on January 23, 2009. Retrieved May 30, 2010. "Palin vs. Obama: Death Panels". www.factcheck.org. August 14, 2009. Retrieved June 28, 2016. "PolitiFact's Lie of the Year: 'Death panels'". PolitiFact. Retrieved October 5, 2011. "Death Panels? Sarah Palin Was Right". Cato Institute. December 22, 2009. Retrieved September 13, 2015. Barnett, Lindsay (April 9, 2010). "Wildlife Group urges Discovery to Drop Sarah Palin's docu-series". L.A. Unleashed. Retrieved May 30, 2010. Gold, Matea (March 30, 2010). "Palin's new Fox show debuts this week". Chicago Tribune. Retrieved January 18, 2022. Hibberd, James (November 15, 2010). "'Sarah Palin's Alaska' Breaks TLC Ratings Record". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on August 5, 2011. Retrieved August 18, 2011. Leonard, Tom (April 2, 2010). "'Guests' say Palin's TV show dishonest". Calgary Herald. Archived from the original on May 14, 2014. Retrieved August 7, 2012. Hambly, Peter (January 25, 2013). "Palin and Fox News call it quits". CNN. Archived from the original on January 27, 2013. Retrieved January 25, 2013. "Months later, Sarah Palin back as Fox News analyst". The Reporter Online. June 13, 2013. Retrieved January 18, 2022. Tapper, Jake (December 8, 2010). "Exclusive: Sarah Palin Under Cyber-Attack from Wikileaks Supporters in 'Operation Payback'". ABC News. Retrieved December 9, 2010. Hudson, John (December 9, 2010). "Is Palin Just Using 'Operation Payback' to Get Attention?". The Atlantic. Retrieved January 18, 2022. Rowland, Kara (September 19, 2008). "Hacker wanted to 'derail' Palin". The Washington Times. Retrieved January 18, 2022. "FAQ". SarahPAC. Archived from the original on January 6, 2011. Carnevale, Mary Lu; Davis, Susan (January 27, 2009). "Sarah Palin Launches Political Action Committee". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved May 30, 2010. Jeremy Diamond. "Key aide may have cemented Donald Trump-Sarah Palin union". CNN. Retrieved May 3, 2017. Salant, Jonathan D. (January 27, 2009). "Palin Forms Political Committee That Could Help a 2012 Campaign". Bloomberg News. Archived from the original on January 31, 2010. Retrieved May 30, 2010. Millstone, Ken (January 27, 2009). "Sarah Palin Launches Political Action Committee". Political Hotsheet. CBS News. Retrieved May 30, 2010. Hallow, Ralph (July 12, 2009). "Exclusive: Palin to stump for conservative Democrats, Vows to shun 'partisan stuff'". The Washington Times. Retrieved May 30, 2010. Bolstad, Erika; Cockerham, Sean (July 14, 2009). "SarahPAC collections reach nearly a million: Nearly 11,000 Contributors". Anchorage Daily News. Retrieved May 30, 2010. "Palin's Legal Fund Faces Ethics Challenge". CBS News. Associated Press. August 28, 2009. Retrieved May 30, 2010. "Illegal Sarah Palin defense fund must give back donations". Reuters. June 25, 2010. Retrieved June 25, 2010. "FEC Disclosure Form 3X for Sarah PAC". docquery.fec.gov. Retrieved February 10, 2017. "Political Insiders Split Over Palin's 'Crosshairs'". The Atlantic. January 12, 2011. Retrieved July 16, 2012. Reynolds, Glenn (January 10, 2011). "The Arizona Tragedy and the Politics of Blood Libel". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved July 16, 2012. Oliphant, James (January 13, 2011). "Sarah Palin video on Giffords aftermath stays true to who Palin is". Los Angeles Times. Boteach, Shmuley (January 14, 2011). "Sarah Palin Is Right About 'Blood Libel'". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved July 16, 2012. Dickerson, John (October 20, 2008). "Palin's Campaign vs. McCain's: When Sarah Palin disagrees with John McCain, it means something. Or does it?". Slate. Retrieved May 30, 2010. Geier, Thom (October 6, 2009). "Sarah Palin's new memoir: Gosh that subtitle sounds familiar". Shelf Life. Archived from the original on December 24, 2009. Retrieved May 30, 2010. AP staff (December 1, 2009). "Sarah Palin Book Goes Platinum". CBS, AP. Retrieved January 23, 2016. Kuznia, Rob (December 9, 2009). "Sarah Palin Tops New York Times Best Seller List with 'Going Rogue'". HispanicBusiness.com. Retrieved May 30, 2010. Reither, Andrea (December 1, 2009). "Sarah Palin's 'Going Rogue' sells 1 million. How does it stack up to Barack and Hillary's books?". The Dishrag. Zap2It Blog. Retrieved May 30, 2010. Stelter, Brian; Dave Itzkoff (November 18, 2009). "Sarah Palin Generates High Ratings for 'Oprah'". The New York Times. Retrieved May 30, 2010. Montopoli, Brian (May 11, 2010). "Sarah Palin's New Book: 'America by Heart'". Political Hotsheet. Retrieved May 20, 2010. Italie, Hillel (May 12, 2010). "Sarah Palin's book, 'America by Heart,' out Nov. 23". USA Today. Retrieved May 30, 2010. Knickerbocker, Brad (November 21, 2010). "Sarah Palin's 'America by Heart' sure to stir friends – and enemies". The Christian Science Monitor. Retrieved November 26, 2010. Zernike, Kate (February 6, 2010). "Palin Assails Obama at Tea Party Meeting". The New York Times. Nashville, TN. Archived from the original on February 9, 2010. Retrieved May 30, 2010. Kurtz, Howard (January 8, 2010). "Obama Takes the Blame". Media Notes. Retrieved May 27, 2010. Schultz, Zac (April 16, 2011). "Sarah Palin Travels To Madison". Madison, Wisconsin: WMTV. Retrieved May 8, 2012. Abcarian, Robin (September 5, 2011). "N.H. Republican says Sarah Palin's window is closed". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved September 6, 2011. Cousineau, Michael. "Sarah Palin: 'We're not going to just sit back'". New Hampshire Union-Leader. Retrieved September 6, 2011. Parker, Kathleen (July 14, 2010). "Sarah Palin, from pit bull to mama grizzly". The Washington Post. Retrieved November 30, 2010. Hennessy, Kathleen (July 24, 2010). "For GOP Women 2010 May Not Be Their Year". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved January 18, 2022. Vejnoska, Jill (July 25, 2010). "For GOP Women 2010 May Not Be Their Year". Atlanta Journal-Constitution. Archived from the original on July 27, 2010. Retrieved January 18, 2022. Davis, Susan (June 10, 2010). "Measuring the Impact of a Nod From Palin". The Wall Street Journal. Archived from the original on July 31, 2010. Retrieved August 15, 2010. "Sarah Palin Issues a Call to Action to 'Mama Grizzlies'", The Washington Post, May 14, 2010. "Palin Tells Women's Group Washington Should Beware of 'Mama Grizzlies'", Associated Press, May 14, 2010. Barr, Andy (May 13, 2010). "Palin endorses Haley for S.C. governor". POLITICO. Retrieved January 18, 2022. Hunt, Kasie (June 22, 2010). "Nikki Haley makes history". Politico. "Nikki Haley bests Vincent Sheheen for South Carolina governor". Los Angeles Times. November 2, 2010. "Nikki Haley Clinches South Carolina GOP Gubernatorial Nomination". ABC News. June 21, 2010. "Palin Endorsements Tracker – The Washington Post". Washington Post. Barr, Andy (December 3, 2008). "Chambliss: Palin 'allowed us to peak'". Politico. Retrieved January 18, 2022. Maggie Haberman (September 21, 2010). "Sarah Palin, Mike Huckabee bid for conservative base". Politico. Retrieved January 18, 2022. Sandra Fish, Sarah Palin's Tuesday Picks Come Out on Top, Mostly Politics Daily, September 15, 2010. Horowitz, Jason (August 25, 2010). "Joe Miller". The Washington Post. Retrieved September 1, 2010. Whether he ultimately prevailed or not was beside the point. Palin, whose presidential and political aspirations are still undetermined, had demonstrated that the strength of her base is not. Gutierrez, Alexandra (August 25, 2010). "Sarah Palin's Tea Party How Joe Miller—the Palin-endorsed, Tea Party-supported candidate—surprised everyone in Alaska". Slate. Retrieved September 1, 2010. And while Palin did not campaign for Miller, she and former Lt. Gov. Loren Leman recorded effective 11th-hour robocalls for him. Yardley, William. "Murkowski Wins Alaska Senate Race." The New York Times. November 17, 2010. Retrieved September 30, 2018. Shushannah Walshe, Palin's Wins Stoke White House Run, The Daily Beast September 16, 2010 Krauthammer, Charles (September 17, 2010). "The Buckley rule". Washington Post. Retrieved January 18, 2022. Scarborough, Joe (November 30, 2010). "GOP should take on Palin". POLITICO. Retrieved July 22, 2022. James, Frank (September 18, 2010). "Sarah Palin Tells Karl Rove Where To Go..." NPR. Retrieved January 18, 2022. Smith, Ben (November 2, 2010). "Palin blog: Coons would have beaten Castle". POLITICO. Retrieved January 18, 2022. Palin, Angle, planning campaign event Archived August 11, 2022, at the Wayback Machine, CNN Political Ticker, Mark Preston, August 18, 2010. Retrieved September 30, 2018. The Nevada plan: Reintroduce Reid. Manu Raju, Politico. Retrieved January 18, 2022. 2010 Election Nevada, Nevada Secretary of State, November 23, 2010. Retrieved September 30, 2018. Rasmussen Reports[permanent dead link], Rasmussen Reports, March 31, 2010. Retrieved September 30, 2018. Rasmussen Reports,Rasmussen Reports, June 9, 2010. Retrieved September 30, 2018. Cillizza, Chris (October 3, 2008). "Sarah Palin, St. Louis and 2012". The Fix. Retrieved May 30, 2010. David Frum, Is Palin Now the 2012 Front-Runner? frumforum.com September 16, 2010 Jonathan Chait "Lord Help Us, Palin Is Running For President", The New Republic, September 16, 2010. Reed, Ali (November 6, 2008). "What next for Sarah Palin?". BBC News. Retrieved May 30, 2010. Pilkington, Ed (February 7, 2010). "Sarah Palin fires up Tea Party faithful and hints at 2012 run". The Guardian. London, UK. Retrieved February 7, 2010. Spillius, Alex (November 17, 2010). "Sarah Palin finally says she is considering White House bid". The Daily Telegraph. London, UK. Archived from the original on November 19, 2010. Retrieved November 21, 2010. Lahiri, Tripti (March 19, 2011). "India's Sarah Palin Hour – India Real Time". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved April 25, 2011. "Raw Data: Sarah Palin Announces She Will Not Seek GOP 2012 Nomination". Fox News Channel. April 7, 2010. Retrieved October 5, 2011. "Palin Endorses Independent-Democratic Ticket for Alaska Governor Against GOP Successor". National Journal. October 23, 2014. Archived from the original on October 24, 2014. Retrieved June 13, 2015. "Alaska Oil and Tax Cuts Veto Referendum". Ballotpedia.org. "Palin Endorses Independent-Democratic Ticket for Alaska Governor Against GOP Successor". National Journal. October 23, 2014. Archived from the original on October 24, 2014. Retrieved October 24, 2014. "2014 General Election November 4, 2014 Official Results". elections.alaska.gov. November 11, 2014. Retrieved June 13, 2015. Jacobs, Ben (January 20, 2016). "'Make America great again': Sarah Palin endorses Donald Trump". The Guardian. Retrieved August 25, 2017. Karl de Vries, Sarah Palin will work to defeat Ryan in primary for Trump stance, CNN (May 9, 2016). Schleifer, Theodore (August 6, 2016). "Palin doubles down on Ryan snub". CNN. Retrieved August 26, 2018. Gilbert, Craig (August 10, 2016). "Despite late drama, Ryan easily beats Nehlen". Milwaukee Journal Sentinel. Retrieved August 10, 2016. Byers, Dylan (June 27, 2017). "Sarah Palin sues New York Times". CNNMoney. Retrieved June 28, 2017. Chamberlain, Samuel (June 27, 2017). "Sarah Palin sues NY Times over editorial tying her to Giffords shooting". Fox News. Retrieved June 28, 2017. Sydney Emberg, Sarah Palin's Defamation Suit Against The New York Times Is Dismissed, New York Times (August 29, 2017). "2nd Circuit reinstates Sarah Palin's defamation suit against the New York Times". ABA Journal. Josh Gerstein (August 29, 2020). "Judge orders jury trial in Palin libel suit against The New York Times". POLITICO. Palin v. N.Y. Times Co., 482 F. Supp. 3d 208 (S.D.N.Y. 2020). Sarah Ellison, Sarah Palin's defamation trial against New York Times delayed by positive coronavirus test, Washington Post (January 24, 2022). Jeremy W. Peters, Sarah Palin Tests Positive, Delaying Libel Case Against The Times, New York Times (January 24, 2022) "Jury Rejects Sarah Palin's Defamation Case Against The New York Times - February 15, 2022". The Daily NewsBrief. February 15, 2022. Retrieved February 16, 2022. Paul, Deanna (February 16, 2022). "Jurors in Sarah Palin's Defamation Suit Against New York Times Knew Judge Planned to Dismiss Her Claims". The Wall Street Journal. Miller, Andrew (April 1, 2022). "Sarah Palin announces run for Congress in Alaska". Fox News. Retrieved April 2, 2022. "Sarah Palin hints at Alaska Senate run against Republican Lisa Murkowski | Alaska". The Guardian. London. August 1, 2021. Retrieved January 2, 2022. "Sarah Palin for Senator?". KABC. August 4, 2021. Romero, Dennis (April 3, 2022). "Trump backs Sarah Palin's bid for Congress". NBC News. Ruskin, Liz; Media, Alaska Public (April 2, 2022). "Sarah Palin among 50 candidates running to fill remainder of Don Young's term in US House". Alaska Public Media. Retrieved April 4, 2022.[permanent dead link] Gross withdrawal scrambles Alaska US House race, Washington Post, Becky Bohrer (AP), June 21, 2022. Retrieved June 23, 2022. "Alaska House District 1 Special Election Results and Maps 2022". CNN. Retrieved September 1, 2022. Bohrer, Becky; Thiessen, Mark (September 5, 2022). "Palin urges Begich to drop House bid. Begich declines". Associated Press. Retrieved September 8, 2022. "RCV Detailed Report | General Election | State of Alaska" (PDF). Alaska Division of Elections. November 23, 2022. Retrieved November 23, 2022. FactCheck.org staff (September 8, 2008). "Sliming Palin: False Internet claims and rumors fly about McCain's running mate". FactCheck.org. Archived from the original on February 27, 2011. Retrieved July 1, 2011. Condon, Stephanie (March 22, 2010). "Palin: Health Care Vote a 'Clarion Call' to Action". Political Hotsheet. CBS News. Retrieved May 29, 2010. Gibson, Charles (September 13, 2008). "Full Excerpts: Charlie Gibson Interviews GOP Vice Presidential Candidate Sarah Palin". ABC News. Retrieved May 29, 2010. New York Times staff. "Running Mates on the Issues". The New York Times. Retrieved May 29, 2010. "Sarah Palin on Civil Rights". OnTheIssues.org. November 25, 2009. Retrieved May 29, 2010. Goldenberg, Suzanne (August 30, 2008). "Meet the Barracuda: anti-abortion, pro-death penalty and gun-lover". London: Guardian (UK). Retrieved May 29, 2010. Montopoli, Brian (June 17, 2010). "Sarah Palin Calls Marijuana "Minimal Problem"". CBS News. Archived from the original on November 24, 2011. Retrieved November 24, 2011. Mehta, Seema (September 6, 2008). "GOP ticket split over condom use: While running for state office, Palin said their use ought to be discussed in schools. McCain disagrees". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on October 6, 2008. Retrieved July 1, 2011. Kizzia, Tom (October 27, 2006). "'Creation science' enters the race: Governor: Palin is only candidate to suggest it should be discussed in schools". Anchorage Daily News. Archived from the original on November 26, 2009. Retrieved May 29, 2010. the discussion of alternative views should be allowed to arise in Alaska classrooms: 'I don't think there should be a prohibition against debate if it comes up in class. It doesn't have to be part of the curriculum. Palin added that, if elected, she would not push the state Board of Education to add such creation-based alternatives to the state's required curriculum. Couric, Katie (September 30, 2008). "Palin Opens Up On Controversial Issues: VP Candidate Speaks Frankly With Katie Couric About Feminism, Homosexuality, Abortion And The Environment". CBS News. Archived from the original on October 1, 2008. Retrieved January 24, 2011. "US gun control: What is the NRA and why is it so powerful? It is one of the most powerful players in one of the most hotly-debated issues in the US – gun control – but what exactly is the NRA? Here's a quick guide". BBC. January 8, 2016. Archived from the original on January 8, 2016. Retrieved June 14, 2016. ...Current members include former vice-presidential candidate Sarah Palin, and actors Tom Selleck and Whoopi Goldberg. ...{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: unfit URL (link) Gibson, Charles (September 13, 2008). "Full Excerpts: Charlie Gibson Interviews GOP Vice Presidential Candidate Sarah Palin". ABC News. Archived from the original on September 25, 2008. Retrieved May 29, 2010. Braiker, Brian (August 29, 2008). "On the Hunt: Sarah Palin, a moose-hunting, lifetime NRA member guns for D.C." Newsweek. Archived from the original on August 31, 2008. Retrieved May 29, 2010. Kudlow, Larry (June 26, 2008). "Drill, Drill, Drill: My Interview with Alaska Governor Sarah Palin". Money & Politics. CNBC. Archived from the original on November 3, 2012. Retrieved May 29, 2010. Weigel, David (April 30, 2010). "Palin on oil spill: 'No human endeavor is ever without risk'". Right Now. The Washington Post. Retrieved May 28, 2010. Kraske, Steve (May 1, 2010). "Key to U.S. prosperity is energy security, Palin says during speech in Independence". The Kansas City Star. Archived from the original on May 4, 2010. Retrieved May 28, 2010. Barr, Andy (June 25, 2010). "Palin praises column linking Obama, Hitler". POLITICO. Retrieved January 18, 2022. "Palin: Global Warming Just "Snake Oil"". CBS News. Associated Press. February 9, 2010. Retrieved March 12, 2014. I named my daughter Willow. Isn't that granola enough for them? Goldman, Russell (September 11, 2008). "Palin Takes Hard Line on National Security, Softens Stance on Global Warming". ABC News. Retrieved January 18, 2022. Palin, Sarah (July 14, 2009). "A 'Cap and Tax' Road to Economic Disaster". Washington Post Op-ed. Retrieved March 12, 2014. Consequently, many of us ... recognize that the president's cap-and-trade energy tax would adversely affect every aspect of the U.S. economy Murphy, Kim (April 15, 2009). "Palin sees gas drilling as step to curb global warming". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved August 15, 2010. "Sarah Palin tells AIPAC she's pro-Israel". Jewish Journal. September 2, 2008. Archived from the original on November 21, 2008. Retrieved December 17, 2010. Palin expresses support for Israel by Yitzhak Benhorin, Ynetnews, September 3, 2008. Retrieved December 17, 2010. Transcript (February 7, 2010). "Sarah Palin on Fox News Sunday". PoliticsDaily.com. Archived from the original on February 7, 2010. Retrieved May 29, 2010. Sullivan, Andrew (August 29, 2008). "Palin on Iraq". The Daily Dish. The Atlantic. Retrieved May 28, 2010. Gourevitch, Philip (September 8, 2008). "Palin on Obama". Butting Heads. The New Yorker. Archived from the original on August 31, 2008. Retrieved May 28, 2010. Palin, Sarah (May 13, 2016). "Palin calls on Obama to stay true with Iraq". Anchorage Daily News. Retrieved August 20, 2020. "Sarah Palin on Syria: 'Let Allah Sort it Out'". Los Angeles Times. August 31, 2013. Rutenberg, Jim (September 11, 2008). "In First Big Interview, Palin Says, 'I'm Ready'". The New York Times. Retrieved May 28, 2010. Kessler, Glenn (September 11, 2008). "War with Russia? Palin Talks Foreign Policy with ABC". TheTrail: A Daily Diary of Campaign 2008. Retrieved May 21, 2010. ""Support continued U.S. aid for Ukraine in war against Russia?" Sarah Palin: "We need to reduce it."". C-SPAN. October 28, 2022. "Sarah Palin will mix any metaphor to stop Obama's Orwellian fairy dust from spreading". The Week. September 9, 2015. Retrieved September 11, 2015. Palin, Sarah. (2009) Going Rogue. p. 51 Thompson, Derek (September 4, 2008). "The Sarah Palin FAQ: Everything you ever wanted to know about the Republican vice presidential nominee". Slate. Retrieved May 30, 2010. Sobieraj Westfall, Sandra (June 1, 2009). "Bristol Palin 'My Life Comes Second Now'". Archive. Retrieved May 30, 2010. New York Times staff. "Times Topics, People, Sarah Palin". Biography. Retrieved May 30, 2010. Quinn, Steve and Calvin Woodward (August 30, 2008). "McCain makes history with choice of running mate". USA Today. Juneau, Alaska. Associated Press. Retrieved May 29, 2010. Demer, Lisa (April 21, 2008). "Palin confirms baby has Down syndrome". Anchorage Daily News. Archived from the original on September 20, 2010. Retrieved May 29, 2010. Benet, Lorenzo (December 29, 2008). "Bristol Palin Welcomes a Son". People. Retrieved May 29, 2010. "Bristol Palin Gives Birth to a Baby Girl, Shares Sweet Photos". E! Online. December 24, 2015. Retrieved January 20, 2016. "Sarah Palin's A Grandma, Again!". Radar Online. August 8, 2011. Retrieved October 5, 2011. Slater, Georgia (November 19, 2019). "Sarah Palin's Daughter Willow Welcomes Twin Girls Banks and Blaise: 'We Are So in Love'". People. Retrieved November 20, 2019. Slater, Georgia; Etienne, Vanessa (April 1, 2022). "Sarah Palin's Daughter Willow Welcomes Third Baby, Son Pace: 'My Sweet Baby Boy'". People. Retrieved April 4, 2022. Miller, Marjorie (September 7, 2008). "New frontier in campaign spouses: Alaska's 'first dude' Todd Palin is a moose hunter, snowmobile racer, oil worker, union man and hockey dad". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved May 29, 2010. Newton-Small, Jay (August 29, 2008). "Transcript: Time's interview with Sarah Palin". Time. Archived from the original on September 1, 2008. Retrieved May 29, 2010. "About us". Wasilla Assembly of God. Archived from the original on July 28, 2011. Retrieved May 29, 2010. "Our Statement Concerning Governor Palin". Wasilla Assembly of God. August 30, 2008. Retrieved August 7, 2012. Miller, Lisa; Coyne, Amanda (September 2, 2008). "A Visit to Palin's Church: Scripture and discretion on the program in Wasilla". Newsweek. Retrieved May 29, 2010. Brachear, Manya (August 29, 2008). "Palin the Pentecostal?". Chicago Tribune. Retrieved May 28, 2014.[dead link] "Sarah Palin's husband, Todd, files for divorce over 'incompatibility of temperament'". NBC News. September 9, 2019. Retrieved September 9, 2019. "Former VP candidate Sarah Palin finalizes divorce, records show". Today. March 2020. "Sarah & Todd Palin Quietly Divorced Earlier This Year, Court Records Show". PEOPLE. "Alumni Awards". North Idaho College. Archived from the original on July 18, 2011. Retrieved February 14, 2010. Page, Susan (August 30, 2008). "Poll: Voters uncertain on Palin". USA Today. Retrieved May 28, 2010. Delbridge, Rena (September 3, 2008). "Alaska delegates see more Republican convention attention". Fairbanks Daily News-Miner. Retrieved February 15, 2010. Weiss, Joanna (September 5, 2008). "McCain takes stage, turns down heat". The Boston Globe. Retrieved May 28, 2010. Harris, John F.; Frerking, Beth (September 3, 2008). "Clinton aides: Palin treatment sexist". Politico. Retrieved January 18, 2022. Frum, David (August 29, 2008). "Palin". National Review. Archived from the original on August 30, 2008. Retrieved May 27, 2010. Will, George (November 3, 2008). "Impulse, Meet Experience". The Washington Post. Retrieved May 27, 2010. Collins, Britt (September 17, 2008). "Sarah Palin: The ice queen; Sarah Palin, the Republican party's vice-president nominee, governs an oil-rich area that has seen some of the most dramatic effects of climate change. So what's her record on environmental concerns?". The Guardian (UK). London, UK. Retrieved May 27, 2010. "Palin Power: Fresh Face Now More Popular Than Obama, McCain". Rasmussen Reports. September 5, 2008. Retrieved December 1, 2010. (full article requires subscription) "Palin Still Viewed More Favorably – And Unfavorably – Than Biden". Rasmussen Reports. September 24, 2008. "45% Say Biden Won Debate, 37% Say Palin". Rasmussen Reports. October 4, 2008. Retrieved August 7, 2012. "Palin sought more taxes and more development from oil companies". Politifact. St Petersburg Times. August 29, 2008. Retrieved May 27, 2010. Stoddard, Ed; Yereth Rosen (September 12, 2008). "Is Palin foe of big oil or a new Cheney?". Reuters. Retrieved May 27, 2010. "Sarah Palin calls for Julian Assange to be pardoned, despite her being targeted by Wikileaks in 2008". The Independent. Dimond, Anna (December 1, 2008). "Barbara Walters Gets Up Close with 2008's Most Fascinating People". TV Guide. Retrieved May 27, 2010. Nugent, Ted (April 29, 2010). "The 2010 TIME 100: Leaders: Sarah Palin". Time. Archived from the original on April 30, 2010. Retrieved May 27, 2010. "CITY OF WASILLA REGULAR ELECTION 10/06/92". City of Wasilla. Retrieved March 12, 2020. "City of Wasilla 1996 Election Results". City of Wasilla. Retrieved March 12, 2020. "CITY OF WASILLA OCTOBER 5, 1999 REGULAR ELECTION OFFICIAL RESULTS". City of Wasilla. Retrieved March 12, 2020. "STATE OF ALASKA – 2006 PRIMARY ELECTION AUGUST 22, 2006 OFFICIAL RESULTS". Archived from the original on March 4, 2010. Retrieved February 11, 2010. "Alaska Division of Elections November 7, 2006". Alaska Division of Elections. November 7, 2006. Retrieved April 22, 2019. "Alaska Primary Election Results". The New York Times. August 16, 2022. Archived from the original on August 23, 2022. Retrieved August 23, 2022. Sarah Palin at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Look up Palinista, Palinism, or refudiate in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Sarah Palin's channel on YouTube Sarah Palin at IMDb Sarah Palin at Curlie Appearances on C-SPAN Sarah Palin at Politifact