The 1947–48 BAA season was the second season of the Basketball Association of America. The 1948 BAA Playoffs ended with the Baltimore Bullets winning the BAA Championship, beating the Philadelphia Warriors in 6 games in the BAA Finals. Although not celebrated at the time, this season was historic, with Wataru Misaka of the New York Knicks becoming the first person of color to play in modern professional basketball. The NBA recognizes the three BAA seasons as part of its own history so the 1947–48 BAA season is considered the second NBA season. Cleveland, Detroit, Pittsburgh and Toronto folded before the season started, leaving the BAA with only seven teams. (All cities except Pittsburgh would get new NBA teams in future years.) The Baltimore Bullets were brought into the league from the American Basketball League to provide a more convenient number, eight. There were no byes. Western and Eastern champions St. Louis and Philadelphia immediately played a long semifinal series with St. Louis having home-court advantage. Philadelphia won the seventh game in St. Louis, 85–46, two days before Baltimore concluded its sequence of tie-breaker (not shown) and two short series with other runners-up. * Division winner Bold Series winner Note: Prior to the 1969–70 season, league leaders in points and assists were determined by totals rather than averages. All-BAA First Team C Ed Sadowski, Boston Celtics F Joe Fulks, Philadelphia Warriors F Howie Dallmar, Philadelphia Warriors F Bob Feerick, Washington Capitols G Max Zaslofsky, Chicago Stags All-BAA Second Team G Buddy Jeannette, Baltimore Bullets C Stan Miasek, Chicago Stags G Carl Braun, New York Knicks G Fred Scolari, Washington Capitols G John Logan, St. Louis Bombers BAA Rookie of the Year F/G Paul Hoffman, Baltimore Bullets The 1948 BAA Playoffs did not generate Eastern and Western champions and runners-up, as NBA Playoffs have done from 1951 to present. Eastern and Western leaders, or perhaps champions, Philadelphia and St. Louis played off to determine one finalist while four runners-up played off to determine the other finalist.   The listed teams were BAA playoff finalists and semifinalists, as Eastern and Western champions and runners-up in the NBA have been playoff finalists and semifinalists from 1951 to present. Philadelphia may reasonably be called Eastern champion. List of NBA regular season records Goldstein, Richard (November 21, 2019). "Wat Misaka, First Nonwhite in Modern Pro Basketball, Dies at 95". The New York Times. Retrieved November 22, 2019. "NBA Season Recaps: 1946-2019". NBA.com. July 24, 2019. Retrieved September 17, 2020.