Jacob Gedleyihlekisa Zuma (Zulu: [geɮʱejiɬeˈkisa ˈzʱuma]; born 12 April 1942) is a South African politician who served as the fourth president of South Africa from 2009 to 2018. He is also referred to by his initials JZ and clan names Nxamalala and Msholozi. Zuma was a former anti-apartheid activist, member of uMkhonto we Sizwe, and president of the African National Congress (ANC) from 2007 to 2017. Zuma was born in the rural region of Nkandla, which is now part of the KwaZulu-Natal province and the centre of Zuma's support base. He joined the ANC at the age of 17 in 1959 and spent ten years in Robben Island Prison as a political prisoner. He went into exile in 1975 and was ultimately appointed head of the ANC's intelligence department. After the ANC was unbanned in 1990, he quickly rose through the party's national leadership and became deputy secretary general in 1991, national chairperson in 1994, and deputy president in 1997. He was the deputy president of South Africa from 1999 to 2005 under President Thabo Mbeki, Nelson Mandela's successor. Mbeki dismissed Zuma on 14 June 2005 after Zuma's financial adviser, Schabir Shaik, was convicted of making corrupt payments to Zuma in connection with the Arms Deal. Zuma was charged with corruption and was also acquitted on rape charges in the highly publicised 2006 trial. He managed to retain the support of a left-wing coalition inside the ANC, which allowed him to remove Mbeki as ANC president in December 2007 at the ANC's Polokwane elective conference. Zuma was elected president of South Africa in the 2009 general election and took office on 9 May. The criminal charges against him were formally withdrawn the same week. As president, he launched the R4-trillion National Infrastructure Plan and signed a controversial nuclear power deal with the Russian government, which was blocked by the Western Cape High Court in 2017. As a former member of the South African Communist Party, he increasingly relied on left-wing populist rhetoric, and in his 2017 State of the Nation address he announced a new policy of "radical economic transformation". Among the few policies implemented before the end of his presidency were land expropriation without compensation, free higher education, a series of attempted structural reforms in key sectors involving restrictions on foreign ownership, and more stringent black economic empowerment requirements. In the international arena, Zuma emphasised South-South cooperation and economic diplomacy. The admission of South Africa to the BRICS grouping has been described as a major triumph for Zuma, and he has been praised for his HIV/AIDS policy. Zuma's presidency was beset by controversy, especially during his second term. In 2014, the Public Protector found that Zuma had improperly benefited from state expenditure on upgrades to his Nkandla homestead, and in 2016, the Constitutional Court ruled that Zuma had failed to uphold the Constitution, leading to calls for his resignation and a failed impeachment attempt in the National Assembly. By early 2016, there were also widespread allegations, later investigated by the Zondo Commission, that the Gupta family had acquired immense corrupt influence over Zuma's administration, amounting to state capture. Several weeks after Deputy President Cyril Ramaphosa was elected to succeed Zuma as ANC president in December 2017, the ANC National Executive Committee recalled Zuma. After a fifth vote of no confidence in Parliament, he resigned on 14 February 2018 and was replaced by Ramaphosa the next day. Shortly after his resignation, on 16 March 2018, the National Prosecuting Authority announced that it would reinstate corruption charges against Zuma in relation to the 1999 Arms Deal. He pleaded not guilty on 26 May 2021, but the trial was not scheduled to take place until early 2023. In a separate matter, in June 2021, the Constitutional Court convicted Zuma of contempt of court for his failure to comply with a court order compelling his testimony before the Zondo Commission. He was sentenced to 15 months' imprisonment and was arrested on 7 July 2021 in Estcourt, KwaZulu-Natal. However, he was released on medical parole two months later on 5 September. The high court rescinded his parole on 15 December. The parole was declared unlawful by the Supreme Court of Appeal, but it allowed the Department of Correctional Services to consider whether to deduct the time spent under it from his sentence. On 11 August 2023, the Department of Correctional Services granted Zuma remission of his 15-month sentence. Zuma was born in Nkandla, Natal Province (now part of the province of KwaZulu-Natal),: 1  and often moved around Natal and the suburbs of Durban as a child. His father, Nobhekisisa, was a policeman who died when Zuma was five, and his mother, Geinamazwi, was a domestic worker.: 4  His middle name, Gedleyihlekisa, means "one who smiles while causing you harm" in Zulu. He did not receive formal schooling. He has at least three brothers—Michael, Joseph, and Khanya—and at least one sister—Velephi. Michael Zuma was employed by Khumbula Property Services, a construction company, and in 2011 admitted to using his elder brother Jacob's political status to secure a government contract for the company in exchange for a homestead in Nkandla. Zuma began engaging in anti-apartheid politics at an early age and joined the ANC in 1959. He became an active member of uMkhonto we Sizwe in 1962, two years after the ANC was banned. That year, he was arrested with a group of 45 recruits near Zeerust in western Transvaal, currently part of the North West Province. Zuma was convicted of conspiring to overthrow the apartheid government and was sentenced to ten years imprisonment, which he served on Robben Island with Nelson Mandela and other notable ANC leaders also imprisoned during that time. While imprisoned, Zuma was a referee for prisoners association football games, organised by the prisoners own governing body, Makana F.A. After his release from prison, Zuma re-established ANC underground structures in Natal. He left South Africa in 1975 and was initially based in Swaziland where he met Thabo Mbeki. In Mozambique, he dealt with the arrival of thousands of exiles seeking military training in the wake of the 1976 Soweto uprising. He became a full member of the ANC National Executive Committee in 1977, and a member of the ANC's Politico-Military Council when it was formed in 1983. He was also Deputy Chief Representative of the ANC in Mozambique, a post he occupied until the signing of the Nkomati Accord between the Mozambican and South African governments in 1984. After the Accord was signed, he was appointed as ANC Chief Representative in Mozambique. In December 1986, the South African government requested that Mozambican authorities expel six senior members of the ANC, including Zuma. He was forced to leave Mozambique in January 1987, so he moved to the ANC headquarters in Lusaka, Zambia, where he was appointed Head of the ANC's underground structures, and shortly afterward was named chief of the intelligence department. Zuma was also a member of the South African Communist Party (SACP). He joined in 1963, served briefly on the party's Politburo, and left in 1990. After the ANC was unbanned in February 1990, Zuma returned to South Africa on 21 March to begin the negotiations process. He was one of the first ANC leaders to return to South Africa for negotiations. Later that year, he was elected unopposed as the ANC's Southern Natal Chairperson. Zuma, as a Zulu, became known as a leading peace broker in Natal during the political violence of this period that was concentrated in that province, and arose largely from conflict between nationalist supporters of the then Xhosa-dominated ANC and supporters of the Zulu nationalist Inkatha Freedom Party (IFP). He is also credited with having expanded the ANC's Zulu support base in Natal. At the ANC's July 1991 elective conference, Zuma stood for the post of ANC Secretary-General and lost to Cyril Ramaphosa, but was elected Deputy Secretary-General, comfortably beating Alfred Nzo and Popo Molefe in a vote. In the 1994 general election, South Africa's first democratic election, Zuma stood as the ANC's candidate for the premiership of his newly constituted home province, KwaZulu-Natal. The ANC rose to power in the elections, with Mandela elected president and Mbeki his deputy, but lost KwaZulu-Natal to the IFP. Zuma became a member of the executive council (MEC) for economic affairs and tourism in KwaZulu-Natal. In December 1994, he was elected ANC provincial chairperson for KwaZulu-Natal, and at the ANC's 1994 elective conference he was elected national chairperson, beating Pallo Jordan and Jeff Radebe by a large margin. He held both positions until 1997, having been re-elected provincial chairperson in 1996. Zuma was elected deputy president of the ANC at the party's 50th National Conference in Mafikeng in December 1997, and was subsequently appointed deputy president of South Africa in June 1999, pursuant to the 1999 general election. Zuma served under newly elected President Mbeki and was the chief mediator in the Burundi peace process, in which he worked with Ugandan president Yoweri Museveni, who chaired the Great Lakes Regional Initiative, a grouping of regional presidents overseeing the peace process in Burundi. In late 2002, the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) announced that Zuma was one of several ANC politicians under investigation by the Scorpions for corruption related to the R30-billion Arms Deal, a major defence procurement package which the government had signed months after Zuma's appointment to the deputy presidency. In August 2003, however, National Director of Public Prosecutions (NDPP) Bulelani Ngcuka told the media that the NPA had a "prima facie case of corruption" against Zuma but had decided not to prosecute on the basis that the case was unlikely to be won. A highly public spat ensued between Zuma allies and Ngcuka, who was accused by Moe Shaik and Mac Maharaj of having been an apartheid spy, an accusation later dismissed by the specially appointed Hefer Commission. Zuma laid a misconduct complaint against Ngcuka with the Public Protector, Lawrence Mushwana, who in May 2004 found that Ngcuka's statement to the media had been "unfair and improper". Mbeki and Zuma were both re-elected in the 2004 general election, but on 14 June 2005, Mbeki removed Zuma from his post as deputy president following the conviction of Zuma's associate, Schabir Shaik, for making underhanded payments to Zuma in relation to the Arms Deal. Mbeki told a joint sitting of Parliament that "in the interest of the honourable Deputy President, the government, our young democratic system and our country, it would be best to release the honourable Jacob Zuma from his responsibilities". Zuma also resigned as a member of Parliament. His successor as deputy president of South Africa was Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, Ngcuka's wife. Mlambo-Ngcuka had been minister of minerals and energy since 1999. Her appointment was booed publicly atANC rallies by Zuma supporters, including at a Women's Day event in Utrecht, KwaZulu-Natal. Soon after Zuma's dismissal, the NPA announced its intention to instate formal corruption charges against him. He was served with a provisional indictment on fraud and corruption charges in November 2005, mirroring the indictment earlier served on Shaik. However, the NPA was unprepared to serve the final indictment and filed an application for postponement. On 20 September 2006, the Pietermaritzburg High Court dismissed the application, and when the NPA indicated that it was not prepared to proceed with the trial, the matter was stricken off. In December 2005, Zuma was charged with raping a 31-year-old woman, known to the public by the pseudonym Khwezi. The incident allegedly occurred on 2 November 2005 at Zuma's home in Forest Town, Johannesburg. When the trial began on 6 March 2006, Zuma pleaded not guilty, claiming that he and Khwezi had consensual sex. He was acquitted on 8 May 2006 following a highly publicised trial. Zuma's admission was controversial, as he stated that he had not used a condom while having sex with Khwezi, despite knowing she was HIV-positive and having been, as deputy president, the head of the National AIDS Council and Moral Regeneration Campaign. He told the court that he had taken a shower after the act, claiming that doing so reduced the risk of HIV transmission. The South African comic strip Madam & Eve, and political cartoonist Zapiro, repeatedly lampooned Zuma for his testimony, and Zuma now always appears under a showerhead in Zapiro cartoons. Although Zuma had been fired as national deputy president, he retained the ANC deputy presidency, and internal factions began to coalesce around him and Mbeki. Between 2005 and 2007, their rivalry deepened into what Susan Booysen called "a brutal and all-consuming disagreement between two major ANC groupings". Although the corruption and rape allegations were considered politically damaging, Zuma continued to enjoy considerable support from left-wing elements of the ANC, especially the ANC Youth League under Fikile Mbalula, and from the ANC's partners in the Tripartite Alliance, the SACP, and the Congress of South African Trade Unions (COSATU). Blade Nzimande of the SACP and Zwelinzima Vavi of COSATU were among Zuma's chief organisers and most vocal supporters (though both recanted their support years later). Vavi and Youth League leader Julius Malema later said that they were prepared to "kill for Zuma". Nzimande and his SACP comrade Gwede Mantashe warned that the corruption trial would endanger public stability if it went ahead, although there were reports that support for Zuma had caused a rift within the SACP. While Zuma's political strength was at least partly based on his relationships within intra-party politics and Mbeki's lack of popularity with the left wing, he also had a large Zulu support base, and one analyst argued that his supporters' loyalty was partially rooted in a traditionalist Zulu loyalty. Zuma's supporters publicly expressed the view that his dismissal and prosecution were the result of a political conspiracy by Mbeki, who they said had sought to oust Zuma to entrench their dominance in the ANC. Zuma's court appearances on the corruption charges drew large crowds of supporters (on one estimate, up to 10,000 at a time), who, on one occasion, burned T-shirts with Mbeki's picture on them, which the ANC leadership condemned. Zuma became known for singing the apartheid-era struggle song "Umshini wami" (English: Bring Me My Machine Gun) with his supporters during these informal rallies. Likewise, during the rape trial, Zuma supporters gathered outside the courthouse and sometimes clashed with smaller groups of anti-rape protesters. Zuma supporters were seen carrying posters questioning Khwezi's integrity, burning photos of her, and on one occasion throwing stones at a woman that they mistook for her. By October 2008, Zuma had been acquitted of rape and was no longer subject to corruption charges. However, this did little to lighten the rivalry between Mbeki and Zuma. A Mail & Guardian analysis stated: The political damage [of events of recent months] is incalculable, with the ruling African National Congress now an openly divided and faltering movement. This has had a domino effect on the South African Communist Party and the Congress of South African Trade Unions, which have floundered and fractured in the face of damaging charges against a man they ardently backed as the country's next president. The trial has been fought against the backdrop of a bitter succession war between Mbeki and Zuma. Both have been fatally wounded. Mbeki's support in the ANC has crumbled... But even Zuma's most diehard supporters privately acknowledge that he cannot now be president... By early 2006 during the rape trial, Zuma and his supporters complained of a concerted media plot to discredit him and harm his political career. In March, he appointed a legal team, including former Conservative Party politician Jurg Prinsloo and advocate Wycliffe Mothuloe, to fight his "crucifixion by the media". Among his targets was the Sowetan, whom he told that the media, at the instruction of Ngcuka of the NPA and former Justice Minister Penuell Maduna, was trying to "crucify" him. The newspaper had printed the interview under the headline "I'm like Christ – Zuma". In June and July 2006, Zuma filed a series of defamation lawsuits against various South African media outlets for publishing content that allegedly besmirched his public profile in the form of cartoons, commentary, photos and parody pieces. The defendants included the Star (sued for R20 million), Rapport (R10 million), Highveld Stereo (R7 million), the Sunday Times (R6 million), the Citizen (R5 million), the Sunday Sun (R5 million), the Sunday Independent (R5 million), and the Sunday World (R5 million). Zuma said in 2005: For a period of five years my person has been subjected to all types of allegations and innuendo, paraded through the media and other corridors of influence without these allegations having being [sic] tested. I have thereby been denied my constitutional right to reply and defend myself. In December 2008, Zuma sued Zapiro for R7 million over his controversial rape of Lady Justice cartoon, bringing the total value of the defamation lawsuits to at least R70 million, an unprecedented figure in South African law. Many of the suits were withdrawn or settled out of court. Rapport settled for R50,000 over a defamatory reader's letter, and the British Guardian newspaper also paid Zuma substantial damages over defamatory statements. As per party tradition, Zuma was in line to succeed Mbeki as head of the party. However, by April 2007 it was clear that Mbeki intended to run for a third term as ANC president. Even though he was prohibited by the Constitution from standing again for the national presidency, the ANC lacks internal term limits. Zuma gained the support of five of the nine provincial ANC branches when they nominated candidates at their provincial congresses in late 2007. He became the favourite to win the presidency and became the ANC's presidential candidate in the 2009 elections. While the ANC was extremely likely to win regardless of its candidate, there were reports that Zuma's support base and left-wing alliances unnerved international and domestic investors. On 18 December 2007, at the ANC's 52nd National Conference in Polokwane, Limpopo, Zuma was elected ANC president, beating Mbeki with 2,329 votes to 1,505. Just over a week after the Polokwane conference, the NPA reinstated charges against Zuma and served him an indictment to stand trial on 12 fraud charges, two corruption charges, and one charge each of racketeering and money laundering. According to the Constitution, he would have been rendered ineligible for the national presidency had he been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment. However, on 12 September 2008, the charges were declared unlawful on a technicality. The presiding judge also expressed a belief that the charges had been the result of a political conspiracy against Zuma. Although this judgement was later overturned by the appellate court, the Zuma-aligned ANC National Executive, as elected at the Polokwane conference, immediately "recalled" Mbeki, asking him to resign as national president. Mbeki, seeking to avoid a protracted dispute, did so, and was replaced by newly elected ANC Deputy President Kgalema Motlanthe, who led an interim administration while Zuma campaigned for the 2009 election. In January 2009, the Supreme Court of Appeal found that the charges against Zuma were not unlawful, contrary to the ruling of the lower court. However, the NPA formally withdrew the charges in the same week that Zuma was inaugurated as national president, citing apparent evidence of prosecutorial misconduct in the so-called spy tapes. In March 2009, Shaik was controversially released from prison on medical parole, just over two years into his 15-year sentence. Earlier the same week, Zuma had said publicly that as national president he would pardon Shaik on medical grounds, and denied having played any role in Shaik's release. Shaik had applied for a presidential pardon in April 2008 when Mbeki was president, and he continued to lobby for a pardon during Zuma's presidency, saying it was unfair that he had been convicted while neither Zuma nor the implicated arms company had been taken to trial. The ANC won the national election on 22 April 2009 by a slightly diminished majority of 65.90%, with Zuma having campaigned under the theme "Continuity and Change". His appointment was formalised by Parliament on 6 May, and he was sworn in as president of South Africa on 9 May 2009. As president and therefore a member of cabinet, Zuma was required by the government's ethics code to declare his financial interests within 60 days of taking office. In March 2010, nine months after taking office, South African media reported that he had failed to do so. Opposition parties and the ANC's Tripartite Alliance partner COSATU urged Zuma to disclose his interests, and the opposition Democratic Alliance (DA) called for an investigation by the Public Protector. ANC spokesperson Brian Sokutu explained that Zuma constituted a "special case" because of his "large family", which complicated the process. The ANC distanced itself from Sokutu's statement and Zuma filed the disclosure later that week. As a former member of the SACP, Zuma has described himself as a socialist and became president with the support of a left-wing coalition. Analysts have claimed that he has bolstered populism in South Africa. From 2017, at the tail-end of his presidency, his rhetoric and policy priorities became more leftist under what is known as the "radical economic transformation" (RET) programme of the ANC of this period. Zuma announced the new focus on RET during his February 2017 State of the Nation address. Later that year, he explained that RET had been adopted as ANC policy and therefore as government policy, and defined it as a "fundamental change in the structures, systems, institutions and patterns of ownership and control of the economy, in favour of all South Africans, especially the poor". The RET policy was controversial, and some critics claimed that it had popular political appeal but lacked substance. Others claimed that it was used to defend "rent-seeking practices" and the influence of the Gupta family on Zuma's administration. Zuma claimed that critics of his politics were agents of "white monopoly capital". Zuma was inaugurated in South Africa at the height of the 2008 global financial crisis and amid South Africa's first recession since the end of apartheid. Upon taking office, he established the National Planning Commission under the office of the presidency which was chaired by Minister Trevor Manuel. It was responsible for developing the National Development Plan, which was adopted by Zuma's cabinet in 2012. Other major initiatives included the Independent Power Producers Procurement Programme, which was launched in 2011 amid electricity generation shortfalls at state energy utility Eskom, and a R4-trillion National Infrastructure Plan launched in 2012. Zuma expressed support for expanding South Africa's nuclear power programme, particularly for a nuclear deal with Russian nuclear agency Rosatom which concluded in September 2014 but was ruled unlawful by the Western Cape High Court in 2017. Zuma's administration pursued a number of structural economic policy reforms, but critics characterised them as "investor-unfriendly", and most were met significant opposition. His reforms included the increased regulation of private security companies. He also increased the regulation of oil, gas, and minerals resources. Furthermore Zuma announced a proposal to increase black economic empowerment ownership requirements in mines. In 2017, Zuma advanced a proposal for the introduction of a national minimum wage. Zuma was attentive to land reform issues throughout his second term, but from 2017 he emphasised his support for land expropriation without compensation. While opening the ANC's 54th National Conference in December 2017, he unilaterally announced that higher education would be free for students in households whose income was less than R350,000 per year, meeting a central demand of the #FeesMustFall student protests. South Africa's social grants programme expanded under Zuma, and Zuma was praised for his HIV/AIDS policy which has been credited with increasing life expectancy in South Africa. However, his critics claim that his policies increased South Africa's debt burden with the debt-to-GDP ratio increasing from 28% at the start of his presidency to just over 50% in the week of his resignation. Nedbank, one of South Africa's largest banks, estimates that poor policy decisions, maladministration, and corruption during Zuma's second term alone cost the South African economy R470 billion (US$33.7 billion). Contracts with the consulting firms McKinsey & Company, KPMG, and Deloitte were linked to alleged corruption in state-owned enterprises. McKinsey & Company eventually reached an agreement with the South African government and paid back R1 Billion (US$67.3 million) for problems relating to work done at Eskom, as well as a company linked to the Gupta family. In January 2022 the South African government published the findings of an inquiry into state capture and the consultancy firm Bain & Company stands accused of helping Zuma to undermine the South African tax authority. Zuma's first state visit as president was to Angola, where he sought to improve relations with the government of President José Eduardo dos Santos, who had had a tense relationship with Mbeki. His government's foreign policy emphasised the developmental objectives of African and Global South countries with a focus on economic diplomacy. It was also characterised by a pivot towards the BRIC, especially China. In December 2010, South Africa became a formal member of BRIC, which was then renamed BRICS, and Zuma attended the group's third summit meeting in Sanya, China, in 2011. South Africa's admission followed a concerted campaign for membership and has been described as "a huge diplomatic coup" and "the most important foreign policy achievement of the Zuma administration". During South Africa's tenure on the United Nations Security Council, Zuma's administration was criticised for deviating in its stance on certain foreign regimes, especially in its attitudes towards international intervention in civil conflicts. It voted in favour of Resolution 1970 and Resolution 1973 but condemned their use by the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO) as the basis for military intervention in Libya. It also voted in favour of a 2012 resolution calling for Syrian President Bashar al-Assad to step down, but established friendly relations with the Assad regime after the 2014 Syrian presidential election. The administration also appeared to vacillate in its response to the disputed 2010 presidential election in Côte d'Ivoire. In Zimbabwe, Mbeki had advocated for non-confrontational "quiet diplomacy" as an alternative to the "megaphone diplomacy" used by Western governments that harshly criticised Robert Mugabe's regime. This approach was controversial, with elements of the ruling alliance calling for a tougher stance against Mugabe and the ruling ZANU–PF. In a 2006 interview with Der Spiegel, Zuma had supported quiet diplomacy and said of Mugabe: The Europeans often ignore the fact that Mugabe is very popular among Africans... The people love him. So how can we condemn him? Many in Africa believe that there is a racist aspect to European and American criticism of Mugabe. Millions of blacks died in Angola, the Republic of Congo and Rwanda. A few whites lost their lives in Zimbabwe, unfortunately, and already the West is bent out of shape. By December 2007, Zuma was more forthcoming in criticising Zimbabwe's leadership, contrasting his own policy to Mbeki's, and observing that it was "tragic that other world leaders who witness repression pretend it is not happening, or is exaggerated". He was critical of the Zimbabwean government's behaviour during the disputed March 2008 elections in Zimbabwe and called the delays "suspicious". In a press conference on 24 June he said, "We cannot agree with ZANU-PF. We cannot agree with them on values. We fought for the right of people to vote, we fought for democracy." At an ANC dinner in July, he rebuked Mugabe for refusing to step down, and in November he said that the South African Development Community (SADC) should "force" Zimbabwean leaders to reach an agreement, if necessary. In 2010, Zuma called for international sanctions against Mugabe and his allies to be lifted. After a March 2013 meeting with Mugabe in Pretoria, he highlighted the commonalities between his and Mugabe's political parties, telling the press, "We share the same values, we went through the same route... We believe that our positions as former liberation movements need to be consolidated." Despite tensions in later months, as Zuma and SADC attempted to nudge Mugabe towards democratic reforms, the Business Day reported that relations between the countries remained "cordial" throughout Zuma's presidency. South Africa hosted the 25th Summit of the AU in Johannesburg from 7 to 15 June 2015. It was attended by Sudanese president Omar al-Bashir, then a fugitive from the International Criminal Court (ICC), which sought to prosecute him on charges of genocide and crimes against humanity. South Africa was a signatory to the Rome Statute, which obliged it to arrest al-Bashir, but instead granted him diplomatic immunity while he attended the summit. While the matter was being adjudicated by a South African High Court, and just after Judge President Dunstan Mlambo ordered al-Bashir's arrest, the state's lawyer told the court that he had left the country. His plane left from Waterkloof Air Force Base, presumably with the government's knowledge and reportedly with Zuma's explicit approval. When it was criticised for this breach, the South African government argued that the ICC was used unfairly against African heads of state while failing to hold Western leaders to the same standards. In 2016, it announced in New York that it was withdrawing from the ICC, and Zuma's administration subsequently tabled legislation to effect the withdrawal. In a press conference on 5 December 2013, Zuma announced the death of Nelson Mandela, South Africa's first democratically elected president. The memorial took place on 10 December 2013 at FNB Stadium near Soweto. When Zuma entered the stadium parts of the crowd booed him loudly. Ramaphosa and Archbishop Desmond Tutu called for discipline, with Ramaphosa telling the crowd in Zulu that the country could address its internal disagreements when foreign dignitaries were not present. Some South African commentators said that the crowd's actions were unexpected, and they were widely linked to the ongoing Nkandla scandal, a draft of the Public Protector's provisional report had been leaked the previous week, or to dissatisfaction with Zuma's administration more generally. Others suggested that the booing reflected frustration with the lack of socioeconomic change under the ANC government since Mandela's presidency, or that it reflected enduring divisions within the ANC; the crowd also chanted Mbeki's name. In a public statement, the ANC chastised those who had booed, saying they had embarrassed the country. The South African Broadcasting Corporation (SABC) was criticised for having cut away from the booing in its live broadcast of the memorial. Despite an "Anyone but Zuma" campaign in the run-up to the ANC's 53rd National Conference, Zuma was re-elected ANC president on 18 December 2012, beating Deputy President Kgalema Motlanthe by a large margin. Although in 2008 he had said that he would prefer to serve only one term as president, Zuma became the ANC's sole presidential candidate in the 2014 national election. In January 2014, after he was heckled at Mandela's memorial, the Sunday Tribune reported that around November 2013, KwaZulu-Natal branches of the ANC had discussed a proposed resolution asking Zuma not to run for a second term as the country's president. However, ANC Deputy Secretary General Jessie Duarte dismissed rumours of disunity in the ANC saying, "The policy is that the president of the ANC is always the candidate for the election. We don't have another candidate and there will be no other candidate." The ANC retained its majority in the national election, and on 21 May 2014, the National Assembly elected Zuma to a second term as president. Zuma began his second term amid ongoing controversy over what were officially security upgrades made with state funds to his private homestead at Nkandla. Public Protector Thuli Madonsela investigated, and in late November 2013 her draft report was leaked to the Mail & Guardian. Similar to the final version of the report, titled "Secure in Comfort" and released on 19 March 2014, the draft found that some of the Nkandla upgrades exceeded Zuma's security needs and recommended that Zuma should repay the state. The opposition, Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF), and DA applied for legal recourse to compel Zuma to follow the recommendations in Madonsela's report, and the Constitutional Court found in their favour on 31 March 2016. In EFF v Speaker; DA v Speaker, the full court agreed that Madonsela's report was binding, meaning Zuma was required to repay the state for some of the Nkandla upgrades and that Zuma had failed to uphold the country's Constitution. In a public address on 1 April, Zuma welcomed the judgment and apologised to the country, though legal academic Pierre de Vos said that the statement seriously misconstrued the judgment. The court's finding that Zuma had failed to uphold the Constitution subsequently provided the basis of an impeachment motion in Parliament, which was sponsored by the DA and defeated by a significant margin. However, Zuma faced serious backlash in the aftermath of the Constitutional Court ruling, including criticism from the SACP, civil society, several ANC stalwarts (including Ahmed Kathrada, Ronnie Kasrils, Trevor Manuel, and Cheryl Carolus), and several active factions of the ANC. Before the ruling, Zuma had faced and defeated five motions of no confidence in Parliament, three of which went to a vote. Following the ruling and failed impeachment motion, he faced three more in November 2016, August 2017, and February 2018. Zuma's close and allegedly corrupt relationship with the Gupta family, known ANC donors, became a major source of discontent both within the ANC and among the South African public. This relationship received widespread public attention in April 2013 when the media reported that the Guptas had landed an Airbus A330 at Waterkloof Air Force Base without formal authorisation, but was welcomed by a police escort. The political influence of the Guptas was one issue that was thought to have motivated a wave of anti-government protests in October 2015, and at Zuma's February 2016 State of the Nation address, the EFF coined the phrase "Zupta", a portmanteau of "Zuma" and "Gupta", when they disrupted the event by repeatedly chanting "Zupta must fall." In March 2016, allegations of state capture of the Zuma administration by the Gupta family were revived when two ANC politicians, Mcebisi Jonas and Vytjie Mentor, publicly claimed that the Guptas had offered them cabinet positions. The Guptas denied the allegations, as did Zuma who reminded Parliament that only he had the power to appoint ministers. Shortly thereafter, the former director-general of the Government Communication and Information System, Themba Maseko, told the Sunday Times that Zuma had asked him to "help" the Guptas and that the Guptas had subsequently asked him to channel government advertising tenders to their newspaper, the New Age. In mid-March 2016, Madonsela launched an investigation into state capture, resulting in a report entitled "State of Capture" in November 2017. The report found prima facie evidence implicating Zuma and other state officials in various improprieties, including improper relationships with the Gupta family. It also recommended that Zuma should appoint a full commission of inquiry into state capture. Zuma applied to have Madonsela's report overturned in the high court, which dismissed his application and ordered him to appoint a commission. In January 2018, just over a month before he resigned, he established the Zondo Commission. Zuma was criticised for a lack of stability in his cabinet. During his two terms in office, he implemented twelve cabinet reshuffles, and some of his appointments unsettled financial markets, such as when Finance Minister Nhlanhla Nene was replacedwith the little-known backbencher Des van Rooyen in the 9 December 2015 reshuffle. The political response was so hostile that van Rooyen was replaced by Pravin Gordhan after four days in office. Later, on 31 March 2017, Gordhan was sacked and replaced by Malusi Gigaba. Gordhan's deputy Jonas, who had alleged corruption by the Guptas a year earlier, was also fired. The reshuffle was criticised by senior ANC leaders including Deputy President Ramaphosa, from the SACP, and from members of the public, who, on 7 April, launched protests against Zuma and his government in several of South Africa's major cities. Another march on the Union Buildings on 12 April, Zuma's birthday, was organised by a coalition of seven opposition parties. It attracted tens of thousands of protesters and the Mail & Guardian said that it was "possibly the largest march in post-apartheid history". From 2015, Zuma was understood to favour his ex-wife, Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, to succeed him as ANC president and therefore, presumptively, as national president. His critics claimed that he would use his relationship with Dlamini-Zuma to retain control of the ANC and the state, and avoid prosecution on corruption charges. She campaigned on a platform of economic transformation – so that the pro-Dlamini-Zuma faction became known as the RET faction – while her challenger, Ramaphosa, emphasised anti-corruption. On 18 December 2017, at the ANC's 54th National Conference, Ramaphosa narrowly beat Dlamini-Zuma in a vote and succeeded Zuma as ANC president. Once Ramaphosa replaced Zuma as ANC president, there was growing pressure for the latter to resign from the national presidency. On 6 February 2018, Zuma's annual State of the Nation Address, scheduled for 8 February, was postponed indefinitely "to create room for establishing a much more conducive political atmosphere". The following week, Ramaphosa and Zuma spent almost five days in talks. On 12 December, when it became clear that the negotiations had failed, the ANC National Executive Committee convened an emergency meeting near Pretoria, and, after nearly ten hours of debate, decided that Zuma should be "recalled" by the party if he did not resign voluntarily. Ramaphosa and another senior official reportedly drove to Zuma's home just after midnight to deliver the ultimatum, but Zuma refused, insisting on a three-month notice period or transition period before leaving office. On 13 December, the National Executive Committee publicly announced its intention to recall Zuma. As a party-political body, it formally lacked the authority to remove sitting presidents, though it could instruct the ANC caucus, which controlled Parliament, to remove Zuma through a motion of no confidence if he did not resign at its request. At dawn on 14 February, there was a police raid at the Johannesburg home of the Gupta family, which the Hawks said was related to an investigation into state capture. Baleka Mbete, the Speaker of the National Assembly, announced that the EFF's motion of no confidence in Zuma had been moved forward in the parliamentary schedule, and that it would now be voted on the following day instead of on 22 February. She told journalists that "the recall, most definitely official, is now being implemented by this institution [Parliament]". The ANC announced that it planned to support the opposition's motion, which would ensure its passage. Shortly afterwards, Zuma gave a long live television interview on SABC on 14 February 2018, arguing that he had done nothing wrong and had not been given reasons for his recall. He said that he disagreed with the ANC's decision and was being "victimised". He also said that if he was dismissed, the ANC could be "plunged in a crisis that I'm sure my comrade leaders will regret". According to a later report by City Press, during this period elements of the South African National Defence Force and State Security Agency were unsuccessfully lobbied to launch a revolt to prevent Zuma's removal. On the same day, in a live televised address just before 11 p.m., Zuma announced his immediate resignation. In his speech, he said that he accepted the ANC's decision but had asked its leadership to "articulate my transgressions and the reason for its immediate instruction that I vacate office". He claimed that he had earlier had an agreement with the party that if he resigned it would be after "a period of transition". He said: Make no mistake, no leader should stay beyond the time determined by the people they serve... No life should be lost in my name and also the ANC should never be divided in my name... I have therefore come to the decision to resign as President of the Republic with immediate effect. Even though I disagree with the decision of the leadership of my organisation, I have always been a disciplined member of the ANC. As I leave I will continue to serve the people of South Africa as well as the ANC, the organisation I have served all my life. I will dedicate all of my energy to work towards the attainment of the policies of our organisation, in particular the radical economic transformation agenda. The week after his resignation, Zuma attended a farewell cocktail party in his honour, hosted by Ramaphosa at Tuynhuys in Cape Town and attended by other members of cabinet. Although former presidents are invited to all State of the Nation addresses, Zuma did not attend Ramaphosa's addresses in 2018, 2019, or 2020. On 16 March 2018, a month after Zuma resigned from the presidency, the NPA announced that he would again face prosecution on the same 16 criminal charges he was indicted on in 2006: 12 charges of fraud, two of corruption, and one each of racketeering and money laundering, all related to the 1999 Arms Deal and to Zuma's relationship with Shaik. The case was enrolled in the Pietermaritzburg High Court. Zuma pleaded not guilty when the trial began on 26 May 2021. As of October 2022, the trial was scheduled to resume in late January 2023. At the instruction of the Public Protector and high court, in January 2018 Zuma established the Zondo Commission to investigate fraud, corruption, and state capture in the public sector in South Africa. Zuma was scheduled to testify before the commission for five days in mid-July 2019, and on Monday 15 July he opened his testimony by claiming that the commission was part of a decades-long "character assassination" conspiracy against him. He denied the veracity of several other witnesses' testimony and questioned the appropriateness of the phrase "state capture", which he said was used to discredit him. If the whole state had truly been captured, he argued that the commission should investigate the judiciary and Parliament as well as the executive branch of government. After the hearings, Zuma addressed supporters who gathered outside the commission's offices in Johannesburg. Before the end of the third day of testimony on Wednesday 17 July, chairperson Ray Zondo adjourned proceedings so that the commission could meet with Zuma and his lawyers in order to discuss Zuma's grievances about his treatment by the commission. On the morning of Friday 19 July, his lawyer announced that Zuma would "take no further part" in the commission's proceedings and would consider court action. Zuma felt that he had been treated like an accused criminal rather than as a witness and that he had been relentlessly cross-examined – though the head of the commission's legal team pointed out that his cross-examination had not yet begun. Later that day Zondo announced that they had come to an agreement: the commission had acquiesced to Zuma's demand to furnish him with specific allegations in advance, and Zuma would provide written statements in response. In subsequent months, Zuma appeared reluctant to cooperate with the commission, and he did not provide further testimony before it. Zondo issued a summons for Zuma's appearance in the week of 16 November 2020, but Zuma applied to have Zondo recuse himself from proceedings. Zuma claimed that he and Zondo were friends, which Zondo denied, and that there was a conflict of interest arising from their "historical family relations". On the latter point, Zondo conceded that he had had a child with the sister of Zuma's third wife, Thobeka Madiba-Zuma, but pointed out that their relationship had ended in the 1990s, before Zuma and Madiba-Zuma met. On Thursday 19 November, Zondo dismissed Zuma's application for his recusal. When the commission heard Zuma's testimony, Zondo announced that Zuma had left during a break without being excused. He did not return on 20 November. In early December, the commission issued summonses for Zuma to appear before it in the weeks of 18 January and 15 February 2021 and applied to the Constitutional Court for an order compelling Zuma to comply with the summonses, which was granted on 28 January. When Zuma did not comply with the February summons, in open defiance of the court order, the commission approached the Constitutional Court and asked it to sentence Zuma to two years' imprisonment for contempt of court. Zuma refused to participate in the contempt proceedings, although he complained of bias, and on 29 June 2021 he was sentenced to 15 months' imprisonment. Zuma was given until 4 July to hand himself in, after which the police would have until 7 July to arrest him forcibly. The uMkhonto we Sizwe Military Veterans' Association warned that his arrest would destabilise the country, and hundreds of supporters gathered outside his Nkandla residence, threatening violence if he was detained. Zuma told the press that he had been sentenced without trial, saying that it might "remind our people of the apartheid days", and told a rally in Nkandla: I fought for freedom. I was fighting for these very rights. No one will take my rights away. Even the dead that I fought against during the liberation struggle will turn in their graves. On 7 July, with the deadline nearing and an outstanding court application by Zuma to halt the arrest, it was unclear whether the South African Police Service planned to arrest him. Forty minutes before the midnight deadline, Zuma handed himself over and was taken to the Estcourt Correctional Centre. On 9 July, the Pietermaritzburg High Court dismissed Zuma's application to have the arrest overturned, citing a lack of evidence for the medical grounds raised by Zuma. There was a severe outbreak of civil unrest in KwaZulu-Natal on the same day linked to Zuma's detention. The Constitutional Court subsequently heard an urgent rescission application by Zuma, reserving judgement on 12 July, but ultimately upheld its earlier sentence in a 7–2 ruling. On 22 July, Zuma was granted one day's compassionate leave to attend the funeral of his brother Michael. On 6 August, the Department of Correctional Services reported that he had been admitted to hospital for routine medical observation following a routine health check. He underwent surgery for an unspecified condition on 14 August and had to remain hospitalised in order to undergo further medical procedures. On 5 September, he was released on medical parole to receive medical care at home, instead of in hospital, in order to complete the rest of his sentence at his Nkandla home, under supervision in the community corrections system. The decision was challenged in court by the Democratic Alliance, the Helen Suzman Foundation, and Afriforum. On 15 December 2021, high court judge Keoagile Matojane set aside the parole decision, declaring it unlawful and saying that it undermined respect for the judiciary, the rule of law, and the Constitution. The Medical Parole Advisory Board had advised against parole, but it had been granted by the Correctional Services Commissioner, Arthur Fraser, who had thereby effectively and improperly overruled the board. Zuma was ordered to return to prison, with his time on parole not counted towards his sentence. Zuma's lawyers immediately announced his intention to appeal the high court's decision, and he was granted leave to do so on 21 December. The Department of Correctional Services declared that Zuma's sentence had ended on 7 October 2022. A ruling had not yet been delivered on his appeal against the cancellation of his medical parole. The Supreme Court of Appeal ruled on 21 November that the medical parole was unlawful, but allowed the national commissioner of the Department of Correctional Services to consider whether the time he spent in parole would count towards his sentence. The Department of Correctional Services appealed the ruling to the Constitutional Court on 16 December. On 11 August 2023, the Department of Correctional Services granted Zuma remission of his 15-month sentence. In December 2023, Zuma announced that, while planning to remain a lifelong member of the ANC, he would not be campaigning for the ANC in the 2024 South African general election, and would instead be voting for a newly-formed party, uMkhonto we Sizwe (MK Party). He stated that "I cannot and will not" campaign for the ANC of current president Cyril Ramaphosa, Zuma's successor, and that to do so would be a 'betrayal'. On 29 January 2024, Zuma was suspended from the ANC for his endorsement of the MK Party. The ANC approached South Africa's electoral court and contended that Zuma's registration of the MK Party was "unlawful" (as it was a name of the ANC's military wing) and also took on the country's Electoral Commission for allowing its registration. Lawyers for the MK Party told the court that the ANC knew about the existence of the party since its registration in September 2023 but wondered why they waited this long for Zuma to endorse it before challenging it. Judges for the electoral court then dismissed the ANC's request and found that the MK Party's registration was lawful. Just two weeks after his suspension from the ANC, the ANC alliance partner, SANCO, in KZN announced on 16 February 2024 that it had expelled Zuma because of absenteeism. Zuma had served as provincial chairperson of SANCO since 19 November 2023 after being elected unopposed in absentia at the organisation's conference in Durban. The organisation said since his election Zuma never attended a single meeting and its provincial executive committee took the decision to get rid of him and find a replacement. On 28 March 2024, Zuma was banned from running in the 2024 South African general election. Zuma's "charisma and affable personality" is at the centre of his public image, and is thought to be responsible for much of his political popularity. His charisma is most fully on display at his political rallies, which sociologist Roger Southall describes as laden with "political theatre" and "popular idiom", especially through song – his longstanding trademark is uMkhonto we Sizwe anthem "Umshini wami" (English: Bring Me My Machine Gun), but he also became associated with "Yinde lendlela" (English: It's a Long Journey) after the ANC's Mangaung conference in 2012. Journalist Alec Russell wrote in 2009, "When Zuma gets in front of these crowds, he is more than a politician: briefly, he becomes something closer to a revivalist preacher, or the leader of a cult." Zuma is known for his sense of humour, and to the disapproval of opposition politicians, as president he frequently joked during his addresses to Parliament, including the mockery of the Democratic Alliance's fixation on the Nkandla scandal. On 1 April 2015, his office released a statement about new cabinet appointments which was later revealed as an April Fools' Day prank on the media. Some have said that one factor in Zuma's popularity is what Southall calls "the politics of charismatic buffoonery". In one phrase, his public persona has been "constructed as sometimes slightly gormless, but warm and accessible". Mondli Makhanya wrote: Zuma's other great strength was that he did not mind looking stupid. And so he sang and danced at will. Whereas other politicians use this as an election gimmick, Zuma did it all the time and genuinely seemed to enjoy it. In Parliament and on public platforms he laughed and giggled as if he had inhaled a potent hallucinogenic. The more stupid he looked, the more it seemed to endear him to the people. As a politician, he was viewed as an accessible figure – "a simple man, a man of the people", and a good listener. In a 2009 interview, Zuma said that apartheid-era ANC president Oliver Tambo inspired his public posture: While Tambo was a great thinker, he was very simple. There is nothing he did not do... When people came to him he attended to them. He would even attend to somebody who comes to raise the issue of the shoe that doesn't have shoelaces, he would ensure that the shoelaces were found... I am not a great man. I am a man of the people. I believe in people and I think that the people are everything. Once there is disconnection with the people you have problems. His connection to the "grassroots" is partly due to his embrace of his rural background, ethnic heritage, and lack of formal education. These aspects of his persona are frequently contrasted with the perceived intellectualism and Pan-Africanism of the ANC under Mbeki. Especially in combination with his penchant for struggle songs and the toyi-toyi, Zuma's acceptance of his background has been described as tapping into "popular understandings, memories, and meanings of racial oppression, racialised dispossession, and struggles of freedom" during apartheid and thereafter. On the ethnic front, he often presents himself as a Zulu traditionalist, and has been associated with social conservatism. He is a polygamist, in line with Zulu tradition, and at a 2006 rally in KwaZulu-Natal, for example, he publicly spoke against same-sex marriage. He was frequently photographed wearing traditional Zulu attire at cultural events, and he appears less comfortable speaking in English than in his native Zulu, in which he is known for his "linguistic flair". Some commentators have claimed that his broad appeal arises from "the populist's trait of sometimes saying what his audiences want to hear", and he has frequently been called a political "chameleon", with little known about what political principles and ideologies he subscribes to personally. This characterisation was made as early as 2007, when, ahead of the ANC's Polokwane conference, the Financial Mail ran the first of two stories on Zuma, famously published under the headline "Be Afraid". The articles criticised Zuma as an "opportunist" and concluded, in the paraphrase of New York Times journalist Barry Bearak, that he was "far more interested in holding power than in making policy, long on charm if short on intellect". During his post-presidency legal battles, when Zuma publicly claimed that he was being vilified under a conspiracy, William Gumede and others criticised what they called his "narcissism". In 2010, Zuma's bodyguards were implicated in multiple incidents involving members of the public and journalists. In February, a Cape Town student, Chumani Maxwele, was detained by police after allegedly showing Zuma's motorcade a "rude gesture". Maxwele, an active ANC member, was released after 24 hours, having provided a written apology to police, which he later claimed was coerced. He also claimed that his home had been raided by plain-clothes policemen, and that he had been forced into the vehicle at gunpoint. Maxwele later instituted legal action against the police, and a complaint was filed on his behalf to the Human Rights Commission. The incident led to a heated dispute when it was discussed in Parliament. In March, journalist Tshepo Lesole was forced to delete pictures of Zuma's convoy from his camera by police, and two photographers were detained by police when photographing Zuma's Johannesburg home. Sky News reporter Emma Hurd claimed she had been pushed, manhandled and "groped" by Zuma's bodyguards in 2009. In January 2012, Zuma gave a speech at the ANC Centennial 2012 celebrations in Bloemfontein and, afterwards, sang the controversial song "Dubul' ibhunu" ("Shoot the Boer"). In 2012, Zuma was featured in a satirical painting by Cape Town-based artist Brett Murray, who depicted him in his painting The Spear, with his genitals exposed. The ANC responded by threatening court action against the gallery showing the painting, and further demanding that the image should be removed from online sources. On 22 May 2012, the painting was vandalised while it was hanging in an art gallery in Johannesburg. Zuma's face and genitals were painted over. Clive Khulubuse Zuma, Jacob Zuma's nephew, was named in the Panama Papers as a result of his links to oilfields in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC). Shortly after Jacob Zuma met with DRC president Joseph Kabila, Khulubuse Zuma's company Caprikat Limited secured a 100-billion-rand oil deal in the DRC. Zuma started the foundation to send children to school and build houses for people living in poverty. The former chairperson of the foundation is Dudu Myeni, before she resigned from her memberships on the boards of directors of these and other bodies because she was declared a delinquent director for life in May 2020 by the Pretoria High Court. Zuma is a polygamist, in line with traditional Zulu culture, and has been married six times. In 2012 the Daily Telegraph estimated he had 20 children, and in 2014 the Guardian reported he has 21, some of whom were born out of wedlock. In an interview, he said: There are plenty of politicians who have mistresses and children that they hide so as to pretend they're monogamous. I prefer to be open. I love my wives and I'm proud of my children. Less than a year into Zuma's presidency in March 2010, responding to a parliamentary question from the DA, the Minister in the Presidency, Collins Chabane, reported that the state spousal support budget was about R15.52 million, close to double the budget in the previous year when Kgalema Motlanthe had been president. Opposition leader Helen Zille expressed disapproval. In subsequent years, Zuma's spokesperson, Mac Maharaj, stressed that South Africa did not have a formal office for the first lady, and that the state did not support the President's wives or children except insofar as it funded some travel expenses and spousal participation at official functions. Yet in June 2012, there were reports that activists in the Eastern Cape branch of the ANC were backing a proposal that only Zuma's first wife should receive state support. Gertrude Sizakele Khumalo, 1973–present Zuma met Khumalo (born 2 March 1940) in 1959 and they married shortly after his release from prison in 1973. They have no children together. Kate Mantsho, 1976–2000 Zuma married Mantsho (born 2 September 1956 in Mozambique) in 1976 while he was in exile in Mozambique. She committed suicide on 8 December 2000 and is buried in Heroes' Acre at Westpark Cemetery in Johannesburg. He has five children with her: Mxolisi Saady (born 1980), twins Duduzile and Duduzane (born 1984), Phumzile (born 1989), and Nhlakanipho Vusi (born 1993, died 1 July 2018). Nkosazana Dlamini, 1982–1998 Zuma met Dlamini (born 27 January 1949), an ANC politician and cabinet minister, while he was in exile in Swaziland. They were married in 1982 and divorced in June 1998, and they have four daughters: Msholozi (born 1982), Gugulethu (born 1985), Nokuthula Nomaqhawe(also known as Thuli, born 1987), and Thuthukile (born 1989). Nompumelelo Ntuli, 2008–present Zuma married Ntuli (born 1975) on 5 January 2008. From 2014, she was investigated by police on the allegation that she had attempted to kill Zuma with poisoned tea. She denied the allegation and the NPA declined to prosecute her due to insufficient evidence. As of 2022, she and Zuma are reportedly estranged. They have three children: Thandisiwe (born 2002), Sinqobile (born 2006), and Manqoba Kholwani (born 2010). Thobeka Stacie Mabhija, 2010–present Zuma married Mabhija, also known as Thobeka Madiba (born 1973), on 4 January 2010. She and Zuma are reportedly estranged, and in 2020 she sued Zuma for spousal maintenance and then filed for divorce. They have three children. Gloria Bongekile Ngema, 2012–present In April 2012, Zuma married Ngema (born 1965), with whom he already had a son, Sinqumo (born c. 2009). In 2017, emails leaked as part of the so-called #GuptaLeaks suggested that the Gupta family had partially funded the purchase of Ngema's R5.4-million house in Waterkloof Ridge, Pretoria. Zuma has also been engaged to other women, including, from 2002, Princess Sebentile Dlamini, a niece of Swazi King Mswati III. Zuma paid the traditional lobola in cattle, but, as of 2022, they have not married, although the Citizen reported in 2017 that they were still engaged. He was also engaged to Nonkanyiso Conco (born 16 October 1993), a cast member on Real Housewives of Durban, but has broken off the engagement and are reportedly estranged. They have a child together: Sakh'muzi (born 12 April 2018). Zuma's firstborn child, Mziwoxolo Edward, was born 1977 to Minah Shongwe, sister of Judge Jeremiah Shongwe, who asked to be recused from Zuma's rape trial because of the relationship. He also has two daughters, born 1998 and 2002, with Pietermaritzburg businesswoman Nonkululeko Mhlongo, whom he met in 1990 and to whom he was rumoured to be engaged. In March 2017, a covert recording was leaked in which Mhlongo allegedly outlined a plan for defrauding the KwaZulu-Natal government, apparently with Zuma's knowledge. His other children include a daughter, Thandekile Matina, born 8 October 2009 to Sonono Khoza, the daughter of soccer administrator Irvin Khoza, and, according to media reports, three children to a woman from Johannesburg and one to a woman from Richard's Bay. In January 2010, the Sunday Times reported that Khoza had given birth to Zuma's daughter in 2009, and Zuma ultimately confirmed that he had paid inhlawulo, acknowledging paternity, and appealed for privacy. Opposition parties criticised Zuma's actions. Both the African Christian Democratic Party and the DA said that it undermined the government's HIV/AIDS prevention programme, which promoted safe sex and marital fidelity. DA leader Zille also argued that it was not a purely private matter, since elected public officials had to embody the principles and values for which they stood. The Congress of the People said that Zuma could no longer use African cultural practices to justify his "promiscuity", and Independent Democrats leader Patricia de Lille said that Zuma was asking people "to do as I say and not as I do". Zuma initially denied that the incident was relevant to the government's HIV/AIDS programme and appealed for privacy. However, amid public controversy, on 6 February Zuma said he "deeply regretted the pain that he caused to his family, the ANC, the alliance and South Africans in general". Similarly, the ANC initially defended Zuma, saying that it saw no links between its HIV/AIDS policies and Zuma's personal life, but on 5 February acknowledged the widespread disapproval and said that it had listened to the public and learnt "many valuable lessons".ANC Youth League leader Julius Malema said, "Zuma is our father so we are not qualified to talk about that", but committed the Youth League to continual emphasis on its HIV/AIDS programme and "one boyfriend, one girlfriend" stance in a nationwide awareness campaign. ANC Women's League deputy president Nosipho Ntwanambi said: With many African people for instance, and generally speaking, it is not right to have an extramarital affair if you have committed to yourself to a marriage. But under the Customary Marriages Act, if the first wife agrees, and if all these issues are discussed with her, we can't do anything. Zwelinzima Vavi, the general secretary of the ANC's Tripartite Alliance partner the Congress of South African Trade Unions, said that he passed no judgment but hoped that the matter would be "on Zuma's conscience", while also reiterating Zuma's appeal for privacy. Nelson Mandela Award for Outstanding Leadership from the Medical University of South Africa, awarded in Washington, D.C. (1998) During a visit to the United Kingdom in 2010, Jacob Zuma was made an honorary Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath. Imo Merit Award, the highest award in the Imo State of Nigeria, is conferred on those who have made a difference in the development of their communities. (15 October 2017) Nigeria's Imo State unveiled a statue of Jacob Zuma on 15 October 2017. University of Zululand (2001), Honorary Doctor of Administration University of Fort Hare (2001), Honorary Doctor of Literature/Letters Medical University of Southern Africa (2001), Honorary Doctor of Philosophy University of Zambia (UNZA) Great East Campus (2009), Honorary Doctor of Law Peking University (2012), Honorary Professor of International Relations Zuma was invested with a chieftaincy title – that of the Ochiaga of Imo – during his trip to the kingdom of Eze Samuel Ohiri of Imo on 15 October 2017. The Passion of Jacob Zuma, a 2009 French documentary by Jean-Baptiste Dusséaux and Matthieu Niango Motherland, a 2010 documentary directed by Owen 'Alik Shahadah How to Steal a Country, a 2019 South African documentary directed by Rehad Desai South Africa portal Biography portal Politics portal Schabir Shaik trial The Spear Gupta family "S Africa's ANC suspends Zuma after new party launch". BBC News. 29 January 2024. Retrieved 30 January 2024. Thank you Nxamalala, Msholozi, News24, 15 Feb 2018. Retrieved 7 Oct 2023 Mbuyazi, Nondumiso (13 September 2008). "JZ receives 'death threat'". The Star. p. 4. Archived from the original on 18 May 2009. Retrieved 14 September 2008. Kaiser, Hein (30 June 2021). "Zuma is going to jail, but what will prison life be like for Msholozi?". The Citizen. Retrieved 10 September 2021. Lander, Alice (19 December 2007). "Durban basks in Zuma's ANC victory". BBC News. Archived from the original on 24 December 2007. Retrieved 14 September 2008. Masuabi, Chris Makhaye and Queenin (11 August 2023). "No prison time for Jacob Zuma after 'remission' decision". Daily Maverick. Retrieved 11 August 2023. Gordin, Jeremy (2008). Zuma, A Biography. Jonathan Ball. ISBN 978-1-86842-263-0. "Biography of Jacob ZUMA". African Success. Archived from the original on 10 July 2012. Retrieved 18 October 2012. "The Trials of Jacob Zuma". BBC. 15 December 2017. Archived from the original on 16 December 2017. Tromp, Beauregard (16 February 2018). "A comrade rises – before the fall". Mail & Guardian. Archived from the original on 21 March 2018. Retrieved 24 December 2021. "The disastrous legacy of South Africa's President Jacob Zuma". The Economist. 14 February 2018. Archived from the original on 15 February 2018. "The Jacob Zuma Page". ANC. Archived from the original on 4 May 2013. Retrieved 13 August 2011. Smith, David (20 April 2009). "Jacob Zuma the chameleon brings South Africans joy and fear". The Guardian. London, UK. Archived from the original on 12 January 2017. Mavuso, Sihle (12 August 2021). "Jacob Zuma's brother describes last moments before former president surrendered to authorities, blames Zondo". IOL. Archived from the original on 12 August 2021. Retrieved 23 December 2021. Khoza, Amanda (15 July 2021). "Jacob Zuma's brother to be laid to rest next Thursday, says family elder". Sowetan. Retrieved 23 December 2021. Cilliers, Charles (29 May 2019). "Jacob Zuma's sister Velephi passes away". The Citizen. Retrieved 23 December 2021. Khoza, Amanda (17 November 2013). "'I sold my Zuma name for R10m house'". IOL. Retrieved 23 December 2021. "Michael Zuma adds finger to corruption pie". eNCA. 11 November 2013. Retrieved 23 December 2021. Beresford, David (22 February 2009). "Zuma's missing years come to light". The Times. UK. Archived from the original on 28 February 2009. "Jacob Gedleyihlekisa Zuma". SA History Online. Archived from the original on 8 July 2017. Retrieved 17 February 2018. "Fifa gives Zuma his ref's certificate". SouthAfrica.info. 30 June 2009. Archived from the original on 11 May 2011. Retrieved 3 November 2009. "Jacob Gedleyihlekisa Zuma". The Presidency. Archived from the original on 9 February 2009. Retrieved 11 December 2007. Trewhela, Paul (15 February 2009). "Jacob Zuma in exile: three unexplored issues". Archived from the original on 28 February 2009. Gevisser, Mark (2007). Thabo Mbeki: The Dream Deferred. Jonathan Ball Publishers. ISBN 978-1-86842-545-7. Piper, Laurence (2002). "Nationalism without a nation: the rise and fall of Zulu nationalism in South Africa's transition to democracy, 1975–99". Nations and Nationalism. 8 (1): 73–94. doi:10.1111/1469-8219.00039. hdl:10566/5798. ISSN 1469-8129. Bosch, Marius (12 December 2007). "Zulus want peacemaker Jacob Zuma for president". Reuters. Retrieved 24 December 2021. Wren, Christopher S. (6 July 1991). "Moderates Chosen By Apartheid Foes". The New York Times. Retrieved 17 November 2022. "Statement of the African National Congress Following the Resignation of the President of the Republic of South Africa, Comrade Jacob Zuma". Independent Online. 14 February 2018. Archived from the original on 15 February 2018. "A closer look at Jacob Gedleyihlekisa Zuma". Independent Online. 6 May 2009. "ANC shuffles its leaders" (PDF). Namibian. 21 December 1994. Retrieved 11 December 2021. "Tutsis boycott Burundi talks". BBC. 27 July 2004. Archived from the original on 30 September 2009. "Burundi peace process back in the spotlight". IOL. 11 October 2004. Retrieved 24 December 2021. Bruce, David (2008). "Without fear or favour: The Scorpions and the politics of justice". SA Crime Quarterly. 24. Carroll, Rory (21 January 2004). "Apartheid spy smear rebounds". The Guardian. Retrieved 3 December 2021. "Public protector a 'liar' and 'sad case'". Mail & Guardian. 30 May 2004. Retrieved 3 December 2021. "Ngcuka-Mushwana 'war' rages on". News24. 1 June 2004. Retrieved 3 December 2021. Vasagar, Jeevan (14 June 2005). "Mbeki fires deputy in corruption scandal". The Guardian. Retrieved 24 December 2021. "Deputy president sacked". Mail & Guardian. 14 June 2005. Archived from the original on 15 February 2018. Mofokeng, Moffett (19 August 2005). "How a lone cameraman 'dented' SABC's credibility". Mail & Guardian. Archived from the original on 12 September 2005. Retrieved 20 December 2007. "Mbeki appoints woman as new deputy president". The New Humanitarian. 22 June 2005. Retrieved 24 December 2021. Oellermann, Ingrid (4 August 2008). "Zuma's long path to court". IOL. Archived from the original on 17 February 2018. "Zuma corruption trial struck off the roll". SABC News. 20 September 2006. Archived from the original on 26 October 2006. Retrieved 20 September 2006. Pather, Raeesa (10 August 2016). "The kanga, womanhood and how Zuma's 2006 rape trial changed the meaning of the fabric". Mail & Guardian. Retrieved 11 January 2022. "Timeline of the Jacob Zuma rape trial". Mail & Guardian. 21 March 2006. Retrieved 11 January 2022. Humphreys, Joe (9 May 2006). "Dramatic scenes as Zuma is cleared of rape". The Irish Times. Retrieved 11 January 2022. "SA's Zuma showered to avoid HIV". BBC News. 5 April 2006. Archived from the original on 25 December 2007. Retrieved 20 December 2007. Grootes, Stephen (22 July 2011). "SA's most famous showerhead sparks more debate". Daily Maverick. Retrieved 11 January 2022. Booysen, Susan (2011), "Aluta continua, from Polokwane to Mangaung", The African National Congress and the Regeneration of Political Power, Wits University Press, pp. 33–84, ISBN 978-1-86814-542-3, JSTOR 10.18772/12011115423.5, retrieved 9 December 2021 Gevisser, Mark (12 December 2007). "South Africa Grows Up". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 9 December 2021. Gevisser, Mark (2007). "Thabo Mbeki, Jacob Zuma, and the Future of the South African Dream". Thabo Mbeki: The Dream Deferred. Jonathan Ball. ISBN 978-1-86842-301-9. "Jacob Zuma cleared of rape". The Guardian. 8 May 2006. Retrieved 11 January 2022. Simao, Paul (28 July 2006). "Left rallies to support embattled Zuma". Mail & Guardian. Archived from the original on 8 September 2011. Du Toit, Pieter (11 December 2017). "The Polokwane Decade Is Over: 'Comrades, Comrades: Sit Down!'". HuffPost UK. Retrieved 9 December 2021. Wills, Zapiro with Mike (14 August 2018). "The back story to the most controversial cartoon in SA history". Daily Maverick. Retrieved 17 August 2018. "We're prepared to kill for Zuma: Vavi". IOL. 21 June 2008. Retrieved 11 January 2022. "The trouble with JZ". Mail & Guardian. 20 December 2007. Archived from the original on 21 June 2007. Retrieved 20 December 2007. Tabane, Rapule (21 April 2006). "SACP divided on Zuma". Mail & Guardian. Archived from the original on 5 February 2015. Retrieved 5 February 2015. "Riding on Zulu empathy". Mail & Guardian. 18 November 2005. Archived from the original on 30 September 2007. Retrieved 20 December 2007. Pearce, Justin (10 October 2005). "Analysis: SA's Zuma in the dock". BBC News. Archived from the original on 22 December 2006. Retrieved 20 December 2007. Robinson, Vicki; Table, Rapule; Haffajee, Ferial (28 April 2006). "23 days that shook our world". Mail & Guardian. Archived from the original on 26 November 2016. Retrieved 26 November 2016. "Mbeki T-shirt burning riles ANC". News24. 12 October 2005. Retrieved 11 January 2022. "Will Zuma's 'Letha umshini wami' (Bring my Machine gun) song win him second term?". News24. 14 May 2012. Retrieved 11 January 2022. Gunner, Liz (2009). "Jacob Zuma, the Social Body and the Unruly Power of Song". African Affairs. 108 (430): 27–48. doi:10.1093/afraf/adn064. ISSN 0001-9909. JSTOR 27667093. "Zuma rape case judge stands down". BBC News. 13 February 2006. Archived from the original on 12 January 2009. Retrieved 20 December 2007. "Accuser insulted as Zuma hailed at court". Independent Online. 14 February 2006. Archived from the original on 25 February 2006. Retrieved 20 December 2007. Meldrum, Andrew (9 May 2006). "Acquitted Zuma ready to fight for presidency". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 5 May 2010. "Zuma team to ask for discharge". IOL. 27 March 2006. Retrieved 11 January 2022. "Zuma defamation claim 'largest in SA history'". Independent Online. 4 July 2006. Archived from the original on 17 February 2018. "Zuma defamation claim 'largest in SA history'". IOL. 4 July 2006. Retrieved 11 January 2022. "Friends of Jacob Zuma Trust". 29 June 2005. Archived from the original on 10 February 2010. Retrieved 15 September 2010. Smith, Janet (19 December 2008). "Zuma exacts defamation action on media". IOL. Retrieved 11 January 2022. Louw, Raymond (12 November 2012). "Was Zuma's cartoon case an attempt to intimidate media?". Business Day. Retrieved 11 January 2022. Gevisser, Mark (2007). "Home". Thabo Mbeki: The Dream Deferred. Jonathan Ball. ISBN 978-1-86842-301-9. Monare, Moshoeshoe (1 June 2006). "Pipe or machinegun for ANC presidency?". IOL. Retrieved 11 January 2022. "ANC rank-and-file vote for change". Independent Online. 26 November 2007. Archived from the original on 5 October 2008. Retrieved 9 September 2021. "Zuma finds favour among his ANC comrades". Independent Online. 26 November 2007. Archived from the original on 5 October 2008. Russell, Alec (30 November 2007). "Jacob Zuma". Financial Times. Retrieved 11 January 2022. "Pipe or machinegun for ANC presidency?". Independent Online. 1 June 2006. Retrieved 13 December 2019. McGreal, Chris (15 December 2007). "South Africa in turmoil as Mbeki heads for defeat". The Guardian. Williams, Juanita (18 December 2007). "Fireworks greet new ANC president". Independent Online. Archived from the original on 13 February 2018. "New charges for S Africa's Zuma". BBC News. 28 December 2007. Archived from the original on 31 December 2007. "'Zuma application shouldn't be taken lightly'". IOL. 12 September 2008. Retrieved 11 January 2022. Zigomo, Muchena (11 September 2008). "South African judge throws out Zuma graft case". Reuters. Archived from the original on 29 November 2014. Retrieved 27 November 2013. "A timeline of Jacob Zuma's presidency". Independent Online. 15 February 2018. Archived from the original on 13 February 2018. "Motlanthe: South Africa's safe hands". BBC. 25 September 2008. Retrieved 9 December 2021. "Mpshe reveals contents of Ngcuka, McCarthy tapes". Mail & Guardian. 6 April 2009. Archived from the original on 24 September 2015. Bearak, Barry (10 March 2009). "Waiting to Helm South Africa: President or Convict? Or Both?". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 11 May 2011. Retrieved 18 October 2012. Brkic, Branko (19 October 2009). "Zuma's past comes back to haunt him as Shaik begs pardon". Daily Maverick. Retrieved 13 January 2022. Rademeyer, Julian (21 December 2009). "Angry Shaik demands his pardon". Witness. Retrieved 13 January 2022. Landsberg, C. (2012). "Continuity and Change in the Foreign Policies of the Mbeki and Zuma Governments". Africa Insight. 41 (4): 1–16. ISSN 1995-641X. Booysen, Susan (2011), "The ANC and its pillars of people's power", The African National Congress and the Regeneration of Political Power, Wits University Press, pp. 86–125, ISBN 978-1-86814-542-3, JSTOR 10.18772/12011115423.6, retrieved 12 January 2022 "South Africa opposition call for probe into Jacob Zuma". BBC News. 8 March 2010. Archived from the original on 11 March 2010. Retrieved 15 September 2010. "ANC distances itself from spokesman's statement on Zuma". Sunday Times. 9 March 2010. Archived from the original on 12 March 2010. Retrieved 15 September 2010. "Zuma under fire after late declaration". Independent Online. 11 March 2010. Archived from the original on 21 August 2010. Retrieved 15 September 2010. Wines, Michael (17 December 2007). "Leadership Battle Grips South Africa's Dominant Party". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 21 July 2016. Gumede, William (28 May 2019). "How the EFF has shifted SA politics to the left". News24. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Ipsos (9 February 2017), Beyond Populism, archived from the original on 10 March 2017, retrieved 27 April 2017 Merten, Marianne (29 June 2017). "ANC policy, radical economic transformation and ideological proxy battles for control". Daily Maverick. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Paton, Carol (7 December 2017). "Foreign investors in energy sector will have to partner with locals, Zuma says". Business Day. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Desai, Ashwin (2 October 2018). "The Zuma moment: between tender-based capitalists and radical economic transformation". Journal of Contemporary African Studies. 36 (4): 499–513. doi:10.1080/02589001.2018.1522424. ISSN 0258-9001. S2CID 158520517. McKaiser, Eusebius (21 April 2017). "It's radical economic gibberish". Mail & Guardian. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Rudin, Jeff (25 April 2017). "Zuma's plan for radical economic transformation is just BEE on steroids". Mail & Guardian. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Bhorat, Haroon (2017). Betrayal of the promise: how South Africa is being stolen (PDF). State Capacity Research Project. "'Let's embrace radical economic transformation'". Mail & Guardian. 2 July 2017. Retrieved 7 December 2021. "Dot by dot, state capture emerges". Mail & Guardian. 31 August 2018. Retrieved 7 December 2021. Shipalana, Palesa (14 December 2017). "The good, the bad and the ugly: an economic review of Zuma's presidency". Africa Portal. Retrieved 12 January 2022. "Statement by President Jacob Zuma on the appointment of Commissioners to the National Planning Commission". The Presidency. 30 April 2010. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Morris, Eythan (20 June 2013). "The National Development Plan (NDP): the current state of play". Helen Suzman Foundation. Retrieved 13 January 2022. "Cabinet's five-point plan to address SA electricity woes". BusinessTech. 11 December 2014. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Paton, Carol (18 February 2019). "Forum linked to Zuma lobby groups joins campaign against IPPs". Business Day. Retrieved 12 January 2022. "Zuma launches national infrastructure plan". Mail & Guardian. 19 October 2012. Retrieved 12 January 2022. "Editorial: SA must stand up against Jacob Zuma's nuclear option". Business Day. 25 March 2019. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Maughan, Karyn (28 March 2019). "Zuma's nuclear deal: Russian roulette for SA". Business Day. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Mtyala, Quinton (16 November 2015). "Zuma yet to sign security industry bill". Independent Online (South Africa) IOL. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Harvey, Ross (9 February 2015). "Will South Africa's Minerals Bill take the road less travelled?". SAIIA. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Phakati, Bekezela (22 June 2017). "Zuma backs new Mining Charter". Sunday Times. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Nicolson, Greg (26 June 2017). "Chamber of Mines: Mining Charter is 'illegal', 'unconstitutional' and 'stupefying'". Daily Maverick. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Orderson, Crystal (8 February 2017). "South Africa's presidential frontrunner announces country's first minimum wage". The Africa Report. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Mokone, Thabo (2 November 2017). "National minimum wage to be implemented in May 2018". Sunday Times. Retrieved 12 January 2022. "Zuma says government will take land without compensation: report". BusinessTech. 24 February 2017. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Merten, Marianne (3 March 2017). "Parliament: Zuma calls on ANC to unite with EFF to change the Constitution on land issues". Daily Maverick. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Fabricius, Peter (30 March 2017). "Will Zuma's attempts to Zanufy South Africa backfire?". ISS Africa. Retrieved 12 January 2022. "Budget 2018 is Zuma's costly legacy". Mail & Guardian. 23 February 2018. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Basson, Adriaan (15 March 2021). "Jacob Zuma did not only steal our money; he also stole our dreams". News24. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Holmes, Thalia (19 June 2014). "Social grants beneficiaries more than doubled in 10 years". Mail & Guardian. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Masombuka, Sipho (14 April 2016). "Step down and salvage your HIV/Aids treatment policy legacy' Zuma advised". Sunday Times. Retrieved 12 January 2022. "Zuma, the accidental Aids hero". Independent Online (South Africa) IOL. 17 December 2017. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Henderson, Roxanne (18 February 2018). "Counting the cost of the blunders, debt and graft of the Zuma-era". Sunday Times. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Atud, Vivian (14 January 2015). "South African Government Debt up 62% Under the Zuma Administration". News24. Retrieved 12 January 2022. "Analysis: Eskom's troubles show everything that's wrong with SA". Fin24. 21 February 2019. Retrieved 21 February 2019. Mariana Mazzucato; Rosie Collington (2023). The Big Con: How the Consulting Industry Weakens Our Businesses, Infantilizes Our Governments and Warps Our Economies. Penguin Books Limited. ISBN 9781802060270. Cilliers, Jakkie (8 June 2017). "Life beyond BRICS? South Africa's future foreign policy interests". Southern Africa Report. 9. ISS Africa. Fabricius, Peter (31 August 2021). "A fit for purpose foreign policy: Dispense with parochial approaches and recognise international opportunities". Daily Maverick. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Mpungose, Luanda (22 February 2018). "South Africa's foreign policy under Zuma: towards greater strategic partnerships". SAIIA. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Maphaka, Dominic (18 December 2020). "A Shift or Priority? An Afrocentric Analysis of Zuma's Foreign Policy towards China". The Strategic Review for Southern Africa. 42 (2): 87–108. doi:10.35293/srsa.v42i2.75. ISSN 1013-1108. S2CID 234511314. Graceffo, Antonio (21 January 2011). "BRIC Becomes BRICS: Changes on the Geopolitical Chessboard". Foreign Policy Journal. Archived from the original on 26 January 2011. Retrieved 12 January 2022. "Zuma lashes Nato for 'abusing' UN resolutions on Libya". Mail & Guardian. 14 June 2011. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Harris, Paul (4 February 2012). "Syria resolution vetoed by Russia and China at United Nations". The Guardian. Retrieved 12 January 2022. al-Sabbagh, Hazem (23 June 2014). "President al-Assad receives congratulatory cable from South African President Zuma". Archived from the original on 14 February 2015. Retrieved 20 April 2015. Fabricius, Peter (5 June 2016). "Syrian horrors 'exaggerated', claims Mfeketo". Sunday Independent. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Russell, Alec (16 April 2008). "Mbeki's stance on Zimbabwe under fire". Financial Times. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Lodge, Tom (27 October 2004). "Quiet diplomacy in Zimbabwe: a case study of South Africa in Africa" (PDF). Paper delivered to the African Studies Centre, Leiden. p. 7. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 September 2008. Retrieved 14 July 2008. Russell, Alec (17 April 2008). "Mbeki's 'quiet diplomacy' meets an ever louder response". Financial Times. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Alden, Chris (1 June 2002). "South Africa's 'Quiet Diplomacy' and the crisis in Zimbabwe". Cadernos de Estudos Africanos (2): 187–211. doi:10.4000/cea.1341. hdl:10071/3100. ISSN 1645-3794. "The West Is Bent out of Shape". Der Spiegel. 20 December 2006. Archived from the original on 10 August 2008. Retrieved 14 July 2008. "Zuma blasts Mbeki's Zimbabwe quiet diplomacy". Zimbabwe Metro. 16 December 2007. Archived from the original on 17 December 2007. Retrieved 18 December 2007. "Zuma condemns Zimbabwe poll delay". BBC. 9 April 2008. Archived from the original on 13 April 2008. Retrieved 14 July 2008. "ZIMBABWE: Mugabe is losing the region's support". IRIN (UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs). 11 April 2008. Archived from the original on 18 April 2008. Retrieved 14 July 2008. "Zuma: Zimbabwe is out of control". Mail & Guardian. 24 June 2008. Archived from the original on 4 July 2008. Retrieved 14 July 2008. "Mugabe has overstayed welcome, Zuma". The Zimbabwe Times. 9 July 2008. Archived from the original on 21 November 2008. Retrieved 14 July 2008. "Zuma says summit must "force" Zimbabwe deal". Reuters. 7 November 2008. Retrieved 12 January 2022. "S.Africa's Zuma backs end to Zimbabwe sanctions". Reuters. 3 March 2010. Retrieved 12 January 2022. "Jacob Zuma calls for sanctions on Zimbabwe to be lifted". The Guardian. 2 March 2010. Retrieved 12 January 2022. "Mugabe visits SA". Drum. News24. 8 March 2013. Retrieved 12 January 2022. "Rift between Zanu-PF and SA deepens". Mail & Guardian. 12 July 2013. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Matsabu, Tokollo (20 December 2017). "Emmerson Mnangagwa to meet Jacob Zuma in first official visit to SA". Business Day. Retrieved 12 January 2022. "Laughter as court told al-Bashir has left". News24. 15 June 2015. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Onishi, Norimitsu (15 June 2015). "Omar al-Bashir, Leaving South Africa, Eludes Arrest Again". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Hunter, Qaanitah (18 June 2015). "How Zuma and ministers plotted Omar al-Bashir's escape". Mail & Guardian. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Bowcott, Owen (15 June 2015). "Sudan president Omar al-Bashir leaves South Africa as court considers arrest". The Guardian. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Du Plessis, Max (10 December 2017). "South Africa's latest threat to withdraw from the ICC, or, How to Squander Leadership". Daily Maverick. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Fabricius, Peter (15 November 2019). "Is Ramaphosa still kicking the ICC can down the road?". ISS Africa. Retrieved 12 January 2022. "President Jacob Zuma on death of former President Nelson Mandela". The Presidency. 5 December 2013. Archived from the original on 14 February 2014. Retrieved 8 December 2013. "President Jacob Zuma announces the passing of Madiba". SABC. 5 December 2013. Archived from the original on 6 June 2014. Retrieved 8 December 2013. "South African president Jacob Zuma booed at Mandela memorial". The Telegraph. 31 March 2013. Archived from the original on 13 April 2016. Retrieved 31 March 2016. "South African President Zuma humiliated at Nelson Mandela memorial". Los Angeles Times. 10 December 2013. Retrieved 13 January 2022. Thelwell, Emma (10 December 2013). "Mandela memorial: why the crowds booed President Zuma". Channel 4 News. Retrieved 13 January 2022. Mnyanda, Siya (11 December 2013). "Mandela memorial: it's the ANC that's betrayed South Africa, not the booing". The Guardian. Retrieved 13 January 2022. Grootes, Stephen (10 December 2013). "Booing Zuma: Is this the turning point?". Daily Maverick. Retrieved 13 January 2022. Whitaker, Raymond (10 December 2013). "Nelson Mandela memorial: The booing of Jacob Zuma shows that divisions still remain". The Independent. Retrieved 13 January 2022. Meredith, Charlotte (10 December 2013). "Outrage As Jacob Zuma Is Booed At Nelson Mandela Memorial". Huffington Post. Retrieved 13 January 2022. "The boos for Jacob Zuma represent Mandela's success". Al Jazeera. 16 December 2013. Archived from the original on 14 January 2014. "SABC censors footage of Zuma booing at Mandela memorial". Mail & Guardian. 11 December 2013. Retrieved 13 January 2022. Mthembu, Kwazi (10 October 2012). "Collective leadership or ABZ are the options". IOL. Retrieved 8 December 2021. "Nomura calls Mangaung for Zuma". Mail & Guardian. 22 November 2012. Retrieved 8 December 2021. "Zuma wins second term". City Press. 18 December 2012. Archived from the original on 9 June 2013. Retrieved 27 November 2013. Monare, Moshoeshoe (28 July 2008). "Zuma: I only want one term". Independent Online. Archived from the original on 30 November 2012. Retrieved 30 November 2012. Olifant, Nathi (26 January 2014). "Stand down request for Zuma". Sunday Tribune. IOL. Archived from the original on 29 January 2014. "ANC united behind Zuma". IOL. 18 January 2014. Archived from the original on 21 January 2014. "Zuma re-elected SA president". IOL. 21 May 2014. Archived from the original on 14 July 2014. Retrieved 18 June 2014. "Nkandla report: Payback time, Zuma". Mail & Guardian. 29 November 2013. Archived from the original on 13 December 2013. Ackroyd, Bianca (19 March 2014). "Damning Nkandla report finds Zuma must pay for upgrades". eNCA. Archived from the original on 25 March 2016. Thamm, Marianne (31 March 2016). "Nkandla ConCourt ruling: President Zuma and National Assembly in breach of Constitution". Daily Maverick. Archived from the original on 2 April 2016. Retrieved 31 March 2016. "Zuma responds to ConCourt ruling". News24. 1 April 2016. Retrieved 13 January 2022. De Vos, Pierre (3 April 2016). "Truth shall set you free, Mr Zuma". Daily Maverick. Retrieved 13 January 2022. "Zuma breached oath of office – De Vos". News24. 5 April 2016. Retrieved 13 January 2022. "South Africa's Jacob Zuma survives Nkandla impeachment vote". BBC News. 5 April 2016. Retrieved 13 January 2022. Friedman, Steven (6 April 2016). "Courts have done their bit, now it's up to politics". Business Day. Retrieved 13 January 2022. Matshiqi, Aubrey (5 April 2016). "Internal ANC politics will dictate leader's fate". Business Day. Retrieved 13 January 2022. Magome, Mogomotsi (3 April 2016). "SACP not satisfied with Zuma's apology". IOL. Retrieved 10 April 2016. Thakali, Thabiso (9 April 2016). "Go, clerics urge Zuma". Weekend Argus. Retrieved 13 January 2022. Poplak, Richard (6 April 2016). "Trainspotter: #ZumaMustFall Take Two, this time for real". Daily Maverick. Retrieved 13 January 2022. "#AhmedKathrada: What he said in letter to Zuma". IOL. 2 April 2016. Retrieved 13 January 2022. Grootes, Stephen (5 April 2016). "Post ConCourt Nkandla ruling bombshell: Trevor Manuel joins the calls for Zuma's resignation". Daily Maverick. Retrieved 13 January 2022. Hunter, Qaanitah (12 April 2016). "ANC Gauteng has resolved that Zuma must resign". Rand Daily Mail. Retrieved 12 April 2016. Letsoalo, Matuma (12 April 2016). "Gauteng ANC: Zuma must step down". Mail & Guardian. Retrieved 12 April 2016. Magome, Mogomotsi (10 April 2016). "Zuma's faithful hit back". Sunday Tribune. Retrieved 11 April 2016. "Zuma like PW Botha, says ANC veteran". Business Day. 12 April 2016. Retrieved 12 April 2016. Wilkinson, Kate (29 June 2017). "How many motions of no confidence has Zuma faced?". EWN. Retrieved 14 January 2022. Tolsi, Niren (27 August 2013). "Concourt dismisses DA appeal to force Zuma 'no confidence' debate". Mail & Guardian. Retrieved 14 January 2022. "Agang SA withdraws motion of no confidence in President Zuma". Drum. 3 March 2015. Retrieved 14 January 2022. Nicolson, Greg (10 November 2016). "No confidence: ANC wins the vote, but Zuma suffers in battle". Daily Maverick. Retrieved 14 January 2022. Allison, Simon (9 August 2017). "Jacob Zuma narrowly survives no-confidence vote in South African parliament". The Guardian. Retrieved 14 January 2022. Winning, Alexander (2 February 2018). "South Africa's Zuma faces new no-confidence vote this month". Reuters. Retrieved 14 January 2022. Munusamy, Ranjeni (14 May 2013). "Guptagate, the ANC and the continuous root of all evil". Daily Maverick. Retrieved 13 January 2022. "Zuma allies 'break ranks' with him over Guptas". Rand Daily Mail. 1 February 2016. Archived from the original on 7 February 2016. Retrieved 9 February 2016. Wild, Franz (17 December 2015). "Gupta family seen as symbol of Zuma's failing rule". Sunday Times. Archived from the original on 16 February 2016. Retrieved 9 February 2016. "Who are the Guptas?". BBC. 14 May 2013. Archived from the original on 18 March 2016. Retrieved 7 February 2016. Munusamy, Ranjeni (1 February 2016). "Keeping Up with the Guptas: What's behind the anti-Saxonwold revolt". Daily Maverick. Archived from the original on 4 February 2016. Retrieved 9 February 2016. England, Andrew (3 May 2013). "South Africa suspends five officials in plane scandal". Financial Times. Retrieved 13 January 2022. "Guptas use Waterkloof airforce base as private landing strip". eNCA. 30 April 2013. Retrieved 13 January 2022. "'Zupta must fall' – and EFF walks out". News24. 11 February 2016. Archived from the original on 12 February 2016. Retrieved 14 February 2016. Hartley, Wyndham; Marrian, Natasha (11 February 2016). "Chaos as EFF once again delays speech and then stages walkout". Business Day. Archived from the original on 15 February 2016. Retrieved 14 February 2016. England, Andrew (16 March 2016). "S Africa minister alleges Guptas offered him Treasury chief role". Financial Times. Retrieved 13 January 2022. England, Andrew (17 March 2016). "Pressure on South Africa's Jacob Zuma grows over Gupta storm". Financial Times. Retrieved 13 January 2022. "Zuma defends relationship with Guptas – report". News24. 23 March 2016. Archived from the original on 28 March 2016. Retrieved 30 March 2016. Maromo, Jonisayi (23 March 2016). "Leaders weigh in on 'pornographic' levels of state capture in SA". Mail & Guardian. Retrieved 13 January 2022. Thamm, Marianne (7 July 2016). "State Capture: Thuli's final quest for the truth – investigating the Guptas' political influence". Daily Maverick. Retrieved 13 January 2022. Savides, Matthew (18 March 2016). "Public Protector will investigate Gupta family's 'state capture'". Sunday Times. Retrieved 13 January 2022. Public Protector South Africa (2017). State of Capture (Report No. 6 of 2016/17) (PDF). SAFLII. "Statement by President Jacob Zuma on the establishment of the Commission of Inquiry into State of Capture". The Presidency. 9 January 2018. Retrieved 13 December 2021. Gous, Nico (9 January 2018). "Zuma appoints commission of inquiry into state capture". Sunday Times. Retrieved 13 December 2021. Haffajee, Ferial (18 October 2017). "Jacob Zuma Is Presiding Over His 12th Cabinet After Tuesday's Shock Reshuffle – Is It A State Of Organised Chaos?". Huffington Post. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Van Onselen, Gareth (17 October 2017). "This is the breakdown of all 12 Jacob Zuma Cabinet reshuffles". Business Day. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Letsoalo, Matuma (9 December 2015). "Nhlanhla Nene removed as finance minister". Mail & Guardian. Archived from the original on 9 January 2016. Retrieved 5 January 2016. Zibi, Songezo (22 December 2015). "SAA is an invaluable case study for democratic accountability". Business Day. Archived from the original on 24 December 2015. Retrieved 31 December 2015. Munusamy, Ranjeni (14 December 2015). "Zuma climbs down, Gordhan takes up SA's rescue mission". The Daily Maverick. Archived from the original on 9 January 2016. Retrieved 5 January 2016. "President Jacob Zuma has fired finance minister Pravin Gordhan". Mail & Guardian. 30 March 2017. Archived from the original on 4 April 2017. Retrieved 12 April 2017. Onishi, Norimitsu; Chanmarch, Sewell (31 March 2017). "Firing of South Africa's Finance Minister Widens a Political Rift". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 7 December 2017. "ANC MPs shouldn't wait for opposition to act against Zuma – SACP". 702. 4 April 2017. Archived from the original on 7 April 2017. Retrieved 12 April 2017. Frassinelli, Pier Paolo (22 April 2017). "Survey sheds light on who marched against Zuma and why". Mail & Guardian. Retrieved 14 January 2022. Cotterill, Joseph (12 April 2017). "Thousands join South Africa opposition march urging Zuma to resign". Financial Times. Retrieved 14 January 2022. "Dlamini-Zuma touted as next president". The Citizen. 11 April 2016. Archived from the original on 29 April 2017. Retrieved 27 April 2017. Tau, Steven (29 April 2017). "Zuma wants to continue controlling ANC using ex-wife – analyst". The Citizen. Archived from the original on 29 April 2017. Retrieved 29 April 2017. Du Preez, Max (2 May 2017). "Could it be Gerrie Nel vs Jacob Zuma?". News24. Archived from the original on 2 May 2017. Retrieved 2 May 2017. Derrick Spies (23 April 2017). "Ramaphosa 'launches' campaign with attack on Zuma, Guptas". News24. Retrieved 6 June 2017. "What NDZ stands for". Mail & Guardian. 29 September 2017. Retrieved 7 December 2021. Herman, Paul (18 December 2017). "Ramaphosa wins ANC presidency". News24. Archived from the original on 18 December 2017. Retrieved 13 February 2018. Marrian, Natasha; Magubane, Khulekani (6 February 2018). "State of nation address postponed". Business Day. Archived from the original on 14 February 2018. Burke, Jason (13 February 2018). "Jacob Zuma defies order from South Africa's ANC to resign". The Guardian. Retrieved 14 January 2022. De Klerk, Aphiwe; Macanda, Siphe (13 February 2018). "ANC confirms it has recalled Jacob Zuma". Sunday Times. Archived from the original on 13 February 2018. Merten, Marianne (14 February 2018). "President's End: While Zuma did resign, Parliament had a plan anyway". Daily Maverick. Retrieved 14 January 2022. Burke, Jason (14 February 2018). "Effort to oust Jacob Zuma turns to option of no-confidence vote". The Guardian. Retrieved 14 January 2022. "Speaker Baleka Mbete reschedules motion of no confidence in President Jacob Zuma". South African Government. 14 February 2018. Retrieved 14 January 2022. Burke, Jason (14 February 2018). "Jacob Zuma resigns as South Africa's president on eve of no-confidence vote". The Guardian. Retrieved 14 January 2022. Davis, Rebecca (14 February 2018). "Jacob Zuma digs in his heels: 'I'm being victimised here'". Daily Maverick. Retrieved 14 January 2022. "How Ramaphosa 'dodged a coup' – security bosses reveal all". News24. 22 July 2018. Retrieved 8 November 2018. "Time's up: Jacob Zuma has resigned". Mail & Guardian. 14 February 2018. Archived from the original on 14 February 2018. "'I do not fear exiting political office': Zuma's resignation speech". Sunday Times. 15 February 2018. Retrieved 14 January 2022. "Zuma and Ramaphosa all smiles at farewell party". Citypress. 21 February 2018. Retrieved 13 January 2022. Malingo, Batandwa (12 February 2020). "Jacob Zuma to attend Sona with other former presidents, says parliament". Sunday Times. Retrieved 13 January 2022. "Jacob Zuma: Former South African president faces corruption trial". BBC News. 16 March 2018. Retrieved 16 March 2018. Burke, Jason (26 May 2021). "Jacob Zuma trial: South Africa's ex-president denies corruption charges". The Guardian. Retrieved 24 September 2021. Ferreira, Emsie (19 October 2022). "Zuma arms deal trial postponed until early 2023". The Mail & Guardian. Retrieved 28 October 2022. Burke, Jason (15 July 2019). "Zuma tells South Africa corruption inquiry he is victim of foreign plot". The Guardian. Retrieved 13 January 2022. Maughan, Karyn (15 July 2019). "Zondo inquiry is part of intelligence plot to 'get rid' of me, Jacob Zuma says". Business Day. Retrieved 13 January 2022. Mailovich, Claudi (19 July 2019). "Jacob Zuma pulls out of state capture inquiry". Business Day. Retrieved 13 January 2022. Bezuidenhout, Jessica (15 July 2019). "The Essence of Zuma, Day One: 'State Capture Commission is designed to bury me'". Daily Maverick. Retrieved 13 January 2022. Tolsi, Niren (24 July 2019). "Zuma's Zondo testimony was like a five-day Test". New Frame. Retrieved 13 January 2022. "Zuma retracts decision to withdraw from the Zondo commission". News24. 19 July 2019. Retrieved 13 January 2022. Bezuidenhout, Jessica (19 July 2019). "Days of Zondo: Zuma's Zondo showing to continue after compromise deal". Daily Maverick. Retrieved 13 January 2022. Haffajee, Ferial (9 October 2020). "Jacob Zuma out of runway as Judge Zondo gives thumbs-up to state capture inquiry summons". Daily Maverick. Retrieved 13 January 2022. Haffajee, Ferial (18 November 2020). "Recusal judgment delayed as Jacob Zuma tables new details of 'friendship' with judge Zondo". Daily Maverick. Retrieved 13 January 2022. Haffajee, Ferial (29 October 2020). "Judge Zondo raises the stakes on Jacob Zuma's plan to use family ties in recusal application". Daily Maverick. Retrieved 13 January 2022. Tolsi, Niren (30 November 2020). "Zuma maintains his true colours at Zondo commission". Mail & Guardian. Retrieved 13 January 2022. Haffajee, Ferial (19 November 2020). "Zuma does a runner after Zondo sets out a three-part judicial smackdown to recusal bid". Daily Maverick. Retrieved 13 January 2022. Quintal, Genevieve (4 December 2020). "Zondo sets down new dates for Zuma to appear at commission". Business Day. Retrieved 13 January 2022. Nicolson, Greg (28 January 2021). "Final order: ConCourt rules Jacob Zuma must appear and answer questions at Zondo Commission". Daily Maverick. Retrieved 13 January 2022. Cele, S'thembile (28 January 2021). "South African Court Rules Zuma Must Testify at Graft Inquiry". Bloomberg. Retrieved 31 January 2021. Nicolson, Greg (25 March 2021). "Zuma and the ConCourt: The punishing of the ex-president could lead to the making of a martyr". Daily Maverick. Retrieved 13 January 2022. Eligon, John; Chutel, Lynsey (29 June 2021). "South African Court Orders Arrest of Ex-President Jacob Zuma for Contempt". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 13 January 2022. "Jacob Zuma: Deadline looms for South African police to arrest former president". BBC News. 7 July 2021. Retrieved 13 January 2022. "South Africa's top court agrees to hear Zuma challenge". Al Jazeera. 3 July 2021. Retrieved 13 January 2022. Eligon, John (7 July 2021). "Jacob Zuma, Former South African President, Is Arrested". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 13 January 2022. Sishi, Siyabonga; Dludla, Nqobile; Cocks, Tim; Wendell, Roelf; Winning, Alexander (8 July 2021). Cocks, Tim; Cooney, Peter (eds.). "South Africa's Zuma hands himself over to police to begin sentence". Reuters. Retrieved 8 July 2021. Winning, Alexander; Roelf, Wendell; Ward, Rogan; Kumwenda-Mtambo, Olivia; Cocks, Tim (9 July 2021). Elgood, Giles; Richardson, Alex (eds.). "South Africa's jailed ex-leader Zuma loses bid to overturn arrest". Reuters. Retrieved 10 July 2021. Cele, S'thembile; Siwele, Khuleko (11 July 2021). "Six Killed as South African Riots Spread After Jailing of Zuma". Bloomberg. Retrieved 13 July 2021. Govender, Suthentira (9 July 2021). "Millions of rand of KZN infrastructure damaged in violent 'Free Jacob Zuma' protests". Sunday Times. Retrieved 10 July 2021. Pillay, Kailene (12 July 2021). "ConCourt reserves judgment on Jacob Zuma's bid to have prison sentence rescinded". IOL. Retrieved 13 January 2022. Magome, Mogomotsi (17 September 2021). "South Africa: Top court upholds ex-president's jail sentence". Associated Press. Retrieved 17 September 2021. Mahvuso, Sihle (21 July 2021). "Jacob Zuma applies for permission to attend brother's funeral at Nkandla". Independent Online. Retrieved 28 August 2021. Aboudouh, Ahmed (22 July 2021). "Jacob Zuma released from prison to attend his brother's funeral after violent riots". Independent. Retrieved 28 August 2021. McKenzie, David (6 August 2021). "South Africa: Top court upholds ex-president's jail sentence". CNN. Retrieved 17 September 2021. "Former SA President Jacob Zuma undergoes surgery, to remain in hospital". Africanews. 15 August 2021. Retrieved 17 September 2021. "South Africa: Jacob Zuma released from prison on medical parole". Deutsche Welle. 6 September 2021. Retrieved 17 September 2021. Ensor, Linda (21 December 2021). "Jacob Zuma granted leave to appeal parole judgment". Business Day. Retrieved 13 January 2022. Erasmus, Des (15 December 2021). "#GoBackToJail ruling: Fraser's decision to grant Zuma parole was an 'unlawful intervention' that undermined respect for SA's courts". Daily Maverick. Retrieved 13 January 2022. Chutel, Lynsey (15 December 2021). "Jacob Zuma Must Return to Prison, a Judge in South Africa Rules". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 13 January 2022. Bhargav Acharya (7 October 2022). "South Africa's Jacob Zuma set free after prison term ends". Reuters. Retrieved 25 October 2022. Linda Givetash (21 November 2022). "South African Court Rules Former President Zuma's Medical Parole Unlawful". Voice of America. Retrieved 24 November 2022. Bernadette Wicks (16 December 2022). "Correctional Services Commissioner Takes Zuma Medical Parole to Concourt". Eyewitness News. Retrieved 17 December 2022. "The battle for the soul of uMkhonto weSizwe". www.polity.org.za. Retrieved 22 December 2023. Mutsila, Lerato (17 December 2023). "Jacob Zuma ditches ANC in 2024 elections, vows 'total liberation". Daily Maverick. Retrieved 23 December 2023. "Former South African president Zuma leaves ANC". www.msn.com. Retrieved 23 December 2023. "South Africa: ANC suspends ex-President Jacob Zuma after rival party launch". BBC News. 29 January 2024. Retrieved 29 January 2024. ANC insists registration of MK Party is "unlawful", Daily Maverick, 19 February 2024. Retrieved 19 February 2024 ANC knew about MK Party but nothing until Zuma to endorsed it, lawyers tell court, News24. Retrieved 22 February 2024 ANC fails in bid to deregister Zuma's MK Party, Daily Maverick, 26 March 2024. Retrieved 26 March 2024. Jacob Zuma expelled as KZN chair over repeated absenteeism, Daily Maverick, 16 February 2024. Retrieved 19 February 2024 ANC-aligned SANCO expels Jacob Zuma as KZN provincial chair, IOL. Retrieved 19 February 2024 "Jacob Zuma barred from running in South Africa elections". BBC News. 28 March 2024. Retrieved 28 March 2024. Makhanya, Mondli (17 December 2017). "Jacob Zuma: A man who knew power – raw power". Citypress. Retrieved 14 January 2022. Harding, Andrew (15 December 2017). "The trials of Jacob Zuma". BBC News. Retrieved 14 January 2022. "Jacob Zuma – the survivor whose nine lives ran out". BBC News. 6 April 2018. Retrieved 14 January 2022. Smith, David (19 April 2009). "Jacob Zuma the chameleon brings South Africans joy and fear". The Guardian. Retrieved 14 January 2022. Southall, Roger (1 October 2020). "Donald Trump and Jacob Zuma as charismatic buffoons". Safundi. 21 (4): 382–393. doi:10.1080/17533171.2020.1832799. ISSN 1753-3171. S2CID 228887576. Shoba, Sandisiwe (6 May 2019). "Inside KZN: A tale of two presidents — greeted very differently". Daily Maverick. Retrieved 14 January 2022. Tolsi, Niren (18 January 2019). "Msholozi desperately tries for another (political) hit". Mail & Guardian. Retrieved 14 January 2022. Khumalo, Fred (23 December 2012). "Zuma's song". Sunday Times. Retrieved 14 January 2022. Russell, Alec (17 April 2009). "The next president of South Africa". Financial Times. Retrieved 14 January 2022. "'Nkandla' Nkandla' Nkandla' ... he he heh!': Zuma mocks opposition". Sunday Times. 27 May 2015. Retrieved 14 January 2022. Merten, Marianne (20 November 2015). "It's all a big joke to Zuma". IOL. Retrieved 14 January 2022. Gqirana, Thulani (27 May 2015). "Zuma jokes and mocks his way through speech". Mail & Guardian. Retrieved 14 January 2022. "MPs mimic Zuma's laugh in Parliament". BusinessTech. 18 May 2016. Retrieved 14 January 2022. "Zuma has last laugh on the media on April Fool's Day". eNCA. 1 April 2015. Retrieved 14 January 2022. Piper, Laurence; Matisonn, Heidi (1 July 2009). "Democracy by Accident: The Rise of Zuma and the Renaissance of the Tripartite Alliance". Representation. 45 (2): 143–157. doi:10.1080/00344890902945657. hdl:10566/482. ISSN 0034-4893. S2CID 55159870. Dixon, Robyn (12 October 2008). "Zuma is a mystery in S. Africa". Los Angeles Times. Johannesburg. Retrieved 14 January 2022. Booysen, Susan (16 November 2015). "Jacob Zuma likes to be cast as a man of the people – but is he?". Mail & Guardian. Retrieved 14 January 2022. "Engaging Zuma". Financial Times. 26 July 2009. Retrieved 14 January 2022. Cotterill, Joseph (14 February 2018). "Political legacy of scandal-hit South African leader Jacob Zuma". Financial Times. Retrieved 14 January 2022. Russell, Alec (30 November 2007). "Jacob Zuma". Financial Times. Retrieved 14 January 2022. Mueller-Hirth, Natascha (2010). "After the rainbow nation: Jacob Zuma, charismatic leadership and national identities in Post-Polokwane South Africa". 20th Annual ASEN Conference – Nation and Charisma. Zulu, Andile (22 September 2021). "Why is Jacob Zuma still so popular?". Mail & Guardian. Retrieved 14 January 2022. Seale, Lebogang (27 September 2006). "Zuma's anti-gay comments lead to backlash". IOL. Retrieved 14 January 2022. Thamm, Marianne (25 July 2014). "Dressing up or dressing down: what's in an overall?". Daily Maverick. Retrieved 14 January 2022. Smith, David (8 September 2010). "English-Zulu dictionary helps break down language barriers in South Africa". The Guardian. Retrieved 14 January 2022. "In divisive ex-president's prison sentence, South Africans see a reckoning". The Christian Science Monitor. 30 June 2021. ISSN 0882-7729. Retrieved 14 January 2022. Maimela, Lerato (6 July 2021). "'Sexier when mute': Duduzane's Woolworths accent dissolves his sex appeal". The Citizen. Retrieved 14 January 2022. Holmes, Carolyn E. (14 July 2021). "Why South Africans are protesting the arrest of former president Jacob Zuma". Washington Post. De Vos, Pierre (22 December 2009). "President chameleon". Constitutionally Speaking. Retrieved 14 January 2022. Nieuwoudt, Stephanie (12 March 2008). "Zuma and the death penalty: Critics cry populism". Mail & Guardian. Retrieved 14 January 2022. Cohen, Tim (24 October 2019). "TIM COHEN: We saw Zuma dangers early". Business Day. Retrieved 14 January 2022. Southall, Roger (2009). "Understanding the 'Zuma Tsunami'". Review of African Political Economy. 36 (121): 317–333. doi:10.1080/03056240903210739. hdl:10.1080/03056240903210739. ISSN 0305-6244. JSTOR 27756284. S2CID 143855956. Bearak, Barry (22 September 2008). "A South African of Charisma and Mystery". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Retrieved 14 January 2022. Gumede, William (11 October 2020). "Let us not be the victims of narcissistic leaders like Zuma and Magashule". TimesLIVE. Retrieved 14 January 2022. "The unbearable narcissism of Jacob Zuma". Business Day. 17 July 2019. Retrieved 14 January 2022. Rose, Rob (5 July 2021). "ROB ROSE: For Zuma, the sneering narcissist, it's all about him". Business Day. Retrieved 14 January 2022. "PIC: Zuma cops lock up jogger". Independent Online. South Africa. Archived from the original on 23 June 2010. Retrieved 15 September 2010. "Zuma jogger to sue police". Times LIVE. Archived from the original on 1 March 2010. Retrieved 15 September 2010. "Zuma jogger case to go to HRC". Times LIVE. Archived from the original on 14 March 2010. Retrieved 15 September 2010. "News – Crime & Courts: MPs blast arrest of jogger". Independent Online. South Africa. Archived from the original on 21 August 2010. Retrieved 15 September 2010. "Mail & Guardian 'disturbed' by Zuma house incident". Independent Online. 18 March 2010. Retrieved 19 February 2018. "Zille: Zuma must rein in his bullies". Mail & Guardian. 17 March 2010. Retrieved 29 May 2020. "Zuma's bodyguards groped me: reporter". Times LIVE. 19 March 2010. Archived from the original on 22 March 2010. Retrieved 15 September 2010. "Complaint laid against Zuma – The Zuma Era". Independent Online. South Africa. 24 February 2012. Archived from the original on 29 April 2012. Retrieved 18 October 2012. SABC (24 February 2012). "SABC News.com – Rightwing movement to lay hate speech charge against Zuma:Friday 24 February 2012". Sabc.co.za. Archived from the original on 23 July 2013. Retrieved 18 October 2012. Stephen, Grootes (19 May 2012). "Zuma portrait saga goes to court". Eyewitness News. Archived from the original on 2 June 2013. Retrieved 19 May 2012. "Just Hanging Out". 6000 Miles from Civilization. 18 May 2012. Archived from the original on 20 October 2012. Retrieved 19 May 2012. "Jacob Zuma painting vandalised in South Africa gallery". BBC News. 22 May 2012. Archived from the original on 22 May 2012. Retrieved 22 May 2012. "The Power Players: Clive Khulubuse Zuma". ICIJ. Archived from the original on 4 April 2016. Retrieved 3 April 2016. "The Panama papers and the Zuma link". News24. 4 April 2016. Archived from the original on 14 April 2016. du Preez, Max (2 May 2017). "Could it be Gerrie Nel vs Jacob Zuma?". News24. Archived from the original on 2 May 2017. Retrieved 2 May 2017. Ndaba, Baldwin (8 February 2021). "Dudu Myeni resigns from Jacob Zuma Foundation and other boards". Independent Online. Retrieved 15 February 2021. "Dudu Myeni 'failed abysmally', declared delinquent director for life". TimesLIVE. 27 May 2020. Retrieved 15 February 2021. Laing, Aislinn (20 June 2012). "Jacob Zuma faces losing £1.2 million support for four wives". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 21 June 2012. Retrieved 20 June 2012. Smith, David (29 July 2014). "Jacob Zuma accused of nepotism after giving daughter ministry position". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 17 July 2016. Retrieved 29 April 2017. Molele, Charles (15 December 2007). "So who will the Zuma First Lady be?". The Times. Archived from the original on 16 May 2011. "Zuma's spousal budget: R15 517 500". IOL. 16 March 2010. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Smith, David (17 March 2010). "South African furore over budget for Jacob Zuma's family". The Guardian. Retrieved 12 January 2022. "Zuma's wedding will be a private affair". Sowetan. 16 April 2012. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Pillay, Verashni (4 January 2010). "All the president's women". Mail & Guardian. Archived from the original on 28 November 2013. Retrieved 27 November 2013. "Tributes as Kate Zuma buried". News24. 17 December 2000. Archived from the original on 19 February 2012. Retrieved 17 December 2004. Pillay, Kailene (2 July 2018). "Jacob Zuma's son Vusi dies". Independent Online. "Who are Zuma's 23 children?". News24. 23 November 2015. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Thamm, Marianne (26 September 2020). "The unMerry Wives of Nkandla – Zuma sheds spouses as his star wanes". Daily Maverick. Retrieved 12 January 2022. "Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma: SA's iron lady". News24. 16 July 2012. Retrieved 21 April 2017. "Zuma gets married in KwaZulu-Natal". Mail & Guardian. 5 January 2008. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Underhill, Glynnis (9 December 2015). "Ntuli-Zuma's poison case remains shrouded in mystery". Mail & Guardian. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Mbhele, Sandisiwe (14 April 2021). "What's next for Zuma's wives?". The Citizen. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Pillay, Verashni (4 February 2010). "All the president's children". Mail & Guardian. Archived from the original on 6 February 2010. Khumalo, Sipho (9 January 2009). "Zuma's bride-to-be 'a glamorous beauty'". IOL. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Smith, David (4 January 2010). "Jacob Zuma weds his third first lady – but not without a hitch". The Guardian. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Mavuso, Sihle (18 August 2020). "Tobeka Madiba in court for maintenance dispute with Jacob Zuma". IOL. Retrieved 12 January 2022. "Ex-president's wife wants out, accuses him of 'hiding his wealth'". Sunday Times. 18 October 2020. Retrieved 18 December 2022. Memela, Mhlaba (20 April 2012). "President Zuma says 'I Do' to MaNgema". Sowetan. Retrieved 12 January 2022. "South Africa's polygamous president marries fourth wife". BNO News. 20 April 2012. Archived from the original on 22 April 2012. Retrieved 20 April 2012. "Zuma to take Mswati's niece as his 4th wife". IOL. 9 November 2002. Retrieved 12 January 2022. "Details: Zumas fork out 120 head of cattle, cash for Swazi princess in lobola settlement". The Citizen. 29 October 2017. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Zeeman, Kyle (26 October 2021). "Jacob Zuma's ex-fiancé Laconco reminisces about her lavish birthday". Sunday Times. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Wicks, Jeff (22 April 2018). "Meet the 24-year-old soon-to-be Mrs Zuma". Sunday Times. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Ngcobo, Gabisile (3 February 2020). "Jacob Zuma's partner on raising her son in a polygamous relationship: 'I have made peace that I'll attend school activities alone'". You. News24. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Wicks, Jeff (20 April 2018). "Future 'Mrs Zuma' gave birth to baby boy on JZ's birthday". Sunday Times. Retrieved 12 January 2022. Gordin, Jeremy (15 February 2006). "Zuma has a love child with judge's sister". Independent Online. Archived from the original on 5 April 2016. "Now Zuma's KZN love kids revealed". Independent Online. 11 February 2010. "Meet Mrs Zuma No 5". News24. 1 May 2011. Retrieved 12 January 2022. "'Shocking Nkandla plot recording' raises intrigue". The Citizen. 2 March 2017. Archived from the original on 30 March 2017. Retrieved 29 March 2017. Govender, Prega (31 January 2010). "Zuma fathers baby with Irvin Khoza's daughter". The Sunday Times. Archived from the original on 2 February 2010. Retrieved 31 January 2010. "Zuma and Khoza 'are married'". Independent Online. 3 February 2010. "Zuma confirms love-child". Independent Online. 3 February 2010. Govender, Peroshni (2 February 2010). "Zuma flouts safe sex campaign, says COPE". Independent Online. "Zuma should apologise, says Zille". Mail & Guardian. 2 February 2010. Archived from the original on 5 February 2010. Davis, Gaye (2 February 2010). "Zuma sex report 'a PR nightmare'". Independent Online. "Zuma 'deeply regrets' love-child pain". Mail & Guardian. 6 February 2010. Archived from the original on 9 February 2010. "ANC defends Jacob Zuma over 'love-child' claims". BBC News. 1 February 2010. Archived from the original on 2 February 2010. Ngalwa, Sibusiso; du Plessis, Carien (6 February 2010). "JZ broke sex pact". Independent Online. South Africa. "Love-child talk 'disrespectful'". News24. 1 February 2010. Archived from the original on 4 February 2010. "SA has 'right to know about love-child'". News24. 1 February 2010. Archived from the original on 3 February 2010. "Remarks by his Excellency President Jacob Zuma on the occasion of the award bestowal on him by Cuban President Raul Castro Ruz, of the order of Jose Marti, the highest honour that the Cubans can bestow on an individual, Havana, Cuba | South African Government". www.gov.za. Retrieved 25 December 2022. "Honorary awards" (PDF). gov.uk. Archived (PDF) from the original on 18 May 2021. Retrieved 16 November 2022. "Zuma awarded the Eagle of Zambia". www.sanews.gov.za. 26 February 2013. Retrieved 3 March 2024. "Ukazi o odlikovanjima". Predsednik Republike Srbije (in Serbian). Retrieved 3 March 2024. Imran Syed (30 April 2017). "South Africa emerging as one of the most popular trade and investment destinations". Saudi Gazette. Retrieved 9 May 2023. "Al-Jubair: South African President's visit to Kingdom positive, enhances Saudi-South African relations in all fields". Saudi Press Agency. 28 March 2016. Retrieved 9 May 2023. MEDUNSA Trust. "Nelson Mandela Award Honors Charles A. Heimbold Jr. for Commitment to African HIV/AIDS Pandemic". www.prnewswire.com (Press release). Archived from the original on 11 November 2016. Retrieved 11 November 2016. "Royal banquet for South African President Jacob Zuma". BBC. 3 March 2010. Archived from the original on 23 December 2015. Retrieved 23 December 2015. "Nigeria honours Zuma with giant statue". Archived from the original on 16 October 2017. Retrieved 16 October 2017. "Jacob Zuma". whoswho. Archived from the original on 3 January 2016. Retrieved 23 December 2015. "UNZA confers honorary Doctor of Law degree on Zuma". Lusaka Times. 9 December 2009. Archived from the original on 1 December 2017. Retrieved 18 July 2017. Haden, Alexis (15 October 2017). "Zuma got a chieftaincy title, road and statue in Nigeria". The South African. Retrieved 27 April 2020. "Ceteris Paribus – Director biographical note". RIFF – Rome independent film festival. Archived from the original on 5 March 2017. Retrieved 5 March 2017. Basson, Adriaan (2012). Zuma Exposed. Jonathan Ball Publishers. ISBN 978-1-86842-540-2. Basson, Adriaan; du Toit, Pieter (2017). Enemy of the People: How Jacob Zuma Stole South Africa and How the People Fought Back. Jonathan Ball Publishers. ISBN 978-1-86842-819-9. Calland, Richard (2013). The Zuma Years: South Africa's Changing Face of Power. Penguin Random House South Africa. ISBN 978-1-77022-276-2. Foster, Douglas (June 2009). "Jacob's Ladder". The Atlantic. Vol. 303, no. 5. pp. 72–80. Retrieved 8 July 2013. Gordin, Jeremy (2008). Zuma: A Biography. Jonathan Ball. ISBN 978-1-86842-263-0. Pauw, Jacques (2017). The President's Keepers: Those Keeping Zuma in Power and Out of Prison. Tafelberg. ISBN 978-0-624-08303-0. Russell, Alec (2009). After Mandela: the Battle for the Soul of South Africa. London: Hutchinson. ISBN 978-0-09-192601-4. Southall, Roger (2009). "Understanding the 'Zuma Tsunami'". Review of African Political Economy. 36 (121): 317–333. JSTOR 27756284. ISSN 0305-6244. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Jacob Zuma. Wikiquote has quotations related to Jacob Zuma. Profile at the African National Congress Zuma: Road to the presidency Jacob Zuma at Who's Who Southern Africa Appearances on C-SPAN Jacob Zuma at IMDb Jacob Zuma collected news and commentary at The New York Times Jacob Zuma at People's Assembly Squires's full judgment in Shaik case Supreme Court judgment upholding 2009 ruling Gupta Leaks portal Crowds heckle Zuma at Mandela's memorial (2013), eNCA Interview with Zuma on the day of his resignation (2014), SABC Zuma sings Umshini wami outside a courthouse (2018)