Get Him to the Greek is a 2010 American comedy film written, produced, and directed by Nicholas Stoller and starring Russell Brand and Jonah Hill. Released on June 4, 2010, the film is a spin-off sequel to Stoller's 2008 film Forgetting Sarah Marshall, reuniting director Stoller with stars Hill and Brand and producer Judd Apatow. Brand reprises his role as character Aldous Snow from Forgetting Sarah Marshall, while Hill plays an entirely new character, Aaron Green. The film also stars Elisabeth Moss, Rose Byrne, Sean Combs, and Colm Meaney. In 2009, British rock star Aldous Snow releases his new album and a titular single, "African Child", which is a commercial and critical failure. In an interview, his girlfriend, pop star Jackie Q, drunkenly declares they have a boring life. Aldous relapses, ending their relationship and losing custody of his son, Naples. Meanwhile, in Los Angeles, Aaron Green is a talent scout at Pinnacle Records, living with his girlfriend Daphne, who is completing a medical residency at a local hospital. Pinnacle is performing poorly, and the head of the company, Sergio Roma, asks for ideas. Aaron suggests Aldous play at the Greek Theatre on the tenth anniversary of a performance there in 1999. Sergio sends Aaron to London to escort Aldous to Los Angeles. Daphne informs Aaron that she has received a residency job offer in Seattle and that they are moving there. They argue and seemingly break up. Aaron meets Aldous and learns that he had not been expecting him, thinking that the concert was not for two months. They bar-hop across the city as Aaron tries to get Aldous to catch a flight to New York City. Aaron and Aldous go to New York City for Aldous's appearance on Today. To keep him sober, Aaron imbibes all of Aldous's alcohol and drugs. While performing live, Aldous is unable to remember the lyrics to "African Child", and replaces it with an old hit, "The Clap", to cheers from the audience. Daphne calls Aaron to apologize, only to learn that he believes they broke up. While partying, Aaron's phone accidentally calls Daphne, informing her of his drunken activities. On their flight to Los Angeles, Aaron learns that Aldous has become depressed, as he misses his son and has been alienated from his own father, Jonathan, for years. Aaron suggests he visit him after the show; instead, Aldous insists they go to Las Vegas to see Jonathan. Sergio, having been keeping tabs on the two, arrives to take control of the situation. Meanwhile, Aldous and Jonathan argue over Jonathan's seeming disinterest in his son outside of his career and his mockery of Aldous's mother. Sergio hooks Aaron up with a sexually violent girl, Destiny, who takes him to a hotel room and rapes him. After Aaron tells Aldous that he has been raped, Aldous gives him a laced marijuana joint to calm him down. He has a bad trip, causing a fight that inadvertently sets the hotel lounge on fire. Believing he is having a heart attack, Aldous attempts to help Aaron by giving him an adrenaline shot. They flee a drugged up Sergio to Los Angeles, where Aaron convinces Aldous to visit Jackie Q. She has been sleeping with Metallica's drummer, Lars Ulrich, and confesses that Naples is not actually Aldous’ biological son. Meanwhile, Aaron goes to his home to apologize to Daphne. They are interrupted when Aldous arrives, proposing a threesome. Daphne agrees and Aaron hesitantly goes along. Aaron angrily decides to kiss Aldous, ending the tryst. Daphne and Aaron both immediately regret it, and Aaron angrily tells Aldous to go, criticizing his mental state. Instead of preparing for his show, he goes to the rooftop of the Standard Hotel, and calls Aaron, threatening to jump. Aaron rushes to the hotel and attempts to talk him down. Aaron arrives, in time to stop Aldous from jumping. Nevertheless, Aldous jumps into a pool several floors down, breaking his arm. Aldous tells him that he is lonely, sad, and embarrassed, but is reminded that thousands of fans love him and are waiting to see him. Aldous decides to perform at the Greek Theatre, although Aaron pleads for him to go to the hospital. Upon their arrival, Sergio offers Aaron drugs to give to Aldous so he will not cancel the concert. Aaron, tired of Sergio's abuse, quits on the spot, then walks stage-side with Aldous, trying to convince him to go to the hospital. However, seeing how happy Aldous is while performing, he heads home to reconcile with Daphne. Months later, Aldous, sober again, has returned to fame with a single produced by Aaron based on events from their night in Las Vegas. Jonah Hill as Aaron Green, a record company employee Russell Brand as Aldous Snow, a free-spirited rock star with a faltering career who first appears in Forgetting Sarah Marshall Elisabeth Moss as Daphne Binks, Aaron's girlfriend Rose Byrne as Jackie Q, a scandalous pop star, Aldous's on and off girlfriend and Naples's mother Sean Combs as Sergio Roma, a volatile and aggressive record company owner and Aaron's boss who assigns him to manage Aldous Aziz Ansari as Matty Briggs, one of Aaron's co-workers Nick Kroll as Kevin McLean, one of Aaron's co-workers Ellie Kemper as one of Aaron's co-workers Kali Hawk as Kali Coleman, one of Aaron's co-workers Jake Johnson as Jazz Man, one of Aaron's co-workers Colm Meaney as Jonathan Snow, Aldous's father Karl Theobald as Aldous's assistant Carla Gallo as Destiny, a groupie T. J. Miller as Brian, a hotel clerk Neal Brennan as Brian's roommate Lino Facioli as Naples, Jackie Q and Aldous's son, later revealed to have been fathered by a photographer Kristen Schaal as a Today Show production assistant Lindsey Broad as Pocket Dial Girl Dinah Stabb as Lena Snow, Aldous's mother Kristen Bell as Sarah Marshall, an actress and Aldous's former girlfriend Lars Ulrich Tom Felton Christina Aguilera Pink Kurt F. Loder Meredith Vieira Mario Lopez Pharrell Williams Paul Krugman Rick Schroder Zöe Salmon Katy Perry (deleted scenes) Alanis Morissette (deleted scenes) Meghan Markle (uncredited) Dee Snider (uncredited) Holly Weber (uncredited) Billy Bush Rachel Roberts Brand's friends Karl Theobald, Greg "Mr Gee" Sekweyama and Jamie Sives also appear in the film. A week after the release of Forgetting Sarah Marshall, Universal Studios announced a new film, Get Him to the Greek, reuniting Jonah Hill and Russell Brand with writer/director Nicholas Stoller and producer Judd Apatow. Variety initially announced the project would focus on "fresh-out-of-college insurance adjuster (Hill) who is hired to accompany an out-of-control rock star (Brand) from London to a gig at L.A.'s Greek Theatre." In July 2008, Brand mentioned that he would be reprising his Aldous Snow role from Forgetting Sarah Marshall, in a new film from Apatow in which the character was back on drugs. In an interview with CHUD.com, Apatow would later reveal that Get Him to the Greek was indeed a spin-off of Forgetting Sarah Marshall with Brand again playing a no-longer-sober Aldous Snow while in a different interview Nicholas Stoller said that Jonah Hill will play a different character named Aaron Green, a young music executive. While Brand was backstage at the Paramount studio lot preparing to present the 2008 MTV Video Music Awards, he approached Christina Aguilera, Pink, and Katy Perry about filming cameos for Get Him to the Greek. Rehearsals began on April 27, 2009 and filming began on May 12 of that year. The film was shot in New York City, Las Vegas, Los Angeles and London. News footage featured in the film was filmed after a Russell Brand stand up performance of "Scandalous" at the O2 Arena in London, which most of the audience stayed for. While filming in Trafalgar Square, Brand was pushed into a fountain by a passerby. The film was released on June 4, 2010 in the United States. Get Him to the Greek grossed $61 million in the United States and Canada and $30.7 million overseas bringing its worldwide total to $91.7 million, against a production budget of $40 million. Get Him to the Greek was released alongside Killers and Marmaduke, and in its opening weekend debuted second at the box office behind Shrek Forever After with $17.6 million. The film fell to fourth the following week with a weekend gross of $10.1 million. In the UK, Get Him to the Greek opened at No. 1 grossing £1.6 million in its first week before dropping to No. 2 the following week with takings of £1 million. On Rotten Tomatoes, Get Him to the Greek has an approval rating of 73% based on 203 reviews, with an average rating of 6.30/10. The site's critical consensus reads, "Thanks to a suitably raunchy script and a pair of winning performances from Jonah Hill and Russell Brand, Get Him to the Greek is one of the year's funniest comedies." On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 65 out of 100, based on 39 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "B" on an A+ to F scale. Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times gave the film three out of four stars, writing: "under the cover of slapstick, cheap laughs, raunchy humor, gross-out physical comedy and sheer exploitation, Get Him to the Greek also is fundamentally a sound movie." A scene in which Jonah Hill is forcibly raped has been lambasted by critics as being "particularly egregious" and "horrific" and of furthering rape culture by "reinforc(ing) cultural myths surrounding the acceptance of rape." A two-disc and one-disc unrated and theatrical version of the film was released on DVD and Blu-ray Disc on September 28, 2010. Kim Garner, the senior vice president of marketing and artist development at Universal Republic Records, said that Brand and Universal Pictures "felt very strongly about doing something like this as opposed to a traditional soundtrack," and that they "wanted to release it like we would an actual rock band's album." The following songs were featured in the film, but not included in the soundtrack: "And Ghosted Pouts (Take the Veil Cerpin Taxt)" by The Mars Volta "London Calling" by The Clash "Anarchy in the U.K." by The Sex Pistols "20th Century Boy" by T.Rex "Rocks Off" by The Rolling Stones "Another Girl, Another Planet" by The Only Ones "Strict Machine" by Goldfrapp "Ghosts N Stuff" by Deadmau5 featuring Rob Swire "Personality Crisis" by The New York Dolls "Girls on the Dance Floor" by Far East Movement "Heureux Tous Les Deux" by Frank Alamo "Come on Eileen" by Dexys Midnight Runners "Cretin Hop" by The Ramones "Stop Drop and Roll" by Foxboro Hot Tubs "Touch My Body" by Mariah Carey "Love Today" by Mika "Fuck Me I'm Famous" by DJ Dougal and Gammer "What Planet You On" by Bodyrox featuring Luciana "Inside of You" by Infant Sorrow (which was originally featured in Forgetting Sarah Marshall). "Licky feat. Princess Superstar (Herve Remix)" by Larry Tee List of films set in Las Vegas "Get Him to the Greek (15)". British Board of Film Classification. April 19, 2010. Archived from the original on July 21, 2015. Retrieved July 17, 2015. Fritz, Ben (June 3, 2010). "Movie projector: 'Get Him to the Greek' and 'Killers' aiming for No. 2 against 'Shrek'". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved June 4, 2010. Greek cost Universal and its financing partners Relativity Media and Spyglass Entertainment about $40 million to make. "Get Him to the Greek Box Office Mojo". Box Office Mojo. IMDb. Retrieved September 14, 2010. Siegel, Tatiana (April 22, 2008). "Apatow, Stoller speak 'Greek'". Variety. Retrieved July 31, 2008. "Brand's Booky Wook not a Filmy Wilm". The Press Association. July 7, 2008. Archived from the original on July 12, 2008. "Exclusive Nick Stoller Interview". Collider. December 17, 2008. Archived from the original on December 18, 2008. Retrieved August 24, 2011. Faraci, Devin (July 29, 2008). "Spinning off from sarah marshall". Cinematic Happenings Under Development. Archived from the original on November 23, 2008. "Christina Aguilera Kissed Russell Brand?". Aguilerabuff.com. September 7, 2008. Archived from the original on July 31, 2009. Retrieved 2011-08-24. "Brand soaked in battle of Trafalgar". Metro. August 17, 2009. Kadri, Anisa (August 8, 2009). "Man 'pushes Russell Brand into fountain'". Digital Spy. ""Shrek" laughs its way past two new comedies". Reuters. June 6, 2010. Retrieved June 6, 2010. "Get Him to the Greek (2010)". Rotten Tomatoes. Fandango Media. Retrieved July 26, 2022. "Get Him to the Greek Reviews". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Retrieved October 10, 2019. Finke, Nikki (June 6, 2010). "JUNE GLOOM: 'Shrek 3D' #1 For 3rd Week; 'Get Him To The Greek' So-So; 'Killers' Weak; 'Marmaduke' And 'Splice' Stillborn". Deadline. both received only "B" Cinemascores. But the buzz on Greek was so much better than Killers Ebert, Roger (June 2, 2010). "And then get him to rehab". Chicago Sun Times. Sharkey, Betsy (June 4, 2010). "Movie review: 'Get Him to the Greek'". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved June 22, 2018. Carmon, Irin (August 3, 2011). "Once Again, Women Can Rape Men Too". Jezebel. Retrieved June 22, 2018. Sowisdral, Alicia (June 15, 2010). "Get Him to the Greek". Elevate Difference. Archived from the original on September 12, 2015. Retrieved June 22, 2018. "Get Him to the Greek Arrives on DVD and Blu-ray September 28th". MovieWeb. August 3, 2010. Retrieved July 26, 2021. Get Him to the Greek at AllMusic "Infant Sorrow Get Him to the Greek OST". Pitchfork Media. Retrieved February 10, 2012. Harding, Cortney (June 11, 2010). "Russell Brand Is A Man of Infant Sorrow". Billboard. Retrieved November 16, 2013. Film portal United States portal Comedy portal Wikiquote has quotations related to Get Him to the Greek. Get Him to the Greek at IMDb Get Him to the Greek at Box Office Mojo Get Him to the Greek at Rotten Tomatoes Get Him to the Greek at Metacritic