Yaren (in earlier times Makwa/Moqua) is a district of the Pacific island country of Nauru. It is the de facto capital of Nauru and is coextensive with Yaren Constituency. The district was created in 1968. Its original name, Makwa (or Moqua), refers to Moqua Well, an underground lake and primary source of drinking water for Nauruan people. Yaren is located in the south of the island. Its area is 1.5 km2 (0.58 sq mi), and its elevation was 25 metres (82 feet) as of 2007[update]. To the north of Yaren is Buada, to the east is Meneng and to the west is Boe. Yaren has a marine tropical rainforest climate (Köppen Af) with hot, humid conditions across the year. Yaren (and sometimes Aiwo) is usually listed as the capital of Nauru. However, this is incorrect; the republic does not have cities nor an official capital. Yaren is accepted by the United Nations as the "main district". English and Nauruan, the official languages of Nauru, are spoken in the district. The following government offices are located in this district: the Parliament House the earth station the administration offices the police station the fire station the National Stadium the Australian High Commission and Taiwanese Embassy the Nauru International Airport, air terminal, and head office of Nauru Airlines Yaren also constitutes a political constituency. It returns two members to the Parliament of Nauru. The Moqua Well is situated in Yaren. The primary and secondary schools serving all of Nauru are Yaren Primary School in Yaren District (Years 1–3), Nauru Primary School in Meneng District (Years 4–6), Nauru College in Denigomodu District (Years 7–9), and Nauru Secondary School (Years 10–12) in Yaren District. The Nauru Learning Village in Yaren houses the University of the South Pacific Nauru Campus, the Nauru Technical & Vocational Education Training Centre, and Nauru Secondary. Kieren Keke (born 1971), politician and medical doctor Charmaine Scotty, politician Dominic Tabuna (born 1980), politician Isabella Dageago (born 1972), politician List of settlements in Nauru Moqua Well Nauru Museum Constituencies of Nauru (naurugov.nr) "Yaren | district, Nauru". Encyclopedia Britannica. Retrieved 2019-09-02. "Moqua Caves and Moqua Well", Gatis Pāvils, 30 October 2011. 313728509 Yaren on OpenStreetMap "Contact." Nauru Airlines. Retrieved on 5 July 2018. "HEAD OFFICE Nauru International Airport PO Box 40 Republic of Nauru" Document by the." OHCHR. Retrieved on 8 July 2018. "The Education system is comprised of 10 schools, there are District Infant schools each[...]and finally Nauru Secondary School (Years 10-12) where compulsory education end at Year 12.[...]" "USP opens new Nauru Campus." University of the South Pacific. Retrieved on June 5, 2018. Media related to Yaren at Wikimedia Commons