The 1994 Men's Ice Hockey World Championships was the 58th such event sanctioned by the International Ice Hockey Federation (IIHF). Teams representing 35 countries participated in several levels of competition, with an additional two national teams failing to advance from a mid-season preliminary qualifying tournament. The competition also served as qualifications for group placements in the 1995 competition. The top Championship Group A tournament took place in Italy from 25 April to 8 May 1994, with games played in Bolzano, Canazei and Milan. Twelve teams took part, with the first round being split into two groups of six, with the four best teams from each group advancing to the quarter-finals. Canada beat Finland in a shootout to capture gold for the first time since 1961. This was Canada's 20th world title in ice hockey. Great Britain returned to Group A for the first time since 1962, but failed to even earn a point. Slovakia, Belarus, Croatia, and Estonia all debuted in Group C, the Slovaks winning the top group, the Estonians winning the bottom group that would be called Group D in two years. Source:[citation needed] Source:[citation needed] American Bill Lindsay tested positive for efedrin so official records indicate a final score of 7–0, however they also still add the two goals into the team totals. Played in Copenhagen and Aalborg 7–17 April. As in Group C1, a two to one score on the final day sealed victory over a former Soviet nation. This time Switzerland narrowly defeated Latvia. Source:[citation needed] Switzerland was promoted to Group A while China was relegated to Group C1. Played in Poprad and Spišská Nová Ves 18–27 March. The hosts, shortly after losing in the quarterfinals of the Olympics, were expected to have a relatively easy time playing in Group C. However, all three former Soviet republics gave them very tough games, and prevailing by a single goal in the final game sealed their victory. North Korea was supposed to be the eighth team in this tournament, but did not participate. Source:[citation needed] Slovakia was promoted to Group B while absent North Korea was relegated to Group C2 Played in November 1993. Two groups played to qualify for the final two spots in Spain. Source:[citation needed] Played in Zagreb Source:[citation needed] Croatia and Estonia qualified for Group C2. Played in Barcelona Source:[citation needed] Source:[citation needed] Source:[citation needed] Estonia was promoted to Group C1 Source:[citation needed] Best players selected by the directorate: Best Goaltender: Bill Ranford Best Defenceman: Magnus Svensson Best Forward: Paul Kariya Media All-Star Team: Goaltender: Bill Ranford Defence: Timo Jutila, Magnus Svensson Forwards: Paul Kariya, Saku Koivu, Jari Kurri The final standings of the tournament according to IIHF: List shows the top skaters sorted by points, then goals. Source: [1] Only the top five goaltenders, based on save percentage, who have played 50% of their team's minutes are included in this list. Source: [2] 1994 World Junior Ice Hockey Championships 1994 IIHF Women's World Championship Tournament summary at Passionhockey.com Duplacey page 508 Podneiks p. 157 Complete results Duplacey, James (1998). Total Hockey: The official encyclopedia of the National Hockey League. Total Sports. pp. 498–528. ISBN 0-8362-7114-9. Podnieks, Andrew (2010). IIHF Media Guide & Record Book 2011. Moydart Press. pp. 157–8.