Daniel Joseph Ricciardo AM (/rɪˈkɑːrdoʊ/ "Ricardo", Italian: [ritˈtʃardo]; born 1 July 1989) is an Australian and Italian racing driver currently competing in Formula One for RB Formula One Team under the Australian flag. He has achieved eight Grand Prix victories and 32 podiums in Formula One. Ricciardo made his debut at the 2011 British Grand Prix with the HRT team as part of a deal with Red Bull Racing, for whom he was test driving under its sister team Scuderia Toro Rosso. He joined Toro Rosso in 2012 full-time after the team changed its driver lineup and drove a Ferrari-powered car for them in 2012 and 2013. In 2014, Ricciardo was promoted to Red Bull as a replacement for the retiring Mark Webber alongside Sebastian Vettel. In his first season with Red Bull under Renault power, Ricciardo finished third in the championship with his first three Formula One wins, in Canada, Hungary, and Belgium. After two years without a victory, Ricciardo returned to the top of the podium at the 2016 Malaysian Grand Prix, eventually sealing third in the championship for the second time in three years at the 2016 Mexican Grand Prix. He won again for Red Bull at the Azerbaijan Grand Prix in 2017 and the Chinese and Monaco Grands Prix in 2018. After 2018, Ricciardo signed with Renault and raced for them in the 2019 and 2020 seasons. He joined McLaren for the 2021 and 2022 Formula One seasons. He obtained his only race win and podium with McLaren at the 2021 Italian Grand Prix. After the 2021 season, Ricciardo was appointed a Member of the Order of Australia in the 2022 Australia Day Honours. He left McLaren at the end of 2022 and became the third driver for Red Bull for the 2023 Formula One World Championship. He replaced the outgoing Nyck de Vries at AlphaTauri, after the 10th round of the season, on loan from Red Bull Racing, and is still racing for the team, which changed its name to RB Formula One Team in the 2024 season. Daniel Joseph Ricciardo was born on 1 July 1989 in Perth, Western Australia, to Italian-Australian parents. His father, Giuseppe "Joe" Ricciardo, was born in Ficarra (Messina), but relocated to Australia with his family aged just seven. Ricciardo's mother, Grace Pulitanò was born in Australia, but had parents originally from Casignana (Calabria). Ricciardo also has a sister; Michelle. Growing up in Duncraig, one of Perth's northern suburbs, Ricciardo's earliest memories of motorsports were of his father racing at the nearby Barbagallo Raceway in Wanneroo. Raised Catholic, he attended high school at Newman College. He started karting at the age of 9. Ricciardo started karting at the age of nine as a member of the Tiger Kart Club (TKC) and entered numerous karting events. In 2005, he entered the Western Australian Formula Ford championship driving a 15-year-old Van Diemen, finishing eighth by season's end. Towards the end of the season, Ricciardo took a leased 13-year-old Van Diemen across to Sandown Raceway in Melbourne to compete at the national Formula Ford series, but his aging car was uncompetitive, and he finished 16th, 17th and retired during the weekend's three races. After finishing sixth in 2007 Formula Renault 2.0 Italia, Ricciardo was selected by Red Bull Junior Team. During the mid-part of the 2008 season, Ricciardo made his Formula Three debut at the Nürburgring, joining SG Formula's Formula 3 Euro Series team. Despite only a short amount of experience in the car, Ricciardo qualified in eighth for the first race, which later converted into sixth in the race after James Jakes and Christian Vietoris stalled on the grid. But he struggled in the reverse-grid race, finishing just fifteenth. Ricciardo moved to the British Formula 3 Championship for the 2009 season driving for Carlin Motorsport. Ricciardo continued his partnership with Carlin by heading to the Macau Grand Prix with the team. On 30 October 2009, Ricciardo was signed by Tech 1 to compete in the 2010 season. He had competed with the team at the Autódromo Internacional do Algarve in Portugal in 2009 and was the teammate to Brendon Hartley, another driver who drove for Tech 1 over the season. Following a minor incident during a mountain bike exercise, Ricciardo was forced to miss the second test of the 2010 season but went on to take pole position for both races at the season-opening round of the 2010 season in Alcañiz, Spain. He finished third and second in the races respectively, to leave himself at the head of the championship standings. Two weeks later, at the Spa-Francorchamps circuit, Ricciardo was relegated to last on the grid after being deemed to have hindered the laps of other drivers. In the next two races, he finished 13th and fifth respectively – coming 2nd in the latter, until many of the front-runners were given penalties for infringing the parc ferme rules before the race. One week later, in Monte Carlo, Ricciardo secured his third pole position of the season, finishing three-tenths of a second ahead of championship rival Stefano Coletti. He secured his first win at the following race, one place ahead of Coletti. Ricciardo went on to secure two more wins at the Hungaroring and at the Hockenheimring in commanding fashion. Following Ricciardo's sixth pole from 12 races, Tech 1 team boss, Simon Abadie, praised his driver's efforts greatly, saying, "I am happy, and happy for Daniel because six poles in 12 races is good going," and later stated his team's ambitions for success, by telling Autosport correspondent Peter Mills, "I really hopes Daniel wins the championship." At the first race at the Silverstone circuit, Ricciardo was involved in a spectacular incident with pole-sitter Jon Lancaster, in which Ricciardo was sent into a barrel roll, eventually landing on his wheels. The crash saw the end of his race, with teammate Jean-Éric Vergne becoming the eventual winner, following disqualifications. Securing pole for the second race of the weekend, Ricciardo spent much of the race leading the pack by upwards of three seconds. However, braking issues in the second half of the event meant that, on the final lap, championship-rival Esteban Guerrieri was able to pass the Tech 1 racer. Going into the final round of the season, Ricciardo sat just three points behind championship leader Mikhail Aleshin and 13 ahead of third-place man Esteban Guerrieri. Managing his 8th pole of the season, Ricciardo managed a lights-to-flag victory, setting the fastest lap and placing himself equal first with one race remaining. After securing second place on the grid for the second race of the weekend, Ricciardo managed to hold position until the pit stops, where he was successfully 'jumped' by two of his rivals, including teammate Vergne. With only two laps left in the race and struggling for pace, Ricciardo was overtaken by championship rival Aleshin. Finishing in that order, Ricciardo failed to secure the title in his debut year, losing out to Mikhail Aleshin by only two points. In 2011 Ricciardo raced for ISR Racing prior to his HRT call-up. Ricciardo made his track debut at the wheel of a Formula One car when he tested for Red Bull Racing at the young drivers test at Circuito de Jerez over three days, starting on 1 December 2009. On the final day of testing, he clocked the fastest time of the test by over a second. This placed him as the only driver to go into the 1:17 bracket. Red Bull Racing's team manager Christian Horner suggested that Ricciardo may replace his 2010 World Series teammate Hartley as the team's test and reserve driver. Ricciardo and Hartley went on to share test and reserve duties for both Red Bull and sister team Scuderia Toro Rosso until the latter was removed from the Red Bull Junior team. On 11 November 2010, Ricciardo was confirmed as the single driver to represent Red Bull Racing at the end-of-season young driver's test at the Yas Marina Circuit, on 16–17 November. Ricciardo continued to show his one-lap prowess and dominated the event, with his fastest lap being 1.3 seconds faster than 2010 World Champion Sebastian Vettel's qualifying lap the Saturday before. Days later, Ricciardo was confirmed as Toro Rosso's test and reserve driver for the 2011 season and would take part in the first free practice session of each race weekend. Franz Tost, Toro Rosso team principal stated that "having a hungry youngster on the books will keep our current driver pairing nice and sharp", referring to then Toro Rosso drivers Jaime Alguersuari and Sébastien Buemi. On 30 June 2011, Ricciardo was contracted to Hispania Racing by Red Bull Racing, replacing Narain Karthikeyan for the remaining races of the 2011 season beside the Indian Grand Prix, to allow Karthikeyan to race at his home Grand Prix. Ricciardo made his Grand Prix debut at the 2011 British Grand Prix at Silverstone Circuit. However, on 22 October 2011, a few days before the inaugural Indian Grand Prix, the race where Karthikeyan was due to gain back his seat for his home race, HRT F1 announced that Vitantonio Liuzzi made way for Karthikeyan, allowing Ricciardo to race in India and extend his learning curve that Red Bull Racing paid the struggling Spanish team to do, as well as allowing Karthikeyan to race in front of his home fans. In Abu Dhabi, Ricciardo retired with mechanical problems after starting 20th on the grid, and in the final race at the Brazilian Grand Prix, Ricciardo finished 20th after starting 22nd on the grid. On 14 December 2011, it was confirmed that Ricciardo would drive for Scuderia Toro Rosso for the 2012 season, alongside Frenchman Jean-Éric Vergne. At the Australian Grand Prix on 18 March, Ricciardo managed to overtake his teammate Vergne late on the last lap to come home in ninth place, securing his first two World Championship points. In wet conditions in Malaysia, he finished 12th, after having been first to switch to slick tyres. In Bahrain, he qualified sixth, but dropped back during the race and finished 15th. In Monaco, he suffered his only retirement of the season, after having started from 15th position. Ricciardo would score points again only after the summer break, at the Belgian Grand Prix, where he started from 16th and finished ninth. He also had a run of three consecutive points scores from the Singapore to the Korean Grand Prix. He scored one more points finish in Abu Dhabi for the year, ending tenth. Ricciardo finished 18th in the championship, with 10 points. Toro Rosso re-signed Ricciardo and Jean-Éric Vergne for the 2013 season. He began the year by not finishing the opening two rounds, both due to exhaust issues. In China, Ricciardo scored his first points of the year after finishing seventh, claiming his best finish in F1 by far. He finished tenth at the Spanish Grand Prix, despite a slow start from 11th on the grid. Ricciardo again was unable to finish the Monaco Grand Prix after Romain Grosjean crashed into the back of him, damaging his rear wing. At the British Grand Prix, Ricciardo had his best qualifying yet in fifth. Despite being overtaken by faster cars behind, he still snatched points with eighth place. Ricciardo once again finished seventh at the Italian Grand Prix, having held off Grosjean in the dying laps. More tenth places followed at India and the Brazilian Grand Prix. Ricciardo out-scored his teammate by seven points and out-qualified him for over three-quarters of the season. His impressive qualifying efforts of 30–7 against Vergne over their two years together helped promote him to Toro Rosso senior team, Red Bull, replacing fellow countryman Mark Webber. Ricciardo finished 13th in the championship with 20 points. Ricciardo replaced Mark Webber at Infiniti Red Bull Racing at the start of the 2014 Formula One season, partnering Sebastian Vettel, a four-time world champion. In the first race of the season, the Australian Grand Prix, Ricciardo qualified in second place behind Lewis Hamilton and completed the race in second place, despite pressure from rookie Kevin Magnussen in the final laps. Ricciardo was later disqualified, as his car was ruled to have exceeded the mandated hourly fuel flow rate limit. Had he not been disqualified, it would have marked the first time an Australian had made the podium at the Australian Grand Prix since the race became part of the World Championship. Infiniti Red Bull Racing filed an appeal against the disqualification, which was rejected by the International Court of Appeal, the FIA decision being upheld. Ricciardo failed to finish in the Malaysian Grand Prix, but managed to record his first points of the 2014 season at the Bahrain Grand Prix, where he finished fourth, after starting in 13th position. He finished fourth again at the Chinese Grand Prix. Ricciardo would not wait long for his first podium, securing third place at the Spanish Grand Prix. Monaco saw Ricciardo qualify in third, behind both Mercedes cars. Despite dropping to fifth early on, he regained third after problems for teammate Vettel and Kimi Räikkönen. He narrowly lost to Lewis Hamilton to second place by 0.4 seconds. At the Canadian Grand Prix, Ricciardo leaped from sixth on the grid to third during the pit stops, and in the last four laps, he overcame Sergio Pérez and Nico Rosberg to take his first win of his career. By winning, Ricciardo became the fourth Australian to win a Grand Prix in Formula One, joining Jack Brabham, Alan Jones and Mark Webber. His victory in Canada broke the chain of six Mercedes victories that marked the beginning of the 2014 season. Ricciardo impressed many by beating Vettel throughout the first half of the 2014 season, and after a clean and tight battle between Ricciardo and Fernando Alonso at the German Grand Prix, Alonso described Ricciardo as "unbelievable" and "very, very smart, very respectful". Ricciardo won the Hungarian Grand Prix on 27 July, ahead of Alonso and Hamilton having started fourth. He was in third place behind Alonso and Hamilton with less than four laps remaining and overtook Hamilton's Mercedes with a pass on the outside of the Hungaroring's turn two. He then easily caught and passed Alonso's Ferrari, as Alonso had very little grip left on his tyres – television footage of his left front tyre after the race showed it to be badly blistered. In the final two laps, Ricciardo pulled away to win the race by 5.225 seconds. His teammate Vettel survived a spin coming onto the main straight late in the race to finish seventh. Ricciardo became the second Australian to win the Hungarian Grand Prix, after Mark Webber's victory – also for Red Bull – in 2010. Ricciardo then went on to score his third victory of his career to go back to back in Belgium, after the two Mercedes drivers collided. This meant he was the first Australian to win there since Jack Brabham in 1960. Ricciardo finished the Italian Grand Prix in fifth place, after a tense battle with teammate Vettel during the late stages of the race. At the Singapore Grand Prix, he qualified third and finished in the same position. On 4 October 2014, it was announced that Ricciardo would partner Daniil Kvyat for the 2015 season, following the announcement of Vettel's departure from the team. He took his final podium of the year at the United States Grand Prix. Ricciardo confirmed third place in the drivers' championship at the Brazilian Grand Prix, despite it being his first retirement since the Malaysian Grand Prix. He was forced to retire on lap 39 due to a broken suspension. In the final race of the season, the Abu Dhabi Grand Prix, despite starting from the pit lane due to a front wing infringement, Ricciardo finished in fourth place and secured the first fastest lap of his Formula One career. For his 2014 performances, Ricciardo won the Laureus World Sports Award for Breakthrough of the Year in April 2015. Throughout the 2014 season, Ricciardo harnessed a total of 238 points, three wins and five more podiums. On 8 February 2015, during the third episode of series 22 of the popular British motoring television programme Top Gear, Ricciardo became the fastest Formula One driver to perform a lap of the Top Gear test track during the Star in a Reasonably Priced Car feature, beating the previous record-holder Lewis Hamilton with a time of 1:42.2. In 2015, Red Bull slipped behind Ferrari and Williams in their efforts to take the title fight to Mercedes. The Red Bull cars were held back by the Renault power unit having been out-developed by Mercedes and Ferrari. The RB11 only showed pace in slow and twisty high downforce tracks[original research?] or rain[failed verification], highlighting the car's strong chassis. He finished the opening race at the Australian Grand Prix in sixth, the RB11 seemingly uncompetitive as he finished a lap down. Despite scoring many points in the first part of the year, Ricciardo's engine blew up on the final lap of the Bahrain Grand Prix, while running in sixth, forcing him to use his fourth and final engine of the year. Ricciardo achieved his first top-five finish in Monaco with fifth and the fastest lap of the race. He had a woeful race at the Canadian Grand Prix, where he finished 13th after being hit by car issues. While tussling for second in Hungary with Nico Rosberg, his race-winning charge ground to a halt when the two clashed while hunting down Sebastian Vettel. Ricciardo managed to finish third behind his teammate. It was his first podium since the 2014 United States Grand Prix. Ricciardo recorded his second podium of the season in Singapore, where he finished second and recorded his third fastest lap of the season. Ricciardo finished the season with 92 points in eighth place in the championship, three points behind teammate Daniil Kvyat. Despite out-qualifying Kvyat 14–5, Ricciardo trailed him 10-9 in races. In a much more competitive Red Bull, Ricciardo began the season well, finishing 4th in both Australia and Bahrain and qualifying 2nd and then leading early on in the Chinese Grand Prix before suffering a tyre blowout and finishing in 4th again. Ricciardo qualified third at the Spanish Grand Prix, and after the two Mercedes cars of Lewis Hamilton and Nico Rosberg crashed out on the first lap, he led the early stages of the race. After a remarkable strategy call by Ferrari resulting in a very short third stint for Sebastian Vettel, Red Bull decided to answer this by pitting Ricciardo again and covering Vettel, also going for the presumed faster three-stop strategy. This dropped him behind Vettel, new teammate Max Verstappen and Kimi Räikkönen on track, and after a few failed attempts at passing Vettel, a tyre blowout late on in the race meant that he finished fourth again, behind eventual winner Verstappen, and the Ferraris of Räikkönen and Vettel. Ricciardo scored his first pole position at the Monaco Grand Prix, and led the early wet stages of the race. However, after a very long pitstop in which his team took nearly 40 seconds to ready a set of tyres, he lost the race lead to Lewis Hamilton and finished the race in 2nd. Ricciardo was notably upset after the race result, saying: "Two weekends in a row I've been screwed now. It sucks. It hurts." A pair of seventh-place finishes followed in Canada and Azerbaijan. A fourth place at the British Grand Prix would soon come, having been outqualified by a teammate for the first time that year. Ricciardo returned to the podium in Hungary, finishing third, and in Germany, where he finished second. On the podium in Germany, Ricciardo performed a new celebration, where he drank champagne out of his shoe. He calls this celebration the "shoey". He repeated the celebration at the Belgian Grand Prix (where he came second again), this time persuading podium interviewer Mark Webber to also drink from the shoe. Ricciardo qualified and finished second at the Singapore Grand Prix, after pushing eventual winner Rosberg hard near the end, a late strategy change pushing him to under half a second behind at the finish line. Ricciardo qualified fourth at the Malaysian Grand Prix but moved up to second into turn one, after a collision between Sebastian Vettel and Nico Rosberg. He then took the lead late on in the race when leader Lewis Hamilton retired with an engine failure. After fighting with his Red Bull teammate Verstappen, Ricciardo took his first victory of the season. He repeated his "shoey" celebration on the podium and was able to get team boss Christian Horner as well as podium sharers Verstappen and Rosberg to repeat the celebration. He finished third at the United States Grand Prix. Ricciardo eventually sealed third in the Drivers' Championship following a podium finish in Mexico. He scored 256 points and achieved one pole, one win, seven other podiums and three fastest laps. Other than Sergio Pérez, he is the only driver to have been classified in every race of the 2016 season. In fact, save for just two races in which Ricciardo equalled the previous year's result, he improved on every other race result from 2015. Ricciardo qualified 10th in Australia after spinning into the tyre barrier in Q3. He incurred a five-place grid penalty due to an unscheduled gearbox change as a result of the crash. A gearbox sensor issue prevented him from taking the start and when he did get going, two laps down, a sudden fuel pressure problem ended his race after 25 laps. Ricciardo would finish fourth after narrowly losing out to teammate Max Verstappen on the last lap. Starting fourth at the Bahrain Grand Prix, and after a poor safety car restart which dropped him three places, he was able to pass Felipe Massa and finish in fifth. He endured a second retirement in four races at the Russian Grand Prix, pulling out on lap 5 due to brake issues. Ricciardo scored his first podium of the year, with third in Spain, albeit finishing over a minute behind the leaders. This marked the start of five consecutive podiums. He qualified fifth at the Monaco Grand Prix, and a strong overcut allowed him to jump Verstappen and Valtteri Bottas for another third place. Yet another third place followed in Canada after jumping Kimi Räikkönen, and inheriting positions after Vettel stopped for a front wing change and Verstappen retired. At the first Azerbaijan Grand Prix, Ricciardo qualified tenth having hit the wall. Ricciardo pitted early on lap 5 due to brake issues, and was down to 17th. However, he would charge back to the top 10 in a matter of laps, and sat fifth at the time of the red flag. Following the restart, Ricciardo made a sensational three-car overtake that moved him to third place, sitting behind Vettel and Lewis Hamilton. However, Vettel was due to serve a stop/go penalty while Hamilton pitted due to a loose headrest, promoting Ricciardo into the lead. He would then cross the line and win the Azerbaijan Grand Prix, four seconds ahead of Bottas. At Austria, Ricciardo got past Räikkönen on the opening lap for third, and held off Hamilton for his fifth podium on the bounce. Ricciardo took a five-place grid penalty for the British Grand Prix due to a gearbox change, but he suffered a turbo failure in Q1, relegating to 19th on the grid. In a stunning drive, Ricciardo produced a comeback that saw him climb fourteen places to fifth place. His run of form came to a halt at the Hungarian Grand Prix, as he and teammate Verstappen collided at Turn 2 on the opening lap, causing Ricciardo's radiator to break and spin out a corner later. Ricciardo stood on the podium in third place at the Belgian Grand Prix, having made up a place on Bottas during the second safety car restart from sixth on the grid. However the next race in Italy forced Ricciardo to take additional power unit elements, which necessitated a 20-place grid penalty. He qualified third, but was demoted to 16th. Making yet another drive-through the field, making spectacular overtakes to end in fourth place. In Singapore, from third, He would inherit second at the start after a multi-car shunt, which was where he would finish. Malaysia delivered another podium in third place, after front-row starter Räikkönen was unable to take the start, and secured third again in Japan. This was followed by consecutive retirements in United States and Mexico. At the Brazilian Grand Prix, Ricciardo took another engine penalty that relegated him to 14th on the grid. He was caught up in a spin at the start by being tagged by Stoffel Vandoorne, but would still vault up to finish in sixth place. Despite having maintained fourth in the drivers' championship for much of the season, a third retirement in the last four races at Abu Dhabi saw Ricciardo drop down to fifth in the championship, with 200 points, five points behind Räikkönen. Ricciardo had scored one win, one fastest lap and nine podiums. Ricciardo started the season with a fourth-place in Australia, from eighth on the grid after a three-place penalty for speeding under red flag conditions. In Bahrain, he recorded a non-finish after an electrical failure on the second lap. His result in the 2018 Chinese Grand Prix was much better, taking a commanding victory by almost nine seconds, after starting sixth on the grid. Running sixth for majority of the race, he and teammate Max Verstappen both pitted for fresher tyres under the safety car on lap 30. Ricciardo would put on an overtaking masterclass, overtaking five cars in a span of eight laps to win the race. At the 2018 Azerbaijan Grand Prix, Ricciardo qualified in fourth. He was fighting for fourth with teammate Max Verstappen in the latter half of the race. On lap 40, both drivers collided, Ricciardo's front wing made heavy contact with his teammate's rear, and the incident caused both drivers to retire. Following the race, Horner stated that both drivers were ordered to "apologise" at the Red Bull factory. At the Spanish Grand Prix, Ricciardo finished fifth and set the track record, despite spinning under the virtual safety car. Coming into the 2018 Monaco Grand Prix, Ricciardo and Verstappen were considered favourites to win the race due to their cars superior chassis and down-force. Ricciardo topped all three practice sessions before qualifying, breaking the lap record with each session. Ricciardo managed to secure the second pole of his career at Monaco, topping every qualifying session as well and setting a new lap record again. In the race, Ricciardo managed to hold off the Ferrari of Sebastian Vettel to take his first Monaco Grand Prix victory and his first Grand Prix win from pole position, despite having to manage a loss of power due to a MGU-K power output issue throughout the race. His result would lift him to third in the standings, but his win would turn out to be his last podium of the season. He was set for a grid penalty at the Canadian Grand Prix due to his damaged MGU-K, but Red Bull opted re-use his other from China. Starting sixth, After jumping Kimi Räikkönen at the start, a successful overcut on Lewis Hamilton brought him to fourth place at the finish. Front wing damage mid-race limited progress in France, as he was passed by Räikkönen late in the race which demoted him out of the podium positions, eventually settling for fourth again. More disappointment came on his birthday weekend at Austrian Grand Prix, retiring with an exhaust failure on lap 54. An uncompetitive weekend followed at the British Grand Prix, finishing fifth after a DRS failure in qualifying. He started the German Grand Prix from the back of the grid after changing power unit components, but suffered yet another engine failure during the race. Bad luck continue to befall Ricciardo in Hungary, as a spin for Lance Stroll early in a wet session prevented him from completing a clean lap, knocking him out in Q2. Despite contact on lap 1 with Marcus Ericsson, Ricciardo managed to progress to fifth place at the halfway mark. He would later make contact again with a damaged Valtteri Bottas on lap 68, but passed him back on the final lap for fourth place. On 3 August, Ricciardo announced his shock departure from Red Bull at the end of 2018. Ricciardo would suffer consecutive retirements in Belgium and Italy, being caught up in a first-lap incident in the former and sustaining a clutch issue in the latter. This was followed by two sixth places in succession, the latter race at the Russian Grand Prix saw Ricciardo start at the back for a third time due to engine penalties. At the Japanese Grand Prix, Ricciardo suffered another qualifying setback, being hit by an exhaust failure that confined him to 15th on the grid, having failed to set a lap in Q2. Fortunately, Ricciardo replicated his Hungary drive and pushed all the way to fourth place. Later in the season, he tied for the most retirements in the 2018 season, with 8 retirements in total. At the United States Grand Prix, Ricciardo outqualified Verstappen for the first time since Monaco in fifth, the Dutchman endured suspension issues. However, his run of mechanical retirements hit him on lap 9, pulling over with a battery failure. Ricciardo secured pole at the Mexican Grand Prix ahead of teammate Verstappen by a mere 0.027 seconds. A slow start dropped him to third, and was later passed by Vettel following the pit stops. Ricciardo did manage to catch up to Hamilton to reclaim third place, but to no avail as his car suffered a hydraulics issue on lap 61, forcing him to retire for an eighth time, tied for the most retirements in the 2018 season. After the race, Ricciardo insisted that his car was cursed and said that he "didn't see the point" in doing the final two races of the season. An engine penalty in Brazil dropped him to 11th, and narrowly missed the podium to Räikkönen by 0.4 seconds in another stunning charge. Ricciardo finished fourth again at the season-ending Abu Dhabi Grand Prix after a wrong strategy meant he finished fourth again. He managed four fastest laps for the season, in Australia, China, Spain and Hungary and finished the season sixth in the World Drivers' Championship with 170 points. On 3 August 2018, it was announced that Ricciardo had signed a contract to drive for Renault in 2019 and 2020. His teammate for the 2019 season was Nico Hülkenberg. Ricciardo had a poor start to the season with retirements in the first two races, from front wing damage in Australia and power failure in Bahrain, having run well in the points in the latter race. A first Q3 appearance followed in China followed, before driving to his first points finish with Renault in seventh place. In Azerbaijan, Ricciardo reversed into Daniil Kvyat when both cars stopped after an overtake attempt by Ricciardo, causing race-ending damage for both drivers and Ricciardo's third retirement in four races. Six consecutive race finishes followed, he finished 13th at the Spanish Grand Prix after a questionable race strategy. He had his best qualifying thus far with sixth in Monaco, but a late call to pit before the safety car, dropped to ninth at the flag. Ricciardo had a successful weekend in Canada, improving his personal best qualifying position to fourth. He proceeded to finish in sixth place, having held off a faster Mercedes of Valtteri Bottas for numerous laps. Ricciardo crossed the line in seventh place at the French Grand Prix having been embroiled in a four-car battle, but was given two separate five-second penalties on the final lap. This was for failing to re-join the track safely after overtaking Lando Norris, and then overtook Kimi Räikkönen off-track, resulting in him being dropped out of the points. After a perplexing race in Austria, Ricciardo started and finished seventh at the British Grand Prix. He then suffered an exhaust failure at the German Grand Prix. More woes followed in Hungarian as he suffered a disastrous Q1 exit, and was then stuck behind Kevin Magnussen's Haas throughout the latter half of the race. At the Italian Grand Prix, Ricciardo finished in 4th place, his best result of the year. Teammate Hülkenberg finished in 5th, contributing to Renault's best finish since the team returned to the sport in 2016. Ricciardo was involved in a first-lap collision in Russia, leading to his eventual retirement. He was initially classified 6th in Japan, before both Renault cars were disqualified ten days later for using illegal driver aids. Three consecutive points finishes followed, with strong 6th-place finishes in the United States and Brazil. Ricciardo ended a relatively disappointing season for Renault in 9th place in the championship, with 54 points, ahead of teammate Hülkenberg. Ricciardo had a new teammate for the 2020 season, with Hülkenberg being replaced by Esteban Ocon. Daniel started the season with a retirement at the 2020 Austrian Grand Prix after his Renault R.S.20 overheated. In this next race, the 2020 Styrian Grand Prix, Ricciardo was running in sixth place with two laps remaining, but was overtaken by Lance Stroll and Lando Norris. He finished the race in eighth. Ricciardo qualified eleventh at the 2020 Hungarian Grand Prix and finished the race in eighth place. At the 2020 British Grand Prix, Ricciardo finished in fourth place, equaling his best result for Renault. He was running in sixth place before late tyre punctures for Carlos Sainz Jr. and Valtteri Bottas promoted him to fourth. At the 70th Anniversary Grand Prix, Ricciardo qualified fifth, but spun midway through the race and finished fourteenth. Ricciardo qualified thirteenth and finished eleventh at the next race in Spain. Ricciardo would go on an eleven race point-scoring streak until the end of the season, starting with the 2020 Belgian Grand Prix. He qualified and finished in fourth place, as well as taking the fastest lap on the last lap of the race. At the 2020 Italian Grand Prix, he qualified seventh and finished in sixth place. At the 2020 Tuscan Grand Prix, he qualified eighth and was running in third place for the majority of the race, but was overtaken by Alex Albon of Red Bull, leaving him to have to finish in fourth place. At the Russian Grand Prix, Ricciardo was fastest in the second qualifying segment, but only managed to qualify in fifth place. In the race, he finished in fifth place despite a 5-second penalty for violating track limits. At the 2020 Eifel Grand Prix, Ricciardo qualified sixth and finished third, scoring the team's first podium since the 2011 Malaysian Grand Prix. This was Ricciardo's first podium since joining Renault, and his first since the 2018 Monaco Grand Prix. In the next race, the 2020 Portuguese Grand Prix, he started tenth after having a crash towards the end of the second segment of qualifying, damaging his rear wing. He finished ninth in the race. He reached the podium a second time for Renault at the 2020 Emilia Romagna Grand Prix. Starting fifth on the grid, he overtook Pierre Gasly on the first lap, before being overcut by Pérez after being stuck behind traffic. However, a tyre failure and the retirement of former teammate Max Verstappen and a strategy error by Pérez's team Racing Point allowed him to finish in third place. In the 2020 Bahrain Grand Prix, he started sixth and overtook Valtteri Bottas on the first lap. However, following a red flag, he had a poor second start, which dropped him down to tenth place. He eventually finished in seventh place. At the 2020 Sakhir Grand Prix, he had a chance of a podium after Charles Leclerc, Max Verstappen, and Sergio Pérez all collided in the first lap of the race. But a mistimed second pit stop caused Ricciardo to be overtaken, ending the race in fifth place. In his final race for Renault at the 2020 Abu Dhabi Grand Prix, he qualified twelfth; however, a good first stint allowed him to exit the pits in seventh place. He also took the fastest lap of the race on the final lap. He finished in fifth place in the championship standings with 119 points, six points behind Sergio Pérez in fourth. After two years at Renault, Ricciardo joined McLaren for the 2021 Formula One World Championship as a replacement for Carlos Sainz Jr., who had signed a multi-year deal with Ferrari. He partnered with Lando Norris, who was retained by the team. He qualified sixth for his first race with the team at the Bahrain Grand Prix. On lap four, Pierre Gasly collided with Ricciardo, causing floor damage to his car, resulting in the loss of a considerable amount of downforce. Despite the performance loss, Ricciardo was able to finish the season opener in seventh. At the following race, the Emilia Romagna Grand Prix, he qualified sixth. Ricciardo moved up to fifth on the opening lap but was subsequently unable to keep pace with the top four cars in the wet conditions and was ordered to let Norris past to contend for the podium, which he did. Ricciardo finished the race in sixth. At the Portuguese Grand Prix, Ricciardo started from sixteenth after being knocked out during the first phase of qualifying. He recovered to ninth during the race. At the Spanish Grand Prix, Ricciardo qualified seventh, but managed to climb to fifth on the opening lap. He defended fifth from Red Bull driver Sergio Pérez until lap 45, where Pérez was able to get past at turn one. He finished sixth, marking the first time in the season he finished ahead of Norris. In the following round of the season, the Monaco Grand Prix, Ricciardo was eliminated in the second phase of qualifying and finished twelfth during the race after being lapped by his teammate, who finished on the podium. A crash in qualifying at the Azerbaijan Grand Prix meant Ricciardo started the race in thirteenth, though he was able to climb up into the points during the race and finished ninth. At the French Grand Prix, Ricciardo finished in sixth position. Ricciardo qualified thirteenth at the Styrian Grand Prix. By the end of the fifth lap, he had moved up to eighth, but on lap seven he suffered a loss in power which saw him drop down to fourteenth, and he finished in thirteenth. At the Austrian Grand Prix, Ricciardo finished seventh after starting thirteenth. The British Grand Prix saw Ricciardo qualify in seventh place, just behind his teammate. He finished Formula One's first-ever sprint race in sixth place after an overtaking move on Fernando Alonso in the closing stages. Starting the Grand Prix from sixth, Ricciardo benefited from Max Verstappen's retirement to finish in fifth place. This was his first top five finish at McLaren. The final race before the summer break, the Hungarian Grand Prix saw Ricciardo qualify in eleventh. A chaotic start to the race, which saw seven cars eliminated, meant Ricciardo climbed to second place by the first corner, only for him to be wiped out of the race by another collision and finish the race in eleventh after picking up significant damage to his car. Upon returning from the summer break, Ricciardo qualified fourth for the Belgian Grand Prix in wet conditions, ahead of his teammate who crashed out in Q3. The race on Sunday was delayed multiple times due to torrential rain and was abandoned after two laps behind the safety car. As a result, Ricciardo was classified fourth and scored six points. The following weekend at the Dutch Grand Prix, Ricciardo qualified in tenth, again ahead of his teammate. On race day, he was denied a points finish after conceding his tenth position during the closing stages, under orders from the team, to Lando Norris, who was on fresher tyres. Nonetheless, it was a weekend where Ricciardo was the quicker of the two McLaren drivers. Ricciardo qualified in fifth at the next race, the Italian Grand Prix, six thousandths of a second behind his teammate. During the sprint race on Saturday, Ricciardo gained two positions on the opening lap to finish in third position, earning one championship point. As a result of a grid penalty for Valtteri Bottas, Ricciardo started Sunday's Grand Prix on the front row. This also marked the third race in a row where he had out-qualified his teammate. At the start of the race, Ricciardo got a better start than polesitter Max Verstappen and took the lead into turn one. He held off Verstappen for 21 laps, surviving a safety car restart and late pressure from Norris, whom he led home to claim his first victory for McLaren while also setting the fastest lap. This was also the team's first win since the 2012 Brazilian Grand Prix and their first one-two finish since the 2010 Canadian Grand Prix. At the Russian Grand Prix, Ricciardo qualified fifth on the grid, behind his teammate Lando Norris who was on pole position. A late rain shower in the final few laps saw Ricciardo pit for intermediate tyres and work his way up to fourth place despite a poor start and slow pit stop earlier during the race. At the Turkish Grand Prix, Ricciardo was knocked out in Q1 and took an engine penalty, starting at the back of the grid. During the race, he managed to progress up to 13th. At the United States Grand Prix, Ricciardo qualified seventh, ahead of teammate Norris, who qualified behind him in eighth. He was then promoted to sixth place on the grid as a result of a grid penalty for Valtteri Bottas. Overtaking Sainz on lap one following a three-way battle between himself, Sainz and Norris, he managed to hold on to fifth place, defending from Sainz and helping McLaren score crucial points in the battle for third place in the Constructors' Championship with Ferrari, while Norris finished eighth. At the Mexico City Grand Prix, Ricciardo qualified in seventh place and split the two Ferraris. He would be McLaren's main driver for the race, as Norris started last with an engine penalty. Ricciardo made a blistering start and was alongside Sergio Pérez for fourth place heading into turn one. He had a small lockup and made contact with Valtteri Bottas at turn one and suffered damage to his front wing. After a pitstop, he fell to last place and could only recover to twelfth place, while teammate Norris was able to come from the back of the grid to finish in tenth place. At the São Paulo Grand Prix, Ricciardo ran in eighth place and challenged Pierre Gasly for seventh before he had to retire with a power issue, making it his first retirement of the season. At the Qatar Grand Prix, Ricciardo was knocked out in Q2, qualifying 14th, and could only manage 12th in the race after fuel issues hindered his opportunity to progress. Ricciardo managed to end his pointless streak at the penultimate race in Saudi Arabia. Despite getting knocked out in Q2, qualifying in 11th place, he benefitted from decent pace and a pit-stop during red flags to gain positions. He ran in fourth after the second red flag, challenging Esteban Ocon for the podium position before he lost his fourth place to eventual third-place finisher Valtteri Bottas and settled for fifth place. At the final race of the season in Abu Dhabi, Ricciardo managed to qualify in 10th place. He then finished 12th after he was overcut by Fernando Alonso and Pierre Gasly as a result of a virtual safety car. He ended the season in eighth place in the drivers standings, scoring 115 points with just one podium, his race win at Monza. Ricciardo missed the final day of the 2022 pre-season test in Bahrain, due to a positive COVID-19 test on 11 March. He was released from isolation in time for the opening race of the season, on 20 March. In the opening season race at the Bahrain Grand Prix, the Australian qualified 18th and finished the race in 14th ahead of his teammate Norris in 15th, due to a lack of pace and three driver retirements. At the Saudi Arabian Grand Prix, Ricciardo qualified 12th, and was running in 9th during the race. However, he brought out the virtual safety car on lap 35 after his McLaren stopped at the pit lane exit due to an engine failure. At the Australian Grand Prix, Ricciardo managed to qualify in 7th place, and finished in 6th place behind his teammate Norris in his home Grand Prix. At the Emilia Romagna Grand Prix, Ricciardo qualified in 6th place for the sprint race on that Saturday, where he managed to maintain 6th place during the sprint for the race. During the first lap of the race, Ricciardo collided with Carlos Sainz Jr., causing Sainz to retire from the race, and damaging Ricciardo's front wing. At the end of the race, Ricciardo finished in last place, while his teammate, Norris finished on the podium with 3rd place. At the Miami Grand Prix, Ricciardo qualified 14th and finished the race in 13th place after his teammate retired. After making it to Q3 and qualifying ninth for the 2022 Spanish Grand Prix, Ricciardo failed to score points and finished twelfth. In the build up to the Monaco Grand Prix Ricciardo was criticised for his early season performance relative to teammate Lando Norris by McLaren Racing CEO Zak Brown in an interview Brown gave to Sky Sports F1 stating Ricciardo's poor early season results had "not met his [Ricciardo's] or our expectations." Ricciardo finished eighth in Azerbaijan ahead of his teammate Lando Norris, a track on which he has previously won. He then failed to score points in the Canadian Grand Prix. At the British Grand Prix Ricciardo qualified 14th and could only finish the race one place higher in 13th after complaining post-race of lacking grip during the race. After two ninth placed points scoring results Austria and France. Ricciardo finished pointless at the Hungarian Grand Prix finishing 15th having received a 5-second penalty for colliding with Lance Stroll during the race. In August 2022, McLaren and Ricciardo terminated his contract a year early, by mutual agreement. Following qualifying of the Japanese Grand Prix, Ricciardo announced that he would not be on the grid for the 2023 Formula One season. Thanks to a marginally stronger second half of the season, where he scored points in three of his last six races, Ricciardo was able to finish the season in 11th position in the Drivers' Championship, although McLaren would finish behind Alpine in the Constructors' Championship. Despite his late season improvement, Ricciardo still finished the 2022 season with a considerable eighty-five point deficit to teammate Norris, who finished seventh in the Drivers Championship. After leaving McLaren at the conclusion of the 2022 season, Daniel Ricciardo elected to rejoin Red Bull Racing as a third driver for the 2023 season. The role saw him complete PR activities, assist in simulator and factory work and, while attending race weekends, access chat channels and communications to support the race team. Ricciardo also drove the Red Bull RB19 in the Pirelli tests held on July 11 at Silverstone, after the British Grand Prix. Nyck de Vries was released from his AlphaTauri seat after the 2023 British Grand Prix. That same day, Ricciardo drove the Red Bull RB19 in the Pirelli tyre tests, and it was announced that he would fill the vacant seat, making his return to the AlphaTauri team and to Formula One for the 2023 Hungarian Grand Prix. He was partnered with Yuki Tsunoda. Ricciardo qualified and finished in 13th position in his first race back with AlphaTauri in Hungary. Despite a first-lap incident that dropped him into last, Ricciardo recovered to 13th place. At the Belgian Grand Prix Ricciardo qualified 19th for the main race after breaching track limits on his final flying lap while teammate Tsunoda qualified 11th, just missing out on a Q3 spot. Ricciardo had a better performance in the sprint shootout, qualifying 11th for the shorter race. He then ran in the points for most of the sprint but was ultimately overtaken by George Russell and Esteban Ocon a few laps before the end, finishing 10th. In the main race Ricciardo finished 16th while Tsunoda earned a point with 10th. During the second free practice of the Dutch Grand Prix, Ricciardo broke a metacarpal bone in his hand in seven places, preventing him from competing for the rest of the weekend. Liam Lawson replaced Ricciardo, making his F1 debut. Riccardo's injury forced him to miss the next 4 rounds in Italy, Singapore, Japan and Qatar with Lawson replacing him for all 4 of those races but he returned for the United States Grand Prix. Ricciardo qualified a season-best fourth for the Mexico City Grand Prix. He went on to finish the race in 7th position, giving AlphaTauri their best finish of the season. This result subsequently took AlphaTauri to 8th in the constructors championship, after being in last for most of the season. AlphaTauri, which was renamed to RB Formula One Team for the 2024 season, retained Ricciardo, who drives alongside Tsunoda. Ricciardo will race full-time in that year for the first time since 2022 after running 7 races in 2023 season. Ricciardo is known for his aggressive style as well as favouring a late braking manoeuvre to engineer overtakes. Ricciardo also prefers to carry more speed through the corner by making it more of a 'U' shape, utilising a little rear instability on entry to turn in, and enough grip to rotate the car mid-corner without the rear breaking away. Ricciardo is regarded as one of the most prominent names in Formula One. He is known for his laid back nature and smile, with The New York Times describing him in 2016 saying, "If a survey could be made of the 22 Formula One drivers to establish who smiles the most, has the sunniest disposition and seems to be generally the nicest guy, Ricciardo would surely be the leader." His personal profile grew with the success of the reality show Drive to Survive, where he has been called "the face of the show". After the 2021 season, Ricciardo was appointed a Member of the Order of Australia in the 2022 Australia Day Honours for "significant service to motor sport as a competitor and ambassador, and to the community". He is often referred to as "the honey badger" referencing his racing style, explaining how "[i]t's supposed to be the most fearless animal in the animal kingdom. When you look at it, he seems quite cute and cuddly, but as soon as someone crosses his territory in a way he doesn't like, he turns into a bit of a savage and he'll go after anything – tigers, pythons – he turns very quickly, but he's a good guy." Ricciardo pronounces his surname "Ricardo" (/rɪˈkɑːrdoʊ/ ) instead of the Italian pronunciation ([ritˈtʃardo], with a "ch"-sound), attributing this to the way it was usually pronounced growing up in Australia and by his family. Growing up as a fan of NASCAR Cup Series driver Dale Earnhardt, Ricciardo adopted the number 3 as his racing number in honour of him. Ricciardo supports the Australian Football League's West Coast Eagles and was the club's number-one ticket holder in 2015 and 2016. He is also a UFC fan and, during the course of his Formula 1 career, developed an affinity for the Buffalo Bills of the National Football League. He is in a relationship with Heidi Berger, the daughter of former F1 driver Gerhard Berger. BRDC The Bruce McLaren Trophy: 2013 Trofeo Lorenzo Bandini: 2014 Confartigianato Motori Driver of the Year: 2014 GQ Australia Sportsman of the Year: 2014 BRDC The Bruce McLaren Trophy: 2014 BRDC The Innes Ireland Trophy: 2014 BRDC The Innes Ireland Trophy: 2015 Laureus World Sports Award for Breakthrough Performance of the Year: 2015 BRDC The Bruce McLaren Trophy: 2016 Confartigianato Motori Driver of the Year: 2018 Appointed Member of the Order of Australia (AM) in the 2022 Australia Day Honours * Season still in progress. (key) (Races in bold indicate pole position; races in italics indicate fastest lap) (key) (Races in bold indicate pole position; races in italics indicate fastest lap) (key) (Races in bold indicate pole position; races in italics indicate fastest lap) (key) (Races in bold indicate pole position; races in italics indicate fastest lap) (key) (Races in bold indicate pole position; races in italics indicate fastest lap) (key) (Races in bold indicate pole position; races in italics indicate fastest lap) (key) (Races in bold indicate pole position; races in italics indicate fastest lap) † Did not finish, but was classified as he had completed more than 90% of the race distance. ‡ Half points awarded as less than 75% of race distance was completed. * Season still in progress. "Yuki Tsunoda and Daniel Ricciardo with us in 2024". Scuderia AlphaTauri. 23 September 2023. Archived from the original on 23 September 2023. Retrieved 23 September 2023. "Interview with Toro Rosso's Daniel Ricciardo". GPUpdate.net. GPUpdate. 1 February 2011. Archived from the original on 24 March 2014. Retrieved 17 April 2018. "Daniel Ricciardo says move to Ferrari from Red Bull not very likely". abc.net.au. 1 July 2015. Archived from the original on 12 August 2021. Retrieved 31 July 2020. "Five things about Daniel Ricciardo". Business Standard Private Limited, New Delhi. 14 May 2020. Archived from the original on 12 September 2021. Retrieved 12 September 2021. "Daniel Ricciardo awarded the Trofeo Lorenzo Bandini for his speed, success and attitude in Formula 1". FOX SPORTS. 2 September 2014. Archived from the original on 2 September 2014. Retrieved 16 April 2022. "Trailblazing dreamer Ricciardo only scratching surface". independent.ie. Archived from the original on 21 December 2016. Retrieved 27 March 2017. "Il ragazzino Ricciardo straccia Vettel". Gazzetta dello Sport. Archived from the original on 26 January 2016. Retrieved 21 January 2016. "Editoriale: F.1: Daniel Ricciardo: un "toro rosso d'origine calabrese" davanti alle Ferrari". Eco della Locride. Archived from the original on 16 May 2021. Retrieved 15 May 2021. "How mum and dad tried to steer Ricciardo away from racing". The West Australian. 9 July 2011. Archived from the original on 28 April 2017. Retrieved 27 April 2017. "The Perth kid with a formula for success". theaustralian.com.au. 14 March 2012. Archived from the original on 27 March 2019. Retrieved 21 December 2016. "Ricciardo driven to succeed". The West Australian. 1 June 2018. Archived from the original on 9 July 2020. Retrieved 8 July 2020. "Daniel Ricciardo on the power of the mind". Red Bull. Archived from the original on 6 November 2022. Retrieved 6 November 2022. "27 to 1: the definitive Daniel Ricciardo". Red Bull. Archived from the original on 7 November 2021. Retrieved 7 November 2021. "2005 Western Australian Formula Ford Championship Final Pointscore". formulaford1600.com.au. Australian Formula Ford State Racing. Archived from the original on 13 October 2009. Retrieved 30 January 2010. "Betta Electrical Sandown 500 – Rd 9 2005 V8 Supercar Series Sandown International Motor Raceway 2005 Australian Formula Ford Championship Qualifying". National Software. AVESCO; Melbourne University Car Club Inc. 10 September 2005. Archived from the original on 18 March 2012. Retrieved 30 January 2010. "F3: Daniel Ricciardo, new Red Bull rising star". Auto123.com. 6 November 2009. Archived from the original on 20 December 2022. Retrieved 19 December 2022. English, Steven (July 2008). "Hülkenberg is 'Ring Leader". Autosport. Vol. 193, no. 5. pp. 58–59. "Carlin confirms Red Bull duo". crash.net. 2 January 2009. Archived from the original on 10 September 2012. Retrieved 3 February 2009. Young, Colin (26 September 2009). "West Australian Daniel Ricciardo expected to make major moves pre-Christmas". news.com.au. Archived from the original on 29 September 2009. Retrieved 9 October 2009. O'Leary, Jamie (30 October 2009). "Ricciardo joins Hartley at Tech 1". autosport.com. Haymarket Publications. Archived from the original on 3 August 2017. Retrieved 9 November 2009. Mills, Peter (4 September 2010). "Tech 1 thrilled with Ricciardo's pole". autosport.com. Haymarket Publications. Archived from the original on 9 October 2012. Retrieved 4 September 2010. Mills, Peter (19 September 2010). "Guerrieri triumphs after epic battle". autosport.com. Haymarket Publications. Archived from the original on 9 October 2012. Retrieved 20 September 2010. Mills, Peter (9 October 2010). "Ricciardo takes crucial pole". autosport.com. Haymarket Publications. Archived from the original on 9 October 2012. Retrieved 13 October 2010. Mills, Peter (9 October 2010). "Ricciardo wins to tie points lead". autosport.com. Haymarket Publications. Archived from the original on 9 October 2012. Retrieved 13 October 2010. Mills, Peter (9 October 2010). "Aleshin secures title, Guerrieri wins". autosport.com. Haymarket Publications. Archived from the original on 9 October 2012. Retrieved 13 October 2010. Noble, Jonathon (11 December 2011). "Ricciardo stays on in FR3.5 with ISR". autosport.com. Haymarket Publications. Archived from the original on 14 January 2011. Retrieved 12 December 2010. Beer, Matt; Noble, Jonathan (9 November 2009). "Red Bull to give Ricciardo first F1 test". autosport.com. Haymarket Publications. Archived from the original on 8 August 2017. Retrieved 10 November 2009. O'Leary, Jamie (3 December 2009). "Ricciardo ends Jerez test on top". autosport.com. Haymarket Publications. Archived from the original on 10 September 2016. Retrieved 3 December 2009. O'Leary, Jamie (2 December 2009). "Ricciardo eyes Red Bull test role". autosport.com. Haymarket Publications. Archived from the original on 10 September 2016. Retrieved 4 December 2009. Noble, Jonathan (26 January 2010). "Ricciardo, Hartley to be Red Bull reserves". autosport.com. Haymarket Publications. Archived from the original on 29 January 2010. Retrieved 27 January 2010. "Hartley Dropped as Red Bull Reserve Driver". GPUpdate.net. GPUpdate.net. 21 July 2010. Archived from the original on 10 September 2016. Retrieved 16 October 2010. "Ricciardo to star for Red Bull at young driver test". formula1.com. Formula One Administration. 11 November 2010. Archived from the original on 8 April 2014. Retrieved 11 November 2010. Straw, Edd (17 November 2010). "Ricciardo dominates rookie testing". autosport.com. Haymarket Publications. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 17 November 2010. Beer, Matt (26 November 2010). "Ricciardo gets STR Friday practice role". autosport.com. Haymarket Publications. Archived from the original on 20 December 2010. Retrieved 26 November 2010. "Ricciardo to get Friday outings as Toro Rosso 2011 reserve". formula1.com. Formula One Administration. 26 November 2010. Archived from the original on 27 November 2010. Retrieved 26 November 2010. Reynolds, Jonathan (June 2011). "Careful Webber: this guy wants your seat...". F1 Racing. "Hispania confirms Daniel Ricciardo will race for it from Silverstone". Autosport. 30 June 2011. Archived from the original on 11 October 2012. Retrieved 30 June 2011. "Ricciardo to make F1 debut for HRT at Silverstone · RaceFans". RaceFans. 30 June 2011. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "F1 car vrooms and wows on Rajpath". Hindustan Times. 1 October 2011. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. Manbos. "RACE - 2011 DANIEL RICCIARDO". www.f1cfa.com. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "2011 Brazilian Grand Prix result · RaceFans". RaceFans. 27 November 2011. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. Elizalde, Pablo (14 December 2011). "Ricciardo, Vergne to race for Toro Rosso in 2012 Formula 1 season". autosport.com. Haymarket Publications. Archived from the original on 13 January 2017. Retrieved 14 December 2011. "Standings". Formula 1® - The Official F1® Website. Archived from the original on 22 October 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Standings". Formula 1® - The Official F1® Website. Archived from the original on 26 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Standings". Formula 1® - The Official F1® Website. Archived from the original on 22 October 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Standings". Formula 1® - The Official F1® Website. Archived from the original on 5 August 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Toro Rosso qualify 15th and 16th at Spa". Motorsport.com. 1 September 2012. Archived from the original on 16 November 2023. Retrieved 16 November 2023. "Standings". Formula 1® - The Official F1® Website. Archived from the original on 29 May 2023. Retrieved 16 November 2023. "Standings". Formula 1® - The Official F1® Website. Archived from the original on 6 April 2023. Retrieved 16 November 2023. "Standings". Formula 1® - The Official F1® Website. Archived from the original on 20 August 2023. Retrieved 16 November 2023. "Both Toro Rosso drivers scored points in Korea". Motorsport.com. 15 October 2012. Archived from the original on 16 November 2023. Retrieved 16 November 2023. "Standings". Formula 1® - The Official F1® Website. Archived from the original on 8 April 2023. Retrieved 16 November 2023. "Standings". Formula 1® - The Official F1® Website. Archived from the original on 12 November 2020. Retrieved 16 November 2023. "Ricciardo and Vergne get another year". AUSmotive.com. AUSmotive.com. 1 November 2012. Archived from the original on 23 November 2020. Retrieved 1 November 2011. "First points for Ricciardo after Shanghai race". Motorsport.com. 14 April 2013. Archived from the original on 17 November 2023. Retrieved 17 November 2023. "Points for the team Toro Rosso by Ricciardo at Spain". Motorsport.com. 12 May 2013. Archived from the original on 17 November 2023. Retrieved 17 November 2023. "Mixed results for Toro Rosso on Monaco GP". Motorsport.com. 27 May 2013. Archived from the original on 23 November 2023. Retrieved 23 November 2023. "Toro Rosso maintain presence on top-10 start grid at Silverstone". Motorsport.com. 29 June 2013. Archived from the original on 23 November 2023. Retrieved 23 November 2023. "Standings". Formula 1. Archived from the original on 23 March 2023. Retrieved 23 November 2023. "Ricciardo finished 7th on Toro Rosso home GP at Monza". Motorsport.com. 9 September 2013. Archived from the original on 23 November 2023. Retrieved 23 November 2023. "Additional point for STR by Ricciardo at India". Motorsport.com. 27 October 2013. Archived from the original on 23 November 2023. Retrieved 23 November 2023. "Ricciardo vs Vergne in 2013". Formula 1 Statistics. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "F1: Australian Daniel Ricciardo named as successor to Mark Webber, driving for team Red Bull in 2014". Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original on 29 November 2020. Retrieved 3 September 2013. "Standings". Formula 1® - The Official F1® Website. Archived from the original on 12 November 2020. Retrieved 15 September 2021. Weaver, Paul (2 September 2013). "Red Bull pick Daniel Ricciardo to partner Sebastian Vettel in 2014 F1". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 7 March 2014. Retrieved 7 March 2014. Cary, Tom (19 August 2013). "Red Bull to replace Mark Webber with fellow Australian Daniel Ricciardo". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 7 March 2014. Benson, Andrew (15 March 2014). "Lewis Hamilton on Australia pole, with Sebastian Vettel down in 13th". BBC Sport. BBC. Archived from the original on 15 March 2014. Retrieved 15 March 2014. "Ricciardo excluded from Australia race results". Formula1.com. Formula One Administration. 16 March 2014. Archived from the original on 16 March 2014. Retrieved 17 March 2014. Clayton, Matthew (17 March 2014). "Daniel Ricciardo disqualified from Australian Grand Prix". The Age. Fairfax Media. Archived from the original on 23 November 2020. Retrieved 17 March 2014. Gill, Pete (15 April 2014). "FIA reject Red Bull appeal and uphold stewards' decision to disqualify Ricciardo". Sky Sports. BSkyB. Archived from the original on 27 August 2014. Retrieved 17 April 2014. Johnson, Daniel (30 March 2014). "Malaysian Grand Prix 2014: Red Bull racer Daniel Ricciardo hit with grid penalty after pit-stop error". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 24 April 2014. Straw, Edd; Mitchell, Scott (6 April 2014). "Daniel Ricciardo 'proud' of recovery from 13th". Autosport. Haymarket Publications. Archived from the original on 24 April 2014. Retrieved 24 April 2014. "Ricciardo, Vettel salvage Red Bull's Spanish GP". USA Today. 11 May 2014. Archived from the original on 25 November 2023. Retrieved 25 November 2023. "2014 Monaco Grand Prix qualifying press conference". Motorsport.com. 25 May 2014. Archived from the original on 25 November 2023. Retrieved 25 November 2023. "Red Bull getting closer with Ricciardo in third on the Monaco GP". Motorsport.com. 26 May 2014. Archived from the original on 25 November 2023. Retrieved 25 November 2023. Benson, Andrew (8 June 2014). "Ricciardo wins ahead of Rosberg, Hamilton retires". BBC Sport. BBC. Archived from the original on 3 January 2015. Retrieved 21 December 2014. "Daniel Ricciardo wins first F1 GP in Montreal". www.abc.net.au. 8 June 2014. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Discover the inside story of Daniel Ricciardo's maiden F1 win". Red Bull. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. Wise, Mike (20 July 2014). "Fernando Alonso hails 'unbelievable' Daniel Ricciardo after close German GP duel". Sky Sports. BSkyB. Archived from the original on 26 July 2014. Retrieved 16 August 2014. Johnson, Daniel (27 July 2014). "Lewis Hamilton beats Nico Rosberg to third at Hungarian GP in thrilling battle as Daniel Ricciardo claims victory". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 27 July 2014. Retrieved 29 July 2014. "2014 Hungarian GP: Daniel Ricciardo wins epic race as Lewis Hamilton surges to third". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Daniel Ricciardo wins Hungarian F1 Grand Prix in stunning finish ahead of Fernando Alonso and Lewis Hamilton". ABC News. Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Reuters/Agence France-Presse. 27 July 2014. Archived from the original on 25 August 2014. Retrieved 16 August 2014. "Webber wins F1 2010 Hungarian GP". Crash. 1 August 2010. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Daniel Ricciardo Q&A: Great to taste winner's champagne again!". Formula1.com. Formula One Administration. 24 August 2014. Archived from the original on 10 February 2015. Retrieved 21 December 2014. "F1 Singapore Grand Prix: Post-race press conference". crash.net. 21 September 2014. Archived from the original on 27 December 2015. Retrieved 16 December 2023. Walthert, Matthew. "F1 2015 Head-to-Head: Daniel Ricciardo vs. Daniil Kvyat at Red Bull". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Podium for Ricciardo in USA". Motorsport.com. 3 November 2014. Archived from the original on 17 December 2023. Retrieved 17 December 2023. "Ricciardo fails to finish in Brazil but secures third place". www.abc.net.au. 10 November 2014. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. Will Dale (24 November 2014). "Daniel Ricciardo caps off stellar 2014 Formula 1 season with charging fourth at Abu Dhabi". NT News. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Ricciardo wins Laureus Breakthrough of the Year Award". Formula1.com. Formula One Administration. 15 April 2015. Archived from the original on 13 July 2015. Retrieved 15 August 2015. DiZinno, Tony (10 February 2015). "Daniel Ricciardo takes his smile, and speed, to Top Gear". MotorSportsTalk | NBC Sports. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Standings". Formula 1® - The Official F1® Website. Archived from the original on 25 November 2016. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Despite Ricciardo points, a frustrating grand prix for Red Bull in Australia". Motorsport.com. 19 March 2015. Archived from the original on 18 December 2023. Retrieved 18 December 2023. van Leeuwen, Andren (20 April 2015). "Ricciardo: "I did all I could do"". Motorsport.com. Archived from the original on 28 December 2023. Retrieved 28 December 2023. "Raikkonen fumes over Ricciardo pass · RaceFans". RaceFans. 24 May 2015. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. Cooper, Adam (9 June 2015). "Ricciardo 'doesn't know where to start' on Montreal issues". Motorsport.com. Archived from the original on 28 December 2023. Retrieved 28 December 2023. "Formula 1 insider questions Red Bull Racing's party habits after Monaco Grand Prix debacle". Fox Sports. 30 May 2016. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Daniel Ricciardo second in Singapore GP, Sebastian Vettel wins after fan invades track". Fox Sports. 20 September 2015. Archived from the original on 28 November 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. van Leeuwen, Andrew (30 November 2015). "Ricciardo "grateful" for tough 2015 season". Motorsport.com. Archived from the original on 28 December 2023. Retrieved 28 December 2023. "Standings". Formula 1® - The Official F1® Website. Archived from the original on 4 August 2020. Retrieved 15 September 2021. Clayton, Matthew (20 March 2016). "Australian Formula One grand prix 2016: Daniel Ricciardo hungry for more after fourth-place finish". The Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. Newman, Stuart. "Bahrain F1 Grand Prix 2016 Results: Winner, Standings, Highlights, Reaction". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Chinese Grand Prix drive of my career: Daniel Ricciardo". The Sydney Morning Herald. 17 April 2016. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. Newman, Stuart. "Spanish Grand Prix 2016 Qualifying: Saturday's F1 Results, Times, Final Grid". Bleacher Report. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "'We threw away win' with strategy - Ricciardo". Formula 1® - The Official F1® Website. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Ricciardo bitter over Red Bull strategy". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Monaco GP 2016, Qualifying: Daniel Ricciardo ends Red Bull pole wait". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Bizarre pit lane mix-up costs Ricciardo victory at Monaco GP". www.abc.net.au. 29 May 2016. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Red Bull reveals Ricciardo's tyres trapped at back of garage". au.motorsport.com. 29 May 2016. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "'I've been screwed two weekends in a row' - Ricciardo · RaceFans". RaceFans. 29 May 2016. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. Cooper, Adam (14 June 2016). "Red Bull has to "clean some things up," says Ricciardo". Motorsport.com. Archived from the original on 4 January 2024. Retrieved 4 January 2024. Elizalde, Pablo (20 June 2016). "Red Bull baffled by struggles with softer tyres". Motorsport.com. Archived from the original on 4 January 2024. Retrieved 4 January 2024. Noble, Jonathan (11 July 2016). "Horner: Verstappen form inspires not depresses Ricciardo". Motorsport.com. Archived from the original on 4 January 2024. Retrieved 4 January 2024. "2016 Hungarian Grand Prix report". Motor Sport Magazine. 25 July 2016. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "2016 German Grand Prix race recap: so-so racing, great questions". Autoblog. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Ricciardo's post-GP 'shoey' confounds F1 commentators". www.abc.net.au. 1 August 2016. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Belgian Grand Prix (Sky Sports)". SkySports. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Webber joins Ricciardo with another 'shoey' on Spa podium (VIDEO)". MotorSportsTalk | NBC Sports. 28 August 2016. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. Bradley, Charles (29 August 2016). "Ricciardo reveals red flag saved podium after wing damage". Motorsport.com. Archived from the original on 9 January 2024. Retrieved 9 January 2024. Ostlere, Lawrence (18 September 2016). "F1: Nico Rosberg wins the Singapore Grand Prix – as it happened". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "F1 Results - 2016 Singapore Grand Prix". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Standings". Formula 1® - The Official F1® Website. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Ricciardo wins Malaysian Grand Prix". www.abc.net.au. 2 October 2016. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. Spurgeon, Brad (2 October 2016). "Daniel Ricciardo Wins Malaysian Grand Prix in a Red Bull Sweep". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 23 October 2017. Retrieved 2 October 2016. Woolcock, Adam (2 October 2016). "F1: Australia's Daniel Ricciardo wins Malaysian Grand Prix - as it happened". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "F1: Daniel Ricciardo wins the 2016 Formula 1 Malaysian Grand Prix at Sepang". Fox Sports. 2 October 2016. Archived from the original on 6 April 2023. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Ricciardo leads Verstappen in Sepang thriller". Red Bull. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. van Leeuwen, Andrew (6 May 2021). "Ricciardo: We had a good car for second". Motorsport.com. Archived from the original on 9 January 2024. Retrieved 9 January 2024. "F1: How Daniel Ricciardo ended up finishing third in the Mexican Grand Prix". Fox Sports. 31 October 2016. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Daniel Ricciardo secures third in the standings with Mexico result". Motorsport Week. 31 October 2016. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "2016 F1 season driver rankings #1: Ricciardo · RaceFans". RaceFans. 16 December 2016. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. Formula 1. "Qualifying – Hamilton on pole as Ricciardo crashes out". Archived from the original on 25 March 2017. Retrieved 25 March 2017.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) jamesallenonf1.com. "Daniel Ricciardo Keen to Move on from Horrible Home F1 Race at 2017 Australian Grand Prix". Archived from the original on 16 June 2018. Retrieved 27 March 2017.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) "'Let's get the f*** out of here': Ricciardo endures nightmare Aus GP". www.abc.net.au. 26 March 2017. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. Cooper, Adam (10 April 2017). "Red Bull "came alive" after wing change, says Ricciardo". Motorsport.com. Archived from the original on 19 January 2024. Retrieved 19 January 2024. Freeman, Chris (16 April 2017). "Ricciardo perplexed by Red Bull qualifying pace upturn". Motorsport.com. Archived from the original on 19 January 2024. Retrieved 19 January 2024. Freeman, Glenn (17 April 2017). "Ricciardo "geniunely thought" Red Bull could win". Motorsport.com. Archived from the original on 19 January 2024. Retrieved 19 January 2024. "What happened at the Spanish Grand Prix?". Red Bull Racing. 14 May 2017. Archived from the original on 19 January 2024. Retrieved 19 January 2024. Klein, Jamie (27 May 2017). "Ricciardo frustrated by Red Bull's "stupid error" in qualifying". Motorsport.com. Archived from the original on 19 January 2024. Retrieved 19 January 2024. "FIA post-race press conference - Monaco". Formula 1. 28 May 2017. Archived from the original on 19 January 2024. Retrieved 19 January 2024. "FIA post-race press conference - Canada". Formula 1. 11 June 2017. Archived from the original on 19 January 2024. Retrieved 19 January 2024. Cooper, Adam (26 June 2017). "Analysis: How Ricciardo navigated Baku chaos to win from 17th". Motorsport.com. Archived from the original on 19 January 2024. Retrieved 19 January 2024. "Ricciardo wins 'crazy' Azerbaijan Grand Prix". www.abc.net.au. 25 June 2017. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. Osten, Phillip van (9 July 2017). "Daniel Ricciardo: 'Five podiums in a row is awesome!'". F1i.com. Archived from the original on 12 May 2022. Retrieved 1 May 2022. "Ricciardo to drop five grid places after gearbox change". Formula 1. 15 July 2017. Archived from the original on 19 January 2024. Retrieved 19 January 2024. Bradley, Charles (15 July 2017). "Ricciardo fears he has lost engine after "big failure"". Motorsport.com. Archived from the original on 19 January 2024. Retrieved 19 January 2024. "Ricciardo: Rise from 19th to fifth enormous 'fun'". Formula 1. 16 July 2017. Archived from the original on 19 January 2024. Retrieved 19 January 2024. "Verstappen apologises as Ricciardo bemoans 'amateur' error". Formula 1. 30 July 2017. Archived from the original on 19 January 2024. Retrieved 19 January 2024. "Winners and Losers - Belgium". Formula 1. 28 August 2017. Archived from the original on 25 January 2024. Retrieved 25 January 2024. "Grid penalties for both Red Bulls, plus Alonso and Sainz". Formula 1. 1 September 2017. Archived from the original on 25 January 2024. Retrieved 25 January 2024. "FIA post-qualifying press conference - Italy". Formula 1. 2 September 2017. Archived from the original on 25 January 2024. Retrieved 25 January 2024. "Horner: Ricciardo 'one of the best overtakers out there'". Formula 1. 3 September 2017. Archived from the original on 25 January 2024. Retrieved 25 January 2024. "Red Bull confident victory still in their grasp". Formula 1. 16 September 2017. Archived from the original on 25 January 2024. Retrieved 25 January 2024. Benson, Andrew (17 September 2017). "Hamilton wins after Ferrari crash". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 20 August 2019. Retrieved 1 May 2022. "Verstappen wins Malaysia GP, Vettel hitches a ride after bizarre post-race bingle". ABC News. 1 October 2017. Archived from the original on 1 May 2022. Retrieved 1 May 2022. "Formula One: Lewis Hamilton wins, Daniel Ricciardo third in Japan GP". The Sydney Morning Herald. 8 October 2017. Archived from the original on 1 May 2022. Retrieved 1 May 2022. "Ricciardo rues "grim" weekend for Renault-powered reliability". Motorsport.com. 30 October 2017. Archived from the original on 25 January 2024. Retrieved 25 January 2024. "Ricciardo, Hartley, Gasly all set for Brazil grid penalties". Formula 1. 10 November 2017. Archived from the original on 25 January 2024. Retrieved 25 January 2024. Bradley, Charles (13 November 2017). "Magnussen didn't see Ricciardo in three-way clash with Vandoorne". Motorsport.com. Archived from the original on 25 January 2024. Retrieved 25 January 2024. "Daniel RICCIARDO - Retirement • STATS F1". www.statsf1.com. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Daniel Ricciardo gets Australian Grand Prix grid penalty". www.autosport.com. 23 March 2018. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "F1 Results - 2018 Australian Grand Prix". BBC Sport. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Ricciardo: 'Brutal' retirement 'rips my heart out'". www.formula1.com. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Get the race report, results and social media reaction from the Chinese Grand Prix". Red Bull. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Ricciardo's victory and more reaction from F1's 2018 Chinese GP". www.autosport.com. 18 April 2020. Archived from the original on 29 January 2022. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "I don't win boring races! – Ricciardo on crazy China triumph". Formula 1. 15 April 2018. Archived from the original on 4 October 2023. Retrieved 9 February 2024. "Strong winds could make for 'crazy' race - Ricciardo". Formula 1. 28 April 2018. Archived from the original on 1 October 2023. Retrieved 9 February 2024. "Max Verstappen, Daniel Ricciardo reprimanded for all-Red Bull Azerbaijan GP crash". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on 5 October 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "'It's a disaster': Ricciardo and Verstappen raked over coals for F1 crash". www.abc.net.au. 29 April 2018. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. Noble, Jonathan (30 April 2018). "Verstappen, Ricciardo ordered to apologise at Red Bull factory". Motorsport.com. Archived from the original on 27 September 2022. Retrieved 9 February 2024. "Get the race report, results and social media reaction from the Spanish Grand Prix". Red Bull. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "F1: Daniel Ricciardo tops Practice 3, 2018 Formula 1 Monaco Grand Prix". Fox Sports. 26 May 2018. Archived from the original on 5 December 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Ricciardo in blistering form to take pole position at Monaco". www.abc.net.au. 26 May 2018. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "'I've got unfinished business' - Monaco pole-sitter Ricciardo". Formula 1. 26 May 2018. Archived from the original on 4 October 2023. Retrieved 12 February 2024. Davies, Tom (27 May 2018). "F1: Daniel Ricciardo wins Monaco Grand Prix – as it happened". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "2018 Monaco F1 Grand Prix results: Daniel Ricciardo wins from pole, Lewis Hamilton finishes third". CBSSports.com. 27 May 2018. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Title challenge 'not impossible' – Ricciardo". Formula 1. 29 May 2018. Archived from the original on 1 December 2023. Retrieved 12 February 2024. "Ricciardo set for Canadian GP grid penalty". Formula 1. 5 June 2018. Archived from the original on 25 September 2023. Retrieved 12 February 2024. "Ricciardo set to avoid grid penalty in Canada". Formula 1. 7 June 2018. Archived from the original on 28 November 2023. Retrieved 12 February 2024. "Red Bull victory possible in Canada - Ricciardo". Formula 1. 9 June 2018. Archived from the original on 3 October 2023. Retrieved 12 February 2024. "A 'little win' to beat Hamilton – Ricciardo". Formula 1. 10 June 2018. Archived from the original on 23 September 2023. Retrieved 12 February 2024. "Ricciardo mid-race pace loss due to front-wing damage". Formula 1. 24 June 2018. Archived from the original on 29 September 2023. Retrieved 12 February 2024. "WINNERS AND LOSERS – Austrian Grand Prix edition". Formula 1. 2 July 2018. Archived from the original on 23 September 2023. Retrieved 12 February 2024. Noble, Jonathan (8 July 2018). "Ricciardo hampered by "frustrating" DRS problem". Motorsport.com. Archived from the original on 15 February 2024. Retrieved 15 February 2024. "Ricciardo hoping Monaco win wasn't 'last hurrah' for 2018". Formula 1. 10 July 2018. Archived from the original on 15 February 2024. Retrieved 15 February 2024. "Ricciardo to start German GP from back of grid". Formula 1. 20 July 2018. Archived from the original on 28 September 2023. Retrieved 15 February 2024. "What the teams said – race day in Germany". Formula 1. Archived from the original on 28 November 2023. Retrieved 15 February 2024. "Shock Q2 exit down to bad luck – Ricciardo". Formula 1. 28 July 2018. Archived from the original on 15 February 2024. Retrieved 15 February 2024. "Ricciardo 'beaten around' but happy with Hungary P4". Formula 1. 29 July 2018. Archived from the original on 15 February 2024. Retrieved 15 February 2024. "Ricciardo to leave Red Bull at the end of 2018". Formula 1. 3 August 2018. Archived from the original on 15 February 2024. Retrieved 15 February 2024. "Raikkonen blames poor qualifying for first-lap Ricciardo collision". Formula 1. 26 August 2018. Archived from the original on 15 February 2024. Retrieved 15 February 2024. "Renault: Clutch issue forced Ricciardo's retirement". Formula 1. 2 September 2018. Archived from the original on 15 February 2024. Retrieved 15 February 2024. "Ricciardo left frustrated despite having 'the race we expected' in Singapore". Formula 1. 16 September 2018. Archived from the original on 15 February 2024. Retrieved 15 February 2024. "Red Bulls, Toro Rossos and Alonso to start Russia race from back of the grid". Formula 1. 28 September 2018. Archived from the original on 8 December 2023. Retrieved 15 February 2024. "'I just can't catch a break' – Ricciardo on latest qualifying setback". Formula 1. 6 October 2018. Archived from the original on 15 February 2024. Retrieved 15 February 2024. "WINNERS AND LOSERS – Japanese Grand Prix edition". Formula 1. 8 October 2018. Archived from the original on 15 February 2024. Retrieved 15 February 2024. "Ricciardo 'done' with 'cursed car' after retiring in Mexican Grand Prix". www.abc.net.au. 29 October 2018. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. Noble, Jonathan (21 October 2018). "Ricciardo warned in advance about kerb Verstappen hit". Motorsport.com. Archived from the original on 15 February 2024. Retrieved 15 February 2024. Freeman, Glenn (22 October 2018). "Ricciardo "put his fist through wall" after US GP exit". Motorsport.com. Archived from the original on 15 February 2024. Retrieved 15 February 2024. "QUALIFYING: Ricciardo snatches Mexico pole from Verstappen". Formula 1. 27 October 2018. Archived from the original on 15 February 2024. Retrieved 15 February 2024. "Winners and Losers – Mexican Grand Prix edition". Formula 1. Archived from the original on 7 February 2024. Retrieved 15 February 2024. "Ricciardo set for Brazil engine penalty". Formula 1. 9 November 2018. Archived from the original on 29 September 2020. Retrieved 15 February 2024. "Ricciardo 'upset' at missing Brazil podium despite trademark recovery drive". Formula 1. 12 November 2018. Archived from the original on 15 February 2024. Retrieved 15 February 2024. "Ricciardo frustrated to have missed out on podium 'shoey' in final Red Bull race". Formula 1. 25 November 2018. Archived from the original on 15 February 2024. Retrieved 15 February 2024. "DHL Fastest Lap Award 2018". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on 7 June 2020. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Standings". Formula 1® - The Official F1® Website. Archived from the original on 19 December 2018. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Daniel Ricciardo joins Renault Sport Formula One Team from 2019". renaultsport.com. Archived from the original on 11 July 2020. Retrieved 4 August 2018. "Daniel Ricciardo hits back at Renault teammate Nico Hulkenberg's criticism". Fox Sports. 28 July 2019. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "F1 Australian Grand Prix 2019: Daniel Ricciardo loses front wing in crash just seconds into the race before retiring". Fox Sports. 17 March 2019. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Bahrain Grand Prix 2019: Ricciardo: Double DNF 'heartbreaking' for Renault". www.formula1.com. Archived from the original on 26 May 2022. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Renault drivers looking forward to attacking opening lap after Q3 breakthrough". Formula 1. 13 April 2019. Retrieved 8 March 2024. "Chinese Grand Prix 2019: Ricciardo reflects on first points for Renault". www.formula1.com. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "'I'll buy him a rear-view mirror for the next race': Another clanger for Ricciardo". www.abc.net.au. 29 April 2019. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Ricciardo frustrated by Renault strategy calls in Spain". Formula 1. 13 May 2019. Retrieved 8 March 2024. "'Brave' set-up changes pay off for Ricciardo and Renault". Formula 1. 25 May 2019. Retrieved 8 March 2024. "'We missed a big opportunity' says frustrated Ricciardo after P9 Monaco finish". Formula 1. 27 May 2019. Retrieved 8 March 2024. "Fourth feels like pole, says Ricciardo after best Renault qualifying". Formula 1. 8 June 2019. Retrieved 8 March 2024. "Standings". Formula 1® - The Official F1® Website. Archived from the original on 4 December 2020. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Ricciardo handed two post-race time penalties, loses French GP points". Formula 1. 23 June 2019. Retrieved 8 March 2024. "Ricciardo fears Renault may have fundamental car issue to solve". Formula 1. 7 July 2019. Retrieved 8 March 2024. "Ricciardo happy to 'put smiles back on faces' as Renault get both cars into Q3". Formula 1. 13 July 2019. Retrieved 8 March 2024. "Renault have to be pleased after 'awesome recovery' says Ricciardo". Formula 1. 16 July 2019. Retrieved 8 March 2024. "Renault looking at exhaust issue that ended Ricciardo's German GP". The Checkered Flag. 1 August 2019. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "'Perez and I screwed each other' says Ricciardo after both exit in Q1". Formula 1. 3 August 2019. Retrieved 8 March 2024. Cooper, Adam (6 August 2019). "Ricciardo: FIA warning "not enough" for Magnussen in Hungary". Motorsport.com. Retrieved 8 March 2024. "Leclerc wins F1 thriller as Ricciardo records best Renault finish". www.abc.net.au. 8 September 2019. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Ricciardo: Renault performance at power-hungry Monza 'a real statement': Italian Grand Prix 2019". www.formula1.com. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "F1 Russian Grand Prix 2019: Daniel Ricciardo's hopes crushed on very first lap". Fox Sports. 29 September 2019. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Renault disqualified from results of the Japanese Grand Prix". www.formula1.com. 23 October 2019. Archived from the original on 23 October 2019. Retrieved 5 January 2020. "GPToday.net's 2019 F1 driver rankings - #9 - Daniel Ricciardo". GPToday.net. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. James Matthey (15 July 2020). "F1 2020: Daniel Ricciardo addresses fight with Esteban Ocon". news.com.au. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Daniel Ricciardo's silver lining in 'unkind' F1 retirement chaos". Fox Sports. 5 July 2020. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Styrian Grand Prix 2020 race report and highlights: Lewis Hamilton eases to Styrian Grand Prix victory over Bottas as Ferraris collide | Formula 1®". www.formula1.com. 12 July 2020. Archived from the original on 16 July 2020. Retrieved 8 May 2022. Bradley, Charles (18 July 2020). "F1 Hungarian Grand Prix qualifying results, who was fastest?". www.motorsport.com. Archived from the original on 8 May 2022. Retrieved 8 May 2022. "Hamilton says there's not enough support for protests, wins Hungarian GP". www.abc.net.au. 19 July 2020. Archived from the original on 20 July 2020. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Ricciardo equals best-ever Renault finish as Hamilton wins on three wheels in stunning last lap". Fox Sports. 2 August 2020. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. James Matthey (10 August 2020). "F1 2020: F1 2020: Daniel Ricciardo'\'s big mistake in awful 70th Anniversary Grand Prix". news.com.au. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "The harsh truth Daniel Ricciardo knew 'deep down' in Spanish Grand Prix shocker". Fox Sports. 17 August 2020. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "'I've never heard that': Mercedes ace fumes at Hamilton order as Ricciardo seizes huge F1 chance". Fox Sports. 31 August 2020. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Red Bull reject nails 'unbelievable' redemption as 'crazy' twist ruins Ricciardo dream". Fox Sports. 7 September 2020. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "'It certainly hurts': Ricciardo hiding 'pain' behind trademark smile". Fox Sports. 15 September 2020. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "F1 Russian Grand Prix qualifying: Nerveless Hamilton seals clutch pole as Vettel crash sparks chaotic qualifying session". Fox Sports. 26 September 2020. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Ricciardo: Sochi time penalty "lit a fire under my bum"". www.motorsport.com. 27 September 2020. Archived from the original on 12 January 2023. Retrieved 12 January 2023. "Daniel Ricciardo FINALLY ends F1 podium pain as Lewis Hamilton levels Michael Schumacher". Fox Sports. 11 October 2020. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Daniel Ricciardo: Eifel Grand Prix podium 'feels like the first all over again'". www.formula1.com. Archived from the original on 4 August 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "F1 reality check for Daniel Ricciardo as teammate edges 'closer and closer'". Fox Sports. 26 October 2020. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Daniel Ricciardo does a shoey with Lewis Hamilton on Imola podium". www.abc.net.au. 1 November 2020. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Ricciardo seals second Renault podium as Hamilton, Mercedes make F1 history". Fox Sports. 2 November 2020. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Ricciardo dirty over podium-costing Renault call in 'scrappy race'". Fox Sports. 6 December 2020. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Ricciardo gutted as mistakes cost him podium". wwos.nine.com.au. Archived from the original on 1 July 2023. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Mad Max sends ominous warning in F1 finale ... but Ricciardo still gets the last laugh". Fox Sports. 13 December 2020. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "2020 F1 driver rankings #5: Daniel Ricciardo · RaceFans". RaceFans. 1 February 2021. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "Daniel Ricciardo joins McLaren for 2021 with Carlos Sainz off to Ferrari". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 15 September 2021. "McLaren swoop for Daniel Ricciardo as Carlos Sainz replacement for 2021". Formula1.com. 14 May 2020. Archived from the original on 16 May 2020. Retrieved 14 May 2020. "Floor damage slowed Ricciardo in Bahrain". Formula1.com. 30 March 2021. Archived from the original on 30 March 2021. Retrieved 30 March 2021. Doyle, Michael (18 April 2021). "Max Verstappen wins F1's Emilia Romagna Grand Prix after massive crash between George Russell and Valtteri Bottas". ABC News. Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original on 18 April 2021. Retrieved 19 April 2021. Richards, Giles (18 April 2021). "Max Verstappen wins Emilia Romagna F1 Grand Prix after Hamilton blunder". The Guardian. Imola. ISSN 0261-3077. Archived from the original on 18 April 2021. Retrieved 19 April 2021. "FORMULA 1 HEINEKEN GRANDE PRÉMIO DE PORTUGAL 2021 - RACE RESULT". Formula1.com. Archived from the original on 25 October 2021. Retrieved 18 May 2022. "FORMULA 1 HEINEKEN GRANDE PRÉMIO DE PORTUGAL 2021 - QUALIFYING". Formula1.com. Archived from the original on 25 October 2021. Retrieved 18 May 2022. "Daniel Ricciardo rips control from McLaren teammate". news.com.au. 10 May 2021. Archived from the original on 10 May 2021. Retrieved 10 May 2021. "Ricciardo's miserable Monaco weekend". f1.com. 24 May 2021. Archived from the original on 24 May 2021. Retrieved 24 May 2021. "Qualifying blunder ruins Azerbaijan race for Ricciardo". news.com.au. 7 May 2021. Archived from the original on 6 June 2021. Retrieved 7 June 2021. "Norris va "discuter" avec un Ricciardo "agressif"". fr.motorsport.com (in French). 21 June 2021. Archived from the original on 12 January 2023. Retrieved 12 January 2023. "Ricciardo's agonizing Styrian GP caused by engine issues". planetf1. 28 June 2021. Archived from the original on 28 June 2021. Retrieved 28 June 2021. "Ricciardo enjoyred race in Austria". racefans.net. 7 July 2021. Archived from the original on 7 July 2021. Retrieved 7 July 2021. "Ricciardo registers first top 5 with McLaren". formula1.com. 19 July 2021. Archived from the original on 19 July 2021. Retrieved 19 July 2021. "Ricciardo could have won chaotic race if not for rival's howler". Fox Sports. 2 August 2021. Archived from the original on 2 August 2021. Retrieved 2 August 2021. "Belgian Grand Prix abanodned after heavy rain". formula1.com. 2 September 2021. Archived from the original on 2 September 2021. Retrieved 2 September 2021. "Ricciardo plays team game in Zandvoort". Fox Sports. 6 September 2021. Archived from the original on 28 September 2021. Retrieved 6 September 2021. "Ricciardo takes well earned maiden victory for McLaren at Monza". Fox Sports. 12 September 2021. Archived from the original on 12 September 2021. Retrieved 12 September 2021. "Ricciardo recovers to 4th after late switch to inters". racefans.net. 27 September 2021. Archived from the original on 27 September 2021. Retrieved 27 September 2021. "Ricciardo happy to move on from 'pretty painful' Turkish GP after early stop costs him in Istanbul". formula1.com. 12 October 2021. Archived from the original on 12 October 2021. Retrieved 12 October 2021. "Ricciardo takes fifth to cap 'overwhelming' Austin weekend". racer.com. 26 October 2021. Archived from the original on 26 October 2021. Retrieved 26 October 2021. "Mercedes 'livid' Ricciardo not given Mexico GP penalty". planetf1.com. 9 November 2021. Archived from the original on 9 November 2021. Retrieved 9 November 2021. "F1 chassis crack caused Ricciardo's Brazil GP retirement". us.motorsport.com. 15 November 2021. Archived from the original on 15 November 2021. Retrieved 15 November 2021. "'It was painful' – Ricciardo reveals bizarre reason he was off the pace in Qatar". formula1.com. 23 November 2021. Archived from the original on 23 November 2021. Retrieved 23 November 2021. "Ricciardo could have fought for Saudi Arabia F1 podium without final restart". highwayf1.com. 6 December 2021. Archived from the original on 7 December 2021. Retrieved 6 December 2021. "Unheard radio message reveals Ricciardo's true feelings on 'f***ed up' F1 finale". foxsports.com.au. 15 December 2021. Archived from the original on 14 December 2021. Retrieved 15 December 2021. "McLaren driver Daniel Ricciardo tests positive for Covid-19 – but set to be released in time for Bahrain GP". www.formula1.com. Archived from the original on 1 April 2022. Retrieved 13 March 2022. "Norris doubted McLaren would score podium in F1 2022 after Bahrain". www.autosport.com. 26 April 2022. Archived from the original on 20 May 2022. Retrieved 20 May 2022. "Ricciardo's great drive spoiled by engine failure as Max Verstappen wins". ABC News. 27 March 2022. Archived from the original on 20 May 2022. Retrieved 20 May 2022. "McLaren Racing - 2022 Australian Grand Prix". www.mclaren.com. Archived from the original on 20 May 2022. Retrieved 20 May 2022. "Ricciardo apologises for Sainz crash at Imola as he opens up on 'painful' Emilia Romagna GP | Formula 1®". www.formula1.com. Archived from the original on 19 May 2022. Retrieved 20 May 2022. "Dramatic Gasly and Norris contact brings out Safety Car in Miami GP". www.formula1.com. Archived from the original on 17 May 2022. Retrieved 20 May 2022. "Daniel Ricciardo admits being 'very, very slow' in 'sad' Spanish GP". 22 May 2022. Archived from the original on 24 May 2022. Retrieved 24 May 2022. "Daniel Ricciardo: McLaren CEO Zak Brown says driver not meeting team's expectations ". www.skysports.com. Sky Sports. Archived from the original on 24 May 2022. Retrieved 24 May 2022. "Ricciardo: Something "a bit off" with F1 car during "pretty sad" British GP". 5 July 2022. Archived from the original on 6 July 2022. Retrieved 6 July 2022. "McLaren apologises as Ricciardo reveals reason he was 'out of the fight'". 19 June 2022. Archived from the original on 6 July 2022. Retrieved 6 July 2022. Coch, Matt (4 July 2022). "McLaren baffled by Ricciardo's lack of pace". www.speedcafe.com. Speedcafe. Archived from the original on 4 July 2022. Retrieved 4 July 2022. "Daniel Ricciardo: 'Zero pace' in British GP down to lack of grip". www.formula1.com. Formula One. Archived from the original on 15 July 2022. Retrieved 3 July 2022. "Hungary 2022 - Championship". statsf1.com. Archived from the original on 27 August 2022. Retrieved 24 July 2022. "Daniel Ricciardo to leave McLaren Racing at the end of 2022". mclaren.com. Archived from the original on 24 August 2022. Retrieved 24 August 2022. Cooper, Adam (8 October 2022). "Ricciardo: I won't be on F1 grid in 2023". Motorsport.com. Archived from the original on 8 October 2022. Retrieved 8 October 2022. "Red Bull confirm Ricciardo to return as third driver in 2023". Formula 1. 23 November 2022. Archived from the original on 29 December 2022. Retrieved 23 November 2022. Bekking, Casper (15 December 2022). "F1 reserve drivers: All the back-up drivers for 2023". Autosport. Archived from the original on 12 January 2023. Retrieved 12 January 2023. "Ricciardo se sube al Red Bull de F1 en el test de Pirelli". es.motorsport.com (in Spanish). 11 July 2023. Archived from the original on 11 July 2023. Retrieved 11 July 2023. Cleeren, Filip (11 July 2023). "AlphaTauri F1 set to replace De Vries for remainder of 2023". motorsport.com. Archived from the original on 12 July 2023. Retrieved 11 July 2023. "SCUDERIA ALPHATAURI WELCOMES BACK DANIEL RICCIARDO". Scuderia AlphaTauri. 11 July 2023. Archived from the original on 11 July 2023. Retrieved 11 July 2023. "Ricciardo 'felt good' on first race back after finishing 13th in 'strong showing' at Hungarian GP". Formula 1. 25 July 2023. Archived from the original on 26 July 2023. Retrieved 28 July 2023. Cleeren, Filip (25 August 2023). "Ricciardo out of F1 Dutch GP with injured hand, Lawson to sub". www.motorsport.com. Archived from the original on 27 August 2023. Retrieved 25 August 2023. Jackson, Kieran (25 August 2023). "Daniel Ricciardo ruled out of Dutch Grand Prix". The Independent. Archived from the original on 25 August 2023. Retrieved 25 August 2023. "'Seven fractures': Red Bull comes clean on Ricciardo's broken hand". 14 September 2023. Archived from the original on 26 September 2023. Retrieved 26 September 2023. Coleman, Madeline (13 October 2023). "Daniel Ricciardo to drive in U.S. Grand Prix". The Athletic. Archived from the original on 16 October 2023. Retrieved 16 October 2023. "HLeclerc takes sensational pole ahead of Sainz and Verstappen as Ferrari lock out front row in Mexico City". Formula1.com. 29 October 2023. Archived from the original on 29 October 2023. Retrieved 29 October 2023. "AlphaTauri's new name for 2024 is confirmed". www.formula1.com. Archived from the original on 24 January 2024. Retrieved 24 January 2024. "Tsunoda and Ricciardo to race for AlphaTauri in 2024". www.formula1.com. Archived from the original on 23 September 2023. Retrieved 23 September 2023. Mitchell-Malm, Scott (30 October 2023). "The Key Difference To McLaren That Makes Ricciardo's Revival Real". The Race. Archived from the original on 31 October 2023. Retrieved 1 November 2023. Smith, Luke (11 July 2023). "Ricciardo's return to F1 with AlphaTauri: Nothing to lose, everything to gain". The Athletic. Archived from the original on 24 August 2023. Retrieved 11 July 2023. Mull, Amanda (7 September 2021). "How Netflix Made Americans Care About the Most European of Sports". The Atlantic. Archived from the original on 18 July 2023. Retrieved 18 July 2023. Spurgeon, Brad (2 September 2016). "The Other Side of Mr. Nice Guy". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 19 July 2023. Retrieved 11 July 2023. Edmondson, Laurence (7 May 2022). "On the water with Daniel Ricciardo". ESPN.com. Archived from the original on 11 July 2023. Retrieved 11 July 2023. Parkes, Ian (24 May 2018). "Daniel Ricciardo, Mr. Smiley, Bares His Teeth on the Track". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 11 July 2023. Retrieved 11 July 2023. Mee, Lydia (20 February 2023). "F1's Next Daniel Ricciardo? New Face of Drive to Survive Finally Revealed". F1 Briefings: Formula 1 News, Rumors, Standings and More. Archived from the original on 11 July 2023. Retrieved 11 July 2023. Smith, Luke (30 March 2023). "Ricciardo: 'Signs are pointing' to chasing F1 comeback". The Athletic. Archived from the original on 11 July 2023. Retrieved 11 July 2023. "Australia Day 2022 Honours List". Sydney Morning Herald. Nine Entertainment Co. 25 January 2022. Archived from the original on 25 January 2022. Retrieved 25 January 2022. "Australian Day 2022 Honors List" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 January 2022. Retrieved 26 January 2022. "Daniel Ricciardo: Make way for the Honey Badger". Red Bull Racing Formula One Team. 28 January 2014. Archived from the original on 5 October 2015. Retrieved 19 March 2016. Youson, Matt. "Mind Over Matter: Daniel Ricciardo". redbull.com. Archived from the original on 20 May 2017. Retrieved 21 December 2016. Daniel Ricciardo & Nico Hulkenberg Answer Google Most Searched Questions. Archived from the original on 21 December 2021. Retrieved 9 November 2020 – via YouTube. Olson, Jeff (2 November 2014). "Australian F1 driver really loves Dale Earnhardt Sr". USA Today. Archived from the original on 15 July 2020. Retrieved 15 July 2020. Beveridge, Riley (29 January 2016). "Your AFL club's most famous supporters, from Barack Obama to Cam Newton". Fox Sports. Archived from the original on 7 June 2017. Retrieved 29 January 2016. "West Coast Eagles No.1 Ticket Holders". www.westcoasteagles.com.au. Archived from the original on 31 July 2017. Retrieved 31 July 2017. "F1 driver Daniel Ricciardo on MMA "It's the purest level of competition"". Fight News Australia. 16 December 2019. Archived from the original on 7 December 2021. Retrieved 7 December 2021. "'Bills Mafia speak our language' - F1 star Daniel Ricciardo on Josh Allen, Tom Brady and his surprising NFL allegiance". ESPN. 16 October 2021. Archived from the original on 16 October 2021. Retrieved 16 October 2021. "Meet Daniel Ricciardo's girlfriend Heidi Berger". Who. Archived from the original on 24 April 2023. Retrieved 24 April 2023. Wilkins, Robert (3 December 2013). "The 2013 BRDC Award winners in full". Crash. Archived from the original on 3 February 2021. Retrieved 18 January 2021. Speed (2 September 2014). "Ricciardo awarded F1 honour". Fox Sports. Archived from the original on 1 July 2023. Retrieved 18 January 2021. "Confartigianato: torna la kermesse "dalle corse alla strada". Premi per Ricciardo e Capelli". MBNews (in Italian). 1 September 2014. Archived from the original on 8 September 2014. Retrieved 20 January 2021. "GQ Australian names Men of the Year 2014". 2014. Archived from the original on 29 November 2018. Retrieved 18 January 2021. "British Racing Drivers' Club Awards 2014". www.brdc.co.uk. 2014. Archived from the original on 1 January 2015. Retrieved 19 January 2021. Paice, Simon (9 December 2015). "BRDC Celebrate Member Success With 2015 Awards". The Checkered Flag. Archived from the original on 6 March 2021. Retrieved 19 January 2021. "Daniel Ricciardo BREAKTHROUGH OF THE YEAR". Laureus. 2015. Archived from the original on 27 January 2021. Retrieved 18 January 2021. "British Racing Drivers' Club Awards 2016". www.brdc.co.uk. 2016. Archived from the original on 20 December 2016. Retrieved 19 January 2021. "CONFARTIGIANATO MOTORI – Il Premio Confartigianato Motori 2018 va a Daniel Ricciardo della Red Bull Racing". www.confartigianato.it (in Italian). 2018. Archived from the original on 26 September 2020. Retrieved 18 January 2021. "Daniel Ricciardo | Racing career profile | Driver Database". www.driverdb.com. Archived from the original on 17 April 2022. Retrieved 3 December 2021. "Champions". Karting Australia. Archived from the original on 15 April 2023. Retrieved 11 August 2023. Saunders, Nate (2018). Daniel Ricciardo: In Pursuit of Greatness. Richmond, Vic: Hardie Grant Books. ISBN 9781743794715. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Daniel Ricciardo. Official website Daniel Ricciardo career summary at DriverDB.com Daniel Ricciardo at IMDb Profile at Formula1.com Daniel Ricciardo on Twitter