Aube (French pronunciation: [ob] ohb) is a French department in the Grand Est region of north-eastern France. As with sixty departments in France, this department is named after a river: the Aube. With 310,242 inhabitants (2019), Aube is the 74th department in terms of population. The inhabitants of the department are known as Aubois or Auboises. The department was constituted as it is today by a decree of the National Assembly of 15 January 1790. The Aube department is located in the south-west side of the Grand Est region. It borders the departments of Marne in the north (about 130 km long), Haute-Marne to the east (about 100 km long), Côte-d'Or in the south-east (about 45 km long), Yonne in the south-west (about 175 km long), and Seine-et-Marne in the west (about 45 km long). Within the department regions of natural or traditional countryside can be identified as follows: northwest quarter: Champagne crayeuse (chalky Champagne) northwestern tip: the Nogentais southwest of Troyes: the Othe region to the south: le Chaourçois to the northeast: the Briennois to the east: the Barrois between Troyes and Barrois: Champagne wetlands Aube is divided into 431 communes totalling 310,242 inhabitants (2019). The most populous commune is the prefecture Troyes. As of 2019, there are 5 communes with more than 10,000 inhabitants: All of those communes, except Romilly-sur-Seine, are part of the agglomeration of Troyes. There are 23 rivers throughout the department, the four main rivers being the Seine, the Aube (tributary of the Seine), the Armance (tributary of the Armançon), and the Vanne (a tributary of the Yonne). The department has 140,000 hectares of forests. Located in the Community of communes of Forests, lakes, and lands in Champagne, the Orient Forest Regional Natural Park was one of the first natural parks created in France. In the same place, there is the Orient Lake and the Amance and Temple lakes where fishing, recreational water sports, and bathing are available. Each lake specialises in one or more of these activities. The climate is moderate without intense cold or excessive heat which represents a climate similar to continental and oceanic. Between 1950 and 1985 the average annual temperature recorded in the department was 10.1 °C which is equivalent to the Paris basin and the cities of north-eastern France. The average sunshine hours per year is 1771. Average annual rainfall is quite high (653.4 mm over 115 days of rain). In general there is more rain in autumn than in winter but rainfall is highest during spring. In contrast summer is the season when rainfall is lowest. There is, however, more rain in the south-east than the north-west. Snow is relatively infrequent. Prevailing wind is from the west. The department has 150 km of autoroutes, 33 km of national roads, 4,517 km of departmental roads and 2,116 km of local roads. In the Agglomeration of Troyes TCAT (Transport for the Communes of Troyes) provides a transport network between communes. Unlike many networks that are provided by other operators, the agglomeration community of the city is the owner of the company. The network currently serves eleven communes including two outside the Troyes agglomeration. Other cities, including Romilly-sur-Seine, have no transport network. Aube also has intercity transport networks. 21 regular bus routes are operated between the major cities of the department. The use of these lines is entrusted to private coaches: Transdev – The Carriers of Aube has 15 routes, Keolis Sud Lorraine has 4 routes, Procars Champagne has 2 routes, Autocars Bardy has one route. Five railway stations are currently in operation. These are: Nogent-sur-Seine, Romilly-sur-Seine, Troyes, Vendeuvre-sur-Barse, Bar-sur-Aube. Aube does not have a strong rail coverage. Only one main non-electrified line passes through Aube – the line that connects Paris-Est to Mulhouse. The department has 34.8 km of navigable waterways. The city of Nogent-sur-Seine has two river ports for grain. The first inhabitants of Aube were the Tricasses and Lingones with a substantial human settlement around the year 400 BC. Saints Potentian and Savinian, Greek priests from Samos, came to preach the gospel from the middle of the 3rd century. Saint Patroclus was one of the first martyrs of the new faith in the year 259. Shortly after Saint Jule and some notables of the city of Tricasses also suffered martyrdom. Nevertheless, as elsewhere, the Christian community became large enough to accommodate a bishop. Saint Amateur was the first in 340. In the year 286 the Bagaudae ravaged the land which forms Aube. Emperor Julian came to Troyes with his army and rescued it. The territory making up Aube was first attached to France in 843, following the Treaty of Verdun. Two important monasteries were founded in the department: one at Clairvaux in 1114, created by Bernard of Clairvaux, the other was the Abbey of the Paraclete near Nogent-sur-Seine, by his illustrious rival, Pierre Abélard and of which Héloïse d'Argenteuil was the first abbess. Bernard of Clairvaux was noted for his eloquence at the Council of Troyes and his preaching of the Second Crusade which had no result and whose outcome was disastrous. The reunion of Champagne with the kingdom of France was finalised in 1361. Yet people wanted absolutely the incorporation of Champagne but in 1328 King Philip VI gave the city of Bar-sur-Seine to Philippe de Croy. The inhabitants, however, ransomed him to return it to the king on the condition that it become inalienable. The decree of the National Assembly of 15 January 1790 formally established the department of Aube. Its first president was Augustin-Henri-Marie Picot and his first deputy was Louis Antoine Joseph Robin. Jacques Claude Beugnot was elected Attorney-General and also MP. The 19th century marked the emergence of the Hosiery business in the department. After the victory of the allies in the Battle of Waterloo on 18 June 1815, the department was occupied by Russian troops from June 1815 to November 1818. In 1911 following the revolt of the vineyards of Champagne large Riots broke out in the department. The consequences of this were tragic because the clashes resulted in dozens of injuries. In 1919, a decree allowed Aube department to produce champagne for the first time. In 1932 Turkish president Mustafa Kemal Atatürk visited Aube and signed a friendship treaty with France there on 4 July 1938. The General Council of Aube is located in Troyes. Its president has been DVD Senator Philippe Adnot since July 1990. It includes the 34 councillors of the 17 cantons of Aube. Of these, 32 are from the Right (mainly the UMP), the others are from the Miscellaneous left. Currently the budget of the General Council is €329.8 million. Its main mission and expenditure on social activities and health. Aube returns three Deputies to the National Assembly, two of whom are from The Republicans (LR), and two Senators: one UMP and one right-wing independent. Aube is inhabited by 310,242 people with more than a third (137,500 inhabitants) living in the Troyes agglomeration (2019). In 2017, the department had 310,020 inhabitants. Percentage Distribution of Age Groups in Aube Department in 2017 Source: INSEE The economy of Aube has focused on the textile industry since the 19th century. This sector is now in crisis due to the department being in an area of real economic change. In 2017, the departmental workforce totalled 137,774 with 114,530 persons in employment and 23,244 people unemployed. Men accounted for 51.4% of the active population and women 48.6%. The Aube department has a high rate of feminization in employment. Nearly half of people with active jobs (48.1% in 2017) are women. The main areas affected by the feminization are trade, transport, textiles, utilities, education, and health. Women are slightly more affected than men by unemployment (51.3% of the unemployed in 2017). This is mainly due to layoffs in the textile sector. Distribution of Employment by Industry sector (2015) The utilized agricultural area is 379,720 hectares. Aube is the largest producer of hemp; the 2nd largest producer of champagne, cabbage for sauerkraut, medicinal poppies, and alfalfa; the 6th largest producer of potatoes; the 8th largest producer of cereals; and the 9th largest producer of beet in France. In 2010 elementary and secondary education consisted of: 11,568 students in kindergarten across 136 schools (including 1 private); 18,465 students in primary school across 255 schools (including 14 private); 12,311 students in college across 34 institutions (including 9 private); 5,199 students in schools of general education across 10 institutions (including 3 private); 2,666 students in vocational high school across 10 institutions (including 3 private). According to the latest census of the academic inspectorate of Aube in 2009 the department has 8,794 students in higher education. List of Universities and Higher Educational Schools Public Schools University of Technology of Troyes (UTT) Institute of Technology of Troyes (University of Reims Champagne-Ardenne) Faculty (University of Reims Champagne-Ardenne) Institute for Heritage Skills (IUMP) Institute for Teacher Training (IUFM) Institute for Nursing Education (IFSI of Troyes/DE IDE) Preparatory classes for Higher Education (CPGE) scientific and economic Graduate School for Applied Arts in Troyes National Conservatory of Music in Troyes Private Schools Graduate School of Commerce in Troyes Supinfo List of Hospitals and Health Clinics There are 580 clubs and sports associations in the Aube department. The main ones are: ES Troyes AC: soccer club in the French Ligue 1; ETAC Handball: Handball Club at National Level 3; Union Sportive de Sainte Maure Troyes Handball: Women's handball club at National Level 1; Pygargues of Troyes: american football club in Division 2; PLAVB (Troyes): volleyball club at Regional one; SUMA (Troyes): Motoball club of France (one of the most successful) moved to elite since the 1930s; Troyes roller hockey: roller hockey club playing at National Level 2; Espadons (Swordfish )(Troyes): baseball club playing at Regional Level 1; Romilly Association for Sports 10: which includes multiple sections. At Troyes there are three independent local radio stations: Radio Latitude: that broadcasts programming focused on the dance floor. This was the first local radio station in the department. It broadcasts from Troyes, Romilly-sur-Seine, and Vendeuvre-sur-Barse Theme Radio: community radio broadcasting music and information flashes Troyes Campus radio: rock music oriented radio and sometimes rap At Romilly-sur-Seine, in addition to Latitude Radio, there is a local independent radio broadcaster: Radio Aube et Seine. French Christian Radio (RCF) Aube is located in the department. Canal 32: television network with a local Troyes and department station France 3 Aube (France 3 Lorraine Champagne-Ardenne) All Aube jurisdictions are located in Troyes. The city has a Tribunal d'instance and a High Court, a commercial court and an Employment Tribunal for civil and criminal jurisdictions. There is also a Correctional court and a Juvenile court. Appeals, however, are passed to the Court of Appeal in Reims. Aube currently has two storage facilities for radioactive waste: Storage Centre for Very Low Activity Waste (CSTFA) Storage Centre for Low and Medium Activity Waste (CSFMA) The Cube – in the Parc des Expositions in Troyes Champagne Theatre Théâtre of la Madeleine Argence space The four main theatres are: Ciné City in Troyes Vagabond in Bar-sur-Aube Lumière in Nogent-sur-Seine Cinema Eden in Romilly-sur-Seine Festival in Othe Aube Templiers 2012 event Andouillette from Troyes Barberey cheese Cacibel liqueur Montgueux champagne Chaource cheese Chocolate from Jacquot (Cémoi group) Sauerkraut from Brienne-le-Château Cider from Othe country Prunelle de Troyes liqueur Rosé des Riceys wine The Aube has 365 historical monuments of which 144 are classified, and 221 are enrolled. La Motte-Tilly Castle Bligny Castle Droupt-Saint-Basle Castle Barberey-Saint-Sulpice Castle Brienne-le-Château Castle Napoleon Museum (Brienne-le-Château) Museum Hugues de Payens (Payns) Resistance Museum (Mussy-sur-Seine) Cider Museum (Eaux-Puiseaux) Museum of the old Champagne malt house (La Chapelle-Saint-Luc) Cheese Museum (Chaource) Museum of crystals – Centre Mazzolay (Bayel) Eco-Museum of the Orient Forest (Brienne-la-Vieille) House of Tools and Work Reflections (Troyes) Museum of Vauluisant (Troyes) Museum of peasant history (Champcharme) Museum of peasant memory (Estissac) Living Museum of Romilly hosiery (Romilly-sur-Seine) The Folk Art Museum (Droupt-Saint-Basle) Renoir Workshop (Essoyes) Museum of Modern Art (Troyes) Loukine Museum (Arsonval) Paul Dubois-Alfred Boucher Museum (Nogent-sur-Seine) Saint-Loup Museum (Troyes) Apothecary of the Hotel-Dieu-le-Comte (Troyes) Michel Marcu Museum of automata (Lusigny-sur-Barse) Di Marco Museum (Troyes) Museum of dolls of yesteryear and cooperage (Maisons-lès-Chaource) Museum of the Simple Past (Crésantignes) Aube Educational History Museum Museum of news design in the press (Troyes) Clairvaux Abbey Basilica of St. Urbain, Troyes Abbey of Saint-Loup of Troyes Monastery Notre-Dame of Saint Espérance Hotel of Marisy Hotel de Ville in Troyes Hotel of the prefecture of Aube Orient Forest Regional Natural Park Orient Lake Amance and Temple Lakes Nigloland: amusement park located at Dolancourt Troyes Troyes Cathedral Aix-en-Othe Clairvaux Abbey Bar-sur-Aube Chrétien de Troyes, writer Urbain IV, Pope Georges Jacques Danton, Revolutionary Martin-Pierre Gauthier, Architect Jacques-Nicolas Paillot de Montabert, Painter Henri Gambey, Inventor Alexandre Du Sommerard, Archeologist Louis Jacques Thénard, Chemist Sylvain Charles Valée, Marshal of France Jacques Claude Beugnot, Politician Nicolas Desmarest, Geologist Pierre-Jean Grosley, Historian Edmé Boursault, Man of Letters Jean de Brienne, King of Jerusalem Jules Guyot, Physician, oenologist (1807–1872) Charles Baltet, Horticulturalist (1830–1908) Gabriel Bonvalot, Explorer (1853–1933) Gaston Bachelard, Philosopher and professor at Bar-sur-Aube Gaston Cheq, Leader of the revolt of the wine-growers in 1911 Olivier Messiaen, Composer, Organist, ornithologist, Fuligny, Aube, 1928–1931 Cantons of the Aube department Communes of the Aube department Arrondissements of the Aube department The complete list can be found at Water Courses of Aube (in French) Including transport and services Including education, health, and social workers This figure does not take into account students from the National Conservatory of Music in Troyes "Répertoire national des élus: les conseillers départementaux". data.gouv.fr, Plateforme ouverte des données publiques françaises (in French). 4 May 2022. "Téléchargement du fichier d'ensemble des populations légales en 2021". The National Institute of Statistics and Economic Studies. 28 December 2023. Populations légales 2019: 10 Aube, INSEE "Le nom des habitants des communes de France - Habitants". www.habitants.fr. Denajar, Laurent (9 July 2017). Carte archéologique de la Gaule: 10. Aube. Les Editions de la MSH. ISBN 9782877540933. Geographical Presentation of the Aube department Archived 5 July 2013 at the Wayback Machine, Aube prefecture website, consulted on 22 September 2010 (in French) Readings from the Météo-France station at Barberey-Saint-Sulpice Paris, Nice, Strasbourg, Brest Data from the Station at Troyes from 1981 to 2010 (in French) Aube and its budget[permanent dead link], General Council of Aube, 2011, consulted on 14 May 2011 (in French) "Résultats de recherche l-entreprise - TCAT". Archived from the original on 15 March 2015. List of Networks in Aube department, Trans'bus, consulted on 20 September 2010 (in French) "Implantations, Ets interurbains et Pôle Régional de Transdev Grand Est". www.transdev-grandest.fr. Keolis Sud Lorraine (in French) "ProCars Champagne - Partenaire de tous vos déplacements et voyages. - L'entreprise". www.procars-champagne.fr. Archived from the original on 11 November 2008. "Autocars Bardy". Archived from the original on 23 June 2012. The port of Aube at Nogent-sur-Seine, Aube Développement, consulted on 21 September 2010 (in French) "Saint-Potentien and Saint-Savinien, first preachers of the Gospel in Gaul". Archived from the original on 8 February 2008. Genealogical and Heraldic History of the peers of France, Volume 8, Jean Baptiste Pierre Jullien de Courcelles, 1827 (in French) Regions-Tourism-Arkantz, 2007, consulted on 19 September 2010 (in French) Foreign Policy Of Atatürk EOLAS. "Les élus au Conseil départemental – Département de l'Aube". aube.fr. Archived from the original on 5 March 2016. "Présidentielles". "Résultats de l'élection présidentielle de 1995 par département - Politiquemania". Nationale, Assemblée. "Assemblée nationale ~ Les députés, le vote de la loi, le Parlement français". Assemblée nationale. "Comparateur de territoire − Unité urbaine 2020 de Troyes (10601), Département de l'Aube (10)". INSEE. Retrieved 6 July 2022. Historique de l'Aube, SPLAF Population en historique depuis 1968, INSEE "Évolution et structure de la population en 2017 − Recensement de la population – Résultats pour toutes les communes, départements, régions, intercommunalités... | Insee". www.insee.fr. Dossier complet: Département de l'Aube (10), INSEE. Retrieved 10 September 2020. The first degree in Aube[permanent dead link], rectory of the Academy of Reims, consulted on 27 October 2010 (in French) The second degree in Aube[permanent dead link], rectory of the Academy of Reims, consulted on 27 October 2010 (in French) Lists of associations, Departmental Directorate of Youth and Sports in Aube Archived 18 January 2011 at the Wayback Machine, consulted on 23 September 2010 m (in French) Circulation is weekly in 2008, OJD Archived 10 November 2009 at the Wayback Machine Competent Jurisdictions for the commune of Troyes, consulted on 2 July 2010 (in French) Heritage and Architecture – Figures for 2012 Archived 16 September 2012 at the Wayback Machine, Ministry of Culture and Communication, consulted on 7 June 2012 (in French) Champagne, Office du Tourisme de l'Aube en. "Vacances et tourisme dans l'Aube en Champagne". Aube Champagne. Archived from the original on 7 May 2013. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Aube. Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article "Aube". (in French) Prefecture website (in English) Departmental Council website (in English) Aube at Curlie Official website for Tourism for Aube (in French) Official website for Tourism in Aube for Tablets and smartphones (in French) Departmental Archives Official website of discovery for Aube (in French) Vitrail website for Aube Archived 6 October 2014 at the Wayback Machine (in French)