Lahore (/ləˈhɔːr/ lə-HOR; Punjabi: لہور [ləˈɦɔːɾ]; Urdu: لاہور [laːˈɦɔːɾ] ) is the capital and largest city of the Pakistani province of Punjab. It is the second largest city in Pakistan, after Karachi, and 26th largest in the world, with a population of over 13 million. It is located in the north-eastern region of Punjab, along the River Ravi. Lahore's origin dates back to antiquity. The city has been inhabited for around two millennia, although it rose to prominence in the late 10th century. Lahore was the capital of several empires during the medieval era, including the Hindu Shahis, Ghaznavids and Delhi Sultanate. It reached the height of its splendor under the Mughal Empire between the late 16th and early 18th centuries and also served as its capital city for many years. During this period, it was one of the largest cities in the medieval world. The city was captured by the forces of the Afsharid ruler Nader Shah in 1739. Although the Mughal authority was re-established, it fell into a period of decay while being contested among the Afghans and the Sikhs between 1748 and 1798. Lahore eventually became the capital of the Sikh Empire in the early 19th century, regaining some of its lost grandeur. Lahore was annexed to the British Raj in 1849 and became the capital of British Punjab. Lahore was central to the independence movements of both India and Pakistan, with the city being the site of both the Declaration of Indian Independence and the resolution calling for the establishment of Pakistan. It experienced some of the worst rioting during the Partition period preceding Pakistan's independence. Following the success of the Pakistan Movement and the subsequent partition of British India in 1947, Lahore was declared the capital of Pakistan's Punjab province. Lahore exerts a strong cultural influence over Pakistan. A UNESCO City of Literature and major center for Pakistan's publishing industry, Lahore remains the foremost center of Pakistan's literary scene. The city is also a major centre of education in Pakistan, with some of Pakistan's leading universities based in the city. For many years, Lahore was home to Pakistan's film industry, Lollywood, though in recent years most filming has shifted to Karachi. Lahore is a major centre of Qawwali music. The city also hosts much of Pakistan's tourist industry, with major attractions including the Walled City, the famous Badshahi and Wazir Khan mosques, as well as several Sikh and Sufi shrines. Lahore is also home to the Lahore Fort and Shalimar Gardens, both of which are UNESCO World Heritage Sites. The origin of Lahore's name is unclear. The city's name has been variously recorded by early Muslim historians as Luhawar, Lūhār, and Rahwar. The Iranian polymath and geographer, Abu Rayhan Al-Biruni, referred to the city as Luhāwar in his 11th century work, Qanun, while the poet Amir Khusrow, who lived during the Delhi Sultanate period, recorded the city's name as Lāhanūr. Yaqut al-Hamawi records the city's name as Lawhūr, mentioning that it was famously known as Lahāwar. Persian historian Firishta mentions the city as Alahwar in his work, with al-Ahwar being another variation. One theory suggests that Lahore's name is a corruption of the word Ravāwar, as R to L shifts are common in languages derived from Sanskrit. Ravāwar is the simplified pronunciation of the name Iravatyāwar, a name possibly derived from the Ravi River, known as the Iravati River in the Vedas. Another theory suggests the city's name may derive from the word Lohar, meaning "blacksmith". According to a legend, Lahore's name derives from Lavpur or Lavapuri ("City of Lava"), and is said to have been founded by Prince Lava, the son of Sita and Rama. The same account attributes the founding of nearby Kasur to his twin brother Kusha, though it was actually established in the 16th century. Historical affiliations Taank Kingdom 550–950 Hindu Shahis 1001–1020 Ghaznavid Empire 1020–1186 Delhi Sultanate 1186–1223 Khwarazmian Empire 1223–1228 Delhi Sultanate 1228–1241 Mongol Empire 1241– 1266 Delhi Sultanate 1266–1287 Mongol Empire 1287–1305 Delhi Sultanate 1320–1325 Chagatai Khanate 1329 Khokars 1394–1398 Timurid Empire 1398–1414 Delhi Sultanate 1414–1524 Mughal Empire 1524–1540 Suri Empire 1540–1550 Mughal Empire 1550–1739 Afsharid Empire 1739 Durrani Empire 1748–1758 Maratha Empire 1758–1759 Durrani Empire 1759–1765 Sikh Misls 1767–1799 Sikh Empire 1799–1846 British East India Company 1846–1858 British Raj / British Empire 1858–1947 Pakistan 1947– present No definitive record of Lahore's early history exists, and its ambiguous historical background has given rise to various theories about its establishment and history. Hindu legend states that Kanaksen, the founder of the Solar dynasty, migrated out from the city. Alexander the Great's historians make no mention of any city near Lahore's location during his invasion in 326 BCE, suggesting the city had not been founded by that point or was not noteworthy. Ptolemy mentions in his Geography a city called Labokla situated near the Chenab and Ravi rivers which may have been in reference to ancient Lahore, or an abandoned predecessor of the city. Chinese pilgrim Xuanzang gave a vivid description of a large and prosperous unnamed city that may have been Lahore when he visited the region in 630 CE during his tour of India. Xuanzang described the city, then under Taank rule, as a great Brahmin city. The first document that mentions Lahore by name is the Hudud al-'Alam ("The Regions of the World"), written in 982 CE, in which Lahore is mentioned as a town which had "impressive temples, large markets and huge orchards". Lahore, previously a town, first emerged as a notable city in 11th century during the era of Sufi saint Ali al-Hajvery. Few other references to Lahore remain from before its capture by the Ghaznavid Sultan Mahmud in the 11th century. During this time, Lahore appears to have served as the capital of Punjab under Raja Anandapala of the Üdi Shahi empire, who moved his capital there from Waihind. Sultan Mahmud conquered Lahore between 1020 and 1027, making it part of Ghaznavid Empire. He appointed Malik Ayaz as its governor in 1021. In 1034, the city was captured by Nialtigin, the rebellious governor of Multan. However, his forces were expelled by Malik Ayaz in 1036. With the support of Sultan Ibrahim, Malik Ayaz rebuilt and repopulated the city, which had been devastated after the Ghaznavid invasion. He also erected city walls and a masonry fort was built in 1037–1040 on the ruins of a previous one. A confederation of Hindu princes unsuccessfully laid siege to Lahore in 1043–44 during Ayaz's rule. The city became a cultural and academic centre, renowned for poetry. Lahore was formally made the eastern capital of Ghaznavid Empire during the reign of Khusrau Shah in 1152. After the fall of Ghazni in 1163, It became the sole capital. Under their patronage, poets and scholars from other cities of Ghaznavid Empire congregated in Lahore. The entire city of Lahore during the medieval Ghaznavid era was probably located west of the modern Shah Alami Bazaar and north of the Bhatti Gate. Following the Siege of Lahore in 1186, the Ghurid ruler Muhammad captured the city and imprisoned the last Ghaznavid ruler Khusrau Malik, thus ending Ghaznavid rule over Lahore. Lahore was made an important establishment of the Mamluk dynasty of the Delhi Sultanate following the assassination of Muhammad of Ghor in 1206. Under the reign of Mamluk sultan Qutb ud-Din Aibak, Lahore attracted poets and scholars from medieval Muslim World. Lahore at this time had more poets writing in Persian than any other city. Following the death of Aibak, Lahore first came under the control of the Governor of Multan, Nasir ad-Din Qabacha, and then was briefly captured in 1217 by the sultan in Delhi, Iltutmish. In an alliance with local Khokhars in 1223, Khwarazmian sultan Jalal al-Din Mangburni captured Lahore after fleeing from Genghis Khan's invasion of his realm. Mangburni then fled from Lahore to the city of Uch Sharif after Iltutmish's army re-captured Lahore in 1228. The threat of Mongol invasions and political instability in Lahore caused future sultans to regard Delhi as a safer capital for the sultanate, even though Delhi was considered a forward base whereas Lahore was widely considered as the centre of Islamic culture in northeastern Punjab. Lahore came under progressively weaker central rule under Iltutmish's descendants in Delhi, to the point that governors in the city acted with great autonomy. Under the rule of Kabir Khan Ayaz, Lahore was virtually independent from the Delhi Sultanate. Lahore was sacked and ruined by the Mongol army in 1241. Lahore governor Malik Ikhtyaruddin Qaraqash fled the Mongols, while the Mongols held the city for a few years under the rule of the Mongol chief Toghrul. In 1266, sultan Balban reconquered Lahore, but in 1287 under the Mongol ruler Temür Khan, the Mongols again overran northern Punjab. Because of Mongol invasions, Lahore region became a city on a frontier, with the region's administrative centre shifted south to Dipalpur. The Mongols again invaded northern Punjab in 1298, though their advance was eventually stopped by Ulugh Khan, brother of Sultan Alauddin Khalji of Delhi. The Mongols again attacked Lahore in 1305. Lahore briefly flourished again under the reign of Ghiyath al-Din Tughlaq (Ghazi Malik) of the Tughluq dynasty between 1320 and 1325, though the city was again sacked in 1329 by Tarmashirin of the Central Asian Chagatai Khanate, and then again by the Mongol chief Hülechü. Khokhars seized Lahore in 1342, but the city was retaken by Ghazi Malik's son, Muhammad bin Tughluq. The weakened city then fell into obscurity and was captured once more by the Khokhar chief, Shaikha in 1394. By the time the Mongol conqueror Timur captured the city in 1398 from Shaikha, he did not loot it because it was no longer wealthy. Timur gave control of the Lahore region to Khizr Khan, governor of Multan, who later established the Sayyid dynasty in 1414 – the fourth dynasty of the Delhi Sultanate. The city was twice besieged by Malik Jasrat during the reign of Mubarak Shah, the longest of which being in 1431–32. To combat Jasrat, the city was granted by the Sayyid dynasty to Bahlul Lodi in 1441, though Lodi would then displace the Sayyids in 1451 by establishing himself upon the throne of Delhi. Bahlul Lodi installed his cousin, Tatar Khan, to be governor of the city, though Tatar Khan died in battle with Sikandar Lodi in 1485. Governorship of Lahore was transferred by Sikandar Lodi to Umar Khan Sarwani, who quickly left the management of this city to his son Said Khan Sarwani. Said Khan was removed from power in 1500 by Sikandar Lodi, and Lahore came under the governorship of Daulat Khan Lodi, son of Tatar Khan and former employer of Guru Nanak (the founder of Sikhism). Badshahi Mosque Lahore Fort Tomb of Jahangir Shahi Hammam Babur, the founder of the Mughal Empire, captured and sacked Lahore and Dipalpur, although he retreated after the Lodi nobles backed away from assisting him. The city became a refuge to Humayun and his cousin Kamran Mirza when Sher Shah Suri rose in power in the Gangetic plains, displacing Mughals. Sher Shah Suri seized Lahore in 1540, though Humayun reconquered Lahore in February 1555. The establishment of Mughal rule eventually led to the most prosperous era of Lahore's history. Lahore's prosperity and central position has yielded more Mughal-era monuments in Lahore than either Delhi or Agra. By the time of the rule of the Mughal empire's greatest emperors, a majority of Lahore's residents did not live within the walled city itself but instead lived in suburbs that had spread outside the city's walls. Only 9 of the 36 urban quarters around Lahore, known as guzars, were located within the city walls during the Akbar period. During this period, Lahore was closely tied to smaller market towns known as qasbahs, such as Kasur and Eminabad, as well as Amritsar, and Batala in modern-day India, which in turn, linked to supply chains in villages surrounding each qasbah. Beginning in 1584, Lahore became the Mughal capital when Akbar began re-fortifying the city's ruined citadel, laying the foundations for the revival of the Lahore Fort. Akbar made Lahore one of his original twelve subah provinces, and in 1585–86, relegated governorship of the city and subah to Bhagwant Das, brother of Mariam-uz-Zamani, who was commonly known as "Jodhabhai". Akbar also rebuilt the city's walls and extended their perimeter east of the Shah Alami bazaar to encompass the sparsely populated area of Rarra Maidan. The Akbari Mandi grain market was set up during this era, which continues to function to the present-day. Akbar also established the Dharampura neighbourhood in the early 1580s, which survives today. The earliest of Lahore's many havelis date from the Akbari era. Lahore's Mughal monuments were built under the reign of Akbar and several subsequent emperors. Lahore reached its cultural zenith during this period, with dozens of mosques, tombs, shrines, and urban infrastructure developed in the city. During the reign of Emperor Jahangir in the early 17th century, Lahore's bazaars were noted to be vibrant, frequented by foreigners, and stocked with a wide array of goods. In 1606, Jehangir's rebel son Khusrau Mirza laid siege to Lahore after obtaining the blessings of the Sikh Guru Arjan Dev. Jehangir quickly defeated his son at Bhairowal, and the roots of Mughal–Sikh animosity grew. Sikh Guru Arjan Dev was executed in Lahore in 1606 for his involvement in the rebellion. Emperor Jahangir chose to be buried in Lahore, and his tomb was built in Lahore's Shahdara Bagh suburb in 1637 by his wife Nur Jahan, whose tomb is also nearby. Jahangir's son, Shah Jahan (reigned 1628–1658), was born in Lahore in 1592. He renovated large portions of the Lahore Fort with luxurious white marble and erected the iconic Naulakha Pavilion in 1633. Shah Jahan lavished Lahore with some of its most celebrated and iconic monuments, such as the Shahi Hammam in 1635, and both the Shalimar Gardens and the extravagantly decorated Wazir Khan Mosque in 1641. The population of pre-modern Lahore probably reached its zenith during his reign, with suburban districts home to perhaps 6 times as many compared to within the Walled City. Shah Jahan's son, Aurangzeb, last of the great Mughal Emperors, further contributed to the development of Lahore. Aurangzeb built the Alamgiri Bund embankment along the Ravi river in 1662 in order to prevent its shifting course from threatening the city's walls. The area near the embankment grew into a fashionable locality, with several nearby pleasure gardens laid by Lahore's gentry. The largest of Lahore's Mughal monuments, the Badshahi Mosque, was raised during Aurangzeb's reign in 1673, as well as the iconic Alamgiri Gate of the Lahore fort in 1674. Civil wars regarding succession to the Mughal throne following Aurangzeb's death in 1707 led to weakening control over Lahore from Delhi, and a prolonged period of decline in Lahore. Mughal preoccupation with the Marathas in the Deccan Plateau eventually resulted in Lahore being governed by a series of governors who pledged nominal allegiance to the ever-weaker Mughal emperors in Delhi. Mughal Emperor Bahadur Shah I died en route to Lahore as part of a campaign in 1711 to subdue Sikh rebels under the leadership of Banda Singh Bahadur. His sons fought a battle outside Lahore in 1712 for succession to the Mughal crown, with Jahandar winning the throne. Sikh rebels were defeated during the reign of Farrukhsiyar when Abd as-Samad and Zakariyya Khan suppressed them. Nader Shah's brief invasion of the Mughal Empire in early 1739 wrested control away from Zakariya Khan Bahadur. Though Khan was able to win back control after the Persian armies had left, the trade routes had shifted away from Lahore, and south towards Kandahar instead. Indus ports near the Arabian Sea that served Lahore also silted up during this time, reducing the city's importance even further. Struggles between Zakariyya Khan's sons following his death in 1745 further weakened Muslim control over Lahore, thus leaving the city in a power vacuum, and vulnerable to foreign marauders. The Durrani ruler Ahmad Shah occupied Lahore in 1748. Following Ahmed Shah Durrani's quick retreat, the Mughals entrusted Lahore to Mu’īn al-Mulk Mir Mannu. Ahmad Shah again invaded in 1751, forcing Mir Mannu into signing a treaty that nominally subjected Lahore to Durrani rule. Lahore was third time conquered by Ahmad Shah in 1752. The Mughal Grand Vizier Ghazi-Din Imad al-Mulk seized Lahore in 1756, provoking Ahmad Shah to invade for fourth time in 1757, after which he placed the city under the rule of his son, Timur Shah. Durrani rule was interrupted when Lahore was conquered by Adina Beg Arain with the assistance of Marathas in 1758 during their campaigns against Afghans. After Adina Beg's untimely death in 1758, however, Marathas occupied the city. The following year, Durranis again marched and conquered it. After the Durranis withdrew from the city in 1765, Sikh forces quickly occupied it. By this time, the city had been ravaged several time and had lost all of its former grandeur. The Durranis invaded two more times—in 1797 and 1798—under Shah Zaman, but the Sikhs re-occupied the city after both invasions. Samadhi of Ranjit Singh Gurdwara Dera Sahib Haveli of Nau Nihal Singh Hazuri Bagh Gurdwara Janam Asthan Guru Ram Das The Lava Temple at the Lahore Fort dates from the Sikh period, and is dedicated to the Hindu deity Lava Expanding Sikh Misls secured control over Lahore in 1767, when the Bhangi Misl state captured the city. In 1780, the city was divided among three rulers: Gujjar Singh, Lahna Singh, and Sobha Singh. Instability resulting from this arrangement allowed nearby Amritsar to establish itself as the area's primary commercial centre in place of Lahore. Ahmad Shah Durrani's grandson, Zaman Shah, invaded Lahore in 1796, and again in 1798–99. Ranjit Singh negotiated with the Afghans for the post of subahdar to control Lahore following the second invasion. By the end of the 18th century, the city's population drastically declined, with its remaining residents living within the city walls, while the extramural suburbs lay abandoned, forcing travellers to pass through abandoned and ruined suburbs for a few miles before reaching the city's gates. In the aftermath of Zaman Shah’s 1799 invasion of Punjab, Ranjit Singh, of nearby Gujranwala, began to consolidate his position. Singh was able to seize control of the region after a series of battles with the Bhangi chiefs who had seized Lahore in 1780. His army marched to Anarkali, where according to legend, the gatekeeper of the Lohari Gate, Mukham Din Chaudhry, opened the gates allowing Ranjit Singh's army to enter Lahore. After capturing Lahore, Sikh soldiers immediately began plundering Muslim areas of the city until their actions were reined in by Ranjit Singh. Ranjit Singh's rule restored some of Lahore's lost grandeur, but at the expense of destroying the remaining Mughal architecture for building materials. He established a mint in the city in 1800, and moved into the Mughal palace at the Lahore fort after repurposing it for his own use in governing the Sikh Empire. In 1801, he established a Gurdwara Ram Das to mark the site where Guru Ram Das was born in 1534. Lahore became the empire's administrative capital, though the nearby economic centre of Amritsar had also been established as the empire's spiritual capital by 1802. By 1812, Singh had mostly refurbished the city's defences by adding a second circuit of outer walls surrounding Akbar's original walls, with the two separated by a moat. Singh also partially restored Shah Jahan's decaying Shalimar Gardens and built the Hazuri Bagh Baradari in 1818 to celebrate his capture of the Koh-i-Noor diamond from Shuja Shah Durrani in 1813. He erected the Gurdwara Dera Sahib to mark the site of Guru Arjan Dev's death (1606). The Sikh royal court also endowed religious architecture in the city, including a number of Sikh gurdwaras, Hindu temples, and havelis. While much of Lahore's Mughal-era fabric lay in ruins by the time of his arrival, Ranjit Singh's rule saw the re-establishment of Lahore's glory, though the Mughal monuments suffered during the Sikh period. Singh's armies plundered most of Lahore's most precious Mughal monuments, and stripped the white marble from several monuments to send to different parts of the Sikh Empire during his reign. Monuments plundered for decorative materials include the Tomb of Asif Khan, the Tomb of Nur Jahan, and the Shalimar Gardens. Ranjit Singh's army also desecrated the Badshahi Mosque by converting it into an ammunition depot and a stable for horses. The Sunehri Mosque in the Walled City was also converted to a gurdwara, while the Mariyam Zamani Mosque was repurposed into a gunpowder factory. The Sikh royal court (Lahore Durbar) underwent a quick succession of rulers after the death of Ranjit Singh. His son Kharak Singh died on 6 November 1840, soon after taking the throne. On that same day, the next appointed successor to the throne, Nau Nihal Singh, died in an accident at the gardens of Hazuri Bagh. Maharaja Sher Singh was then selected as Maharajah, though his claim to the throne was quickly challenged by Chand Kaur, widow of Kharak Singh and mother of Nau Nihal Singh, who quickly seized the throne. Sher Singh raised an army that attacked Chand Kaur's forces in Lahore on 14 January 1841. His soldiers mounted weaponry on the minarets of the Badshahi Mosque in order to target Chand Kaur's forces in the Lahore fort, destroying the fort's historic Diwan-e-Aam. Kaur quickly ceded the throne, but Sher Sing was then assassinated in 1843 in Lahore's Chah Miran neighbourhood along with his wazir Dhiyan Singh. Dhyan Singh's son, Hira Singh, sought to avenge his father's death by laying siege to Lahore in order to capture his father's assassins. The siege resulted in the capture of his father's murderer, Ajit Singh. Duleep Singh was then crowned Maharajah, with Hira Singh as his wazir, but his power would be weakened by the continued infighting among Sikh nobles, as well as confrontations against the British during the two Anglo-Sikh wars. After the conclusion of the two Anglo-Sikh wars, the Sikh Empire fell into disarray, resulting in the fall of the Lahore Durbar, and commencement of British rule after they captured Lahore and the wider Punjab region. University of the Punjab Government College University Lahore Museum Lahore High Court King Edward Medical University The British East India Company seized control of Lahore in February 1846 from the collapsing Sikh state and occupied the rest of Punjab in 1848. Following the defeat of the Sikhs at the Battle of Gujrat, British troops formally deposed Maharaja Duleep Singh in Lahore that same year. Punjab was then annexed to the British Indian Empire in 1849. At the commencement of British rule, Lahore was estimated to have a population of 120,000. Prior to annexation by the British, Lahore's environs consisted mostly of the Walled City surrounded by plains interrupted by settlements to the south and east, such as Mozang and Qila Gujar Singh, which have since been engulfed by modern Lahore. The plains between the settlements also contained the remains of Mughal gardens, tombs, and Sikh-era military structures. The British viewed Lahore's Walled City as a bed of potential social discontent and disease epidemics, and so largely left the inner city alone, while focusing development efforts in Lahore's suburban areas and Punjab's fertile countryside. The British instead laid out their capital city in an area south of the Walled City that would first come to be known as "Donald's Town" before being renamed "Civil Station". Under early British rule, formerly prominent Mughal-era monuments that were scattered throughout Civil Station were also re-purposed and sometimes desecrated – including the Tomb of Anarkali, which the British had initially converted to clerical offices before re-purposing it as an Anglican church in 1851. The 17th-century Dai Anga Mosque was converted into railway administration offices during this time, the tomb of Nawab Bahadur Khan was converted into a storehouse, and the tomb of Mir Mannu was used as a wine shop. The British also used older structures to house municipal offices, such as the Civil Secretariat, Public Works Department, and Accountant General's Office. The British built the Lahore Railway Station just outside the Walled City shortly after the Sepoy Mutiny of 1857; the station was therefore styled as a medieval castle to ward off any potential future uprisings, with thick walls, turrets, and holes to direct gun and cannon fire for the defence of the structure. Lahore's most prominent government institutions and commercial enterprises came to be concentrated in Civil Station in a half-mile wide area flanking The Mall, where unlike in Lahore's military zone, the British and locals were allowed to mix. The Mall continues to serve as the epicentre of Lahore's civil administration, as well as one of its most fashionable commercial areas. The British also laid the spacious Lahore Cantonment to the southeast of the Walled City at the former village of Mian Mir, where unlike around The Mall, laws did exist against the mixing of different races. Lahore was visited on 9 February 1870 by Prince Alfred, Duke of Edinburgh – a visit in which he received delegations from the Dogras of Jammu, Maharajas of Patiala, the Nawab of Bahawalpur, and other rulers from various Punjabi states. During the visit, he visited several of Lahore's major sights. British authorities built several important structures around the time of the Golden Jubilee of Queen Victoria (1887) in the distinctive Indo-Saracenic style, including the Lahore Museum and Mayo School of Industrial Arts. The British carried out a census of Lahore in 1901, and counted 20,691 houses in the Walled City. An estimated 200,000 people lived in Lahore at this time. Lahore's posh Model Town was established as a "garden town" suburb in 1921, while Krishan Nagar locality was laid in the 1930s near The Mall and Walled City. Lahore played an important role in the independence movements of both India and Pakistan. The Declaration of the Independence of India was moved by Jawaharlal Nehru and passed unanimously at midnight on 31 December 1929 at Lahore's Bradlaugh Hall. The Indian Swaraj flag was adopted this time as well. Lahore's jail was used by the British to imprison independence activists such as Jatin Das, and was also where Bhagat Singh was hanged in 1931. Under the leadership of Muhammad Ali Jinnah, the All India Muslim League passed the Lahore Resolution in 1940, demanding the creation of Pakistan as a separate homeland for the Muslims of India. The 1941 census showed that city of Lahore had a population of 671,659, of which was 64.5% Muslim, with the remainder 35% being Hindu and Sikh, alongside a small Christian community. The population figure was disputed by Hindus and Sikhs before the Boundary Commission that would draw the Radcliffe Line to demarcate the border of the two new states based on religious demography. In a bid to have Lahore awarded to India, they argued that the city was only 54% Muslim, and that Hindu and Sikh domination of the city's economy and educational institutions should trump Muslim demography. Two-thirds of shops, and 80% of Lahore's factories belonged to the Hindu and Sikh community. Kuldip Nayyar claimed that Cyril Radcliffe had told him in 1971 that he originally had planned to give Lahore to the new Dominion of India, but decided to place it within the Dominion of Pakistan, which he saw as lacking a major city as he had already awarded Calcutta to India. As tensions grew over the city's uncertain fate, Lahore experienced Partition's worst riots. Carnage ensued in which all three religious groups were both victims and perpetrators. Early riots in March and April 1947 destroyed 6,000 of Lahore's 82,000 homes. Violence continued to rise throughout the summer, despite the presence of armoured British personnel. Hindus and Sikhs began to leave the city en masse as their hopes that the Boundary Commission would award the city to India came to be regarded as increasingly unlikely. By late August 1947, 66% of Hindus and Sikhs had left the city. The Shah Alami Bazaar, once a largely Hindu quarter of the Walled City, was entirely burnt down during subsequent rioting. When Pakistan's independence was declared on 14 August 1947, the Radcliffe Line had not yet been announced, and so cries of "Long live Pakistan" and "God is greatest" were heard intermittently with "Long live Hindustan" throughout the night. On 17 August 1947, Lahore was awarded to Pakistan on the basis of its Muslim majority in the 1941 census and was made capital of the Punjab province in the new state of Pakistan. The city's location near the Indian border meant that it received large numbers of refugees fleeing eastern Punjab and northern India, though it was able to accommodate them given the large stock of abandoned Hindu and Sikh properties that could be re-distributed to newly arrived refugees. Islamic Summit Minar Minar-e-Pakistan Grand Jamia Mosque Provincial Assembly of the Punjab WAPDA House Arfa Karim tower in Lahore Partition left Lahore with a much-weakened economy, and a stymied social and cultural scene that had previously been invigorated by the city's Hindus and Sikhs. Industrial production dropped to one-third of pre-Partition level by the end of the 1940s, and only 27% of its manufacturing units were operating by 1950, and usually well-below capacity. Capital flight further weakened the city's economy while Karachi industrialized and became more prosperous. The city's weakened economy, and proximity to the Indian border, meant that the city was deemed unsuitable to be the Pakistani capital after independence. Karachi was therefore chosen to be the capital on account of its relative tranquility during the Partition period, stronger economy, and better infrastructure. After independence, Lahore slowly regained its significance as an economic and cultural centre of western Punjab. Reconstruction began in 1949 of the Shah Alami Bazaar, the former commercial heart of the Walled City until it was destroyed in the 1947 riots. The Tomb of Allama Iqbal was built in 1951 to honour the philosopher-poet who provided the spiritual inspiration for the Pakistan movement. In 1955, Lahore was selected to be the capital of all West Pakistan during the single-unit period that lasted until 1970. Shortly afterwards, Lahore's iconic Minar-e-Pakistan was completed in 1968 to mark the spot where the Pakistan Resolution was passed. With support from the United Nations, the government was able to rebuild Lahore, and most scars from the communal violence of Partition were ameliorated. The second Islamic Summit Conference was held in the city in 1974. In retaliation for the destruction of the Babri Masjid in India, riots erupted in 1992 in which several non-Muslim monuments were targeted, including the tomb of Maharaja Sher Singh, and the former Jain temple near The Mall. In 1996, the International Cricket Council Cricket World Cup final match was held at the Gaddafi Stadium in Lahore. The Walled City of Lahore restoration project began in 2009, when the Punjab government restored the Royal Trail from Akbari Gate to the Lahore Fort with money from the World Bank. Lahore is in northeastern portion of Pakistan, lying between 31°15′—31°45′ N and 74°01′—74°39′ E. The city is bounded on the north and west by the Sheikhupura District, on the east by Wagah, and on the south by Kasur District. The Ravi River flows on the northern side of Lahore. Lahore city covers a total land area of 404 square kilometres (156 sq mi). Lahore has a semi-arid climate (Köppen climate classification BSh), falling just under the category of humid subtropical climate (Köppen climate classification Cwa). The hottest month is June, where temperatures routinely exceed 45 °C (113 °F). The monsoon season starts in late June, and the wettest months are July, August and September. with heavy rainfalls and evening thunderstorms with the possibility of cloudbursts and flash floods. The coolest month is January, with dense fog. The city's record high temperature was 50.4 °C (122.7 °F), recorded on 5 June 2003. On 10 June 2007, a temperature of 48 °C (118 °F) was recorded; this was in the shade, and the meteorological office recording the figure reported a heat index in direct sunlight of 55 °C (131 °F). The highest rainfall in a 24-hour period is 221 millimetres (8.7 in), recorded on 13 August 2008. The results of the 2017 Census determined the population of Lahore to be 11,126,285, with an annual growth rate of 4.07% since 1998. Gender-wise, 52.35% of the population are male, 47.64% are female, and 0.01% are transgender. Lahore is a demographically young city, with over 40% of its inhabitants below the age of 15. According to the 2017 Pakistani census, the largest groups in terms of ethnicity and caste are Punjabi Arains, constituting 40%, followed by Kashmiris at 30% with other groups such as Punjabi Rajputs and Punjabi Kamboh at 5% each. According to the 2017 Census, the vast majority of Lahore's population are Muslims (94.7%), roughly the same as in the 1998 Census, and up from 60% in 1941. Other religions include Christians (5.14%, slightly less than 5.80% in 1998; though according to the 1998 Census, they formed around 9.0% of the rural population) and small numbers of Ahmadis, Baháʼís, Hindus, Parsis, and Sikhs. There is also a small but longstanding Zoroastrian community. Since Lahore contains some of Sikhism's holiest sites, it is a major pilgrimage destination for Sikhs. Lahore's first church was built during the reign of Emperor Akbar in the late 16th century, but was then leveled by Shah Jahan in 1632. Due to the few numbers of Hindus living in Lahore, the only two functional Hindu temples in the city are the Shri Krishna Mandir and the Valmiki Mandir. The Punjabi language is the most-widely spoken native language in Lahore, with 80% of Lahore counting it as their first language according to the 2017 Census. Lahore is the largest Punjabi-speaking city in the world. According to the 2017 Pakistani census 12.6% speak Urdu, 2.7% Pashto, 1.02% Saraiki and 2.78% other mother tongues. Urdu and English are used as official languages and as mediums of instruction and media administration. However, Punjabi is also taught at graduation level and used in theatres, films, and newspapers from Lahore. Several Lahore-based prominent educational leaders, researchers, and social commentators have demanded that the Punjabi language should be declared as the medium of instruction at the primary level and be used officially in the Punjab Assembly, Lahore. Lahore's modern cityscape consists of the historic Walled City of Lahore in the northern part of the city, which contains several World Heritage Sites and national heritage sites. Lahore's urban planning was not based on geometric design but was instead built piecemeal, with small cul-de-sacs, as katrahs and galis developed in the context of neighbouring buildings. Though certain neighbourhoods were named for particular religious or ethnic communities, the neighbourhoods themselves typically were diverse and were not dominated by the namesake group. Lahore's urban typology is similar to other ancient cities in South Asia, such as Peshawar, Multan and Delhi – all of which were founded near a major river, and included an old walled city and royal citadel. By the end of the Sikh rule, most of Lahore's massive haveli compounds had been occupied by settlers. New neighbourhoods occasionally grew up entirely within the confines of an old Mughal haveli, such as the Mohallah Pathan Wali, which grew within the ruins of a haveli of the same name, built by Mian Khan. By 1831, all Mughal Havelis in the Walled City had been encroached upon by the surrounding neighbourhood, leading to the modern-day absence of any Mughal Havelis in Lahore. A total of thirteen gates once surrounded the historic walled city. Some of the remaining gates include the Raushnai Gate, Masti Gate, Yakki Gate, Kashmiri Gate, Khizri Gate, Shah Burj Gate, Akbari Gate, and Lahori Gate. Southeast of the walled city is the spacious British-era Lahore Cantonment. Lahore is home to numerous monuments from the Mughal Dynasty, Sikh Empire, and the British Indian Raj. The architectural style of the Walled City of Lahore has traditionally been influenced by Mughal and Sikh styles. By the arrival of the Sikh Empire at the end of the 18th century, Lahore had decayed from its former glory as the Mughal capital. Rebuilding efforts under Ranjit Singh and his successors were influenced by Mughal practices, and Lahore was known as the 'City of Gardens' during the Ranjit Singh period. Later, British maps of the area surrounding Lahore dating from the mid-19th century show many walled private gardens which were confiscated from the Muslim noble families bearing the names of prominent Sikh nobles – a pattern of patronage which was inherited from the Mughals. While much of Lahore's Mughal-era fabric lay in ruins by the time of his arrival, Ranjit Singh's army's plundered most of Lahore's most precious Mughal monuments, and stripped the white marble from several monuments to send to different parts of the Sikh Empire. Monuments plundered of their marble include the Tomb of Asif Khan and the Tomb of Nur Jahan; the Shalimar Gardens was plundered of much of its marble, and its costly agate gate was stripped. The Sikh state also demolished a number of shrines and monuments laying outside the city's walls. Still, Sikh rule left Lahore with several monuments, and a heavily altered Lahore Fort. Ranjit Singh's rule restored some of Lahore's previous grandeur, and the city was left with a large number of religious monuments from this period. Several havelis were built during this era, though only a few still remain. As the capital of British Punjab, the city derived much of its architecture from British colonialists. Structures were built predominantly in the Indo-Gothic style – a syncretic architectural style that blends elements of Victorian and Islamic architecture o r in the distinct Indo-Saracenic style. The British also built neoclassical Montgomery Hall, which today serves as the Quaid-e-Azam Library. Lawrence Gardens were also laid near Civil Station, and were paid for by donations solicited from both Lahore's European community, as well as from wealthy locals. The gardens featured over 600 species of plants, and were tended to by a horticulturist sent from London's Royal Botanic Gardens at Kew. The leafy suburbs to the south of the Old City, as well as the Cantonment southwest of the Old City, were largely developed under British colonial rule, and feature colonial-era buildings built alongside leafy avenues. The British authorities built several important structures around the time of the Golden Jubilee of Queen Victoria in 1887 in the distinctive Indo-Saracenic style, such as the Lahore Museum and Mayo School of Industrial Arts. Other prominent examples of the Indo-Saracenic style in Lahore include Lahore's prestigious Aitchison College, the Punjab Chief Court (today the Lahore High Court), Lahore Museum, and the University of the Punjab. Many of Lahore's most important buildings were designed by civil engineer and architect Sir Ganga Ram, who is considered "the father of modern Lahore". Lahore is also known as "the city of gardens" due to its large number of gardens. The Shahdara Bagh was one of the earliest Mughal gardens, laid out in 15th century, and contains the Tomb of Jahangir. The Shalimar Gardens were laid out during the reign of Shah Jahan and were designed to mimic the Islamic paradise of the afterlife described in the Qur'an. The gardens follow the familiar charbagh layout of four squares, with three descending terraces. In 1818, Hazuri Bagh was built during reign of Ranjit Singh to celebrate his capture of the Koh-i-Noor diamond from Shuja Shah Durrani. The Lawrence Garden was established in 1862 and was originally named after Sir John Lawrence, late 19th-century British Viceroy to India. The Circular Garden, which surrounds the Walled City on three sides, was established by 1892. The former parade ground adjacent to Badshahi Mosque was also renamed during the British era as Minto Park, which after restoration was re-established as Iqbal Park. The many other gardens and parks in the city include Hazuri Bagh, Iqbal Park, Mochi Bagh, Gulshan-e-Iqbal Park, Model Town Park, Jilani Park, Nasir Bagh Lahore, Jallo Park, Lahore Zoo Safari Park, and Changa Manga, a human-made forest near Lahore in the Kasur district. Another example is the Bagh-e-Jinnah, a 141-acre (57 ha) botanical garden that houses entertainment and sports facilities as well as a library. Expo Centre Lahore PIA Head Office Emporium Mall MCB headquarters As of 2008[update], the city's gross domestic product (GDP) by purchasing power parity (PPP) was estimated at $40 billion with a projected average growth rate of 5.6 percent. This is on par with Karachi, Pakistan's economic hub, with Lahore (having half the population) fostering an economy that is 51% of the size of Karachi's ($78 billion in 2008). It is estimated that Lahore contributes 11.5% to the national economy, and 19% to the provincial economy of Punjab. As a whole, Punjab has a $115 billion economy, making it the first (and to date,[as of?] only) Pakistani Subdivision with an economy of more than $100 billion, at the rank 144[of what?].[failed verification] Lahore's GDP is projected to be $102 billion by 2025, with a slightly higher growth rate of 5.6% per annum, as compared to Karachi's 5.5%. A major industrial agglomeration with about 9,000 industrial units, Lahore has shifted in recent decades from manufacturing to service industries. Some 42% of its work force is employed in finance, banking, real estate, community, cultural, and social services. The city is Pakistan's largest software and hardware producing centre, and hosts a growing computer-assembly industry. The city has always been a centre for publications; 80% of Pakistan's books are published in Lahore, and it remains the foremost centre of literary, educational, and cultural activity in Pakistan. The Lahore Expo Centre is one of the biggest projects in the history of the city and was inaugurated on 22 May 2010. Defense Raya Golf Resort, also under construction, will be Pakistan's and Asia's largest golf course. The project is the result of a partnership between DHA Lahore and BRDB Malaysia. The rapid development of large projects such as these in the city is expected to boost the economy of the country. Ferozepur Road of the Central business districts of Lahore contains high-rises and skyscrapers including Kayre International Hotel and Arfa Software Technology Park. Lahore's main public transportation system is operated by the Lahore Transport Company (LTC) and Punjab Mass Transit Authority (PMTA). The backbone of its public transport network is the PMTA's Lahore Metrobus and the Orange Line of the Lahore Metro train. LTC and PMTA also operates an extensive network of buses, providing bus service to many parts of the city and acting as a feeder system for the Metrobus. The Orange Line metro spans 27.1 km (16.8 mi) around the city and operates at a speed of 80 km/h (50 mph). The Lahore Metrobus is a bus rapid transit service operating in Lahore, Punjab, Pakistan. Lahore Metrobus service is integrated with Lahore Transport Company's local bus service to operate as one urban transport system, providing a connected transit service across Lahore District with connections to neighboring suburban communities. Low occupancy vehicle (LOVs)—functionally a medium-sized van or wagon—run on routes throughout the city. They function like buses and operate on many routes throughout the city. The Orange Line Metro Train is an automated rapid transit system in Lahore. The Orange line is the first of the three proposed rail lines proposed for the Lahore Metro. As of 2020, it is the primary metro rail line in the city. The line spans 27.1 km (16.8 mi), with 25.4 km (15.8 mi) elevated and 1.72 km (1.1 mi) underground, and had a cost of 251.06 billion rupees ($1.6 billion). The line consists of 26 subway stations (Ali Town Station to Dera Gujran Station) and is designed to carry over 250,000 passengers daily. CRRC Zhuzhou Locomotive rolled out the first of 27 trains for the metro on 16 May 2017. The train has speed up to 80 km/h (50 mph). For improved durability, its bogies are heat-resistant, can manage unstable voltage, and feature energy-saving air-conditioning. Successful initial test trials were run in mid-2018, and commercial operations began on 25 October 2020. The Blue Line is a proposed 24 kilometres (15 mi) line from Chauburji to College Road Township. Along the way, it will connect places like Mozang Chungi, Shadman Chowk, Jail Road, Mian Boulevard Gulberg, Mian Boulevard Garden Town, and Faisal Town. The Purple Line is a proposed 19 kilometres (12 mi) line from Bhaati Chowk to the Allama Iqbal International Airport. Along the way, it will connect places like Brandreth Road, Railway Station, Allama Iqbal Road, Dharampura, and Ghazi Road. Ride-sharing services such as Uber and Careem are available in the city. Motorcycle rides are also available in the city, which have been introduced by private companies. Auto rickshaws play an important role of public transport in Lahore. There are 246,458 auto rickshaws, often simply called autos, in the city.[citation needed] Motorcycle rickshaws, usually called chand gari ('moon car') or chingchi (after the Chinese company Jinan Qingqi Motorcycle Co. Ltd, who first introduced these to the market), are also a common means of domestic travel, though they are less common and cheaper than auto rickshaws. Chingchi rickshaws provide a shared ride experience for multiple passengers and fares, whereas auto rickshaws cater to only one passenger or group for a fare. Since 2002, all auto rickshaws have been required to use compressed natural gas as fuel. Lahore Junction Station serves as the main railway station for Lahore, and serves as a major hub for all Pakistan Railways services in Northern Pakistan. It includes services to Peshawar and the national capital metropolitan area of Islamabad–Rawalpindi, and long-distance services to Karachi and Quetta. Lahore Cantonment Station also operates a few trains. Lahore Badami Bagh Bus Terminal (known colloquially as "Lari Adda") serves as a hub for intercity bus services in Lahore, served by multiple bus companies providing a comprehensive network of services in Punjab and neighbouring provinces. Lahore Jinnah Bus Terminal is also a major bus stand in southern Lahore. Apart from these stations, multiple privately owned bus transportation companies operate from Band Road (referred to colloquially as "Chowk Yateem Khana"), offering intercity transport at varying fares and comfort levels. Pakistan's third busiest airport, Allama Iqbal International Airport (IATA: LHE), straddles the city's eastern boundary. The new passenger terminal was opened in 2003, replacing the old terminal which now serves as a VIP and Hajj lounge. The airport was named after the national poet-philosopher, Muhammad Iqbal, and is a secondary hub for the national carrier, Pakistan International Airlines. Walton Airport in Askari provides general aviation facilities. Sialkot International Airport (IATA: SKT) and Faisalabad International Airport (IATA: LYP) also serve as alternate airports for the Lahore area, in addition to serving their respective cities. Allama Iqbal International Airport connects Lahore with many cities worldwide (including domestic destinations) by both passenger and cargo flight including Ras al Khaimah, Guangzhou (begins 28 August 2018), Ürümqi, Abu Dhabi, Barcelona, Beijing–Capital, Copenhagen, Dammam, Dera Ghazi Khan, Doha, Dubai–International, Islamabad, Jeddah, Karachi, Kuala Lumpur–International, London–Heathrow, Manchester, Medina, Milan–Malpensa, Multan, Muscat, Oslo–Gardermoen, Paris–Charles de Gaulle, Peshawar, Quetta, Rahim Yar Khan, Riyadh, Salalah, Tokyo–Narita, Toronto–Pearson, Mashhad, Bangkok–Suvarnabhumi, and Tashkent. There are a number of municipal, provincial and federal roads that serve Lahore. Municipal roads Canal Road – serves as the major north–south artery Provincial highways Lahore Ring Road Lahore–Kasur Road (Ferozepur Road) Lahore–Raiwind Road (Raiwind Road) Lahore–Sharaqpur Road (Sagianwala Bypass Road) Lahore–Wagah Road Grand Trunk Road (G.T Road ) Federal highways M-2 motorway M-3 motorway M-11 motorway N-5 National Highway (Multan Road) N-60 National Highway (Sargodha–Lahore road) Under Punjab Local Government Act 2013, Lahore is a metropolitan area under the authority of the Metropolitan Corporation Lahore. The Metropolitan Corporation Lahore is a body consisting of nine deputy mayors (one from each zone in the district) and the city's mayor – all of whom are elected in popular elections. The Metropolitan Corporation approves zoning and land use, coordinates urban design and planning, sets environmental protection laws, and provides municipal services. As per the Punjab Local Government Act 2013, the Mayor of Lahore is the elected head of the Metropolitan Corporation of Lahore. The mayor is directly elected in municipal elections every four years alongside 9 deputy town mayors. Mubashir Javed of the Pakistan Muslim League (N) was elected mayor of Lahore in 2016. The mayor is responsible for the administration of government services, the composition of councils and committees overseeing Lahore City District departments and serves as the chairperson for the meeting of the Lahore Council. The mayor also functions to help devise long-term development plans in consultation with other stakeholders and bodies to improve the condition, livability, and sustainability of urban areas. Lahore District is a subdivision of the Punjab, and is further divided into 9 administrative zones. Each town in turn consists of a group of union councils, of which there are 274 total. The 2015 local government elections for Union Councils in Lahore yielded the following results: The people of Lahore celebrate many festivals and events throughout the year, including Islamic, traditional Punjabi, Christian, and national holidays and festivals. Many people decorate their houses and light candles to illuminate the streets and houses during public holidays; roads and businesses may be lit for days. Many of Lahore's dozens of Sufi shrines hold annual festivals called urs to honour their respective saints. For example, the mausoleum of Ali Hujwiri at the Data Darbar shrine has an annual urs that attracts up to one million visitors per year. The popular Mela Chiraghan festival in Lahore takes place at the shrine of Madho Lal Hussain, while other large urs take place at the shrines of Bibi Pak Daman, and at the Shrine of Mian Mir. Eid ul-Fitr and Eid ul-Adha are celebrated in the city with public buildings and shopping centers decorated in lights. The people of Lahore also commemorate the martyrdom of Imam Husain at Karbala with massive processions that take place during the first ten days of the month of Muharram. Basant is a traditional Punjabi festival that marks the coming of spring. Basant celebrations in Pakistan are centred in Lahore, and people from all over the country and abroad come to the city for the annual festivities. Kite-flying competitions traditionally take place on city rooftops during Basant, while the Lahore Canal is decorated with floating lanterns. Courts have banned kite-flying because of casualties and power installation losses. The ban was lifted for two days in 2007, then immediately reimposed when 11 people were killed by celebratory gunfire, sharp kite-strings, electrocution, and falls related to the competition. Lahore's churches are elaborately decorated for Christmas and Easter celebrations. Shopping centers and public buildings also feature Christmas installations to celebrate the holiday, even though Christians only constitute 3% of the total population of Lahore in 2016. Wazir Khan Mosque Badshahi Mosque Lahore Fort (Shahi Qila) Minar-e-Pakistan at night Shalimar Gardens Lahore remains a major tourist destination in Pakistan. The Walled City of Lahore was renovated in 2014 and is popular due to the presence of UNESCO World Heritage Sites. Among the most popular sights are the Lahore Fort, adjacent to the Walled City, and home to the Sheesh Mahal, the Alamgiri Gate, the Naulakha pavilion, and the Moti Masjid. The fort and adjoining Shalimar Gardens have been a UNESCO World Heritage Site since 1981. The city is home to several ancient religious sites, including prominent Hindu temples: the Krishna Temple and Valmiki Mandir. The Samadhi of Ranjit Singh, also located near the Walled City, houses the funerary urns of the Sikh ruler Maharaja Ranjit Singh. The most prominent religious building is the Badshahi Mosque, constructed in 1673; it was the largest mosque in the world upon construction. Another popular sight is the Wazir Khan Mosque, constructed in 1635 and known for its extensive faience tile work. Well-known religious sites in the city include: Badshahi Mosque Dai Anga Mosque Darbar Madho Lal Hussain Data Darbar Complex Grand Jamia Mosque, Lahore Gurdwara Dera Sahib Gurdwara Janam Asthan Guru Ram Das Krishna Mandir, Lahore Lava Temple Lohari Gate Mosque Masjid of Mariyam Zamani Masjid Shuhada Moti Masjid (Lahore Fort) Muhammad Saleh Kamboh Mosque Neevin Mosque Oonchi Mosque Sacred Heart Cathedral, Lahore Shab Bhar Mosque Shaheed Ganj Mosque St. Andrew's Presbyterian Church Suneri Mosque Valmiki Temple Wazir Khan Mosque Army Museum Lahore Fakir Khana Islamic Summit Minar Javed Manzil Lahore Museum National History Museum House of NANNA's by Dr. Ejaz Anwar Como Museum of Art National Museum of Science and Technology Shakir Ali Museum Tollinton Market-Lahore City Heritage Museum Tomb of Ali Mardan Khan Tomb of Allama Iqbal Tomb of Anarkali Tomb of Asif Khan Tomb of Dai Anga Tomb of Jani Khan Tomb of Jahangir Tomb of Nadira Begum Tomb of Nur Jahan Tomb of Dai Anga Buddhu's Tomb Cypress Tomb or Sarowala Maqbara Tomb of Zeb-un-Nissa Begum Tomb of Gul Begum Tomb of Malik Ayaz Kuri Bagh Mai Dai Mian Khan Nusrat Khan Prince Pervez Qutb-ud-din Aibak Saleh Kamboh Mir Niamat Khan Rasul Shahyun Zafar Jang Kokaltash Bibi Pak Daman Ali Hujwiri Mian Mir Madho Lal Hussain Khawaja Tahir Bandgi Ghazi Ilm Din Shaheed Sheikh Musa Ahangar Khawaja Mehmud Nizam-ud-Din Siraj-ud-Din Gilani peer makki Baba Shah Jamal Bhai Vasti Ram Ranjit Singh Samadhi of Bhai Mani Singh Sir Ganga Ram Bhai Taru Singh There are many havelis inside the Walled City of Lahore, some in good condition while others need urgent attention. Many of these havelis are fine examples of Mughal and Sikh architecture. Some of the havelis inside the Walled City include: Chuna Mandi Havelis Dina Nath Ki Haveli Haveli Barood Khana Haveli Mian Khan (Rang Mehal) Haveli of Nau Nihal Singh Haveli Shergharian (near Lal Khou) Haveli Sir Wajid Ali Shah (near Nisar Haveli) Lal Haveli beside Mochi Bagh Mubarak Begum Haveli Bhatti Gate Mubarak Haveli – Chowk Nawab Sahib, Mochi/Akbari Gate Mughal Haveli (residence of Maharaja Ranjeet Singh) Nisar Haveli Salman Sirhindi ki Haveli Shahi Hammam Alhamra Art Council Lahore Royal Fort Greater Iqbal Park Anarkali Badami Bagh Baghbanpura Begampura Heera Mandi Mughalpura Shahdara Bagh Walled City of Lahore Lahore is known as Pakistan's educational capital,[citation needed] with more colleges and universities than any other city in Pakistan. The literacy rate of Lahore is 74%. The city is Pakistan's largest producer of professionals in the fields of science, technology, IT, law, engineering, medicine, nuclear sciences, pharmacology, telecommunication, biotechnology, microelectronics, and nanotechnology, and has the only future hyper high-tech center[clarification needed] in Pakistan. Most of the reputable universities are public, but in recent years there has also been an upsurge in the number of private universities. Lahore University of Management Sciences (LUMS) is the only AACSB accredited business school in Pakistan. Lahore hosts some of Pakistan's oldest and best educational institutes, including: Aitchison College, established in 1886 Beaconhouse National University, established in 2003 Central Model School, established in 1883 Crescent Model Higher Secondary School, established in 1968 College of Home Economics, established in 1955 College of Statistical and Actuarial Sciences, established in 1950 Convent of Jesus and Mary, established in 1867 Dayal Singh College, established in 1910 De'Montmorency College of Dentistry, established in 1929 Fatima Jinnah Medical University, established in 1948 Forman Christian College, established in 1864 Government College University, Lahore, established in 1864 Hailey College of Commerce, established in 1927 Islamia College, established in 1892 Jamia Ashrafia, established in 1947 King Edward Medical University, established in 1860 Kinnaird College for Women University, established in 1913 Lady Maclagan Training College, established in 1933 Lady Willingdon Nursing School, established in 1933 Lahore College for Women University, established in 1922 Lahore Garrison University Lahore Grammar School, established in 1979 Lahore Medical and Dental College, established in 1997 Lahore School of Economics, established in 1993 Lahore University of Management Sciences, established in 1986 M.A.O College, established in 1933 Muslim Model High School, established in 1890 National College of Arts, established in 1875 Oriental College, established in 1876 Pakistan Institute of Fashion and Design, established in 1994 PakTurk International Schools and Colleges, established in 2006 Queen Mary College, established in 1908 Sacred Heart High School, established in 1906 Shaikh Khalifa Bin Zayed Al-Nahyan Medical and Dental College, established in 2009 St. Anthony's High School, established in 1892 St. Francis High School, established in 1842 University College of Pharmacy, established in 1944 University Law College, established in 1868 University of Central Punjab, established in 2002 University of Education, established in 2002 University of Engineering and Technology, Lahore, established in 1921 University of Health Sciences, Lahore, established in 2002 University of Lahore, established in 1999 University of Management and Technology (Lahore), established in 2002 University of the Punjab, established in 1882 University of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, established in 1882 Sports venues Pakistan playing against Argentina in 2005 Gaddafi Stadium is one of the largest stadiums of Pakistan, with a capacity of 27,000 spectators. Gymkhana Club Lahore has successfully hosted many international sports events, including the finals of the 1990 Men's Hockey World Cup and the 1996 Cricket World Cup. The headquarters of all major sports governing bodies in Pakistan are located in Lahore, including cricket, hockey, rugby, and football.[citation needed] Lahore is also home to the head office of the Pakistan Olympic Association. Gaddafi Stadium is a Test cricket ground in Lahore. It was completed in 1959, and renovations were carried out by Pakistani architect Nayyar Ali Dada in the 1990s. Lahore is home to several golf courses, including the Lahore Gymkhana Golf Course, the Lahore Garrison Golf and Country Club, the Royal Palm Golf Club, and newly built Defence Raya Golf & Country Club. Lake City, a 9-hole course, opened in nearby Raiwind Road in 2011. The newly opened Oasis Golf and Aqua Resort is a state-of-the-art resort, featuring golf, water parks, and leisure activities like horse riding and archery. The Lahore Marathon is part of an annual package of six international marathons sponsored by Standard Chartered Bank across Asia, Africa, and the Middle East. More than 20,000 athletes from Pakistan and all over the world participate in this event. It was first held on 30 January 2005, and again on 29 January 2006. More than 22,000 people participated in the 2006 race. The third marathon was held on 14 January 2007.[failed verification] Plans exist to build Pakistan's first sports city in Lahore, on the bank of the Ravi River.[better source needed] Professional sports teams from Lahore The following international cities have been declared twin towns and sister cities of Lahore. Istanbul, Turkey (1975) Sariwon, North Korea (1988) Xi'an, Shaanxi, China (1992) Kortrijk, Belgium (1993) Fez, Morocco (1994) Bukhara, Uzbekistan (1995) Samarkand, Uzbekistan (1995) Isfahan, Iran (2004) Mashad, Iran (2006) Glasgow, Scotland (2006) Chicago, Illinois, United States (2007) Belgrade, Serbia (2007) Kraków, Poland (2007) Coimbra, Portugal (2007) Dushanbe, Tajikistan (2008) Córdoba, Spain (2008) Bogotá, Colombia (2009) Amol, Iran (2010) Rio de Janeiro, Brazil (2015) In 1966, the Government of Pakistan awarded a special flag, the Hilal-i-istaqlal, to the cities of Lahore, Sargodha, and Sialkot for showing severe resistance to the enemy during the Indo-Pakistani War of 1965, as these cities were targets of the war. Every year on Defence Day (6 September), this flag is hoisted in these cities in recognition of the will, courage, and perseverance of their people.  Pakistan portal Lahore Fashion Week Lahore Knowledge Park Lahore Literary Festival Lahore Railway Station Lahori cuisine List of cemeteries in Lahore List of cities proper by population List of films set in Lahore List of hospitals in Lahore List of largest cities in Organisation of Islamic Cooperation member countries List of metropolitan areas in Asia List of people from Lahore List of streets in Lahore List of tallest buildings in Lahore List of towns in Lahore List of urban areas by population Lahori chaddar Sikh period in Lahore Transport in Lahore Walled City of Lahore 1881-1941: Data for the entirety of the town of Lahore, which included Lahore Municipality and Lahore Cantonment.: 32  1931-1941: Including Ad-Dharmis Only includes protestant population.: 152  "Landing in the heart of Pakistan". The Express Tribune. 9 August 2015. Archived from the original on 23 April 2021. Retrieved 22 April 2021. Smith, Oliver (12 June 2018). "Paris of the East? Athens of the North? The cities with ideas above their station". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022 – via www.telegraph.co.uk. "The 'City of Lights' vs 'City of Gardens'". 12 January 2018. Archived from the original on 14 June 2021. Retrieved 23 September 2020. "Unesco confers 'City of Literature' title on Lahore". 4 February 2021. Archived from the original on 31 August 2021. Retrieved 31 August 2021. "Local govts term ends today". Dawn (newspaper). 31 December 2021. Archived from the original on 5 January 2022. Retrieved 5 January 2022. "Commissioner, CCPO discuss encroachment removal strategy". The News International (newspaper). 19 December 2023. Retrieved 19 December 2023. "Anti-encroachment Drive To Start On 20th". UrduPoint. 19 December 2023. Retrieved 19 December 2023. "Punjab Portal". Government of Punjab. Archived from the original on 25 June 2014. Retrieved 7 July 2014. "Announcement of Results of 7th Population and Housing Census-2023 (Punjab province)" (PDF). Pakistan Bureau of Statistics. 5 August 2023. Retrieved 24 November 2023. "A Lahori for life". The News International (newspaper). 12 December 2021. Archived from the original on 6 January 2022. Retrieved 6 January 2022. "National Dialing Codes". Pakistan Telecommunication Company Limited. Archived from the original on 3 September 2014. Retrieved 28 August 2014. "Pakistan: 4 Top Cities". The Business Year. 16 October 2020. Archived from the original on 20 November 2021. Retrieved 25 November 2021. "| Finance Division | Government of Pakistan |". www.finance.gov.pk. Archived from the original on 6 March 2023. Retrieved 6 March 2023. "DAWN - Features; 22 August, 2004". DAWN.COM. 22 August 2004. Archived from the original on 6 March 2023. Retrieved 6 March 2023. Dyson, Tim (2018). A Population History of India: From the First Modern People to the Present Day. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-882905-8. Archived from the original on 4 April 2023. Retrieved 16 March 2023. Glover, William (January 2007). Making Lahore Modern, Constructing and Imagining a Colonial City. Univ of Minnesota Press. ISBN 978-0-8166-5022-4. "Rising Lahore and reviving Pakistan – The Express Tribune". The Express Tribune. 21 July 2013. Archived from the original on 10 May 2021. Retrieved 16 June 2016. Kudaisya, Gyanesh; Yong, Tan Tai (2004). The Aftermath of Partition in South Asia. Routledge. ISBN 978-1134440481. Retrieved 28 December 2017. Discover Lahore: The Heart of Pakistan[permanent dead link] Chicago Sister Cities International "Leading News Resource of Pakistan". Daily Times. 4 March 2005. Archived from the original on 12 February 2008. Retrieved 16 September 2011. Zaidi, S. Akbar (15 October 2012). "Lahore's domination". Dawn. Pakistan. Archived from the original on 20 November 2021. Retrieved 16 June 2016. Windsor, Antonia (22 November 2006). "Out of the rubble". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 5 November 2013. Retrieved 27 March 2010. "Lahore, Pakistan". Lonely Planet. Archived from the original on 20 November 2021. Retrieved 16 June 2016. Latif, Syad Muhammad (1892). Lahore: Its History, Architectural Remains and Antiquities: With an Account of Its Modern Institutions, Inhabitants, Their Trade, Customs, &c. Printed at the New Imperial Press. Suvorova, Anna (22 July 2004). Muslim Saints of South Asia: The Eleventh to Fifteenth Centuries. Routledge. ISBN 1134370059. al-Hamawi, Yaqut. "Mu'jam al-Buldan". Archived from the original on 2 August 2020. Retrieved 14 March 2020. Briggs, J. trans. Mohammad Kasim Firishta, "History of the Rise of the Mahomedan Power in India Till the Year A.D. 1612", Volume VI Wink 2002, p. 121. Journal of Central Asia. Centre for the Study of the Civilizations of Central Asia, Quaid-i-Azam University. 1978. Boltz, William G.; Shapiro, Michael C. (1 January 1991). Studies in the Historical Phonology of Asian Languages. John Benjamins Publishing. ISBN 9027235740. Journal of Asian Civilisations. Taxila Institute of Asian Civilisations. 2001. Gazetteer of the Ferozpur District: 1883. 1883. Haroon Khalid. "How old is Lahore? The clues lie in a blend of historical fact and expedient legend". Dawn. Archived from the original on 1 January 2019. Retrieved 1 January 2019. A legend subsequently grew that connected the history of the city with Valmiki's Ramayana. According to this narrative, Valmiki lived on a mound on the banks of the Ravi when he hosted Ram's consort Sita after she was banished from Ayodhya. It is here that she gave birth Lav and Kush, the princes of Ayodhya, who later founded the twin cities of Lahore and Kasur. Annual bibliography of Indian history and Indology, Volume 4. Bombay Historical Society. 1946. p. 257. Retrieved 29 May 2009. Baqir, Muhammad (1985). Lahore, past and present. B.R. Pub. Corp. pp. 19–20. Retrieved 29 May 2009. Nadiem, Ihsan N (2005). Punjab: land, history, people. Al-Faisal Nashran. p. 111. ISBN 9789695032831. Retrieved 29 May 2009. Nadiem, Ihsan H. (2005). Punjab: Land, History, People. Al-Faisal Nashran. ISBN 9789695034347. Neville, p.xii Latif, Syad Muhammad (1892). Lahore: Its History, Architectural Remains and Antiquities: With an Account of Its Modern Institutions, Inhabitants, Their Trade, Customs, &c. Printed at the New Imperial Press. Charles Umpherston Aitchison (2002). Lord Lawrence and the Reconstruction of India Under the British Rule. Genesis Publishing Pvt Ltd. p. 54. ISBN 9788177551730. Bosworth, C. Edmund (2007). Historic Cities of the Islamic World. Brill. ISBN 978-9047423836. Retrieved 26 December 2017. Unknown author from Jōzjān (1937). Hudud al-'Alam, The Regions of the World: A Persian Geography, 372 A.H. – 982 A.D. Translated by V. Minorsky. London: Oxford University Press. Archived from the original on 15 April 2021. Retrieved 4 September 2013. {{cite book}}: |last= has generic name (help) Al-Hind, the Slave Kings and the Islamic Conquest, 11th–13th Centuries By André Wink "Dawn Pakistan – The 'shroud' over Lahore's antiquity". Dawn. Pakistan. 22 August 2004. Archived from the original on 29 October 2010. Retrieved 15 March 2011. Amjad, Yaḥyá (1989). Tārīḵẖ-i Pākistān: qadīm daur : zamānah-yi mā qabl az tārīḵẖ : Pākistān kī sarzamīn par āj se paune do kaṛoṛ sāl pahle... (in Urdu). Sang-i Mīl Pablīkeshanz. Al-Hind, the Slave Kings and the Islamic Conquest, 11th–13th Centuries By André Wink PAGE 235 Imperial Gazetteer of India, v. 16, p. 106. Archived from the original on 13 March 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2017. Andrew Petersen (1996). Dictionary of Islamic Architecture. Routledge. p. 159. ISBN 978-0-415-06084-4. ".GC University Lahore". Gcu.edu.pk. Archived from the original on 8 September 2012. Retrieved 15 March 2011. James L. Wescoat; Joachim Wolschke-Bulmahn (1 January 1996). Mughal Gardens: Sources, Places, Representations, and Prospects. Dumbarton Oaks. p. 149. ISBN 978-0-88402-235-0. Encyclopedia of Chronology: Historical and Biographical. Longmans, Green and Company. 1872. p. 590. Retrieved 26 December 2017. lahore 1152. "Lahore" Archived 2 May 2015 at the Wayback Machine Encyclopædia Britannica Ikram, S. M (1964). Muslim Civilization in India. New York, USA: Columbia University Press. "Once upon a time". Apnaorg.com. Archived from the original on 15 June 2011. Retrieved 15 March 2011. Mikaberidze, Alexander. "Conflict and Conquest in the Islamic World: A Historical Encyclopedia (2 volumes): A Historical Encyclopedia" Archived 4 April 2023 at the Wayback Machine ABC-CLIO, 22 July 2011 ISBN 978-1-59884-337-8 pp 269–270 Jackson, Peter (16 October 2003). The Delhi Sultanate: A Political and Military History. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0521543290. Retrieved 27 December 2017. Sadasivan, Balaji (14 August 2018). The Dancing Girl: A History of Early India. Institute of Southeast Asian Studies. ISBN 9789814311670 – via Google Books. "isbn:8190891804 – Google Search". books.google.com. Neville, p.xiii Imperial Gazetteer of India, v. 16, p. 107. Archived from the original on 13 March 2016. Retrieved 27 December 2017. Ahmed, Farooqui Salma (2011). A Comprehensive History of Medieval India: Twelfth to the Mid-Eighteenth Century. Pearson India. ISBN 9788131732021. Dhillon, Dalbir Singh (1988). Sikhism Origin and Development. Atlantic Publishers & Distributors. Retrieved 27 December 2017. Masson, Vadim Mikhaĭlovich (2003). History of Civilizations of Central Asia: Development in contrast : from the sixteenth to the mid-nineteenth century. UNESCO. ISBN 9789231038761. Iqtidar Alam Khan (2008). Historical Dictionary of Medieval India. Scarecrow Press. p. 32. ISBN 978-0-8108-5503-8. "Short Cuts". The Economist. 19 March 2016. Archived from the original on 19 August 2016. Retrieved 19 August 2016. For centuries Lahore was the heart of Mughal Hindustan, known to visitors as the City of Gardens. Today it has a greater profusion of treasures from the Mughal period (the peak of which was in the 17th century) than India's Delhi or Agra, even if Lahore's are less photographed. Chandra, Satish (2005). Medieval India: From Sultanat to the Mughals Part – II. Har-Anand Publications. ISBN 8124110662. Retrieved 27 December 2017. Latif, Syad Muhammad (2003). Agra historical and descriptive with an account of Akbar and his court and of the modern city of Agra. Asian Educational Services. ISBN 8120617096. Retrieved 27 December 2017. Holt, P. M. (1977). The Cambridge History of Islam: Volume 2A, The Indian Sub-Continent, South-East Asia, Africa and the Muslim West. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0521291372. Retrieved 27 December 2017. Pashaura Singh (2006). Life, and Work of Guru Arjan: History, Memory, and Biography in the Sikh Tradition. Oxford University Press. pp. 23, 217–218. ISBN 978-0-19-567921-2. "International council on monuments and sites" (PDF). UNESCO. Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 July 2015. Retrieved 13 April 2015. "Lahore Fort Alamgiri Gate". Asian Historical Architecture. Archived from the original on 28 December 2017. Retrieved 28 December 2017. Latif, Syad Muhammad (1892). Lahore: Its History, Architectural Remains and Antiquities. Oxford University: New Imperial Press. Axworthy, Michael (2010). Sword of Persia: Nader Shah, from Tribal Warrior to Conquering Tyrant. I.B. Tauris. p. 195. ISBN 978-0-85773-347-4. Roy, Kaushik (2004). India's Historic Battles: From Alexander the Great to Kargil. Permanent Black, India. pp. 80–1. ISBN 978-81-7824-109-8. Mehta, J.L. (2005). Advanced study in the history of modern India 1707–1813. Sterling Publishers Pvt. Ltd. p. 260. ISBN 978-1-932705-54-6. Retrieved 23 September 2010. Zamir, Sufia (14 January 2018). "Heritage: the Lonely Little Temple". DAWN.COM. Archived from the original on 3 August 2020. Retrieved 27 April 2020. "Tomb of Asif Khan" (PDF). Global Heritage Fund. Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 November 2015. Retrieved 13 September 2017. Pakistani Sikhs reopen temple after 73 years, archived from the original on 11 December 2021, retrieved 21 January 2020 Bansal, Bobby (2015). Remnants of the Sikh Empire: Historical Sikh Monuments in India & Pakistan. Hay House, Inc. ISBN 978-9384544935. Kakshi, S.R.; Pathak, Rashmi; Pathak, S.R. Bakshi R. (1 January 2007). Punjab Through the Ages. Sarup & Sons. pp. 272–274. ISBN 978-81-7625-738-1. Retrieved 12 June 2010. Singh, Bhagata (1990). Maharaja Ranjit Singh and his times. Sehgal Publishers Service. K.S. Duggal (1989). Ranjit Singh: A Secular Sikh Sovereign. Exoticindiaart.com. ISBN 8170172446. Archived from the original on 17 June 2008. Retrieved 3 September 2015. "Pakistan – Lahore – Hindukush Karakuram Tours & Treks". Archived from the original on 2 February 2019. Retrieved 1 February 2019. Kartar Singh Duggal (1 January 2001). Maharaja Ranjit Singh: The Last to Lay Arms. Abhinav Publications. pp. 125–126. ISBN 978-81-7017-410-3. Masson, Charles. 1842. Narrative of Various Journeys in Balochistan, Afghanistan and the Panjab, 3 v. London: Richard Bentley (1) 37 Sidhwa, Bapsi (2005). City of Sin and Splendour: Writings on Lahore. Penguin Books India. ISBN 978-0-14-303166-6. Marshall, Sir John Hubert (1906). Archaeological Survey of India. Office of the Superintendent of Government Printing. Sidhwa, Bapsi (14 August 2018). City of Sin and Splendour: Writings on Lahore. Penguin Books India. ISBN 9780143031666 – via Google Books. The Panjab Past and Present. Vol. 22. Department of Punjab Historical Studies, Punjab University. 1988. Retrieved 28 August 2016. Soomro, Farooq (13 May 2015). "A visual delight – Maryam Zamani and Wazir Khan Mosques". Dawn. Archived from the original on 26 December 2018. Retrieved 29 August 2016. Glover, William (January 2007). Making Lahore Modern, Constructing and Imagining a Colonial City. Univ of Minnesota Press. ISBN 978-0-8166-5022-4. By the turn of the twentieth century, Lahore's population had nearly doubled from what it had been when the province was first annexed, growing from an estimated 120,000 people in 1849 to over 200,000 in 1901. Glover, William (January 2007). Making Lahore Modern, Constructing and Imagining a Colonial City. Univ of Minnesota Press. ISBN 978-0-8166-5022-4. On the eve of annexation, Lahore's suburbs were made up of a flat, debris-strewn plain interrupted by a small number of populous abadis, the deserted cantonment and barracks of the former Sikh infantry (which, according to one British large buildings in various states of disrepair. Glover, William (January 2007). Making Lahore Modern, Constructing and Imagining a Colonial City. Univ of Minnesota Press. ISBN 978-0-8166-5022-4. The inner city, on the other hand, remained problematic. Seen as a potential hotbed of disease and social instability, and notoriously difficult to observe and fathom, the inner districts of the city remained stubbornly resistant to colonial intervention. Throughout the British period of occupation in Punjab, for reasons we will explore more fully, the inner districts of its largest cities were almost entirely left alone. 5 The colonial state made its most significant investments in suburban tracts outside of cities... It should not surprise us that the main focus of imperial attention in Punjab was its fertile countryside rather than cities like Lahore. Glover, William (January 2007). Making Lahore Modern, Constructing and Imagining a Colonial City. Univ of Minnesota Press. ISBN 978-0-8166-5022-4. . Glover, William (January 2007). Making Lahore Modern, Constructing and Imagining a Colonial City. Univ of Minnesota Press. ISBN 978-0-8166-5022-4. What is more striking than the fact that Punjab's new rulers (cost-effectively) appropriated the symbolically charged buildings of their predecessors is how long some of those appropriations lasted. The conversion of the Mughal-era tomb of Sharif un-Nissa, a noblewoman during Shah Jahan's reign, popularly known as Anarkali, was one such case (Figure 1.2). This Muslim tomb was first used as offices and residences for the clerical staff of Punjab's governing board. In 1851, however, the tomb was converted into the Anglican church Glover, William (January 2007). Making Lahore Modern, Constructing and Imagining a Colonial City. Univ of Minnesota Press. ISBN 978-0-8166-5022-4. the mosque of Dai Anga, Emperor Shah Jahan's wet nurse, which the British converted first into a residence and later into the office of the railway traffic manager. Nearby was the tomb of Nawab Bahadur Khan, a highly placed member of Akbar's court, which the railway used as a storehouse... manager. Nearby was the tomb of Nawab Bahadur Khan, a highly placed member of Akbar's court, which the railway used as a storehouse. That same tomb had been acquired earlier by the railway from the army, who had used it as a theater for entertaining officers. The railway provided another nearby tomb free of charge to the Church Missionary Society, who used it for Sunday services. The tomb of Mir Mannu, an eighteenth-century Mughal viceroy of Punjab who had brutally persecuted the Sikhs while he was in power, escaped demolition by the railway but was converted nevertheless into a private wine merchant's shop Glover, William (January 2007). Making Lahore Modern, Constructing and Imagining a Colonial City. Univ of Minnesota Press. ISBN 978-0-8166-5022-4. with an abundance of abandoned large structures scattered throughout the civil station on nazul (state administered) property, the colonial government often chose to house major institutions in converted buildings rather than to build anew. These institutions included the Civil Secretariat, which, as we have seen, was located in Ventura's former house; the Public Works from Ranjit Singh's period; and the Accountant General's office, headquartered in a converted seventeenth century mosque near the tomb of Shah Chiragh, just off Mall Road. In Glover, William (January 2007). Making Lahore Modern, Constructing and Imagining a Colonial City. Univ of Minnesota Press. ISBN 978-0-8166-5022-4. The Lahore station, built during a time when securing British civilians and troops against a future "native" uprising was foremost in the government's mind, fortified medieval castle, complete with turrets and crenellated towers, battered flanking walls, and loopholes for directing rifle and cannon fire along the main avenues of approach from the city Glover, William (January 2007). Making Lahore Modern, Constructing and Imagining a Colonial City. Univ of Minnesota Press. ISBN 978-0-8166-5022-4. We should remember that outside of colonial military cantonments, where rules encouraging racial separation were partially formalized in the residential districts of India's colonial cities. Wherever government institutions, commercial enterprises, and places of public congregation were concentrated, mixing among races and social classes was both legally accommodated and necessary. In Lahore these kinds of activities were concentrated in a half-mile-wide zone stretching along Mall Road from the Civil Secretariat, near Anarkali's tomb, at one end to the botanical gardens at the other (see. Muḥammad Laṭīf (Saiyid, Khān Bahādur) (1891). History of the Panjáb from the Remotest Antiquity to the Present Time. Calcutta Central Press Company, limited. Glover, William (January 2007). Making Lahore Modern, Constructing and Imagining a Colonial City. Univ of Minnesota Press. ISBN 978-0-8166-5022-4. As a gesture of loyalty, Punjab's "Princes, Chiefs, merchants, men of local note, and the public generally" formed a subscription to erect the "Victoria Jubilee Institute for the Promotion and Diffusion of Technical and Agricultural Education and Science" in Lahore, a complex that eventually formed the nucleus of the city's museum and the Mayo School of Art (completed in 1894). Glover, William (January 2007). Making Lahore Modern, Constructing and Imagining a Colonial City. Univ of Minnesota Press. ISBN 978-0-8166-5022-4. According to the 1901 census, therefore, the inner city of Lahore contained exactly 20,691 "houses" Glover, William (January 2007). Making Lahore Modern, Constructing and Imagining a Colonial City. Univ of Minnesota Press. ISBN 978-0-8166-5022-4. We should remember that outside of colonial military cantonments, where rules encouraging racial separation were partially formalized in the residential districts of India's colonial cities. Wherever government institutions, commercial enterprises, and places of public congregation were concentrated, mixing among races and social classes was both legally accommodated and necessary. In Lahore these kinds of activities were concentrated in a half-mile-wide zone stretching along Mall Road from the Civil Secretariat, near Anarkali's tomb, at one end to the botanical gardens at the other "Republic Day". The Tribune. Archived from the original on 29 January 2015. Retrieved 15 March 2011. "A memorial will be built to Bhagat Singh, says the governor of Lahore." Archived 29 July 2012 at archive.today Daily Times Pakistan. 2 September 2007. Story of Pakistan – Lahore Resolution 1940 Archived 26 January 2012 at the Wayback Machine, Jin Technologies. Retrieved 19 September 2007. Ahmed, Khalid (3 June 2017). "The City that wanted to know". Indian Express. Archived from the original on 24 February 2021. Retrieved 28 December 2017. Dabas, Maninder (17 August 2017). "Here's How Radcliffe Line Was Drawn On This Day And Lahore Could Not Become A Part of India". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 28 November 2021. Retrieved 22 January 2019. Kuldip Nayar (24 August 2018). "'I nearly gave you Lahore': When Kuldip Nayar asked Cyril Radcliffe about deciding Indo-Pak border". Scroll.in. Scroll.in. Archived from the original on 22 January 2022. Retrieved 22 January 2019. Kaul, Pyarelal (1991). Crisis in Kashmir. Suman Publications. p. 42. Under Radcliffe Award, Lahore was to have gone to India and not to Pakistan. The Arbitrator Radcliffe, announced to the representatives of India and Pakistan that Lahore had fallen to the lot of India. Nayar, Kuldip (24 September 2006). "Line of Division: Real and Imagined". The Tribune. Archived from the original on 9 March 2021. Retrieved 22 January 2019. Fiddian-Qasmiyeh, Elena; Loescher, Gil; Long, Katy; Sigona, Nando (2014). The Oxford Handbook of Refugee and Forced Migration Studies. OUP Oxford. ISBN 978-0191645884. Retrieved 28 December 2017. de Jonge, Rene (1989). Urban planning in Lahore: a confrontation with real development. Peter Groote. ISBN 9789036701839. Retrieved 11 October 2017. "Second Islamic Summit Conference". Oic-oci.org. Archived from the original on 14 October 2006. Retrieved 15 March 2011. "Political History and Administrative History of the Punjab" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 October 2021. Retrieved 27 December 2017. "Lahore – History of Lahore". thelahorecity.com. Archived from the original on 26 December 2018. Retrieved 11 September 2016. "Climatological Normals of Lahore". Hong Kong Observatory. Archived from the original on 13 October 2018. Retrieved 6 May 2010. "Smoke not smog". 6 November 2016. Archived from the original on 18 September 2017. Retrieved 18 September 2017. "Quetta". Pakmet.com.pk. Archived from the original on 16 July 2011. Retrieved 15 March 2011. "Highest temperature in 78 years: Four die as city sizzles at 48o C". Daily Times. 10 June 2007. Archived from the original on 30 September 2007. Retrieved 15 March 2011. "Heatwave to persist for 4–5 days" Archived 30 December 2008 at the Wayback Machine, The Dawn, 10 June 2007. "Lahore Extremes (1881-2022)". Pakistan Meteorological Department. Archived from the original on 24 December 2018. Retrieved 20 November 2022. "Pakmet.com.pk - Pakistan's Biggest Property Website". PakMet. Archived from the original on 16 July 2011. "Lahore Climate Normals 1991–2020". World Meteorological Organization Climatological Standard Normals (1991–2020). National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Retrieved 17 September 2023. "Extremes of Lahore". Pakistan Meteorological Department. Retrieved 2 February 2015. "Pakistan: Provinces and Major Cities - Population Statistics, Maps, Charts, Weather and Web Information". citypopulation.de. Archived from the original on 28 July 2020. Retrieved 28 March 2019. "Population of Major Cities Census – 2017" (PDF). Pakistan Bureau of Statistics. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 August 2017. Retrieved 30 August 2017. "District Wise Population by Sex and Rural/Urban – Census 2017" (PDF). Pakistan Bureau of Statistics. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 August 2017. Retrieved 30 August 2017. "Lahore Population 2018". 18 October 2017. Archived from the original on 6 December 2021. Retrieved 31 July 2018. "District Profile". District Lahore - Government of Punjab. Archived from the original on 27 November 2023. "District Profile". District Lahore - Government of Punjab. Archived from the original on 27 November 2023. "TABLE 9 - POPULATION BY SEX, RELIGION AND RURAL/URBAN" (PDF). Population Census 2017. Pakistan Bureau of Statistics. Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 July 2022. Retrieved 20 July 2022. "Largest Christian Community of Pakistan resides in Lahore District". christiansinpakistan.com. Archived from the original on 18 September 2016. Retrieved 11 September 2016. "Sikh pilgrims from India arrive in Lahore". Dawn. Pakistan. 21 November 2015. Archived from the original on 10 October 2021. Retrieved 23 September 2016. Chaudhry, Nazir Ahmad (2000). Lahore. Sang-e-Meel Publications. ISBN 969351047X. Sehyr Mirza (31 October 2014). "Lahore's only functional Hindu temple: Persecution amidst lights". Archived from the original on 2 February 2021. Retrieved 14 November 2020. "CENSUS OF INDIA, 1941 VOLUME VI PUNJAB". Archived from the original on 11 October 2022. Retrieved 17 January 2023. "Census of India, 1881 Report on the Census of the Panjáb Taken on the 17th of February 1881, vol. I." 1881. JSTOR saoa.crl.25057656. Retrieved 14 January 2024. "Census of India, 1881 Report on the Census of the Panjáb Taken on the 17th of February 1881, vol. II". 1881. JSTOR saoa.crl.25057657. Retrieved 14 January 2024. "CENSUS OF INDIA, 1891 GENERAL TABLES BRITISH PROVINCES AND FEUDATORY STATES VOL I". Archived from the original on 17 January 2023. Retrieved 17 January 2023. "CENSUS OF INDIA, 1901 VOLUME I-A INDIA PART II-TABLES". Archived from the original on 17 January 2023. Retrieved 17 January 2023. "CENSUS OF INDIA, 1911 VOLUME XIV PUNJAB PART II TABLES". Archived from the original on 7 October 2022. Retrieved 17 January 2023. "CENSUS OF INDIA, 1921 VOLUME XV PUNJAB AND DELHI PART II TABLES". Archived from the original on 17 January 2023. Retrieved 17 January 2023. "CENSUS OF INDIA, 1931 VOLUME XVII PUNJAB PART II TABLES". Archived from the original on 17 January 2023. Retrieved 17 January 2023. "Final Results (Census-2017)". Archived from the original on 17 October 2021. Retrieved 17 January 2023. PBC 2017 Statistics (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 14 April 2022. Retrieved 14 April 2022. "LAHORE DISTRICT - POPULATION BY MOTHER TONGUE, SEX AND RURAL/ URBAN" (PDF). Pakistan Bureau of Statistics. Archived (PDF) from the original on 14 April 2022. Retrieved 14 April 2022. "Lahore (District, Pakistan) - Population Statistics, Charts, Map and Location". www.citypopulation.de. Archived from the original on 20 July 2022. Retrieved 20 July 2022. "Lahore District - 2017 Pakistan Census" (PDF). Pakistan Bureau of Statistics. Archived (PDF) from the original on 30 July 2022. Retrieved 20 July 2022. University of the Punjab (2015), "B.A. Two-Year (Pass Course) Examinations" "University of the Punjab – Examinations". pu.edu.pk. Archived from the original on 8 February 2017. Retrieved 13 January 2017. "Department of Punjabi". University of the Punjab. 2015. Archived from the original on 27 November 2016. "Supreme Court's Urdu verdict: No language can be imposed from above". The Nation. 15 September 2015. Archived from the original on 16 September 2015. Retrieved 15 September 2015. "Two-member SC bench refers Punjabi language case to CJP". Business Recorder. 14 September 2015. Archived from the original on 21 October 2015. Retrieved 15 September 2015. "Architecture of Lahore." Wikipedia: The Free Encyclopedia. Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. Web. 19 August 2016. The Nation newspaper, Published 23 September 2010, Retrieved 27 February 2017 "Hazori Bagh". lahore.city-history.com. Archived from the original on 21 April 2019. Retrieved 27 February 2017. Latif, Syad Muhammad (1892). Lahore: Its History, Architectural Remains and Antiquities. Oxford University: New Imperial Press. (page 87) Glover, William (January 2007). Making Lahore Modern, Constructing and Imagining a Colonial City. Univ of Minnesota Press. ISBN 978-0-8166-5022-4. Montgomery Hall faced inward, toward the main avenue of what would become a and reading room, a teak dance and "rinking"floor (skating rink), and room for the Gymkhana Club. Lawrence Hall was devoted to the white community in Lahore;the spaces and program of Montgomery Hall allowed for racial interaction between British civilians and officials and the elites of Lahori society. Glover, William (January 2007). Making Lahore Modern, Constructing and Imagining a Colonial City. Univ of Minnesota Press. ISBN 978-0-8166-5022-4. Like Lawrence and Montgomery Halls, moreover, the garden's major elements were all financed through a combination of provincial, municipal, and private funds from both British carefully isolated space of controlled cultural interaction underwritten by elite collaboration. Both the botanical garden and the zoo in Lawrence Gardens drafted a controlled display of exotic nature to the garden's overall didactic program. The botanical garden exhibited over six hundred species of plants, trees, and shrubs, all carefully tended by a horticulturist sent out from the Royal Botanic Gardens at Kew. Khaled Ahmed (2001). Pakistan: behind the ideological mask : facts about great men we don't want to know. Vanguard. ISBN 978-969-402-353-3. Khalid, Haroon (25 April 2018). "Lahore owes Hindu philanthropist Ganga Ram more than it would care to admit". DAWN News. Archived from the original on 22 May 2021. Retrieved 27 February 2022. Special Reports (4 September 2015). "'Father of Modern Lahore' remembered". The Milli Gazette. Archived from the original on 27 February 2022. Retrieved 27 February 2022. Siraj, M.A. (21 May 2021). "Pakistan reopens Samadhi of Ganga Ram, iconic engineer, philanthropist who rebuilt Lahore". The Siasat Daily. Archived from the original on 15 September 2021. Retrieved 27 February 2022. Luqman, Tariq (15 November 2018). "Sir Ganga Ram: The Father of Modern Lahore, our Khadim-Ala Punjab". blogspot.com. Archived from the original on 27 February 2022. Retrieved 27 February 2022. Sharma, Unnati (27 January 2021). "Sir Ganga Ram's descendant Kesha Ram celebrates US senate seat in salwar kameez to show the way". ThePrint. Archived from the original on 27 February 2022. Retrieved 27 February 2022. Mazhar Abbas (18 July 2021). "A hard call—II". The News International. Archived from the original on 26 February 2022. Retrieved 27 February 2022. U.S. Consulate General Lahore [@USCGLahore] (26 January 2021). "#DYK "the father of modern #Lahore", Sir Ganga Ram's great granddaughter Kesha Ram has become the State Senator of #Vermont #USA? She was sworn in on January 6 and wore shalwar kameez during the swearing-in ceremony. Good luck for your endeavors, Kesha! 📸 @KeshaRam/ Wikipedia" (Tweet). Archived from the original on 17 January 2022. Retrieved 27 February 2022 – via Twitter. Gill, Anjum. "Father of modern Lahore remembered on anniversary." Daily Times (Pakistan). 12 July 2004. Archived 3 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine Lawrence Gardens Archived 6 October 2007 at the Wayback Machine at Garden Visit website. (Retrieved on 27 March 2007) "Bagh-E-Jinnah / Lawrence Gardens". 12 February 2015. Archived from the original on 31 July 2018. Retrieved 31 July 2018. "Global city GDP rankings 2008–2025". PricewaterhouseCoopers. Archived from the original on 13 May 2013. Retrieved 12 February 2010. "Lahore's Shahbaz growth rate". Express Tribune. 29 September 2017. Archived from the original on 7 December 2021. Retrieved 8 November 2017. "Richest cities in the world in 2020 by GDP". City Mayors. 11 March 2007. Archived from the original on 4 June 2020. Retrieved 6 July 2009. Asian Development Bank. "Rapid Mass Transit System Project" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 August 2010. Retrieved 1 January 2009. "Expo Centre Lahore". LahoreExpo. Archived from the original on 2 July 2011. Retrieved 1 July 2011. "Defence Raya Golf Resort, Lahore – By D.H.A Lahore". Homespakistan.com. Archived from the original on 26 February 2021. Retrieved 6 June 2014. "Metro Bus Lahore Pakistan -Rapid Bus Transport". pakvisit.com. Archived from the original on 9 June 2018. Retrieved 9 June 2018. "Urban (LOV) Wagon / Mini Bus - Routes & Fares | Lahore Transport Company". ltc.gop.pk. Archived from the original on 9 June 2019. Retrieved 9 June 2019. "Good news on track: Lahore to get Pakistan's first metro train" Archived 13 June 2018 at the Wayback Machine, Express Tribune, Lahore, 23 March 2014. Retrieved on 20 October 2014. "Development agenda: Lahore metro train gets green signal – The Express Tribune". 14 May 2015. Archived from the original on 4 July 2018. Retrieved 4 July 2018. "Norinco Technical Proposal" (PDF). January 2016. p. 12. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 February 2017. Retrieved 25 January 2017. "First Orange Line Metro train rolls out – The Express Tribune". The Express Tribune. 16 May 2017. Archived from the original on 4 July 2018. Retrieved 16 May 2017. "Lahore opens Pakistan's first metro line". International Railway Journal. 26 October 2020. Archived from the original on 1 November 2020. Retrieved 30 March 2021. "Orange Line Metro train runs on trial basis in Lahore". thenews.com.pk. Archived from the original on 18 June 2018. Retrieved 1 March 2018. "Punjab CM inaugurates Lahore's much-delayed Orange Line Metro Train". Daily Pakistan. 25 October 2020. Archived from the original on 28 October 2020. Retrieved 25 October 2020. "Lahore Rapid Mass Transit Rail - Railway Technology". www.railway-technology.com. Archived from the original on 9 March 2021. Retrieved 30 March 2021. "2020 Ultimate Guide To Lahore". Visit Lahore. 29 May 2020. Archived from the original on 16 July 2020. Retrieved 16 July 2020. "History of Allama Iqbal International Airport, Lahore". lahoreairport.com.pk. Archived from the original on 22 June 2016. Retrieved 9 June 2016. "Pakistan International Airlines". Archived from the original on 23 January 2011. Retrieved 3 October 2015. "China Southern adds Guangzhou – Lahore route from Aug 2018". Routes. Archived from the original on 24 June 2018. Retrieved 4 July 2018. Liu, Jim (18 March 2018). "China Southern adds plans Lahore launch from late-June 2018". Routesonline. Archived from the original on 18 March 2018. Retrieved 18 March 2018. "PIA advertisement promoting Barcelona resumption". Archived from the original on 14 October 2016. "Pakistan International W16 International route additions". Routes. Archived from the original on 6 March 2023. Retrieved 6 March 2023. "Uzbek Airways resumes flight from Tashkent to Lahore". 5 April 2017. Archived from the original on 4 July 2018. Retrieved 4 July 2018. "Metropolitan Corporation Lahore". lahore.gop.pk. Archived from the original on 20 February 2020. Retrieved 24 September 2017. "City District Governments". National Reconstruction Bureau, Government of Pakistan. Archived from the original on 5 October 2009. Retrieved 18 February 2009. "City District". National Reconstruction Bureau, Government of Pakistan. Archived from the original on 13 October 2008. Retrieved 18 February 2009. "LG polls results: a nightmare for PTI". thenews.com.pk. Archived from the original on 26 December 2018. Retrieved 31 August 2016. Linus Strothman (2016). Tschacher, Torsten; Dandekar, Deepra (eds.). Islam, Sufism and Everyday Politics of Belonging in South Asia. Routledge. ISBN 9781317435969. Retrieved 12 September 2017. "Devotees throng Lahore shrine for Mian Mir Sahab's Urs | SAMAA". Samaa TV. 7 November 2019. Archived from the original on 3 August 2020. Retrieved 18 June 2020. Shahid, QAM | Sheharyar Rizwan | Kalbe Ali | Shakeel Ahmed | Mohammad Hussain Khan | Zulfiqar Ali | Saleem (8 September 2019). "Muharram: Walking the Mourners' Path". dawn.com. Archived from the original on 18 June 2020. Retrieved 18 June 2020. "11 Dead at Pakistani Kite Festival, Metal Kite Strings, Stray Celebratory Gunfire Claim Lives at Annual Event, More Than 100 Injured". CBS News. 26 February 2007. Archived from the original on 13 October 2007. Retrieved 2 August 2007. "In pictures: Christmas celebrations across Pakistan". www.geo.tv. Archived from the original on 19 June 2020. Retrieved 18 June 2020. "Christmas festivities all set to begin in Lahore". The Express Tribune. 22 December 2018. Archived from the original on 8 March 2021. Retrieved 7 December 2020. "Ten-fold increase in foreign tourists for Lahore Walled City". Dawn. Pakistan. 2 January 2016. Archived from the original on 14 May 2016. Retrieved 16 June 2016. "Historical mosques of Lahore". Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 16 June 2016. "Lahore, Punjab, Pakistan – A Guide For Travelers – The Tourist". The Tourist. 29 September 2017. Archived from the original on 9 November 2017. Retrieved 3 January 2018. Blanshard Asher, Catherine (1992). Architecture of Mughal India. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-26728-1. Raza, M. Hanif (1999). Portrait of Pakistan. Lahore, Punjab, Pakistan: Ferozsons, Ltd. p. 155. ISBN 969-0-01545-1. "Lahore Marathon Website". Lahoremarathon.com. Archived from the original on 18 January 2011. Retrieved 15 March 2011. "Lahore soon to get a Sports City". Lahore Metblogs. Archived from the original on 14 July 2011. Retrieved 15 March 2011. "No committee to develop ties with Lahore's twins". Daily Times of Pakistan. 2 March 2007. Archived from the original on 29 September 2013. Retrieved 8 February 2008. Abbas, Zaffar, ed. (5 January 2016). "Islamabad to get new sister city". Dawn. Karachi, Pakistan: Pakistan Herald Publications. "Glasgow finds another new twin in Punjab". Herald Scotland. 26 May 2006. Archived from the original on 12 January 2023. Retrieved 12 January 2023. "Lahore and Chicago declared sister cities". City District Government of Lahore. Archived from the original on 1 May 2008. Retrieved 8 February 2008. Aslam, Talat, ed. (27 April 2007). "Musharraf for Lahore-Cordoba liaison to promote ties with Spain". The News International. Karachi, Pakistan: Jang Group of Newspapers. Syed Shayan (February 2015). "Ground Realities 4". Akhbar Peela. Archived from the original on 5 March 2016. Retrieved 23 October 2015. "Lei nº 6.105/2016". Câmara Municipal do Rio de Janeiro. 25 November 2016. Archived from the original on 29 November 2016. Retrieved 28 November 2016. (in Portuguese) "Commemorating Sept 1965: Nation celebrates Defence Day with fervour". The Express Tribune. 6 September 2013. Archived from the original on 12 January 2021. Retrieved 7 December 2020. "Defence Day celebrated with renewed pledges". DAWN.COM. 7 September 2002. Archived from the original on 30 June 2020. Retrieved 7 December 2020. Syad Muhammad Latif (1892). Lahore: Its History, Architectural Remains and Antiquities, with an Account of Its Modern Institutions, Inhabitants, Their Trade, Customs Etc. New Imperial Press. Pran Neville (2006). Lahore : A Sentimental Journey. Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-14-306197-7. Wink, André (2002). Al-Hind, the Making of the Indo-Islamic World. Boston and Leiden: Brill Academic Publishers. ISBN 0-391-04173-8. Lahore at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Travel information from Wikivoyage Official website Lahore Postal Codes (Complete List)