The 1982–83 NBA season was the 37th season of the National Basketball Association. The season ended with the Philadelphia 76ers winning the NBA Championship, sweeping the Los Angeles Lakers 4 games to 0 in the NBA Finals. The 1983 NBA All-Star Game was played at The Forum in Inglewood, California, with the East defeating the West 132–123. Julius Erving of the Philadelphia 76ers won the game's MVP award. It was at this game that R&B singer Marvin Gaye performed his famous rendition of the "Star-Spangled Banner". This season marked the final season for Larry O'Brien as commissioner of the NBA. In honor of his long tenure, the NBA would rename its championship trophy after him (it was originally named after the late Boston Celtics owner Walter A. Brown). The USA Network extended their cable deal with the NBA for another two years, and ESPN shared broadcast rights with them. The 76ers posted a 12–1 record in the playoffs, a record for highest winning percentage in the postseason (it was later broken by the 2001 Los Angeles Lakers, whose record was, in turn, later broken by the 2017 Golden State Warriors). The Boston Celtics were swept for the first time in their playoff history, at the hands of the Milwaukee Bucks in the Conference Semifinals of the 1983 NBA playoffs. The Bucks swept the Celtics 4–0. The 1983 NBA Finals was the last Finals to end before June 1. This was the final season for Wilson serving as the suppliers of the official NBA game ball (a partnership that dated back to 1946)[2]; it was replaced in that capacity by Spalding in the following season, which supplied game balls to the NBA through the 2020–21 season. Wilson returned as the game ball supplier for the 2021–22 season. Ted Stepien sold the Cleveland Cavaliers to Gordon Gund. Under Stepien, attendance at the Cavaliers' home arena at Richfield Coliseum declined, first-round picks were traded in consecutive years (which led the NBA to institute the Ted Stepien rule), and long-time announcer Joe Tait was fired (he returned following the Gund purchase). The Cavaliers had five different coaches and three consecutive losing seasons under Stepien. On November 3, 1982, Randy Smith played in his 845th consecutive NBA game, breaking Johnny Kerr's iron man record. The game was a 130–111 loss to the Philadelphia 76ers in which Smith started and scored 14 points. Smith's iron man streak ended at 906 games when he played his last game with the Clippers on March 13, 1983, and was traded to the Atlanta Hawks. The record was later surpassed by A.C. Green in 1997. On April 16, 1983, during a 12-point victory over the Dallas Mavericks, the San Antonio Spurs set the all-time NBA regular season record for team field goal percentage by shooting .707 from the floor. The NBA adds the NBA Defensive Player of the Year and the NBA Sixth Man of the Year Award awards. This season saw the final season of eventual Hall of Famers' Dave Cowens, Spencer Haywood and Calvin Murphy. Notes z – Clinched home court advantage for the entire playoffs and first round bye c – Clinched home court advantage for the conference playoffs and first round bye y – Clinched division title and first round bye x – Clinched playoff spot Teams in bold advanced to the next round. The numbers to the left of each team indicate the team's seeding in its conference, and the numbers to the right indicate the number of games the team won in that round. The division champions are marked by an asterisk. Home court advantage does not necessarily belong to the higher-seeded team, but instead the team with the better regular season record; teams enjoying the home advantage are shown in italics. * Division winner Bold Series winner Italic Team with home-court advantage Most Valuable Player: Moses Malone, Philadelphia 76ers Rookie of the Year: Terry Cummings, San Diego Clippers Defensive Player of the Year: Sidney Moncrief, Milwaukee Bucks Sixth Man of the Year: Bobby Jones, Philadelphia 76ers Coach of the Year: Don Nelson, Milwaukee Bucks The following players were named NBA Player of the Week. The following players were named NBA Player of the Month. The following players were named NBA Rookie of the Month. The following coaches were named NBA Coach of the Month. List of NBA regular season records [1][permanent dead link] "Clippers' Smith NBA Iron Man". USA Today. November 4, 1982.