Look up Bass, bass, or basses in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Bass or Basses may refer to: Bass (fish), various saltwater and freshwater species Bass (sound), describing low-frequency sound or one of several instruments in the bass range: Any of a number of bass instruments, including: Acoustic bass guitar, with a hollow body Bass clarinet, a clarinet with a lower sound Bass cornett, a low pitched wind instrument Bass drum, a large drum Bass flute, an instrument one octave lower than a flute Bass guitar, with a solid body and electric pickups Bass recorder, an instrument one octave lower than the alto recorder Bass sarrusophone, a low pitched double reed instrument Bass saxophone Bass trombone, a lower pitched trombone Bass trumpet Bass violin Double bass, the largest and lowest pitched bowed string instrument Electric upright bass, the electric version of a double bass Tuba, often called "the bass" in the context of brass instruments Bass (voice type), a type of classical male singing voice Bass clef, the musical clef used for lower-sounding instruments and voices Bass music, broad category of electronic dance music genres, focusing on a prominent bass drum and/or bassline sound Bass note, the lowest note in a chord Bassline, or bass line, a term used in music for a lower-pitched part "Bass", a song by Robyn Hitchcock from his 1986 album Element of Light "Bass", audio file on Culture Vulture (EP) by Jesus Jones (2004) "Bass (How Low Can You Go)", a 1988 single by Simon Harris; also his 1989 album Bass! "Basses", a movement of Mike Oldfield's Tubular Bells 2003 album Bass Brewery, a British brewery Bass Anglers Sportsman Society (B.A.S.S.) G.H. Bass & Co., an American footwear brand founded in 1876 Bass Pro Shops, an American outdoors company Bass (surname) Bass Reeves (1838–1910), notable deputy U.S. marshal Chuck Bass, a fictional character in the novel and television series Gossip Girl Bass Armstrong, a character from Dead or Alive Bass Monroe, fictional character in Revolution Bass and Bass.EXE, Mega Man characters Bass Strait, between Australia and Tasmania Bass Pyramid, a small island in the Bass Strait Bass, Victoria, a town in Australia Bass Coast Shire, a local government area in Victoria Division of Bass, a federal electoral division in Tasmania, Australia Division of Bass (state), state electoral division in Tasmania, Australia Electoral district of Bass, a state electoral division in Victoria, Australia Shire of Bass, a former local government area in Victoria, Australia Bass, Alabama, an unincorporated community in Jackson County, Alabama, U.S. Bass, Arkansas, an unincorporated community in Newton County, Arkansas, U.S. Bass, Casey County, Kentucky, U.S. Bass, Missouri, U.S. Bass, West Virginia, U.S. Bass Creek, a stream in Missouri Bass Lake (disambiguation), a number of places and lakes Bass River (disambiguation) Nancy Lee and Perry R. Bass Performance Hall, or simply Bass Performance Hall, in Fort Worth, Texas, U.S. Bass, Hansi, a sub-tehsil of Hisar district, Haryana, India Bass Lake (Ontario), several lakes Bass River (disambiguation) Bass Rock, or the Bass, an island in the outer part of the Firth of Forth in the east of Scotland Basses, Vienne, a commune of the Vienne department in France Bass diffusion model, or Bass model, a mathematical marketing model Beneath a Steel Sky, a 1994 computer adventure game Buttocks, in slang BASS [ru], a freeware cross-platform audio library and API USS Bass, several vessels of the U.S. Navy Bas (disambiguation) Base (disambiguation) Bass House (disambiguation) Basse (disambiguation) Bassline (disambiguation) Drum and bass, a type of electronic dance music Figured bass, a kind of integer musical notation Miami bass, a type of hip hop music Ghettotech or Detroit Bass, a form of electronic dance music Sebastian (name) This disambiguation page lists articles associated with the title Bass. If an internal link led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended article.