Amy Jade Winehouse (14 September 1983 – 23 July 2011) was an English singer and songwriter. She was known for her deep, expressive contralto vocals and her eclectic mix of musical genres, including soul, rhythm and blues, reggae and jazz. A member of the National Youth Jazz Orchestra during her youth, Winehouse signed to Simon Fuller's 19 Management in 2002 and soon recorded a number of songs before signing a publishing deal with EMI. She also formed a working relationship with producer Salaam Remi through these record publishers. Winehouse's debut album, Frank, was released in 2003. Many of the album's songs were influenced by jazz and, apart from two covers, were co-written by Winehouse. Frank was a critical success in the UK and was nominated for the Mercury Prize. The song "Stronger Than Me" won her the Ivor Novello Award for Best Contemporary Song from the British Academy of Songwriters, Composers and Authors. Winehouse released her follow-up album, Back to Black, in 2006, which went on to become an international success and one of the best-selling albums in UK history. At the 2007 Brit Awards, it was nominated for British Album of the Year and Winehouse received the award for British Female Solo Artist. The song "Rehab" won her a second Ivor Novello Award. At the 50th Grammy Awards in 2008, she won five awards, tying the then record for the most wins by a female artist in a single night and becoming the first British woman to win five Grammys. These included three of the General Field "Big Four" Grammy Awards: Best New Artist, Record of the Year and Song of the Year (for "Rehab"), as well as Best Pop Vocal Album. Winehouse struggled with substance abuse, mental illness and addiction. She died of alcohol poisoning on 23 July 2011, at the age of 27. Her brother believed that bulimia was also to blame. After her death, Back to Black briefly became the UK's best-selling album of the 21st century. VH1 ranked Winehouse 26th on their list of the 100 Greatest Women in Music. Amy Jade Winehouse was born on 14 September 1983 at Chase Farm Hospital in Gordon Hill, Enfield, to Jewish parents. Her father, Mitchell "Mitch" Winehouse, was a window panel installer and taxi driver; her mother, Janis Winehouse (née Seaton), was a pharmacist. Her mother was diagnosed with multiple sclerosis in 2003. Winehouse's great-great-grandfather Harris Winehouse emigrated from Minsk, Belarus, to London in 1891. She had an older brother, Alex (born 1979). The family lived in London's Southgate area, where she attended Osidge Primary School and then secondary at Ashmole School. Winehouse attended a Jewish Sunday school while she was a child. During an interview following her rise to fame, she expressed her dismissal towards the school by saying that she used to beg her father to permit her not to go and that she learned nothing about being Jewish by going anyway. In the same interview, Winehouse said she only went to a synagogue once a year on Yom Kippur "out of respect". Many of Winehouse's maternal uncles were professional jazz musicians. Amy's paternal grandmother, Cynthia, had been a singer and had dated the English jazz saxophonist Ronnie Scott. She and Amy's parents influenced Amy's interest in jazz. Her father, Mitch, often sang Frank Sinatra songs to her, and whenever she was chastised at school, she would sing "Fly Me to the Moon" before going up to the headmistress to be told off. Winehouse's parents separated when she was nine, and she lived with her mother in Whetstone, London and stayed with her father and his girlfriend in Hatfield Heath, Essex on weekends. In 1992, her grandmother Cynthia suggested that Amy attend the Susi Earnshaw Theatre School, where she went on Saturdays to further her vocal education and to learn to tap dance. She attended the school for four years and founded a short-lived rap group called Sweet 'n' Sour, with Juliette Ashby, her childhood friend, before seeking full-time training at Sylvia Young Theatre School. Several years later it was reported that Winehouse had been expelled at 14 for "not applying herself" and also for piercing her nose, but these claims were denied by Sylvia Young: "She changed schools at 15...I've heard it said she was expelled; she wasn't. I'd never have expelled Amy." Mitch Winehouse also denied the claims. An English teacher at the Sylvia Young Theatre School remembered Amy as a gifted writer, predicting that she would become a novelist or journalist. She attended the Mount School, Mill Hill and the BRIT School in Selhurst, Croydon, dropping out at age 16. After toying around with her brother Alex's guitar, Winehouse bought her own guitar when she was 14 and began writing music shortly afterwards. Soon after, she began working for a living as an entertainment journalist for the World Entertainment News Network and also singing with local group the Bolsha Band. In July 2000, she became the featured female vocalist with the National Youth Jazz Orchestra. At home she learned from and practised singing songs by Frank Sinatra, Dinah Washington, Sarah Vaughan and Minnie Ripperton—singers who she said "will get under the song" and remake it as their own rather than sing it straight as written. Winehouse's best friend, soul singer Tyler James, sent her demo tape to an A&R person. Winehouse was signed to Simon Fuller's 19 Management in 2002 and was paid £250 a week against future earnings. While being developed by the management company, Winehouse was kept as a recording industry secret, although she was a regular jazz standards singer at the Cobden Club. Her future A&R representative at Island, Darcus Beese, heard of her by chance when the manager of the Lewinson Brothers showed him some productions of his clients, which featured Winehouse as key vocalist. When he asked who the singer was, the manager told him he was not allowed to say. Having decided that he wanted to sign her, it took several months of asking around for Beese to eventually discover who the singer was. However, by that time Winehouse had already recorded a number of songs, signed a publishing deal with EMI, and formed a working relationship with producer Salaam Remi. Beese introduced Winehouse to his boss, Island head Nick Gatfield, who shared his enthusiasm in signing the young artist. Winehouse was signed to Island while rival interest in her had started to build with representatives of EMI and Virgin starting to make moves. Beese told HitQuarters that he felt the excitement over an artist who was an atypical pop star for the time was due to a backlash against reality TV music shows, whose audiences starved for fresh, genuine young talent. Winehouse's debut album, Frank, was released on 20 October 2003. Produced mainly by Salaam Remi, many songs were influenced by jazz and, apart from two covers, Winehouse co-wrote every song. The album received critical acclaim with compliments given to the "cool, critical gaze" in its lyrics. Winehouse's voice was compared with those of Sarah Vaughan and Macy Gray, among others. The album entered the upper reaches of the UK Albums Chart in 2004 when it was nominated for the Brit Awards in the categories of British Female Solo Artist and British Urban Act. It went on to achieve platinum sales. Later in 2004, she and Remi won the Ivor Novello Award for Best Contemporary Song, for their first single together, "Stronger Than Me." The album was also shortlisted for the 2004 Mercury Music Prize. In the same year, she performed at the Glastonbury Festival – Jazzworld, the V Festival and the Montreal International Jazz Festival. After the release of the album, Winehouse commented that she was "only 80 percent behind [the] album" because Island Records had overruled her preferences for the songs and mixes to be included. The further singles from the album were "Take the Box," "In My Bed"/"You Sent Me Flying" and "Pumps"/"Help Yourself." After the release of her first jazz-influenced album, Winehouse's focus shifted to the girl groups of the 1950s and 1960s. Winehouse hired New York singer Sharon Jones's longtime band, the Dap-Kings, to back her up in the studio and on tour. Mitch Winehouse relates in Amy, My Daughter how fascinating watching her process was: her perfectionism in the studio and how she would put what she had sung on a CD and play it in his taxi outside to know how most people would hear her music. In May 2006, Winehouse's demo tracks such as "You Know I'm No Good" and "Rehab" appeared on Mark Ronson's New York radio show on East Village Radio. These were some of the first new songs played on the radio after the release of "Pumps" and both were slated to appear on her second album. The 11-track album, completed in five months, was produced entirely by Salaam Remi and Ronson, with the production credits being split between them. Ronson said in a 2010 interview that he liked working with Winehouse because she was blunt when she did not like his work. She in turn thought that when they first met, he was a sound engineer and that she was expecting an older man with a beard. Promotion of Back to Black soon began and, in early October 2006 Winehouse's official website was relaunched with a new layout and clips of previously unreleased songs. Back to Black was released in the UK on 30 October 2006. It went to number one on the UK Albums Chart for two weeks in January 2007, dropping then climbing back for several weeks in February. In the US, it entered at number seven on the Billboard 200. It was the best-selling album in the UK of 2007, selling 1.85 million copies over the course of the year. The first single released from the album was the Ronson-produced "Rehab". The song reached the top ten in the UK and the US. Time magazine named "Rehab" the Best Song of 2007. Writer Josh Tyrangiel praised Winehouse for her confidence, saying, "What she is is mouthy, funny, sultry, and quite possibly crazy" and "It's impossible not to be seduced by her originality. Combine it with production by Mark Ronson that references four decades worth of soul music without once ripping it off, and you've got the best song of 2007." The album's second single and lead single in the US, "You Know I'm No Good," was released in January 2007 with a remix featuring rap vocals by Ghostface Killah. It ultimately reached number 18 on the UK singles chart. The title track, "Back to Black," was released in the UK in April 2007 and peaked at number 25, but was more successful across mainland Europe. "Tears Dry on Their Own," "Love Is a Losing Game" were also released as singles, but failed to achieve the same level of success. A deluxe edition of Back to Black was also released on 5 November 2007 in the UK. The bonus disc features B-sides, rare, and live tracks, as well as "Valerie". Winehouse's debut DVD I Told You I Was Trouble: Live in London was released the same day in the UK and 13 November in the US. It includes a live set recorded at London's Shepherd's Bush Empire and a 50-minute documentary charting the singer's career over the previous four years. Frank was released in the United States on 20 November 2007 to positive reviews. The album debuted at number 61 on the Billboard 200 chart. In addition to her own album, she collaborated with other artists on singles. Winehouse was a vocalist on the song "Valerie" on Ronson's solo album Version. The song peaked at number two in the UK, upon its October single release. "Valerie" was nominated for a 2008 Brit Award for British Single of the Year. Her work with ex-Sugababe Mutya Buena, "B Boy Baby," was released on 17 December 2007. It served as the fourth single from Buena's debut album, Real Girl. Winehouse was also in talks of working with Missy Elliott for her album Block Party. Winehouse promoted the release of Back to Black with headline performances in late 2006, including a Little Noise Sessions charity concert at the Union Chapel in Islington, London. On 31 December 2006, Winehouse appeared on Jools Holland's Annual Hootenanny and performed a cover of Marvin Gaye's "I Heard It Through the Grapevine" along with Paul Weller and Holland's Rhythm and Blues Orchestra. She also performed Toots and the Maytals' "Monkey Man". At his request, actor Bruce Willis introduced Winehouse before her performance of "Rehab" at the 2007 MTV Movie Awards in Universal City, California, on 3 June 2007. During the summer of 2007, she performed at various festivals, including Glastonbury Festival and Lollapalooza in Chicago. The rest of her tour, however, did not go as well. In November 2007, the opening night of a 17-date tour was marred by booing and walkouts at the National Indoor Arena in Birmingham. A critic for the Birmingham Mail said it was "one of the saddest nights of my life...I saw a supremely talented artist reduced to tears, stumbling around the stage and, unforgivably, swearing at the audience." Other concerts ended similarly, with, for example, fans at her Hammersmith Apollo performance in London saying that she "looked highly intoxicated throughout," until she announced on 27 November 2007, that her performances and public appearances were cancelled for the remainder of the year, citing her doctor's advice to take a complete rest. A statement issued by concert promoter Live Nation blamed "the rigours involved in touring and the intense emotional strain that Amy has been under in recent weeks" for the decision. Mitch Winehouse wrote about her nervousness before public performances in his 2012 book, Amy, My Daughter. On 13 January 2008, Back to Black held the number-one position on the Billboard Pan European charts for the third consecutive week. On 10 February 2008, Winehouse received five Grammy Awards, winning in the following categories: Record of the Year, Song of the Year, Best Female Pop Vocal Performance for the single "Rehab", and Best Pop Vocal Album. The singer also earned a Grammy as Best New Artist, earning her an entry in the 2009 edition of the Guinness Book of Records for Most Grammy Awards won by a British Female Act. Additionally, Back to Black was nominated for Album of the Year. Ronson's work with her won the Grammy Award for Producer of the Year, in the non-classical category. She ended her acceptance speech for Record of the Year with, "This is for London because Camden Town ain't burning down," in reference to the 2008 Camden Market fire. Performing "You Know I'm No Good" and "Rehab" via satellite from London's Riverside Studios at 3 a.m. UK time, she couldn't be at the ceremony in Los Angeles as her visa approval had not been processed in time. After the Grammys, the album's sales increased, catapulting Back to Black to number two on the US Billboard 200, after it initially peaked in the seventh position. On 20 February 2008, Winehouse performed at the 2008 Brit Awards at Earls Court in London, performing "Valerie" with Mark Ronson, followed by "Love Is a Losing Game". She urged the crowd to "make some noise for my Blake." A special deluxe edition of Back to Black topped the UK album charts on 2 March 2008. Meanwhile, the original edition of the album was ranked at number 30 in its 68th week on the charts, while Frank charted at number 35. In Paris, she performed what was described as a "well-executed 40-minute" set at the opening of a Fendi boutique in early March. By 12 March, the album had sold a total of 2,467,575 copies—318,350 copies had been sold in the previous 10 weeks—putting the album on the UK's top-10 best-selling albums of the 21st century for the first time. On 7 April, Back to Black was in the top position of the pan-European charts for the sixth consecutive and thirteenth aggregate week. Amy Winehouse – The Girl Done Good: A Documentary Review, a 78-minute DVD, was released on 14 April 2008. The documentary features interviews with those who knew her at a young age, people who helped her achieve success, jazz music experts, and music and pop culture specialists. At the 2008 Ivor Novello Awards in May, Winehouse became the first-ever artist to receive two nominations for the top award: Best Song Musically & Lyrically. She won the award for "Love Is a Losing Game" and was nominated for "You Know I'm No Good". "Rehab", a Novello winner for best contemporary song in 2006, also received a 2008 nomination for best-selling British song. Winehouse was also nominated for a 2008 MTV Europe Music Award in the Act of the Year category. Although her father, manager and various members of her touring team reportedly tried to dissuade her, Winehouse performed at the Rock in Rio Lisboa festival in Portugal in May 2008. Although the set was plagued by a late arrival and problems with her voice, the crowd warmed to her. In addition to her own material she performed two Specials covers. Winehouse performed at Nelson Mandela's 90th Birthday Party concert at London's Hyde Park on 27 June 2008, and the next day at the Glastonbury Festival. On 12 July, at the Oxegen Festival in Ireland she performed a well-received 50-minute set which was followed the next day by a 14-song set at T in the Park. On 16 August she played at the Staffordshire leg of the V Festival, and the following day played the Chelmsford leg of the festival. Organisers said that Winehouse attracted the biggest crowds of the festival. Audience reaction was reported as mixed. On 6 September, she was Bestival's Saturday headliner, where her performance was described as polished—terminated by a curfew as the show running overdue, after Winehouse started an hour late—and her storming off stage. A clip of Winehouse's music was included in the "Roots and Influences" area that looked at connections between different artists at the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame Annex NYC, which opened in December 2008. One thread started with Billie Holiday, continued with Aretha Franklin and Mary J. Blige, and then finished with Winehouse. Back to Black was the world's seventh-biggest-selling album of 2008. The album's sales meant that the market performance of Universal Music's recorded music division did not drop to levels experienced by the overall music market. In a 2009 poll of U.S. residents conducted for VisitBritain by Harris Interactive, one-fifth of the participants indicated they had listened to Winehouse's music during the previous year. She performed with Rhythms del Mundo on their cover of the Sam Cooke song, "Cupid", for an Artists Project Earth benefit album released in July that year. Winehouse and Ronson contributed a cover of Lesley Gore's "It's My Party" to the Quincy Jones tribute album Q Soul Bossa Nostra, released in November 2010. She had agreed to form a group with Questlove of the Roots but her problems obtaining a visa delayed their working together. Salaam Remi had already created some material with Winehouse as part of the project. According to The Times, Universal Music pressed her for new material in 2008, but as of 2 September that year she had not been near a recording studio. In late October, Winehouse's spokesman was quoted as saying that Winehouse had not been given a deadline to complete her third album, for which she was learning to play drums. In May 2009, Winehouse returned to performing at a jazz festival in Saint Lucia amid torrential downpours and technical difficulties. During her set, it was reported she was unsteady on her feet and had trouble remembering lyrics. She apologised to the crowd for being "bored" and ended the set in the middle of a song. During her stay in Saint Lucia, however, she worked on new music with Remi. On 23 August that year Winehouse sang with the Specials at the V Festival, on their songs "You're Wondering Now" and "Ghost Town". Island claimed that a new album would be due for release in 2010. Island co-president Darcus Beese said, "I've heard a couple of song demos that have absolutely floored me." In July 2010, Winehouse was quoted as saying her next album would be released no later than January 2011, saying "It's going to be very much the same as my second album, where there's a lot of jukebox stuff and songs that are... just jukebox, really." Ronson, however, said at that time that he had not started to record the album. She performed "Valerie" with Ronson at a movie premiere but forgot some of the song's lyrics. In October, Winehouse performed a four-song set to promote her fashion line. In December 2010, she played a 40-minute concert at a Russian oligarch's party in Moscow, with the tycoon hand-selecting the songs. In January 2011, Winehouse played five dates in Brazil, with opening acts of Janelle Monáe and Mayer Hawthorne. While performing in Florianópolis, Winehouse forgot the lyrics of her songs several times and had to be aided by the public and her band. During the concert, she only drank from a water bottle, but even so, in two occasions, she left the stage in the midst of the show for a period of circa 5 minutes. Upon her return, the crowd showed strong compassion for her and praised Winehouse for continuing the performance. The following month she cut a performance in Dubai short following booing from the audience. Winehouse was reported to be tired, distracted and "tipsy" during the performance. On 18 June 2011, Winehouse started her twelve-leg European tour in Belgrade. Local media described her performance as a scandal and disaster; she was booed off the stage due to her apparently being too drunk to perform. Serbian defence minister Dragan Šutanovac called Winehouse's performances "a huge shame and a disappointment". It was reported that she was unable to remember the city she was in, the lyrics of her songs or the names of the members of her band. The local press also claimed that Winehouse was forced to perform by her bodyguards, who did not allow her to leave the stage when she tried to do so. She then pulled out of performances in Istanbul and Athens, which had been scheduled for the following week. On 21 June, it was announced that she had cancelled all shows of her tour and would be given "as long as it takes" to sort herself out. Winehouse's last public appearance took place at Camden's Roundhouse on 20 July 2011, when she made a surprise appearance on stage to support her goddaughter, Dionne Bromfield, who was singing "Mama Said" with the Wanted. Winehouse died three days later. Her last recording was a duet with American singer Tony Bennett for his album, Duets II, released on 20 September 2011. Their single from the album, "Body and Soul", was released on 14 September 2011 on MTV and VH1 to commemorate what would have been her 28th birthday. Winehouse joined a campaign to stop a block of flats being built beside the George Tavern, a famous London East End music venue. Campaign supporters feared the residential development would end the spot's lucrative sideline as a film and photo location, on which it relies to survive. As part of a breast cancer awareness campaign, Winehouse appeared in a revealing photograph for the April 2008 issue of Easy Living magazine. Winehouse had an estimated £10m fortune, tying her for tenth place in the 2008 The Sunday Times listing of the wealth of musicians under age 30. The following year her fortune had dropped to an estimated £5m. Her finances are run by Mitch and Janis Winehouse. It was reported she earned about £1m singing at two private parties during Paris Fashion Week. as well as another £1m to perform at a Moscow Art Gallery for Russian oligarch Roman Abramovich. Winehouse loaned a vintage dress used in her video for "Tears Dry on Their Own" as well as a DVD to the British Music Experience, a new museum dedicated to the history of British pop music. The museum, located at the O2 Arena in London, opened on 9 March 2009. In January 2009, Winehouse announced that she was launching her own record label. The first act on her Lioness Records is Winehouse's 13-year-old goddaughter, Dionne Bromfield. Her first album, featuring covers of classic soul records, was released on 12 October 2009. Winehouse is the backing singer on several tracks on the album and she performed backing vocals for Bromfield on the BBC's television programme Strictly Come Dancing on 10 October. Winehouse and her family are the subject of a 2009 documentary shot by Daphne Barak titled Saving Amy. Winehouse entered into a joint venture in 2009 with EMI to launch a range of wrapping paper and gift cards containing song lyrics from her album Back to Black. On 8 January 2010, a television documentary, My Daughter Amy, aired on Channel 4. Saving Amy was released as a paperback book in January 2010. Winehouse collaborated on a 17-piece fashion collection with the Fred Perry label. It was released for sale in October 2010. According to Fred Perry's marketing director "We had three major design meetings where she was closely involved in product style selection and the application of fabric, colour and styling details," and gave "crucial input on proportion, colour and fit". The collection consists of "vintage-inspired looks including Capri pants, a bowling dress, a trench coat, pencil skirts, a longline argyle sweater and a pink-and-black checkerboard-printed collared shirt." At the behest of her family, three forthcoming collections up to and including autumn/winter 2012 that she had designed prior to her death were released. Following Winehouse's death, Fred Perry has donated 20% of the net revenue from the Amy Winehouse collection to the charity set up in Winehouse's name, the Amy Winehouse Foundation. Throughout her life Winehouse donated her money, music and time to many charities, particularly those concerned with children. She was once named "the most charitable act" by Pop World. While this side of her personality was never well known to the general public, throughout both the arts community and the charity community she was known for her generosity. In 2008, Winehouse appeared naked in an issue of Easy Living Magazine to raise awareness of breast cancer. In 2009, she appeared on a CD called Classics alongside musicians such as the Rolling Stones, the Killers and many Cuban musicians to raise awareness of climate change. In March 2011, Winehouse donated over £20,000 worth of clothes to a local charity shop in London. A Caribbean man Julian Jean DeBaptiste revealed that Winehouse had paid for his urgent surgery costing £4,000 during her stay in Saint Lucia in 2009. "I had surgery on 1 July 2009... it cost a fortune and Amy paid for the whole thing. I tried to thank her but she just hugged me and told me not to say anything. Her generosity gave me my life back." Winehouse's greatest love was 1960s girl groups. Her hairdresser, Alex Foden, borrowed her "instantly recognisable" beehive hairdo (a weave) and she borrowed her Cleopatra makeup from the Ronettes. Her imitation was so successful, as The Village Voice reports: "Ronnie Spector—who, it could be argued, all but invented Winehouse's style in the first place when she took the stage at the Brooklyn Fox Theater with her fellow Ronettes more than 40 years ago—was so taken aback at a picture of Winehouse in the New York Post that she exclaimed, "I don't know her, I never met her, and when I saw that pic, I thought, 'That's me!' But then I found out, no, it's Amy! I didn't have on my glasses." The New York Times style reporter, Guy Trebay, discussed the multiplicity of influences on Winehouse's style after her death. Trebay noted, "her stylish husband, Blake Fielder-Civil, may have influenced her look." Additionally, Trebay observed: She was a 5-foot-3 almanac of visual reference, most famously to Ronnie Spector of the Ronettes, but also to the white British soul singer Mari Wilson, less famous for her sound than her beehive; to the punk god Johnny Thunders...; to the fierce council-house chicks... (see: Dior and Chanel runways, 2007 and 2008) ... to a lineage of bad girls, extending from Cleopatra to Louise Brooks's Lulu and including Salt-n-Pepa, to irresistible man traps that always seemed to come to the same unfortunate end. Former Rolling Stone editor Joe Levy, who had put her on the magazine's cover, broke her look down this way: Just as her best music drew on sampling – assembling sonic licks and stylistic fragments borrowed from Motown, Stax, punk and early hip-hop – her personal style was also a knowing collage. There was a certain moment in the '90s when, if you were headed downtown and turned left, every girl looked like Bettie Page. But they did not do what Winehouse did, mixing Bettie Page with Brigitte Bardot and adding that little bit of Ronnie Spector. Winehouse's use of bold red lipstick, thick eyebrows and heavy eyeliner came from Latinas she saw in Miami, on her trip there to work with Salaam Remi on Back to Black. Her look was repeatedly denigrated by the British press. At the same time that the NME Awards nominated Winehouse in the categories of "Best Solo Artist" and "Best Music DVD" in 2008, they awarded her "Worst Dressed Performer". Winehouse was also ranked number two on Richard Blackwell's 48th annual "Ten Worst Dressed Women" list, behind Victoria Beckham. Winehouse's dichotomous public image of critical and commercial success versus personal turmoil prompted significant media comment. The New Statesman called Winehouse "a filthy-mouthed, down-to-earth diva", while Newsweek called her "a perfect storm of sex kitten, raw talent and poor impulse control". Karen Heller with The Philadelphia Inquirer summarised the maelstrom this way: She's only 24 with six Grammy nominations, crashing headfirst into success and despair, with a codependent husband in jail, exhibitionist parents with questionable judgement, and the paparazzi documenting her emotional and physical distress. Meanwhile, a haute designer Karl Lagerfeld appropriates her dishevelled style and eating issues to market to the elite while proclaiming her the new Bardot. By 2008, her drug problems threatened her career. As Nick Gatfield, the president of Island Records, toyed with the idea of releasing Winehouse "to deal with her problems", he said, "It's a reflection of her status [in the US] that when you flick through the TV coverage [of the Grammys] it's her image they use." Post-Grammys, some questioned whether Winehouse should have been honoured with the awards given her recent personal and drug problems, including Natalie Cole, who introduced Winehouse at the ceremony and who herself battled substance-abuse problems while winning a Grammy for Best New Artist in 1975. Winehouse was prevented from travelling to and performing at the Grammy Awards ceremony in the US due to failing a drug test, and the executive director of the UN Office on Drugs and Crime, Antonio Maria Costa, said that the alleged drug habits of Winehouse and other celebrities sent a bad message "to others who are vulnerable to addiction" and undermine the efforts of other celebrities trying to raise awareness of problems in Africa, now that more cocaine used in Europe passes through that continent. Winehouse's spokesperson noted that "Amy has never given a quote about drugs or flaunted it in any way. She's had some problems and is trying to get better. The U.N. should get its own house in order." In January 2008, her record label stated it believed the extensive media coverage she had received increased record sales. In an April 2008 poll conducted by Sky News, Winehouse was named the second-greatest "ultimate heroine" by the UK population at large, topping the voting for that category of those polled under 25 years old. Psychologist Donna Dawson commented that the results demonstrated that women like Winehouse who had "a certain sense of vulnerability or have had to fight against some adversity in their lives" received recognition. In July 2008, BBC Radio Scotland's head, Jeff Zycinski, stated that the BBC, and media in general, were complicit in undermining celebrities, including Winehouse. He said that public interest in the singer's lifestyle did not make her lifestyle newsworthy. Rod McKenzie, editor of the BBC Radio One programme Newsbeat, replied: "If you play [Amy Winehouse's] music to a certain demographic, those same people want to know what's happening in her private life. If you don't cover it, you're insulting young licence fee payers." In The Scotsman, British singer and songwriter Lily Allen was quoted to have said – "I know Amy Winehouse very well. And she is very different to what people portray her as being. Yes, she does get out of her mind on drugs sometimes, but she is also a very clever, intelligent, witty, funny person who can hold it together. You just don't see that side." Winehouse was raised Jewish and expressed pride in being Jewish, although she was not religious. During one interview, Winehouse said "being Jewish to me is about being together as a real family. It's not about lighting candles and saying a bracha." Winehouse also frequently performed with a large Star of David medallion. In 2013, in memory of Winehouse, the Jewish Museum London ran an exhibition titled "Amy Winehouse: A Family Portrait". The museum researched her paternal great-great-grandfather's arrival from Minsk in 1890, and how the family finally settled in London, starting out in working-class jobs before gradually moving to middle-class jobs. Winehouse had 14 known tattoos, including "Daddy's Girl" on her left arm for her father and a pin-up girl with the name "Cynthia" on her right arm in memory of her Jewish grandmother. Winehouse dated chef-musician Alex Clare in 2006, while on a break from her on-off boyfriend and future husband, Blake Fielder-Civil. She and Clare lived together briefly, and in a pattern that Fielder-Civil would later repeat, Clare sold his story to the News of the World, which published it under the headline "Bondage Crazed Amy Just Can't Beehive in Bed." Fielder-Civil, a former video production assistant, had dropped out of Bourne Grammar School and, aged 16, moved to London from his native Lincolnshire. He married Winehouse on 18 May 2007, in Miami Beach, Florida. In a June 2007 interview, Winehouse admitted she could sometimes be violent toward him after she had been drinking, saying: "If he says one thing I don't like, then I'll chin him." In August 2007, they were photographed, bloodied and bruised, in the streets of London after an alleged fight, although she contended her injuries were self-inflicted. Winehouse's parents and in-laws publicly reported their numerous concerns, the latter citing fears that the two might commit suicide. Fielder-Civil's father encouraged fans to boycott Winehouse's music, and Mitch Winehouse said this would not help. Fielder-Civil was quoted in a British tabloid as saying he introduced Winehouse to crack cocaine and heroin. During a visit with Mitch Winehouse at the prison in July 2008, Fielder-Civil reportedly said that he and Winehouse would cut themselves to ease the pain of withdrawal. From 21 July 2008 to 25 February 2009, Fielder-Civil was imprisoned following his guilty plea on charges of trying to pervert the course of justice and of grievous bodily harm with intent. The incident, in July 2007, involved his assault of a pub landlord that broke the victim's cheek. According to the prosecution, the landlord accepted £200,000 as part of a deal to "effectively throw the [court] case and not turn up", and he testified that the money belonged to Winehouse, but she pulled out of a meeting with the men involved in the plot, to attend an awards ceremony. Mitch Winehouse, as manager of his daughter's money, has denied the payoff came from her. When Winehouse was spotted with aspiring actor Josh Bowman on holiday in Saint Lucia, in early January 2009, she said she was "in love again, and I don't need drugs." She commented that her "whole marriage was based on doing drugs" and that "for the time being I've just forgotten I'm even married." On 12 January, Winehouse's spokesman confirmed that "papers have been received" for what Fielder-Civil's solicitor said were divorce proceedings based on a claim of adultery. In March, Winehouse was quoted in a magazine as saying, "I still love Blake and I want him to move into my new house with me—that was my plan all along ... I won't let him divorce me. He's the male version of me and we're perfect for each other." Nonetheless, an uncontested divorce was granted on 16 July 2009 and became final on 28 August 2009. Fielder-Civil received no money in the settlement. She was in a relationship with a British writer and director of films, Reg Traviss, from early 2010 until she died. According to media reports and a biography written by Winehouse's father, Traviss and Winehouse had planned to marry and intended to have children. In July 2008, when Rolling Stone reporter Claire Hoffman asked Winehouse if she was in a relationship with Pete Doherty, she replied: "We're just good friends", and added: "I asked Pete to do a concept EP, and he made this face, he looked at me like I'd pooed on the floor. He wouldn't do it. We're just really close". However, after Winehouse's death, Doherty said that he and Winehouse had been lovers at one point. Winehouse's battles with substance abuse were the subject of much media attention. In 2005, she went through a period of drinking, heavy drug use, and weight loss. People who saw her during the end of that year and early 2006 reported a rebound that coincided with the writing of Back to Black. Her family believes that the mid-2006 death of her grandmother, who was a stabilising influence, set her off into addiction. In August 2007, Winehouse cancelled a number of shows in the UK and Europe, citing exhaustion and ill health. She was hospitalised during this period for what was reported as an overdose of heroin, ecstasy, cocaine, ketamine and alcohol. In various interviews, she admitted to having problems with self-harm, depression, and eating disorders. Winehouse told a magazine that the drugs were to blame for her hospitalisation and that "I really thought that it was over for me then." Soon afterwards, Winehouse's father commented that when he had made public statements regarding her problems he was using the media because it seemed the only way to get through to her. In an interview with The Album Chart Show on British television, Winehouse said she was manic depressive and not alcoholic, adding that that sounded like "an alcoholic in denial". A US reporter writes that Winehouse was a "victim of mental illness in a society that doesn't understand or respond to mental illness with great effectiveness." According to Forensic physician Dr Jason Payne-James, Winehouse may have suffered from borderline personality disorder (BPD). He explained she shows some symptoms for disorder such as extreme reactions to trauma like abandonment (when described as a symptom "frantic efforts to avoid real or imagined abandonment"), impulsive or reckless behaviors like substance use disorders, binge eating, recurrent suicidal ideation, self-cutting or self-harm, rapidly shifting intense emotional dysregulation, chronic feelings of emptiness or boredom, unstable and chaotic interpersonal relationships, often characterized by alternating between extremes of idealization and devaluation, also known as "splitting", inappropriate, intense anger that can be difficult to control. Before her death Winehouse had been examined by a psychiatrist and psychologist and doctors recommended that she undergo dialectical behaviour therapy (DBT). DBT is based upon the biosocial theory of mental illness and is the first therapy that has been experimentally demonstrated to be generally effective in treating borderline personality disorder. In December 2007, Winehouse's spokesman reported that the singer was in a physician-supervised programme and was channelling her difficulties by writing a lot of music. The British tabloid The Sun posted a video of a woman, alleged to be Winehouse, apparently smoking crack cocaine and speaking of having taken ecstasy and Valium. Winehouse's father moved in with her, and Island Records, her record label, announced the abandonment of plans for an American promotion campaign on her behalf. On 23 January 2008, the video was passed on to the Metropolitan Police, who questioned her on 5 February. No charges were brought. In late January, Winehouse reportedly entered a rehabilitation facility for a two-week treatment program. On 26 March, Winehouse's spokesman said she was "doing well". Her record company reportedly believed that her recovery remained fragile. By late April 2008, her erratic behaviour—including an allegation of assault—caused fear that her drug rehabilitation efforts had been unsuccessful. Winehouse's father and manager then sought to have her detained under the Mental Health Act of 1983. Her dishevelled appearance during and after a scheduled club night in September 2008 prompted new rumours of a relapse. Photographers were quoted as saying she appeared to have cuts on her arms and legs. According to her physician, Winehouse quit using illegal substances in 2008. In an October 2010 interview, speaking of her decision to quit drugs, Winehouse said, "I literally woke up one day and was like, 'I don't want to do this any more.'" However, alcohol emerged as a problem, with Winehouse abstaining for a few weeks and then lapsing into alcohol abuse. Her physician said that Winehouse was treated with Librium for alcohol withdrawal and anxiety and underwent psychological and psychiatric evaluations in 2010, but refused psychological therapy. In 2006, Winehouse admitted to punching a female fan in the face for criticising her having taken Blake Fielder-Civil as a husband. She then attacked her own spouse as he attempted to calm her down, kneeing him in the crotch. In October 2007, Winehouse and Fielder-Civil were arrested in Bergen, Norway, for possession of seven grams of cannabis. The couple were later released and fined 3850 kroner (around £350). Winehouse first appealed the fines, but later dropped the appeal. On 26 April 2008, Winehouse was cautioned after she admitted to police she slapped a 38-year-old man in the face, a "common assault" offence, her first of two. She voluntarily turned herself in and was held overnight. Police said, at her arrival she was "in no fit state" to be interviewed. Ten days later, Winehouse was arrested on suspicion of possessing drugs after a video of her apparently smoking crack cocaine was passed to the police in January, but was released on bail a few hours later because they could not confirm, from the video, what she was smoking. The Crown Prosecution Service considered charging her, but cleared her when it could not establish that the substance in the video was a controlled drug. Some members of Parliament reacted negatively. Two London residents were subsequently charged with conspiracy to supply cocaine and ecstasy to Winehouse. One of the pair was sentenced to two years in prison on 13 December 2008, while the other received a two-year community order. On 5 March 2009, Winehouse was arrested and charged with common assault following a claim by dancer Sherene Flash that Winehouse hit her in the eye at the September 2008 Prince's Trust charity ball. Winehouse's spokesperson announced the cancellation of the singer's US Coachella Festival appearance in light of the new legal issue, and Winehouse appeared in court on 17 March to enter her plea of not guilty. On 23 July, her trial began with prosecutor Lyall Thompson charging that Winehouse acted with "deliberate and unjustifiable violence" while appearing to be under the influence of alcohol or another substance. She testified that she did not punch Flash, but tried to push her away because she was scared of her; she cited her worry that Flash would sell her story to a tabloid, Flash's height advantage, and Flash's "rude" behaviour. On 24 July, District Judge Timothy Workman ruled that Winehouse was not guilty, citing the facts that all but two of the witnesses were intoxicated at the time of the incident and that medical evidence did not show "the sort of injury that often occurs when there is a forceful punch to the eye." On 19 December 2009, Winehouse was arrested for a third time on charges of common assault, plus another charge of public order offence after assaulting the front-of-house manager of the Milton Keynes Theatre after he asked her to move from her seat. Winehouse pled guilty to the charges and was given a conditional discharge. With the paparazzi taking photographs of her wherever they could, Winehouse obtained an injunction against a leading paparazzi agency, Big Pictures, under the Protection from Harassment Act 1997; the resultant court order issued by the High Court in 2009 banned them from following her. Photographers were also banned from following her within 100 metres of her London home and photographing Winehouse in her home or the homes of her friends and relatives. According to a newspaper report, sources close to the singer said legal action was taken out of concern for the safety of Winehouse and those close to her. On 23 June 2008, Winehouse's publicist corrected earlier misstatements by Mitch Winehouse that his daughter had early stage emphysema, instead claiming she had signs of what could lead to early-stage emphysema. Mitch Winehouse had also stated that his daughter's lungs were operating at 70 percent capacity and that she had an irregular heartbeat. He said that these problems had been caused by her chain smoking crack cocaine. The singer's father also reported that doctors had warned Winehouse that, if she continued smoking crack cocaine, she would have to wear an oxygen mask and would eventually die. In a radio interview, Mitch Winehouse said the singer was responding "fabulously" to treatment, which included being covered with nicotine patches. British Lung Foundation spokesman Keith Prowse noted this type of condition could be managed with treatment. Prowse also said the condition was not normal for a person her age but "heavy smoking and inhaling other substances like drugs can age the lungs prematurely." Norman H. Edelman of the American Lung Association explained that if she stopped smoking, her lung functions would decline at the rate of a normal person, but continued smoking would lead to a more rapid decline in lung function. Winehouse was released from the London Clinic 24 hours after returning from a temporary leave to perform at Nelson Mandela's 90th birthday and at a concert in Glastonbury, and continued receiving treatment as an outpatient. In July 2008, Winehouse stated that she had been diagnosed with "some areas of emphysema" and said she was getting herself together by "eating loads of healthy food, sleeping loads, playing my guitar, making music and writing letters to my husband every day." She also kept a vertical tanning bed in her flat. Winehouse began precautionary testing on her lungs and chest on 25 October 2008 at the London Clinic for what was reported as a chest infection. Winehouse was in and out of the facility and was granted permission to set her own schedule regarding home leave. She returned to the hospital on 23 November 2008 for a reported reaction to her medication. Winehouse's bodyguard said that he had arrived at her residence three days before her death and felt she had been somewhat intoxicated. He observed moderate drinking over the next few days, and said she had been "laughing, listening to music and watching TV at 2 a.m. the day of her death". At 10 a.m. BST on 23 July 2011, he observed her lying on her bed and tried (unsuccessfully) to rouse her. This did not raise much suspicion because she usually slept late after a night out. According to the bodyguard, shortly after 3 p.m., he checked on her again and observed her lying in the same position as before, leading to a further check, in which he concluded that she was not breathing and had no pulse; he said he called emergency services. At 3:54 p.m., two ambulances reached Winehouse's home in Camden, London. Winehouse was pronounced dead at the scene. Shortly afterwards, the Metropolitan Police confirmed that she had died. Her death at age 27 prompted media comparisons to other musician deaths at the same age, collectively named the 27 Club. After her death was announced, media and camera crews appeared near Winehouse's residence to pay their respects. Forensic investigators entered the flat as police cordoned off the street outside; they recovered one small and two large bottles of vodka from her room. After her death, the singer broke her second Guinness World Record: for the most songs by a woman to simultaneously appear on the UK singles chart, with eight. A coroner's inquest reached a verdict of misadventure. The report released on 26 October 2011 explained that Winehouse's blood alcohol content was 416 mg per 100 ml (0.416%) at the time of her death, more than five times the legal drink-drive limit. According to the coroner, the "unintended consequence" of so much drink was her "sudden and unexpected death". Winehouse's record label, Universal Republic, released a statement that read in part: "We are deeply saddened at the sudden loss of such a gifted musician, artist and performer." Many musical artists have since paid tribute to Winehouse including U2, M.I.A., Lady Gaga, Marianne Faithfull, Ronnie Spector, Bruno Mars, Nicki Minaj, Keisha Buchanan, Rihanna, George Michael, Adele, Kelly Clarkson, Courtney Love, and the rock band Green Day, who wrote a song in her tribute titled "Amy". In her 2012 album Banga, singer Patti Smith released "This Is the Girl", written as an homage to Winehouse. Mark Ronson dedicated his UK number-one album Uptown Special to Winehouse, stating: "I'm always thinking of you and inspired by you." Winehouse did not leave a will; her estate was inherited by her parents. Winehouse's parents set up the Amy Winehouse Foundation to prevent harm from drug misuse among young people; her brother Alex is an employee. On 17 December 2012, British authorities reopened the probe into Winehouse's death. On 8 January 2013, a second inquest confirmed that Winehouse died of an accidental alcohol overdose. In a June 2013 interview, Alex Winehouse revealed his belief that his sister's eating disorder, and the consequent physical weakness, was the primary cause of her death: She suffered from bulimia very badly. That's not, like, a revelation – you knew just by looking at her... She would have died eventually, the way she was going, but what really killed her was the bulimia... I think that it left her weaker and more susceptible. Had she not had an eating disorder, she would have been physically stronger. Family and friends attended Winehouse's private funeral on 26 July 2011 at Edgwarebury Lane Cemetery in North London. Her mother and father, Janis and Mitch Winehouse, close friends Nick Grimshaw and Kelly Osbourne, producer Mark Ronson, goddaughter Dionne Bromfield and her boyfriend Reg Traviss were among those in attendance at the private service led by Rabbi Frank Hellner. Her father delivered the eulogy, saying "Goodnight, my angel, sleep tight. Mummy and Daddy love you ever so much." Carole King's "So Far Away" closed the service with mourners singing along as it was one of Winehouses's favorite songs. She was later cremated at Golders Green Crematorium. The family planned to sit a two-day shiva. On 16 September 2012, Winehouse's ashes were buried alongside her grandmother's, Cynthia Levy at Edgwarebury Lane Cemetery. Among the awards and recognition for her debut album Frank, Winehouse earned an Ivor Novello Award from the British Academy of Songwriters for Best Contemporary Song ("Stronger Than Me"), a Brit Award nomination for Best British Female Solo Artist, and an inclusion in Robert Dimery's 2006 book, 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die. Her second studio album, Back to Black, produced numerous nominations, including two Brit Awards (Best British Album, and won her Best British Female Solo Artist), six Grammy Awards (including five wins), four Ivor Novello Awards, four MTV Europe Music Awards, three MTV Video Music Awards, three World Music Awards, and it was nominated for the Mercury Prize (Album of the Year) and a MOBO Awards (Best UK Female). During her career, Winehouse received 23 awards from 60 nominations. Winehouse was known for her deep, expressive contralto vocals and her eclectic mix of musical genres, including soul, (sometimes labelled as blue-eyed soul and neo soul), rhythm and blues, and jazz. The BBC's Garry Mulholland called Winehouse "the pre-eminent vocal talent of her generation". According to AllMusic's Cyril Cordor, she was one of the UK's premier singers during the 2000s. "Fans and critics alike embraced her rugged charm, brash sense of humor, and distinctively soulful and jazzy vocals". In The Guardian, Caroline Sullivan later wrote that "her idolisation of Dinah Washington and the Ronettes distinguished her from almost all newly minted pop singers of the early 2000s, and her exceptionally-susceptible-to-heartbreak voice did the rest". Soon after Winehouse's death, a number of prominent critics assessed the singer's legacy. Maura Johnston from The Village Voice said, "When she was on, Winehouse had few peers—she wasn't an octave-jumper like other big divas of the moment, but her contralto had a snap to it that enriched even the simplest syllables with a full spectrum of emotion". Sasha Frere-Jones of The New Yorker proclaimed, "Nobody can match Winehouse's unique transitions or her utterly weird phrasings. She sounded like an original sixties soul star, developed when the landscape had no rules. But now untrammeled traditionalism is in the lead and her beautiful footnote has been cut short. American soul—through visionaries like Erykah Badu and Janelle Monáe and Jill Scott—had moved on. But Winehouse was a fine shepherd of the past." On 13 February 2012, Winehouse was ranked 26th on VH1's 100 Greatest Women in Music list. In March 2017, singer-songwriter Bob Dylan said he was enjoying listening to Winehouse's last record (Back to Black), and called her "the last real individualist around". In 2023, Rolling Stone ranked Winehouse at number 83 on its list of the 200 Greatest Singers of All Time. London's Mall Galleries opened an exhibition in May 2008 that included a sculpture of Winehouse, titled Excess. The piece, created by Guy Portelli, had a miniature of the singer lying on top of a cracked champagne bottle, with a pool of spilled liquid underneath. The body was covered with what appeared to be tiny pills, while one outstretched hand held a glass. Another piece, a print titled Celebrity 1 by artist Charlotte Suckling, was shown in the same exhibition. A wax sculpture of Winehouse, created via photographs as she didn't sit for it, went on display at the London Madame Tussauds on 23 July 2008. She was unable to attend the unveiling although her parents did. A sculpture by Marco Perego, titled The Only Good Rock Star Is a Dead Rock Star, that depicts Winehouse lying in a pool of blood with an apple and a bullet hole in her head after being shot by American novelist and Beat poet William S. Burroughs (in a recreation of the accidental killing of his wife Joan Vollmer), was scheduled to go on display in New York's Half Gallery on 14 November 2008 with a sale price of US$100,000. Perego said of the sculpture: "Rock stars are the sacrificial animals of society." Winehouse's spokesperson stated: "It's a funny kind of tribute. The artist seems in thrall to a tabloid persona that is not the real Amy. People often use her image to sell their work." In 2012, Winehouse was among the British cultural icons selected by artist Sir Peter Blake to appear in a new version of his most famous artwork – the Beatles' Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band album cover – to celebrate the British cultural figures of his life that he most admires. On 14 September 2014 (which would have been Winehouse's 31st birthday), a statue of her by sculptor Scott Eaton was unveiled at Stables Market in Camden Town, North London. Fans and relatives gathered for the unveiling in Camden's Stable Market, where it will be a permanent memorial to her. London-based Eaton, who sculpted the piece after being introduced to Winehouse's father Mitch, said the statue was meant to capture her "attitude and strength, but also give subtle hints of insecurity." Her father Mitch said of the statue: "Now Amy will oversee the comings and goings of her home town forever... Amy was in love with Camden and it is the place her fans from all over the world associate her with." In 2018, the artist Dan Llywelyn Hall's portrait of the singer 'Amy's Glance' was exhibited at the London Art Fair In March 2020, Winehouse's name on a stone was unveiled on the new Music Walk of Fame in Camden, with her parents Mitch and Janis in attendance at the ceremony. Adele has credited Winehouse's success in making her and fellow British singer Duffy's journey to the United States "a bit smoother." Lady Gaga credited Winehouse with paving the way for her rise to the top of the charts, explaining that Winehouse made it easier for unconventional women to have mainstream pop success. Raphael Saadiq, Anthony Hamilton and John Legend said "Amy Winehouse was produced by people who wanted to create a marketing coup. The positive side is that it reacquainted an audience with this music and played an introductory role for others. This reinvigorated the genre by overcoming the vintage aspect." Other artists that have credited Winehouse as an influence and/or for paving the way for them include Bruno Mars, Tove Lo, Jessie J, Emeli Sandé, Victoria Justice, Paloma Faith, Lana Del Rey, Sam Smith, Florence Welch, Halsey, Alessia Cara, Estelle, Daya, Jorja Smith, Lauren Jauregui and Billie Eilish. After the release of Back to Black, record companies sought out female artists with a similar sound and fearless and experimental female musicians in general. Adele and Duffy were the second wave of artists with a sound similar to Winehouse's. A third wave of female musicians that has emerged since the album was released are led by V V Brown, Florence and the Machine, La Roux and Little Boots. In March 2011, the New York Daily News ran an article attributing the continuing wave of British female artists that have been successful in the United States to Winehouse and her absence. Spin magazine music editor Charles Aaron was quoted as saying "Amy Winehouse was the Nirvana moment for all these women," "They can all be traced back to her in terms of attitude, musical styles or fashion." According to Keith Caulfield, chart manager for Billboard, "Because of Amy, or the lack thereof, the marketplace was able to get singers like Adele, Estelle and Duffy," "Now those ladies have brought on the new ones, like Eliza Doolittle, Rumer and Ellie." After the singer's death by alcohol intoxication in July 2011, the Amy Winehouse Foundation was set up by Winehouse's family and launched on 14 September 2011 (which would have been Winehouse's 28th birthday). Its aim is to help vulnerable or disadvantaged young people, and it works with other charitable organisations to provide frontline support. Its central office is in North London, but it also has an office in New York (operating under the name 'The Amy Winehouse Foundation US'). Jon Snow is a patron for the charity, with Barbara Windsor also before she died in 2020, and ambassadors include Jess Glynne, Patsy Palmer, Jessie Wallace, Keira Chaplin and Mica Paris. In October 2015 Mark Ronson became a patron. Amy's brother Alex works full-time for the foundation, having given up his career as an online music journalist. The charity itself works to prevent the effects of drug and alcohol misuse on young people and it also aims to support, inform and inspire vulnerable and disadvantaged young people to help them reach their full potential. On 12 March 2013, with the help of ex-addict Russell Brand, the Foundation launched the Amy Winehouse Foundation Resilience Programme For Schools across the UK which aims to provide effective education around drugs, alcohol and dealing with emotional issues. A documentary film, Amy (2015), directed by Asif Kapadia and produced by James Gay-Rees, was released on 3 July 2015. The film covers Winehouse's life, her relationships, her struggles with substance abuse both before and after her career blossomed, and which eventually caused her death. The film received its première at the 2015 Cannes Film Festival on 16 May and has been reviewed as "a tragic masterpiece", "brilliant", "heartbreaking" and "unmissable". The soundtrack of the same name was released on 30 October 2015, along with the DVD that includes music featured in the documentary by film composer Antônio Pinto and classic and some unreleased tracks by Winehouse. The film was highly acclaimed and received various accolades, including the Academy Award for Best Documentary Feature at the 2016 Oscars, Best Music Film at the 2016 Grammy Awards, the BAFTA for Best Documentary, the MTV Movie Award for Best Documentary, in addition to a nomination for the BAFTA Award for Best British Film. In October 2018, it was announced that Winehouse's estate had signed a deal to make a biopic about her life and career. In July 2022, it was reported that the feature film entitled Back To Black (2024) will be produced by StudioCanal UK, distributed by Focus Features and directed by Sam Taylor-Johnson—who previously created a biopic based on The Beatles star John Lennon, Nowhere Boy (2009)—and directed Fifty Shades of Grey (2015). The script was written by Matt Greenhalgh and the release date is yet to be announced. In January 2023, it was revealed that British actress Marisa Abela would play the leading role of Winehouse and filming commenced later that month in London. In January 2024, a trailer for Back to Black was released along with a debut release date of April 12 in the UK. On 9 October 2017, it was announced by Winehouse's father Mitch that a West End/Broadway musical on Amy is in the works. Mitch Winehouse revealed the news at the Amy Winehouse Foundation Gala event in London. Winehouse's parents have each written memoirs about their daughter and donated the proceeds from both books to the Amy Winehouse Foundation. In the introduction to Mitch Winehouse's biography, entitled Amy: My Daughter (2012), he explained: "Apart from being her father, I was also her friend, confidant and adviser—not that she always took my advice, but she always heard me out." Her mother Janis published Loving Amy: A Mother's Story, in 2014. An exhibit of Winehouse's personal items, co-curated by her brother and sister-in-law, entitled Amy Winehouse: A Family Portrait, was on display at the Jewish Museum London from 3 July 2013 until 15 September 2013, and later exhibited in San Francisco, 23 July 2015 to 1 November 2015. Display items, such as books and music, were featured together with captions written by Winehouse's brother. In late 2011, there were reports that Winehouse's former boyfriend, Reg Traviss, was developing a film about her. Winehouse's father Mitch Winehouse, who owns the copyright to his daughter's music, said he would not authorise the use of her music for the film. Winehouse is the subject of Amy (2015), a documentary directed by Asif Kapadia and produced by James Gay-Rees, Kapadia, and Universal Music. Kapadia and Gay-Rees introduced the project at the 2013 Cannes Film Festival. The film debuted at the 2015 Cannes Film Festival and won the 2016 Academy Award for Best Documentary Feature. In 2018, a documentary film based on Winehouse's album Back to Black, Amy Winehouse – Back to Black, was released. It contains new interviews as well as archival footage. It was made by Eagle Vision and produced by Gil Cang. Released on DVD on 2 November 2018, the film features interviews by producers Ronson & Remi, who worked half and half on the album, along with the Dap Kings, Remi's music team, Ronnie Spector from the Ronettes and close ones to Winehouse, including Nick Shymansky, Juliette Ashby and Dionne Bromfield. The film is accompanied by An Intimate Evening in London, footage of a show Winehouse gave at Riverside Studios, London in 2008. In February 2019, Salaam Remi released a compilation album including the song "Find My Love" which is a posthumous collaboration between Winehouse and rapper Nas. In 2020, an exhibition entitled Beyond Black – The Style of Amy Winehouse opened at the Grammy Museum in Los Angeles. The exhibit mainly explores Winehouse's style and fashion, displaying her outfits such as her iconic dresses, shoes, hair accessories, her makeup bag as well as Winehouse's personal belongings including her Grammy awards from 2008, handwritten lyrics, records and unseen home videos. The exhibition went on display in the U.S. from 17 January 2020 until 13 April 2020. In November 2021, various of Winehouse's personal items and famous dresses would later be auctioned at Julien's Auctions in Los Angeles and made more than £3m, 30% going to the Amy Winehouse Foundation. A follow-up exhibition Amy: Beyond the Stage opened on 26 November 2021 until 10 April 2022 at the Design Museum in Kensington, London which also presented some of Winehouse's personal belongings and focus on her fashion sense, as well as paying homage to her musical career. In July 2021, a new documentary entitled Reclaiming Amy aired on BBC Two to mark the 10th anniversary of Winehouse's death. The film was primarily based on the perspective and narrated by her mother Janis Winehouse-Collins and included intimate stories of those who were close to Winehouse until the end of her life, including close friends Naomi Parry (Winehouse's stylist), Catriona Gourlay and Chantelle Dusette. Frank (2003) Back to Black (2006) Amy (2015) Amy Winehouse: Back to Black (2018) Reclaiming Amy (2021) List of deaths through alcohol Copsey, Rob (13 October 2018). "The UK's biggest studio albums of all time". Official Charts Company. Retrieved 11 April 2019. "Amy Winehouse's Back to Black sets chart record". BBC News. 25 August 2011. Archived from the original on 26 August 2011. Winehouse 2012, p. xiii. Winehouse 2012 Senior, Amy (25 July 2011). "Death of Amy Winehouse spurs mourning among friends, family and fans as music world loses troubled star". Mancunian Matters. Archived from the original on 5 September 2012. Sullivan, Caroline (24 July 2011). "Amy Winehouse obituary". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 22 September 2013. "Janis Winehouse: Amy would be proud of how I'm coping with MS". The Irish News. 24 April 2019. Retrieved 24 July 2021. Allsopp, Tatsiana (20 June 2019). "Belarus is the only CIS country where the last Amy Winehouse exhibition will be shown". BelarusDigest. Archived from the original on 25 April 2022. Retrieved 3 May 2022. Eliscu, Jenny (23 July 2011). "The Diva and Her Demons: Rolling Stone's 2007 Amy Winehouse Cover Story". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 25 July 2011. Day, Elizabeth (23 June 2013). "Growing up with my sister Amy Winehouse". The Guardian. Retrieved 25 June 2013. Addley, Esther (17 August 2007). "'She has had her troubles but she has been catapulted to being a superstar ... the thing is, she absolutely can deliver'". The Guardian. Retrieved 24 January 2023. Pfeffer, Anshel (9 July 2013). "Remembering Amy Winehouse as the Jew She Was Not". Haaretz. Retrieved 5 July 2017. Weissman, Sara (23 July 2015). "5 Facts About Amy Winehouse's Jewish Roots". HuffPost. Archived from the original on 22 May 2017. Retrieved 5 July 2017. Cordor, Cyril. "Amy Winehouse – Artist Biography". AllMusic. Retrieved 28 March 2017. Mulholland, Garry (31 January 2004). "Charmed and dangerous". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 22 December 2013. Nissim, Mayer (13 July 2012). "Exclusive: Amy Winehouse music playlist: Mitch chooses the songs of Amy's life". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on 14 July 2014. Sturges, Fiona (25 July 2011). "Amy Winehouse: Singer who won the hearts of millions but was unable to overcome her dependency on drink and drugs". The Independent. Archived from the original on 19 September 2011. Winehouse 2012, p. 12. Sandall, Robert (27 July 2008). "Can Amy Winehouse be saved?". The Sunday Times Magazine. Archived from the original on 7 October 2008. Winehouse 2012, p. 15. "Amy Winehouse". AskMen. Archived from the original on 25 August 2008. Roussoulis, Henrietta (18 January 2004). "Amy Winehouse: The Q interview". The Independent on Sunday. Archived from the original on 4 April 2009. Nissim, Mayer (8 September 2009). "Young: 'We never expelled Winehouse'". Digital Spy. Retrieved 1 August 2020. "I think she genuinely believed that [she had been expelled], because her mum took her out to go to another school. "Fame Academy". The Guardian. 12 September 2008. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 23 April 2023. "Amy Winehouse: 1983–2011". The Daily Telegraph. 23 July 2011. Archived from the original on 26 July 2011. ...aged 16, she dropped out of school and sang with a jazz band...Aged 12, she won a scholarship to the Sylvia Young Theatre School, but poor exam results and general attitude problems led her mother to move her to the Mount in Mill Hill, an all-girls school which she hated. She ended up at the Brit Performing Arts and Technology School in Croydon Braddock, Kevin (28 January 2007). "Fame Academy: The Brit School". The Independent. Archived from the original on 9 May 2008. Performers including Amy Winehouse, The Kooks, Katie Melua, Floetry, Dane Bowers, The Feeling, The Noisettes, Imogen Heap and the 2006 Christmas Number One holder, Leona Lewis, were all tutored at the Brit School, and more than 60 per cent of the school's leavers go on to work in the creative industries. Winehouse, Amy. "Amy Winehouse – Interview". Access All Areas. Archived from the original on 15 February 2008. Winehouse 2012, p. 34. Bouwman, Kimbel (23 February 2004). "Interview with Darcus Beese, A&R at Island for Amy Winehouse, Sugababes". HitQuarters. Archived from the original on 23 January 2012. "Amy Winehouse found dead, aged 27". BBC News. 24 July 2011. Archived from the original on 23 July 2011. Lindon, Beccy (16 October 2003). "Amy Winehouse, Frank". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 20 September 2013. Bush, John. "Amy Winehouse – Frank". AllMusic. Retrieved 4 November 2006. Boraman, Greg (27 November 2003). "Amy Winehouse Frank Review". BBC Music. Archived from the original on 21 April 2010. "Amy Winehouse (official site)". AmyWinehouse.co.uk. Archived from the original on 18 September 2009. Winehouse 2012, p. 55. "ASCAP Members Honored at the Ivors". American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers. Archived from the original on 28 June 2004. Sisario, Ben (29 September 2007). "She's Not Anybody's Backup Act". The New York Times. Retrieved 13 December 2007. Winehouse 2012, p. 71. Topping, Alexandra (8 June 2010). "Mark Ronson gets all new romantic with Duran Duran". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 31 October 2013. Winehouse 2012, p. 68. "Winehouse and Lewis head charts". BBC News. Archived from the original on 2 January 2008. "Amy Winehouse". Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on 28 May 2015. "Amy Winehouse – Awards". AllMusic. Archived from the original on 28 July 2012. Tyrangiel, Josh. "Top 10 Songs". Time. Archived from the original on 28 March 2010. "Amy Winehouse – Back To Black" (in Dutch). Ultratop. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. "The Rolling Stones headline Isle of Wight". NME. 10 June 2007. Retrieved 24 October 2019. Gallagher, Serena (2 October 2007). "Universal Republic Stars, Amy Winehouse and Mika, to Release Special Live DVDs in U.S. November 13" (Press release). Business Wire. Retrieved 13 December 2007. Friskics-Warren, Bill (20 November 2007). "Amy Winehouse: A 'Frank' Assessment". The Washington Post. Retrieved 13 December 2007. Toombs, Mikel (22 November 2007). "Listen Up: Amy Winehouse's 'Frank'". Seattle Post-Intelligencer. Archived from the original on 11 August 2011. Harris, Chris (28 November 2007). "'American Idol' Champ Jordin Sparks Fails to Ignite the Charts, Barely Cracking Billboard Top 10". MTV. Archived from the original on 29 June 2011. "Mark Ronson feat. Amy Winehouse – Valerie". I Like Music. 27 October 2007. Archived from the original on 27 October 2007. Colothan, Scott (26 November 2007). "Leona Lewis Does the Chart Double Again". HipHop-Elements.com. Archived from the original on 5 December 2007. "Amy Winehouse – I Told You I Was Trouble – Documentary & Live Concert DVD". I Like Music. 28 October 2007. Archived from the original on 28 October 2007. "Brit Awards nominations go pop!". eGigs.co.uk. 14 January 2008. Archived from the original on 6 February 2008. "Missy Elliott Still Keen to Work with Amy Winehouse". ShowbizSpy. 8 June 2008. Archived from the original on 18 March 2012. "Amy Winehouse pays tribute to a soul legend". NME. 24 November 2006. Archived from the original on 20 February 2017. Retrieved 3 June 2019. Ditzian, Eric (27 May 2009). "Amy Winehouse Barely Made It to 2007 MTV Movie Awards Performance". MTV. Archived from the original on 26 April 2012. Wilkes, Neil (24 June 2007). "Winehouse camps in style at Glastonbury". Digital Spy. Archived from the original on 7 February 2016. Retrieved 4 June 2019. "Amy Winehouse plays surly set at Lollapalooza". NME. 6 August 2007. Archived from the original on 20 February 2017. Retrieved 3 June 2019. "Amy Winehouse Birmingham show ends in chaos". WOW Magazine. 15 November 2007. Archived from the original on 7 December 2008. "Amy Winehouse fans revolt after shambolic gig". NME. 26 November 2007. Archived from the original on 28 November 2007. "Amy Winehouse scraps all concerts". BBC News. 27 November 2007. Archived from the original on 29 November 2007. Winehouse 2012. Sexton, Paul (14 January 2008). "Macdonald Bumps Radiohead from U.K. Album Chart". Billboard. Archived from the original on 23 July 2013. Winehouse, Alex (13 February 2008). "Amy Winehouse's brother on her return to form". The Sunday Times. Archived from the original on 9 August 2011. "Now That's Entertaining". Daily Record. 15 September 2008. Archived from the original on 9 February 2009. "Grammy scorecard". The Envelope. Archived from the original on 14 December 2007. "The 50th Annual Grammy Awards winners". LiveDaily. 10 February 2008. Archived from the original on 7 January 2010. The Envelope. "Production, Non-Classical; Surround Sound; Production, Classical; Classical; Music Video". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved 26 December 2012. Gamboa, Glenn (11 February 2008). "Amy Winehouse takes home 5 Grammy Awards". Newsday. Archived from the original on 13 February 2008. Gamboa, Glenn (20 February 2008). "Winehouse, Hancock see post-Grammy bump". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 12 June 2008. Lawless, Jill (20 February 2008). "Winehouse, McCartney Play at Brit Awards" (Press release). Associated Press. Archived from the original on 21 February 2008. Retrieved 26 December 2012. "Amy Winehouse back on top of UK album chart". NME. 2 March 2008. Archived from the original on 3 March 2008. "Amy Winehouse performs at Fendi opening". United Press International (Press release). 3 March 2008. Retrieved 28 May 2015. "Amy Winehouse enters biggest sellers list". NME. 12 March 2008. Archived from the original on 21 October 2012. Sexton, Paul (7 April 2008). "R.E.M. Earns Eighth U.K. No. 1 Album". Billboard. Archived from the original on 20 June 2013. Shamrow, Alisa. "Amy Winehouse – The Girl Done Good DVD Review". UnderGroundOnline. Archived from the original on 9 May 2008. Quinn, Ben (23 May 2008). "Amy Winehouse misses beat for Ivor Novello award". The Times. Archived from the original on 23 November 2008. Gibson, Owen (22 April 2008). "Novello first for Winehouse". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 5 November 2013. "MTV nods for Coldplay and Duffy". BBC News. 29 September 2008. Archived from the original on 14 June 2012. Roberts, Alison (31 May 2008). "Winehouse performs gig in Lisbon". BBC News. Archived from the original on 15 October 2012. "Winehouse performs at Mandela concert". United Press International (Press release). 28 June 2008. Retrieved 26 December 2012. Nikkhah, Roya (29 June 2008). "Glastonbury: Amy Winehouse seems to scuffle with fan". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 22 October 2014. "Flawless performance for troubled Winehouse". The Irish Times. 7 July 2008. Archived from the original on 17 July 2009. "Amy Winehouse makes Blake dedication at T in the Park". NME. 13 July 2008. Retrieved 26 December 2012. Youngs, Ian (18 August 2008). "United front for The Verve at V". BBC News. Archived from the original on 2 August 2012. Dalton, Stephen (7 July 2008). "Bestival on the Isle of Wight". The Irish Times. Archived from the original on 17 July 2009. Lustig, Jay (4 December 2008). "Annex to Cleveland's rock'n'roll shrine opens in Manhattan". The Star-Ledger. Archived from the original on 15 October 2012. Khan, Urmee (16 February 2009). "Coldplay and Duffy among British acts dominating top ten global albums of 2008". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 18 February 2012. "Business big shot: Amy Winehouse". The Times. 2 September 2008. Archived from the original on 12 June 2011. "Poll: Americans embrace U.K. music". United Press International (Press release). 13 March 2009. Retrieved 26 December 2012. "RDM – Classics". Apeuk.org. Archived from the original on 23 December 2015. Retrieved 26 December 2012. "Rhythms Del Mundo Classic". RhythmsDelmundo.com. Archived from the original on 16 June 2009. Ziegbe, Mawuse (8 September 2010). "Amy Winehouse to Appear on Quincy Jones Tribute Album". MTV. Archived from the original on 15 June 2011. Ziegbe, Mawuse (2 July 2010). "The Roots' ?uestlove Teams Up with Amy Winehouse". MTV. Archived from the original on 5 July 2010. "Amy Winehouse's hospital leave". Virgin Media. Archived from the original on 8 December 2008. "Forgotten lyrics, abandoned songs ... Amy Winehouse's comeback flops". Herald Scotland. 9 May 2009. Archived from the original on 7 March 2014. Youle, Jo (9 May 2009). "Winehouse gig a washout, say fans". BBC News. Archived from the original on 1 August 2012. "Amy Winehouse sings at V festival". BBC News. 23 August 2009. Archived from the original on 27 August 2009. Youngs, Ian (9 October 2009). "Amy Winehouse album 'due in 2010'". BBC News. Archived from the original on 9 October 2009. Michaels, Sean (16 July 2010). "Amy Winehouse promises new album for January 2011". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 13 February 2011. Osborn, Andrew (20 December 2010). "Amy Winehouse plays oligarch's gig in Moscow". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 20 January 2011. "Amy Winehouse announces one-off tour in Brazil". The Independent. 20 November 2010. Archived from the original on 23 November 2010. Levino, Rodrigo (16 January 2011). "Amy Winehouse encerra turnê no Brasil com show vacilante". Veja (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 19 January 2011. "Amy Winehouse faz 1º show no Brasil em clima de 'ano novo, vida nova'". 9 January 2011. "Amy Winehouse Booed Off Stage". MTV. 13 February 2011. Archived from the original on 28 January 2012. Needham, Alex (20 June 2011). "Was Amy Winehouse's Belgrade gig really that bad?". The Guardian. Retrieved 10 October 2021. "This Amy Winehouse footage is shocking!". Heat. 19 June 2011. Archived from the original on 22 June 2011. Peric Zimonjic, Vesna (21 June 2011). "Winehouse a staggering flop". The New Zealand Herald. Retrieved 21 June 2011. "Amy Winehouse zaštitari su natjerali da izađe na pozornicu". Večernji list (in Croatian). 23 June 2011. Archived from the original on 11 February 2014. "Amy Winehouse cancels two dates of European tour". BBC News. 19 June 2011. Archived from the original on 21 June 2011. "Amy Winehouse tour pulled so she can 'sort herself out'". BBC News. 21 June 2011. Archived from the original on 24 June 2011. "Amy Winehouse's last public appearance". The Daily Telegraph. 23 July 2011. Archived from the original (Video upload) on 23 July 2011. Retrieved 6 January 2014. Lipshutz, Jason (25 March 2011). "Tony Bennett Taps Amy Winehouse for 'Duets II,' Due in September". Billboard. Archived from the original on 29 January 2013. "Video: Amy Winehouse and Tony Bennett sing 'Body and Soul'". The Daily Telegraph. 12 September 2011. Archived from the original on 14 September 2011. Retrieved 18 July 2020. Blunden, Mark; Littlejohn, Georgina (31 January 2008). "Inn crowd battle for pub". London Evening Standard. Archived from the original on 17 May 2008. "Amy Winehouse poses for naked photos". NME. Archived from the original on 21 October 2012. "Amy Winehouse in naked photos". Marie Claire. 20 March 2008. Archived from the original on 17 May 2013. "Amy Winehouse joins 'rich list'". BBC News. 24 April 2008. Retrieved 26 December 2012. Foster, Patrick (24 April 2009). "Music millionaires suffer huge losses in 2009 Sunday Times Rich List". The Times. Archived from the original on 7 May 2009. Dougary, Ginny (19 December 2009). "Mitch Winehouse on the torment of Amy's self-destruction". The Times. p. 3. Archived from the original on 15 June 2011. Verrico, Lisa (1 June 2008). "Why music stars are playing private parties". The Sunday Times. Archived from the original on 15 June 2011. "Winehouse performs for Abramovich". BBC News. 13 June 2008. Archived from the original on 21 October 2012. Youngs, Ian (21 November 2008). "Stars back British music museum". BBC News. Archived from the original on 15 January 2009. Khan, Urmee (20 January 2009). "British 'hall of fame' to commemorate British talent including Beatles and The Who". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 19 September 2013. "Britain still rocking 60 years on as music museum opens". The Scotsman. 9 March 2009. Archived from the original on 21 October 2012. "Amy Winehouse announces goddaughter's album details". NME. 24 September 2009. Archived from the original on 21 October 2012. "Amy Winehouse to sing on Strictly". BBC News. 6 October 2009. Retrieved 26 December 2012. Laudadio, Marisa (19 May 2009). "Amy Winehouse Documentary in the Works". People. Archived from the original on 20 May 2009. "Winehouse launches Card Range". Contactmusic.com. 25 June 2009. Dougary, Ginny (19 December 2009). "Mitch Winehouse on the torment of Amy's self-destruction". The Times. p. 4. Archived from the original on 15 June 2011. "Saving Amy – Daphne Barak". Guardian bookshop. Archived from the original on 25 June 2010. "Amy Winehouse Teams with Fred Perry on Fashion Line". Women's Wear Daily. 11 March 2010. Archived from the original on 16 March 2010. Vesilind, Emili (27 October 2010). "Soul clothes: Amy Winehouse inspires a collection by Brit brand Fred Perry". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 4 December 2011. Bergin, Olivia (8 August 2011). "The show will go on: Amy Winehouse for Fred Perry range to be released". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 17 January 2012. "Fred Perry Community Our Values". fredperry.com. Retrieved 14 January 2024. "Charity launches on Amy Winehouse's birthday". London Evening Standard. 14 September 2011. Bang Showbiz (8 March 2011). "Amy Winehouse donates clothes to charity shop". The Independent. Archived from the original on 10 December 2012. Saunders, Tim (9 March 2011). "Amy Winehouse Donates Clothes to Charity Shop". Look to the Stars. Archived from the original on 18 November 2012. "Amy Winehouse – Generous Amy Winehouse Paid for Pal's Life-saving Operation". Contactmusic.com. 13 August 2011. Archived from the original on 24 October 2012. Sisario, Ben (23 July 2011). "Amy Winehouse, British Soul Singer with a Troubled Life, Dies at 27". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 25 August 2011. Topping, Alexandra (26 July 2011). "Amy Winehouse: private funeral held". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 27 July 2011. Hoffman, Claire (10 July 2008). "Up All Night with Amy Winehouse: Rolling Stone's 2008 Story". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 27 July 2013. Yaeger, Lynn (22 May 2007). "Winehouse Rules". The Village Voice. Archived from the original on 6 March 2012. Trebay, Guy (27 July 2011). "A Bad Girl with a Touch of Genius". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 24 January 2012. Winehouse 2012, p. 70. Hines, Nico (13 February 2008). "Record seven NME nominations for Arctic Monkeys". The Times. Archived from the original on 20 July 2008. "Shockwaves NME Awards 2008: Winners' list". NME. 29 February 2008. Archived from the original on 11 October 2011. "Beckham, Winehouse top worst-dressed list". United Press International. 8 January 2008. Retrieved 31 May 2014. Rogers, Jude (11 December 2006). "Year of the woman". New Statesman. Vol. 135, no. 4822. pp. 36–38. Alston, Joshua (12 March 2007). "Soul on Ice, and a Twist". Newsweek. Vol. 149, no. 11. p. 60. Heller, Karen (12 December 2007). "The ruin of a talent, shrilly told by tabloids". The Philadelphia Inquirer. Archived from the original on 14 December 2007. "Winehouse may be charged over drugs video". The Times. 24 January 2008. Jones, Steve; Mansfield, Brian (11 February 2008). "Winehouse and West: Big night". USA Today. Retrieved 15 February 2008. "Winehouse wins big". Hofstra Chronicle. Archived from the original on 7 December 2008. "Showbiz Tonight: LA Official Backs Law to Curb Paparazzi; Amy Winehouse Grammys: Rewarded for Bad Behavior?". CNN. 12 February 2008. Archived from the original on 18 October 2012. Sundel, Jenny; Silverman, Stephen M. (11 February 2008). "Natalie Cole: Amy's Wins Send a 'Bad Message'". People. Archived from the original on 14 October 2014. Costa, Antonio Maria (9 March 2008). "Every line of cocaine means a little part of Africa dies". Archived from the original on 16 October 2014. "Anti-drugs chief hits out at Winehouse, Moss". CNN. 9 March 2008. Archived from the original on 14 October 2014. Colothan, Scott (31 January 2008). "Amy Winehouse's Label Thank Media Frenzy for Record Sales". Gigwise. Archived from the original on 29 November 2014. Gregory, Jason (23 April 2008). "Amy Winehouse Is the UK's 'Ultimate Heroine' Amongst under 25s". Gigwise. Archived from the original on 10 July 2012. Shepherd, Robert (2 July 2008). "BBC news execs clash over celebrity coverage". Broadcast. Archived from the original on 14 October 2012. "Lily Allen interview: Rebuilding the Lily". The Scotsman. 5 December 2008. Archived from the original on 17 January 2014. "Amy Winehouse: in her own words". The Guardian. 22 July 2012. Retrieved 5 July 2017. "Amy Winehouse Tattoos". Amy Winehouse Forever. Retrieved 5 July 2017. Winehouse 2012, p. 62. "Amy Winehouse: 1983–2011". The Daily Telegraph. 23 July 2011. Archived from the original on 29 July 2011. "Amy Winehouse cut out my heart and stomped on it says ex". NOW Daily. 29 April 2007. Archived from the original on 29 September 2016. Hoffman, Claire (10 July 2008). "Up All Night With Amy Winehouse: Rolling Stone's 2008 Story". Rolling Stone. p. 2 of 3. Archived from the original on 1 January 2014. "Singer Amy Winehouse weds in Miami Beach". Yahoo! News. Associated Press. 18 May 2007. Archived from the original on 21 May 2007. Ogunnaike, Lola (1 July 2008). "Commentary: Whither Winehouse?" (Press release). CNN. Archived from the original on 27 January 2012. "Amy Winehouse bloody, bruised after alleged fight with husband". International Herald Tribune. 24 August 2007. Archived from the original on 7 December 2008. "Fans Urged to boycott Winehouse". BBC News. 28 August 2007. Archived from the original on 15 July 2014. Perry, Simon (1 December 2008). "Divorce Drama for Amy Winehouse?". People. Retrieved 31 May 2014. Addley, Esther (10 June 2008). "Crime: Amy Winehouse's husband pleads guilty to GBH and cover-up". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 6 November 2011. "Winehouse husband must stay in jail, judge rules". The Times. 21 July 2008. "Winehouse is arrested by police". BBC News. 18 December 2007. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. "Amy Winehouse husband Blake Fielder-Civil 'used her money to pay off victim'". The Times. 11 June 2008. "Singer absent from 'plot' meeting". BBC News. 11 June 2008. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. "Amy Winehouse's husband seeks divorce" (Press release). CNN. 12 January 2009. Archived from the original on 21 January 2009. "Amy Winehouse's husband to file for divorce". MSNBC. Associated Press. 12 January 2009. Archived from the original on 21 January 2009. Retrieved 10 June 2016. Collett-White, Mike (12 January 2009). "Amy Winehouse's husband seeks divorce" (Press release). Reuters. Archived from the original on 13 February 2009. Laurie I (24 March 2009). "Winehouse 'Won't Let' Husband Divorce Her". San Francisco Chronicle. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Retrieved 31 May 2014. "Winehouse divorces Fielder-Civil". BBC News. 16 July 2009. Archived from the original on 21 October 2022. Isola, Laurie (7 July 2010). "Blake Fielder-Civil received nothing in Amy Winehouse split". SFGate. Archived from the original on 26 January 2011. "Amy Winehouse's boyfriend Reg Traviss: 'Drugs were not part of her world when she died'". NME. 25 October 2011. Retrieved 11 February 2020. Love, Ryan (12 September 2011). "Amy Winehouse, Reg Traviss would have married and had children, says dad Mitch". Digital Spy. Retrieved 11 February 2020. Singh, Anita (8 May 2008). "Amy Winehouse bailed over drugs video". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Retrieved 2 June 2014. "Profile: Amy Winehouse". BBC News. 29 July 2008. Archived from the original on 7 January 2009. "Amy Winehouse was not hospitalized for 'exhaustion'". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 15 July 2014. Retrieved 28 May 2015. "Who'd be a pop star's parent?". BBC News. 17 March 2008. Archived from the original on 22 December 2013. Salahi, Lara (25 July 2011). "Amy Winehouse: Career Shadowed by Manic Depression". ABC News. Archived from the original on 24 July 2011. Sparber, Max (25 July 2011). "On the death of Amy Winehouse". MinnPost. Archived from the original on 19 August 2011. Her mental illness described also in Milloy, Courtland (24 July 2011). "Amy Winehouse another tragic victim of manic depression". The Washington Post. and Satel, Sally (27 July 2011). "Amy Winehouse's Killers". The Wall Street Journal. Retrieved 28 July 2011. Fertuck EA, Fischer S, Beeney J (December 2018). "Social Cognition and Borderline Personality Disorder: Splitting and Trust Impairment Findings". The Psychiatric Clinics of North America. 41 (4): 613–632. doi:10.1016/j.psc.2018.07.003. PMID 30447728. S2CID 53948600. "Diagnostic criteria for 301.83 Borderline Personality Disorder – Behavenet". behavenet.com. Retrieved 23 March 2019. "27 Club: The Last Hours Of Amy Winehouse | Our History" – via www.youtube.com. Rayment, Tim (23 June 2023). "Mental illness crippled Amy" – via www.thetimes.co.uk. Linehan, M. M.; Armstrong, H. E.; Suarez, A.; Allmon, D.; Heard, H. L. (1991). "Cognitive-behavioral treatment of chronically parasuicidal borderline patients". Archives of General Psychiatry. 48 (12): 1060–64. doi:10.1001/archpsyc.1991.01810360024003. PMID 1845222. Linehan, M. M.; Heard, H. L.; Armstrong, H. E. (1993). "Naturalistic follow-up of a behavioural treatment of chronically parasuicidal borderline patients". Archives of General Psychiatry. 50 (12): 971–974. doi:10.1001/archpsyc.1993.01820240055007. PMID 8250683. Rubin, Courtney (10 December 2007). "Amy Winehouse 'Determined' to Attend Grammys". People. Archived from the original on 20 September 2013. "Amy Winehouse living with her father, under 24-hour watch". The Daily Telegraph. 24 January 2008. Archived from the original on 27 January 2008. "Winehouse Questioned About Drugs". The New York Times. 7 February 2008. Archived from the original on 26 November 2014. "Amy takes the rehab route". The Times of India. 12 January 2009. Archived from the original on 12 January 2009. "Rep: Amy Winehouse Not Returning to Rehab". Us Magazine. 26 March 2008. Archived from the original on 30 March 2008. Sherwin, Adam (21 March 2008). "Rep: Amy Winehouse Not Returning to Rehab". The Times. Archived from the original on 30 March 2008. Miller, Vikki (26 April 2008). "Rep: Amy Winehouse Not Returning to Rehab". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 7 December 2008. "Papa Winehouse 'committed' to Amy's care". Boston Herald. 28 April 2008. Retrieved 31 December 2019. Gregory, Jason (12 September 2008). "Amy Winehouse Sparks New Health Fears After Wild Night Out". Gigwise. Archived from the original on 10 July 2012. Davies, Caroline (26 October 2011). "Amy Winehouse inquest records verdict of misadventure". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 27 October 2011. Perry, Simon (5 October 2010). "Amy Winehouse Unveils Her Fred Perry Designs". StyleWatch. Archived from the original on 21 July 2011. "Amy Winehouse is summoned to court over drugs appeal". The Times. 1 January 2009. Archived from the original on 15 June 2011. White, Nicholas (27 December 2007). "Amy Winehouse summoned to appear in court in Norway for drug conviction". People. Archived from the original on 20 February 2008. "Amy Winehouse drops drug case appeal in Norway". USA Today. Associated Press. 6 January 2009. Retrieved 28 May 2015. "Winehouse cautioned over assault". BBC News. 26 April 2008. Archived from the original on 30 April 2008. "Amy Winehouse released after arrest over 'drugs video'". The Times. 8 May 2008. Archived from the original on 16 May 2008. "CPS statement: Amy Winehouse suspected drug abuse". Crown Prosecution Service. 30 May 2008. Archived from the original on 30 May 2008. Sahu, Nina (15 May 2008). "Amy Winehouse escapes charges over drug video". TopNews.in. Archived from the original on 20 January 2012. Retrieved 2 June 2014. "Winehouse drug accused in court". BBC News. 1 July 2008. Archived from the original on 1 July 2008. "Jail for Winehouse drug plot man". BBC News. 12 December 2008. Archived from the original on 12 December 2008. Itzkoff, Dave (6 March 2009). "Winehouse Charged with Assaulting Fan". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 17 April 2009. "Winehouse pulls out of Coachella". BBC News. 9 March 2009. Archived from the original on 12 March 2009. "Winehouse denies assault charge". ITV. 17 March 2009. Archived from the original on 20 March 2009. "Amy Winehouse 'punched dancer after photo request'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 26 July 2009. "Amy Winehouse: I'm too short to have punched anyone". The Times. 23 July 2009. "Winehouse not guilty of assault". BBC News. 24 July 2009. Archived from the original on 24 July 2009. Naughton, Philippe (24 December 2009). "Rep: Amy Winehouse Not Returning to Rehab". The Times. Archived from the original on 25 March 2010. "Amy Winehouse admits pantomime assault". BBC News. 20 January 2010. Retrieved 2 October 2016. Dowell, Ben; Robinson, James (1 May 2009). "Amy Winehouse wins court ban on paparazzi at her home". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 21 October 2013. "Spokeswoman: Amy Winehouse doesn't have emphysema". USA Today. 23 June 2008. "Singer Amy Winehouse has lung damage and irregular heart beat, says her father". International Herald Tribune. Associated Press. 22 June 2008. Archived from the original on 29 June 2008. "Dad says Winehouse flourishing". BBC News. 23 June 2008. Archived from the original on 30 October 2013. Schmidt, Veronica (23 June 2008). "Amy Winehouse diagnosed with emphysema". Times Online. Archived from the original on 15 June 2011. Kaufman, Gil (23 June 2008). "Amy Winehouse's Father Clarifies Diagnosis, Sort Of: 'She Has a Small Amount of Emphysema'". MTV. Archived from the original on 28 September 2008. "Winehouse leaves London clinic". United Press International. 1 July 2008. Retrieved 23 July 2011. Singh, Anita (22 July 2008). "Amy Winehouse: I want five kids and to appear on Countdown". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 9 December 2013. "Winehouse back in the hospital for more tests". Today. 27 October 2008. Archived from the original on 2 November 2013. "Amy Winehouse hospitalized for drug reaction" (Press release). CNN. 25 November 2008. Archived from the original on 17 December 2008. Roberts, Randall (23 July 2011). "Soul singer Amy Winehouse found dead in her London home". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on 7 November 2011. "Amy Winehouse post-mortem takes place". BBC News. 25 July 2011. Archived from the original on 25 July 2011. Chaney, Jen; Hughes, Sarah Anne (23 July 2011). "Amy Winehouse, Jimi Hendrix, Kurt Cobain and the 27 Club". The Washington Post. Retrieved 3 May 2022. "Rihanna, Lady Gaga and Adele break World Records with digital music sales". Guinness World Records. 7 September 2012. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. "Amy Winehouse death: Coroner records misadventure verdict". BBC News. 26 October 2011. Archived from the original on 26 October 2011. "Amy Winehouse Found Dead". MTV. 27 March 2011. Archived from the original on 19 October 2014. Baltin, Steve (23 July 2011). "Courtney Love on Amy Winehouse: 'I'm Gutted'". Rolling Stone. Archived from the original on 25 July 2011. Kaufman, Gil (26 July 2011). "Amy Winehouse Funeral Held in London". MTV. Retrieved 26 July 2011. Hendicott, James (2 April 2012). "Patti Smith pays tribute to Amy Winehouse on new album 'Banga'". NME. Retrieved 23 July 2015. "Ronson dedicates album to Winehouse". Irish Independent. 13 January 2015. Retrieved 7 October 2016. Mayoras, Danielle; Mayoras, Andy (28 March 2012). "Amy Winehouse Didn't Have a Will After All, But Did Have Millions". Forbes. Retrieved 14 June 2012. "Amy Winehouse foundation for addiction planned". BBC News. 27 July 2011. Archived from the original on 27 July 2011. Duke, Alan (18 December 2012). "Amy Winehouse death probe reopened" (Press release). CNN. Archived from the original on 17 December 2012. "Amy Winehouse inquest: Singer drank herself to death". BBC News. 8 January 2013. Archived from the original on 29 March 2014. Levy, Glen (26 July 2011). "'Good Night, My Angel': Friends and Family Gather for Amy Winehouse's Funeral". Time. Retrieved 26 July 2011. Saunders, Emma (26 July 2011). "Singer Amy Winehouse bows out gracefully". BBC News. Archived from the original on 28 July 2011. "Family plan private funeral for Amy Winehouse". BBC News. 25 July 2011. Archived from the original on 25 July 2011. "Amy Winehouse's favourite song of all time". faroutmagazine.co.uk. 14 October 2023. Retrieved 1 March 2024. Bose, Lilledeshan (27 July 2011). "Amy Winehouse's Funeral: Who Was There, What Was Said – OC Weekly". Retrieved 1 March 2024. "Amy Winehouse: Five Facts You May Not Have Known". ABC News. Retrieved 1 March 2024. Jonze, Tim (23 July 2012). "Amy Winehouse anniversary: songs in the key of life". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 1 March 2024. Marikar, Sheila (26 July 2011). "Amy Winehouse to Be Cremated Following Emotional Funeral". ABC News. Archived from the original on 26 July 2011. "Amy Winehouse's ashes buried in north London". NME. 17 September 2012. "Brits 2004: The winners". BBC News. Archived from the original on 26 September 2013. Dimery, Robert, ed. (2006). 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die. Universe Publishing. p. 916. ISBN 0-7893-1371-5. "Winehouse dominates Grammys with 5 wins" (Press release). Today Music. Associated Press. 2 November 2008. Archived from the original on 18 May 2013. Caulfield, Keith (23 July 2012). "Amy Winehouse's Death Led to Surge in Sales, Chart Moves". Billboard. Archived from the original on 27 January 2013. Vozick-Levinson, Simon (9 September 2010). "Amy Winehouse to sing 'It's My Party' for Quincy Jones". Entertainment Weekly. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. "Amy Winehouse's comeback tour going about as well as you'd expect". The A.V. Club. 20 June 2011. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. Cairns, Dan. "Blue-eyed soul: Encyclopedia of Modern Music". The Sunday Times. Archived from the original on 16 June 2011. Lee, Chris (2 July 2015). "Amy Winehouse's boyfriend blasts new documentary 'Amy' as a 'slur upon her'". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved 14 August 2015. De Sylvia, Dave (15 January 2007). "Amy Winehouse – Back to Black". Sputnikmusic. Archived from the original on 13 July 2015. Powers, Ann (23 July 2011). "Remembering Retro-Soul Singer Amy Winehouse". NPR Music. Archived from the original on 25 July 2011. "Winehouse, a voice in control of her art, but little else". CNN. Archived from the original on 6 October 2014. McVeigh, Tracy (23 July 2011). "Amy Winehouse: 'She was a sweet, tiny thing with this huge great voice'". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 5 October 2013. Mulholland, Garry (12 November 2012). "Amy Winehouse – Amy Winehouse at the BBC Review". BBC Music. Archived from the original on 14 November 2012. Sullivan, Caroline (22 March 2017). "Amy Winehouse – 10 of the best". The Guardian. Retrieved 28 March 2017. Perpetua, Matthew (27 July 2011). "Critics Assess Amy Winehouse's Legacy". Rolling Stone. Retrieved 21 May 2019. "VH1's 100 Greatest Women in Music". VH1's The Greatest. 13 February 2012. Archived from the original on 29 October 2013. Samuelson, Kate (23 March 2017). "Here's What Bob Dylan Has to Say About His Favorite Popular Musicians Right Now". Time. Retrieved 6 April 2017. "The 200 Greatest Singers of All Time". Rolling Stone. 1 January 2023. Retrieved 26 June 2023. Greenwood, Richard (14 May 2008). "Amy Winehouse sculpture to go on display". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 11 November 2011. Entertainmentwise (15 July 2008). "Amy Winehouse Unimpressed With Waxwork Statue". Entertainmentwise. Archived from the original on 29 August 2008. Retrieved 20 February 2024. NME (23 July 2008). "Amy Winehouse waxwork revealed". NME. Archived from the original on 20 February 2024. Retrieved 20 February 2024. Ruiz, Cristina (9 November 2008). "Amy Winehouse 'shot down' in name of art". The Sunday Times. Archived from the original on 2 July 2009. Davies, Caroline (5 October 2016). "New faces on Sgt Pepper album cover for artist Peter Blake's 80th birthday". The Guardian. Retrieved 6 November 2016. "Life-size Amy Winehouse statue unveiled in north London". BBC News. 14 September 2014. Retrieved 16 May 2015. "Amy Winehouse life-size statue to be unveiled on her birthday". BBC News. 21 August 2014. Retrieved 15 August 2015. "Amy Winehouse portrait to go on sale at art fair". The Belfast Telegraph. Press Association. 12 January 2018. Retrieved 8 March 2023. Savage, Mark (4 March 2020). "Amy Winehouse honoured on Camden's Music Walk of Fame". BBC News. Retrieved 5 March 2020. Corcoran, Liz; Orloff, Brian (21 December 2012). "Adele Recoils from Botched Meeting with Justin". People. Retrieved 26 December 2012. Crane, Kelly (25 July 2011). "Amy Winehouse: Forever 27". Gulf News. Retrieved 1 May 2020. "The revival of soul, 50 years after Motown". Kuwait Times. 14 March 2009. Archived from the original on 16 April 2009. "Bruno Mars Reveals Amy Winehouse as Surprise Influence on Unorthodox Jukebox". Contactmusic.com. 12 December 2012. Retrieved 14 January 2017. Graves, Shahlin (5 December 2013). "Interview: musical crush – Tove Lo". Coup De Main. Retrieved 27 March 2017. Kaufman, Gil (26 July 2011). "Amy Winehouse's Influence Goes Beyond 'Rehab'". MTV. Archived from the original on 6 January 2014. "Spotlight: Emeli Sande". 92PRO FM. 28 January 2013. Archived from the original on 6 January 2014. Harp, Justin (13 December 2010). "Victoria Justice 'reveals musical influences'". Digital Spy. Retrieved 19 February 2016. Baggs, Michael (23 July 2012). "Amy Winehouse Legacy: The Artists She Inspired". Gigwise. Archived from the original on 6 January 2014. Fischer, Reed (16 July 2014). "Shades of Cool: 12 of Lana Del Rey's Biggest Influences > Amy Winehouse". Rolling Stone. Retrieved 22 February 2015. Geslani, Michelle (5 November 2015). "Sam Smith covers Amy Winehouse's "Love is a Losing Game" – listen". Consequence of Sound. Retrieved 17 February 2016. ""Rehab" singer Amy Winehouse had wide influence with thin output". CBS News. 23 July 2011. Archived from the original on 29 October 2011. Thurmond, Alexandra (11 April 2015). "Sound Scout: Meet Halsey, Songstress Who's Making Waves with Her Feminist Pop Mystique". Teen Vogue. Retrieved 11 January 2017. "2nd Alessia Cara". BBC Music. 16 July 2014. Retrieved 8 January 2017. "Selling their soul: women leading the way in R&B British invasion". Canada.com. 9 June 2008. Archived from the original on 31 January 2015. Retrieved 28 May 2015. Stern, Claire (6 July 2016). "Meet Daya, the 17-Year-Old Pop Artist You Should Be Listening to Now". InStyle. Archived from the original on 7 November 2021. Retrieved 22 February 2020. Lamarre, Carl (15 September 2017). "Jorja Smith on Working with Drake & Why Amy Winehouse's 'Frank' Is the Soundtrack to Her Life". Billboard. Retrieved 16 December 2018. Mahjouri, Shakiel (13 September 2018). "Elton John Says Amy Winehouse Performed 'One of the Best 10 Shows' He Had Ever Seen". Entertainment Tonight Canada. Archived from the original on 16 December 2018. Retrieved 22 February 2020. "Billie Eilish Revisits SPIN Covers of Madonna, Amy Winehouse and More". Spin. 23 December 2019. Retrieved 22 February 2020 – via YouTube. Cairns, Dan (26 July 2009). "The rise of a new wave of female singers". The Sunday Times. Archived from the original on 15 June 2011. Farber, Jim (29 March 2011). "British music invasion triggered by Amy Winehouse now includes Eliza Doolittle, Adele, Rumer". Daily News. Archived from the original on 22 December 2013. "Amy Winehouse Foundation US". Amywinehousefoundation.org. Retrieved 22 November 2014. "Mark Ronson 'happy' to be Amy patron". Newsbeat. 18 October 2015. "Charity overview". Charity Commission for England and Wales. Retrieved 22 November 2014. "The Amy Winehouse Foundation Resilience Programme". 18 March 2013. Retrieved 26 February 2016. Nussbaum Cohen, Debra (17 July 2015). "Portrait of Amy Winehouse as a Fragile Jewish Girl". Haaretz. Retrieved 6 July 2017. Lodge, Guy (16 May 2015). "Cannes Film Review: Amy Winehouse Documentary 'Amy'". Variety. Retrieved 28 May 2015. "Baftas 2016: the nominations". The Daily Telegraph. 8 January 2016. Archived from the original on 8 January 2016. Retrieved 8 January 2016. Ford, Rebecca (14 January 2016). "Oscar Nominations: The Complete List". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved 14 January 2016. Snapes, Laura (15 October 2018). "Amy Winehouse family signs deal to make biopic". The Guardian. Retrieved 21 August 2019. Kroll, Justin (11 July 2022). "Amy Winehouse Biopic 'Back To Black' Moving Forward At Studiocanal With Sam Taylor-Johnson Directing". Deadline Hollywood. Retrieved 11 July 2022. D'Souza, Shaad (13 January 2023). "Amy Winehouse biopic: first photo released of Marisa Abela as late singer". The Guardian. Retrieved 13 January 2023. "Amy Winehouse Biopic 'Back to Black' Trailer: Marisa Abela Transforms into Iconic Singer in Sam Taylor-Johnson Film". 11 January 2024. "Watch Marisa Abela Embody Amy Winehouse in 'Back to Black' Trailer". Rolling Stone. 11 January 2024. Trendell, Andrew (9 October 2017). "Amy Winehouse's family in talks to turn her life into a West End musical". NME. Retrieved 2 November 2019. Murphy, Lauren (7 March 2020). "Amy Winehouse's dad says that a biopic and Broadway musical is in the works". Entertainment.ie. Retrieved 3 February 2021. Winehouse 2012, p. ix. Winehouse, Janis (23 September 2014). "Interview: Janis Winehouse". The Jewish Chronicle (Interview). Interviewed by Charlotte Oliver. Retrieved 16 August 2015. "Past Exhibitions: Amy Winehouse: A Family Portrait". Jewish Museum London. Retrieved 5 August 2015. "Two Amy Winehouse art exhibitions to open in San Francisco" (Press release). Jewish Telegraphic Agency. 22 July 2015. Retrieved 19 September 2021. Brown, Mark (4 July 2013). "Amy Winehouse's possessions go on display at Jewish Museum in London". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 16 July 2013. Boardman, Madeline (22 November 2013). "Amy Winehouse's Dad Shoots Down Movie Rumors". The Huffington Post. Archived from the original on 9 December 2013. Bliss, Karen (20 September 2018). "Amy Winehouse 'Back to Black' Documentary Offers Revealing Commentary from Mark Ronson, Salaam Remi & More". Billboard. Retrieved 12 October 2018. Itzkoff, David (25 April 2013). "Amy Winehouse Documentary Coming from Director of 'Senna'". The New York Times. Retrieved 4 July 2013. McNary, Dave (24 April 2013). "Amy Winehouse Documentary Planned by 'Senna' Director". Variety. Archived from the original on 19 October 2013. Macnab, Geoffrey (11 May 2015). "Amy, Cannes film review: Brilliant, unutterably sad film depicts the descent of Amy Winehouse". The Independent. Archived from the original on 19 May 2015. Retrieved 16 April 2015. Clark, Jessica (29 February 2016). "All the winners from the 2016 Oscars". Yahoo!. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Snapes, Laura (12 October 2018). "Hologram of Amy Winehouse set for 2019 worldwide tour". The Guardian. Retrieved 12 October 2018. Bowenbank, Starr (19 September 2018). "Amy Winehouse 'Back to Black' Documentary Announced: Watch the Trailer". Billboard. Retrieved 12 October 2018. Maicki, Salvatore (20 September 2018). "A new documentary on Amy Winehouse's Back to Black is in the works". The Fader. Retrieved 12 October 2018. Cook-Wilson, Winston (19 September 2018). "New Amy Winehouse Doc About the Making of Back to Black Announced". Spin. Retrieved 12 October 2018. Saponara, Michael (15 February 2019). "Salaam Remi Unearths Nas & Amy Winehouse Posthumous Collaboration 'Find My Love'". Billboard. Retrieved 7 November 2019. Applefeld Olson, Cathy (21 January 2020). "Lyrics, Lipstick, Legacy: Inside the Grammy Museum's 'Beyond Black: The Style of Amy Winehouse' Exhibit". Billboard. Retrieved 21 January 2020. Baynes, Megan (8 November 2021). "Amy Winehouse: Dress worn by singer during final show when she was booed off stage sells for £180,000 at auction". Sky News. Retrieved 8 November 2021. Bakare, Lanre (14 September 2021). "Design Museum to host major Amy Winehouse retrospective". The Guardian. Retrieved 14 September 2021. Patterson, Sylvia (24 November 2021). "Amy: Beyond the Stage review – a ghostly, gut-punchingly poignant exhibition". The Guardian. Retrieved 1 December 2021. "Reclaiming Amy". BBC Two. BBC. Retrieved 19 September 2021. Aubrey, Elizabeth (24 July 2021). "Reclaiming Amy, review: Documentary is a harrowing account of a family's grief". The Independent. Archived from the original on 23 July 2021. Retrieved 24 July 2021. "Amy Winehouse wanted children". Wisconsin State Journal. Celebretainment. 13 July 2021. Archived from the original on 8 November 2021. Retrieved 19 September 2021. Chantelle Dusette added: "She would have been a beautiful mum." Elsewhere in the documentary, Catriona spoke about her "undefined" relationship with the 'Rehab' singer, who she lived with....Amy's stylist Naomi Parry added... Winehouse, Mitch (2012). Amy, My Daughter. HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-219139-7. Winehouse, Janis (2014). Loving Amy: A Mother's Story. Random House. ISBN 978-1-4735-0816-3. Amy Winehouse at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Official website Amy Winehouse at AllMusic Amy Winehouse at Curlie Amy Winehouse collected news and commentary at The Guardian Amy Winehouse collected news and commentary at The New York Times Amy Winehouse Foundation - Charity Commission for England and Wales