Fjotolf Hansen (born 13 February 1979), better known by his birth name Anders Behring Breivik (Norwegian pronunciation: [ˈɑ̂nːəʂ ˈbêːrɪŋ ˈbræ̂ɪviːk] ), is a Norwegian neo-Nazi terrorist. He is known primarily for committing the 2011 Norway attacks on 22 July 2011, in which he killed eight people by detonating a van bomb at Regjeringskvartalet in Oslo, and then killed 69 participants of a Workers' Youth League (AUF) summer camp, in a mass shooting on the island of Utøya. After Breivik was found psychologically competent to stand trial, his criminal trial was held in 2012. That year, Breivik was found guilty of mass murder, causing a fatal explosion, and terrorism. Breivik was sentenced to the maximum civilian criminal penalty in Norway, which is 21 years' imprisonment through preventive detention, allowing the possibility of one or more extensions for as long as he is deemed a danger to society. At the age of 16 in 1995, Breivik was arrested for spraying graffiti on walls. He was not chosen for conscription into the Norwegian Armed Forces. At the age of 20, he joined the anti-immigration Progress Party, and chaired the local Vest Oslo branch of the party's youth organization in 2002. He joined a gun club in 2005. He left the Progress Party in 2006. A company he founded was later declared bankrupt. He had no declared income in 2009 and his assets were 390,000 kroner (equivalent to $72,063), according to Norwegian tax authority figures. He financed the terror attacks with a total of €130,000; nine credit cards gave him access to credit. On the day of the attacks, Breivik emailed a compendium of texts entitled "2083: A European Declaration of Independence", describing his militant ideology. In them, he stated his opposition to Islam and blamed feminism for a European "cultural suicide." The text called for the deportation of all Muslims from Europe and Breivik wrote that his main motive for the attacks was to publicize his manifesto. Two teams of court-appointed forensic psychiatrists examined Breivik before his trial. The first team diagnosed Breivik with paranoid schizophrenia, but after this initial finding was criticized, a second evaluation concluded that he was not psychotic during the attacks but did have narcissistic personality disorder and antisocial personality disorder. In 2016, Breivik sued the Norwegian Correctional Service, claiming that his solitary confinement violated his human rights. The justice system concluded that his rights had not been violated, despite a lower court ruling in 2016. The European Court of Human Rights dismissed his complaint in 2018 - the year after he filed it. In January 2022, due to the fact that under Norwegian law Breivik was eligible to be paroled after he had served ten years of his twenty-one year sentence, he stood trial to determine whether the District Attorney's initial decision to refuse parole would be reversed or upheld. He lost, with the court refusing his request for parole. The verdict [was] appealed [and a final verdict exists], and Breivik and his lawyer [launched] a lawsuit (in a non-Norwegian court) regarding the conditions of his imprisonment and alleged violations of the European Convention on Human Rights, [and the last-mentioned lawsuit, was not heard in court]. He applied for parole in 2022, which the Court rejected, and subsequently appealed the rejection. In early 2024, Breivik sued the Government of Norway for violating his human rights by keeping him in prison isolation; the 5-day trial ended on 12 January 2024, concluding in February that his human rights were not being violated and he shall still be kept under isolation. He is scheduled to be in court, in June 2024, regarding the possibility for parole. Breivik was born in Oslo on 13 February 1979, the son of Jens David Breivik [no] (born 1935), a civil economist, who worked as a diplomat for the Norwegian Embassy in London and later in Paris, and Wenche Elisabeth Behring (1946–2013), a nursing assistant. He has a maternal half-sister named Elisabeth, and three paternal half-siblings: Erik, Jan, and Nina. Breivik began his life in London until the age of one, when his parents divorced. His family name is Breivik, while Behring, his mother's maiden name, is his middle name and not part of the family name. His family name comes from Breivika in Hadsel, and means "broad vik" or "broad bay." In 2017, it was reported he had changed his legal name to Fjotolf Hansen. When Breivik was aged 4, and living in Oslo's Frogner borough, two reports were filed expressing concern about his mental health. A psychologist in one report made a note of the boy's peculiar smile, suggesting it was not anchored in his emotions but was rather a deliberate response to his environment. In another report from Norway's National Centre for Child and Adolescent Psychiatry (SSBU), concerns were raised about how Breivik was treated by his mother: "[s]he 'sexualised' the young Breivik, hit him, and frequently told him that she wished that he were dead." In the report, Wenche Behring is described as "a woman with an extremely difficult upbringing, borderline personality disorder and an all-encompassing if only partially visible depression" who "projects her primitive aggressive and sexual fantasies onto him [Breivik]". The report recommended he be forcibly removed from his mother and placed into foster care, as she was heavily emotionally and psychologically abusive towards him, but this was not carried out by the Child Welfare Service. Breivik's mother had fled her abusive home at age 17 and soon after that became a teenage mother. In her thirties, she became pregnant with Anders and married his father, Jens Breivik. During her pregnancy she moved to London, where Jens worked. Even before his birth, Breivik's mother developed a disdain for her son. She claimed that he was a "nasty child" and that he was "kicking her on purpose". She had wanted to abort him but by the time she went to a hospital, she had passed the three-month threshold for an abortion. Psychologist reports later stated that she thought that Breivik was a "fundamentally nasty and evil child and determined to destroy her." She stopped breastfeeding her son early on because he was "sucking the life out of her". A year after Breivik's birth, his parents' relationship ended. Breivik's mother moved back to Oslo, where she borrowed Jens Breivik's apartment in the Frogner borough. Neighbours claimed that there were noises of fights and that the mother left her children completely alone for extended periods of time, while she was working as a nurse. In 1981, Breivik's mother applied for welfare benefits, specifically monetary payment or financial aid; in 1982, she applied for respite care for her son. She says that she was overwhelmed with the boy and unable to care for him. She described him as "clingy and demanding". Breivik was then placed, in cooperation with the Child Welfare Service, with a young couple. This couple later told police that the mother, when bringing two-year-old Breivik to the house, had asked that he be allowed to touch the man's penis because he had no one to compare himself to in terms of appearance; "He has only ever seen girls' parts", the mother told the couple, according to the couple's undated statement to police. In February 1983, on the advice of her neighbours, Breivik's mother sought help from the National Centre for Child and Adolescent Psychiatry (SSBU); Breivik and his mother were outpatients, and they stayed there during the daytime for about one month. The psychiatrists' conclusion of the stay was that Breivik should be placed in the foster care system and had to be removed from his mother for him to develop normally. This was based on several observations: Breivik had little emotional engagement and did not show joy or cry when he was hurt; he also made no attempts to play with other children and was extremely clean and became anxious when his toys were not in order. Psychologists believed that Breivik's mother had punished him and reacted extremely negatively to him displaying emotions leading him to become devoid of any visible emotions. His mother had also claimed that he was unclean and that she constantly had to care for him. Psychologists believed that Breivik had developed obsessive–compulsive disorder (OCD) because of fear of punishment from his mother. He did not show the normal level of uncleanliness of a four-year-old and had no repertoire on how to express emotions normally. On rare occasions, his long phases of emotional voidness would be interrupted by fits where he would erupt and display extreme uncontrolled emotions. Reports of the staff said that his mother had told Breivik that she "wished that he was dead" while she knew that she was being observed by health personnel. At the same time she bound him emotionally to her, alternating between great affection and extreme cruelty from one moment to the next. Some nights, Breivik and his mother would share the bed with close body contact. The psychiatrists concluded this was an unacceptable situation for a four-year-old to be in and the report from 1983 stated: "Anders is a victim of his mother's projections of paranoid-aggressive and sexual fears toward men in general", and "she projects onto him her own primitive, aggressive and sexual fantasies; all the qualities in men that she regards as dangerous and aggressive." Breivik reacted very negatively to his mother and alternated between clinginess, petty aggression and extreme childishness. The final conclusion of the observation was that the "family is in dire need of help. Anders should be removed from the family and given a better standard of care; the mother is provoked by him and remains in an ambivalent position which prevents him from developing on his own terms. Anders has become an anxious, passive child that averts making contact. He displays a manic defense mechanism of restless activity and a feigned, deflecting smile. Considering the profoundly pathological relationship between Anders and his mother it is crucial to make an early effort to ward off a severely skewed development in the boy." However, Child Welfare Services did not follow this recommendation and instead, he was placed in respite care only during the weekends. When Breivik's father learned of the situation, he filed for custody. Although Breivik's mother had agreed to have him put in respite care, after Jens had filed for custody she demanded that Breivik be put back into full custody with her. Both the mother and father involved lawyers and eventually, the case was dropped because the Welfare Services thought that they would not be able to provide enough evidence in court to warrant the placement of Breivik in foster care. One of the main reasons for this was the testimony of staff from the Vigelandsparken Nursery, which Breivik had been attending since 1981. They described him as a happy child and claimed that nothing was wrong or had been wrong with him all along. During all of this, the SSBU maintained their stances and said "urgent action is crucially needed to prevent a severely skewed development in the boy". The SSBU wrote Child Welfare Services a letter claiming that an order should be placed to have Breivik removed by force. In 1984, a hearing in front of Barnevernsnemnda (the municipal child welfare committee) took place on whether Breivik's mother should lose custody of him. The Child Welfare Service lost the case; the agency was represented by a social worker with no prior experience of representing a case in front of the committee. It was ruled that the family should be supervised. However, after only three visits the supervision was discontinued. Breivik was never again put into respite care or foster care. Breivik attended Smestad Grammar School, Ris Junior High, Hartvig Nissens Upper Secondary School and Oslo Commerce School. A former classmate recalled that Breivik was an intelligent student, physically stronger than others of the same age, who often took care of people who were bullied. Breivik lived with his mother and his elder half-sister in the West End of Oslo, regularly visiting his father and stepmother, who had now moved to France, until they divorced when he was 12. His mother remarried to an officer in the Norwegian Army. Breivik chose to be confirmed into the Lutheran Church of Norway at the age of 15. In his adolescence, Breivik's behaviour was described as rebellious. In his early teen years, he was a prolific graffiti artist and part of the hip hop community in Oslo West. He took his graffiti much more seriously than his associates did and was caught by the police on several occasions; child welfare services were notified once again and he was fined on two occasions. According to Breivik's mother, his father ceased contact with him at the age of 15, after he was caught and fined for spraying graffiti on walls in 1995. It was reported they had not been in contact since then. According to Breivik's father, however, it was his son who broke off contact, claiming "I was always willing to see [Anders]," despite his destructive activities. At this age, Anders fell out with his best friend and broke off contact with the hip hop community. Beginning in adolescence, Breivik spent his spare time weight training, and started to use anabolic steroids. He cared a lot about his looks and about appearing big and strong. Breivik was exempt from conscription to military service in the Norwegian Army; he had no military training. The Norwegian Defence Security Department, which conducts the vetting process, says he was deemed "unfit for service" at the mandatory conscript assessment. After age 21, Breivik worked in the customer service department of an unnamed company, working with "people from all countries" and being "kind to everyone". A former co-worker described him as an "exceptional colleague", while a close friend of his said he usually had a big ego. Breivik is reported to have traveled extensively and visited up to 24 countries in the years before the attacks, including Belarus as a tourist in 2005. Norwegian prosecuting authorities claim that Breivik went to Belarus to meet a woman he had met on a dating website. The same woman later visited him in Oslo. Norwegian police sent legal requests to sixteen countries to investigate Breivik following his attacks. According to acquaintances, in his early-twenties Breivik had cosmetic surgery on his chin, nose and forehead, and reportedly was pleased with the results. At the age of 23, Breivik claimed he started a nine-year plan in 2002 to finance the 2011 attacks, forming his own computer programming business while working at a customer service company. He claimed his company grew to six employees and "several offshore bank accounts", and that he had made his first million kroner at the age of 24. He wrote in his manifesto that he lost 2 million kroner on stock speculation, but still had about 2 million kroner to finance the attack. The company was later declared bankrupt and Breivik was reported for several breaches of the law. He then moved back to his mother's home in order to save money. The first set of psychiatrists who evaluated him said in their report that his mental health deteriorated at this stage and he entered a state of withdrawal and isolation. His declared assets in 2007 were about NKr 630,000 (US$76,244), according to Norwegian tax authority figures. He claimed that by 2008 he had about NKr 2,000,000 (US$243,332) and nine credit cards giving him access to €26,000 in credit. In May 2009, he founded a farming company called "Breivik Geofarm", described as a farming sole proprietorship set up to cultivate vegetables, melons, roots, and tubers. In 2010, he visited Prague in an attempt to buy illegal weapons. He was unable to obtain a weapon there and decided to use legal channels in Norway instead. He bought one semi-automatic 9 mm Glock 34 pistol legally by demonstrating his membership in a pistol club in the police application for a gun license, and the semi-automatic Ruger Mini-14 rifle by possessing a hunting license. Breivik had no declared income in 2009 and his assets amounted to 390,000 kroner ($72,063), according to Norwegian tax authority figures. He stated that in January 2010 his funds were "depleting gradually". On 23 June 2011, a month before the attacks, he paid the outstanding amount on his nine credit cards so he could have access to funds during his preparations. Breivik had covered up the windows of his house. Breivik's former neighbour described him as a "city dweller, who wore expensive shirts and who knew nothing about rural ways". The owner of a local bar, who once worked as a profiler of passengers' body language at Oslo Airport, said there was nothing unusual about Breivik, who was an occasional customer at the bar. In late-June or early-July 2011, he moved to a rural area north of Åsta in Åmot, Innlandet county, about 140 km (87 mi) north-east of Oslo, the site of his farm. According to his manifesto, Breivik used the company as a cover to legally obtain large amounts of artificial fertiliser and other chemicals for the manufacturing of explosives. A farming supplier sold Breivik's company six tonnes of fertiliser in May. The newspaper Verdens Gang reported that after Breivik bought a small quantity of an explosive primer from an online shop in Poland, his name was among sixty passed to the Police Security Service (PST) by the Norwegian Customs Service as having used the store to buy products. Speaking to the newspaper, Jon Fitje of PST said the information they found gave no indication of anything suspicious. He sets the cost of the preparations for the attacks at €317,000—"130,000 out of pocket and 187,500 euros in lost revenue over three years." [sic] The first attack was a car bomb explosion in Oslo within Regjeringskvartalet, the executive government quarter of Norway, at 15:25:22 (CEST) on 22 July 2011. The bomb was placed inside a van next to the tower block housing the office of the then Prime Minister Jens Stoltenberg. The explosion killed eight people and injured at least 209 people, twelve severely. The second attack occurred less than two hours later at a youth summer camp on the island of Utøya in Tyrifjorden, Buskerud. The camp was organised by the AUF, the youth wing of the ruling Norwegian Labour Party (AP). Breivik, dressed in a homemade police uniform and showing false identification, took a ferry to the island and opened fire at the participants, methodically killing 69 and injuring 32 over more than an hour. Among the dead were friends of Stoltenberg, and the stepbrother of Norway's crown princess Mette-Marit. When the police tactical unit Delta based in Oslo arrived on the island and confronted him, he surrendered without resistance. After his arrest he was held on the island and interrogated throughout the night, before being moved to a holding cell in Oslo. Breivik admitted to the crimes and said the purpose of the attack was to save Norway and Western Europe from a Muslim takeover, and that the Labour Party had to "pay the price" for "letting down Norway and the Norwegian people." After his arrest, Breivik referred to himself as "the greatest monster since Quisling." On 25 July 2011, Breivik was charged with violating paragraph 147a of the Norwegian criminal code, "destabilising or destroying basic functions of society" and "creating serious fear in the population", both of which are acts of terrorism under Norwegian law. He was held for eight weeks, the first four in solitary confinement, pending further court proceedings. The custody was extended in subsequent hearings. The indictment was ready in early March 2012. The Director of Public Prosecutions had initially decided to censor the document to the public, leaving out the names of the victims as well as details about their deaths. Due to the public's reaction, this decision was reversed prior to its release. On 30 March, the Borgarting Court of Appeal announced that it had scheduled the expected appeal case for 15 January 2013. It would be heard in the same specially-constructed courtroom where the initial criminal case was tried. Breivik was kept at Ila Prison after arrest. There, he had at his disposal three prison cells: one where he could rest, sleep, and watch DVDs and TV, a second that was set up for him to use a computer without the Internet, and a third with gymnasium equipment. Only selected prison staff with special qualifications were allowed to work around him, and the prison management aimed to not let his presence as a high-security prisoner affect any of the other inmates. Subsequent to the January 2012 lifting of letters and visitors censorship for Breivik, he received several inquiries from private individuals, and he devoted his time to writing back to like-minded people. According to one of his attorneys, Breivik was curious to learn whether his manifesto has begun to take root in society. Breivik's attorneys, in consultation with Breivik, considered whether to have some of his interlocutors called as witnesses during the trial. Media outlets, both Norwegian and international, requested to interview Breivik. The first such was cancelled by the prison administration following a background check of the journalist in question. A second interview was agreed to by Breivik, and the prison requested a background check to be done by the police in the country of the journalist. No information was divulged about the media organisations in question. Breivik underwent his first examination by court-appointed forensic psychiatrists in 2011. The psychiatrists diagnosed him with paranoid schizophrenia, concluding that he had developed the disorder over time and was psychotic both when he carried out the attacks and during the observation. He was also diagnosed with abuse of non-dependence-producing substances antecedent of 22 July. The psychiatrists consequently found Breivik to be criminally insane. According to the report, Breivik displayed inappropriate and blunted affect and a severe lack of empathy. He spoke incoherently in neologisms and had acted compulsively based on a universe of bizarre, grandiose and delusional thoughts. Breivik alluded to himself as the future regent of Norway, master of life and death, while calling himself "inordinately loving" and "Europe's most perfect knight since WWII". He was convinced that he was a warrior in a "low intensity civil war" and had been chosen to save his people. Breivik described plans to carry out further "executions of categories A, B and C traitors" by the thousands, the psychiatrists included, and to organize Norwegians in reservations for the purpose of selective breeding. Breivik believed himself to be the "knight Justiciar grand master" of a Templar organisation. He was deemed to be suicidal and homicidal by the psychiatrists. According to his defence attorney, Breivik initially expressed surprise and felt insulted by the conclusions in the report. He later said "this provides new opportunities". The outcome of Breivik's first competency evaluation was fiercely debated in Norway by mental health experts, over the court-appointed psychiatrists' opinion and the country's definition of criminal insanity. An extended panel of experts from the Norwegian Board of Forensic Medicine reviewed the submitted report and approved it "with no significant remarks". News in the meantime emerged that the psychiatric medical staff in charge of treating prisoners at Ila Detention and Security Prison did not make any observations that suggested he had either psychosis, depression or was suicidal. According to senior psychiatrist Randi Rosenqvist, who was commissioned by the prison to examine Breivik, he rather appeared to have personality disorders. Counsels representing families and victims filed requests that the court order a second opinion, while the prosecuting authority and Breivik's lawyer initially did not want new experts to be appointed. On 13 January 2012, after much public pressure, the Oslo District Court ordered a second expert panel to evaluate Breivik's mental state. He initially refused to cooperate with new psychiatrists. He later changed his mind and in late February a new period of psychiatric observation, this time using different methods than the first period, was begun. If the original diagnosis had been upheld by the court, it would have meant that Breivik could not be sentenced to a prison term. The prosecution could instead have requested that he be detained in a psychiatric hospital. Medical advice would then have determined whether or not the courts decided to release him at some later point. If considered a perpetual danger to society, Breivik could have been kept in confinement for life. Shortly after the second period of pre-trial psychiatric observation was begun, the prosecution said it expected Breivik would be declared legally insane. On 10 April 2012, the second psychiatric evaluation was published with the conclusion that Breivik was not psychotic during the attacks and he was not psychotic during their evaluation. Instead, they diagnosed antisocial personality disorder and narcissistic personality disorder. Breivik expressed hope at being declared sane in a letter sent to several Norwegian newspapers shortly before his trial, in which he wrote about the prospect of being sent to a psychiatric ward: "I must admit this is the worst thing that could have happened to me as it is the ultimate humiliation. To send a political activist to a mental hospital is more sadistic and evil than to kill him! It is a fate worse than death." On 8 June 2012, Professor of Psychiatry Ulrik Fredrik Malt testified in court as an expert witness, saying he found it unlikely that Breivik had schizophrenia. According to Malt, Breivik primarily had Asperger syndrome, Tourette syndrome, narcissistic personality disorder and possibly paranoid psychosis. Malt cited a number of factors in support of his diagnoses, including deviant behaviour as a child, extreme specialization in Breivik's study of weapons and bomb technology, strange facial expression, a remarkable way of talking, and an obsession with numbers. Eirik Johannesen disagreed, concluding that Breivik was lying and was not delusional or psychotic. Johannesen had observed and spoken to Breivik for more than twenty hours. In the pre-trial hearing, on February 2012, Breivik read a prepared statement demanding to be released and treated as a hero for his "pre-emptive attack against traitors" accused of planning cultural genocide. He said, "They are committing, or planning to commit, cultural destruction, including deconstruction of the Norwegian ethnic group and deconstruction of Norwegian culture. This is the same as ethnic cleansing." The criminal trial of Breivik began on 16 April 2012 in Oslo Courthouse under the jurisdiction of Oslo District Court. The appointed prosecutors were Inga Bejer Engh and Svein Holden with Geir Lippestad serving as Breivik's lead counsel for the defence. Closing arguments were held on 22 June. On 24 August 2012, Breivik was adjudged sane at the time the crimes were committed and sentenced to preventive detention for a period of 21 years—the maximum penalty in Norway; with a minimum non-parole period of 10 years which is the longest minimum sentence available. This sentence allows the court to continue Breivik's detention indefinitely, five years at a time for as long as the prosecuting authority deems it necessary in order to protect society. Whilst Breivik pleaded not guilty, Breivik did not appeal the sentence, and on 8 September, the media announced that the verdict was final. The court said, "many people share Breivik's conspiracy theory, including the Eurabia theory. The court finds that very few people, however, share Breivik's idea that the alleged 'Islamisation' should be fought with terror." Breivik announced that he did not recognize the legitimacy of the court and therefore did not accept its decision—he decided not to appeal, saying this would legitimize the authority of the Oslo District Court. Since August 2011, Breivik has been imprisoned in a SHS section (a prison section with "particularly high security"—"særlig høy sikkerhet"). In March 2022, Breivik was transferred to Ringerike Prison; As of 2022, he is in a SHS section; there is another prisoner in the section, but Breivik is completely separated from that prisoner. Breivik's earlier prison transfers are: on 23 July 2012, he transferred from Ila Detention and Security Prison in Bærum to Skien Prison, formally known as Telemark fengsel, Skien avdeling, in Skien, county Telemark. On 28 September 2012 he transferred back to Ila. In Q1 2023, Breivik chose to put a stop to receiving more visits from [the prison visitor or] a prison visitor—a military chaplain (ranked major), that Breivik had been seeing every two weeks since 2015; this visitor has been paid 164,000 Norwegian kroner, by the government as of 1 January 2016[update], in regard to [visiting] Breivik. His mother visited him five times before her death in 2013 and researcher Mattias Gardell interviewed Breivik in 2014, but no other visitors requested by Breivik have been granted access. He is isolated from the other inmates, and only has contact with health care workers and guards. The type of isolation that Breivik has experienced in prison is what the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) calls relative social isolation, according to a verdict of 2016 in Oslo District Court. In November 2020, Breivik had an interaction with another prisoner for the first time, in the presence of at least seven prison officers; the prisoners played cards and talked for around one or two hours; the other prisoner chose to not have a third meeting with Breivik, according to media reports in January 2021. In Norway, it is not uncommon to grant compensatory measures to prisoners that are being held in isolation for several years. As of 2021[update], he has access (in his cell, between 9 AM and 2:30 PM) to a personal computer (with seals [that impede unauthorised opening of the computers panels]), that he uses to write letters. Earlier reports - in 2016 - said that he has an electric typewriter and an Xbox (without internet connection) in his cell. Previously, when the original verdict was upheld in September 2012, his permission for access to a computer (without internet) in his prison cell ended. Breivik has been enrolled in a bachelor's degree program in political science at the University of Oslo; he passed two courses in 2015. In 2015, he claimed in a letter that harsh prison conditions had forced him to drop out. According to a statement by his lawyer, Breivik had become a Nazi in prison. The government denied him parole in 2021, and the court system upheld that decision in 2022. Since his imprisonment, Breivik has identified himself as a fascist and a Nazi, and a practitioner of Odinism. As of 2012, Breivik has written to, among others, Peter Mangs and Beate Zschäpe. In 2012, politicians protested Breivik's activities in prison, which they see as him continuing to promote or expose his ideology and possibly encouraging further criminal acts. As with all convicts his letters are vetted before sending to prevent further crimes. After he came to Skien Prison in 2013, 5 out of 300 letters that he had sent had not been confiscated, he testified in court in 2016. He added: "Of the 200 forms regarding prison visits that I have mailed, all have been confiscated." By 2016, around 4,000 postal items had been sent to or from Breivik, and about 15 per cent of these (600 items) had been confiscated. On 11 March 2016, political scientist Ingeborg Kjos was copied in on a letter from Breivik to the Ministry of Justice that had taken over a year and a half to reach her; the letter did not advocate violence. In a reply to a letter from Breivik addressed to all members of parliament and with a personalized note to Kamzy Gunaratnam, a survivor of the Utøya attack, Gunaratnam wrote: "... As deputy mayor [... of Oslo] it is my job to see that no one experiences the same social rejection that you did [experience]. Your fight against social rejection is the only fight we have in common, Anders. The fight against the lacking presence of parents and adults. [Lack of] teachers who saw you [or validated you]. [Lack of] psychiatric assistance." In 2021, NRK printed a facsimile of part of a letter which Breivik sent in July to an organisation headed by the mother of a woman that Breivik had killed. The letter is described as "white power propaganda". In November 2012, Breivik wrote a 27-page letter of complaints to the prison authorities, talking about the security restrictions he was being held under, claiming that the prison director personally wanted to punish him. In letters to foreign media outlets, he told them about his demands to prison authorities "including easier communication with the outside world and a PlayStation 3 to replace the current PlayStation 2, because it offered more suitable games"; media reported in 2014 about demands that he would starve himself to death if he was refused "access to a sofa and a bigger gym"; furthermore he said that "Other inmates have access to adult games while I only have the right to play less interesting kids' games. One example is "Rayman Revolution", a game aimed at three-year-olds," Breivik complained to prison officials." In September 2015, Breivik again threatened a hunger strike, because of deteriorating prison conditions, but delayed in order to sue the Norwegian Government over prison conditions. Breivik sued the government of Norway; the civil trial was held during four days in 2016. The verdict in the lower court was appealed; in the appellate court, he lost on all counts, and the supreme court decided not to hear the case. Breivik sued the government over his solitary confinement, and his general conditions of imprisonment, including a claim of an excessive use of handcuffs. Breivik claimed that his solitary confinement violated his human rights and asserted that he had been subjected to "degrading treatment, including hundreds of strip searches and frequent searches of his cell, including at night." The Parliamentary Ombudsman had previously reported that the regimen for serving a prison sentence at the level of particularly high security constitutes a heightened risk of inhumane treatment. On 14 March, members of the court performed a walk-through of prison cells used by Breivik at Ila Prison; later the same week the members of the court inspected the prison facilities used by Breivik at Skien Prison. On 15 March, Oslo District Court convened inside Skien Prison. After his handcuffs were removed upon his arrival, Breivik faced the gallery and performed a Nazi salute. One judge said that Breivik's salute seemed disruptive, "therefore I wish that you do not do it again". Øystein Storrvik, the head of Breivik's legal team, told the court about Breivik's letter of complaint to the government in 2012 which detailed being awakened by flashlight as often as every half-hour. On 16 March, Breivik started his testimony, "to give his view on the strict prison regimen [that he is exposed to] and any damage done to his health while in prison as a cause of isolation". He reported having been handcuffed 3,500 times. The main points of his testimony were: He had been subjected to a "grip manoeuvre" 2,300 times—where he put his hands through the slot of the door to his prison cell, and his hands had been held in place by a prison officer while the door swung open. Breivik described these two forms of "extra punishment", saying: "it is quite demeaning to be exposed to this every day, so I countered by not leaving my prison cell. I did not want to exercise in the fresh air, [I did not want to] train, or use my study [prison-] cell." On paper he had three prison cells, but because of the government's actions he hardly used the training cell and the study cell. Prison officers at Ila Prison were not to speak to him during his [first] stay there, and this was the case for parts of his stay at Skien [prison]; only the chief of the section was supposed to speak to Breivik. Furthermore, Breivik had not said "no" to the prison offering him activities such as playing floorball or chess, but asked to be offered other activities. Beginning in March 2014, he said he was finally able to receive the one hour of fellowship with prison officers; he said that claims had been made that he was allowed to prepare food, but that he was permitted only to press an egg cooker, and was not permitted to put frozen pizza in the oven—that he had only done once. He still received a prison visitor twice a month—an officer of the Norwegian Armed Forces. Regarding recreation in fresh air, Breivik said: "Until December 2015 all outdoor recreation was in a concrete box. In December 2015, probably because of the upcoming trial, I was permitted to walk 20 minutes in the outdoors recreation area. A couple of weeks later I was permitted [again]. Thereafter I was permitted to recreate there every other week." Regarding being awoken at night, Breivik said: "There are inspections through the slot [of the door to the prison cell] every 40 minutes. Every time the slot was opened they demanded a sign of life. They wanted me to shake a leg every time the slot opened". He felt humiliated that the prison officers made such a demand and said "They shined a flashlight into the bed, depending on the prison officer. Called into the cell "Are you alive, are you alive?", until I woke up. Then they had the sign of life that they needed. Countless times I was awoken at night." After he came to Skien Prison, only 5 out of 300 letters that Breivik sent, had not been confiscated: "Of the 200 forms regarding prison visits that I have mailed, all have been confiscated." In 2015, he was told that he would be locked into an isolation cell for 23 hours a day; the decision was reversed in December 2015, weeks after the visit by the Parliamentary Ombudsman. Breivik said: "Dark film on all the windows has prevented natural light, and it is not possible to see anything outside during large parts of the winter months of the year." Breivik testified about how the authorities prevent him from buying postage stamps, and how Skien Prison has confiscated envelopes [where the stamps are] worth several thousand Norwegian kroner. Breivik told about having to wait a long time after having asked for [the prison officers to present his] toothbrush, or asked [the prison officers] about turning off the TV switch; "This low-level terrorising continued for two years until" his transfer to Skien [prison]. Breivik testified that he had to drink cold coffee because he was not permitted to have a thermos; Breivik has also complained about announcements over the PA system at Ila, including that each message was repeated such as Now it's time for outdoors recreation, it's time for outdoors recreation; the PA system was eventually switched off in Breivik's section [at the prison]. Breivik says that he had not been permitted to publish his correct mailing address. Breivik said: "It is important that Oslo District Court says what types of addressees [pertaining to the postal system] are permissible." He added that media [outlets] that he has access to are Aftenposten, Dagen, TA and Varden, and broadcast Teletext on several channels; he would read other newspapers if he had such access, "Klassekampen is perhaps even more interesting than Aftenposten." Breivik testified that after two years in isolation he has started to love the reality television program Paradise Hotel, which he says is evidence that he has become seriously brain damaged. Breivik said that "Isolation is the most effective way to radicalise people because one never gets corrected by others." Randi Rosenqvist, a psychiatrist at Ila Prison, was cross-examined by Storrvik. Storrvik asked if she had suggested visits without a glass wall; Rosenqvist replied: "Yes I have discussed this. I have been thinking that visits without a glass wall could be something [to consider]. I don't think that with his image, he would be violent to someone he has [some sort of] a [working-] relationship to." Storrvik read out loud recommendations by Rosenqvist, including "Retired police officers could, for example, come [to socialise with Breivik], drink coffee, play games". Later, Storrvik introduced a report from the "prevention section" at the office of the Parliamentary Ombudsman, dated 11 November 2015, regarding a series of visits that year by the ombudsman; the report said that Breivik was being held at a section where sometimes there was only one prisoner. Storrvik read from the report that "The limitations on visits at the time of the inspection [by the Parliamentary Ombudsman] seemed quite strict". He said that in that section of the prison, it should expand the planned fellowship or community between prisoners and employees and consider other measures to minimise the risk of isolation damage. At that section the prison should evaluate alternative possibilities for recreation in fresh air, in addition to the concrete exercise yard. The report recommended that the prison should discontinue the visual surveillance of health-related conversations that occur with a glass wall between prisoner and health personnel. The second witness was Knut Bjarkeid, Chief Warden at Ila Prison. Storrvik confronted Bjarkeid with a document regarding prison Section G being turned in part into a "particularly high security department". He read: "There are obvious limits to how long he can be in Section G"; the document was written by Bjarkeid. Storrvik said: "The words are here, obviously there are limits to how long he shall be isolated. This was in 2012. He is still in total isolation". After Bjarkeid left the witness stand, the government's chief lawyer in the trial, Marius Emberland read out loud from a letter that Breivik had written, dated 29 September 2013; in the letter Breivik reported several persons to the police; the Asker and Bærum Police District investigated and later dropped the investigation; Breivik's letter detailed the number of strip searches, "grip manoeuvres", and handcuffings he had undergone. The next witness was Bjørn Draugedalen, a general practitioner working one day per week at Skien Prison. His first consultation with Breivik was held in a recreation room in a high-security unit. Draugedalen shook hands with Breivik, with five prison officers present; all the later consultations (until the trial) were held with a glass wall separating them. Storrvik asked: "This change, when another prisoner arrived [and started to live in the same prison section], which resulted in Breivik's movement being restricted—did you consider to go up there to view [his living conditions or] how things were?" Draugedalen answered: "We have to deal with changes done by the Corrections Services". The judge interjected, and she said that the Correction Services likely would listen to health care workers. Draugedalen replied that "We did not see any extra value then, regarding visiting him in the [prison] section". Draugedalen said that he has not been notified that Breivik has discontinued his university studies. The fourth witness was a doctor for prisoners at Ila Prison. Storrvik read from Breivik's medical record dated 5 February 2013 that Breivik intended to recreate less in fresh air because of the strip searches that follow. Storrvik asked: "The fact that he goes outside less, to avoid being strip searched, was that discussed as a problem?" The physician answered: "No, that was not discussed [among the health care workers or] in the health section". Later, the judge referred to nightly inspections every half hour, and the physician answered that he could not remember. Tore Stenshagen, a corrections officer (and section leader) at Skien Prison, testified that sometimes he sat down [in Breivik's cell] and talked with Breivik, and that they were accompanied by only one prison officer. Summing up the case for Breivik, Storrvik said: "For some reason, in Norway it has been established that in a female prison, a male prison officer cannot strip search a prisoner, but in a male prison it is ok that females are present. This is offensive—I do not see any alternatives". He then talked about the case of strip searches of prisoner Piechowicz in Poland. In that case, the court was not convinced by the Polish government's arguments that the systematic, humiliating, daily searches were necessary to secure the prison. He continued: "He was also awoken at night, but he had 147 visits that compensated", and Piechowicz's isolation lasted for a shorter period; Storrvik said: "Note that one calls it isolation, even though he had one cellmate". Storrvik said that "the verdict [of] Piechowicz vs. Poland point to a breach of ECHR in our case". Storrvik said: "In my opinion there is not a complete concurrence between risk analyses and measures in our case. Risk analyses have at an early stage come with suggestions for measures [and these have not been followed up] (...) For example, removing the glass wall during visits and the possibility of introducing fellow prisoner, has been discussed at such an early stage that there should be a good reason for why Rosenqvist's advice has not been followed". Storrvik said: "The main problem for the government in this case is that the discrepancies between well-founded—in the context of security—suggestions from one of those who knows this case the best has not been followed". Storrvik compared Breivik's position as a Catch-22 situation: if Breivik says that he has psychiatric problems, then he has picked them out of a book; if he says that he does not have psychiatric problems, then he does not have psychiatric problems. Storrvik said that there had been no inspections by agencies tasked with oversight, as far as he knew, until the Parliamentary Ombudsman came. Breivik's lawyer referred to visual or manual body cavity searches; he disagreed with Emberland's view that there was a difference regarding anal inspection as referred to in ECHR verdicts in other cases, and the squats that Breivik must perform while naked; Storrvik's opinion is that Ila lacks specific reasons for all the inspections. Mestad said: "The government's primary task is to protect its citizens. To let a convicted terrorist establish a network, is dangerous". Storrvik said Breivik's previous verdict "indicates a mental vulnerability. If that is not enough, Breivik appears—by my standards—confused in court". Storrvik added that "mental vulnerability is a very, very weak expression". Emberland said that "Storrvik is quoting from the dissenting opinions from verdicts of the ECHR"—at least as much as he is quoting the majority opinions of the verdicts. Breivik's testimony about his ideology was described as incoherent. In Dagbladet, research advisor and psychologist Aina Sundt Gullhaugen said about prison superintendent Bjarkeid's opinion that Breivik was not one of the prisoners at Ila suffering from isolation: And surely it is an ugly sight when humans in the basement at Ila [Prison] smear feces on the walls and no longer are oriented about themselves, time or place. But those who think that Breivik is not suffering have made themselves unavailable for the documented pain that Anders partook in [during childhood] ... The problem is that Breivik ... expresses his affliction in a manner that does not get captured particularly well by diagnostics manuals. The type of fundamental relational and emotional deficiencies that Breivik was allowed to develop, usually results in that person ending up speaking a language that others do not recognise. In Aftenposten, Ulrik Fredrik Malt said that "the mass murderer is mentally quite ill, and that's being undercommunicated". On 20 April 2016, District Court Judge Helen Andenæs Sekulic gave her verdict. The verdict said that the conditions of his imprisonment breached Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights, but that Article 8 of the Convention had not been violated—confiscation of letters had been justified. The government was also ordered to pay Norwegian kroner 330,937.5 ($40,373) for the plaintiff's legal expenses incurred by the court case. Breivik could not receive the money, but his lawyer could upon the verdict being upheld. Breivik was not in any courtroom when he received the verdict; his copy of the verdict was faxed to the prison. On 21 April 2016, news media said that Ole Kristoffer Borhaug, chief warden at Skien Prison, said that the prison regimen for Breivik would not be lightened, in part because the verdict has not been officially upheld, and there are regulations preventing high security prisoners from interacting with prisoners of other categories. Two former convicts opined: Kjell Alrich Schumann said that the verdict is most importantly about the principles regarding the application of isolation in Norwegian prisons. He said: "The decisions are evaluated by an entity at the Correctional Service every six months, and they can use any kinds of arguments. There is no oversight"; Sven-Eirik Utsi said that "isolation [is something that the prison system of] Norway has been criticised about for several decades [by the ECtHR]". The government's chief lawyer in the trial, Marius Emberland, had voiced his opinion about the verdict before the appeal; his opinion was criticized by the leader of the Norwegian Judges' Association, Ingjerd Thune: "I clearly understand that many react. I have never heard a lawyer speak in that manner—ever. That was surprising"; lawyer Frode Sulland said that one gets the impression that Office of the Attorney General "does not respect the justice system, and they still think that they are right, even when the court thinks they are wrong"; Emberland eventually recognised that some of his verbal comments can be interpreted as arrogant, adding that "they really were not meant that way". Legal scholar Mads Andenæs, said that "The appeal has no bearing on the responsibility of the government to evaluate and make the changes that the verdict of Oslo District Court imposes on the government. This results directly from Norwegian Law and practices of ECtHR". In August, media said that Storrvik claims that the judge [scheduled to rule in the trial] is partial; the judge was recused. The appeal was heard in Borgarting Court of Appeal (convening within the prison), in January 2017; Breivik came to court without handcuffs. Storrvik made comparisons with verdicts at European Court of Human Rights, including the case of the leader of Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) (Abdullah Öcalan). The verdict, stated that solitary confinement did not violate Breivik's rights, and all recommendations were voided. In 2017, Norway's Supreme Court decided not to hear the case. In January 2022, a three-day trial started at Telemark District Court – in a makeshift courtroom in Skien Prison – to decide whether to reverse or uphold the District Attorney's refusal of parole. The indictment states that the prosecuting authority does not consent to parole because "preventive detention is deemed necessary to protect society". At the start of the trial, Breivik gave several Nazi salutes, to both the judge and the members of the public in the courtroom. Breivik testified that he is still a Nazi and will continue to work for White Power, but no longer wants to pursue it through violence. He says that he is trying to register a Nazi political party; he apparently is aspiring to be a candidate running for parliamentary election in Norway. Breivik's lawyer said that he wanted Breivik to serve his prison sentence together with one or more inmates; furthermore if that were to happen, then it would have to be with Philip Manshaus – because they would not injure each other. On day two, Pär Öberg [sv], a Swedish local politician belonging to the Nordic Resistance Movement, testified. The next witness was a psychiatrist, Randi Rosenqvist, who retired in 2020. She said that she had met with Breivik as late as May and June 2017. The court permitted that Breivik could interject a comment regarding the testimonies; Breivik said that Rosenqvist is not an expert on extremism. Breivik added that Rosenqvist said that he uses "a lot of time" on politics, however, Breivik commented that he used nearly all of his time on business plans and his studies. The next witness was Emily Krokann – an advisor at the prison. She testified about a document that she did not write – about the prison's view that Breivik should not be paroled. Furthermore, she said that "repeatedly letters have been stopped, that were to persons he had no contact with before the acts of terrorism". Furthermore, she said that "letters to public figures have been stopped, because supporters might become inspired by the letters". She also said that Breivik used anti-depressants and when she was asked by Breivik's lawyer, if she could give an example of one person who Breivik had two-way communication with, through postal letters; she said "No". The next witness was Espen Jambak, an assistant warden. He said that Breivik had permission to write letters to people he knew "before [the acts of terrorism]". He said that he agreed that there was little "progresjon". Progresjon entails that the prisoner is given the possibility of gradually transferring to lower security conditions, up to and including serving the sentence as a parolee. Rehabilitation can be aided by giving room for "progresjon". On day three, Storrvik said that "it is a paradox that if a [prisoner] is treated so badly [by the government while] in prison that he never gets better, then he will never be released". He said that someone can do horrible things, without later, as an ex-con or parolee, trying to repeat it. "There is a goal that all punishment in Norway should have progresjon", Storrvik said during closing arguments, according to Anders Giæver. Breivik had not had physical contact with anyone except correction officers for the previous nine years, with his lawyer adding "that might be against regulations". NRK's crime journalist, Olav Rønneberg, said that: "In other words, the opinion of Breivik's lawyer is that if there is no facilitation for improvements, then the regulations will be violated by the government to a degree where the courts will be forced to let him out sometime in the future". The verdict was handed down on 1 February. The verdict said that Breivik appeared to be "obviously mentally disturbed, and with a mind that is difficult for other people to penetrate". Some psychiatrists watched media broadcasts from the trial and they claimed that Breivik appeared to be mentally ill. Tor Ketil Larsen, a professor of Psychiatry at the University of Bergen, claimed that Breivik appeared to be psychotic and delusional, and that medical treatment should be attempted with antipsychotics. Fred Heggen, a psychiatrist and chief physician at Gaustad Hospital, said that Breivik clearly displayed psychotic behavior and a psychotic way of thinking, and that Breivik "has a lack of reality that is pervasive, and it is dramatic". Psychologist Pål Grøndahl stated that Breivik's personality was so fragmented, that he moved, psychologically speaking, at the edge of the states between various psychotic and personality disorders. Grøndahl went on to say that "[when Breivik] throws forward odd ideas like that he was brainwashed in 2011, radicalised by descendents of German SS soldiers, and ordered by a right-wing 'collective' to re-establish the Third Reich, he sounds like a person that has a lacking sense of reality", and that "it is not difficult to notice statements from Breivik that are characteristic of psychosis." Randi Rosenqvist, one of Norway's leading forensic psychiatrists and a [then-retired] psychiatrist for the Correctional Service, disagreed with comments that Breivik was psychotic, because although she thought Breivik's thoughts were "crazy" they were "completely down to earth", and that she believed he had autism. Rosenqvist stated in Aftenposten, she found he mostly functioned in a clearly non-psychotic manner. Tor Langback, a lawyer, said that Breivik seems more insane now than during the criminal trial in 2012, and that Breivik's prison conditions were not exactly aiding the improvement of his mental health. In 2021, Aage Storm Borchgrevink, a Norwegian author and literary critic, critiqued the press saying that "even after 77 burials ... the Norwegian press does not want to tell about the child abuse and psychiatric illness in Breivik's family". On 8 January 2024, the court convened inside his prison. The lawsuit against the government, is in regard to how the lacking contact with people is doing something to Breivik's mental health. Breivik's lawyer said in court that Breivik has contact with two other inmates, through "controlled fellowship" for one hour every other week. At those times, several corrections officers are seated between these prisoners. Breivik also got a visit (in prison) from a Red Cross dog and its handler, "a while ago"; the dog was Breivik's only visitor in 12 years that has been allowed behind the bars in the room for visitation. As part of its communication control of Breivik, he receives [some of the] letters from people outside the prison, but he is not permitted to reply. The prison has also stopped attempts at correspondence with a prisoner that Breivik got acquainted with. In regard to a report last year from PST, Breivik is being implicated in cases where Breivik has had no contact with the involved persons, according to Breivik's lawyer. On day two, the prosecution's [main] lawyer [talked about] the two latest risk evaluations (regarding Breivik), and those conclude that Breivik is still a great risk. Breivik started his testimony on day two, by replying to questions from Breivik's lawyer; Breivik talks about the letters he receives; Breivik claims that the letters are not political, and he has received 2000 letters from people that want to become friends with Breivik; Another media outlet quoted Breivik: "There are 4000 that are awaiting my reply, but I am not allowed to send letters to anyone that I did not have contact with before 2011. Many years have passed since I had any meaningful relationships"; Furthermore, he said that "The only people that want to be friends with me, are rather conservative, but that does not mean that they are Nazis". Breivik [started contradiction toward] what the prosecution said earlier (in the trial), and Breivik's lawyer interrupted and said: "Talk about the conditions under which you are serving your sentence. [Any other subject or] anything else would be to break through all limits"; Breivik said that he first and foremost wishes a pen pal; "That is what I have strived for, during the past 12 years. I have not had a meaningful pen-pal since 2012"; Breivik also suggested several ways that he could have contact with [a person or] people: Tinder is one suggestion, and Breivik is open for [his] idea that he would not need to use his (real) name (on Tinder); Breivik talked about his wish for an animal in his cell: he had [asked or] petitioned for a dog or a goat or a miniature pig; Breivik received three birds – common parakeets (and they stay in the hallway outside his prison cell); Breivik said that "The birds were a signal to me, that I shall never [have or] receive meaningful relations - this is what you [will be getting – or] get"; Breivik said that the birds are better than nothing, but he [would rather have, or] wishes for a mammal. Breivik testified that he is using antidepressants [medication] and that he is struggling with thoughts about taking his own life; with a voice that was [choked up or] choked (gråtkvalt) while crying, he talked about a life that was difficult to live. Another media outlet said that Breivik's lawyer said earlier [in the trial] that Breivik has lost his [appetite or desire] to live; when Breivik testified about that, Breivik cried; He touched his face and said that he is a human being, despite what he has done. Breivik said that "There are many pleasant people that work [... at his prison], but in the end it is not enough to be offered to" play cards. On several occasions, Breivik's lawyer [had to, or] must interrupt Breivik, and ask Breivik to answer the questions (that the lawyer is asking). One of the prosecuting attorneys asked how Breivik views [Breivik's attack in 2011, or] "July 22"; Breivik replied that "I was radicalised over two years. I am very sorry about [my actions, or] the actions. If this is my future, then I am willing to give up politics. But [the authorities or] you say that it makes no difference, no matter what"; Breivik replied to other questions from one of the prosecuting attorneys: Breivik still has [views or] opinions that are Right Extreme. A recent report by PST (that remained classified until the first day of trial), was referred to in court; In the report, Breivik is characterised as a saint in international circles of the Extreme Right; Breivik said that "PST is not saying that I am still dangerous, but they are saying that I have an inspirational effect. They are not accusing me anymore of having terrorist intentions any longer. Of course I am dangerous, but it is not I that is dangerous, [but rather] it is the character about me that is being cultivated by the Extreme Right". Another news outlet said that Breivik agrees that he is still dangerous, but in his opinion that is something that he [can not do anything about, or he] "does not get anything done about that", according to media; Media said that "Breivik's prison officers – daily [log or] write a log about what Breivik has done and said"; [Prosecutor] Kristoffer Nerland said the government's view is that much of what Breivik's lawyer said (on the previous day), is in the ballpark (omtrentlig) or inaccurate. They think that the conditions under which Breivik is serving his sentence is much better than what was said in court. Breivik's lawyer disagrees, and said that "[The prosecutor or] the government is not listening. They are saying that we have launched a lawsuit so that Breivik will get to meet other inmates [who have killed or] are killing – that is not true. Listen [closer] before you say that I am speaking [untruths or] untrue", Breivik's lawyer said to [prosecutor] Nerland. Breivik's lawyer accused the prosecutor for [not being attentive or] doing other things, while Breivik's lawyer was presenting the case (during the previous day), and Breivik's lawyer said to the prosecutor: "Can you [please] stop. You are ridiculing my lawsuit, also you have not been listening for what this lawsuit is actually about. These are [complicated or] difficult matters"; In the recess, his lawyer said that he (the lawyer) does not get to view all the documents of the case, but the government has access to all the documents. Other things that Breivik said on the stand: He replied to the judge, when asked about his occupation, that he is CEO of a political party called Nordic State. He claims that he no longer is militant, and he would not have done [the terrorist attacks or] the same today. Breivik's lawyer showed the court, copies of two letters that the lawyer called private, and which (in the lawyer's opinion) should not have been confiscated by the prison authorities. One of the prosecuting attorneys did not want to say how many [of Breivik's] letters that the prison has confiscated. Analysis of Breivik's testimony: Breivik appears different in this trial compared to the previous ones, according to Olav Rønneberg (crime commentator at NRK); furthermore, gone are the propaganda and the Right Wing salutes. Other reactions to Breivik's testimony: Breivik's lawyer said about that people who have had much contact with Breivik have not experienced him (as) depressed or suicidal: Breivik has expressed to the lawyer that Breivik "has problems finding the meaning with [life or] living on. He also [wishes or] wished to appear as a strong person that does not wish to show weakness"; Furthermore, "I know that his reactions are real. They are nothing but real. He has been medicated against depression consistently (konsekvent) [during] the last years".Martine Aurdal reported that Breivik has "no credibility as a repenting sinner. But that is not the core [of the 2024 trial, or] this case"; furthermore, she reported that this trial is different, and that in the other trials Breivik was "spreading his propaganda, through right-wing salutes, symbols and messages". Other information regarding Breivik (and surfacing during the trial): In one meeting with a prisoner [from another prison section], Breivik fried waffles and discussed World War II; that other prisoner was later released. Day 3 of the trial: The chief of Ringerike Prison testified that the prison is steering toward easing the [security measures or] security around Breivik, and transferring him to [the prison's main prison population, or transferring him to] ordinary lukket avdeling; furthermore, there is no schedule in regard to when that might happen. An inspector at the prison testified that Breivik appears as a [leader-like figure, or] lederperson. The prison guard in charge of the SHS section at the prison, said that [the prison guards, or] "the employees" and Breivik always have dinner together. Furthermore, they have breakfast together [ during the workweek or] on normal days. Furthermore, "Breivik says that he experiences the employees as family", according to that section leader. Breivik stopped seeing the prison visitor in Q1 2023, and that person testified. (On the third day of trial, media revealed his name.) The prison visitor testified that Breivik and he met about 400 times and that the conversations lasted around 700 hours; he referred to Breivik as Anders; Earlier in the trial, Breivik said that it appeared that the visitor had a list of words that he could use to provoke Breivik with, including words such as child-killer; the witness, who is in his fifties, rejected Breivik's [suspicion/idea about a list]. Day 4: a psychiatrist testified that she has counseled Breivik at the prison, 21 times and most of those since late-summer 2023; she is a chief physician of a department at an [outpatient] public psychiatric clinic. A psychologist testified later. Closing arguments: Breivik's [main] lawyer said that [prisoners] have the right to create [new, personal] relationships, [... in addition to having the possibility for] keeping personal relationships. Breivik's [secondary] lawyer referred to the cases regarding two Italian mafia bosses that got lifetime sentences; furthermore, the first one was under a strict regime of isolation, yet he still was in a [prison section, or] fellowship consisting of a couple of other prisoners, and he got family visits. [The first] one is Francesco Madonia (d. 2007). Furthermore, the other one, also got phone calls with his family, and he got out of isolation after 12 years; She added that Breivik had to wait for nine years, before he was even allowed to see another prisoner; furthermore, trial testimony [in 2024] has shown that there is no indication of an increase in fellowship [with other prisoners] in the near future. Breivik's [main] lawyer said that Breivik can not do anything about the [alleged] symbolic power [of Breivik] that one of the [two] recent PST-reports, paints; furthermore, if the report were to lead the way in regard to Breivik's future, then [his current prison conditions, or] this will last into eternity. Furthermore, when there has been no signs [in prison] of violence or hostage taking, then the [authorities] should ease-up on things like bars [in the visitation room] and stab-proof vests [for the prison officers, that are not working in the main prison population]. Breivik wishes to exchange letters with people outside prison, including people that he had met in prison [but have later been released]; furthermore, Breivik's [main] lawyer mentioned [the confiscated letter, or] the letter that Breivik wanted to send to a former inmate (who was transferred to another prison); furthermore, the lawyer said that it is a letter between two people that [have or] had a personal relationship, and the letter is entirely without ideology or politics. In regard [to a pet], Breivik wants an animal with fur [but that was rejected by authorities as of 2023, and he only received access to parakeets]. Prosecuting attorney said that in the case of Salvatore Enea (from 2009), the verdict found no violation of paragraph 3 of ECHR. Breivik's lawyer said in the final rebuttal, that [a police report was made about Breivik, or he] was reported "for threats against prison guards and prison administrators" during a period last year; furthermore during that period Breivik had a pause in regard to his being medicated with fluoxetine the active ingredient of Prozac; the lawyer added that "I perceive that he broke down. He was in deep despair"; the lawyer added that he (the lawyer) feels that Breivik was treated in an inhumane manner, in that period. Olav Rønneberg, commentator at NRK, referred to "a headache for the [... authorities]. For how long can one hold" Breivik "almost completely [sic] isolated from contact with other prisoners?"; furthermore, Breivik "and his lawyers" think that Breivik is developing [illness or] damages due to the conditions under which he is serving his prison sentence; furthermore, Breivik and [his legal team] have some support in previous verdicts [regarding the earlier lawsuits with the same topic as the current lawsuit] - even though Breivik's previous lawsuit was rejected in the supreme court and in the human rights court in Strasbourg, both those courts made annotations; furthermore, the section (that deals with appeals, ankeutvalget) at the supreme court, wrote in its verdict that six years of isolation from other prisoners, is [an extremely long time or] "extremely long", while from Strasbourg the annotation said that one can not isolate (a prisoner from other prisoners) for ever; furthermore, now Breivik has been in isolation for over twice as long (as the six years of isolation, which was the subject of the first lawsuit). The view of Breivik's lawyer is, according to media, that the Norwegian government is violating Breivik's human rights in regard to prohibitions against torture and inhumane treatment, and for having violated Breivik's rights in regard to personal life and family life. The trial ended on 12 January 2024. On 15 February, it was determined his human rights were not being violated and he will still be kept under isolation. Breivik is receiving pro bono legal aid [as of 2024] from the law firm of Øystein Storrvik – his lawyer since 2014. Previously the firm of Geir Lippestad did pro bono representation of Breivik after the 2012 trial. Legal aid during criminal trials has been paid by the government, as is the norm in the country. On 23 March 2013, Breivik's mother died from complications from cancer. On the same day media said that mother and son "took farewell during a meeting at Ila last week. Breivik was permitted to move himself out from behind the glass wall of the visit room—to give his mother a farewell hug". Breivik asked prison officials for permission to attend his mother's funeral service; permission was denied. Janne Kristiansen, then Chief of the Norwegian Police Security Service (PST), said Breivik "deliberately desisted from violent exhortations on the net [and] has more or less been a moderate, and has neither been part of any extremist network." He is reported to have written many posts on the Islam-critical website document.no. He also attended a meeting of "Documents venner" (Friends of Document), affiliated with the website, in late 2009, and reportedly sought to start a Norwegian version of the Tea Party movement in cooperation with the owners of document.no. After expressing initial interest, they turned down his proposal because he did not have the contacts he promised. Due to the media attention on his Internet activity following the 2011 attacks, document.no compiled a complete list of comments made by Breivik on its website between September 2009 and June 2010. Breivik was also very active writing on the neo-Nazi websites Stormfront—with several thousand posts— and nordisk.nu, as well as mainstream newspapers such as Verdens Gang and Aftenposten. Six hours before the attacks, Breivik posted a picture of himself as a Knight Templar officer in a uniform festooned with a gold aiguillette and multiple medals he had not been awarded. In the video, he included an animation depicting Islam as a Trojan horse in Europe. The video, which promotes fighting against Islam, shows Breivik wearing a wetsuit and holding a semi-automatic weapon. Breivik prepared a document titled 2083: A European Declaration of Independence. It runs to 1,518 pages and is credited to "Andrew Berwick" (an Anglicization of Breivik's name). Breivik admitted in court that it was mostly other people's writings he had copied and pasted from different websites. The file was e-mailed to 1,003 addresses about 90 minutes before the bomb blast in Oslo. The document describes two years of preparation of unspecified attacks, supposedly planned for late-2011, involving a rented Volkswagen Crafter van (small enough not to require a truck driving licence) loaded with 1,160 kilograms (2,560 lb) of ammonium nitrate/fuel oil explosive (ANFO), a Ruger Mini-14 semi-automatic rifle, a Glock 34 pistol, personal armour including a shield, caltrops, and police insignias. It reported Breivik spent thousands of hours gathering email addresses from Facebook for distribution of the document, and that he rented a farm as a cover for a fake farming company buying fertilizer (3 tons for producing explosives and 3 tons of a harmless kind to avoid suspicion) and as a lab. It describes burying a crate with the armour in the woods in July 2010, collecting it on 4 July 2011, and abandoning his plan to replace it with survival gear because he did not have a second pistol. It also expresses support for far-right groups such as the English Defence League and paramilitaries such as the Scorpions in Serbia. The introductory chapter of the manifesto asserts that political correctness is responsible for social rot. He blames the Frankfurt School for the promulgation of political correctness, which he identifies with "cultural Marxism". Parts of these sections are plagiarized from Political Correctness: A Short History of an Ideology by Paul Weyrich's Free Congress Foundation. Major parts of the compendium are attributed to the pseudonymous Norwegian blogger Fjordman, while Serbian writer, Srđa Trifković, is quoted in a number of places. The text also copies sections of the Unabomber manifesto, without giving credit, while replacing the words "leftists" with "cultural Marxists" and "black people" with "muslims". The New York Times described American influences in the writings, observing that the compendium mentions the anti-Islamist American Robert Spencer 64 times and cites Spencer's works at great length. The work of Bat Ye'or is frequently cited. Conservative blogger Pamela Geller is also mentioned as a source of inspiration. Breivik blames feminism for allowing the erosion of the fabric of European society and advocates a restoration of patriarchy which he claims would save European culture. India, and in particular Hindu nationalism, figures repeatedly in the manifesto where he expresses praise and admiration for Hindu nationalist groups. He claimed to have attempted to reach out to Indians through email & Facebook. In his writings Breivik also states that he wants to see European policies on multiculturalism and immigration more similar to those of Japan, South Korea and Taiwan which he said are "not far from cultural conservatism and nationalism at its best". He expressed his admiration for the "monoculturalism" of Japan and for Japan and South Korea's refusal to accept refugees. The Jerusalem Post describes his support for Israel as a "far-right Zionism". He calls all "nationalists" to join in the struggle against "cultural Marxists/multiculturalists". He also expressed his admiration of the Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin, finding him "a fair and resolute leader worthy of respect", though he was "unsure at this point whether he has the potential to be our best friend or our worst enemy." Putin's spokesman Dmitry Peskov has denounced Breivik's actions as the "delirium of a madman". Benjamin R. Teitelbaum, former professor of Nordic Studies (current professor of musicology) at University of Colorado, argues that several parts of the manifesto suggest that Breivik was concerned about race, not only about Western culture or Christianity, labelling him as a white nationalist. Thomas Hegghammer of the Norwegian Defence Research Establishment described the ideologies of Breivik as "not fitting the established categories of right-wing ideology, like white supremacism, ultranationalism or Christian fundamentalism", but more akin to macro-nationalism and a "new doctrine of civilisational war". Norwegian social scientist Lars Gule characterised Breivik as a "national conservative, not a Nazi". Pepe Egger of the think-tank Exclusive Analysis says "the bizarre thing is that his ideas, as Islamophobic as they are, are almost mainstream in many European countries". In one section of the manifesto titled "Battlefield Wikipedia", Breivik explained the importance of using Wikipedia as a venue for disseminating views and information to the general public, although the Norwegian professor Arnulf Hagen claims that this was a document that he had copied from another author and that Breivik was unlikely to be a contributor to Wikipedia. According to the leader of the Norwegian chapter of the Wikimedia Foundation an account belonging to Breivik has been identified. On the second day of his trial, Breivik cited Wikipedia as the main source for his worldview. Breivik's manifesto 2083: A European Declaration of Independence circulated in online fascist forums where strategies were set and tactics debated. In an essay called "Right-wing terrorism as folk activism," neoreactionary blogger Curtis Yarvin wrote about Breivik's actions, "No one who condones Che, Stalin, Mao, or any other leftist murderer, has any right to ask anyone else to dissociate himself from a rightist who didn't even make triple digits." Australian terrorist Brenton Harrison Tarrant, who killed 51 people (all Muslims) and injured 50 more during the Christchurch mosque shootings at Al Noor Mosque and Linwood Islamic Centre in Christchurch, New Zealand, mentioned Breivik in his manifesto The Great Replacement as one of the far-right mass murderers and killers he supports. Tarrant said he "only really took true inspiration from Knight Justiciar Breivik" even going as far as to claim "brief contact" with him and his organization Knights' Templar. With the exception of the Christchurch shootings, Breivik's influence on the tactics of far-right terrorists appears to be rather limited. Breivik had been active on several anti-Islamic and nationalist blogs, including document.no, and was a regular reader of Gates of Vienna, the Brussels Journal and Jihad Watch. He cited Jihad Watch 162 times in his 2011 manifesto, and cited Daniel Pipes and the Middle East Forum a further 18 times. Breivik frequently praised the writings of blogger Fjordman. He used Fjordman's thinking to justify his actions, citing him 111 times in the manifesto. In 2016, however, Breivik stated that he had in reality been a "national socialist", or Nazi, since age twelve, read Adolf Hitler's Mein Kampf at age fourteen, and that he had in later years only disguised himself as a counter-jihadist. In 2022 he blamed the neo-Nazi organisation Blood & Honour for having radicalised him to the use of violence, and that this group carried the main responsibility for the terror attacks. After studying several militant groups, including the IRA, ETA and others, Breivik suggests far-right militants should adopt al-Qaeda's methods, learn from their success, and avoid their mistakes. Breivik described al-Qaeda as the "most successful revolutionary force in the world" and praised their "cult of martyrdom". He stated that the European Union is a project to create "Eurabia" and describes the 1999 NATO bombing of Yugoslavia as being authorised by "criminal western European and American leaders". In his writings, Breivik stated that "the Battle of Vienna in 1683 should be celebrated as the Independence Day for all Western Europeans as it was the beginning of the end for the second Islamic wave of Jihads". The manifesto urges the Hindu nationalists to drive Muslims out of India. It demands the forced deportation of all Muslims from Europe, based on the model of the Beneš decrees. In a letter Breivik sent to international media in 2014, he stated that he had exploited "counterjihadist" rhetoric as a means to protect "ethno-nationalists" and instead start a media hunt against "anti-nationalist counterjihadist"-supporters, in a strategy he calls "double psychology". Breivik further stated that he strives for a "pure Nordic ideal", advocating the establishment of a similar party in Norway to the neo-Nazi Party of the Swedes, and identifying himself as a part of "Western Europe's fascist movement". Moreover, he stated that his "support" for Israel is limited for it to function as a place to deport "disloyal Jews". During the trial in 2012, Breivik listed as his influences a number of neo-Nazi activists, as well as perpetrators of attacks against immigrants and leftists, considering them "heroes". In 2019, he claimed to have converted to democratic right-wing populism. This has later been disputed since he still identifies as a "national socialist" and is possibly "more radical" than before with advocacy for white separatism. On 17 April 2012, when asked by Lawyer Siv Hallgren if he is religious, Breivik answered in the affirmative. Later, during the same conversation, he states "I am Christian. I believe in God, but I am a bit religious, but not especially religious." Breivik has later described his religious faith as being Odinism, a neopagan belief. While Breivik was frequently described in the media as a "Christian fundamentalist", such assertions were disputed in a number of sources, and Breivik has later denied it, stating in letters to Norwegian newspaper Dagen that he "is not, and has never been a Christian", and that he thinks there are few things in the world more "pathetic" than "the Jesus-figure and his message". He said he prays and sacrifices to Odin, and identifies his religion as Odinism. Following his arrest, Breivik was characterised by analysts as being a right-wing extremist with anti-Muslim views and a deep-seated hatred of Islam, who considered himself a knight dedicated to stemming the tide of Muslim immigration into Europe. At the same time, Breivik said both during his trial and in his manifesto to have been inspired by jihadist groups, and stated his willingness to work together with groups like Al-Qaeda and Al-Shabaab in order to conduct attacks with weapons of mass destruction against Western targets. Breivik was an active member of an Oslo shooting club between 2005 and 2007, and from 2010. According to the club, which banned him for life after the attacks, Breivik took part in thirteen organized training sessions and one competition since June 2010. The club states that it does not evaluate the members' suitability regarding possession of weapons. At the time of the attacks, Breivik was a member of the Lodge of St. Olaf at the Three Columns in Oslo and had displayed photographs of himself in partial Masonic regalia on his Facebook profile. In interviews after the attacks, his lodge said it had only minimal contact with him, and that when made aware of Breivik's membership, Grand Master of the Norwegian Order of Freemasons, Ivar Skaar, issued an edict immediately excluding him from the fraternity based upon the acts he carried out and the values that appear to have motivated them. According to the Lodge records, Breivik took part in a total of four meetings between his initiation in February 2007 and his exclusion from the order (one each to receive the first, second, and third degrees, and one other meeting) and held no offices or functions within the Lodge. Skaar said that although Breivik was a member of the Order, his actions showed that he was in no way a Mason. Breivik became a member of the Progress Party (FrP) in 1999. He paid his membership dues for the last time in 2004, and was removed from the membership lists in 2006. During his time in the Progress Party, he held two positions in the Progress Party's youth organisation FpU: he was the chair of the local Vest Oslo branch from January to October 2002, and a member of the board of the same branch from October 2002 until November 2004. After the attack, the Progress Party immediately distanced itself from Breivik's actions and ideas. At a 2013 press conference, Ketil Solvik-Olsen said that Breivik "left us [the party] because we were too liberal". Breivik claimed he had contact with the far-right English Defence League (EDL), a movement in the United Kingdom that has been accused of Islamophobia. He allegedly had extensive links with senior EDL members and wrote that he attended an EDL demonstration in Bradford. On 26 July 2011, EDL leader Tommy Robinson denounced Breivik and his attacks and has denied any official links with him. On 31 July 2011, Interpol asked Maltese police to investigate Paul Ray, a former EDL member who blogs under the name "Lionheart". Ray conceded that he may have been an inspiration for Breivik, but deplored his actions. In an online discussion on the Norwegian website Document.no on 6 December 2009, Breivik proposed establishing a Norwegian version of the EDL. Breivik saw this as the only way to stop left-wing radical groups like Blitz and SOS Rasisme from "harassing" Norwegian cultural conservatives. Following the establishment of the European Defence League, the Norwegian Defence League (NDL) launched in 2010. Breivik indeed became a member of this organization under the pseudonym "Sigurd Jorsalfar". Former head of the NDL, Lena Andreassen, claimed that Breivik was ejected from the organization when she took over as leader in March 2011 because he was too extreme. In his manifesto and during interrogation, Breivik claimed membership in an "international Christian military order", which he called the new Pauperes commilitones Christi Templique Solomonici (PCCTS, Knights Templar). According to Breivik, the order was established as an "anti-Jihad crusader-organisation" that "fights" against "Islamic suppression" in London in April 2002 by nine men: two Englishmen, a Frenchman, a German, a Dutchman, a Greek, a Russian, a Norwegian (apparently Breivik), and a Serb (supposedly the initiator, not present, but represented by Breivik). The compendium gives a "2008 estimate" that there are between 15 and 80 "Justiciar Knights" in Western Europe, and an unknown number of civilian members, and Breivik expects the order to take political and military control of Western Europe. Breivik gave his own code name in the organisation as Sigurd and that of his assigned "mentor" as Richard, after the twelfth-century crusaders and kings Sigurd Jorsalfar of Norway and Richard the Lionheart of England. He called himself a one-man cell of this organisation, and claimed that the group has several other cells in Western countries, including two more in Norway. On 2 August 2011, Breivik offered to provide information about these cells, but on unrealistic preconditions. After an intense investigation assisted internationally by several security agencies, the Norwegian police did not find any evidence a PCCTS network existed, or that an alleged 2002 London meeting ever took place. The police concluded Breivik's claim was a figment of his imagination because of his schizophrenia diagnosis, and were confident that he had no accessories. Breivik continued to insist he belonged to an order and that his one-man cell was "activated" by another clandestine cell. On 14 August 2012, several Norwegian politicians and media outlets received an email from someone claiming to be Breivik's "deputy", demanding that Breivik be released and making more threats against Norwegian society. Law portal Norway portal Politics portal List of rampage killers (religious, political, or ethnic crimes) Counter-jihad Far-right extremism Hate crime Spree killer "Notat – Redgjørelse Stortinget" (PDF). Politiet. 10 November 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 December 2013. Retrieved 10 November 2011. "Slik var Behring Breiviks bevegelser på Utøya". Aftenposten. 16 April 2012. Archived from the original on 19 April 2012. Retrieved 16 April 2012. "En av de sårede døde på sykehuset" [One of the wounded died in hospital]. Østlendingen (in Norwegian). 24 July 2011. Retrieved 25 July 2011. "Norwegian killer Breivik changes his name". BBC News. 10 June 2017. "Breivik pronouncing his own name". Archived from the original on 29 October 2013. Retrieved 13 September 2014. "Bells toll in Norway to mark 10 years since neo-Nazi Breivik killed 77". Reuters. 22 July 2021. "Norway extremist makes Nazi salute as he seeks parole just 10 years after killing 77". Times of Israel. 19 January 2022. "Anders Breivik: Mass murderer sues Norway over prison isolation". BBC News. 9 January 2024. A neo-Nazi who killed 77 people in Norway in 2011 is suing the country in a bid to end his years in isolation. "Court rejects parole for neo-Nazi mass murderer Breivik". Deutsche Welle. 1 February 2022. "Psychiatrist says Breivik still a danger, hitting parole chances". France 24. 19 January 2022. Neo-Nazi Breivik, who killed 77 people in twin attacks, was sentenced in 2012 to 21 years in prison, which can be extended as long as he is considered a threat. "Norway's far-right mass killer Breivik sues state over prison isolation". Al Jazeera. 19 August 2023. A neo-Nazi, Breivik killed 77 people, most of them teenagers, in shootings and a bombing attack in Norway's worst peacetime atrocity in July 2011. Sources describing Breivik as neo-Nazi include: Dearden, Lizzie (20 April 2016). "Anders Breivik: Right-wing extremist who killed 77 people in Norway massacre wins part of human rights case". The Independent. London, England. Archived from the original on 20 April 2016. Retrieved 18 September 2021. Lewis, Mark; Cowell, Alan (24 August 2012). "Norway Killer Is Ruled Sane and Given 21 Years in Prison". The New York Times. Retrieved 24 August 2012. Pracon, Adrian (1 June 2012). "Utøya, a survivor's story: 'No!' I yelled. 'Don't shoot!'". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 24 August 2012. "Rettssaken – Aktoratets prosedyre" [The trial – The defense counsel's closing] (in Norwegian). Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation. 22 June 2012. Retrieved 22 June 2012. The verdict convicts Breivik for violations of the criminal code §147 (terrorism), §148 (fatal explosion), and §233 (murder). "Mass killer Anders Breivik sentencing – live text coverage". RAPSI. 24 August 2012. Retrieved 13 September 2014. "En modig dom". 24 August 2012. Retrieved 13 September 2014. Meldalen, Sindre Granly; Brustad, Line; Kristiansen, Arnhild Aass; Sandli, Hansen; Espen Frode; Krokfjord, Torgeir P. (2 April 2012). "Breivik planla tagging som militær operasjon" [Breivik planned tagging as military operation]. Dagbladet (in Norwegian). Retrieved 3 April 2012. "Father of Norway attack suspect says in shock". Reuters. 24 July 2011. Retrieved 13 September 2014. [1]. Retrieved 11 April 2021. "Oslo pistolklubb bekrefter at Anders Behring Breivik har vært medlem av klubben fra 2005 til 2007 og siden juni 2010, opplyser pistolklubben i en pressemelding." "Terrorsiktede Anders Behring Breivik tappet selskapet like før det gikk konkurs". Hegnar.no. Retrieved 27 July 2011. using a July 2011 conversion rate dead link Sujay Dutt. "Breivik lade alla besparingar på terrorattentaten" (in Swedish). DN.se. Taylor, Matthew (25 July 2011). "Norway gunman claims he had nine-year plan to finance attacks". The Guardian. London. Ben Hartman (24 July 2011). "Norway attack suspect had anti-Muslim, pro-Israel views". Retrieved 26 April 2016. Kumano-Ensby, Anne Linn (23 July 2011). "Sendte ut ideologisk bokmanus en time før bomben". NRK News (in Norwegian). Archived from the original on 9 March 2012. Retrieved 23 July 2011. Avkristina Overnight. "Var aktiv i norsk antiislamsk organisasjon – Nyheter – Innenriks". Aftenposten.no. Archived from the original on 4 January 2012. Retrieved 27 July 2011. Bjoern Amland; Sarah Dilorenzo (24 July 2011). "Lawyer: Norway suspect wanted a revolution". Yahoo! News. Associated Press. Retrieved 20 April 2012. Jones, Jane Clare (27 July 2011). "Anders Breivik's chilling anti-feminism". The Guardian. Goldberg, Michelle (24 July 2011). "Norway Killer's Hatred of Women". The Daily Beast. Buehrer, Jack (27 July 2011). "Oslo terrorist sought guns in Prague". The Prague Post. Archived from the original on 31 May 2015. McIntyre, Jody. "Anders Behring Breivik: a disturbing ideology". The Independent. London. Archived from the original on 17 January 2012. "Norway Shooting Suspect Breivik Is Ordered Into Isolation for Four Weeks". Bloomberg L.P. 25 July 2011. Retrieved 27 December 2011. Olsen, Ole N.; Andresen, David (29 November 2011). "Rettspsykiaterne beskriver bisarre vrangforestillinger hos Breivik". Verdens Gang (in Norwegian). Retrieved 30 May 2015. "Norway killer Breivik is 'not psychotic', say experts". BBC News. 4 January 2012. Retrieved 4 January 2012. "Norway's mass killer Breivik 'declared sane'". BBC News. 10 April 2012. Retrieved 10 April 2012. Lewis, Mark; Cowell, Alan (16 April 2012). "Norwegian Man Claims Self-Defense in Killings". New York Times. New York City. European Court of Human Rights, Decision 'Hansen v. Norway', 48852/17 "Breivik i fengsel". Nrk.no. 19 September 2013. Retrieved 9 February 2022. "Norway court rejects mass killer Breivik's parole request". Al Jazeera. 1 February 2022. Retrieved 18 March 2022. Olsson, Svein Vestrum (1 February 2022). "Breivik holdes i fengsel – anker avgjørelsen". Nrk.no. Retrieved 9 February 2022. "Sier nei til løslatelse av Anders Behring Breivik". www.vg.no. February 2022. Retrieved 1 February 2022. https://www.nrk.no/norge/breivik-holdes-i-fengsel-_-anker-avgjorelsen-1.15837019. NRK. Retrieved 1 February 2022 Klesty, Victoria (1 February 2022). "Court rejects Norwegian mass killer Breivik's parole application". Reuters. Retrieved 13 April 2023. NRK (19 October 2023). "Aftenposten: Datoen klar for Breiviks neste rettsrunde". NRK (in Norwegian Bokmål). Retrieved 10 January 2024. "Norway court says mass killer Breivik's prison isolation not 'inhumane'". Al Jazeera. Retrieved 22 February 2024. Revheim-Rafaelsen, Mathias (18 August 2023). "Anders Behring Breivik saksøker staten på nytt". NRK (in Norwegian Bokmål). Retrieved 22 February 2024. Rayment, Sean (25 July 2011). "Modest boy who became a mass murderer". Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved 25 July 2011. "Dagens navn [Today's names]". Aftenposten, morgen. 15 February 1979. p. 10. Aker hospital, Oslo, 13. February 1979. A boy. Name of parents. In Norwegian: (Aker sykehus, 13. ds.: En gutt. Wenche og Jens Breivik) Allen, Peter (23 July 2011). "Norway Killer: Father horrified by Anders Behring Breivik killing spree". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 26 July 2011. Retrieved 27 July 2011. Åsebø, Synnøve (9 June 2017). "Anders Behring Breivik har skiftet navn". Verdens Gang (in Norwegian). Retrieved 13 March 2018. Allen, Peter; Fagge, Nick; Cohen, Tamara (25 July 2011). "Mummy's boy who lurched to the Right was 'privileged' son of diplomat but despised his liberal family". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Skårderud, Finn (26 April 2012). "Psykiater Finn Skårderud: – Ekstremt viktig å forstå mer av Breivik" [Psychiatrist Finn Skårderud: – Extremely important to understand more of Breivik]. Dagbladet (Interview) (in Norwegian). Interviewed by Møystad, Cathrine Loraas. Retrieved 27 April 2012. Orange, Richard (7 October 2012). "Anders Behring Breivik's mother 'sexualised' him when he was four". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. – Breivik var skadet allerede som toåring. Retrieved 9 April 2021. "Psykologen ved Statens Senter for Barne – og Ungdomspsykiatri (SSBU), som på 80-tallet observerte samspillet mellom Anders og hans mor, ble avhørt av politiet etter terroraksjonen 22.juli 2011." Olsen, Asbjørn (20 April 2016). "Breivik was 'already damaged by the age of two'". TV2. Retrieved 1 December 2019. AS, TV 2 (16 March 2016). "Breivik var skadet allerede som toåring". Tv2.no. Retrieved 9 February 2022.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) – Breivik var skadet allerede som toåring. Retrieved 9 April 2021. " 'Han så bare jentetisser', fortalte hun dem." "- Breivik var skadet allerede som toåring". 17 March 2016. Archived from the original on 17 March 2016. Retrieved 13 April 2023. Kim Willsher (25 July 2011). "Norway gunman's father speaks out: 'He should have taken his own life'". the Guardian. Retrieved 13 September 2014. "En av treningskameratene på ungdomsskolen var jo fra Midtøsten". Norge – NRK Nyheter. 23 July 2011. Retrieved 29 November 2011. Bundgaard, Maria (23 July 2011). "Skolekammerat: Han hjalp mobbeofre". Willsher, Kim (26 July 2011). "Norway gunman's father speaks out: 'He should have taken his own life'". The Guardian. Retrieved 25 March 2022. Within a year of the boy's birth, in February 1979, the couple had split. Jens Breivik remained in London and Behring moved back to Oslo with Anders and his elder half-sister. Gibson, David (28 July 2011). "Is Anders Breivik a 'Christian' terrorist?". Times Union. Retrieved 29 July 2011. Sadhbh, Walshe (28 July 2011). "The Right Word: Telling left from right". The Guardian (UK). London. "Norway suspect admits responsibility". Sky News. Archived from the original on 26 March 2012. Retrieved 24 July 2011. "Slik var dramaet på Utøya". Verdens Gang. Retrieved 27 July 2011. "Anders Behring Breivik's father: 'My son should have taken his own life'". The Daily Telegraph. London. 25 July 2011. Archived from the original on 29 July 2011. Retrieved 24 August 2011. Henley, Jon (13 April 2012). "Anders Behring Breivik trial: the father's story". The Guardian. London. Retrieved 13 April 2012. Breivik disputes this. "It's true I was angry," he says. "Several times the police called me to say he had sprayed buildings, trains, buses. He was also shoplifting. But I was always willing to see him, and he knew that. It was Anders who cut it off. His decision, not mine. "1995: Året da alt forandret seg – nyheter". Dagbladet.no. 28 July 2011. Retrieved 29 November 2011. "Skrøt av egen briljans, utseende, kjærester og penger – nyheter". Dagbladet.no. 27 July 2011. Retrieved 29 November 2011. Aune, Oddvin. "32-åringen skal tilhøre høyreekstremt miljø". NRK. No. special. Oslo. Etter det NRK får opplyst, har ikke den pågrepne noen yrkesmilitær bakgrunn. Han ble fritatt fra verneplikt, og dermed har han ikke spesialutdanning eller utenlandsoppdrag for Forsvaret." – "From what NRK have been informed, the suspect has no military background. He was exempt from conscription and therefore does not have military training or service abroad. Landsend, Merete (27 July 2011). "Skrøt av egen briljans, utsende, kjærester og penger". Dagbladet (in Norwegian). Oslo. Retrieved 2 August 2011. Kilder i Forsvarets sikkerhetsavdeling Dagbladet har snakket med, forteller at Breivik allerede ved sesjon ble luket ut av rullene som ikke tjenesteskikket." – "Sources in the Defence Security Department that Dagbladet has talked to, says Breivik was weeded out from the files as unfit for service during the service assessment. Hansen, Anette Holth; Skille, Øyvind Bye (23 July 2011). "Han var en utmerket kollega" (in Norwegian). NO: NRK. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help) "Passet avslørte Breiviks verdensturne". Dagbladet (in Norwegian). 3 February 2012. Lankevich, Denis (28 July 2011). Он был типичным североевропейским туристом. Gazeta.ru (in Russian). "Breivik var på konejakt i Hviterussland" (in Norwegian). Norway: NRK.no. 4 January 2012. Retrieved 9 January 2012. "Politiet etterforsker terroristen i minst 16 land". Dagbladet (in Norwegian). 5 January 2012. "Anders Behring Breivik: Mum is the only one who can make me emotionally unstable". Nettavisen. 30 November 2011. Archived from the original on 3 December 2011. Retrieved 2 December 2011. "Brønnøysundregistrene – Nøkkelopplysninger fra Enhetsregisteret". Brønnøysund Business Register (in Norwegian). NO: Ministry of Trade and Industry. 18 May 2009. Retrieved 22 July 2011. "Profile: Norway attacks suspect Anders Behring Breivik". BBC. 25 July 2011. "Oslo killer sought weapons from Prague's underworld". Czech Position. 25 July 2011. Archived from the original on 22 February 2014. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help) "Skytternes taushet". Dagbladet (in Norwegian). Retrieved 2 September 2011. "Der Terrorist und die Brandstifter". Der Spiegel 1 August 2011 "Pågrepet 32-åring kalte seg selv nasjonalistisk". Verdens Gang (in Norwegian). Archived from the original on 26 July 2011. Retrieved 22 July 2011.[verification needed] "Oslo bomb suspect bought 6 tonnes fertiliser: supplier". Reuters. 23 July 2011. Retrieved 23 July 2011. "Eksplosjonen i Oslo sentrum 22. juli 2011" [The explosion in Oslo 22 July 2011] (in Norwegian). 23 July 2011. Archived from the original on 28 March 2012. Retrieved 1 August 2011. "Her er restene av bombebilen" [Here is the remains of the car]. NRK (in Norwegian). 29 October 2011. "Ble sett av ti kameraer" [Was seen by ten surveillance cameras]. ABC Nyheter (in Norwegian). 16 September 2011. Archived from the original on 11 December 2011. "Dette er Breivik tiltalt for" [Breivik's indictment] (in Norwegian). NRK. 7 March 2012. "Oslo government district bombing and Utøya island shooting July 22, 2011: The immediate prehospital emergency medical service response". Scandinavian Journal of Trauma, Resuscitation and Emergency Medicine. 26 January 2012. "Læring for bedre beredskap; Helseinnsatsen etter terrorhendelsene 22. juli 2011" (in Norwegian). 9 March 2012. Archived from the original on 29 October 2013. "Slik skaffet han politiuniformen" [How he obtained the uniform]. NRK (in Norwegian). 24 July 2011. "Slik var Behring Breivik kledd for å drepe" [How Behring Breivik was dressed to kill]. Dagbladet (in Norwegian). 20 November 2011. "Terrorofrene på Utøya og i Oslo". Verdens Gang (in Norwegian). Schibsted ASA. Archived from the original on 9 September 2011. Retrieved 29 July 2011. "Navn på alle terrorofre offentliggjort". Verdens Gang (in Norwegian). Schibsted ASA. 29 July 2011. Archived from the original on 23 November 2011. Retrieved 27 September 2011. Sanchez, Raf (25 July 2011). "Norway killings: Princess's brother Trond Berntsen among dead". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 12 January 2022. Helen Pidd; James Meikle (27 July 2011). "Anders Behring Breivik: 'It was a normal arrest'". The Guardian. London. "Arbeiderpartiet har sveket landet og prisen fikk de betale fredag" (in Norwegian). Nrk.no. 25 July 2011. Retrieved 27 July 2011. Grivi, Jarle Brenna et al. "I'm the greatest monster since Quisling: This said Breivik under interrogation at Utøya", Verdens Gang, 2 January 2012. (accessed 18 November 2015). "Ruling on holding Anders Behring Breivik in custody (Norwegian)" (PDF). Oslo District Court. 25 July 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 March 2012. Retrieved 2 December 2011. "First Court Hearing for Anders Behring Breivik Held in Private". International Business Times. 25 July 2011. Archived from the original on 18 July 2012. Retrieved 2 December 2011. "Norway massacre suspect appears to be insane, his lawyer says". Haaretz. Reuters. 26 July 2011. Retrieved 30 May 2015. Steven Erlanger; Alan Cowell (25 July 2011). "Norway suspect hints that he did not act alone". The New York Times. "Ruling on holding Anders Behring Breivik in extended custody (Norwegian)" (PDF). Oslo District Court. 14 November 2011. Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 January 2012. Retrieved 2 December 2011. "Sladder ikke tiltalen". Avisa Nordland (in Norwegian). ANB-NTB. 2 March 2012. Archived from the original on 5 November 2013. Retrieved 3 March 2012. "Ankesak om 22. juli kan begynne i januar 2013" [Appeal case about 22 July can start in January 2013] (in Norwegian). NRK. NTB. 30 March 2012. Retrieved 30 March 2012. Johnsen, Alf Bjarne; Sæther, Anne Stine; Andersen, Gordon (24 January 2012). "Breivik kan få eget sykehus på Ila" [Breivik may get his own hospital at Ila]. Verdens Gang (in Norwegian). Retrieved 24 January 2012. "23-årig amerikan vill träffa Breivik" [23-year-old American wants to meet Breivik]. Svenska Dagbladet (in Swedish). 19 April 2012. Retrieved 19 April 2012. Moland, Annemarte; Andersen, Ingunn; Omland, Ellen; Skille, Øyvind Bye (22 February 2012). "– Breivik brevveksler med meningsfeller" [Breivik exchanging letters with like-minded people] (in Norwegian). NRK. Retrieved 22 February 2012. "Breivik har sagt ja til intervju igjen" [Breivik has agreed to another interview]. Verdens Gang (in Norwegian). NTB. 20 March 2012. Retrieved 20 March 2012. Torgeir Huseby; Synne Sørheim (29 November 2011). "Forensic psychiatric statement Breivik, Anders Behring (Norwegian)" (PDF) (in Norwegian). TV2. Retrieved 2 December 2011. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help) "Norway massacre: Breivik declared insane". BBC. 29 November 2011. Retrieved 30 November 2011. "Breivik sees opportunities". The Foreigner. 1 December 2011. Retrieved 1 December 2011. "Norway split on Breivik's likely fate in mental ward, as mass-killer himself 'insulted' by ruling". Agence France-Presse. 30 November 2011. Retrieved 1 December 2011. "Norway killer Anders Behring Breivik 'is not psychotic'". The Daily Telegraph. London. 4 December 2012. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 5 December 2012. Den rettsmedisinske kommisjon; Andreas Hamnes; Agneta Nilsson; Gunnar Johannessen; Jannike E. Snoek; Kirsten Rasmussen; Knut Waterloo; Karl Heinrik Melle (20 December 2011). "Breivek, Anders Behring. Rettspsykiatrisk erklæring" (PDF) (in Norwegian). Oslo Tingrett. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 July 2012. Retrieved 26 December 2011. Ravndal, Dennis; Jarle Brenna; Fridtjof Nygaard; Marianne Vikås; Morten Hopperstad (6 January 2012). "Breivik not likely to bluff about mental illness". Verdens Gang (in Norwegian). Retrieved 7 December 2011. Svein Holden; Inga Bejer Engh (4 January 2012). "Anders Behring Breivik – the question of appointing new forensic psychiatrists" (PDF) (in Norwegian). Oslo Statsadvokatembeter. Archived from the original (PDF) on 31 August 2012. Retrieved 23 August 2016. Spiegel Magazine Court Orders New Psychiatric Review for Breivik "Families question experts on Oslo terrorist". Agence France-Presse. 5 January 2012. Retrieved 6 January 2012. Liss Goril Anda (25 November 2011). "Norway massacre: Breivik declared insane". BBC News. Retrieved 29 November 2011. "Regular Criminal Code (Norwegian: straffeloven)" (in Norwegian). Lovdata. 22 May 1909. Retrieved 30 November 2011. "Breivik may avoid prison". Sky News Australia. 3 March 2012. Archived from the original on 5 August 2020. Retrieved 3 March 2012. "Anders Behring Breivik: prosecutor may accept he's not responsible for killings". The Province. Vancouver, Canada. AFP. 2 March 2012. Archived from the original on 4 May 2012. Retrieved 3 March 2012. Mark Lewis (22 June 2012). "Breivik delivers final tirade". the Guardian. Retrieved 13 September 2014. "Norway Mass Killer Gets the Maximum: 21 Years". The New York Times. 25 August 2012. Retrieved 20 April 2016. "Diagnosis of insanity would be 'worse than death,' Norway killer says". The Globe and Mail. Toronto. Reuters. 4 April 2012. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 10 April 2012. Psykiater mener Breivik har Aspergers og Tourettes Archived 13 June 2012 at the Wayback Machine, Vårt Land "Dette er diagnosene på Breivik – nyheter". Dagbladet.no. 9 June 2015. Retrieved 23 September 2015. Richard Orange (11 June 2012). "Anders Behring Breivik is lying, not delusional". Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 9 October 2013. Lars Bevanger (14 June 2012). "Breivik trial: Psychiatric reports scrutinised". BBC News Europe. Retrieved 9 October 2013. "Total mangel på respekt". 6 February 2012. Archived from the original on 29 February 2012. Retrieved 6 February 2012. Professor Douglas, Linder. "Breivik Trial: Verdict and Sentence". Famous Trials by Professor Douglas O. Linder. Retrieved 23 February 2023. "Anders Behring Breivik: Norway court rules him sane". BBC News. 24 August 2012. Retrieved 24 August 2012. "Lippestad: – Breivik bekrefter at han ikke anker". TV 2. 24 August 2012. Retrieved 13 September 2014. Andreas Bakke Foss (31 January 2014). "Nå er dommen mot Breivik rettskraftig". Aftenposten.no. Retrieved 26 March 2016. "Smilende Breivik fornøyd med dommen". Nettavisen. Archived from the original on 25 August 2012. Retrieved 13 September 2014. "Breivik: Jeg anker ikke". NRK. 24 August 2012. Retrieved 13 September 2014. "Telemark fengsel, Skien avdelingo". Kriminalomsorgen.no. Retrieved 11 November 2021. "Dom" (PDF). p. 2. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 April 2016. Retrieved 25 April 2016. "Breivik-saken forklart" [The Breivik Trial explained]. Dagbladet.no. 23 April 2016. Retrieved 28 April 2016. https://direkte.vg.no/nyhetsdognet/news/breivik-flyttet-over-til-nytt-fengsel.jWqo_86OZ Verdens Gang. Retrieved 30 March 2022 https://www.dagsavisen.no/nyheter/innenriks/2024/01/10/retten-pa-befaring-i-breiviks-celle/. Dagsavisen.no. Retrieved 2024-01-10 Anders Behring Breivik flyttes. Nettavisen. Retrieved 8 February 2022 "Norge har aldri evaluert Breiviks soningsregime" [Norway has never evaluated Breivik's regimen of imprisonment]. NRK. 10 March 2016. Retrieved 28 April 2016. "Dom" (PDF). p. 12. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 April 2016. Retrieved 25 April 2016. "Prisons in Norway". Life in Norway. 20 October 2018. Retrieved 23 March 2019. "Preventive Detention – Ila fengsel og forvaringsanstalt". Ilafengsel.no. Archived from the original on 13 May 2018. Retrieved 25 April 2016. Berglund, Nina (24 July 2012). "Breivik sets up conservative network". Views and News from Norway. Archived from the original on 27 July 2012. Retrieved 26 July 2012. Ighoubah, Farid (10 January 2024). "Anders Behring Breivik vraket besøksvenn gjennom ni år på telefon fra fengselet". Nettavisen (in Norwegian). Retrieved 13 January 2024. [2] "... besøksvennen, som har besøkt Breivik i fengselet siden mars 2014, er en profesjonell aktør, og at Kriminalomsorgen har betalt totalt 164.000 kroner for besøksvennen per 1. januar 2016." "Breivik får én time aktivisering i uken" [Breivik receives one hour of activisation per week]. NRK. 11 November 2015. Retrieved 20 April 2016. "Breivik saksøkte Staten". NRK. 23 October 2015. Retrieved 20 April 2016. [3] "besøksvennen, som har besøkt Breivik i fengselet siden mars 2014, er en profesjonell aktør, og at Kriminalomsorgen har betalt totalt 164.000 kroner for besøksvennen per 1. januar 2016." "Dom" [Verdict] (PDF). p. 3. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 April 2016. Retrieved 25 April 2016. "Anders Behring Breiviks hyllning till seriemördaren Peter Mangs – Kvällsposten". Expressen.se. 6 November 2015. Retrieved 22 July 2016. "Mass murderer Anders Behring Breivik to sue Norway over jail conditions". News.com.au. 17 October 2015. AS, TV 2 (16 January 2021). "Ronny (43) hadde hemmelige møter med Breivik: – Jeg ble brukt". Tv2.no. Retrieved 11 November 2021.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) https://www.nettavisen.no/nyheter/anders-behring-breivik-ble-anbefalt-a-lese-se-og-hor-i-fengsel/s/5-95-1566403. Nettavisen.no. Retrieved 2024-01-10 Av Tom Erik Holland (15 March 2016). "Telemarksavisa – Kort og godt en svært farlig mann". Ta.no. Retrieved 26 March 2016. "Breivik saksøkte Staten". Nrk.no. 23 October 2015. Retrieved 2 October 2020. "13. januar 2017 kl. 15:02 [...] forteller at Breivik begynte på bachelor i statsvitenskap høsten 2015, da han tok emnene offentlig politikk og administrasjon, samt politisk teori. Han fikk C på begge emnene" Matt Pickles (2 October 2018). "Should a university teach a killer?". BBC News. "Norway killer Anders Breivik threatens hunger strike". BBC News. 30 September 2015. "Breivik vil sende et signal til venner og fiender" [Breivik wants to send a signal to friends and foes]. NRK. 15 March 2016. Retrieved 20 April 2016. [4] "Det opplyser massemorderens forsvarer, advokat Øystein Storrvik til VG. – Jeg har på vegne av ham sendt inn en begjæring om prøveløslatelse, sier Storrvik til VG. – Han har krav på domstolsprøving av prøveløslatelse ved minstetid som er ti år i hans tilfelle. " "Mass killer Breivik says wants to create fascist party". Reuters. 5 September 2014. Retrieved 26 April 2018. "Breivik mener Jesus er "patetisk" [Breivik thinks Jesus is "pathetic"]". Dagen (in Norwegian). 19 November 2015. Archived from the original on 12 May 2021. Retrieved 20 November 2015. "Breivik: Jeg er ikke kristen (Breivik: I am not a Christian)". Vårt Land (in Norwegian). 15 November 2015. Daniel Vergara (10 January 2014). "Breivik vill deportera "illojala judar" [Breivik wants to deport "disloyal Jews"]". Expo (in Swedish). The newspaper Verdens Gang reported on 26 July 2012 Brenna, Jarle; Utheim, Eric Brekstad; Grøttum, Eva-Therese (26 July 2012). "Breivik sender brev til høyreekstreme støttespillere. Ber om hjelp til å fortsette kampen" [Breivik sends letters to extreme right-wing supporters. Requests assistance to continue the struggle]. Verdens Gang (in Norwegian). Archived from the original on 29 July 2012. Retrieved 26 July 2012. Berglund, Nina (26 July 2012). "Breivik sets up conservative network". Views and News from Norway. Archived from the original on 30 July 2012. Retrieved 26 July 2012. Brenna, Jarle; Utheim, Eric Brekstad; Grøttum, Eva-Therese (26 July 2012). "Konstant trussel at Breivik får sende brev" [Allowing Breivik to send letters is a constant threat]. Verdens Gang (in Norwegian). Archived from the original on 29 July 2012. Retrieved 26 July 2012. "breivik til sak mot staten" [Breivik in a lawsuit against the government]. NRK. Retrieved 20 April 2016. "Brevet fra Breivik" [The letter from Breivik]. Dagbladet.no. 18 March 2016. Retrieved 20 April 2016. Mauno, Hanne (8 April 2021). "Fikk brev fra Breivik: "Da jeg leste navnet ditt, fikk jeg frysninger nedover ryggen"". Dagsavisen. Retrieved 6 June 2021. "Ap-Kamzy i ny bok: Fikk brev fra Anders Behring Breivik". Vg.no. 7 April 2021. Retrieved 9 February 2022. "Terroristen sender brev til overlevende og etterlatte". NRK. 28 November 2021. Retrieved 29 November 2021. Chu, Henry (18 February 2014). "Mass killer Breivik threatens hunger strike for better games and gym". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved 20 February 2014. "Mass killer Anders Behring Breivik demands better video games, amenities". CBC News. Associated Press. 18 February 2014. Retrieved 20 February 2014. Frode Sætran. "Trist at Breivik får tilbake arenaen" [Sad that Breivik receives the arena again]. Aftenposten.no. Retrieved 20 April 2016. "Nå vurderer Breivik likevel anke". Nrk.no. 26 April 2016. Retrieved 28 April 2016. "'Judgment in the appeal case between The Norwegian Ministry of Justice and Breivik'". Domstol.no. Archived from the original on 24 September 2017. Retrieved 11 November 2021. "Judgment (case number 16-111749ASD-BORG/02)" (PDF). Retrieved 11 November 2021. "Mass killer Breivik loses human rights case against Norway". Reuters. 1 March 2017. Retrieved 24 September 2017. "Anders Behring Breivik, Killer in 2011 Norway Massacre, Says Prison Conditions Violate His Rights". The New York Times. 16 March 2016. Retrieved 20 April 2016. "Har rekonstruert Breiviks Ila-celler – NRK Norge – Oversikt over nyheter fra ulike deler av landet". Nrk.no. 14 March 2016. Retrieved 26 March 2016. "Nytt avslag: Pressen får ikke bli med inn på cellen til Breivik". VG. 8 March 2016. Retrieved 20 April 2016. "Breivik gives Nazi salute in court return to challenge jail isolation – BBC News". Bbc.co.uk. 15 March 2016. Retrieved 15 March 2016. "Skjeggete Breivik viste nazi-hilsen". Vg.no. 10 January 2017. Retrieved 9 February 2022. "Heller ikke etter 800 ganger kunne de konstatere at jeg hadde noen gjenstand mellom rumpeballene – nyheter". Dagbladet.no. 15 March 2016. Retrieved 26 March 2016. "Lukkede dører under ABB-rettssak – NRK Nyheter". Nrk.no. 8 March 2016. Retrieved 26 March 2016. "Breivik saksøkte Staten – NRK Nyheter". Nrk.no. 23 October 2015. Retrieved 26 March 2016. "Dommeren vil holde Breivik i stramme tøyler" [The judge will hold tight reins on Breivik]. NTB – Aftenposten. Retrieved 20 April 2016. "Sivilombudsmannen – Front page". Sivilombudsmannen.no. Archived from the original on 1 April 2016. Retrieved 26 March 2016. Tallaksen, Simen (17 March 2016). "La fram sine politiske krav". Klassekampen. p. 6. "ECHR" (PDF). Echr.coe.int. Retrieved 22 July 2016. Breivik suing the government "Storrvik: – Hovedproblemet for Staten i denne saken her er avvik mellom sikkerhetsmessige, godt funderte forslag fra en av dem som kjenner denne saken aller best, ikke er fulgt." Bjørgulv Braanen (19 March 2016). "I går var det tid for sluttprosedyrer. Ved veis ende". Klassekampen. p. 9. Simen Tallaksen (19 March 2016). "Satser alt på ett kort". Klassekampen. p. 8. Hege Ulstein (19 March 2016). "Punktum". Retrieved 20 April 2016. "De som tror at Breivik ikke lider tar feil" [Those who think that Breivik does not suffer are wrong]. Dagbladet.no. 21 March 2016. Retrieved 20 April 2016. Ulrik Fredrik Malt. "Hån og latterliggjøring av et psykisk sykt menneske – Ulrik Fredrik Malt" [Scorn and ridicule of a mentally ill person]. Aftenposten. Retrieved 20 April 2016. Dennis Ravndal (20 April 2016). "Staten har krenket Breiviks menneskerettigheter" [The government has violated Breivik's human rights]. VG. Retrieved 20 April 2016. NRK (20 April 2016). "Oslo tingrett: Breivik utsatt for nedverdigende behandling" [Oslo District Court: Breivik exposed to degrading treatment]. NRK. Retrieved 20 April 2016. using a April 2016 conversion rate "Dette betyr dommen etter Breiviks søksmål – NRK Norge – Oversikt over nyheter fra ulike deler av landet". Nrk.no. 20 April 2016. Retrieved 25 April 2016. Tore Bergsaker (20 April 2016). "Sjokk, vantro og usannhet" [Shock, disbelief and untruth]. Dagbladet.no. Retrieved 28 April 2016. "Vil ikke endre soningsforhold for Breivik – NRK Telemark – Lokale nyheter, TV og radio". Nrk.no. 21 April 2016. Retrieved 25 April 2016. Dennis Ravndal (23 April 2016). "Utsi: Isolasjon er psykisk terror" [Utsi: Isolation is mental terror]. VG. Retrieved 28 April 2016. "Juristforbundet – Dommerforeningen". Archived from the original on 22 April 2016. Retrieved 28 April 2016. Andreas Slettholm. "Regjeringsadvokaten: Tingretten har lagt terskelen for lavt for hva som utgjør "umenneskelig eller nedverdigende behandling"" [Office of the Attorney General: The district court has laid the threshold too low for what constitutes "inhuman or demeaning treatment"]. Aftenposten. Retrieved 28 April 2016. Ådne HusSandnes (26 April 2016). "Fengselsmyndighetene har en plikt til å vurdere om Breivik kan sone med andre fanger" [The prison authorities have a duty to evaluate if Breivik kan do time with other prisoner]. Dagbladet.no. Retrieved 28 April 2016. "Breiviks advokat mener dommer er inhabil". Dagbladet. 5 August 2016. "Lagmannsretten: Dommer i Breivik-saken byttes ut". Verdens Gang (in Norwegian). 11 August 2016. "Breiviks søksmål mot Staten". Nrk.no. 23 October 2015. [5] "18. januar 2017 kl. 11:33 [...] Storrvik gjennomgår andre dommer fra Den europeiske menneskerettsdomstolen (EMD) og sammenligner med Breiviks sak. Han sammenligner blant annet med en sak hvor EMD konkluderte med at menneskerettighetene til PKK-lederen Abdullah Öcalan var krenket fra det sjette til det tiende året i soningen. – Det som ble avgjørende for EMD, var at han deretter fikk andre medfanger han kunne være sammen med, sier" "Noway's top court rejects Anders Breivik appeal that his human rights are being violated". The Independent. 8 June 2017. Archived from the original on 9 June 2017. Retrieved 24 September 2017. "Grandstanding fears as Norwegian mass killer seeks parole". Euronews.com. 18 January 2022. Retrieved 9 February 2022. Breivik i fengsel [Breivik in prison]. NRK.no. Retrieved 18 January 2022 "Statsadvokaten mener Breivik er for farlig til å slippes ut". Dagsavisen.no. 2 January 2022. Retrieved 9 February 2022. "Breivik går til retten for å bli løslatt". Dagsavisen.no. 27 August 2021. Retrieved 9 February 2022. Lie, Kari (28 November 2021). "Terroristen sender brev til overlevende og etterlatte". Nrk.no. Retrieved 9 February 2022. https://www.vg.no/nyheter/innenriks/i/lVbqB9/aktor-ber-retten-nekte-filming-av-breiviks-forklaring. "Forvaringsdømte har en lovgitt rett til å be om prøveløslatelse når minstetiden er ute. Hvis påtalemyndigheten motsetter seg begjæringen, skal det tas ut ny tiltale som skal underlegges domstolsbehandling." Svein Vestrum Olsson et al. "Aktor om Breiviks forklaring". 18 January 2022. NRK.no https://www.dagsavisen.no/nyheter/innenriks/2022/01/18/aktor-hans-soningsforhold-er-underordnet/. Dagsavisen. Retrieved 18 January 2022 Norwegian mass killer Anders Breivik appears before parole hearing. The Guardian. Retrieved 18 Januaray 2022 Breivik i fengsel [Breivik in prison]. NRK.no. Retrieved 20 January 2022 Rosenqvist: – Dette er en scene for ham [Rosenqvist: – This is a stage for him]. Retrieved 25 January 2022 according to website veiviseren.no (a governmental one) "Vendepunktet – Tilbakeføringsarbeid i kriminalomsorgen". Veiviseren.no. P. 13 "Djevelens advokat". Vg.no. 20 January 2022. Retrieved 9 February 2022. Rønneberg, Olav (20 January 2022). "Breiviks advokat kan ha et poeng". NRK (in Norwegian Bokmål). Retrieved 13 January 2024. Mæland, NTB, Kjetil (1 February 2022). "Breivik slipper ikke ut: – Blottet for empati". Nettavisen.no. Retrieved 9 February 2022.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) "Nyhetsstudio – Breivik-dommen kommer i dag". Dagbladet.no. Retrieved 9 February 2022. Ertesvåg, NTB, Edvard Ruggesæter (3 February 2022). "Rettsprofessor: – Om Breivik var psykisk syk, kan han ha blitt utsatt for justismord". Nettavisen.no. Retrieved 9 February 2022.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Psykiatere reagerer etter rettssaken: Mener terroristen må få behandling og medisiner for psykose.. Aftenposten. Retrieved 3 February 2022 "Det er svært sannsynlig at 22. juli-terroristen har en vrangforestillingslidelse". www.aftenposten.no (in Norwegian Bokmål). 22 March 2022. Retrieved 13 April 2023. https://www.aftenposten.no/meninger/debatt/i/KzKa8o/vil-vi-noen-gang-forstaa-anders-behring-breivik. Aftenposten. Retrieved 9 February 2022. "En [...] hypotese er at han er så personlighetsmessig oppløst og fragmentert at han beveger seg, psykisk sett, i ytterkanten av de tilstandene som er trukket opp mellom psykoselidelser og personlighetsforstyrrelse" https://www.aftenposten.no/meninger/debatt/i/Bj4dPe/det-er-lett-aa-vaere-enig-i-at-breivik-fremstaar-som-gal-men-mye-er-vanv. Aftenposten. Retrieved 9 February 2022 [6]. 21 June 2021. Retrieved 17 July 2021. "Pressen har også vært forsiktige. Selv etter 77 begravelser ville ikke redaksjonene fortelle om barnemishandling og psykisk sykdom i familien Breivik." Haraldsen, Stian (9 January 2024). "Har saksøkt staten: Breivik ble flere ganger avbrutt av egen advokat". NRK (in Norwegian Bokmål). Retrieved 13 January 2024. "Staten om Breiviks anklager: – Ikke i nærheten". www.vg.no (in Norwegian Bokmål). 8 January 2024. Retrieved 13 January 2024. Haraldsen, Stian (8 January 2024). "Breivik gjorde ingen hilsener da rettssaken startet". NRK (in Norwegian Bokmål). Retrieved 13 January 2024. Aurdal, Martine (9 January 2024). "Håpløshetens logikk". dagbladet.no (in Norwegian). Retrieved 13 January 2024. "Breivik avbrutt av egen advokat: – Snakk om soningsforholdene". www.vg.no (in Norwegian Bokmål). 9 January 2024. Retrieved 13 January 2024. Rønneberg, Olav (9 January 2024). "Statens evige hodepine". NRK (in Norwegian Bokmål). Retrieved 13 January 2024. Hageskal, Ralf Lofstad, Maja Walberg Klev, Emma Thingstad Dalen, Audun (10 January 2024). "- Beklagelig å høre". dagbladet.no (in Norwegian). Retrieved 13 January 2024.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Aurdal, Martine (10 January 2024). "Ingen gråter med Breivik". dagbladet.no (in Norwegian). Retrieved 13 January 2024. AS, TV 2 (10 January 2024). "Fengselet: Dette er planen for Breivik". TV 2 (in Norwegian Bokmål). Retrieved 13 January 2024.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) "Nettavisen". Nettavisen (in Norwegian). Retrieved 13 January 2024. "Advokat mener PSTs Breivik-rapport fører til brudd på menneskerettighetene". www.vg.no (in Norwegian Bokmål). 11 January 2024. Retrieved 13 January 2024. Barka, Vetle Ravn Viken, Farid Ighoubah, Even Hye T. (4 January 2024). "Breivik saksøker staten". Nettavisen (in Norwegian). Retrieved 13 January 2024.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Haraldsen, Stian (11 January 2024). "Breivik-advokater brukte mafia-eksempel i retten". NRK (in Norwegian Bokmål). Retrieved 13 January 2024. Klev, Ralf Lofstad, Maja Walberg (11 January 2024). "- Jeg er veldig narsissistisk". dagbladet.no (in Norwegian). Retrieved 13 January 2024.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Solberg, Ralf Lofstad, Lars Eivind Bones, Maja Walberg Klev, Anabelle Bruun, Tobias Fjeldvang, Kristoffer (12 January 2024). "- Han brøt sammen". dagbladet.no (in Norwegian). Retrieved 13 January 2024.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) Viken, Farid Ighoubah, Vetle Ravn (9 January 2024). "Anders Behring Breivik ble anbefalt å lese Se og Hør i fengsel". Nettavisen (in Norwegian). Retrieved 13 January 2024.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link) "Breiviks kamp bak murene". www.vg.no (in Norwegian Bokmål). 13 July 2021. Retrieved 13 January 2024. Andreas Slettholm (31 January 2014). "Behring Breivik har fått avslag – får ikke gratis advokat". Aftenposten.no. Retrieved 22 July 2016. "Ikke bruk Breivik som sponsorobjekt" [Do not use Breivik as an object of sponsoring]. Dagbladet.no. 12 March 2016. Retrieved 20 April 2016. "Breiviks mor døde i går – VG Nett om Terrorangrepet 22. juli". VG. 23 March 2013. Retrieved 13 September 2014. "Moren tok farvel med Breivik i fengselet – VG Nett om Terrorangrepet 22. juli". VG. 23 March 2013. Retrieved 13 September 2014. "Breivik: Killer Asks To Attend Mother's Funeral". Sky News. Retrieved 13 September 2014. "Breivik denied permission to attend mother's funeral". Telegraph.co.uk. 26 March 2013. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 13 September 2014. "Anders Behring Breivik sto på PST-liste over kjemikaliekjøpere" (in Norwegian). VG Nett. 22 July 2011. Retrieved 27 July 2011. Henmo, Ola (20 February 2009). "Dynamittgubben". Aftenposten, A-magasinet (in Norwegian). p. 20. "32-åringen skal tilhøre høyreekstremt miljø – Norge". Nyheter (in Norwegian). NO: NRK. 23 July 2010. Retrieved 23 July 2011. "Som en liten gutt" (in Norwegian). {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires |journal= (help) "Tungt å bli rost av den terrorsiktede" [Difficult to be praised by the accused of terror]. Dagens Næringsliv (in Norwegian). 23 July 2011. Retrieved 24 July 2011. Breivik, Anders Behring (23 July 2011). "Anders Behring Breiviks kommentarer hos Document.no" [Anders Behring Breivik's comments at Document.no]. Document.no (in Norwegian). Archived from the original on 1 August 2011. Retrieved 21 February 2021. "– Stormfront ansvarlig for hundre drap på fem år". NRK (in Norwegian). 30 April 2014. Allely, Clare S. (2020). The Psychology of Extreme Violence: A Case Study Approach to Serial Homicide, Mass Shooting, School Shooting and Lone-actor Terrorism. Routledge. p. 293. ISBN 978-1000061932. "Anders Behring Breivik" (in Norwegian). 21 April 2023. Toldnes, Gunhild; Lundervold, Linn Kongsli; Meland, Astrid (30 July 2011). "Slik skaffet han seg sin enmannshær" (in Norwegian). Dagbladet Nyheter. Retrieved 22 March 2015. "The Norway killer and Christian terrorism (commentary)". Flcourier.com. 22 March 2012. Archived from the original on 22 March 2012. Retrieved 10 August 2011. "Video: Norway shootings: Anders Behring Breivik's YouTube video posted hours before killings". Telegraph. London. 24 July 2011. Archived from the original on 29 July 2011. Retrieved 10 August 2011. Matthew Taylor (26 July 2011). "Breivik sent 'manifesto' to 250 UK contacts hours before Norway killings". The Guardian. UK. Archived from the original on 28 July 2011. Retrieved 27 July 2011. "2083: A European Declaration of Independence" (PDF). Federation of American Scientists. Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 May 2012. Retrieved 24 April 2012. "2083: A European Declaration of Independence". Internet Archive. Archived from the original on 14 April 2012. Retrieved 24 April 2012. Trygve Sorvaag (19 April 2012). "Anders Behring Breivik trial, day four – Thursday 19 April". The Guardian. London. Prosecutor tries to get #Breivik to explain how manifesto was made. Breivik admits it is 60% cut and paste. Adam Geller (30 July 2011). "Norway gunman's tale diverges sharply from reality". ABC News. Associated Press. Retrieved 20 April 2012. Balkan Insight (25 July 2011). "NATO Attack On Serbia Set Off Norwegian Bomber". Eurasiareview.com. Archived from the original on 5 December 2012. Retrieved 21 August 2011. "Scholars Respond to Breivik Manifesto" (Press release). National Association of Scholars. 28 July 2011. Archived from the original on 1 September 2011. Retrieved 28 July 2011. Anne-Catherine Simon; Christoph Saiger; Helmar Dumbs (29 July 2011). "Die Welt, wie Anders B. Breivik sie sieht". Die Presse (in German). Astrid Meland; Thorenfeldt Gunnar (26 July 2011). "De var Breiviks helter [They were Breivik's heroes]". dagbladet.no (in Norwegian). Archived from the original on 10 August 2017. Retrieved 11 October 2022. "Dette er terroristens store politiske forbilde – nyheter". Dagbladet.no. 18 August 2009. Retrieved 25 July 2011. Van Gerven Oei, Vincent W.J. (2011). "anders Breivik: On Copying the Obscure". Continent. 1 (3): 213–23. Archived from the original on 16 July 2020. Retrieved 15 March 2019. "Massedrapsmannen kopierte 'Unabomberen' ord for ord". Nrk.no. 24 July 2011. Retrieved 24 July 2011. Shane, Scott (24 July 2011). "Killings in Norway Spotlight Anti-Muslim Thought in U.S". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 18 September 2011. Retrieved 26 July 2011. Archer, Toby (25 July 2011). "Breivik's Swamp". Foreign Policy. Archived from the original on 1 August 2014. "Norway Killer's Hatred of Women". TDB. Archived from the original on 29 July 2011. Retrieved 29 July 2011. "Norway killer's pro-Hindutva rant has Sangh squirming". The Times of India. 27 July 2011. Retrieved 11 November 2021. "Norway massacre: Breivik manifesto attempts to woo India's Hindu nationalists". Christian Science Monitor. 25 July 2011. Retrieved 11 November 2021. "Norway killer Anders Behring Breivik's cultural references". The Daily Telegraph. 25 July 2011. "Norway killings: Breivik posted hate-filled video on YouTube hours before attacks". The Daily Telegraph. 24 July 2011. "Breivik looked up to Japanese 'monoculturalism' Archived 16 July 2015 at the Wayback Machine". The Tokyo Times. 25 July 2011. "Norway killer praises Japan as model country – Kyodo". Reuters. 26 July 2011. "'Norway attack suspect had anti-Muslim, pro-Israel views'". The Jerusalem Post | Jpost.com. Retrieved 15 September 2022. Andrew E. Kramer (25 July 2011). "Russia Youth Group and Putin Distance Themselves from Killer's Compliments". The New York Times. Retrieved 25 July 2011. Teitelbaum, Benjamin (8 August 2011). "Hvit Nasjonalist". Dagbladet.no. Retrieved 25 August 2011. Thomas Hegghammer (30 July 2011). "The Rise of the Macro-Nationalists". Archived from the original on 14 August 2011. "Mein kleines Land gibt es nicht mehr" (in German). FAZ. 25 July 2011. William Maclean; Catherine Hornby (26 August 2012). "Analysis: Europe far right shuns Breivik's acts, flirts with ideas". Reuters. "Dette skriver Behring Breivik om Wikipedia" [This is what Breivik writes about Wikipedia] (in Norwegian). NRK. 27 March 2012. Retrieved 28 March 2012. "Høyreekstremt angrep på Wikipedia". Archived from the original on 15 January 2015. Retrieved 13 September 2014. Larsen, Eirin (27 March 2012). "Wikipedia vil ha hjelp til å kjempe mot høyreekstremisme" [Wikipedia wants help to combat right-wing extremism] (in Norwegian). NRK. Retrieved 28 March 2012. "Norway killer Anders Behring Breivik trial: day two live". Telegraph.co.uk. 17 April 2012. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 13 September 2014. Pein, Corey (2017) Live Work Work Die: A Journey into the Savage Heart of Silicon Valley. Metropolitan Books: Henry Holt and Co: New York. p. 235.[ISBN missing] Yarvin, Curtis (23 July 2011) "Right-wing terrorism as folk activism." Unqualified Reservations (blog). Ravndal, Jacob Aasland (16 March 2019). "The Dark Web Enabled the Christchurch Killer". Foreign Policy. Archived from the original on 18 March 2019. Retrieved 19 March 2019. Taylor, Adam (16 March 2019). "Christchurch suspect claimed 'brief contact' with Norwegian mass murderer". Sydney Morning Herald. Archived from the original on 15 March 2019. Retrieved 19 March 2019. Macklin, G.; Bjørgo, T. (2021). "Breivik's Long Shadow? The impact of the July 22, 2011 attacks on the modus operandi of extreme-right lone actor terrorists". Perspectives on Terrorism. 15 (3, The Long-Term Impacts of the July 22, 2011 Attacks in Norway – Ten Years After): 14–36. ISSN 2334-3745. Mark Townsend (14 April 2012). "Far-right anti-Muslim network on rise globally as Breivik trial opens". The Guardian. Retrieved 13 September 2014. "Attacks strike at Norway's values". BBC News. Retrieved 22 July 2021. Sindre Bangstad, Anders Breivik and the Rise of Islamophobia, Zed Books, 2014, ISBN 978-1783600083 "Her er Breiviks meningsfeller". Dagbladet.no. 25 August 2011. Retrieved 13 September 2014. "Islamophobes distance themselves from Breivik". Al Jazeera. "The Islamophobia misinformation experts" (PDF). Center for American Progress. "Breivik police question 'Fjordman'". Newsinenglish.no. 4 August 2011. Retrieved 10 August 2011. Herrmann, Gunnar (6 August 2011). "Vorbild für einen Mörder ('Model for a murderer')". Süddeutsche Zeitung. Retrieved 6 August 2011. Diese Gedankengänge hatte Breivik übernommen, um seinen Massenmord zu rechtfertigen. 111-mal zitiert er Fjordman in seinem Manifest. ("Breivik has used this thinking to justify his mass murder. In his manifesto, he cites Fjordmann 111 times.") "Breivik: Jeg leste Hitlers Mein Kampf da jeg var 14 år". Nettavisen (in Norwegian). 16 March 2016. "Aktor om Breiviks forklaring: En måte å rettferdiggjøre det han gjorde på". NRK (in Norwegian). 15 February 2022. Gronnevet, Julia (20 April 2012). "Norwegian gunman describes hunting down teenagers". Associated Press. "Mener han er tilregnelig". ANB-NTB. 20 April 2012. Archived from the original on 10 January 2015. Retrieved 21 April 2012. Saunders, Doug (25 July 2011). "Norway gunman's manifesto calls for war against Muslims". The Globe and Mail. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 24 August 2017. Saunders, Doug (26 July 2011). "'Eurabia' opponents scramble for distance from anti-Muslim murderer". The Globe and Mail. Archived from the original on 3 February 2017. Retrieved 24 August 2017. Archer, Toby (25 July 2011). "Breivik's swamp". Foreign Policy. Archived from the original on 1 August 2014. "Terroristen ville bruke atomvåpen". bt.no (in Norwegian). Retrieved 27 July 2011. "July 24, as it happened". The Daily Telegraph. Norway shootings. London. 24 July 2011. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. "Breivik manifesto attempts to woo India's Hindu nationalists". Norway massacre. 25 July 2011. Retrieved 13 September 2014 – via Yahoo News. Townsend, Mark; Traynor, Ian (30 July 2011). "How far right views created Anders Behring Breivik". World news – The Observer. The Guardian. Norway attacks. London. Retrieved 10 August 2011. "Grillet Breivik om Liberia". Siste.no (in Norwegian). 4 June 2012. Archived from the original on 25 July 2018. Retrieved 22 January 2016. "Elver av blod". Klassekampen (in Norwegian). 18 April 2012. "Ap-Kamzy i ny bok: Fikk brev fra Anders Behring Breivik". Vg.no. 7 April 2021. Retrieved 11 November 2021. "Åpenbart at han fortsatt har det samme politiske budskapet som før". TV 2 (in Norwegian). 18 January 2022. "Her er Breiviks ordrette forklaring under utspørringen (word for word transcript of the court case against Breivik on April 17th 2012)". TV2. 18 July 2012. Retrieved 1 January 2021. "Breivik: Odin er min gud". Nettavisen (in Norwegian). 16 March 2016. "Norway police say 85 killed in island youth camp attack". BBC News. London. 23 July 2011. Archived from the original on 24 July 2011. Retrieved 25 July 2011. We have no more information than ... what has been found on [his] own websites, which is that it goes towards the right and that it is, so to speak, Christian fundamentalist. "Google cache of Facebook page of Anders Behring Breivik". Archived from the original on 11 July 2013. Retrieved 25 July 2011.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) Davey, Melissa (24 July 2011). "'You will all die' – Anders Behring Breivik". Sydney Morning Herald. Norway terror attack. "Norway police say 84 killed in Utoeya shooting". Reuters. 23 July 2011. Retrieved 23 July 2011. Erlanger, Steven; Shane, Scott (24 July 2011). "As horrors emerge, Norway charges Christian extremist". The New York Times. New York. Retrieved 23 September 2015. Brown, Andrew (24 July 2011). "Anders Breivik is not Christian but anti-Islam". The Guardian. London. Archived from the original on 26 July 2011. Retrieved 26 July 2011. Norway mass murderer Anders Breivik's internet writings show him to be anti-Muslim and anti-Marxist, not a fundamentalist Christian. "Norway remembers 77 victims a month after massacre". InterAksyon. 21 August 2011. Archived from the original on 16 July 2015. Retrieved 31 May 2015. Muhammad, Starla (19 August 2011). "Tragedy in Norway borne out of seeds of racism and intolerance in UK, EU". New America Media. Archived from the original on 5 January 2012. Retrieved 29 November 2011. Godfrey, Hannah (19 August 2011). "Utøya island shooting victims return to scene of Breivik's killing spree". The Guardian. London. "Norway killer Breivik inspired by al-Qaeda". thelocal.no. AFP. 17 April 2012. "Norway killer Breivik willing to work with al-Qaeda, says Templars may need to kill children and cut off own penis". International Business Times. London. 25 July 2011. "Breivik og al-Qaida i samme kamp". forskning.no (in Norwegian). 6 October 2011. "Oslo shooting club reveals Behring Breivik's membership". Hindustan Times. 28 July 2011. Archived from the original on 17 July 2015. "Oslo Pistolklubb". Oslopk.com. Retrieved 10 August 2011. "Frimurer Anders Behring". Tv2.no. Retrieved 24 July 2011. Goodwin, Matthew (24 July 2010). "Norway attacks: We can no longer ignore the far-right threat". The Guardian. UK. Archived from the original on 24 July 2011. Retrieved 24 July 2011. Kremer, Josiane (24 July 2011). "Norway Killing Suspect's Postings Offer Clues". Bloomberg L.P. Retrieved 10 August 2011. Ivar A. Skar (23 July 2011). "The Norwegian Order of Freemasons expressing compassion and care". Norwegian Order of Freemasons. Archived from the original on 29 July 2014. Retrieved 23 July 2011. Grøttum, Eva-Therese (23 July 2011). "Frimurerordenen: – Terrorsiktet hadde minimal kontakt med oss". Nyheter. NO: VG. Skar, Ivar A. (September 2011). "22. JULI 2011". FRIMURERbladet. "Den terrorsiktede var ingen aktiv frimurer". Norwegian Order of Freemasons. Archived from the original on 10 August 2014. Retrieved 29 July 2011. Langset, Kristine Grue (23 July 2011). "Frp: Breivik har vært medlem og har hatt verv i ungdomspartiet". Aftenposten (in Norwegian). Norway. Archived from the original on 5 January 2012. Retrieved 24 December 2011. Beaumont, Peter (23 July 2011). "Anders Behring Breivik: profile of a mass murderer". The Guardian. UK. Archived from the original on 24 July 2011. Retrieved 25 July 2011. Fondenes, Eivind; Kathleen Buer (23 July 2011). "Terrorsiktede var tidligere medlem av Fremskrittspartiet". Nyhetene (in Norwegian). NO: TV 2. Retrieved 23 July 2011. Nilsen, Carine Louise (24 July 2011). "– Hvis noen i Frp har meninger i tråd med Behring Breivik, vil de bli ekskludert". "Breivik mente Frp var for liberalt". Bergens Tidende. Retrieved 13 September 2014. Hughes, Mark (25 July 2011). "Norway killer Anders Behring Breivik had extensive links to English Defence League". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 17 September 2011. Rayner, Gordon (26 July 2011). "Norway killer Anders Behring Breivik emailed 'manifesto' to 250 British contacts". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 11 January 2022. Retrieved 29 November 2011. "Official Statement – Anders Brievik". BigJay. Archived from the original on 29 November 2014. "Interpol requests Maltese police to investigate Norway mass-murderer's Malta-based "mentor", Malta Independent Online, 31 July 2011". Independent.com.mt. 31 July 2011. Retrieved 10 August 2011. "The extremists in our midst". Timesofmalta.com. 31 July 2011. Retrieved 10 August 2011. Breivik, Anders Behring (6 December 2009). "Anders Behring Breiviks kommentarer hos Document.no" [Anders Behring Breiviks comments at Document.no] (in Norwegian). Document.no. Retrieved 4 February 2012. EDL er et eksempel til etterfølgelse og en norsk versjon er det eneste som kan hindre Blitz/SOS i å trakassere norske kulturkonservative fra andre fronter. Å lage en norsk EDL bør være nr. 3 på agendaen etter at vi har fått startet opp en kulturkonservativ avis med nasjonal distribusjon. Paust, Thomas (26 July 2011). "Breivik var medlem i Norsk forsvarsallianse" [Breivik was member of Norwegian Defence Allianse]. Nettavisen (in Norwegian). Oslo, Norway. Retrieved 3 February 2012. "Hevder Breivik var for ekstrem for Norwegian Defence League" [Claims Breivik was too extreme for Norwegian Defence League]. Agderposten (in Norwegian). NTB. 26 July 2011. Retrieved 3 February 2012.[dead link] "Jeg er en del av en internasjonal orden" [I am a part of an international order] (in Norwegian). 24 July 2011. Retrieved 24 July 2011. "Skulle drepe 4848 nordmenn" [Planned to kill 4,848 Norwegians] (in Norwegian). 24 July 2011. Retrieved 24 July 2011. "Norway attacks: Breivik makes 'unrealistic' demands". BBC. 2 August 2011. Retrieved 10 August 2011. Nina Berglund (4 January 2012). "Helicopter delayed, Breivik bluffing". Norway International Network. Retrieved 5 January 2012. "Breivik's 'Deputy' Issues Terror Warning". Sky News. Retrieved 13 September 2014. Borchgrevink, Aage Storm ["A Norwegian tragedy. Anders Behring Breivik and the roads to Utøya"] En norsk tragedie: Anders Behring Breivik og veiene til Utøya (2012) Borchgrevink, Aage Storm; Puzey, Guy A Norwegian Tragedy: Anders Behring Breivik and the Massacre on Utøya. 2013. ISBN 978-0745672205 (translated from the Norwegian) ["The Mother"] Moren (2013), by Marit Christensen. Christensen claimed that for the last year of Wenche Behring Breivik's life, she had been her confidant, and that the book is based on Christensen's interviews with her. Wenche Behring Breivik hired a lawyer to prevent Christensen from publishing the book. The book was criticized for character assassinations of still living people. Frydnes, Jørgen Watne ["No man is an island"] Ingen mann er en øy (2021) Seierstad, Åsne One of Us: The Story of a Massacre in Norway – and Its Aftermath (2013) Seierstad, Åsne; Death, Sarah. One of us: the story of Anders Breivik and the massacre in Norway. New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 2015. ISBN 978-0374277895 (translated from the Norwegian) Turrettini, Unni; Puckett, Kathleen M. The Mystery of the Lone Wolf Killer: Anders Behring Breivik and the Threat of Terror in Plain Sight. New York: Pegasus Crime, 2015. ISBN 978-1605989105 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Anders Behring Breivik. Wikinews has related news: Anders Behring Breivik Wikiquote has quotations related to Anders Behring Breivik. 2083: A European Declaration of Independence Original document by Breivik. Washington Times: The Oslo Terrorist in His Own Words – Summary of Breivik's political beliefs BBC: Norway attacks: The victims – The eight Oslo bomb victims and the 69 youth camp victims Daily Telegraph: Trial indictment Influencing from prison The government should accept the criticism of the verdict "Norway: The rich cousin". The Economist. Retrieved 13 September 2014.