The University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) is a public land-grant research university in Los Angeles, California, United States. Its academic roots were established in 1881 as a normal school then known as the southern branch of the California State Normal School which later evolved into San José State University. The branch was transferred to the University of California, becoming the Southern Branch of UC in 1919, making it the second-oldest of the ten-campus University of California system after the University of California, Berkeley. UCLA offers 337 undergraduate and graduate degree programs in a range of disciplines, enrolling about 31,600 undergraduate and 14,300 graduate and professional students annually. It received 174,914 undergraduate applications for Fall 2022, including transfers, making it the most applied-to university in the United States. The university is organized into the College of Letters and Science and twelve professional schools. Six of the schools offer undergraduate degree programs: Arts and Architecture, Engineering and Applied Science, Music, Nursing, Public Affairs, and Theater, Film and Television. Three others are graduate-level professional health science schools: Medicine, Dentistry, and Public Health. Its three remaining schools are Education & Information Studies, Management and Law. UCLA student-athletes compete as the Bruins in the Pac-12 Conference. They have won 121 NCAA team championships, second only to Stanford University's 128 team titles. 410 Bruins have made Olympic teams, winning 270 Olympic medals: 136 gold, 71 silver and 63 bronze. UCLA has been represented in every Olympics since the university's founding (except in 1924) and has had a gold medalist in every Olympics in which the U.S. has participated since 1932. UCLA has been considered a Public Ivy. As of March 2024[update], 16 Nobel laureates, 11 Rhodes scholars, two Turing Award winners, two Chief Scientists of the U.S. Air Force, one Pritzker prize winner, 7 Pulitzer prize winners, two U.S. Poet laureates, one Gauss prize winner, and one Fields Medalist have been affiliated with it as faculty, researchers and alumni. As of March 2024[update], 59 associated faculty members have been elected to the National Academy of Sciences, 17 to the American Philosophical Society, 32 to the National Academy of Engineering, 42 to the National Academy of Medicine, 10 to the National Academy of Inventors, and 167 to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences.The university was elected to the Association of American Universities in 1974. In the 2019 U.S. News & World Report 'Best Colleges' Rankings, UCLA earned the distinction of the youngest institution among the top 33 schools (ranked twentieth), having been founded just a century earlier in 1919. In March 1881, at the request of state senator Reginaldo Francisco del Valle, the California State Legislature authorized the creation of a southern branch of the California State Normal School (now San José State University) in downtown Los Angeles to train teachers for the growing population of Southern California. The Los Angeles branch of the California State Normal School opened on August 29, 1882, on what is now the site of the Central Library of the Los Angeles Public Library system. The facility included a demonstration school where teachers-in-training could practice their techniques with children. That elementary school would become the present day UCLA Lab School. In 1887, the branch campus became independent and changed its name to Los Angeles State Normal School. In 1914, the school moved to a new campus on Vermont Avenue (now the site of Los Angeles City College) in East Hollywood. In 1917, UC Regent Edward Augustus Dickson, the only regent representing the Southland at the time, and Ernest Carroll Moore, Director of the Normal School, began to lobby the State Legislature to enable the school to become the second University of California campus, after UC Berkeley. They met resistance from UC Berkeley alumni, Northern California members of the state legislature and then-UC President Benjamin Ide Wheeler, who were all vigorously opposed to the idea of a southern campus. However, David Prescott Barrows, the new President of the University of California in 1919, did not share Wheeler's objections. On May 23, 1919, the Southern Californians' efforts were rewarded when Governor William D. Stephens signed Assembly Bill 626 into law, which acquired the land and buildings and transformed the Los Angeles Normal School into the Southern Branch of the University of California. The same legislation added its general undergraduate program, the Junior College. The Southern Branch campus opened on September 15 of that year, offering two-year undergraduate programs to 250 Junior College students and 1,250 students in the Teachers College. Southern Californians continued to fight Northern Californians for the right to three and then four years of instruction. In late 1923, the Board of Regents authorized a fourth year of instruction and transformed the Junior College into the College of Letters and Science, which awarded its first bachelor's degrees in 1925. Under UC President William Wallace Campbell, enrollment at the Southern Branch expanded so rapidly that by the mid-1920s the institution was outgrowing the 25 acre Vermont Avenue location. The Regents announced the new "Beverly Site" — just west of Beverly Hills — in 1925. After the athletic teams entered the Pacific Coast conference in 1926, the Southern Branch student council adopted the nickname "Bruins", a name offered by the student council at UC Berkeley. On February 1, 1927, the Regents renamed the Southern Branch the University of California at Los Angeles. In the same year, the state broke ground in Westwood on land sold for $1 million, less than one-third its value, by real estate developers Edwin and Harold Janss, for whom the Janss Steps are named. The campus in Westwood opened to students in 1929. The original four buildings were the College Library (now Powell Library), Royce Hall, the Physics-Biology Building (which became the Humanities Building and is now the Renee and David Kaplan Hall), and the Chemistry Building (now Haines Hall), arrayed around a quadrangular courtyard on the 400 acre (1.6 km2) campus. The first undergraduate classes on the new campus were held in 1929 with 5,500 students. UCLA was permitted to award the master's degree in 1933, and the doctorate in 1936, against continued resistance from UC Berkeley. During its first 32 years, UCLA was treated as an off-site department of the main campus in Berkeley. As such, its presiding officer was called a "provost." In 1951, UCLA was formally elevated to co-equal status with UC Berkeley, and its presiding officer Raymond B. Allen was the first chief executive to be granted the title of chancellor. The appointment of Franklin David Murphy to the position of Chancellor in 1960 helped spark an era of tremendous growth of facilities and faculty honors. This era also secured UCLA's position as a proper university and not simply a branch of the UC system. On June 1, 2016, two men were killed in a murder-suicide at an engineering building in the university. School officials put the campus on lockdown as Los Angeles Police Department officers, including SWAT, cleared the campus. In February 2022, Matthew Harris, a former lecturer and postdoctoral fellow at UCLA, was arrested after allegedly making numerous threats of violence against students and faculty members of UCLA's Philosophy Department. In 2018, a student-led community coalition known as "Westwood Forward" successfully led an effort to break UCLA and Westwood Village away from the existing Westwood Neighborhood Council and form a new North Westwood Neighborhood Council, with over 2,000 out of 3,521 stakeholders voting in favor of the split. Westwood Forward's campaign focused on making housing more affordable and encouraging nightlife in Westwood by opposing many of the restrictions on housing developments and restaurants the Westwood Neighborhood Council had promoted. In 2022, UCLA signed an agreement to partner with the Tongva for the caretaking and landscaping of various areas of the campus. This included land use for ceremonial events and educational workshops and outreach events. In 2014, a graduate student adviser and professor in the history department, Gabriel Piterberg, was accused of sexually assaulting two students. A lawsuit was filed against the university by attorney Ann Olivarius for its failure to properly act on the accusations. An editorial in the student newspaper wrote about the university's response, "This outcome is an embarrassment for UCLA. Not only does this represent a huge step backward and a betrayal of students' trust, but it displays a startlingly low standard when it comes to treatment of sexual assault suspects." The university settled with the plaintiffs and suspended and fined Piterberg, then did more after student protest and legal efforts, including "separation from employment, denial of emeritus status, [and] denial of future employment with the University of California." In 2015, the U.S. Department of Education's Office for Civil Rights investigated UCLA and other universities for their compliance with Title IX and responses to sexual violence. In 2018, the university came into the national spotlight again when the Los Angeles Times reported that four employees had filed lawsuits against UCLA and the UC Board of Regents having accused their workplace supervisor of sexual harassment and the university of failing to properly handle abuse complaints. The harassment allegedly started in early 2016, according to the lawsuits. The women faced retaliation from other supervisors after they filed complaints. The retaliatory behavior included making the women do more work and not allowing them to take time off to see their attorney. They are seeking more than $120 million in damages. Subsequently, an audit by the California State Auditor found inconsistent discipline in UCLA sexual misconduct cases. The state audit also found that UCLA did not follow university policy or Title IX requirements. UCLA was one of several universities named in the largest college admissions scandal ever prosecuted by the United States Department of Justice. On Tuesday, March 12, 2019, UCLA men's soccer coach Jorge Salcedo was one of many coaches across the country charged with racketeering and conspiracy, and is alleged to have taken over $200,000 in bribes. Salcedo pleaded guilty to the charges in April 2020, and in March 2021 was sentenced to, among other things, 8 months in prison. The new UCLA campus in 1929 had four buildings: Royce Hall and Haines Hall on the north, and Powell Library and Kinsey Hall (now called Renee And David Kaplan Hall) on the south. The Janss Steps were the original 87-step entrance to the university that lead to the quad of these four buildings. Today, the campus includes 163 buildings across 419 acres (1.7 km2) in the western part of Los Angeles, north of the Westwood shopping district and just south of Sunset Boulevard. In terms of acreage, it is the second-smallest of the ten UC campuses. The Channel Islands are visible from the UCLA campus. The first buildings were designed by the local firm Allison & Allison. The Romanesque Revival style of these first four structures remained the predominant building style until the 1950s, when architect Welton Becket was hired to supervise the expansion of the campus over the next two decades. Romanesque Revival was chosen as an alternative to Collegiate Gothic to parallel the climate of Southern California to the warm, sunny weather of the Southern Mediterranean. Becket greatly streamlined its general appearance, adding several rows of minimalist, slab–shaped brick buildings to the southern half, the largest of these being the UCLA Medical Center. Architects such as A. Quincy Jones, William Pereira, and Paul Williams designed many subsequent structures on the campus during the mid-20th century. More recent additions include buildings designed by architects I.M. Pei, Venturi, Scott Brown and Associates, Richard Meier, Cesar Pelli, and Rafael Vinoly. To accommodate UCLA's rapidly growing student population, multiple construction and renovation projects are in progress, including expansions of the life sciences and engineering research complexes. This continuous construction gives UCLA the nickname "Under Construction Like Always". One notable building on campus is named after African-American alumnus Ralph Bunche, who received the 1950 Nobel Peace Prize for negotiating an armistice agreement between the Jews and Arabs in Israel. The entrance of Bunche Hall features a bust of him overlooking the Franklin D. Murphy Sculpture Garden. He was the first individual of non-European background and the first UCLA alumnus to be honored with the Prize. The Hannah Carter Japanese Garden is located a mile north of campus, in the community of Bel Air. The garden was designed by landscape architect Nagao Sakurai of Tokyo and garden designer Kazuo Nakamura of Kyoto in 1959. The garden was donated to UCLA by former UC regent and UCLA alumnus Edward W. Carter and his wife Hannah Carter in 1964 with the stipulation that it remains open to the public. After the garden was damaged by heavy rains in 1968, UCLA Professor of Art and Campus Architect Koichi Kawana took on the task of its reconstruction. The property was sold in 2016 and public access is no longer required. UCLA has attracted filmmakers for decades with its proximity to Hollywood. It was used to represent fictional Windsor College in Scream 2 (1997). In response to frequent requests for filming at the campus, UCLA has instated a policy to regulate filming and professional photography. "UCLA is located in Los Angeles, the same place as the American motion picture industry", said UCLA visiting professor of film and television Jonathan Kuntz. "So we're convenient for (almost) all of the movie companies, TV production companies, commercial companies and so on. We're right where the action is." The David Geffen School of Medicine, School of Nursing, School of Dentistry and Fielding School of Public Health constitute the professional schools of health science. The UCLA Health System operates the Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center, a hospital in Santa Monica and twelve primary care clinics throughout Los Angeles County. In addition, the UCLA David Geffen School of Medicine uses two Los Angeles County public hospitals as teaching hospitals—Harbor–UCLA Medical Center and Olive View–UCLA Medical Center—as well as the largest private nonprofit hospital on the west coast, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center. The Greater Los Angeles VA Medical Center is also a major teaching and training site for the university. The UCLA Medical Center made history in 1981 when Assistant Professor Michael Gottlieb first diagnosed AIDS. UCLA medical researchers also pioneered the use of positron emission tomography (PET) scanning to study brain function. Professor of Pharmacology Louis Ignarro was one of the recipients of the 1998 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for discovering the signaling cascade of nitric oxide, one of the most important molecules in cardiopulmonary physiology. The U.S. News & World Report Best Hospitals ranking for 2021 ranks UCLA Medical Center 3rd in the United States and 1st in the West. UCLA Medical Center was ranked within the top 20 in the United States for 15 out of 16 medical specialty areas examined. UCLA is classified among "R1: Doctoral Universities – Very high research activity" and had $1.32 billion in research expenditures in 2018. The 2024 U.S. News & World Report Best Colleges report ranked UCLA first among public universities and tied for 15th among national universities. The Washington Monthly ranked UCLA 22nd among national universities in 2021, with criteria based on research, community service, and social mobility. The Money Magazine Best Colleges ranking for 2015 ranked UCLA 26th in the United States, based on educational quality, affordability and alumni earnings. In 2014, The Daily Beast's Best Colleges report ranked UCLA 10th in the country. The Kiplinger Best College Values report for 2015 ranked UCLA 6th for value among American public universities. The Wall Street Journal and Times Higher Education ranked UCLA 26th among national universities in 2016. The 2013 Top American Research Universities report by the Center for Measuring University Performance ranks UCLA 11th in power, 12th in resources, faculty, and education, 14th in resources and education and 9th in education. The 2015 Princeton Review College Hopes & Worries Survey ranked UCLA as the No. 5 "Dream College" among students and the No. 10 "Dream College" among parents. The National Science Foundation ranked UCLA 6th among American universities for research and development expenditures in 2021 with $1.45 billion. In 2017 The New York Times ranked UCLA 1st for economic upward-mobility among 65 "elite" colleges in the United States. The Times Higher Education World University Rankings for 2017–2018 ranks UCLA 15th in the world for academics, No.1 US Public University for academics, and 13th in the world for reputation. In 2020, it ranked 16th among the universities around the world by SCImago Institutions Rankings. UCLA was ranked 33rd in the QS World University Rankings in 2017 and 12th in the world (10th in North America) by the Academic Ranking of World Universities (ARWU) in 2017. In 2017, the Center for World University Rankings (CWUR) ranked the university 15th in the world based on quality of education, alumni employment, quality of faculty, publications, influence, citations, broad impact, and patents. The 2017 U.S. News & World Report Best Global University Rankings report ranked UCLA 10th in the world. The CWTS Leiden ranking of universities based on scientific impact for 2017 ranks UCLA 14th in the world. The University Ranking by Academic Performance (URAP) conducted by Middle East Technical University for 2016–2017 ranked UCLA 12th in the world based on the quantity, quality and impact of research articles and citations. The Webometrics Ranking of World Universities for 2017 ranked UCLA 11th in the world based on the presence, impact, openness and excellence of its research publications. As of March 2021[update], the U.S. News & World Report Best Graduate Schools report ranked the Graduate School of Education and Information Studies (GSEIS) 3rd, the Anderson School of Management 18th, the David Geffen School of Medicine tied for 12th for Primary Care and 21st for Research, the School of Law 14th, the Henry Samueli School of Engineering and Applied Science (HSSEAS) 16th, the Jonathan and Karin Fielding School of Public Health 10th, and the School of Nursing 16th. The QS Global 200 MBA Rankings report for 2015 ranks the Anderson School of Management 9th among North American business schools. The 2014 Economist ranking of Full-time MBA programs ranks the Anderson School of Management 13th in the world. The 2014 Financial Times ranking of MBA programs ranks the Anderson School 26th in the world. The 2014 Bloomberg Businessweek ranking of Full-time MBA programs ranks the Anderson School of Management 11th in the United States. The 2014 Business Insider ranking of the world's best business schools ranks the Anderson School of Management 20th in the world. The 2014 Eduniversal Business Schools Ranking ranks the Anderson School of Management 15th in the United States. In 2015, career website Vault ranked the Anderson School of Management 16th among American business schools, and the School of Law 15th among American law schools. In 2015, financial community website QuantNet ranked the Anderson School of Management's Master of Financial Engineering program 12th among North American financial engineering programs. The U.S. News & World Report Best Online Programs report for 2016 ranked the Henry Samueli School of Engineering and Applied Science (HSSEAS) 1st among online graduate engineering programs. Departments ranked in the national top ten by the 2016 U.S. News & World Report Best Graduate Schools report are Clinical Psychology (1st), Fine Arts (2nd), Psychology (2nd), Medical School: Primary Care (6th), Math (7th), History (9th), Sociology (9th), English (10th), Political Science (10th), and Public Health (10th). Departments ranked in the global top ten by the 2016 U.S. News & World Report Best Global Universities report are Arts and Humanities (7th), Biology and Biochemistry (10th), Chemistry (6th), Clinical Medicine (10th), Materials Science (10th), Mathematics (7th), Neuroscience and Behavior (7th), Psychiatry/Psychology (3rd) and Social Sciences and Public Health (8th). Departments ranked in the global top ten by the Academic Ranking of World Universities (ARWU) for 2015 are Mathematics (8th) and Computer Science (9th). Departments ranked in the global top ten by the QS World University Rankings for 2020 are English Language & Literature (9th), Linguistics (10th), Modern Languages (7th), Medicine (7th), Psychology (6th), Mathematics (9th), Geography (5th), Communications & Media Studies (13th), Education (11th) and Sociology (7th). Academic field rankings in the global top ten according to the Academic Ranking of World Universities (ARWU) for 2015 are Clinical Medicine and Pharmacy (10th). Academic field rankings in the global top ten according to the Times Higher Education World University Rankings for 2014–2015 include Arts & Humanities (10th), Clinical, Pre-clinical and Health (9th), Engineering and Technology (9th), Physical Sciences (9th), and Social Sciences (9th). Academic field rankings in the global top ten according to the QS World University Rankings for 2015 are Arts & Humanities (10th) and Life Sciences and Medicine (10th). The Institute of International Education ranked UCLA the American university with the seventh-most international students in 2016 (behind NYU, USC, Arizona State, Columbia University, The University of Illinois, and Northeastern University). In 2014, Business Insider ranked UCLA 5th in the world for the number of alumni working at Google (behind Stanford, Berkeley, Carnegie Mellon, and MIT). In 2015, Business Insider ranked UCLA 10th among American universities with the most students hired by Silicon Valley companies. In 2015, research firm PitchBook ranked UCLA 9th in the world for venture capital raised by undergraduate alumni, and 11th in the world for producing the most MBA graduate alumni who are entrepreneurs backed by venture capital. UCLA's library system has over nine million books and 70,000 serials in over twelve libraries and eleven other archives, reading rooms, and research centers. It is the United States' 12th largest library in number of volumes. The first library, University Library (presently Powell Library), was founded in 1884. Lawrence Powell became librarian in 1944, and began a series of system overhauls and modifications, and in 1959, was named Dean of the School of Library Service. More libraries were added as previous ones filled. According to the Association of American Medical Colleges (AAMC), UCLA supplies the most undergraduate applicants to U.S. medical schools among all American universities. In 2015, UCLA supplied 961 medical school applicants, followed by UC Berkeley with 819 and the University of Florida with 802. Among first-time medical school applicants who received their bachelor's degree from UCLA in 2014, 51% were admitted to at least one U.S. medical school. U.S. News & World Report rates UCLA "Most Selective" and The Princeton Review rates its admissions selectivity of 98 out of 99. 149,815 prospective freshmen applied for Fall 2021, the most of any four-year university in the United States. Admission rates vary according to the residency of applicants. For Fall 2019, California residents had an admission rate of 12.0%, while out-of-state U.S. residents had an admission rate of 16.4% and internationals had an admission rate of 8.4%. UCLA's overall freshman admit rate for the Fall 2019 term was 12.3%. As of 2020, the basis for selection at UCLA includes several academic and nonacademic factors. Those considered "very important" are all academic; they are rigor of secondary school record, academic GPA, standardized test scores, and application essay(s). Those considered "important" are talent/ability, character/personal qualities, volunteer work, work experience, and extracurricular activities. Factors that are not considered at all include class rank, interviews, alumni relation, and racial/ethnic status. UCLA is need-blind for domestic applicants. Enrolled freshman for Fall 2019 had an unweighted GPA of 3.90, an SAT interquartile range of 1280–1510, and an ACT interquartile range of 27–34. The SAT interquartile ranges were 640–740 for reading/writing and 640–790 for math. Among the admitted freshman applicants for the Fall 2019 term, 43.1% chose to enroll at UCLA. UCLA's freshman admission rate varies drastically across colleges. For Fall 2016, the College of Letters and Science had an admission rate of 21.2%, the Henry Samueli School of Engineering and Applied Science (HSSEAS) had an admission rate of 12.4%, the Herb Alpert School of Music had an admission rate of 23.5%, the School of the Arts and Architecture had an admission rate of 10.3%, the School of Nursing had an admission rate of 2.2%, and the School of Theater, Film and Television had an admission rate of 4.4%. One of the major issues is the decreased admission of African-Americans since the passage of Proposition 209 in 1996, prohibiting state governmental institutions from considering race, sex, or ethnicity, specifically in the areas of public employment, public contracting, and public education. UCLA responded by shifting to a holistic admissions process in Fall 2007, which evaluates applicants based on their opportunities in high school, personal hardships, and unusual circumstances at home. For Fall 2020, the David Geffen School of Medicine admitted 2.9% of its applicants, making it the 8th most selective U.S. medical school. The School of Law had a median undergraduate GPA of 3.82 and median Law School Admission Test (LSAT) score of 170 for the enrolled class of 2024. The Anderson School of Management had a middle-80% GPA range of 3.1–3.8 and an average Graduate Management Admission Test (GMAT) score of 711 for the enrolled MBA class of 2024. The School of Dentistry had an average overall GPA of 3.65, an average science GPA of 3.6 and an average Dental Admissions Test (DAT) score of 22.8 for the enrolled class of 2025. The Graduate School of Nursing has an acceptance rate of 33% as of 2022[update]. For Fall 2020, the Henry Samueli School of Engineering and Applied Science (HSSEAS) had a graduate acceptance rate of 27%. The university has a significant impact in the Los Angeles economy. It is the fifth largest employer in the county (after Los Angeles County, the Los Angeles Unified School District, the federal government and the City of Los Angeles) and the seventh largest in the region. The UCLA trademark "is the exclusive property of the Regents of the University of California", but it is managed, protected, and licensed through UCLA Trademarks and Licensing, a division of the Associated Students UCLA, the largest student employer on campus. As such, the ASUCLA also has a share in trademark profits. Apparel, fashion accessories and other items with UCLA'S logo and insignea are popular in many parts of the world due to both the university's academic and athletic prestige, and its association with colorful images of Southern California life and culture. This demand for UCLA-branded merchandise has inspired the licensing of its trademark to UCLA brand stores throughout Europe, the Middle East and Asia. Since 1980, 15 UCLA stores have opened in South Korea, and 49 are currently open in China. The newest store recently opened in Kuwait; there are also stores in Mexico, Singapore and India. UCLA earns about $400,000 in royalties each year through its international licensing program. UCLA has various store locations around campus, with the main store in Ackerman Union. In addition, UCLA-themed products are sold at the gift shop of Fowler Museum on campus. Due to licensing and trademarks, products with UCLA logos and insignia are usually higher priced than their unlicensed counterparts. These products are popular among visitors, who buy them as gifts and souvenirs. The UCLA store offers some products, such as notebooks and folders, in both licensed (logoed) and cheaper unlicensed (un-logoed) options, but for other products the latter option is often unavailable. Students employed part-time by ASUCLA at UCLA Stores and Restaurants receive discounts when they shop at UCLA Stores. The school's sports teams are called the Bruins, represented by the colors true blue and gold. The Bruins participate in NCAA Division I as part of the Pac-12 Conference. Two notable sports facilities serve as home venues for UCLA sports. The Bruin men's football team plays home games at the Rose Bowl in Pasadena; the team won a national title in 1954. The basketball and volleyball teams, and the women's gymnastics team compete at Pauley Pavilion on campus. The school also sponsors cross country, soccer, women's rowing, golf, tennis, water polo, track and field, and women's softball. The mascots are Joe and Josephine Bruin, and the fight songs are Sons of Westwood and Mighty Bruins. The alma mater is Hail to the Hills of Westwood. When Henry "Red" Sanders came to UCLA to coach football in 1949, the uniforms were redesigned. Sanders added a gold loop on the shoulders—the UCLA Stripe. The navy blue was changed to a lighter shade of blue. Sanders figured that the baby blue would look better on the field and in film. He dubbed the uniform "Powder Keg Blue", a powder blue with an explosive kick. This would also differentiate UCLA from all other UC teams, whose official colors are blue and gold. UCLA competes in all major Division I sports and has won 134 national championships, including 121 NCAA championships. Only Stanford University has more NCAA team championships, with 132. On April 21, 2018, UCLA's women's gymnastics team defeated Oklahoma Sooners to win its 7th NCAA National Championship as well as UCLA's 115th overall team title. Most recently, UCLA's women's soccer team defeated Florida State to win its first NCAA National Championship along with women's tennis who defeated North Carolina to win its second NCAA National title ever. UCLA's softball program is also outstanding. Women's softball won their NCAA-leading 12th National Championship, on June 4, 2019. The women's water polo team is also dominant, with a record 7 NCAA championships. Notably, the team helped UCLA become the first school to win 100 NCAA championships overall when they won their fifth on May 13, 2007. The men's water polo team won UCLA's 112th, 113th, and 114th national championships, defeating USC in the championship game three times: on December 7, 2014, on December 6, 2015, and on December 3, 2017. On October 9, 2016, the top-ranked men's water polo team broke the NCAA record for consecutive wins when they defeated UC Davis for their 52nd straight win. This toppled Stanford's previous record of 51 consecutive wins set in 1985–87. The men's water polo team has become a dominant sport on campus with a total of 11 national championships. Among UCLA's 118 championship titles, some of the more notable victories are in men's basketball. Under legendary coach John Wooden, UCLA men's basketball teams won 10 NCAA championships, including a record seven consecutive, in 1964, 1965, 1967–1973, and 1975, and an 11th was added under then-coach Jim Harrick in 1995 (through 2008, the most consecutive by any other team is two). From 1971 to 1974, UCLA men's basketball won an unprecedented 88 consecutive games. UCLA has also shown dominance in men's volleyball, with 19 national championships. All 19 teams were led by former coach Al Scates, which ties him with John McDonnell of the University of Arkansas as NCAA leader for national championships in a single sport. UCLA is one of only six universities (Michigan, Stanford, Ohio State, California, and Florida being the others) to have won national championships in all three major men's sports (baseball, basketball, and football). UCLA shares a traditional sports rivalry with the University of Southern California. UCLA teams have won the second-most NCAA Division I-sanctioned team championships, while USC has the third-most. Only Stanford University, a fellow Pac-12 member also located in California, has more than either UCLA or USC. The football rivalry is distinctive for two of the strongest conference programs located in one city. In football, UCLA has one national champion team and 16 conference titles, compared to USC's 11 national championships and 37 conference championships. The two football teams compete for annual possession of the Victory Bell, the trophy of the rivalry football game. The schools share a rivalry in many other sports, and are each the best in the nation for many. UCLA has won 19 NCAA Championships in men's volleyball, 11 in men's basketball, 12 in Softball, and 7 in women's water polo, the most of any school in those sports. USC has won 26 NCAA Championships in Men's Outdoor Track and Field, 21 in men's tennis, and 12 in baseball, also the most of any school in each respective sport. The annual SoCal BMW Crosstown Cup compares the two schools based on their performance in 19 varsity sports; UCLA has won five times and USC has won nine times. This rivalry extends to the Olympic Games, where UCLA athletes have won 250 medals over a span of 50 years while USC athletes have won 287 over 100 years. UCLA and USC also compete in the We Run The City 5K, an annual charity race to raise donations for Special Olympics Southern California. The race is located on the campus of one of the schools and switches to the other campus each year. USC won the race in 2013 and 2015, while UCLA won the race in 2012, 2014, 2016, and 2017. The campus is located near prominent entertainment venues such as the Getty Center, the Los Angeles County Museum of Art (LACMA) and the Santa Monica Pier. UCLA offers classical orchestras, intramural sports, and over 1000 student organizations UCLA is also home to 66 fraternities and sororities, which represent 13% of the undergraduate population. Phrateres, a non-exclusive social-service club for women was founded here in 1924 by the Dean of Women, Helen Matthewson Laughlin. Students and staff participate in dinghy sailing, surfing, windsurfing, rowing, and kayaking at the UCLA Marina Aquatic Center in Marina del Rey. UCLA is home to a slew of performing arts groups, including an improv comedy team called Rapid Fire. UCLA's first contemporary a cappella group, Awaken A Cappella, was founded in 1992. The all-male group, Bruin Harmony, has enjoyed a successful career since its inception in 2006, portraying a collegiate a cappella group in The Social Network (2010), while the ScatterTones finished in second-place in the International Championship of Collegiate A Cappella (ICCA) in 2012, 2013, and 2014, and third-place in 2017, 2019, and 2022. In 2020, The A Cappella Archive ranked the ScatterTones at #2 among all ICCA-competing groups. Resonance, founded in 2012, was an ICCA finalist in 2021. Other a cappella groups include Signature, Random Voices, Medleys, YOUTHphonics, Deviant Voices, AweChords, Pitch Please, Da Verse, Naya Zaamana, Jewkbox, On That Note, Tinig Choral, and Cadenza. YOUTHphonics and Medleys are UCLA's only nonprofit service-oriented a cappella groups. There are a variety of cultural organizations on campus, such as Nikkei Student Union (NSU), Japanese Student Association (JSA), Association of Chinese Americans (ACA), Chinese Students and Scholars Association (CSSA), Chinese Music Ensemble (CME), Chinese Cultural Dance Club (CCDC), Taiwanese American Union (TAU), Taiwanese Student Association (TSA), Hong Kong Student Society (HKSS), Hanoolim Korean Cultural Awareness Group, Samahang Pilipino, Vietnamese Student Union (VSU), and Thai Smakom. Many of these organizations have an annual "culture night" consisting of drama and dance which raises awareness of culture and history to the campus and community. Additionally, there are over twenty LGBTQ organizations on campus, including the undergraduate student organizations Queer Alliance, BlaQue, Lavender Health Alliance, OutWrite Newsmagazine, Queer and Trans in STEM (qtSTEM), and Transgender UCLA Pride (TransUP) as well as the graduate student organizations Out@Anderson, OUTLaw, and Luskin PRIDE. Notably, OutWrite, established under the name TenPercent in 1979, is the first college queer newsmagazine in the country. UCLA operates on a quarter calendar with the exception of the UCLA School of Law and the UCLA School of Medicine, which operate on a semester calendar. UCLA's official charity is UniCamp, founded in 1934. It is a week-long summer camp for under-served children from the greater Los Angeles area, with UCLA volunteer counselors. UniCamp runs for seven weeks throughout the summer at Camp River Glen in the San Bernardino National Forest. Because UniCamp is a non-profit organization, student volunteers from UCLA also fundraise money throughout the year to allow these children to attend summer camp. The Pediatric AIDS Coalition organizes the annual Dance Marathon in Pauley Pavilion, where thousands of students raise a minimum of $250 and dance for 26 hours to support the Elizabeth Glaser Pediatric AIDS Foundation, Project Kindle, and the UCLA AIDS Institute. Dancers are not allowed to sit (except to use the restroom) during the marathon, literally taking a stand against pediatric AIDS, and symbolizing the suffering of affected children around the world. In 2015, Dance Marathon at UCLA raised $446,157. During Finals Week, UCLA students participate in "Midnight Yell", where they yell as loudly as possible for a few minutes at midnight to release some stress from studying. The quarterly Undie Run takes place during the Wednesday evening of Finals Week, when students run through the campus in their underwear or in skimpy costumes. With the increasing safety hazards and Police and Administration involvement, a student committee changed the route to a run through campus to Shapiro Fountain, which culminates with students dancing in the fountain. The Undie Run has spread to other American universities, including the University of Texas at Austin, Arizona State University, and Syracuse University.[citation needed] The Alumni Association sponsors several events, usually large extravaganzas involving huge amounts of coordination, such as the 70-year-old Spring Sing, organized by the Student Alumni Association (SAA). UCLA's oldest tradition, Spring Sing is an annual gala of student talent, which is held at either Pauley Pavilion or the outdoor Los Angeles Tennis Center. The committee bestows the George and Ira Gershwin Lifetime Achievement Award each year to a major contributor to the music industry. Past recipients have included Stevie Wonder, Frank Sinatra, Ella Fitzgerald, James Taylor, Ray Charles, Natalie Cole, Quincy Jones, Lionel Richie, and in 2009, Julie Andrews. The Dinner for 12 Strangers is a gathering of students, alumni, administration and faculty to network around different interests. The "Beat 'SC Bonfire and Rally" occurs the week before the USC rivalry football game. The USAC Cultural Affairs Commission hosts the JazzReggae Festival, a two-day concert on Memorial Day weekend that attracts more than 20,000 attendees. The JazzReggae Festival is the largest, entirely student produced and run event of its kind on the West Coast. Sigma Eta Pi and Bruin Entrepreneurs organize LA Hacks, an annual hackathon where students from around the United States come to build technology products. LA Hacks established itself as the largest hackathon in the United States when over 1500 students participated on April 11–13, 2014. LA Hacks also holds the record for the most funds raised via corporate sponsorships with $250,000 raised. Some of the tech world's most prominent people have given talks and judged projects at LA Hacks, including Evan Spiegel (Founder and CEO of Snapchat), Alexis Ohanian (co-founder of Reddit), Sam Altman (President of Y Combinator) and Chris De Wolfe (Founder of Myspace). The Associated Students UCLA (ASUCLA) encompasses the student government and student-led enterprises at UCLA. ASUCLA has four major components: the Undergraduate Students Association, the Graduate Students Association, Student Media, and Services & Enterprises. However, in common practice, the term ASUCLA refers to the services and enterprises component. This includes the Student Store, Bookstore, Food Services, Student Union, etc. These commercial enterprises generate approximately $40 million in annual revenues. As a nonprofit corporation, the financial goal of ASUCLA is to provide quality services and programs for students. ASUCLA is governed by a student-majority Board of Directors. The Undergraduate Students Association and Graduate Students Association each appoint three members plus one alternative. In addition to the student members, there are representatives appointed by the administration, the academic senate, and the alumni association. The "services and enterprises" portion of ASUCLA is run by a professional executive director who oversees some 300 staff and 2,000 student employees. The Graduate Students Association is the governing body for approximately 13,000 graduate and professional students at UCLA. The Undergraduate Students Association Council (USAC) is the governing body of the Undergraduate Students Association (USA) whose membership comprises every UCLA undergraduate student. As of 2015[update], the student body had two major political slates: Bruins United and Let's Act. In the Spring 2016 election, the two competing parties were Bruins United and Waves of Change—a smaller faction that broke off of Lets Act. USAC's fourteen student officers and commissioners are elected by members of the Undergraduate Students Association at an annual election held during Spring Quarter. In addition to its fourteen elected members, USAC includes appointed representatives of the Administration, the Alumni, and the Faculty, as well as two ex-officio members, the ASUCLA Executive Director and a student Finance Committee Chairperson who is appointed by the USA President and approved by USAC. All members of USAC may participate fully in Council deliberations, but only the elected officers, minus the USAC President may vote. Along with the council, the student government also includes a seven-member Judicial Board, which similar to the Supreme Court, serves as the judicial branch of government and reviews actions of the council. These seven students are appointed by the student body president and confirmed by the council. USAC's programs offers additional services to the campus and surrounding communities. For example, each year approximately 40,000 students, faculty and staff attend programs of the Campus Events Commission, including a low-cost film program, a speakers program which presents leading figures from a wide range of disciplines, and performances by dozens of entertainers. Two to three thousand UCLA undergraduates participate annually in the more than twenty voluntary outreach programs run by the Community Service Commission. A large corps of undergraduate volunteers also participate in programs run by the Student Welfare Commission, such as AIDS Awareness, Substance Abuse Awareness, Blood Drives and CPR/First Aid Training. The film program is part of the Bruin Film Society, which is also a registered organization to host advance screenings of films during Oscars season. It hosts other events, like filmmaker panels, through its partnership with production and distribution company A24. UCLA Student Media is the home of UCLA's newspaper, magazines, and radio station. Most student media publications are governed by the ASUCLA Communications Board. The Daily Bruin is UCLA's most prominent student publication. Founded in 1919 under the name Cub Californian, it has since then developed into Los Angeles' third-most circulated newspaper. It has won dozens of national awards and is regularly commended for layout and content. In 2016, the paper won two National Pacemaker Awards – one for the best college newspaper in the country, and another for the best college media website in the country. UCLA Student Media also publishes seven special-interest news magazines: Al-Talib, Fem, Ha'Am, La Gente, Nommo, Pacific Ties, and OutWrite, a school yearbook, BruinLife, and the student-run radio station, UCLA Radio. Student groups such as The Forum for Energy Economics and Development also publish yearly journals focused on energy technologies and industries. There is also a student-run satire newspaper, The Westwood Enabler. There are also numerous graduate student-run journals at UCLA, such as Carte Italiane, Issues in Applied Linguistics, and Mediascape. Many of these publications are available through open access. The School of Law publishes the UCLA Law Review which is currently ranked seventh among American law schools. UCLA provides housing to over 10,000 undergraduate and 2,900 graduate students. Most undergraduate students are housed in 14 complexes on the western side of campus, referred to by students as "The Hill". Students can live in halls, plazas, suites, or university apartments, which vary in pricing and privacy. Housing plans also offer students access to dining facilities, which have been ranked by the Princeton Review as some of the best in the United States. Dining halls are located in Covel Commons, Rieber Hall, Carnesale Commons and De Neve Plaza. In winter 2012, a dining hall called The Feast at Rieber opened to students. The newest dining hall (as of Winter Quarter 2014) is Bruin Plate, located in the Carnesale Commons (commonly referred to as Sproul Plaza). Residential cafes include Bruin Cafe, Rendezvous, The Study at Hedrick, and Cafe 1919. UCLA currently offers four years guaranteed housing to its incoming freshmen, and two years to incoming transfer students. There are four types of housing available for students: residential halls, deluxe residential halls, residential plazas, and residential suites. Available on the hill are study rooms, basketball courts, tennis courts, and Sunset Recreational Center which includes three swimming pools. Graduate students are housed in one of five apartment complexes. Weyburn Terrace is located just southwest of the campus in Westwood Village. The other four are roughly five miles south of UCLA in Palms and Mar Vista. They too vary in pricing and privacy. Approximately 400 students live at the University Cooperative Housing Association, located two blocks off campus. Students who are involved in Greek life have the option to also live in Greek housing while at UCLA. Sorority houses are located east of campus on Hilgard Avenue, and fraternity houses are located west of campus throughout Westwood Village. A student usually lives with 50+ students in Greek housing. Hospitality constituents of the university include departments not directly related to student life or administration. The Hospitality department manages the university's two on-campus hotels, the UCLA Guest House and the Meyer and Renee Luskin Conference Center. The 61-room Guest House services those visiting the university for campus-related activities. The department also manages the UCLA Conference Center, a 40-acre (0.2 km2) conference center in the San Bernardino Mountains near Lake Arrowhead. Hospitality also operates UCLA Catering, a vending operation, and a summer conference center located on the Westwood campus. The UCLA Chabad House is a community center for Jewish students operated by the Orthodox Jewish Chabad movement. Established in 1969, it was the first Chabad House at a university. In 1980, three students died in a fire in the original building of the UCLA Chabad House. The present building was erected in their memory. The building, completed in 1984, was the first of many Chabad houses worldwide designed as architectural reproductions of the residence of the Lubavitcher Rebbe, Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson at 770 Eastern Parkway in Brooklyn, New York. The Chabad House hosts the UCLA chapter of The Rohr Jewish Learning Institute's Sinai Scholars Society. In January 2013, Chancellor Gene Block launched the UCLA Healthy Campus Initiative (HCI), envisioned and supported by Jane and Terry Semel. The Semel HCI prioritizes the health and wellness of UCLA students, staff, and faculty by "making the healthy choice the easy choice." The goal of the initiative is to make UCLA the healthiest campus in the country, and to share best practices and research with other communities, locally and beyond. The initiative is a campuswide, multi-year effort that champions programs such as the tobacco-free policy, expansion of campus gardens, stairwell makeovers, bicycle infrastructure improvements, healthy and sustainable dining options, and peer counseling, among others. The UCLA Healthy Campus Initiative is credited with providing inspiration for national initiatives including the Partnership for a Healthier America (PHA) Healthier Campus Initiative and the University of California Office of the President (UCOP) Global Food Initiative (GFI). In November 2014, UCLA was one of the 20 inaugural colleges and universities to pledge to adopt PHA's guidelines for food and nutrition, physical activity and programming over three years. The Semel HCI is a member of both the Menus of Change Research Collaborative and the Teaching Kitchen Collaborative, and a contributor to The Huffington Post. UCLA's faculty and alumni have won a number of awards including: 105 Academy Awards 278 Emmy Awards 1 Fields Medal 3 Turing Awards 11 Fulbright Scholars (since 2000) 78 Guggenheim Fellows 50 Grammy Awards 16 MacArthur Fellows 1 Mark Twain Prize for American Humor 10 National Medals of Science 16 Nobel Laureates 3 Presidential Medals of Freedom 1 Pritzker Prize in Architecture 3 Pulitzer Prizes 1 Rome Prize in Design 12 Rhodes Scholars 1 Medal of Honor 2 Mitchell Scholars Notable UCLA alumni include: Jackie Robinson, first African-American player in the MLB James Franco, Academy Award-nominated actor Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, 2nd in NBA all-time scoring Sean Astin, actor Arthur Ashe, former world #1 tennis player, who won three Grand Slam titles Sara Bareilles, Grammy Award-winning singer-songwriter Randy Newman, singer-songwriter Leonard Nimoy, actor, who played Spock in Star Trek Ben Shapiro, conservative political commentator Stefano Bloch, author, graffiti artist, academic Jack Black, actor and comedian Mayim Bialik, actress and host of Jeopardy! Tom Bradley, first African-American Mayor of Los Angeles Carol Burnett, actress Steve Martin, actor and comedian Rob Reiner, actor and filmmaker Ben Stiller, actor and comedian Johnnie Cochran, lawyer and civil rights activist Francis Ford Coppola, Academy Award-winning filmmaker Paul Schrader, screenwriter and film director Troy Aikman, Pro Football Hall of Fame member Mark Harmon, actor and producer George Takei, actor and activist Kirsten Gillibrand, U.S. Senator from New York James Dean, actor H.R. Haldeman, former White House Chief of Staff Bill Walton, Basketball Hall of Fame member Jimmy Connors, former world #1 tennis player, who won eight Grand Slam titles Michael Morhaime, co-founder of Blizzard Entertainment Jim Morrison, lead singer of The Doors Tim Robbins, Academy Award-winning actor Russell Westbrook, NBA MVP and all-time leader in triple-doubles Sam Mewis, professional soccer player for USWNT and KCCFC Abby Dahlkemper, professional soccer player for USWNT and San Diego Wave FC Azadeh Kian, Social Scientist and Director at Paris Cité University Jessie Fleming, professional soccer player for CANWNT and Chelsea F.C. Women As of October 2023, 28 Nobel laureates have been affiliated with UCLA: 12 professors, 8 alumni and 10 researchers (three overlaps). Two other faculty members winning the Nobel Prize were Bertrand Russell and Al Gore, who each had a short stay at UCLA. The alumni Nobel laureates include Richard Heck (Chemistry, 2010); Elinor Ostrom (Economic Sciences, 2009); and Randy Schekman (Physiology or Medicine, 2013). Fifty-two UCLA professors have been awarded Guggenheim Fellowships, and sixteen are MacArthur Foundation Fellows. Mathematics professor Terence Tao was awarded the 2006 Fields Medal. Geography professor Jared Diamond won the 1998 Pulitzer Prize for his book Guns, Germs, and Steel. Two UCLA history professors have each won 2008 Pulitzer Prizes for general nonfiction and history. Saul Friedländer, noted scholar of the Nazi Holocaust, won the prize for general nonfiction for his 2006 book, The Years of Extermination: Nazi Germany and the Jews, 1939–1945, and Daniel Walker Howe for his 2007 book, What Hath God Wrought: The Transformation of America, 1815–1848. A number of UCLA alumni are notable politicians. In the State of Hawaii, Ben Cayetano ('68), became the first Filipino American to be elected Governor of a U.S. state. In the U.S. House of Representatives, Henry Waxman ('61, '64) represented California's 30th congressional district and was Chairman of the House Energy and Commerce Committee. U.S. Representative Judy Chu ('74) represents California's 32nd congressional district and became the first Chinese American woman elected to the U.S. Congress in 2009. Kirsten Gillibrand ('91) is U.S. Senator from the State of New York and former U.S. Representative for New York's 20th congressional district. UCLA boasts two Mayors of Los Angeles: Tom Bradley (1937–1940), the city's only African-American mayor, and Antonio Villaraigosa ('77), who served as mayor from 2005 to 2013. Nao Takasugi was the mayor of Oxnard, California and the first Asian-American California assemblyman. Azadeh Kian, PhD at UCLA and Director of social sciences at University of Paris, is a prominent expert on Iranian politics. H. R. Haldeman ('48) and John Ehrlichman ('48) are among the most infamous alumni because of their activities during the 1972 Watergate Scandal. Ben Shapiro (BA '04) is an American conservative political commentator, nationally syndicated columnist, author, radio talk show host, and attorney. He is the editor-in-chief at The Daily Wire. Michael Morhaime (BA '90), Allen Adham (BA '90) and Frank Pearce (BA '90) are the founders of Blizzard Entertainment, developer of the award-winning Warcraft, StarCraft and Diablo computer game franchises. Tom Anderson (MA '00) is a co-founder of the social networking website Myspace. Computer scientist Vint Cerf ('70, '72) is vice president and Chief Internet Evangelist at Google and the person most widely considered the "father of the Internet." Henry Samueli ('75) is co-founder of Broadcom Corporation and owner of the Anaheim Ducks. Susan Wojcicki (MBA '98) is the former CEO of YouTube. Travis Kalanick is one of the founders of Uber. Guy Kawasaki (MBA '79) is one of the earliest employees at Apple. Nathan Myhrvold is the founder of Microsoft Research. Bill Gross (MBA '71) co-founded Pacific Investment Management (PIMCO). Laurence Fink (BA '74, MBA '76) is chairman and CEO of the world's largest money-management firm BlackRock. Donald Prell (BA '48) is a venture capitalist and founder of Datamation computer magazine. Ben Horowitz (MS '90) is a co-founder of the Silicon Valley venture capital firm Andreessen Horowitz. UCLA alumni have also achieved prominence in the arts and entertainment. John Williams is laureate conductor at the Boston Pops Orchestra and Academy Award-winning composer of the Star Wars film score. Martin Sherwin ('71) was awarded the Pulitzer Prize for American Prometheus: The Triumph and Tragedy of J. Robert Oppenheimer. Actors Ben Stiller, Tim Robbins, James Franco, George Takei, Mayim Bialik, Sean Astin, Holland Roden, Danielle Panabaker, and Milo Ventimiglia are also UCLA alumni. Popular music artists Sara Bareilles, The Doors, Linkin Park, and Maroon 5 all attended UCLA. Ryan Dusick of Maroon 5 majored in English. Giada De Laurentiis is a program host at Food Network and former chef at Spago. Greg Graffin, lead singer of punk rock band Bad Religion, earned a master's degree in geology at UCLA, and used to teach a course on evolution there. Carol Burnett was the winner of the Mark Twain Prize for American Humor in 2013 (also winner of Emmys, a Peabody and a Presidential Medal of Freedom in 2005). Francis Ford Coppola ('67) was the director of the gangster film trilogy The Godfather, The Outsiders starring Tom Cruise, and the Vietnam War film Apocalypse Now and Dustin Lance Black is the Academy Award-winning screenwriter of the film Milk. Meb Keflezighi ('98) is the winner of the 2014 Boston Marathon and the 2004 Olympic silver medalist in the marathon. The UCLA men's basketball team has produced Basketball Hall of Fame players such as Bill Walton and Kareem Abdul-Jabbar as well as current NBA players Kevin Love and Russell Westbrook. Noted Bruins baseball players include Troy Glaus, Chase Utley, Brandon Crawford, Gerrit Cole, and Trevor Bauer. Los Angeles Dodgers manager Dave Roberts won World Series titles as a member of the 2004 Boston Red Sox and in 2020 as manager of the Dodgers. UCLA also boasts an excellent military background, with hundreds of alumni serving their nation. Carlton Skinner was a U.S. Coast Guard Commander who racially integrated that service at the end of World War II on the Sea Cloud. He was also the first civilian governor of Guam. Francis B. Wai is, to date, the only Chinese-American and the first Asian-American to be awarded the Congressional Medal of Honor for his actions in World War II. UCLA also lost an alumnus in early 2007 when Second Lieutenant Mark Daily was killed in Mosul, Iraq after his HMMWV was hit by an IED. Lieutenant Daily's service is marked by a plaque located on the northern face of the Student Activities Center (SAC), where the ROTC halls are currently located. As of August 1, 2016, the top three places where UCLA alumni work are Kaiser Permanente with 1,459+ alumni, UCLA Health with 1,127+ alumni, and Google with 1,058+ alumni. 2019 College Admissions Bribery Scandal Daily Bruin – UCLA Student Newspaper Other consists of Multiracial Americans & those who prefer to not say. The percentage of students who received an income-based federal Pell grant intended for low-income students. The percentage of students who are a part of the American middle class at the bare minimum.  This article incorporates public domain material from websites or documents of the United States Coast Guard. Dundjerski, Marina (2011). UCLA: The First Century. Los Angeles: Third Millennium Publishing. p. 46. ISBN 9781906507374. Archived from the original on August 20, 2020. Retrieved February 3, 2019. "A brief history of the University of California". Academic Personnel and Programs. Archived from the original on October 21, 2020. Retrieved December 3, 2020. As of June 30, 2022; includes assets managed by the UC Regents in the General Endowment Pool for the exclusive benefit of UCLA. "Annual Endowment Report, Fiscal Year Ended June 30, 2022" (PDF). University of California. Archived (PDF) from the original on February 8, 2023. Retrieved August 27, 2023. "The Inauguration of Gene D. Block as Chancellor of UCLA". UCLA. May 13, 2008. Archived from the original on April 2, 2015. Retrieved March 8, 2015. "Darnell Hunt named executive vice chancellor and provost" (Press release). UCLA. Archived from the original on July 17, 2019. Retrieved November 30, 2019. "Facts and Figures". UCLA. 2023. "UCLA APB - Enrollment". UCLA Academic Planning and Budget. Archived from the original on June 4, 2022. Retrieved June 18, 2022. "University of California Annual Financial Report 18/19" (PDF). University of California. p. 8. Archived (PDF) from the original on September 23, 2020. Retrieved October 12, 2020. "College Navigator - University of California-Los Angeles". nces.ed.gov. Archived from the original on July 29, 2022. Retrieved November 7, 2021. "Brand Guidelines | Identity | Colors". Archived from the original on November 24, 2018. Retrieved November 23, 2018. Ho, Melanie (2005). "Bruin Bear". UCLA English department. Archived from the original on February 19, 2007. Retrieved May 20, 2007. Vazquez, Ricardo (January 18, 2013). "UCLA sets new undergraduate applications record" (Press release). UCLA Newsroom. Archived from the original on September 21, 2013. Retrieved July 14, 2013. "Facts & Figures". www.ucla.edu. Archived from the original on December 10, 2021. Retrieved December 6, 2021. "Admissions". UCLA Academic Planning and Budget. Archived from the original on December 6, 2021. Retrieved November 11, 2022. "College and Schools". www.ucla.edu. Archived from the original on December 13, 2021. Retrieved December 6, 2021. "NCAA Championships". UCLA. Archived from the original on July 29, 2022. Retrieved December 6, 2021. "Home of Champions". Stanford University Athletics. Archived from the original on December 12, 2019. Retrieved December 6, 2021. "Bruins Total 16 Medals at Tokyo Olympics". UCLA Bruins. August 9, 2021. Archived from the original on August 13, 2021. Retrieved August 14, 2021. "UCLA's Olympic Tradition and Medal Winners". Archived from the original on May 24, 2013. https://www.ucla.edu/about/awards-and-honors/faculty. {{cite web}}: Missing or empty |title= (help) https://www.ucla.edu/about/awards-and-honors/alumni-and-student-honors. {{cite web}}: Missing or empty |title= (help) "Faculty Honors". UCLA. Retrieved April 1, 2024. "Member Institutions and Years of Admission". Association of American Universities. Archived from the original on May 21, 2012. Retrieved December 30, 2011. "UCLA named No. 1 U.S. public institution by U.S. News & World Report for third consecutive year". UCLA College. UCLA. Administrative/Biographical History, UCLA Lab School records (University Archives Record Series 208). UCLA Library Special Collections, University Archives, University of California, Los Angeles. [1] Archived December 6, 2021, at the Wayback Machine "Bruin Timeline" (PDF). UCLA GSE&IS. 2018. Archived from the original (PDF) on April 12, 2019. Retrieved April 17, 2018. Hamilton, Andrew (June 18, 2004). "(UC) Los Angeles: Historical Overview". University of California History, Digital Archives (from Berkeley). Archived from the original on April 30, 2006. Retrieved June 20, 2006. "UCLA University Archives". UCLA Library. January 20, 2007. Archived from the original on June 15, 2006. Retrieved June 20, 2006. Dundjerski, Marina (January 1, 2011). UCLA: The First Century. Third Millennium Publishing. ISBN 978-1-906507-37-4. Archived from the original on April 7, 2022. Retrieved November 20, 2020. Dundjerski, Marina (2011). UCLA: The First Century. Los Angeles: Third Millennium Publishing. p. 27. ISBN 9781906507374. Archived from the original on April 7, 2022. Retrieved February 21, 2021. Dundjerski, Marina (2011). UCLA: The First Century. Los Angeles: Third Millennium Publishing. p. 31. ISBN 9781906507374. Archived from the original on July 13, 2021. Retrieved February 21, 2021. Dundjerski, Marina (2011). UCLA: The First Century. Los Angeles: Third Millennium Publishing. p. 33. ISBN 9781906507374. Archived from the original on July 13, 2021. Retrieved February 21, 2021. Garrigues, George (2001). "The Daily Bruin Is Born". Loud Bark and Curious Eyes, A History of the UCLA Daily Bruin, 1919–1955. Archived from the original on May 28, 2006. Retrieved July 3, 2006. UCLA Alumni (2012). "History: The Beginning". UCLA Alumni. Archived from the original on April 4, 2013. Retrieved April 4, 2013. Yan, Holly; Bloom, Deborah (June 1, 2016). "UCLA shooting: 2 killed in murder-suicide, campus on lockdown". CNN. Archived from the original on June 1, 2016. Retrieved June 1, 2016. Bella, Timothy (February 1, 2022). "Ex-UCLA Lecturer Who Appeared to Threaten a Mass Shooting is Arrested in Colorado, University says". Washington Post. Archived from the original on November 11, 2022. Retrieved October 13, 2022. "Westwood students, community leaders vote to create new neighborhood council after heated debate". Los Angeles Times. May 26, 2018. Archived from the original on February 4, 2020. Retrieved February 17, 2020. "How UCLA Students Fought for—and Won—the Right to Shape Westwood's Future". Los Angeles Magazine. February 8, 2019. Archived from the original on February 18, 2020. Retrieved February 17, 2020. "UCLA signs agreement with local tribal community for use of land". UCLA. Archived from the original on January 6, 2023. Retrieved January 6, 2023. "Lawsuit alleges UC Regents' indifference toward Title IX violations Archived December 2, 2020, at the Wayback Machine," Daily Bruin, June 16, 2015. "Editorial: UCLA failed to properly punish professor involved in Title IX lawsuit Archived December 2, 2020, at the Wayback Machine," Daily Bruin, February 15, 2016. "Critical Reception Archived November 11, 2020, at the Wayback Machine," Inside HigherEd, October 3, 2029. "UCLA Title IX compliance investigation seeks student participation Archived December 2, 2020, at the Wayback Machine," Daily Bruin, April 28, 2015. Smith, Dakota (June 17, 2018). "Four UCLA employees sue school, alleging workplace sexual harassment". The Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on July 2, 2018. Retrieved July 2, 2018. Coneeny, Sydney (June 16, 2018). "Four UCLA employees sue school, alleging workplace sexual harassment". Daily Bruin. Archived from the original on July 2, 2018. Retrieved July 2, 2018. Perez, Tanya (June 27, 2018). "State audit finds inconsistent discipline in UC sexual misconduct cases". The Davis Enterprise. Archived from the original on June 27, 2018. Retrieved July 2, 2018. Mascias, Martin (June 22, 2018). "UCLA, 2 More UC Campuses Faulted for Sex Misconduct Process". SVC News. Archived from the original on July 2, 2018. Retrieved July 2, 2018. Das, Andrew; Tracy, Marc; Meyers, Naila-Jean (March 12, 2019). "The Coaches Connected to the College Admissions Fraud Case". The New York Times. ISSN 0362-4331. Archived from the original on March 20, 2019. Retrieved March 20, 2019. "UCLA men's soccer coach Jorge Salcedo indicted in college bribery case, placed on leave". Daily News. March 12, 2019. Archived from the original on July 13, 2021. Retrieved March 20, 2019. Helsel, Phil (March 19, 2021). "Former UCLA Coach Sentenced to 8 Months in College Admissions Cheating Case". NBC News. Archived from the original on April 12, 2021. Retrieved October 14, 2022. "Billy Fitzgerald, The Bruin". Archived from the original on April 14, 2012. Retrieved April 7, 2012. "Welton Becket and Associates". Emporis Buildings. 2007. Archived from the original on March 14, 2007. Retrieved May 29, 2007. Lee, Cynthia (October 12, 2004). "A 'sense of place' from the old and new". UCLA Today. Archived from the original on January 28, 2007. Retrieved May 29, 2007. Coleman, Laura (June 3, 2016). "UCLA Accepts $12.5 Million Offer For Hannah Carter Japanese Garden". Beverly Hills Courier. Archived from the original on August 7, 2020. Retrieved December 14, 2019. "Ethel Guiberson / Hannah Carter Japanese Garden | Los Angeles Conservancy". www.laconservancy.org. Archived from the original on March 8, 2023. Retrieved March 8, 2023. Wes Craven (Director) (December 12, 1997). Scream 2 - Commentary by Wes Craven, Patrick Lussier & Marianne Maddalena (DVD). United States: Dimension Films. Archived from the original on August 3, 2018. Retrieved July 21, 2018. Morabito, Sam (January 23, 2004). "UCLA Policy 863: Filming and Photography on Campus". UCLA Administrative Policies & Procedures Manual. Archived from the original on September 1, 2006. Retrieved May 21, 2007. "Jonathan Kuntz – Visiting Associate Professor". UCLA School of Theater, Film, and Television. 2007. Archived from the original on July 8, 2007. Retrieved May 21, 2007. "UCLA Medical Center". Archived from the original on July 31, 2019. Retrieved August 1, 2019. Harder, Ben. "Best Hospitals 2015–16: an Overview". U.S. News & World Report. Archived from the original on November 25, 2015. Retrieved December 28, 2015. "Carnegie Classifications Institution Lookup". carnegieclassifications.iu.edu. Center for Postsecondary Education. Archived from the original on July 20, 2020. Retrieved July 19, 2020. "Table 20. Higher education R&D expenditures, ranked by FY 2018 R&D expenditures: FYs 2009–18". ncsesdata.nsf.gov. National Science Foundation. Archived from the original on September 30, 2020. Retrieved July 19, 2020. "ShanghaiRanking's 2023 Academic Ranking of World Universities". Shanghai Ranking Consultancy. Retrieved February 10, 2024. "Forbes America's Top Colleges List 2023". Forbes. Retrieved September 22, 2023. "2023-2024 Best National Universities". U.S. News & World Report. Retrieved September 22, 2023. "2023 National University Rankings". Washington Monthly. Retrieved February 10, 2024. "2024 Best Colleges in the U.S." The Wall Street Journal/College Pulse. Retrieved January 27, 2024. "ShanghaiRanking's 2023 Academic Ranking of World Universities". Shanghai Ranking Consultancy. Retrieved February 10, 2024. "QS World University Rankings 2024: Top global universities". Quacquarelli Symonds. Retrieved June 27, 2023. "World University Rankings 2024". Times Higher Education. Retrieved September 27, 2023. "2022-23 Best Global Universities Rankings". U.S. News & World Report. Retrieved February 25, 2023. "University of California--Los Angeles – U.S. News Best Grad School Rankings". U.S. News & World Report. Archived from the original on April 29, 2020. Retrieved April 28, 2020. "University of California--Los Angeles – U.S. News Best Global University Rankings". U.S. News & World Report. Archived from the original on October 16, 2015. Retrieved April 28, 2020. "Top Public Universities". U.S. News & World Report. U.S. News & World Report LP. Archived from the original on February 23, 2017. Retrieved September 19, 2023. "Money's Best Colleges". Money. Time Inc. Archived from the original on July 30, 2015. Retrieved July 25, 2015. Zadrozny, Brandy (November 6, 2014). "College Rankings 2014". The Daily Beast. The Daily Beast Company LLC. Archived from the original on December 5, 2014. Retrieved November 30, 2014. "Kiplinger's Best College Values". Kiplinger. The Kiplinger Washington Editors. Archived from the original on December 18, 2016. Retrieved January 3, 2016. "US College Rankings: top universities in the USA". Times Higher Education. TES Global Limited. October 7, 2016. Archived from the original on January 8, 2017. Retrieved January 7, 2017. "The Top American Research Universities" (PDF). The Center for Measuring University Performance. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 29, 2016. Retrieved April 5, 2015. O'Toole, Kristen. "The Princeton Review's 2015 "College Hopes & Worries Survey" Reports on 12,000 Students' & Parents' "Dream colleges" and Application Viewpoints". The Princeton Review. TPR Education IP Holdings, LLC. Archived from the original on September 19, 2016. Retrieved May 25, 2015. "Universities Report Largest Growth in Federally Funded R&D Expenditures since FY 2011 | NSF - National Science Foundation". ncses.nsf.gov. Retrieved December 28, 2023. "Economic diversity and student outcomes at the University of California, Los Angeles". The New York Times. January 18, 2017. Archived from the original on August 8, 2018. Retrieved November 30, 2019. "Times Higher Education World Reputation Rankings". Times Higher Education. TES Global Ltd. Archived from the original on June 17, 2017. Retrieved March 29, 2015. "SCImago Institutions Rankings - Higher Education - All Regions and Countries - 2020 - Overall Rank". www.scimagoir.com. Archived from the original on April 22, 2019. Retrieved June 11, 2019. "CWUR 2015 – World University Rankings". Center for World University Rankings. Archived from the original on January 13, 2016. Retrieved July 25, 2015. "University of California--Los Angeles: Overall Rankings". U.S. News & World Report. Archived from the original on December 8, 2015. Retrieved November 28, 2015. "CWTS Leiden Ranking 2015". CWTS Leiden Ranking. Centre for Science and Technology Studies. Archived from the original on December 23, 2017. Retrieved June 20, 2015. "University Ranking by Academic Performance". University Ranking by Academic Performance. Middle East Technical University. Archived from the original on June 6, 2017. Retrieved November 29, 2015. "Ranking Web of Universities". Ranking Web of Universities. Spanish National Research Council. Archived from the original on August 8, 2017. Retrieved November 29, 2015. "QS Global 200 MBA Rankings 2014/15: North America". Top MBA. QS Quacquarelli Symonds Limited. Archived from the original on January 12, 2015. Retrieved January 11, 2015. "Full time MBA ranking". The Economist. The Economist Newspaper Limited. Archived from the original on October 13, 2012. Retrieved January 5, 2015. "Global MBA Ranking 2014". Financial Times. The Financial Times Ltd. Archived from the original on January 28, 2014. Retrieved January 5, 2015. "Full-Time MBA Programs". Bloomberg Businessweek. Bloomberg L.P. Archived from the original on September 16, 2013. Retrieved January 5, 2015. Stanger, Melissa (August 4, 2014). "The World's 50 Best Business Schools". Business Insider. Archived from the original on January 17, 2015. Retrieved January 11, 2015. "University and Business School Ranking in USA". Eduniversal Business Schools Ranking. Eduniversal. Archived from the original on June 30, 2015. Retrieved June 6, 2015. "Best Business Schools". Vault. Vault.com Inc. Archived from the original on August 11, 2018. Retrieved September 19, 2015. "Best Law Schools". Vault. Vault.com Inc. Archived from the original on September 5, 2015. Retrieved September 19, 2015. "2015 Rankings of Best Financial Engineering Programs". QuantNet. QuantNet Inc. Archived from the original on January 22, 2016. Retrieved November 21, 2015. "Best Online Graduate Engineering Programs". U.S. News & World Report. U.S. News & World Report LP. Archived from the original on March 19, 2016. Retrieved January 14, 2016. "University of California--Los Angeles". U.S. News & World Report. U.S. News & World Report LP. Archived from the original on October 16, 2015. Retrieved October 17, 2015. "Academic Ranking of World Universities in Mathematics – 2015". Academic Ranking of World Universities. Archived from the original on September 17, 2015. Retrieved September 5, 2015. "Academic Ranking of World Universities in Computer Science – 2015". Academic Ranking of World Universities. Archived from the original on September 18, 2015. Retrieved September 5, 2015. "QS World University Rankings by Subject 2020 – English Language & Literature". QS Top Universities. QS Quacquarelli Symonds Limited. Archived from the original on October 30, 2020. Retrieved January 29, 2021. "QS World University Rankings by Subject 2020 – Linguistics". QS Top Universities. QS Quacquarelli Symonds Limited. Archived from the original on December 10, 2020. Retrieved January 29, 2021. "QS World University Rankings by Subject 2020 – Modern Languages". QS Top Universities. QS Quacquarelli Symonds Limited. Archived from the original on October 30, 2020. Retrieved January 29, 2021. "QS World University Rankings by Subject 2020 – Medicine". QS Top Universities. QS Quacquarelli Symonds Limited. Archived from the original on November 1, 2020. Retrieved January 29, 2021. "QS World University Rankings by Subject 2020 – Psychology". QS Top Universities. QS Quacquarelli Symonds Limited. Archived from the original on November 24, 2020. Retrieved January 29, 2021. "QS World University Rankings by Subject 2020 – Mathematics". QS Top Universities. QS Quacquarelli Symonds Limited. Archived from the original on December 19, 2020. Retrieved January 29, 2021. "QS World University Rankings by Subject 2020 – Geography & Area Studies". QS Top Universities. QS Quacquarelli Symonds Limited. Archived from the original on November 1, 2020. Retrieved January 29, 2021. "QS World University Rankings by Subject 2020 – Communication & Media Studies". QS Top Universities. QS Quacquarelli Symonds Limited. Archived from the original on November 24, 2020. Retrieved January 29, 2021. "QS World University Rankings by Subject 2020 – Education". QS Top Universities. QS Quacquarelli Symonds Limited. Archived from the original on November 27, 2020. Retrieved January 29, 2021. "QS World University Rankings by Subject 2020 – Sociology". QS Top Universities. QS Quacquarelli Symonds Limited. Archived from the original on November 26, 2020. Retrieved January 29, 2021. "Academic Ranking of World Universities in Clinical Medicine and Pharmacy – 2015". Academic Ranking of World Universities. Archived from the original on August 16, 2015. Retrieved September 5, 2014. "Top 100 universities for arts and humanities 2014–2015". Times Higher Education World University Rankings. Archived from the original on October 3, 2014. Retrieved October 4, 2014. "Top 100 universities for clinical, pre-clinical and health 2014–2015". Times Higher Education World University Rankings. Archived from the original on October 3, 2014. Retrieved October 4, 2014. "Top 100 universities for engineering and technology 2014–2015". Times Higher Education World University Rankings. Archived from the original on October 3, 2014. Retrieved October 4, 2014. "Top 100 universities for physical sciences 2014–2015". Times Higher Education World University Rankings. Archived from the original on October 3, 2014. Retrieved October 4, 2014. "Top 100 universities for social sciences 2014–2015". Times Higher Education World University Rankings. Archived from the original on October 3, 2014. Retrieved October 4, 2014. "QS World University Rankings by Faculty 2015 – Arts and Humanities". QS Top Universities. QS Quacquarelli Symonds Limited. September 11, 2015. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved February 27, 2016. "QS World University Rankings by Faculty 2015 – Life Sciences and Medicine". QS Top Universities. QS Quacquarelli Symonds Limited. September 11, 2015. Archived from the original on March 3, 2016. Retrieved February 27, 2016. "Top 25 Institutions Hosting International Students, 2015/16". Institute of International Education. Institute of International Education, Inc. Archived from the original on November 25, 2016. Retrieved January 2, 2017. Baer, Drake (October 2, 2014). "The 20 Schools with the Most Alumni at Google". Business Insider. Archived from the original on November 30, 2014. Retrieved November 29, 2014. Carson, Biz. "The 20 universities that are most likely to land you a job in Silicon Valley". Business Insider. Business Insider Inc. Archived from the original on July 15, 2015. Retrieved July 18, 2015. "The Top Universities Producing VC-Backed Entrepreneurs". ValueWalk. September 24, 2015. Archived from the original on July 13, 2021. Retrieved September 26, 2015. "The Nation's Largest Libraries: A Listing By Volumes Held". American Library Association. 2012. Archived from the original on June 19, 2010. Retrieved February 16, 2014. "A Tribute to Lawrence Clark Powell". UCLA Library. 2006. Archived from the original on December 17, 2005. Retrieved December 13, 2006. "Table A-2.1: Undergraduate Institutions Supplying 15 or More Black or African-American Applicants to U.S. Medical Schools, 2015–2016" (PDF). Association of American Medical Colleges. Archived (PDF) from the original on March 4, 2016. Retrieved December 28, 2015. "Medical School Admissions: 2014 UCLA Bachelor's Degree Recipients" (PDF). UCLA Career Center. UCLA. Archived (PDF) from the original on October 24, 2018. Retrieved January 3, 2017. "Freshman admit data | UC Admissions". admission.universityofcalifornia.edu. Archived from the original on August 12, 2022. Retrieved August 10, 2022. "University of California--Los Angeles: College". U.S. News & World Report. Archived from the original on January 16, 2013. Retrieved January 26, 2013. "University of California--Los Angeles". The Princeton Review. Archived from the original on January 3, 2017. Retrieved January 2, 2017. "Freshman Profile". UCLA. Archived from the original on January 12, 2023. Retrieved January 12, 2023. "Profile of Admitted Freshmen Fall 2019". UCLA Admissions. Archived from the original on April 28, 2020. Retrieved April 28, 2020. "University of California Admissions 2021". University of California. Archived from the original on November 2, 2021. Retrieved November 28, 2021. "Frequently Asked Questions". University of California, Los Angeles. Archived from the original on January 18, 2021. Retrieved January 17, 2021. "Freshman admissions to the college and schools, Fall 2016". UCLA Academic Planning and Budget. UCLA. Archived from the original on March 16, 2017. Retrieved January 2, 2017. Leonhardt, David (September 30, 2007). "The New Affirmative Action". The New York Times Magazine. Archived from the original on April 17, 2009. Retrieved September 28, 2007. Smallwood, Scott (September 29, 2006). "UCLA Adopts 'Holistic' Model in Admissions to Stem Decline in Minority Enrollment". The Chronicle of Higher Education. Archived from the original on September 30, 2007. Retrieved May 21, 2007. Snider, Susannah. "10 Medical Schools That Are Most Competitive for Applicants". U.S. News & World Report. Archived from the original on April 16, 2015. Retrieved June 29, 2022. "Fall 2024 Incoming Class Profile". UCLA School of Law. Archived from the original on October 31, 2015. Retrieved November 7, 2015. "MBA Class of 2024 Profile". UCLA Anderson School of Management. Archived from the original on November 16, 2015. Retrieved November 15, 2015. "About the Class of 2025". Archived from the original on April 29, 2022. Retrieved June 30, 2022. "Program Profile Report – Nursing". Archived from the original on June 30, 2022. Retrieved June 30, 2022. Corpuz, Erkki. "Report to the University-Wide Council on Engineering Education (UCEE)". Archived from the original on July 29, 2022. Retrieved June 30, 2022. Largest Employers in Los Angeles County Archived October 29, 2012, at the Wayback Machine. Compiled by the LA Almanac, Source: California Employment Development Department, The Los Angeles Business Journal, and Almanac research "UCLA — A Smart Investment for the Greater Los Angeles Region ... and Beyond". Ucla.edu. Archived from the original on October 4, 2008. Retrieved September 11, 2011. "UCLA Trademark Use Guidelines". Associated Students UCLA. Archived from the original on February 4, 2012. Retrieved September 5, 2012. "UCLA Licensing and Trademarks: About Us". Associated Students UCLA. Archived from the original on May 25, 2012. Retrieved September 5, 2012. "Welcome to UCLA Trademarks & Licensing". Associated Students UCLA. Archived from the original on May 25, 2012. Retrieved September 5, 2012. "UCLA Store List". UCLAstore.com.cn (in Chinese). Archived from the original on February 20, 2008. Retrieved December 26, 2006. Fernando, Menaka (April 5, 2005). "UCLA name, L.A. lifestyle marketable overseas". Daily Bruin. UCLA. Archived from the original on June 14, 2011. Retrieved May 13, 2005. "Stanford University Athletics". Archived from the original on December 12, 2019. Retrieved December 23, 2019. "UCLA wins NCAA women's tennis championship". UCLA Athletics. Archived from the original on December 31, 2014. Retrieved October 27, 2014. "Bruins lead the nation with 106 NCAA team championships and 124 total national championships". UCLA Bruins. 2008. Archived from the original on May 16, 2008. Retrieved May 31, 2008. Foster, Chris (May 10, 2011). "Al Scates to retire as UCLA volleyball coach after 2012 season". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on December 18, 2012. Retrieved December 8, 2012. "– The Official Website of NCAA Championships". NCAA.com. Archived from the original on September 15, 2014. Retrieved September 15, 2014. Championships Summary Through Jan. 1, 2022 Archived March 20, 2014, at the Wayback Machine. NCAA Men's Championships Summary Through Jan. 1, 2022 Archived April 11, 2021, at the Wayback Machine. NCAA Women's Championships Summary Through Jan. 1, 2022 Archived April 11, 2021, at the Wayback Machine. NCAA "UCLA's Olympic Medal Winners". UCLA Bruins. 2004. Archived from the original on June 2, 2007. Retrieved May 22, 2007. "USC Olympians: 1904–2004" (PDF). Fans Only (CSTV). 2004. Archived from the original (PDF) on June 15, 2007. Retrieved May 22, 2007. "USC Concludes Its Most Successful Olympics Ever – University of Southern California Official Athletic Site". Usctrojans.com. August 12, 2012. Archived from the original on September 30, 2012. Retrieved October 14, 2012. "We Run the City 5K/10K: History - Special Olympics Southern California". sosc.convio.net. Archived from the original on February 9, 2018. Retrieved February 8, 2018. "College Scorecard: University of California-Los Angeles". United States Department of Education. Archived from the original on May 9, 2022. Retrieved May 8, 2022. "Clubs and Organizations". Archived from the original on January 19, 2021. Dougherty, Kevin. "Welcome to Fraternity & Sorority Life". UCLA Fraternity & Sorority Relations. UCLA. Archived from the original on November 5, 2015. Retrieved November 14, 2015. "The A Cappella Archive - Rankings & Records". sites.google.com. Archived from the original on July 13, 2021. Retrieved October 7, 2020. "Welcome to the Ultimate UCLA A Cappella Guide". uclaacappellaguide.weebly.com. Archived from the original on August 31, 2021. Retrieved August 26, 2021. "medleys a cappella". Medleys a Cappella at UCLA. Archived from the original on April 30, 2016. Retrieved April 21, 2016. Ucla Jsa Archived April 3, 2013, at the Wayback Machine. Studentgroups.ucla.edu. Retrieved on July 14, 2013. "Undergraduate Organizations | LGBTQ Resource Center". lgbtq.ucla.edu. Archived from the original on June 19, 2022. Retrieved June 30, 2022. "Graduate Organizations | LGBTQ Resource Center". lgbtq.ucla.edu. Archived from the original on June 30, 2022. Retrieved June 30, 2022. "UCLA Student Media – UCLA's Unofficial Journalism Department". apply.uclastudentmedia.com. Archived from the original on December 30, 2021. Retrieved June 30, 2022. "UCLA Unicamp". Archived from the original on November 27, 2012. Retrieved December 4, 2012. "Dance Marathon students raise $446,157 for pediatric AIDS". UCLA Newsroom. UCLA. Archived from the original on June 21, 2015. Retrieved June 20, 2015. Staines, Xandi (June 13, 2005). "Undie Run Tradition Faces Growing Pains". Daily Bruin. Archived from the original on September 10, 2012. Retrieved June 13, 2007. Rushovich, Colin (December 12, 2005). "Undie Run Safety at Issue". Daily Bruin. Archived from the original on September 10, 2012. Retrieved May 21, 2007. "Gershwin Award Winners". Alumni Association. 2007. Archived from the original on August 17, 2011. Retrieved May 21, 2007. "Lional Richie accepts the Gershwin Award". Newsroom.ucla.edu. May 2, 2008. Archived from the original on September 27, 2011. Retrieved September 11, 2011. Valentine, Jane (January 21, 2004). "Dinner with 12 strangers is a feast for friends". UCLA Today. Archived from the original on September 1, 2006. Retrieved May 21, 2007. "JazzReggae Fest 2011". Jazzreggaefest.com. Archived from the original on September 3, 2011. Retrieved September 11, 2011. Chang, Andrea (April 13, 2014). "LA Hacks Hackathon Draws Hordes of Young Developers to UCLA [Updated]". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on April 22, 2014. Retrieved April 22, 2014. "Associated Students UCLA [95-1777979] GuideStar Report". .guidestar.org. Archived from the original on October 6, 2011. Retrieved May 23, 2010. "UCLA Graduate Student Association". Gsa.asucla.ucla.edu. February 2, 2010. Archived from the original on June 10, 2010. Retrieved May 23, 2010. "UCLA Undergraduate Students Association". UCLA. Archived from the original on July 20, 2011. Retrieved September 11, 2011. "Awards Screenings". Richie Solomon. Archived from the original on December 3, 2021. Retrieved December 3, 2021. "Bruin Film Society". community.ucla.edu. Archived from the original on December 3, 2021. Retrieved December 3, 2021. "UCLA film society's partnership provides accessibility to industry professionals". Daily Bruin. Archived from the original on December 3, 2021. Retrieved December 3, 2021. "UCLA Student Media". Apply: UCLA Student Media. Archived from the original on July 10, 2013. Retrieved March 8, 2015. "Daily Bruin wins awards for nation's best online, daily college newspaper". Daily Bruin. 2016. Archived from the original on October 24, 2016. Retrieved October 23, 2016. "The Westwood Enabler". Archived from the original on June 10, 2023. Retrieved September 7, 2023. Watkins, Mary (Spring 2011). "Publication Revolution" (PDF). UCLA Graduate Quarterly. Archived (PDF) from the original on February 8, 2015. Retrieved October 21, 2014. "Law Journals: Submissions and Ranking 2013 Combined Score". Archived from the original on March 7, 2006. Retrieved June 7, 2016. "UCLA Student Housing Master Plan 2007–2017" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on July 7, 2010. Retrieved August 6, 2010. "The Best 371 Colleges: Quality of Life – Campus Food". Archived from the original on January 12, 2015. Retrieved April 20, 2010. "UCLA Housing". Archived from the original on February 18, 2017. Retrieved February 17, 2017. "Living in University Apartments". Archived from the original on August 15, 2010. Retrieved August 6, 2010. Rogers, K. (February 1, 2011). "UCLA's cooperative housing options offer more than chores as tenants form close social ties living and working together". dailybruin. Archived from the original on July 10, 2017. Retrieved July 11, 2017. "Guest House Hotel". Official site. 2007. Archived from the original on June 12, 2007. Retrieved May 21, 2007. "Conference Center at Lake Arrowhead". Official site. 2007. Archived from the original on May 6, 2007. Retrieved May 21, 2007. "UCLA Catering". official site. 2009. Archived from the original on July 20, 2011. "Conference Services". Official site. 2007. Archived from the original on April 25, 2007. Retrieved May 21, 2007. The Visual Culture of Chabad, Maya Balakirsky Katz, Cambridge University Press, 2010, page 152. The Rebbe's Army: Inside the World of Chabad-Lubavitch, Sue Fishkoff, Random House, 2009 Torok, Ryan (August 20, 2014). "Moving and shaking". Jewish Journal. Archived from the original on July 16, 2015. Sichel, Jared (October 24, 2013). "Sharing the next gen: How Chabad is changing Hillel — and reshaping campus life". Jewish Journal. Archived from the original on July 16, 2015. Retrieved July 15, 2015. "UCLA selected to participate in nationwide Healthier Campus Initiative". Daily Bruin. Archived from the original on November 19, 2016. Retrieved November 19, 2016. "Submission: Healthy Campus Initiative works to promote wellness of UCLA community". Archived from the original on November 19, 2016. Retrieved November 18, 2016. "It's lights out as UCLA enacts tobacco ban on Earth Day". Los Angeles Times. April 22, 2013. Archived from the original on November 19, 2016. Retrieved November 18, 2016. "UC president announces food initiative, recognizes campus efforts". January 23, 2015. Archived from the original on November 19, 2016. Retrieved November 18, 2016. "UC president honors students with the President's Award for Outstanding Student Leadership". University of California News. May 11, 2016. Archived from the original on November 19, 2016. Retrieved November 18, 2016. "Bike Share Coming to UCLA, Westwood This Fall". Curbed LA. April 29, 2016. Archived from the original on November 19, 2016. Retrieved November 18, 2016. "Students meet Bruin Plate food producers in Earth Day event". Daily Bruin. Archived from the original on November 19, 2016. Retrieved November 18, 2016. "Submission: Healthy Campus Initiative works to promote wellness of UCLA community". Daily Bruin. Archived from the original on November 19, 2016. Retrieved November 18, 2016. "UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, LOS ANGELES". Menus of Change Research Collaborative. Retrieved November 18, 2016.[permanent dead link] "Member Organizations" (PDF). Teaching Kitchen Collaborative. Archived (PDF) from the original on November 19, 2016. Retrieved November 18, 2016. "UCLA Healthy Campus Initiative". Huffington Post. Archived from the original on November 19, 2016. Retrieved November 18, 2016. "Awards & Honors". University of California, Los Angeles. Archived from the original on November 2, 2015. Retrieved November 1, 2015. "UCLA Profile". Aim.ucla.edu. Archived from the original on June 10, 2010. Retrieved May 23, 2010. "UCLA Faculty Nobel Laureates". Listing with bio. Regents of the University of California. Archived from the original on October 1, 2012. Retrieved December 17, 2012. "UCLA Alumni Nobel Laureates". Listing with bio. Regents of the University of California. Archived from the original on March 8, 2013. Retrieved December 17, 2012. Lee, Cynthia; Ko, Amy (February 13, 2001). "Gore Taps Faculty Expertise". UCLA Today. Archived from the original on May 16, 2011. Retrieved August 20, 2008. Deanna Necula, UCLA professor emeritus wins Nobel Prize in chemistry Archived October 9, 2016, at the Wayback Machine, Daily Bruin, October 8, 2016 "The Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences 2012". Nobel Foundation. Archived from the original on May 17, 2013. Retrieved December 17, 2012. "The Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine 1998". Nobel Foundation. Archived from the original on August 16, 2017. Retrieved December 17, 2012. "The Nobel Prize in Chemistry 1997". Nobel Foundation. Archived from the original on October 24, 2017. Retrieved December 17, 2012. "The Nobel Prize in Chemistry 1987". Nobel Foundation. Archived from the original on December 16, 2012. Retrieved December 17, 2012. "The Nobel Prize in Physics 1965". Nobel Foundation. Archived from the original on April 7, 2018. Retrieved December 17, 2012. "The Nobel Prize in Chemistry 1960". Nobel Foundation. Archived from the original on April 11, 2018. Retrieved December 17, 2012. "The Nobel Prize in Chemistry 2010". Nobel Foundation. Archived from the original on December 31, 2012. Retrieved December 17, 2012. "The Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences 2009". Nobel Foundation. Archived from the original on November 25, 2012. Retrieved December 17, 2012. "Randy Schekman, molecular biologist and UCLA alumnus, wins 2013 Nobel Prize". UCLA. Archived from the original on October 16, 2013. Retrieved October 7, 2013. "Highly Cited Researchers". ISI Highly Cited Researchers. Thomson Scientific. Archived from the original on September 29, 2007. Retrieved December 2, 2006. "Academy Memberships Held by UCLA Faculty". UCLA. Archived from the original on March 12, 2017. Retrieved March 9, 2017. "The Pulitzer Prize Winners in 1998". Pulitzer Board. 2007. Archived from the original on February 23, 2007. Retrieved May 21, 2007. "Amid Budgetary Woes, University of Hawaii Hunts for a Rainbow". Los Angeles Times. October 24, 1999. Archived from the original on August 7, 2020. Retrieved March 13, 2020. "POLITICS : New Governor Making Waves in Honolulu : Ben Cayetano's Cabinet appointments have already ruffled feathers. His style gives fits to the Establishment". Los Angeles Times. December 26, 1994. Archived from the original on August 7, 2020. Retrieved March 13, 2020. "Honolulu Star-Bulletin Local News". archives.starbulletin.com. Archived from the original on February 24, 2021. Retrieved March 13, 2020. Broder, John M. (November 21, 2008). "Democrats Oust Longtime Leader of House Panel". The New York Times. Archived from the original on April 10, 2009. Retrieved November 20, 2008. Merl, Jean (July 16, 2009). "Judy Chu becomes first Chinese American woman elected to Congress". Los Angeles Times. Archived from the original on December 5, 2009. Retrieved July 16, 2009. Gormley, Michael (January 24, 2005). "Gillibrand appointed to Senate Seat". The Boston Globe. Associated Press. Archived from the original on February 10, 2012. Retrieved May 18, 2005. "Ben Shapiro". Simon & Schuster. Archived from the original on January 7, 2016. Retrieved January 3, 2016. "Cerf urges standards for cloud computing". InfoWorld. 2010. Archived from the original on January 10, 2010. Retrieved January 8, 2010. "Reading, Writing and Rock 'n' Roll – Web Exclusive". UCLA Magazine. March 20, 2007. Archived from the original on June 13, 2013. Retrieved July 14, 2013. Mary Daily, Carol Burnett: UCLA's class clown takes national honors, UCLA Today, October 22, 2013 "Francis Ford Coppola". IMDb. Archived from the original on August 18, 2019. Retrieved August 6, 2019. "UCLA-top three companies". Archived from the original on July 17, 2014. Retrieved August 2, 2016. Dundjerski, Marina. UCLA: The First Century (2012) contents; a major history Hayes-Bautista, David E., et al. "Reginaldo Francisco del Valle: UCLA's Forgotten Forefather." Southern California Quarterly 88.1 (2006): 1-35. online Pelfrey, Patricia A. A brief history of the University of California (2nd ed. 2004) Purdy, William Charles. "Something New Under the Los Angeles Sun: UCLA's Early Years, 1919-1938" (PhD dissertation, University of California, Los Angeles; ProQuest Dissertations Publishing, 2016.10056032) online; a scholarly history and well illustrated. Smith, John Matthew. The sons of Westwood: John Wooden, UCLA, and the dynasty that changed college basketball (University of Illinois Press, 2013) online. Stadtman. Verne A. The University of California, 1868-1968 (1970), a standard scholarly history focusedon Berkeley and the origins of UCLA. online Wikimedia Commons has media related to UCLA. Official website UCLA Athletics website Image of UCLA on a zoning map of Los Angeles, 1927 Archived February 26, 2021, at the Wayback Machine. Los Angeles Times Photographic Archive (Collection 1429). UCLA Library Special Collections, Charles E. Young Research Library, University of California, Los Angeles. University of California, Los Angeles at Wikipedia's sister projects: Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Taxa from Wikispecies Data from Wikidata