Latgalian pottery (Latgalian: Latgolys pūdnīceiba, Latvian: Latgales podniecība) or Latgalian ceramics (Latgolys keramika, Latgales keramika), also known as Silajāņi ceramics is the best-known subset of Latvian pottery. The region of Latgale historically has been the most prolific producer of wares. Latgalian ceramics rose to the popularity in the Soviet period, when art historian Jānis Pujāts wrote books about the best Latgalian ceramicists and organized several exhibitions to showcase their works. Most of the types of wares of Latgalian ceramics were used in the local households for everyday use. Examples include vuoraunīks (a pot for cooking), madaunīks (a pot for honey storage), sloinīks (a pot for storing fruit preserves), stuodiņs (a pot for storing sour cream), ļaks (a vessel for storage of oil), pīna pūds (a pot for storing cow's milk), kazeļnīks (a pot for goat milk storage), puorūss (lit. "over-handle", a vessel for bringing food to the field), bļūda (bowl), kryuze (a jug or a mug, most often for beer or milk). For decorative purposes, Latgalian ceramicists were making candlesticks (svečturi) and human, animal, folk figure shaped ocarinas (sviļpaunīki). In Rainis Museum in Jasmuiža are located the relocated workshop and kiln of Andrejs Paulāns from Šembeļi. In this museum, there is a renovated unique tile stove that was relocated from ceramicist Ādams Kāpostiņš house in Puša. Latgale Culture and History Museum has a collection of the Latgalian ceramicist works. Gross, Daina. "Latgalian Pottery". Latvian Culture Canon. Retrieved 2013-07-26. Pujāts, Jānis (1957-06-01). "Silajāņu keramikas meistari" (11 ed.). Zvaigzne. p. 16. Pujāts, Jānis. Latgales keramika. Rēzekne:Latgales kultūras centra izdevniecība, 2002, pages 20-26 "Ceramics of Latgale". futureofmuseums.eu. Retrieved 2013-07-26. Pujāts, Jānis (1957-06-01). "Silajāņu keramika" (6 ed.). Karogs. p. 115-117. "The Rainis Museum "Jasmuiža"". memorialiemuzeji.lv. Retrieved 2021-02-16. "House of Traditional Latgalian Culture and Handicrafts Opens in Jasmuiža". aspazijarainis.lv. Retrieved 16 February 2021. "Latgale Culture and History Museum Collection". futureofmuseums.eu. Retrieved 2021-02-26. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Latgalian ceramics. Virtual exhibition about Latgalian ceramics @ Latgale Culture History Museum