Sachin Ramesh Tendulkar, (/ˌsʌtʃɪn tɛnˈduːlkər/ ; pronounced [sətɕin teːɳɖulkəɾ]; born 24 April 1973) is an Indian former international cricketer who captained the Indian national team. He is widely regarded as one of the greatest batsmen in the history of cricket. Hailed as the world's most prolific batsman of all time, he is the all-time highest run-scorer in both ODI and Test cricket with more than 18,000 runs and 15,000 runs, respectively. He also holds the record for receiving the most player of the match awards in international cricket. Tendulkar was a Member of Parliament, Rajya Sabha by nomination from 2012 to 2018. Tendulkar took up cricket at the age of eleven, made his Test match debut on 15 November 1989 against Pakistan in Karachi at the age of sixteen, and went on to represent Mumbai domestically and India internationally for over 24 years. In 2002, halfway through his career, Wisden ranked him the second-greatest Test batsman of all time, behind Don Bradman, and the second-greatest ODI batsman of all time, behind Viv Richards. The same year, Tendulkar was a part of the team that was one of the joint-winners of the 2002 ICC Champions Trophy. Later in his career, Tendulkar was part of the Indian team that won the 2011 Cricket World Cup, his first win in six World Cup appearances for India. He had previously been named "Player of the Tournament" at the 2003 World Cup. Tendulkar has received several awards from the government of India: the Arjuna Award (1994), the Khel Ratna Award (1997), the Padma Shri (1998), and the Padma Vibhushan (2008). After Tendulkar played his last match in November 2013, the Prime Minister's Office announced the decision to award him the Bharat Ratna, India's highest civilian award. He was the first sportsperson to receive the reward and, as of 2023[update], is the youngest recipient. In 2010, Time included Tendulkar in its annual list of the most influential people in the world. Tendulkar was awarded the Sir Garfield Sobers Trophy for cricketer of the year at the 2010 International Cricket Council (ICC) Awards. Having retired from ODI cricket in 2012, he retired from all forms of cricket in November 2013 after playing his 200th Test match. Tendulkar played 664 international cricket matches in total, scoring 34,357 runs. In 2013, Tendulkar was included in an all-time Test World XI to mark the 150th anniversary of Wisden Cricketers' Almanack, and he was the only specialist batsman of the post–World War II era, along with Viv Richards, to get featured in the team. In 2019, he was inducted into the ICC Cricket Hall of Fame. On 24 April 2023, the Sydney Cricket Ground unveiled a set of gates named after Tendulkar and Brian Lara on the occasion of Tendulkar's 50th birthday and the 30th anniversary of Lara's innings of 277 at the ground. Tendulkar was born at Nirmal Nursing Home in Dadar, Bombay on 24 April 1973 to a Maharastrian family. His father, Ramesh Tendulkar, was a Marathi-language novelist and poet while his mother, Rajni, worked in the insurance industry. Tendulkar's father named him after his favourite music director, Sachin Dev Burman. Tendulkar has three older siblings: two half-brothers Nitin and Ajit, and a half-sister Savita. They were his father's children by his first wife, who died after the birth of her third child. His brother Ajit played in Bombay's Kanga Cricket League. Tendulkar spent his formative years in the Sahitya Sahawas Cooperative Housing Society in Bandra (East). As a young boy, Tendulkar was considered a bully, and he often picked fights with new children in his school. As a child, Tendulkar was interested in both tennis and cricket. He particularly idolised American player John McEnroe, and emulated his hero by growing his hair long at the age of 7 or 8 years. At this time, Tendulkar also regularly wore tennis wristbands and headbands and carried a tennis racquet with him as a sign of his love for tennis. To help curb his bullying tendencies, his elder brother Ajit introduced Tendulkar to cricket in 1984. Ajit introduced him to cricket coach Ramakant Achrekar at Shivaji Park in Dadar. At their first meeting, Tendulkar did not play well. Ajit told Achrekar that he was feeling self-conscious due to the coach observing him, and was not displaying his natural game. Ajit requested the coach to give him another chance at playing, but watch while hiding behind a tree. This time, Tendulkar, apparently unobserved, played much better and was accepted at Achrekar's academy.[better source needed] Achrekar was impressed with Tendulkar's talent and advised him to shift his schooling[citation needed] to Sharadashram Vidyamandir School, a school in Dadar that had produced many notable cricketers. He made his debut as a cricketer for Sharadashram in late 1984. Prior to this, Tendulkar had attended the Indian Education Society's New English School in Bandra (East). He was also coached under the guidance of Achrekar at Shivaji Park in the mornings and evenings. Tendulkar would practice for hours; if he became exhausted, Achrekar would put a one-rupee coin on the top of the stumps, and the bowler who dismissed Tendulkar would get the coin. If Tendulkar completed the session without getting dismissed, the coach would give him the coin. Tendulkar considers the 13 coins he won among his most prized possessions. While he was training at Shivaji Park, he moved in with his aunt and uncle, who lived near the park. Besides school cricket, Tendulkar also played club cricket. In 1984, at age 11, he debuted in the Kanga Cricket League while playing for the John Bright Cricket Club. Beginning in 1988, he played for the Cricket Club of India. In 1987, at the age of 14, he attended the MRF Pace Foundation in Madras (now Chennai) to train as a fast bowler, but the trainer, Australian fast bowler Dennis Lillee, was unimpressed and suggested that Tendulkar focus on his batting instead. On 20 January 1987, he was a substitute for Imran Khan's side in an exhibition match at Brabourne Stadium in Bombay. A couple of months later, former Indian batsman Sunil Gavaskar gave Tendulkar a pair of his own lightweight pads and told him to not get disheartened for not receiving the Bombay Cricket Association's Best Junior Cricketer Award. Of this experience, Tendulkar later said, "It was the greatest source of encouragement for me". Tendulkar served as a ball boy in the 1987 Cricket World Cup when India played against England in the semifinal in Bombay. In 1988, while playing for Sharadashram, Tendulkar and Vinod Kambli batted in an unbroken 664-run partnership in a Lord Harris Shield inter-school game against St. Xavier's High School. Tendulkar scored 326 (not out) in that match and scored over 1,000 runs in the tournament. This was a record partnership in any form of cricket until 2006, when it was broken by two junior cricketers in Hyderabad, India. On 14 November 1987, at age 14, Tendulkar was selected to represent Bombay in the Ranji Trophy for the 1987–88 season, but he was not selected for the final eleven in any of the matches, though he was often used as a substitute fielder. A year later, on 11 December 1988, aged 15 years and 232 days, Tendulkar made his debut for Bombay against Gujarat at Wankhede Stadium and scored 100 not out in that match, making him the youngest Indian to score a century on debut in first-class cricket. He was selected to play for the team by Bombay captain Dilip Vengsarkar who watched him play Kapil Dev in Wankhede Stadium's cricket practice nets, where the Indian team had come to play against the touring New Zealand team. Tendulkar followed this by scoring a century each in his Deodhar and Duleep Trophy debut, which are also India's domestic cricket tournaments. Tendulkar finished the 1988–89 Ranji Trophy season as Bombay's highest run-scorer. He scored 583 runs at an average of 67.77, and was the eighth-highest run-scorer overall. In both 1988 and 1989, he was picked for a young Indian team to tour England under the Star Cricket Club banner. In the 1990–91 Ranji Trophy final, which Bombay narrowly lost to Haryana, Tendulkar's 96 from 75 balls was key to giving Bombay a chance of victory as it attempted to chase 355 from only 70 overs on the final day. At the start of the 1989–90 season, while playing for Rest of India, Tendulkar scored an unbeaten century in an Irani Trophy match against Delhi. In the final of 1995 Ranji Trophy, Tendulkar, captaining Bombay, scored 140 and 139 versus Punjab. In the 1995–96 Irani Cup, he captained Mumbai against Rest of India. His first double century (204*) was for Mumbai while playing against the visiting Australian team at the Brabourne Stadium in 1998. He is the only player to score a century on debut in all three of his domestic first-class tournaments (the Ranji, Irani, and Duleep Trophies). Another double century was an innings of 233* against Tamil Nadu in the semi-finals of the 2000 Ranji Trophy, which he regards as one of the best innings of his career. In total, Tendulkar was part of five Ranji Trophy finals, in which Mumbai won 4. In 1992, at the age of 19, Tendulkar became the first overseas-born player to represent Yorkshire, which prior to Tendulkar joining the team, never selected players, even UK-based, from outside Yorkshire. Selected for Yorkshire as a replacement for the injured Australian fast bowler Craig McDermott, Tendulkar played 16 first-class matches for the team and scored 1,070 runs at an average of 46.52. Raj Singh Dungarpur is credited for the selection of Tendulkar for the Indian tour of Pakistan in late 1989, after one first class season. The Indian selection committee had shown interest in selecting Tendulkar for the tour of the West Indies held earlier that year, but eventually did not select him, as they did not want him to be exposed to the dominant fast bowlers of the West Indies so early in his career.[citation needed] Tendulkar was the youngest player to debut for India in Tests at the age of 16 years and 205 days, and also the youngest player to debut for India in ODI at the age of 16 years and 238 days. Tendulkar made his Test debut against Pakistan in Karachi in November 1989 aged 16 years and 205 days. He scored 15 runs, being bowled by Waqar Younis, who also made his debut in that match. He was noted for how he handled numerous blows to his body at the hands of the Pakistani pace attack. In the fourth and final Test match in Sialkot, he was hit on the nose by a bouncer bowled by Younis, but he declined medical assistance and continued to bat even as he his nose gushed blood. In a 20-over exhibition game in Peshawar, held in parallel with the bilateral series, Tendulkar made 53 runs off 18 balls, including an over in which he scored 27 runs bowled by leg-spinner Abdul Qadir. This was later called "one of the best innings I have seen" by the then Indian captain Krishnamachari Srikkanth. In all, Tendulkar scored 215 runs at an average of 35.83 in the Test series, and was dismissed without scoring a run in the only One Day International (ODI) he played. The series was followed by a tour of New Zealand in which he scored 117 runs at an average of 29.25 in Tests. He was dismissed without scoring in one of the two ODI games he played, and scored 36 in the other. On a 1990 tour to England, on 14 August, he became the second-youngest cricketer to score a Test century as he made 119 not out in the second Test at Old Trafford in Manchester. Wisden described his innings as "a disciplined display of immense maturity" and also wrote, "He looked the embodiment of India's famous opener, Gavaskar, and indeed was wearing a pair of his pads. While he displayed a full repertoire of strokes in compiling his maiden Test hundred, most remarkable were his off-side shots from the back foot. Though only 5ft 5in tall, he was still able to control without difficulty short deliveries from the English pacemen". Tendulkar's reputation grew during the 1991–92 tour of Australia held before the 1992 Cricket World Cup. During the tour, he scored an unbeaten 148 in the third Test at Sydney, making him the youngest batsman to score a century in Australia. He then scored 114 on a fast, bouncing pitch in the final Test at Perth against a pace attack from Merv Hughes, Bruce Reid, and Craig McDermott. Hughes commented to Allan Border at the time that "This little prick's going to get more runs than you, AB." Tendulkar opened the batting at Auckland against New Zealand in 1994, making 82 runs off 49 balls. He scored his first ODI century on 9 September 1994 against Australia in Sri Lanka at Colombo. He competed in 78 ODIs before scoring his first century.[citation needed] Tendulkar's rise continued when he was the leading run scorer at the 1996 World Cup, scoring two centuries. He was the only Indian batsman to perform well in the semi-final against Sri Lanka.[citation needed] Tendulkar fell amid a batting collapse[citation needed] and the match referee, Clive Lloyd, awarded Sri Lanka the match after the crowd began rioting and throwing litter onto the field. After the World Cup, in the same year against Pakistan at Sharjah, Indian captain Mohammed Azharuddin was going through a lean patch. Tendulkar and Navjot Singh Sidhu both made centuries to set a then record partnership for the second wicket. After getting out, Tendulkar found Azharuddin in two minds about whether he should bat.[citation needed] Tendulkar convinced Azharuddin to bat and Azharuddin subsequently unleashed 24 runs off one over. India went on to win that match. It enabled India to post a score in excess of 300 runs for the first time in an ODI. Tendulkar scored 143 (131) runs in Sharjah against the Australian team in the 1998 Coca-Cola cup, including 5 sixes in an innings against Shane Warne, Damien Fleming and Michael Kasprowicz. The innings is known as the "Desert Storm" because it was interrupted by a sand storm. In 2020, a poll from the ICC declared it Tendulkar's best ODI innings. In early 1998, while playing in an Australian tour of India, Tendulkar scored three consecutive centuries. The focus of the tour was the clash between Tendulkar and spinner Shane Warne, both at the peak of their careers. In the lead-up to the series, Tendulkar simulated scenarios in the nets with Laxman Sivaramakrishnan. In their tour opener, Australia faced Mumbai at the Brabourne Stadium in a three-day first class match. Tendulkar scored an unbeaten 204 runs as Shane Warne conceded 111 runs in 16 overs and Australia lost the match within three days. He also had a role with the ball in the five-match ODI series in India following the Tests, including a five wicket haul in an ODI in Kochi. Set 310 runs to win, Australia were cruising at 203 for 3 in the 31st over when Tendulkar turned the match for India, taking the wickets of Michael Bevan, Steve Waugh, Darren Lehmann, Tom Moody and Damien Martyn for 32 runs in 10 overs. The Test match success was followed by two consecutive centuries in April 1998 in a Triangular cricket tournament in Sharjah—the first in a must-win game to take India to the finals and then again in the finals, both against Australia. These twin knocks were also known as the Desert Storm innings. Following the series, Warne ruefully joked that he was having nightmares about his Indian nemesis. Tendulkar's contribution in the ICC 1998 quarterfinal at Dhaka paved the way for India's entry into the semifinals, when he took four Australian wickets after scoring 141 runs in 128 balls. The inaugural Asian Test Championship took place in February and March 1999, involving India, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka. Around 100,000 attended the first four days of the tournament, breaking a 63-year-old record for aggregate Test attendance record. In the first match, between India and Pakistan at Eden Gardens, Tendulkar was dismissed from the match after colliding with Pakistan bowler Shoaib Akhtar. The crowd reacted by throwing objects at Akhtar, and the players were taken off the field. The match resumed after Tendulkar and the president of the ICC appealed to the crowd; however, further rioting meant that the match was finished in front of a crowd of 200 people. Tendulkar scored his 19th Test century in the second Test and the match resulted in a draw with Sri Lanka. India did not progress to the final, which was won by Pakistan, and refused to participate in the 2001–02 Asian Test Championship due to increasing political tensions between India and Pakistan. In a Test match against Pakistan at Chepauk in 1999, the first of a two-Test series, Tendulkar scored 136 runs; India lost the match by 12 runs. Tendulkar's father, Ramesh Tendulkar, died during the 1999 Cricket World Cup. Tendulkar flew back to India to attend the final rituals of his father, missing the match against Zimbabwe. He returned to the World Cup, scoring a century (140 not out of 101 balls) in his very next match against Kenya in Bristol. He dedicated the century to his father. Tendulkar's two tenures as captain of the Indian cricket team were not very successful. Tendulkar became captain in 1996, but by 1997 the team was performing poorly. Discussing Tendulkar's first term as captain, Azharuddin was credited with saying, "He won't win! It's not in the small one's destiny!" (Hindi: "Nahin jeetega! Chote ki naseeb main jeet nahin hai!") Tendulkar, succeeding Azharuddin as captain for his second term, led India on a tour of Australia, where the visitors were beaten 3–0 by the newly crowned world champions.[when?] Tendulkar won the player of the series award, as well as player of the match in one of the games. After another Test series defeat, this time by a 0–2 margin at home against South Africa, Tendulkar resigned, and Sourav Ganguly took over as captain in 2000. In 2000, members of the South African national team attempted to fix matches during their visit to India. After the incident, Tendulkar and three other senior cricketers worked to ensure that players "whose performance and conduct was dubious were never picked for the Indian squad again". During the Indian team's 2007 tour of England, the desire of Rahul Dravid to resign from the captaincy became known. Then Board of Control for Cricket in India (BCCI) President Sharad Pawar offered the captaincy to Tendulkar, who instead recommended Mahendra Singh Dhoni. Pawar later revealed this conversation, crediting Tendulkar for suggesting Dhoni, who since achieved much success as captain. During India's 2001 tour of South Africa, in the second Test match, referee Mike Denness fined four Indian players for excessive appealing, and fined the Indian captain Sourav Ganguly for not controlling his team. Denness suspended Tendulkar from one match for alleged ball tampering. Television cameras captured images that suggested Tendulkar may have been involved in cleaning the seam of the cricket ball. The incident escalated to include sports journalists accusing Denness of racism, and led to Denness being barred from entering the venue of the third Test match. The ICC revoked the status of the match as a Test as the teams rejected the appointed referee. The charges against Tendulkar triggered a massive backlash from the Indian public. On the final day of the Kolkata Test against Australia in 2001, Tendulkar took three wickets, including the key wickets of Matthew Hayden and Adam Gilchrist, who were centurions in the previous Test. His three wickets haul helped India win the match. In the five-match ODI series that followed, he took his 100th wicket in ODIs, claiming the wicket of then Australian captain Steve Waugh in the final match at the Fatorda Stadium in Goa. In the 2002 series in the West Indies, Tendulkar started well, scoring 79 in the first Test. In the second Test at Port of Spain, Sachin Tendulkar scored 117 in the first innings, his 29th Test century in his 93rd Test match, to equal Donald Bradman's record of 29 Test hundreds. He was gifted a Ferrari 360 Modena by Fiat through Michael Schumacher for achieving this feat. Then, in an unprecedented sequence, he scored just 0, 0, 8, and 0 in the next four innings. He returned to form in the last Test scoring 41 and 86, one half century. However, India lost the series. In this period, in the third Test match against England in August 2002, Tendulkar scored his 30th Test century to surpass Bradman's haul, in his 99th Test match. Tendulkar made 673 runs in 11 matches in the 2003 Cricket World Cup, helping India reach the final. While Australia won, Tendulkar was given the Man of the Tournament award. He continued to score heavily in ODI cricket that year, with two hundreds in a tri-series involving New Zealand and Australia. As a part-time bowler, he dismissed an exhausted centurion, Matthew Hayden, in the tri-series final. The drawn series as India toured Australia in 2003–04 saw Tendulkar making his mark in the last Test of the series, scoring 241 not out from 436 balls with 33 fours at a strike rate of 55.27 in Sydney, putting India in a virtually unbeatable position. He spent 613 minutes at the crease during the innings. He followed this up with an unbeaten 60 in the second innings of the Test. Prior to this Test match, he had had an unusually horrible run of form, failing in all six innings in the preceding three Tests.[citation needed] It was no aberration that 2003 was his worst year in Test cricket, with an average of 17.00 and just one fifty. Tendulkar scored an unbeaten 194 against Pakistan at Multan in the following series. Indian captain Rahul Dravid declared before Tendulkar reached 200; had he done so it would have been the fourth time he had passed the landmark in Tests. Tendulkar said that he was disappointed and that the declaration had taken him by surprise. Many former cricketers commented that Dravid's declaration was in bad taste. After the match, which India won, Dravid said that the matter had been discussed internally and put to rest. A tennis elbow injury then took its toll on Tendulkar, leaving him out of the side for most of the year, coming back only for the last two Tests when Australia toured India in 2004. He played a part in India's victory in Mumbai in that series with a fast 55, though Australia took the series 2–1. On 10 December 2005 at Feroz Shah Kotla, Tendulkar scored his record-breaking 35th Test century, against the Sri Lankans. After this, Tendulkar endured the longest[needs update] spell of his career without a Test century: 17 innings elapsed before he scored 101 against Bangladesh in May 2007. Tendulkar scored his 39th ODI hundred on 6 February 2006 in a match against Pakistan. He followed with a 42 in the second One-Day International against Pakistan on 11 February 2006, and then a 95 in hostile, seaming conditions on 13 February 2006 in Lahore, which set up an Indian victory. On 19 March 2006, after being dismissed for only one run against England in the first innings of the third Test in his home ground, Wankhede, Tendulkar was booed off the ground by a section of the crowd. Tendulkar ended the three-Test series without a half-century to his credit, and the need for a shoulder operation raised more questions about his longevity.[citation needed] Tendulkar's comeback came in the DLF cup in Malaysia and he was the only Indian batsman to shine. In his comeback match, against West Indies on 14 September 2006, Tendulkar responded to his critics who believed that his career was inexorably sliding with his 40th ODI century. Though he scored 141 not out, West Indies won the rain-affected match by the D/L method. During the preparation for the 2007 World Cup, Tendulkar's attitude was criticised by Indian coach Greg Chappell. Chappell reportedly felt that Tendulkar would be more useful down the order, while Tendulkar felt that he would be better off opening the innings, the role he had played for most of his career. Chappell also believed that Tendulkar's repeated failures were hurting the team's chances. In a rare show of emotion, Tendulkar hit out at the comments attributed to Chappell by pointing out that no coach had ever suggested his attitude towards cricket was incorrect. On 7 April 2007, the Board of Control for Cricket in India issued a notice to Tendulkar asking for an explanation for his comments made to the media. Chappell subsequently resigned as coach but said that this affair had no bearing on his decision and that he and Tendulkar were on good terms. At the World Cup in the West Indies, Tendulkar and the Indian cricket team led by Rahul Dravid had a dismal campaign. Tendulkar, who was pushed to bat lower down the order had scores of 7 against Bangladesh, 57 not out against Bermuda and 0 against Sri Lanka. As a result, former Australian captain Ian Chappell, brother of Greg, called for Tendulkar to retire in his newspaper column. After the loss against Bangladesh and Sri Lanka, Tendulkar suffered depression and thought to retire from cricket, but Viv Richards and Ajit Tendulkar stopped him. According to Tendulkar, 23 March 2007, the loss against Bangladesh is one of the worst days of his cricketing career. In 2007, in a Test series during India's tour of Bangladesh, Tendulkar returned to his opening slot and was chosen as the Man of the Series. He continued by scoring 99 and 93 in the first two matches of the Future Cup against South Africa. During the second match, he also became the first to score 15,000 runs in ODIs. He was the leading run scorer and was adjudged the Man of the Series. On the second day of the Nottingham Test on 28 July 2007, Tendulkar became the third cricketer to complete 11,000 Test runs. In the subsequent one-day series against England, Tendulkar was the leading run scorer from India with an average of 53.42. In the ODI Series against Australia in October 2007 Tendulkar was the leading Indian run scorer with 278 runs. Tendulkar was dismissed five times in 2007 between 90 and 100, including three times at 99, leading some to suggestions that he struggles to cope with nervousness in this phase of his innings. Tendulkar has got out 27 times in the 90s during his international career. In a five-ODI series against Pakistan, he was caught by Kamran Akmal off the bowling of Umar Gul for 99 in the second match at Mohali, and in the fourth match of that series, he got out in the 90s for a second time, scoring 97 before dragging a delivery from Gul on to his stumps. In 2008 India's tour of Australia, at a Sydney Test match, Australian Andrew Symonds accused Indian Harbhajan Singh of using racist terminology by calling him a monkey. This matter was dubbed "Monkeygate" by the media. Singh was suspended by the match ICC referee after hearing. Sachin Tendulkar was standing on non-striker's end, at that moment, when Symonds claimed racist comments happened. In the hearing, Tendulkar said to the ICC match referee Mike Procter, that he could not say what exactly Singh said to Symonds, but in the next hearing, Tendulkar changed his stance and said that Symonds had not said "monkey" but "Teri Maa Ki..." ('Your mother's...'). In his autobiography Playing It My Way, Tendulkar wrote, "Teri Maa Ki..., It is an expression we often use in North India to vent our anger and to me it all part of the game".[full citation needed] The matter became big in following days and nearly led to the cancellation of this tour. Referee suspended Singh for 3 Test but after appeal and Tendulkar's statement in hearing the suspension was overturned. Andrew Symonds later said in Monkeygate- Ten years on, a documentary that was based on this matter, "When I began to play for Mumbai Indians, IPL franchise, once Harbhajan Singh came to me and apologised." Symonds said in the documentary, "We go to a very wealthy man's place for a barbecue, drinks, and dinner one night, and the whole team's there, and he had guests there, and Harbhajan said 'mate, can I speak to you for a minute out in the garden out the front?' He goes, 'look, I've got to say sorry to you for what I did to you in Sydney. I apologise."[excessive citations] The Herald Sun quoted, Tendulkar is still not "forgiven" by some Aussie players for changing his account on Monkeygate, dubbed Tendulkar as Indian "demigod". In the Border-Gavaskar Trophy, 2007–08, Tendulkar showed exceptional form, becoming the leading run scorer with "493 runs in four Tests, despite consistently failing in the second innings. Tendulkar scored 62 runs in the first innings of the first Test at the MCG in Melbourne, but could not prevent a heavy 337-run win for Australia. In the controversial New Years' Test at Sydney, Tendulkar scored an unbeaten 154, even though India lost the Test. This was his third century at the SCG and his 38th Test century overall, earning him an average of 326 at the ground at the time of completing the innings. In the third Test at the WACA cricket ground in Perth, Tendulkar was instrumental in India's first innings score of 330, scoring a well-compiled 71. India went on to record a historic triumph at the WACA, ending Australia's run of 16 consecutive wins. In the fourth Test at the Adelaide Oval, which ended in a draw, he scored 153 in the first innings, being involved in a crucial 126-run stand with VVS Laxman for the fifth wicket to lead India to a score of 282 for 5 from 156 for 4. He secured the Man of the Match award. In the One-Day International Commonwealth Bank Tri-Series involving India, Sri Lanka and Australia, Tendulkar became the only batsman to complete 16,000 runs in ODIs. He achieved this feat against Sri Lanka on 5 February 2008 at the Gabba in Brisbane. He started the series wth scores of 10, 35, 44 and 32. His form dipped a bit in the middle of the tournament,[original research?] but Tendulkar came back strongly in India's must-win game against Sri Lanka at the Bellerive Oval in Hobart, scoring 63 off 54 balls. He finished the series with a match winning 117 not out off 120 balls in the first final, and 91 runs in the second final. Both the knocks were nominated to be the ODI Batting Performance of the year by ESPNcricinfo. South Africa toured in March and April 2008 for a three-Test series. Tendulkar scored a five-ball duck in his only innings of the series; he sustained a groin strain in the match and as a result was forced not only to miss the second and third Tests, but also the tri-series involving Bangladesh, the 2008 Asia Cup, and the first half of the inaugural season of the IPL. Before the Indian cricket team's tour of Sri Lanka in July 2008, Tendulkar needed 177 runs to go past Brian Lara's record of Test 11,953 runs. However, he failed in all six innings, scoring a total of 95 runs. India lost the series and his average of 15.83 was his worst in a Test series with at least three matches. In the following ODI series against Sri Lanka, Tendulkar was sidelined due to injury. However, during the following Australia tour of India, he returned to fitness and form, scoring 13 and 49 in the first Test before making 88 in the first innings of the second Test, breaking the record for most Test runs held by Brian Lara. He also reached the 12,000-run mark when he was on 61. He described the achievement as the biggest in 19 years of his career on the day he achieved the record. He made a fifty in the third Test and 109 in the fourth, as India won the series 2–0 and regained the Border-Gavaskar Trophy. Tendulkar was again out of the first three ODIs of a seven-match ODI series at home against England due to an injury, but he made 11 in the fourth ODI and 50 in the fifth, before the series was called off due to the 2008 Mumbai terrorist attacks, the scoreline being 5–0 to India. England returned for a two-match Test series in December 2008, and the first Test, which was originally planned to be held in Mumbai, was shifted to Chennai following the terror attacks. Chasing 387 for victory in that match, Tendulkar scored 103 not out and shared a 163-run unbroken fifth wicket partnership with Yuvraj Singh. This was his third century in the fourth innings of a Test match, and the first which resulted in a win. He dedicated this century to the victims of the Mumbai terror attacks. The knock was nominated to be one of the Test Batting Performance of the year by ESPNcricinfo. Tendulkar scored poorly in the second Test at Mohali, which ended in a draw. India won the series 1–0. In early 2009, India revisited Sri Lanka for five ODIs, as the Pakistan series had been cancelled due to the security situation in Pakistan and the attacks in Mumbai.[citation needed] Tendulkar scored 5, 6 and 7 in the first three matches, being dismissed leg before wicket in all of them, and did not play in the remaining two matches. India's next assignment was an away series against New Zealand, consisting of three Tests and five ODIs. In the ODI series, Tendulkar made an unbeaten 163 in the third match before stomach cramps forced him to end his innings. India made 392, won the match and eventually won the series 3–1. Tendulkar made 160 in the first Test, his 42nd Test century, and India won. He made 49 and 64 in the second Test and 62 and 9 in the third, in which play was halted on the last day due to rain with India needing only two wickets to win. India won the series 1–0. Tendulkar rested himself for the ODI tour of West Indies, but was back for the Compaq Cup Tri Series between India, Sri Lanka and New Zealand in early September 2009. He made 46 and 27 in the league matches before notching up 138 in the final, as India made 319 and won by 46 runs. This was Tendulkar's sixth century in a final of an ODI tournament and his third consecutive score of over 50 in such finals. Tendulkar played only one innings in the ICC Champions trophy in South Africa, scoring 8 against Pakistan as India lost. The next match against Australia was abandoned due to rain and he was out with a stomach infection in the third match against the West Indies, as India were eliminated. Australia returned for a seven-match ODI series in India in October, and Tendulkar made 14, 4, 32 and 40 in the first four games. In the fifth match, with the series tied at 2–2, Australia amassed 350/4 in 50 overs. Tendulkar made his 45th ODI hundred, a 175 off 141 balls. Just when it seemed that he would steer India to the large victory target, he tried to scoop a slower delivery from debutant bowler Clint McKay over short fine leg only to be caught by Nathan Hauritz, with India needing 19 runs to win with 18 balls and four wickets left. The Indian tail collapsed, and Australia won the match by three runs. During this match, Tendulkar also became the first player to reach 17,000 ODI runs, and achieved his personal best against Australia, as well as the third-highest score in a defeat. The knock was voted as the Best ODI Batting Performance of 2009 by ESPNcricinfo. In the five-match ODI series against Sri Lanka in 2009–10, Tendulkar scored 69, 43, 96 not out and 8 in the first four matches, with the fifth match being abandoned as the pitch was deemed unfit and potentially dangerous. India won the series 3–1. In the Test series that followed, he scored a 100 not out in the first Test, which was drawn, and 40 and 53 in the second and third Tests, respectively, as India clinched innings victories in both the Tests, to win the series 2–0. Tendulkar rested himself for the ODI tri-series in Bangladesh in 2010, but played in the subsequent Test series. He made 105 not out and 16 in the first Test, and 143 in the second. India won both the Tests. In the two-Test Series against South Africa, Tendulkar made 7 and 100 in the first Test. He then scored 106 in the first innings of the second Test, which was his 47th hundred in Test cricket. It was also his fourth hundred in successive Tests, and he was the fourth Indian to achieve this feat. In the second match of the subsequent ODI series, Tendulkar scored 200 not out, becoming the world's first batsman to score a double century in ODI cricket and breaking the previous highest score of 194 jointly held by Pakistan's Saeed Anwar and Zimbabwe's Charles Coventry. From February to April, Bangladesh, India, and Sri Lanka hosted the 2011 World Cup. Amassing 482 runs at an average of 53.55 including two centuries, Tendulkar was India's leading run-scorer for the tournament; only Tillakaratne Dilshan of Sri Lanka scored more runs in the 2011 tournament, and was named in the ICC "Team of the Tournament". India defeated Sri Lanka in the final. Shortly after the victory, Tendulkar commented that "Winning the World Cup is the proudest moment of my life. ... I couldn't control my tears of joy." India were due to tour the West Indies in June, although Tendulkar chose not to participate. He returned to the squad in July for India's tour of England. Throughout the tour there was much hype in the media about whether Tendulkar would reach his 100th century in international cricket (Test and ODIs combined). However, his highest score in the Tests was 91; Tendulkar averaged 34.12 in the series as England won 4–0 as they deposed India as the No. 1 ranked Test side. The injury Tendulkar sustained to his right foot in 2001 flared up and as a result he was ruled out of the ODI series that followed. Tendulkar created another record on 8 November 2011 when he became the first cricketer to score 15,000 runs in Test cricket, during the opening Test match against the West Indies at the Feroz Shah Kotla Stadium in New Delhi. For his performances in 2011, he was named in the World Test XI by the ICC. Ian Chappell was not happy with Tendulkar's performance after India's tour of Australia. He says that Tendulkar's quest for his 100th hundred has proved to be a hurdle for the entire team and has hampered their performance on the Tour of Australia. Former India World Cup winning captain and all-rounder Kapil Dev has also voiced his opinion that Tendulkar should have retired from ODI's after the World Cup. Former Australian fast bowler, Geoff Lawson, has said that Tendulkar has the right to decide when to quit although he adds that Tendulkar should not delay it for too long. The selection committee of BCCI expectedly included Tendulkar in the national Test squad for the upcoming series against New Zealand commencing in August 2012. On 16 March 2012, Tendulkar accomplished a remarkable feat by scoring his 100th international century in a match against Bangladesh in the Asia Cup, held at Mirpur. This was a pioneering achievement, as he became the first cricketer to ever reach this landmark. This century was not just a momentous occasion for Tendulkar, but it was also his first ODl century against Bangladesh. Despite the widespread media attention and public fascination with this milestone, Tendulkar confessed that it was a challenging time for him, as the constant focus on his 100th hundred became a mentally onerous task. Despite Tendulkar's illustrious century, India was unable to secure a triumph against Bangladesh, resulting in a defeat by a margin of 5 wickets. After being bowled out in three similar instances against New Zealand and hitting a slump in form, Tendulkar returned to the Ranji Trophy to get back some form ahead of the England Series at home,[citation needed] in a match for Mumbai against Railways on 2 November 2012. This was his first Ranji Trophy match since 2009. He scored 137 off 136 balls, with 21 fours and 3 sixes, to take his team to 344 for 4 at stumps on day one. However, because of a poor form in the first two Tests in the series against England, and India being humiliated in the second match of that series by 10 wickets on 26 November 2012, some people have started to question his place in the Indian team. A report by The Hindustan Times said that Tendulkar had a discussion with the national chief selector Sandeep Patil, in which he said that he would leave it to the selectors to decide on his future as he is not getting any runs. This speculation, however, was later considered to be false. Then he decided to play in the knockout stage of the 2012–13 Ranji Trophy. He scored 108 in the quarter-final against Baroda before being bowled by Murtuja Vahora, where Tendulkar was involved in a 234-run partnership with opener Wasim Jaffer (150) for the 3rd wicket at Wankhede Stadium. Mumbai eventually piled on 645/9 and won on 1st innings lead. In the semi-final against Services at Palam A Ground, with Mumbai reeling at 23/3, Tendulkar scored 56 from 75 balls and had an 81-run 4th wicket partnership with Abhishek Nayar (70), and Mumbai eventually won on 1st innings lead after the match went into the sixth day due to rain delays. In the final against Saurashtra, he was run out for 22 following a misunderstanding with Wasim Jaffer. Mumbai eventually won the Ranji Trophy 2012–13. He also played in the Irani Trophy for Mumbai, where he scored 140* against Rest of India and helped Mumbai to score 409 in reply to Rest of India's 526. This was also his 81st hundred in first-class cricket, equalling Sunil Gavaskar's Indian record for most first-class hundreds. After a series of underwhelming performances during the 2012 series against England, Tendulkar announced his departure from One Day International cricket on 23 December 2012. However, he stated that he would continue to be available for representation in the Test format of the sport. Upon the announcement of his retirement from One Day International cricket, former Indian captain Sourav Ganguly expressed his surprise, noting that Tendulkar could have still participated in the upcoming series against Pakistan. Anil Kumble reflected on the difficulty of imagining an Indian ODI team without Tendulkar's name, while Javagal Srinath acknowledged the transformative impact Tendulkar had on the game, starting from the time he debuted as an opener in New Zealand in 1994. After playing a Twenty20 International in 2006 against South Africa, he said that he would not play the format again. He announced his retirement from the IPL after his team, Mumbai Indians, beat Chennai Super Kings by 23 runs at the Eden Gardens in Kolkata on 26 May to win the Indian Premier League 2013. He retired from Twenty20 cricket and limited-overs cricket, after playing the 2013 Champions League Twenty20 in September–October 2013 in India for Mumbai Indians. On 10 October 2013 Tendulkar announced that he would retire from all cricket after the two-Test series against West Indies in November. At his request, the BCCI arranged that the two matches be played at Kolkata and Mumbai so that the farewell would happen at his home ground. He scored 74 runs in his last Test innings against West Indies, thus failing short by 79 runs to complete 16,000 runs in Test cricket, the next man to bat after him was the future captain Virat Kohli. The Cricket Association of Bengal and the Mumbai Cricket Association organised events to mark his retirement from the sport. Various national and international figures from cricket, politics, Bollywood and other fields spoke about him in a day-long Salaam Sachin Conclave organised by India Today. In July 2014, he captained the MCC side in the Bicentenary Celebration match at Lord's. In December 2014, he was announced ambassador of the ICC Cricket World Cup 2015 event. It is his second term as he has already held the ambassador of the previous ICC Cricket World Cup 2011. He got the ambassador position of the ICC Cricket world cup in consecutive terms of the cricket world cup (2011 and 2015). Tendulkar organised exhibition cricket matches in partnership with former Aussie cricketer Shane Warne. Cricket All-Stars held in US in baseball stadiums and had retired players, some of them was Sourav Ganguly, Shoaib Akhtar, Wasim Akram. On 8 February 2020, he played in the Bushfire Cricket Bash, a charity match organised to raise fund for Australian bushfire victims. He captained the India legends team to victory in the 2020–21 Road Safety World Series and was the leading run scorer for the Indian team in the tournament. He acted as a coach for the Ponting XI during The Big Appeal. During the innings break, he batted an over against Ellyse Perry and Annabel Sutherland at Perry's request. Tendulkar was made the Icon player and captain for his home side, the Mumbai Indians in the inaugural Indian Premier League Twenty20 competition in 2008. As an icon player, he was signed for a sum of US$1,121,250, 15% more than the second-highest paid player in the team, Sanath Jayasuriya. In 2010 edition of Indian Premier League, Mumbai Indians reached the final of the tournament. Tendulkar made 618 runs in 14 innings during the tournament, breaking Shaun Marsh's record of most runs in an IPL season. He was declared player of the tournament for his performance during the season. He also won Best Batsman and Best Captain awards at 2010 IPL Awards ceremony. Tendulkar has scored more than 500 runs in IPL in two different seasons as a captain. Sachin Tendulkar captained Mumbai Indians in 4 league matches of the second edition of the Champions League T20. He scored 68 in the first match and 48 against Guyana. But Mumbai Indians failed to qualify for semifinals after losing the initial two matches. Tendulkar scored 135 runs. In the 2011 IPL, against Kochi Tuskers Kerala, Tendulkar scored his maiden Twenty20 hundred. He scored 100 not out off 66 balls. In 2013, Tendulkar retired from Indian Premier League and in 2014 he was appointed as the Mumbai Indian's "Team Icon". His last match for the team was the final of the 2013 Champions League, where he scored 14 runs in an Indians victory. In his 78 matches in the IPL, Tendulkar scored a total of 2,334 runs; at the time of his retirement he was the fifth-highest run-scorer in the competition's history. Mumbai Indians retired his number 10 jersey as a tribute to Tendulkar. He recently stepped down as the mentor of the franchise citing personal reasons. Tendulkar is cross-dominant: he bats, bowls and throws with his right hand, but writes with his left hand. He would also practice left-handed throws at the nets on a regular basis. ESPNcricinfo columnist Sambit Bal has described him as the "most wholesome batsman of his time". His batting is based on complete balance and poise while limiting unnecessary movements and flourishes. He appears to show little preference for the slow and low wickets which are typical in India, and has scored many centuries on the hard, bouncy pitches in South Africa and Australia. He is known for his unique punch style of hitting the ball over square. He is also renowned for his picture-perfect straight drive, often completed with no follow-through. The straight drive is often said to be his favourite shot. In 2008, Sunil Gavaskar, in an article he wrote in the AFP, remarked that "it is hard to imagine any player in the history of the game who combines classical technique with raw aggression like the little champion does". Equipment-wise, his bats tend to be heavier than the average batman. Sir Donald Bradman, considered by many as the greatest batsman of all time, considered Tendulkar to have a batting style similar to his. In his biography, it is stated that "Bradman was most taken by Tendulkar's technique, compactness and shot production, and had asked his wife to have a look at Tendulkar, having felt that Tendulkar played like him. Bradman's wife, Jessie, agreed that they did appear similar." Former Australian cricket team coach John Buchanan voiced his opinion that Tendulkar had become susceptible to the short ball early in his innings because of a lack of footwork. Buchanan also believes Tendulkar has a weakness while playing left-arm pace. He was affected by a series of injuries since 2004. Since then Tendulkar's batting has tended to be less attacking. Explaining this change in his batting style, he has acknowledged that he is batting differently because, firstly, no batsman can bat the same way for the entire length of a long career and, secondly, he is a senior member of the team now and thus has more responsibility. During the early part of his career, he was a more attacking batsman and frequently scored centuries at close to a run a ball. Ian Chappell, former Australian player, remarked in 2007 that "Tendulkar now, is nothing like the player he was when he was a young bloke". Tendulkar has incorporated several modern and unorthodox strokes into his repertoire, including the paddle sweep, the scoop over short fine leg and the slash to third man over the slips' heads, especially in his later years. He is often praised for his ability to adapt to the needs of his body and yet keep scoring consistently. While Tendulkar was not a regular bowler, he could bowl medium pace, leg spin, and off spin. He often bowled when two batsmen of the opposite team had been batting together for a long period, as he could often be a useful partnership breaker. With his bowling, he helped secure an Indian victory on more than one occasion. He took 201 international wickets—46 in Tests, 154 in ODIs where he is India's twelfth-highest wicket taker, and one wicket in Twenty20 Internationals. Tendulkar is often regarded as one of the greatest and most influential cricketer in the history of cricket. His consistent performances earned him a fan following across the globe, including amongst Australian crowds, where Tendulkar has consistently scored centuries. One of the most popular sayings by his fans is "Cricket is my religion and Sachin is my God". ESPNcricinfo mentions in his profile that "... Tendulkar remains, by a distance, the most worshipped cricketer in the world."[additional citation(s) needed] During the Australian tour of India in 1998 Matthew Hayden said "I have seen God. He bats at no. 4 in India in Tests." However, on God, Tendulkar himself is reported to have said "I am not God of cricket. I make mistakes, God doesn't." Tendulkar made a special appearance in the Bollywood film Stumped in 2003, appearing as himself.[unreliable fringe source?] On 24 February 2010, ESPNcricinfo site could not handle the heavy traffic experienced after Tendulkar broke the record for the highest individual male score in a One Day International match against South Africa, also becoming the first player to score 200* in the history of ODIs as more than 5 million fans visited the website at a time. There have been many instances when Tendulkar's fans have undertaken extreme activities over his dismissal in the game. As reported by many Indian newspapers, a young man hanged himself due to distress over Tendulkar's failure to reach his 100th century. At home in Mumbai, Tendulkar's fan following has caused him to lead a different lifestyle. Ian Chappell has said that he would be unable to cope with the lifestyle Tendulkar was forced to lead, having to "wear a wig and go out and watch a movie only at night". In an interview with Tim Sheridan, Tendulkar admitted that he sometimes went for quiet drives in the streets of Mumbai late at night when he would be able to enjoy some peace and silence. In the 2021 IPL, season he worked for Mumbai Indians team as a mentor. 1994 – Arjuna Award, by the Government of India in recognition of his outstanding achievement in sports. 1997–98 – Khel Ratna Award, India's highest honour given for achievement in sports. 1999 – Padma Shri, India's fourth-highest civilian award. 2001 – Maharashtra Bhushan Award, Maharashtra state's highest civilian award. 2008 – Padma Vibhushan, India's second-highest civilian award. 2014 – Bharat Ratna, India's highest civilian award. 2012 – Honorary Member of the Order of Australia, given by the Australian government. 1997 – Wisden Cricketer of the Year. 1998, 2010 – Wisden Leading Cricketer in the World. 2001 – Mumbai Cricket Association renamed one of Wankhede Stadium's stands after Sachin Tendulkar. 2002 – In commemorating Tendulkar's feat of equalling Don Bradman's 29 centuries in Test Cricket, Formula One (F1) team Ferrari invited him to its paddock on the eve of the British Grand Prix on 23 July, to receive a Ferrari 360 Modena from the F1 world champion Michael Schumacher. 2003 – Player of the tournament in 2003 Cricket World Cup. 2004, 2007, 2010 – ICC World ODI XI. 2006–07, 2009–10 – Polly Umrigar Award for International cricketer of the year 2009, 2010, 2011 – ICC World Test XI. 2010 – Outstanding Achievement in Sport and the People's Choice Award at The Asian Awards in London. 2010 – Sir Garfield Sobers Trophy for cricketer of the year. 2010 – LG People's Choice Award. 2010 – Made an Honorary Group Captain by the Indian Air Force. 2011 – Castrol Indian Cricketer of the Year award. 2012 – Wisden India Outstanding Achievement award. 2013 – India Post released a stamp of Tendulkar and he became the second Indian after Mother Teresa to have such stamp released in their lifetime. 2014 – ESPNcricinfo Cricketer of the Generation. 2017 – The Asian Awards Fellowship Award at the 7th Asian Awards. 2019 – Inducted into the ICC Cricket Hall of Fame 2020 – Laureus World Sports Award for Best Sporting Moment (2000–2020) 2023- On his 50th birthday, the West Stand at the iconic Sharjah Cricket Stadium has been renamed the 'Sachin Tendulkar Stand. Tendulkar is the leading run-scorer in Test matches, with 15,921 runs, as well as in ODI matches, with 18,426 runs. He is the only player to score more than 30,000 runs combined in all forms of international cricket (Test, ODI, and Twenty20). He is the 16th player and the first Indian to score 50,000 runs in all forms of domestic and international recognised cricket (First-class, List A, and Twenty20). He achieved this feat on 5 October 2013, during a Champions League Twenty20 match for his IPL team Mumbai Indians against Trinidad and Tobago. Tendulkar has scored over 1,000 runs in a calendar year in ODIs 7 times, and in 1998 he scored 1,894 runs, the record for the highest number of runs scored by any player in a single calendar year for One-Day Internationals. He is the first male cricketer to score a double-century in one-day cricket. Tendulkar was also one half of the most prolific Test cricket partnership to date, alongside Rahul Dravid. Batting together, they scored 6920 runs for India at a partnership average of over fifty runs. He became the first batsman to score 12,000, 13,000, 14,000 and 15,000 runs in Test cricket, having also been the third batsman and the first Indian to pass 11,000 runs in that form of the game. He was also the first player to score 10,000 runs in one-day internationals, and also the first player to cross every subsequent 1,000-run mark that has been crossed in ODI cricket history.[citation needed] On 8 November 2011, Tendulkar became the first batsman to score 15,000 runs in Test Cricket. Tendulkar has consistently done well in Cricket World Cups. He was the highest run scorer of the 1996 Cricket World Cup with a total of 523 runs and also of the 2003 Cricket World Cup with 673 runs. Tendulkar holds the record of the highest number of centuries in Tests (51) and stands second in the highest number of centuries in ODIs (49) behind Virat Kohli. He has the most number of centuries when Tests and ODIs combined (100). He is the only player to have scored 50 centuries in Test cricket, and was the first to score 50 centuries in all international cricket combined. In the fourth Test match of the 2008–09 Border-Gavaskar Trophy against Australia on 6 November 2008, Tendulkar surpassed Australia's Allan Border to become the player to cross the 50-run mark the most times in Test cricket history, and also the second ever player to score 11 Test centuries against Australia, tying Jack Hobbs, who had set the record more than 70 years prior. After his century against England during group stages of 2011 Cricket World Cup, he became the player to hit most centuries in Cricket World Cups with six centuries, and the first player to score 2000 runs in World Cup cricket. On 16 March 2012, Tendulkar scored his 100th international hundred against Bangladesh during the Asia Cup 2012. He also holds the world record for playing the highest number of Test matches (200) and ODI matches (463). Tendulkar has been part of most wins by an Indian in both Test cricket with 72 wins and ODIs with 234 wins, and is third in the world in ODI victories after Ricky Ponting (262), Mahela Jayawardene (241). He has been Man of the Match 13 times in Test matches and Man of the Series four times, including twice in the Border-Gavaskar Trophy against Australia. The performances earned him respect from Australian cricket fans and players. In ODI, he has been Man of the Match 62 times and Man of the Series 15 times. On 24 May 1995, Tendulkar married Anjali Mehta, a paediatrician of Gujarati origin, whom he had first met in 1990. Anjali decided to leave her medical career following their marriage. They have two children: Sara and Arjun. Tendulkar lives in a bungalow in the Mumbai suburb of Bandra. Tendulkar is a Hindu. He is a devotee of Ganesha, and a follower of Sathya Sai Baba, whom he visited for the first time in 1997. The death of Sai Baba on Tendulkar's 38th birthday, in 2011, caused him to cancel his birthday celebrations. Tendulkar's popularity has led him to be a pioneer in India on cricket business dealings. In 1995, he signed a record sports management deal with WorldTel, the value of the deal being ₹300 million (US$3.8 million) over five years. In 2001, he re-signed with WorldTel in 2001 with a five-year, ₹800 million (US$10 million) contract. In 2006, Tendulkar's marketing rights were sold to Saatchi and Saatchi through a three-year, ₹1.8 billion (US$23 million) contract. He started Sachin Ramesh Tendulkar Sports Management Pvt Ltd, a sports management organisation. It manages all social and commercial work of Tendulkar.[when?][better source needed] Tendulkar has opened two restaurants: Tendulkar's (Colaba, Mumbai) and Sachin's (Mulund, Mumbai). Tendulkar owns these restaurants in partnership with Sanjay Narang of Mars Restaurants. In 2013, Tendulkar was listed in the 51st position on Forbes' list of world's highest-paid athletes, with his total earnings estimated to be US$22 million. In October 2013, the net worth of Tendulkar was estimated at US$160 million by Wealth-X, making him India's wealthiest cricket player. Until 2017, Tendulkar co-owned the Kerala Blasters FC in the Indian Super League Football in association with Prasad V. Potluri's PVP Ventures. The team was named for Tendulkar's nickname, "Master Blaster". In 2016, Tendulkar became co-owner of the Bengaluru Blasters badminton team, which participates in the Premier Badminton League. In October 2021, Tendulkar was named in the Pandora Papers leak. His representatives stated that Tendulkar's investments have been legitimate and fully taxed. In April 2012, Tendulkar was nominated by President Pratibha Patil to the Rajya Sabha, the upper house of India's parliament. He became the first active sportsperson and cricketer to receive the honour. He took the oath of office on 4 June. He refused to accept the bungalow allotted to him in New Delhi, calling it "a waste of [taxpayers'] money as I reside in Mumbai". As a member of parliament in Rajya Sabha, Tendulkar was one of the worst performers in regards to attendance at parliament sessions and house debates. Fellow MPs from various parties, including other nominated MPs, criticised Tendulkar for his absence. In his first year, he did not attend a single day of budget or winter session, and his attendance for the monsoon session was 5 percent. In his career as an MP, he asked 22 questions and did not participate in any debates. He was part of the Standing Committee on Information Technology. Overall, his attendance for his six year-term was 8 percent. In response to criticism about his attendance, Tendulkar said that he was absent because of personal issues. In 2015, Tendulkar released ₹76 lakh (equivalent to ₹1.1 crore or US$140,000 in 2023) from his Members of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme fund to a West Midnapore, West Bengal school after receiving a request from the school. In 2019, Tendulkar contributed ₹22 lakh (US$28,000) from his Members of Parliament Local Area Development (MPLAD) funds allotted to him during his stint as Rajya Sabha MP for the renovation of a Children's Park in East Bandra. In his six years as a Rajya Sabha MP, Tendulkar accrued nearly ₹90 lakh (US$110,000) in salaries and other monthly allowances. He donated this entire salary and allowances to the Prime Minister Relief Fund. In response, the Prime Minister's Office released a statement: "Prime Minister acknowledges this thoughtful gesture and conveys his gratitude. These contributions will be of immense help in providing assistance to the persons in distress." Tendulkar has a charitable organisation, the Sachin Tendulkar Foundation.[third-party source needed] He has also supported the campaigns of other organisations. Since November 2013, he has been the UNICEF Goodwill Ambassador for South Asia as well its national ambassador for India. In 2003, Tendulkar worked for UNICEF's initiative to spread awareness about polio prevention in India. In 2010, Tendulkar's campaign for the Crusade Against Cancer Foundation, "Sachin's Crusade Against Cancer in Children", raised ₹10.25 million (equivalent to ₹23 million or US$290,000 in 2023). In November 2021, he donated retinal cameras, which can be used to diagnose retinopathy of prematurity, to a hospital in Assam. In 2008, Tendulkar became involved with UNICEF's initiative to promote hygiene and sanitation. Tendulkar led UNICEF's Team Swachh Bharat campaign which supported the Indian government's Swachh Bharat Mission (Clean India Mission), a campaign dedicated to improving sanitation in India. In 2014, Tendulkar was one of the first nine celebrities appointed by Prime Minister Narendra Modi to promote Swachh Bharat Mission. Tendulkar accepted the nomination, posting a video of himself sweeping a street with his friends in Mumbai. In 2017, he helped sanitation workers clean the Bandra Fort to contribute to the Swachhata Hi Seva ('Cleanliness is Service') campaign. In 2019, he was awarded the most effective Swachhta ('Cleanliness') Ambassador by India Today Group's fifth edition of Safaigiri (lit. 'Spread awareness about hygiene movement'). In March 2020, he donated ₹25 lakh (US$31,000) to the Prime Minister Relief Fund and ₹25 lakh (US$31,000) to the Chief Minister Relief Fund of Maharashtra in the initial months of the COVID-19 pandemic. In May 2020, Tendulkar donated an undisclosed amount of money to 4,000 people, including children of Brihanmumbai Municipal Corporation schools. On 29 April 2021, during the second wave of the pandemic in India, he donated ₹1 crore (US$130,000) to the Mission Oxygen group, which imported and donated oxygen concentrator devices. On 18 September 2011, Tendulkar spent nine hours on the 12-hour "Coca-Cola-NDTV Support My School" telethon. The campaign raised ₹70 million (equivalent to ₹140 million or US$1.8 million in 2023) for "the creation of basic facilities, particularly toilets for girl students, in 140 government schools across the country". In 2009, Tendulkar announced that he would sponsor the education of 200 children through Apnalaya, a Mumbai-based non-governmental organisation associated with his mother-in-law, Annabel Mehta. As of 2013[update], Tendulkar continued to annually support 200 children through Apnalaya. In 2015 he was appointed by BCCI into the Cricket Advisory Committee (CAC). He was one of three in the committee along VVS Laxman and Sourav Ganguly. He resigned from this job after allegations of conflict of interest on him.[date missing][when?]CAC was formed by BCCI to appoint a head coach for Indian cricket team. On 23 June 2016, CAC appointed Anil Kumble as national team's head coach. In 2019, Tendulkar made his debut as a Cricket commentator during the 2019 ICC Cricket World Cup. In 2001, Tendulkar appeared on Kaun Banega Crorepati on Star Plus with Vinod Kambli In 2011, Tendulkar Opus was released by Kraken Opus, a specialty book publisher. Ten copies were part of the "Blood Edition", in which Tendulkar's blood was "mixed into the paper pulp" of the signature page. The proceeds from the "Blood Editions", which cost US$75,000 each, went to Tendulkar's charitable organisation. Other editions were offered: about a thousand hardback copies at US$2,000–$3,000, a smaller edition at US$200–$300, and a digital edition. Tendulkar's autobiography, Playing It My Way, was released on 6 November 2014. It was listed in the 2016 Limca Book of Records for breaking the record for adult hardback pre-publication orders, with 150,289. It was written by a ghostwriter, Boria Majumdar. In 2017, Sachin: A Billion Dreams, directed by James Erskine, was released. It is a docudrama film about Tendulkar, featuring interviews with cricket players and sports commentators. The film received mixed reviews. The 2023 film Sachin: The Ultimate Winner depicts a child called Sachin who is inspired by Tendulkar, his hero and namesake, to return to cricket after becoming severely injured. Craig White, although born in Yorkshire was the first player to be signed as an overseas player by Yorkshire. He had to be listed as an overseas player as he had already played for Victoria in Australia. Belinda Clark of the Australian women's cricket team was the first cricketer (of any gender) to score 200 or more in an ODI match. She scored 229* in a 1997 Women's Cricket World Cup match against Denmark. "Sachin Tendulkar: How the Boy Wonder became Master Blaster". NDTV. 6 November 2013. Archived from the original on 16 November 2013. Retrieved 17 November 2013. Gupta, Gaura (13 November 2013). "Top guns salute Master Blaster Sachin Tendulkar". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 18 November 2013. Retrieved 17 November 2013. "THROWBACK: When Sachin Tendulkar captained East Bengal in P. Sen Trophy!". BADGEB.com. Archived from the original on 25 April 2020. Retrieved 25 April 2020. *"Sachin Tendulkar is greatest cricketer in history – Brian Lara". BBC Sport. 12 November 2013. Archived from the original on 16 November 2013. Retrieved 19 November 2013. "Sachin Tendulkar greatest batsman to have played cricket: Dennis Lillee". The Times of India. 26 June 2012. Retrieved 5 December 2017. "'Why Sachin Tendulkar is the greatest' by Michael Vaughan". The Daily Telegraph. Archived from the original on 11 November 2014. Retrieved 5 December 2017. "Is Sachin Tendulkar the greatest batsman of all time?". The Daily Telegraph. 10 October 2013. Archived from the original on 13 October 2013. Retrieved 19 November 2013. Alex Brown (11 October 2013). "Cricket's greatest batsmen: Sachin Tendulkar v Don Bradman." Archived 16 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine News.com.au "Revealed! What makes Sachin Tendulkar the greatest batsman..." rediff.com. Archived from the original on 5 August 2014. Retrieved 5 August 2014. "Records | One-Day Internationals | Batting records | Most runs in career". ESPNcricinfo. Retrieved 16 September 2022. "Records | Combined Test, ODI and T20I records | Individual records (captains, players, umpires) | Most player-of-the-match awards". ESPNcricinfo. Retrieved 16 September 2022. "Sachin Tendulkar confirmed as Rajya Sabha member | Cricket News". NDTVSports.com. Retrieved 27 April 2023. "Sachin Tendulkar donates entire salary to Prime Minister's Relief Fund after Rajya Sabha term ends". Hindustan Times. 1 April 2018. Retrieved 27 April 2023. "Records | Test matches | Individual records (captains, players, umpires) | Longest careers | ESPNcricinfo.com". ESPNcricinfo. Retrieved 30 March 2023. "Tendulkar second-best ever: Wisden". Rediff.com. Archived from the original on 23 January 2009. Retrieved 27 November 2008. "Reliving a dream". The Hindu. 6 April 2011. Archived from the original on 19 May 2012. Retrieved 6 April 2011. "Padma Awards" (PDF). Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India. 2015. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 October 2015. Retrieved 21 July 2015. "Sachin Tendulkar received Arjuna Award in 1994". CricEarth. 28 May 2020. Retrieved 16 September 2022. "Sachin first sportsperson to win country's highest civilian honour Bharat Ratna". Hindustan Times. New Delhi. 16 November 2013. Archived from the original on 17 January 2014. Retrieved 16 November 2013. "Bharat Ratna for Prof CNR Rao and Sachin Tendulkar". Prime Minister's Office. 16 November 2013. Archived from the original on 19 November 2013. Retrieved 16 November 2013. "Sachin Tendulkar and CNR Rao conferred Bharat Ratna". The Times of India. 4 February 2014. Archived from the original on 4 February 2014. Retrieved 4 February 2014. "CNR Rao, Sachin receive Bharat Ratna". The Hindu. 4 February 2014. Archived from the original on 22 February 2014. Retrieved 4 February 2014. "Rajya Sabha stint". Hindustan Times. 4 June 2012. Archived from the original on 4 June 2012. Retrieved 4 June 2012. "the time 2010 time 100". time. "Sachin Tendulkar named cricketer of the year". 6 October 2010. Archived from the original on 12 October 2010. Retrieved 24 November 2010. "Tendulkar announces limited-overs retirement". Wisden India. Archived from the original on 23 December 2012. Retrieved 23 December 2012. "Tendulkar calls time on IPL career". Wisden India. 26 May 2013. Archived from the original on 16 October 2013. Retrieved 26 May 2013. "India's next generation thrives after Tendulkar 74". ESPNcricinfo. 15 October 2013. Archived from the original on 15 November 2013. "Records / Combined Test, ODI and T20I records / Batting records; Most runs in career". ESPNcricinfo. 17 November 2013. Archived from the original on 21 November 2013. Retrieved 17 November 2013. "Don Bradman, Shane Warne in Wisden's XI". theaustralian.com. 23 October 2013. Archived from the original on 24 October 2013. Retrieved 23 October 2013. ESPNcricinfo (19 July 2019). "Sachin Tendulkar, Allan Donald, Cathryn Fitzpatrick inducted in ICC Hall of Fame". ESPNcricinfo. Retrieved 19 July 2019. "Sydney Cricket Ground gates named after Tendulkar, Lara". Reuters. 24 April 2023. Retrieved 24 April 2023. ANI (24 April 2023). "Gates named after Sachin Tendulkar, Brian Lara unveiled at Sydney Cricket Ground". The Hindu. Retrieved 24 April 2023. "Sachin Tendulkar honoured with gate at Sydney Cricket Ground on 50th birthday". Deccan Herald. 24 April 2023. Retrieved 24 April 2023. Bal, Sambit. "Sachin Tendulkar—Cricinfo Profile". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 14 November 2010. Retrieved 14 December 2007. Abraham, Derek (24 April 2013). "Sachin Tendulkar: The multi-million dollar baby". Daily News and Analysis. Retrieved 11 May 2019. "I am proud to be a Maharashtrian – Sachin Tendulkar". India TV News. 13 November 2009. Archived from the original on 27 April 2019. Retrieved 8 November 2023. Thani, L.; Mishra, R. (1999). Sensational Sachin. Diamond Pocket Books. p. 113. ISBN 81-288-2573-9. His mother Rajni Tendulkar worked in L.I.C. "Happy Birthday Sachin Tendulkar: Master Blaster turns 46". India Today. 24 April 2019. Retrieved 11 May 2019. "Ajit Dotes on Sachin, Who Could've Guessed They're Half-Brothers!". The Quint. Retrieved 2 September 2018. "This man sacrificed his cricket, career for Sachin Tendulkar". Asianet Newsable. Pandey, Kirti Phadtare (25 May 2017). "Ajit Dotes on Sachin, Who Could've Guessed They're Half-Brothers!". TheQuint. Retrieved 24 December 2021. "38 special facts about Sachin Tendulkar – 3". MSN. 16 March 2012. Archived from the original on 6 June 2013. Retrieved 18 December 2012. "Did you know Sachin Tendulkar is a big promoter of these sports?". The Economic Times. 23 April 2023. Retrieved 3 February 2024. "'कांबली बहुत गुस्सैल है,' सचिन ने KBC में अमिताभ को सुनाई थी दोस्त की कहानी; देखें Video". Jansatta (in Hindi). 16 September 2021. Retrieved 24 December 2021. "38 special facts about Sachin Tendulkar – 2". MSN. 16 March 2012. Archived from the original on 6 June 2013. Retrieved 18 December 2012. "Throwback to Sachin Tendulkar's Comments About Vinod Kambli on KBC That Surprised Amitabh Bachchan - News18". News18. 16 September 2021. Retrieved 3 February 2024. "Reminiscing old days: Sachin Tendulkar on late coach Ramakant Achrekar". in.com.[dead link] Gulu Ezekiel. "HTCricket.com: A special HTCricket section celebrating Sachin Tendulkar's 100th Test". Hindustan Times. Archived from the original on 25 October 2012. Retrieved 18 December 2012. Baliga, Linah (1 April 2011). "Shivaji Park prays for famous son". The Times of India. Times News Network. Archived from the original on 1 May 2013. Somak Sen (17 October 2008). "Sachin Tendulkar: The last word in cricket". Merinews. Archived from the original on 29 January 2013. Retrieved 3 June 2009. Shetty, Disha (12 July 2018). "The fading charm of the Kanga League". Wisden India. Archived from the original on 12 July 2018. Williams, Richard (15 May 1999). "Tendulkar's genius inspires awe". The Independent. Archived from the original on 21 March 2012. Retrieved 17 February 2012. "Tendulkar's interview with BBC". The Indian Express. Archived from the original on 17 March 2009. Retrieved 1 June 2008. Krishnan, G (30 October 2013). "When 13-year-old Sachin Tendulkar fielded for Pakistan team". DNA. Archived from the original on 30 October 2013. Retrieved 30 October 2013. "Sachin Tendulkar and Sunil Gavaskar: Two masters and the amazing chemistry between the two". DNA India. Archived from the original on 17 October 2013. Retrieved 16 October 2013. Booth, Lawrence (12 April 2007). "Strange innovations". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 17 December 2009. Retrieved 3 August 2009. Naik, Nitin (1 April 2011). "Sachin Tendulkar: From ball boy to champ". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 9 July 2015. Retrieved 17 February 2012. Williams, Richard (15 May 1999). "Ballboy to badshah, Sachin's Cup story- Sachin Tendulkar in a one-on-one with Lokendra Pratap sahi". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 24 February 2011. Retrieved 17 February 2012. Bhatia, Rahul (21 August 2004). "A tale of two terrors". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 23 February 2012. Retrieved 1 June 2008. ESPNcricinfo staff (16 November 2006). "Teenagers eclipse Tendulkar-Kambli record". Archived from the original on 12 March 2014. Retrieved 18 December 2013. Sardesai, Rajdeep (24 October 2017). "'A new dawn in Indian cricket': Remembering Sachin Tendulkar's iconic Ranji Trophy debut". Scroll.in. Retrieved 19 March 2020. "Sachin Tendulkar factfile". espnstar.com. Archived from the original on 20 October 2008. Retrieved 3 August 2009. "Batting – Most Runs". ESPNcricinfo. Retrieved 9 April 2018. "Remembering Sachin Tendulkar's first England tours". mid-day.com. Archived from the original on 19 October 2013. Retrieved 3 August 2013. "The Greatest Ranji Match ever played". Piyush Mishra. 8 February 2013. Archived from the original on 3 February 2014. Retrieved 2 February 2014. "Rest of India v Delhi in 1989/90". CricketArchive. Archived from the original on 23 January 2010. Retrieved 3 August 2009. "Sachin Tendulkar's Bradmanesque achievements in Ranji Trophy". TOI. "Australia in India, 1997-98-Mumbai v Australians-Brabourne Stadium, Mumbai-24,25,26 February 1998 (3-day match)". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 15 November 2010. Retrieved 1 June 2008. "Sachin Tendulkar". Cricket365.com. Archived from the original on 18 April 2012. Retrieved 25 April 2012. "Ranji Trophy – 2nd semi final-2000-Mumbai v Tamil Nadu". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 13 January 2012. Retrieved 1 June 2008. "Sachin puts knock of 233 "at the top"". Rediff.com. Archived from the original on 1 November 2013. Retrieved 1 June 2008. "Sachin Tendulkar's Bradmanesque achievements in Ranji Trophy". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 27 January 2013. Retrieved 1 June 2008. "Yorkshire players at CricketArchive". CricketArchive. Archived from the original on 10 March 2008. Retrieved 1 June 2008. "His last words: Donald George Bradman". Daily News and Analysis. India. 13 September 2009. Archived from the original on 3 April 2012. Retrieved 11 March 2011. "First-Class Matches played by Sachin Tendulkar". CricketArchive. Archived from the original on 23 January 2010. Retrieved 3 August 2009. "Sachin the youngest ever to play for India". Yahoo Cricket. Archived from the original on 15 September 2017. Retrieved 20 November 2013. "Sachin the youngest ever to play for India in ODIs". Yahoo Cricket. Archived from the original on 23 November 2013. Retrieved 20 November 2013. Miller, Andrew; Williamson, Martin (11 December 2007). "Eleven quirky debuts". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 21 June 2014. Retrieved 12 December 2007. "Sachin Tendulkar Timeline". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 22 May 2010. Retrieved 4 August 2009. "Exhibition Match, Pakistan v India, 16 Dec 1989". ESPNcricinfo. 16 December 1989. Archived from the original on 27 September 2013. Retrieved 2 August 2013. "A suitable beginning – Tendulkar takes Qadir on". March 2005. Archived from the original on 4 November 2009. Retrieved 5 August 2009. "Cricket Records – India in Pakistan Test Series, 1989/90 – Most runs". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 19 August 2010. Retrieved 4 August 2009. "Batting and Fielding for India in Wills Challenge 1989/90". CricketArchive. Archived from the original on 12 March 2010. Retrieved 5 August 2009. "Test Batting and Fielding for India in India in New Zealand 1989/90". CricketArchive. Archived from the original on 6 March 2010. Retrieved 5 August 2009. "Batting and Fielding for India in Rothmans Cup Triangular Series 1989/90". CricketArchive. Archived from the original on 10 March 2010. Retrieved 5 August 2009. Otway, Graham. "Wisden – England v India 1990". Wisden Almanack. Archived from the original on 26 November 2009. Retrieved 17 August 2009. Saltau, Chloe (9 December 2007). "Tender touch". Melbourne: The Age Newspaper. Archived from the original on 12 December 2007. Retrieved 12 December 2007. "Sachin the opener". ESPNcricinfo. 26 March 2007. Retrieved 26 October 2020. "Sachin's First ODI Century". Archived from the original on 15 April 2013. Retrieved 18 December 2013. "Sachin's First ODI Ton". ESPNcricinfo. 9 September 2005. Archived from the original on 9 September 2016. Retrieved 9 September 2016. "Cricket Records – Wills World Cup, 1995/96". ESPNcricinfo. Retrieved 26 October 2020. Bal, Sambit (21 February 2007). "Mad Max destroys India". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 23 March 2014. Retrieved 27 March 2014. "Wisden – INDIA v PAKISTAN". Archived from the original on 21 June 2014. Retrieved 27 March 2014. "Team records | One-Day Internationals | ESPNcricinfo Statsguru | ESPNcricinfo". Archived from the original on 6 December 2014. Retrieved 27 March 2014. "Sachin Tendulkar's "Desert Storm" voted his top ODI innings on birthday | Cricket". Hindustan Times. 24 April 2020. Retrieved 10 January 2022. "Warne-Ing Shane!Outlook India Magazine". Outlook. Retrieved 15 September 2020. "Off-spinner with leg-breaks is like a multi-lingual: Sachin Tendulkar". The Economic Times. Retrieved 30 August 2021. "Australia in India, 1997-98-Mumbai v Australians-Brabourne Stadium, Mumbai-24,25,26 February 1998 (3-day match)". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 31 October 2013. Retrieved 17 November 2013. Nishad Pai Vaidya (25 February 2013). "When Sachin Tendulkar showed Shane Warne who is the boss". CricketCountry.com. Archived from the original on 28 February 2013. Retrieved 17 November 2013. Ramchand, Partab (24 February 2001). "Tendulkar's duel with Warne symbolised India's superiority". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 29 November 2013. Retrieved 17 November 2013. "ESPNcricinfo Match Report, IND-AUS 1 April 1998". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 11 February 2008. Retrieved 1 June 2008. "Sachin's operation Desert Storm". Ibnlive. Archived from the original on 8 December 2013. Retrieved 17 November 2013. "Down Memory Lane – Shane Warne's nightmare". Cricketnetwork. Archived from the original on 6 January 2009. Retrieved 1 June 2008. "Tendulkar single handedly helped to win India". IBN Live.in. Archived from the original on 27 December 2013. Retrieved 18 December 2013. "Asian Test Championship from Feb 14 to March 17 (24 December 1998)". ESPNcricinfo. 24 December 1998. Archived from the original on 11 November 2012. Retrieved 30 January 2011. "Sachin Tendulkar collides with Shoaib Akhtar". ESPN. Archived from the original on 22 October 2014. Retrieved 18 December 2013. "Riot police, fires and a sobbing Vinod Kambli". ESPNcricinfo. 28 January 2011. Archived from the original on 31 January 2011. Retrieved 30 January 2011. "Sri Lanka v India 1998–99". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 8 February 2011. Retrieved 30 January 2011. Williamson, Martin (20 October 2010). "The run-out that sparked a riot". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 22 October 2014. Retrieved 30 January 2011. the second Championship ... was rendered fairly meaningless by the withdrawal of India because of another escalation of political tensions with Pakistan. Ramchand, Partab (1 February 1999). "India succumb on home stretch despite Tendulkar's heroics". The Indian Express. Retrieved 30 March 2014. "Sachin loses father, team loses its wits". Leicester/Mumbai. Agencies/ENS. 19 May 1999. Retrieved 20 March 2014. Sahi, Lokendra Pratap (23 May 1999). "Sachin's Ton in Father's Memory". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 30 March 2014. Retrieved 30 March 2014. "List of Captains". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 16 November 2011. Retrieved 25 April 2012. "List of ODI Captains". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 17 November 2011. Retrieved 25 April 2012. "A tale of two captains". Rediff. Archived from the original on 30 April 2008. Retrieved 1 June 2008. McGregor, R.S. (1993). Oxford Hindi–English Dictionary (2004 ed.). Oxford University Press, US. ISBN 978-0-19-864317-3. Pradeep Magazine (20 December 1999). "Flat-track bullies bounced out again". The Indian Express. Melbourne. Retrieved 30 March 2014. "2nd Test: Australia v India at Melbourne, Dec 26–30, 1999 | Cricket Scorecard | ESPNcricinfo". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 19 November 2010. Retrieved 1 June 2008. Jaishankar, Vedam (6 March 2000). "South Africa completes sweep with an innings and 71 runs". Retrieved 30 March 2014. Ugra, Sharda (9 December 2000). "'I've survived and will survive longer'". India Today. Archived from the original on 19 December 2013. Retrieved 18 December 2013. Ganguly took over in mid-2000 during a difficult period ... "The feat Sachin never got praise for – Opinion News". Indiatoday.in. 22 May 2013. Retrieved 10 January 2022. "Tendulkar suggested Dhoni's name: Pawar". Hindustan Times. India. PTI. 21 March 2008. Archived from the original on 12 September 2013. Retrieved 18 July 2010. "ICC Match Referee confirms disciplinary action for Indian cricketers". ESPNcricinfo. 20 November 2001. Retrieved 1 June 2008. "Tendulkar appears before match referee". ESPNcricinfo. 19 November 2001. Archived from the original on 25 June 2012. Retrieved 1 June 2008. "Tendulkar handed suspended ban". ESPNcricinfo. 19 November 2001. Archived from the original on 26 November 2010. Retrieved 1 June 2008. "Indian media fury over Tendulkar". BBC News. London. 21 November 2001. Archived from the original on 19 December 2008. Retrieved 1 June 2008. "ICC sets out latest position regarding South Africa v India". ESPNcricinfo. 23 November 2001. Archived from the original on 11 November 2012. Retrieved 31 January 2011. "Indians cry foul". BBC News. London. 20 November 2001. Archived from the original on 14 February 2008. Retrieved 1 June 2008. "2nd Test: India v Australia at Kolkata, Mar 11–15, 2001 | Cricket Scorecard | ESPNcricinfo". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 4 December 2013. Retrieved 18 December 2013. Prabhu, Niraj (16 November 2013). "Of Tendulkar and his Goa milestone". The Goan. p. 28. Archived from the original on 21 November 2013. Retrieved 27 March 2013. "Tendulkar equals Sir Donald Bradman's record at Port of Spain". ESPNcricinfo. 19 April 2002. Archived from the original on 13 November 2013. Retrieved 8 November 2013. "Sachin equals The Don". BBC. Archived from the original on 20 October 2002. Retrieved 20 April 2002. "Sachin equals Bradman's record – Twenty of Tendulkar's best Test hundreds". MSN. 27 April 2012. Archived from the original on 21 October 2013. Retrieved 8 November 2013. "Swinging 60". 7 May 2016. Archived from the original on 8 May 2016. "5th Test: West Indies v India at Kingston, May 18–22, 2002 | Cricket Scorecard | ESPNcricinfo". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 21 June 2014. Retrieved 29 March 2014. "A special rediff section celebrating Sachin Tendulkar's 100th Test". Rediff.com. Archived from the original on 1 November 2013. Retrieved 8 November 2013. "Sachin outdoes Bradman with 30th Test hundred – Express India". The Indian Express. Reuters. 23 August 2002. Archived from the original on 21 October 2013. Retrieved 8 November 2013. "Sachin Tendulkar produced 673 runs and 2 wicket in 2003 world cup without net practice, reveals Rahul Dravid". Patrika Group. No. 5 August 2014. Archived from the original on 8 August 2014. Retrieved 5 August 2014. "Sachin Tendulkar Timeline: 1989 to 2013". IBN. Archived from the original on 27 December 2013. Retrieved 22 December 2013. Makes 673 runs in 11 matches in the ICC World Cup – ... wins him the player of the tournament award "Sachin received the Man of the Tournament award". Rediff. Archived from the original on 19 December 2013. Retrieved 18 December 2013. Lokapally, Vijay. "India tames the Aussies". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 30 September 2005. Retrieved 29 March 2014. Mukhopadhyay, Atreyo (15 November 2003). "Sachin, Sehwag demolish NZ". The Telegraph. Hyderabad. Archived from the original on 29 March 2014. Retrieved 29 March 2014. cricket.com.au (2015) [2003]. From the Vault: Hayden too big, too strong. Retrieved 1 January 2023 – via Youtube. "4th Test: Australia v India at Sydney, Jan 2–6, 2004 | Cricket Scorecard | ESPNcricinfo". ESPN. Archived from the original on 5 December 2013. Retrieved 18 December 2013. "Batting records | Test matches | ESPNcricinfo Statsguru". ESPNcricinfo. Retrieved 16 September 2020. "India high on Sehwag's 309". ESPNcricinfo. 29 March 2004. Archived from the original on 14 February 2011. Retrieved 30 January 2011. "'I was taken by surprise': Tendulkar". ESPNcricinfo. 29 March 2004. Archived from the original on 15 November 2011. Retrieved 1 June 2008. "'Don't worry, Sachin': Miandad". Rediff. Archived from the original on 18 June 2008. Retrieved 1 June 2008. "'Declaration in bad taste': Intikhab Alam". Rediff. Archived from the original on 29 February 2008. Retrieved 1 June 2008. "'The boys can be justifiably proud': Dravid". ESPNcricinfo. April 2004. Archived from the original on 6 December 2010. Retrieved 1 June 2008. NDTVCricket. "Sachin's Tennis Elbow Injury". NDTV. Archived from the original on 23 November 2013. Retrieved 18 December 2013. In 2004, Tendulkar was diagnosed with tennis elbow, an injury that prevented him from lifting a cricket bat for almost 4 and half months. Weaver, Paul (20 February 2006). "Wisden – India v Australia". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 21 June 2014. Retrieved 29 March 2014. As Australia prepared ..., even the return of Tendulkar, who had been out of cricket for two months with tennis elbow, was overshadowed ... ESPNcricinfo staff (5 November 2004). "Damp start to the Mumbai Test". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 31 May 2014. Retrieved 29 March 2014. Lynch, Steven (23 April 2011). "Tendulkar's tribulations, and the nervous 290s". Archived from the original on 25 September 2011. Retrieved 10 September 2011. Premachandran, Dileep (6 February 2006). "Tendulkar the Strong". ESPNcricinfo. Peshawar. Archived from the original on 21 June 2014. Retrieved 29 March 2014. Premachandran, Dileep (11 February 2006). "Yuvraj and Sehwag ease India to victory". ESPNcricinfo. Rawalpindi. Archived from the original on 13 January 2014. Retrieved 29 March 2014. The run-rate climbed ... when Tendulkar, who had eased to a run-a-ball 42, ... ESPNcricinfo staff (13 February 2006). "'Special' Tendulkar a treat to watch, says Dravid". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 21 June 2014. Retrieved 29 March 2014. Byrant, Nick (23 March 2006). "Is Sachin mortal?". BBC News. Archived from the original on 28 February 2010. Retrieved 10 September 2011. "Sensational Sachin returns". www.aljazeera.com. Retrieved 15 September 2020. "2nd Match: India v West Indies at Kuala Lumpur, Sep 14, 2006 | Cricket Scorecard | ESPNcricinfo". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 4 November 2013. Retrieved 18 December 2013. "Should have handled Sachin differently in 2007 World Cup: Chappell". The Times of India. 4 February 2011. Archived from the original on 1 May 2013. Retrieved 25 April 2012. "Tendulkar hurt by comments". Jamaica Gleaner News. Archived from the original on 28 June 2008. Retrieved 1 June 2008. "Cricket scorecard – Bangladesh vs India, 8th Match, Group B, ICC World Cup, 2007". Cricbuzz. Retrieved 31 August 2021. "Cricket scorecard – Bermuda vs India, 12th Match, Group B, ICC World Cup, 2007". Cricbuzz. Retrieved 31 August 2021. "Cricket scorecard – India vs Sri Lanka, 20th Match, Group B, ICC World Cup, 2007". Cricbuzz. Retrieved 31 August 2021. "Tendulkar faces calls to retire". BBC News. 30 March 2007. Archived from the original on 4 October 2007. Retrieved 1 June 2008. "Sachin Tendulkar: Thought of retirement after 2007 World Cup debacle but Viv Richards convinced me otherwise". The Times of India. 23 March 2017. Retrieved 18 November 2021. "2nd Test: Bangladesh v India at Dhaka, May 25–27, 2007 | Cricket Scorecard | ESPNcricinfo". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 23 February 2014. Retrieved 29 March 2014. "After Yuvraj breaks in, Sachin seals victory". The Indian Express. Press Trust of India. 29 June 2007. Archived from the original on 29 March 2014. Retrieved 29 March 2014. "Cricket Records | Future Cup, 2007 | Records | Most runs | ESPNcricinfo". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 28 December 2007. Retrieved 1 June 2008. "3rd ODI: India v South Africa at Belfast, Jul 1, 2007 | Cricket Scorecard | ESPNcricinfo". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 2 January 2013. Retrieved 29 March 2014. "Tendulkar gets to 11,000 Test runs". ESPNcricinfo. 28 July 2007. Archived from the original on 4 September 2015. Retrieved 1 June 2008. "Statistics, NatWest Series India in England, 2007". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 14 March 2008. Retrieved 1 June 2008. "Statistics, Australia in India ODI Series, 2007/08". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 20 February 2008. Retrieved 1 June 2008. "Tendulkar still nervous in 90s". Hindustan Times. 8 November 2007. Retrieved 31 August 2021. "Statistics / Statsguru / SR Tendulkar / Batting records / Combined Test, ODI and T20I records". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 31 October 2013. Retrieved 31 May 2013. Vivek, G S (8 November 2007). "Sachin falls short of his own genius". The Indian Express. Mohali. Archived from the original on 29 March 2014. Retrieved 29 March 2014. Sridhar, Nandita (16 November 2007). "Sachin Tendulkar stars as India clinches series". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 29 March 2014. Retrieved 29 March 2014. "Forget about 'Monkeygate': Harbhajan Singh to Aussies | Cricket News – Times of India". M.timesofindia.com. 17 December 2018. Retrieved 10 January 2022. "Sachin Tendulkar claims "Monkeygate" hearing was unfair; slams Adam Gilchrist for lack of sportsmanship". DNA India. Retrieved 26 December 2021. Morris, Tom (16 December 2018). "'Broke down, what for?' Harbhajan refutes new Monkeygate claims". Herald Sun. Retrieved 26 December 2021. Singh, Ujwal (22 January 2018). "Mike Procter criticises Tendulkar's role in 2008 Monkeygate controversy". India Today. Retrieved 26 December 2021. "12 years of Monkeygate: The IND vs AUS Sydney Test that erupted into a courtroom battle". The Indian Express. 7 January 2021. Retrieved 26 December 2021. "Monkeygate Was Lowest Point As Australia Captain, Says Ricky Ponting". NDTVSports.com. Retrieved 26 December 2021. "Tendulkar throws light on "monkeygate" scandal". The Hindu. Press Trust of India. 6 November 2014. ISSN 0971-751X. Retrieved 26 December 2021. Conn, Malcolm (17 October 2013). "Former Test captain Ricky Ponting in his new book questions the role of Indian great Sachin Tendulkar in "monkey gate" scandal". Herald Sun. Retrieved 22 April 2022. "Australian media digs out Monkeygate ghost". India Today. 3 January 2012. Retrieved 10 January 2022. "Cricket Records | Records | Border-Gavaskar Trophy, 2007/08 | Most runs". ESPNcrcinfo. ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 2 March 2014. Retrieved 18 December 2013. "Australia wins the first match". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 14 November 2013. Retrieved 18 December 2013. Vivek, G S (4 January 2008). "Tendulkar lords over Sydney, cracks 38th century". The Indian Express. Sydney. Archived from the original on 29 March 2014. Retrieved 29 March 2014. Binoy, George; Gopalakrishna, HR (4 January 2008). "Tendulkar's SCG success and Gilchrist bags No. 400". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 13 December 2013. Retrieved 29 March 2014. Premachandran, Dileep (19 January 2008). "Inspired India end Australia's streak". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 15 January 2014. Retrieved 29 March 2014. Premachandran, Dileep (24 January 2008). "Tendulkar ton lights up keen contest". Archived from the original on 27 November 2013. Retrieved 29 March 2014. "3rd ODI: India v South Africa at Belfast, Jul 1, 2007 | Cricket Scorecard | ESPNcricinfo". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 27 November 2013. Retrieved 18 December 2013. "Sachin reaches to 16000 runs". IBN Live. Archived from the original on 27 December 2013. Retrieved 18 December 2013. "Batting records | One-Day Internationals | ESPNcricinfo Statsguru | ESPNcricinfo". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 9 June 2015. Retrieved 29 March 2014. Vivek, G.S. (26 February 2008). "India hammer final nail". Hobart. Archived from the original on 29 March 2014. Retrieved 29 March 2014. "1st Final: Australia v India at Sydney, 2 March 2008". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 22 June 2008. Retrieved 1 June 2008. "2nd Final: Australia v India at Brisbane, 4 March 2008". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 16 May 2008. Retrieved 1 June 2008. "One-day international batting: the nominees". ESPNcricinfo. 2 January 2009. Retrieved 23 January 2020. "f50749 t1870 India v South Africa: South Africa in India 2007/08 (1st Test)". CricketArchive. Archived from the original on 19 July 2011. Retrieved 3 April 2011. "Tendulkar to miss Bangladesh tri-series and Asia Cup". 29 May 2008. Archived from the original on 12 November 2012. Retrieved 3 April 2011. "Statistics / Statsguru / SR Tendulkar / Test matches: Series average". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 5 October 2012. Retrieved 17 August 2011. Alter, Jamie (19 August 2008). "India need to fix opening problem". ESPNcricinfo. Dambulla. Archived from the original on 7 February 2014. Retrieved 29 March 2014. "1st Test: India v Australia at Bangalore, Oct 9–13, 2008 | Cricket Scorecard | ESPNcricinfo". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 13 March 2014. Retrieved 21 December 2013. "Sachin reaches 12000 runs and breaks Lara's Record". The Times of India. 17 October 2008. Archived from the original on 21 December 2013. Retrieved 21 December 2013. Pradhan, Kunal (18 October 2008). "12,000 and counting, but he isn't just about numbers". The Indian Express. Archived from the original on 29 March 2014. Retrieved 29 March 2014. Special Correspondent (18 October 2008). "Tendulkar scales another peak". The Hindu. Chennai, India. Archived from the original on 20 October 2008. Retrieved 18 October 2008. "It is definitely the biggest achievement in 19 years of my career," the 35-year-old said ... Coverdale, Brydon (29 October 2008). "Gambhir century sets India on course". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 22 January 2014. Retrieved 29 March 2014. Alter, Jamie (10 November 2008). "India reclaim the Border-Gavaskar Trophy". Archived from the original on 21 June 2014. Retrieved 29 March 2014. "4th ODI: India v England at Bangalore, Nov 23, 2008 | Cricket Scorecard | ESPNcricinfo". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 15 November 2013. Retrieved 21 December 2013. Kumar, K.C. Vijaya (27 November 2008). "Indian juggernaut rolls on". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 29 March 2014. Retrieved 29 March 2014. Kumar, K.C. Vijaya (28 November 2008). "One-Day International series called off". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 29 March 2014. Retrieved 29 March 2014. "England players fly back home". The Indian Express. 29 November 2008. Archived from the original on 29 March 2014. Retrieved 29 March 2014. McGlashan, Andrew (15 December 2008). "Tendulkar century sets up famous win". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 13 March 2014. Retrieved 21 December 2013. "Statistics / Statsguru / SR Tendulkar / Test matches". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 6 December 2014. Retrieved 30 March 2014. Dwivedi, Sandeep (15 December 2008). "This century, this win is for victims of terror". Chennai. Archived from the original on 30 March 2014. Retrieved 30 March 2014. "Test batting: the nominees". ESPNcricinfo. 2 January 2009. Retrieved 23 January 2020. "India v England at Mohali, Dec 19–23, 2008 | Cricket Scorecard | ESPNcricinfo". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 14 April 2014. Retrieved 30 March 2014. "Statistics / Statsguru / SR Tendulkar / One-Day Internationals". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 13 June 2015. Retrieved 30 March 2014. Veera, Sriram (8 March 2009). "India prevail in battle of batsmen". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 22 June 2014. Retrieved 10 April 2014. "Auckland ODI: New Zealand win by 8 wickets". India Today. Press Trust of India. 14 March 2009. Archived from the original on 21 April 2014. Retrieved 10 April 2014. Premachandran, Dileep (21 March 2009). "India end drought with thumping win". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 12 April 2014. Retrieved 10 April 2014. "2nd Test: New Zealand v India at Napier, Mar 26–30, 2009 | Cricket Scorecard | ESPNcricinfo". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 11 December 2013. Retrieved 22 December 2013. "3rd Test: New Zealand v India at Wellington, Apr 3–7, 2009 | Cricket Scorecard | ESPNcricinfo". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 18 February 2014. Retrieved 22 December 2013. "Wellington Test ends in a draw, India win series". India Today. 14 March 2009. Archived from the original on 7 April 2014. Retrieved 10 April 2014. "Tendulkar, Zaheer rested; Nehra in for Caribbean tour". The Indian Express. New Delhi. 17 June 2009. Archived from the original on 21 April 2014. Retrieved 10 April 2014. "2nd Match: India v New Zealand at Colombo (RPS), Sep 11, 2009 | Cricket Scorecard | ESPNcricinfo". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 13 March 2014. Retrieved 22 December 2013. "3rd Match: Sri Lanka v India at Colombo (RPS), Sep 12, 2009 | Cricket Scorecard | ESPNcricinfo". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 12 April 2014. Retrieved 10 April 2014. Hemant, AR (14 September 2009). "India beat Sri Lanka in Compaq Cup final; Harbhajan takes 5 after Tendulkar's 138". India Today. New Delhi. ITGD. Archived from the original on 21 April 2014. Retrieved 10 April 2014. Rajesh, S (14 September 2009). "Tendulkar's final onslaught". Archived from the original on 17 April 2014. Retrieved 10 April 2014. "India lose Champions Trophy opener against Pak by 54 runs". The Indian Express. Centurion. 27 September 2009. Archived from the original on 21 April 2014. Retrieved 10 April 2014. Dwivedi, Sandeep (29 September 2009). "India's chances watered down". The Indian Express. Centurion. Archived from the original on 21 April 2014. Retrieved 10 April 2014. Dinakar, S. (1 October 2009). "India beats Windies, but bows out of tournament". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 21 April 2014. Retrieved 11 April 2014. "Statistics / Statsguru / SR Tendulkar / One-Day Internationals". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 13 June 2015. Retrieved 11 April 2014. "Australia scores 350/4 in the Fifth ODI". ESPN. Archived from the original on 12 March 2014. Retrieved 22 December 2013. Monga, Sidharth (5 November 2009). "Australia survive terrific Tendulkar". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 13 March 2014. Retrieved 22 December 2013. Kumar, K.C. Vijaya (6 November 2009). "Tendulkar's incandescent innings in vain". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 18 March 2014. Retrieved 11 April 2014. "Sachin becomes the First Player to achieve the 17000 run mark". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 22 December 2013. Retrieved 22 December 2013. "Statistics / Statsguru / SR Tendulkar / One-Day Internationals". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 13 June 2015. Retrieved 11 April 2014. "Statistics / Statsguru / One-Day Internationals / Batting records". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 13 June 2015. Retrieved 11 April 2014. "Hyderabad heartbreaker". ESPNcricinfo. 19 February 2010. Retrieved 23 January 2020. "Statistics / Statsguru / SR Tendulkar / One-Day Internationals". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 14 June 2015. Retrieved 12 April 2014. Sridhar, Nandita (28 December 2009). "Minefield of a pitch forces abandonment". The Hindu. Archived from the original on 21 April 2014. Retrieved 12 April 2014. "5th ODI: India v Sri Lanka at Delhi, Dec 27, 2009 | Cricket Scorecard | ESPNcricinfo". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 8 April 2014. Retrieved 12 April 2014. "India vs SL Test Series 2009". Archived from the original on 4 August 2011. "Tendulkar rested for Bangladesh Tri-series". New Delhi. 25 December 2009. Archived from the original on 21 April 2014. Retrieved 12 April 2014. "1st Test: Bangladesh v India at Chittagong, Jan 17–21, 2010 | Cricket Scorecard | ESPNcricinfo". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 7 December 2013. Retrieved 22 December 2013. "2nd Test: Bangladesh v India at Dhaka, Jan 24–27, 2010 | Cricket Scorecard | ESPNcricinfo". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 7 December 2013. Retrieved 22 December 2013. "1st Test: India v South Africa at Nagpur, Feb 6–9, 2010 | Cricket Scorecard | ESPNcricinfo". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 18 December 2013. Retrieved 22 December 2013. "Sachin Tendulkar slams 47th Test century". The Times of India. Times News Network. 15 February 2010. Archived from the original on 22 December 2013. Retrieved 22 December 2013. Kumar, Rajesh. "Highlights: Kolkata Test, Day 2". NDTV. Archived from the original on 10 June 2014. Retrieved 13 April 2014. Naik, Nitin (8 March 2010). "Before Sachin, there was Belinda Clark". The Times of India. Times News Network. Retrieved 19 April 2014. Nataranjan, H (17 December 1997). "Aussie skipper scores double ton. News is it's not Steve Waugh". The Indian Express. Retrieved 19 April 2014. "Sachin Tendulkar fires record 200 against South Africa". BBC Sport. London. 24 February 2010. Archived from the original on 25 February 2010. Retrieved 24 February 2010. "Tendulkar double ton leads India to series win". Gwalior: Rediff. 24 February 2010. Archived from the original on 27 February 2010. Retrieved 24 February 2010. "Sachin Tendulkar "The God" creates History again". DownTheWicket. 24 February 2010. Archived from the original on 5 June 2013. Retrieved 26 March 2013. "ICC Cricket World Cup, 2010/11 / Records / Most runs". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 2 September 2011. Retrieved 3 April 2011. "Sachin, Zaheer, Yuvi in ICC's World Cup XI". NDTVSports.com. Retrieved 23 January 2020. Miller, Andrew (2 April 2011). "Retroreport - Dhoni and Gambhir lead India to World Cup glory". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 4 April 2011. Retrieved 3 April 2011. "'I couldn't control my tears of joy'". ESPNcricinfo. 2 April 2011. Archived from the original on 4 April 2011. Retrieved 3 April 2011. "Tendulkar not thinking of 100th hundred". ESPNcricinfo. 12 July 2011. Archived from the original on 18 July 2011. Retrieved 18 July 2011. "Tendulkar ruled out of series". ESPNcricinfo. 5 September 2011. Archived from the original on 15 October 2011. Retrieved 10 September 2011. Miller, Andrew (16 August 2011). "Swann content with team success". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 13 November 2012. Retrieved 22 August 2011. "Sachin Tendulkar passes 15,000 Test runs". BBC Sport. 9 November 2011. Retrieved 8 November 2011. "Sachin Tendulkar becomes the first batsman to score 15,000 Test runs". Cricket Wizard. 8 March 2017. Archived from the original on 17 March 2017. Retrieved 17 March 2017. "England dominate ICC Test team of the year". ESPNcricinfo. 26 August 2011. Retrieved 23 January 2020. "Sachin Tendulkar needs to introspect: Ian Chappell". NDTV Sports. 3 March 2015. Archived from the original on 4 September 2015. Retrieved 27 April 2015. "Let Tendulkar decide when to retire: Former players". NDTVSports.com. Retrieved 31 August 2021. "Why is Sachin Tendulkar still playing? ..." International Reporter.com. Archived from the original on 8 March 2012. "Sachin returns, Laxman retained in squad for NZ Tests". 10 August 2012. Archived from the original on 13 August 2012. "On This Day: When Master Blaster Sachin Tendulkar hit his 100th international ton". The Indian Express. 16 March 2021. "On this day in 2012: Sachin Tendulkar became first player to score 100 international centuries". Firstpost. 16 March 2022. "Sachin Tendulkar finally scores his 100th international century but India lose to Bangladesh in Asia Cup". Fox Sports. 24 December 2022. Burke, Jason (16 March 2012). "Sachin Tendulkar's century of centuries has India celebrating". The Guardian. Delhi. "RESULT 4th Match (D/N), Mirpur". ESPNcricinfo. 16 March 2012. Cricketnext Staff (2 November 2012). "Ranji Trophy: Sachin roars back to form; Sehwag, Gambhir miss out". Cricketnext.com. Archived from the original on 5 November 2012. Retrieved 2 November 2012. David Hopps (26 November 2012). "England spinners humiliate India". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 29 November 2012. Retrieved 30 November 2012. Sanjjeev K Samyal; Firoz Mirza (27 November 2012). "I'm not getting runs, now it's your call: Sachin to selectors". Hindustan Times. Archived from the original on 30 November 2012. Retrieved 30 November 2012. Vinay Nayudu (28 December 2012). "Sachin Tendulkar's mind is only on cricket". The Times of India. Times News Network. Archived from the original on 26 January 2013. Retrieved 30 November 2012. "Speculation over Tendulkar's retirement downplayed". Indo-Asian News Service. 28 November 2012. Archived from the original on 2 December 2012. Retrieved 30 November 2012. "Tendulkar, Jaffer hit hundreds in Ranji quarterfinal". Yahoo! Cricket. 6 January 2013. Archived from the original on 9 January 2013. Retrieved 14 February 2012. "3rd Quarter-final: Mumbai v Baroda at Mumbai, Jan 6–10, 2013 | ESPNcricinfo". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 8 January 2013. Retrieved 14 February 2012. Diwan, Kunal (16 January 2013). "Spunky Services stretch Mumbai". Yahoo! Cricket. Archived from the original on 19 January 2013. Retrieved 14 February 2012. Ugra, Sharda (21 January 2013). "Mumbai demolish Services to enter 44th Ranji final". ESPNcricinfo. Delhi. Archived from the original on 23 January 2013. Retrieved 14 February 2012. Sampath, Skandan (27 January 2013). "Unfortunate that Sachin got run out: Jaffer". Yahoo! Cricket. Archived from the original on 30 January 2013. Retrieved 14 February 2012. Ravindran, Siddarth (28 January 2013). "Mumbai boss their way to No. 40". ESPNcricinfo. Mumbai. Archived from the original on 29 January 2013. Retrieved 14 February 2012. Rao, K Shriniwas (8 June 2013). "Sachin Tendulkar equals Sunil Gavaskar's first-class record". NDTV. Archived from the original on 4 September 2015. Retrieved 30 October 2013. "Sachin Tendulkar announces retirment [sic] from ODI format". Hindustan Times. Mumbai. Press Trust of India. 23 December 2012. Archived from the original on 23 December 2012. "Sachin Tendulkar announces retirement from ODIs". India Today. Mumbai. Press Trust of India. 23 December 2012. Archived from the original on 23 December 2012. "Tributes to Tendulkar". Wisden India. 23 December 2012. Archived from the original on 23 December 2012. Retrieved 23 December 2012. "Sachin is right in not playing international T20: Rajput". Archived from the original on 25 January 2013. "Tendulkar calls time on IPL career". Wisden India. 26 May 2013. Archived from the original on 16 October 2013. Retrieved 26 May 2013. "Sachin Tendulkar, Rahul Dravid bid goodbye, Twitter overflows with emotion". NDTV. Archived from the original on 7 October 2013. Retrieved 8 October 2013. "Sachin Tendulkar announces retirement from Test cricket". The Times of India. 10 October 2013. Archived from the original on 11 October 2013. "Sachin Tendulkar: India batting legend to retire from all cricket". BBC Sport. 10 October 2013. Archived from the original on 10 October 2013. Retrieved 11 October 2013. "Tendulkar to bid farewell in Mumbai". Wisden India. 15 October 2013. Archived from the original on 17 October 2013. Retrieved 15 October 2013. "Will consider Sachin Tendulkar's request to play 200th Test in Mumbai, says BCCI". NDTV. 11 October 2013. Archived from the original on 14 October 2013. Retrieved 8 November 2013. Episode 1: The Little Master Bids Goodbye (English version), 26 November 2016, archived from the original on 11 December 2021, retrieved 17 January 2018 "MCA honours Sachin Tendulkar". The Hindu. 12 November 2013. Archived from the original on 14 November 2013. Retrieved 15 November 2013. Narula, Chetan (13 November 2013). "Fans get shortchanged in build-up to Sachin Tendulkar's last Test". Live Mint. Archived from the original on 15 November 2013. Retrieved 15 November 2013. Chadband, Ian (14 November 2013). "1.2 billion say goodbye to Little Master". WAtoday. Mumbai. Archived from the original on 1 February 2014. Retrieved 14 November 2013. "Salaam Sachin India Today Conclave kick-starts with Ajit Tendulkar". AFAQS. 12 November 2013. Archived from the original on 1 February 2014. Retrieved 14 November 2013. "MCC v Rest of the World – 5 July". Lord's. 5 July 2014. Archived from the original on 7 July 2014. Retrieved 5 July 2014. "Tendulkar announced as ICC Cricket World Cup 2015 Ambassador" Archived 27 June 2015 at the Wayback Machine,"International Cricket Council", 22 December 2014. "Sachin Tendulkar announced as ICC World Cup 2015 ambassador" Archived 26 February 2015 at the Wayback Machine,"IbnLive", 22 December 2014. "Sachin Tendulkar Named Cricket World Cup 2015 Ambassador" Archived 2 April 2015 at the Wayback Machine,"NDTV Sports", 23 December 2014. "Sachin Tendulkar Named As 2015 Cricket World Cup Ambassador". Economic Times. December 2014. Retrieved 1 January 2023. "All-Star Series: Shane Warne Hails New York Crowd's "Fantastic" Atmosphere". NDTV. Agence France-Presse. 8 November 2015. Archived from the original on 24 April 2021. Retrieved 24 April 2021. "After Sachin Tendulkar and Courtney Walsh, Brian Lara to feature in bushfire relief match". India Today. Saha, Shivam (21 March 2021). "Road Safety World Series: Sachin Tendulkar-led India Legends clinch title after heroic show from Yuvraj Singh, Yusuf Pathan". Zee News. Retrieved 29 March 2021. "Road Safety World Series, 2019/20-2020/21 Cricket Team Records & Stats". ESPNcricinfo. Retrieved 29 March 2021. "Sachin Tendulkar bats for an over against Ellyse Perry in Bushfire charity match". India Today. 9 February 2020. Retrieved 9 February 2020. Khanna, Akash (9 February 2021). "Bushfire Bash: Sachin Tendulkar "Comes Out Of Retirement" To Face Ellyse Perry In Charity Match. Watch Video". NDTV. Retrieved 9 February 2021. "Tendulkar to lead "Mumbai Indians"". ESPNcricinfo. 8 March 2008. Archived from the original on 12 March 2008. Retrieved 1 June 2008. Kelso, Paul (20 February 2008). "Testosterone sparks Indian Premier League bidding frenzy". The Guardian. UK. Archived from the original on 16 December 2013. Retrieved 1 June 2008. "Sachin breaks Shaun Marsh's IPL record for Most Runs scored in a single season and he also Received the Best Batsman and Best Captain Award". IBN. Archived from the original on 29 December 2013. Retrieved 22 December 2013. "IPL: Virat Kohli breaks Sachin Tendulkar's record". The Times of India. 7 May 2016. Archived from the original on 8 May 2016. "CLT20 Mumbai Indians | IPL Cricket Live, Season 5 IPL Cricket 2012, CLT20, IPL 2012 Schedule, IPL Fixtures, IPL Online, IPL Live, Champions League T20 Live Cricket". Iplcricketlive.org. Archived from the original on 24 March 2012. Retrieved 17 March 2012. "Sachin appointed as Mumbai Indian Team Icon". IBN. Archived from the original on 29 April 2014. Retrieved 28 May 2014. "IPLT20.com – Indian Premier League Official Website". www.iplt20.com. Archived from the original on 9 September 2018. Retrieved 8 September 2018. "Records / Indian Premier League / Most runs". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 31 October 2013. Retrieved 31 October 2013. "Sachin Tendulkar's No.10 jersey retired because players refused to wear it". India Today. 29 November 2017. Retrieved 17 September 2020. Crickified Mohit (17 December 2023). "Sachin Tendulkar Steps Down as Mumbai Indians Mentor". Retrieved 17 December 2023. Sekhar, Senjam Raj (12 June 2011). "Fundamentals". Deccan Chronicle. Archived from the original on 24 January 2016. Retrieved 25 April 2012. "Nostalgic Sachin recalls writing letters to wife Anjali". O Heraldo. Press Trust of India. 27 February 2014. p. 16. Archived from the original on 29 March 2014. Retrieved 29 March 2014. Tendulkar is a righthanded batsman but uses his left for writing. "Straight drive is my favourite shot, says Tendulkar". The Times of India. 18 September 2011. Archived from the original on 7 July 2012. Retrieved 23 September 2011. "AFP: Tendulkar a special talent, says Gavaskar". 18 October 2008. Archived from the original on 21 October 2008. Retrieved 27 November 2008. "Five players who used heavy bats". 22 September 2016. Retrieved 1 February 2018. "Bradman never missed a Tendulkar innings in last five years". ESPNcricinfo. 16 August 2001. Archived from the original on 28 January 2010. Retrieved 14 December 2007. "I dream of genius ..." Observer Sport Monthly. 4 August 2002. Archived from the original on 28 September 2012. Retrieved 26 April 2012. "Buchanan spots Sachin's weakness!". Deccan Herald. India. Archived from the original on 2 December 2007. Retrieved 14 December 2007. "Next change: the superstars of the future". ESPNcricinfo. 30 July 2007. Archived from the original on 22 October 2008. Retrieved 31 December 2007. "Sachin incorporates several Unorthodox shots". Hindustan Times. Archived from the original on 17 December 2013. Retrieved 22 December 2013. "Sachin can bowl Medium Pace, Off Spin and Leg Spin". The Indian Express. Archived from the original on 8 November 2013. Retrieved 22 December 2013. "1st ODI: India v Pakistan at Kochi, 2 April 2005". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 8 December 2007. Retrieved 1 June 2008. "ESPNcricinfo Statsguru –All-Test- One-Day Internationals-Twenty20Internationals – Bowling records". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 31 October 2013. Retrieved 21 July 2012. "Brown moots honour for Tendulkar". The Economic Times. India. Archived from the original on 28 February 2008. Retrieved 1 June 2008. Surendran, CP (29 March 2010). "Why English fails Tendulkar". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 11 August 2011. "I am not god of cricket: Tendulkar". The Hindu. Press Trust of India. 4 April 2013. Archived from the original on 21 October 2013. Retrieved 2 August 2013. Abhishek Boyanpalli (10 October 2013). "Sachin Tendulkar retires: 100 facts about the Little Master bowing out after 24 years". Daily Mirror. Archived from the original on 10 October 2013. Retrieved 10 October 2013. Bal, Sambit. "Tendulkar breaks ESPNcricinfo records". 'From the Editor' blog. ESPNcricinfo. Retrieved 22 January 2012. Hoult, Nick (24 February 2010). "Sachin Tendulkar's 200 breaks ODI world record as India crush South Africa". The Daily Telegraph. London. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. "Sachin fan hangs himself". The Times of India. Times News Network. 3 April 2011. Archived from the original on 1 May 2013. Retrieved 30 May 2012. Murzello, Clayton (1 February 2012). "Figures, But Only of Speech". Outlook India. Archived from the original on 30 April 2013. Retrieved 26 April 2012. "IPL 2021: Mumbai Indians mentor Sachin Tendulkar joins team for training session". TOI. "List of Arjuna Awardees". Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports, Government of India. Archived from the original on 25 December 2007. Retrieved 1 June 2008. "Arjuna awards for Sachin, Felix, Rana and Malleswari". The Hindu. 4 July 1995. p. 22. Archived from the original on 22 December 1996. Retrieved 13 September 2023. "List of Rajiv Gandhi Khel Ratna Award Winners". Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports, Government of India. Archived from the original on 25 December 2007. Retrieved 1 June 2008. "Padma Awards Directory, 1954–2007" (PDF). Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 October 2013. Retrieved 1 June 2008. "Sachin got Maharashtra Bhushan award". ESPNcricinfo. Retrieved 2 December 2009. "Tendulkar receives Padma Vibhushan". The Hindu. Chennai, India. 6 May 2008. Archived from the original on 9 May 2008. Retrieved 1 June 2008. "Australia toughened up Sachin". The Australian. 8 November 2012. Archived from the original on 8 November 2012. "Sachin Tendulkar receives Order of Australia". Zee News. 7 November 2012. Archived from the original on 8 November 2012. "Sachin becomes the Wisden Crciketer of the Year". ESPNcricinfo. ESPN. 16 May 2005. Archived from the original on 23 March 2015. Retrieved 22 December 2013. "WISDEN'S LEADING CRICKETER IN THE WORLD". 2010. Wisden. Archived from the original on 22 July 2012. Retrieved 6 July 2012. "MCA renames stand at Wankhede stadium after Tendulkar". ESPNcricinfo. Retrieved 16 November 2021. "When Sachin met Schumacher". Rediff. Archived from the original on 27 June 2008. Retrieved 1 June 2008. "Sachin included in ICC World ODI 11". MSN. Archived from the original on 24 December 2013. Retrieved 22 December 2013. Staff (16 December 2007). "Seniors honoured at BCCI awards". Rediff.com. Retrieved 22 July 2019. "Tendulkar, Durani honoured at BCCI awards". ESPNcricinfo. 31 May 2011. Archived from the original on 10 August 2011. Retrieved 18 July 2011. "Dhoni leads Test Team of Year". ESPNcricinfo. Retrieved 21 February 2023. "Tendulkar named ICC Cricketer of the Year". The National. 7 October 2010. Retrieved 21 February 2023. "ICC Test Team Of The Year 2011 Announced". India TV. 28 August 2011. Retrieved 18 April 2023. "Sachin Awarded in London". The Economic Times. 27 October 2010. Archived from the original on 16 October 2015. Retrieved 2 August 2013. "Sachin wins Sir Garfield Sobers Trophy". ESPN. 6 October 2010. Archived from the original on 22 December 2013. Retrieved 22 December 2013. "Sachin wins the People's Choice Award". The FICA. 6 October 2010. Archived from the original on 24 December 2013. Retrieved 22 December 2013. "Sachin becomes IAF's honorary Group Captain". The Times of India. Press Trust of India. 3 September 2010. Archived from the original on 16 October 2015. Retrieved 18 December 2013. "Sachin, Mohinder Bag Top Honors at Castrol Awards for Cricketing Excellence". Castrol India. 28 January 2010. Archived from the original on 1 February 2011. Retrieved 29 January 2011. "Wisden India Outstanding Achievement award for Tendulkar". Wisden India. 11 June 2012. Archived from the original on 21 October 2013. Retrieved 6 November 2012. "Sachin's stamp released; MCA removes Kohli's hoardings from Wankhede". The Hindu. 16 November 2013. Archived from the original on 16 November 2013. Retrieved 14 November 2013. "ESPNcricinfo Awards 2013 cricketer of the generation: The 20-year dream". ESPNcricinfo. 14 March 2014. Retrieved 31 July 2019. "Sachin Tendulkar awarded Asian Awards Fellowship". The Indian Express. 9 May 2017. Retrieved 23 October 2021. "Sachin Tendulkar, Allan Donald inducted into ICC's Hall of Fame". The Hindu. Press Trust of India. 19 July 2019. ISSN 0971-751X. Retrieved 23 October 2021. "Laureus World Sports Awards 2020: Sachin Tendulkar Wins Sporting Moment of the Year Award". Jagranjosh.com. 19 February 2020. Retrieved 19 March 2020. "Sachin Tendulkar receives Laureus best sporting moment award; Hamilton, Messi share World Sportsman of the year honour". The Economic Times. 18 February 2020. Retrieved 19 March 2020. "Sharjah stadium stand named after Sachin Tendulkar on his 50th birthday". Hindustan Times. 25 April 2023. Retrieved 27 April 2023. "Statistics / Statsguru / Sachin Tendulkar/Test Cricket". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 20 September 2015. Retrieved 25 April 2015. "Records / Combined First-class, List A and Twenty20 / Batting records; Most runs in career". ESPNcricinfo. 27 September 2013. Archived from the original on 8 October 2013. Retrieved 27 September 2013. "CLT20: Sachin Tendulkar first Indian to reach 50,000 runs in all formats". 5 October 2013. Archived from the original on 5 October 2013. Retrieved 27 September 2013. Andrew Fidel Fernando (5 October 2013). "Smith puts Mumbai in all-IPL final". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 7 October 2013. Retrieved 27 March 2013. Tendulkar crossed the 50,000-run aggregate for recognised cricket across all formats in ... "Sachin Tendulkar in Numbers". BCCI. 10 October 2013. Archived from the original on 26 March 2014. Retrieved 26 March 2014. "Records | Test matches | Partnership records | Highest overall partnership runs by a pair". ESPNcricinfo. Retrieved 4 February 2021. "Tendulkar passes 15,000 Test runs". BBC Sport. Retrieved 16 September 2020. Soni, Paresh (28 July 2007). "2nd Test England v India". BBC News. London. Retrieved 1 June 2008. "Sachin Tendulkar Timeline: 1989 to 2013". IBN. Archived from the original on 27 December 2013. Retrieved 22 December 2013. "Sachin Tendulkar passes 15,000 Test runs". BBC. 9 November 2011. Archived from the original on 6 January 2014. Retrieved 26 March 2013. "Sachin scores the highest runs in the 1996 and 2003 World Cup". Sky Sports. Archived from the original on 24 December 2013. Retrieved 22 December 2013. "India's Sachin Tendulkar hits 50th Test century in first Test against South Africa". The Daily Telegraph. UK. 19 December 2010. Archived from the original on 22 December 2010. Retrieved 27 December 2010. Rudra, Tanya (24 November 2017). "Fastest batsmen to score 50 international centuries". Yahoo! Cricket. Retrieved 11 May 2019. "Sachin breaks Border record: he is a genius (Nagpur)". Cricket Crowd. 2008. Retrieved 19 April 2014. "ESPNcricinfo Statsguru – Test matches – Batting records". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 5 May 2009. Retrieved 27 November 2008. "Ballboy in 1987, now highest run-getter in World Cups". NDTV. 10 March 2011. Archived from the original on 13 March 2011. Retrieved 10 March 2011. "Cricket Records | ESPNcricinfo". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 1 October 2012. Retrieved 17 March 2012. "Tendulkar scores his 100th international century". 16 March 2012. Archived from the original on 19 March 2012. "Statistics / Statsguru / SR Tendulkar /One-Day Internationals". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 13 February 2013. Retrieved 25 April 2012. "List of Test victories". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 19 January 2014. Retrieved 25 April 2012. "List of ODI victories". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 31 October 2013. Retrieved 25 April 2012. "List of T20I victories". ESPNcricinfo. Archived from the original on 31 October 2013. Retrieved 25 April 2012. "Records | Test matches | Individual records (captains, players, umpires) | Most matches in career | ESPNcricinfo". Archived from the original on 26 December 2016. Retrieved 26 March 2014. "All-round records | Test matches | ESPNcricinfo Statsguru | ESPNcricinfo". stats.espncricinfo.com. Archived from the original on 19 September 2015. Retrieved 9 November 2015. "All-round records | One-Day Internationals | ESPNcricinfo Statsguru | ESPNcricinfo". stats.espncricinfo.com. Archived from the original on 19 September 2015. Retrieved 9 November 2015. "Statistics, Sachin Tendulkar in Tests". ESPNcricinfo. Retrieved 1 June 2008. Bezbaruah, Ajit (23 November 2013). "The God and his Gujarat connections". The Times of India. Chadband, Ian (11 November 2013). "How family helps Indian great Sachin Tendulkar hold the world at bay". The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 1 May 2016. Retrieved 12 May 2017. "I didn't even know who Sachin was when we first met: Anjali". Hindustan Times. 14 November 2009. Retrieved 12 May 2017. "Sachin Tendulkar To Celebrate A Quiet Marriage Anniversary". Press Trust of India. ndtv.com. 25 May 2013. Archived from the original on 12 May 2017. Retrieved 12 May 2017. "Sachin: A Billion Dreams review – love letter to cricket's sultan of swing". The Guardian. 26 May 2017. Retrieved 23 November 2021. "Sachin Tendulkar's son Arjun selected for the under-14 Mumbai team". 10 January 2013. Archived from the original on 5 March 2013. "Arjun Tendulkar bowls in England nets". ESPNcricinfo. 15 July 2015. Archived from the original on 12 September 2015. Retrieved 7 September 2015. "Sachin Tendulkar's house: Check price and unseen pics of Master Blaster's lavish bungalow in Mumbai". Archived from the original on 6 July 2021. Retrieved 16 November 2021. "VIDEO: मास्टर ब्लास्टर सचिन तेंडुलकरकडून पाडव्याच्या खास शुभेच्छा". ABP News (in Marathi). 28 March 2017. Retrieved 24 December 2021. "Sachin Tendulkar celebrates Ganesh Chaturthi on a Zoom call; Taimur builds himself a Lego Ganesha". The Economic Times. 22 August 2020. Retrieved 10 January 2022. "Deccan Herald – Tendulkar cancels birthday celebrations, prays for Sai Baba". Deccan Herald. 24 April 2011. Archived from the original on 11 August 2013. Retrieved 2 August 2013. "Indian Express – Sai Devotee Sachin". The Indian Express. 24 April 2011. Retrieved 2 August 2013. "Sai bhakt Sachin calls off birthday celebrations". The New Indian Express. Retrieved 2 August 2013.[dead link] "Sachin in tears while paying last respects to Sathya Sai Baba". Deccan Herald. 25 April 2011. Archived from the original on 11 August 2013. Retrieved 2 August 2013. "The master mourns his guru". Hindustan Times. 26 April 2011. Archived from the original on 11 August 2013. Retrieved 2 August 2013. "Sachin signs the Sports Management Deal with World Tel". NDTV. Archived from the original on 29 January 2014. Retrieved 22 December 2013. "A Brand Name called Sachin Tendulkar". The Times of India. India. 7 August 2002. Archived from the original on 20 October 2012. Retrieved 21 March 2007. "$17 mn deal for Sachin". Rediff. 16 May 2001. Archived from the original on 23 October 2007. Retrieved 21 March 2007. "Tendulkar signs $40-million contract". Mail & Guardian Online. 4 May 2006. Archived from the original on 11 August 2013. Retrieved 26 April 2012. "Home". Sachintendulkar.com. Retrieved 10 January 2022. "Sachin opens restaurant, plans chains". Rediff. 19 July 2002. Archived from the original on 23 October 2007. Retrieved 21 March 2007. "Tendulkar expanding restaurant business". The Economic Times. 17 October 2004. Archived from the original on 28 September 2012. Retrieved 26 April 2012. "God Of Good Life: How Sachin Is Minting His Millions And Spending Them". Business Insider. Retrieved 29 June 2021. "#51 Sachin Tendulkar – In Photos: The World's 100 Highest-Paid Athletes". Forbes. Archived from the original on 15 June 2013. Retrieved 2 August 2013. ET Bureau (7 June 2013). "Retiring Tendullkar is India's Wealthiest Cricket Player". wealthx.com. Archived from the original on 2 November 2013. Retrieved 2 August 2013. ET Bureau (7 June 2013). "Richest Sachin Tendulkar now worth $160m: Wealth X". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 31 October 2013. Retrieved 2 August 2013. Basu, Saumyajit (14 April 2014). "Stars embrace soccer through Indian Super League". The Times of India. Archived from the original on 9 June 2014. Retrieved 27 May 2014. "Sachin Tendulkar names his football team "Kerala Blasters"". The Times of India. Press Trust of India. 27 May 2014. Archived from the original on 6 February 2016. Retrieved 27 May 2014. "Sachin Tendulkar's Indian Super League Team Named "Kerala Blasters"". NDTV. 27 May 2014. Archived from the original on 3 June 2014. Retrieved 27 May 2014. "Sachin Tendulkar picks up stake in PBL franchise Bengaluru Blasters". mid-day. 8 December 2016. Retrieved 18 January 2019. "Sachin Tendulkar named in Pandora Papers exposing offshore tax havens". India Today. 4 October 2021. Retrieved 20 March 2022. "Sachin Tendulkar accepts Congress's Rajya Sabha nomination offer: reports". India: CNN-IBN. Archived from the original on 28 April 2012. Retrieved 26 April 2012. "Sachin Tendulkar sworn in as Rajya Sabha MP". The Times of India. 4 June 2012. Archived from the original on 26 January 2013. "Sachin Tendulkar turns down government quarter". DNA Media, Mumbai. 10 June 2012. Archived from the original on 13 June 2012. Retrieved 10 June 2012. "Sachin Tendulkar Says Medical Emergency in Family Kept Him Away From Parliament". NDTV.com. Retrieved 18 November 2021. "Sachin Tendulkar yet to attend parliament this year". The Times of India. 7 August 2014. Archived from the original on 8 August 2014. "Why "worst performer" Sachin Tendulkar had to attend Rajya Sabha". 3 August 2017. "Tendulkar attends Rajya Sabha, after being questioned". ABP. 3 August 2017. Retrieved 22 April 2022. "MPs question absence of Sachin Tendulkar, Rekha from Rajya Sabha". Deccan Chronicle. 8 August 2014. Retrieved 18 November 2021. Kaushik, Pragya (9 August 2018). "Mary Kom is a much better MP than Sachin Tendulkar". The Print. Retrieved 22 April 2022. Uttam, Kumar (8 August 2014). "Rajya Sabha MPs question absence of Sachin, Rekha". Hindustan Times. Retrieved 22 April 2022. "Sachin Tendulkar donates Rs 76 lakh to Bengal school". Deccan Chronicle. "Mumbai: Sachin gifts childhood park a makeover". The Times of India. 8 March 2019. Retrieved 17 July 2019. "MP Tendulkar donates his salary to PM's Relief Fund". The Economic Times. 2 April 2018. Retrieved 23 January 2020. "Foundation". Sachintendulkar.com. Retrieved 10 January 2022. "Regional Ambassadors". UNICEF. 26 January 2014. Retrieved 20 February 2014. "National ambassadors". UNICEF. 15 May 2019. Retrieved 19 February 2020. "Sachin Tendulkar raises Rs 10 Million for Cancer Charity". Breakingnewsonline.net. 29 May 2010. Archived from the original on 11 August 2013. Retrieved 17 March 2012. "Sachin Tendulkar donates retinal cameras to district hospital in Assam". Hindustan Times. 3 November 2021. Retrieved 16 November 2021. "Sachin Tendulkar". UNICEF. "Swachh Bharat: PM Modi ropes in celebrities for his "Swachh Bharat" challenge". The Times of India. 2 October 2014. Retrieved 31 July 2020. "With broom in hand, Sachin Tendulkar joins "Swachh Bharat" campaign". One India. 6 October 2014. Retrieved 31 July 2020. "Sachin Tendulkar along with son Arjun, participate in Swachh Bharat week". The Indian Express. 26 September 2017. Retrieved 23 December 2021. "Sachin Tendulkar gets Most Effective Swachhata Ambassador award at Safaigiri 2019". India Today. 2 October 2019. Retrieved 31 July 2020. Gupta, Rishabh (27 March 2020). "Sachin Tendulkar donates Rs 50 lakh in fight against coronavirus". www.indiatvnews.com. Retrieved 16 November 2021. "Sachin Tendulkar comes forward to support 4,000 underprivileged people amid coronavirus pandemic – Sports News". Indiatoday.in. 9 May 2020. Retrieved 10 January 2022. "Sachin Tendulkar donates Rs 1 crore to procure oxygen concentrators for Covid-19 patients in India". India Today. 29 April 2021. Retrieved 13 May 2022. "Humble Sachin Tendulkar helps telethon raise Rs 7 crore for schools – Sport – DNA". Daily News and Analysis. 19 September 2011. Archived from the original on 3 April 2012. Retrieved 17 March 2012. "Sachin's social responsibility – Behindindia.com – General News – Sachin Tendulkar Apnalaya". behindindia.com. Archived from the original on 9 August 2009. Retrieved 3 August 2009. "Award of MBE to Annabel Mehta". GOV.UK. Retrieved 29 March 2023. "Sachin sponsors 200 children". thatscricket.com. Archived from the original on 21 October 2013. Retrieved 19 August 2013. "Sachin sponsors 200 children of apnalaya". Archived from the original on 19 August 2013. Retrieved 19 August 2013. "Not getting "any compensation" from Mumbai Indians – Sachin Tendulkar". ESPNcricinfo. "Sachin Tendulkar, VVS Laxman likely to return to BCCI's Cricket Advisory Committee". India Today. "Anil Kumble appointed India's new coach at BCCI's inaugural conclave". India Today. "Sachin Opens Again: Tendulkar makes debut in commentary box in World Cup opener". The Indian Express. 31 May 2019. Retrieved 16 November 2021. Lalotra, Gautam (31 May 2019). "'Sachin Opens Again' marks debut of Tendulkar in commentary box at World Cup opener". news.abplive.com. Retrieved 13 May 2022. "KBC: When Sachin Tendulkar made a comment about Vinod Kambli's temper and Amitabh Bachchan was surprised". Hindustan Times. 15 September 2021. Retrieved 10 January 2022. Luxurylaunches.com. "First Sachin Tendulkar Opus is the most expensive book on cricket at $350,000". Business Insider. Retrieved 29 March 2023. Flood, Alison (19 July 2010). "Sachin Tendulkar's blood used to prepare special edition of his memoirs". The Guardian. ISSN 0261-3077. Retrieved 29 March 2023. Luscombe, Belinda (21 July 2010). "Sachin Tendulkar: You Want Blood with That Book?". Time. ISSN 0040-781X. Retrieved 29 March 2023. "One Sachin Tendulkar Opus to cost $ 350,000 - India Today". 29 March 2023. Archived from the original on 29 March 2023. Retrieved 29 March 2023.{{cite web}}: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown (link) "Bestselling adult hardback on release (orders on first day of publication)". Limca Book of Records. Archived from the original on 18 August 2016. Retrieved 30 June 2016. Mohan, R (10 November 2014). "Another record for Sachin?". Deccan Chronicle. Retrieved 24 December 2021. Iyer, Meena (30 May 2017). "Sachin A Billion Dreams Movie Review". The Times of India. Retrieved 23 October 2023. Sen, Raja (26 May 2017). "Sachin: A Billion Dreams Movie Review: This Brings Back All Our Sachin Tendulkar Memories". NDTV. Retrieved 23 October 2023. Khurana, Archika (13 January 2023). "Sachin The Ultimate Winner Movie Review: A predictable and feeble story about the willpower required to achieve one's goals". The Times of India. Retrieved 23 October 2023. The following is a list of books focused on Tendulkar's career: Athalye, Neelima (2012). Master stroke : 100 centuries of Sachin Tendulkar : Old Trafford, Manchester 1990-Shere Bangla National Stadium, Mirpur 2012 (1st ed.). Pune: Sakāl Publications. ISBN 978-93-80571-84-3. OCLC 813287935. Dudhane, Sanjay (2013). Dhruvtara. Dilipraj Prakashan. ISBN 978-81-7294-966-2. (in Marathi) Ezekiel, Gulu (2002). Sachin : the story of the world's greatest batsman. New Delhi: Penguin Books. ISBN 0-14-302854-5. OCLC 50711787. Ezekiel, Gulu (2005). The A to Z of Sachin Tendulkar. New Delhi: UBSPD. ISBN 81-7476-530-1. OCLC 62872657. Krishnaswamy, V. (2012). Sachin : a hundred hundreds now. Noida: Harper Sport. ISBN 978-93-5029-999-9. OCLC 798903474. Murray, Peter (2002). Sachin Tendulkar Masterful. Ashish Shukla. New Delhi: Rupa. ISBN 81-7167-806-8. OCLC 50562812. Pant, Dharmendra; पंत, धर्मेन्द्र (2012). Sacina ke sau śataka = Sachin ke sau shatak (Pahalā saṃskaraṇa ed.). Naī Dillī. ISBN 978-81-237-6524-2. OCLC 829937315. (in Hindi) Purandare, Vaibhav (2005). Sachin Tendulkar : a definitive biography. New Delhi. ISBN 978-81-7436-898-0. OCLC 903937930. Santhanam, Vijay (2009). If cricket is a religion, Sachin is God. Shyam Balasubramanian. New Delhi: HarperCollins Publishers India, a joint venture with the India Today Group. ISBN 978-81-7223-821-6. OCLC 315479432. Sachin Tendulkar at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Data from Wikidata Sachin Tendulkar on Facebook Sachin Tendulkar's channel on YouTube Sachin Tendulkar at ESPNcricinfo Sachin Tendulkar at Wisden India Portals:  Biography  India  Cricket  Sport