The 1998 FIBA World Championship was the 13th FIBA World Championship, the international basketball world championship for men's national teams. The tournament was organised by the International Basketball Federation (FIBA), and hosted in Greece from 29 July to 9 August 1998. It was contested by 16 nations, with matches held at two venues, in Athens and Piraeus. Because of the National Basketball Association lockout and unlike in the previous championship, the USA Basketball Association was unable to send a team composed of NBA players, thus causing the American national team roster consisting of professional basketball players playing in Europe and two college players. The tournament was won by FR Yugoslavia, in their first participation after the breakup of Yugoslavia, defeating Russia in the final 64–62. There were 16 teams taking part in the 1998 World Cup of Basketball. After the 1996 Olympics, the continental allocation for FIBA Americas was reduced by one when the United States won the Olympic tournament, automatically qualifying them for the 1998 World Cup. Host nation: 1 berth 1996 Summer Olympics: 12 teams competing for 1 berth, removed from that country's FIBA zone. FIBA Oceania: 3 teams competing for 1 berth FIBA Europe: 16 teams competing for 5 berths FIBA Africa: 9 teams competing for 2 berths FIBA Americas: 10 teams competing for 4 berths FIBA Asia: 15 teams competing for 2 berths The top three teams in each group advance to the second round, into either Group E or F. The fourth place team in each group moves onto the 13th–16th classification. Source: FIBA archive Rules for classification: 1) points; 2) head-to-head points; 3) head-to-head goal average; 4) head-to-head number of points scored. (H) Hosts Source: FIBA archive Rules for classification: 1) points; 2) head-to-head points; 3) head-to-head goal average; 4) head-to-head number of points scored. Source: FIBA archive Rules for classification: 1) points; 2) head-to-head points; 3) head-to-head goal average; 4) head-to-head number of points scored. Source: FIBA archive Rules for classification: 1) points; 2) head-to-head points; 3) head-to-head goal average; 4) head-to-head number of points scored. First three teams in each group of the first group phase qualify to the second phase, creating two new groups of six teams. The final standings also take in account the results of previous round matches. Source: FIBA archive Rules for classification: 1) points; 2) head-to-head points; 3) head-to-head goal average; 4) head-to-head number of points scored. (H) Hosts Notes: Head-to-head record: FR Yugoslavia 1–0 Russia Head-to-head record: Greece 1–0 Italy Source: FIBA archive Rules for classification: 1) points; 2) head-to-head points; 3) head-to-head goal average; 4) head-to-head number of points scored. Notes: Head-to-head results: United States 1–0 Spain Head-to-head results: Argentina 1–0 Australia Vasili Karasev Alberto Herreros Dejan Bodiroga — MVP Gregor Fučka Željko Rebrača 1998 USA Basketball Archived 10 September 2008 at the Wayback Machine FIBA official website EuroBasket.com FIBA Basketball World Cup Page